NYPL RESEARCH LIBRARIES

3 3433 08254501 7

^^^^^^BS^

'H

Digitized by the Internet Archive

in 2007 with funding from

IVIicrosoft Corporation

http://www.archive.org/details/diarylettersofma01burn

DIARY AND LETTERS

OF

lADAlE p'ARBLAY,

AUTHOR OF  "EVELINA,"  "CECILIA,"  &c.

EDITED BY HER NIECE.

THE SPIRIT WALKS OF EVERY DAY DECEASED.

youxG.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL.   I

\^  :  ..

'     «-< » ,

PHILADELPHIA:

CAREY AND HART.

1842.

THE NEW YORK

PUBLIC LIBRARY

ASTOR,  LENOX AND

TILDEN FOUNDATIONS.

ISOO.

Philadelphia,
C.  Sherman,  Printer,  19 St.  James Street.

EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION.

It has been asserted that if any person,  however  "  unknown to fame,"
should write a journalizing memoir of his own life,  in which every thought
and feeling should be faithfully portrayed,  such a narrative could not fail of
being curious and interesting.  Yet,  considering the satisfaction which most
people find in speaking of themselves,  it is singular how iew specimens of
such autobiography exist.

Perhaps their scarcity may arise from a consciousness of the rare assem-
blage of qualities necessary to their successful production ;  for the writer
should be endowed with candour that shall prompt him to  "  extenuate
nothing," — honestly setting down his own foibles and mistakes,  which are
sometimes more mortifying to self-love than graver faults.  He should have
acumen and penetration,  enabling him to unravel his own secret feelings and
motives,  and to trace each sentiment and action to its source.  He should be
gifted with  "  the pen of a ready writer,"  in order to arrest thoughts and im-
pressions which fade almost as fast as they arise ; — and,  what is most rare
of all,  he should possess,  however alloyed by human weakness and infirmi-
ties, such a predominance of sound principles and virtuous dispositions,  as
may render it safe to sympathize in his feelings  ;  otherwise his memoir must
either corrupt or disgust the reader,  by showing

"  That hideous sight,  a naked human heart."

To ensure a full and free narration,  it might also be desirable for the
memorialist to believe that his pages will meet no eye but that of indulgent
friendship ;  since those who expect their portraits will be handed down to
posterity can scarcely resist dressing them in holiday suits.

May we not,  however,  venture to affirm that all these supposed requisites.,
were united in the case of Madame D'Arblay,  whose journals and letters
are now offered to the public 1 As an author she has long been known to
the world,  and the high place which her works have held in public estima-
tion for more than sixty years,  renders criticism and comment superfluous.

Her long and virtuous life -is now closed,  and those who have derived
pleasure and instruction from her publications may feel interested in reading
her private journals,  and thus becoming acquainted with the merits and
peculiarities of her individual character ;  more especially as the timidity
which made her always shrink from observation,  confined to the circle of
her chosen friends that knowledge of her intimate feelings and real excel-
lence which won in no common degree their respect and love.  We would
also hope there may be a moral use in presenting the example of one who,
being early exalted to fame and literary distinction,  yet found her chief hap-

4 INTRODUCTION.

piness in the discharge of domestic duties,  and in the friendships and attach-
ments of private life,

FRA^x■Es BuRNEY,  the second daughter and third child of Dr.  Burney,
was born at Lynn Regis in Norfolk,  on the 13th of June,  1752.  Her father
had in the preceding year accepted the office of Organist to that royal
borough,  having been obliged by ill health to quit London,  and to relinquish
more advantageous prospects.

The most remarkable features of Frances Burney's childhood were,  her
extreme shyness,  and her backwardness at learning ;  at eight years of age,
she did not even know her letters,  and her elder brother used to amuse him-
self by pretending to teach her to read,  and presenting the book to her turned
upside down, — which he declared she never found out.  Her mother's
friends generally gave her the name of  "  the little dunce ;"  but her mother,
more discerning as well as more indulgent,  always replied,  that  "  she had
no fear about Fanny. ''^

In fact,  beneath an appearance so unpromising to cursory observers,  there
was an under-current,  not only of deep feeling and affection,  but of shrewd
observation and lively invention ;  though the feelings were rarely called
forth in the happy careless course of childish life,  and the intellectual powers
were concealed by shyness,  except when her own individuality was forgotten
in the zest with which she would enact other personages,  in the little sports
and gambols she invented.  Her father relates,  that  "  she used,  after having
seen a play in Mrs.  Garrick's box,  to take the actors off,  and compose
speeches for their characters,  for she could not read them."  But in com-
pany, or before strangers,  she was silent,  backward,  and timid,  even to
sheepishness ;  and,  from her shyness,  had such profound gravity and com-
posure of features,  that those of Dr.  Burney's friends who went often to his
house,  and entered into the different humours of the children,  never called
Fanny by any other name,  from the time she had reached her eleventh year,
than  "  the old lady."

Dr.  Burney adds,  "■  she had always a great affection for me ;  had an ex-
cellent heart,  and a natural simplicity and probity about her that wanted no
teaching.  In her plays with her sisters and some neighbours'  children,  this
straightforward morality operated to an uncommon degree in one so young.
There lived next door to me at that time in Poland Street,  and in a private
house,  a capital hair-merchant,  who furnished perukes to the judges and
gentlemen of the law.  The hair-merchant's female children and mine used
to play together in the little garden behind the house,  and unfortunately,  one
day,  the door of the wig-magazine being lefl open,  they each of them put on
one of those dignified ornaments of the head,  and danced and jumped about
in a thousand antics,  laughing till they screamed,  at their own ridiculous
figures.  Unfortunately,  in their vagaries,  one of the flaxen wigs,  said by the
proprietor to be worth upwards of ten guineas  [in those days an enormous
price],  fell into a tub of water placed for shrubs in the little garden,  and lost
all its gorgon buckle,  and was declared by the owner to be totally spoilt.
He was extremely angry,  and chid very severely his own children ;  when
my little daughter,  '  the old lady,'  then ten years of age,  advancing to him,
as I was informed,  with great gravity and composure,  sedately said,  '  What
signifies talking so much about an accident  ?  The wig is wet,  to be sure  ;
and the wig was a good wig,  to be sure ;  but  'tis of no use to speak of it any
more,  because ichaVs clone canH be undone^

"  Whether these stoical sentiments appeased the enraged perruquier,  I
know not ;  but the younkers were stript of their honours,  and my little
monkeys were obliged to retreat without beat of drum or colours flying."

INTRODUCTION.  5

Mrs.  Burney was well qualified to instruct and train her numerous
family;  but they lost her early,  and her chief attention appears to have been
bestowed on the education of her eldest daughter,  Esther,  with whom she
read all Pope's works,  and Pitt's iEneid ;  while the silent,  observant Fanny
learnt by heart passages from Pope,  merely from hearing her sister recite
them,  and long before she cared for reading them herself.

In the year 1760,  Dr.  Burney returned to London with his wife and
children,  and took a house in Poland Street,  w^here he renewed,  under
happy auspices,  the acquaintance which,  during his former residence in
London,  he had made with several of the most distinguished literary cha-
racters of his day.  At this period,  his eldest son James,  afterwards Admiral
Burney,  had been sent to sea as a midshipman,  in the ship of Admiral
Montagu  ;  his second son,  Charles,  afterwards the celebrated Greek
scholar,  was still quite a child  ;  and his fourth daughter,  Charlotte,  was
an infant.

From this young family,  for whom maternal care appeared so necessary,
their affectionate mother was removed by death in the autumn of 1761.
During the latter period of her illness,  Frances and her sister Susanna had
been placed in a boarding-school in Queen Square,  that they might be out
of the way  ;  and when the sad intelligence of their loss was brought to
them,  the agony of Frances's grief was so great,  though she was not more
than nine years old,  that her governess declared she had never met with a
child of such intense and acute feelings.

The bereaved father soon recalled his children home,  and their education
carried itself on,  rather than owed its progress to any regular instruction.
Dr.  Burney was too much occupied by his professional engagements to
teach them,  except by his own example of industry and perseverance.
These were so great that he actually studied and acquired the French and
Italian languages on horseback ;  having for that purpose written out a
pocket grammar and vocabulary of each.

His son Charles was,  at a proper age,  sent to the Charter-House School,
but his daughters remained at home ;  they had no governess,  and though
the eldest and the third,  Esther and Susanna,  were subsequently taken to
France,  and placed for two years in a Parisian seminary,  Frances shared
not this advantage.  Dr.  Burney afterwards acknowledged that one reason
which decided him against carrying her to France was her strong attach-
ment to her maternal grandmother,  who was a Roman Catholic.  "  He
feared she might be induced to follow the religion of one she so much loved
and honoured,  if she should fall so early into the hands of any zealots who
should attempt her conversion."  She was,  therefore,  literally self-educated,
and to use her own words,  "  Her sole emulation for improvement,  and sole
spur for exertion were,  her unbounded veneration and affection for her
father,  who,  nevertheless,  had not at the time a moment to spare for giving
her any personal instruction,  or even for directing her pursuits."

At ten years of age she could read,  and with the occasional assistance of
her eldest sister she had taught herself to write ;  and no sooner had she
acquired the latter accomplishment than she began to scribble,  almost inces-
santly, little poems and works of invention,  though in a character that was
illegible to every one but herself.  Her love of reading did not display
itself till two or three years later ;  thus practically reversing the axiom
that

"  Authors before they write should read."

But although the education of Dr.  Burney's daughters was not conducted

1*

6 INTRODUCTION.

according to the elaborate systems of the present day,  they yet enjoyed
some advantages which more than compensated for the absence of regular
and salaried instructors.  The sentiments and example of their father
excited them to love whatever was upright,  virtuous,  and amiable  ;  while,
from not being secluded in a schot3l-room,  they also shared the conversation
of their father's guests  ;  and,  in London,  Dr.  Burney's miscellaneous but
agreeable society included some of those most eminent for literature in our
own country,  together with many accomplished foreigners,  whose observa-
tions and criticisms were in themselves lessons.  Perhaps the taste of
Frances Burney was formed much in the same way as that of her celebrated
cotemporary,  Madame de Stael,  who relates that she used to sit with her
work,  on a little stool at her mother's knee,  and listen to the conversation
of all Monsieur Neckar's enhghtened visiters  ;  thus gathering notions on
literature and politics long ere it was suspected that she knew the meaning
of the words.

If,  however,  the above methods were of themselves sufficient for educa-
tion, all good conversers might offer a  "  royal road"  to learning.  But the
benefit here obtained was chiefly that of directing the attention to intellectual
pursuits,  enlightening the judgment,  and exciting a thirst for knowledge
which led the youthful Frances to diligent and laborious application.  By
the time she was fourteen she had carefully studied many of the best
authors in her father's library,  of which she had the uncontrolled range.
She began also to make extracts,  keeping a catalogue raisonnl of the books
she read ;  and some of her early remarks were such as would not have
disgraced a maturer judgment.

Thus passed,  not idly nor unprofitably,  nearly six years after the death
of that mother who would have been her best instructress.  Dr.  Burney
then made another journey to Paris,  for the purpose of conducting home his
daughters,  Esther and Susanna,  whose allotted two years of education in
that capital had expired.  Their improvement had kept pace with their
father's hopes and wishes,  but he gave up his original plan of carrying
Frances and Charlotte abroad on the return of their sisters  :  Susanna
volunteered to instruct Fanny in French ;  and they were all so enchanted
to meet again,  that perhaps Dr.  Burney's parental kindness withheld him
from proposing a new separation.

On the first return of the youthful travellers,  Susanna,  who was then
scarcely fourteen,  wrote a sort of comparison between her two elder sisters,
which,  as it happens to have been preserved,  and may in some measure illus-
trate their early characters,  we will give verbatim.

"  Hetty seems a good deal more lively than she used to appear at Paris ;
whether it is that her spirits are better,  or that the great liveliness of the in-
habitants made her appear grave there by comparison,  I know not :  but she
was there remarkable for being sirieiise^  and is here for being gay and lively.
She is a most sweet girl.  My sister Fanniy is unlike her in almost every
thing,  yet both are very amiable,  and love each other as sincerely as ever
sisters did.  The characteristics of Hetty seem to be wit,  generosity,  and
openness of heart : — Fanny's, — sense,  sensibility,  and bashful ness,  and even
a degree of prudery.  Her understanding is superior,  but her diffidence gives
her a bashfulness before company with whom she is not intimate,  which is
a disadvantage to her.  My eldest sister shines in conversation,  because,
though very modest,  she is totally free from any niauvaise Jwnte :  were
Fanny equally so,  I am persuaded she would shine no less.  I am afraid
that my eldest sister is too communicative,  and that my sister Fanny is too
reserved.     They are both charming girls, — desfillcs comme il y en a peu^

INTRODUCTION.  7

Very soon after his return from Paris,  an important change took place in
Dr.  Burney's domestic circle,  by forming a second matrimonial connexion,
and bringing home to his family as their mother-in-law,  Mrs.  Stephen
Allen,  the widow of a Lynn merchant,  and herself the parent of several
children who had been friends and playmates of the young Burneys.  Both
families were pleased at this reunion  ;  a larger house was taken,  in Queen
Square,  that they might all reside under the same roof, — although this
dwelling was afterwards exchanged for a house in St.  Martin's Street ;  and
the new Mrs.  Burney,  who was herself highly intellectual,  entered with in-
telligent delight into the literary circle which formed the solace and refresh-
ment of her husband.

Among those friends who were accustomed to assemble round their tea-
table,  or to enliven their simple early supper,  were.  Sir Robert and Lady
Strange, — the former so well known for his admirable engravings,  and his
lady for her strong sense and original humour ;  Dr.  Hawkesworth,  the
worthy and learned Editor of Byron's and Cooke's First Voyages  ;  Garrick,
and his amiable wife,  the friend of Hannah More;  Barry,  the Painter,
whose works still adorn the Adelphi  ;  Mr.  Twining,  the Translator of
Aristotle  ;  Mason,  the Poet ;  Mr.  Greville,  and his Lady,  the latter cele-
brated as the Authoress of the beautiful  "  Ode to Indifference  ;"  Dr.  Arm-
strong; Arthur Young,  the Agriculturist,  who had married a sister of Mrs.
Burney's  ;  John Hutton,  the Moravian ;  the musical and clever La Trobe,
and Nollekens the Sculptor.  To these might be added many others of
equal or superior celebrity,  who formed part of Dr.  Burney's society,  as
time and circumstances brought them within his reach.

But the companion and counsellor who was dearest to himself,  and most
loved and honoured by his youthful group,  was Mr.  Crisp.  This gentle-
man, several years older than Dr.  Burney,  had been to him a  "  Guide,
Philosopher,  and Friend,"  in early life  ;  they had then been separated in con-
sequence of Mr.  Crisp's residing on the continent during several years,  but
when they again met,  their intimacy was renewed with a cordiality and
dehght that only ended with life.

At this time Mr.  Crisp had given up the world,  in consequence of va-
rious losses,  diminished fortune,  and disappointed hopes ;  and he had fixed
his dwelling in an old-fashioned country-house,  called Chesington Hall,  not
far from Kingston in Surrey,  and within a few miles of Hampton.  This
mansion stood upon a large and nearly desolate common,  and not a road
or even a track led to it from Epsom,  which was the nearest town.  It was
encircled by ploughed fields,  and one-half of the building was inhabited by
a farmer  ;  while in the remaining portion dwelt the proprietor,  Christopher
Hamilton,  Esq.,  with whom Mr.  Crisp had adopted some pic-7iic plan,
which enabled him to consider Chesington as his decided residence.  At the
death of I\Ir.  Hamilton,  the house,  which was then his only property,  de-
volved to his maiden sister,  Mrs.  Hamilton,  who,  with her niece.  Miss Kitty
Cooke,  continued to receive Mr.  Crisp as an inmate,  and to admit other
persons as occasional boarders.

This independent method of visiting his friend,  and of obtaining country
air and exercise for his children,  exactly suited the views of Dr.  Burney,
and they all in turn,  or in groups,  enjoyed the society of their Chesington
Daddy^  as they familiarly called Mr.  Crisp  ;  while he was indulgent to
all their youthful vagaries,  and amused with observing their diflferent
characters.

Among those who most frequently availed themselves of Mrs.  Hamilton's
arrangement,  was Mrs.  Gast,  the sister of Mr.  Crisp,  who,  whenever she

8 INTRODUCTION.

quitted her house at Burford,  in order to visit her brother,  failed not to en-
hance the pleasure of the Chesington meetings* by her good sense and kind
nature,  added to a considerable degree of cultivation.

But whatever might offer itself of occupation or amusement,  Fanny con-
tinued secretly,  yet perseveringly,  her own literary attempts.  When in
London,  she used to write in a little play-room up two pair of stairs,  which
contained the toys of the younger children.  At Lynn,  to which place the
Doctor's family paid annual visits,  she would shut herself up in a summer-
house which they called The Cabin,  and there unburden her mind,  by
writing the tales and compositions with which her fancy abounded.

To none but her sister Susanna was the secret of this authorship con-
fided ;  and even she could seldom hear or read these productions,  for want
of private opportunities by which she might avoid betraying them to
others.

Notwithstanding all these precautions,  the vigilant eye of their mother-
in-law was not long in discovering Fanny's love of seclusion,  her scraps
of writing,  and other tokens of her favourite employment,  which excited no
small alarm in her.

Perhaps if she had desired to see the little manuscripts she might
have perceived in them traces of genius worth encouraging ;  but while her
delicacy prevented such investigation,  her good sense,  acting upon general
principles,  led her to inveigh very frequently and seriously against the evil
of a scribbling turn in young ladies — the loss of time,  the waste of thought,
in idle,  crude inventions — and the  (at that time)  utter discredit of being
known as a female writer of novels and romances.

Whatever conviction these strictures may have produced,  they at least so
wrought upon Fanny's sense of duty and obedience,  that she resolved to
make an a2ito da fe of all her manuscripts,  and,  if possible,  to throw away
her pen.  Seizing,  therefore,  an opportunity when Dr.  and Mrs.  Burney
were from home,  she made over to a bonfire in a paved play-court,  her
whole stock of prose compositions,  while her faithful Susanna stood by,
weeping at the conflagration.  Among the works thus immolated,  was one
tale of considerable length,  the  "  History of Caroline Evelyn"  the mother of
Evelina.

This sacrifice was made in the young authoress's fifteenth year,  and for
some weeks she probably adhered to her resolution of composing no more
works of fiction,  and began,  perhaps as a less objectionable employment,
the Journal which she continued during so many years.  But the peren-
nial fountain could not be restrained ;  her imagination was haunted by the
singular situations  "  to which Caroline Evelyn's infant daughter might be
exposed,  from the unequal birth by which she hung suspended between the
elegant connexions of her mother,  and the vulgar ones of her grandmother  ;
thus presenting contrasts and mixtures of society so unusual,  yet,  under the
supposed circumstances,  so natural,  that irresistibly,  and almost uncon-
sciously, the whole story of  "  Evelina  ;  or,  A Young Lady's Entrance
into the World,"  was pent up in the inventor's memory,  ere a paragraph
was committed to paper.

Writing was to her always more difficult than composing,  because her
time and her pen found ample employment in transcribing for her father,
who was occupied at every spare moment with preparations for his great
work,  "  The General History of Music."

In the summer of 1770,  Fanny obtained several months of leisure for her
own studies and compositions,  as Dr.  Burney then set out on a solitary tour
through France and Italy,  for the purpose of collecting materials for his

INTRODUCTION.  9

"History;"  but on his return in the spring of 1771,  she was employed as
his principal amanuensis,  in preparing the minutes of his tour for the press.
All his daughters,  however,  shared in this service,  copying his numerous
manuscripts,  tracing over and over again the same page when his nicety of
judgment suggested alterations  ;  while their patient and affectionate assiduity
brought its own reward,  in the extension of knowledge and improvement of
taste which accrued from such labours.

Dr.  Burney's  "  Italian Tour"  was no sooner published,  than he set out on
another journey,  for the same purpose of musical research,  in Germany and
the Low Countries.  His family resided during his absence at Lynn and at
Chesington,  where Fanny gradually arranged and connected the disjointed
scraps and fragments in which  "  Evelina"  had been originally written,
whenever a quarter of an hour's leisure and solitude had allowed her thus
to preserve the creations of her fancy.  She mentions with great naivete^  in
her  "  Lynn Diary,"  that she never indulged herself with writing or reading
except in the afternoon ;  always scrupulously devoting her time to needle-
work till after dinner.  As,  however,  the hours of repast were somewhat
earlier in those days than at present,  this notable self-denial may only have
sent her to her favourite pursuits with fresh vigour.

The arrival of her father from Germany turned her thoughts into another
channel ;  as a long and painful illness,  which Dr.  Burney owed to the
fatigues and difficulties of a hurried journey,  "  called for the incessant assi-
duity of his fondly-attached wife and daughters to nurse him through it."
Even then,  when confined to his bed by spasmodic rheumatism,  he generally
kept one of his daughters seated near him,  pen in hand,  that,  during the
intervals of sufferingc,  he misiht dictate the ideas which occurred to him for
his musical work ;  and perhaps the example of such literary perseverance
was a stimulus that amply compensated for the hindrance it occasioned.

After the Doctor's recovery,  some years still elapsed before he was able
to execute his plan  ;  and it was not till the year 1776 that he brought out the
first volume of his  "  History of Music."  During all this period of literary
occupation and anxiety,  it is not surprising that his daughter,  gifted,  though
unconsciously,  with equal powers,  should,  even in sympathy with her father's
feelings,  be seized with a wish to see a work of her own also in print ;
though she was far from desiring the public suffrage which he coveted ;  on
the contrary,  she fully intended always to remain unknown.

She communicated this idea to her sisters,  under promise of inviolable
secrecy ;  and,  in furtherance of the project,  she now transcribed the manu-
script of  "  Evelina,"  in an upright feigned hand;  for,  as she was her father's
amanuensis,  she feared lest her common writing might accidentally be seen
by some compositor employed in printing the  "  History of Music,"  and so
lead to detection.

Growing weary,  however,  of this manual labour,  after she had thus pre-
pared the.  first and second volumes,  she wrote a letter,  without signature,
offering the unfinished work to Mr.  Dodsley,  and promising to send the
sequel in the following year.  This letter was forwarded by the post,  with
a request that the answer might be directed to a coffee-house.

Her younger brother,  Charles,  though without reading a word of the manu-
script, accepted a share in the frolic,  and undertook to be her agent at the
coffee-house and with the bookseller.  But Mr.  Dodsley declined looking at
any thing anonymous  ;  and the young group,  "  after sitting in committee on
this lofty reply,"  next fixed upon Mr.  Lowndes,  a bookseller in the city, —
who desired to see the manuscript ;  and shortly after it had been conveyed
to him,  signified in a letter to the unknown author,  that he could not publish

10 INTRODUCTION.

an unfinished book,  though he hked the work ;  but he should be ready to
purchase and print it when it should be completed.

Disappointed at this stipulation,  reasonable as it was,  the inexperienced
authoress was on the point of giving up her scheme altogether  ;  and yet,  as
she has herself observed,  "  to be thiuarted on the score of our inclinatimi^
acts more frequently as a spur tha7i as a bridle  /"  so that,  ere another year
could pass away,  she had almost involuntarily completed and transcribed
her third volume.

But,  during the hesitation occasioned by the demand of Mr.  Lowndes,
another difficulty occurred,  for she felt a conscientious scruple whether it
would be right to allow herself such an amusement unknown to her father.
She had never taken any important step without his sanction,  and had now
refrained from asking it through confusion at acknowledging her authorship
and dread of his desiring to see her performance.  However,  in this,  as in
every instance during her life,  she no sooner saw what was her duty,  than
she honestly performed it.  Seizing,  therefore,  an opportunity when lier father
was bidding her a kind farewell,  preparatory to a Chesington visit,  she
avowed to him with many blushes,  "  her secret little work,  and her odd in-
clination to see it in print ;"  adding,  that her brother Charles would transact
the affair with a bookseller at a distance,  so that her name could never trans-
pire, and only entreating that he would not himself ask to see the manu-
script. "  His amazement was even surpassed by his amusement ;  and his
laugh was so gay,  that,  revived by its cheering sound,  she lost all her fears
and embarrassment,  and heartily joined in it,  though somewhat at the ex-
pense of her new author-like dignity,"

Dr.  Burney thought her project as innocent as it was whimsical,  and
kindly embracing her,  enjoined her to be careful in guarding her own
incognita,  and then dropped the subject without even asking the name oi
her book.

With heightened spirits she now forwarded the packet to Mr.  Lowndes,
who,  in a few days,  signified his approbation,  and sent an offer of twenty
pounds for the manuscript : — "  An offer which was accepted with alacrity,
and boundless surprise at its magnificence !"

In the ensuing January,  1778,  "  Evelina"  was published ;  a fact which
only became known to its writer from her hearing the newspaper adver-
tisement read accidentally at breakfast-time,  by her mother-in-law Mrs.
Burney.

And here we gladly suspend this attempt at introducing to the public the
Memoirs of Madame D'Arblay.  From this period till her marriage,  her
Journal contains a minute and animated narrative of all that the reader
can wish to know concerning her.  He is entreated to bear in mind that it
was originally intended for no eye but her own,  though she afterwards ex-
tended the privilege to her sisters,  to Mr.  Crisp,  and to Mrs.  Locke  ;  making,
for these trusted friends,  as she has herself expressed it,  "  a window in her
breast,"  yet disclosing,  in the simplicity of her ingenuous confidence such
undeviating uprightness of character,  such unhackneyed nobleness of feel-
ing, that now,  when she is removed far above the reach of embarrassment
or pain from this publication,  it cannot be derogatory to her beloved
memory to make known her inmost thoughts,  as far as she has left them
recorded;  while it might be unjust to withhold the lessons conveyed inci-
dentally, not only by traits of filial duty and generous self-denial in the
historian herself,  but by the picture she exhibits of domestic virtues in the
most exalted rank,  and of sound discretion,  united with humble faith and

INTRODUCTION.  H

pious resignation,  under the most painful and trying circumstances, — such
as she witnessed and deeply venerated in her august Royal Mistress,

To those personal friends of Madame D'Arblay whose affection for her
may render them jealous of any apparent deviation from her intentions,  it
may be satisfactory to state,  that in her latter years,  when all her juvenile
adventures seemed to her  "  as a tale that is told,"  and when she could dwell,
sadly yet submissively,  on recollections of deeper interest,  she herself ar-
ranged these Journals and Papers with the most scrupulous care ;  affixing
to them such explanations as would make them intelligible to her successors
— avowing a hope that some instruction might be derived from them — and
finally,  in her last hours,  consigning them to the editor,  with full permission
to publish whatever might be judged desirable for that purpose,  and with no
negative injunction except oxe,  which has been scrupulously obeyed,  viz  :
that whatever might be effaced or omitted,  xothing should in anywise be
altered or added to her records.

THE AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION.

To have some account of my thoughts,  manners,  acquaintance and ac-
tions, when the hour arrives at which time is more nimble than memory,  is
the reason which induces me to keep a Journal — a Journal in which I must
confess my every thought,  must open my whole heart.

But a thing of the kind ought to be addressed to somebody — I must imagine
myself to be talking — talking to the most intimate of friends — to one in
whom I should take delight in confiding,  and feel remorse in concealment  :
but who must this friend be  ?  To make choice of one in whom I can but
half rely,  would be to frustrate entirely the intention of my plan.  The only
one I could wholly,  totally confide in,  lives in the same house with me,  and
not only never has,  but never icill^  leave me one secret to tell her.  To
U'lwm then must I dedicate my wonderful,  surprising,  and interesting
adventures  ? — to whom dare I reveal my private opinion of my nearest
relations  ?  my secret thoughts of my dearest friends  \  my own hopes,
fears,  reflections,  and dislikes  ? — Nobody.

To Nobody,  then,  will I write my Journal  ? — since to Nobody can I be
wholly unreserved,  to Nobody can I reveal every thought,  every wish of
my heart,  with the most unlimited confidence,  the most unremitting sincerity,
to the end of my life  !  For what chance,  what accident,  can end my con-
nexions with Nobody  ?  No secret can I conceal from Nobody,  and to
Nobody can I be ever unreserved.  Disagreement cannot stop our affection
— time itself has no power to end our friendship.  The love,  the esteem I
entertain for Nobody,  Nobody's self has not power to destroy.  From
Nobody I have nothing to fear.  The secrets sacred to friendship Nobody
will not reveal ;  when the affair is doubtful,  Nobody will not look towards
the side least favourable.

[The above are the opening passages of Miss Burney's Diary,  which she commenced
at the age of fifteen years.  Tliey are given because they express in the writer's own
words her design and objects in undertaking a task the results of which are now about
to be laid before the world.

That portion of the Diary which intervenes between the abovenamed  |>eriod and the
publication of  "EveHna"  (in 1778)  it has been thought right to withhold, — at least for the
present  ; — for thougli it is,  to the family and friends of the writer,  quite as full of interest
as the subsequent portions,  the interest is of a more private and personal nature than that
which attaches to the Journal after its writer became universally known,  as the authoress
of"  Evelina,"  "  Cecilia,"  &c.

Whether the more juvenile portions of the Journal see the light hereafter,  or not,  will
in some measure depend on the temper in which the portions now offered may be received
by the public.  In the mean time,  it should be mentioned that after Miss Burney had
for some years addressed her Journal as above  (to  "Nobody") — when its topics began to
assume a more general and public interest,  she changed this rather embarrassing feature
of her plan,  and addressed these records of her life and thoughts to her beloved sister,  Miss
Susan Burney  (afterwards Mrs,  Phillips),  and occasionally to her accomplished and vene-
rated friend,  Mr.  Crisp,  of Chesington, — to whom the packets were forwarded respectively,
from time to time,  as opportunities offered.]

DIAET A^^D LETTERS

AUTHOR OF  "EVELINA.'

CHAPTER I.

1778.

The Publication of  "  Evelina" — Its Design and Objects — Secrecy of its Publication —
Letter from the Publisher — Alarm of the Writer at being known — Awkward Predica-
ment— Critiques on  "  Evelina" — Mr.  Crisp — "  Evelina"  read by Dr.  Burney — His Dis-
covery of its Author — Dr.  Johnson — Letters from Miss Burney to her Father — Mrs.
Thrale — Astonishing Success of  "  Evelina" — Disclosure of its Authorship to her
Mother — Mrs.  Cholmondeley — Mrs.  Thrale — Mr.  Lowndes — Letters from Miss Burney
to her Sister — Dr.  Johnson — Miss Burney's Feelings on her unlooked-for Success as
an Authoress — Guesses as to the Writer of  "  Evelina" — Diary resumed — Dr.  Burney
acquaints Mrs.  Thrale with the Secret — Singular Position of the Writer — Letter of
Mrs.  Thrale — Madame Riccoboni — Dr.  Johnson reads  "Evelina" — His Opinion of it —
Anna Williams — Invitation to Streatham — The Author's Alarm at meeting the Lite-
rary Circle there — Great Profits of the Publisher — First Visit to Streatham — Her
Reception by the Thrales — Mrs.  Thrale's admiration of  "Evelina" — She describes
Dr.  Johnson imitating Characters in  "  Evelina" — Mr.  Seward — First Introduction to
Dr.  Johnson — His Conversation — Garrick — His Prologues and Epilogues — Garrick
and Wilkes — Wear and Tear of the Face — Sir John Hawkins — An  "  Unclubable
Man" — A Mean Couple — Mrs.  Reynolds — Sir Joshua Reynolds — He sits up all night
to read  "Evelina" — Miss Burney visits Mr.  Lowndes— His account of the Author of
"  Evelina" — Secret History — Letters from Mr.  Crisp — Anecdote of Quin the Actor.

This year was ushered in by a grand and most important event !  At
the latter end of January,  the literary world was favoured with the first
publication of the ingenious,  learned,  and most profound Fanny Burney !
I doubt not but this memorable affair will,  in future times,  mark the period
whence chronologers will date the zenith of the polite arts in this island !

This admirable authoress has named her most elaborate performance,
Evelina  ;  or,  a Young Lachfs Entrance into the World.

Perhaps this may seem rather a bold attempt and title,  for a female
whose knowledge of the world is very confined,  and whose inclinations,  as
well as situation,  incline her to a private and domestic life.  All I can urge
is,  that I have only presumed to trace the accidents and adventures to which

VOL.  I.  2

14 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

a  "  young woman"  is liable ;  I have not pretended to show the world what
it actually w,  but what it appears to a girl of seventeen ;  and so far as that,
surely any girl who is past seventeen may safely do  ?  The motto of my
excuse shall be taken from Pope's  "  Temple of Fame :"

In every work,  regard the writer's end  ;
None e'er can coinpass more tJian they intend.

About the middle of January,  my cousin Edward brought me a parcel,
under the name of Grafton.  I had,  some little time before,  acquainted both
my aunts of my frolic.  They will,  I am sure,  be discreet ;  indeed,  I
exacted a vow from them of strict secrecy ;  and they love me with such partial
kindness,  that I have a pleasure in reposing much confidence in them.

I immediately conjectured what the parcel was,  and found the following
letter.

TO MR.  GRAFTON.

To be left at tho Orange Coffee House.
Sir,

I take the liberty to send you a novel,  which a gentleman,  your
acquaintance,  said you would hand to him.  I beg with expedition,  as  'tis
time it should be published,  and  'tis requisite he should first revise it,  or the
reviewers may find a flaw. — I am,  sir,

Your obedient servant,

Thomas Lowndes.
Fleet Street,  Jan.  7,  1778.

My aunts,  now,  would take no denial to my reading it to tlicm^  in
order to mark errata ;  and — to cut the matter short,  I was compelled to
communicate the affair to my cousin Edward,  and then to obey their com-
mands.

Of course^  they were all prodigiously charmed with it.  My cousin now
became my agent,  as deputy to Charles,  with Mr.  Lowndes,  and when 1 had
made the errata,  carried it to him.

The book,  however,  was not published till the latter end of the month.
A thousand little odd incidents happened about this time,  but I am not in a
humour to recollect them ;  however,  they were none of them productive of
a discovery either to my father or mother.

My little book,  I am told,  is now at all the circulating libraries.  I have
an exceeding odd sensation,  when I consider that it is now in the power of
any and every body to read what I so carefully hoarded even from my best
friends,  till this last month or two ;  and that a work which was so lately
lodged,  in all privacy,  in my bureau,  may now be seen by every butcher
and baker,  cobbler and tinker,  throughout the three kingdoms,  for the small
tribute of threepence.

My aunt Anne and Miss Humphries being settled at this time at
Brompton,  I was going thither with Susan to tea,  when Charlotte
acquainted me that they were then employed in reading  "  Evelina"  to the
invalid,  my cousin Richard.  My sister had recommended it to Miss Hum-
phries, and my aunts and Edward agreed that they would read it,  but with-
out mentioning any thing of the author.

This intelligence gave me the utmost uneasiness — I foresaw a thousand
dangers of a discovery — I dreaded the indiscreet warmth of all my con-

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  15

fidants.  In truth,  I was quite sick with apprehension,  and was too uncom-
fortable to go to Brompton,  and Susan carried my excuses.

Upon her return,  I was somewhat tranquillized,  for she assured me that
there was not the smallest suspicion of the author,  and that they had con-
cluded it to be the work of a mail!  and Miss Humphries,  who read it aloud
to Richard,  said several things in its commendation,  and concluded them
by exclaiming,  "  It's a thousand pities the author should lie concealed !"

Finding myself more safe than I had apprehended,  I ventured to go to
Brompton next day.  In my way up stairs,  I heard Miss Humphries in
the midst of Mr.  Villars'  letter of consolation upon Sir John Belmont's
rejection of his daughter ;  and just as I entered the room,  she cried out,
"  How pretty that is 1"

How much in luck would she have thought herself,  had she known v:lio
heard her  !

In a private confabulation which I had with my aunt Anne,  she told me
a thousand things that had been said in its praise,  and assured me they had
not for a moment doubted that the work was a uian^s.

Comforted and made easy by these assurances,  I longed for the diversion
of hearing their observations,  and therefore  (though rather 7nal a propos)
after I had been near two hours in the room,  I told Miss Humphries that I
was afraid I had interrupted her,  and begged she would go on with what
she was reading.

"  Why,"  cried she,  taking up the book,  "  we have been prodigiously
entertained ;"  and very readily she continued.

I must own I suffered great difficulty in refraining from laughing upon
several occasions, — and several times,  when they praised what they read,  I
was upon the point of saying,  "  You are very good !"  and so forth,  and I
could scarcely keep myself from making acknowledgments,  and bowing
my head involuntarily.     However,  I got off perfectly safe.

Monday.  Susan and I went to tea at Brompton.  We met Miss Hum-
phries coming to town.  She told us she had just finished  "  Evelina,"  and
gave us to understand that she could not get away till she had done it.  We
heard afterwards from my aunt the most flattering praises  ;  and Richard
could talk of nothing else.  His encomiums gave me double pleasure,  from
being wholly unexpected  :  for I had prepared myself to hear that he held it
extremely cheap.  And I was yet more satisfied,  because I was sure they
were sincere,  as he convinced me that he had not the most distant idea
of suspicion,  by finding great fault with  "  Evelina"  herself,  for her bashful-
ness with such a man as Lord Orville.

I could have answered him that he ought to have considered the original
character of Evelina, — that she had been brought up in the strictest retire-
ment ;  that she knew nothing of the world,  and only acted from the impulses
of nature ;  and that her timidity always prevented her from daring to hope
that Lord Orville was seriously attached to her.  In short,  \  could have bid
him read the preface again,  where she is called  "  the offspring of Nature,
and of Nature in her simplest attire."  But I feared appearing too well ac-
quainted with the book,  and I rejoiced that an unprejudiced reader should
make no weightier objection.

It seems,  to my utter amazement,  Miss Humphries has guessed the author
to be Anstey,  who wrote the  "  Bath Guide  !"  How improbable and how
extraordinary a supposition  !  But they have both of them done it so much
honour that,  but for Richard's anger at Evelina's bashful ness,  I never could
believe they did not suspect me.  I never went to Brompton without finding
the third volume in Richard's hands ;  he  'speaks of all the characters as if

16 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

they were his acquaintance,  and praises different parts perpetually :  both he
and Miss Humphries seem to have it by heart,  for it is always a 2jropo&  to
whatever is the subject of discourse,  and their whole conversation almost
consists of quotations from it.

As Richard's recovery seemed now confirmed,  his Worcester friends grew
impatient to see him,  and he fixed upon Tuesday to leave town  :  to the great
regret of us all,  glad as we were that he was able to make the journey.
Sunday,  therefore,  was settled for his making a last visit at our house,  that
he might again see my father,  and try his own strength.

I now grew very uneasy,  lest Miss Humphries and Richard should speak
of the book to my mother,  and lest she should send for it to read,  upon their
recommendation ;  for I could not bear to think of the danger I should run
from my own consciousness,  and various other causes,  if the book were
brought into the house.  I therefore went on Saturday morning to consult
with my aunt at Brompton.  She advised,  nay,  besought me to tell them the
real state of the case at once  ;  but I could not endure to do that,  and so,  after
much pondering,  I at last determined to take my chance.

Richard,  in handing me some macaroons,  chose to call them macaro7iics^
and said,  "  Come,  Miss Fanny,  you Qiuist have some of these, — they are all
Sir Clemeyit WiUouglibifs, — all in the highest style, — and I am sure to be
like him will recommend them to yoii^  for Ids must be a very favourite
character with you  ;  a character in the Jirst style,  give me leave to assure
you."

March 30. — I have just received a letter from my dear Charles,  in which
he informs me that he has subscribed to a circulating library at Reading,
and then he adds,  "  I am to have  '  Evelina'  to-day ;  the man told me it was
spoken very highly of,  and very much inquired after ;  that,  as yet,  there
has been no critique upon it ;  but that it was thought one of the best publi-
cations we have had for a long time."

As to a critique,  it is with fear and fidgets I await it.  Next Wednesday
I expect to be in one of the reviews. — Oh Heavens !  what should I do if I
were known,  for I have very little doubt I shall be horribly mauled.

I will copy the Monthly Revieio of my book  ;  in the Critical I have not
yet appeared.

But hold — first in order comes the London Revieiv for February 1778,
by W.  Kenrick.

"  Evelina. — The history of a young lady exposed to very critical situa-
tions. There is much more merit,  as well respecting style,  as character
and incident,  than is usually to be met with in modern novels."

From the Monthly Revieiv for April 1778.

"  Evelina ;  or,  a Young Lady's Entrance into the World. — This novel
has given us so much pleasure in the perusal,  that we do not hesitate to
pronounce it one of the most sprightly,  entertaining,  and agreeable produc-
tions of this kind that has of late fallen under our notice.  A great variety
of natural incidents,  some of the comic stamp,  render the narrative ex-
tremely interesting.  The characters,  which are agreeably diversified,  are
conceived and drawn with propriety,  and supported with spirit.  The whole
is written with great ease and command of language.  From this commenda-
tion we must,  however,  except the character of a son of Neptune,  whose
manners are rather those of a rough,  uneducated country squire than those
of a genuine sea-captain."

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  17

Chesington,  June 18th.

Here I am,  and here I have been this age ;  though too weak to think of
journaUzing ;  however,  as I never had so many curious anecdotes to record,
I will not — at least this year,  the first of my appearing in public — give up
my favourite old hobby-horse.

I came hither the first week in May.  My recovery from that time to this
has been slow and sure ;  but as I could walk hardly three yards in a day at
first,  I found so much time to spare,  that I could not resist treating myself
with a little private sport with  "  Evelina,"  a young lady whom I think I
have some right to make free with.  I had promised Hetty that she should
read it to Mr.  Crisp,  at her own particular request ;  but I wrote my excuses,
and introduced it myself.

I told him it was a book which Hetty had taken to Brompton,  to divert
my cousin Richard during his confinement.  He was so indifferent about it,
that I thought he would not give himself the trouble to read it,  and often
embarrassed me by unlucky questions,  such as,  "  If it was reckoned clever?"
and  "  What I thought of it^f and  "  Whether folks laughed at it?"  I always
evaded any direct or satisfactory answer ;  but he was so totally free from
any idea of suspicion,  that my perplexity escaped his notice.

At length,  he desired me to begin reading to him.  I dared not trust my
voice with the little introductory ode,  for as tJiat is no romance,  but the
sincere effusion of my heart,  I could as soon read aloud my own letters,
written in my own name and character :  I therefore skipped it,  and have so
kept the book out of his sight,  that,  to this day,  he knows not it is there.
Indeed,  I have,  since,  heartily repented that I read any of the book to him,
for I found it a much more awkward thing than I had expected :  my voice
quite faltered when I began it,  which,  however,  I passed off for the effect of
remaining weakness. of lungs  ;  and,  in short,  from an invincible embarrass-
ment, which I could not for a page together repress,  the book,  by my read-
ing, lost all manner of spirit.

Nevertheless,  though he has by no means treated it with the praise so
lavishly bestowed upon it from other quarters,  I had the satisfaction to ob-
serve that he was even greedily eager to go on with it ;  so that I flatter myself
the story caught his attention  :  and,  indeed,  allowing for my mauling read-
ing, he gave it quite as much credit as I had any reason to expect.  But,
now that I was sensible of my error in being my own mistress of the
ceremonies,  I determined to leave to Hetty the third volume,  and there-
fore pretended I had not brought it.  He was in a delightful ill-humour
about it,  and I enjoyed his impatience far more than I should have done his
forbearance.    Hetty,  therefore,  when she comes,  has undertaken to bring it.

I have had a visit from my beloved Susy,  who,  with my mother and little
Sally,*  spent a day here,  to my no small satisfaction ;  and yet I was put
into an embarrassment,  of which I even yet know not what will be the end,
during their short stay :  for Mr.  Crisp,  before my mother,  very innocently
said to Susan,  "O,  pray Susette,  do send me the third volume of'  Evelina;'
Fanny brought me the two first on purpose,  I believe,  to tantalize me."

I felt myself in a ferment ;  and Susan,  too,  looked foolish,  and knew not
what to answer.  As I sat on the same sofa with him,  I gave him a gentle
shove,  as a token,  which he could not but understand,  that he had said
something wTong — though I believe he could not imagine U'hat,  Indeed,
how should he  ?

*  Dr.  Barney's daughter by liis second wife.
2*

18 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778,

My mother instantly darted forward,  and repeated  "  Evelina — what's
that,  pray?"

Again 1 jolted Mr.  Crisp,  who,  very much perplexed,  said,  in a boggling
manner,  that it was a novel — he supposed from the circulating library —
"  only a trumpery nwelT

Ah,  my dear daddy !  thought I,  you would have devised some other sort
of speech,  if you knew all  ! — but he was really,  as he well might be,  quite
at a loss for what I wanted him to say.

"  You have had it here,  then,  have you  ?"  continued my mother.

"  Yes — two of the volumes,"  said Mr.  Crisp.

"  What,  had you them from the library  ?"  asked my mother.

"  No,  ma'am,"  answered I,  horribly frightened,  "  from my sister."

The truth is,  the books are Susan's,  who bought them the first day of
publication  ;  but I did not dare own that,  as it would have been almost an
acknowledgment of all the rest.  She asked some further questions,  to
which we made the same sort of answers,  and then the matter dropped.
Whether it rests upon her mind,  or not,  I cannot tell.

Susan and I were next forced to exert our wits for some excuse to Mr.
Crisp,  for my checking him.

Two days after,  I received from Charlotte a letter the most interesting
that could be written to me,  for it acquainted me that my dear father was,  at
length,  reading my book,  which has now been published six months.

How this has come to pass,  I am yet in the dark  ;  but,  it seems the very
moment almost that my mother and Susan and Sally left the house,  he
desired Charlotte to bring him the Monthly Review  ;  she contrived to look
over his shoulder as he opened it,  which he did at the account of  "  Evelina  ;
or,  a Young Lady^s Entrance into the World.''''  He read it with great
earnestness,  then put it down  ;  and presently after snatched it up,  and read
it again.  Doubtless,  his paternal heart felt some agitation for his girl,  in
reading a review of her publication  ! — how he got at the name,  I cannot
imagine.

Soon after,  he turned to Charlotte,  and bidding her come close to him,
he put his finger on the word  "  Evelina,"  and saying,  she knew what it ivas,
bade her write down the name,  and send the man to Lowndes,  as if for
herself.     This she did,  and away went William.

He then told Charlotte,  that he had never known the name of it till the
day before.  'Tis strange how he got at it !  He added that I had come off
vastly well in this review,  except for the Captain.  Charlotte told him it
had also been in Kenrick's review,  and he desired her to copy out for him
what was said in both of them.  He asked her,  too,  whether I had mentioned
the work was by a lady  ?

When William returned,  he took the books from him,  and the moment
he was gone,  opened the first volume — and opened it upon the ode  !

How great must have been his astonishment,  at seeing himself so ad-
dressed !  Indeed,  Charlotte says,  he looked all amazement,  read a line or
two with great eagerness,  and then,  stopping short,  he seemed quite affected,
and the tears started into his eyes:  dear soul!  I am sure they did into
mine,  nay,  I even sobbed,  as I read the account.

I believe he was obliged to go out before he advanced much further.  But
the next day I had a letter from Susan,  in which I heard that he had begun
reading it with Lady Hales,  and Miss Coussmaker,  and that they liked it
vastly  !

Lady Hales spoke of it very innocently,  in the highest terms,  declaring

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  19

she was sure it was  -written by somebody in high life,  and that it had all the
marks of real genius  !     She added,  "  he must be a man of great abilities  !"

How ridiculous  !  but Miss Coussmaker was a little nearer the truth,
for she gave it as her opinion,  that the writer was a icoman^  for she said
there was such a remarkable delicacy in the conversations and descriptions,
notwithstanding the grossness and vulgarity of some of the characters,  and
that all oaths and indelicate words were so carefully,  yet naturally avoided,
that she could not but suspect the writer was a female ;  but,  she added,  not-
withstanding the preface declared that the writer never would be known,
she hoped,  that if the book circulated as she expected it would,  lie or she^
would be tempted to make a discovery.

Ha  !  ha  !  ha  ! — that's my answer.  They little think how well they are
already acquainted with the writer they so much honour  !  Susan begged to
have,  then,  my father's real and final opinion ; — and it is such as I almost
blush to write,  even for my own private reading ;  but yet is such as I can
by no means suffer to pass unrecorded,  as my whole journal contains
nothing so grateful to me. — I will copy his own words,  according to Susan's
solemn declaration of their authenticity.

"  Upon my word I think it the best novel I know,  excepting Fielding's,
and,  in some respects,  better than his  !  I have been excessively pleased
with it;  there are,  perhaps,  a few things that might have been otherwise.
Mirvan's trick upon Level is,  I think,  carried too far, — there is something
even disgusting in it :  however,  this instance excepted,  I protest I think it
will scarce bear an improvement.  The language is as good as any body
need write — I declare as good as I would ivish to read.  Lord Orville's
character is just what it should be  ;  perfectly benevolent and upright ;  and
there is a boldness in it that struck me mightily,  for he is a man not
ashamed of being better than the rest of mankind.  Evelina is a new style
too,  so perfectly innocent and natural ;  and the scene between her and her
father.  Sir John Belmont,  is a scene for a tragedy  !  I blubbered at it,  and
Lady Hales and Miss Coussmaker are not yet recovered from hearing it  ;
it made them quite ill :  it is,  indeed,  wrought up in a most extraordinary
manner  !"

This account delighted me more than I can express.  How little did I
dream of ever being so much honoured  !  But the approbation of all the
world put together,  would not bear any competition,  in my estimation,  with

that of my beloved father.     He told Susan that Lady H had bought

her set ;  and that he heard Lady Radnor had bought another.  So  "  Eve-
lina" is still travelling in the great ivorld!

Soon after this communication,  my sister Hetty came hither to spend a
few days.  Mr.  Crisp almost immediately asked her for the third volume
of  "  Evelina,"  but,  as she had not time to stay to read it,  she pretended

that it was lent to Mrs. .     While she was with us,  though fortunately,

when I was not present,  he asked her if any body had yet been named or
suspected for the author?  "No!"  she said,  "  but that it took vastly i'  and
she praised it very freely;  and he assented to all she said.

What will all this come to  ? — where will it end 1 and when,  and how,
shall I wake from the vision of such splendid success  ?  for I hardly know
how to believe it real.

Well,  I cannot but rejoice that I published the book,  little as I ever
imagined how it would fare ;  for hitherto it has occasioned me no small
diversion, — and nothing of the disagreeable sort.  But I often think a
change will happen,  for I am by no means so sanguine as to suppose such
success will be uninterrupted.     Indeed,  in the midst of the greatest satis-

20 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

faction that I feel,  an inward something,  which I cannot account for,  pre-
pares me to expect a reverse  ;  for the more the book is drawn into notice,
the more exposed it becomes to criticism and remark.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

Chesington,  Friday,  July 25,  1778.
My dear and most kind Father,

The request you have condescended to make me,  I meant to anti-
cipate in my last letter.  How good you are to pave the way for my secrets
being favourably received,  by sparing your mvn time and breath to gain the
book attention and partiality !  I can't express a third part of either the
gratitude or pleasure I feel upon hearing from Susy,  that you are reading
it aloud to my mother ;  because I well know nothing can give it so good a
chance with her.

Will you tell,  or shall I write to my mother  ?  I believe she will not be
all surprise,  for I fancy she is not totally without suspicion ;  but pray be
so kind as to tell her,  that it was not want of confidence in Iter,  but in
77iys€lf,  that occasioned my reserve and privacy.  She knows how severe
a critic I think her,  and therefore I am sure cannot wonder I should dread
a lash which I had no other hope of escaping from,  but flight or disguise.
Indeed,  the thoughts of  "  hot rolls and butter in July"  could not have a
more indelicate effect on my Lord Ogleby,  than those had upon me which
followed the news of  "  Evelina's"  visit to St.  Martin's Street.

However,  Susan comforts me with assurances that things are in a pretty
good way ;  and therefore I am willing to flatter myself that,  hearing who
is the writer will rather serve to blunt than to sharpen the edge of criticism.
I am sure it does with you,  or your patience and precious time could never
wade through three volumes of that sort;  and I encourage myself,  in
regard to my mother,  with the knowledge that no person's feelings will be
so likely to prove infectious to her as yours.  She must not be angry if I
own I heartily hope she will not escape the contagion.

My mother will the sooner pardon my privacy,  when she hears that
even from you I used every method in my power to keep my trash con-
cealed, and that I even yet know not in what manner you got at the name
of it.  Indeed,  I only proposed,  like my friends the Miss Branghtons,  a
little  "  private fun,"  and never once dreamt of extending my confidence
beyond my sisters.

As to Mrs.  Thrale, — your wish of telling Jier quite unmans me ;  I shook
so,  when I read it,  that,  had any body been present,  I must have betrayed
myself;  and,  indeed,  many of my late letters have given me such extreme
surprise,  and perturbation,  that I believe nothing could have saved me from
Mr.  Crisp's discernment,  had he seen me during my first reading.  How-
ever, he has not an idea of the kind.

But if you do tell Mrs.  Thrale,  won't she think it strange where I can
have kept company,  to describe such a family as the Braughtons,  Mr.
Brown,  and some others?  Indeed,  (thank Heavea!)  I don't myself recol-
lect ever passing half-an-hour at a time with any one person quite so bad  ;
so that,  I am afraid she will conclude I must have an innate vulgarity of
ideas,  to assist me with such coarse colouring for the objects of my imagi-
nation. Not that I suppose the book would be better received by her,  for
having characters very pretty,  and all alike.  My only fear,  in regard to
that particular,  is for poor Miss Bayes  ! — If I were able to  "  insinuate the

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  21

plot into the boxes,"  I should build my defence upon Swift's maxim,  that
"  a nice man is a man of nasty ideas."  I should certainly have been
more finical,  had I foreseen what has happened,  or had the most remote
notion of being known by Mrs.  Thrale for the scribe.  However,  'tis
perhaps as well as it is  ;  for these kind of compositions lose all their spirit
if they are too scrupulously corrected :  besides,  if I had been very nice,  I
must have cleared away so much,  that,  like poor Mr.  Twiss after his friends
had been so obliging as to give his book a scourge,  nothing but hum-drum
matter of fact would be left.

Adieu,  my dearest sir.  Pray give my duty to my mother,  and pray let
her know,  after the great gun is gone off,  that 1 shall anxiously wait to
hear her opinion  :  and believe me ever and ever

Your dutiful and most affectionate,

Francesca Scriblerus.

JOURNAL RESUMED.

July 25. — Mrs.  Cholmondeley has been reading and praising  "Evelina,"
and my father is quite delighted at her approbation,  and told Susan that I
could not have had a greater compliment than making two such women my
friends as Mrs.  Thrale and Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  for they were severe and
knowing,  and afraid of praising a tort et a travers,  as their opinions are
liable to be quoted.

Mrs.  Thrale said she had only to complain it was too short.  She recom-
mended it to my mother to read  ! — how droll ! — and she told her she would
be much entertained with it,  for there was a great deal of human life in it,
and of the manners of the present times,  and added that it was written  "  by
somebody who knows the top and the bottom,  the highest and the lowest of
mankind."  She has even lent her set to my mother,  who brought it home
with her !

By the way,  I have again resumed my correspondence with my friend
Mr.  Lowndes.  When I sent the errata I desired to have a set,  directed to
Mr.  Grafton,  at the Orange Coffee House ;  for 1 had no copy but the one
he sent me to make the errata from,  which was incomplete and unbound.
However,  I heard nothing at all from him ;  and therefore,  after some con-
sideration, and much demur,  I determined to make an attempt once more ;
for my father told me it was a shame that I the author,  should not have
even one set of my own work  ;  I ought,  he said,  to have had six :  and
indeed,  he is often quite enraged that Lowndes gave no more for the MS. —
but I was satisfied, — and that sufficed.

I therefore wrote him word,  that I supposed,  in the hurry of his business,
and variety of his concerns,  he had forgotten my request,  which I now
repeated.  I also added,  that if ever the book went through another edition,
I should be glad to have timely notice,  as I had some corrections and altera-
tions to propose.

I received an immediate answer,  and intelligence from my sisters,  that
he had sent a set of  "  Evelina"  most elegantly bound.  The answer I will
copy.

Fleet Street,  July 2, 1778.

Sir, — I bound up a set for you the first day I had them,  and hoped by
some means to hear from you.  The Great World send here to buy
*'  Evelina."     A polite lady said.  Do,  Mr.  Lowndes,  give me  "  Evelina,"  I

22 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

am treated as unfashionable for not having read it.  I think the impression
will be sold by Christmas.  If meantime,  or about that time,  you favour me
with any commands,  I shall be proud to observe them.

Your obliged servant,

J.  Lowndes.
To Mr.  Grafton,

MISS F.  BURNEY,  TO MISS S.  BURNEY.

Chesington,  July 5,  1778.
My dearest Susy,

Don't you think there must be some wager depending among the
little curled imps who hover over us mortals,  of how much flummery goes
to turn the head of an authoress  ?  Your last communication very near did
my business  ;  for,  meeting Mr.  Crisp ere I had composed myself,  I  "  tipt
him such a touch of the heroics"  as he has not seen since the time when I
was so much celebrated for dancing  "  Nancy Dawson."  I absolutely longed
to treat him with one of Captain Mirvan's frolics,  and to fling his wig
out of the windov/.  I restrained myself,  however,  from the apprehension
that they would imagine I had a universal spite to that harmless piece of
goods,  which I have already been known to treat with no little indignity.
He would fain have discovered the reason of my skittishness ;  but as I
could not tell it him,  I was obliged to assure him it would be lost time to
inquire further into my flights,  since  "  true no meaning puzzles more than
wit,"  and,  therefore,  begging the favour of him to  "  set me down an  «55,"  I
suddenly retreated.

My dear,  dear Dr.  Johnson !  what a charming man you are  !  Mrs.
Cholmondeley,  too,  I am not merely prepared but determined to admire  ;
for really she has shown so much penetration and sound sense of late,  that
I think she will bring about a union between Wit and Judgment,  and though
their separation has been so long and though their meetings have been so
few.

But,  Mrs.  Thrale !  she — she is the goddess of my idolatry ! — What an
eloge is hers  ! — an eloge that not only delights at first,  but proves more and
more flattering every time it is considered !

I often think when I am counting my laurels,  what a pity it would have
been had I popped off'  in my last illness,  without knowing what a person of
consequence I was  ! — and I sometimes think that,  were I now to have a
relapse,  I could never go off"  with so much eclat  /  '  I am now at the summit
of a high hill ;  my prospects on one side are bright,  glowing,  and invitingly
beautiful  ;  but when I turn round,  I perceive,  on the other side,  sundry
caverns,  gulfs,  pits,  and precipices,  that,  to look at,  make my head giddy
and my heart sick.  I see about me,  indeed,  many hills of far greater height
and sublimity ;  but I have not the strength to attempt climbing them  ;  if I
move,  it must be downwards.  I have already,  I fear,  reached the pinnacle
of my abilities,  and therefore to stand still will be my best policy.

But there is nothing under heaven so difficult to do.  Creatures who are
formed for motion 77ii/st move,  however great their inducements to forbear.
The wisest course I could take,  would be to bid an eternal adieu to writing ;
then would the cry be,  "  Tis pity she does not go on  ! — she might do some-
thing better by and by,"  &c.  &c.  Evelina,  as a first and a youthful publi-
cation, has been received with the utmost favour and lenity ;  but would a
future attempt be treated with the same mercy  ? — no,  my dear Susy,  quite
the contrary;  there would not,  indeed,  be the same plea to save it;  it would

1778.  ^^  "^HE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.  23

no longer be a young lady's first appearance in public  ;  those who have
met with less indulgence would all peck at any second work  ;  and even
those who most encouraged the first offspring,  might prove enemies to the
second,  by receiving it with expectations which it could not answer :  and
so,  between either the friends or the foes of the eldest,  the second would
stand an equally bad chance,  and a million of flaws which were overlooked
in the former,  would be ridiculed as villanous and intolerable blunders in
the latter.

But,  though my eyes ache as I strain them to look forward,  the tempta-
tions before me are almost irresistible ;  and what you have transcribed from
Mrs.  Thrale may,  perhaps,  prove my destruction.

So you wish to have some of the sayings of the folks here about the hook  ?
I am sure I owe you all the communications I can possibly give you ;  but
I have now nothing new to offer,  for the same strain prevails here as in
town  ;  and no one will be so obliging to me as to put in a little abuse  :  so
that I fear you will be satiated with the sameness of people's remarks.
Yet,  what can I do 1 If they ivill be so disagreeable and tiresome as to be
all of one mind,  how is it to be helped  ?  I can only advise you to follow
my example,  which is,  to accommodate my philosophy to their insipidity  ;
and in this I have so wonderfully succeeded,  that I hear their commendations
not merely with patience,  but even with a degree of pleasure  !  Such,  my
dear Susy,  is the effect of true philosophy.

You desire Kitty Cooke's remarks in particular.  I have none to give you
for none can I get.  To the serious part she indeed listens,  and seems to
think it may possibly be very fine ;  but she is quite lost when the Brangh-
tons and Madame Duval are mentioned ; — she hears their speeches very
composedly,  and as  \yords of course;  but when she hears them followed by
loud bursts of laughter from Hetty,  Mr.  Crisp,  Mrs.  Gast,  and Mr.  Burney,
she stares with the gravest amazement,  and looks so aghast,  and so dis-
tressed to know where the joke can be,  that I never dare trust myself to look
at her for more than an instant.  Were she to speak her thoughts,  I am sure
she would ask why such common things,  that pass every day,  should be
printed  ?  And all the derision with which the party in general treat the
Branghtons,  I can see she feels herself,  with a plentiful addition of astonish-
ment, for the author  !

By the way,  not a human being here has the most remote suspicion of the
fact ;  I could not be more secure were I literally unknown to them.  And
there is no end to the ridiculous speeches perpetually made to me,  by all of
them in turn,  though quite by accident.

"  Ain't you sorry this sweet book is done  ?"  said  ]\Irs.  Gast.

A silly little laugh was the answer.

"  Ah  !"  said Patty,  "  'tis the sweetest book ! — don't you think so,  i\Iiss
Burney  ?"

N.B.  Answer as above.

"Pray,  Miss Fan,"  says Mrs.  Hamilton,  "  who wrote it?"

*'  Really I never heard."

'Cute enough that.  Miss Sukey !

I desired Hetty to miss the verses ;  for I can't sit them :  and I have been
obliged to hide the first volume ever since,  for fear of a discovery.  But I
don't know how it will end ;  for JMrs.  Gast has declared she shall buy it,  to
take to Burford with her.

24 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.

Chesington,  Sunday,  July 6,  1778.

Your letter,  my dearest Susan,  and the inclosed one from Lowndes,
have flung me into such a vehement perturbation,  that I hardly can tell
whether I wake or dream,  and it is even with difficulty that I can fetch my
breath.  I have been strolling round the garden three or four times,  in hopes
of regaining a little quietness.  However,  I am not very angry at my inward
disturbance,  though it even exceeds what I experienced from the Monthly
Review.

My dear Susy,  what a wonderful affair has this been,  and how extraordi-
nary is this torrent of success,  which sweeps down all before it !  I often
think it too much,  nay,  almost wish it would happen to some other person,
who had more ambition,  whose hopes were more sanguine,  and who could
less have borne to be buried in the oblivion which I even sought.  But
though it might have been better bestowed,  it could by no one be more
gratefully received.

Indeed I can't help being grave upon the subject ;  for a success so really
unexpected almost overpowers me.  I wonder at myself that my spirits are
not more elated.  I believe half the flattery I have had would have made
me madly merry  ;  but all serves only to almost depress me by the fulness
of heart it occasions.

^  ^  Tp Tp  ^  "ff

I have been serving Daddy Crisp a pretty trick this morning.  How he
would rail if he found it all out !  I had a fancy to dive pretty deeply into
the real rank in which he held my book ;  so I told him that your last letter
acquainted me who was reported to be the author of  "  Evelina."  I added
that it was a profound secret,  and he must by no means mention it to a
human being.  He bid me tell him directly,  according to his usual style of
command — but I insisted upon his guessing.

"  I can't guess,"  said he  ;  "  may be it is you  /"

Oddso !  thought I,  what do you mean by that  ?

"  Pooh,  nonsense  !"  cried I,  "  what should make you think of me?"

"  Why,  you look guilty,"  answered he.

This was a horrible home stroke.  Deuce take my looks  !  thought I — I
shall owe them a grudge for this !  however I found it was a mere random
shot,  and,  without much difficulty,  I laughed it to scorn.

And who do you think he guessed next  ? — My father  ! — there's for you  !
— and several questions he asked me,  whether he had lately been shut up
much — and so on.  But this was not all — for he afterwards guessed Mrs.
Thrale and Mrs.  Greville.

There's honour and glory for you  ! — I assure you I grinned prodigiously.

He then would guess no more.  So I served him another trick for his
laziness.  I read a paragraph in your last letter,  (which,  perhaps,  you may
not perfectly remember,)  in which you say the private report is,  that the
author is a son of the late Dr.  Friend,  my likeness.

Now this son is a darling of my daddy's,  who reckons him the most sen-
sible and intelligent young man of his acquaintance ;  so I trembled a feiv^
for I thought,  ten to one but he'd say — "  He 1 — not he — I promise you  !" —
but no such thing — his immediate answer was — "  Well,  he's very capable of
that or any thing else."

I grinned broader than before.

And here the matter rests.  I shan't undeceive him,  at least till he has
finished the book.

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  25

JOURNAL RESUMED.

July 20. — I have had a letter from my beloved father — the kindest,
sweetest letter in the world  !  He tells me too,  that he found Mrs.  Thrale
full of 3Ia fob's jokes,  the Captain's brutality.  Squire Smith's gentility.  Sir
Clement's audaciousness,  the Branghtons'  vulgarity,  and Mother Selwyn's
sharp knife,  &c.  &c.  He then says,  that he wishes to tell Lady Hales,
though she cannot be made more fond of a book by a personal partiality for
the author.  He concludes with — "  I never heard of a novel writer's statue
— yet,  who knows — but above all things take care of your head ;  if that
should be at all turned out of its place by all this intoxicating success,  what
a figure would you cut upon a pedestal — prenez y hien garde  /"

Well may he caution me ! — but,  as I have told him in answer,  if I were to
make so ungrateful,  so sinful a return for the favours of fortune,  as to be
ridiculously vain,  I should think all this success,  charming as it is,  bought
much too dear.

I have also had a letter from Susanne.  She informs me that my father,
when he took the books to Streatham,  actually acquainted Mrs.  Thrale with
my secret.  He took an opportunity,  w hen they were alone together,  of
saying that upon her recommendation,  he had himself,  as well as my
mother,  been reading  "  Evelina."

"  Well !"  cried she,  "  and is it not a very pretty book  ?  and a very clever
book  ?  and a very comical book  ?"

"  Why,"  answered he,  "  'tis well enough ;  but I have something to tell
you about it."

"  Well !  what 1"  cried she ;  "  has Mrs.  Cholmondeley found out the
author."

"  No,"  returned he,  "  not that I know of,  but I believe  /  have,  though
but very lately."

"  Well,  pray let's hear  !"  cried she,  eagerly,  "  I want to know him of all
things."

How my father must laugh at the him  ! — He then,  however,  undeceived
her in regard to that particular,  by telling her it was  "  our Fanny  /"  for she
knows all about all our family,  as my father talks to her of his domestic
concerns without any reserve.

A hundred handsome things,  of course,  followed  ;  and she afterwards
read some of the comic parts to Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.  Thrale,  and whoever came
near her.  How I should have quivered had I been there  !  but they tell me
that Dr.  Johnson laughed as heartily as my father himself did.

Nothing can be more ridiculous than the scenes in which I am almost
perpetually engaged.  Mr.  Crisp,  who is totally without suspicion,  says,
almost daily,  something that has double the meaning he intends to convey ;
for,  as I am often writing,  either letters,  Italian,  or some of my own vagaries,
he commonly calls me the scribe,  and the authoress  ;  asks when I shall
print ;  says he will have all my works on royal paper,  &c. ;  and the other
day,  Mrs.  Gast,  who frequently lectures me about studying too hard,  and in-
juring my health,  said —

"  Prav,  Miss Burney,  now vou write so much,  when do you intend to
publish f"

"  Publish  ?"  cried Mr.  Crisp,  "  why she has published  ;  she brought out
a book the other day that has made a great noise — '  Eivelina^ — ^and she
bribed the reviewers to speak well of it,  and set it a going."

I was almost ready to run out of the room  ;  but,  though the hit was so
palpable in regard to the book,  what he said of the reviewers was so much

VOL.  I.  3

26 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

the contrary,  that it checked my alarm :  mdeed,  had he the most remote
idea of the truth,  he would be the last man to have hinted at it before a
room full of people.

"  Oh  !"  cried I,  as composedly as I could,  "  that is but a small part of
my authorship — I shall give you a list of my folios soon."

They had some jocularity upon the occasion,  but I found I was perfectly
safe ;  indeed my best security is,  that my daddy concludes the author to be
a man,  and all the rest follow as he leads.

Mr.  Burney,  yesterday,  after dinner,  said — "  Gentlemen and ladies,  I'll
propose a toast ;"  then filling his glass,  he drank to  "  The author of
'  Evelina' !"

Had they known the author was present,  they could not have more civilly
accepted the toast ;  it was a bold kind of drollery in Mr.  Burney,  for I was
fain to drink my own health in a bumper,  which he filled for me,  laughing
heartily himself.

August 3. — I have an immensity to write.  Susan has copied me a letter
which Mrs.  Thrale has written to my father,  upon the occasion of returning
my mother two novels by Madame Riccoboni.  It is so honourable to me,
and so sweet in her,  that I must copy it for my faithful journal.

Streatham,  July 22.
"  Dear Sir,

I forgot to give you the novels in your carriage,  which I now send.
"  Evelina"  certainly excels them far enough,  both in probability of story,
elegance of sentiment,  and general power over the mind,  whether exerted in
humour or pathos ;  add to this,  that Riccoboni is a veteran author,  and all
she ever can be ;  but I cannot tell what might not be expected from
*'  Evelina,"  were she to try her genius at comedy.

So far had I written of my letter,  when Mr.  Johnson returned home,  full
of the praises of the book I had lent him,  and protesting there were pas-
sages in it which might do honour to Richardson.  We talk of it for ever,
and he feels ardent afler the denouement;  he  "could not get rid of the
rogue,"  he said.  I lent him the second volume,  and he is now busy with
the other.

You must be more a philosopher,  and less a father,  than I wish you,  not
to be pleased with this letter ;  and the giving such pleasure yields to nothing
but receiving it.  Long,  my dear sir,  may you live to enjoy the just praises
of your children  !  and long may they live to deserve and delight such a
parent !  These are things that you would say in verse  ;  but poetry implies
fiction,  and all this is naked truth.

My compliments to Mrs.  Burney,  and kindest wishes to all your flock,  &c."

How sweet,  how amiable in this charming woman is her desire of making
my dear father satisfied with his scribbler's attempt !  I do,  indeed,  feel the
most grateful love for her.

But Dr.  Johnson's approbation  ! — it almost crazed me with agreeable
surprise — it gave me such a flight of spirits,  that I danced a jig to Mr.
Crisp,  without any preparation,  music,  or explanation ; — to his no small
amazement and diversion.  I left him,  however,  to make his own comments
upon my friskiness,  without affording him the smallest assistance.

Susan also writes me word,  that when my father went last to Streatham,
Dr.  Johnson was not there,  but Mrs.  Thrale told him,  that when he gave
her the first volume of"  Evelina,"  which she had lent him,  he said,  "Why,
madam,  why,  what a charming book you lent me !"  and eagerly inquired

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  37

for the rest.  He was particularly pleased with the Snow Hill scenes,  and
said that Mr.  Smith's vulgar gentility was admirably portrayed ;  and when
Sir Clement joins them,  he said there was a shade of character pro-
digiously well marked.  Well may it be said,  that the greatest minds are
ever the most candid to the inferior set !  I think I should love Dr.  Johnson
for such lenity to a poor mere worm in literature,  even if I were not my-
self the identical grub he has obliged.

Susan has sent me a little note which has really been less pleasant to
me,  because it has alarmed me for my future concealment.  It is from Mrs.
Williams,  an exceeding pretty poetess,  who has the misfortune to be blind,
but who has,  to make some amends,  the honour of residing in the house of
Dr.  Johnson  :  for though he lives almost wholly at Streatham,  he always
keeps his apartments in town,  and this lady acts as mistress of his house.

"July 25.
"  Mrs.  Williams sends compliments to Dr.  Burney,  and begs he will
intercede with Miss Burney to do her the favour to lend her the reading
of '  Evelina.'  "

I was quite confounded at this request,  which proves that Mrs.  Thrale
has told Dr.  Johnson of my secret,  and that he has told Mrs.  Williams,
and that she has told the person,  whoever it be,  whom she got to write the
note !

I instantly scrawled a hasty letter to town,  to entreat my father would
be so good as to write to her,  to acquaint her with my earnest and
unaffected desire to remain unknown.

And yet,  though I am frightened at this affair,  I am by no means insen-
sible to the honour which I receive from the certainty that Dr.  Johnson
must have spoken very well of the book,  to have induced Mrs.  Williams to
send to our house for it.  She has known my father indeed for some years,
but not with any intimacy ;  and I never saw her,  though the perusal of her
poems has often made me wish to be acquainted with her.

I now come to last Saturday evening,  when my beloved father came to
Chesington,  in full health,  charming spirits,  and all kindness,  openness,
and entertainment.

I inquired what he had done about Mrs.  Williams 1 He told me he went
to her himself at my desire,  for if he had written she could not herself have
read the note.  She apologized very much for the liberty she had taken,
and spoke highly of the book,  though she had only heard the first volume,
as she was dependent upon a lady's good nature and time for hearing any
part of it ;  but she went so far as to say that  "  his daughter was certainly
the first writer,  in that way,  now living !"

In his way hither he had stopped at Streatham,  and he settled with Mrs.
Thrale that he would call on her again in his way to town,  and carry me
with him  !  and Mrs.  Thrale said,  "We all long to know her."

I have been in a kind of twitter ever since,  for there seems something
very formidable in the idea of appearing as an authoress  !  I ever dreaded
it,  as it is a title which must raise more expectations than I have any
chance of answering.  Yet I am highly flattered by her invitation,  and
highly delighted in the prospect of being introduced to the Streatham
society.

She sent me some very serious advice to write for the theatre,  as she
says,  I so naturally run into conversations,  that  "  Evelina"  absolutely and
plainly points out that path to me ;  and she hinted how much she should
be pleased to be  "  honoured with my confidence."

28 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

My dear father communicated this intelligence,  and a great deal more,
with a pleasure that almost surpassed that with which I heard it,  and he
seems quite eager for me to make another attempt.  He desired to take
upon himself the communication to my daddy Crisp,  and as it is now in so
many hands that it is possible accident might discover it to him,  I readily
consented.

Sunday evening,  as I was going into my father's room,  I heard him say,
"  The variety of characters — the variety of scenes — and the language —
why she has had very little education but what she has given herself, — less
than any of the others !"  and Mr.  Crisp exclaimed,  "  Wonderful ! — it's
wonderful !"

I now found what was going forward,  and therefore deemed it most
fitting to decamp.

AlDOUt an hour after,  as I was passing through the hall,  I met my daddy
(Crisp).  His face was all animation and archness ;  he doubled his fist at
me,  and would have stopped me,  but I ran past him into the parlour.

Before supper,  however,  I again met him,  and he would not suffer me to
escape ;  he caught both my hands,  and looked as if he would have looked
me through,  and then exclaimed,  "  Why you little hussy, — you young
devil ! — ain't you ashamed to look me in the face,  you Evelina,  you  !  Why,
what a dance have you led me about it !  Young friend,  indeed !  O you
little hussy,  what tricks have you served me !"

I was obliged to allow of his running on with these gentle appellations
for I know not how long,  ere he could sufficiently compose himself after
his great surprise,  to ask or hear any particulars ;  and then,  he broke out
every three instants with exclamations of astonishment at how' I had found
time to write so much unsuspected,  and how and where I had picked up
such various materials  ;  and not a few times did he,  with me,  as he had
with my father,  exclaim,  "  w^onderful !"

He has,  since,  made me read him all my letters upon this subject.  He
said Lowndes would have made an estate had he given me 1000(?.  for it,
and that he ought not to have given less!  "You have nothing to do now,"
continued he,  "  but to take your pen in hand,  for your fame and reputation
are made,  and any bookseller will snap at what you write."

I then told him that I could not but really and unaflectedly regret that
the affair was spread to Mrs.  Williams and her friends.

"  Pho,"  said he,  "  if those who are proper judges think it right that it
should be known,  why should you trouble yourself about it  ?  You have not
spread it,  there can be no imputation of vanity fall to your share,  and it
cannot come out more to your honour than through such a channel as Mrs.
Thrale."

London,  August. — I have now to write an account of the most conse-
quential day I have spent since my birth  :  namely,  my Streatham visit.

Our journey to Streatham was the least pleasant part of the day,  for the
roads were dreadfully dusty,  and I was really in the fidgets from thinking
what my reception might be,  and from fearing they would expect a less
awkward and backward kind of person than I was sure they would find.

Mr.  Thrale's house is white,  and very pleasantly situated,  in a fine pad-
dock. Mrs.  Thrale was strolling about,  and came to us as w^e got out of
the chaise.

"  Ah,"  cried she,  "  I hear Dr.  Burney's voice  !  and you have brought
your daughter? — well,  now you are good!"

She then received me,  taking both my hands,  and with mixed politeness
and cordiality welcoming me to Streatham.  She led me into the house,
and addressed herself almost wholly for a  ^ew minutes to my father,  as if

1778.  ^^  ^^^  AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  39

to give me an assurance she did not mean to regard me as a show,  or to
distress or frighten me by drawing me out.  Afterwards she took me up
stairs,  and showed me the house,  and said she had very much wished to
see me at Strealham,  and should always think herself much obliged to Dr.
Burney for his goodness in bringing me,  which she looked upon as a very
great favour.

But though we were some time together,  and though she was so very
civil,  she did not hint at my book,  and I love her much more than ever
for her delicacy in avoiding a subject which she could not but see would
have greatly embarrassed me.

When we returned to the music-room,  we found Miss Thrale was with
my father.  Miss Thrale is a very fine girl,  about fourteen years of age,
but cold and reserved,  though full of knowledge and intelligence.

Soon after,  Mrs.  Thrale took me to the library ;  she talked a little while
upon common topics,  and then,  at last,  she mentioned  "  Evelina."

"  Yesterday at supper,"  said she,  "  we talked it all over,  and discussed
all your characters ;  but Dr.  Johnson's favourite is Mr.  Smith.  He
declares the fine gentleman manque was never better drawn :  and he acted
him all the evening,  saying he was  '  all for the ladies !'  He repeated whole
scenes by heart.  I declare I was astonished at him.  O you can't imagine
how much he is pleased with the book  ;  he  '  could not get rid of the rogue,'
he told me.  But was it not droll,"  said she,  "  that I should recommend it
to Dr.  Burney?  and tease him,  so innocently,  to read it?"

I now prevailed upon Mrs.  Thrale to let me amuse myself,  and she went
to dress.  I then prowled about to choose some book,  and I saw,  upon the
reading-table,  "  Evelina."  I had just fixed upon a new translation of
Cicero's Lselius,  when the library-door was opened,  and Mr.  Seward
entered.  I instantly put away my book,  because I dreaded being thought
studious and affected.  He offered his service to find any thing for me,  and
then,  in the same breath,  ran on to speak of the book with which I had
myself  "  favoured the world  !"

The exact words he began with I cannot recollect,  for I was actually
confounded by the attack ;  and his abrupt manner of letting me know he
was au fait equally astonished and provoked me.  How different from the
delicacy of Mr.  and Mrs.  Thrale !

When we were summoned to dinner,  Mrs.  Thrale made my father and
me sit on each side of her.  I said that I hoped I did not take Dr.  Johnson's
place ; — for he had not yet appeared.

"  No,"  answered Mrs.  Thrale,  "  he will sit by you,  which I am sure will
give him great pleasure."

Soon after we were seated,  this great man entered.  I have so true a
veneration for him,  that the very sight of him inspires me with delight and
reverence,  notwithstanding the cruel infirmities to which he is subject ;  for
he has almost perpetual convulsive movements,  either of his hands,  lips,
{e.Qi^  or knees,  and sometimes of all together.

Mrs.  Thrale introduced me to him,  and he took his place.  We had a
noble dinner,  and a most elegant dessert.  Dr.  Johnson,  in the middle of
dinner,  asked Mrs.  Thrale what was in some little pies that were near him.

"  Mutton,"  answered she,  "  so I don't ask you to eat any,  because I
know you despise it."

"  No,  madam,  no,"  cried he ;  "  I despise nothing that is good of its sort  ;
but I am too proud now to eat of it.  Sitting by Miss Burney makes me
very proud to-day !"

"  Miss Burney,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  laughing,  "  you must take great care

3*

30 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

of your heart if Dr.  Johnson attacks it ;  for I assure you he is not often
successless."

"  What's that you say,  madam  ?"  cried he  ;  "  are you making mischief
between the young lady and me already  ?"

A little while after he drank Miss Thrale's health and mine,  and then
added  :

"  'Tis a terrible thing that we cannot wish young ladies well,  without
wishing them to become old women  !"

"  But some people,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "  are old and young at the same
time,  for they wear so well that they never look old."

"No,  sir,  no;"  cried the Doctor,  laughing;  "that never yet was  ;  you
might as well say they are at the same time tall and short.  I remember
an epitaph to that purpose,  which is in "

(I have quite forgot what, — and also the name it was made upon,  but the
rest I recollect exactly  :)

lies buried here

So early wise,  so lasting fair,

That none,  unless her years you told,

Thought her a child,  or thought her old."

Mrs.  Thrale then repeated some lines in French,  and Dr.  Johnson some
more in Latin.  An epilogue of Mr.  Garrick's to Bonduca was then men-
tioned, and Dr.  Johnson said it was a miserable performance,  and every
body agreed it was the worst he had ever made.

"  And yet,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "  it has been very much admired  ;  but it
is in praise of English valour,  and so I suppose the subject made it
popular."

"  I don't know,  sir,"  said Dr.  Johnson,  "  any thing about the subject,  for
I could not read on till I came to it ;  I got through half a dozen lines,  but I
could observe no other subject than eternal dulness.  I don't know what is
the matter with David ;  I am afraid he is grown superannuated,  for his
prologues and epilogues used to be incomparable."

"  Nothing is so fatiguing,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  as the Kfe of a wit :  he
and Wilks are the two oldest men of their ages I know ;  for they have both
worn themselves out,  by being eternally on the rack to give entertainment
to others."

"  David,  madam,"  said the Doctor,  "  looks much older than he is ;  for
his face has had double the business of any other man's ;  it is never at rest ;
when he speaks one minute,  he has quite a different countenance to what
he assumes the next ;  I don't believe he ever kept the same look for half
an hour together,  in the whole course of his life  ;  and such an eternal,
restless,  fatiguing play of the muscles,  must certainly wear out a man's
face before its real time."

"  O yes,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  we must certainly make some allowance
for such wear and tear of a man's face."

The next name that was started,  was that of Sir John Hawkins  :  and
Mrs.  Thrale said,  "  Why now.  Dr.  Johnson,  he is another of those whom
you suffer nobody to abuse but yourself;  Garrick is one,  too ;  for if any
other person speaks against him,  you browbeat him in a minute !"

"  Why,  madam,"  answered he,  "  they don't know when to abuse him,  and
when to praise him ;  I will allow no man to speak ill of David that he does
not deserve ;  and as to Sir John,  why really I believe him to be an honest
man at the bottom :  but to be sure he is penurious,  and he is mean,  and it
must be owned he has a degree of brutality,  and a tendency to savageness,
that cannot be easily defended."

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  gj

We all laughed,  as he meant we should,  at this curious manner of speak-
ing in his favour,  and he then related an anecdote that he said he knew to
be true in regard to his meanness.  He said that Sir John and he once
belonged to the same club,  but that as he eat no supper after the first night
of his admission,  he desired to be excused paying his share.
"  And was he excused 1"

"  O yes  ;  for no man is angry at another for being inferior to himself!  we
all scorned him,  and admitted his plea.  For my part I was such a fool as
to pay my share for wine,  though I never tasted any.  But Sir John was a
most uncluhable man !"

How delighted was I to hear this master of languages so unaffectedly and
sociably and good-naturedly make words,  for the promotion of sport and
good humour !

"  And this,"  continued he,  "  reminds me of a gentleman and lady with
whom I travelled once ;  I suppose I must call them gentleman and lady,
according to form,  because they travelled in their own coach and four
horses.  But at the first inn where we stopped,  the lady called for — a pint
of ale !  and when it came,  quarrelled with the waiter for not giving full
measure. — Now,  Madame Duval could not have done a grosser thing !"

Oh,  how every body laughed !  and to be sure I did not glow at all,  nor
munch fast,  nor look on my plate,  nor lose any part of my usual com-
posure !  But how grateful do I feel to this dear Dr.  Johnson,  for never
naming me and the book as belonging one to the other,  and yet making an
allusion that showed his thoughts led to it,  and,  at the same time,  that seemed
to justify the character as being natural !  But;  indeed,  the delicacy I met
with from him,  and from all the Thrales,  was yet more flattering to me than
the praise with which I have heard they have honoured my book.

After dinner,  when Mrs.  Thrale and I left the gentlemen,  we had a con-
versation that to me could not but be delightful,  as she was all good humour,
spirits,  sense and agreeahility.  Surely I may make words,  when at a loss,
if Dr.  Johnson does.

However,  I shall not attempt to write any more particulars of this day —
than which I have never known a happier,  because the chief subject that was
started and kept up,  was an invitation for me to Streatham,  and a desire that
I might accompany my father thither next week,  and stay with them some
time.

We left Streatham at about eight o'clock,  and Mr.  Seward,  who handed
me into the chaise,  added his interest to the rest,  that my father would not
fail to bring me.  In short I was loaded with civilities from them all.  And
my ride home was equally happy with the rest of the day,  for my kind and
most beloved father was so happy in my happiness,  and congratulated me
so sweetly,  that he could,  like myself,  think on no other subject ;  and he told
me that,  after passing through such a house as that,  I could have nothing to
fear — meaning for my book,  my honoured book.

Yet my honours stopped not here ;  for Hetty,  who with her sposo,  was
here to receive us,  told me she had lately met Mrs.  Reynolds,  sister of Sir
Joshua ;  and that she talked very much and very highly of a new novel
called  "  Evelina;"  though without a shadow of suspicion as to the scribbler;
and not contented with her own praise,  she said that Sir Joshua,  who began
it one day when he was too much engaged to go on with it,  was so much
caught,  that he could think of nothing else,  and was quite absent all the day,
not knowing a word that was said to him  ;  and,  when he took it up again,
found himself so much interested in it,  that he sat up all night to finish it i
Sir Joshua,  it seems,  vows he would give fifty pounds to know the author !

32 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

I have also heard,  by the means of Charles,  that other persons have declared
they will find him out !

This intelligence determined me upon going myself to Mr.  Lowndes,  and
discovering what sort of answers he made to such curious inquirers as I
found were likely to address him.  But as I did not dare trust myself to
speak,  for I felt I should not be able to act my part well,  I asked my mother
to accompany me.

We introduced ourselves by buying the book,  for which I had a commis-
sion from Mrs.  G .    Fortunately Mr.  Lowndes himself was in the shop;

as we found by his air of consequence and authority,  as well as his age ;  for
I never saw him before.

The moment he had given my mother the book,  she asked if he could tell
her who wrote it.

"  No,"  he answered  ;  "  I don't know myself."

"  Pho,  pho,"  said she,  "  you mayn't choose to tell,  but you must know."

"  I don't indeed,  ma'am,"  answered he ;  "I have no honour in keeping
the secret,  for I have never been trusted.  All I know of the matter is,  that
it is a gentleman of the other end of the town."

My mother made a thousand other inquiries,  to which his answers were
to the following effect :  that for a great while,  he did not know if it was a
man or a woman ;  but now,  he knew that much,  and that he was a master
of his subject,  and well versed in the manners of the times.

"  For some time,"  continued he,  "  I thought it had been Horace Walpole's ;
for he once published a book in this snug manner ;  but I don't think it is
now.  I have often people come to inquire of me who it is  ;  but I suppose
he will come out soon,  and then,  when the rest of the world knows it,  I shall.
Servants often come for it from the other end of the town,  and I have asked
them divers questions myself,  to see if I could get at the author ;  but I never
got any satisfaction."

Just before we came away,  upon my mother's still further pressing him,
he said,  with a most important face,

"  Why,  to tell you the truth,  madam,  I have been informed that it is a
piece of real secret history ;  and,  in that case,  it will never be known."

This was too much for me ;  I grinned irresistibly,  and was obliged to
look out at the shop door till we came away.

How many ridiculous things have I heard upon this subject !  I hope that
next,  some particular family will be fixed upon,  to whom this secret history
must belong !     However,  I am delighted to find myself so safe.

#  *  #  *  *  *

FROM MR.  CRISP TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Aug.  16.
My dear Fannikin,

"  If I wish to hear the sequel of the day  ?"  the question is injurious — both
because I warmly interest myself in whatever concerns a Fannikin,  and
likewise that I must else be

Duller than the fat weed.

That rots itself at ease on Lethe's wharf.

The reception you met with at Streatham,  though highly flattering,  by
no means surprises me ;  every article of it is most strictly your due.  You
have fairly earned it,  and if your host and hostess had given you less,  they
had defrauded you.     Flummery is a commodity I do not much deal in  ;  but

J 779^  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  33

on this occasion I will subscribe with hand and heart to what I have now
written.

After what I had heard of Mr.  Seward,  I should not,  I own,  have expected
such an attack as you describe from him.  What a contrast between him
and Mrs.  Thrale  !

I was once in a situation somewhat like yours,  when I supped with Quin
at Bath,  a good many years ago.  There was a fade,  empty fellow at table
with us,  who thought to be mighty civil to me.  Quin observing I did not
much relish his insipid trash,  cried out,  "Why,  he is a grocer,  man  !
Prythee,  don't choke him with his own figs."

Mr.  Seward certainly merited such a rebuff.

I desire you to be very minute in the remainder of the day,  particularly
with regard to Dr.  Johnson,  who,  though single,  is himself an host.

W^ell the ice is now broke,  and your perturbation ought to be in a great
measure at an end.  When you went into the sea at Teignmouth,  did not
you shiver and shrink at first,  and almost lose your breath when the water
cajne up to your chest  ?  I suppose you afterwards learned to plunge in
boldly,  over head and ears at once,  and then your pain was over.  You
must do the like now ;  and as the public have thought proper to put you on
a cork jacket,  your fears of drowning would be unpardonable.

S.  O,

CHAPTER II.

1778.

Streatham Journal resumed— Character of Mr.  Thrale— Dr.  Johnson— Country neigh-
hours- Bennet Langton— Character of Mrs.  Thrale — Table-talk of Dr.  Johnson —
Eccentricities of tlie Cumberland family — Dr.  Johnson and Richard Cumberland —
More Table-talk of Dr.  Johnson — Anecdotes of the Cumberland Family — Mrs.  Mon-
tagu and Bet Flint— The Female Wits— Mrs.  Pinkethman— Mrs.  Rudd— Kitty Fisher
— An Election Dinner — Dr.  Johnson — Anecdote of his Rudeness — His Lives of the
Poets — Mrs.  Charlotte Lennox — The Author of  "  Hermes"— Learned Ladies — John-
son's Opinion of them— Richardson — Fielding — Murphy — Mr.  Lort— Cumberland —
Seward— Chatterton— The Perils of Popularity— Hannah More— Dr.  Johnson's harsh
treatment of her.

Steeatham,  Sunday,  Aug.  23. — I know not how to express the fulness
of my contentment at this sweet place.  All my best expectations are
exceeded,  and you know they were not very moderate.  If,  when my dear
father comes,  Susan and Mr.  Crisp were to come too,  I believe it would
require at least a day's pondering to enable me to form another wish.

Our journey was charming.  The kind Mrs.  Thrale would give courage
to the most timid.  She did not ask me questions,  or catechise me upon
what I knew,  or use any means to draw me out,  but made it her business
to draw herself out — that is,  to start subjects,  to support them herself,  and
to take all the weight of the conversation,  as if it behoved her to find me
entertainment.  But I am so much in love with her,  that I shall be obliged
to run away from the subject,  or shall write of nothing else.

When we arrived here,  Mrs.  Thrale showed me my room,  which is an
exceeding pleasant one,  and then conducted me to the library,  there to
divert myself while she dressed.

Miss Thrale soon joined me ;  and I begin to like her.     Mr.  Thrale was

34 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

neither well nor in spirits all day.  Indeed,  he seems not to be a happy
man,  though he has every means of happiness in his power.  But I think I
have rarely seen a very rich man with a light heart and light spirits.

Dr.  Johnson was in the utmost good humour.

There was no other company at the house all day.

After dinner,  I had a delightful stroll with Mrs.  Thrale,  and she gave me
a list of all her  "  good neighbours"  in the town of Streatham,  and said she

was determined to take me to see Mr.  T ,  the clergyman,  who was a

character I could not but be diverted with,  for he had so furious and so
absurd a rage for building,  that in his garden he had as many temples,  and
summer-houses,  and statues as in the gardens of Stow,  though he had so
little room for them that they all seemed tumbling one upon another.

In short,  she was all unaffected drollery and sweet good humour.

At tea we all met again,  and Dr.  Johnson was gaily sociable.  He gave
a very droll account of the children of Mr.  Langton.

"  Who,"  he said,  "  might be very good children if they were let alone ;
but the father is never easy when he is not making them do something
which they cannot do ;  they must repeat a fable,  or a speech,  or the
Hebrew alphabet ;  and they might as well count twenty,  for what they
know of the matter :  however,  the father says half,  for he prompts every
other word.  But he could not have chosen a man who would have been
less entertained by such means."

"  I believe not !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  :  "  nothing is more ridiculous than
parents cramming their children's nonsense down other people's throats.  I
keep mine as much out of the way as I can."

"Yours,  madam,"  answered he,  "are in nobody's way;  no children can
be better managed or less troublesome ;  but your fault is,  a too great per-
verseness in not allowing any body to give them any thing.  Why should
they not have a cherry,  or a gooseberry,  as well as bigger children  ?"

"  Because they are sure to return such gifts by wiping their hands upon
the giver's gown or coat,  and nothing makes children more offensive.
People only make the offer to please the parents,  and they wish the poor
children at Jericho when they accept it."

"  But,  madam,  it is a great deal more offensive to refuse them.  Let those
who make the offer look to their own gowns and coats,  for when you inter-
fere,  they only wish you at Jericho."

"  It is difficult,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  to please every body."

Indeed,  the freedom with which Dr.  Johnson condemns whatever he
disapproves,  is astonishing ;  and the strength of words he uses would,  to
most people,  be intolerable ;  but Mrs.  Thrale seems to have a sweetness of
disposition that equals all her other excellencies,  and far from making a
point of vindicating herself,  she generally receives his admonitions with the
most respectful silence.

But I fear to say all I think at present of Mrs.  Thrale,  lest some flaws
should appear by and by,  that may make me think differently.  And yet,
why should I not indulge the nmv^  as well as the thejt^  since it will be with
so much more pleasure?  In short,  I do think her delightful;  she has
talents to create admiration,  good humour to excite love,  understanding to
give entertainment,  and a heart which,  like my dear father's,  seems already
fitted for another world.  My own knowledge of her,  indeed,  is very little
for such a character ;  but all I have heard,  and all I see,  so well agree,  that
I won't prepare myself for a future disappointment.

But to return.  Mrs.  Thrale then asked whether Mr.  Langton took any
better care of his affairs than formerly  ?

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  35

"  No,  madam,"  cried the Doctor,  "  and never will ;  he complains of the
ill effects of habit,  and rests contentedly upon a confessed indolence.  He
told his father himself that he had  '  no turn to economy  ;'  but a thief might
as well plead that he had  '  no turn to honesty.' "

Was not that excellent  ?

At night,  Mrs.  Thrale asked if I would have any thing  ?  I answered,
"  No  ;"  but Dr.  Johnson said,

"  Yes  :  she is used,  madam,  to suppers  ;  she would like an egg or two,
and a few slices of ham,  or a rasher — a rasher,  I believe,  would please her
better."

How ridiculous !  However,  nothing could persuade Mrs.  Thrale not to
have the cloth laid :  and Dr.  Johnson was so facetious,  that he challenged
Mr.  Thrale to get drunk!

"  I wish,"  said he,  "  my master would say to me,  Johnson,  if you will
oblige me,  you will call for a bottle of Toulon,  and then we will set to it,
glass for glass,  till it is done ;  and after that,  I will say,  Thrale,  if you will
oblige me,  you will call for another bottle of Toulon,  and then we will set
to it,  glass for glass,  till that is done :  and by the time we should have
drunk the two bottles,  we should be so happy,  and such good friends,  that
we should fly into each other's arms,  and both together call for the third !"

I ate nothing,  that they might not again use such a ceremony with me.
Indeed,  their late dinners forbid suppers,  especially as Dr.  Johnson made
me eat cake at tea,  for he held it till I took it,  with an odd or absent com-
plaisance.

He was extremely comical after supper,  and would not suffer Mrs.
Thrale and me to go to bed for near an hour after we made the motion.

The Cumberland family was discussed.  Mrs.  Thrale said that Mr.  Cum-
berland was a very amiable man in his own house ;  but as a father mighty
simple ;  which accounts for the ridiculous conduct and manners of his
daughters,  concerning whom we had much talk,  and were all of a mind ;
for it seems they used the same rude stare to Mrs.  Thrale that so much dis-
gusted us at Mrs.  Ord's :  she says that she really concluded something was
wrong,  and that,  in getting out of the coach,  she had given her cap some
unlucky cuff, — by their merciless staring.

I told her that I had not any doubt,  when I had met with the same atten-
tion from them,  but that they were calculating the exact cost of all my dress.
Mrs.  Thrale then told me that,  about two years ago,  they were actually hissed
out of the playhouse,  on account of the extreme height of their feathers  !

Dr.  Johnson instantly composed an extempore dialogue between himself
and Mr.  Cumberland upon this subject,  in which he was to act the part of a
provoking condoler :

"  Mr.  Cumberland,  (I should say,)  how monstrously ill-bred is a play-
house mob  !     How I pitied poor Miss Cumberland's about that affair  ?"

"  What affair  ?"  cries he,  for he has tried to forget it.

"  Why,"  says I,  "  that unlucky accident they met with some time ago."

"Accident?  what accident,  sir?"

"  Why,  you know,  when they were hissed out of the-  playhouse — you re-
member the time — oh,  the English mob is most insufferable  !  they are
boors,  and have no manner of taste !"

Mrs.  Thrale accompanied me to my room,  and stayed chatting with me

for more than an hour.

******

Now for this morning's breakfast.

Dr.  Johnson,  as usual,  came last into the library ;  he was in high spirits

36 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

and full of mirth and sport.  I had the honour of sitting next to him  ;  and
now,  all at once,  he flung aside his reserve,  thinking,  perhaps,  that it was
time I should fling aside mine.

Mrs.  Thrale told him that she intended taking me to Mr.  T 's.

"  So you ought,  madam,"  cried he ;  "  'tis your business to be Cicerone
to her."

Then suddenly he snatched my hand,  and kissing it,

"  Ah!"  he added,  "  they will little think what a tartar you carry to
them  !"

"  No,  that they won't !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale ;  "  Miss Burney looks so
meek and so quiet,  nobody would suspect what a comical girl she is  ;  but
I believe she has a great deal of malice at heart."

"  Oh,  she's a toad  !"  cried the Doctor,  laughing — "  a sly young rogue  !
with her Smiths and her Branghtons  !"

"  Why,  Dr.  Johnson,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I hope you are very well this
morning  !  if one may judge by your spirits and good humour,  the fever you
threatened us with is gone off"."

He had complained that he was going to be ill last night.

"  Why no,  madam,  no,"  answered he,  "  I am not yet well ;  I could not
sleep at all ;  there I lay,  restless and uneasy,  and thinking all the time of
Miss Burney.  Perhaps I have ofl?ended her,  thought I ;  perhaps she is
angry ;  I have seen her but once,  and I talked to her of a rasher  ! — Were
you angry  ?"

I think I need not tell you my answer.

"  I have been endeavouring to find some excuse,"-  continued he,  "  and,
as I could not sleep,  I got up,  and looked for some authority for the word  ;
and I find,  madam,  it is used by Dryden  :  in one of his prologues,  he says,
*  And snatch a homely rasher from the coals.'  So you must not mind
me,  madam  ;  I say strange things,  but I mean no harm."

I was almost afraid he thought I was really idiot enough to have taken
him seriously;  but,  a few minutes after,  he put his hand on my arm,  and
shaking his head,  exclaimed,

"  Oh,  you are a sly little rogue ! — what a Holbourn beau have you
drawn !"

"  Ay,  Miss Burney,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  the Holbourn beau is Dr.
Johnson's favourite ;  and we have all your characters by heart,  from Mr.
Smith up to Lady Louisa."

"  Oh,  Mr.  Smith,  Mr.  Smith is the man  !"  cried he,  laughing violently.
*'  Harry Fielding never drew so good a character  ! — such a fine varnish of
low politeness  ! — such a struggle to appear a gentleman  !  Madam,  there is
no character better drawn any where — in any book or by any author."

I almost poked myself under the table.  Never did I feel so delicious a
confusion since I was born  !  But he added a great deal more,  only I cannot
recollect his exact words,  and I do not choose. to give him mine.

"  Come,  come,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  we'l]  torment her no more for her
book,  for I see it really plagues her.  I own I thought for awhile it was
only affectation,  for I'm sure if the book were mine I should wish to hear
of nothing else.  But we shall teach her in time how proud she ought to be
of such a performance."

"  Ah,  madam,"  cried the doctor,  "  be in no haste to teach her that ;
she'll speak no more to us when she knows her own weight."

"  Oh,  but sir,"  cried she,  "  if Mr.  Thrale has his way she will become
our relation,  and then it will be hard if she won't acknowledge us."

You may think I stared,  but she went on.

1788.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  37

"  Mr.  Thrale says nothing would make him half so happy as giving Miss
Burney to Sir J — '—  L /'

Mercy !  what an exclamation did I give.  I wonder you did not hear
me to St.  Martin's Street.     However,  she continued,

"  Mr.  Thrale says.  Miss Burney seems more formed to draw a husband
to herself,  by her humour when gay,  and her good sense when serious,  than
almost any body he ever saw."

"  He does me much honour,"  cried I ;  though I cannot say I much en-
joyed such a proof of his good opinion as giving me to Sir J L ;

but Mr.  Thrale is both his uncle and his guardian,  and thinks,  perhaps,  he
would do a mutual good office in securing me so much money,  and his
nephew a decent companion.  Oh,  if he knew how little I require with re-
gard to money — how much to even bear with a companion  !  But he was
not brought up with such folks as my father,  my Daddy Crisp,  and my
Susan,  and does not know what indifference to all things but good society
such people as those inspire.

"  My master says a very good speech,"  cried the doctor,  "  if Miss
Burney's husband should have any thing in common with herself;  but I

know not how we can level her with Sir J L ,  unless she would be

content to put her virtues and talents in a scale against his thousands  ;  and

poor Sir J must give cheating weight even then !     However,  if we

bestow such a prize upon him,  he shall settle his whole fortune on her."

Ah  !  thought I,  I am more mercenary than you fancy me,  for not even
that would bribe me high enough.

Before Dr.  Johnson had finished his eloge,  I was actually on the ground,
for there was no standing it, — or sitting it,  rather  :  and  ]Mrs.  Thrale seemed
delighted for me.

"  I assure you,"  she said,  "  nobody can do your book more justice than
Dr.  Johnson does  :  and yet,  do you remember,  sir,  how unwilling you
were to read it  ?  He took it up,  just looked at the first letter,  and then put
it away,  and said  '  I don't think I have any taste for it  !' — but when he was
going to town,  I put the first volume into the coach with him ;  and then,
when he came home,  the very first words he said to me were  '  Why,
Madam,  this Evehna is a charming creature  !' — and then he teased me to
know who she married,  and what became of her, — and I gave him the rest.
For my part,  I used to read it in bed,  and could not part with it :  I laughed
at the second,  and I cried at the third ;  but what a trick was that of Dr.
Burney's,  never to let me know whose it was till I had read it !  Suppose
it had been something I had not liked*!     Oh,  it was a vile trick  !"

"  No,  madam,  not at all !"  cried the Doctor,  "for,  in that case,  you would
never have known ; — all would have been safe,  for he would neither have
told you who wrote it,  nor Miss Burney what you said of it."

Some time af\er the doctor began laughing to himself,  and then,  suddenly
turning to me,  he called out,  "  Only think,  Polly !  JMiss has danced with a
lord  !"

"  Ah,  poor Evelina  !"  cried IMrs.  Thrale,  "I see her now in Kensington
Gardens.  What she must have suffered  !  Poor girl  !  what fidgets she
must have been in  !  And I know Mr.  Smith,  too,  very well ; — I always
have him before me at the Hampstead Ball,  dressed in a white coat,  and
tambour waistcoat,  worked in green silk.  Poor Mr.  Seward  !  Mr.  Johnson
made him so mad t'other day  !  '  Why,  Seward,'  said he,  '  how smart you
are dressed !  why you only want a tambour waistcoat to look like Mr.
Smith  !'     But I am very fond of Lady Louisa ;  I think her as well drawa

VOL.  I.  4

38 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

as any character in the book ;  so fine,  so affected,  so languishing ;  and,  at
the same time,  so insolent  !"

She then ran on with several of her speeches.

Some time after,  she gave Dr.  Johnson a letter from Dr.  Jebb,  concerning
one of the gardeners who is very ill.  When he had read it,  he grumbled
violently to himself,  and put it away with marks of displeasure.

"  What's the matter,  sir !"  said Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  do you find any fault
with the letter  ?"

"  No madam,  the letter is well enough,  if the man knew how to write
his own name ;  but it moves my indignation to see a gentleman take pains
to appear a tradesman.  Mr.  Branghton would have written his name with
just such beastly flourishes."

"  Ay,  well,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  he is a very agreeable man,  and an ex-
cellent physician,  and a great favourite of mine,  and so he is of Miss
Burney's."

"  Why I have no objection to the man,  madam,  if he would write his
name as he ought to do."

"  Well,  it does not signify,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale ;  "  but the commercial
fashion gains ground every day,  for all Miss Burney abuses it,  with her
Smiths and her Branghtons.  Does not the great Mr.  Pennant write like a
clerk,  without any pronouns  ?  and doe§  not every body flourish their names
till nobody can read them  ?"

After this they talked over a large party of  'company who are invited to
a formal and grand dinner for next Monday,  and among others Admiral
Montague was mentioned.     The doctor,  turning to me,  with a laugh,  said,
"  You must mark the old sailor,  Miss Burney ;  he'll be a character."
"  Ah  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  who was going out of the room,  "  how I wish
you would hatch up a comedy between you  !  do,  fall to work  !"

A pretty proposal  !  to be sure Dr.  Johnson would be very proud of such
a fellow-labourer  !

As soon as we were alone together,  he said,

"  These are as good people as you can be , with  ;  you can go to no better
house  ,•  they are all good nature  ;  nothing makes them angry."

As I have always heard from my father that every individual at Streat-
ham spends the morning alone,  I took the first opportunity of absconding
to my own room,  and amused myself in writing till I tired.  About noon,
when I went into the library,  book hunting,  Mrs.  Thrale came to me.

We had a very nice confab about various books,  and exchanged opinions
and imitations of Baretti ;  she told me many excellent tales of him,  and I,
in return,  related my stories.

She gave me a long and very entertaining account of Dr.  Goldsmith,
who was intimately known here  ;  but in speaking of  "  The Good-natured
Man,"  when I extolled my favourite Croaker,  I found that admirable cha-
racter was a downright theft from Dr.  Johnson.  Look at the  "  Rambler"
and you will find Suspirius is the man,  and that not merely the idea,  but the
particulars of the character,  are all stolen thence  !*

While we were yet reading this  "  Rambler"  Dr.  Johnson came in  :  we
told him what we were about.

"  Ah,  madam  !"  cried he,  "  Goldsmith was not scrupulous  ;  but he would
have been a great man had he known the real value of his own internal
resources."

"  Miss Burney,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  is fond of his  '  Vicar of Wakefield  :'
and so am I ; — don't you like it,  sir  ?"

*  Suspirius,  the Screech Owl.    See  "  Rambler"  for Tuesday,  October 9,  1750.

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  39

"  No,  madam,  it is very faulty ;  there is nothing of real life in it,  and
very little of nature.     It is a mere fanciful performance."

He then seated himself upon a sofa,  and calling to me,  said  "  Come, —
Evelina, — come and sit by me."

I obeyed;  and he took me almost in his arms, — that is,  one of his arms,
for one would go three times,  at least,  round me, — and,  half laughino-,  half
serious,  he charged me to  "  be a good girl !"

"  But,  my dear,"  continued he with a very droll look,  "  what makes you
so fond of the Scotch  ?  I don't like you for that ; — I hate these Scotch,  and
so must you.  I wish Branghton had sent the dog to jail !  That Scotch
dog Macartney."

"  Why,  sir,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  don't you remember he says he would,
but that he should get nothing by it  ?"

"  Why,  ay,  true,"  cried the doctor,  see-sawing very solemnly,  "  that,
indeed,  is some palliation for his forbearance.  But I must not have you so
fond of the Scotch,  my little Burney  ;  make your hero what you will but
a Scotchman.  Besides,  you write Scotch — you say  '  the one,' — my dear,
that's not English.     Never use that phrase again."

"  Perhaps,"  said Mrs.  Thrale, "  it may be used in Macartney's letter,  and
then it will be a propriety."

"  No,  madam,  no  !"  cried he  ;  "  you can't make a beauty of it ;  it is in
the third volume ;  put it in Macartney's letter,  and welcome  ! — that,  or any
thing that is nonsense."

"  Why,  surely,"  cried I,  "  the poor man is used ill enough by the
Branghtons."

"  But Branghton,"  said he,  "  only hates him because of his wretchedness,
— poor fellow  ! — But,  my dear love,  how should he ever have eaten a good
dinner before he came to England 1"

And then he laughed violently at young Branghton's idea.

"  Well,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I always liked Macartney  ;  he is a very
pretty character,  and I took to him,  as the folks say."

"  Why,  madam,"  answered he,  "  I like Macartney myself.  Yes,  poor
fellow,  I liked the man,  but I love not the nation."

And then he proceeded,  in a dry manner,  to make at once sarcastic re-
flections on the Scotch,  and flattering speeches to me,  for Macartney's firing
at the national insults of young Branghton  :  his stubborn resolution in not
owning,  even to his bosom friend,  his wretchedness of poverty  ;  and his
fighting at last for the honour of his nation,  when he resisted all other pro-
vocations ;  he said,  were all extremely well marked.

We staid with him till just dinnertime,  and then we were obliged to run
away and dress  ;  but Dr.  Johnson called out to me as I went —

"  Miss Burney,  I must settle that affair of the Scotch with you at our
leisure."

At dinner we had the company,  or rather the presence,  for he did not

speak two words,  of Mr.   E ,  the clergyman,  I believe,  of Strcatham.

And afterwards,  Mrs.  Thrale took the trouble to go with me to the T 's.

Dr.  Johnson,  who has a love of social converse that nobody,  without living
under the same roof with him,  would suspect,  quite begged us not to go till
he went to town ;  but as we were hatted and ready,  Mrs.  Thrale only told
him she rejoiced to find him so jealous of our companies,  and then away we
whisked, — she.  Miss Thrale,  and my ladyship.

I could write some tolerable good sport concerning this visit,  but that I
wish to devote all the time I can snatch for writing,  to recording what
passes here  ; — themes of mere ridicule offer every where.

40 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

We got home late,  and had the company of Mr.  E ,  and of Mr.  Rose

Fuller,  a young man who lives at Streatham,  and is nephew of the famous
Rose Fuller ;  and whether Dr.  Johnson did not like them,  or whether
he was displeased that we went out,  or whether he was not well,  I know
not ;  but he never opened his mouth,  except in answer to a question,  till he
bid us good night.

Saturday Morning. — Dr.  Johnson was again all himself;  and so civil
to me! — even admiring how I dress myself!  Indeed,  it is well I have so
much of his favour ;  for it seems he always speaks his mind concerning
the dress of ladies,  and all ladies who are here obey his injunctions impli-
citly, and alter whatever he disapproves.  This is a part of his character that
much surprises me  :  but notwithstanding he is sometimes so absent,  and
always so near-sighted,  he scrutinizes into every part of almost every body's
appearance.  They tell me of a Miss Brown,  who often visits here,  and who
has a slovenly way of dressing.  "  And when she comes down in a morning,"
says Mrs.  Thrale,  "her hair will be all loose,  and her cap half off;  and
then Dr.  Johnson,  who sees something is wrong,  and does not know where
the fault is,  concludes it is in the cap,  and says,  *  My dear,  what do you
wear such a vile cap for?'  '  I'll change it,  sir,'  cries the poor girl,  '  if you
don't like it.'  '  Ay,  do,'  he says  ;  and away runs poor Miss Brown ;  but
when she gets on another,  it's the same thing,  for the cap has nothing to do
with the fault.  And then she wonders Dr.  Johnson should not like the cap,
for she thinks it very pretty.  And so on with her gown,  which he also
makes her change  ;  but if the poor girl were to change through all her ward-
robe, unless she could put her things on better,  he would still find fault."

When Dr.  Johnson was gone,  she told me of my mother's being obliged
to change her dress.

"  Now,"  said she,  "  Mrs.  Burney had on a very pretty linen jacket and
coat,  and was going to church ;  but Dr.  Johnson,  who,  I suppose,  did not
like-  her in a jacket,  saw something was the matter,  and so found fault with
the linen :  and he looked and peered,  and then said.  '  Why,  madam,  this
won't do  !  you must not go to church so  !'  So away went poor Mrs.  Bur-
ney and changed her gown !  And when she had done so,  he did not like
it,  but he did not know why ;  so he told her she should not wear a black
hat and cloak in summer  !  Oh,  how he did bother poor Mrs.  Burney  !  and
himself too,  for if the things had been put on to his mind,  he would have
taken no notice of them."

"  Why,"  said Mr.  Thrale,  very drily,  "  I don't think Mrs.  Burney a
very good dresser."

"  Last time she came,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  she was in a white cloak,  and
she told Dr.  Johnson she had got her old white cloak scoured on purpose to
oblige him  !  '  Scoured  !'  says he,  '  ay, — have you,  madam V — so he see-
sawed, for he could not for shame find fault,  but he did not seem to like the
scouring."

So I think myself amazingly fortunate to be approved by him  ;  for,  if he
disliked,  alack a-day,  how could I change  !  But he has paid me some very
fine compliments upon this subject !

*  *  *  *  *  #  *  *    '

I was very sorry when the doctor went to town,  though Mrs.  Thrale
made him promise to return to Monday's dinner ;  and he has very afl^ec-
tionately invited me to visit him in the winter,  when he is at home  :  and he
talked to me a great deal of Mrs.  Williams,  and gave me a list of her works,
and said I must visit them ; — which I am sure I shall be very proud of
doing.

J778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  41

And now let me try to recollect an account he gave us of certain cele-
brated ladies of his acquaintance  :  an account which,  had you heard from
himself,  would have made you die with laughing,  his manner is so peculiar,
and enforces his humour so originally.

It was begun by Mrs.  Thrale's apoligizing to him for troubling him with
some question she thought trifling — O,  I remember !  We had been talking
of colours,  and of the fantastic names given to them,  and why the palest
lilac should be called a soiqnr ctouffe  ;  and when Dr.  Johnson came in she
applied to him.

"  Whv,  madam,"  said he with wonderful readiness,  "  it is called a stifled
sigh because it is checked in its progress,  and only half a colour."

I could not help expressing my amazement at his universal readiness
upon all subjects,  and Mrs.  Thrale said to him,

"  Sir,  Miss Burney wonders at your patience with such stufl";  but I tell
her you are used to me,  for I believe I torment you with more foolish ques-
tions than any body else dares do."

"  No,  madam,"  said he,  "  you don't torment me  ; — you tease me,  indeed,
sometimes."

"  Ay,  so I do,  Dr.  Johnson,  and I wonder you bear with my nonsense."

"  No,  madam,  you never talk nonsense  ;  you have as much sense,  and
more wit,  than any woman I know  !"

"  Oh,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  blushing,  "  it is my turn to go under the table
this morning.  Miss Burney  !"

"And yet,"  continued the doctor,  with the most comical look,  "I have
known all the wits,  from Mrs.  Montague down to Bet Flint !"

"  Bet Flint !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  pray who is she?"

"Oh,  a fine character,  madam  !  She was habitually a slut and a drunk-
ard, and occasionally a thief and a harlot."

"  And,  for Heaven's sake,  how came you to know her?"

"  Why,  madam,  she figured in the literary world,  too !  Bet Flint
wrote her own life,  and called herself Cassandra,  and it was in verse ; — it
began :

♦When Nature first ordained my birth,
A diminutive I was born on earth  :
And then I came from a dark abode,
Into a gay and gaudy world'

"  So Bet brought me her verses to correct;  but I gave her half a crown,  and
she liked it as well.  Bet had a fine spirit ; — she advertised for a husband,
but she had no success,  for she told me no man aspired to her !  Then
she hired very handsome lodgings and a footboy ;  and she got a harpsi-
chord, but Bet could not play ;  however,  she put herself in fine attitudes,
and drummed."

Then he gave an account of another of these geniuses,  who called herself
by some fine name,  I have forgotten what.

"  She had not quite the same stock of virtue,"  continued he,  "  nor the
same stock of honesty as Bet Flint ;  but I suppose she envied her accom-
plishments, for she was so little moved by the power of harmony,  that while
Bet Flint thought she was drumming very divinely,  the other jade had her
indicted for a nuisance  !"

"  And pray what became of her,  sir  ?"

"  Why,  madam,  she stole a quilt from the man of the house,  and he had
her taken up :  but Bet Flint had a spirit not to be subdued ;  so when she
found herself obliged to go to jail,  she ordered a sedan chair,  and bid her

4*

42 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

footboy walk before her.     However,  the boy proved refractory,  for he was
ashamed,  though his mistress was not."

"  And did she ever get out of jail again,  sir  ?"

"  Yes,  madam ;  when she came to her trial the judge acquitted her.  '  So
now,'  she said to me,  '  the quilt is my own,  and now I'll make a petticoat of
it.'     Oh,  I loved Bet FHnt !"

Oh,  how we all laughed  !  Then he gave an account of another lady,  who
called herself Laurinda,  and who also wrote verses and stole furniture  ;  but
he had not the same affection for her,  he said,  though she too  "  was a lady
who had high notions of honour."

Then followed the history of another,  who called herself Hortensia,  and
who walked up and down the park repeating a book of Virgil.

"  But,"  said he,  "  though I know her story,  I never had the good fortune
to see her."

After this he gave us an account of the famous Mrs.  Pinkethman ;  "And
she,"  he said,  "  told me she owed all her misfortunes to her wit ;  for she was
so unhappy as to marry a man who thought himself also a wit,  though I
believe she gave him not implicit credit for it,  but it occasioned much con-
tradiction and ill-will."

"  Bless me,  sir  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  how can all these vagabonds contrive
to get at you^  of all people  ?"

"  O the dear creatures  !"  cried he,  laughing heartily,  "  I can't but be glad
to see them !"

"  Why I wonder,  sir,  you never went to see Mrs.  Rudd among the rest?"
"  Why,  madam,  I believe I should,"  said he,  "  if it was not for the news-
papers ;  but I am prevented many frolics that I should like very well,  since
I am become such a theme for the papers."

Now would you ever have imagined this  ?  Bet Flint it seems once took
Kitty Fisher to see him,  but to his no httle regret he was not at home.
"  And Mrs.  Williams,"  he added,  "  did not love Bet Fhnt,  but Bet Flint
made herself very easy about that."

How Mr.  Crisp would have enjoyed this account !  He gave it all with
so droll a solemnity,  and it was all so unexpected,  that Mrs.  Thrale and I
were both almost equally diverted.

Streatham,  August 26. — My opportunities for writing grow less and
less,  and my materials more and more.  After breakfast I have scarcely a
moment that I can spare all day.

Mrs.  Thrale I like more and more.  Of all the people I have ever seen
since I came into this  "  gay and gaudy world,"  I never before saw the per-
son who so strongly resembles our dear father.  I find the likeness perpe-
tually ;  she has the same natural liveliness,  the same general benevolence,
the same rare union of gaiety and of feeling in her disposition .

And so kind is she to me  !  She told me,  at first,  that I should have all
my mornings to myself,  and therefore I have actually studied to avoid her,
lest I should be in her way ;  but since the first morning she seeks me,  sits
with me,  saunters with me in the park,  or compares notes over books in the
library ;  and her conversation is delightful ;  it is so entertaining,  so gay,  so
enlivening,  when she is in spirits,  and so intelligent and instructive when
she is otherwise,  that I almost as much wish to record all she says,  as all
Dr.  Johnson says.

Proceed — no  !  Go back,  my muse,  to Thursday.
Dr.  Johnson came home to dinner.

In the evening he was as lively and full of wit and sport as I have ever
seen him ;  and Mrs.  Thrale and I had him quite to ourselves  ,*    for Mr.

1778.  ^^  "^^^  AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  43

Thrale came in from giving an election dinner  (to which he sent two bucks
and six pine-apples)  so tired,  that he neither opened his eyes nor mouth,
but fell fast asleep.     Indeed,  after tea he generally does.

Dr.  Johnson was very communicative concerning his present work of
the Lives of the Poets  ;  Dryden is now in the press,  and he told us he had
been just writing a dissertation upon Hudibras.

He gave us an account of Mrs.  Lennox.  Her  "  Female Quixote"  is very
justly admired here.  But Mrs.  Thrale says that though her books are gene-
rally approved,  nobody hkes her.  I find she,  among others,  waited on Dr.
Johnson upon her commencing writer,  and he told us that,  at her request,
he carried her to Richardson.

"  Poor Charlotte Lennox  !"  continued he  ;  "  when we came to the house,
she desired me to leave her,  '  for,'  says she,  '  I am under great restraint in
your presence,  but if you leave me alone with Richardson Pll give you
a very good account of him :'  however,  I fear poor Charlotte was disap-
pointed, for slie gave me no account at all !"

He then told us of two little productions of our Mr.  Harris,  which w^e
read ;  they are very short and very clever :  one is called  "  Fashion,"  the
other  "  Much Ado,"  and they are both of them full of a sportive humour,
that I had not suspected to belong to Mr.  tiarris,  the learned grammarian.

Some time after,  turning suddenly to me,  he said,  "  Miss Burney,  what
sort of reading do you delight in?      History? — travels? — poetry? — or

romances

?"

"  O sir  !"  cried I,  "  I dread being catechized by you.  I dare not make
any answer,  for I fear whatever I should say would be wrong !"

"  Whatever you should say — how's that  ?"

"  Why,  not whatever I should — but whatever I could say."

He laughed,  and to my great relief spared me any further questions upon
the subject.  Indeed,  I was very happy I had the presence of mind to evade
him as I did,  for I am sure the examination which would have followed,
had I made my direct answer,  would have turned out sorely to my dis-
credit.

"  Do you remember,  sir,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  how you tormented poor
Miss Brown about reading  ?"

"  She might soon be tormented,  madam,"  answerd he,  "  for I am not
yet quite clear she knows what a book is."

"  Oh for shame !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  she reads not only English,  but
French and Italian.     She was in Italy a great while."

"  Pho  !"  exclaimed he  ;  "  Italian,  indeed  !  Do you think she knows as
much Italian as Rose Fuller does English  ?"

"  Well,  well,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  Rose Fuller is a very good young man,
for all he has not much command of language,  and though he is siliy enough,
yet I like him very well,  for there is no manner of harm in him."

Then she told me that he once said,  "  Dr.  Johnson's conversation is so
instructive that I'll ask him a question.  '  Pray,  sir,  what is Palmyra  ?  I
have often heard of it,  but never knew what it was.'  '  Palmyra,  sir  ?'  said
the doctor  ;  '  why,  it is a hill in Ireland,  situated in a bog,  and has palm-trees
at the top,  whence it is called Palm-mire.'  "*

*  Mrs.  Thrale  (then Mrs.  Piozzi),  in relating this story,  after Johnson's death,  in her
"Anecdotes"  of him,  adds — "  Seeing,  however,  that the lad"  (whom she does not name,
but calls a  "  young fellow")  "  thought him serious,  and thanked him for his information,
he undeceived him very gently indeed  ;  told him the history,  geography,  and chronology
of Tadmor in the Wilderness,  with every incident that literature could furnish,  I think,
or eloquence express,  from the building of Solomon's palace to the voyage of Dawkius
and Wood."

44 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

Whether or not he swallowed this ticcount,  I know not yet.

"  But Miss Brown,"  continued she, "  is by no means such a simpleton as
Dr.  Johnson supposes her to be ;  she is not very deep,  indeed,  but she is a
sweet,  and a very ingenuous girl,  and nobody admired Miss Streatfield more.
But she made a more foolish speech to Dr.  Johnson than she would have
done to any body else,  because she was so frightened and embarrassed that
she knew not what she said.  He asked her some question about reading,
and she did,  to be sure,  make a very silly answer  ;  but she was so perplexed
and bewildered,  that she hardly knew where she was,  and so she said the
beginning of a book was as good as the end,  or the end as good as the be-
ginning, or some such stuff;  and Dr.  Johnson told her of it so often,  saying,
'Well,  my dear,  which part of a book do you like best now?'  that poor
Fanny Brown burst into tears  !"

"I am sure I should have compassion for her,"  cried I ;  "  for nobody would
be more likely to have blundered out such,  or any such speech,  from fright
and terror."

"  You  ?"  cried Dr.  Johnson.  "  No  ;  you are another thing ;  she who could
draw Smiths and Branghtons,  is quite another thing."

Mrs.  Thrale then told some other stories of his degrading opinion of us
poor fair sex ;  I mean in general,  for in particular he does them noble
justice.  Among others,  was a Mrs.  Somebody who spent a day here once,
and of whom he asked,  "  Can she read  ?"

"  Yes,  to be sure,"  answered Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  we have been reading to-
gether this afternoon."

"  And what book did you get for her  ?"

"  A-^Tiy,  what happened to lie in the way, '  Hogarth's Analysis of Beauty.' "

"  '  Hogarth's Analysis of Beauty  !'     What made you choose that?"

"  Why,  sir,  what would you have had me to take  ?"

"  What she could have understood — '  Cow-hide,'  or  '  Cinderella  !'  "

"  O Dr.  Johnson  !"  cried I ;  "  'tis not for nothing you are feared  !"

"  Oh,  you're a rogue !"  cried he,  laughing  ;  "and they would fear you if
they knew you  !"

"  That they would,"  said Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  but she's so shy they don't sus-
pect her.    Miss P gave her an account of all her dress,  to entertain her,

t'other night !  To be sure she was very lucky to fix on Miss Burney for
such conversation  !  But I have been telling her she must write a comedy  ;
I am sure nobody could do it better.     Is it not true.  Dr.  Johnson  ?"

I would fain have stopt her,  but she was not to be stopped,  and ran on
saying such fine things  !  though we had almost a struggle together  ;  and she
said at last,

"  Well,  authors may say what they will of modesty  ;  but I believe Miss
Burney is really modest about her book,  for her colour comes and goes every
time it is mentioned."

I then escaped to look for a book which we had been talking of,  and Dr.
Johnson,  when I returned to my seat,  said he wished Richardson had been
alive.

"  And then,"  he added,  "  she should have been introduced to him — though
I don't know neither — Richardson would have been afraid of her."

"  O yes  !  that's a likely matter,"  quoth I.

"  It's very true,"  continued he :  "  Richardson would have been really
afraid of her ;  there is merit in  '  Evelina'  which he could not have borne.
No ;  it would not have done  !  unless,  indeed,  she would have flattered him
prodigiously.  Harry Fielding,  too,  would have been afraid of her;  there is
nothing so delicately finished in all Harry Fielding's works,  as in '  Evelina !'  "

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELL\A.  45

Then shaking his head at me,  he exclaimed,  "  O,  you little character-monger,
you  !"

Mrs.  Thrale then returned to her charge,  and again urged me about a
comedy ;  and again I tried to silence her,  and we had a fine fight together ;
till she called upon Dr.  Johnson to back her.

"  Why,  madam,"  said he,  laughing, "  she is writing one.  What a rout is
here,  indeed  !  she is writing one upstairs all the time.  Who ever knew when
she began  '  Evelina V She is working at some drama,  depend upon it."

"  True,  true,  O king  !"  thought I.

"  Well,  that will be a sly trick  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  however,  you know
best,  I believe,  about that,  as well as about every other thing."

Friday,  was a very full day.  In the morning,  we began talking of"  Irene,"
and Mrs.  Thrale made Dr.  Johnson read some passages which I had been
remarking as uncommonly applicable to the present times.  He read several
speeches,  and told us he had not ever read so much of it before since it was
first printed.

"Why there is no making you read a play,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "either of
your own,  or any other person.  What trouble had I to make you hear
Murphy's  '  Know your own Mind  !'  '  Read rapidly,  read rapidly,'  you cried,
and then took out your watch to see how long I was about it!  Well,  we
won't serve Miss Burney so,  sir ;  when we have her comedy we will do it
all justice."

]\Iurphy,  it seems,  is a very great favourite here  ;  he has been acquainted
intimately with Mr.  Thrale from both their boyhoods,  and Mrs.  Thrale is
very partial to him.  She told me,  therefore,  in a merry way,  that though
she wished me to excel Cumberland,  and all other dramatic writers,  yet she
would not wish me better than her old friend Murphy.  I begged her,  how-
ever, to be perfectly easy,  and assured her I would take care not to eclipse
him  !

At noon Mrs.  Thrale took me with her to Kensington,  to see her little
daughters Susan and Sophia,  who are at school there.  They are sweet
little girls.

Wlien we were dressed for dinner,  and went into the parlour,  we had the
agreeable surprise of seeing Mr.  Seward there.  I say agreeable,  for not-
withstanding our acquaintance began in a manner so extremely unpleasant
to me,  there is something of drollery,  good sense,  intelligence,  and archness
in this young man,  that have not merely reconciled me to him,  but brought
me over to liking him vastly.

There was also Mr,  Lort,  w^ho is reckoned one of the most learned men
alive,  and is also a collector of curiosities,  alike in literature and natural
history.  His manners are somewhat blunt and odd,  and he is altogether out
of the common road,  without having chosen a better path.

The day was passed most agreeably.  In the evening we had,  as usual,
a literary conversation.  I say we,  only because Mrs.  Thrale will make me
take some share,  by perpetually applying to me  ;  and,  indeed^  there can be
no better house for rubbing up the memory,  as I hardly ever read,  saw or
heard of any book that by some means or other has not been mentioned
here.

Mr.  Lort produced several curious MSS.  of the famous Bristol Chatterton  ;
among others,  his will,  and divers verses written against Dr.  Johnson,  as a
placeman and pensioner  ;  all which he read aloud,  with a steady voice and
unmoved countenance.

46 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

I was astonished at him ;  Mrs.  Thrale not much pleased ;  Mr.  Thrale
silent and attentive ;  and Mr.  Seward was slily laughing.  Dr.  Johnson him-
self, listened profoundly and laughed openly.  Indeed,  I believe he wishes
his abusers no other thing than a good dinner,  like Pope.

Just as we had got our biscuits and toast-and-water,  which make the
Streatham supper,  and which,  indeed,  is all there is any chance of eating
after our late and great dinners,  Mr.  Lort suddenly said,

"  Pray,  ma'am,  have you heard any thing of a novel that runs about a
good deal,  called  '  Evelina V  "

What a ferment did this question,  before such a set,  put me in  !

I did not know whether he spoke to me,  or Mrs.  Thrale  ;  and Mrs.  Thrale
was in the same doubt,  and as she owned,  felt herself in a little palpitation
for me,  not knowing what might come next.  Between us both,  therefore,
he had no answer.

"  It has been recommended to me,  "  continued he  ;  *'  but I have no great
desire to see it because it has such a foolish name.  Yet I have heard a great
deal of it,  too."

He then repeated  "  Evelina" — in a very languishing and ridiculous tone.

My heart beat so quick against my stays that I almost panted with extreme
agitation,  from the dread either of hearing some horrible criticism,  or of being
betrayed  ;  and I munched my biscuit as if I had not eaten for a fortnight.

I believe the whole party were in some little consternation  ;  Dr.  Johnson

began see-sawing  ;  Mr.  Thrale awoke  ;  Mr.  E ,  who I fear has picked up

some notion of the affair from being so much in the house,  grinned amazingly ;
and Mr.  Seward,  biting his nails and flinging himself back in his chair,  I am
sure had wickedness enough to enjoy the whole scene.

Mrs.  Thrale was really a little flattered,  but without looking at me,  said,

"  And pray what,  Mr,  Lort,  what have you heard of it  ?"

Now,  had Mrs.  Thrale not been flurried,  this was the last question she
should have ventured to ask before me.  Only suppose what I must feel
when I heard it.

"  Why they say,"  answered he,  "  that it's an account of a young lady's
first entrance into company,  and of the scrapes she gets into  ;  and they say
there's a great deal of character in it,  but I have not cared to look in it,
because the name is so foolish — '  Evelina.' "

"  Why foohsh,  sir  ?"  cried Dr.  Johnson.     "  Where's the folly of it  ?"

"  Why,  I won't say much for the name myself,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  to
those who don't know the reason of it,  which I found out,  but which nobody
else seems to know."

She then explained the name from Evelyn,  according to my own meaning.

"  Well,"  said Dr.  Johnson,  "  if that was the reason,  it is a very good one."

"  Why,  have you had the book here  ?"  cried Mr.  Lort,  staring.

"  Ay,  indeed,  have we,"  said Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  I read it when I was last
confined,  and I laughed over it,  and I cried over it  !"

"  O ho  !"  said Mr.  Lort,  "  this is another thing  !  If you have had it here,
I will certainly read it."

"  Had it  !  ay,"  returned she  ;  "  and Dr.  Johnson,  who would not look at
it at first,  was so caught by it when I put it in the coach with him,  that he
has sung its praises ever since, — and he says Richardson would have been
proud to have written it."

"  O ho  !  this is a good hearing !"  cried Mr.  Lort ;  "  if Dr.  Johnson can
read it,  I shall get it with all speed."

"  You need not go far for it,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  for it's now upon
yonder table."

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  47

I could sit still no longer;  there was something so awkward,  so uncommon,
so strange in my then situation,  that I wished myself a hundred miles off;
and indeed,  I had almost choked myself with the biscuit,  for I could not
for my life swallow it ;  and so I got up,  and,  as Mr.  Lort went to the table
to look for  "  Evelina,"  I left the room,  and was forced to call for water to
wash down the biscuit,  which literally stuck in my throat.

I heartily wished Mr.  Lort at Jerusalem.  Notwithstanding all this may
read as nothing,  because all that was said was in my favour,  yet at the time,
when I knew not what might be said,  I suffered the most severe trepidation.
I did not much like going back,  but the moment I recovered breath,  I
resolved not to make bad worse by' staying longer away :  but at the door of
the room,  I met Mrs.  Thrale,  who,  asking me if I would have some water,
took me into a back room,  and burst into a hearty fit of laughter.

"  This is very good sport !"  cried she ;  "  the man is as innocent about
the matter as a child,  and we shall hear what he says to it to-morrow at
breakfast.     I made a sign to Dr.  Johnson and Seward not to tell him."

When she found I was not in a humour to think it such good sport as
she did,  she grew more serious,  and taking my hand kindly said,

"May you never.  Miss Burney,  know any other pain than that of hearing
yourself praised  !  and I am sure that you must often feel."

When I told her how much I dreaded being discovered,  and besought her
not to betray me any further,  she again began laughing,  and openly de-
clared she should not consult me about the matter.  I was really uneasy,
nay,  quite uncomfortable, — for the first time I have been so since I came
hither ;  but as we were obliged soon to return,  I could not then press my
request with the earnestness I wished.  But she told me that,  as soon as I
had left the room,  when Mr.  Lort took up  "  Evelina,"  he exclaimed con-
temptuously, "  Why,  it's printed for Lowndes !"  and that Dr.  Johnson
then told him there were things and characters in it more than worthy of
Fielding.

"  Oh ho  !"  cried Mr.  Lort ;    "  what,  is it better than Fielding  ?"
"  Harry Fielding,"  answered Dr.  Johnson,  "  knew nothing but the shell
of life."

"  So you,  ma'am,"  added the flattering Mrs.  Thrale, "  have found the
kernel."

Are they all mad  ?  or do they only want to make me so  ?
When we returned,  to my great joy,  they were talking of other subjects  ;
yet I could not sulHciently recover myself the whole evening to speak one
word but in answer  ;  for the dread of the criticisms which Mr.  Lort might
innocently make the next day,  kept me in a most uncomfortable state of
agitation.

When Mrs.  Thrale and I retired,  she not only as usual,  accompanied me
to my room,  but stayed with me at least an hour,  talking over the affair.  I
seized with eagerness this favourable opportunity of conjuring her not
merely not to tell Mr.  Lort my secret,  but even after never to tell any body.
For a great while she only laughed,  saying,

"  Poor Miss Burney  !  so you thought just to have played and sported
with your sisters and cousins,  and had it all your own way  ;  but now you
are in for it !  But if you will be an author and a wit,  you must take the
consequences  !"

But when she found me seriously urgent,  and really frightened,  she
changed her note,  and said,

"  Oh,  if I find you are in earnest in desiring concealment,.  I shall quite
scold you  ;  for if such a desire does not proceed from affectation,  'tis from
something worse."

48 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

"  No,  indeed,"  cried I,  "  not from affectation  ;  for my conduct has been
as uniform in trying to keep snug as my words ;  and I never have wavered  ;
I never have told any body out of my family,  nor half the bodies in it.  And
I have so long forbore making this request to you,  for no other reason in the
world but for fear you should think me affected."

"  Well,  I won't suspect you of affectation,"  returned she — "  nay,  I can't,
for you have looked like your namesake in the  '  Clandestine Marriage,'  all
this evening,  '  of fifly colours,  I wow and purtest ;'  but when I clear you of
that,  I leave something worse."

"  And what,  dear madam,  what can be worse  ?"

"  Why,  an over-delicacy that may make you unhappy all your life.
Indeed you must check it — you must get the better of it :  for why should
you write a book,  print a book,  and have every body read and like your
book  :  and then sneak in a corner and disown it  ?"

"  My printing it,  indeed,"  said I,  "  tells terribly against me to all who are
unacquainted with the circumstances that belonged to it ;  but I had so little
notion of being discovered,  and was so well persuaded that the book would
never be heard of,  that I really thought myself as safe,  and meant to be as
private,  when the book was at Mr.  Lowndes's,  as when it was in my own
bureau."

"  Well,  I don't know what we shall do with you  !  But indeed you must
blunt a little on this delicacy,  for the book has such success,  that if you
don't own it,  somebody else will !"

Yet notwithstanding all her advice,  and all her encouragement,  I was so
much agitated by the certainty of being known as a scribbler,  that I was
really ill all night,  and could not sleep.

When Mrs.  Thrale came to me the next morning,  she was quite concerned
to find I had really suffered from my panics.

"O!  Miss Burney,"  cried she,  "what shall we do with you?  This
must be conquered  ;  indeed this delicacy must be got over."

"  Don't call it delicacy,"  cried I,  "  when I know you only think it folly."

"  Why,  indeed,"  said she laughing,  "  it is not very wise !"

"  Well,"  cried I,  "  if,  indeed,  I am in for it,  why I must seriously set
about reconciling myself — yet I never can !"

"We all love you,"  said the sweet woman,  "we all love you dearly
already  ;  but the time will come when we shall all be proud of you — so proud,
we shall not know where to place you  !  You must set about a comedy  ;
and set about it openly  ;  it is the true style of writing for you  :  but you
must give up all these fears and this shyness ;  you must do it without any
disadvantages ;  and we will have no more of such sly,  sneaking,  private
ways  !"

I told her of my fright while at Chesington,  concerning Mrs.  Williams,
and of the letter I wrote to beg my father would hasten to caution her.

"  And did he  ?"  said she.

"  Oh,  yes  !  directly."

"  Oh,  fie  ! — I am ashamed of him  !  how can he think of humouring you
in such maggots !  If the book had not been liked,  I would have said
nothing to it.  But it is a sweet book,  and the great beauty of it is,  that it
reflects back all our own ideas and observations  :  for every body must have
met with something similar to almost all the incidents."

In short,  had I been the child of this delightful woman,  she could not
have taken more pains to reconcile me to my situation  :  even when she
laughed,  she contrived,  by her manner,  still to reassure or to soothe me.

We went down together.     My heart was in my mouth as we got to the

1778.  O^  ^^^  AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  49

library,  where all the gentlemen were waiting.  I made Mrs.  Thrale go in
before me.

Mr.  Lort was seated close to the door,  "  Evelina"  in his hand.  Mrs.
Thrale began with asking how he found it? — I could not,  if my life had
depended on it,  I am sure I could not,  at that moment,  have followed her in,
and therefore,  I skipped into the music-room.

However foolish all this may seem,  the foolery occasioned me no manner
of fun,  for I was quite in an agony.  However,  as I met with Miss Thrale,
in a ihw minutes we went into the library together.

Dr.  Johnson was later than usual this morning,  and did not come down
till our breakfast was over,  and Mrs.  Thrale had risen to give some orders,
I believe :  I,  too,  rose,  and took a book at another end of the room.  Some
time after,  before he had yet appeared,  Mr.  Thrale called out to me,

"  So Miss Burney,  you have a mind to feel your legs before the doctor
comes  ?"

"  Why so  ?"  cried Mr.  Lort.

"  Why,  because when he comes she will be confined."

"  Ay f — how is that  ?"

"  Why he never lets her leave him,  but keeps her prisoner till he goes to
his own room."

"  Oh,  ho  !"  cried Mr.  Lort,  "  she is in great favour with him."

"  Yes,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "  and I think he shows his taste."

"  I did not know,"  said Mr.  Lort,  "  but he might keep her to help him in
his  '  Lives of the Poets,'  if she's so clever."

"  And yet,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  Miss Burney never flatters him,  though
she is such a favourite with him ; — but the tables are turned,  for he sits and
flatters her all day long."

"  I don't flatter"^him,"  said I,  "because nothing I could say would flatter
him."

Mrs.  Thrale then told a story of Hannah More,  which I think exceeds,
in its severity,  all the severe things I have yet heard of Dr.  Johnson's
saying.

When she was introduced to him,  not long ago,  she began singing his
praise in the warmest manner,  and talking of the pleasure and the instruction
she had received from his writings,  with the highest encomiums.  For some
time he heard her with that quietness which a long use of praise has given
him ;  she then redoubled her strokes,  and,  as Mr.  Seward calls it,  peppered
still more highly  ;  till,  at length,  he turned suddenly to her,  with a stern and
angry countenance,  and said,  "  Madam,  before you flatter a man so grossly
to his face,  you should consider whether or not your flattery is worth his
having."

Mr.  Seward then told another instance of his determination not to mince
the matter,  when he thought reproof at all deserved.  'During a visit of Miss
Brown's to Streatham,  he was inquiring of her several things that she could
not answer  ;  and,  as he held her so cheap in regard to books,  he began to
question her concerning domestic affairs, — puddings,  pies,  plain work,  and
so forth.  Miss Brown,  not at all more able to give a good account of herself
in these articles than in the others,  began all her answers with  "  Why,  sir,
one need not be obliged to do so, — or so,"  whatever was the thing in ques-
tion. When he had finished his interrogatories,  and she had finished her
"  need nots,"  he ended the discourse with saying,  "  As to your needs,  my
dear,  they are so very many,  that you would be frightened yourself if you
knew half of them."

VOL.  I.  5

50 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

CHAPTER III.

1778.

Anecdotes of Johnson — A Dinner at Streatham — Sir Joshua Rejmolds — Mystification —
Dr.  Calvert — Mrs,  Cholmondeley — Edmund Burke — His Opinion of"  Evelina" — Mrs.
Montagu — Dr.  Johnson's Household — A Collection of Oddities — A Poor Scholar — The
Lives of the Poets — Visit of Mrs.  Montag-u to Streatham — Johnson's Opinion of her —
Character of Johnson's Conversation — His Compliments and Rebuffs — Table-talk of
Johnson,  Mrs.  Montag-u,  and Mrs.  Thrale — The value of Critical Abuse — Dr.  Johnson's
Severe Speeches — "  Civil for Four" — Dr.  Johnson and Goldsmith — Dr.  Jebb — Match-
Making — Critics and Authors — Letter from Mr.  Crisp — Mr.  Seward— A Grand Dinner
at Streatham — High Heels — Table Talk — The Distinctions of Rank — Irene — Hannah
More — Her Play — Letter from Mr.  Crisp — How to write a Comedy.

After breakfast on Friday^  or yesterday,  a curious trait occurred of Dr.
Johnson's jocosity.  It was while the talk ran so copiously upon their
urgency that I should produce a comedy.  While Mrs.  Thrale was in the
midst of her most flattering persuasions,  the doctor,  see-sawing in his chair,
began laughing to himself so heartily as to almost shake his seat as well as
his sides.  We stopped our confabulation,  in which he had ceased to join,
hoping he would reveal the subject of his mirth ;  but he enjoyed it inwardly,
without heeding our curiosity, — till at last he said he had been struck with
a notion that  "  Miss Burney would begin her dramatic career by writing a
piece called  '  Streatham.'  "

He paused,  and laughed yet more cordially,  and then,  suddenly com-
manded a pomposity to his countenance and his voice,  and added — "  Yes  !
'  Streatham — a Farce  !'"

How little did I expect from this Lexiphanes,  this great and dreaded lord
of English literature,  a turn for burlesque humour  !

Streatham,  September. — Our journey hither proved,  as it promised,
most sociably cheerful,  and Mrs.  Thrale opened still further upon the
subject she began in St.  Martin's Street,  of Dr.  Johnson's kindness towards
me.  To be sure she saw it was not totally disagreeable to me  ;  though I
was really astounded when she hinted at my becoming a rival to I\Iiss Streat-
field in the doctor's good graces.

"  I had a long letter,"  she said,  "  from Sophy Streatfield t'other day,  and
she sent Dr.  Johnson her elegant edition of the  'Classics ;'  but when he had
read the letter,  he said  '  she is a sweet creature,  and I love her much ;  but
my little Burney writes a better letter.'  Now,"  continued she,"  that is just
what I wished him to say of you both."

Mr.  Thrale came out to the door,  and received me with more civility than
ever ;  indeed we are beginning to grow a little acquainted.

We had no company all day  ;  but Mr.  Thrale,  being in much better spirits
than when I was here last,  joined in the conversation,  and we were mighty
agreeable.  But he has taken it into his head to insist upon it that I am a
spouter.  To be sure I can't absolutely deny the fact ;  but yet I am certain
he never had any reason to take such a notion.  However,  he has repeatedly
asked me to read a tragedy to him,  and insists upon it that I should do it
marvellous well ;  and when I ask him why,  he says I have such a marking
face.  However,  I told him I would as soon act to Mr.  Garrick,  or try atti-
tudes to Sir Joshua Reynolds,  as read to any body at Streatham.

The next morning,  after church,  I took a stroll round the grounds,  and
was followed by Miss Thrale,  with a summons into the parlour,  to see Miss
Brown.     I willingly obeyed it,  for I wished much to have a peep at her.

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  51

She is very like the Duchess of Devonshire,  only less handsome  ;  and,  as
I expected,  seems a gay,  careless,  lively,  good-humoured girl.  She came
on horseback,  and stayed but a short time.

Our Monday's intended great party was very small,  for people are so dis-
persed at present in various quarters,  that nothing is more difficult than to
get them together.  In the list of invitations were included Mr.  Garrick,  Sir
Richard Jebb,  Mr.  Lort,  Mr.  Seward,  Miss Brown,  and Mr.  Murphy, — all
of whom were absent from town :  we had,  therefore,  only Sir Joshua Rey-
nolds, the two Miss Palmers,  Dr.  Calvert,  Mr.  Rose Fuller,  and Lady Ladd.
Dr.  Johnson did not return.

Sir Joshua I am much pleased with  :  I like his countenance,  and I like
his manners :  the former I think expressive,  soft,  and sensible ;  the latter
gentle,  unassuming,  and engaging.

The eldest Miss Palmer seems to have a better understanding than Offy  ;
but Offy has the most pleasing face.  Dr.  Calvert I did not see enough of to
think about.

The dinner,  in quantity as well as quality,  would have sufficed for forty
people.  Sir Joshua said,  when the dessert appeared,  "  Now if all the com-
pany should take a fancy to the same dish,  there would be sufficient for all
the company from any one."

Afler dinner,  as usual,  we strolled out ;  I ran first into the hall for my
cloak,  and Mrs.  Thrale,  running after me,  said in a low voice,

"  If you are taxed with  '  Evelina,'  don't own it ;  I intend to say it is mine,
for sport's sake."

You may think how much I was surprised,  and how readily I agreed not
to own it ;  but I could ask no questions,  for the two Miss Palmers followed
close,  saying

"  Now pray,  ma'am,  tell us who it is  ?"

"  No,  no,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  who it is,  you must find out  ;  I have told
you that you dined with the author  ;  but the rest you must make out as you
can."

Miss Thrale began tittering violently,  but I entreated her not to betray
me ;  and,  as soon as I could,  I got Mrs.  Thrale to tell me what all this
meant.  She then acquainted me,  that when she first came into the parlour,
she found them all busy in talking of  "  Evelina ;"  and heard that Sir Joshua
had declared he would give fifty pounds to know the author  !

"  Well,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  thus much,  then,  I will tell you  ;  the author
will dine with you to-day."

They were then all distracted to know the party.

"  Why,"  said she,  "  we shall have Dr.  Calvert,  Lady Ladd,  Rose Fuller,
and Miss Burney."

"  Miss Burney  ?"  quoth they,  "  which Miss Burney  ?"

"  Why the eldest.  Miss Fanny Burney  ;  and so out of this list,  you
must make out the author."

I shook my head at her,  but begged her,  at least,  to go no further.

"  No,  no,"  cried she,  laughing,  "  leave me alone ;  the fun will be to
make them think it mine."

However,  as I learnt at night,  when they were gone.  Sir Joshua was so
very importunate with Mr.  Thrale and attacked him with such eagerness,
that he made him confess who it was,  as soon as the ladies retired.

Well,  to return to our walk.  The Miss Palmers grew more and more
urgent.

"  Did we indeed,"  said the eldest,  "  dine with the author of  '  Evelina?'"

"  Yes,  in good truth did you."

52 DIARY AiND LETTERS 1778.

Why then,  ma'am,  it was yourself  !"

"  I shan't tell you whether it was or not  ;  but were there not other people
at dinner besides me?     What think you of Dr.  Calvert !"

*'  Dr.  Calvert  !  no,  no ;  I am sure it was not he:  besides they say it was
certainly written by a woman."

"  By a woman  ?  nay,  then,  is not here Lady Ladd,  and Miss Burney,  and
Hester 1"

"  Lady Ladd I am sure it was not,  nor could it be Miss Thrale's.  O
ma'am  !  I begin to think it was really yours  !  Now,  was it not,  Mrs.  Thrale  ?"

Mrs.  Thrale only laughed.  Lady Ladd,  coming suddenly behind me,
put her hands on my shoulders,  and whispered,

"  Shall I tell  ?"

"  Tell 1 — tell what  ?"  cried I,  amazed.

"  Why,  whose it is  !"

"  O ma'am,"  cried I,  "  who has been so wicked as to tell your ladyship?"

"  Oh,  no matter for that ;  I have known it some time."

I entreated her however,  to keep counsel,  though I could not forbear ex-

essing my surprise and chagrin.

"  A lady of our acquaintance,"  said Miss Palmer,  "  Mrs.  Cholmondeley,
went herself to the printer,  but he would not tell."

"  Would he not?"  cried Mrs.  Thrale ;  "  why,  then,  he's an honest man."

"  Oh,  is he so? — nay,  then,  it is certainly Mrs.  Thrale's  !"

"  Well,  well,  I told you before I should not deny it."

"  Miss Burney,"  said she,  "  pray do you deny it  ?"  in a voice that seemed
to say, — I must ask round,  though rather from civility than suspicion.

"  Me  ?"  cried I,  "  oh no  :  if nobody else will deny it,  why should I  ?  It
does not seem the fashion to deny it."

"  No,  in truth,"  cried she ;  "  I believe nobody would think of denying it
that could claim it,  for it is the sweetest book in the world.  My uncle could
not go to bed till he had finished it,  and he says he is sure he shall make
love to the author,  if ever he meets with her,  and it should really be a
woman  !"

"  Dear madam,"  cried Miss Offy,  "  I am sure it was you  ;  but why will
you not own to it at once  ?"

"  I shall neither own nor deny any thing about it."

"  A gentleman whom we know very well,"  said Miss Palmer,  "  when he
could learn nothing at the printer's,  took the trouble to go all about Snow
Hill,  to see if he could find any silversmith's."

"  Well,  he was a cunning creature  !"  said Mrs.  Thrale ;  "  but Dr.
Johnson's favourite is Mr.  Smith."

"  So he is of every body,"  answered she  ;  "  he and all that family :
every body says such a family never was drawn before.  But Mrs.  Chol-
mondeley's favourite is Madam Duval ;  she acts her from morning to night,
and ma^foih every body she sees.  But though we all want so much to know
the author,  both Mrs.  Cholmondeley and my uncle himself say they should
be frightened to death to be in her company,  because she must be such a
very nice observer,  that there would be no escaping her with safety."

What strange ideas are taken fi-om a mere book reading  !  But what fol-
lows gave the highest delight I can feel.

"  Mr.  Burke,"  she continued,  "  doats on it :  he began it one morning at
seven o'clock,  and could not leave it a moment ;  he sat up all night reading
it.     He says he has not seen such a book he can't tell when."

Mrs.  Thrale gave me involuntarily a look of congratulation,  and could not
forbear exclaiming,    "  How glad she was Mr.  Burke approved it  !"    This

1778.  Of'  THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  53

served to confirm the Palmers in their mistake,  and they now,  without
further questioning,  quietly and unaffectedly concluded the book to be really
Mrs.  Thrale's  ;  and Miss Palmer said^ — "  Indeed,  ma'am,  you ought to
write a novel  :  nobody can write like you  !"

I was both delighted and diverted at this mistake,  and they grew so easy
and so satisfied under it,  that the conversation dropped,  and Offy went to
the harpsichord.

When the gentlemen came in to tea.  Rose Fuller,  who sat on the other
side of me,  began a conversation with the Miss Palmers in a very low voice,
and they listened with a most p'rofound attention  ;  but presently,  hearing
Miss Palmer say,  "  How astonishing  !  what an extraordinary performance  !
what a nice observer she must be  !"  I began to fear Rose Fuller was him-
self a^^y«/^.  However,  they all spoke so low,  I could only now and then
gather a word  ;  but I found the tenor of the conversation to be all com-
mendation, mixed with expressions of surprise.

Lady Ladd would not let me listen as I wished to do,  for she interrupted
me to ask  (almost killing herself with laughter as she spoke)  whether I was
ever at Vauxhall the last night  ?  I knew what she meant,  and wished
young Branghton over head and ears in a kennel for drawing me into such
a scrape.

Not long after the party broke up,  and they took leave.

I had no conversation with Sir Joshua all day  ;  but I found myself much
more an object of attention to him than I wished to be  ;  and he several
times spoke to me,  though he did not make love  !

When they rose to take leave.  Miss Palmer,  with the air of asking the
greatest of favours,  hoped to see me when I returned to town ;  and Sir Joshua,
approaching me with the most profound respect,  inquired how long I should
remain at Streatham  ?  A week,  I believed :  and then he hoped,  when I left
it,  they should have the honour of seeing me in Liecester Square.

In short,  the joke is,  the people speak as if they were afraid of me,
instead of my being afraid of them.  It seems,  when they got to the door,
Miss Palmer said to Mrs.  Thrale,

"  Ma'am,  so it's Miss Burney after all !"

"  Ay,  sure,"  answered she,  "  who should it be?"

"  Ah  !  why did not you tell us sooner  ?"  said Offy,  ''  that we might
have had a little talk about it  ?"

Here,  therefore,  end all my hopes of secrecy  !  I take leave of them
with the utmost regret,  and though never yet was any scribbler drawn
more honourably,  more creditably,  more partially into notice,  I neverthe-
less cannot persuade myself to rejoice in the loss of my dear old obscurity.

Tuesday morning,  Mrs.  Thrale asked me if I did not want to see Mrs.
Montagu 1 I truly said,  I should be the most insensible of all animals,
not to like to see our sex's glory.

"  Well,"  said she,  "  we'll try to make you see her.  Sir Joshua says
she is in town,  and I will write and ask her here.  I wish you to see her
of all things."

Mrs.  Thrale wrote her note before breakfast.

I had a great deal of private confab afterwards with Lady Ladd and
Miss Thrale,  concerning Miss Streatfield  :  I find she is by no means a
favourite with either of them,  though she is half adored by Mr.  and Mrs.
Thrale,  and by Dr.  Johnson.  And Lady Ladd,  among other things,  men-
tioned her being here once when Mrs.  Montagu came,  and blamed Mrs.
Thrale for making much of her before Mrs.  Montagu ;  "  who,"  she added,

5*

54 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

"  has no notion of any girl acquaintance,  and indeed,  makes a point of only
cultivating people of consequence."

I determined,  in my own mind,  to make use of this hint,  and keep myself
as much out of her way as I could.  Indeed,  at any rate,  a woman of such
celebrity in the literary world would be the last I should covet to con-
verse with,  though one of the first I should wish to listen to.

Lady Ladd went to town before dinner.  Her ladyship is immensely
civil to me,  and we are mighty facetious together.  I find she has really
some drollery about her,  when she lays aside her dignity and stateliness,
and is very fond of jocoseness,  to which she contributes her part much
better than I first imagined she could.

An answer came from Mrs.  Montagu at noon.  Mrs.  Thrale gave it me
to read  :  it was in a high strain of j^olitcsse^  expressed equal admiration
and regard for Mrs.  Thrale,  and accepted her invitation for the next day.
But w^hat was my surprise to read,  at the bottom of the letter,  "  I have not
yet seen  '  Evelina,'  but will certainly get it :  and if it should not happen
to please me,  the disgrace must be mine,  not the author's."

*'  Oh ma'am,"  cried I,  "  what does this mean  ?"

"  Why only,"  said she,  "  that,  in my letter this morning,  I said.  Have
you seen the new work called  '  Evelina V it was written by an amiable
young friend of mine,  and I wish much to know your opinion of it ;  for if
you should not approve it,  what signifies the approbation of a Johnson,  a
Burke,  &c.  1"

Oh what a woman is this Mrs.  Thrale  ! — since she wall make the book
known,  how sweet a method was this of letting Mrs.  Montagu know the
honour it has received  !

Before dinner,  to my great joy,  Dr.  Johnson returned home from Warley
Common.  I followed Mrs.  Thrale into the library to see him,  and he is so
near-sighted,  that he took me for Miss Streatfield ;  but he did not welcome
me less kindly when he found his mistake,  which Mrs.  Thrale made known
by saying — "  No,  'tis Miss Streatfield's rival,  Miss Burney."

At tea-time the subject turned upon the domestic economy of Dr.  John-
son's own household.  Mrs.  Thrale has often acquainted me that his house
is quite filled and overrun with all sorts of strange creatures,  whom he
admits for mere charity,  and because nobody else will admit them, — for
his charity is unbounded, — or,  rather,  bounded only by his circumstances.

The account he gave of the adventures and absurdities of the set,  was
highly diverting,  but too diffused for writing, — though one or two speeches
I must give.     I think I shall occasionally theatricalize my dialogues.

Mrs.  Thrale — Pray,  sir,  how does Mrs.  Williams like all this tribe  ?

Dr.  Johnson — Madam,  she does not like them at all ;  but their fondness
for her is not greater.  She and De Mullin quarrel incessantly ;  but as
they can both be of occasional service to each other,  and as neither of
them have any other place to go to,  their animosity does not force them to
separate.

Mrs.  T. — And pray,  sir,  what is Mr.  Macbean  ?

Dr.  J. — Madam,  he is a Scotchman :  he is a man of great learning,  and
for his learning I respect him,  and I wish to serve him.  He knows many
languages,  and knows them well  ;  but he knows nothing of life.  I advised
him to write a geographical dictionary ;  but I have lost all hopes of his
ever doing any thing properly,  since I found he gave as much labour to
Capua as to Rome.

Mr.  T. — And pray who is clerk of your kitchen,  sir  ?

Dr.  J. — Why,  sir,  I am afraid there is none ;  a general anarchy prevails

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  55

in my kitcheiiy as I am told by Mr.  Levat,  who says it is not now what it
used to be !

Mrs.  T. — Mr.  Levat,  I suppose,  sir,  has the office of keeping the hospital
in health 1 for he is an apothecary.

Dr.  J. — Levat,  madam,  is a brutal fellow,  but I have a good regard for
him ;  for his brutality is in his manners,  not his mind.

Mr.  T. — But how do you get your dinners drest  ?

Dr.  J. — Why De Mullin has the chief management of the kitchen  ;  but
our roasting is not magnificent,  for we have no jack.

Mr.  T.-^-No jack  ?  Why how do they manage without  ?

Dr.  J. — Small joints,  I believe,  they manage with a string,  and larger
are done at the tavern.  I have some thoughts  (with a profound gravity)  of
buying a jack,  because I think a jack is some credit to a house.

Mr.  T. — Well,  but you'll have a spit,  too  ?

Dr.  J. — No,  sir,  no,  that would be superfluous ;  for we shall never use
it ;  and if a jack is seen,  a spit will be presumed  !

Mrs.  T. — But pray,  sir,  who is the Poll you talk of?  She that you used
to abet in her quarrels with Mrs.  Williams,  and call out,  "  at her again,
Poll !     Never flinch.  Poll 1"

Dr.  J. — Why I took to Poll very well at first,  but she won't do upon a
nearer examination.

Mrs.  T. — How came she among you,  sir  ?

Dr.  J. — Why I don't rightly remember,  but we could spare her very
well from us.  Poll is a stupid slut ;  I had some hopes of her at first ;  but
when I talked to her tightly and closely,  I could make nothing of her ;  she
was wiggle waggle,  and I could never persuade her to be categorical.  I
wish Miss Burney would come among us;  if she would only give us a
week,  we should furnish her with ample materials for a new scene in her
next work.

A little while after he asked Mrs.  Thrale,  who had read  "  Evelina"  in
his absence  ]

"Who?"  cried she; — "  why Burke! — Burke sat up all night to finish
it ;  and Sir Joshua Reynolds is mad about it,  and said he would give fifty
pounds to know the author.  But our fun was with his nieces — we made
them believe I wrote the book,  and the girls gave me the credit of it at
once."

"  I am sorry for it,  madam,"  cried, he,  quite angrily, — "  you were much
to blame ;  deceits of that kind ought never to be practised ;  they have a
worse tendency than you are aware of."

Mrs.  T. — Why,  don't frighten yourself,  sir ;  Miss Burney will have all
the credit she has a right to,  for I told them whose it was before they went.

Dr.  J. — But you were very wrong for misleading them a moment ;  such
jests are extremely blamable ;  they are foolish in the very act,  and they
are wrong,  because they always leave a doubt upon the mind.  What first
passed will be always recollected by those girls,  and they will never feel
clearly convinced which wrote the book,  Mrs.  Thrale or Miss Burney.

Mrs.  T. — Well,  well,  I am ready to take my Bible oath it was not me ;
and if that won't do.  Miss Burney must take hers too.

I was then looking over the  "  Life of Cowley,"  which he had himself
given me to read,  at the same time that he gave to Mrs.  Thrale that of
Waller.  They are now printed,  though they will not be published for
some time.     But he bade me put it away.

"  Do,"  cried he,  "  put away that now,  and prattle with us ;  I can't make
this little Burney prattle,  and I am sure she prattles well ;  but I shall teach
her another lesson than to sit thus silent before I have done with her."

56 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

"To talk,"  cried I,  "  is the only lesson I shall be backward to learn from
you,  sir."

"  You shall give me,"  cried he,  "  a discourse upon the passions  :  come,
begin  !  Tell us the necessity of regulating them,  watching over and curb-
ing them  !     Did you ever read Norris's  '  Theory of Love  '/' "

*'  No,  sir,"  said I,  laughing,  yet staring a little.

Dr.  J. — Well,  it is worth your reading.  He will make you see that in-
ordinate love is the root of all evil  :  inordinate love of wealth brings on
avarice ;  of wine,  brings on intemperance  ;  of power,  brings on cruelty  ;
and so on.     He deduces from inordinate love all human frailty.

Mrs.  T. — To-morrow,  sir,  Mrs.  Montagu dines here,  and then you will
have talk enough.

Dr.  Johnson began to see-saw,  with a countenance strongly expressive of
inward fun,  and after enjoying it sometime in silence,  he suddenly,  and with
great animation,  turned to me and cried,

"  Down with her,  Burney  ! — down with her  ! — spare her not ! — attack
her,  fight her,  and down with her at once  !  You are a rising wit,  and she
is at the top ;  and when I was beginning the world,  and was nothing and
nobody,  the joy of all my life was to fire at all the established wits !  and
then every body loved to halloo me on.  But there is no game now ;  every
body would be glad to see me conquered  :  but then,  when I was new,  to
vanquish the great ones was all the delight of my poor little dear soul  !  So
at her,  Burney — at her,  and down with her."

Oh,  how we were all amused  !  By the way I must tell you that Mrs.
Montagu is in very great estimation here,  even with Dr.  Johnson himself,
when others do not praise her improperly.  Mrs.  Thrale ranks her as the
first of women in the literary way.  I should have told you that Miss
Gregory,  daughter of the Gregory who wrote the  "  Letters,"  or,  "  Legacy
of Advice,"  lives with Mrs.  Montagu,  and was invited to accompany her.

"  Mark,  now,"  said Dr.  Johnson,  "  if I contradict her to-morrow.  I am
determined,  let her say what she will,  that I will not contradict her."

Mrs.  T. — Why,  to be sure,  sir,  you did put her a little out of countenance
last time she came.  Yet you were neither rough,  nor cruel,  nor ill-natured  ;
but still,  when a lady changes colour,  we imagine her feelings are not quite
composed.

Dr.  J. — Why,  madam,  I won't answer that I shan't contradict her again,
if she provokes me as she did then  ;  but a less provocation I will withstand.
I believe I am not high in her good graces already  ;  and I begin  (added he,
laughing heartily,)  to tremble for my admission into her new house.  I doubt
I shall never see the inside of it.

(Mrs.  Montagu is building a most superb house.)

Mrs.  T. — Oh,  I warrant you,  she fears you,  indeed ;  but that,  you know,
is nothing uncommon :  and dearly I love to hear your disquisitions  ;  fof
certainly she is the first woman for literary knowledge in England,  and
if in England,  I hope I may say in the world.

Dr.  J. — I believe you may,  madam.  She diffuses more knowledge in her
conversation than any woman I know,  or indeed,  almost any man.

Mrs.  T. — I declare I know no man equal to her,  take away yourself and
Burke,  for that art.  And you who love magnificence,  won't quarrel with
her,  as every body else does,  for her love of finery.

Dr.  J. — No,  I shall not quarrel with her upon that topic.  (Then looking
earnestly at me),  "  Nay,"  he added,  "  it's very handsome !"

"  What,  sir?"  cried I,  amazed.

"  Why,  your cap  : — I have looked at it some time,  and I like it much.
It has not that vile bandeau across it,  which I have so often cursed."

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  57

Did you ever hear any thing so strange?  nothing escapes him.  My
Daddy Crisp is not more minute in his attentions:  nay,  I think he is even
less so.

Mrs.  T. — Well,  sir,  that bandeau you quarrelled with was worn by
every woman at court the last birthday,  and I observed that all the men
found fault with it.

Dr.  J. — The truth is,  women,  take them in general,  have no idea of
grace.  Fashion is all they think of.  I don't mean Mrs.  Thrale and Miss
Burney,  when I talk of women  ! — they are goddesses  ! — and therefore I ex-
cept them.

Mrs.  T. — Lady Ladd never wore the bandeau,  and said she never would,
because it is unbecoming.

Dr.  J. — (^Laugliing.)  Did not she?  then is Lady Ladd a charming
woman,  and I have yet hopes of entering into engagements with her  !

Mrs.  T. — Well,  as to that I can't say ;  but to be sure,  the only similitude
I have yet discovered in you,  is in size  :  there you agree mighty well.

Dr.  J. — Why,  if any body could have worn the bandeau,  it must have
been Lady Ladd  ;  for there is enough of her to carry it off;  but you are too
little for any thing ridiculous  ;  that which seems nothing upon a Patagonian,
will become very conspicuous upon a Lilliputian,  and of you there is so little
in all,  that one single absurdity would swallow up half of you.

Some time after,  when we had all been a few minutes wholly silent,  he
turned to me and said,

"  Come,  Burney,  shall you and I study our parts against Mrs.  Montagu
comes  ?"

"  Miss Burney,"  cried Mr.  Thrale,  "  you must get up your courage for
this encounter  !  I think you should begin with Miss Gregory  ;  and down
with her first."

Dr.  J. — No,  no,  always fly at the eagle  !  down with Mrs.  Montagu her-
self!    I hope she will come full of"  Evelina !"

Wednesday. — At breakfast,  Dr.  Johnson asked me,  if I had been read-
ing his  "  Life of Cowley  ?"

"  O yes,"  said I.

"  And what do you think of it  ?"

"  I am delighted with it,"  cried I ;  "  and if I was somebody,  instead of
nobody,  I should not have read it without telling you sooner what I think
of it,  and unasked."

Again,  when I took up Cowley's Life,  he made me put it away to talk.
I could not help remarking how very like Dr.  Johnson is to his writing ;
and how much the same thing it was to hear or to read him ;  but that
nobody could tell without coming to Streatham,  for his language was
generally imagined to be laboured and studied,  instead of the mere common
flow of his thoughts.

"  Very true,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  he writes and talks with the same ease,
and in the same manner ;  but,  sir  (to him),  if this rogue is like her book,
how will she trim all of us by and by  !  Now,  she dainties us up with all
the meekness in the world ;  but when we are away,  I suppose she pays us
ofl'  finely."

".My paying off","  cried I,  "  is like the Latin of Hudibras,

' who never scanted,

His learning unto such as wanted  ;'

for I can figure like any thing when I am with those who can't figure at all."

58 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

]\Irs.  T. — Oh,  if you have any mag in yon,  Vvc'll draw it ont !

Dr.  J. — A rogue  !  she told me that if she was somebody instead of no-
body, she would praise my book  !

F.  B. — Why,  sir,  I am sure you would scoff my praise.

Dr.  J. — If you think that,  you think very ill of me  ;  but you don't think it.

Mrs.  T. — We have told her what you said to Miss More,  and I believe
that makes her afraid.

Dr.  J. — Well,  and if she was to serve me as Miss More did,  I should say
the same thing to her.  But I think she will not.  Hannah More has very
good intellects,  too ;  but she has by no means the elegance of Miss Burney.

"  Well,"  cried I,  "  there are folks that are to be spoilt,  and folks that
are not to be spoilt,  as well in the world as in the nursery ;  but what will
become of me,  I know not."

Mrs.  T. — Well,  if you are spoilt,  we can only say,  nothing in the
world is so pleasant as being spoilt.

Dr.  J. — No,  no ;  Burney will not be spoilt :  she knows too well what
praise she has a claim to,  and what not,  to be in any danger of spoiling.

F.  B. — I do,  indeed,  believe I shall never be spoilt at Streatham,  for it
is the last place where I can feel of any consequence.

Mrs.  T. — Well,  sir,  she is our Miss Burney,  however ;  we were the first
to catch her,  and now we have got,  ^^  e will keep her.  And so she is all
our own.

Dr.  J. — Yes,  I hope she is ;  I should be very sorry to lose Miss Burney.

F.  B. — Oh,  dear  !  how can two such people sit and talk such

Mrs.  T. — Such stuff,  you think  ?  but Dr.  Johnson's love

Dr.  J. — Love  ?  no,  I don't entirely love her yet ;  I must see more of her
first ;  I have much too high an opinion of her to flatter her.  I have,
indeed,  seen nothing of her,  but what is fit to be loved,  but I must know
her more.     I admire her,  and greatly too.

F.  B. — Well,  this is a very new style to me  !  I have long enough had
reason to think myself loved,  but admiration is perfectly new to me.

Dr.  J. — I admire her for her observation,  for her good sense,  for her
humour,  for her discernment,  for her manner of expressing them,  and for
all her writing talents.

I quite sigh beneath the weight of such praise from such persons — sigh
with mixed gratitude for the present,  and fear for the future ;  for I think I
shall never,  never be able to support myself long so well with them.

We could not prevail with him to stay till Mrs.  Montagu arrived,  though,
by appointment,  she came very early.  She and Miss Gregory came by
one o'clock.

There was no party to meet her.

She is middle-sized,  very thin,  and looks infirm  ;  she has a sensible and
penetrating countenance,  and the air and manner of a woman accustomed
to being distinguished,  and of great parts.  Dr.  Johnson,  who agrees in
this,  told us that a Mrs.  Hervey,  of his acquaintance,  says,  she can remem-
ber Mrs.  Montagu trying for this same air and manner.  Mr.  Crisp has
said the same  :  however,  nobody can now impartially see her,  and not con-
fess that she has extremely well succeeded.

My expectations,  which were compounded of the praise of Mrs.  Thrale,
and the abuse of Mr.  Crisp,  were most exactly answered,  for I thought her
in a medium way.

Miss Gregory is a fine young woman,  and seems gentle and well-bred.

A bustle with the dog Presto — Mrs.  Thrale's favourite — at the entrance
of these ladies into the library,  prevented any formal reception  ;  but as

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  59

soon as Mrs.  Montagu heard my name,  she inquired very civilly after my
father,  and made many speeches concerning a volume of  "  Linguet,"  which
she has lost  ;  but she hopes soon to be able to replace it.  I am sure he is
very high in her favour,  because she did me the honour of addressing her-
self to me three or four times.

But my ease and tranquillity were soon disturbed  :  for she had not been
in the room more than ten minutes,  ere turning to Mrs.  Thrale,  she said,

"  Oh,  ma'am — but your  '  Evelina' — I have not yet got it — I sent for it,
but the bookseller had it not.     However,  I will certainly have it."

"  Ay,  I hope so,"  answered Mrs.  Thrale,  "  and I hope you will Hke it
too  ;  for  'tis a book to be liked."

I began now a vehement nose-blowing,  for the benefit of handkerchiefing
my face.

"  I hope though,"  said Mrs.  Montagu,  drily,  "  it is not in verse?  I can
read any thing in prose,  but I have a great dread of a long story in verse."
"  No,  ma'am,  no  ;  'tis all in prose,  I assure you.  'Tis a novel ;  and an
exceeding — but it does nothing good to be praised too much,  so I will say
nothing more about it :  only this,  that Mr.  Burke sat up all night to read it."
"  Indeed  !  Well,  I propose myself great pleasure from it ;  and I am gra-
tified by hearing it is written by a woman."

"  And Sir Joshua Reynolds,"  continued Mrs.  Thrale,  "  has been offering
fifty pounds to know the author."

"  Well,  I will have it to read on my journey;  I am going to Berkshire,"
and it shall be my travelling book."

"  No,  ma'am,  if you please you shall have it now.  Queeny,  do look it for
Mrs.  Montagu,  and let it be put in her carriage,  and go to town with her."

Miss Thrale rose to look for it,  and involuntarily I rose too,  intending to
walk off,  for my situation was inexpressibly awkward ;  but then I recol-
lected that if I went away,  it might seem like giving Mrs.  Thrale leave and
opportunity to tell my tale,  and therefore I stopped at a distant window,
w^here I busied myself in contemplating the poultry.

"  And Dr.  Johnson,  ma'am,"  added my kind puffer,  "  says Fielding
never wrote so well — never wrote equal to this book  ;  he says it is a
better picture of life and manners than is to be found any where in Fielding."
"  Indeed  !"  cried Mrs.  Montagu surprised  ;  "  that I did not expect,  for I
have been informed it is the work of a young lady,  and therefore,  though I
expected a very pretty book,  I supposed it to be a work of mere imagination,
and the name I thought attractive  ;  but life and manners I never dreamt of
finding."

"  Well,  ma'am,  what I tell you is literally true  ;  and for my part,  I am
never better pleased than when good girls write clever books— and that this
is clever — But all this time we are killing Miss Burney,  w^ho wrote the book
herself."

What a clap of thunder was this  ! — the last thing in the world I should
have expected before my face  !  I know not what bewitched Mrs.  Thrale,
but this was carrying the jest further than ever.  All rctenu being now at an
end,  I fairly and abruptly took to my heels,  and ran out of the room with the
utmost trepidation,  amidst astonished exclamations from Mrs.  Montagu and
Miss Gregory.

I was horribly disconcerted,  but I am now so irrecoverably in for it,  that
I begin to leave off reproaches and expostulations;  indeed,  they have very
little availed me while they might have been of service,  but now they would
pass for a mere parade and affectation  ;  and therefore since they can do no
good,  I gulp them down.  I find them,  indeed,  somewhat hard of digestion,
but they must make their own way as well as they can.

60 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

I determined not to make my appearance again till dinner was upon table  ;
yet I could neither read^nor write,  nor indeed do any thing but consider the
new situation in life into which I am thus hurried — I had almost said forced
— and if I had,  methinks it would be no untruth.

Miss Thrale came laughing up after me,  and tried to persuade me to
return.  She was mightily diverted all the morning,  and came to me with
repeated messages of summons to attend the company ;  but I could not
brave it again into the room,  and therefore entreated her to say I was finish-
ing a letter.     Yet I was sorry to lose so much of Mrs.  Montagu.

When dinner was upon table,  I followed the procession,  in a tragedy
step,  as Mr.  Thrale will have it,  into the dining-parlour.  Dr.  Johnson was
returned.

The conversation was not brilliant,  nor do I remember much of it ;  but
Mrs.  Montagu behaved to me just as 1 could have wished,  since she spoke
to me very little,  but spoke that little with the utmost politeness.  But Miss
Gregory,  though herself a very modest girl,  quite stared me out of counte-
nance, and never took her eyes off my face.

When Mrs.  Montagu's new house was talked of.  Dr.  Johnson,  in a
jocose manner,  desired to know if he should be invited to see it.

"  Ay,  sure,"  cried Mrs.  Montagu,  looking well pleased  ;  "  or else I shan't
like it :  but I invite you all to a house-warming;  I shall hope for the honour
of seeing all this company at my new house next Easter day  :  I fix the day
now that it may be remembered."

Every body bowed and accepted the invite but me,  and I thought fitting
not to hear it ;  for I have no notion of snapping at invites from the emi-
nent. But Dr.  Johnson,  who sat next to me,  was determined I should be of
the party,  for he suddenly clapped his hand on my shoulder,  and called
out aloud,

"  Little Burney,  you and I will go together !"

"  Yes,  surely,"  cried Mrs.  Montagu,  "  I shall hope for the pleasure of
seeing  '  Evelina.' "

" '  Evelina V  "  repeated he  ;  "  has Mrs.  Montagu then found out '  Evelina V  "

"  Yes,"  cried she,  "  and I am proud of it :  I am proud that a work so
commended should be a woman's."

Oh,  how my' face burnt !

"  Has Mrs.^Montagu,"  asked Dr.  Johnson,  "  read  '  Evelina  ?'  "

"  No,  sir,  not yet ;  but I shall immediately,  for I feel the greatest eager-
ness to read it."

"  I am very sorry,  madam,"  replied he,  "  that you have not read it
already,  because you cannot speak of it with a full conviction of its merit :
which,  I believe when you have read it,  you will find great pleasure in ac-
knowledging."

Some other things were said,  but I remember them not,  for I could
hardly keep my place  :  but my sweet,  naughty Mrs.  Thrale looked delighted
for me.

I made tea as usual,  and Mrs.  Montagu and Miss Gregory seated them-
selves on each side of me.

"  I can see,"  said the former,  "  that Miss Burney is very like her father,
and that is a good thing,  for every body would wish to be like Dr.  Burney.
Pray when you see him,  give my best respects to him  ;  I am afraid he thinks
me a thief with his  '  Linguet ;'  but I assure you I am a very honest woman,
and I spent full three hours in looking for it."

"  I am sure,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  Dr.  Burney would much rather you
should have employed that time about some other book."

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  Qi

They went away very early,  because Mrs.  Montagu is a great coward in
a carriage.  She repeated her invitation as she left the room.  So now that
I am invited to Mrs.  r>iontagu's,  I think the measure of my glory full  !

When they were gone,  how did Dr.  Johnson astonish me by asking
if I had observed what an ugly cap Miss Gregory had on?  And then
taking both my hands,  and looking at me with an expression of much kind-
ness, he said,

"  Well,  Miss Burney,  Mrs.  Montagu now will read  '  Evelina.'  "

To read it he seems to think is all that is wanted,  and,  far as I am from
being of the same opinion,  I dare not to him make disqualifying speeches,
because it might seem impertinent to suppose her more difficult to please
than himself.

"You were very kind,  sir,"  cried I,  "  to speak of it with so much favour
and indulgence at dinner  ;  yet I hardly knew how to sit it then,  though I
shall be always proud to remember it hereafter."

"  Why,  it is true,"  said he,  kindly,  "  that such things are disagreeable
to sit,  nor do I wonder you were distressed  ,*  yet sometimes they are
necessary."

Was this not very kind  ?  I am sure he meant that the sanction of his
good opinion,  so publicly given to Mrs.  Montagu,  would in a manner stamp
the success of my book ;  and though,  had I been allowed to preserve the
snugness 1 had planned,  I need not have concerned myself at all about its
fate,  yet now that I find myself exposed with it,  I cannot but wish it in-
sured from disgrace.

"  Well,  sir,"  cried I,  "  I don't think I shall mind Mrs.  Montagu herself
now-;  after what you have said,  I believe I should not mind even abuse
from any one."

"  No,  no,  never mind them  !"  cried he  ;  "  resolve not to mind them :  they
can do you no serious hurt."

Mrs.  Thrale then told me such civil things.  Mrs.  Montagu it seems,
during my retreat,  inquired very particularly what kind of book it was  ?

"  And I told her,"  continued Mrs.  Thrale,  "  that it was a picture of life,
manners,  and characters.  '  But won't she go on  ?'  says she  ;  '  surely she
won't stop here V

"  '  Why,'  said I,  '  I want her to go on in a new path — I want her to
write a comedy.'

"  '  But,'  said Mrs.  Montagu,  '  one thing must be considered  ;  Fielding,
who was so admirable in novel writing,  never succeeded when he wrote for
the stage.' "

"  Very well said,"  cried Dr.  Johnson  ;  "  that was an answer which
showed she considered her subject."

Mrs.  Thrale continued :

"  '  Well,  but a propos^  said Mrs.  Montagu,  '  if Miss Burney does write a
play,  I beg I may know of it ;  or,  if she thinks proper,  see it ;  and all my
influence is at her service.  We shall all be glad to assist in spreading the
fame of Miss Burney.'  "

I tremble for what all this will end in.  I verily think I had best stop
where I am,  and never again attempt writing :  for after so much honour,  so
much success — how shall I bear a downfall  ?

Mrs.  T. — O,  a propos  ;  now you have a new edition coming out,  why
should you not put your name to it  ?

F.  B. — O ma'am,  I would not for the world !

Mrs.  T. — And why not  ?  come,  let us have done now with all this diddle-
daddle.

VOL.  I.  6

62 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

F.  B. — No,  indeed,  ma'am,  so long as I live I never can consent to that.

Mrs.  T. — Well,  but seriously,  Miss Burney,  why should you not  ?  I
advise it with all my heart,  and I'll tell you why ;  you want hardening,  and
how can you get it better than by putting your name to this book  (to begin
with),  which every body likes,  and against which I have heard nobody ofier
any objection  ?     You can never write what will please more universally.

F.  B. — But why,  ma'am,  should I be hardened  ?

Mrs.  T. — To enable you to bear a little abuse by and by.

F.  B. — Oh,  Heaven forbid I should be tried in that way !

Mrs.  T. — Oh,  you must not talk so ;  I hope to live to see you trimmed
very handsomely.

F.  B. — Heaven forbid  !  I am sure I should hang or drown myself in such
a case !

Mrs.  T. — You grieve me to hear you talk so  ;  is not every body abused
that meets with success  ?  You must prepare yourself not to mind a few
squibs.     How is Dr.  Johnson abused  !  and who thinks the worse of him  ?

This comparison made me grin,  and so our discourse ended.  But pray
Heaven may spare me the horror irrecoverable of personal abuse !  Let
them criticise,  cut,  slash,  without mercy my book,  and let them neglect me ;
but may God avert my becoming a public theme of ridicule  !  In such a
case,  how should I wish  "  Evelina"  had followed her humble predecessors
to the all devouring flames,  which,  in consuming her,  would have preserved
her creatress  !

Monday,  September 21st. — I am more comfortable here than ever  ;  Dr.
Johnson honours me with increasing kindness ;  Mr.  Thrale is much more
easy and sociable than when I was here before ;  I am quite jocose,  when-
ever I please,  wath Mrs»  Thrale ;  and the charming head and life of the
house,  her mother,  stands the test of the closest examination,  as well and as
much to her honour as she does a mere cursory view.  She is,  indeed,  all
that is excellent and desirable in woman.

1 have had a thousand delightful conversations with Dr.  Johnson,  who,
whether he loves me or not,  I am sure seems to have some opinion of my dis-
cretion, for he speaks of all this house to me with unbounded confidence,
neither diminishing faults,  nor exaggerating praise.  Whenever he is below
stairs he keeps me a prisoner,  for he does not like I should quit the room
a moment ;  if I rise he constantly calls out  "  Don't you go,  little Burney !"

Last night,  when we were talking of compliments and of gross speeches,
Mrs.  Thrale most justly said,  that nobody could make either like Dr.  John-
son. "  Your compliments,  sir,  are made seldom,  but when they are made
they have an elegance unequalled  ;  but then when you are angry,  who
dares make speeches so bitter and so cruel  ?"

Dr.  J. — Madam,  I am always sorry when I make bitter speeches,  and I
never do it,  but when I am insufferably vexed.

Mrs.  T. — Yes,  sir;  but you suffer things to vex you that nobody else
would vex at.     I am sure I have had my share of scolding from you !

Dr.  J. — It is true you have ;  but you have borne it like an angel,  and
you have been the better for it.

Mrs.  T. — That I believe,  sir  :  for I have received more instruction from
you than from any man,  or any book :  and the vanity that you should think
me worth instructing,  always overcame the vanity of being found fault with.
And so you had the scolding,  and I the improvement.

F.  B. — And I am sure both make for the honour of both  !

Dr.  J. — I think so too.  But Mrs.  Thrale is a sweet creature,  and never
angry ;  she has a temper the most delightful of any woman I ever knew.

]778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  53

Mrs.  T. — This I can tell you,  sir,  and without any flattery — I not only
bear your reproofs when present,  but in almost every thing I do in your
absence,  I ask myself whether you would like it,  and what you would say
to it.     Yet I believe there is nobody you dispute with oftener than me.

F.  B. — But you two are so well established with one another,  that you
can bear a rebuff that would kill a stranger.

Dr.  J. — Yes  :  but we disputed the same before we were so well esta-
blished with one another.

Mrs.  T. — Oh,  sometimes I think I shall die no other death than hearing
the bitter things he says to others.  What he says to myself I can bear,
because I know how sincerely he is my friend,  and that he means to mend
me  ;  but to others it is cruel.

Dr.  J. — Why,  madam,  you often provoke me to say severe things,  by
unreasonable commendation.  If you would not call for my praise,  I would
not give you my censure ;  but it constantly moves my indignation to be
applied to,  to speak well of a thing which I think contemptible.

F.  B. — Well,  this I know,  whoever I may hear complain of Dr.  John-
son's severity,  I shall always vouch for his kindness,  as far as regards
myself,  and his indulgence.

Mrs.  T. — Ay,  but I hope he will trim you yet,  too !

Dr.  J. — I hope not :  I should be very sorry to say any thing that should
vex my dear little Burney.

F.  B. — If you did,  sir,  it would vex me more than you can imagine.  I
should sink in a minute.

Mrs.  T. — I remember,  sir,  when we were travelling in Wales,  how you
called me to account for my civility to the people ;  "  Madam,"  you said,
"  let me have no more of this idle commendation of nothing.  IVhy is it,
that whatever you see,  and whoever you see,  you are to be so indiscri-
minately lavish of praise 1"  "  Why I'll tell you,  sir,"  said I,  "  when I am
with you,  and Mr.  Thrale,  and Queeny,  I am obliged to be civil for four !"

There w^as a cutter for you !  But this I must say,  for the honour of
both — Mrs.  Thrale speaks with as much sincerity,  (though with greater
softness,)  as he does to her.

Well,  now I have given so many fine compliments from Dr.  Johnson,
and Mrs.  Thrale,  suppose,  by way of contrast and variety,  I give a few of
Rose Fuller's.  He called here on Saturday morning,  with his little dog
Sharp,  who is his constant companion.  When the common salutations
were over,  and every body had said something to him and his dog,  he
applied to me.

"  Well,  Miss Burney,  and how do you do  ?  Pray how do you like my
little dog 1 his name is Sharp."

F.  B.— Oh,  very well !

Mr.  Fuller. — I am very glad to hear it ;  I shall pique myself upon Miss
Burney's opinion,  and  "  that sort of thing ;"  I assure you I am quite proud
of it.  I have got an  "  Evelina"  of my own,  now,  Mrs.  Thrale  ;  we shall
break the bookseller,  for Dr.  Calvert sent for it too.  I am now in the
middle of the second volume  :  upon my word.  Miss Burney,  "  in that sort
of way,"  'tis amazing how you've hit off characters  !  Upon my word,  I
never read any thing higher !  I declare I never laughed so in my life.
And give me leave to say,  for  "  that sort of thing,"  I think that Captain a
very ingenious sort of man;  upon my word he is quite smart in some of his
replies  ;  but he is too hard upon the old Frenchwoman,  too.

In the evening he came to tea,  with Stephen Fuller,  his uncle,  a sensible

64 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

and gentlemanlike looking man,  but who is dreadfully deaf.  Rose Fuller
sat by me,  and began again upon  "  Evelina ;"  indeed,  now the ice is
broken,  I believe he will talk of nothing else.

"  Well,  Miss Burney,  I must tell you all the secrets,  now,  in that sort of way.
I put the first volume into Mr.  Stephen Fuller's hands  ;  but I did not tell
him, — don't be alarmed, — I kept counsel ;  but upon my word,  you never
saw a man laugh so  !  I could hardly get him to come,  in that sort of way  ;
he says he never saw characters so well hit off, — true  !  upon my word  !  I
was obliged to take the book from him,  '  and that sort of thing,'  or we
should have been too late for dinner.  But,  upon my word,  'tis amazing,
every body says,  in that sort of way."

Streatham,  September 26. — I have,  from want of time,  neglected my
journal so long,  that I cannot now pretend to go on methodically,  and be
particular as to dates.

Messrs.  Stephen and Rose Fuller stayed very late on Monday  ;  the
former talking very rationally upon various subjects,  and the latter boring
us with his systems and  "  those sort of things."  Yet he is something of a
favourite,  "  in that sort of way,"  at this house,  because of his invincible
good humour,  and Mrs.  Thrale says she would not change him as a neigh-
bour for a much wiser man.  Dr.  Johnson says he would make a very
good Mr.  Smith :  "  Let him but,"  he adds,  "  pass a month or two in Hol-
born,  and I would desire no better."

The other evening the conversation fell upon Romney,  the painter,  who
has lately got into great business,  and who was first recommended and
patronized by Mr.  Cumberland.

"See,  madam,"  said Dr.  Johnson,  laughing,  "what it is to have the favour
of a literary man  !  I think I have had no hero a great while ;  Dr.  Gold-
smith was my last ;  but I have had none since his time till my little Burney
came !"

"  Ay,  sir,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  Miss Burney is the heroine now ;  is it
not really true,  sir 1"

"  To be sure it is,  my dear  !"  answered he,  with a gravity that made not
only me,  but Mr.  Thrale laugh heartily.

Another time,  Mr.  Thrale said he had seen Dr.  Jebb,  "  and he told me
he was afraid Miss Burney would have gone into a consumption,"  said he ;
"but I informed him how well you are,  and he committed you to my care ;
so I shall insist now upon being sole judge of what wine you drink."
(N.B.'He had often disputed this point).
Dr.  J. — Why did Dr.  Jebb forbid her wine  ?
F.  B. — Yes,  sir.

Dr.  J. — Well,  he was in the right ;  he knows how apt wits are to trans-
gress that way.     He was certainly right !

In this sort of ridiculous manner he ivits me eternally.  But the present
chief sport with Mrs.  Thrale is disposing of me in the holy state of matri-
mony, and she offers me whoever comes to the house.  This was begun by
Mrs.  Montagu,  who,  it seems,  proposed a match for me in my absence,
wqth Sir Joshua Reynolds  ! — no less a man,  I assure you  !

When I was dressing for dinner,  Mrs.  Thrale told me that Mr.  Crutchley
was expected.

"  Who's he  ?"  quoth I.

"  A young man of very large fortune,  who was a ward of Mr.  Thrale.
Queeny,  what do you say of him for Miss Burney  ?"

"  Him  ?"  cried she  ;  "  no,  indeed  ;  what has Miss Burney done to have
him  ]"

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  55

"  Xay,  believe me,  a man of his fortune may offer himself any where.
However,  I won't recommend him."

"  Why then,  ma'am,"  cried I,  with dignity,  "  I reject him!"

This Mr.  Crutchley stayed till after breakfast the next morning.  I can't
tell you any thing of him,  because I neither like nor dislike him.

Mr.  Crutchley was scarce gone,  ere JMr.  Smith arrived.  Mr.  Smith is a
second cousin of j\Ir.  Thrale,  and a modest pretty sort of young man.

He stayed till Friday morning.     When he was gone,

"  What say you to him,  Miss Burney  ?"  cried Mrs.  Thrale — "  I am sure
I offer you variety."

"  Why I like him better than Mr.  Crutchley,  but I don't think I shall pine
for either of them."

"  Dr.  Johnson,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  don't you think Jerry Crutchley very
much improved  ?"

Dr.  J. — Yes,  madam,  I think he is.

Mrs.  T.— Shall he have Miss Burney  ?

Dr.  J. — Why,  I think not ;  at least I must know more of him  ;  I must
inquire into his connexions,  his recreations,  his employments,  and his cha-
racter, from his intimates,  before I trust Miss Burney with him.  And he
must come down very handsomely with a settlement.  I will not have him
left to his own generosity  ;  for as he will marry her for her wit,  and she him
for his fortune,  he ought to bid well  ;  and let him come down with what he
will,  his price will never be equal to her worth.

Mrs.  T. — She says she likes Mr.  Smith better.

Dr.  J. — Yes,  but I won't have her like Mr.  Smith without the money,
better than Mr.  Crutchley with it.  Besides,  if she has Crutchley,  he will use
her well,  to vindicate his choice.  The world,  madam,  has a reasonable claim
upon all mankind to account for their conduct ;  therefore,  if with his great
wealth he marries a woman who has but little,  he will be more attentive to
display her merit than if she was equally rich, — in order to show that the
woman he has chosen deserves from the world all the respect and admira-
tion it can bestow,  or that else she would not have been his choice.

Mrs.  T. — I believe young Smith is the better man.

F.  B. — Well,  I won't be rash in thinking of either  ;  I will take some time
for consideration before I fix.

Dr.  J. — Why,  I don't hold it to be delicate to offer marriages to ladies,
even in jest,  nor do I approve such sort of jocularity  ;  yet for once I must
break through the rules of decorum,  and propose a match myself for Miss
Burney.     I therefore nominate Sir J —  L— .

Mrs.  T. — I'll give you my w^ord,  sir,  you are not the first to say that,  for
my master the other morning,  when we were alone,  said,  "  W^hat would I
give that Sir J —  L —  was married to Miss Burney  ;  it might restore him to
our family."     So spoke his uncle and guardian.

F.  B.— He,  he  !     Ha,  ha  !     He,  he  !     Ha,  ha  !

Dr.  J. — That was elegantly said of my master,  and nobly said,  and not
in the vulgar way we have been saying it.  And where,  madam,  will you
find another man in trade who will make such a speech — who will be capable
of making such a speech  ?  Well,  I am glad my master takes so to Miss
Burney  ;  I would have every body take to Miss Burney,  so as they allow me
to take to her most !  Yet I don't know whether Sir J —  L —  should have
her,  neither.  I should be afraid for her  ;  I don't think I would hand her to
him.

F.  B. — W^hv,  now,  what a fine match is here broken off!

6*

QQ DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

Some time after,  when we were in the library,  he asked me very gravely
if 1 loved reading  ?
"  Yes,"  quoth I.

"  Why do you doubt it,  sir V cried Mrs.  Thrale.

"  Because,"  answered he,  "  I never see her with a book in her hand.  I
have taken notice that she never has been reading whenever I came into
the room."

"  Sir,"  quoth I,  courageously,  "  I am always afraid of being caught
reading,  lest I should pass for being studious or affected,  and therefore in-
stead of making a display of books,  I always try to hide them,  as is the
case at this very time,  for I have now your  '  Life of Waller'  under my
gloves behind me.  However,  since I am piqued to it,  I'll boldly produce
my voucher."

And so saying,  I put the book on the table,  and opened it with a flourish-
ing air.  And then the laugh was on my side,  for he could not help making
a droll face ;  and if he had known Kitty Cooke,  I would have called out,
"  There I had you,  my lad  !"

"  And now,"  quoth Mrs.  Thrale,  "  you must be more careful than ever
of not being thought bookish,  for now you are known for a wit and a bel
esprit,  you will be watched,  and if you are not upon your guard,  all the
misses will rise up against you."

Dr.  J. — Nay,  nay,  now it is too late.  You may read as much as you will
now,  for you are in for it, — you are dipped over head and ears in the Cas-
talian stream,  and so I hope you will be invulnerable.

Another time,  when we were talking of the licentiousness of the news-
papers. Dr.  Johnson said,

"  I wonder they have never yet had a touch at little Burney."

"  Oh,  Heaven forbid  !"  cried I:  "  I am sure if they did,  I believe I should
try the depth of Mr.  Thrale's spring-pond."

"  No,  no,  my dear,  no,"  cried he,  kindly,  "  you must resolve not to
mind them ;  you must set yourself against them,  and not let any such non-
sense affect you."

"  There is nobody,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  tempers the satirist with so
much meekness as Miss Burney."

Satirist,  indeed  !  is it not a satire upon words to call me so  ?

"  I hope to Heaven I shall never be tried,"  cried I,  "  for I am sure
I should never bear it.  Of my book they may say what they will and
welcome,  but if they touch at me — I shall be — "

"  Nay,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  if you are not afraid for the book,  I am
sure they can say no harm of the author."

"  Never let them know,"  said Dr.  Johnson,  "  which way you shall most
mind them,  and then they will stick to the book ;  but you must never
acknowledge how tender you  -are for the author."

MR.  CRISP TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

'6th Nov.  1778.
My dear Fannikin,

Since peace is proclaimed,  and I am  ^ot out of my hobble,  I am content,
and shall never lose a thought more in considering how I got into it.  My
object now is to reap the fruits of the accommodation  ;  of which the prin-
cipal article is to be,  an open trade and renewal of commerce and con-
fidence, together with a strict observance of former treaties,  by which no
new alliances are to be formed to the prejudice of the old family compact.

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  gy

These preliminaries being acceded to,  nothing now remains but to sing Te
Deum,  and play off the fireworks.

I do entirely acquit you of all wish or design of being known to the
world as an author.  I believe it is ever the case with writers of real merit
and genius,  on the appearance of their first productions :  as their powers
are finer and keener than other people's,  so is their sensibility.  On these
occasions they are as nervous as Lady Louisa in  "  Evelina."  But surely
these painful feelings ought to go off when the salts of general applause are
continually held under their nose.  It is then time to follow your friend Dr.
Johnson's advice,  and learn to be a swaggerer,  at least so far as to be able
to face the world,  and not be ashamed of the distinction you have fairly
earned,  especially when it is apparent you do not court it.

I now proceed to assume the daddy,  and consequently the privilege of
giving counsel.  Your kind and judicious friends are certainly in the right
in wishing you to make your talents turn to something more solid than
empty praise.  When you come to know the world half so well as I do,
and what yahoos mankind are,  you will then be convinced that a state of
independence is the only basis on which to rest your future ease and comfort.
You are now young,  lively,  gay.  You please,  and the world smiles upon
you — this is your time.  Years and wrinkles in their due season  (perhaps
attended with want of health and spirits)  will succeed.  You will then be no
longer the same Fanny of 1778,  feasted,  caressed,  admired with all the
soothing circumstances of your present situation.  The Thrales,  the
Johnsons,  the Sewards,  Cholmondeleys,  &c.  &c.,  who are now so high
in fashion,  and might be such powerful protectors as almost to insure
success to any thing that is tolerable,  may then themselves be moved off
the stage.  I will no longer dwell on so disagreeable a change of the
scene ;  let me only earnestly urge you to act vigorously  (what I really
believe is in j^our power)  a distinguished part in the present one — "  now
while it is yet day,  and before the nighttcometh,  when no man can work."

I must again and again repeat my former admonitions regarding your
posture in reading and writing ;  it is of infinite consequence,  especially to
such lungs,  and such a frame as yours.

Lastly,  if you do resolve to undertake any thing of the nature your
friends recommend,  keep it  (if possible)  an impenetrable secret that you are
even about such a work.  Let it be all your own till it is finished entirely
in your own way ;  it will be time enough then to consult such friends as
you think capable of judging and advising.  If you suffer any one to interfere
till then,  'tis ten to one  'tis the worse for it — it won't be all of a piece.  In
these cases generally the more cooks the v.'orse broth,  and I have more
than once observed those pieces that have stole privately into the world,
without midwives,  or godfathers and godmothers, — like your own,  and the
"  Tale of a Tub,"  and a few others,  have far exceeded any that followed.

Your loving daddy,

S.  C.

DIARY RESUMED.

Saturday evening Mr.  and Mrs.  Thrale took me quite round the paddock,
and showed me their hot-houses,  kitchen-gardens,  &:c.  Their size and their
contents are astonishing :  but we have not once missed a pine-apple since I
came,  and therefore you may imagine their abundance;  besides grapes,
melons,  peaches,  nectarines,  and ices.

Sunday we went to Streatham Church,  and afterwards to visit the family

63 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

of the P s,  who now live in B House,  which is about half a mile

off.     The papa I did not see  ;  the mamma is a civil,  simple woman,  and the
daughters are pretty,  well dressed,  trifling,  and furiously extravagant.

While Mrs.  Thrale and I were dressing,  and,  as usual,  confabbing,  a
chaise drove into the park,  and word was brought that Mr.  Seward was
arrived.

"  You don't know much of Mr.  Seward,  Miss Burney 1"  said Mrs.  Thrale.
I could have told her I wished he had not known much of me  ;  but her
maid was in my wa}^,  and I only said  "  No."

"  But I hope you will know more of him,"  said she,  "  for I want you to
take to him.  He is a charming young man,  though not without oddities.
Few people do him justice,  because as Dr.  Johnson calls him,  he is an
abrupt young man  ;  but he has excellent qualities,  and an excellent under-
standing. He has the misfortune to be a hypochondriac,  so he runs
about the world to borrow spirits,  and to forget himself.  But after all,  if his
disorders are merely imaginary,  the imagination is disorder sufficient,  and
therefore I am sorry for him."

The day passed very agreeably,  but I have no time for particulars.
I fight very shy with Mr.  Seward,  and as he has a great share of sense
and penetration,  and not a little one of pride and reserve,  he takes the hint  ;
and I believe he would as soon bite off his own nose as mention  "  Evelina"
again.  And,  indeed,  now that the propriety of his after-conduct has softened
me in his favour,  I begin to think of him much in the same way Mrs.
Thrale does,  for he is very sensible,  very intelligent,  and very well bred.

Monday was the day for our great party  ;  and the doctor came home,  at
Mrs.  Thrale's request,  to meet them.

The party consisted of Mr.  C. ,  who was formerly a timber-merchant,

but having amassed a fortune of one million of pounds,  he has left off busi-
ness.    He is a good-natured busy sort of man.

Mrs.  C. ,  his lady,  a sort of Mrs.  Nobody.

Mr.  N ,  another rich business leaver-off.

Mrs.  N ,  his lady  ;  a pretty sort of woman,  who was formerly a pupil

of Dr.  Hawkesworth.     I had a great deal of talk with her about him,  and
about my favourite Miss Kinnaird,  whom she knew very well.

Mr.  George and Mr.  Thomas N ,  her sons-in-law.

Mr.  R. ,  of whom I know nothing but that he married into Mrs.

Thrale's family.

Lady Ladd  ;  I ought to have begun with her.  I beg her ladyship a
thousand pardons — though if she knew my offence,  I am sure I should not
obtain one.  She is own sister to Mr.  Thrale.  She is a tall and stout
woman,  has an air of mingled dignity and haughtiness,  both of which wear
off in conversation.  She dresses very youthful and gaily,  and attends to
her person with no little complacency.  She appears to me uncultivated in
knowledge,  though an adept in the manners of the world,  and all that.  She
chooses to be much more lively than her brother ;  but liveliness sits as
awkwardly upon her as her pink ribbons.  In talking her over with Mrs.
Thrale,  who has a very proper regard for her,  but who I am sure,  cannot
be blind to her faults,  she gave me another proof to those I have already
had,  of the uncontrolled freedom of speech which Dr.  Johnson exercises to
every body,  and which every body receives quietly from him.  Lady Ladd
has been very handsome,  but is now,  I think,  quite ugly — at least she has
a sort of face I like not.  Well,  she was a little while ago dressed in so
showy a manner as to attract the doctor's notice,  and when he had looked
at her some time he broke out aloud into this quotation  :

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  69

"  With patches,  paint,  and jewels on,
Sure Phillis is not twenty-one I
But if at niglit you Phillis see.
The dame at least is forty -three  !"

I don't recollect the verses exactly,  but such was their purport.

"  However,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  Lady Ladd took it very good-naturedly,
and only said,

"  '  I know enough of that forty-three — I don't desire to hear any more
of it !' "

Miss Moss,  a pretty girl,  who played and sung,  to the great fatigue of
Mrs.  Thrale ;  Mr.  Rose Fuller,  Mr.  Embry,  Mr.  Seward,  Dr.  Johnson,  the
three Thrales,  and myself,  close the party.

We had a sumptuous dinner of three courses,  and a most superb dessert.
I shall give no account of the day,  because our common days are so much
more worth recounting.

I had the honour of making tea and coffee for all this set,  and upon my
word I was pretty well tired of it.  But since the first two days I have
always made tea,  and now I am also the breakfast woman.  I am by no
means fond of the task,  but I am very glad to do any thing that is any sort
of relief to Mrs.  T.

In the evening the company divided pretty much into parties,  and almost
every body walked upon the gravel-walk before the windows.  I was going
to have joined some of them,  when Dr.  Johnson stopped me,  and asked how
1 did.

"  I was afraid,  sir,"  cried I,  "  you did not intend to know me again,  for
you have not spoken to me before since your return from town."

"  My dear,"  cried he,  taking both my hands,  "  I was not sure of you,  I
am so near-sighted,  and I apprehended making some mistake."

Then drawing me very unexpectedly towards him,  he actually kissed me  !

To be sure,  I was a little surprised,  having no idea of such facetiousness
from him.  However,  I was glad nobody was in the room but Mrs.  Thrale,
who stood close to us,  and Mr.  Embry,  who was lounging on a sofa at the
furthest end of the room.  Mrs.  Thrale laughed heartily,  and said she
hoped I was contented with his amends for not knowing me sooner.

A little after she said she would go and walk with the rest,  if she did not
fear for my reputation in being left with the doctor.

"  However,  as Mr.  Embry is yonder,  I think he'll take some care of you,"
she added.

"  Ay,  madam,"  said the doctor,  "  we shall do very well ;  but I assure
you I shan't part with Miss Burney !"

And he held me by both hands  ;  and when Mrs.  Thrale went,  he drew
me a chair himself facing the window,  close to his own  ;  and thus Utc-a-ttte
we continued almost all the evening.  I say Ute-d-ttte,  because Mr.  Embry
kept at an humble distance,  and offered us no interruption.  And though
Mr.  Seward soon after came in,  he also seated himself in a distant corner,
not presuming,  he said,  to break in upon us  !  Every body,  he added,
gave way to the doctor.

Our conversation chiefly was upon the Hebrides,  for he always talks to
me of Scotland,  out of sport;  and he wished I had been of that tour — quite
gravely,  I assure you  !

Tuesday morning our breakfast was delightful.  We had Mr.  Seward,
Mr.  Embry,  and Lady Ladd added to our usual party,  and Dr.  Johnson was
quite in a sportive humour.  But I can only write some few speeches,
wanting time to be prolix,  not inclination.

70 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

"  Sir,"  said Mrs.  Thrale to Dr.  Johnson,  "  why did you not sooner leave
your wine yesterday,  and come to us  ?  we had a Miss who sung and played
like any thing  !"

"  Ay,  had you  ?"  said he,  drolly  ;  "  and why did you not call me to the
rapturous entertainment  ?"

"  Why,  I was afraid you would not have praised her,  for I sat thinking
all the time myself whether it were better to sing and play as she sung and
played,  or to do nothing.  And at first I thought she had the best of it,  for
we were but stupid before she began;  but afterwards she made it so long,
that I thought nothing had all the advantage.  But,  sir.  Lady Ladd has had
the same misfortune you had,  for she has fallen down and hurt herself
wofully."

"  How did that happen,  madam  ?"

"  Why,  sir,  the heel of her shoe caught in something."

*'  Heel  ?"  replied he  ;  "  nay,  then,  if her ladyship,  who walks six foot
high"  (N.B.  this is a fact),  "  will wear a high heel,  I think she almost de-
serves a fall."

"  Nay,  sir,  my heel was not so high !"  cried Lady Ladd.

*'  But,  madam,  why should you wear any  ?  That for which there is no
occasion,  had always better be dispensed with.  However,  a fall to your
ladyship is nothing,"  continued he,  laughing ;  "  you,  who are light and
little,  can soon recover  ;  but I who am a gross man,  might suffer severely :
with your ladyship,  the case is different,  for

'  Airy substance soon unites again.'  "

Poor Lady Ladd,  who is quite a strapper,  made no answer,  but she was
not offended.  Mrs.  Thrale and I afterwards settled,  that not knowing his
allusion from the  "  Rape of the Lock,"  she only thought he had made a
stupid sort of speech,  and did not trouble herself to find a meaning to it.

"  However,"  continued he,  "  if my fall does confine me,  I will make my
confinement pleasant,  for Miss Burney shall nurse me — positively !"  (and
he slapped his hand on the table,)  "  and then,  she shall sing to me,  and
soothe my cares."

When public news was started,  Mr.  Thrale desired the subject might be
waived till my father came,  and could let us know what part of the late
accounts were true.

Mr.  Thrale then offered to carry Mr.  Seward,  who was obliged to go to
town,  in the coach with him, — and Mr.  Embry also left us.  But Dr.  John-
son sat with Mrs.  Thrale,  Lady Ladd,  and me for an hour or two.

The subject was given by Lady Ladd ;  it was the respect due from the
lower class of the people.

"  I know my place,"  said she,  "  and I always take it :  and I've no notion
of not taking it.  But Mrs.  Thrale lets all sort of people do just as they've
a mind by her."

"  Ay,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  *'  why should I torment and worry myself
about all the paltry marks of respect that consist of bows and courtesies  ?
— I have no idea of troubling myself about the manners of all the people I
mix with."

"  No,"  said Lady Ladd,  "  so they will take all sorts of liberties with you.
I remember,  when you was at my house,  how the hair-dresser flung down
the comb as soon as you were dressed,  and went out of the room without
making a bow."

"  Well,  all the better,"  said Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  for if he had made me one,

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  7j

ten thousand to one if I had seen it.  I was in as great haste to have done
with him,  as he could be to have done with me.  I was glad enough to get
him out of the room  ;  I did not want him stand bowing and crincrino-."

"  If any man had behaved so insolently to me,"  answered she,  "I would
never again have suffered him in my house."

"  Well,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  your ladyship has a great deal more dignity
than I have! — Dr.  Johnson,  we are talking of the respect due from inferiors  ;
— and Lady Ladd is of the same side you are."

"  Why,  madam,"  said ho,  "  subordination is always necessary to the pre-
servation of order and decorum."

"  I protest,"  said Lady Ladd,  "  I have no notion of submitting to any
kind of impertinence  :  and I never will bear either to have any person nod
to me,  or enter a room where I am,  without bowing."

"But,  madam,"  said Dr.  Johnson,  "what if they will nod,  and what if
they w^on't bow — how then  ?"

"  Why I always tell them of it,"  said she.

"  Oh,  commend me to that !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  I'd sooner never see
another bow in my life,  than turn dancing master to hair-dressers."

The doctor laughed his approbation,  but said that every man had a right
to a certain degree of respect,  and no man liked to be defrauded of that
right.  ^  ■

"  Well,  sir,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I hope you meet with respect enough 1"

"  Yes,  madam,"  answered he,  "  I am very well contented."

"  Nay,  if you ain't,  I don't know who should be  ;  for I beheve there is no
man in the world so greatly respected."

Soon after he went,  I went and shut myself up in a sweet and cool summer-
house,  to read Irene  : — which,  indeed,  though not a good play,  is a beautiful
poem.

As my dear father spent the rest of the day here,  I will not further par-
ticularize, but leave accounts to his better communication.     He probably

told you that the P family came in to tea  ;  and,  as he knows Mrs.

P ,   pray tell him what Dr.  Johnson says of her.      When they were

gone Mrs.  Thrale complained that she was quite worn out with that tire-
some silly woman,  who had talked of her family and affairs till she was
sick to death of hearing her.

"  Madam,"  said he,  "  why do you blame the woman for the only sensible
thing she could do — talking of her family and her affairs 1 For how should
a woman who is as empty as a drum,  talk upon any other subject  ? — If you
speak to her of the sun,  she does not know it rises in the east ;  if you speak
to her of the moon,  she does not know it changes at the full ; — if you
speak to her of the queen,  she does not know she is the king's wife ; —
how,  then,  can you blame her for talking of her family and affairs 1"

Yesterday morning,  to my great regret,  Dr.  Johnson went to town,  but
we expect him again to-day.     Lady Ladd also went yesterday.

When they were gone,  I had such a conversation with Mrs.  Thrale  !  We
were alone in the library for,  I believe,  three hours,  and though I shall only
give you two or three of the principal speeches,  I am sure you will not
wonder that the extraordinary good opinion that she professes of me should
have quite overpowered me with gratitude and surprise.

Our tite-a-Ute began by comparing notes about Irene,  and picking out
favourite passages,  and agreeing that though the language and sentiments
are equally noble,   there was not any reason to wonder that the play

72 DIARY AND LETTERS 1778.

altogether had no success on the stage.  Thence we talked over all the
plays we could recollect,  and discussed their several merits according to our
particular notions,  and when we had mentioned a great number,  approving
some for this thing,  and disliking others for that,  Mrs.  Thrale suddenly said,

"  Now,  Miss Burney,  if you would write a play,  I have a notion it would
hit my taste in all things  ;  do — you must write one  ;  a play will be some-
thing worth your time — it is the road both to honour and profit ;  and why
should you have it in your power to gain both,  and not do it  ?"

"  I declare,"  continued she,  "  I mean,  and think what I say,  with all my
heart and soul  !  You seem to me to have the right and true talents for
writing a comedy ;  you would give us all the fun and humour we could
wish,  and you would give us a scene or two of the pathetic kind,  that would
set all the rest off.  If you would but try,  I am sure you would succeed,  and
give us such a play as would be an honour to all your family.  And,  in the
grave parts,  all your sentiments would be edifying,  and such would do good,
— and I am sure that would be real pleasure to you."

I recollect her words as exactly as my memory will allow.

"Hannah More,"  added she,  "got nearly four hundred pounds for her
foolish play,  and if you did not write a better than hers,  I say you deserve
to be whipped  ! — Your father,  I know,  thinks the same ;  but we will allow
that he may be partial ;  but what can make me think it  ? — and Dr.  Johnson  ;
— he,  of all men,  would not say it if he did not think it,"

She then rejoiced I had published  "  Evelina"  as I did,  without showing it
to any body  ;  "  because you have proved what are your own real resources,"
she said,  "  and now you have nothing to do but to write a play.  Dr.  John-
son, I am sure,  will be at your service in any thing in his power ;  we'll
make him write your prologue ; — we'll make him carry your play to the
managers  ;  we'll do any thing for you  ; — and so,  I am sure,  he readily will.
As to plot,  situation,  and character,  nobody shall assist you in them^  for
nobody can  !"

I will write no more,  as these heads will mve a notion of all the rest.

FROM MR.  CRISP TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Chesington,  Dec.  8th,  1778.
My dear Fannikin,

Exclusive of the high entertainment your Susannistical letter afforded me,
I was much delighted with it on another account,  and that a solid and sub-
stantial one :  I mean,  because it informed me of those numerous and power-
ful friends,  your own genius and intrinsic merit have raised you up.  The
prospect is now fair before you — it cannot but be bright when shone upon
by such first-rate luminaries of wit and learning.  Keep it in your eye  ;  and
if you pursue your path with resolution,  not suffering yourself to be checked
by indolence or diffidence,  and an overstrained modesty,  I dare say it will
lead you on to the temple of fame,  and perhaps to that of fortune.

'Tis true,  I have more than once,  Fanny,  whispered in your ear a
gentle caution — that you have much to lose.  Why is that 1 — because
much you have gained.  Now you have gone so far,  and so rapidly,  you
will not be allowed to slacken your pace.  This is so far from being meant
as a discouragement,  that it is intended to animate you.  But it will explain
what was in my head when I threw out those  (perhaps useless,  perhaps too
officious)  hints.  I plainly foresaw  (what has since happened)  that,  as your
next step,  you would be urged,  strongly urged,  by your many friends and
admirers,  to undertake a comedy.     I think you capable,  highly capable of

1778.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  73

it ;  but in the attempt there are great difficuhies in the way ;  some more
particularly and individually in the way of a Fanny,  than of most people.

I will instantly name these,  lest you should misapprehend.  I need not
observe to you,  that in most of our successful comedies,  there are
frequent lively freedoms  (and waggeries that cannot be called licentious,
neither)  that give a strange animation and vigour to the style,  and of
which if it were to be deprived it would lose wonderfully of its salt and spirit.
I mean such freedoms as ladies of the strictest character would make
no scruple,  openly,  to laugh at,  but at the same time,  especially if they
were prudes  (and you know you are one),  perhaps would shy at being
known to be the authors of.  Some comic characters would be deficient
without strokes of this kind  ;  in scenes where gay men of the world are
got together,  they are natural and expected ;  and the business would be
mighty apt to grow facie without them.

O'i iate years,  (I can't tell why,  unless from the great purity of the age)
some very fine-spun,  all-delicate,  sentimental comedies have been brought
forth on the English,  and more particularly on the French stage,  which  (in
my coarse way of thinking,  at least)  are such sick things,  so void of blood
and spirits,  that they may well be called Comedies Larmoijantes  ; — and I
don't find that they have been greatly relished by the public in general,  any
more than by my vulgar soul.  ]\Ioral — sublime,  to a degree —
"  We cannot blame,  indeed, — but we may sleep I"

They put me in mind of a poor girl,  a Miss Peachy,  (a real,  and in the
end,  a melancholy story).  She was a fine young woman,  but thinking her-
self too ruddy and blowzy,  it was her custom to bleed herself  (an art she
had learned on purpose)  three or four times,  against the Rugby races,  in
order to appear more dainty and ladylike at the balls,  &c.  Poor thing  ! —
she lost her aim  ;  for when she came she appeared like a ghost,  and at last
became one  : — her arm bled in the night,  and in the morning she was past
recovery.

I am afraid these fine performances are not pictures of real life and man-
ners. I remember I sat next to a Frenchman at the play at Milan,  who
preferred the French theatre to the whole world,  and as much disliked the
English.     When I asked his reasons,  he cried,

"  ?»Ia foi,  11 faut pousser des beaux sentiments  !"

Excuse these digressions  :  the sum total amounts to this — it appears to me
extremely difficult,  throughout a whole spirited comedy,  to steer clear of
those agreeable,  ir oVicSsOme jeux cVe&prit^  on the one hand,  and languor and
heaviness on the other: — pray,  observe,  I only say difficult — not impracti-
cable— at least to your dexterity  ;  and to that I leave it.

I find myself forestalled by the intelligent Mrs.  Montagu in another ob-
servation I was going to make,  and which she very justly and judiciously
enforces by the instance she gives of Fielding,  who,  though so eminent in
characters and descriptions,  did by no means succeed in comedy.

'Tis certain,  different talents are requisite for the two species of writing,
though they are by no means incompatible ;  I fear,  however,  the labouring
oar lies on the comic author.

In these little entertaining elegant histories,  the writer has his full scope ;
as large a range as he pleases to hunt in — to pick,  cull,  select whatever he
likes  :  he takes his own time — he may be as minute as he pleases,  and the
more minute the better,  provided that taste,  a deep and penetrating know-
edge of human nature,  and the world,  accompany that minuteness.    When

VOL.  r.  7

74 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

this is the case,  the very soul,  and all its most secret recesses and workings,
are developed and laid as open to the view as the blood globules circulating
in a frog's foot,  when seen through a microscope.  The exquisite touches
such a work is capable of  (of which  "  Evelina"  is,  without flattery,  a
glaring instance),  are truly charming.  But of these great advantages,
these resources,  you are strangely curtailed the moment you begin
a comedy.  There every thing passes in dialogue, — all goes on rapidly
— narrative and descriptive,  if not extremely short,  become intolera-
ble. The detail,  which in Fielding,  Marivaux,  and Crebillon,  is so de-
lightful, on the stage would bear down all patience.  There all must be
compressed into quintessence  ;  the moment the scene ceases to move on
briskly,  and business seem to hang,  sighs and groans are the consequence.
Dreadful sound  ! — In a word,  if the plot,  the story of the comedy does not
open and unfold itself in the easy,  natural,  unconstrained flow of the
dialogue — if that dialogue does not go on with spirit,  wit,  variety,  fun,
humour,  repartee,  and — and,  all in short into the bargain — serviteur  ! —
good bye t'ye  !

One more :  now Fanny,  don't imagine that I am discouraging you from
the attempt ;  or that I am retracting or shrinking back from what I have
said above — i.  e.  that I think you highly capable of it.  On the contrary
I reaflirm it ;  I affirm that in common conversation,  I observe in you a
ready choice of words,  w'ith a quickness and conciseness that have often
surprised me.  This is a lucky gift for a comic w^riter,  and not a very
common one ;  so that if you have not the united talents I demand,  I don't
know who has ;  for if you have your familiar,  your sprite,  for ever thus at
your elbow without calling for,  surely it will not desert you,  when in deep
conjuration raising your genius in your closet.

God bless you.  Adieu,

Your loving daddv,

S.  C.

CHAPTER IV.
1779.

Diary Resumed — Pacchierotti — Description of his Singing — Bertoni — Giardini — Piozzi
— An Adventure — Dr.  Franklin — Letters from Mrs.  Thrale and Mr.  Crisp — Remon-
strance on False Delicacy — Difficulties of Dramatic Writing— Dancing in Fetters —
How to use Advice — Miss Burney's Views on Comedy — Female Authorship — Letter
from Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp — The Pains of Publicity — Diary Resumed — Sir Joshua
Reynolds — Mason,  the Poet — Visit from Dr.  Johnson — Mrs.  Thrale — Visit to Sir
Joshua Reynolds — Mrs.  Horneck and Mrs.  Bunbury — Lord Palmerston — Mrs.  Chol-
mondeley — A Scene — Cross-examination — A Dialogue — The Knight of Plympton —
Visit to Streatham — Dr.  Johnson — Mr.  Seward — Dr.  Burney — Fair and Brown — A
Dialogue with Dr.  Johnson — Books and Autliors — Table-Tallt between Johnson,  Mrs.
Thrale,  and Miss Burney — Evelina — Mrs.  Montagu — Three Classes of Critics on
Books — Miss Burney's Anxiety to avoid Notice as an Author — Mrs.  Cholmondeley —
Lord Palmerston — Visit to Dr.  Johnson — Mr.  Seward — Lady Miller's Vase — Baretti
— Visit to Mrs.  Cholmondeley — A Party of Wits and Fashionables — The beautiful Mrs.
Sheridan — Mrs.  Crewe — Pacchierotti's Singing — The Duke of Dorset and Miss Cum-
berland — Hannah More — Her Habit of flattering her Friends — Dr.  Johnson's Reproof
of her — The Earl of Harcourt — Mrs.  Vesey — R.  B.  Sheridan — His Personal Appear-
ance and Manner — Dr.  Joseph Wharton — Sheridan's Opinion of  "  Evelina" — "  The
Sylph" — Dialogue between Sheridan,  Miss Burney,  Sir Joshua Reynolds,  and Mrs.
Cholmondeley — Miss Burney urged by Sheridan to write a Comedy.

DIARY RESUMED.

St.  Martin's Street,  January,  1779. — How will you bear,  my dearest
Susan,  to hear about Pac — may I finish the name  ?     I am almost afraid —

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  75

yet think it a miserable compliment to treat you as a baby,  and hide from
you the playthings you must not have in your own hand.  So I will only
remind you of similar situations in which I have been  ;  and,  at the same
time,  reminding myself of your conduct upon those occasions — the upshot
of all which will be,  a true account of the transaction.

Well,  last Saturday morning,  "  mine fader"  sent a present of his  "  His-
tory" to Pacchierotti,  by way of an incentive to the study of the English
language.  At the Opera at night,  he promised to call here on Sunday.
And so on Sunday morning he came,  attended by Signor Bertoni.

Well,  but he did not sing — so far be easy.

I like him of all things  ;  he is perfectly modest,  humble,  well-bred,  and
unassuming.  He has a very anxious desire to learn English,  which he
has studied grammatically,  and with much application and diligence,  abroad  :
and he promised to come hither frequently to take lessons of conversation.
Bv wav of beji^innino;  with vi2;our,  he settled to drink tea here the next dav.

They came early,  and I am more pleased with Pacchierotti than ever  :
ho seems to be perfectly amiable,  gentle,  and good  :  his countenance is
extremely benevolent,  and his manners infinitely interesting.  We are all
become very good friends,  and talked English,  French,  and Italian,  by
commodious starts,  just as phrases occurred — an excellent device for
appearing a good linguist.

He had a very bad cold,  yet sung with the utmost good humour,  as soon
as asked.  Bertoni accompanied him.  He first sang a rondeau of  "  Arta-
serse,"  of Bertoni's.  It is a very fine one,  and had it been a very execrable
one,  he would have made it exquisite :  such"  taste,  expression,  freedom,
fancy,  and variety,  never were before joined,  but in Agujari.  His voice,
however,  was by no means clear,  though extremely touching :  but his cold
quite tormented him.  He afterwards sung a song for a tenor in the same
opera,  and admirably ;  then some accompanied recitative to a song in the
"  Orfeo"  of Bertoni,  and lastly,  the  "  die faro senza Euridicey

He and I were very sociable :  and he said,  in English,

"  Miss Borni give me very much encourage  ;  but is very troublesome
the difficulties."

Bertoni is very much that common sort of character that admits no
delineation.

Piozzi,  by invitation,  came in the evening :  he did not sing,  but was
very good-humoured.

Giardini — not by invitation — came also.  We did not,  just then,  wish
for him,  but he was very comique.

I have seen but four folks worth mentioning,  these Italians excepted,
since you went.

The first and second were,  Mr.  Magellan and IMr.  Humphreys,  who
both drank tea here on Monday se'nnight last.

Mr.  Magellan was just a Vordinaire.  r>Ir.  Plumphreys was almost
insufferable,  from curiosity about the book-writer.  He said not a word,
but he looked all meaning,  and actually stared me so much out of counte-
nance, that I was obliged to contrive myself a seat out of his way.  He
seemed as if he thought to read in my face at least half the characters he
had read in the book  ;  ickicJi half,  whether the w;ulgar or the genteel part
of the family,  I cannot pretend to say ;  but I was not afflicted when he
went.

On Thursday,  I had another adventure,  and one that has made me grin
ever since.     A gentleman inquiring for my father,  was asked into the par-

76 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

lour.  The then inhabitants were only my mother and me.  In entered a
square old gentleman,  well wigged,  formal,  grave,  and important.  He
seated himself.     My mother asked if he had any message for my father  ?

"  No,  none."

Then he regarded me with a certain dry kind of attention for some
time  ;  after which,  turning suddenly to my mother,  he demanded,

"  Pray,  ma'am,  is this your daughter?"

"  Yes,  sir."

"O!  this is Evelina,  is it?"

"  No,  sir,"  cried I,  staring at him,  and glad none of you were in the
way to say Yes.

"  No  ?"  repeated he,  incredulous  ;  "  is not your name Evelina,  ma'am  ?"

"  Dear,  no,  sir,"  again quoth I,  staring harder.

"  Ma'am,"  cried he,  drily,  "  I beg your pardon  !  I had understood your
name was EveHna."

And soon after he went away.

When he put down his card,  who should it prove but Dr.  Franklin  !
Was it not queer?

FROM MRS.  THRALE TO MISS BURNEY.

Streatham.

Instead of writing monitory letters to Dick,*  I find I must now be a little
serious with the great  "  Evelina."  W^hy will you,  my lovely friend,  give
consequence to trifles,  by thus putting your peace in their power  ?  Is not
the world full of severe misfortunes and real calamities  ?  and will you fret
and look pale about such nonsense as this  ?  Let me see you on Thursday
next,  if but for an hour,  and let me see you cheerful,  I insist.  Your look-
ing dismal can only advertise the paltry pamphlet,  w^hich I firmly believe
no one out of your own family has seen,  and which is now only lying like
a dead kitten on the surface of a dirty horsepond,  incapable of scratching
any one who does not take pains to dirty their fingers for it.

But it has proclaimed you authoress of  "Evelina  !"  And is that an injury?
Surely you are not yet to learn how highly that little sweet book has been
praised,  admired,  and esteemed by people whose good word should at least
weigh with you against such a wretch as I hear this is,  who has mentioned
your name irreverently — for I do not perceive he has done any thing else
at last.

And so,  as Mowbray the brutal says of Lovclrice the gay,  "  We comforted
and advised him."

When will Miss Susan come home,  that I may have you here to brace
your fibres,  and enable you to endure these direful misfortunes  ?  But I see
you saying,  "  Why this is Mrs.  Selivyn,  without her wit."

Very well,  madam  ;  don't you be Lacly Loicua,  then,  without her
quality.

Give my best love and kindest compliments to your amiable household.
You know if I love you,  and may be sure I pity your pain,  but do not mean
to soothe it.  This world is a rough road,  and those who mean to tread it
many years must not think of beginning their journey in buff*  soles.

What hurts me most is lest you should like me the less for this letter.
Yet I will be true to my own sentiments and send it ;  if you will think me
coarse and indelicate,  I can't help it.  You are twenty odd years old,  and I
am past thirty-six — there's the true difl^erence.  I have lost seven children,
and been cheated out of two thousand a-year,  and I cannot,  indeed I cannot,

*  Dr.  Burney's son by his second wife.

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  -77

sigh and sorrow over pamphlets and paragraphs.     Did you never hear
Johnson's story of the  "  Man with his Paper and Packthread  ?"

Mr.  Pepys — my master in chancery,  as your papa calls him — says you
should try at a tragedy.  He is in love with the character of Macartney,
the pistol scene,  and the denouement with Sir John Belmont.

Murphy is charmed with the comic part,  and thinks highly of the writer.
Will these help to fill the scale against our formidable adversary — God
knows who — in the garret  ?

Adieu till Thursday,  "  my own dear little Burney,"  and forgive the
sauciness of a truly affectionate and faithful friend,  servant,  &c.,

H.  L.  Thrale.

I can't stay till Thursday to hear if you forgive me,  nor will forgiveness
do.  You must not love me less for all this — it would vex me more than
many a silly couplet,  which you mind more than your friends.  Once more,
adieu  !

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

January,  1779.

Your patience,  my dear daddy,  in being able to mention my name without
invectives,  as you have done in your letter to Hetty,  forces me to write,  be-
cause it makes me eager to thank you for not having taken offence at me.
Indeed your last most excellent letter ought to have had my acknowledg-
ments long since,  but the fact is I received it when I was most violently out
of sorts,  and really had not spirits to answer it.  1 intended to have kept
from you the subject of my uneasiness,  because I know you will only scoff
it,  or perhaps,  think it should rather have gratified than dispirited me ;  and
in truth I have been so plentifully lectured already upon my vexation,  that
I feel no gout for further lashing and slashing  ;  and yet I will own to you
the subject,  because I had rather of the two that you should think me a fool,
than think I wanted gratitude sufficient to thank you for the many useful
hints,  the kind and excellent advice you took the trouble to give me.

In short,  not to spend my whole letter in enigmatical preluding,  just as I
received your letter I had had information that my name had got into print,
and what was yet worse,  was printed in a new pamphlet.

I cannot tell you,  and if I could you would perhaps not believe me,  how
greatly I was shocked,  mortified,  grieved,  and confounded at this intelli-
gence :  I had always dreaded as a real evil my name's getting into print,
— but to be lugged into a pamphlet  !

I must,  however,  now I have gone so far,  tell you how it is,  lest you
should imagine matters worse.  This vile pamphlet is called  "  Warley  :  a
Satire ;"  it is addressed to the first artist in Europe,  who proves to be Sir
Joshua Reynolds.  Probably it is to his unbounded partiality for  "  Evelina"
that I owe this most disagreeable compliment,  for he had been so eager to
discover the author,  that by what I had reason given me to conjecture,  I
fancy he has been not a little laughed at since the discovery,  for divers
comique sort of speeches which he had made while in the dark.

So now the murder's out !  but,  dear daddy,  don't belabour me for my
weakness,  though I confess I was for more than a week unable to eat,
drink,  or sleep,  for vehemence of vexation.  I am now got tolerably stout
again,  but I have been furiously lectured for my folly  (as I see every body
thinks it)  by all who have known of it.  I have,  therefore,  struggled against
it with all my might,  and am determined to aim at least at acquiring more
strength of mind.

7*

78 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

Yet,  after all,  I feel very forcibly that I am not — that I have not been —
and that I never shall be formed or fitted for any business with the public.
Yet now my best friends,  and my father at their head,  absolutely prohibit a
retreat ;  otherwise I should be strongly tempted to empty the whole contents
of my bureau into the fire,  and to vow never again to fill it.  But,  had my
name never got abroad with my book,  ere this I question not I should again
have tried how the world stood affected to me.

Now once again to your letter.

Why,  my dear daddy,  will you use so vile,  so ill-applied a word as  "  officious'''
when you are giving me advice  ?  Is it not of all favours the most valuable
you can confer on me  ?  and don't I know that if you had not somewhat of
a sneaking kindness for me you would as soon bite off your own nose,  as
the Irishman says,  as take so much trouble about me?  I do most ear-
nestly, seriously,  and solemnly entreat that you will continue to me this
first,  best,  greatest proof of regard,  and I do,  with the utmost truth and
gratitude,  assure you that it is more really flattering to me than all the
flummery in the world.  I only wish with all my heart,  you would be
more liberal of it.

Every word you have urged concerning the salt and spirit of gay,
unrestrained freedom in comedies,  carries conviction along with it, — a con-
viction which I feel,  in trembling  ;  should I ever venture in that walk pub-
licly, perhaps the want of it might prove fatal to me.  I do,  indeed,  think it
most likely that such would be the event,  and my poor piece,  though it
might escape catcalls and riots,  would be fairly slept off the stage.  I
cannot,  however,  attempt to avoid this danger,  though I see it,  for I would
a thousand times rather forfeit my character as a writer,  than risk ridicule or
censure as a female.  I have never set my heart on fame,  and therefore would
not,  if I could,  purchase it at the expense of all my own ideas of propriety.
You who know me for a prude will not be surprised,  and I hope not offended,
at this avowal,  for I should deceive you were I not to make it.  If I should
try,  I must e'en take my chance,  and all my own expectations may be
pretty easily answered.

The Streathamites have been all reassembled for these six weeks,  and I
have had invitation upon invitation to join them,  or,  in Mrs.  Thrale's words,
to go home.  But Susan is at Howletts,  and I can by no means leave town
till her return.  However,  we correspond,  and Mrs.  Thrale's kindness for
me promises to be as steady as it is flattering and delightful to me ;  but I
never knew how much in earnest and in sincerity she was my friend till
she heard of my infinite frettaiio?i upon occasion of being pamphleted;  and
then she took the trouble to write me a long scolding letter ;  and Dr.  John-
son himself came to talk to me about it,  and to reason with me ;  and now
I see that tliey have sufficient regard to find fault with me,  I do indeed hope
that I am well with them.*

Yours affectionately,

F.  B.

FROM MR.  CRISP TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Chesington,  January,  1779.

I LONG of all things,  Fannikin,  to see  "  Warley,"  and the continuation of
your journal  (for I have copied and will faithfully return by the first oppor-

*  The following-  is the passage which so annoyed Miss Burney.  Speaking of some
aim of Sir Joshua Reynolds,  the writer,  (a Mr.  Huddisford)  asks — "  Will it gain approba-
tion from  '  dear little Burney  ?'  "  The phrase,  "  dear little Burney,"  was Dr.  Johnson's
favourite mode of speaking of Miss Burney.

1779.  Of"  THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA-  79

tunity your last).  If you answer me,  you have not contiaued it,  you are
unpardonable,  and I advise you to set about it immediately,  as well as you
can,  while any traces of it rest in your memory.  It will one day be the
delight of your old age — it will call back your youth,  your spirits,  your
pleasures,  your friends,  whom you formerly loved,  and who loved you  (at
that time,  also,  probably,  long gone oft'  the stage),  and lastly,  when your
own scene is closed,  remain a valuable treasure to those that come after you.
But I will not suppose you have not continued it — you can't be so wanting
to yourself.  This is what I require — the whole in all its details — not bits
and scraps of three characters at a time,  as you talk of — that won't satisfy
my maw.

As to your vexation,  child,  I don't mind it of a pin.  Framed as you are,
I knew that must come first before you could be easy.  People that are
destined to live in the midst of the world,  must and ought to be inoculated
before they can go about in safety.  You talk of being slipped oft*  the stage
— would you wish your book to die such a death?  There is no alternative ;
if it lives,  its fate and yours are inseparable,  and the names of  "  Evelina"
and Burney must and will go together:  so that your discontent at what has
happened,  to me seems strangely ill-founded  ;  and your fantastic sickly
stomach is to recoil forsooth,  because you cannot compass impossibilities  !

Well,  I have been ruminating a good deal on the obstacles and difficulties
I mentioned in my last,  that lie directly across your path  (as a prude)  in the
walk of comedy.  On the most mature consideration,  I do by no means
retract the general principle that produced those observations ;  I will never
allow you to sacrifice a grain of female delicacy for all the wit of Congreve
and Vanbrugh put together — the purchase would be too dear :  but thus
much will I assert,  and can prove by several instances,  viz.,  that light prin-
ciples may be displayed without light expressions :  and that is a rock the
female must take care to steer clear of — vice must not talk unlike itself;
but there is no necessity it should show all its filth.  A great deal of
management and dexterity will certainly be requisite to preserve spirit and
salt,  and yet keep up delicacy ;  but it may be done,  and you can do it if
any body.  Do you remember,  about a dozen years ago,  how you used to
dance Nancy Dawson on the grass-plot^  with your cap on the ground,  and
your long hair streaming down your back,  one shoe off,  and throwing about
your head like a mad thing  ?  Now you are to dance Nancy Dawson with
fetters on ;  there is the difference :  yet there is certainly a nameless grace
and charm in giving a loose to that wildness and friskiness sometimes.

I am very glad you have secured Mrs.  Montagu for your friend ;  her
weight and interest are powerful ;  but there is one particular I do not
relish  ;  though she means it as a mark of favour and distinction  ; — it is,
where she says,  "  If Miss Burney does write a play,  I beg I may know of
it,  and  (if she thinks proper)  see it."

Now Fanny,  this same seeing it  (in a professed female wit,  authoress,
and Maecenas into the bargain),  I fear implies too much interference —
implies advising,  correcting,  altering,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. ;  not only so,  but in so
high a critic,  the not submitting to such grand authority,  might possibly
give a secret,  concealed,  lurking offence.  Now,  d'ye see,  as I told you
once before,  I would have the whole be all my own — all of a piece ;  and to
tell you the truth,  I would not give a pin for the advice of the ablest friend
who would not suffer me at last to follow my own judgment without resent-
ment. Besides let me whisper in your ear the very words Dr.  Johnson
made use of when Miss Streatfield's letter was mentioned, —

"  She is,"  &c.,  &c.,  &c. ;  "  but my little B.  writes a better letter."

80 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

Adieu !  send me a vast journal to copy,  containing a full and true account
of all the variety of names you have given me a list of,  and what they have
said of and to you.  May I send to Gast my copy of your journal,  upon
condition of her letting nobody see it but Molly Lenthal  ?  Shall we see you
at Chesington this summer  ?  or are you to be at home at Streatham the
whole season,  and the old homely home quite forgotten  ?  One more adieu  !
your loving daddy,  S.  C.

DIARY RESUMED.

To be sure I have been most plentifully lectured of late ;  and to be sure
I have been most plentifully chagrined  ;  but there is but one voice,  and that
goes against me.  I must,  therefore,  give up the subject,  and endeavour to
forget the ideas it raised in me.

I will try,  my dear Susy,  to become somewhat more like other folks,  if,
as it seems by their reasoning,  I am now so different to them.  All that I
can say for myself is,  that I have always feared discovery,  always sought
concealment,  and always known that no success could counterbalance the
publishing my name.  However,  what is inevitable ought not to torment
long,  and after such counsel as I have received,  from almost all my best
friends,  it becomes my duty to struggle against my refractory feelings.

And now,  my love,  let me thank you for your letter,  and let me try to
send you one that may make some amends for my last.

I will recollect the most particular circumstances that have happened,
journal fashion,  according to the old plan.

This same pamphlet that has so much grieved me,  was brought home by
my mother on Thursday.  But who says my name is not at full length  ?  I
wish to Heaven it were not !

At night my father went to the Royal Academy to hear Sir Joshua Rey-
nolds discourse ;  and now for a bouquet of uncommon fragrance.  Mr.
Mason came up to my father,  and wished him joy,  and said the finest
things imaginable of the book,  and extolled the characters,  and talked it all
over.  You who respect and admire Mr.  Mason as much as I do,  will be
sure such praise was some cordial to me.  Mr.  Humphreys too joined his
vote.  My father himself has seemed more pleased with Mr.  Mason's appro-
bation than with any body's since the Streathamites.

On Monday,  to my great dissatisfaction,  Mrs.  Reynolds came.  I was
wofully dumpish.

"  Pray,"  said she,  afler some time,  "  how does Miss Fanny do  ?  Oh
no  ! — not Miss Fanny — Miss Sukey,  I mean ! — this I think is Miss Fanny  ?
— though your name,  ma'am,  is swallowed up in another, — that of — of — of
Miss Burney, — if not of — of — of,  dear,  how odd in Dr.  Franklin to ask if
that was not your name  ?"

To be sure I stared,  and asked where she had her intelligence  ?  I found,
from my father himself.

"  Well,"  continued she,  "  what would not Mrs.  Horneck and Mrs.  Bun-
bury give to see the writer of that book  !  Why,  they say they would walk
a hundred and sixty miles only to see her,  if that would do  !"

"  Why then,"  quoth I,  "  I would walk just as far to avoid them  !"

"  O no  !  don't say that !  I hope you will have the goodness to consent
to meet them  !  But I think I have made out how Dr.  Franklin came to say
that odd thing.  '  Oh,  ho,'  thought he,  '  am I now in company with the
writer of that celebrated book  ?  Well,  I must say something  !'  So then he
became so embarrassed,  that in his confusion he made the blunder."

1779*  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  81

Now I think the only doubt is,  which was most infinitely absurd,  the
question or the comment  ?

The next morning,  the Misses Palmer called.  They were cold and for-
mal, and full of reproaches that I had been so unsociable ;  however,  by
degrees,  their reserve wore off.  They invited us very pressingly for Satur-
day evening.  I would fain have been excused,  for I more than ever wished
to shirk seeing Sir Joshua Reynolds,  as I could not but suppose he as well
as myself must think of this vile pamphlet upon our meeting,  and as I must
owe to his extreme partiality to the book,  and talk of the writer,  the line
that mentions me.  However,  they obviated all possible objections,  and dis-
regarded all offered excuses.  My father was to be at the Opera ; — still I
must come.  My mother was engaged by expecting Miss Young — still I
was not to be let off.  If I were ill,  they vowed they would send a phy-
sician: and,  in short,  I was obliged to promise to wait on them,  though I
said I must hope at least to find them alone.

On Thursday,  my dear father talked me over quite seriously,  about my
vexation  ;  and,  to be brief,  made me promise to think no more of it ; — which
though I could not literally perform,  I have done all that in me lay.

On Friday,  I had a visit from Dr.  Johnson!  he came on purpose to reason
with me about this pamphlet,  which he had heard from my father had so
greatly disturbed me.

Shall I not love him more than ever?  However,  Miss Young was just
arrived,  and Mr.  Bremner spent the evening here,  and therefore he had the
delicacy and goodness to forbear coming to the point.  Yet he said several
things that I understood,  though they were unintelligible to all others ;  and
he was more kind,  more good-humoured,  more flattering to me than ever.
Indeed,  my uneasiness upon this subject has met with more indulgence from
him than from any body.  He repeatedly charged me not to fret ;  and bid
me not to repine at my success,  but think of Floretta,  in the Fairy Tale,
who found sweetness and consolation in her wit sufficient to counterbalance
her scoffers and libellers  !  Indeed he was all good humour and kindness,  and
seemed quite bent on giving me comfort as well as flattery.

The next evening,  just as I was dressed for my formidable visit at Sir
Joshua's,  I received a letter from Mrs.  Thrale,  the longest and most de-
lightful she has ever written me.  It contains,  indeed,  warm expostulations
upon my uneasiness,  and earnest remonstrances that I would overcome it  ;
but that she should think me worth the trouble of reproof,  and the danger of
sincerity,  flattered,  soothed,  and cheered me inexpressibly ;  and she speaks
so affectionately of her regard for me,  that I feel more convinced of it than
ever.

By the way,  it is settled that I am not to make my visit to Streatham till

your return to town ;  our dear father not choosing to have us both absent

at once.     Nevertheless,  Mrs.  Thrale,  whose invitations upon that plea,  are,

with her usual good sense and propriety,  dropped,  or rather deferred being

further pressed till your return,  said in her charming letter that she must

see me,  if only for an hour,  and insisted that I should accompany my

father on his next lesson day.     I could not persuade myself to go out till I

wrote an answer,  which I did in the fulness of my heart,  and without form,

ceremony,  or study of any kind.

******

Now to this grand visit ;  which was become more tremendous than ever
from the pamphlet business,  as I felt almost ashamed to see Sir Joshua,  and
could not but conclude he would think of it too.

My mother,  who changed her mind,  went also.  My father promised to
come before the Opera was half over.

$2 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

^Ve foimd the  ^Nliss Palmers alone.  We were,  for near an hour,  quite
easy,  chatty,  and comfortable ;  no pointed speech was made,  and no starer
entered.  But when I asked the eldest  ]Miss Palmer if she would allow me
to look atsome of her drawings,  she said,

"  Not unless you will let me see something of yours."

"  Of mine  ?"  quoth I.     "  Oh,  I have nothing to'  show."

"  I am sure you have  ;  you must have."

"  No,  indeed  ;  I don't draw at all."

"  Draw  ?  No,  but I mean some of your writing."

"Oh,  I never write — except letters."

"  Letters  ?  those are the very things I want to see."

"  Oh,  not such as you mean."

*'  Oh,  now,  don't say so  ;  I am sure you are about something,  and if you
would but show me — "

"  No,  no,  I am about nothing — I am quite out of conceit with writing."

I had my thoughts full of the vile Warley.

"  You out of conceit  ?"  exclaimed she  ;  "  nay,  then,  if you are,  who should
be otherwise !"

Just then,  Mrs.  and Miss Horneck were announced.  You may suppose
I thought directly of the one hundred and sixty miles — and may take it for
granted I looked them very boldly in the face!  Mrs.  Horneck seated her-
self by my mother.  Miss Palmer introduced me to her and her daughter,
who seated herself next to me  ;  but not one word passed between us  !

^frs.  Horneck,  as I found in the course of the evening,  is an exceeding
sensible,  well-bred woman.  Her daughter is very beautiful ;  but was low-
spirited and silent during the whole visit.  She was,  indeed,  very unhappy,
as i\liss Palmer informed me,  upon account of some ill news she had lately
heard of the affairs of a gentleman to whom she is shortly to be married.

I have not a great man}^  bo?t mots of my ov/n to record,  as I think I
seldom opened my mouth above once in a quarter of an hour.

Next came a Mr.  Gwatkin,  of whom I have nothing to say,  but that he
was very talkative with Miss Offy Palmer,  and very silent with every body
else ;  and that,  in their talk,  which on his part was all in a low voice,  I
more than once heard my own name pronounced in a questioning tone.
For this I thanked him not.

Not long after came a whole troop,  consisting of Mr.  Cholmondeley  ! —
O perilous name  ! — Miss Cholmondeley,  and Miss Fanny Cholmondeley,  his
daughters,  and Miss Forrest.  Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  I found,  was engaged
elsewhere,  but soon expected.

Now here was a trick of Sir Joshua,  to make me meet all these people  !

Mr.  Cholmondeley is a clergyman ;  nothing shining either in person or
manners,  but rather somewhat grim in the first,  and glum in the last.  Yet
he appears to have humour himself,  and to enjoy it much in others.

Miss Cholmondeley I saw too little of to mention.

Miss Fanny Cholmondeley is a rather pretty,  pale girl ;  very young and
inartificial,  and though tall and grown up,  treated by her family as a child,
and seemingly well content to really think herself such.  She followed me
whichever way I turned,  and though she was too modest to stare,  never
ceased watching me the whole evening.

Miss Forrest is an immensely tall and not handsome young woman.
Further I know not.

Next came my father,  all gaiety and spirits.     Then Mr.  William Burke.

Soon after.  Sir Joshua returned home.  He paid his compliments to every
body,  and then brought a chair next mine,  and said,

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  83

"  So,  you were afraid to come amongst us T'

I don't know if I wrote to you a speech to that purpose,  which I made to
the  ]\Iiss Pahners  ?  and which,  I suppose,  they had repeated to him.  He
went on,  saying,  I might as well fear hobgoblins,  and that I had only to
hold up my head to be above them all.

After this address,  his behaviour was exactly what my wishes would have
dictated to him,  for my own ease and quietness  ;  lor he never once even
alludtd to my book,  but conversed rationally,  gaily,  and serenely  :  and so
I became more comfortable than I had been ever since the hrst entrance of
company.

Our subject was chiefly Dr.  Johnson's Lives of the Poets ;  we had both
read the same,  and therefore could discuss them with equal pleasure,  and
we both were charmed with them,  and therefore could praise them vrith
equal warmth  ;  and we both love and reverence the writer,  and therefore
could mix observations on the book and the author with equal readiness.

By the way,  I believe I did not mention that  ?»Iiss Palmer told me all
the world gave me to Dr.  Johnson,  for that he spoke of me as he spoke of
hardly any body  !

Our confab was interrupted by the entrance of Mr.  King  ;  a gentleman
who is,  it seems,  for ever with the Burkes ;  and presently Lord Palmerston
was announced.

By a change of seats I was now next to Mrs.  Horneck ;  who,  after some
general conversation with me,  said,  in a low voice  :

"  I suppose.  Miss Burney,  I must not speak of Evelina to you I"

"  Why,  indeed,  ma'am,"  said I,  "I would rather you should speak of any
thing else."

"  Well,  I must only beg leave to say one thing,  which is,  that my
daughters had the credit of the first introducing it into this set.  Mrs.
Bunbury was the very first among us who read it;  she met it,  accidentally,
at a bookseller's,  and she could not leave it behind her ;  and when she had
read it,  she sent it to me,  and wrote me word she was sure I should read it,
and read it through,  though it was a novel ;  for she knew novels were not
favourites with me  ;  and indeed,  they are generally so bad,  that they are
not to be read.  But I have seen nothincr like this since Fieldincr.  But
where.  Miss Burney,  where can,  or could you pick up such characters  ?
where find such variety of incidents,  yet all so natural  ?"'

"  O ma'am,  any body might find,  who thought them worth looking for."

Well,  while this was going forward,  a violent rapping bespoke,  I was sure,
Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  and I ran from the standers,  and turning my back against
the door,  looked over Miss Palmer's cards  ;  for you may well imagine,
I was really in a tremor at a meeting which so long has been in agitation,
and with the person who,  of all persons,  has been most warm and enthu-
siastic for my book.

She had not,  however,  been in the room half an instant,  ere my lather
came up to me,  and tapping me on the shoulder,  said,  "  Fanny,  here's a
lady who wishes to speak to you."

I curtsied in silence,  she too curtsied,  and fixed her eyes full on my
face  :  and then tapping me with her fan,  she cried —

"  Come,  come,  you must not look gi-ave upon me."

Upon this,  I te-he'd  ;  she now looked at me yet more earnestly,  and
after an odd silence,  said,  abruptly —

"  But is it true  ?"

"  What,  ma'am  ?"

84 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

"  It can't be  ! — tell me,  though,  is it true  ?"

I could only simper.

"  Why don't you tell me 1 — but it can't be — I don't believe it !  no,  you
are an impostor  !"

Sir Joshua and Lord Palmerston were both at her side — oh,  how notably
silly must I look  !  she again repeated her question of  "  Is it true  ?"  and I
again affected not to understand her  ;  and then Sir Joshua,  taking hold of
her arm,  attempted to pull her away,  saying  :

"  Come,  come,  Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  I won't have her overpowered here !"

I love Sir Joshua much for this.  But Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  turning to
him,  said,  with quickness and vehemence  :

"  Why,  I ain't going to kill her  !  don't be afraid,  I shan't compliment
her ! — I can't,  indeed  !"

Then,  taking my hand,  she led me through them all,  to another part of
the room,  where again she examined my phiz,  and viewed and re-viewed my
whole person.

"  Now,"  said she,  "  do tell me  ;  is it true  ?"

"  What,  ma'am  ? — I don't — I don't know what — "

"  Pho  !  what, — why you know what :  in short,  can you read  ?  and can
you write  ?"

"  N — o,  ma'am  !"

"  I thought so,"  cried she ;  "  I have suspected it was a trick,  some time,
and now I am sure of it.     You are too young by half! — it can't be  !"

I laughed,  and would have got away,  but she would not let me.

"  No,"  cried she,  "  one thing you must,  at least,  tell me ; — are you very
conceited  ?  Come,  answer me,"  continued she.  "  You won't  ?  Mrs.
Burney,  Dr.  Burney, — come here, — tell me if she is not very conceited  ] —
if she is not eat up with conceit by this time  ?"

They were both pleased to answer  "  Not half enough."

"  Well,"  exclaimed she,  "  that is the most wonderful part of all !  Why
that is yet more extraordinary than writing the book !"

I then got away from her,  and again looked over Miss Palmer's cards  :
but she was after me in a minute.

"  Pray,  Miss Burney,"  cried she,  aloud,  "  do you know any thing of this
game  ?"

"  No,  ma'am."

"  No V repeated she  ;  "  ma foi,  that's pity  !"

This raised such a laugh,  I was forced to move on ;  yet every body
seemed to be afraid to laugh,  too,  and studying to be delicate,  as if they
had been cautioned ;  which,  I have since found,  was really the case,  and by
Sir Joshua himself.

Again,  however,  she was at my side.

"  What game do you like.  Miss Burney  ?"  cried she.

"  I play at none,  ma'am."

"  No  ?  pardie,  I wonder at that !"

Did you ever know such a toad?  Again I moved on,  and got behind Mr.
W.  Burke,  who,  turning round to me,  said, —

"  This is not very politic in us.  Miss Burney,  to play at cards,  and have
you listen to our follies."

There's for you !     I am to pass for a censoress now.

My frank will hold no more.     Adieu,  my dearest Susan.

January 11.
Your repeated call,  my dear Susan,  makes me once more attempt to

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  35

finish my visit to Sir Joshua :  but I have very much forgotten where I left
off;  therefore,  if I am guilty of repetition or tautology,  you must not much
marvel.

Mrs.  Cholmondeley hunted me quite round the card-table,  from chair to
chair,  repeating various speeches of Madame Duval  ;  and when,  at last,  I
got behind a sofa,  out of her reach,  she called out aloud,  "  Polly,  Polly  !
only think !  miss has danced with a lord  !"

Some time after,  contriving to again get near me,  she began flirting her
fan,  and exclaiming,  "  Well,  miss,  I have had a beau,  I assure  )-ou  ?  ay,
and a very pretty beau too,  though I don't know if his lodgings were so
prettily furnished,  and every thing,  as Mr.  Smith's."

Then,  applying to Mr.  Cholmondeley,  she said,  "  Pray,  sir,  what is be-
come of my lottery-ticket  ?"

"  I don't know,"  answered he.

"  Fardie^''  cried she,  "  you don't know nothing  !"

I had now again made off,  and,  after much rambling,  I at last seated
myself near the card-table :  but Mrs.  Cholmondeley was after me in a
minute,  and drew a chair next mine.  I now found it impossible to escape,
and therefore forced myself to sit still.  Lord Palmerston and Sir Joshua,
in a few moments,  seated themselves by us.

I must now write dialogue-fashion,  to avoid the enormous length of Mrs.
C.'s name.

Mrs.  Choi. — I have been very ill ;  monstrous ill indeed !  or else I should
have been at your house long ago.  Sir Joshua,  pray how do you do?
You know,  I suppose,  that I don't come to see you  ]

Sir Joshua could only laugh  ;  though this was her first address to him.

Mrs.  Choi. — Pray,  miss,  what's your name  ?

F.  B. — Frances,  ma'am.

Mrs.  Choi. — Fanny 7 Well,  all the Fannys are excellent !  and yet, —
my name is Mary  !  Pray,  Miss Palmers,  how are you  ? — though I hardly
know if I shall speak to you to-night.  I thought I should never have got
here !  I have been so out of humour with the people for keeping me.  If
you but knew,  cried I,  to whom I am going to-night,  and who I shall see
to-night,  you would not dare keep me muzzing here !

During all these pointed speeches,  her penetrating eyes were fixed upon
me ;  and what could I do  ? — what,  indeed,  could any body do,  but colour
and simper? — all the company watching us,  though all,  very delicately,
avoided joining the confab.

Mrs.  Choi. — My Lord Palmerston,  I was told to-night that nobody could
see your lordship for me,  for that you supped at my house every night  ?
Dear,  bless me,  no  !  cried I,  not every night !  and I looked as confused as
I was able ;  but I am afraid I did not blush,  though I tried hard for it !

Then,  again,  turning to me,

"  That Mr.  What-d'ye-call-him,  in Fleet Street,  is a mighty silly fellow ;
— perhaps you don't know who I mean  ? — one T.  Lowndes, — but maybe
you don't know such a person  ?"

F.  B. — No,  indeed,  I do not ! — that I can safely say.

Mrs.  Choi. — I could get nothing from him :  but I told him I hoped he
gave a good price,-  and he answered me,  that he always did things genteel.

What trouble and tagging we had  !     Mr. [I cannot recollect the name

she mentioned]  laid a wager the writer was a man : — I said I was sure it
was a woman  :  but now we are both out ;  for it's a girl !

In this comical,  queer,  flighty,  whimsical manner,  she ran on,  till we were
summoned to supper ;  for we were not allowed to break up before :  and

VOL.  I.  8

86 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

then,  when Sir Joshua and ahnost every body was gone down stairs,  she
changed her tone,  and,  with a face and voice both grave,  said  :

"  Well,  Miss Burney,  you must give me leave to say one thing to you  ;
yet,  perhaps you won't,  neither,  will you  ?"

"  What is it,  ma'am  ?"

"  Why it is,  that I admire you more than any human being !  and that I
can't help !"

Then,  suddenly rising,  she hurried down stairs.

While we were upon the stairs,  I heard Miss Palmer say to Miss Fanny
Cholmondeley,

"  Well,  you don't find Miss Burney quite so tremendous a person as you
expected  ?"

Sir Joshua made me sit next him at supper  ;  Mr.  William Burke was at
my other side  ;  though,  afterwards,  I lost the Knight of Plimton,  who,  as
he eats no suppers,  made way for Mr.  Gwatkin,  and,  as the table was
crowded,  stood at the fire himself.  He was extremely polite and flattering
in his manners towards me,  and entirely avoided all mention or hint at
"  Evelina"  the whole evening  :  indeed,  I think I have met with more scru-
pulous delicacy from Sir Joshua than from any body,  although I have heard
more of his approbation than of almost any other person's.

Mr.  W.  Burke was immensely attentive at table  ;  but,  lest he should be
thought a Mr.  Smith for his pains,  he took care,  whoever he helped,  to add,
*'  You know I am all for the ladies  !"

I was glad I was not next Mrs.  Cholmondeley  ;  but she frequently,  and
very provokingly,  addressed herself to me ;  once she called out aloud,
"  Pray,  Miss Burney,  is there any thing new coming out  ?"  And another
time,  "  Well,  I wish people who can entertain me would entertain me!"

These sort of pointed speeches are almost worse than direct attacks  ;  for
there is no knowing how to look,  or what to say,  especially where the eyes
of a whole company mark the object for whom they are meant.

To the last of these speeches I made no sort of answer  :  but Sir Joshua
very good-naturedly turned it from me,  by saying,

"  Well,  let every one do what they can in their different ways  ;  do you
begin yourself."

"  Oh,  I can't !"  cried she ;  "  I have tried,  but I can't."

"  Do you think,  then,"  answered he,  "  that all the world is made only to
entertain you  ?"

A very lively dialogue ensued.  But I grow tired of writing.  One thing,
however,  I must mention,  which,  at the time,  frightened me wofuUy.

"  Pray,  Sir Joshua,"  asked Lord Palmerston,  "  what is this Warley that
is just come out  ?"

Was not this a cruel question  ?     I felt in such a twitter  !

"  Why,  I don't know,"  answered he  ;  "  but the reviewers,  my lord,
speak very well of it."

Mrs.  Choi. — Who wrote it  ?

Sir Joshua. — Mr.  Huddisford.

Mrs.  Choi. — O  !  I don't like it at all,  then  !  Huddisford  !  What a name!
Miss Burney,  pray can you conceive any thing of such a name as Hud-
disford 1

I could not speak a word,  and I dare say I looked no-how.  But was it
not an unlucky reference to me  ?

Sir Joshua attempted a kind of vindication of him  :  but Lord Palmerston
said,  drily,

"  I think,  Sir Joshua,  it is dedicated to you?"

^*  Yes,  my lord,"  answered he.

1779.  Of THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  87

"  Oh,  your servant !  Is it so  ?"  cried Mrs.  Cholmondeley ;  "  then you
need say no more  !"

Sir Joshua laughed,  and the subject,  to my great relief,  was dropped.

When we broke up to depart,  which was not till near two in the morning,
Mrs.  Cholmondeley went up to my mother,  and begged her permission to
visit in St.  Martin's Street.  Then,  as she left the room,  she said to me,  with
a droll sort of threatening look,

"  You have not got rid of me yet,  I have been forcing myself into your
house."

I must own I was not at all displeased at this,  as I had very much and
very reasonably feared that she would have been by then as sick of me
from disappointment,  as she was before eager for me from curiosity.

When we came away,  Offy Palmer,  laughing,  said to me,

"  I think this will be a breaking-in to you  !"

"  Ah,"  cried I,  "  if I had known of your party  !"

"  You would have been sick in bed,  I suppose  ?"

I would not answer  "  No,"  yet I was glad it was over.  And so concludeth
this memorable evening.  Yet I must tell you that I observed with much
delight,  that whoever spoke of the Thrales,  was sure to turn to me,  whence
I conclude,  since I am sure no puffs of mine can have caused it,  that her
kindness towards me has been published by herself.

I shall now skip to the Thursday following,  when I accompanied my
father to Streatham.  We had a delightful ride,  though the day was
horrible.

In two minutes we were joined by Mr.  Seward,  and in four,  by Dr.  John-
son.  Mr.  Seward,  though a reserved and cold young man,  has a heart open
to friendship,  and very capable of good nature and good will,  though I be-
lieve it abounds not with them to all indiscriminately  :  but he really loves
my father,  and his reserve once,  is always,  conquered.  He seemed heartily
glad to see us both  :  and the dear Dr.  Johnson was more kind,  more pleased,
and more delightful than ever.  Our several meetings in town seem now
to have quite established me in his favour,  and I flatter myself that if he
were now accused of loving me,  he would not deny it,  nor,  as before,  insist
on waiting longer ere he went so far.

"  I hope.  Dr.  Burney,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  "  you are now come to stay V

"  No !"  cried my father,  shaking his head,  "  that is utterly out of my
power at present."

"  Well,  but this fair lady" — (N.B.  Fair and brown are synonymous terms
in conversation,  however opposite in looks)  "  I hope will stay  ?"

"  No,  no,  no  !"  was the response,  and he came to me and pressed the in-
vitation very warmly ;  but Dr.  Johnson,  going to the window,  called me
from him.

"  Well,  my dear,"  cried he,  in a low voice,  "  and how are you now  ?
have you done fretting  ?  have you got over your troubles  ?"

"  Ah,  sir,"  quoth I,  "  I am sorry they told you of my folly  ;  yet I am
vcrv much obliged to you for bearing to hear of it with so much indulgence,
for I had feared it would have made you hold me cheap ever after."

"  No,  my dear,  no  !  What should I hold you cheap for 1 It did not
surprise me at all ;  I thought it very natural ;  but you must think no more
of it."

F.  B. — Why,  sir,  to say the truth,  I don't know,  after all,  whether I do
not owe the affair in part to you  !

88 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

Dr.  J. — To me  ?  how so  ?

F.  B. — Why,  the appellation of"  little Burney,"  I think,  must have come
from you,  for I know of nobody else that calls me so.

This is a fact,  Susy,  and the  "  dear little Burney"  makes it still more
suspicious,  for I am sure Sir Joshua Reynolds would never speak of me so
facetiously after only one m.eeting.

Dr.  Johnson seemed almost shocked,  and warmly denied having been any
way accessory.

*'  Why,  sir,"  cried I,  "  they say the pamphlet was written by a Mr.  Hud-
disford.  Now I never saw,  never heard of him before  ;  how,  therefore,  should
he know whether I am little or tall  ?  he could not call me little by inspira-
tion ;  I might be a Patagonian for any thing he could tell."

Dr.  J. — Pho  !  fiddle-faddle  ;  do you suppose your book is so much talked
of and not yourself]  Do you think your readers will not ask questions,  and
inform themselves whether you are short or tall,  young or old  ?  Why should
you put it on me  ?

After this he made me follow him into the library,  that we might continue
our confab without interruption  ;  and just as we were seated,  entered Mrs.
Thrale.  I flew to her,  and she received me with the sweetest cordiality.
They placed me between them,  and we had a most delicious trio.

We talked over the visit at Sir Joshua's  ;  and Dr.  Johnson told me that
Mrs.  Cholmondeley was the first person who publicly praised and recom-
mended "  Evelina"  among the wits.  Mrs.  Thrale told me that at Tunbridge
and Brighthelmstone it was the universal topic ;  and that Mrs.  Montagu had
pronounced the dedication to be so well written,  that she could not but sup-
pose it must be the doctors.

"  She is very kind,"  quoth I,  "  because she likes one part better than
another,  to take it from me !"

"  You must not mind that,"  said Dr.  Johnson,  "  for such things are
always said where books are successful.  There are three distinct kinds of
judges upon all new authors or productions  ;  the first are those who know
no rules,  but pronounce entirely from their natural taste and feelings  ;  the
second are those who know and judge by rules  ;  and the third are those who
know,  but are above the rules.  These last are those you should wish to
satisfy.  Next to them rate the natural judges  ;  but ever despise those
opinions that are formed by the rules."

Mrs.  Thrale wanted me much to stay all night,  but it could not be  ;  and
she pressed me to come the next week to be introduced to Miss Streatfield,
who,  she said,  much wished the same  ;  but these wishes only serve to chill
me,  for I am sure I shall always disappoint them ;  and therefore the minute
I hear any body desires particularly to see me,  I desire particularly to avoid
them  !

Don't scold,  Susy,  for I can't help it.  The idea of being an object of any
attention,  gives me a restraint equally unconquerable and uncomfortable.  I
therefore entirely deferred repeating my visit till your return,  for I only could
have had leave for one day.

When we came home we heard that Mrs.  Cholmondeley had been at our
house almost all the morning,  asking questions innumerable about me,  and
asserting that she must come to close quarters with me,  ere she could satisfy
her mind fully that all those characters could be my own  !  She said,  more-
over, that Lord Palmerston,  hearing the authoress of  "  Evelina"  was to be
at Sir Joshua's,  had begged to be invited.

But what was most charming,  she said that my whole behaviour that
evening was sat upon afterwards,  and that the jury brought in their verdict,

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  89

that it was strictly proper.  This,  I will own,  has relieved me from some
very disagreeable apprehensions I had been full of,  that I had certainly
disappointed the whole partv,  and exposed myself to their ridicule.

Last week I called on Mrs.  Williams,  and Dr.  Johnson,  who had just
returned from Streatham,  came down stairs to me,  and was so kind  !  I quite
doat on him  ;  and I do really believe that,  take away Mr.  Crisp,  there is no
man out of this house who has so real and affectionate a regard for me  :  and
I am sure,  take away the same person,  I can with the utmost truth say the
same thing in return.

I asked after all the Streathamites.

*'  Why,"  said he,  "  we now only want you — we have Miss Streatfield,
Miss Brown,  Murphy,  and Seward — we only want you  !  Has Mrs.  Thrale
called on you lately  ?"

"  Yes,  sir,"

"  Ah,"  said he,  "  you are such a darling  !"

Mrs.  Williams added a violent compliment to this,  but concluded with
saying,

"  My only fear is lest she should put me in a book  !"

"  Sir Joshua Reynolds,"  answered Dr.  Johnson,  "  says,  that if he were
conscious to himself of any trick,  or any affectation,  there is nobody he
should so much fear as this little Burney  !"

This speech he told me once before,  so that I find it has struck him much  ;
and so I suppose it did Mr.    Huddisford,  who probably,  has heard one

similar to it.

*****

The Sunday following,  Mr.  Seward drank tea,  and Mr.  Baretti supped
here.

I had a great deal of conversation with Mr.  Seward about Miss Streatfield  :
he thinks her a very pleasing girl ;  but,  notwithstanding her knowledge of
what he calls  "  the crooked letters,"  he owned that he thought her neither
bright nor deep,  and rather too tenderhearted,  for that she had tears at
command.

Miss Brown,  though far less formed and less cultivated,  he said had a
better natural understanding  :  but she was coarse and rough.

Of whom,  I wonder,  would Mr.  Seward speak really well  ?  I think alto-
gether, he is more diflicult to please as to persons than any body I know.

He was so facetious as to propose my writing for Lady Miller's vase,  and
undertook to convey my verses to it.

He asked many questions of when I should go to Streatham ;  but said he
was sure Miss Streatfield would not answer to me.

Baretti worries me about writing — asks a million of questions of how much
I have written and so forth,  and when I say  "  nothing,"  he raves and rants,
and says he could beat me.

However,  we had a very agreeable evening.     Baretti was in very good
humour,  and Mr.  Seward was extremely droll and entertaining.     You know
les agremens are all his own,  when he chooses to call for them.
*****

And now%  my dear Susan,  to relate the affairs of an evening,  perhaps the
most important of my life.  To say that,  is,  I am sure,  enough to interest
you,  my dearest girl,  in all I can tell you of it.

On Monday last,  my father sent a note to Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  to propose
our waitino^  on her the Wednesday following :  she accepted the proposal,

8*

90 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

and accordingly on Wednesday evening,  my father,  mother,  and self went
to Hertford Street.

I should have told you that Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  when my father some
time ago called on her,  sent me a message,  that if I would go to see her,  I
should not again be stared at or worried;  and she acknowledged that my
visit at Sir Joshua's was a formidable one,  and that I was watched the
whole evening;  but that upon the whole,  the company behaved extremely
well,  for they only ogled !

Well,  we were received by Mrs.  Cholmondeley with great politeness,  and
in a manner that showed she intended to entirely throw aside Madame
Duval,  and to conduct herself towards me in a new style.

Mr.  and the Misses Cholmondeley and Miss Forrest were with her ;  but
who else think you  ? — why Mrs.  Sheridan  !  I was absolutely charmed at
the sight of her.  I think her quite as beautiful as ever,  and even more
captivating ;  for she has now a look of happiness that animates her whole
face.

Miss Linley was with her ;  she is very handsome,  but nothing near her
sister :  the elegance of Mrs.  Sheridan's beauty is unequalled by any I ever
saw,  except Mrs.  Crewe.  I was pleased with her in all respects.  She is
much more lively and agreeable than I had any idea of finding her ;  she
was very gay,  and very unaffected,  and totally free from airs of any kind.

Miss Linley was very much out of spirits  ;  she did not speak three words
the whole evening,  and looked wholly unmoved at all that passed.  Indeed
she appeared to be heavy and inanimate.

Mrs.  Cholmondeley sat next me.  She is determined,  I believe,  to make
me like her ;  and she will,  I believe,  have full success ;  for she is very
clever,  very entertaining,  and much unlike any body else.

The first subject started was the Opera,  and all joined in the praise of
Pacchierotti.  Mrs.  Sheridan declared she could not hear him without
tears,  and that he was the first Italian singer who ever affected her to such
a degree.

They then talked of the intended marriage of the Duke of Dorset with
Miss Cumberland,  and many ridiculous anecdotes were related.  The con-
versation naturally fell upon Mr.  Cumberland,  and he was finely cut up !

"  What a man is that !"  said Mrs.  Cholmondeley :  "  I cannot bear him
— so querulous,  so dissatisfied,  so determined to like nobody and nothing
but himself!"

"  What,  Mr.  Cumberland  ?"  exclaimed I.

"  Yes,"  answered she  ;  "  I hope you don't like him  ?"

"  I don't know him,  ma'am.    I have only seen him once,  at Mrs.  Ord's."

"  Oh,  don't like him for your life !  I charge you not !  I hope you did not
like his looks  ?"

"  Why,"  quoth I,  laughing,  "  I went prepared and determined to like
him  :  but,  perhaps,  when I see him next,  I may go prepared for the con-
trary."

After this.  Miss More was mentioned  ;  and I was asked what I thought
of her?

"  Don't be formal with me  ;  if you are,  I shan't like you  !"

"  I have no hope that you will any way !"

"  Oh,  fie  !  fie !  but as to Miss More — I don't like her at all ;  that is,  I
detest her  !  She does nothing but flatter and fawn ;  and then she thinks ill
of nobody.     Don't you hate a person who thinks ill of nobody  ?"

My father then told what Dr.  Johnson had said to her on the occasion
of her praising him.

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  91

"  This rejoices,  this does me good  !"  cried she  ;  "  I would have given the
world to have heard that.  Oh,  there's no supporting the company of pro-
fessed flatterers.  She gives me such doses of it,  that I cannot endure her ;
but I always sit still and make no answer,  but receive it as if I thought it
my due :  that is the only way to quiet her.  She is really detestable.  I
hope.  Miss Burney,  you don't think I admire all geniuses?  The only
person I flatter,"  continued she,  "  is Garrick ;  and he likes it so much,
that it pays one by the spirits it gives him.  Other people that I like,  I dare
not flatter."

A rat-tat-tat-tat ensued,  and the Earl of Harcourt was announced.  When
he had paid his compliments to Mrs.  Cholmondeley, —

"  I knew,  ma'am,"  he said,  "  that I should find you at home."
"  I suppose,  then,  my lord,"  said she,  "  that you have seen Sir Joshua
Reynolds  ;  for he is engaged to be here."

"  I have,"  answered his lordship ;  "  and heard from him that 1 should
be sure to find you."

And then he added some very fine compliment,  but I have forgot it.
"  Oh,  my lord,"  cried she,  "  you have the most discernment of any body!
His lordship  (turning another way)  always says these things to me,  and yet
he never flatters."

Lord Harcourt,  speaking of the lady from whose house he was just
come,  said,

"  Mrs.  Vesey is vastly agreeable,  but her fear of ceremony is really
troublesome  ;  for her eagerness to break a circle is such,  that she insists
upon every body's sitting with their backs one to another;  that is,  the
chairs are drawn into little parties of three together,  in a confused manner,
all over the room."

"  Why,  then,".,said my father,  "  they may have the pleasure of caballing
and cutting up one another,  even in the same room."

"  Oh,  I like the notion of all things,"  cried Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  "  I shall
certainly adopt it !"

And then she drew her chair into the middle of our circle.  Lord Har-
court turned his round,  and his back to most of us,  and my father did the
same.     You can't imagine a more absurd sight.

Just then the door opened,  and Mr.  Sheridan entered.
Was I not in luck  ?     Not that I believe the meeting was accidental ;  but
I had more wished to meet him and his wife than any people I know not.

I could not endure my ridiculous situation,  but replaced myself in an
orderly manner immediately.  Mr.  Sheridan stared at them all,  and Mrs.
Cholmondely said she intended it as a hint for a comedy.

Mr.  Sheridan has a very fine figure,  and a good though I don't think a
handsome face.  He is tall,  and very upright,  and his appearance and
address are at once manly and fashionable,  without the smallest tincture of
foppery or modish graces.  In short,  I like him vastly,  and think him
every way worthy his beautiful companion.

And let me tell you what I know will give you as much pleasure as it
gave me, — that,  by all I could observe in the course of the evening,  and we
stayed very late,  they are extremely happy in each other ;  he evidently
adores her,  and she as evidently idolizes him.  The world has by no means
done him justice.

When he had paid his compliments to all his acquaintance,  he went
behind the sofa on which Mrs.  Sheridan and Miss Cholmondely were seated,
and entered into earnest conversation with them.

Upon Lord Harcourt's again paying Mrs.  Cholmondeley some compli-
ment, she said,

92 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

"  Well,  my lord,  after this I shall be quite sublime for some days !  I
shan't descend into common life till — till Saturday,  and then I shall drop
into the vulgar style — I shall be in the ma foi way."

I-  do really believe she could not resist this,  for she had seemed deter-
mined to be quiet.

When next there was a rat-tat,  Mrs,  Cholmondeley and Lord Harcourt,
and my father again,  at the command of the former,  moved into the middle
of the room,  and then Sir Joshua Reynolds and Dr.  Wharton entered.

No further company came.  You may imagine there was a general roar
at the breaking of the circle,  and when they got into order,  Mr.  Sheridan
seated himself in the place Mrs.  Cholmondeley had left,  between my father
and myself.

And now I must tell you a httle conversation which I did not hear myself
till I came home ;  it was between Mr.  Sheridan and my father.

*'  Dr.  Burney,"  cried the former,  "  have you no older daughters  ?  Can
this possibly be the authoress of '  Evelina  ?'  "

And then he said abundance of fine things,  and begged my father to
introduce him to me.

"Why,  it will be a very formidable thing to her,"  answered he,  "to be
introduced to you."

"  Well then,  by and by,"  returned he.

Some time after this,  my eyes happening to meet his,  he waived the
ceremony of introduction,  and in a low voice said,

"  I have been telling Dr.  Burney that I have long expected to see in Miss
Burney a lady of the gravest appearance,  with the quickest parts."

I was never much more astonished than at this unexpected address,  as
among all my numerous puffers the name of Sheridan has never reached
me,  and I did really imagine he had never deigned to look at my trash.

Of course I could make no verbal answer,  and he proceeded then to
speak of  "  Evelina"  in terms of the highest praise ;  but I was in such a
ferment from surprise  (not to say pleasure),  that I have no recollection of
his expressions.  I only remember telling him that I was much amazed he
had spared time to read it,  and that he repeatedly called it a most surprising
book  ;  and some time after he added,  "  But I hope.  Miss Burney,  you don't
intend to throw away your pen  ?"

"  You should take care,  sir,"  said I,  "  what you say  :  for you know not
what weight it may have."

He wished it might have any,  he said,  and soon after turned again to my
father.

I protest,  since the approbation of the Streathamites,  I have met with
none so flattering to me as this of Mr.  Sheridan,  and so very unexpected.

Sir Joshua then came up to me,  and after some general conversation
said,

"  Pray do you know any thing of the  '  Sylph?'  "

This is a novel,  lately advertised by Lowndes.  Mr.  Hutton has already
been with me to inquire if it was mine.

"  No,"  quoth I.

"  Don't you,  upon your honour?"

"  Upon my honour  ? — did you suspect me  ?"

"  Why,  a friend of mine sent for it upon suspicion."

"  So did we,"  said Miss Linley,  "  but I did not suspect after I had
read it."

"What is the reason," said Sir Joshua,  "that Lowndes always advertises
it with  '  Evelina  ?' "

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  93

"  Indeed I know nothing about it."

"  Ma'am,"  cried Mr.  Sheridan,  turning to me abruptly,  "  you should
send and order him not, — it is a take in,  and ought to be forbid  ;"  and
with great vehemence he added,  "  it is a most impudent thing in that
fellow  !"

I assure you I took it quite kind in him to give me this advice.  By the
way,  Mrs.  Thrale has sent me a message to the same purpose.

About this time Mrs.  Cholmondeley was making much sport,  by wishing
for an acrostic on her name.  She said she had several times begged for
one in vain,  and began to entertain thoughts of writing one herself.

"  For,"  said she,  "  I am very famous for my rhymes,  though I never
made a line of poetry in my life."

"  An acrostic on your name,"  said Mr.  Sheridan,  "  would be a for-
midable task  :  it must be so long that I think it should be divided into
cantos."

"  Miss Burney,"  cried Sir Joshua,  who was now reseated,  "  are not you
a writer of verses  ?"

F.  B.— No,  Sir.

Mrs.  Choi. — O don't believe her.  I have made a resolution not to believe
any thing she says.

Mr.  Sheridan. — I think a lady should not write verses till she is past re-
ceiving them.

Mrs.  Choi,  (rising and stalking majestically towards him). — Mr.  Sheridan,
pray sir,  what may you mean by this insinuation ;  did I not say I writ
verses  ?

Mr.  Sheridan. — Oh,  but you —

Mrs.  Choi. — Say no more,  sir  !  You have made your meaning but too
plain already.     There now,  I think that's a speech for a tragedy":!

Some time after,  Sir Joshua returning to his standing-place,  entered into
confab with Miss Linley and your slave,  upon various matters,  during
which Mr.  Sheridan,  joining us,  said,

"  Sir Joshua,  I have been telling Miss Burney that she must not suffer
her pen to lie idle — ought she  ?"

Sir Joshua. — No,  indeed,  ought she not.

Mr.  Sheridan. — Do you then.  Sir Joshua,  persuade her.  But perhaps you
have begun something  ?  May we ask  ?  Will you answer a question can-
didly ?

F.  B. — I don't know,  but as candidly as Mrs,  Candour I think I cer-
tainly shall.

Mr.  Sheridan. — What then are you about now  ?

F.  B. — Why,  twirling my fan,  I think  !

Mr.  Sheridan. — No,  no  ;  but what are you about at home  ?  However,  it
is not a fair question,  so I won't press it.

Yet he looked very inquisitive  ;  but I was glad to get off without any
downright answer.

Sir Joshua. — Any thing in the dialogue way,  I think,  she must succeed
in  ;  and I am sure invention will not be wanting.

Mr.  Sheridan. — No,  indeed  ;  I think,  and say,  she should write a comedy.

Sir Joshua, — I am sure I think so ;  and hope she will.

I could only answer by incredulous exclamations.

"  Consider,"  continued Sir Joshua,  "  you have already had all the applause
and fame you can have given you in the closet ;  but the acclamation of a
theatre will be new to you."

And then he put down his trumpet,  and began a violent clapping of his
hands.

94 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

I actually shook from head to foot !  I felt myself already in Drury Lane,
amidst the hubbub of a first night.

"  Oh,  no  !"  cried I,  "there may be a noise,  but it will be just the reverse."
And I returned his salute with a hissing.

Mr.  Sheridan joined Sir Joshua very warmly.

"  Oh sir !"  cried I,  "  you should not run on so, — you don't know what
mischief you may do!"

Mr.  Sheridan. — I wish I may — I shall be very glad to be accessory.

Sir Joshua. — She has,  certainly,  something of a knack at characters  ; —
where she got it,  I don't know, — and how she got it,  I can't imagine  ;  but
she certainly has it.     And to throw it away is —

Mr.  Sheridan. — Oh,  she won't, — she will write a comedy, — she has pro-
mised me she will !

F.  B. — Oh  ! — if you both run on in this manner,  I shall —  •;

I was going to say get under the chair,  but Mr.  Sheridan,  intei'rupting
me with a laugh,  said,

"  Set about one?  very well,  that's right !"

"  Ay,"  cried Sir Joshua,  "  that's very right.  And you  (to Mr.  Sheridan)
would take any thing of hers,  would you not  ? — unsight,  unseen 1"

What a point-blank question!  who but Sir Joshua would have ventured it !

"  Yes,"  answered Mr.  Sheridan,  with quickness,  "  and make her a bow
and my best thanks into the bargain."

Now,  my dear Susy,  tell me,  did you ever hear the fellow to such a
speech as this  ! — it was all I could do to sit it.

"  Mr.  Sheridan,"  I exclaimed,  "  are you not mocking me  ?"

"  No,  upon my honour !  this is what I have meditated to say to you the
first time I should have the pleasure of seeing you."

To be sure,  as Mrs.  Thrale says,  if folks are to be spoilt,  there is nothing
in the world so pleasant as spoiling !  But I never was so much astonished,
and seldom have been so much delighted,  as by this attack of Mr.  Sheridan.
Afterwards he took my father aside,  and formally repeated his opinion that
I should write for the stage,  and his desire to see my play, — with enco-
miums the most flattering of  "  Evelina."

And now,  my dear Susy,  if I should attempt the stage,  I think I may be
fairly acquitted of presumption,  and however I may fail,  that I was strongly
pressed to try by Mrs.  Thrale,  and by Mr.  Sheridan,  the most successful
and powerful of all dramatic living authors,  will abundantly excuse my
temerity.

In short, — this evening seems to have been decisive ;  my many and in-
creasing scruples all gave way to encouragement so warm,  from so ex-
perienced a judge,  who is himself interested in not making such a request
par coinplaisance.  Some time after,  Sir Joshua beckoned to Dr.  Warton
to approach us,  and said,

"  Give me leave.  Miss Burney,  to introduce Dr.  Warton to you."

We both made our reverences,  and then Sir Joshua,  who was now quite
facetious,  said,  laughing,

"  Come,  Dr.  Warton,  now give Miss Burney your opinion of — something,
— tell her what is your opinion of — a certain book."

This was very provoking of Sir Joshua,  and Dr.  Warton seemed as
much embarrassed as myself;  but,  after a little hesitation,  he very politely
said,

"  I have no opinion to give — I can only join in the voice of the public."

I have no more time nor room to go on,  or I could write you a folio of
the conversation at supper,  when every body was in spirits,  and a thousand

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  95

good things were said  :  I sat between Sir Joshua and Miss Linley.  Mrs.
Cholmondeley addressed almost all her bo7i mots and drolleries to me,  and
was flattering in her distinction to a degree ;  yet did not,  as at our first
meeting,  overpower me.

CHAPTER V.
1779.

Diary Resumed — Mrs.  Thrale and Dr.  Johnson — Sir Philip Gierke — Whi^s and Tories
— A Political Discussion — Liberality of Dr.  Johnson — Murphy,  the Dramatist — He
urges Miss Burney to write a Comed)'^ — Table-talk between Jolmson,  Murphy,  Mrs.
Thrale,  and Miss Burney — Country Neighbours — Goldsmith — Tears at Will — Letter
from Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp — The Mcecenases of the Day — Diary Resumed —
Visit to Brighton — Brighton Society in 1779 — A Grand Dinner-Party — A Character —
The Bishop of Peterborough — An Evening Party — Wealth and Ennui — Queen Dido-
News from Home — An Order from Head-quarters — Military Discipline — Captain Crop
— Dr.  Delap — Mr.  Murphy — Slyboots — Cross-examination — The Bishop of Winchester
— Return to Streatham — Illness of Mr.  Thrale — Sir Philip Gierke — "Evelina" — A
Learned Lady — Table-talk — Tears at Will — The Man of Indifference — Taste in
Dress — Raillery— Affectation — Candide — Poco-curante — Dr.  Middleton — A Weeping
Beauty — Table-talk — Intended Journey to Spa — Projected Comedy — A Scene — Ennui
— Sir Richard Jebb — Lady Anne Lindsay — Learned Ladies — Dr.  Johnson.

Streatham,  February. — I have been here so long,  my dearest Susan,
without writing a word,  that now I hardly know where or how to begin.
But I will try to draw up a concise account of what has passed for this last
fortnight,  and then endeavour to be more minute.

Mrs.  Thrale and Dr.  Johnson vied with each other in the kindness of
their reception of me.  Mr.  Thrale was,  as usual at first,  cold and quiet,
but soon,  as usual also,  warmed into sociality.

The next day Sir Philip Jennings Gierke came.  He is not at all a man
of letters,  but extremely well-bred,  nay,  elegant,  in his manners,  and sensi-
ble and agreeable in his conversation.  He is a professed minority man,  and
very active and zealous in the opposition.  He had,  when I came,  a bill in
agitation concerning contractors — too long a matter to explain upon paper
— but which was levelled against bribery and corruption in the ministry,
and which he was to make a motion upon in the House of Commons the
next week.

Men of such different principles as Dr.  Johnson and Sir Philip,  you may
imagine,  can not have much sympathy or cordiality in their political de-
bates ;  however,  the very superior abilities of the former,  and the remarka-
ble good breeding of the latter,  have kept both upon good terms ;  though
they have had several arguments,  in which each has exerted his utmost
force for conquest.

The heads of one of the debates I must try to remember,  because I should
be sorry to forget.  Sir Philip explained his bill ;  Dr.  Johnson at first
scoffed it ;  Mr.  Thrale betted a guinea the motion would not pass,  and Sir
Philip,  that he should divide a hundred and fifty upon it.

I am afraid,  my dear Susan,  you already tremble at this political com-
mencement, but I will soon have done,  for I know your taste too well to en-
large upon this theme.

Sir Philip,  addressing himself to Mrs.  Thrale,  hoped she would not suffer
the Tories to warp her judgment,  and told me he hoped my father had not
tainted my principles ;  and then he further explained his bill,  and indeed

96 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

made it appear so equitable,  that Mrs.  Thrale gave in to it,  and wished her
husband to vote for it.  He still hung back  ;  but,  to our general surprise,
Dr.  Johnson having made more particular inquiries into its merits,  first
softened towards it,  and then declared it a very rational and fair bill,  and
joined with Mrs.  Thrale in soliciting Mr.  Thrale's vote.

Sir Philip was,  and with very good reason,  quite delighted.  He opened
upon politics more amply,  and freely declared his opinions,  which were so
strongly against the government,  and so much bordering upon the republi-
can principles,  that Dr.  Johnson suddenly took fire ;  he called back his
recantation,  begged Mr.  Thrale not to vote for Sir Philip's bill,  and grew
very animated against his antagonist.

"  The bill,"  said he,  "  ought to be opposed by all honest men  !  in itself,
and considered simply,  it is equitable,  and I would forward it ;  but when we
find what a faction it is to support and encourage,  it ought not to be
listened to.     All men should oppose it who do not wish well to sedition !"

These and several other expressions yet more strong,  he made use of  ;
and had Sir Philip had less unalterable politeness,  I believe they would have
had a vehement quarrel.  He maintained his ground,  however,  with calm-
ness and steadiness,  though he had neither argument nor wit at all equal to
such an opponent.

Dr.  Johnson pursued him with unabating vigour and dexterity,  and at
length,  though he could not convince,  he so entirely baffled him,  that Sir
Philip was self-compelled to be quiet — which,  with a very good grace,  he
confessed.

Dr.  Johnson then,  recollecting himself,  and thinking,  as he owned after-
wards, that the dispute grew too serious,  with a skill all his own,  suddenly
and unexpectedly turned it to burlesque ;  and taking Sir Philip by the hand
at the moment we arose after supper,  and were separating for the night,

"  Sir Philip,"  said he,  "  you are too liberal a man for the party to which
you belong;  1 shall have much pride in the honour of converting you;  for I
really believe,  if you were not spoiled by bad company,  the spirit of faction
would not have possessed you.  Go,  then,  sir,  to the House,  but make not
your motion !  G've up your bill,  and surprise the world by turning to the
side of truth and reason.  Rise,  sir,  when they least expect you,  and ad-
dress your fellow-patriots to this purpose : — Gentlemen,  I have,  for many a
weary day,  been deceived and seduced by you.  I have now opened my
eyes  ;  I see that you are all scoundrels — the subversion of all government
is your aim.  Gentlemen,  I will no longer herd among rascals in whose
infamy my name and character must be included.  I therefore renounce
you all,  gentlemen,  as you deserve to be renounced."

Then,  shaking his hand heartily,  he added,

"  Go,  sir,  go to bed ;  meditate upon this recantation,  and rise in the morn-
ing a more honest man than you laid down."

*******

Now I must try to be rather more minute.  On Thursday,  while my dear
father was here,  who should be announced but Mr.  Murphy ;  the man of all
other strangers to me whom I most longed to see.

He is tall and well made,  has a very gentlemanlike appearance,  and a
quietness of manner upon his first address that,  to me,  is very pleasing.
His face looks sensible,  and his deportment is perfectly easy and polite.

When he had been welcomed by Mrs.  Thrale,  and had gone through the
reception-salutations of Dr.  Johnson and my father,  Mrs.  Thrale,  advancing
to me,  said,

"  But here is a lady I must introduce to you,  Mr.  Murphy :  here is
another F.  B."

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  97

"  Indeed  !"  cried he,  taking my hand  ;  "  is this a sister of Miss Brown's  ?"

"  No,  no  ;  this is Miss Burney."

"  What !"  cried he,  staring,  "  is this — is this — this is not the lady that —
that—"

"  Yes,  but it is,"  answered she,  laughing.

"  No,  you don't say so  ?     You don't mean the lady that — "

"  Yes,  yes,  I do ;  no less a lady,  I assure you."

He then said he was very glad of the honour of seeing me  ;  and I
sneaked away.

When we came up stairs,  Mrs.  Thrale charged me to make myself
agreeable to Mr.  Murphy.

"  He may be of use to you,  in what I am most eager for — your writing
a play :  he knows stage business so well ;  and if you will but take a
fancy to one another,  he may be more able to serve you than all of us put
together.  My ambition is,  that Johnson should write your prologue,  and
Murphy your epilogue  ;  then I shall be quite happy."

At tea-time,  when I went into the library,  I found Dr.  Johnson reading,
and Mrs.  Thrale in close conference with Mr.  Murphy.

"  It is well.  Miss Burney,"  said the latter,  "  that you are come,  for we
were abusing you most vilely  ;  we were in the very act of pulling you to
pieces."

"Don't you think her very like her father  ?"  said Mrs.  Thrale.

"  Yes  :  but what a sad man is Dr.  Burney,  for running away so  !  how
long had he been here  ?"

Mrs.  Thrale. — Oh,  but an hour or two.  I often say Dr.  Burney is the
most of a male coquet of any man I know  ;  for he only gives one enough
of his company to excite a desire for more.

Mr.  Murphy. — Dr.  Burney is,  indeed,  a most extraordinary man  ;  I think
I don't know such another :  he is at home upon all subjects,  and upon all
so agreeable  !  he is a wonderful man  !

And now let me stop this conversation,  to go back to a similar one with
Dr.  Johnson,  who,  a few days since,  when Mrs.  Thrale was singing our
father's praise,  used this expression  :

"  I love Burney  :  my heart goes out to meet him  !"

"  He is not ungrateful sir,"  cried I ;  "  for most heartily does he love
you."

"  Does he,  madam  ?     I am surprised at that."

"  Why,  sir  ?  why should you have doubted it  ?"

"  Because,  madam,  Dr.  Burney is a man for all the world to love :  it is
but natural to love him."

I could almost have cried with delight at this cordial,  unlaboured iloge.
Another time he said,

"  I much question,  if there is,  in the world,  such another man as Dr.
Burney."

But to return to the tea-table.

"  If I,"  said Mr.  Murphy,  looking very archly,  "  had written a certain
book — a book I won't name,  but a book I have lately read — I would next
write a comedy."

"  Good,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  colouring with pleasure  ;  "  do you think so
too  ?"

"  Yes,  indeed ;  I thought so while I was reading it ;  it struck me re-
peatedly."

"Don't look at me,  Miss Burney,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  for this is no
doing of mine.    Well,  I do wonder what Miss Burney will do twenty years

VOL.  I.  9

98 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

hence,  when she can blush no more  ;  for now she can never bear the name
of her book."

Mr.  Murphy. — Nay,  I name no book  ;  at least no author  :  how can I,
for I don't know the author  ;  there is no name given to it ;  I only say,
whoever wrote that book ought to write a comedy.  Dr.  Johnson might write
it for aught I know.

F.  B.— Oh,  yes  !

Mr.  Murphy. — Nay,  I have often told him he does not know his own
strength,  or he would write a comedy  ;  and so I think.

Dr.  Johnson  [laughing]. — Suppose Burney and I begin together  ?

Mr.  Murphy. — Ah,  I wish you would  !  I wish you would Beaumont and
Fletcher us !

F.  B. — My father asked me,  this morning,  how my head stood.  If he
should have asked me this evening,  I don't know what answer I must have
made.

Mr.  Murphy. — I have no wish to turn any body's head  :  I speak what I
really think  ; — comedy is the forte of that book.  I laughed over it most
violently ;  and if the author — I won't say who  [all the time looking away
from me] — will write a comedy,  I will most readily,  and with great pleasure,
give any advice or assistance in my power.

"  Well,  now you are a sweet man  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  who looked ready
to kiss him.  "  Did not I tell you,  Miss Burney,  that Mr.  Murphy was the
man  ?"

Mr.  Murphy. — All I can do,  I shall be very happy to do ;  and at least,  I
will undertake to say I can tell what the sovereigns of the upper gallery will
bear :  for they are the most formidable part of an audience.  I have had
so much experience in this sort of work,  that I believe I can always tell
what will be hissed at least.  And if Miss Burney will write,  and will show
me —

Dr.  Johnson. — Come,  come,  have done with this now  ;  why should you
overpower her  ?  Let's have no more of it.  I don't mean to dissent from
what you say ;  I think well of it,  and approve of it ;  but you have said
enough of it.

Mr.  Murphy,  who equally loves and reverences Dr.  Johnson,  instantly
changed the subject.

The rest of the evening was delightful.  Mr.  Murphy told abundance of
most excellent stories ;  Dr.  Johnson was in exceeding good humour  ;  and
Mrs.  Thrale all cheerfulness and sweetness.

For my part,  in spite of her injunctions,  I could not speak  ;  1 was in a
kind of consternation.  Mr.  Murphy's speeches,  flattering as they were,
made me tremble ;  for I cannot get out of my head the idea of disgracing
so many people.

After supper.  Dr.  Johnson turned the discourse upon silent folks — whether
by way of reflection and reproof,  or by accident,  I know not ;  but I do know
he is provoked with me for not talking more  ;  and I was afraid he was
seriously provoked  :  but,  a little while ago,  I went into the music-room,
where he was Ute-d-Ute with Mrs.  Thrale,  and calling me to him,  he took
my hand,  and made me sit next him,  in a manner that seemed truly aflec-
tionate.

"  Sir,"  cried I,  "  I was much afraid I was going out of your favour  !"

"  Why so  ]  what should make you think so  ?"

*'  Why,  I don't know — my silence,  I believe.  I began to fear you would
give me up."

*'  No,  my darling  ! — my dear little Burney,  no.     When I give you up — "

1779.  <^F THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  99

"  AVhat then,  sir  ?"  cried Mrs.  Thrale.

"  Why,  I don't know  ;  for whoever could give her up would deserve
worse than I can say  ;  I know not what would be bad enough."

Streatham,  Tuesday. — On my return hither,  my dearest Susy,  Mrs.
Thrale received Dick with her usual kindness,  and in the evening we went
to visit the P 's.

Miss Thrale,  Miss P ,  and myself,  after tea,  retired to have some talk

among ourselves,  which of all things in the world,  is most stupid with these

sort of misses  (I mean the P 's,  not Miss Thrale),  and we took Dick

with us,  to make sport.

Dick,  proud of the office,  played the buffoon extremely well,  and our

laughs reaching to the company-room,  we were followed by a Mr.  D ,  a

poor half-witted clergyman.  Dick played his tricks over again,  and,  mad
with spirits and the applause of the young ladies,  when he had done,  he
clapt  -Mr.  D on the back,  and said,

"  Come,  sir,  now you do something to divert the ladies."

*'  No,  sir,  no  ;  I really can't,"  answered he.

"  What,  sir  !"  cried Dick,  "  not if the ladies request you  ?  why,  then
you'll never do for JMr.  Smith  !  You ain't half so clever as Mr.  Smith  ;
and I'm sure you'll never be a Sir Clement Willoughby  !"

Did you ever hear the like  ?     I was forced to turn myself quite away,

and poor Mr.  D was thunderstruck at the boy's assurance.     W^hen he

recovered himself,  he said to me,

"  Ma'am,  this is a very fine young gentleman — pray what book is he in  ?"

"  Do you mean at school,  sir  ?"

"  No  ;  I mean what books does he study at home besides his grammar  ?"

"  Indeed I don't know  ;  you must examine him."

*'  No  ?  don't you know Latin,  ma'am  ?"

"  No,  indeed  ;  not at all  !"

"  Really  ?     Well,  I had heard you did."

I wonder,  my dear Susy,  what next will be said of me  !

Yesterday,  at night,  I told Dr.  Johnson the inquiry,  and added that I
attributed it to my being at Streatham,  and supposed the folks took it for
granted nobody would be admitted there without knowing Latin,  at least.

"  No,  my dear,  no,"  answered he  ;  "  the man thought it because you
have written a book — he concluded that a book could not be written by one
who knew no Latin.  And it is strange that it should — but,  perhaps you do
know it — for your shyness,  and slyness,  and pretending to know nothing,
never took me in,  whatever you may do with others.  I always knew you
for a toadling."

At our usual time of absconding,  he would not let us go,  and was in
high good-humour ;  and when,  at last,  Mrs.  Thrale absolutely refused to
stay any longer,  he took me by the hand,  and said,

"  Don't you mind her,  my little Burney  ;  do you stay whether she will
or not."

So away went Mrs.  Thrale,  and left us to a Ute-d-tcte.

Now I had been considering that perhaps I ought to speak to him of my
new castle,  lest hereafter he should suspect that I preferred the counsel of
Mr.  Murphy.  I therefore determined to take this opportunity,  and,  after
some general nothings,  I asked if he would permit me to take a great liberty
with him  ?

He assented with the most encouraging smile.     And then I said,

"  I believe,  sir,  you heard part of what passed between Mr.  Murphy and
me the other evening,  concerning — a — a comedy.     Now,  if I should make

100 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

such an attempt,  would 3-ou be so good as to allow me any time before
Michaelmas,  to put it in the coach,  for you to look over as you go to town  ?"
"  To be sure,  my dear ! — What,  have you begun a comedy then  ?"
I told him how the affair stood.  He then gave me advice which just ac-
corded with my wishes,  viz.  not to make known that I had any such inten-
tion ;  to keep my own counsel ;  not to whisper even the name of it ;  to
raise no expectations,  which were always prejudicial,  and finally,  to have it
performed while the town knew nothing of whose it was.

I readily assured him of my hearty concurrence in his opinion  ;  but he
somewhat distressed me when I told him that Mr.  Murphy must be in my
confidence,  as he had offered his services,  by desiring he might be the last
to see it.

What shall I do,  I know not,  for he has,  himself,  begged to be the first.
Mrs.  Thrale,  however,  shall guide me between them.  He spoke highly of
Mr.  Murphy,  too,  for he really loves him.  He said he would not have it in
the coach,  but that I should read it to him  ;  however,  I could sooner drown
or hang  !

When I would have offered some apology for the attempt,  he stopt me,
and desired I would never make any.

"  For,"  said he,  "  if it succeeds,  it makes its own apology,  if not — "
"  If not,"  quoth I,  "  I cannot do worse than Dr.  Goldsmith,  when his play
failed, — go home and cry  !"

He laughed,  but told me,  repeatedly  (I mean twice,  which,  for him,  is very
remarkable)  that I might depend upon all the service in his power  ;  and,  he
added,  it would be well to make Murphy the last judge,  "  for he knows the
stage,"  he said,  "  and I am quite ignorant of it."

Afterwards,  grasping my hand with the most affectionate warmth,  he said,
"  I wish you success I I wish you well  !  my dear little Burney  !"
W^hen,  at length,  I told him I could stay no longer,  and bid him good
night,  he said,  "  There is none like you,  my dear little Burney !  there is
none like you  ! — good night,  my darling  !"

You,  my dearest Susy,  who know so well how proud I am of his kind-
ness, will,  for that reason,  think it not ill-bestowed  :  but I very often and

very unaffectedly wonder at it mvself.

********

Yesterday morning Miss Brown made a visit here Mrs.  Thrale,  un-
luckily, was gone to town.  But I am become quite intimate with her.  She
is a most good-humoured,  frank,  unaffected,  sociable girl,  and I like her
very much.  She stayed,  I believe,  three hours.  We had much talk of
Mr.  Murphy,  whom she adores,  and whose avowed preference of her to
Miss Streatfield has quite won her heart.  We also talked much of Dr.
Johnson,  and she confessed to me that both she and Miss S.  S.  were in
fevers in his presence,  from apprehension.

"  But,"  said she,  "  a lady of my acquaintance asked me,  some time ago,
if I knew you  ;  I said no,  for then 1 had not had the honour of seeing you  ;
well,  said she,  but I hear Dr.  Johnson is quite devoted to her ;  they say
that he is grown quite polite,  and waits upon her,  and gets her her chair,
and her tea,  and pays her compliments from morning to night.  I was quite
glad to hear it,  for we agreed it would quite harmonize him."

I forgot to mention that,  when I told Dr.  Johnson Mr.  Murphy's kind
offer of examining my plan,  and the several rules he gave me,  and owned
that I had already gone too far to avail myself of his obliging intention,  he
said  "  Never mind,  my dear, — ah  !  you'll do without, — you want no rules."

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  101

Tuesday Night. — Before they went,  Miss Streatfield came.  Mrs.
Thrale prevailed upon her to stay till the next day.

I find her a very amiable girl,  and extremely handsome  ;  not so wise as I
expected,  but very well ;  however,  had she not chanced to have had so un-
common an education,  with respect to literature or learning,  I believe she
would not have made her way among the wits by the force of her natural
parts.

Mr.  Seward,  you know,  told me that she had tears at command,  and I
begin to think so too,  for when Mrs.  Thrale,  who had previously told me I
should see her cry,  began coaxing her to stay,  and saying  "  If you go,  I
shall know you don't love me so well as Lady Gresham," — she did cry,
not loud indeed,  nor much,  but the tears came into her eyes,  and rolled
down her fine cheeks.

*'  Come hither.  Miss Burney,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  come and see Miss
Streatfield cry !"

I thought it a mere badinage.  I went to them,  but when I saw real
tears,  I was shocked,  and saying  "  No,  I won't look at her,"  ran away
frightened,  lest she should think I laughed at her,  which Mrs.  Thrale did so
openly,  that,  as I told her,  had she served me so,  I should have been
affronted with her ever after.

Miss Streatfield,  however,  whether from a sweetness not to be ruffled,  or
from not perceiving there was any room for taking offence,  gently wiped
her eyes,  and was perfectly composed !

FROM MISS F.  BURNEY,  TO MR.  CRISP.

Streatham,  March 1779.

The kindness and honours I meet with from this charming family are
greater than I can mention  ;  sweet Mrs.  Thrale hardly suffers me to leave
her a moment ;  and Dr.  Johnson is another Daddy Crisp to me,  for he has
a partial goodness to your Fannikin,  that has made him sink the compara-
tive shortness of our acquaintance,  and treat and think of me as one who
had long laid claim to him.

If you knew these two you would love them,  or I don't know you so well
as I think I do.  Dr.  Johnson has more fun,  and comical humour,  and love
of nonsense about him,  than almost any body I ever saw :  I mean when
with those he likes ;  for otherwise,  he can be as severe and as bitter as
report relates him.  Mrs.  Thrale has all that gaiety of disposition and light-
ness of heart,  which commonly belong to fifteen.  We are,  therefore,  merry
enough,  and I am frequently seized with the same tittering and ridiculous fits
as those with which I have so often amazed and amused poor Kitty Cooke.

One thing let me not omit of this charming woman,  which I believe will

weigh with you in her favour ;  her political doctrine is so exactly like

yours,  that it is never started but I exclaim,  "  Dear,  ma'am,  if my Daddy

Crisp was here,  I believe between you,  you'  would croak me mad  !"     And

this sympathy of horrible foresight not a little contributes to incline her to

believe the other parts of speech with which I regale her concerning you.

She wishes very much to know you,  and I am sure you would hit it off

comfortably  ;  but I told her what a vile taste you had for shunning all new

acquaintance,  and shirking almost all your old ones.    That I may never be

among the latter,  heartily hopes my dear daddy's

Ever affectionate and obliged,

F.  B.

Best love to Mrs.  Ham and dear Kitty.

9#

102 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

FROM MISS F.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

Streatham,  May 4,  1779.
Oh  !  my dear daddy,

Ah  ! — alas ! — wo is me  ! — In what terms may I venture to approach you  ?
I don't know%  but the more I think of it,  the more guilty I feel.  I have a
great mind,  instead of tormenting you w^ith apologies,  and worrying myself
with devising them,  to tell you the plain honest,  literal truth.  Indeed,  I
have no other w^ay any chance of obtaining your forgiveness for my long
silence.  Honestly,  then,  my time has,  ever since the receipt of your most
excellent letter,  been not merely occupied,  but burthened,  with much em-
ployment. I have lived almost wholly at Streatham,  and the little time I
have spent at home,  has been divided between indispensable engagements,
and preparations for returning hither.

But you wdll say there is no occasion to exert much honesty in owning
this much  ;  therefore now to the secret of the disposal of my private hours.
The long and the short is,  I have devoted them to wanting,  and I have
finished a play.  I must entreat you,  my dearest daddy,  to keep this com-
munication to yourself,  or,  at least,  if you ow^n it to Kitty,  w^hose long
friendship for me I am sure deserves my confidence,  make her vow not to
reveal it to any body w^hatsoever.

This is no capricious request,  as I w^ill explain  ;  my ow-n secret inclina-
tion leads me forcibly and involuntarily to desire concealment ;  but that is
not all,  for Dr.  Johnson himself enjoins it ;  he says,  that nothing can do
so much mischief to a dramatic work as previous expectation,  and that my
wisest way will be to endeavour to have it performed before it is known,
except to the managers,  to be written.

I am extremely sorry you decline my three characters at a time,  as I
have nothing better to offer you.  Journal I have kept none,  nor had any
time for such sort of writing.  In my absence from Susan,  I have,  indeed,
occasionally made essays in that style ;  but they are very imperfect,  un-
certain, and abrupt.  However,  such sketches as she has had I will borrow
of her for you,  if,  after all my transgression,  you are not sick both of me
and my afTairs.

The paragraph you saw in the papers concerning a lady's first attempt
in the di-amatic walk,  meant a Miss Richardson of Tower Hill,  who has
just brought out a play called  "  The Double Deception."

I wdsh with ah my heart it was in my power to take a trip to Chesington
for a few days ;  I have so many things I long to talk over,  and I wish so
sincerely to see you again.  The homely home,  as you call it,  will never
be forgotten while I keep aloof from my last home.

But I forgot to mention,  that another and a very great reason for secrecy
in regard to my new attempt,  is what you have j^ourself mentioned — avoid-
ing the interference of the various Msecenases who would expect to be con-
sulted. Of these,  I could not confide in one without disobliging all the rest  ;
and I could not confide in all,  without having the play read all over
the town before it is acted.  Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Greville,  Mrs.  Crew^e,  Sir
Joshua Reynolds,  Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  and many inferior  &c.'s,  think they
have an equal claim,  one with the other,  to my confidence :  and the conse-
-quence of it all would be,  that,  instead of having it,  in your words,  all my
awn,  and all of a piece,  every body would have a stroke at it,  and it would
become a patchwork of all my acquaintance.  The only way to avoid this,
is to keep to myself that such a thing exists.  Those to w^hom I have
owned it seem all of the same opinion,  and I am resolutely determined to
own it no more.

1779.  O^  'THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  103

"  Evelina"  continues to sell in a most wonderful manner ;  a fourth
edition is preparing,  with cuts,  designed by Mortimer just before he died,
and executed by Hall and Bartolozzi.

JOURNAL RESUMED.

Streatham,  Friday,  May.

Once more,  my dearest Susy,  I will attempt journalizing,  and endeavour,
according to my promise,  to keep up something of the kind during our ab-
sence, however brief and curtailed.

We took up Sir Philip Jennings Gierke at some coffee-house in our
way,  and two armed men met us at the Piccadilly turnpike,  and,  so
guarded,  we got there very safe,  but not till past one in the mornifig.  Sir
Philip left us the next day at noon,  but we shall see him again when we
return from Brighthelmstone.

To-day,  while Mrs.  Thrale was chatting with me in my room,  we saw
Mr.  Murphy drive into the court-yard.  Down stairs flew Mrs.  Thrale,  but,
in a few minutes,  up she flew again,  crying,

"  Mr.  Murphy is crazy for your play — he won't let me rest for it — do
pray let me run away with the first act."

Little as I like to have it seen in this unfinished state,  she was too urgent
to be resisted,  so off she made with it.

I did not show my phiz till I was summoned to dinner.  Mr.  Murphy,
probably out of flummery,  made us wait some minutes,  and when he did
come,  said,

"I had much ado not to keep you all longer,  for I could hardly get
away from some new acquaintances I was just making."

As he could not stay to sleep here,  he had only time,  afler dinner,  to
finish the first act.  He was pleased to commend it very liberally ;  he has
pointed out two places where he thinks I might enlarge,  but has not criti-
cised one word  ;  on the contrary,  the dialogue he has honoured with high
praise.

So far is well  :  what may be yet to come,  I know not.  Further par-
ticulars I shall write to my dear Padre himself.

O — but — shall I tell you something 1 — yes,  though you won't care a fig ;
but I have had my lesson in Latin.  Dr.  Johnson tutored Miss Thrale
while I was with you,  and was set off for Litchfield before I came ;  but
Mrs.  Thrale attended the lecture,  and has told me every word of it she
could recollect :  so we must both be ready for him against his return.  I
heartily wish I rejoiced more sincerely in this classical plan.  But the
truth is,  I have more fear of the malignity which will follow its being
known,  than delight in what advantages it may afford.  All my delight,
indeed,  is that this great and good man should think me worthy his instruc-
tions.

Brighthelmstone,  May 26.

I have not had a moment for writing,  my dear Susy,  since I came hither,
till now,  for we have been perpetually engaged either with sights or com-
pany ;  for notwithstanding this is not the season,  here are folks enough to
fill up time from morning to evening.

The road from Streatham hither is beautiful :  Mr.,  Mrs.,  Miss Thrale,
and Miss Susan Thrale,  and I,  travelled in a coach,  with four horses,  and
two of the servants in a chaise,  besides two men on horseback ;  so we
were obliged to stop for some time at three places on the road.

Reigate,  the first town,  is a very old,  half-ruined borough,  in a most
neglected condition.     A high hill,  leading to it,  afforded a very fine pros-

104 DIARY AND LETTERS        "  1779.

pect,  of the Malvern Hill nature,  though inferior.  We amused ourselves
while we waited here,  at a bookseller's shop,  where Mrs.  Thrale inquired if
they had got the book she had recommended to them?  "  Yes,  ma'am,"  was
the answer,  "  and it's always out, — the ladies like it vastly."  I suppose I
need not tell you what it was  ?

At Cuckfield,  which is in Sussex,  and but fourteen miles hence,  we
dined.  It is a clean and pretty town,  and we passed all the time we
rescued from eating in the churchyard,  where I copied four epitaphs in
my tablets, — and you shall have them.

First :

Lord,  thou hast pointed out my life

In length much like a span  ;
My age was nothing unto thee,

So vain is every man.

The second was

An indulgent husband,  and friend sincere,
And a neighbourly man lies buried here.

The third was upon a young wife :

Not twelve months were passed after our wedding day,

But death in come,  and from a loving husband took me away.

The fourth,  upon a young couple who both died soon after marriage :

Repent in time,  make no delay,

We after each other were soon called away.

So,  you see,  the dabblers have not been idle in the noble town of
Cuckfield.

The view of the South Downs from Cuckfield to this place is very curious
and singular.  We got home by about nine o'clock.  Mr.  Thrale's house is
in West Street,  which is the court end of the town here as well as in
London.  'Tis a neat,  small house,  and I have a snug,  comfortable room to
myself.  The sea is not many yards from our windows.  Our journey was
dehghtfully pleasant,  the day being heavenly,  the roads in fine order,  the
prospects charming,  and every body good-humoured and cheerful.

Thursday.

We pass our time here most delectably.  This dear and most sweet
family grow daily more kind to me ;  and all of them contrive to make me
of so much consequence,  that I can now no more help being easy than,  till
lately,  I could help being embarrassed.  Mrs.  Thrale has,  indeed,  from the
first moment of our acquaintance,  been to me all my heart could wish  ;  and
now her husband and daughter gain ground in my good grace and favour
every day.

Just before we went to dinner,  a chaise drove up to the door,  and from it
issued Mr.  Murphy.  He met with a very joyful reception  ;  and Mr.  Thrale,
for the first time in his life,  said he was  "  a good fellow  :"  for he makes it
a sort of rule to salute him with the title of  "  scoundrel,"  or  "  rascal."
They are very old friends  ;  and I question if Mr.  Thrale loves any man so
well.

He made me many very flattering speeches,  of his eagerness to go on with
my play,  to know what became of the several characters,  and to what place
I should next conduct them  ;  assuring me that the first act had run in his
head ever since he had read it.

1779.  O^  ^^^  AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  105

In the evening we all adjourned to iMajor H 's,  where,  besides his

own family,  we tbund Lord Mordaunt,  son to the Earl of Peterborough, —
a pretty languid,  tonnish young man  ;  j\Ir.  Fisher,  who is said to be a
scholar,  but is nothing enchanting as a gentleman  ;  young Fitzgerald,  as
much the thing as ever  ;  and Mr.  Lucius Concannon.

Mr.  Murphy was the life of the party  :  he was in good spirits,  and ex-
tremely entertaining  :  he told a million of stories,  admirably well  ;  but
stories won't do upon paper,  therefore I shall not attempt to present you with
them.

This morning,  as soon as breakfast was over,  Mr.  Murphy said,  "  I must
now go to the seat by the sea-side,  with my new set of acquaintance,  from
whom I expect no little entertainment."

"  Ay,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  and there you'll find us all  !  I believe this
rogue means me for Lacli/  Smatter ;  but Mrs.  Voluble must speak the
epilogue,  Mr.  Murphy."

"  That must depend upon who performs the part,"  answered he.

"  Don't talk of it now,"  cried I,  "  for 3Ir.  Thrale knows nothing of it."

"  I think,"  cried Mr.  Murphy,  "  you might touch upon his character in
'  Censor.'  "

"  Ay,"  cried Mr.  Thrale,  "  I expect a knock some time or other ;  but,
when it comes,  I'll carry all my myrmidons to catcall it !"

Mr.  Murphy then made me fetch him the second act,  and marched off with it.

We had a very grand dinner to-day  (though nothing to a Streatham
dinner)  at the Ship Tavern,  where the officers mess,  to which we were
invited by the major and captain.     All the officers I have mentioned,  and

three or four more,  the H 's.  Miss Forth,  Lord Mordaunt,  Messieurs

Murphy,  Fisher,  and Fitzgerald,  Dr.  Delap,  and our own party,  made an
immensely formidable appearance.

Dr.  Delap arrived in the morning,  and is to stay two days.  He is too
silent for me to form much judgment of his companionable talents,  and his
appearance is snug and reserved.  Mrs.  Thrale is reading his play,  and likes
it much.  It is to come out next season.  It is droll enough that there should
be,  at this time,  a tragedy and comedy in exactly the same situation,  placed
accidentally in the same house.

We afterwards went on the parade,  where the soldiers were mustering,  and
found Captain Fuller's men all half intoxicated,  and laughing so violently as
we passed by them,  that they could hardly stand upright.  The captain
stormed at them most angrily ;  but,  turning to us,  said,  "These poor fellows
have just been paid their arrears,  and it is so unusual to them to have a six-
pence in their pockets,  that they know not how to keep it there."

The wind being extremely high,  our caps and gowns were blown about
most abominably ;  and this increased the risibility of the merry light
infantry.  Captain Fuller's desire to keep order made me laugh as much as
the men's incapacity to obey him  ;  for,  finding our flying drapery provoked
their mirth,  he went up to  \he biggest grinner,  and,  shaking him violently
by the shoulders,  said,  "  What do you laugh for,  sirrah  ?  do you laugh at
the ladies  ?"  and,  as soon as he had given the reprimand,  it struck him to
be so ridiculous,  that he was obliged to turn quick round,  and commit the
very fault he was attacking most furiously.

I broke off where we were all assembled on Thursday, — which,  by the
way,  is exactly opposite to the inn in which Charles II.  hid himself after the
battle of Worcester,  previous to his escaping from the kingdom.  So I fail
not to look at it with loyal satisfaction:  and his black-wigged majesty
has,  from the time of the Restoration,  been its sign.

106 DIARY AND LETTERS I779,

After tea,  the bishop,  his lady.  Lord Mordaunt,  and Mrs.  H seated

themselves to play at whist ;  and Mr,  Murphy,  coming up to me,  said,

"  I have had no opportunity,  Miss Burney to tell you how much I have
been entertained this morning,  but I have a great deal to say to you about
it  ?  I am extremely pleased with it,  indeed.  The dialogue is charming  ;
and the — "

"  What's that  ?"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  Mr.  Murphy always flirting with
Miss Burney  ?     And here,  too,  where every body's w^atched  !"

And she cast her eyes towards Mrs.  H ,  v/ho is as censorious a

country lady as ever locked up all her ideas in a country town.  She has
told us sneering anecdotes of every woman and every officer in Bright-
helmstone.

Mr.  Murphy,  checked by Mrs.  Thrale's exclamation,  stopt the conversa-
tion, and said he must run away,  but would return in half an hour.

"  Don't expect,  however.  Miss Burney,"  he said,  "  I shall bring with me
what you are thinking of;  no,  I can't part with it yet!"

"  What !  at it again  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale.  "  This flirting is incessant ;
but it's all to Mr,  Murphy's credit."

Mrs.  Thrale told me afterwards,  that she made these speeches to divert
the attention of the company from our subject ;  for that she found they were
all upon the watch the moment Mr.  Murphy addressed me,  and that the
bishop and his lady almost threw down their cards,  from eagerness to dis-
cover what he meant.

I am now more able to give you some sketch of Dr.  Delap ;  and as he is
coming into the world next winter,  in my own walk,  and,  like me,  for the
first time,  you may shake us together when I have drawn him,  and conjec-
ture on fates.

He is commonly and naturally grave,  silent,  and absent ;  but when any
subject is once begun upon which he has any thing to say,  he works it
threadbare,  yet hardly seems to know,  when all is over,  what,  or whether
any thing,  has passed.  He is a man,  as I am told by those who know,  of
deep learning,  but totally ignorant of life and manners.  As to his person
and appearance,  they are much in the John-trot style.  He seems inclined
to be particularly civil to me ;  but not knowing how,  according to the gene-
ral forms,  he has only shown his inclination by perpetual offers to help me
at dinner,  and repeated exclamations at my not eating more profusely.

So much for my brother dramatist.

The supper was very gay :  Mrs.  Thrale was in high spirits,  and her wit
flashed with incessant brilliancy;  Mr.  Murphy told several stories with
admirable humour ;  and the Bishop of Peterborough was a worthy third in
contributing towards general entertainment.  He turns out most gaily socia-
ble.    Mrs.  H.  was discussed,  and poor lady,  not very mercifully.

Mrs.  Thrale said she lived upon Steyn,  for the pleasure of viewing,  all
day long,  who walked with who,  how often the same persons were seen
together,  and what visits were made by gentlemen to ladies,  or ladies to
gentlemen.

"  She often tells me,"  said the captain,  "of my men.  *  Oh,'  she says,
*  Captain Fuller,  your men are always after the ladies !'  "

"  Nay,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I should have thought the officers might
have contented her ;  but if she takes in the soldiers too,  she must have busi-
ness enough !"

"  Oh,  she gets no satisfaction by her complaints  ;  for I only say,  '  Why,
ma'am,  we are all young ! — all young and gay ! — and how can we do
better than follow the ladies V  "

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  107

"  After all,"  returned Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I believe she can talk of nothing
else,  and therefore we must forgive her."

Friday,  May 28.

In the morning before breakfast,  came Dr.  Delap ;  and Mrs.  Thrale,  in
ambiguous terms,  complimented him upon his play,  and expressed her wish
that she might tell me of it;  upon which hint he instantly took the manu-
script from his pocket,  and presented it to me,  begging me at the same time,
to tell him of any faults that I might meet with in it.

There,  Susy  !  am I not grown a grand person ;  not merely looked upon
as a writer,  but addressed as a critic  !     Upon my word this is fine  !

By the way,  it is really amazing the fatigue these militia officers go
through,  without compulsion or interest to spur them.  Major H.  is a man
of at least 8000/.  a year,  and has a noble seat in this county,  and quits ease,
pleasure,  retirement in the country,  and public diversions in London,  to take
the charge of the Sussex militia !  Captain Fuller,  too,  has an estate of
4000/.  or 5000/.  a year, — is but just of age, — has figure,  understanding,
education,  vivacity,  and independence, — and yet voluntarily devotes almost
all his time,  and almost all his attention,  to a company of light infantry !

Instances such as these,  my dear Susy,  ought to reconcile all the penny-
less sons of toil and industry to their cares and labours ;  since those whom
affluence invites to all the luxuries of indolence,  sicken of those very gifts
which the others seem only to exist to procure.

As soon as we returned home,  I seized Dr.  Delap's play.  It is called
"  Macaria."  I\Ir.  Thrale,  who frequently calls me Queen Dido,  from a
notion that I resemble an actress in France who performed that part,  and
from a general idea of my having a theatrical turn,  was mightily diverted at
this oddly-timed confidence of Dr.  Delap,  and,  tapping at my door,  called
out,  "  Qiiccn Dido,  what !  rehearsing still  ?  Why,  I think you should tip
the doctor the same compliment !"

I could only read the first act before dinner.  Mrs.  Thrale came to me
while I was dressing,  and said,  "  Murphy is quite charmed with your
second act :  he says he is sure it will do,  and more than do.  He has been
talking of you this half hour :  he calls you a sly designing body,  and says
you look all the people through most wickedly :  he watches you,  and vows
he has caught you in the fact.  Nobody and nothing,  he says,  escapes you,
and you keep looking round for characters all day long.  And Dr.  Delap
has been talking of you."

"  I hope he does not suspect the play  ?"
"  Why,  he would not tell !"

"  Oh,  but I should be sorry to put it in his power !"
"  Why,  he's such an absent creature,  that if he were to hear it to-day he
would forget it to-morrow."

"  No,  as he is engaged in the same pursuit himself at this very time,  I
believe he would remember it."

"  Well,  it's too late,  however,  now,  for he knows it :  but I did not tell him ;
Murphy did  ;  he broke out into praises of the second act before him.  But
he'll tell nobody,  depend upon it,"  continued she :  "  it only put him upon
asking one a hundred questions about you,  and singing your praise ;  he has
teased me all the morning about your family,  and how many sisters and
brothers you have,  and if you were Dr.  Burney's daughter,  and a million
more inquiries."

108 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779,

During dinner,  I observed that Mr.  Murphy watched me almost inces-
santly, with such archness of countenance that I could hardly look at him  ;
and Dr.  Delap did the same,  with an earnestness of gravity that was truly
solemn, — till Mr.  Murphy,  catching my eye,  said,

"  We have been talking of you — ask Mrs.  Thrale what I say of you — I
have found out your schemes,  shy as you are.  Dr.  Delap,  too,  heard how
I discovered you."

"  Oh,  but Dr.  Delap,"  answered Mrs.  Thrale,  "  is the best man in the
world for discoveries, — for he'll forget every word by to-morrow, — shan't
you.  Dr.  Delap  ?"

"  Not Miss iBurney  !"  cried the doctor,  gallantly,  "  I'm sure I shan't
forget Miss Burney  !"

When Mrs.  Thrale gave the signal for our leaving the gentlemen,  Dr.
Delap,  as I past him,  said in a whisper,  "  Have you read it  ?"

"  No,  not quite."

"  How do you like it  ?"

I could make but one answer.  How strangely ignorant of the world is
this good clergyman,  to ask such a question so abruptly  !

We were engaged to finish the evening at Major Holroyd's,  but as I
feared hurting Dr.  Delap by any seeming indifference,  1 begged Mrs.  Thrale
to let me stay at home till I had read his play,  and,  therefore,  the rest of
the party went before me.

I had,  however,  only three acts in my possession.  The story is of the
daughter and widow of Hercules  ; — and,  indeed,  I liked the play much better
than I expected to do.  The story is such as renders the author's ignorance
of common life and manners not very material,  since the characters are of
the heroic age,  and therefore require more classical than worldly knowledge,
and,  accordingly,  its only resemblance is to the tragedies of  ^schylus and
Sophocles.

Saturday,  May 29.

Early in the morning,  the kind Mrs.  Thrale brought me your letter,
saying,  "  Here — here's news from home  !  My master would have had me
keep it till breakfast ;  but I told him he did not"  love you so well as I did  ;
he vowed that was not true, — but it's plain it was,  for I was in most haste
to make you happy."

After breakfast,  Mrs.  and Miss Thrale took me to Widget's,  the milliner
and library- woman on the Steyn.  After a little dawdling conversation,
Captain Fuller came in to have a little chat.  He said he had just gone
through a great operation — '"'  1 have been,"  he said,  "  cutting off the hair of
all my men."

"  And why  ?"

"  Why,  the Duke of Richmond ordered that it should be done,  and the
fellows swore that they would not submit to it, — so I was forced to be the
operator myself.  I told them they would look as smart again when they
got on their caps  ;  but it went much against them  ;  they vowed,  at first,  they
would not bear such usage  ;  some said they would sooner be run through
the body,  and others,  that the duke should as soon have their heads.  I told
them I would soon try that,  and fell to work myself with them."

"  And how did they bear it  ?"

"  Oh,  poor fellows,  with great good-nature,  when they found his honour
was their barber  :  but I thought proper to submit to hear all their oaths,
and all their jokes  ;  for they had no other comfort but to hope I should have

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  109

enough of it,  and such sort of wit.  Three or four of them,  however,  escaped,
but I shall find them out.  I told them I had a good mind to cut my own
hair off too,  and then they would have a Captain Crop.  I shall soothe
them to-morrow with a present of new feathers for all their caps."

Presently we were joined by Dr.  Delap and Mr.  Murphy.  The latter,
taking me aside,  said,

"  Has Mrs.  Thrale told you what I said V

"  I don't know, — she has told me some odd sort of — nonsense,  I was
going to say."

"  But do you know the name I have settled to call you by  ?"

"  No."

"  Miss Slyboots  ! — that is exactly the thing  ! — Oh,  you are a wicked one  !
— I have found you out !"

"  Oh,  to be sure  ! — but pray,  now,  don't tell such a name about,  for if
you give it,  it will soon spread."

Then he begun upon the second act ;  but I feared being suspected,  and stole
away from him.

Different occupations,  in a short time called away all our gentlemen but
Dr.  Delap ;  and he,  seating himself next me,  began to question me about
his tragedy.  I soon said all I wanted to say upon the subject, — and,  soon
after,  a great deal more, — but not soon after was he satisfied ;  he returned
to the same thing a million of times,  asked the same questions,  exacted the
same compliments,  and worked at the same passages,  till I almost fell asleep
with the sound of the same words  ;  and at last,  with what little animation
was left me,  I contrived to make Miss Thrale propose a walk on the Steyn,
and crawling out of the shop,  I sought, — and found, — revival from the
breezes.  Yet not before he had planned a meeting at Streatham,  where a
council,  composed of Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.  Murphy,  and Mrs.  Thrale,  are to sit
upon the play for oral judgment,  and where,  at his express desire,  I am to
make one.     This is to take place some time before the Spa journey.

Sunday,  May 30. — Just as I was finishing my attire for dinner,  I saw
Captain Fuller drive past my window in his phaeton,  and stop at the door.
He had not time to alight.  I went down stairs as soon as I was ready,  and
found the three Thrales,  Mr.  Murphy,  and Mr.  Mitchell crowding the door
to take leave of him.  He kissed his hand to me with a military air,  and
wishing me good morning,  drove away.  I mention this because it comes
into play afterwards.

In the middle of the dinner,  Mr.  Mitchell,  who had scarce opened his
mouth to me twice before,  turned to me abruptly,  and very gravely said,

"  Pray,  Miss Burney,  where is Captain Fuller going  ?"

"  To London,  I believe,  sir."

"  Dear,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  how odd Mr.  Mitchell is  ?  what should
make him ask Miss Burney  ?"

"  Why,  ma'am,"  said he,  "  a very obvious reason, — I thought her most
likely to know."

"  And why should you think that,  sir !"  quoth I.

"  Because I observed he would not go till he had seen you.  I saw very
plainly  ! — he is a fine young man,  and I think — "

"  I think,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  he could not show his taste more  !  And
he is so amiable and so sensible,  that I wish neither Queeney,  nor Miss
Burney,  nor Miss Brown,  worse luck."

"  It is presumed,  ma'am,"  said Mr.  Mitchell,  "  that he is now gone to

town to wait upon Dr.  Burney, — such,  at least is the Brighthelmstone report."

"  Well,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  but seriously though — before you came

VOL.  I.  10

110 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

down,  when I said,  remember you are engaged at Streatham for the 10th,
11th,  and 12th,  he said,  '  Will Miss Burney be there V  "

What strange and absurd rubbish  !

Sunday evening we had the bishop,  his lady,  and Mr.  Murphy  ;  and
Right Reverend and all were most outrageously merry.

Dr.  Delap is returned to Lewes  ;  and he bored Mr.  Murphy and Miss
Thrale by asking so many questions of how I came to write  "  Evelina,"
and why I writ it at all,  and what set me on,  and other such curious
inquiries,  that at last,  they almost lost all patience with him.

Streatham,  June 15. — Now,  my dear Susan,  hard and fast — let me
write up to the present time.

I left you all,  as you truly say,  on Saturday,  in no very high spirits.
Mrs.  Thrale's visible uneasiness and agitation quite alarmed me.  I dared
ask her no questions;  but,  soon after we drove off,  Sir Philip Gierke gently
and feelingly led to the subject,  and,  in the course of our ride,  got from her
all the particulars of poor Mr.  Thrale's dreadful and terrifying attack.

I find,  with true concern,  that it was undoubtedly a paralytic stroke.
He was taken ill at his sister's,  Mrs.  Nesbitt's,  during dinner ;  he did not
absolutely fall,  but his head sunk upon the table,  and,  as soon as he was
able to raise it,  they found that his reason had left him  ; — he talked wildly,
and seemed to know nobody.  Mrs.  Nesbitt brought him home ;  he was
much better before Dr.  Bromfield could be fetched  ;  yet,  for three days
afterwards,  his senses,  at intervals,  were frightfully impaired.

When we stopped here.  Sir Philip immediately went to Mr.  Thrale,  but I
ran past the door,  and up to my own room,  for I quite dreaded seeing him
till 1 had prepared myself to meet him without any seeming concern,  as I
was told that he was extremely suspicious of being thought in any danger.
I dawdled away about an hour,  and then asked Miss Thrale to accompany
me into the parlour.

Mr.  Thrale was there,  with Sir Philip,  Mr.  Seward,  and Captain Fuller.
I endeavoured to enter,  and behave as if nothing had happened.  I saw Mr.
Thrale fix his eyes upon me with an inquisitive and melancholy earnest-
ness, as if to read my opinion :  indeed,  his looks were vastly better than I
expected,  but his evident dejection quite shocked me.  I did not dare go up
to him,  for if he had offered to shake hands with me,  I believe I should have
been unable to disguise my concern  ;  for,  indeed,  he has of late made him-
self a daily increasing interest in my regard and kind wishes.  I therefore,
turned short from him,  and,  pretending earnest talk with Miss Thrale,  went
to one of the windows.

At dinner every body tried to be cheerful ;  but a dark and gloomy cloud
hangs over the head of poor Mr.  Thrale which no flashes of merriment or
beams of wit can pierce through ;  yet he seems pleased that every body
should be gay,  and desirous to be spoken to,  and of,  as usual.

At tea we had the company of Dr.  and Mrs.  Parker.  I think I have
mentioned them before.  By chance I was about ten minutes alone with the
doctor in the parlour,  who,  with a formality that accompanies whatever he
says,  slowly observed —

"  So,  they are gone, — and I am now left alone with thee,  Evelina  !"

1 instantly started some other subject,  in order to stop him ;  but,  with the
same gravity,  he,  nevertheless,  chose to continue.

"  You have gained esteem,  great esteem,  indeed,  in the world,  by that
performance !"

"  The world,"  cried 1,  "  is sometimes taken with a very kind fit ;  Fm
sure it has in regard to that poor book !"

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.  m

"  No,  not so, — only with a judicious fit !"

And then he proceeded with formal cornpHments till we were joined by
the rest of the company.

After tea the Parkers left us,  and we walked round the grounds.  We
now walk as much as possible,  in order to seduce Mr.  Thrale to take exer-
cise, which is not only the best,  but the only thing for him.

Sunday,  Juxe 13. — After church we all strolled round the grounds,  and
the topic of our discourse was Miss Streatfield.  Mrs.  Thrale asserted that
she had a power of captivating that was irresistible ;  that her beauty,  joined
to her softness,  her caressing manners,  her tearful eyes,  and alluring looks,
would insinuate her into the heart of any man she thought worth attacking.

Sir Philip declared himself of a totally different opinion,  and quoted Dr.
Johnson against her,  who had told him that,  taking away her Greek,  she
was as ignorant as a butterfly.

Mr.  Seward declared all her Greek was against her with him,  for that,
instead of reading Pope,  Swift,  or the Spectator — books from which she
might derive useful knowledge and improvement — it had led her to devote
all her reading time to the first eight books of Homer.

"  But,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  her Greek,  you must own,  has made all her
celebrity;  you would have heard no more of her than of any other pretty
girl,  but for that."

"  What I object to,"  said Sir Philip,  "  is her avowed preference for this
parson.  Surely it is very indelicate in any lady to let all the world kno\v
with whom she is in love  !"

"  The parson,"  said the severe Mr.  Seward,  "  I suppose,  spoke first, — or
she would as soon have been in love with you,  or with me !"

You will easily believe I gave him no pleasant look.  He wanted me to
slacken my pace,  and tell him,  in confidence,  my private opinion of her :
but I told him,  very truly,  that as I knew her chiefly by account,  not by
acquaintance,  I had not absolutely formed my opinion.

"  Were I to live with her four days,"  said this odd man,  "  I believe the
fifth I should want to take her to church."

"  You'd be devilish tired of her,  though,"  said Sir Philip, "  in half a year.
A crying wife will never do  !"

"  Oh,  yes,"  cried he,  "  the pleasure of soothing her would make
amends."

"  Ah,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I would insure her power of crying herself
into any of your hearts she pleased.  I made her cry to Miss Burney,  to
show how beautiful she looked in tears."

"  If I had been her,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "  I would never have visited you
again."

"  Oh,  but she liked it,"  answered Mrs.  T.,  "  for she knows how well she
does it.  Miss Burney would have run away,  but she came forward on pur-
pose to show herself.  I would have done so by nobody else  :  but Sophy
Streatfield is never happier than when the tears trickle from her fine eyes
in company."

"  Suppose,  Miss Burney,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "  we make her the heroine
of our comedy]  and call it  '  Hearts have at ye all  !'  "

"  Excellent !"  cried I,  "  it can't be better."

"  Tell me,  then — what situations you will have  ?  But stay,  I have
another name that I think will do very well for a comedy, — '  Every thing
a Bore.' "

"  Oh,  mighty well !  and you shall be the hero  !"  cried I.

"  Well said,  Miss Burney  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  and pray let his name
be Mr.  Chagri?i,^''

112 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

Well,  indeed,  did she name him;  for I think his ennui,  his sickness of
the world and its inhabitants,  grow more and more obvious every day.  He
is,  indeed,  a melancholy instance of the inefficacy of fortune,  talents,  edu-
cation, wit,  and benevolence united,  to render any man happy whose mind
has not a native disposition of content.

At dinner we had three persons added to our company, — my dear father.
Miss Streatfield,  and Miss Brown.

Well selected,  gay and good-humoured,  and uncommonly agreeable as
was the whole society,  the day failed of being happy ;  for Mr.  Thrale's ex-
treme seriousness and lowness,  and Mrs.  Thrale's agitated and struggling
cheerfulness,  spread a degree of gravity and discomfort over us,  that,  though
they prevented not partial and occasional sallies,  totally banished our ac-
customed general and continued gaiety.

Miss Brown,  however,  as you may remember I foresaw,  proved the queen
of the day.  Miss Streatfield requires no longer time to make conquests.
She is,  indeed,  much more really beautiful than Fanny Brown  ;  but Fanny
Brown is much more showy,  and her open,  good-humoured,  gay,  laughing
face inspires an almost immediate wish of conversing and merry-making
with her.  Indeed,  the two days she spent here have raised her greatly in
my regard.  She is a cliarming girl,  and so natural,  and easy,  and sweet-
tempered,  that there is no being half an hour in her company without
ardently wishing her well.

MoxDAY,  June 14,  proved far more lively and comfortable.  Mr.  Thrale
daily looks somewhat better ;  and his sweet wife's natural spirits and happi-
ness insensibly,  though not uniformly,  return.

At breakfast,  our party was Sir Philip,  Mr.  Fuller,  Miss Streatfield,  Miss
Brown,  the Thralcs,  and I.

The first office performed was dressing Miss Brown.  She had put on
bright jonquil ribbons.  Mrs.  Thrale exclaimed against them immediately  ;
Mr.  Fuller half joined her,  and away she went,  and brought green ribbons
of her own,  which she made Miss Brown run up stairs with to put on.
This she did with the utmost good humour :  but dress is the last thing in
which she excels  ;  for she has lived so much abroad,  and so much with
foreigners at home,  that she never appears habited as an Englishwoman,
nor as a high-bred foreigner,  but rather as an Italian opera-dancer ;  and
her wild,  careless,  giddy manner,  her loud hearty laugh,  and general negli-
gence of appearance,  contribute to give her that air and look.  I like her so
much,  that I am quite sorry she is not better advised,  either by her own or
some friend's judgment.

Miss Brown,  however,  M-as queen of the breakfast :  for though her giddi-
ness made every body take liberties with her,  her good humour made every
body love her,  and her gaiety made every body desirous to associate with
her.  Sir Philip played with her as with a young and sportive kitten  ;
Mr.  Fuller laughed and chatted with her  ;  and Mr.  Seward,  when here,
teases and torments her.  The truth is,  he cannot bear her,  and she in
return,  equally fears and dislikes him,  but still she cannot help attracting
his notice.

We then all walked out,  and had a very delightful stroll :  but in returning,
one of the dogs  (we have twelve,  I believe,  belonging to the house)  was de-
tected pursuing the sheep on the common.  Miss Thrale sent one of the
men after him,  and he was seized to be punished.  The poor creature's cries
were so dreadful,  that I took to my feet and ran away.

When,  after all was over,  they returned to the house,  the saucy Captain
Fuller,  as soon as he saw me,  exclaimed,  "Oh,  some hartshorn!  some
hartshorn for Miss Burney  !"

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  213

T instantly found he thought me guilty of affectation  ;  and the drollery of
his manner made it impossible to be affronted with his accusation  ;  theretbre
I took the trouble to try to clear myself,  but know not how I succeeded.  I
assured him that if my staying could have answered any purpose,  J would
have compelled myself to hear the screams,  and witness the correction,  of the
offending animal  ;  but that as that was not the case,  I saw no necessity for
giving myself pain officiously.

"  But I'll tell you,"  cried he,  "  my reason for not liking that ladies should
run away from all disagreeable sights :  I think that if they are totally unused
to them,  whenever any accident happens,  they are not only helpless,  but
worse,  for they scream and faint,  and get out of the way  ;  when,  if they
were not so frightened,  they might be of some service.  I was with a lady
the other day,  when a poor fellow was brought into her house half killed :
but,  instead of doing him any good,  she only shrieked,  and called out — '  Oh  !
mercy on me !'  and ran away."

There was an honesty so characteristic in this attack,  that I took very
serious pains to vindicate myself,  and told him that,  if I had any knowledge
of myself,  I could safely affirm that,  in any case similar to what he
mentioned,  instead of running away,  I should myself,  if no abler person
were at hand,  have undertaken not merely to see,  but to bind the man's
wounds  :  nor,  indeed,  can I doubt but I should.

While we were dressing,  Mr.  Seward returned  ;  he had postponed his
journey to Cornwall ;  and,  before dinner.  Dr.  Delap arrived from Lewes.

Mr.  Seward's ennui coming under consideration,  Mrs.  Thrale asked us if
he was not the Pococurante in  "  Candidel"

Not one of us had read it.

"  What !"  cried Mr.  Seward,  "  have not you.  Miss Burney  ?"

"  No,  never."

*'  Well,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I am quite amazed at that !  I did not ex-
pect Dr.  Delap or Sophy Streatfield to have read it ;  but how you missed it
I do wonder."

"  Miss Streatfield,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "  I dare say,  never reads but in
form — finishes one book before she will look at another,  and spreads a green
cloth on her table,  and sets to it in earnest."

"  Perhaps,"  said Dr.  Delap,  "  Miss Burney,  like Dr.  Middleton,  is in a
course of reading,  so goes on regularly."

"  No,  no,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  that is not her way ;  she is a very de-
sultory reader."

"  I dare say she is,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "  and that makes her so clever."

"Candide"  was then produced,  and Mrs.  Thrale read. aloud the part
concerning Pococurante  ;  and really the cap fitted so well,  that Mr.  Seward
could not attempt to dispute it.

Wednesday,  June 16. — We had,  at breakfast,  a scene,  of its sort,  the
most curious I ever saw.

The persons were Sir Philip,  Mr.  Seward,  Dr,  Delap,  Miss Streatfield,
Mrs.  and Miss Thrale,  and I.

The discourse turning,  I know not how,  upon Miss Streatfield,  Mrs.
Thrale said,

"  Ay,  I made her cry once for Miss Burney as pretty as could be :  but
nobody does cry so pretty as the S.  S.  I'm sure when she cried for
Seward,  I never saw her look half so lovely."

"  For Seward 1"  cried Sir Philip ;  "  did she cry for Seward  ?  What a
happy dog !  I hope she'll never cry for me,  for if she does,  I won't answer
for the consequences  !"

10*

1]4 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

"  Seward,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  had affronted Johnson,  and then John-
son affronted Seward,  and then the S.  S.  cried."

"  Oh,"  cried Sir PhiHp,  "  that I had but been here  !"
"  Nay,"  answered Mrs.  Thrale,  "  5-ou'd only have seen how like three
fools three sensible persons behaved :  for my part,  I was quite sick of it,
and of them too."

Sir Philip. — But what did Seward do?  was he not melted?

Mrs.  Thrale. — Not he ;  he was thinking only of his own affront,  and
taking fire at that.

Mr.  Seward, — Why,  yes,  I did take fire,  for I went and planted my back
to it.

S.  S. — And Mrs.  Thrale kept stuffing me with toast and water.

Sir Philip. — But what did Seward do with himself]  Was he not in ec-
stasy 1 What did he do or say  ?

Mr.  Seward. — Oh,  I said pho,  pho,  don't let's have any more of this, —
it's making it of too much consequence :  no more piping,  pray.

Sir Philip. — Well,  I have heard so much of these tears,  that I would
give the universe to have a sight of them.

Mrs.  Thrale. — Well,  she shall cry again if vou like it.

S.  S.— No,  pray,  Mrs.  Thrale.

Sir Philip. — Oh,  pray do  !  let me see a little of it.

Mrs.  Thrale. — Yes,  do cry a little,  Sophy  [in a wheedling voice],  pray,
do  !  Consider,  now,  you are going to-day,  and it's very hard if you won't
cry a little  :  indeed,  S.  S.,  you ought to cr3\

Now for the wonder of wonders.  When Mrs.  Thrale,  in a coaxing
voice,  suited to a nurse soothing a baby,  had run on for some time, — while
all the rest of us,  in laughter,  joined in the request, — two crystal tears
came into the soft eyes of the S.  S.,  and rolled gently down her cheeks  !
Such a sight I never saw before,  nor could I have believed.  She offered
not to conceal or dissipate them  :  on the contrary,  she really contrived to
have them seen by every body.  She looked,  indeed,  uncommonly hand-
some ;  for her pretty face was not,  like Chloe's,  blubbered  ;  it was smooth
and elegant,  and neither her features nor complexion were at all ruffled  ;
nay,  indeed,  she was smiling all the time.

"  Look,  look !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale ;  "  see if the tears are not come
already."

Loud and rude bursts of laughter broke from us all at once.  How,
indeed,  could they be restrained  ?  Yet we all stared,  and looked and re-
looked again and again,  twenty times,  ere we could believe our eyes.  Sir
Philip,  I thought,  nvould have died in convulsions ;  for his laughter and his
politeness,  struggling furiously with one another,  made him almost black in
the face.  Mr.  Seward looked half vexed that her crying for him was now
so much lowered in its flattery,  yet grinned incessantly ;  Miss Thrale
laughed as much as contempt would allow her  ;  but Dr.  Delap seemed
petrified with astonishment.

When our mirth abated.  Sir Philip,  colouring violently with his efforts to
speak,  said,

"  I thank you,  ma'am,  Pm much obliged to you."

But I really believe he spoke without knowing what he was saying.

"  What a wonderful command,"  said Dr.  Delap very gravely,  "  that lady
must have over herself!"

She now took out a handkerchief,  and wiped her eyes.

"  Sir Philip,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  "  how can you suffer her to dry her
own eyes  ? — you,  who sit next her  ?"

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  115

"  I dare not dry them for her,"  answered he,  "  because I am not the
right man."

"  But if I sat next her,"  returned he,  "  she should not dry them herself."

"  I wish,"  cried Dr.  Delap,  "  I had a bottle to put them in ;  'tis a thou-
sand pities they should be wasted."

"  There,  now,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  she looks for all the world as if
nothing had happened  ;  for,  you know,  nothing has happened !"

"  Would you cry,  Miss Burney,"  said Sir Philip,  "  if we asked you 1"

"  Oh,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I would not do thus by Miss Burney for ten
worlds !  I dare say she would never speak to me again.  I should think
she'd be more likely to walk out of mv house than to crv because I bid
her."

"  I don't know how that is,"  cried Sir Philip  ;  "  but Pm sure she's gentle
enough."

"  She can cry,  I doubt not,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "  on any proper occasion."

"  But I must know,"  said I,  "  what for."

I did not say this loud enough for the S.  S.  to hear me  ;  but if I had,
she would not have taken it for the reflection it meant.  She seemed,  the
whole time,  totally insensible to the numerous strange and,  indeed,  imper-
tinent speeches which were made,  and to be very well satisfied that she
was only manifesting a tenderness of disposition,  that increased her beauty
of countenance.  At least,  I can put no other construction upon her con-
duct, which was,  without exception,  the strangest I ever saw.  AVithout any
pretence of affliction, — to weep merely because she was bid,  though bid in
a manner to forbid any one else, — to be in good spirits all the time, — to
see the whole company expiring with laughter at her tears,  without being
at all offended, — and,  at last,  to dry them up,  and go on with the same sort
of conversation she held before they started  !

What Sir Philip or Mr.  Seward privately thought of this incident I know
not yet :  but Dr.  Delap said,

"  Yes,  she has pretty blue eyes, — very pretty indeed  ;  she's quite a
wonderful miss.  If it had not been for that little gush,  I don't know what
would have become of me.  It was very good-natured of her,  really,  for
she charms and uncharms me in a moment ;  she is a bane and an antidote
at the same time."

Then,  after considering it more deeply,

"  I declare,"  he said,  "  I was never so much surprised in my life I I
should as soon have expected that the dew would fall from heaven because
Mrs.  Thrale called for it,  as that Miss What-d"ye-call-her would have cried
just because she was asked.  But the thing is — did she cry  ?  I declare I
don't believe it.  Yet I think,  at this moment,  I saw it, — only I know it
could not be :  something of a mist,  I suppose,  was before my eyes."

Sunday,  June 20th. — Dr.  Delap stayed here till yesterday,  when he re-
turned to Lewes.  He attacked me before he went,  about my comedy,  and
said he had some claim to see it.  However,  I escaped showing it,  though
he vows he will come again,  when he is able,  on purpose ;  but I hope we
shall be set out for Spa.

Mr.  Thrale continues,  I hope,  to get better,  though slowly.  While I was
sitting with him in the library,  Mr.  Seward entered.  W^hat has become of
his Cornwall scheme I know not.  As soon as the first inquiries were over,
he spoke about what he calls our comedy,  and he pressed and teased me to
set about it.  But he gi'ew,  in the evening,  so queer,  so ennuye^  that,  in a
fit of absurdity,  I called him Mr.  Dry;  and the name took so with  ]\Irs.
Thrale,  that I know not when he will lose it.     Indeed there is something

116 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

in this young man's alternate drollery and lassitude,  entertaining qualities
and wearying complaints,  that provoke me to more pertness than I practise
to almost any body.

The play,  he said,  should have the double title of  "  The Indifferent Man,
or Every Thing a Bore  ;"  and I protested 3Ir.  Dry should be the hero.
And then we ran on,  jointly planning a succession of ridiculous scenes  ; —
he lashing himself pretty freely,  though not half so freely,  or so much to
the purpose,  as I lashed him  ;  for I attacked him,  through the channel of
JSIr.  Dnj^  upon his cnmd^  his causeless melancholy,  his complaining
languors,  his yawning inattention,  and his restless discontent.  You may
easily imagine I was in pretty high spirits to go so far  :  in truth,  nothing
else could either have prompted or excused my facetiousness  :  and his own
manners are so cavalier,  that they always with me,  stimulate a sympathizing
return.

He repeatedly begged me to go to work,  and commit the projected scenes
to paper :  but I thought that might be carrying the jest too far ;  for as I was
in no humour to spare him,  written raillery might,  perhaps,  have been less
to his taste than verbal.

He challenged me to meet him the next morning,  before breakfast,  in the
library,  that we might work together at some scenes ;  but I thought it as
well to let the matter drop,  and did not make my entry till they were all
assembled.

His mind,  however,  ran upon nothing else ;  and,  as soon as we happened
to be left together,  he again attacked me.

"  Come,"  said he,  "  have you nothing ready yet?  I dare say you have
half an act in your pocket."

"  No,"  quoth I,  "  I have quite forgot the whole business  ;  I was only in
a humour for it last night."

"How shall it begin?"  cried he;  "with Mr.  Dry in his study? — his
slippers just on,  his hair about his ears, — exclaiming,  '  What a bore is life  !
— What is to be done next?'  "

"  Next 1"  cried I ;  "  what,  before he has done any thing at all  ?"

"  Oh,  he has dressed himself,  you know. — Well,  then he takes up a
book—"

"  For example,  this,"  cried I,  giving him Clarendon's History.

He took it up in character,  and flinging it away,  cried,

"  No, — this will never do, — a history by a party writer is odious."

I then gave him Robertson's America.

"  This,"  cried he,  "  is of all reading the most melancholy  ; — an account
of possessions we have lost by our own folly."

I then gave him Baretti's  "  Spanish Travels."

"  Who,"  cried he,  flinging it aside,  "  can read travels by a fellow who
never speaks a word of truth."

Then I gave him a volume of  "  Clarissa."

"  Pho  !"  cried he,  "  a novel writ by a bookseller  ! — there is but one novel
now one can bear to read, — and that's written by a young lady."

I hastened to stop him with Dalrymple's Memoirs,  and then proceeded to
give him various others,  upon all which he made severe,  splenetic,  yet
comical comments ;  and we continued thus employed till he was summoned
to accompany Mr.  Thrale to town.

The next morning,  Wednesday,  I had some very serious talk with Mr.
Seward, — and such as gave me no inclination for raillery,  though it was
concerning his ennui  ;  on the contrary,  T resolved,  at the moment,  never to
rally him upon that subject again,  for his account of himself filled me with

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  117

compassion.  He told me that he had never been well for three hours in a
day in his life,  and that when he was thought only tired,  he was really so
ill that he believed scarce another man would stay in company.  I was
quite shocked at this account,  and told him,  honestly,  that I had done him
so little justice as to attribute all his languors to affectation.

When Mrs.  Thrale joined us,  he told us he had just seen Dr.  Jebb, — Sir
Richard,  I mean, — and that he had advised him to marry.

"  No,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  that will do nothing for you  ;  but if you
should marry,  I have a wife for you."

"  Who 1"  cried he,  "  the S.  S.  ?"

"  The S.  S. — no  ? — she's the last person for you, — her extreme softness,
and tenderness,  and weeping,  would add languor to languor,  and irritate all
your disorders  ?  'twould be drink to a dropsical man."

"  No,  no, — it would soothe me."

"  Not a whit !  it would only fatigue you.  The wife for you is Lady
Anne Lindsay.  She has birth,  wit,  and beauty,  she has no fortune,  and
she'd readily accept you ;  and she is such a spirit that she'd animate you,
I warrant you  !  O,  she would trim you well !  You'd be all alive presently.
She'd take all the care of the money affairs, — and allo\V you out of them
eighteen-pence a week  !  That's the wife for you !"

Mr.  Seward was by no means  "  agreeable"  to the proposal ;  he turned the
conversation upon the S.  S.,  and gave us an account of two visits he had
made her,  and spoke in favour of her manner of living,  temper,  and cha-
racter. When he had run on in this strain for some time,  Mrs.  Thrale
cried,

"  Well,  so you are grown very fond of her  ?"

"  Oh dear,  no  !"  answered he,  drily,  "  not at all  !"

"  Why,  I began to think,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  you intended to supplant
the parson."

"  No,  I don't :  I don't know what sort of an old woman she'd make ;  the
tears won't do then.    Besides,  I don't think her so sensible as I used to do."

"  But she's very pleasing,"  cried I,  "  and very amiable."

"  Yes,  she's pleasing, — that's certain  ; — but I don't think she reads much  ;
the Greek has spoilt her."

"  Well,  but you can read for yourself"

"  That's true  ;  but does she work well 1"

"  I believe she does,  and that's a better thing."

"  Ay,  so it is,"  said he saucily,  "  for ladies ;  ladies should rather write
than read."

"  But authors,"  cried I,  "  before they write should read."

Returning again to the S.  S.,  and being again rallied about her by Mrs.
Thrale,  who said she believed at last he would end there, — he said,

"  Why,  if I must marry — if I was bid to choose between that and racking
on the wheel,  I believe I should go to her."

We all laughed at this exquisite compliment ;  but,  as he said,  it ivas a
compliment,  for though it proved no passion for her,  it proved a preference.

"  However,"  he continued,  "  it won't do."

"  Upon my word,"  exclaimed I,  "  you settle it all your own way ! — the
lady would be ready at any rate  !"

"  Oh yes  !  any man might marry Sophy Streatfield."

I quite stopt to exclaim against him.

"  I mean,"  said he,  "  if he'd pay his court to her."

And now I cannot resist telling you of a dispute which Dr.  Johnson had
with Mrs.  Thrale,   the next morning,  concerning me,  which that sweet

118 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

woman had the honesty and good sense to tell me.  Dr.  Johnson was talk-
ing to her and Sir Philip Jennings of the amazing progress made of late
years in literature by the women.  He said he was himself astonished at it,
and told them he well remembered when a woman who could spell a
common letter was regarded as all accomplished ;  but now they vied with
the men in every thing.

"  I think,  sir,"  said my friend Sir Philip,  "  the young lady we have here
is a very extraordinary proof of what you say."

"  So extraordinary,  sir,"  answered he,  "  that I know none like her, —
nor do I believe there is,  or there ever was,  a man who could write such a
book so young."

They both stared — no wonder I am sure! — and Sir Philip said,

"  What do you think of Pope,  sir 1 could not Pope have written such a
one  ?"

"  Nay,  nay,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  there is no need to talk of Pope ;  a
book may be a clever book,  and an extraordinary book,  and yet not want a
Pope for its author.  I suppose he was no older than Miss Burney when he
wrote  '  Windsor Forest ;'  and I suppose  '  Windsor Forest'  is equal to
'  Evelina !' "

"'Windsor Forest,'"  repeated Dr.  Johnson,  "though so delightful a
poem,  by no means required the knowledge of life and manners,  nor the
accuracy of observation,  nor the skill of penetration,  necessary for com-
posing such a work as  '  Evelina :'  he who could ever write  '  Windsor
Forest,'  might as well write it young as old.  Poetical abilities require not
age to mature them  ;  but  '  Evelina'  seems a work that should result from
long experience,  and deep and intimate knowledge of the world ;  yet it has
been written without either.  Miss Burney is a real wonder.  What she is,
she is intuitively.  Dr.  Burney told me she had had the fewest advantages
of any of his daughters,  from some peculiar circumstances.  And such has
been her timidity,  that he himself had not any suspicion of her powers."

"  Her modesty,"  said Mrs.  Thrale  (as she told me),  "  is really beyond
bounds.  It quite provokes me.  And,  in fact,  I can never make out how
the mind that could write that book could be ignorant of its value."

"  That,  madam,  is another wonder,"  answered my dear,  dear Dr.  John-
son, "  for modesty with her is neither pretence nor decorum ;  'tis an ingre-
dient of her nature  ;  for she who could part with such a work for twenty
pounds,  could know so little of its worth,  or of her own,  as to leave no
possible doubt of her humility."

My kind Mrs.  Thrale told me this with a pleasure that made me em-
brace her with gratitude ;  but the astonishment of Sir Philip Gierke at such
an eloge from Dr,  Johnson was quite,  she says,  comical.

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  119

CHAPTER VI.
1779.

Dr.  Johnson — His Brilliant Conversation — His Preference of Men of the World to
Scholars — The late General Phipps — Dr.  Johnson teaches Miss Burney Latin — Fatal
Effects of using-  Cosmetics — Mr.  Vesey and Anstey — Eng-lish Ladies taken by a
French Privateer — Letters — Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp — Miss Barney's Comedy,  "  The
Witlings" — Miss Burney to her Father — "  The Witlings"  condemned by him and
Mr.  Crisp — She determines not to bring it forward — Admired by Mrs.  Thrale and Mr.
Murphy — Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp — Lamentations for her Comedy — Mr.  Crisp to
Miss Burney — The Dangers of Sincerity — Littleness and Vanity ofGarrick — Ideas for
another Comedy — An Eccentric Family — Diary Resumed — Visit to Brighton — Mr.
Chamier — A Dandy of Hfly Years ago — A Visit to Knowle Park — Description of the
Pictures and State Apartments — Sevenoaks — Tunbridge Wells — A Female Oddity —
The Pantiles — Mr.  Wedderburne — A Runaway Matcli — Its Miseries — Extraordinary
Child — Brighton — A Character — A Fascinating Bookseller — Topham Beauclerk —
Lady Di Beauclerk — Mrs.  Musters — A Mistake — Lady Pembroke — Scenes in a Ball-
room— How to put down Impertinence — A Provincial Company — Dryden's  "Tempest"
— Cumberland — Singular Anecdotes of him — His Hatred of all Contemporary Authors
— Scene with him and Mrs.  Thrale in a Ball-room — A Singular Character — Table-talk
— Mystification — A Solemn Coxcomb — Dr.  Johnson — Sir Joshua Reynolds — Price of
his Portraits — Artists and Actors — Garrick — Fifty Pounds for a Song — Learned
Ladies — Married Life  —  A Lordly Brute — Physicians and Patients — Single-speech
Hamilton — the Humours of a Newspaper — Odd Names — A Long Story — Letter from
Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp — Character and Objects of her Journal.

Streatham,  July 5. — I have hardly had any power to write,  my dear
Susy,  since I left you,  for my cold has increased so much that I have hardly
been able to do any thing.

Mr.  Thrale,  I think,  is better,  and he was cheerful all the ride.  Mrs.
Thrale made as much of me as if the two days had been two months.

I was heartily glad to see Dr.  Johnson,  and I believe he was not sorry
to see me :  he had inquired very much after me,  and very particularly of
Mrs.  Thrale whether she loved me as well as she used to do.

He is better in health than I have ever seen him before ;  his journey has
been very serviceable to him,  and he has taken very good resolutions to
reform his diet ; — so has my daddy Crisp.  I wish I could pit them one
against the other,  and see the effect of their emulation.

I wished twenty times to have transmitted to paper the conversation of
the evening,  for Dr.  Johnson was as brilliant as I have ever known him, —
and that's saying something  ; — but I was not very well,  and could only
attend to him.  for present entertainment.

July 10. — Since I wrote last,  I have been far from well, — but I am now
my own man again — a.  peu pres.

Very concise,  indeed,  must my journal grow,  for I have now hardly a
moment in my power to give it ;  however,  I will keep up its chain,  and
mark,  from time to time,  the general course of things.

Sir Philip Jennings has spent three days here,  at the close of which he
took leave of us for the summer,  and set out for his seat in Hampshire.  We
we were all sorry to lose him  ;  he is a most comfortable man in society,
for he is always the same — easy,  good-humoured,  agreeable,  and well-bred.
He has made himself a favourite to the whole house.  Dr.  Johnson included,
who almost always prefers the company of an intelligent man of the world
to that of a scholar.

120 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

Lady Ladd spent the day here last Sunday.  Did I ever do her the
justice to give you a sketch of her since I have been more acquainted with
her than when I first did her that favour  ?  I think not.

She is gay,  even to levity,  wholly uncultivated as to letters,  but possesses
a very good natural capacity,  and a fund of humour and sport that makes
her company far more entertaining than that of half the best educated
women in the kingdom.  The pride I have mentioned never shows itself
without some provocation,  and wherever she meets with respect,  she returns
it with interest.

In the course of the day she said to me in a whisper,  "  I had a gentleman
with me yesterday who is crazy to see you, — and he teased me to bring
him here with me,  but I told him I could not till I had paved the way."

I found,  afterwards,  that this gentleman is Mr.  Edmund Phipps,  a
younger brother of Lord Mulgrave,  and of the Harry Phipps Hetty danced
with at Mr.  Laluze's masquerade.  Lady Ladd appointed the next Tuesday
to bring him to dinner.  As he is a particular favourite with Mrs.  Thrale,
her ladyship had no difficulty in gaining him admittance.

I think times have come to a fine pass,  if people are to come to Streatham
with no better views.

Well, — on Tuesday I was quite ill, — and obliged to be blooded, — so I
could not go down to dinner.

Mr.  Seward accompanied Lady Ladd and Mr.  E.  Phipps,  and added to
the provocation of my confinement.

Lady Ladd and Mrs.  Thrale both persuaded me to make my appearance,
and as my head grew much easier,  I thought it better so to do,  than to in-
crease a curiosity I was sure of disappointing,  by any delay I had power
to prevent.

"  You will like him,  I dare say,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  for he is very like
you."

I heard afterwards that,  when they returned to the parlour,  Mr.  Phipps,
among other questions,  asked,  "  Is she very pretty  ?"

N.  B. — I wish there was no such question in the language.

"  Very pretty  ? — no,"  said Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  but she is very like you.  Do
you think yourself very handsome,  Mr.  Phipps  ?"

"  Pho  !" — cried he, — "  I was in hopes she was like her own  '  Evelina.' "

"  No,  no such thing,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  unless it is in timidity,  but
neither in beauty nor ignorance of life."

I am very glad this passed before I came down, — for else I think I should
have struck him all of a heap.

Now it's my turn to speak of him.

He is very tall — not very like me in that,  you'll say — very brown — not
very unlike me in that,  you'll say ;  for the rest,  however,  the compliment is
all to me.

I saw but little of him,  as they all went about an hour after I came down ;
but I had time to see that he is very sensible,  very elegant in his manners,
and very unaffected and easy.

*****

A propos to books,  I have not been able to read Wraxall's Memoirs yet,
— I wish Mrs.  Ord had not lent them me ;  and now Lady Ladd,  too,  has
brought me two volumes,  called Sketches from Nature,  written by Mr.
Keate.  What I have read of them repaid me nothing for the time they took
up, — a mere and paltry imitation of Sterne's Sentimental Journey.

July 20. — What a vile journalist do I grow ! — it is,  however,  all I can
do to keep it at all going ;  for,  to let you a little into the nature of things,

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  121

you must know my studies occupy almost eveiy moment that I spend by
myself.  Dr.  Johnson gives us a Latin lesson every morning.  I pique
myself somewhat upon being ready for him ;  so that really,  when the copy-
ing my play,  and the continual returning occurrences of every fresh day
are considered,  you will not wonder that I should find so little opportunity
for scrawling letters.

What progress we may make in this most learned scheme I know not ;
but,  as I have always told you,  I am sure I fag more for fear of disgrace
than for hope of profit.  To devote so much time to acquire something I
shall always dread to have known,  is really unpleasant enough,  considering
how many things there are I might employ myself in that would have no
such drawback.  However,  on the other side,  I am both pleased and flat-
tered that Dr.  Johnson should think me worth inviting to be his pupil,  and I
shall always recollect with pride and with pleasure the instructions he has
the goodness to give me:  so,  since I cannot without dishonour alter matters,

'tis as well to turn Frenchwoman,  and take them in the tant Jiiieux fashion,

*  #  *  #  #

A new light is of late thrown upon the death of poor Sophy P .     Dr.

Hervey,  of Tooting,  who attended her the day before she expired,  is of
opinion that she killed herself by quackery,  that is,  by cosmetics and pre-
parations of lead or mercury,  taken for her complexion,  which,  indeed,  was
almost unnaturally white.     He thinks,  therefore,  that this pernicious stufi"

got into her veins and poisoned her.     Peggy P ,  nearly as white as her

sister,  is suspected strongly of using the same beautifying methods of
destroying herself,  but as Mrs.  Thrale has hinted this suspicion to her,  and
charged her to take care of herself,  we hope she will be frightened,  and
warned to her safety.  Poor foolish girls  !  how dearly do they pay for the
ambition of being fairer than their neighbours !  I say they,  for poor Peggy
looks upon the point of death already.

Yesterday Mrs.  Vesey came hither to tea.  I'm sure if Anstey saw her
he would make an exception to his assertion,  that  "  he never should see an
old woman again!"  for she has the most wrinkled,  sallow,  time-beaten face
I ever saw.  She is an exceeding well-bred woman,  and of agreeable
manners  ;  but all her name in the world must,  I think,  have been acquired
by her dexterity and skill in selecting parties,  and by her address in render-
ing them easy with one another — an art,  however,  that seems to imply no
mean understanding.

The breaking-up of our Spa journey my father has doubtless told you.
The fears and dangers of being taken by the enemy,  which prevented that
journey,  have proved to be but too well grounded,  for Mrs.  Vesey informed
us that the Duchess of Leinster,  Lady F.  Campbell,  and several others,
were all actually taken by a French privateer,  in crossing the sea,  in order
to proceed to Spa.  We have,  however,  heard that they are all safe and at
liberty.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

Friday,  July 30,  1779.

Now,  my dear daddy,  let me attempt something like an answer to your
two last most kind letters.

In the first place I have the pleasure to tell you that Mr.  Thrale is as
well as ever he was in health,  though the alarming and terrible blow he so
lately received,  has,  I fear,  given a damp to his spirits that will scarce ever
be wholly conquered.  Yet he grows daily rather more cheerful ;  but the
shock was too rude and too cruel to be ever forgotten.

VOL.  I.  11

122 DIARY AND LETTERS I779,

I am not half so well satisfied with your account of yourself as I hoped
to have been ;  I fear you are not so steady in your intended reformation as
to diet and exercise as you proposed being  ?  Dr.  Johnson has made reso-
lutions exactly similar to yours,  and in general adheres to them with strict-
ness, but the old Adam,  as you say,  stands in his way,  as well as in his
neighbours'.  I wish I could pit you against each other,  for the sake of
both.  Yet he professes an aversion to you,  because he says he is sure you
are very much in his way with me !  however,  I believe you would neither
of you retain much aversion if you had a fair meeting.

I cannot tell you how kind I take your invitations to me.  I had half
feared I was to be left out of the scrape now  ;  and I am sure I should wish all
my new friends at Jericho if their goodness to me procured coldness,  neglect,
or suspicion from my old and deep-rooted ones.  I will most certainly and
thankfully contrive to accept your kind offer,  and,  if possible,  when Mrs.
Gast is with you,  as that would be doubling my pleasure ;  but you,  my dear
daddy,  must let me know what time will be most convenient and comfort-
able to yourself for seeing me,  and then I will manage matters as well as I
can,  to conform to it.

All you say of the times made me shudder ;  yet I was sure such would
be your sentiments,  for all that has happened you actually foresaw and
represented to me in strong colours last spring — I mean in relation to the
general decline of all trade,  opulence,  and prosperity.

This seems a strange,  unseasonable period for my undertaking,  among
the rest ;  but yet,  my dear daddy,  when you have read my conversation
with Mr.  Sheridan,  I believe you will agree that I must have been wholly
insensible,  nay,  almost ungrateful,  to resist encouragement such as he gave
me — nay,  more than encouragement,  entreaties,  all of which he warmly
repeated to my father.

Now,  as to the play itself,  I own I had wished to have been the bearer of
it when I visit Chesington ;  but you seem so urgent,  and my father himself
is so desirous to carry it you,  that I have gave that plan up.

O my dear daddy,  if your next letter were to contain your real opinion
of it,  how should I dread to open it !  Be,  however,  as honest as your good-
nature and delicacy will allow you to be,  and assure yourself 1 shall be
very certain that all 3^our criticisms will proceed from your earnest wishes
to obviate those of others,  and that you would have much more pleasure in
being my panegyrist.

As to Mrs.  Gast,  I should be glad to know what I would refuse to a sister
of yours.  Make her,  therefore,  of your coterie,  if she is with you while the
piece is in your possession.

And now let me tell you what I wish in regard to this affair.  I should
like that your first reading should have nothing to do with me — that you
should go quick through it,  or let my father read it to you — forgetting all
the time,  as much as you can,  that Fannikin is the writer,  or even that it is a
play in manuscript,  and capable of alterations  ; — and then,  when you have
done,  I should like to have three lines,  telling me,  as nearly as you can
trust my candour,  its general effect.  After that take it to your own desk,
and lash it at your leisure.

Adieu,  my dear daddy  !  I shall hope to hear from you very soon,  and
pray believe me,

Yours ever and ever,

Frances Bueney.

P.  S. — Let it fail never so much,  the manager will have nothing to reproach
me with  :  is not that a comfort  ?     He would really listen to no denial.

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  123

MISS F.  BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

The fatal knell is knolled,  and down among the dead men sink the poor
"  Witlings" — for ever,  and for ever,  and for ever  !

I give a sigh,  whether I will or not,  to their memory  !  for,  however worth-
less, they were mes enfans^  and one must do one's nature,  as Mr,  Crisp will
tell you of the dog.

You,  my dearest sir,  who enjoyed,  I really think,  even more than myself,
the astonishing success of my first attempt,  would,  I believe,  even more
than myself,  be hurt at the failure of my second  ;  and I am sure I speak
from the bottom of a very honest heart,  when I most solemnly declare,  that
upon your account any disgrace would mortify and afflict me more than
upon my own  ;  for whatever appears with your knowledge,  will be naturally
supposed to have met with your approbation,  and,  perhaps,  your assistance  ;
therefore,  though all particular censure would fall where it ought — upon me
— yet any general censure of the whole,  and the plan,  would cruelly,  but
certainly involve you in its severity.

Of this I have been sensible from the moment my  "  authorshipness"  was
discovered,  and,  therefore,  from that moment I determined to have no opinion
of my own in regard to what I should thenceforth part with out of my own
hands.  I would long since have burnt the fourth act,  upon your disappro-
bation of it,  but that I waited,  and was by Mrs.  Thrale so much encouraged
to wait,  for your finishing the piece.

You have finished it now in every sense of the word.  Partial faults may
be corrected  ;  but what I most wished was,  to know the general effect of the
whole  ;  and as that has so terribly failed,  all petty criticisms would be need-
less. I shall wipe it all from my memory,  and endeavour never to recollect
that I ever wrote it.

You bid me open my heart to you, — and so,  my dearest sir,  I will,  for it
is the greatest happiness of my life that I dare be sincere to you.  I expected
many objections to be raised — a thousand errors to be pointed out — and a
million of alterations to be proposed;  but the suppression of the piece were
words I did not expect  ;  indeed,  after the warm approbation of Mrs.  Thrale,
and the repeated commendations and flattery of Mr.  Murphy,  how could I  ?

I do not,  therefore,  pretend to wish you should think a decision,  for which
I was so little prepared,  has given me no disturbance  ;  for I must be a far
more egregious witling than any of those I tried to draw,  to imagine you
could ever credit that I wrote without some remote hope of success now —
though I literally did when I composed  "  Evelina  !"

But my mortification is not at throwing away the characters,  or the con-
trivance ; — it is all at throwing away the time, — which I with difficulty stole,
and which I have buried in the mere trouble of writing.

What my daddy Crisp says,  "  that it would be the best policy,  but for
pecuniary advantages,  for me to write no more,"  is exactly what I have
always thought since  "  Evelina"  was published.  But I will not now talk of
putting it into practice, — for the best way I can take of shewing that I have
a true and just sense of the spirit of your condemnation,  is not to sink sulky
and dejected under it,  but to exert myself to the utmost of my power in
endeavours to produce something less reprehensible.  And this shall be the
way I will pursue as soon as my mind is more at ease about Hetty and
Mrs.  Thrale,  and as soon as I have read myself into a forgetfulness of
my old dramatis 2^e''soncE^ — lest I should produce something else as witless
as the last.

124 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

Adieu,  my dearest,  kindest,  truest,  best friend.  I will never proceed so
far again without your counsel,  and then I shall not only save mj-self so
much useless trouble,  but you,  who so reluctantly blame,  the kind pain
which I am sure must attend your disapprobation.  The world wall not
always go well,  as Mrs.  Sapient might say,  and I am sure I have long
thought I have had more than my share of success already.

I expect another disappointment to follow  ;  i.  e. — that of the Spa journey  ;
for I believe poor Mrs.  Thrale will not be able to go any where  ;  but T must
get in practice with a little philosophy,  and then make myself amends for
all evils by a conceited notion of bearing them well.

Once more,  adieu,  dearest sir  !  and never may my philosophy be put to
the test of seeing any abatement of true kindness from you, — for that would
never be decently endured by

Your own,

Frances Bueney.*

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

Well  !  "  there are plays that are to be saved,  and plays that are not to
be saved  !"  so good night,  Mr.  Dabbler ! — good night,  Lady Smatter, —
Mrs.  Sapient, — Mrs.  Voluble, — Mrs.  Wheedle, — Censor, — Cecilia, — Beau-
fort,— and you,  you great oaf,  Bobby ! — good night !  good night !

And good morning,  Miss Fanny Burney  ! — I hope you have opened your
eyes for some time,  and will not close them in so drowsy a fit again — at
least till the full of the moon.

I won't tell you I have been absolutely ravie with delight at the fall of the
curtain  ;  but intend to take the affair in the taut mieux manner,  and to con-
sole myself for your censure by this greatest proof I have ever received of the
sincerity,  candour,  and,  let me add,  esteem,  of my dear daddy.  And as I
happen to love myself rather more than my play,  this consolation is not a
very trifling one.

As to all you say of my reputation and so forth,  I perceive the kindness
of your endeavours to put me in humour with myself,  and prevent my
taking huff,  which,  if I did,  I should deserve to receive,  upon any future trial,
hollow praise from you, — and the rest from the public.

As to the MS.,  I am in no hurry for it.  Besides,  it ought not to come
till I have prepared an ovation,  and the honours of conquest for it.

The only bad thing in this affair,  is,  that I cannot take the comfort of my
poor friend Dabbler,  by calling you a crabbed fellow,  because you write
with almost more kindness than ever;  neither can I  (though I try hard)  per-
suade myself that you have not a grain of taste in your whole composition.

This,  however,  seriously I do believe,  that when my two daddies put their
heads together to concert for me that hissing,  groaning,  catcalling epistle
they sent me,  they felt as sorry for poor little Miss Bayes as she could pos-
sibly do for herself.

You see I do not attempt to repay your frankness with the art of pre-
tended carelessness.  But though somewhat disconcerted just now,  I will
promise not to let my vexation live out another day.  I shall not browse
upon it, — but,  on the contrary,  drive it out of my thoughts,  by filling them
up with things almost as good of other people's.

*  The following note is appended to this letter,  in the handwriting of Miss Burney,  at a
subsequent period.  "  The objection of Mr Crisp,  to the MS.  play of '  The Witlings,'  was
its resemblance to MoUere's Femmes Sgavantes,  and consequent immense inferiority.  It
is,  however,  a curious fact,  and to the author a consolatory one,  that she had literally
never read the Femmes Sgavantes when she composed  '  The Witlings.' "

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  125

Our Hettina is much better ;  but pray don't keep Mr.  B.  beyond Wednes-
day, for Mrs.  Thrale makes a point of my returning to Streatham on Tues-
day, unless,  which God forbid,  poor Hetty should be worse again.

Adieu,  my dear daddy,  I won't be mortified,  and I won't be downed, —
but I will be proud to find I have,  out of my own family,  as well as in it,  a
friend who loves me well enough to speak plain truth to me.
Always do thus,  and always you shall be tried by.

Your much obliged

And most affectionate,

Frances Burney.

MR.  CRISP TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

My dear Fannikin,

I have known half a letter filled up with recapitulating the tedious and
very particular reasons why and wherefore,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.,  it was not sent
before.  I don't hke the example,  and shall not follow it.  I will only tell
you that I have been far from well.  I should not say thus much,  but from
an anxious care lest a Fannikin should think I am supine in any thing that
relates either to her interest or fame.     Thus much for preface.

Your other daddy  (who hardly loves you better than I do)  I understand
has written you his sentiments on the subject of your last letter.  I cannot
but be of the same opinion  ;  and have too sincere a regard for you not to
declare it.  This sincerity I have smai'ted for,  and severely too,  ere now ;
and yet,  happenjwhat will,  (where those I love are concerned,)  I am deter-
mined never to part with it.  All the world  (if you will believe them)  pro-
fess to expect it,  to demand it,  to take it kindly,  thankfully,  &c.,  &;c. ;  and
yet how few are generous enough to take it as it is meant ! — it is imputed
to envy,  ill-will,  a desire of lowering,  and certainly to a total want of taste.
Is not this,  by vehement importunity,  to draw your very entrails from you,
and then to give them a stab  ? — On this topic I find I have,  ere I was
aware,  grown warm  ;  but I have been a sufferer.  My plain-dealing  (after
the most earnest solicitations,  professions,  and protestations)  irrecoverably
lost me Garrick.  But his soul was little I— Greville,  for a while,  became my
enemy,  though afterwards,  through his constitutional inconstancy,  he be-
came more attached than before ;  and since that time,  through absence,
whim,  and various accidents,  all is  (I thank Fortune)  dwindled to nothing.

How have I wandered !  I should never have thought aloud in this man-
ner, if I had not perfectly known the make and frame of a Fannikin's
inmost soul :  and by this declaration I give her the most powerful proof I
am capable of,  how highly I think of her generosity and understanding.

Now then,  to the point — I have considered as well as I am able,  what
you state as Mrs.  Thrale's idea — 'of new modelling the play;  and I observe
what you say,  that the pursuing this project is the only chance you have of
bringing out any thing this year,  and that with hard fagging perhaps you
might do that.  I agree with you,  that for this year you say true  ;  but,  my
dear Fanny,  don't talk of hard fagging.  It was not hard fagging that pro-
duced such a work as  "  Evelina !" — -it was the ebullition of true sterling
genius — you wrote it because you could not help it — it came,  and so you
put it down on paper.     Leave fagging and labour to him

'Who,  high in Drury Lane,

LuU'd by soft zephyrs through the broken pane,
Rhymes ere he wakes,  and prints before term ends,
Compell'd by hunger and request of friends.
11*=

126 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

'Tis not sitting down to a desk with pen,  ink,  and paper,  that will com-
mand inspiration.

Having now so frankly spoke my mind on the present production,  con-
cerning which I am sorry and ashamed to differ from much wiser heads
than my own,  I shall acquaint you with a fancy of mine.  Your daddy
doctor related to me something of an account you had given him of a most
ridiculous family in your present neighbourhood,  which,  even in the imper-
fect manner he described it,  struck me most forcibly — the  *  *  *.  He says
you gave it him with so much humour,  such painting,  such description,  such
fun,  that in your mouth it was a perfect comedy.  He described  (from you)
some of the characters,  and a general idea of the act.  I was quite animated
— there seemed to me an inexhaustible fund of matter for you to work on,
and the follies of the folks of so general a nature as to furnish you with a
profusion of what you want,  to make out a most spirited,  witty,  moral,
useful comedy,  without descending to the invidious and cruel practice of
pointing out individual characters,  and holding them up to public ridicule.

Nothing can be more general than the reciprocal follies of parents and
children — few subjects more striking — they,  if well drawn,  will seize the
attention,  and interest the feelings of all sorts,  high and low.  In short,  I
was delighted with the idea.  The proceedings of this family,  as he gave
them,  seemed so preposterous,  so productive of bad consequences,  so ludi-
crous besides,  that their whole conduct might be termed the right road to go
wrong.

Your daddy doctor talks of Mrs.  Thrale's coming over to this place,  to
fetch back him and madam,  Cannot you prevail on her to drop you here
for a little while  ?  I long to have a good talk with you,  as the Cherokees
call it — I cannot by letter say my say — my say,  look ye,  Fanny,  is honest
— and that is something  ;  and I think is merit enough in these evil days to
incline you now and then to turn your ear my way.

I am your loving daddy,

S.  C.

Brighthelmstone,  Oct.  12. — As you say you will accept memorandums
in default of journals,  my dear Susy,  I will scrawl down such things as most
readily recur to my remembrance,  and when I get to the present time,  I will
be less remiss in my accounts.

Sunday. — We had Lady Ladd at Streatham ;  she did not leave us till
the next day.  She and I are grown most prodigious friends.  She is really
so entertaining and lively,  that it is not often possible to pass time more
gaily than in her company.

Mr.  Stephen Fuller,  the sensible,  but deaf old gentleman I have formerly

mentioned,  dined here also ;  as did Mr.  R ,  whose trite,  settled,  tonish

emptiness of discourse is a never-failing source of laughter and diversion.

"  Well,  I say,  what.  Miss Burney,  so you had a very good party last
Tuesday  ? — what we call the family party — in that sort of way  ?  Pray
who had you  ?"

"  Mr.  Chamier."

"  Mr.  Chamier,  ay  ?  Give me leave to tell you,  Miss Burney,  that Mr.
Chamier is what we call a very sensible man!"

"  Certainly.     And Mr.  Pepys."

"  Mr.  Pepys  ?  Ay,  very good — very good in that sort of way.  Pm
quite sorry I could not be here  ;  but I was so much indisposed — quite what
we call the nursing party."

"  Pm very sorry ;  but I hope little Sharp is well  ?"

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  127

"  ]\Ia'am,  your most humble  !  you're a very good lady,  indeed ! — quite
what we call a good lady  !  Little Sharp is perfectly well :  that sort of at-
tention, and things of that sort, — the bow-wow system is very well.  But
pray.  Miss Burney,  give me leave to ask,  in that sort of way,  had you any
body else V

"  Yes,  Lady Ladd and Mr.  Seward."

"  So,  so  ! — quite the family system ! — Give me leave to tell you,  Miss
Burney,  this commands attention  ! — what we call a respectable invitation  !
I am sorry I could not come,  indeed  ;  for we young men.  Miss Burney,  we
make it what we call a sort of a rule to take notice of this sort of attention.
But I was extremely indisposed,  indeed  ! — what we call the walnut svstem

had quite Pray what's the news,  Miss Burney  ? — in that sort of way —

is there news  ?"

"  None,  that I have heard.     Have you heard any 1"

"  Why,  very bad  ! — very bad,  indeed  ! — quite what we call poor old
England  !  I was told,  in town, — fact — fact,  I assure you — that these Dons
intend us an invasion this very month  ! — they and the Monsieurs intend us
the respectable salute this very month  ; — the powder system,  in that sort of
way  !  Give me leave to tell you.  Miss Burney,  this is what we call a disa-
greeable visit,  in that sort of way."

I think,  if possible,  his language looks more absurd upon paper even
than it sounds in conversation,  from the perpetual recurrence of the same
words and expressions.

On Tuesday Mr.,  Mrs.,  jMiss Thrale,  and your  "  yours,  ma'am,  yours,"
set out on their expedition.  The day was very pleasant,  and the journey
delightful ;  but that which chiefly rendered it so was Mr.  Thrale's being ap-
parently the better for it.

I need not tell you how sweet a county for travelling is Kent,  as you
know it so well.  We stopped at Sevenoaks,  which is a remarkably well-
situated town ;  and here,  while dinner was preparing,  my kind and sweet
friends took me to Knowle,  though they had seen it repeatedly themselves.

The park,  which,  it seems,  is seven miles in circumference,  and has,  as
the gamekeeper told us,  700 head of deer in it,  is laid out in a most beauti-
ful manner, — nearly,  I think,  equal to Hagley,  as far as belongs to the dis-
position of the trees,  hills,  dales,  &c.,  though,  in regard to temples,  obelisks,
or any sort of buildings it will bear no comparison to that sweet place,  since
nothing is there of that sort.

The house,  which is very old,  has the appearance of an antique chapel or
rather cathedral.  Two immense gates and two court-yards precede the
entrance into the dwelling part of the house  ;  the windows are all of the
small old casements  ;  and the general air of the place is monastic and
gloomy.  It was begun to be built,  as the housekeeper told us,  in the reign
of Henry IL,  by Thomas a Becket,  but the modern part was finished
in the time of Elizabeth.

The Duke of Dorset was not there himself;  but we were prevented seeing
the library,  and two or three other modernized rooms,  because Madlle.
Bacelli was not to be disturbed.  The house,  however,  is so magnificently
large,  that we only coveted to see that part of it which was hung with
pictures.  Three state-rooms,  however,  were curious enough.  One of them
had been fitted up by an  "  Earle of Dorsete,'  for the bed-chamber of King
James L when upon a visit to Knowle  :  it had all the gloomy grandeur and
solemn finery of that time.  The second state-room a later earl had fitted up
for James IL The two Charleses either never honoured Knowle with their
presence,  or else condescended to sleep in their father and grandfather's

128 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

bed.  Well,  this James II. 's room was more superb than his predecessors' —
flaming with velvet,  tissue,  tapestry,  and what not.  But the third state-room
was magnificence itself;  it was fitted up for King William.  The bed-
curtains,  tester,  quilt,  and valence were all of gold flowers,  worked upon a
silver ground  :  its value,  even in those days,  was 7000/.  The table,  a
superb cabinet,  frame of the looking-glass,  and all the ornaments,  and,  I
believe,  all the furniture in the room,  were of solid massive silver,  curiously
embossed.     Nothing could be more splendid.

But to leave all this show,  and come to what is a thousand times more in-
teresting— the pictures,  of which there is,  indeed,  a delicious collection.  I
could have spent a day in looking at every room,  and yet have longed to see
them again.  I can,  however,  give a very imperfect and lame account of
them,  as we were so hurried by the housekeeper from room to room,  and I
was so anxious to miss nothing,  that the merely glancing over so many
beautiful paintings has only left a faint remembrance in my head of each
particular picture,  though a very strong and deep impression of the pleasure
they at the time afforded me.

Among such as just now occur to me were a Lucretia with a dagger,  a
large whole-length,  by Guide,  extremely beautiful,  purchased by the present
duke in Italy;  a Madonna and Child,  small size,  by Raphael,  so lovely I
could not turn from it till called repeatedly  ;  a Virgin,  by Carlo Dolci,  that
w^as irresistibly attractive;  a Raphael,  by himself,  that was noble;  land-
scapes, by Poussin,  and one or two by Claude Lorraine,  that were
enchanting.

There are several pictures by Sir Joshua Reynolds,  and though mixed
with those of the best old painters,  they are so bewitching,  and finished in
a style of taste,  colouring,  and expression,  so like their companions,  that it
is not,  at first view,  easy to distinguish the new from the old.  The cele-
brated Ugolino family is almost too horrible to be looked at,  yet I was glad
to see it again ;  two Beggar-Boys make an exceedingly pleasing picture  ;
the duke himself,  by Sir Joshua,  among the portraits of his own family,  in
a state-room,  is,  I think,  by no means a likeness to flatter his grace's vanity.
One room is appropriated to artists,  and among them three are by Sir
Joshua  : — Dr.  Johnson,  Dr.  Goldsmith,  and Sacchini, — all charmingly done,
and the two I know extremely like.

We dined very comfortably at Sevenoaks,  and thence made but one stage
to Tunbridge.  It was so dark when we went through the town that I could
see it very indistinctly.  The Wells,  however,  are about seven miles yet
further, — so that we saw that night nothing  ;  but I assure you,  I felt that I
was entering into a new country pretty roughly,  for the roads were so sicle-

him  ?indjumblum,  as Miss L called those of Teignmouth,  that I expected

an overturn every minute.  Safely,  however,  we reached the Sussex Hotel,
at Tunbridge Wells.

Having looked at our rooms,  and arranged our afTairs,  we proceeded to
Mount Ephraim,  where Miss Streatfield resides.  We found her with only
her mother,  and spent the evening there.

Mrs.  Streatfield is very — very little,  but perfectly well made,  thin,  genteel,
and delicate.  She has been quite beautiful,  and has still so much of beauty
left,  that to call it only the remains of a fine face seems hardly doing her
justice.  She is very lively,  and an excellent mimic,  and is,  I think,  as much
superior to her daughter in natural gifls as her daughter is to her in acquired
ones:  and how infinitely preferable are parts without education to education
without parts  !

The fair S.  S,  is really in higher beauty than I have ever yet seen her  ;

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  129

and she was so caressing,  so soft,  so amiable,  that I felt mj^self insensibly
inclining to her with an affectionate regard.  "  If it was not for that little
gush,"  as Dr.  Delap said,  I should certainly have taken a very great fancy
to her  :  but tears so ready — oh,  they blot out my fair opinion of her  !  Yes,
whenever I am with her,  I like,  nay almost love her,  for her manners are
exceedingly captivating  ;  but when I quit her,  I do not find that she improves
by being thought over — no,  nor talked over  ;  for Mrs.  Thrale,  who is always
disposed to half adore her in her presence,  can never converse about her
without exciting her own contempt by recapitulating what has passed.  This,
however,  must always be certain,  whatever may be doubtful,  that she is a
girl in no respect Kke any other.

But I have not yet done with the mother  :  I have told you of her vivacity
and her mimicry,  but her character is yet not half told.  She has a kind
of whimsioel conceit,  and odd affectation,  that,  joined to a very singular sort
of humour,  makes her always seem to be rehearsing some scene in a
comedy.  She takes off,  if she mentions them,  all her own children,  and,
though she quite adores them,  renders them ridiculous with all her power.
She laughs at herself for her smallness and for her vagaries,  just with the
same ease and ridicule as if she were speaking of some other person  ;  and,
while perpetually hinting at being old and broken,  she is continually frisk-
ing, flaunting,  and playing tricks,  hke a young coquet.

When I was introduced to her by Mrs.  Thrale,  who said,  "  Give me leave,
ma'am,  to present to you a friend of your daughter's — Miss Burney,"  she
advanced to me with a tripping pace,  and,  taking one of my fingers,  said,
"  Allow me,  ma'am,  will you,  to create a little acquaintance with you."

And,  indeed,  I readily entered into an alliance with her,  for I found no-
thing at Tunbridge half so entertaining,  except,  indeed,  Miss Birch,  of whom
hereafter.

The next morning the S.  S.  breakfasted with us  ;  and then they walked
about to show me the place.

The Sussex Hotel,  where we lived,  is situated at the side of the Pantiles,
or public walk,  so called because paved with pantiles  ;  it is called so also,
like the long room at Hampstead,  because it would be difficult to distinguish
it by any other name  ;  for it has no beauty in itself,  and borrows none from
foreign aid,  as it has only common houses at one side,  and little millinery
and Tunbridge-ware shops at the other,  and at each end is choked up by
buildings that intercept all prospect.     How such a place could first be made

a fashionable pleasure-walk,  every body must wonder.

*****

Tunbridge Wells is a place that to me appeared very singular  :  the country
is all rock,  and every part of it is either up or down hill,  scarce ten yards
square being level ground in the whole place  :  the houses,  too,  are scattered
about in a strange wild manner,  and look as if they had been dropped where
they stand by accident,  for they form neither streets nor squares,  but seem
strewed promiscuously,  except,  indeed,  where the shopkeepers live,  who have
got two or three dirty little lanes,  much like dirty little lanes in other places.

Mrs.  Streatfield and I increased our intimacy marvellously.  She gave
me the name of  "  the dove^''  for what reason I cannot guess,  except it be
that the dove has a sort of greenish gray eye,  something like mine  ;  be that
as it may,  she called me nothing else while I stayed at Tunbridge.

In the evening we all went to the rooms.  The rooms,  as they are called,
consisted,  for this evening,  of only one apartment,  as there was not company
enough to make more necessary,  and a very plain,  unadorned and ordinary
apartment that was.

130 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

There were very few people,  but among them Mr.  Wedderburne,  the
attorney-general.  You may believe I rather wished to shrink from him,  if
you recollect what Mrs.  Thrale said of him,  among the rest of the Tunbridge
coterie last season,  who discussed  "  Evelina"  regularly every evening,  and
that he,  siding with Mrs.  Montagu,  cut up the Branghtons,  and had as well
as Mrs.  Montagu,  almost a quarrel with Mrs.  Greville upon the subject,
because she so warmly vindicated,  or rather applauded them.  Lady Louisa,
however,  I remember he spoke of with very high praise,  as Mrs.  Montagu
did of the dedication  :  and if such folks can find any thing to praise,  I find
myself amply recompensed for their censures,  especially when they censure
what I cannot regret writing,  since it is the part most favoured by Dr.
Johnson.

Mr.  Wedderburne joined us immediately.  Mrs.  Thrale presently said,
"  Mr.  Wedderburne,  I must present my daughter to you,-*-and Miss
Burney."

I curtsied mighty gravely,  and shufHed to the other end of the party.

Amongst the company,  I was most struck with the Hon.  Mrs.  W ,

lately Miss T .     She ran away with a Mr.  W ,  a man nearly old

enough to be her father,  and of most notorious bad character,  both as a
sharper and a libertine.  This wretch was with her — a most hackneyed,
ill-looking object as I ever saw ;  and the foolish girl,  who seems scarce
sixteen,  and looks a raw school-girl,  has an air of so much discontent,  and
seems in a state of such dismal melancholy,  that it was not possible to look
at her without compassionating a folly she has so many years to live
regretting.  I would not wish a more striking warning to be given to other
such forward,  adventurous damsels,  than to place before them this miserable
runaway,  who has not only disgraced her family,  and enraged her friends,
but rendered herself a repentant mourner for life.

%  %  %  %  %  ^

The next morning we had the company of two young ladies at breakfast
— the S.  S.  and a Miss Birch,  a little girl but ten years old,  whom the S.  S.
invited,  well foreseeing how much we should all be obliged to her.

This Miss Birch is a niece of the charming Mrs.  Pleydell,  and so like
her,  that I should have taken her for her daughter,  yet she is not,  now,
quite so handsome ;  but as she will soon know how to display her beauty
to the utmost advantage,  I fancy,  in a few years,  she will yet more resem-
ble her lovely and most bewitching aunt.  Every body,  she said,  tells her
how like she is to her aunt Pleydell.

As you,  therefore,  have seen that sweet woman,  only imagine her ten
years old,  and you will see her sweet niece.  Nor does the resemblance
rest with the person  ;  she sings like her,  laughs like her,  talks like her,
caresses like her,  and alternately softens and animates just like her.  Her
conversation is not merely like that of a woman already,  but like that of a
most uncommonly informed,  cultivated,  and sagacious woman  ;  and at the
same time that her understanding is thus wonderfully premature,  she can,
at pleasure,  throw off all this rationality,  and make herself a mere playful,
giddy,  romping child.  One moment,  with mingled gravity and sarcasm,
she discusses characters,  and the next,  with schoolgirl spirits,  she jumps
round the room  ;  then,  suddenly,  she asks,  "  Do you know such,  or such
a song  ?"  and instantly,  with mixed grace and buffoonery,  singles out an
object,  and sings it ;  and then,  before there has been time to applaud her,
she runs into the middle of the room,  to try some new step in a dance  ;
and after all this,  without waiting till her vagaries grow tiresome,  she
flings herself with an affectionate air,  upon somebody's lap,  and there,  com-

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIiNA.  131

posed and thoughtful,  she continues quiet till she again enters into rational
conversation.

Her voice is really charming — infinitely the most powerful,  as well
as sweet,  I ever heard at her age.  Were she well and constantly taught,
she might,  I should think,  do any thing, — for,  two or three Italian songs,
which she learnt out of only five months'  teaching by Parsons,  she sung
like a little angel,  with respect to taste,  feeling,  and expression  ;  but she
now learns of nobody,  and is so fond of French songs,  for the sake,  she
says,  of the sentiment,  that I fear she will have her wonderful abilities all
thrown away.     Oh,  how I wish my father had the charge of her  !

She has spent four years out of her little life in France,  which has made
her distractedly fond of the French operas,  "  Rose et Colas,"  "  Annette
et Lubin,"  &c.,  and she told us the story quite through of several I never
heard of,  always singing the sujet when she came to the airs,  and comi-
cally changing parts in the duets.  She speaks French with the same
fluency as English,  and every now and then,  addressing herself to the S.  S.
— "  Queje vous culore  /" — "  A]i^  permettez que je me mette d vos 2Jieds  /"
&c.,  with a dying languor that was equally laughable and lovely.

When I found,  by her taught son^s,  what a delightful singer she was
capable of becoming,  I really had not patience to hear her little French
airs,  and entreated her to give them up ;  but the little rogue instantly began
pestering me with them,  singing one after another with a comical sort of
malice,  and following me round the room,  when I said I would not listen to
her,  to say,  "  But is not this pretty  ? — and this  ? — and this 1"  singing away
with all her might and main.

She sung without any accompaniment,  as we had no instrument;  but the
S.  S.  says she plays too,  very well.  Indeed,  I fancy she can do well
whatever she pleases.

We hardly knew how to get away from her when the carriage was
ready to take us from Tunbridge,  and Mrs.  Thrale was so much enchanted
with her that she went on the Pantiles and bought her a very beautiful ink-
stand.

"  I don't mean,  Miss Birch,"  she said,  when she gave it her,  "  to present
you this toy as to a child,  but merely to beg you will do me the favour to
accept something that may make you now and then remember us."

She was much delighted with this present,  and told me,  in a whisper,
that she should put a drawing of it in her journal.

So you see,  Susy,  other children have had this whim.  But something
being said of novels,  the S.  S.  said —

"  Selina,  do you ever read them?" — And,  with a sigh,  the little girl
answered —

"  But too often  !— I wish I did not !"

The only thing I did not like in this seducing little creature was our
leave-taking.  The S.  S.  had,  as we expected,  her fine eyes suffused with
tears,  and nothing would serve the little Selina,  who admires the S.  S.
passionately,  but that she,  also,  must weep — and weep,  therefore,  she did,
and that in a manner as pretty to look at,  as soft,  as melting,  and as little
to her discomposure,  as the weeping of her fair exemplar.  The child's
success in this pathetic art made the tears of both appear to the whole
party to be lodged,  as the English merchant says,  "  very near the eyes !"

Doubtful as it is whether we shall ever see this sweet syren again,
nothing,  as Mrs.  Thrale said to her,  can be more certain than that we shall
hear of her again,  let her go whither she will.

Charmed as we all were with her,  we all agreed that to have the care of

132 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

her would be distraction !  "  She seems the girl in the world,"  Mrs.  Thrale
wisely said,  "  to attain the highest reach of human perfection as a man's
mistress !— as such she would be a second Cleopatra,  and have the world
at her command."

Poor thing !  I hope to Heaven she will escape such sovereignty and such
honours !

^  vP  ^  vf*  vS*  vF

We left Tunbridge Wells,  and got,  by dinner time,  to our first stage,
Uckfield,  which afforded me nothing to record,  except two lines of a
curious epitaph which I picked up in the churchyard : —

A wife and eight little children had I,
And two at a birth who never did cry.

Our next stage brought us to Brighthelmstone,  where I fancy we shall
stay till the Parliament calls away Mr.  Thrale.

The morning after our arrival,  our first visit was from Mr.  Kipping,  the
apothecary,  a character so curious that Foote designed him for his next
piece,  before he knew he had already written his last.  He is a prating,
good-humoured old gossip,  who runs on in as incoherent and unconnected
a style of discourse as Rose Fuller,  though not so tonish.

The rest of the morning we spent,  as usual at this place,  upon the Steyn,
and in booksellers'  shops.  Mrs.  Thrale entered all our names at Thomas's,
the fashionable bookseller;  but we find he has now a rival,  situated also upon
the Steyn,  who seems to carry away all the custom and all the company.
This is a Mr.  Bowen,  who is just come from London,  and who seems just
the man to carry the world before him as a shopkeeper.  Extremely civil,
attentive to watch opportunities of obliging,  and assiduous to make use of
them — skilful in discovering the taste or turn of mind of his customers,
and adroit in putting in their way just such temptations as they are least
able to withstand.  Mrs.  Thrale,  at the same time that she sees his manage-
ment and contrivance,  so much admires his sagacity and dexterity,  that,
though open-eyed,  she is as easily wrought upon to part with her money,  as
any of the many dupes in this place,  whom he persuades to require in-
dispensably whatever he shows them.

He did not,  however,  then at all suspect who I was,  for he showed me
nothing but schemes for raffles,  and books,  pocket-cases,  &c.,  which were
put up for those purposes.  It is plain I can have no authoress air,  since so
discerning a bookseller thought me a fine lady spendthrift,  who only wanted
occasions to get rid of money.

In the evening we went to the rooms,  which,  at this time,  are open every
other night at Shergold's,  or the New Assembly Rooms,  and the alternate
nights at Hick's,  or the Ship Tavern.     This night they were at the latter.

There was very little company,  and nobody that any of us knew,  except
two or three gentlemen of Mr.  Thrale's acquaintance,  among whom was
that celebrated wit and libertine,  the Hon.  Mr.  Beauclerk,  and a Mr.
Newnham,  a rich counsellor,  learned in the law,  but,  to me,  a displeasing
man.

Almost every body but ourselves went to cards  ;  we found it,  therefore,

pretty stupid,  and I was very glad when we came home.

*  *  *  *  *  *

Sunday morning,  as we came out of church,  we saw Mrs.  Cumberland,
one of her sons,  and both her daughters.  Mrs.  Thrale spoke to them,  but
I believe they did not recollect me.     They are reckoned the flashers of the

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I33

place,  yet every body laughs at them for their airs,  affectations,  and tonish
graces and impertinences.

In the evening,  Mrs.  Dickens,  a lady of Mrs.  Thrale's acquaintance,
invited us to drink tea at the rooms with her,  which we did,  and found them
much more full and lively than the preceding night.

Mrs.  Dickens is,  in Mrs.  Thrale's phrase,  a sensible hard-headed woman,
and her daughter,  Miss Dickens,  who accompanied us,  is a pretty girl of
fifteen,  who is always laughing,  not however from folly,  as she deserves
the same epithet I have given her mother,  but from youthful good-humour,
and from having from nature,  as Mr.  Thrale comically said to her,  after
examining her some minutes,  "  a good merry face of her own."

The folks of most consequence with respect to rank,  who were at the
rooms this night,  were Lady Pembroke and Lady Di Beauclerk,  both of
whom have still very pleasing remains of the beauty for which they have
been so much admired.  But the present beauty,  whose remains our children
(z.  e.  nieces)  may talk of,  is a Mrs.  Musters,  an exceeding pretty woman,
who is the reigning toast of the season.

While Mrs.  Thrale,  Mrs.  Dickens,  and I were walking about after tea,
w^e were joined by a Mr.  Cure,  a gentleman of the former's acquaintance.
After a little while he said —

"  Miss Thrale is very much grown since she w^as here last year ;  and
besides,  I think she's vastly altered."

"Do you,  sir,"  cried she,  "  I can't say I think so."

"  Oh vastly! — but young ladies at that age are ahvays altering.  To tell
you the truth,  I did not know her at all."

This,  for a little while,  passed quietly ;  but soon after he exclaimed,

"  Ma'am,  do you know I have not yet read  '  Evelina?'  "

"  Have not you so,  sir  ?"  cried she,  laughing.

"  No,  and I think I never shall,  for there's no getting it ;  the booksellers
say they never can keep it a moment,  and the folks that hire it keep lending
it from one to another in such a manner that it is never returned to the
library.     It's very provoking."

"  But,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  what makes you exclaim about it so to me?"

"  Why,  because,  if you recollect,  the last thing you said to me when
we parted last year,  was — be sure you read  '  Evelina.'  So as soon as I
saw you I recollected it all again.  But I wish Miss Thrale would turn
more this way."

"  Why what do you mean,  Mr.  Cure?  do you know Miss Thrale now?"

"  Yes,  to be sure,"  answered he,  looking full at me,  "  though I protest I
should not have guessed at her had I seen her with any body but you."

"  Oh ho  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  laughing,  "  so you mean Miss Burney all
this time."

"What? — how? — eh? — why is that — is not that Miss Thrale?  is not
that your daughter  ?"

"  No to be sure it is not — I wish she was  !"

Mr.  Cure looked aghast,  Mrs.  Dickens laughed aloud,  and I,  the whole
time,  had been obliged to turn my head another way,  that my sniggering
might not sooner make him see his mistake.

As soon,  I suppose,  as he was able,  Mr.  Cure,  in a low voice,  repeated,
"  Miss Burney !  so then that lady is the authoress of '  Evelina'  all this time."

And,  rather abruptly,  he left us and joined another party.

I suppose he told his story to as many as he talked to,  for,  in a short
time,  I found myself so violently stared at that I could hardly look any way
without being put out of countenance, — particularly by young Mr.  Cumber-

VOL.  I.  12

134 DIARY AiND LETTERS 1779.

land,  a handsome,  soft-looking youth,  who fixed his eyes upon me in-
cessantly, though but the evening before,  when I saw him at Hick's he
looked as if it would have been a diminution of his dignity to have regarded
me twice.

This ridiculous circumstance will,  however,  prevent any more mistakes
of the same kind,  I believe,  as my  "  authorshipness"  seems now pretty
well known and spread about Brighthelmstone.  The very next morn-
ing as Miss Thrale and I entered Bowen's shop,  where we were appointed
to meet Mrs.  Thrale,  I heard her saying to him,  as they were both in serious
and deep confabulation :  "  So you have picked up all this,  Mr.  Bowen,  have
you?"  then seeing me,  "  Oh,  ho !"  she cried,  "  so one is never to speak of
any body at Brighthelmstone,  but they are to be at one's elbow."

"  I presume,"  quoth I,  "you were scarcely speaking of me?"

"  No,  but I was hearing of you from Mr.  Bowen."

And when we left the shop she told me that he had said to her,  "  O
ma'am,  what a book thrown away was that !  All the trade cry shame on
Lowndes.  Not,  ma'am,  that I expected he could have known it's worth,
because that's out of the question  ;  but when its profits told him what it was,
it's quite scandalous that he should have done nothing  ! — quite ungentleman-
like indeed !"

There's a bookseller for you,  Susy  !

TF VT-  ^  vF  ^  VP

And now,  if by the mention of a ball,  I have raised in you any expecta-
tions of adventures,  which with Charlotte,  at least,  I doubt not has been the
case, — I am sorry to be obliged to blast them all by confessing that none
at all happened.

One thing,  however,  proved quite disagreeable to me,  and that was the
whole behaviour of the whole tribe of the Cumberlands,  which I must
explain.

Mr.  Cumberland,  when he saw Mrs.  Thrale,  flew with eagerness to her
and made her take his seat,  and he talked to her,  with great friendliness and
intimacy,  as he has been always accustomed to do, — and inquired very par-
ticularly concerning her daughter,  expressing an earnest desire to see her.
But when,  some time after,  Mrs,  Thrale said,  "  Oh,  there is my daughter,
with Miss Burney,"  he changed the discourse abruptly, — never came near
Miss Thrale,  and neither then nor since,  when he has met Mrs.  Thrale,  has
again mentioned her name  :  and the whole evening he seemed determined
to avoid us both.

Mrs.  Cumberland contented herself with only looking at me as at a person
she had no reason or business to know.

The two daughters,  but especially the eldest,  as well as the son,  were by
no means so quiet  ;  they stared at me every time I came near them as if I
had been a thing for a show  ;  surveyed me from head to foot,  and then
again,  and again,  and again returned to my face,  with so determined and so
unabating a curiosity,  that it really made me uncomfortable.

All the folks here impute the whole of this conduct to its having transpired
that I am to bring out a play this season  ;  for Mr.  Cumberland,  though in
all other respects an agreeable and a good man,  is so notorious for hating
and envying and spiting all authors in the dramatic line,  that he is hardly
decent in his behaviour towards them.

He has little reason,  at present at least,  to bear me any ill-will ;  but if he
is capable of such weakness and malignity as to have taken an aversion to
me merely because I can make use of pen and ink,  he deserves not to hear
of my having suppressed my play,  or of any thing else that can gratify so
illiberal a disposition.

1779.  Of'  THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I35

Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.  Cholmondeley,  and i\Ir.  and Mrs.  Thrale have all re-
peatedly said to me,  "  Cumberland no doubt hates you heartily by this time  ;"
but it always appeared to me a speech of mingled fun and flattery,  and I
never dreamed of its being possiljle to be true.  However,  perhaps yet all
this may be accidental,  so I will discuss the point no longer.

*******

A few days since we drank tea at Mrs.  Dickens's,  where,  with other com-
pany, we met Sir John and Lady S .    Sir John prides himself in being

a courtier of the last age.  He is abominably ugly,  and a prodigious puffer,
— nov>^  of his fortune,  now of his family,  and now of his courtly connexions
and feats.  His lady is a beautiful woman,  tall,  genteel,  and elegant in her
person,  with regular features,  and a fine complexion.  For the rest,  she is
well-bred,  gentle,  and amiable.

She invited us all to tea at her house the next evening,  where we met
Lady Pembroke,  whose character,  as far as it appears,  seems exactly the

same as Lady S 's.     But the chief employment of the evening was

listening to Sir John's braggadocios of what the old king said to him, — which
of the ladies of quality were his cousins, — how many acres of land he
enjoyed in Sussex,  and other such modest discourse.

After tea we all went to the rooms,  Lady Pembroke having first retired.
There was a great deal of company,  and among them the Cumberlands.
The eldest of the girls,  who was walking with Mrs.  Masters,  quite turned
round her whole person every time we passed each other,  to keep me in
sight,  and stare at me as long as possible ;  so did her brother.  I never saw
any thing so ill-bred and impertinent  ;  I protest I was ready to quit the
rooms to avoid them ;  till at last Miss Thrale,  catching Miss Cumberland's
eye,  gave her so full,  determined,  and downing a stare,  that whether cured
by shame or by resentment,  she forebore from that time to look at either of
us.  Miss Thrale,  with a sort of good-natured dryness,  said,  "  When-
ever you are disturbed with any of these starers,  apply to me, — I'll warrant
PU cure them.  I dare say the girl hates me for it ;  but what shall I be the
worse for that  ?  I would have served  ^Master Dickey so too,  only I could
not catch his eye."

Oct.  20. — Last Tuesday,  at the request of Lady S ,  who patronised

a poor actor,  we all went to the play, — which was Dryden's  "  Tempest,"
— and a worse performance have I seldom seen.  Shakspeares'  "  Tempest,"
which for fancy,  invention,  and originality,  is at the head of beautiful im-
probabilities, is rendered by the additions of Dryden a childish chaos of
absurdity and obscenity ;  and the grossness and awkwardness of these poor
unskiful actors rendered all that ought to have been obscure so shockingly
glaring,  that there was no attending to them without disgust.  All that
afforded me any entertainment was looking at Mr.  Thrale,  who turned up
his nose with an expression of contempt at the beginning of the performance,
and never suffered it to return to its usual place till it was ended  !

The play was ordered by Mrs.  Cumberland.  These poor actors never
have any company in the boxes unless they can prevail upon some lady to
bespeak a play,  and desire her acquaintance to go to it.  But we all agreed
we should not have been very proud to have had our names at the head of
a play bill of Dryden's  "  Tempest."

By the way,  Mrs.  Cumberland has never once waited on Mrs.  Thrale
since our arrival,  though,  till now,  she always seemed proud enough of the
acquaintance.     Very strange !     ]\Ir.  Cumberland,  after a week's considera-

136 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

tion and delay,  called at last,  and chatted with Mr.  and Mrs.  Thrale very
sociably and agreeably.  I happened to be up stairs,  and felt no great
desire,  you may believe,  to go down,  and Mrs.  Thrale archly enough said
afterwards,

"  I would have sent to you,  but hang it,  thought I,  if I only name her,
this man will snatch his hat and make off."

The other morning the two Misses came into Thomas's shop while we
were there,  and the eldest,  as usual,  gave me,  it seems,  the honour of em-
ploying her eyes the whole time she stayed.

We afterwards met them on the Steyn,  and they curtsied to Mrs.  Thrale,
who stopt and inquired after their father,  and then a dawdling conversation
took place.

"  How were you entertained at the play,  ma'am? — did you ever see any
thing so full?"

"  Oh,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  the ladies are all dying of it !  such holding
up of fans !"

"  Oh,  because it was so hot,"  cried Miss Cumberland,  entirely misunder-
standing her  :  "  it was monstrous hot,  indeed  !"

The next time I met them,  I intend to try if I can stop this their staring
system,  by courtesying to them immediately.  I think it will be impossible,
if I claim them as acquaintance,  that they can thus rudely fasten their eyes
upon me.

We have had a visit from Dr.  Delap.  He told me that he had another
tragedy,  and that I should have it to read.

He was very curious to see Mr.  Cumberland,  who,  it seems,  has given
evident marks of displeasure at his name whenever Mrs.  Thrale has men-
tioned it.  That poor man is so wonderfully narrow-minded in his author-
ship capacity,  though otherwise good,  humane,  and generous,  that he
changes countenance at either seeing or hearing of any writer whatsoever.
Mrs.  Thrale,  with whom,  this foible excepted,  he is a great favourite,  is so
enraged with him for his littleness of soul in this respect,  that merely to
plague him,  she vowed at the rooms she would walk all the evening between
Dr.  Delap and me.  I wished so little to increase his unpleasant feel-
ings, that I determined to keep with Miss Thrale and Miss Dickens entirely.
One time,  though,  Mrs.  Thrale,  when she was sitting by Dr.  Delap,  called
me suddenly to her,  and when I was seated,  said,  "  Now let's see if Mr.
Cumberland will come and speak to me  !"  But he always turns resolutely
another way when he sees her with either of us ;  though at all other times
he is particularly fond of her company.

"  It would actually serve him right,"  says he,  "  to make Dr.  Delap and
you strut at each side of me,  one with a dagger,  and the other with a mask,
as tragedy and comedy."

'^  I think.  Miss Burney,"  said the doctor,  "  you and I seem to stand in
the same predicament.  What shall we do for the poor man 1 suppose we
burn a play apiece  ?"

"  Depend upon it,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  he has heard in town,  that you
are both to bring one out this season,  and perhaps one of his own may be
deferred on that account."

"  Well,  he's a fine man,"  cried the doctor;  "pray.  Miss Burney,  show
me him when you see him."

On the announcement of the carriage,  we went into the next room for our

cloaks,  where Mrs.  Thrale and Mr.  Cumberland were in deep conversation.

"  Oh,  here's Miss Burney  !"  said Mrs.  Thrale aloud.     Mr.  Cumberland

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I37

turned round,  but withdrew his eyes instantly  ;  and T,  determined not to in-
terrupt them,  made Miss Thrale walk away with me.  In about ten minutes
she left him,  and we all came home.

As soon as we were in the carriage,

"  It has been,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  warmly,  "  all I could do not to affront
Mr.  Cumberland to-night !"

"  Oh,  I hope not !"  cried I ;  "I would not have you for the world !"

"  Why,  I have refrained  :  but with great difficulty !"

And then she told me the conversation she had just had with him.  As
soon as I made off,  he said,  with a spiteful tone of voice,

"  Oh,  that young lady is an author,  I hear!"

"  Yes,"  answered Mrs.  Thrale,  "  author of'  Evelina  !'  "

"  Humph, — I am told it has some humour !"

"  Ay,  indeed  !     Johnson says nothing like it has appeared for years  !"

*'So,"  cried he,  biting his lips,  and waving uneasily in his chair,  "so,
so !"

"  Yes,"  continued she,  "  and Sir Joshua Reynolds told Mr.  Thrale he
would give fifty pounds to know the author  !"

"  So,  so — oh,  vastly well !"  cried he,  putting his hand on his forehead.

"  Nay,"  added she,  "  Burke himself sat up all night to finish it !"

This seemed quite too much for him ;  he put both his hands to his face,
and waving backwards and forwards,  said,

"  Oh,  vastly well ! — this will do for any thing !"  with a tone as much as
to say,  Pray,  no more  ?  Then Mrs.  Thrale bid him good night,  longing,
she said,  to call Miss Thrale first,  and say,  "  So you won't speak to my
daughter  ? — why,  she is no author  !"

I much rejoice that she did not,  and I have most earnestly entreated her
not to tell this anecdote to any body here,  for I really am much concerned
to have ever encountered this sore man,  who,  if already he thus burns with
envy at the success of my book,  will,  should he find his narrowness of mind
resented by me,  or related by my friends,  not only wish me ill,  but do me
every ill office hereafter in his power.  Indeed,  I am quite shocked
to find how he avoids and determines to dislike me ;  for hitherto I
have always been willing and able to hope that I had not one real enemy or
ill-wisher in the world.  I shall still,  however,  hope,  if I can but keep Mrs.
Thrale's indignant warmth of friendship within bounds,  to somewhat con-
ciliate matters,  and prevent any open enmity,  which authorizes all ill deeds,
from taking place.     All authorship contention I shudder to think of.

I must now have the honour to present to you a new acquaintance,  who
this day dined here.

Mr.  B y,  an Irish gentleman,  late a commissary in Germany.     He

is between sixty and seventy,  but means to pass for about thirty  ;  gallant,
complaisant,  obsequious,  and humble to the fair sex,  for whom he has an
awful reverence  ;  but when not immediately addressing them,  swaggering,
blustering,  puffing,  and domineering.  These are two apparent characters ;
but the real man is worthy,  moral,  religious,  though conceited and parading.

He is as fond of quotations as my poor  "  Ladt/  Smatter,''^  and,  like her,
knows little beyond a song,  and always blunders about the author of that.
His language greatly resembles Rose Fuller's,  who,  as Mrs.  Thrale well
says,  when as old,  will be much such another personage.  His whole con-
versation consists in little French phrases,  picked up during his residence
abroad,  and in anecdotes and story-telling,  which are sure to be retold daily
and daily in the same words.

12*

138 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

Having given you this general sketch,  I will endeavour to illustrate it by-
some specimens  ;  but you must excuse their being unconnected,  and only
such as I can readily recollect.

Speaking of the ball in the evening,  to which we were all going,  "  Ah,
madam  !"  said he to Mrs.  Thrale,  "  there was a time when — tol-de-rol,  tol-
de-rol  [rising and dancing and singing],  tol-de-rol ! — I could dance with the
best of them ;  but,  now a man,  forty and upwards,  as my Lord Ligonier
used to say — but — tol-de-rol ! — there was a time  !"

"  Ay,  so there was,  Mr.  B y,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  and I think you

and I together made a very venerable appearance !"

"  Ah!  madam,  I remember once,  at Bath,  I was called out to dance with
one of the finest young ladies I ever saw.  I was just preparing to do my
best,  when a gentleman of my acquaintance was so cruel as to whisper me

— '  B y  !  the eyes of all Europe are upon you !' — for that was the

phrase of the times.    '  B y !'  says he,  '  the eyes of all Europe are upon

you  !' — I vow,  ma'am,  enough to make a man tremble ! — tol-de-rol,  tol-de-
rol  !  [dancing] — the eyes of all Europe are upon you  ! — I declare,  ma'am,
enough to put a man out of countenance !"

Dr.  Delap,  who came here some time after,  was speaking of Horace.

*'  Ah  !  madam,"  cried Mr.  B y,  "  this Latin — things of that kind —

we waste our youth,  ma'am,  in these vain studies.  For my part I wish I
had spent mine in studying French and Spanish — more useful,  ma'am.  But,
bless me,  ma'am,  what time have I had for that kind of thing?  Travcllino;
here,  over the ocean,  hills and dales,  ma'am — reading the great book of the
world — poor ignorant mortals,  ma'am, — no time to do any thing !"

"  Ay,  Mr.  B y,"  said  ]\Irs.  Thrale,  ''  I remember how you downed

Beauclerk and Hamilton,  the wits,  once at our house,  when they talked of
ghosts !"

"  Ah,  ma'am,  give me a brace of pistols,  and I warrant I'll manage a
ghost for you  !  Not but Providence may please to send little spirits — guar-
dian angels,  ma'am — to watch us :  that I can't speak about.  It would be
presumptuous,  ma'am — for what can a poor,  ignorant mortal know 1"

"  Ay,  so you told Beauclerk and Hamilton."

"  Oh yes,  ma'am.  Poor human beings can't account for any thing — and
call themselves esprits forts!  I vow  'tis presumptuous,  ma'am  !  Esprits
forts ^  indeed !  they can see no further than their noses,  poor,  ignorant
mortals  !  Here's an admiral,  and here's a prince,  and here's a general,  and
here's a dipper — and poor Smoker,  the bather,  ma'am  !  What's all this
strutting about,  and that kind of thing  ?  and then they can't account for a
blade of grass  !"

After this.  Dr.  Johnson being mentioned,

"  Ay,"  said he,  "  I'm sorry he did not come down with you.  I liked
him better than those others  :  not much of a fine gentleman,  indeed,  but a
clever fellow — a deal of knowledge — got a deuced good understanding?"

Dr.  Delap rather abruptly asked my Christian name  :  Mrs.  Thrale
answered,  and Mr.  B y tenderly repeated,

"  Fanny  !  a prodigious pretty name,  and a pretty lady that bears it.
Fanny  !     Ah  !  how beautiful is that song of Swift's —

'  When Fanny,  blooming fair,

First caught my ravished sight,
Struck with her mien and air — ' "

^'  Her face and air,"  interrupted Mrs.  Thrale,  "  for  '  mien and air'  we
hold to be much the same thino;."

1770.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I39

"  Right,  ma'am,  right !  You,  ma'am — why,  ma'am — you know every
thing ;  but,  as to me — to be sure,  I began with studying the old Greek and
Latin,  ma'am  :  but,  then,  travelling,  ma'am  ! — going through Germany,
and then France,  and Spain,  ma'am  !  and dipping at Brighthelmstone,  over
hills and dales,  reading the great book of the world  !  Ay,  a little poetry
now and then to be sure,  I have picked up.

'  My Phoebe and I,
O'er hills,  and o'er dales,  and o'er valleys will fly,
And love shall be by 1'

But,  as you say,  ma'am

Struck with her face and air,
I felt a strange delight I'

How pretty that is  :  how progressive from the first sight of her !     Ah  !
Swift was a fine man  !"

"  Why,  sir,  I don't think it's printed in his works !"  said Dr.  Delap.

"  No  !"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  because  'tis Chesterfield's  !"

"  Ay,  right,  right,  ma'am  !  so it is."

Now,  if I had heard all this before I wrote my play,  would you not have
thought I had borrowed the hint of my Witlings from Mr.  B y 1

"  I am glad,  Mr.  Thrale,"  continued this hero,  "  you have got your fire-
place altered.  Why,  ma'am,  there used to be such a wind,  there w^as no
sitting here.  Admirable dinners — excellent company — tres hon fare — and,
all the time,  'Signer Vento' coming dow^n the chimney  !  Do you remember,
Miss Thrale,  how^,  one day at dinner,  you burst out a laughing,  because I
said a trts hon goose  ?"

But if I have not now given you some idea of Mr.  B y's conversa-
tion, I never can,  for I have written almost as many w^ords as ever he uses,
and given you almost as many ideas as he ever starts  !  And as he almost
lives here,  it is fitting I let you know something of him.

Well,  in the evening we all went to the ball,  where we had appointed to

meet Lady S ,  Mrs.  Dickens,  and Mr.,  Mrs.,  and the blisses S ,  of

Lewes.

The eldest Miss S had for a partner a most odiously vulgar young

man,  short,  thick,  and totally underbred.

"  I wonder,"  said she to me,  between one of the dances,  "  what my
partner's name is — do you know  ?"

"  I am not sure,"  quoth I,  "  but I fancy Mr.  Squab  !"

"  Mr.  Squab  !"  repeated she.  "  Well,  I don't like him at all.  Pray,  do
you know who that gentleman is that jumps so  ]"  pointing to Mr.  Cure.

"  Yes,"  answered I,  "  'tis a Mr.  Kill  !"

"  Well,"  cried she,  "  I don't like his dancing at all.  I wonder who that
officer is?"  pointing to a fat,  coarse sort of a man,  who stooped im-
moderately.

"  Captain Slouch,"  quoth I.

"  Well,"  said she,  "  I think the people here have very odd names  !"

And thus,  though the names I gave them were merely and markingly
descriptive of their persons,  did this little noodle and her sister instantly
believe them.  When the dancing was over,  and we walked about,  Mr.
Cure,  with his usual obsequiousness,  came to speak to me,  and for a while
joined us  ;  and these girls,  who penned me between them,  tittered,  and
pinched me,  and whispered observations upon  "  Mr.  Kill,"  till I was obliged
to assume the most steady gravity,  to prevent his discovering how free I
had made with him.

140 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

Just before we came away,  Mr.  S came up to his daughter,  and said,

"  Pray,  my dear,  who was the gentleman you danced with  ?"

"  Mr.  Squab,  papa,"  answered she.

"  A good,  tight young man,"  said Mr.  S .     "  I must go and make a

bow to him before we go."

All the Cumberlands were there.  Mr.  Cumberland avoids Miss Thrale
as much as he does me,  merely,  I suppose,  because she is commonly with
me.  However,  if such is his humour,  he was not made too happy this
night,  for Mrs.  Thrale told me,  that while she was seated next him,  as he
was playing at cards.  Dr.  Delap came to her,  and began singing my lloge^
and saying how I should be adored in France  ;  that that was the paradise
of lady wits,  and that,  for his part,  if he had not known I was Dr.  Burney's
daughter,  he thought I had so much a French face and look that he should
have guessed me for a daughter of Voltaire's, — and other such speeches,
all of which,  I fear,  were so many torments to poor Mr.  Cumberland.

"  But,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  let him be tormented,  if such things can
torment him.     For my part I'd have a starling taught to halloo  '  Evelina  !'  "

^  tE-  vr vp  ^  vP

I am absolutely almost ill with laughing.  This Mr.  B y half con-
vulses me  ;  yet I cannot make you laugh by writing his speeches,  because
it is in the manner which accompanies them,  that,  more than the matter,
renders them so peculiarly ridiculous.  His extreme pomposity,  the solemn
stiffness of his person,  the conceited twinkling of his little old eyes,  and the
quaint importance of his delivery,  are so much more like some pragmatical
old coxcomb represented on the stage,  than like any thing in real and
common life,  that I think,  were I a man,  I should sometimes be betrayed
into clapping him for acting so well.  As it is,  I am sure no character in
any comedy I ever saw has made me laugh more extravagantly.

He dines and spends the evening here constantly,  to my great satisfaction.

At dinner,  when Mrs.  Thrale offers him a seat next her,  he regularly
says,

"  But where are Ics charmantes  ?"  meaning Miss T.  and me.  "  I can
do nothing till they are accommodated  !"

And,  whenever he drinks a glass of wine,  he never fails to touch either
Mrs.  Thrale's or my glass,  with  ''''  est-il pennis  ?"

But at the same time that he is so courteous,  he is proud to a most
sublime excess,  and thinks every person to whom he speaks honoured
beyond measure by his notice,  nay,  he does not even look at any body
without evidently displaying that such notice is more the effect of his
benign condescension,  than of any pretension on their part to deserve such
a mark of his perceiving their existence.  But you will think me mad about
this man.

By far the best among our men acquaintance here,  and him who,  next
to Mr.  Selwin,  I like the best,  is Mr.  Tidy.  You will probably suspect,  as
Lady Hesketh did,  last night when she met him here,  that this is a nick-
name only,  wheri^as he hath not,  heaven knows,  a better in the world  !  He
appears a grave,  reserved,  quiet man  ;  but he is a sarcastic,  observing,  and
ridiculing man.  No trusting to appearances,  no,  not even to wigs  !  for a
meaner,  more sneaking and pitiful wig, — a wig that less bespeaks a man
worth twopence in his pocket,  or two ideas in his head,  did I never see
than that of Mr.  Tidy.

But the most agreeable part of the evening was the time I spent with Mr.
Selwin,  to whom I have taken a prodigious fancy,  and a very odd one you

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  141

will say if  'you inquire into the  "  peticklers,"  for it is neither for brilliancy,
talents,  wit,  person,  nor youth,  since he is possessed of none of these  ;  but
the fact is,  he appears to me uncommonly good,  full of humanity,  generosity,
delicacy,  and benevolence.

One time,  while Mrs.  and Miss Thrale and I were parading up and
down,  he came to us laughing,  and said,

"  A gentleman has this moment been asking Lord Sefton who is the lady
in the hat  (n.  b.,  I only had one)  1  '  What  !'  answered his lordship,  '  did
you never read — '  "

He stopped and bit his lips,  and I bit mine,  and whisked to the other side.

I wonder if ever I shall cease feeling awkward at the first attack of every
fresh attacker upon this subject.

Do you know I have been writing to Dr.  Johnson  !  I tremble to men-
tion it  ;  but he sent a message in a letter to Mrs.  Thrale,  to wonder why
his pupils did not write to him,  and to hope they did not forget him  :  Miss
Thrale,  therefore,  wrote a letter immediately,  and I added only this little
postscript :

"  P.  S.  Dr.  Johnson's other pupil a little longs to add a few lines to this
letter, — but knows too well that all she has to say might be comprised in
signing herself his obliged and most obedient servant,  F.  B.  :  so that's better
than a long rigmarole about nothing."

Nov.  3. — Last Monday we went again to the ball.     Mr.  B y,  who

was there and seated himself next to Lady Pembroke,  at the top of the room,
looked most sublimely happy  ! — He continues still to afford me the highest
diversion.  Rose Fuller was never half so entertaining  ;  and Mr.  Sehvin,
who has long known him,  and has all his stories and sayings by heart,
studies to recollect all his favourite topics,  and tells me beforehand what he
will say upon the subject he prepares me for leading him to.  Indeed,
between him and Mrs.  Thrale,  almost all he has to say is almost exhausted.

As he is notorious for his contempt of all artists,  whom he looks upon
with little more respect than upon day-labourers,  the other day,  when
painting was discussed,  he spoke of Sir Joshua Reynolds as if he had been
upon a level with a carpenter or farrier.

"  Did you ever,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  see his Nativity  ?"

"  No,  madam, — but I know his pictures very well ;  I knew him many
years ago,  in Minorca ;  he drew my picture there, — and then he knew how
to take a moderate price  ;  but now,  1 vow,  ma'am,  'tis scandalous — scan-
dalous indeed  !  to pay a fellow here seventy guineas for scratching out a
head  !"

"  Sir,"  cried Dr.  Delap,  "  you must not run down Sir Joshua Reynolds,
because he is Miss Burney's friend."

"  Sir,"  answered he,  "  I don't want to run the man down  :  I like him
well enough in his proper place ;  he is as decent as any man of that sort I
ever knew  ;  but for all that,  sir,  his prices are shameful.  Why,  he would
not  [looking at the poor doctor with an enraged contempt]  he would not do
your head under seventy guineas  !"

"  Well,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "he had one portrait at the last exhibition,
that I think hardly could be paid enough for ;  it was of a Mr.  Stuart ;  I
had never done admiring it."

"  What stuff is this,   ma'am  !"  cried Mr.  B y,  "  how can two or

three dabs of paint ever be worth such a sum as that 1"

"  Sir,"  said Mr.  Selwin  (always willing to draw him out),  "  you know
not how much he is improved since you knew him in Minorca ;  he is now
the finest painter,  perhaps,  in the world."

142 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

"  Pho,  pho,  sir,"  cried he,  "  how can you talk so  ?  you,  Mr.  Selwin,
who have seen so many capital pictures abroad  ?"

"  Come,  come,  sir,"  said the ever odd Dr.  Delap,  "  you must not go on
so undervaluing him,  for,  I tell you,  he is a friend of Miss Burney's."

"  Sir,"  said Mr.  B y,  "  I tell you again I have no objection to the

man ;  I have dined in his company two or three times ;  a very decent man
he is,  fit to keep company with gentlemen ;  but,  ma'am,  what are all your
modern dabblers put together to one ancient  ?  nothing  ! — a set of — not a
Rubens among them  !  I vow,  ma'am,  not a Rubens among them  !"

But,  perhaps,  his contempt of Dr.  Delap's plea that he was my friend,
may make you suppose that I am not in his good graces ;  whereas I assure
you it is not so  ;  for the other evening when they were all at cards,  I left
the room for some time,  and on my return,  Mr.  Selwin said,

"  Miss Burney,  do not your cheeks tingle  ?'

"  No,"  quoth I,  "  why should they  ]"

"  From the conversation that has just passed,"  answered he ;  and after-
wards I heard from Mrs.  Thrale,  that Mr.  B y had been singing my

praises,  and pronouncing me  "  a dear little charmmiteP

Brigiithelmstone. — To go on with the subject I left off with last — my

favourite subject you will think it — Mr.  B y.     I must inform you that

his commendation was more astonishing to me than any body's could be,  as
I had really taken it for granted he had hardly noticed my existence.  But
he has also spoken very well of Dr.  Delap — that is to say,  in a very con-
descending manner,  "  That Dr.  Delap,"  said he,  "  seems a good sort of
man  ;  I wish all the cloth were like him  ;  but lackaday !  'tis no such thing ;
the clergy in general are but odd dogs."

Whenever plays are mentioned,  we have also a regular speech about
them.

"  I never,"  he says,  "  go to a tragedy, — it's too affecting ;  tragedy
enough in real life :  tragedies are only fit for fair females ;  for my part,  I
cannot bear to see Othello tearing about in that violent manner  ; — and fair
little Desdemona — ma'am,  'tis too affecting !  to see your kings and your
princes tearing their pretty locks, — oh there's no standing it  !  '  A straw-
crown'd monarch,' — what is that,  Mrs.  Thrale  ?

'  A straw-crovvn'd monarch in mock-majesty.*

I can't recollect now where that is;  but for my part,  I really cannot bear
to see such sights.  And then out come the white handkerchiefs,  and all
their pretty eyes are wiping,  and then come poison and daggers,  and all
that kind of thing, — O ma'am,  'tis too much  ;  but yet the fair tender hearts,
the pretty little females,  all like it  !"

This speech,  word for word,  I have heard already from him literally four
times.

When Mr.  Garrick was mentioned,  he honoured him with much the
same style of compliment as he had done Sir Joshua Reynolds.

"  Ay,  ay,"  said he,  "  that Garrick was another of those fellows that
people run mad about.  Ma'am,  'tis a shame to think of such things  !  an
actor living like a person of quality  !  scandalous  !  I vow,  scandalous  !"

"  Well, — commend me to Mr.  B y  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  for he is

your only man to put down all the people that every body else sets up."

"  Why,  ma'am,"  answered he,  "  I like all these people very well in their
proper places  ;  but to see such a set of poor beings living like persons of
quality, — 'tis preposterous  !    common sense,   madam,    common sense is

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I43

against that kind of thing.  As to Garrick,  he was a very good mimic,  an
entertaining fellow enough,  and all that kind of thing ;  but for an actor to
live hke a person of quality — oh,  scandalous  !"

Some time after the musical tribe was mentioned.  He was at cards at
the time with Mr.  Selwin,  Dr.  Delap,  and Mr.  Thrale,  while we  "  fair
females,"  as he always calls us,  were speaking of Agujari.  He constrained
himself from flying out as long as he was able ;  but upon our mentioning
her having fifty pounds a song,  he suddenly,  in a great rage,  called out
"  Catgut and rosin  ! — ma'am,  'tis scandalous !"

We all laughed,  and Mr.  Selwin,  to provoke him on,  said,
"  Why,  sir,  how shall we part with our money better  ?"
"  Oh fie  !  fie  !"  cried he,  "  I have not patience to hear of such folly  ;
common sense,  sir,  common sense is against it.  Why now there was one
of these fellows at Bath last season,  a Mr.  Rauzzini, — I vow I longed to
cane him every day  !  such a work made with him !  all the fair females
sighing for him  !  enough to make a man sick  !"

%  ^  %  %  %

I have always,  at dinner,  the good fortune to sit next the General,  for I
am sure if I had not I could not avoid offending him,  because I am eternally
upon the titter when he speaks,  that if I faced him he must see my merri-
ment was not merely at his humour,  but excited by his countenance,  his
language,  his winking,  and the very tone of his voice.

J\Ir.  Selwin,  who,  as I have already hinted,  indulges my enjoyment of Mr.

B y's conversation,  by always trying to draw him out upon such topics

as he most shows off in,  told me some days since,  that he feared I had now
exhausted all his stories,  and heard him discuss all his shining subjects of
dib'course  ;  but aflerwards,  recollecting himself,  he added,  that there was yet
one in reserve,  which was  "  Ladies learning Greek,"  upon which he had,
last year,  flourished very copiously.  The occasion was Miss Streatfield's
knowledge of that language,  and the General,  who wants two or three phrases
of Latin to make him pass for a man of learning  (as he fails not daily to
repeat his whole stock),  was so much incensed that a  "  fair female"  should
presume to study Greek,  that he used to be quite outrageous upon the
subject.       Mr.   Selwin,  therefore promised to treat me with hearing his

dissertation,  which he assured me would afford me no little diversion.

*  *  *  #  *

The other day,  at dinner,  the subject was,  married life,  and among various

husbands and wives Lord L —  being mentioned,  Mr.  B y pronounced

his panegyric,  and called him his friend.

Mr.  Selwin,  though with much gentleness,  differed from him in opinion,
and declared he could not think well of him,  as he knew his lady,  who
was an amiable woman,  was used very ill by him.

"  How,  sir  '?"  cried Mr.  B y.

"  I have known him,"  answered Mr.  Selwin,  "  frequently  ])inch her till
she has been ready to cry with pain though she has endeavoured to pre-
vent its being observed."

"  And I,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  know that he pulled her nose,  in his frantic
brutality,  till he broke some vessels of it ;  and when she was dying she
still found the torture he had given her by it so great,  that it was one of her
last complaints."

The General,  who is all for love and gallantry,  far from attempting to
vindicate his friend,  quite swelled with indignation at this account,  and after
a pause,  big with anger,  exclaimed,

"  Wretched doings,  sir,  wretched doings  !"

144 DIARY AND LETTERS 1779.

"  Nay,  I have known him,"  added Mr.  Selwin,  "  insist upon handing her
to her carriage,  and then,  with an affected kindness,  pretend to kiss her hand,
instead of which he has almost bit a piece out of it !"

"Pitiful! — pitiful!  sir,"  cried the General,  "I know nothing more
shabby  !"

"  He was equally inhuman to his daughter,"  said Mrs.  Thrale, "  for,  in
one of his rages,  he almost throttled her."

"Wretched doings  !"  again exclaimed Mr.  B y,  "what!  cruel to a fair

female  !  Oh fie  !  fie  !  fie  ! — a fellow who can be cruel to females and chil-
dren, or animals,  must be a pitiful fellow indeed.  I wish we had had him
here in the sea.  I should like to have had him stripped,  and that kind of
thing,  and been well banged by ten of our dippers here with a cat-o'-nine-
tails.    Cruel to a fair female  ?     Oh fie  !  fie  !  fie  !"

I know not how this may read,  but I assure you its sound was ludicrous
enough.

However,  I have never yet told you his most favourite story,  though we
have regularly heard it three or four times a day  ! — And this is about his
health.

"  Some years ago,"  he says, — "  let's see,  how many  ?  in the year 71, —
ay,  71,  72 — thereabouts — I was taken very ill,  and,  by ill-luck,  I was per-
suaded to ask advice of one of these Dr.  Gallipots  : — oh,  how I hate them
all !  Sir,  they are the vilest pickpockets — know nothing,  sir !  nothing in the
vi^orld  !  poor ignorant mortals !  and then they pretend — In short,  sir,  I hate
them all,  I have suffered so much by them,  sir — lost four years of the hap-
piness of my life — let's see,  71,  72,  73,  74 — ay,  four years,  sir  ! — mistook
my case,  sir  ! — and all that kind of thing.  Why,  sir,  my feet swelled as big
as two horses'  heads  !  I vow I will never consult one of these Dr.  Gallipot
fellows again  !  lost me,  sir,  four years of the happiness of my hfe  ! — why I
grew quite an object  ! — you would hardly have known me ! — lost all the
calves of my legs  ! — had not an ounce of flesh left  ! — and as to the rouge —
why,  my face was the colour of that candle  ! — those deuced Gallipot fellows  !
— why they robbed me of four years — let me see,  ay,  71,  72 — "

And then it all goes over again !

This story is always a propos ;  if health is mentioned,  it is instanced to
show its precariousness  ;  if life,  to bewail what he has lost of it ;  if pain,  to
relate what he has suffered ;  if pleasure,  to recapitulate what he has been
deprived of;  but if a physician is hinted at,  eagerly indeed is the opportunity
seized of inveighing against the whole faculty.

^  -vF tIP Tf-  T^

Tuesday was a very agreeable day indeed,  and I am sure a merry one to
me  ;  but it was all owing to the General,  and I do think you seem to have
a true taste for him,  so I shall give you but a brief account of my entertain-
ment from him.

We had a large party of gentlemen to dinner.  Among them was Mr.
Hamilton,  commonly called Single-speech Hamilton,  from having made one
remarkable speech in the House of Commons against government,  and
receiving some douceur to be silent ever after.  This Mr.  Hamilton is ex-
tremely tall and handsome  ;  has an air of haughty and fashionable supe-
riority ;  is intelligent,  dry,  sarcastic,  and clever.  I should have received
much pleasure from his conversational powers,  had I not previously been
prejudiced against him,  by hearing that he is infinitely artful,  double,  and
crafty.

The dinner conversation was too general to be well remembered  ;  neither,
indeed shall I attempt more than partial scraps relating to matters of what
passed when we adjourned to tea.

1779.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  145

]Mr.  Hamilton,  Mr.  Selwyn,  Mr.  Tidy,  and Mr.  Thrale seated themselves
to whist ;  the rest looked on  :  but the General,  as he always does,  took up
the newspaper,  and with various comments,  made aloud,  as he went on
reading to himself,  diverted the whole company.  Now he would cry,
"  Strange !  strange that !" — presently,  "  What stuff!  I don't believe a word
of it !" — a little after,  "  O Mr.  Bate,  I wish your ears were cropped  !" — then,
"  Ha  !  ha  !  ha  !  funnihus  !  fmuiihus  !  indeed  !" — and,  at last,  in a great
rage,  he exclaimed,  "  What a fellow is this,  to presume to arraign the con-
duct of persons of quality  !"

Having diverted himself and us in this manner,  till he had read every
column methodically through,  he began all over again,  and presently called
out,  "  Ha  !  ha !  here's a pretty thing  !"  and then,  in a plaintive voice,  lan-
guished out some wretched verses.

Although the only mark of approbation with which the company favoured
these lines was laughing at them,  the General presently found something
else equally bad,  which he also praised,  also read,  and also raised a laugh at.

A few minutes after he began puffing and blowing,  with rising indignation,
and,  at last,  cried out,  "  What a fellow is this?  I should not be at all sur-
prised if General Burgoyne cut off both his ears  !"

"  You have great variety there,"  cried Mr.  Hamilton drily ;  "  but I think,
Mr.  B y,  you have read us nothing to-day about the analeptic pills  !"

Though we all smiled at this,  the General,  unconscious of any joke,
gravely answered.

"  No,  sir !  I have not seen them yet,  but I dare say I shall find them by
and by !"

And,  by the time the next game was finished,  he called out,  "  No !  I see
nothing of the analeptic pills to-day  ;  but here's some Samaritan drops  !"

Soon after he began to rage about some baronet,  whose title began,  Sir
Carnaby.  "  Well,"  he cried,  "  what names people do think of!  Here's
another now,  Sir Onesiphoras Paul  !  why,  now what a name is that !  Poor
human beings here,  inventing such a name as that !  I can't imagine where
they met with it ;  it is not in the Bible."

"  There you are a little mistaken  !"  said Mr.  Hamilton,  coolly.

"  Is it?     Well,  I protest,  Onesiphoras  !  ha  !  ha  !"

"  But you don't exactly pronounce it right,"  returned Mr.  Hamilton,  "  it
is OnesiphorZf^s — not  <25,  as you say it."

Mr.  B y made no answer,  but went on reading the newspaper to

himself.

Mr.  Hamilton,  who had now given his place at the whist-table to Mr.
Bateson,  related to us a very extraordinary cure performed by a physician,
who would not write his prescriptions,  "  Because,"  said he,  "  they should
not appear against him,  as his advice was out of rule ;  but the cure was
performed,  and I much honour,  and would willingly employ such a man."

"  How  !"  exclaimed Mr.  B y,  who always fires at the very name of a

physician,  "  what  !  let one of those fellows try his experiments upon you.
For my part,  I'll never employ one again as long as I live !  I've suffered too
much by them  ;  lost me-  five years of the happiness of my life — ever since
the year — let's see,  '71,  72 — "

"  Mrs.  Thrale,"  interrupted Mr.  Hamilton,  "  I was in some hopes Dr.
Johnson would have come hither with you."

Mrs.  Thrale answered him ;  but Mr.  B y went on.

"  One of those Dr.  Gallipots,  now — Heberden — attended a poor fellow I
knew.     '  Oh,'  says he,  '  he'll do vastly well !'  and so,  and so on,  and all

VOL.  I.  13

146 DIARYJAND LETTERS 1779.

that kind of thing  :  but the next morning,  when he called,  the poor gentle-
man was dead  !     There's your Mr.  Heberden for you  !     Oh,  fie  !  fie 7"

"  What will you do without them  ?"  said Mr.  Hamilton.

"  Do,  sir  ?  Why,  live like men  !  Who wants a pack of their nostrums  ?
I'll never employ one again while I live  !  They mistook my case,  sir ;  they
played the very devil with me  !  Let me see,  '71,  72 — "

"  What !"  interrupted Mr.  Hamilton,  "  are you seventy-two  ?"

The dry humour with which he asked this,  set the whole company in a
roar.     Mr.  B y angrily answered,

"  No,  sir,  no  !  no such thing ;  but I say — "

And then he went on with his story  :  no calves to his legs  ;  mistook his
case  ;  feet swelled as big as horses'  heads  ;  not an ounce of flesh  ; — and all
the old phrases were repeated with so sad a solemnity,  and attended to by
Mr.  Hamilton with so contemptuous a frigidity,  that I was obliged to take
up a newspaper to hide my face.     Miss Thrale ran out of the room  ;  Mr.

Selwyn laughed till he could hardly hold his cards  ;    Captain W

halloed quite indecently  ;  and Mr.  Tidy shook all over as if he was in an
ague:  and yet the General never found it out.

MISS F.  BURNEY,  TO MR.  CRISP.

St.  Martin's Street,  Dec.  1779.
My dearest Daddy,

I have deferred writing from day to day,  in expectation of being able
to fix some time for my long and most earnestly coveted visit to dear
Chesington  ;  but my father's own movements have been so uncertain,  that
I found it impossible to tease him about fixing mine.  At length,  however,
we have come to the point.  He has desired me to sift for what room you
have,  and to sound as to convenience.  Now I know the shortest way of
doing this is by coming plump upon the question  ;  and,  therefore,  both to save
myself the trouble of a long half-meaning,  half-hinting,  half-intelligible rig-
marole, and you the trouble of vague suspicions,  and puzzling conjectures,
I think the best method is plainly to say,  that,  in about ten days he thinks
he can come to Chesington,  if,  without difficulty,  you can then accom-
modate him.

Not one word has he yet said about the rest of the family  ;  but I know
he means not to travel solus :  and I know,  too,  that it is not any secret to
him that I,  for one,  build upon accompanying him,  as a thing of course.

I am extremely gratified by your approbation of my journal.  Miss Birch,
I do assure you,  exists exactly such as I have described her.  I never mix
truth and fiction :  all that I relate in journalizing is strictly,  nay plainly,
fact.  I never,  in all my life,  have been a sayer of the thing that is not ;
and now I should be not only a knave but a fool also,  in so doing,  as I have
other purposes for imaginary characters than filling letters with them.  Give
me credit,  therefore,  on the score of interest,  and common sense,  if not of
principle.  But,  however,  the world,  and especially the Great world,  is
so filled with absurdity of various sorts,  now bursting forth in impertinence,
now in pomposity,  now gigghng in silliness,  and now yawning in dulness,
that there is no occasion for invention to draw what is striking in every
possible species of the ridiculous.

I hope to be very comfortable with you,  when I can get to you,  I will
bring you the little sketch I made of the heroine you seem to interest your-
self in,  and perhaps by your advice may again take her up,  or finally let
her rest.

Adieu,  dearest daddy ;  kindest love to you from all quarters, — mostly
from —  F.  B.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I47

CHAPTER VII.

1780.

Miss Barney to Mr.  Crisp — The Troubles of Popularity — Ladies Dress — Miss Burnev's
Comedy of  "  The Witlings" — Sheridan's Application to her — Plot and Characters"  of
"The Witlings" — Lord Sandwich — Captain Cook — His Death — Hon.  Capt.  Walsing-
ham — George IIL and the Navy — Dr.  Hunter — Dr.  Solander — Murphy — His Oddities
— Table-talk — Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney — Excellent Advice about her Comedy — Colley
Cibber — Journal Resumed — Pacchierotti — Journey to Bath — The Lawrence Family at
Devizes — The late President of the Royal Academy at Ten Years of age — Prince
Hoare — Arrival at Bath — Description of the Place and Company — Parties — Lady
Miller's Vase— Mrs.  Montagu— The Theatre— The Bowdler Family— Dr.  Woodward
— Dr.  Harrington — ]\Irs.  Byron — Lord Mulgrave — The Hon.  Augustus Phipps — Table-
talk — Anecdotes of the late General Phipps — Illustrations of  "  Evelina" — Dr.  Johnson
— The Provost of Eton — Bath Society — Dean of Ossory — Mrs.  Montagu — A Witling
— Mrs.  Montagu and Mrs.  Thrale contrasted — Letter from Mr.  Crisp — The Duchess
of Marlborough — A Scotch Bishop — Duchess of Portland — Colley Cibber — Sheridan —
Bath — Journal Resumed — Lord Mulgrave — The Bowdler Family — The Byrons — A
Pleasant Meeting — A Mistake — An Evening Party — A Pretty Poet — Mrs.  Siddons as
Belvidera — A Pink and White Poet — Anstey,  Author of the  "New Bath Guide."

FROM MISS F.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

St.  ^lartin's Street,  January 22d,  1780.
My dearest Daddy,

As this sheet is but to contain a sequel of what I writ last,  not to aspire
at being regarded as a separate or answer-claiming letter,  I shall proceed
without fresh preamble.

You make a condque kind of inquiry about my  "  incessant and un-
common engagements." — Now,  my dear daddy,  this is an inquiry I feel
rather small in answering,  for I am sure you expect to hear something
respectable in that sort of way,  whereas I have nothing to enumerate that
commands attention,  or that will make a favourable report.  For the truth
is,  my  "  uncommon"  engagements have only been of the visiting system.,
and my  "  incessant"  ones only of the icorJdng imrty  ; — for perpetual dress
requires perpetual replenishment,  and that replenishment actually occupies
almost every moment I spend out of company.

"  Fact !  fact !"  I assure you, — however paltry,  ridiculous,  or incon-
ceivable it may sound.  Caps,  hats,  and ribbons make,  indeed,  no venerable
appearance upon paper ;  no more do eating and drinking  ; — yet the one can
no more be worn without being made,  than the other can be swallowed
without being cooked ;  and those who can neither pay milliners nor keep
scullions,  must either toil for themselves,  or go capless and dinnerless.  So
if you are for a high-polished comparison!,  I'm your man  !

Now,  instead of furbelows and gewgaws of this sort,  my dear daddy
probably expected to hear of duodecimos,  octavos,  or quartos  ! — Helas  !  I
am sorry that is not the case, — but not one word,  no,  not one syllable did I
write to any purpose,  from the time you left me at Streatham,  till Christmas,
when I came home.  But now I have something to communicate concerning
which I must beg you to give me your opinion.

As my play was settled in its silent suppression,  I entreated my father to
call on Mr.  Sheridan,  in order to prevent his expecting any thing from me.

148 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

as he had had a good right to do,  from my having sent him a positive mes-
sage that I should,  in compliance with his exhortations at Mrs.  Cholmonde-
ley's,  try my fortune in the theatrical line,  and send him a piece for this
winter.  My father did call,  but found him not at home,  neither did he
happen to see him till about Christmas.  He then acquainted him that what
I had written had entirely dissatisfied me,  and that I desired to decline for
the present all attempts of that sort.

Mr.  Sheridan was pleased to express great concern, — nay more,  to pro-
test he would not accept my refusal.  He begged my father to tell me that
he could take no denial to seeing what I had done — that I could be no fair
judge lor myself — that he doubted not but I would please,  but w^as glad I
was not satisfied,  as he would much rather see pieces before their authors
were contented with them than afterwards,  on account of sundry small
changes always necessary to be made by the managers,  for theatrical pur-
poses, and to which they were loth to submit when their writings were
finished to their own approbation.  In short,  he said so much,  that my
father,  ever easy to be worked upon,  began to waver,  and told me he wished
I would show the play to Sheridan at once.

This very much disconcerted me :  I had taken a sort of disgust to it,  and
was myself most earnestly desirous to let it die a quiet death.  I therefore
cooled the affair as much as I conveniently could,  and by evading from time
to time the conversation,  it was again sinking into its old state, — when
again J\fr.  Sheridan saw my father,  and asked his leave to call upon me
himself.

This could not be refused.

Well, — I was now violently fidgeted,  and began to think of alterations, —
and by setting my head to work,  I have actually now written the fourth act
from beginning to end,  except one scene.  Mr.  Sheridan,  however,  has not
yet called,  and I have so little heart in the afiiair,  that I have now again
quite dropt it.

Such is the present situation of my politics.  Now,  I wish you much to
write me your private opinion what I had best do in case of an emergency.
Your letters are always sacred,  so pray write with your usual sincerity and
openness.  I know you too well to fear your being offended if things should
be so managed that your counsel cannot be followed  ;  it will,  at any rate,  not
be thrown away,  since it will be a fresh proof of your interest in my affairs
and my little self.

My notions I will also tell you ;  they are  (in case I must produce this
piece to the manager) : —

To entirely omit all mention of the club  ; —

To curtail the parts of Smatter and Dabbler as much as possible  : —

To restore to Censor his 5000/.  and not trouble him even to offer it ; —

To give a new friend to Cecilia,  by whom her affairs shall be retrieved,
and through whose means the catastrophe shall be brought to be happy ; —

And to change the nature of Beaufort's connexions with Lady Smatter,
in order to obviate the unlucky resemblance the adopted nephew bears to our
female pride of literature.

This is all I have at present thought of.  And yet,  if I am so allowed,
even these thoughts shall all turn to nothing ;  for I have so much more fear
than hope,  and anxiety than pleasure,  in thinking at all of the theatre,
that I believe my wisest way will be to shirk — which,  if by evasive and
sneaking means I can,  I shall.

Now concerning Admiral Jem; — you have had all the accounts of him
from my mother;  whether or not he has made any change in his situation
we cannot tell.      The Morning Post had yesterday this paragraph : —

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I49

"  We hear Lieutenant Burney has succeeded to the command of Cant.
Gierke's ship."

That this,  as Miss Waldron said of her hair,  is all a falsity,  we are,  how-
ever, certain,  as Lord Sandwich has informed my father that the first lieu-
tenant of poor Capt.  Cook was promoted to the Discovery.  Whether,  how-
ever, Jem has been made first lieutenant of the Resolution,  whether that
vacancy has been filled up by the second lieutenant of that ship,  we are not
informed.  The letter from my admiral has not,  it seems,  been very clear,
for I met the Hon.  Capt.  Walsingham last week on a visit,  and he said lie
had been at court in the morning.  "  And the king,"  he continued,  "  said to
me,  '  Why,  I don't think you captains in the navy shine much in the lite-
rary way !'  '  No,  sir,'  answered I,  '  but then,  in return,  no more do your
Majesty's captains in the army' — except Burgoyne,  I had a good mind to
say  ! — but I did not dare."

I shall give you some further particulars of my meeting this Capt.  Wal-
singham in some future letter,  as I was much pleased with him.

I am sure you must have been grieved for poor Capt.  Cook.*  How hard,
after so many dangers,  so much toil, — to die in so shocking a manner — in
an island he had himself discovered — among savages he had himself,  in his
first visit to them,  civilized and rendered kind and hospitable,  and in pur-
suit of obtaining justice in a cause in which he had himself no interest,  but
zeal for his other captain !  He was,  besides,  the most moderate,  humane,
and gentle circumnavigator who ever went out upon discoveries  ;  agreed the
best with all the Indians,  and till this fatal time,  never failed,  however hostile
they met,  to leave them his friends.

Dr.  Hunter,  who called here lately,  said that he doubted not but Capt.
Cook had trusted them too unguardedly ;  for as he always had declared his
opinion that savages never committed murder without provocation,  he boldly
went among them without precautions for safety,  and paid for his incautious
intrepidity with his very valuable life.

The Thrales are all tolerably well, — Mr.  Thrale I think and hope much
better.  I go to them very often,  and they come here certainly once every
week,  and Mrs.  Thrale generally oftener.  I have had some charming meet-
ings at their house,  which though in brief,  I will enumerate.

At the first the party was,  Mr.  Murphy,  Mr.  Seward,  Mr.  Evans,  Dr.
Solander,  and Lady Ladd.  Dr.  Johnson had not then settled in the bo-
rough.

Mr.  Evans is a clergyman,  very intimate with the Thrales,  and a good-
humoured and a sensible man.

Dr.  Solander,  whom I never saw before,  I found very sociable,  full of
talk,  information,  and entertainment.     My father has very exactly named
him,  in calling him a philosophical gossip.
The others you have heard of frequently.

Mr.  Murphy  "  made at me"  immediately  ; — he took a chair next to mine,
and would talk to me,  and to me only,  almost all the day.  He attacked me
about my play,  entreated me most earnestly to show him the rest of it,  and
made it many compliments.  I told him that I had quite given it up — that I
did not like it now it was done,  and would not venture to try it,  and there-
fore could not consent to show it.  He quite flew at this — vowed I should
not be its judge.

"  What !"  cried he,  "  condemn in this manner  ! — give up such writing  !

*  The news of Captain Cook's melancholy death had just reached England.  It took
place in the preceding February.

13*

150 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

such dialogue !  such character !  No,  it must not be.  Show it me — you
shall show it me.  If it wants a few stage-tricks trust it with me,  and I will
put them in.  I have had a long experience in these matters.  I know what
the galleries will and will not bear.  I will promise not to let it go out of
my hands without engaging for its success."

This,  and much more he went on with in a low voice,  obliging me by the
nature of the subject to answer him in the same,  and making every body
stare at the closeness of our confab,  which I believe was half its pleasure
to him,  for he loves mischievous fun as much as if he was but sixteen.

While we were thus discoursing,  Mr.  Seward,  who I am sure wondered
at us,  called out,  "  Miss Burney,  you don't hear Dr.  Solander."  I then
endeavoured to listen to him,  and found he was giving a very particular
account to the company of Captain Cook's appearance at Khamtschatka — a
subject which they naturally imagined would interest me.  And so indeed it
did ;  but it was in vain,  for Mr.  Murphy would not hear a word ;  he con-
tinued talking to me in a whisper,  and distracted my attention in such a
manner that 1 heard both and understood neither.

Again,  in a few minutes,  Mr.  Seward called out,  "  Miss Burney,  you
don't hear this ;"  and yet my neighbour would not regard him,  nor would
allow that I should.      Exhortation followed exhortation,    and entreaty
entreaty,  till,  almost out of patience,  Mr.  Seward a third time exclaimed,
*'  Why,  Miss Burney,  Dr.  Solander is speaking of your brother's ship."
I was half ashamed,  and half ready to laugh.

"  Ay,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  Mr.  Murphy and Miss Burney are got to flir-
tation, so what care they for Captain Cook and Captain Clerke."

"  Captain Cook and Captain Clerke V repeated Mr.   Murphy, — "  who
mentioned them 1"
Every body laughed.

"  Who  ?"  said Mrs.  Thrale.  "  Why Dr.  Solander has been talking of
them this hour."

"  Indeed  !"  exclaimed he,  "  why then it's Miss Burney's fault :  she has
been talking to me all this time on purpose to prevent my listening."
Did you ever hear such assurance  ?

I can write no more particulars of my visit,  as my letter is so monstrously
long already  ;  but in conclusion.  Dr.  Solander invited the whole party to the
Museum that day week,  and Lady Ladd,  who brought me home,  invited us
all to dine with her after seeing it.  This was by all accepted,  and I will
say something of it hereafter.  I am very sorry I have forgot to ask for
franks,  and must not forget to ask your pardon.

And so God bless you,  my dear daddy !  and bless Mrs.  Gast,  Mrs.  Ham,
and Kitty,  and do you say God bless

Your ever loving and affectionate

F.  B.

MR.  CRISP TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Chesington,  Feb.  23,  1780.
My dear Fannikin,

Our letters crossed each other.  I did not receive yours till the day after
mine was sent off*,  otherwise I should not have then omitted what you seemed
to require — my notions on the subject of Mr.  Sheridan's importunity.  My
great scruple all along has been the consideration of the great stake you are
playing for,  how much you have to lose,  and how unequal your delicate and
tender frame of mind would be to sustain the shock of a failure of success,
should that be the case.     You can't easily imagine how much it goes

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  151

against me to say any thing that looks like discouragement to a spirit
already too diffident and apprehensive.  Nothing but so rooted a regard for
my Fannikin,  and her peace and happiness,  as I feel at this instant,  could
ever have prevailed on me to have used that freedom with her,  which though
all authors pretend to insist on from the friends they consult,  yet ninety-
nine out of a hundred are offended at ;  and not only so,  but bear a secret
grudge and enmity for the sincerity they have demanded,  and in some mea-
sure extorted.  I myself have met with and smarted for some instances of
this kind ;  but that shall not hinder me from delivering my real sentiments
to those I love when called upon,  and particularly my own creature,  Fanni-
kin, for I think I know her generosity too well to suspect her of taking
amiss what can proceed from no motive but friendship and fidelity.

Well,  then,  this is my idea.  The play has wit enough and enough — but
the story and the incidents don't appear to me interesting enough to seize
and keep hold of the attention and eager expectations of the generality of
audiences.     This,  to me,  is its capital defect.

The omissions you propose are right,  I think ;  but how the business of
the piece is to go on with such omissions and alterations as you mention,  it
is impossible for me to know.  What you mean to leave out — the club and
the larger share of Smatter and Dabbler — seems to have been the main sub-
ject of the play.  Cecilia's loss and unexpected restoration of her fortune,
is not a new incident by any means ;  however,  any thing is preferable to
Censor's interfering in the business by his unaccountable generosity.

Now,  as to the very great importance,  and indeed  (to my thinking)  the
indispensable necessity,  of an interesting plot or story, — let me recommend
you to borrow or get from the circulating library,  "  An Apology for the
Life of Mr.  Colley Cibber."  This book chance has thrown in my way since
I last wrote to you ;  and in running it over I very unexpectedly met with a
full and copious detail of all my very thoughts on this subject,  to a most
minute exactness.     The passage itself begins thus  : —

"  Reader,  by your leave,  I will just speak a word or two to any author
that has not yet writ one word of his next play,  and then I will come to the
point again."

He then goes on,  ending with these words,  viz: —

"  I imagined these observations might convince some future author,  of
how great advantage a fable well planned must be,  to a man of any tolera-
ble genius."

The echo of my sentiments of the matter for these forty years past !  No
man living was ever a better judge of stage interests and stage politics than
Cibber.

What to advise,  I profess,  I know not — only thus much  :  I should have
a much greater deference for the opinion of Sheridan than of Murphy  ;  I
take him in himself to be much deeper  ;  and besides deeply interested in the
fate of whatever he brings forward on his own stage.  Upon the whole,  as
he is so pressing to see what you have done,  I should almost incline to consent.

Your other daddy and madam were kind enough last Sunday to come on
purpose from London to see me ;  for which I think myself greatly obliged
to them.  They tell me of a delightful tour you are to make this autumn on
the other side of the water,  with Mr.  and Mrs.  Thrale,  Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.
Murphy,  &c.  Where will you find such another set !  O,  Fanny,  set this
down as the happiest period of your life  ;  and when you come to be old and
sick,  and health and spirits are fled  (for the time may come),  then live upon
remembrance,  and think that you have had your share of the good things of
this world,  and say, — For what I have received,  the Lord make me thankful !

152 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

And now,  my Fanny,  let me hear from you soon the result of your
theatrical councils  ;  also a continuation of your own other adventures,  and
likewise  (what you have hitherto shirked me of)  the Susannitical Journal of
Brighthelmstone.

Your loving daddy,

S.  C.
JOURNAL RESUMED.

Bath,  April 7. — A thousand thanks,  my dearest Susy,  for your kind
and very satisfactory letter.  I had,  indeed,  been extremely anxious to hear
of poor Pacchierotti,  for the account of his illness in the newspapers had
alarmed me very much.  You are very good for being so circumstantial.
I long to hear of his more perfect recovery,  for,  to use his own words,  he
has made himself an interest in my regard more than for his profession.
Merely for the profession,  never can I admire more passionately than I did
Millico  ;  but I now consider Pacchierotti as an estimable friend,  and as such
I value him sincerely and affectionately,  and you,  I think,  my little Susanna,
are in this also of"  one mind"  with me.

Don't be angry that I have been absent so long without writing,  for I
have been so entirely without a moment to myself,  except for dressing,  that
I really have not had it in my power.  This morning,  being obliged to have
my hair dressed early,  I am a prisoner,  that I may not spoil it by a hat,
and therefore I have made use of my captivity in writing to my dear Susy  ;
and,  briefly,  I will now chronicle what has occupied me hitherto.

The journey was very comfortable  ;  Mr.  Thrale was charmingly well
and in very good spirits,  and Mrs.  Thrale must be charming,  well or ill.
We only went to Maidenhead Bridge the first night,  where I found the caution
given me by Mr.  Smelt,  of not attempting to travel near Windsor on a hunt-
ing-day, was a very necessary one,  as we were with difficulty accommo-
dated even the day after the hunt ;  several stragglers yet remaining at all
the inns,  and we heard of nothing but the king and royal huntsmen and
huntswomen.

The second day we slept at Speen Hill,  and the third day we reached
Devizes.

And here,  Mrs.  Thrale and I were much pleased with our hostess,  Mrs.
Laurence,  who seemed something above her station in her inn.  While we
were at cards before supper,  we were much surprised by the sound of a
piano-forte.  I jumped up,  and ran to listen whence it proceeded.  I found
it came from the next room,  where the overture to the  "  Buona Figliuola"
was performing.  The playing was very decent,  but as the music was not
quite new to me,  my curiosity was not whole ages in satisfying,  and there-
fore I returned to finish the rubber.

Don't I begin to talk in an old-cattish manner of cards  ?

Well,  another deal was hardly played,  ere we heard the sound of a voice,
and out I ran again.  The singing,  however,  detained me not long,  and so
back I whisked  ;  but the performance,  however indifferent in itself,  yet
surprised us at the Bear at Devizes,  and therefore Mrs.  Thrale determined
to know from whom it came.  Accordingly,  she tapped at the door.  A very
handsome girl,  about thirteen years old,  with fine dark hair upon a finely
formed forehead,  opened it.  Mrs.  Thrale made an apology for her intru-
sion, but the poor girl blushed and retreated into a corner of the room  ;  an-
other girl,  however,  advanced,  and obligingly and gracefully invited us in,
and gave us all chairs.  She was just sixteen,  extremely pretty,  and with
a countenance better than her features,  though those were also very good.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  153

Mrs.  Thrale made her many compliments,  which she received with a
mingled modesty and pleasure,  both becoming and interesting.  She was,
indeed,  a sweetly pleasing girl.

We found they were both daughters of our hostess,  and born and bred
at Devizes.  We were extremely pleased with them,  and made them a long
visit,  which I wished to have been longer.  But though those girls struck
us so much,  the wonder of the family was yet to be produced.  This was
their brother,  a most lovely boy of ten years of age,  who seems to be not
merely the wonder of their family,  but of the times,  for his astonishing skill
in drawing.*  They protest he has never had any instruction,  yet showed
us some of his productions that were really beautiful.  Those that were
copies were delightful — those of his own composition amazing,  though far
inferior.     I was equally struck with the boy and his works.

We found that he had been taken to town,  and that all the painters had
been very kind to him,  and Sir Joshua Reynolds had pronounced him,  the
mother said,  the most promising genius he had ever met with.  Mr.  Hoare
has been so charmed with this sweet boy's drawings that he intends sending
him to Italy with his own son.

This house was full of books,  as well as paintings,  drawings,  and music ;
and all the family seem not only ingenious and industrious,  but amiable  ;
added to which they are strikingly handsome.

I hope w^e shall return the same road that we may see them again.

I forgot to mention that when we were at Reading,  we walked to see
Coley,  the seat of Miss Thompsons,  sisters-in-law of Sir Philip Jennings
Gierke.     The house is large,  old-fashioned,  new vamped,  and rambling.

I shall now skip to our arrival at this beautiful city,  which I really
admire more than I did,  if possible,  when I first saw it.  The houses are so
elegant,  the streets are so beautiful,  the prospects so enchanting.  I could
fill whole pages upon the general beauty of the place and country,  but that
I have neither time for myself,  nor incitement for you,  as I know nothing
tires so much as description.

We alighted at York House,  and Mrs.  Thrale sent immediately to Sir
Philip Jennings Gierke,  who spent the Easter holidays here.  He came
instantly,  with his usual alacrity to oblige,  and told us of lodgings upon the
South Parade,  whither in the afternoon we all hied,  and Mr.  Thrale imme-
diately hired a house at the left corner.  It was most deliciously situated  ;
w^e have hilb,  meadows,  Prior Park,  "  the soft-flowing Avon" — whatever
Nature has to offer,  I think,  always in our view.  My room commands all
these ;  and more luxury for the eye I cannot form a notion of.

We stayed that night,  Friday,  at York House,  and Sir Philip Gierke
supped with us,  and came to breakfast the next morning.  I am quite sorry
this Sir Philip is so violent and so wrong in his political opinions and con-
duct, for in private life he is all gentleness,  good breeding,  and friendliness.
I was very sorry too when he left us,  which he was obliged to do at noon,
and to quit Bath next day.

W^ell — we spent Saturday morn in removing hither,  and then imme-
diately followed an engagement.  It was to spend the afternoon with some
relations of Mrs.  T.

The relations were Mrs.  G ,  an ugly,  proud old woman,  but mar-
vellous civil to me ;   Mr.  L ,  a sensible man of eighty-two,  strong,

healthy,  and conversible as he could have been at thirty-two ;  his wife,  a
dull,  muzzy old creature;  his sister,  a ditto.

*  Tliis boy was afterwards the celebrated painter,  Sir Thomas Lawrence,  President of
the Royal Academy.

154 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

Our afternoon was horribly wearying.

When we came away,  Mrs.  Thrale ordered our chairs to the playhouse ;
Mr.  Thrale would not accompany us.  We were just in time for  "  The
Padlock,"  which was almost as bad to me as the company I had just left.
Yet the performers here are uncommonly good,  some of them as good as
almost any we have in town.

Sunday. — We went to St.  James's Church,  heard a very indifferent
preacher,  and returned to read better sermons of our own choosing.

In the evening we had again an engagement.  This,  however,  was far
more agreeable than our last.  It was at Mrs.  Lambert's.  Mrs.  Lambert
is a widow of General Lambert,  and a sister of Sir Philip Jennings.  She
is an easy,  chatty,  sensible woman of the world.

There was a good deal of company  ;  among them,  all that I much
observed were two clergymen and a Miss Lewis.

One of the clergymen was Mr.  W ,  a young man who has a house

on the Crescent,  and is one of the best supporters of Lady Miller's vase at
Bath Easton.  He is immensely tall,  thin,  and handsome,  but affected,
delicate,  and sentimentally pathetic ;  and his conversation about his own
"  feehngs,"  about  "  amiable motives,"  and about the wind,  which,  at the
Crescent,  he said in a tone of dying horror,  "  blew in a manner really
frightful !"  diverted me the whole evening.  But Miss Thrale,  not content
with private derision,  laughed out at his expressions,  till I am sure he per-
ceived and understood her merriment.

The young lady.  Miss Lewis,  is a daughter of the Dean of Ossory  ;  she
is very handsome,  and mighty gay and giddy,  half tonish,  and half hoy-
denish  ;  and every other word she utters is  "  Horrible  !"

Well,  I must now to Monday.

In the morning Miss Gregory called  ;  she is here with Mrs.  Montagu.
She made a long visit,  and she brought me a very polite message from
sweet Mr.  Smelt's daughter,  Mrs.  Cholmley,  who had told Miss Gregory
that her father had written to charge her to get acquainted with me,  in
terms too civil to repeat ;  and she was very willing,  but did not know how.

"  And so,"  said Miss Gregory,  "  I told her I would ask you."

I begged her to give my respects to Mrs.  Cholmley,  and to tell her I
should certainly wait upon her.

In the evening we had company at home, — Mrs.  Lambert,  Miss Gregory,
and Mrs.  Montagu.

Mrs.  Montagu was in very good spirits,  and extremely civil to me,
taking my hand,  and expressing herself well pleased that I had accom-
panied Mrs.  Thrale hither.  She was very flashy,  and talked away all the
evening,  but Miss Gregory was as much disposed to talk herself,  and she
took to me this night as she did to Mrs.  Campbell at Mrs.  Ord's,  and there-
fore I could scarce hear a word that Mrs.  Montagu said.

Bath,  April 9. — Tuesday morning we spent in walking all the town,
viewing the beautiful Circus,  the company-crowded Pump-room,  and the
exquisite Crescent,  which,  to all the excellence of architecture that adorns
the Circus,  adds all the delights of nature that beautify the Parades.  We
also made various visits,  and I called upon Mrs.  Cholmley,  but was not
admitted,  and also upon Miss Bowdler,  who was also invisible.  We then
went to Mrs.  Lambert's,  where we again met Miss Lewis,  and heard abun-
dance of Bath chit-chat and news,  and were all invited for Friday to cards.
I am,  however,  determined never to play but when we are quite alone,  and
a fourth is indispensably wanted.  I have,  therefore,  entreated Mrs.  Thrale
not to make known that I can.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  155

In the evening we went to the play,  and saw  "The School for Scandal"
and  "The Critic;"  both of them admirably well acted,  and extremely
entertaining.

Wednesday,  in the morning.  Miss Bowdler returned my visit :  I was
glad to see her,  for old acquaintance sake.  She does not look well,  but is
more agreeable than formerly,  and seems to have thrown aside her pedantry
and ostentatious display of knowledge  ;  and therefore as she is very sensible,
and uncommonly cultivated,  her conversation and company are very well
worth seeking.  I introduced her to Mrs.  Thrale,  which I saw was a great
gratification,  as she had long known her by fame,  and wished much to be
presented to her.

We had much talk of Teignmouth,  and I inquired about my old friend
Mr.  Crispen,  who I find now lives at Clifton.

Mrs.  Thrale inquired of Miss Bowdler if she knew any thing of Miss
Cooper,  and where she lived  ?  And then Miss Bowdler,  in a very respectful
manner,  begged permission to invite us all to meet Miss Cooper at her
father's,  for that very evening,  as Mrs.  Montagu was also engaged there ;
and Mrs.  Thrale,  with her usual frankness and good-humour,  accepted the
invitation without further ceremony.

Accordingly,  in the afternoon we all went to Alfred Buildings,  where Mr.
Bowdler lives.  He was not at home,  but his wife and two daughters did
the honours.

We found Mrs.  Montagu,  Miss Gregory,  Miss Cooper,  and Mrs.  Sydney
Lee already assembled.

This Mrs.  Sydney Lee is a maiden sister of the famous rebel General.
She is a very agreeable woman.

Miss Cooper you must have heard of:  she is Miss Streatfield's darling
friend,  and a very amiable and gentle old maid.  I have seen her twice at
Streatham.

Mrs.  Bowdler is very sensible and intelligent,  and my namesake was
very rational and entertaining.

Mrs.  Montagu and Mrs.  Thrale both flashed away admirably ;  but I was
again engrossed by Miss Gregory,  who raved of nothing but Mr.  Seward.

When we returned home I found a note from Mrs.  Cholmley,  the most
elegantly civil that ever was written,  apologizing for not having called upon
me on account of her indifl^erent state of health,  expressing her desire to
be known to a daughter of Dr.  Burney,  for whom,  she says,  she must ever
retain the highest esteem and respect,  and inviting me to meet Mrs.  Montagu
on Friday.

I was already engaged to a large party at Mrs.  Lambert's,  but my
kind Mrs.  Thrale,  perceiving which way my inclination led,  undertook to
make my apologies for the beginning of the evening,  and to allow me to
join her after my own visit was paid.  I therefore wrote my thanks to Mrs.
Cholmley,  and accepted her invitation.

Thursday. — The kindness of this family seems daily to increase towards
me ;  not indeed that of Mrs.  Thrale,  for it cannot,  so sweetly and delight-
fully she keeps it up  ;  she has not left herself power to do more ; — but Mr.
Thrale evidently interests himself more and more about me weekly — as does
his fair daughter.

This morning a milliner was ordered to bring whatever she had to re-
commend, I believe,  to our habitation,  and Mr.  Thrale bid his wife and
daughter take what they wanted and send him the account.

But not content with this,  he charged me to do the same.  You may
imagine if I did.     However,  finding me refractory,  he absolutely insisted

156 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

upon presenting me with a complete suit of gauze lino,  and that in a manner
that showed me a refusal would greatly disoblige him.  And then he very
gravely desired me to have whatever I pleased at any time,  and to have it
added to his account.  And so sincere I know him to be,  that I am sure he
would rather be pleased than surprised if I should run him up a new bill at
this woman's.  He would fain have persuaded me to have taken abundance
of other things,  and Mrs.  Thrale seemed more gratified than what he did for
herself.     Tell my dear father all this.

Dr.  Woodward called this morning.  He is a physician here,  and a chatty
agreeable man.

At dinner,  we had Dr.  Harrington,  another physician,  and my father's
friend and correspondent,  upon whose account he was excessively civil to
me.     He is very sensible,  keen,  quiet,  and well-bred.

In the evening we were all engaged to the Belvidere,  to visit Mrs.  Byron,
who arrived at Bath two days before.

The Belvidere is a most beautiful spot ;  it is on a high hill,  at one of the
extremities of the town,  of which as of the Avon and all the adjacent country,
it commands a view that is quite enchanting.

Poor Mrs.  Byron is very far from well,  though already better than when
I saw her in town  ;  but her charming spirits never fail her,  and she rattled
and shone away with all the fire and brilliancy of vigorous health.  Augusta
is much improved in her person,  but preserves the same engaging simplicity
of manners that distinguished her at Brighthelmstone.  She was quite over-
joyed at meeting me,  and talked quite in raptures of renewing our acquaint-
ance and seeing me oflen.  I never hardly met with so artless an enthusiasm
for what she loves as in this fair Augusta,  whom I must love in return,
whether I will or not.

In our way home we stopped at the theatre,  and saw the farce of the
*'  Two Misers" — wretched,  wretched stuff indeed!

Friday. — In the evening I had to make my first visit to Mrs.  Cholmley,
and a most formidable business it was,  for she had company to dinner,  and
a formal circle was already formed when my name was announced  ;  added
to which,  as I knew not the lady of the house from her guests,  you may
imagine I entered the room without astonishing the company by my brass.
Mrs.  Cholmley made it as little awkward as she could to me,  by meeting
me almost at the door.  She received me in a most elegant manner,  making
all sorts of polite speeches about my goodness in making the first visit,  and
so forth.  She seems very gentle and well-bred,  and perfectly amiable in
character and disposition.

The party I found assembled was Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Poyntz,  a relation
of Lady Spencer,  Miss Gregory,  Lord Mulgrave,  Hon.  Augustus Phipps,
Sir Cornwallis Maud,  Mr.  Cholmley,  Miss Ann Cholmondeley,  and one or
two more that I did not hear named.

Mrs.  Cholmley very obligingly placed me between herself and Miss
Gregory,  who is now become the most intimate acquaintance I have here,
and I find her far more agreeable than I believed she could have been.
Mrs.  Cholmley and I talked of nothing but our fathers  ;  she told me I could
not have more affection and respect for her father than she had for mine ;
and I told her that if we should make any acquaintance with each other,  I
hoped nothing but good would come of it,  for no connexion ever had a
more dutiful foundation ;  and then we went on,  she praising Dr.  Burney,
and I Mr.  Smelt,  till our party lessened,  and all the gentlemen were gone.

Mrs.  Poyntz,  then,  who had been at our side of the room,  went over to
Mrs.  Montagu,  who whispered her,  and looked towards me.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  157

"  Ay,"  said Miss Gregory,  "  Mrs.  Montagu has just now,  I believe,  found
out Miss Burney."

"  Yes,"  said Mrs.  Montagu,  smiling at me,  "  I never knew her till this
moment ;  but it was very cruel in you,  Miss Gregory,  to let me remain so
long in ignorance ;  you know I cannot see any body three yards off.  I
asked my Lord Mulgrave who it was,  but he could not tell me ;  and I asked
Sir Cornwallis,  but he did not know ;  at last Mrs.  Poyntz informed me."

By the way,  that Mrs.  Poyntz is a very sensible old gentlewoman.  Of
Lord Mulgrave and Sir Cornwallis I saw too little to speak.

I was obliged now to take my own leave ;  and Mrs.  Montagu,  when I
was departing,  arose and followed me,  and took my hand,  and inquired
earnestly concerning Mr.  Thrale,  who is a great favourite with her,  and was
all graciousness to me :  and Mrs.  Cholmley made me promise to repeat my
visit ;  and all did wondrous well.

Mr.  Cholmley handed me to the chair,  and I then proceeded to Mrs.
Lambert's.  Here I found two rooms with company:  whist players in one,
and a commerce party in the other.  Fortunately,  I escaped the latter by
being very late.  Among the folks were the Dean of Ossory,  who is a well-
bred gentlemanlike dean,  Mrs.  Lewis,  his wife,  a very civil woman,  and his
daughter,  &c.

When I had given an account of my preceding visit to my own friends,
Mrs.  Lambert made me sit next her,  for she did not play herself,  and we
had some very comfortable talk till the commerce table broke up,  and then
a certain Miss Willis came to my other side,  and entered into conversation
with me very facetiously.     A mighty good-natured,  foolish girl.

While we were prating,  Mr.  E— - — ,  the clergyman I have mentioned
before,  joined us,  and told Miss Willis how to call herself in Latin.

"  Go,"  said he,  "  to your father,  and say,  '  How do you do,  Mr.
Voluntas-est V  "

This conceited absurdity diverted her and Miss Lewis amazingly.

"  But,  dear  !"  she cried,  "  it's so long I shan't remember it.  I do think
Latin words sound very odd.  I dare say,  Miss Burney,  you know Latin
very well  ]"

I assured her to the contrary.

"  Well,"  said the little fool,'"  I know one word."

*'  Do you  ?  pray what is it 1"

•'  Why,  it's cogitabund.     It's a very droll word."

******

Monday. — Lord Mulgrave,  Augustus Phipps,  Miss Cooper,  Dr.  Harring-
ton, and Dr.  Woodward dined with us.

I like Lord Mulgrave very much.  He has more wit,  and a greater readi-
ness of repartee,  than any man I have met with this age.  During dinner
he was all brilliancy,  but I drew myself into a little scrape with him,  from
which I much wanted some of his wit to extricate myself.  Mrs.  Thrale was
speaking of the House of Commons,  and lamenting that she had never heard
any debates there.

"And now,"  said she,  "I cannot,  for this General Johnson has turned
us all out most barbarously."

"  General Johnson V repeated Lord Mulgrave.

"  Ay,  or colonel — I don't know what the man was,  but I know he was
no man of gallantry."

"  Whatever he was,"  said his lordship,  "  I hope he was a land officer."

"  I hope so too,  my lord,"  said she.

"  No,  no,  no,"  cried Mr.  Thrale,  "  it was Commodore Johnson."

VOL.  I.  14

15S DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

"  That's bad indeed  !"  said Lord Mulgrave laughing.  "  I thought by his
manners that he had belonged to the army."

"  True,"  said I  :  "  they were hardly polished enough for the sea."

This I said a demi-voix,  and meant only for Mrs.  Thrale ;  but Lord
Mulgrave heard and drew up upon them,  and pointing his finger at me with
a threatening air,  exclaimed,

"  Don't you speak,  Miss Burney  ?     What's this,  indeed  ?"

They all stared,  and to be sure 1 rouged pretty high.

"  I did not expect this from you,"  continued he  ;  "  but take care  !  I shall
tell you of it a twelvemonth hence  !"

I could not,  at the moment,  understand him,  but I afterwards found he
was thinking of poor Jem,  and meant to threaten me with putting the quarrel
into his hands.  And so,  for more reasons than one,  I only answered by
laughing.

"  Miss Burney,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  should be more respectful,  to be sure,
for she has a hrother at sea herself."

"  I know it,"  said he,  "  and for all her,  we shall see him come back from
Kamtschatka as polished a beau as any he will find."

Poor Jem  !     God send him safe back,  polished or rough.

Lord Mulgrave's brother Edmund has just entered into the army.

"  He told me t'other day,"  said his lordship,  "  that he did not like the
thoughts of being a parson."

"  '  Very well,'  said I,  '  you are old enough to choose for yourself;  what
will you be then V

" '  Why a soldier,'  says he.

"  '  A soldier  ?  will you so 1 Why then the best thing you can do is to
embark with your brother Henry immediately,  for you won't know what to
do in a regiment by yourself.'  Well,  no sooner said than done  !  Henry
was just going to the West Indies in Lord Harrington's regiment,  and
Edmund ordered a chaise,  and drove to Portsmouth alter him.  The whole
was settled in half an hour.

Curious enough.  But I am sorry Edmund has taken this freak.  He is
an amiable young man,  and I had rather he had kept clear of this fighting
system,  and  "  things of that sort."

In the evening,  we had our company enlarged.  Mrs.  Montagu came first,
and was followed by Miss Gregory,  Mrs.  Sydney Lee,  Mrs.  Bowdler,  and
Fanny Bowdler.

^Vhile I made tea,  Lord Mulgrave sat next to me,  and with a comical
mock resentment told me he had not yet forgiven me for that sneer at his
profession.

"  However,"  he added,  "  if I can be of any use to you here at the tea-
table,  out of neighbourly charity,  I will."

I declined his offer with thanks,  but when I was putting away the tea-
chest,

"  So,"  he cried,  taking it from me,  "  cannot I put that down?  am I not
polished enough for that 1"

And afterwards,  upon other similar opportunities,  he said,

"  So you are quite determined not to trust me  ?"

Wednesday. — I received Charlotte's most agreeable account of Edward's
stained drawings from  "  Evelina,"  and I am much delighted that he means
them for the Exhibition,  and that v.e shall thus show off together.  His
notion of putting a portrait of Dr.  Johnson into Mr.  Villars's parlour was
charming.  I shall tell the doctor of it in my next letter,  for he makes me
write to him.

In the evening we had Mrs.  Lambert,  who brought us a tale,  called

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  X59

"  Edwy and Edilda,"  by the sentimental Mr.  W ,  and unreadably soft,

and tender,  and senseless is it.

Thursday Morxing,  April 13. — I am now come to the present time,
and will try,  however brief,  to be tolerably punctual.

Dr.  Johnson has sent a bitter reproach to Mrs.  Thrale of my not writing
to him,  for he has not yet received a scrawl I have sent him.  He says Dr.
Barnard,  the provost of Eton,  has been singing the praises of my book,  and
that old Dr.  Lawrence has read it through three times within this last month  !
I am afraid he will pass for being superannuated for his pains  !

"  But don't tell Burney this,"  adds Dr.  Johnson,  "  because she will not
write to me,  and values me no more than if I were a Branghton !"

Our party to-night at the Dean of Ossory's has by no means proved en-
chanting, yet Mrs.  Montagu was there,  and Hoare the painter,  and the
agreeable Mrs.  Lambert.  But I was unfortunate enough not to hear one
word from any of them,  by being pestered with witlings all the night.

First I was seated next the eldest Miss L ,  not the pretty girl I have

mentioned,  Charlotte,  who is the second daughter.     This Miss L is

very heavy and tiresome,  though she was pleased to promise to call upon
me,  and to cultivate acquaintance with me,  in most civil terms.

This was my fag till after tea,  and then Mr.  E joined us  ;  I have

always endeavoured to shirk this gentleman,  who is about as entertaining
and as wise as poor Mr.  Pugh,  but for whom not having the same regard,  I
have pretty soon enough of him  ;  and so,  as I rather turned away,  he
attacked Miss L ,  and I spent another half hour in hearing them.

After this,  he aimed at me downright,  inquiring if I had been at Bath
before,  and so forth,  and a mighty insipid discourse ensued.

This lasted till Miss L proposed a  "  miss"  party in the next room.

Accordingly,  off*  we moved ;  Miss Gregory went first,  and I was following,
when she ran back,  and said the dean was there writing.  I would then
also have made off,  but he came out after us,  and taking my hand,  would
lead me into his library,  protesting he had just sealed his letter.     And then

the other misses followed,  and that wearisome Mr.  E ,  and another

young man yet sillier.

The dean is very musical,  and was much disappointed,  I believe,  that I
did not play to him.  However,  we had a good deal of talk together,  and
he promised to contrive for me a hearing of Miss Guest,  a lady whose
piano forte playing I have heard extolled by all here,  and whom I shall be
much obliged to him for meeting with.

Soon after he went to join the party in the next room.  And then two
hours,  I believe were consumed in the most insipid manner possible.  I
will give you a specimen though to judge of.

Mr.  E. — "  I never had the pleasure of being in company with Mrs.  Mon-
tagu before — I was quite pleased at it."

And yet the booby could not stay where she was  !

"  Mrs.  Montagu  !  let's see,"  he continued,  "  pray Miss Burney,  did she
not write  '  Shakspeare Moralized V  "

I simpered a little,  I believe,  but turned to Miss Gregory to make the
answer.

"  No,  sir,"  said she,  "  only an  '  Essay on the Genius of Shakspeare.' "

"  I think,"  said this wight,  "  nobody must have so much pleasure at a
play as Mrs.  Montagu,  if it's well done ;  if not,  nobody must suffer so
much,  for that's the worst of too much knowledge,  it makes people so diffi-
cult."

"  Ay,  that is to say,"  said the other wiseacre,  "  that the more wisdom,
the less happiness."

160 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

"  That's all the better,"  said Miss L ,  "  for there are more people in

the world ignorant than wise."

"  Very true,"  said Mr.  E ;  "  for,  as Pope says,

'  If ignorance is bliss,
'Tis folly to be wise.'  "

Pope says  !     Did you ever hear such witlings  ?

But I won't write a word more about the evening — it was very stupid,
and that's enough.

vf*  -K^  vp vF tR"

We see Mrs.  Montagu very often,  and I have already spent six evenings
with her at various houses.

I am very glad at this opportunity of seeing so much of her ;  for,  allow-
ing a little for parade and ostentation,  which her power in wealth,  and rank
in literature,  offer some excuse for,  her conversation is very agreeable ;  she
is always reasonable and sensible,  and sometimes instructive and entertain-
ing ;  and I think of our Mrs.  Thrale,  we may say the very reverse,  for she
is always entertaining and instructive,  and sometimes reasonable and sen-
sible ;  and I write this because she is just now looking over me — not but
what I think it too  !

MR.  CRISP TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

April 27, 1780.
My dear Fannikin,

I am very glad you are now with the Thrales,  in the midst of the Bath
circle.  Your time could not be better employed,  for all your St.  Martin's
daddy wanted to retain you for some other purpose.  You are now at school,
the great school of the world,  where swarms of new ideas and new characters
will continually present themselves before you,

"  which you'll draw in,
As we do air,  fast as  'tis ministered !"

My sister Gast,  in her younger days,  was a great favourite with an old
lady who was a particular crony and intimate of old Sarah Marlborough,
who,  though much of the jade,  had undoubtedly very strong parts,  and was
indeed remarkably clever.  When Mrs.  Hinde  (the old lady)  would some-
times talk to her about books,  she'd cry out,  "  Prithee,  don't talk to me
about books ;  I never read any books but men and cards  !"  But let any
body read her book,  and then tell me if she did not draw characters with as
masterly a hand as Sir Joshua Reynolds.

The portion you allowed me of your Tunbridge and Brighton Journal I
sucked in with much pleasure and avidity.  Why,  you have begun already,
and make good what I have said above — you take down whatever you see.
Sophy Streatfield's mother is a character entirely new,  and strongly marked,
I pronounce it to be like,  and though to a degree uncommon,  is natural.

I am glad the Attorney-General is a Scotchman,  for I have heard it is
a settled observation,  that the Scotch,  though deeply learned,  great lawyers,
great philosophers,  physicians,  historians,  mathematicians,  &c.,  are re-
markable for having no turn,  neither talents nor relish,  for humour.  Does
not one of the letters in Swift's work s}3eak of some bishop who was a Scot,
and when asked his opinion of Gulliver's Travels,  wondered how people
could read such a heap of nonsensical,  improbable lies?  I hope Mr.
Wedderburne is a better judge of law than of satire and ridicule,  or the Lord
have mercy on the suitors in the Court of Common Pleas I

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  161

Mrs.  Montagu,  too !  How it flatters me to have my idea of her,  formed
above thirty years ago,  confirmed by this instance.

I believe I Iiave told you of several letters the Duchess of Portland
showed me of hers formerly  (for I had no acquaintance with herself),  so
full of affectation,  refinement,  attempts to philosophize,  talking metaphysics
— in all which particulars she so bewildered and puzzled herself and her
readers,  and showed herself so superficial,  nay,  really ignorant in the sub-
jects she paraded on — that,  in my own private mind's pocket-book,  I set
her down for a vain,  empty,  conceited pretender,  and little else.  I know I
am now treading on tender ground  ;  therefore mum for your life,  or rather
for my life.  Were Mrs.  Thrale to know of my presumption,  and that I
dare to vent such desperate treason to her playmate,  what would she say
to me  ?

You take no notice of several particulars I want to hear of.  Your
unbeaatiful,  clever heroine,  beset all round for the sake of her great fortune
— what is become of her  ?  I am persuaded she'd make her own fortune,
whatever were the fate of her hunters.  The idea is new and striking,  and
presents a large field for unhackneyed characters,  observations,  subjects
for satire and ridicule,  and numberless advantages you'd meet with by walk-
ing in such an untrodden path.

Have you yet met with Colley Gibber,  and read the passage I recommended
to you  ?

I can't say I am sorry your affair with Mr.  Sheridan is at present at a
stand.  In the meantime,  the refusal 'coming from yourself,  and not the
manager,  tells highly in your favour  :  your coyness will tend to enhance
your fame greatly in public opinion.

"  'Tis expectation makes the blessing dear !"

Your loving daddy.

S.  C.
JOURNAL RESUMED.

Bath,  Friday. — This evening we have all been at Mrs.  Montagu's,
where we met Mrs.  and Miss Bowdler,  Lord Mulgrave,  Mr.  Cholmley,  and
Miss Cooper.  Miss Gregory,  of course.  Poor Mrs.  Cholmley never ven-
tures out of her own house in an evening,  as her health is extremely
delicate.

We had a very entertaining evening,  for Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Thrale,
and Lord Mulgrave talked all the talk,  and talked it so well,  no one else
had a wish beyond hearing them.

Just before we came away.  Miss Bowdler,  who had been seated so far
from me that I had not once spoken with her,  crossed over to me and said,
"  I have been longing this great while to get to you,  but could not bear
to cross the circle  ;  but there is a lady now at Bath,  an acquaintance of mine,
who wishes most eagerly to be an acquaintance of yours.  She is a relation
of Mr.  Crisp."

"  Mr.  Crisp  ?"  exclaimed L     "  Don't you mean Mr.  Crispen  ?"
"  No,  Mr.  Crisp !"  repeated she ;  "  and this lady wishes to see you so much."
"  Oh,  so do I to see her,"  quoth I,  "  if she is a relative of Mr.  Crisp  !"
"  I have promised,"  continued she,  "  to endeavour to introduce her to
you  :  will you,  therefore,  be so good as to meet her at my house 1"

"  Oh,  with the greatest pleasure in the world,  at any time you please !"
"  She has heard a great deal of you,  and has seen some of your letters,
and is so impatient that the first moment you can spare — "

14*

162 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780-

We then immediately settled next Monday morning,  when I shall break-
fast with them.

I am much delighted with the prospect of seeing a relation of my beloved
daddy  :  but I am very much concerned,  nay,  and hurt,  and half angry,
that this lady,  whose name it seems is Leigh,  should have seen any of my
letters.  It is not fair,  and I am sure it is not pleasant ;  however,  I shall
write to Chesington about it.

I have one packet ready for him,  which I shall send to-morrow.  I dare
not scold in that,  because I am so much in arrears,  I have not assurance  ;
but when I get out of that shame I shall at both him and Mrs.  Gast,  whom
I believe to be an accomplice.

Saturday. — We walked in the beautiful meadows round the city all the
morning,  and went to drink tea with the ugly Mrs.  C in the evening.

But no more of the beauty of meadows,  or ugliness of poor old women,
for I must now speak,  and thank you  (I would,  if I knew how,)  for your
very delightful packet,  with the account of Rinaldo.  You do very well to
compassionate me for missing such a rehearsal — I was half moped in read-
ing it ;  yet your relation,  my dearest Susy,  is the very next best thing to
having been there,  because it is so circumstantial,  so warm,  and so full of
feeling.  Oh that I could but have been with you  !  Pacchierotti's having so
much to do in the cantahile style is just what I have always wished,  and I
was almost thrilled only with your account of his energy,  and fire,  and
exertion in his last song.  Oh that I could but have heard him  !  Do,  pray,
tell him how much I repine at my unfortunate absence.

April 29th. — It is such an age since I have written that had I not kept
memorandums in my tablets,  I could not possibly give any account of our
proceedings.

But I shall begin where I left off,  with again thanking you for your long
relation of sweet Pacchierotti's visit after his illness,  and for your design of
making him begin his letter sur-le-cham'p  ;  but in truth,  I'm a little disap-
pointed that he makes me wait so long.  It will be very good-natured in
you to tease him for me  ;  but of all things I desire you not to help him  ;
for much as I love your letters,  I hate even Garrick thus at second hand,
and would not give a fig a dozen for compilations of that sort.  His note to
Sheridan made me laugh,  yet it much surprised me. — O these Italians !
no meekness can guard them from the rage of revenge  ;  yet I do most
firmly believe nothing but almost intolerable ill-usage would provoke it in
our Pac.

You managed very kindly for me in what you produced of my letter to
him  ;  and I wonder,  indeed,  in what,  if you managed at all,  you would not
manage kindly for me.  I am rather disappointed by your character of
Miss Harrop ;  but the description of the benefit and the crowd diverted me
so much,  that I read it in public,  and it merryfied us all.

Now back to my memorandums,

Sunday. — We had Mrs.  Byron and Augusta,  and Mrs.  Lee,  to spend the
afternoon.  Augusta opened her whole heart to me,  as we sat together,  and
told me all the affairs of her family.  Her brother.  Captain George Byron,
is lately returned from the West Indies,  and has brought a wife with him
from Barbadoes,  though he was there only three weeks,  and knew not this
girl he has married till ten days before he left it ! — a pleasant circumstance
for this proud family  !

Poor Mrs.  Byron seems destined for mortification and humiliation ;  yet
such is her native fire,  and so wonderful are her spirits,  that she bears up
against all calamity,  and though half mad one day with sorrow and vexa-

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  163

tion,  is fit the next to entertain an assembly of company ; — and so to enter-
tain them as to make the happiest person in the company,  by comparison
with herself,  seem sad.

Augusta is a very amiably ingenuous girl,  and I love her the more for
her love of her sisters :  she talked to me of them all,  but chiefly of Sophia,
the youngest next to herself,  but who,  having an independent fortune,  has
quarrelled with her mother,  and lives with one of her sisters,  Mrs.  Byron,
who married a first cousin,  and son of Lord Byron.

"  Ah,  Miss Burney,"  she says continually,  "  if you knew Sophy,  you
would never bear me  !  she is so much better than I am, — and so handsome,
and so good,  and so clever, — and I used to talk to her of you by the hour
together.  She longs so to know you  !  '  Come,'  she says,  '  now tell me
something more about your darling.  Miss Burney.'  But I ought to hope you
may never see her,  for if you did I should be so jealous  !"

You wish to hear more of Mrs.  Sydney Lee,  but Augusta so entirely
occupied me,  that I could talk to no one else.  But it was an odd sort of
meeting between the sister of the rebel general,  and the wife of the king's
admiral !  Mrs.  Lee corresponds with her brother,  and had a letter from
him not long since, — almost torn,  she says,  to pieces,  it had been so often
opened and read in its voyage and journey.

Monday. — According to my appointment I breakfasted at the Bowdlers'.
I was immediately introduced to my daddy's cousin.  Miss Leigh.  She is a
tall,  pretty,  elegant girl,  very sensible in her conversation,  and very gentle
and pleasing in her manners.  I went prepared to like her for Mr.  Crisp's
sake,  and I came away forced to like her for her own.

She came up to me in a very flattering manner,  to tell me how much she
had wished to make the acquaintanc(i,  and so forth :  and then I told her
how happy I was to see a relation of Mr.  Crisp.

"  What Mr.  Crisp is it?"  cried Mrs.  Bowdler ;  "  is it Sam  ?"

"Yes,  ma'am,"  said I,  staring at her familiarity.

"  What !"  cried she again,  "  do you know little Sam Crisp  ?"

"  1 don't know for little,"  returned I,  much surprised ;  "  but he is the
most intimate friend I have in the world,  and the dearest.  Do you know
him then  ?"

"  Do I  ? — yes,  very well ;  I have known little Sam Crisp this long
while."

"  I can't imagine,"  cried I,  half affronted at her manner of naming him,
"  why you should so  '  little'  him ;  I know not any one thing in the world
in which he is little, — neither in head,  nor heart, — neither in understanding,
person,  talents,  nor mind."

"  I fancy,  ma'am,"  said Miss Leigh,  "  you hardly mean the Mr.  Crisp
Miss Burney does."

"  I mean Sam Crisp,"  said she,  "  the Greenwich Traveller."

This appeased me, — and we cleared up the mistake.  But Mrs.  Bowdler,
though a very clever woman,  is not a very delicate one.  For,  after this,
Miss F.  Bowdler had a letter brought her, — and presently read aloud from
it,  "I long extremely to know Miss Burney, — I hope she will not leave
Bath till I return."

"  Pray,"  said I,  "  may I ask who that is from?"

"  From my sister Harriet,"  answered she.

"  Yes,"  bolted out Mrs.  Bowdler,  "  Harriet is one of the greatest ad-
mirers of '  Evelina.'  "

These sort of abrupt speeches from people one hardly knows,  are amaz-
ingly disagreeable :  and Fanny Bowdler and Miss Leigh looked almost as
awkward as myself.

164 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

The rest of the visit was almost wholly devoted to the praise of Mr.  Crisp
and Mrs.  Gast ;  Miss Leigh adores Mrs.  Gast,  and so the brother and sister
were in good hands.  She lives here with her mother,  from whom she
brought me many kind speeches,  and whom I readily promised to wait upon.

This evening,  the only one since we came,  we spent at home without
company.

Tuesday. — We all went to Mrs.  Bowdler's.

Mr.  Bowdler,  a very worthy,  extremely little man  (much less than Sam
Crisp,  I assure you,  Mrs.  Bowdler),  appeared to-day ;  but only appeared,
for he was shy,  and spoke not.  I have neglected to mention that the eldest
Miss Bowdler,  by a dreadful cold,  has quite lost her voice — lost all possible
power of speech  !  I never heard of so extraordinary or so horrible a cir-
cumstance ;  she has been wholly dumb for three years.  She seems per-
fectly resigned,  and very mild and patient ;  but it is really painful to be in
a room with her.

Besides their own family,  we met Mr.  Jerningham,  the poet.  I have
lately been reading his poems,  if his they may be called.  He seems a
mighty delicate gentleman ;  looks to be painted,  and is all daintification in
manner,  speech,  and dress.

The rest of the company I shall not trouble you with mentioning,  save Miss
Leigh,  who sat next me,  and filled up all the evening with hearing of Mr.
Crisp,  and talking of Mrs.  Gast,  except what was given to attending to Mr.
Jerningham's singing to his own accompaniment upon the harp.  He has
about as much voice as Sacchini,  and very sweet toned,  though very Eng-
lish ;  and he sung and played with a fineness that somewhat resembled the
man we looked at at Piozzi's benefit ;  for it required a painful attention to
hear him.  And while he sings,  he looks the gentlest of all dying Cory-
dons  !

Oh,  what must he have thought of Mrs.  Bowdler,  who,  when he was try-
ing to recollect an air from the  "  Hermit,"  called out,

"  Pray,  Mr.  Jerningham,  can't you sing us some of your own poetry  ?"

I really feared he would have fainted away at so gross a question ;  but,
to my great relief,  I observed he only looked down and smiled.

Wednesday. — At the desire of Miss F.  Bowdler,  we all went to the play,
to see an actress she is doatingly fond of,  Mrs.  Siddons,  in  "  Belvidera ;"
but instead of falling in love with her,  we fell in love with Mr.  Lee,  who
played Fierre — and so well !  I did not believe such an actor existed
now our dear Garrick is gone ;  a better,  except Garrick,  never did I see —
nor any one nearly equal to him — for sense,  animation,  looks,  voice,  grace
— Oh,  for every thing the part would admit — he is indeed delightful.

Augusta Byron and Miss Gregory were of our party.  They are both so
much my friends,  that they made me divide the evening between them.

In the evening we had Mrs.  L ,  a fat,  round,  panting,  short-breathed

old widow ;  and her daughter,  a fubsy,  good-humoured,  laughing,  sillj^,
merry old maid.  They are rich folks,  and live together very comfortably,
and the daughter sings — not in your fine Italian taste  !  no,  that she and her
mother agree to hold very cheap — but all about Daphne,  and Chloe,  and
Damon,  and Phillis,  and Jockey !

Friday. — In the morning,  to my great concern,  Lord Mulgrave called to
take leave.  He takes away with him more wit than he leaves behind him
in all Bath,  except what is lodged with Mrs.  Thrale.  As to Mrs.  Montagu,
she reasons well,  and harangues well,  but wit she has none.  Mrs.  Thrale
has almost too much ;  for when she is in spirits,  it bursts forth in a torrent
almost overwhelming.  Ah !  'tis a fault she has as much to herself as her
virtues !

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  165

Mrs.  Cholmley was so kind as to call this morning,  and as I happened to
be alone,  we had a very comfortable chat together,  and then Mrs.  Thrale
came in,  and I had the pleasure of introducing them to each other.  She is
a woman of as much real delicacy as Mr.  Jerningham  (whom Lord Mul-
grave calls a pink and white poet — for not only his cheeks,  but his coat is
pink)  is a man of affected delicacy.

In the evening we went to visit Mrs.  K .

Mrs.  K is a Welsh lady,  of immense fortune,  who has a house in the

Crescent,  and lives in a most magnificent style.  She is about fifty,  very
good-humoured,  well-bred,  and civil,  and her waist does not measure above
a hogshead.  She is not very deep,  I must own  ;  but what of that  ?  If all
were wits,  where would be the admirers of them  ?

She received me very graciously,  having particularly desired Mrs.  Thrale
to bring me  :  for she is an invalid,  and makes no visits herself.  She told
me she knew my uncle at Shrewsbury very well.

"  And pray,  ma'am,"  says she,  "  how does Dr.  Burney do  ?"

"  Very well,"  I thanked her.

"  Do you know Dr.  Burney,  ma'am  ?"  said Mr.  Thrale.

"  No,  sir,  but I know his book.     I think it's vastly pretty."

"  Why,  yes,  ma'am,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  Dr.  Burney has found out the
art of making all people like both him and his book."

It is comical enough to see how she is always provoked at hearing these
underlings praise him.  She is ready to kill them for liking him,  and has
a whimsical notion that their applause degrades him.

*'  Yes,  ma'am,"  answered Mrs.  K ,  "  and there is somebody else too

that has made all people like her book."

"  True,  ma'am ;  Dr.  Burney's daughter inherits that art from him."

*'  O,  ma'am,  I was so entertained  !  Oh,  dear !  and I was quite ill too,
ma'am,  quite ill when I read it.  But for all that — why,  why,  ma'am,  I was
as eager,  and I wanted sadly to see the author."

Soon after this,  arrived Mrs.  Montagu and Miss Gregory.  Miss Gregory
brought a chair next to mine,  and filled up the rest of my evening.  I am
really half sorry she appeared to such disadvantage that evening we saw
her together at Mrs.  Ord's,  for I now begin to like her very much.  She is
frank,  open,  shrewd,  and sensible,  and speaks her opinion both of matters
and things with a plumpness of honesty and readiness that both pleases and
diverts me.  And though she now makes it a rule to be my neighbour
wherever we meet,  she has never made me even a hint of a compliment ;
and that is not nothing as times go.

Afterwards,  who should be announced but the author of the  "  Bath
Guide,"  Mr.  Anstey.  I was now all eye  ;  but not being able to be all ear,
I heard but little that he said,  and that little was scarce worth hearing.  He
had no opportunity of shining,  and was as much like another man as you
can imagine.  It is very unfair to expect wonders from a man all at once ;
yet it was impossible to help being disappointed,  because his air,  look,  and
manner are mighty heavy and unfavourable to him.

But here see the pride of riches  !  and see whom the simple Mrs.  K

can draw to her house  !  However,  her party was not thrown away upon
her, — as I ought to say,  because highly honoured by her exultingly whis-
pering to Mrs.  Thrale,

"  Now,  ma'am,  now,  Mrs.  Thrale,  I'm quite happy ;  for I'm surrounded
with people of sense !  Here's Mrs.  Montagu,  and Mrs.  Thrale,  and Mr.
Anstey,  and Miss Burney.  I'm quite surrounded,  as I may say,  by people
of sense  !"

166 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

CHAPTER VIII.

1780.

Dr.  Harrington — Chatterton — Bishop Porteus — A Dull Evening — a Busy Day — Mrs.
Dobson — A MS.  Tragedy — A Long Story about Nothing — An Evening Party — Pliny
Melmoth — A Comical Day — A Fine Lady — A Disappointed Gentleman — A Grand-
daughter of Richardson — Bath Diary resumed — Dr.  Johnson — His Fondness for Miss
Burney— Sir Thomas Lawrence's Family — Anstey — Bishop of Peterborough — A
Bishop's Lady — The Duchess of Devonshire — Lady Spencer — Lord Mulgrave — Sea
Captains — Younger Brothers — A Mistake — Bath Gossips — Anecdotes of Abyssinian
Bruce — The Bowdler Family — Table-talk — Admiral Byron — Mrs.  Cholmley — An
Evening Party — Anstey — Lady Miller — An Agreeable Rattle — A Private Concert —
— An Accident — Lord Althorpe — A Bath Beau— Lord Huntingdon — Lord Mulgrave —
The Bishop of Peterborough — Mrs.  EUzabeth Carter — Ferry's Folly — A Singular Col-
lation— An Evening Party — A Public Breakfast — A Singular Character — A Female
Misanthrope — The Results of Hume's Essays — Love and Suicide — Beattie versus
Bolingbroke — The Belvidere — Anecdote of Lord Mulgrave — A Bath Ball — Love-Ma-
king—Chit-Chat—Blue stockings— Flirtation- A Good Match— Mrs.  Thrale— Match-
making — The Dangers of Levity.

Saturday. — In the morning my ever kind Mrs.  T.  accompanied me to
the Belvidere,  to call upon Mrs.  and Miss Leigh,  and to invite the latter to
our house in the evening to meet the Bowdlers.  Mrs.  Leigh herself cannot
make any visits,  because she has dreadfully sprained her ankle,  and is
obliged to wear a large shoe and flannel.  She is a very sensible,  agree-
able woman,  not so elegant as her daughter,  but very civil,  courteous,  and
good-natured.  We talked away about Mr.  Crisp,  and Mrs.  Gast like mad.
I know no subject upon which I am more fluent :  and so I suppose I seldom
have,  to a new acquaintance,  appeared more loquacious.  They were both
too prudent to mention having seen my letters ;  but Miss Bowdler has given
me intelligence which I shall not make the less use of.

VF  •Tt'  "TT vt*  vf*

Is it not a shocking thing,  my dear Susette,  that I am obliged to write to
you upon this decent paper 1 I never bring half enough riff-raff with me
for the volumes I write to you,  and yet it always goes to my heart to treat
you so genteelly.

Well,  to go back to that Saturday that passed an age ago,  where I left oflT
in my last.

Dr.  Harrington and Miss Cooper dined here.

Dr.  Harrington,  I find,  is descended in a right line from the celebrated
Sir John Harrington,  who was god-son of Queen Elizabeth,  and one of the
gayest writers and flashers of her reign;  and it is his son that is the Rev.
Henry Harrington,  who published those very curious,  entertaining and
valuable remains of his ancestor under the title  "  Nugse Antiquse,"  which
my father and all of us were formerly so fond of.

We had much talk among us of Chatterton,  and as he was best known
in this part of the world,  I attended particularly to the opinion of Dr.  Har-
rington concerning him ;  and the more particularly because he is uncom-
monly well versed in the knowledge of English antiquities ;  therefore was I
much surprised to find it his opinion that Chatterton was no impostor,  and
that the poems were authentic,  and Rowley's.  Much,  indeed,  he said they
had been modernized in his copies ;  not by design,  but from the difliculty

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  167

which attended reading the old manuscript — a difficulty which the genius of
Chatterton urged him not to confess but to redress.  A book,  however,  is
now publishing that is entirely to clear up this so long disputed and very
mysterious affair,  by Dr.  Mills,  Deacon of Exeter.

In the evening we had a great deal more company, — consisting of the
Dean of Ossory,  Mrs.  and Miss Lewis,  but not Charlotte Lewis,  who is not
well,  Mrs.  and Miss Bowdler,  my pretty new acquaintance.  Miss Leigh,  and
Mr.  Jerningham.

Miss Leigh and I kept together very rigidly the whole evening,  and
talked a great deal of talk,  and grew very intimate  ;  but one time,  when
accidentally I took up a book from the table,  merely to peep at the title-
page,  Mr.  Jerningham approached me,  and said,  in a gentle style of raillery,

"  Why do you take up a book.  Miss Burney  ? — you know you can't read."

"  Oh,"  answered I,  in the same gentle style,  "  I only do it to make
believe."

And you can't think how prettily he laughed.  He inquired,  however,  a
great deal after my father,  and wonders he does not come down here.

Another time he said to me,  "  Pray were not you the lady that used the
glass the other night at the play  ?"

Here I was quite shocked  ;  but could only defend,  not deny ;  protesting,
with great truth,  that I only used it for the performers,  and could not see at
all without it.

"  A lady in the box with me,"  continued he,  "  wanted sadly to know
which was you ;  so,  indeed,  did all the company I was with,  and I fancy I
pointed right — did not I point right  ?"

Mrs.  Bowdler,  to keep up the character I have already given of her,  once
called out from the furthest end of the room,  "  Miss Burney,  my daughter
Harriet longs more and more to see you ;  she writes us word she hopes to
come home in time,  or she shall be prodigiously disappointed."

I had much discourse with the dean,  all about the prospects,  and the
walks,  and the country  ;  he is extremely civil and well-bred.

Sunday. — This morning Miss Gregory came to accompany us to St.
James's Church,  to hear Dr.  Porteus,  Bishop of Chester,  preach a charity
sermon for an excellent institution here,  to enable the poor sick to drink the
waters in an hospital.  It was an admirable sermon,  rational,  judicious,
forcible,  and truth-breathing  ;  and delivered with a clearness,  stillness,  grace,
and propriety that softened and bettered us all — as I believe appeared by the
collection,  for I fancy not a soul left the church without offering a mite.

The evening we spent with old Mrs.  C ,  and divers other old gentle-
women assembled at her house.     Immensely dull work,  indeed  !

Monday. — This morning we appointed for hearing Miss Guest play  ;  and
Miss Lawes,  that good and odd old maid I have already mentioned,  con-
ducted us to her house  ;  and was delighted beyond measure with a mixture
of good-humour for us,  and exultation for herself,  that she had the credit
of the introduction.

Miss Guest is very young,  but far from handsome;  she is,  however,
obliging,  humble,  unassuming,  and pleasing.  At her house,  by appointment,
we met the Dean of Ossory and Dr.  Woodward.

She began with playing the third of Eichner,  and I wished she had begun
with something else,  for I have so oflen heard our dear Etty in this,  that I
was quite spoifed for Miss Guest,  or,  I firmly believe for any body  ;  because
in Eichner,  as in Bach of Berlin,  Echard and Boccherini,  Etty plays as if
inspired,  and in taste,  expression,  delicacy and feeling,  leaves nothing to
wish.    Miss Guest has a very strong hand,  and is indeed a very fine player

168 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

— SO fine a one as to make me think of Etty while she plays,  though always,
and in all particulars,  to this poor girl's disadvantage.

She next played the second of Clementi,  which seemed to want nothing
but a strong hand,  and therefore I was full as well content with the player
as with the music,  but not enchanted with either.

After this she sung,  "  lo che fedele,"  and here I thought I liked hfer
better than in her playing.  She has but little voice,  but it is very sweet.
Sacchini was her master,  and,  I fancy,  must have taught her this very song,
for she really sings it charmingly.  Altogether I was so well pleased with
her that I was quite sorry we could stay to hear nothing more.  I am most
greedily hungry for a little music,  and have heard nothing at all approach-
ing Miss Guest since I left town.  She is to come hither to give lessons to
Miss Thrale,  and help keep up her singing,  and so I shall probably often
hear her.

In our way home we met Miss Gregory,  who flew up to me,  and taking
my hand,  cried,

"  I have received in a letter I had this morning such an eloge of '  Evelina'
— such a description of you.  'Tis from Mrs.  Chapone,  too,  and I will show
you next time we meet."

There's for you  !  who would not be a blue-stockinger at this rate  ?

We parted with Miss Lawes upon the parade,  and came in to dress,  and
while I was yet engaged in this important occupation,  Mrs.  Thrale came
laughing into my room to tell me Miss Lawes had just been with her again,
and told her she had just been with Mrs.  Dobson,  "  And dear ma'am,  there
I heard all about Miss Burney !  I was never so surprised.  But I am going
to the library immediately for the book  ;  though I assure you I read it all
when it first came out ;  but that was nothing like,  not knowing any thing of
the matter ;  but Mrs.  Dobson has let me into the secret,  so I wanted to know
if it's all true?"

Mrs.  Thrale readily confirmed it.

"  Well,"  cried she,  "  I shall run to the library,  then,  directly and fetch
it ;  but to be sure I thought from the beginning that something was the
matter,  though I could not tell what,  because,  ma'am,  I felt such a panic, —
I assure you when I sung before Miss Burney I was never in such a panic
in my life !"

Mrs.  Dobson,  I dare say,  is not a new name to you  ;  she has made an
abridged translation of  "  Petrarch's Life,"  and of the  "  History of the
Troubadours."  She has long been trying to make acquaintance with Mrs.
Thrale,  but Mrs.  Thrale not liking her advances,  has always shrunk from
them ;  however,  I find she has prevailed with Miss Lawes to let her be one
of her party when her visit is returned.

This evening we all went to Mrs.  Cholmley's,  in consequence of an
elegant invitation from that very elegant lady,  to meet Mrs.  Montagu,  who
was there with Miss Gregory,  Miss Poyntz,  and a Mrs.  Wilson.

We had a very cheerful and pleasant evening.

Tuesday. — This morning I went to the Belvidere to breakfast,  by en-
gagement, with Mrs.  and Miss Leigh.

I like them more and more,  and we talked about dear Chesington,  and
were quite comfortable,  and I was so well pleased with my visit that I
stayed with them almost all the morning.

In the evening we went to Mrs.  Lambert,  who is another of my favourites.
I was very ready to like her for the sake of her brother.  Sir Philip Jennings
Gierke ;  and I find her so natural,  so chatty,  so prone to fun and ridicule,
and so sociably agreeable,  that I am highly pleased with her acquaintance.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I(j9

This evening we had plenty of sport with her,  of the ridiculous sort,
which is quite her favourite style.  She had nobody with her at first but a
Miss Pieydell,  a very unaffected and good-humoured girl,  and therefore she
produced for our entertainment a new tragedy,  in manuscript,  written by a
Worcester clergyman,  who is tutor to her son.  I will inquire his name
some time,  and perhaps Edward may know him.  This tragedy it seems
Mr.  Sheridan has read,  and has promised to bring out next winter.  It is
called  "  Timoleon."  It is mighty common trash,  and written in very
clumsy language,  and many of the expressions afforded us much diversion
by their mock grandeur,  though not one affected,  interested,  or surprised us.
But it seems when we complained of its length and want of incident,  Mrs.
Lambert told us that the author was aware of that,  and said he knew there
was no incident,  but that he could not help it,  for there was none that he
could find in the history  !  Don't you admire the necessity he was under of
making choice of a subject to which he knew such an objection  ?

I did not,  however,  hear above half the piece,  though enough not to

regret missing the rest,  for Mr.  E now made his appearance,  and Mrs.

Thrale read the rest to herself

As you seem to have rather a taste for these  "  Witlings,"  I will give you
another touch of this young divine.  He soon found what we were about,
and presently said,  "  If that play is writ by the person I suspect,  I am
sure I have a good right to know some of it ;  for I was once in a house
with him,  and his study happened to be just over my head,  and so there I
used to hear him spouting by the hour together."

He spoke this in a tone of complaint that made us all laugh,  with which
facetiousness,  however,  he was so far from being disturbed,  that he only
added,  in a voice of fretful plaintiveness,

"  I'm sure I've cause enough to remember it,  for he has kept me awake
by the whole night together."

We were now not content  \vith simpering,  for we could not forbear down-
right laughing :  at which he still looked most stupidly unmoved.

"  Pray,  Mrs.  Lambert,"  said he,  "  what is its name  ?"

"  Timoleon,"  answered she.

"  Pray,"  said he,  "is it an invention of his own,  or an historical fact  ?"

When we were coming away,  Mrs.  Lambert,  taking the play from off the
table,  and bringing it to me,  asked me,  in a comical manner,  to read it
through,  and try to find something to praise,  that she might let the author
know I had seen and approved of it.  I laughed,  but declined the task,  for
many reasons,  and then Mr.  E approaching me said,

"  Ma'am,  if you were to read it with a little pencil in your hand,  just to
mark your favourite passages,  and so forth,  I should think it might be a
very good thing,  and — and of use."

Of use  ? — ha,  ha  !

Wednesday was a sort of grand day.     We all dined and spent the

evening at Mrs.  K 's.     Our party was Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Poyntz,

Miss Gregory,  Miss Owen,  Dr.  Maningham,  and Mr.  Hunt.

The ladies you have heard of enough.  Of the men,  Dr.  Maningham is
very good-humoured,  fat,  and facetious.  He asked me much after my dear
father,  whom he met with at Buxton,  and after the Denoyers,  with whom
he seemed extremely intimate,  and so,  indeed,  has well inclined to be with
me,  for he shook me by the wrist twenty times in the course of the day.
Mr.  Hunt is a young man of very large independent fortune,  very ugly,
very priggish,  a violent talker,  and a self-piquer upon immense good
breeding.

VOL.  I.  15

170 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

Miss Gregory and I kept together all the day,  and did each of us very
well.  She told me that the Mrs.  Wilson I met at Mrs.  Cholmley's wanted
to know me,  and,  if I should not think her  "  very impudent"  would come
up to speak to me the first time she saw me on the Parade.  I condescended
to send her a civil permission.

Mrs.  K took the first opportunity that presented itself,  to make me,

in a low voice,  abundance of civil speeches about  "  Evelina."  All the loud
speeches were made by Mr.  Hunt,  who talked incessantly,  and of nothing
but dancing  !  Poor Mrs.  Montagu looked tired to death,  and could not get
in a word  ; — it was really ridiculous to see how this coxcomb silenced her.

When every body was gone but ourselves and Miss Gregory,  we Misses

growing somewhat facetious in a corner,  Mrs.  K good-humouredly called

out,  "  Fm sure,  ladies,  I am very glad to see you so merry.  Ah, — one of
you young ladies, — I don't say which — has given me a deal of entertain-
ment !  Fm sure I could never leave off reading  ;  and when Miss Owen
came into my room,  says I,  don't speak a word to me,  for Fm so engaged  !
— I could not bear to be stopped — and then,  Mrs.  Thrale,  I had such a pro-
digious desire to see her — for I said,  says I,  '  Fm sure she must have a good
heart, — here's such fine sentiments,'  says I. — Oh  !  it's a sweet book  !"

"  Ay,  ma'am,"  said Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  and we that know her,  like her yet
better than her book."

"  Well,  ma'am,"  answered she,  "  and I that know the book best, — to be
sure I Hke that."

"  Then,  ma'am,  you show your taste  ;  and I my judgment."

"  And what must I show  ?"  cried I — "  my back,  I believe,  and run away,
if you go on so  !"

Here,  then,  it stopped  ;  but when I was taking leave Mrs.  K repeated

her praises,  and added,

"  Fm sure,  ma'am,  you must have a very happy way of thinking  ;  and
then there's Mrs.  Duval, — such a natural character  !"

Thursday. — We were appointed to meet the Bishop of Chester at Mrs.
Montagu's.  This proved a very gloomy kind of grandeur  ;  the Bishop
waited for Mrs.  Thrale to speak,  Mrs.  Thrale for the Bishop  ;  so neither of
them spoke at all !

Mrs.  Montagu cared not a fig,  as long as she spoke herself,  and so she
harangued away.  Meanwhile Mr.  Melmoth,  the Pliny Melmoth,  as he is
called,  was of the party,  and seemed to think nobody half so great as him-
self, and therefore chose to play first violin without further ceremony.  But,
altogether,  the evening was not what it was intended to be,  and I fancy
nobody was satisfied.     It is always thus in long-projected meetings.

The Bishop,  however,  seems to be a very elegant man  :  Mrs.  Porteus,  his
lady,  is a very sensible and well-bred woman :  he had also a sister with
him,  who sat quite mum all the night,  and looked prodigious weary.

Mr.  Melmoth seems intolerably self-sufficient — appears to look upon him-
self as the first man in Bath,  and has a proud conceit in look and manner,
mighty forbidding.  His lady is in nothing like the Bishop's  ;  I am sure I
should pity her if she were.

The good Miss Cooper was of the party,  and a Mrs.  Forster.  I,  as usual,
had my friend Greg at my elbow.  If I had not now taken to her,  I should
absolutely run wild !

Friday was a busy and comical day.     We had an engagement of long

standing,  to drink tea with Miss L ,  whither we all went,  and a most

queer evening did we spend.

When we entered,  she and all her company were looking out of the

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  171

window  ;  however,  she found us out in a few minutes,  and made us welcome
in a strain of delight and humbleness at receiving us,  that put her into a
flutter of spirits,  from which she never recovered all the evening.

Her fat,  jolly mother took her seat at the top of the room  ;  next to her
sat a lady in a riding habit,  whom I soon found to be Mrs.  Dobson  ;  below
her sat a gentlewoman,  prim,  upright,  neat,  and mean  ;  and,  next to her,
sat another,  thin,  bagged,  wrinkled,  fine,  and tawdry,  with a thousand frip-
pery ornaments and old-fashioned furbelows ;  she was excellently nick-named,
b}^  Mrs.  Thrale,  the Duchess of Monmouth.  On the opposite side was placed
Mrs.  Thrale,  and,  next to her,  Queeny.  For my own part,  little liking the
appearance of the set,  and half-dreading Mrs.  Dobson,  from whose notice I
wished to escape,  I had made up myself to one of the now deserted windows,

and Mr.  Thrale had followed me.     As to Miss L ,  she came to stand

by me,  and her panic,  I fancy,  returned,  for she seemed quite panting with
a desire to say something,  and an incapacity to utter it.

It proved very happy for me that I had taken this place,  for in a few
minutes the mean,  neat woman,  whose name was Aubrey,  asked if Miss
Thrale was Miss Thrale  ?

"  Yes,  ma'am."

"  And pray,  ma'am,  who is that other young lady  ?"

"  A daughter of Dr.  Burney's,  ma'am."

"  What !"  cried Mrs.  Dobson,  "  is that the lady that has favoured us
with that excellent novel  ?"

"  Yes,  ma'am."
-  Then burst forth a whole volley from all at once.  "  Very extraordinary,
indeed  !"  said one — "  Dear heart,  who'd have thought it !"  said another —
"  I never saw the like in my life  !"  said a third.  And Mrs.  Dobson,  enter-
ing more into detail,  began praising it through,  but chiefly Evelina herself,
which she said was the most natural character she had ever met in any
book.

Meantime,  I had almost thrown myself out of the window,  in my eager-
ness to get out of the way of this gross and noisy applause  ;  but poor  ]\Iiss

L ,  having stood quite silent a long time,  simpering,  and nodding her

assent to what was said,  at last broke forth with,

"  I assure you,  ma'am,  we've been all quite delighted :  that is,  we had
read it before,  but only now upon reading it again — "

I thanked her,  and talked of something else,  and she took the hint to have
done ;  but said,

"  Pray,  ma'am,  will you favour me with your opinion of IMr.  Dobson's
works  ?"

A pretty question,  in a room so small that even a whisper would be
heard frorn one end to another  !  However,  I truly said I had not read
them.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Whalley now arrived,  and I was obliged to go to a chair —
when such staring followed ;  they could not have opened their eyes wider
when they first looked at the Guildhall giants  !  I looked with all the gravity
and demureness possible,  in order to keep them from coming plump to the
subject again,  and,  indeed this,  for a while kept them ofl*.

Soon after Dr.   Harrington arrived,    which closed our party.      Miss

L went whispering to him,  and then came up to me,  with a look of

dismay,  and said,

"  O,  ma'am,  I'm so prodigiously concerned  ;  Mr.  Henry won't come !"

"Who,  ma'am 1"

"  Mr.  Henry,  ma'am,  the doctor's son.      But,  to be sure,  he does not

172 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

know you are here,  or else — but I'm quite concerned,  indeed,  for here now
we shall have no young gentlemen  !"

"  O,  all the better,"  cried I,  "  I hope we shall be able to do very well
without."

"  O yes,  ma'am,  to be sure.  I don't mean for any common young gen-
tlemen ;  but Mr.  Henry,  ma'am,  it's quite another thing ; — however,  I think
he might have come ;  but I did not happen to mention in my card that you
was to be here,'  and so — but I think it serves him right for not coming to
see me."

Soon after the mamma hobbled to me,  and began a furious panegyric
upon my book,  saying,  at the time,

"  I wonder.  Miss,  how you could get at them low characters.  As to the
lords and ladies,  that's no wonder at all ;  but as to t'others,  vvhy,  I have
not stirred,  night nor morning,  while I've been reading it :  if I don't wonder
how you could be so clever  !"

And much,  much more.    And,  scarcely had she unburthened herself,  ere

Miss L trotted back to me,  crying,  in a tone of mingled triumph and

vexation,

"  Well,  ma'am,  Mr.  Henry will be very much mortified when he knows
who has been here  ;  that he will,  indeed:  however,  I'm sure he deserves it!"
I made some common sort of reply,  that I hoped he was better engaged,
which she vehemently declared was impossible.

We had now some music.     ]\Iiss L sung various old elegies of

Jackson,  Dr.  Harrington,  and Linley,  and O how I dismalled in hearing
them !  Mr.  Whalley,  too,  sung  "  Robin Gray,"  and divers other melan-
cholic ballads,  and Miss Tlirale sang  "  Ti seguiro fedele."

But the first time there was a cessation of harmony,  Miss L again

respectfully approaching me,  cried,

"  Well,  all my comfort is that Mr.  Henry will be prodigiously mortified !
But there's a ball to-night,  so I suppose he's gone to that.  However,  I'm
sure if he had known of meeting you young ladies here — but it's all good
enough for him,  for not coming 1"

"  Nay,"  cried I,  "  if meeting young ladies is a motive with him,  he can
have nothing to regret while at a ball,  where he will see many more than he
could here."

"  O,  ma'am,  as to that — but I say no more,  because it mayn't be proper ;

but,  to be sure,  if Mr.  Henry had known — however,  he'll be well mortified  !"

Soon after this,  a chair next mine being vacated,  Mrs.  Dobson came and

seated herself in it,  to my somewhat dismay,  as I knew what would follow.

Plump she came upon her subject,  saying,

"  Miss Burney,  I am come to thank you for the vast entertainment you
have given me.  I am quite happy to see you  ;  I wished to see you very
much.  It's a charming book,  indeed;  the characters are vastly well
supported  !"

In short,  she ran on for half-an-hour,  I believe,  in nothing but plain
unadorned,  downright praise  ;  while I could only bow,  and say she was
very good,  and long to walk out of the room.

When she had run herself out of breath,  and exhausted her store of
compliments,  she began telling me of her own affairs  ;  talked,  without any
introduction or leading speeches,  of her translation,  and took occasion to
acquaint me she had made 400/.  of her  "  Petrarca."  She then added some
other anecdotes,  which I have not time to mention,  and then said,

"  Miss Burney,  I shall be very happy to wait upon you and Mrs.  Thrale.
I have longed to know Mrs.  Thrale these many years  :  pray,  do you think
I may wait upon you both on Sunday morning  ?"

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I73

"  To be sure,  we shall be very happy."

"  Well,  then,  if you don't think it will be an intrusion — but will you be
so good as to mention it to Mrs.  Thralel"

I was obliged to say  "  Yes,"  and soon after she quitted me,  to go and
give another dose of flummery to Mrs.  Thrale.

I was not two minutes relieved,  ere Miss L — —  returned,  to again assure
me how glad she was that Mr.  Henry would be mortified.  The poor lady
was quite heart-broken that we did not meet.

The next vacation of my neighbouring chair was filled by Mrs.  L.  who
brought me some flowers  ;  and when I thanked her,  said,

"  O Miss,  you deserve everything!  You've writ the best and prettiest
book.  That lord there — I forget his name,  that marries her at last — what
a fine gentleman he is  !  You deserve every thing for drawing such a
character  ;  and then Miss Elena,  there,  Miss Belmont,  as she is at last —
what a noble couple of  'em you have put together!  As to that t'other lord,  I
was glad he had not her,  for I see he had nothing but a bad design."

Well,  have'you enough of this ridiculous evening?  Mrs.  Thrale and I
have mutually agreed that we neither of us ever before had so complete a
dish of gross flattery as this night.  Yet let me be fair,  and tell you that this
Mrs.  Dobson,  though coarse,  low-bred,  forward,  self-sufficient and flaunting,
seems to have a strong and masculine understanding,  and parts that,  had
they been united with modesty,  or fostered by education,  might have made
her a shining and agreeable woman;  but she has evidently kept low
company,  which she has risen above in literature,  but not in manners.  She
obtained Mrs.  Thrale's leave to come on Sunday and to bring with her a
granddaughther of Mr.  Richardson's,  who she said was dying to see Mrs.
T.  and Miss B.,  and who Mr.  Whalley said had all the elegance and beauty
which her grandfather had described in Clarissa or Clementina.

Sunday. — -Mrs.  Dobson called,  and brought with her Miss Ditcher —
a most unfortunate name for a descendant of Richardson !  However,
Mr.  W^halley had not much exaggerated,  for she is,  indeed,  quite beautiful,
both in face and figure.  All her features are very fine ;  she is tall,  looks
extremely modest,  and has just sufficient consciousness of her attractions to
keep off bashfulness,  without enough to raise conceit.  I think I could take
to her very much,  but shall not be likely to see her again.

Bath,  May 28. — I was very happy,  my dearest girls,  with the account
of your safe return from the borough.  I never mentioned your having both
accompanied me till I had got half way to Bath ;  for I found my dear Mrs.
Thrale so involved in business,  electioneering,  canvassing,  and letter-
writing,  that after our first emhrassades^  we hardly exchanged a word till
we got into the chaise next morning.

Dr.  Johnson,  however,  who was with her,  received me even joyfully  ;
and making me sit by him,  began a gay and spirited conversation,  which
he kept up till we parted,  though in the midst of all this bustle.

The next morning we rose at four o'clock,  and when we came down
stairs,  to our great surprise,  found Dr.  Johnson waiting to receive and
breakfast with us ;  though the night before he had taken leave of us,  and
given me the most cordial and warm assurances of the love he has for me,
which I do indeed believe to be as sincere as I can wish ;  and I failed not
to tell him the affectionate respect with which I return it ;  though,  as well
as I remember,  we never came to this open declaration before.

We therefore drank our coffee with him,  and then he handed us both into

15*

174 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

the chaise.  He meant to have followed us to Bath,  but Mrs.  Thrale dis-
couraged him,  from a firm persuasion that he would be soon very horribly
wearied of a Bath life  :  an opinion in which I heartily join.

When at last I told Mrs.  T.  of your adventure of accompanying me to the
borough,  she scolded me for not bringing you both in ;  but,  as I told her,  I
am sure you would have been very uncomfortable in a visit so ill-timed.
However,  she said she hoped she should see you both there when again
settled for winter,  and make amends for so inhospitable a beginning.

Adventures in our journey we had no time to think of;  we flew along as
swift as possible,  but stopped to change horses at Devizes in preference to
Chippenham,  merely to inquire after the fair and very ingenious family of
the Lawrences  ;  but we only saw the mother and elder son.

We found our dear master charmingly well,  and very glad indeed to see
us.  Miss Cooper,  who was with them,  and who is made up of quick sen-
sations, manifested the most pleasure of all the party.  We have agreed to
visit comfortably in town.  She is by no means either bright or entertain-
ing, but she is infinitely good,  so charitable to the poor,  so kind to the sick,
so zealous for the distressed,  and in every part of her conduct so blameless
where quiet,  and so praiseworthy where active,  that I am really proud of
the kindness she seems to have taken for me,  and shall cultivate it with the
truest satisfaction.

The next morning we had visiters pouring in to see us after our journey;
but the two whose eagerness was infinitely most sincere,  were the Bishop
of Peterborough,  who adores,  and is adored in return by Mrs.  Thrale,  and
the fair Augusta Byron,  my romantically partial young friend.

In the evening we all went to the Dean of Ossory's.  I felt horribly
fagged  ;  but Mrs.  Thrale was so gay and so well,  in spite of all her
fatigues,  that I had not courage to complain and desire to be excused
joining the party.

There was a great deal of company  :  among them Mrs.  and Miss F.
Bowdler,  who again spoke very kindly of my mother ;  but of that I shall
write to herself;  and Mrs.  Lambert,  and Mr.  Anstey,  and the Bishop of
Peterborough  ;  besides others not worth naming.

The bishop,  in conversation,  is indeed a most shining and superior man,
— gay,  high-spirited,  manly,  quick,  and penetrating.  I was seated,  how-
ever,  between the two Miss L 's,   and heard but little conversation

besides theirs and my own, — and which of the three afforded me the most
delight I have now no time to investigate.

Mr.  Anstey opens rather more,  and approaches nearer to being rather
agreeable.  If he could but forget he had written the  "  Bath Guide,"  with
how much more pleasure would every body else remember it.

Sunday we went to the abbey,  to hear the bishop preach.  He gave us a
very excellent sermon,  upon the right use of seeking knowledge,  namely,
to know better the Creator by his works,  and to learn our own duty in
studying his power.

Mrs.  ]\Iontagu we miss cruelly,  and Miss Gregory I think of every where
I go,  as she used to be my constant elbow companion,  and most smiling
greeter.  Mrs.  Montagu has honoured me,  in a letter to Mrs.  T.,  with this
line :  "  Give my love to the truly lovely Miss Burney  !"  I fancy she
meant loveable ;  but be that as it may,  I am sure she meant no harm,  and
therefore I shall take her blindness in good part.

Monday. — We went to Mrs.  Lambert.  Here we met Lady Dorothy
Inglish,  a Scotchwoman ;  Sir Robert Pigot,  an old Englishman  ;  Mrs.
North,  the Bishop of Worcester's handsome wife,  and many nameless
others.

17S0.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I75

Mrs.  North,  who is so famed for tonishness,  exhibited herself in a more
perfect undress than I ever before saw any lady,  great or small,  appear in
upon a visit.  Any thing alike worse as better than other folks,  that does
but obtain notice and excite remark,  is sufficient to make happy ladies and
gentlemen of the ton.  I always long to treat them as daddy Crisp does
bad players  (when his own partners)  at whist,  and call to them,  with a nod
of contemptuous anger,  "  Bless you  !  bless you  !"

I had no talk but with Mrs.  Lambert herself,  who now,  Mrs.  Byron
excepted,  is far the most agreeable woman in Bath — I mean among the
women mistresses — for among the woman misses of the very first class,  I
reckon Miss F.  Bowdler.

Tuesday. — The bishop and Mrs.  Lambert dined with us,  and stayed the
afternoon,  which was more agreeable,  lively,  and sociable than when we
have more people.  I believe I told you that,  before I last left Bath,  the
bishop read to Mrs.  T.  and me a poem upon Hope,  of the Duchess of
Devonshire,  obtained with great difficulty from Lady Spencer.  Well,  this
day he brought a tale called  "  Anxiety,"  which he had almost torn from
Lady Spencer,  who is still here,  to show to Mrs.  Thrale  ;  and,  as before,
he extended his confidence to me.  It is a very pretty tale,  and has in it as
much entertainment as any tale upon so hackneyed a subject as an assembly
of all the gods and goddesses to bestow their gifts upon mankind,  can be
expected to give.

Lord Mulgrave called this morning.  He is returned to Bath for only a
few days.  He was not in his usual spirits  ;  yet he failed not to give me a
rub for my old offence,  which he seems determined not to forget ;  for upon
something being said,  to which,  however,  I had not attended,  about seamen,
he cast an arch glance at me,  and cried out,

"  Oh,  Miss Burney,  I know,  will take our parts — if I remember right,  she
is one of the greatest of our enemies  !"

"  All the sea captains,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  fall upon Miss Burney ;  Cap-
tain Cotton,  my cousin,  was for ever plaguing her about her spite to the
navy."

This,  however,  was for the character of Captain Mirvan,  which,  in a
comical and good-humoured way.  Captain Cotton pretended highly to
resent,  and so,  he told me,  did all the captains in the navy.

Augusta Byron,  too,  tells me that the admiral,  her father,  very often
talks of Captain Mirvan,  and though the book is very high in his favour,  is
not half pleased with the captain's being such a brute.

However,  I have this to comfort me, — that the more I see of sea captains,
the less reason I have to be ashamed of Captain Mirvan  ;  for they have all
so irresistible a propensity to wanton mischief, — to roasting beaus,  and
detesting old women,  that I quite rejoice I showed the book to no one ere
printed,  lest I should have been prevailed upon to soften his character.

Some time after,  while Lord Mulgrave was talking of Captain G.  Byron's
marrying a girl at Barbadoes,  whom he had not known a week,  he turned
suddenly to me,  and called out,

"  See,  Miss Burney,  what you have to expect ; — your brother will bring
a bride from Kamtschatka,  without doubt !"

"  That,"  said I,  "  may perhaps be as well as a Hottentot,  for when he
was last out,  he threatened us with a sister from the Cape of Good Hope."

In the evening we went to see the  "  Merchant of Venice,"  and Augusta
was of our party.  My favourite Mr.  Lee played Shylock,  and played it
incomparably.    With the rest of the performers I was not too much charmed.

Thursday. — Lord Mulgrave and Dr.  Harrington dined here.    Lord Mul-

176 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

grave was delightful ; — his wit is of so gay,  so forcible,  so splendid a kind
that when he is disposed to exert it,  he not only engrosses attention from all
the rest of the company,  but demands the full use of all one's faculties to
keep pace in understanding the speeches,  allusions,  and sarcasms which he
sports.  But he will never,  I believe,  be tired of attacking me about the sea  ;
"  he will make me  '  eat it that leak,'  I assure you  !"

During dinner he was speaking very highly of a sea officer whose name,
I think,  was Reynolds.

"And who is he?"  asked Mrs.  Thrale ;  to which his lordship answered,
"  Brother to Lord — something,  but I forget what :"  and then,  laughing and
looking at me,  he added,  "  We have all the great families in the navy, — ay,
and all the best families,  too, — have we not.  Miss Burney  ?  The sea is so
favourable an element to genius,  that there all high-souled younger brothers
with empty pockets are sure of thriving :  nay,  I can say even more for it,
for it not only fosters the talents of the spirited younger brothers,  it also
lightens the dulness even of that poor animal, — an elder brother ;  so that
it is always the most desirable place both for best and worst."

"  Well,  your lordship is always ready to praise it,"  said Mrs.  Thrale  ;
"  and I only wish we had a few more like you in the service, — and long
may you live,  both to defend and to ornament it !"

"  Defence,"  answered he with quickness,  "  it does not want, — and,  for
ornament,  it is above all !"

In the evening we had more company — the Bishop of Peterborough,  Mr.
Anstey,  Dean of Ossory,  Mrs.  and Charlotte Lewis,  F.  Bowdler,  and Miss
Philips, — a lady with whom the beginning of my acquaintance was by a very
strange mistake.

I forget if I ever mentioned to you that Miss Gregory long since told me
that a Mrs.  Wilson,  whom 1 had seen at Mrs.  Cholmley's,  wishes to know
me,  and sent me word she should accost me some day when I was walking
on the Parade,  if I should not think her very impudent for her pains.  Well,
divers messages,  in consequence of this,  passed between us  ;  and some time
after,  as I was sauntering upon the Parade with Mr.  Thrale,  a lady came
out of the house in which I knew Mrs.  Wilson resided,  and with a smiling
face,  and a curtsey,  made up to us.  I took it for granted this was my des-
tined acquaintance,  whose face,  as I was never near to her,  I was too near-
sighted to mark.  I readily returned her civility,  and myself began a con-
versation with her,  of the weather,  walks,  and so forth,  but we were both of
us abominably embarrassed,  and parted rather abruptly  ;  and while Mr.
Thrale and I were laughing at the encounter,  we saw this lady join Mrs.
Thrale,  and presently we all met again.  "  And so,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale to
her husband,  "  you did not know Miss Philips  ?  she says she made up to
you,  and you never spoke to her  !"  I now found my mistake,  and that she
neither was Mrs.  Wilson,  nor had intended addressing me.  I was therefore
quite ashamed of my own part in the affair,  and obliged to clear it up with
all speed.

Miss Phihps,  however,  who is a Welsh lady,  and sister to Lady Milford,
has been pleased to make me her acquaintance ever since.  Two days after,
she called,  and finding me at home,  and alone,  sat with me a full hour,  and
talked away very sociably and unreservedly.  She presses me to visit and
take morning walks with her  ;  but the truth is,  though she is sensible and
sprightly,  she is not much to my taste,  and therefore I have evaded availing
myself of her civility as much as has been in my power.

Charlotte Lewis,  who is a mighty gay,  giddy,  pretty girl,  and says what-
ever comes uppermost,  told me she had heard a very bad account of me the
night before at an assembly.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I77

"  A gentleman told me,"  she continued,  "  that you and Mrs.  Thrale did
nothing but criticise the play and the players at the  '  Merchant of Venice'
the whole night."

For the play,  I believe it might defy us ;  but for the players,  I confess
the case,  and am by no means happy in having been so remarked,  for Char-
lotte Lewis declared she had heard the same account since from another
gentleman,  and from three ladies,  though there was not a face in the boxes
I ever recollected having seen before  ;  but Bath is as tittle-tattle a town as
Lynn  ;  and people make as many reports,  and spread as many idle nothings
abroad,  as in any common little town in the kingdom.

Friday. — In the morning,  I waited upon Miss Cooper,  to return her a
letter which she had sent me to peruse,  from Mr.  Bruce to Mr.  H.  Seaton.

It was in his own handwriting,  and contained a curious account of his
making a friendship with an Arab,  through the means of being known to a
Mr.  Hamilton,  by w^hom this Arab had been kindly treated when a prisoner
in Italy  :  and,  through the friendship of this man,  he enabled himself to pass
on quietly to various places forbidden to strangers,  and to make several of
his best drawings,  of ruins shown him by this Arab.

Saturday. — According to appointment,  I went to breakfast at the Bow-
dlers.     I found all the Bowdlers,  and Miss Leigh.

Harriet Bowdler is much younger than any of her sisters,  but less hand-
some ;  she is sprightly,  good-humoured,  and agreeable.  I was introduced
to her very quietly by her sister,  but soon after,  Mrs.  Bow^dler finding some
fault with the manner in which she had pinned her ribbons,  applied to me
about them.     I sided,  however,  with Harriet,  whose method I preferred.

"  Ah  !"  cried J\frs.  Bowdler,  "  there spoke the Evelina — you Hke that
way best because it is whimsical !  Well,  I like a little  \\  him,  too ;  but
Harriet — oh,  she is such an admirer of '  Evelina  !'  "

Harriet modestly hung her head  ;  Fanny,  sensibly frowned ;  and so,  to
my great ease,  the matter went no further.  But Mrs.  Bowdler has long been
dying to come to the point.

The very amiable Miss Leigh,  with whom indeed I am greatly pleased,
told me she had a favour to request of me,  which I gladly promised to per-
form cTavmice.

"  I have a relation here,"  said she,  "  Captain Frodsham,  who was made
captain by Admiral Byron,  to whom he is under very great obligations.
Now he has heard that Mrs.  Byron is quite incensed with him for not having
waited upon her  :  but as he did not know her,  he stayed away merely from
fearing she would think a visit from liim impertinent.  Now if you will be
so good as to pave the way for his reception,  and make his apologies,  he
will be greatly obliged to you,  and so shall I."

This I most readily undertook  :  and having stayed prating with them all
till twelve o'clock,  I broke away,  after a very agreeable breakfast,  and w^nt
to Mrs.  Cholmley.

I found her at home and quite alone,  and I stayed with her the rest of the
morning.  I have never yet been near so well pleased with her.  She is
much better in a tite-d-tite than in a mixed company.  Her gentleness,  good
sense,  and the delicacy of her mind,  all show to advantage in close and in-
timate conversation ;  but in a room full of company,  they are buried in the
tumult of general talk and more flashy brilliancy.  I found her now  "  soft
without insipidity,"  as my dear father said she was,  and every way worthy
her own most sweet padre.  Not,  however,  quite,  neither,  for I am still far
from believing her talents equal to his.  But she is a sweet woiian,  and I
was very happy in being earnestly pressed by her to visit her in town.

178 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

In the afternoon we all went to the Whalleys,  where we found a large
and a high dressed company  :  at the head of which sat Lady Miller.  Among
the rest were Mr.  Anstey,  his lady,  and two daughters,  Miss Weston,  Mrs.
Aubrey,  the thin quaker-like woman I saw first at Mrs.  Lawes',  Mrs.  Lam-
bert, and various others,  male and female,  that I knew not.

Miss Weston instantly made up to me,  to express her  "  delight"  at my
return to Bath,  and to beg she might sit by me.  Mrs.  Whalley,  however,
placed me upon a sofa between herself and Mrs.  Aubrey ;  which,  however,
I did not repine at,  for the extreme delicacy of Miss Weston makes it pro-
digiously fatiguing to converse with her,  as it is no little difficulty to keep
pace with her refinement,  in order to avoid shocking her by too obvious an
inferiority in daintihood and ton.

Mr.  Whalley,  to my great astonishment,  so far broke through his delicacy
as to call to me across the room,  to ask me divers questions concerning my
London journey  ;  during all which,  Mr.  Anstey,  who sat next to him,  earn-
estly fixed his eyes in my face,  and both then and for the rest of the evening,
examined me with a look of most keen penetration.

As soon as my discourse was over with Mr.  Whalley  (during which,  as
he called me by my name,  every body turned towards me,  which was not very
agreeable),  Lady Miller arose,  and went to Mrs.  Thrale,  and whispered
something to her.     Mrs.  Thrale then rose,  too,  and said,

"  If your ladyship will give me leave,  I will first introduce my daughter
to you" — making Miss Thrale,  who was next her mother,  make her reve-
rences.

"  And now,"  she continued,  "  Miss Burney,  Lady Miller desires to be
introduced to you."

Up I jumped and walked forward :  Lady Miller,  very civilly more than
met me half way,  and said very polite things,  of her wish to know me,  and
regret that she had not sooner met me,  and then we both returned to our
seats.

Do you know now that notwithstanding Bath Easton is so much laughed
at in London,  nothing here is more tonish than to visit Lady Miller,  who is
extremely curious in her company,  admitting few people who are not of rank
or of fame,  and excluding of those all who are not people of character very
unblemished.

Some time after,  Lady Miller took a seat next mine on the sofa,  to play
at cards,  and was excessively civil indeed — scolded Mrs.  Thrale for not
sooner making us acquainted,  and had the politeness to offer to take me to
the balls herself,  as she heard Mr.  and Mrs.  Thrale did not choose to go.

After all this,  it is hardly fair to tell you what I think of her.  However,
the truth is,  I always,  to the best of my intentions,  speak honestly what I
think of the folks I see,  without being biassed either by their civilities or
neglect ;  and that you will allow is being a very faithful historian.

Well then,  Lady Miller is a round,  plump,  coarse-looking dame of about
forty,  and while all her aim is to appear an elegant woman of fashion,  all
her success is to seem an ordinary woman in very common life,  with fine
clothes on.  Her manners are bustling,  her air is mock-important,  and her
manners very inelegant.

So much for the lady of Bath Easton ;  who,  however,  seems extremely
good-natured,  and who is I am sure extremely civil.

The card-party was soon after broken up,  as Lady Miller was engaged to
Lady Dorothy Inglish,  and then I moved to seat myself by Mrs.  Lambert.

I was pupsently followed by Miss Weston,  and she was pursued by Mr.
Bouchier,  a man of fortune who is in the army or the militia,  and who was

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  179

tormenting Miss Weston,  en hadinage^  about some expedition upon the river
Avon,  to which he had been witness.  He seemed a mighty ratthng,  harem-
scarem gentleman,  but talked so fluently,  that I had no trouble in contri-
buting my mite towards keeping up the conversation,  as he talked enough
for four ;  and this I was prodigiously pleased at,  as I was in an indolent
mood,  and not disposed to bear my share.  I fancy,  when he pleases,  and
thinks it worth while,  he can be sensible and agreeable,  but all his desire
then,  was to alarm Miss Weston,  and persuade the company she had been
guilty of a thousand misdemeanours.

In the midst of this rattle,  Mr.  Whalley proposed that Miss Thrale
should go down stairs to hear a Miss Sage play upon the harpsichord.  Miss
Sage is a niece of Mrs.  Whalley,  and about nine years old.  I offered to be
of the party.  Miss Weston joined us,  as did the Miss Ansteys,  and down
we went.

And terribly wearied was I !  she played a lesson of Giordani's that
seemed to have no end,  and repeated all the parts into the bargain  ;  and
this,  with various little English songs,  detained us till we were summoned
to the carriage.  I had an opportunity,  however,  of seeing something of the
Miss Ansteys.

Mr.  Anstey,  I cannot doubt,  must sometimes be very agreeable ;  he could
not else have written so excellent,  so diverting,  so original a satire.  But he
chooses to keep his talents to himself,  or only to exert them upon very parti-
cular occasions.  Yet what he can call particular I know not,  for I have seen
him with Mrs.  Montagu,  with Mrs.  Thrale,  with the Bishop of Peterborough,
and with Lord Mulgrave ;  and four more celebrated folks for their abilities
can hardly be found.  Yet,  before them all he has been the same as when
I have seen him without any of them — shyly important,  and silently
proud  !

Well,  and there are men who are to be and to make happy,  and there are
men who are neither to make nor be made so !

Ah,  how different and how superior our sweet father !  who never thinks
of his authorship and fame at all,  but who is respected for both by every
body for claiming no respect from any body ;  and so,  Heaven be praised,
Dr.  Burney and not Mr.  Anstey gave birth to my Susan and to her F.  B.

Bath,  June 4. — To go on with Saturday evening.

We left the Whalleys at nine,  and then proceeded to Sir J.  C ,  who

had invited us to a concert at his house.

We found such a crowd of chairs and carriages we could hardly make
our way.  I had never seen any of the family,  consisting of Sir J.  and
three daughters,  but had been particularly invited.  The two rooms for the
company were quite full when we arrived,  and a large party was standing
upon the first floor landing-place.  Just as I got up stairs,  I was much sur-
prised to hear my name called by a man's voice who stood in the crowd
upon the landing-place,  and who said,

"  Miss Burney,  better go up another flight  (pointing up stairs) — if you'll
take my advice,  you'll go up another flight,  for there's no room any where
else."

I then recollected the voice,  for I could not see the face,  of Lord Mul-
grave, and I began at first to suppose I must really do as he said,  for there
seemed not room for a sparrow,  and I have heard the Sharp family do
actually send their company all over their house when they give concerts.
However,  by degrees we squeezed ourselves into the outer room,  and then

Mrs.  Lambert made way up to me,  to introduce me to Miss C ,  who is

extremely handsome,  genteel,  and pleasing,  though tonish,  and who did

180 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

the honours,  in spite of the crowd,  in a manner to satisfy every body.
After that,  she herself introduced me to her next sister,  Arabella,  who is
very fat,  but not ugly.  As to Sir J.,  he was seated behind a door in the
music-room,  where,  being lame,  he was obliged to keep still,  and I never
once saw his face,  though I was upon the point of falling over him ;  for,  at
one time,  I had squeezed just into the music-room,  and was leaning against
the door,  which was open,  and which Lord Althorpe,  the Duchess of
Devonshire's brother,  was also lolling against,  the pressure pushed Sir
James's chair,  and the door beginning to move,  I thought we should have
fallen backwards.  Lord Althorpe moved off instantly,  and I started for-
wards without making any disturbance,  and then Mr.  Travell came to
assure me all was safe behind the door,  and so the matter rested quietly,
though not without giving me a ridiculous fright.

Mr.  Travell,  ma'am,  if I have not yet introduced him to you,  I must tell
you is known throughout Bath by the name of Beau Travell ;  he is a most
approved connoisseur in beauty,  gives the tx)n to all the world,  sets up
young ladies in the heau mo7ide^  and is the sovereign arbitrator of fashions,
and decider of fashionable people.  I had never the honour of being
addressed by him before,  though I have met him at the dean's and at Mrs.
Lambert's.     So you may believe I was properly struck.

Though the rooms were so crowded,  I saw but two faces I knew — Lord
Huntingdon,  whom I have drank tea with at Mrs.  Cholmley's,  and Miss
Philips  ;  but the rest were all showy tonish people,  who are only to be seen
by going to the rooms,  which we never do.

Some time after,  Lord Mulgrave crowded in among us,  and cried out
to me,

"  So you would not take my advice!"

I told him he had really alarmed me,  for I had taken him seriously.

He laughed at the notion of sending me up to the garrets,  and then poked
himself into the concert-room.

Oh,  but I forgot to mention Dr.  Harrington,  with whom I had much
conversation,  and who was dry,  comical,  and very agreeable.  I also saw
Mr.  Henry,  but as Miss L was not present,  nothing ensued.

Miss C herself brought me a cup of ice,  the room being so crowded

that the man could not get near me.  How ridiculous to invite so many more
people than can be accommodated  !

Lord Mulgrave was soon sick of the heat,  and finding me distressed what
to do with my cup,  he very good-naturedly took it from me,  but carried
not only that,  but himself also,  away,  which I did not equally rejoice at.

You may laugh,  perhaps,  that 1 have all this time said never a word of
the music,  but the truth is I heard scarce a note.  There were quartettes
and overtures by gentlemen performers whose names and faces I know
not,  but such was the never ceasing tattling and noise in the card-room,
where I was kept almost all the evening,  that a general humming of musical
sounds,  and now and then a twang,  was all I could hear.

Nothing can well be more ridiculous than a concert of this sort ;  and Dr.
Harrington told me that the confusion amongst the musicians,  was equal to
that amongst the company ;  for that,  when called upon to open the concert,

they found no music.     The Miss C 's had prepared nothing,  nor yet

solicited their dilettanti^ s to prepare for them.  Miss Harrington,  his
daughter,  who played upon the harpsichord,  and by the very little I could
sometimes hear,  I believe very well,  complained that she had never touched
so vile an instrument,  and that she was quite disturbed at being obliged to
play upon it.

About the time that I sot asrainst the door,  as I have mentioned,  of the

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  181

music-room,  the young ladies were preparing to perform,  and with the
assistance of j\Ir.  Henry,  they sang catches.  Oh,  such singing  !  worse
squalHng,  more out of tune,  and more execrable in every respect,  never
did I hear.     We did not get away till late.

Su>'DAY. — We had an excellent sermon from the Bishop of Peterborough,
who preached merely at the request of i\Irs.  Thrale.  From the abbey we
went to the pump-room,  where we met Mrs.  and jMiss Byron,  and I gave
Captain Frodsham's message,  or rather apologies,  to  ]\Irs.  Byron,  who,  in
her warm and rapid way told me she thought it extremely ill-bred that he
had not waited upon her,  but consented to receive him if he thought proper
to come,  and I undertook to let him know the same through Miss Leigh.

At the pump-room we also saw the beautiful Miss Ditcher,  Richardson's
granddaughter,  Mr.  Whalley,  &c.  But what gave me most pleasure was
meeting with I\Iiss Cooper,  and hearing from her that Mrs.  Carter was
come to Bath,  though only for that very day,  in her way somewhere
farther.  I have long languished to see Mrs.  Carter,  and I entreated Miss
Cooper to present me to her,  which she most readily undertook to do,  and
said we should meet her upon the Parade.  JMiss F.  Bowdler joined us,  and
we all walked away in search of her,  but to no purpose  ;  Mrs.  Thrale,
therefore,  accompanied Miss Cooper to York House,  where she was to
repose that night,  purposely to invite her to spend the evening with us.
She could not,  however,  make her promise,  but brought us some hopes.
At dinner we had the bishop and Dr.  Harrington ;  and the bishop,  who
was in very high spirits,  proposed a frolic,  which was,  that we should all
go to Spring Gardens,  where he should give us tea,  and thence proceed to
Mr.  Ferry's,  to see a very curious house and garden.  Mrs.  Thrale pleaded
that she had invited company to tea at home,  but the bishop said we would
go early,  and should return in time,  and was so gaily authoritative that he
gained his point.  He had been so long accustomed to command,  when
master of Westminster school,  that he cannot prevail with himself,  I believe,
ever to be overcome.

Dr.  Harrington was engaged to a patient,  and could not be of our party.
But the three Thrales,  the bishop,  and I,  pursued our scheme,  crossed the
Avon,  had a sweet walk through the meadows,  and drank tea at Spring
Gardens,  where the bishop did the honours with a spirit,  a gaiety,  and an
activity that jovialized us all,  and really we were prodigiously lively.  We
then walked on to Mr.  Ferry's habitation.

Mr.  Ferry is a Bath alderman  ;  his house and garden exhibit the house
and garden of Mr.  Tattersall,  enlarged.  Just the same taste prevails,  the
same paltry ornaments,  the same crowd of buildings,  the same unmeaning
decorations,  and the same unsuccessful attempts at making something of
nothing.

They kept us half an hour in the garden,  while they were preparing for
our reception in the house,  where after parading through four or five little
vulgarly showy closets,  not rooms,  we were conducted into a very gaudy
little apartment,  where the master of the house sat reclining on his arm,  as
if in contemplation,  though every thing conspired to show that the house
and its inhabitants were carefully arranged for our reception.  The bishop
had sent in his name by way of gaining admission.

The bishop,  with a gravity of demeanour difficult to himself to sustain,
apologized for our intrusion,  and returned thanks for seeing the house and
garden.  Mr.  Ferry started from his pensive attitude,  and begged us to be
seated,  and then a curtain was drawn,  and we perceived through a glass a
perspective view of ships,  boats,  and water !  This raree-show over,  the
VOL.  I.  16

132 DIARY AND LETTERS 17 SO.

maid who officiated as show -woman had a hint given her,  and presently a
trap-door opened,  and up jumped a covered table,  ornamented with various
devices.  When we had expressed our delight at this long enough to satisfy
JMr.  Ferry,  another hint was given,  and presently down dropped an eagle
from the ceiling,  whose talons were put into a certain hook at the top of
the covering of the table,  and when the admiration at this was over,  up
again flew the eagle,  conveying in his talons the cover,  and leaving under
it a repast of cakes,  sweetmeats,  oranges,  and jellies.

When our raptures upon this feat subsided,  the maid received another
signal,  and then seated herself in an armchair,  which presently sunk down
underground,  and up in its room came a barber's block,  with a vast quan-
tity of black wool on it,  and a high head-dress.

This,  you may be sure,  was more applauded than all the rest  ;  we were
€71 e.rtasc,  and having properly expressed our gratitude,  were soon after
sutiered to decamp.

You may easily believe that these sights occasioned us a good merry
walk home ;  indeed we laughed all the way,  and thought but little how ill
time went till we were again crossing the Avon,  when we were reminded of
it by seeing the windows full of company.

This was the worst part of the story.  Mrs.  Thrale was in horrid con-
fusion, but as the bishop gave her absolution,  her apologies were very good-
naturedly accepted in general.  But Mrs.  Byron,  half atrronted,  had
decamped before we returned,  and Mr.  Travell,  the beau,  looked very
grim at this breach of etiquette,  and made his bow just atler we returned.
But what was to me most vexatious,  was finding that I\Irs.  Carter had
been waiting for us near an hour.  The loss of her company I most sin-
cerely regretted,  because it was irretrievable,  as she was to leave Bath
next day.

The rest of the party waiting consisted of Miss Cooper,  Misses F.  and
Harriet Bowdler,  Miss Sharp,  who is always with  ]\Irs.  Carter,  Mrs.  Lam-
bert, and my gentle friend Augusta.  The two latter had been to Spring
Gardens in search of us,  where they had drank tea,  but we were then at
Mr.  Ferry's.

As soon as the general apologies were over,  Miss Cooper,  who knew my
earnest desire of being introduced to Mrs.  Carter,  kindly came up to me,
and taking my hand,  led me to her venerable friend,  and told her who I
was.  Mrs.  Carter arose,  and received me with a smiling air of benevo-
lence that more than answered all my expectations of her.  She is really a
noble-looking woman  ;  I never saw age so gracetul in the female sex yet  ;
her whole face seems to beam with goodness,  piety,  and philanthropy.

She told me she had lately seen some relations of mine at Mrs.  Ord's,
who had greatly delighted her by their musical talents — meaning,  I found,
Mr.  Burney and our Etty ;  and she said something further in their praise,
and of the pleasure they had given her  ;  but as I was standing in a large
circle,  all looking on,  and as I kept her standing,  I hardly could understand
what she said,  and soon after returned to my seat.

She scarce stayed three minutes longer.  When she had left the room,  I
could not forbear following her to the head of the stairs,  on the pretence of
inquiring for her cloak.  She then turned round to me,  and looking at me
with an air of much kindness,  said,  "  Miss Burney,  I have been greatly
obliged to you long before I have seen you,  and must now thank you for the
very great entertainment you have given me."

This was so unexpected a compliment that I was too much astonished to
make any answer.     However,  I am very proud of it from Mrs.  Carter,  and

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  183

1 will not fail to seek another meeting with her when I return to town, —
which I shall be able enough to do by means of Miss Cooper,  or Miss Ord,
or Mrs.  Pepys.

You are,  indeed,  a most good and sweet girl for writing so copiously,
and you oblige and indulge me more than I can express.

Well,  after I had read your letter,  1 went to the Belvidere,  to call upon
Mrs.  and Miss Leigh,  and made Mr.  Thrale accompany me by way of
exercise,  for the Belvidere is near a mile from our house,  and all up hill.

Mrs.  Leigh and her fair daughter received me with their usual kindness,
which,  indeed,  is quite affectionate,  and I found with them Miss Harriet
Bowdler and Captain Frodsham.  I negotiated matters with all the address
in my power,  and softened Mrs.  Byron's haughty permission into a very
civil invitation,  which I hoped would occasion an agreeable meeting.  Capt.
Frodsham is a very sensible,  well-bred and pleasing young man  :  he returned
me many thanks for my interference,  and said he would wait upon Mrs.
Byron very speedily.

We made a long visit here,  as the people were mighty likeable,  and then
Miss Harriet Bowdler,  Miss Leigh,  and Captain Frodsham accompanied us
to the Parade,  ^.  e.  home.

In the evening we all went to Mrs.  Cholmley's where we met Vlx.  Poyntz,
and were,  as usual at that house,  sociable,  cheerful,  and easy.

Tuesday. — This morning,  by appointment,  we met a party at the pump-
room,  thence to proceed to Spring Gardens,  to a public breakfast.  The
folks,  however,  were not to their time,  and we sallied forth only with the
addition of Miss Weston and Miss Byron.

As soon as we entered the gardens,  Augusta,  who had hold of my arm,
called out,  "  Ah there's the man I danced with at the ball!  and he plagued
me to death,  asking me if I liked this,  and that,  and the other,  and,  when
I said  '  No,'  he asked me what I did like  ?  So,  I suppose he thought me
a fool,  and so,  indeed,  I am  !  only you are so good to me that I wrote my
sister Sophy word you had almost made me quite vain ;  and she wrote to
me t'other day a private letter,  and told me how glad she was you were
come back,  for,  indeed,  I had written her word I should be quite sick of my
life here,  if it was not for sometimes seeing you."

The gentleman to whom she pointed presently made up to us,  and I
found he was Captain Bouchier,  the same w^ho had rattled away at Mr.
Whalley's.  He instantly joined Miss Weston and consequently our party,
and was in the same style of flighty raillery as before.  He seems to have
a very good understanding,  and very quick parts,  but he is rather too
conscious of both  :  however,  he was really very entertaining,  and as he
abided wholly by Miss Weston,  whose delicacy gave way to gaiety and flash,
whether she would or not,  I was very glad that he made one among us.

The rest of the company soon came,  and were Mr.  and Mrs.  Whalley,
Mrs.  Lambert,  Mrs.  Aubrey,  Colonel Campbell,  an old officer,  an old
acquaintance of Mr.  Thrale,  and some others,  both male and female,  whose
names I know not.

We all sat in one box,  but we had three tea-makers.  Miss Weston pre-
sided at that to which I belonged,  and Augusta,  Captain Bouchier,  and her-
self, were of our set.  And gay enough we were,  for the careless rattle of
Captain Bouchier,  which paid no regard to the  "daintiness of Miss Weston,
made her obliged,  in her own defence,  to abate her finery,  and laugh,  and
rally,  and rail in her turn.  But,  at last,  I really began to fear that this
flighty officer would bring on a serious quarrel,  for,  among other subjects

184 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

he was sporting,  he imfortunately started that of the Bath Easton vase,
which he ridiculed without mercy,  and yet,  according to all I have heard of
it,  without any injustice ;  but Mrs.  Whalley,  who overheard him,  was quite
irritated with him.  Sir John and Lady Miller are her friends,  and she
thought it incumbent upon her to vindicate even this vain folly which she
did weakly and warmly,  while Captain Bouchier only laughed and ridiculed
them the more.  Mrs.  Whalley then coloured,  and grew quite enraged,
reasoning upon the wickedness of laughing at her good friends,  and talking
of generosity and sentiment.  Meanwhile,  he scampered from side to side,
to avoid her  ;  laughed,  shouted,  and tried every way of braving it out ;  but
was compelled at last to be serious,  and enter into a solemn defence of his
intentions,  ^hich were,  he said,  to ridicule the vase,  not the Millers.

In the evening we went to P>Irs.  Lambert's ;  but of that visit,  in which I
made a very extraordinary new acquaintance,  in my next packet,  for this
will not hold the account.

Wedxesday. — To go on with Mrs.  Lambert.  The party was Mr and
Mrs.  Vanbrugh — the former a good sort of man — the latter.  Captain
Bouchier says,  reckons herself a woman of humour,  but she kept it pro-
digious snug  ;  Lord Huntingdon,  a very deaf old lord  ;  Sir Robert Pigot,  a
very thin old baronet ;  Mr.  Tyson,  a very civil master of the ceremonies  ;

Mr.  and Mrs.  White,   a very insignificant couple  ;    Sir James C ,  a

bawling old man ;  two Misses C ,  a pair of tonish misses ;  Mrs.   and

Miss Byron ;  Miss W ,  and certain others I knew nothing of.

Augusta Byron,  according to custom,  had entered into conversation with

me,  and we were talking about her sisters,  and her affairs,  when Mr.  E

(whose name I forgot to mention),  came to inform me that Mrs.  Lambert

begged to speak to me.     She was upon a sofa with Miss W ,  who,  it

seemed,  desired much to be introduced to me,  and so I took a chair facing
them.

Miss W is young and pleasing in her appearance,  not pretty,  but

agreeable in her face,  and soft,  gentle,  and well bred in her manners.  Our
conversation,  for some time,  was upon the common Bath topics but when
Mrs.  Lambert left us — called to receive more company — we went insensibly
into graver matters.

As I soon found,  by the looks and expressions of this young lady,  that
she was of a pecuhar cast,  I left all choice of subject to herself,  determined
quietly to follow as she led ;  and very soon,  and I am sure I know not how,
we had for topics the follies and vices of mankind,  and,  indeed,  she spared
not for lashing them.  The women she rather excused than defended,  laying
to the door of the men their faults and imperfections  ;  but the men,  she
said were all bad — all,  in one word,  and without exception,  sensualists !

I stared much at a severity of speech for which her softness of manner
had so ill prepared me ;  and she perceiving my surprise,  said,

"  I am sure I ought to apologize for speaking my opinion to you — you,
who have so just and so uncommon a knowledge of human nature.  I have
long  \vished ardently to have the honour of conversing with you  ;  but
your party has,  altogether,  been regarded as so formidable,  that I have not
had courage to approach it."

I made — as what could I do else  ? — disqualifying speeches,  and she then
led to discoursing of happiness and misery :  the latter she held to be the
invariable lot of us all  ;  and  "  one word,"  she added,  "  we have in our
language,  and in all others,  for which there is never any essential necessity,
and that is — pleasure P""  And her eyes filled with tears as she spoke.

"  How you amaze me  !"  cried I ;  "  I have met Avith misanthropes before,

1780.  Of'  THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  Ig5

but never with so complete a one ;  and I can hardly think I hear right
when I see how young you are  !"

She then,  in rather indirect terms,  gave me to understand that she was
miserable at home,  and in very direct terms,  that she was wretched abroad  ;
and openly said,  that to affliction she was born,  and in affliction she must
die,  for that the world was so vilely formed as to render happiness impos-
sible for its inhabitants.

There was something in this freedom of repining that I could by no
means approve,  and,  as I found by all her manner that she had a disposition
to even respect whatever I said,  I now grew very serious,  and frankly told
her that I could not think it consistent with either truth or religion to cherish
such notions.

"  One thincr,"  answered she,  "  there is,  which I believe might make me
happy,  but for that I have no inclination  :  it is an amorous disposition ;  but
that I do not possess.     I can make myself no happiness by intrigue."

"  I hope not,  indeed !"  cried I,  almost confounded by her extraordinary
notions and speeches ;  "  but,  surely,  there are worthier subjects of happi-
ness attainable."

"  No,  I believe there are not,  and the reason the men are happier than
us,  is because they are more sensual  !"

"  I would not think such thoughts,"  cried I,  clasping my hands with an
involuntary vehemence,  "  for worlds  !"

The Misses C then interrupted us,  and seated themselves next to

us  ;  but Miss W paid them little attention at first,  and soon after none

at all ;  but,  in a low voice,  continued her discourse with me,  recurring to
the same subject of happiness and misery,  upon which,  after again assert-
ing the folly of ever hoping for the former,  she made this speech,

"  There may be,  indeed,  one moment of happiness,  which must be the
finding one worthy of exciting a passion which one should dare own to him--
self.  That would,  indeed,  be a moment worth living for!  but that can never
happen — I am sure not to me, — the men are so low,  so vicious,  so worth-
less !     No,  there is not one such to be found !"

What a strange girl  !  I could do little more than listen to her,  from sur-
prise at all she said.

"  If,  however,"  she continued,  "  I had your talents I could,  bad as this
world is,  be happy in it.  There is nothing,  there is nobody I envy like you.
With such resources as yours there can never be ennui ;  the mind may be
employed,  and always be gay!     Oh,  if I could write as you write  !"

"  Try,"  cried I,  "  that is all that is wanting  ;  try,  and you will soon do
much better things !"

"  O no  !  I have tried,  but I cannot succeed."

"  Perhaps you are too diffident.  But is it possible you can be serious in
so dreadful an assertion as that you are never happy  ?  Are you sure that
some real misfortune would not show you that your present misery is ima-
ginary ?"

"  l' don't know,"  answered she,  looking down,  "  perhaps it is so, — but in
that case  'tis a misery so much the harder to be cured."

"  You surprise me more and more,"  cried I,  "  is it possible you can so
rationally see the disease of a disordered imagination,  and yet allow it such
power over your mind  ?"

"  Yes,  for it is the only source from which I draw any shadow of felicity.
Sometimes when in the country,  I give way to my imagination for whole
days,  and then I forget the world and its cares,  and feel some enjoyment of
existence."

16*

186 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

"Tell me what is then your notion of felicity?  Whither does your
castle-building carry you  ?"

"  O,  quite out of the world — I know not where,  but I am surrounded with
sylphs,  and I forget every thing besides."

"  Well,  you are a most extraordinary character,  indeed  ;  I must confess
I have seen nothing like you !"

"  I hope,  however,  I shall find something like myself,  and,  like the
magnet rolling in the dust,  attract some metal as I go."

"  That you may attract what you please,  is of all things the most likely ;
but if you wait to be happy for a friend resembling yourself,  I shall no
longer wonder at your despondency."

"  Oh  !"  cried she,  raising her eyes in ecstasy,  "  could I find such a one !
— male or female — for sex would be indifferent to me.  With such a one I
would go to live directly."

I half laughed,  but was perplexed in my own mind whether to be sad or
merry at such a speech.

"  But then,"  she continued,  "  after making,  should I lose such a friend,  I
would not survive."

"  Not survive  ?"  repeated I,  "  what can you mean  ?"

She looked down,  but said nothing.

"  Surely you cannot mean,"  said I,  very gravely indeed,  "  to put a violent
end to your life  ?"

"  I should not,"  said she,  again looking up,  "  hesitate a moment."

I was quite thunderstruck,  and for some time could not say a word ;  but
when I did speak,  it was in a style of exhortation so serious and earnest,  I
am ashamed to write it to you,  lest you should think it too much.

She gave me an attention that was even respectful,  but when I urged her
to tell me by what right she thought herself entitled to rush unlicensed on
eternity,  she said,  "  By the right of believing I shall be extinct."

I really felt horror-struck.

"  Where,  for Heaven's sake,"  I cried,  "  where have you picked up such
dreadful reasoning 1"

"  In Hume,"  said she  ;  "  I have read his Essays repeatedly."

"  I am sorry to find they have power to do so much mischief,  you should
not have read them,  at least till a man equal to Hume in abilities had
answered him.     Have you read any more infidel writers  ?"

"  Yes,  Bolingbroke,  the divinest of all writers."

*'  And do you read nothing upon the right side  ?"

"  Yes,  the Bible,  till I was sick to death of it,  every Sunday evening to my
mother."

"  Have you read Beattie on the Immutability of Truth  ?"

"  No."

"  Give me leave then to recommend it to you.  After Hume's Essays
you ought to read it.  And even for lighter reading,  if you were to look at
Mason's  '  Elegy on Lady Coventry,'  it might be of no disservice to you."

And then I could not forbear repeating to her from that beautiful poem,

Know,  vain sceptics,  know th'  Almig'hty Mind

That breath'd on man a portion of His fire,
Bade his free soul,  by earth nor time confin'd,

To Heaven,  to immortality,  aspire I

Nor shall the pile of hope His mercy rear'd

By vain philosophy be e'er destroyed  ;
Eternity — by all,  or vs^ished,  or fear'd,

Shall be by all,  or Buffered— or enjoyed  !

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  187

This was the chief of our conversation,  which indeed made an impres-
sion upon me I shall not easily get rid of.  A young and agreeable infidel
is even a shocking sight,  and with her romantic,  flighty,  and unguarded
turn of mind,  what could happen to her that could give surprise?

Poor misguided girl !  I heartily indeed wish she was in good hands.
She is in a very dangerous situation,  with ideas so loose of religion,  and so
enthusiastic of love.  What,  indeed,  is there to restrain an infidel,  who has
no belief in a future state,  from sin and evil of any sort  ?

Before we left Mrs.  Lambert,  Mrs,  Byron took me aside to beg I would
go and make her peace with Captain Frodsham.  Droll enough to have the
tables so turned.  She feared,  she said,  shat she had offended him by cer-
tain unfortunate reflections she had inadvertently cast upon some officers to
whom he was related.  The particulars would but tire you  ;  but I readily
undertook the commission,  and assured her I was certain such condescen-
sion on her part would make the captain all her own.

Augusta,  with her usual sweetness,  lamented seeing so little of me,  as

Miss W had occupied me solely  ;  but said she did not wonder,  and had

no right to complain,  as she wished to do the same.     She is,  indeed,  quite
romantic in her partiality.

Thursday. — In the morning I walked to the Belvidere,  to execute my
commission.  Captain Frodsham I met at Mrs.  Leigh's,  and began my
treaty of peace,  but soon found he had taken no offence,  but,  on the con-
trary had been much charmed with Mrs.  Byron's conversation and vivacity.
I had therefore soon done,  and having spent an hour with them very agree-
ably, I proceeded to  ]\Irs.  Byron,  to tell her the success of the negotiation.

Augusta walked back with me,  but on the South Parade we met Miss C ,

who joined me,  and then the bashful Augusta would not go another step,  but
hastily shook my hand and ran away.

At night,  however,  we met again,  as we had a party at home,  consisting
of the Byrons,  Dean of Ossory,  Mrs.  and Charlotte Lewis,  Mrs.  Lambert,
and Dr.  Finch.

Dr.  Finch is a tall,  large,  rather handsome,  smiling,  and self-complacent
clergyman.  He talked very much of an old lady here aged 90,  who was
very agreeable,  and upon inquiry I found she was Mrs.  Ord's mother,  Mrs.
Dellingham.  I could not forbear wishing to see her,  and then Dr.  Finch,
who lodges in the same house with her,  was very pressing to introduce me
to her.  I could not agree to so abrupt an intrusion,  but I did not object to
his making overtures for such a meeting,  as my affection and respect for
Mrs.  Ord made me extremely wish to see her mother.

Friday. — Early this morning I received my Susan's second packet of
this second Bath journey.  The remaining account of the miserere concert
is very entertaining,  and Rauzzini's badinage diverted me much.

I have nobody to tell you of here that you care a fig for,  but not caring,
you may sometimes have a chance of being diverted, — so on I go.

This morning by appointment I was to breakfast with Miss Leigh.  Just
as I came to the pump-room,  I met Mr.  and Mrs.  Cholmley.  The latter
shook hands with me,  and said she should leave Bath in a day or two.  I
"was very sorry for it,  as she is a real loss to me.  On then I posted,  and
presently before me I perceived Lord Mulgrave.  As I was rather hurried,
I meant to take an adroit turn to pass him,  but he was in a frisky humour,
and danced before me from side to side to stop me,  saying,  "  Why where
now,  where are you posting so fast  ?"

I then halted,  and we talked a little talk of the Thrales,  of the weather,  &c.,
and then finding he was at his old trick of standing still before me,  without

188 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

seeming to have any intention we should separate,  though I did not find he
had any thing more to say,  I rather abruptly wished him good morning and
whisked off.

I had,  however,  only gone another street ere I again encountered him,
and then we both laughed,  and he walked on with me.  He himself lives at
the Belvidere,  and very good-humouredly made my pace his,  and chatted
with me all the way,  till I stopped at Mrs.  Leigh's.  Our confabulation
however was all about Bath matters and people,  and therefore will not bear
writing,  though I assure you it was pretty enough,  and of half a mile's
length.

At the Leighs'  I found Harriet Bowdler,  and passed the morning very
comfortably.

In the evening was the last ball expected to be at Bath this season,  and
therefore knowing we could go to no other,  it was settled we should go to
this.  Of our party were Mrs.  Byron and Augusta,  Miss Philips,  and Char-
lotte Lewis.

Mrs.  Byron was placed at the upper end of the room by Mr.  Tyson,
because she is honourable,  and her daughter next to her ;  I,  of course,  the
lowest of our party  ;  but the moment Mr.  Tyson had arranged us,  Augusta
arose,  and nothing would satisly her but taking a seat not only next to but
below me  ;  nor could I for my life get the better of the affectionate humility
with which she quite supplicated me to be content.  She was soon after
followed by Captain Brisbane,  a young officer who had met her in Spring
Gardens,  and seemed much struck with her,  and was now presented to her
by Mr.  Tyson for her partner.

Captain Brisbane is a very pretty sort of young man,  but did not much
enliven us.  Soon after I perceived Captain Bouchier,  who,  after talking
some time with Mrs.  Thrale,  and various parties,  made up to us,  and upon
Augusta's being called upon to dance a minuet,  took her place,  and began
a very lively sort of chit-chat.

I had,  however,  no small difficulty to keep him from abusing my friend
Augusta.  He had once danced with her,  and their commerce had not been
much to her advantage.  I defended her upon the score of her amiable sim-
plicity and unaffected ingenuousness,  but I could not have the courage to
contradict him when he said he had no notion she was very brilliant by the
conversation he had with her.  Augusta,  indeed,  is nothing less than bril-
liant: but she is natural,  artless,  and very affectionate.  Just before she
went to dance her minuet,  upon my admiring her bouquet,  which was the
most beautiful in the room,  she tore from it the only two moss roses in it,
and so spoilt it all before her exhibition,  merely that I might have the best
of it.

Country dances were now preparing,  and after a little further chat,
Captain Bouchier asked me for the honour of my hand,  but I had previously
resolved not to dance,  and therefore declined his offer.  But he took,  of the
sudden,  a fancy to prate with me,  and therefore budged not after the refusal.

He told me this was the worst ball for company there had been the whole
season  ;  and,  with a wicked laugh that was too significant to be misunder-
stood, said,  "And,  as you have been to no other,  perhaps you will give this
for a specimen of a Bath ball !"

He told me he had very lately met with Hannah More,  and then men-
tioned Mrs.  Montagu and Mrs.  Carter,  whence he took occasion to say most
high and fine things of the ladies of the present age, — their writings,  and
talents ;  and I soon found he had no small reverence for us blue-stock-
ings.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  189

About this time Charlotte,  who had confessedly dressed herself for
dancing,  but whose pretty face had by some means been overlooked,
drawled towards us,  and asked me why I did not dance  ?

*'  I never intended it,"  said I ;  "  but I hoped to have seen you."

"  No,"  said she,  yawning,  "  no more shall I, — I don't choose it."

"  Don't you?"  said Captain Bouchier,  drily,  "  why not?"

"  Why,  because I don't like it."

*'  O fie  !"  cried he  ;  "  consider how cruel that is."

"  I must consider myself,"  said she,  pertly ;  "  for I don't choose to heat
myself this hot weather."

Just then a young man came forward,  and requested her hand.  She
coloured,  looked excessively silly,  and walked off with him to join the
dancers.

When,  between the dances,  she came our way,  he plagued her,  a la Sir
Clement.

"Well,"  cried he,  "so you have been dancing this hot night !  I thought
you would have considered yourself better  ?"

"  Oh,"  said she,  I could not help it — I had much rather not ; — it was
quite disagreeable to me."

"  No,  no, — pardon me there !"  said he,  maliciously ;  "  I saw pleasure
dance first in your eyes ;  I never saw you look more delighted :  you were
quite the queen of smiles  !"

She looked as if she could have killed him  ;  and yet,  from giddiness and
good-humour,  was compelled to join in the laugh.

After this we went to tea.  When that was over,  and we all returned to
the ball-room,  Captain Bouchier followed me,  and again took a seat next
mine,  which he kept,  without once moving,  the whole night.

He again applied to me to dance,  but I was more steady than Charlotte  ,*
and he was called upon,  and reproached by Captain Brisbane and others for
sitting still when there were so few dancers ;  but he told them he could not
endure being pressed into the service,  or serving at all under the master of
the ceremonies.

Well,  I have no more time for particulars,  though we had much more
converse ;  for so it happened that we talked all the evening almost to-
gether, as Mrs.  Thrale and Mrs.  Byron were engaged with each other:  Miss
Thrale,  who did not dance,  was fairly jockeyed out of her place next me by
Captain Bouchier,  and the other young ladies were with their partners.

Before we broke up,  this captain asked me if I should be at the play
next night  ? — "  Yes,"  I could not but say,  as we had had places taken some
time ;  but I did not half like it,  for his manner of asking plainly implied,
"  If you go,  why  /  will !"

When we made our exit,  he saw me safe out of the rooms,  with as much
attention as if we had actually been partners.  As we were near home we
did not get into chairs ;  and Mr.  Travell joined us in our walk.

"  Why,  what a flirtation  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  why,  Burney,  this is a
man of taste  ! — Pray,  Mr.  Travell,  will it do  ?     What has he  ?"

"  Twenty thousand pounds,  ma'am,"  answered the beau.

"  O ho l^has he so?— Well,  well,  we'll think of it."

Findinf?  her so facetious,  I determined not to acquaint her with the query
concerning the play,  knowing that,  if I did,  and he appeared there,  she
would be outrageous in merriment.  She is a most dear creature,  but
never restrains her tongue in any thing,  nor indeed,  any of her feelings  : —
she laughs,  cries,  scolds,  sports,  reasons,  m.akes fun, — does every thing she

190 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

has an inclination to do,  without any study of prudence,  or thought of
blame ;  and pure and artless as is this character,  it often draws both her-
self and others into scrapes,  which a little discretion would avoid.

CHAPTER IX.

1780.

Batli Diary resumed — A Dinner-party — Raillery — Flirtation — The Bath Theatre — Bath
Actors — The Abbey Church — Garrick and Quia — Morning Calls — Curiosity — The
Dean of Ossory — Beau Travell — Family Quarrels — An Oddity — Batli Easton — Female
Admiration — Miss Bowdler — A Female Sceptic — A Baby Critic — Lord George Gor-
don— The No Popery Riots — Danger of Mr.  Thrale from the Riots — Precipitate
Retreat — Letters from Miss Burney — Public Excitement — Riots at Bath — Salisbury —
Mr.  Thrale's House Attacked — Letters from Dr.  Burney — and Mrs.  Thrale — Descrip-
lion of the Riots — Brighton Society — Conclusion of the Riots — Letters from Miss
Burney — Pacchierotti — A Dinner-party at Dr.  Burney's — Lord Sandwich — Captain
Cook's Journal — Letter from Mrs,  Thrale — Brighton Society — Grub Street — Miss
Burney to Mrs.  Thrale — Dangerous Times — A Dinner-party at Dr.  Burney's — A Visit
to Dr.  Johnson — Miss Burney and Dr.  Johnson in Grub Street — Son of Edmund
Burke — A Female Rattle — Johnson's Lives of the Poets — Streatham Diary Resumed
— Brighton — Lady Hesketh — Lady Shelley — A Juvenile Musician — Dangerous Illness
of Mr.  Thrale — Dr.  Johnson and Mr.  Murphy — Lady Ladd — Letters — Sheridan's
"  Critic" — "  Evelina"  in the Bodleian Library — Promotion — Chit-chat.

June. — I feel myself inclined,  my dearest Susy,  to do nothing now but
write to you ;  and so many packets do I owe you,  that le devoir here joins
Vmcluiation.

I left off with Friday's ball.

Saturday morning I spent in visiting, — when I took leave of the
Cholmleys,  called on the Lewis's,  Kynaston,  Weston,  Whalley,  Mrs.  Lam-
bert and the Bowdlers.

At dinner we had Mrs.  Lambert and Colonel Campbell.  All the dis-
course was upon Augusta Byron's having made a conquest of Captain
Brisbane,  and the match was soon concluded upon, — at least,  they all
allowed it would be decided this night,  when she was to go with us to the
play  ;  and if Captain Brisbane was there,  why then he was in for it,  and
the thing was done.

Well — Augusta came at the usual time ;  Colonel Campbell took leave,
but Mrs.  Lambert accompanied us to the play :  and,  in the lobby,  the first
object we saw was Captain Brisbane.  He immediately advanced to us,
and,  joining our party,  followed us into our box.

Nothing could equal the wickedness of Mrs.  Thrale and Mrs.  Lambert  ;
they smiled at each other with such significance  !  Fortunately,  however,
Augusta did not observe them.

Well,  we took our seats,  and Captain Brisbane,  by getting into the next
box,  on a line with ours,  placed himself next to Augusta :  but,  hardly had
Mrs.  T.  and L.  composed their faces,  ere I heard the box-door open.  Every
one looked round but me,  and I had reasons for avoiding such a curiosity, —
reasons well enough founded,  for instantly grins,  broader than before,  widened
the mouths of the two married ladies,  while even Miss Thrale began a titter
that half choked her,  and Augusta nodding to me with an arch smirk,
said,  "  Miss Burney,  I wish you joy !"

To be sure I could have no doubt who entered,  but,  very innocently,  I
demanded of them all the cause of their mirth.     They scrupled not explain-

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  191

ing themselves  ;  and I found my caution,  in not mentioning the query that
had been put to me,  availed me nothing,  for the captain was already a
marked man in my service  !

He placed himself exactly behind me,  but very quietly and silently,  and
did not,  for some minutes,  speak to me  ;  afterwards,  however,  he did a
little, — except when my favourite,  Mr.  Lee,  who acted old Nerval,  in
*  Douglas,'  was on the stage,  and then he was strictly silent.  I am in no cue
to write our discourse  ;  but it was pleasant and entertaining enough at the
time,  and his observations upon the play and the players were lively and
comical.  But I was prodigiously worried by my own party,  who took
every opportunity to inquire how I was entertained,  and so forth, — and to
snigger.

Two young ladies,  who seemed about eighteen,  and sat above us,  were
so much shocked by the death of Douglas,  that they both burst into a loud
fit of roaring,  like little children, — and sobbed on,  afterwards,  for almost
half the farce  !  I was quite astonished  ;  and Miss Weston complained that
they really disturbed her sorrows ;  but Captain Bouchier was highly
diverted,  and went to give them comfort,  as if they had been babies,  telling
them it was all over,  and that they need not cry any more.

Sunday. — In the morning,  after church-time,  I spent an hour or two
looking over the abbey-church,  and reading epitaphs, — among which,
Garrick's on Quin was much the best.  There is a monument erected,  also,
for Sarah Fielding,  who wrote  "  David Simple,"  by Dr.  Hoadley.

Will any future doctor do as much by me  ?

In the afternoon,  I called upon the Leighs,  to take leave,  as they were
going from Bath next day.  Mrs.  Leigh was out,  but her daughter kept me
to the last minute another engagement would allow,  and then took quite a
kind and friendly farewell.  She is really so sensible,  so well-bred,  and so
engaging,  that I shall always be very happy to meet with her.  I gave our
direction,  and she promised to make use of it.

From her I went to Mrs.  Byron's,  where the Thrales were already,  and
a large party  :  Lord Mulgrave,  Mrs.  Vanbrugh,  Mrs.  Lambert,  Captains
Brisbane and Frodsham,  Beau Travell,  Mr.  Tyson,  the Hon.  Mr.  Wyndham,
brother to Lord Egremont,  and Mr.  Chadwick.

Though the party was so good,  I have not a word to write concerning it,
for I only conversed with Augusta,  and on her account.  Captain Brisbane  ;
and though she is a very sweet girl,  she is not,  as Captain Bouchier said,
very brilliant,  and therefore I should not dazzle you with much wit in re-
cording our speeches.

Monday. — At breakfast,  Mrs.  Thrale said,

"  Ah,  you never tell me your love-secrets,  but I could tell you one if I
chose it !"

This produced entreaties — and entreaties thus much further —

"  Why,  I know very well who is in love with Fanny Burney !"

I told her that was more than I did,  but owned it was not difficult to me
to guess who she meant,  though I could not tell what.

"  Captain Bouchier,"  said she.  "  But you did not tell me so,  nor he
either ;  I had it from Mr.  Tyson,  our master of the ceremonies,  who told
me you made a conquest of him at the ball ;  and he knows these matters
pretty well  ;  'tis his trade to know them."

"  Welladay !"  quoth I — "  'tis unlucky we did not meet a little sooner,
for this very day he is ordered away with his troop into Norfolk."

After breakfast,  Fanny Bowdler called upon me,  and we were Ute-d-tite
all the morning.    She is an extraordinary good Ute-d-tUe,  and I did not think

192 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

her the less agreeable,  I suppose,  for telling me that Mrs.  Carter^has con-
descended to speak of me in very flattering terms since our meeting.

She told me also that Miss Leigh is soon to be married to Captain Frod-
sham.  I am very glad of it,  as they seem very deserving of each other,  and
will make a most agreeable and sensible pair.

In the evening we were at the Vanbrughs',  where we met Mr.,  Mrs.,  and

Miss G ,  all three mighty tonish folks  :  the Mr.  in a common and heavy

way,  the Mrs.  in an insolent,  overbearing way,  and the Miss in a shy,  proud,
stiff way.  Also the good-humoured Dr.  Maningham,  and Mrs.  and Miss
ditto,  of no characters apparent ;  Miss Jones,  an ugly,  sensible,  reserved
woman ;  her father — I know not what ;  Mr.  Tom Pitt,  a prosing,  conceited
man of fashion,  and sense to boot ;  Mrs.  Lam.bert,  Mrs.  Byron,  and some
others I know not.

All the early part of the evening Miss Thrale and I sat together ;  but
afterwards Mrs.  Thrale,  who was at another part of the room,  called me
over,  and said,

"  Come,  Miss Burney,  come and tell Mrs.  Lambert about these green
rails at Clifton."

And so saying,  she gave me her seat,  which was between Mrs.  Lambert
and Mrs.  Byron,  and walked away to other folks.

I found they had been laughing about some house upon Clifton Hill with
green rails,  which Mrs.  Lambert vowed was Mrs.  Beaiwwnfs,  and said she
was sure I must have meant it should seem such :  and a sportively compli-
mentary conversation took place,  and lasted till Mrs.  G ,  having cut out

at cards,  with an air of tonish stateliness approached us,  and seating herself
by Mrs.  Lambert,  and nearly opposite to me,  fixed her eyes on my face,  and
examined it with a superb dignity of assurance that made me hardly know
what I said,  in my answers to Mrs.  Lambert and Mrs.  Byron.

Having looked in silence till she was tired,  in which I must own I felt
some sympathy,  she whispered Mrs.  Lambert,

"  Is that Miss Burney  ?"

*'  Yes,"  rewhispered Mrs.  Lambert ;  "  shall I introduce her to you.  "

"  No,  no,"  answered she,  "  I can do that well enough."

This,  though all in very low voices,  I was too near not to hear ;  and I
began to feel monstrous glumpy upon this last speech,  which indeed was
impertinent enough.

Soon after this high lady said,

"  Were you ever in Bath before.  Miss Burney 1"

"  Yes,  ma'am,"  I replied,  very drily ;  and to show how little I should
stoop the lower for her airs,  I instantly went on talking with Mrs.  Byron,
without allowing her an opportunity for the conference she seemed opening.
Characters of this sort always make me as proud as they are themselves,
while the avidity with which Mrs.  Byron honours,  and the kindness with
which Mrs.  Thrale delights me,  make me ready to kiss even the dust that
falls from their feet.

Having now,  therefore,  reanimated my courage,  I took a fit of talking,
and made my own part good,  and then I less minded her busy eyes,  which
never a moment spared me.

This lasted till Mrs.  Thrale again joined us,  and sat down next to Mrs.
G ,  who,  in a few minutes,  said to her in a whisper,

"  She is just what I have heard — I like her vastly."

This quite amazed me,  for her whisper was unavoidably heard by me,  as
we all sat cheek by jowl ;  and presently she repeated with yet more earnest-
ness,

"I like her of all things."

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I93

"  Yes,  she is a sweet creature indeed,"  answered my dear puffer  ;  "  and
I am sure 1 love her dearly."

Afterwards she asked Mrs.  Thrale a hundred questions concerning Dr.
Johnson,  with an air and an abruptness that provoked her so she could
hardly answer her  ;  and when Mrs.  Lambert again hinted at the green rails,
Mrs.  G ,  looking at me with a smile the softest she could assume,  said,

"  I am a great admirer of '  Evelina' — I think it has very great merit."

And I dare say she thought the praise of Dr.  Johnson had never been
half so flattering to me.

Tuesday evening we spent at the Dean of Ossory's.  We met no com-
pany there but Dr.  Finch,  who appointed the next morning for presenting
me to Mrs.  Dellingham.  (N.  B.  I hope I have mentioned this doctor is
married,  otherwise you may be justly and cruelly alarmed for my reputa-
tion.)

All my afternoon was devoted to Charlotte L ,  whose wild giddy non-
sense entertained me passing well.

O Heavens !  I forgot that Beau Travell was there  !  and just before we
went,  he came up to Charlotte and me,  to upbraid us for talking only to
each other,  and then he said,

"  I am sorry.  Miss Burney,  that your friend Captain Bouchier is gone  ;  he
is ordered directly into No rfolk."

Our friendship,  I told him,  was quite long enough of duration to make us
vastly afflicted that it was broken up.

Wednesday. — Dr.  Finch called in the morning,  and escorted me to Mrs.
Dellingham's.

Mrs.  Dellingham is said to be ninety and more ;  I therefore expected to
walk up to her easy chair and bawl out in her ear,  "  Ma'am,  your servant ;"
but no such thing happened ;  to my great surprise,  she met me at the door
of the drawing-room,  took my hand,  welcomed me very pohtely,  and led me
to the best seat at the upper end of the room.  She is a very venerable and
cheerful old gentlewoman,  walks well,  hears readily,  is almost quite up-
right, and very chatty and wellbred.

My discourse,  as you may imagine,  was all of Mrs.  Ord ;  but Dr.  Finch
took care it should not be much,  as he is one of those placid prosers who
are never a moment silent.

As soon as I had returned home,  Charlotte L called,  and the little

gig told all the quarrels and all les malheurs of the domestic life she led in
her family,  and made them all ridiculous,  without meaning to make her-
self so.

She was but just gone,  when I was again called down to Miss Weston —
nobody else at home :  and then I was regaled with a character equally
ludicrous,  but much less entertaining,  for nothing would she talk of but
*'  dear nature,"  and nothing abuse but  "  odious affectation !"  She really
would be too bad for the stage,  for she is never so content as when drawing
her own character for other people's,  as if on purpose to make one sick of
it.  She begged,  however,  for my town direction,  and talked in high strains
of the pleasure she would have in visiting me.  But in London we can
manage those matters better.     She was to leave Bath next day.

Mrs.  Whalley also called pour prendre conge^  and made much invitation
to her country-seat for us.

In the evening we all went to Mrs.  Lambert's,  where we met the Gren-
villes,  Byrons,  Vanbrughs,  Captain Brisbane,  Messrs.  Chadwicke,  Travell,
and Wyndham,  Miss Philips,  Lady Dorothy Inglish,  Lord Cunningham,,

VOL.  I.  17

194 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

and various others.  But I have no time for particulars,  and as I shall per-
haps see few of them any more,  no inclination.

Thursday,  June 8. — We went to Bath Easton.  Mrs.  Lambert went
with us.

The house is charmingly situated,  well fitted up,  convenient,  and plea-
sant, and not large,  but commodious and elegant.  Thursday is still their
public day for company,  though the business of the vase is over for this
season.

The room into which we were conducted was so much crowded we could
hardly make our way.  Lady Miller came to the door,  and,  as she had first
done to the rest of us,  took my hand,  and led me up to a most prodigious
fat old lady,  and introduced me to her.  This was Mrs.  Riggs,  her lady-
ship's mother,  who seems to have Bath Easton and its owners under her
feet.

I was smiled upon with a graciousness designedly marked,  and seemed
most uncommonly welcome.  Mrs.  Riggs looked as if she could have
shouted for joy at sight of me  !  She is mighty merry and facetious.  Sir
John was very quiet,  but very civil.

I saw the place appropriated for the vase,  but at this time it was removed.
As it was hot.  Sir John Miller offered us to walk round the house,  and see
his green-house,  &c.  So away we set off,  Harriet Bowdler accompanying
me,  and some others following.

We had not strolled far ere we were overtaken by another party,  and

among them I perceived Miss W ,  my new sceptical friend.    She joined

me immediately,  and I found she was by no means in so sad a humour as
when J saw her last ;  on the contrary she seemed fiightily gay.

"  Were you never here before  ?"  she asked me.

"  No."

"  No 1 why what an acquisition you are then  !  I suppose you will con-
tribute to the vase  ?"

"  No,  indeed !"

"  No more you ought ;  you are quite too good for it."

"  No,  not that;  but I have no great passion for making the trial.  You,
I suppose,  have contributed  ?"

"  No,  never — I can't.  I have tried,  but I could never write verses in
my life — never get beyond Cupid and stupid."

"  Did Cupid,  then,  always come in your way  ?  what a mischevous
urchin  !"

*'  No,  he has not been very mischievous to me this year."

"  Not this year?  Oh,  very well !  He has spared you then,  for a whole
twelvemonth  ?"

She laughed,  and we were interrupted by more company.

Afterwards,  when we returned into the house,  we found another room
filled with company.  Among those that I knew were the Cald wells,  the
Grenvilles,  some of the Bowdlers,  Mr.  Wyndham,  and Miss J .

This Miss J had,  when I last met her at Mrs.  Lambert's,  desired to

be introduced to me,  as Mrs.  Lambert told me,  who performed that cere-
mony ;  for Mrs.  Lambert,  with whom I am in no small favour,  always
makes me the most consequential,  and I found she was Mrs.  Rishton's old
friend,  and therefore all I remember hearing of her gave me no desire to
make her my new one.  However,  nothing convinced me more that I was the
ton at Bath,  than her making this overture,  for every thing I ever heard of
her proved her insolent pride.  Besides,  Beau Travel 1 has spoken very
highly of me  !     So my fame is now made,  and Mrs.  G ,  who had

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I95

passed me when she entered the room at Bath Easton,  while I was engaged
in conversation with Lady Miller,  afterwards suddenly came up,  and with a
look of equal surprise and pleasure at sight of me,  most graciously and
smilingly addressed me.  My coldness in return to all these sickening,
heartless,  ton-\ed people,  I try not to repress,  though to treat them with
such respect as their superior stations fairly claim,  I would Jiot for the
world neglect.

Some time after,  while I was talking with Miss W and Harriet

Bowdler,  Mrs.  Riggs came up to us,  and with an expression of comical
admiration,  fixed her eyes upon me,  and for some time amused herself with
apparently watching me.  Mrs.  Lambert,  who was at cards,  turned round
and begged me to give her her cloak,  for she felt rheumatic ;  I could
not readily find it,  and after looking some time,  I was obliged to give her
my own ;  but while I was hunting,  Mrs.  Riggs followed me,  laughing,  nod-
ding, and looking much delighted,  and every now and then saying,

"  That's right,  Evelina  ! — Ah,  look for it,  Evelina  ! — Evelina always did
so — she always looked for people's cloaks,  and was obliging and well-
bred  !"

I grinned a little to be sure,  but tried to escape her,  by again getting

between Miss W and Harriet Bowdler;    but Mrs.   Riggs still kept

opposite to me,  expressing from time to time,  by uplifted hands and eyes,
comical applause.

Harriet Bowdler modestly mumbled some praise,  but addressed it to Miss
Thrale.     I begged a truce,  and retired to a chair in a corner,  at the request

of Miss W to have a Utc-a-tUe^  for which,  however,  her strange levity

gave me no great desire.

She begged to know if I had written any thing else.  I assured her
never.

"  The  '  Sylph,'  "  said she,  "  I am told,  was yours."

"  I had nothing at all to do with that or any thing else that ever was
published but  '  Evelina  ;'  you,  I suppose,  read the  '  Sylph'  for its name's
sake  ?"

"  No  ;  I never read novels — I hate them  ;  I never read  '  Evelina'  till I
was quite persecuted by hearing it talked of.  '  Sir Charles Grandison'  I
tried once,  but could not bear it ;  Sir Charles for a lover !  no lover for me !
for a guardian or the trustee of an estate,  he might do very well — but for a
lover T"

"  What — when he bows upon your hand !  would not that do?"

She kept me by her side for a full hour,  and we again talked over our
former conversation  ;  and I inquired what first led her to seeking infidel
books  ?

"  Pope,"  she said  ;  "  he was himself a deist,  she believed,  and his praise
of Bolino-broke made her mad to read his books,  and then the rest followed
easily."

She also gave me an account of her private and domestic life ;  of her
misery at home,  her search of dissipation,  and her incapability of happiness.

Poor girl !  I am really sorry for her ;  she has strong and lively parts,  but
I think her in the high road of lasting destruction.  And she thinks about
religion only to persuade herself there is none.  I recommended to her all the
good books I could think of,  and scrupled not to express warmly and most
seriously my surprise and horror at her way of thinking.  It was easy to
me to see that she attended to my opinions with curiosity,  and yet easier to
discover that had she not respected me as author of a book she happened
to be fond of,  she would have rallied them unmercifully ;  however,  that

196 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

consideration gave weight to what I said,  and evidently disposed her to be
pleased,  with me.

Our conversation would have lasted till leave-taking,  but for our being
interrupted by Miss Miller,  a most beautiful little girl of ten years old.

Miss W begged her to sing us a French song.    She coquetted,  but

Mrs.  Riggs-  came to us,  and said if I wished it I did her grand-daughter
great honour,  and she insisted upon her obedience.  The little girl laughed
and complied,  and we went into another room to hear her,  followed by the
Misses Caldwell.     She sung in a pretty childish manner enough.

When we became more intimate,  she said,

"  Ma'am,  I have a great favour to request of you,  if you please  !"

I begged to know what it was,  and assured her I would grant it ;  and to
be out of the way of these misses,  I led her to the window.

"  Ma'am,"  said the little girl,  "  will you then be so good as to tell me
where Evelina is now V

I was a little surprised at the question,  and told her I had not heard
lately.

"  O ma'am,  but I am sure you know  !"  cried she,  "  for you know you
wrote it !  and mamma was so good as to let me hear her read it ;  and pray,
ma'am,  do tell me where she is  ;  and whether Miss Branghton and Miss
Polly went to see her when she was married to Lord Orville '?"

I promised her I would inquire,  and let her know.

"  And pray,  ma'am,  is Madame Duval with her now?"

And several other questions she asked me,  with a childish simplicity that
was very diverting.  She took the whole for a true story,  and was quite
eager to know what was become of all the people.  A«d when I said I
would inquire,  and tell her when we next met,

"  Oh,  but,  ma'am,"  she said,  "  had not you better write it down,  because
then there would be more of it,  j^ou know  ?"

She told me repeatedly how sorry she was that I had not come to Bath
Easton in  "  vase"  time,  and how sorry her mamma had been.

When we were coming away,  and Lady Miller and Sir John had both
taken very civil leave of me,  I curtsied in passing Mrs.  Riggs,  and she rose
and called after me — "  Set about another  !"

When we came home,  our newspaper accounts of the tumults in town,
with Lord George Gordon and his mob,  alarmed us very much  ;  but we had
still no notion of the real danger you were all in.

Friday. — W^e drank tea with the Bowdlers,  and met Captain Brodsham.
Fany Bowdler congratulated me very wickedly upon my initiation at Bath
Easton.  At our return home we were informed a mob was surrounding a
new Roman Catholic chapel.  At first we disbelieved it,  but presently one
of the servants came and told us they were knocking it to pieces  ;  and in
half an hour,  looking out of our windows we saw it in flames  !  and listening,
we heard loud and violent shouts  !

I shall write no particulars ;  the horrible subject you had more than your
share of.  Mrs.  Thrale and I sat up till four o'clock,  and walked about the
parades,  and at two we went with a large party to the spot,  and saw the
beautiful new building consuming ;  the mob then were all quiet — all still
and silent,  and every body seemed but as spectators.

Saturday morning to my inexpressible concern,  brought me no letters
from town,  and my uneasiness to hear from you made me quite wretched.
Mrs.  Thrale had letters from Sir Philip Gierke and Mr.  Perkins,  to acquaint
her that her town-house had been three times attacked,  but was at last
saved by guards, — her children,  plate,  money,  and valuables all removed.
Streatham also threatened,  and emptied of all its furniture.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I97

The same morning also we saw a Bath and Bristol paper,  in which Mr.
Thrale was asserted to be a papist.  This villanoiis falsehood terrified us
even for his personal safety,  and Mrs.  Thrale and I agreed it was best to
leave Bath directly,  and travel about the country.

She left to me the task of acquainting Mr.  Thrale with these particulars
being herself too much disturbed to be capable of such a task.  I did it as
well as I could,  and succeeded so far that,  by being lightly told of it,  he
treated it hghtly,  and bore it with much steadiness and composure.  We
then soon settled to decamp.

We had no time nor spirits jpoiir j^rendre co7tge stuff,  but determined to
call upon the Bowdlers and Miss Cooper.  They were all sorry to part,  and
Miss Cooper,  to my equal surprise and pleasure,  fairly made a declaration
of her passion for me,  assuring me she had never before taken so great a
fancy to a new acquaintance,  and beginning warmly the request T meant to
make myself,  of continuing our intimacy in town.  I am sure I think so
highly of her,  that I shall be pleased to attend to this injunction.

FROM MISS F.  BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

Bath,  June 9,  1780.
My dearest Sir,

How are you  ?  where are you  ?  and what is to come next 1 These are
the questions I am dying with anxiety to have daily announced.  The
accounts from town are so frightful,  that I am uneasy,  not only for the city
at large,  but for every individual I know in it.  I hope to Heaven that ere
you receive this,  all will be once more quiet ;  but till we hear that it is so,
I cannot be a moment in peace.

Does this martial law confine you quite to the house  ?  Folks here say
that it must,  and that no business of any kind can be transacted.  Oh,
what dreadful times !  Yet I rejoice extremely that the opposition members
have fared little better than the ministerial.  Had such a mob been con-
firmed friends of either or of any party,  I think the nation must have been
at their disposal ;  for,  if headed by popular or skilful leaders,  who and
what could have resisted them  ? — I mean,  if they are as formidable as we
are here told.

Dr.  Johnson has written to Mrs.  Thrale,  without even mentioning the
existence of this mob  ;  perhaps at this very moment he thinks it  "  a hum-
bug upon the nation,"  as George Bodens called the Parliament.

A private letter to Bull,  the bookseller,  brought word this morning that
much slaughter has been made by the military among the mob.  Never,  I
am sure,  can any set of wretches less deserve quarter or pity ;  yet it is
impossible not to shudder at hearing of their destruction.  Nothing less,
however,  would do ;  they were too outrageous and powerful for civil
power.

But what is it they want 1 who is going to turn papist  ?  who indeed is
thinking in an alarming way of religion — this pious mob,  and George Gor-
don excepted  ?

I am very anxious indeed about our dear Etty.  Such disturbance in her
neighbourhood I fear must have greatly terrified her ;  and I am sure she
is not in a situation or state of health to bear terror.  I have written and
begged to hear from her.

All the stage-coaches that come into Bath from London are chalked over
with  "  No Popery,"  and Dr.  Harrington called here just now,  and says
the same was chalked this morning upon his door,  and is scrawled in

17*

198 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

several places about the town.  Wagers have been laid that the popish
chapel here will be burnt or pulled down in a few days ;  but I believe not
a word of the matter,  nor do I find that any body is at all alarmed.  Bath,
indeed,  ought to be held sacred as a sanctuary for invalids  ;  and I doubt
not but the news of the firing in town will prevent all tumults out of it.

Now,  if,  after all the intolerable provocation given by the mob,  after all
the leniency and forbearance of the ministry,  and after the shrinking of the
minority we shall by and by hear that this firing was a massacre — will it
not be villanous and horrible  ?  And yet as soon as safety is secured —
though by this means alone all now agree it can be secured — nothing would
less surprise me than to hear the seekers of popularity make this assertion.

Will you,  dear sir,  beg Charlotte to answer this letter by your directions
and tell me how the world goes  ?  We are sure of hearing too much or
too little.  Mr.  Grenville says he knows not whether any thing can be done
to Lord George ;  and that quite shocks me,  as it is certain that,  in all equity
and common sense,  he is either mad enough for Moorfields,  or wicked
enough for the Tower,  and therefore that to one of these places he ought
to go.

Friday night. — The above I writ this morning,  before I recollected this
was not post-day,  and all is altered here since.  The threats I despised
were but too well grounded,  for,  to our utter amazement and consternation,
the new Roman Catholic Chapel in this town was set on fire at about nine
o'clock.  It is now burning with a fury that is dreadful,  and the house of*
the priest belonging to it is in flames also.  The poor persecuted man him-
-self has I believe escaped with life,  though pelted,  followed,  and very ill
used.  Mrs.  Thrale and I have been walking about with the footmen
several times.  The whole town is still and orderly.  The rioters do their
work with great composure,  and though there are knots of people in every
corner,  all execrating the authors of such outrages,  nobody dares oppose
them.  An attempt indeed was made,  but it was ill-conducted,  faintly
followed,  and soon put an end to by a secret fear of exciting vengeance.

Alas  !  to what have we all lived  ! — the poor invalids here will probably
lose all chance of life,  from terror.  Mr.  Hay,  our apothecary,  has been
attending the removal of two,  who were confined to their beds in the street
where the chapel is burning.  The Catholics throughout the place are all
threatened with destruction,  and we met several porters,  between ten and
eleven at night,  privately removing goods,  walking on tiptoe,  and scarcely
breathing.

I firmly believe,  by the deliberate villany with which this riot is conducted,
that it will go on in the same desperate way as in town,  and only be stopped
by the same desperate means.  Our plan for going to Bristol is at an end.
We are told it would be madness,  as there are seven Romish chapels in it ;
but we are determined upon removing somewhere to-morrow  ;  for why
should we,  who can go,  stay to witness such horrid scenes  ?

Saturday afternoon,  June 10. — I was most cruelly disappointed in
not having one word to-day.  I am half crazy with doubt and disturbance
in not hearing.  Every body here is terrified to death.  We have intelli-
gence that Mr.  Thrale's house in town is filled with soldiers,  and threatened
by the mob with destruction.  Perhaps he may himself be a marked man for
their fury.  We are going directly from Bath,  and intend to stop only at
villages.  To night we shall stop at Warminster,  not daring to go to Devizes.
This place is now well-guarded,  but still we dare not await the event of to-
night ;  all the Catholics in the town have privately escaped.

I know not now when I shall hear from you.  I am in agony for news.  Our

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  I99

head-quarters will be Brighthelmstone,  where I do most humbly and fer-
vently entreat you to write — do,  dearest sir,  write,  if but one word — if but
only you name yourself  !  Nothing but your own hand can now tranquil-
lize me.  The reports about London here quite distract me.  If it were pos-
sible to send me a line by the diligence to Brighton,  how grateful I should
be for such an indulgence !  I should then find it there upon our arrival.
Charlotte,  I am sure,  will make it in a sham parcel,  and Susy will write for
you all but the name.  God bless — defend — preserve you !  my dearest
father.     Life is no life to me while I fear for your safety.

God bless and save you all !  I shall write to-morrow from wherever we
may be, — nay,  every day I shall write,  for you will all soon be as anxious
for news from the country,  as I have been for it from town.  Some infamous
villain has put it into the paper here that Mr.  Thrale is a papist.  This,  I
suppose,  is an Hothamite report,  to inflame his constituents.

FROM MISS F.  BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

Salisbury,  June 11,  1780.

Here we are,'  dearest sir,  and here we mean to pass this night.

We did not leave Bath till eight o'clock yesterday evening,  at which time
it was filled with dragoons,  militia,  and armed constables,  not armed with
muskets,  but bludgeons :  these latter were all chairmen,  who were sworn
by the mayor in the morning for petty constables.  A popish private chapel,
and the houses of all the Catholics,  were guarded between seven and eight,
and the inhabitants ordered to keep house.

We set out in the coach-and-four,  with two men on horseback,  and got to
Warminster,  a small town in Somersetshire,  a little before twelve.

This morning two more servants came after us from Bath,  and brought us
word that the precautions taken by the magistrates last night had good suc-
cess, for no attempt of any sort had been renewed towards a riot.

But the happiest tidings to me were contained in a letter which they
brought,  which had arrived after our departure,  by the diligence,  from Mr.
Perkins,  with an account that all was quiet in London,  and that Lord G.
Gordon was sent to the Tower.

I am now again tolerably easy,  but I shall not be really comfortable,  or
free from some fears,  till I hear from St.  Martin's Street.

The Borough House has been quite preserved.  I know not how long we
may be on the road,  but nowhere long enough for receiving a letter till we
come to Brighthelmstone.

We stopped in our way at Wilton,  and spent half the day at that beau-
tiful place.

Just before we arrived there,  Lord Arundel had sent to the officers in the
place,  to entreat a party of guards immediately,  for the safety of his house,
as he had intelligence that a mob was on the road from London to attack
it: — he is a catholic.     His request was immediately complied with.

We intended to have gone to a private town,  but find all quiet here,  and
therefore prefer it as much more commodious.  There is no Romish chapel
in the town  ;  mass has always been performed for the Catholics of the place
at a Mrs.  Arundel's in the Close — a relation of his lordship's,  whose house
is fifteen miles off.  I have inquired about the Harris's  ;  I find they are
here and all well.

Peace now,  I trust,  will be restored to the nation — at least as soon as
some of the desperate gang that may escape from London in order to
spread confusion in the country,  are dispersed or overcome.

200 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

I will continue to write while matters are in this doubtful state,  that you
may have no anxiety added to the great stock you must suffer upon my
account.

We are all quite well,  and when I can once hear you are so,  I shall be
happy.

Adieu,  most dear sir  !     Love,  duty,  and compliments from

Your most dutiful.

And most affectionate,

F.  B.

DR.  BURNEY TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

1,  St.  Martin's Street,  Monday afternoon.
Your letter just received.
My dear Fanny,

We are all safe and well,  after our heartaches,  and terrors.  London is
now the most secure residence in the kingdom,

I wrote a long letter to our dear Mrs.  T.  on Friday night,  with a kind of
detail of the week's transactions.  I am now obliged to go out,  and shall
leave the girls to fill up the rest of the sheet.  All is safe and quiet in the
Borough.  We sent William thither on Saturday.  God bless you I All
affection and good wishes attend our dear friends.

I said that riot would go into the country,  like a new cap,  till it was
discountenanced and out of fashion in the metropolis.  I bless every soldier
I see — we have no dependence on any defence from outrage but the mili-
tary.

MISS CHARLOTTE BURNEY TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

I am very sorry,  my dear Fanny,  to hear how much you have suffered
from your apprehension about us.  Susan will tell you why none of us
wrote before Friday  ;  and she says,  she has told you what dreadful havoc
and devastation the mob have made here in all parts of the town.  How-
ever, we are pretty quiet and tranquil again now.  Papa goes on with his
business pretty much as usual,  and so far from the military keeping the
people within doors  (as you say in your letter to my father,  you suppose to
be the case),  the streets were never more crowded — every body is wander-
ing about in order to see the ruins of the places that the mob have destroyed.

There are two camps,  one in St.  James's,  and the other in Hyde Park,
which together with the military law,  makes almost every one here think
he is safe again.  I expect we shall all have  "  a passion for a scarlet
coat"  now.

I hardly know what to tell you that won't be stale news.  They say that
duplicates of the handbill that I have enclosed were distributed all over the
town on Wednesday and Thursday last ;  however,  thank Heaven,  every
body says now that Mr.  Thrale's house and brewery are as safe as we can
wish them.  There was a brewer in Turnstile that had his house gutted
and burnt,  because,  the mob said,  "  he was a papish,  and sold popish
beer."     Did you ever hear of such diabolical ruffians  ?

Sister Hetty is vastly well,  and has received your letter ;  I think she has
stood the fright better,  and been a greater heroine,  than any of us.

To add to the pleasantness of our situation,  there have been gangs of
women going about to rob and plunder.  Miss Kirwans went on Friday
afternoon to walk in the Museum gardens,  and were stopped by a set of
women,  and robbed of all the money they had.  The mob had proscribed
the mews,  for they said,  "  the king should not have a horse to ride upon  !"

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  201

They besieged the new Somerset House,  with intention to destroy it,  but
were repulsed by some soldiers placed there for that purpose.

Mr.  Sleepe has been here a day or two,  and says the folks at Watford,
where he comes from,  "  approve very much of having the Catholic chapels
destroyed,  for they say it's a shame the pope should come here  !"  There
is a house hereabouts that they had chalked upon last week,  "  Empty,  and
no Popery !"

I am heartily rejoiced,  my dearest Fanny,  that you have got away from
Bath,  and hope and trust that at Brighthelmstone you will be as safe as we
are here.

It sounds almost incredible,  but they say,  that on Wednesday night last,
when the mob were more powerful,  more numerous,  and outrageous than
fever,  there was,  nevertheless,  a number of exceeding genteel people at
Ranelagh,  though they know not but their houses might be on fire at the
time  !

God bless you,  my dear Fanny, — for Heaven's sake keep up your
spirits  !

Yours ever,  with the greatest affection,

Charlotte Ann Burney.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Brighton,  Thursday Evening-,  29 June,  1780.

Streatham detained me so scandalously late that I never entered Rye-
gate till 12 o'clock — you know we had calculated for 11.  I had,  however,
the satisfaction of leaving Presto in the arms of a mistress he preferred
to me,  and he found love an ample recompense for the loss of friendship.
All dogs do,  I suppose  ?

At 10 o'clock I saw myself here,  and quitted my very riotous companions,
to look for their father and sister,  who were walked with Miss Owen to the
Point.  The evening was spent in chat,  and this morning I carried a bunch
of grapes to Mr.  Scrase,  who was too ill to swallow one,  or to see even me.
My master,  however,  is in quite rosy health — he is,  indeed — and jokes
Peggy Owen for her want of power to flash.  He made many inquiries for
you ;  and was not displeased that I had given Perkins two hundred guineas
instead of one — a secret I never durst tell before,  not even to Johnson,  not
even to you — but so it was.

I have no society,  here,  so I might go to work like you,  if I had any
materials.  Susan and Sophy have taken to writing verses — 'tis the fashion
of the school they say,  and Sophy's are the best performances of all the
misses,  except one monkey of eighteen years old.

Harry C is here,  and with him a Mr,  S ,  two poor empty,  un-
meaning lads from town,  M'ho talk of a man being a high treat,  &c.  They
are,  I think,  the first companions I ever picked up and dismissed,  as fairly
worse than none.

Ah,  my sweet girl  !  all this stuff written,  and not one word of the loss I
feel in your leaving me !  But,  upon my honour,  I forbear only to save
your fretting,  for I do think you would vex if you saw how silly I looked
about for you ever since I came home.  I shall now say,  as Johnson does,
"  Ah,  Burney  !  if you loved me,  &c.  &c.,"  But no more of what must be
missed and must not be mourned.

Yours,

H.  L.  T.

202 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

MISS F.  BURNEY,  TO MRS.  THRALE.

Saturday,  July 1,  1780.

Have you no  "  quality"  yet,  my dearest madam,  that letters are three
days upon the road  !  I have only this instant received yours,  though you
were so kindly indulgent to my request of writing the next day after your
journey.  I rejoice,  indeed,  that you found my master so well.  I dare say
Queeny had kept him sharp.  What does he think of Dr.  Johnson's dieting
scheme  ?  I must confess that if,  like  ]\Irs.  Tattersall,  he should consent to
adopt the z^'egetable system,  I should be as unwilling as her husband to be a
good beefsteak in his way  !

Your liberality to Perkins charms me ;  and so does Mr.  Thrale's
approbation of it ;  for his being not displeased implies nothing short
of approbation.  I am sorry for Miss Owen,  but I much hope you will be
able to revive and comfort her ;  sure I am that if spirit can reanimate,  or
sweetness can soothe her,  she will not be long in so forlorn a way.

Your account of Miss M 's being taken in,  and taken in by Captain

B ,  astonishes me  !  surely not half we have heard either of her adorers,

or her talents,  can have been true.  Mrs.  Byron has lost too little to have
any thing to lament,  except,  indeed,  the time she sacrificed to foolish con-
versation, and the civilities she threw away upon so worthless a subject.
Augusta has nothing to reproach herself with,  and riches and wisdom must
be rare indeed,  if she fares not as well with respect to both,  as she would
have done with an adventurer whose pocket,  it seems,  was as empty as his
head.

Nothing here is talked of but the trial of the rioters :  most people among
those who are able to appear as witnesses,  are so fearful of incurring the
future resentment of the mob,  that evidence is very difficult to be obtained,
even where guilt is undoubted :  by this means numbers are daily discharged
who offended against all laws,  though they can be punished by none.  I am
glad,  however,  to see the moderation of those who might now,  perhaps,  ex-
tirpate all power but their own ;  for neither art nor authority is used to
blacken the crimes of the accused,  or force into light the designs of the sus-
pected. Nothing has yet appeared that indicates any plot,  except of general
plunder,  nor have any of the conspirators,  who have yet been examined,
seemed to have confederated for any deeper purpose than to drink hard,
shout aloud,  and make their betters houseless as themselves.

I have seen Pacchierotti,  and he has sung to me as sweetly,  and compli-
mented me as liberally,  as ears the most fastidious,  and a mind the most
vain,  could desire :  yet not the less have I thought of or regretted my ever
dear,  ever kind,  and most sweet Mrs.  Thrale !  But,  as I am come,  after
many absences,  to a family so deservedly beloved by me,  I am determined
neither to sour my friends nor myself,  by encouraging a repining spirit,  but
now to be happy as I can with them,  and hope ere long,  to be again so with
you ;  for,  with affection more sincere,  and a heart more true,  nobody can
love my dear Mrs.  Thrale more fervently and faithfully than her ever
devoted

F.  BUENEY.

My love and duty to my master :  and love,  without the duty,  to Miss
Thrale  ;  and my best compliments to Miss Owen.

We shall go to Chesington as soon as the trials are over and the town is
quiet.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  203

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.

Saturday,  July 8,  1780.

See but,  dearest madam,  my prompt obedience,  by this brown and rough-
edged mark of it.  Your sweet letter I have but this moment received,
so I think the quality use you very ill,  or rather me,  for I have made a wry
face at the postman's knock,  without a letter from Brighton,  this day or two.

You give me nothing but good news about my master,  and that delights
me very sincerely ;  but I can see that you are not quite comfortable your-
self. Why have you this cold and headach 1 Have you gone imprudently
into the sea — I mean without taking counsel with nurse Tibson  ?  You
know we long since settled,  that whenever you were ill all your friends
would impute it to bathing ;  so this doubt will not surprise,  though ten to
one but it provokes you.

I have not seen Dr.  Johnson since the day you left me,  when he came
hither,  and met Mrs.  Ord,  Mr.  Hoole,  Mrs.  Reynolds,  Baretti,  the Paradises,
Pepys,  Castles,  Dr.  Dunbar,  and some others ;  and then he was in high
spirits and good humour,  talked all the talk,  affronted nobody,  and delighted
every body.  I never saw him more sweet,  nor better attended to by his
audience.  I have not been able to wait upon him since,  nor,  indeed,  upon
any body,  for we have not spent one evening alone since my return.

Pacchierotti left London yesterday morning.  We all miss him much,
myself perticularly,  because,  for all Dr.  Johnson,  he is not only ihe first,
most finished,  and most delightful of singers,  but an amiable,  rational,  and
intelligent creature,  who has given to himself a literary education,  and who
has not only a mind superior to his own profession,  which he never names
but with regret,  in spite of the excellence to which he has risen,  but he has
also,  I will venture to say,  talents and an understanding that would have
fitted him for almost any other,  had they,  instead of being crushed under
every possible disadvantage,  been encouraged and improved.  Had you seen
as much of him as I have done,  I think,  in defiance of prejudice,  you would
be of the same opinion.

I am quite disappointed with respect to Miss Owen.  I had hoped she
would have been more comfortable to you.  Mr.  Scrase too  ! — indeed your
account of your society grieves me.  Sickness,  spleen,  or folly seem to
compose it ;  and if you,  who have so much facility in making new acquaint-
ance, find them so insupportable,  it is,  I am sure,  that they must be impene-
trable blockheads!

Sir John Bounce's apology for not having signalized himself more
gloriously in public life,  made me laugh very heartily.  Do you hear any
■thing of my General,  his case,  or his monkey,  or the lost calves of his legs?
as one of your true ancient swaggerers,  Brighthelmstone seems to have a
fair and natural right to him.

Mrs.  Montagu has been in town.  I heard this from Mrs.  Ord,  who
had an appointment to meet her at her new house,  and was invited to a
conversazione with her at Mr.  Pepy's.

I have no private intelligence to give about the rioters,  or Lord George,
save that I am informed that he is ceriainly to be tried for high treason,
not a misdemeanour.  Are you not rejoiced at the sequel of good news from
America  ?

The soldiers are drawn off gently,  but daily,  from all parts of the me-
tropolis. The camps in the parks are,  however,  expected to remain all
summer.  Poor Captain Gierke is dead !  I was willing to doubt it as long
as possible,  but it has been confirmed to my father by Lord Sandwich.

204 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

We have no consolation from Admiral Jem's promotion,  for the first
lieutenant of the late Captain Cook's ship has succeeded to the command
of Captain Clerke's.  Is it not a melancholy circumstance that both the
captains of this expedition should perish ere it is completed  ?  Lord Sand-
wich told my father that the journal of Captain Cook is arrived,  and now in
the hands of the king,  who has desired to have the first perusal of it.  I am
very impatient to know something of its contents.  The ships are both ex-
pected almost daily.  They have already been out a year longer than was
intended.  Mr.  Jem has not written one line.  Don't you think my master
will allow him to be a man of sense,  and take to him  ?

Adieu,  my dearest madam  !     I hope I have used you ill enough,  with re-
gard to paper,  to satisfy your desire,  and convince you of the true afiection of
Your faithful and much obliged

F.  B.

My best respects to Mr.  and Miss Thrale.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.

Nobody does write such sweet letters as my dear Mrs.  Thrale,  and I would
sooner give up a month's allowance of meat,  than my week's allowance of
an epistle.

The report of the parliament's dissolution I hope is premature.  I inquire
of every body I see about it,  and always hear that it is expected now to last
almost as long as it can last.  Why,  indeed,  should government wish to
dissolve it,  when they meet with no opposition from it  ?

Since I wrote last I have drunk tea with Dr.  Johnson.  My father took
me to Bolt Court,  and we found him,  most fortunately,  with only one brass-
headed cane gentleman.  Since that I have had the pleasure to meet him
again at Mrs.  Reynolds's,  when he offered to take me with him to Grub
Street,  to see the ruins of the house demolished there in the late riots,  by a
mob that,  as he observed,  could be no friend to the Muses  !  He inquired if
I had ever yet visited Grub Street  ?  but was obliged to restrain his anger
when I answered  "  No,"  because he ackowledged he had never paid his
respects to it himself.  "  However,"  says he,  "  you and I,  Burney,  will go
together ;  we have a very good right to go,  so we'll visit the mansions of
our progenitors,  and take up our own freedom together."

There's for you,  madam  !  What can be grander  ?  The loss of Timoleon
is really terrible ;  yet,  as it is an incident that will probably dwell no little
time upon the author's mind,  who knows but it may be productive of another
tragedy,  in which a dearth of story will not merely be no fault of his,  but
no misfortune?

I have no intelligence to give about the Dean of Coleraine,  but that we
are now in daily expectation of hearing of his arrival.

Yesterday I drank tea at Sir Joshua's,  and met by accident with Mrs.
Cholmondeley  ;  I was very glad to find that her spirits are uninjured by her
misfortunes  ;  she was as gay,  flighty,  entertaining and as frisky as ever.
Her sposo is not confined,  as was said ;  he is only gone upon his travels  :
she seems to bear his absence with remarkable fortitude.  After all,  there
is something in her very attractive ;  her conversation is so spirited,  so
humorous,  so enlivening,  that she does not suffer one's attention to rest,
much less to flag,  for hours together.

Sir Joshua told me he was now at work upon your pictures,  touching
them up for Streatham,  and that he has already ordered the frames,  and
shall have them quite ready whenever the house is in order for them.

17S0.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  205

I also met at his house Mr.  W.  Burke,  and young Burke,  the orator's son,
who is made much ado about,  but I saw not enough of him to knovv why.

We are all here very truly concerned for Mr.  Chamier,  who you know
is a very great favourite among us.  He is very ill,  and thinks himself in
a decline.  He is now at Bath,  and writes my father word he has made up
his mind,  come what may.

Your good news of my master glads me,  however,  beyond what good
news of almost any other man in the world could do.  Pray give him my
best respects,  and beg him not to forget me so much as to look strange upon
me when we next meet ;  if he does it won't be fair,  for I feel that I shall
look very kind upon him.

I fancy Miss Thrale is quite too difficult  :  why,  bless me,  by  "  something
happening"  I never meant to wait for a murder,  nor a wedding,  no nor an
invasion,  nor an insurrection  ;  any other bore will do as well.  My father
charges me to give you his kindest love,  and not daintify his affection into
respects or compliments.

Adieu,  dearest madam,  and from me accept not only love,  and not only
respects,  but both,  and gratitude,  and warmest wishes,  and constancy in-
variable into the bargain.  F.  Burney.

I am very glad  ]\Ir.  Tidy is so good.  Thank him for me,  and tell him I
am glad he keeps my place open  ;  and pray give Dr.  Delap my compliments.
Has he settled yet how he shall dress the candle snuffers the first night  ?  I
would by no means have the minutest directions omitted.

FROM MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Brighthelmstone,  Wednesday,  July 19,  1780.
And so my letters please you,  do they,  my sweet Burney  ?  I know yours
are the most entertaining things that cross me in the course of the whole
week  ;  and a miserable praise too,  if you could figure to yourself my most
dull companions.  I write now from Bowen's shop,  where he has been
settled about three days I think  ;  and here comes in one man hopping,  and
asks for  "  Russel on Sea- water" — another tripping,  and begs to have the
last new novel sent him home to-night ;  one lady tumbles the ballads about,
and fingers the harpsichord which stands here at every blockhead's mercy ;
and another looks over the Lilliputian library,  and purchases Polly Sugar-
cake for her long-legged missey.

My master is gone out riding,  and we are to drink tea with Lady Rothes  ;
after which the Steyne hours begin,  and we cluster round Thomas's shop,
and contend for the attention of Lord John Clinton,  a man who could,  I
think,  be of consequence in no other place upon earth,  though a very well-
informed and modest mannered boy.  Dr.  Pepys is resolutely and pro-
foundly silent;  and Lady Shelley,  having heard wits commended,  has
taken up a new character,  and says not only the severest but the cruellest

things you ever heard in your life.     Here is a Mrs.  K ,  too,  sister to

the Duchess of M ,  who is very uncompanionable indeed,  and talks of

T'^/7?^bridge.     These,  however,  are literally all the people we ever speak to
— oh yes,  the Drummonds — but they are scarce blest with utterance.

Mr.  Scrase mends,  and I spent an hour with him to-day.  Now have I
fairly done with Brighthelmstone,  and will congratulate myself on being
quite of your advice — as Pacchierotti would call it — concerning Burke the
minor whom I once met and could make nothing of.

Poor Mr.  Chamier  !  and poor Dr.  Burney,  too  !  The loss of real friends
after a certain time of life is a terrible thing,  let Dr.  Johnson say what he

VOL.  I.  18

206 DIARY Ax\D LETTERS 1780.

will.  Those who are first called do not get first home.  I remember
Chamier lamenting for Mr.  Thrale,  who will now,  I verily think,  live to see
many of those go before him who expected to stay long after.  He will not
surely look strange upon you,  for he is glad to see your letters ;  though he
does not sigh over them so dismally as he did yesterday,  over one he saw I
had directed to Chid.

Lord George Gordon is to be liberated upon bail,  his quality brethren tell
me.  This is,  I think,  contrary to the general disposition of the people,
who appear to wish his punishment.  But the thunder-cloud always moves
against the wind,  you know.

The going to Grub Street would have been a pretty exploit.  Are you
continuing to qualify yourself for an inhabitant  ?

Sweet Mrs.  Cholmondeley  !  I am glad she can frolic and frisk so  : — the
time will come too soon,  that will,  as Grumio expresses it,  "  tame man,
woman,  and beast," — and thyself,  fellow Curtis.

The players this year are rather better than the last ;  but the theatre is
no bigger than a band-box,  which is a proper precaution,  I think,  as here
are not folks to fill even that.  The shops are almost all shut still,  and a
dearth of money complained of that is lamentable ;  but we have taken some
Spanish ships,  it seems,  and La Vera Cruz besides.

Adieu, — and divide my truest kindness among all the dear Newtonians,*
and keep yourself a large share.  You are in no danger of invaders from
the sea-coast.  Susan and Sophy bathe and grow,  and riot me out of my
senses.     I am ever,  my dear girl,  most faithfully yours,

H.  L.  T.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.

August 16.

I return you my most hearty thanks,  my dear madam,  for your last most
comfortable tidings,  which,  as they have removed all my fears,  shall,  for the
present,  banish their subject.  I will never be melancholic,  even though it
were recommended to be lady as well as  "  gentlemanlike,"  but when
perforce I cannot help it ;  for in good truth that method of varying the mode
of existence offers itself with so kind a readiness of its own accord,  that a
very little patience,  and a very little feeling will bring in supplies,  fresh and
fresh,  of that sort of food,  which,  with a very moderate economy of anxiety,
will lay by for croaking moments stores inexhaustible.  Indeed,  though I
have so often heard lamentations of the scarcity of every other commodity,
useful or ornamental,  intellectual or sensual,  I never once,  even from the
most gteedy devourer of sadness,  have heard the remotest hint,  that de qiioi
manger was in danger of being wanted for the gluttons of evil and misery ;
for though eating but makes their appetite the stronger,  their materials are
as little diminished by voracity as their hunger.

Well — mat a pro2)os to all this, — Dr.  Johnson,  who expects nothing
but what is good,  and swallows nothing but waht he likes,  has delighted
me with another volume of his  "  Lives," — that which contains Blackmore,
Congreve,  &c.,  which he tells me you have had.  O what a writer he is  !
what instruction,  spirit,  intelligence,  and vigour in almost every paragraph !
Addison I think equal to any in the former batch  ;  but he is rather too
hard upon Prior,  and makes Gay,  I think,  too insignificant.  Some of
the little poems of Prior seem to me as charming as any little poems

*  Alluding to the house of Sir Isaac Newton,  in St.  Martin's Street,  in which Dr.
Burney was at this time residing.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         .  207

can be ;    and Gay's pastorals I had hoped to have seen praised more
liberally.

At length,  I have seen the S.  S.  She has been again in town,  and was
so good as to make us a very long visit.  She looked as beautiful as an
angel,  though rather pale,  but was in very high spirits,  and I thought her
more attractive and engaging than ever.  So I believe did my father. — Ah !
"  littel cunning woman,"  if you were to put your wicked scheme in prac-
tice, I sec how it would take.

We are to go to Chesington next week ;  so I suppose there we shall
be when you quit Brighton.  If so,  pray tell my dear master I insist upon
his keeping his promise of coming thither  ;  if not,  I won't hold myself in
readiness to go to Italy — no,  not if FarineUi were in his prime.  But do
come,  dearest madam,  and do make him :  you know he always does as
you bid him,  so you have but to issue your commands.  'Tis a charming
thing to keep a husband in such order.  A thousand loves from all here,
but mostly,  being spokeswoman,  I have a right to say that.

From yours,

F.  B.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.

Chesington,  August 24th.

Here at length we are — arrived just in time to witness poor Daddy
Crisp's misery upon receiving intelligence of our late very dreadful loss.
Good heaven,  what a terrible blow !  our prophet here,  who,  however,  is
always a croaking prophet,  foretells nothing but utter distruction for its
inevitable consequence.  You,  dearest madam,  who are as croaking a
prophetess,  what say you?  must Jamaica,  must all the West Indies be
lost  ?  or have you some words of comfort to give us  ?

Baretti met Mr.  Greville and Mr.  Sastris at our house the evening before
we left town,  and assured us peremptorily,  and with furious vehemence,  that
the war would be finished in another year,  and France,  Spain,  and America,
would make what terms we pleased  !  Perhaps,  as he found every body else
forboding ill,  he thought it something for the benefit of mankind to forebode
good ;  but you would have laughed to have seen the little respect he paid to
the opposition and opinions of the great Mr.  Greville,  the arrogance with
which he  "  downed"  whatever he advanced,  and the fury with which he
answered him when contradicted in his assertions.  I really expected every
moment to hear him exclaim,  "It is that you are an impenetrable block-
head ;" — and I could not get out of my head the rage with which Mr.  Gre-
ville would have heard such a compliment.  As it was,  the astonishment
that seized him when he saw the violence and contempt of Baretti,  was suffi-
ciently comical ;  he had never before spoken a word to him,  though he had
accidentally met with him,  and I fancy he expected,  by his tonish grandeur,
to have instantly silenced and intimidated him  :  but when he found Baretti
stout,  and that the more he resisted,  the more he bullied him,  he could only
stare,  and look around at us all,  with an expression that said  "  Am I
awake  ?"

We had one very pleasant day last week with our dear Dr.  Johnson,  who
dined with us,  and met Mr.  Barry,  Dr.  Dunbar,  and Dr.  Gillies,  and afi;er-
wards Mr.  Crofts,  the famous book collector,  Mr.  Sastris,  J\Irs.  Reynolds,
Mr.  Devaynes,  and Baretti,  and altogether we made it out very well.  But
Dr.  Johnson took the same dislike to poor Dr.  Gillies that you did.  What
he can have done to you both I cannot imagine,  for every body else likes
him mightily.     I had a good mind to have asked Miss Reynolds to conjee-

208 DIARY A^^D LETTERS  "       1780.

ture the reason of your aversion,  for that would have been a happy subject
for her to have pondered upon.  Dr.  Johnson was very sweet and very
dehghtful indeed  ;  I think he grows more and more so,  or at least,  I grow
more and more fond of him.  I really believe Mr.  Barry found him almost
as amusing as a fit of the toothache  !

Don't fear my opening my lips,  my dear madam,  about your letters ;  I
never read but scraps and chosen morsels to any body, — and I hope you do
the same by me ;  for though what I have to say is not of equal consequence,
my flippancies,  which I rather indulge than curb to you,  might do me mis-
chief should they run about.  I have not seen Piozzi :  he left me your letter,
which indeed is a charming one ;  though its contents puzzled me much
whether to make me sad or merry.  AVho is your dwarf? — Your fan gentle-
man is after my own heart.  I am glad you find comfort in Dr.  Delap.  I
beg my best compliments to him, — and to my master and missey, — and
believe me ever and most faithfully vours,

F.  B.

My father's best love to you,  and my daddy's respects.

JOURNAL RESUMED.

Streatiiam,  Monday,  December 6. — As I am now well enough to
employ myself my own way,  though not to go down stairs,  I will take this
first opportunity I have had since my return hither,  to write again to my
dearest Susan.

Your letters,  my love,  have been more than usually welcome to me of late  ;
their contents have been very entertaining and satisfactory,  and their arrival
has been particularly seasonable  ;  not on account of my illness — that alone
never yet lowered my spirits as they are now lowered,  because I knew I
must ere long,  in all probability,  be again well ;  but O Susy  !  I am — I have
been — and I fear must always be,  alarmed indeed for Mr.  Thrale ;  and the
more I see and know him,  the more alarmed,  because the more I love and
dread to lose him.

I am not much in cue for journalizing :  but I am yet less inclined for
any thing else.  As writing to my own Susy commonly lightens my heart,
so I'll e'en set about recollecting the good as well as bad that has passed
since I wrote last ;  for else I were too selfish.

1 cannot remember where I left ofi'; — but to go back to the last few days
we spent at Brighthelmstone — I must tell you that on the last Friday — but
I cannot recollect anecdotes,  nor write them if I did;  and so I will only
draw up an exit for the characters to which I had endeavoured to introduce
you.

Lady Hesketh made us a very long,  sociable,  and friendly visit before
our departure,  in which she appeared to much advantage,  with respect to
conversation,  abilities,  and good breeding.  I saw that she became quite
enchanted v\ith Mrs.  Thrale,  and she made me talk away with her very
copiously,  by looking at me,  in a former visit,  when she was remarking that
nothing was so formidable as to be in company with silent observers  ;  where-
upon I gathered courage,  and boldly entered the lists  ;  and her ladyship has
inquired my direction of Mrs.  Thrale,  and told her that the acquaintance
should not drop at Brighton,  for she was determined to wait upon me in
town.

We saw,  latterly,  a great deal of the H 's.     The colonel — for he has

given up his majorship in the militia,  and is raising a company for himself
— appeared to us just as before, — sensible,  good-humoured,  and pleasant ;
and just as before also his lady — tittle-tattling,  monotonous,  and tiresome.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  209

They had a Miss Cooke with them, — whom I only mention,  because her
name was also Kitty,  and because her resemblance to our Kitty did not
stop there,  for she was always gay,  and always good-humoured.

Lady Shelley was as civil to me as Lady Hesketh.  Indeed I have good
reason to like Sussex.  As my cold prevented my waiting upon her with
Mrs.  Thrale,  to take leave,  she was so good as to come to me.  I am rather
sorry she never comes to town,  for she is a sweet woman,  and very hand-
some.

Miss Benson called upon us several times,  and I abide exactly by what
I have already said of her.

Dr.  Delap was with us till the Friday night preceding our departure ;  he
has asked me,  in his unaccountable way,  "  If I will make him a dish of tea
in St.  Martin's Street  ?"

We had also made an acquaintance with a Miss Stow,  that I have never
had time to mention :  a little girl she is,  just seven years old,  and plays on
the harpsichord so well,  that she made me very fond of her.  She lived
with a mother and aunt,  neither of whom I liked ;  but she expressed so
much desire to see Dr.  Burney,  and is so clever,  and forward,  and ingenious
a child,  that I could not forbear giving her my direction in town,  which she
received very gladly,  and will,  I am sure,  find me out as soon as she leaves
Brighton.

Miss Thrale and I paid visits of coJige to Mrs.  Chamier and Miss Emily
Jess.

We went together,  also,  to Miss Byron  ;  but she was invisible with this
influenza : — the mother,  however,  admitted us,  and spent almost the whole
two hours she kept us in exhorting me most kindly to visit her,  and pro-
mising to introduce me to the Admiral, — which I find is a great thing,  as he
always avoids seeing any of her female friends,  even Mrs.  Thrale,  from
some odd peculiarity of disposition.

On Monday,  at our last dinner,  we had Mr.  Tidy,  ^Ir.  B ,  and Mr.

Selwin  ;  and in the evening came Mrs.  Byron.

Mr.  Tidy I liked better and better  ;  he reminded me of Mr.  Crisp  ;  he
has not so good a face,  but it is that sort of face,  and his laugh is the very
same  :  for it first puts every feature in comical motion,  and then fairly
shakes his whole frame,  so that there are tokens of thorough enjoyment
from head to foot.  He and I should have been very good friends,  I am
sure,  if we had seen much of each other ; — as it was,  we were both upon
the watch,  drolly enough.

Mr.  B ,  though,  till very lately,  I have almost lived upon him,  I shall

not bore you with more than naming  ;  for I find you make no defence to my
hint of having given you too much of him,  and I am at least glad you are
so sincere.

And now,  my dear Susy,  to tragedy — for all I have yet writ is farce to
what I must now add  ;   but I will be brief,  for your sake as well as my own.

Poor Mr.  Thrale had had this vile influenza for two days before we set
out ;  but then seemed better.  We got on to Crawley all well :  he then
ordered two of the servants to go on to Ryegate and prepare dinner  :  mean-
time he suffered dreadfully from the coldness of the weather  ;  he shook from
head to foot,  and his teeth chattered aloud very frightfully.  When we got
again into the coach,  by degrees he grew warm and tolerably comfortable  :
but when we stopped at Ryegate his speech grew inarticulate,  and he said
one word for another.  I hoped it was accident,  and Mrs.  Thrale by some
strange infatuation,  thought he was joking, — but Miss Thrale saw how it
was from the first.

18*

210 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

By very cruel ill-luck,  too tedious to relate,  his precaution proved
useless  ;  for we had not only no dinner ready,  but no fire,  and were shown
into a large and comfortless room.  The town is filled with militia.  Here
the cold returned dreadfully, — and here,  in short,  it was but too plain to all,
his faculties were lost by it.  Poor Mrs.  Thrale worked like a servant :
she lighted the fire with her own hands, — took the bellows,  and made such
a one as might have roasted an ox in ten minutes.  But I will not dwell on
particulars  : — after dinner Mr.  Thrale grew better ;  and for the rest of our
journey was sleepy and mostly silent.

It was late in the night when we got to Streatham.  Mrs.  Thrale con-
sulted me what to do  : — I was for a physician immediately  ;  but Miss Thrale
opposed that,  thinking it would do harm to alarm her father by such a step.
However,  Mrs.  Thrale ordered the butler to set off by six the next morning
for Dr.  Heberden and Mr.  Seward.

The next morning,  however,  he was greatly better,  and when they ar-
rived he was very angry ;  but I am sure it was right.  Dr.  Heberden
ordered nothing but cupping.  Mr.  Seward was very good and friendly,  and
spent five days here,  during all which Mr.  Thrale grew better.  Dr.  John-
son, you know,  came with my dear father the Thursday after our return.

You cannot,  I think,  have been surprised that I gave up my plan of going
to town immediately  :  indeed I had no heart to leave either Mr.  Thrale in a
state so precarious,  or his dear wife in an agitation of mind hardly short of
a fever.

Things now went on tolerably smooth,  and Miss Thrale and I renewed our
Latin exercises with Dr.  Johnson,  and with great eclat of praise.  At
another time I could have written much of him and of Mr.  Seward,  for
many very good conversations past ;  but now I have almost forgot all about
them.

The Tuesday following,  I received your kind letter,  and instances to re-
turn on Thursday with my father, — but I determined to take no measures
either way till I saw how matters went at the last.

The next day I was far from well,  as my dear father must have told you,
— and I got worse and worse,  and I could not go down to dinner  ;  but in the
evening,  being rather better,  I just popt down to play one rubber with dear
Mr.  Thrale,  whose health I have truly at heart,  and who is only to be kept
from a heavy and profound sleep by cards  :  and then I was glad to come
back,  being again worse  : — but let me add,  I had insisted on performing this
feat.

I had a miserable night, — I kept my bed all day,  and my ever sweet Mrs.
Thrale nursed me most tenderly,  letting me take nothing but from herself.

I will say no more about the illness,  but that it was short,  though rather
violent.  On Saturday,  as I got into Mr.  Thrale's dressing-room to dinner.
Dr.  Johnson visited me.  On Sunday,  Mr.  Murphy came to dinner  ;  and in the
evening begged that he might be admitted to ask me how I did.  I was rather
bundled up,  to be sure,  with cloaks,  &c.,  but could not well refuse  ;  so he
and Mr.  Thrale,  lady and daughter,  all came together.

He appeared in high flash  ;  took my hand,  and insisted on kissing it ;  and
then he entered into a mighty gay,  lively,  droll,  and agreeable conversation,
— running on in flighty compliments,  highly seasoned with wit,  till he
diverted and put us all into spirits.  But Mrs.  Thrale,  who was fearful I
should be fatigued,  found no little difficulty to get him away ;  he vowed he
would not go, — said she might,  and all of them,  but for his part,  he desired
not to budge, — and,  at last,  when by repeated remonstrances he was made
retreat,  he vowed he would come aeain.

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  211

As soon as their tea was over below stairs,  Dr.  Johnson came to make
me a visit,  and while he was with me,  I heard Mr.  Murphy's step about the
adjoining rooms,  not knowing well his way ;  and soon after in he bolted,
crying out,  "  They would fain have stopped me,  but here I am  !"

However,  I have no time to write what passed,  except that he vowed
when he came next he would read the rest of my play.  However,  I shall
bring it with me to town,  and hide it.

The next day,  Monday,  he left us ;  and Lady Ladd came.  She sat up-
stairs with me the whole morning,  and she has been saying such shocking
things of her apprehensions for my dear Mr.  Thrale,  that they have quite
overset me,  being already weaker by the fever :  and just now,  unluckily,
Mrs.  Thrale came in suddenly,  and found me in so low-spirited a situation
that she insisted on knowing the cause.  I could not tell her,  but hinted that
Lady L.,  who had just gone down,  had been talking dismally,  and she im-
mediately concluded it was concerning Sir John.  I am sure she wondered
at my prodigious susceptibih'ty,  as she well might  ;  but I preferred passing
for half an idiot to telling her what I cannot even tell you of Lady L.'s
shocking and terrifying speeches.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

Streatham,  Saturday morning,  2 o'clock.
My dearest Sir,

We have this moment finished  "  The Critic."*  I have been extremely
well entertained with it indeed.  The first act seems as full of wit,  satire,
and spirit as it is of lines.  For the rest I have not sufficiently attended to
the plays of these degenerate days to half enjoy or understand the censure
or ridicule meant to be lavished on them.  However,  I could take in enough
to be greatly diverted at the flighty absurdities,  so well,  though so severely
pointed out.

Our dear master came home to-day quite as well as you saw him yes-
terday. He is in good spirits and good humour,  but I think he looks
sadly.  So does our Mrs.  T.,  who agitates herself into an almost perpetual
fever.

Adieu,  my dearest sir  :  a thousand thanks for this treat.  Dr.  Johnson
is very gay and sociable and comfortable,  and quite as kind to me as ever ;
and he says,  the Bodleian librarian has but done his duty,-f and that when
he goes to Oxford,  he will write my name in the books,  and my age when
I writ them,  and sign the whole with his own ;  "  and then,"  he says,  "  the
world may know that we —

*  So mixed our studies,  and so joined our fame.'

For we shall go down hand in hand to posterity  !"

Mrs.  T.  sends her best love.  I don't know when I can leave her,  but
not,  unless you desire it,  till Mr.  T.  seems better established in health,  or
till Mrs.  Davenant can come hither.

Mr.  Seward is now here.     Once more,  dearest sir,  good night — says

Your dutiful and most affectionate,

F.  B.  -

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.

Chesington,  Nov.  4.
I never managed matters so adroitly before.     Here I am already.     My

*  Sheridan's  "  Critic,"  printed at this time  ;  but unpublished.

+  The Bodleian librarian had placed  "  Evelina"  in his noble library,  to the author's
astonished delight. — Note by F.  B.

212 DIARY AND LETTERS 1780.

brother most good-naturedly offered to convoy me immediately  ;  my father
consented :  and the murmuring of the rest,  though  "  more comfortable to
me than the buzzing of hornets and wasps,"  was yet of no avail to retard
me.  I was sorry indeed to leave them so soon,  but as my six weeks here
were destined and promised,  it is better to have them over before I pretend
to be settled at home — at either home,  may I say  ?

As I spent only one day in town,  I gave it wholly to my sisters,  and
they to me  ;  and in the morning we had by chance such a meeting as w^e
have not had before for very many years.  My two brothers,  Susan,  and
Charlotte,  and myself,  wjre of course at home,  and Hetty accidentally
coming to town,  called in while we were all at breakfast.  I ran up stairs,  and
dragged my father down out of the study,  to see once more all together his
original progeny,  and when he came,  he called out  "  Offspring  !  can you
dance  ?"

We were soon,  however,  again dispersed  ;  but the evening also was con-
cluded with equal demonstrations of joy.  My mother happened to be
engaged to the Kirwans,  and Charles,  Susan,  Charlotte and I were not
very dolefully drinking our tea,  when the parlour door was opened,  and in
entered Pacchierotti,  who stayed all the evening.  Again we flew to the
study,  and again hauled down my father,  and I believe I need hardly tell
you the time hung not very heavily upon our hands.

Pacchierotti inquired very much after  "  my so great favourite Mrs.
Thrale,"  He is much more embarrassed in speaking English than he was,
but understands it more readily and perfectly than ever.  He sung to us one
air from Ezio,  and his voice is more clear and sweet than I ever heard it
before.  I made but little inquiry about the opera,  as I was running away
from it,  and wanted not to be tempted to stay.  My father invited him in
your name to Streatham,  but I charged him by no means to go in my ab-
sence.     Little Bertoni was with him.

I had no other adventure in London,  but a most delightful incident has
happened since I came hither.  We had just done tea on Friday,  and Mrs.
Hamilton,  Kitty,  Jem,  and Mr.  Crisp,  were sitting down to cards,  when we
were surprised by an express from London,  and it brought a  "  Whereas we
think fit"  from the Admiralty,  to appoint Captain Burney to the command
of the Lafmia^  during the absence of the Honourable Captain Conway.  This
is one of the best frigates in the navy,  of thirty-eight guns,  and immediately,
I believe,  ready for service.  Jem was almost frantic with ectasy of joy ;  he
sang,  laughed,  drank to his own success,  and danced about the room with
Miss Kitty till he put her quite out of breath.  His hope is to get out imme-
diately, and have a brush with some of the Dons,  Monsieurs,  or Mynheers,
while he is in possession of a ship of sufficient force to attack any frigate he
may meet.

Adieu,  dearest madam.  I know j^ou will approve my manoeuvre in so
quickly getting here,  because so much the sooner again at Streatham you
will see your F.  B.

This moment enters our parson with your letter.  How kind of you to
write even before you received my scrawl from St.  Martin's Street !  We
had lieard nothing of any earthquake when I came away.  Have you heard
from Lyons 1

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.

St.  Martin's Street,  Dec.  14.
Three days only have I left dear Streatham,  and I feel as if I had neither
seen or heard of it as many months.     Gratify me,  dearest madam,  with a

1780.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  213

few lines to tell me how you all do,  for I am half uneasy,  and quite impa-
tient for intelligence.  Does the card system flourish  ? — Does Dr.  Johnson
continue gay and good-humoured,  and  "  valuing nobody"  in a morning  ? —
Is Miss Thrale steady in asserting that all will do perfectly well  ? — But most
I wish to hear whether our dear master is any better in spirit 1 — And whe-
ther my sweet Dottoressa perseveres in supporting and exerting her own  ?

I never returned to my own home so little merrily disposed as this last
time.  When I parted with my master,  I wished much to have thanked him
for all the kindness he has so constantly shown me,  but I found myself too
grave for the purpose ;  however,  I meant,  when I parted with you,  to make
myself amends by making a speech long enough for both  ;  but then I was
yet less able ;  and thus it is that some or other cross accident for ever frus-
trates my rhetorical designs.

Adieu,  my dearest madam.  Pray give my affectionate respects to Mr.
Thrale and Dr.  Johnson,  my love to Miss Thrale,  and compliments to your
doves, — and pray believe me,

Ever and ever,

F.  B.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Streatham,  Dec.  22,  1780.

My lovely Burney will believe that I have lost the use of my fingers,  or
that I never employ them in writing to her but when they are shaking with
agony.  The truth is,  all goes well,  and so I quiet my mind and quarrel
with my maids — for one must have something to do.

Now I have picked up something to please you  :  Dr.  Johnson pronounced
an actual eulogium upon Captain Burney,  to his yesterday's listeners — how
amiable he was,  and how gentle in his manner,  &c.,  though he had lived so
many years with sailors and savages.

This I know is a good thing  ;  the only bad part is,  that my good word
will now be of less importance to him,  and I had a great mind to court him
out of a share of his good opinion and kindness  :  but I'll try at it yet when-
ever I come to town.

Dr.  Burney brought my master a nice companion t'other morning  ;  he
was quite happy,  and applauded her schemes of education — ^just like a man
who never heard how the former ones succeeded.  I thought like old Croaker
— heaven send us all the better for them this time three years  !

What a noodle I was to get no franks for Chesington  !  and now all the
members are dispersed over the globe,  till the hanging Lord George Gordon
shall call them together again  :  he is to be hanged sure enough.

Sir R.  Jebb is leaving us,  just in the manner of a hen who is quitting her
chickens — he leaves us by degrees,  and makes long intervals now,  short
visits,  &c.  Dear creature,  how I adore him  !  and what praises have I coaxed
Mrs.  Montagu out of to please him.  He'll value those more than mine — a
rogue !

The Parkers were here yesterday,  and sate whole hours,  and told all
their terrors in the riot season,  &c.,  besides an adventure of a trunk cut

from behind a post chaise,  which lasted Oh,  I thought I should have

died no other death than that trunk would have given me.

I suppose you gather from all this that Mr.  Thrale dines below,  plays at
cards,  &c.,  for so he does,  and makes all the haste to be well that mortal
man can make.

214 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

Tell Mr.  Crisp that your friend is a whimsical animal enough,  but that
she loves her friends,  and her friends'  friends,  and him of course  :  and tell
the Captain that I had a lady here last Saturday,  and could think of nothing
for chat so well as the discoveries in the South Seas,  and his kindness in
giving Hester some rarities from thence,  which she produced — that the lady
made the following reflection on what she saw and heard — "  Why,  madam,"
said she,  "  I have been thinking all this while how happy a thing it is that
when some parts of the world wear out and go to decay,  Captain Burney
should find out new ones to supply their places,  and serve instead."  All
this with perfect innocence of all meaning whatsoever.

Adieu,  dearest,  loveliest Burney  !  Write to me kindly,  think of me par-
tially, come to me willingly,  and dream of me if you will ;  for I am,  as you
well know,

Ever yours,

H.  L.  T.

CHAPTER X.
1781.

Correspondence between Miss Burney and Mrs.  Thrale — Good Things — Mr.  Crisp — The
War — Admiral Byron — Origin of our Affections —Merlin — His Mill to Grind Old
Ladies Young — Dr.  Johnson — Bartolozzi — An Owhyhee Dress — Conversazione —
Characters — Mrs.  Montagu — Dinner at Mrs.  Thrale's — Lord Sheffield — Lord John
Clinton — Two Beauties and a Fright — Mrs.  Carter — Webber's South Sea Drawings
— Curious Fans — The Duchess of Devonshire — Sir Joshua Reynolds — A Dinner Party
— A Character — Sudden Death of IMr.  Thrale — Correspondence between Mr,  Crisp
and Miss Burney — The Three Warnings — Diary Resumed — Visiters — Misconceptions
— A Dinner Party — A Quarrel — Perseverance and Obstinacy — Reconciliation — Sale
of Mr.  Thrale's Brewery — Mr.  Barclay,  the Rich Quaker — Dr.  Johnson — Newspaper
Scandal — A Poor Artist — An Odd Adventure — Anecdote of Dr.  Johnson — Sitting for
One's Portrait — Visit to Streatham — A Subject for Harry Bunbury — The Wits at
War — Johnson's  "  Life of Lord Lyttleton" — Singular Scene — Johnson in a Savage
Fit — A Peace-maker — Merlin,  the Mechanician.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Streatham,  Saturday.
My dear Miss Burney,

And so here comes your sweet letter.  And so I pleased Mr.  Crisp,  did
I?  and yet he never heard,  it seems,  the only good things I said,  which
were very earnest,  and very honest,  and very pressing invitations to him,
to see Streatham nearer than through the telescope.  Now,  that he did not
hear all this was your fault,  mademoiselle  ;  for you told me that Mr.  Crisp
was old,  and Mr.  Crisp was infirm  ;  and,  if I had found those things so,  I
should have spoken louder,  and concluded him to be deaf:  but,  finding him
very amiable,  and very elegant,  and very polite to me,  and very unlike an
old man,  I never thought about his being deaf;  and,  perhaps,  was a little
coquettish too,  in my manner of making the invitation.  I now repeat it,
however,  and give it under my hand,  that I should consider such a visit as
a very,  very great honour,  and so would Mr.  Thrale.

And now for dismal  !

1 have been seriously ill ever since 1 saw you.  Mrs.  Burney has been
to me a kind and useful friend, — has suffered me to keep her here all this
time — is here still — would not go to Sir Joshua's,  though she was asked,
because I could not ;  and has been as obliging,  and as attentive,  and as
good to me as possible.     Dick is happy,  and rides out with my master,  and

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  215

liis mamma and I look at them out of the dressing-room window.    So much
for self.

In the midst of my own misery I felt for my dear Mrs.  Byron's  ;  but
Chamier has relieved that anxiety by assurances that the Admiral behaved
quite unexceptionably,  and that,  as to Jwnour in the West Indies,  all goes
well.  The Grenadas are a heavy loss indeed,  nor is it supposed possible
for Byron to protect Barbadoes and Antigua.  Barrington has acted a noble
part ;  he and Count d'Estaing remind one of the heroic contentions of dis-
tant times.  The Lyon,  on our side,  commanded by a Welshman,  and the
Languedoc,  on the side of the French,  fought with surprising fury,  and lost
a great number of men  ;  it was a glorious day,  though on our side unfor-
tunate.

D'Orvilliers has left our Channel after only cutting a  ^^w ships out of
Torbay,  and chasing Sir Charles to Spithead.  Many suppose the home
campaign quite over for this year.

1 have had very kind letters from Dr.  Delap.  I love the Sussex people
somehow,  and they are a mighty silly race too.  But  'tis never for their
wisdom that one loves the wisest,  or for their wit that one loves the wittiest  ;
'tis for benevolence,  and virtue,  and honest fondness,  one loves people  ;  the
other qualities make one proud of loving them too.

Dear,  sweet,  kind Burney,  adieu  ;  whether sick or sorry,  ever yours,

H.  L.  T.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Streatham,  Thursday,  4th January.

Don't I pick up franks prettily  ?  I sent a hundred miles for this,  and
the churl enclosed but one — "  certain that Miss Burney could not live long
enough away from me to need two."  Ah,  cruel Miss Burney  !  she will
never come again,  I think.

Well  !  but I did see Phillips written in that young man's honest face,
though nobody pronounced the word  ;  and I boldly bid him,  "  Good mor-
row^ Caiptain^''  at the door,  trusting to my own instinct when I came away.
Your sweet father,  however,  this day trusted me with the whole secret,
and from my heart do I wish every comfort and joy from the match.

'Tis now high time to tell you that the pictures are come home,  all but
mifie^ — which my master don't like.  He has ordered your father to sit
to-morrow,  in his peremptory way  ;  and I shall have the dear Doctor every
morning at breakfast.  I took ridiculous pains to tutor him to-day,  and to
insist,  in my peremptory way,  on his forbearing to write or read late this
evening,  that my picture might not have bloodshot eyes.

Merlin has been here to tune the fortepianos.  He told Mrs.  Davenant
and me that he had thoughts of inventing a particular mill to grind old
ladies young,  as he was so prodigiously fond of their company.  I suppose
he thought we should bring grist.  Was that the way to put people in tune 1
I asked him.

Doctor Burney says your letters and mine are alike,  and that it comes
by writing so incessantly to each other.  I feel proud and pleased,  and find
1 shall slip pretty readily into the Susannuccia's place,  when she goes to
settle on her 700^.  a-year ;  of which God give her joy seven hundred times
over,  dear creature  !  I never knew how it was to love an incognita but
Susan Burney  :  my personal acquaintance with her is actually nothing — is
it  ?  and yet we always seem to understand one another.

H.  L.  T.

216 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Streatham,  Thursday,  11th.

I never was so glad of a letter from you before :  the dear Doctor had
been in the room just half an hour,  and had frightened me with an account of
your fever.  Thank God there is no harm come to my sweet little friend  ;
her spirits and her affection are as strong as ever,  for all Dr.  Johnson, —
who says nobody loves each other much when they have been parted long.
How well do you know him,  and me,  and all of us, — and talk of  "niy pene-
tration !

Your father sits for his picture in the Doctor of Music's gown  ;  and Bar-
tolozzi makes an engraving from it to place at the head of the book.  Sir
Joshua delights in the portrait,  and says  'twill be the best among them.  I
hope it will  ;  and by this time,  perhaps,  you may have begun thinking of
the 7niniature too  ;  but it is not touched yet,  I assure you.  Sweet Susan-
nuccia  !  I will slide into her place  ;  I shall get more of your company,  too,
and more — is there any more to be had  ? — of your confidence.  Yes,  yes,
there is a little,  to be sure  ;  but dear Mrs.  Thrale shall have it all now.
Oh,  'tis an excellent match  !  and he has 700/.  a-year — that is,  he will have  :
it is entailed,  and irrevocable.

I send this by your father,  who will put.it in the post ;  not a frank to-day
for love or money.  I did not intend to have written so soon.  He and 1
shall meet at St.  James's this day se'nnight.  The Ovvhyhee*  is to be
trimmed with grebeskins and gold to the tune of 65/. — the trimming only.
What would I give to show it to you  ! — or show you any thing,  for that
matter,  that would show how affectionately 1 am yours 1

Dr.  Burney says you carry birdlime in your brains,  for every thing that
lights there sticks.  I think you carry it in your heart,  and that mine sticks
very close to it.     So adieu  !  H.  L.  T.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS BURNEY.

Grosvenor Square,  Tuesday,  Feb.  7,  1781.

This moment Dick Burney tells me how ill you are.  My dear,  how shall
I keep from stepping into a postchaise,  and sousing through Gascoyne Lane
to look after you  ?  Complicated as my engagements are,  between business
and flash,  I shall certainly serve you so,  if you do not make haste and be
well.

Yesterday I had a conversazione.  Mrs.  Montagu was brilliant in dia-
monds, solid in judgment,  critical in talk.  Sophy smiled,  Piozzi sung,
Pepys panted with admiration,  Johnson was good-humoured.  Lord John
Clinton attentive,  Dr.  Bowdler lame,  and my master not asleep.  Mrs.  Ord
looked elegant,  Lady Rothes dainty,  Mrs.  Davenant dapper,  and Sir Philip's
curls were all blown about by the wind.  Mrs.  Byron rejoices that her
Admiral and I agree so well ;  the way to his heart is connoisseurship it
seems,  and for a background and contorno,  who comes up to Mrs.  Thrale,
you know.

Captain Fuller flashes away among us.  How that boy loves rough
merriment  !  the people all seem to keep out of his way for fear.

Aunt Cotton died firmly persuaded that Mrs.  Davenant was a natural,  and
that I wrote her letters for her — how odd  !

*  Mrs.  Thrale had a court dress woven at Spitalfields,  from a pattern of Owhyhee
manufacture,  brought thence by Captain Burney.

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  217

Many people said she was the prettiest woman in the room last night, —
and that is as odd  ;  Augusta Byron,  and Sophy Streatfield,  and Mrs.
HinchlifFe,  being present.

Mrs.  Montagu talked to me about you for an hour t'other day,  and said
she was amazed that so delicate a girl could write so boisterous a book.

Loveliest Burney,  be as well as ever you can,  pray do.  When you are
with me,  I think I love you from habit  ;  when you are from me,  I fancy
distance endears you  :  be that as it may,  your own father can alone love
you better,  or wish you better,  or desire the sight of you more sincerely
than does your

L.  H.  T.

Dr.  Johnson is very good and very cliihhahle,  but Sir R.  Jebb is quite a
scourge to me.  Who now would believe that I cannot make a friend of
that man,  but am forced to fly to Dr.  Pepys for comfort  ?  He is so haughty,
so impracticable a creature  ;  and yet I esteem and honour him,  though I
cannot make him feel any thing towards me but desire of downing^  &c.

MISS BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.

Chesington,  February 8th,  1781.

This moment have two sweet and most kind letters from my best-loved
Mrs.  Thrale made me amends for no little anxiety which her fancied silence
had given me.  I know not what is now come to this post  ;  but there is
nothing I can bear with so little patience as being tricked out of any of
your letters.  They do,  indeed,  give me more delight than I can express;
they seem to me the perfection of epistolary writing;  for,  in Dr.  Johnson's
phrase,  all that is not kindness is wit,  and all that is not wit is kindness.

What you tell me of Mrs.  Montagu and Mrs.  Carter gives me real con-
cern ;  it is a sort of general disgrace to us  ;  but,  as you say,  it shall have
nothing to do with you and I.  Mrs.  Montagu,  as we have often agreed,  is
a character rather to respect than love,  tor she has not that don d'aimer by
which alone love can be made fond or faithful  ;  and many as are the causes
by which respect may be lessened,  there are very few by which it can be
afterwards restored to its first dignity.  But where there is real affection,  the
case is exactly reversed ;  few things can weaken,  and every trifle can
revive it.

Yet not for forty years,  in this life at least,  shall we continue to love each
other  ;  1 am very sure I,  for one,  shall never last half that time.  If you
saw but how much the illness of a week has lowered and injured me,  con-
sidering in what perfect health I came hither,  you would be half astonished  ;
and that in spite of the utmost care and attention from every part of this
kind family.  I have just,  with great difTiculty,  escaped a relapse,  from an
unfortunate fresh cold with which I am at this time struggling.  Long last
you,   dearest madam? — I am sure in the whole world I know not such

another.

******

I think I shall always hate this book*  which has kept me so long away
from you,  as much as I shall always love  "  Evelina,"  who first comfortably
introduced me to you  ;  an event which I may truly say opened a new,  and
I hope,  an exhaustless source of happiness to your most gratefully afTec-
tionate F.  B.

*  "  Cecilia,"  which Miss Burney had been long employed in writing,  and which made
its appearance shortly afterwards.

VOL.  I.  19

218 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

JOURNAL RESUMED.

(Addressed to Mr.  Crisp.)

March 23,.  1781. — I have narrowly escaped a return of the same vile
and irksome fever which with such difficulty has been conquered,  and that
all from vexation.  Last week 1 went to dinner in Grosvenor Square.  I
ran up-stairs,  as usual,  into Mrs.  Thrale's dressing-room,  and she there
acquainted me that Mr.  Thrale had resolved upon going abroad  ;  jir&t to
Spa,  next to Italy,  and then whither his fancy led him  !  that Dr.  Johnson
was to accompany them,  but that,  as their journey was without limit either
of time or place,  as Mr.  Thrale's ill state of health and strange state of
mind would make it both melancholy and alarming,  she could not in con-
science think of taking 7ne from my own friends and country without know-
ing either whither,  or for what length of time.  She would write to me,
however,  every post ;  leave me the keys of all she left of any value,  and,
in case of any evil to herself,  make me her executrix  !

Oh,  what words  !  and what a scheme  !  I was so infinitely shocked,  sur-
prised, and grieved,  that I was forced to run away from her,  and insist upon
hearing no more;  neither could I sufficiently recover even to appear at
dinner,  as Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.  Seward,  and Mr.  Ingram,  were of the party;
I was obliged,  therefore,  to shut myself up all the afternoon.

You will not,  I am sure,  wonder that I should be utterly disconcerted and
afflicted by a plan so wild in itself,  and so grievous to me.  I was,  indeed,
hardly able to support myself with any firmness all day  ;  and unfortunately,
there was in the evening a great rout.  I was then obliged to appear,  and
obliged to tell every body I was but half recovered from my late indispo-
sition.

The party was very large,  and the company very brilliant.  I was soon
encircled by acquaintances,  and forced to seem as gay as my neighbours.
My steady companions were Miss Coussmaker,  Augusta Byron,  Miss Ord,
and Miss Thrale;  and the S.  S.  never quits me.

I had a long conversation with the new Lord Sheffield ;  and,  as I had
never seen him since he was Colonel Holroyd,  I was ridiculously enough
embarrassed with his new title,  blundering from my lord to 5/^,  and from sir
to my lord.  He gave me a long account of his Coventry affairs,  and of the
commitment of the sheriffs to Newgate.  He is a spirited and agreeable man,
and,  I doubt not,  will make himself conspicuous in the right way.  Lady
Sheffield was also very civil ;  and,  as she came second,  I was better pre-
pared, and therefore gave her ladyship her title with more readiness;
which was lucky enough,  for I believe she would much less have liked the
omission.

Mrs.  Thrale took much pains to point out her friend Lord John Clinton
to me,  and me to him  :  he is extremely ugly,  but seems lively and amiable.

The greatest beauty in the room,  except the S.  S.,  was Mrs.  Gwynn,
lately Miss Horneck  ;  and the greatest fright was Lord Sandys.

I have time for nothing more about this evening,  which,  had not my mind
been wholly and sadly occupied by other matters,  would have been very
agreeable to me.

The next day I again spent in Grosvenor Square,  where nothing new
had passed about this cruel journey.  I then met a very small party,  con-
sisting only of Mrs.  Price,  who was a Miss Evelyn,  Miss Benson,  Dr.
Johnson,  and Mrs.  Carter.

The latter,  as there were so few folks,  talked a good deal,  and was far

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  219

more sociable and easy than I had yet seen her.  Her talk,  too,  though all
upon books  (for life and manners she is as ignorant of as a nun),  was very
imafTected and good-humoured,  and I liked her exceedingly.  Mrs.  Price is
a very sensible,  shrewd,  lofty,  and hard-headed woman.  Mjss Benson not
very unlike her.

Tuesday. — I passed the whole day at Sir Joshua Reynolds's with Miss
Palmer,  who,  in the morning,  took me to see soma most beautiful fans,
painted by Poggi,  from designs of Sir Joshua,  Angelica,  West,  and Cipriani,
on leather ;  they are,  indeed,  more delightful than can well be imagined  :
one was bespoke by the Duchess of Devonshire,  for a present to some
woman of rank in France,  that was to cost 30/.

We were accompanied by Mr.  Eliot,  the knight of the shire for Cornwall,
a most agreeable,  lively,  and very clever man.

We then went to Mr.  Webber's,  to see his South Sea drawings.  Here
we met Captain King,  who chiefly did the honours in showing the curiosi-
ties and explaining them.  He is one of the most natural,  gay,  honest,  and
pleasant characters I ever met with.  We spent all the rest of the morning
here,  much to my satisfaction.  The drawings are extremely well worth
seeing  ;  they consist of views of the country of Otaheite,  New Zealand,  New
Amsterdan),  Kamtschatka,  and parts of China;  and portraits of the inhabi-
tants done from the life.

When we returned to Leicester Fields we were heartily welcomed by Sir
Joshua.  Mr.  Eliot stayed the whole day  ;  and no other company came but
Mr.  Webber,  who was invited to tea.  Sir Joshua is fat and well.  He is
preparing for the Exhibition a new  "  Death of Dido;"  portraits of the three
beautiful Lady Waldegraves,  Ploratia,  Laura,  and Maria,  all in one picture,
and at work with the tambour  ;  a Thais,  for which a Miss Emilij,  a cele-
brated courtesan,  sat,  at the desire of the Hon.  Charles Greville;  and what
others I know not :  but his room and gallery are both crowded.

Thursday. — I spent the whole day again in Grosvenor Square,  where
there was a very gay party to dinner;  Mr.  Boswell,  Dudley Long,  Mr.

Adair,  Dr.  Delap,  Mr.  B ,  Dr.  Johnson,  and my father;  and much

could I write of what passed,  if it were possible for me to get time.     Mr.

B was just as absurdly pompous as at Brighton;  and,  in the midst of

dinner,  without any sort of introduction,  or reason,  or motive,  he called out
aloud, —

"  Sweet are the slumbers of the charming maid  !"

A laugh from all parties,  as you may imagine,  followed this exclamation  ;
and he bore it with amazing insensibility.

"  What's all this laugh for?"  cried Dr.  Johnson,  who had not heard the
cause.

"  Why,  sir,"  answered Mrs.  Thrale,  when she was able to speak,  "  Mr.

B just now called out, — nobody knows why, — '  Sweet are the slumbers

of the virtuous maid  !'  "

"  No,  no,  not virtuous,''^  cried Mr.  Boswell,  "  he said charming ;  he
thought that better  !"

"Ay,  sure,  sir,"  cried Mr.  B ,  unmoved;  "  for why sSiy virtuous?

— can we doubt a fair female's virtue? — oh fie,  oh fie,  'tis a superfluoj^
epithet."

"  But,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  in the original it is the virtuous man  ;  why
do you make it a maid of the sudden,  Mr.  B 1"

"I was alarmed at first,"  cried Dr.  Delap,  "and thought he had caught
Miss Burney napping ;  but when I looked at her,  and saw her awake,  I
was at a loss,  indeed,  to find the reason of the change."

220 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

"  Here,  sir  !    my lad  !"   cried Mr.  B —   to the servant ;   "  why,    my

head's on fire  !  What have you got never a screen  ?  Why,  I shall be
what you may call a hot-headed fellaiv  !  I shall be a mere rati  /"

In the afternoon we were joined by Mr.  Crutchley,  Mr.  Byron,  and Mr.
Selwin ;  and then we had a thousand private conferences and consultations
concerning the Spa journey.

I have been so often and so provokingly interrupted in writing this,  that
I must now finish it by lumjnng matters at once.  Sir Richard  .Tebb and
Dr.  Pepys have both been consulted concerning this going abroad,  and are
both equally violent against it,  as they think it even unwarrantable,  in such
a state of health as Mr.  Thrale's ;  and,  therefore,  it is settled that a great
meeting of his friends is to take place before he actually prepares for the
journey,  and they are to encircle him in a body,  and endeavour,  by repre-
sentations and entreaties,  to prevail with him to give it up  ;  and I have little
doubt myself but,  amongst us,  we shall be able to succeed.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.*

Wednesday evening.

You bid me write to you,  and so I will ;  you bid me pray for you,  and
so,  indeed,  I do,  for the restoration of your sweet peace of mind.  I pray
for your resignation to this hard blow,  for the continued union and exertion
of your virtues with your talents,  and for the happiest reward their exertion
can meet with,  in the gratitude and prosperity of your children.  These
are my prayers for my beloved Mrs.  Thrale ;  but these are not my only
ones ;  no,  the unfailing warmth of her kindness for myself I have rarely,
for a long time past,  slept without first petitioning.

I ran away without seeing you again when I found you repented that
sweet compliance with my request which I had won from you.  For the
world would I not have pursued you,  had I first seen your prohibition,  nor
could I endure to owe that consent to teasing which I only solicited from
tenderness.  Still,  however,  I think you had better have suffered me to follow
you  ;  I might have been of some use ;  I hardly could have been in your
way.  But I grieve now to have forced you to an interview which I would
have spared myself as well as you,  had I foreseen how little it would have
answered my purpose.

Yet though I cannot help feeling disappointed,  I am not surprised  :  for in
any case at all similar,  I am sure I should have the same eagerness for
solitude.

I tell you nothing of how sincerely I sympathize in your aflliction  ;  yet
T believe that Mr.  Crutchley and Dr.  Johnson alone do so more earnestly  ;
and I have some melancholy comfort in flattering myself that,  allowing for
the difference of our characters,  that true regard which I felt was as truly
returned.  Nothing but kindness did I ever meet with  ;  he ever loved to
have me,  not merely with his family,  but with himself;  and gratefully shall
I ever remember a thousand kind expressions of esteem and good opinion,
which are now crowding upon my memory.

Ah,  dearest madam  !  you had better have accepted me ;  I am sure,  if

*  This letter was written in reply to a  ^ew words from Mrs.  Thrale,  in which,  alluding-
to her husband's sudden death,  she begs Miss Burney to  "  write to me — pray for me I"
The hurried note from Mrs.  Thrale is thus endorsed by Miss Burney  : — "  Written a few
hours after the death of Mr.  Tlirale,  which happened by a sudden stroke of apoplexy,
on the morning-  of a day on which half the fashion of London had been invited to an
intended assembly at his house in Grosvenor Square."

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  221

unfit for you^  I am at this time unfit for every body.  Adieu,  and Heaven
preserve my heart's dearest friend  !  Don't torment yourself to write to me,
nor will I even ask Queeny,  though she is good,  and I believe would not deny
me  ;  but what can you say but that you are sad and comfortless  ?  and do
I not know that far too well?  I will write again to you,  and,  a thousand
times again,  for nothing am I more truly than your

F.  B.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.

Saturday,  April 6th.

I would I had some commission,  some business,  some pretence for writing
to my best-loved friend ;  for write I must,  while I have the faintest hope
my letters will be received without aversion.  Yet I have nothing on earth
to say,  but how much I love and how truly I am grieved for her.  To
you^  dearest madam,  I can offer nothing by way of comfort or consolation,
whatever I might do to many others ;  but what could I urge which you
have not a thousand times revolved in your own mind  ?  Dr.  Johnson alone
could offer any thing new,  or of strength to deserve attention from Mrs.
Thrale.  The rectitude  ^nd purity of your principles,  both religious and
moral,  I have often looked up to with reverence,  and I now no more doubt
their firmness in this time of trial than if I witnessed their operation.
Queeny,  too,  I saw was bent upon exerting the utmost fortitude upon this
first,  and I believe,  indeed,  most painful occasion to her that could call for
it.  May she now for her sweet mother unite all the affection and attention
which hitherto have deserved to be divided  !"

Many friends call and send here to inquire after you ;  but I have myself
avoided them all.  I cannot yet bear the conversation which is to follow
every meeting.  To be with you I would wrap myself up in misery ;  but,
without such a motive,  no one more hasty to run away from all that is
possible to be fled from.

Dr.  Johnson,  I hear,  is well.  I hear nothing else I have any wish to
communicate.

Adieu,  m.ost dear:  madam ;  and still love,  when you have time and com-
posure to again think of her,  the sincerest,  the gratefullest,  the fondest of
your friends,  in F.  B.  who,  though she first received your affection as an
unmerited partiality,  hopes never  ^to forfeit,  and perhaps some time to
deserve it.

I do not even request an answer ;  I scarce loisk for it ;  because I know
what it must be.  But I will write again in a few days.  My kind love to
Miss Thrale.  F.  B.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

Streatham,  April 29th,  1781.

Have you not,  my dearest daddy,  thought me utterly lost  ?  and,  indeed,
to all power of either giving or taking comfort,  I certainly have been for
some time past.  I did not,  it is true,  hope that poor Mr.  Thrale could live
very long,  as the alteration I saw in him only during my absence while
with you had shocked and astonished me.  Yet,  still the suddenness of the
blow gave me a horror from which I am not even now recovered.  The
situation of sweet Mrs.  Thrale,  added to the true concern I felt at his loss,
harassed my mind till it affected my health,  which is now again in a state
of precariousness and comfortless restlessness that will require much
trouble to remedy.

19*

222 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

You have not,  I hope,  been angry at my silence ;  for,  in truth,  I have
had no spirits to write,  nor,  latterly,  ability of tuvy kind,  from a headach
that has been incessant.

I now begin to long extremely to hear more about yourself,  and whether
you have recovered your sleep and any comfort.  The good nursing you
mention is always my consolation when I have the painful tidings of your
illness ;  for I have myself experienced the kindness,  care,  and unwearied
attention of the ever good and friendly Kitty,  who,  indeed,  as you well say,
can by no means be excelled in the most useful and most humane of all
sciences.

Mrs.  Thrale flew immediately upon this misfortune to Brighthelmstone,  to
Mr.  Scrase — her Daddy Crisp — both for consolation and counsel ;  and she
has but just quitted him,  as she deferred returning to Streatham till her pre-
sence was indispensably necessary upon account of proving the will.  I
offered to accompany her to Brighthelmstone  ;  but she preferred being alone,
as her mind was cruelly disordered,  and she saw but too plainly I was too
sincere a mourner myself to do much besides adding to her grief.  The
moment,  however,  she came back,  she solicited me to meet her, — and I am
now here with her,  and endeavour,  by every possible exertion,  to be of some
use to her.  She looks wretchedly indeed,  and is far from well ;  but she bears
up,  though not with calm intrepidity,  yet with flashes of spirit that rather,
I fear,  spend than relieve her.  Such,  however,  is her character,  and were
this exertion repressed,  she would probably sink quite.

Miss Thrale is steady and constant,  and very sincerely grieved for her
father.

The four executors,  Mr.  Cator,  Mr.  Crutchley,  Mr.  Henry Smith,  and
Dr.  Johnson,  have all behaved generously and honourably,  and seem deter-
mined to give Mrs.  Thrale all the comfort and assistance in their power.
She is to carry on the business jointly with them.  Poor soul !  it is a dread-
ful toil and worry to her.

Adieu,  my dearest daddy.  I will write again in a week's time.  I have
now just been blooded ;  but am by no means restored by that loss.  But
well and ill,  equally and ever.

Your truly affectionate child,

F.  B.

MR.  CRISP TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Chesington,  May 15th,  1781.
My dear Fannikin,

I was neither cross nor surprised at not hearing from you so long,  as I
was at no loss for the cause of your silence.  I know you have a heart,  and
on a late occasion can easily imagine it was too full to attend to forms,  or,
indeed,  to any but the one great object immediately before you.  To say
the truth,  I should be sorry to have your nature changed,  for the sake of a
letter or two more or less from you  ;  because I can now with confidence
say to myself,  "The girl is really sincere,  and,  as she does profess some
friendship and regard for me,  I can believe her,  and am convinced that,  if
any evil were to befall me,  she would be truly sorry for me."

There is a pleasure in such a thought,  and I will indulge it.  The steadi-
ness and philosophy of certain of our friends is,  perhaps,  to be admired  ;
but I wish it not to be imitated by any of my friends.  I would have the
feelings of their minds be keen and even piercing,  but stop there.  Let not
the poor tenement of clay give way  ; — if that goes,  how shall they abide the
peltings of these pitiless storms  ?     Your slight machine is certainly not made

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  223

for such rough encounters  ; — for which I am truly sorry.  You did not make
yourself;  allowed  ! — agreed  ! — But you may mend yourself,  and that is all
I require of you.

If I had you here,  I should talk to you on this head  ;  but at present I
ought not to wish it.  Mrs.  Thrale has an undoubted right to you,  nor
should I wish to tear you from her.  When the wound is healed,  and nothing
but the scar remaining,  the plaster ought to be removed, — and then I put in
my claim.

Let me hear from you soon that your health and spirits are mended —
greatly mended.  I sincerely wish the same to your beloved friend,  to whom
you must present my best respects.  I am glad she is connected with such
worthy people in her affairs.  I have more than once observed that the una-
voidable necessity of attending to business of indispensable consequence,  and
that,  with strict,  unabated perseverance,  has contributed more to divert,  and
dissipate,  and finally to cure deep sorrow,  than all the wise lessons of phi-
losophers, or the well-meant consolations of friends.  May she prove an
instance to confirm this observation  !

As for my own shattered frame,  I have had a pretty long and convincing
proof that it is not immortal.  Gout,  rheumatism,  indigestion,  want of sleep,
almost ever since I saw you,  I think,  may amount pretty nearly to the sum
total of Mrs.  Thrale's  "  Three Warnings."  If I don't take the hint the
fault is my own — Nature has done her part.

Bad as I have been though,  I now hobble about the garden with a stick,
and for this fortnight past have been gradually mending,  though slowly.

Ham and Kate are constantly inquiring after you,  and when you will
come.  I am sure they love you,  or I should not love them.  Adieu,  my
Fannikin.

Your affectionate daddy,

S.  C.

JOURNAL RESUMED.

Streatham,  May,  1781. — Miss Owen and I arrived here without inci-
dent, which,  in a journey of six or seven miles,  was really marvellous !
Mrs.  Thrale came from the Borough with two of the executors,  Dr.  Johnson
and Mr.  Crutchley,  soon after us.  She had been sadly worried,  and in the
evening frightened us all by again fainting away.  Dear creature  !  she is
all agitation of mind and of body :  but she is now wonderfully recovered,
though in continual fevers about her affairs,  which are mightily difficult and
complicate indeed.  Yet the behaviour of all the executors is exactly to her
wish.  Mr.  Crutchley,  in particular,  was he a darling son or only brother,
could not possibly be more truly devoted to her.  Indeed,  I am very happy
in the revolution in my own mind in favour of this young man,  whom
formerly I so little liked ;  for I now see so much of him,  business and incli-
nation uniting to bring him hither continually,  that if he were disagreeable
to me,  I should spend my time in a most comfortless manner.  On the con-
trary, I both respect and esteem him very highly ;  for his whole conduct
manifests so much goodness of heart and excellence of principle,  that he is
fairly un liomme conune il y en a peu;  and that first appearance of cold-
ness, pride,  reserve,  and sneering,  all wears off upon further acquaintance,
and leaves behind nothing but good-humour and good-will.  And this you
must allow to be very candid,  when I tell you that,  but yesterday,  he
affronted me so much by a piece of impertinence,  that I had a very serious
quarrel with him.     Of this more anon.

224 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

Dr.  Johnson was charming,  both in spirits and humour.  I really think
he grows gayer and gayer daily,  and more ductile and pleasant.

Mr.  Crutchley stayed till Sunday,  when we had many visiters, — Mrs.
Plumbe,    one of poor Mr.  Thrale's sisters  ;  Mrs.   Wallace,    wife to the
Attorney-C4eneral,  a very ugly,  but sensible and agreeable woman  ;    Sir
Philip Jennings Gierke,  and Mr.  Selwin.
Monday Miss Owen left us.

Tuesday came Lord and Lady Westcote,  and afterwards Dr.  and Mrs.
Parker,  Dr.  Lort,  and the Bishop of Killaloe.  Dr.  Parker is a terrible old
proser,  and wore me out ;  Mrs.  Parker is well-bred and sensible ;  my
friend Dr.  Lort was comical and diverting  ;  and the Bishop of Killaloe is a
gay,  sprightly,  polite,  and ready man:  I like him well.

Sunday morning nobody went to church but Mr.  Crutchley,  Miss Thrale,
and myself;  and some time after,  when I was sauntering upon the lawn
before the house,  Mr.  Crutchley joined me.  We were returning together
into the house,  when Mrs.  Thrale popping her head out of her dressing-
room-window,  called out,  "  How nicely these men domesticate among us,
Miss Burney  !     Why,  they take to us as natural as life  !"

"  Well,  well,"  cried Mr.  Crutchley,  "  I have sent for my horse,  and I
shall release you early to-morrow morning.  I think yonder comes Sir
Philip."

"  Oh  !  you'll have enough to do with him^^  cried she,  laughing  ;  "  he is
well prepared to plague you,  I assure you."
"  Is he  ? — and what about  ]"

"  Why,  about Miss Burney.  He asked me the other day what was my
present establishment.  '  Mr.  Crutchley and Miss Burney,'  I answered.
'  How well those two names go together,'  cried he ;  '  I think they can't do
better than make a match of it :  I will consent,  I am sure,'  he added ;  and
to-day,  I dare say,  you will hear enough of it."

I leave you to judge if I was pleased at this stuff thus communicated  ;
but Mrs.  Thrale,  with all her excellence,  can give up no occasion of making
sport,  however unseasonable,  or even painful.

"  I am very much obliged to him,  indeed !"  cried I,  drily  ;  and Mr.
Crutchley called out,  "  Thank him  !  thank him  /"  in a voice of pride and
of pique that spoke him mortally angry.

I instantly came into the house,  leaving him to talk it out with Mrs.
Thrale,  to whom I heard him add,  "  So this is Sir Philip's kindness I"  and
her answer,  "  I wish you no worse luck  !"

Now,  what think you of this?  was it not highly insolent? — and from a
man who has behaved to me hitherto with the utmost deference,  good
nature,  and civility,  and given me a thousand reasons,  by every possible
opportunity,  to think myself very high indeed in his good opinion and good
graces  ?  But these rich men think themselves the constant prey of all por-
tionless girls,  and are always upon their guard,  and suspicious of some
design to take them in.  This sort of disposition I had very early observed
in Mr.  Crutchley,  and therefore I had been more distant and cold with him
than with any body I ever met with  :  but latterly his character had risen
so much in my mind,  and his behaviour was so much improved,  that I had
let things take their own course,  and no more shunned than I sought him  ;
for I evidently saw his doubts concerning tne and my plots were all at an
end,  and his civility and attentions were daily increasing,  so that I had be-
come very comfortable with him,  and well pleased with his society.

I need not,  I think,  add that I determined to see as little of this most fear-
ful and haughty gentleman in future as was in my power,  since no good

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  225

qualities can compensate for such arrogance of suspicion  ;  and,  therefore,
as I had reason enough to suppose he would,  in haste,  resume his own re-
serve, I resolved,  without much effort,  to be beforehand with him in resuming
mine.

At dinner we had a large and most disagreeable party of Irish ladies,
whom Mrs.  Thrale was necessitated to invite from motives of business and
various connexions.  We were in all fourteen,  viz.  Sir Philip Gierke  ;  Mrs.
Lambert and her son,  a genteel young youth  ;  Miss Owen  ;  Mr.  and Mrs.
Perkins  ;  Mrs.  Vincent ;  Mrs.  O'Riley,  and Miss O'Riley,  her sister-in-law ;
Mr.  Crutchley  ;  Mrs.  and Miss Thrale  ;  and myself.

I was obliged,  at dinner,  to be seated between Miss O'Riley and Mr.
Crutchley,  to whom you may believe I was not very courteous,  especially
as I had some apprehensions of Sir Philip.  Mr.  Crutchley,  however,  to my
great surprise,  was quite as civil as ever,  and endeavoured to be as chatty ;
but there I begged to be excused,  only answering upon the reply^  and that
very drily,  for I was indeed horribly provoked wath him.

Indeed,  all his behaviour would have been natural and good-humoured,
and just what I should have liked,  had he better concealed his chagrin at the
first accusation ;  but that,  still dwelling by me,  made me very indifferent to
what followed,  though I found he had no idea of having displeased me,  and
rather sought to be more than less sociable than usual.

I was much diverted during dinner by this Miss O'Riley,  who took it in
her humour to attack Mr.  Crutchley repeatedly,  though so discouraging a
beau never did I see !  Her forwardness,  and his excessive and inordinate
coldness,  made a contrast that,  added to her brogue,  which was broad,  kept
me in a grin irrepressible.

In the afternoon,  we had also Mr.  Wallace,  the Attorney-General,  a most
squat and squab-looking man  ;  and further I saw not of him.

In the evening,  when the Irish ladies,  the Perkinses,  Lamberts,  and Sir
Philip,  were gone,  Mrs.  Thrale walked out with Mr.  Wallace,  whom she
had some business to talk over with  ;  and then,  w^hen only Miss Owen,
Miss T.  and I remained,  Mr.  Crutchley,  after repeatedly addressing me,  and
gaining pretty dry answers,  called out suddenly,  "  Why,  Miss Burney  !
why,  what's the matter V

"  Nothing."

"  Why,  are you stricken,  or smitten,  or ill 1"

"  None of the three."

"  Oh,  then,  you are settmg cloum all these Irish folks V

"  No,  indeed,  I don't think them worth the trouble."

"  Oh,  but I am sure you are  ;  only I interrupted you."

I went on no farther with the argument,  and Miss Thrale proposed our
walking out to meet her mother.  We all agreed  ;  and Mr.  Crutchley would
not be satisfied without walking next me,  though I really had no patience
to talk with him,  and wished him at Jericho.

"  What's the matter  ?"  said he ;  "  have you had a quarrel 1"

"  No."

"  Are you aff*ronted  ?"

Not a word.     Then again he called to Miss Thrale, —

"  Why,  Queeny — why,  she's quite in a rage!  What have you done to
her  ?"

I still sulked on,  vexed to be teased  ;  but,  though,  with a gayety that
showed he had no suspicion of the cause,  he grew more and more urgent,
trying every means to make me tell him what was the matter,  till at last,
much provoked,  I said, —

226  .  DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

*'  I must be strangely in want of a confidant,  indeed,  to take you for one  !"

*'  Why,  what an insolent speech  !"  cried he,  half-serious and half-laugh-
ing,  but casting up his eyes and hands with astonishment.

He then let me be quiet some time,  but in a few minutes renewed his
inquiries with added eagerness,  begging me to tell him if nobody else.

A likely matter!  thought I ;  nor did I scruple to tell him,  when forced
to answer,  that no one had so little chance of success in such a request.

"  Why so V cried he ;  "  for I am the best person in the world to trust
with a secret,  as I always forget it."

He continued working at me till we joined Mrs.  Thrale and the Attorney-
General.  And then Miss Thrale,  stimulated by him,  came to inquire if I
had really taken any thing amiss oHier.     No,  I assured her.

"  Is it of wie,  then'!"  cried Mr.  Crutchley,as if sure I should say no  ;  but
I made no other answer than desiring him to desist questioning me.

"  So I will,"  cried he  ;  "  only clear me, — only say it is not we."

"  I shall say nothing about the matter  ;  so do pray be at rest."

"  Well,  but it can't be wze,  I know  :  only say that.  It's Queeny,  I dare
say."

*'  No,  indeed."

'"  Then it's you,^^  cried Miss Thrale  ;  "  and I'm glad of it,  with all my
heart!"

He then grew quite violent,  and at last went on with his questions till,
by being quite silent to them,  he could no longer doubt who it was.  He
seemed then wholly amazed,  and entreated to know what he had done ;  but
I tried only to avoid him,  and keep out of his way.

Soon after the Attorney-General took his leave,  during which ceremony
Mr.  Crutchley,  coming behind me,  exclaimed, —

"  Who'd think of this creature's having any venom in her  !"

"  Oh yes,"  answered I,  "  when she's provoked."

*'  But have I provoked you V

Again I got off.  Taking Miss Thrale by the arm,  we hurried away,
leaving him with Mrs.  Thrale and Miss Owen.  He was presently,  how-
ever, with us again  ;  and when he came to my side,  and found me really
trying to talk of other matters with Miss Thrale,  and avoid him,  he called
out, —

"  Upon my life,  this is too bad  !  Do tell me.  Miss Burney,  what is the
matter  ?  If you won't,  I protest I'll call Mrs.  Thrale,  and make her work
at you herself."

I now,  in my turn,  entreated he would not ;  for I knew she was not to
be safely trusted with any thing she could turn into ridicule.  I was,  there-
fore, impatient to have the whole matter dropped  ;  and after assuring him
very drily,  yet peremptorily,  that I should never satisfy him,  I started
another subject with Miss Thrale,  and we walked quietly on.

He exclaimed,  with a vehemence that amazed me in return,  "  Why will
you not tell me?  Upon my life,  if you refuse me any longer,  I'll call the
whole house to speak for me  !"

"I assure you,"  answered I,  "  that will be to no purpose;  fori must
offend  ^mjselfhy telling it,  and therefore I shall mention it to nobody."

*<  But what in the world have I done 1"

"  Nothing  ;  you have done nothing."

"  What have I said,  then?  Only let me beg your pardon, — only let me
know what it is,  that 1  'inay beg your pardon."

I then took up the teasing myself,  and quite insisted upon his leaving us
and joining Mrs.  Thrale.  He begged me to tell Miss Thrale,  and let her
mediate,  and entreated her to be his agent ;  which,  in order to get rid of

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  227

him,  she promised  ;  and he then slackened his pace,  though very reluc-
tantly, while we quickened ours.

Miss Thrale,  however,  asked me not a question,  which I was very glad
of,  as the affair,  trifling as it is,  would be but mortifying to mention  ;  and
though I could not,  when so violently pressed,  disguise my resentment,  I
was by no means disposed to make any serious complaint.  I merely wished
to let the gentleman know I was not so much his humble servant as to
authorize even the smallest disrepect from him.

He was,  however,  which I very little expected,  too uneasy to stay long
away;  and when we had walked on quite out of hearing of Mrs.  Thrale
and Miss Owen,  he suddenly galloped after us.

"  How odd it is of you,"  said Miss Thrale,  "  to come and intrude your-
self in this manner upon any body that tries so to avoid you  !"

"Have you done anything for me  ?"  cried he;  "I don't believe you
have said a word."

"  Not T,  truly  !"  answered she  :  "  if I can keep my own self out of
scrapes,  it's all I can pretend to."

"  Well,  but do tell me.  Miss Burney, — pray tell me  !  indeed,  this is quite
too bad  ;  I sha'n't have a wink of sleep all night.  If I have offended you,
I am very sorry indeed ;  but I am sure I did not mean — "

"  No,  sir  !"  interrupted I,  "  I don't suppose you did mean to offend me,
nor do I know why you should.  I expect from you neither good nor ill, —
civility I think myself entitled to,  and that is all I have any desire for."

"  Good Heaven,"  exclaimed he.  "  Tell me,  however,  but what it is,  and
if I have said any thing unguardedly,  1 am extremely sorry,  and I most
sincerely beg your pardon."

Is it not very strange,  that any man,  in the same day,  could be so dis-
dainfully proud,  and so condescendingly humble?  I was never myself more
astonished,  as 1 had been firmly persuaded he would not have deigned to
take the smallest notice of me from the moment of his hearing Sir Philip's
idle raillery.

I now grew civiller,  for I dreaded his urgency,  as it was literally impos-
sible for me to come to the point.

I told him,  therefore,  that I was sorry he took so much trouble,  which I
had by no means intended to give him,  and begged he would think of it no
more.

He was not,  however,  to be so dismissed.  Again he threatened me with
Mrs.  Thrale,  but again I assured him that nothing could less answer to
him.

"  Well,  but,"  cried he,  "  if you will not let me know my crime,  why,  I
must never speak to you any more."

"Very well,"  answered I,  "if you please we will proclaim a mutual
silence henceforward."

"  Oh,"  cried he,  "  ymc^  1 suppose,  will be ready enough  ;  but to me that
would be a loss of very great pleasure.  If you would tell me,  however,  I
am sure I could explain it off,  because I am sure it has been done unde-
signedly."

"  No,  it does not admit of any explanation;  so pray don't mention it any
more."

"  Only tell me what part of the day it was."

Whether this unconsciousness was real,  or only to draw me in so that he
might come to the point,  and make his apology with greater ease,  I know
not ;  but I assured him it was in vain he asked,  and again desired him to
puzzle himself with no further recollections.

"  Oh,"  cried he,  "  but I shall think of every thing I have ever said to you

228  ,      DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

for this half year.  I am sure,  whatever it was,  it must have been unmeant
and unguarded."

"  That,  sir,  I never doubted  ;  and probably you thought me hard enough
to hear any thing without minding it."

"  Good Heaven,  Miss Burney !  why,  there is nobody I would not sooner
offend, — nobody in the world.  Queeny knows it.  If Queeny would speak,
she could tell you so.     Is it not true.  Miss Thrale?"

"  I shall say nothing about it ;  if I can keep my own neck out of the
collar,  it's enough for me."

"  But won't it plead something for me that you are sure,  and must be
sure,  it was by blunder,  and not design  ?"

"Indeed I am sorry you take all this trouble,  which is very little worth
your while  ;  so do pray say no more."

"But will you forgive mel"

"Yes."

"It seems to come very hard from you.  Will you promise to have quite
forgiven it by the time I return next Thursday]"

"  Oh,  I hope I shall have no remembrance of any part of it before then.
I am sorry you know any thing about it;  and if you had not been so ex-
cessively earnest,  I should never have let you;  but I could not say an
untruth when pushed so hard."

"I hope,  then,  it will all be dissipated by to-morrow morning."

"Oh,  surely  !  I should be very much surprised if it outlasted the night."

"  Well,  but then will you be the same?  I never saw such a change.  If
you are serious "

"Oh,  no,  I'll be wondrous merry  !"

"  I beg you will think no more of it.  I — I believe I know what it is  ;  and,
indeed,  1 was far from meaning to give you the smallest offence,  and I most
earnestly beg your pardon.  There is nothing I would not do to assure yoii
how sorry I am.  But I hope it will be all over by the time the candles
come.  I shall look to see,  and I hope — I beg — you will have the same
countenance again."

I now really felt appeased,  and so I told him.

We then talked of other matters till we reached home,  though it was not
without difficulty I could even yet keep him quiet.  I then ran up-stairs with
my cloak,  and stayed till supper-time,  when I returned without,  I hope,  any
remaining appearance of dudgeon in my phiz  ;  for after so much trouble
and humiliation,  it would have been abominable to have shown any.

I see,  besides,  that Mr.  Crutchley,  though of a cold and proud disposi-
tion,  is generous,  amiable,  and delicate,  and,  when not touched upon the
tender string o^ gallantry,  concerning which he piques himself upon invari-
able hardness and immovability,  his sentiments are not merely just,  but
refined.

VK vjt vp  ^  ^  4?

After supper,  Mr.  Crutchley,  though he spoke to me two or three times
with an evident intention to observe my looks and manner in answering
him,  which were both meant to be as much as usual,  seemed still dissatisfied
both with his own justification and my appeasement ;  and when we all arose
to go to bed,  he crossed over to me,  and said in a whisper,  "  I have begged
Miss Thrale to intercede for me  ;  she will explain all ;  and I hope "

"Very well — very well,"  said I,  in a horrible hurry  ;  "  there's no occa-
sion for any thing more."

For Mrs.  and Miss Thrale,  and Miss Owen,  were all standing waiting for
me :  he put himself,  however,  before me,  so that I could not get away,  and
went on :

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLXA.  229

"  Only hear me^—j^rmj hear me.  Is it what she  (pointing to Mrs.  Thrale)
put about in the morning?"

"  I'll tell you another time,"  cried I,  in fifty agonies to see how they were
all ready to titter,  which he,  whose back was to them,  perceived not.

"  I have told Miss Thrale what I thought it was,"  he continued,  "  and she
will explain it all,  and tell you how very impossible it was I could think of
offending you.  Indeed,  I beg your pardon  !  I do,  indeed,  most sincerely.
I hope you will think of it no more, — I hope it will be all over."

"  It is all over,"  cried I,  still trying to get away.

"  Well,  but — stop — only tell me if it was that "

"Ay — ay — to-morrow morning;"  and then I forced myself into the
midst of them,  and got off.

Streatham,  Thursday. — This was the great and most important day to
all this house,  upon which the sale of the Brewery was to be decided.  Mrs.
Thrale went early to town,  to meet all the executors,  and Mr.  Barclay,  the
Quaker,  who was the bidder.  She was in great agitation of mind,  and told
me if all went well she would wave a white pocket-handkerchief out of the
coach window.

Four o'clock came and dinner was ready,  and no Mrs.  Thrale.  Five
o'clock followed,  and no Mrs.  Thrale.  Queeny and I went out upon the
lawn,  where we sauntered,  in eager expectation,  till near six,  and then the
coach appeared in sight,  and a white pocket-handkerchief was waved
from it.

I ran to the door of it to meet her,  and she jumped out of it,  and gave
me a thousand embraces while I gave my congratulations.  We went
instantly to her dressing-room,  where she told me,  in brief,  how the matter
had been transacted,  and then we went down to dinner.

Dr.  Johnson and Mr.  Crutchley had accompanied her home.  I deter-
mined to behave to Mr.  Crutchley the same as before our quarrel,  though
he did not so to me,  for he hardly spoke a word to me.  An accident,
however,  happened after dinner,  which made him for a while more loqua-
cious. Mrs.  Thrale,  in cutting some fruit,  had cut her finger,  and asked
me for some black sticking-plaster,  and as I gave it her out of my pocket-
book,  she was struck with the beautiful glossiness of the paper of a letter
which peeped out of it,  and rather waggishly asked me who wrote to me
with so much elegant attention 1

"  Mrs.  Gast,"  answered I.

"  Oh,"  cried she,  "  do pray then let me see her hand."

I showed it her,  and she admired it very justly,  and said, —

"  Do show it to Mr.  Crutchley  ;  'tis a mighty genteel hand indeed."

I complied,  but took it from him as soon as he had looked at it.  Indeed,
he is the last man in the world to have even desired to read any letter not
to himself.

Dr.  Johnson now%  who,  too deaf to hear what w-as saying,  wondered
what we were thus handing about,  asked an explanation.

"  Why,  we were all,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  admiring the hand of Fanny's
Mr.  Crisp's sister."

"  And mayn't I admire it too  ?"  cried he.

"  Oh,  yes,"  said she  ;  "  show it him,  Burney."

I put it in his hand,  and he instantly opened and began reading it.  Now
though there was nothing in it but what must reflect honour upon Mrs.
Gast,  she had charged me not to show it ;  and,  also,  it was so very flatter-
ing to me,  that I was quite consternated at this proceeding,  and called
out, —

VOL.  I.  20

230 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

"  Sir,  it was only to show you the hand-writing,  and you have seen
enough for that."

"  I shall know best myself,"  answered he,  laughing,  "  when I have seen
enough."

And he read on.  The truth is I am sure he took it for granted they
had all read it,  for he had not heard a word that had passed.

I then gave Mrs.  Thrale a reproachful glance for what she had done,
and she jumped up,  and calling out, —

"  So I have done mischief,  I see !"  and ran out of the room,  followed
by Queeny.  I stayed hovering over the Doctor to recover my property:
but the minute the coast was clear,  Mr.  Crutchley,  taking advantage of his
deafness,  said, —

"  Well,  ma'am,  I hope we are now friends  ?"
"  Yes  !"  cried I.
"  And is it all quite over 1"
"  Entirely."

"  Why then,  do pray,"  cried he,  laughing,  "  be so good as to let me know
what teas our quarrel 7"

"  No — no,  I sha'nt !"  (cried I,  laughing too,  at the absurdity of quar-
relling and seeming not to know icltat for)  :  "  it is all over,  and that is
enough."

"  No,  by no means enough  :  I must really beg you to tell me ;  I am
uneasy till I know.     Was it that silly joke of mine at dinner V
"  No,  I assure you,  it was no joke  !"
"  But was it at dinner,  or before dinner  ?"

"  Is it not enough that it is over 1 I am sorry you knew any thing of the
matter,  and I am obliged to you for taking so much trouble about it ;  so
there let it rest."

"  But pray do tell me  ! — if only that I may be more on my guard
another time."

"  No,  pray,"  cried I,  in my turn,  "  don't be on your guard ;  for if you
are,  I shall suppose you have taken the resentment up where I have laid it
down."

"  That I won't do,  indeed,"  said he ;  "  but I merely wish to beg your
pardon  :  and I think my earnestness must at least have convinced you how
very sorry I am to have given you any offence."

Here Dr.  Johnson returned me my letter,  with very warm praise of its
contents.  Mrs.  Gast would not only have forgiven me,  but have been
much delighted had she heard his approbation of all she had written to me.
Mr.  Crutchley,  never satisfied,  again began his entreaties that I would
"  come to the point,"  while I was putting up my letter ;  but I hurried out of
the room without any new answer,  though he called after me, —
*'  I shan't rest.  Miss Burney,  till you tell me !"

It cannot be,  all this time,  that he does not know  ;  he merely wants me
to mention the matter myself,  that with a better grace he may apologize
about it.  However,  I shall certainly not give him that assistance,  though
far from bearing him any malice.  I think of him as well as I did before
the fracas  ;  for however his pride of indifl^erence urged him so to fly out,
it is evident he could half murder himself with self-anger that he has given
any cause of displeasure.

Friday. — Miss Thrale,  Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.  Crutchley,  and myself,  went
to town  ;  and having set down Dr.  Johnson at his own house,  we went to
Bond Street for Miss Owen,  and proceeded to the exhibition.  I think I
need not describe the pictures.

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  231

Miss Owen returned with us to Streatham  ;  Mr.  Crutchley recovered his
spirits,  and we all did very well.  But in the afternoon,  just as we had
finished tea,  Mr.  Crutchley said to Mrs.  Thrale, —

"  Ma'am,  I must beg a private conference with you."

"  With me V cried she  ;  "  I thought now I had parted with my brew-
house,  all our conferences were over."

"  No,"  said he,  "  one more,  just to take leave of them."

Away they Avent,  and when they returned he said it was something
about Queeny,  who,  however,  never inquired what.  I should not have
mentioned this,  but that the next morning —

Saturday — Mrs.  Thrale,  who sleeps in the next room to mine,  called
me to her bedside,  and said —

"  Now,  my dearest Tyo,*  you know not how I hate to keep from you
anv thin<T-.  Do you love me well enouirh to bear something you will mor-
tally dislike,  without hating me for it  ?"

"  What on earth coidd I hate you for?"  cried I.

"  Nay,  'tis no fault of mine  ;  but still it is owing to me,  and I dread to
tell you lest it should make you sorry for your kindness to me."

I was quhe out of breath at this preparation ;  and though I warmly and
truly,  I am sure,  protested that nothing upon earth could lessen my affec-
tion for her,  I was really afraid to ask what was next to follow.

"  I am as sorry,"  continued she,  "  as I can live,  that any thing should
give you any disturbance,  but most especially any thing that relates to nie.
I would give you,  if I could,  nothing but pleasure,  for I am sure I receive
nothing else from you.  Pray,  then,  don't let any malice,  or impertinence,
or ridicule,  make you hate me  ;  for I saw,  and you know told you long ago,
the world would be ill-natured enough to try to part us ;  but let it not suc-
ceed, for it is worth neither of our attentions."

"  On 7ny part,  I am sure,  it can not succeed,  cried I more and more
alarmed  ;  "  for I am yours for ever and for ever,  and now almost whether
I will or not."

"  1 hope so,"  cried she,  "  for I am sure no one can love you more  ;  and I
am sorry,  and grieved,  and enraged that your affection and kindness for me
should iDring you any uneasiness.     We are all sorry,  indeed  ;  Queeny is

very sorry,  and Mr.  Crutchley is very sorry "

''  You make me more and more afraid,"  said I ;  "  but pray tell me what
it all means 1"

"  Why you know Mr.  Crutchley yesterday called me out of the room to tell
me a secret ;  well,  this was to show me a paragraph he had just read in the
newspaper,  '  And do,  ma'am,'  says he,  '  have the newspaper burnt,  or put
somewhere safe out of Miss Burney's way ;  for I am sure it will vex her
extremely.' "

Think if this did not terrify me pretty handsomely.  I turned sick as death.
She gave me the paper,  and I read the following paragraph  :

"  Miss Burney,  the sprightly writer of the elegant novel,  '  Evelina,'  is
now domesticated with Mrs.  Thrale,  in the same manner that Miss More is
with Mrs.  Garrick,  and Mrs.  Carter with Mrs.  Montagu."

The preparation for this had been so very alarming,  that little as I liked
it,  I was so much afraid of something still worse,  that it really was a relief

*  When Lieutenant Burney accompanied Captain Cook to Otaheite,  each of the
EngUsh sailors was adopted as a brother by some one of the natives.  The ceremony
consisted in rubbing noses together,  and exchanging the appellation of Tt^o or 7oro,
which signified chosen friend.  This title was sometimes playfully given to Miss Burney
by Mrs.  Thrale.

232 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

to me to see it ;  and Mrs.  Thrale's excess of tenderness and delicacy about
it was such as to have made me amends for almost any thing.  I promised,
therefore,  to take it like a man  ;  and,  after thanking her with the sincerest
gratitude for her infinite kindness,  we parted to dress.

It is,  however,  most insufferably impertinent to be thus dragged into print,
notwithstanding every possible effort and caution to avoid it.  There is
nothing,  merely concerning myself,  that can give me greater uneasiness  ;
for there is nothing I have always more dreaded,  or more uniformly endea-
voured to avoid.

I think myself,  however,  much obliged to Mr.  Crutchlcy for his very
good-natured interference and attempt to save me this vexation,  which is an
attention I by no means expected from him.  He has scolded Mrs.  Thrale,
since,  she says,  for having told me,  because he perceived it had lowered my
spirits  ;  but she thought it most likely I should hear it from those who would
tell it me with less tenderness,  and,  therefore,  had not followed his advice.

Sunday. — We had Mr.  and Mrs.  Davenant here.  They are very lively
and agreeable,  and I like them more and more.  Mrs.  Davenant is one of
the saucy women of the ton^  indeed  ;  but she has good parts,  and is gay and
entertaining  ;  and her sposo,  who passionately adores her,  though five years
her junior,  is one of the best-tempered and most pleasant-charactered young
men imaginable.

I had new specimens to-day of the oddities of Mr.  Crutchley,  whom I do
not yet quite understand,  though I have seen so much of him.  In the course
of our walks to-day,  we chanced,  at one time,  to be somewhat before the
rest of the company,  and soon got into a very serious conversation  ;  though
we began it by his relating a most ludicrous incident which had happened to
him last winter.

There is a certain poor wretch of a villanous painter,  one Mr.  Lowe,  who
is in some measure under Dr.  Johnson's protection,  and whom,  therefore,
he recommends to all the people he thinks can afford to sit for their pictures.
Among these,  he made Mr.  Seward very readily and then applied to Mr.
Crutchley.

"  But now,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  as he told me the circumstance,  "  I have
not a notion of sitting for my picture, — for who wants it  ?  I may as well
give the man the money without ;  but no,  they all said that would not do so
well,  and Dr.  Johnson asked me to give liini my picture.  '  And I assure
you,  sir,'  says he,  '  I shall put it in very good company,  for I have portraits
of some very respectable people in my dining-room.'  *  Ay,  sir,'  says I,
'  that's sufficient reason why you should not have mine,  for I am sure it has
no business in such society.'  So then Mrs.  Thrale asked me to give it to
her.  '  Ay,  sure,  ma'am,'  says I,  '  you do me great honour ;  but pray,  first,
will you do me the favour to tell me what door you intend to put it behind V
However,  after all I could say in opposition,  I was obliged to go to the pain-
ter's. And I found him in such a condition  !  a room all dirt and filth,  brats
squalling and wrangling,  up two pair of stairs,  and a closet,  of which the
door was open,  that Seward well said was quite Pandora's box — it was the
repository of all the nastiness,  and stench,  and filth,  and food,  and drink,

and oh,  it was too bad to be borne  !  and  '  Oh  !'  says I,  '  Mr.  Lowe,  I

beg your pardon for running away,  but I have just recollected another en-
gagement ;'  so I poked the three guineas in his hand,  and told him I would
come again another time,  and then run out of the house with all my
might."

Well,  when we had done laughing about this poor unfortunate painter,
the subject turned upon portraits in general,  and our conference grew very

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  233

grave  :  on his part it soon became even melancholy.  I have not time to
dialogue it;  but he told me he could never bear to have himself the picture
of any one he loved,  as,  in case of their death or absence,  he should go dis-
tracted by looking at it;  and that,  as for himself,  he never had,  and never
would sit for his own,  except for one miniature by Humphreys,  which his
sister begged of him,  as he could never flatter himself there was a human
being in the world to whom it could be of any possible value  :  "  And now,''
he added,  "  less than ever !"

This and various other speeches to the same purpose,  he spoke with a
degree of dejection that surprised me,  as the coldness of his character,  and
his continually boasted insensibility,  made me believe him really indifferent
both to love and hatred.

After this we talked of Mrs.  Davenant.

"  She is very agreeable,"  said I,  "  1 like her much.     Don't you 1"

*'  Yes,  very much,"  said he  ;  "  she is lively and entertaining;"  and then
a moment after,  "'Tis wonderful,"  he exclaimed,"  that such a thing as that
can captivate a man  !"

"Nay,"  cried 1,  "nobody more,  for her husband quite adores her."

"  So I find,"  said he ;  "  and Mrs.  Thrale says men in general like her."

"  They certainly do,"  cried 1 ;  "  and all the oddity is in you v/ho do not,
not in them who do."

"  May be so,"  answered he,  "  but it don't do for me,  indeed."

We then came to two gates,  and there I stopped short,  to wait till they
joined us;  and Mr.  Crutchley,  turning about and looking at Mrs.  Davenant,
as she came forward,  said,  rather in a muttering voice,  and to himself than
to me,  "  What a thing for an attachment !  No,  no,  it would not do for me  ! —
too much glare  !  too much flippancy!  too much hoop!  too much gauze!
too much slipper!  too much neck!  Oh,  hide it!  hide it ! — muffle it up!
muffle it up !     If it is but in a fur cloak,  I am for muffling it all up  !"

And thus he diverted himself till they came up to us.  But never,  I
believe,  was there a man who could endure so very few people.  Even Mrs.
and Miss Thrale,  of whom he is fond to excess,  he would rather not see
than see with other company  !

Is he not a strange composition  ?

Streatham,  June. — I found Dr.  Johnson in admirable good-humour,
and our journey hither was extremely pleasant.  I thanked him for the last
batch of his poets,  and we talked them over almost all the way.

Sweet Mrs.  Thrale received me with her wonted warmth of affection,  but
shocked me by her own ill looks,  and the increasing alteration in her person,
which perpetual anxiety and worry have made.  I found with her Mrs.
Lambarl and the Rev.  Mr.  Jennings,  a young brother of Sir Philip Gierke,
and Mr.  Seward.

Mrs.  Lambart I was much pleased with again meeting,  for she is going in
a few days to Brussels with her son,  in order to reside for two years.  Mr.
Jennings I was not much charmed with  ;  but he may be a good sort of man
for all that,  and for all he was somewhat overfacetious,  or would have been  ;
for Mrs.  Thrale,  after running to kiss me,  introduced me to Sir Philip's
brother,  who said, —

"  Pray,  ma'am,  may not that fashion go round  !"

"  No,  no,  there's no occasion for that,"  cried I.

"Oh,  yes,  there is,"  returned he;  "it may be an old-fashioned custom,
but I am an old-fashioned man,  and therefore I rather like it the better.
Come,  Mrs.  Thrale,  may I not be introduced  ^/'opt'r/^  to Miss Burney  ?"

"No,  no,"  cried she,  while I took care to get out of the way,  "  nobody
kisses Miss Burney in this house but myself."

19*

234 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

*'  I have ventured,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  "  to sometimes touch the tip of
Miss Burney's little fingernail  ;  but never farther."

I then gave Mrs.  Thrale some account of my visit to Mrs.  Byron,  which
turned the conversation;  and presently entered Mr.  Crutchley.

We had a good cheerful day,  and in the evening Sir Richard Jebb came  ;
and nothing can I recollect,  but that Dr.  Johnson forced me to sit on a very
small sofa with him,  which was hardly large enough for himself;  and which
would have made a subject for a print by Harry Bunbury that would have
diverted all London  ;  ergo,  it rejoiceth me that he was not present.

Wednesday. — We had a terrible noisy day.  Mr.  and Mrs.  Cator came
to dinner,  and brought with them Miss Collison,  a niece.  Mrs.  Nesbitt was
also here,  and Mr.  Pepys.

The long war which has been proclaimed among the wits concerning
Lord Lyttelton's  "  Life,"  by Dr.  Johnson,  and which a whole tribe of hluesj
with Mrs.  Montagu at their head,  have vowed to execrate and revenge,  now
broke out with all the fury of the first actual hostilities,  stimulated by long-
concerted schemes and much spiteful information.  Mr.  Pepys,  Dr.  Johnson
well knew,  was one of Mrs.  Montagu's steadiest abettors  ;  and,  therefore,
as he had sometime determined to defend himself with the first of them he
met,  this day he fell the sacrifice to his wrath.

In a long Ute-Ci-tite which I accidentally had with Mr.  Pepys before the
company was assembled,  he told me his apprehensions of an attack,  and
entreated me earnestly to endeavour to prevent it ;  modestly avowing he
was no antagonist for Dr.  Johnson  ;  and yet declaring his personal friend-
ship for Lord Lyttelton made him so much hurt by the  "  Life,"  that he
feared he could not discuss the matter without a quarrel,  which,  especially
in the house of Mrs.  Thrale,  he wished to avoid.

It was,  however,  utterly impossible for me to serve him.  I could have
stopped Mrs.  Thrale with case,  and Mr.  Seward with a hint,  had either of
them begun the subject;  but,  unfortunately,  in the middle of dinner it was
begun by Dr.  Johnson himself,  to oppose whom,  especially as he spoke
with great anger,  would have been madness and folly.

Never before have I seen Dr.  Johnson speak with so much passion.

"  Mr.  Pepys,"  he cried,  in a voice the most enraged,  "  I understand you
are offended by my  '  Life of Lord Lyttelton.'  What is it you have to say
against it?  Come forth,  man!  Here am I,  ready to answer any charge
you can bring !"

"  No,  sir,"  cried Mr.  Pepys,  "  not at present ;  I must beg leave to decline
the subject.  I told Miss Burney before dinner that I hoped it would not be
started.""

I was quite frightened to hear my own name mentioned in a debate which
began so seriously  ;  but Dr.  Johnson made not to this any answer  :  he re-
peated his attack and his challenge,  and a violent disputation ensued,  in which
this great but mortal man did,  to own the truth,  appear unreasonably furious
and grossly severe.  I never saw him so before,  and I heartily hopel never
shall again.  He has been long provoked,  and justly enough,  at ihe sneakmg
complaints and murmurs of the Lytteltonians ;  and,  therefore,  his long-
excited wrath,  which hitherto had met no object,  now burst forth with a
vehemence and bitterness almost incredible.

Mr.  Pepys meantime never appeared to so much advantage;  he preserved
his temper,  uttered all that belonged merely to himself with modesty,  and
all that more immediately related to Lord Lyttelton with spirit.  Indeed,
Dr.  Johnson,  in the very midst of the dispute,  had the candour and libe-
rality to make him a personal compliment,  by saying, —

"  Sir,  all thai you say,  while you are vindicating one who cannot thank

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  335

YOU,  makes me only think better of you than I ever did before.     Yet still I
think you do ine wrong,"  &c.  &c.

Some time after,  in the heat of the argument,  he called out —

"  The more my  '  Lord Lyttelton'  is inquired after,  the worse he will
appear ;  Mr.  Seward has just heard two stories of him,  which corroborate
all I have related."

He then desired Mr.  Seward to repeat them.  Poor Mr.  Seward looked
almost as frightened as myself at the very mention of his name ;  but he
quietly and immediately told the stories,  which consisted of fresh instances,
from good authorities,  of Lord Lyttelton's illiberal behaviour to Shenstone  ;
and then he flung himself back in his chair,  and spoke no more during the
whole debate,  which I am sure he was ready to vote a bore.

One happy circumstance,  however,  attended the quarrel,  which was the
presence of Mr.  Cator,  who would by no means be prevented talking him-
self, either by reverence for Dr.  Johnson,  or ignorance of the subject in ques-
tion ;  on the contrary,  he gave his opinion,  quite uncalled,  upon every thing
that was said by either party,  and that with an importance and pomposity,
yet with an emptiness and verbosity,  that rendered the whole dispute,  when
in his hands nothing more than ridiculous,  and compelled even the dispu-
tants themselves,  all inflamed as they were,  to laugh.  To give a specimen
— one speech will do for a thousand.

"  As to this here question of Lord Lyttelton I can't speak to it to the pur-
pose, as I have not read his  '  Life,'  for I have only read the  '  Life of Pope  ;'
I have got the books though,  for I sent for them last week,  and they came
to me on Wednesday,  and then I began them ;  but I have not yet read
'  Lord Lyttelton.'  '  Pope'  I have begun,  and that is what I am now reading.
But what I have to say about Lord Lyttelton is this here :  Mr.  Seward says
that Lord Lyttelton's steward dunned Mr.  Shenstone for his rent,  by which
I understand he was a tenant of Lord Lyttelton's.  Well,  if he was a
tenant of Lord Lyttelton's,  why should not he pay his rent?"

Who could contradict this?

When dinner was quite over,  and we left the men to their wine,  we hoped
they would finish the affair ;  but Dr.  Johnson was determined to talk it
through,  and make a battle of it,  though Mr.  Pepys tried to be off*  continually.

When they were all summoned to tea,  they entered still warm and vio-
lent. Mr.  Cator had the book in his hand,  and was reading the  "  Life of
Lyttelton,"  that he might better,  he said,  understand the cause,  though not
a creature cared if he had never heard of it.

Mr.  Pepys came up to me and said, —

"  Just what I had so much wished to avoid  !  I have been crushed in the
very onset."

I could make him no answer,  for Dr.  Johnson immediately called him off*,
and harangued and attacked him with a vehemence and continuity that quite
concerned both Mrs.  Thrale and myself,  and that made Mr.  Pepys,  at last,
resolutely silent,  however called upon.

This now grew more unpleasant than ever ;  till Mr.  Cator,  having some
time studied his book,  exclaimed, —

"  What I am now going to say,  as I have not yet read the  '  Life of Lord
Lyttelton'  quite through,  must be considered as being only said aside,  be-
cause what I am going to say "

•'  I wish,  sir,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  it had been all said aside  ;  here is too
much about it,  indeed,  and I should be very glad to hear no more of it."

This speech,  which she made with great spirit and dignity,  had an admir-
able effect.     Every body was silenced.     Mr.  Cator,  thus interrupted in the

236 DIARY A^'D LETTERS 1781.

midst of his proposition,  looked quite amazed ;  Mr.  Pepys was much grati-
fied by the interference  ;  and Dr.  Johnson,  after a pause,  said, —

"  Well,  madam,  you shall hear no more of it;  yet I will defend myself
in every part and in every atom  !"

And from this time the subject was wholly dropped.  This dear violent
doctor was conscious he had been wrong,  and therefore he most candidly
bore the reproof.

Mr.  Cator,  after some evident chagrin at having his speech thus rejected,
comfoi'ted himself by coming up to Mr.  Seward,  who was seated next me,
to talk to him of the changes of the climates from hot to could in the coun-
tries he had visited  ;  and he prated so much,  yet said so little,  and pro-
nounced his words so vulgarly,  that I found it impossible to keep my coun-
tenance, and was once,  when most unfortunately he addressed himself to
me,  surprised by him on the full grin.  To soften it otf as well as I could,
I pretended unusual complacency,  and instead of recovering my gravity,  I
continued a most ineffable smile for the whole time he talked,  which was in-
deed no difficult task.  Poor Mr.  Seward was as much off his guard as my-
self, having his mouth distended to its fullest extent every other minute.

When the leave-taking time arrived,  Dr.  Johnson called to Mr.  Pepys to
shake hands,  an invitation which was most coldly and forcibly accepted.
Mr.  Cator made a point of Mrs.  Thrale's dining at his house soon,  and she
could not be wholly excused,  as she has many transactions with him  ;  but
she fixed the day for three weeks hence.  They have invited me so often,
that I have now promised not to fail making one.

TnrRSDAY Morning. — Dr.  Johnson went to town for some days,  but
not before Mrs.  Thrale read him a very serious lecture upon giving way to
such violence ;  which he bore with a patience and quietness that even more
than made his peace with me ;  for such a man's confessing himself wrong
is almost more amiable than another man being steadily right.

Friday,  June 14th. — We had my dear father and Sophy Streatfield,
who,  as usual,  was beautiful,  caressing,  amiable,  sweet,  and — fatiguing.

Sunday,  June 16tii. — This morning,  after church,  we had visits from
the Pitches,  and afterwards from the Attorney-General and Mrs.  Wallace,
his wife,  who is a very agreeable woman.  And here I must give you a little
trait of Mr.  Crutchley,  whose solid and fixed character I am at this moment
unable to fathom,  much as I have seen of him.

He has an aversion,  not only to strangers,  but to the world in general,
that I never yet saw quite equalled.  I at first attributed it to shyness,  but I
now find it is simply disgust.  To-day at noon,  while I was reading alone
in the library,  he came in,  and amused himself very quietly in the same
manner ;  but,  upon a noise which threatened an intrusion,  he started up,
and as the Pitches entered,  he hastened away.  After this,  the Wallaces
came,  from whom he kept equally distant ;  but when we all went out to
show the Attorney-General the hot-house and kitchen-gardens,  he returned,
I suppose,  to the library,  for there,  when we came back,  we found him read-
ing. He instantly arose,  and was retreating,  but stopped upon my telling
him in passing that his particular enemy,  Mr.  Merlin,  was just arrived  ;  and
then some nonsense passing among us concerning poor Merlin and Miss
Owen,  he condescended to turn back and take a chair.  He sat then,  as
usual when with much company,  quite silent,  till Mr.  Wallace began talking
of the fatigue he had endured at the birth-day,  from the weight and heat of
his clothes,  which were damask and gold,  belonging to his place,  and of the
haste he was in to get at the Queen,  that he might speak to her Majesty,  and
make his escape from so insufferable a situation as the heat,  incommodious-
ness,  and richness of his dress,  had put him into.

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  237

"Well,  sir,"  interrupted Mr.  Crutchley,  in the midst of this complaint,
to which he had listened with evident contempt,  "  but you had at least the
pleasure of showing this dress at the levee  !"

This unexpected sarcasm instantly put an end to the subject,  and when
I afterwards spoke of it to Mr.  Crutchley,  and laughed at his little respect
for an  "  officer of the state" —

"  Oh  !"  cried he,  "  nothing makes me so sick as hearing such ostentatious
complaints  !  The man has but just got the very dress he has been all his
life working for,  and now he is to parade about its inconvenience  !"

This is certainly a good and respectable spirit,  though not much calcu-
culated to make its possessor popular.

We had afterwards a good deal of sport with Merhn,  who again stayed
dinner,  and was as happy as a prince  ;  but Mr.  Crutchley plagued me
somewhat by trying to set him upon attacking me ;  which,  as I knew his
readiness to do better than I chose to conless,  was not perfectly to my taste.
Once,  when Piozzi was making me some most extravagant compliments,
upon Heaven knows what of accomplishments and perfections,  which he
said belonged to the  ^hoiefamille Borni^  and was challenging me to speak
to him in Italian,  which I assured him I could not do.  Merlin officiously
called out, —

"  O,  je vous assure.  Mile.  Burney n'ignore rien ;  mais elle est si modeste
qu'elle ne veut pas,  c'est a dire,  parler."

And soon after,  when a story was told of somebody's sins^  which I have
forgotten.  Merlin encouraged again by some malicious contrivance of Mr.
Crutchley 's to address himself to me,  called out aloud,  and very malapropos^
"  Pour Mile.  Burney,  c'est une demoiselle qui n'a jamais peche du tout."

"  No,  I hope not,"  said I,  in a low voice to Miss Thrale,  while they were
all holloaing at this oddity ;  "  at least,  if I had,  I think I would not coyifess^

"  Tell him so,"  cried Mr.  Crutchley.

"  No,  no,"  cried I,  "  pray let him alone."

"  Do you hear,  Mr.  Merlin,"  cried he then aloud  ;  "  Miss Burney says if
she has sinned,  she will not confess."

"  O,  sir  !"  answered Merlin,  simpering,  "  for the modest ladies,  they never
do confess,  because,  that is,  they have not got nothing to confess."

During the dessert,  mention was made of my father's picture,  when this
ridiculous creature exclaimed, —

"  Oh  !  for that picture of Dr.  Burney,  Sir Joshua Reynhold has not taken
pains,  that is,  to please me  !  I do not like it.  Mr.  Gainsborough has done
one much more better of me,  which is very agreeable indeed.  I wish it
had been at the Exhibition,  for it would have done him a great deal of
credit indeed."

There was no standing the absurdity of this  "  agreeable"  and we all
laughed heartily,  and Mrs.  Thrale led the way for our leaving the room.

"  Oh  !"  cried Merlin,  half piqued,  and half grinning from sympathy,  "  I
assure you there is not nothing does make me so happy,  that is,  as to see
the ladies so pleased  !"

Monday,  June llrii. — There passed,  some time ago,  an agreement be-
tween Mr.  Crutchley and Mr.  Seward,  that the latter is to make a visit to
the former,  at his country-house in Berkshire ;  and to-day the time was
settled  :  but a more ridiculous scene never was exhibited.  The host elect
and the guest elect tried which should show least expectation of pleasure
from the meeting,  and neither of them thought it at all worth while to disguise
his terror of being weary of the other.  Mr.  Seward seemed quite melan-
choly and depressed in the prospect of making,  and Mr.  Crutchley absolutely

238 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

miserable in that of receiving,  the visit.  Yet nothing so ludicrous as the
distress of both,  since nothing less necessary than that either should have
such a punishment inflicted.  I cannot remember half the absurd things that
passed  ;  but a few,  by way of specimen,  I will give.

"  How long do you intend to stay with me,  Seward?"  cried Mr.  Crutchley  ;
"  how long do you think you can bear it !"

"  O,  I don't know  ;  I shan't fix,"  answered the other  :  "just as I find it."

"  Well,  but — when shall you come 1 Friday or Saturday 1 I think
you'd better not come till Saturday."

"  Why yes,  I believe on Friday."

"  On Fridav  !  Oh,  vou'U have too much of it !  what shall I do with
youl"

"  Why on Sunday we'll dine at the Lyells.  Mrs.  Lyell is a charming
woman ;  one of the most elegant creatures I ever saw."

"  Wonderfully so,"  cried Crutchley  ;  "  I like her extremely — an insipid
idiot !  She never opens her mouth but in a whisper  ;  I never heard her
speak a word in my life.  But what must I do with you on Monday  ?  will
you come away  ?"

"  Oh,  no ;  I'll stay and see it out."

"  Why,  how long shall you stay  ?  Why I must come away myself on
Tuesday."

"01 shan't settle yet,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  very drily.  "  I shall put up
six shirts,  and then do as I find it."

"  Six shirts  !"  exclaimed Mr.  Crutchley  ;  and then,  with equal dryness
added — "  Oh,  I suppose you wear two a-day."

And so on.

CHAPTER XI.
1781.

Streatham Diary continued — Dr.  Johnson — The Rival Duchesses,  Rutland and Devon-
shire— Happiness and Misery — Nobody dies of Grief — Fox-hunting Mania — Table-
talk on Indecision — Sherlock's Letters — Pride and Humility — A Discussion on Vanity
— Delicate Distinctions — Vanity and Pride — Merlin,  the Mechanician — Hunting Idiots
— Anecdote — Raillery — Johnson's Lives — Pope and Martha Blount — An Amateur Phy-
sician— Cure for Indigestion — An Act of Generosity — Despondency — The Inefficacy
of Worldly Goods to give Happiness — Sacchini — His Improvidence — His Exquisite
Singing — A tete-a-tete — Pride or no Pride — Dr.  Burney — Signs of Long Life — Ima-
ginary Evils — A Dinner Party — Montagu Burgoyne — Dr.  Johnson — His Generosity
— The Amende Honorable — Mr.  Pepys — A New Acquaintance — An Irish Member—
A Strange Mixture — A Caricature of a Caricature — Boswell — A Character — V^olubility
— An Irish Rattle — Mr.  Seward's Mode of finding a Cicerone.

DIARY CONTINUED.

Streatham,  June 25. — I sent you off a most sad morsel,  my dearest Susy,
but receiving no news of James had really so much sunk me,  that I could
hardly support my spirits with decency.  Nothing better has happened
since  ;  but as all help of evil is out of my power,  I drive from my mind the
apprehension of it as much as I am able,  and keep,  and will keep,  my
fears and horrors in as much subjection as possible.  You will let me
know,  I am sure,  when you get any intelligence,  and you will,  I earnestly
hope,  keep your mind quiet till it arrives.  There is never such a superfluity
of actual happiness as to make it either rational or justifiable to feed upon

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  239

expected misery.  That portion of philosophy which belongs to making the
most of the present day,  grows upon me strongly ;  and,  as I have sutiered
infinitely from its neglect,  it is what I most encourage,  and indeed,  require.
I will go on with a little journalizing,  though I have now few things,  and
still fewer people,  to mention.

Wednesday,  June 26. — Dr.  Johnson,  who had been in town some
days,  returned,  and Mr.  Crutchley came also,  as well as my father.  I did
not see the two latter till summoned to dinner ;  and then Dr.  Johnson
seizing my hand,  while with one of his own he gave me a no very gentle
tap on the shoulder,  half droUy and half reproachfully called out, —

"  Ah,  you little baggage,  you  !  and have you known how long I have
been here,  and never to come to me  ?"

And the truth is,  in whatever sportive mode he expresses it,  he really
likes not I should be absent from him half a minute whenever he is here,
and not in his own apartment.

Mr.  Crutchley said he had just brought Mr.  Seward to town in his
phaeton,  alive.  He gave a diverting account of the visit,  which I fancy
proved much better than either party pretended to expect,  as I find Mr.  '
Seward not only went a day sooner,  but stayed two days later,  than was
proposed ;  and Mr.  Crutchley,  on his part,  said he had invited him to repeat
his visit at any time when he knew not in what other manner  "  to knock
down a day or two."  What curious characters these are  !  Mr.  Crutchley,
however,  continues the least fathomable,  not only of these,  but of all the
men I have seen.  I will give you,  therefore,  having,  indeed,  nothing better
to offer,  some further specimens to judge of.

Dr.  Johnson,  as usual when here,  kept me in chat with him in the library
after all the rest had dispersed  ;  but when Mr.  Crutchley returned again,  he
went up-stairs,  and,  as I was finishing some work I had in hand,  Mr.
Crutchley,  either from civility or a sudden turn to loquacity,  forbore his
books,  to talk.

Among other folks,  we discussed the two rival duchesses,  Rutland and
Devonshire.  "  The former,"  he said,  "  must,  he fancied,  be very weak
and silly,  as he knew that she endured being admired to her face,  and com-
plimented perpetually,  both upon her beauty and her dress  :"  and when I
asked whether he was one who joined in trying her —

"  Me  !"  cried he  ;  "  no,  indeed  !  I never complimented any body  ;  that
is,  I never said to any body a thing I did not think,  unless I was openly
laughing at them,  and making sport for other people."

"  Oh,"  cried I,  "  if every body went by this rule,  what a world of con-
versation would be curtailed  !  The Duchess of Devonshire,  I fancy,  has
better parts."

"  Oh yes  ;  and a fine,  pleasant,  open countenance.  She came to my
sister's once,  in Lincolnshire,  when I was there,  in order to see hare-
hunting,  which was then quite new to her."

"  She is very amiable,  I believe,"  said I ;  "  for all her friends love and
speak highly of her."

"  Oh,  yes,  very much so  ;  perfectly good-humoured and unaffected.  And
her horse was led,  and she was frightened ;  and we told her that was the
hare,  and that was the dog ;  and the dog pointed at the hare,  and the hare
ran away from the dog;  and then she took courage,  and then she was
timid  ; — and,  upon my word,  she did it all very prettily  !  For my part,  I
liked it so well,  that in half an hour I took to my own horse,  and rode
away."

Afler this,  we began more seriously to talk upon happiness and misery ;

240 DIARY A^'D LETTERS 1781.

and I accused him of having little sense of either,  from the various strange
and desperate speeches which he is continually making ;  such as those I
told you,  of his declaring he cared not if he was to be shut up in the
Exchequer for the rest of his life  ;  and as to Mrs.  Plumbe — the stupidest of
all women — he had as lieve as not pass the rest of his days with her :  and
during this last visit,  when the horrors of a convent were enumerating by
Mrs.  Thrale,  he asserted that there was nothing but prejudice in preferring
any other mode of life,  since every mode was,  in fact,  alike.

"  Well,"  said he,  "  and custom will make any thing endured  ;  though a
great deal of all this must be given to mere talk without meaning ;  for as to
living with Mrs.  Plumbe,  I protest I would not spend an hour with her to
save me from ruin,  nor with any body I did not like.  I cannot even make
common visits to people unless I like them.  But the few I do like,  perhaps
nobody ever Hked equally.  I have,  indeed,  but one wish or thought about
them ;  and that is,  to be with them not only every day but every hour.
And I never change,  and never grow tired  :  nobody in the world has less
taste for variety."

Afterwards he asserted that nobody ever died of grief.  I did not agree
with him  ;  for I do,  indeed,  believe it is a death but too possible.

"  I judge,"  said he,  "  as people are too apt to judge,  by myself;  I am
sure I have no affections that can kill me."

"  I can easily believe that,"  said I,  "  and I fancy very few people have  ;
but,  among them,  I certainly never number those who settle themselves into
a philosophic coldness and apathy that renders all things equal to them,  and
the convent or the Exchequer the same as any other places."

"  Why,  a little use would make them so,"  said he,  laughing.  "  How-
ever, I believe I have had as much delight 07ie way as any man breathing  ;
and that is,  in hunting.  I have pursued that with an enthusiasm that has
been madness.  I have been thrown from my horse and half killed,  and
mounted her again and gone on.  I have been at it till every one has been
tired out ;  but myself never.  I have jumped from my horse to catch a dirty
hound in my arms and kiss it !"

"  Well,"  cried I,  "  and does this last  ?"

"  Why,  no,"  cried he,  "  thank Heaven  !  not quite so bad now.  To be
sure,  'tis the most contemptible delight that ever man took,  and I never
knew three men in the world who pursued it with equal pleasure that were
not idiots.  Those,  however,"  said he afterwards,  "  are,  I believe,  the most
happy who have most affections;  even the pain of such has pleasure with it."

This from a man whose evident effort is to stifle every affection,  nay,
every feeling of the soul !

"  I do not,"  continued he,  "  believe that any grief in the world ever
outlasted a twelvemonth."

"  A twelvemonth,"  said I,  "  spent in real sorrow is a long,  long time
indeed.     I question myself if it almost can last or be supported longer."

After this,  upon my saying I supposed him hardly a fair judge of afflic-
tion, as I believed him a man determined to extinguish every feeling that
led to it,  he grew very unexpectedly grave and communicative,  and told me
he had had two calamities as heavy and as bitter as any body could have
or could feel.

"  And yet,"  said he,  "  I found I got the better of them.  I was ill — I
lost my appetite — I could not sleep — I had a fever  ;  yet in time all these
complaints were gone,  and I got well,  and lived on much as usual."

One of these calamities he then explained to have been the loss of his
mother,  whom I find he quite adored  ;  and he seems still to wonder how

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  241

he survived her.  The other he seemed half incHned to mention,  but I did
not venture to lead to it,  as it occurred to me that it was possibly an affair of
the heart ;  in which,  if,  notwithstanding all his assertions of ignorance of
la hclle 2')assio7ij he has had a disappointment,  I think much of the strange-
ness of his character accounted for.

At dinner he appeared in his riding dress,  prepared for his journey ;  and,
during the dessert,  his phaeton was announced.  Mrs.  Thrale at that time
had stepped out of the room.  He soon after called Miss Thrale aside,  and
proposed taking her two sisters,  Susan and Sophy,  who are still at home
for the holidays,  a ride in his phaeton  !  He bid her mention it to her mother,
saying,  that if she liked,  he would defer going till next morning,  that he
might give the little girls this frolic.

Mrs.  Thrale instantly returned,  and,  thanking him for his good-nature,
most readily agreed to the proposal ;  though she could not but laugh at it,
after his sullen refusal to stay at her request.

Friday. — The moment breakfast was over,  Mr.  Crutchley arose,  and
was taking leave  ;  but Mrs.  Thrale told him,  with an arch laugh,  he had
better stay,  for he would not get mended by going.  He protested,  however,
that he must certainly go home.

"  And why V cried she  ;  "  what do you go for 1"

"  Nay,"  cried he,  hesitating,  "  I don't know,  I am sure  !"

"  Never mind him,  madam,"  cried Dr.  Johnson  ;  "  a man who knows not
why he goes,  knows not why he stays  ;  therefore never heed him."

"  Does any body expect you?"  said Mrs.  Thrale.  "  Do you want to see
any body  '/"

"  Not a soul !"

"  Then why can't you stay  ?"

"  No  ;  I can't stay now  ;  I'll meet you on Tuesday."

"  If you know so little why you should either go or stay,"  said Dr.  John-
son, "  never think about it,  sir  ;  toss up — that's the shortest way.  Heads
or tails  ! — let that decide."

"No,  no,  sir,"  answered he;  "  this is but talk,  for I cannot reduce it to
that mere indifference in my own mind."

"  What !  must you go,  then f said Mrs.  Thrale.

"  I must go,"  returned he,  "  upon a system of economy."

"  What !  to save your horses coming again V

"  No;  but that 1 may not weary my friends quite out."

"Oh,  your friends are the best judges for themselves,"  said Mrs.  Thrale ;
"  do you think you can go any where that your company will be more
desired?"

"  Nay,  nay,"  cried Dr.  Johnson,  "  after such an excuse as that,  your
friends have a right to practise Irish hospitality,  and lock up your bridle."

The matter was still undecided when Mrs.  Thrale called him to walk out
with her.

In about two hours,  and when I thought he was certainly gone,  he came
into the library,  where I was reading Sherlock's flippant but entertaining
letters,  and said, —

"  A good morning to you,  ma'am."

«  Are you going at last,"  cried I,  "  in all this heat  ?"

"No,"  cried he ;  "I am upon a new plan now.  I have sent my man to
Sunning Hill,  and I am going now to see if I can stop him ;  for,  in spite of
all my resolves,  I find there is no resisting the pleasures of this place."

"  There is,  indeed,  no resisting Mrs.  Thrale ;"  said I ;  "  but why,  indeed,
should you resist her V

VOL.  I.  21

242 DIARY AMD LETTERS 1781.

"  Oh,"  cried he,  in a tone half vexed,  half laughing,  "I wish with all my
heart I was at Jericho at this very moment."

He then wished me good-by,  and was off;  leaving me,  indeed,  little better
able to judge his actual character than the first day I saw him.

At dinner,  accordingly,  he returned,  and is now to stay till Tuesday.

*  *  *  *  *  *       '

I have very often,  though I mention them not,  long and melancholy dis-
courses with Dr.  Johnson,  about our dear deceased master,  whom,  indeed,  he
regrets incessantly  ;  but I love not to dwell on subjects of sorrow when I can
drive them away,  especially to you,  upon this account,  as you were so much
a stranger to that excellent friend,  whom you only lamented for the sake of

those who survived him.

******

The receipt of your second letter,  my dearest Susy,  has so much animated
and comforted me,  that I can now go back to give you a better account of
what passed here after the receipt of the first.

While we were at church on Sunday morning,  we heard a sermon,  upon
which,  by means of a speech I chanced to make,  we have been talking ever
since.  The subject w^as treating o{ humility^  and declaiming against jo/zVZe;
in the midst of which,  Mrs.  Thrale whispered, —

"This sermon is all against 2^5;  that is,  ybwr of us  :  Queeny,  Burney,
Susan,  and I,  are all as proud as possible — Mr.  Crutchley and Sophy are
humble enough."

"  Good heavens !"  cried I,  "  Mr.  Crutchley  ! — why,  he is the proudest
among us  !"

This speech she instantly repeated,  and just at that moment the preacher
said, — "Those who are the weakest are ever the soonest puffed up."

He instantly made me a bow,  with an expressive laugh,  that thanked me
for the compliment.     To be sure,  it happened most untimely.

As soon as we came out of church,  he called out, —

"  Well,  Miss Burney,  this is what I never can forgive  !  Am I so
proud  ?"

"  I am sure if you are,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale, "  you have imposed upon me,
for I always thought you the humblest man I knew.  Look how Burney
casts up her eyes!     Why are you so proud after all,  Mr.  Crutchley?"

"  I hope not,"  cried he,  rather gravely  ;  "  but I little thought of ever going
to Streatham Church to hear I was the proudest man in it."

"  Well,  but,"  said I,  "  does it follow you certainly are so because  /
say so?"

"  Why yes,  I suppose 1 am if you see it,  for you are one that see all
things and people right."

"  Well,  it's very odd,"  said Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  I wonder how she found you
out."

"  /wonder,"  cried I,  laughing,  "  how you missed finding him out."

"  Oh  !  worse and worse  !"  cried he.     "  Why there's no bearing this  !"

"I protest,  then,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  he has always taken me in  ;  he
seemed to me the humblest creature I knew ;  always speaking so ill of him-
self— always depreciating all that belongs to him."

"Why,  I did not say,"  quoth I,  "that he had more vanity than other
men;  on the contrary,  I think he has none."

"  W^ell distinguished,"  cried she  :  "  a man may be proud enough,  anrd yet
have no vanity."

"  Well,  but what 75 this pride  ?"  cried Mr.  Crutchley—"  what is it
shown in  ? — what are its symptoms and marks  ?"

"  A general contempt,"  answered I,  undaunted,  "  of every body and of
every thing."

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.  243

"  Well said,  Miss Burney  !"  exclaimed Mrs.  Thrale.  "  Why that's true
enough)  and so he has."

"A total indifference,"  continued I,  "of what is thought of him by others,
and a disdain alike of happiness or misery."

"  Bravo,  Burney  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  that's true enough  !"

"  Indeed,"  cried Mr.  Crutchley,  "  you are quite mistaken.  Indeed,
nobody in the world is half so anxious about the opinions of others;  I am
wretched,  I am miserable if I think myself thought ill of;  not,  indeed,  by
every body, — not by Mr.  Cator,  nor Mr.  Perkins,  nor Mr.  Barclay, — but
by those whose good opinion I have tried  : — there if I fail,  no man can be
more unhappy."

"  Oh,  perhaps,"  returned I,  "  there may be two or three people in the
world you may wish should think well of you,  but that is nothing to the
general character."

"  Oh,  no  !  many more.  I am now four-and-thirty,  and perhaps,  indeed,
in all my life I have not tried to gain the esteem of more than four-and-
thirty people,  but "

"  Oh,  leave out the thirty !"  cried I,  "  and then you may be nearer the truth."

"  No,  indeed  ;  ten,  at least,  I dare say I have tried for,  but,  perhaps,  I
have not succeeded with two.  However,  I am thus even with the world  ;
for if it likes me not,  I can do without it, — I can live alone  ;  and that,
indeed,  I prefer to any thing I can meet with  ;  for those with whom I like
to live are so much above me ;  that I sink into nothing in their society ;  so
I think it best to run away from them."

"  That is to say,"  cried I,  "  you are angry you cannot yourself excel,
— and this is not pride  !"

"  Why not,  indeed;  but it is melancholy to be always behind — to hear
conversation in which one is unable to join "

"  Unwilling,"  quoth I,  "  you mean."

"  No,  indeed,  but really unable  ;  and therefore what can I do so well as
to run home  ?  As to an inferior,  I hope I think that of nobody ;  and as to
my equals,  and such as I am on a par with.  Heaven knows I can ill bear
them  ! — I would rather live alone to all eternity  !"

This conversation lasted till we got home,  when Mrs.  Thrale said, —

"  Well,  Mr.  Crutchley,  has she convinced you  ]"

"  I don't know,"  cried I,  "  but he has convinced 7?ze."

"  Why how you smote him,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  but I think you
make your part good as you go on."

"  The great difference,"  said I,  "  which I think there is between Mr.
Seward and Mr.  Crutchley,  who in some things are very much alike,  is
this  :  Mr.  Seward has a great deal of vanity and no pride,  Mr.  Crutchley
a great deal of pride and no vanity."

"  Just,  and true,  and wise  !"  said dear Mrs.  Thrale,  "  for Seward is
always talking of himself,  and always with approbation ;  Mr.  Crutchley
seldom mentions himself,  and when he does,  it is with dislike.  And which
have  /,  most pride or most vanity  ?"

"  Oh,  most vanity,  certo  /"  quoth I.

"  And which have you  ?"  said Mr.  Crutchley to Queeny.

"  I don't know,"  answered she.

Some time after,  while I was again reading Sherlock's  "  Letters"  in the
library,  Mr.  Crutchley came in.

"  Well,  ma'am,"  cried he,  "  I have not forgiven this yet ;  though I con-
fess you somewhat softened the charge,  by all that distinction about the
pride and vanity  ;  but still I suppose even that was only pretence."

244 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

"  'No,  no,"  cried I,  "  all I said I think  ;  though all I think to be sure I
did not say  !"

And I went on with my book.

"  Well,"  cried he,  "  I shall take Johnson's  '  Life of Pope,'  and go to the
green bench in the wood,  and get it by heart.  If I have no ideas of my
own,  I can do nothing better than get some of his.  This part of pride I
am ready to own,  and I wish nothing more than to cultivate it — and that is
— from those who recede from Me,  to recede yet faster from tkeni.  This
much I would always wish to do."

"  I can very easily credit it,"  cried I.

"  Why,  I don't know neither,"  cried he  ;  "  I don't think I do it as much
as I ought to do  ;  I think I begin to grow more cringing,  and sneaking,
^nd worldly."

*'  How ridiculous  !"  cried I;  for certainly cringing,  sneaking,  and worldly,
are three things most distant from him.

"  But as to all this pride of which you accuse me,  I declare I believe no
man has so little."

"  Look here,"  interrupted I,  "  Mr.  Sherlock himself says he is  '  modcsie
a la exces.^     See but by that how people know their own characters."

This was a finishing stroke ;  for the vanity and flippancy and conceit of
Sherlock we have all been railing at ever since we took to reading his book,
which was about a week ago ;  and Mr.  Crutchley himself has been the
most struck with it.

He laughed and went off,  not,  I believe,  affronted,  but I fancy somewhat
disturbed,  which was more than I meant he should be,  though,  in fact,  all
I said I believe to be strictly true  ;  for though,  in the strange composition of
his character,  there is a diffidence of himself,  the most unaffected I ever,
except in Edward Burney,  saw, — a diffidence which makes the misery of
his life,  by inducing him to believe himself always de tro]:^, — he has yet a
contempt of almost all others,  which,  however free from vanity,  can pos-
sibly have no other spring than pride.

At dinner we had Sir Philip Gierke and Piozzi;  and Mr.  Crutchley told
me  "  my friend"  Mr.  Merlin was come.

"  Is he my friend  ?"  cried I ;  "  he says 7/011 are his particular enemy  !"

And this,  indeed,  is now become our hack speech to Mr.  Crutchley,
whose supposed enmity to Merlin is,  indeed,  a stretch of that absurd crea-
ture's imagination,  even more than usually ridiculous.

AVhen Merlin came in I gave the hint of your story about Sir Christopher
Whitchcott,  whom Mr.  Crutchley knows,  and says is  "  one of his hunting
idiots,"  and,  therefore,  he endeavoured to draw him into telling the tale,  by
talking of drinking.  ]\lerlin was quiet a long time,  but when at last Mr.
Crutchley said, —

"  In England no man is ever obliged to drink more than he pleases !"  he
suddenly called out,  and with a most rueful face, —

"  Oh,  certainly I beg your pardon  !  there is a person,  Sir Christopher
Whitchcott,  which certainly does do it?"

"  Do what,  Mr.  Merlin!"

"  Why certainly,  sir,  he does give,  that is,  a very great reprimand,  to
any person that does not drink as much as himself."

They then questioned him,  and he gave several of the particulars of his
disgrace  ;  though,  being separately dragged from him,  they were by no

means so diverting as when you told them me.

#  *  #  #  *  *

At supper we had only Sir Philip and Mr.  Crutchley.  The conversation
of the morning was then again renewed.

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  245

"  Oh  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  what a smoking did Miss Burney give Mr.
Crulchley  !"

"A smoking,  indeed!"  cried he.  "  Never had I such a one before!
Never did I think to get such a character  !     I had no notion of it."

"  Nay,  then,"  said I,  "  why should you,  now I"

»'But what is all this?"  cried Sir Philip,  delighted enough at any mis-
chief between Mr.  Crutchley and me,  or between any male and female,  for
he only wishes something to go forward,  and thinks a quarrel or dispute
next best to fondness and flirting.

"  VVhy,  Miss Burney,"  answered she,  "  gave Mr.  Crutchley this morn-
ing a noble trimming.  I had always thought him very humble,  but she
showed me my mistake,  and said I had not distinguished pride from vanity."

"  Oh,  never was I so mauled in my life !"  said he.

Enough,  however,  of this rattle,  which lasted till we all went to bed,  and
which Mrs.  Thrale most kindly kept up,  by way of rioting me from think-
ing, and which Mr.  Crutchley himself bore with the utmost good-nature,
from having noticed that I was out of spirits.

JMoNDAY,  July 2d. — In a tete-d-ttte I chanced to have with Mr.  Crutch-
ley, he again gave me reason to recollect the notion he lately put in my
head,  that he is still suffering in his own mind from some former bitter dis-
appointment.

We were talking over Johnson's  "Life of Pope,"  and after mutually
giving our opinions upon various passages,  and agreeing to prefer it alto-
gether to any other of the Lives,  he asked me if I had remarked how beau-
tifully he had written upon Pope's fondness for Patty Blount.  And then he
looked out the paragraph and read it r —

"  Their acquaintance began early;  the life of each was pictured on the
other's mind  ;  their conversation,  therefore,  was endearing,  for when they
met there was an immediate coalition of congenial notions.  Perhaps he
considered her unwillingness to approach the bed of sickness,  as female
weakness or human frailty  ;  perhaps he was conscious to himself of
peevishness and impatience,  or,  though he was offended by her inattention,
might yet consider her merit as overbalancing her fault ;  and,  if he had
suffered his heart to be alienated from her,  he could have found nothing
that might fill her place;  he could only have shrunk within himself;  it
\vas too late to transfer his confidence or his fondness."

The manner in which he read this paragraph was so strikingly tender
and feeling,  that it could not,  I think,  proceed merely from the words  ;  and
when he came to  "  he might consider her merit as overbalancing her fault,"
he exclaimed,  "  How impossible that a thing one loves can ever for a mo-
ment offend one!"  And when he had done it,  he read it all over again,
with yet more sensibility  ;  and,  not yet satisfied,  he repeated it a third time.

Poor Mr.  Crutchley  !  I begin to believe his heart much less stubborn
than he is willing to have it thought  :  and I do now really but little doubt
either that some former love sits heavy upon it,  or that he is at this moment
suffering the affliction of a present and hopeless one  :  if the latter is the
case,  Miss ,  I am next to certain,  is the object.  I may possibly,  how-
ever, be mistaken in both conjectures,  for he is too unlike other people to
be judged by rules that will suit them.

We had much literary chat upon this occasion,  w^hich led us to a gene-
ral discussion,  not only of Pope's Life,  but of all his works,  which we tried
who should outpraise.  He then got a book to take to his favourite bench,
and made me,  as he left the room,  an apology the most humble,  for having
interrupted or taken up any part of my time,  which could not otherwise

21*

246 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

have but been spent better ;  though again he assured me that he had not
yet forgiven my charge against him.

Two minutes after he came back for another book,  and while he was
seeking it Mr.  Evans came in..  They tiien both of them sat down to chat,
and Mr.  Seward was the subject.  Mr.  Evans said he had met him the day
before in the Park,  with Mrs.  Nesbitt and another lady,  and that he was
giving jMrs.  Nesbitt a prescription.  In his medical capacity he seems to
rise daily  :  'tis a most strange turn to take merely for killing ennui  !  But,
added to quacking both himself and his friends,  he has lately,  I hear,  taken
also to making a rather too liberal use of his bottle,  thinking,  I suppose,
that generous wine will destroy even the blue devils.  I am really sorry,
though,  for this,  as it may be attended with serious evil to him.

"  When he was at my place,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  "  he did himself up
pretty handsomely  ;  he ate cherries till he complained most bitterly of in-
digestion, and he poured down Madeira and Port most plentifully,  but with-
out relief.  Then he desired to have some peppermint-water,  and he drank
three glasses  ;  still that would not do,  and he said he must have a large
quantity of ginger.  We had no such thing in the house.  However,  he
had brought some,  it seems,  with him,  and then he took that,  but still to no
purpose.  At last,  he desired some brandy,  and tossed off a glass of that  ;
and,  after all,  he asked for a dose of rhubarb.  Then we had to send and
inquire all over the house for this rhubarb,  but our folks had hardly ever
heard of such a thing.  I advised him to take a good bumper of gin and
gunpowder,  for that seemed almost all he had left untried."

In the afternoon Mrs.  Byron came  ;  and Mr.  Crutchley,  who has a vio-
lent aversion to her,  notwithstanding she is particularly courteous to him,
contrived,  the moment he could,  to make his escape,  and hid himself till
she was gone.

Mrs.  Thrale's sweetness to me is inexpressible  ;  but the generosity she
is practising at this tim.e to Mr.  Perkins,  whom she does not like,  though
she thinks herself obliged to him,  exalts her character yet more highly than
her kindness to me.  Every thing in her power is she doing to establish
him comfortably in the brewhouse,  even to the lending all her own money
that is in the stocks.

The other morning she ran hastily into my room,  her eyes full of tears,
and cried, —

"  What an extraordinary man is this Crutchley  !  I declare he has quite
melted me!  He came to me just now,  and thinking I was uneasy I could do
no more for Perkins,  though he cared not himself if the man were drowned,
he offered to lend him a thousand pounds,  merely by way of giving pleasure
to me I"

His fondness,  indeed,  for Mrs.  Thrale and her daughter is the most
singular I have ever seen  ;  he scarcely exists out of their sight,  and holds
all others so^nferior to them,  that total solitude seems his dearest alterna-
tive to their society.  Dr.  Johnson,  indeed,  he honours and reveres  ;  and
myself I believe he very well esteems ;  but I question,  nevertheless,
whether he would desire to see either of us but for our connexion in this

house.

#  *  #  *  *

When Mrs.  Thrale came back,  she brought with her Mr.  Henry Smith,
who dined here,  as did also that ridiculous Merlin,  who contrived to divert
Miss Thrale and me with his inconceivable absurdities.

Wednesday,  July 4th. — Mrs.  Thrale was obliged to go to town again to-

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  247

day upon business with the executors,  and she brought back an account of
JMr.  Crutchley that has really given me much concern  ;  he was very far,  she
says,  from well,  and extremely feverish.  She begged him to stay in town
and have a physician,  but he declared he would go instantly to Sunning
Hill.  She then asked him to come hither and be nursed  ;  but that also he
declined  ;  and when she urged him to take great care of himself,  he said it
was of small matter whether he did or not,  since he cared not whether he
lived or died,  as life was of no value to him,  for he had no enjoyment of it.

How strange,  sad,  and perverse  !  With every possible means of happi-
ness, as far as speculation reaches,  to be thus unaccountably miserable.  He
has goodness,  understanding,  benevolence,  riches,  and independence,  and
with all these a something is wanting without which they are all as nothing.

He acknowledged to her readily that he was never so well pleased as
when at Streatham,  and spoke of its four inmates,  Mrs.  and JMiss Thrale,
Dr.  Johnson,  and F.  B.  in terms of praise bordering upon enthusiasm;  pro-
testing he believed the world contained not four other such folks,  and that
it was a society which made all other insupportable.  Yet,  he would not be
prevailed upon to come again,  though he knew not,  he said,  how he should
forbear,  before the week was out,  hanging or drowning himself!

In ten days'  time,  however,  he is obliged to be again in town,  in order to
meet Mrs.  Thrale at the brewhouse,  and then he expects his two sisters,  of
whom he is excessively fond,  to come from Lincolnshire on a visit to him
of some months.  His mind then will,  I hope,  be easier,  and more of that
happiness which his character deserves,  and his situation in life offers,  will

be enjoyed by him.

*  #  #  #  *

Streatham,  July 16th. — I will give you now,  my dear girls,  some little
account how the world goes with me ;  but,  in return,  if you do not both
communicate something,  I shall take it for the  "  hint of an insult,"  and not,
like poor Merlin,  proceed just the same as if no such  "  disagreeable com-
pliment" had been paid me.

You will believe I was not a little surprised to see Sacchini.  He is going
to the Continent with Piozzi,  and Mrs.  Thrale invited them both to spend the
last day at Streatham,  and from hence proceed to Margate.

Sacchini is the mere ghost of what he was,  in almost every respect ;  so
altered a man in so few a years I never saw.  I should not even have known
him had his name not been spoken ;  and the same ill health which has so
much impaired his person,  and robbed him of more beauty than any other man
ever possessed,  seems also to have impaired his mental faculties.  He is no
longer pleasant now,  even when he tries to be gay ;  and that good-breeding
we so much admired in him is degenerated into too much obsequiousness.
The change in his circumstances,  and his continual distress for money,  no
doubt have much contributed to this general decadence.

He is obliged to steal away privately,  lest his creditors sh<^ild stop him.
He means to try his fortune at Paris,  where he expects to retrieve it,  and
then to return to London,  and begin the world anew.

That a man of such extraordinary merit,  after so many years giving to
this country such works as must immortalize him,  should at last be forced
to steal away from it,  made me,  I must own,  feel more compassion for him
than a man whose own misconduct has been the sole occasion of his dis-
tresses has any fair claim to.  But to see talents which to all the world
can give such delight,  so useless to the owner,  is truly melancholy.

I pressed him very much to sing,  and,  though somewhat reluctantly,  he
complied.     He seemed both gratified and surprised by my civility and at-

248 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

tention to him,  which he must long have observed were withdrawn,  and
which nothing but my present pity for him would have revived.  He in-
quired after all the family,  and  "  Miss Susanne"  twice,  and reminded me of
many things which had passed upon the commencement of our acquaintance
with him — his one j^ea,  his German story,  and his Watchman and the
Olives ;  and we had much talk about sweet Millico.

The first song he sang,  beginning,  "  En quel amabil volto,"  you may
perhaps know,  but I did not  :  it is a charming mezza bravura.  He and
Piozzi then sung together the duet of the  "  Amore Soldato  ;"  and nothing
could be much more delightful  ;  Piozzi taking pains to sing his very best,
and Sacchini,  with his soft but delicious whisper,  almost thrilling me by his
exquisite and pathetic expression.  They then went through that opera,  great
part of  "  Creso,"  some of  "  Erifile,"  and much of  "  Rinaldo."

"  Sacchini also sung  "  Poveri affetti miei,"  and most divinely indeed.  I
begged him to sing  "  Dov'  e s'affretti per me la morta  ;"  he could hardly
recollect it,  and what he recollected he could hardly sing  ;  it required more
exertion than he can now use without pain and fatigue.  I have not,  how-
ever, had so much pleasure from music since Pacchierotti left England,  and
I am sure I shall have none like it till he again returns.

******

Monday,  July 30th. — Mrs.  Thrale ran out to meet me upon my return,
in the courtyard  ;  and then we explicated about the letters,  and the coach,
and so forth,  and,  as I came,  all went well.  Then,  leading the way into
the library,  she called out, —

"  ]\Ir.  Crutchley,  I have got my Tyo again  !"

I was somewhat surprised to find him here,  as I had only expected him
to meet the great party the next day  ;  but it seems he escorted his guests,
Mrs.  and Miss Thrale,  and Dr.  Johnson,  from Sunning Hill Park on Saturday,
and was not yet returned thither.

His park and house,  Mrs.  Thrale says,  are extremely fine  ;  his sister is
a sensible and unafllscted woman;  he entertained them quite magnificently;
and his character among his own people,  and in his own neighbourhood,  is
so high,  that she has left his place with double the esteem,  if possible,  that
she entered it.  He is,  indeed,  I believe sincerely,  one of the worthiest and
most amiable creatures in the world,  however full of spleen,  oddities,  and
minor foibles.

*******  *

In the afternoon we had walking and music;  and in the evening my
father and Mrs.  Thrale seated themselves out of doors,  just before the Blue-
room windows,  for coolth and chat;  and then Mr.  Crutchley came up to me,
and we had a very long conversation together.

I have not time to scribble it all ;  but it began by talking of the late
party- at his house at Sunning Hill;  and I told him — for I believed nothing
could give him greater pleasure — how well satisfied Mrs.  and Miss Thrale
had returned from it.  And then he said how hi^h an honour he had thought
it,  both from them and from Dr.  Johnson,  and added,  that he had never been
happier in his life than during these two days.

But as he has never forgotten,  and never,  I believe,  will forget,  the con-
versation J had with him so long ago about his pride^  and to which he has
alluded tAventy times a-day every time I have since been in his company,
so now,  though how I do not remember,  he presently,  and quite naturally
according to custom,  recurred to it.

"  Well,"  cried I,  "  1 can really hardly tell myself what made me say all
that stuff"  to you  ;  but this 1 must own,  had I then doubled its justice,  I
should not now,  it dwells so with you  !"

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  349

"  Oh,  but,"  cried he,  "  it does not dwell with me from consciousness,  but
only because I am afraid it must be true,  as you say it ;  for I lake it for
granted you know,  and must be right."

"  No,  no,"  cried I,  "  'tis merely from feeling it.  If I had said you were
very mean,  illiberal,  ill-natured,  you would never have thought of it again."

"Oh,  yes,  I should — I should have thought you knew what you said."

"  No,  I beg your pardon  ;  you would have known it was a mere jest,  and
have thought of it no more than if I had said you were but three feet high,
and kept a cobbler's stall."

"But you could not have said that,"  answered he,  laughing,  "  or if you
could,  you would not."

"  The other,  however,"  said I,  "  comes home,  and therefore you think so
much of it."

"  I hope,"  said he,  very seriously,  "  you have mistaken me."

"  Nay,"  cried I,  a little shocked at the unex[)ected impression my casual
and unpremeditated lecture had made,  "  you must remember I told you at
the same time,  that,  though what I said I thought^  I did not say all I
thought."

"But all,"  cried he,  "  that remains behind,  I take it for granted is so
much worse."

This was a net — but I saw it ;  so it was spread in vain.

"  My liking to live so much alone,"  continued he,  "  which is,  perhaps,
what seems proud,  proceeds merely from the great difficulty there is to meet
with any society that is good."

"But that difficulty,"  quoth I,  "is a part of the pride;  were you less
fastidious,  you would find society as other people find it."

"  Nay,  now,"  said he,  "  but even about horses I am not proud,"  [for you
must know he is very curious about his horses]  "  for I care not what looJdng
horse I have  ;  I never think of his appearance,  nor mind if half the people
I meet think how ill I am mounted."

"  Yes,"  returned I,  "  provided those who are judges know him to be
good."

"  Why yes;  I should not choose to ride a horse that people who knew
any thing of the matter would call a bad one."

"  Ah  !"  cried I,  reproachfully,  "  and this is not pride !"

This again was coming home,  and he had little to answer,  but said,  in a
laughing way, —

"  Now ril tell you when I can be happy enough  :  when I have nobody
at all at my place but workmen  :  and then I niggle after them up and down,
and say to myself — Well,  I think I am somewhat better than these!''''

"  How ridiculous  !"  cried 1 ;  "  but such speeches as these,  instead of
proving your humility,  are so absurd and overstrained,  they pass literally
for nothing."

Miss Thrale went away to have her hair dressed,  and I stayed in the
library reading.  Mr.  Crutchley,  in about half an hour,  returned there
again,  saying, —

"  So,  I have prevailed upon Miss Thrale at last to go and spend her time
better?"

"She's gone,"  said I,  "  to have her hair dressed,  if that is better."

"  I suppose it is what she likes,"  answered he.  "  Is that a long business
with you ladies?"

"  O yes,  terribly long  !  I only wish all our hair was combed as straight
as yours was some time ago,  frightful as I thought it."

We afterwards talked of my father,  whom he knows but very slightly;

250 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

he said of him,  however,  things more pleasing for me to hear than any
other subject in the world would have been;  for he told me he never saw
any man more likely to live long than Dr.  Burney.

"  He is strong-built,"  said he,  "  stout and well-knit.  I looked at him par-
ticularly, and never saw an appearance of more true muscular strength,
unincumbered with flesh  ;  for flesh and bulk have nothing to do with
strength.     I dare say he will be a very long liver."

♦'  And what may contribute to that,"  said I,  "  will be the equanimity of
his temper;  for,  with all his gaiety and sprightliness,  he has more i)atience,
and even cheerfulness,  than any body in the world.  And he is one of
those who makes no distresses for himself,  and those he meets with,
whether he will or not,  he drives away as soon as he possibly can."

I am not sure I did not mean this rather pointedly  ;  and so,  I believe,  he
took it,  for he exclaimed, —

"  How unlike me  !     I make every thing a wo  !"

"  That is nothing,"  cried I,  "  but the want of real evils.  Imaginary woes
always follow people who have no other."

"  Imaginary woes  !     Good Heaven  !"  he repeated,  half between his teeth.

A servant at the same time coming in to announce his phaeton,  he then
hoped I should keep well till he had the pleasure of seeing me again,  and
went away.

I have some notion he is half inclined to tell me all his affairs  ;  for,  when-
ever we are alone together,  he almost constantly leads to some subject that
draws out melancholy hints of his unhappiness,  though in company he
always pretends to laugh at all feeling,  and despise all misfortune.  Could
I do him any possible service,  I should be sincerely glad  ;  but as that is very
improbable,  I think such a confidence better avoided than sought.

At dinner we had a large party of old friends of Mrs.  Thrale.  Lady
Frances Burgoyne,  a mighty erect old lady of the last age,  lofty,  ceremoni-
ous, stiff',  and condescending.

Montague Burgoyne,  her son,  and as like any other son as ever you saw.

Mrs.  Burgoyne,  his wife,  a sweet,  pretty,  innocent,  simple young girl,  just
married to him.

Miss Burgoyne,  his eldest sister,  a good,  sensible,  prating old maid.

Miss Kilty Burgoyne,  a younger sister,  equally prating,  and not equally
sensible.

Mr.  Ned Hervey,  brother to the bride.

To these were added Mr.  Pepys and Sophy Streatfield  ;  the former as
entertaining,  the latter as beautiful as ever.  VVe had a very good day,  but
not of a writing sort.

Dr.  Johnson,  whom I had not seen since his Sunning Hill expedition,  as
he only returned from town to-day,  gave me almost all his attention,  which
made me of no little consequence to the Burgoynes,  who all stared amain
when they saw him make up to me the moment I entered the room,  and
talk to me till summoned to dinner.

Mr.  Pepys had desired this meeting,  by way of a sort of reconciliation
after the Lyttelton quarrel ;  and Dr.  Johnson now made amends for his
former violence,  as he advanced to him as soon as he came in,  and holding
out his hand to him,  received him with a cordiality he had never shown him
before.  Indeed,  he told me himself,  that  "  he thought the better of Mr.  Pepys
for all that had passed."  He is as great a soiiled man as a bodied one,  and,
were he less furious in his passions,  he would be demi-divine.

Mr.  Pepys also behaved extremely well,  politely casting aside all reserve
or coldness that might be attributed to a lurking ill-will for what had passed.
******

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  251

Streatham — My poor journal is now so in arrears,  that I forget wholly
the date of what I sent you last.  I have,  however,  minutes by me of things,
though not of times,  and,  therefore,  the chronology not being very impor-
tant, take them,  my dear girls,  promiscuously.  1 am still,  I know,  in August,
et voild tout.

We have now a new character added to our set,  and one of no small
diversion, — IMr.  Musgrave.  an Irish gentleman of fortune,  and member of
the Irish Parliament.  He is tall,  thin,  and agreeable in his face and figure;
is reckoned a good scholar,  has travelled,  and been very well educated.
His manners are impetuous and abrupt ;  his language is highflown and
hyperbolical ;  his sentiments are romantic and tender  ;  his heart is warm
and generous;  his head hot and wrong  !  And the whole of his conversa-
tion is a mixture the most uncommon,  of knowledge and triteness,  simplicity
and fury,  literature and folly  !

Keep this character in your mind,  and,  contradictory as it seems,  I will
give you,  from time to time,  such specimens as shall remind you of each of
these six epithets.

He was introduced into this liouse by Mr.  Seward,  with whom,  and Mr.
Graves of Worcester,  he travelled into Italy  :  and some years ago lie was
extremely intimate here.  But,  before my acquaintance was made at Streat-
ham,  he had returned to Ireland  ;  where,  about a year since,  he married
Miss Cavendish.  They are now,  by mutual consent,  parted.  She is gone
to a sister in France,  and he is come to spend some time in England by way
of diverting his chagrin.

Mrs.  Thrale who,  though open-eyed enough to his absurdities,  thinks
well of the goodness of his heart,  has a real regard for him  ;  and he quite
adores her,  and quite worships Dr.  Johnson — frequently declaring  (for what

he once says,  he says continually),  that he would spill his blood for him,

or clean his shoes, — or go to the East Indies to do him any good  !  "I am
never,"  says he,  "  afraid of him  ;  none but a fool or a rogue has any need
to be afraid of him.  What a fine old lion  (looking up at his picture)  he is !
Oh  !  I love him, — 1 honour him, — I reverence him  !  I would black his
shoes for him.     I wish 1 could give him my night's sleep!"

These are exclamations which he is making continually.  Mrs.  Thrale
has extremely well said that he is a caricature of Mr.  Boswell,  who is a
caricature,  I must add,  of all other of Dr.  Johnson's admirers.

The next great favourite he has in the world to our Doctor,  and the person
whom he talks next most of,  is Mr.  Jessop,  who was his schoolmaster,  and
whose praise he is never tired of singing in terms the most vehement, —
quoting his authority for every other thing he says,  and lamenting our mis-
fortune in not knowing him.

His third favourite topic,  at present is,  "  The Life of Louis XV". "  in 4
vols.  8vo.,  lately translated from the French  ;  and of this he is so extrava-
gantly fond,  that he talks of it as a man might talk of his mistress,  provided
he had so little wit as to talk of her at all.

Painting,  music,  all the fine arts in their turn,  he also speaks of in rap-
tures. He is himself very accomplished,  plays the violin extremely well,
is a very good linguist,  and a very decent painter.  But no subject in his
hands fails to be ridiculous,  as he is sure,  by the abruptness of its introduc-
tion, the strange turn of his expressions,  or the Hibernian twang of his pro-
nunciation, to make every thing he says,  however usual or common,  seem
peculiar and absurd.

When he first came here,  upon the present renewal of his acquaintance
at Streatham,  Mrs.  Thrale sent a summons to her daughter and me to come
down stairs.     We went together;  I had long been curious to see him,  and

252 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

was glad of the opportunity.  The moment i\Irs.  Thrale introduced me to
him,  he began a warm cloge of my father,  speaking so fast,  so much,  and
so Irish,  that I could hardly understand him.

That over,  he began upon this book,  entreating Mrs.  Thrale and all of us
to read it,  assuring us nothing could give us equal pleasure,  minutely relat-
ing all its principal incidents with vehement expressions of praise or abhor-
rence, according to the good or bad he mentioned ;  and telling us that he
had devoted three days and nights to making an index to it himself!

Then he touched upon his dear schoolmaster,  Mr.  Jessop,  and then
opened upon Dr.  Johnson,  whom he calles  "  the old lion,"  and who lasted
till we left him to dress.

When we met again at dinner,  and were joined by Dr.  Johnson,  the in-
cense, he paid him,  by his solemn manner of listening,  by the earnest reve-
rence with which he eyed him,  and by a theatric start of admiration every
time he spoke,  joined to the Doctor's utter insensibility to all these tokens,
made me find infinite difficulty in keeping my countenance during the whole
meal.  His talk,  too,  is incessant  ;  no female,  however famed,  can possibly
excel him for volubility.

He told us a thousand strange staring stories,  of noble deeds of valour
and tender proofs of constancy,  interspersed with extraordinary,  and indeed
incredible accidents,  and with jests,  and jokes,  and bon-mots,  that I am sure
must be in Joe Miller.  And in the midst of all this jargon he abruptly
called out,  "  Pray,  Mrs.  Thrale,  what is the Doctor's opinion of the Ameri-
can war  ?"

Opinion of the American war at this time of day !  We all laughed
cruelly  ;  yet he repeated his question to the Doctor,  who,  however,  made no
other answer but by laughing too.  But he is never affronted with Dr.  Johnson,
let him do what he will ;  and he seldom ventures to speak to him till he has
asked some other person present lor advice how he will take such or such a
question.

At night he left us,  and Mr.  Crutchley arrived,  who came to spend two
or three days,  as usual.  Sir Philip Gierke also was here ;  but I have no
time now to write any account of what passed,  except that I must and ought
to mention that Mr.  Crutchley,  in the presence of Sir Philip,  is always more
respectful to me than at any other time ;  indeed,  only then,  for he troubles
not himself with too much ceremony.  But I believe he does this from a
real delicacy of mind,  by way of marking still more strongly it was the
raillery,  not the object of it,  he w^as so strangely piqued about.

But I told you I thought I had secured his never more mentioning my
charge of his pride.  There I was mistaken,  as,  for his life,  he cannot for-
bear. The day he ended his visit.  Sir Philip also ended his,  having only
come from Hampshire for a few days  ;  and,  as I wanted much to go down
and see my sister,  Mrs.  Thrale ordered her coach,  and took us all thither
herself.

In our way Mr.  Crutchley,  who was in uncommon spirits,  took it in his
head to sing the praises of wine,  (though no man drinks less)  and after-
wards of smoking ;  Mrs.  Thrale all the time combating all he said.  Sir
Philip only laughing,  and I,  I suppose,  making faces.  At last he called
out, —

"  Look at  ]\Iiss Burney,  how she sits wondering at my impudence  !"

He expected,  I fancy,  I should contradict this ;  but not a word did I say :
so then,  with a little depit^  he added, —

"  I suppose,  now,  I shall have impude^ice added to the — the xanity you
gave my character before."

1731.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  353

This mistake I am pretty sure was a ivilfid one,  by way of passing for
only slightly remembering the accusation.

"Vanity  !"  cried I ;  "  when did I charge you with vanity  ?"

"  Well,  what was it then  \— prided

I said nothing ;  neither choosing to confirm what he has taken so
seriously to heart,  nor to contradict what I think as strongly as ever.

"  Pride and impudence  !"  continued he,  with a look at once saucy and mor-
tified— "  a pretty composition,  upon my life  !"

"  Nay,  nay,"  said I,  "  this is an addition of your own.  I am sure I
never called,  or thought,  you impudent."

It would be strange if I had ;  for,  on the contrary,  he is an actual male
prude  !

"  No,  no ;  she gave you nothing but the pride,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  she
left all the vanity for me !  Saucy that she is  !  So you have,  at least,  the
higher fault ;  for vanity is much the meaner of the two.  Lord Bacon says,
'  K beggar of bread is a better man than a beggar of a bow;  for the bread
is of more worth.'     So see if you are not best off."

"Me best off!"  cried he — "  no,  indeed ;  Miss Burney thinks better of
vanity than pride,  by her giving one to you and t'other to me."

To this,  again,  I would not speak  ;  for I could not well without a new
argument,  and the old one is so long remembered that I am determined to
have no more.

"  If Miss Burney,"  said he presently,  "  thought as well of me,  as of you,
I believe I should have reason to be very well contented.     Should not I  ?"

"  As well of you as of me  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale ;  "  why,  if ever I heard
such a speech  !  No,  indeed,  I hope not !  I have always heard her called
a very wise girl !"

*  *  *  *  *

Mrs.  Thrale set me down at home,  and I ran to dear Etty's,  and saw and
kissed her and her dear baby,  and promised to return to town soon to spend
a week with her.  Mrs.  T.  called for me again at three o'clock,  and I re-
turned to Streatham,  and I spent two days with only ourselves  ; — c'est a
dire.,  Mrs.  and Miss T.  and Dr.  Johnson,  who is so earnest to have me here
always,  that I assure you we know not how to break to him my intended
week's absence !  You may laugh if you please,  but I can tell you my impor-
tance with him seems continually increasing.      And seriously,  I am sure my

gratitude for his kindness goes on crescendo.,  in the same manner.

******

Well — it was,  I think,  Saturday,  August 25th,  that Mrs.  Thrale
brought me back.  But first,  we went together to see Sir Joshua's pictures,
which is always a feast to me,  and afterwards to see Pine's,  where is one of
Mrs.  Thrale herself;  not like,  I think,  but a mighty elegant portrait.  We
then took up Mr.  Crutchley,  who had come to hi*  town-house upon business,
and who accompanied us thither for a visit of three days.

In the eveninof Mr.  Seward also came.  He has been makins^  the western
tour,  and gave us,  with a seriousness that kept me continually grinning,
some account of a doctor,  apothecary,  or chemist,  belonging to every town
at which he stopped.  And when we all laughed at his thus following up
\\\Q faculty.,  he undauntedly said, —

I think it the best way to get information  ;  I know no better method to
learn what is going forward any where than to send for the chief physician
of the place ;  so I commonly consult him the first day I stop at a place
and when I have feed him,  and made acquaintance,  he puts me in a way,,
to find out what is worth looking at."

VOL.  I.  22

254 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

A most curious mode of picking up a cicerone  !

After this,  still pursuing his favourite topic,  he began to inquire into the
particulars of Mr.  Crutchley's late illness;  but that gentleman,  who is as
much in the opposite extreme,  of disdaining even any decent care of him-
self, as Mr.  Seward is in the other,  of devoting almost all his thoughts to
his health,  cut the matter very short,  and would not talk upon it at all.

"  But,  if I had known sooner,*'  said Mr.  Seward,  "  that you were ill,  I
should have come to see you."

"  Should you V cried Mr.  Crutchley,  with a loud laugh  ;  "  very kind,
indeed ! — it would have been charming to see you when I am ill,  when I
am afraid of undertaking you even when well  !"

Some time after Sophy Streatfield was talked of, — Oh,  with how much
impertinence !  as if she was at the service of any man who would make
proposals to her  !  Yet Mr.  Seward spoke of her with praise and tenderness
all the time,  as,  if,  though firmly of this opinion,  he was warmly her
admirer.  From such admirers and such admiration Heaven guard me  !
Mr.  Crutchley said but litttle ;   but that little was bitter enough.

"  However,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "  after all that can be said,  there is
n:»body whose manners are more engaging,  nobody more amiable than the
little Sophy ;  and she is certainly very pretty  ;  I must own I have always
been afraid to trust myself with her."

Here Mr.  Crutchley looked very sneeringly.

"  Nay,  'squire,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  "  she is very dangerous,  I can tell
you  ;  and if she had you at a fair trial,  she would make an impression that
w'ould soften even your hard heart."

"  No need of any further trial,"  answered he,  laughing,  "  for she has
done that already  ;  and so soft was the impression that it is absolutely all
dissolved  ! — melted quite away,  and not a trace of it left  !"

Mr.  Seward then proposed that she should marry Sir John Miller,  who
has just lost his wife  ;  and very gravely said,  he had a great mind to set
out for Tunbridge,  and carry her with him to Bath,  and so make the match
without delay  !

"  But surely,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  if you fail,  you will think yourself
bound in honour to marry her yourself?"

"  Why,  that's the thing,"  said he  ;  "  no,  I can't take the little Sophy
myself;  I should have too many rivals  ;  no,  that won't do."

How abominably conceited and sure these pretty gentlemen are  !  How-
ever, Mr.  Crutchley here made a speech that half won my heart.

"  I wish,"  said he,  "  Miss Streatfield was here at this moment to cuff
you,  Seward !"

"  Cuft*  me  !"  cried he.    "  What,  the little Sophy  !— and why  ?"

"  For disposing of her so freely.  I think a man deserves to be cuffed for
saying any lady will marry him."

I seconded this speech with much approbation.

Mr.  Crutchley then told us of a painter,  with whom he is well acquainted,
and to whom he has been very kind,  that professes the art of discovering
7}ioral characters from written ones ;  and he told us that if we would write
something,  he would carry the paper to the man,  and bring us word what
he had said of us without letting him know who we were.

Mrs.  Thrale immediately started up and wrote in a very fine hand, —

"  The character of the writer of this is earnestly desired."

Mr.  Seward was called upon next,  and proposed adding, —

"  The greatest secrecy must be depended upon."

But I objected to this mode,  because such sentences might help the con-

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  355

juror to our characters without much assistance  ;  whereas,  he ought to
decipher them merely from the handwriting.

Mr.  Crutchley then proposed that we should take some book,  and each
of us write two lines,  and then the man could have nothing to judge by
but our several scrawls.

"  Wisely said,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale ;  ^'  for judgment Mr.  Crutchley
excels us all."

We took,  therefore,  Mr.  Crabbe's  "  Library,"  and Mrs.  Thrale,  I\Ir.
Seward,  Miss Thrale,  and myself,  copied two lines each.  Mr.  Crutchley
put the paper in his pocket,  and promised to bring us an account of our-
selves on Monday.  I charged him repeatedly to be very honourable,  and
not make characters of us himself,  and then pretend to pass them off for
this painter's.  When I give you the characters,  you must judge yourself
whether he was faithful,  or only,  as I told him I expected he would,  took
the opportunity to give us all a smoking.

Sunday. — To these two gentlemen was added a third, — Mr.  Musgrave.
I did not see him till we all met in the dinner-parlour  ;  and then he im-
mediately addressed me with so vociferous a rapidity that I could not catch
above one word in ten of what he said ;  but I found his purport was to tell
me he had been at Worcester,  where he had seen my uncle,  and seen divers
of Edward's performances,  and he very warmly declared he would make a
very great and capital painter  ,•  and,  in the midst of this oration,  Mr.  Seward
very drily called out, —

"  Pray,  Musgrave,  whom are you talking of]"

"  Her cousin,"  cried he,  with the same eagerness,  "  ^liss Burney's cousin.
I assure you he will be so great a painter that "

"  Why,  when and where,"  interrupted  ]\Ir.  Seward,  "  are these Burneys
to stop  ?"

"  Now here,"  said  ?\Irs.  Thrale,  "  till they are tired ;  for they go on just
as long as they please,  and do what they please,  and are what they please."

"  Here,  ma'am,  is a mark of their power and genius,"  said Mr.  Mus-
grave, pointing to me  ;  "  and I assure you this young man is another.
And when I told old Mr.  Burney I thought so,  I assure you I thought he
would have wrung my arm out of joint."

"  Old Mr.  Burney V'  said Mrs.  Thrale ;"  pray,  do you call our 7/oif??g
Doctor's brother old Mr.  Burney I"

"  Oh,  ma'am,  I assure you I have the greatest respect for him in the
world  ;  he is a worthy old gentleman,  I assure you.  He and I shook
hands together for a quarter of an hour.  He was vastly pleased.  I told
him his son would be a great painter.  And,  indeed,  so he will.  He'll be
quite at the head."

"Ay,  how should he be Miss Burney's cousin else I"  said Mrs.  Thrale.

'•j\Iiss Burney will be so elated,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "if you go on thus
with all her family,  that she will not condescend to take notice of us."

"  Oh,  yes,  she will,"  said the literal Mr.  Musgrave  ;  "  where there is true
merit there is always modesty.  Miss Burney may hear praise without
danger."

I called for water,  munched bread,  and did what I could to pass the time;
but though Mr.  Musgrave made me laugh,  I found it pretty warm work to
sit all this.

In the evening,  Mr.  Seward,  who plays off  ]\Ir.  Musgrave most unmerci-
fully, called out to him, —

"  Musgrave,  how goes on your play  ?"

"  My play,  sir !"  cried he,  a little alarmed  ;  "  sir,  I assure you I have not
thought about it."

256 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

"  No ! — why,  I suppose you would have finished it in 3-our last fit of
sickness.  Do,  Musgrave,  pray go on with it when you are tied by the heel
next.     We'll get Miss Burney to write a prologue for it."

"  Miss Burney will do me a great deal of honour,"  said he,  not suspect-
ing he was laughed at,  "  if she will be so good as to look at it."

"And pray,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  "  what do you call it?"

"  Oh,  I shall beg the favour of Miss Burney to name it."

He then told us the plan and story of this comedy,  which was so trite,  and
yet sojiaming,  that I cannot imagine how any man can have read so much
to so little advantage as to suppose it could be listened to.

Mr.  Seward,  however,  protests he has altered it from what he originally
intended  ;  and no great mischief,  I think,  could cmy alteration do to such a
plan as Mr.  Seward says he had at first formed,  which was to make a
bishop be discovered by his own chaplain in a house of ill-fame 1 a
denouement he had devised for the purpose of making the bishop come doiun
with his money and consent for the marriage of his daughter,  the heroine
of the piece,  with the man of her choice  !

Monday. — We were to have Mr.  Cator and other company to dinner  ;
and all breakfast Mr.  Seward kept plaguing poor Mr.  Musgrave,  who is an
incessant talker,  about the difficulty he would have in making his part good
with Mr.  Cator,  who,  he assured him,  would out-talk him if he did not take
care.  And Mr.  Crutchley recommended to him to  "  wait for a sneeze,"  in
order to put in  ;  so that he was almost rallied into a passion,  though,  being
very good-natured,  he made light of it,  and it blew over.

Our company was Mr.  and Mrs.  Cator,  Mrs.  Byron and her daughter
Augusta,  Mr.  Jenkinson,  ]\Ir.  Lewis,  a friend who is on a visit at his house,
and the three gentlemen already here.

Mr.  Crutchley rode to town in the morning,  and told us at dinner that
he had been to the painter's for our characters,  but refused to let us know
what they were  ;  only telling us in general that Miss Thrale had fared the
worst.

"  I have written it all down,"  cried he  ;  "  and oh  !  what a noble trimming
is there for Queeny  !"

"  And pray,"  cried she  ;  "  how has Miss Burney fared  ?"

"  Oh  !  pretty well."

"  And SewaVd  ?"

"  Why pretty well,  too."

*'  And my mother  ?"

"  Why ill — very ill ; — but not so ill as you."

"  Upon my word  !     And what,  pray,  has he said of me  ?"

"  I have all the particulars upon a paper in my pocket."

I plagued him,  however,  without ceasing till he told me all the items  ;
which were —

Of Mrs,  Thrale :  That she was very unsteady in her affections,  a great
lover of pleasure,  and had no dislike to living in the country.

Of Mr.  Seward :  That he was a man quite without genius,  and that all
the accomplishments he possessed resulted from labour and application.

Of me :  That 1 was very steady,  apt to be sullen,  grave myself,  but fond
of those who were gay.

I think I did come pretty well off,  considering the villanous things said of
the rest ;  but I battled with him warmly the character of Mr.  Seward,  which
his calling  "  pretty well"  was very unjust,  as he has really more original
wit and humour than one man in five hundred.

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  257

In the middle of dinner I was seized v.-ith a violent laughing fit,  by see-
ing Mr,  Miisgrave,  who had sat quite silent,  turn very solemnly to Mr.
Seward and say,  in a reproachful tone, —

"  Seward,  you said I should be fighting to talk all the talk,  and here I
have not spoke once."

"  Well,  sir,"  cried Mr.  Seward nodding at him,  "  why don't you put in  ?"

"  Why,  I lost an opportunity just now,  when Mr.  Cator talked of climates  ;
I had something I could have said about them very well."

After this,  however,  he made himself amends;  for when we lefl the men
to their wine,  he began such a violent dispute with Mr.  Cator,  that Mr.
Jenkinson and Mr.  Crutchley left the field of battle,  and went out to join the
ladies in their walk round the grounds  ;  and that breaking up the party,  the
rest soon followed.

By the way,  I happened not to walk myself,  which was the most ludi-
crously noticed by Mr.  Musgrave ;  who,  while we were at tea,  suddenly
crossed the circle to come up to me,  and say, —

"  You did not walk,  Miss Burney 1"

"  No,  sir."

"  Very much in the right — very much in the right,  indeed  !  You were
studvinor  ?     Oh,  very ricrht !  never lose a moment !    Such an understanding

•^■^  •111"!

as yours it would be a shame to neglect ;  it ought to be cultivated every
moment."

And then he hurried back to his seat.

In the evening,  when all the company was gone but our three gentlemen,
Seward ,  Crutchley,  and Musgrave  ;  we took a walk round the grounds
by moonlight ;  and Mr.  Musgrave started with rapture at the appearance of
the moon,  now full,  now cloudy,  now clear,  now obscured,  every three
yards we moved.

We have had some extra diversion from two queer letters.  The first of
these was to Dr.  Johnson,  dated from the Orkneys,  and costing him  \s.  6d.
The contents were,  to beg the Doctor's advice and counsel upon a very
embarrassing matter ;  the writer,  who signs his name and place of abode,
says he is a clergyman,  and labours under a most peculiar misfortune,  for
which he can give no account ;  and which is, — that though he very often
writes letters to his friends and others,  he never gets any answers ;  he en-
treats, therefore,  that Dr.  Johnson will take this into consideration,  and
explain to him to what so strange a thing may be attributed.

He then gives his direction.

The other of these curious letters is to myself;  it is written upon fine
French-glazed and gilt paper.

"  Miss F.  Burney,

"  At Lady ThraWs^  Streatham,  Surrey,

"  Madam, — I lately have read the three elegant volumes of  '  Evelina,'
which were penned by you ;  and am desired by my friends who are very
numerous,  to entreat the favour of you to oblige the public with a fourth.

"  Now,  if this desire of mine should meet with your approbation,  and you
will honour the public with another volume  (for it will not be ill-bestowed
time),  it will greatly add to the happiness of,

"  Honoured madam,  a sincere admirer

"  Of you and  '  Evelina.' "
"  Snow Hill.

22*

258 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

Now don't our two epistles vie well with each other for singular absur-
dity 1 Which of them shows least meaning,  who can tell  ?  This is the
third queer anonymous letter I have been favoured with.  The date is more
curious than the contents  ;  one would think the people on Snow Hill might
think three volumes enough for what they are the better,  and not desire a
fourth to celebrate more Smiths and Branghtons.

Monday,  Sept.  3d. — Our solitude was interrupted by a visit from Mr.
Crutchley,  which afforded me as usual,  subject-matter for debate upon his
never-ending oddities.     Take the following patterns  : —

My dear Mrs.  Thrale had been ill of a rash for some days,  though not
confined,  and Sir Richard Jebb came this evening to see her.  He stayed
and drank tea with us,  and was,  as to me he always is,  very agreeable.
After having written for Mrs.  Thrale and given her his general directions,
he charged her very earnestly not to suffer her spirits to be agitated,  and to
be very careful to keep quiet.

When he was gone,  she repeated this in laughing,  and said,  "  I suppose
he meant I should not put myself in a Welsh passion,  and flame and spit."

"  Nay,  nay,"  cried Mr.  Crutchley,  "  tJuit you do all day long."

"  What !"  cried she,  going out of the room,  and not well hearing him,
while I turned round to laugh at his assurance.

"  Why Miss Burney,"  answered he,  "  says you always spit."

"  I !"  cried I,  amazed.     "  When did I say so  ?"

"  Why,  just this moment."

"  Mercy  !"  cried Miss Thrale,  "  that is too bad  !"

*'  Nay,  she said it,  I'll swear  !"  said he,  very coolly.

I only turned up my eyes at him,  and Miss Thrale followed her mother
out of the room.

"  Well,  now,"  said he,  very gravely,  "  did you say it,  or did you not 1"

"  Why not,  to be s"ure !"  returned I,  staring at his effrontery.

"  You did not say it  ?"

"  No  ;  you know I did not."

"  Nay,  I don't know for the tcorcls,  but you looked it,  I am sure,  and
that's the same.  I always hold it exactly the same.  I see,  indeed,  no dif-
ference between saying and looking."

"  Yes,  but I did 7iot look it ;  my look was only at you,  and marvelling
at your saying it."

"  Nay,  but you know very well that she does spit."

"  No,  indeed,  I don't ;  or if I do,  I know also,  and very certainly,  that it
is only when she is provoked."

•'*  Yes,  yes  ;  nobody,  I suppose,  does it  ■w??provoked  ;  but what will pro-
voke one will not provoke another ;  that is all the real difference."

I had no time to answer this,  as the dear spitter returned  ;  but I was all
amazement at his persisting in such an attack,  and insisting that I was of
the same mind.

*****

At dinner,  Dr:  Johnson returned,  and Mr.  Musgrave came with him.  I
did not see them till dinner was upon the table ;  and then Dr.  Johnson,
more in earnest than in jest,  reproached me with not coming to meet him,
and afterwards with not speaking to him,  which,  by the way,  across a
large table,  and before company,  I could not do,  were I to be reproached
ever,  so solemnly.  It is requisite to speak so loud in order to be heard by
him,  and every body listens so attentively for his reply,  that not all his
kindness will ever,  I believe,  embolden me to discourse with him willingly
except tite-a-ttte,  or only with his family or my own.

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  259

Mr.  Crutchley,  who has more odd spite in him than all the rest of the
world put together,  enjoyed this call upon me,  at which Mr.  Musgrave no
less wondered  !  He seemed to think it an honour that raised me to the
highest pinnacle of glory,  and started,  and lifted up his hands in profound
admiration.

This,  you may imagine,  was no great inducement to me to talk more  ;
and when in the evening we all met again in the library.  Dr.  Johnson still
continuing his accusation,  and vowing I cared nothing for him,  to get rid
of the matter,  and the grinning of Mr.  Crutchley,  and the theatrical staring
of Mr.  Musgrave,  I proposed to Miss Thrale,  as soon as tea was over,  a
walk round the grounds.

The next morning,  the instant I entered the library at breakfast-time,
where nobody was yet assembled but Messrs.  Musgrave and Crutchley,  the
former ran up to me the moment I opened the door with a large folio in his
hand,  calling out, —

"  See here,  Miss Burney,  you know what I said about the Racks "

"  The what,  sir 1"  cried I,  having forgot it all.

"  Why the Racks  ;  and here you see is the very same account.  I must
show it to the Doctor presently  ;  the old lion hardly believed it."

He then read to me I know not how much stuff,  not a word of which
could I understand,  because Mr.  Crutchley set laughing slyly,  and casting
up his eyes exactly before me,  though unseen by Mr.  Musgrave.

As soon as I got away from him,  and walked on to the other end of the
room,  Mr.  Crutchley lollowed me and said, —

"  You went to bed too soon last night ;  you should have stayed a little
longer,  and then you would have heard such a panegyric as never before
was spoken."

"  So I suppose,"  quoth I,  not knowing what he drove at.

"  Oh,  yes  !"  cried Mr.  Musgrave,  "  Dr.  Johnson pronounced such a
panegyric upon Miss Burney as would have quite intoxicated any body
else ;  not her,  indeed,  for she can bear it,  but nobody else could."

"  Oh !  such praise,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  "  never did I hear before.  It
kept me awake,  even tne,  after eleven o'clock,  when nothing else could, —
poor drowsy wretch that I am  !"

They then both ran on praising this praise  (a qui mieux,  tnieux)^  and
trying which should distract me most with curiosity to hear it ;  but I know
Mr.  Crutchley holds all panegyric in such infinite contempt and ridicule,
that I felt nothing but mortification in finding he had been an auditor to my
dear Dr.  Johnson's partiality.

*'  Wo to him,"  cried he at last,  "  of whom no one speaks ill !  Wo,
therefore,  to you in this house,  1 am sure !"

"  No,  no,"  cried I,  '-'-you,  I believe,  will save me from that wo."

In the midst of this business entered Miss Thrale.  Mr.  Musgrave,  in-
stantly flying to her with the folio,  exclaimed,  "  See,  Miss Thrale,  here's
all that about the origin of Racks,  that — "

"  Of ivhat  ?"  cried she.     "  Of rats  ?"

This set us all grinning;  but Mr.  Crutchley,  who had pretty well reco-
vered his spirits,  would not rest a moment from plaguing me about this
praise,  and began immediately to tell Miss Thrale what an oration had
been made the preceding evening.

The moment Mrs.  Thrale came in,  all this was again repeated,  Mr.  Mus-
grave almost blessing himself with admiration while he talked of it,  and
Mr.  Crutchley keeping me in a perpetual fidget,  by never suffering the sub-
ject to drop.

260 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

When they had both exhausted all they had to say in a general manner
of this eloge^  and Dr.  Johnson's fondness for me,  for a little while we were
allowed to rest ;  but scarce had I time to even hope the matter would be
dropped,  when Mr.  Crutchley said to Mr.  Musgrave, —

"  Well,  sir,  but now we have paved the way,  I think you might as well
go on."

"  Yes,"  said Miss Thrale,  never backward in promoting mischief,  "  me-
thinks you might now disclose some of the particulars."

"  Ay,  do,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  "  pray repeat what he said."

"  Oh !  it is not in my power,"  cried Mr.  Musgrave  ;  "  I have not the
Doctor's eloquence.  However,  as well as I can remember,  I will do it.
He said that her manners were extraordinarily pleasing,  and her language
remarkably elegant ;  that she had as much virtue of mind as knowledge of
the world  ;  that with all her skill in human nature,  she was at the same
time as pure a little creature — "

This phrase,  most comfortably to me,  helped us to a laugh,  and carried
off in something like a joke praise that almost carried me off,  from very
shame not better to deserve it.

"  Go on,  go on I"  cried Mr.  Crutchley  ;  "  you have not said half."

"  I am sensible of that,"  said he,  very solemnly  ;  "  but it really is not in
my power to do him justice,  else I would say on,  for Miss Burney I know
would not be intoxicated."

"  No,  no  ;  more,  more,"  cried that tiresome creature  ;  "  at it again."

*'  Indeed,  sir  ;  and upon my word I would if I could  ;  but only himself
can do the old lion justice."

"  *  And what light is,'  "  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  'tis only light can show.'
However,  let him love her as much as he will,  he will never love her half
enough,  for he knows not half how good she is."

"  Upon my word  !"  cried Miss Thrale,  drolly ;  "  do you think I shan't
take some sly opportunity to poison you  ?"

"  Miss Burney wants no incentive to virtue,"  said Mr.  Musgrave,  "  or
else,  to any body else such a character as Dr.  Johnson has given her would
be enough to stimulate her to it."

Ay,  thought I,  that is the best way for  "me — to take all this sober serious-
ness. And I assure you,  though I tried to laugh all this off as if I did not
believe it,  I knew so well his readiness and pleasure in speaking highly of
me,  that I was inwardly quite melted by his kindness,  and my sense of the
honour I receive from it.

We had half done breakfast before he came down  ;  he then complained
he had had a bad night and was not well.

"  I could not sleep,"  said he,  laughing  ;  "  no,  not a wink,  for thinking
of Miss Burney  ;  her cruelty destroys my rest."

"  Mercy,  sir  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  what,  beginning again already? —
why,  we shall all assassinate her.  Late at night,  and early at morn, — no
wonder you can't sleep  !"

"  Oh  !  what would I give,"  cried he,  ''  that Miss Burney would come
and tell me stories all night long  ! — if she would but come and talk to me  !"

"  That would be delightful,  indeed  !"  said I ;  "  but when,  then,  should I
sleep  ?"

"  Oh,  that's your care  !  I should be happy enough in keeping you
awake."

"  I wish,  sir,"  cried Mr.  Musgrave,  with vehemence,  "  I could give you
my own night's sleep 1"

"  I would have you,"  continued Dr.  Johnson to me,  (taking no notice of
this flight),  "  come and talk to me of Mr.  Smith,  and then tell me stories
of old Brangkton,  and then of his son,  and then of your sea-captain."

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIxNA.  261

"  And pray,  sir,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  don't forget Lady Louisa,  for I
shall break my heart if you do."

"Ay,"  answered he,  "  and of Lady Louisa,  and of Evelina herself as
much as you please,  but not of Mr.  Macartney, — no,  not a word of him  !"

"  I assure you,  ma'am,"  said Mr.  Musgrave,  "  the very person who first
told me of that book was Mr.  Jessop,  my schoolmaster.  Think of that ! —
was it not striking?  *  A daughter,'  says he,  'of your friend Dr.  Burney
has written a book,  and it does her much credit.'  Think of that !  (lifting
up his hands to enforce his admiration) ;  and he desired me to read it — he
recommended it to me  ; — a man of the finest taste, — a man of great pro-
fundity,— an extraordinary scholar, — living in a remote part of Ireland, —
a man I esteem,  upon my word  !"

"  But,  sir,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale to Dr.  Johnson,  "  why,  these men tell such
wonders of what you said last night !  Why,  you spoke quite an oration
in favour of Miss Burney."

"  Ay,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  "  the moment it was over I went to bed.  I
stayed to hear the panegyric  ;  but I thought 1 could bear nothing after it,
and made off."

"  I would you were off now,"  cried I, "  and in your phaeton in the midst
of this rain  !"

"  Oh,  sir  ?"  cried Mr.  Musgrave,  "  the Doctor went on with it again after
you went ;  I had the honour to hear a great deal more."

"  Why,  this is very fine indeed !"  said  ]\Irs.  Thrale ;  "  why,  Dr.  John-
son,— why,  what is all this  !"

"  These young fellows,"  answered he,  "  play me false  ;  they take me in  ;
tliey start the subject,  and make me say something of that Fanny Burney,
and then the rogues know that when I have once begun I shall not know
when to leave off."

"  We are glad,  sir,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  "  to hear our own thoughts ex-
pressed so much better than we can express them ourselves."

I could only turn up my eyes at him.

"*Just so,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,

"  '  What oft was thought,  but ne'er so well express'd.'  "

Here,  much to my satisfaction,  the conversation broke up.

"  I hope,"  said Miss Thrale,  comically bowing to me,  "  you have approved
this discourse.     For my part,  I wonder you will speak to me again."

"  I wonder,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  "  she could eat  /"

"  Nay,"  quoth I,  "  this is no way to take off my appetite :  though,  per-
haps, you think I ought to be too sublime to eat."

His phaeton was now announced,  and regardless of the rain,  he took
leave.

Mr.  Musgrave stayed with us two or three days longer ;  but he is so
infinitely more quiet when neither Mr.  Seward nor Mr.  Crutchley is here,
that he left me nothing to write about him.

Friday,  Sept.  14x11. — And now,  if I am not mistaken,  I come to relate
the conclusion of Mr.  Crutchley's most extraordinary summer career at
Streatham,  which place,  I believe,  he has now left without much inten-
tion to frequently revisit.  However,  this is mere conjecture ;  but he really
had a run of ill-luck not very inviting to a man of his cold and splenetic
turn,  to play the same game.

Wlien we were just going to supper,  we heard a disturbance among the
dogs ;  and Mrs.  and Miss Thrale went out to see what was the matter,

262 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

while Dr.  Johnson and I remained quiet.  Soon returning,  "  A friend !  a
friend !"  she cried,  and was followed by Mr.  Crutchley.

He would not eat with us,  but was chatty and in good-humour,  and as
usual,  when in spirits,  saucily sarcastic.  For instance,  it is generally half
my employment in hot evenings here to rescue some or other poor buzzing
idiot of an insect from the flame of a candle.  This,  accordingly,  I was per-
forming with a Harry Longlegs,  which,  after much trial to catch,  eluded
me,  and escaped,  nobody could see how.  Mr.  Crutchley vowed I had
caught and squeezed him to death in my hand.

"  No,  indeed,"  cried I,  "  when I catch them,  I put them out of the win-
dow."

"Ay,  their bodies,"  said he,  laughing;  "but their legs,  I suppose,  you
keep."

"  Not I,  indeed ;  I hold them very safe in the palm of my hand."

"  Oh  !"  said he,  "  the palm of your hand !  why,  it would not hold a fly  !
But what have you done with the poor wretch — thrown him under the table
slyly?"

"  What good would that do  ?"

"  Oh,  help to establish j'our full character for mercy."

Now,  was not that a speech to provoke Miss Grizzle herself?  However,
I only made up a saucy lip.

"  Come,"  cried he,  ofl^ering to take my hand,  "  where is he  ?  Which
hand is he in  ?     Let me examine  ?"

"  No,  no,  I thank you ;  I shan't make you my confessor,  whenever I
take one."

He did not much like this ;  but I did not mean he should.

Afterwards he told us a most unaccountably ridiculous story of a crying
wife,  A gentleman,  he said,  of his acquaintance had married lately his
own kept mistress;  and last Sunday he had dined with the bride and bride-
groom ;  but,  to his utter astonishment,  without any apparent reason in the
world,  in the middle of dinner or tea,  she burst into a violent fit of crying,
and went out of the room,  though there was not the least quarrel,  and the
sjposo seemed all fondness and attention  !

"  What,  then,"  said I,  somewhat maliciously,  I grant,  "  had you been
saying to her  !"

"  Oh,  thank you  !"  said he,  with a half-affronted bow,  "  I expected this  !
I declare I thought you would conclude it was me  !"

v^  7f*  vt^  ^  tF  ^

Dr.  Johnson has been very unwell indeed.  Once I was quite frightened
about him  ;  but he continues his strange discipline — starving,  mercury,
opium  ;  and though for a time half demolished by its severity,  he always,
in the end,  rises superior both to the disease and the remedy, — which com-
monly is the most alarming of the two.  His kindness for me,  1 think,  if
possible,  still increased  :  he actually bores every body so about me that the
folks even complain of it.  I must,  however,  acknowledge I feel but little
pity for their fatigue.

FROM MISS F.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

Streatham,  Wednesday morning,
22d September.

At length,  my dear daddy,  1 hope to have a peep at you.  Mrs.  Thrale
is much better,  though not well,  but so kindly desirous to give me this in-
dulgence, as well as to see you and my father,  that she will venture to
promise for next Monday  ;  and,  therefore,  if nothing unlucky intervenes,  and
you send no prohibition,  early on Monday morning you will see us.     I

1781.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  263

cannot tell you half how glad I feel in the prospect of being again at dear
Chesington,  which I do indeed love at the bottom of my heart — and top too,
for the matter of that.

Bid all the Misses look pretty,  and Mrs.  Hamilton be quite well.  Tell
dear Kitty not to prim up as if we had never met before,  and charge Jem to
be the pink of gallantry.  Beg my dear father to  "get from behind 7a harho^'*
before breakfast ;  and do you,  my dear daddy,  put on my favourite vig.

I have time for no more,  as I have an opportunity to send this to town
now,  and if it goes by Streatham post,  you may not receive it before you
receive your ever and obliged and loving child.

F.  B.

My duty,  love,  and compliments to all.

Mrs.  Thrale's best compliments.

Miss Thrale will accompany us,  but not Dr.  Johnson.

FROM MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Sunday,  12tli November,  178L

Sweet Burney,

Your little scrap to my Tit was the most delightful thing I ever read —
better than forty letters.  Now that my stomach is lightened by doses of
emetic tartar,  and my heart pacified by a Paris letter,  I can try for flash
again — at least rake up some old embers.

Our journal would be yet emptier and more compressible than yours,  for
not a living thing have we seen since Criitchley left us late on Monday
night,  till Seward visited us yester noon  :  but the poor lady of the manor
tried all she could to keep us from tormenting the only creature in her reach
with ill-humour ;  and for that creature's comfort the house will now soon
be full.

Sir Richard Jebb has done Peggy Pitches so much good,  she is enchanted
with him.  A physician can sometimes parry the scythe of death,  but has
no power over the sand in the hourglass.

How happy Mr.  Crisp in his Fannikin  !  Take care of yourself for all
our sakes,  and do not go to church such weather as this ;  but keep the fear
of the churchyard before your eyes.

Fm glad the little book or volume goes on  ;  my notion is that I shall cry
myself blind over the conclusion — it runs in my head — 'tis so excessively
pathetic.     I saw your sweet father on Thursday,  but he came alone.

"  Not a ship on the ocean,"  says my last letter from Ashbourne,*  "  goes
out with more good wishes than that which carries the fate of Burney.  I
love,"  continues he,  "  all of the race which I do know,  and some that I do
not,  and love them for loving each other."

Of this consanguineous fondness I have had little experience myself,  but
I consider it as one of the lenitives of life.  It has,  however,  this deficiency
— that it is never found where distress is mutual.  He who has less than
enough has nothing to spare.  Prosperous people only love each other.
May you and I,  my love,  be ever prosperous  !

Miss Kilty may well think this is the surprisingest world that ever was.
I have long been of her mind.  Cavendish Square is the place appointed for
me to perform in next winter,  1 perceive by every body  ;  and though
matters look cloudy just at present,  I find we are to hope for a  "  little bit of
Burney"  in the spring.     Did I say that bright thing before  ?

Somebody told me  (but not your father)  that the Opera singers would not

*  Dr Johnson was then at Ashbourne.

264 DIARY AND LETTERS 1781.

be likely to get any money out of Sheridan this year.  "  Why,  that fellow
grows fat,"  says I,  "  like Heliogabalus,  upon the tongues of nightingales."
Did I tell you that bright thing before?  Ah,  Burney  !  if I was well I would
make a little fun yet,  but I cannot get well.  The next time 1 see Sir
Richard I will coax him to let me go in the cold bath again,  I am so low,
so lamentable  !

I am,  however,  most sincerely yours in all affection,

H.  L.  T.

Respects to Mr.  Crisp.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.

Chesington,  December 10th.

And so Mrs.  Shirley,  Captain Phillips*  sister;  has been visiting Susan in
form,  and Susan has returned the courtesy with the proper formalities  ;  and
that awkward business being over,  they begin to take to one another,  and
are already upon kind,  open,  and sisterly terms,  visiting to and fro without
ceremony.     This is a very comfortable circumstance.

The Capitano has lately been promoted,  and is now very earnest to ac-
celerate matters  ;  but my father,  very anxious and fearful for poor Susanne,
does not think there is de quoi manger very plentifully,  and is as earnest
for retarding them.  For my own part,  I think they could do very well.  I
know Susan is a very good economist,  and I know there is not any part
of our family that cannot live upon very little as cheerfully as most folks
upon very much.  Besides,  who knows how long poor nmicle may live,  and
keep the estate to himself?  And why should he not live?  I detest living
upon no hopes but those of other people's losing all — I mean pour le monde,
which we have no right to despise for others,  while so anxious to fare well
in it ourselves.

All this,  dearest madam,  you must at present keep wholly to yourself.
My father,  all the while,  is so much pleased with the disinterestedness of
Phillips,  that it is painful to his kind heart to oppose him,  and,  between
friends,  I have little doubt but he will give way ere long.

******

All these things put together,  you may believe I am called enough for
home  ;  very — very little,  therefore,  shall I be able to see of dear Streatham
before next summer ;  but what I can I will.

Mr.  Crisp is much gratified by your so kindly and constantly remember-
ing him.  He is vastly well this year,  and has had no gout since I came ;
he is,  therefore,  grown somewhat unruly,  and if I hint but at going away,
storms and raves with such a vengeance you would stare to see,  and start to
hear him.  We keep to  "  fun-making"  though,  very gaily.  Every thing
here is so new that has passed elsewhere,  that nothing can be mentioned
that has not the air of an anecdote,  and the credit of peculiar observation
upon matters and manners.

Adieu,  my ever dearest Mrs.  Thrale,  and long,  long preserve the health,
spirits,  and kindness,  which mark your last letter to F.  B.

May we be prosperous,  you say, — and Amen !  say I,  without a devotion
particularly extraordinary  ;  but yet I am by no means of opinion that there
is no kindness where distress is mutual ;  on the contrary,  I think,  and once
I found,  that mutual distress gives mutual endearment.

1782.  Of"  THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  265

CHAPTER XII.

1782.

Progress of  "Cecilia"  through the Press — Dr.  Barney's Opinion of it — The Author's
Fears — Barry — Hoole — a Rout — Dr.  Solander — Coxe,  the traveller — Sir Sampson
Gideon — Count Zenobia — Lady Say and Sele — An Amateur Novelist — Lady Hawke —
Literary Gossip — Sir Greg^ory Page Turner.  Correspondence : — Mrs.  Thrale to Miss
Burney — Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney — His Opinion of  "Cecilia" — Miss Burney to Mr.
Crisp — Her Intentions in writing  "Cecilia" — Literary Ladies — Poetical Description of
them by Dr.  Burney — General Paoli — Mrs.  Garrick — Literary Forgery — Conversazione
at Mrs'  Thrale's— xMiss Burney to Mrs.  Phillips— Mrs.  Garrick— The Female Wits-
Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney — Voltaire versus Shakspeare — Advice to a Young Author
— Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp— Alterations in  "Cecilia" — Mrs.  Thrale to Miss Burney
— Odd Reason for Marrying — Mrs.  Thrale and  "  Cecilia" — Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp
— Diary Resumed — Edmund Burke — Dinner at Sir Joshua Reynolds's — Lord Corke
— The Bishop of St.  Asaph — Gibbon,  the Historian — Person and Manner of Burke —
Lady Di.  Beauclerk — Goldsmith's Blundering — Letter from Edmund Burke to Miss
Burney — Visit to Chesington — Sitting for one's Portrait — Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney —
Criticism — Good Advice— Miss Burney to Mrs.  Thrale — Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp-
General Paoli — Boswell — The Irish Giant.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  PHILLIPS.

February 25,  1782.

Are you quite enragee with me,  my dearest Susy  ?  Indeed,  I think I am
with myself,  for not sooner and oftener writing to you  ;  and every night
when I go to bed,  and every morning when I awake,  I determine shall be
the last I will do either again till I have written to you.  But,  hclas!  my
pens get so fagged,  and my hands so crippled,  when I have been up two or
three hours,  that my resolution wavers,  and I sin on,  till the time of rest
and meditation,  and then I repent again.  Forgive me,  however,  my dearest
girl,  and pray pay me not in kind  ;  for,  as Charlotte would say,  kind that
would not be,  however deserved and just.

My work is too long in all conscience for the hurry of my people to have
it produced.  I have a thousand million of fears for it.  The mere copying,
without revising and correcting,  would take at least ten weeks,  for I cannot
do more than a volume in a fortnight,  unless I scrawl short hand and rough
hand,  as badly as the original.  Yet my dear father thinks it will be pub-
lished in a month  !  Since you went I have copied one volume and a quarter
— no more  !  Oh,  I am sick to think of it !  Yet not a little reviving is my
father's very high approbation of the first volume,  which is all he has seen.
I totally forget whether,  in my last,  I told you I had presented it to him ;
but I am sure you would never forget,  for the pleasure you would have felt
for me,  had you seen or heard him reading any part of it.

Would you ever believe,  bigoted as he was to  "  Evelina,"  that he now
says he thinks this a superior design and superior execution?

You can never half imagine the delight this has given me.  It is answer-
ing my first wish and first ambition in life.  And though I am certain,  and
though he thinks himself,  it will never be so popular as  "Evelina,"  his so
warm satisfaction will make me amends for almost any mortification that
may be in store for me.

I would to Heaven it were possible for me to have a reading de suite of it
VOL.  I.  23

266 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

with you,  my Susy,  more than with any body ;  but I could not admit Cap-
tain Phillips,  dearly as I love him  ;  I could not for my life read myself to
Mr.  Burney,  and was obliged to make Etty.  It is too awkward a thing to
do to any human beings but my sisters,  and poor auntys,  and Kitty Cooke.
I have let the first tome also run the gauntlet with Mrs.  Thrale.

^  Tt*  vt»  vK  ^  T?^

One thing frets me a good deal,  which is,  that my book affair has got
wind,  and seems almost every where known,  notwithstanding my earnest-
ness and caution to have it kept snug till the last.  Mr.  Barry,  t'other day,
told me he had heard from Miss Mudge what,  &c.  &c.  he had soon to expect
from me.  The Hooles have both told Charlotte how glad they are in the
good news they hear ;  and Mrs.  Boyle and the strangers take it for granted,
they say,  that I am too busy for visiting !  Mrs.  Ord,  also,  attacked me
very openly about it,  and I have seen nobody else.  It is easy to guess
whence this comes,  but not easy to stop its course,  or to prevent the mis-
chief of long expectation,  any more than the great desagrement of being
continually interrogated upon the subject.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  PHILLIPS.

I thank you most heartily for your two sweet letters,  my ever dearest
Susy,  and equally for the kindness they contain and the kindness they
accept.  And,  as I have a frank and a subject,  I will leave my hotkers^  and
write you and my dear brother Molesworth a little account of a rout I have
just been at,  at the house of Mr.  Paradise.

You will wonder,  perhaps,  in this time of hurry,  why I went thither;  but
when 1 tell you Pacchierotti was there,  you will not think it surprising.

There was a crowd of company  ;  Charlotte and I went together  ;  my
father came afterwards.  Mrs.  Paradise received us very graciously,  and
led me immediately up to Miss Thrale,  who was sitting by the Pac.  The
Miss Kirwans,  you may be sure,  were not far off,  and so I did pretty well.
There was nobody else I knew but Dr.  Solander,  Mr.  Coxe,  the traveller,
Sir Sampson and Lady Gideon  (Streatham acquaintances),  Mr.  Sastres,
and Count Zenobia,  a noble Venetian,  whom I have often met lately at Mrs.
Thrale's.

We were very late,  for we had waited cruelly for the coach,  and Pac.
had sung a song out of"  Artaxerxes,"  composed for a tenor,  which we lost,
to my infinite regret.  Afterwards he sang  "  Dolce speme,"  set by Bertoni,
less elegantly than by Sacchini,  and more expressively for the words.  He
sang it delightfully.  It was but the second time 1 have heard him in a room
since his return to England.

After this he went into another room,  to try if it would be cooler ;  and
Mrs.  Paradise,  leaning over the Kirwans and Charlotte,  who hardly got a
seat all night for the crowd,  said she begged to speak to me.  I squeezed
my great person out,  and she then said, —

"  Miss Burney,  Lady Say and Sele desires the honour of being introduced
to you."

Her ladyship stood by her side.  She seems pretty near fifty — at least
turned forty ;  her head was full of feathers,  flowers,  jewels,  and gewgaws,
and as high as Lady Archer's  ;  her dress was trimmed with beads,  silver,
Persian sashes,  and all sorts of fine fancies  ;  her face is thin and fiery,  and
her whole manner spoke a lady all alive.

"  Miss Burney,"  cried she,  with great quickness,  and a look all curiosity,
*'  I am very happy to see you  ;  I have longed to see you a great while;  I
have read your performance,  and I am quite delighted with it.     I think it's

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  267

the most elegant novel I ever read in my life.  Such a style !  I am quite
surprised at it.     I can't think where you got so much invention  !"

You may helieve this was a reception not to make me very loquacious.  I
did not know which way to turn my head.

«■  "  I must introduce you,"  continued her ladyship,  "  to my sister;  she'll be
quite delighted to see you.  She has written a novel herself;  so you are
sister authoresses.  A most elegant thing it is,  I assure you  ;  almost as
pretty as yours,  only not quite so elegant.  She has written two novels,
only one is not so pretty as the other.  But I shall insist upon your seeing
them.  One is in letters,  like yours,  only yours is prettiest;  it's called the
'Mausoleum of Julia!'"

What unfeeling things,  thought I,  are 7ny sisters  !  I'm sure I never heard
them go about thus praising me!

Mrs.  Paradise then again came forward,  and taking my hand,  led me up
to her ladyship's sister.  Lady Hawke,  saying aloud,  and with a courteous
smirk,  "  Miss Burney,  ma'am,  authoress of'  Evelina.'  "

"  Yes,"  cried my friend.  Lady Say and Sele,  who followed me close,  "  it's
the authoress of '  Evelina ;'  so you are sister authoresses  !"

Lady Hawke arose and courtesied.  She is much younger than her sister,
and rather pretty  ;  extremely languishing,  delicate,  and pathetic;  apparently
accustomed to be reckoned the genius of her family,  and well contented to
be looked upon as a creature dropped from the clouds.

I was then seated between their ladyships,  and Lady S.  and S.,  drawing
as near to me as possible,  said, —

"  Weil,  and so you wrote this pretty book! — and pray did your papa
know of it]"

"  No,  ma'am  ;   not till some months after the publication."

"  So I've heard  ;  it's surprising  !  I can't think how you invented it ! —
there's a vast deal of invention in it !  And you've got so much humour,
too!  Now my sister has no humour — hers is all sentiment.  -You can't
think how I was entertained with that old grandmother and her son 1"

I suppose she meant Tom Branghton for the son.

"  How much pleasure you must have had in writing it ;  had not you V

«'  Y — e — s,  ma'am."

"  So has my sister  ;  she's never without a pen in her hand ;  she can't
help writing for her life.  When Lord Hawke is travelling about  -with her,
she keeps writing all the way."

"  Yes,"  said Lady Hawke;  "  I really can't help writing.  One has great
pleasure in writing the things  ;  has not one.  Miss Burney f

"  Y — e — s,  ma'am."

"  But your novel,"  cried Lady Say and Sele,  "  is in such a style ! — so
elegant  !  I am vastly glad you made it end happily.  I hate a novel that
don't end happy."

"  Yes,"  said Lady Hawke,  with a languid smile,  "  I was vastly glad
when she married Lord Orville.  I was sadly afraid it would not have
been."

"  My sister intends,"  said Lady Say and Sele,  "  to print her  '  Mauso-
leum,' just for her own friends and acquaintances."

"  Yes,"  said Lady Hawke  ;  "  I have never printed yet."

"  I saw Lady Hawke's name,"  quoth I to my first friend,  "  ascribed to
the play of '  Variety.'  "

"  Did you indeed  ?"  cried Lady Say,  in an ecstasy.  "  Sister  !  do you
know Miss Burney saw your name in the newspapers,  about the play  !"

"  Did she 1"  said Lady Haw^ke,  smiling complacently.  "  But I really
did not write it ;  I never wrote a play in my life."

268 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

"  Well,"  cried Lady Sa}^  "  but do repeat that sweet part that I am so
fond of— you know what I mean ;  Miss Burney 7nnst hear it, — out of your
novel,  you know  !"

Lady H. — No,  I can't ;  I have forgot it.

Lady S. — Oh,  no  !  I am sure you have not ;  I insist upon it.  »

Lady H. — But I know you can repeat it yourself;  you have so fine a
memory  ;  I am sure you can repeat it.

Lady S. — Oh,  but I should not do it justice  !  that's all, — I should not do
it justice !

Lady Hawke then bent forward,  and repeated — "  '  If,  when he made the
declaration of his love,  the sensibility that beamed in his eyes was felt in
his heart,  what pleasing sensations and soft alarms might not that tender
avowal awaken  !' "

"  And from what,"  ma'am,  cried I,  astonished,  and imagining I had
mistaken them,  "  is this taken?"

"  From my sister's novel !"  answered the delighted Lady Say and Sele,
expecting my raptures to be equal,  to. her o.wn  ;  "  it's in the  '  Mausoleum,' —
did not you know that  ?  Well,'  F can't think how you can write these
sweet novels  !  And it's all just like that part.  Lord Hawke himself says
it's all poetry.  For my part,  Fm sure I never could write so.  I suppose,
Miss Burney,  you are producing another, — ain't you  ?"

"  No,  ma'am."

"  Oh,  I dare say you are.  I dare say you are writing one at this very
minute  !"

Mrs.  Paradise now came up to me again,  followed by a square man,
middle-aged,  and hum -drum,  who,  I found,  was Lord Say and Sele,  after-
wards from the Kirwans  ;  for though they introduced him to me,  I was so
confounded by their vehemence and their manners,  that I did not hear his
name.

*'  Miss Burney,"  said Mrs.  P.,  presenting me to him,  "  authoress of
*  Evelina.' "

"  Yes,"  cried Lady Say and Sele,  starting up,  "  'tis the authoress of
»  Evelina  !'  "

"  Of what  ?"  cried he.

"  Of  '  Evelina.'  You'd never think it, — she looks so young,  to have so
much invention,  and such an elegant style  !  Well,  I could write a play,  I
think,  but Fm sure I could never write a novel."

*'  Oh,  yes you could,  if you would try,"  said Lady Hawke.

"  Oh,  no,  I could not,"  answered she  ;  "  I could not get a style — that's
the thing — I could not tell how to get a style  !  and a novel's nothing without
a style,  you know  !"

"  Why no,"  said Lady Hawke  ;  "  that's true.  But then you write such
charming letters,  you know  !"

"  Letters  !"  repeated Lady S.  and S.  simpering ;  "  do you think so  ?  Do
you know I wrote a long letter to Mrs.  Ray just before I came here,  this
very afternoon,  quite a long letter  !     I did,  I assure you !"

Here Mrs.  Paradise came forward with another gentleman,  younger,
slimmer,  and smarter,  and saying to me,  "  Sir Gregory Page Turner,"
said to him,  "  Miss Burney,  authoress of'  Evelina.'  "

At which Lady Say and Sele,  in fresh transport,  again arose,  and raptu-
rously again repeated — "  Yes,  she's authoress of  '  Evelina !  Have you
read it  ?"

"  No  ;  is it to be had  ?"

"  Oh dear,  yes  !  it's been printed these two years  !     You'd never think

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  269

it !     But it's the most elegant novel I ever read in my life.     Writ in such a
style !"

"  Certainly,"  said he,  very civilly  ;  "  I have every inducement to get it.
Pray where is it to be had 1 every where,  I suppose  ?"

"  Oh,  nowhere,  I hope !"  cried I,  wishing at that moment it had been
never in human ken.

My sqimre friend.  Lord Say and Sele,  then putting his head forward,
said,  very solemnly,  "  I'll purchase it!"

His lady then mentioned to me a hundred novels that I had never heard
of,  asking my opinion of them,  and whether I knew the authors ;  Lady
Hawke only occasionally and languidly joining in the discourse  :  and then
Lady S.  and S.,  suddenly arising,  begged me not to move,  for she should
be back again in a minute,  and flew to the next room.

I took,  however,  the first opportunity of Lady Hawke's casting down her
eyes,  and reclining her delicate head,  to make away from this terrible set  ;
and,  just as I was got by the piano-forte,  where I hoped Pacchierotti would
soon present himself,  Mrs.  Paradise again came to me,  and said, —

"  Miss Burney,  Lady Say and Sele wishes vastly to cultivate your
acquaintance,  and begs to know if she may have the honour of your com-
pany to an assembly at her house next Friday  ? — and I will do myself the
pleasure to call for you,  if you will give me leave."

"  Her ifldyship does me much honour,  but I am unfortunately engaged,"
was my answer,  with as much promptness as I could command.

F.  B.

FROM MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Wednesday Night,  going to bed.
My dearest Burney,

May I venture,  do you think,  to call a little company about me on St.
Taffy's day  ?  or,  will the world in general,  and the Pepyses in particular,
feel shocked at my  "  dissipation"  and my  "  haste to be married  ?"  They
came last night and found me alone with Murphy.  There was an epoch  !
The Bishop of Peterborough came in soon after.  Queeny was gone to Mrs.
Davenant's,  with Miss Owen and Dr.  Delap.  What dangers we do go
through  !     But I have not gone out to meet mine half way,  at least.

Pray come on Friday se'nnight,  if you never come again.

I was very near you yesterday,  but I put a constraint upon myself,  and
pressed forward,  for I should only have dirtied the house,  and hindered you,
and been wished at York by the Padrona di casa.

I went to dear Dr.  Johnson's rassegiiarlo la solita serviiii,  but at one
o'clock he was not up,  and I did not like to disturb him.  I am very sorry
about him — exceeding sorry  !  When I parted from you on Monday,  and
found him with Dr.  Lawrence,  I put my nose into the old man's wig and
shouted ;  but got none except melancholy answers — so melancholy,  that I
was forced to crack jokes for fear of crying.

"  There is gout at the bottom,  madam,"  says Lawrence.

"  I wish it were at the bottom  !"  replied saucebox,  as loud as she could
bawl,  and pointing to the pedestals.

"  He complains of a general gravedo,^''  cries the Doctor  ;  "  but he speaks
too good Latin for z^5."

"  Do you take care,  at least,  that it does not increase long^''  quoth I.
(The word gravedo,  you know,  makes graved'uiis,  and is,  therefore,  said to

23*

270 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

"  increase long in the genitive case.")  I thought this a good,  stupid scholar-
like pun,  and Johnson seemed to like that Lawrence was pleased.

This morning I was with him again,  and this evening Mrs.  Ord's conver-
sation and Piozzi's car a voce have kept away care pretty well.  Mr.  Selwyn
helped us to be comfortable.     My Tit went with her Coz,  to Abel's concert.

Good night,  sweetest ;  I am tired and want to go to bed.

Good night once more,  through the door at Streatham,  for thithejr imagi-
nation carries your affectionate H.  L.  T.

MR.  CRISP TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Chesington,  February 25th.
Our own Fannikin,

I do acquiesce  ('tis true),  but not in calm acquiescence  (as Dr.  Johnson
does with Pope),  that you should remain where you are instead of Ches-
ington ;  but still I do say that,  if you could have returned hither in Suzette's
chaise,  safe and warm,  your undisturbed,  unbroken,  assiduous minding your
lesson would have overbalanced the time you gain by being upon the spot
to correct proofs,  &c.*

I am not of your other Daddy's mind,  who would have it sent off to Mr.
Payne just as it is.  You have so much to lose,  you cannot take too much
care.  Not that I would have you file,  and polish,  and refine,  till the original
fire and spirit of the composition flies off in vapour, — and that,  I dare say,
is what he would guard against ;  and so should I if I were not convinced
there is no danger of that kind to be apprehended  ; — that belongs to your
half geniuses  ; — a true — a real — a great one,  cannot be otherwise than
highly luxuriant,  and must be pruned.  The finest apricots I ever tasted
were the produce of a tree on the side of a house,  that had on it,  at one
time,  eighteen hundred dozen,  and were thinned to about seven hundred,
from twenty-one thousand six hundred  !  You may imagine this enormous
quantity were mostly not bigger than peas.  What then  ? — it demonstrates
the monstrous force and vigour of the tree.

You  "  wish I had never seen the book in the rough."  There you are in
the wrong.  If ever the hints or observations of others can be worth
listening to,  that is the time;  and I have already told you one opinion and
piece of advice of mine,  the truth and solidity of which every day of my
life I am more and more convinced of.  Whoever you think fit to consult,
let their talents and taste be ever so great,  hear what they say, — allowed  !
— agreed  ! — but never give up or alter a tittle merely on their authority,
nor unless it perfectly coincides with your own inward feelings.  I can say
this to my sorrow and to my cost.  But mum  !  The original sketches of
works of genius,  though ever so rude and rough,  are valuable and curious
monuments,  and well worth preserving.

I am truly glad you have resolution enough of your own,  and are
permitted by others to stand your ground manfully,  and sustain the siege of
visiters that would overwhelm you with their numbers and incessant
attacks.  I perfectly concur with your Doctor Daddy in his selection of
particulars,  so far as he Jm^  read,  and with his sentiments in general of the
work and the plan,  which  (by what he has already seen)  he cannot but
have conceived an idea of.  The unreasonable hurry with which I was
obliged to gallop over such a book has disabled me from making,  or even
forming observations,   other than general ones.      But by my imperfect

*  The allusions throughout this letter are to  "  Cecilia,"  then in press.

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  271

recollection of particulars,  and what I felt at the time,  I think nothing
struck me more forcibly than the Foxhall*  scene  ;  it is finely — it is power-
fully imagined;  it is a noble piece of mortality!  the variety — the contrast
of the different characters quite new and unhackneyed,  and yet perfectly in
nature ;  and the dreadful catastrophe that concludes the whole makes it a
masterpiece.  What a subject for that astonishing lad,  Edward,  to make a
finished drawing,  and Bartolozzi a print of!  The scene of Foxhall illu-
minated— the mangled,  bleeding body carried along — the throng of spec-
tators crowding after,  filled with various expressions of horror,  wonder,
eager curiosity,  and inquiry;  and many other particulars,  which the perusal
of the passage itself,  and his genius,  would suggest.  I like Cecilia much
better than Albina,  which I never was fond of,  though not of much con-
sequence.

I long to see Mrs.  Thrale's letter,  which I do most faithfully promise to
return  ;  and I do hereby summon you to despatch it to me immediately.
To own to you the real truth,  it was wholly owing to my impatience to get
at it that I so directly answered your last.

As to your lovely Greek,  I most earnestly recommend to you,  notwith-
standing your five sheets of paper,  to put her down  (while she is strong and
warm in your memory and imagination)  in a finished drawing in black and
white.  I don't mean this merely to satisfy curiosity,  but as a wonderful
academy figure,  which may be of powerful use to you hereafter,  to design
from,  in some future historical composition.  Such opportunities don't offer
every day ;  perfect novelty,  united to such uncommon excellence,  is a prize
indeed ;  don't let her slip,  but like Lothario,

"Seize the golden,  glorious opportunity."

I am in thorough,  serious earnest,  and seriously for the reason I have
given.  Your loving Daddy,

S.C.

p.  S. — You say the book is to be printed vol.  by vol.,  as fast as you can
get it out.  Sure,  1 hope,  you don't mean by that that it is to come out ia
single,  separate volumes  ]  I can't bear the thoughts of it.  All published
at once,  or  "  Chaos is come again  !"

2d P.  S. — I have not the conscience to demand long letters now in return  ;
only send Mrs.  Thrale's and to Kit.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

15th March.

Your letter,  my dear daddy,  which I have just received,  has given me so
much uneasiness that I may as well answer it immediately,  as I can do
nothing for thinking of it.

The conflict scene for Cecilia,  between the mother and son,  to which
you so warmly object,  is the very scene for which I wrote the whole book,
and so entirely does my plan hang upon it,  that I must abide by its re-
ception in the world,  or put the whole behind the fire.

You will believe,  then,  with the opinion I have of your judgment,  and
the anxious desire I have to do nothing quite contrary to your approbation,
if I can now be very easy.  I would it were in my power to defer the whole
publication to another spring,  but I am sure my father would run crazy if
I made such a proposal.

*  The old mode of spelling Vauxhall.

272 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

Let me not,  however,  be sentenced without making my defence,  and at
least explaining to you my own meaning in the part you censure.

I meant in Mrs.  Delville to draw a great,  but not a perfect character  ;  I
meant,  on the contrary,  to blend upon paper,  as I have frequently seen
blended in life,  noble and rare qualities with striking and incurable defects.
I meant,  also,  to show how the greatest virtues and excellences may be
totally obscured by the indulgence of violent passions and the ascendancy
of favourite prejudices.

This scene has yet been read by no human creature but yourself and
Charlotte,  who would not let me rest till 1 let her go through the book.
Upon Charlotte's opinion you will easily believe I put no solid reliance  ;
but yet I mention to you the effect it had on her,  because,  as you told me
about dear Kitty Cooke,  the natural feelings of untaught hearers ought never
to be slighted  ;  and Dr.  Johnson has told me the same a thousand times.
Well,  she prefers it to any part of the book,  and cried over it so vehemently
that she could eat no dinner,  and had a violent headach all day.

I would rather,  however,  have had one good word from you than all the
tears of the tender,  and all the praises of the civil.

The character of Mrs.  Delville struck you in so favourable a light,  that
you sunk,  as I remember I privately noticed to myself,  when you mentioned
her,  all the passages to her disadvantage previous to this conflict,  else it
would have appeared to you less inconsistent,  for the way is paved for it
in several places.  But,  indeed,  you read the whole to cruel disadvantage  ;
the bad writing,  the haste,  the rough copy,  all were against me.  Your
anger at Mrs.  Delville's violence and obduracy are nothing but what I meant
to excite  ;  your thinking it unnatural is all that disturbs me.

Yet,  when I look about me in the world,  such strange inconsistencies as
I see,  such astonishing contrariety of opinions,  and so bigoted an adherence
of all 77iarked characters to their own way of thinking,  1 really know not
how to give up this point.

Another thing gives me some comfort — the part you have selected to like
best,  Foxhall,  is what I read to you myself,  and the whole of the residence
at Delville Castle,  which I also read to you,  I remember well you were
pleased with more than with any other part of the book.  I cannot,  there-
fore, but hope the bad copy and difficulty of reading did me as much mis-
chief as the bad and unequal composition.

But what are you thinking of,  my dear daddy,  when you desire me to
send you the two last vols,  immediately  ?  Did I not tell you I am still
actually at work upon the second 1 And as to sending you again the rough
draft,  it would both be soliciting and establishing your disapprobation.

The first volume seems to grow,  by recollection,  both on my father and
Mrs.  Thrale.  It is not to be expressed how fond they are of it,  especially
my father.

Have you seen the verses in the newspaper,  where they poked me in
with all the belles esjorits  ?*  Two days ago,  at Mr.  Pepys's I met them
almost all.  Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.  Chapone,  Hannah More,  Mrs.  Carter,
Sophy Streatfield,  Mrs.  Buller,  famous for writing Greek notes in Greek
books.  Miss Georgiana Shipley  (Mrs.  Washingham's friend),  famous for
construing Horace after a year's studying Latin,  Mr.  VVraxall,  the northern
historian,  General Paoli,  Dr.  Cadogan,  Sir Joshua Reynolds,  &c.  &c.  But
the greatest pleasure I received was from meeting Mrs.  Garrick again.  She
had almost forgot me,  but was very kind,  and looked very well,  very sweet,
and very elegant.     1 was also gratified by meeting with the lady of the late

*  See p.  274.

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  273

young Lord Lyttelton,  who was made very celebrated by the book called
the  "  Correspondents,"  which was asserted to be written by her and the
old Lord Lyttelton,  but proves to be a very impertinent forgery.  She is
still pretty,  though a ViUle pass ee,  and very elegant and pleasing in her man-
ners.   Mrs.  and Miss Ord,  Mr.  Burrows,  and many others,  were there also.

This is but the second large assembly I have been to this year,  though I
have been invited to a hundred.  The other was at Mrs.  Thrale's,  who first
invited a large party about a week ago.  There I met again the fair Greek,
the Hales,  Mr.  Jenkinson,*  Lord and Lady Sandys,  the Burgoynes,  Mr.
Seward,  Mr.  Murphy,  Dr.  Delap,  Mrs.  Byron,  and fifty more at least.

I wish,  my dear daddy,  1 had time to write you some of the flash that
passes upon these occasions  ;  but it is totally impossible.

******

Every body knows that I am about something ;  and the moment I put
my head out of doors,  I am sure to be attacked and catechised.  Oh,  that
I were but as sure of the success as of the sale of this book  !  but,  indeed,  I
am now more discomfited' and alarmed than I have ever been yet.

Adieu,  my dear daddy.  I would I could do better  ;  but to love you and
your most kind sincerity more truly is not possible.  Never,  therefore,
spare it,  till you cease to love,  or cease to esteem,  your ever affectionate

F.  B.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  PHILLIPS.

Saturday,  March 19, 1782.

But that I am myself in continual disgrace about writing,  how should I
murmur to hear,  so very,  very seldom from beloved Susy !  yet,  when your
letters do come,  to tell you half the pleasure with which I read them,  would
almost tempt you,  culprit as I am,  to let me see them oflener.  The serenity
of happiness you seem now to enjoy,  my ever dearest girl,  makes me ready
to cry over your letters with fulness of content for you ;  and were it other-
wise, how to forbear repining at your absence I am sure I should not know  ;
for I miss you here so seriously,  so cruelly,  so perpetually,  that nothing in
the world short of your established happiness could make me any mental
amends for your loss.  The house seems so strange without you,  my room
so unoccupied,  and my aflairs and interests and thoughts so uncomfortable,
in wanting your participation.

I don't well know what sullen fit of selfishness makes me write all this  ;
so,  to have done with it,  give to your sweet captain my kindest love,  and
tell him,  let me murmur as I will by fits,  I would not,  if I could,  change
your destination,  nor reverse the decree that was given by Mr.  Shirley in
St.  Martin's Church  ;  and repeat to him — if you can — what I once told him
myself, — that never,  till I knew him,  did I see the person to whom I could
so cheerfully resign my first,  longest,  best,  and dearest friend.  So now —
lefs Jmve a dance  !

I had a very agreeable evening last Tuesday at Mr.  Pepys,  where I met
Mrs.  Garrick,  whom I rejoiced much to see.  She had all but forgot me  ,*
but when I was introduced to her,  by her half recollecting and asking who
I was,  she was extremely kind and obliging.  She looks very well,  and very
elegant.  She was cheerfully grave,  did not speak much,  but was followed
and addressed by every body.  I could not help being quite melancholy
myself at sight of her,  from remembrance of dear Mr.  Garrick.

Do you know they have put me again into the newspapers,  in a copy of

*  Since Earl of Liverpool.

274 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

verses made upon literary ladies, — where are introduced,  Mrs.  Carter,
Chapone,  Cowley,  Hannah More,  Mrs.  Greville,  Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.
Thrale,  Mrs.  Crewe,  Sophy Streatfield,  and Mrs.  Montagu.  In sueh honour-
able company,  to repine at being placed,  would,  perhaps,  be impertinent ;
so I take it quietly enough ;  but I would to Heaven I could keep clear of the
whole  !  However,  my dear father is so delighted,  that,  though he was half
afraid of speaking to me at all about them at first,  he carries them con-
stantly in his pocket,  and reads them to every body  !  I have a great sus-
picion they were written by Mr.  Pepys,  as they are just what I have heard
him say of all the people,  and as every creature mentioned in them,  but
Mrs.  Cowley,  Greville,  and Crewe,  were invited to be at his house on the
very day they were printed.

Yesterday I went,  with Charlotte and the two Kirwans,  to a rehearsal of
Rauzzini's new opera.  I was not at all enchanted,  though very well enter-
tained. The music is pretty,  and the accompaniments pleasant ;  but there
is such a struggle for something uncommon,  and such queer disappointments
of the ear in the different turns given to the passages from what it expects,
that it appears to have far more trick than genius in the composition ;  and
every song is so very near being comic,  that the least change in the world
would make it wholly so.

Pacchierotti was in better spirits than I have seen him for some time,  and
very earnest to help Rauzzini,  acting as maestro for him,  and singing like
twenty angels ;  but his songs are so unworthy of him,  I think,  that I never
found out by the symphonies whether they were meant for him  ;  and I never
was at an opera rehearsal before without knowing the first singer's airs long
enough before he began them.  Yet I really expect this will be the favourite
opera for the season,  as there are Scoticisms and oddities in it of all sorts,  to
catch popularity.     Pacchierotti came and spoke and said, —

"  I have not seen you for a great age,  Miss Burni."

*'  No,"  quoth I,  "  you never come."

"  I beg your pardon,  ma'am,"  said he, "  never you are at home,  and then
you say never I come."

For I have been denied to him,  perforce,  repeatedly.

"  Well,"  said I,  "  I am obliged to be a great deal with Mrs.  Thrale,  but
if you will fix a time,  I will be sure to be in the way."

"  Ah  !"  said he,  "  always you are to Mrs.  Thrale  !  Well,  I only say.
Heaven forgive her  !"

However he could not fix a positive time  ;  but next Tuesday,  Wednesday,
or Friday,  he will come,  and the Kirwans are to come and watch for him
till he does.  They are sweet girls,  but this is a most inconvenient arrange-
ment for me at present.

Adieu,  my Susy, — write very soon.*

F.  B.

*  The following are the lines alluded to in this letter  ;  they appeared in the  »  Morning
Herald"  for March 12,  1782.  Some years afterwards,  Sir W.  W.  Pepys denied having
written these lines  ;  and in the year 1822,  a MS.  copy of them was found among Dr.
Burney's papers,  with so many erasures,  interlineations,  and changes,  as to give the most
direct internal evidence that they were the doctor's own composition.

"  ADVICE TO THE HERALD.

"  Herald,  wherefore thus proclaim
Nought of woman but the shame  ?
Quit,  oh,  quit,  at least awhile,
Perdita's too luscious smile  ;
Wanton Worsley,  stilted Daly,
Heroines of each blackguard alley  ;

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  275

FROM MR.  CRISP TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Chesington,  Friday,  April 5,  1782.
******

In works of genius,  fancy,  imagination,  'tis not the long,  learned
argumentations of critics,  pro and con.,  that come with the compass and line
in their hands,  to measure right and wrong,  that will decide  ;  no,  'tis the
genuine,  unbiassed,  uninfluenced,  inward feelings of mankind that are the
true,  infallible test,  ultimately,  of sterling merit.  In vain comes Voltaire,
with all the powers of wit,  satire,  learning,  and art to knock down Shak-
speare,  and turn him into ridicule  ;  when he has finished his harangue,
Shakspeare stands just where he did — like a rock in the sea  ;  and the uni-
versal voice of high and low,  from their own impressions,  without attempt-
ing to answer him in his own way,  give him the lie,  and send him about
his business.

And now,  Fanny,  after this severe lecturing,  I shall give a sweetener to
make it up with you  ;  after assuring you it comes from the same sincerity
that dictated what I have said already  ;  and I shall do it in the very words
1 made use of to Daddy Burney on Tuesday morning last — that I would
ensure the rapid and universal success of this work for half-a-crown  ;  that
nothing like it had appeared since Fielding and Smollett ;  and that you bid
fair for becoming the first writer of the age in compositions of this kind.

I have nothing farther to add,  but this piece of advice — not to let success
intoxicate you,  and influence you to remit your ardour and industry to be
perfect.  There have been more instances than one,  where writers have
wrote themselves down,  by slovenliness,  laziness,  and presuming too much
on public favour for what is past.

Your loving daddy,

S.  C.

Better sure record in story
Such as shine their sex's glory  !
Herald  !  haste,  with me proclaim
Those of literary fame  !
Hannah More's pathetic pen,
Painting high th'  impassioned scene  ;
Carter's piety Tud learning.
Little Barney's quick discerning  ;
Cowley's neatly pointed wit,
Healing those her satires hit ;
Smiling Streatfield's iv'ry neck,
Nose,  and notions — a la Grecque I
Let Chapone retain a place,
And the mother of her Grace,
Each art of conversation knowing,
High-bred elegant Boscawen,
Thrale,  in whose expressive eyes
Sits a soul above disguise,
Skill'd with wit and sense t'  impart
Feelings of a generous heart.
Lucan,  Leveson,  Greville,  Crewe;
Fertile-minded Montague,
Who makes each rising art her care,
'  And brings her knowledge from afar  !'
Whilst her tuneful tongue defends
Authors dead,  and absent friends :
Bright in genius,  pure in fame : —
Herald,  haste,  and these proclaim  !"

276 DIARY AJND LETTERS 1782.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

April 6,  1782.

Heartily do I thank you,  my ever dear daddy,  for your kind and
honourable dealing with me.  A lecturing do you call this?  Believe me,
I am,  as yet,  so far from being  "  intoxicated with success,"  that I read it
•with gratitude and wonder  ;  for I expected much more severity,  and when
I received your letters,  I was almost sick with painful prognostics of your
disapprobation.  I shall do the utmost in my power to profit from your
criticisms,  but I can speak to no particulars till I come to the places
themselves.

With respect,  however,  to the great point of Cecilia's fortune,  I have
much to urge in my own defence,  only now I can spare no time,  and I must
frankly confess I shall think I have rather written a farce than a serious
history,  if the whole is to end,  like the hack Italian operas,  with a jolly
chorus that makes all parties good and all parties happy I The people I
have ever met with who have been fond of blood and family,  have all scouted
title when put in any competition with it.  How then should these proud
Delvilles think a new-created peerage any equivalent for calling their sons'
sons,  for future generations,  by the name of Beverley  ?  Besides,  I think
the book,  in its present conclusion,  somewhat original,  for the hero and
heroine are neither plunged in the depths of misery,  nor exalted to vahiwian
happiness.  Is not such a middle state more natural,  more according to real
life,  and less resembling every other book of fiction?

Besides,  my own end will be lost if I change the conclusion,  which was
chiefly to point out the absurdity and short-sightedness of those naine-com-
pelli?ig wills,  which make it always presumed a woman marries an inferior,
since he,  not she,  is to leave his own family in order to be incorporated
into hers.

You find,  my dear daddy,  I am prepared to fight a good battle here;  but
I have thought the matter much over,  and if I am made to give up this
point,  my whole plan is rendered abortive,  and the last page of any novel
in Mr.  Noble's circulating library may serve for the last page of mine,  since
a marriage,  a reconciliation,  and some sudden expedient for great riches,
concludes them all alike.  In every things else you have pointed out I shall
either wholly change or greatly alter.  And I will be very diligent to im-
prove and mend the whole.  Pray,  if any thing more occurs to you,  write
it,  and believe me with the truest gratitude and affection your.

F.  B.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS BURNEY.

Streatham,  April 24,  1782.

1 thought to have seen my dear Fanny in London to-day,  instead of her
father here,  for I was engaged to meet my fellow-executors at Robson's
upon business ;  but  'tis all put off till to-morrow,  and so Mr.  Johnson and
Crutchley came home with me then.

How does dear Cecilia do at Delville Castle?  and how does my poor
Henrietta get letters to kiss from him who seems wholly engaged to her
best friend and most dangerous rival  ?  What becomes of Lady Honoria
without scandal and flirtation?  and when does Mr.  Monckton bury peevish
Lady Margaret and fill us with fresh confusion?

Oh  !  write away,  sweet Burney  !  I wish I could help you in the manual
part.  1 think I could submit to be printer's devil,  to get a sight of the next
volume,  verily.

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  377

My last word puts me in mind of David Barclay.  He has sent me the
"  Apology for the Quakers,"  and thinks to convert me,  1 believe.  1 have
often been solicited to change my religion by Papists.  Why do all the
people think me foolisher than I am 1

So Sir Philip's bill*  is past,  and I am so glad  !  Why your father says
that there would have been a rebellion if his bill had not past.  A rebellion 1
and all about our dear innocent sweet Sir Philip  ;  who,  while his humanity
is such that he would scruple no fatigue to save the life of a lamb,
would have drenched the nation in blood without ever foreseeing,  or ever
repenting,  the consequences  !  What a world do we live in  !  and how such
things justly operate to make Johnson and you,  and all observers of life,
despise us readers of the Punic War,  in which,  perhaps,  the agents we
learn the names of in Latin,  French,  and English,  were people not a whit
more respectable than Sir Harbord Flarbord and Sir Philip Jennings Gierke.

Miss Sharp will marry the old schoolmaster too  !  Did you ever talk to
Baretti,  or hear him talk,  of the Tromba Marino man,  that the girl in
Venice would absolutely marry for the comfort of combing his beard  !

Adieu,  my love,  I only disturb the Doctor and my Til,  and they
plague me.

Adieu,  and love your

H.  L.  T.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Thursday,  April 25,  1782.

Upon my honour then,  my dear,  I have not said half of what my heart
is full.  The Delvilles,  since I wrote last,  efface every thing else.  When
I read the lady's character in my own dressing-room,  I catch myself look-
ing at my picture every moment;  yours is so like her in many things.
Hobson and Simkins are Borough men,  and I am confident they were both
canvassed last year;  they are not representations of life,  they are the life
itself.  Even Mr.  Briggs,  caricato as he certainly is,  won all my esteem
by his scene with Don Pufl?endorff*,  whose misty magnitude was never shown
so despicably dropsical before.  1 was happy to see Briggs have the better
of him.

But poor Henrietta !  some harm will come to her,  I see,  and break my
heart,  for she has won it strangely  ;  her innocent love of a character supe-
rior in rank and fortune to herself,  shows her taste and proves her merit;

while the delicacy of her mind,  the diffidence arising from I am just

ready to order the coach,  in short,  and fetch her away to Streatham,  from
that most inimitably painted mother,  whom Queeny does so detest.  But
she has seized Lady Plonoria for her favourite,  and her saying how Cecilia's
fortune should patch up the old fortifications there about West Wood en-
chanted us both.

Oh,  lovely Burney I 9na die talento mai  !  I will trust myself no further
on a subject that makes me wild.

And so your father don't come to-day;  and so I must send Daniel back
"with your sweet manuscript in the morning.  Very well,  he shall take the
greatest care of it.  I had never one in my possession that I valued half so
much before.     Seward only have I said any thing about it to.

Do you believe that I am steadily set to read  "  Marmontel"  all over again,
to see whether,  in variety of character,  comprehension of genius,  and ele-
gance of touch,  he at all equals this third volume of my Burney's?

*  Probably the bill alluded to in the remarkable conversation between Sir Philip Gierke
and Dr.  Johnson,  reported at pp.  ^^^  6.

VOL.  I.  24

278 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

Here comes your father.     What can make him so late  ?     Adieu,  ever
more and more your admirer  !     Can 1 be more your friend  ?

H.  L.  T.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Tuesday Nig-ht.

My eyes red with reading and crying,  I stop every moment to kiss the
book and to wish it was my Burney  !  'Tis the sweetest book,  the most
interesting,  the most engaging.  Oh  !  it beats every other book,  even your
own other vols.,  for  "  Evelina"  was a baby to it.

Dear charming creature  !  do I stop every six pages to exclaim  ;  and my
Tit is no less delighted than I ;  she is run out of the room for a moment.
But young Delville is come and Queeny returned,  so I leave the pen and
seize the MSS.

Such a novel !  Indeed,  I am seriously and sensibly touched by it,  and
am proud of her friendship who so knows the human heart.  May mine
long bear the inspection of so penetrating,  so discriminating an eye  !

This letter is written by scraps and patches,  but every scrap is admira-
tion, and every patch thanks you for the pleasure I have received.  I will
say no more  ;  I cannot say half 1 think with regard to praise.

I am sorry Pacchierotti does not come on Thursday,  for on Thursday
se'nnight I am engaged.  In your book his praises will be recorded,  and by
it they will be diffused.

The Beifields are my joy,  my delight.  Poor Henrietta  !  how I adore her  !
How easily was her sweet heart engaged by that noble friend  !  But I have
not finished my book yet ;  'tis late now,  and I pant for morning.  Nothing
but hoarseness made me leave off at all.

My most ingenious,  my most admirable friend,  adieu 1 If I had more
virtue than  "  Cecilia,"  I should half fear the censures of such an insight into
the deepest recesses of the mind.  Since I have read this volume,  I have
seriously thanked Heaven that all the litter of mine was in sight ;  none
hoarded in holes,  nor hastily stuffed into closets.  You have long known
the worst of your admiring

H.  L.  T.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

May,  1782.

Who in the world has a daddy so kind as mine?  I cannot,  indeed,  say
half how grateful I am for your solicitude for me.     All you say about the

annuity and the money appears to me unanswerably right.

*  *  #  *  *  *

If I had made a request to you for the sum total of my wishes upon your
reading this trash,  it would have been precisely what you have promised
voluntarily at the end of your letter, — to let me have your real opinion,  yet
not insist,  if that opinion is condemnation,  upon my forbearing to try that
of the public:  which I now must do,  and which my former success makes
me hope obtainable.  But though I can now do little in consequence of your
objections,  I may in future profit from remembering them.

With regard to the second volume,  every body has seemed to prefer it to
the first,  except Mrs.  Thrale,  who was so fond of the ton parties in the be-
ginning, and of Miss Larolles,  Mr.  Meadows,  and the Captain,  that she
lamented not having more of them.  Mr.  Gosport,  too,  she is so fond of,
that she declares if I don't provide for him,  "  she will have him herself."

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  379

]\Irs.  Belfield,  however,  has quite enchanted her, — she knows,  she says,  so
many like her in the Borough.

Etty much prefers the second vokime,  because there is so much more
incident ;   Mrs.  Thrale is more partial to character.

i\Iy father's present favourite is the old crazy moralist,  Albany.  He is
quite delighted with him;  and no one else has taken any notice of him.
Next to him he is fondest of Belfield.  The tradesman manque^  lie says,  is
new,  and may not be uninstructive,  and he is much pleased with his various
struggles,  and the agremens of his talents,  and the spirit,  yet failure,  of his
various flights and experiments.

F.  B.

JOURNAL RESUMED.

June,  1782. — At length,  my ever dearest Susan,  my long-neglected jour-
nal and long-promised renewal behold at your feet — for thither shall I speed
them with all the expedition in my power.

So much has passed since I lost you — for I cannot use any other word —
that I hardly know what first to record  ;  but I think  'tis best to begin with
what is uppermost in my mind,  Mr.  Burke.

Among the many I have been obliged to shirk this year,  for the sake of
living almost solely with  "  Cecilia,"  none have had less patience with my
retirement than Miss Palmer,  who,  bitterly believing I intended never to visit
her again,  has forebore sending me any invitations  :  but,  about three weeks
ago,  my father had a note from Sir Joshua Reynolds,  to ask him to dine at
Richmond,  and meet the Bishop of St.  Asaph :  and,  therefore,  to make my
peace,  I scribbled a note to Miss Palmer to this purpose, —

"  After the many kind invitations I have been obliged to refuse,  will you,
my dear Miss Palmer,  should I offer to accompany my father to morrow,
bid me remember the old proverb, —

'  Those who will not when they may,
When they will,  they shall have nay  ?'

F.  B."

This was graciously received  ;  and the next morning Sir Joshua and
Miss Palmer called for my father and me,  accompanied by my L-ord,
Corke.  We had a mighty pleasant ride.  Miss Palmer and I 7nade up
though she scolded most violently about my long absence,  and attacked me
about the book without mercy.  The book,  in short,  to my great consterna-
nation,  I find is talked of and expected all the tow^n over.  My dear father
himself,  I do verily believe,  mentions it to every body  ;  he is fond of it to en-
thusiasm, and does not foresee the danger of raising such general expecta-
tion, which fills 7ne with the horrors every time I am tormented with the
thought.

Sir Joshua's house is delightfully situated,  almost at the top of Rich-
mond Hill.  We walked till near dinner-time upon the terrace,  and there
met j\Ir.  Richard Burke,  the brother of the orator.  Miss Palmer,  stopping
him,  said, —

"  Are you coming to dine with us  ?"

"  No,"  he answered ;  "  I shall dine at the Star and Garter."

"  How did you come — with Mrs.  Burke,  or alone !"

"  Alone."

"  What,  on horseback  ?"

"  Ay,  sure  !"  cried he,  laughing ;  "  up and ride!     Now's the time."

280 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

And he made a fine flourish with his hand and passed us.  He is just
made under-secretary at the Treasury.  He is a tall and handsome man,
and seems to have much dry drollery  ;  but we saw no more of him.

After our return to the house,  and while Sir Joshua and I were tete-d-ttte.
Lord Corke and my father being still walking,  and Miss Palmer having,  I
suppose,  some orders to give about the dinner,  the  "  Knight of Plympton"
was desiring my opinion of the prospect from his window,  and comparing
it with Mr.  Burke's,  as he had told me after I had spoken it, — when the
Bishop of St.  Asaph and his daughter.  Miss Georgiana Shipley,  were an-
nounced. Sir Joshua,  to divert himself,  in introducing me to the bishop,  said
"  Miss Burney,  my lord  ;  otherwise,  '  Evelina.' "

The bishop is a well-looking man,  and seemed grave,  quiet,  and sensible.
I have heard much more of him  ;  but nothing more appeared.  Miss Georgi-
ana, however,  was showy enough for tico.  She is a very tall,  and rather
handsome girl  ;  but the expression of her face is,  to me,  disagreeable.  She
has almost a constant smile,  not of softness,  nor of insipidity,  but of self-
sufficiency and internal satisfaction.  She is very much accomplished,  and
her fame for painting and for scholarship I know you are well acquainted
with.  I believe her to have very good parts and much quickness  ;  but she
is so full of herself,  so earnest to obtain notice,  and so happy in her confi-
dence of deserving it,  that I have been not less charmed with any young
lady I have seen for many a day.  I have met with her before,  at Mrs.
Pejiys's,  but never before was introduced to her.

Miss Palmer soon joined us  ;  and,  in a short time,  entered more com-
pany,— three gentlemen and one lady  ;  but there was no more ceremony
used of introductions.  The lady,  I concluded,  was Mrs.  Burke,  wife of the
Mr.  Burke,  and was not mistaken.  One of the gentlemen I recollected to
be young Burke,  her son,  whom I once met at Sir Joshua's in town,  and
another of them I knew for Mr.  Gibbon  :  but the third I had never seen
before.  I had been told that the Burke was not expected  ;  yet I could con-
clude this gentleman to be no other ;  he had just the air,  the manner,  the
appearance,  I had prepared myself to look for in him,  and there was an
evident,  a striking superiority in his demeanour,  his eye,  his motions,  that
announced him no common man.

I could not get at Miss Palmer to satisfy my doubts,  and we were soon
called down stairs to dinner.  Sir Joshua and the unlnioicn stopped to speak
with one another upon the stairs ;  and,  when they followed us.  Sir Joshua,
in taking his place at the table,  asked me to sit next to him  ;  I willingly
complied.  "  And then,"  he added,  "  Mr.  Burke shall sit on the other side
of you."

"Oh,  no,  indeed!"  cried Miss Georgiana,  who also had placed herself
next Sir Joshua  ;  "  I won't consent to that ;  Mr.  Burke must sit next me  ;
I won't agree to part with him.  Prav,  come and sit dow^n quiet,  Mr.
Burke."

Mr.  Burke, — for him it was, — smiled and obeyed.

"  I only meant,"  said Sir Joshua,  "  to have made my peace with Mr.
Burke,  by giving him that place,  because he has been scolding me for not
introducing him to Miss Burney.  However,  I must do it now  ; — Mr.
Burke  ! — Miss Burney  !"

We both half rose,  and Mr.  Burke said, —

"  I have been complaining to Sir Joshua that he left me wholly to my
own sagacity ;  however,  it did not here deceive me."

"  Oh dear,  then,"  said Miss Georgiana,  looking a little co7isternated,
"  perhaps you won't thank me for calling you to this place  !"

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  28 X

Nothing was said,  and so we all began dinner, — young Burke making
himself my next neighbour.

Captain Phillips knows Mr.  Burke.  Has he or has he not told you how
delightful a creature he is  ?  If he has not,  pray,  in my name,  abuse him
without mercy ;  if he has,  pray ask if he will subscribe to my account of
him,  which herewith shall foftow.

He is tall,  his figure is noble,  his air commanding,  his address graceful  :
his voice is clear,'  penetrating,  sonorous,  and powerful ;  his '  language is
copious,  various,  and eloquent ;  his manners are attractive,  his conversation
is delightful.

What says Captain Phillips  ?  Have I chanced to see him in his happiest
hour  ?  or is he all this in common  ?  Since we lost Garrick I have seen
nobody so enchanting.

I can give you,  however,  very little of what was said,  for the conversa-
tion was not suivie,  Mr.  Burke darting from subject to subject with as
much rapidity as entertainment.  Neither is the charm of his discourse
more in the matter than the manner;  all,  therefore,  that is velixted fro?}i him
loses half its effect in not being related b?/  him.  Such little sketches as I
can recollect take however.

From the window of the dining-parlour.  Sir Joshua directed us to look at
a pretty white house which belonged to Lady Di.  Beauclerk.

"  I am extremely glad,"  said Mr.  Burke,  "  to see her at last so well
housed;  poor woman  !  the bowl has long rolled in misery;  I rejoice that it
has now found its balance.  I never,  myself,  so much enjoyed the sight of
happiness in another,  as in that woman when I first saw her after the death
of her husbands.  It was really enlivening to behold her placed in that
sweet house,  released from all her cares,  a thousand pounds a-year at her
own disposal,  and her husband was dead !  Oh,  it was pleasant,  it was
delightful to see her enjoyment of her situation  !"

"  But,  without considering the circumstances"  said Mr.  Gibbon,  "  this
may appear very strange,  though,  when they are fairly stated,  it is perfectly
rational and unavoidable."

"  Very true,"  said Mr.  Burke,  "  if the circumstances are not considered,
Lady Di.  may seem highly reprehensible."

He then,  addressing himself particularly to me,  as the person least likely
to be acquainted with the character of Mr.  Beauclerk,  drew it himself in
strong and marked expressions,  describing the misery he gave his wife,  his
singular ill-treatment of her,  and the necessary relief the death of such a
man must give.

He then reminded Sir Joshua of a day in which they had dined at Mr.
Beauclerk's,  soon after his marriage with Lord Bolingbroke's divorced wife,
in company with Goldsmith,  and told a new story of poor Goldsmith's eter-
nal blundering.

FROM THE RIGHT HON.  EDMUND BURKE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Madam,

I should feel exceedingly to blame if I could refuse to myself the natural
satisfaction,  and to you the just but poor return,  of my best thanks for the
very great instruction and entertainment I have received from the new pre-
sent you have bestowed on the public.  There are few — I believe I may say
fairly there are none at all — that will not find themselves better informed
concerning human nature,  and their stock of observation enriched,  by read-
ing your  "  Cecilia."     They certainly will,  let their experience in life and

24*

282 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

manners be what it may.  The arrogance of age must submit to be taught
by youth.  You have crowded into a few small volumes an incredible variety
of characters  ;  most of them well planned,  well supported and well contrasted
with each other.  If there be any fault in this respect,  it is one in which
you are in no great danger of being imitated.  Justly as your characters
are drawn,  perhaps they are too numerous.  But I beg pardon ;  I fear it
is quite in vain to preach economy to those who are come young to excessive
and sudden opulence.

I might trespass on your delicacy if I should fill my letter to you with
what I fill my conversation to others.  I should be troublesome to you alone
if I should tell you all I feel and think on the natural vein of humour,  the
tender pathetic,  the comprehensive and noble moral,  and the sagacious obser-
vation, that appear quite throughout that extraordinary performance.

In an age distinguished by producing extraordinary women,  I hardly dare
to tell you where my opinion would place you amongst them,  t respect
your modesty,  that will not endure the commendations which your merit
forces from every body.

I have the honour to be,  with great gratitude,  respect,  and esteem,
madam,  your most obedient and most humble servant,

Ed3i.  Burke.

Whitehall,July 29,  1782.

My best compliments and congratulations to Dr.  Burney on the great
honour acquired to his family.

JOURNAL RESUMED.

Chesington,  Monday,  August 12th. — I set out for this ever dear place,
accompanied by Edward,  who was sent for to paint Mr.  Crisp for my father.
I am sure you will rejoice in this.  I was a little dumpish in the journey,
for I seemed leaving my Susan again.  However,  I read a  "  Rambler"  or
two,  and  "  composed the harmony of my temper,"  as well as I could,  for
the sake of Edward,  who was not only faultless of this,  but who is,  I
almost think,  faultless of all things.  I have thought him more amiable and
deserving than ever,  since this last sojourn under the same roof with him ;
and,  as it happened,  I have owed to him almost all the comfort I have this
time met with here.

We came in a chaise,  which was well loaded with canvasses,  pencils,  and
painting materials  ;  for Mr.  Crisp was to be three times painted,  and Mrs.
Gast once.  My sweet father came down Gascoign Lane to meet us,  in
very good spirits and very good health.  Next came dear Daddy Crisp,
looking vastly well,  and,  as usual,  high in glee and kindness at the meeting.
Then the affectionate Kitty,  the good Mrs.  Hamilton,  the gentle Miss Young,
and the enthusiastic Mrs.  Gast.

The instant dinner was over,  to my utter surprise and consternation,  I
was called into the room appropriated for Edward and his pictures,  and in-
formed I was to sit to him for Mr.  Crisp  !  Remonstrances were unavailing
and declarations of aversion to the design were only ridiculed ;  both dad-
dies interfered,  and when I ran off,  brought me back between them,  and
compelled my obedience ; — and from that time to this nothing has gone for-
ward but picture-sitting.

Now to the present state of things and people.

My father is all himself — gay,  facile,  and sweet.  He comes to all meals,
writes without toiling,  and gives us more of his society than he has done

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  283

many years.  His third volume he is not tied down to produce at any
stated time,  and he has most wisely resolved not to make any promises to
the public about it,  nor to take in any subscriptions,  but to keep free from
all enfragement.

A serious piece of intelligence has given,  does give,  and long must give
me the utmost concern and sorrow.  My dear Mrs.  Thrale,  the friend,
though not the most dear friend of my heart,  is going abroad for three years
certain.  This scheme has been some time in a sort of distant agitation,  but
it is now brought to a resolution.  Much private business belongs to it relative
to her detestable lawsuit ;  but much private inclination is also joined with it
relative to her long wishing to see Italy.  I have determined,  therefore,  to
do all in my power to bear this blow steadily  ;  and the remembrance how
very much I suffered when such an one was formerly thought of,  makes me
suppress all my regret,  and drive the subject from my mind by every method
in my power,  that I may save myself from again experiencing such unavail-
ing concern.  The thought,  indeed,  that she wishes to go,  would reconcile
me to a yet longer absence,  by making me feel that my own sorrow is
merely selfish.

Streatham, — my other home,  and the place where I have long thought
my residence dependent only upon my own pleasure,  and where,  indeed,  I
have received such as my father and you alone could make greater, — is
already let for three years to Lord Shelburne.  If I was to begin with talking
of my loss,  my strangeness,  I had almost said,  for these three years,  I
should never have done,  and only make us both melancholy  ;  so nothing
will I say about the matter,  but that you,  tender and liberal as you are,  will
be almost my only friend who will not rejoice in this separation,  as the
most effectual means of keeping me more in London  ;  though you,  my
Susy,  will be,  perhaps,  the most sincerely gratified by what additional time
it may give me.

MR.  CRISP TO MISS BURNEY.

My dear Fannikin,

I deferred a return of my most sincere thanks and acknowledgments,
both for your highly agreeable present and your two kind short notes,  till I
had twice read over,  and thoroughly,  nay,  severely considered the first.
Don't be surprised at so harsh an adverb.  I was resolved to put myself in
place of an uninfluenced,  yawning,  fastidious reader,  that takes up a new
book with careless indifference,  expecting from a novel nothing more than
the usual common-place trash they abound with.

In this state of mind I endeavoured at divesting myself,  as well as I
could,  of all remembrance of the work,  and all partiality for the author.
To do this completely was indeed impossible  ;  but still it was something to
be continually saying to myself,  after I had read a chapter,  How will this go
down  ?  What will the multitude,  who care not a straw for author or book-
seller, or any thing but their own immediate amusement,  say of it  ?  These
were my queries to myself.  If I could have given a positive and certain
answer to them,  that answer would have determined the fate of the book,
and the character of the author's abilities  ;  for these are the people  (not a
few,  nay,  even a numerous partial set of friends)  that ultimately can and
do decide.

The tribunal of the Inquisition itself is not more inflexible than I en-
deavoured to be on this occasion.  Every other mode of proceeding is only
delusive,  and what is called making one's market at home.

284 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

What was the result of these my meditations?  To enter into particulars
would be endless  ;  but the sum total amounts to this — a full,  unlimited con-
firmation of my warm approbation of the whole work together,  and a posi-
tive declaration of the improvements it has received,  beyond all expectation ;
— greatly and judiciously compressed  ;  long conversations curtailed  ;  several
incidents much better managed ;  and the winding up beyond all compare,
more happy,  more judicious,  more satisfactory.  Many particulars,  which
I did not quite relish are softened off to a degree that,  if I do not perfectly
assent to,  I hardly know how to condemn,  particularly in the instance of
old Delville,  in whom  (without departing from his original character,
which would have been unpardonable)  you have found means,  fairly ac-
counted for,  to melt down some of that senseless obstinate,  inherent pride,
which,  if still kept up to its height,  would have rendered miserable those
who ought to have been dearest to him,  and have established him,  (which
w^ould have been a great impropriety)  without any necessity,  (young
Delville's father,  and the excellent Mrs.  Delville's husband,)  the most hateful
of beings.

These,  my dear Fannikin,  without the least favour or affection,  are my
sincere sentiments  ;  and,  if I know myself,  would be such if I had met with
the book without any name to it.  At the same time,  to evince my sincerity,
and that you may not think I mean,  sycophant-like,  to turn about and recant,
in order to swim with the wind and tide that brings you  (as I liear)  clouds
of incense from every quarter — to avoid this scandalous imputation,  I do
declare that I must adhere to my former sentiments on some parts of the
work,  particularly the loss of Cecilia's estate.

But don't think I pretend to set up against the public voice my trumpery
objection,  which,  even if well founded,  would be a mere dust in the balance.
So much at present for  "  Cecilia."

Now,  Fannikin,  I must remind you of your promise,  which was to come
to your loving daddy when you could get loose.  Look ye,  Fanny,  I don't
mean to cajole you hither with the expectation of amusement or entertain-
ment. You and I know better than to hum or be hummed in that manner.
If you come here,  come to work, — work hard — stick to it.  This is the
harvest-time of your life ;  your sun shines hot  ;  lose not a moment,  then,
but make your hay directly.  "  Touch the yellow boys,"  as Briggs says,
— "  grow warm ;"  make the booksellers come down handsomely — count
the ready — the chink.  Do but secure this one point while it is in your
power,  and all things else shall be added unto thee.

I talked to your doctor daddy on the subject of disposing of your money ;
and we both agreed in the project of a well-secured annuity ;  and in the
meantime,  till that could be procured,  that the ready should be vested in
the three per cent annuities,  that it might produce something ;  and he pro-
mised to advance,  to make even money.

S.  C.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  THRALE.

August 1782.

I have been kept in hot water,  in defiance of snow till I heard from my
dearest Tyo ;  and if you do like the book,  I am gratified to my heart's
content;  and if you only say you do,  to have it so said is very delightful,
for your wish to give me pleasure would give it,  if you hated all I ever
wrote.

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  285

So you are all for the heroine and Miss LaroUes  ?  Mr.  Crisp was for the
heroine and Mrs.  Dclville.  My father likes the imperious old gentleman  ;
my mother is all for the Harrels.  Susan and Charlotte have not seen a
word.  If it does but attract,  as dear Dr.  J.  says,  I am happy,  be it which
way it will.  Why do you lament Gosporti he is clever,  but an elderly
man from the first,  and no rival.

Adieu,  my sweetest of friends.  To-morrow I spend with Mrs.  Ord.
Friday,  if there comes a dry frost,  to you will run your own

F.  B.

MISS BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

Oct.  15,  1782.

******

I am very sorry you could not come to Streatham at the time Mrs.
Thrale hoped to see you,  for when shall we be likely to meet there
again  ?  You would have been much pleased,  I am sure,  by meeting with
General Paoli,  who spent the day there,  and was extremely communicative
and agreeable.  I had seen him in large companies,  but was never made
known to him before  ;  nevertheless,  he conversed with me as if well
acquainted not only with myself,  but my connexions, — inquiring of me
when I had last seen Mrs.  Montagu?  and calling Sir Joshua Reynolds,
M'hen he spoke of him,  my friend.  He is a very pleasing man,  tall and
genteel in his person,  remarkably well bred,  and very mild and soft in his
manners.

1 will try to give you a little specimen of his conversation,  because I
know you love to hear particulars of all out-of-the-way persons.  His
English is blundering,  but not unpretty.  Speaking of his first acquaintance
with Mr.  Boswell, —

"  He came,"  he said,  "  to my country,  and he fetched me some letter of
recommending him ;  but I was of the belief he might be an impostor,  and I
supposed,  in my minte,  he was an espy ;  for I look away from him,  and in
a moment I look to him again,  and I behold his tablets.  Oh  !  he was to
the work of writing down all I say  !  Indeed I was angry.  But soon I dis-
cover he was no impostor and no espy  ;  and I only find I was myself the
monster he had come to discern.  Oh, — is a very good man  ;  I love him
indeed ;  so cheerful !  so gay  !  so pleasant !  but at the first,  oh  !  I was
indeed angry."

After this he told us a story of an expectation he had had of being
robbed,  and of the protection he found from a very large dog that he is
very fond of.

"  I walk out,"  he said,  "  in the night ;  I go towards the field  ;  I behold
a man — oh,  ugly one  !  I proceed — he follow  ;  I go on — he address me,
'  You have one dog,'  he says.  '  Yes,'  say I to him.  *  Is a fierce dog V he
says  ;  '  is he fiery V  '  Yes,'  reply I,  '  he can bite.'  '  I would not attack
in the night,'  says he,  '  a house to have such a dog in it.'  Then I conclude
he was a breaker ;  so I turn to him — oh,  very rough  !  not gentle — and I
say,  very fierce,  '  He shall destroy you,  if you are ten  !  '  "

Afierwards,  speaking of the Irish giant,  who is now shown in town,  he
said, —

"  He is so large I am as a baby  !  I look at him — oh  !  I find myself so
little as a child  !  Indeed,  my indignation it rises when I see him hold up
his hand so high.  I am as nothing ;  and I find myself in the power of a
man who fetches from me half a crown."

This language,  which is all spoke very pompously by him,  sounds
comical from himself,  though I know not how it may read.

286 DIARY AMD LETTERS 1782

Adieu,  my dear and kind daddy,  and believe me your ever obliged and
ever afiectionate

F.  B.

CHAPTER XIII.

1782.

Dr.  Johnson — The Pepyses — The Rooms at Brighton — Mr.  Coxa — A Literary Milliner
— A Ball — Dr.  Johnson and Mr.  Pepys — Discussion on Wit — Confounding-  Words
•  with Things — Sarcastic Repartees — Lady Borlase Warren — A Story  :  Way to Pre-
serve 50,000/. — A Cool Request — Bringing up a Child Stout — Character of Lady
Rothes — Dr.  .Johnson — Consequences of his Severity — His Hatred of being Alone —
Lord and Lady De Ferrers — Miss Ellerker — Dr.  Johnson's Declaration that he never
saw a Word of  "Cecilia"  till it was Printed — Mr.  Metcalf — Newmarket Hill — Miss
Monckton,  afterwards Countess of Cork — Her Parties — Description of Her — Anec-
dote of the Duke of Devonshire — Madame de Genlis's  "  Adele et Theodore" — Party at
Mrs.  Thrale's— Watching for a Snug Chat.

JOURNAL RESUMED.

Brighthelmstoxe,  Oct.  26th. — My journey was incidentless  ;  but the
moment I came into Brighthelmstone I was met by Mrs.  Thrale,  who had
most eagerly been waiting for me a long while,  and therefore I dismounted,
and walked home with her.  It would be very superfluous to tell you how
she received me,  for you cannot but know,  from her impatient letters,  what
I had reason to expect of kindness and welcome.

I was too much tired to choose appearing at dinner,  and therefore eat
my eat up stairs,  and was then decorated a little,  and came forth to tea.

Mr.  Flarry Cotton and Mr.  Swinerton were both here.  Mrs.  Thrale
said they almost lived with her,  and therefore were not to be avoided,  but
declared she had refused a flaming party of blues,  for fear I should think,
if I met them just after my journey,  she was playing Mrs.  Harrel.

Dr.  Johnson received me too with his usual goodness,  and with a salute
so loud,  that the two young beaus,  Cotton and Swinerton,  have never done
laughing about it.

Mrs.  Thrale spent two or three hours in my room,  talking over all her
afl^airs,  and then we wished each other hon repos,  and — retired.  Grandis-
sima conclusion !

Oh,  but let me not forget that a fine note came from Mr.  Pepys,  who is
here with his family,  saying he was presse de vivre^  and entreating to see
Mrs.  and Miss T.,  Dr.  Johnson,  and Cecilia,  at his house the next day.  I
hate mightily this method of naming me from my heroines,  of whose honour
I think I am more jealous than of my own.

Oct.  27th. — The Pepys came to visit me in form,  but I was dressing  ;
in the evening,  however,  Mrs.  and Miss T.  took me to them.  Dr.  Johnson
would not go  :  he told me it was my day,  and I should be crowned,  for
Mr.  Pepys was wild about  "  Cecilia."

"  However,"  he added,  "  do not hear too much of it ;  but when he has
talked about it for an hour or so,  tell him to have done.  There is no other
way."

A mighty easy way,  this  !  however,  'tis what he literally practises for
himself.

We found at Mr.  Pepys'  nobody but his wife,  his brother,  Dr-  Pepys,  and
Dr.  Pepys'  lady,  Countess of Rothes.     Mr.  Pepys received me with such

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELL\A.  287

distinction,  that it was very evident how much the book,  with the most flat-
tering opinion of it,  was in his head  ;  however,  he behaved very prettily,
and only mentioned it by allusions  ;  most particularly upon the character
of Meadows,  which he took various opportunities of pronouncing to be the
*'  best hit possible"  upon the present race of fine gentlemen.  He asked me
whether I had met with Mrs.  Chapone lately  ;  and when I said no,  told me
he had two letters from her,  all about me,  which he must communicate
to me.

We did not stay with them long,  but called upon Miss Benson,  and pro-
ceeded to the Rooms.  Mr.  Pepys was very unwilling to part with us,  and
wanted to frighten me from going,  by saying, —

"And has Miss Burney courage to venture to the Rooms?  I wonder
she dares  !"

I did not seem to understand him,  though to mistake him was impossible.
However,  I thought of him again when 1 was at the Rooms,  for most violent
was the staring and whispering as I passed and repassed  ;  insomuch that
I shall by no means be in any haste to go again to them.  Susan and Sophy
Thrale,  who were with their aunt,  Mrs.  Scot,  told Queeny,  upon our return,
that they heard nothing said,  whichever way they turned,  but  "  That's she  !"
"  That's the famous Miss Burney  !"  I shall certainly escape going any
more,  if it is in my power.

Lady Shelley and Lady Poole were there,  and were very civil,  and looked
very pretty.  There was also a Mr.  Coxe,  brother to the writer,  a very
cultivated man,  a great scholar,  a poet,  a critic,  and very soft-mannered
and obliging.  He is,  however,  somewhat stitf and aflected,  and rather too
plaintive in his voice.

Monday,  Oct.  28th. — Mr.  Pepys had but just left me,  when Mrs.  Thrale
sent Susan with a particular request to see me in her dressing-room,  where
I found her with a milliner.

•'  Oh,  Miss Burney,"  she cried,  "  I could not help promising Mrs.  Cock-
ran that she should have a sight of you — she has begged it so hard."

You may believe 1 stared  ;  and the woman,  whose eyes almost looked
ready to eat me,  eagerly came up to me,  exclaiming, —

"  Oh,  ma'am,  you don't know what a favour this is,  to see you  !  I have
longed for it so long  !  It is quite a comfort to me,  indeed.  Oh,  ma'am,
how clever you must be!  All the ladies I deal with are quite distracted
about  'Cecilia,' — and I got it myself.  Oh,  ma'am,  how sensible you must
be  !     It does my heart good to see you."

Did you ever hear the like?  'Twas impossible not to laugh,  and Mrs.
Thrale has done nothing else ever since.

At dinner,  we had Dr.  Delap and Mr.  Selwyn,  who accompanied us in
the evening to a ball ;  as did also Dr.  Johnson,  to the universal amazement
of all who saw him there  ; — but he said he had found it so dull being quite
alone the preceding evening,  that he determined upon going with us  ;  "  for,"
he said,  "  it cannot be worse than being alone."

Strange that he should think so  !     I am sure I am not of his mind.
Mr.  PI.  Cotton and Mr.  Swinerton of course joined us immediately.     We
had hardly been seated five minutes before Mr.  Selwyn came to me,  from
some other company he had joined,  and said, —
"  I think you don't choose dancing,  ma'am  ?"
"  No,"  I answered.

"  There is a gentleman,"  he added,  who is very ambitious of the honour
of dancing with you  ;  but I told him I believed you would not dance."
I assured him he was right.
There was,  indeed,  no need of my dancing by way of attraction,  as I

288 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

saw,  again,  so much staring,  I scarce knew which way to look  ;  and every
glance 1 met was followed by a whisper from the glancer to his or her
party.  It was not,  indeed,  quite so bad as on Sunday,  as the dancers were
something to look at besides me  ;  but 1 was so very much watched,  and
almost pointed at,  that I have resolved to go no more,  neither to balls nor
Rooms,  if I can possibly avoid it.

Lady Shelley,  who spied us out,  sent us an invitation to her party,  and
we all paraded to the top of the room,  which in these places is the post of
honour.  There we found also Mrs.  Hatsel,  Mrs.  Dickens,  and Miss Ben-
son, and we all drank tea together.  Dr.  Johnson was joined by a friend of
his own,  Mr.  Metcalf,  and did tolerably well.

Oct.  29th. — We had a large party at home in the evening,  consisting of
Lady Shelley,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Hatsel,  Mrs.  and Miss Dickens,  IVIiss Benson,
H.  Cotton,  Mr.  Swinerton,  Mr.  Pepys,  and Mr.  Coxe.  Mr.  Selvvyn is gone
away to town upon business.  I was presently engaged by Mr.  Pepys,  and
he was joined by Mr.  Coxe,  and he by Miss Benson.  Poor Miss Dickens
was also in our circle  ;  but if I had not made her some sport by occasional
ridiculous whispers,  she would certainly have gone to sleep,  as no one else
noticed her,  and as not a word was said in which she had any chance of
taking any interest.  Mr.  Pepys led the conversation,  and it was all upon
criticism and poetry,  and such subjects as she had no chance to care for.
But I kept her awake by applying to her from time to time,  to give us an
epigram of Martial,  a quotation from Ovid,  a few lines of Homer,  and such
sort of impracticable requests,  which served to divert her lassitude and ennui
of all else that was said.  The conversation,  however,  grew so very bookish,
I was ashamed of being one in it,  and not without reason,  as every body,
out of that party,  told me afterwards,  "  they had been afraid of approach-
ing me,  I was so well engaged  ;"  and the odd Dr.  Delap told me the next
morning,  that Lady Shelley had complained she could not venture to speak
with me,  "  I was surrounded by so many,  and all prostrate  !"

This is just the sort of stuff I wish to avoid,  and,  as far as I can,  I do
avoid  ;  but wholly it is not possible.

Mr.  Coxe repeated several of his own compositions in verse,  and in such
melting strains,  I thought he would have wept over them!  When I got
from that set,  Mr.  Hatsel said to me, —

"  Pray,  Miss Burney,  what was all that poetry you have been repeating]
I was quite grieved to be out of the way of hearing it."

"  Not me,  sir,  it was Mr.  Coxe."

"And what was the poem?"

"  Something of his own,  sir."

Oh,  how he stared and looked  !  I saw he longed to say wicked things,
but I would not encourage him,  for the poems were pretty,  though the man
was conceited.

Poor Mr.  Pepys had,  however,  real cause to bemoan my escape  ;  for the
little set was broken up by my retreat,  and he joined Dr.  Johnson,  with
whom he entered into an argument upon some lines of Gray,  and upon
Pope's definition of wit,  in which he was so roughly confuted,  and so
severely ridiculed,  that he was hurt and piqued beyond all power of dis-
guise, and,  in the midst of the discourse,  suddenly turned from him,  and
wishing Mrs.  Thrale good night,  very abruptly withdrew.

Dr.  Johnson was certainly right with respect to the argument and to
reason  ;  but his opposition was so warm,  and his wit so satirical and exult-
ing, that I was really quite grieved to see how unamiable he appeared,  and
how greatly he made himself dreaded by all,  and by many abhorred.
What pity that he will not curb the vehemence of his love of victory and
superiority 1

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF  £V£LL\A.  289

The sum of the dispute was this.  Wit being talked of,  Mr.  Pepys
repeated, —

"  True wit is Nature to advantage dress'd,
What ofl was thought,  but ne'er so well express'd."

"  That,  sir,"  cried Dr.  Johnson,  "  is a definition both false and foolish.
Let wit be dressed how it will,  it will equally be wit,  and neither the more
nor the less for any advantage dress can give it."

Mr.  P.  But,  sir,  may not wit be so ill expressed,  and so obscure,  by a bad
speaker,  as to be lost 1

Dr.  J.  The fault,  then,  sir,  must be with the hearer.  If a man cannot
distinguish wit from words,  he little deserves to hear it.

Mr.  P.  But,  sir,  what Pope means

Dr.  J.  Sir,  what Pope means,  if he means what he says,  is both false and
foolish.  In the first place,  '  what oft was thought,'  is all the worse for being
oCien thought,  because to be wit,  it ought to be newly thought.

Mr.  P.  But,  sir,  'tis the expression makes it new.

Dr.  J.  How can the expression make it new  ?  It may make it clear,  or
may make it elegant  ;  but how new  ?  You are confounding words with
things.

Mr.  P.  But,  sir,  if one man says a thing very ill,  may not another man
say it so much better that

Dr.  J.  That other man,  sir,  deserves but small praise for the amendment ;
he is but the tailor to the first man's thoughts.

Mr.  P.  True,  sir,  he may be but the tailor  ;  but then the difference is as
great as between a man in a gold lace suit and a man in a blanket.

Dr.  J.  Just so,  sir,  I thank\ou for that:  the difference is precisely such,
since it consists neither in the gold lace suit nor the blanket,  but in the man
by whom they are worn.

This was the summary  ;  the various contemptuous sarcasms intermixed
would fill,  and very unpleasantly,  a quire.

Wed^jesday,  Oct.  30th. — In the evening we all went to Mr.  Platsel's,
where there was a large party  :  the Countess Rothes,  Lady Shelley,  Lady
Warren,  formerly Miss Clavering,  Miss Benson,  Mrs.  and Miss Dickens,
H.  Cotton,  Mr.  Swinerton,  two Bartons,  the Hatsels,  and Mrs.  Thrale.  Dr.
Johnson was not invited.  We had a very good evening;  but that I had a
vile cold,  and could not quit the fire a moment.

Lady Warren is immensely tall,  and extremely beautiful :  she is now but
just nineteen,  though she has been married two or three years.  She is
giddy,  gay,  chatty,  good-humoured,  and a little affected  ;  she hazards all
that occurs to her,  seems to think the world at her feet,  and is so young,
and gay,  and handsome,  that she is not much mistaken.  She is,  in short,
an inferior Lady Honoria Pemberton  :  somewhat beneath her in parts and
understanding,  but strongly in that class of character.  I had no conversa-
tion with her myself;  but her voice is loud and deep,  and all she said was
for the whole room.

Take a trait or two,  which I think will divert my daddy Crisp.  Mar-
riages being talked of,

"  I'll tell you,"  cried she,  "  a story  ;  that is,  it shan't be a story,  but a
fact.  A lady of my acquaintance,  who had 50,000/.  fortune,  ran away ta
Scotlahd with a gentleman she liked vastly  ;  so she was a little doubtful of
him,  and had a mind to try him  :  so when they stopped to dine,  and change
horses,  and all that,  she said,  'Now,  as I have a great regard for you,  I
dare say you have for me ;  so I will tell you a secret :  I have got no for-
tune at all,  in reality,  but only 5000/. ;  for all the rest is a mere pretence:
VOL.  I.  25

290 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

but if you like me for myself,  and not for my fortune,  you won't mind
that.'  So the gentleman said,  '  Oh,  I don't regard it at all,  and you are the
same charming angel that ever you was,'  and all those sort of things that
people say to one,  and then went out to see about the chaise.  So he did not
come back  ;  but when dinner was ready,  the lady said,  '  Pray,  where is he?'
'  Lor,  ma'am,'  said they,  '  why,  that gentleman has been gone ever so long 1'
So she came back by herself;  and now she's married to somebody else,  and
has her 50,000/.  fortune all safe."

Lady Warren was extremely smitten with Mrs.  Thrale,  and talked to
her almost incessantly,  though they had never before met  ;  but in the end
of the evening,  when Mrs.  T.  mentioned that she was going the next
morning to make a visit at Lewes

"  Oh,"  cried her ladyship,  "  I have a great mind to beg a favour of you
then."

"  Pray do,  ma'am,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I shall think it an honour to
grant it."

"  Oh,  but it's such an odd thing — it's quite an odd request ;  but it is for
a place in your coach."

"  My coach shall be very much at your ladyship's service ;  I beg you
will make what use of it you please."

"  VVhy,  you must know it is to carry a little dog for me to Lewes.  It
belongs to Dr.  Poole,  and he'll quite break his heart if I don't send it
him  ;  so I part with it at once,  before I grow too fond of it."

This was,  indeed,  an odd request to a new acquaintance,  and to a Welsh
M'oman,  as Mrs.  Thrale said afterwards.  The look of her eye the moment
she heard it made Lady Warren colour violently ;  but she answered with
great good humour, —

"  Suppose your ladyship w^as to do me the honour to go too,  and so carry
your little dog yourself?"

Lady Warren evidently understood her,  and began many apologies ;  but
said she was engaged herself to spend the morning at Lady Dash wood's.

"  I had hoped,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  your ladyship had meant your little
boy ;  for I should have been very proud to have been trusted with him ;  but
I suppose you could not spare him so long."

She has one child,  of ten weeks old,  of which she is doatingly fond.

"  Oh,  no,"  she answered eagerly,  "  not for half an hour.  I shall never
trust him away from me till he is eight years old,  and then I shall send him
to sea.  He shall be true blue.  I bring him up very stout.  He sucked a
hare bone for dinner to-day."

"  A hare bone for a child of ten weeks old!"

"  Oh,  he liked it vastly.  He laughed and crowed the whole time.  I
often have veal stewed into good strong broth for him."

Her husband,  Sir John Borlase Warren,  is in the navy.  Mrs.  Thrale
soon saw that though she was careless and unthinking,  she did not mean
to be insolent,  so that she afterwards very gracefully offered to carry the
dog,  and assured her nobody would more carefully perform her commis-
sion. She thought,  however,  better of the matter than to send him,  and
she told Mrs.  Hatsel she found she was  "  in a scrape."

My own chat was all with Mrs.  Hatsel or Lady Rothes,  with whom I
never spoke before,  though I have often seen her.  The talk was by no
means writable ;  but very pleasant.  Lady Rothes is sociable,  lively,
sensible,  gentle and amiable.  She,  Lady Shelley,  and Mrs.  Hatsel,  are all
of the same cast ;  but Lady Rothes in understanding seems to have the
advantage.     In manners it would be hard to say which excelled.

Thursday,  October 31. — A note came this morning to invite us all,

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  291

except Dr.  Johnson,  to Lady Rothes's.  Dr.  Johnson has tortured poor Mr.
Pepys so much that I fancy her ladyship omitted him in compHment to her
brother-in-law.  She mentions me in the civilest terms ;  and,  as I like her
much,  I will hide my blushes and recollect them.

"  May I flatter myself that Miss Burney will do me the favour to
accompany you?  I shall be much obliged and particularly happy to cul-
tivate so charming an acquaintance."

There's a Countess for you  !  Does not she deserve being an Earl  ?  for
such in fact she is,  being Countess in her own right,  and giving her own
name to her children,  who,  though sons and daughters of Mr.  Evelyn and
Dr.  Pepys, — for she has been twice married, — are called the eldest Lord
Lesley,  and the rest the Honourable Mr.  Lesleys,  and Lady Harriet and
Lady Mary.

At noon,  Mr.  Pepys called and found only me,  and sate with me till
dressing-time.  He brought me a book I was very glad to see.  He has
collected into one volume all the political works of Mr.  Burke,  and has
marked in the margin all the passages that will be entertaining or instructive
to non-politicians.  They are indeed charming,  eloquent,  spirited,  rational,
yet sentimental.  He told me he had two long letters from Mrs.  Chapone to
show me all about me and mine,  but he had them not in his pocket.

At Lady Rothes's we met only her doctor,  and Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys.
The talk was all literary,  but not pedantic;  and the evening was very
agreeable.

Friday,  Nov.  1st. — We spent at home with only our two young beaus.
I was quite glad of not going out ;  for,  though the places have done very
well,  and been very lively when we have assembled at them,  I have been
heartily tired of such perpetual preparation,  dressing,  and visiting.

Saturday,  Nov.  2d. — We went to Lady Shelley's.  Dr.  Johnson,  again,
excepted in the invitation.  He is almost constantly omitted,  either from too
much respect or too much fear.  I am sorry for it,  as he hates being alone,
and as,  though he scolds the others,  he is well enough satisfied himself ;
and,  having given vent to all his occasional anger or ill-humour,  he is ready
to begin again,  and is never aware that those who have so been  "  downed"
by him,  never can much covet so triumphant a visiter.  In contest of wit,
the victor is as ill off in future consequences as the vanquished in present
ridicule.

Moxday,  Nov.  4tii. — This was a grand and busy day.  Mr.  Swinerton
has been some time arrano-incr a meetino;  for all our house,  with Lady De
Ferrars,  whom you may remember as Charlotte Ellerker,  and her lord and
sisters ;  and this morning it took place,  by mutual appointment,  at his
lodgings,  where we met to breakfast.  Dr.  Johnson,  who already knew
Lord De Ferrars,  and Mrs.  and Miss Thrale,  and myself,  arrived first ;
and then came the Lord and Lady,  and Miss Ellerker and her youngest
sister,  Harriet.  Lord De Ferrars is very ugly,  but extremely well-bred,
gentle,  unassuming,  sensible,  and pleasing.  His lady is much improved
since we knew her in former days,  and seems good-humoured,  lively,  and
rather agreeable.     Miss Ellerker is nothing altered.

I happened to be standing by Dr.  Johnson when all the ladies came in  ;
but,  as I dread him before strangers,  from the staring attention he attracts
both for himself and all with whom he talks,  I endeavoured to change my
ground.  However,  he kept prating a sort of comical nonsense that detained
me some minutes whether I would or not ;  but when we were all taking
places at the breakfast table I made another effort to escape.  It proved
vain  ;  he drew his chair next to mine,  and went rattlino;  on in a humorous

292 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

sort of comparison he was drawing of himself to me, — not one word of
which could I enjoy,  or can I remember,  from the hurry I was in to get
out of his way.  In short,  I felt so awkward from thus being marked out,
that I was reduced to whisper a request to Mr.  Swinerton to put a chair
between us,  for which I presently made a space:  for I have often known him
stop all conversation with me,  when he has ceased to have me for his next
neighbour.  Mr.  Swinerton,  who is an extremely good natured young man,
and so intimate here that I make no scruple with him,  instantly complied,
and placed himself between us.

But no sooner was this done,  than Dr.  Johnson,  half seriously,  and very
loudly,  took him to task.

"  How now,  sir  !  what do you mean by this  ?  Would you separate me
from Miss Burney  ?"

Mr.  Swinerton,  a little startled,  began some apologies,  and Mrs.  Thrale
winked at him to give up the place  ;  but he was willing to oblige me,  though
he grew more and more frightened every minute,  and coloured violently as
the Doctor continued his remonstrance,  which he did with rather unmerciful
raillery,  upon his taking advantage of being in his own house to thus sup-
plant him,  and croiv  ;  but when he had borne it for about ten minutes,  liis
face became so hot with the fear of hearing something worse,  that he ran
from the field,  and took a chair between Lady De Ferrars and IMrs.  Thrale.

I think I shall take warning by this failure,  to trust only to my own expe-
dients for avoiding his public notice in future.  However,  it stopped here;
for Lord De Ferrars came in,  and took the disputed place without knowing
of the contest,  and all was quiet.

All that passed afterwards was too general and too common to be recol-
lected.

I walked out afterwards,  up Newmarket Hill,  with Mrs.  Thrale and Mr.
Swinerton.  This young man is very sweet tempered,  and good,  and soft-
hearted ;  but alas  !   he is also soft-headed.

We met,  upon the Newmarket Hill,  a large troop of horse and a pack of
hounds returning from hunting.  Among the gentlemen one stopped Mr.
Swinerton,  who,  we were told,  is the object here at this lime, — Mr.  Kaye of
the dragoons, — a baronet's son,  and a very tall,  handsome,  and agreeable-
looking young man  ;  and,  as the folks say,  it is he for whom all the belles
here are sighing.  I was glad to see he seemed quite free from the noncka-
lante impertinence of the times.

At dinner we had Mr.  Swinerton and Mr.  Selwyn,  who is just returned.

Miss Thrale,  who had met with Miss Benson,  brought me a long message
from her,  that I had used her very ill,  and would make her no reparation  ;
for she had been reading my book till she was so blind with crying,  she had
disfigured herself in such a manner she could not dress,  and must give up
going to the ball in the evening,  though it was the last;  and though she had
not yet near come to the end,  she was so knocked up with blubbering,  she
must give up every engagement in order to go on with it,  being quite unfit
for any thing else;  but she desired Miss Thrale to tell me she thought it
very unwarrantable in me to put her nerves in such a state I

"Ay,"  cried Dr.  Johnson,  "some people want to make out some credit
to me from the little rogue's book.  I was told by a gentleman this morning,
that it was a very fine book,  if it was all her own.  '  It is all her own,'  said
T,  '  for me,  I am sure,  for I never saw one word of it before it was printed.'  "

This gentleman 1 have good reason to believe is Mr.  Metcalf.  Captain
Phillips 1 dare say remembers that he supped with us at Sir Joshua Rey-
nolds's the evening that James came from Portsmouth.     He is much with

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  293

Dr.  Johnson,  but seems to have taken an unaccountable dislike to Mrs.
Thrale,  to whom he never speaks.  1 have seen him but once or twice
myself;  and as he is dry,  and I am shy,  very little has passed between us.

When all our company was gone,  late as it was,  it was settled we should
go to the ball,  the last for the season being this night.  My own objections
about going not being strong enough to combat the ado my mentioning
them would have occasioned,  I joined in the parly without demur.  We all
went but Dr.  Johnson.

The ball was half over,  and all the company seated to tea.  Mr.  Wade*
came to receive us all,  as usual,  and we had a table procured for us,  and
went to tea ourselves,  for something to do.  When this repast was over,  the
company returned to their recreation.  The room was very thin,  and almost
half the ladies danced with one another,  though there were men enough
present,  I believe,  had they chosen such exertion ;  but the Meadowses at
balls are in crowds.  Some of the ladies were in riding habits,  and they
made admirable men.  'Tis tonnisli to be so much undressed at the last
ball.

None of our usual friends,  the Shelleys,  Hatsels,  Dickens,  or Pepys,  were
here,  and we,  therefore,  made no party  ;  but Mrs.  Thrale and I stood at the
top of the room to look on the dancing,  and as we were thus disengaged,  she
was seized with a violent desire to make one among them,  and 1 felt myself
an equal inclination.  She proposed,  as so many women danced together,
that we two should,  and nothing should 1 have liked so well ;  but I begged
her to give up the scheme,  as that would have occasioned more fuss and
observation than our dancing with all the men that ever were born.

While we were debating this matter,  a gentleman suddenly said to me, —
"Did you walk far this morning.  Miss Burney 1"  And,  looking at him,  I
saw Mr.  Metcalf,  whose graciousness rather surprised me,  for he only made
to Mrs.  Thrale a cold and distant bow,  and it seems he declares,  aloud and
around,  his aversion to literary ladies.  That he can endure,  and even seek
me,  is,  I presume,  only from the general perverseness of mankind,  because
he sees I have always turned from him ;  not,  however,  from disliking him,
for he is a shrewd,  sensible,  keen,  and very clever man ;  but merely from a
dryness on his own side that has excited retaliation.

"Yes,"  I answered,  "  we walked a good way."

"  Dr.  Johnson,"  said he,  "  told me in the morning you were no walker  ;
but I informed him then 1 had had the pleasure of seeing you upon the
Newmarket Hill."

"  Oh,  he does not know,"  cried 1,  "  whether lama walker or not — he
does not see me walk,  because he never walks himself."

"  He has asked me,"  said he,  "  to go with him to Chichester,  to see the
cathedral,  and I told him I would certainly go if he pleased;  but why,  I
cannot imagine,  for how shall a blind man see a cathedral?"

"  I believe,"  quoth I,  "  his blindness is as much the effect of absence as
of infirmity,  for he sees wonderfully at times."

"Why,  he has assured me he cannot see the colour of any man's eyes,
and does not know what eyes any of his acquaintance have."

"  I am sure,  however,"  cried I,  "  he can see the colour of a lady's top-
knot, for he very often finds fault with it."

"  Is that possible?"

"  Yes,  indeed  ;  and I was much astonished at it at first when I knew him,
for I had concluded that the utmost of his sight would only reach to tell him
whether he saw a cap or a wig."

*  The master of the ceremonies.
25*

294 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

Here he was called away by some gentlemen,  but presently came to me
again.

"  Miss Burney,"  he said,  "  shall you dance V

"No,  sir,  not to-night."

"  A gentleman,"  he added,  "  has desired me to speak to you for him."

Now,  Susanna,  for the grand moment ! — the height — the zenith of my
glory in the ton meridian  !  I again said I did not mean to dance,  and to
silence all objection,  he expressively said, — •

"  'Tis Captain Kaye who sends me."

Is not this magnificent  ?     Pray congratulate me  !

I was really very much surprised,  but repeated my refusal,  with all cus-
tomary civilities to soften it.  He was leaving me with this answer,  when
this most flashy young officer,  choosing to trust his cause to himself,  came
forward,  and desired to be introduced to me.  Mr.  Metcalf performed that
ceremony,  and he then,  with as much respect and deference as if soliciting
a countess,  said, —

"  May I flatter myself you will do me the honour of dancing with me?"

I thanked him,  and said the same thing over again.  He looked much
disappointed,  and very unwilling to give up his plan.

"  If you have not,"  he said,  "  any particular dislike to dancing,  it will
be doing,  not only me,  but the whole room much honour,  if you will make
one in a set."

"  You do me much honour,  sir,"  I answered,  "  but I must beg you to
excuse me."

"  I hope not,"  cried he  ;  "  I hope out of charity you will dance,  as it is
the last ball,  and the company is so thin."

"  Oh,  it will do very well without me  ;  Mr.  Wade himself says he dies
to-night a very respectable death  ?"

"  And will you not have the goodness to help it on a little in its last
stage 1"

"  No,"  said I,  laughing ;  "  why should we wish it to bo kept lingering?"

"  Lingering  !"  repeated he,  looking round at the dancers  ;  "  no,  surely it
is not quite so desperate ;  and if you will but join in,  you will give it new
existence."

I was a little thrown off*  my guard at this unexpected earnestness,  so dif-
ferent to the ton of the day,  and I began hardly to know what to answer,
my real objection being such as I could by no means publish,  though his
urgency and his politeness joined would have made me give up any other.

"  This is a very quiet dance,"  he continued  ;  "  there is nothing fatiguing
in it."

"  You are very good,"  said I,  "  but I cannot really dance to-night."

I was sorry to seem so obstinate,  but he was just the man to make every
body inquire whom he danced with  ;  and any one who wished for general
attention could do no better than to be his partner.

The ever-mischievous Mrs.  Thrale,  calling to Mr.  Selwyn,  who stood by
us,  said, —

"  Why,  here's a man in love  ! — quite,  downright in love with Miss Bur-
ney, if ever I saw one I"

"  He is quite mortified,  at least,"  he answered  ,-  "  I never saw a man
look more mortified."

"  Well,  he did not deserve it,"  said she ;  "  he knew how to beg,  and he
ought not to have been so served."

I begged her to be silent,  for Mr.  Metcalf returned to me.

"  Were you too much tired,"  he said,  "  with your walk this morning,  to
try at a dance  ?"

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  295

I excused myself as well as I could,  and we presently went into the card-
room to vary the scene.  When we returned to the ball-room I was very
glad to see my new captain had just taken out Lady Anne Lindsay,  who is
here with Lady iMargaret Fordyce,  and who dances remarkably well,  and
was every way a more suitable partner for him.  He was to leave the town,
with his regiment,  the next day.

Tuesday. — Mrs.  Thrale took me out to walk with her.  We met Lady
De Ferrars and j\Iiss Ellerker in our ramble,  and the very moment the ball
was mentioned,  this dear and queer creature called out, —

"Ay,  there was a sad ado,  ladies dancing with ladies,  and all sorts of
odd things  ;  and that handsome and fine Mr.  Kaye broke his heart almost
to dance with Miss Burney;  but she refused him,  and so,  in despair,  he
took out Lady Anne Lindsay."

Wednesday. — Dr.  Delap called to-day and brought a play with him for
Mrs.  Thrale and me to read,  and he has most vehemently and repeatedly
begged me to write a critique upon it.  I will not,  however,  undertake any
such thing,  which I not only do not hold myself equal to,  but which would
be a most disagreeable and thankless task.  I shall,  nevertheless,  mark
such places and passages as I think would be obviously mended by some
change,  for he is so very earnest,  it would be either ill nature or treachery
to refuse him.

At night we had Dr.  Pepys and Lady Rothes,  and were very sociable
and pleasant.

Thursday. — Mr.  Metcalf called upon Dr.  Johnson,  and took him out an
airing.  3Ir.  Hamilton is gone,  and Mr.  Metcalf is now the only person out
ofthis house that voluntarily communicates with the Doctor.  He has been
in a terrible severe humour of late,  and has really frightened all the people,
till they almost ran from him.  To me only I think he is now kind,  for
Mrs.  Thrale fares worse than any body.  'Tis very strange and very
melancholy that he will not a little more accommodate his manners and
language to those of other people.  He likes I\Ir.  Metcalf,  however,  and so
do I,  for he is very clever and entertaining when he pleases.  Capt.  Phil-
lips will remember that was not the case when we saw him at Sir Joshua's.
He has,  however,  all the de quoi.

Poor Dr.  Delap confessed to us,  that the reason he now came so seldom,
though he formerly almost lived with us when at this place,  was his being
too unwell to cope with Dr.  Johnson.  And the other day Mr.  Selwya
having refused an invitation from Mr.  Hamilton to meet the Doctor,  because
he preferred being here upon a day when he was out,  suddenly rose at the
time he was expected to return,  and said he must run away,  "  for fear the
Doctor should call him to account."

Friday. — We strolled all the morning,  and spent the evening with Lady
S.,  where we met Miss Benson,  Dr.  Delap,  and Mr.  Selvvyn.  Sir John is
very civil to me,  and,  as it is the t07i to do here,  he,  among the rest,  has
discovered a new excellence.  Dr.  Delap,  in his odd manner,  said here the
other morning, —

"  Sir John S.  told me he had met yesterday Miss Burney,  but he neither
said she talked well nor wrote well ;  he only said she walked well ;  he
never,  he said,  saw any woman walk so well !"

Comic enough  ;  but this is a mere specimen,  by the by,  of the various new
discoveries made in the polite world,  of my endowments — discoveries which
would make you grin amain,  if I had room to write them.  It is not modesty
stops me,  for they are far too sublime for vanity,  and consequently for
shame.

Saturday. — We had Miss Benson and Mr.  Selvvyn,  and a very good

296 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

chatty quiet day.  Miss Benson has given me a little commission to do for
her with Dr.  Delap,  concerning some books belonging to Louisa Harris,  on
purpose,  she says,  to make me call upon her when I return to town.  I
like the office very well,  for her hardness and disagreeableness wear off
more and more,  and there is so much of that rare quality,  sound sense,  in
her composition,  that it makes amends for much deficiency in her address
and manner.

Sunday,  Nov.  10th,  brings in a new person.  The Honourable Miss
Monckton,*  who is here with her mother,  the Dowager Lady Galway,  has
sent various messages of her earnest desire to be acquainted with Mrs.
Thrale and your humble servant to command.  Dr.  Johnson she already
knew,  for she is one of those who stand foremost in collecting all extraor-
dinary or curious people to her London conversaziones,  which,  like those
of Mrs.  Vesey,  mix the rank and the literature,  and exclude all beside.
Well — after divers intimations of this sort,  it was at last settled that Lady
De Ferrars should bring her here this morning.

In the evening came Lady De Ferrars,  Miss Monckton,  and Miss EUer-
ker.  Miss Monckton is between thirty and forty,  very short,  very fat,  but
handsome ;  splendidly and fantastically dressed,  rouged not unbecomingly,
yet evidently and palpably desirous of gaining notice and admiration.
She has an easy levity in her air,  manner,  voice and discourse,  that speak
all within to be comfortable  ;  and her rage of seeing any thing curious may
be satisfied,  if she pleases,  by looking in a mirror.

I can give you no account of the conversation,  as it w^as broken,  and not
entertaining.  Miss Monckton went early,  having another engagement,  but
the other ladies stayed very late.  She told us,  however,  one story extremely
well worth recording.  The Duke of Devonshire w^as standing near a very
fine glass lustre in a corner of a room,  at an assembly,  and in a house of
people who,  Miss Monckton said,  were by no means in a style of life to
hold expense as immaterial ;  and,  by carelessly lolling back,  he threw the
lustre down and it was broke.  He showed not,  however,  the smallest con-
cern or confusion at the accident,  but coolly said,  "  I wonder how I did
that !"  He then removed to the opposite corner,  and to show,  I suppose,
he had forgotten what he had done,  leaned his head in the same manner,
and down came the opposite lustre !  He looked at it very calmly,  and,
with a philosophical dryness,  merely said,  "  This is singular enough I"  and
walked to another part of the room,  without either distress or apology.

After Miss Monckton was gone.  Lady De Ferrars drew a chair next mine
and began talking of"  Cecilia."

"  We have plagued my lord,"  said she,  "  to death about it,  because he
always says that old Delville was in the right not to give up a good family
name ;  but I was never so glad as when I found the old gentleman's own
name was my Lord De Ferrars ;  for he,  you know,  is a Compton ;  so I
told him I was sure it  ^vas himself,  and he owned that if he had been a
Delville,  he should have done the same wuth a Beverley."

Is not this triumph for me,  my dearest Susy  ?  Pray let my daddy Crisp
hear it,  and knock under.  Mr.  Bewley,  too,  shall be told it,  who has made
the same objection with my daddy to the improbability of relinquishing a
fortune for a name.  Neither my daddy,  my father,  nor Mr.  Bewley are
here judges to oppose to Lord De Ferrars,  who,  being a man of rank,  and
having cherished a name himself,  is more fit to decide upon this question
than wit,  understanding,  judgment,  or general knowledge,  can make any

*  Afterwards the Countess of Corke and Orrery, — lately deceased.

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  297

Others who have not the power to so well feel the temptation of family-
pride in exciting such obstacles to reason and happiness.  I never meant to
vindicate old Delville,  whom I detested and made detestable ;  but I always
asserted that,  his character and situation considered,  he did nothing that
such a man would hesitate in doing.

Mrs.  Thrale has since met Lord De Ferrars,  and talked over all the
book to him  ;  and he told her that he thought its great merit was the
reasonableness of the Delvillian distress with respect to changing their
name !

I felt,  however,  a little ashamed when Lady De Ferrars told me her
lord's name,  which he has,  with his title,  in right of his mother  ;  but as I
had tied it to a family celebrated for its antiquity,  I saw they were none of
them displeased.  Lord De Ferrars told Mrs.  Thrale himself that he is
descended from Elfrida,  and has the castle of Tamworth,  originally built by
her,  now in his possession.  So here is a Delvillian ancestry with great
exactness.  I always told my dear daddy that his reasoning against the
Delville prejudice,  however unanswerable for truth,  by no means disproved
the existence of such prejudice,  as all those very high-born and long
genealogists agree.  Mrs.  Thrale's herself says that her own mother would
have acted precisely as Mrs.  Delville acted.  And Mrs.  Thrale's father was
descended from Adam of Salisbury.

"  I assure,  you,"  however,  continued her ladyship,  "  my lord was so
fond of the book,  he could never part with it,  and so much interested in the
story,  he could think of nothing else.  He cried,  violently,  too,  I assure
you  ;  so I hope that will give you a good idea of his heart."

Mrs.  Thrale and Miss Ellerker then joined in the conversation,  and much
discussion followed about family names and family honour.  Lady De
Ferrars said —

"  This is very rude,  I confess,  to talk so of the book before Miss Burney ;
but when once one has begun there is no dropping the subject."

I was glad,  however,  when it was dropped,  as I think it as little my busi-
ness to vindicate as to censure my characters ;  and,  therefore,  from caring
to do neither,  I am always at a loss and uncomfortable when they are men-
tioned.

Tuesday. — We went in a party to breakfast with Dr.  Delap,  at Lewes,
by his earnest desire.  Mr.  Selwyn accompanied us.  The doctor again
urged his request that I would write a criticism upon his new play  ;  but I
assured him,  very truly,  I was too ignorant of stage business and stage
effects to undertake offering any help or advice to him  ;  yet I pointed out
lines that I thought wanted alteration,  and proposed a change in two or
three scenes,  for he would not let me rest without either praising what I
did not like,  or giving explicit reasons why I did not praise.  Mrs.  Thrale
has promised him an epilogue.

I am now so much in arrears that I must be more brief in my accounts.
We spent this evening at Lady De Ferrars,  where Dr.  Johnson accompa-
nied us,  for the first time he has been invited to our parties since my arrival.
The company was select,  but dull.  Miss Monckton,  Sir Henry Dashwood,
Mr.  Manners — son of Lord Robert — Mr.  Musgrave — a buckish kind of
young man of fashion — the two Miss Ellerkers,  and ourselves.  Miss
Monckton only confirmed my first notions of her,  and the rest gave me no
notions worth mentioning.

MoxDAY and Tuesday. — I have no time,  except to tell you a comical
tale which Mrs.  Thrale ran to acquaint me with.  She had been call-
ing upon  ]\Ir.  Scrase,  an old and dear friend,  who is confined with the gout ;

298 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

and while she was inquiring about him of his nurse and housekeeper,  the
woman said, —

"  Ah,  madam,  how happy are you to have Minerva in the house with
you !"

"  Oh,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  you mean my dear Miss Burney,  that wrote
*  CeciUa.'     So you have read it;  and what part did you Uke  ?"

"  Oh,  madam,  I liked it all better than any thing I ever saw in my hfe  ;
but most of all I liked that good old gentleman,  Mr.  Albany,  that goes about
telling people their duty,  without so much as thinking of their fine clothes."

When Mrs.  Thrale told us this at dinner,  Dr.  Johnson said, —

"  I am all of the old housekeeper's mind  ;  Mr.  Albany I have always
stood up for  ;  he is one of my first favourites.  Very fine indeed are the
things he says."

My dear Dr.  Johnson  ! — what condescension is this  !  He fully,  also,
enters into all my meaning in the high-flown language of Albany,  from his
partial insanity and unappeasable remorse.

So here concludes Brighthelmstone for  ]  782.

Wednesday,  Nov.  20tii,  Mrs.  and the three Miss Thrales and myself
all arose at six o'clock in the morning,  and  "  by the pale blink of the moon"
we went to the sea-side,  where we had bespoke the bathing-women to be
ready for us,  and into the ocean we plunged.  It was cold,  but pleasant.  I
have bathed so often as to lose my dread of the operation,  which now gives
me nothing but animation and vigour.  We then returned home,  and dressed
by candle-light,  and as soon as we could get Dr.  Johnson ready,  we set out
upon our journey,  in a coach and a chaise,  and arrived in Argyll Street at
dinner time.  Mrs.  Thrale has there fixed her tent for this short winter,
which will end with the beginning of April,  when her foreign journey takes
place.

St.  Martin's Street. — The day after my return home,  Pacchierotti
came and spent part of the afternoon here.  Mr.  Sastres also was with us.
The Pac.  was very sweet and amiable,  in exceeding good humour,  and
tolerably in spirits.  But what was my delight to receive,  by Charlotte,  a
message from Mrs.  Fitzgerald,  to invite me to a place in her box at the
Opera.  She called for us,  and we both went.  Her box is a new one,  only
up two pair of stairs,  the fourth from the stage,  and holds six.  It is,  indeed,
the most delightful box in the house,  from not being so much in sight as to
render very much dress necessary,  yet enough to have every convenience
of seeing both performers and company.

The opera was the new serious one,  "  Medonte."  I am not enchanted
with it ;  there is a general want of something striking or interesting.  Pac-
chierotti sang most sweetly,  without force,  effort,  or pain to himself,  but with
an even excellence,  he is seldom well enough to keep throughout a whole
opera.  He is but too perfect ;  for how we shall bear his successors I can-
not guess.

He found me out,  and gave me several smiles during the performance  ;
indeed,  he could never look either to the right or left without a necessity of
making some sort of acknowledgment in return to the perpetual bows
made him from almost every box in the house.

Nov.  24Tn. — Mrs.  Thrale was with me all the morning,  up stairs in my
cold bedchamber  ;  and all the evening I spent with my mother,  in reading
*'  Adele and Theodore  ;"  a book you must purchase,  for there are so many
good directions about education,  that though the general plan is impracti-
cable, except to very rich and very independent people,  there are a thousand
useful hints for folks in real life.     Its worst fault seems tediousness,  much

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  299

repetition and minuteness,  making it necessary to skip,  from time to time,
in order to keep up any attention  ;  but the whole,  as a work,  has great
merit indeed,  both in design and execution.  Some of the episodes are pretty,
but the plot of the stories is commonly either trite or unnatural,  though the
circumstances attending them are very interesting and very well told.

Dec.  2d. — This evening Mrs.  Thrale had a large party,  and invited
Charlotte to it,  which I was very glad of,  as she was much delighted.  My
father took us both,  for I could not go to dinner,  and we were very late.

Dear Mrs.  Thrale received me as usual,  as if I were the first person of
her company.  There was not a creature there with whom I was not ac-
quainted, except the Duca di Sangro a Neapolitan nobleman,  very much
in fashion at present among the young ladies comrtic ilfaut,  with two or
three of whom he has trifled not very honourably.  He is very young and
very handsome,  and very insinuating in his address and manners.

The rest were Lady Rothes,  who very politely and obligingly apologized
for not having waited upon me in town,  and Dr.  Pepys,  Mrs.  Ord,  who
made me promise to spend Thursday with her,  to meet a relation of hers
lately come to town  ;  Mrs.  Byron,  who asked me for the same day,  and
whom I rejoiced in being able to refuse without affronting ;  Mr.  and Mrs.
Davenant,  Harry Cotton,  Mr.  Swinerton  ;  Piozzi,  who sang very well,  and
whose voice is this year in very good order ;  Mr.  Evans,  Mr.  Seward,  Mr.
Sastres ;  Mr.  Thornton,  the new member for the borough,  a man of Pres-
byterian extraction,  upon which he has grafted of late much ton and 7io7i-
chalance,  and who was pleased to follow me about with a sort of hard and
unmeaning curiosity,  very disagreeable to me,  and to himself very much
like nothing  ;  Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys,  Mrs.  Scot,  and Dr.  and Mrs.  Parker.

Tuesday. — Pacchierotti called in the morning,  and was very sweet and
amiable.  I received,  also,  a most perfumed note,  on French paper,  gilt,
bordered,  glazed,  inclosed in a finely decorated cover,  and sealed with a
miniken figure,  from Miss Monckton,  to invite me for the 8th,  to meet Mrs.
Thrale.  I accepted the invitation with pleasure  ;  her parties are the most
brilliant in town,  and she is acquainted with many people I wish to meet.
In small parties,  or intimate acquaintances,  it is necessary to like the mis-
tress of the house  ;  but in large assemblies,  it is but like going to a better
regulated public place.

Wednesday. — I called in the morning upon Miss Palmer,  with whom I
sat some time.  Her uncle has been very dangerously ill,  but is now quite
recovered.  I then went and spent all the day with sweet Mrs.  Thrale,  who
shut out all company,  and gave me herself to myself,  and it was much the
happiest time I have spent,  away from my father,  since I left Brighton.
Dr.  Johnson was at home,  and in most excellent good humour and spirits.

300 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

CHAPTER XIY.

1782.

An Assembly at the Hon.  Miss Monckton's — Singular Style of Reception — Lady Gal-
way — Dr.  Johnson — Chit-chat — Female Costume — Edmund Burke — Sir Joshua Key-
nolds — The old Duchess of Portland — Mrs.  Greville — Flirtation — Conversation with
Burke— Tlie Old Wits— Gibbon— Mrs.  Siddons— Truth and Romance — Dr.  Johnson
and Mrs.  Siddons — Table-talk- Dr.  Johnson at the Play — A Party at Mrs.  Walsing-
ham's — Sir Charles Hanbury Williams — Mrs.  Montagu — Mr.  Percy — Introduction to
Mrs.  Siddons — Erskine— Lady Lucan— Dinner at Mrs.  Thrale's— The Opera — Alle-
grante — Assembly at Lady Gideon's — Sir Sampson Gideon — Lady Margaret Fordyce —
Lady Anne Lindsay — Lord Gage — Sir Hugh Dalrymplc — The Duca di Sangro — Lady
Clarges — Mrs.  Walsingham's Paintings — Queen Charlotte — Her Remarks on  "Cecilia"
— Party at Lady Rothes — Lord Falmouth — Dr.  Cadogan — Mr.  Wraxall — The Incon-
veniences of Popularity — Visit to Dr.  Johnson — Christmas Day — A Party at Mrs.
Ord's — Dr.  Johnson's Advice to a Young Lady on her  "Coming Out" — Mrs.  Chapone
— Mrs.  Delany — Chit-chat — Character of Mr.  Crisp — Dinner at Sir Joshua's — West,
the Painter — Jackson of Exeter — Table-talk — Anecdotes of Mrs.  Reynolds — A Hum-
drum Evening — Mrs.  Delany and Mrs.  Chapone — Sir Ashton Lever — His Museum —
Nollekens,  the Sculptor.

Dec.  8th. — Now for Miss Monckton's assembly.

I had begged Mrs.  Thrale to call for me,  that I might have her counte-
nance and assistance upon my entrance.  Miss Thrale came also.  Every
thing was in a new style.  We got out of the coach into a hall full of ser-
vants, not one of which inquired our names,  or took any notice of us.  We
proceeded,  and w^ent up stairs,  and when we arrived at a door,  stopped and
looked behind us.  No servant had followed or preceded us.  We delibe-
rated what was to be done.  To announce ourselves was rather awkward,
neither could we be sure we were going into the right apartment.  I pro-
posed our going up higher,  till we met with somebody  ;  Miss Thrale thought
we should go down and call some of the servants ;  but Mrs.  Thrale,  after
a ridiculous consultation,  determined to try her fortune by opening the door.
This being done,  we entered a room full of — tea-things,  and one maid-ser-
vant !

"  Well,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  laughing,  "  what is to be done now  ?  I sup-
pose we are come so early that nothing is ready."

The maid stared,  but said, — "  There's company in the next room."

Then we considered again how to make ourselves known and then Mrs.
Thrale again resolved to take courage and enter.  She therefore opened
another door,  and went into another apartment.  I held back,  but looked
after,  and observing that she made no courtesy,  concluded she was gone
into some wrong place.  Miss Thrale followed,  and after her went little I,
wondering who was to receive,  or what was to become of us.

Miss JMonckton lives with her mother,  the old Dowager Lady Galway,  in
a noble house in Charles Street,  Berkeley Square.  The room was large
and magnificent.  There was not much company,  for we were very early.
Lady Galway sat at the side of the fire,  and received nobody.  She seems
very old,  and was dressed with a little round white cap,  and not a single
hair,  no cushion,  roll,  nor any thing else but the little round cap,  which was
flat upon her forehead.  Such part of the company as already knew her
made their compliments to her where she sat,  and the rest were never taken
up to her,  but belonged wholly to Miss Monckton.

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.  301

Miss Monckton's own manner of receiving her guests was scarce more
laborious ;  for she kept her seat when they entered,  and only turned round
her head to nod it,  and say  "  How do do  ?"  after which they found what
accommodation they could for themselves.

As soon,  however,  as she perceived Mrs.  and Miss Thrale,  which was
not till they had been some minutes in the room,  she arose to welcome them,
contrary to her general custom,  and merely because it was their first visit.
Our long trains making my entrance some time after theirs,  gave me the
advantage of being immediately seen by her,  and she advanced to me with
quickness,  and very politely thanked me for coming,  and said, —

"  I fear you think me very rude for taking the liberty of sending to you."

"  No,  indeed,  you did me much honour,"  quoth I.

She then broke further into her general rules,  by making way for me to
a good place,  and seating me herself,  and then taking a chair next me,  and
begining a little chat.  I really felt myself much obliged to her for this sea-
sonable attention,  for I was presently separated from Mrs.  Thrale,  and
entirely surrounded by strangers,  all dressed superbly,  and all looking
saucily ;  and as nobody's names were spoken,  I had no chance to discover
any acquaintances.  Mr.  Metcalf,  indeed,  came and spoke to me the instant
I came in,  and I should have been very happy to have had him for my
neighbour ;  but he was engaged in attending to Dr.  Johnson,  who was
standing near the fire,  and environed wdth listeners.

Some new people now coming in,  and placing themselves in a regular
way.  Miss Monckton exclaimed, — "  My whole care is to prevent a circle ;"
and hastily rising,  she pulled about the chairs,  and planted the people in
groups,  with as dexterous a disorder as you would desire to see.

The company in general were dressed with more brilliancy than at any
rout I ever was at,  as most of them were going to the Duchess of Cumber-
land's, and attired for that purpose.  Just behind me sat Mrs.  Hampden,
still very beautiful,  but insufferably affected.  Another lady in full dress,  and
very pretty,  came in soon after,  and got herself a chair just before me ;  and
then a conversation began between her and Mrs.  Hampden,  of which I will
give you a specimen.

"  How disagreeable these sacques are  !  I am so incommoded with these
nasty rufHes  !     I am going to Cumberland House — are you  ?"

"  To be sure,"  said Mrs.  Hannpden  ;  "  what else,  do you think,  would
make me bear this weight of dress 1 I can't bear a sacque."

"  Why,  I thought you said you should always wear ihern  ?"

"  Oh,  yes,  but I have changed my mind since then — as many people do.'*

"  Well,  I think it vastly disagreeable indeed,"  said the other ;  "  you can't
think how I'm encumbered with these rufiles  !"

"  Oh,  I am quite oppressed with them,"  said Mrs.  Hampden  ;  "  I can
hardly bear myself up."

"  And I dined in this way  !"  cried the other ;  "  only think — dining in a
sacque  !"

"  Oh,"  answered Mrs.  Hampden,  "  it really puts me quite out of spirits."

Well,  have you enough 1 — and has my daddy raved enough  ?

After this they found some subject less popular,  and the lady unknown
leaned over me,  without any ceremony,  to whisper with Mrs.  Hampden.
I should have offered her my place if she had made any apology,  but as it
was,  I thought she might take her own way.  In the course of the evening,
however,  I had the pleasure to observe a striking change in her manners  ;
for as soon as she picked up,  I know not how,  my name,  she ceased her

VOL.  I.  26

302 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

whispering,  looked at me with the civilest smiles,  spoke to me two or three
times,  and calling to a fine beau,  said, —

"  Do pray sit this way,  that you may screen Miss Burney as well as me
from that fire."

I did not,  however,  sufficiently like her beginning,  to accept her challenge
of talking,  and only coldly answered by yes,  no,  or a bow.

Mrs.  and Miss Thrale had other engagements,  and soon went away.
Miss Monckton then took a chair again next to me,  which she kept till we
both started at the same voice,  and she cried out, — "  Oh,  it's Mr.  Burke  !"
and she ran to him with as much joy as,  if it had been our house,  I should.
Cause the second for liking her better.

I grew now in a violent fidget,  both to have his notice,  and for what his
notice would be  ;  but I sat very still,  and he was seized upon by scores,
and taken to another part of the room.

Then came in Sir Joshua Reynolds,  and he soon drew a chair near mine,
and from that time I was never without some friend at my elbow.

"  Have you seen,"  said he,  "  Mrs.  Montagu lately  ?"

•'  No,  not very lately."

"  But within these k\v months V

"  No,  not since last year."

"  Oh,  you must see her,  then.  You ought to see and to hear her — 'twill
he worth your while.  Have you heard of the fine long letter she has
written 1"

"  Yes,  but I have not met with it."

"  1 have."

"  And who is it to  ?"

*'  The old Duchess of Portland.  She desired Mrs.  Montagu's opinion of
<  Cecilia,'  and she has written it at full length.  I was in a party at Her
Grace's,  and heard of nothing but you.  She is so delighted,  and so sen-
sibly, so rationally,  that I only wish you could have heard her.  And old
Mrs.  Delany had been forced to begin it,  though she had said she should
never read any more  ;  however,  when we met,  she was reading it already
for the third time.

Pray tell my daddy to rejoice for me in this conquest of the Duchess,  his
old friend,  and Mrs.  Delany,  his sister's.

Sir Joshua is extremely kind  ;  he is always picking up some anecdote
of this sort for me  ;  yet,  most delicately,  never lets me hear his own praises
but through others.     He looks vastly well,  and as if he had never been ill.

After this Mrs.  Burke saw me,  and,  with much civility and softness of
manner,  came and talked with me,  while her husband,  without seeing me,
went behind my chair to speak to Mrs.  Hampden.

Miss Monckton,  returning to me,  then said, —

"  Miss Burney,  I had the pleasure yesterday of seeing Mrs.  Greville."

I suppose she concluded I was very intimate with her.

"  I have not seen her,"  said I,  "  many years."

"  I know,  however,"  cried she,  looking surprised,  "  she is your god-
mother."

"  But she does not do her duty and answer for me,  for I never see her."

*'  Oh,  you have answered very well for yourself!  But 1 know by that
your name is Fanny."

She then tripped to somebody else,  and Mr.  Burke very quietly came
from Mrs.  Hampden,  and sat down in the vacant place at my side.  I could
then wait no longer,  for 1 found he w-as more near-sighted than myself;
1,  therefore,  turned towards him and bowed  :  he seemed quite aniazed,
and really made me ashamed,  however delighted,  by the expressive civility

2782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  303

and distinction with which he instantly rose to return nny bow,  and stood
the whole time he was making his compliments upon seeing me,  and call-
ing himself the blindest of men for not finding me out sooner.  And Mrs.
Burke,  who was seated near me,  said,  loud enough for me to hear her, —

"  See,  see  !  what a flirtation Mr.  Burke is beginning with Miss Burney !
and before my face too  !"

These ceremonies over,  he sat down by me,  and began a conversation
which you,  my dearest Susy,  would be glad to hear,  for my sake,  word
for word  ;  but which I really could not listen to with sufficient ease,  from
shame at his warm eulogiums,  to remember with any accuracy.  The gene-
ral substance,  however,  take as I recollect it.

After many most eloquent compliments upon the book,  too delicate either
to shock or sicken the nicest ear,  he very emphatically congratulated me
upon its most universal success  ;  said,  "  he was now too late to speak of it,
since he could only echo the voice of the whole nation  ;"  and added,  with
a laugh,  "  I had hoped to have made some merit of my enthusiasm  ;  but
the moment I went about to hear what others say,  I found myself merely
one in a multitude."

He then told me that,  notwithstanding his admiration,  he was the man
who had dared to find some faults with so favourite and fashionable a work.
I entreated him to tell me what they were,  and assured him nothing would
make me so happy as to correct them under his direction.  He then enu-
merated them  :  and I will tell you what they are,  that you may not con-
clude I write nothing but the fairer part of my adventures,  which I really
always relate very honestly,  though so fair they are at this time,  that it
hardly seems possible they should not be dressed up.

The masquerade he thought too long,  and that something might be spared
from Harrel's grand assembly  ;  he did not like Morrice's part of the pan-
theon ;  and he wished the conclusion either more happy or more miserable  ;
"  for in a work of imagination,"  said he,  "  there is no medium."

I was not easy enough to answer him,  or I have much,  though perhaps
not good for much,  to say in defence of following life and nature as much
in the conclusion as in the progress of a tale ;  and when is life and nature
completely happy or miserable 1

"  But,"  said he,  when he had finished his comments,  "  what excuse must
I give for this presumption?  I have none in the world to offer but the real,
the high esteem I feel for you  ;  and I must at the same time acknowledge
it is all your own doing that I am able to find fault ;  for it is your general
perfection in writing that has taught me to criticise where it is not quite
uniform."

Here's an orator,  dear Susy  !

Then,  looking very archly at me,  and around him,  he said, —
"  Are you sitting here for characters 1 Nothing,  by the way,  struck me
more in reading your book than the admirable skill with which your in-
genious characters make themselves known by their own words."

He then went on to tell me that I had done the most wonderful of
wonders in pleasing the old wits,  particularly the Duchess of Portland and
Mrs.  Dclany,  who resisted reading the book till they were teased into it,
and,  since they began,  could do nothing else;  and he failed not to point out,
with his utmost eloquence,  the difficulty of giving satisfaction to those who
piqued themselves upon being past receiving it.

"  But,"  said he,  "  I have one other fault to find,  and a far more material
one than any I have mentioned."

"  I am the more obliged to you.     What is it 1"

304 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

"  The disposal of this book.  I have much advice to offer to yon upon
that subject.  Why did you not send for 3'our own friend out of the city  ?
he would have taken care you should not part with it so much below par."

He meant Mr.  Briggs.

Sir Joshua Reynolds now joined us.

"  Are you telling her,"  said he,  "  of our conversation with the old wits  ?
I am glad you hear it from Mr.  Burke,  Miss Burney,  for he can tell it so
much better than I can,  and remember their very words."

"  Nothing else would they talk of for three whole hours,"  said he,  "  and
we were there at the third reading of the bill."

"  I believe I was in good hands,"  said I,  "  if they talked of it to you  ?"

"  Why,  yes,"  answered Sir Joshua,  laughing,  "  we joined in from time
to time.     Gibbon says he read the whole five volumes in a day."

"  'Tis impossible,"  cried Mr.  Burke,  "  it cost me three days  ;  and you
know I never parted with it from the time I first opened it."

Here are laurels,  Susy!  My dear daddy and Kitty,  are you not doubly
glad you kindly hurried me up stairs to write when at Chesingtoni

Mr.  Burke then went to some other party,  and Mr.  Swinerton took his
place,  with whom I had a dawdling conversation upon dawdling subjects  ;
and I was not a little enlivened,  upon his quitting the chair,  to have it filled
by Mr.  Metcalf,  who,  with much satire,  but much entertainment,  kept
chattering with me till Dr.  Johnson found me out,  and brought a chair
opposite to me.

Do you laugh,  my Susan,  or cry at your F.  B's honours?

"  So,"  said he to Mr.  Metcalf,  "  it is you,  is it,  that are engrossing her
thus  ?"

"  He's jealous,"  said Mr.  Metcalf,  drily.

"■  How these people talk of Mrs.  Siddons  !"  said the Doctor.  "  I came
hither in full expectation of hearing no name but the name I love and pant
to hear, — when from one corner to another they are talking of that jade
Mrs.  Siddons  !  till,  at last wearied out,  J went 3'-onder into a corner,  and
repeated to myself Burney  !  Burney  !  Burney  !  Burney  !"

"  Ay,  sir,"  said Mr.  Metcalf,  "  you should have carved it upon the
trees."

"  Sir,  had there been any trees,  so I should ;  but being none,  I was
content to carve it upon my heart."

Soon after the parties changed again,  and young Mr.  Burke came and
sat by me.  He is a very civil and obliging,  and a sensible and agreeable
young man.  I was occasionally spoken to afterwards by strangers,  both
men and w^omen,  whom I could not find out,  though they called me by
name as if they had known me all my life.  Old Lady Galway trotted from
her corner,  in the middle of the evening,  and leaning her hands upon the
back of two chairs,  put her little round head through two fine high dressed
ladies on purpose to peep at me,  and then trotted back to her place  !    Ha,  ha  !

Miss Monckton now came to us again,  and I congratulated her upon her
power in making Dr.  Johnson sit in a group  ;  upon which she immediately
said to him, —

"  Sir,  Miss Burney says you like best to sit in a circle."

"  Does she  ?"  said he,  laughing ;  "  ay,  never mind what she says.
Don't you know she is a writer of romances  ?"

"  Yes,  that I do,  indeed  !"  said Miss Monckton,  and every one joined in a
laugh that put me horribly out of countenance.

"  She may write romances and speak truth,"  said my dear Sir Joshua,
who,  as well as young Burke,  and Mr.  Metcalf,  and two strangers,  joined
now in our little party.

17S2.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  3O5

"  But,  indeed,  Dr.  Johnson,"  said Miss Monckton,  "  you must see Mrs.
Siddons.     Won't you see her in some fine part?"

"  Why,  if I must madam,  I have no choice."

"  She says,  sir,  she shall be very much afraid of you."

"  Madam,  that cannot be true."

"  Not true,"  cried Miss Monckton,  staring,  "  yes it is."

"  It caruiot be,  madam."

"  But she said so to me  ;  I heard her say it myself."

"  Madam,  it is not possible  !  remember,  therefore,  in future,  that even
fiction should be supported by probability."

Miss Monckton looked all amazement,  but insisted upon the truth of what
she had said.

"  I do not believe,  madam,"  said he,  warmly,  "  she knows my name."

"  Oh,  that is rating her too low,"  said a gentleman stranger.

"  By not knowing my name,"  continued he,  "  I do not mean so literally  ;
but that,  wl^n she sees it abused in a newspaper,  she may possibly recollect
that she has seen it abused in a newspaper before."

"  Well,  sir,"  said Miss Monckton,  "  but you must see her for all this."

"  Well,  madam,  if you desire it,  I will go.  See her I shall not,  nor hear
her ;  but I'll go,  and that will do.  The last time I was at a play,  I was
ordered there by Mrs.  Abington,  or Mrs.  Somebody,  I do not well remember
who;  but I placed myself in the middle of the first row of the front boxes,
to show that when I was called I came."

The talk upon this matter went on very long,  and with great spirit ;  but
I have time for no more of it.  I felt myself extremely awkward about
going away,  not choosing,  as it was my first visit,  to take French leave,
and hardly knowing how to lead the way alone among so many strangers.

At last,  and with the last,  I made my attempt.  A large party of ladies
arose at the same time,  and I tripped after them ;  Miss Monckton,  however,
made me come back,  for she said I must else wait in the other room till
those ladies'  carriages drove away.

When I returned.  Sir Joshua came and desired he might convey me
home  ;  I declined the ofl^er,  and he pressed it a good deal,  droUy saying, —

"  Why,  I am old enough,  ain't 11"

And when he found me stout,  he said to Dr.  Johnson, —

"Sir,  is not this very hard?  Nobody thinks me very young,  yet Miss
Burney won't give me the privilege of age in letting me see her home?
She says I ain't old enough."

I never said any such thing.

"Ay,  sir,"  said the Doctor,  "  did I not tell you she was a writer of
romances?"

Again I tried to run away,  but the door stuck,  and Miss Monckton pre-
vented me,  and begged I would stay a litJe longer.  She then went and
whispered something to her mother,  and I had a notion from her manner
she wanted to keep me to supper,  which I did not choose,  and,  therefore,
when her back was turned,  I prevailed upon young Burke to open the door
for me,  and out I went.  Miss Monckton ran after me,  but I would not
come back.  I was,  however,  and I am,  much obliged by her uncommon
civility and attentions to me.  She is far better at her own house than
elsewhere.

Dec.  15th To-day,  by an invitation of ten days'  standing,  I waited

upon Mrs.  Walsingham.     She is a woman high in fame for her talents,  and
a wit by birth,  as the daughter of Sir Charles Hanbury Williams.

She has the character of being only civil to people of birth,  fame,  or

26*

306 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

wealih,  and extremely insolent to all others.  Of this,  however,  I could see
nothing,  since she at least took care to invite no company to her own house
whom she was disposed to disdain.  Her reception of me appeared rather
singular.  She was violently dressed, — a large hoop,  flowers in her small
and full dressed cap,  ribands and ornaments extremely shown,  and a fan in
her hand.  She was very polite,  said much of her particular pleasure in
seeing me,  and kept advancing to me so near,  that involuntarily,  I retreated
from her,  not knowing her design,  and kept,  therefore,  getting further and
further back,  as she came forward,  till I was stopped from any power
of moving by the wainscot.  I then necessarily stood still,  and she
saluted me.

We then quietly sat down,  and my father began a very lively conversa-
tion upon various subjects;  she kept it up with attention and good breeding,
often referring to me,  and seeming curious to know my notions.

The rest of the company who came to dinner were Mrs.  Montagu,  Mr.
Percy,  Speaker of the Irish House of Commons,  his lady aad daughter,
and Sir Joshua Reynolds and Miss Palmer.  I was excessively glad to see
the latter,  who clung to me all the visit,  and took off from its formality and
grandeur by her chatting and intimacy.

Mrs.  Walsingham lives in a splendid house in Stratford Place,  elegantly
fitted up,  chiefly by her own paintings and drawings,  which are reckoned
extremely clever.     I hate that word,  but cannot think of another.

We did not stay late,  for my father and I were both engaged to Miss
Monckton's ;  so was Sir Joshua,  who accompanied us.  Miss Palmer had
not been invited,  which she much regretted.  Mrs.  Walsingham begged to
see me ag^in,  and very much pressed me to call some morning.

1 was extremely happy to have my dear father with me at Miss Monck-
ton's. We found Mrs.  Siddons,  the actress,  there.  She is a woman of ex-
cellent character,  and therefore I am very glad she is thus patronised,  since
Mrs.  Abington,  and so many frail fair ones,  have been thus noticed by the
great.  She behaved with great propriety  ;  very calm,  modest,  quiet,  and
unaffected.  She has a very fine countenance,  and her eyes look both
intelligent and soft.  She has,  however,  a steadiness in her manner and
deportment by no means engaging.  Mrs.  Thrale,  who was there,  said, —
"  Why,  this is a leaden goddess we are all worshipping !  however,  we shall
soon gild it."

A lady who sat near me then began a dialogue with Mr.  Erskine,  who,
had placed himself exactly opposite to Mrs.  Siddons ;  and they debated
together upon her manner of studying her parts,  disputing upon the point
with great warmth,  yet not only forbearing to ask Mrs.  Siddons herself
which was right,  but quite overpowering her with their loquacity,  when she
attempted,  unasked,  to explain the matter.  Most vehement praise of all she
did followed,  and the lady turned to me,  and said, —

"  W^hat invitation.  Miss Burney,  is here,  for genius to display itself ! —
Every body,  I hear,  is at work for Mrs.  Siddons ;  but if you would work
for her,  what an inducement to excel you would both of you have  ! — Dr.
Burney-

"  Oh,  pray,  ma'am,"  cried I,  "  don't say to him-

"  Oh,  but I will ! — if my influence can do you any mischief,  you may
depend upon having it !"

She then repeated what she had said to my father,  and he instantly
said, —

"  Your ladyship may be sure of my interest."

I whispered afterwards to know who she was,  and heard she was Lady
Lucan.

17S2.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  307

MoxDAY, — There was a very full assembly at Mrs.  Thrale's,  where I
dined and spent the day.

The evening proved very gay and very agreeable,  though I have but a
short account to give of it,  as the conversation was only in parties,  and
never for more than a few minutes with the same people.  I had some chat
with every body in turn,  and therefore I had not one moment unoccupied.
What gave me,  however,  the most pleasure,  was the discourse of the two
Mr.  Cambridges,  father and son,  who both,  though at different times,  sung
to me the praises of Captain Phillips with so much energy and heartiness,
that I was ready to shake hands with them,  and cry,  "  Gentlemen,
agreed  !"

Mr.  Seward made me known to Mrs.  Hunter,  who is extremely pretty,
and reckoned very ingenious.  Dr.  Parker introduced me to Mr.  Hutton,  a
clergyman,  at his desire ;  but I saw nothing of him that made it mine.

My father told me that Miss Catherine Bull had desired her compliments
to  "  Cecilia,"  and begged her acceptance of her opera ticket for the next
night,  to see Anfossi's new opera,  if it would be of any use.  Miss Bull then
called out, —

"  And pray give my compliments too, — though I should be dreadfully
afraid of her  !"

Plow provoking that they have this simple notion !  as my father himself
once answered them, —

"  So tame a lion,  who can say fie on?"

I am glad,  however,  there seems a little opening to an acquaintance I so
much desire.  I accepted the ticket,  and should if I had not wished for it,
merely that I might have to thank her for it.

Thursday. — We were all invited to Sir Joshua Reynolds's to dinner,  but
I was engaged to Mrs.  Thrale.  In the morning.  Miss Benson returned my
visit,  and Miss Streatfield called also,  and sate hours,  and Mrs.  Hatsel
called too,  and sat only minutes.  I am increasing my acquaintance daily,
and that,  whether I will or not,  with new folks of all sorts.

At Mrs.  Thrale's we were comfortable and alone.  She and her daughter
carried me to the opera house,  and tried to entice me to sit in the pit with
them ;  but I have already engaged a place in Mrs.  Fitz's box.  I can give
you but little account of the opera,  for I was much disappointed in it.  3Iy
expectations had planned another Buona Figliuola,  or Fraschetana,  from
Anfossi, — but it is a pretty opera,  simply,  and nothing more.  Allegrante
sung very well,  but — but — but — oh,  how has Pacchierotti spoilt me.

Friday. — There was a grand assembly at Lady Gideon's  ;  and every
thing in the house,  both of decorations,  refreshments,  and accommodation,
was in greater magnificence than I have yet seen.  Lady Gideon is still
very pretty,  and extremely gentle,  well bred,  attentive and amiable.  Sir
Sampson seems all go.od nature,  and his desire to oblige is unremitting,
and there is even a humility in the manners of both that makes it impos-
sible to quarrel with them for such other brighter qualities as they have
missed.

The moment my reception was over,  and my dear father being with me,
I felt no awkwardness in my entrance.  Mrs.  Walsingham came up to me,
and invited me to her house for the next Monday morning,  to meet Lady
Gideon,  who was to go and see her paintings.  There was no refusing,  and,
indeed,  I wished to see them,  as they are of great fame in the world,  and,
I fancy,  very well worth seeing.

The next who found me out was Sir Joshua,  and the instant I told him of

308 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

the engagement I had made,  he said he would go too,  for he was invited to
call some morning,  so he would choose Monday.  He kept with me,  to my
great satisfaction,  the principal part of the evening.  He is so pleasant,
unaffected and agreeable,  that there is no one,  among those who are of
celebrity,  I can converse with half so easily and comfortably.

Late in the evening came in Lady Margaret Fordyce,  and Lady Anne
Lindsay  ;  I had hopes they would have sung,  but I was disappointed,  for
they only looked handsome.  Mrs.  Hampden,  also,  did that,  and was much
less in her airs.

Among my acquaintance,  were Lord Gage,  Miss Monckton,  Mr.  Selwyn,
Mr.  Swinerton,  Harry Cotton,  Mr.  H.  Shelly,  Mrs.  Walsingham,  the Thrales,
and Sir Joshua.  Among those at whom I looked,  were Sir Hugh Dalrymple,
author of the Memoirs,  a very respectable-looking man,  Mr.  Erskine,  and
Soame Jenyngs.

Sir Joshua desired me to speak to Soame Jenyngs,  for he said he was
now of an age to be entitled to such an attention.  You may suppose I com-
plied readily.  Another time,  when he had strolled away for a few minutes,
he hastened back to me,  and exclaimed, —

"  I have just found out Mr.  Simkins  !"

"  Where  ?  which is he  ?"

"  There, — that gentleman,  who is bowing to Lady Juliana Penn."

"  Mercy !"  cried I,  perceiving,  to my great dismay,  Mr.  Selwyn,  "  why,
that is one of our intimate friends  !"

"  O,  is he sol"  cried he,  with great readiness,  "  Why,  then,  that,  I sup-
pose, is the reason of the resemblance  !"

Wicked enough  !  however,  by no means true.

Afterwards I had some talk with the Duca di Sangro,  a Neapolitan
nobleman  ;  very young,  excessively handsome,  and very gay,  talkative,
sportive and frolicsome.  He took off the French manner of singing in
general,  then M.  le Gros in particular ;  he acted,  capered,  talked comical
bad English,  sang,  languished,  laughed and mimicked ;  and,  in short,  was
an admirable and most diverting buffoon.

A small part of the company,  consisting of about thirty,  were kept to
supper  ;  my father and self were of the number.  The entertainment given
was superb,  and most elegantly costly.  Twenty-four had seats at our
table  ;  the rest stood round,  till another supper was prepared in another
room.  But I shall give no further particulars,  as the evening,  altogether,
was but tiresome.

Sunday,  Dec.  22. — I went to the French chapel in the morning,  and
found Mr.  Seward here when I returned.  He was followed by Barry,  and
succeeded by Pacchierotti,  who,  in rather better spirits than I have lately
seen him,  told me he had been admitted for half-an-hour the day before to
Lady Clarges,  as poor Sir Thomas was a little better.  She told him that
Sir Thomas,  though often delirious,  never failed,  in his intervals of reason
and of ease,  to inquire for Pacchierotti,  and to call out,  "  Has Pacchierotti
been here to-day 1" — "  Does Pacchierotti call always to ask how I do
himself?"     This affected the feeling of Pacchierotti very strongly.

Lady Clarges,  in this short interview,  inquired very much about you,
and whether you were coming to town,  and how your health was,  and
what were your designs.  "  Indeed,"  added the Pac,  "  is a very true
regard which Lady Clarges she has always for Mrs.  Phillips."

1 asked him if he had heard that Miss Catherine Bull had lent me an
Opera ticket — and told him I very much wished to be acquainted with her
family.     He looked much pleased,  and called out,  "  Then,  I am sure,  it is

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELTJNA.  309

in your own power,  for Doctor Burney can "  He stopped,  as if sud-
denly recollecting,  and checking himself,  and added,  "  I don't know,  ma'am,
how it is;  but you have made,  indeed,  all the people,  not only for the young,
but at the same time for the old,  quite afraid of you.  Indeed,  is their just
veneration which is the cause of such a thing."

This always much vexes me,  but I know not how to conquer so unfair a
prejudice,  while I never can get sight of these folks,  except through an opera-
glass  :  in v.'hich way they most assiduously view me in return,  whenever I
am in Mrs.  Fitzgerald's box.  By his saying the old^  as well as the youngs
I suspected he meant Lady Mary Duncan;  and upon sounding my father,
he acknowledged she professed the same ridiculous fear.  'Tis horribly
provoking,  and thwarts my most favourite views.

Monday. — I waited upon Mrs.  Walsingham.  I found Lady Gideon and
two of her daughters,  and Lady Middleton,  and two other ladies,  all assem-
bled to see these pictures.  I was,  indeed,  extremely pleased with the exhi-
bition. They appear to me surprisingly well executed,  and the subjects are
admirably chosen and selected.  They are chiefly copies from old pictures,
or from Sir Joshua Reynolds.  Two were lent her by the king himself,  at
Windsor, — a Silence,  a beautiful picture of Caracci,  and a Madonna and
Child of Guido.  The others are chiefly from the Devonshire collection,  of
Sir Joshua  ;  she has the Fishing Boys,  the noble Angel viewing the Cross,
two Samuels,  a beautiful Child,  and one other I cannot recollect.  She has,
also,  copied Gainsborough's sweet Shepherd's Boy:  and there are originals,
by herself,  of Captain Walsingham,  and her son,  and Miss Boyle.  These
are all in oils.  There were also some heads in crayons,  and several small
figures in plaster of Paris by Miss Boyle,  who inherits her mother's genius
and fondness for painting,  and who behaved with great modesty and polite-
ness. They showed me,  also,  a work of Mrs.  Delany,  which they have
framed.  'Tis from an invention of her own,  a Geranium — composed of
paper stained dilferent colours,  cut out very delicately,  and pasted upon
paper,  so as to look in relief,  and the effect is extremely pretty.  This she
did at eighty-two  !

I would have made my exit at the same time with the rest of the company,
but Mrs.  Walsingham would not suffer me,  and made me stay and chat with
her for I believe two hours.  She insisted upon my telling her the whole
history of my writing and publishing  "  Evelina,"  and was curious for the
most minute particulars.

When this curiosity was satisfied,  she gave me a long history of herself,
and her painting,  with equal openness,  and then said, —

"  But do pray,  now.  Miss Burney,  let me ask one thing more — how came
you to write that book that is my first darling — Cecilia]  did the idea come
to you by chance?  or did you regularly sit down to write by design!"

I had then to satisfy her about this,  and she spared not for praises in
return,  but said one thing which extremely astonished me.

"The character,"  cried she,  "  which I most delight in is IMr.  Briggs.  I
think it the most admirable and entertaining in the book."

"  I am very glad to hear it,  ma'am,  for he has very few friends."

*'  Oh,  I know many people think him too low,  but that is merely from
choosing only to look in the upper circle.  Now,  I am not at all surprised
to find that the queen objects to him  ; — a foreigner,  and in so exalted a sta-
tion, may well not understand so vulgar a miser  ;  but why people in common
life should object to what in common life is to be found,  I don't understand.
For myself,  while I paint,  or work,  1 can divert myself with thinking of him,
and,  if I am quite alone,  I can burst out a-laughing by recollecting any of
his speeches."

310 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

You will easily believe I was by no means so sorry at the queen's objec-
tion, as I was glad and surprised that her majesty should ever have met with
the book.

"  But how wonderfully you have contrived,"  she added,  "  to make one
love Mrs.  Delville for her sweetness to Cecilia,  notwithstanding all her pride,
and always to hope the pride is commanded by the husband."

"  No,  ma'am,"  answered I,  "  I merely meant to show how differently
pride,  like every other quality,  operates upon different minds,  and that,
though it is so odious when joined with meanness and incapacity,  as in Mr.
Delville,  it destroys neither respect nor affection when joined with real dig-
nity and generosity of mind,  as in Mrs.  Delville."

I had much more to have said of my meaning and purpose in these cha-
racters ;  but she has so much established in the world an opinion of her own
pride,  that I was glad to leave the subject.

In the evening I went to Lady Rothes's with my father.  I found her,  as
I had left her at Brighton,  amiable and sociable.  I never lell you when
the invitations come,  for I rather fancy you will not conclude I am likely
to go without them.  The party was a good one, — Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.
Walsingham,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys,  sweet Mrs.  Thrale and her daughter.
Dr.  Cadogan,  Miss Streatfield,  Mr.  Wraxall,  Lord Falmouth,  Mr.  Seward,
Mrs.  Ord,  and some others I did not know ;  but the evening was a melan-
choly one,  for I soon heard,  from  ^Irs.  Ord,  that poor Sir Thomas Clarges
was dead  !  How sorry was I for his lady,  for Pacchierotti,  and for you  !
I could never get you a moment out of my head  ;  and from the time that I
heard it,  I could do nothing but wish myself at home.

The next morning,  Tuesday,  I wrote a little note of consolation and good
wishes to poor Pacchierotti.  My father called on the Miss Bulls,  and found
them in deep affliction.  I long to hear if Lady Louisa Nugent can go to
Lady Clarges.     I believe she is now out of town.

I called upon Bessy Kirvvan,  and stayed with her a couple of hours  ;  and
all our talk was of poor Pacchierotti and his loss,  and dear Susy and her
health.  As I had the coach,  I then sjoit cards at Mrs.  Chapone's,  who has
sent me an invitation.  I declined  ;  for so I do by at least half I receive,
much as 1 go out ; — and at Mrs.  Hatsel's,  and Mrs.  Paradise's,  and Lady
Gideon's.

When I came here,  I found Mrs.  Wilkinson,  v/ho insists upon again
renewing our long-dropped acquaintance.  She is somewhat improved,  I
think,  and much less affected.  Mrs.  Ord also called,  at the desire of Secre-
tary Ord's lady,  to make a tender of acquaintance with me.

I begin to grow most heartily sick and fatigued of this continual round of
visiting,  and these eternal new acquaintances.  I am now arranging matters
in my mind for a better plan  ;  and I mean,  henceforward,  never to go out
more than three days in the week;  and,  as I am now situated,  with Mrs.
Thrale to seize every moment I do not hide from her,  it will require all the
management 1 can possibly make use of to limit my visits to only half the
week's days.  But yet,  I am fixed in resolving to put it in practice,  except
upon some very singular and unforeseen occasions,  as I really have at pre-
sent no pleasure in any party,  from the trouble and tiresomeness of being
engaged to so many.

For my own part,  if I washed to prescribe a cure for dissipation,  I should
think none more effectual than to give it a tree course.  The many who
have lived so from year to year amaze me now more than ever ;  for now
more than ever I can judge what dissipation has to offer.  I would not lead a life
of daily engagements even for another month,  for any pay short of the most
serious and substantial benefit.    I have been tired some time,  though I have

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  311

only now broke out :  but I will restore my own spirit and pleasure by
getting more courage in making refusals,  and by giving that zest to com-
pany and diversion which can only be given by making them subservient
to convenience,  and by taking them in turn with quietness and retirement.

This is my intention,  and I shall never,  by inclination,  alter it.

Now to return to Tuesday,  one of my out-days.

I went in the evening to call on Mrs.  Thrale,  and tore myself away from
her to go to Bolt Court to see Dr.  Johnson,  who is very unwell.  He
received me with great kindness,  and bade me come oftener,  which I will
try to contrive.  He told me he heard of nothing but me,  call upon him
who would  ;  and,  though he pretended to growl,  he was evidently delighted
for me.  His usual set,  Mrs.  Williams and Mrs.  De Mullins,  were with
him  ;  and some queer man of a parson who,  after grinning at me some
time,  said, —

"  Pray,  Mrs.  De Mullins,  is the fifth volume of  '  Cecilia'  at home yet 1
Dr.  Johnson made me read it,  ma'am."

"  Sir,  he did it much honour "

"  Made you,  sir  ?"  said the Doctor,  "  you give an ill account of your
own taste or understanding,  if you wanted any snaking to read such a
book as  '  Cecilia.'  "

"  Oh,  sir,  I don't mean that ;  for I am sure I left every thing in the
world to go on with it."

A shilling was now wanted for some purpose or other,  and none of them
happened to have one ;  I begged that I might lend one.

"  Ay,  do,"  said the Doctor,  "  I will borrow of you ;  authors are like
privateers,  always fair game for one another."

"  True,  sir,"  said the parson,  "  one author is always robbing another."

"  I don't know that,  sir,"  cried the Doctor,  *'  there sits an author who,  to
my knowledge,  has robbed nobody.  I have never once caught her at a
theft.     The rogue keeps her resources to herself!"

Christmas Day. — And a merry one be it to my Susy  !  I went to
Oxendon chapel,  and heard a very good sermon,  by a Mr.  Lazard,  against
infidelity  ;  and I came home and repeated it for divers purposes.  I was
soon followed by Miss Palmer  ;  and,  just as she took her leave,  came
Pacchierotti,  looking so ill — so thin — so dejected  !  He came to thank me
for my consolatory note,  and he stayed till dinner-time.  Our whole talk
was of poor Sir Thomas and his lady.  I was happy,  however,  to keep
him,  and to make him talk  ;  for he says that when he is at home he is in a
state so deplorable it cannot be described.  He pressed me to make use
both of Lady Mary's tickets and her box for the next comic opera  ;  but I
refused both,  as I intend to go but once or twice more to the comic opera,
and then can make use of Mrs.  Crewe's ticket.

Thursday. — In the morning-  Mr.  Cambridire came,  and made a lonsf
visit.'  He is entertaining,  original,  and well-bred;  somewhat formal,  but
extremely civil and obliging,  and,  I believe,  remarkably honourable and
strict in his principles and actions.

I wished I could have been easy and chatty with him,  as I hear he is so
much my friend,  and as I like him very much ;  but,  in truth he listens to
every syllable I utter with so grave a deference,  that it intimidates and
silences me.     When he was about taking leave,  he said, —

"  Shall you go to Mrs.  Ord's to-morrow  '?'

"  Yes,  sir."

"  I thought so,"  said he,  smiling,  "  and hoped it.  Where shall you go
to-night  ?"

312 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

"  Nowhere, — I shall be at home."

"  At home 1 Are you sure V

"  Yes."

"  Why,  then,  Miss Burney,  my son and I dine to-day in your neigh-
bourhood, at the Archbishop of York's,  and,  if you please,  we will come
here in the evening."

This was agreed to.  And now I am writing up to the very moment ;
for it is just seven o'clock,  and we are going to tea,  as these gentlemen are
not expected till nine.  He talked much of Capitano,  and said several times
how happy he should be to know Mrs.  Phillips.

Our evening was really a charming one.  The two Mr.  Cambridges
came at about eight o'clock,  and the good Mr.  Hoole was here.  My father
came down stairs to them in high spirits and good humour,  and he and the
elder Mr.  Cambridge not only talked enough for us all,  but so well and so
pleasantly that no person present had even a wish to speak for himself.
Mr.  Cambridge has the best stock of good stories I almost ever heard ;  and,
though a little too precise in his manner,  he is always well-bred,  and almost
always entertaining.  Our sweet father kept up the ball with him admirably,
whether in anecdotes,  serious disquisitions,  philosophy,  or fun  ;  for all which
Mr.  Cambridge has both talents and inclination.

The son rises extremely in my opinion and liking.  He is sensible,
rational,  and highly cultivated  ;  very modest in all he asserts,  and atten-
tive and pleasing in his behaviour ;  and he is wholly free from the cox-
combical airs,  either of impertinence,  or negligence and nonchalance,  that
almost all the young men I meet,  except also young Burke,  are tainted
with.  What chiefly,  however,  pleased me in him was observing that he
quite adores his father.  He attended to all his stories with a face that
never told he had heard them before ;  and,  though he spoke but little him-
self, he seemed as well entertained as if he had been the leading person in
the company, — a post which,  nevertheless,  I believe he could extremely
well sustain  ;  and,  no doubt,  much the better for being in no haste to aspire
to it.  I have seldom,  altogether,  had an evening with which I have been
better pleased.

And now,  for once,  I leave off a packet at the end of a day's adventures.
So bless you,  my Susy,  and all your hearers.

Friday. — I dined with Mrs.  Thrale and Dr.  Johnson,  who was very
comic and good-humoured.  Susan Thrale had just had her hair turned up,
and powdered,  and has taken to the womanly robe.  Dr.  Johnson sportively
gave her instructions how to increase her consequence,  and to  "  take upon
her"  properly.

"  Begin,"  said he,  "  Miss Susy,  with something grand — something to
surprise mankind  !  Let your first essay in life be a warm censure of
«  Cecilia.'  You can no way make yourself more conspicuous.  Tell
the world how ill it was conceived,  and how ill executed.  Tell  'them
how little there is in it of human nature,  and how well your knowledge of
the world enables you to judge of the failings in that book.  Find fault
without fear  ;  and if you are at a loss for any to find,  invent whatever
comes into your mind,  for you may say what you please,  with little fear of
detection,  since of those who praise  '  Cecilia'  not half have read it,  and of
those who have read it,  not half remember it.  Go to work,  therefore,
boldly  ;  and particularly mark that the character of Albany is extremely
unnatural,  to your own knowledge,  since you never met with such a man
at Mrs.  Cummyn's School."

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  313

This stopped his exhortation,  for we laughed so violently at this happy-
criticism that he could not recover the thread of his harangue.

Mrs.  Thrale,  who was to have gone wiih me to Mrs.  Ord's,  gave up her
visit in order to stay with Dr.  Johnson  ;  Miss Thrale,  therefore,  and I went
together.  We found there Charlotte,  who had been invited to dinner,  and
who looked very pretty and very innocent ;  Mrs.  Chapone,  Mr.  and Mrs.
Pepys,  Mr.  Mulso,  and young Mr.  Cambridge.  There came afterwards
Mr.  Burrows,  Lady Rothes,  Miss Burgoyne,  Dr.  Pepys,  Mr.  Seward,  and
a lady I knew not.

Mrs.  Ord received us with her usual good breeding.  Mrs.  Chapone was
more civil than ever,  and,  after a little general discourse,  she asked me if
I had yet heard that Swift's Mrs.  Delany was among my unknown friends.

"  I have a letter,"  she said,  "  which I must beg to show you from her,
for I think it will be worth your running over.  It is in answer to one I
wroie,  begging to know whether she had met with  '  Cecilia.'  She tells me
that both she and the old Duchess of Portland are reading it for the third
time,  and that they desire nothing so much as an acquaintance with the
amiable writer."

There,  Miss Susanna,  there,  daddy,  the Old Wits have begun the charge  !
This was very pleasant to me,  indeed,  for if they have curiosity as well as 1,
we shall all have some end to answer in meeting.

Saturday,  Dec.  28th. — My father and I dined and spent the day at
Sir Joshua Reynolds's,  after many preceding disappointments.  Our dinner
party consisted merely of Mr.  West,*  the painter,  Mr.  Jackson of Exeter,
and Miss Reynolds.  Mr.  West had,  some time ago,  desired my father to
invite him to our house,  to see that lion,  your sister,  saying to him  "  you
will be safe,  Dr.  Burney,  in trusting to our meeting,  for I am past forty,
and married."

My father,  however,  has had no time,  and therefore I believe he applied
to Sir Joshua,  for the servant who brought our card of invitation said he
was to carry no other till ours was answered.

The moment Miss Palmer had received me with a reproachful  "  At last
we are met,"  Sir Joshua took my hand,  and insisted upon wishing me a
merry Christmas according to old forms,  and then presenting me to Mr.
West,  he said, —

"  You must let me introduce to you one of your greatest admirers."

Mr.  West is a very pleasing man,  gentle,  sofi-mannered,  cheerful,  and
serene.  Mr.  Jackson you may remember our formerly seeing  ;  he is very
handsome,  and seems possessed of much of that ardent genius which dis-
tinguishes Mr.  Young  ;  for his expressions,  at times,  are extremely violent,
while at other times he droops,  and is so absent that he seenas to forget not
only all about him,  but himself.

They were both exceedingly civil to me,  and dear Sir Joshua is so plea-
sant, so easy,  so comfortable,  that I never was so little constrained in a first
meeting with people who I saw came to meet me.

After dinner Mr.  Jackson undertook to teach us all how to write with
our left hands.  Some succeeded,  and some failed  ;  but both he and Mr.
West wrote nothing but my name.  I tried,  and would have written Sir
Joshua,  but it was illegible,  and 1 tore the paper  ;  Mr.  Jackson was very
vehenjent to get it from me.

"  I have done the worst,"  cried I,  "  and I don't like disgracing myself."

"  Pho  !"  cried he,  just with the energy and freedom of Mr.  Young,  "  let

*  Benjamin West,  afterwards President of the Royal Academy.
VOL.  I.  27

314 DIARY AND LETTERS 1782.

me see it at once  ;  do you think you can do any thing with your left hand
that will lessen the credit of what you have done with your right?"

This,  however,  was all that was hinted me upon that subject by him.  I
had afterwards one slight touch from Mr.  West,  but the occasion was so
tempting I could not possibly wonder at him.  Sir Joshua had two snuff-
boxes in use,  a gold and a tin one  ;  I examined them,  and asked why he
made use of such a vile and shabby tin one.

"  VV hy,"  said he laughing,  "  because 1 naturally love a little of the black-
guard. Ay,  and so do you too,  little as you look as if you did,  and all the
people all day long are saying,  where can you have seen such company as
you treat us with  '/"

"  Why you have seen such,  Sir Joshua,"  said Mr.  West,  taking up the
tin snufF-box,  "  for this box you must certainly have picked up at Briggs's
sale."

You may believe I was eager enough now to call a new subject ;  and Sir
Joshua,  though he loves a little passing speech or two upon this matter,
never insists upon keeping it up,  but the minute he sees he has made me
look about me or look foolish,  he is most good-naturedly ready to give it up.

But how,  my dearest Susy,  can you wish any wishes about Sir Joshua
and me?  A man who has had two shakes of the palsy I What misery
should I suffer if I were only his niece,  from a terror of a fatal repetition of
such a shock  !  I would not run voluntarily into such a state of perpetual
apprehension for the wealth of the East.  Wealth,  indeed,  per se,  I never loo
much valued,  and my acquaintance with its possessors has by no means
increased my veneration for it.

Sir Joshua has a plan in consideration for instituting a jubilee in honour
of Raphael,  who,  this Easter,  will have been dead 300 years.  He is not
yet determined what ceremonies to have performed,  but he charged me to
set my  ''  little brain"  to work in thinking for him,  and said he should insist
upon my assistance.

I had afterwards a whispering conversation with Mrs.  Reynolds,  which
made me laugh,  from her excessive oddness and absurdity.  It began about
Chesington.  She expressed her wonder I could have passed so much time
there.  I assured her that with my own will I should pass much more time
there,  as I know no place where I had had more,  if so much,  happiness.

"  Well,  bless me!"  cried she,  holding up her hands,  "and all this variety
comes from only one man  !  That's strange indeed,  for,  by what I can make
out,  there's nothing but that one Mr.  Quip there  !"

"  Mr.  Cmjp,"  said I,  "  is indeed,  the only man,  but there are also two
ladies,  very dear friends of mine,  who live there constantly."

"  What !  and they neither of them married that Mr. — that same gen-
tleman ]"

"  No,  they never married any body  ;  they are single and so is he."

"  Well,  but if he is so mighty agreeable,"  said she,  holding her finger
up to her nose most significantly,  "  can you tell me how it comes to pass he
should never have got a wife in all this time  ?"

There was no answering this but by grinning ;  but I thought how my
dear Kitty would again have called her the old sifter.

She afterwards told me of divers most ridiculous distresses she had been
in with Mrs.  Montagu and Mrs.  Ord.

"  I had the most unfortunate thing in the world to happen me,"  she said,
"  about Mrs.  Montagu,  and I always am in some distress or misfortune with
that lady.  She did me the honour to invite me to dine with her last week,
— and I am sure there is nobody in the world can be more obliged to Mrs.

1782.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  315

Montagu for taking such notice of any body  ; — but just when the day came
I was so unlucky as to be ill,  and that,  you know,  made it quite improper
to go to dine with Mrs.  Montagu,  for fear of any disagreeable consequences.
So this vexed me very much,  for I had nobody to send to her that was
proper to appear before Mrs.  Montagu  ;  for,  to own the truth,  you must
know I had no servant but a maid,  and I could not think of sending such a
person to IVIrs.  Montagu.  So I thought it best to send a chairman,  and to
tell him only to ring at the bell,  and to wait for no answer;  because then
the porter might tell Mrs.  Montagu my servant brought the note,  for the
porter could not tell but he might be my servant.  But my maid was so
stupid,  she took the shilling I gave her for the chairman,  and went to a
green-shop,  and bid the woman send somebody with the note,  and she left
the shilling with her  ;  so the green- woman,  I suppose,  thought she might
keep the shilling,  and instead of sending a chairman she sent her own
errand-girl ;  and she was all dirt and rags.  But this is not all  ;  for,  when
the girl got to the house nothing would serve her but she would give the
note to Mrs.  Montagu,  and wait for an answer ;  so then,  you know,  Mrs.
Montagu saw this ragged green-shop girl.  I was never so shocked in my
life,  for when she brought me back the note I knew at once how it all was.
Only think what a mortification,  to have Mrs.  Montagu see such a person
as that !  She must think it very odd of me indeed to send a green-shop
girl to such a house as hers  !"

Now for a distress equally grievous with Mrs.  Ord  :

"  You must know Mrs.  Ord called on me the other day when I did not
happen to be dressed  ;  so I had a very pretty sort of a bed-gown,  like a
jacket,  hanging at the fire,  and I had on a petticoat,  with a border on it
of the same pattern  ;  but the bed-gown I thought was damp,  and I was in a
hurry to go down to Mrs.  Ord,  so I would not stay to dry it,  but went down
in another bed-gown,  and put my cloak on.  But only think what Mrs.
Ord must think of it,  for I have since thought she must suppose I had
no gown on at all,  for you must know my cloak was so long it only showed
the petticoat.'

If this makes you grin as it did me,  you will be glad of another specimen
of her sorrows  :

"  I am always,"  said she,  "  out of luck with Mrs.  Ord;  for another time
when she came there happened to be a great slop on the table  ;  so,  while
the maid was going to the door,  I took up a rag that I had been wiping my
pencils with,  for I had been painting,  and I wiped the table  ;  but as she got
up-stairs before I had put it away,  I popped a white handkerchief upon it.
However,  while we were talking,  I thought my handkerchief looked like a
litter upon the table,  and,  thinks T,  Mrs.  Ord will think it very untidy,  for
she is all neatness,  so I whisked it into my pocket ;  but I quite forgot the
rag with the paint on it.  So when she was gone, — bless me  ! — there I saw
it was sticking out of my pocket,  in full sight.  Only think what a slut
Mrs.  Ord must think of me,  to put a dishclout in my pocket  !"

I had several stories of the same sort,  and I fear I have lost all repu-
tation with her for dignity,  as I laughed immoderately at her disasters.

December 29th. — In the morning called Pacchierotti,  rather in better
spirits,  but still looking very ill.  I did not dare mention Lady Clarges,
though I much wished to have gathered some information,  in order to have
sent it to you  ;  but he is now so depressed by the loss of his friend,  that
he cannot without a sadness too much well to endure,  talk or think of him.

Monday,  Dec.  30th. — I spent all the morning at my aunt's.  In the
evening I went,  by appointment to Mrs.  Chapone,  where I met Mr.  and Mrs.
Pepys,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Mulso,  and Mr.  Burrows and his old maiden sister.

316 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

We had rather r hicm-dnan evening.  I cannot bring myself to be well
enough acquainted with this set to try at enlivening it,  because I cannot
help being half afraid of them ;  otherwise,  a little rattling would pro-
digiously mend matters,  and though they might stare a little I am sure they
would like it.

Mrs.  Chapone showed me a head of Mrs.  Delany  ;  I admired it much  ;
there looks much benevolence and sense in it.

"  J am glad,"  said I,  "  to see even thus much of her."

"  I hope,  then,"  said Mrs.  Chapone,  "  you will give me the pleasure of
introducing you to know more of her."

Tuesday,  Dec.  31st. — I went this morning with my dear father to Sir
John Ashton Lever's,  where we could not but be entertained.  Sir Ashton
came and talked to us a good while.  He may be an admirable naturalist,  but
I think if in other matters you leave the ist out,  you will not much wrong
him.  He looks full sixty years old,  yet he had dressed not only two young
men,  but himself,  in a green-jacket,  a round hat with green feathers,  a
bundle of arrows under one arm,  and a bow in the other,  and thus accoutred
as a forester,  he pranced about ;  while the younger fools,  who were in the
same garb,  kept running to and fro in the garden,  carefully contriving to
shoot at some mark,  just as any of the company appeared at any of the
windows.  After such a specimen of his actions,  you will excuse me if I
give you none of his conversation.

We met with Mr.  Nollekens and Miss Welsh.

As soon as I came home I went to Mrs.  Thrale's,  where I bargained for
having nobody admitted,  and Istayed till eleven o'clock,  spending as quietly
sociable a day as I could wish.  But I w^as much vexed I had not returned
somewhat sooner when I heard that young Mr.  Cambridge had been here,
just arrived from Chesington.  I would have given the world to have heard
his immediate account of what had passed,  and whether the place and
people had answered his expectations.

CHAPTER XV.

1783.

A Quiet Day — A Busy Day — An Opera Rehearsal — Bertoni and Sacchini — Carnevale,
the Singer — A Dinner Party at Dr.  Barney's — Dr.  Parr and Dr.  Johnson — Loose Mo-
rality— Table-talk — Mrs.  Chapone — Pacchierotti — Mrs.  Siddons in Belvidera — Jack-
son of Exeter — Anecdotes of Dr.  Johnson — The Bishop of Chester — A Dainty Gentle-
man— A Strange Question — Beauty thrown away — A Dinner at Mrs.  Walsingbam's —
The Wartons — Walker,  the Lecturer on Astronomy — Lady Charlotte Finch — Soame
Jenyns — Mrs.  Carter — The Bishop of Winchester — Mrs.  North — Sir Henry Clinton —
Mrs.  Delany — Mrs.  Chapone — A Conversazione — Meeting between Soame Jenyns and
Miss Burney — Mrs.  Ord — Foreign Impressions of English Climate — The Hooles —
Miss Burney's first Introduction to Mrs.  Delany,  and the Duchess of Portland —
Singular art of Flower-making — The Etiquette of the Old School — "  Clarissa"  and Sir
Charles Grandison — Lord Weymouth — The Bishop of Exeter — Mr.  Lightfoot.

Wednesday,  Jan.  1st,  1783. — This was one of my quiet days at home,
upon the new construction I mentioned to you.  Pacchierotti called for a
few minutes in the morning,  to wish us a happy new year,  and desired I
would not forget making his compliments to Mrs.  Phillips upon such an
account.

Thursday. — I again spent at home.

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  317

Friday,  Jxs.  3d.  Was a very busy day.  In the morning there was a
grand rehearsal of a new serious opera.  Mrs.  Fitzgerald had engaged to go
with me,  but sent me suddenly an excuse.  I,  therefore,  wrote to ask Mrs.
Ord,  for she had said she should like it a few days before.  She sent me a
very kind answer,  and called for me at twelve o'clock.

We got into a very good box,  though so much in the dark,  that Pacchie-
rotti did not know me.  There was very little company.  The famous old
dilettante^  Mrs.  French,  was in the next box to ours,  and put her head in to
ask if I was not  "  Miss Mee  ?"  Mrs.  Ord had a good mind to answer no,
Miss B.  However,  when I told her of her mistake,  she entered,  neverthe-
less, into chat,  asking my opinion of the opera,  and what was the story,  and
the new singer,  Carnevale,  &c.

The opera is called  "  Cimene,"  and the story is the  "  Cid."  The music
Bertoni's.  Some is very pretty,  some very trite,  and a good many pas-
sages borrowed from Sacchini.  Many things,  however,  in the scheme of
the opera were,  to me,  quite new.  The duet they begin and end together,
without one solo bit for either singer.  It is extremely pretty,  and if Piozzi
had the upper part would have been beautiful.  The conclusion is a long
historic finale,  such as we have been only used to in comic operas  ;  and
just before the last chorus Pacchierotti has a solo air,  accompanied by the
mandoline,  which has a mighty pretty effect;  but,  not being expected,  John
Bull did not know whether it would be right or not to approve it,  and,  there-
fore, instead of applauding,  the folks only looked at one another.

The new singer,  Carnevale,  has a loud,  violent voice,  very harsh and
unpleasing,  and as little manageable or flexible as if she had sung all her
life merely by ear,  and without teaching of any sort.  She has all the abili-
ties to be a great singer,  and she is worse than any little one.  Pacchierotti's
first song is a sweet mezza bravura,  or sweet,  at least,  he made it,  with the
same words Millico had,  "  Placa lo sdegno,  O cara."  His second is  "  una
vera cantabile."  Oh,  such singing ! — so elegant ! — so dignified I — so chaste  !
— so polished  !  I never hear him sing without wishing for you,  who only
feel his singing as my father and I do;  for my father seems more and more
delighted with it every time he hears him.

Friday,  4th Jan. — We had an invited party at home,  both for dinner
and the evening.  The occasion was in honour of Dr.  Parr,  of Norwich,
Mr.  Twining's friend  ;  and who has been very kind about our Charles.  He
had been asked to dinner,  to meet Dr.  Johnson,  but could not come till the
evening.  i\Ir.  Seward and Mr.  Sastres came early.  Charles,  also,  came
from Chiswick.

Dr.  Johnson came so very late,  that we had all given him up  :  he was,
however,  very ill,  and only from an extreme of kindness did he come at all.
When I went up to him,  to tell how sorry I was to find him so unwell, —

"  Ah  !"  he cried,  taking my hand and kissing it,  "  who shall ail any thing
when  '  Cecilia'  is so near?     Yet you do not think how poorly I am  !"

This was quite melancholy,  and all dinner time he hardly opened his
mouth but to repeat to me, — "Ah  !  you little know how ill I am."  He was
excessively kind to me,  in spite of all his pain,  and indeed I was so sorry for
him,  that I could talk no more than himself.  All our comfort was from Mr.
Seward,  who enlivened us as much as he possibly could by his puns and his
sport.     But poor Dr.  Johnson was so ill,  that after dinner he went home.

Very early in the evening came Mrs.  Fitzgerald,  who has all her life
been dying to see Dr.  Johnson,  and who,  I am sure,  was extremely disap-
pointed in missing him.  Soon after came Mrs.  Ord,  who was less provoked,
because her curiosity has been often gratified.     Then came young Mr,

27*=

818 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

Cambridge,  who bad bad the same inducement sent bim.  Charles also
came,  and Mr.  P the only accidental caller-in of the party.

My father now came up to me,  followed by Dr.  Parr,  and said, —

"Fanny,  Dr.  Parr wishes to be introduced to you."

I got up and made my reverence.

"  Dr.  Parr,"  said my father,  "  gives us hopes of seeing Mr.  Twining this
year."

"If Miss Burney,"  cried the Doctor,  "would write to him,  success would
be certain.  I am sure he could resist nothing from her hand.  Tell him he
must come and see Mrs.  Siddons."

"Ay,"  said my father,  "and hear Pacchierotti."

"  Whatever Miss Burney tells him,  will do — one line from her would do.
And if she makes use even of any false pretences,  as they will be for so
good a purpose,  I will absolve her."

I hale,  even in jest,  this loose morality from a clergyman.  I only courte-
sied,  and so forth,  but attempted no answer;  and he grew tired,  and went
on with my father and Mr.  Seward.

Mr.  Cambridge then asked me concerning this Mr.  Twining,  and I gave
him a little history of his character,  but not so animated a one as of my
Daddy,  lest he should order his horse,  and set off for Colchester.  His
enthusiasm for any thing he supposes admirable would never have stopped
short of such an expedition.  We then went on chatting about Mrs.  Siddons,
Mr.  Garrick,  Dr.  Johnson,  and sundries,  till Mrs.  Ord broke up the party
by taking leave.     Mrs.  Fitzgerald,  too,  went at the same time.

Mr.  P ,  at last,  spied me out,  and came squinying up to me.     His

eyes are smaller than ever,  and he is more blind than ever,  and he pokes
his nose more into one's face than ever.  Mrs.  Fitzgerald could not look at
him without bursting into an almost horse laugh;  which really made me
hardly able to speak to him  :  but he talked to me with his usual prolific
powers of entertainment.  Dr.  Parr,  Mr.  Seward,  my father,  and Mr.
Sastres kept in a clump.

'-t'  vt^  ^  ^  ^

Young Mr.  Cambridge need not complain of my taciturnity,  whatever his
father may do.  Who,  indeed,  of all my new acquaintances,  has so well
understood me.  The rest all talk of  "Evelina"  and  "Cecilia,"  and turn
every other word into some compliment;  while he talks of Chesington,
or Captain Phillips,  and pays me,  not even by implication,  any compliments
at all.  He neither looks at me with any curiosity,  nor speaks to me with
any air of expectation;  two most insufferable honours,  which I am con-
tinually receiving.  He is very properly conscious he has at least as
much to say as to hear,  and he is above affecting a ridiculous deference to
which he feels 1 have no claim.  If I met with more folks who would talk
to me upon such rational terms, — considering,  like him,  their own dignity
of full as much value as my ladyship's vanity, — with how infinitely more
ease and pleasure should I make one in those conversations.

Saturday. — I made visits this morning to Miss E and Mrs.  Chapone,

and found only the last at home;  but as she was not only last,  but best,  it
accorded extremely well with my wishes.  I then went on to Mrs.  Thrale,
with whom I spent the day — always with all my heart.

Monday. — Mrs.  Fitzgerald called for me in the morning,  to go to the last
rehearsal of  "  Cimene."  I have nothing new to say about it.  Mr.  Fitz-
gerald brought Pacchierotti,  for a few moments,  into our box.  He was not
in spirits,  but could not help singing sweetly.

As we were coming out of the Opera house,  just at the door leading to
the Playmarket,  I saw the two Miss Bulls.     Lady Mary Duncan,  whom

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  319

they had been with,  had gone on.  Miss Catherine Bull accidentally-
looked round,  and,  thinking now or never to put an end to the awkward-
ness of our acquaintance and no acquaintance,  I ventured to instantly
courtesy,  though rather uncertain whether I was known.  Miss Catherine
returned my reverence with much alacrity,  and most eagerly called after
her sister, — "Sister!  sister!  here's Miss Burney  !"  Miss Bull came back,
and more courtesies followed.  Miss Catherine Bull then began a most warm
eloge of Pacchierotti.

"  I hope,"  cried she,  "  the new opera will be applauded  ! — If Pacchierotti
is not applauded,  I shall die  !     He is so unhappy about it  !"

"  It is very unfortunate,"  said I,  "  that even those friends he has made,
small as the number is to what I wish it,  he is not conscious that he pos-
sesses ;  for they are in general,  the most quiet and attentive part of the
audience,  and though they listen to him with as much pleasure as we do,
they hardly think of applauding him  ;  and therefore he concludes they do
not like him."

"Yes,"  cried Miss Catherine,  "and one may talk one's self out of breath
before he will believe one,  when one tells him how many people admire
him."

Mrs.  Fitzgerald then made me go with her to Cosway's,  to see her little
girl's picture.  I saw also some sweet things there,  especially a miniature
of the Duchess of Rutland,  that is beauty itself.  I passed the rest of the
day chez nous,

Tuesday. — I was all the morning with Mrs.  Thrale,  and then went with
my father to dinner at Mrs.  Ord's.  We met the Denoyers,  and Jonas
Hanway,  the old traveller.  He is very loquacious,  extremely fond of
talking of what he has seen and heard,  and would be very entertaining,
were he less addicted to retail anecdotes and reports from newspapers.  Mr.
Selwyn also was there.

Thursday. — Again at home,  though Mrs.  Thrale came to me to offer
me a place in her side-box,  to see Mrs.  Siddons in  "  Belvidera."  I
could refuse that without offence,  though not without surprise,  as it was so
generally a desirable thing,  that it showed how much I really and sincerely
coveted a little respite from dress and bustle.  I had,  however,  seen and
been half killed by Mrs.  Siddons in  "  Belvidera,"  or I could not have been
so heroic in my domesticity.

Friday. — Again at home,  but not alone,  for we had visiters all day.
Mr.  Jackson of Exeterj came in the morning,  and brought,  as he had
begged leave to do,  his daughter.  She seems sensible,  but she is rather
conceited,  and fond of talking,  and talking as if well satisfied she deserved
hearers.

Before they went came Miss Streatfield,  looking pale,  but very elegant
and pretty.  She was in high spirits,  and I hope has some reason.  She
made,  at least,  speeches that provoked such surmises.  When the Jacksons
went, —

"  That,"  said I,  "  is the celebrated Jackson of Exeter ;  I dare say you
would like him if you knew him."

"  I dare say I should,"  cried she,  simpering,  "  for he has the two requi-
sites for me, — he is tall and thin."

To be sure,  this did not at all call for raillery I Dr.  Vyse has always
been distinguished by those two epithets.  I said,  however,  nothing,  as my
mother was present ;  but she would not let my looks pass unnoticed.

"  Oh !"  cried she,  "  how wicked you look  ! — No need of seeing Mrs.
Siddons,  for expression ! — However,  you know how much that is my taste,
— tall and thin  ! — but you don't know how apropos it is just now  !"

320  •      DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

She was here interrupted by the entrance of young Mr.  Cambridge,  who
then came into the room.

He had a good deal of talk with Miss Streatfield about her darling Bishop
of Chester,  at whose house he has often met her.  She talked of him with
her usual warmth of passionate admiration,  and he praised him very much
also,  and said, —

"  I know no house where conversation is so well understood as the Bishop
of Chester's, — except this, — where,  from the little I have seen — and much
more I hope to see — I think it more pleasantly and desirably managed than
any where."

Friday. — Mr.  Jackson and his daughters came to tea in the evening,
and Miss Mathias,  as a visiter of Charlotte's.  Mr.  Jackson,  unfortunately,
was in one of his gloomy humours,  and would not talk with my mother  ;
as to me,  I never hardly,  when the party is so small,  can talk with any
comfort or spirit.  I gave the evening wholly,  therefore,  to Miss Jackson,
who could give me back nothing in payment,  but that I had merely done
what was fitting to do.

I made a visit to poor Dr.  Johnson,  to inquire after his health.  I found
him better,  yet extremely far from well.  One thing,  however,  gave me
infinite satisfaction.  He was so good as to ask me after Charles,  and
said,  "  I shall be glad to see him  :  pray tell him to call upon me."  I
thanked him very much,  and said how proud he would be of such a per-
mission.

"  I should be glad,"  said he,  still more kindly,  "  to see him,  if he were
not your brother  ;  but were he a dog,  a cat,  a rat,  a frog,  and belonged to
you,  I must needs be glad to see him  !"

Mr.  Seward has sent me a proof plate,  upon silver paper,  of an extremely
fine impression of this dear doctor,  a mezzotinto,  by Doughty,  from Sir
Joshua's picture,  and a very pretty note to beg my acceptance of it.  I am
much obliged to him,  and very glad to have it.

Saturday,  Jan.  11th. — I went early to my dear Mrs.  Thrale's to
spend the whole day with her,  which I did most comfortably,  and nobody
was let in.  In the evening,  as I had Mrs.  Crewe's ticket,  I went with her
and Miss Thrale into the pit at the Opera.  It was Medonte.  Pacchierotti
was charmingly in voice,  and we sat near the orchestra,  and I heard him
to all possible advantage.

In our way we passed through the coflTee-room.  There we were recog-
nised by Mr.  J .     He was very civil,  and soon after we had taken our

places,  Mrs.  Thrale being between her daughter and me,  he took the out-
ward seat next to mine,  where he sat during the whole opera.  He is affected
and dainty,  but he knows music very well,  and is passionately an admirer
of Pacchierotti,  which made me very glad of having him in my neighbour-
hood. A gentleman,  too,  of his acquaintance,  who sat between us,  was
quite a vehement admirer of the sweet Pac's.,  yet I observed that neither of
them gave him any applause, — so indolent people are even in their plea-
sures.

Mr.  J ,  though he talked to me very much,  never did it while the

Pac.  was singing,  or while any thing else was going forward that was worth
attention.

"  Have you read,"  he said,  "  the new book that has had such a run in
France,  '  Les liasons dangereiises V  "

"  No,"  answered I,  not much pleased at the name,  "  I have not even
heard of it."

"  Indeed  ! — it has made so much noise in France I am quite surprised at

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA/  321

that.  It is not,  indeed,  a work that recommends very strict morality ;  but
you,  we all know,  may look into any work without being hurt by it."

J felt hurt then,  however,  and very gravely answered, —

"I cannot give myself that praise,  as I never look into any books that
could hurt me."

He bowed,  and smiled,  and said,  that was  "very right,"  and added, —

"  This book was written by an officer;  and he says,  there are no charac-
ters nor situations in it that he has not himself seen."

"  That,  then,"  cried I,  "  will with me always be a reason to as little
desire seeing the officer as his hook."

He looked a little simple at this,  but pretended to approve it very much.
However,  I fancy it will save him the trouble of inquiring into my readings
any more.  I was really provoked with him,  however,  and though he was
most obsequiously civil to me,  I only spoke to him in answer,  after this little
dialogue.

When the opera was over,  he took leave of us to go into some better
place,  I fancy,  for seeing a new dance,  which was to follow.  But I was
very much surprised,  when,  while I was speaking to Mrs.  Thrale,  a voice

said,  "  How do you do.  Miss Burney V and turning about,  I saw Mr.  J 's

place had been taken by Mr.  George Cambridge.  You may easily believe
I was not sorry at the change.  I like him,  indeed,  extremely.  He is both
elegant and sensible,  and almost all the other folks I meet deserve,  at best,
but o?te of those epithets.

When the dance was over,  he joined some other ladies,  and we met with
my father,  and Harry Cotton,  and proceeded to the coffee-room.  It was,
however,  so crowded,  we could not make way to the door.

Among the fine folks was Lady Archer,  whom I had never before seen
so near :  and notwithstanding all her most unnatural cake of white and red,
her features were so perfect and so lovely,  I could not help saying, —

"  What pity so much heauty should be thrown away  !"

"  Beauty,"  repeated H.  Cotton,  "  if any there be,  I must own it lies too
deep for me to see it."

I went to-day to Lady H's.,  who has been here.  She looks extremely
ill,  and is very ill  ;  and Miss C.  looked extremely ugly,  and is very ugly  ;
and the other Misses looked extremely affected and conceited,  and are
affected and conceited  :  so looks and facts were well suited.

I then called on Mrs.  Fitzgerald,  and had a hearty and robust halloo with
her,  comically in contrast with the languor I had just left,  and then came
home,  where I stayed with my mother the rest of the day.

Monday,  Jan.  13th. — This proved,  and unexpectedly,  a very agreeable
day to me.  I went with my father to dine at Mrs.  Walsingham's,  where I
only went so soon again because he wished it,  but where I passed my time
extremely well.  The party was small — Dr.  Warton,  Mr.  T.  Warton,  Mr.
Pcpys,  Mr.  Montagu,  Mr.  Walker the lecturer,  and my dear Sir Joshua
Reynolds,  with my father,  were all the men;  and Mrs.  Montagu was the
only other female besides myself.

Dr.  Warton made me a most obsequious bow;  I had been introduced to
him,  by Sir Joshua,  at Mrs.  Cholmondeley's.  He is what Dr.  Johnson
calls a rapturist,  and I saw plainly he meant to pour forth much civility
into my ears,  by his looks,  and watching for opportunities to speak to me:
I so much,  however,  dread such attacks,  that every time I met his eye,  I
turned.another way,  with so frigid a countenance,  that he gave up his design.
He is a very communicative,  gay,  and pleasant converser,  and enlivened the
whole day by his readiness upon all subjects.

322 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

Mr.  Tom Warton,  the poetry historiographer,  looks unformed in his man-
ners, and awkward in his gestures.  He joined not one word in the general
talk,  and,  but for my father,  who was his neighbour at dinner,  and entered
into a Ute-d-Ute conversation with him,  he would never have opened his
mouth after the removal of the second course.

Mr.  Montagu is Mrs.  Montagu's nephew,  and adopted son.  He is young,
and well enough looking,  has an uncommon memory for all he has read,  is
extremely civil in his behaviour,  and seems extremely well-formed in his
mind,  both with respect to literature and to principle.  He affects,  however,
talking French rather too much,  and has a something finical in his manners,
that,  with me,  much lessens their power of pleasing.

Mr.  Walker,  though modest in science,  is vulgar in conversation.  The
rest I have nothing new to say about.

I was placed at dinner between Sir Joshua and Mr.  Montagu.  I had a
great deal of exceeding comfortable and easy chat with Sir Joshua,  as I
always have,  which makes his very sight enliven me in all these places.  I
had intended not speaking at all with Mr.  Montagu,  as I thought him so
fine;  but he was so very civil,  and so perpetually addressed me,  that before
dinner was over we seemed quite well acquainted.

When we left the gentlemen,  Mrs.  Montagu and Mrs.  Walsingham began
a conversation upon Lady Charlotte Finch's late excursion to Spain,  and
then talked upon foreign places and foreign people with much spirit and
entertainment.  When the gentlemen joined us,  the same subject continued,
and was extremely well treated.  Mrs.  Montagu was particularly cheerful,
and said many very good things.  Indeed,  nothing was said that deserved
not attention.

Once,  however,  I was a little startled  :  the conversation,  by degrees,  fell
upon books,  and every body agreed that Sir Roger de Coverley was,  per-
haps, the first character ever drawn,  for perfection of delineation.

"  But I cannot help suspecting,"  said Dr.  Warton,  "  it is taken from the
life,  as there are certain traits in it too excellent to have been merely in-
vented:  particularly that singularity,  that wherever he visited he always
talked to the servants the whole way he went up stairs."

Mr.  Montagu here arose,  and walking round to the back of my chair,
said,  in a whisper, —

"  Miss Burney,  pray how is this  ?  must a character,  to be excellent,  be
drawn from the life?  I beg you would tell me?"

Malicious enough,  this  !

"  O,"  answered I,  as easily as I could,  "  unless we knew what characters
are,  and what are not,  drawn from the life,  'tis impossible to decide."

Tuesday. — I spent at Mrs.  Thrale's all the afternoon,  but had two en-
gagements for the evening ;  one with Mrs.  Ord,  who had written me the
finest of panegyrics from Soame Jenyns,  who had charged her to contrive
a meeting for him,  and she begged to see me on Saturday.  1 had no heart
for such an encounter,  and sent an excuse.  She then insisted upon seeing
me,  and,  when I went,  declared I should fix my own day,  and showed me
Mr.  Jenyns'  notes upon the subject,  all expressing his violent impatience for
the interview.  I wns obliged to agree for Friday  ;  but indeed with no good
will,  for I am not at all equal to such formal engagements.  If I had met
him accidentally I should have been much pleased  ;  but arranging a meeting,
professedly to hear his compliments,  nothing in the world but an inability
of resisting Mrs.  Ord's importunity should have made me consent to. ,

Mrs.  Carter was with her.  I could not,  however,  stay,  though so quiet a
trio would much better have suited me.

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  323

We had a note to-day from Hetty,  who is just returned from Farnham,
with a request from the Bishop of Winchester and Mrs.  North that they
might come here to tea the next day.  Mrs.  North has long made advances
to me of acquaintance;  however,  Hetty wrote me word from Farnham,  that
she said she saw I shirked her,  but she was determined to conquer me,  if
human powers could do it.

My dear father was delighted,  and readily agreed to their coming.  He
would have had nobody invited to meet them  ;  but my mother,  of her own
accord,  had without telhng him,  sent to invite Mr.  George Cambridge,  whose
civility to her has won her heart,  and most especially his bringing her the
print of Mrs.  Siddons.

They came very early,  the Bishop,  Mrs.  North,  Mr.  Burney,  and Hetty,
who had dined with them.  Mrs.  North apologized with an easy gaiety,  to
my mother,  for the liberty she had taken,  and then bid Hetty introduce her
to Charlotte and me.  She spoke to me at once with a freedom and face-
tiousness which she meant to inspire me with the same,  and make me shake
off the shyness she had heard belonged to me with strangers  ;  but her
flightiness,  like that of Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  which it a good deal resembled,
only served to make me feel foolish,  and wish her to address somebody
else.     The Bishop was quiet and gentle,  and talked only with my father.

I was sitting by myself upon the sofa,  when Hetty,  crossing over to me,
said, —

"  Mrs.  North declares she sees you are going into a lethargy,  and she
has sent me to rouse you."

Mrs.  North then followed herself,  and began a vehement charsie to me not
to be formal.  She reproached mc,  with great good humour,  for so long
shirking her acquaintance ;  said she was sure I had conceived an aversion
to her,  but gave me her word I should like the Bishop of all things.  Then
calling him up to us,  she said, —

"  Did not I tell you as we came along that I knew she would like you
vastly,  and me not at all  ?"

"  I beg your pardon,"  cried I,  "  but perhaps I may be less afraid of the
Bishop from expecting less of his notice."

"  There now — that's abominable  !     She's afraid of me,  and not of you."

"  Because I,"  cried the Bishop,  "  am afraid of her,  that's all."

My mother now summoned them to look at Mrs.  Siddons's print,  and I
was glad of the opportunity to remove,  as this rattling requires more inti-
macy and congeniality to make it to me pleasant.

Mrs.  North,  being satisfied with the print,  again placed me next her on
the sofa.  She showed us all a very beautiful bouquet half natural and half
artificial,  and then,  taking it out of her bosom,  she insisted upon fastening
it in mine  ;  and when I would have declined it,  cried out, —

"  Come,  you little toad,  don't be absurd.     Let me fix it for you at once."

And afterwards,  when I did not instantly understand some queer speech
she made,  and which might be taken many ways,  she exclaimed, —

"  Come,  now,  don't be dull !"

When they were taking leave,  Monday was fixed upon for all of us but
my mother,  who was allowed to excuse herself,  to dine at the Bishop's.  I
was engaged in the evening to an assembly at Mrs.  Thrale's.

Thursday. — This morning we had a visit from the elder Mr.  Cambridge.
I cannot,  however,  be at all easy with the father,  though I admire him more
and more,  and think all that is formal in him wears off upon acquaintance,
and all that is pleasant grows more and more conspicuous.  But he behaves
to me with a kind of deference that kills me  ;    he listens to what I

324 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783^

say,  as you would listen to Dr.  Johnson,  and leans forward with an air
of respect that,  from a man such as him,  half petrifies me  ;  for what upon
earth could I find to say that would answer high-raised expectations from
Mr.  Cambridge?  I feel with him as I did with Mr.  Burke — an admiration
that makes me delighted to hear him  ;  but that makes me,  at the same
time,  dread to hear myself.  If they took less notice of me,  I should do
better.

He told us he had had great pleasure in seeing again his old acquaintance
Mr.  Crisp, —

"  But for Mrs.  Phillips,"  he cried,  "  I am in love with her — I want to
marry her — I never was so much charmed in so short a time before."

I believe I did look a little more at my ease when he said this.  His
praise of my Susy is worth having ;  and he spoke it with a warmth and
pleasure that made me almost long to embrace him.  I think that would
have put an end to this distance 1 complain of pretty completely.

Friday. — Now for this grand interview with Soame Jenyns.  I went
with my dear father,  who was quite enchanted at the affair.  Dear soul,
how he feeds upon all that brings fame to Cecilia !  His eagerness upon this
subject,  and his pleasure in it,  are truly enthusiastic,  and,  I think,  rather
increase by fulness than grow satiated.

We were late ;  there was a good deal of company,  not in groups,  nor yet
in a circle,  but seated square round the room,  in order following, — Miss
Elleker,  Mrs.  Soame Jenyns,  Mrs.  Thrale,  her daughter,  Mrs.  Buller,  Mr.
Cambridge,  sen.,  Mr.  Soame Jenyns,  Mr,  Selwin,  Mr.  Cambridge,  jun.,  Miss
Burgoyne,  a lady or two I knew not,  and three or four men.

Mrs.  Ord almost ran to the door to receive us,  and every creature of this
company,  contrary to all present custom in large meetings stood up.

"  Why have you been so late V cried Mrs.  Ord  ,•  "  we have been waiting
for you this hour.     I was afraid there was some mistake."

"  My father could not come sooner."

"  But why would not you let me send my coach for you  ?  Mr.  Soame
Jenyns has been dying with impatience  ;  some of us thought you would
not come  ;  others thought it only coquetry ;  but come,  let us repair the
time as we can,  and introduce you to one another without further delay."

You may believe how happy I felt at this  "  some thought,"  and  "  others,"
which instantly betrayed that every body was apprised they were to see this
famous rencounter  ;  and lest I should mark it less,  every body still stood up.

Mr.  Jenyns now,  with all the speed in his power,  hastened up to me,  and
began a long harangue of which I know hardly a word,  upon the pleasure
and favour,  and honour,  and what not,  of meeting me,  and upon the delight,
and information,  and amusement of reading  "Cecilia."

1 made all possible reverences,  and tried to get to a seat,  but Mrs.  Ord,
when 1 turned from him,  took my hand,  and leading me to the top of the
room,  presented me to Mrs.  Jenyns.  Reverences were repeated here,  in
silence,  however,  so they did very well.  I then hoped to escape to Mrs.
Thrale,  who held out her hand to me,  pointing to a chair by her own,  and
saying, —

"  Must I,  too,  make interest to be introduced to Miss Burney  ?"

This,  however,  was not allowed  ;  Mrs.  Ord again look my hand,  and
parading me to the sofa,  said, —

"  Come,  Miss Burney,  and let me place you by Mrs.  Buller."

I was glad,  by this lime,  to be placed any where,  for not till then did the
company seat themselves.

Mr.  Cambridge,  sen.,  then came up to speak to me,  but had hardly asked

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  325

how I did before Mrs.  Ord brought Mr.  Jenyns to me again,  and made him
my ritrht-hand neighbour,  saying, —

"  There  !  now I have put you fairly together,  I have done with you."

]\Irs.  Buller is tall and elegant in her person  ;  she is a famous Greek
scholar,  a celebrated traveller upon the Continent to see customs and man-
ners ;  and a woman every way singular,  for her knowledge and enterprising
way of life.

Mr.  Soame Jenyns then,  thus called upon — could he do less  ? — began an
eulogy unrivalled,  I think,  for extravagance of praise.  All creation was
open to me  ;  no human being ever began that book and had power to put
it down  :  pathos,  humour,  interest,  moral — O Heavens  !  I heard,  however,
but the leading words  ;  though every body else,  the whole room being silent,
doubtless heard how they hung together.  Had 1 been carried to a theatre
to hear an oration upon my own performances,  I could hardly have felt
more confounded.

I bowed my head during the first two or three sentences,  by way of
marking that I thought them over  ;  but over they were not the more.  I
then turned away,  but I only met Mrs.  Buller,  who took up the panegyric
where Mr.  Jenyns stopped for breath.

In short,  the things that were said,  with the attention of the whole com-
pany, would have drawn blushes into the cheeks of Agujari or Garrick.
I was almost upon the point of running away.  I changed so often from hot
to cold that I really felt myself in a fever and an ague.  I never even at-
tempted to speak to them,  and I looked with all the frigidity I possibly could,
in hopes they would tire of bestowing such honours on a subject so un-
grateful.

One moment I had hopes that Mr.  G.  Cambridge,  in Christian charity,
was coming to offer some interruption  ;  for,  when these speeches were in
their height,  he came and sat down on a chair immediately opposite Miss
Thrale,  and equally near,  in profile,  to me;  but he merely said,  "  I hope
Dr.  Burney has not wanted his pamphlet?"  Even Mrs.  Thrale would not
come near me,  and told me afterwards it had been such a settled thing,
before my arrival,  that I was to belong to Mr.  Soame Jenyns,  that she did
not dare.

At length,  however,  the people,  finding there was no chance of amuse-
ment from me,  and naturally concluding Mr.  Jenyns could say little more,
began to entertain themselves in a more general way  ;  and then Mr.  Cam-
bridge, sen.,  entered into an argument with Mrs.  Buller upon foreign cus-
toms opposed to English,  and upon the difficulty of getting good conversa-
tion, from the eternal intervention of politics or dissipation.

Mrs.  Buller was clever and spirited,  but bold and decisive;  Mr.  Cam-
bridge was entertaining and well-bred,  and had all the right,  I thought,  on
his side.  I had more relief,  however,  than pleasure in the conversation  ;
for my joy in being no longer the object of the company was such as not
to leave me quite at liberty for attending to what was said.

The moment they were gone,  "  Well,  Miss Burney,"  said Mrs.  Ord,
"  have you and Mr.  Jenyns had a great deal of conversation together?"

"  O yes,  a great deal on my part  !"

"  Why you don't look quite recovered from it yet — did not you like it?"

"  O yes,  it was perfectly agreeable to me  !"

"  Did he oppress you  ?"  cried Mr.  Cambridge,  and then began a very
warm praise of him for his talents,  wit,  and understanding,  his knowledge,
writings,  and humour.

I should have been very ready to have joined with him,  had I not feared
he meant an implied reproach to me,  for not being more grateful for the

VOL.  I.  28

326 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

praise of a man such as he described.  I am sorry he was present if that
is the case  ;  but the truth is,  the evening was not merely disagreeable but
painful to me.  It became now,  however,  quite the contrary  ;  Mr.  Cambridge
took the lead,  and told some stories,  that for humour and comicality I think
unequalled.

When we all broke up upon Mrs.  and Miss Thrale's going,  Mr.  George
Cambridge,  very good-naturedly,  said to me, —

"  How sorry I have been for you to-night !"

"  O,  I shall take care how I come here again,"  answered I ;  "  1 have
often tied Mrs.  Ord up to promise I should find her alone,  and I don't much
think I shall be in haste to come again without making the same agree-
ment."

Mrs.  Ord herself,  then coming up to me,  regretted that Mrs.  Boscawen
had been at the house ;  but,  though she came on purpose,  could not stay
my arrival,  I was so late  !  I wished to have remonstrated against her making
this silly interview thus public,  and inviting witnesses;  but I saw she meant
me so much kindness,  that I had not courage to tell her how very utterly
she had failed.  I shall not,  therefore,  complain or scold,  but only try to
guard against any more such scenes in future.

Even my father himself,  fond as he is of this ado about  "  Cecilia,"  was
sorry for me to-night,  and said I looked quite ill one time.

Saturday. — I felt so fagged with the preceding day's fuss,  that 1 really
wanted quieting and refitting.  Mr.  George Cambridge,  in the morning,
brought home my father's pamphlet,  and asked me how I did after Mr.
Soame Jenyns.

"  O,  pretty well,  now  !"  cried I,  "  but I must own 1 most heartily wished
myself at plain,  quiet,  sober Chesington the whole of the evening."

"  Well !"  said he,  "  you concealed your uneasiness extremely well,  for
my father never saw it.  I saw it,  and was very much concerned at it ;
but when I mentioned something of it to him this morning,  he was quite
astonished."

"  I doubt not,"  said I ;  "  he only thought I received a great deal of
honour."

"  No,  no,  it was not that;  but he has no idea of those sort of things.  I
am sorry,  however,  you saw Soame Jenyns to such disadvantage,  for he is
worth your knowing.  His conversation is not flowing nor regular,  but
nobody has more wit in occasional sallies."

"  Well,  all my comfort was from Mr.  Cambridge;  when he began that
argument with Mrs.  Buller I was in heaven !"

"  My father hates argument,  too,"  said he ;  "  it was a mere accident
that he would enter into one.  For my own part,  I was quite sorry not to
hear Soame Jenyns talk more."

*'  Were you  ?"  quoth I,  shaking my head a little piteously.

*'  Not to you — I don't mean to you,"  cried he,  laughing  ;  "  but I assure
you you would find him extremely entertaining.  However,  was not Mrs.
Ord herself,  though she is a sweet woman,  a little to blame  ]  Nothing
could be so natural as that Soame Jenyns,  having himself so much humour,
should have been charmed with  '  Cecilia,'  and should wish to know you ;
but if there had not been so many people or if there had been as many,
and they had been set to conversing with one another,  it might all have
done very well."

While he was here Pacchierotti called — very grave,  but very sweet.  Mr.
G.  C.  asked if he spoke English.

"  O,  very well,"  cried I,  "  pray try him;  he is very amiable,  and I fancy
you will like him."

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  307

Pacchierotti began with complaining of the variable weather.

"  I cannot,"  he said,  "  be well such an inconsistent day."

We laughed at the word  "  inconsistent,"  and Mr.  Cambridge said, —

"  It is curious to see what new modes all languages may take in the
hands of foreigners.  The natives dare not try such experiments  ;  and,
therefore,  we all talk pretty much alike;  but a foreigner is obliged to
hazard new expressions,  and very often he shows us a force and power in
our words,  by an unusual adaptation of them,  that we were not ourselves
aware they would admit."

And then,  to draw Pacchierotti out,  he began a dispute,  of the different
merits of Italy and England  ;  defending his own country merely to make
him abuse it ;  while Pacchierotti most eagerly took up the gauntlet on the
part of Italy.

"  This is a climate,"  said Pacchierotti,  "  never in the same case for half
an hour at a time ;  it shall be fair,  and wet,  and dry,  and humid,  forty
times in a morning in the least.  I am tired to be so played with,  sir,  by
your climate."

"  We have one thing,  however,  Mr.  Pacchierotti,"  he answered,  "  which
I hope you allow makes some amends,  and that is our verdure  ;  in Italy
you cannot boast that."

"  But it seem to me,  sir,  to be of no utility so much ever-green;  is rather
too much for my humble opinion."

"And then your insects,  Mr.  Pacchierotti;  those alone are a most
dreadful drawback upon the comfort of your fine climate."

"  To Mr.  Cambridge,"  cried,  I meaning his father,  "I am sure they would  ;
for his aversion to insects is quite comical."

He wanted me to explain myself,  but I dare not tell a story after Mr.
Cambridge,  especially to his son.

"  I must own,"  said Pacchierotti,  "  Italy is rather disagreeable for the
insects ;  but is not better,  sir,  than an atmosphere so bad as they cannot
live in it  ?"

"  Why,  as I can't defend our atmosphere,  I must shift my ground,  and
talk to you of our fires,  which draw together society."

"  O,  indeed,  good sir,  your societies are not very invigorating  !  Twenty
people of your gentlemen and ladies to sit about a fire,  and not to pronounce
one word,  is very dull !"

We laughed heartily at this retort courteous,  and Mr.  G.  C.  was so much
pleased with it,  that he kept up a sportive conversation with him the whole
time he stayed,  much to my satisfaction;  as most of the people the poor
Pac.  meets with here affect a superiority to conversing with him,  though he
has more intelligence,  ay,  and cultivation too,  than half of them.

The entrance of young Mr.  Hoole,  and afterwards of Mrs.  Meeke,
interrupted them,  and Pacchierotti took leave.  I then made his elo^e to
Mr.  G.  C,  who said, —

"  I was very glad to meet with him ;  I had heard he applied very much
to our language,  and there is a softness in his manner,  and at the same
time a spirit in his opinions,  extremely engaging,  as well as entertaining."

Sunday,  Jan.  19. — And now for Mrs.  Delany.  I spent one hour with
Mrs.  Thrale,  and then called for Mrs.  Chapone,  and we proceeded together
to St.  James's Place.

Mrs.  Delany was alone in her drawing-room,  which is entirely hung
round with pictures of her own painting,  and ornaments of her own de-
signing. She came to the door to receive us.  She is still tall,  though
some of her height may be lost  :  not much,  however,  for she is remarkably

328 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

upright.  She has no remains of beauty in feature,  but in countenance I
never but once saw more,  and that was in my sweet maternal grandmother.
Benevolence,  softness,  piety,  and gentleness are all resident in her face ;
and the resemblance with which she struck me to my dear grandmother,  in
her first appearance,  grew so much stronger from all that came from her
mind,  which seems to contain nothing but purity and native humility,  that
I almost longed to embrace her  ;  and I am sure if I had,  the recollection of
that saintlike woman would have been so strong that 1 should never have
refrained from crying over her.

Mrs.  Chapone presented me to her,  and taking my hand,  she said, —

"  You must pardon me if I give you an old-fashioned reception,  for I
know nothing new."

And she saluted me.  I did not,  as with Mrs.  Walsingham,  retreat from
her.

"  Can you forgive.  Miss Burney,"  she continued,  "  this great liberty I
have taken with you,  of asking for your company to dinner?  I wished so
impatiently to see one from whom I have received such extraordinary
pleasure,  that,  as I could not be alone this morning,  I could not bear to put
it off to another day  ;  and,  if you had been so good to come- in the evening,
1 might,  perhaps,  have had company  ;  and I hear so ill that I cannot,  as I
wish to do,  attend to more than one at a time  ;  for age makes me stupid
even more than I am by nature;  and how grieved and mortified I must have
been to know I had Miss Burney in the room,  and not to hear her !"

She then mentioned her regret that we could not stay and spend the
evening with her,  which had been told her in our card of accepting her
invitation,  as we were both engaged,  which,  for my part,  1 heartily
regretted.

"  I am particularly sorry,"  she added,  "  on account of the Duchess
Dowager of Portland,  who is so good as to come to me in an evening,  as
she knows I am too infirm to wait upon her Grace myself:  and she wished
so much to see Miss Burney.  But she said she would come as early as
possible,  and you won't,  I hope,  want to go very soon  ?"

My time,  1 answered,  was Mrs.  Chapone's,  and Mrs.  Chapone said she
could not stay later than half-past seven.

"Fie,  fie!"  cried  ]\Irs.  Delany,  smiling;  "why Miss Larolles would not
for the world go before eight.  However,  the Duchess will be here by seven,
I dare say,  for she said nothing should detain her."

Mrs.  Chapone then made me look at the paintings,  which I greatly
admired  ;  particularly a copy of Saccharissa,  from Vandyke.  There was
also a portrait of Madame de Sevigne,  which struck me very much  ;  and,
while I was noticing the gaiety of its countenance,  Mrs.  Delany,  with an
arch look,  said, —

"  Yes,  it is very enjouee,  as Captahi Areshy would say."

And afterwards of some other,  but I have forgot what,  she said, —

"I don't know how it is,  Mrs.  Chapone,  but I can never look at that pic-
ture without thinking of poor Beljield.  You must forgive us,  Miss Burney  ;
it is not right to talk of these people ;  but we don't know how to speak at all
now without,  they are so always in our minds !"

Soon after we went to dinner,  which was plain,  neat,  well cooked,  and
elegantly served.  When it was over,  I began to speak ;  and now,  my
Chesington auditors,  look to yourselves!

♦'  Will you give me leave,  ma'am,  to ask you if you remember any body
of the name of Crisp  ?"

"  Crisp  ?"  cried she,  «  what  !  Mrs.  Ann Crisp  ?"

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  309

<'  Yes,  ma'am."

"  O surely  !  extremely well !  a charming,  an excellent woman she was  ;
we were very good friends once ;  I visited her at Burford,  and her sister
Mrs.  Gast."

Then came my turn,  and I talked of the brother  ;  but I won't write what
I said.

Mrs.  Delany said she knew him but very little  ;  and by no means so
much as she should have liked.  I reminded her of a letter which he wrote
her from abroad,  which she immediately recollected  ;  and I told her that the
account I had heard from him and from Mrs.  Gast,  of her former friend-
ship for Mrs.  Ann Crisp,  had first given me a desire to be acquainted with
her.

"  I am sure,  then,"  said she,  "  I am very much obliged to them both ;  but
how Mr.  Crisp can so long have remembered so insignificant a body I don't
know.  I beg,  however,  when you write to him,  you will give my compli-
ments and thanks to him,  and also to Mrs.  Gast,  for being so good as to
think of me."

Mrs.  Chapone then asked me a hundred questions about Mr.  Crisp,  and
said, —

"  Pray is he a Doctor Lyster  ?"

"I don't know Dr.  Lyster,  ma'am,"  cried T,  very simply,  for the book
was so wholly out of my head at the time,  that I really thought she meant
some living character.  They both laughed very much,  and assured me
they should soon teach me to remember names better,  if I lived with
them.

This Chesingtonian talk lasted till we went up stairs,  and then she
showed me the new art which she has invented.  It is staining paper of all
possible colours,  and then cutting it out,  so finely and delicately,  that when
it is pasted on paper or vellum,  it has all the appearance of being pencilled,
except that,  by being raised,  it has still a richer and more natural look.
The efl'ect is extremely beautiful.  She invented it at seventy-five  !  She
told me she did four flowers the first year  ;  sixteen the second  ;  and the
third,  160 ;  and after that many more.  They are all from nature,  and con-
sist of the most curious flowers,  plants,  and weeds,  that are to be found.
She has been supplied with patterns from all the great gardens,  and all the
great florists in the kingdom.  Her p*lan was to finish 1000  ;  but,  alas  !
her eyes now fail her,  though she has only twenty undone of her task.

She has marked the places whence they all came,  on the back,  and where
she did them,  and the year  ;  and she has put her cipher,  M.  D.,  at the
corner of each,  in different coloured letters for every difl^erent year — such
as red,  blue,  green,  &c.

"  But,"  said she,  "  the last year,  as I found my eyes grew very dim,  and
threatened to fail before my work was completed,  I put my initials in white,
for I seemed to myself already working in my winding sheet."

I could almost have cried at the mingled resignation and spirit with which
she made this melancholy speech.

Mrs.  Chapone asked her whether any cold had lately attacked her eyes?

"  No,"  said she,  smiling,  "  nothing but my reigning malady,  old age I
'Tis,  however,  what we all wish to attain  ;  and,  indeed,  a very comfortable
state I have found it.  I have a little niece coming to me soon,  who will
see for me."

At about seven o'clock,  the Duchess Dowager of Portland came.  She is
not near so old as Mrs.  Delany,  nor,  to me,  is her face by any means so
pleasing ;  but yet there is sweetness,  and dignity,  and intelligence in it.
Mrs.  Delany received her with the same respectful ceremony as if it was

28*

330 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

her first visit,  though she regularly goes to her every evening.  But what
slie at first took as an honour and condescension,  she has so much of true
humility of mind,  that no use can make her see in any other light.  She
immediately presented me to her.  Her Grace courtesied and smiled with
the most flattering air of pleasiire,  and said she was particularly happy in
meeting with me.

We then took our places,  and Mrs.  Delany said, —

"  Miss Burney,  ma'am,  is acquainted with Mr.  Crisp,  whom your Grace
knew so well ;  and she tells me he and his sister have been so good as to
remember me,  and to mention me to her."

The Duchess instantly asked me a thousand questions about him  ,* —
where he lived,  how he had his health,  and whether his fondness for the
polite arts still continued.  She said he was one of the most ingenious and
agreeable men she had ever known,  and regretted his having sequestered
himself so much from the society of his former friends.

This conversation lasted a long while,  for it was one upon which I could
myself be voluble.  I spared not for boasting of my dear daddy's kindness
to me ;  and you can hardly imagine the pleasure,  ease,  and happiness it
was to me,  to talk of him to so elegant a judge,  who so well knew I said
nothing that was not true.  She told me,  also,  the story of the poor Bir-
mingham boy,  and of the sketches which Mr.  Crisp,  she said,  had been so
good as to give her.

In the course of this conversation I found her very charming,  high-bred,
courteous,  sensible,  and spirited ;  not merely free from pride,  but free from
affability — its most mortifying deputy.

After this she asked me if I had seen Mrs.  Siddons,  and what I thought
of her.     I answered that I admired her very much.

"  If Miss Burney approves her,"  said the Duchess,  "  no approbation,  I
am sure,  can do her so much credit ;  for no one can so perfectly judge of
characters or of human nature."

"  Ah,  ma'am,"  cried Mrs.  Delany,  archly,  "  and does your Grace re-
member protesting you would never read  '  Cecilia V  "

"  Yes,"  said she,  laughing  ;  "  I declared that five volumes could never
be attacked ;  but since I began I have read it three times."

"  O terrible  !"  cried I,  "  to make them out fifteen 1"

"  The reason,"  continued she,  "  I held out so long against reading them,
was remembering the cry there was in favour of '  Clarissa'  and  '  Sir Charles
Grandison,'  when they came out ;  and those I never could read.  I was
teased into trying both of them ;  but I was disgusted with their tediousness,
and could not read eleven letters,  with all the effort I could make  :  so
much about my sisters and my brothers,  and all my uncles and my
aunts  !"

"  But if your Grace had gone on with  '  Clarissa,' "  said Mrs.  Chapone,
^'  the latter part must certainly have affected you,  and charmed you."

"  O,  I hate any thing so dismal  !  Every body that did read it had
melancholy faces for a week.  '  Cecilia'  is as pathetic as I can bear,  and
more sometimes ;  yet,  in the midst of the sorrow,  there is a spirit in the
writing,  a fire in the whole composition,  that keep off that heavy depression
given by Richardson.  Cry,  to be sure,  we did.  O Mrs.  Delany,  shall you
ever forget how we cried  ?  But then we had so much laughter to make us
amends,  we were never left to sink under our concern."

I am really ashamed to write on.

"  For my part,"  said Mrs.  Chapone,  "  when I first read it,  I did not cry
at all ;  I was in an agitation that half killed me,  that shook all my nerves,

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  33I

and made me unable to sleep at nights,  from the suspense I was in ;  but I
could not cry,  for excess of eagerness.

"I only wish,"  said the Duchess,  "Miss Burney could have been in
some corner,  amusing herself with listening to us,  when Lord Weymouth,
and the Bishop of Exeter,  and Mr.  Lightfoot,  and Mrs.  Delany,  and I,  were
all discussing the point of the name.  So earnest we were,  she must have
been diverted with us.  Nothing,  the nearest our own hearts and interests,
could have been debated more warmly.  The Bishop was quite as eager as
any of us  ;  but what cooled us a little,  at last,  was Mr.  Lightfoot's thinking
we were seriously  ^oing to quarrel ;  and while Mrs.  Delany and I were
disputing about Mrs.  Delville,  he very gravely said,  '  Why,  ladies,  this is
only a matter of imagination  ;  it is not a fact :  don't be so earnest.'  "

"  Ah,  ma'am,"  said Mrs.  Delany,  "  how hard your Grace was upon
Mrs.  Delville:  so elegant,  so sensible,  so judicious,  so charming a woman."

"  O,  I hate her,"  cried the Duchess,  "  resisting that sweet Cecilia ;
coaxing her,  too,  all the time,  with such hypocritical flattery."

"  I shall never forget,"  said Mrs.  Delany,  "  your Grace's earnestness
when we came to that part where Mrs.  Delville bursts a blood-vessel.
Down dropped the book,  and just with the same energy as if your Grace
had heard some real and important news,  you called out,  '  I'm glad of it
with all my heart !'  "

"  What disputes,  too,"  said Mrs.  Chapone,  "  there are about Briggs.  I
was in a room some,  time ago where somebody said there could be no such
character ;  and a poor little mean city man,  who was there,  started up and
said,  '  But there is though,  for I'se one myself!' "

"  The Harrels  ! — O,  then the Harrels  !"  cried Mrs.  Delany.

"  If you speak of the Harrels,  and of the morality of the book,"  cried the
Duchess,  with a solemn sort of voice,  "  we shall,  indeed,  never give Miss
Burney her due :  so striking,  so pure,  so genuine,  so instructive."

"  Yes,"  cried Mrs.  Chapone,  "  let us complain how we will of the torture
she has given our nerves,  we must all join in saying she has bettered us by
every line."

"  No book,"  said Mrs.  Delany,  "  ever was so useful as this,  because
none other that is so good was ever so much read."

I think I need now write no more.  I could,  indeed,  hear no more :  for
this last so serious praise,  from characters so respectable,  so moral,  and so
aged,  quite affected me  ;  and though I had wished a thousand times during
the discourse to run out of the room,  when they gave me finally this solemn
sanction to the meaning and intention of my writing,  I found it not without
difficulty that I could keep the tears out of my eyes ;  and when I told what
had passed to our sweet father his quite ran over.

Of all the scenes of this sort in which I have been engaged,  this has
been the least painful to me,  from my high respect for the personages,
from their own elegance,  in looking only at one another while they talked,
and from having no witnesses to either watch me or to be wearied them-
selves :  yet I still say only least painful ;  for pleasant nothing can make a
conversation entirely addressed to one who has by no means in the world
of taking any share in it.

This meeting had so long been in agitation,  and so much desired by
myself,  that I have not spared for being circumstantial.

The Duchess had the good sense and judgment to feel she had drawn up
her panegyric to a climax,  and therefore here she stopped ;  so,  however,
did not we,  for our coach was ready.

332 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

CHAPTER XVI.
1783.

An Assembly at Mrs.  Thrale's — Owen Cambridge and Dr.  Johnson — Mr.  Bowles— His
Enthusiasm about Johnson— An Evening Party — Pacchierotti and Bertoni— Mr.
Twining— A Character — Dr.  Johnson's carelessness of his Writings— Baretti's Dia-
logues— Mrs.  Byron — Correspondence— Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp— Dr.  Burney to
Mr.  Crisp — Illness and Death of Mr.  Crisp— Dr.  Burney to Miss Burney — Sorrovv and
Condolence — Diary Resumed — Illness of Dr.  Johnson — Affecting Anecdote of him —
A party at Mrs.  Vesey's— Mrs.  Garrick,  Miss More,  Horace Walpole— Miss Burney's
Introduction to Horace Walpole — Another party at Mrs.  Vesey's — Walpole,  Burke,
Sir Joshua Reynolds — The Abb6 Berquin— L'J.mi des Enfans — A Day with Mrs.
Delany— A Party at Dr.  Burney's — Strange,  the celebrated Engraver — Dr.  Garthshore
— Hoole,  the translator of  "  Tasso" — A Party at the Bishop of Winchester's — A Day
at Twickenham — Owen Cambridge — Thoughts on Dying — A Pleasant Tete-a-tete —
Anecdotes — Gibbon,  the Historian — His Ducking in the Thames — Dinner at Lady
Mary Duncan's — Mrs.  Lock,  of Norbury Park — A Musical Idol — Mrs.  Delany —
Letter from Dr.  Johnson to Miss Burney — A Visit to Dr.  Johnson — His Conversation
—The Bas Bleus— Mrs.  Thrale— A Little Mystery— A Party at Mrs.  Vesey's— Chit-
chat — Owen Cambridge — Mrs.  Walsingham — Lady Spencer — Sir William Hamilton
— Table-talk — Lord Lyttleton and Dr.  Johnson — Johnson in a Passion — Curious Anec-
dote of him — Singular Scene — Johnson and Mrs,  Montagu — Anecdotes of Horace
Walpole — Party at the Pepys's — A Party at Mrs.  Chapone's — Anecdote of Burke.

Thursday,  Feb.  23d. — How sorry I have been,  my sweetest Susy,  not
to have had a moment for writing till to-day.

In our journey to town I was not very gay ;  though I had turned from
my best loved Susy without one chaste embrace to keep myself hardy.
But the minute I had got into the coach,  I felt provoked that I had done it,
and I wish I had bid all things defiance for the pleasure which I had denied
myself.

Mr.  Cambridge talked a great deal,  and as well,  and with as much spirit,
as any man could who had so much toil upon his hands.  Miss Cambridge,
indeed,  talked also;  but I found it out of my power to support my own part
with any chance of dividing the labour.

He began talking of Dr.  Johnson,  and asking after his present health.

"  He is very much recovered,"  I answered,  "  and out of town,  at Mr.
Langton's.    And there I hope he will entertain him with enough of Greek."

"  Yes,"  said Mr.  Cambridge,  "  and make his son repeat the Hebrew
alphabet to him."

"  He means,"  said I,  ''  to go,  when he returns,  to Mr.  Bowles,  in Wilt-
shire. I told him I had heard that Mr.  Bowles was very much delighted
with the expectation of seeing him,  and he answered me, — "  He is so
<3elighted,  that it is shocking  ! — it is really shocking to see how high are his
expectations."  I asked him why;  and he said, — "Why,  if any man is
expected to take a leap of twenty yards,  and does actually take one of ten,
every body will be disappointed,  though ten yards may be more than any
other man ever leaped  !"

London,  April 2d. — I have much,  very much to write to you already,
my sweet Susy,  though we parted so lately ;  but nothing that I am more
interested in than in what I want to hear of my beloved daddy.  You will
indulge me,  I am sure,  and therefore I will resume my journal, — in which

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  333

there is a gap that will make my accounts,  for some time at least,  fully intel-
ligible only to yourself;  but when and what you read to your coterie you
must stop and explicate as well as you can.  If I help to furnish you with
matter of conversation,  my little obscurities will be as amusing as my copi-
ousness.    Tell them so.

The next day Mr.  Cambridge and his son called.  After- some general
conversation,  Mr.  C.  said, —

"  I am perfectly satisfied with the reason you gave me that night at Mrs.
Thrale's for Albany's rising madness.  I have been reading that part all
over again,  and I find nothing can be better done.  1 like it more and more.
But I was startled at the character at first ;  but George has got an account
of exactly such a man.     George shall tell it you."

<'The man,"  said Mr.  G.  C,  "  is an old half-pay officer.  His name,  I
think,  is De la Port ;  he almost lives in St.  James's Park,  where he wanders
up and down,  looking about him for any objects he thinks in distress.  He
then gives them all the money he can spare,  and he begs for them of his
friends.  He once borrowed a sum of money of Mr.  L.  from whom I had this
account;  and,  some time after,  he paid him half,  and said,  'I return you
all 1 spent upon myself, — the rest you will be paid in another place  !'  He
composes prayers for poor and sick people  ;  he wears a very shabby coat,
that he may spend no more upon himself than is absolutely necessary  ;
and,  in his benevolence and singularity,  there is an undoubted mixture of
insanity.  Mrs.  L.,  when she talked of him to me,  said,  ♦  the resemblance
to the character of Albany was so very strong,  that she thought it must
certainly be meant for him,'  and desired me to ask Miss Burney if she did
not know him.  I ventured,  however,  to immediately answer,  I was sure
she did not,  merely from that circumstance,  as I was certain she would not
have put him in her book if she had known him."

"  I am very much obliged to you," cried I,  "  forgiving her that answer."

Mr.  Cambridge continued  :

"  That which makes the wonderful merit of your book — if you'll excuse
my just mentioning it — is that you see with such exact discrimination all
classes of characters,  and let the individuals pass unnoticed."

Some time after we talked about Dr.  Johnson,  for Mr.  G.  C.  is one of his
warmest admirers.  He has requested me to get him a list of his miscella-
neous works,  as he wishes to collect them  :  and I have promised I will as
soon as I have a fair opportunity.

"  Though,  indeed,"  I added,  "  it will be very difficult,  as I dare say he
hardly knows himself what he has written  ;  for he has made numerous
prefaces,  dedications,  odd chapters,  and I knov/  not what,  t'or other authors,
that he has never owned,  and probably never will own.  But I was sure,
when I read it,  that the preface to  *  Baretti's Dialogues'  was his  ;  and that 1
made him confess."

"  ♦  Baretti's Dialogues V — What are they about 1"

"  A thimble,  and a spoon,  and a knife,  and a fork  !  They are the most
absurd,  and yet the most laughable things you ever saw.  T would advise
you to get them.  They were written for Miss Thrale,  and all the dialogues
are between her and him,  except,  now and then,  a shovel and a poker,  or a
goose and a chair,  happen to step in."

We talked,  Mr.  Cambridge and I,  next,  upon the effect of manner,  in a
beginning acquaintance ;  and what power some people had,  by that alone,
of immediate captivation.

"  What a charm,"  cried he,. "  is that in your sister,  Mrs.  Phillips  ! — what
a peculiar felicity she has in her manner!  She cannot even move — she
cannot get up,  nor sit down,  but there is something in her manner that is
sure to give pleasure."

334 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

At this I flew into a great passion !

April 6th. — My dear Mrs.  Thrale spent all the morning in my room
with me  ;  and Mr.  Twining dined and stayed all the day with us.  In the
evening,  you know,  I had an engagement.  My father sent me first,  as he
determined to stay till the last moment with Mr.  Twining.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys received me very civilly,  and would have carried
me to a seat near the fire  :  but I was glad,  as I always am where I go alone,
to catch at the first chair in my way,  and take possession of it,  merely to
sink from notice.  They disputed the matter with me some time,  but I fas-
tened upon a chair,  and they then gave it over.

Not long after this,  my dear Mrs.  Thrale,  with whom I had not one word,
said she must go to take leave of Mrs.  Byron,  and would then come back,
and carry me to Argyll Street,  where I had promised to spend an hour or
two,  as it was her last evening,  for early on Monday morning she was to
set out for Bath.  This circumstance gave a melancholy cast to the whole
evening,  and nothing but the recollection of how narrowly I had escaped
losing her for a longer time,  and at a greater distance,  could have made me
bear it with sufficient composure for observation.  As it was,  however,  I
took it cheerfully enough,  from the contrast of the greater evil.

Mr.  Pepys began an eloge of Mrs.  Thrale;  but my heart was too full of
more serious affection to give vent to it,  just then,  in praise  :  and soon after
my father came.  Mrs.  Thrale still was the topic.  And soon after that a
note was brought me.  It was from Mrs.  Thrale,  to beg I would join her at
Mrs.  Byron's,  as she could not return to take a formal leave.  Her note was
a very affecting one.  It was meant for the rest of the company,  as well as
myself;  but I felt that either to read or hear it would overset me,  and I had
no inclination for a tragedy scene before witnesses.  I therefore only begged
my father's leave to go to her.

MISS BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

April 12,  1783.
My dearest — dearest Daddy,

I am more grieved at the long and most disappointing continuation of
your illness than I know how to tell you  ;  and though my last account,  I
thank Heaven,  is better,  I find you still suffer so much,  that my congratula-
tions in my letter to Susan,  upon what I thought your recovery,  must have
appeared quite crazy,  if you did not know me as well as you do,  and were
not sure what affliction the discovery of my mistake would bring to myself.

I think I never yet so much wished to be at Chesington,  as at this time,
that I might see you go on,  and not be kept in such painful suspense from
post to post.

Why did you tell me of the Delanys,  Portlands,  Cambridges,  &c.,  as if
any of them came into competition with yourself?  when you are better,  I
shall send you a most fierce and sharp remonstrance upon this subject.  At
present I must be content with saying,  I will undoubtedly accept your most
kind invitation as soon as I possibly can.  Meantime,  if my letters will
give you any amusement,  I will write oftener than ever,  and supply you
with all the prog I get myself.

Susan,  who is my reader,  must be your writer,  and let me know if such
tittle-tattle as I can collect serves to divert some of those many moments of
languor and weariness that creep between pain and ease,  and that call more
for mental food than bodily medicine.  Your love to your Fannikin,  I well
know,  makes all trash interesting to you that seems to concern her ;  and I
have no greater pleasure,  when absent,  than in letting you and my dear

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  335

Susan be acquainted with my proceedings.  I don't mean by this to exclude
the rest of the dear Chesington set — far from it — but a sister and a daddy
must come first.

God bless and restore you,  my most dear daddy  !  You know not how
kindly I take your thinking of me,  and inquiring about me,  in an illness
that might so well make you forget us all  :  but Susan assures me your
heart is as affectionate as ever to your ever and ever faithful and loving
child,  F.  B.

DR.  BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.

Saturday Night,  12th April,  1783.
(Written on the same sheet with the foregoing.)

My dear Friend,

Though the incessant hurry I have for some time been in has exceeded
that of former years,  which I then thought impossible to be exceeded,  yet I
have hardly ever had your sufferings and situation a moment out of my
mind ;  and the first question I have constantly asked at my coming jaded
home of a night,  has been, — "  What news from Chesington  ?"  I do hope
most fervently that you will still weather this terrible attack,  and that in a
very few months I shall see you alive and happy in my favourite retreat,
which has been always rendered so superior to all others by your presence.

Susy was desired to ask you if I had any kind of book that was likely
to afford you any amusement,  and it is with extreme pleasure that her
answer is in favour of  "  Memoires de Petrarque."  I will not only send that
with the greatest pleasure,  but a cart-load of the choicest and best books in
my collection,  if you will but furnish a list.

Adieu,  my ever dear and honoured friend!  may your recovery be not only
sure,  but speedy !  is the most hearty wish of him to whom your loss would
be the most painful and severe amputation which misfortune could perform
upon my affections.

My wife,  as well as all around me,  have been greatly alarmed for you,
and entreat me to send their warmest and most affectionate wishes for your
speedy recovery.

C.  B.

[The illness of Mr.  Crisp now became so alarming that Miss Burney
hastened to Chesington,  where she had been only a few days when her
valued friend breathed his last.  The annexed letter from Dr.  Burney was
in answer to her account of Mr.  Crisp's increasing sufferings ;  that which
follows it was intended to condole with her on his death,  and at the same
time to rouse her fortitude to bear the affliction with which she was over-
whelmed.]

FROM DR.  BURNEY TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Ah  !  my dear Fanny,  your last letter has broke all our hearts  !  your
former accounts kept off despair  ;  but this brings it back in all its horrors.
I wish,  if it were possible,  that you would let him know how much I loved
him,  and how heavily I shall feel his loss when all this hurry subsides,  and
lets me have time to brood over my sorrows.  I have always thought that,
in many particulars,  his equal was not to be found.  His wit,  learnhig,  taste,
penetration,  and,  when well,  his conviviality,  pleasantry,  and kindness of

336 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

heart to me and mine,  will ever be thought of with the most profound and
desponding regret.

I know not what to say that will not add to your own affliction and all
around you.  What in the way of comfort can be said at present 1 or at least
be believed and received 1 I can only wish you all possessed of fortitude
sufficient to bear what now appears inevitable,  and almost immediate.  'Tis
terrible,  when no good can be done,  to be in the way of such scenes,  and
yet we console ourselves with the belief of its being right.

C.  B.

FROxM DR.  BURNEY TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

I am much more afflicted than surprised at the violence and duration of
your sorrow for the terrible scenes and events at Chesington,  and not only
pity you,  but participate in all your feelings.  Not an hour in the day has
passed,  as you will some time or other find,  since the fatal catastrophe,  in
which I have not felt a pang for the irreparable loss I have sustained.
However,  as something is due to the living,  there is,  perhaps,  a boundary
at which it is right to endeavour to stop in lamenting the dead.  It is very
hard,  as I have found all my life,  to exceed these bounds in our duty or at-
tention, without its being at the expense of others.  I have lost in my time
persons so dear to me,  as to throw me into the utmost affliction and de-
spondency which can be suffered without insanity  ;  but I had claims on my
life,  my reason,  and activity,  which drew me from the pit of despair,  and
forced me,  though with great difficulty,  to rouse and exert every nerve and
faculty in answering them.  It has been very well said of mental wounds,
that they must digest,  like those of the body,  before they can be healed.
Necessity can alone,  perhaps,  in some cases,  bring on this digestion  ;  but
we should not prevent it by caustics or corrosion  ;  let the wound be open a
due time,  but not treated with violence.  To quit all metaphor,  we must,
alas  !  try to diminish our sorrow for our calamity,  to enable us to support
another  ;  as a national peace is but time to refit,  a mental is no more.  So far,
however,  am I from blaming your indulgence of sorrow on the present oc-
casion, that I both love and honour you for it ;  and therefore shall add no
more on that melancholy subject.

#  *     "  *  #  *

C.  B.

[When the last mournful duties had been performed at Chesington,  Miss
Burney returned to her father's house in St.  Martin's Street ;  but some time
elapsed ere she recovered composure sufficient to resume her journal.

The next entry relates to an alarming paralytic seizure of Dr.  Johnson.]

JOURNAL RESUMED

Thursday,  June 19th. — We heard to-day that Dr.  Johnson had been
taken ill,  in a way that gave a dreadful shock to himself,  and a most anxious
alarm to his friends.  Mr.  Seward brought the news here,  and my father
and I instantly went to his house.  He had earnestly desired me,  when we
lived so much together at Streatham,  to see him frequently if he should be
ill.  He saw my father,  but he had medical people with him,  and could not
admit me up stairs,  but he sent me down a most kind message,  that he
thanked me for calling,  and when he was better should hope to see me often.
I had the satisfaction to hear from Mrs.  Williams that the physicians had
pronounced him to be in no danger,  and expected a speedy recovery.

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  337

The stroke was confined to his tongue.  ^Irs.  Williams told a most
striking and touching circumstance that attended the attack.  It was at
about four o'clock in the morning  :  he found himself with a paralytic affec-
tion ;  he rose,  and composed in his own mind a Latin prayer to the Almighty,
"  that whatever were the sufferings for which he must prepare himself,  it
would please Him,  through the grace and mediation of our blessed Saviour,
to spare his intellects,  and let them all fall upon his body."  When he had
composed this,  internally,  he endeavoured to speak it aloud,  but found his
voice was gone.

I went to Mrs.  Vesey's in the evening,  for I had promised to meet at
her house Mrs.  Garrick,  who came to town that day from Hampton.  I
found her and Miss More,  and Lady Claremont,  and Horace Walpole,  Mr.
Pepys and Miss G. ;  no one else.

Mrs.  Garrick was very kind to me,  and invited me much to Hampton.
Mrs.  Vesey would make me sit by Horace Walpole  :  he was very enter-
taining. I never heard him talk much before ;  but I was seized with a
panic upon finding he had an inclination to talk with me,  and as soon as I
could I changed my place.  He was too well-bred to force himself upon me,
and finding I shied,  he left me alone.  I was very sociable,  however,  with
Mrs.  Garrick.

Lady Claremont,  Mr.  Pepys,  and I,  outstayed the rest near an hour.  Mrs.
Vesey would not permit me to go ;  but when the others were gone she
exclaimed, —

"  Mr.  Walpole is sadly vexed that Miss Burney won't talk with him  !"

"  If she had any thing to say,"  cried I,  "  she would be very proud that
he would give her hearing."

"  ^V^hy,  dear ma'am,"  said Mr.  Pepys,  good-naturedly,  "  who can talk,
so called upon  ?  I,  who am one of the greatest chatterers in the world,  if
set upon in that manner,  why,  I could not say a word."

"  What,  then,"  cried she,  alarmed,  "  is it,  do you think,  my fault that
Miss Burney does not talk  ?"

Friday,  Juxe 20th. — I went in the morning to Dr.  Johnson,  and heard
a good account of him.  Dr.  Rose,  Dr.  Dunbar,  and Sam Rose,  the Doctor's
son,  dined with us.  We expected the rest of our party early  ;  though the
absence of Dr.  Johnson,  whom they were all invited to meet,  took off the
spirit of the evening.

Wednesday,  July 1st. — I was again at Mrs.  Vesey's,  where again I
met Mr.  Walpole,  Mr.  Pepys,  Miss Elliott,  Mr.  Burke,  his wife and son.  Sir
Joshua Reynolds,  and some others.

Mr.  Burke was extremely kind to me,  but not at all in spirits.  He is
tormented by the political state of affairs ;  and loses,  I really believe,  all
comfort of his life,  at the very time he is risen to the station his ambition
has long pointed out to him.

I had the satisfaction to hear from Sir Joshua that Dr.  Johnson had dined
with him at the Club.  I look upon him,  therefore,  now,  as quite recovered.
I called the next morning to congratulate him,  and found him very gay and
very good-humoured.

Saturday,  July 5tii. — My father and I went to dinner at Winchester
House,  Chelsea.  Mrs.  North was rather cold at first,  and reproached me
with my long absence,  but soon made up,  and almost forced from me a
promise to go to Farnham,  as the only condition of her forgiveness.  She
is clever,  bright,  pleasing,  eccentric,  and amusingly whimsical ;  and she is
also beautiful  :  but her manner has something in it alarming,  that seems
always upon the qui vive.

VOL.  I.  29

338 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

Sunday,  July 6tii. — We have now a new man who is always at our
house,  M.  Berquin,  a French author,  who came here a week or two since to
present to  "  Mile.  Berni,"  his work,  Mhich is called L'Ami des Enfans.
We had a droll interview enough,  but I cannot give the time for writing it :
but he desired my mother to deliver me the books,  with a thousand fine
speeches,  and never once suspected I was the Mile.,  though I was in the
room all the time.  I have since made some acquaintance with him  ;  but
his rapture when I talk to him is too great to be excited often,  therefore I
am chary of my words.  O you would laugh to see how enchantl he thinks
fit to appear.  His book,  however,  is extremely pretty,  and admirably adapted
to its purpose, — that of instructing not only in French,  and in reading, — but
in morals,  all the children who meet this their true ami.

July 7th. — I spent the whole day with sweet Mrs.  Delany,  whom I love
most tenderly.  I always long to ask for her blessing.  We had no com-
pany but Mrs.  Sandford,  an old lady who was formerly her ellve^  and
who seems well worthy that honour.  In ihe evening,  indeed,  came in Mr.
Walpole,  gay,  though caustic  ;  polite,  though sneering;  and entertainingly
epigrammatical.     I like and admire,  but I could not love,  nor trust him.

I have always forgot to mention to you a Poem,  by young Hoole,  called
"  Aurelia,  or the Contest."  He sent it me,  and I soon found the reason.
His  "  Aurelia"  runs through the hackneyed round of folly and dissipation,
and then appears suddenly to her,  in a vision,

"  The guardian power,  whose secret sway
The wiser females of the world obey."

This guardian power tells her what he has done for his favourites, — that
he gave to Dudley's wife

"  A nobler fortitude than heroes reach,
And virtue greater than the sages teach."

Then,  skipping suddenly to modern times,  that he instructed

"  Streatfield,  the learn'd,  the gay,  in blooming years,"

to assist the poor,  to attend the sick,  and watch over her dying old tutor,
Dr.  Collier.     Then,  that he directed

That he

That he told More

And then he says,-

"  Carter's piercing eyes
To roll inquisitive through starry skies.

■  To Chapone th'  important task assigned
To smooth the temper and improve the mind.'

'  To guide unthinking youth,

"  I stood,  a favouring muse at Burney's side,
To lash unfeeling Wealth and Stubborn Pride,
Soft Affectation,  insolently vain,

And wild Extravagance,  with all her sweeping train ;
Led her that modern Hydra to engage,
And paint a Harrel to a madd'ning age  ;
Then bade the moralist,  admired and praised  ;
Fly from the loud applause her talent raised."

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  339

And then the coterie concludes with Mrs.  Montagu.  What think you of
this our guardian genius  ?

Saturday,  July 12tii. — My father and Charlotte and I went again to
spend the day at Winchester House.  We met Dr.  and Mrs.  W^arren,  and
two of their sons,  and Mr.  Sayre,  an agreeable young man.

In the evening my father,  Hetty,  Charlotte,  and I went to Le Tessier's.
To-night he charmed me more than ever by  "  Le Roi a la Chasse."  His
talents are truly wonderful,  and I have never,  but from Garrick and Pac-
chierotti,  received equal pleasure in public.

July 15th. — To-day my father,  my mother,  and I,  went by appointment
to dine and spend the day at Twickenham with the Cambridges.  Soon
after our arrival Mr.  C.  asked if we should like to walk,  to which we most
readily agreed.

We had not strolled far before we were followed by Mr.  George.  No
sooner did his father perceive him,  than,  hastily coming up to my side,  he
began a separate conversation with me ;  and leaving his son the charge of
all the rest,  he made me walk off*  with him from them all.  It was really a
droll manoeuvre,  but he seemed to enjoy it highly,  and though he said not
a word of his design,  I am sure it reminded me of his own old trick to his
son,  when listening to a dull story,  in saying to the relator, — "  Tell the rest
of that to George."  And if George was in as good-humour with his party as
his father was with his tete-d-tcte why,  all were well pleased.  As soon as
we had fairly got away from them,  I\Ir.  Cambridge,  with the kindest smiles
of satisfaction,  said, — "  I give you my word I never was more pleased at
any thing in my life than I am now at having you here to-day."

I told him that I had felt so glad at seeing him again,  after so long an
absence,  that I had really half a mind to have made up to him myself,  and
shook hands.

"  You cannot imagine,"  said he,  "  how you flatter me ! — and there
is nothing,  I do assure you,  of which I am prouder,  than seeing you have
got the better of your fear of me,  and feeling that I am not afraid of you."

"  Of me,  sir?' — but how should you be 1"

"  Nay,  I give you my word,  if I was not conscious of the greatest purity
of mind,  I should more fear you than any body in the world."

Which had the greatest compliment,  Susy — he or me?

"  You know every thing,  every body,"  he continued,  "  so wonderfully
well I"

Afterwards,  when we were speaking of illness and of dying,  he assured
me that,  however pleasant his life was just now,  he should feel nothing in
giving it up  ;  for he could not tell what misery he might be saved by death,
nOr what sin.  And when this led me on to say I had never an illness in
life,  without thinking,  "  probably I had better die now,"  he joined in it with
such Christian reasoning as almost surprised as much as it edified me.

We then,  I know not how,  fell into discussing the characters of forward
and flippant women ;  and I told him it was my fortune to be,  in general,  a
very great favourite with them,  though I felt so little gratitude for that
honour,  that the smallest discernment would show them it was all thrown
away.

"  Why,  it is very difficult,"  said he,  "  for a woman to get rid of those
forward characters without making them her enemies.  But with a man it
is different.  Now I have a very peculiar happiness,  which I will tell you.
I never took very much to a very amiable woman but I found she took also
ot me,  and I have the good fortune to be in the perfect confidence of some
of the first women in this kingdom  ;  but then there are a great many

340 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

women that I dislike,  and think very impertinent and foolish,  and,  do you
know,  they all dislike me too  ! — they absolutely cannot bear me  !  Now,  I
don't know,  of those two things,  which is the greatest happiness."

How characteristic this  ! — ^do you not hear him saying it  ?

We now renewed our conversation upon various of our acquaintances,
particularly Mr.  Pepys,  Mr.  Langton,  and Mrs.  Montagu.  We stayed in
this field,  sitting and sauntering near an hour.  We then went to a stile,
just by the river side,  where the prospect is very beautiful,  and there we
again seated ourselves.  Nothing could be more pleasant,  though the wind
was so high I was almost blown in the water.

He now traced to me great part of his life and conduct in former times,
and told me a thousand excellent anecdotes of himself and his associates.
He summed them all up in a way that gave me equal esteem and regard for
him,  in saying he found society the only thing for lasting happiness ;  that,
if he had not met a woman he could permanently love,  he must,  with every
other advantage,  have been miserable ;  but that such was his good fortune,
that  "  to and at this moment,"  he said,  "  there is no sight so pleasing to
me as seeing Mrs.  Cambridge enter a room  ;  and that after having been
married to her for forty years.  And the next most pleasing sight to me is
an amiable w^oman."

He then assured me that almost all the felicity of his life both had con-
sisted, and did still consist,  in female society.  It was,  indeed,  he said,  very
rare,  but there was nothing like it.

"  And if agreeable women,"  cried I,  "  are rare,  much more so,  I think,
are agreeable men ;  at least,  among my acquaintance they are very few,
indeed,  that are highly agreeable."

"Yes,  and when they"  are so,"  said he,  "it is difficult for you to have
their society with any intimacy or comfort ;  there are always so many
reasons why you cannot know them."

He very kindly regretted seeing so little of me,  and said, —

"  This is nothing — such a visit as this.  If you could come now,  and
spend a month with us,  that is what I want.  If you could but come for a
month."

We continued chatting till we came to the end of the meadow,  and there
we stopped,  and again were joined by the company.

Mr.  Cambridge now proposed the water,  to which I eagerly agreed.

We had an exceeding pleasant excursion.  We went up the river beyond
the Duke of Montagu's,  and the water was smooth and delightful.  Me-
thinks I should like much to sail from the very source to the mouth of the

Thames.

******

Mr.  Cambridge told an absurd story of Dr.  Monso,  a strange,  gross man,
who,  at Mr.  Garrick's table,  called out to a very timid young woman to
help him to some greens.  She did her office slow and awkwardly,  and he
called out again,  in a loud voice,  "  You Trollop,  some greens,  I say !"  The
man,  it seems,  was a humorist.  Oh,  from such humorists Heaven shield
us  !     I would rather live with the dullest of the dull.

After dinner we again repaired to the lawn,  in a general body  ;  but we
had scarce moved ten paces,  before Mr.  Cambridge again walked off with
me,  to a seat that had a very fine view of Petersham wood,  and there we
renewed our confabulation.

He now showed me a note from Mr.  Gibbon,  sent to engage himself to
Twickenham on the unfortunate day he got his ducking.  It is the most
affected little piece of writing I ever saw.     He shall attend him,  he says,  at

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  341

Twickenham,  and upon the water,  as soon as the weather is propitious,
and the Thames,  that amiable creature,  is ready to receive him.

Nothing,  to be sure,  could be so apt as such a reception as that  "  amiable
creature"  happened to give him !  jMr.  Cambridge said it was  "  God's re-
venge against conceit."

Thursday,  July 17th. — I went with my dear father to-day to dine and
spend the evening at Lady Mary Duncan's.  How vexatious never to have
made this visit till it was necessarily the last in which I could see Pacchie-
rotti there  !  He was in good humour,  and more tolerable spirits than I
have lately seen him in.  Lady Shaub,  mother to Mrs.  Lock,  and Miss
Shaub,  her sister,  and Sir John Elliott,  made all the dinner party.  The
two Miss Bulls came in the evening.

^  Pacchierotti did not sing one song accompanied,  but he sung several little
airs and ballads,  English,  Scotch,  French,  and Italian,  most deliciously.  I
had a very agreeable day,  and I saw he was quite delighted that I made
one of the party,  and that added to my delight almost its sum total, — though
add is a little Irish there.  Oh how the Miss Bulls do idolize him  !  They
profess thinking him quite angelic,  and declared they should even look
upon it as a favour to be beat by him !  I laughed violently at this extrava-
gance, and vowed I would tell him.  They desired no better.  We called
him to us ;  but I was really ashamed myself when I found they were not.
He leaned down his head very patiently for an explanation.

"  Do tell him  !"  cried they,  both together.

"  What !"  cried he  ;  "  what does the sweet Miss Burney say 1"

*'  Oh,  oh  !"  cried one  ; — "  Oh dear  !"  cried the other  ;  "  how he speaks to
Miss Burney !"

"  Miss Burney,"  cried he,  quite warmly and undauntedly,  "  is a trea-
sure !"

"  Oh,  dear  ! — only hear him.  Lady Mary  !"  exclaimed Miss Catharine
Bull ;  "  he says Miss Burney is a treasure  !"

"  Well,  and is it not true  ?"  said she,  graciously.

"  Oh,  yes  !"  answered she,  half laughing,  yet in a repining voice ;  "  but
I don't like to hear him say so."

This was our sort of chat almost all the evening,  with various imitations,
and light summer singing,  from Pacchierotti.  Miss Bulls made me make
many promises about our future acquaintance,  and Lady Mary was all
graciousness and intimacy.

Friday,  July 18th. — I called in the morning upon my dear Mrs.  De-
lany,  who received me with the utmost kindness,  and whom I really love
even more than I admire.  I appointed to spend Tuesday with her.  And
so I would any other day she had named,  or even any week.  It is sweet,
it is consolatory to me to be honoured with so much of her favour as to see
her always eager to fix the time for our next and next meeting.  I feel no
cares with her.  I think myself with the true image and representative of
my loved grandmother,  and I seem as if I could never do wrong while I
keep her in my mind,  and as if to suffer it were immaterial,  if only in
worldly considerations.

These thoughts,  and this composure,  alas !  will not last long ;  but it is
pleasant to feel it even if for a few hours.  I wish you knew her.  I would
not give up my knowledge of her for the universe.  Nothing has so truly
calmed my mind since its late many disturbances as her society :  the reli-
gious turn which kindness and wisdom from old age,  give to all commerce
with it,  brings us out of anxiety and misery a thousand times more success-
fully than gaiety or dissipation have power to do.

29*

342  •  DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

Satueday,  July 19tii. — This morning a letter was brought into my
room,  and the maid said it came from Mr.  Cambridge,  but that the messen-
ger was gone.  The hnes were suggested by my father's portrait in Barry's
great painting.

"  When Chloe's picture was to Venus shown,
Surprised,  the goddess took it for her own." — Prior.

"  When Barney's picture was to Gibbon shown.
The pleased historian took it for his own ;
*  For,  who,  with shoulders dry,  and powdered locks,
E'er bathed,  but I  ?'  he said,  and rapp'd his box."

Barry repHed, —

'*  My lasting colours show
Wliat gifts the painter's pencil can bestow.
With nymphs of Thames,  those amiable creatures,
I placed the charming minstrel's smiling features  :
And let not then his bonne fortune concern ye.
For there are nymphs enough for you and Burney."

Pacchierotti is gone  ;  and I most provokingly missed seeing him at his
leave-taking visit ;  which has vexed me exceedingly.

MISS BURNEY TO MRS.  PHILLIPS.

October 3d,  1783.
Ah,  my Susy,  how I miss you already  ! — how I want you by my side  !
I have been repeating,  internally,  all day long,  these heartfelt lines, —

"  I prized ev'ry hour that passed by
Beyond all that had pleased me before.
But now they are gone  ! — and I sigh
And I grieved that I prized them no more."

For I seem dissatisfied with myself,  and as if I had not made the most of
being with you.  Yet I am sure I cannot tell how I could have made more.
Were I but certain of meeting you again in any decent time — but I have a
thousand fears that something will interfere and prevent that happiness  ;  and
there is nothing like being with you,  my Susy — to me,  nothing in the
world.

That kind Kitty  ! — I found a basket filled with all sort of good things
from her.  I believe she has determined I never shall be ill again,  or at least
have no illness for which she has not prepared a remedy.  Really,  between
her medicines,  and the dear Capitano's cosmetics,  I shall expect to become
stout and beautiful.  I don't know which will happen first,  and I am deter-
mined not to ask which is most probable.

My father and I began first upon Berquin,  to drive you all a little out
of our heads ;  and then,  when we were a little soothed by his feeling and
elegant writing,  we had recourse to Pasquin,  to put us in better spirits.
And so we laughed.  But I must own I too frequently meet with disgust in
all Fielding's dramatic works,  to laugh with a good heart even at his wit,
excellent as it is  ;  and I should never myself think it worth wading through
so much dirt to get at.  Where any of his best strokes are picked out for
me,  or separately quoted,  I am always highly pleased,  and can grin most
cordially  ;  but where I hear the bad with the good,  it preponderates too
heavily to suffer my mind to give the good fair play.

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  343

JOURNAL RESUMED.

Thursday,  Oct.  29tii. — This morning,  at breakfast,  Mr.  Hoole called.  I
wanted to call upon Dr.  Johnson,  and it is so disagreeable to me to go to
him alone,  now poor Mrs.  Williams is dead,  on account"  of the quantity of
men always visiting him,  that I most gladly accepted,  and almost asked,
his  'squireship.

We went together.     The dear Doctor received me with open arms.

"  Ah,  dearest of all dear ladies !"  he cried,  and made me sit in his best chair.

He had not breakfasted.

*'  Do you forgive my coming so soon  ?"  said I.

"  I cannot forgive your not coming sooner,"  he answered.

I asked if I should make his breakfast,  which I have not done since we
left Streatham  ;  he readily consented.

"  But,  sir,"  quoth I,  "  I am in the wrong chair."  For I was away from
the table.

"  It is so difficult,"  said he, "  for any thing to be wrong that belongs to you,
that it can only be I am in the wrong chair,  to keep you from the right one."

And then we changed.

You will see by this how good were his spirits and his health.

I stayed with him two hours,  and could hardly get away  ;  he wanted me
to dine with him,  and said he would send home to excuse me ;  but I could
not possibly do that.     Yet I left him with real regret.

Wednesday,  Nov.  19th. — I received a letter from Dr.  Johnson,  which I
have not by me,  but wull try to recollect.

«  TO MISS BURNEY.

"  Madam, — You have now been at home this long time,  and yet I have
neither seen nor heard from you.     Have we quarrelled 1

"  I have met with a volume of the  '  Philosophical Transactions,'  which I
imagine to belong to Dr.  Burney.     Miss Charlotte will please to examine.

"  Pray send me a direction where Mrs.  Chapone lives ;  and pray,  some
time,  let me have the honour of telling you how much I am,  madam,  your
most humble servant,  Sam.  Johnson.

"  Bolt Court,  Nov.  19th,  1783."

Now if ever you read any thing more dry,  tell me.  I was shocked to see
him undoubtedly angry,  but took courage,  and resolved to make a serious
defence  ;  therefore thus I answered, —

"TO DR.  JOHNSON.

"  Dear Sir, — May I not say dear  ?  for quarrelled I am sure we have not.
The bad weather alone has kept me from waiting upon you ;  but now you
have condescended to give me a summons,  no lion shall stand in the way
of my making your tea this afternoon,  unless I receive a prohibition from
yourself,  and then I must submit ;  for what,  as you said of a certain great
lady,  signifies the barking of a lap-dog,  if once the lion puts out his paw  ?

"  The book was very right.  Mrs.  Chapone lives at either No.  7 or 8 in
Dean Street,  Soho.

"  I beg you,  sir,  to forgive a delay for which I can only  '  tax the elements
with unkindness,'  and to receive,  with your usual goodness and indulgence,
your ever most obliged and most faithful humble servant,

"  F.  Burney.
"  St.  Martin's Street,  Nov.  19th,  1783."

344 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

My dear father spared me the coach,  and to Bolt Court,  therefore I went,
and with open arms was I received.  Nobody was there but Charles and
Mr.  Sastres,  and Dr.  Johnson was,  if possible,  more instructive,  entertain-
ing, good-humoured,  and exquisitely fertile,  than ever.  He thanked me re-
peatedly for coming,  and was so kind I could hardly ever leave him.

^  v\-  tK vp  ^  ^

In the evening I accompanied  ]\Irs.  Ord to Mrs.  Pepys.  There we met
Dr.  Pepys,  and Lady Rothes,  and Mr.  Hawkins Brown,  and had a very
sociable evening.

Mr,  Pepys read to us Miss More's  "  Bas Bleu"  again.  I longed to ask
for a copy,  but did not dare,  to send to Twickenham.

Dr.  Pepys had a long private conference with me concerning Mrs.  Thrale,
with whose real state of health he is better acquainted than any body ;  and
sad,  indeed,  was all that he said.

There are some new lines added to the  "  Bas Bleu,"  upon wit and attention  ;
and Mr.  Pepys chose to insist upon it I had sat to Miss More for the por-
trait of Attention,  which is very admirably drawn  ;  but the compliment is
preposterous,  because the description is the most flattering.

Saturday,  Nov.  22d, — I passed in nothing but sorrow — exquisite sor-
row, for my dear unhappy friend,  who sent me one letter,  that came early
by the Baih Diligence,  and another by the post.  But of these things no
more.

I am sorry not to be more explicit,  but I showld not give you more plea-
sure if I were.  I can only now tell you that 1 love Mrs.  Thrale with a
never-to-cease affection,  and pity her more than ever I pitied any human
being ;  and,  if I did not blame her,  1 could,  I should,  I believe,  almost die
for her !

I am extremely sorry,  my dearest Susy,  that in the late distress of my
mind about poor Mrs.  Thrale,  I mentioned any thing that has so much in-
terested you to know more.  It is too true that many know all, — but none
from me.  I am bound,  and should be miserable not to say,  if called upon,
and not to know,  if not called upon,  that no creature,  not even you to whom
I communicate every thing else,  nor to the trusty Charlotte with whom I
live,  and who sees my frequent distress upon the subject,  has tempted me

to an explanation.     General rumour 1 have no means to prevent spreading.

*  *-  *  *  *  *

I am still as much bent as ever to go to her,  if 1 can obtain leave ;  but I
will mention no more of the matter,  since the difficulties under which I
labour not to offend or afllict that beloved friend,  and yet to do nothing
wrong,  are by no means new,  though of late they have grown doubly pain-
ful. I will only say further,  that though her tailings are unaccountable
and most unhappy,  her virtues and good qualities,  the generosity and feel-
ing of her heart,  the liberality and sweetness of her disposition,  would coun-
terbalance a thousand more.

This I say,  lest you should think something worse than the truth — some-
thing stranger you cannot.  I am very sorry not to satisfy you more;  but
when you weigh what I have said,  you will be sensible I have reasons to
preserve silence  ;  though to myself,  believe me,  'tis by far most painful,
and has long been most cruel.

Tuesday,  Nov.  25th. — I went this morning to Lady Mary Duncan,  whose
visit my father grew angry that I did not return.  She admitted me,  and kept
me full two hours.  She is really entertaining,  very entertaining,  though
not very respectably always,  as every thing she says has some mixture of
absurdity in the manner,  even when the idea is faultless.  She much invited
me to frequent visits,  and was excessively civil and courteous.     Our talk

1783.        "  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  345

was all of her late Sir William and Pacchierotti.  She runs from one to the
other with a most ludicrous facility,  as if well content they should share
her favour,  divide her thoughts,  and keep the use of her tongue wholly to
themselves.

Tuesday,  Dec.  9. — This evening I went to Mrs.  Vesey's at last.  I was
obliged to go alone,  as my father would not be earlier than nine o'clock  ;
an hour too fine-Iadyish for me to choose visiting at.  But as I cannot bear
entering a room full of company sola,  I went soon after seven.

I found,  as 1 wished,  no creature but Mrs.  Vesey and Mrs.  Hancock,  who
lives with her.  I soon made my peace,  for several delays and excuses I
have sent her,  as she is excessively good-natured,  and then we had near
an hour to ourselves.  And then,  the first person who came, — who do you
think it was? — Mr.  Cambridge,  sen.  I leave you to guess whether or not
1 felt glad  ;  and I leave you,  also,  to share in my surprise upon finding he
was uninvited and unexpected ;  for Mrs.  Vesey looked at him with opea
surprise.

As soon as the salutations were over,  Mrs.  Vesey,  with her usual odd
simplicity,  asked him what had put him upon calling?

"  The desire,"  cried he,  "  to see you.  But what !  are there only you
three  ? — nothing but women  ?"

"  Some more are coming,"  answered she,  "  and some of your friends  ;
so you are in luck."

"  They are men,  I hope,"  cried he,  laughing  ;  «  for I can't bear being
with only women  !"

"  Poor Mr.  Cambridge,"  cried I,  "  what will become of him  ?  I know
not,  indeed,  if the three women now present overpower him."

"  To be sure they do,"  cried he,  "  for I like nothing in the world but
men I So if you have not some men coming,  I declare off."

Mrs.  Vesey and Mrs.  Hancock stared,  and I laughed  ;  but neither of us
could discover v/hat he was aiming at,  though he continued this raillery
some time,  till he exclaimed, —

"  Well,  I am sure of one friend,  however,  to stick by me,  for one has
promised me to come."

"  And who is that  ?"  said Mrs.  Vesey,  staring more.

"  Why a Christian-maker  !"

"  A Christian-maker  ! — who's that  ?"

"  Why one who is gone to-night to make two Christians,  and when they
are made,  will come to see if he can make any more here."

*'  Who is it  ?"

"  My son."

»'  O  ! — well,  I am always glad to see him."

Mr.  Cambridge then ran on with other such speeches  ;  but Mrs.  Vesey
sat gravely pondering,  and then called out, —

"  Pray how did your son know I should be at home  ?"

"  Why he does not know it,"  answered Mr.  C. ;  "  but he intends coming
to try."

She said no more,  but I saw she looked extremely perplexed.

Soon after Miss E entered.     She is a sort of yea and nay young

gentlewoman,  to me very wearisome.  Mr.  Cambridge,  during the recep-
tion, came up to me,  and whispered with a laugh,^ —

"  I called upon your friend,  Mrs.  Ord,  this morning,  and she told me you
would be here to-night."

'  I laughed,  too,  but thanked him,  and we were going on with our own
chat when Mrs.  Vesey,  as if from a sudden thought,  came up to us,  and
patting Mr.  Cambridge on the arm,  said, —

346 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

*'  I dare say you came to meet Miss Burney  "?"

"  Me 1 — no,"  cried he,  "  I came to meet Miss E ;"  and,  immediately

quitting me,  he went to talk with her.

This was rather a home stroke to be sure,  yet I really believe accidental.

Soon after came Mrs.  Walsingham,  and insisted upon sitting next me,  to
whom she is most marvellous civil.

Then came Mr.  Vesey,  with Sir Joshua Reynolds and Mr.  Richard
Burke,  from dinner.  I was very glad to see Sir Joshua,  who came up to
shake hands with me;  while Mr.  Richard Burke called out aloud from the
other end of the room,  in his Irish facetious way, —

"  Oho !  I shall go round to speak with Miss Burney  !"

I so hate these public addresses,  that I received him with the most chilling
gravity;  and,  after he had leant over my chair a minute or two,  with in-
quiries about my health and my father,  he quietly went away,  and liked
his reception too little to return.

The next were Mrs.  Burke and her son.  I should have liked much to
have sat by the former,  who spoke to me with the greatest politeness  ;  but
I was hemmed in between Mrs.  Walsingham and IMiss E .

Lady Spencer brought with her a colleclion of silver ears,  to serve instead
of trumpets,  to help deafness.  They had belonged to the late lord,  and she
presented them to Mrs.  Vesey,  who,  with great fia'ivete,  began trying them
on before us all  ;  and a more ludicrous sight you cannot imagine.

Sir William Hamilton followed  ;  and then a coterie was formed at the
other side the room,  by all the men but young Burke,  who would not quit
my elbow.

Miss E then came next to me again,  and worried me with most un-
interesting prosing,  never allowing me to listen for two minutes following to
either Sir William Hamilton or my dear Mr.  Cambridge,  though they were
both relating anecdotes the most entertaining.

During this came Mr.  George Cambridge.  The sight of Mrs.  Vesey,
rising to receive him with one of her silver ears on,  and the recollection of
several accounts given me of her wearing them,  made me unable to keep
my countenance.

Mrs.  Vesey offered him a chair next to Miss E ;  but,  while she was

moving to make way for him,  down dropped her ear.

******

Mr.  G.  C.  was going to speak,  when Mrs.  Vesey interrupted him,  by
saying,  "  Did you know Mr.  Wallace,  Mr.  Cambridge  ?"

"  No,  ma'am."

"  It's a very disagreeable thing,  I think,"  said she,  "  when one has just
made acquaintance with any body,  and likes them,  to have them die."

This speech set me grinning so irresistibly,  that I was forced to begin
filliping off the crumbs of the macaroon cake from my muff,  for an excuse
for looking down.

Just then my father came in :  and then Mr.  G.  C.  came,  and took the
chair half beside me.

I told him of some new members for Dr.  Johnson's club.

"  I think,"  said he,  "  it sounds more like some club that one reads of in
the  '  Spectator,'  than like a real club in these times  ;  for the forfeits of a
whole year will not amount to those of a single night in other clubs.  Does
Pepys belong to it?"

"  Oh,  no  !  he is quite of another party  !  He is head man on the side of
the defenders of Lord Lyttelton.  Besides,  he has had enough of Dr.  John-
son ;  for they had a grand battle upon the Life of Lyttelton,  at Streatham."

"And had they really a serious quarrel?  I never imagined it had
amounted to that."

1783.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  347

"  Oh,  yes,  serious enough,  I assure you.  I never saw Dr.  Johnson really
in a passion but then:  and,  dreadful indeed it was to see.  I wished my-
self away a thousand times.  It was a frightful scene.  He so red,  poor Mr.
Pepys so pale !"

"  But how did it begin  ?     What did he say  ?"

"  Oh,  Dr.  Johnson came to the point without much ceremony.  He called
out aloud,  before a large company,  at dinner,  '  What have you to say,  sir,
to me or of me 1 Come forth,  man  !  I hear you object to my  '  Life of Lord
Lyttelton.'  What are your objections  ?  If you have any thing to say,  let's
hear it.     Come forth,  man,  when I call you  !'  "

"  What a call,  indeed  !     Why then he fairly bullied him into a quarrel !"

''  Yes.  And I was the more sorry,  because Mr.  Pepys had begged of me,
before they met,  not to let Lord Lyttelton be mentioned.  Now I had no
more power to prevent it than this macaroon cake in my hand."

<'It was behaving ill to Mrs.  Thrale,  certainly,  to quarrel in her house."

"Yes;  but he never repeated it ;  though he wished of all things to have
gone through just such another scene with Mrs.  Montagu,  and to refrain was
an act of heroic forbearance."

"  Why,  1 rather wonder he did not;  for she was the head of the set of
Lytteltonians."

"  Oh,  he knows that ;  he calls Mr.  Pepys only her prime minister."

"  And what does he call her  ?"

"  '  Queen,'  to be sure!  '  Queen of the Blues!'  She came to Streatham
one morning,  and I saw he was dying to attack her.  But he had made a
promise to Mrs.  Thrale to have no more quarrels in her house,  and so he
forced himself to forbear.  Indeed he was very much concerned,  when it
was over,  for what had passed  ;  and very candid and generous in acknow-
ledging it.     He is too noble to adhere to wrong."

"And how did Mrs.  Montagu herself behave?"

"Very stately,  indeed,  at first.  She turned from him very stiffly,  and
with a most distant air,  and without even courtesying to him,  and with a firm
intention to keep to what she had publicly declared — that she would never
speak to him more I However,  he went up to her himself,  longing to begin  !
and very roughly said, — '  Well,  madam,  what's become of your fine new
house?     I hear no more of it.'  "

"  But how did she bear this  ?"

"  Why she was obliged to answer him ;  and she soon grew so frightened
— as every body does — that she was as civil as ever."

He laughed heartily at this account.  But I told him Dr.  Johnson was
now much softened.  He had acquainted me,  when I saw him last,  that he
had written to her upon the death of Mrs.  Williams,  because she had allowed
her something yearly,  which now ceased.

"  And I had a very kind answer from her,"  said he.

"  Well then,  sir,"  cried I,  "I hope peace now will be again proclaimed."

"Why,  1 am now,"  said he,  "come to that time when I wish all bitter-
ness and animosity to be at an end.  I have never done her any serious
harm — nor would I ;  though I could give her a bite  ! — but she must provoke
me much first.  In volatile talk,  indeed,  I njay have spoken of her not much
to her mind  ;  for in the tumult of conversation malice is apt to grow sprightly  ;
and there,  I hope,  I am not yet decrepid 1"

He quite laughed aloud at this characteristic speech.

"  I most readily assured the doctor that I had never yet seen him limp  !"

Mr.  G.  C.  told me next a characteristic stroke of Mr.  W^alpole's.  It is the
custom,  you know,  among the Macaronies,  to wear two watches,  which,  it
is always observed,  never go together :  "  So I suppose,"  says he,  in his

348 DIARY AND LETTERS 1783.

finical way,  "  one is to tell us what o'clock it is,  and the other what o'clock
it is not.''^

Another Walpolian a Mr.  G.  C.  told me,  upon the Duke de Bouillon,  who
tries to pass for an Englishman,  and calls himself Mr.  Godfrey.  "  But I
think,"  says Mr.  Walpole,  "  he might better take an English title,  and call
himself the Duke of Mutto7i Broth.''''

Tuesday. — I spent the afternoon with Dr.  Johnson,  who indeed is very
ill,  and whom I could hardly tell how to leave.  But is rather better since,
though still in a most alarming way.     Indeed,  I am very much afraid for

him  !     He was very,  very kind  ! — Oh,  what a cruel,  heavy loss will he be !

******

You have heard the whole story of Mr.  Burke,  the Chelsea Hospital,  and
his most charming letter  ?  To-day he called,  and,  as my father was out,
inquired for me.  He made a thousand apologies for breaking in upon me,
but said the business was finally settled at the Treasury.  Nothing could
be more delicate,  more elegant than his manner of doing this kindness.  I
don't know whether he was most polite or most friendly in his whole be-
haviour to me.  I could almost have cried when he said,  "  This is my last
act in office  ;"*  he said it with so manly a cheerfulness,  in the midst of un-
disguised regret.     What a man he is  !

Fkiday,  Dec.  19th. — This morning,  Mr.  Cambridge sen.,  came again,
and I had a charming ttte-d-tite with him.  He most comically congratu-
lated himself upon finding me alone :  "  for now,"  says he,  "  you will talk
to me."  He then repeatedly hoped he did not disturb me,  which 1 assured
him he could never do,  and then we began our usual conversation upon
every sort of thing that came uppermost.

Some time after he said, —

"  Gay as you may think me,  I am always upon the watch for evil :  only
I do not look for it,  like the Croakers,  to be miserable,  but to prevent it.
And,  for this purpose,  I am constantly turning about in my own mind every
possible evil that can happen,  and then I make it my whole business to guard
against it."

I went afterwards,  by long appointment,  to Mr.  Burrows's,  to meet Mr.
and Mrs.  Barbauld.     Mrs.  Chapone carried me.

Mrs.  Chapone herself is the most superiorly unaffected creature you can
conceive,  and full of agrlmens from good sense,  talents,  and conversational
powers,  in defiance of age,  infirmities,  and uncommon ugliness.  I really love
as well as admire and esteem her.

Dec.  27th. — We went at night,  according to appointment,  to the Pepys.
We found only Lady Rothes,  Sir Lucas Pepys,  for Dr.  Pepys has just been
made a baronet.  Lord Leslie,  a youth of about eighteen,  son of Lady Rothes,
Mr.  Montagu,  Mr.  Wraxall,  and the master and mistress.  Mrs.  Walsing-
ham and Miss Boyle went to one side of the room,  and I was placed next
Lady Rothes on the other.

All the Pepys were in good humour and good spirits  ,*  their new dignity
has elated without making them impertinent.

Tuesday,  Dec.  30. — I went to Dr.  Johnson and spent the evening with
him.  He was very indifferent,  indeed.  There were some very disagreeable
people with him ;  and he once affected me very much,  by turning suddenly
to me,  and grasping my hand,  and saying, —

*  This alludes to Dr.  Burney's appointment to the office of organist to the Chapel of
Chelsea Hospital.

1784.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIJNA.  349

"  The blister I have tried for my breath has betrayed some very bad
tokens ;  but I will not terrify myself by talking of them  ;  ah,  priez Dicu
pour moi  /"

You may believe I promised that I would  ! — Good and excellent as he is,
how can he so fear death  ? — Alas,  my dear Susy,  how awful is that idea ! —
He was quite touchingly affectionate to me.  How earnestly I hope for his
recovery !

CHAPTER XVII.

1784.

Mrs.  Dclany — A Visit to her — Kindness of Queen Charlotte — Mrs.  Carter — The Duchess
of Portland — Miss Twining- — Letter from Mrs.  Thrale — R.  Owen Cambridge — Chit-
chat— A Conversazione at Mrs.  Vesey's — Mr.  Jerningham — Literary Ladies — Mrs.
Montagu and Mrs.  Carter— Sir W.  Hamilton— The Hamilton Vase — Party at Mr.
Pepys's — Letter from Mrs.  Thrale — Bath Society — Dinner at Mrs.  Fitzgerald's — Mrs.
Montagu,  Mrs.  Garrick,  the Bishop of St.  Asaph — Visit to Dr.  Johnson — Sir PhilipCJarke
— R.  Owen Cambridge — The Dulness of Set Parties — Mrs.  Lock — Party at Mrs.
Thrale's — Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Garrick,  Hannah More,  Mrs.  Chapone — A Day with
Mrs.  Delany — Her Correspondence with Swift and Young — The Loss of Friends —
Age and Youth — Lady Andover — A Literary Breakfast — Flying Visits — Dinner at
the Bishop of Winchester's Evening Party at Sir Joshua Reynolds's — Letter from Mrs.
Thrale — More Dinner Parties — Resignation — Sad Anticipations — Marriage of Mrs.
Tiirale — Visit to Mrs.  Lock at Norbury Park — Madame de Genlis — Happy news —
Bolougne Sixty Years Ago — Life at Norbury Park—  Madame de Sevigne — Domestic
Adventures — Moravians — Defence of Mrs.  Piozzi — Illness of Dr.  Johnson — Anecdote
— Johnson's Opinion of Mrs.  Piozzi's Marriage — The Bristol Milk-woman — Johnson's
Definition of Genius — Visit to Norbury Park — Letters from Miss Burney to Dr.
Burney and Mrs.  Lock — Lord George Gordon — The Duchess of Devonshire,  and
Blanchard the Aeronaut — Dr.  Johnson's last Illness — Anecdotes of his last Days —
His Death.

Tuesday,  Jan.  6th. — I spent the afternoon with Dr.  Johnson,  and had
th e great satisfaction of finding him better.

Thursday,  Jan.  Sth — I dined with Mrs.  Delany.  The venerable and
excellent old lady received me with open arms,  and we kissed one another
as if she had been my sweet grandmother,  whom she always reminds me
of.  She looks as well as ever,  only rather thinner ;  but she is as lively,
gay,  pleasant,  good-humoured,  and animated,  as at eighteen.  She sees,
she says,  much worse;  "but I am thankful,"  she added,  cheerfully,  "  I can
see at all at my age.  My greatest loss is the countenance of my friends,
however,  to see even the light is a great blessing."

She showed me a most excellent and ingenious loom,  which the Queen
made her a present of last summer at Windsor,  for making fringe  ;  and a
gold knitting needle given her by the King.  And she told me the whole
history of their manner of presenting them,  with a sort of grateful sim-
plicity that was quite affecting.  Did I ever tell you of the letter the Queen
wrote her,  when she gave her a beautiful case of instruments for her curious
works 1 She signed it her  "  affectionate Queen."  I quite reverence the
Queen for her sense of Mrs.  Delany's merit.

We had,  however,  but half an hour alone,  and it seemed to me much
shorter.     Mrs.  Carter and Miss Hamilton came to dinner.

Mrs.  Carter is a charming woman  ;  I never liked her so much before  ;
but I never before saw so much of her to like.  Miss Hamilton I have
nothing new to say about ;  I had no opportunity to ask her for the Bas

VOL.  I.  30

350 DIARY AND LETTERS 1784.

Bleu^  as I had never been near her,  and was much reproached,  and had
peace to make for myself.

In the evening the Duchess of Portland came,  and was very gracious
and very agreeable.  Lady Dartmouth,  also,  who seems a very plain,  and
unaffected worthy woman;  Mrs.  Levison,  one of Mr.  Bosca wen's daughters,
and Miss G.  a maid of honour,  whom I had been invited three days fol-
lowing to meet at Mrs.  Walsingham's.  She has had,  it seems,  a man's
education ;  yet she is young,  pretty,  and at times very engaging.  She
seems unequal,  and,  I am told,  can be very saucy and supercilious.

The evening did very well,  but the first half hour was worth the whole
day.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Bath,  January 15,  1784.

Well,  my dearest Burney — now Mrs.  Byron is ill,  and all my tenderness
returns.  Do send her the inclosed,  and let me know whether she is bad
or no.  Poor soul !  she loves me dearly in her way,  and if I do not like
her method,  'tis no reason for rejecting her regard.

I have got a world of franks,  and shall torment you accordingly.

Sir Lucas Pepys received a letter from me the other day,  all about my
health  ;  perhaps he'll answer it ;  and Seward hears all the particulars as if
he were an old nurse.

As for being well in this weather,  it were as rational to bid me calm the
heats of Parliament as my own agitated nerves  :  but,  as the man in  "  The
Rambler"  says,  "  perhaps I shall mend in the spring."

Air balloons go no faster than post-horses at last !  I caught my deatli
almost by looking at one the other day,  which went to Bristol in an hour
from hence.  I dare say Sir John Lade's phaeton would have beaten our
Icarus out of sight.

Adieu,  my love,  and may God bless you but as is wished and prayed for
by your own H.  L.  T.

DIARY RESUMED.

Thursday,  January 15th. — My Bath journey,  my dear Susy,  I know
not what to say about ;  could I go for one fortnight,  nothing could so much
rejoice me  ;  for I ever languish,  I pine to see again my beloved and very —
oh,  very unhappy Mrs.  Thrale  !  I know well the meeting,  as things are at
present situated,  would half kill her with joy,  and me with a thousand
feelings I keep off as well as I can  ;  but I cannot tell how to arrange
matters for this purpose.  The expense of such an expedition,  for so short
a time,  I know not how even to name to my father,  who has a thousand
reasons against my going,  all founded on arguments unanswerable.

I had a very long conference with dear Mr.  Cambridge,  who returned to
town with undiminished kindness for me,  as he showed in a manner that
will amaze you.  Charlotte was with us at first,  but soon retired ;  and we
then had an hour or two by ourselves.

He began by talking of the preceding evening at Mrs.  Ord's,  and its
heaviness.  I was half ready to laugh, — there was something so na'cfm the
complaint.

"  But I must tell you,"  said he,  "  how I made George laugh,  though
without intending it,  after we got into Mortimer Street last night.  Why,
George,  says I,  what an evening we have had here.  Why,  there's neither
been mirth nor instruction  !"

1784.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  35X

"  Mrs.  Ord,"  cried I,  "  is a very friendly woman,  and very sensible  ;
and,  indeed,  I go to see her because I have a real regard for her,  and she
has the warmest regard for me  ;  but I don't go expecting entertainment
from her brilliancy."

"  Oh,  it is quite right for you,  and quite another thing for you ;  but for
me,  who come seldom to town,  it does not answer ;  for I always want
either to hear something that is new,  or something that is pleasant.  But it
is very well for you who live in town,  and I would have you go."

AVe had then a little further talk about the evening,  after which,  in a
very serious tone,  Mr.  Cambridge said, —

"  And now 1 have something very interesting to say to you.  I hardly
know how to tell it you  ;  but you must bear it as well as you can,  and not
suffer it to prey upon your spirits."

And then,  while I listened aghast,  he told me that the sweet Kitty was in
so dangerous a way he could not but look forward to the most fatal conclu-
sion of her malady.

I was truly concerned — concerned at my very heart to hear such sounds
from him ;  but when he proceeded to comfort me, — to beg me to bear up,
— I was really obliged to poke at the fire with all my might to hide from
him the effect of such generosity of sentiment.  I cannot write you the par-
ticulars of what he said,  because,  things being since a little mended,  I hope
there is less occasion to think over such sad admonitions  :  but he charged
me to bear up against the misfortune as he did.

"  You,"  said he,  "  must remind me hereafter,  should you see me sinking
at last in sorrow when all is over,  of what I say to you now,  and of all
her sufferings,  which now I think worse than all."

Again he charged me to be cheerful myself,  and said he had given the
same charge to Sally Baker.

"  You two,"  added he,  "  and my two girls,  have,  among you all four but
one fault, — and that is too.  much feeling.  You must repress it therefore,  as
much as you can."

And when he had repeated these injunctions,  he said, —

"  And now we will talk of it no more.  I have prepared you for what
may happen ;  so now think of it as little as you can,  and forgive me for
giving you so much pain ;  and the less we say upon this subject in future
the better."

******

I went alone to Mrs.  Vesey's,  which was very disagreeable to me.
There was a very full meeting too,  and most of the company were already
arrived  ;  and,  to add to the pleasure of my entree,  Mrs.  Vesey was in an
inner room  ;  so my name was spoke aloud at the door,  and then nobody
was ready to receive me.  I stood so awkward  ;  till at last Sir Joshua
Reynolds smiHngly called out, —

"  Miss Burney,  you had better come and sit by me,  for here's no Mrs.
Vesey."

I instantly obeyed the droll summons.

"  Why don't Dr.  Burney come with you?"  cried he,  good-natuielly  ;
"  you should make him,  for it is very distressing to you to come in alone."

I never will go alone again unless I can go much earlier.

I now soon saw folks enough that I knew.  Mr.  Jerningham first came
up to me,  and offered to fetch Mrs.  Vesey,  which,  though I declined,  he
would do.  She received me most kindly,  and told me I had a little partv
of friends in the boudoir who desired I would join them  ;  but I had had
enough of exhibiting myself,  and begged leave to sit still.

352 DIARY AND LETTERS 1784.

"  But you can't think,  my clear ma'am,"  cried she,  "  how happy you
will make me,  if you will be quite at your ease here,  and run about just as
you like."

How well she sees what would make me happy ! — to run about in rooms
fuli of company  !

As soon as she was called off,  Mr.  Jerningham took her place,  civilly
declaring he would not give it up,  come who might.

Soon after came Mr.  Montagu with another message from the boudoir ;
but I was now by the Burrows and Mrs.  Pepys,  and did not like parading
away.  They sent a bad messenger,  however  ;  for he got a chair in our
circle,  and took back no answer.  Afterwards Miss Hamilton herself came,
and taking my hand,  insisted upon carrying me back with her.

The boudoir party was Mrs.  Carter,  Miss Gregory,  Miss Hamilton,
Lady Wake,  Miss Ann Clarke,  and Mr.  Montagu.  I was introduced by
Miss Hamilton to the two ladies whose names are new to you.  I stayed
with this party all the evening.

Mrs.  Carter talked more than any body ever heard her talk before ;  and
Mr.  iMontagu declared he was sure it was for me.  I should desire nothing
more than such influence,  were it so ;  for her talk was all instruction.
Were I to see much of her,  I really think we should be exceeding good
friends.  Mrs.  Vesey,  Dr.  Warton,  and Mr.  Jerningham joined us occa-
sionally. In the other rooms were Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Buller,  Sir Wil-
liam Hamilton,  and crowds more,  with dear,  amiable,  unaffected Sir
Joshua.

Mr.  Cambridge came very late,  and ventured not into our closet,  which
seemed a band exclusive.

There was a world of regret in the boudoir,  about my not going to see
the Hamilton Vase next day ;  for most of that set were to form the party.

Saturday,  January 17th. — To-day,  by long invitation,  I was to spend
the evening at the Pepys.

We kept up,  among our own group,  a general conversation,  but not a
very lively one ;  for Miss G.  whispered me she wished Miss O.  away,  she
could say so little  :  and Mr.  M.  told me,  in another whisper,  he could not
bear looking at Miss H.  there was something so disagreeably languishing
in her eyes  !  The two ladies had no opportunity,  as I was seated,  to whis-
per a return of these compliments  ;  but I found that none of them desired
the affinity of the others.

The evening rubbed on and rubbed off till it began to break up.  Mrs.
Montagu was the first who rose to take leave,  and,  in passing by to go
out,  suddenly perceived me,  and eagerly advancing,  put both her hands
upon my shoulders,  and good-humouredly exclaimed,  "  Oh,  have I found
you out at last  ?"  And then she said many very obliging things,  which
she finished with an invitation for the next Wednesday evening with my
father.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Bath,  Wednesday,  February 18,  1784.
Thanks,  thanks,  a thousand,  my prettiest,  dearest Burney  !  This charm-
ing letter makes amends for all.  And you remember last winter,  do you  ?
and remember it with tenderness  ?  What then must have passed in my
mind,  on the dreadful anniversary of a day which,  instead of killing me as
it ought to have done,  gave to two innocent,  unfortunate people,  a cruel and
lingering death, — like the arrows tipped with African poison,  which slowly

1784.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  '  3.53

and gradually retarding the vital powers,  at length  (in about three years
1 think)  wholly put a stop to their exertion  !

You are vastly good-natured about the little Dobbina,  who is my fond
and humble adorer  ;  though somewhat jealous of her husband's being  (as
he truly is)  a greater favourite with me than her.  The means she tlikes
to supplant him are truly comical,  and would make you laugh most heartily  ;
but so might twenty undescribable situations if you were on the spot,— the
only clean,  and warm,  and wholesome spot in England at this time.  Oh,
I would not quit dear Bath just now for any place in King George's domi-
nions  !

Pray,  is Baretti sick or in distress 1 The Italians think him dead  :  but
1 suppose all is well with him,  ain't it  ]

Johnson is in a sad way,  doubtless  ;  yet he may still with care last an-
other twelvemonth,  and every week's existence is gain to him,  who,  like
good Hezekiah,  wearies Heaven with entreaties for life.  I wrote him a
very serious letter the other day.

The Methodists do certainly reconcile one to death,  by rendering all tem-
poral enjoyments obtuse,  or representing them as illicit.  Whoever considers
this world as a place of constant mortification,  and incessant torment,  will
be well enough contented to leave it;  but I can scarcely think our Saviour,
who professed his yoke to be easy and his burden to be light,  will have
peculiar pleasure in their manner of serving him.  My principles are never
convinced by their arguments,  though my imagination is always fluttered
by their vehemence.  We must do the best we can at last,  and as King
David says,  "  Let us fall into the hands of God,  and not into the hands of
men;  for they are severe and cruel judges of each other."

Ajj/'ojjos — Mr.  Seward's disapprobation is merely external,  and by no
means like yoiirs,  the growth of his heart  ;  but the coarseness of his ex-
pressions he has to himself,  and I cannot guess how I have deserved them.
Sir Lucas Pepys writes very tenderly to me.  Live or die,  he shall not find
me ungrateful.

Why do you catch these horrible fevers,  dear Burney  ?  They will de-
molish you some day before you are aware.

Well,  you have lost some of the old treason-plotters,  to be sure,  by whom
you were and are dearly loved and valued  ;  but when friends are once
parted in this wide world,  'tis so strange if they ever meet again,  that no
one ought to wonder should they see each other no more.  There is a place,
however,  where we shall meet those we love,  and enjoy their society in
peace and comfort.  To such as have fully experienced the agonies of
absence,  sure that will be heaven enough.

Adieu,  my precious friend,  and don't forget one on whose heart time and
distance have no other effect than to engrave afTection and affliction the
deeper.  Adieu  !  I am really almost drawn together from emptiness and
sinking.     Love me,  however,  while I am your

H.  L.  T.

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Bath,  Tuesday,  23d March,  1784.
You were a dear creature to write so soon and so sweetly  ;  but we shall
never meet.  I see that clearly,  and have seen it long.  My going to Lon-
don would be a dreadful expense,  and bring on a thousand inquiries and
inconveniences — visits to Johnson and from Cator  :  and where must I live
for the time,  too 1 Oh,  I have desired nothing else since you wrote  ;  but
all is impossibility.    Why would you ever flatter me that you might,  maybe,

30*

354 DIARY A.ND LETTERS 1784.

come to Bath 1 T saw the unlikelihood even then,  and my retired life will
not induce your friends to permit your coming hither now.  1 fancy even
my own young ladies will leave me,  and I sincerely think they will be per-
fectly right so to do,  as the world they wish to shine in is quite excluded
by my style of living.

Bath flash they properly enough despise,  and London flash I cannot attend
them in.  More chapters of the Bible,  or more volumes of the Roman and
English histories,  would fatigue their ears — for their lungs have not yet
suffered.  I have,  however,  read to them the Bible from beginning to end,
the Roman and English histories,  Milton,  Shakspeare,  Pope and Young's
works from head to heel  ;  Warton and Johnson's criticisms on the Poets  ;
besides a complete system of dramatic writing  ;  and classical — I mean
English classics — they are most perfectly acquainted with.  Such works
of Voltaire,  too,  as were not dangerous,  we have worked at  ;  "  Rollin des
Belles Lettres,"  and a hundred more.

But my best powers are past,  and I think I must look them a lady to
supply my deficiency,  to attend them if they should like a jaunt next sum-
mer or so  ;  for I will not quit Bath.  The waters and physicians of this
place are all my comfort,  and I often think I never shall again leave the
spot.

Ah,  Burney  !  you little know the suffering,  and,  I will add,  the patient
suffering of your

H.  L.  T.*

JOURNAL RESUMED.

Saturday,  April 17th. — The sight of your paw any way,  my dearest
Susy,  my heart's ever dearest friend,  would be well worth all the pence I
have in the world,  could 1 see it on no other condition.  Indeed I have not
been really in spirits,  nor had one natural laugh,  since 1 lost you  ;  there
seems such an insipidity,  such a vacuity in all that passes.  I know not,
in truth,  whether I most miss you when happy or when sad.  That I wish
for you most when happy is certain  ;  but that nothing upon earth can do
me so much good,  when sad,  as your society,  is certain too.  Constantly
to hear from you,  and to write to you,  is the next best thing  ;  so now,  with
as little murmuring as I am able,  [  return to our paper conversations.

Your note by the postilion was truly welcome  ;  and I thank you most
warmly for writing it.  I am grieved you had so bad a journey,  which I
fear you could never bear so well as you imposingly pretend.  As to me,  I
have had,  I confess,  a slight headach ever since you went;  but I believe it
to be owing to stagnation of blood from stupidity,  nothing of an enlivening
nature having passed to give me 2iJiUij}  for the Philip I have lost.  There  !
could Charlotte do more?  However,  I solemnly assure you I am only heavy-
ish,  not ill ;  and I intend to shake that off*  by the first opportunity.

Your letter to my father,  and account of the sweet little girl,  delighted us
all.  He will very soon answer it himself.  I am rejoiced on your account
as much as hers that she can now walk so well.    So now to my proceedings.

*  The above letter is endorsed as follows in the handwriting-  of Madame d'Arblay  :
"Many letters of a subsequent date to this letter,  of 14th March,  1784,  I have utterly,
for cog-ent reasons  (cogent and conscientious,)  destroyed.  Following,  with this so long
dearest friend,  the simple,  but unrivalled,  golden rule,  I would only preserve such as
evince her conflicts,  her misery,  and her sutFerings,  mental and corporeal,  to exonerate
her from the banal reproach of yielding unresisting to her passions.  Her fault and grievous
misfortune was,  not combating them in their origin  ;  not flying even from their menace.
How have I loved her  !  with what affection,  Avhat gratitude,  what admiration,  and what
affliction I

"12^^  February,  1825."

1734.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  355

Monday,  April 19tii. — I went in the evening to see dear Dr.  Johnson.
He received me with open arms,  scolded me with the most flattering expres-
sions for my absence,  but would not let me come away without making me
promise to dine with him next day,  on a salmon from Mrs.  Thrale.  This I
did not dare refuse,  as he was urgent,  and I had played truant so long ;  but,
to be sure,  I had rather have dined first,  on account of poor Blacky.  He
is amazingly recovered,  and perfectly good-humoured and comfortable,  and
smilingly alive to idle chat.

At Dr.  Johnson's we had Mr.  and Mrs.  Hoole and their son,  and Mrs.
Hall,  a very good Methodist,  and sister of John Wesley.  The day was
tolerable ;  but Dr.  Johnson is never his best when there is nobody to draw
him out ;  but he was much pleased with my coming,  and very kind indeed.

April 22d.  Sweet and delectable to me was my dearest Susy's letter.  I
am so glad of seeing your sentiments,  when I cannot hear them,  that your
letters are only less valuable to me than yourself:  and,  indeed,  no letters
were ever so very near conversation as ours  ;  they have but this fault, — the
longest never says half there is to say.

I will not answer one word to what you say of our dear,  lost Chesington  ;
if I do,  I shall start no other subject.  But I am truly delighted by all you
say of the sweet little girl,  and most thankful to heaven for the comfort she
affords you.  I am well,  ray dear Susy,  I assure you,  though not  "  all alive
and jolly  ;"  yet by no means melancholic neither ;  a little still in the stag-
nating order ;  but it will wear away,  I hope,  and I spare not for continual
employment,  by way of forwarding its departure.

I did not receive your letter,  my dear Susy,  till Tuesday.  I have lately
spent a great deal of time at home,  for I have now a little broke my father
into permitting my sending excuses  ;  and,  indeed,  I was most heartily tired
of visiting,  though the people visited have been among the first for talents
in the kingdom.  I can go nowhere with pleasure or spirit,  if I meet not
somebody who interests my heart as well as my head,  and I miss Mrs.  Thrale
mosj wofully in both particulars.

Friday,  April 23d. — The sweet and most bewitching Mrs.  Lock called
upon me in the evening,  with her son George.  I let her in,  and did so rejoice
I had not gone to Mrs.  Vesey's.  But I rejoiced for only a short time  ;  she
came but to take leave,  for she was going to Norbury the very next morn-
ing. I was quite heavy all the evening.  She does truly interest both head
and heart.  I love her already.  And she was so kind,  so caressing,  so soft  ;
pressed me so much to fix a time for going to Norbury ;  said such sweet
things of Mrs.  Phillips  ;  and kissed me so affectionately in quitting me,  that
I was quite melted by her.

What a charm has London lost for me by her departure !  Sweet
creature that she is  ;  born and bred to dispense pleasure and delight to all
who see or know her !  She,  Mrs.  Thrale,  and Mrs.  Delany,  in their several
ways all excellent,  possess the joint powers of winning ihe affections,  while
they delight the intellects,  to the highest summit I can even conceive of
human attraction.  The heart fascination of Mrs.  Thrale,  indeed,  few know  ;
but those few must confess and must feel her sweetness,  to them,  is as cap-
tivating as her wit is brilliant to all.

Saturday,  April 24. — My father and I went very late to the Borough  :
early enough,  however,  for me,  as I was not in cue for a mixed party of
praters.  I respect and esteem them  ;  but they require an exertion to which
I am not always inclined.  The company was Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Garrick,
Miss More,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys,  Mrs.  Chapone,  and two or three less
eminent.

I had many flattering reproaches for my late truancy from these parties  ,*

356 DIARY AND LETTERS 1784.

but all that I received any pleasure in was about a quarter of an hour's
separate talk with Mrs.  Garrick,  who was so unaffected,  cheerful,  and ra-
tional, that I was very glad of the chat.

Monday,  April 26. — I spent with my dear Mrs.  Delany,  and more
pleasantly than I have spent any day since my Susy left town.  She gave
i^nie her letters to rummage,  from Swift and Young;  and she told me all the
anecdotes that occurred to her of her acquaintance with them.  How T grieve
that her sight visibly continues to decay !  all her other senses and faculties
are perfect,  though she says not.

"  My friends,"  said she once when we were alone,  "  will last,  I believe,
as long as I last,  because they are very good  ;  but the pleasure of our friend-
ship is now all to be received by me,  for I have lost all power of returning
any."

If she often spoke such untruths,  I should not revere her as I do.  She
has been in great affliction lately for Lady Mansfield,  a very old friend,  just
dead.

"  The Duchess of Portland and I,"  said she,  "  have shut ourselves up to-
gether, and seen nobody  ;  and some people said we did mischief to ourselves
by it,  for the Duchess lamented Lady Mansfield still more than I did.
However,  our sympathy has only done good to both.  But to-day I want a
cordial,  and that made me wish for you."

How kind and how sweet !     We were quite alone till evening,  except for

lovely Miss P ,  whom I like very much  ;  and I entreated Mrs.  Delany

always to let me dine with her alone ;  and I believe she will comply,  for we
grow more and more sociable and unreserved.

"  I was told,"  said she once,  "  that when I grew older,  I should feel less  ;
but I do not find it so  ;  I am sooner,  1 think,  hurt than ever.  I suppose it
is with very old age as with extreme youth,  the effect of weakness ;  neither
of those stages of life have firmness for bearing misfortunes."

In the evening we had Lady Andover and Mrs.  Walsingham.

May 6th. — 1 breakfasted at Mrs.  Ord's,  to meet Mr.  and Mrs.  Spelt,
Mrs.  Garrick,  and Miss More,  and we had a very pleasant morning,  of
rational and elegant conversation.  Mr.  Smelt has the same taste in the
fine arts and in literature that Mr.  Lock has.  He is a most polished and
high-bred man  ;  but 1 could make no acquaintance with him,  though Mrs.
Ord and himself were both earnest that I should;  for never once did he
open his mouth but to make me some compliment allusive to  "  Cecilia  ;"
and though always with delicacy,  even to refinement,  it always was compli-
ment, and kept me in that sort of acknowledging restraint,  that put it out
of my power to say any thing in reply.  He asked me where I should spend
the summer?  I told him at Chesington  ;  and,  for some part of it,  at Mr.
Lock's.

"Ah  !"  cried he,  "  you are acquainted,  then,  with that divine family  ?"

No wonder he,  who has so much in common with Mr.  Lock,  should pas-
sionately admire both him and his.

May 7th. — My father and I dined at the Bishop of Winchester's;  this
being my first sight of Mrs.  North this year.  She reproached me,  however,
very gently,  pressing me to come to Chelsea,  and assuring me she would
never forgive it if I did not visit her at Farnham in the summer.  The
Bishop is charming,  and the children are very interesting.

In the evening we went to Sir Joshua Reynolds's.  Here we met Mr.
Burke;  not well,  however,  nor in high spirits,  but very good-humoured and
pleasant;  and so kind as to seat himself next me all the evening.  His son
was there too,  and,  as he came a full half hour before his father,  had kept

1784.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  357

that seat himself,  as usual,  till his arrival.  I am quite amazed at him and
young Montagu,  for their noble perseverance in working so resolutely at so
much dryness and coldness as I treat them with.  They are both very
pleasing and well-bred young men;  and I can hardly tell myself why I am
not more sociable with them  ;  but it is so that I am not ;  and I feel obliged
to them in vain.

Young B.'s uncle,  Mr.  R.  Burke,  was there also,  and,  as he ever does,
instantly distinguished me in a public manner;  but though 1 am much
entertained sometimes with his strong humour,  there is a boldness in his
manners that always excites in mine a chillness that distances him.  How
unlike his brother !

MRS.  THRALE TO MISS F.  BURNEY.

Mortimer Street,  Cavendish Square,
Tuesday Night,  May,  1784.

I am come,  dearest Burney.  It is neither dream nor fiction  ;  though 1
love you dearly,  or I would not have come.  Absence and distance do
nothing towards wearing out real affection  ;  so you shall always find it in
your true and tender H.  L.  T.

I am somewhat shaken bodily,  but  'tis the mental shocks that have made
me unable to bear the corporeal ones.  'Tis past ten o'clock,  however,  and
I must lay myself down with the sweet expectation of seeing my charming
friend in the morning to breakfast.  I love Dr.  Burney too well to fear
him,  and he loves me too well to say a word which should make me love
him less.

JOURNAL RESUMED.

May 17. — Let me now,  my Susy,  acquaint you a little more connectedly
than I have done of late how 1 have gone on.  The rest of that week I de-
voted almost wholly to sweet Mrs.  Thrale,  whose society was truly the most
delightful of cordials to me,  however,  at times,  mixed with bitters the least
palatable.

One day I dined with IMrs.  Garrick to meet Dr.  Johnson,  Mrs.  Carter,
Miss Hamilton,  and Dr.  and Miss Cadogan ;  and one evening I went to
Mrs.  Vesey,  to meet almost every body, — the Bishop of St.  Asaph,  and all
the Shipleys,  Bishop Chester and Mrs.  Porteus,  Mrs.  and Miss Ord,  Sir
Joshua Reynolds and Miss Palmer,  Mrs.  Buller,  all the Burrows,  Mr.  VVal-
pole,  Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.  Garrick,  and Miss More,  and some others.  But
all the rest of my time I gave wholly to dear Mrs.  Thrale,  who lodged in
Mortimer Street,  and who saw nobody else.     Were I not sensible of her

goodness,  and full of incurable affection for her,  should I not be a monster?

******

I parted most reluctantly with my dear Mrs.  Thrale,  whom,  when or
how I shall see again.  Heaven only knows  !  but in sorrow we parted — on
my side in real affliction.

The next morning,  while ruminating in much sadness upon my late inter-
views with Mrs.  Thrale,  how great was the relief of my mind, — the delight,
indeed,  to be summoned to my dear Mr.  Cambridge.  I flew to him — I gave
him my hand,  for I could not help it,  from the great satisfaction I felt in
again seeing him.  "  But why,  sir,"  I cried,  "  have you been such a stran-
ger ? — I hope nothing is worse>at Twickenham]"

The grave and fixed countenance that now met my eyes,  though the first

358 DIARY AND LETTERS 1784.

look had been kindly smiling,  told me instantly how all our fair,  lately raised
hopes were blasted.  He was silent a moment,  and then slowly answered,
— "  Yes;  we must not talk of that."

Shocked and disappointed at this relapse,  I could not forbear expressing
my concern.  He then more explicitly told me how ill every thing went;
and that now all hope was finally over.  Sir John Elliot had been with them
the morning before,  and told them to expect the worst !  "  You must now,
therefore,"  said he,  "  only pray to have her released."

Something then,  but in a hurrying manner,  as if willing to get rid of the
subject,  he said of disappointment about my going to Twickenham,  or seeing
his beloved Kitty any more  ;  and concluded it with, — "  I can now only hope
to see you a consolation to Charlotte."

O that I might be so !  but who on earth can console that noble-minded
creature?  He told me how greatly she behaved,  and said that but the day
before she had declared she could not,  for the sake of one quarter of an
hour's smiles from her darling sister,  any longer wish her to endure twenty-
four hours'  misery !

The old complaints still continue,  and new ones appear:  he had stayed
with them only to watch by the poor sufferer,  who bore her accumulated
torments like an angel.  He came up now in order to dine with Dr.  Heber-
den and Sir John Elliot ;  but gave me to understand this was the last visit
he purposed making to town till all suspense was over.

*  .ft  *  *  *  *

[At this period the health of Mrs.  Phillips failed so much that,  after some
deliberation,  she and Captain Phillips decided on removing to Boulogne for
change of air.  The following letter was written by Miss Burney to her
sister,  when this plan was first in agitation.]

June  ]  3. — My dearest,  dearest Susy,  I have read your final letter with
much more composure than I did your leading one.  I saw what was
coming,  and was therefore prepared for it ;  but do not grieve so,  my darling
Susy, — my own ever,  ever most dear of friends and sisters  !  Grieve not
for me,  in taking measures to preserve the life and health most valuable to
my own.  Such being the motive of your removal,  I can bear it without a
murmur,  and I will do all in my power to assist it,  by taking upon me the
whole management of it with my father whenever you please.

But must it be to the Continent  ? — the division by sea — how could I cross
it were you ill?  Who would take me?  and could I bear that Phillips
should leave you to fetch me in such a case  ?  The remotest part of Eng-
land were better to me.  But if he or you think your abode there v/ill be
pleasanter,  oh,  dearest Susy  !  that,  indeed,  will be a pull upon my heart-
strings ! — but of this when we meet.  Y'ou certainly have been well in
various parts of England  :  Ipswich,  Twickenham,  Norbury, — all show the
nation is not against you,  only the clay soil.  However,  when we meet is
time enough ;  1 will do nothing to plague you out of a scheme,  if it is
formed.

You will,  probably,  have heard how they are relieved at Twickenham,
and how angelically the whole family bear what has befallen them.  O my
Susy  ! — let me preserve you,  and all other evils now seem trifling.  I
would not oppose Capt P.  in his plan for the world.  I adore him for it —
if it be for your health.

[Towards the end of July in this year,  Mrs,  Thrale's second marriage
took place with Mr.  Piozzi,  and Miss Burney went about the same time to
Norbury Park,  where she passed some weeks with Mr.  and Mrs.  Lock.
The following  "Sketch"  of a letter,  and memorandum of what had recently

1784.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  359

passed between Mrs.  Piozzi and herself is taken from the journal of that
period.]

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  PIOZZI.

Norbury Park,  Aug.  10,  1784.

When my wondering eyes first looked over the letter I received last
night,  my mind instantly dictated a high-spirited vindication of the con-
sistency, integrity,  and faithfulness of the friendship thus abruptly re-
proached and cast away.  But a sleepless night gave me leisure to recollect
that you were ever as generous as precipitate,  and that your own heart
would do justice to mine,  in the cooler judgment of future reflection.  Com-
mitting myself,  therefore,  to that period,  I determined to simply assure you,
that if my last letter hurt either you or Mr.  Piozzi,  I am no less sorry than
surprised;  and that if it offended you I sincerely beg your pardon.

Not to that time,  however,  can I wait to acknowledge the pain an accusa-
tion so unexpected has caused me,  nor the heartfelt satisfaction with which
I shall receive,  when you are able to write it,  a softer renewal of regard.

May Heaven direct and bless you  !  F.  B.

N.  B.  This is the sketch of the answer which F.  B.  most painfully wrote
to the unmerited reproach of not sending cordial congratulations upon a
marriage which she had uniformly,  openly,  and with deep and avowed
affliction,  thought  ^vrong.

MRS,  PIOZZI TO MISS BURNEY.

Wellbeck Street,  No.  33 Cavendish Square.
Friday,  August 13, 1784.

Give yourself no serious concern,  sweetest Burney.  All is well,  and I
am too happy myself to make a friend otherwise;  quiet your kind heart
immediately,  and love my husband if you love his and your

H.  L.  Piozzi.

N.  B.  To this kind note,  F.  B.  wrote the warmest and most affectionate
and heartfelt reply  ;  but never received another word  !  And here and thus
stopped a correspondence of six years of almost unequalled partiality and
fondness on her side ;  and affection,  gratitude,  admiration,  and sincerity on
that of F.  B.,  who could only conjecture the cessation to be caused by the
resentment of Piozzi,  when informed of her constant opposition to the union.

DIARY RESUMED.

Addressed to Mrs.  Fhilli2JS.

Friday,  Oct.  8th. — I set off with my dear father for Chesington,  where
we passed five days very comfortably ;  my father was all good-humour,  all
himself, — such as you and I mean by that word.  The next day we had the
blessing of your Dover letter and on Thursday,  October 14,  I arrived at
dear Norbury Park,  at about seven o'clock,  afier a pleasant ride in the dark.
Mr.  Lock most kindly and cordially welcomed me  ;  he came out upon the
steps to receive me,  and his beloved Fredy waited for me in the vestibule.
Oh,  with what tenderness did she take me to her bosom  !  I felt melted
with her kindness,  but I could not express a joy like hers,  for my heart

360 DIARY AND LETTERS 1784.

was very full — full of my dearest Susan,  whose image seemed before me
upon the spot where we had so lately been together.  They told me that
Madame de la Fite,  her daughter,  and Mr.  Hinde,  were in the house  ;  but
as I am now,  I hope,  come for a long time,  I did not vex at hearing this.
Their first inquiries were if I had not heard from Boulogne.

Saturday. — I fully expected a letter,  but none came ;  but Sunday I
depended upon one.  The post,  however,  did not arrive before we went to
church.  Madame de la Fite,  seeing my sorrowful looks,  good-naturedly
asked Mrs.  Locke what could be set about to divert a little la pauvre
Mademoiselle Beurney 1 and proposed reading a drama of Madame de
Genlis.  I aproved it much,  preferring it greatly to conversation  ;  and,
accordingly,  she and her daughter,  each taking characters themselves,  read
*'  JLe Rositre de Salency,''''  It is a very interesting and touchingly simple
little drama.  I was so much pleased that they afterwards regularly read
one every evening while they stayed.

Next morning I went up stairs as usual,  to treat myself with a solo of
impatience for the post,  and at about twelve o'clock I heard Mrs.  Locke
stepping along the passage.  I was sure of good news,  for I knew,  if there
was bad,  poor Mr.  Locke would have brought it.  She came in,  with three
letters in her hand,  and three thousand dimples in her cheeks and chin  !
Oh,  my dear Susy,  what a sight to me was your hand !  I hardly cared for
the letter ;  I hardly desired to open it ;  the direction alone almost satisfied
me sufficiently.  How did Mrs.  Locke embrace me !  I half kissed her to
death.  Then came dear Mr.  Locke,  his eyes brighter than ever — "  Well,
how does she do 1"

This question forced me to open my letter  ;  all was just as I could wish,
except that 1 regretted the having written the day before such a lamenta-
tion. J was so congratulated  !  I shook hands with Mr.  Locke  ;  the two
dear little girls came jumping to wish me joy  ;  and Mrs.  Locke ordered a
fiddler,  that they might have a dance in the evening,  which had been pro-
mised them from the time of Mademoiselle de la Fite's arrival,  but post-
poned from day to day,  by general desire,  on account of my uneasiness.

Monday Oct.  25th. — Mr.  Hinde and  ]\fadame and Mademoiselle de la
Fite all left us.  They were all so good-humoured and so happy,  there was
no being glad  ;  though how to be sorry at remaining alone with this family,
I really know not.  Both the De la Fites went away in tears.  I love them
for it.

Wednesday,  Nov.  3rd. — This day has brought me another sweet letter
from my Susy.  What a set of broken-fortuned,  broken-charactered people
of fashion are about you at Boulogne  !*  The accounts are at once curious
and melancholy to me.

Nothing can be more truly pleasant than our present lives.  I bury all
disquietudes in immediate enjoyment ;  an enjoyment more fitted to my
secret mind than any I had ever hoped to attain.  M'^e are so perfectly
tranquil,  that not a particle of our whole frames seems ruffled or discom-
posed. Mr.  Locke is gayer and more sportive than I ever have seen him ;
his Fredy seems made up of happiness ;  and the two dear little girls are in
spirits almost ecstatic ;  and all from that internal contentment which Nor-
bury Park seems to have gathered from all corners of the world into its
own sphere.

*  [Mrs.  Phillips returned in less than a twelvemonth from Boulogne,  much recovered
in health,  and settled with her husband and family in a house at Miekleham,  at the foot
of Norbury Park.]

1784.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  361

Our mornings,  if fine,  are to ourselves,  as Mr.  Locke rides out;  if bad,
we assemble in the picture-room.  We have two books in public reading,
Madame de Sevigne's Letters,  and Cook's Last Voyage.  Mrs.  Locke
reads the French,  myself the English.

Our conversations,  too,  are such as I could almost wish to last for ever.
Mr.  Locke has been all himself, — all instruction,  information,  and intel-
ligence,— since we have been left alone ;  and the invariable sweetness,  as
well as judgment,  of all he says,  leaves,  indeed,  nothing to wish.

They will npt let me go while I can stay,  and I am now most willing to
stay till I must go.  The serenity of a life like this,  smooths the whole
internal surface of the mind.  My own,  I assure you,  begins to feel quite
glossy.  To see Mrs.  Locke so entirely restored to total health,  and to see
her adoring husband lose all his torturing solicitude,  while he retains his
unparalled tenderness — these are sights to anticipate a taste of paradise,  if
paradise has any felicity consonant to our now ideas.

I am most amazingly well and hearty.  Since your letter arrived,  I have
not had an unpleasant thought that I have not driven away pellmell,  as if it
was a wasp near an open window.

#  *  *  #  #

Tuesday,  Nov.  9th. — This is Mr.  William Locke's birthday ;  he is
now seventeen :  he came home,  with his brothers,  to keep it three days
ago.  May they all be as long-lived and as happy as they are now sweet
and amiable  !  This sweet place is beautiful even yet,  though no longer of
a beauty young and blooming,  such as you left it ;  but the character of the
prospect is so grand,  that winter cannot annihilate its charms,  though it
greatly diminishes them.  The variety of the grounds,  and the striking
form of the hills,  always afford something new to observe,  and retain some-
thing lasting to admire.  Were I,  however,  in a desert,  people such as
these would make it gay and cheery.

I am quite enchanted with Madame de Sevigne ;  I think her almost all
that can be wished to form female perfection.  Her softness,  her fond affec-
tion, her wit,  spirit and drollery,  the right turn of her understanding,  the
gay entertainment of her abilities,  but more than all,  the exquisite refinement
of her quick sensibility,  attach me to her as if she were alive,  and even now
in my room,  and permitting me to run into her arms.

We go on but slowly with Captain Cook,  for this syren seduces me from
all other reading ;  but nothing can be so delightful as any reading in such
society,  and such reading as Madame de Sevigne has written would be de-
lightful in any.

FROM MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  LOCKE.

St.  Martin's Street,  Nov.  14.

"  On gracious errand bent,"  indeed !  Dear Mr.  Locke 1 what a day for
his benevolent excursion  !  But he never thinks of himself,  where others
may be benefited by self-forgetfulness.  May his success but make him
recall those melancholy words I had once the pain to hear him utter —
'  That,  though he had tried to do good, — from twenty shillings to some
thousands, — he had never answered his own expectations.'  "

I was happy at the time,  to hear you recollect for him some instances in
which he had prospered, — and another instance,  I hope,  will pay his exer-
tion of to-day.

And now let me give my beloved Mrs.  Locke a little history of my  (no)
adventures.

VOL.  I.  31

362 DIARY AND LETTERS 1784.

I found at home my dear father,  my mother,  Charlotte,  and Sarah,  with
two Mr.  La Trobes,  sons of a Moravian bishop,  two tall,  thin,  black,  very
good sort of young men,  whom I had never seen before,  but who stayed all
the afternoon and evening, — probably to take off the strangeness of a new
acquaintance.

On Sunday Mr.  Seward called  ;  and he stayed till dinner — not for the
same reason that kept the Moravians,  but because he was dying with im-
patience to talk over a transaction which I grieve even to think of;  and I
had the satisfaction of hearing all the merits and demerits of the cause fully
discussed.  I sate very uneasily,  and spoke as little as I could  :  but how
did I congratulate myself in being spared this cruel subject at the time I
should have felt it the most,  by my fortunate residence in the sweetly for-
bearing family at Norbury  !  Had I then been in town,  while my whole
heart was filled with sorrow and disturbance,  I hardly know how I could
have endured the perpetual canvassing in which I must have been made a
party.  To hear just blame cast upon those who are dear to us,  and to be
checked both by truth and opinion from defending them,  is,  at least,  one
of the most irksome situations in the world  ;  especially where,  as here,  the
person censured possessed a thousand good qualities which her censurers
never could boast.  Those,  however,  were known to few ;  her defects
were seen by all.  Could I tell how to direct,  I think I should write to her
again ;  for her heart must be strangely changed if this breach of all inter-
course gives her no concern.  I begin to fancy my last letter to her mis-
carried.

I had a very pleasant morning after I left you.  When the coach and I
had waited upon my father,  I made the visit I mentioned to you.  O what
a visit ! — all that I presupposed of attack,  inquiry and acrimony,  was nothing
to what passed.  Rage more intemperate I have not often seen ;  and the
shrill voice of feeble old age,  screaming with unavailing passion,  is horrible.
She had long looked upon Mrs.  T.  as a kind of protege,  whom she had
fondled when a child,  and whose fame,  as she grew into notice,  she Mas
always proud to hear of,  and help to exalt.  She is a woman  (I can well
attest !)  of most furious passions herself,  however at liberty she thinks she
may be to show no sort of mercy to those of another.

Once,  had I been less disturbed,  I could have laughed  ;  for she declared
with great vehemence,  that if she had suspected  "  the wretch of any inten-
tion to marry the man,  she would have ordered her own postchaise,  and
followed her to prevent it !"
Alas,  poor Lady F. !

She then called upon me,  to hear my story ;  which,  most painfully to my-
self, I related.     She expressed herself very sorry for me,  till I came to an
avowal of my letter after the marriage  ;  she then flew out into new choler.
"  I am amazed you would write to her.  Miss Burney  !     I wonder you
could think of it any more  !"

I told her,  I had thought myself so much indebted to her patience with
my opposition to all her views and wishes,  for the whole time of her long
conflict,  that,  although I was the first to acknowledge her last action inde-
fensible, I should be the last to forget all that had made me love her before
it was committed.

This by no means satisfied her,  and she poured forth again a torrent of
abuse.  Some company,  at last,  came in,  and I hastily took my leave.  She
called after me to fix some day for a longer visit ;  but I pretended not to
hear,  and ran down stairs,  heartily resolving that necessity alone should
force me into her presence again.

1784.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  363

One lady had come in before  ;  but as it was in the height of our confe-
rence, her stately violence gave her courage to beg she would walk into
another room with Miss B — e,  as she was particularly engaged  ;  and the
poor lady looked as little gratified at being sent away as I did at being
detained.

When I came home — before I could get up stairs, — I was summoned to
Miss Streatfield,  whom I met with as little pleasure as Lady F.,  since I had
never seen her,  nor indeed any body,  from the time this cruel transaction
has been published.  Not that I dreaded her violence,  for she is gentle as a
lamb  ;  but,  there were causes enough for dread of another nature.  How-
ever, fortunately and unexpectedly,  she never named the subject,  but prattled
away upon nothing but her own affairs  ;  and so,  methinks,  have I done too,
and just as if I knew you wished to hear them.  Do you 1 — I ask only for
decency's sake.

DIARY RESUMED.

NoRBURY Park,  Sunday,  Nov.  28th. — How will my Susan smile at sight
of this date!  Let me tell her how it has all happened.  Last Thursday,
Nov.  25th,  my father set me down at Bolt Court,  while he went on upon
business.  I was anxious to again see poor Dr.  Johnson,  who has had ter-
rible health since his return from Lichfield.  He let me in,  though very ill.
He was alone,  which I much rejoiced at ;  for I had a longer and more
satisfactory conversation with him than I have had for many months.  He
was in rather better spirits,  too,  than I have lately seen him  ;  but he told
me he was going to try what sleeping out of town might do for him.

"  I remember,"  said he,  "  that my wife when she was near her end,  poor
woman,  was also advised to sleep out of town ;  and when she was carried
to the lodgings that had been prepared for her,  she complained that the
staircase was in very bad condition — for the plaster was beaten off the walls
in many places.  '  Oh,'  said the man of the house,  '  that's nothing but by
the knocks against it of the coffins of the poor souls that have died in the
lodgings I'  "

He laughed,  though not without apparent secret anguish,  in telling me this.
I felt extremely shocked,  but,  willing to confine my words at least to the
literal story,  I only exclaimed against the unfeeling absurdity of such a con-
fession.

"  Such a confession,"  cried he,  "  to a person then coming to try his
lodging for her health,  contains,  indeed,  more absurdity than we can well
lay our account for."

I had seen Miss T.  the day before.

"  So,"  said he,  "  did L"

I then said, — "  Do you ever,  sir,  hear from her mother  ?"

*'  No,"  cried he,  "  nor write to her.  I drive her quite from my mind.  If
I meet with one of her letters I burn it instantly.  I have burnt all I can
find.  I never speak of her,  and I desire never to hear of her more.  I drive
her,  as I said,  wholly from my mind."

Yet,  wholly to change this discourse,  I gave him a history of the Bristol
milk-woman,  and told him the tales I had heard of her writing so wonder-
fully, though she had read nothing but Young and Milton  ;  "  though those,"
I continued,  "  could never possibly,  I should think,  be the first authors with
any body.  Would children understand them  ?  and grown people who have
not read are children in literature."

364 DIARY AND LETTERS 1784.

"  Doubtless,"  said he ;  "  but there is nothing so little comprehended
among mankind as what is genius.  They give to it all,  when it can be
but a part.  Genius is nothing more than knowing the use of tools ;  but
there must be tools for it to use  :  a man who has spent all his life in this
room will give a very poor account of what is contained in the next."

"  Certainly,  sir ;  yet there is such a thing as invention  ?  Shakspeare
could never have seen a Caliban."

"  No ;  but he had seen a man,  and knew,  therefore,  how to vary him to a
monster.  A man who would draw a monstrous cow,  must first know what
a cow commonly is  ;  or how can he tell that to give her an ass's head or
an elephant's tusk will make her monstrous  ?  Suppose you show me a
man who is a very expert carpenter  ;  another will say he was born to be
a carpenter — but what if he had never seen any wood  ?  Let two men,  one
with genius,  the other with none,  look at an overturned wagon  : — he who
has no geuius,  will think of the wagon only as he sees it,  overturned,  and
walk on  ;  he who has genius will paint it to himself before it was over-
turned,— standing still,  and moving on,  and heavy loaded,  and empty ;  but
both must see the wagon,  to think of it at all."

How just and true all this,  my dear Susy  !  He then animated,  and
talked on,  upon this milk-woman,  upon a once as famous shoemaker,  and
upon our immortal Shakspeare,  with as much fire,  spirit,  wit,  and truth of
criticism and judgment,  as ever yet I have heard him.  How delightfully
bright are his faculties,  though the poor and infirm machine that contains
them seems alarmingly giving way.

Yet,  all brilliant as he was,  I saw him growing worse,  and offered to go,
which,  for the first time I ever remember,  he did not oppose;  but,  most
kindly pressing both my hands, —

"  Be not,"  he said,  in a voice of even tenderness,  "  be not longer in
coming again for my letting you go now."

I assured him I would be the sooner,  and was running off,  but he called
me back,  in a solemn voice,  and,  in a manner the most energetic,  said, —

"  Remember me in your prayers  !"

I longed to ask him to remember me,  but did not dare.  I gave him my
promise,  and very heavily indeed,  I left him.  Great,  good,  and excellent
that he is,  how short a time will he be our boast  !  Ah,  my dear Susy,  I see
he is going  !  This winter will never conduct him to a more genial season
here I Elsewhere,  who shall hope a fairer?  I wish I had bid him pray
for me ;  but it seemed to me presumptuous,  though this repetition of so kind
a condescension might,  I think,  have encouraged me.  Mrs.  Locke,  however,
T know does it daily  ;  my Susan's best prayers I know are always mine  ;
and where can I find two more innocent pleaders  ?     So God bless you both  !

MISS BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

Norbury Park,  Nov.  29th,  1784.
My dearest Sir,

I don't write because I have got any thing to say,  nor,  indeed,  because I
have got nothing to say  ;  for that were a most woful reason for you,  who
are to read that nothing  ;  but I write because — because — because — because
— because — because — and if that should not be reason adequate,  I confess I
have none more forcible  !

Oh yes,  I have  !  Mrs.  Locke is your most devoted.  She will adhere,
she says,  most religiously to her proposed conditions  ;  you shall have the
best-selected,  the sweetest-smelling,  the most picturesque-formed nosegays
she can procure you,  made up by her own fair hand,  and elected by her

1784.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  355

own discriminating nose  :  you shall have as long,  and as broad,  and as short,
and as narrow a ribbon to tie them up as you shall decide yourself,  and sh3
will love you not only dearly by promise,  but tout de hon^  and without
chicanery.

The housewife has not been mentioned again ;  but I know you may
command the whole fair.  This sweet place is just as I best like it,  occupied
only by its proper inhabitants.  Winter here does not sweep away all beauty,
though it deducts much from its character of smiling gaiety ;  but the bold
and majestic form of the surrounding hills,  and the thick mass of the noble,
though leafless v/ood,  still,  and throughout the whole varying year,  affjrd
objects sufficiently diversified to engage,  though not fully delight attention.
A flat country is utterly desolate when all its trees are stripped,  and its un-
interesting extent is laid open to the disappointed eye,  which wants some
occasional check to stimulate curiosity,  and give some play to fancy ;  and
this,  in summer,  is done by every luxuriant branch.  Here the irregularity
of the ground supplies a constant variety,  however variety may elsewhere
regard change as its very essence  ;  but every new gleam of light from every
fresh breaking or passing cloud,  so changes the point of view,  and so meta-
morphoses the principal object,  from the hill to the vale,  and the wood to the
plain,  that much as summer is every where to be regretted,  winter,  here,  has
a thousand claims to being admired.

I shall come home faithfully to my time,  Saturday.  Mrs.  Locke says
she is ambitious you should know she may be trusted.

Mr.  Locke has'  been himself to Mickleham,  to give orders for the planting
some trees before our captain's cottage,  to shelter it from the dust,  and from
the staring of the road.

I wish Charlotte would have the kindness to give me a letter.  I always
want intolerably to hear something from home,  by the time I have left it two
days.  I am preparing a noble folio sheet for our Susan.  The weather is,
I suppose,  too bad for any intercourse with dear Etty.

Adieu,  dearest sir.  Mr.  Locke desires me to give his compliments to you  ;
for Mrs.  Locke I think I have said enough.  I beg my duty to my mother,
and love to Charlotte,  Dick,  and Sarah,  and am,  dearest sir,  yours most
dutifully and affectionately.

F.  B.

I suppose to-night is the first muster of the Blue forces.  I want to know
how they perform their exercises,  who are their new recruits,  and if there
is ever a deserter to keep me in countenance.

MISS F.  BURXEY TO MRS.  LOCKE.

St.  Martin's Street,  Dec.  7,  17S4.

Why,  poor Norbury and I are now in greater disgrace than ever.  To
have known nothing of the Emperor and the Dutch,  was indeed rather rustic  ;
to have heard nothing of Lord George Gordon and his cockades,  was,  I
acknowledge,  somewhat defective : — but a new ignorance was discovered
just now,  more ignominious than all that preceded it  ;  I was informed that
the Duchess of Devonshire had cut the string of Mr.  Blanchard's balloon I
I had vegetated upon a spot,  unconscious that  ]Mrs.  Crewe had sent up a
glove in it !  Oh,  unaspiring Norbury  !  ignorant of wars,  bloodshed,  and
rumours of war  !  Oh,  clownish Norbury  !  stranger to the vagaries of the
ton  !

Thursday Morxi>-g. — I was called away in the midst of my rhodomon-
tade,  and have lost all zest for pursuing it.     I have been a second time to

31*

366 DIARY AND LETTERS 1784.

see poor Dr.  Johnson,  and both times he was too ill to admit me.  I know
how very much worse he must be,  for when I saw him last,  which was the
morning before I went to Norbury,  he repeatedly and even earnestly begged
me to come to him again,  and to see him both as soon and as often as I
could.  I am told by Mr.  Hoole,  that he inquired of Dr.  Brocklesby if he
thought it likely he might live six weeks 1 and the doctor's hesitation say-
ing No,  he has been more deeply depressed than ever.  Fearing death
as he does,  no one can wonder.      Why he should fear it,  all may wonder.

Fie sent me down yesterday,  by a clergyman who was with him,  the
kindest of messages,  and I hardly know whether I ought to go to him again
or not ;  though I know still less why I say so,  for go again I both must
and shall.  One thing,  his extreme dejection of mind considered,  has both
surprised and pleased me  ;  he has now constantly an amanuensis with him,
and dictates to him such compositions,  particularly Latin and Greek,  as he
has formerly made,  but repeated to his friends without ever committing to
paper.  This,  I hope,  will not only gratify his survivors,  but serve to divert
him.

The good Mr.  Hoole and equally good Mr.  Sastres attend him,  rather as
nurses than friends,  for they sit whole hours by him,  without even speaking
to him.  He will not,  it seems,  be talked to — at least very rarely.  At
times,  indeed,  he reanimates  ;  but it is soon over,  and he says of himself,
"  I am now like Macbeth, — question enrages me."

My father saw him once while I was away,  and carried Mr.  Burke with
him,  who was desirous of paying his respects to him once more in person.
He rallied a little while they were there;  and Mr.  Burke,  when they left
him,  said to my father — "  His work is almost done  ;  and well has he
done it !"

How cheering,  in the midst of these sad scenes and accounts of poor Dr.
Johnson,  are your words about your dear self and many selves  !

One of the Moravians was here again the other evening,  and was really
entertaining enough,  by the singular simplicity of his conversation.  He
was brought up in Germany,  and spent the greater part of his early youth
in roving about from place to place,  and country to country  ;  for though
he had his education in Germany,  he is a native of Ireland,  and his father
and mother reside chiefly in England.

"  Not being used,"  said he,  "  to a family when I was a boy,  I always
hated it ;  they seemed to me only so many wasps  ;  for one told me I was
too silent,  and another wished I would not speak so much,  and all of them
found some fault or other.  But now that I am come home to live,  and am
constrained to be with them,  I enjoy it very much."

What must be the sect,  and where the travelling,  that shall un-Irish an
Irishman  ?

Another of his confessions was this  : —

"  Luckily for me,"  said he,  "  1 have no occasion to speak till about two
o'clock,  when we dine,  for that keeps me fresh.  If I were to begin earlier,
I should only be like skimmed milk the rest of the day."

As he came in between five and six o'clock,  we were still at dinner.  My
father asked him if he would join,  and do what we were doing?  "No,  sir,"

answered he,  very composedly,  "  I have done my tea this hour."

*  *  #  *  *  #

F.  B.
DIARY RESUMED.

St.  Martin's Street,  Wednesday,  Dec.  10th. — I went in the evening
to poor Dr.  Johnson.     Frank told me he was very ill,  but let me in.     He

1784.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  357

would have taken me up stairs,  but 1 would not see him without his direct
permission.  1 desired Frank to tell him I called to pay my respects to
him,  but not to disturb him if he was not well enough to see me.  Mr.
Strahan,  a clergyman,  he said,  was with him alone.

In a few minutes,  this Mr.  Strahan came to me himself.  He told me Dr.
Johnson was very ill,  very much obliged to me for coming,  but so weak
and bad he hoped I would excuse his not seeing me.

I had promised to call for Charlotte at  ^r.  Hoole's  ;  and there I went in
to tea,  sure of a good reception,  though too much out of spirits to be worth
one.  They were all at home,  and their good-humour and happiness were
pleasant to behold,  after such an unexpected blow.

Dear,  dear,  and much-reverenced Dr.  Johnson  !  how ill or how low must
he be,  to decline seeing a creature he has so constantly,  so fondly,  called
about him  !  If I do not see him again I shall be truly afflicted.  And I
fear,  I almost know,  I cannot !

At night my father brought us the most dismal tidings of dear Dr.  Johnson.
Dr.  Warren had seen him,  and told him to take what opium he pleased  !
He had thanked and taken leave of all his physicians.  Alas  ! — I shall lose
him,  and he will take no leave of me!  My father was deeply depressed;
he has himself tried in vain for admission this week.  Yet some people see
him — the Hooles,  Mr.  Sastres,  Mr.  Langton  ; — but then they must be in
the house,  watching for one moment,  whole hours.  I hear from every one
he is now perfectly resigned to his approaching fate,  and no longer in terror
of death.  I am thankfully happy in hearing that he speaks himself now of
the change his mind has undergone,  from its dark horror,  and says — "  He
feels the irradiation of hope  !"  Good,  and pious,  and excellent Christian
— who shall feel it if not he  ?

Dec.  11th. — We had a party to dinner,  by long appointment,  for which,
indeed,  none of us were well disposed,  the apprehension of hearing news
only of death being hard upon us all.  The party was,  Dr.  Rose,  Dr.  Gil-
lies, Dr.  Garthshore,  and Charles.

The day could not be well — but mark the night.

My father,  in the morning,  saw this first of men  !  I had not his account
till bedtime  ;  he feared over-exciting me.  He would not,  he said,  but have
seen him for worlds  !  He happened to be better,  and admitted him.  He
was up,  and very composed.  He took his hand very kindly,  asked after
his family,  and then,  in particular,  how Fanny did?

"  I hope,"  he said,  "  Fanny did not take it amiss that I did not see her?
I was very bad I"

Amiss  ! — what a word  !  Oh that I had been present to have answered
it !  My father stayed,  I suppose,  half an hour,  and then was coming away.
He again took his hand,  and encouraged him to come again to him  ;  and
when he was taking leave,  said — "  Tell Fanny to pray for me!"

Ah  !  dear Dr.  Johnson  !  might I but have your prayers  !  After which,
still grasping his hand,  he made a prayer for himself, — the most fervent,
pious,  humble,  eloquent,  and touching,  my father says,  that ever was com-
posed. Oh,  would I had heard it  !  He ended it with Amen  !  in which my
father joined,  and was echoed by all present.  And again,  when my father
was leaving him,  he brightened up,  something of his arch look returned,
and he said — "  I think I shall throw the ball at Fanny yet  !"

Little more passed ere my father came away,  decided,  most tenderly,  not
to tell me this till our party was gone.

This most earnestly increased my desire to see him;  this kind and fre-
quent mention of me melted me into double sorrow and regret.     I would

368 DIARY AND LETTERS 1784.

give the world I had but gone to him that day !  It was,  however,  impossi-
ble, and the day was over before I knew he had said what I look upon as a
call to me.  This morning,  after church time,  I went.  Frank said he was
very ill,  and saw nobody;  I told him I had understood by my father the
day before that he meant to see me.  He then let me in.  I went into his
room up stairs  ;  he was in his bedroom.  I saw it crowded,  and ran hastily
down.  Frank told me his master had refused seeing even Mr.  Langton.  I
told him merely to say I had called,  but by no means to press my admis-
sion. His own feelings were all that should be consulted  ;  his tenderness,
I knew,  would be equal,  whether he was able to see me or not.

I went into the parlour,  preferring being alone in the cold,  to any com-
pany with a fire.  Here 1 waited long,  here and upon the stairs,  which I
ascended and descended to meet again with Frank,  and make inquiries ;  but
I met him not.  At last,  upon Dr.  Johnson's ringing his bell,  I saw Frank
enter his room,  and Mr.  Langton follow.  "  Who's that?"  I heard him say;
they answered,  "Mr.  Langton,"  and I found he did not return.

Soon after,  all the rest went away but a Mrs.  Davis,  a good sort of woman,
whom this truly charitable soul had sent for to take a dinner at his house.
I then went and waited with her by the fire  :  it was,  however,  between three
and four o'clock before I got any answer.  ]\Ir.  Langton then came himself.
He could not look at me,  and I turned away from him.  Mrs.  Davis asked
how the Doctor was?  "  Going on to death very fast!"  was his mournful
answer.  "  Has he taken,"  said she,  "  any thing?"  Nothing at all!  We
carried him some bread and milk — he refused it,  and said,  '  Tlce less the
better.''  "  She asked more questions,  by which I found his faculties were
perfect,  his mind composed,  and his dissolution was quick drawing on.
*  *  *  *  *

I could not immediately go on,  and it is now long since I have written at
all ;  but I will go back to this afflicting theme,  which I can now better bear.

Mr.  Langton was,  I believe,  a quarter of an hour in the room before I
suspected he meant to speak to me,  never looking near me.  At last he
said —

"This poor man,  I understand,  ma'am,  desired yesterday to see you."

"  My understanding that,  sir,  brought me to-day."

"  Poor man  !  it is pity he did not know himself better,  and that you should
have had this trouble."

"  Trouble !"  cried 1 ;  "  I would come a hundred times to see him the hun-
dredth and first!"

"  He hopes,  now,  you will excuse him  ;  he is very sorry not to see you ;
but he desired me to come and speak to you myself,  and tell you he hopes
you will excuse him,  for he feels himself too weak for such an interview."

I hastily got up,  left him my most afTectionate respects,  and every good
wish 1 could half utter,  and ran back to the coach.  Ah,  my Susy  !  I have
never been to Bolt Court since  !  I then drove to poor Miss Strange,  to make
inquiries of the maid  ;  but Andrew ran out to the coach door,  and told me
all hope was at an end.  In short,  the next day was fatal to both  ! — the same
day !

^  tF  ^  ^  ^  ^

Dec.  20th. — This day was the ever-honoured,  ever-lamented Dr.  John-
son committed to the earth.  Oh,  how sad a day to me  !  My father
attended,  and so did Charles.  I could not keep my eyes dry all day ;  nor
can I now,  in the recollecting it ;  but let me pass over what to mourn is
now so vain  !

I had the good fortune at night of a sweet letter from my dearest Susy ;
that,  and another from my Fredy,  were alone able to draw me from this
mournful day's business.

1784.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  369

Thursday,  Dec.  30th. — As I was engaged for this evening at Mrs.  Cha-
pone's,  I found it necessary to call upon two or three people in the morning,
lest my going thither,  after so long a secession,  should give offence.  1 went
first to Lady Mary Duncan,  who is but lately come from Bath.  She was
very gracious,  and,  as usual,  very diverting.  I then went to Lady F.  B.,
and had another painful conference.  Then I went to Mrs.  Vesey,  with
whom I spent an hour very sociably,  and she gave me great pleasure by
showing me a letter from Mrs.  Allison,  late Miss Gregory,  who is married
very happily,  though not richly,  and with the world's approbation,  though
against Mrs.  Montagu's.  She would have kept me to dinner,  very kindly ;
but I could not stay.  I then left a card for Sophy Streatfield,  and came
home.

In the evening,  I went to Mrs.  Chapone.  I was late,  on account of the
coach,  and all her party was assembled.  Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.  Levison,
her daughter,  Mrs.  Burrows,  Mrs.  Amy Burrows,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys,  Lady
Rothes,  Sir Lucas Pepys,  young Burrows,  Mr.  Sandford,  a young sea-
officer,  Mrs.  Ord,  and Miss Ord,  her cousin.

This was the first time I had seen any of them,  except Mrs.  Ord,  since
last spring.  I was received with the utmost kindness by them all,  but chiefly
by Mrs.  Chapone herself,  who has really,  I believe,  a sincere regard for
mc.  I had talk with all of them,  except Mrs.  Levison,  with whom I have
merely a courtesying acquaintance.  But I was very sad within  :  the loss
of dear Dr.  Johnson — the flight of Mrs.  Thrale — the death of poor Miss
Kitty Cambridge,  and of poor,  good Miss Strange, — all those home and
bosom strokes,  which had all struck me since my last meeting this society,
were revolving in my mind the whole time I stayed.

Sir Lucas Pepys talked to me a great deal of Mrs.  Thrale,  and read me
a letter from her,  which seems to show her gay and happy.  I hope it shows
not false colours.  No one else named her ;  but poor Dr.  Johnson was
discussed repeatedly.  How melancholy will all these circumstances render
these once so pleasant meetings.

Dec.  31st. — I called early upon my dear Mrs.  Delany,  who was just
come to town,  as Mrs.  Boscawen told me the night before ;  but she was not
up,  and I could not see her.  And where did I spend the rest of the day  ?
With the sweet Lockes,  in Upper Brook Street.  I went to wait their arrival,
with their dear little girls,  and I stayed with them till bed-time.  Dear,
charming people  !  how did they soothe my troubled mind.  I had felt nothing
so like peace since 1 left them  ;  and this real pleasure,  with an exerted sup-
pression of sadness,  gave us all,  I believe,  an equally pleasant day.  You
may think how I must be guarded there— there,  where I can show no sorrow
that will not instantly spread to themselves,

370 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

CHAPTER XVIII.
1785.

Correspondence — Mrs.  Delany — Dr.  Johnson — Acquaintance of Miss Burney with Ma-
dame de Genlis — Letter from Madame de Genlis to Miss Burney — Mrs.  Delany —
Noble Conduct of George the Third and Queen Charlotte towards her— Miss Burney
to Mrs.  Phillips— Mrs.  Delany— Miss Burney to Mrs.  Locke — Anecdotes of Mrs.
Delany and the Duchess of Portland — Anecdote of the King and Queen — Horace
Walpole— Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney— Warren Hastings — Mr.  W.  Locke's Paintings
— Miss Burney to Mrs.  Gast— Character of Mr.  Crisp — Diary Resumed — Windsor —
The Queen — The Princesses — Lady Louisa Clayton and Lady Charlotte Finch — A
Conjuring Doctor — Visit of the King to Mrs.  Delany — Anecdote of the Queen — Visit
of the King and Queen to Mrs.  Delany — Royal Chit-chat — Writings for the Stage —
Princess Elizabeth — The Cave of Elephanta — Virtuosi— Visit to Thames Ditton —
Return to Windsor— The Comedy of Errors — Visit of the King to Mrs.  Delany — His
Com^ersation with Miss Burney — Hunting in a Hoop — Arrival of the Queen — The
Duke of Marlborough — Conversation between Queen Charlotte and Miss Burney —
The Queen's Description of the Drawing-room — Anecdote of the Duke of Dorset —
Webb,  the Musician — Anecdote of the Princess Sophia — Anecdote of Webb — Etiquette
at Leave-taking of Royalty — Personal Character of Queen Charlotte and George III.
— Their Behaviour to each other — St.  George's Chapel — A Court Preacher — Collection
of Chinese Curiosities — Another Visit from the King — His Fondness for his Children —
Attendance on Royalty — Bon Mot of the King about Richard Cumberland — Lord Sack-
ville — Madame de Genlis — The King's Opinion of Voltaire and Rousseau — Anecdotes
of Rousseau — The King and the Players — Mrs.  Clive,  Henderson and Mrs.  Siddons —
The King's Opinion of Shakspeare — His Vindication of the English Stage — Tete-a-
tete with the Queen — Her Opinion of Boswell and Madame de Genlis — The Sorrows
of Werter — The Queen at a Bookstall — Her Opinion of Klopstock — Her Anecdote of
Catholic Superstition — Her Account of Protestant Nunneries in Germany — Letter
from Mrs.  Montagu — Letter from Miss Burney — How to behave in the presence of
Royalty.

MISS BURNEY TO MISS    *****.

St.  Martin's Street,  January 3d,  1785.

vf=  ^  ^  ^  vF v^

Your and my beloved Mrs.  Delany I have not yet been able to see,  though
we are now both inhabitants of this  "  dark and busy city."  I heard on
Thursday of her arrival,  from Mr.  Sandford,  the seaman,  whom I met at Mrs.
Chapone's,  and the next morning early I hastened to St.  Jam-es's Place.  I
was anxious to catch her alone,  that I might enjoy what is so precious to
me — her own conversation,  unmixed,  uninterrupted,  I had almost said un-
adulterated, by casual visiters and miscellaneous talk  ;  but I fancy,  by my
ill success,  my plan was too selfish.  She had been tired the day before,
and was not stirring.  Mrs.  Astley,  however,  assured me she was pretty
well,  and I have heard from Mrs.  Boscawen,  that she is in excellent spirits;
and her spirits,  we know,  enliven all around her,  though their vivacity is so
gentle that they could not oppress even a mourner in the deepest affliction —
if,  ndeed,  such a one could be present and her spirits not sink into similar
sadness.

I am sure my dear M  *  *  *  *  will give me a little share of concern for
the loss of my great,  good,  and highly reverenced friend.  Dr.  .Johnson.  My
loss,  indeed,  where a whole nation has cause to mourn,  it seems almost im-
pertinent to mention ;  yet,  immaterial as it is in so wide and general a
regret,  I do not feel it the less for knowing it to be universal.     You can

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  37X

now only know him in his works  ;  and,  perhaps,  from his character of
harshness and severity,  you may think you could there alone know him to
any advantage.  But had you been presented to him,  you would not have
found that the case.  He was always indulgent to the young,  he never-
attacked the unassuming,  nor meant to terrify the diffident.  I pretend not,
however,  to vindicate his temper,  nor to justify his manners  ;  but his many
and essential virtues and excellences made all who were much connected
with him rather grieve at his defects than resent them, — grieve,  indeed,  to
see how much remains to be pardoned,  even where there is most to be
applauded and admired !

Considerations such as these,  though they sadly lessen our expectations
of human perfection,  may yet be extremely useful in increasing our lenity
for its frailty in others,  and our vigilance for guarding against it in our-
selves.

Our all-amiable Mrs.  Delany seems to me to have these two reflections
ever uppermost,  and to owe to them chiefly the benevolence that makes her
so pleasing to others,  and the purity that makes her so valuable in herself.
Need I say to my dear M  *  *  *  *  *  how edifying an example  ?  Oh,  no  !
no one is more watchfully awake to all her virtues.  You have constantly
before you whatever is most worthy to be imitated.  Sweet and happy
plant !  long may you thrive,  and long may those who rear rejoice in
your fragrance  !

To one of your cultivators,  I beg to present my best respects  ;  to the
other,  I hope personally to pay them very spedily.  A very happy new year
to you,  and your fireside.  I am,  my dear  ;m  *****  's sincerely aflfec-
tionate friend,  F.  B.

[Few journals or letters written in the beginning of this year have been
preserved.  Daring the spring of 1785,  Dr.  Burney and his daughter be-
came acquainted with the celebrated Madame de Genlis,  who was then,  for
the first time,  in England,  and who  "  warmly,  and with predetermined
partiality,  sought the friendship of Miss Burney."  The following brief
mention of her is in a letter to Mrs.  Phillips,  dated July 11th,  1785.]

St.  Martin's Street.

"  I have been this whole morning with Madame de Genlis,  the sweetest
as well as most accomplished Frenchwoman I ever met with.  Were my
time and mind more disengaged,  I would send you an account of her,  highly
interesting both for you and Mr.  and Mrs.  Locke;  but I have neither leisure
nor spirits for journalizing."

[A note from Madame de Genlis was long preserved as a memorial of so
attractive a person.]

MADAME DE GENLIS TO MISS BURNEY.

Ce Vendredi,  15 Juillet,  1785.

Combien j'ai ete fachee,  ma chere amie,  de n'avoir pu jouir du plaisir de
vous recevoir  ;  mais je dinois avec des personnes qu'il m'etoit impossible
de quitter.  Recevez tous mes remercimens du precieux present que vous
m'avez fait,  et chargez vous d'exprimer a monsieur votre pere toute la
reconnoissance que je lui dois.  Je sais combien son ouvrage est estimable  ;
il sera pour moi doublement interessant,  et je me flatte que vous en devinerez

372 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

facilement la ralson.  Je pars dans I'instant pour Oxford  ;  adieu,  ma chere
amie  ;  n'oubliez pas que vous avez pris Tengagement de m'aimer.  Pour
moi,  je vous aime depuis I'instant oil j'ai lu Evelina et Cecilia^  et le bon-
heur de vous entendre et de vous connoitre personnellement,  a rendu ce
sentiment aussi tendre qu'il est bien fonde.

[The acquaintance,  however,  was not kept up.  They were not at this
time thrown in each other's way,  and afterwards,  such tales,  whether true
or false,  were forced into the unwilling ears of Miss Burney,  that,  to use
her own words,  "  notwithstanding the most ardent admiration of Madame
de Genlis's talents,  and a zest yet greater for her engaging society and
elegantly lively and winning manners,  she yet dared no longer come
within the precincts of her fascinating allurements." — "  In France,  equally,
she felt compelled to keep aloof,  though most reluctantly."]

MISS F.  BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

St.  James's Place,  August 24th,  1785.

I have been very much alarmed,  dearest sir,  these last four days,  by a
feverish attack which dear Mrs.  Delany has suffered.  Unfortunately none
of her physical assistants were in town ;  however,  she is now,  thank
Heaven !  recovering,  and if there is no relapse,  will soon,  I hope,  be well.

I must tell you,  dearest sir,  a tale concerning her,  which I am sure you
"will hear with true pleasure.  Among the many inferior losses which have
been included in her great and irreparable calamity,*  has been that of a
country house for the summer,  w^hich she had in Bulstrode,  and which for
the half of every year was her constant home.  The Duke of Portland
behaved with the utmost propriety and feeling upon this occasion,  and was
most earnest to accommodate her to the best of his power,  with every com-
fort to which she had been accustomed  ;  but this noblest of women declared
she loved the memory of her friend beyond all other things,  and would not
suffer it to be tainted in the misjudging world by an action that would be
construed into a reflection upon her will,  as if deficient in consideration to
her.  "  And I will not,"  said she to me,  "  suffer the children of my dearest
friend to suppose that their mother left undone any thing she ought to have
done.  She did not ;  1 knew her best,  and I know she did what she was
sure I should most approve."  She steadily,  therefore,  refused all offers,
though made to her with even painful earnestness,  and though solicited till
her refusal became a distress to herself.

This transaction was related,  I believe to their majesties ;  and Lady
Weymouth,  the Duchess's eldest daughter,  was commissioned to wait upon
Mrs.  Delany with this message : — That the Queen was extremely anxious
about her health,  and very apprehensive lest continuing in London during
the summer should be prejudicial to it :  she entreated her,  therefore,  to
accept a house belonging to the King at Windsor,  which she should order
to be fitted up for her immediately  ;  and she desired Lady Weymouth to
give her time to consider this proposal,  and by no means to hurry her ;  as
well as to assure her,  that happy as it would make her to have one she so
sincerely esteemed for a neighbour,  she should remember her situation,  and
promise not to be troublesome to her.  The King,  at the same time,  desired
to be allowed to stand to the additional expenses incurred by the mainte-
nance of two houses,  and that Mrs.  Delany would accept from him  £300
a-year.

*  The death of the Duchess Dowager of Portland.

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  373

It would be needless to tell you how Mrs.  Delany was touched by this
benevolence ;  for no creature has heard it without emotion,  and I am sure
my dear father will not be the first.  Yet she dreaded accepting what she
feared would involve her in a new course of life,  and force her into notice
and connexions she wished to drop or avoid.  She took the time the Queen
so considerately gave her for dehberation,  and she consulted with some of
her old friends.  They all agreed there must be no refusal,  and,  after
many circumstances too long for writing,  though otherwise well worth
knowing,  Lady Weymouth was made the messenger of her Majesty's otTer
being accepted.

The house,  therefore,  is now fitting up,  and the King sees after the work-
men himself.

A few days ago,  Miss Planta was sent from the Queen,  with very kind
inquiries after Mrs.  Delany's health,  and information that she would receive
a summons very soon.  She told her,  also,  that as the house might still
require a longer time in preparation than would suit Mrs.  Delany to wait in
London,  the Queen had ordered some apartments in the Castle,  which
lately belonged to Prince Edward,  to be got ready with all speed,  that she
might reside in them till her own house was finished.

This is the state of her afiliirs.  I am now with her entirely.  At first I
slept at home;  but going after supper,  and coming before breakfast,  was
inconvenient,  and she has therefore contrived me a bed-room.

When she sets off'  for Windsor,  Mr.  Locke will be so kind as to send his
carriage for me to return to Norbury.  But now,  if the coach should continue
at that time in town,  and unemployed,  would there be any harm in my
using it to make a visit to Twickenham 1 Charlotte will much oblige me
by a yes or no to this question.

I hope every body is quite well at Chesington,  and I beg my duty,  love,
and compliments,  with proper propriety,  may be delivered.  "  To be sure,"
you will say,  "  I have nothing else to do."

The milk-woman's ungrateful tale I have heard confirmed,  and that is all

(and a very bad all)  the news I have heard since I came.     Adieu,  dearest

sir  ;  I have good accounts from Norbury,  and Mrs.   Delany charges me

with her kind compliments to you.   I hope James brought back Baron Tott.

Most affectionately and dutifully yours,

F.  B.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  PHILLIPS.

St.  James's Place,  August 25th,  1785.

My most dear Susan's letter is this moment arrived,  just as I was pre-
paring to write to her without so kind an inducement.  You are right in
concluding me entirely under this roof.  My plans are lying in wait for
Mrs.  Delany's,  which depend upon her summons from the Queen,  and her
ability to obey it.  She is far from well,  and unfit at present to remove.
But Miss Cambridge earnestly claims my long-given promise,  and I have
sent her the situation of things.  She is very good,  and very affectionate,
and very sincere,  and I will certainly go to her for one night and day.

I am by no means at ease about my revered Mrs.  Delany.  Dr.  Turton
has been with her.  He says she has a thrush,  and says,  too,  by the state
he finds her in,  that what she must have suffered is very great indeed.
Sweet soul  !  I have all along dreaded some such effect,  from the constraint
she has imposed upon all her feelings.  I would not but be here for the
world.    I draw her from so hard and dangerous a self-set task,  with all the

VOL.  I.  33

374 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

vigilance in my power  ;  and to me,  whenever we are quite alone,  she now
iinburihens her loaded heart,  and allows her tears some vent.  And to see
them upon her venerable cheeks calls forth mine,  as if the friend she laments
had been equally dear to myself.  It is,  indeed,  the most touching spectacle
that can be beheld.

As I told my dear Susan some melancholy circumstances relative to the
examination we are making of her papers,  let me not forget to mention that
she is taken by surprise with respect to those,  but employs me by design
to search for all she thinks I can receive entertainment from  ;  and I have
met with a thousand both amusing and instructive things in the course of
the general survey.

The Queen sent a message the other day to tell I\Irs.  Delany,  that as
her own house would siill require a week or two,  she had ordered apart-
ments to be prepared for her in the Castle.

If she does but recover her strength,  honours and favours such as these,
to her grateful and most loyal heart,  will prove,  I am sure,  very pleasant.

She preserves,  indeed,  in the midst of affliction,  a disposition to happi-
ness, that makes her thankfully accept whatever is put in her way,  to lead
her back to it.  She repulses no attempt even at gaiety,  and delights in
nothing so much as in seeing her sweet niece in high spirits.  1 talk to
her often at Norbury,  and she always hears me with pleasure.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  LOCKE.

St.  James's Place,  August 29,  1785.

How is my beloved Fredy  ?  and can she forgive her most defective,  most
deficient,  but most grateful correspondent 1 — for grateful,  indeed,  more than
ever,  I have felt,  when your dear letters have come to hand  ; — and,  to con-
fess the truth,  most blank and disappointed looked the breakfast-table this
morning,  when not a word from sweet Norbury gave a zest to its fare.  Don't
think me too confident,  my Fredy  ;  'tis your indulgence has spoiled me,  if
spoiled I am  ;  and certain it is I build,  whether 1 will or not,  upon hearing
from you very often,  however little I call for your letters by my own.  And
yet,  when they come,  a strong sense how ill I have earned them,  makes
me fancy I scarcely expected them.  But the moment they cease their kind
frequency,  I find,  by my chagrin,  that my wishes had in fact been my law.

My dear Mrs.  Delany has gone on mending gradually ever since I wrote
last.  She is employing me,  when able,  to look over her papers  :  'tis to
me a sacred task,  fi)r she cannot read what she is trusting me with.  Some-
times, with a magnifying glass,  she examines,  first,  if what she is giving
me is some manuscript of secrecy,  with respect to the affairs or character
of her friends  ;  and as a word suffices to inform her,  she destroys,  unread,
whatever is of that sort.  But this,  though a business she wishes to have
done,  produces letters and memorandums too affecting for her spirits.  Yet
she never,  but by persuasion,  leaves off";  she seems bent upon subduing all
emotions but those that might give pain to others by their suppression.  I
frequently court her to sadness,  for her exertions make me tremble more
than her tears  ;  yet those,  when they do fall,  I can hardly,  indeed,  with all
her example before my eyes,  bear to look at.

Just now we have both of us been quite overset.  In examining some
papers in a pocket-book,  she opened one with two leaves dried in it;  she
held them a little while in silence,  but very calmly,  in her hand,  yet as
something I saw she highly prized  :  she then bade me read what was
written on the envelope  ; — it was,  I think,  these words — "  Two leaves

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  375

picked at Balsover,  by the Duchess of Portland and myself,  in September,
1756,  the 20th year of our most intimate and dear friendship."  I could
hardly read to her the last words,  and,  upon hearing them,  for a little while
she sunk.  But I hastened,  the moment I could,  to other less interesting
papers,  and she forced her attention to them with a strength of resolution
that makes me honour as much as I love her.

To me alone,  she kindly says,  she gives way to any indulgence of sor-
row ;  she fears being misunderstood and thought repining by most others  ;
and,  indeed,  the rest of her friends spending with her but a short time,  she
thinks it her duty to study their comfort,  by appearing composed to them.
Mine,  she justly and sweetly sees,  can only be studied by what is most
relief to herself.  The nobleness of her mind can never have had such op-
portunity of displaying itself as during this last month  ;  and in the number-
less instances in which it now appears,  she seems already raised to that
height I am still selfishly trying to keep her fi'om yet reaching.

AH our movements are at present uncertain  ;  her Windsor house is still
unfinished,  but I suppose it will be fit for her reception by the beginning of
next week,  and I have the happiest reasons for hoping she will then be fit
for it herself.  Her maid has been to see what forwardness it is in,  and this
was her report : — She was ordered to wait upon Miss Goldsworthy,  by the
King's direction,  who lieard of her being sent to inspect the house;  and
there she received commands,  in the name of both King and Queen,  to see
that Mrs.  Delany brought with her nothing but Iwrself and clothes^  as they
insisted upon fitting up her habitation with every thing themselves,  including
not only plate,  china,  glass,  and linen,  but even all sort of stores — wine,
sweetmeats,  pickles,  &c.,  &c.  Their earnestness to save her every care,
and give her every gratification in their power,  is truly benevolent and
amiable.  They seem to know and feel her worth as if they had never
worn crowns,  or,  wearing,  annexed no value to them.

I have just written to Mrs.  Walsingham,  to apologize for my long for-
bearance of that satisfaction,  and to talk of Thames Ditton.  I was informed,
the other day,  by Mr.  Walpole,  that she is going,  or  £i;one,  to see the lakes
in the North,  with Mrs.  Garrick and Miss More.  i\Irs.  Delany had sent
for Mr.  Walpole,  to return him a picture of her uncle Lansdowne,  which
he had lent her to get copied  ;  and I never knew him so entertaining,  for
he exerted himself to the utmost to amuse my dear friend,  who accepted his
attempts with a grace and sweetness that encouraged them,  and gave double
poignancy to all his anecdotes.

I will not say,  forgive me that I talk of her so much  :  who can I talk
of so fitted to my dear Freddy's ear?  I only wish I had time to acquaint
you with every thing that belongs to her,  and every thing that passes.

F.  B.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

Norbury Park,  Sept.  24th,  1785.

I hope,  dearest sir,  you are quite well,  but I long a little to know how you
all go on.

Mr.  Locke fetched me himself from Twickenham on Wednesday.  I had
the pleasure of passing one day while there with IMr.  Hastings,  who came
to dine with Mr.  Cambridge.  I was extremely pleased,  indeed,  with the ex-
traordinary plainness and simplicity of his manners,  and the obliging open-
ness and intelligence of his communication.  He talked of India,  when the
subject was led to,  wath the most unreserved readiness,  yet was never the

376 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

hero of his own tale,  but simply the narrator of such anecdotes or descrip-
tions as Vv'ere called for,  or as fell in naturally with other topics.

Mr.  Wm.  Locke goes on with painting,  in a manner equally rapid in
success with his drawing.  He has just finished a lemale head,  from an idea
rather than a representation of his sister Amelia,  which is,  I think,  nearly the
most beautiful portrait ever I saw.  He is now about a drawing,  from a
Venetian story,  of a son,  who has been unjustly condemned to banishment
and imprisonment by the senate,  in the action of his taking his last leave of
his unhappy father and mother.  I have not yet seen what he has done in it,
but am told his first sketch is wonderfully striking.

I long to know what you think of our dear Dr.  Johnson's meditations,
and if you do not,  in the midst of what you will wish unpublished,  see
stronger than ever the purity of his principles and character,  and only
lament that effusions should be given to the world that are too artless to be
suited to it.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  GAST.

Norbuvy Park,  Nov.  14th,  1785.

Can you,  dear madam,  after a silence so long,  bear to receive a letter
from me,  that has no other motive for being written than a wish to inquire
after your health,  and an anxiety to solicit your pardon for not sooner thank-
ing you for the kind letter with which you last favoured me?

I am happy to find we thought so exactly alike with respect to my most be-
loved friend,  your honoured and truly incomparable brother.  As to his
"  Virginia"*  I believe,  indeed,  it was his wish and intention that every thing
belonging to it should rest in silence and quiet,  till they finally sunk into ob-
livion. With me nothing can,  that ever belonged to him  ;  but I shall keep
all the papers with which you have so kindly entrusted me,  wholly to
myself.

I have great pleasure in telling j^ou,  dear madam,  that our good Kitty
Cooke is evidently restored to some share of her natural,  though long lost
cheerfulness.  Her spirits,  however,  have received a shock which they can
never  \\  holly recover  ;  nor can I woj:ider,  when I consider how every way
irreparable is the loss she has sustained,  and when I feel that,  with the in-
numerable blessings with,  which I am myself encompassed,  scarce a day
passes in which T do not lament him,  and not an incident happens to me
that I do not long to communicate to him.  My confidence in him was one
of the greatest sources of my happiness  ;  his wisdom and his kindness
made my unbounded trust at once my pleasure and my profit.  He thought
no occasion too trifling to be consulted upon ;  and I thought none too im-
portant to be governed in wholly by his advice.  I hardly ever could tell
whether I most loved or admired him,  for my reverence for his abilities
always kept pace with my affection for his virtues.  Unconscious of his own
superiority,  he used frequently to apprehend that when I went more into the
world,  my regard for him would weaken.  But,  even if my nature had been
of so ungratefid a texture,  (which I must hope is not the case,)  he would
still have nothing to fear  ;  for where could I go to meet friendship more
sincere  ?  and whom could I see to inspire a more deserved return?

You will forgive me,  I hope — I know,  indeed you will forgive me — for

*  A tragedy,  by Mr.  Crisp,  which had been produced at Drury Lane theatre by Garrick,
wilh moderate success.     It was printed in 1754.

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  377

entering so largely upon this subject ;  for though you have looked too far
and too clearly to suffer your affliction to overpower you,  I am surs your
best beloved on earth will ever be uppermost in your thoughts,  and the
grateful justice done his honoured memory by her whom you so truly call
his favourite adopted child,  cannot be offensive to you.

Captain Frodsham and his amiable lady and their family are,  I hope,
better than when you were so good as to write last.  I beg my best com-
phments when you see them.

I am now at the house of a friend,  Mr.  Locke,  who lives only six miles
from Chesington,  and whose many similar excellencies,  both of head and
heart,  make me frequently regret that he knew not what a treasure was in
his neighbourhood.  Mr.  Crisp could not,  with all his persevering love of
retirement,  have rejected the acquaintance of a man so nobly worthy his at-
tention and regard,  and whose own good and great qualities would have
taught him the value of our beloved hermit's.  His lady too,  the fair partner
of his worth as well as affection,  being no fine lady,  but,  on the con-
trary, the pattern of all that is amiable and lovely in woman,  would have
conquered unavoidably my dear daddy's secluding spirit.  But it would have
made me,  perhaps,  too happy here,  to have been allowed the friendship I
now experience from this admirable family,  while my first and best friend,
out of my own house,  was still spared me.  *
I remain,  dear madam,  your obliged and

affectionately obedient servant,

F.  BURNEY.

JOURNAL RESUMED.

Addressed to her Father and Sister.

Windsor,  November,  1785. — As you don't quite hate one another,  you
will not,  I hope,  hate me,  for coupling you in my journal.  It will be im-
possible for me to write separate accounts of any length or satisfaction,  so I
crave your joint permissions to address you together.  And now,  this
settled,  I have only to beg of Fortune some events worth recording,  and
only to remind my dear father it is my misfortune,  not fault,  if they will not
happen ;  his misfortune,  too,  I grant,  should he have but common nothings
to read.  As to Susanna,  I heed her not,  for she has been in that practice
all her life,  when we have been separated.     Well,  then, —

Saturday,  Nov.  25th. — I got to Hounslow almost at the same mo-
ment with Mrs.  Astley,  my dear Mrs.  Delany's maid,  who was sent to
meet me.  As soon as she had satisfied my inquiries concerning her lady,
she was eager to inform me that the Queen had drunk tea with Mrs.  Delany
the day before,  and had asked when I should come,  and heard the time;
and that Mrs.  Delany believed she would be with her again that evening,
and desire to see me.

This was rather fidgeting intelligence.  I rather,  in my own mind,  thought
the Queen would prefer giving me the first evening alone with my dear old
friend.

I found that sweet lady not so well as I had hoped,  and strongly affected
by afflicting recollections at sight of me.  With all her gentleness and resig-
nation, bursts of sorrow break from her still,  whenever we are alone together  ;
and with all her gratitude and all her real fondness for the Queen,  her
suffering heart moans internally its irreparable loss ;  for the Duchess of
Portland was a bosom friend — a very Susan to her.

32*

378 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

The Queen herself is most sensible of this,  and while she tries,  by all the
means in her power,  to supply the place of the lamented Duchess of Port-
land, she is the first to observe and to forgive the impossibility of a full
success  ;  indeed,  the circumstances I am continually hearing of her sweet-
ness and benevolence make me more than ever rejoice she has taken my
dear Mrs,  Delany under her immediate protection.

Miss P ,  who is a truly lovely girl,  received me with her usual

warmth of joy,  and was most impatient to whisper me that  "  all the
Princesses intended to come and see me."  She is just at the age to doat
upon an aclo^  and nothing so much delights her as the thought of my pre-
sentations.

My dear Mrs.  Delany,  meanwhile,  fearful of occasioning the smallest
embarrassment,  gave me no hint of any design to notice me,  but only told
me things of the Queen,  that could not but make it my own wish to see her
in her private conduct,  life,  and demeanour.

I did well,  it seems,  to be the champion of Madame de Genlis  ;  for Miss

P tells me Madame de G.  spoke of me to the Queen in terms the most

extraordinary,  and which the Queen has repeated to Mrs.  Delany,  and
which,  when we meet,  perhaps I may tell, — but on paper,  this hint,  me-
thinks,  is pretty well.

Mrs.  Delany acquainted me that the Queen,  in their first interview,  upon
her coming to this house,  said to her,  "  Why did not you bring your friend
Miss Burney with you 1"

My dear Mrs.  Delany was very much gratified by such an attention to
whatever could be thought interesting to her,  but with her usual propriety,
answered that,  in coming to a house of her Majesty's she could not presume
to ask any body without immediate and express permission.  "  The King,
however,"  she added,  "  made the very same inquiry when I saw him next."

SuxDAY,  Nov.  26th. — So now the royal encounters,  for a while at least,
are out of all question.     Nobody came last night,  though Mrs.  Delany,  I

saw,  and Miss P I heard,  in continual expectation  ;  but this morning,

Mr.  Battiscombe,  apothecary to the houseold,  called,  and said that an
express arrived from Germany yesterday afternoon,  with an account of the
death of the Queen's youngest brother.

The Queen,  whose domestic virtues rise upon me every hour,  is strongly
attached to all her family,  and in much afRiction at this news  ;  for though
this brother was quite a boy when she left Germany,  he has twice been to
visit her in England.  None of the Royal Family will appear till the mourn-
ing takes place  ;  the Queen,  perhaps,  may shut herself up still longer.

Afterwards came Lady Louisa Clayton,  who had dined at the Queen's
Lodge,  where she often attends in the place of her sister,  Lady Charlotte
Finch,  whose ill health makes her frequently require assistance in her office
of governess.  The Queen,  she said,  had been expecting this ill news some
timcj though she heard it with great grief.

Lady Louisa is very earnest to oblige Mrs.  Delany,  and most civilly
offered her an apartment for me in her house,  if the single spare bed in this
should be at all wanted by any of her nephews  ;  desiring that no circum-
stance of that sort might hasten my leaving Windsor a moment sooner than
I was obliged to go.

Some time after,  while I was writing to my dear father about my mourn-
ing. Miss P jumped into my room.

"  Oh,  Miss Burney  !  you must come this moment !  Here's a gentleman
here wants to see you,  and he says he has danced with 3^ou."

I could not conceive who this might be,  but she would not let me rest till

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  379

I went into the dining-room,  and there who should I find but Dr.  Lind,  who
might,  perhaps,  have been my partner at Mr.  Bremner's Twelfth Night ball.
He asked very much after my father,  and invited me to see his curiosities  ;

which invitation I shall be glad to accept,  as will Miss P .     He is

married and settled here,  and follows,  as much as he can get practice,  his
profession  ;  but his taste for tricks,  conundrums,  and queer things,  makes
people fearful of his trying experiments upon their constitutions,  and think
him a better conjuror than physician  ;  though I don't know why the same
man should not be both.

At night,  quite incog. ^  quite alone,  and quite privately,  the King came,
and was shut up with Mrs.  Delany for an hour.  It is out of rule for any
of the family to be seen till in mourning,  but he knew she was anxious for
an account of the Queen.  I had a very narrow escape of being surprised
by him,  which would have vexed me,  as he only meant to see J\Irs.  Delany
by herself,  though she says he told her he was very glad to hear I was
come.

Tuesday,  Nov.  29th. — My dear Mrs.  Delany was ill yesterday,  and
to-day she has been much worse.  The Queen sent to ask her to the
Lodge,  but she was obliged to be blooded,  and seemed so full of inflamma-
tion, that I was extremely alarmed for her.  The Queen sent Miss Planta
to see her at night ;  she says the Queen is in much grief for her brother.

Wedxesday,  Nov.  30th. — This morning I had the happiness of seeing
my dear Mrs.  Delany much cooler and more easy,  but a little incident
happened that a good deal affected her.  It shows the tenderness of the
Queen for her in so strong and amiable a manner,  that I must tell it
my dear father and Susan,  who,  I am sure,  like me,  will grow more and
more loyal in hearing it.

When the Duchess of Portland died,  the Duke,  before Mrs.  Delany took
her last leave of Bulstrode,  beo-CTed her to choose and take whatever she
pleased that had belonged to his mother.  Mrs.  Delany refused every thing
that was proposed to her of any value,  but said she would name one thing
herself,  which was all she could accept :  this was a favourite bird of her
friend's — a weaver,  an African bird, — which the Duchess has been very
fond of,  and always kept in her room.  She brought it to town with her,
and thence to Windsor,  and it has grown so dear to her,  that she could
scarce ever look at it with dry eyes.  Imagine,  then,  if I was concerned,
when this morning,  upon coming into the room where we breakfast,  not
seeing the bird perching,  I took down the cage,  and perceived it at the
bottom,  lying dead.

Mrs.  Delany was still in her own room,  weak and unwell,  though better.
It was a particularly unlucky time to tell her of this loss,  which we knew
she would regard as the conclusion of all that had remained to her of Bul-
strode.    While Miss P and I were considering what we could do,  Miss

Planta came in,  to inquire,  from the Queen,  how Mrs.  Delany had passed
the night.  The bird was in my hand,  and I told her the circumstances
belonging to it.  She was sorry,  went to speak with Mrs.  Delany in her
bedroom,  and returned to the Queen.  In less than a quarter of an hour
she came back again,  bringing with her a bird in a very fine cage.  It was
the weaver bird,  she said,  and sent by the Queen,  to know if we thought it
could not be put in the same cage that had belonged to the Duchess,  and
prevent  ^Irs.  Delany from hearing that hers was dead.

This lender desire to spare her any pain,  though without the reward of
having such kindness known to its object,  touched me extremely,  and the
more,  for being told the Queen herself had never possessed but two of those

380 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

birds.  I saw,  however,  the kind deception could not succeed,  for the resem-
blance was very imperfect,  and much as my dear old friend has lost of the
acutencss of her eyesight,  enough,  thank Heaven  !  yet remains to have
discerned the change.  I told IMiss Planta this,  but at the same time added,
that,  if she could leave the bird,  an attention so sweet and so delicate in the
Queen would soften the tale we had to tell,  and be her best solace for the
loss.  Miss Planta answered,  she would certainly leave it ;  for the Queen
had desired that if we thought it could not pass for the same bird,  it might
be left in its own cage,  and given immediately from herself.  This,  accord-
ingly, we did  ;  she heard it more quietly than we expected,  yet not without
emotion  ;  but when we brought her the Queen's bird,  the tears came into
her eyes,  and she looked at it with great tenderness,  and exclaimed,  "  Don't
you,  too,  die in my hands  !"

I have been making a very melancholy visit to Madame de la Fite.  She
sent her little son to invite me.  She cried the whole time I was with her,
and told me she was quite overcome by my visiting Windsor,  now she had
lost her poor Eliza,  who had always looked forward to showing it me her-
self. I felt the strongest compassion for her,  and could not come away till
she grew somewhat more composed,  for she" seemed relieved by indulging
her grief.  She said she would talk of Norbury Park and of Madame de
Genlis when we met next  ;  but now she could only talk of her dear Elise.
She compared herself with poor Mrs.  Hill,  who had lost her Billy,  and
could speak of nothing without recurring to him.  She had just been read-
ing "  Cecilia,"  she told me,  to Princess Elizabeth  ;  but when she came to
that part,  she could not go on for her tears.  Dreadful,  indeed,  and most
irreparable is her loss 1

I afterwards made a short call upon my old friend,  Madame de Luc.
You may remember Miss Cooper,  my dear father,  at Streatham.  I had
the pleasure to see her very comfortably settled in a pretty and neat house,
with a view of the Castle.  She carried me up stairs into Mr.  de Luc's
study,  which is full of instruments,  tools,  and learned litter.  His daughter
lives with them,  and is a good-humoured,  sensible,  prating girl ;  she talked
excessively,  and seemed mighty happy to be so employed.

I then went and aired in the Old Park with dear Mrs.  Delany,  up and
down the fine old avenue,  which,  with the Castle in view,  has so grand a
formality,  that to alter,  and even improve it,  would make me think of
Mason's expression in the English Garden,  "  that taste here were sacrilege."

Dr.  Lind has called regularly every day,  to invite us to see his Indian
curiosities,  and to offer being my esquire in going about Windsor  ;  but Mrs.
Delany is so far from well,  that I could have no pleasure in leaving her.
He is excessively curious about my seeing the King and Queen,  and ear-
nest to know what will pass  :  he is one of their most loyal admirers,  and
very eager that 1 should be another;  and he said to Mrs.  Delany,  when I
was out of the room,  "  I hope,  ma'am,  you will apprise Miss Burney of the
King's quick manner of speaking,  for fear it should disconcert her?"  Mrs.
Delany is much diverted with his solicitude and good humour.

Thursday,  Dec.  1st. — To-day the Queen sent Miss Planta to tell Mrs.
Delany that if she would not yet venture to the Lodge,  she would come to
her in the evening.  Mrs.  Delany accepted the gracious offer,  and,  at tea-
time,  she came,  as well as the King,  and spent two hours here.

Mrs.  Delany told me afterwards,  that the Queen was very low-spirited,
and seemed to wish for nothing but the solace of sitting perfectly quiet.
She is a sweet woman,  and has all the domestic affections warm and strong
in her heart.

Nevertheless they talked of me,  she says,  a good deal ;  and the King

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  381

asked many questions about me.  There is a new play,  he told Mrs.  De-
lany,  coming out ;  "  and it is said to be Miss Burney's  !"  Mrs.  Delany
immediately answered that she knew the report must be untrue.  "  But I
hope she is not idle?"  cried the king.     "  I hope she is writing something?"

What an opportunity,  my dear father,  for the speech Mr.  Cambridge told
you he longed to make — that  "  Miss JB,  had no time to icrite^  for she teas
alivays icorking at her clothes  /"

What Mrs.  Delany said,  1 know not;  but he afterwards inquired what
she thought of my writing a play  ?

"  What,"  said he,  "  do you wish about it,  Mrs.  Delany  ?"

Mrs.  Delany hesitated,  and the Queen then said,

"  I wish what I know Mrs.  Delany does — that she may not  ;  for though
her reputation is so high,  her character,  by all I hear,  is too delicate to suit
with writing for the sta^e."

Sweet Queen  !  I could have kissed the hem of her garment for that
speech,  and I could not resist writing it.

Mrs.  Delany then said,

"  Why my opinion is what I believe to be Miss Burney's own  ;  that it is
too public and hazardous a style of writing for her quiet and fearful turn
of mind."

I have really the grace to be a little ashamed of scribbling this,  but I
know I can scribble nothing my dear father will be more curious to hear.

Upon Mrs.  Delany's coming to Windsor,  the Queen had Cecilia read to
her again  ;  and by M.  de Luc,  who can hardly speak four words of Eng-
lish !   but she told Mrs.  Delany she had no good English reader.

Saturday,  Dec.  3rd. — To-night,  the King and Queen again spent two
hours with Mrs.  Delany.  They were both of them in the greatest alarm
for the Princess Elizabeth,  who has a complaint on the chest,  and whose
sufferings afflict them very deeply.  They go to her two or three times a
day,  but are forbid speaking to her.  How happy for sweet Mrs.  Delany
that,  after the obligations innumerable showered down upon her by the
King and Queen,  she now sees herself the resource to which they fly for
comfort and relief in their own distresses  !     The Queen sees nobody else.

In the midst of all,  the Queen took the good-humoured pleasure of telling
]\Irs.  Delany the kind things said of her guest,  by Madame de la Fite  :-—
"  You two,"  she said,  "  speak of her just alike."

Madame de la Fite sent me a note,  to say she heard the Queen was to pass
the evening with Mrs.  Delany,  and to ask me to pass it with her.  I was
very busy,  however,  at work,  and excused myself till to-morrow,  when Mrs.
Delany,  if well enough,  will go to the Lodge;  and she is very much better.

Miss P and I went to Dr.  Lind's,  and saw his fat,  handsome wife,

who is as tall as himself,  and about six times as big.  We had not time to
stay and look at his collection,  but he showed me one very curious repre-
sentation of the  "  Elephanta,"  in the East Indies,  which has been admirably
executed,  from a drawing of his own,  taken on the spot,  by Paul Sandby.
He told me that when he went to see it,  with a large party of English,  they
carried masons,  carpenters,  and workmen with them,  no less in number than
sixty — in short,  I suppose all who could dig,  saw,  or carry — from the ship
he belonged to,  for he was surgeon to an East Indiaman.  But after all their
toiling in this wonderful excavation,  they found the rock so impenetrable,
and the pillars and idols so stupendous,  that they could only bring away an
odd head or two,  and a few limbs.  I assured him he now fully explained to
me why,  in  "  Gulliver's Travels,"  Swift has ranked in one class,  assassins,
murderers,  robbers,  and virtuosi.

This morning we had better news of the Princess  ;  and  ]\Irs.  Delany went

382 DIARY A^D LETTERS 1785.

again to the Lodge in the evening,  to the Queen.  When I\Irs.  Delany
returned,  she confirmed the good accounts of the Princess Elizabeth's
amendment.  She had told the Queen I was going to-morrow to Thames
Ditton,  for a week  ;  and was asked many questions about my comino;  back,

which the Queen said she was sure I should be glad to do from Mrs.  W •

to Mrs.  Delany.     O most penetrating Queen  !

She gratified Mrs.  Delany,  by many kind speeches,  of being sorry I was
going,  and glad I was returning,  and so forth.  Mrs.  Delany then told her
I had been reading  "The Clandestine Marriage"  to her,  which the Queen
had recommended,  and she thanked her majesty for the very great pleasure
she had received from it.

"  O then,"  cried the Queen,  "  if Miss Burney reads to you,  what a pleasure
you must have to make her read her own works I"

Mrs.  Delany laughed,  and exclaimed,

*'  O ma'am  !  read her own works  ! — your majesty has no notion of Miss
Burney  !     I believe she would as soon die  !"

This,  of course,  led to a great deal of discussion,  in the midst of which
the Queen said,

*'  Do you know Dr.  Burney,  Mrs.  Delany 1"

"Yes,  ma'am,  extremely well,"  answered Mrs.  Delany.

"  I think him,"  said the Queen,  "  a very agreeable and entertaining man."

There,  my dear father 1 said I not well just now,  O most penetrating
queen  ?

So here ends my Windsor journal,  part the first.  To-morrow morning I
go for my week to Thames Ditton.

Windsor,  Wednesday,  Dec.  14th,  1785. — Yesterday I returned to my
dear Mrs.  Delany,  from Thames Ditton,  and had the great concern of finding
her very unwell.  Mr.  Barnard Dewes,  one of her nephews,  and his little
girl,  a sweet child of seven years old,  were with her,  and,  of course.  Miss

P .    She had been hurried,  though only with pleasure,  and her emotion,

first in receiving,  and next in entertaining them,  had brought on a little
fever.  Her health,  now,  is fearfully precarious,  and her days,  to me,  are
most tremblingly precious.  Everything shatters her dear feeble frame;
she can bear neither joy nor sorrow  ;  and how few are those placid days
that are touched by neither!  Her mind,  however,  has still its original
strength,  and all her faculties are in their fullest vigour  ;  'tis only the  "  tene-
ment of clay"  that has suffered by time.

She revived in the afternoon,  and I had the pleasure of reading to her a
play of Shakspeare's,  that she had not heard for forty years,  and which I
had never read since I was a child, — "  The Comedy of Errors ;" — and we
found in it all the entertainment belonging to an excellent farce,  and all the
objections belonging to an indifferent play  ;  but the spirit with which she
enters into every part of every thing she hears,  gives a sort of theatric effect
to whatever is read to her ;  and my spirits rise in her presence,  with the joy
,  of exciting hers.

But I am now obliged,  by what follows,  to confess a little discussion I
have had with my dear Mrs.  Delany,  almost all the time I spent with her
at first,  and now again upon my return,  relative to the royal interview,  so
long in expectation.

Immediately upon my arrival,  she had imagined,  by what had preceded
it,  that a visit would instantly ensue here,  and I should have a summons to
appear;  but the death of the queen's brother,  which was known the very
night I came,  confined her majesty and all the family for some days to the
Lodge  ;  and the dangerous illness'of the Princess Elizabeth next took place,
in occupying all their thoughts,  greatly to their credit.    My dear old friend,

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  383

however,  earnest I should have an honour which her grateful reverence for
their majesties makes her regard very highly,  had often wished me to stay
in ihe room when they came to see her,  assuring me that though they were
so circumstanced as not to send for a stranger,  she knew they would be
much pleased to meet with me.  This,  however,  was more than I could
assent to,  without infinite pain,  and that she was too kind to make a point
of my enduring.

Yesterday,  upon my return,  she began again the same reasoning;  the
Princess Elizabeth had relapsed,  and she knew,  during her being worse,
there was no chance the Queen would take any active step towards a meet-
ing. "But she inquires,"  continued Mrs.  Delany,  "so much about you,
and is so earnest that you should be with me,  that I am sure she wants to
see and converse with you.  You will see her,  too,  with more ease to your-
self by being already in the room,  than from being summoned.  I would not
for the world put this request to you,  if I were not sure she wishes it."

There was no withstanding the word  "  request"  from Mrs.  Delany,  and,
little as I liked the business,  I could not but comply.  What next was to be
done,  was to beg directions for the rencounter.

Now though you,  my dear father,  have had an audience,  and you,  my
dear Susan,  are likely enough to avoid one,  yet I think the etiquettes on
these occasions will be equally new to you both  ;  for one never inquired
into them,  and the other has never thought of them.  Here,  at Windsor,
where more than half the people we see are belonging to the court,  and
where all the rest are trying to be in the same predicament,  the intelligence
I have obtained must be looked upon as accurate  ;  and I shall therefore give
it,  in full confidence you will both regard it as a valuable addition to your
present stock of court knowledge,  and read it with that decent awe the dig-
nity of the topic requires  !

DIRECTIONS FOR A PRIVATE ENCOUNTER WITH THE ROYAL

FAMILY.

But no,  they will take me so long,  that I had better put them on a sepa-
rate sheet,  and go on with my journal while all is fresh in my memory.  I
am sorry to have wasted so solemn a preamble,  but hope you will have the
generosity to remember it when I produce my directions,  as I cannot pos-
sibly undertake writing another.

To come,  then,  now,  to those particular instructions I received myself,
and which must not be regarded as having any thing to do with general
rules.

"  I do beg of you,"  said dear Mrs.  Delany,  "  when the Queen or the
King speak to you,  not to answer with mere monosyllables.  The Queen
often complains to me of the difficulty with which she can get any conver-
sation, as she not only always has to start the subjects,  but,  commonly,
entirely to support them  :  and she says there is nothing she so much loves
as conversation,  and nothing she finds so hard to get.  She is always best
pleased to have the answers that are made lead on to further discourse.
Now,  as I know she wishes to be acquainted with you,  and converse with
you,  I do really entreat you not to draw back from her,  nor to stop conver-
sation with only answering Yes,  or No."

This was a most tremendous injunction  ;  however,  I could not but pro-
mise her I would do the best I could.

To this,  nevertheless,  she readily agreed,  that if upon entering the room,
they should take no notice of me,  I might quietly retire.  And that,  believe
me,"  will not be very slowly!     They cannot find me in this house without

384 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

knowing who I am,  and therefore they can be at no loss whether to speak
to me or not,  from incertitude.

In the midst of all this,  the Queen came!

I heard the thunder at the door,  and,  panic struck,  away flew all my
resolutions and agreements,  and away after them flew I !

Don't be angry,  my dear father — I would have stayed if I could,  and I
meant to stay  ;  but,  when the moment came,  neither my preparations nor
intentions availed,  and I arrived at my own room,  ere I well knew I had
left the drawing-room,  and quite breathless between the race 1 ran with
Miss Port and the joy of escaping.

Mrs.  Delany,  though a little vexed at the time,  was not afterwards,  when
she found the Queen very much dispirited by a relapse of the poor Princess
Elizabeth.  She inquired if I was returned,  and hoped I now came to make
a longer stay.

Friday,  Dec.  16th. — Yesterday morning we had a much better account
of the Princess Elizabeth  ;  and Mrs.  Delany said to me,

"Now you will escape no longer,  for if their uneasiness ceases,  I am
sure they will send for you,  when they come next."

To be sent for,  I confessed to her,  would really be more formidable than
to be surprised  ;  but to pretend to be surprised would answer no purpose in
making the meeting easy to me,  and therefore I preferred letting the matter
take its chance.

After dinner,  while Mrs.  Delany was left alone,  as usual,  to take a little
rest, — for sleep it but seldom proves, — Mr.  B.  Dewes,  his little daughter.
Miss Port,  and myself,  went into the drawing-room.  And here,  while,  to
pass the time,  I was amusing the little girl with teaching her some Christ-
mas games,  in which her father and cousin joined,  Mrs.  Delany came in.
We were all in the middle of the room,  and in some confusion  ; — but she
had but just come up to us to inquire what was going forwards,  and I was
disentangling myself from Miss Dewes,  to be ready to fly off"  if any one
knocked at the street-door,  when the door of the drawing-room was again
opened,  and a large man,  in deep mourning,  appeared at it,  entering and
shutting it himself without speaking.

A ghost could not more have scared me,  when I discovered by its glitter
on the black,  a star  !     The general disorder had prevented his being seen,

except by myself,  who was always on the watch,  till Miss P ,  turning

round,  exclaimed,  "  The King  ! — Aunt,  the King  !"

0 mercy  !  thought I,  that I were but out of the room !  which way shall
I escape  ]  and how pass him unnoticed  ?  There is but the single door at
which he entered,  in the room  !  Every one scampered out of the way  :
Miss P ,  to stand next the door  ;  Mr.  Bernard Dewes to a corner oppo-
site it ;  his little girl clung to me  ;  and Mrs.  Delany advanced to meet his
Majesty,  who,  after quietly looking on till she saw him,  approached,  and
inquired how she did.

He then spoke to Mr.  Bernard,  whom he had already met tw^o or three
times here.

1 had now retreated to the wall,  and purposed gliding softly,  though
speedily,  out of the room  ;  but before I had taken a single step,  the King,
in a loud whisper to Mrs.  Delany,  said,  "  Is that Miss Burney V — and on
her answering,  "  Yes,  sir,"  he bowed,  and with a countenance of the most
perfect good-humour,  came close up to me.

A most profound reverence on my part arrested the progress of my in-
tended retreat.

"  How long have you been come back.  Miss Burney  ?"

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIJNA.  3Q5

"  Two days,  sir."

Unluckily he did not hear nrie,  and repeated his question  ;  and whether
the second time he heard me or not,  I don't know,  but he made a little civil
inclination of his head,  and went back to  ]\Irs.  Delany.

He insisted she should sit down,  though he stood himself,  and began to
give her an account of the Princess Elizabeth,  who once again was reco-
vering, and trying,  at present,  James's Powders.  She had been blooded,
he said,  twelve times in this last fortnight,  and had lost seventy-five ounces
of blood,  besides undergoing blistering and other discipline.  He spoke of
her illness with the strongest emotion,  and seemed quite filled with concern
for her danger and sufferings.

Mrs.  Delany next inquired for the younger children.  They had all,  he
said,  the whooping-cough,  and were soon to be removed to Kew.

"  Not,"  added he,  "  for any other reason than change of air for them-
selves ;  though I am pretty certain I have never had the distemper myself,
and the Queen thinks she has not had it either : — we shall take our chance.
When the two eldest had it,  I sent them away,  and would not see them till
it was over ;  but now there are so many of them that there would be no
end to separations,  so I let it take its course."

Mrs.  Delany expressed a good deal of concern at his running this risk,
but he laughed at it,  and said,  he was much more afraid of catching the
rheumatism,  which has been threatening one of his shoulders lately.  How-
ever, he added,  he should hunt the next morning,  in defiance of it.

A good deal of talk then followed about his own health,  and the extreme
temperance by which he preserved it.  The fault of his constitution,  he
said,  was a tendency to excessive fat,  which he kept,  however,  in order,  by
the most vigorous exercise,  and the strictest attention to a simple diet.

When Mrs.  Delany was beginning to praise his forbearance,  he
stopped her.

"  No,  no,"  he cried,  "  'tis no virtue  ;  I only prefer eating plain and
little,  to growing diseased and infirm."

During this discourse,  I stood quietly in the place where he had first
spoken to me.  His quitting me so soon,  and conversing freely and easily
with Mrs.  Delany,  proved so delightful a relief to me,  that I no longer
wished myself away  ;  and the moment my first panic from the surprise
was over,  I diverted myself with a thousand ridiculous notions,  of my own
situation.

The Christmas games we had been showing Miss Dewes,  it seemed as it
we were still performing,  as none of us thought it proper to move,  though
our manner of^  standing reminded one of puss in the corner.     Close to the

door was posted Miss P ;  opposite her,  close to the wainscot,  stood Mr.

Dewes  ;  at just an equal distance from him,  close to a window,  stood my-
self; Mrs.  Delany,  though seated,  was at the opposite side to Miss P ;

and his Majesty kept pretty much in the middle of the room.  The little
girl,  who kept close to me,  did not break the order,  and I could hardly help
expecting to be beckoned with a puss  !  puss  !  puss  !  to change places with
one of my neighbours.

This idea,  afterwards,  gave way to another more pompous.  It seemed
to me we were acting a play.  There is something so little like common
and real life,  in every body's standing,  while talking,  in a room full of
chairs,  and standing,  too,  so aloof from each other,  that I almost thought
myself upon a stage,  assisting in the representation of a tragedy, — in which
the King played his own part,  of the king ;  Mrs.  Delany that of a venerable
confidante  ;  Mr.  Dewes,  his respectful attendant  ,*  Miss P ,  a suppliant

VOL.  I.  33

386 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

virgin,  waiting encouragement to bring forward some petition  ;  Miss Dewes,
a young orphan,  intended to move the royal compassion  ;  and myself, — a
very solemn,  sober,  and decent mute.

These fancies,  however,  only regaled me while I continued a quiet spec-
tator, and without expectation of being called into play.  But the King,  I
have reason to think,  meant only to give me time to recover from my first
embarrassment ;  and I feel myself infinitely obliged to his good breeding
and consideration,  which perfectly answered,  for before he returned to me
I was entirely recruited.

To go back to my narration.

"When the discourse upon health and strength was over,  the King went
up to the table,  and looked at a book of prints,  from Claude Lorraine,  which
had been brought down for Miss Dewes ;  but Mrs.  Delany,  by mistake,
told him they were for me.     He turned over a leaf or two,  and then said —

"  Pray,  does Miss Burney draw,  too  ?"

The too was pronounced rather civilly.

*'  I believe not,  sir,"  answered Mrs.  Delany ;  "  at least,  she does
not tell  ?"

"  Oh  !"  cried he,  laughing,  "  that's nothing  !  she is not apt to tell ;  she
never does tell,  you know  ! — Her father told me that himself.  He told me
the whole history of her Evelina.  And I shall never forget his face when
he spoke of his feelings at first taking up the book  ! — he looked quite
frightened,  just as if he was doing it that moment !  I never can forget his
face while I live  !"

Then coming up close to me,  he said —

"  But what 1 — what  ? — how was it  ?"

"  Sir" — cried I,  not well understanding him.

"How came you — how happened it — what? — what?"

"  I — I only wrote,  sir,  for my own amusement, — only in some odd,  idle
hours."

"  But your publishing — your printing, — how was that?"

"That was only,  sir, — only because — "

I hesitated most abominably,  not knowing how to tell him a long story,
and growing terribly confused at these questions: — besides, — to say the
truth,  his own  "what!  what?"  so reminded me of those vile Probationary
Odes,  that,  in the midst of all my flutter,  I was really hardly able to keep
my countenance.

The Wliat!  was then repeated,  with so earnest a look,  that,  forced to say
something,  I stammeringly answered —

"  I thought — sir — it would look very well in print I"

I do really flatter myself this is the silliest speech I ever made  !  I am
quite provoked with myself for it ;  but a fear of laughing made me eager to
utter any thing,  and by no means conscious,  till 1 had spoken,  of what I
was saying.

He laughed very heartily himself, — well he might — and walked away to
enjoy it,  crying out,

"  Very fair,  indeed  !  that's being very fair and honest I"

Then,  returning to me again,  he said,

"  But your father — how came you not to show him what you wrote?"

"  I was too much ashamed of it,  sir,  seriously."

Literal truth that,  I am sure.

"  And how did he find it out?"

"  I don't know myself,  sir.     He never would tell me."

Literal truth again,  my dear father,  as you can testify.

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  397

"  But how did you get it printed  ?"

"I sent it,  sir,  to a bookseller my father never employed,  and that I
never had seen myself,  Mr.  Lowndes,  in full hope by that means he never
would hear of it."

"But how could you manage that?"

"  By means of a brother,  sir."

a O  ! — you confided in a brother,  then?"

"Yes,  sir — that is,  for the publication."

"  What entertainment you must have had from hearing people's conjec-
tures, before you were known  !     Do you remember any of them  ?"

"  Yes,  sir,  many."

"And what?"

"  I heard that Mr.  Baretti laid a wager it was written by a man ;  for no
woman,  he said,  could have kept her own counsel."

This diverted him extremely.

"  But how was it,"  he continued,  "  you thought most likely for your
father to discover you?"

"Sometimes,  sir,  I have supposed I must have dropt some of the manu-
script ;  sometimes,  that one of my sisters betrayed me."

"  O  !  your sister? — what,  not your brother?"

"No,  sir;  he could not,  for — "

I was going on,  but he laughed so much I could not be heard,  exclaiming,

"Vastly well!  I see you are of Mr.  Baretti's mind,  and think your
brother could keep your secret,  and not your sister?"

"  Well,  but,"  cried he presently,  "  how was it first known to you,  you
were betrayed  ?"

"  By a letter,  sir,  from another sister.  I was very ill,  and in the country  ;
and she wrote me word that my father had taken up a review,  in which the
book was mentioned,  and had put his finger upon its name,  and said —
'  Contrive to get that book for me.'  "

"  And when he got it,"  cried the King,  "  he told me he was afraid of
looking at it !  and never can I forget his face when he mentioned his first
opening it.     But you have not kept your pen unemployed ail this time  ?"

"  Indeed I have,  sir."

"But why?"

"  I — I believe I have exhausted myself,  sir."

He laughed aloud at this,  and went and told it to Mrs.  Delany,  civilly
treating a plain fact as a mere bon mot.

Then,  returning,  to me again,  he said,  more seriously,  "  But you have
not determined against writing any more  ?"

"  N— o,  sir—"

"  You have made no vow — no real resolution of that sort  ?"

"  No,  sir."

"  You only wait for inclination  ?"

How admirably Mr.  Cambridge's speech might have come in here  !

"  No,  sir."

A very civil little bow spoke him pleased with this answer,  and he went
again to the middle of the room,  where he chiefly stood,  and addressing us
in general,  talked upon the different motives of writing,  concluding with,

"  I believe there is no constraint to be put upon real genius  ;  nothing but
inclination can set it to work.  Miss Burney,  however,  knows best."  And
then,  hastily returning to me,  he cried,  "  What?  what  ?"

"  No,  sir,  I — I — believe not,  certainly,"  quoth I,  very awkwardly,  for I
seemed taking a violent compliment only as my due  ;  but I knew not how
to put him off as I would another person.

388 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

He then made some inquiries concerning the pictures with which the
room is hung,  and which are all Mrs.  Delany's own painting ;  and a little
discourse followed,  upon some of the masters whose pictures she has copied.

This was all with her  ;  for nobody ever answers him without being im-
mediately addressed by him.

He then came to me again,  and said,

"  Is your father about any thing,  at present 1"

"  Yes,  sir,  he goes on,  when he has time,  with his history,"

"  Does he write quick  ?"

"  Yes,  sir,  when he writes from himself;  but in his history,  he has so
many books to consult,  that sometimes he spends three days in finding
authorities for a single passage."

"  Very true  ;  that must be unavoidable."

He pursued these inquiries some time,  and then went again to his general
station before the fire,  and Mrs.  Delany inquired if he meant to hunt the
next day.     "  Yes,"  he answered,  and,  a little pointedly,  Mrs.  Delany said,

"  I would the hunted could but feel as much pleasure as the hunter."

The King understood her,  and with some quickness,  called out,  "  Pray
what did you hunt  ?"

Then,  looking round at us all, —

"  Did you know,"  he said,  "  that Mrs.  Delany once hunted herself? — and
in a long gown,  and a great hoop  ?"

It seems she had told his Majesty an adventure of that sort which had
befallen her in her youth,  from some accident in which her will had no
share.

While this was talking over,  a violent thunder was made at the door.  I
was almost certain it was the Queen.  Once more I would have given any
thing to escape  ;  but in vain.  I had been informed that nobody ever quitted
the royal presence,  after having been conversed with,  till motioned to
withdraw.

Miss P ,  according to established etiquette on these occasions,  opened

the door which she stood next,  by putting her hand behind her,  and slid out,
backwards,  into the hall to light the Queen in.  The door soon opened
again,  and her Majesty entered.

Immediately seeing the King,  she made him a low courtesy,  and cried, —

"  Oh,  your Majesty is here  !"

"  Yes,"  he cried,  "  I ran here without speaking to any body."

The Queen had been at the lower Lodge to see the Princess Elizabeth,  as
the King had before told us.

She hastened up to Mrs.  Delany,  with both her hands held out,  saying,

"  My dear Mrs.  Delany,  how are you 1"

Instantly after,  I felt her eye on my face.  I believe,  too,  she courtesied
to me  ;  but though I saw the bend,  I was too near-sighted to be sure it was
intended for me.  I was hardly ever in a situation more embarrassing ;  I
dared not return what I was not certain I had received,  yet considered my-
self as appearing quite a monster,  to stand stiff-necked,  if really meant.

Almost at the same moment,  she spoke to Mr.  Bernard Dewes,  and then
nodded to my little clinging girl.

I was now really ready to sink,  with horrid uncertainty of what I was
doing,  or what I should do, — when his Majesty,  who I fancy saw my
distress,  most good-humouredly said to the Queen something,  but I was too
much flurried to remember what except these words, — "  I have been telling
Miss Burney — "

Relieved from so painful a dilemma,  I immediately dropped a courtesy.

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  389

She made one to me in the same moment,  and,  with a very smiling coun-
tenance, came up to me  ;  but she could not speak,  for the King went on
talking,  eagerly,  and very gaily,  repeating to her every word I had said
during our conversation upon Evelina,  its publication,  &c.  &c.

Then he told her of Baretti's wager,  saying, — "  But she heard of a great
many conjectures about the author,  before it was known,  and of Baretti,  an
admirable thing ! — he laid a bet it must be a man,  as no woman,  he said,
could have kept her own counsel  !"

The Queen,  laughing a little,  exclaimed —

"  Oh,  that is quite too bad an affront to us  ! — Don't you think so  ?"  ad-
dressing herself to me,  with great gentleness of voice and manner.

I assented  ;  and the King continued his relation,  which she listened to
with a look of some interest ;  but when he told her some particulars of my
secrecy,  she again spoke to me.

"  But your sister was your confidant,  was she not  ?"

"  Yes,  ma'am."

My sisters,  I might have said,  but I was always glad to have done.

"  Oh,  yes  !"  cried the King,  laughing  ;  "  but I assure you she is of
Baretti's opinion herself;  for I asked her if she thought it was her sister or
her brother that betraved her to her father  ? — and she says her sister,  she
thinks."

Poor Esther! — but I shall make her amends by what follows;  for the
Queen,  again addressing me,  said —

"  But to betray to a father is no crime — don't you think so  ?"

I agreed;  and plainly thought she saw Esther,  if Esther it was,  had only
done right.

The King then went on,  and when he had finished his narration the Queea
took her seat.

She made Mrs.  Delany sit next her,  and Miss P brought her some

tea.

The King,  meanwhile,  came to me again,  and said, — "Are you
musical 1"

"  Not a performer,  sir."

Then,  going from me to the Queen,  he cried, — "  She does not play."

I did not hear what the Queen answered  ;  she spoke in a low voice,  and
seemed much out of spirits.

They now talked together a little while,  about the Princess Elizabeth,
and the King mentioned having had a very promising account from her
physician,  Sir George Baker  ;  and the Queen soon brightened up.

The King then returned to me,  and said, —

"  Are you sure you never play  ? — never touch the keys at all  ?"

"  Never to acknowledge it,  sir."

«  Oh !  that's it !"  cried he ;  and flying to the Queen,  cried,  "  She does
play — but not to acknowledge it !"

I was now in a most horrible panic once more;  pushed so very home,  I
could answer no other than I did,  for these categorical questions almost con-
strain categorical answers  ;  and here,  at Windsor,  it seems an absolute point
that whatever they ask must be told,  and whatever they desire must be
done.  Think but then of my consternation,  in expecting their commands
to perform  !     My dear father,  pity me  !  •

The ea^er air with which he returned to me fully explained what was to
follow,  f hastily,  therefore,  spoke first,  in order to stop him,  crying—"  I
never,  sir,  played to any body but myself! — never  !"

*'  No  ?"  cried he,  looking incredulous  ;  "  what,  not to "

33*

390 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

"  Not even to me,  sir !"  cried my kind Mrs.  Delany,  who saw what was
threatening me.

"  No? — are you sure?"  cried he,  disappointed  :  *'  but — but you'll "

"  I have never,  sir,"  cried I very earnestly,  "  played in my life,  but when
I could hear nobody else — quite alone,  and from a mere love of any
musical sounds."

He repeated all this to the Queen,  whose answers I never heard  ;  but
when he once more came back,  with a face that looked unwilling to give it
up,  in my fright I had recourse to dumbshow,  and raised my hands in a
supplicating fold,  with a most begging countenance to be excused.  This,
luckily,  succeeded  ;  he understood me very readily,  and laughed a little,  but
made a sort of desisting,  or rather complying little bow,  and said no more
about it.

I felt very much obliged to him,  for I saw his curiosity was all alive.  I
wished I could have kissed his hand.

He still,  however,  kept me in talk,  and still upon music.

"  To me,"  said he,  "  it appears quite as strange to meet with people who
have no ear for music,  and cannot distinguish one air from another,  as to
meet with people who are dumb.  Lady Bell Finch once told me that she
had heard there was some difference between a psalm,  a minuet,  and a
country dance,  but she declared they all sounded alike to her!  There
are people who have no eye for difference of colour.  The Duke of
Marlborough actually cannot tell scarlet from green!"

He then told me an anecdote of his mistaking one of those colours for
another,  which was very laughable,  but I do not remember it clearly enough
to write it.  How unfortunate for true virtuosi that such an eye should
possess objects worthy the most discerning — the treasures of Blenheim  !

"  I do not find,  though,"  added his Majesty,  "  that this defect runs in his
family,  for Lady Di Beauclerk draws very finely."

He then went to Mr.  Bernard Dewes.

Almost instantly upon his leaving me,  a very gentle voice called out —
"  Miss Burney  !"

It was the Queen's.  I walked a little nearer her,  and a gracious inclina-
tion of her head made me go quite up to her.

"  You have been,"  she said,  "  at Mrs.  Walsingham's  ?"

"  Yes,  ma'am."

"  She has a pretty place,  I believe  ?"

"  Yes,  ma'am."

"  Were you ever there before  ?"

"  Yes,  ma'am."

Oh,  shocking  !  shocking  !  thought I ;  what will Mrs.  Delany say to all
these monosyllables  ?

"  Has not she lately made some improvements  ?"

"  Yes,  ma'am  ;  she has built a conservatory."

Then followed some questions about its situation,  during which the King
came up to us  ;  and she then,  ceasing to address me in particular,  began a
general sort of conversation,  with a spirit and animation that I had not at all
expected,  and which seemed the result of the great and benevolent pleasure
she took in giving entertainment to Mrs.  Delany.

The subject was the last drawing-room,  which she had been in town to
keep on Thursday,  during the dense fog.

"  I assure you,  ma'am,"  cried she to Mrs.  Delany,  "  it was so dark there
was no seeing any thing,  and no knowing any body.  And Lady Harcourt
could be of no help to me to tell me who people were,  for when it was light,
she can't see  ;  and now it was dark,  I could not see myself.    So it was in

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  391

vain for me to go on in that manner,  without knowing which I had spoken
to,  and which was waiting for me  ;  so I said to Lady Harcourt,  "  We had
better stop,  and stand quite still,  for I don't no any body no more than you
do.  But if we stand still,  they will all come up in the end,  and we must
ask them who they are,  and if I have spoken to them yet,  or not :  for it is
very odd to do it,  but what else can we manage  ?"

Her accent is a little foreign,  and very prettily so ;  and her emphasis has
that sort of changeability,  which gives an interest to every thing she utters.

But her language is rather peculiar than foreign.

*'  Besides,"  added she,  with a very significant look, "  if we go on here in
the dark,  maybe I shall push against some body,  or some body will push
against me — which is the more likely to happen !"

She then gave an account of some circumstances which attended the dark-
ness, in a manner not only extremely lively,  but mixed,  at times,  with an
archness and humour that made it very entertaining.  She chiefly addressed
herself to Mrs.  Delany  ;  and to me,  certainly,  she would not,  separately,
have been so communicative  ;  but she contrived,  with great delicacy,  to in-
clude me in the little party,  by frequently looking at me,  and always with
an expression that invited my participation in the conversation.  And,  in-
deed, though I did not join in words,  I shared very openly in the pleasure
of her recital.

"  Well,"  she continued,  *'  so there was standing by me a man that I
could not see in the face  ;  but I saw the twisting of his bow  ;  and I said to
Lady Harcourt,  '  I am sure that must be nobody but the Duke of Dorset.'
— '  Dear,'  she says,  ^  how can you tell that V — '  Only ask,'  said I ;  and so
it proved he."

"  Yes,"  cried the King,  "  he is pretty well again  ;  he can smile again,
now  !"

It seems his features had appeared to be fixed,  or stiffened.  It is said,
he has been obliged to hold his hand to his mouth,  to hide it,  ever since his
stroke, — which he refuses to acknowledge was paralytic.

The Queen looked as if some comic notion had struck her,  and after
smiling a little while to herself,  said,  with a sort of innocent archness,  very
pleasing,

"  To be sure,  it is very wrong to laugh at such things, — I know that ;
but yet,  I could not help thinking,  when his mouth was in that way,  that it
was very lucky people's happiness did not depend upon his smiles!"

Afterwards,  she named other persons,  whose behaviour and manners
pointed them out to her,  in defiance of obscurity.

"  A lady,"  said she,  "  came up to me,  that I could not see,  so I was
forced to ask who she was  ;  and immediately she burst into a laugh.  'O,'
says I,  '  that can be only Mrs.  De Rolles  !' — and so it proved."

Methinks by this trait she should be a near relation to my Miss Larolles  !

When these,  and some more anecdotes which I do not so clearly remem-
ber, were told,  the King left us,  and went to Mr.  Bernard Dewes.  A pause,
ensuing,  I too,  drew back,  meaning to return to my original station,  which,
being opposite the fire,  was never a bad one.  But the moment I began re-
treating, the Queen,  bending forward,  and speaking in a very low voice,
said,  "  Miss Burney  !" — and,  upon my coming up to her,  almost in a
whisper,  cried,  "  But shall we have no more — nothing more  ?"

I could not but understand her,  and only shook my head.

The Queen then,  as if she thought she had said too much,  with great
sweetness and condescension,  drew back herself,  and very delicately said,

"  To be sure it is,  I own,  a very home question,  for one who has not the
pleasure to know you."

392 DIARY A\D LETTERS 1785.

I was quite ashamed of this apology,  but did not know what to say to it.
But how amiable a simplicity in her speaking of herself in such a style, —
"  for one who has not the pleasure to know you."

"  But,  indeed,"  continued she,  presently,  "  I would not say it,  only tliat I
think from what has been done,  there is a power to do so much good — and
good to young people — which is so very good a thing — that I cannot help
wishing it could be."

I felt very gratetul for this speech,  and tor the very soft manner in which
she said it ;  and I very much wished to thank her,  and was trying to mutter
something though not very intelligibly,  when the King suddenly coming up
to us,  inquired what was going forward.

The Queen readily repeated her kind speech.

The King eagerly undertook to make my answer for me,  crying,

"  O,  but she will write  ! — she only waits for inclination — she told me so."
Then speaking to me,  he said,  "  What is it not so  ?"

I only laughed a little ;  and he again said to the Queen,

■  "  She will write  !    She told me,  just now,  she had made no vow against it."

*'  No,  no,"  cried the Queen,  "  I hope not,  indeed 1"

"  A vow  !"  cried dear iMrs.  Delany,  "  no,  indeed,  I hope she would not be
so wicked — she who can so do what she does  !"

"  But she has not,"  said the King,  earnestly  ;  "  she has owned that to me
already."

What excessive condescension,  my dear padre!

"I only wish,"  cried Mrs.  Delany,  "it could be as easily done,  as it is
earnestly and universally desired."

"  I doubt it not to be so desired,"  said the Queen.

I was quite ashamed of all this,  and quite sorry to make no acknowledg-
ment of their great condescension in pressing such a subject,  and pressing it
so much in earnest.  But I really could get out nothing,  so that's the truth ;
and I wish I could give a better account of my eloquence,  my dear padie
and Susan.

1 cannot,  however,  in justice any more than in inclination,  go on,  till 1
stop to admire the sweetness of the Queen,  and the consideration of the King,
in each making me a party in their general conversation,  before they made
any particular address to me.

They afterwards spoke of Mr.  Webb,  a Windsor musician,  who is master
to the young princesses,  and who has a nose,  from some strange calamity,
of so enormous a size that it covers the middle of his face.  I never saw so
frightful a deformity.     Mrs.  Delany told the Queen I had met with him,

accidentally,  when he came to give a lesson to Miss P ,  and had been

quite startled by him.

"  I dare say so ;"  said her majesty.  "  I must tell Miss Burney a little
trait of Sophia,  about Mr.  Webb."

A small table was before the queen,  who always has it brought when
she is seated,  to put her tea or work upon,  or,  when she has neither,  to
look comfortable,  I believe;  for certainly it takes off much formality in a
standing circle.  And close to this,  by the gracious motion of her head,  she
kept me.

"  When first,"  continued she,  "  Mr.  Webb was to come to Sophia,  I told
her he had had some accident to disfigure his whole face,  by making him
an enormous nose ;  but I desired her to remember this was a misfortune,
for which he ought,  to be pitied,  and that she must be sure not to laugh at
it,  nor stare at it.  And she minded this very well,  and behaved always
very properly.     But,  while Lady Cremorne was at the Lodge,  she was with

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  393

Sophia when Mr.  Webb came to give her a lesson.  As soon as he was
named,  she coloured very red,  and ran up to Lady Cremorne,  and said to
her in a whisper,  '  Lady Cremorne,  Mr.  Webb has got a very great nose,
but that is only to be pitied — so mind you don't laugh  !'  "

This little princess is just nine years old  !

The King joined us while the Queen was telling this,  and added,  "  Poor
Mr.  Webb was very much discountenanced when he first saw me,  and tried
to hide his nose,  by a great nosegay,  or 1 believe only a branch,  which he
held before it:  but really that had so odd a look,  that it was worse,  and
more ridiculous,  than his nose.  However,  I hope he does not mind me
now,  for I have seen him four or five times."

After this,  Mrs.  Delany mentioned Madame de la Fite,  and her son.

The queen said  "  He is a pretty little boy;  and when he goes to school,
it will do him good."

"  Where will she send him?"  said the King.

The Queen,  looking at me,  with a smile answered,

"  To the school where Mr.  Locke puts his sons.     I knew that !"

"  And where is that?"

"  Indeed I don't know  ;  where is it,  Miss Burney  ?"

"  At Cheam,  ma'am."

"  Oh,  at young Gilpin's  ?"  cried the King.     "  Is it near Mr.  Locke's  ?"

"  Yes,  sir  ;  within about six miles,  I believe."

The Queen,  then,  with a little arch smile,  that seemed to premise she
should make me stare,  said,

"  It was there,  at Mr.  Locke's,  your sister laid in  !"

"  O yes,  ma'am  !"  cried I,  out of breath with surprise.

The King repeated my O yes !  and said,  "  I fancy — by that O — you
were frightened a little for her  ?     What  ?"

I could not but assent to that ;  and the King,  who seemed a good deal
diverted at the accident — for he loves little babies too well to look upon it,
as most people would,  to be a shocking business — questioned me about it.

"  How was it 1"  said he, — "  how happened it 7 Could she not get home  ?"

"  It was so sudden,  sir,  and so unexpected,  there was no time."

"  I dare say,"  said the sweet Queen,  "  Mrs.  Locke was only very happy
to have it at her house."

"  Indeed,  ma'am,"  cried I,  "  her kindness,  and Mr.  Locke's would make
any body think so  !  but they are all kindness and goodness."

"  I have heard indeed,"  said the Queen,  "  that they are all sensible,  and
amiable,  and ingenious,  in that family."

"  They are indeed,"  cried I,  "and as exemplary as they are accomplished."

"  I have never seen Mrs.  Locke,"  said the King,  "  since she was that
high  ;" — pointing to little Miss Dewes.

"  And I,"  said the Queen — "  I have never seen her in my life ;  but for
all that,  from what I hear of her,  I cannot help feeling interested whenever
I only hear her name."

This,  with a good deal of animation,  she said directly to me.

"  Mr.  William Locke,  ma'am,"  said Mrs.  Delany,  "  I understand from
Miss Burney,  is now making the same wonderful progress in painting that
he had done before in drawing."

"  I have seen some of his drawings,"  said the Queen,  "  which were
charming."

"  How old is he  !"  cried the King.

*'  Eighteen,  sir."

"  Eighteen  !"  repeated the King — "  how time flies  !"

394 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

"  Oh  !  for me,"  cried the Queen,  "  I am always quarrelling with time  !
It is so short to do something,  and so long to do nothing."

She has now and then something foreign to our idiom,  that has a very
pretty effect.

"  Time,"  said the King,  "  always seems long when we are young,  and
short when w^e begin to grow old."

"  But nothing makes me so angry,"  said the Queen,  "  as to hear people
not know what to do  !  For me,  I never have half time enough for things.
But what makes me most angry still,  is to see people go up to a window
and say,  '  what a bad day  ! — dear,  what shall we do such a day as this?'
*  What !'  I say  ;  '  why employ yourselves  ;  and then what signifies the bad
day V  "

Afterwards,  there was some talk upon sermons,  and the Queen wished
the Bishop of Chester would publish another volume.

"  No,  no,"  said the King,  "  you must not expect a man,  while he con-
tinues preaching,  to go on publishing.  Every sermon printed,  diminishes
his stock for the pulpit."

*'  Very true,"  said the Queen  ;  "  but I believe the Bishop of Chester has
enough to spare."

The King then praised Carr's sermons,  and said he liked none but what
were plain and unadorned.

"  Nor I neither,"  said the Queen  ;  "  but for me it is,  I suppose,  because
the others I don't understand."

The King then,  looking at his watch,  said,  "  It is eight o'clock,  and if we
don't go now,  the children will be sent to the other house."

"  Yes,  your IMajesty,"  cried the Queen,  instantly rising.

Mrs.  Delany put on her Majesty's cloak,  and she took a very kind leave
of her.  She then curtsied separately to us all,  and the King handed her to
the carriage.

It is the custom for every body they speak to to attend them out,  but they

would not suffer Mrs.  Delany to move.     Miss P ,  Mr.  Dewes,  and his

little daughter,  and myself,  all accompanied them,  and saw them in their
coach,  and received their last gracious nods.

When they w^ere gone,  Mrs.  Delany confessed she had heard the King's
knock at the door before she came into the drawing-room,  but would not
avow it,  that I might not run away.  Well !  being over was so good a thing,
that I could not but be content.

The Queen,  indeed,  is a most charming woman.  She appears to me full
of sense and graciousness,  mingled with delicacy of mind and liveliness of
temper.  She speaks English almost perfectly well,  with great choice and
copiousness of language,  though now and then with foreign idiom,  and
frequently with a foreign accent.  Her manners have an easy dignity,  with
a most engaging simplicit}^,  and she has all that fine high breeding which
the mind,  not the station,  gives,  of carefully avoiding to distress those who
converse with her,  or studiously removing the embarrassment she cannot
prevent.

The King,  however he may have power,  in the cabinet,  to command him-
self, has,  in private,  the appearance of a character the most open and sincere.
He speaks his opinions without reserve,  and seems to trust them intuitively
to his hearers,  from a belief that they will make no ill use of them.  His
countenance is full of inquiry,  to gain information without asking it,  probably
from believing that to be the nearest road to truth.  All I saw of them both
was the most perfect good humour,  good spirits,  ease,  and pleasantness.

Their behaviour to each other speaks the most cordial confidence and

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  395

happiness.  The King seems to admire as much as he enjoys her conversa-
tion, and to covet her participation in every thing he either sees or hears.
The Queen appears to feel the most gratelul regard for him,  and to make
it her chief study to raise his consequence with others,  by always marking
that she considers herself,  though Queen to the nation,  only,  to him,  the
first and most obedient of subjects.  Indeed,  in their different ways,  and
allowing for the difference of their characters,  they left me equally charmed
both with their behaviour to each other and to myself.

Friday. — Mrs.  Delany went to the Lodge to-night,  and,  when she came
home,  brought very kind words of the Queen's with respect to our meeting,
which she now acknowledged she had much been wishing for.

SujsDAY,  Dec.  18. — This morning I went with IMiss P to hear the

cathedral service at St.  George's Chapel.  That antique and venerable
structure gave me much pleasure,  and the particular prayer offered up for
the Knights of the Garter brought me back to the days of its founder,  as I
imagine it must have been used in this chapel from the time of Edward the
Third.

One of the gates of the old Castle I have a view of from a window in my
bed-chamber,  and I have a sufficient smattering of antiquarian affection to
look at it with great satisfaction.

Our preacher was Dr.  L ,  and though'  he told us nothing either new

or striking,  he at least took care to give not disappointment after his first
opening — by preaching in a manner that never drew our attention.

Monday,  Dec.  19th. — Miss P — ,  Mr.  Bernard Dewes,  his daughter,

and myself,  have been to Dr.  Lind's,  by repeated invitation,  to see his East-
ern curiosities.  I was extremely well entertained there.  His collection is
chiefly Chinese.  He has a book of the whole process of preparing silk,
described in prints.  It is not,  however,  so done as to give a very clear idea
of the operation.  He has also a curious book representing every part of a
Chinese monastery,  building,  utensils,  gods,  priests,  and idols ;  it is very
neatly and most elaborately executed,  and the colours are uncommonly
vivid.  A dictionary of the Chinese language,  in which many folio pages
contain but the various uses of a single word,  tilled me with wonder at the
preposterous pedantry that could contrive to make the whole life of man too
short for learning to read and write.  There is a class even for every letter,
and more ways of varying it,  by different accents,  than there are in French
or English of varying every word that begins with the same letter.  A book,
too,  of Chinese plants,  very finely executed and brightly coloured,  showed
how little their artists want patience,  though every thing shows how little is
the pleasure to be given by any pains without taste.

Upon the whole,  and for me,  don't you think,  my dear father and Susan,
I comported myself mighty well in my grand interview 1 Indeed,  except
quite at the first,  I was infinitely more easy than 1 usually am with stran-
gers ;  and the great reason of that was,  that I had no fear of being frio-ht-
ened,  nor shame of being ashamed  ;  for they,  I was sure,  were more ac-
customed to see people frightened and confused,  than to find them composed
and undisturbed.  But that is not the case with others,  who cannot,  there-
fore, make the same allowance.

In the evening,  while Mrs.  Delany,  Miss P ,  and I were sitting and

working together in the drawing-room,  the door was opened,  and the King
entered.

We all started up ;  Miss P flew to her modest post by the door,  and

I to my more comfortable one opposite the fire,  which caused me but a

396 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

slight and gentle retreat,  and Mrs.  Delany he immediately commanded to
take her own place again.

He was full of joy for the Princess Elizabeth.  He had been to the lower
Lodge,  and found her in a sweet sleep,  and she was now,  he said,  in a
course of James's Powders,  from which he hoped her perfect restoration.  I
fear,  however,  it is still but precarious.

Mrs.  Delany congratulated him,  and then inquired after the whooping-
cough.  The children,  he said,  were better,  and where going to Kew for some
days,  to change the air.  He and the Queen had been themselves,  in the morn-
ing, to Kew,  to see that their rooms were fit for their reception.  He could not,
he said,  be easy to take any account but from his own eyes,  when they
were sick.     He seems,  indeed,  one of the most tender fathers in the world.

I cannot pretend to write this meeting with the method and minuteness of
the first ;  for that took me so long,  that I have not time to spare for such
another detail.  Besides,  the novelty is now over,  and I have not the same
inducement to be so very circumstantial.  But the principal parts of the
conversation I will write,  as I recollect.

Our party being so small,  he made all that passed general ;  for though
he principally addressed himself to Mrs.  Delany,  he always looked round to
see that we heard him,  and frequently referred to us.

I should mention,  though,  the etiquette always observed upon his entrance,

which,  first of all,  is to fly off to distant quarters ;  and next.  Miss P

goes out,  walking backwards,  for more candles,  which she brings in,  two at
a time,  and places upon the table and piano-forte.  Next she goes out for tea,
which she then carries to his Majesty,  upon a large salver,  containg sugar,
cream,  and bread and butter,  and cake,  while she hangs a napkin over her
arm for his fingers.

When he has taken his tea,  she returns to her station,  where she waits
till he has done,  and then takes away his cup and fetches more.

This,  it seems,  is a ceremony performed,  in other places,  always by the
mistress of the house ;  but here,  neither of their Majesties will permit Mrs.
Delany to attempt it.

Well ;  but to return.  The King said he had just been looking over a new
pamphlet of Mr.  Cumberland's,  upon the character of Lord Sackville.

"  I have been asking Sir George Baker,"  said he,  "  if he had read it,  and
he told me yes ;  but that he could not find out why Cumberland had written
it.  However,  that,  I think,  I found out in the second page.  For there he
takes an opportunity to give a high character of himself."

He then enlarged more upon the subject,  very frankly declaring in what
points he differed from Mr.  Cumberland about Lord Sackville ;  but as I
neither knew him,  nor had read the pamphlet,  I could not at all enter into
the subject.

Mrs.  Delany then mentioned something of Madame de Genlis,  upon which
the King eagerly said to me,

*'  Oh,  you saw her while she was here  ?"

"  Yes,  sir."

*'  And — did she speak English?"

"  Yes,  sir,"

«  And how  ?"

"  Extremely well,  sir ;  with very great facility."

"  Indeed  ?  That always surprises me in a foreigner that has not lived
here."

Her accent is foreign,  however ;  but her language is remarkably ready.

He then spoke of Voltaire,  and talked a little of his works,  concluding
with this strong condemnation of their tendency  : —

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  397

"  I,"  cried he,  "  think him a monster,  I own it fairly."

Nobody answered.  Mrs.  Delany did not quite hear him,  and I knew too
little of his works to have courage to say any thing about them.

He next named Rousseau,  whom he seemed to think of with more favour,
though by no means with approbation.  Here,  too,  I had read too little to
talk at all,  though his Majesty frequently applied to me.  Mrs.  Delany told
several anecdotes which had come to her immediate knowledge of him while
he was in England,  at which time he had spent some days with her brother,
Mr.  Granville,  at Calwich.  The King,  too,  told others, 'which had come to
his own ears,  all charging him with savage pride and insolent ingratitude.

Here,  however,  I ventured to interfere ;  for,  as I knew he had had a pen-
sion from the King,  I could not but wish his Majesty should be informed he
was grateful to him.  And as you,  my dear father,  were my authority,  I
thought it but common justice to the memory of poor Rousseau to acquaint
the King of his personal respect for him.

"  Some gratitude,  sir,"  said I,  "  he was not without.  When my father
was in Paris,  which was after Rousseau had been in England,  he visited
him,  in his garret,  and the first thing he showed him was your Majesty's
portrait over his chimney."

The King paused a little while upon this ;  but nothing more was said
of Rousseau.

The sermon of the day before was then talked over.  Mrs.  Delany had
not heard it,  and the King said it was no great loss.  He asked me what I
had thought of it,  and we agreed perfectly,  to the no great exaltation of
poor Dr.  L .

Some time afterwards,  the King said he found by the newspapers,  that
Mrs.  Clive was dead.

Do you read the newspapers  ?  thought I.  O,  King  !  you must then
have the most un vexing temper in the world,  not to run wild.

This led on to more players.  He was sorry,  he said,  for Henderson,
and the more as Mrs.  Siddons had wished to have him play at the same
house with herself.  Then Mrs.  Siddons took her turn,  and with the
warmest praise.

"  I am an enthusiast for her,"  cried the King,  "  quite an enthusiast.  I
think there was never any player in my time so excellent — not Garrick
himself;  I own it !"

Then,  coming close to me,  who was silent,  he said, —

"  What  ?  what V — meaning,  what say you  ?  But I still said nothing  ;  I
could not concur where I thought so differently,  and to enter into an argu-
ment was quite impossible ;  for every little thing I said,  the King listened
to with an eagerness that made me always ashamed of its insignificancy.
And,  indeed,  but for that I should have talked to him with much greater
fluency,  as well as ease.

From players he went to plays,  and complained of the great want of
good modern comedies,  and of the extreme immorality of most of the old onps.

"  And they pretend,"  cried he,  "  to mend them ;  but it is not possible.
Do you think it is  ? — what  ?"

"  No,  sir,  not often,  I beheve ; — the fault commonly lies in the very
foundation."

"  Yes,  or they might mend the mere speeches ; — ^but the characters are
all bad from the beginning to the end."

Then he specified several ;  but I had read none of them,  and conse-
quently could say nothing about the matter ; — till,  at last,  he came to Shak-
speare.

VOL.  I.  34

398 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

"  Was there ever,"  cried he,  "  such stuff as great part of Shakspeare 1
only one must not say so  !  But what think you 1 — What 1 — Is there not sad
stuff?— What?— what?"

*'  Yes,  indeed,  I think so,  sir,  though mixed with such excellences,
that—"

"  O  !"  cried he,  laughing good-humouredly,  "  I know it is not to be said !
but it's true.     Only it's Shakspeare,  and nobody dare abuse him."

Then he enumerated many of the characters and parts of plays that he
objected to ;  and when he had run them over,  finished with again laughing,
and exclaiming,

"  But one should be stoned for saying so?"

"  Madame de Genlis,  sir,"  said I,  "  had taken such an impression of the
English theatre,  that she told me she thought no woman ought to go to any
of our comedies."

This,  which,  indeed,  is a very overstrained censure of our dramas,  made
him draw back,  and vindicate the stage from a sentence so severe ;  which,
however,  she had pronounced to me,  as if siie looked upon it to be an
opinion in which I should join as a thing past dispute.

The King approved such a denunciation no more than his little subject ;
and he vindicated the stage from so hard an aspersion,  with a warmth not
wholly free from indignation.

This led on to a good deal more dramatic criticism  ;  but what was said
was too little followed up to be remembered for writing.  His Majesty
stayed near two hours,  and then wished Mrs.  Delany good night,  and
having given me a bow,  shut the door himself,  to prevent Mrs.  Delany,  or

even me,  from attending him out,  and,  with only Miss P to wait upon

him,  put on his great coat in the passage,  and walked away to the lower
lodge,  to see the Princess Elizabeth,  without carriage or attendant.  He is
a pattern of modest,  but manly superiority to rank.

I should say more of this evening,  and of the King,  with whose unaffected
conversation and unassuming port and manner I was charmed,  but that I
have another meeting to write, — a long,  and,  to me,  very delightful private
conference with the Queen.     It happened the very next morning.
Tuesday,  Dec.  20th. — 1st,  summons  ;  2ndly,  entree.
"Miss Burney,  have you heard that Boswell is going to publish a life of
your friend Dr.  Johnson?"
*'  No,  ma'am."

"  I tell you as I heard.  I don't know for the truth of it,  and I can't tell
what he will do.  He is so extraordinary a man,  that perhaps he will de-
vise something extraordinary.  What do you think of Madame de Genlis's
last work  ?"

"  I have not read it,  ma'am."
*'  Not read it  ?"

(I believe she knew my copy,  which lay on the table.)
I said I had taken it to Norbury,  and meant to read it with Mrs.  Locke,
but things then prevented.

"  Oh  !  (looking pleased)  have you read the last edition of her  '  Adele?' "
*'  No,  ma'am."

•'  Well,  it is much improved;  for the passage,  you know,  Mrs.  Delany,
of the untruth,  is all altered  ;  fifteen pages are quite new  ;  and she has
altered it very prettily.  She has sent it to me.  She always sends me her
works  ;  she did it a long while ago,  when I did not know there was such a
lady as Madame de Genlis.  You have not seen  '  Adele,'  then?"
*'  No,  ma'am."

"  You would like to see it.     But I have it not here.     Indeed,  I think
sometimes I have no books at all,  for they are at Kew,  or they are in town,

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  399

and they are here  ;  and I don't know which is which.  Is Madame de
Genlis about any new work  ?"

"  Yes,  ma'am  ;  one which she intends  ^ pour le peuple.^  "

*^Ah,  that will be a good work.  Have you heard of — "  (mentioning
some German book,  of which I forget the name.)

"  No,  ma'am."

"  O,  it will be soon translated  ;  very fine language, — very bad book.
They translate all our worst !  And they are so improved in language  ;  they
write so finely now,  even for the most silly books,  that it makes one read
on,  and one cannot help it.  O,  I am very angry sometimes at that !  Do
you like the  '  Sorrows of Werter V  "

*'  I — I have not read it,  ma'am,  only in part."

"  No?  Well,  I don't know how it is translated,  but it is very finely writ
in German,  and I can't bear it."

"  I am very happy to hear that,  for what I did look over made me de-
termine never to read it.  It seemed only writ as a deliberate defence of
suicide."

"  Yes  ;  and what is worse,  it is done by a bad man for revenge."

She then mentioned,  with praise,  another book,  saying,

"I wish I knew the translator."

"  I wish the translator knew that !"

"O — it is not — I should not like to give my name,  for fear I have judged
ill :  I picked it up on a stall.  O it is amazing what good books there are
on stalls."

"  It is amazing to me,"  said Mrs.  Delany,  "  to hear that."

"  Why,  I don't pick them up myself;  but I have a servant very clever ;
and if they are not to be had at the booksellers',  they are not for me any
more than for another."

She then spoke of Klopstock's  "Messiah,"  saying it contained four lines
most perfect on religion.

"How I should like to see it.  Is it translated?"  asked Mrs.  Delany,
turning to me.

"  111,"  said her Majesty :  "  there is a story of Lazarus and the Cen-
turion's daughter;  and another young lady,  Asyddel,  he calls her;  and
Lazarus is in love  ; — a very pretty scene — no stopping  ; — but it is out
of place  ; — I was quite angry to read it.  And a long conversation between
Christ and Lazarus — very strange  !"

"  Yet Milton does that."

"  Yes."

And then she went on discussing Milton  :  this led to Wickliffe,  and
Cranmer  ;  and she spoke of the Roman Catholic superstitions.

"  O,  so odd  !  Can it signify to God Almighty if 1 eat a piece of fish or a
piece of meat?  And,  one of the Queen of France's sisters wears the heel
of her shoe before,  for a penance  ;  as if God Almighty could care for
that !"

"  It is supposing in Him the caprice of a fine lady."

"  Yes,  just so.     Yet it is amusing,  and pretty too.  How sincere the lower

people are,  of the Catholics.     I was with my mother at ,  a Catholic

town,  and there was a lady we knew,  had a very bad toothache  ;  she
suffered night and day,  and we were very sorry.  But over the river there
was a Virgin Mary of great fame for miracles,  and,  one morning,  when I
wanted to get up,  our maid did not come,  and nobody knew where she was,
and she could not be found.  At last she came back with a large bouquet,
which she had carried over the river in the night and got it blessed,  and

400 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

gave it to the lady to cure her toothache.  But we have Protestant nun-
neries in Germany.  I belonged to one which was under the Imperial pro-
tection ;  there is one for royal families — one for noblesse;  the candidates'
coats of arms are put up several weeks to be examined,  and if any flaw is
found,  they are not elected.  These nunneries are intended for young ladies
of little fortunes and high birth.  There is great licence in them.  They
have balls,  not at home,  but next door  ;  and there is no restriction but to go
to prayers at eight,  at nine,  and at night — that is very little,  you know, —
and wear black or white.  The dress consists of three caps,  one over the
forehead,  one for the back,  one up high,  and one lower,  for the veil;  very
pretty  ;  and the gown is a vest,  and the skirt has I don't know how many
hundred plaits.  1 had the Cross and Order,  but I believe I gave it away
when I came to England  ;  for you may transfer  ;  so I gave it to the
Countess of ,  a friend of mine."

I could not help saying,  how glad we all were that she was no nun  !

"  Once,"  she continued,  "  I wanted to go to a chapel in that Catholic
town,  and my mother said I should go if 1 would be sure not to laugh at any
thing  ;  and I promised I would not  ;  so,  I took care to keep my eyes half
shut,  half open,  thus for fear 1 should see something to make me laugh,  for
my mother told me I should not come out all day if I laughed.  But there
was nothing ridiculous."

[The memorandum of the above conversation breaks off abruptly.]

MRS.  MONTAGU TO MISS BURNEY.*

Portman Square,  December 16th,  1785.
Dear Madam,

It is dangerous to indulge an opinion that any temptation could be abso-
lutely irresistible,  and it would be absurd to urge it to Miss Burney,  whose
sentiments would contradict it,  and whose writings teach better doctrines ;
so I cannot assert it was impossible not to seize the pretence I had to write
to you,  but I thought you would pardon my availing myself of it ;  for
indeed,  my dear madam,  if all people could,  few would be able to withstand
the temptation of corresponding with you.

This morning I took the liberty to send by the Windsor coach,  directed
to Mrs.  Delany,  a basket of game containing a brace of partridges,  a moor-
game,  and a pheasant,  and beg,  if they are not delivered,  that you would
order one of her servants to call at the inn where the stage sets up,  and
make inquiry after it.  1 could not address myself to Mrs.  Delany on this
occasion,  for it would be impossible for me to write to her without touching
on a subject too affecting to us both.  I have known by sad experience the
agonies excited,  the wounds of the breast torn open afresh,  by letters of con-
dolence. However,  there is some degree of comfort in affliction,  derived
from the assurance of another's sympathy;  but in this case,  where my own
misfortune and loss was so great,  it was quite unnecessary to express the
share I took in the sad event ;  nor was there any argument of consolation
which was not to be found in the characters of the deceased and surviving
friend  ;  so that Mrs.  Delany would best read them in her own,  and the
excellent virtues of the friend she had lost.  Nor indeed can any thing
administer comfort,  but the well-grounded confidence,  that after a short sepa-
ration, there will be a reunion in an eternal state.  Most truly and em-
phatically is it said,  "  the sting of death is sin,"  whether the dart assail us
in our own person,  or that of the friend one loves.

*  This letter is preserved merely as a specimen of the epistolary style of so celebrated
a person as the writer.

1785.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  401

Their Majesties'  goodness must have been to Mrs.  Delany the best support
in affliction which this world could give;  their acts were princely,  but the
sentiments they have shown in their manner are angelical.  May the hearts
where such virtues dwell never feel affliction more  !  This will ever be my
earnest wish,  and was my earnest prayer while Princess Elizabeth was ill.
I hope her royal highness is now out of all danger.

I had the pleasure of meeting Dr.  Burney at dinner at Mrs.  Vesey's last
week.  The society was very agreeable,  which may easily be imagined,  as
the doctor made a part of it ;  but my poor friend is so deaf,  she lost much
of the pleasant table-talk.  She is still much afflicted  ;  \\\e agremeiis which
she found in the society of Mr.  Vesey she regrets the loss of,  and he had
not those virtues from whence consolation can be drawn.  A frippery cha-
racter, like a gaudy flower,  may please while it is in bloom ;  but it is the
virtuous only that like the aromatics,  preserve their sweet and reviving odour
when withered.

I beg you would take some opportunity to present my most affectionate
and sincere respects to Mrs.  Delany.

I have solicited Dr.  Burney to meet some of his friends at dinner here on
Wednesday.  I need not say how happy I should have been to have had a
hope of your being of the party  ;  but 1 am afraid we shall not get you to
London till the Christmas holidays are over.

I ask pardon for having intruded this long letter on your time and patience.
With great esteem,  I am,

Dear madam,  yours,  &c.

E.  Montagu.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO MRS.  BURNEY.

Windsor,  Dec.  17th,  1785.
My dearest Hetty,

I am sorry I could not more immediately write  ;  but I really have not had
a moment since your last.

Now I know what you next want is,  to hear accounts of kings,  queens,
and such royal personages.     O ho  !  do you so  ?     Well.

Shall I tell you a few matters of fact  ? — or,  had you rather a  ^qw matters
of etiquette  ?  Oh,  matters of etiquette,  you cry  !  for matters of fact are
short and stupid,  and any body can tell,  and every body is tired with them.

Very well,  take your own choice.

To begin,  then,  with the beginning.

You know 1 told you,  in my last,  my various difficulties,  what sort of
preferment to turn my thoughts to,  and concluded with just starting a young
budding notion of decision,  by suggesting that a handsome pension for
nothing at all would be as well as working night and day for a salary.

This blossom of an idea,  the more I dwelt upon,  the more I liked.  Think-
ing served it for a hot-house,  and it came out into full blow as I ruminated
upon my pill ow.  Delighted that thus all my contradictory and waysvard
fancies were overcome,  and my mind was peacebly settled what to wish and
to demand,  I gave over all further meditation upon choice of elevation,  and
had nothing more to do but to make my election known.

My next business,  therefore,  was to be presented.  This could be no diffi-
culty ;  my coming hither had been their own desire,  and they had earnestly
pressed its execution.     I had only to prepare myself for the rencounter.

You would never believe — you,  who,  distant from courts and courtiers,
know nothing of their ways, — the many things to be studied,  for appearing

34*

402 DIARY AND LETTERS 1785.

with a proper propriety before crowned heads.     Heads without crowns are
quite other sort of rotundas.

Now,  then,  to the etiquette.  I inquired into every particular,  that no
error might be committed.  And as there is no saying what m.ay happen
in this mortal life,  I shall give you those instructions I have received myself,
that,  should you find yourself in the royal presence,  you may know how to
comport yourself.

DIRECTIONS FOR COUGHING,  SNEEZING,  OR MOVING,  BEFORE THE
KING AND QUEEN.

In the first place you must not cough.  If you find a cough tickling in
your throat,  you must arrest it from making any sound ;  if you find your-
self choking with the forbearance,  you must choke — but not cough.

In the second place,  you must not sneeze.  If you have a vehement cold,
you must take no notice of it ;  if your nose-membranes feel a great irrita-
tion, you must hold your breath  ;  if a sneeze still insists upon making its
way,  you must oppose it,  by keeping your teeth grinding together  ;  if the
violence of the repulse breaks some blood-vessel,  you must break the blood-
vessel— but not sneeze.

In the third place,  you must not,  upon any account,  stir either hand or
foot.  If,  by chance,  a black pin runs into your head,  you must not take it
out.  If the pain is very great,  you must bear it without wincing ;  if it
brings the tears into your eyes,  you must not wipe them off*;  if they give
you a tingling by limning down your cheeks,  you must look as if nothing
was the matter.  If the blood should gush from your head by means of the
black pin,  you must let it gush ;  if you are uneasy to think of making
such a blurred appearance,  you must be uneasy,  but you must say nothing
about it.  If,  however,  the agony is very great,  you may,  privately,  bite the
inside of your cheek,  or of your lips,  for a little relief;  taking care,  mean-
while, to do it so cautiously as to make no apparent dent outwardly.  And
with that precaution,  if you even gnaw a piece out,  it will not be minded,
only be sure either to swallow it,  or commit it to a corner of the inside of
your mouth till they are gone — for you must not spit.

I have many other directions,  but no more paper ;  I will endeavour,  how-
ever, to have them ready for.you in time.  Perhaps,  meanwhile,  you would
be glad to know if I have myself had opportunity to put in practice these
receipts 1

How can I answer in this little space 1 My love to Mr.  B.  and the little
ones,  and remember me Idndly to cousin Edward,  and believe me,  my
dearest Esther,

Most affectionately yours,

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  403

CHAPTER XIX.

1786.

Expectation — An Invitation to Windsor — Journey thither — Message from the Queen —
The Terrace at Windsor Castle — Interview with the King and Queen — Disappointment
— Warren Hastings — His Amiable Manner and private Character — Mrs.  Hastings — A
Dilemma — Proposal of the Queen for Miss Burney to accept a situation about her
Person — Her Doubts and Fears on the Occasion — Consultation — Extreme Delicacy
of the Queen's Conduct to Miss Burney — Nature and Duties of the Office — Mrs.
Schwellenberg — Mrs.  Haggerdorn — A Message from the Queen — Letter from Miss
Burney to Dr.  Burney — Anecdote of the Queen's Conduct to her — Her Reasons for
choosing Miss Burney for the Office — The Appointment takes place— Preparations and
Preliminaries — Astonishment of the Court — Letter from Miss Burney to her Sister
Charlotte — Change in her Condition and Prospects — Fitting Out — Conjectures and
Mistakes — Letter from Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney — Duties and Difficulties of her
New Office — Congratulations from the Ladies of the Court — The Embarrassments of
Etiquette.

DIARY RESUMED.

[The records of the early part of this year are few,  and the topics of
them are chiefly of a private nature,  until the correspondence reaches a sub-
ject which formed an era in Miss Burney's life — her connexion with the
court and household of Queen Charlotte.]

SuJVDAY,  May 21. — I have now quite a new business to write upon.
Late on Saturday night,  news reached my father of the death of my worthy
Mr.  Stanley,  who has been long in a declining state of health.  His place
of Master of the King's band my dear father had been promised formerly.
Now he was once more to apply for it ;  and early on Sunday morning he
went to Mr.  Smelt,  to beg his advice what way to proceed.

Just as I was at the door,  and going to church,  my father returned,  and
desired me to come back,  as he had something to communicate to me.  Mr.
Smelt,  he then told me,  had counselled him to go instantly to Windsor,  not
to address the King,  but to be seen by him.  "  Take your daughter,"  he
said,  "  in your hand,  and w^alk upon the terrace.  The King's seeing you
at this time he will understand,  and he is more likely to be touched by a
hint of that delicate sort than by any direct application."

My father determined implicitly to follow this advice.  But let me not
omit a singular little circumstance,  which much enlivened and encouraged
our expedition.     While I was changing my dress for the journey,  I received

a letter from Miss P ,  which was sent by a private hand,  and ought to

have arrived sooner,  and which pressed my visit to my dear Mrs.  Delany
very warmly,  and told me it was by the Queen's express wish.  This gave
me great spirits for my dear father's enterprise,  and I was able to help his
on the road,  from so favourable a symptom.

When we got to Windsor,  my father saw me safe to Mrs.  Delany's and
then went himself to Dr.  Lind's.  With what joy did I fly into the dear,
open arms of this most venerable of women  !  Her reception had all the
warm liveliness of pleasant surprise,  added to its unfailing kindness.  I spent
about two hours with her,  most sweetly indeed  ;  she unbosomed all her
cares and sorrows,  with that trusting openness that twines her round my
heart,  and makes it take a part,  such as it feels for its own,  in all her sadnesses
and solicitudes.  Grievous it is indeed,  grievous and most melancholy,  that,
at her very great age,  good,  pure,  and excellent as she is,  sadness and

404 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

solicitude should fall to her lot.  But all her primitive sensibility remains
unimpaired,  and some there are who put it to most cruel proof.

Miss P ,  with her usual partiality,  was in high glee from the surprise.

I dined and drank tea with them.  Mrs.  Delany wished me to continue with
her,  and make my visit,  so long delayed,  from that time  ;  but I had two
positive engagements for Monday and Tuesday,  that could not well be
broken.  But I promised to go after that day whenever she pleased.  She
related to me the most flattering speech made to her by the Queen,  about my
coming to her as  "  the friend best suited to solace her in her disturbances,"
and assured me she had quite interested herself in pressing Mrs.  Delany to
hasten me.

'Tis very extraordinary what a gracious disposition towards me this
sweet Queen always manifests,  and what peculiar elegance there is in the
expressions she makes use of in my favour.  They were now particularly
well-timed,  and gave me most pleasant hopes for my dear father.  He came
to tea at Mrs.  Delany's,  and,  at the proper hour,  went to the terrace,  with
the good-natured Dr.  Lind,  who is always ready to oblige.  I waited to go
with a female party,  which was arranged for me by Mrs.  Delany,  and soon
followed  : — it was Lady Louisa Clayton,  Miss Clayton,  her daughter-in-
law,  and Miss Emily,  her own daughter,  with Miss P .

All the royal family were already on the terrace before we arrived.  The
King and Queen,  and the Prince of Mechlenberg,  and her Majesty's mother,
walked together.  Next to them the Princesses and their ladies,  and the
young Princes,  making a very gay and pleasing procession,  of one of the
finest families in the world.  Every way they moved,  the crowd retired to
stand up against the wall as they passed,  and then closed in to follow.  When
they approached towards us,  and we were retreating.  Lady Louisa Clayton
placed me next herself,  making her daughters stand below — a politeness
and attention without which I had certainly not been seen  ;  for the moment
their Majesties advanced,  I involuntarily looked down,  and drew my hat
over my face.  I could not endure to stare at them,  and,  full of our real
errand,  I felt ashamed even of being seen by them.  The very idea of a
design,  however fai from illaudable,  is always distressing and uncomfortable.
Consequently,  I should have stood in the herd,  and unregarded ;  but Lady
Louisa's kindness and good breeding put me in a place too conspicuous to
pass unnoticed.  The moment ihe Queen had spoken to her,  which she
stopped to do as soon as she came up to her,  she inquired,  in a whisper,
who was with her ;  as I know,  by hearing my own name given for the
answer.  The Queen then instantly stepped nearer me,  and asked me how I
did ;  and then the King came forward,  and,  as soon as he had repeated the
same question,  said,  '*  Are you come to stay  ?"

"  No,  sir,  not now."

"  No  ;   but how long shall you stay  ?"

"  I go to-night,  sir."

"  I was sure,"  cried the Queen,  "  she was not come to stay by seeing
her father."

I was glad by this to know my father had been observed.

"  And when did you come,"  cried the King.

"  About two hours ago,  sir."

"  And when do you return again to Windsor?"

"  Very soon,  I hope,  sir."

"  And — and— and — "  cried he,  half laughing,  and hesitating significantly,
"  pray,  how goes on the Muse  ?"

At first I only laughed,  too  ;  but he repeated the inquiry,  and then I an-
swered, «  Not at all,  sir."

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  405

*'  No  ?     But why  ?— Why not  ?"

"  I — I — I am afraid,  sir,"  stammered I,  and true enough,  I am sure.

"  And why,  repeated he — "of what?"

I spoke something, — I hardly know what myself, — so indistinctly,  that he
could not hear me,  though he had put his head quite under my hat,  from the
beginning of the little conference  ;  and,  after another such question or two,
and no greater satisfaction in the answer,  he smiled very good-humouredly,
and walked on,  his charming Queen by his side.  His condescension coa-
fuses,  though it delights me.

We stayed some time longer on the terrace,  and my poor father occa-
sionally joined me  ;  but he looked so conscious and depressed,  that it pained
me to see him.  There is nothing that I know so very dejecting as solicita-
tion. I am sure I could never,  I believe,  go through a task of that sort.
My dear father was not spoken to,  though he had a bow every time the
King passed him,  and a curtsey from the Queen.  But it hurt him,  and he
thought it a very bad prognostic  ;  and all there was at all to build upon
was the graciousness shown to me,  which,  indeed,  in the manner I was
accosted,  was very flattering,  and,  except to high rank,  I am told,  very rare.

We stayed but a very short time with my sweet Mrs.  Delany,  whose best
wishes you are sure were ours.  I told her our plan,  and our full convic-
tion that she could not assist in it,  as the obligations she herself owes are so
great and so weighty,  that any request from her would be encroaching and
improper.

We did not get home till past eleven o'clock.  We were then informed
that Lord Brudenel had called to say Mr.  Parsons had a promise of the
place from the Lord Chamberlain.     This was not very exhilarating.

I had been invited by Mr.  Cambridge to pass a day at Twickenham with
Mr.  and Mrs.  Hastings,  who had proposed to carry me thither with them:
accordingly,

Wednesday,  May 25Tn. — Mrs.  Hastings sent her carriage here before
ten o'clock.  I made her and Mr.  Hastings a visit of about half an hour
previously to our journey.  I am quite charmed with IVIr.  Hastings  ;  and,
indeed,  from all I can gather,  and all I can observe, — both which are but
little, — he appears to me to be one of the greatest men now living,  as a
public character ;  while,  as a private one,  his gentleness,  candour,  soft
manners,  and openness of disposition,  make him one of the most pleasing.

The little journey w^as extremely agreeable.  He spoke w^ith the utmost
frankness of his situation and affairs,  and with a noble confidence in his
certainty of victory over his enemies,  from his consciousness of integrity
and honour,  that filled me with admiration and esteem for him.

Mrs.  Hastings is lively,  obliging,  and entertaining,  and so adored by her
husband,  that,  in her sight and conversation he seems to find a recompense
adequate to all his wishes,  for the whole of his toils,  and long disturbances
and labours.  How rare,  but how sweet and pleasant,  the sight of such
unions !

[A vacancy at this time occurred in the royal household,  from the resig-
nation of Madame Haggerdorn,  one of the Queen's German attendants who,
together with Madame Schwellenberg,  held the office of Keeper of the Robes.
The place was much sought after,  but her Majesty had been so well pleased
with what she saw of Miss Burney,  that she graciously empowered Mr.
Smelt to offer her this situation,  allowing her time to consider and weigh its
advantages.

Miss Burney,  though deeply grateful for such a distinction,  foresaw with

406 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

alarm the separation from her family and the total confinement it would oc-
casion ;  and,  in her perplexity how to decide,  she wrote the following letter
to her judicious and faithful friend,  the late Miss Cambridge.]

TO MISS CAMBRIDGE.

Monday,  June  —  86.

"  I will share,"  says my dearest Miss Cambridge,  in a letter,  not long
ago,  "  in all your cares — all your joys."  Is it fair in me,  beginning,  per-
force, by the worst,  to take you at your generous word  ?  Yes,  I hope it is —
for would you have invited such a participation,  and not have wished it?
No,  I know your noble sincerity too well,  and I call upon you to speak to
me in those words you would speak to yourself,  when I have told you the
subject of my present difficulty.

It is only by minds such as yours — as my Susan's,  Mrs.  Delany's,  and
Mrs.  Locke's — my four invaluable friends,  that I can hope to be even un-
derstood, when I speak of difficulty and distress from a proposal apparently
only advantageous.  But Susan's wishes are so certainly and invariably my
own,  that I wish to spare her from hearing of this matter till the decision
is made  ;  Mrs.  Delany,  with all her indulgent partiality,  is here too deeply
interested on the other side to be consulted without paining her ;  and Mrs.
Locke has an enthusiasm in her kindness that makes every plan seem cruel
to her that puts or keeps us asunder.  In this particular case,  therefore,  I
shall apply for no opinion but yours, — yours,  which I may here peculiarly
trust,  from knowing that it unites the two precise qualities that suit it for
judging my situation, — a strong sense of duty,  with a disinterested love of
independence.  And you are liberal enough,  too,  I am sure,  to permit me
openly to tell you that I do not beg your advice with a premeditated reso-
lution to follow it ;  but simply with a view to weigh and compare your ideas
with my own,  in the same manner I should do could I talk the matter over
with you instead of writing it.

I now come straight to the point.

Yesterday evening,  while I was with Mrs.  Delany,  Mr.  Smelt arrived
from Windsor,  and desired a private conference with her;  and,  when it was
over,  a separate one with me  :  surprising me not a little,  by entreating me
to sutler some very home questions from him,  relative to my situation,  my
views,  and even my wishes,  with respect to my future life.  At first,  I only
laughed  ;  but my merriment a little failed me,  when he gave me to under-
stand he was commissioned to make these inquiries by a great personage,
who had conceived so favourable an opinion of me as to be desirous of un-
doubted information,  whether or not there was a probability she might per-
manently attach me to herself and her family.

You cannot easily,  my dear Miss Cambridge,  picture to yourself the
consternation with which I received this intimation.  It was such that the
good and kind Mr.  Smelt,  perceiving it,  had the indulgence instantly to
offer me his services,  first,  in forbearing to mention even to my father his
commission,  and next in fabricating and carrying back for me a respectful
excuse.  And I must always consider myself the more obliged to him,  as I
saw in his own face the utmost astonishment and disappointment at this re-
ception of his embassy.

I could not,  however,  reconcile to myself concealing from my dear father
a matter that ought to be settled by himself;  yet I frankly owned to Mr.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  407

Smelt that no situation of that sort was suited to my own taste,  or promising
to my own happiness.

He seemed equally sorry and surprised  ;  he expatiated warmly upon the
sweetness of character of all the royal family,  and then begged me to con-
sider the very peculiar distinction shown me,  that,  unsolicited,  unsought,  I
had been marked out with such personal favour by the Queen herself,  as a
person with whom she had been so singularly pleased,  as to wish to settle
me with one of the princesses,  in preference to the thousands of offered can-
didates, of high birth and rank,  but small fortunes,  who were waiting and
supplicating for places in the new-forming establishment.  Her majesty pro-
posed giving me apartments in the palace  ;  making me belong to the table
of Mrs.  Schvvellenberg,  with whom all her own visiters — bishops,  lords,  or
commons — always dine  ;  keeping me a footman,  and settling on me j6200
a year.  "  And in such a situation,"  he added,  "  so respectably offered,  not
solicited,  you may have opportunities of serving your particular friends, —
especially your father,  such as scarce any other could afford you."

My dear Miss Cambridge will easily feel that this was a plea not to be
answered.  Yet the attendance upon this princess was to be incessant, — the
confinement to the court continual ; — I was scarce ever to be spared for a
single visit from the palaces,  nor to receive any body but with permission, —
and,  my dear Miss Cambridge,  what a life for me,  who have friends so dear
to me,  and to whom friendship is the balm,  the comfort,  the very support of
existence !

Don't think me ungrateful,  meanwhile,  to the sweet Queen,  for thus
singling out and distinguishing an obscure and most unambitious individual.
No indeed,  I am quite penetrated with her partial and most unexpected con-
descension :  but yet,  let me go through,  for her sake,  my tasks with what
cheerfulness I may,  the deprivations I must suffer would inevitably keep me
from all possibility of happiness.

Though I said but little,  my dear Mrs.  Delany was disturbed and good
Mr.  Smelt much mortified,  that a proposition which had appeared to them
the most flattering and honourable,  should be heard only with dejection.  I
cast,  however,  the whole into my father's disposal and pleasure.

But I have time for no more detail,  than merely to say,  that till the offer
comes in form,  no positive answer need be given,  and therefore that I am
yet at liberty.  Write to me,  then,  my dearest Miss Cambridge,  with all
your fullest honesty,  and let me know which you wish to strengthen — my
courage in making my real sentiments openly known,  or my fortitude in
concealing what it may be right I should endure.

The moment this affair is decided,  as I shall then strive to make the best
of it,  whatever be my decision,  I shall entreat you to return me this letter,
or commit it to the flames.  The measles will keep off any meetings at
Windsor for some time.  I hope,  therefore,  to receive your answer before
I am obliged to speak finally.

Can you forgive me this trouble  ?  If matters take the turn I so much
dread,  I shall not give you much more !

If it should be in my power,  I still intend to defer my going to Windsor
till all this is arranged.

Adieu  !  my dearest Miss Cambridge ;  I am sorry to send you a letter
written in such confusion of mind.

Monday Night. — I have now to add,  that the zealous Mr.  Smelt is just
returned from Windsor,  whither he went again this morning,  purposely to
talk the matter over with her Majesty.  What passed I know not, — but the
result is,  that she has desired an interview with me herself;  it is to take

408  '        DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

place next Monday,  at Windsor.  I now see the end — I see it next to inevi-
table. I can suggest nothing upon earth that I dare say for myself,  in an
audience so generously meant.  I cannot even to my father utter my reluc-
tance,— I see him so much delighted at the prospect of an establishment he
looks upon as so honourable.  But for the Queen's own word 2>err/ianent^ —
but for her declared desire to attach me entirely to herself and family, — I
should share in his pleasure ;  but what can make me amends for all I shall
forfeit?  But I must do the best I can.  Write me a comforting and
strengthening letter,  my dearest Miss Cambridge.  I have no heart to write
to Mickleham,  or Norbury.  I know how they will grieve : — they have ex-
pected me to spend the whole summer with them.  My greatest terror is,
lest the Queen,  from what Mr.  Smelt hinted,  should make me promise my-
self to her for a length of years.  What can I do to avoid that  ?  Any thing
that has a period is endurable ;  but what can I object that will not sound
ungrateful,  to the honour she is doing me and meaning me  ?  She has given
the most highly flattering reasons for making this apphcation,  in preference
to listening to that of others ;  she has put it upon terms of commendation
the most soothing ;  she is,  indeed,  one of the sweetest characters in the
world.  Will you,  too,  condemn me,  then,  that I feel oppressed by her pro-
posal !  I hope not, — I think not  ? — but be very honest if you really do.  I
wish I could see you !  It is not from nervousness ; — I have always and
uniformly had a horror of a life of attendance and dependence.

Don't be uneasy about me,  however ;  for,  this one week of conflict over,
I shall set all my faculties at work to do the best,  and think the least I can.
And till that time comes,  I must not venture to write to my poor Susan.
She and Mrs.  Locke have long feared this.  I thought their fears so vain,
so partial,  so almost absurd,  that I never heeded them.  Yet I now hear the
Queen has been forming this plan ever since I had first the honour of know-
ing her ;  and she has been making the minutest inquiries from that time into
my conduct and disposition,  and all that belongs to me.  How little did I
suspect it !

Could I but save myself from a lasting bond, — from a promised devotion !
That is the great point of all,  my dearest Miss Cambridge,  in which,  if you
can help me to suggest something that will not sound disrespectful or im-
proper, you will serve me indeed.

F.  B.

[The answer to this letter does not appear ;  but Miss Burney's grateful
sense of her Majesty's goodness,  and the desire avowed by Dr.  Burney and
Mrs.  Delany that so honourable and advantageous an offer should not be
declined,  all concurred to make her accept it ;  and the following letter to
her father shows the final result of her deliberations,  and her affectionate
care to prevent him from perceiving her uneasiness.]

MISS F.  BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

Monday,  June 19th,  1786.

How great must have been your impatience,  dearest sir !  but my inter-
view has only this morning taken place.  Every thing is settled,  and to-
morrow morning I go to the Queen's Lodge,  to see the apartments,  and to
receive my instructions.

I must confess myself extremely frightened and full of alarms,  at a change
of situation so great,  so unexpected,  so unthought of.  Whether I shall suit
it or not.  Heaven only knows,  but I have a thousand doubts.  Yet nothing
could be sweeter than the Queen, — more encouraging,  more gentle,  or more

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.  409

delicate.  She did not ask me one question concerning my qualifications for
the charge ;  she only said,  with the most condescending softness,  "  I am
sure,  Miss Burney,  we shall suit one another very well."  And,  another
time,  "  I am sure we shall do very well together."

And Avhat is it,  dear Sir,  you suppose to be my business  ?  Not to attend
any of the Princess — but the Queen herself?  This,  indeed,  was a dehghtful
hearing,  reverencing and admiring her as I have so sincerely done ever
since I first saw her.  And in this,  my amazement is proportioned to my
satisfaction  ;  for the place designed me is that of Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  who
came with her from Germany,  and it will put me more immediately and
more constantly in her presence than any other place,  but that of j\Irs.
Schwellenberg,  in the Court.

The prepossession the Queen has taken in my favour is truly extraordi-
dary,  for it seems as if her real view was,  as Mr.  Smelt hinted,  to attach
me to her person.  She has been long,  she told Mrs.  Delany,  looking out
for one to supply the place of Mrs.  H.,  whose ill health forces her back to
Germany :  "  and I was led to think of I\Iiss Burney,  first by her books  ;
then by seeing her;  then by always hearing how she was loved by her
friends  ;  but chiefly by your friendship for her."

I fancy my appointment will take place very soon.

'  *  #  *  %  %  *

F.  B.

MISS F.  BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

Windsor,  June 20th,  1786.
Most dear Sir,

I am sure you will be glad to hear I have got one formality over,  that
was very disagreeable to my expectations.  1 have been introduced to I\Irs.
Haggerdorn whom I am to succeed,  and to  ]\Irs.  Schwellenberg,  whom I am
to accompany.  This passed at the Queen's Lodge,  in their own apart-
ments, this morning.  I cannot easily describe the sensation with which I
entered that dwelling, — the thoughts of its so soon becoming my habitation,
— and the great hazard of how all will go on in it — and the sudden change !

Every thing was perfectly civil and easy ;  the Queen had herself pre-
pared them to receive me,  and requested me to go.

They made no use of the meeting in the way of business  ;  it was merely
a visit of previous ceremony.

I hope to get to town on Thursday  ;  I shall have very little time,  indeed,
for a multiplicity of things to do,  and to order,  and to settle.

Nobody has been told this affair here as yet,  but Mrs.  S.  and Mrs.  H.,
and Lady Weymouth,  who is now in waiting,  to attend the Queen to the
Races.

I am to go again to the Queen's Lodge,  in order to receive some instruc-
tions from xMrs.  Haggerdorn,  in presence of her  ^Majesty  :  and I hope that
will take place to-morrow,  as I cannot leave Windsor till it is done.

The utmost astonishment will take place throughout the Court when
they hear of my appointment.  Every body has settled some successor to
]\Irs.  Haggerdorn  ;  and I have never,  I am very sure,  been suggested by a
single person.  I saw,  this morning,  by all that passed with Mrs.  S.,
how unexpected a step her Majesty has taken.  The place,  she told me,
had been solicited,  distantly,  by thousands and thousands of women of
fashion and rank.

As my coming away cannot be fixed,  on account of my going again to
the Lodge,  and as I shall want to decamp the very instant I have it in my

VOL.  I.  35

410 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

power,  we think it will be best for you,  dearest sir,  to bring me back,
instead of fetching me.  Indeed I shall want all the encouragement and all
the support you can give me,  flattering as the whole of this business is,  to
enter upon such a new scene,  and prepare for such painful separations,
with any spirit or cheerfulness.

Adieu again,  dearest,  dearest sir,

Most dutifully and affectionately,  yours,

F.  B.

MISS BURNEY TO MRS.  FRANCIS,  AYLESHAM,  NORFOLK.

St.  Martin's Street,  June 27th,  1786.

My sweet Charlotte's kind indulgence to my long silence has been very,
very dearly accepted.  It is like your ever affectionate mind to believe and
feel for my hurries.  New ones that you dream not of have occupied,  and
now occupy me.  I must tell you them briefly,  for I have scarce a moment;
but it would be very vexatious to me that any pen but my own should com-
municate any event material to me,  to my dear Charlotte.

Her Majesty has sent me a message,  express,  near a fortnight ago,  with
an offer of a place at Court,  to succeed Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  one of the Ger-
mans M^io accompanied her to England,  and who is now retiring into her
own country.  'Tis a place of being constantly about her own person,  and
assisting in her toilette, — a place of much confidence and many comforts  :
apartments in the palace ;  a footman kept for me  ;  a coach in common
with Mrs.  Schwellenberg  ;  200/.  a-year,  &c.  &c.

I have been in a state of extreme disturbance ever since,  from the reluc-
tance I feel to the separation it will cause me from all my friends.  Those,
indeed,  whom I most love,  I shall be able to invite to me in the palace ;  but
I see little or no possibility of being able to make,  what most I value,  ex-
cursions into the country.

When you come,  however,  my dearest Charlotte,  I shall certainly take
measures for seeing you,  either in town,  or at Windsor,  or both.

So new a scene,  so great a change,  so uncertain a success,  frightens and
depresses me;  though the extreme sweetness of the Queen,  in so unsolicited
an honour,  so unthought of a distinction,  binds me to her with a devotion
that will make an attendance upon her light and pleasant.  I repine only
at losing my loved visits to the country,  IMickleham,  Norbury,  Chesington,
Twickenham,  and Aylesham,  as I had hoped  ;  all these I must now forego.

Every body so violently congratulates me,  that it sems as i^  all was gain.
However,  I am glad they are all so pleased.  My dear father is in rap-
lures;  that is my first comfort.  Write to wish him joy,  my Charlotte,
without a hint to him,  or any one but Susan,  of my confessions of my
internal reluctance and fears.

You may believe how much I am busied.  I have been presented at the
Queen's Lodge in Windsor,  and seen Mrs.  Haggerdorn in office,  and find I
have a place of really nothing to do,  but to attend ;  and on Thursday I am
appointed by her Majesty to go to St.  James's,  to see all that belongs to me
there.  And I am now fitting out  ]ust as you were,  and all the maids and
workers suppose I am going to be married,  and snigger every time they
bring in any of my new attire.  I do not care to publish the affair,  till it is
made known by authority  ;  so I leave them to their conjectures,  and I fancy
their greatest wonder is,  icho and ichcre is the S2)o$o  ;  for they must think it
odd he should never appear !  F.  B.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  4H

MISS BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

Queen's Lodge,  Windsor,  July 20tb,  1786.

Never were tears so sweet as those I have this moment been shedding
over my beloved father's most kind letter.  Praise such as this,  coming
from the very hand in the whole world that can make it most valuable to
me,  quite melts me.  The confidence you feel in my well-doing is most
grateful to my heart,  and most encouraging to my spirits.

What my difficulties are to be,  I know not,  nor what my dangers  ;  but
every body speaks of this as a situation abounding in both,  and requiring
the most indefatigable prudence and foresight.  At present,  however,  I see
none  :  I am happy,  indeed,  to tell my dearest father that my road has
grown smoother and smoother,  and that whatever precipices and brambles
I may have to encounter,  they have not appeared to terrify me on the
onset,  and that I therefore hope they will not occur till I am so well
prepared to see them,  that I shall know how to slip aside,  without tumbling
from one,  or being torn by the other.

What a delightful writing-box !  with what pleasure shall I always think
of who sent it,  and the sweet,  sweet letter that accompanied it,  whenever I
use it ;  and that will be continually,  for I have none other.  I am now
making my first experiments of all its contents.  May I but send you
letters as pleasant from it as the first letter I have found in it !

Sweet Mrs.  Delany comes to me this afternoon  ;  she has already made
me two visits.  I shall read her what you say of her,  if we are alone,  for I
know it will much gratify her.

Tuesday,  after I lost you,  and yesterday,  I was receiving congratulatory
visits from the ladies of the Household,  during all my leisure time.  Lady
Charlotte Finch came in the morning,  and was extremely civil indeed.  I
returned her visit,  and that of her sister.  Lady Louisa Clayton,  this morning,
for I was desired to walk out,  for health and exercise in the most gracious
manner.  Mrs.  Fielding has been with me also,  renewing our town ac-
quaintance. Madame La Fitte calls every day.  Miss Goldsworthy has
made an opening ;  Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave brought her sister.  Lady
Caroline,  to sit with me for half an hour before they went upon the
Terrace ;  and Miss Planta came the first morning.

To-day,  Lady Effingham,  Lady Frances Howard,  and Sir George,  who
came to wait upon the Queen,  all entered my room,  and introduced them-
selves to me,  with a very flattering speech,  of desiring to cultivate,  &c.  ;
but most unluckily,  I was just going to dress,  and was obliged to tell them
so,  though I could hardly get such words out ;  and to make them leave me
at once.  The shock,  however,  was all mine  ;  for they are too much used
to a court to receive any from submitting to its train of subordinate etiquettes.
*  *  #  *  *  *

F.  B.

412 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

CHAPTER XX.
1786.

Letter from the Rev.  Mr.  Twining;  on Miss Barney's Court Appointment — Diary Resumed
— Journey to Windsor — Reception at the Castle — Mrs.  Delany — First Attendance on the
Queen — Kindness and DeUcacy of the Queen — Leave-taking — Mrs.  Schwellenberg —
(>ount Poher — Madame La Fite — Bishop of Salisbury — The King's Equerries — Visit
from Princess EUzabeth — Royal Concert — Official Duties — Tlie Royal Family in Pri-
vate— Attire of the Queen — The Ladies Waldegrave — The Princess Royal — Visits of
Congratulation — Mrs.  Fielding — Lady Charlotte Finch — Surprise at Miss Burney's
Appointment — Domestic Details — Visit from Mrs,  Delany — Major Price — A Royal
Message — A Surprise — The Queen's Dressing-room — A Difficulty — Lady Effingham
— Lady Frances Howard — Duke of Saxe Gotha — Visits Returned — Charles Wesley —
Music— Routine — A Day at Court — The Toilet — Early Prayers — The Royal Coiffi^ur
— Dinner  —  Terracing — The Concert Room — Bed-Time — A Royal Visiter — The
Princess Royal — The King — Infant Royalty — Princess Amelia — Mr.  Mathias — A
Court Day — Kevv — St.  James's — Etiquette — Court Toilet — A Private Audience —
Duchess of Ancaster— Routine of the Court Day — Sir Richard Jebb — Doubts and
Difficulties — Sir George Howard — Baretti — Mrs.  Hastings — Too Late — General Bude.

THE REV.  T.  TWINING TO MISS BURNEY.

Fordham,  July 10th,  1786.

Pray pardon the embarrassment and gcmclierie of my entrance,  for,
indeed,  I never was at court before in all my life.  I come to kiss hands —
there  ! — and Ileaven bless you,  for I am so pleased  !  "  Goodness me,"  said
a Scotch Lady Somebody one day to Merlin,  after wondering at his pedal
tea-table — "goodness me,  sir !  and did you make that yourself?"  So I
say,  goodness me.  Madam!  and are you to take care of the robes yourself]

Now pray don't mistake this for a letter of congratulation — it is no such
thing — I am only excessively glad,  and determined to tell you so myself.
My head is full of the charming little liistoriette in your father's letter,
which I received on Saturday,  not above ten minutes after the news had
accidentally reached me.  You may guess how comfortable it was to me to
receive so immediately the certainty and detail that I was gaping for :  for
to be kept fasting two or three days upon a general fact,  when one is so
interested as to be dying with hunger for particulars,  is  "  really so horrid,
you have no notion."

Well,  but now,  one thing disturbs me a little — I fear you will be so taken
up with your courtly attendance,  that you will have no leisure,  or not the

kind of leisure,  necessary to —  to —  to — .     Hu sh  !     I dare not finish

my sentence.  I hope you will not understand it.  Plutarch says,  I think,
that fame is an object to all mankind  ;  but that some pursue it like rowers
in a boat,  with their backs towards it.  Is this your way 1 — Nay,  nay,  it is
not the worst way.

Another thing I am afraid of:  when I come to town I shall never get a
peep at you in St.  Martin's Street,  you will be so taken up with reading or
talking to your royal mistress,  or handing jewels,  and colif diets,  and hri?7i-
horions,  baubles,  knick-knacks,  or gewgaws,  toys,  &c.  [That word brim-
horion is to me delightful  ;  there is a fine twang of nasal dignity in it,  that
contrasts so charmingly with the nothingness of its meaning  !]     But I trust

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  413

you will not fulfil that verse of the psalm,  "  forget also thine own people,
and thy fatlier's house."  The best thing you can do will be to get me made
a bishop,  that I may dine now and then at your table  ;  but then do not let
it come to the ears of their Majesties that I am a mortal enemy to trumpets
and drums,  single or double.  [If music goes on improving in noise at this
rate,  I am sure the audiences ought to have double drums to their ears.]

If I had not heard of this bwsiness at Colchester,  and had not received
the letter,  I should have read the next day in our rustic Ipswich journal,
that  "  Mrs.  Berney,  daughter of Dr.  Berney,  was appointed,  &c.,  in the
room of Mrs.  Haggadore  ;"  and I suppose,  after some exercise of my
sagacity,  I might have guessed it to be you.  Why is an innocent blunder
in the spelling of a name always so very ridiculous to those who can't spell
it wrong 1

I must put an end to my impertinence.  Will you forgive all this foolery  ?
Let me say,  with a little more composure and gravity,  that your father's
accoimt did really give me great pleasure.  The manner of the thing is so
handsome,  that I think it cannot but be much to your satisfaction ;  and as
for the satisfaction of certain other folks,  for other reasons which I will tell
any body but you,  I have no doubt of it ;  and I see,  or think I see,  a heap
of pleasant circumstances and pleasant consequences,  &c.  &c.

I thank your father heartily for his letter,  and will write very soon.  We
salute you all.

Lawk  !  that I could but see you handing the brimborio7is  !  Shall you be
frightened  ?  I shall have a thousand curiosities about you  ;  for I am most
sincerely yours,  T.  Tavining.

P.  S.  What a fine opportunity you will have of studying  "  the philosophy
of the human capacity"  in the highest sj^ere of life !

DIARY RESUMED.

Queen's Lodge,  Windsor,  Monday,  July 17th,  1786. — With what
hurry of mind and body did I rise this morning!  Every thing had already
been arranged for Mrs.  Ord's carrying us to Windsor,  and my father's
carriage was merely to go as baggage-wagon for my clothes.  But I wept
not then.  I left no one behind me to regret ;  my dear father accompanied
me,  and all my dear sisters had already taken their flight,  never more to
return.  Even poor little Sarah,  whom I love very dearly,  was at Chesington.

Between nine and ten o'clock we set off*.  We changed carriage in Queen
Ann Street,  and Mrs.  Ord conveyed us thence to Windsor.  With a strug-
gling heart,  I kept myself tolerably tranquil during the little journey.  My
dear father was quite happy,  and Mrs.  Ord felt the joy of a mother in
relinquishing me to the protection of a Queen so universally reverenced.
Had I been in better spirits,  their ecstacy would have been unbounded ;
but alas  ! — what I was approacliing was not in my mind  ;  what I was
leaving had taken possession of it solely.

Miss P flew out to us as the carriage stopped — the youthful blush of

pleasure heightening her complexion,  and every feature showing her kind
happiness.  ]Mrs.  Delany,  she said,  was gone out with the Queen.  I took
leave of my good Mrs.  Ord,  whose eyes overflowed with maternal feelings —
chiefly of contentment.  Mrs.  Delany came home in about an hour.  A
chastened satisfaction was hers ;  she rejoiced in the prospect before me ;
she was happy we should now be so much united,  but she felt for my

35*

414 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

deprivations,  she saw the hard conflict within me,  and the tenderest pity-
checked her delight.

It was now debated whether I was immediately to go to the Lodge,  or wait
for orders.  The accustomed method for those who have their Majesties'
commands to come to them is,  to present themselves to the people in
waiting,  and by them to be announced.  My heart,  however,  was already
sinking,  and my spirits every moment were growing more agitated,  and my
sweet Mrs.  Delany determined to spare me the additional task of passing
through such awe-striking formalities.  She therefore employed my dear
father — delighted with the employment — to write a note,  in her name.

"  Mrs.  Delany presents her most humble duty to the Queen  ;  she found
Dr.  Burney and his daughter at her house  ;  Miss Burney waits the honour
of Her Majesty's commands."

This,  though unceremonious and unusual,  she was sure the Queen
would pardon.  A verbal answer came that I was to go to the Lodge im-
mediately.

O,  my dear Susan  !  in what an agony of mind did I obey the summons !
I was still in my travelling dress,  but could not stay to change it.  My
father accompanied me.  Mrs.  Delany,  anxiously and full of mixed sensa-
tions, gave me her blessing.  We walked  ;  the Queen's Lodge is not fifty
yards from Mrs.  Delany 's door.  My dear father's own courage all failed
him in this little step  ;  for as I was now on the point of entering — probably
for ever— 'into an entire new way of life,  and of foregoing by it all my most
favourite schemes,  and every dear expectation my fancy had ever indulged
of happiness adapted to its taste — as now all was to be given up — I could
disguise my trepidation no longer — indeed I never had disguised,  I had only
forborne proclaiming it.  But my dear father now,  sweet soul !  felt it all,
as I held by his arm,  without power to say one word,  but that if he did not
hurry along I should drop by the way.  I heard in his kind voice that he
was now really alarmed  ;  he would have slackened his pace,  or have made
me stop to breathe  ;  but I could not ;  my breath seemed gone,  and I could
only hasten with all my might,  lest my strength should go too.

A page was in waiting at the gate,  who showed us into Mrs.  Haggerdorn's
room,  which was empty.  My dear father endeavoured here to compose my
spirits;  I could have no other command over them than to forbear letting
him know the afflicted state of all within,  and to suffer him to keep to his
own conclusions,  that my emotion was all from fear of the approaching
audience.  Indeed was it not ! — I could hardly even think of it.  All that I
was resigning — there,  and there only went every fear,  and all reluctance.

The page came in a minute or two to summon me to the Queen.  The
Queen was in her dressing-room.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg was standing behind
her  :  nobody else present.

She received me with a most gracious bow of the head,  and a smile that
was all sweetness.  She saw me much agitated,  and attributed it,  no doubt,
to the awe of her presence.  O,  she little knew my mind had no room in it
for feelings of that sort !  She talked to me of my journey,  my father,  my
sisters,  and my brothers ;  the weather,  the roads,  and Mrs.  Delany — any,
every thing she could suggest,  that could best tend to compose and to make
me easy ;  and when I had been with her about a quarter of an hour,  she
desired Mrs.  Schwellenberg to show me my apartment,  and,  with another
graceful bow,  motioned my retiring.

Not only to the sweet Queen,  but to myself let me here do justice,  in
declaring that though I entered her presence with a heart filled with every
thing but herself,  I quitted it with sensations much softened.     The con-

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  415

descension of her efforts to quiet me,  and the elegance of her receiving me,
thus,  as a visiter,  without naming to me a single direction,  without even the
most distant hint of business,  struck me to show so much delicacy,  as well
as graciousness,  that I quitted her with a very deep sense of her goodness,
and a very strong conviction that she merited every exertion on my part to
deserve it.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg left me at the room door,  where my dear father was
still waiting for me,  too anxious to depart till he again saw me.

We spent a short time together,  in which I assured him I would from
that moment take all the happiness in my power,  and banish,  all the regret.
I told him how gratifying had been my reception,  and I omitted nothing I
could think of to remove the uneasiness that this day seemed first to awaken
in him.  Thank God !  I had the fullest success  ;  his hopes and gay ex-
pectations were all within call,  and they ran back at the first beckoning.

This settled,  and his dear countenance all fresh illumined with returning
content,  vre went together to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  whei'e we made a visit of
about an hour,  in which I had the pleasure of seeing them upon very
amicable terms ;  and then we had one more tcte-d-tite.  all in the same
cheering style,  and he sent me to dress,  and went to dine with Mrs.
Delany.

Left to myself,  I did not dare stop to think,  nor look round upon my
new abode,  nor consider for how long I was taking possession  ;  I rang for
my new maid,  and immediately dressed for dinner.

I now took the most vigorous resolutions to observe the promise I had
made my dear father.  Now all was finally settled,  to borrow my own
words,  I needed no monitor to tell me it would be foolish,  useless,  even
wicked,  not to reconcile myself to my destiny.

The many now wishing for just the same- — O  !  could they look within
me.  I am married,  my dearest Susan — I look upon it in that light — I was
averse to forming the union,  and I endeavoured to escape it ;  but my friends
interfered — they prevailed — and the knot is tied.  What then now remains
but to make the best wife in my power  ?  I am bound to do*  it in duty,  and
I will strain every nerve to succeed.

[In Mrs.  Phillips's replies to the Court Journal of her sister,  she deemed
it prudent to give fictitious names to some of the persons mentioned ;  and
in one or two instances we shall,  for obvious reasons,  adhere to her
nomenclature. — Ed.]

When summoned to dinner,  I found Mrs,  Schwellenberg and a German
ofRcer,  Colonel Poller,  who is now an attendant of Prince Charles of Meck-
lenberg,  the Queen's brother,  who is on a visit to their Majesties.  I was
introduced to him,  and we took our places.

I was offered the seat of Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  which was at the head of the
table;  but that was an undertaking I could not bear.  I begged leave to decline
it ;  and as Mrs.  Schwellenberg left me at my own choice,  I planted myself
quietly at one side.

Colonel Poller,  though a German officer,  is of a Swiss family.  He is a
fat,  good-humoured man,  excessively fond of eating and drinking.  His
enjoyment of some of the fare,  and especially of the dessert,  was really
laughable  :  he could never finish a speech he had begun,  if a new dish
made its appearance,  without stopping to feast his eyes upon it,  exclaim
something in German,  and suck the inside of his mouth ;  but all so openly,
and with such perfect good-humour,  that it was diverting without any thing
distasteful.

416 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

After dinner we went up stairs into Mrs.  Schwellenberg's room,  to drink
coffee.  This is a daily practice.  Her rooms are exactly over mine  ;  they
are the same size,  and have the same prospect,  but they are much more
sumptuously fitted up.

Colonel Poller soon left us,  to attend Prince Charles.  We had then a
long tete-a-tete^  in which 1 found her a woman of understanding,  and fond

of conversation.     I was called down afterwards to Miss P ,  who was

eager to see me in my new dwelling,  and dying with impatience to know,
hear,  and examine every thing about me.  She ran about to make all the
inquiries and discoveries she could for me,  and was so highly delighted with
my situation,  it was impossible not to receive some pleasure even from
looking at her.  She helped me to unpack,  to arrange,  to do every thing
that came in the way.

In a short time Madame La Fite entered,  nearly as impatient as herself
to be my first visiter.  She was quite fanciful and entertaining about my
succeeding to Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  and repeatedly turned round to look at me
fresh and fresh,  to see if it was really me,  and me in that so long differently
appropriated apartment.

She had but just left me,  when who should enter but my dear Mrs.
Delany herself.  This was indeed a sweet regale to me.  She came to
welcome me in my own apartment,  and I am sure to teach me to love it.
What place could I see her in and hate  ?  I could hardly do any thing but
kiss her soft cheeks,  and dear venerable hands,  with gratitude for her
kindness,  while she stayed with me,  which was till the royal family came
home from the terrace,  which they walk upon every fine evening.  She
had already been invited to the King's concert,  which she then attended.

Miss P ,  and I now planned that we would drink tea together.     It

was,  indeed,  my dearest Mrs.  Locke's injunctions that determined me upon
making that trial  ;  for I knew nothing could more contribute to my future
chance of some happy hours than securing this time and this repast to
myself.  Mrs.  Delany had the same wish,  and encouraged me in the
attempt.

As I knew not to whom to speak,  nor how to give a positive order,  in my
ignorance whether the measure I desired to take was practicable or not,
Miss P undertook to be my agent.  She therefore ran out,  and scam-
pered up and down the stairs and passages in search of some one to whom
she could apply.  She met at last Mrs.  Schwellenberg's man,  and boldly
bid him  "  bring Miss Burney's tea."  "  It is ready,"  he answered,  "  in the
dining parlour."  And then he came to me with his mistress's compliments
and that she was come down to tea,  and waited for me.

To refuse to go was impossible ;  it would have been an opening so offen-
sive, with a person destined for my principal companion,  and who had her-
self begun very civilly and attentively,  that I could not even hesitate.     I

only felt heavy-hearted,  and Miss P made a thousand faces,  and together

we went to the eating-room.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg had already made the tea  ;  and four gentlemen were
seated at the table.  The Bishop of Salisbury,  as I afterwards found he
was,  came up to congratulate me,  and spoke very kindly of my father,
whom he said he had just seen on the terrace.  This is a brother of Lord
Barrington's  :  I had never met him before.

Next him sat a young clergyman,  Mr.  Fisher,  whom I did not recollect,
but who said he had seen me once at Mrs.  Ord's,  and spoke to me of her,
and of Mrs.  Thrale,  whom he had lately left in Italy,  where he has been
Iravelling.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  417

And next was Major Price,  the Equerry of the King at present in waiting.
He is the same that all the Barborne family so adored when a captain.  He
mentioned them all to me,  with high praise and great good breeding.  I am
very much pleased with him,  and happy he should be the Equerry in waiting
on my first arrival.

Colonel Polier was also of the party.

1 find it has always belonged to Mrs.  Schwellenberg and Mrs.  Hagger-
dorn to receive at tea whatever company the Kmg or Queen invite to the
Lodge,  as it is only a very select few that can eat with their majesties,  and
those few are only ladies;  no men,  of what rank soever,  being permitted
to sit in the Queen's presence.

I mean and hope to leave this business wholly to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,
and only to succeed Mrs.  Haggerdorn in personal attendance upon the
Queen.

During tea the door opened,  and a young lady entered,  upon whose
appearance all the company rose,  and retreated a few paces backward,
with looks of high respect.  She advanced to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and
desired her to send a basin of tea into the music-room for Mrs.  Delany  :
then walking up to me,  with a countenance of great sweetness,  she said  "  I
hope you are very well,  Miss Burney  ]"  I only curtseyed,  and knew not
till she had left the room,  which was as soon as she had spoken a few words
to Major Price,  that this was the Princess Elizabeth.

Immediately after the concert began  ;  the band being very full,  and the
performance on the ground-floor,  as is the eating-room.  I heard it perhaps
better,  because softer,  than if I had been in the music-room.  I was very
glad of this circumstance.  Nothing was played but Handel ;  but I was
pleased to hear any music,  so much had I persuaded myself 1 should hear
no more.

At night I was summoned to the Queen's apartment.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg
was there,  waiting.  We sat together some time.  The Queen then arrived,
handed into her dressing-room by the King,  and followed by the Princess
Royal and Princess Augusta.  None other of the princesses slept in the
Queen's Lodge.  The lower Lodge,  which is at the further end of the
garden,  is the dwelling-place of the four younger Princesses.

The King,  with a marked appearance of feeling for the — no doubt evi-
dent— embarrassment of my situation on their entrance,  with a mild good
breeding inquired of me how I had found Mrs.  Delany  ;  and then,  kissing
both his daughters,  left the room.

The two princesses each took the Queen's hand,  which they respectfully
kissed,  and wishing her good night,  curtseyed condescendingly to her new
attendant,  and retired.

The Queen spoke to me a little of my father,  my journey,  and Mrs.
Delany,  and then retired into easy conversation,  in German,  with Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  who never speaks English but by necessity.  1 had no sort
of employment given me.  The Queen was only waited upon by Mrs.
Schwellenberg and xMrs.  Thielky,  her wardrobe woman;  and when she had
put on her night deshabille,  she wished me good night.

This consideration to the perturbed state of my mind,  that led her
majesty to permit my presence merely as a spectatress,  by way of taking a
lesson of my future employment for my own use,  though to her,  doubtless,
disagreeable,  was extremely gratifying to me,  and sent me to bed with as
much ease as I now could hope to find.

Monday,  July 18th. — I rose at six,  and was called to the Queen soon
after seven.     Only Mrs.  Schwellenberg was with her,  and again she made

418 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

me a mere looker-on  ;  and the obligation I felt to her sent me somewhat
lighter-hearted from her presence.

When she was dressed,  in a simple morning gown,  she had her hat and
cloak put on,  to go to prayers at eight o'clock,  at the King's chapel in the
castle  ;  and I returned to my room.

At noon came my dear father,  and spent an hour or two with me — so
happy  !  so contented  !  so big with every pleasant expectation  ! — I rejoice to
recollect that I did nothing,  said nothing this morning to check his satisfac-
tion ;  it was now,  suddenly and at once,  all my care to increase his delight.
And so henceforward it must invariably continue.

We parted cheerfully on both sides;  yet I saw a little pang in his last
embrace,  and felt it in his dear hands; — but I kept myself well up,  and he
left me,  I really believe,  without a wish ungratified.

At dressing-time the same quiet conduct was still observed by the Queen
— fixed in her benign determination to permit me to recover breath and ease,
ere she gave me any other trial than merely standing in her presence.

At dinner we — I mean Mrs.  Schwellenberg and myself — had Miss Planta
and Colonel Poller;  and I was happy to be again diverted with the excess
of his satisfaction at the sight of turtle upon the table.

In the evening I had a visit from Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave,  who
brought her sister,  Lady Caroline Waldegrave,  both to pay congratulatory
compliments.  Lady Elizabeth is lady of the bedchamber to the Princess
Royal,  and lives in this Lodge.  Her sister,  by the Queen's goodness,  is
permitted to spend some months of every year with her.  They were left
orphans at about sixteen  ;  the Queen instantly took them both under her
protection.     They are gentle and well bred,  and seem very amiable.

They stayed with me till it was time for them to go into waiting for the
Princess Royal,  whom they attend to the terrace.

My dearest J\lrs.  Delany came again,  to visit me wholly,  and drink tea
with me.  We had a thousand things to discuss,  but were scarce a moment
together before we were interrupted by Madame La Fite,  who,  however,
only stayed to give and receive from Mrs.  Delany congratulations on meet-
ing in my room at  ^.Vindsor,  and then she pretty soon took leave.

We had but again arranged ourselves to a little comfort,  when a tat-tat
at my door followed,  and a lady entered whom I had never seen before,
with a very courteous air and demeanour,  saying  "  I could not defer paying
my compliments to Miss Burney,  and wishing her much joy,  which we
must all feel in such an accession to our society  :  I must get my daughter
to introduce me."  And then advanced Mrs.  Fielding,  and I found this was
Lady Charlotte Finch.

Mrs.  Fielding is one of the women of the bedchamber.  She lives with
her mother,  Lady Charlotte,  and her three daughters,  girls from ten to
fiileen years of age.

When she also wished me joy,  I saw in her face a strong mark of still
remaining astonishment at my appointment.  Indeed all the people in office
here are so evidently amazed,  that one so unthought of amongst them
should so unexpectedly fill a place to which they had all privately appro-
priated some acquaintance,  that I see them with difficulty forbear exclaiming
"  How odd it is to see you here  !"

Lady Charlotte's visit was short and very civil ;  she was obliged to hasten
to the Castle,  to attend the younger Princesses till they went to the terrace.
They are sent to wait in an apartment of the Castle,  till the King and Queen
and the elders walk out,  and then they are called to join them,  when the
crowd is not great,  and when the weather is fine.

17S6.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  419

My Windsor apartment Is extremely comfortable.  I liave a large draw-
ing-room, as they call it,  which is on the ground-floor,  as are all the Queen's
rooms,  and which faces the Castle and the venerable Roimd Tower,  and
opens at the further side,  from the windows,  to the Little Park.  It is airy,
pleasant,  clean,  and healthy.  My bed-room is small,  but neat and com-
fortable ;  its entrance is only from the drawing-room,  and it looks to the
garden.  These two rooms are delightfully independent of all the rest of
the house,  and contain every thing I can desire for my convinicnce and
comfort.

In her way to my room,  Mrs.  Delany had met the King !  she was a
little shocked,  and feared she came at an improper hour,  or ought to have
come in the back way.  I know not if he had perceived her distress  ;  but
he soon removed it,  for when he went out to go to the terrace,  he looked
towards my windows,  and seeing her there,  advanced a iew steps to ask
her how she did.  The Queen turned round and curtseyed to her,  and the
Princess Augusta ran up to speak to her.

I had retired behind her;  but when they moved on,  Miss Goldsworthy,
the sub-governess,  stole from her charges,  and came to the window to desire
Mrs.  Delany to introduce her to me.

Sueet  ]\Irs.  Delany,  thwarted in her kind private views of an interesting'
confabulation,  grew fatigued,  and went home;  and then Mrs.  Fielding rose
to accompany her.  Miss P made a second attempt for tea,  but re-
ceived for answer that Mrs.  Schwellenberg would come down and make it
as soon as the King and Queen came from the terrace.

The ceremony of waiting tea till the royal family return from the ter-
race, is in order to make it for any company they may invite to it.

Major Price and Colonel Poller were of the party.

At night,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg inquired of me if I had rather have no
supper?  I told her a little fruit was all I should like;  and then orders were
given,  and I had some in my own room,  and ijie great pleasure of making
my good-natured little friend partake of it.

This practice has been kept up.  ever since,  and has proved the means of
procuring me a little time to myself,  and to quietness,  before my last sum-
mons to the Queen.

To-night,  like the rest of my attendance,  I was merely treated as if an
accidental visiter.  Sweet Queen  ! — she seems as fearful of employing me as
I am myself of being employed.

Wednesday,  July 19tii. — The morning and noon attendance were just
the same as I have already mentioned  :  but,  when the Queen was dressed,
she said  "  Should you be afraid to go to Mrs.  Delany  ?"

You may imagine my answer:  she then desired me to tell her she should
be glad to see her if she could come and sit with her while she worked.

1 knew myself a welcome messenger,  and away therefore I tript.  I had
determined never to stir out till I was bid,  that I might do nothing wrong  ;
and I am sure this little commission was given me for my own private
gratification.

My dear I\Irs.  Delany received me almost with acclamations of joy,  from
satisfaction in finding the Queen herself had sent me.

Mrs.  Delany came in a chair,  and I walked by its side.  She went imme-
diately to the Queen's room,  and stayed with her all the morning.

At dinner to-day we had Mr.  T ,  French reader,  I believe,  to the

Queen and Princesses.  He is a well bred and sensible man.  He left us
afier dinner to attend the Princesses.  Major Price again sent to invite him-
self to our coffee.  1 like him exceedingly.  A man more unaffectedly a
gentleman I have seldom met with.

420 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

He regretted the disunion of our tables.  Formerly,  the men belonging
to the King dined at the same table with the women belonging to the
Queen.

July 20th. — This morning the Queen inquired of me if I loved walk-
ing ?  I answered yes  ;  and she then told me 1 had better not leave off that
exercise,  but walk out every morning.

I called at my dear Mrs.  Delany's,  and took Miss P with me.     We

went together to Lady Louisa Clayton.     We next went to Lady Charlotte
Finch,  who is one of her sisters and governess to the Princesses.

I called also at Madame La File's;  but she was so urgent with me to
prolong my stay,  that I returned too late to dress for my noon attendance  ;
and just as 1 was in the midst of my hair dishevelling,  I was summoned.

I was obliged to slip on my morning gown,  and a large morning cap,  and
run away as fast as possible.  The Queen,  who was only preparing for her
own hair-dresser,  was already e;e peignoir:  she sat down,  the man was
called in,  and then,  looking at me with a smile,  she said  "Now,  Miss
Burney,  you may go and finish your dress."

Away I gal lopped as fast as possible,  to be ready against her hair-dresser
departed  ;  but when I came pretty near my own apartment,  I was stopped
in the gallery by a lady,  who coming up to me,  said  "Miss Burney?"

I started,  and looked at her,  but finding her a perfect stranger to me,  I
only said  "  Ma'am  !" — and my accent of surprise made her beg my pardon
and walk on.

1 was too much in haste to desire any explanation,  and was only
quickening my pace,  when I was again stopped by a gentleman with a star
and red riband,  who,  bowing very civilly,  said  "Miss Burney,  I pre-
sume?— "

"Sir! — "  was again all my answer;  and again,  like the lady,  he begged
my pardon and retreated;  and 1 was too seriously earnest to pursue my
business to dare lose a moment.  On,  therefore,  I again hurried  ;  but,  at the
very door of my room,  which three steps down and three up place out of
the even line of the gallery,  I was once more stopped,  by a very fat lady  :
who,  coming up to me,  also said  "Miss Burney,  1 believe?"

"  Yes,  ma'am — "

"  We have just,"  cried she,  "  been to wait upon you, — but I could find
nobody to introduce me ;  I believe 1 must introduce myself, — Ladv Effing-
ham."

I thanked her for the honour she did me, — but when she proposed re-
turning with me to my room,  in order to finish her visit,  I was quite discon-
certed ;  and hesitated so much that she said  "  Perhaps it is not convenient
to you  ?— "

"  Ma'am — I — I was just going to dress — "  cried I ;  I meant to add,  and
ought to have added,  to  "  wait upon the Queen  ;"  but I was so unused to
such a plea,  that it sounded as a liberty to my mind's voice,  and I could not
get it out.

She desired she might be no impediment to me, — and we parted ;  I was
forced to let her go and to run into my own room,  and fly to my toi-
lette ! — Not quite the sort of flight I have been used to making.  However,
all is so new here that it makes but a part in the general change of system.

The lady who had met me first was her daughter,  Lady Frances Howard  ;
and the gentleman,  her second husband.  Sir George Ploward.

I afterwards saw^  her ladyship in the Queen's dressing-room,  where her
majesty sent for her as soon as she was dressed,  and very graciously kept
me some time,  addressing me frequently while I stayed,  in the conversation

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  421

that took place,  as if with a sweet view to point out to this first lady of her
bedchamber I have yet seen the favourable light in which she considers me.
The Duke de Saxe-Gotha,  first cousin to the King,  came to Windsor to-
day, to spend some time.     Major Price,  who had the honours to do to his

chief attendant,  Baron ,  missed us therefore at coffee ;  but at tea we

had them both,  and my dear Mrs.  Delany,  as well as the jovial gourmand
Colonel,  with whom 1 became prodigiously well acquainted,  by making him
teach me a few German phrases,  which he always contrives,  let me ask
what question 1 may,  to turn into some expression relating to eating and
drinking.

When all were gone,  except the Duke de Saxe-Gotha's Baron and Major
Price,  I had a very long conversation with the Major,  while Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg was entertaining the Baron in German.  I find,  my dearest Susan,  he
has seen you often at Lady Clarges's  ;  Sir Thomas was his first cousin.
He knows my dearest Mrs.  Locke,  also,  by another cousin,  Lady Temple-
town  ;  and he knows me my own self by my cousins of Worcester.  These
mutual acquaintances have brought us into almost an intimacy at once,  and
I was quite glad of this opportunity of a little easy and natural conversation.
July 21 st. — I went to the Lower Lodge to return my visits from Miss
Goldsworthy and Miss Planta  ;  and heard not,  till after my return to my
constant Madame La Fite,  that Miss Planta lives under the same roof with
myself  'Twas ridiculous enough,  for I left my name for her with the
porter  ;  but I know nothing of this Lodge,  save my own rooms,  and the
Queen's,  and Mrs.  Schwellcnberg's,  and to go to Mrs.  Schwellenberg's I
have merely to walk up one flight of stairs,  which commence from the very
door of ray own room.

July 22 d. — ^frs.  De Luc called upon me this morning,  and made me a
long and very sociable visit.  She is an amiable woman,  and so cordial,
gently,  not vehemently,  that I take a good deal of pleasure in her kindness
and conversation.

A concert,  I think I have mentioned,  is performed every night ;  and this
night,  Mr.  Charles Wesley played the harpsichord extremely well.

Sunday,  July 23d. — Charles Wesley played the organ  ,•  and after the
service was over he performed six or seven pieces by the King's order.
They were all of Handel,  and so well suited to the organ,  and so well per-
formed on a remarkably good instrument,  that it was a great regale to me
to hear them.  The pleasure I received from the performance led me into
being too late for the Queen.  I found I had already been inquired for to
attend at the Queen's toilette.

When I came back the tea-party were all assembled in the eating-par-
lour. Colonel Poller was in the highest spirits  :  the King had just bestowed
some appointment upon him in Hanover.  He was as happy as if just cast-
ing his eyes upon pine-apple,  melon,  and grapes.  I made Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg teach me how to wish him joy in German :  which is the only phrase I
have yet got that has no reference to eating or drinking.

But imagine,  my Susan,  what a charm to my ears ensued,  on the opening
of this evening's concert,  when the sweet-flowing,  melting,  celestial notes of
Fischer's hautbois reached them  !  It made the evening pass so soothingly,
I could listen to nothing else.

Monday,  July 24. — Having now journalized for one complete week,  let
me endeavour to give you,  more connectedly,  a concise abstract of the gene-
ral method of passing the day,  that then I may only write what varies,  and
occurs occasionally.

I rise at six o'clock,  dress in a morning gown and cap,  and wait my first
VOL.  I.  36

422 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

summons,  which is at all times from seven to near eight,  but commonly in
the exact half hour between them.

The Queen never sends for me till her hair is dressed.  This,  in a morn-
ing, is always done by her wardrobe- woman,  Mrs.  Thielky,  a German,  but
who speaks English perfectly well.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  since the first week,  has never come down in a
morning at all.  The Queen's dress is finished by Mrs.  Thielky and myself.
No maid ever enters the room while the Queen is in it.  Mrs.  Thielky hands
the things to me,  and I put them on.  'Tis fortunate for me I have not the
handing them  !  I should never know which to take first,  embarrassed as I
am,  and should run a prodigious risk of giving the gown before the hoop,
and the fan before the neckerchief.

By eight o'clock,  or a little after,  for she is extremely expeditious,  she is
dressed.  She then goes out to join the King,  and be joined by the Prin-
cesses, and they all proceed to the King's chapel in the Castle,  to prayers,
attended by the governesses of the Princesses,  and the King's equerry.
Various others at times attend  ;  but only these indispensably.

I then return to my own room to breakfast.  I make this meal the most
pleasant part of the day ;  I have a book for my companion,  and I allow
myself an hour for it.  My present book is Gilpin's description of the Lakes
of Cumberland and Westmoreland.  Mrs.  Delany has lent it me.  It is the
most picturesque reading I ever met with  :  it shows me landscapes of every
sort,  with tints so bright and lively,  I forget I am but reading,  and fancy I
see them before me,  coloured by the hand of Nature.

At nine o'clock I send ofi^  my breakl'ast things,  and relinquish my book,
to make a serious and steady examination of every thing I have upon my
hands in the way of business — in which preparations for dress are always
included,  not for the present day alone,  but for the court-days,  which require
a particular dress  ;  for the next arriving birthday of any of the Royal
Family,  every one of which requires new apparel ;  for Kew,  where the
dress is plainest ;  and for going on here,  Mhere the dress is very pleasant
to me,  requiring no show nor finery,  but merely to be neat,  not inelegant,
and moderately fashionable.

That over,  I have my time at my own disposal till a quarter before twelve,
except on Wednesdays and Saturdays,  when I have it only to a quarter
before eleven.

My rummages and business sometimes occupy me uninterruptedly to
those hours.  When they do not,  J give till ten to necessary letters of
duty,  ceremony,  or long arrears; — and now,  from ten to the times I have
mentioned,  I devote to walking.

These times mentioned call me to the irksome and quick-returning
labours of the toilette.  The hour advanced on the Wednesdays and Satur-
days is for curling and craping the hair,  which it now requires twice a
week.

A quarter before one is the usual time for the Queen to begin dressing
for the day.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg then constantly attends  ;  so do I ;  Mrs.
Thielky,  of course,  at all times.  We help her off with her gown,  and on
with her powdering things,  and then the hairdresser is admitted.  She
generally reads the newspapers during that operation.

When she observes that 1 have run to her but half dressed,  she constantly
gives me leave to return and finish as soon as she is seated.  If she is grave,
and reads steadily on,  she dismisses me,  whether I am dressed or not ;  but
at all times she never forgets to send me away while she is powdering,  with
a consideration not to spoil my clothes,  that one would not expect belonged

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  423

to her high station.  Neither does she ever detain me without making a
point of reading here and there some little paragraph aloud.

When I return,  I finish,  if any thing is undone,  my dress,  and then take
Baretti's Dialogues,  my dearest Fredy's Tablet of Memory,  or some such
disjointed matter,  for the few minutes that elapse ere I am again summoned.

I find her then always removed to her state dressing-room,  if any room
in this private mansion can have the epithet of state.  There,  in a very
short time,  her dress is finished.  She then says she won't detain me,  and
I hear and see no more of her till bedtime.

It is commonly three o'clock when I am thus set at large.  And I have
then two hours quite at my own disposal :  but,  in the natural course of
things,  not a moment after  !  These dear and quiet two hours,  my only
quite sure and undisturbed time in the whole day,  after breakfast is over,  I
shall henceforward devote to thus talking with my beloved Susan,  my
Fredy,  my other sister,  my dear father,  or Miss Cambridge ;  with my
brothers,  cousins,  Mrs.  Ord,  and other friends,  in such terms as these two
hours will occasionally allow me.  Henceforward,  I say ;  for hitherto
dejection of spirits,  with uncertainty how long my time might last,  have
made me waste moment after moment as sadly as unprofitably.

At five we have dinner.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg and I meet in the eating-
room.  We are commonly ttte-a-ttte :  when there is any body added,  it is
from her invitation only.  Whatever right my place might afford me of also
inviting my friends to the table I have now totally lost,  by want of courage
and spirits to claim it originally.

When we have dined,  we go up stairs to her apartment,  which is directly
over mine.  Here we have coffee till the terracing is over :  this is at about
eight o clock.  Our tite-d-tite then finishes,  and we come down again to
the eating-room.  There the equerry,  whoever he is,  comes to tea constantly,
and with him any gentleman that the King or Queen may have invited for the
evening ;  and when tea is over,  he conducts them,  and goes himself,  to the
concert-room.

This is commonly about nine o'clock.

PVom that time,  if Mrs.  Schwellenberg is alone,  I never quit her for a
minute,  till I come to my litde supper at near eleven.

Between eleven and twelve my last summons usually takes place,  earlier
and later occasionally.  Twenty minutes is the customary time then spent
with the Queen  :  half an hour,  I believe,  is seldom exceeded.

I then come back,  and after doing whatever I can to forward my dress
for the next morning,  I go to bed — and to sleep,  too,  believe me  :  the early
rising,  and a long day's attention to new affairs and occupations,  cause a
fatigue so bodily,  that nothing mental stands against it,  and to sleep I fall
the moment I have put out my candle and laid down my head.

Such is the day to your F.  B.  in her new situation at Windsor ;  such,  I
mean,  is its usual destination,  and its intended course.  I make it take now
and then another channel,  but never stray far enough not to return to the
original stream after a little meandering about and about it.

I think now you will be able to see and to follow me pretty closely.

W^ith regard to those summonses I speak of,  I will now explain myself.
My summons,  upon all regular occasions — that is,  morning,  noon,  and night
toilets — is neither more nor less than a bell.  Upon extra occasions a page
is commonly sent.

At first,  I felt inexpressibly discomfited by this mode o^  call.  A
bell ! — it seemed so mortifying a mark of servitude,  I always felt myself
blush,  though alone,  with conscious shame at my own strange degradation.

424 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

But I have philosophized myself now into some reconcilement with this man-
ner of summons,  by reflecting that to have some person always sent would
be often very inconvenient,  and that this method is certainly less an inter-
ruption to any occupation I may be employed in,  than the entrance of mes-
sengers so many times in the day.  It is,  besides,  less liable to mistakes.
So I have made up my mind to it as well as I can ;  and now I only feel
that proud blush when somebody is by to revive my original dislike of it.

Tuesday,  July 25th. — I now begin my second week,  with a scene a
little,  not much,  different.  We were now to go to Kew,  there to remain till
Friday.

I had this morning,  early,  for the first time,  a little visit from one of the
Princesses.  I was preparing for my journey,  when a little rap at my room-
door made me call out  "  Come in  !"  and who should enter but the Princess
Royal !

I apologized for my familiar admittance,  by my little expectation of such
an honour.  She told me she had brought the Queen's snuff-box,  to be filled
with some snuff which I had been directed to prepare.  It is a very fine-
scented and mild snuff,  but requires being moistened from time to time,  to
revive its smell.

The Princess,  with a very sweet smile,  insisted upon holding the box
while I filled it ;  and told me she had seen Mrs.  Delany at the chapel,  and
that she was very well;  and then she talked on about her,  with a visible
pleasure in having a subject so interesting to me to open upon.

When the little commission was executed,  she took her leave with as
elegant civility of manner as if she was parting with another King's
daughter.  I am quite charmed with the Princess Royal ;  unaffected conde-
scension and native dignity are so happily blended in her whole deportment.

She had left me but a short time before she again returned.  "Miss
Burney,"  cried she,  smiling with a look of congratulation,  "  Mamma says
the snuff is extremely well mixed;  and she has sent another box to be
filled."

I had no more ready.  She begged me not to mind,  and not to hurry
myself,  for she would wait till it was done.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  Miss Planfa,  and myself travelled to Kew together.
I have two rooms there;  both small,  and up two pair of stairs;  but tidy and
comfortable enough.  Indeed all the apartments but the King's and Queen's,
and one of Mrs.  Schwellenberg's,  are small,  dark,  and old-fashioned.  There
are staircases in every passage,  and passages to every closet.  I lost myself
continually,  only in passing from my own room to the Queen's.

Just as I got up stairs,  shown the way first by Miss Planta,  I heard the
King's voice.    I slipped into my room  ;  but he saw me,  and following,  said,

"  What !  is Miss Burney taking possession  ?"

And then he walked round the room,  as if to see if it were comfortable
for me,  and smiling very good-humouredly,  walked out again.  A surveyor
was with him  ;  I believe he is giving orders for some alterations and addi-
tions.

When I came in to dress,  John told me Mr.  Dundas was waiting to see
me.  Mr.  Dundas is the household apothecary at Kew.  I wanted him not
officially  ;  but I knew Miss Cambridge,  who sees him continually,  intended
desiring him to call,  that she might hear an account of me from somebody's
"live voice."  Though inconvenient,  therefore,  I admitted him  ;  but I did
not ask him to sit down,  nor encourage him to stay a moment.  He is a
sensible and worthy man,  Miss Cambridge says,  and behaved so well,  so
humanely and attentively to her long-suffering.  Kitty,  that her affectionate
heart has been bound to him for ever.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.  425

When T went to the Queen before dinner,  the little Princess Amelia was
with her;  and,  though shy of me at first,  we afterwards made a very plea-
sant acquaintance.  She is a most lovely liitle thing,  just three years old,
and full of sense,  spirit,  and playful prettiness  :  yet decorous and dignified
when called upon to appear en princesse to any strangers,  as if conscious
of her high rank,  and of the importance of condescendingly sustaining it.
'Tis amazing what education can do,  in the earliest years,  to'those of quick
understandings.  This little Princess,  thus in infancy,  by practice and
example taught her own consequence,  conducts herself,  upon all proper
occasions,  with an air of dignity that is quite astonishing,  though her
natural character seems all sport and humour.

When we became a little acquainted,  the Queen desired me to take her
by the hand,  and carry her down stairs to the King,  who was waiting for
her in the garden.  She trusted herself to me with a grave and examining
look,  and showed me,  for I knew it not,  the way.  The King,  who dotes
upon her,  seemed good-humouredly pleased to see me bring her.  Pie took
her little hand and led her away.

The next day I had a visit from Mrs.  Tunstall,  the new housekeeper,  to
inquire if I wanted any thing  :  she seems a good sort of a woman,  and I
have returned her visit.

Mr.  Mathias also came,  from the Queen,  to make out the warrant for my
appointment.  He is uncle to Charlotte's friend Mr.  Mathias,  who is sub-
treasurer to the Queen,  and he sometimes officiates for him.

I had an exceeding kind,  friendly,  and instructive letter this morning
from Miss Young.  I was quite happy in this mark of her faithful friend-
ship.    You may be sure the subject was my new situation.

Thursday,  July 27tii. — This being a court-day we wentto town.  The
Queen dresses her head at Kew,  and puts on her drawing-room apparel at
St.  James's.  Her new attendant dresses all at Kew,  except tippet and long
.  ruffles,  which she carries in paper,  to save from dusty roads.  I forgot to
tell you,  I believe,  that at St.  James's I can never appear,  even though I
have nothing to do with the drawing-room,  except in a sacque  :  'tis the
etiquette of my place.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  Miss Planta,  and myself went about an hour before
the King and Queen.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg went to the Queen's dressing-
room to give orders about the dress,  Miss Planta went to the Princesses'
room for the same purpose,  and I was shown to mine for no purpose.

Mine are two small rooms,  newly and handsomely furnished,  one of
which has a view of the Park over the stable-yard,  and the other only of
the passage to the Park from St.  James's Street.

I had now the great satisfaction to find that there was a private staircase,
from that same passage,  that leads straight up to my apartments,  and also that
I may appoint any friend to meet me in them on the court-days.  I hope
never to be there again without making use of this privilege.

Having now neither companion nor book,  I sent John,  who came with
me to town,  to borrow some writing implements of one of the pages,  and I
employed myself in answering some letters,  till the Queen arrived,  and I
was summoned,  by Mrs.  Lcverick,  the town wardrobe woman,  to the
dressing-room.

There the Queen put on her court dress,  and as soon as she was attired
sent for the Princess Royal and Augusta,  who came to attend her to the
drawing-room.

Mr.  Nicolay,  the page in waiting,  then came to beg a little audience for
the Duchess of Ancaster.  The Queen went to her in the ante-room.  The
moment I was left with the Princesses,  they both came up to me,  and began

36*

426 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

conversing in the most easy,  unaffected,  cheerful,  and obliging manner that
can be conceived.

When the Queen returned,  the bell was rung for the bedchamber woman;
the etiquette of court days requiring that one of them should finish her
dress.

It happened now to be my acquaintance,  Mrs.  Fielding.  She only tied
on the necklace,  and handed the fan and gloves.  The Queen then leaves
the dressing-room,  her train being carried by the bedchamber woman.  The
Princesses follow.  She goes to the ante-room,  where she sends for the
Lady of the Bedchamber in waiting,  who then becomes the first train-bearer,
and they all proceed to the drawing-room.

We returned to Kew to dinner,  very late.  M.  Poller and Miss Planta
dined with us ;  and at the dessert I was very agreeably surprised by the
entrance of Sir Richard Jebb,  who stayed coffee.  It seems so odd to me
to see an old acquaintance in this new place and new situation,  that I
hardly feel as if I knew them.

Friday,  July 28th. — W^e returned to Windsor at noon.

The Kew life,  you will perceive,  is different from the Windsor.  As
there are no early prayers,  the Queen rises later  ;  and as there is no form
or ceremony here of any sort,  her dress is plain,  and the hour for the second
toilette extremely uncertain.  The royal family are here always in so very
retired a way,  that they live as the simplest country gentlefolks.  The
King has not even an equerry with him,  nor the Queen any lady to attend
her when she goes her airings.

Miss Planta belongs here to our table ;  so does any body that comes,  as
there is no other kept.

There is no excuse for parting after dinner,  and therefore I live un-
remittingly with Mrs.  Schwellenberg after the morning.

It is a still greater difficulty to see company here than at Windsor,  for
as my apartments are up stairs,  there is a greater danger of encountering
some of the royal family ;  and I find all the household are more delicate
in inviting or admitting any friends here than elsewhere,  on account of the
very easy and unreserved way in which the family live,  running about
from one end of the house to the other,  without precaution or care.

To-day I made my first evening visit,  and,  for the first time,  failed Mrs.
Schwellenberg's tea-table entirely.  You will be surprised to hear for
whom I took this effort ; — Lady Effingham  !  But I found from Mrs.
Delany she had been a little hurt by the passage-scene,  and seemed to think
I meant to avoid her future visits and civilities.  Mrs.  Delany,  therefore,
advised me to go to Stoke,  her country-seat,  by way of apologizing,  and to
request the Queen's permission,  promising to carry me herself.

I never hesitate where she counsels.  I thought it,  too,  a good oppor-
tunity of trying my length of liberty,  as Lady Effingham is one of the
ladies of the bedchamber,  and is frequently at the Lodge as a private
visiter.

It was inexpressibly awkward to me to ask leave to go out,  and
awkwardly enough I believe I did it,  only saying that if her Majesty had
no objection,  Mrs.  Delany would carry me in the evening to Stoke.  She
smiled immediate approbation,  and nothing more passed.

I had then to tell my intention to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who was,  I believe,
a littte surprised.  Fortunately,  Major Price came up stairs to coffee.  A
little surprised,  too,  I am sure,  was Major Price,  when I made off for the
whole evening.  Every body had taken it for granted I must necessarily
pursue the footsteps of Mrs.  Haggerdorn,'  and never stir out.     But,  thank

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  427

God,  I am not in the same situation  ;  she had no connexions — I have such
as no one,  I believe,  ever had before.

The evening was rainy  ;  but,  my leave asked and obtained,  my kind
Mrs.  Delany would not defer the excursion.     Stoke is about three miles ofT.

We were received in the civillest manner possible by Lady Effiingham,
and Sir George Howard and Lady Frances.  There were also several of
their relations with them.

Lady Effingham seems a mighty good-humoured,  friendly woman.  Sir
George is pompous,  yet he,  too,  is as good-humoured in his manners as his
lady.

Sunday,  July 30th. — This morning I received a letter,  which,  being
short and pithy,  I will copy  :

"  My dear Miss Burney,  or Mrs.  Burney,  as I am told you must now be
called — let your old friend Baretti give you joy of what has given him as
great and as quick a one as ever he felt in all his days.  God bless you,
and bless somebody I dare not name,  Amen.  And suppose I add,  bless me
too — will that do me any harm 1"

July 31st. — I had a very pleasant visit from Mrs.  Hastings this
morning,  whose gay good-humour is very enlivening  :  but she detained me
from my dress,  and I was not ready lor the Queen  ;  and I have now
adopted the measure of stationing John in the gallery while I am at that
noble occupation,  and making him keep off all callers,  by telling them  [
am dressing for the Queen.  I have no other way  ;  and being too late,  or
even the fear of being too late,  makes me nervous and ill.

Every little failure of this sort,  though always from causes unknown to
her Majesty,  she has borne without even a look of surprise or of gravity ;
though she never waits an instant,  for if Mrs.  Schwellenberg is not with
her,  she employs Mrs.  Thielky,  or goes on with her dress or her undress
without either.

This graciousness,  however,  makes me but the more earnest to grow
punctual  ;  especially as I am now always employed,  when present and in
time.

I went in the afternoon to Mrs.  de Luc.  Mr.  de Luc's place here
enables me to visit at that house with entire approbation,  whenever I
have leisure.  But I can scarce spare a moment of my own from Mrs.
Delany.

When I returned here,  to the conclusion of the tea-drinking,  I found a
new gentleman,  dressed in the King's Windsor uniform — which is blue and
gold,  turned up with red,  and worn by all the men who belong to his
Majesty,  and come into his presence at Windsor.

Major Price immediately presented us to each other.  It was General
Bude  :  what his post may be I have not yet learned,  but he is continually,
I am told,  at Windsor,  and always resides in this Lodge,  and eats with the
equerries.

I do not quite know what to say of General Bude;  except that his person
is tall and showy,  and his manners and appearance are fashionable.  But
he has a sneer in his smile that looks sarcastic,  and a distance in his
manner that seems haughty.

428

DIARY AND LETTERS 1766.

CHAPTER XXT.
1786.

The Young Princesses— The Queen's Lap-dog— A Nice Point— Royal Visiters— Duchess
of Ancaster— Lady Charlotte Bertie— Attempt on the King's Life by Margaret Nichol-
son—Behaviour of the Royal Family on the Occasion— The King's Relation of the
Circumstanpcs— Consternation of the Queen— Calm Behaviour of the King— New De-
tails of the Circumstances— The Assassin protected by the King— True Courage
evinced by the King— Insanity of the Assassin- Domestic Details— Alarm for Mrs.
Delany— The Dowager Lady Spencer— A Royal Favourite— Etiquette of a Palace—
The Heberdens— Visit of the Prince of Wales to Windsor Castle— Coolness betvveen
him and the King — The Newspapers of the Day — Royal Comments on them — The
Coronation Anthem — The Queen reading Cowper's Task — Lord Walsingham— Lord
and Lady Boston— The Neapolitan Ambassador— Congratulations— A Bold Request-
Royal Table-Talk— The Duke of Montagu— The King and Mrs.  Delany— An Embar-
rassment—Sir Francis Drake— A RoyafBirthday- Customs of the Day— The Chapel
Royal— A Staircase Drawing-room— A Walk on the Terrace— llie Infant Princess
Amelia— Royal Cortege— Etiquette of the Terrace at Windsor— An Evening Party—
OfficialJealousy— Loyalty of Kew— The Arcana of a Palace— Royal Gift— A Dilemma
— Mrs.  Locke— St.  James's— A Drawing-room— Court Scandal— Accusation and De-
fence— Divorce in Germany — Newspaper Calumny.

Wednesday,  August 2d. — This morning,  for the first linne,  I made a
little sort of acquaintance with the two younger Princesses.  I was coming
from the Queen's room,  very early,  when I met the Princess Mary,  just
arrived from the Lower Lodge  :  she was capering up stairs to her elder
sisters,  but instantly stopped at sight of me,  and then coming up to me,  in-
quired how I did,  with all the elegant composure of a woman of maturest
age.  Amazingly well are all these children brought up.  The readiness
and the grace of their civilities,  even in the midst of their happiest wild-
nesses and freedom,  are at once a surprise and a charm to all who see them.

The Queen,  when she goes to early prayers,  often leaves me the charge
of her little favourite dog,  Badine.  To-day,  after her return,  she sent her
page for him  ;  and presently after,  1 had a rap again at the door,  and the
little Princess Sophia entered.  "Miss Burney,"  cried she,  courtesying and
colouring,  "  Mamma has sent me for the little dog's basket."

I begged her permission to carry it to the Queen's room ;  but she would
not suffer me,  and insisted upon taking it herself,  with a mingled modesty
and good breeding extremely striking in one so young.

About half an hour after she returned again,  accompanying the Princess
Royal.  The Queen had given me a new collection of German books,  just
sent over,  to cut open for her ;  and she employed the Princess Royal to
label them.  She came most smilingly to the occupation,  and said she would
write down their names,  "  if I pleased,"  in my room.  You may believe I
was not much displeased.  I gave her a pencil,  and she seized a piece of
whity-brown paper,  inquiring  "  if she might have it  ?" — I would fain have
got her better,  but she began writing immediately,  stooping to the table.

I was now in a momentary doubt whether or not it would be proper,  or
too great a liberty,  to ask her royal highness to be seated  ;  but,  after a
moment's hesitation,  I thought it best to place her a chair,  and say nothing.

I did  ;  and she turned about to me with a most graceful courtesy,  and
immediately accepted it,  with a most condescending apology for my trouble.
I then,  thus encouraged,  put another chair for the little Princess Sophia,
who took it as sweetly.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  429

"  Pray sit down too  !"  cried the Princess Royal  :  "  I beg you will,  Miss
Burney  !"

I resisted a little while;  but she would not hear me,  insisting,  with the
most obliging earnestness,  upon carrying her point.

She writes German with as much facility as I do English  ;  and there-
fore, the whole time she was taking down the titles of the books,  she kept
up a conversation,  Mrs.  Delany her well and kindly-chosen subject.

When she had done her task,  she quitted me with the same sweetness,
and the Princess Mary ran in for her little sister.

The Princess Royal,  not long after,  again returned  : — "  There is no end
to me,  you will think this morning,"  cried she,  on entering;  and then de-
sired to have all the books I had cut open  :  nor would she sutTer me to
carry one for her,  though they were incommodious,  from their quantity,  for
herself.

Such has been the singular condescension of the Queen,  that every little
commission with which she has yet intrusted me she has contrived to render
highly honourable,  by giving the Princesses some share in them.

Jn the evening I had no little difficulty how to manage to go to Mrs.  De-
lany,— for I have here to mention the worst thing that has happened to me
at Windsor, — the desertion of Major Price from the coffee.  The arrival of
General Bude,  who belongs to the equerries'  table,  has occasioned his stay-
ing to do the honours to him till terrace time.  At tea,  they belong to Mrs.
Schwellenberg.

This has not only lost ine some of his society,  the most pleasant I had
had in the Lodge,  but has trebled my trouble to steal away.  While I left
him behind,  the absconding from a beau was apology all-sufficient for run-
ning away from a belle  ;  but now I am doubly wanted to stay,  and two-
doubly earnest to go  !

For this evening,  however,  an opportunity soon offered.  The Duchess
of Ancaster,  who,  with her daughter.  Lady Charlotte Bertie,  was just come
on a visit to the Queen,  called in upon Mrs.  Schwellenberg;  and,  after an
extremely civil salutation and introduction to me,  and joy-vvishing on my
appointment,  she showed so much agitation,  and seemed so desirous to
speak of something important to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  that I found it per-
fectly easy to make my apology for retiring.

I went into my own room for my cloak,  and,  as usual,  found Madame
La Fite just waiting for me.  She was all emotion, — she seized my hand,
— "  Have you heard 1 — 0 mon Dieic !  O le hon Roi  !  O Miss Burney  !
what an horreur!''''

I was very much startled,  but soon ceased to wonder at her perturbation  ;
— she had been in the room with the Princess Elizabeth,  and there heard,
from Miss Goldsworthy,  that an attempt had just been made upon the life
of the King !

I was almost petrified with horror at the intelligence.  If this King is not
safe, — good,  pious,  beneficent as he is, — if his life is in danger,  from his
own subjects,  what is to guard the Throne 1 and which way is a monarch
to be secure  ?

Miss Goldsworthy had taken every possible precaution so to tell the matter
to the Princess Elizabeth as least to alarm her,  lest it might occasion a
return of her spasms  ;  but,  fortunately,  she cried so exceedingly that it was
hoped the vent of her tears would save her from those terrible convulsions.

Madame La Fite had heard of the attempt only,  not the particulars  ;  but
I was afterwards informed of them in the most interesting manner, —
namely,  how they were related to the Queen.  And as the newspapers will
have told you all else,  I shall only and briefly tell that.

430 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

No information arrived here of the matter before his Majest3^'s return,  at
the usual hour in the afternoon,  from the levee.  The Spanish Minister had
hurried ofi'  instantly to Windsor,  and was in waiting,  at Lady Charlotte
Finch's,  to be ready to assure her Majesty of the King's safety,  in case any
report anticipated his return.

The Queen had the two eldest Princesses,  the Duchess of Ancaster,
and Lady Charlotte Bertie with her when the King came in.  He hastened
up to her,  with a countenance of striking vivacity,  and said  "  Here I am  !
safe and well, — as you see  ! — but I have very narrowly escaped being
stabbed  !"

His own conscious safety,  and the pleasure he felt in thus personally
showing it to the Queen,  made him not aware of the effect of so abrupt a
communication.  The Queen was seized with a consternation that at first
almost stupified her,  and,  after a most painful silence,  the first words she
could articulate were,  in looking round at the Duchess and Lady Charlotte,
who had both burst into tears, — "  I envy you  ! — I can't cry  !"

The two Princesses were for a little while in the same state  ;  but the tears
of the Duchess proved infectious,  and they then wept even with violence.

The King,  with the gayest good-humour,  did his utmost to comfort them ;
and then gave a relation of the aflair,  with a calmness and unconcern that,
had any one but himself been his hero,  would have been regarded as totally
unfeeling.

You may have heard it wrong  ;  I will concisely tell it right.  His carriage
had just stopped at the garden-door at St.  James's,  and he had just alighted
from it,  when a decently-dressed woman,  who had been waiting for him
some time,  approached him with a petition.  It was rolled up,  and had the
usual superscription — "  For the King's most Excellent Majesty."  She pre-
sented it with her right hand  ;  and,  at the same moment that the King bent
forward to take it,  she drew from it,  with her left hand,  a knife,  with which
she aimed straight at his heart !

The fortunate awkwardness of taking the instrument with the left hand
made her design perceived before it could be executed  ; — the King started
back,  scarce believing the testimony of his own eyes  ;  and the woman made
a second thrust,  which just touched his waistcoat before he had time to pre-
vent her ; — and at that moment one of the attendants,  seeing her horrible
intent,  wrenched the knife from her hand.

"  Has she cut my waistcoat?"  cried he,  in telling it, — "  Look!  for I has^e
had no time to examine."

Thank heaven,  however,  the poor wretch had not gone quite so far.
*'  Though nothing,"  added the King,  in giving his relation,  "  could have
been sooner done,  for there was nothing for her to go through but a thin
linen,  and fat."

While the guards and his own people now surrounded the King,  the
assassin was seized by the populace,  who were tearing her away,  no doubt
to fall the instant sacrifice of her murtherous purpose,  when the King,  the
only calm and moderate person then present,  called aloud to the mob,
"  The poor creature is mad  ! — Do not hurt her  !     She has not hurt me  !"

He then came forward,  and showed himself to all the people,  declaring
he was perfectly safe and unhurt ;  and then gave positive orders that the
woman should be taken care of,  and went into the palace,  and had his
levee.

There is something in the whole of his behaviour upon this occasion that
strikes me as proof indisputable of a true and noble courage  :  for in a
moment so extraordinary — an attack,  in this country,  unheard of before — to

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLXA.  431

settle so instantly that it was the effect of insanity,  to feel no apprehension
of private plot or latent conspiracy — to stay out,  fearlessly,  among his
people,  and so benevolently to see himself to the safety of one who had
raised her arm against his life, — these little traits,  all impulsive,  and there-
fore to be trusted,  have given me an impression of respect and reverence
that I can never forget,  and never think of but with fresh admiration.

If that love of prerogative,  so falsely assigned,  were true,  what an oppor-
tunity was here offered to exert it !  Had he instantly taken refuge in his
palace,  ordered out all his guards,  stopped every avenue to St.  James's,  and
issued his commands that every individual present at this scene should be
secured and examined, — who would have dared murmur,  or even blame
such measures 1

The insanity of the woman has now fully been proved  :  but that noble
confidence which gave that instant excuse for her was then all his own.

Nor did he rest here;  notwithstanding the excess of terror for his safety,
and doubt of further mischief,  with which all his family and all his household
were seized,  he slill maintained the most cheerful composure,  and insisted
upon walking on the terrace,  with no other attendant than his single
equerry.

The poor Queen went with him,  pale and silent, — the Princesses fol-
lowed, scarce yet commanding their tears.  In the evening,  just as usual,
the King had his concert  :  but it was an evening of grief and horror to his
family  ;  nothing was listened to,  scarce a word was spoken  ;  the Princesses
wept continually  ;  the Queen,  still more deeply struck,  could only,  from
time to time,  hold out her hand to the King,  and say,  "  I have you yet !"

The affection for the King felt by all his household has been at once
pleasant and affecting to me to observe :  there has not been a dry eye in
either of the Lodges,  on the recital of his danger,  and not a face but his
own that has not worn marks of care ever since.

I put oft' my visit to my dear i\Irs.  Delany  ;  I was too much horror-struck
to see her immediately  ;  and when,  at night,  I went to her,  I determined to
spare her the shock of this event till the next day.     I was sure it would

soon travel to her house ;  and I cautioned Miss P and Mrs.  Astley,  if

any intelligence reached them concerning the King,  to conceal it.

I found the Dowager Lady Spencer with her,  whom I had been invited to
meet,  at her repeated desire.  She was easy,  chatty,  and obliging  ;  she
seems to have a good understanding,  and a perfect assurance of it.  She
was most earnestly flattering about cultivating our acquaintance,  which had
begun last winter at Mrs.  Delany's in town.

General Bude and  ]M;ijor Price were with Mrs.  Schwellenberg at my
return  ;  and not a word was uttered by either of them concerning the
day's terrific alarm.  There seemed nothing but general consternation and
silence.

When I went to the Queen at night she scarce once opened her lips.
Indeed I could not look at her without feeling the tears ready to start into
my eyes.  But I was very glad to hear again the voice of the King,  though
only from the next apartment,  and calling to one of his dogs.

August 3d. — The poor Queen looked so ill that it was easy to see how
miserable had been her night.  It is unfortunately the unalterable opinion
of Mrs.  Schwellenberg that some latent conspiracy belongs to this attempt,
and therelore that it will never rest here.  This dreadful suggestion preys
upon the mind of the Que^en,  though she struggles to conquer or conceal it.
I longed passionately this morning,  when alone with her,  to speak upon the
matter,  and combat the opinion  ;  but as she still said nothing,  it was not
possible.

432 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

When she was dressed for the chapel,  she desired me to keep little
Badine;  but he ran out after her  :  I ran too,  and in the gallery leading from
the Queen's room to mine,  all the Princesses,  and their governesses,  were
waiting for the Queen.  They all looked very ill,  the Princess Royal
particularly.  O well indeed might they tremble  !  for a father more tender,
more kind,  more amiable,  I believe has scarcely ever had daughters to
bless.

The Princess Mary assisted me to recover the little dog,  or,  rather,  took
all the trouble herself,  for she caught him and brought him to me in her
arms  ;  and the Princess Augusta very sweetly came up to me,  to say she
had just seen Mrs.  Delany pass by to the chapel,  which must be a proof of
her health.

The Queen and Princesses then went into the room where they usually
wait for the King.  Miss Goldsworthy came forward,  wiih another lady,
who,  she said,  desired acquaintance with me:  it was Mile.  Monmoulin,  one
of the governesses.

Major Price,  who was in waiting for the King at the head of a great
staircase just out of the gallery,  made me also his bow,  but is ever scrupu-
lously attentive not to utter a syllable either in the sight or in the hearing
of the King or Queen.

I then passed on to my own room,  which terminates this gallery.  But
I have since heard it is contrary to rule to pass even the door of an
apartment in which any of the royal family happen to be,  if it is open.
However,  these little formalities are all dispensed with to the ignorant;  and
as I learn better I shall observe them more.  I am now obliged lo feel and
find my way as I can,  having no friend,  adviser,  nor informer in the whole
house.  Accident only gives me any instruction,  and that generally arrives
too late to save an error.  My whole dependence is upon the character of
the Queen;  her good sense and strong reason will always prevent the unne-
cessary offence of ranking mistakes from inexperience with disrespect or
inattention.  I have never,  therefore,  a moment's uneasiness upon these
points;  though there is a lady who from time to time represents them as
evils the most heinous.

1 had afterwards a letter from my poor Mrs.  Delany,  written with her
own hand,  and with a pencil,  as she is now too indistinct of sight to see
even a word.  She writes therefore only by memory,  and,  if with a pen and
ink,  cannot find her place again when she leaves it,  to dip her pen in the
inkstand.

She had escaped the news at the chapel,  by the care of Lady Spencer,
who had been cautioned to watch her ;  but she had been told it afterwards
by Lady Spencer herself,  lest it should reach her ears in any worse manner.
You may imagine how greatly it shocked her.  1 ran to answer her note in
person,  determining,  upon such an occasion,  to risk appearing before the
Queen a second time in my morning dress,  rather than not satisfy my dear
Mrs.  Delany by word of mouth.  I gave her all the comfort in my power,
and raised her agitated spirits by dwelling upon the escape,  and slightly-
passing by the danger.

The Queen was so late before her second summons that I was still in
lime.  I found her with her eyes almost swollen out of her head,  but more
cheerful and easy,  and evidently relieved by the vent forced,  at length,  to
her tears.

She now first spoke upon the subject to me  ;  inquiring how Mrs.  Delany
had borne the hearing it.  I told her of the letter sent me in the morning,
and half proposed showing it,  as it expressed her feelings beyond the power
of any other words.    She bowed her desire to see it,  and I ran and brought

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.  433

it.     She read it aloud,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg being present,  and was pleased
and soothed by it.

Almost as soon as I returned to my room,  I had the honour of a visit
from the Duchess of Ancaster,  who sat with me till dinner time.  She is,
easy,  obliging,  unaffected,  and well bred.  I am happy to like her so well
and happy in her civility,  as I find she spends the greatest part of the
summer here.

She told me all the particulars I have related already concerning the
"Wednesday's alarming business.  You may easily imagine no other subject
can find entrance here at present.

A little incident happened afterwards that gave me great satisfaction in
perspective.  While I was drinking coffee with Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  a
message was brought to me,  that Mrs.  and Miss Heberdcn desired their
compliments,  and would come to drink tea with me if I was disengaged.

To drink tea with me!  The words made me colour.  I hesitated, —
I knew not if I might accept such an offer.  With regard to themselves,  I
had little or no interest in it,  as they were strangers to me,  but with regard
to such an opening to future potentiality, — there,  indeed,  the message
acquired consequence.

After keeping the man some minutes,  I was so much at a loss still,  to
know what step I had power to take,  that I was induced to apply to Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  asking her what I must do.

"  What you please  !"  was her answer ;  and I waited nothing more explicit,
but instantly sent back my compliments,  and that I should be very glad of
their company.

This was a most happy event to me  :  it first let me know the possibility
of receiving a friend in my own room to tea.

Both mother and daughter are sensible women.  I had met them one
morning at Mrs.  Delany's,  and they had then proposed and settled that we
were to meet again.

They left me before the tea-party assembled in our common room.  It
was very much crowded,  every body being anxious to hear news of the
Queen.  Miss Egerton,  Mrs.  Fielding,  and her three daughters,  Mrs.
Douglas,  wife of the biographical Dr.  Douglas,  and my own dear Mrs.
Delany,  were amongst them.  The General and the Major as usual ;  and
the rest were strangers to me.

When they were all gone but Mrs.  Delany,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg made us
both very happy by a private communication that the Prince of Whales was
actually then in the Lodge,  whither he rode post haste,  on the first news of
the alarm given to the Queen.

Friday,  August 4th. — This was an extremely arduous morning to the
poor Queen.  The King again went to town  ;  and her anxiety in his absence,
and fear how it might end,  oppressed her most painfully.  She could not
take her usual airing.  She shut herself up with the Princess Augusta  ;  but,
to avoid any rumours of her uneasiness,  the carriage and usual horsemen were
all at the door at the customary time  ;  and the Princess Royal,  attended by
the Duchess of Ancaster,  went out,  and passed,  driving quick through the
town,  for the Queen herself,  to most of the people.

At her toilette,  before dinner.  Lady Effingham was admitted.  The
Queen had her newspapers as usual,  and she read aloud,  while her hair
was dressing,  several interesting articles concerning the attack,  the noble
humanity of the King,  his presence of mind,  and the blessing to the whole
nation arising from his preservation.  The spirit of loyalty,  warmth,  and
zeal with which all the newspapers are just now filled seemed extremely
VOL.  I.  37

434 DIARY AISD LETTERS 1786.

gratifying to her  :  she dwelt upon several of the strongest expressions with
marked approbation,  exclaiming from time to time,  as she read particular
praises of his Majesty's worth and importance,  "  That is true I — That is
true,  indeed !" — But suddenly,  afterwards,  coming upon a paragraph
beginning with the words of the coronation anthem,  "  Long live the King  !
May the  "king live for ever !"  her tears flowed so last that they blinded her,
and to hear her read such words was so extremely affecting,  that I was
obliged to steal behind her chair to hide myself;  while Lady Effingham
took out her handkerchief,  and cried in good earnest.  I believe her to be
warmly and gratefully attached both to the King and Queen  ;  and she has
received from the Queen very uncommon assistance,  I am informed,  in
some very distressful situations.

The Queen,  however,  read on  ;  dispersing her tears as she could,  and
always smiling through them when the praise,  not the danger,  drew them
forth'

Nothing could be more gracious than her manner to me the whole time :
she did not,  as usual,  dismiss me,  either for her hair-dressing,  or for Lady
Effingham  :  she was sure I must be interested in what was going forward,
and she looked at us alternately,  for our comments as she went on.

I rejoiced she had not set me to read these papers.  I expected,  for the
first week,  every summons would have ended in a command to read to her.
But it never happened,  and I was saved an exertion for which I am sure I
should have had no voice.

One night,  indeed,  I thought the matter inevitable.  Something was men-
tioned, by the Queen,  to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  of Mr.  Cowper's poem of the
Task  ;  and she said there was one of the most just compliments,  without
extravagance,  and without coldness,  that could be paid him.  She asked me
if I knew the poem  ?  I told her only by character.  She then desired me
to get the book,  which was only in the window.

I did, — and felt all my breath desert me at the same moment.  I held it
quietly,  by the side of her chair,  fearing every instant her commands to
find the passage,  and read it :  but,  very unexpectedly,  she took it into her
own hands,  to look for it,  and then read it aloud herself,  looking at me as
she proceeded,  to observe and to draw from me what I thought of it.

How sweet this was  !  when merely curiosity must have led her to wish
to hear me,  that she m[ght judge whether or not I could be of any use to
her in a capacity in which she has declared she really wants an assistant.

From this time she frequently read me little paragraphs out of the papers,
without even appearing to think of employing me in that way.

Madame La Fite,  in the afternoon of my descent from Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg to go to Mrs.  Delany,  brought me Mile.  Monmoulin.  She seems a
perfectly good creature,  and is one of the best and finest workwomen to be
met with.  She has taught the little Princesses a thousand ingenious uses of
the needle.

I still had time for a moment or two with my Windsor guardian angel,
and failed not to accept them.

On my entrance into the common room I found it again filled with com-
pany. The first to speak to me was Lord Walsingham,  whom I had spent
a day or two with at Thames Ditton.  His lady,  also,  was there ;  and
Lord and Lady Boston,  Miss Egerton,  a German Baron,  M.  Del Campo,  the
Spanish Ambassador,  and the General and the Major.

The confusion of the present time,  and the quantity of company pouring
into Windsor to pay their respects to the King and Queen,  make the place
appear all crowd and bustle.  I rejoice in the proof it affords of the uni-
versal interest taken in the safety of ihe King.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  435

The German Baron is an attendant on the Duke de Saxe Gotha,  who
was here for a few days again  :  he remained therefore after all others were
gone,  except Major Price  ;  and as he could speak no English,  Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg had him wholly on her own hands,  to entertain in German.

I had again a very long confabulation with Major Price,  who seems to
make it a part of his business to do whatever is in his power to assist me
over the awkwardness of my first passage into a situation so utterly new
to me.  I had,  indeed,  to-day,  made a little step forward for him.  In my way
to the Queen at noon,  he had stopped me,  in the gallery,  to inquire if I had
the Queen's newspapers? — No,  I said,  I never saw any but in her own
hands.  "  I wanted exceedingly,"  cried he,  "  to look at the Morning Herald,
and see in what manner they treat this affair there."  He was going on,
but I was in too much haste to answer him,  and only made the best of my
way to the dressing-room.  But as I owed him every little civility in my
power,  I determined to make my apology for running off,  by procuring him
the newspaper.  I ventured,  therefore,  to tell the Queen his wish to see
the Morning Herald,  and she instantly said,  "  O certainly !  Let him see
them all."

I brought them,  therefore,  away,  and sent them to him by John.  He
thanked me this evening,  but was quite startled when I told him how the
matter had passed,  and that I had made the request for him.  I believe it
was a little out of the usual order of things  ;  but it could not signify.

Sunday,  August 6tii. — The private conduct of the Royal Family is all
so good,  so exemplary,  that it is with the greatest pleasure I take,  from
time to time,  occasion to give my Susan some traits of it.

This morning,  before church,  Miss Planta was sent to me by the Queen,
for some snuff,  to be mixed as before  :  when I had prepared it,  I carried it,
as directed,  to her Majesty's dressing-room.  I turned round the lock,  for
that,  not rapping at the door,  is the mode of begging admission  ;  and she
called out to me to come in.

I found her reading,  aloud,  some religious book,  but I could not discover
what,  to the three eldest Princesses.  Miss Planta was in waiting.  She con-
tinued after my entrance,  only motioning to me that the snuff might be put
in a box upon the table.

I did not execute my task very expeditiously  :  for I was glad of this
opportunity of witnessing the maternal piety with which she enforced,  in
voice and expression,  every sentence that contained any lesson that might
be useful to her Royal daughters.  She reads extremely well,  with great
force,  clearness,  and meaning.

Just as I had slowly finished my commission,  the King entered.  She then
stopped,  and rose  ;  so instantly did the Princesses.  He had a letter in hfs
hand open:  he said something to the Queen in German,  and they left the
room together;  but he turned round from the door,  and first spoke to me,
with a good-humoured laugh,  saying,  "  xMiss Burney,  I hear you cook snufF
very well !"

"Cook snuff!"  repeated the Princess Augusta,  laughing,  and coming up
to me the moment they had left the room.  "  Pray,  Miss Barney,  let me
have one pinch !"

The Princess Elizabeth ran up to me,  also,  exclaiming  "  Miss Burney,  I
hope you hate snuff I I hope you do,  for 1 hate it of all things in the
world  !"

In the afternoon I had a sweet visit from Mrs.  Delany,  who stayed with
me till the evening party,  when she accompanied me into the tea-room,
where we found the Duke of Montagu,  31.  Del Campo,  the German Baron,
and Mr.  Fisher,  with the two customary beaux.

436 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

Just as tea was over,  the door opened,  and the King entered.  He only
seized Mrs.  Delany by the arm,  and,  laughing a little at the enltvement^
instantly carried her away with him to the concert-room.  I was very glad
even to lose her thus,  knowing well the great gratification she receives from
the honours done her by such sovereigns.

The Major and General immediately followed,  but the Baron stayed,  and
while he engrossed Mrs.  Schvvellenberg — (I wish he would live here  !) — and
M.  Del Campo the Duke,  Mr.  Fisher,  for the first time,  entered into conver-
sation with me,  and spoke to me of Mrs.  Thrale — with whom he had seen
me in former times — with such candour that it quite won my heart.

During this discourse,  Weslerhahl,  one of Mrs.  Schwellenberg's domestics,
called me out of the room.     John waited to speak to me in the gallery.

"  What time,  ma'am,"  cried he,  "  shall you have your supper 1"

"  What supper?"  cried I.     "I only eat fruit,  as usual."

"Have not you ordered supper,  ma'am,  for to-night]"

"  No."

"  There is one cooking for you — a fowl and peas."

"  It's some great mistake  ;  run down and tell them so."

I returned to the company,  and would have related the adventure,  had I
been in spirits;  but voluntary speech escaped me not.  Where I am not
happy,  or forced to it,  it never does.  In silence and in quiet,  I court repose
and revival ;  and I think,  my dearest Susan,  I feel that they will come.

Presently 1 was called out again.

"  Ma'am,"  cried John,  "  the supper is ordered in your name.  I saw the
order — the clerk of the kitchen gave it in."

This was the most ridiculous thing I ever heard.  1 desired him to run
down forthwith,  and inquire by whose directions all this was done.

He came back,  and said,  "  By Sir Francis Drake's."

Sir Francis Drake is,  I think,  steward of the household.

I then desired him to interfere no more,  but let the matter be pursued in
their own way.

As soon as the company was gone,  all but a Miss Mawer,  who is on a
visit to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  I told my tale.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg said the
orders had been hers,  that a hot supper belonged to my establishment,  and
that sometimes she might come and eat it with me.

I had now not a word to add.  At ten o'clock,  both she and Miss Mawer
accompanied me to my room.

Miss Mawer is an old maid  ;  tall,  thin,  sharp-featured,  hurrying and disa-
greeable in her manner,  but,  I believe,  good-natured and good-hearted,  from
all I have observed in her.  The smell of the meat soon grew offensive to
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who left me with Miss Mawer.  As I never eat any
myself at night,  all 1 could devise to make the perfume tolerable was to con-
sider it as an opportunity for a lesson in carving :  so I went to work straight-
forward to mangle my unbidden guest,  for the use and service of Miss
Mawer.

Soon after,  I was delighted and surprised by the entrance of Mrs.  Delany,
ushered to my room by Major Price.  The concert being over,  and the
Royal Family retired to supper,  she would not go away without seeing me.
I thanked the Major for bringing me so sweet a guest,  but almost fear he
expected to be invited in with her.  I am sure I could have had nothing but
pleasure from his joining us ;  but I had made a rule,  on my thus first setting
up for myself,  to invite no man whatever,  young,  old,  married,  single,
acquaintance or stranger,  till I knew precisely the nature of my own situa-
tion :  for I had been warned by an excellent friend,  Mrs.  De Luc,  on my
first entrance into oflice,  that there was no drawing back in a place such as

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,  437

this  ;  and that therefore I ought studiously to Iceep back,  till I felt my way,
and knew,  experimentally,  what I could do,  and what 1 should wish to leave
alone.

This advice has been of singular use to me,  in a thousand particulars,
from the very first to the present day of my abode in this Lodge.  Mrs.  De
Luc trusted me with several other private hints,  that have proved of the
greatest utility to me.  Indeed,  I never see her without receiving the most
indubitable testimonies of her confidence and friendship.

MoxDAY,  August 7th. — This has been the first cheerful day since the
memorable and alarming attack of the 2d of August.  It was the birthday
of the little Princess Amelia;  and the fondness of the whole family for that
lovely child,  and her own infantine enjoyment of the honours paid her,  have
revived the spirits of the whole house.

The manner of keeping the birthdays here is very simple.  All the
Royal Family are new dressed  ;  so — at least so they appear — are all their
attendants.  The dinners and desserts are unusually sumptuous;  and some
of the principal officers of state,  and a few of the ladies of the court,  come
to Windsor to make their compliments  ;  and at night there is a finer con-
cert, by an addition from town of the musicians belonging to the Queen's
band.  If the weather is fine,  all the fi^mily walk upon the terrace,  which
is crowded with people of distinction,  who take that mode of showing
respect,  to avoid the trouble and fatigue of attending at the following draw-
ing-room.

Another method,  too,  which is taken to express joy and attachment upon
these occasions,  is by going to the eight o'clock prayers at the Royal Chapel.
The congregation all assemble,  after the service,  in the opening at the
foot of the great stairs which the Royal Family descend from their gallery;
and there those who have any pretensions to notice scarce ever fail to meet
with it.

To-day,  this Staircase Drawing-room,  as it is named by Major Price,
was very much crowded  ;  and it was a sweet sight to me,  from my win-
dows, to see that the royal group — respectfully followed by many people of
distinction,  who came on the occasion,  and,  at a still greater distance,
encircled by humbler,  but not less loyal congratulators — had their chief
attention upon my dear,  aged,  venerable Mrs.  Delany,  who was brought in
by the King and Queen,  to partake with them the birthday breakfast.

In the evening,  for the first time since my arrival,  I went upon the ter-
race, under the wing and protection of my dear Mrs.  Delany,  who was
tempted to walk there herself,  in order to pay her respects on the little Prin-
cess's birthday.     She was carried in her chair to the foot of the steps.

Mrs.  Delany was desirous to save herself for the royal encounter :  she
therefore sat down on the first seat till the royal party appeared in sight :
we then,  of course,  stood up.

It was really a mighty pretty procession.  The little Princess,  just turned
of three years old,  in a robe coat covered with fine muslin,  a dressed close
cap,  white gloves,  and a fan,  walked on alone and first,  highly delighted in
the parade,  and turning from side to side to see every body as she passed  :  for
all the terracers stand up against the walls,  to make a clear passage for the
Royal Family,  the moment they come in sight.  Then followed the King
and Queen,  no less delighted themselves with the joy of their little darling.
The Princess Royal,  leaning on Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave,  followed at a
little distance.

This Princess,  the second female in the kingdom,  shows,  I think,  more
marked respect and humility towards the King and Queen than any of the
family.

37*

438 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

Next the Princess Augusta,  holding by the Duchess of Ancaster ;  and
next the Princess Elizabeth,  holding by Lady Charlotte Bertie.  Office here
takes place of rank,  which occasioned Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave,  as lady
of her bedchamber,  to walk with the Princess Royal.

Then followed the Princess Mary with Miss Goldsworthy,  and the Prin-
cess Sophia with Mademoiselle Monmoulin and Miss Planta ;  then General
Bude and the Duke of Montagu ;  and,  lastly,  Major Price,  who,  as equerry,
always brings up the rear,  walks at a distance from the group,  and keeps
off all crowd from the Royal Family.

On sight of Mrs.  Delany,  the King instantly stopped to speak to her.  The
Queen,  of course,  and the little Princess,  and all the rest,  stood still,  in their
ranks.  They talked a good while with the sweet old lady ;  during which
time the King once or twice addressed himself to me.  I caught the Queen's
eye,  and saw in it a little surprise,  but by no means any displeasure,  to see
me of the party.

The little Princess went up to Mrs.  Delany,  of whom she is very fond,
and behaved like a little angel to her :  she then,  with a look of inquiry and
recollection,  slowly,  of her own accord,  came behind Mrs.  Delany to look
at me.  "  I am afraid,"  said I,  in a whisper,  and stooping down,  "  your
Royal Highness does not remember me  ?"

What think you was her answer]  An arch little smile,  and a nearer
approach,  with her lips pouted out to kiss me.  I could not resist so inno-
cent an invitation ;  but the moment I had accepted it,  I was half afraid it
might seem,  in so public a place,  an improper liberty :  however,  there was
no help for it.  She then took my fan,  and,  having looked at it on both
sides,  gravely returned it me,  saying,  "  O  !  a brown fan  !"

The King and Queen then bid her curtsey to Mrs.  Delany,  which she
did most gracefully,  and they all moved on ;  each of the Princesses speak-
ing to Mrs.  Delany as they passed,  and condescending to curtsey to her
companion.

We afterwards met the Heberdens,  Fieldings,  Egertons,  Lord Walsing-
ham,  and Dr.  Lind.  Lord Walsingham gave me a pretty palpable hint or
two of being willing lo honour me with a call ;  but I pretended not to under-
stand him.  I am forced to that method of slack comprehension continually,
to save myself from more open and awkward declinings.

Mrs.  Delany was too much fatigued to return to the Lodge to tea ;  but
Mrs.  Fielding and her three daughters.  Lord Courtown,  Mr.  Fisher,  the
General,  and the Major,  made up our set.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg was very ill.  She declined making tea,  and put it into
the hands of the General.  I had always kept back from that office,  as w^ell
as from presiding at the table,  that I might keep the more quiet,  and be per-
mitted to sit silent ;  which,  at first,  was a repose quite necessary to my
depressed state of spirits,  and which,  as they grew better,  I found equally
necessary to keep off the foul fiends of Jealousy and Rivality in my col-
league ;  who,  apparently,  never wishes to hear my voice but when we are
Ute-a-tete,  and then never is in good-humour when it is at rest.  I could
not,  however,  see this feminine occupation in masculine hands,  and not,  for
shame,  propose taking it upon myself.  The General readily relinquished it,
and I w^as fain to come forth and do the honours.

Lord Courtown sat himself next me,  and talked with me the whole time,
in well-bred and pleasant discourse.  The Major waited upon me as
assiduously as if he had been as much my equerry as the King's,  and all
went smooth,  well,  and naturally,  except that the poor sick lady grew
evidently less and less pleased with the arrangement of things,  and less and

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  439

less in humour with its arrangers :  so obvious,  indeed,  was the displeasure
that the cipher should become a number,  that had my own mind been easy,
I should have felt much vexed to observe what a curb was placed over me  :
for hitherto,  except when she has been engaged herself,  and only to Major
Price and Mr.  Fisher,  that cipher had  "  word spoke never one."  'Tis won-
derful, my dearest Susan,  what wretched tempers are to be met with —
wretched in and to themselves — wretched to and for all that surround them.
However,  while only to be stupid and silent will do,  we shall not be at
variance.  Were I happier,  perhaps I might comply with more difficulty;  so
be not sorry,  my Susan,  nor you,  my sweet Fredy,  if,  by-and-by,  you
should hear me complain.     It will be a very good sign.

August 8th. — An exceeding pretty scene was exhibited to-day to their
Majesties.  We came,  as usual on every alternate Tuesday,  to Kew.  The
Queen's Lodge is at the end of a long meadow,  surrounded with houses,
which is called Kew Green;  and this was quite filled with all the inhabi-
tants of the place — the lame,  old,  blind,  sick,  and infants,  who all assembled,
dressed in their Sunday garb,  to line the sides of the roads through which
their Majesties passed,  attended by a band of musicians,  arranged in the
front,  who began  "  God save the King  !"  the moment they came upon the
Green,  and finished it with loud huzzas.  This was a compliment at the
expense of the better inhabitants,  who paid the musicians themselves,  and
mixed in with the group,  which indeed left not a soul,  I am told,  in any
house in the place.

This testimony of loyal satisfaction in the King's safe return,  after the
attempted assassination,  affected the Queen to tears  :  nor were they shed
alone ;  for almost every body's flowed that witnessed the scene.  The
Queen,  in speaking of it afterwards,  said,  "  I shall always love little Kew
for this!"

At the second toilette to-day,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who left the dressing-
room before me,  called out at the door,  "  Miss Bernar,  when you have done
from the Queen,  come to my room."

There was something rather more peremptory in the order,  than was
quite pleasant to me,  and I rather drily answered,  "  Very well,  Mrs.
Schwellenberg."

The Queen was even uncommonly sweet and gracious in her manner
after this lady's departure,  and kept me with her some time after she was
dressed.  I never go from her presence till I am dismissed ;  no one does,
not even when they come in only with a hurried message, — except the
pages,  who enter merely as messengers,  and Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  whose
place and illness together have given her that privilege.

The general form of the dismission,  which you may perhaps be curious
to hear,  is in these words,  "  Now I will let you go,"  which the Queen
manages to speak with a grace that takes from them all air of authority.

At first,  I must confess,  there was something inexpressibly awkward to
me in waiting to be told to go,  instead of watching an opportunity,  as else-
where, for taking leave before I thought myself de trop :  but I have since
found that this is,  to me,  a mark of honour;  as it is the established custom
to people of the first rank,  the Princesses themselves included,  and only not
used to the pages and the wardrobe women,  who are supposed only to enter
for actual business,  and therefore to retire when it is finished,  without expecta-
tion of being detained to converse,  or beyond absolute necessity.

I give you all these little details of interior royalty,  because they are
curious,  from opening a new scene of life,  and can only be really known by
interior residence.

When I went to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  she said,  "  You might know I had

440 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

something to say to you,  by my calling you before tbe Queen."  She then
proceeded to a long prelude,  which I could but ill comprehend,  save that it
conveyed much of obligation on my part,  and favour on hers  ;  and then
ended with,  "I might tell you now,  the Queen is going to Oxford,  and j'ou
might go with her  ;  it is a secret — you might not tell it nobody.  But 1 tell
you once,  I shall do for you what I can  ;  you are to have a gown."

I stared,  and drew back,  with a look so undisguised of wonder and dis-
pleasure at this extraordinary speech,  that I saw it was understood,  and she
then thought it time,  therefore,  to name her authority,  which,  with great
emphasis,  she did thus  :  "  The Queen will give you a gown  !  The Queen
says you are not rich,"  &c.

There was something in the manner of this quite intolerable to me  ;  and
I hastily interrupted her with saying,  "I have two new gowns by me,  and
therefore do not require another."

Perhaps a proposed present from her Majesty was never so received
before;  but the grossness of the manner of the messenger swallowed up the
graciousness of the design in the principal;  and I had not even a w^ish to
conceal how little it was to my taste.

The highest surprise sat upon her brow:  she had imagined that a gown
— that any present — would have been caught at with obsequious avidity  ;
but indeed she was mistaken.

Seeing the wonder and displeasure now hers,  I calmly added,  "  The Queen
is very good,  and I am very sensible of her Majesty's graciousness;  but
there is not,  in this instance,  the least occasion for it."

"Miss Bernar,"  cried she,  quite angrily,  "I tell you once,  when the
Queen will give you a gown,  you must be humble,  thankful,  when you are
Duchess of Ancaster  !"

She then enumerated various ladies to whom her Majesty had made
the same present,  many of them of the first distinction,  and all,  she said,
great secrets.     Still I only repealed again the same speech.

I can bear to be checked and curbed in discourse,  and would rather be
subdued into silence — and even,  if that proves a gratification that secures
peace and gives pleasure,  into apparent insensibility  ;  but to receive a favour
through ihe vehicle of insolent ostentation — no!  no!  To submit to ill-
humour rather than argue and dispute,  I think an exercise of patience,  and I
encourage myself all I can to practise it:  but to accept even a shadow of an
obligation upon such terms I should think mean and unworthy  ;  and there-
fore I mean always,  in a Court as I would elsewhere,  to be open and fear-
less in declining such subjection.

When she had finished her list of secret ladies,  I told her I must beg to
speak to the Queen,  and make my own acknowledgments for her gracious
intention.

This she positively forbid  ;  and said it must only pass through her hands.
"  When I give you the gown,"  she added,  "  I will tell you when you may
make your curtsey."

I was not vexed at this prohibition,  not knowing what etiquette I might
ofl^end by breaking it;  and the conversation concluded with nothing being
settled.

I might have apprehended some misrepresentation of this conference;
but I could not give up all my own notions of what I think every body owes
to themselves,  so far as to retract or apologize,  or say any thing further.  I
determined to run the risk of what might be related,  and wait the event
quietly.  In situations entirely new,  where our own ideas of right and wrong
are not strictly and courageously adhered to from the very beginning,  we
are liable to fall into shackles which no after time,  no future care and atten-
tion, can enable us to shake off.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  441

How little did the sweet Queen imagine that this her first mark of favour
should so be offered me as to raise in me my first spirit of resistance  !  How
differently would she have executed her own commission herself!  To avoid
exciting jealousy was,  I doubt not,  her motive for employing another.

At night,  however,  this poor woman was so ill,  so lost for want of her
party at cards,  and so frightened with apprehensions of the return of some
dreadful spasmodic complaints,  from which she has many years suffered
the severest pain,  that 1 was induced to do a thing you will wonder at,  and
against which I had resolved to struggle unrelentingly.  This was to play
at cards with her.  She had frequently given me broad hints of desiring
me to learn  ;  but I had openly declared 1 disliked cards,  and never wished
nor meant to learn a single game.  However,  to-night's sufferings conquered
me,  and 1 proposed it myself.  The offer was plumply accepted,  and INIiss
Planta was sent for to help to teach me.  Irksome enough is this compli-
ance ;  but while I stand firm in points of honour,  I must content myself to
relinquish those of inclination.  Miss Goldsworthy and Miss Planta spent
the day with us.

August 9th. — T had my dearest Mrs.  Locke to tea and supper.  I need
give no account to my Susan of particulars she must long since have heard
from the so much better way of conversation.

August 10th. — I journeyed to town with IMrs.  Schwellenberg and Miss
Planta  ;  and this morning I was employed for the first time on a message
to the Queen.  I was in the ante-room,  when Mr.  Nicolay,  her Majesty's
page at St.  James's,  came and told me the Duchess of Ancaster sent her
humble duty to the Queen,  and begged an audience before the drawing-
room.  I told the Queen,  who,  when dressed,  all but her necklace,  received
the Duchess in the ante-room.

I mention all these little ceremonies as they occur,  that hereafter I may
have no occasion,  when they lead to other matters,  to explain them.

When the Queen left the dressing-room,  the two eldest Princesses,  who
had been summoned at the same time,  both came to speak with me.

"  Pm so glad.  Miss Burney,"  cried the Princess Royal,  "that you have
seen Mrs.  Locke to-day.   I believe I saw her going away from your room."

The bedchamber woman was rung for on the Queen's return.  So you
see I am not the only one to answer a bell.  It was Mrs.  Fielding,  who
looked at me with an attention that will not leave her much in doubt as to
my dress,  at least,  though she could not speak.  I have told you,  I believe,
that no one,  not even the Princesses,  ever speak in the presence of the
King and Queen,  but to answer what is immediately said by themselves.
There are,  indeed,  occasions in which this is set aside,  from particular en-
couragement given at the moment;  but it is not less a rule,  and it is one
very rarely infringed.

When the drawing-room began,  I went to my own room  ;  and there I
had the great happiness of finding my father,  who had contrived to be in
town purposely,  and to whom I had sent John,  in St.  Martin's Street,  that
he might be shown the straight way to my apartment.  He had determined
upon going to the drawing-room himself,  to manifest,  amongst the general
zeal of the times,  his loyal joy in his Majesty's safety.

The drawing-room was over very late indeed.  So anxious has been the
whole nation to show their affectionate attachment to the King,  that this,  the
first drawing-room since his danger,  was as splendid,  and as much crowded,
as upon a birthday.  When the Queen summoned me,  upon returning to her
dressing-room,  and mentioned how fijll and how hot it had been,  I ventured
to say,  "  I am very glad of it,  ma'am  ;  it was an honest crowd to-day."

442 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

At tea I found a new uniform.  Major Price immediately introduced me
to him  ;  he was Colonel Fairly.  He is a man of the most scrupulous good
breeding,  diffident,  gentle,  and sentimental in his conversation,  and as-
siduously attentive in his manners.     He married Lady ,  and I am told

he is a most tender husband to her.

A very unfortunate subject happened to be started during our tea ;
namely,  the newspaper attacks upon Mrs.  Hastings.  The Colonel,  very
innocently,  said he was very sorry that lady was ever mentioned in the same
paragraph with her Majesty.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg indignantly demanded
"  Why  ? — where  ? — when  ? — and what V

Unconscious of her great friendship for Mrs.  Hastings,  the Colonel,  un-
fortunately, repeated his concern,  adding,  "  Nothing has hurt me so much
as the Queen's being ever named in such company."

The most angry defence was now made,  but in so great a storm of dis-
pleasure, and confusion of language,  that the Colonel,  looking utterly
amazed,  was unable to understand what was the matter.

Major Price and myself were both alarmed  ;  Miss P longed to laugh  ;

Miss Mawer sat perfectly motionless  ;  Mr.  Fisher decidedly silent.  No one
else was present.

The Colonel,  whenever he could be heard,  still persisted in his assertion,
firmly,  though gently,  explaining the loyalty of his motives.

This perseverance increased the storm,  which now blew with greater
violence,  less and less distinct as more fierce.  Broken sentences were all that
could be articulated.  "  You might not say such thing !" — "  Upon my
vord  !" — "  I tell you once  !" — "  Colonel what-you-call, — I am quite warm  !"
— "  Upon my vord  ! — I tell you the same  !" — "  You might not tell me such
thing  !"— "  What for you say all that f

As there was nothing in this that could possibly clear the matter,  and the
poor Colonel only sunk deeper and deeper,  by not understanding the nature
of his offence.  Major Price now endeavoured to interfere ;  and,  as he is a
great favourite,  he was permitted not only to speak but to be heard.

"  Certainly,"  said he,  "  those accounts about Mrs.  Hastings,  and the
history of her divorce,  are very unpleasant anecdotes in public newspapers  ;
and I am sorry,  too,  that they should be told in the same paragraph that
mentions her being received by the Queen."

Nothing could equal the consternation with which this unexpected speech
was heard  !  "  Upon my vord  !  You sorprise me I"  was all that could now
be got out.

As I found them now only running further from general comprehension,
I felt so sorry that poor Mrs.  Hastings,  whom I believe to be a most injured
woman,  should so ill be defended,  even by her most zealous friend,  that I
compelled myself to the exertion of coming forward,  now in her behalf my-
self; and I therefore said,  it was a thousand pities her story should not be
more accurately made known:  as the mode of a second marriage from a
divorce was precisely the contrary here of what it was in Germany;  since
here it could only take place upon misconduct,  and there,  I had been told,
a divorce from mi-conduct prohibited a second marriage,  which could only
be permitted where the divorce was the mere effect of disagreement from
dissimilar tempers.  Mrs.  Hastings,  therefore,  though acquitted of ill-beha-
viour by the laws of her own country,  seemed,  by those of England,  con-
victed ;  and I could not but much regret that her vindication was not
publicly made by this explanation.

"  So do I,  too,"  cried Major Price  ;  "  for I never heard this before."

"  Nor I,"  cried the Colonel ;  "  and indeed it ought to be made known,
both for the sake of Mrs.  Hastings,  and because she has been received at

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  443

Court,  \\'hich gave every body the greatest surprise,  and me,  in my igno-
rance, the greatest concern,  '  on account of the Queen.'  "

This undid all again,  though my explanation had just stilled the hurri-
cane ;  but now it began afresh.  "  You might not say that,  Colonel Fairly  ;
you might not name the Queen  ! — O,  I can't bear it ! — I tell you once it is
too moch  ! — What for you tell me that  ?"

"  Ma'am,  I — I only said — It is not me,  ma'am,  but the newspapers — "

"  What for you have such newspapers  ? — I tell you the same — it is —
what you call — I don't like such thing  !"

"  But,  ma'am—"

"  O,  upon my vord,  T might tell you once,  when you name the Queen,  it
is — what you call — I can't bear it ! — when it is nobody else,  with all my
heart  ! — I might not care for that — but when it is the Queen, — I tell you
the same.  Colonel Fairly — it makes me — what you call — perspire."

The Major again interfered,  saying it was now all cleared up,  by
the account of the diflerence of the German customs,  and therefore that it
was all very well.  A certain quiet,  but yet decisive way,  in which he some-
times speaks,  was here very successful ;  and as the lady stopped,  the
Colonel saw all explanation too desperate to aim at further argument.

CHAPTER XXII.
1786.

The Prince of Wales — A Royal Visit to Oxford — Preparations — Adviee — The Queen's
Dressinnr-room — Journey to Nuneliam — Arrival at Lord Harcourt's — A Dilemma —
The Royal Suite — T-ord and Lady Harcourt — The Miss Vernons — Amiability of the
Princess Royal — More Embarrassments — A Rencontre with the Kin^ — A strang-e
Message — The King's Equerries — The Amende — The Royal Coiffeur — Explanations
—Departure for Oxford— Spectators of the Royal Cortege — Arrival at Oxford — Recep-
tion by the Vice-Chancellor — Duke and Duchess of  ^larlborough — Marquess of Bland-
ford — The Ladies Spencer — Procession in the Theatre — Etiquette — Address and Reply
— Kissing Hands — Visits to all the Colleges — Christchurch — Ceremony at the Town-
hall — Excuses and Explanations — Walking backwards — Practice makes Perfect —
Politeness thrown away — A Surprise — Return to Nuneham — A New Acquaintance —
Royal Visit to Blenheim — Mr.  Mason's Garden — Peace-making.

August 12th,  Saturday. — The Prince of Wales's birthday.  How I
grieve at whatever may be the cause which absents him from his family  ! —
a family of so much love,  harmony,  and excellence,  that to mix with them,
even rarely,  must have been the first of lessons to his heart ;  and here,  I
am assured,  his heart is good,  though,  elsewhere,  his conduct renders it so
suspicious.

I come now to the Oxford expedition.

The plan was to spend one day at Lord Harcourt's,  at Nuneham,  one at
Oxford,  and one at Blenheim  ;  dining and sleeping always at Nuneham.

I now a little regretted that I had declined meeting Lady Harcourt,  when
invited to see her at Mrs.  Vesey's about three years ago.  I was not,  just
then,  very happy — and I was surfeited of new acquaintances  ;  when the
invitation,  therefore,  came,  I sent an excuse.  But now when I was going
to her house,  I wished I had had any previous knowledge of her,  to lessen
the difficulties of my first appearance in my new character,  upon attending
the Queen on a visit.

I said something of this sort to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  in our conversa-
tion the day before the journey  ;  and she answered that it did not signify  :
for,  as I went with the Queen,  I might be sure 1 should be civilly treated.

444 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

Yes,  1 said,  I generally had been,  and congratulated myself that at least
1 knew a little of Lord Harcourt,  to whom I had been introduced,  some
years ago,  at Sir Joshua Reynolds's,  and whom I had since met two or
three times.  "  O,"  she cried,  "  it is the same, — that is nothing, — when you
go with the Queen,  it is enough ;  they might be civil to you for that sake.
You might go quite without no,  what you call,  fuss  ;  you might take no
gown but what you go in  : — that is enough, — you might have no servant, —
for what? — You might keep on your riding-dress.  There is no need you
might be seen.  I shall do every thing that I can to assist you to appear for
nobody."

I leave you to imagine my thanks.  But the news about the servant was
not very pleasant,  as 1 thought it most likely I could never more want one
than in a strange house added to a strange situation.  However,  1 determined
upon assuming no competition in command,  and therefore I left the matter
to her own direction.

Their Majesties went to Nuneham to breakfast.  Miss Planfa and myself
were not to follow till after an early dinner.  Princess Elizabeth,  in a
whisper,  after the rest left the room,  advised rne to go and lie down
again as soon as they were gone.  And,  indeed,  I was sufficiently fatigued
to be glad to follow the advice.

My dear Mrs.  Delany came to sit with me while I packed up.  What a
pleasure to me is her constant society,  and the reciprocal confidence of all
our conversations  !  She intrusts me with every thing in the world — I intrust
her with every thing that now happens to me.

Our early dinner was with Mrs.  Schwellenberg and Miss Mawer.  We
set out at three o'clock,  and took with us Mrs.  Thielky,  the Queen's ward-
robe woman,  and the comfort of my life in the absence of Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg, for she is the real acting person,  though I am the apparent one  :  and
she is also a very goodsort of woman, — plain,  sensible,  clear-headed,  mild-
mannered,  sedate and steady.  I found her in this journey of infinite ser-
vice, for she not only did almost every thing for the Queen,  but made it her
business to supply also the place of maid to me,  as much as ever 1 would
suffer her.  How ibrtunale for me that the person so immediately under me
should be so good a creature  !  The other person we took was a Miss
Mhaughendorf,  a dresser to the Princesses Royal and Augusta,  a very
pleasing young woman,  gentle and interesting,  who is just come from the
King's German dominions to this place,  to which she has been recommended
by her father,  who is clerk of the kitchen to the Duke of York.  The Prin-
cesses have a Gern)an in this office,  to assist their study of that language,
which,  in their future destinations,  may prove essential to them.

Miss Planta's post in the court-calendar is that of English teacher,  but it
seems to me,  that of personal attendant upon the two eldest Princesses.  She
is with them always when they sup,  work,  take their lessons,  or walk.

We arrived at Nuneham at about six o'clock.

The house is one of those straCTCT|in<T,  half new,  half old,  half comfortable,
and half forlorn mansions that are begun in one generation,  and finished in
another.  It is very pleasantly situated,  and commands,  from some points
of view,  all the towers of Oxford.

In going across the park to the entrance,  we saw not a creature.  All were
busy,  either in attendance upon the royal guests,  or in finding hiding-places
from whence to peep at them.

We stopped at the portico, — but not even a porter was there  ;  we were
obliged to get out of the carriage by the help of one of the postilions,  and
to enter the house by the help of wet grass,  which would not suffer me to
stay out of it,  otherwise,  I felt so strange in going in uninvited and uncon-

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  445

ducted,  that I should have begged leave to stroll about till somebody
appeared.

Miss Planta,  more used to these expeditions,  though with quite as little
taste for them,  led the way,  and said we had best go and see for our own
rooms.

I was quite of the same opinion,  but much at a loss how we might find
them.  We went through various passages,  unknowing whither they might
lead us,  till at length we encountered a prodigious fine servant.  Miss
Planta asked him for Lady Harcourt's maid;  he bowed slightly,  and passed
on without making any answer.

Very pleasant this  ! — I then begged we might turn back,  not caring for
another adventure of the same sort.  Miss Planta complied  ;  and we met
two more of the yellow-laced saunterers,  with whom she had precisely the
same success.

I think I never remember to have felt so much shame from my situation
as at that time.  To arrive at a house where no mistress nor master of it
cared about receiving me  ;  to wander about,  a guest uninvited,  a visiter
unthought of;  without even a room to go to,  a person to inquire for,  or
even a servant to speak to 1 It was now I felt the real want of either a
man or maid,  to send forward,  and find out what we were to do with
ourselves  ;  and indeed 1 resolved,  then,  I would not another time be so
passive to unauthorized directions.

The fault of this strange reception was certainly in the lady of the
house,  whose affair it was to have given orders,  previous to our arrival,
that some of her people should show us to whatever apartment she destined
for us.  The Queen herself had sent word that we were to attend her  ;  and
however impossible it was that she could receive us herself,  which her own
attendance upon their Majesties made really impracticable,  it was incum-
bent upon her to have taken care that we should not have been utterly
neglected.

We strayed thus,  backwards and forwards,  for a full quarter of an hour,
in these nearly deserted straggling passages ;  and then,  at length,  met a
Frenchwoman,  whom Miss Planta immediately seized upon  ;  it was Lady
Harcourt's woman,  and Miss Planta had seen her at Windsor.

"  Pray show us,"  cried Miss Planta,  "  where we are to go."

She was very civil,  and led us to a parlour looking very pleasantly upon
the park,  and asked if we would have some tea.  Miss Planta assented.
She told us the King and Queen were in the park,  and left us.

As there was a garden-door to this room,  I thought it very possible the
royal party and their suite might return to the house that way.  This gave
great addition to my discomposure,  for I thought that to see them all in this
forlorn plight would be still the worst part of the business ;  I therefore
pressed Miss Planta to let us make another attempt to discover our own
rooms.

Miss Planta laughed exceedingly at my disturbance,  but complied very
obligingly with my request.

The wardrobe women had already been shown to the rooms they were
to prepare for the Queen and the Princesses.

The King and Queen's suite,  then in the house,  were the Duchess of
Ancaster,  Lady Charlotte Bertie,  Colonel Fairly,  and Major Price;  with
pages whose names I know not,  and footmen,  and two hairdressers.

The family party in the house were,  the Lord and Lady  ;  two Miss
Vernons,  sisters of Lady Harcourt ;  General Harcourt,  brother to Lord
Harcourt,  and aide-de-camp to the King ;  and Mrs.  Harcourt,  his wife.

VOL.  I.  38

446 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

In this onr second wandering forth we had no better success than in the
first  ;  we either met nobody,  or only were crossed by such superfine men
in laced liveries,  that we attempted not to question them.  My constant
dread was of meeting any of the royal party,  while I knew not whither to
run.  Miss Planta,  more inured to such situations,  was not at all surprised
by our difficulties and disgraces,  and only diverted by my distress from
them.

We met at last with Mhaughendorf,  and Miss Planta eagerly desired to
be conducted to the Princesses'  rooms,  that she might see if every thing
was prepared for them.

When they had looked at the apartments destined for the Princesses,
Miss Planta proposed our sitting down to our tea in the Princess Elizabeth's
room.  This was extremely disagreeable to me,  as I was sensible it must
seem a great freedom from me,  should her Royal Highness surprise us
there  ;  but it was no freedom for Miss Planta,  as she has belonged to all
the Princesses these nine years,  and is eternally in their sight.  I could
not,  therefore,  persuade her of the difference ;  and she desired Mhaughen-
dorf to go and order our tea up stairs.

Miss Planta,  followed by poor me,  then whisked backwards and forwards,
from one of the apartments to another,  superintending all the preparations  ;
and,  as we were crossing a landing-place,  a lady appeared upon the stairs,
and Miss Planta called out  "  It's Lady Harcourt,"  and ran down to
meet her.

They talked together a few minutes.  "  I must get you,  Miss Planta,"
said she,  looking up towards me,  "  to introduce me to Miss Burney."

She then came up the stairs,  said she was glad to see me,  and desired I
w^ould order any thing I wanted,  either for the Queen or for myself.

Cold enough was my silent curtsey.

She talked again to Miss Planta,  who,  already knowing her,  from seeing
her frequently when in waiting,  as she is one of the ladies of the bed-
chamber, was much more sociable than myself.

She afterwards turned to me,  and said,  "  If there is any thing you want,
Miss Burney,  pray speak for it."  And she added,  "  My sisters will attend
you presently ; — you will excuse me, — I have not a moment from their
Majesties."     And then she curtseyed,  and left us.

We returned to the Princess Elizabeth's room,  and there the tea followed,
but not the promised sisters.

I never saw Miss Planta laugh so heartily before nor since  ;  but my
dismay was possibly comical to behold.

The tea was but just poured out,  when the door opened,  and in entered
all the Princesses.  I was very much ashamed,  and started up,  but had no
asylum whither to run.  They all asked us how we did after our journey  ;
and I made an apology,  as well as I could,  to the Princess Elizabeth,  for
my intrusion into her apartment ;  confessing I did not know where to find
my own.

The Princess Royal,  eagerly coming up to me,  said,  "  I thought you
would be distressed at first arriving,  and I wanted to help you  ;  and I
inquired where your room was,  and said I would look at it myself;  and I
went round to it,  but I found the King was that way,  and so,  you know,  I
could not go past him ;  but indeed I wished to have seen it for you."

There was hardly any thanking her for such infinite sweetness  ; — they
then desired us to go on with our tea,  and went into the Princess Royal's
room.

I was now a little revived;  and soon afier the Princess Elizabeth came

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  447

back,  and asked if we had done,   desiring us at the same time not
to hurry.

Yes,  we said  ;  and ashamed of thus keeping possession of her room,  1
was gliding out,  when she flew to me,  and said,  "  Don't go  ! — pray come
and stay with me a little."  She then flew to another end of the room,  and
getting a chair,  brought it herself close up to me,  and seating herself on
another,"  said,  "  Come,  sit down by me,  Miss Burney."

You may suppose how I resisted and apologized, — truly telling her that
I had not opposed her Royal Highness's design,  from being ashamed of even
suspecting it.  She only laughed good-humouredly,  and made me take the
chair she had thus condescended to fetch me.

*'  Well,"  cried she,  drawing close to me, — "  so you have had Mrs.  Locke
with you  ? — how happy that must have made you  !"

And then she went on,  in a manner that seemed desirous of being com-
fortable, till,  in a very few minutes,  the other Princesses came for her.

The Princess Royal then told me she was quite sorry to hear we had
been so much distressed ;  and I found Miss Planta had recounted our
adventures.

I was not glad of this,  though greatly gratified by the goodness of the
Princess.  But I know how quickly complaints circulate,  and I wish not
even for redress by such means,  which commonly,  when so obtained,  is
more humiliating than the off'ence which calls for it.

When the Princesses left us,  we were again at a loss what to do with
ourselves ;  we saw several passing servants,  maids as well as men,  and  ]\iis3
Planta applied to them all to show me my room,  which I was anxious to
inhabit in peace and solitude:  however,  they all promised to send some one
else,  but no one came.  Miss Planta,  in the midst of the diversion she
received from my unavailing earnestness to get into some retreat,  had
the good nature to say,  "  I knew how this would turn out,  and wished the
visit over before it began ;  but it must really be very new to you,  unused as
you are to it,  and accustomed to so much attention in other places."

At length she seized upon a woman servant,  who undertook to conduct
me to this wished-for room.     j\Iiss Planta accompanied me,  and off we set.

In descending the stairs,  a door opened which led to one of the state
rooms,  in which were the Royal family.  We glided softly past ;  but the
Princess Royal,  attended by the Duchess of Ancaster,  came out to us.  We
soon found her Royal Highness had told our tale.  "  Miss Vernons,"  said
the Duchess,  "  will come to take care of you  ;  you must both go and take
possession of the eating-parlour,  where you will sup;  and the equerries will
be of your party."

I said not a word,  but of general thanks,  still longing only to go to my
own room.  I whispered this to Miss Planta,  who obligingly,  though rather
reluctantly,  consented to pursue our first scheme.  But when the Duchess
observed that we were turning ofl^,  she called out,  "  I see you do not know
your way,  so Pll come and show you to the eating-parlour."  The Princess
Royal said she would come with us also  ;  and,  according to direction,  we
were therefore necessitated to proceed.

When we got to the hall leading to this parlour,  we were suddenly stop-
ped by the appearance of the King,  who just then came out of that very
room.  Lord Harcourt attended,  with a candle in his hand,  and a group of
gentlemen followed.

We were advanced too far to retreat,  and therefore only stood still.  The
King stopped,  and spoke to the Duchess of Ancaster;  and then spoke very
graciously to Miss Planta and me,  inquiring when we set out,  and what sort
of journey we had had.     He then ascended the stairs,  the Princess Royal

448 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

accompanying him,  and all the rest following  ;  the Duchess first pointing to
the door of the eating-parlour,  and bidding us go there,  and expect Miss
Vernons.

Lord Harcourt,  during this meeting,  had contrived to slip behind the King,
to make me a very civil bow  ;  and when His IMajesty moved on,  he slid
nearer me,  and whispered a welcome to his house,  in very civil terms.  This
was all he could do,  so situated.

We now entered the eating-room.  We sat down, — but no Miss Vernons  !
Presently the door opened, — I hoped they were coming, — but a clergyman,
a stranger to us both,  appeared.  This gentleman,  I afterwards found,  was
Mr.  Hagget,  chaplain to Lord Harcourt,  and rector of a living in his lord-
ship's gift and neighbourhood  ;  a young man,  sensible,  easy,  and remarkably
handsome,  in very high favour with all the family.

With nobody to introduce us to each other,  we could but rise and bow,
and curtsey,  and sit down again.

In a few minutes,  again the door gave hopes to me of Miss Vernons  ; —
but there only appeared a party of gentlemen.

Major Price came foremost,  and immediately introduced me to General
Harcourt.  The General is a very shy man,  with an air of much haughti-
ness ;  he bowed and retreated,  and sat down,  and was wholly silent.

Colonel Fairly followed him,  and taking a chair next mine,  began some
of the civilest speeches imaginable,  concerning this opportunity of making
acquaintance with me.

Just then came in a housemaid,  and said she would show me my room.
I rose hastily.  Miss Planta,  who knew every body present except the cler-
gyman, was now willing to have sat still and chatted ;  but nothing short of
compulsion could have kept me in such a situation,  and therefore I instantly
accompanied the maid  ;  and poor Miss Planta could not stay behind.

The truth is,  the non-appearance of any of the ladies of the house struck
me to be so extremely uncivil,  that I desired nothing but to retire from all
the party.

I felt quite relieved when I once took possession of a room that,  for the
time,  I might call my own ;  and I could not possibly listen to Miss Planta's
desire of returning to the company.  I told her frankly,  that it was a situa-
tion so utterly disagreeable to me,  that I must beg to decline placing myself
in it again.

She was afraid,  she said,  that,  as the Duchess of Ancaster had taken the
trouble to show us the room,  and to tell us what to do,  in the presence of
the Princess Royal,  the Queen might hear of our absconding,  and not be
pleased with it.

"  I must risk that,"  I answered  ;  "  I shall openly tell my reasons,  if ques-
tioned, and I firmly believe they will be satisfactory.  If not questioned,  I
shall say nothing  ;  and indeed I very much wish you would do the same."

She agreed, — consented,  rather  ; — and I was the more obliged to her from
seeing it was contrary to her inclination.  I was sorry,  but I could not com-
pliment at the expense of putting myself again into a situation I had been so
earnest to change.  Miss Planta bore it very well,  and only wished the maid
farther,  for never finding us out till we began to be comfortable without her.

Here we remained about two hours,  unsummoned,  unnoticed,  unoccu-
pied,— except in forcing open a box which Mrs.  Thielky had lent me for
my wardrobe,  and of which I had left the key,  ingeniously,  at Windsor.

At ten o'clock a maid came to the door,  and said supper was ready.

"  Who sent you  ?"  I called out.

"  Who do you come from  ?"  cried Miss Planta.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  449

She was gone  ; — we could get no answer.

About a quarter of an hour after,  one of those gentlemen footmen for
whom you must already have discovered my partiality,  called out from the
stairs without troubling himself to come to the door,  "  The supper waits."

He was already gone  ;  but Miss Planta darted after him,  calling out,
"  Who sent you  ? — who did you come to 1"

^  She was not heard by this gentleman,  but what she said was echoed after
him by some other,  and the answer that reached our ears was, "  The equer-
ries want the ladies."

This was enough  ;  Miss Planta returned quite indignant,  after hastily
replying,  "  We don't choose any supper."

We were now precisely of an opinion.  Miss Planta,  indeed,  was much
more angry than myself;  for I was very sure the equerries had sent a very
different message,  and therefore thought nothing of the words used by the
servant,  but confined all my dissatisfaction to its first origin, — the incivility
in the ladies of the house,  that they came not themselves,  or some one from
them,  to invite us in a manner that might be accepted.

From this time,  however,  we became more comfortable,  as absconding
was our mutual desire ;  and we were flung,  by this means,  into a style of
sociability we might else never have arrived at.

We continued together till Miss Planta thought it right to go and see if
Mhaughendorf had prepared every thing for the Princesses  ;  and then I was
left to myself — the very companion I just at that time most wished a tete-
a-tete with — till I was summoned to the Queen.

In this tete-d-tete,  I determined very concisely upon my plan of procedure  ;
which was to quietly keep my own counsel,  unless I found my conduct dis-
approved ;  and,  in that case,  to run all risks in openly declaring that I must
always prefer solitude to society upon terms to which I was unaccustomed.

A little after the scenes I have described,  I was surprised,  when,  late at
night,  my summons was brouglit me by Lady Harcourt,  who tapped gently
at my door,  and made me a little visit,  previously to telling me her errand.
She informed me,  also,  that the Queen had given her commands for Miss
Planta and me to belong to the suite the next day,  in the visit to Oxford  ;  and
that a carriage was accordingly ordered for us.

The Queen said not a word to me of the day's adventures ;  and I was
glad to have them passed over,  especially as Lady Harcourt's visit,  and the
civility which accompanied it,  appeared a little conscious of remissness.  But
when,  in speaking of Oxford,  Her Majesty condescended to ask what gown I
had brought with me,  how did I rejoice to answer,  a new Chamberry gauze,
instead of only that which I have on,  according to my Cerbera's advice.

My next difficulty was for a hair-dresser.  Nuneham is three or four
miles from Oxford ;  and I had neither maid to dress,  nor man to seek a
dresser.  I could only apply to Mrs.  Thielky,  and she made it her busi-
ness to prevail with one of the royal footmen to get me a messenger,  to order
a hair-dresser from Oxford at six o'clock in the morning.  The Queen,  with
most gracious consideration,  told me,  over night,  that sha should not want
me till eight o'clock.

Thus ended the first night of this excursion.

August 13tii. — At six o'clock,  my hair-dresser,  to my great satisfaction,
arrived.  Full two hours was he at work,  yet was I not finished,  when
Swarthy,  the Queen's hair-dresser,  came rapping at my door to tell me her
Majesty's hair was done,  and she was waiting for me.  I hurried as fast as
I could,  and ran down without any cap.  She smiled at the sight of my
hasty attire,  and said 1 should not be distressed about a hair-dresser the

38*

450 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

next day,  but employ Swarthy's assistant,  as soon as he had done with the
Princesses  :  "  You should have had him,"  she added,  "  to-day,  if I had
known you wanted him."

When her Majesty was dressed,  all but the hat,  she sent for the three
Princesses;  and the King came also.  1 felt very foolish with my unco-
vered head;  but it was somewhat the less awkward,  from its being very
much a custom,  in the Royal Family,  to go without caps  ;  though none that
appear before them use such a freedom.

As soon as the hat was on, — *'  Now,  Miss Burney,"  said the Queen,  "  I
won't keep you  ;  you had better go and dress too."

While 1 was dressing,  a footman came to my door,  with a formal mes-
sage, that Miss Vernons begged I would come to breakfast.  I immediately
promised to make haste,  glad to find something more resembling civility at
length coming round to me.

Presently after entered Miss Planta,  in high spirits and great enjoyment.
She told me she had been acquainting the Queen with the whole affiir,  and
that the Queen quite approved of our staying up stairs.  She had been,  also,
with the equerries,  and had a fine laugh with them about their  "  wanting
the ladies  ;"  they declared they had sent no message at all,  and that the
servant had simply received orders to tell us that Miss Vernons desired our
company to supper.

I thought it mighty unnecessary to have acquainted the equerries with
what could only furnish a laugh against ourselves  :  however,  the thing was
done,  and down we went together.

The two Miss Vernons,  General Harcourt,  Colonel Fairly,  Major Price,
and Mr.  Hagget were all at breakfast.  The Miss Vernons immediately
began an apology about the supper the preceding night,  declaring themselves
extremely sorry we should not have had any,  which they found was entirely
owing to a blunder in the message given by the servants.

The gentlemen were all dying to make a laugh about the equerries
"wanting the ladies  ;"  and Colonel Fairly began:  but the gravity of my
behaviour soon quieted him.  Mr.  Hagget was content to be observant of a
new person  ;  General Harcourt scarce ever speaks but from necessity  ;  and
Major Price was as grave as myself.

The eldest Miss Vernon is plain,  and a little old-maidish;  but I found
her,  afterwards,  sensible,  well read,  and well bred :  but not quite imme-
diately did she appear so,  as you will soon see.

The youngest is many years her junior,  and fat and handsome,  good-
humoured,  and pleasing in her smiles,  though high and distant till they are
called forth.

After breakfast,  when we were all breaking up,  to prepare for church,  I
had a short explanatory conversation with Major Price,  who came to speak
to me concerning the preceding evening,  and to confess his extreme surprise
at our shutting ourselves up from their society.  He had had a great mind,
he said,  to have come himself to see for us,  but did not know whether it
would be right.  They waited,  he added — Miss Vernons and all of them —
a quarter of an hour after the supper was upon the table,  and then a servant
came in,  from us,  to tell the equerries that we would not have any supper ;
— "  And indeed,"  continued he,  a little forcibly,  "  I must own I was rather
hurt by the message."

"  Hurt?"  cried I, — "  what a gentle word  ! — I am sure I think you might
rather have been angry."

"  Why — to own the truth — I believe I was."

I was interrupted before I could explain more fully how the matter stood;
nor have I ever found opportunity since.     However,  I think it very likely

17S6.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  ^  451

he suggested the truth himself.  Be that as it may,  Miss Vernons went for
their cloaks,  and Miss Planta ran to the Princesses,  and therefore I was
obliged to be a little abrupt,  and retreat also.

When Miss Planta was ready,  she came to fetch me.  We went down
stairs,  but knew not whither to proceed.  In the eating-parlour we had left
only the gentlemen,  and they were waiting to attend the King.  There was
no other place to which we could turn,  and we had another of those wonder-
ing distresses that had made me so comfortless the night before.  My wish
was to find Miss Vernons  ; — my expectation was to be found by them.
Neither,  however,  happened ;  and the first time we met any body that could
give us any information,  we were told they had been gone some time.

Very agreeable news  !

I could not,  however,  bear to give up going to church,  for I knew that
the thanksgiving was to be that morning for the preservation of the King
from assassination ;  and to let pique at this unaccountable behaviour,
after all the apologies just passed,  prevent my hearing and joining in a
prayer of such a nature,  in which now I am peculiarly interested,  would
have been ill worth the while.  I therefore proposed to Miss Planta that we
should go by ourselves,  and desire one of the servants to show us at once
into Mr.  Hagget's pew :  for that we had already heard offered to the use of
Miss Vernons,  as Lord Harcourt's was reserved for their Majesties.  She
agreed  ;  and we proceeded,  following such stragglers as showed us our way  :
the servant to whom we applied having soon deserted us.

The church is in a very beauiiful situation in the park,  and built in the
form of a Grecian temple.  I admired it very much for its plainness and
elegance.

When we got to it,  the very first step we took in it showed us the Miss
Vernons,  very composedly seated in a large pew at the entrance.  I now
led the way,  and took a place next to Miss Vernons,  as much without
apology as without invitation.

Mr.  Hagget both read and preached.  I was a good deal touched by the
occasional thanksgiving,  chiefly from knowing how much it must aflect the
Queen and the Princesses.  Cause enough,  indeed,  is there for thanksgiving
and rejoicing in the safety of so mild and exemplary a sovereign.

When the service was over,  and the Royal Family were gone,  I thought
it but right,  in such a place,  to subdue my proud feelings so far as to say
to the Miss Vernons,  I hoped we had not disturbed them.

1 was very glad I took this little step down,  for Miss Vernon,  colouring,
apologized for not waiting for us,  which she said was owing to the fear of
not getting into the chapel before the Royal Family.  And then she asked
if we should like to look at the altar-piece,  which was the work of  ]\Ir.
Mason.

And now for the Oxford expedition.

How many carriages there were,  and how they were arranged,  I observed
not sufficiently to recollect ;  but the party consisted of their Majesties,  the
Princesses Royal,  Augusta,  and Elizabeth,  the Duchess of Ancaster,  Lord
and Lady Harcourt,  Lady Charlotte Bertie,  and the two Miss Vernons.

These"^  last ladies are daughters of the late Lord Vernon,  and sisters of
Lady Harcourt.

General Harcourt,  Colonel Fairly,  and Major Price,  and Mr.  Hagget,
with Miss Planta and myself,  completed the group.  IVIiss Planta and I,  of
course,  as the only undignified persons,  brought up the rear.  We were in
a chaise of Lord Harcourt.

The city of Oxford afforded us a very noble view on the road,  and

452 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

its spires,  towers,  and domes soon made me forget all the little objects of
minor spleen that had been crossing me as I journeyed towards them ;  and
indeed,  by the time I arrived in the midst of them,  their grandeur,  nobility,
antiquity,  and elevation impressed my mind so forcibly,  that I felt for the
first time since my new situation had taken place a rushing in of ideas that
had no connexion with it whatever.

The roads were lined with decently dressed people and the high street was
so crowded we were obliged to drive gently and carefully,  to avoid trampling
the people to death.  Yet their behaviour was perfectly respectful and
proper.  Nothing could possibly be better conducted than the whole of this
expedition.

We all drove straight to the Theatre,  in procession.  Here,  in alighting
from the carriages,  there was some difficulty,  on account of the pressure of
the people to see the King and Queen,  and Princesses ;  however,  even then,
it was still the genteelest and most decent crowd I ever saw.

Here it was that Major Price signalized that part of his character I have
so strongly marked,  of his being truly a gentleman.  It was his business
to attend and guard the King ;  but he was determined to take almost equal
care of some of his Majesty's subjects  :  he was every body's equerry during
the whole expedition,  assisting and looking after every creature,  seeing us
all out of our carriages and into them,  and addressing the people,  when they
pressed too forward,  with a steadiness and authority that made them quicker
in retreat than all the staves of all the constables,  who were attending by
dozens at the entrance of every college.

At the outward gate of the theatre,  the Vice-Chancellor,  Dr.  Chapman,
received their Majesties.  All the Professors,  Doctors,  &c.,  then in Oxford,
arrayed in their professional robes,  attended him. — How I wished my dear
father amongst them !

The Vice-Chancellor then conducted their Majesties along the inner
court,  to the door of the theatre,  all the rest following ;  and there,  waiting
their arrival,  stood the Duke and Duchess of Marlborough,  the Marquis of
Blandford,  in a nobleman's Oxford robe,  and Lady Caroline and Lady
Elizabeth Spencer.

After they had all paid their duties,  a regular procession followed,  which
I should have thought very pretty,  and much have liked to have seen,  had
I been a mere looker on ;  but I was frequently at a loss what to do with
myself,  and  .uncertain whether I ought to proceed in the suite,  or stand by
as a spectator  ;  and Miss Planta was still,  if possible,  more fearful.

The theatre was filled with company,  all well dressed,  and arranged in
rows around it.  The area below them was entirely empty,  so that there
was not the least confusion.  The Chancellor's chair,  at the head of about
a dozen steps,  was prepared for the King  ;  and just below him,  to his left,
a form,  for the Queen and the Princesses.

The King walked foremost from the area,  conducted by the University's
Vice-Chancellor.  The Queen followed,  handed by her own Vice-Chamber-
lain. The Princess Royal followed,  led by the King's Aide-de-camp,
General Harcourt ;  and Princess Augusta,  leaning on Major Price.
Princess Elizabeth walked alone,  no other servant of the King being pre-
sent, and no rank authorizing such a conduct,  without office.

Next followed the Duke and Duchess of Marlborough  ;  then the Duchess
of Ancaster,  and Marquis of Blandford ;  next,  Lord and Lady Harcourt,
then the two Lady Spencers and Lady Charlotte Bertie,  then Miss Planta
and a certain F.  B.

We were no sooner arranged,  and the door of the theatre shut,  than the

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  453

King,  his head covered,  sat down ;  the Queen did the same,  and then the
three Princesses.

All the rest,  throughout the theatre,  stood.

The Vice-Chancellor,  then made a low obeisance to the King,  and pro-
ducing a written paper,  began the Address of the University,  to thank his
Majesty for this second visit,  and to congratulate him,  and the nation on his
late escape from assassination.  He read it in an audible and distinct voice  ;
and in its conclusion,  an address was suddenly made to the Queen,  expres-
sive of much concern for her late distress,  and the highest and most pro-
found veneration for her animated and exalted character.

An address,  to me so unexpected,  and on a subject so recent and of so
near concern,  in presence of the person preserved,  his wife,  and his chil-
dren, was infinitely touching.

The Queen could scarcely bear it,  though she had already,  I doubt not,
heard it,  at Nuneham,  as these addresses must be first read in private,  to
have the answers prepared.  Nevertheless,  this public tribute of loyalty to
the King,  and of respect to herself,  went gratefully to her heart,  and filled
her eyes with tears — which she would not,  however,  encourage,  but,  smiling
through them,  dispersed them with her fan,  with which she was repeatedly
obliged to stop their course down her cheeks.

The Princesses,  less guarded,  the moment their father's danger was
mentioned,  wept with but little control;  and no wonder,  for I question if there
was one dry eye in the theatre.  The tribute,  so just,  so honourable,  so
elegant,  paid to the exalted character of the Queen,  affected every body,
with joy for her escape from the affliction,  and with delight at the reward
and the avowal of her virtues.

When the address was ended,  the King took a paper from Lord Harcourt,
and read his answer.  The King reads admirably ;  with ease,  feeling,  and
force,  and without any hesitation.  His voice is particularly full and fine,
I was very much surprised by its effect.

When he had done,  he took off his hat,  and bowed to the Chancellor and
Professors,  and delivered the answer to Lord Harcourt,  who walking back-
wards descended the stairs,  and presented it to the Vice-Chancellor.

All this ceremony was so perfectly new to me,  that I rejoiced extremely
in not missing it.  Indeed I would not have given up the pleasure of seeing
the Queen on this occasion for any sort of sight that could have been
exhibited to me.

Next followed music ;  a good organ,  very well played,  anthem-ed and
voluntary-ed us for some time.

After this,  the Vice-Chancellor and Professors begged for the honour of
kissing the King's hnnd.  Lord Harcourt was again the backward mes-
senger ;  and here followed a great mark of goodness in the King  :  he saw
that nothing less than a thorough-bred old courtier,  such as Lord Harcourt,
could walk backwards down these steps,  before himself,  and in sight of so
full a hall of spectators  ;  and he therefore dispensed with being approached
to his seat,  and walked down himself into the area,  where the Vice-Chan-
cellor kissed his hand,  and was imitated by every Professor and Doctor in
the room.

Notwithstanding this considerate good-nature in his Majesty,  the sight,
at times,  was very ridiculous.  Some of the worthy collegiates,  unused to
such ceremonies,  and unaccustomed to such a presence,  the moment they
had kissed the King's hand,  turned their backs to him,  and walked away as
in any common room;  others,  attempting to do better,  did still worse,  by
tottering and stumbling,  and falling foul of those behind them;   some,

454 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

ashamed to kneel,  took the King's hand straight up to their mouths  ;  others,
equally off their guard,  plumped down on both knees,  and could hardly get
up again  ;  and many,  in their confusion,  fairly arose by pulling his Majesty's
hand to raise them.

As the King spoke to every one,  upon Lord Harcourt's presenting them,
this ceremoniid look up a good deal of time;  but it was too nesv and divert-
ing to appear long.

It was vacation time;  there were therefore none of the students present.
When the whole was over,  we left the theatre in the same form we had
entered it.     The Duke and the Duchess of Marlborough,  the Marquis and
the Ladies Spencer,  attended the King and Queen to their carriages,  and
then went back to the theatre,  to wail for their own.

I cannot now go on with our progress regularly,  for I do not remember
it.  I will only,  therefore,  in general say,  that I was quite delighted with
the city,  and so entertained and so pleased with such noble buildings as it
presented to me,  that  [  felt,  as I have told you,  a consciousness to pleasure
revived in me,  which had long Iain nearly dormant.

We went to all the colleges in the same order that we came to the
theatre.  I shall attempt no descriptions;  1 shall only mention a few little
personal circumstances,  and some of those court etiquettes which from their
novelty to me,  will,  I judge,  be new also to my Susan;  and what is new in
customs or manners is always worth knowing.

At Christ Church College,  where we arrived at about three o'clock,  in a
large hall there was a cold collation prepared for their Majesties and the
Princesses.  It was at the upper end of the hall.  I could not see of what
it consisted,  though it would have been very agreeable,  after so much
standing and sauntering,  to have given my opinion of it in an experimental
way.

Their Majesties and the Princesses sat down to this table;  as well satis-
fied, I believe,  as any of their subjects so to do.  The Duchess of Ancaster
and Lady Harcourt stood behind the chairs of the Queen and the Princess
Royal.  There were no other ladies of sufficient rank to officiate for Prin-
cesses Augusta and Elizabeth.  Lord Harcourt stood behind the King's
chair  ;  and the Vice-Chancellor,  and the head master of Christ Church,
with salvers in their hands,  stood near the table,  and ready to hand,  to the
three noble waiters,  whatever was wanted:  while the other Reverend
Doctors and Learned Professors stood aloof,  equally ready to present to
the Chancellor and the Master whatever they were to forward.

We,  meanwhile,  untitled attendants,  stood at the other end of the room,
forming a semicircle,  and all strictly facing the royal collationers.  Wo
consisted of the Miss Vernons,  thrown out here as much as their humble
guests — Colonel Fairly,  Major Price,  General Harcourt,  and, — though 1
know not why, — Lady Charlotte Bertie; — with all the inferior Professors,
in their gowns,  and some,  too much frightened to advance,  of the upper
degrees.  These,  with IMiss Planta,  Mr.  Hagget,  and myself,  formed this
attendant semicircle.

The time of this collation was spent very pleasantly — to me,  at least,  to
whom the novelty of the scene rendered it entertaining.  It was agreed
that we must all be absolutely famished unless we could partake of some
refreshment,  as we had breakfasted early,  and had no chance of dining
before six or seven o'clock.  A whisper was soon buzzed through the semi-
circle, of the deplorable state of our appetite apprehensions  ;  and presently
it reached the ears of some of the worthy Doctors.  Immediately a new
whisper was circulated,  which made its progress with great vivacity,  to offer
us whatever we would wish,  and to bes us to name what we chose.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  455

Tea,  coffee,  and chocolate,  were whispered back.

The method of producing,  and the means of swallowing them,  were
much more difficult to settle than the choice of what was acceptable.  Major
Price and Colonel Fairly,  however,  seeing a very large table close to the
wainscot behind us,  desired our refreshments might be privately conveyed
there,  behind the semicircle,  and that,  while all the group backed very
near it,  one at a time might feed,  screened by all the rest from observation.
I suppose I need not inform you,  my dear Susan,  that to eat in presence
of any of the Royal Family is as much Itors d'usage as to be seated.

This plan had speedy success,  and the very good Doctors soon,  by sly
degrees and wiih watchful caution,  covered the whole table with tea,  coffee,
chocolate,  cakes,  and bread and butter.

The further plan,  however,  of one at a time feasting and the rest fasting
and standing sentinels,  was not equally approved;  there was too much
eagerness to seize the present moment,  and too much fear of a sudden
retreat,  to give patience for so slow a proceeding.  We could do no more,
therefore,  than stand in a double row,  with one to screen one throughout the
troop  ;  and,  in this manner,  we were all very plentifully and very plea-
santly served.

The Duchess of Ancaster and Lady Harcourt,  as soon as the first
serving attendance was over,  were dismissed from the royal chairs,  and
most happy to join our group,  and partake of our repast.  The Duchess,
extremely fatigued with standing,  drew a small body of troops before her,
that she might take a few minutes'  rest on a form by one of the doors ;  and
Lady Charlotte Bertie did the same,  to relieve an ankle which she had
unfortunately sprained.

"  Poor Miss Burney  !"  exclaimed the good-natured Duchess,  "I wish she
could sit down,  for she is unused to this work.  She does not know yet
what it is to stand for five hours following,  as we do."

The beautiful window of Sir Joshua Reynolds and Mr.  Jervis,  in New
College,  would alone have recovered me,  had my fatigue been infinitely
more serious.

In one of th^  colleges I stayed so long in an old chapel,  lingering over
antique monuments,  that all the party were vanished before I missed them,
except Doctors and Professors  ;  for we had a train of those every where ;
and I was then a little surprised by the approach of one of them saying,  "You
seem inclined to abide with us,  Miss Burney?" — and then another,  in an
accent of facetious gallantry,  cried  "  No,  no,  don't let us shut up Miss
Burney among old tombs! — No,  no!"

After this,  many of the good Doctors occasionally spoke to me,  when
there happened to be an opportunity.  Plow often did I wish my dear father
amongst them  !  They considered me as a Doctor's daughter,  and were all
most excessively courteous, — handing,  and pointing,  and showing me about
as much as possible.

In another college,  while Miss Planta and myself were hanging a little
back,  at the entrance into a small cedar chapel,  that would not much more
than hold the Royal Family and their immediate suite,  the Duchess of
Ancaster,  who took every opportunity to show me civilities,  and distinguish
me,  came down the steps,  and made me ascend them,  to return with her,
when she called to her daughter,  and in the most obliging terms introduced
me to her,  with many kind speeches of her wish that we should cultivate
much acquaintance.

Lady Charlotte is very handsome,  and has a very good figure:  she
unfortunately lisps very much,  which,  at first,  never prejudices in favour of
the understanding ;  but I have conversed with her too little to know any

456 DIARY AWD LETTERS 1786.

thing more of her than that she is well bred,  and seems to have a large
portion,  internally,  of the good-natured and obliging disposition of her
mother.

At the Town Hall,  an Address was presented by the Mayor and Corpo-
ration of the city of Oxford to the King,  which the Mayor read,  while the
same ceremony of the sitting and standing was practised that 1 have de-
scribed at the theatre.  The King took off his hat,  and bowed,  and received
the Address,  after hearing it,  but returned no answer.  Nor has his Majesty
made any except to the Oxford University,  though they have,  since,  poured
in upon him from every part of the kingdom.

The Mayor was then knighted.

I think it was in Trinity College that we saw the noblest library I have
ever happened to enter.  For  'tis but little,  my dear Susan,  I have seen of
sights.  Here we had new court scenery,  in which I acted but an uncour-
tier-like part.  The Queen and Princesses had seats prepared for them,  which,
after a stroll up and down the library,  they were glad,  I believe,  to occupy.
The ladies of their suite were then graciously ordered by her Majesty to be
seated,  as there was not here the state or public appearance that was
observed at the theatre,  and in the college where the refreshments were
given.

As to the poor men,  they never must sit in the presence of the Queen,  be
they whom they will or what they will :  so they were fain to stand it out.

Miss Planta glided away behind a pillar,  and,  being there unseen,  was
able to lounge a little.  She was dreadfully tired.  So was every body but
myself.  For me,  my curiosity was so awake to every thing,  that I seemed
insensible to all inconvenience.

I could not,  in such a library,  prevail with myself to so modest a retire-
ment as Miss Planta's  :  I considered that the Queen had herself ordered my
attendance in this expedition,  and 1 thought myself very well privileged to
make it as pleasant as I could.  I therefore stole softly down the room,  to
the further end,  and there amused myself with examining what books were
within reach of my eyes,  and with taking down and looking into all such as
were also within reach of my understanding.  This was very pleasant sport
to me  ;  and had we stayed there till midnight would have kept me from
weariness.

In another college  (we saw so many,  and in such quick succession,  that
I recollect not any by name,  though all by situation)  I saw a performance
of courtly etiquette,  by Lady Charlotte Bertie,  that seemed to me as diffi-
cult as any feat I ever beheld,  even at Astley's or Hughes's.  It was in an
extremely large,  long spacious apartment.  The King always led the way
out,  as well as in,  upon all entrances and exits  •  but here,  for some reason
that I know not,  the Queen was handed out first and the Princesses,  and the
Aide-de-camp,  and Equerry followed.  The King was very earnest in
conversation with some Professor ;  the attendants hesitated whether to wait
or follow the Queen ;  but presently the Duchess of Ancaster,  being near
the door,  slipped out,  and Lady Harcourt after her.  The Miss Vernons,
who were but a  {ew steps from them,  went next.  But Lady Charlotte,  by
chance,  happened to be very high up in the room,  and near to the King.
Had I been in her situation,  I had surely waited till his Majesty went first ;
but that would not,  I saw,  upon this occasion,  have been etiquette ; — she
therefore faced the King,  and began a march backwards, — her ankle already
.sprained,  and to walk forward,  and even leaning upon an arm,  was painful
to her :  nevertheless,  back she went,  perfectly upright,  without one stumble,
without ever looking once behind to see what she might encounter ;  and

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  457

with as graceful a motion,  and as easy an air,  as I ever saw any body
enter a long room,  she retreated,  I am sure,  full twenty yards backwards
out of one.

For me,  I was also,  unluckily,  at the upper end of the room,  looking at
some portraits of founders,  and one of Henry VII.  in particular,  from Hol-
bein. However,  as soon as I perceived what was going forward, — back-
ward, rather, — I glided near the wainscot;  (Lady Charlotte,  I should men-
tion, made her retreat along the very middle of the room,)  and having paced
a few steps backwards,  stopped short to recover,  and,  while I seemed
examining some other portrait,  disentangled my train from the heels of my
shoes,  and then proceeded a few steps only more  ;  and then,  observing the
King turn another way,  I slipped a yard or two at a time forwards  ;  and
hastily looked back,  and then was able to go again according to rule,  and
in this manner,  by slow and varying means,  I at length made my escape.

Miss Planta stood upon less ceremony,  and fairly ran off.

Since that time,  however,  I have come on prodigiously,  by constant
practice,  in the power and skill of walking backwards,  without tripping up
my own heels,  feeling my head giddy,  or treading my train out of the plaits
— accidents very frequent among novices in that business  ;  and I have no
doubt but that,  in the course of a few months,  I shall arrive at all possible
perfection in the true court retrograde motion.

In another college,  in an old Chapter House,  I had the opportunity to see
another court-scene.  It was nearly round in shape,  and had various old
images and ornaments.  We were all taken in by the doctors attendant,
and the party,  with doctors and all,  nearly filled it:  but,  finding it crowded,
every body stood upon the less ceremony,  and we all made our examina-
tions of the various contents of the room quite at our ease:  till suddenly the
King and Queen,  perceiving two very old-fashioned chairs were placed at
the head of the room for their reception,  graciously accepted them,  and sat
down.  Nothing could exceed the celerity with which all confusion instantly
was over,  and the most solemn order succeeded to it.  Chairs were pre-
sented to the three Princesses by the side of the Queen,  and the Duchess of
Ancasterand Lady Harcourt planted themselves at their backs;  while Lady
Charlotte instantly retreated close to the wall,  and so did every creature else
in the room,  all according to their rank or station,  and the Royal Family
remained conspicuous and alone,  all crowd dispersed,  and the space of
almost the whole room unoccupied before them,  so close to the walls did
every body respectfully stand.

The last college we visited was Cardinal Wolsey's, — an immense fabric.

While roving about a very spacious apartment,  Mr.  F came behind

me,  and whispered that I might easily slip out into a small parlour,  to rest
a little while ;  almost every body having taken some opportunity to con-
trive themselves a little sitting but myself.  I assured him,  very truly,  I
was too little tired to make it worth while  ;  but poor Miss Planta was so
wofully fatigued that I could not,  upon her account,  refuse to be of the
party."^  He conducted us into a very neat little parlour,  belonging to the
master of the college,  and Miss Planta flung herself on a chair half dead
with weariness.

Mr.  F was glad of the opportunity to sit for a moment also;  for my

part,  I was quite alert.  Alas  !  my dear Susan,  'tis my mind that is so
weak,  and so open to disorder  ; — my body,  I really find,  when it is an
independent person,  very strong,  and capable of much exertion without
suffering from it.

Mr.  F now produced from a paper repository concealed ia his coat

VOL.  I.  39

458 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

pocket,  some apricots and bread,  and insisted upon my eating  ; — but I was
not inclined to the repast,  and saw he was half lamished himself; — so was
poor Miss Planta :  however,  he was so persuaded I must both be as hungry
and as tired as himself,  that I was forced to eat an apricot to appease
him.

Presently,  while we were in the midst of this regale,  the door suddenly
openrd,  and the Queen came in! — followed by as many attendants as the
room would contain.

Up we all started,  myself alone not discountenanced  ;  for I really think it
quite respect sufficient never to sit down in the royal presence,  without
aiming at having it supposed that I have stood bolt upright ever since 1 have
been admitted to it.

Quick into our pockets was crammed our bread,  and close into our hands

was squeezed our fruit;  by which I discovered that our appetites were to be

supposed annihilated,  at the same time that our strength was to be invincible.

Very soon after this we were joined by the King,  and in a few minutes

we all paraded forth to the carriages,  and drove back to Nuneham.

1 have been very minute in this Oxford account,  because it presented
scenes so new to me,  and because I conclude that,  after you have had a
month or two of general journal,  you will have nothing more to be new to
either of us.

This Oxford expedition was,  altogether,  highly entertaining to me;  but I
ought not to close it without telling you of the sweetness of all the Prin-
cesses, who each made a point of speaking to Miss Planta and to me upon
entering or quitting every college,  as we stood in the ranks,  while they
passed.

I stayed in my own room till a message from Miss Vernons brought me
down to dinner,  and from this time forward those ladies exerted themselves
to the utmost in being attentive,  sociable,  and civil.  I found the Major,  Mr.
F^ ,  Mr.  Hagget,  Miss Planta,  and themselves;  and we had a very plea-
sant dinner,  talking over the sights just seen.

All the afternoon was spent in the same party.  We went into Lord
Harcourt's library to tea and coffee,  and there we had short visits from his
lordship and the Duchess of Ancaster.

Ill the evening Lady Harcourt came also,  and was amazingly courteous.
The Queen then sent for the Miss Vernons into the drawing-room,  and Miss
Planta and myself left the gentlemen to take care of themselves,  and retired
for the evening to our own rooms.

You must know,  wherever the King and Queen are,  nobody comes into
their sight unsent for,  not even the master and mistress of the house,  unless
they are publicly acquainted that their Majesties are coming,  and mean to
see them.

Monday,  August 14th. — I come now to introduce to you a new ac-
quaintance.

1 did not get down to breakfast till it was almost over,  as I was detained
with the Queen,  and as every body was obliged to make what haste they
could,  in order to insure a meal before a summons.

I found Miss Planta,  and the Aid-de-camp,  Vice-Chamberlain,  and
Equerry  ;  Lady Plarcourt had already breakfasted with them,  but made off
as soon as the Queen was visible,  to wait upon her Majesty.  Miss Vernons
lay in bed,  from yesterday's fatigues.

The extreme silence and gravity of the Aid-de-camp threw a reserve and
constraint on all the party,  and we were all nearly dumb,  when a new lady
suddenly rushed into the room.  This was Mrs Harcourt,  the Aid-decamp's
wife,  who had been ill the preceding day,  and therefore had not ventured to

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  459

Oxford.    She is a showy handsome woman,  extremely talkative,  with quick
parts,  hiij;h spirits,  and a rattling vein of humour.

Miss Planta,  who had taken Lady Harcourt's place,  in order to pour out
the tea,  instantly moved to another.  Mrs.  Harcourt hurried into that just
vacated,  without ceremony,  calling out,  "  How monstrous late you all are  ! —
though I need not talk,  for I hate getting up early.  I was so vastly ill
yesterday I could not stir,  but I am vastly well to-day,  so I am going to
Blenheim."

This day had been previously dedicated to seeing Blenheim.
•'  To Blenheim  ?"  repeated General Harcourt,  in a low voice.
*'  Yes,  Sir,  to Blenheim  !     So no grave faces,  for my plan is fixed."
He half articulated a fear of her being ill again,  but she stopped him with
"O,  no matter,  leave that to the Fates  ; — the Queen has been so gracious
as to say 1 may go,  and therefore go I shall :   so say nothing about it,  for
that's settled and unalterable."

"  After being so ill yesterday,"  said Mr.  F ,  "  I think it will be rather

too much for you."

"  Not at all  ! — and what's more,  you must carry me."
"  I am very glad to hear it,"  cried he,  "  if go you will."
<' Yes,  that I will,  certainly;  and some of you must take me.     I have no
coach ordered, — and there is not one to spare  :   so,  amongst you,  you
equerries,  you must carry me.     I have never been to Blenheim since I was
married."

"  Were you before  ?"  said the General.
"Yes,  Sir,  and vou took me."
"  Did 1 1"

"  Yes,  Sir,  you had that honour ;  and I think you have never taken that
trouble since."

All this,  though uttered in a voice as peremptory as the language,  was
spoken with very becoming smiles,  and an air of saucy good-humour.

The breakflist all this while had stood quite still  :  indeed there was
nobody but myself that had not nearly done.  Major Price handed me roll
and butter and bread across the table,  by way of hint,  I believe;   all which

I declined  :  at last Mr.  F said,  "  Miss Burney,  which is your cup  ?"

Upon this,  Mrs.  Flarcourl,  abruptly turning to me,  exclaimed,  "O dear,
you've  <i:ot no tea  !"     Then pouring out a dish of slop,  added,  "  Can you
drink it?     It looks very melancholy'/"
"  No,"  I said,  "  I had had enough."

Have not you also,  my Susan,  had enough of this scene?
The Blenheim visit being considered a private one,  nobody went but of
the Marlborough acquaintance  :  though,  in all royal parties,  the whole
company is always named by the Royals,  and the lords and ladies of the
mansions have no more right to invite a guest than a guest has to come
uninvited.

I spent this day very pleasantly,  in walking over the grounds,  which are
extremely pretty,  seeinir a flower-garden planned by Mr.  Mason,  and the
pictures in the house.  The two Miss Vernons,  Miss Planta,  and Mr.  Hagget,
were all that remained at Nuneham.  And it was now I wholly made peace
with those two ladies  ;  especially the eldest,  as I found her,  the moment she
was removed from rays so bright that they had dazzled her,  a rational,
composed,  obliging woman.  She took infinite and unwearied pains to make
amends for the cold and strange opening of our acquaintance,  by the most
assiduous endeavours to give me pleasure and amusement.  And she suc-
ceeded very well.  I could blame nobody but the Countess's sister for our
reception  ;  I plainly saw these ladies had been unprepared to look upon us
as any charge to themselves.

460 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

In the flower-garden,  there are some very pretty and unpublished verses
by Mr.  Whitehead.

The Royal excursioners did not return till between six and seven o'clock,
when we dined with the same party as the preceding day.  The evening,
too,  had just the same number of visiters,  and passed in just the same
manner.

CHAPTER XXIII.
1786.

Return to Windsor — Mrs,  Hastingfs — Mischief-making- — Birthday of the Duke of York
— Tlie Terrace — Dr.  Warton — Dr.  Roberts,  Provost of Eton — Bryant the Mythologist
— An Alarm — A Failure — Conversation with the Queen — A Mistake — Mrs.  Dejany
and the Kin^ — A Perplexity — Letter from Miss Burney to her Sister — Mrs,  Locke —
Resolutions and Struggles — Duty versus Inclination — Diary Resumed — M,  Argant —
Madame de Genlis — Doubt and Difficulties concerning her — Mrs.  Delany — Confession
and Advice — The Queen — A Nice Point of Casuistry — Dr.  Herschel — His Modesty
and Simplicity — The King's Patr^mage of him — Miss Herschel — Comet — Miss Bowd-
ler — The Duchess of Ancaster — Madame La Roche — German Enthusiasm — A Scene
for a Melodrama — Literary Conversation — The Sights of London — Lord George Gor-
don,  and Count Cagliostro — Visit from the Princess Royal — More Enthusiasm — M.
Wieland — A Romance of Real Life — A trying Question — A Trio of Friends — An awk-
ward Dilemma — The Queen's Dislike to Novels and Novel-writers — Visit to Kew — St.
James's — A Visit from the King — A singular Contretemps — Visit of the Archduke
Ferdinand and the Duchess of Modena — The Queen's Diamonds.

Tuesday,  August 15th. — This morning we all breakfasted together,
and at about twelve o'clock we set off again for Windsor.

Lord Harcourt came into the breakfast-room with abundance of civil
speeches upon his pleasure in renewing our acquaintance,  and the Miss
Vernons parted with me like wholly different people from those I met.

As soon as I returned to the Queen's Lodge at Windsor,  I called upon
Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  I found her still occupied concerning the newspaper
business about Mrs.  Hastings.     She was more than ever irritated against

Mr.  F for his information,  and told me she was sure he must have said

it to her on purpose,  and that she wished people might hold their tongue :
but that she was bent upon having satisfaction,  and therefore she had sent
for Mrs.  Hastings,  and informed her of the whole business.

I was not only sorry,  but frightened,  lest any mischief should arise

through misrepresentations and blunders,   between Mr.   F and Mr.

Hastings  :  however,  this imprudent step was taken already,  and not to be
called back.

She protested she was determined to insist that Mr.  F should pro-
duce the very paper that had mentioned the Queen,  which she should show,
and have properly noticed.

I,  on the other side,  instantly resolved to speak myself to Mr.  F ,  to

caution him by no means to be led into seeking any such paper,  or into
keeping such a search awake  :  with the best intentions in the world,  I saw
him on the point of being made the object of vindictive resentment to Mr.
Hastings,  or of indignant displeasure to the Queen herself, — so wide-spread-
mg is the power of misapprehension over the most innocent conversation.

I saw,  however,  nothing of Mr.  F till tea-time  :  indeed,  except by

very rare chance,  I never see any of the King's people but at that meeting.
Mrs.  Schwellenberg was then present,  and nothing could I do.     Ma^or Price

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  461

and Mr.  Fisher were of the party.     Mr.  F fortunately had letters to

write,  and hastily left us,  after taking one dish of tea.  The moment he was
gone Mrs.  Schwellenberg said she had forgot to speak to him about the
newspaper,  and told Major Price to ask him for it.  Mcijor Price assented
with a bow only,  and the matter dropped.

I,  however,  who best knew the danger of its going any farther,  now
determined upon speaking to Major Price,  and making him contrive to hush
it up.  I knew I had but to hint my apprehensions to a man such as him,
to animate him to every exertion for preventing what I feared.

Utterly impossible,  nevertheless,  proved this scheme  ;  Major Price was too
great a favourite to be an instant disengaged.  I was obliged therefore to
be quiet.

Wednesday,  August 16th — Was the birthday of Prince Frederick,
Duke of York.  The Queen sent me in the morning to my dear Mrs.  Delany,
whom I had but just found a moment to fly to the preceding day,  and I was
commanded to bring her,  if well enough,  just as she was,  in her home
morning dress,  to her Majesty.

This I did with great delight ;  and that most venerable of women accepted
the invitation with all the alacrity of pleasure she could have felt at fifteen.

The Queen,  in the late excursion,  had made many purchases at Wood-
stock ;  and she now made some little presents from them to this dear lady.

In the evening,  as it was again a birthday,  I resolved upon going to the

terrace,  as did Mrs.  Delany,  and with her and Miss Mawer,  and Miss P ,

I sallied forth.  To avoid the high steps leading to the terrace from the
lodge,  we went through a part of the castle.

The terrace was much crowded,  though so windy we could hardly keep
our feet;  but I had an agreeable surprise in meeting there with Dr.  Warton.
He joined Mrs.  Delany instantly,  and kept with us during the whole walk.
He congratulated me upon my appointment,  in terms of rapture  :  his ecsta-
cies are excited so readily,  from the excessive warmth of his disposition,  and
its proneness to admire and wonder,  that my new situation was a subject to
awaken an enthusiasm the most highflown.

Presently after we were joined by a goodly priest,  fat,  jovial,  breathing
plenty,  ease and good living.  I soon heard him whisper Mrs.  Delany to in-
troduce him to me.  It was Dr.  Roberts,  Provost of Eton .  I had already
seen him at Mrs.  Delany's last winter,  but no introduction had then passed.
He is a distant relation of Mr.  Cambridge.  His wife was with him,  and
introduced also.

These also joined us ;  and in a few minutes more a thin,  little,  wizen old
gentleman,  with eyes that scare seemed to see,  and a rather tottering gait,
came up to Mrs.  Delany,  and after talking with her some time,  said in a
half whisper,  "Is that Miss Burney 1"  and then desired a presentation.  It
was Mr.  Bryant,  the Mythologist.  I was very glad to see him,  as he bears
a very high character,  and lives much in this neighbourhood.  He talks a
great deal,  and with the utmost good-humour and ease,  casting entirely aside
his learning,  which 1 am nevertheless assured is that of one of the most
eminent scholars of the age.

We had now a very good party,  and seated ourselves in a sort of alcove,
to be sheltered from the wind  ;  but it was so very violent that it deterred
the Royal Family from walking.  They merely came on the terrace to
show themselves to those who were eager to pay their compliments upon
the day,  and then returned to the Castle.  Dr.  Warton insisted upon accom-
panying me home as far as the iron rails,  to see me enter the royal pre-
mises.    I did not dare invite him in,  without previous knowledge whether

39*

462 DIARY AND LETTERS 178G.

I had any such privilege;  otherwise,  with all his parts,  and all his expe-
rience, 1 question whether there is one boy in his school at Winchester
who would more have delighted in feeling himself under the roof of a
sovereign.

Wednesday,  August 17th. — From the time that the Queen condescended
to desire to place me in immediate attendance upon her own person,  I had
always secretly concluded she meant me for her English reader  ;  since the
real duties of my office would have had a far greater promise of being ful-
filled by thousands of others than by myself.  This idea had made the
prospect of reading to her extremely awful to me  ;  an exhibition,  at any
rate,  is painful to nje,  but one in which I considered Fler Majesty as a judge,
interested for herself in the sentence she should pronounce,  and gratified or
disappointed according to its tenor — this was an exhibition formidable in-
deed, and must have been considered as such by any body in similar circum-
stances.

Not a book,  not a pamphlet,  not a newspaper,  had I ever seen near the
Queen,  for the first week,  without feeling a panic  ;  I always expected to be
called upon.  She frequently bid me give her the papers  ;  I felt that they
would be the worst reading 1 could have,  because full of danger,  in matter
as well as manner  :  however,  she always read them herself.

To-day,  after she was dressed,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg went to her own
room  ;  and the Queen,  instead of leaving me,  as usual,  to go to mine,  de-
sired me to follow her to her sitting dressing-room.  She then employed
me in helping her to arrange her work,  which is chair covers done in riband  ;
and then told me to fetch her a volume of the Spectator.  I obeyed with
perfect tranquillity.  She let me stand by her a little while without speak-
ing, and then,  suddenly,  but very gently,  said  "  Will you read a paper
while I work  ?"

I was quite  "  consternated  !"  I had not then the smallest expectation of
such a request.     I said nothing,  and held the book unopened.

She took it from me,  and pointed out the place where I should begin.  She
is reading them regularly through,  for the first time.  1 had no choice  :  I
was forced to obey  ;  but my voice was less obedient than my will,  and it
became so husky,  and so unmanageable,  that nothing more unpleasant could
be heard.  The paper was a curious one enough — all concerning a court
favourite.  I could hardly rejoice when my task was over,  from my con-
sciousness how ill it was performed.  The Queen talked of the paper,  but
forbore saying any thing of any sort about the reader.  I am sorry,  how-
ever, to have done so ill.

General Harcourt came here to tea,  but I went to my good Mrs.  De Luc,
and was there very comfortable,  and told her of my disastrous essay.  She
assured me Mr.  De Luc himself,  in reading French,  began little better.

August 18th. — The Queen again,  when Mrs.  Schwellenberg was re-
tired, ordered me to follow her,  and gave me a little employment about her
work,  which I saw meant nothing but to detain without alarming me  ;  for
she soon began such topics as necessarily called me forth beyond monosyl-
lables. She named two ladies of my acquaintance,  and asked me a few
questions,  very delicately,  of my connexion with them.  Mrs.  W.  was one.
I answered very charily in words,  and merely that she had been pleased to
desire the acquaintance herself.     Here this dropped.     The other v/as Miss

.     I know not where she had heard of my knowing that lady  ;  but I

had again to say the same thing,  and I said it with less scruple,  because I
soon found the tales to that lady's disadvantage,  which are spread about
the town,  have been heard,  and not wholly discredited at Court :  therefore,
as vindicate her I cannot,  I had only to declare my connexion there was

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  463

formed by something little short of compulsion  ; — which is the real and sim-
ple fact.

This frankness made her speak out ;  and she told me that,  unless I
wished it,  I need not,  under that roof,  keep up such an acquaintance any
longer.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany was with me in the evening  ;  and the King,
when going on the terrace,  came into my room to speak to her.  He scarce
stayed a minute,  but it was a very odd sensation to me,  that it should be
my room in which I saw the King.

Saturday,  August 19th. — This morning I was put into a very unex-
pected perplexity.  While 1 was dressing,  John called to inform Scourfield
that Miss Baker was in a carriage at the gate,  and had asked to see me.  I
knew not what to say or do  ;  1 had formed a resolution,  since the little con-
ference I have mentioned,  to see nobody whatsoever,  till I could gain some
intelligence with respect to the Queen's own intentions or desire upon the
subject of my visiters  :  yet to refuse seeing one who came in pure affection,
and who I well know feels it very unfeignedly towards me,  was impossible;
and after a most hurried deliberation  (to put together two words of apparent
contradiction),  I was determined to see her at all events.

I desired John to ask her into the eating-parlour,  and apologize for my
finishing my dress.  I am forced to deny all admission to my toilette,  as it
has never taken place without making me too late.

The hurry I dressed in,  joined to much doubt if my compliance was right,
and a secret sadness that the thought of meeting any friend then gave me,
made me dreadfully nervous  ;  and by the time 1 was ready,  and admitted
her,  I was in a slate that could little make her sensible of the mark of real
regard I was showing her.  Unconscious of any ditTiculty or etiquette,  she
came to me because she had power herself,  without the smallest idea any
was exerted on my part to receive her.  There is an innocence and heed-
lessness in her character,  extremely amiable,  though at times rather dis-
tressing.

I was now very eager to leave her  :  I told her the Queen was waiting
for me,  but she still began upon something else,  not in the least conceiving
that it could be of any consequence whether 1 went ten minutes sooner or
later.  To know the value and weight of ten minutes it is needful and suf-
ficient to reside in a Court.

MISS BURNEY TO MRS.  PHILLIPS.

August 20.

Has my dear Susan thought me quite dead  ? — not to write so long  !  and
after such sweet converse as she has sent me.  O my beloved Susan,  'tis a
refractory heart I have to deal with  ! — it struggles so hard to be sad — and
silent — and fly from you entirely,  since it cannot fly entirely to you.  I do
all I can to conquer it,  to content it,  to give it a taste and enjoyment for
■what is still attainable;  but at times I cannot manage it,  and it seems abso-
lutely indispensable to my peace to occupy myself in any thing rather than
in writing to the person most dear to me upon earth  ! — 'Tis strange, — but
such is the fact, — and I now do best when I get with those who never
heard of you,  and who care not about me.

My dearest Mrs.  Locke's visit to Kew had opened all my heart to its
proper channels,  and your dear — your soothing narrative had made it
yearn to see you  ;  but the cruel stroke of Mr.  and Mrs.  Locke both coming
to Windsor in my absence,  has turned my mortification back into the same
dry course again.

464 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

If to you alone I show myself in these dark colours,  can you blame the
plan that I have intentionally been forming — namely,  to wean myself from
myself — to lessen all my atfections — to curb all my wishes — to deaden all
my sensations  ? — This design,  my Susan,  I formed so long ago as the first
day my dear father accepted my offered appointment :  I thought that what
demanded a complete new system of life,  required,  if attainable,  a new set
of feelings for all enjoyment of new prospects,  and for lessening regrets at
what were quitted,  or lost.  Such being my primitive idea,  merely from my
grief of separation,  imagine but how it was strengthened and confirmed
when the interior of my position became known to me  ! — when I saw myself
expected by Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  not to be her colleague,  but her dependent
deputy  !  not to be her visiter at my own option,  but her companion,  her
humble companion,  at her own command  !  This has given so new a cha-
racter to the place I had accepted under different auspices,  that nothing but
my horror of disappointing,  perhaps displeasing,  my dearest father,  has
deterred me,  from the moment that I made this mortifying discovery,  from
soliciting his leave to resign.  But oh,  my Susan, — kind,  good,  indulgent as
he is to me,  I have not the heart so cruelly to thwart his hopes — his views
— his happiness,  in the honours he conceived awaiting my so unsolicited
appointment.  The Queen,  too,  is all sweetness,  encouragement,  and gra-
cious goodness to me,  and I cannot endure to complain to her of her old
servant.  You see then,  my situation  ;  here I must remain  ! — The die is
cast,  and that struggle is no more.  To keep off every other,  to support the
loss of the dearest friends,  and best society,  and bear,  in exchange,  the
tyranny,  the exigeance,  the emiui,  and attempted indignities of their greatest
contrast, — this must be my constant endeavour.

My plan,  in its full extent,  I meant not to have told  ;  but since so much
of it,  unhappily,  burst from me in the hurry of that Friday morning,  I have
forced out the rest,  to be a little less mysterious.

Amongst my sources of unhappiness in this extraordinary case is,  the
very favour that,  in any other,  might counteract it — namely,  that of the
Queen:  for while,  in a manner the most attractive,  she seems inviting my
confidence,  and deigning to wish my happiness,  she redoubles my conflicts
never to shock her with murmurs against one who,  however to me noxious
and persecuting,  is to her a faithful and truly devoted old servant.  This
will prevent my ever having my distress and disturbance redressed;  for
they can never be disclosed.  Could I have,  as my dear father conceived,
all the time to myself,  my friends,  my leisure,  or my own occupations,  that
is not devoted to my official duties,  how different would be my feelings,  how
far more easily accommodated to my privations and sacrifices !  Little does
the Queen know the slavery I must either resist or endure.  And so frightful
is hostility,  that I know not which part is hardest to perform.

What erasures  !  Can you read mel 1 blot,  and re-write — yet know not
how to alter or what to send;  I so fear to alarm your tender kindness.

DIARY RESUMED.

Windsor,  Monday Evening. — Madame La Fite,  who calls upon me
daily,  though I am commonly so much engaged I can scarce speak to her
for a moment,  came to desire 1 would let her bring me M.  Argant,  who was
come to Windsor to show some experiment to the King.

I was very well pleased with him  :  his extreme ingenuity and the oppres-
sive usage he has met with,  notwithstanding the utility and success of his
projects,  made him a quick interest in my good opinion  ;  and he gave me
very great pleasure by telling me he had just ventured to mention to his

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  455

Majesty a plan for procuring some recompense for his losses,  which Mr.
Locke had either started or approved,  and that the King immediately said,
"  If it has Mr.  Locke's approbation,  I look upon him in such a light that I
will do any thing to forward it that lies in my power."

A noble sovereign this is,  my dearest Susan;  and when justice is done
him,  he will as such be acknowleged.  To think so highly,  and speak so
liberally,  of a subject whom he has never seen,  and whose absence from
Court has been represented,  once,  in no very flattering manner,  redounds
greatly to his honour,  and shows the fair impartiality of his judgment.

Madame la Fite has long pressed me with great earnestness to write to
Madame de Genlis,  whose very elegant little note to me I never have
answered.  Alas  !  what can I do? — 1 think of her as one of the first among
women — I see her full of talents and of charms — I am willing to believe her
good,  virtuous,  and dignified  ; — yet,  with all this,  the cry against her is so
violent and so universal,  and my belief in her innocence is wholly unsup-
ported by proof in its favour,  or any other argument than internal convic-
tion, from what I observed of her conduct and manners and conversation
when I saw her in London,  that 1 know not how to risk a correspondence
with her,  till better able to satisfy others,  as well as I am satisfied myself:
most especially,  I dare not enter into such an intercourse through Madame
la Fite,  whose indiscreet zeal for us both would lead her to tell her success-
ful mediation to every body she could make hear her.  Already she has
greatly distressed me upon this subject.  Not content with continual impor-
tunity to me to write,  ever since my arrival,  which 1 have evaded as gently
as possible,  to avoid giving her my humiliating reasons,  she has now written
Madame de Genlis word that I am here,  belonging to the same Royal
Household as herself;  and then came to tell me,  that as we were now so
closely connected,  she proposed our writing jointly,  in the same letter.

All this,  with infinite difficulty,  I passed over, — pleading my little time;
which indeed she sees is true.  But when M.  Argant was here,  she said to
me,  in French,  "  M.  Argant will immediately wait upon IMadame de Genlis,
for he is going to Paris;  he will tell her he saw us together,  and he will
carry her a letter from me;  and surely Miss Burney will not refuse M.
Argant the happiness of carrying two lines from one lady so celebrated to
another?"

I was quite vexed  ;  a few lines answer the same purpose as a few sheets;
since,  once her correspondent,  all that I am hesitating about is as completely
over,  right or wrong,  as if 1 wrote to her weekly.  1 made as little answer
as possible;  but Madame la Fite said that he did not go before Thursday or
Friday,  and,  therefore,  that I should have time for a few little words,  which
she would keep her own letter open for,  to the last moment.

As soon as they left me,  1 hastened to my dear Mrs.  Delany,  to consult
with her what to do.

"  By all means,"  cried she,  "  tell the affair of your difficulties whether to
write to her or not,  to the Queen  :  it will unavoidably spread,  if you enter
into such correspondence,  and the properest step you can take,  the safest
and the happiest,  is to have her opinion,  and be guided by it.  Madame
de Genlis is so public a character,  you can hardly correspond with her in
private,  and it would be better the Queen should hear of such an intercourse
from yourself than from any other."

I entirely agreed in the wisdom of her advice,  though I very much
doubted my power to exert sufficient courage to speak,  unasked,  upon any
affair of my own.  You may be sure I resolved to spare poor Madame La
Fite in my application,  if I made it:  "  to write,  or not to write,"  was all I
wanted to determine:  for the rest,  I must run any risk rather than complain
of a friend who always means well.

466 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

The day following,  which was Prince Williand's birthday,  was very
melancholy.  Princess Elizabeth had heen very unwell ever since the
Oxford expedition,  and was now so much worse as to be quite in an alarm-
ing state;  and she is so much beloved,  that her illness grieved the whole
house as sincerely as if she had been the private relation of every individual.
The account of her danger,  however,  and of her sufferings,  I shall here only
mention,  as her recovery is now perfectly established,  and not one of the
Royal Family seems more healthy.

While I was at Mrs.  Delany's,  this evening,  I was called down stairs to

Mr.  F .     I found him in great haste,  and much agitated,  with a paper in

his hand.  I instantly concluded some mischief belonging to the Hastingses:
but he exjilained to me,  briefly,  that his wife was ill,  and had sent for him  ;
that he had taken a hasty leave of their Majesties,  and had only stopped for
a moment to speak to me,  while the chaise was at the door,  to beg me to
deliver to the Queen a paper he had forgot,  and to hope that in the winter
we should renew and augment an acquaintance that,  on his part,  &c.,  &c.

I found,  upon returning to the Queen's Lodge,  that Mr.  F had taken

no leave of Mrs.  Schwellenberg ;  he had left his compliments for her with
Major Price.  I was extremely glad to hear it,  and resolved to speak to Mr.
Fisher the first moment I could,  and so finish the affair.  Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg again regretted she had not attacked him,  but said she had no idea he
would have gone so suddenly.  1 kept my paper to deliver when she was
not present,  lest she should be angry he had not called to leave it with her.
An opportunity offered the next morning,  for the Queen again commanded
me to follow her into her saloon  ;  and there she was so gentle,  and so gra-
cious, that I ventured to speak of Madame de Genlis.

It was very fearfully that I took this liberty.  I dreaded lest she should
imagine I meant to put myself under her direction,  as if presuming she would
be pleased to direct me.  Something,  I told her,  I had to say,  by the advice
of Mrs.  Delany,  which I begged her permission to communicate.  She
assented in silence,  but with a look of the utmost softness,  and yet mixed with
strong surprise.  1 felt my voice faltering,  and I was with difficulty able to
go on, — so new to me was it to beg to be heard,  who,  hitherto,  have always
been begged to speak.  There is no absolutely accounting for the forcible
emotions which every totally new situation and new effort will excite in a
mind enfeebled,  like mine,  by a long succession of struggling agitations.  I
got behind her chair,  that she might not see a distress she might wonder at :
for it was not this application itself that affected me;  it was the novelty of
my own situation,  the new power I was calling forth over my proceedings,
and the — O my Susan  ! — the all that I was changing from — relinquishing —
of the past, — and hazarding for the future!

With many pauses,  and continual hesitation,  I then told her that I had been
earnestly pressed by  ^ladame de Genlis to correspond with her;  that I
admired her with all my heart,  and with all my heart believed all good of her  ;
but that,  nevertheless,  my personal knowled;ge of her was too slight to make
me wish so intimate an intercourse,  which I had carefully shunned upon all
occasions but those where my affection as well as my admiration had been
interested  ;  though I felt such a request from such a woman as Madame de
Genlis as an honour,  and therefore not to be declined without some reason
stronger than my own general reluctance to proposals of that sort ;  and I found
her unhappily,  and I really and sincerely believed undeservedly,  encircled
with such powerful enemies,  and accused with so much confidence of having
voluntarily provoked them,  that  [  could not,  even in my own mind,  settle if it
were right to connect myself with her so closely,  till I could procure informa-
tion more positive in her favour,  in order to answer the attacks of those who

1786.  .  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  457

asperse her,  and who would highly blame me for entering into a correspon-
dence with a character not more unquestionably known to me.  I had been
desirous to wait,  suspended,  till this fuller knowledge might be brought
about;  but I was now solicited into a decision,  by M.  Argant,  who was
immediately going to her,  and who must either take her a letter from me or
show her,  by taking none,  that I was bent upon refusing her request.

The Queen heard me with the greatest attention,  and then said,  "Have
you yet writ to her?"

No,  f said  ;  I had had a little letter from her,  but I received it just as the
Duchess of Portland died,  when my whole mind was so much occupied by
Mrs.  Delany,  that 1 could not answer it.

"I will speak to you then,"  cried she,  "very honestly;  if you have not
yet writ,  I think it better you should not write.  If you had begun,  it would
be best to go on  ;  but as you have not,  it will be the safest way to let it alone.
You may easily say,  without givmg her any offence,  that you are now too
much engaged to find time for entering into any new correspondence."

I thanked her for this open advice as well as I was able,  and 1 felt the
honour its reliance upon my prudence did me,  as well as the kindness of
permitting such an excuse to be made.

The Queen talked on,  then,  of Madame de Genlis with the utmost frank-
ness;  she admired her as much as 1 had done myself,  but had been so
assaulted with tales to her disadvantage,  that she thought it unsafe and in-
discreet to form any connexion with her.  Against her own judgment,  she
had herself been almost tormented into granting her a private audience,
from the imprudent vehemence of one of Madame de G.'s friends here,  with
whom she felt herself but little pleased for what she had done,  and who,  I
plainly saw,  from that unfortunate injudiciousness,  would'  lose all power of
exerting any influence in future.  Having thus unreservedly explained her-
self, she finished the subject,  and has never started it since.  But she
looked the whole time with a marked approbation of my applying to her.

Poor Madame de Genlis  !  how I grieve at the cloud which hovers over so
much merit,  too bright to be hid,  but not to be obscured.

In the evening Mr.  Herschel came to tea.  I had once seen that very
extraordinary man at Mrs.  De Luc's,  but was happy to see him again,
for he has not more fame to awaken curiosity,  than sense and modesty to
gratify it.  He is perfectly unassuming,  yet openly happy  ;  and happy in
the success of those studies which would render a mind less excellently
formed presumptuous and arrogant.  The King has not a happier subject
than this man,  who owes wholly to His Majesty that he is not wretched  :
for such was his eagerness to quit all other pursuits to follow astronomy
solely,  that he was in danger of ruin,  when his talents,  and great and un-
common genius,  attracted the King's patronage.  He has now not only his
pension,  which gives him the felicity of devoting all his time to his darling
study,  but he is indulged in licence from the King to make a telescope
according to his new ideas and discoveries,  that is to have no cost spared in
its construction,  and is wholly to be paid for by His Majesty.

This seems to have made him happier even than the pension,  as it
enables him to put in execution all his wonderful projects,  from which his
expectations of future discoveries are so sanguine as to make his present
existence a slate of almost perfect enjoyment.  Mr.  Locke himseK would
be quite charmed with him.  He seems a man without a wish that has its
object in the terrestrial globe.

At night,  Mr.  Herschel,  by the King's command,  came to exhibit to His
Majesty and the Royal Family the new comet lately discovered by his
sister,  Miss Herschel ;  and while 1 was playing at piquet with Mrs.  Schwel-

468 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

lenberg,  the Princess Augusta came into the room,  and asked her if she
chose to go into the garden and look at it.  She declined the offer,  and
the Princess then made it to me.  I was glad to accept it,  for all sorts of
reasons.

We foynd him at his telescope,  and I mounted some steps to look
through it.  The comet was very small,  and had nothing grand or striking
in its appearance  ;  but it is the first lady's comet,  and I was very desirous
to see it.  Mr.  Herschel then showed me some of his new-discovered
universes,  wiih all the good humour with which he would have taken the
same trouble for a brother or a sister-astronomer  :  there is no possibility of
admiring his genius more than his gentleness.

#  ^  •ft^  7^^  ^  vf=  ^

Friday,  August 25th. — To-day I had the happiness of seeing my dear
Charlotte,  for the first time since I parted with her almost at the altar.

The dear girl stayed a week and a day,  and came to me constantly every
morning,  and almost every afternoon  :  even when I did not venture to keep
her to tea,  but v/as forced to part from her when it was announced.  She
was introduced to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and dined with us once,  as also Mr.
Francis ;  and once 1 begged permission for meeting her at Mr.  Hastings's,
at Beaumont Lodge,  where 1 passed an agreeable evening with that very
intelligent and very informing man,  whom I pity at my heart,  for the per-
secutions he undergoes,  and whom 1 think the man the most oppressed and
injured of modern times.  His lively and very pleasing wife contributed
largely to the afternoon's well-doing.

1 shall put the little occurrences of this week of her stay together,  with-
out journalizing.

I had one day a visit from  ]Miss Gomme,  who was brought by Madame
la Fite.  Miss Gomme was but lately settled at the Lower Lodge,  where
she is one of the governesses to the Princesses Mary and Sophia.  She is
short and plain,  but sensible,  cultivated,  and possessed of very high spirits.

Another day — or rather night — I met accidentally Major Price in the

gallery,    and he stopped me to talk over the F affair,  which we

mutually flatter ourselves is wholly blown over since his absence.  This
led on to other matters,  and he frankly told me that there was not a man in
the establishment that did not fear even speaking to me,  from the apparent
jealousy my arrival had awakened  ;  and after a little longer talk,  opening
still more,  he confessed that they had all agreed never to address me,
but in necessary civilities that were unavoidable.

Plow curious  !  I applauded the resolution,  which I saw might save me
from ill-will,  as well as themselves.  Yet he owned himself extremely
surprised at my management,  and acknowledged they had none of them
expected I could possibly have done so well.

"  Nay,"  cried 1,  "  1 only do nothing  ;  that's all  !"

"  But that,"  answered he,  "  is the difficulty  ;  to do nothing is the hardest
thing possible."

Much more passed, — for when he could speak he resolved to make him-
self amends for former silence.

This curious conference has been productive of an almost total reserve
and taciturnity at our tea-meetings  ;  for now the Major has satisfied him-
self that I am informed of their motives,  he and all of them think their
scheme may go on with my concurrence  ;  which,  accordingly,  I give it,  by
more scrupulously keeping aloof than ever.

Monday,  September 4th. — This morning Mrs.  De Luc called,  and
brought Miss Harriet Bowdler,  who was on a visit at her house,  and,  under

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELTiNA.  469

Mrs.  De Luc's wing,  ventured to the Lodge.  They did not stay two
minutes.  Mrs.  De Luc knows my situation thoroughly,  but she invited me
to tea for the evening,  to meet Miss Harriet,  and begged me to invite Mr.
Fisher,  who sleeps here while his house is fitting up.  He is in very high
and very deserved favour with all the Royal Family,  and the King grants
him the same apartment,  I believe,  that he inhabited when a preceptor of
Prince Edward,  till his Canon of Windsor's residence is furnished and
fitted up.

We had a very sociable and sensible evening.  There was no other
company,  and Miss Bowdler consented to show us several books of draw-
ings, which she had taken from nature,  chiefly in Wales,  and which were
extremely pretty and interesting.

Mr.  Fisher himself takes landscapes in a most pleasing manner,  and
travelled all through Italy and Switzerland with a pencil in his hand.

The evening was tranquil and rational.  1 love Mrs.  De Luc  ;  Miss
Harriet Bowdler is very amiable;  and Mr.  Fisher was full of intelligence,
communicated in the gentlest and simplest manner.  It was quite comic,
after such an excess of shyness on both sides,  to see how easy and natural
we mutually became.

#  #  #  *  #

On returning to Windsor I had the same solace as heretofore,  of going
every morning to Mrs.  Delany,  and the same entertainment every evening
of sitting dumb and unnoticed.  To me,  as I have explained,  this was no
hardship ;  but to Mrs.  Delany,  when she joined the set,  it was quite afflict-
ing. Accustomed to place me herself so high,  to see me,  now,  even
studiously shunned,  had an efTect upon her tender mind that gave me
uneasiness to observe  ;  and indeed she told me it was so painful a scene to
her,  that she would positively come no more,  unless I would exert and
assert myself into a little more consequence.

I have promised to do what I can to comfort her for the apprehensions
she conceives of my depression  ;  but in truth I like the present state of
things better than at present I should any reform in them.  But I
never say this to my dear Mrs.  Delany  ;  her fervent,  pure,  and tender joy
in seeing me situated where we can daily meet would all be damped,
destroyed rather,  if she read as far into my heart as she sutlers me to read
into hers.  Our confidence cannot be mutual  :  there is nothing,  I believe,
that she conceals from me  ;  she tells me every occurrence of her long life,
and even every feeling,  shows me all her letters,  confides to me all her
own papers,  and,  through the soft subdued colours of the most timid humility,
lets me see,  since she cannot hide it,  the purest tints of the most exalted
nature.  These she sees not herself,  but I,  who do,  find them the most
edifying contemplation of which my present life admits.

One day in this week I saw my beloved Fredy and Mr.  Locke,  and I
tried to feel happy  ;  but I hardly know how to describe — nor wish to do it
— how far I am from all the sweet peace that belongs to hapj)iness,  when I
see that sweet friend who brings me almost piercingly near what she has
not power to make me reach.

Monday,  September 11th. — Mr.  Fisher sent me  "  Coxe's Travels in
Russia,  Sweden,  Poland,  and Denmark,"  two thick quarto volumes  ;  and I
have been reading them almost ever since.  The style is far from either
elegant or pleasing,  but they are full of information and historic anecdotes,
and seem written with the strictest intention of veracity  : — intention,  I say,
for a foreign traveller can rarely be certain of the truth and justice even of
his own observations,  much less of those he gathers as he runs.

The Duchess of Ancaster made me a long visit before tea,  and was ex-
voL.  I.  40

470 DIARY AWD LETTERS 1786.

tremely communicative upon her own travels,  which made her conversation
very well worth hearing  ;  for she has lately resided some time in France
and Italy,  and it is always curious to know how people and things strike
the various minds of various ranks in society.

I come now to introduce to you,  with a new character,  some new per-
j)lexities from my situation.  Aladame la Fite called the next morning,  to
tell me she must take no denial to forming me a new acquaintance —
Madame de la Roche,  a German by birth,  but married to a Frenchman  ; —
an autlioress,  a woman of talents and distinction,  a character highly
celebrated,  and unjustly suffering from an adherence to the Protestant
religion.  "  She dies with eagerness to see you,"  she added in French,
"and I have invited her to VV^indsor,  where I have told her I have no
other feast prepared for her but to show her Dr.  Herschel and Miss
Burney."

I leave you to imagine if I felt competent to fulfil such a promise:  openly,
on the contrary,  I assured her I was quite unequal to it.

She had already,  she said,  written to Madame la Roche,  to come the
next day,  and if 1 would not meet her she must be covered with disgrace.

Expostulation was now vain  ;  I could only say that to answer for myself
was quite out of my own power.

"  And why 1 — and wherefore  ] — and what for  ? — and surely to me  ! — and
surely for Madame de la Roche  ! — une femme cVesjvit — vion amie — Vamie
de Madame de Genlis^''  &c.  &c.  filled up a hurried conference in the midst
of my dressing for the Queen,  till a summons interrupted her,  and forced
me,  half dressed,  and all too late,  to run away from her,  with an extorted
promise to wait upon her if I possibly could.

Accordingly I went,  and arrived before Madame la Roche.  Poor
Madame La Fite received me in transport ;  and 1 soon witnessed another
transport,  at least equal,  to Madame la Roche,  which happily was returned
with the same warmth  ;  and it was not till after a thousand embraces,  and
the most ardent professions — "  Ma digne amie  ! — est il jwssiUe 1 — te vois-
je  ?"  &c. — that I discovered they had never before met in their lives  ! — they
had corresponded,  but no more  !

This somewhat lessened my surprise,  however,  when my turn arrived  ;
for no sooner was I named than all the embrassades were transferred to me
— "  La digne Miss Borni  ! — Vauteur de Cecile  ? — d' Evelina  ? — 7ion^  ce
n'est pas possible  ! — suis-je si heureusc  ! — oui^je le vois d ses yeux  ! — Ah  !
que de bonlieur  /"  &c.

As nobody was present,  I had not the same confusion from this scene as
from that in which I first saw Madame la Fite,  when,  at an assembly at
Miss Streatfield's,  such as these were her exclamations aloud,  in the midst
of the admiring bystanders.

But soon after there entered Mrs.  Fielding and Miss Finch,  both invited
by Madame la Fite to witness these new encounters.  A literary conversa-
tion was then begun,  opened by Madame la Fite,  and kept alive by Mrs.
Fielding.

Madame la Roche,  had I met her in any other way,  might have pleased
me in no common degree  ;  for could I have conceived her character to be
unaff*ected,  her manners have a softness that would render her excessively
engaging.  She is now bien passee — no doubt fifty — yet has a voice of
touching sweetness,  eyes of dovelike gentleness,  looks supplicating for
favour,  and an air and demeanour the most tenderly caressing.  1 can
suppose she has thought herself all her life the model of the favourite
heroine of her own favourite romance,  and I can readily believe that she

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  47 1

has had attractions in her youth nothing short of fascinating.  Had I not
been present,  and so deeply engaged in this interview,  I had certainly been
caught by her myself;  for in her presence I constantly felt myself forgiving
and excusing what in her absence I as constantly found past defence or
apology.

Poor iMadame Id Fife has no chance in her presence;  for though their
singular enthusiasm upon  "the people of the literature,"  as Pacchierotti
called them,  is equal,  Madame la Fite almost subdues by her vehemence,
while Madame la Roche almost melts by her softness.  Yet I fairly believe
they are both very good women,  and doth believe themselves sincere.

In the midst of a warmth the most animated for whatever she could
approve,  how admirably did Madame de Genlis steer clear of both these
extremes,  of violence and of languor,  and confer honour by her praise,  even
where most partial and unmerited,  by the dignity mingled with sweetness
that accompanied it !

I returned still time enough to find Mrs.  Schwellenberg with her tea-party  ;
and she was very desirous to hear something of Madame la Roche.  I was
led by this to give a short account of her  :  not such a one as you have
heard,  because I kept it quite independent of all reference to poor Madame
la Fite  ;  but there was still enough to make a little narration.  Madame la
Roche had told me that she had been only three days in England,  and had
yet made but a beginning of seeing Us spectacles^  and les gens cellbres ; —
and what do you think was the first,  and,  as yet,  sole spectacle to which
she had been carried? — Bedlam! — And who the first,  and,  as yet,  only
homyne celehre she had seen — Lord George Gordon  ! — whom she called le
fameux George Gordon,  and with whom she had dined,  in company with
Count Cagliostro !

When foreigners come hither without proper recommendation?,  how
strange is their fare!  General Bude found himself so excessively diverted
wilh this account,  intermixed,  at the time,  with several circumstances I have
now forgot,  and with the novelty of hearing any thing beyond a grave
monosyllable from my mouth,  that it surprised him off all guard,  and he
began,  for the first time since the day of his arrival,  to venture coming for-
ward to converse wilh me  ;  and though it was soon over,  from that time he
has never seen me without the amazing temerity of speaking a few words
to me !

At night the Princess Royal came into my room,  sent by the Queen for
little Badine's basket.  I begged her permission to carry it myself,  but she
would not sutler me.  She stayed a few minutes,  conversing chiefly upon
Mrs.  Delany,  and when,  as she was going away,  I could not forbear saying
a word or two of the many little marks of favour she had shown me,  she
came back,  and took hold of my hand to make me a kind answer.  Charm-
ing indeed is it to see the goodness,  native and acquired,  of this lovely young
Princess.

Sunday,  Sept.  ITth. — At the chapel this morning,  Madame la Fite
placed Madame la Roche between herself and me,  and proposed bringing
her to the Lodge,  "to return my visit."  This being precisely what I had
tried to avoid,  and to avoid without shocking Madame la Fite,  by meeting
her correspondent at her own house,  I was much chagrined at such a pro-
posal, but had no means to decline it,  as it was made across Madame la
Roche herself.

Accordingly,  at about two o'clock,  when I came from the Queen,  [  found
them both in full possession of my room,  and Madame la Fite occupied in
examining my books.  The thing thus being done,  and the risk of conse-
quences inevitable,  I had only to receive them with as little display of disap-

472 DIARY AND LETTERS 1766.

probation of their measures as I could help  ;  but one of the most curious
scenes followed I have ever yet been engaged in or witnessed.

As soon as we were seated,  Madame la Fite began with assuring me,  aloud,
of the  "  conquest"  I had made of  ]\Iadame la Roche,  and appealed to that
lady for the truth of what she said.  Madame la Roche answered her by
rising,  and throwing her arms about me,  and kissing my cheeks from side
to side repeatedly.

Madame la Fite,  as soon as this was over,  and we had resumed our seats,
opened the next subject,  by saying IMadame la Roche had read and adored
"  Cecilia  ;"  again appealing to her for confirmation of her assertion.

"  O,  oiii^  Old!''''  cried her friend,  '■^  mais la vraie Cecile,  g'tst Miss
Borni !  cliarmaate Miss Bonii  !  digne,  cloiice,  et aimahle  !  Coom to me
arms!  que je voits emhrasse mille fois T

Again we were all deranged,  and again the same ceremony being per-
formed, we all sat ourselves down.

"  Cecilia"  was then talked over throughout,  in defiance of every obstacle
I could put in its way.

After this,  Madame la Fite said,  in French,  that  ^ladame la Roche had
had the most extraordinary life and adventures that had fallen to any body's
lot ;  and finished with saying,  "  Eh  !  ma dure amie,  contez nous unpeuy

They were so connected,  she answered,  in their early part with M.
VVieland,  the famous author,  that they would not be intelligible without his
story.

"  Ell hien  !  ma tres-chcre contez 7ious,  donc^  iin  ^:»e2^  d.e ses aventures  ;
ona ckire Miss Burney^  c^etoit son amant,  et Vliomme le 2^it.is extraor-
dinaire— dhm genie  !  dhin feu  !  Eh hien^  ma chere 1 oil Vavez vous
recontre  ?  oU est-ce qiCil a commen^l a vous aimer 1 contez nous un i^eu
de tout pa."

Madame la Roche,  looking down upon her fan,  began then the recital.
She related their first interview,  the gradations of their mutual attachment,
his extraordinary talents,  his literary fame and name;  the breach of
their union from motives of prudence in their friends  ;  his change of
character from piety to voluptuousness,  in consoling himself for her loss
with an actress,  his various adventures,  and various transformations from
good to bad,  in life and conduct ;  her own marriage with M.  de la Roche,
their subsequent meetings when she was mother of three children,  and all
the attendant circumstances.

This narrative was told in so touching and pathetic a manner,  and inter-
spersed with so many sentiments of tenderness and of heroism  ;  that I
could scarcely believe I was not actually listening to a Clelia or a Cassandra,
recounting the stories of her youth.

When she had done,  and I had thanked her,  ]\Iadame la Fite demanded
of me what I thought of her,  and if she was not delightful?  1 assented,  and
Madame la Roche then,  rising,  and fixing her eyes,  filled will tears,  in my
face,  while she held both my hands,  in the most melting accents,  exclaimed,
'■^  Miss Borni  !  la i:)lus chtre^  la plus digue des Angloiscs  !  dites moi —
7n''aimez vous V

I answered as well as I could,  but what I said was not very positive.
Madame la Fite came up to us,  and desired we might make a trio of friend-
ship, which should bind us to one another for life.

And then they both embraced me,  and both wept for joyful fondness  !  I
fear I seemed very hard-hearted  ;  but no spring was opened whence one tear
of mine could flow.

The clock had struck four some time,  and Madame la Fite said she

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  473

feared ihey kept me from dinner.    I knew it must soon be ready,  and there-
fore made but a slight negative.

She then,  with an anxious look at her watch,  said she feared she was
already too late for her own little dinner.

I was shocked at a bint 1 had no power to notice,  and heard it in silence
— silence unrepressing !  for she presently added,  "  You dine alone,  don't
you  ?"

"  Y — e — s, — if Mrs.  Schwellenberg is not well enough to come down
stairs to dinner."

"  And can you dine,  tyia chlre Mademoiselle — can you dine at that great
table alone '.'"

"  I must ! — the table is not mine."

"Yes,  in Mrs.  Schwellenberg's absence it is."

"  It has never been made over to me,  and I take no power that is not
given to me."

"  But the Queen,  my dearest ma'am — the Queen,  if she knew such a
person as Madame la Roche was here."

She stopped,  and I was quite disconcerted.  An attack so explicit,  and in
presence of Madame la Roche,  was beyond all my expectations.  She then
went to the window,  and exclaimed,  "It rains! — Mon Dieu  !  que ferons
nous  ? — My poor littel dinner ! — it will be all spoilt I — La pauvre Madcune
la Roche  !  une telle femme  /"

I was now really distressed,  and wished much to invite them both to stay;
but I was totally helpless ;  and could only look,  as I felt,  in the utmost
embarrassment.

The rain continued.  Madame la Roche could understand but imperfectly
what passed,  and waited its result with an air of smiling patience.  I
endeavoured to talk of other things  ;  but Madame la Fite was restless in
returning to this charge.  She had several times given me very open hints
of her desire to dine at Mrs.  Schwellenberg's table  ;  but I had hitherto
appeared not to comprehend them  :  she was now determined to come home
to the point ;  and the more I saw her determination,  the less liable I became
to being overpowered by it.

At length John came to announce dinner.

Madame la Fite looked at me in a most expressive manner,  as she rose
and walked towards the window,  exclaiming that the rain would not cease;
and Madame la Roche cast upon me a most tender smile,  while she lamented
that some accident must have prevented her carriage from coming for her.

I felt excessively ashamed,  and could only beg them not to be in haste,
faithfully assuring them I was by no means disposed for eating.

Poor Madame la Fite now lost all command of herself,  and desiring to
speak to me in my own room,  said,  pretty explicitly,  that certainly I might
keep any body to dinner,  at so great a table,  and all alone,  if I wished it.

I was obliged to be equally frank.  I acknowledged that 1 had reason to
believe I might have had that power,  from the custom of my predecessor,
Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  upon my first succeeding to her;  but that I was then too
uncertain of any of my privileges to assume a single one of them unau-
thorized by the Queen  ;  and I added that I had made it the invariable rule
of my conduct,  from the moment of my entering into my present office,  to
run no risk of private blame,  by any action that had not her previous con-
sent or knowledge.

She was not at all satisfied,  and significantly said,

"  But you have sometimes Miss Planta  ?"

"  Not I ;  Mrs.  Schwellenberg invites her."

"And M.  de Luc,  too, — he may dine with you !"

40*

474 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

"He also comes to  ]\Irs.  Schwellenberg.  Mrs.  Delany alone,  and her
niece,  come to me;  and they have had the sanction of the Queen's own
desire."

'■^  Mais,  enfin,  ma cliere Miss Burney, — when it rains, — and when it is
so Kite, — and when it is for such a woman as Madame la Roche  !"

So hard pressed,  1 was quite shocked to resist her;  but I assured her
that when my own sisters,  Phillips and Francis,  came to Windsor purposely
to see me,  they had never dined at the Lodge but by the express invitation
of Mrs.  Schwellenberg  ;  and that when my father himself was here,  I had
not ventured to ask him.

This,  though it surprised,  somewhat appeased her;  and we were called
into the other room to Miss Planta,  who was to dine with me,  and who,
unluckily,  said the dinner would be quite cold.

They begged us both to go,  and leave them till the rain was over,  or till
Madame la Roche's carriage arrived.  I could not bear to do this,  but
entreated  ]\Iiss Planta,  who was in haste,  to go and dine by herself.

This,  at last,  was agreed to,  and I tried once again to enter into discourse
upon other matters.  But how greatly did my disturbance at all this urgency-
increase,  when Madame La Fite said she was so hungry she must beg a bit
of bread and a glass of water !

I was now,  indeed,  upon the point of giving way  ;  but when I considered,
while I hesitated,  what must follow — my own necessary apology,  which
would involve Madame la Fite in much blame,  or my own concealing
silence,  which would reverse all my plans of openness with the Queen,  and
acquiescence with my own situation — I grew firm again,  and having assured
her a thousand times of my concern tor my little power,  I went into the
next room :  but I sent her the roll and water by John ;  I was too much
ashamed to carry them.  Miss Planta was full of good-natured compassion
for the scene in which she saw me engaged,  but confessed she was sure I
did right.

When I returned to them again,  Madame la Fite requested me to go at
once to the Queen,  and tell her the case.  Ah,  poor Madame la Fite !  to see
so little a way for herself,  and to suppose me also so every way short-
sighted I I informed her that I never entered the presence of the Queen
unsummoned.

"But why not,  my dear ma'am? — Mrs.  Haggerdorn went out and in
whenever she pleased."

"  So I have heard ;  but she was an old attendant,  and only went on in
her old way :  I am new,  and have yet no way marked out."
"  But Miss Planta does also."

"  That must have been brought about by the Queen's directions."
She then remonstrated with me upon my shyness,  for my own sake;  but
1 assured her I was more disengaged and better pleased,  in finding myself
expected only upon call,  than I could be in settling for myself the limes,
seasons,  and proprieties of presenting myself of my own accord.

Again she desired to speak to me in my own room  ;  and then she told
me that Madame la Roche had a most earnest wish to see all the Royal
Family  ;  she hoped,  therefore,  the Queen would go to early prayers at the
chapel,  where,  at least,  she might be beheld  :  but she gave me sundry hints,
not to be misunderstood,  that she thought I might so represent the merits
of Madame La Roche as to induce the honour of a private audience.

I could give her no hope of this,  as I had none to give  ;  for I well knew
that the Queen has a settled aversion to almost all novels,  and something
very near it to almost all novel-writers.

She then told me she had herself requested an interview for her with the

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  475

Princess Royal,  and had told her that if it was too nnuch to grant it in the
Royal apartments,  at least it might take place in JVIiss Burney's room.
Her Royal Highness coldly answered that she saw nobody without the
Queen's commands.

How much I rejoiced in her prudence and duty !  I would not have had a
meeting in my room unknown to the Queen for a thousand worlds.  But
poor mistaken Madame la Fite complained most bitterly of the deadness of
the whole court to talents and genius.

In the end,  the carriage of Madame la Roche arrived,  about tea-time,  and
Madame la Fite finished with making me promise to relate my difficulti s to
the Queen,  that she might give me such orders as to enable me to keep them
any other time.  And thus ended this most oppressive scene.  You may-
think I had no very voracious appetite after it.

To give you the result at once.  Miss Planta,  of her own accord,  briefly-
related the afllair to the Queen,  dwelling upon my extreme embarrassment
with the most good-natured applause of its motives.  The Queen graciously
joined in commendation of my steadiness,  expressed her disapprobation of
the indelicacy of poor Madame la Fite,  and added that if I had been over-
come, it would have been an encouragement to her to bring foreigners for
ever to the Lodge,  wholly contrary to the pleasure of the King.

Friday,  Septe.aiber 20tii. — A grand incident,  for my new life,  hap-
pened. Mrs.  Schwellenberg finding herself very unwell,  and wishing for
advice from a physician,  went on to town,  and I remained,  lor the first time,
with the Queen by myself.

Nothing could be more gracious and encouraging than her behaviour
upon this occasion.  We were at Kew only two days,  and her sweetness,  in
sundry particulars,  rendered them,  with respect to my attendance,  the most
pleasant of any I had witnessed.

Friday,  September 22nd. — We all went to town for keeping the anni-
versary of the King's coronation,  on which there is always a drawing-
room.  We found Mrs.  Schwellenberg still very unwell,  and uncertain
whether she should be able to return with us to Windsor the next day.

Fiarly the following morning,  Miss Planta sent to me to know whether we
went back alone,  or with Mrs.  Schwellenberg  :  I could give her no satisfac-
tion. Soon after she came herself;  but,  while she was apologizing for her
inquiries,  a message came to me,  to let me know that Mrs.  Schwellenberg
meant to continue in town.  Miss Planta took a hasty leave to prepare for
our journey  ;  but,  turning round as she opened the door,  she made a sort of
involuntary exclamation,  "  Ah,  Miss Burney,  if Mrs.  Schwellenberg was
not so sick — and so cross — how happily we might all live  !"

Secure of the Queen's approbation,  the moment I arrived at Windsor I
sent to entreat to see my dearest Mrs.  Delany and her niece to dinner.
They came;  and,  in the evening,  Mr.  Fisher alone added to our party:
the rest were attending the King at the castle,  whence His Majesty was
viewing some experiments of signals.

This was the first tolerable evening I spent in our eating-room.  Mr.
Fisher produced the drawings he had sketched in Italy and Switzerland  :
views from well-chosen prospects,  very happily,  I believe,  executed.  With
the help of his verbal description,  Mrs.  Delany saw them pretty well  ;  and
we w^ere both indebted to him for much entertainment.  The quietness of
the evening pleased him as much as it did ourselves;  and I was only sorry
that Major Price,  who was never obliged to be absent before,  should not
partake of it.

The next day passed in the same manner,  only with the addition of

476 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

Major Price and General Bude.  The tranquillity of the evening was
evidenlly enjoyed by all;  and I could not forbear thinking of the words of
Miss Planta upon our leaving London.

I was quite glad to have once again sonne natural conversation with the
Major,  who of late had carried his circumspection to such a height as never
to speak a word to me after his first salutation.  Whether his fear of
exciting displeasure towards me,  or towards himself,  was strongest,  I
cannot tell ;  but it is extremely provoking to see the universal mischief
spread by partial ill-humour.

September 25th. — This morning,  after sundry difficulties,  I received
my first visit here from Miss Cambridge.  Mrs.  Hemming brought her to
Windsor,  where she had a visit to make herself.

While she was with me,  a gentle tap at the door made me call out
"  Come in  !"  It opened — and enter Princess Royal ! — who stood quietly at
it,  upon sight of a stranger,  saying,  in a low voice,  that the Queen desired
I would go to her.  1 answered I would follow immediately,  and she made,
with her usual grace,  a curtseying exit.

«*  Who was that]"  cried Miss Cambridge;  and when I told her,  she
exclaimed,  with the greatest surprise,  "  Good Heaven  !  the Princess Royal,
— with a manner so modest and gentle? — Then I see,  by her standing in
the door to deliver her message,  that the very highest in rank think it right
to be as humble in their appearance as the lowest !"

Mrs.  Delany came to me to dinner,  and we promised ourselves the whole
afternoon tite-d-ttte^  with no other interruption than what we were well
contented to allow to Major Price and General Bude.  But before we were
well settled in my room,  after our late dinner in the next,  a visiter appeared,
— Miss Finch.

VV'e were both sadly vexed at this disappointment;  but you will wonder
to hear that 1 became,  in a few minutes,  as averse to her going as I had
been to her coming:  for the Princess Amelia was brought in,  by Mrs.
Cheveley,  to carry away Mrs.  Delany to the Queen.  1 had now,  there-
fore, no one,  but this chance-comer,  to assist me in doing the honours to my
two beaus  ;  and well as I like their company,  I by no means enjoyed the
prospect of receiving them alone:  not,  1 protest,  and am sure from any
prudery,  but simply from thinking that a single female,  in a party,  either
large or small,  of men,  unless very much used to the world,  appears to be
in a situation awkward and unbecoming.

I was quite concerned,  therefore,  to hear from Miss Finch that she meant
but a short visit,  for some reasons belonging to her carriage;  and when she
rose to go,  I felt my distaste to this nev/  mode of proceeding so strong,  that
I hastily related to her my embarrassment,  and frankly begged her to stay
and help to recreate my guests.  She was very much diverted with this
distress,  which she declared she could not comprehend,  but frankly agreed
to remain with me ;  and promised,  at my earnest desire,  not to publish what
I had confessed to her,  lest I should gain,  around Windsor,  the character of
a prude.

I had every reason to be glad that I detained her,  for she not only made
my meeting with the equerries easy and  {)leasant,  but was full of odd enter-
tainment herself.  She has a large portion of whimsical humour,  which,  at
times,  is original and amusing,  though always eccentric,  and frequently,
from uttering whatever comes uppermost,  accidental.

Among many other flights,  she very solemnly declared that she could
never keep any body's face in her mind when they were out of her sight.
"  I have quite forgot,"  cried she,  "  the Duke of York already,  though I used
to see him so continually.     Really it's quite terrible,  but I cannot recollect

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  477

a single trait of any body when they are the shortest time out of my sight ;
especially if they are dead  ; — it's quite shocking,  but really I can never re-
member the face of a person the least in the world when once they are
dead !"

The Major,  who knows her very well,  and who first had introduced her
to me on my settling here,  was much amused with her rattle  ;  and General
Bude is always pleased with any thing bordering upon the ridiculous.  Our
evening therefore turned out very well.

in the next 1 was not so successful  :  uncertain whether or not Mrs.
Schwellenberg would return,  I could make no invitations in the morning,
though T knew that Mrs.  Delany was to be with the Queen.  I dined alone;
and then gave up my companion,  and took courage to send and invite Mrs.
and Miss Heberden : — they had company at home I I sent to Madame la
File : — she was engaged with company abroad  !

It was too late to send any further, — and I was forced to make my entree
into the tea-room sola.  It was really very awkward to me,  at first;  though
the ease of General Bude,  and the gentleness and good breeding of Major
Price,  made me soon tolerably conjforiable, — till the door opened,  and His
Majesty appeared at it !

"  What !"  cried he,  smiling,  "  a trio? — only you three 1"

Two bows,  and one curtsey,  was the answer.

He then came in,  and talked for some time upon general subjects,  chiefly
with Major Price,  who stands extremely high in his favour and esteem.
Afterwards he spoke much of Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  and commended her resig-
nation of employment,  and timely retirement.  This,  by various steps,  led
to some ludicrous stories of an old servant who had belonged to her for,  I
think,  seventeen years,  and,  having stayed behind,  was married to a woman
of some fortune,  though old,  much wanting in sobriety,  and of unwieldy
corpulency.  While this was relating,  the King advanced to me,  and said,
"Siiould you have thought Draugher would have had such success?"

"I never saw him,  Sir,"  I answered.

"Never saw him? — O yes,  you must have seen him a hundred times;
he was here when you came."

"But I saw nothing then.  Sir!"  quoth I,  which little truism diverted him,
and led him to talk on with me some time longer,  still upon Mrs.  Hagger-
dorn and this Draugher.

When he went away,  he took both the gentlemen with him:  the Major

to backgammon,  the General to his concert-room.

"'^  *  #  *  *  *  *=

I have something to relate now that both my dearest friends will take
great pleasure in hearing,  because it appertains to my dignity and conse-
qu€7ice.  The Queen,  in the most gracious manner,  desired me this morning
to send an invitation to M.  Mithofl^,  a German clergyman,  to come to dinner  ;
and she added,  "  I assure you he is a very worthy man,  of very excellent
character,  or I would not ask you to invite him."

W'as not this a very sweet manner of making over to me the presidency
of the table in Mrs.  Schwellenberg's absence?

It was for the next day,  and I sent John to him immediately ; — rather
awkward,  though,  to send my compliments to a man I had never seen,  and
invite him to dine with me.     But there was no other mode — I could not

name the Queen.     I knew Miss P would be happy to make us a trio,

and I begged her not to fail me.

But alas  ! — if awkwardness was removed,  something worse was substi-
tuted in its place;  my presidency was abolished on the very day it was to
be declared,  by the sudden return of its rightful superseder.     I acquainted

478 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

her with the invitation I had been desired to send,  and I told her I had also

engaged Miss P .     I told of both as hurnbly as possible,  that I might

raise no alarms ofany intention of rivalry in power.

Mr.  MithofTwas not yet come when dinner was announced,  nor yet Miss

P ;  we sat down tite-u-ttte.  myself in some pain for my invitations,  my

companion well content to show she would wait for none of my making.

At length came Miss P ,  and presently after a tall German clergy-
man entered the room.  I was a little confused by his immediately making
up to me and thanking me in the strongest terms for the honour of my invi-
tation, and assuring me it was the most flattering one he had ever received.

I answered as short as T could,  for I was quite confounded by the looks
of Mrs.  Schvvellcnberg.  Towards me they were directed with reproach,  and
towards the poor visiter with astonishment:  why I could not imagine,  as
I had frequently heard her speak of M.  Mithoff with praise.

Finding nothing was said to him,  1 was obliged to ask him to take a
place at the table myself,  which he did  ;  still,  and with great glee of manner,
addressing himself v/holly to me,  and never finishing his warm expressions
of gralitude for my invitation.

I quite longed to tell him I had Fler Majesty's orders for what I had done,
that he might cease his most unmerited acknowledgments;  but I could not
at that time.  The dinner went off very ill ;  nobody said a word but this
gentleman,  and he spoke only to do himself mischief.

When we all adjourned to Mrs.  Schwellenberg's room up stairs,  for coffee,
my new guest again poured forth such a torrent of thanks,  that I could not
resist taking the first opportunity,  to inform him he owed me no such strong
obligation,  as I had simply obeyed the commands of the Queen.

"  The Queen  !"  he exclaimed,  with yet greater enchantment ;  "  then I am
very happy,  indeed,  madam  ;  I had been aOaid at first there was some mis-
take in the honour you did me."

"  It might have seemed a sad mistake indeed,  Sir,"  cried I,  "  if you sup-
posed I had taken the liberty of making you such an invitation,  without the
pleasure of knowing you myself."

Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  just after,  calling me aside,  said,  "  For what have
you brought me this man  ?"

I could make no answer,  lest he should hear me,  for I saw him look
uneasily towards us  ;  and therefore,  fo end such interrogations,  I turned to
him,  and asked him how many days he should continue at Windsor.

He looked surprised,  and said he had no thought of leaving it.

It was my turn to look surprised now;  1 had heard he only came upon
her Majesty's commands,  and was to stay but a day or two.

I now began to suspect some mistake,  and that my message had gone to
a wrong person.  I hastened,  therefore,  to pronounce the name of Mithoff,
and my suspicion was changed into a certainty,  by his telling me,  with a
stare,  that it was not his.

Imagine but my confusion at this information  ! — the Queen's commission
so ill executed,  M.  Mithoff neglected,  and some one else invited whose very
name I knew not  ! — nor did he,  though my mistake was now visible,  tell it
me.  Yet he looked so much disappointed,  that I thought it incumbent upon
me,  since the blunder must have been my servant's,  to do what I could to
comfort him.  I therefore forced myself forward to talk to him,  and pass
over the embarrassment ;  but he was modest,  and consequently overset,  and
soon after took his leave.

I then cleared myself to Mrs.  Schwellenberg of any voluntary deed in
bringing her this man,  and inquired of John how it had happened.  He
told me he had forgot the gentleman's name,  but as I had said he was a

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  479

German clergyman,  he bad asked for him as such,  and thought this must
be the right person.  I heard afterwards that this is a M.  Schravvder,  one
of the masters of the German language to the Princesses.  I made all the
apologies in my power to him for the error.

In the evening,  our party was the General,  Mr.  Fisher,  and Major Price;
and I was tempted to tell them my disaster,  upon Mrs.  Schweilenberg's
being suddenly called out of the room;  and the account interested them so
much,  from their knowledge of all the parlies,  that when the lady's return
interrupted it,  they were all taken with fits of sullenness that made them
nearly as dumb as myself.

The Queen,  at night,  with great good-humour,  laughed at the mistake,
and only desired it nnight be rectified for the next day.  Accordingly it was;
and M.  ]\Iithoff had an invitation for the next day,  in proper order:  that is,
from Mrs.  Schwellenberg.

It was a day of festivity for the Royal Family.  The Archduke Ferdi-
nand, brother to the Emperor,  and his Duchess,  Princess of Modena,  with
their train,  were invited here to dine with their  ^Majesties.  They had already
had the honour of breakfasting with them at Kew.  The dinner was at the
Castle.

In the morning,  at the door of my room,  I met Major Price;  he told me
he was very unwell,  and felt quite unequal to the fatigue of attendance on a
day of such ceremony  ;  he had therefore begged that Colonel Goldsworthy
might be his deputy, — "  And I,"  added he,  "  shall stay quietly at the Lodge,
and dine with you."  With Mrs.  Schwellenberg!  thought I, — in whose pre-
sence little i am fairly as one annihilated.

Colonel Goldsworthy had been invited to Windsor for the Princess
Royal's birthday,  which was the next day  ;  Mr.  Fisher,  also,  was of the
dinner party;  yet it was as heavy as if we had been our usual tite-d-Ute :
more so,  indeed,  for then one at least exerts herself,  namely,  F.  B.  :  now
every one seemed to do their worst.

When we went up stairs to coffee,  upon Mrs.  Schweilenberg's leaving us
a few minutes,  and M.  Mithoff's looking at her Indian paper,  Mr.  Fisher
and the Major pressed me to finish my account of my hapless guest and
erroneous invitation  ;  but,  upon a re-entrance,  we all suddenly parted,  like
detected conspirators.

At night Mrs.  Schwellenberg told Major Price she would give him a treat ;
he is quite her first favourite among the equerries.  This was to show him
all the Queen's jewels  ;  and Mr.  Fisher and myself were allowed to partake
in it.     Nothing could be more superb,  more dazzling.

Would you know how the evening concluded  ? — look at the account of
the dinner.

480 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

CHAPTER XXIV.

1786.

Birthday of the Princess Royal— Birthday Gifts of the King and Queen— The Princess
Amelia — Birthday Concert — Arduous Duties of the Equerries — Official Jealousy —
Visit from the King— The Queen's Jewels — Royal Governesses— Visit to Kew —
Return to Windsor— The Princess Royal— Amiable Conduct of the Queen — Her Opi-
nions on Dress and State — The Inconveniences of Grandeur — A strange Mistake —
The Equerries — Explanations and Apologies — The Hardships of a Royal Equerry —
A Day's Hunting with the King — Barley Water — Abstemiousness of George IH —
Correspondence of Mrs.  Delany — Visit from the King — Mrs.  Montagu's Character in
the  "  Observer" — Vanessa — Mrs.  Wright,  the Wax-modeller — Characters of Hume and
Lord George Sackville in the  "Observer" — Letter from Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney —
An Awkward Predicament — Dr.  Burney's Opinions on Germany — Curiosity and Ex-
planation — Diary Resumed — More Mistakes — x\necdote of the Queen — Colonel Fox
— Wedding Presents— The Duke of Montague — A nice Point — This Century or the
Last  ? — Visits to Kew — A Trait of Character — An Escapade — Benjamin West — His
Cartoon of the Painted Window at St.  George's Chapel — Simplicity of West's Character
— Death of the King's Aunt.

Friday,  September 29th. — This day the Princess Royal entered her
twenty-first year.  I had the pleasure of being in the room with the Queen
when she sent for her early in the morning.  Her Majesty bid m,e stop,  while
she went into another apartment to fetch her birthday gifts.  The charming
Princess entered with so modest,  so composed an air,  that it seemed as if
the day,  with all its preparations for splendour,  was rather solemn than
elevating to her.  I had no difficulty,  thus alone with her,  in offering my
best wishes to her.  She received them most gracefully,  and told me,  with
the most sensible pleasure,  that the King had just been with her,  and pre-
sented to her a magnificent diamond necklace.

The Queen then returned,  holding in her hands two very pretty portfolios
for her drawings,  and a very fine gold etui.  The Princess,  in receiving
them with the lowest curtsey,  kissed her hand repeatedly,  while the Queen
gave back her kisses upon her cheeks.

The King came in soon afier,  and the three youngest Princesses.  They
all flew to kiss the Princess Royal,  who is affectionately fond of them all.
Princess Amelia showed how fine she was,  and made the Queen admire
her new coat and frock  :  she then examined all the new dresses of her
sisters,  and then looking towards me with some surprise,  exclaimed,  "  And
won't Miss Burney be fine,  too?"

1 shall not easily forget this little innocent lesson.  It seems all the house-
hold dress twice on these birthdays — for their first appearance,  and for
dinner — and always in something distinguished.  I knew it not,  and had
simply prepared for my second attire only,  wearing in the morning my
usual white dimity great coat.

I was a little out of countenance  ;  and the Queen probably perceiving it,
said —

"  Come hither,  Amelia  ;  who do you think is here — in Miss Burney's
room  ?"

"  Lany,"  answered the quick little creature;  for so she calls Mrs.
Delany who had already exerted herself to come to the Lodge with her
congratulations.

The King,  taking the hand of the little Princess,  said they would go and
see her ;  and turning to the Queen as they left the room,  called out

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  481

*'What shall we do with Mrs.  Delany?"

*'  What the King pleases,"  was her answer.

I followed them to my roonn,  where his Majesty stayed some time,  giving
that dear old lady a history of the concqrt of the preceding evening for the
Archduke and Duchess,  and that he had ordered for this day for the
Princess Royal.  It is rather unfortunate Her Royal Highness should have
her birthday celebrated by an art which she even professes to have no
taste for,  and to hear almost with pain.

The King took Mrs.  Delany to breakfast with himself and family.

Poor Major Price was really ill.  I did not see him all day,  and believe
he kept his bed.  It has been to me a most serious concern to see how little
his strength is suited to his office,  the duties of which are quite laborious to
any but the most robust constitutions.  The equerry in waiting must be
dressed and ready to attend by six o'clock in summer,  and by seven in the
winter  ;  and he must be constantly prepared either for hunting,  riding,  or
walking,  the whole day through.  The King,  however,  is the kindest
master,  and exacts from his equerries no more than he performs himself,
save in watching and waiting,  which are highly fatiguing;  but His Majesty
has the most vigorous heahh,  and accustoms himself to none of the in-
dulgences which almost all his subjects regard as indispensable.

For his own sake,  therefore,  I could not be sorry that the waiting of
Major Price was to expire on the 1st of October;  though for mine I could
not help it,  nor have helped it ever since.  He was my first friend in this
house — the first who ventured to speak to me with any trust,  of the situation
of things,  and the first of course,  from whom I received any solace or pleasure.

I wore my memorable present-gown this day,  in honour of the Princess
Royal.  It is a lilac tabby.  I saw the King for a minute at night,  as he
returned from the Castle,  and he graciously admired it,  calling out  "  Emily
should see Miss Burney's gown now,  and she would think her fine enough.'*

All the day's entertainment was again at the Castle.  The following
evening I first saw the newly-arrived equerry,  Colonel Goldsworthy.  Mrs.
Schwellenberg was ill,  and sent for Mr.  de Luc,  and told me to go into the

eating-room,  and make the tea for her.     I instantly wrote to Miss P ,

to beg she would come to assist me  :  she did,  and Mrs.  Schwellenberg,
changing her plan,  came down stairs at the same time.  The party was
Major Price,  General Bude,  Mr.  Fisher,  and the Colonel.  Major Price
immediately presented us to each other.

"  Upon my word  !"  cried Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  "you do the honour here
in my room  ! — you might leave that to me.  Major Price  !"

*'  What  !  my brother equerry 1"  cried he;  "  No,  ma'am,  I think I have
a right there."

Colonel Goldsworthy's character stands very high for worth and honour,
and he is warmly attached to the King,  both for his own sake,  and from the
lie that binds him to all the Royal Family,  of regard for a sister extremely
dear to him,  Miss Goldsworthy,  whose residence here brings him frequently
to the Palace.  Pie seems to me a man of but little cultivation or literature,
but delighting in a species of dry humour,  in which he shines most success-
fully, in giving up himself for its favourite butt.

He brought me a great many compliments,  he said,  from Dr.  Warton of
Winchester,  where he had lately been quartered with his regiment.  He
rattled away very amusingly upon the balls and the belles he had seen there,
laughing at his own gallantry,  and pitying and praising himself alternately
for venturing to exert it.

The party was the same as the day before.  The King came into the room
at tea-time,  and endeavoured to laugh the Major out of his opinion of hiy

VOL.  I.  41

482 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

own ill-health,  which his Majesty thinks all a fancy,  as he has a very good
colour,  and looks strong and well :  he could not succeed  ;  the Major smiled
at the raillery,  but could not allow it to be just.  The King then suddenly
applied to me,  saying —

"  What think you,  Miss Burney,  is it not all mere fancy,  or is any thing
the matter with him?"

"Indeed,  Sir,  I don't know,"  was all the answer I could make  ;  and he
went on to repeat it to the Major,  as an argument against him.

Monday,  October 2d. — Major Price left Windsor.  He took leave of
nobody  :  every body,  I believe,  regretted him  ;  the sweet little Princess
Amelia cried when told he was gone.

The next day we were all to go to Kew;  but Mrs.  Schwellenberg was
taken ill,  and went by herself to town.

The Queen sent for me after breakfast,  and delivered to me a long box,
called here the jewel box,  in which her jewels are carried to and from town
that are worn on the drawing-room days.  The great bulk of them remain
in town all the winter,  and remove to Windsor for all the summer,  with the
rest of the family.  She told me,  as she delivered the key info my hands,
that as there was always much more room in the box than her travelling
jewels occupied,  I might make what use 1 pleased of the remaining part  ;
adding,  with a very expressive smile,  "I dare say you have books and
letters that you may be glad to carry backwards and forwards with you."

I owned that nothing was more true,  and thankfully accepted the offer.
It has proved to me since a comfort of the first magnitude,  in conveying all
my choice papers and letters safely in the carriage with me,  as well as books
in present reading,  and numerous odd things.

She then said that as the King had resolved upon taking the Princess
Amelia to Kew this time,  Mrs.  Cheveley,  her nurse and governess,  must go
also ;  and she desired to have her travel in the same coach in which I went,
as well as Mr.  De Luc and Miss Planta.

"Do you,"  she said,  "send to them all,  and appoint the time for their
coming to you."

In this gentle,  but expressive manner,  she made over to me the presidency
of the carriage in Mrs.  Schwellenberg's absence,  in the same manner as she
had done of the table.  I sent accordingly my compliments to them all,
naming eleven o'clock.

Mrs.  Cheveley is rather handsome,  and of a showy appearance,  and a
woman of exceeding good sense,  whose admirable management of the young
Princess has secured her affection without spoiling her.  She always treats
her with respect,  even when reproving her,  yet gives way to none of her
humours where it is better they should be conquered.  Fewer humours,
indeed,  I never in any child saw;  and I give the greatest credit to Mrs.
Cheveley for forbearing to indulge them.

At Kew the Smelts were just arrived.  The King has presented them with
one of the prettiest little houses upon the banks of the Thames that I have
ever seen.  I was impatient to wait upon them,  but could not,  after my
journey,  find time  :  much was I gratified,  therefore,  when the Princess
Royal came to me,  and said the Queen had sent her to acquaint me that
she had invited Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt to dine with me.

They did not,  however,  find me overflowing with spirits at our meeting.
I had not seen them since the critical period of my arrangement with the
Queen took place;  and their sight now revived so many recollections that
then were bitter to me,  that I felt a sinking at my heart unconquerable.
Melancholy,  therefore,  was the day to me;  though heretofore I had always
found pleasure in meeting with Mr.  Smelt,     But I will not go back so far,

X786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  483

except to facts and circumstances.    Sufficient for the day are the reflections
thereof!

Again I waited alone,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg being in town.  Nothing could
be sweeter than the Queen in these my first single essays;  and she bid me
the next day send an invitation again to Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt to dine with
me,  if 1 wished it.  She translated to me also the whole story of a German
play,  which she had just been reading,  and narrated it so well,  and with
observations so just of its characters,  that she filled me with fresh admira-
tion at the keenness of her penetration into people and things so remote
from her own sphere of life.

She lent me an old Scotch ballad to read,  that had lately been printed in
Germany,  with an introductory essay upon the resemblance still subsisting
between the German and Scotch languages.  The ballad is entitled the
"Gaberlunzie Man."  It had to me no recommendation,  save its curiosity
in a vocabulary and glossary,  that pointed out the similitude of the two
languages.

The lovely little Princess x\melia was brought by Mrs.  Cheveley to our
tea-room to see Mrs.  Smelt,  and stayed all the evening.  We are become
very great friends by this long visit,  and she has promised  "  always to come
and drink tea with me at Kew."

Thursday,  October 5th,  was my first waiting at St.  James's without
Mrs.  Schwellenberg:  and Mr.  and Mrs.  Locke came to me in my rooms,
and at night they carried me to Tancred and Sigismunda.  I saw also my
father and my dear brother James.

Friday,  October 6th. — We returned to Windsor without Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg, who stayed in town for her physician's advice.  The Queen went
immediately to Mrs.  Delany ;  the Princess Royal came into my room.

"  I beg pardon,"  she cried,  "  for what I am going to say  ;  I hope you will
excuse my taking such a liberty with you — but,  has nobody told you that
the Queen is always used to have the jewel-box carried into her bedroom?"

"No,  ma'am,  nobody mentioned it to me.  I brought it here because I
have other things in it."

"  I thought,  when I did not see it in mamma's room,"  cried she,  "  that
nobody had told you of that custom,  and so I thought I would come to you
myself:  I hope you will excuse it?"

You may believe how I thanked her,  while I promised to take my own
goods and chattels,  and have it conveyed to its proper place immediately.
1 saw that she imagined the Queen might be displeased  ;  and though I could
never myself imagine that,  for an omission of ignorance,  I felt the benevo-
lence of her intention,  and received it with great gratitude.

"  My dear ma'am,"  cried she,  "  I am sure 1 should be most happy to do
any thing for you that should he in my power,  always;  and really Mrs.
Schwellenberg ought to have told you this."

Afterwards I happened to be alone with this charming Princess,  and her
sister Elizabeth,  in the Queen's dressing-room.  She then came up to me,
and said,

"Now will 5^ou excuse me.  Miss Burney,  if I ask you the truth of some-
thing I have heard about you  ?"

"  Certainly,  ma'am."

"  It's such an odd thing,  I don't know how to mention it ;  but I have wished
to ask you about it this great while.  Pray is it really true that,  in your
illness last year,  you coughed so violently that you broke the whalebone of
your stays in two?"

"As nearly true as possible,  ma'am;  it actually split with the force of
the almost convulsive motion of a cough that seemed loud and powerful

484 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

enough for a giant.     I could hardly myself believe it was little I that made
so formidable a noise."

*'I could not have given credit to it if I had not heard it from yourself!
I wanted so much to know the truth,  that I determined,  at last,  to lake
courage and ask you."

"And pray,  Miss Burney,"  cried the Princess Elizabeth,  "  had you not a
blister that gave you great torture?"

"  Yes,  ma'am — in another illness."

*'  O  ! — I know how to pity you  ! — I have one on at this moment !"

"And pray,  Miss Burney,"  cried the Princess Royal,  "were not you
carried out of town,  when you were in such a weak condition that you
could not walk]"

"  Where could your Royal Highness hear all this?"

"  And were you not almost starved by Sir Richard Jebb?"  cried Princess
Elizabeth.

"  And did not you receive great benefit from asses'  milk  ?"  exclaimed the
Princess Royal.

Again 1 begged to know their means of hearing all this  ;  but the Queen's
entrance silenced us all.

Her Majesty lent me a new little book,  just translated from the German
into French,  called  "  Le Nouveau Robinson."  I found it a very ingenious
lesson of industry for young male readers.  'Tis an imitation,  with improve-
ments, of our Robinson Crusoe.

While I was dressing 1 heard something in my next room move :  I opened
the door of my bed-room,  to see what it might be,  and who should I perceive
but Madame la Roche at the window,  and Madame la Fite tossing over and
examining my books! — One of them slipped from her hands,  or they had
been so gentle that they would not have disturbed me.

They besought me not to hurry myself,  but go on just as if they were not
there.  I was already hurrying to be ready for the Queen,  and this visit
was not so timed as to compose me.  I made what apologies I could,  and
then returned to my bed-room.  Madame la Fite,  however,  followed me  ;
she said she came only to request I would drink tea with her,  to meet some
German baron,  whose name I have forgotten,  who belonged to Madame la
Roche.

I made all the excuses I could suggest,  but none were accepted.  She
told me she would never make such a petition to me again,  if I would but
this last time comply,  and that it was necessary to save her from disgrace,
as she had vvritten to him,  and promised him this interview.  If he would
but come to Windsor,  instead of sending for Madame la Roche to join him
in London,  she had promised him a meeting avec le grand Herscliel and
Mile.  Borni  !

I was less than ever inclined to go where I had been so injudiciously,  so
unduly offered,  and where I must give as much disappointment to the Baron
as he could embarrassment to me.  I retreated,  however,  in vain  ;  she was
inflexible in entreaty  ;  1 was obliged to tell her fairly that 1 had made a
resolution never to begin any acquaintance designedly,  or make any evening
visit beyond a mere call,  without first telling the Queen I had such an inten-
tion. I was very much vexed to be forced to say to her things that opposed
her own plans too strongly for any chance of her concurrence;  and she
was,  notwithstanding my being thus explicit,  so dissatisfied and so urgent,
that she compelled me to promise 1 would endeavour to mention her invita-
tion, and accept it.

I had no opportunity for my forced acquiescence tliat eveninsr,  and drank
tea quietly with Colonel Goldsworthy,  General Bude,  and Miss Planta,
whom 1 invited to stay with me.     But the next morning,  fearing to quite

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  495

hurt this poor Madame la Fite,  1 ventured to her house,  and breakfasted
with her;  and was introduced to her baron,  and to two other gentlemen,
one of them a son of Madame la Roche.  Much of civilities passed,  and I
feel that I could really like Madame la Roche,  were she less flattering;
which,  perhaps,  rather means were she more so:  for much flattery given
makes one fear much is thought acceptable.

I have seen her no more ;  she was going immediately to town,  and
thence soon back to the continent.  She wept in parting with me,  as if we
had been friends of long standing! — If I were likely to see her often,  I
should be at some pains to try at discovering what is sensitive from what is
affected.  As it is,  she has left me in such doubt of her real character,  I
scarce know whether I most should pity,  admire,  or laugh.

In the evening the sweet little Princess Amelia came to fetch Mrs.  Delany
to the Queen,  and promised me she would then return to play with me:  she
did,  and her innocent facility to be pleased delighted me extremely.  Fondly
as she is beloved,  and universally indulged,  there is not the least difficulty
in finding entertainment for her.  Capt.  Phillips's beautiful little strawberry
fork is much in favour:  she asks for it regularly when I see her,  and for
something to eat with it ;  but the play is so much more her object than the
food,  that a piece of dry bread,  or any thing that will but serve to show the
fork has real prongs,  satisfies her as well as fruit or sweetmeat.

I shall now give the rest of October without daily dates,  though all from
daily memorandums,  and try if that will bring me on a httle faster:  for to
be sure I am terribly belated.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg came no more either to Windsor or Kew ;  she found
her health better at the Queen's house in town.

The Queen was unremittingly sweet and gracious,  never making me
sensible of any insufficiency from my single attendance;  which,  to me,  was
an opportunity the most favourable in the world for becoming more inti-
mately acquainted with her mind and understanding.  For the excellency
of her mind I was fully prepared  ;  the testimony of the nation at larfjje could
not be unfaithful ;  but the depth and soundness of her understanding sur-
prised me:  good sense I expected;  to that alone she could owe the even
tenor of her conduct,  universally approved,  though examined and judged by
the watchful eye of multitudes.  But I had not imagined that,  shut up in the
confined limits of a court,  she could have acquired any but the most
superficial knowledge of the world,  and the most partial insight into cha-
racter. But I find now,  1 have only done justice to her disposition,  not to
her parts,  which are truly of that superior order that makes sagacity intui-
tively su|)ply the place of experience.  In the course of this month I spent
much time quite alone with her,  and never once quitted her presence with-
out fresh admiration of her talents.

There are few points I have observed with more pleasure in her than all
that concerns the office which brings me to her in this private and confiden-
tial manner.  All that breaks from her,  in our tite-d-tites,  upon the subject
of dress,  is both edifying and amiable.  She equips herself for the drawing-
room with all the attention in her power;  she neglects nothing that she
thinks becoming to her appearance upon those occasions,  and is sensibly
conscious that her high station makes her attire in public a matter of busi-
ness. As such,  she submits to it without murmuring;  but a yet stronger
consciousness of the real futility of such mere outward grandeur bursts from
her,  involuntarily,  the moment the sacrifice is paid,  and she can never refuse
herself the satisfaction of expressing her contentment to put on a quiet
undress.  The great coats are so highly in her favour,  from the quickness
with which they enable her to finish her toilette,  that she sings their praise

41*

486 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

with fresh warmth every time she is allowed to wear them,  archly saying
to me,  with most expressive eyes,  "  If I could write — if I could but write! —
how I would compose upon a great coat!  1 wish 1 were a poetess,  that I
might make a song upon it — I do think something very pretty might be said
about it."

These hints she has given me continually;  but the Muse was not so kind
as ever to make me think of the matter again when out of her sight — till,
at last,  she one day,  in putting on this favourite dress,  half gravely,  said,
"  I really take it a little ill you won't write something upon these great
coats  !"

I only laughed,  yet,  when I left her,  I scribbled a few stanzas,  copied
theni very feirly,  and took them,  as soon as they were finished,  into her
room;  and there kept them safely in my pocket-book,  for 1 knew not how
to produce them,  and she,  by odd accident,  forbore from that time to ask for
them,  though her repeated suggestion had,  at last,  conquered my literary
indolence.

I cannot here help mentioning a very Interesting little scene at which I
was present,  about this time.  The Queen had nobody but myself with her,
one morning,  when the King hastily entered the room,  with some letters in
his hand,  and addressing her in German,  which he spoke very fast,  and
with much apparent interest in what he said,  he brought the letters up to
her,  and put them into her hand.  She received them with much agitation,
but evidently of a much pleased sort,  and endeavoured to kiss his hand as
he held them.  He would not let her,  but made an effort,  with a countenance
of the highest satisfaction,  to kiss hers.  I saw instantly in her eyes a
forget fulness,  at the moment,  that any one was present,  while,  drawing
away her hand,  she presented him her cheek.  He accepted her kindness
with the same frank affection that she offered it;  and the next moment they
both spoke English,  and talked upon common and general subjects.

What they said I am far enough from knowing;  but the whole was too
rapid to give me time to quit the room;  and f could not but see with plea-
sure that the Queen had received some favour with which she was sensibly
delighted,  and that the King,  in her acknowledgments,  was happily and
amply paid.

******

No sooner did I find that my coadjutrix ceased to speak of returning to
Windsor,  and that I became,  by that means,  the presidentess of the dinner
and tea table,  than I formed a grand design — no other than to obtain to my
own use the disposal of my evenings.

From the time of my entrance into this court,  to that of which I am
writing,  I had never been informed that it was incumbent upon me to
receive the King's equerries at the lea-table;  yet I observed that they
•always came to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and that she expected them so entirely
as never to make tea till their arrival.  Nevertheless,  nothing of that sort
had ever been intimated to me,  and I saw no necessity of falling into all her
ways without commands to that purpose:  nor could I conclude that the
King's gentlemen would expect from me either the same confinement,  or
readiness of reception,  as had belonged to two invalid old ladies,  glad of
company,  and without a single connexion to draw them from home.

The first week,  however,  of my presidency,  my dear Mrs.  Delany,  with

Miss P ,  came to dine and spend the rest of the day with me regularly;

and though Mrs.  Delany was generally called away to the royal apartments,
her niece always remained with me.  This not only obviated all objections
to the company of the equerries,  but kept me at home naturally,  and for my
own society and visiters.

I could not,  however,  but be struck with a circumstance that showed me,

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,  487

in a rather singular manner,  my lea-making seemed at once to bo regarded
as indispensable  :  this was no other than a constant summons,  which John
regularly brought me every evening,  from these gentlemen,  to acquaint me
they were come up stairs to the tea-room,  and waiting for me.

I determined not to notice this:  and consequently,  the first time Mrs.
Delany was not well enough to give me her valuable society at the Lodge,
I went to her house,  and spent the evening there;  without sending any
message to the equerries,  as any apology must involve me in future confine-
ment.

This I did three or four times,  always with so much success as to gain
my point for the moment,  but never with such happy consequences as to
ensure it me for the time to come  ;  since every next meeting showed an air
of pique,  and since every evening had still,  unremittingly,  the same message
for John.

I concluded this would wear away by use,  and therefore resolved to give
it that chance.  One evening,  however,  when,  being quite alone,  I was going
to my loved resource,  John,  ere I could get out,  hurried to me,  "  Ma'am,  the
gentlemen are come up,  and they send their compliments,  and they wait tea
for you."

"  Very well,"  was my answer to this rather cavalier summons,  which I
did not wholly admire;  and 1 put on my hat and cloak,  when I was called
to the Queen.  She asked me whether I thought Mrs.  Delany could come
to her,  as she wished to see her?     I ofl^ered to go instantly,  and inquire.

"  But don't tell her I sent you,"  cried the most considerate Queen,  "  lest
that should make her come when it may hurt her:  find out how she is,
before you mention me."

I promised implicit obedience,  and she most graciously called after me,

"  Will it hurt you,  Miss Burney,  to go — is it a fine evening?"

I assured her it was.

"  Well,  put on your clogs,  then,  and take care,"  was her kind injunction.

As I now knew 1 must return myself,  at any rate,  I slipped into the tea-
room before I set off.     I found there Colonel Goldsworlhy,  looking quite

glum.  General Bude,  Mr.  Fisher,  Mr. Fisher,  his brother,  and Mr.

Blomberg,  chaplain to the Prince of Wales.

The moment I opened the door.  General Bude presented Mr.  Blomberg to
me,  and Mr.  Fisher his brother;  1 told them,  hastily,  that I was running
away to Mrs.  Delany,  but meant to return in a quarter of an hour,  when I
should be happy to have their company,  if they could wait so long  ;  but if
they were hurried,  my man should bring their tea.

They all turned to Colonel Goldsworthy,  who,  as equerry in waiting,  w^as
considered as head of the party  ;  but he seemed so choked with surprise
and displeasure that he could only mutter something too indistinct to be
heard,  and bowed low and distantly.

"  If Colonel Goldsworthy can command his time,  ma'am,"  cried Mr.
Fisher,  "  we shall be most happy to wait yours."

General Bude said the same  :  the Colonel again silently and solemnly
bowed,  and I curtsied in the same manner,  and hurried away.

Mrs.  Delany was not well;  and I would not vex her with the Queen's
kind wish for her.  I returned,  and sent in,  by the page in waiting,  my
account :  for the Queen was in the concert-room,  and I could not go to her.

Neither would I seduce away Miss P from her duty ;  I came back,

therefore,  alone,  and was fain to make my part as good as I was able among
my beaus.

I found them all waiting.  Colonel Goldsworthy received me with the
same stately bow,  and a look so glum and disconcerted,  that I instantly

488 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

turned from him to meet the soft countenance of the good Mr.  Fisher,  who
took a chair next mine,  and entered into conversation with his usual intelli-
gence. General Bude was chatty and well bred,  and the two strangers
wholly silent.

1 could not,  however,  but see that Colonel Goldsworlhy grew less and
less pleased.  Yet what had I done  ? — I had never been commanded to
devote my evenings to him,  and,  if excused officially,  surely there could be
no private claim from either his situation or mine.  His displeasure there-
fore appeared to me so unjust,  that I resolved to take not the smallest notice
of it.  He never opened his mouth,  neither to me nor to any one else.  In
this strange manner we drank our tea.  When it was over,  he still sat dumb  ;
and slill 1 conversed with Mr.  Fisher and General Bude.

At length a prodigious hemming showed a preparation in the Colonel for
a speech  :  it came forth with great difficulty and most considerable hesita-
tion.

"I am afraid,  ma'am, — I am afraid you — you — that is — that we are
intruders upon you."

"N — o,"  answered I,  faintly,  "why so?"

*'  I am sure,  ma'am,  if we are — if you think — if we take too much liberty
— I am sure I would not for the world  ! — I only — your commands — nothing
else—"

"  Sir!"  cried I,  not understanding a word.

"I see,  ma'am,  we only intrude upon you:  however,  you must excuse
my just saying we would not for the world have taken such a liberty,
though very sensible of the happiness of being allowed to come in for half
an hour, — which is the best half-hour of the whole day;  but yet,  if it was
not for your own commands — "

"  What commands,  sir?"

He grew still more perplexed,  and made at least a dozen speeches to the
same no purpose,  before i could draw from him any thing explicit  ;  all of
them listening silently the whole time,  and myself invariably staring.  At
last,  a  (ew words escaped him more intelligible.

"  Your messages,  ma'am,  were what encouraged us to come."

"  And pray,  sir,  do tell me what messages  ? — 1 am very happy to see you,
but I never sent any messages at all I"

"Indeed,  ma'am!"  cried he,  staring in his turn  ;  "  why your servant,
little John there,  came rapping at our door,  at the equerry room,  before we
had well swallowed our dmner,  and said,  "  My lady is waiting tea,  sir."

I was quite confounded.  I assured him it was an entire fabrication of my
servant's,  as I had never sent,  nor even thought of sending him,  for I was
going out.

"  Why to own the truth,  ma'am,"  cried he,  brightening up,  "  I did really
think it a little odd to send for us in that hurry, — for we got up directly
from table,  and said,  if the lady is wailing,  to be sure we must not keep
her ;  and then — when we came — to just peep in,  and say you were going
out  !"

How intolerable an impertinence in John  ! — it was really no wonder the
poor Colonel was so glum.

Again I repeated my ignorance of this step  ;  and he then said  "  Why,
ma'am,  he comes to us regularly every afternoon,  and says his lady is
waiting;  and we are very glad to come,  poor souls that we are,  with no
rest all the livelong day but what we get in this good room! — but then — to
come,  and see ourselves only intruders — and to find you going out,  after
sending for us !"

I could scarce find words to express my amazement at this communica-

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  489

tion.  I cleared myself instantly from having any the smallest knowledge
of John's proceedings,  and Colonel Goldsworthy soon recovered all his
spirits and good- humour when he was satisfied he had not designedly been
treated with such strange and unmeaning inconsistency.  He rejoiced
exceedingly that he had spoke out,  and I thanked him for his frankness,
and the evening concluded very amicably.^i

My dearest friends will easily conceive how vexed I must feel myself
with my foolish servant,  for taking so great a liberty in my name;  and how
provoked to have had these gentlemen,  and all others that had occasionally
dined at their table,  persuaded that I sent them so pressing a call,  for the
mere impertinent caprice of running away from them afier ihey obeyed it.

Colonel Goldsworthy had been quite seriously affronted with me;  General
Bude is of a disposition too placid and unconcerned for pique,  and had
therefore taken the matter very quietly  ;  but Mr.  Fisher,  as he has since
owned to me.  suspected some mistake the whole time,  and never believed I had
sent them any such message.  It was owing to his interference,  and at his
earnest request,  that the Colonel had been prevailed upon to state the case
to me.

As I have the greatest aversion to seeing servants exposed or reprimanded
before witnesses,  I would not summon John till I could speak to him alone.
I then desired him to explain to me the reason of carrying messages never
given to him.  At first he positively denied the fact;  but when I assured
him my intelligence came from Colonel Goldsworthy himself,  he only said,
*'  Law,  ma'am,  I'm sure I did not do it for any harm  !  I did not know as I
did any thing wrong;"  nor could I get any further satisfaction from him.
I can only conclude that he acted from officious folly,  simply fancying he
added to his own importance,  by carrying messages from one party to the
other.  His want of truth,  indeed,  is a mischief beyond folly,  and made me
see him quite unfit for the place I had given him.

The evening after,  I invited Miss P ,  determined to spend it entirely

with my beaus,  in order to wholly explain away this impertinence.  Colonel
Goldsworthy now made me a thousand apologies for having named the
matter to me at all.  I assured him I was extremely glad he had afforded me
an opportunity of clearing it.  In the course of the discussion,  I mentioned the
constant summons brought me by John every afternoon.  He lifted up his
hands and eyes,  and protested most solemnly he had never sent a single one.

"  I vow,  ma'am,"  cried the Colonel,  "  I would not have taken such a
liberty on any account ;  though all the comfort of my life,  in this house,  is
one half-hour in a day spent in this room.  After all one's labours,  riding,
and walking,  and standing,  and bowing — what a life it is?  Well!  it's
honour !  that's one comfort ;  it's all honour  !  royal honour  ! — one has the
honour to stand till one has not a foot left ;  and to ride till one's stiff,  and
to walk till one's ready to drop, — and then one makes one's lowest bow,
d'ye see,  and blesses one's self with joy for the honour !"

This is his style of rattle,  when perfectly at his ease,  pleased with every
individual in his company,  and completely in good humour.  But the
moment he sees any one that he fears or dislikes,  he assumes a look of
glum distance and sullenness,  and will not utter a word,  scarcely even in
answer.  He is warmly and faithfully attached to the King and all the
Royal Family,  yet his favourite theme,  in his very best moods,  is complaint
of his attendance,  and murmuring at all its ceremonials.  This,  however,  is
merely for sport and oddity,  for he is a man of fortune,  and would certainly
relinquish his post if it were not to his taste.

His account of his own hardships and sufferings here,  in the discharge of

490 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

his duty,  is truly comic,  "  How do you like it,  ma'am?"  he says to me,
"  though it's hardly fair to ask you yet,  because you know almost nothing
of the joys of this sort of life.  But wait till November and December,  and
then you'll get a pretty taste of them  !  Running along in these cold pas-
sages ;  then bursting into rooms fit to bake you  ;  then back again into all
these agreeable puffs  ! — Bless us  !  I believe in my heart there's wind enough
in these passages to carry a man of war !  And there you'll have your
share,  ma'am,  I promise you that !  you'll get knocked up in three days,
take my word for that."

I begged him not to prognosticate so much evil for me.

"  O ma'am,  there's no help for it !"  cried he  ;  "  you won't have the
hunting,  to be sure,  nor amusing yourself with wading a foot and a half
through the dirt,  by way of a little pleasant walk,  as we poor equerries do  ?
It's a wonder to me we outlive the first month.  But the agreeable puffs of
the passages you will have just as completely as any of us.  Let's see,  how
many blasts must you have every time you go to the Queen?  First,  one
upon your opening your door;  then another,  as you get down the three
steps from it,  which are exposed to the wind from the garden door down-
stairs ;  then a third,  as you turn the corner to enter the passage ;  then you
come plump upon another from the hall door;  then comes another,  fit to
knock you down,  as you turn the upper passage  ;  then,  just as you turn
towards the Queen's room,  comes another ;  and last,  a whifl'  from the King's
stairs,  enough to blow you half a mile off!"

"  Mere healthy breezes,"  I cried,  and assured him I did not fear them.

"Stay till Christmas,"  cried he,  with a threatening air,  "only stay till
then,  and let's see what you'll say then  ;  you'll be laid up as sure as fate  !
you may take my word for that.  One thing,  however,  pray let me caution
you about — don't go to early prayers in November;  if you do,  that will
completely kill you  !  Oh,  ma'am,  you know nothing yet of all these mat-
ters ! — only pray,  joking apart,  let me have the honour just to advise you
this one thing,  or else it's all over with you,  I do assure you !"

It was in vain I begged him to be more merciful in his prophecies  ;  he
failed not,  every night,  to administer to me the same pleasant anticipations.

"  When the Princesses,"  cried he,  "  used to it as they are,  get regularly
knocked up before this business is over,  off they drop,  one by one  ; — first
the Queen deserts us  ;  then Princess Elizabeth is done for ;  then Princess
Royal begins coughing  ;  then Princess Augusta gets the snuffles  ;  and all
the poor attendants,  my poor sister at their head,  drop off,  one after another,
like so many snuffs of candles:  till at last,  dwindle,  dwindle,  dwindle — not
a soul goes to the chapel but the King,  the parson,  and myself;  and there
we three freeze it out together  !"

One evening,  when he had been out very late hunting with the King,  he

assumed so doleful an air of weariness,  that had not Miss P exerted

her utmost powers to revive him,  he would not have uttered a word the
whole night ;  but when once brought forward,  he gave us more entertain-
ment than ever,  by relating his hardships.

"  After all the labours,"  cried he,  "  of the chase,  all the riding,  the
trotting,  the galloping,  the leaping,  the — with your favour,  ladies,  I beg
pardon,  I was going to say a strange word,  but the — the perspiration, — and
— and all that — after being wet through over head,  and soused through
under feet,  and popped into ditches,  and jerked over gates,  what lives we do
lead  !  Well,  it's all honour  !  that's my only comfort !  Well,  after all this,
fagging away like mad from eight in the morning to five or six in the after-
noon, home we come,  looking like so many drowned rats,  with not a dry

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  49I

thread about us,  nor a morsel within us — sore to the very bone,  and forced
to smile all the time  !  and then after all this what do you think follows? —
'  Here,  Goldsworthy,'  cries his Majesty :  so up I comes to him,  bowing pro-
foundly, and my hair dripping down to my shoes  ;  '  Goldsworthy,'  cries
his Majesty.  '  Sir,'  says I,  smiling agreeably,  with the rheumatism just
creeping all over me  !  but still,  expecting something a little comfortable,  I
wait patiently to know his gracious pleasure,  and then,  '  Here,  Goldsworthy,
I say!'  he cries,  'will you have a little barley water?'  Barley water in
such a plight as that !  Fine compensation for a wet jacket truly  ! — barley
water !  I never heard of such a thing in my life  !  barley water after a
whole day's hard hunting  !"

"  And pray did you drink it  ?"

"1 drink it? — Drink barley water  ?  no,  no  ;  not come to that neither!
But there it was,  sure enough  ! — in a jug fit for a sick room  ;  just such a
thing as you put upon a hob in a chimney,  for some poor miserable soul
that keeps his bed  !  just such a thing as that ! — And,  «  Here,  Goldsworthy,'
says his Majesty,  '  here's the barley water !' "

"  And did the King drink it himself?"

"  Yes,  God bless his Majesty  !  but I was too humble a subject to do the
same as the King  ! — Barley water,  quoth I  ! — Ha  !  ha  ? — a fine treat truly  !
— Heaven defend me  !  I'm not come to that,  neither  !  bad enough too,  but
not so bad as that."

This sort of sport and humour,  however,  which,  when uttered by himself,
is extremely diverting,  all ceases wholly if the smallest thing happens to
disconcert him.  The entrance of any person unexpected by him was
always sufficient not merely to silence,  but obviously to displease him.  If
Madame de la Fite came,  his mouth was closed,  and his brows were knit,
and he looked as if even ill used by her entrance.

I have now to mention an affair — a secret one — which relates to Mrs.
Delany.  That dear and very extraordinary lady,  in our long and many
meetings,  has communicated to me almost all the transactions of her life,
and as nearly as she can remember them,  almost the thoughts.  The purity
and excellence of her character have risen upon me in every circumstance
and in every sentiment that has come to my knowledge  ;  but the confidence
most delightful that she has placed in me has been of her transactions with
her darling friend,  the late Duchess of Portland.  That friend,  some years
ago,  had prevailed with Mrs.  Delany,  by her earnest entreaties,  to write
down the principal events of her life.  This she did in the form of letters,
and with feigned names  :  these letters,  invaluable both from their contents
and their writer.  Lady Weyniouth,  upon her mother's death,  most honour-
ably restored to Mrs.  Delany.  She has permitted me to see them,  and to
read them to her.

In reading them to her,  she opened upon several circumstances which
were omitted,  or slightly mentioned  ;  and related so many interesting anec-
dotes belonging to the times,  which,  being known already to the Duchess,
she had not inserted,  that I proposed filling up the chasms,  and linking the
whole together.  She was pleased with the thought,  and accordingly we
began.  I have commenced from the earliest time to which her incompa-
rable memory reaches,  and,  if health permits our meeting for this purpose,
I shall complete,  with the help of these letters,  a history of her whole life.
Its early part was entirely left out,  and its latter,  of course,  had never been
related.

All the time,  therefore,  that we are able to pass by ourselves was regularly
appropriated to this new work.     We have not advanced very far,  for our

492 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

interruptions are almost continual ;  but I hope,  nevertheless,  we shall not
conclude till the design is completed.

The first night that we began this business,  when all the letters,  and
sundry papers relative to them,  were spread upon the table,  the King entered
my room  !  Dear Mrs.  Delany was quite frightened,  and I felt myself pretty-
hot in the cheeks.  He immediately asked what we were about?  Neither of
us answered.  "  Sorting letters  ?"  cried he,  to me.  "  Reading some.  Sir,"
quoth I.  And there the matter dropped for that time  :  but not long after
he surprised us again.  We were then prepared with a double employment,
and therefore had one ready for avowal.  This was,  selecting and exa-
mining letters from eminent persons,  or from chosen friends,  and burning all
that contained any thing of a private nature,  and preserving only such as
were ingenious,  without possible hazard to the writers or their family.

This has been a pleasant,  painful task — pleasant from the many admi-
rable letters it gave me opportunity to read,  and painful from the melancholy
retrospections they occasioned dearest Mrs.  Delany.

The King,  from this time,  grew used to expecting to find us encircled
with papers when he came into my room for this highly,  justly favoured
lady  (which was almost every evening that we spent at VVindsor during
this month),  and only said — "  Well,  who are you reading now?"

I went through Swift's letters to her.  Dr.  Young's,  and Mr.  Mason's ;
and destroyed all that could not be saved every way to their honour.  And
we proceeded in the memoirs pretty well through the infantine part.  'Twas
a sweet occupation for our private hours,  and I would not have exchanged
it for any that could have been offered me.

About this time,  the Queen one day,  taking up a book,  said,  "  Now don't
answer what I am going to ask if you have any objection to it — This book,
I have been told,  contains the character of Mrs.  Montagu  ?"

It was the  "  Observer  ;"  I could not deny it ;  and she opened at the
account of Vanessa,  and read it out to me,  stopping upon every name,  for
a key from me.  1 could give it to but very few — Mrs.  Wright,  the wax-
modeller.  Dr.  Johnson,  and 1 have forgot what others ;  but when she came
to a complimentary passage of a young lady with art.  Arcadian air,  to
whom Vanessa says,  "  My dear,  I am in your third volume,"  she looked
towards me,  with an archness that did not make me feel Very pale,  as she
added,  "  Who is meant by that  ?"  I truly answered I knew not.

How infinitely severe a criticism is this Vanessa upon Mrs.  Montagu  !
Do you remember hearing Mr.  Cambridge read it at Twickenham  ?  I think
it a very injurious attack in Mr.  Cumberland  ;  for whatever may be Mrs.
Montagu's foibles,  she is free,  I believe,  from all vice,  and as a member of
society she is magnificently useful.  This,  and much more to this purpose,
I instantly said to her Majesty,  defending her,  as well I was able,  from this
illiberal assault.  The Queen was very ready to hear me,  and to concur in
thinking such usage very cruel.  She told me that the character of Hume
was also given under another fictitious name,  and of Lord George Sack-
ville ;  and asked me if I wished to read the work.  The book was the
Princess Royal's,  but she would borrow it for me.

I could not but accept such graciousness ;  and I have consequently read
over the three volumes.  I am heartily averse to any work of any species,
that contains such hard personalities ;  and I think the  "  Observer,"  besides,
little more than a compilation from some classic scholar's commonplace
book :  for all that is not personal is criticism on Greek authors and cus-
toms.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELL\A.  493

MISS BURNEY TO DR.  BURNEY.

Queen's House,  October 16th,  178fi.

I have now,  dearest sir,  an adventure for you that if it serves you as it
served me,  will make you start indeed,  and  "  each particular hair to stand
on end  !"

Yesterday evening my dear Mrs.  Delany was sitting with me in my own
room,  when,  for the first time,  the Princess Elizabeth entered it.  She told
me that the Queen desired to speak with me.  I instantly obeyed the sum-
mons, and found Her Majesty with only Mr.  Bolton,  who teaches the Prin-
cesses geography ;  she was studying with him herself,  as he stood before
her with a book in his hand.  The Princesses have no masters,  except the
maitre de danse,  from whom she does not occasionally receive instructions
— so indefatigable and so humble is her love of knowledge.

Well — she looked up very smilingly,  and said she believed I had some-
thing she wished for,  and which she doubted not I would let her have.  You
may imagine my answer ;  but how was I struck,  and thunderstruck,  when
she said it was your  "  German Tour  !"

0  !  all those  "  hundert tausend sacrements  /"  How did I start !  I felt all
within bubble bubble round me,  as if whirled by a wheel.  I made no answer
— I could not get out a word.

A little surprised at this backwardness about a matter which I saw was
expected to give me pleasure,  she added — "  My set is at Kew  ;  but  [  wish
to lend it Elizabeth  ;  1 think it will amuse her;  and I should like she should
read it."

This a little revived me.  I had fancied it was to look for some passage
herself,  and immediately concluded it must be that upon German Genius! —
and then,  thought T,  'tis all over with us for ever  !

1 now hesitated out that I was not sure if I had it at Windsor  ;  and that
I had only been in possession of it since my last going to town,  when you
had been so kind as to bring me a set.     I added not a word of the perche  !

Still,  I am sure,  surprised at this unwillingness,  she said that  "the
greatest care should be taken of it,  and she would answer for no injury
coming to it if I would lend it."

Quite ashamed of this misapprehension of my reluctance,  I said I would
go and see if I had brought it to Windsor or not ;  and away I ran.

It then occurred to me that it would be best to take this opportunity to
mention your  -pentimento fairly and openly,  and your intention,  upon a
future edition,  to correct some of the severities which you regretted.  I
therefore took back the book — out of breath,  both with fear and conscious-
ness.

She looked much pleased at seeing me return with it.  I immediately
proposed sending it to the Princess,  who I was sure would not read it with
half the attention to its national strokes that her royal mother would  ;  but
she held out her hand to take it from me.

I was all in a quiver,  but gathered courage now to say,  "  Ma'am,  this is
a set my father was preparing for some amendment ;  as he wrote in haste,
and with the very recent impression of much personal suffering and ill-
usage on his journey ;  and therefore he now thinks he was led to some rash
declarations and opinions,  which he is earnest to correct."

I was ready to clap myself for this speech the moment I had got it out.

She smiled with much approbation of the design,  and said most good-
VOL.  I.  42

494 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

humouredly,  "  Indeed it is but true that the travelling in Germany is very
bad and provoking."

How I longed to kiss her hand  !

She then opened at Frankfort,  and read about the street-musicians aloud,
and was going on in a tone of pleasure,  when — the King entered  !  Not to
interrupt the Queen,  he spoke to me  :  "  What are you about  ? — What have
you got there 1"

I was now in a worse twitter than ever.  I hemmed and hawed — but the
Queen stopped reading,  and answered,  "'Tis her father's tour;  I wish Eliza-
beth to read it,  and my set is at Kew."

"  O,"  cried he,  "  mine is here."

Ah,  ah !  my dearest daddy  !  here was some comfort at least.  I found
my holding back the book,  which my surprise made impossible,  would have
answered no purpose,  since it was so near at hand.

He sat down and took up a volume.

I now,  in the best way I could,  forced out a repetition of the same speech
I made before.

He opened at the beginning,  and read out  "  From the Author,"  with a
Jaughing face,  and turning to look at me.     I laughed too — a little  !

The Queen,  turning over to another place,  said  "  Here are marks with a
pencil !"

"  Yes,  ma'am,"  cried I,  in a horrid hurry,  "  those are only of places to
be altered — but my father would be very sorry your Majesty should look at
what he gives up himself!"

She felt this,  and turned from the paragraph.

The King,  looking very wickedly droll indeed,  and eyeing me to see how
I took it,  turned over his volume with great rapidity,  calling out  ''  Why,  I
can't find a mark  ! — where are they all?"

"  The marked places,  sir,"  said I,  "  are just what "  "I would not have

you find,"  I meant — but,  though I stopped,  I saw he understood me ;  for
he laughed very expressively,  and still watching me,  looked on,  and I
expected every minute lie would meet with that terrible sentence.

At last his eye was caught by  "  Guadagni,"  and he stopped and read a
word or two of his being hissed off the stage,  and then proceeded,  to him-
self, through the rest of the paragraph,  finishing with calling out aloud
"  Very true indeed  ! — and very just!  He says an actor or a singer are the
only people never allowed to have a cold or toothache.  But pray,"  cried
he,  again laughing,  "what does your father send you this set for? — to give
your opinion of his alterations  ?"

I was as hot as fire at this question.

"  To see.  Sir,  what places he meant to alter."

"  She used to copy for her father,"  said the Queen ;  "  indeed I think her
father has a great loss of her."

Was not that sweet  ? — Pray,  dear Sir,  say yes  !

*'  And who copies for him now  ?"  cried the King.

"  I don't know.  Sir."

"  Have not you any sister left behind  ?"

"  Yes,  Sir,  one — but she has been so much of her time abroad that she
forgot her English,  and has not yet recovered it sufficiently for such an
employment."

"  What does he do then  ?"

"  I fancy he copies for himself!"

"  Suppose he should send any to you here?"

"  1 — I should endeavour to find time to copy it."

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  495

Here there was an interruption,  and in a few minutes they both went to
the concert-room  :  the Queen assuring me,  in parting,  that the Princess
should take the utmost care of the books.  Since then nothing more has
passed,  but that the books were sent to the Lower Lodge,  where the Princess
lives.  And happy was I when I heard they were so far removed  !  Was
it not a most difficult transaction  ?  I am glad,  however,  I had this set,  since
else the King would have given his,  without the marks or any signs of con-
trition or intended amendment.  As soon as it is all over and returned I
will certainly write again.

DIARY RESUMED.

I have written my father an account of the Queen's borrowing his
"  German Tour"  for the Princess Elizabeth,  and of my panic at placing
the books in her Majesty's hands,  though I was in hopes they would be sent
to the Princess without further examination.

And so I believe they were,  as I never heard them mentioned any more ;
but a most ridiculous mistake followed,  from the marks made by my dear

father  :  the Princess Elizabeth told Miss P she was going to read Dr.

Burney's German Tour  ;  "  And I am quite delighted,"  she added,  "  that I
have Miss Burney's set,  with all the marks of her favourite passages  !"

I was now doubly shocked  ;  first for my father,  that he should be thought
so prejudiced a writer,  and secondly for myself,  that his hardest reflections
should seem what were most pleasing to me.  I had an opportunity,  how-
ever, afterwards,  of explaining this matter to Her Royal Highness,  who
was highly diverted with her own conclusions,  and my consternation upon
them.  I made at the same time an apology for my dear father,  which she
accepted very sweetly ;  and I entreated her to forbear pointing out the parts
she had imagined I preferred.    She laughed,  but I am sure she will reiriG-m-

ber my request.

******

I must now tell a little thing for my dear Fredy,  for  'tis about a flower  :
though my Susan will equally feel how much more grateful it was to me
than the fine robe sent by other hands.

The Queen received one morning from Stoke some of the most beautiful
double violets I ever saw  ;  they were with other flowers,  very fine,  but too
powerful for her,  and she desired me to carry them into another room  :  but,
stopping me as I was going,  she took out three little bunches of the violets,
and said  "  This you shall send to Mrs.  Delany  ;  this I will keep  ;  and this
— take for yourself."

I quite longed to tell her how much more I valued such a gift,  presented
by her own hand,  than the richest tabby in the world by a deputy  !  She
knows,  however,  that,  be the intrinsic worth small as it may,  the honour of
any thing that comes immediately from herself is always great:  she does
such things,  therefore,  charily,  and always in a manner that marks them

for little traits of favour.

*******

I have mentioned to you,  I think,  the eldest Miss Clayton.  I believe,  indeed,
my dearest Susanna saw her at the tea-drinking when at Windsor.  She left
this place in this month,  to prepare for changing her name as well as dwell-
ing, and to bestow herself upon Colonel Fox,  brother to the famous Charles.
She called upon me the last morning of her stay,  with her sister.  Miss
Emily.  She seems very hapj)y,  and she seems also,  so amiable,  that she
had my best wishes for continuing so.     She had just been receiving little

496 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

parting tokens from the Queen and the Princesses,  with whom she was in
such favour that Her Majesty had permitted her to take lessons of drawing
at the Lodge,  at the same time with their Royal Highnesses.  The Queen
had given her a pincushion in a gold case ;  the Princess Royal a belt of fine
steel  ;  and the Princess Augusta an ivory tooth-pick case,  inlaid with gold.
She is really a loss to Windsor,  where there are not many young women of
equal merit and modesty.

The Duke of Montagu came for some days to Windsor,  and always took
his tea with us.  He is Governor of Windsor Castle,  in which he has apart-
ments ;  but he comes to them only as a visiter,  for he cannot reside here
without a degree of royal attendance for which he is growing now rather
unable.  Long standing and long waiting will not,  after a certain time of
life,  agree either with the strength or the spirits.  He speaks to me always
much of Mr.  Cambridge,  whom he has a most neighbourly regard for.

One evening poor Madame la Fite,  even from Colonel Goldsworthy,
brought forth much entertainment.  The party at that time consisted of her-
self and Miss P ,  the Colonel,  the General,  ]\Ir.  Fisher,  and Mr.  Blom-

berg — a chaplain to the Prince of Wales,  whom I believe I have named before.
A general silence was just threatening us,  when IMadame la Fite suddenly,
in her broken English,  exclaimed,  she had been having a great dispute
whether Mrs.  Delany was born in this century or the last.  The Colonel,
surprised out of his glumncss,  called out,  "  In the last century,  ma'am  ! —
What do you mean by that  ?  Would you make the good old lady out to be
two hundred years old  ?"

She explained herself so extremely ill,  that not a creature was brought
over to her opinion,  though it was afterwards proved that she was right,  and
that the year 1700,  in which Mrs.  Delany was born,  belonged to the last
CCIltury.

Mr.  Fisher and Mr.  Blomberg both said that the year 1700 must be the
first of the present century.  Madame la Fite declared she had made it
clearly belong to the last,  and that Mr.  Turbulent was as well convinced of
it as herself.

"  1700 belong to 1600  !"  c^-ied the Colonel indignantly—"  why then I
suppose Friday belongs to Thursday,  and Wednesday to Tuesday  !  Bless
us  !  here's such a set of new doctrines,  a man won't know soon whether he's
alive now or was alive the last age !"

Madame la Fite now attempted a fuller explanation,  but was so confused
in her terms,  and so much at a loss for words,  that though perfectly right,
the Colonel looked at her as if he thought her half mad.

"  O dear,  yes,  ma'am  !  yes,"  cried he,  bowing with mock submission,  "  1
dare say it's all very right I only it's a little new — that's all ! — 1700 makes
1600  !— O,  vastly right !     A little like Mr.  Rust !"

"  No,  Sir:  give me leave only just to say "

"O,  no,  ma'am!"  cried he,  turning away in haste,  "I don't understand
any thing of these matters! — they're too deep for me! — I know nothing
about them."

"  Mais,  monsieur — Sir — if you will give me leave — si monsieur vent Men
me pcrmettre — "

"O,  no,  ma'am,  don't trouble yourself!  I am not worth the pains;  I am
quite in the dark in these things.  I was franking a parcel of letters yester-
day, and I thought I franked them all for this year;  but I suppose now I
franked them all in the last century  !"

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  497

I met Princess Elizabeth conning into the Lodge,  with Miss Goldsvvorthy,
on the morning of her departure for Kew  ;  and she seemed so little happy
in the journey,  so extremely delicate in her constitution,  and so sweet and
patient in submitting to her destiny,  that I was quite affected by the sight.
She perceived me at some distance in the gallery,  and turned back to
speak to me,  and receive my good wishes for the effect of the change of air.

The Kew visits,  which took place from Tuesday to Friday in every other
week,  grew now less irksome to me.  I could not but be pleased at
journeys that united the sick and the well of an affectionate family,  and I
conquered by degrees — or at least lessened — the sadness of recollection
that at first embittered my meetings with Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt.  Mrs.
Delany,  also,  in one of those excursions,  spent the three days at their
house  ;  and 1 had the pleasure of drinking tea with them all on her arrival.

During our tea the King himself suddenly arrived  :  we all rose,  and
stood,  according to royal etiquette,  as much aloof from him and from one
another as the room permitted,  so as to leave all the space possible for His
Majesty,  who moved from Mrs.  Delany to Mr.  Smelt almost every other
speech.  He was in excellent spirits,  and full of good-humoured gaiety.
Mr.  Smelt and Mrs.  Delany are perhaps the man and woman in the world
the most to his taste,  of any persons out of his own family.  And what
honour upon his taste do two such choices reflect! — To me he never looks
so amiable as when in society so chosen.

My dear father came over to me there one morning,  from Chesington.
I met him at Mr.  Smelt's.  I then had the happiness of conveying him to
my little apartment in the Lodge  ;  and he stayed with me till 1 was sum-
moned to the Queen.

I told Her Majesty what a gratification I had had  ;  and she instantly and
most graciously desired me to ask him to stay and dine with me.  I flew to
write him the invitation — but he was already gone.  I was very much dis-
appointed, and the sweet Queen was so sorry for me,  that she immediately
promised me a visit to C'hesington,  to see him there,  in recompense  :  an
offer,  indeed,  most highly acceptable to me,  and which I gratefully acceded
to;  as you will believe without much stretch of credulity.

After this,  the Smelts,  at royal motioning,  returned the visit of Mrs.
Delany,  and came to her house at Windsor for four days.

Shall I make you smile with a little trait — as you will call it-r— of my own
character,  during their stay at Windsor?

M.  Miihoff,  at the Queen's desire,  had again been asked to dinner;  and
we had left him with Mr.  Smelt in the eating-room,  while we went to my
drawing-room for coffee.  As they did not join us,  we concluded they were
gone to the equerries  ;  and as Mrs.  Delany happened to be thirsty,  she
wished for some tea before she was carried away from me.  My great and
constant distress how to order any thing at that time was insurmountable,
for I had no bell for my man,  and his room is at the further end of a long
range of offices.  1 rang vainly for my maid to summon him  ;  she was
gossiping out of hearing.  I then went into the passage gallery,  to seek
for somebody to help me.  I could find no one.  1 opened the eating-room
door,  10 see if it was ready for tea,  but saw to my surprise,  a party of
uniforms.  I shut it hastily,  with the guilt of intrusion so strong upon me,
that I could distinguish none of them.  They called after me,  and one of
them opened the door,  entreating me to come back.  I apologized for break-
ing in upon them,  retreating all the time,  as fast as I could,  to my own room  ;
when,  looking back,  1 perceived a star,  and saw it belonged to the Duke of
Montagu.     He again asked me in,  and again 1 assured him I knew not any

42*

498 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

body was there when I opened the door,  and curtsied myself into my own
room.

Mr.  Smelt,  now followed me,  saying,  "  Why do you run away from the
Duke of Montagu?"

"  1 did not mean to run away,"  cried I,  "  but I was ashamed of breaking
in upon you in that manner."

"  Why we were only waiting for you  !"  cried he :  "  the Duke came pur-
posely to pay his respects to you,  he said,  and expected to find you in the
room,  not that you would run away from it !"

I was quite ashamed,  now,  the other way,  and was hastening back with
an explanation,  when I met the King at the door,  and was forced to retreat
again  ;  and as His Majesty came to carry the Duke to the Queen's rooms,
I had no opportunity of making any after apology.  I could only do it by
never repeating the flight.  But I knew not then,  that no one entered that
room in Mrs.  Schwellenberg's absence,  but as a visiter of mine.  These are
things I had no one to tell me  :  1 was left to find them out as I could.
*****

The Queen,  one morning,  told me she was going a long excursion,  and
that I therefore might make what use I pleased of my time.  I accepted the
kind intimation,  by telling her 1 would go to the cathedral with Mrs.
Delany,  who was waiting my opportunity,  to see the painted window.  The
next moment I sent to Mrs.  Delany,  with this proposal.  An answer was
brought me,  that Mrs.  Delany could not then go out,  as the three young
Princesses were with her;  but that she had their orders for my coming
immediately to her house.

As this message came only through John,  I concluded it was one of his

forward mistakes,  and did not obey the summons,  but wrote to Miss P

for an explanation.  She wrote me for answer,  that Princess Mary and
Princess Sophia wanted to know me extremely,  and complained that they
never saw me,  though Princess Amelia did very often;  and they wanted to
do so too,  "  Because,"  said Princess Mary,  "  Mamma likes her mightily 1"

I went instantly to the Princesses,  who,  when I. came,  were ashamed,  and
silent.  They have a modesty and sweetness that represses all consequence
from their rank.

After they were gone,  Mrs.  Delany carried Miss P and me to the

cathedral.  We were met there by Mr.  West,  whose original cartoon for
the painted window was to be exhibited.  The subject is the Resurrection.
The Guiding Angel is truly beautiful in it,  but our Saviour is somewhat too
earthly ;  he seems athletic as an Hercules,  and rather as if he derived his
superiority from strength of body than from influence of divinity.  The
window itself was not yet to be seen.

Mr.  West,  whom I had once met at Sir Joshua Reynolds's,  was exceeding
civil,  showing the cartoon himself,  and explaining his intentions in it.  He
spoke of the performance with just such frank praise and open satisfaction
as he might have mentioned it with,  if the work of any other artist;  point-
ing out its excellencies,  and expressing his happiness in the execution — yet
all with a simplicity that turned his self-commendation rather into candour
than conceit.

On the last day of this month we left Windsor,  and at Kew were met by
intelligence of the death of Princess Amelia,  the King's aunt.  On this ac-
count the drawing-room was put off,  and we were informed we should re-
main at Kew till after the funeral.

1736.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  499

CHAPTER XXV.
1786.

A Poor Petitioner — Etiquette of petitioning Royalty — Anecdote of the Queen — The
Tattler and the Prince of Wales — The King and the Princess Amelia — A Conversa-
tion with the Queen — The Queen's Reminiscences of her Youth — Mrs.  Delany —
Anecdotes of the Queen — A Visit to Chesington — Painful Recollections — Surprise — A
Warm Reception — Doing the Honours — A Dilemma — Stanzas on a Royal Dishabille —
Embarrassment — A Sunday at Kew — Too late — Excuse sand Explanations — Anecdotes
of the King and Queen — Fairings — A Royal Birthday — Est-il-permis  ? — The Burnt
Finger — Manners of the Chinese — Travellers'  Tales — Vanessa again — Return to Kew
— An Anecdote — The Duchess of Beaufort and the Quaker — St.  James's — Visit from the
Queen — A Present — Mrs.  Trimmer — Visits and Calls — An Evening Party — The Pro-
vost of Eton — Jacob Bryant — Anecdotes of him — Lord Courtovvn — A Discourse on
the Female Character — Paradox — Madame de Genlis — Horace Walpole's  "  Mysterious
Mother" — Anecdote of the Princess Amelia — Mrs.  Kcnnicott — Lady Bute — Studies in
Shakspeare — A Surprise and Detection- — "  Cecilia"  pirated — Strange Application-
New mode of Intimidation — Tea-table Talk — A Visit from the Queen — Dr.  Hurd —
Anecdote of the Queen — Female Fmilty — Christmas-day at Court — T'ea-table Talk —
Facetias of the Equerry's Room — The Duties of an Equerry — Mr,  Matthias — Anec-
dotes of the Princesses — Traits of Mrs.  Delany — Dr.  Burney no Courtier — Visit to
Dr.  Herschel — His great Discoveries — The King,  Princess Amelia,  and Dr.  Burney —
The King and Jacob Bryant.

November 1st. — We began this month by steadily settling ourselves at
Kew,  Miss Planta,  Miss Gomme,  Mile.  Monmoulin,  and Mr.  De Luc,  and
Mrs.  Cheveley.  Miss Goldsworthy resided at the Princess Elizabeth's
house on Kew Green.

A very pleasant circumstance happened to me on this day,  in venturing to
present the petition of an unfortunate man who had been shipwrecked ;
whose petition was graciously attended to,  and the money he soHcited was
granted him.  I had taken a great interest in the poor man,  from the sim-
plicity and distress of his narration,  and took him into one of the parlours
to assist him in drawing up his memorial.

The Queen,  when,  with equal sweetness and humanity,  she had delivered
the  «'"^  to one of her pages to give to him,  said to me,  "  Now,  though your
account of this poor man makes him seem to be a real object,  I must give
you one caution  :  there are so many impostors about,  who will try to speak
to you,  that if you are not upon your guard,  you may be robbed yourself
before you can get any help  :  I think,  therefore,  you had better never trust
yourself in a room alone with any body you don't know."

I thanked her for her gracious counsel,  and promised,  for the future,
to have my man always at hand.

I was afterwards much touched with a sort of unconscious confidence
with which she relieved her mind.  She asked me my opinion of a paper
in the  "  Tattler,"  which I did not recollect ;  and when she was dressed,  and
seated in her sitting-room,  she made me give her the book,  and read to me
this paper.  It is an account of a young man of a good heart and sweet
disposition,  who is allured by pleasure into a libertine life,  which he pursues
by habit,  but with constant remorse,  and ceaseless shame and unhappiness.

It was impossible for me to miss her object :  all the mother was in her
voice while she read it,  and her glistening eyes told the application made
throughout.   My mind sympathized sincerely,  though my tongue did not dare

500 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

allude to her feelings.  She looked pensively down when she had finished
it,  and before she broke silence,  a page came to announce the Duchess of
Ancasler.

In the evening the King brought the Princess Amelia to fetch me,  for she
had signified her pleasure that I should undress her,  or she would not go to
bed  !  1 was quite ready for so endearing an office with the sweet child,  and
attended her up stairs,  till her most expert nurse,  Mrs.  Cheveley,  managed to
soothe her to rest.

The next morning the Queen said to me  "  I have just been reading a long
letter from Madame la Fite,  and you are its heroine."

The Princess Royal,  who was present,  laughed exceedingly  ;  and the
Queen then proceeded to say that there were friends whose panegyric was
sometimes less judicious than their silence.  I agreed in this,  protesting,
sincerely,  that I was always grieved when I found myself its object where
I knew it would be more fervent than just,  for I could only feel alarmed,
not gratified,  by praise so much beyond desert and reason.

Her Mnjesty then bid me not be alarmed,  for there was nothing that could
seriously hurt me:  yet 1 saw her fitlly of the same opinion  ;  and I found
the letter was from Norbury Park,  and written to the Princess Elizabeth.  I
am sure 1 am extremely obliged to Madame la Fite for her kindness;  but
I cannot forbear wishing it were of a nature more quiet.

November 3d. — In the morning I had the honour of a conversation with
the Queen,  the most delightful,  on her parr,  I had ever yet been indulged
•with.  It was all upon dress,  and she said so nearly what I had just imputed
to her in my little stanzas,  that I could scarce refrain producing them;  yet
could not muster courage.  She told me,  with the sweetest grace imaginable,
how well she had liked at first her jewels and ornaments as Queen, — "  But
how soon,"  cried she,  "  was that over!  Believe me.  Miss Burney,  it is a
pleasure of a week, — a fortnight,  at most, — and to return no more  !  I
thought,  at first,  I should always choose to wear them;  but the fatigue and
trouble of putting them on,  and the care they required,  and the fear of losing
them, — believe me,  ma'am,  in a fortnight's time I longed again for my own
earlier dress,  and wished never to see them more  !"

She then still more opened her opinions and feelings.  She told me she
had never,  in her most juvenile years,  loved dress and show,  nor received
the smallest pleasure from any thing in her external appearance beyond
neatness and comfort:  yet did not disavow that the first week or fortnight
of being a Queen,  when only in her seventeenth year,  she thought splendour
sufficiently becoming her station to believe she should thenceforth choose
constantly to support it.  But her eyes alone were dazzled,  not her mind  ;
and therefore the delusion speedily vanished,  and her understanding was too
strong to give it any chance of returning.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany came to-day,  to remain at Mr.  Smelt's for the
rest of our Kew sojourn  ;  and in the evening she joined our tea-party,  and
stayed with us till she was fetched to the Queen by the Princess Augusta.
The King also came for Mr.  Smelt.  The rest,  as usual,  dispersed,  and I
had again a long itte-d-tete with Mrs.  Smelt;  whom the more 1 am with,
the more,  from her real goodness,  both of heart and understanding,  I am
satisfied.

November 4Tn. — This morning,  when 1 attended the Queen,  she asked
me if I should like to go and see my father at Chesington  ?  and then gave
orders immediately for a chaise to be ready without delay — "  And there is
no need you should hurry yourself,"  she added,  "for it will do perfectly
well if you are back to dinner ;  when I dress,  I will send for Miss Planta."

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  501

I thanked her very much,  and she seemed quite delighted to give me this
gratification.

"  The first thing I thought of this morning when I woke,"  said she,  "  and
when I saw I he sun shining in upon the bed,  was that this would be a fine
morning for Miss Burney to go and see her father."

And soon after,  to make me yet more comfortable,  she found a deputy
for my man as well as for myself,  condescending to give orders herself that
another person might lay the cloth,  lest I should be hurried home on that
account.

I need not tell my two dear readers how sensibly I felt her goodness,
when 1 acquaint them of its effect upon me  ;  which was no less than to
induce,  to compel me to trust her with my performance of her request.
Just as she was quitting her dressing-room,  I got behind her and suddenly
blurted out —

"Your Majesty's goodness to me,  ma'am,  makes me venture to own that
there is a command which I received some time ago,  and which I have made
some attempt to execute."

She turned round with great quickness, — *'  The great coat?"  she cried,
"is it that?"

I was glad to be so soon understood,  and took it from my pocket book —
but holding it a little back,  as she offered to take it.

"  For your Majesty alone  !"  I cried  ;  "  1 must entreat that it may meet
no other eyes,  and 1 hope it will not be looked at when any one else is even
in sight !"

She gave me a ready promise,  and took it with an alacrity and walked off*
with a vivacity that assured me she would not be very long before she
examined it;  though,  when I added another little request,  almost a condi-
tion, that it might not be read till I was far away,  she put it into her pocket
unopened,  and,  wishing me a pleasant ride,  and that I might find my father
well,  she proceeded towards the breakfast parlour.

My dear friends will,  I know,  wish to see it, — and so they shall  ;  though
not this moment,  as I have it not about me,  and do not remember it com-
pletely.

My breakfast was short,  the chaise was soon ready,  and forth I sallied
for dear — once how dear ! — old Chesington  !  Every step of the road brought
back to my mind the first and most loved and honoured friend of my earliest
years,  and I felt a melancholy almost like my first regret for him,  when I
considered what joy,  what happiness I lost,  in missing his congratulations
on a situation so much what he would have chosen for me — congratulations
which,  flowing from a mind such as his,  so wise,  so zealous,  so sincere,
might almost have reconciled me to it myself — I mean even then — for now
the struggle is over,  and I am content enough.

Ah,  my dearest Susan,  till wiihin these very few months,  how unquiet
has been my life from the time of that great calamity,  the loss of that noble-
minded friend  ! — whose abilities to this moment I have never seen excelled,
whose counsel,  to his last hour,  was the only one that,  out of my owa
family,  I had ever sought,  and whose early kindness for me won,  and must
ever retain,  my latest gratitude.

I must have done,  however,  with this.

John rode on,  to open the gates ;  the gardener met him  :  and I believe
surprise was never greater than he carried into the house with my name.
Out ran dear Kitty Cooke,  whose honestly afl^ectionate reception touched
me very much, — "  O,"  cried she,  "  had our best friend lived to see this day
when you came to poor old Chesington from Court !"

Her grief,  ever fresh,  then overflowed in a torrent,  and I could hardly

502 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

either comfort her,  or keep down the sad regretful recollections rising in my
own memory.  O my dear Susan,  with what unmixed satisfaction,  till that
fatal period when I paid him my last visit,  had I ever entered those gates —
where passed the scenes of the greatest ease,  gaiety,  and native mirth that
have fallen to my lot!

Mrs.  James Burney next,  all astonishment,  and our dear James himself,
all incredulity,  at the report carried before me,  came out.  Their hearty
welcome and more pleasant surprise recovered me from the species of con-
sternation vviih which I had approached their dwelling,  and the visit,  from
that time,  turned out perfectly gay and happy.

My dearest father was already gone to town  ;  but I had had much reason
to expect I should miss him,  and therefore I could not be surprised.

Poor Mrs.  Hamilton had been ill,  and still kept her room,  and was so
much overcome by her surprise,  though I did not go to her till she sent for
me,  that she could not refrain from crying,  repeatedly declaring she had
never thought to see me more.  I did not venture to tell her how much our
opinions had coincided.

I left them all with great reluctance.  1 had no time to walk in the garden,
— no heart to ascend the little mount,  and see how Norbury hills and woods
looked frotn it !

I set out a little the sooner,  to enable me to make another visit,  which I
had also much at heart — it was to our aunts at Kingston.  I can never tell
you their astonishment at sight of me;  they took me for my own ghost,  I
believe,  at first,  but they soon put my substance to the proof,  and nothing
could belter answer my motives than my welcome,  which I need not paint
to my Susan,  who never sees them without experiencing it.  To my great
satisfaction,  also,  my nieces Fanny and Sophy happened to be there at that
time.

My return was just in time for my company,  which I found increased by
the arrival of two more gentlemen,  Mr.  Fisher and Mr.  Turbulent.

Mr.  Fisher had been ordered to come,  that he might read prayers the next
day,  Sunday;  as none of the Royal Family were to go out,  not even to
church,  till after the funeral.

Mr.  Turbulent was summoned,  I suppose,  for his usual occupations;
reading with the Princesses,  or to the Queen.

Shall 1 introduce to you this gentleman such as I now think him at once?
or wait to let his character open itself to you by degrees,  and in the same
manner that it did me?  I wish I could hear your answer!  So capital a
part as you will find him destined to play,  hereafter,  in my concerns,  I
mean,  sooner or later,  to the best of my power,  to make you fully acquainted
with him — as fully as I am myself,  let me add  :  for even yet I could not
delineate him with precision,  nor be certain that the very next time I see
him may not change the whole progress of the texture I should weave.
For a while,  therefore,  at least,  I will leave him to make his own way with
you,  by simply recounting the gradations of our acquaintance,  and the
opinions,  as they arose,  that 1 conceived of him.

He took his seat next mine at ihe table,  and assisted me,  while  ]Mr.  Fisher
sat as chaplain at the bottom.  The dinner went off extremely well,  though
from no help of mine.  Unused to doing the honours to any party,  so large
a one found me full employment in attending to their grosser food,  without
any space or power to provide for their mental recreation.  To take care of
both,  as every mistress of a table ought to do,  requires practice as well as
spirits,  and ease as well as exertion.  Of these four requisites I possessed
not one !

However,  I was not missed  ;  the three men and the three females were all

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  503

intimately acquainted with one another,  and the conversation,  altogether,
was equal,  open,  and agreeable.

You rnay a little judge of this,  when I tell you a short speech that escaped
Miss Planta.  Mr.  Turbulent said he must go early to town the next morn-
ing, and added,  he should call to see Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  by order of the
Queen.  "  Now for Heaven's sake,  Mr.  Turbulent,"  cried she,  eagerly,  "  don't
you begin talking to her of how comfortable we are here  ! — it will bring her
back directly  !"

This was said in a half whisper ;  and I hope no one else heard it.  I leave
you,  my dear friends,  to your own comments.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt and Mrs.  Delany came to us at tea-time.  Then,  and
in their society I grew more easy and disengaged.

The sweet little Princess Amelia,  who had promised me a visit,  came
during tea.  I left every body to play with her,  and Mr.  Smelt joined in our
gambols.  We pretended to put her in a phaeton,  and to drive about and
make visits with her.  She entered into the scheme with great spirit and
delight,  and we waited upon Mrs.  Delany and Mrs.  Smelt alternately.
Children are never tired of playing at being women  ;  and women there are
who are never tired,  in return,  of playing at being children  !

Jn the midst of this frolicking,  which at times was rather noisy,  by Mr.
Smelt's choosing to represent a restive horse,  the King entered 1 We all
stopped short,  guests,  hosts,  and horses ;  and all,  with equal celerity,
retreated,  making the usual circle for his Majesty to move in.

The little Princess bore this interruption to her sport only while surprised
into quiet by the general respect inspired by the King.  The instant that
wore off,  she grew extremely impatient for the renewal of our gambols,  and
distressed me most ridiculously by her innocent appeals.  "Miss Burney I
— come  ! — why don't you play  ? — Come,  Miss Burney,  I say,  play with
me  ! — come into the phaeton again  ! — why don't you.  Miss Burney?"

After a thousand vain efforts to quiet her by signs,  I was forced to
whisper her that I really could play no longer.

"  But why  ]  why,  Miss Burney  ? — do  !  do come and play with me  ! —
You must,  Miss Burney  !"

This petition growing still more and more urgent,  I was obliged to
declare my reason,  in hopes of appeasing her,  as she kept pulling me by
the hand and gown,  so entirely with all her little strength,  that I had the
greatest difficulty to save myself from being suddenly jerked into the middle
of the room  :  at length,  therefore,  I whispered,  "  We shall disturb the King,
ma'am  !"

This was enough  ;  she flew instantly to his Majesty,  who was in earnest
discourse with Mr.  Smelt,  and called,  "  Papa,  go  !"

"What?"  cried the King.

"  Go  !  Papa, — you must go  !"  repeated she eagerly.

The King took her up in his arms,  and began kissing and playing with
her;  she strove with all her might to disengage herself,  calling aloud
"  Miss Burney  !  Miss Burney  !  take me  ! — come,  I say,  Miss Burney  ! — O
Miss Burney,  come!"

You may imagine what a general smile went round the room at this
appeal :  the King took not any notice of it,  but set her down,  and went on
with his discourse.

She was not,  however,  a moment quiet till he retired  :  and then we
renewed our diversions,    which lasted to her bed-time.       The Princess
Auo-usta soon after came for Mrs.  Delany,  and a page for Mr.  Smelt.
%  *  *  *  *  *

At night when I went to the Queen but I believe my most intelligible

504 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

plan will be to here leave a space for copying my little rhyming,  when I
find the original.

THE GREAT COAT.

Thrice honour'd Robe  !  couldst thou espy

The form that deigns to show thy worth ;
Hear the mild voice,  view the arch eye,

That c-11 thy panegyric forth  ;

Wouldst thou not swell with vain delight?

With proud expansion sail along  ?
And deem thyself more grand and bright

Than aught that lives in ancient song  ?

Than Venus'  cestus,  Dian'a crest,

Minerva's helmet,  fierce and bold,
Or all of emblem gay that dress'd

Capricious goddesses of old  ?

Thee higher honours yet await : —

Haste,  then,  thy triumphs quick prepare,
Thy trophies spread in haughty stiite,

Sweep o'er the earth,  and scoff the air.

Ah no  ! — retract ! — retreat !— oh stay  !

Learn,  wiser,  whence so well thou  'st sped  ;
She whose behest produced this lay

By no false colours is misled.

Suffice it for the buskin'd race

Plaudits by pomp and show to win ;
Those seek simplicity and grace

Whose dignity is from within.

The cares,  or joys,  she soars above

That to the toilette's duties cleave ;
Far other cares her bosom move.

Far other joys those cares relieve.

The garb of state she inly scorn'd.

Glad from its trappings to be freed,
She saw thee humble,  unadorn'd.

Quick of attire, — a child of speed.

Still,  then,  thrice honour'd Robe  !  retain

Thy modest guise,  thy decent ease  ;
Nor let thy favour prove thy bane

By turning from its fostering breeze.

She views thee with a mental eye.

And from thee draws this moral end : —
Since hours are register'd on high.

The friend of Time is Virtue's friend.

You may easily believe I did not approach the Queen that night with
much of a sleepy composure.  She inquired very sweetly after my
little excursion,  and was quite disappointed for me when she heard I had
not seen my father;  and all the Princesses,  afterwards,  as I chanced to be
in their way,  expressed their concern for me.  When Mrs.  Thielky left the
room,  ths Queen,  with a smile very expressive,  half arch,  half ashamed,
thanked me for the little pcem,  addmg,  "  Indeed it is very pretty — only — I
don't deserve it."

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  505

I made no answer whatever ;  and nothing more passed.

I afterwards heard from Mrs.  Delany that as soon as I was set off for
Chesington,  the Queen went to Mrs.  Smelt's and there called Mrs.  Delany
into another room.  She then asked her if she was not in the secret?  and
soon finding,  with some surprise,  that I had not made her my confidant,
she produced the little stanzas and said she was sure I should never regard
any communication to Mrs.  Delany as treachery,  and therefore she would
read them to her.

November 5Tir. — Mr.  Fisher read the service to us this morning,  which
was Sunday ;  and I must now tell you the manner of its being performed,
which is rather singular,  and,  T suppose,  only Royal.

There is no private chapel at Kew Lodge :  the King and Queen,  conse-
quently, except by accident,  as now,  never pass the Sabbath there.  The
form,  therefore,  stands thus  : — Their Majesties and five Princesses go into
an inner room by themselves,  furnished with hassocks,  &c.  like their closet
at church :  by the door of this room,  though not within it,  stands the
clergyman at his desk  :  and here were assembled Mrs.  Delany,  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Smelt,  Miss Goldsworthy,  Miss Gomme,  Miss Planta,  Mile.  Mon-
moulin,  M.  De Luc,  and I ;  the pages were all arranged at the end of the
room  ;  and in an outer apartment,  were summoned all the servants,  in
rows,  according to their stations.

November 6th. — This morning happened my first disgrace of being too
late for the Queen — this noon,  rather  ;  for in a morning  'tis a disaster that
has never arrived to this moment.

The affair thus came to pass.  I walked for some time early in Kew
gardens,  and then called upon Mrs.  Smelt.  I there heard that the King
and Queen were gone privately to Windsor,  to the Lodge  :  probably for
some papers they could not entrust with a messenger.  Mr.  Smelt,  there--
fore proposed taking this opportunity for showing me Richmond gardens,
offering to be my security that I should have full time.  I accepted the pro-
posal with pleasure,  and we set out upon our expedition.  Our talk was
almost all of the Queen.  Mr.  Smelt wishes me to draw up her character.
I owned to him that should it appear to me,  on nearer and closer inspection,
what it seemed to me then,  the task could not be an unpleasant one.

He saw me safe to the Lodge,  and there took his leave:  and I was going
leisurely up stairs,  when I met the Princess Amelia and Mrs.  Cheveley  ;  and
while I was playing with the little Princess,  Mrs.  Cheveley announced to me
that the Queen had been returned some time,  and that I had been sent for
immediately.

Thunderstruck at this intelligence,  I hastened to her dressing-room  ;  when
I opened the door,  I saw she was having her hair dressed.  To add to my
confusion,  the Princess Augusta,  Lady Eflingham,  and Lady Frances
Howard were all in the room.

I stood still at the door,  not knowing whether to advance,  or wait a new
summons.  In what a new situation did I feel myself! — and how did I long
to give way to my first impulse,  and run back to my own room I

In a minute or two,  the Queen not a little drily said,  "  Where have you
been.  Miss Burney  ?"

I told her my tale, — that hearing she was gone to Windsor,  I had been
walking in Richmond gardens with Mr.  Smelt.

She said no more,  and I stood behind her chair.  The Princess and two
ladies were seated.

What republican feelings were rising in my breast,  till she softened them
down again,  when presently,  in a voice changed from that dryness which

VOL.  I.  43

506 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

had wholly disconcerted me,  to its natural tone,  she condescended to ask
me to look at Lady Frances Howard's gown,  and see if it was not very
pretty.

This made a dutiful subject of me again in a moment.  Yet I felt a dis-
composure all day,  that determined me upon using the severest caution to
avoid such a surprise for the future.  The Windsor journey having been
merely upon business had been more brief than was believed possible.

When I left the Queen,  I was told that Mrs.  Delany w^as waiting for me
in the parlour.  What a pleasure and relief to me to run to that dear lady,
and relate to her my mischance,  and its circumstances !  Mr.  Smelt soon
joined us there ;  he was shocked at the accident ;  and I saw strongly by his
manner how much more seriously such a matter was regarded,  than any
one,  unused to the inside of a court,  could possibly imagine.

This discovery added not much to my satisfaction — on the contrary,  I
think from that time I did not,  till long — long after — see noonday approach,
"without the extremest nervousness,  if not entirely prepared for my sum-
mons.

While we w^ere talking this over,  the Queen's carriage passed the window,
and she came into the hall.  She had been visiting the Princess Elizabeth.
In another minute the parlour-door was opened by a page,  and her Majesty
entered.     She was all smiles and sweetness.

"  O,  are you here,  Mrs.  Delany  ?"  cried she,  laughing ;  "  I had only
seen Mr.  Smelt and Miss Burney from the window,  and I came in on pur-
pose to accuse them of flirting  !"

I understood w-ell the favour meant me by this little gay sally,  and I
brightened up upon it to the utmost of my power.

In the evening early,  I made my offering to the sweet little Princess
Amelia,  who came to fetch Mrs.  Delany,  of the prettiest toy I ever saw,  the
pincushion and its contents sent me by my dear and most ingenious Fredy.
Her delight was excessive  :  and she was eager to go off with it,  to show it
to the Queen.

November 7th. — When I rang,  this morning,  at the garden -door at Mr.
Smelt's,  I was informed the King was up stairs  :  of course I instantly
retreated,  and was walking back through the garden,  hardly able to make
my w-ay,  through the violence of the wind,  blowing hard from the Thames,
when I heard a tapping from a window up stairs  :  I looked up, — and thought
I saw the King  : — but too uncertain to trust to eyes so short-sighted as mine,
I hastily looked down again,  and affecting not to hear the rap-tapping,
though it w-as repeated,  and louder,  I proceeded on my way.

'Tis almost inconceivable the inconvenience I suffer,  thus placed amon
the Royals of the land,  from my utter inability to confide in my own sight.
I never know whether they look at me,  or at some one beyond me,  nor
whether they notice me,  or pass me regardlessly.

In a few instants,  my footsteps were hastily pursued,  with a loud call.
I then thought I might venture to turn,  and beheld Mr.  Smelt,  quite out of
breath with running,  but highly delighted to bring me word that the King
had ordered me back,  and into the room where they all were assembled,
that I might not have two such walks in so high a wind,  without rest.

How gracious this  !  I found his Majesty in a little circle,  composed of
Mrs.  Delany,  Mrs.  Smelt,  and Mr.  Hays,  a gentleman who was formerly a
tutor to one of the younger Princes.

When I went to the Queen at noon,  she made many inquiries concerning
the Norbury fairings  :  the little Princess had excited her curiosity by the full-
fraught pincushion.     She desired me to bring my whole cargo  :  she admired

fT

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  5O7

it exceedingly,  and asked me if I had any objection to letting her have some
of the things  ?  and then she selected several from my store.  I had much
wished to present them to her,  but could not venture at such a liberty.

November 8th. — This was the birthday,  of the Princess Augusta,  now
eighteen.  I could not resist this opportunity of presenting her one of my
fairings,  though I had some little fear she might think herself past the age
for receiving birthday gifts,  except from the Royal Family :  however they
had arrived so seemingly aj^rojws,  and had been so much approved by the
Queen,  that I determined to make the attempt.  I took one of the work-
boxes,  and wrote with a pencil,  round the middle ornament,  "  Est il per-
mis  ?" — and then I sent for Miss Makentomb,  the Princess's wardrobe
woman,  and begged her to place the box upon her Royal Highness's table.

At the Queen's dressing-time,  as I opened the door,  Her Majesty said,
"  O,  here she is  ? — Est il permis  ! — Come,  come in to Augusta ;"  and
made me follow her into the next room,  the door of which was open,  where
the Princess was seated at a writing-desk,  probably answering some con-
gratulatory letters.

Immediately,  in a manner the most pleasing,  she thanked me for the little
cadeau,  saying,  "  Only one thing I must beg — that you will write the motto
with a pen."

The Queen seconded this motion,  smilingly repeating  "  Est il permis V

And afterwards,  in ihe evening,  the Princess Augusta came to the parlour,
to fetch Mrs.  Delany and Mrs.  Smelt,  and again said,  "  Now,  will you,  Miss
Burney — will you write that for me with a pen  ?"

The King brought in the Princess Amelia during tea.  "  Here,"  cried he,
"  we shall all be jealous of Miss Burney  !  Amelia insists upon coming to
her again  ;  and says she wont go to bed if Miss Burney does not take her  !"

The sweet little child then called upon me to play with her.  I did what
was possible to quiet her,  but to no purpose.  "  Come,  Miss Burney,"  she
cried,  "  come and sit down with me — sit down,  I say  ! — why won't you sit
down  ?"

Nothing can be so pretty as this innocence of her royal station and her
father's rank :  though she gave me a thousand small distresses,  I longed

to kiss her for every one of them.

*******

This long visit at Kew made me more acquainted with much of the house-
hold than any other mode of life could have done.  At Windsor I mix with
quite another set.  I liked them all passing well,  and was pleased to see
that they all appeared persons of worth,  sense,  and cultivation.  But my
only real satisfaction,  except from the arrival of Mrs.  Delany,  was in the
society of Mr.  Smelt.  That very excellent,  amiable,  and most highbred
gentleman showed a disposition to render our acquaintance more intimate,
that was extremely flattering to me.  His universal courtesy had hitherto
forbid my attributing his civilities to any regard  ;  but I now received them
with fuller confidence,  as I found in him an increasing openness in every
meeting,  and a readiness to bestow his time upon me,  that made me receive
and accept it with very grateful pleasure.  His conversation,  when he is
wholly easy,  is both fanciful and instructive ;  and his imagination is filled
with systems of his own,  that make his discussions of almost all subjects
both new and enlightening.  What an acquisition,  in a situation so con-
fined, is the power of such frequent intercourse with so amiable,  so intelli-
gent, and so useful a friend  !

Saturday,  November 11th. — All the party returned to Windsor but
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who still continued in London.

508 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

I had the honour of a very long and confidential discourse with the Queen

at noon  ;  the subject Mrs.  D ,  formerly Miss H ,  and an attendant

upon the elder Princesses.  I gave her a narration of the beginning and the
progress of our acquaintance,  and she opened with the utmost frankness,
in giving her opinions and thoughts.  When they are upon characters
living,  I never will commit them to paper,  except where so closely blended
with my own affairs as to be of deeper interest to myself than to her  ;  or
except,  also,  where they are mentioned with praise unmixed — which is
rarely the case where a judge so discerning speaks with entire openness.

Miss Planta and Miss P dined with me,  and Mrs.  Delany came to

coffee.  Miss Planta,  you must understand,  regularly goes into waiting as
soon as she has drunk her coffee ;  we therefore again took out our papers,
which had lain dormant during the Kew residence,  and were just opening
them as the King entered the room.

He asked immediately how our letter-sorting went on  ;  and Mrs.  Delany,
who was in excellent spirits,  answered his questions with an archness and
gaiety that extremely entertained him.  He carried her away,  and Miss
P and I returned to the eating-parlour,  where we found Colonel Golds-
worthy and General Bude,  eager to resume old stories and mock lamenta-
tions,— when the entrance of poor Madame de la Fite abruptly closed the
lips of our ever-whimsical colonel,  which were no more to be opened that
evening.

After tea I had a visit from the sweet little Princess Amelia.  She had
burnt one of her poor little fingers,  by playing with some wax,  that she got
from her sister Mary,  and was in great pain.  The King followed,  to see
how she bore it ;  and Dr.  Lind was sent for,  who made a mixture,  of which
oil was the principal ingredient,  and stroked her finger with a feather from
it for a considerable time.  The King watched the abatement of her pain
with great solicitude,  and she sustained it with the firmness of a little heroine,
making many involuntary grimaces,  but resisting her evident inclination
to cry.

"  She wanted to come to you,"  said the King,  "  very much  ; — she would
not be denied ;  Miss Burney is now the first in favour with her."

"  At Kew,  Sir  !"  cried I.  "  I fear I shall lose all my favour at Windsor,
where I see her Royal Highness so seldom."

"  No,  no you won't, — she asked to come to you herself, — it was all her
own motion."

When the operation was over,  and the Princess was retired,  I invited Dr.
Lind to stay with us  ;  and he made us amends for the glumness of Colonel
Goldsworthy,  by various singular relations of customs and manners among
the Chinese,  with whom he has lived very much.  Some of his anecdotes,
particularly his accounts of the animals they kill for food,  appeared so
strange to Colonel Goldsworthy,  that I saw he thought his assertions de-
served no more attention than those of Madame de la Fite,  about the century
in which Mrs.  Delany was born.  And when he mentioned that r;  ts and
cats were among their table-cattle,  he actually heaved a groan oi despair
that said,  "  What lies these travellers do tell  !"

Again the next day,  the Queen kept me with her all the morning.  I must
here mention that Mrs.  Delany had just received a letter from Mrs.  Montagu,
which was filled with the strongest expressions of delight at the recovery of
the Princess Elizabeth,  worded so dutifully and loyally,  that it was not diffi-
cult to perceive they were meant for the royal eye  ;  though they were fol-
lowed by something peculiarly unfit for it,  namely,  an eloge on a certain

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  5O9

person you know,  conceived in very flattering terms,  but ending with a
hope that that person would not fail applying her thoughts and her time to
delineating the characters of the exalted personages with whom she lived  ;
and the whole finishing with much rejoicing that opportunity should so
happily be bestowed  !

This letter the dear Mrs.  Delany ventured to show to the Queen, — as I
found upon entering her dressing-room at noon,  when she was surrounded
by the three eldest Princesses  ;  for she almost instantly said,  "  I have seen
a letter of Vanessa's  !"

I was really half frightened,  lest she should conclude such a desire from
such a lady might lead me to a work that must render my near approach
to her extremely disagreeable.  I acknowledged I knew what letter she
meant.

"  You have read it  ?"  she said,  with a little earnestness.

"  Yes,  ma'am,"  I answered  ;  "  and had it been less civil,  I might have
been much flattered by it ;  but it goes such lengths,  that it puts me in no
danger."

She said nothing more,  nor I either.

I thought it best,  unless she had herself pursued the subject,  not to speak
of what related to her and the King.  I am always glad to avoid profes-
sions and promises,  even where I feel the fullest confidence of the safety
with which I might make them  ;  they are chains,  that,  however loosely fas-
tened, may,  eventually,  be grievous shackles.

The Queen has a nobleness of mind that sets her above all false fears or
vague suspicions  :  she is extremely quick of discernment,  yet never trusts
herself,  but waits the slow test of time and trial before she risks her favour
or confidence.

Two days afterwards we again went to Kew,  though not in so large a
party,  as our stay was only from Tuesday to Friday.  None of the younger
Princesses,  therefore,  nor their governesses,  made this journey.

Just before we set out,  the Queen sent for me to her dressing-room,  and
there,  in the most gracious manner possible,  she presented me with a ma-
hogany writing box and desk,  made after particular directions of her own.
I am at this moment writing upon it,  and I have found it the most useful,
compact,  and comfortable piece of furniture that I am worth.

She told me then that Mr.  Turbulent w^as to accompany me this time to
Kew,  as well as Miss Planta and Mr.  de Luc  ;  and the motion of her head
when she named him,  showed me instantly that she considered herself as
bestowing a pleasure upon me in joining him to our party.

Accordingly,  at about ten o'clock they all assembled in my room,  and
we set oft'  together.  But we did not make much progress in our acquaint-
tance,  he talking but little,  and I less.

Immediately upon arriving I made a visit to Mrs.  Smelt,  and engaged
her and her excellent mate to dinner.  With the latter I had the satisfac-
tion to pass all the evening tlte-a-tite  ;  Miss Planta going to her Princesses,
Mrs.  Smelt to the Queen,  Mr.  Turbulent to make some visit at Kew,  and
Mr.  de Luc to his writings.

Our discourse took a very serious turn,  falling almost wholly upon reli-
gious subjects.  I am particularly happy to discuss them with Mr.  Smelt,
whose piety is warm and zealous,  rational and refined  ;  and whose reliance
upon the goodness of Providence is striking and edifying.  I must give you
a little trait of it,  in a speech he made me this evening that extremely struck
me  : — he had related to me a tale which had for its theme the sudden death

43*

510 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

of a gentleman who left a large family of children,  all in the earliest season
of life.     "  Poor things 1"  I exclaimed,  "  what will become of them 1"

"  Foor tilings  /"  he repeated,  expressively, — "  as if there was nobody to
take care of them P''

This speech,  as I told him,  reminded me of one of the same striking sort,
made by a Quaker to the Duchess Dowager of Beaufort,  who,  on the death
of her Duke,  shut herself up in a room hung with black,  and refused all
comfort.  This Quaker found means to enter her apartment,  where he found
her all disconsolate,  in the deepest mourning,  and with scarce a glimmer-
ing light suffered to enter the room  :  he stopped to examine her,  while she
stared at him in amazement,  and then he ejaculated,  "  What ! — hast thou
not forgiven God Almighty yet  ?"

The next day the same party assembled again,  and the day following we
went to town.  Miss Planta and Mr.  De Luc were of course to accompany
me  ;  and as I heard Mr.  Smelt talk of going,  I proposed to him being of
our party.  He consented,  with his usual ready good-breeding,  and I named
what I had done to the Queen,  with that confidence in my proceedings that
always belongs to whatever I have to do in reference to Mr.  Smelt.

I was,  however,  a little startled by an immediate answer of — "  Does Mr.
Turbulent not go with you  ?"

I had never thought of him upon this occasion,  not having the smallest
idea,  at that time,  of his belonging to our party,  except by accident.  I
made some hesitating half answer,  and she added,  "  Certainly,  if Mr.  Tur-
bulent does not desire to have a place with you,  you can accommodate Mr.
Smelt."

I now saw,  by her manner,  not only how high Mr.  Turbulent had the
honour to stand with her,  but a sort of solicitude that he should stand equally
high with little me  ;  and this appeared still stronger afterwards.  I had
seen,  however,  too little of him to form any further opinion than what I
have already told you, — that he was serious,  silent,  quiet,  and observant  ;
— and that.  Heaven knows,  is an opinion that has changed often enough
since  !

At St.  James's my dear father came to me,  and our James,  and,  in the

midst of our family comfort,  enters Mr.  S .     Nothing can be more

obliging than this gentleman,  who will come to me with offers of services
always refused,  and with efforts for sociability constantly repelled  !

As we slept in town,  I inhabited,  for the first time,  my own apartments  :
hitherto I had used those of Miss Gomme,  for mine were now papering,
painting,  and furnishing.  They are very neat and comfortable.  My father
came again in the evening  ;  but James had been quite satisfied with Mr.

S in the morning  !     I believe he concluded I was always to be ohsldk

by some such  *'  court chap,"  and therefore would trust himself to visit me
no more.  Indeed if that gentleman was to serve as a specimen of my new
colleagues,  he would do right well to stay away.

Friday,  November 17th. — We returned to Windsor,  Miss Planta and
myself tite-a-tite.

In the Queen's room,  while Her Majesty left it for some minutes,  I was
seized upon with great eagerness by the elder Princesses,  to tell them how
I liked my new furniture,  and to describe to them every part of it.  They
seemed vying with each other in good-humoured interest,  about my having
it all comfortable and to my liking.

Sunday,  November 19th. — While I was at breakfast,  the door was
suddenly opened,  and the Queen entered the room.  I started up,  and went
to meet her.  She smiled,  asked me what book I was reading,  and then
told me to write a note to Mrs.  Delany ;  «  Tell her,"  said she,  "  that this

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  511

morning is so very cold and wet,  that I think she will suffer by going to
church  ; — tell her,  therefore,  that Doctor Queen is of opinion she had better
stay and say her prayers at home."

I always feel ready to thank her for these instances of goodness to my
most venerable friend,  and am afraid lest,  some time or other,  without
weighing the self-important inference,  I shall involuntarily do it.  'Tis so
sweet in her,  I can scarcely refrain.

Afterwards,  when I attended her at noon,  she spoke to me a great deal
of Mrs.  Trimmer,  that excellent instructress and patroness of children and
the poor  ;  and she made me a present of her last two little books,  called
"  The Servant's Friend,"  and  "  The Two Farmers."

Miss Gomme,  by direction of the Queen,  who wanted her early in the
afternoon,  dined with me.  She came an hour before the rest of the party,
and I had a long discourse with her upon Prussia,  where she has passed the
greater part of her life.  She is very sensible,  and,  I fancy,  well informed ;
but her manner is not pleasing to strangers,  and her conversation,  perhaps
from great inequality of spirits,  has no flow,  nothing gliding — it is either
abrupt and loquacious,  like the rush of a torrent,  or it is lost and stagnant,
like the poor little round old-fashioned garden-pond.

Monday,  November 20th. — Just before 1 went to the Queen at noon,  I
had a visit from Lady Effingham.  I was obliged to run away from her,  but
she stopped me a moment in the passage to introduce me to Mr.  Howard,
her second son.  I could not even see him for hurry,  but less regard flying
from that family than almost any,  as their frequent intercourse with this
house makes them well acquainted with all its etiquettes.

When I told the Queen they were there,  as soon as I had helped her on
with her peignoir^  she ordered her hair-dresser,  and sent me to fetch Lady
Effingham,  after which she said,  "And now do you go,  Miss Burney,  and
entertain Mr.  Howard."

I had a visit from the Duchess of Ancaster,  and a tete-d-tete dinner with
Miss Planta,  who now,  in an hour we spent by ourselves at coffee,  could not
forbear a  ^q\\  very open confessions.  She told me that she knew the Queen
much approved of her always dining at our table,  because it made her more
certainly in the way,  if suddenly wanted:  she has,  besides,  no table allowed
her,  but is forced to dine at some friend's,  or to get her own maid to cook
for her  ;  which,  in a house such as this,  is infinitely disagreeable :  neverthe-
less, she had quite given up this table,  from the desagremens attending it,
and had resolved never to come to it more,  but by particular and civil invi-
tation.   She had therefore dined alternately with Miss Goldsworthy and Mr.

and Mrs.  T ,  both whose tables she had constant requests to consider as

her own.  Now,  however,  she said,  she would resume the privilege given
by her Majesty,  and if it was not inconvenient to me,  dine with me always
when the table was mine, — but no longer.

Thursday,  November  ^Sd. — I paid a morning visit to Miss E ,  the

bedchamber woman.  She is not wanting in parts,  nor in a desire of show-
ing them  :  for a lady artist she paints remarkably well,  I believe,  and I
could look at her pictures with pleasure,  would she display them with less
vehemence for exciting it.

In the evening I had a large party of new acquaintance ;   the Provost of

Eton,  Dr.  Roberts,  his lady,  Mr.  Dewes,  Miss P ,  the Duke of Montagu,

General Bude,  Colonel Goldsworthy,  and Madame de la Fite.

The party had the Royal sanction,  I need not tell you.  The King and
Queen are always well disposed to show civility to the people of Eton and
Windsor,  and were therefore even pleased at the visit.

512 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

The Provost is very fat,  with a large paunch and gouty legs.  He is good-
humoured,  loquacious,  gay,  civil,  and parading.  1 am told,  nevertheless,  he
is a poet,  and a very good one.  This,  indeed,  appears not,  neither in a
person such as 1 have described,  nor in manners such as have drawn from
me the character just given.

Mrs.  Roberts is a fine woman,  though no longer very young;  she is his
second wife,  and very kind to all his family.  She seems good-natured and
sensible.

The evening turned out very well :  they were so delighted with making
a visit under the royal roof,  that every thing that passed pleased them  ;  and
the sight of that disposition helped me to a little more spirit than usual in
receiving them.

The King came into the room to fetch Mrs.  Delany,  and looked much
disappointed at missing her;  nevertheless,  he came forward,  and entered
into conversation with the Provost,  upon Eton,  the present state of the
school,  and all that belongs to its establishment.  His Majesty takes a great
interest in the welfare and prosperity of that seminary.

The Provost was enchanted by this opportunity of a long and private
conference,  and his lady was in raptures in witnessing it.  She concluded,
from that time,  that the door would never open but for the entrance of some
of the Royal Family  ;  and when the equerries came,  she whispered me,
"  Who are they?'  And again,  on the appearance of a star on the Duke of
Montagu,  she said,  "  Who^an that be.  Miss Burney  ]"

However,  I had not always to disappoint her expectations,  for soon after,
the sweet little Princess Amelia was permitted to come and pay me a visit ;
and that was a motive to delight that we all felt equally.  She had not yet
forgot her Kew partiality,  and continued,  at that time,  to frequently beg the
Queen's leave for coming to me.

SuxDAY,  NovE3iBER 26th. — The King,  whom I saw in the Queen's room
before the early prayers,  gave me the same kind message to Mrs.  Delany
about church that 1 had had from the Queen that day week.

To-day,  having found at last my opportunity for obtaining permission,  I

invited Mr.  Bryant to dinner.     Mrs.  Delany,  Mr.  Dewes,  Miss P ,  and

Miss Planta,  were the rest of the party,  and it all passed very well.

The King and Queen were both much pleased with this visit.  I saw it by
the manner of the Queen when I proposed it,  and the King showed it still
more strongly by coming into the tea-room in the evening,  and chatting
with him for a considerable time.  He lives at Cypenham,  a village near
Salt Hill,  about two miles and a half from Windsor;  and his character is
so highly respectable,  that their Majesties,  in their morning excursions,  have
several times made him little visits at his own house.

There is,  indeed,  something very peculiar and very pleasant in his dis-
course. He is full of little anecdotes,  and gives his facts and his opinions
upon them with a quaint kind of brevity and simplicity,  extremely original
and very entertaining.  His learning,  deep as it is,  taints no part of his con-
versation, when he bestows it upon those who could not keep pace with it  :
on the contrary,  whatever he has to say is uttered with a plainness and
humility that seem rather to imply a notion of his own inferiority than of
the ignorance of others.

Lord Courtown,  General Bude,  and Colonel Goldsworthy came to tea.
Lord Courtown is always well bred and pleasing,  but Colonel Goldsworthy
was quite set aside by the presence of Mr.  Bryant,  and retired,  taking with
him the General and Lord Courtown,  the moment he was able.     The King

carried off Mrs.  Delany,  and Mr.   Dewes,  Miss P ,  and Mr.  Bryant

remained with me the rest of the evening,  during which not a minute

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  513

passed without producing something amusing or instructive from my new
acquaintance.

The talk was all on natural and revealed religion,  and on natural history.
My share,  you may well believe,  was simply that of leading to these sub-
jects, upon which I had no power to speak but in question.  I knew them
to be themes well studied by Mr.  Bryant,  and I was happy to reap,  from the
good-natured readiness of his communications,  as much intelligence upon
them as I could comprehend,  and more than I could have gathered from
books in a year's reading.

As I was just then deeply engaged in Coxe's Travels,  I was enabled to
lead the way to much curious discussion upon the state of the earth at the
creation,  and its condition after the Deluge;  subjects which Mr.  Bryant has
been all his life investigating,  and reconciling to the Mosaic system.  Mr.
Coxe relates many things of the interior parts of Siberia that illustrate and
confirm his general ideas,  and I felt myself much enlightened by his fair and
explicit manner of developing them.  He is a man of the most orthodox prin-
ciples in religion,  and the whole of his learning and his inquiries tends to
elucidate the Scriptures,  and to clear the perplexities of unbelievers.

So notorious is his great fondness for studying and proving the truths of
the creation according to Moses,  that he told me himself,  and with much
quaint humour,  a pleasantry of one of his friends in giving a character of
him  ; — "  Bryant,"  said he,  "  is a very good scholar,  and knows all things
whatever up to Noah,  but not a single thing in the world beyond the
Deluge !"

Tuesday,  November 28th. — Miss Planta and Mr.  De Luc accompanied
me to Kew,  where,  as soon as I arrived,  I had the honour of a little call
from the Princess Royal,  with a most gracious message from the Queen,  to
desire me to invite my friends the Smelts to dinner.  You may imagine
with what pleasure I obeyed.

They came, — as did,  afterwards,  Mr.  Turbulent,  and the dinner was
enlivened with very animated conversation,  in which this gentleman took a
part so principal,  that I now began to attend,  and now,  first,  to be surprised
by him.

The subject was female character.  Miss Planta declared her opinion that
it was so indispensable to have it without blemish,  that nothing upon earth
could compensate,  or make it possible to countenance one who wanted it.
Mrs.  Smelt agreed that compassion alone was all that could be afforded
upon such an occasion,  not countenance,  acquaintance,  nor intercourse.
Mr.  De Luc gave an opinion so long and confused,  that I could not suffi-
ciently attend to make it out.  Mr.  Smelt spoke with mingled gentleness
and irony,  upon the nature of the debate.  I said little,  but that little was,
to give every encouragement to penitence,  and no countenance to error.

The hero,  however,  of the discourse was Mr.  Turbulent.  With a warmth
and fervour that broke forth into exclamations the most vehement,  and re-
flections the most poignant,  he protested that many of the women we were
proscribing were amongst the most amiable of the sex — that the fastidious-
ness we recommended was never practised by even the best part of the
world — and that we ourselves,  individually,  while we spoke with so much
disdain,  never acted up to our doctrines,  by using,  towards all fair failers,
such severity.

This brought me forth.  I love not to be attacked for making professions
beyond my practice ;  and I assured him,  very seriously,  that I had not one
voluntary acquaintance,  nor one with whom I kept up the smallest inter-
course of my own seeking or wilful concurrence,  that had any stain in their
characters that had ever reached my ears.

514 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

"  Pardon me,  ma'am,"  cried he,  warmly,  "  there are amongst your
acquaintance,  and amongst every body's,  many of those the most admired,
and most charming,  that have neither been spared by calumny,  nor been
able to avoid reproach and suspicion."

I assured him he was mistaken ;  and Mrs.  Smelt and Miss Planta pro-
tested he was wholly in an error.

He grew but the more earnest,  and opened,  in vindication of his assertions
and his opinions,  a flow of language that amazed me,  and a strain of argu-
ment that struck and perplexed us all.  He felt the generosity of the side he
undertook,  and he could not have been more eager nor more animated had
the fair dames in w^hose cause he battled been present to reward him with
their smiles.

In the end,  finding himself alone,  and hard pressed,  he very significantly
exclaimed,  "  Be not too triumphant,  ladies  ! — I must fight you with weapons
of your own making for me.  There is a lady,  a lady whom you all know,
and are proud to know,  that stands exactly in the place I speak of."

"  I'm sure I don't know whom you mean  !"  cried Miss Planta.

"  You know very well, — at least as well as you can,"  answered he,  drily.

Mrs.  Smelt,  laughing, -said she might know many unfortunate objects,  but
she was unconscious of her knowledge.

I boldly protested I knew not,  as an acquaintance of my own,  a single
person his description suited.  Those whom I might see or meet or know
at the house of others,  I could not pretend to assert might all be blameless ;
but however I might compassionate,  or even admire,  some who could not be
vindicated,  I began no such acquaintances — I wished them well,  and wished
them better, — but I distanced them to the best of my power,  as I had not
weight enough to do good to them,  and avoided,  therefore,  the danger of
being supposed to approve them.

"  Yes,  ma'am,"  cried he,  in a high tone,  "  you also know,  visit,  receive,
caress,  and distinguish a lady in this very class!"

"  Do I  ?"  cried I,  amazed.

"  You do,  ma'am  !     You all do  !"

Fresh general protestations followed,  and Mr.  De Luc called eagerly for
the name.

"  I do not wish to name her,"  answered he,  coolly,  "  after what I have
said,  lest it seem as if I were her censurer ;  but,  on the contrary,  I think
her one of the most charming women in the world  ! — amiable,  spirited,  well
informed,  and entertaining,  and of manners the most bewitching!"

"  And with all this,  sir,"  cried I, — and I stopped.

"  And with all this,  ma'am,"  cried he,  (comprehending me immediately,)
"  she has not escaped the lash of scandal ;  and,  with every amiable virtue
of the mind,  she has not been able to preserve her reputation,  in one sense,
unattacked."

"And— I know her?"

"  Yes,  ma'am  ! — know her,  and do her justice  ;  and I have heard you,  in
common with all this company,  sing her praises as she deserves to have
them sung."

I assured him I was quite in a wood,  and begged him to be more explicit.
He hung back,  but we all called upon him,  and I declared I should regard
the description as fabulous unless he spoke out,  and this piqued him to be
categorical ;  but what was my concern to hear him then name — almost
whispering with his own reluctance — Madame de Genlis  !  I was quite
thunderstruck,  and every body was silent.

He was then for closing the discourse,  but I could not consent to it.  I
told him that I pretended not to say the character of that lady had never,  in

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIiS^A.  515

my hearing,  been attacked  ;  but that I could,  and would,  and hoped I ever
should,  say I believed her perfectly innocent of the charges brought
against her.

He smiled a little provokingly,  and said  "  We agree here,  ma'am, — I
think her innocent too."

"  No,  sir,  we do not agree! — I should not think her innocent if I believed
the charge  !"

"  Circumstances,"  cried he,  "  may make her mind innocent."

I could say nothing to this,  I think it so true ;  but I would not venture
such a concession,  where my wishes led me aim at a full defence.  Ac-
cordingly, with all the energy in my power,  I attempted it ;  assuring him that
there was an evidence of her untainted worth in her very countenance,  and
written there so strongly that to mistake the characters was impossible.

"  True,"  cried he,  again smiling,  "  the countenance speaks all that cap-
tivating sweetness that belongs — if she has them — to the very frailties of
her character."

I could not bear this.  "  No,  sir,"  I cried,  as warmly as himself,  "  'tis a
countenance that announces nothing but the openness of virtue and good-
ness !  There would be more reserve and closeness if she failed in them.  I
saw her myself,  at tirst,  with a prejudice in her disfavour,  from the cruel
reports I had heard  ;  but the moment I looked at her,  it was removed.
There was a dignity with her sweetness,  and a frankness with her modesty
that assured,  that convinced me,  beyond all power of report,  of her real
worth and innocence."

Nobody else spoke a Mord,  and his fervour was all at an end  ;  he only
smiled,  and protested that,  admiring her so very much himself,  it made him
happy to hear I was so warmly her admirer also.

Here the matter was forced to drop,  I was vexed at the instance he
brought,  and grieved to have nothing more positive than my own opinion to
bring forward in her defence  :  for it is most true I do believe her innocent,
though I fear she has been imprudent.

The Queen,  in looking over some books while I was in waiting one
morning,  met with  "  The Mysterious Mother,"  Mr.  Walpole's tragedy,
which he printed at Strawberry Hill,  and gave to a few friends,  but has
never suffered to be published.  I expressed,  by looks,  I suppose,  my wishes,
for she most graciously offered to lend it me.  I had long desired to read
it,  from so well knowing and so much liking the author ;  and he had pro-
mised me,  if I would come a second time to Strawberry Hill,  that I should
have it.  Excursions of that sort being now totally over for me,  I was par-
ticularly glad of this only chance for gratifying my curiosity.
I I had had it in my possession some days without reading it.  I had
named it to Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,  and they were eager to see it :  the loan,
however,  being private,  and the book having been lent to Her Majesty by
Lord Harcourt,  I knew not under what restrictions,  I could not produce it
without leave  :  this morning I asked and obtained it ;  and promised it should
be forthcoming.

A difficulty arose about the reader,  till at last Mrs.  Smelt,  with a sen-
sible and good-humoured scolding,  told her husband that if he resisted any
longer,  she would read herself,  in defiance of her asthmatic complaints.

This determined him,  and the curtain drew up.

The opening of the play contains a description of superstitious fear,
extremely well,  and feelingly,  and naturally depicted  :  it begins too in an un-
common style,  promising of interest and novelty  :  but my praise will soon
be ended,  swallowed up in all the heaviest censure.

516 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

Dreadful was the whole  !  truly dreadful  !  A story of so much horror,
from atrocious and voluntary guilt never did I hear  !  Mrs.  Smelt and my-
self heartily regretted that it had come in our way,  and mutually agreed
that we felt ourselves ill-used in ever having heard it.  She protested she
would never do herself so much wrong as to acknowledge she had suffered
the hearing so wicked a tale,  and declared she would drive it from her
thoughts as she would the recollection of whatever was most baneful to
them.

For myself,  I felt a sort of indignant aversion rise fast and warm in my
mind,  against the wilful author of a story so horrible:  all the entertainment
and pleasure I had received from Mr.  Walpole seemed extinguished by this
lecture,  which almost made me regard him as the patron of the vices he
had been pleased to record.

Mr.  De Luc had escaped from the latter part of this hateful tragedy,  pro-
testing, afterwards,  he saw what was coming,  and would not stay to hear
it out.

Mr.  Smelt confessed,  with me,  it was a lasting disgrace to Mr.  Walpole
to have chosen such a subject,  and thought him deserving even of punish-
ment for such a painting of human wickedness  ;  and the more as the story
throughout was forced and improbable.

But the whole of all that could be said on this subject was summed up
in one sentence by Mr.  Turbulent,  which,  for its masterly strength and
justice,  brought to my mind my ever-revered Dr.  Johnson. — "  Mr.  Wal-
pole," cried he,  "  has chosen a plan of which nothing can equal the
abomination but the absurdity  !"

When I returned it to the Queen I professed myself earnest in my hopes
that she would never deign to cast her eye upon it.

The next day I found my beloved Mrs.  Delany ill.  I spent the whole
afternoon with her,  in defiance of all equerries.  1 had the Queen's sanc-
tion for eloping,  as she gave me a message about bleeding,  for my dear sick
Mrs.  Delany.

The following day,  thank God,  she was so much better that my solicitude
about her pretty much ceased.  I read once more,  in the morning,  to the
Queen,  a paper of the Microcosm,  which I forget whether I have mentioned  ;
it is a periodical imitation of other periodical papers,  and written by a set
of Eton scholars.     It has great merit for such youthful composers.*

Let me mention the sweetness of the lovely little Princess Amelia.
Hearing Mrs.  Delany was ill,  of her own accord,  when saying her prayers
at night to Mrs.  Cheveley,  she said  "  Pray God make Lany well again!"

At Eton College I made an invitation for the following week.  A sister
of Mrs.  Roberts,  Mrs.  Kennicott,  was then on a visit to her,  and Madame de
la Fite had brought me sundry messages from her,  of her civil desire about
making my acquaintance.  Mrs.  Kennicott,  who was a Miss Chamberlayn,
is widow of the famous Hebraist,  Kennicott,  and has rendered herself
famous also,  by having studied that language,  after marriage,  in order to
assist her husband in his edition of the Bible ;  she learnt it so well as to
enable herself to aid him very essentially in copying,  examining,  and
revising.  She was much acquainted with many of my friends,  from whom
I have frequently heard of her,  particularly Mr.  Cambridge,  Mrs.  Garrick,
and Miss More;  and I had received similar messages while I yet lived in
the world,  through their means  ;  and therefore,  to avoid the iclat of an

*  This work afterwards became famous as the vehicle of Canning's first literary efforts.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  517

introduction at Madame de la Fite's,  I obtained permission from the Queen

to invite her here,  with the Provost and Mrs.  Roberts,

*  #  *  *  ^  #  ^

One morning at this time,  Mrs.  Delany had a long visit from Lady Bute
and Lady Louisa Stuart,  and I went to her house to meet them.  I had
frequently been of the same party with them in town,  and I was glad to see
them again.  Lady Bute,  with an exterior the most forbidding to strangers,
has powers of conversation the most entertaining and lively,  where she is
intimate.  She is full of anecdote,  delights in strokes of general satire,  yet
with mere love of comic,  not invidious ridicule.  She spares not for giving
her opinions,  and laughs at fools as well as follies with the shrewdest deri-
sion.

Lady Louisa Stuart,  her youngest daughter,  has parts equal to those of
her mother,  with a deportment and appearance infinitely more pleasing :
yet she is far from handsome,  but proves how well beauty maybe occasion-
ally missed when understanding and vivacity unite to fill up her place.  I
had conceived much liking to her formerly in town,  and had been much
flattered by marks of kindness  .  received from her.  She and her mother
both sent to me now,  and I spent an hour — all I had to command — very
pleasantly with them.  They told a thousand anecdotes of Mrs.  North,
whom they had just parted from at Bath.  They seem both to inherit an
ample portion of the wit of their mother and grandmother.  Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu,  though I believe them both to have escaped all inheri-
tance of her faults.  I wish I had it in my power to meet with them more
frequently — spirited conversation with agreeable people falls now so rarely
to my lot.

^  ^  vr Tp tF

During my dear Mrs.  Delany's confinement she desired me to read to
her something of Shakspeare.  We had purposed going through his works,
which 1 had begun to her in that eventful visit I made her at Windsor,
whence arose my present situation:  for had I not just so met the Queen,

most probably I had never been known to her.     Miss P now fixed

upon Hamlet,  and whenever we had not too much to say,  that was our
regale.  How noble a play it is,  considered in parts  ;  how wild and how
improbable taken as a whole  !  But there are speeches,  from time to time,
of such exquisite beauty of language,  sentiment and pathos,  that T could wade
through the most thorny of roads to arrive at them,  especially when,  in
meeting with them,  I meet at the same time with a sympathy like Mrs.
Delany's in feeling and enjoying them.

Again I read a little to the Queen — two  "  Tattlers  ;"  both happened to be
very stupid  ;  neither of them Addison's,  and therefore reader and reading
were much on a par  :  for I cannot arrive at ease in this exhibition to Her
Majesty ;  and where there is fear or constraint,  how deficient,  if not faulty,
is every performance  !

December 10th. — This evening I had my appointed party,  the Provost,
Mrs.  Roberts,  Miss Roberts,  Mrs.  Kennicott,  and my dearest Mrs.  Delany,
quite recovered.  We were soon joined by the General,  the Colonel,  and
Mr.  Fisher.

Mrs.  Kennicott is a middle-aged woman,  neither ugly nor handsome.
She must certainly be very estimable,  for she is sought and caressed by a
laro-e circle of friends,  among people whose friendship is most honourable.
I saw too little of her to form any independent judgment.

The best part of my evening was the honour done to it by the entrance
VOL.  I.  44

518 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

of His Majesty to fetch Mrs.  Delany.  He knew of the party,  and stayed
to converse with the Provost for a considerable time.  This was a gratifica-
tion that made all else immaterial.

Mrs.  Delany,  upon her recovery,  had invited the General and Colonel to
come to tea any evening.  For them to be absent from the Lodge was con-
trary to all known rules ;  but the Colonel vowed he would let the matter be
tried,  and take its course.  Mrs.  Delany hoped by this means to bring the
Colonel into better humour w^ith my desertion of the tea-table,  and to recon-
cile him to an innovation of which he then must become a partaker.

On the day when this grand experiment was to be made,  that we might
not seem all to have eloped clandestinely,  in case of inquiry,  I previously
made known to the Queen my own intention,  and had her permission for
my visit.  But the gentlemen,  determining to build upon the chance of
returning before they were missed,  gave no notice of their scheme,  but fol-
lowed me to Mrs.  Delany's as soon as they quitted their own table.

I had sent to speak with General Bude in the morning,  and then arranged
the party  :  he proposed that the Colonel and himself should esquire me,  but
I did not dare march forth in such bold defiance ;  I told him,  therefore,  I
must go in a chair.

Mrs.  Delany received us with her usual sweetness.  We then began
amusing ourselves with surmises of the manner in which we should all be
missed,  if our rooms were visited in our absence ;  and the Colonel,  in par-
ticular, drew several scenes,  highly diverting,  of what he supposed would
pass, — of the King's surprise and incredulity,  of the hunting up and down
of the house in search of him,  and of the orders issued throughout the house
to examine to what bed-post he had hanged himself, — for nothing less than
such an act of desperation could give courage to an equerry to be absent
without leave  !

Further conjectures were still starting,  and all were engaged in aiding
them and enjoying them,  when suddenly a violent knocking at the door was
followed by the most unexpected entrance of the Queen and the Princess
Amelia !

Universal was the start,  and most instantaneous and solemn the silence  !

I felt almost guilty,  though not for myself:  my own invariable method
of avowing all my proceedings saved me from the smallest embarrassment
on my own account in this meeting ;  but I was ashamed to appear the
leader in a walk so new as that of leaving the Lodge in an evening,  and to
have induced any others to follow my example.  The Queen looked ex-
tremely surprised,  but not at me,  whom she knew she should encounter  ;
and the two gentlemen hardly could settle whether to make humble expla-
nations, or frank ridicule,  of the situation in which they were caught.  The
Queen,  however,  immediately put them at their ease,  speaking to them with
marked civility,  and evidently desirous not to mar what she found intended
as a private frolic,  by any fears of her disapprobation.

She did not stay long,  and they soon followed her to the Lodge.  I also
returned,  and at night the Queen owned to me,  but very good-humouredly,
that she had never been more astonished than at sight of the equerries that
evening,  and asked me how it came to pass.

"  Mrs.  Delany,  ma'am,"  I answered,  "  as she had taken away their tea-
maker,  thought she could do no less than offer them tea for once at her own
table."

And here the matter rested.     But the enterprise has never been repeated.

Tuesday,  December 12th. — We made now our last excursion for this
year,  and indeed for half of the next,  to Kew.  The party was Miss Planta,
Mr.  Turbulent,  and Mr.  De Luc.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  51 9

The Queen,  immediately on my waiting upon her after our arrival,  asked
me if I had sent to invite i\Ir.  and Mrs.  Smelt.  I was most glad so to do,
and most pleased by her gracious manner of investing me with powers so
much to my wish.

They came,  and the dinner and the coffee were very pleasant,  for Mr.  Smelt,
and Mr.  Turbulent,  and Mr.  De Luc took the whole talk,  and supported a
conversation extremely instructive and lively.  The subject was monks and
convents.  Mr.  Turbulent found all the materials for the discourse,  with a
fulness of memory and knowledge that taught me very highly to respect
his abilities and acquirements;  Mr.  Smelt descanted upon them with a
fertility of fancy that furnished me with many new ideas;  and JMr.  De Luc
broke forth into digressions,  explanations,  and discussions,  so extraneous,
yet so ingenious that they could not but entertain,  though they sometimes
tease,  by constantly retarding the progress of what is being pursued.  Mr.
De Luc is one of the most retrograde conversers and disputants I ever met
with.

Just about this time I put a finishing stroke to an affair which cost me a
very unexpected disturbance.  I had a letter from Mr.  Foss,  the attorney,
written in the name of Messrs.  Cadell and Payne,  to inform me that
"  Cecilia"  was then priming in Ireland or Scotland,  I forget which,  ille-
gally; and that they desired me to sign a letter,  which Mr.  Foss enclosed,
in which I threatened,  jointly with these booksellers,  to prosecute to the
utmost extent of the law any person or persons who should dare thus pirate
my work.

Equally astonished and dissatisfied at such a demand,  I wrote for answer
that I had wholly done with the book,  that I would enter into no prosecution
for any consideration,  and that I wished them well through a business that
was entirely their own.

To this refusal succeeded fresh applications.  I was made so uneasy that
I confided in Mr.  Smelt,  and begged his counsel.  He happened to be present
when one of the letters came to me.  He advised me by no means to give
way to a request so big with consequences which I could not foresee,  and,
since the property and the profit were now alike made over to them,  to per-
severe in leaving to their own sole conduct so disagreeable a contest.

I did very thankfully follow this advice  ;  but they next had recourse to
my father,  and offered to indemnify me of all costs,  if I would only give
them my name and sanction.

My name and sanction were just what I most wished to keep to myself;
but so importunate they continued that my father asked the opinion of Mr.
Batt.  He said he conceived that they had actually a claim to my concur-
rence in prosecuting any false editors.  A softer paper was drawn up than
the first,  and,  little as I liked it,  1 was obliged to sign myself,  with the utmost
reluctance,  their assistant in the proceedings.

I know not when I have been more astonished than in finding myself in
a situation so unlike any into which I had ever meant to place myself.
I have heard nothing of the matter since;  I flatter myself,  therefore,  that
this signature,  fierce as it was constrained,  has frightened those who have
received,  as much as it did her who writ it.  Otherwise,  to be involved in a
prosecution, — a lawsuit ! — I know few things indeed that could more heartily
have disturbed me.

A most troublesome letter,  also,  arrived to me from Ireland.  A Mrs.
Lemman wrote me her whole history,  which was very lamentable,  if true,
but which concluded with requesting me to pay her debts,  amounting to
about thirty or forty pounds,  and to put her and her family into some

520 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

creditable way of business ;  otherwise,  as 1 was now her sole resource,  she
must inevitably put an end to her existence !

I wrote an immediate answer,  to assure her I had no power to comply
with her demand,  and frankly to own that if my power were greater,  my
claims nearer home must first be satisfied:  I was sorry for a reliance so
misplaced,  but as we were wholly strangers to each other,  1 could never
suppose myself a resource on which she had placed much dependence.  And
I concluded with a severe — 1 thought it right — reprehension of her threat,
assuring her that I held such an action in too much horror to suffer it to
move my compassion at the expense of my prudence,  and,  indeed,  ability;
and I strongly advised her to take an opposite method in the next plan she
formed,  than that of using a menace that must rob her of pity by provoking
displeasure.  To this I added such counsel as her letter enabled me to draw
out for her,  and sent it off.

Soon after came another letter from the same person.  She told me she
had just read  "  Cecilia,"  and was satisfied whoever could write it must save
and deliver her;  and she added that she was then compiling her own
memoirs,  and would mention to the world,  in the highest terms,  all I would
do for her.

Simple artifice ! — to suppose flattery so grossly promised could so dearly
be bought ! — vexed was I,  however,  to have written at all to a person who
then was in the act of committing to the press probably whatever she could
gather.  1 made no further answer, — I only wish,  now,  I had a copy of
what she has already.  Doubtless her threat originated from a scheme like
that she supposes in Mr.  Harrel.  She thought where Cecilia had been
frightened,  I also must give way.  She forgot that she was no wife of my
earliest friend,  no guardian to myself,  that I saw not the instrument of death
in her hand,  and that I possessed not three thousand pounds a year,  from
which to borrow her release.

And now for the last day of Kew.

Wednesday,  December 13th. — The Queen,  in the morning,  spoke to
me of Mrs.  Hayes,  wife of the gentleman I have already mentioned,  and
said she was a very pretty kind of woman,  and that she wished me to invite
her to tea.

Our dinner was as usual,  the Smelts,  Messrs.  De Luc and Turbulent,  and
Miss Planta  ;  and the last only was gone when Mr.  and Mrs.  Hayes arrived.

Mrs.  Hayes is a really pretty as well as a pretty sort of woman,  and
modest,  well-bred,  and sensible  ;  and the afternoon,  with the assistance of
Mr.  Smelt,  did very well.  They went early home,  and both the Smelts
were called to the Queen's rooms  ;  M.  De Luc said he must retire to write
down  "  some thoughts upon an experiment in his head,"  and only Mr.  Tur-
bulent remained.

I found the partner of my confinement a man of uncommon capacity,  but
something there was hung about him,  or hung about me,  that prevented my
assimilating with him in any thing.  I saw he was endowed with great
powers of agreeability  ;  but I thought him obtrusive;  and that alone is a
drawback to all merit,  that I know not how to pass over.  He spoke his
opinions with great openness,  equally upon people and things  ;  but it seemed
rather from carelessness than confidence,  and I know him too little to feel
obhged in his trust.  The whole trouble of the discourse fell upon him  ;
something between fear of his abilities,  and doubts of his turn of mind,  keep-
ing me entirely grave and reserved.  It was a trouble,  however,  he was
highly capable of taking,  for he was never at a loss,  yet uttered not a word
that was superfluous.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  521

The talk was chiefly upon mere general subjects,  till by some accident
the approaching birthday of the Queen was mentioned.  He then inquired
of me how I should like the state business of that day?

I told him I knew nothing of what I had to expect from it.  He undertook
readily to inform me.  He said I was to be sumptuously arrayed,  to sit in
one of the best rooms at St.  James's,  and there to receive all the ladies of
the Queen in particular,  and to do the honours to all the gentlemen also,
belonging to the establishment.

I laughed,  and told him he had painted to me a scene of happiness pecu-
liarly adapted to my taste  !

He did not concern himself to examine whether or not I was serious,  but
said he supposed,  of course,  the dignity of such a matter of state could not
be disagreeable to me,  and added,  he should take the liberty to wish me joy
of the day,  among the rest,  when it arrived,  and to see me in my glory.

After this he said,  "  You have now nearly seen the whole of every thing
that will come before you  :  in a very short time you will have passed six
months here,  and then you will know your life for as many,  and twice and
thrice as many years.  You will have seen every body and every thing,  and
the same round will still be the same,  year after year,  without intermission
or alteration."

*  *  *  *  *  *

Saturday,  Dece^iber 23rd. — I had a sweet and most gracious visit
from the Queen in my own apartment.  She had opened the door to let
herself in,  and I did not know her till she advanced near me,  and kept my
seat very composedly,  hardly looking up,  but concluding it must be Miss

P ,  as no one else enters without rapping first.     She laughed when she

saw my surprise ;  and I laughed too,  for the circumstance explained itself
too obviously to need any apology ;  and my near-sightedness is now pretty
generally known,  from the various mistakes it has occasioned me.

One of these had just led the King to make inquiry if 1 were not short-
sighted, for,  in returning to the Lodge from Mrs.  Delany's,  I met His
Majesty,  Mr.  Smelt,  General Bude,  and Colonel Goldsworthy,  and by not
distinguishing who they were till I approached them,  I had advanced straight
forward till I came up to them ;  a matter contrary to all etiquette,  which
exacts a dead stand-still,  and retiring to the side of the walls or houses,
when any of the Royal Family appear,  and till they are passed.  However,
his own good sense instantly pointed out to him whence my misdemeanour
must arise,  and his good-nature led him to make me easy under it,  by turn-
ing to me very graciously,  and taking off his hat while he asked me how I
had left Mrs.  Delany.  He has a true benevolence of nature,  and never
fancies ill or evil without manifest and undoubted provocation.

The Queen,  when in my room,  looked over all my books — a thing pretty
briefly done,  as I have scarce any of my own but a few dictionaries,  and
such works as have been the gifts of their own authors.  ]\Iy father's most
delightful library,  as I then told her,  with my free access to it,  had made it
a thing as unnecessary as,  in fact,  it would have been impracticable,  for me
to buy books of my own.  I believe she was a little disappointed  ;  for I could
see,  by her manner of turning them over,  she had expected to discover my
own choice and taste in the collection I possessed.

The day after,  she increased my little store herself,  in the sweetest manner
imaginable.  She presented me a set of Ogden's Sermons,  asking me first
if I had read them.  No,  I said  : — "  The Bishop of Worcester,"  she an-
swered, "  approves them much,  and recommends them,  so I give you nothing
bad for you."

44*

522 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

You may easily suppose what would follow on my part on such a speech,
and when I had returned my thanks I said,  "  These Sermons,  ma'am,  were
great favourites with Dr.  Johnson ;  he thought of them very highly,  and
frequently quoted them."

"  O,  I am glad of that !"  cried she,  smiling archly,  "  for now I am sure
you will like them  !"  and indeed I do :  as many as 1 have yet read of them,
I find instructive and excellent.

We had scarce left the dining-parlour for my apartment when the
Princess Royal followed us to fetch Mrs.  Smelt to the Queen ;  and then,
while I was left in a tete-a-tete I always prize with her husband,  the King
entered.  He delights in Mr.  Smelt,  and seems to meet and to converse
with him with  "  pleasure ever new."  He stayed talking upon many sub-
jects, several of them so confidential with respect to business and business
matters,  that I was almost tempted to leave the room.  But when I consi-
dered it was my own private apartment,  and not the eating-room,  in which
he had voluntarily entered into this conference,  I conceived I might more
properly stay,  especially as he never lowered his voice,  nor seemed to in-
tend excluding my attention.  At last,  having said all his say,  and stayed
about an hour,  he went away,  and called to Mr.  Smelt to follow him.

In the morning of this day,  the Bishop of Worcester,  Dr.  Hurd,  arrived
at the Lodge,  to spend the Windsor week.  I was told that he had always
dined with Mrs.  Schwellenberg and Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  upon these visits,
which it seems he has made annually at Christmas for some years.  As I
had not any acquaintance with him,  I had neither spirits nor pretensions to
the honour of receiving him.  His character and his works would have
made me think it a good fortune to have met with him,  on any other terms,
but those of presiding at a table ;  and to avoid that,  I took as much pains as
any one else,  thinking equally well of him,  would have taken to obtain it.
I mentioned to the equerries my respectful disinclination to the encounter,
and begged they would immediately invite him to their table upon his arrival.

To this they gladly assented,  as he was well known,  and highly regarded
by them all,  and they had always thought it an infringement of their right
that he had hitherto belonged to the female table.

Having taken this previous step,  to prevent any mischief arising from it,
I next told the Queen frankly what I had done,  expressing at the same time
my respect for the Bishop,  whom I had once met at Mrs.  Delany's,  but who,
I doubted not,  would be much better pleased by this new arrangement than
by coming to a person almost wholly a stranger to him.

The Queen made no sort of comment,  but I had spoken,  and was there-
fore easy.

When Mr.  Smelt arrived he spoke to me at once of the Bishop,  with
whom he has always maintained the most intimate friendship,  from the time
of being Sub-Governor to the Prince of Wales,  when the Bishop was precep-
tor. I told him openly what 1 had done ;  but I was sorry to see that he was
vexed and disappointed.  He loves the Bishop,  and had flattered himself
with the expectation of dining and spending the afternoon in his company
during his whole Royal visit;  and I was sorry also for my shyness,  and
frankly blamed it.

At tea-time,  when I returned to the eating parlour,  I found the General
and the Colonel,  and they told me that the Bishop had desired them to intro-
duce him to me,  and was just coming to my room when the King sent for
him.  ^  I was glad to find by this civiUty he had taken in good part my re-
linquishing him to the equerries.

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  523

At the same moment that they left me to go to the concert-room Mr.
Smelt found his way back.  He came,  he said,  to beg a little tea with me;
and we were beginning a conversation that was reviving to my spirits,  when
General Bude opened the door,  and announcing the Bishop of Worcester,
ushered him in,  and returned to the concert-room.

His appearance and air are dignified,  placid,  grave and mild,  but cold,
and rather distancing.  He is extremely well bred,  nevertheless,  and his
half-hour's visit passed off without effort or constraint.  I was indebted,
indeed,  for all its agreeability,  to the presence of Mr.  Smelt.

December 24tii. — When I attended the Queen to-day after church,  she
kept me with her the whole morning,  and spoke with more openness and
trust upon various matters than I had yet observed.  Chiefly the subject
was the unhappy and frail Lady C.  The Queen had known her all her
life,  and particularly interested herself in all her proceedings  :  she had fre-
quently received her in private,  and had taken pains as well as pleasure in
showing a marked,  a useful,  and a partial regard for her.  What a disap-
pointment, wliat a shock,  then,  did she not receive by her fall !  She spoke
of the whole transaction,  gave me her character,  her story,  her situation —
all at large ;  and at last,  in speaking of her utter ruin,  and all its horrors,
the tears ran down her face,  as she held her handkerchief to her eyes some
time before she could dry them.

How amiable and how touching did such sorrow appear in a mind so
rigidly a stranger to every frail sensation that could lead to similar guilt !
I never admired the Queen more.  In characters the most exalted,  not all
the severity of virtue,  however nobly sustained,  strikes me with so much
admiration as a soft commiseration of vice.

My dear Mrs.  Delany to-day joined us at coffee  ;  but the King,  staying
first near an hour to converse with her and Mr.  Smelt,  took her to the
Queen's rooms as well as Mrs.  Smelt and her charming husband.

Christjias-Day. — Miss Planta and T went together to the Chapel Royal
this morning,  where we attended two complete services.  The first concluded
with a sermon by Dr.  Wilson,  one of the canons  ;  after which we received
the sacrament from Dr.  Lockman,  senior canon,  and Mr.  Majendie  ;  and
then returning to our seats,  stayed on,  after the communion service was
over,  till the arrival of the Royal Family,  when the prayers read by Mr.
Fisher,  began again,  and were ended with a sermon by the Bishop of Wor-
chester ;  after which every body left the chapel except the Royal Family,
of whom the King,  Queen,  Princess Royal,  and Princess Augusta remained
to take the sacrament.

Immediately after so awful a solemnity,  to go through the whole service
a second time was just what I liked.  The mind,  by this sacred ceremony,
is fitted solely for devotion,  and I was happy in recapitulating prayers and
praises here rather than in my chamber.

The sermon of the Bishop was excellent — plain,  simple,  devout,  instruc-
tive; written manifestly for the Royal ears,  yet carefully and without
disguise levelling them,  on this holy occasion,  with other creatures of the
dust,  alike and throughout the world,  dependent,  frail,  and unimportant.

When I came home I read some of my Queen's gift,  "  Ogden's Sermons."
Some may sound odd,  but they are so short that a common sermon would
at least comprise three — in quantity,  I mean,  not in matter  ;  for indeed they
are admirable.

My dear Mrs.  Delany could not come to-day,  and I was sorry,  though I
wanted her not,  nor any of those who did,  to wish me what was so far from
possibility — a merry Christmas  !

524 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt dined with me,  and,  as usual,  Miss Planta,  and when
we came to my apartment for coffee,  the King soon entered,  and stayed
long in conversation with Mr.  Smelt ;  and now finding by his manner
nothinTj was wrong,  I had no longer any scruples with regard to remaining
in the room.  My dear friends will both wonder I ever should have had
any;  but there are so many peculiarities and unaccountabilities here,  that
I can feel sure of nothing but by long and repeated trial.

The Queen sent for the Bishop,  and ordered him tea in the concert-room,
that he might be nearer at hand.  He is,  and justly,  most high in her
favour.  In town she has his picture in her bedroom,  and its companion is
Mrs.  Delany.  How worthily paired !  what honour to herself such honour
to them !  There is no other portrait there but of royal houses — her own
mother,  one of her brothers.  His Majesty,  the late Queen of Denmark,
Princess Elizabeth when a baby,  and two of the youngest Princes when
children.

The Queen presented me'  this morning with two pieces of black stuff,
very prettily embroidered,  for shoes.  These little tokens of favour she has
a manner all her own,  in its grace and elegance,  of bestowing,

The next day the Bishop again came to my tea-table,  where he found Mr.
and Mrs.  Smelt,  and a very desirable discourse was beginning,  when the
Queen sent for him.  She is very right,  for how seldom can she enjoy con-
versation so worthy of her,  from those whose rank and station enable her
to call for them thus publicly  !

The King just after fetched Mr.  Smelt ;  and the equerries and  ]Miss P

came to tea.  Colonel Goldsworlhy was in one of his most facetious humours,
and invited us to a supper at his house in town,  giving a really comic
account of his way of life,  the great power of his domestics,  their luxurious
manner of living,  and the ascendancy they had gained over their master.

Mrs.  Smelt was to be the head lady,  he said,  of the parly,  to which she

readily agreed.     Miss P made inquiries into every particular of the

entertainment he was to give us  ;  and he uttered a very solemn charge to
her,  not to offend one of his maids,  an elderly person,  so extremely tena-
.  cious of her authority,  that she frequently took up a poker and ran furiously
about with it,  after any of her fellow-servants who thwarted her will.  To
me also he gave a similar charge — "  I have a poor old soul of a man,
ma'am,"  says he,  "  that does his business very well for such a forlorn poor
fellow as me;  but now,  when you want a glass of wine or so,  don't be in
too great a hurry with him — that's all 1 beg;  don't frighten him,  poor
fellow,  with calling to him hastily,  or angrily,  or that — for if you once do
that he won't know a single thing he says or does all the rest of the time!
—he'll quite lose his wits at a stroke !"

Some one now by chance named Mrs.  Ariana Egerton,  the bedchamber

woman  ;  and Miss P said she now sent in her name in that manner,  as

she must no longer be called Miss,  from her present office.

"Mrs.  what]"  cried Colonel Goldsworthy,  "Mrs.  Ariana?  what name
is that  ?"

"  Why,  it's her name,"  said Miss P ;   "  she writes it upon her

cards."

"  Ariana?"  repeated he,  "I never heard the like in my life  !  Why I no
more believe — what will these folks tell us next !  It's nobody's name
under the sun,  I'll be bound for it.  All the world put together shan't make
me believe it.  Ariana,  forsooth  !  why it must be a nickname I depend upon it
it's nothing else.     There,  at my poor miserable bachelor's cell in the Mews,

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  525

I've got a boy that says his name is Methusalem  ;  he comes from Windsor,
too?  Heaven help the poor people!  if they are but near a court,  it turns
their heads directly.  I had the boy only out of the stable,  just by the
bottom of the garden,  yet he told me his name was Methusalem  !  A
likely matter,  truly!  ha!  ha!  I'll be sworn his name is no other than
Jack  !"

"  Pray,"  cried I,  "  what do you call him for short?"

"  Why,  ma'am,  that was a great difficulty to me at first :  I'd have called
him Me,  for shortest,  but I thought the people would all laugh,  and say,
Ah,  poor gentleman,  it's all over with him now!  he's calling hi?7iself when
he wants his man  !  and then I thought of Thusy.  Thusy sounds soft and
pretty enough  ;  but I thought it is like a woman's name — Susy  ;  to be sure,
thinks I,  they'll all suppose I mean one of the maids;  and then again,  ah,
say they,  the poor gentleman's certainly cracked  !  nothing else would
make him behave so comical  !  And then I thought of Lem.  But it's quite
too much for me to settle such a set of hard long names  !"

In this manner he ran on,  till General Bude reminded him it was time
they should appear in the concert-room.

"  Ay,"  cried he,  reluctantly,  "  now for the fiddlers  !  There I go,  plant
myself against the side of the chimney,  stand first on one foot,  then on the
other,  hear over and over again all that fine squeaking,  and then fall fast
asleep,  and escape by mere miracle from flouncing down plump in all their
faces  !"

"  What would the Queen say if you did that  ?"

"  O,  ma'am,  the Queen would know nothing of the matter  ;  she'd only
suppose it some old double bass that tumbled."

"  Why,  could not she see what it was  ?"

"  O no  !  ma'am,  we are never in the room with the Queen I that's the
drawing-room,  beyond,  where the Queen sits ;  we go no farther than the
fiddling-room.  As to the Queen,  we don't see her week after week some-
times. The King,  indeed,  comes there to us,  between whiles,  though that's
all as it happens,  now Price is gone.  He used to play at backgammon with
Price."

*'  Then what do you do there  ?"

"  Just what I tell you — nothing at all,  but stand as furniture !  But the
worst is,  sometimes,  when my poor eye-peepers are not quite closed,  I look
to the music-books to see w^hat's coming ;  and there I read  '  Chorus of Vir-
gins :'  so then,  when they begin,  I look about me.  A chorus of virgins,
indeed !  why there's nothing but ten or a dozen fiddlers  !  not a soul beside!
it's as true as I'm alive !  So then,  when we've stood supporting the chim-
ney-piece about tw^o hours,  why then,  if I'm not called upon,  I shufile back
out of the room,  make a profound bow to the harpsichord,  and I'm off."

So was he again then,  with the General ;  but the evening was not con-
cluded, for the Bishop returned,  accompanied by Mr.  Smelt.

"  Her Majesty,  ma'am,"  said he,  with a tone and look extremely pleas-
ing, "  has been so gracious as to order me tea,  which I have drunk,  but I
was determined still not to be disappointed of having some with Miss
Burney."

Mr.  Smelt spoke of the Christmas-Day sermon,  and gave it,  delicately,
yet pointedly,  its due praise.  I could not take that liberty,  except by small,
little assents.  The Bishop,  with a very expressive smile,  turning towards
me,  said,  "  Mrs.  Delany has been making me a request to have a copy of
the sermon to read  ;  no,  I told her,  it would not do for her — it was a mere

526 DIARY AJN'D LETTERS 1786.

plain,  simple Christian sermon,  made for the King and Queen,  but it would
not do for a hel-esprit  /"

No further summons arriving to hasten them,  the Bishop,  with Mr.  and
Mrs.  Smelt,  stayed rather later,  and the quietness,  with the solidity of the
conversation,  joined to my real reverence of the Bishop's piety,  made this
evening more tranquil and less strained than any 1 had passed for a long
while.

I think I have omitted to mention,  in its place,  Mr.  Mathias.  My first
official visit from Mr.  Gabriel,  uncle to our,  or rather Charlotte's Mr.
Mathias,  I remember telling ;  but my second quarterly meeting was with
the nephew.  Greatly to my advantage was the change.  He really de-
served our Charlotte's good opinion,  in its fullest possible extent.  He stayed
with me more than an hour,  though he came only for a minute  ;  but so
much he found to say,  and all so lively and well worth hearing,  that I was
pleased with his stay,  and encouraged him to lengthen it.  His first recom-
mendation with me was a secret pleasure in receiving a favourite of my
dear Charlotte.  How widely may we spread the chains of true affection  !
when absent from its objects,  how tenderly do we bind them round every
thing those objects could have intercourse with  !  how fantastically,  yet how
soothingly weave them into all our actions,  of our own choice,  by fond though
imaginary concatenations in our ideas  !

If you will not laugh at me too much,  I w^ill also acknowledge that I
liked Mr.  Mathias all the more for observing him as awkward and embar-
rassed how to present me my salary as I felt myself in receiving it.

There is something,  after all,  in money,  by itself money,  that I can never
take possession of it without a secret feeling of something like a degrada-
tion :  money in its effects,  and its produce,  creates far different and more
pleasant sensations.  But here it made me feel so like — what I am,  in
short — a servant !  We are all servants,  to be sure,  in the red book,  but
still

Well  !  to the Christmas week again.

Dece3ieer 27th. — This morning I had the very grateful employment
of going to my dear Mrs.  Delany,  to prepare her for seeing,  in two days'
time,  my beloved father  :  he had promised me a Windsor visit in these
holidays,  and she had most kindly insisted her house might be his home.
I also told the Queen,  who appeared quite pleased for me that I had such a
pleasure in view.

While I was yet at Mrs.  Delany's arranging matters,  the Princess
Augusta,  attended by Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave,  came to make her a
visit.  I would then have retreated,  but the Princess desired me to stay,  and
immediately and most condescendingly made me take my seat in the little

party,  consisting only of themselves,  Miss P ,  and the venerable lady of

the house.

Mrs.  Delany ordered a breakfast ;  her Royal Highness took some of it
immediately,  and desired Lady Elizabeth,  and asked every body else,  one
after another,  by name:  all declined,  and she exclaimed,  with great na'ivete,
"  But I can't eat alone  !  I really cannot do it.  I never did it in my life  !"
Lady Elizabeth then took some chocolate.

The conversation was all upon common topics,  only rendered interesting
by a sweetness and most unafl^ected simplicity of manners in the amiable
Princess,  who is the general,  the almost universal first favourite even among
those who are every one highly approved.

The next morning I met  "the Bishop of Worcester at Mrs.  Delany's  :  he
was very serious,  unusually so,  but Mrs.  Delany was cheerful.     He soon

1786.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  527

left us ;  and she then told me she had been ill in the night,  and had been
led to desire some very solemn conversation with the good Bishop,  who is
her friend of many years'  standing,  and was equally intimate with her lost
darling,  the Duchess of Portland.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany had been discoursing upon the end of all things
with this good and pious Bishop  ;  and she went on with the conversation,
in a manner so content with her fair expectations,  yet so meek upon her
deserts,  that she inspired me,  at once,  with double pain in the prospect of
losing so inestimable a friend.  O how shall I now do without herl I felt so
sorrowed in the talk,  that she sweetly and benignly glided into other and
less affecting matters,  yet not till first she had given me this serious exhor-
tation, tenderly at the same time folding me to her loved heart, — "  You
must let me,  my dear Fanny,  you must let me go quietly  !"  I understood
her,  and promised all the composure I could gather.  O could I but cling to
her wings  !  how willingly would they waft me,  if to her indulgent partiality
my future lot were given in charge !

All gay and all alive,  her mind relieved and her sweet spirits cheered by
the conference with the Bishop,  who had spoken peace to her fears and joy
to her best hopes,  this evening came again my revered Mrs.  Delany.  With
what admiration did I look at her — what admiration and what tenderness  !
I knew what was passing in her mind  ;  I knew well she believed her disso-
lution approaching,  and I saw with what pious,  what edifying faith she was
resigning herself to everlasting mercy.

This,  however,  has passed away,  and her precious life is yet spared us.

Friday,  December 29th. — This day,  by long arrangement,  I expected
to receive a visit from my father.  He had engaged himself to me for three
days,  and was to reside at Mrs.  Delany's,

I acquainted the Queen with my hopes,  which she heard with the most
pleased and pleasing expression of approlbation.  She told them to the King,
who inquired,  with an air of real satisfaction in my happiness,  when he
would come?

Afterwards,  while the Queen was at her toilette,  and asking me kind
questions of my father and all the family,  the King entered.  He inquired
if my father was arrived.  I was delighted to see,  by their natural behaviour,
how right,  as well as sweet,  was this parental visit.

Before this,  however,  she had desired that my father should dine with me  ;
and then asked me to invite,  also.  Mile.  Montmoullin,  because she was
wanted early in the afternoon  ;  and she condescended to add,  "  1 would not
else have her with you to-day  ;  but she will not stay long,  and I hope it
won't be troublesome to you."

At three o'clock our dearest Padre arrived — well,  gay,  and sweat — and
we spent near two hours wholly alone,  and truly happy.

At dinner the party was enlarged by the presence of Mrs.  Delany and

Mr.    Smelt ;  to these were added the lovely and lively Miss P ,  the

gentle Mile.  Montmoullin,  and the friendly Miss Planta.

My dear father was the principal object to all,  and he seemed to enjoy
himself,  and to be enjoyed throughout.

We returned to my own apartment to our coffee,  and the two governess
ladies retired  ;  and then came the King for Mrs.  Delany ;  and not for that
solely,  though ostensibly,  for his behaviour to my fatlier proved his desire
to see and converse with him.

He began immediately upon musical matters,  and entered into a discourse
upon them with the most animated wish of both hearing and communicating

528 DIARY AND LETTERS 1786.

his sentiments  ;  and my dear father was perfectly ready to meet his advances.
No one,  at all used to the court etiquettes,  could have seen him without
smilino- ;  he was so totally unacquainted with the forms usually observed in
the royal presence,  and so regardless or thoughtless of acquiring them,  that
he moved,  spoke,  acted,  and debated,  precisely with the same ease and free-
dom that he would have used to any other gentleman whom he had acci-
dentally met.

A certain flutter of spirits,  which always accompanies these interviews,
even with those who are least awed by them,  put my dear father off the
guard which is the customary assistant upon these occasions,  of watching
what is done by those already initiated in these royal ceremonies  :  highly
gratified by the openness and good-humour of the King,  he was all energy
and spirit,  and pursued every topic that was started,  till he had satisfied him-
self upon it,  and started every topic that occurred to him,  whether the King
was ready for another or not.

While the rest,  retreating towards the wainscot,  formed a distant and
respectful circle,  in which the King alone moves,  this dear father came for-
ward into it himself,  and,  wholly bent upon pursuing whatever theme was
begun,  followed the King when he moved away,  and came forward to meet
his steps when he moved back  ;  and while the rest waited his immediate ad-
dress ere they ventured to speak a word,  he began and finished,  sustained
or dropped,  renewed or declined,  every theme that he pleased,  without con-
sulting any thing but his feelings and understanding.

This vivacity and this nature evidently pleased the King,  whose good
sense instantly distinguishes what is unconscious from what is disrespectful ;
and his stay in the room,  which I believe was an hour,  and the perfect good-
humour with which he received as well as returned the sprightly and in-
formal sallies of my father,  were proofs the most convincing of his appro-
bation.

December 30th. — This morning my dear father carried me to Dr.  Herschel.
That great and very extraordinary man received us with almost open arms.
He is very fond of my father,  who is one of the Council of the Royal So-
ciety this year,  as well as himself,  and he has much invited me when we
have met at the Lodge or at Mr.  De Luc's.

At this time of day there was nothing to see but his instruments :  those,
however,  are curiosities sufficient.  His immense new telescope,  the largest
ever constructed,  will still,  I fear,  require a year or two more for finishing,
but I hope it will then reward his labour and ingenuity by the new views of
the heavenly bodies,  and their motions,  which he flatters himself will be
procured by it.  Already,  with that he has now in use,  he has discovered
fifteen hundred universes  !  How many more he may find who can conjecture 1
The moon,  too,  which seems his favourite object,  has already afl^orded him
two volcanoes  ;  and his own planet,  the Georgium Sidus,  has now shown
two satellites.  From such a man what may not astronomy expect,  when an
instrument superior in magnitude to any ever yet made,  and constructed
wholly by himself or under his own eye,  is the vehicle of his observation?

I wished very much to have seen his sister,  whose knowledge in his own
science,  is so extraordinary,  and who herself was the first discoverer of the
last comet ;  but she had been up all night,  and was then in bed.

Mr.  Smelt joined us,  by appointment ;  and the Bishop of Worcester came
afterwards,  with Dr.  Douglas,  to whom I was then introduced.  He is the
famous editor,  who has published and revised and corrected so many works  :
among them,  the last voyage round the world.

By the invitation of Mr.  Herschel,  I now took a walk which will sound

1786,  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.  529

to you rather strange  :  it was through his telescope  !  and it held me quite
upright,  and without the least inconvenience ;  so would it have done had I
been dressed in feathers and a bell hoop — such is its circumference.  Mr.
Smelt led the way,  walking also upright ;  and my father followed.  After
we were gone,  the Bishop and Dr.  Douglas were tempted,  for its oddity,  to
make the same promenade.

Again my dear father,  by the Queen's command,  dined with me  ;  and
Mr.  Smelt and Miss Planta met him.  Mrs.  Delany could not come till the
afternoon.

After coffee,  the sweet Princess Amelia was brought by the King himself,
to fetch Mrs.  Delany.  The King showed her to my father,  who could not
but most unaffectedly admire so lovely a child.

Then,  sportively pointing to my father,  the King whispered her,  "  Do you
know who that is,  Emily  ?"

«  No."

" Is it Miss Burney's papa?"

«  No  !"

*'  Why not?  is he too young?"

"Yes!"

This mightily entertained the King,  who repeated it to my father,  as a
great compliment to his youthful looks.

The little Princess then,  taking Mrs.  Delany by the hand,  pulled her on,
to go to her mamma,  saying,  "  Come,  Mrs.  Delany,  come to mamma  ;  take
care,  Mrs.  Delany  ! — Papa,  come and take care of Mrs.  Delany down the
steps  ! — Don't you come alone,  Mrs.  Delany I"

The King,  though I believe he had meant to stay and converse again with
my father,  was too much the father himself to resist this bewitching little
claimant;  and away they all went;  though he turned round first,  and in
answer to her  "  Take care of Mrs.  Delany  !"  said,  "  And who shall we leave
to take care of Miss Burney  ?"

*'  Why — That r''  cried she,  comically,  and pointing to my father.

When Mrs.  Delany came back to take my father to her hospitable house,
she whispered to me that she had been requesting the Queen to allow her a
copy of the verses on a Great Coat:  and the Queen had referred her to me;
saying at the same time, —

*'  I would give you them,  and I would show and produce them often,  and
to many,  but I cannot,  because of what belongs to myself in them."

Very true,  my conscious Queen  !  thought conscious F.  B.,  for on that
very reliance did I compose and present them.

Sunday,  Dece3iber 31st. — This morning my dear father breakfasted
with me previous to his departure;  most reluctantly I parted with him,  my
present pre-eminence enabling me to see him so constantly and so irre-
proachably that my enjoyment in his society had no mixture of thwarting
ingredients.  Pie made his last bow at the chapel,  where the King conde-
scended to ask if he would not stay another day?  and the Queen told me,
at noon,  she would surely have seen my father,  had she not imagined he
would have remained longer.

I consulted with my oracle,  Mr.  Smelt,  upon these gracious hints,  and he
was fully of opinion my father ought to come again.  I wrote him this,  and
he promised compliance.  I had already told the Queen how much he
wished to express his grateful sense of her goodness to his daughter,  and
she seemed willing and pleased to give him the opportunity;  for I instantly
communicated to her the project of his returning.

I finished the old year in excellent society,  though damped by my father's
departure.     I had invited Mr.  Bryant to dinner,  to meet Mr.  Smelt,  and

VOL.  I.  45

530 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

they were both so well pleased with each other that each appeared to great
advantage.

The King,  who is always much entertained with Mr.  Bryant's conversa-
tion, came into my room at coffee-time,  and stayed talking with him near
an hour.

And here ends December,  1786.

CHAPTER XXVI.

1787.

Good Resolutions — West's Picture— St.  George's Chapel — The King's Offering as Sove-
i-eign of the Garter — The Bishop of Worcester — Benjamin West — Simplicity of his
Character and Manners — St.  James's — New Year's Gift of the Queen — Dr.  Burney at
Court — Kindness of the Queen — Visit from the King — Reflections in Sickness — Reso-
lution— A Ball at the Palace — Duchess of Ancaster — Courtesy of the Queen — An
Adventure — A Fright — A Difficulty — Official Visit and Civilities — A Travelling Com-
panion — A Dissertation on Morals and Religion — Cross-questioning — Conference with
the Queen — Colonel Welbred — Tete-a-tete with the Queen — The Inconveniences of a
Place at Coiu-t — An unexpected Pleasure — Illness of Mrs.  Delany — Mr.  Jerningham —
The Bishop of Worcester — Misanthropy — Anecdote of Dr.  Charles Burney — Memoirs
of Warren Hastings,  by Himself — The Mogul's son — A Visiter — Remonstrance —
Badinage — A Rencontre — Return to Windsor — The Troubles of Royalty — Claims on
the Royal Bounty.

Monday,  January 1st. — I opened the new year with what composure I
could acquire.  I considered it as the first year of my being settled in a
permanent situation,  and made anew the best resolutions 1 was equal to
forming,  that I would do what I could to curb all spirit of repining,  and to
content myself calmly — unresistingly,  at least — with my destiny.

For this end I kept myself more than ever employed,  not suffering 'a
moment to be wasted by meditation,  save what,  perforce,  was borrowed
from my sleep.  This measure,  indeed,  I had pursued from my first settle-
ment, and without it I had never,  I am sure,  been able to support myself.
Even with it,  for what a length of tinne must I have appeared to the Queen
(all ignorant of the state of my mind)  cold,  shy,  and inaccessible !

Mr.  Smelt and Mr.  De Luc called only to make their congratulations on the

new year;  and then Miss P went with me to St.   George's Chapel,

which was this morning opened,  with West's picture of the Resurrection,  on
Jarvis's painted glass.  I have already said my say upon it,  and can only
add that this solemn old chapel is extremely beautified  ("  a vile phrase !")
by this superb window.

The crowd was so great,  that we had difficulty to get entrance ;  and but
for Mr.  Battiscomb,  who perceived us,  and assisted us to pass on,  we might
have been left in the midst of the mob.     And even when admitted,  we had

still no seats,  and the people said none Were to be had  :  but on Miss P 's

speaking to me aloud,  by my name,  a clergyman went up to her,  and said,
"  Is Miss Burney here  ?"  and immediately offered me a seat in his own
stall.  It proved to be a canon,  Mr.  Majendie.  I sat very near his hand-
some wife,  whom I took this opportunity to address,  begging her to make
my thanks.  She talked to me then of Norbury,  and we formed just the
acquaintance for which alone I have time or inclination — that of a little in-
tercourse upon accidental meetings,  without any necessary consequence of
appointed interviews.

1 787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  53X

The King was to make an offering,  as Sovereign of the Garter.  He was
seated in the Dean of Windsor's stall,  and the queen sat by his side.  The
Princesses were in the opposite seats,  and all of them at the end of the
church.

When the service was over,  the offering ceremony began.  The Dean
and the Senior Canon went first to the communion table ;  the Dean then
read aloud,  "  Let your light so shine before men,"  &c.  The organ began
a slow and solemn movement,  and the King came down from his stall,  and
proceeded with a grave and majestic walk,  towards the communion table.
W^hen he had proceeded about the third of the way,  he stopped,  and bowed
low to the altar;  then he moved on,  and again,  at an equal distance,  stopped for
the same formality,  which was a third and last time repeated as he reached the
steps of the altar.  Then he made his offering,  which,  according to the
order of the original institution,  was ten pounds in gold and silver,  and
delivered in a purse :  he then knelt down,  and made a silent prayer,  after
which,  in the same measured steps,  he returned to his stall,  when the whole
ceremony concluded by another slow movement on the organ.

The air of piety,  and the unaffected grace and dignity,  with which the
King performed this rite,  surprised and moved me ;  Mr.  Smelt,  the most
affectionate of his many loyal subjects,  even shed tears from emotion,  in
looking at him in this serious office.  The King,  I am told,  always acquits
himself with true majesty,  where he is necessarily to appear in state as a
monarch.

The very great crowd detained Miss P and me some time in the

chapel ;  we parted at the iron rails,  and I ran on to the Lodge Gate,  but
there,  seeing some uniforms,  I stopped,  and peeping in,  discerned he King,
with his equerries,  in the passage.  I was retreating,  but he graciously came
forward,  saying,  "  How do you do,  Miss Burney  ? — Come in  ! — come out of
that sharp air.     Do you find it too hot  ?"

General Bude and Colonel Goldsworthy,  with the Bishop of Worcester,
were standing against the wall.  Thither went my little figure,  also,  for I
knew not how to pass the King,  who was walking up and down,  and wait-
ing for the Queen,  who,  with the Princesses,  soon arrived.  She looked
towards me with great surprise ;  and then,  laughing,  said,  "  Well — I did
not know Miss Burney !"  She might well not be aware of seeing me in
such a circle !  I said,  as she passed me,  it was by the King's orders I had
entered,  and her smile showed her approval.

Afterwards,  in her dressing-room,  she presented me with a new almanac
for the year 1787, — the  "  Almanac Atlas."

Tuesday,  January 2nd. — The Bishop of Worcester made me a visit this
morning whilst I was at breakfast,  but damped the pleasure I received from
his company,  by telling me he came to take leave,  as he returned to town
at noon.  There is no chance of his again visiting Windsor till this time
twelvemonth,  and I felt very sorry to lose sight of him for such a length of
time.  Piety and goodness are so marked on his countenance,  which is truly
a fine one,  that he has been named,  and very justly,  "  The Beauty of Ploli-
ness."  Indeed,  in face,  manner,  demeanour,  and conversation,  he seems
precisely what a bishop should be,  and what would make a looker-on,  were
he not a bishop,  and a see vacant,  call out — Take Mr.  Hurd  ! — that is the
man !

He had not long left me when another visiter came to take leave also, —
Mr.  West.  He has done,  for the present,  with Windsor,  but returns to his
great work in the summer.  We talked over,  of course,  his window  :  and
he spoke of it in the highest terms of praise and admiration.  Another man
would be totally ridiculous who held such language about his own perfor-

532 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

mances ;  but there is,  in Mr.  West,  a something of simplicity in manner,
that makes his self-commendation seem the result rather of an unaffected
mind than of a vain or proud one.  It may sometimes excite a smile,  but
can never,  I think,  offend or disgust.

Mr.  Smelt came also,  and much brightened the discourse;  for though he
continued the subject, — and Mr.  West could have talked upon no other, —
he varied and animated it by fanciful suggestions on the painting art  ;
which happily drew the artist into a more open field,  and seduced him,  from
time to time,  to leave his individual work,  and discuss more general rules,
and consider more extensive possibilities.

When Mr.  West rose to go,  he inquired if he might first wait on the
Bishop of Worcester.  Mr.  Smelt offered to find out if he were visible;  and
presently,  to my great gratification,  he returned,  attended by the reverend
prelate himself,  who was so good as to ask me if he might receive Mr.
West's visit in my room instead of his own.

By this means I had a little coterie highly desirable.  The talk still was
all of the window  ;  but I could not be tired,  nor could that or any subject be
exhausted,  while Mr.  Smelt and the Bishop were the talkers.

At night we came to town.  I found Mrs.  Schwellenberg better ;  and she
presented me,  from Her Majesty,  with a new year's gift.  The Queen makes
one annuall^y to all her household ;  I mean all of the upper class.  Mine
was very elegant:  a complete set of very beautiful while and gold china
for tea,  and a coffee-pot,  tea-pot,  cream-jug,  and milk-jug of silver,  in forms
remarkably pretty.

At night,  as well as I was able,  I thanked the gracious giver of my gift ;
and ventured to hint my wishes that Her Majesty would deign to look in at
my apartment in its new state :  for all is quite renovated there since poor
Mrs.  Haggerdorn's departure.  She readily promised me the honour I
solicited.

The next day,  though the fourth of the month,  was kept at Court as New
Year's Day.  I cannot but relate a little trait of the Princess Elizabeth this
morning,  which is strongly expressive of the modest ingenuousness of her
character,  and the simplicity of her education.  Her Royal Highness was
with the Queen during the duties of the toilette;  when they were over,  Her
Majesty went to anotlier apartment ;  I was then retiring,  but the Princess,
who had been desired to wait the Queen's return,  insisted that 1 should stay
with her,  and bade me sit down.  I begged to decline that honour,  as I ex-
pected the Queen every moment,  and was not tired.  She then would not
sit herself,  but came and stood by me at the window,  and entered into aa
easy and cheerful chattery^  till the return of the Queen.  Her Majesty gave
her a commission to write to Lady Courtown,  about a present intended her,
of a screen,  and again quitted the room.

Once more I was retreating,  but the Princess charged me to stay,  and to
help her ;  and while she was writing,  applied to me continually about her
expressions  ;  and,  having finished,  said,  "  Now,  Miss Burney, — as I am sure
nobody knows so well, — will you look at this,  and tell me if it is proper?"
She then put it into my liand.

What truly amiable modesty and humility  !  The letter was quite without
fault,  short,  and well-bred.

Friday,  January 5th. — I was preparing to journey back to Windsor,
when Mrs.  Thielky came to inquire if I was alone;  and immediately disap-
pearing, her place was supplied by the Queen,  who,  with the three eldest
Princesses,  came to visit my new fitted up apartment.  I showed every thing
off to the best advantage,  and they were all much pleased with my content.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  533

I produced my royal gift to their Royal Highnesses,  who take the most s^\eet
interest in every thing done by the Queen for the gratification of any part
of the household.

Mr.  De Luc and Miss Planta accompanied me to Windsor.  Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg had now finally given up all thoughts of going there during the
winter.

Colonel Welbred was arrived,  and was,  at this time,  the only attendant
upon the King at Windsor.

There seemed to be no opportunity in the pow^r of chance so favourable
as the present for the execution of my long-wnshed project of liberating my
evenings from official trammels.  My plan having long been revolving in
my head,  I had ventured,  in the last week,  to hint at it to General Bude,
and to beg him to take no notice to the succeeding equerries that I gave tea,
as I had not the honour to know them.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany came to coffee.  I then informed her of my plan,
by which I hoped to spend every evening with her,  either at her ow^n house
or in my own room,  quite undisturbed,  during the rest of her stay at Wind-
sor. But how surprised was I to find she totally disapproved it !  Without
the concurrence of the Queen,  she said,  no innovations ought to be risked  ;
and as the King's attendants for so many years had drank their tea with the
Queen's she thought it could only pass for dissatisfaction,  with their Majes-
ties, to break the custom,  and probably,  for prudery with the gentlemen
themselves.

I then resolved,  in obedience to Mrs.  Delany,  to make tea constantly in
the usual way,  and,  after it,  to retire to my own room,  or go to her house
when she was not at the Lodge.

Saturday,  January 6th. — To-day arrived again my dearest father,  in
consequence of the gracious speeches that had passed about his lengthened
stay when here last.     Sweet hospitable Mrs.  Delany received him  ;  but he

came to me to dinner, — at the Queen's suggestion.     Miss P and Miss

Planta were of our party  ;  Mrs.  Delany could only join us at coffee.

This evening proved indeed a pleasant one ;  the honours paid my dear
father gladdened my heart.  The King came into my room to see IVIrs.  De-
lany, and conversed with him so openly,  so gaily,  and so readily,  that it
was evident he was pleased with his renewed visit,  and pleased with his
society.  Nor was this all ;  soon after,  the Queen herself came also,  pur-
posely to see him.  She immediately sat down,  that she might seat Mrs.
Delany,  and then addressed herself to my father,  with most winning com-
placency. Repeatedly,  too,  she addressed herself to me,  as if to do me
honour in my father's eyes,  and to show him how graciously she was disposed
towards me.  I had previously entreated my father to snatch at any possible
opportunity of expressing his satisfaction in all that related to me,  as I knew
it would not only give pleasure to her benevolence,  but was a token of
gratitude literally expected from him.

My Susan,  however,  knows our dear father,  and will know him by the
following trait :  he had planned his speech,  and was quite elevated with the
prospect of making it,  and with the pleasure of my pointing it out,  and being
so happy  !  Dearest father  !  how blessed in that facility of believing all
people as good and as happy as he wishes them  !  Nevertheless,  no sooner
did the King touch upon that dangerous string,  the history of music,  than all
else was forgotten  !  Away flew the speech, — the Queen herself was present
in vain, — eagerly and warmly he began an account of his progress,  and an
enumeration of his materials, — and out from his pockets came a couple of
dirty books,  which he had lately picked up,  at an immense price,  at a sale,

45*

534 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

and which,  in showing to the King,  he said were equally scarce and valuable,
and added,  with energy,  "  I would not take fifty pounds for that  !"  Just as
if he had said — little as he meant such meaning — "  Don't hope for it to your
own collection !"

Was not this a curious royal scene  ?

They carried Mrs.  Del any away with them.  I obeyed her,  however,  by
returning to the eating-parlour,  to make tea for my father and Miss P .

Back again we hurried,  my apparent duty over,  to my own room  ;  and
thither we were soon followed by the King and the Princess Amelia :  the
Princess,  and her Mrs.  Cheveley,  he left with me  ;  but my father,  to my
infinite satisfaction,  he ordered to follow him,  and kept in the concert-room
with him all the evening.

This was the height of my father's AVindsor ambition.  Could I help feeling
really happy to see it gained  ?

The next day Mrs.  Delany was unusually unwell ;  the Queen took alarm
for her,  and consulted with the King whether Dr.  Turton ought not to be
sent for.  His Majesty gave immediate sanction to the proposal,  and I had
orders to write to him,  in the Queen's name,  and command his attendance.

Wednesday,  January 10th. — This morning my dear Mrs.  Delany was
better.  When I was hurrying to the Queen I met Mr.  Fairly,  who said he
was waiting to see me.  Very melancholy he looked — very much changed
from what I had seen him.  His lady,  to whom he is much attached,  is
suffering death by inches,  from the most painful of all complaints,  a cancer.
His eldest son,  who seems about twelve years old,  was with him.  He was
going,  he said,  to place him at Eton.

The day following I was taken very ill myself;  a bilious fever,  long
lurking,  suddenly seized me,  and a rheumatism in my head at the same
time.  I was forced to send to Mr.  Battiscomb for advice,  and to Miss Planta
to officiate for me at night with the Queen.

Early the next morning Miss Planta came to me from the Queen,  to de-
sire 1 would not be uneasy in missing my attendance,  and that 1 would think
of nothing but how to take care of myself.  This,  however,  was not all,
for soon after she came herself,  not only to my room,  but to my bedside,
and,  after many inquiries,  desired me to say sincerely what I should do if
I had been so attacked at home.

A blister,  I said,  was all I could devise ;  and I had one accordingly,
which cured the head,  and set me at ease.  But the fever had been longer
gathering,  and would not so rapidly be dismissed.

I kept my bed this day and the next.

The third day I was sufficiently better to quit my bed and bed-room  ;  and
then I had not only another visit from the Queen,  but also from the two
eldest Princesses  ;  and Princess Mary sent to me from the Lower Lodge,
to inquire,  in her own name,  how I did.

Tuesday,  January 16th. — Was the day appointed for removing to
town for the winter  ;  from which time we were only to come to Windsor
for an occasional day or two every week.

I received a visit,  just before I set out,  from the King.  He came in alone,
and made most gracious inquiries into my health,  and whether I was suf-
ficiently recovered for the journey.

The four days of my confinement,  from the fever afier the pain,  were
days of meditation the most useful  :  I reflected upon all my mental suffer-
ings in the last year  ;  their cause seemed inadequate to their poignancy.
In the hour of sickness and confinement,  the world,  in losing its attractions,

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  535

forfeits its regrets  : — a new train of thinking,  a new set of ideas,  took pos-
session of all my faculties  ;  a steady plan,  calm,  yet no longer sad,  delibe-
rately formed itself in my mind  ;  my affliction was already subsided  ;  I
now banished,  also,  discontent.  I found myself as well off,  upon reflection,
as I could possibly merit,  and better,  by comparison,  than most of those
around me.  The beloved friends of my own heart had joined me unalter-
ably, inviolably to theirs  ; — who,  in number,  who,  in kindness,  has more?

Now,  therefore,  I took shame to myself,  and Resolved to he happy.  And
my success has shown me how far less chimerical than it appears is such a
resolution.

To be patient under two disappointments now no longer recent ; — to re-
linquish, without repining,  frequent intercourse with those I love  ; — to settle
myself in my monastery,  without one idea of ever quitting it; — to study for
the approbation of my lady abbess,  and make it a principal source of con-
tent, as well as spring of action  ; — and to associate more cheerily with my
surrounding nuns and monks  ; — these were the articles which were to sup-
port my resolution.

I thank God I can tell my dearest friends I have observed them all ;  and,
from the date of this illness to the time in which I am now drawing out my
memorandums,  I can safely affirm 1 know not that I have made one break
with myself in a single promise here projected.

And now,  I thank God,  the task is at an end  ; — what I began from prin-
ciple, and pursued from resolution,  is now a mere natural conduct.  My
destiny is fixed,  and my mind is at ease ; — nay,  I even think,  upon the
whole,  that my lot is,  altogether,  the best that can betide me,  except for one
flaw in its very vitals,  which subjects me,  at times,  to a tyranny wholly sub-
versive of all power of tranquillity.

I go back to the 16th,  when 1 went to town,  accompanied only by Mr.
De Luc.  I saw my dear father the next morning,  who gave me a poem on
the Queen's birthday,  to present.  It was very pretty ;  but I felt very awk-
ward in offering it to her,  as it was from so near a relation,  and without
any particular reason or motive.  Mr.  Smelt came and stayed with me
almost all the morning,  and soothed and solaced me by his charming con-
verse. The rest of the day was devoted to milliners,  mantua-makers,  and
such artificers,  and you may easily conjecture how great must be my fa-
tigue. Nevertheless,  when in the midst of these wasteful toils,  the Princess
Augusta entered my room,  and asked me,  from the Queen,  if I should wish
to see the ball the next day.  I preferred running the risk of that new fa-
tigue, to declining an honour so offered  :  especially as the Princess Augusta
was herself to open the ball.

A chance question this night from the Queen,  whom I now again attended
as usual,  fortunately relieved me from my embarrassment about the poem.
She inquired of me if my father was still writing.  "  A little,"  1 answered,
and the next morning,

Thursday,  January 18th,  when the birthday was kept,  I found her
all sweetness and serenity  ;  mumbled out my own little compliment,  which
she received as graciously as if she had understood and heard it;  and then,
when she was dressed,  I followed her through the great rooms,  to get rid
of the wardrobe woman,  and there taking the poem from my pocket,  I said,
"  I told your Majesty yesterday that my father had written a little  ! — and
here — the little is  !"

She took it from me with a smile and a courtesy,  and I ran off*.  She
never has named it since  ;  but she has spoken of my father with much
sweetness and complacency.  The modest dignity of the Queen,  upon all
subjects of panegyric,  is truly royal and noble.

536 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

I had now,  a second time,  the ceremony of being entirely new dressed.
1 then went to St.  James's,  where the Queen gave a very gracious appro-
bation of my gewgaws,  and called upon the King to bestow the same  :  which
his constant good-humour makes a matter of great case to him.

The Queen's dress,  being for her own birthday,  was extremely simple,
tlie style of dress considered.  The King was quite superb,  and the Prin-
cesses Augusta and Elizabeth were ornamented with much brilliancy.

Not only the Princess Royal was missed at this exhibition,  but also the
Prince of Wales.  He wrote,  however,  his congratulations to the Queen,
though the coldness then subsisting between him and his Majesty occa-
sioned his absence from court.  I fear it was severely felt by his Royal
mother,  though she appeared composed and content.

The two Princesses spoke very kind words,  also,  about my frippery on
this festival  ;  and Princess Augusta laid her positive commands upon me
that I should change my gown before I went to the Lord Chamberlain's box,
where only my head could be seen.  The counsel proved as useful as the
consideration was amiable.

When the Queen was attired,  the Duchess of Ancaster was admitted to
the dressing-room,  where she stayed,  in ccnversation with their Majesties
and the Princesses,  till it was time to summon the bedchamber women.
During this,  I had the office of holding the Queen's train.  I knew,  for me,
it was a great honour,  yet it made me feel,  once more,  so like a mute upon
the stage,  that I could scarce believe myself only performing my own real
character.

Mrs.  Stainforth and I had some time to stand upon the stairs before the
opening of the doors.  We joined Mrs.  Fielding and her daughters,  and
all entered together,  but the crowd parted us ;  they all ran on,  and got in as
they could,  and I remained alone by the door.  They soon found me out,
and made signs to me,  which I saw not,  and then they sent me messages
that they had kept room for me just by them.  I had received orders from
the Queen to go out at the end of the second country dance;  I thought,
therefore,  that as I now was seated by the door,  I had better be content,  and
stay where I could make my exit in a m.oment,  and without trouble or
disturbance.  A queer-looking old lady sat next me,  and I spoke to her now
and then,  by way of seeming to belong to somebody.  She did not appear
to know whether it were advisable for her to answer me or not,  seeing me
alone,  and with high head ornaments  ;  but as I had no plan but to save
appearances to the surrounders,  I was perfectly satisfied that my very con-
cise propositions should meet with yet more laconic replies.

Before we parted,  however,  finding me quiet and inoffensive,  she became
voluntarily sociable,  and I felt so much at home by being still in a part of
the palace,  that I needed nothing further than just so much notice as not to
seem an object to be avoided.

The sight which called me to that spot perfectly answered all my expec-
tations:  the air,  manner,  and countenance of the Queen,  as she goes round
the circle,  are truly graceful and engaging:  I thought I could understand,
by the motion of her lips,  and the expression of her face,  even at the height
and distance of the Chamberlain's box,  the gracious and pleasant speeches
she made to all whom she approached.  With my glass,  you know,  I can
see just as other people see with the naked eye.

The Princesses looked extremely lovely,  and the whole court was in the
utmost splendour.

At the appointed moment I slipped through the door,  leaving my old lady
utterly astonished at my sudden departure,  and I passed,  alone and quietly,
to Mr.  Rhamus's apartment,  which was appropriated for the company to

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  537

wait in.  Here I desired a servant I met with to call my man  :  he was not
to be found.  I went down the stairs,  and made them call him aloud,  by my
name;  all to no purpose.  Then the chairmen were called,  but also in
vain  !

What to do I knew not;  though I was still in a part of the palace,  it was
separated by many courts,  avenues,  passages,  and alleys,  from the Queen's
or my own apartments  ;  and though I had so lately passed them,  I could not
remember the way,  nor at that late hour could I have walked,  dressed as I
then was,  and the ground wet with recent rain,  even if I had had a servant;
I had therefore ordered the chair allotted me for these days  ;  but chair and
chairmen and footmen were alike out of the way.

My fright lest the Queen should wait for me was very serious.  I believe
there are state apartments through which she passes,  and therefore 1 had
no chance to know when she retired from the ball-room.  Yet could I not
stir,  and was forced to return to the room whence I came,  in order to wait
for John,  that I might be out of the way of the cold winds which infested the
hall.

I now found a young clergyman,  standing by the fire.  I suppose my
anxiety was visible,  for he instantly inquired if he could assist me.  I
declined his offer,  but walked up and down,  making frequent questions about
my chair and John.

He then very civilly said,  "  You seem distressed,  ma'am ;  would you
permit me the honour to see for your chair,  or,  if it is not come,  as you
seem hurried,  would you trust me to see you home?"

I thanked him,  but could not accept his services.  He was sorry,  he said,
that I refused him,  but could not wonder,  as he was a stranger.  I made
some apologizing answer,  and remained in that unpleasant situation till,  at
length,  a hackney-chair was procured me.  My new acquaintance would
take no denial to handing me to the chair.  When I got in,  I told the men
to carry me to the palace.

"  We are there now  !"  cried they  ;  "  what part of the palace?'*

I was now in a distress the most extraordinary  :  I had always gone to my
apartment in a chair,  and had been carried by chairmen officially appointed;
and,  except that it was in St.  James's Palace,  I knew nothing of my own
situation.

"  Near the park,"  I told them,  and saw my new esquire look utterly
amazed at me.

"  Ma'am,"  said he,  "  half the palace is in the park !"

"  I don't know how to direct,"  cried I,  in the greatest embarrassment,
"  but it is somewhere between Pall Mall and the Park."

"  I know where the lady lives well enough,"  cried one of the chairmen,
"  'tis in St.  James's Street."

«'  No,  no,"  cried I,  "  'tis in St.  James's Palace."

"  Up with the chair  !"  cried the other man,  "  I know best — 'tis in South
Audley Street ;  I know the lady well enough."

Think what a situation at the moment !  I found they had both been
drinking the Queen's health till they knew not what they said,  and could
with difficulty stand.  Yet they lifted me up,  and though I called in the most
terrible fright to be let out,  they carried me down the steps.

I now actually screamed for help,  believing they would carry me off to
South Audley Street;  and now my good genius,  who had waited patiently
in the crowd,  forcibly stopped the chairmen,  who abused him violently,  and
opened the door himself,  and I ran back into the hall.

You may imagine how earnestly I returned my thanks for this most season-
able assistance,  without which I should almost have died with terror,  for where

538 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

they might have taken or dropped me,  or how or where left me,  who
could say?

He begged me to go again np stairs,  but my apprehension about the
Queen prevented me.  1 knew she was to have nobody but me,  and that her
jewels,  though few,  were to be intrusted back to the Queen's house to no
other hands.  I must,  1 said,  go,  be it in what manner it might.  All I
could devise was to summon Mr.  Rhamus,  the page.  I had never seen him,
but my attendance upon the Queen would be an apology for the application,
and I determined to put myself under his immediate protection.

Mr.  Rhamus was nowhere to be found  ;  he was already supposed to be
gone to the Queen's house,  to wait the arrival of his Majesty.  This news
redoubled my fear;  and now my new acquaintance desired me to employ
him in making inquiries for me as to the direction I wanted.

It was almost ridiculous,  in the midst of my distress,  to be thus at a loss
for an address to myself!  I felt averse to speaking my name amongst so
many listeners,  and only told him he would much oblige me by finding out
a direction to Mrs.  Haggerdorn's rooms.

He went upstairs;  and returning,  said he could now direct the chairmen,
if 1 did not fear trusting them.

I did fear — I even shook with fear  ;  yet my horror of disappointing the
Queen upon such a night prevailed over all reluctance,  and I ventured once
more into the chair,  thankina;  this excellent Samaritan,  and begging him to
give the direction very particularly.

Imagine,  however,  my gratitude and my relief,  when,  instead of hearing
the direction,  I heard only these words,  "  Follow me."  And then did this
truly benevolent young man himself play the footman,  in walking by the
side of the chair till we came to an alley,  where he bid them turn  ;  but they
answered him with an oath,  and ran out with me,  till the poles ran against
a wall,  for they had entered a passage in which there was no outlet !

I would have fain got out,  but they would not hear me  ;  they would only
pull the chair back,  and go on another way.  But my guardian angel
told them to follow him,  or not,  at their peril ;  and then walked before
the chair.

We next came to a court where we were stopped by the sentinels.  They
said they had orders not to admit any hackney chairs.  The chairmen
vowed they would make way  ;  I called out aloud to be set down  ;  the
sentinels said they would run their bayonets through the first man that
attempted to dispute their orders.  I then screamed out again to be set
down,  and my new and good friend peremptorily forced them to stop,  and
opening the door with violence,  offered me his arm,  saying,  "  You had
better trust yourself with me,  ma'am  !"

Most thankfully I now accepted what so fruitlessly I had declined,  and I
held by his arm,  and we walked on together — but neither of us knew
whither,  nor the right way from the wrong!  It was really a terrible
situation.

The chairmen followed us,  clamorous for money,  and full of abuse.
They demanded half a crown  ;  my companion refused to listen to such an
imposition  ;  my shaking hand could find no purse,  and I begged him to pay
them what they asked,  that they might leave us.  He did  ;  and when they
were gone,  I shook less,  and was able to pay that one part of the debt I
was now contracting.

We wandered about,  heaven knows where,  in a way the most alarming,
and horrible to myself imaginable :  for I never knew where I was. — It was
midnight.  I concluded the Queen waiting for me. — It was wet.  My head
was full dressed.     I was under the care of a total stranger ;  and 1 knew

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  539

not which side to take,  wherever we came.  Inquiries were vain.  The
sentinels alone were in sight,  and they are so continually changed that
they knew no more of Mrs.  Haggerdorn than if she had never resided
here.

At length I spied a door open,  and I begged to enter it at a venture,  for
information.  Fortunately a person stood in the passage who instantly
spoke to me by my name ;  1 never heard that sound with more glee  :
to me he was a stranger,  but I suppose he had seen me in some of the
apartments.  1 begged him to direct me straight to the Queen's rooms :  he
did  ;  and I then took leave of my most humane new friend,  with a thousand
acknowledgments for his benevolence and services.

Was it not a strange business?  I can never say what an agony of fright
it cost me at the time,  nor ever be sufficiently grateful for the kind assist-
ance, so providentially afforded me.

I found myself just in time;  and I desired immediately to speak with
Mr.  Nicolay,  the page,  of whom I requested a direction to my own rooms.

Friday,  Jan.  19th. — The good stranger called upon Scourfield,  to ask
her how I did,  but left no name,  and did not ask to see me.  1 was really
quite sorry not to see and to know him.

I had visits from some of the Queen's ladies that were entirely strangers
to me — Mrs.  Tracy and Mrs.  Herbert,  two bedchamber women  ;  the former
a motherly,  good sort of woman  ;  the latter mighty good-humoured,  but
immeasurably heavy.  Mrs.  Chetwyn also, — who,  though a nobleman's
daughter,  is the Queen's laundress, — and Miss Boscawen,  one of the maids
of honour,  came while I was dressing.  I fear I shall never go through so
arduous an undertaking as that of returning all these official civilities.

I had two notes from Lady Rothes,  both very embarrassing to me.  The
first was an invitation to her own home,  the second an offer to visit me in
mine.  I knew not at all what I might,  or might not do,  with respect to
visits,  either at home or abroad.  Hitherto I had gone nowhere,  and received
nobody but a few of my relations,  my dear Mr.  and Mrs.  Locke,  Miss
Cambridge,  and Mrs.  Ord.  Spirits I had wanted,  as much as knowledge and
opportunity,  for going further.  Something,  however,  must be answered to
this double proposition,  and it compelled me to form some immediate plan.
I determined,  therefore,  to speak openly to the Queen,  upon the visiting
subject,  and to learn,  if possible,  my proper privileges,  and her own desires
concerning them.  The next day we were to go to Windsor,  and then I
expected opportunity to open my suit.  Meanwhile I sent no answer what-
ever to Lady Rothes.

Saturday,  Jan.  20th. — To-day began our short weekly visits for the
winter to Windsor.  I travelled with Mr.  Turbulent,  and with him only.
He says that he and his lady were acquainted with our step-sister,  Mrs.
Rishton,  at Geneva  ;  and 1 have some idea that both you and I once saw
him.  He speaks English perfectly well.  Do you remember our hearing
a younger sister of his wife sing a fine French air,  with all the true French
cadenzas?

The journey was rather awkward.  To be three hours and a half tete-d,-
tete with a person so little known to me,  and of whom I had been unable to
form any precise opinion,  while still in a feeble state of health,  and still
feebler of spirits,  was by no means desirable;  and yet the less as there
was something in the uncertainty of my notions that led me to fear him,
though I knew not exactly why.

The conversation that ensued did not remove these difficulties  :  wholly
brought on and supported by himself,  the subjects were just such as I at
least wish to discuss with him — religion and morality.

With respect to morality,  his opinions seemed upon rather too large a

540 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

scale for that perfect measurement which suited my more circumscribed
ideas.  Nothing faulty fell from him,  but much was thrown out ihat,  though
not positively censurable,  had far better never be uttered.  He again revived
the subject of Madame de Genlis  ;.  again I defended her,  and again,  while
he palliated all the wrong with which he charged her,  he chose to disbelieve
the seriousness of my assertions in her favour.  True,  however,  it is,  1 do
believe her innocent of ail crime but indiscretion,  and of that 1 know not
how to clear her,  since to nothing softer can I attribute the grounds upon
which so much calumny has been raised.  I imagine her,  and so I told
him,  to have fallen at an early and inexperienced period into designing and
depraved hands,  and not to have been able,  from cruel and distressed
circumstances,  to give up the miworthy protection of a profligate patron,
though her continuing under it has stained her fame for evermore  !  Perhaps
her husband,  himself worthless,  would not permit her — perhaps she feared
the future ruin of her two children — perhaps,  in a country such as France,
she did not,  in that first youth,  dare even to think of relinquishing the pro-
tection of a Prince of the blood.  She was only fifteen when she was
married — she told me that herself.  How hard do I think her lot,  to fall
into the hands she must have ever despised,  and so to be entangled in them
as not to dare show to the world,  in the only way the world would believe
her,  the abhorrence of her mind to the character of her patron,  by quitting
a roof under which she could not live without censure !

The subject,  however,  was so nice,  it was difficult to discuss,  and I wished
much to avoid it,  since there was so much that I could not explain without
apparent concessions against my own case,  which he instantly seized,  and
treated as actual concurrences.  He praised her as much as I praised her
myself,  and I found he admired her with as sincere a warmth  :  but though
we agreed thus far,  and yet farther,  in thinking all that might be wrong in
her was venial,  we differed most essentially in our opinions of what that
wrong might be.  He thought her positively fallen,  yet with circumstances
claiming every indulgence.  I thought her positively saved,  yet with cir-
cumstances authorizing suspicion.

I tried what was possible to fly from this disquisition,  but I found I had
one to deal with not easy to control.  He kept it up,  forcibly and steadily,
till I was compelled to be silent to his assertions,  from want of proof beyond
opinion for answering them.

He then proceeded to a general vindication of the victims to such sort of
situations,  in which I could by no means concur;  but when I resisted he
startled me by naming as individuals amongst them some characters of
whom I had conceived far superior notions.  I heard him quite with grief,
and I will not write their names.  I cannot look upon him as a detractor,
and 1 saw him by no means severe in his exactions from female virtue :  I
gave,  therefore,  and give,  implicit credit to his information,  though I gave
not,  and give not,  any to his inferences and general comments.

"  Depend upon it,"  said he,  "  with whatever prejudice,  and even just pre-
judice, you may look upon these fallen characters at large,  and considered
in a class,  you will generally find them,  individually,  amongst the most
amiable of your sex ;  I had almost said amongst the most virtuous  ;  but
amongst those who possess the greatest virtues,  though not every virtue,
undoubtedly.  Their own sweetness and sensibility will generally have been
the sole source of their misconduct."

I could neither agree nor dispute upon such a subject with such an anta-
gonist, and I took my usual resource,  of letting the argument die away for
want of food with which to nourish it.

I did not fare the better,  however,  by the next theme,  to which the death
of this led us  :  Religion.

1787.  ^^  THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  54I

There is no topic in the world upon which I am so careful how I speak
seriously as this.  By  "  seriously"  I do not mean gravely,  but with earnest-
ness ;  mischief here is so easily done,  so diflicultly reformed.  I have made
it,  therefore,  a rule through my life never to talk in detail upon religious
opinions,  but with those of whose principles I have the fullest conviction
and highest respect.  It is therefore very,  very rarely I have ever entered
upon the subject but with female friends or acquaintances,  whose hearts I
have well known,  and who would be as unlikely to give as to receive any
perplexity from the discourse.  But with regard to men,  I have known none
with whom i have willingly conferred upon them,  except Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.
Locke,  and Mr.  Smelt,  and one more.

My companion was urgent to enter into a controversy which I was equally
urgent to avoid  ;  and 1 knew not whether most to admire or to dread the
skill and capacity with which he pursued his purpose,  in defiance of my
constant retreat.  When,  in order to escape,  I made only light and slight
answers to his queries and remarks,  he gravely said I led him into  "  strange
suspicions"  concerning my religious tenets :  and when I made to this some
rallying reply,  he solemnly declared he feared I was a  "  mere philosopher"
on these subjects,  and totally incredulous with regard to all revealed reli-
gion.

This was an attack which even in pleasantry I liked not,  as the very
words gave me a secret shock.  I therefore then spoke to the point,  and
frankly told him that subjects which I held to be so sacred,  I made it an
invariable rule never to discuss in casual conversations.

*'  And how,  ma'am,"  said he,  suddenly assuming the authoritative serious-
ness of his professional character and dignity,  "  and how,  ma'am,  can you
better discuss matters of this solemn nature than now,  with a man to whom
their consideration peculiarly belongs  ? — with a clergyman  ?"

True,  thought I ;  but I must better be apprised of your principles,  ere I
trust you with debating mine  ! — Yet,  ashamed to decline so serious a call,  I
could only make a general answer,  that as I was very well satisfied at pre-
sent, I did not wish to make myself unnecessary difficulties by any discus-
sions whatsoever.

"  And why unnecessary,  ma'am 1 Do you fear to sift your opinions  ?"

"  No — but I want them not to be sifted by others."

"  And upon what principle do you decline to have them examined  ?"

"  Because I see not any good in such an examination to others ;  and for
myself,  I am clear and satisfied — and what should I aim at more  ?"

"  Upon what grounds are you satisfied,  ma'am  ?"

Fairly afraid of him,  and conscious that one serious answer would draw
on as many more as he pleased,  I honestly told him I must beg to decline at
once a subject in which no good could accrue to him,  and none that I knew
was likely to accrue to myself

A little affi-ontedjhe somewhat haughtily said,  "You disdain then,  ma'am,,
to enter into this topic with me  ?"

"  No,  sir,  not with you particularly ;  but I love not to talk upon contro-
versial points with any body."

"  Are you a Catholic,  ma'am  ?"

"  No,  indeed !"

"  If you take your religion upon faith,  and without venturing at any inves-
tigation, what else can you call yourself?"

Again I made what slight answers I could suggest,  struggling with all
my might to fly from the theme entirely ;  and when at last I fairly assumed

VOL.  I.  46

542 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

courage to declare I would say no more upon it,  he raised his hands and
eyes,  and with an air of being greatly consternated,  protested —

"  By all,  then,  that I can gather,  I see and can infer but one of these two
things — either that you are a Roman Catholic,  or an esprit fort  /"

Even this,  however,  would not provoke me to the controversy — though it
provoked me with the logician I frankly confess ;  and nothing but predeter-
mined steadiness upon this point could have guarded me,  in such an attack,
from any intricacy or labyrinth into which he might have amused himself
by leading me.

These were the principal features of our tite-d-tite,  which left me unsettled
as ever in my notions of my companion.

When,  afterwards,  I attended the Queen,  she inquired of me particularly
how the journey had passed,  and if it was not very pleasant 1 I made some
short and general answer;  and she cried  "Did you read?  Did Mr.  Turbu-
lent read to you  ?"

"  No,  ma'am,  we had no provision of that sort :  I heartily wish I had
thought of it;  I should have liked it exceedingly."

"  But surely you do not like reading better tlian conversation  !"

"  No,  ma'am — not better than some conversation."

"  Surely not better than Mr.  Turbulent's  ?  Nobody converses better
than Mr.  Turbulent ;  nobody has more general knowledge,  nor a more
pleasing and easy way of communicating it."

Fearing to do mischief,  I assented — but faintly,  however,  for indeed he
had perplexed far more than he had pleased me.  The Queen again made
his panegyric,  and in very warm terms,  and seemed quite disappointed at
the coldness of my concurrence.

Good there must be,  I was sure,  in a man so honoured,  who for many
years has been tried in his present trying situation,  of teacher to the elder
Princesses,  and occasionally to her Majesty herself.  I resolved,  therefore,
to suspend the judgment which was inclining on the evil side,  and to wait
undecided till further opportunity gave me fairer reasons for fixing my
opinions.

The Princess Royal was nearly recovered on our return.  Miss Planta
came to dinner with me  :  so did Mr.  Turbulent.  Much was said about
Colonel Welbred.  I made such answers when he was named as left it
still in the dark that we had never met,  for I dreaded some introducing
scheme from Mr.  Turbulent that might seize out of my hands the only re-
maining chance of gaining to my own disposal the evenings spent at Windsor
in Mrs.  Schwellenberg's absence.

He left us after dinner to visit this Colonel,  who stands in his favour the
highest of all the equerries.

At tea-time Mr.  Turbulent returned in very high spirits,  and quite a dif-
ferent man from the importunate casuist who had alarmed and tormented
me in the coach.

When the tea was brought,  and I was preparing to make it, —

"  Have you sent,  ma'am,"  he cried,  "  to Colonel Welbred  ?"

*'  No,  I have not the pleasure of his acquaintance."

"  But,  do you not know,  ma'am,  the honourable customs of this house,
and that the gentlemen here are always invited to the ladies  ?"

I tried to laugh this off;  but he pursued it,  till Miss Planta,  quite teased,
begged he would not trouble his head about the matter,  but leave me to
manage as I pleased.

Turning upon her very short,  "What is your objection,"  he cried,  "Miss

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  543

Miss Planta,  surprised,  and a little intimidated,  disclaimed having any.

Mercy I thought I,  what an imperious esquire is this to whom we are
committed  !  And this was just the thought that gave me courage to deter-
mine against yielding to him.

Turning then again to me,  he said,  with a very courteous bow, —

*'  Will you depute me,  ma'am,  to fetch the Colonel  ]"

"  By no means,  sir  !     1 would not give you that trouble."

"  Shall you send him a message,  then,  ma'am  ]"

"No,  sir,"  cried I very steadily.

*' And why not,  ma'am T'  cried he in the same tone.

Miss Planta then again broke forth,  asking him why in the world he
could not be content with minding his own affairs?

With an adroitness of raillery,  against which she had not the smallest
chance,  he retorted the question upon her.  Again she was silenced;  and
again he renewed his application.

"  You will not make the tea,  ma'am,  and leave the Colonel out  ?"

"  I have never had the Colonel in,  sir,  and therefore there is nothing
peculiar in the omission."

"And why,  ma'am? — why have you not?  There cannot be a more
amiable man — a man of manners,  person,  address,  appearance,  and con-
versation— more pleasing — more enchanting,  ma'am."

"  1 don't at all doubt it,  sir."

"Shall I fetch him,  then?"

"  No,  sir."

"  Vous avez clone peur  ?"

"  Now,  if you would but let him alone  !"  cried Miss Planta  ;  "  he does not
want to come."

"  And how do you know that.  Miss Peggy Planta  ?"

Again poor Miss Planta was silenced  ;  but soon after,  with an impatience
that she could not repress,  she declared that if Colonel Welbred had wished
to come he would have made his appearance the first evening.

This was a most unfortunate speech.  Mr.  Turbulent seized upon it
eagerly,  and said he now perceived the motive to so much shyness,  which
was all the effect of resentment at the Colonel's apparent backwardness.

1 protested against this warmly,  but to no purpose  ;  and all that fell from
the too eager zeal of Miss Planta in my service seemed but to confirm his
pretended new explanation.

"  However,  ma'am,"  he continued,  "  if you will suffer me to fetch him,
he will soon satisfy you with his apologies.  I do assure you he only waits
an invitation  :  when I asked him if he was not coming up to tea,  he said he
had not the pleasure to know Miss Burney,  and could not take the liberty
to intrude upon her."

I was now satisfied that General Bude had given him a hint of the new

construction of the tea-table  :  I therefore earnestly begged Mr.  Turbulent

to permit me to have my own arrangement in my own way,  and only to be

quiet,  and forbear any interference of any sort in the business  ;  and after

much opposition he submitted to my request.

******

At night 1 had nn opportunity to speak to the Queen upon the subject of
my visits and acquaintance,  but I knew not how to introduce it abruptly;
and therefore,  only just as she had wished me good night,  with her usual
gracious bow of the head,  I boggod to know whether,  when she should be a
little at leisure,  she would condescend to allow me to make her a little
harangue,  all about my own little self? — She seemed surprised and curious,
but gave an immediate assent,  and in a manner extremely encouraging.

544 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

Sunday,  January 21st. — To-day I had the honour of a very long con-
ference with her Majesty,  upon my own affairs and proceedings.  She sent
for me at noon,  and with the greatest complacency desired me to explain
what I had meant the preceding evening.

I came immediately to the point :  I told her that there was nothing I
more earnestly coveted than the high honour of her own personal directions,
with regard to the acquaintance it might now be proper for me to keep or
dech'ne,  and,  for the time to come,  to make or to refuse.

I saw instantly by her manner the importance she annexed to this subject :
she treated it,  at once,  as a matter of serious concern,  and entered upon it
with the most ready concurrence to discuss it fully.  My acquaintance,
hitherto,  I frankly told her,  was not only very numerous,  but very mixed,
taking in not only most stations in life,  but also most parties.

To this last word she gave the deepest attention,  and gave me,  upon that
subject,  the most open opinions.  I must not here enter into them,  as they
were all necessarily interspersed with names and characters of whom she
could not speak with unmixed praise,  if with praise at all.  But I found her
liberal and noble-minded,  beyond what I had conceived her rank and limited
connexions could have left her,  even with the fairest endowments from her
early nature  ;  and many things dropped from her,  in relation to parties and
their consequences,  that showed a feeling so deep upon the subject,  joined
to a lenity so noble towards the individuals composing it,  that she drew tears
from my eyes in several instances.

1 begged her permission to assure her that,  for myself,  I would form no
connexion,  and make no acquaintance,  but with her consent ;  nor even
maintain those already made and formed,  but by her knowledge  :  and I
entreated her leave to constantly mention to her whomsoever I saw,  or
desired to see,  that I might have the undoubted satisfaciion of a security
that I could run no risk,  in the only way I feared it — that of ignorance.

She gave a pleased,  though only tacit assent,  but I saw that the proposal
met with her entire approvance.

I told her of the two notes of Lady Rothes  ;  and she cheerfully assured
me her acquaintance was perfectly what she should approve my cultivating.

In the conclusion,  with a high and just panegyric upon Mr.  Smelt,  she
desired that whenever I had any perplexity v/ith respect to this subject,  I
would consult with him,  and abide by his counsel.

This was extremely pleasant to me  ;  his wisdom,  his goodness,  and his
long experience in a court,  all concurring to make him the most desirable,
as well as able,  adviser that,  in this situation,  I can have.  And here,  most
graciously on her side,  and much satisfied on mine,  the conference ended.

January 22nd. — We returned early to town,  Mr.  Turbulent,  Miss Planta,
and myself;  and 1 had the gratification of a very long visit from Mr.  Smelt,
to whom I communicated,  in full detail,  my whole conference with her
Majesty.  The important charge devolving on himself in its conclusion
made it necessary to acquaint him with all its circumstances.

You may imagine him not insensible to such a trust from the Queen.  I
ran over to him,  in brief,  the names of all those who yet desired,  openly,
the renewal or continuance of intercourse,  and we discussed at large their
several recommendations or defects for visiting under the Royal roof.

1 name none now,  the Queen's opinions being deeply involved in all that
passed;  but the general directions and counsel of Mr.  Smelt,  which I have
scrupulously observed ever since,  were,  in abridgment,  these:

That I should see nobody at all but by appointment.  This,  as he well
said,  would obviate,  not only numerous personal inconveniences to myself,

1 787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  545

but prevent alike surprises from those I had no leave to admit,  and repeti-
tions of visits from others who might inadvertently come loo often.  He
advised me to tell this to my father,  and beg it might be spread,  as a settled
part of my situation,  among all who inquired for me.

That I should see no fresh person whatsoever without an immediate per-
mission from tlie Queen,  nor any party,  even amongst those already autho-
rized, without apprising her of such a plan.

That I should never go out without an immediate application to her,  so
that no possible inquiry for me might occasion surprise or disappointment.

These and other similar ties,  perhaps,  had my spirits been better,  I might
less readily have acceded to  :  as it was,  I would have bound myself to as
many more.

At length,  however,  even then,  I was startled when Mr.  Smelt,  with some
earnestness,  said,  "  And,  with respect to your parties,  such as you may
occasionally have here,  you have but one rule for keeping all things smooth,
and all partisans unuffended,  at a distance — which is,  to have no men —
none  /"

I stared a little and made no answer.

*'  Yes,"  cried he,  "  Mr.  Locke may be admitted  ;  but him singly.  Your
father,  you know,  is of course."

Still  [  was silent  :  after a pause of some length,  he plumply — yet with
an evidently affected unmeaningness,  said,  "Mr.  Cambridge — as to Mr.
Cambridge" —

I stopped him short at once;  I dared not trust to what might follow,  and
eagerly called out  "  Mr.  Cambridge,  sir,  I cannot exclude !  So much friend-
ship and kindness I owe,  and have long owed him,  that he would go about
howling at my ingratitude,  could I seem so suddenly to forget it !"

My impetuosity in uttering this surprised,  but silenced him  ;  he said not
a word more,  nor did I.

I agreed to invite Lady Rothes for next Thursday,  and only Mrs.  and
Miss Ord to meet her.  And then,  with a repetition of the rules I have men-
tioned, our conference concluded.

Jaxuaky 2:iD. —  A singular circumstance happened this evening,  and one
which I am sure will please you both to hear.  While I was in Mrs.
Schwellenberg's room,  with only Mrs.  Planta and herself,  ]Mr.  Griffith was
announced,  and who should I see enter but the very clergyman to whom I
had been so much obliged on the birthnight!

I started and so did he,  and he could not make his bow to Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg till he received my compliments,  of thanks for his good offices,  and
of pleasure in this opportunity to make them to him.

The accident that brought him here will,  I hope,  turn out to his advan-
tage. He has a sister in the household,  as laundress to the Princesses  ;  and
she is a great favourite with Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  This brother has some
small living,  but greatly requires something more;  and he came to-night to
read to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  that she might make some report of him, — to
whom or how I know not,  but surely my best wishes n)ust accompany him.
He had not at all,  he said,  known me,  till he went up stairs to inquire Mrs.
Haggerdorn's direction,  and then he heard my own name,  which had much
surprised him.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg speedily desired him to read;  and had a standing
desk procured him,  such as is used by the readers to the Queen,  who are
not,  of course,  allowed to sit down.

"What book is it to be,  ma'am,"  cried he;  "something interesting,  I
hope 1"

"No,"  cried she,  "I won't have nothing what you call novels,  what you

46*

546 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

call romances,  what you call histories — I might not read such what you call
stuff, — not I !"

The fTood Mrs.  Pianta,  who is an excellent old woman,  a Swiss or Italian
by birth,  and cheerful,  gay,  social,  and good-humoured,  evidently feared I
should look upon this speech as a personal reflection;  and therefore,  to
soften it,  said  "O Miss Burney  !  what pretty book you write!  I cry at it!  I
cry just like littel baby  ! — And then I laugh so! — O you would think me
mad,  for an old woman to laugh so  !"

I tried to stop her,  but Mr.  Griffith seized the moment to exclaim,  "How
little did I think,  the other night,  that the lady I had the honour to attend to
her chair'was the Miss Burney from whom 1 had received such pleasure  !"

I begged him to read,  and the book was brought :  it was Josephus,  which
is the only book in favour at present,  and serves for all occasions,  and is
quoted to solve all difficulties.

Januaky 24th. — I wejit in the morning to see my sweet Mrs.  Delany,
whom I had not for a long,  long time been able to behold.  I found her in
bed and ill.  I was cruelly alarmed;  she wept bitterly — bitterly I say,  for
her tears of kind joy in my return to her were embittered indeed by personal
sorrows and afflictions of the most poignant sort.  Dear and venerable Mrs.
Delany  ! — what on earth can be so affecting as to see excellence and age such
as hers bowed down by personal ill-usage and ingratitude,  from those who
are most bound to cherish and revere her ! — yet such has been her hard lot
through all the latter period of her long and exemplary life!

I stayed to my last moment,  and left her more calm,  and promised to see
her,  now I was myself well again,  almost daily.  For,  since the birthday,
I had been much indisposed till now.

The Queen,  in the morning,  when 1 chanced to be alone with her,  read to
me a new poem of Mr.  Jerningham's,  upon the death of his mother.  It is
very pretty.

The King,  whom I saw at St.  James's,  was so gracious as to tell me the
concern the Queen had expressed at seeing me frightened and low-spirited
for dear Mrs.  Delany.  How doubly welcome to me her condescension
when so communicated !  They were both of them in the greatest anxiety
about her.

Friday,  January 26th. — After a short but very pleasing visit this morn-
ing from the Bishop of Worcester,  I accompanied Miss Pianta and Mr.  Tur-
bulent to Windsor.

The journey was very different to the last,  and Mr.  Turbulent appeared
in a new character.  Lamentation and murmuring upon the ill condition of
human life filled up the sum of all that he troubled himself to say.  Youth,
he averred,  was the only season of possible happiness,  and that,  once flown,
nothing but pain,  mortification,  and sorrow,  remained for mortal man.

Every tendency to misanthropy makes me sad or angry,  and Mr.  Turbu-
lent, for whose happiness I was not sufficiently interested,  though I wished
him well,  to be sad,  nor with whose circumstances I was sufficiently
acquainted to know his situation well enough to be angry,  gave me a feeling
something between concern and disapprobation,  that by no means helped to
lighten the present journey,  or to brighten the prospects of those to come.

Miss Pianta said almost nothing;  she has a very useful understanding,
but no powers of entertainment.

Saturday,  January 27th — To-day,  in the Queen's room,  Mr.  Turbu-
lent most suddenly and unexpectedly made his peace with me for all his
hitherto offences.  While her Majesty's hair was dressing,  the King returned
from his hunt,  and entered her dressing-room.  He began talking of the
death of Mr.  Maty,  and the vacancy at the Museum.     He sent in for Mr.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  5^7

Turbulent and M.  de Luc,  who were both in waiting for the Queen's com-
mands.  He then talked over the affair with them both,  as both were much
acquainted with Mr.  Maty.

The first moment there was a pause,  Mr.  Turbulent,  in French,  which
they always choose he should speak with them,  said  "that there had been
une belle action performed,  upon the death of Mr.  Maty,  by M.  Burney,
frtre de Mademoiselle.^''

The King eagerly asked what it was,  looking suddenly towards me;  and
the Queen,  instantly rising,  and casting upon me one of her sweetest smiles,
approached him to hear more distinctly.

Mr.  Turbulent then related the little circumstance,  that Charles,  on the
death of Mr.  Maty,  and the distress of his widow,  insisted upon taking the
only son under his care,  without any recompense but his pleasure in brinCTJncr
up the son of an eminent scholar,  who bequeathed not ibrtune sufficient for
his education.

I knew the fact,  but never hoped to have had it so proclaimed.  Poor
Charles! — I trembled and glowed alternately with surprise and pleasure at
this recital.  It was received with every mark of approbation,  and I know
it will not be forgotten when his name recurs.

Mr.  Turbulent told it,  also,  in terms the most flattering,  adorninfr the
little narration with his best ornaments of language and manner.

Is it,  thought I,  from the misanthrope of yesterday that flows this good-
nature to-day 1 — For no one knows better the weight of a little anecdote thus
told,  and nobody knows more how rarely,  for the relatives of others,  such
anecdotes are told at all.

At last,  then,  thought I,  the good is coming.  I did well to wait a little
patiently,  I see now it is at hand.

*    *  *  #  *  *  #

In the evening I read Mr.  Hastings's Memoirs of India,  and the Memoir
of the Son of the Mogul in his visit to Mr.  Hastings,  when Governor-General
of Bengal.  Mr.  Hastings's Memoirs are too imperfect and unfinished to be
satisfactory,  and seem by no means meant for publication  :  in parts they
are nervous and interesting,  but upon the whole obscure,  and insufficient
for their purpose and promise.

The Memoir of the Mogul's Son,  which is subjoined,  is truly curious,  and
paints the notions and gives the terms of the Eastern Court,  in a stronger
and mora minute manner than any tract I have chanced to meet with before.
I am sure Mr.  Locke would be pleased with reading it.

Sunday,  January 25th. — I was too ill to go to church.  I was now,
indeed,  rarely well enough for any thing but absolute and unavoidable duties  ;
and those were still painfully and forcibly performed.

I had only Miss Planta for my guest,  and when she went to the Princesses
I retired for a quiet and solitary evening to n)y own room.  But here,  while
reading,  I was interrupted by a tat-tat at my door.  I opened it,  and saw
Mr.  Turbulent.  I saw upon his face,  at the first glance,  a look of doubt as
to his reception  :  but it soon vanished,  for though lie,  at that moment,  forgot,
/instantly recollected,  his good office concerning Charles  ;  and I gave him,
therefore,  the first smile of welcome he ever received from me.

He was not backward in perceiving or accepting it  :  he came forward,
and began a gay and animated conversation,  with a flow of spirits and good-
humour which I had never observed in him before.

His darling Colonel was the subject that he still harped upon  ;  but it was
only with a civil and amusing raillery,  not,  as before,  with an overpowering
vehem.ence to conquer.  Probably,  however,  the change in myself might be
as observable as in him, — since I now ceased to look upon him with that
distance and coldness which hitherto he had uniformly found in me.

54S DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

I must give you a little specimen of him in this new dress.

After some general talk,

"When,  ma'am,"  he said,  "am I to have the honour of introducing
Colonel Welbred to you?"

"  Indeed,  I have not settled that entirely  !"

"Reflect a Httle,  then,  ma'am,  and tell me.    I only wish to know when."

"  Indeed to tell you that is somewhat more than I am able to do  ;  I must
find it out myself,  first."

"  Well,  ma'am,  make the inquiry as speedily as possible,  I beg.     What
say you to now  'I shall I call him up?"
■   "  No,  no, — pray let him alone."

"  But will you not,  at least,  tell me your reasons for this conduct?"

"  Why,  frankly,  then, — if you will hear them and be quiet,  I will confess
them."

I then told him,  that I had so little time to myself,  that to gain even a
single evening was to gain a treasure;  and that I had no chance but this.
"  Not,"  said 1,  "  that I wish to avoid him,  but to break the custom of con-
stantly meeting with the equerries."

"  But it is impossible to break the custom,  ma'am  ;  it has been so always  :
the tea-table has been the time of uniting the company,  ever since the King
came to Windsor."

"  Well,  but every thing now is upon a new construction.  I am not posi-
tively bound to do every thing Mrs.  Haggerdorn did,  and his having drank
tea with her will not make him conclude he must also drink tea with me."

"  No,  no,  that is true,  I allow.  Nothing that belonged to her can bring
conclusions round to you.  But still,  why begin with Colonel Welbred?
You did not treat Colonel Goldsworthy so?"

"  I had not the power of beginning with him.  I did what I could,  I assure
you."

"  Major Price,  ma'am  ? — I never heard you avoided him."

"  No;  but I knew him before I came,  and he knew much of my family,
and indeed I am truly sorry that I shall now see no more of him.  But
Colonel Welbred and I are mutually strangers."

"All people are so at first;  every acquaintance must have a begianing."

"  But this,  if you are quiet,  we are most willing should have nono."'

"Not he,  ma'am — he is not so willing;  he wishes to come.  He asked
me,  to-day,  if I had spoke about it."

I disclaimed believing this,  but he persisted in asserting it,  pddir.g  "  For he
said if I had spoke he would come."

"  He is very condescending,"  cried I,  "but I am satisfied he would not
think of it at all,  if you did not put it in his head."

"  Upon my honour you are mistaken ;  we talk just as much of it down
there as up here."

"You would much oblige me if you would not  :  .Ik o't it, — neither there
nor here.''''

"  Let me end it,  then,  by bringing him at onr    :

"  No,  no,  leave us both alone  :  he has his resources und his engagements
as much as I have;  we are both best as we now are."

"But wliat can he say,  ma'am?  Consider his confusion and disgrace I
It is well known in the world,  the private life that the Royal Family live at
Windsor,  and who are the attendants that belong to them  ;  and when Colonel
Welbred quits his waiting — three months'  wailing — and is asked how he
likes Miss Burney,  he must answer Jte has never seen her!  And what,
ma'am,  has Colonel Welbred done to merit such a mortification?"

It was impossible not to laugh at such a statement of the case ;  and again

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  549

he requested to bring him directly.  «  One quarter of an hour will content
me;  I only wish to introduce him — for the sake of his credit in the world ;
and when once you have met,  you need meet no more ;  no consequences
whatever need be drawn to the detriment of your solitude !"

I begged him to desist,  and let us both rest.

"  But have you,  yourself,  ma'am,  no curiosity — no desire to see Colonel
Welbred?"

"  None in the world."

"If,  then,  hereafter you admit any other equerry — "

"  No,  no,  1 intend to carry the 7ieiv construction throughout."

"  Or if you suffer any one else to bring you Colonel VVelbred."

"  Depend upon it I have no such intention."

"  But if any other more eloquent man prevails — "

"  Be assured there is no danger I"

"  Will you,  at least,  promise I shall be present at the meeting?"

"There will be no meeting."

"You are certainly,  then,  afraid of him?"

I denied this,  and hearing the King's supper called,  he took his leave;
though not before I very seriously told him that,  however amusing all this
might be as pure badinage^  I should be very earnestly vexed if he took any
steps in the matter without my consent.

Monday,  January 29th. — This morning an unusually early summons
to the Queen made me scamper out of my room without any cap on,  with
my hair just dressed,  no gloves,  and my girdle in my hand,  which I meant
to buckle as I ran along the gallery ;  and in this manner,  as I darted out of
my room,  full speed,  to gallop on,  I was suddenly met by one of the Windsor
Uniforms I — Colonel Welbred,  I conclude.

Ashamed both of my violent speed,  and my unfinished appearance,
instantly and involuntarily I turned round and ran back to my own room.
What he might think of such a flight I know not;  but it was provoking
altogether.

VVhen Miss Planta came to me,  previous to our journey back,  she spoko
very seriously about Mr.  Turbulent,  and said she saw he was bent upon
thwarting all my schemes of privacy,  and that she had been arguing with
him,  m the other room,  till she was quite weary,  in vain.  She advised me
to be more peremptory with him ;  but I knew my attempt was a real innova-
tion, anc I could not therefore proceed in so authoritative a mode.  I saw,
too,  by yesterday's dialogue,  that he was far more conquerable by an easy
kind of raillery than by argument and opposition;  and now that I saw this,
I began to wish she would quiet her zeal,  kind as it was,  and leave the
matter to me.

At the appointed hour of departure he came,  and almost instantly ex-
claimed "  Have you seen Colonel Welbred,  ma'am  ?"

"  What should make you think I have?"  cried I.

"  Because he ju^t now ran after me,  saying,  '  Pray do tell me what Miss
Burney is dressed ii'  !' — so I presumed you had met."

I gave him no sutisfactory answer,  and he now very sedately said he
should make the intr eduction as we went to the carriage,  for Colonel Welbred
was in waiting in the gallery.

I was glad to be informed of his intention,  for now I resolved not to move
till he should be out of the way.

Miss Planta entered into rny scheme,  and even went out,  from time to
time,  to see if he were still in the way :  nor would I stir till she assured me
the coast was clear.

Mr.  Turbulent,  thus defeated,  was almost provoked into running to the

550 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

Equerry-room to call him,  after handing us into the carriage;  but we forced
him to follow.  He repined ail the way,  accusing me of mere coquetry or
singularity;  and compelling me to laugh,  through all his complaints and
charges,  by very earnestly exclaiming  "  When we are all so agreeable,  why
should we not live together?"

He protested,  further,  that as he now liked not to quit either of the tea-
tables,  it was a weighty distress to him what to do in the evenings;  and
there was no way to make him content but by uniting them.  He talked
incessantly the whole way of the Colonel,  who,  he told us,  had invited hirn
to go in the Equerry coach,  but he would not leave us.  I entreated him
never to stand upon that ceremony,  but,  since Colonel Welbred was as desi-
rous of his company as he could be of the Colonel for a companion,  1 begged
him,  without scruple,  to attend him in future.

No,  he declared himself as free from wish as from intention to make any
such change :  yet the name of Colonel Welbred was never out of his
mouth.

When our horses stopped at Hounslow,  to water,  the Equerry coach
overtook us,  and stopped also.  Mr.  Turbulent protested there could be no
better spot for the interview,  and that he would fetch the Colonel to the
coach door.  I absolutely refused to let him even put down the glass at my
side.  He let down the glass at the opposite side,  and stood up,  to look out
from it ;  and then,  as I heard afterwards from Miss Planta,  he beckoned the
Colonel to advance to us.  The Colonel,  however,  had more grace than to
accept such an invitation.

When,  afterwards,  the carriages passed each other,  he wanted again to
let down the glass:  but I positively forbade it.  He was not,  however,  to be
kept in order:  he not only bowed,  with a most expressive smile,  to the
passing Colonel,  but kissed his hand to him,  and motioned it towards me,
as if pointing me out to him  !

I was a good deal provoked,  yet the whole was too ridiculous for any
thing but laughter.

And thus,  during this whole journey,  in another new character appeared
Mr.  Turbulent!  For nothing did he seem,  more or less,  than a mere tms-
ch'ievous polisso?i,  from its beginning to its end  !

January 30th. — I had a visit extremely distressing to me,  from a
stranger,  who came with a petition for the Queen.     The petition wt;s from

Elinor de C ,  the last of one of the oldest English noble fami'ies,  who

was confined at Exeter for debt.  The story,  with many interesting
circumstances,  was related to me by Lady Lumm,  who had been this
unfortunate lady's friend from her earliest years.  I promised to do what
I could,  and 1 gave her the best counsel my little experience in these
matters furnished me with,  for altering the petition,  and adding and omit-
ting such things as I conceived,  from her narration,  mign:  do good or
mischief to her cause.

Lady Lumm prepared and brought me the petition but T found 1 had
done wholly wrong in accepting and presenting it.  The Queen,  though
with great gentleness,  informed me of my error,  and row frankly told me,
that of the many I had presented her,  there was not on^  that I ought not to
have refused,  as it was singly the place of the Lord Chamberlain to receive
and mention them.

I was extremely sorry for this intelligence,  ;:;jugh given with every
lenient expression to soften its prohibition;  but I considered with grief the
disappointment and mortification of which it must be productive to so many
solicitors.

When I saw poor Lady Lumm,  this information was a thunderbolt to

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  551

her.  However,  she carried the petition,  by my advice,  to Lord Aylesbury  ;
and thither I now directed all who applied to me.

She has had,  however,  no success :  the petition was for a pension,  and a
pension can now only be granted by the Parliament,  which has already a
list of expectants too long lor present addition.

Since this time I have ventured no more to interfere — but I have had
several very afflicting scenes with those whom 1 have been compelled to
refuse.  Nothing can be more painful  :  yet the poor Queen is so over-
whelmed with these prayers and pleadings,  that she touched me by saying,
upon this very occasion — "If I listen to many more I must want a pension
for myself?"

The call and claims upon their i\Iajesties are indeed tremendous,  and
how they answer to them in any degree according to the expectations with
which they are made,  is a real surprise to me,  since I have lived under
their roof,  and seen their expenses,  and been somewhat informed of the
insufficiency of their means.

CHAPTER XXVII.
1787.

Mrs.  Montagu — Sir  "Robert Strange — Colonel Welbrcd — The Reward of Perseverance—
A Conference with the Queen — The Sventurata — An injudicious Friend — Advice and
Caution — Treachery — The Paston Letters — Returning Tranquillity — Visit from the
Princess Royal — Another Conversation with the Queen — On the Use and Abuse of
Time — Family Affairs — A Dinner with Jacob Bryant — The Mosaic Law — Doctrines
of Voltaire — Jacob Bryant's Mode of Composition — The King and Jacob Bryant —
Bryant when at School — His Prowess as a Fighter — His Pet Dogs — The Marlborough
Family — The Ladies Spencer — Dr.  Heberden — A Debate— Slavery and Freedom — An
Enthusiast— Colonel Welbred — Wild Beast Spectacles in Germany — A Royal Party
to the Play — "  Such things are I" — Visiters — M.  Bonneville — A Conference with the
Queen — A Pleasant Party — A Visit from the King — Lent at St.  James's Palace — HI-
assorted Companions — Traits of Character — James Boswill — Anecdote of Him — Visit
from the Kng — His Opinion of Hawkins's Life of Johnson — A turbulent Companion
— An unexpected Meeting — A Visit from the King and Queen — A new office,  Back-
gammon player to the King — Remonstrances and Reply — French Plays — Visit from
the King — Lord Templelon — Errors of Female Education — Inconveniences of Argu-
mentation — Badinage and Rhodomontade — Travelling Small-talk — A Quarrel and
Reconciliation — Anecdotes — Jacob Bryant — An awkward Predicament — Meeting with
old Acquaintance.

Thursday,  February 1st. — During the drawing-room,  i\Ir.  Smelt called
upon me  ;  he informed me that Mrs.  Montagu had applied to him for in-
structions how she might come to me.  To be sure application was never
more judiciously made.  He answered,  according to our covenant,  that I
was only visible by appointment ;  and he promised to meet her at my apart-
ment when I should be able to name a time.  I determined to wait the ar-
rival of Mr.  Locke and my Fredy,  that I might have something to recom-
pense her civility and kindness when she honoured me with her company.

February 2xd. — In the morning I had a visit from the new knight.  Sir
Robert Strange,  who w^as so kind as to give me a proof plate of his print of
the two little Princes Octavius and Altred.

Miss Planta came to tea,  and we went together to the eating-parlour,
which wo found quite empty.  Mr.  Turbulent's studious table was all de-
serted, and his books laid waste ;  but in a very  {ew minutes he entered

552 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

again,  with his arms spread wide,  his face all glee,  and his voice all triumph,
calling out,  "  Mr.  Smelt and Colonel Welbred desire leave to wait upon
Miss Burney to tea  ?"

A little provoked at this determined victory over my will and my wish,
I remained silent, — but Miss Planta broke forth into open upbraidings :

"  Upon my word,  Mr.  Turbulent,  this is really abominable  ;  it's all your
own doing — and if I was Miss Burney I would not bear it !" — and much
more,  till he fairly gave her to understand she had nothing to do with the
matter.

Then,  turning to me,  "  What am I to say,  ma'am 1 am I to tell Colonel
Wellbred you hesitate  ?"

*'  No,  no  ;  but why in the world have you done this — so seriously as I
begged you to be quiet  ?"

"  And what harm have I done?  Tt will be but for once — and what mis-
chief can there be in your giving Colonel Welbred a dish of tea one single

even m Of

7"

"  But will it be one single evening  ?"

"  Unless you make it more,  ma'am  !"

"  Indeed,  Miss Burney,"  cried Miss Planta,  "  if I were you,  I would not
consent  !"

"  And what reaso?t would you assign.  Miss Peggy  ?"

This silenced poor Miss Planta  ;  and I then questioned him whether he
was not inventing this message,  or whether it was really sent  ?

He protested he came upon the embassy fairly employed.

"  Not fairli/,  I am sure,  Mr.  Turbulent !  The whole is a device and con-
trivance of your own  !  Colonel Welbred would have been as quiet as my-
self, had you let him alone."

"  Don't throw it all upon me,  ma'am ;  'tis Mr.  Smelt.  But what are they
to think of this delay  ?  are they to suppose it requires deliberation whether
or not you can admit a gentleman to your tea-table  ?"

I begged him to tell me at least,  how it had passed,  and in what manner
he had brought his scheme about.  But he would give me no satisfaction  ;
he only said  "  You refuse to receive him,  ma'am  ? — shall I go and tell him
you refuse to receive him  ?"

"  O,  no."

This was enough :  he waited no fuller consent,  but ran off.  Miss
Planta began a good-natured repining for me.  I determined to fetch some
work before they arrived  ;  and in coming for it to my own room,  I saw Mr.
Turbulent,  not yet gone down stairs.  I really believe,  by the strong marks
of laughter on his countenance,  that he had stopped to compose himself
before he could venture to appear in the equerry-room !

I looked at him reproachfully,  and passed on  ;  he shook his head at me
in return,  and hied down stairs.

I had but just time to rejoin Miss Planta when he led the way to the two
other gentlemen  :  entering first,  with the most earnest curiosity,  to watch
the scene.     Mr.  Smelt followed,  introducing the Colonel.

I could have almost laughed,  so ridiculous had the behaviour of Mr.  Tur-
bulent, joined to his presence and watchfulness,  rendered this meeting  ;  and
I saw in Colonel Welbred the most evident marks of similar sensations  :
for he coloured violently on his entrance,  and seemed in an embarrassment
that,  to any one who knew not the previous tricks of Mr.  Turbulent,  must
have appeared really distressing.  And,  in truth,  Mr.  Smelt himself,  little
imagining what had preceded the interview,  was so much struck with his
manner and looks,  that he conceived him to be afraid of poor little me,  and

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  553

observed,  afterwards,  with what  "  blushing diffidence"  he had begun the ac-
quaintance !

I,  who saw the true cause through the effect,  felt more provoked than
ever with Mr.  Turbulent,  since I was now quite satisfied he had been as
busy with the Colonel about me,  as with me about the Colonel.

He is tall,  his figure is very elegant,  and his face very handsome  :  he is
sensible,  well-bred,  modest,  and intelligent.  I had always been told he was
very amiable and accomplished,  and the whole of his appearance confirmed
the report.

The discourse was almost all Mr.  Smelt's  ;  the Colonel was silent and
reserved,  and Mr.  Turbulent had resolved to be a mere watchman.  The
King entered early and stayed late,  and took away with him,  on retiring,
all the gentlemen.

Certainly,  were no consequences of future constraint to be apprehended,
no one could be otherwise than pleased by the acquisition of such an ac-
quaintance as Colonel Wei bred ;  but my fears of other times told me that
the exclusion to which he might have submitted contentedly,  those who were
every way his inferiors might always resent,  unless such a precedent stood
before them.     However,  it was over,  and past remedy.

February 3rd. — As the tea hour approached,  to-day.  Mr.  Turbulent
grew very restless.  I saw what was passing in his mind,  and therefore
forebore ordering tea;  but presently,  and suddenly,  as if from some instant
impulse,  he gravely came up to me,  and said  "  Shall I go and call the
Colonel,  ma'am?"

"  No,  sir !"  was my Johnsonian reply.

"  What,  ma'am  ! — won't you give him a little tea?"

"  No,  no,  no ! — I beg you will be at rest  !"

He shrugged his shoulders,  and walked away  ;  and Mr.  Smelt,  smiling,
said,  "  Will you give us any  ?"

"  O yes,  surely  !"  cried I,  and was going away to ring for the man.

I believe I have already mentioned that  [  had no bell at all,  except in my
bed-room,  and that only for my maid,  whom I was obliged to summon first,,
like Smart's monkey —

"  Here Betty  !— Nan  !—
Go call the maid,  to call the man  !"

For Mrs.  Haggerdorn had done without,  twenty-six years,  by always keep-
ing her servant in waiting at the door.  I could never endure inflicting such
a hardship,  and therefore had always to run to my bed-room,  and wait the
progress of the maid's arrival,  and then of her search of the man,  ere
ever I could give him an order.  A mighty tiresome and inconvenient
ceremony.

Mr.  Turbulent insisted upon saving me this trouble,  and went out himself
to speak to John.  But you will believe me a little amazed,  when,  in a very
few minutes,  he returned again,  accompanied by his Colonel !

My surprise brought the colour both into my own cheeks and those of
my guests.  Mr.  Smelt looked pleased  ;  and Mr.  Turbulent,  though I saw-
he was half afraid of what he was doing,  could by no means restrain a most
exulting smile,  which was constantly in play during the whole evening.

Mr.  Smelt instantly opened a conversation,  with an ease and good breed-
inw which drew every one into sharing it.  The Colonel was far less re-
served and silent,  and I found him very pleasing,  and very unassuming,
extremely attentive,  and sensible,  and obliging.

VOL.  I.  47

554 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

The moment,  however,  that we mutually joined in the discourse,  Mr.  Tur-
bulent came to my side,  and,  seating himself there,  whispered that he
begged my pardon for the step he had taken.

1 made'him no answer,  but talked on with the Colonel and Mr.  Smelt.

He then whispered me again,  "  1 am now certain of your forgiveness,
since 1 see your approbation  !"

And when still 1 said nothing,  he interrupted every speech to the Colonel
with another little whisper,  saying that his end was obtained,  and he was
now quite happy,  since he saw he had obliged me  !

At length he proceeded so far,  with so positive a determination to be
answered,  that he absolutely compelled me to say I forgave him,  lest he
should go on till the Colonel heard him.

The King came soon after tea,  and stayed,  conversing chiefly with Mr.
Smelt,  for some time;  he then summoned Mr.  Turbulent to read to the
Queen,  and called the two gentlemen to join the audience.

February 4th. — I spent the evening most sweetly with my beloved Mrs.
Delany.

At night I chanced to be alone with the Queen and I had a very long and
interesting conversation with her,  on the subject of society and acquaint-
ances. The poor Sventurata was much involved in it ;  and the Queen told
me,  with a marked displeasure towards her,  that she was a friend to do
more mischief than an enemy,  by her extreme injudiciousness and officious-
ness;  and then exi)lained it was to myself she meant,  whom her Majesty
considered as injured rather than exalted by the style of praise which she
bestows upon me in my absence.

I was very much surprised  ;  and she soon condescended to be more
explicit  :  acquainting me that this ill-judginnj friend,  extolling me to all she
could induce to hear her,  constantly offered me to their acquaintance,  of
her own accord,  and told them that the charmante auteur tie Cecile was
vraiment Vheroine cVunroman  !  And this,  which to the Queen's cool judg-
ment sounds a character of romantic affectation and flightiness,  was what
she asserted of me so strongly after my first meeting wiih her,  at Norbury
Park,  that her Majesty frankly told me she had conceived,  from that time,
an idea of me so little to her satisfaction,  that it had taken from her all
desire even to see me,  till she heard of me again from Mrs.  Delany.

How curious an incident this to come to my knowledge,  and how little
did I imagine,  when first I saw her Majesty at Mrs.  Delany's,  that a pre-
judice had been conceived against me so greatly disadvantageous  !  and how
much less could 1 then foresee that it was so soon to give place to so volun-
tary a distinction.

She then added,  that she thought such a character in the world as the
heroine of a romance,  so unjust and so injurious to me,  that she designed
interfering herself,  and speaking to the Sventurata,  in order to put a stop
to such mistaken panegyric.

After this,  which gave me real concern for the poor panegyrist,  she
questioned me concerning certain propositions which had been made to me
by her,  for enlarging my acquaintance,  by adding to them her own.

I am all amazed,  and all in the dark to this moment,  who can have given
her Majesty all this information  !

I very honestly related,  in brief,  all that belonged to this subject ;  and
received a candid caution,  in return,  to repulse these offers with uniform
distance,  lest I should be involved in a coterie of successive foreigners,
dangerous in the consequences of iheir acquaintance,  which might be pro-
ductive of numberless inconveniences,  and a variety of accounts of myself,

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  555

that might travel abroad,  and,  however erroneous,  become public,  and gain
general credit.

Poor M.  Bonneville,  the poet,  was here included,  and I readily promised,
with regard to him and to all others,  never to mai<e or to receive aa
acquaintance that I did not first mention to her Majesty,  that no one,
through my means,  might ever be brought under the Royal roof,  from whom
any danger might be previously apprehended.

In all this,  my chief concern was for the poor Sventurata,  whose impru-
dence has thus largely brought her into discredit and distrust.  Who there
is that thus betrays her I know not ;  but certainly she has some enemy who
spares not to recount her failings.

FRiDAiT,  February 9th. — This morning I performed my self-promise
with regard to Mr.  Turbulent,  for I made an application to the Queen that
he might be permiited to travel,  occasionally,  with the Equerries.

She seemed so much surprised,  that I hardly knew how to account for
my request.  1 could not tell the fact,  that he really was too boisterous for
my spirits,  in their present state,  nor yet that I wished to repress his self-
consequence with respect to his services:  I could only,  therefore,  put it
upon his attachment to Colonel Welbred.  She seemed to think it quite
strange that I should be content to part with him,  and spoke of his agreeable
and entertaining faculties in conversation with very partial admiration.  I
concurred in allowing them,  but accepted her tacit consent to the occasional
separation.

I had now something to say to my Knight that I knew would keep him
in some order.  He came,  at the usual hour of journey,  with Miss Planta  :
I instantly expostulated on his not accompanying his Colonel,  but added
nothing more at that time,  as I saw he was again in his humour de misa?!-
thrope and could not take such a moment to give him a dismission,  which,
unless e?i badinant,  must be rude and affronting.

I am now reading the  "  Paston Family Original Letters,"  written in the
wars of York and Lancaster.  I had borrowed the first volume of my dear
father  :  the second,  by accident,  I have not yet seen.  I am much enter-
tained with them.  They do not bring forth any thing very new in facts,  or
very striking in sentiments;  but they contain much information on the
manners and customs of the times,  by the anecdotes and observations and
directions incidentally interwoven with them.  As they were not written
for the public,  no professed or formal instruction must be expected from
them  ;  and much allowance for insignificance and tautology must be made  :
but their antique air,  their unstudied communication of the modes of those
old times,  not only in diction and in action,  but in thinking ;  with their
undoubted authenticity,  render them,  to me at least,  interesting,  curious,  and
informing.

Saturday,  February 10th. — This little ijartie will not be the least
welcome to my beloved readers,  for it opens upon the first day that,  since
my abode royal,  I was sensible of an internal sensation of returning tran-
quillity— the first day in which a little leisure was found,  yet not seized
upon for the indulgence of sadness.

I have,  indeed,  I thank God,  now fiiirly and thoroughly formed my
mind to my situation.  I even think I now should do ill to change it  :  for
though my content with it has been factitious,  I believe it,  in the main,  suited
to save me from more disturbance than it gives me.

This morning,  soon after my breakfast,  the Princess Royal came to fetch
me to the'Queen.  She talked of Mrs.  Delany all the way,  and in terms of
affection that can never fail to raise her in the minds of all that hear her.

556 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

Tlie Queen was alone;  and told me she had been so much struck with
the Duke of Suffolk's letter to his son,  in the Paston collection,  that she
wished to hear my opinion of it.  She then condescended to read it to me.
It is indeed both instructive and interesting.  A conversation then took place,
which lasted almost all the morning,  and in which the Queen spoke at once
so rationally and so feelingly,  so openly and so wisely,  upon the use and
abuse of time,  that she filled me with new admiration,  both of her parts and
her disposition.

She was then so gracious,  when she dismissed me,  as to lend me the
book,  desiring me to have it sent back to her apartment when I went to
dinner.

So great was her complacency,  that I even ventured to speak to her of
my own family concerns;  namely,  of the state of my household.  John
has become quite irreclaimable in foppery and forwardness,  and a German,
Frederic Ebers,  has been recommended to me,  who the Queen promised
me should have his character investigated by the means of one of her own
pages.

I had invited Mr.  Bryant to dinner.  He came an hour before,  and I conid
not read Paston,  but rejoiced the more in his living intelligence.  We talked
upon the Jew's Letters,  which he had lent me.  Have I mentioned them?
They are a mighty well written defence of the Mosaic law and mission,  and
as orthodox for Christians as for Jews,  with regard to their main tenor,
which is to refute the infidel doctrine of Voltaire up to the time of our
Saviour.

Before our dinner we were joined by Mr.  Smelt;  and the conversation
was then very good.  The same subject was continued,  except where it was
interrupted by Mr.  Bryant's speaking of his own works,  which was very
frequently,  and with a droll sort of simplicity that had a mixture of nature
and of humour extremely amusing.  He told us,  very frankly,  his manner
of writing;  he confessed that what he first committed to paper seldom could
be printed without variation or correction,  even to a single line;  he copied
every thing over,  he said,  himself,  and three transcribings were the fewest
he could ever make do;  but,  generally,  nothing went from him to the press
under seven.

Afterwards,  whilst we were in the midst of another subject,  he suddenly
made an interruption,  to ask Mr.  Smelt if he had got his work on Mythology?

Mr.  Smelt,  a little ashamed,  confessed himself without it.  'Tis in four
volumes quarto.

"Pll send it you,  sir!"  cried he with quickness,  "  Pll give it you  !"

Mr.  Turbulent and Miss Planta came to dinner,  and it was very cheerful.
Ere it was over John told me somebody wanted me.  I desired they might
be shown to my room till the things were removed ;  but,  as these were some
time taking away,  I called John to let me know who it was.  "  The Princess
Royal,  ma'am,"  was his answer,  with perfect ease.

Up I started,  ashamed and eager,  and flew to her Royal Highness
instantly  :  and I found her calmly and quietly wailing,  shut up in my room,
without any candles,  and almost wholly in the dark,  except from the light
of the fire!

I made all possible apologies,  and doubled and trebled them upon her
smilingly saying,  "  I would not let them tell you who it was,  nor hurry you,
for I know  'tis so disagreeable to be called away in the middle of dinner!"
And then,  to reconcile me to the little accident,  she took hold of both my
hands.

She cama to me from the Queen,  about the Paston Letters,  which John
had not carried to the right page.

*****

1737.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  557

Very soon after came the King,  who entered into a gay disquisition with
Mr.  Bryant upon his school achievements;  to which he answered with a
readiness and simplicity highly entertaining.

"You were an Etonian,  Mr.  Bryant,"  said the King;  "but pray,  for
what were you most famous at school '/"

We all expected,  from the celebrity of his scholarship,  to hear him
answer his — Latin Exercises  :  but no such thing  !

"  Cudgelling,  sir.     I was most famous for that."

While a general laugh followed this speech,  he very gravely proceeded
to particularize his feats  ;  though unless you could see the diminutive figure,
the weak,  thin,  feeble,  little frame,  whence issued the proclamation of his
prowess,  you can but very inadequately judge the comic effect of his big
talk.

"Your Majesty,  sir,  knows General Conway?  I broke his head for
him,  sir."

The shout which ensued did not at all interfere with the steadiness of his
further detail.

"And there's another man,  sir,  a great stout fellow,  sir,  as ever you saw
— Dr.  Gibbon of the Temple:  I broke his head too,  sir.  1 don't know if he
remembers it."

The King,  afterwards,  inquired about his present family,  meaning his
dogs,  which he is famed for breeding and preserving.

"  Why,  sir,"  he answered,  "I have now only twelve.  Once,  I recollect,
when your Majesty was so gracious as to ask me about them,  1 happened to
have twenty-two;  and so 1 told you,  sir.  Upon my word,  sir,  it made me
very uneasy afterwards when I came to reflect upon it:  I was afraid your
Majesty might think I presumed to joke  !"

The King then asked him for some account of the Marlborough family,
with which he is very particularly connected  ;  and desired to know which
among the young Lady Spencers was his favourite.

"  Upon my word,  sir,  I like them all !  Lady Elizabeth is a charming
young lady — I believe,  sir,  1 am most in her favour ;  I don't know why,  sir.
But I happened to write a letter to the Duke,  sir,  that she took a fancy to  ;
I don't know the reason,  sir,  but she begged it.  1 don't know what was in
the letter,  sir — I could never find out;  but she took a prodigious fancy to
it,  sir."

The King laughed heartily,  and supposed there might be some compli-
ments to herself in it.

"  Upon my word,  sir,"  cried he,  "  I am afraid your Majesty will think I
was in love with her!  but indeed,  sir,  I don't know what was in the letter."

Dr.  H ,  also,  was talked over,  and some of his peculiarities,  of which

it seems he has many,  in matters of religion.

"  Upon my word,  sir,"  cried Mr.  Bryant,  "  he is never of the same mind
upon these points for four days together ; — now he's one way,  now another,
always unsettled and changing,  and never satisfied nor fixed.  I tell him,  as
his religion was made hefore him,  and not he before his religion,  he ought
to take it as he finds it,  and be content to fit himself to that,  not expect that
to fit itself to him."

The converse went on in the same style,  and the King was so much
entertained by Mr.  Bryant,  that he stayed almost the whole evening.  The
Queen sent for Mr.  Bryant,  and all the party dispersed soon after.

Friday,  February 16th. — The usual trio assembled in my room for

the usual expedition back to Windsor.

******

47*

558 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

While I was dressing for dinner,  I heard a step advancing in my parlour.
I hastily shut my bedroonn-door,  and then heard the sweet voice of the
Princess Augusta,  saying,  "It's only me.  Miss Burney  ;  1 won't come in to
disturb you."  Out I rushed,  all bepowdered,  entreating her pardon  :  she
said she only came for little Badine,  but stayed chatting on some time,
merely to recover me from the confusion of having seemed to shut her out.

The instant I was left alone with Mr.  Turbulent he demanded to know my
li p^-oject for his happiness  ;"  and he made his claim in a tone so determined,
that I saw it would be fruitless to attempt evasion or delay.

"  Your captivity,  then,  sir,"  cried I — "for such I must call your regard-
ing your attendance to be indispensable — is at an end:  the Equerry-coach
is now wholly in your power.  I have spoken myself upon the subject to
the Queen,  as you bid — at least,  braved me to do  ;  and I have now her con-
sent to discharging you from all necessity of travelling in our coach."

He looked extremely provoked,  and asked if I really meant to inform him
I did not choose his company?

1 laughed the question oft',  and used a world af civil argument to persuade
him I had only done him a good office  :  but I was fain to make the whole
debate as sportive as possible,  as I saw him disposed to be seriously af-
fronted.

A long debate ensued.  I had been,  he protested,  excessively ill-natured
to him.  "  What an impression,"  cried he,  "  must this make upon the
Queen  !  After travelling,  with apparent content,  six years with that oyster
Mrs.  Haggerdorn — now — now that travelling is become really agreeable —
in that coach — I am to be turned out of it I How must it disgrace me in her
opinion  !"

She was too partial,  I said,  to  '■'■that oyster^''  to look upon the matter in
such a degrading light :  nor would she think of it at all,  but as an accidental
matter.

I then added,  that the reason he had hitherto been destined to the female
coach was,  that Mrs.  Schwellenberg and Mrs.  Flaggerdorn were always
afraid of travelling by themselves;  but that as I had more courage,  there
was no need of such slavery.

"  Slavery  !" — repeated he,  with an emphasis that almost startled me, —
"  Slavery is pleasure — is happiness — when directed by our wishes  !"

And then,  with a sudden motion that made me quite jump,  he cast him-
self at my feet,  on both his knees —

"  Your slave,"  he cried,  "  I am content to be  !  your slave I am ready to
live and die!"

I begged him to rise,  and be a little less rhapsodic.  "  I have emanci-
pated you,"  I cried  ;  "  do not,  therefore,  throw away the freedom you have
been six years sighing to obtain.  You are now your own agent — a volun-
teer— "

"  If I am,"  cried he,  impetuously,  "  I dedicate myself to you  ! — A volun-
teer, ma'am,  remember that !  I dedicate myself to you,  therefore,  of my
own accord,  for every journey!  You shall not get rid of me these twenty
years."

I tried to get away myself — but he would not let me move ;  and he began,
■with still increasing violence of manner,  a most fervent protestation that he
would not be set aside,  and that he devoted himself to me entirely.  And,  to
say the simple truth,  ridiculous as all this was,  I really began to grow a little
frightened by his vehemence and his posture;  till,  at last,  in the midst of an
almost furious vow,  in which he dedicated himself to me forever,  he relieved
me,  by suddenly calling upon Jupiter,  Juno,  Mars,  and Hercules,  and every

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  559

god,  and every goddess,  to witness his oath.  And then,  content with his
subhmity,  he arose.

Was it not a curious see,  e?  and ha\e I not a curious fellow-traveller for
my little journeys?

This sample of his behaviour in a tcte-d-tcte will not invite m  ■  t'^  ano'her
with hinn  :  for though I think his rhodomontading as innocent as that of our
cousin Richard,  there is something in it now and then a little more violent
than suits either my taste or my nerves.

■Tf-'  tK  ^  vP tF vP

The next day I had a very large evening party.  Miss Emily Clayton I
had invited,  as Miss Planta was engaged  ;  and she brought an aunt,  Lady
Harriet Conyers,  who,  with Lady Louisa Clayton,  made me a visit previous
to going to the Queen's rooms.  Mr.  Smelt brought not only the Colonel,
but a nephew of the Colonel,  who is at Eton,  on the last form.  Colonel
VVelbred,  in the mildest manner,  made many apologies,  but declared Mr.
Smelt had urged him to bring this ne[)hew.  I assured him Mr.  Smelt had
done perfectly well,  and he came and sat by me;  and an open and pleasant
converse,  with Mr.  Smelt for leader,  passed during the rest of the evening.
I liked him very much.  I found him by no means the reserved character
he had been represented  :  he is only shy in making and beginning an
acquaintance,  not backward in supporting it.

He spoke to me now of Captain Phillips  ;  and told me he had been very
much indebted to him for procuring him one of the best copies he ever saw
of one of the portraits he most esteemed:  it was Edward's,  of his brother,
from Romney.

He then gave a very entertaining account of some of the icild-heast
spectacles in Germany.  He had been to several at Vienna.  My father
speaks of them in his  '  German Tour.'  Several things which he told
served to exalt the brute so much above the mortal man,  that I almost
sighed to hear him.  The beasts are so urged,  so provoked,  to the
combat,  which by the man is undertaken deliberately and wilfully,  that
there was no listening to his relation without a conscious acknowledgment
that the lerm brute,  in those fights,  might better have suited the animal with
two feet.  Unless they are just starved with forced hunger,  they never,  he
declared,  were the aggressors in these encounters.

Monday,  February 19th. — This morning I proposed to my fellow-
travellers that we should begin our journey on foot.  The wonderment with
which they heard a proposal so new was diverting:  but they all agreed to
it ;  and though they declared that my predecessor,  Mrs.  Huggerdorn,  would
have thought the person fit for Bedlam who should have suggested such a
plan,  no one could find any real objection,  and off we set,  ordering the
coach to proceed slowly after us.

The weather was delightful,  and the enterprise served to shorten and
enliven the expedition,  and pleased them all.

Mr.  Turbulent began,  almost immediately,  an attack about his Colonel  :
upon quite a new ground,  yet as restless and earnest as upon the old one.
He now reproached my attention to him,  protesting I talked to him con-
tinually, and spun out into an hour's discourse what might have been said
in three minutes.

"  And was it my spinning?"     I could not forbear saying.

"Yes,  ma'am  ;  for you might have dropped it."

"  How? — by not answering when spoken to?"

"  By not talking to him,  ma'am,  more than to any one else."

«' And pray,  Mr.  Turbulent,  solve me,  then,  this difficulty:  what choice
has a poor female with whom she may converse?  Must she not,  in com-
pany as in dancing,  take up with those who choose to take up with her  ?"

560 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

Ho was staggered by this question,  and while he wavered how to answer
it,  I pursued my little advantage —

"  No man,  Mr.  Turbulent,  has any cause to be flattered that a woman talks
with him,  while it is only in reply;  for though Jte may come,  go,  address or
neglect,  and do as he will, — she,  let her think and wish what she may,
must only follow as he leads."

He protested,  with great warmth,  he never heard any thing so proudly
said in his life.     But I would not retract.

*'  And now,  ma'am,"  he continued,  "  how wondrous intimate you are
grown  !  After such averseness to a meeting — such struggles to avoid him
— what am I to think of the sincerity of that pretended reluctance]"

"  You must think the truth,"  cried I  ;  "  that it was not the Colonel,  but
the Equerry,  I wished to avoid  ;  that it was not ihe individual but the official
necessity of receiving company,  that I wished to escape."

Monday,  February 19th  {coiiti7med). — The Queen sent for me as
soon as we arrived in tov/n,  and told me she had ordered the Box,  that we
might go to the Play.  There is a Box appropriated for this purpose,  when-
ever her Majesty chooses to command it  :  'lis the Balcony-Box,  just oppo-
site to the King's Equerries,  and consequently in full view of their Majesties
and all their suite.  Miss Goldsworthy,  Miss Gomme,  and Miss Planta,
made the party,  and Colonel Goldsworthy was our esquire.

The play was new,  "  Such Things Are,"  by Mrs.  Inchbald  ;  and it has
great merit,  I think,  both in the serious and the comic parts.

It was a great pleasure to me to see the reception given by the public to
the Roya!  Family:  it was always,  indeed,  pleasant to me;  but now it has
so strong an additional interest,  that to be in the house when they are
present makes them become half the entertainment of the evening to me.

I had also,  this day,  a very gracious message from the King,  to inquire
if I should like to have my name down among the subscribers to the
Tottenham Street Oratorio.  Doubtless I accepted this condescension very
willingly.

At night I had the gratification of talking over the play,  in all its parts,
with the Queen,  who has a liberality and a justice in her judgments that
make all discussions both easy and instructive with her.

I found many invitations awaiting me in town  ;  among them from Lady
Mary Duncan,  Mrs.  North,  Mrs.  Robinson  (who was Miss Harris),  Miss
Bowdler,  Miss Bulls,  and Lady Harris.

Madame La Fite called upon me,  and renewed her pleadings for M.
Bonneville in the most urgent and distressing manner.  I really cannot,  if
I would,  receive foreigners,  or strangers,  without a painful application for a
reluctant leave,  which I have neither courage nor inclination to solicit.

So far,  however,  I went,  as to name this M.  Bonneville to her M ijesty ;
but an immediate look of anxiety,  and a general remark upon the extreme
circumspection necessary to be observed with respect to all persons who
were admitted under this roof,  made me eagerly close my opening,  by a
protestation of the most scrupulous exactness upon that subject;  and,  with
that,  poor M.  Bonneville was dropped  !  There might,  she wisely said,  be
no harm in him  ;  but we knew nothing of him,  and there was no foreseeing
the use that might be made,  or the designs that might be formed,  from
visits of people who were strangers,  and might mean to gather or invent
intelligence,  for purposes the most dangerous.

*  *  *  ""      *  #  *

I made a visit at this time to Mrs.  Ord  ;  and met Miss More,  Miss
Cholmley,  Mr.  Smelt,  Captain Phillips,  and my father  :  a very sweet party,
and sweet evening.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  561

I forget if I have mentioned that I had the satisfaction of settling to
accompany Mrs.  Ord to the Oratorios,  during their whole six performances.
The night before they began,  his Majesty surprised me much by coming
into my room,  where he gave nie a commission for Mr.  Smelt respecting
some tickets,  and then inquired of me very particularly with whom I should
go,  and some other questions,  all kindly gracious and condescending.

Sunday,  Feb.  25th. — This was the first Sunday 1 spent in town.  We
never keep the Sabbath there,  I find,  but for the six Sundays in Lent,  and
during these,  the fatigue is very great,  as I am obliged to be full dressed, in
order to be at the Queen's apartment at St.  James's between ten and eleven
o'clock,  though I have to prepare for two waitings upon the Queen
before I go.

Monday,  Feb.  26th. — To-day — our travelling day — I was drawn into a
species of trust with my companions that I had resolved from prudence
steadily to avoid  ;  but I was not proof against the discoveries of Mr.  Tur-
bulent. With respect to a certain lady,  I had hitherto uniformly declined
all discussion.  The hard or coarse treatment I occasionally met with I had
kept to myself,  and accepted the intermediate better usage without making
any remark whatsoever.  Mr.  Turbulent,  however,  this last week,  had told
Miss Planta he was in much concern,  at a sight he had accidentally ob-
tained of my poor phiz,  when Ute-a-We in one of the Queen's rooms with
this lady,  and when I knew not,  from short-sightedness,  even that a door
was ajar  ;  though he,  long-sighted and observant,  had seen through it suffi-
ciently to read all the depression of countenance which some immediate
disa^reeability had brought on.

Miss Planta had already informed me of this accident,  which was vexa-
tious enough.  I had hitherto always tried to make them suppose that either
I did well enough,  or was unconcerned in doing otherwise.  But there was
no combating ocular proof.  He put aside all his flights and his violences,
and seemed hurt for me more than I could have supposed.  I passed it all
off as gaily as I could,  but he touched me,  I own,  when in a tone of the
most compassionate regret at my lot,  he exclaimed,  "  This,  ma'am,  is your
colleague! — Who could ever have imagined it would have been Miss
Burney's fate to be so coupled  ?  Could you ever,  ma'am,  foresee,  or
suspect,  or believe you should be linked to such a companion 1"

No,  thought I,  indeed did I not  !  But to recover myself from the train
of thoughts to which so home a question led,  I frankly narrated some
small circumstances,  of a ludicrous and unimportant nature,  which regarded
this lady,  with some of her domestics.

They were almost in fits of laughter;  and Mr.  Turbulent's compassion
so fleeted away from diversion of this recital,  that he now only lamented
I had not also known the other original colleague,  that she too might have
lived in my memory.     I thank him much 1

He had lately,  he told me,  had much conversation concerning me with
Mr.  Boswell.  I feel soyy to be named or remembered by that biographical,
anecdotical memorandummer,  till his book of poor Dr.  Johnson's life is
finished and published.  What an anecdote,  however,  did he tell me of that
most extraordinary character!  He is now an actual admirer and follower
of Mrs.  Rudd ! — and avows it,  and praises her extraordinary attractions
aloud  !

The King came into the room during coffee,  and talked over Sir John
Hawkins's  "Life of Dr.  Johnson"  with great candour and openness.  I
have not yet read it.

I have parted with my man John.     His fopperies and forwardness were

562 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

become even dangerous,  in a situation such as mine,  where the conduct of
the servant may always be ascribed to the directions,  the approbation at
least,  of the mistress.  He was very urgent to stay,  offering any submission
or reformation  ;  but after repeated trials,  and promises made and broken,
I hired another man in the middle of this month — a German,  named
Frederick Ebers,  and strongly recommended to me from various quarters.

I had but just got to my own room when this Frederick brought me compli-
ments from Colonel VVelbred and Major Price,  with a request for admittance.
I had already,  and with great pleasure,  heard that Major Price was just
arrived,  upon an invitation from the King,  to spend a few days at the Lodge.
I most readily desired to see them,  and gave orders to have tea in the next
room in half an hour's time;  but I guessed not they were already at my
own door,  and Frederick,  who knew nothing of my contrivances for keeping
my own room to myself,  brought them instantly in.

1 was quite glad to see the Major,  and told him how much I had regretted
his resignation.  We talked it all over very socially,  and he protested
nothing on earth but the visible decline of his health,  and insufficiency of
his strength for his office,  could have induced him to a resignation which
the King's constant graciousness to him had made particularly painful.  He
now lives entirely in the country,  and keeps a small farm close to his eldest
brother's estate.

When tea was ready I summoned Miss Planta,  and we adjourned,  luckily
before Mr.  Turbulent returned from a walk.  Had he surprised the two
Equerries in my room whence I so frequently turn him out,  how v/ould he
have rioted I For lam now fairly obliged to turn him out two or three
limes a day,  so frequent are his visits,  so little else has he to do in these
short excursions,  and so much does he love to make^  give,  or take a little
disturbance  !     I think this last sentence pictures him exactly.

We had a very cheerful evening,  and one that renewed my concern for
the loss of Major Price.  He is so good,  so upright,  so sincere even in
trifles,  that it will not be easy to find him a successor who shall merit equal
esteem.

February 27th. — To-day I had obtained leave for inviting Mr.  Light-
foot to dinner again.  Mr.  De Luc,  coming by accident,  I believe,  into my
room,  met him there  ;  and imagine their mutual surprise and satisfaction
when they saw each other,  and told me that they had made acquaintance
on the mountains of Wales,  where both had been naturalizing thirteen
years ago,  and had never seen each other since till this chance encounter in
my room !

In the afternoon the Queen,  accompanied by the Princess Royal,  came
into my room to have some botanical conversation with Mr.  Lightfoot,
who was made as happy as if he had been nominated Archbishop of
Canterbury.

The moment they retired came a message with compliments from Major
Price and Colonel Welbred,  and a request from the latter to have leave to
bring his nephew and Dr.  Lind to tea with me.

After some general conversation,  Colonel Welbred told me he had been
much concerned at observing my frequent difficulties about a Bell,  ihe want
of which for my man occasioned me frequently to run into my own room
to ring for my maid  ;  and he had therefore taken the liberty to speak to
Mr.  Gray,  the Surveyor-General upon the subject.

I thanked him for so very obliging and unexpected an attention,  but told
him I had already vainly applied to Mr.  Gray,  who had declined doing any
thing without the leave of the King,  which I had not yet found an oppor-
tunity to beg.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  553

"I know all that,"  answered he,  smiling;  and then added that the whole
was settled,  for he had started the subject again with Mr.  Gray in the King's
hearing,  and so made an opportunity of mentioning the difficulty.

Imagine my pleasure and amazement at this step  :  I assured him nothing
possibly could be more useful to me;  that there was nothing I had so long
wished for with respect to convenience,  and that I was very essentially
obliged to him.

He then communicated to me various schemes he had been projecting for
conducting this bell-wire to the man's apartment,  "  which you are not,
perhaps,"  said he,  "aware is 7iear half a tnile off P''  without causing any
disturbance by the way.

When the King came he condescended to take much notice of Mr.  Light-
foot  ;  and I believe that worthy and very ingenious man has seldom passed
so pleasant a day.  The Major,  however — and well he deserves the dis-
tinction— had His Majesty's chief attention.  Indeed the Kmg is quite
grieved at losing him.  I told Colonel Welbred I wanted to find out some
new place of less fatigue,  to bring him back again to the family  ;  but I
could think of nothing to propose,   except Bu/zkganimon flayer to His

Majesty — a post which no one fills so much to the King's satisfaction.

#  *  #  *  *  ^-  #

I had a little discussion with Mr.  De Luc:  he began,  upon our being left
together one day,  a very warm exhortation,  upon my not spending more
time with Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  I immediately answered that I spent far
more than,  upon my entering under the royal roof,  I had ever meant to do.
Extremely surprised,  he hinted to me that I ought to be more guarded,
and to attend better to my interest,  which,  he need not tell me,  must hang
upon her good will.  I could not stand this:  I assured him,  with spirit and
with truth,  1 had no interest in the matter.  I had not sought the situation
in which I had been placed:  I owed nothing to Mrs.  Schwellenberg but
such civility as her civility might claim;  and far from trembling at her
power,  I considered myself wholly out of it,  and must frankly declare that
while I relinquished so much in my nearest and dearest connexions,  from
the duties and confinements properly and inevitably requisite to my place
and attendance,  I could by no means consent to sacrifice the little leisure
I might call my own,  to dedicate it where I could so little regard it as due.

I am very glad to have said all this openly at once,  though it was heard
with an amazf^ment and disappointment that half hurt me lor poor Mr.  De
Luc,  who had imagined till then he had a right to a partner in his assiduous
attentions.

March 1st. — With all the various humours in which I had already seen
Mr.  Turbulent,  he gave me this evening a surprise,  by his behaviour to one
of the Princesses,  nearly the same that 1 had experienced from him myself.
The Princess Augusta came,  during coffee,  for a knotting shuttle of the
Queen's.  While she was speaking to me,  he stood behind and exchnmed,  a
demi voix,  as if to himself,  "  Comrne elle estjolie ce soir,  son AUesse Royale!''^
And then,  seeing her blush extremely,  he clasped his hands,  in high pre-
tended confusion,  and hiding his head,  called out  "  Que feraije  ?  The
Princess has heard me  !"

"  Pray,  Mr.  Turbulent,"  cried she hastily,  "  what play are you to read
to-night?"

"  You shall choose,  ma'am  ;  either La Coquette corrigee or — "  [he named
another I have forgotten.]

*'0 no !"  cried she,  "  that last is shocking !  don't let me hear,  that  !"

"I understand you,  ma'am.  You fix,  then,  upon La Coquette?  La
Coquette is your Royal Highness's taste  ?"

564 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

»'  No,  indeed,  I am sure I did not say that."

"Yes,  ma'am,  by implication.  And certainly,  therefore,  I will read it,  to
please your Royal Higlmess  !"

"  No,  pray don't ;  for I like none of them  !"
"  None of them,  ma'am  ?"
"  No,  none  ; — no French plays at all  !"

And away she was running,  with a droll air,  that acknowledged she had
said something to provoke him.

"This is a declaration,  ma'am,  I must beg you to explain!"  cried he,
gliding adroitly between the Princess and the door,  and shutting it wiih his
back.

"  No,  no,  I can't explain it ;  so pray,  Mr.  Turbulent,  do open the door."
"  Not for the world,  ma'am,  with such a stain uncleared upon your Royal
Highness's taste and feeling  !"

She told him she positively could not stay,  and begged him to let her
pass instantly.

But he would hear her no more than he has heard me,  protesting he was
too much shocked for her to suffer her to depart without clearing her own
credit !

He conquered at last,  and thus forced to speak,  she turned round to
us and said,  "  Well — if I must then,  I will appeal to these ladies,  who under-
stand such things far better than I do,  and ask them if it is not true about
these French plays,  that they are all so like one to another,  that to hear
them in this manner every night is enough to tire one?"

"Pray,  then,  madam,"  cried he,  "  if French plays have the misfortune to
displease you,  what National plays have the honour of your preference  ?"

I saw he meant something that she understood better than me,  for she
blushed again,  and called out  "  Pray open the door at once  !  I can stay no
longer;  do let me go,  i\lr.  Turbulent."

"Not till you have answered that question,  ma'am!  what Country has
plays to your Royal Highness's taste 1"

"Miss Burney,"  cried she impatiently,  yet laughing,  "pray do you take
him away  ! — Pull him  !"

He bowed to me very invitingly for the ofhce ;  but I frankly answered
her,  "  Indeed,  ma'am,  1 dare not undertake him  !  I cannot manage him
at all."

"The Country!  the Country!  Princess Augusta!  name the happy
Country  !''''  was all she could gain.

'''•Order him away,  Miss Burney,"  cried she:  "'tis your room:  order
him away from the door."

"Name it,  ma'am,  name it!"  exclaimed he;  "name but the chosen
nation  /"

And then,  fixing her with the most provoking eyes,  "  Est-ce la Dane-
7narc V he cried.

She coloured violently,  and quite angry with him,  called out,  "Mr.
Turbulent,  how can you be such a fool?"

And now I found  ...  the Prince Royal of Denmark was in his meaning,
and in her understanding!

He bowed to the ground in gratitude for the term fool^  but added with
pretended submission to her will,  "  Very well,  ma'am,  sHl rie faut lire que
les comedies Danoises.''^

"  Do let me go!"  cried she,  seriously;  and then he made way,  with a
profound bow as she passed,  saying,  "  Very well,  ma'am.  La Coquette^  then  ?
your Royal Highness chooses Ln Coquette cor rigee?''''

"  Corrigee?     That never was done!"  cried she,  with all her sweet good-

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.  565

humour,  the moment she got out,  and off she ran,  like lightning,  to the
Queen's apartments.

What say you to Mr.  Turbulent now?

For my part I was greatly surprised.  I had not imagined any man,
but the King or Prince of Wales had ever ventured at a badinage of this
sort with any of the Princesses;  nor do I suppose any other man ever did.
Mr.  Turbulent is so great a favourite with all the Royal Family,  that he
safely ventures upon whatever he pleases,  and doubtless they find,  in his
courage and his rhodomontading,  a novelty extremely amusing  .to them,  or
they would not fail to bring about a change.

For myself,  I own,  when I perceived in him this mode of conduct with
the Princesses,  I saw his flights,  and his rattling,  and his heroics,  in a light
of mere innocent play,  from exuberance of high spirits ;  and I looked upon
them,  and upon him,  in a fairer light.

*  #  #  *  *  *  #

The King came in just as the tea was pouring out.  He made a long stay,
and then,  coming up to the tea-table,  said  "  How far are you got?"

I knew he meant to know if he might carry off Major Price ;  but while I
hesitated,  the Major,  with his usual plainness,  said  "  Sir,  we had not
begun."

His Majesty then went away,  without giving any commands to be fol-
lowed ;  and Major Price had the thanks and compliments of all the company
for his successful hardiness.

When Major Price was sent for to the King,  to play at backgammon,  he
asked me if he might bring Lord Templeton to drink tea with me on our
next meeting.  I was very happy in the proposal,  and in thinking I could
name Norbury,  and tell my dear Fredy I had seen her friend's son.

Tuesday,  March 6th. — I spent almost all this morning with her Ma-
jesty, hearing her botanical lesson,  and afterwards looking over some prints
of Herculaneum,  till the Princess Augusta brought a paper,  and a message
from Mr.  Turbulent,  with his humble request to explain it himself lo her
Majesty.     It was something he had been ordered to translate.

"  O yes  !"  cried the Queen readily,  "  let him come  ;  I am always glad
to see him."

He came immediately  ;  and most glad was I when dismissed to make
way for him  :  for he practises a thousand mischievous tricks,  to con-
fuse me,  in the Royal presence  ;  most particularly by certain signs which
he knows I comprehend,  made by his eyebrows  ;  for he is continually
assuring me he always discovers my thoughts and opinions by the motion
of mine,  which it is his most favourite gambol to pretend constantly to exa-
mine, as well as his first theme of gallantry to compliment,  though in a
style too highflown and rhodomontading to be really  ^embarrassing,  or seri-
ously offensive.  Nevertheless,  in the Royal presence,  my terror lest he
should be observed,  and any questions should be asked of the meaning of
his signs and tokens,  makes it seriously disagreeable to me to continue
there a moment when he is in the room.

He and Miss Planta both dined with me  ;  and they entered into a very
long dispute upon female education,  which he declared was upon the worst
of plans,  teaching young girls nothing but disguise,  double-dealing,  and
falsehood  ;  and which she maintained was upon no other plan than deco-
rum and propriety dictated.  In all essential points she was undoubtedly
right ;  but in all the detail he conquered — crushed her,  rather,  as forcibly
by his arguments,  as he disconcerted her by his wit.  It was no disgrace
to Miss Planta that she was no match for him,  though she answered him

VOL.  I.  48

566 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

with a degree of vexation,  when overset,  that made her lose the advantages
she might have kept.  Both of them called frequently upon me,  but I de-
clined the discussion  :  I should have been happy to have assisted Miss
Planta,  who,  in the main,  was right,  but that she defended all,  every thing,
on her own side,  whether right or wrong,  and sought to oppose the domi-
neering powers of her adversary by allowing no quarter to any thing he
advanced.  Candour in argument is the most rare of all things,  and truth
is for ever sacrificed to the love of victory and the fear of disgrace.

At length,  she went for her work  :  he then attacked me most vehemently,
insisting on my opinion.  But I never professedly argue  :  I may be drawn
in by circumstances,  or from the interest and feeling of the moment,  or
from an earnest desire to bring forward conviction,  in some point of serious
consequence to the principles or conduct either of another or my own  ;  but
deliberately and designedly I never enter into that mode of conversation,
which,  except arising from the sudden animation of the moment,  I have
always thought and found either wearisome or irritating.

Ho tried whatever was possible to urge me to the battle.  "  Come,"  he
cried,  "  speak out your real sentiments now we are alone."

"  Assure yourself,"  quoth I,  "  you will never have any other,  whether
alone or before millions  !"

"  O yes,  I beg your pardon  ;  ladies are never so sincere,  with one an-
other, as with us  : — tell me,  therefore,  now,  the truth of your opinions upon
this matter."

Even this would not do.     I told him I was in no disputative humour.

"  You are unwilling to own it,"  cried he,  "  but I see you are precisely
of my way of thinking  !  You would not say so before poor Peggy,  who is
but a bad logician,  but I saw which way you turned."

This also failed.  I assured him I was seized with a silent fit,  and he
might spare himself further trouble.

He would not allow this plea,  and grew quite violent in his remonstrances,
protesting I ought not to be silent,  and he would not suffer it.

I worked on very quietly,  only informing him that to be silent was a
privilege I had every where claimed,  and that though he had heard me talk
probably as much as my neighbours,  it was merely because I generally
appeared before him as Lady of the Ceremonies,  either at table or in the
carriage,  where I thought it incumbent on me to help forward al'  I could  ;
but that,  otherwise,  and where I considered myself at liberty to do as I
pleased,  I had a general character,  among strangers and short acquaintance,
of the most impenetrable taciturnity.

He vowed he could not believe it.  "  It would be a shame,"  he cried,
"  and not only a shame,  but an impossibility  ;  you cannot be taciturn  ! — I
defy you  !     Your eyebrow  !"

And then broke forth one of his most flighty rants of compliments,  with
expressions really beyond badinage.  He made me a little grave,  and I
told him,  that however he might amuse himself with conning fine speeches
to me,  I should desire and hope he would at least confine them to my own
ears,  and say nothing of me in any way in my absence.

He was a little affronted,  and asked why  ?  but he had given me a feeling
I could not quite explain,  even lo myself,  and which,  however,  he almost
immediately dissipated by a more moderate mode of proceeding.

"  I should be glad,"  said he,  "  you should yourself have heard how I
have mentioned you."

"  I should be far more glad,"  cried I,  "  to hear you never mentioned me
at all."  D     :  :  :i

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  567

"  And why,  ma'am  ?  why that distrust or disdain V

"  Because— shall I tell you the truth  ? — I do not believe you would speak
of me so well as I think any body else would  !  This may be vain about
others,  perhaps  !"

This occasioned a vehement outcry,  and professions of superior devotion
to all the world  ;  but they afforded me the very opportunity I was waiting
for,  and,  with some circumlocution,  I frankly acknowledged I should be
sorry to be spoken of by one whose manner had taught me to fear he
thought,  in fact,  less well of me than I had ever had reason to brieve any
one else had done.

I was almost concerned this escaped me,  it produced such asseverations  ;
but I was glad afterwards,  when I found,  in its effect,  it distanced that man-
ner for the rest of the conference.

Some time after,  "  I want,"  cried he,  a little thoughtfully,  "  to hear more
of you from your older acquaintances ;  I want to meet somebody who has
known you long,  and to converse with them about you :  those I meet tell
me nothing but what 1 already know,  and what every body knows,  that Miss
Burney is very,"  &c.  &c.  &c. :  "  but I want to see some of her intimates,
and to hear them speak to particulars.  1 had heard much of her before I
saw her,  and I wished much to see her,  and her Majesty was so gracious as
to order me to dine here one day,  last summer,  on purpose to give me that
satisfaction  ;  and now — "

His speeches were all stopped short by the return of Miss Planta.

I find no further memorandums of my winter Windsor expeditions of this
year.  I will briefly record some circumstances which I want no memoran-
dums to recollect,  and then tie my accounts concisely together till I find my
minutes resumed.

Mr.  Turbulent became now every journey more and more violent in his
behaviour.  He no longer sued for leave to bring in his Colonel,  who con-
stantly sent in his own name to ask it,  and invariably preserved that deli-
cacy, good-breeding,  and earnestness to oblige,  which could not but secure
the welcome he requested.

I saw no more of Major Price,  which I sincerely regretted.  He returned
to his farm in Herefordshire.

We were travelling to Windsor — Mr.  Turbulent,  Miss Planta,  and my-
self, the former in the highest spirits,  and extremely entertaining,  relating
various anecdotes of his former life,  and gallantly protesting he was content
to close the scene by devoting himself to the service of the ladies then
present.

All this for a while did mighty well,  and I was foremost to enter into the
spirit of his rhodomontading :  but I drew a little back when he said we did
not live half enough together during these journeys,  and desired he might
come to breakfast with me.  "  Why should we not,"  he cried,  "  all live
together]     I hate to breakfast alone.      What time do you rise?"

"  At six o'clock,"  cried I.

"  Well,  I shall wait upon you then — call you,  no doubt,  for you can never
be really up then.     Shall I call you?     Will you give me leave?"

"No,  neither leave,  nor the trouble."

"  Why not?  I used to go to Miss Planta's room,  before she rose,  and
wander about as quiet as a lamb."

Miss Planta was quite scandalized,  and exclaimed and denied with great
earnestness.     He did not mind her,  but went on —

"  I shall certainly be punctual to six o'clock.     If I should rap at your

568 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

ling poor I\Irs.  Vesey's which she expressed once in the opening of a letter
)  me in these words — "  You look as if you could forgive a liberty l^"*     I

door to-morrow morning early,  should you be very angry  ? — ca7i you be
very angry 1"

An unfortunate idea this,  both for him and for me,  and somewhat resem-
bli
to
fear Mr.  Turbulent thought so too.

His vehemence upon the eternal subject of his Colonel lasted during the
whole journey,  and when we arrived at Windsor he followed me to my
room,  uttering such high-flown compliments,  mixed with such bitter re-
proaches, that sometimes I was almost tempted to be quite serious with him,
especially as that manner which had already so little pleased me returned,
and with double force,  so as to rise at times to a pitch of gallantry in his
professions of devotion and complaints of ill-usage that would have called
for some very efl^ectual exertion to subdue and crush,  had I not considered
all the circumstances of his situation,  and the impossibility of his meaning
to give me cause for gravity.

All his murmurs at the weariness of these winter journeys,  and all his
misanthropical humours,  were now vanished.  He protested he longed for
the return of the Windsor days  ;  and when he got into my room upon our
arrival,  he detained me in a sort of conversation hard to describe,  of good-
humoured raillery and sport,  mixed with flighty praise and protestations,
till 1 was regularly obliged to force him away,  by assurances that he would
disgrace me,  by making me inevitably too late to be dressed for the Queen.
Nevertheless,  till this evening,  to which I am now coming,  I was altogether
much amused with him,  and though sometimes for a moment startled,  it was
only for a moment,  and 1 felt afterwards constantly ashamed I had been
startled at all.

I must now,  rather reluctantly I own,  come to recite a quarrel,  a very
serious quarrel,  in which I have been involved with my most extraordinary
fellow-traveller.  One evening at Windsor Miss Planta left the room while
I was winding some silk.  I was content to stay and finish the skein,
though my remaining companion was in a humour too flighty to induce me
to continue with him a moment longer.  Indeed I had avoided pretty suc-
cessfully all ttte-d-tctes with him since the time when his eccentric genius
led to such eccentric conduct in our long conference in the last month.

This time,  however,  when I had done my work,  he protested I should stay
and chat with him.  I pleaded business — letters — hurry — all in vain  :  he
would listen to nothing,  and when I offered to move was so tumultuous in
his opposition,  that I was obliged to reseat myself to appease him.

A flow of compliments followed,  every one of which I liked less and less;
but his spirits seemed uncontrollable,  and,  I suppose,  ran away with all that
ought to check them.  I laughed and rallied as long as I possibly could,  and
tried to keep him in order,  by not seeming to suppose he wanted aid for that
purpose  :  yet still,  every time I tried to rise,  he stopped me,  and uttered at last
such expressions of homage — so like what Shakspeare says of the school-
boy, who makes  "  a sonnet on his mistress'  eijebroiv^''  which is always his
favourite theme— that I told him his real compliment was all to my temioer^
in imagining it could brook such mockery.

This brought him once more on his knees,  with such a volley of assevera-
tions of his sincerity,  uttered with such fervour and violence,  that I really
felt uneasy,  and used every possible means to get away from him,  rallying
him however all the time,  and disguising the consciousness I felt of my ina-
bility to quit him.  More and more vehement,  however,  he grew,  till I could
be no longer passive,  but forcibly rising,  protested I would not stay another
minute.     But you may easily imagine my astonishment and provocation,

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  569

when,  hastily rising himself,  he violently seized hold of me,  and compelled
me to return to my chair,  with a force,  and a freedom that gave me as much
surprise as offence.

All now became serious.  Raillery,  good-humour,  and even pretended
ease and unconcern,  were at an end.  The positive displeasure I felt I made
positively known  ;  and the voice,  manner,  and looks with which I insisted
upon an immediate release were so changed from what he had ever heard or
observed in me before,  that I saw him quite thunderstruck with the altera-
tion ;  and,  all his own violence subsiding,  he begged my pardon with the
mildest humility.

He had made me too angry to grant it,  and I only desired him to let me
instantly go to my own room.  He ceased all personal opposition,  but going
to the door,  planted himself before it,  and said  "  Not in wrath I I cannot
let you go away in wrath  !"

"  You must,  sir,"  cried I,  "  for I am in wrath  !"

He began a thousand apologies,  and as many promises of the most sub-
missive behaviour in future  ;  but I stopped them all,  with a peremptory
declaration that every minute he detained me made me but the more seri-
ously angry.

His vehemence now was all changed into strong alarm,  and he opened
the door,  profoundly bowing,  but not speaking,  as I passed him.

I am sure I need not dwell upon the uncomfortable sensations I felt,  in a
check so rude and violent to the gaiety and entertainment of an acquaintance
which had promised me my best amusement during our winter campaigns.
I was now to begin upon quite a new system,  and instead of encouraging,
as hitherto I had done,  every thing that could lead to vivacity and spirit,  I
was fain to determine upon the most distant and even forbidding demeanour
with the only life of our parties,  that he might not again forget himself.

This disagreeable conduct I put into immediate practice.  I stayed in my
ow^n room till I heard every one assembled in the next :  I was then obliged
to prepare for joining them,  but before I opened the door a gentle rap at it
made me call out  "  Who's there  ?"  and Mr.  Turbulent looked in.

I hastily said I was coming instantly,  but he advanced softly into the
room,  entreating forgiveness at every step.  I made no other answer than
desiring he would go,  and saying I should follow.  He went back to the
door,  and,  dropping on one knee,  said  "  Miss Burney  !  surely you cannot
be seriously ano^rv  ? — 'tis so impossible you should think I meant to offend
you  !"  '  "^

I said nothing,  and did not look near him,  but opened the door,  from which
he retreated to make way for me,  rising a little mortified,  and exclaiming,
"  Can you then have such real ill-nature  ?    How little I suspected it in you  !"

"  'Tis you,"  cried I,  as I passed on,  "  that are ill-natured I"

I meant for forcing me into anger ;  but I left him to make the meaning
out,  and walked into the next room.

He did not immediately follow,  and he then appeared so much discon-
certed that I saw Miss Planta incessantly eyeing him,  to find out what w^as
the matter.  I assumed an unconcern I did not feel,  for I was really both
provoked and sorry,  foreseeing what a breach this folly must make in the
comfort of my Windsor expeditions.

He sat down a little aloof,  and entered into no conversation all the even-
ino- ;  but just as tea was over,  the hunt of the next day being mentioned,  he
suddenly asked Miss Planta to request leave for him of the Queen to ride
out with the party.

48*

570 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

"  I shall not see the Queen,"  cried she  ;  "  you had much better ask Miss
Burney."

This was very awkward.  I was in no humour to act for him at this
time,  nor could he muster courage to desire it ;  but upon Miss Planta's look-
ing at each of us with some surprise,  and repeating her amendment to his
proposal,  he faintly said,  "  Would Miss Burney be so good as to take that
trouble  ?"

I felt he was forced to ask this to avoid exciting fresh wonder,  and the
same reason forced me to answer,  though most unwillingly,  that I would
mention it to her Majesty,  if I found an opportunity.

I rose to retire to my room at the same moment with Miss Planta,  and
he let us both pass without molestation.  He will not,  however,  again ask
if I ca7i be angry,  but I was truly vexed he should have put me to such a
test.

An opportunity offering favourably,  I spoke at night to the Queen,  and
she gave leave for his attending the chase.  I intended to send this permis-
sion to Miss Planta,  but I had scarce returned to my own room from her
Majesty,  before a rap at my door was followed by his appearance.  He stood
quite aloof,  looking grave and contrite.  I immediately called out  "  I have
spoken,  sir,  to the Queen,  and you have her leave to go."

He bowed very profoundly,  and thanked me,  and was retreating,  but came
back again,  and advancing,  assumed an air of less humility,  and exclaimed
"  Allans,  clone,  Mile. ;  fesi^lre que vous n^Ues plus si mechante qiCliier an
soir  ?"

I said nothing ;  he came nearer,  and,  bowing upon his own hand,  held it
out for mine,  with a look of most respectful supplication.  I had no intention
of cutting the matter so short,  yet from shame to sustain resentment,  I was
compelled to hold out a finger :  he took it with a look of great gratitude,
and very reverently touching the tip of my glove with his lip,  instantly let
it go,  and very solemnly said, "  Soijez sur.que je nhii jamais eu la moindre
idle de vous offenser ;''''  and then he thanked me again for his license,  and
went his way.

I was not sorry to have our war end here apparently,  though I was
obliged to resolve upon a defensive conduct in future,  that would prevent any
other attack.

And now for a few general anecdotes that belong to this month.
I had the pleasure of two or three visits from Mr.  Bryant,  whose loyal
regard for the King and Queen makes him eagerly accept every invitation,
from the hope of seeing them in my room;  and one of the days they both
came in to speak to him,  and were accompanied by the two eldest Princesses,
who stood chatting with me by the door the whole time,  and saying comical
things upon royal personages in tragedies,  particularly Princess Augusta,
who has a great deal of sport in her disposition.  She very gravely asserted
she thought some of those 'princes on the stage looked really quite as well as
some she knew off it.

Once about this time I went to a play myself,  which surely I may live
long enough and never forget.  It was  "  Seduction,"  a very clever piece,
but containing a dreadful picture of vice and dissipation in high life,  written
by Mr.  Miles Andrews,  with an epilogue — O,  such an epilogue ;  I was
listening to it with uncommon attention,  from a compliment paid in it to
Mrs.  Montagu,  among other female writers  ;  but imagine what became of
my attention when 1 suddenly was struck with these lines,  or something
like them : —

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  57 1

"  Let sweet Cecilia gain your just applause,
Whose every passion yields to Reason's laws."

To hear,  wholly unprepared and unsuspicious,  such lines in a Theatre —
seated in a Royal Box — and with the whole Royal Family and their suite
immediately opposite me — was it not a singular circumstance?  To describe
my embarrassment would be impossible.  My whole head was leaning for-
ward, with my opera-glass in my hand,  examining I\Iiss Farren,  who spoke
the epilogue.  Instantly I shrunk back,  so astonished and so ashamed of
my public situation,  that I was almost ready to take to my heels and run,
for it seemed as if I were there purposely in that conspicuous place —

"  To list attentive to my own applause."

The King immediately raised his opera-glass to look at me,  laughing
heartily — the Queen's presently took the same direction — all the Princesses
looked up,  and all the attendants,  and all the maids of honour  !

I protest I was never more at a loss what to do with myself:  nobody was
in the front row with me but Miss Goldsworthy,  who instantly seeing how
I was disconcerted,  prudently and good-naturedly forbore taking any notice
of me.  I sat as far back as I could,  and kept my fan against the exposed
profile for the rest of the night,  never once leaning forward,  nor using my
glass.

None of the Royal Family spvoke to me upon this matter till a few days
after ;  but I heard from Mrs.  Delany they had all declared themselves sorry
for the confusion it had caused me.  And some time after the Queen could
not forbear saying  "  I hope,  Miss Burney,  you minded the epilogue the
other night  ]"

And the King,  very comically,  said  "  I took a peep at you  ! — I could not
help that.  I wanted to see how you looked when your father first discovered
your writing — and now I think I know  !"

The Princesses all said something,  and the kind Princess Elizabeth,  in
particular,  declared she had pitied me with all her heart,  for being so situated
when such a compliment was made.

My Fredy will have told our visit to Mrs.  Cholmley,  where I met
sundry old acquaintances,  amongst whom were Sir Joshua Reynolds,  Mrs.
Montagu,  the Bishop of Chester,  and Mrs.  Porteus.

But what was most interesting,  and,  alas  !  most melancholy to me in this
month,  was news of the return of Mrs.  Piozzi to England  !  I heard it first
from Mr.  Stanhope,  but my dear Fredy will have told all that also,  since
she spent with me the same evening.

The waiting of Colonel Welbred finished with this month,  and it finished
with leaving me very sorry it was over,  especially as I had an entirely new
acquaintance to form with his successor.

His elder brother made him a visit during one of our last journeys for
three days,  and the Colonel sent to request leave to bring him to my tea-
table,  before he made his appearance.  I need say nothing of him,  as you
all know^  him  ;  but I had a good deal of vertu talk with him,  and an oppor-
tunity of feehng very thankful to the consideration of the Colonel,  who,
when called away himself after tea to attend the King,  whispered his brother
that he must not stay longer in that room than nine o'clock.

The elder,  without asking a question,  observed the injunction,  and the
moment the clock struck nine started up and led the way to the rest of the
party in retiring.

And here closes March.

572 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

1787.

Illness of the Diarist — Visits — Recovery — Leave-taking — Consistencies of the Incon-
sistent — A Surprise — Windsor Terrace — Gratitude — the Queen and Mrs.  Locke— Lady
Bute and Lady Louisa Stuart — Mrs.  Delany and the Princess Augusta — A Review —
Partiality of the King and Queen to Mrs.  Delany — A Philosopher turned Fly-catcher —
Pet Frogs — Bruce's Travels — Dr,  Douglass — General Gary — Congratulations — A
Classical Spot — An Enthusiastic Traveller — A Presentation Copy — Liberties of the
Newspapers— The King's Birthday at St.  James's — Toilet Etiquette — Attendance on
the Queen — Routine of the day in the Queen's Apartments — Overpowering Effects of
Music at a Public Ceremony — Grand Toilette — The Queen's Diamonds — Visit to Mrs.
Vesey — Horace Walpole — A Cure for Spleen — Lady Herries — Lady Juliana Penn —
Lady Clanbrassil — Colonel Ramsden — M.  del Campo — Colonel Hotham — Equerries'
Small-talk — Ascot Races — Jacob Bryant — Windsor Terrace — A high-flown Compli-
ment — The Miseries of an Equerry — Volcanoes in the Moon — Conversation on Cos.
tume — The Duke and Duchess de Polignac — Windsor Terrace — The Prince of Wales
— His Reconciliation with the King — Time the only Rewarder of Genius — Singing
Extraordinary — A Counter-tenor — A Singing Lesson — Sir Richard Jebb — Lord Mul-
grave — The Toils of the Toilette— Much Ado about Nothing— A Tale of a Leather
Trunk — Mystification — Alarming Illness of Mrs.  Delany — Mrs.  Schwellenberg's Tame
Frogs — M.  de la Blancherie — The three M's — Mrs.  Piozzi — A German Family — Dr.
Beattie — His Person,  Manners,  and Conversation — His Family Misfortunes — Anec-
dote of Dr.  Johnson — Dr.  Beattie's Minstrel — Another Book of it written,  but de-
stroyed— Jacob Bryant and his Dogs — His House and Library — Persecution — Good
Resolutions — A Day at Eton — Canning and the Microcosm.

April. — Colonel Manners now came into waiting,  and the very first day,
as if generously to mark the superior elegance of his predecessor — he came
into my tea-room with General Bude,  who was at Windsor by invitation —
without any previous message or ceremony of any sort whatever.  The
King himself was already there,  and Mr.  Smelt,  with whom his Majesty
was conversing ;  but as soon as he retired.  General Bude named us to each
other,  and from that time Colonel IManners came every evening,  without the
smallest trouble of arrangement,  either for himself or for me.

Fortunately Miss Planta or Miss Emily Clayton at this time were
constantly of my party,  which took off from,  the awkwardness of these
visits.

Colonel Manners is a tall and extremely handsome young man,  well
enough versed in what is immediately going forward in the world  ;  and
though not very deep in his knowledge,  nor profound in his observations,  he
is very good-humoured,  and I am told well principled.  I saw,  however,  but
little of him at this time,  as my illness so soon took place,  and I shall
mention nothing more of this month except to have the pleasure of saying
that my very strange fellow-traveller gave me no further uneasiness after
the scene I have mentioned.  I continued grave and distant,  in defiance of
the piqued air with which he received my change,  till I saw all his own
flights subside into quiet and common behaviour.  I then by degrees suf-
fered my stiffness to wear away,  and before the time of my illness he had
reconciled me to him pretty entirely,  by a general propriety of conduct.
This caused me very great satisfaction.  Yet from the moment of my pro-
vocation to that of my fever I could never bring myself to venture to be one
moment alone with him.  He remonstrated on my constantly running away
when he only remained  ;  but though he remonstrated,  now,  with gentleness,

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  573

I could not change my plan.     I saw all was then right,  and I thought it
most wise to run no risks.

I need say nothing to my dear friends of my illness — they and my dear
Esther nursed me out of it,  and I shall skip useless recollections upon unplea-
sant subjects  ;  though never will my memory's best tablet skip the records
of their kindness and goodness.

May. — A fresh beginning now of journal to the kindest of sisters,  and of
friends,  from the date of my parting with them as nurses and companions.

When I could see no more of my Susan's hat,  and lost all sight of my
Fredy's carriage,  I drew in my head,  and shut down my window,  and walked
slowly up and down the room,  to keep myself from stagnation  ;  and then I
determined to set about — all I was equal to undertaking— an inspection of
some of my drawers.

I had but just unlocked one of them when a smart rap at my door startled
me.  Goter was up stairs with her mother and sister — I was unwilling,
and indeed unfit,  to see any body.  I made no answer — a second rapping
followed  ;  I was forced to call out  "  Who's there?"  "  May I pay my com-
pliments for a moment to Miss Burney  ?"  was the answer,  in the voice of
Mr.  Tuburlent.

Of all the whole household he was just the last person I then wished to
see.  Those who have never been ill themselves know nothing of the gen-
tleness which an invalid requires.  Afraid,  therefore,  of his visit,  I earnestly
called out  "  No,  not now  ;  I am not visible ;  I can see no company  !"

He entered,  notwithstanding,  crying  "  Why  ?"  in answer to all I could
say to stop him,  though I was so little disposed for his society that I fairly
turned away from him,  when I could not prevail,  with almost serious peevish-
ness.

He must at least,  he said,  ask me after Mrs.  Phillips,  with whom he had
been extremely struck,  whom he much wished to know more,  and thought
a very uncommonly charming woman.

I was softened a little in my spleen by this,  for I saw he spoke it with all
his heart :  "  She was gone !"  I answered, — "  I had lost both my nurses but
that moment."

"  Indeed  ?"  said he;  "I had had hopes of seeing — under your protec-
tion— Mrs.  Locke ;  I long to know that lady — what pity to part you from
them?"

I had now a good mind to shake hands with him.  His soothing fit,  how-
ever, was soon over,  for he presently added, — "  But since that must have
been — why this was as good a way to begin as any other.  "  He then
insisted upon it that I must dine with them again  :  "  We have Miss Golds-
worthy,"  said he,  "  Miss Planta,  and Mile.  Montmoulin,"  and ran on with
most vehement protestations that I not only could come,  but ought to come,
to join the party.

i assured him I was quite unequal to so much company;  and I told him
if he would but go then,  I would see him again in the evening.  This bribery,
as he called it,  made him consent to depart,  and he got up immediately.

I have told you so much,  in brief,  of the singularities of this gentleman,
that I enter afresh into detail,  in order to prove to you the consistencies of
my accounts of him.     And take now a most characteristic trait.

You will naturally suppose he did not spare for length of visit in the
evening,  when privileged to come by my own invitation  : — he never came
at all !  You will conclude he was kept away by business or necessity  : —
no  ;  for in that case,  when we met next he would not have spared for com-
plaints.    The simple fact is,  he forgot before night all he had been so eager

for at noon  !

*****  *

574 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

After dinner,  while I was standing  (for practice!)  at the window,  to see
the Royal Family go to the Terrace,  I heard my door open,  and,  concluding
only Goter would enter without rapping,  I also heard it shut without turning
to look round  :  but,  when at last another step than Goter's caught my ear,
and my eye followed it,  judge my surprise to see the Queen I Taking the
Princess Royal for her,  I had no doubt of her being of the Terrace party  ;
but she told me she had a little hurt her foot,  and would not walk.

Nothing could be sweeter than this unexpected second visit in the same
day.  I eagerly seized the opportunity of expressing thanks in my Fredy's
and my Susan's names,  as well as my own,  and then in my dear Esther's
also,  for the marks of favour so recently received  ;  and I endeavoured to
tell her,  in stronger words than I had yet attempted,  my sense of her good-
ness to me throughout my whole illness  :  but I did not succeed very well,
and was not half heard or understood;  for when, — in despair, — 1 gave up
the point,  and ventured to say 1 hoped she would herself feel for me, — she
turned towards me with a compassionate sweetness in her countenance,  and
answered,  "Indeed I do!"  and I found she had misconceived me to mean
for my sufferings^  when I had thought only of my gratitude.

She told me she had really longed to see Mrs.  Locke,  and spoke in just
praise of her charming countenance.  Yet she could not,  she owned,  agree
with her in one thing, — that there was any likeness between my sister Phil-
lips and me, — and I owned myself"  of her advice.^''

She asked me if I had found my sister's children much grown and im-
proved. "  Yes,"  I answered,  and was indulging myself in an eulogy upon
my dear little Fanny,  when the arrival of Lady Bute and Lady Louisa
Stuart,  who were invited by the Queen,  cut off our conference,  much to my
regret,  and she returned to her own rooms to receive them.

At night I had a few minutes from Mrs.  Delany,  by means of the sweet
Queen,  who kept Lady Bute and Lady Louisa till ten o'clock,  but dismissed
her at nine,  saying she was sure she would like to come to me for the rest
of the evening.  The Princess Augusta insisted upon taking care of her to
my room,  and when she begged to be made over to a page,  said,  "  No,  no
— I want to see Miss Burney again this evening myself."

Monday. — My kind Mrs.  Delany came to me at my breakfast,  and
stayed with me almost all the morning.  We had much to talk over of her
affairs.  The sweetness,  the patience with which she bears the wrongs she
receives,  even while feeling them with the most poignant sensibility,  is so
touching a sight,  that the hardest heart might melt to look in her soft,
suffering countenance,  and the worst might be edified by reading what is
written in it.

The Royal Family had all been to review Colonel Goldsworthy's regi-
ment. Upon their return,  they saw,  through my windows,  that  ]\Irs.  Delany
was with me,  and the King and Queen both came in to speak to her.  How
they love her!  and what mutual honour does such love confer on all three  !
The King counselled me to be as much as possible in the air,  for the
recovery of my strength,  graciously naming to me that I should walk in
the garden for that purpose, — giving me,  in those words,  the license with
the advice.  You may believe 1 would not let the day pass without accept-
ing both.

I had advice,  too,  from the dinner-party in the next room,  afterwards,  to
invigorate myself in another way.  Goter brought me Mr.  Turbulent's com-
pliments, and that Miss Goldsworthy had ordered champagne in honour of
her brother's review;  and he was sure it would do me a great deal of good
to permit him to send me a glass,  that I might drink the toast he had just
given, — "  Colonel Goldsworthy and all his dragoons  !"     I sent him word,  I

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIiXA.  575

had just eaten a whole chicken,  and therefore thought it best to put off my
champagne-drinking to another day.  My appetite,  you see,  continues of
the same voracious cast as at dear Norbury.

When I had done this feat,  I prepared and cloaked myself for my walk
in the garden  ;  I heard a rap at the door of my drawing-room  ;  I sent Goter
to it,  who brought me word she saw the Princess Elizabeth going away.
I made what haste I could to stop her,  and thank her for her condescension.
She assured me I looked quite spruce again,  and stayed chatting at the
door till Mr.  Turbulent,  hearing our voices from the eating-parlour,  came
out,  followed by Miss Goldsworthy and Mile.  Montmoulin.

Mr.  Turbulent seized the opportunity to enter my room,  whence I could
with difficulty get rid of him;  for he told me he had something to commu-
nicate to my private ear that I ought to know.  And when I begged him to
proceed,  he said he must inform me  .  .  .  .  "  That Fkilosopher De Luc was
now turned fly-catcher for Mrs.  Schwellenberg's frogs !"

'Twas impossible not to laugh,  though the news was far enough from
being new to me  ;  but he made a sport of it that 1 assured him was quite
too obstreperous,  and I fairly entreated his departure.

If this,  he said,  was a subject too gay for me,  he had at hand one per-
fectly fitted for quiet investigation.  This was an account of the travels of
Mr.  Bruce in Abyssinia,  which,  at last,  are actually in the press.  The MS.
is now with Mr.  Douglas,  who had lent Mr.  Turbulent the frontispiece and
advertisement to show to his Majesty,  with a map of the journey of Mr.
Bruce to the source of the Nile.

Tuesday. — My kindest Mrs.  Delany came to me again for all the
morning  ;  and she desired that I would see General Gary,  who is here on
some reviewing business,  as he had wished it,  and is some sort of relation
to her.  He came accordingly ;  he is a mighty good-humoured,  rattling,
gay old man :  he knows my father extremely well,  and was the first,  I

believe,  who assisted him in putting our James out to sea.

******

Soon after followed,  both here and in town,  congratulatory visits on my
recovery,  from most of the household with whom I am acquainted.  You
may suppose Mr.  Turbulent would not alone be omitted  ;  but you can
hardly suppose how he made me stare when he assured me,  most solemnly,
that he was now planning,  for his first leisure,  a ride to Norbury Park  !

I begged to know what had occasioned that resolution 1

"  I go,"  he cried,  "  to see the spot,  the very spot,  where Madame La
Fite first beheld you."

I thought him ranting ;  and not less when he proceeded, — "  I must see
the very,  the identical piece of earth  ! — I shall want no one to tell me which
it is — I must needs feel it by inspiration,  when once I approach that hal-
lowed ground  ;  and who knows what may follow,  or what blessing may be
in store for me  !  That spot which blessed Madame La Fite may bless me
also  ;  that look — for you loved one another at first sight — that look which
she describes,  when you met at Lord Locke's  ! — "

I asked him whether he was really in his senses  ?  And he then positively
assured me that Madame La Fite had just published a book,  in which she
had recounted the origin of her friendship with Miss Burney,  whom she met
at Lord and Lady Locke'' s  !- —

I must own I did not believe one word of this  ;  attributing it all to his
fertile invention,  till he resumed the subject at dinner,  in presence of Miss
Planta,  by whom it was partly confirmed.

I was really vexed for all parties,  well knowing my beloved Fredy and

576 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

Mr.  Locke would contemn such an ill-judged frivolite as much as I could
myself.  Miss Planta — and I did not wonder — could not resist a most
hearty laugh at it ;  but Mr.  Turbulent protested I had no right to find fault,
as that single passage was the only one in the book that had any salt or
spirit !  "  I read that,"  he cried ;  "  but when I opened it elsewhere,  I fell
asleep involuntarily."

They then joined in giving a general notion of the composition  ;  to which
Mr.  Turbulent put a finishing stroke by suddenly exclaiming,  "  /,  however,
personally,  am very angry with Madame La Fite  !  She has related so many
things that can interest nobody,  and she has left out all mention of my little
Thisbe !"

This was a favourite dog,  given him by Mr.  Bryant,  and which fell out of
a window about this time.

In town I found Madame La Fite's book upon my table,  de la part
de Fauteur,  and speedily followed by a visit.  Cold enough were my thanks
for the present ;  and,  to avoid any necessity of comment,  since expostula-
tion would now have been too late,  I told her with truth,  I had not yet had
time to read it.

How simple the mistake to suppose flattery so easy !

But if Mr.  Turbulent and his Thisbe here escaped mention,  he had not,
for himself,  the same good fortune in the newspapers.  Miss Planta told me
that an account had been drawn up of all the Royal Household who
appeared at the last Commemoration,  and he came in thus : — "  Mr.  Turbu-
lent, who takes care always to be seen "

Poor Mr.  Turbulent laughed,  but said,  "  Pray,  how can a man six feet
high be hid?"

St.  James's Palace,  June 4th. — I have had a dread of the bustle of this
day for some weeks,  and every kind friend has dreaded it for me :  yet am
I at this moment more quiet than I have been any single moment since I
left my dearest Susan at that last gate of sweet Norbury Park.  Till we meet
again,  I shall feel as if always seeing that beloved sister on that very spot.

Take a little of the humours of this day,  with respect to myself,  as they
have arisen.  I quitted my downy pillow at half-past six o'clock;  for bad
habits in sickness have lost me half an hour of every morning ;  and then,
according to an etiquette I discovered but on Friday night,  I was quite new
dressed:  for I find that,  on the King's birthday,  and on the Queen's,  both
real and nominal,  two new attires,  one half,  the other full dressed,  are ex-
pected from all the attendants that come into the royal presence.

This first labour was happily achieved in such good time,  that I was just
seated to my breakfast — a delicate bit of roll half eaten,  and a promising
dish of tea well stirred — when I received my summons to attend the Queen.

She was only with her wardrobe woman,  and accepted most graciously a
little murmuring congratulation upon the day,  which I ventured to whisper
while she looked another way.  Fortunately for me she is always quick in
conceiving what is meant,  and never wastes time in demanding what is said.
She told me she had bespoke Miss Planta to attend at the grand toilette at
St.  James's,  as she saw my strength still diminished by my late illness.
Indeed it still is,  though in ail other respects I am perfectly well.

The Queen wore a very beautiful dress,  of a new manufacture,  of worked
muslin,  thin,  fine,  and clear,  as the Chambery gauze.  I attended her from
the Blue Closet,  in which she dresses,  through the rooms that lead to the
breakfast apartment.  In one of these,  while she stopped for her hair-dresser
to finish her head dress,  the King joined her.  She spoke to him in German,
and he kissed her hand.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  577

The three elder Princesses came in soon after ;  they all went up,  with
congratulatory smiles and curtsies,  to their royal father,  who kissed them
very affectionately  ;  they then,  as usual every morning,  kissed the Queen's
hand.  The door was thrown open to the breakfast-room,  which is a noble
apartment,  fitted up with some of Vandyke's best works ;  and the instant
the King,  who led the way,  entered,  1 was surprised by a sudden sound
of music,  and found that a band of musicians were stationed there to
welcome him.  The Princesses followed,  but Princess Elizabeth turned
round to me to say she could hardly bear the sound :  it was the first
morning of her coming down to breakfast for many months,  as she
has had that repast in her own room ever since her dangerous illness.
It overcame her,  she said,  more than the dressing,  more than the early
rising,  more than the whole of the hurry and fatigue of all the rest of a
public birthday.  She loves the King most tenderly;  and there is a some-
thing in receiving any person who is loved,  by sudden music,  that I can
easily conceive to be very trying to the nerves.

Princess Augusta came back to cheer and counsel her ;  she begged her
to look out at the window to divert her thoughts,  and said she would place
her where the sound might be less affecting to her.

A lively  "  How d'ye do.  Miss Burney?  I hope you are quite well now?"
from the sweet Princess Mary,  who was entering the ante-room,  made me
turn from her two charming sisters ;  she passed on to the breakfast,  soon
followed by Princess Sophia,  and then a train of their governesses,  Miss
Goldsworthy,  Mademoiselle Montmoulin,  and Miss Gomme,  all in full dress,
with fans.  We reciprocated little civilities,  and I had then the pleasure to
see little Princess Amelia,  with Mrs.  Cheveley,  who brought up the rear^
Never,  in tale or fable,  were there six sister Princesses more lovely.

As I had been extremely distressed upon the Queen's birthday,  in
January,  where to go or how to act,  and could obtain no information from
my coadjutrix,  I now resolved to ask for directions from the Queen herself;
and she readily gave them,  in a manner to make this gala-day far more
comfortable to me than the last.  She bade me dress as fast as 1 could,  and
go to St.  James's by eleven o'clock  ;  but first come into the room to her.

Then followed my grand toilette.  The hair-dresser was waiting for me,
and he went to work first,  and I second,  with all our might and main.

When my adorning tasks were accomplished,  I went to the Blue Closet.
No one was there.  I then hesitated whether to go back or seek the Queen.
I have a dislike insuperable to entering a royal presence,  except by an
immediate summons:  however,  the directions 1 had had prevailed,  and 1.
went into the adjoining apartment.  There stood Madame la Fite !  she was
talking in a low voice with M.  De Luc.  They told me the Queen was in
the next room,  and on I went.

She was seated at a glass,  and the hair-dresser was putting in her jewels,
while a clergyman in his canonicals was standing near and talking to her.

I imagined him some bishop unknown to me,  and stopped  ;  the Queen
looked round,  and called out  "  O,  it's Miss Burney  ! — come in.  Miss Burney."
In I came,  curtseying respectfully to a bow from the canonicals ;  but I found
not out till he answered something said by the Queen,  that it was no other
than Mr.  Turbulent.

Madame la Fite then presented herself at the door  (which was open for
air)  of the ante-room.  The Queen bowed to her,  and said she would see her
presently :  she retired,  and her Majesty,  in a significant low voice,  said to
me,  "  Do go to her,  and keep her there a little  !"

I obeyed,  and being now in no fright nor hurry,  entered into conversation
with her sociably and comfortably.
VOL.  I.  49

578 DIARY AJ\D LETTERS 1787.

I then went to St.  James's.  The Queen was most brilliant in attire ;  and
when she was arrayed,  Mr.  West was allowed to enter the dressing-room,
in order to give his opinion of the disposition of her jewels,  which indeed
were arranged with great taste and effect.

The three Princesses,  Princess Royal,  Augusta,  and Elizabeth,  were all
very splendidly decorated,  and looked beautiful.  They are indeed uncom-
monly handsome,  each in their different way — the Princess Royal for
figure,  the Princess Augusta for countenance,  and the Princess Elizabeth
for face.

The Duchess of Ancaster,  on these gala-days,  is always admitted to the
dressing-room before the bedchamber-women are summoned.  I quite
forget if I have told you that ceremonial  ?     If not,  I will in some future

pacquet.

******

I made a visit to poor Mrs.  Vesey,  whom I had not been able to see since
my Court residence.  I had let her know my intention,  by the kind means
of Captain Phillips ;  she had therefore prepared a party for me,  among
whom I had the pleasure to meet Mr.  Walpole,  who had come from Straw-
berry Hill,  purposely ;  and that,  I suppose,  made me forget the spleen I
had conceived against him upon reading his tragedy,  which had been so
great as to make me wish never more to behold his face.  He was very civil
and very entertaining.  My good Mrs.  Ord met me also;  the rest that I can
recollect were Lady Herries,  Lady Juliana Penn,  Lady Clanbrassil,  and the
Miss Clarks.

Friday,  June 8th. — This day we came to Windsor for the summer,
during which we only go to town for a drawing-room once a fortnight,  and
to Kew in the way.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg remained in town,  not well enough to remove.  That
poor unhappy woman has an existence truly pitiable.  Mr.  De Luc and
Miss Planta were my travelling companions.  Mr.  Turbulent never belongs
to the summer excursions  :  he is then a fixed inhabitant of Windsor,  where
his wife keeps house.  In the winter she lives in London,  and he only
comes as a royal attendant,  and therefore belongs wholly to the Queen's
suite.

The house was now quite full,  the King having ordered a party to it for
the Whitsun holidays.

This party was Colonel Manners,  the equerry in waiting;  Colonel Rams-
den,  a good-humoured and well-bred old officer of the King's household  ;
Colonels Welbred and Goldsworthy,  and General Bude.

I shall not give these days in separate articles,  but string their little
events under one head.

One evening I tried vainly for Miss Planta,  and,  for any other person,
my notice was too short.  I could not persuade myself to remain singly
with so large a party of men,  and therefore I even ventured to go for the
whole evening to my venerable friend,  and sent an apology to the gentle-
men, by my man,  that I could not have the honour of their company to
drink tea with me.

My dear Mrs.  Delany was a little frightened at this step ;  but I preferred
its novelty to its only alternative,  and spent three or four hours most delight-
fully for my pains.

Colonel Hotham,  also,  a brother of Sir Charles Hotham Thompson,  came
for a part of these ten days  :  he belongs to the Prince of Wales  ;  and for
two or three of them,  M.  del Campo.

The party proved too large to be generally pleasant unless Mr.  Smelt,  or

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELL^A.  579

some good leader in society,  had been present :  for as to myself,  I am truly
insufficient to doing the honours of a mixed company,  unless formed of inti-
mate acquaintance.

Colonel Ramsden is gentle and pleasing,  but very silent ;  General Bude
is always cheerful,  but rises not above a second;  Colonel Hotham has a
shyness that looks haughty,  and therefore distances ;  Colonel Goldsworthy
reserves his sport and humour for particular days and particular favourites;
and Colonel Welbred draws back into himself unless the conversation pro-
mises either instruction or quiet pleasure  ;  nor would any one of these,
during the whole time,  speak at all,  but to a next neighbour,  nor even then,
except when that neighbour suited his fancy.

You must not,  however,  imagine we had no public speakers :  M.  del
Campo harangued aloud to whoever was willing to listen,  and Colonel
Manners did the same,  without even waiting for that proviso.

Colonel Manners,  however,  I must first introduce to you by a few speci-
mens :  he is so often,  in common with all the equerries,  to appear on the
scene,  that I wish you to make a particular acquaintance with him.

One evening,  when we were all,  as usual,  assembled,  he began a dis-
course upon the conclusion of his waiting,  which finishes with the end of
June  : — "  Now I don't think,"  cried he,  "  that it's well managed :  here we're
all in waiting for three months at a time,  and then for nine months there's
nothing !"

"  Cry you mercy  !"  cried Colonel Goldsworthy,  "if three months — three
whole months  ! — are not enough for you,  pray take a few more from mine
to make up your market !"

"  No,  no,  I don't mean that; — but vvhy can't we have our waitings month
by month  ? — would not that be better  ?"

"  I think not  ! — we should then have no time unbroken."
"  Well,  but would not that be better than what it is now  ?     Why,  we're
here so long,  that when one goes away nobody knows one ! — one has quite
to make a new acquaintance  !     Why,  when I first come out of waiting,  I
never know where to find any body !"

The Ascot races were held at this time  ;  the Royal Family were to be at
them one or two of the days.     Colonel Manners earnestly pressed Miss

P to be there.     Colonel Goldsworthy said it  ^vas quite immaterial to

him who was there,  for when he was attending royalty he never presumed
to think of any private comfort.

"  Well,  I don't see that !"  cried Colonel Manners, — "  for if I was you,
and not in my turn for waiting,  I should go about just as I liked  ; — but now,
as for me,  as it happens to be my own turn,  why I think it right to be civil
to the King."

We all looked round ; — but Colonel Goldsworthy broke forth aloud, —
"Civil,  quotha?"  cried he:  "Ha!  ha!  civil,  forsooth! — You're mighty
condescending ! — the first equerry I ever heard talk of his civility to the
Kino- ! — '  Duty,'  and  '  respect,'  and  '  humble reverence,' — those are words
we are used to, — but here come you with your civility ! — Commend me to
such affability  !"

You see he is not spared  ;  but Colonel Godsworthy is the wag professed
of their community,  and privileged 10 say what he pleases.  The other,
with the most perfect good-humour,  accepted the joke,  without dreaming of
taking offence at the sarcasm.

Another day I invited Mr.  Bryant to dinner,  and detained him for the
evening party,  to meet his favourite Colonel Welbred.  Before tea,  as he
wished to go on the Terrace,  I accompanied him thither,  where we met

580 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

the Heberdens,  Fieldings,  &c.,  and Colonel Welbrcd,  joined us to tell me
an incomparable courtier speech just made,  by a foreign lady of distinction
on the Terrace to the King : — she had rejoiced in the fineness of the day,
which indeed,  she said,  was so perfect,  it was easy to see who had ordered
it  !  The King himself turned round,  and repeated this ridiculous flight to
all his attendants.

The tea,  with the present addition of Mr.  Bryant for leader,  was
extremely pleasant.  He was,  as he constantly is,  communicative and
instructive,  and Colonel Welbred was just the man to draw him forth,  and
keep him in employ,  by judicious observations and modest inquiries.  Mr.
Bryant was quite delighted with him,  and gave me to understand he should
be very much gratified by an opportunity of making a further acquaintance
with him.     I am sure I shall be very happy to find it him.

The subjects with Mr.  Bryant are almost always antiquities,  or odd
accidents  ;  but this night Dr.  Herschel and his newly-discovered volcanoes
in the moon came in for their share.

The following evening,  when the same party,  Mr.  Bryant excepted,  were
assembled,  the King sent for Colonel Ramsden to play at backgammon.
"  Happy,  happy man  ?"  exclaimed Colonel Goldsworthy,  exultingly ;  but
scarce had he uttered the words ere he was summoned to follow himself.
«  What 1 already  !"  cried he, — "  without even my tea  !  Why this is worse
and worse  ! — no peace in Israel !— only one half hour allowed for comfort,
and now that's swallowed  !  Well,  I must go  ; — make my complaints aside,
and my bows and smiles in full face  !"

Off he went,  but presently,  in a great rage,  came back,  and,  while he
drank a hot dish of tea which I instantly presented him,  kept railing
at his stars for ever bringing him under a royal roof.  "  If it had not
been for a puppy,"  cried he,  "  I had never got off even to scald my
throat in this manner  !  But they've just got a dear little new ugly dog:  so
one puppy gave way to t'other,  and I just left them to kiss and hug it ;
while I stole off to drink this tea?  But this is too much  ! — no peace for a
moment I — no peace in Israel  !"

When this was passed.  Colonel Welbred renewed some of the conver-
sation of the preceding day with me ;  and,  just as he named Dr.  H^erschel,
Colonel Manners broke forth with his dissenting opinions.  "  I don't give
up to Dr.  Herschel at all,"  cried he  ;  "  he is all system ;  and so they are
all  :  and if they can but make out their systems,  they don't care a pin for
any thing else.  As to Herschel,  I liked him well enough till he came to his
volcanoes in the moon,  and then I gave him up :  I saw he was just like the
rest.  How should he know any thing of the matter?  There's no such
thing as pretending to measure at such a distance as that."

Colonel Welbred,  to whom I looked for an answer,  instead of making
any,  waited in quiet silence till he had exhausted all he had to say upon the
subject,  and then,  turning to me,  made some inquiry about the Terrace,  and
went on to other general matters.  But,  some time after,  when all were
engaged,  and this topic seemed quite passed,  he calmly began in general
terms,  to lament that the wisest and best of people were always so little
honoured or understood in their own time,  and added that he had no doubt
but Sir Isaac Newton had been as much scoffed and laughed at formerly as
Herschel was now  ;  but concluded,  in return,  Herschel,  hereafter,  would be
as highly reverenced as Sir Isaac was at present.

This quiet reproof,  though not at all comprehended as such by the one to
whom it was addressed,  satisfied me at once of his justness of judgment
upon the subject,  and his good sense in making it so tardily known,  to avoid
a vain argument that could have turned to so little purpose.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  5q1

We had then some discourse upon dress and fashions.  Colonel Welbied
regretted that we had not had little figures,  dressed in the habits of the
times,  preserved from every century ;  and proceeded with enumerating
various changes in the modes,  from square shoes to peaked,  from the mantle
to the coat,  the whiskers to the smooth chin,  &c.,  till Colonel Manners inter-
rupted him with observing,  "  Why,  you may wear things of all times now,
ever so far back ; — buckles of four years ago,  if you will  !"

There was certainly no gaining further ground here !

Virtuosos being next,  unfortunately,  named.  Colonel Manners inveighed
against them quite violently,  protesting they all wanted common honour and
honesty  ;  and,  to complete the happy subject,  he instanced in particular.  Sir
William Hamilton,  who,  he declared,  had absolutely robbed both the King
and State of Naples  !

After this,  somebody related that,  upon the heat in the air being mentioned
to Dr.  Heberden,  he had answered that he supposed it proceeded from the
last eruption in the volcano in the moon  : — "  Ay,"  cried Colonel Manners,
*'  I suppose he knows as much of the matter as the rest of them  :  if you put
a candle at the end of a telescope,  and let him look at it,  he'll say,  what an
eruption there is in the moon  !  I mean if Dr.  Herschel would do it to him;
I don't say he would think so from such a person as me."

"  But Mr.  Bryant himself has seen this volcano from the telescope."

"  Why,  I don't mind Mr.  Bryant any more than Dr.  Heberden  :  he's
just as credulous as t'other."

I wanted to ask by what criterion he settled these points in so superior a
manner  ; — but I thought it best to imitate the silence of Colonel Welbred,
who constantly called a new subject,  upon every pause to avoid all argu-
ment and discussion  ;  while the good-humoured Colonel Manners was just
as ready to start forward in the new subject,  as he had been in that which
had been set aside.

One other evening I invited Madame La Fite  :  but it did not prove the
same thing ;  they have all a really most undue dislike of her,  and shirk
her conversation and fly to one another,  to discourse on hunting and horses.

Poor Madame La File cordially returns,  without knowing,  their aversion  ;
for she concludes them always the same,  and bemoans my lot in spending
any time with them.  She stayed with me all the rest of the evening.  She
read me some of Madame de Genlis'  new work upon Religion  :  it seems an
excellent one.

The following Sunday,  June 17th,  I was tempted to go on the Terrace,
in order to see the celebrated Madame de Polignac,  and her daughter,
Madame de Guiche.  They were to be presented,  with the Duke de Polignac,
to their Majesties,  upon the Terrace.  Their rank entitled them to this dis-
tinction;  and the Duchess of Ancaster,  to whom they had been extremely
courteous abroad,  came to Windsor to introduce them.  They were accom-
panied to the Terrace by Mrs.  Harcourt and the General,  with whom they
were also well acquainted.

They went to the place of rendezvous at six o'clock ;  the royal party
followed about seven,  and was very brilliant upon the occasion.  The King
and Queen led the way,  and the Prince of Wales,  who came purposely to
honour the interview,  appeared at it also,  in the King's Windsor uniform.
Lady Weymouth was in waiting upon the Queen.  The Duchess of Ancas-
ter, Lady Charlotte Bertie,  and Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave,  with some
other ladies,  I think,  attended  :  but the two eldest Princesses,  to the very
great detriment of the scenery,  were ill,  and remained at home.  Princesses
Elizabeth and Mary were alone in the Queen's suite ;  and to the gentlemen

49*

582 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

I have already mentioned there were added Sir George Howard and sonae
others.

I went with Miss P and Mrs.  and Miss Heberden.     The crowd was

so great,  it was difficult to move.  Their Majesties and their train occupied
a large space,  and their attendants had no easy task in keeping them from
being incommoded by the pressing of the people.  They stopped to converse
with these noble travellers for more than an hour.  Madame la Duchesse
de Polio-nac is a very well-looking woman,  and Madame de Guiche is very
pretty.  There were other ladies and gentlemen in their party.  But I was
much amused by their dress,  which they meant should be entirely dVAng-
loise  ;  for which purpose they had put on plain undress gowns,  with close
ordinary black silk bonnets!  I am sure they must have been quite con-
fused when they saw the Queen and Princesses,  with their ladies,  who were
all dressed with uncommon care,  and very splendidly.

But I was glad,  at least,  they should all witness,  and report,  the recon-
ciliation of the King and the Prince of Wales,  who frequently spoke together,
and were both in good spirits.

Miss P and myself had,  afterwards,  an extremely risible evening with

Colonels Golds worthy,  Wei bred,  and Manners :  the rest were summoned
away to the King,  or retired to their own apartments.  Colonel Welbred
began the sport,  undesignedly,  by telling me something new relative to Dr.
Herschel's volcanoes.  This was enough for Colonel Manners,  who declared
aloud his utter contempt for such pretended discoveries.  He was deaf to all
that could be said in answer,  and protested he wondered how any man of
common sense could ever listen to such a pack of stuff.

Mr.  De Luc's opinion upon the subject being then mentioned — he ex-
claimed, very disdainfully?  "  O,  as to Mr.  De Luc,  he's another man for a
system himself,  and I'd no more trust him than any body ;  if you was only
to make a little bonfire,  and put it upon a hill a little way off,  you might
make him take it for a volcano directly  ! — And Herschel's not a bit better.
Those sort of philosophers are the easiest taken in in the world."

A smile from Colonel Welbred led me to say to him,  "  We must wait Sir
Isaac's round for Dr.  Herschel !"  And I owned to him I had been a little
startled at his silence the other evening,  till he had explained his notions,
that Time only could bring tihoui justice.

"  O yes,"  cried he,  "  this is all as it should be — in the mere regular pro-
gress of things  ;  all great discoverers must be abused and disbelieved in
their lifetime :  I should doubt the skill and science of Dr.  Herschel myself,
if he escaped any better at present."

Colonel Manners was talking on during this,  and quite inattentive to
what might be said in answer.

Our next topic was still more ludicrous.  Colonel Manners asked me if I
had not heard something very harmonious at church in the morning 1 I
answered I was too far off,  if he meant from himself.

"  Yes,"  said he ;  "I was singing with Colonel Welbred ;  and he said he
was my second. — How did I do that song  ?"

"  Song  ? — Mercy  !"  exclaimed Colonel Goldsworthy  ;  "  a song at church !
— why it was the 104th Psalm!"

"  But how did I do it,  Welbred  ;  for I never tried at it before  ?"

"Why, — pretty well,"  answered Colonel Welbred,  very composedly;
^'  only now and then you run me a little into  '  God save the King.' "

This dryness discomposed every muscle but of Colonel Manners,  whore-
plied,  with great simplicity,  "  Why,  that's because that's the tune I know
best !"

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  583

"  At least,"  cried I,  "  'twas a happy mistake to make so near their
Majesties  !"

"  But pray,  now.  Colonel Welbred,  tell me sincerely, — could you really
make out what I was sinsfino;  ?"

"  O yes,"  answered Colonel Welbred  ;  "  with the words.''''

"  Well,  but pray,  now,  what do you call my voice?"

"  Why — a — a — a counter-tenor."

"  Well,  and is that a good voice V

There was no resisting, — even the quiet Colonel Welbred could not re-
sist laughing out here.  But Colonel Manners,  quite at his ease,  continued
his self-discussion.

"  I do think,  now,  if I was to have a person to play over a thing to"  me
again and again,  and then let me sing it,  and stop me every time I was
wrong,  I do think I should be able to sing  '  God save the King'  as well as
some ladies do,  that have always people to show them."

"  You have a good chance then here,"  cried I,  "  of singing some pieces of
Handel,  for I am sure you hear them again and again."

"  Yes,  but that is not the thing  ;  for though I hear them do it so often
over,  they don't stop for me to sing it after them,  and then to set me right.
Now I'll try if you'll know what this is."

He then began humming aloud,  "  My soul praise,"  &c.,  so very horribly,

that I really found all decorum at an end,  and laughed,  with Miss P ,

a qui mieux 7nieux.  Too much engaged to mind this,  he very innocently,
when he had done,  applied to us all round for our opinions.

Miss P begged him to sing another,  and asked for that he had

spouted the other day,  "Care,  thou bane of love and joy."

He instantly complied;  and went on,  in such shocking,  discordant,  and
unmeaning sounds,  that nothing in a farce could be more risible:  in de-
fiance, however,  of all interruptions,  he continued till he had finished one
stanza  ;  when Colonel Goldsworthy loudly called out, — "  There, — there's
enough  ! — have mercy  !"

"  Well,  then,  now I'll try something else."

"  O,  no  !"  cried Colonel Goldsworthy,  hastily;  "  thank you,  thank you
for this, — but I won't trouble you for more — I'll not hear another word  !"

Colonel Welbred then,  with an affected seriousness,  begged to know,
since he took to singing,  what he should do for a shake,  which was abso-
lutely indispensable.

"  A shake V he repeated,  "  what do you mean  ?"

"  Why — a shake with the voice,  such as singers make."

"  Why,  how must I do it?"

"  O,  really,  I cannot tell you  !"

"  Why then I'll try myself, — is it so  .  .  .  V

And he began such a harsh hoarse noise,  that Colonel Goldsworthy ex-
claimed, between every other sound, — "  No,  no, — no more  !"  While
Colonel Welbred professed teaching him,  and gave such ridiculous lessons
and directions, — now to stop short,  now to swell, — now to sink the voice,
&c.,  &c., — that,  between the master and the scholar,  we were almost
demolished.

Afterwards, — "  I think,"  cried Colonel Welbred,  turning to me,  "  we
might make a little concert among ourselves when Major Price comes."

This was the last day of freedom for the whole livelong summer  ! — Were
we not right to laugh while we were able  ?  The next day — to dinner —
arrived  ^Irs.  Schwellenberg.

Tuesday,  June 19th. — Mr.  Smelt came early to Windsor,  to inquire

584 DIARY AND LETTERS 17 S7.

after the Princesses,  who all had now the measles,  except Princesses Eliza-
beth and Amelia;  but,  thank God,  all did well,  though the Princess Royal
was once in much danger.  Sir Richard Jebb attended them  ;  and I was
quite happy to see that excellent old friend and physician again,  to whom I
had already been so frequently obliged.

Mr.  Smelt was so kind as to breakfast with me ;  and then he hastened
back to his family,  all in happy commotion.  Miss Cholmley was to be
married to Lord Mulgrave on Wednesday :  she is most amiable  ;  he must
be happy — may he but make her so too 1

I had many visits at this time,  with measles-inquiries concerning the
Princesses  ;  and amongst them,  one to-day from a lady,  who,  entering my
room with an air of friendly freedom,  asked me how I did,  as if we had
been old acquaintances of great intimacy,  taking my hand,  and nodding
and laughing all the time.

I just recollected the face and manner,  but not the name,  till she said,
"  What !  don't you know me  ?  O,  you naughty child  !  1 thought we
were to have been good neighbours !"

I then saw it was Mrs.  Harcourt.  I apologized as well as I could,  and
begged her to be seated.

"No,"  cried she,  "  I can't;  for I have a man out there waiting for me —
my uncle — he brought me."

Ha !  ha  !  do not you know her again,  though I had forgot her  ?

A few more speeches followed,  and then she went her way — and I went
mine,  to my toilette — that eternal business — never ending and never pro-
fiting !  1 think to leave the second syllable out,  for the future ;  the ette is
superfluous,  the first is all-sufficient.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany came to me early,  and was fetched away by the

King and the Princess Amelia.     At tea we had Miss P ,  Madame la

Fite,  Colonel Manners,  and,  of course,  now,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who
presides.

We were scarcely all arranged when the Colonel eagerly said,  "  Pray,
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  have you lost any thing?"

"  Me  ?— no,  not I !"

"  No  ] — what,  nothing  ?"

«  Not I !"

"  Well,  then,  that's very odd  !  for I found something that had your name
writ upon it."

"My name?  and where did you find that?"

"  Why — it was something I found in my bed."

"  In your bed  ? — O,  ver well  !  that is reelly comeecal?"

"  And pray what was it  ?"  cried Miss P .

"  Why — a great large,  clumsy lump of leather."

"  Of leadder.  Sir  ?— of leadder  ?     What was that for me  ?"

"  Why,  ma'am,  it was so big and so heavy,  it was as much as I could
do to lift it 1"

"  Well,  that was nothing from me !  when it was so heavy,  you might let
it alone !"

"But,  ma'am.  Colonel Welbred said it was somewhat of yours."

"Of mine? — O,  ver well!  Colonel Welbred might not say such thing!
I know nothing,  Sir,  from your leadder,  nor from your bed,  Sir, — not I  !"

"  Well,  ma'am,  then your maid does.  Colonel Welbred says he sup-
poses it was she."

"  Upon my vord  !  Colonel Welbred might not say such things from my
maid  !     I won't not have it so 1"

"  O yes,  ma'am  ;  Colonel Welbred says she often does so.  He says
she's a very gay lady."

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  585

She was quite too much amazed to speak  :  one of her maids,  Mrs.  Arline,
is a poor humble thing,  that would not venture to jest,  I believe,  with the
kitchen-maid  ;  and the other has never before been at Windsor.

"  But what was it  ?"  cried Miss P

"  Why,  I tell you — a great,  large lump of leather,  with  '  Madame Schwel-
lenberg'  wrote upon it.     However,  I've ordered it to be sold."

"To be sold?  How will you have it sold,  Sir?  You might tell me
that,  when you please."

"  Why,  by auction,  ma'am."

*'By auction,  Sir?  What,  when it had my name upon it?  Upon my
vord  ! — how come you to do dat,  Sir  ?     Will you tell me once?"

"  Why,  1 did it for the benefit of my man,  ma'am,  that he might have
the money."

"  But for what is your man to have it when it is mine?"

"  Because,  ma'am,  it frightened him so."

"  O,  ver well !  Do you rob,  Sir  ?  Do you take what is not your own,
but other's.  Sir,  because your man is frightened  ?"

"  O yes,  ma'am  !     We military men take all we can get !"

"  What !   in the King's house,  Sir?"

"  Why then,  ma'am,  what business had it in my bed?  My room's my
castle  :  nobody has a right there.  My bed must be my treasury ;  and
here they put me a thing into it big enough to be a bed itself."

"  O  !  veil !  (much alarmed)  it might be my bed-case,  then  !"

Whenever Mrs.  Schwellenberg travels,  she carries her bed,  in a large
black leather case,  behind her servants'  carriage.

"Very likely,  ma'am."

"Then,  Sir,"  very angrily,  "  how came you by it?"

"  Why,  I'll tell you,  ma'am.  I was just going to bed;  so my servant
took one candle and I had the other.  I had just had my hair done,  and my
curls were just rolled up,  and he was going away;  but I turned about,  by
accident,  and I saw a great lump in my bed  ;  so I thought it was my clothes.
*  What do you put them there for?'  says I.  '  Sir,'  says he,  '  it looks as if
there was a drunken man in the bed  !'  '  A drunken man  ?'  says I ;  '  Take
the poker,  then,  and knock him o'  the head  ! — '  "

"  Knock him o'  the head  ?"  interrupted Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  "  What  !
when it might be some innocent person  ?  Fie  !  Colonel Manner  !  I thought
you had been too good-natured for such thing — to poker the people in the
King's house !"

"  Then what business have they to get into my bed,  ma'am  ?  So then
my man looked nearer,  and he said,  '  Sir,  why here's your nightcap  ! — and
here's the pillow  ! — and here's a great,  large lump of leather  !'  '  Shovel it
all out !'  says 1.  '  Sir,'  says he,  '  it's Madame Schwellenberg's ;  here's her
name on it.'     '  Well,  then,'  says I,  '  sell it,  to-morrow,  to the saddler.'  "

"What  !  when you knew it was mine,  Sir?  Upon my vord,  you been
ver good  !"     (Bowing very low.)

"  W^ell,  ma'am,  it's all Colonel Welbred,  I dare say  ;  so,  suppose you and
I were to take the law of him  ?"

"  Not I,  Sir  !"  (scornfully.)

"  Well,  but let's write him a letter,  then,  and frighten him  :  let's tell him
it's sold,  and he must make it good.     You and I'll do it together."

"No,  Sir;  you might do it yourself!  I am not so familiar to write to
gentlemens."

"  Why then,  you shall only sign it,  and I'll frank it."

Here the entrance of some new person stopped the discussion.

Happy in his success,  he began,  the next day,  a new device :  he made an

586 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

attack in politics,  and said,  he did not doubt that Mr.  Hastings would come
to be hanged  ;  though,  he assured us,  afiervvards,  he was firmly his friend,
and believed no such thing.

Even with this not satisfied,  he next told her that he had just heard Mr.
Burke was in Windsor.

Mr.  Burke is the name in the world most obnoxious,  both for his Reform
Bill,  which deeply affected all the household,  and for his prosecution of Mr.
Hastings  ;  she therefore declaimed against him very warmly.

"  Should you like to know him,  ma'am  ?"  cried he.

"Me?— No:  not 1."

"  Because,  I dare say,  ma'am,  I have interest enough with him to procure
his acquaintance.     Shall I bring him to the Lodge,  to see you 1"

"When you please,  Sir,  you might keep him to yourself!"

"Well,  then,  he shall come and dine with me,  and after it drink tea with
you."

"No,  no,  not I !     You might have him all to yourself."

"  O,  but if he comes,  you must make his tea."

"There is no such must.  Sir!  I do it for my pleasure only — when 1
please,  Sir I"

At night,  when we were separating,  he whispered Miss P that he had

something else in store for the next meeting,  when he intended to introduce
magnetizing.

I was stopped on the terrace by Madame la Fite,  to introduce me to
Monsieur Tremblai,  who had seen my sister and Monsieur and Madame
Locke at Norbury.  The recommendation was great to me ;  but the florid
speech accompanying it made me involuntarily drav^'  back,  and,  the moment
I was able,  retreat.  Mrs.  Turbulent was also in the party,  and we were
introduced to each other for the first time.     She looks very pleasing.

There were also several other foreigners  ;  and Colonel Manners expressed
a warm disapprobation of them,  saying,  "  Why,  now these people take to
coming on the Terrace so,  I suppose every thing one says will be put in the
Brussels Gazette  !"

July 1st,  Sunday. — Alarming to my heart was the opening of this

month  !     As soon as I came from church I found a note from Miss P ,

that my beloved Mrs.  Delany was taken extremely ill.  O how did I suffer
in not instantly flying to her!  I was compelled only to write,  and to stay
for my noon attendance;  but the moment 1 then acquainted the Queen with
my intelligence,  which indeed she saw untold,  she most sweetly and kindly
dispensed with my services,  said Mrs.  Schwellenberg should wait alone,  and
permitted me to be absent for the whole day.

The sweet soul,  all heart,  all sensibility,  unhackneyed by the world,
uninjured by age and time — had suffered a mental distress,  and to that
solely was her illness owing.  Something had gone very wrong,  and so
deeply was she wounded,  that she had been seized with cruel nervous
spasms,  that ended in a high fever.  Mr.  Young,  her town apothecary,  had
been sent for.  I went to her bedside as calmly as was in my power,  and
there I spent the precious day.

How edifying,  between whiles,  was the conversation she held with me  !
how prepared for the last scene!  —  with what humble,  yet fervent joy,
expecting its approach  !  It seemed almost wicked to pray for its delay, —
yet,  while destined to stay in the world,  can we help devoutly wishing to
detain those who can best fit us for quittinij;  it 1

We sent for Dr.  Heberden  ;— he saw no immediate danger ;  Mr.  Young

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  597

soon arrived,  and gave hopes of recovery.  With what exquisite sensations
of delight did I hear that sound  !

The Queen herself presently came to the house,  and sent for me down
stairs to the drawing-room.     She was equally surprised and pleased that so

fair a prospect was once again opening.     She then ordered Miss P to

her,  and I returned to this most honoured friend,  whose sweet soft smiles
never a moment forsook her when she saw me approach,  or permitted me to
be seated by her side.

The King,  also,  came himself,  in the evening,  and sent for me.  1 delighted
his benignant heart with a still fairer account,  for all went better and better;
and before I was forced,  at night,  to tear myself away,  she was so happily
revived,  that 1 left her with scarce a tear,  though I would have given the
world not to have left her at all.

Monday,  July 2d. — When I returned home in the evening from my
beloved friend,  with whom I had spent the morning and the evening,  I
waited upon Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  whom I found alone,  and much out of
spirits.  She informed me that Sir Richard Jebb,  who had been in close
attendance at the Lodge,  upon the Princesses who had the measles,  was
himself very dangerously ill,  and not likely ever to be better.  1 heard this
with great concern  ;  and the prophecy turned out but too true.  ,

While we were talking this over.  Colonel Manners entered the room,  fol-
lowed by another imiforni ;  and coming straight up to me,  said,  "  Miss
Burney,  will you give me leave to introduce Colonel Gwynn to you —
the new Equerry,  and my successor  ?"

A few bows and curtsies ensued,  and we entered into a little formal dis-
course, till they said they must show themselves in the music room,  and re-
treated.

Colonel Gwynn is reckoned a remarkably handsome man,  and he is husband
to the beautiful eldest daughter of Mrs.  Horneck.     More of him anon.

Afterwards we heard a little humming in the passage.  My companion
said she would soon know who dared do that in the King's house ;  and de-
sired me to look.  But I declined the office,  for I knew the voice  ;  and she
therefore went herself,  and returned with a smile  ;  "  O,  'tis only the
Madger  /"  and invited him in.

For a few minutes he complied,  but hurried off as soon as possible.

******

What a stare was drawn from our new Equerry the following evening,
by Major Price's gravely asking Mrs.  Schwellenberg after the health of her
Frogs !  She answered they were very well,  and the Major said,  "  You
must know,  Colonel Gwynn,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg keeps a pair of Frogs."

"  Of Frogs  ? — pray what do they feed upon  ?"

"  Flies,  sir,"  she answered.

"  And pray,  ma'am,  what food have they in winter?"

"  Nothing other."

The stare was now still wider.

"  But I can make them croak when I will,"  she added  ;  "  when I only
go so to my snuff-box,  knock,  knock,  knock,  they croak all what I please."

"  Very pretty,  indeed  !"  exclaimed Colonel Goldsworthy.

"  I thought to have some spawn,"  she continued  ;  "  but Lady Maria
Carlton,  what you call Lady Doncaster,  came and frightened them  ;  I was
never so angry I"

"I am sorry for that !"  cried the Major,  very seriously,  "  for else I should
have begged a pair."

"  So you meant,  ma'am,  to have had a breed of them,"  cried Colonel
Goldsworthy  ;  "  a breed of young frogs  ?     Vastly clever,  indeed  !"

588 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

Then followed a formal enumeration of their virtues and endearing little
qualities,  which made all laugh except the new equerry,  who sat in perfect
amaze.

Then,  suddenly she stopped short,  and called out  "  There  !  now I have
told you all this,  you might tell something to me.  I have talked enoff;  now
you might amuse meP

Major Price,  to humour the demand,  instantly said he would tell a story ;
and so he did,  and such a story as truly won my surprise at his courage  !
It was of a Sir Joseph something,  who was walking by the side of a pond,
and fell plump in,  and being well soused got out again  !  It diverted how-
ever, so well,  that Colonel Goldsworthy was desired to do as much.  And
so he did,  and just in the same style;  and,  had I not been yet low from
Mrs.  Delany's continued confinement,  I must have laughed at this intrepid
absurdity.

Poor Colonel Gwynn,  expecting the next summons could not laugh at
all ;  but he was happily relieved by the appearance of the Princess Amelia,
who came to order him and Colonel Goldsworthy to attend her to the lower
Lodge.

July 7th. — This morning I received so urgent a note from Mrs.  DeLuc,
to invite me to meet M.  de la Blancherie,  a foreign man of letters,  just come
over,  that I could not refuse her.  Indeed I do not love to refuse her.  She
is so gentle and quiet in her management of those sort of encounters,  that,
even though I know them designed and arranged,  she contrives to make me
feel them carried off as if they were accidental.

I was not much charmee with M.  de la Blancherie :  he is lively,  full of
talk,  ready to take the lead,  and perfectly satisfied every body is ready that
he should.

Poor Madame la Fite was there,  and looked much surprised at sight of
me.  I cannot bring her to understand that an old acknowledged friend,  like
Mrs.  De Luc,  has a claim upon me that any other acquaintance must make
before they should demand.

M.  de la Blancherie has a scheme of a periodical work that I do not thin
likely to succeed.     He by no means strikes me to have abilities equal t
supporting such an undertaking after its first novelty is over.     He invite
me to Paris,  and with a torrent of compliments acquainted me I was ex-
pected there  ;  and then followed another torrent upon other expectations.

Dry was the gulf into which these torrents poured — no stream met them,
no emotion stirred them, — and so they soon grew stagnant.  Indeed,  I often
wonder with myself if ever while I live this right hand will find other em-
ployment than writing to you.

I was obliged to write two letters for M.  de la Blancherie,  one to my
father,  and one to Charles,  whom he had met in his little Paris excursion.

A note from M.  de la Blancherie,  which I received the next morning,  I
shall copy.

A Miss

Miss Burney^  To Yindsor,

M.  de la Blancherie presente son respect a Miss Burney,  et tous les autres
hommages qui lui sont dus et il a I'honneur de la remercier des deux lettres
qu'elle a bien voulu lui donner pour M.  son pere et M.  son frere.  II sera tres
empresse de les porter,  et de jouir de tous les avantages qu'il s'en promet.  11
sera tres heureux s'il peut encore etre a port^e de faire sa cour a I'une des
Muses Angloises,  et s'il al'occasion de remplir envers elle les obligations de
1 agent de correspondance.  II prend la liberte de joindre a ce billet un petit pros-

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  589

pectus de Petablissement qui lui a procure I'honneur de connoitre Miss,  et
d'etre couvert de son Egide.
Windsor,  le 8 Juillet,  1787.

Thus,  being,  in the same note a Muse,  Minerva,  and a Miss,  Mrs.  Delany
has called me M.  M.  M.  ever since.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg had a German family to dine here — M.  and Madame
Freuss,  and some young men  :  they talked nothing but German,  and I
understood not a word.     I liked it very well.

July 10th. — We came to Kew — Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  Miss Planta,
Mr.  De Luc,  and myself.  Mrs.  Schwellenburg was extremely angered
against the equerries,  who had wholly neglected all conversation with her,
and hurried out of the room the moment they had drunk their tea.  She
protested that if they did not mind,  she would have them no more,  but let
them make their tea for themselves.  "  O yes,  I will put an end to it !  your
humble servant !  when they won't talk to me,  they may stay;  comical men!
they bin bears  !"  «

*  #  *  #  #  *  :jt

Mr.  Fisher said to me,  "  A friend of yours,  ma'am,  drank tea with me
lately — one who did not ask after you  !"

"  And who was that  ?"

"  There can be but one of that description in the universe  !'*

He meant,  I found,  poor Mrs.  Piozzi.  May she be happy  !  She has had
her share of making me otherwise — a share the world holds not power to
give to her again.  Alas  !  she has lost what gave that ascendance  !  And
those cannot long give great pain who have forfeited their power to give
pleasure.  I find this truth more and more strongly every time I think of
her ;  but where I find its strength the most,  is that I think of her,  any way,
less and less.

The same German family dined with us again at Kew  ;  and now I had
my share in the company.  They no longer confined themselves to their
own language :  they eagerly came up to me,  as I entered the room,  to tell
me,  in broken English,  that they had not known who I was when they were
at Windsor.  The lady told me she had read my book in German,  and
liked it  "  best of any book,"  adding,  warmly,  "  Upon my vorcl^  it is so
vat I sink,  dot I iviss I had lurote it selfs P''  The gentleman,  in French,
told me he was charmed to know my name,  but said he had little enough
imagined himself in a room with one  "  >S^  hien connue"  by him already,
^''par la re^iomme.^^

So you see,  my dear friends,  here is a little of the old flummery coming
round to me again.

Madame de Freuss took me by the hand and the arm,  and charged me to
sit by her,  and not to esquiver so continually  :  however,  I could not help it,
for when her hand was off me,  there was nothing else to draw me.

The next day,  at St.  James's,  when I retired from the Queen's apartments
to my own,  who should I find there but Madame de Freuss  !  waiting for me,
with Mrs.  Farman the mantua-maker,  and a couple of milliners  !  I despatched
them soon ;  but not my new friend.  My dear father came  ;  "  She was glad
to see him."  Mrs.  and Miss Ord called — that did not disturb her.  Mr.
Stanhope peeped in, — that had no sort of effect.  My two Worcester
cousins came, — and  "  She liked to see any of my family."

Well — she outstayed every one of them  !

Well !  she is gone back to Germany,  so no matter.  Poor Mrs.  Ord was
VOL.  I.  50

590 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

in deep dejection at the loss of Sir Richard Jebb ; — she was going to Bath,
and took leave of me till November — sadly on both sides.

#  *  *  *  *  *:

The Queen,  in the sweetest manner in the world,  gave me this morning a
little pocket inkstand,  with a gold pen.  Was it not almost an invitation to
make some visible use of it  ?

July 13th. — We returned to Windsor  ;  and I flew,  as usual to my be-
loved Mrs.  Delany,  to spend there my customary hour between the coffee
and tea time.     O,  how sweet to me that hour !

This most beloved friend told me Dr.  Beattie was in Windsor,  and had
desired to meet me at her house.  I was very glad of such an opportunity,
and fixed the next evening.

Our tea-party now consisted of Colonel Gwynn and General Bude.  It
was impossible not to smile a little,  when,  upon my taking my work to the
window,  aloof,  as usual,  my companion,  after their departure,  said she never
saw such rude people in her life,  and added,  "  You been right to despise
them so,  and I will do it the same  \V

Her Majesty lent me Mrs.  Scott's  "  Filial Duty"  to read.  I think I have
seldom perused any thing that has contained less to surprise.

I kept my appointment with Dr.  Beattie,  and was much gratified by so
doing.  I found him pleasant unaffected,  unassuming,  and full of conversible
intelligence;  with a round,  thick,  clunch figure,  that- promises nothing
either of his works or his discourse ;  yet his eye,  at intervals,  and when
something breaks from him pointed and sudden,  shoots forth a ray of genius
that instantly lights up his whole countenance.  His voice and his manners
are particularly and pleasingly mild,  and seem to announce an urbanity of
character both inviting and edifying.

My very high admiration of his two principal productions,  "  The Min-
strel" and the  "  Immutability of Truth,"  made it a real satisfaction to me
to see their author  ;  and finding him such as I have described,  I felt a desire
to be acquainted with him that made me regret my little likelihood of
meeting with him again.  His present errand to Windsor was to see Mrs.
Delany.

The  "  Immutability of Truth"  is full of religious instruction,  conveyed
with such a rare mixture of precision and of wit as to carry amusement
hand in hand with conviction  :  at least such it appeared to me when I read
it,  at the desire of Mrs.  Chapone,  who lent it me.  Yet the opening,  I
remember,  was so obscure and metaphysical,  that I had nearly abandoned
the book in despair of comprehending it :  Mrs.  Chapone would not suffer
me to give it up,  and I have felt much obliged ever since to her persevering
exhortations.

Once before,  when I lived in the world,  I had met with Dr.  Beattie,  but
he then spoke very little,  the company being large  ;  and for myself,  I spoke
not at all.  Our personal knowledge of each other therefore sunk not very
deep.  It was at the house of Miss Reynolds.  My ever honoured Dr.
Johnson was there,  and my poor Mrs.  Thrale,  her daughter,  Mrs.  Ord,
Mrs.  Horneck,  Mrs.  Gwynn,  the Bishop of Dromore,  and Mrs.  Percy,  and
Mr.  Boswell,  and Mr.  Seward,  with some others.

Many things do I recollect of that evening,  particularly one laughable
circumstance.  I was coming away at night,  without having been seen by
Dr.  Johnson,  but knowing ho would reproach me afterwards,  I begged my
father to tell him I wished him good night.  He instantly called me up to
him,  took both my hands,  which he extended as far asunder as they would
go,  and just as I was unfortunately curtseying to be gone,  he let them loose and

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,  591

dropped both his own on the two sides of m}*  hoop,  with so ponderous a
weight,  that I could not for some time rise from the inclined posture into
which I had put myself,  and in which,  though quite unconscious of what he
was about,  he seemed forcibly holding me.

I liked my little encounter so well,  that the next day I not only repeated
it,  but as Dr.  Beattie was so kind as to give up an appointment for the next
day,  that the same little party might again take place,  I made my customary
preparations,  and went for the whole evening instead of my ordinary hour.

He was very pleasant,  and in better spirits than the preceding day.  He
was gayer,  as I found afterwards,  with me,  as a stranger,  than with any of
his old acquaintances for his mind was sad and wounded by domestic mis-
fortunes.

Mrs.  Delany,  in the course of the evening,  was called out of the room  :
he then,  in a low voice,  and looking another way,  very gently said — "J
must now,  ma'am,  seize an opportunity for which I have long wished,  to tell
you of the equal amazement and pleasure I have received from you."

And then,  without further preamble,  he entered upon the old subject^  and
uttered such flattering things as were now,  from a person such as him,  be-
come almost new to my ears,  and I was really ready to run away.

When my dear Mrs.  Delany returned he was so kind and so delicate as
to suffer her to change the subject,  which she,  with her never-faihng indul-
gence to my every inclination,  immediately attempted.

She asked him if there were any hopes of any thing new from him.  No,
he said,  he had been otherwise employed.  I then ventured a wish for a
conclusion to the  "  Minstrel."  He owned he had written another book,  but
that he had disapproved and burned it.

"  O  !"  I exclaimed in parody from his  "  Edwin,"  "then may we say of
Dr.  Beattie —

'  Some thought him wondrous oM;  and some believed him mad I'  "

He laughed heartily,  and said to Mrs.  Delany,  "  Miss Burney,  ma'am,
vanquishes me with my own weapons  !"  And then we went on to other sub-
jects, till I was forced to decamp.

In coming away he told me he heard that Lady Pembroke was at the
Queen's Lodge,  and asked me to give him directions how he might see her.
I offered to convey a note to her,  for I could venture at nothing further ;  but
I added,  that when she had made her appointment,  if he would call at my
door I should think myself much honoured,  though I could not have had the
courage to solicit his coming to the house purposely to see me.

"  Not purposely !"  cried he,  with the utmost good humour and vivacity,
"  why,  I would go to the Land's End  !"

He then positively and undeniably insisted I should name my own time
for seeing him,  without any reference to Lady Pembroke,  or any other lady,
or any other thing whatsoever.  I thanked him,  and accepting his kindness,
mentioned three o'clock for the next day.

I determined to acquaint the Queen with my assignation,  but felt so cer-
tain of her indisputable approbation,  that I could not be uneasy at not speak-
ing to her first.

I like Dr.  Beattie extremely.  I am quite happy he made this visit.  ]\Iy
dearest Mrs.  Delany told me he had been formerly amongst the first of men
in his social powers  ;  but family calamities had greatly altered him.  I was
truly sorry to hear of his sad fate,  but as I had not known him in his hap-
pier days,  I found him now all I could wish him.

Mrs.  Delany,  according to an almost general custom,  came for mc the

592 DIARY AKD LETTERS 1787.

next morning early,  in her chaise,  to air with her.  She was met by the
King,  who rode up to her,  and asked whither she was going.  "  Only to
spend one quarter of an hour with Miss Burney,  sir,"  was her answer.
"  But you may keep her two hours,"  cried he,  "  this morning — or as
long as you will."  And then he rode up to the Queen's carriage,  and
having spoken to her,  returned to Mrs.  Delany,  with a confirmation of the
permission.     They were going to Kew.

We made use of the license,  by driving to Mr.  Bryant,  at Cypenham.
We found him in his garden,  encompassed with his numerous family of
dogs.  His fondness for these good animals is quite diverting :  he makes
them his chief companions,  and speaks to them as if they were upon terms
of equality with him.  He says they regularly breakfast with him,  and he
then gives them his principal lesson how to behave themselves.

After all,  where is the philosopher wise enough to be all-sufficient to him-
self? A man had better arrange himself with a family of human beings,
after the common mode,  at once.

It was extremely amusing to see his anxiety that his children should not
disgrace themselves.  My dear Susan is not more solicitous for her Fanny
and Nordia.  "Come,  now,  be good!  Be good,  my little fellows! — don't
be troublesome  !  Don't jump up on Mrs.  Delany  !  Miss Burney,  I'm afraid
they are in your way.  Come,  my little fellows,  keep back! — pray do.
There  ! — there's good dogs  ! — keep back  !"

And then,  when they persevered in surrounding Mrs.  Delany — too kind
and too easy to mind them — he addressed them quite with pathos  :  "  My
sweet dogs  ! — O,  my sweet dogs  ! — don't ! — don't — my sweet dogs?"

Well ! — we are all born to have some recreation,  and I should certainly
do the same,  had I nothing else alive about me.

W^e returned in very good time,  and I was just dressed as Dr.  Beattie
arrived.  I had taken all proper measures,  and therefore received him very
comfortably.

He was very cheerful and very charming.  He seems made up of gentle-
ness and benevolence,  yet with a disposition to decent mirth,  an enjoyment
of humour and sport,  that give an animation to his mildness truly engaging.
You would be surprised to find how soon you forget that he is ugly and
clumsy,  for there is a sort of perfect good-will in his countenance and his
smile,  that is quite captivating.

I told him of my visit to Mr.  Bryant and his dogs.  He laughed very
heartil3r,  but outdid my account by another — of a gentleman who always
partook a mess of hasty pudding with a favourite hound,  which was the
breakfast of both.  "  And when,"  said he,  "  the dog happened to infringe
on his share,  he only gave him a knock on the nose,  to set him right,  and
then ate quietly on with him  !"

This introduced many other little contes a rire^  which chiefly occupied
the time he had to bestow upon me,  or rather the time I had to solicit his
stay,  for he went not till that was over.

I longed to have spoken of his  "  Immutability of Truth,"  which 1 truly
think a glorious work,  but I had not courage.  I feared it might look like a
return of compliment,  which I could not bear.  For,  to be sure,  I had it to
return  !  I have heard nothing like what fell from him since under this
roof I came ;  and I will not refrain,  as his good opinion was equally grati-
fying and surprising to me,  telling you what he most dwelt upon.  "  What
most,"  cried he,  "  has struck me,  is all that concerns a species of distress
the most common in life,  yet most neglected in representation — that of
people of high cultivation and elegance forced to associate with those of

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  593

gross and inferior capacities and manners.     'Tis a most just and most
feeling distress;  yet you,  as you have stated,  have it now.''''

Whether he meant Evelina with the Branghtons,  or Henrietta with her
mother and Mr.  Hobson,  I'  know not.  Will you say,  Why could you not
ask 1

I saw no more of him to my great regret.  He left Windsor the next day.
July 18th. — This morning I received the very alarming letters — very
afflicting,  rather,  for the alarm was,  thank God,  passed — of my dear and
most valued Mr.  Locke's illness.  How kindly had my generous Fredy
spared me all anxiety but of retrospection,  of what I might have shared  ! —
but no,  I can share nothing.     1 can but feel,  and be felt for,  apart !

July 19th. — The election of a member for Windsor,  who proved to be
Lord Mornington,  determined his Majesty to spend the day at Kew with the
Queen and all the Princesses.  By appointment,  therefore,  the vacation was
destined to Mr.  Bryant,  to whose house I accompanied my dearest Mrs.
Delany.  W^e found Mr.  Turbulent waiting for us,  with the good old gentle-
man, and an ample breakfast prepared for our reception.

The morning was very pleasant.  Mr.  Bryant was quite delighted with
the visit,  and did the honours with the utmost activity and spirit,  regaling
us at once with his excellent anecdotes and excellent brown bread,  &c.  He
gave me carte blanche to choose and to take whichever of his books I pleased,
and put his keys into my hand,  that I might examine his store,  and send
for whatever I wished,  at any time that I desired.  I accepted his liberal
offer with great thanks  ;  but,  unhappily,  his books are very few of them such
as I could covet.  They are chiefly very antique and voluminous accounts
of voyages and travels,  books of science,  or authors in the dead languages.
He took us all over his house,  which has books in every part.  He
begged me to follow him,  when in his own room,  to a small neat case,
which he desired me to examine.  I complied very readily,  but you may
believe my surprise when I saw there,  very elegantly bound,  "  Cecilia"  and
"Evelina^!"

He laughed very heartily at my start;  how,  indeed,  could I suspect such
a compliment from this good old Grecian?  "  Cecilia"  and  "  Evelina"  were
not written before the Deluge !

He then lent me some curious old newspapers,  printed just before the
Revolution  ;  with various tracts upon that era,  not very interesting to me.

We stayed very late,  and returned well pleased with our expedition.  Mr.
Bryant was eager in displaying his collection to Mrs.  Delany,  who accepts
every attention not as a due,  but a favour,  and who excuses every omission
with an indulgence that seems to put pardon out of the question.

In the afternoon,  while I was working in Mrs.  Schwellenberg's room,  Mr.
Turbulent entered to summon Miss Planta to the Princesses  ;  and,  in the
little while of executing that commission,  he made such use of his very
ungovernable and extraordinary eyes,  that the moment he was gone,  Mrs.
Schwellenberg demanded for what he looked so at me  ?
I desired to know what she meant.

"  Why,  like when he was so cordial with you  ?     Been you acquainted?"
"  O yes  !"  cried I,  "  I spent three hours twice a week upon the road with
him and Miss Planta,  all the winter  ;  and three or four dinners and after-
noons besides."

"  O that's nothing  !  that's no acquaintance at all.  I have had people to
me,  to travel and to dine,  fourteen and fifteen years,  and yet they been never
so cordial I"

This was too unanswerable for a reply  ;  but it determined me to try at
some decided measure for restraining or changing looks and behaviour that

50*

594 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

excited such comments.  And I thought my safest way would be fairly and
frankly to tell him this very inquiry.  It might put him upon his guard from
such foolishness,  without any more serious effort.

July 20th. — This evening Mrs.  Schwellenberg was not well,  and sent to
desire I would receive the gentlemen to tea,  and make her apologies.     I

immediately summoned my lively and lovely young companion,  Miss P ,

who hastens at every call with good-humoured delight.

We had really a pleasant evening,  though simply from the absence of
spleen and jealousy,  which seemed to renew and invigorate the spirits of all
present:  namely.  General Bude,  Signer del Campo,  and Colonel Gwynn.

They all stayed very late ;  but when they made their exit,  I dismissed
my gay assistant,  and thought it incumbent on me to show myself up stairs.
But what a reception was awaiting me  ! — so grim  !  O Heaven  !  how depress-
ing, how cruel,  to be fastened thus on an associate so exigeante^  so tyran-
nical, and so ill-disposed  !

I feared to blame the Equerries for having detained me,  as they were all
already so much out of favour.  I only,  therefore,  mentioned M.  del Campo,
who,  as a Foreign Minister,  might be allowed so much civility as not to be
left to himself:  for I was openly reproached that I had not quitted them to
hasten to her !  Nothing,  however,  availed ;  and after vainly trying to
appease her,  I was obliged to go to my own room,  to be in attendance for
my royal summons.

July 21 st. — I resolved to be very meek and patient,  as I do,  now and
then,  when I am good,  and to bear this hard trial of causeless offence with-
out resentment ;  and therefore I went this afternoon as soon as I had dined,
and sat and worked,  and forced conversation,  and did my best,  but with very
indifferent success ;  when,  most perversely,  who should be again announced
but Mr.  Turbulent.

As I believe the visit was not,  just after those  "  cordiaV^  looks,  supposed
to be solely for the lady of the apartment,  his reception was no better than
mine had been the preceding days.  He did not,  however,  regard it,  but
began a talk,  in which he made it his business to involve me,  by perpetual
reference to my opinion.  This did not much conciliate matters  ;  and his
rebuffs,  from time to time,  were so little ceremonious,  that nothing but the
most confirmed contempt could have kept off an angry resentment.  I could
sometimes scarcely help laughing at his utterly careless returns to an impe-
rious haughtiness,  vainly meant to abash and distance him.

I took the earliest moment in my power to quit the room ;  and the
reproach with which he looked at my exit,  for my leaving him to such a
Ute-d-Ute,  was quite risible.  He knew he could not,  in decency,  run away
immediately,  and he seemed ready to commit some desperate act for having
drawn himself into such a difficulty.  I am always rejoiced when his flights
and follies bring their own punishment.

In my own room I found my beloved Mrs.  Delany,  but I had only the
contrast of her sweet looks,  not of her society,  as the Princess Amelia
fetched her away almost immediately.

Miss P remained  ;  and Madame de la Fite joined us  ;  and,  not long

after,  Mr.  Turbulent.  He was in a humour that nothing could daunt ;
he began the warmest reproaches that I had left the room,  and for my little
notice of him while in it.  I could not make a serious lecture,  such as I
wished,  and such as he wanted,  in the presence of these two ladies,  though
he endeavoured to make me speak to him apart,  heedless of their observa-
tion. I gave him,  however,  to understand,  that he was upon the brink of
makmg himself an enemy of the most dangerous sort,  if he did not pay a

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  595

little more attention where his attentions were more expected,  "  And a little
less,"  I added,  with a laugh,  "  where they are not expected."

"  All that,"  cried he,  scornfully,  "  all danger and all consequences
are indifferent to me.  I despise them from my soul !  Nor do I care how
steep or how deep the precipice from which I may fall,  if I could but draw
you down from its summit !"

I made him a very low curtsey,  and begged to be excused so sublime an
obligation.  I could only laugh,  though internally I own I almost shuddered,
but it was only for a moment.  I soon saw him merely ridiculous and
burlesque  :  indeed,  could I have taken such a speech seriously,  I must have
considered him as a savage.

A summons to tea parted us.  He went his way,  as I did not invite him
to stay,  and we adjourned to the eating-parlour.

July 22nd. — A very painful transaction,  which had employed my
mornings for a little while past,  was very painfully concluded to-day.  A
captain,  of the name of Pike,  an officer severely and unjustly injured in
the American war,  represented to me with so much distress his situation,
that I could not hesitate a moment in laying it before her Majesty,  to be
submitted to the King.  She most graciously accorded her consent :  but on
stating the particulars,  she found it was a case in which prerogative had no
power  ;  and,  in short,  though with infinite lenity towards the efforts I had
presumed to make,  at sundry times,  for distressed petitioners,  I was finally
given to understand that I had better never undertake such commissions,
but make it known by every opportunity that I must no longer venture to
step out of my department,  as it only belonged to the Lord Chamberlain to
present any petitions.

I was very sorry,  and I have since been far more so,  by the many dis-
appointments I have unavoidably given  ;  for I must not dare disobey an
injunction so general and so positive.

So great was the poor man's distress,  that I did not dare send him this
ill-news in a common manner :  I employed Mr.  Gray,  a kind of surveyor
and carpenter,  and head mechanic for all sort of things in the household,
to go to him,  and carry a note from me,  in answer to sundry urgent letters,
in which I tried what I could to soften the disappointment,  and to give him
some counsel,  such as I could,  about two daughters,  who were very inge-
nious, and copied from nature landscapes in needlework.

In the end,  the poor man determined to go with these industrious poor
things to Bath,  there to set their talents to advantage,  and sell their works.
And such was his indigence,  that the poor mites of this Mr.  Gray and my-
self were even treasures to him.

Mrs.  Delany was not well I made her two little visits  :  her eyes,  she
said,  failed more and more;  but with such resignation,  such piety,  she
spoke their threatened loss,  that I know not which I felt most at heart,
sorrow,  or admiration.

July 24. — This day we came to Kew.

While Miss Planta and I were waiting in the parlour for Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg,  Mr.  Turbulent entered  :  involuntarily affrighted at the thought of his
accompanying us,  in his present flighty humour,  and in the carriage with
one whom it had already offended,  I earnestly exclaimed,  "  Good Heaven,
Mr.  Turbulent,  I hope you are not going with us  ?"

"  Upon my word,"  answered he,  "  you are a most flattering lady  !  What
compliments you pay me !  You don't like I should travel with you in the

596 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

summer, — you declared against it in the spring, — it was disagreeable to 3^ou
in the winter, — and you are affected by it in the autumn  !" — And off he
went,  half angry.

July 25th. — Mr.  Turbulent amused himself this morning with giving
yet another panic.  He was ordered to attend the Queen during her hair-
dressing,  as was Mr.  De Luc.  I remained in the room  :  the Queen con-
versed with us all three,  as occasions arose,  with the utmost complacency ;
but this person,  instead of fixing there his sole attention,  contrived,  by
standing behind her chair,  and facing me,  to address a language of signs
to me the whole time,  casting up his eyes,  clasping his hands,  and placing
himself in various fine attitudes,  and all with a humour so burlesque,  that
it was impossible to take it either ill or seriously.  Indeed,  when I am on the
very point of the most alarmed displeasure with him,  he always falls upon
some such ridiculous devices of affected homage,  that I grow ashamed of my
anger,  and hurry it over,  lest he should perceive it and attribute it to a mis-
understanding he might think ridiculous in his turn.

How much should I have been discountenanced had her Majesty turned
about and perceived him  !  yet by no means so much disconcerted as by a
similar Cerberic detection  ;  since the Queen,  who,  when in spirits,  is gay
and sportive herself,  would be much farther removed from any hazard of
misconstruction.

I saw him afterwards,  just before dinner,  alone.  He began a vehement
expostulation at my conduct in shunning him  ;  but I stopped him short
in his career,  by seriously assuring him I had something of moment for
his attention.

Surprised and alarmed,  he exclaimed,  "  L it good or bad  ?"

"  1 hope it may be good  !"  I answered,  not to inflame his curiosity,  as I
could not now have time to go on.

"  If,"  cried he,  with great abatement of violence from an answer milder
than he expected,  "if it were bad,  from such a channel — "  but the entrance
of Mr.  De Luc spared me the rest of the compliment.

No opportunity of an explanation offering,  I had not long stole to my
room,  for a little breathing,  before he followed me,  tapping at my door,  but
entering without waiting for any leave.

I did not much like his pursuit,  but resolved to make the fijllest use of the
conference ;  and just as he began his usual round of reproaches for my
elopements and shynesses,  I desired him to desist,  and hear me.  "  Most
willingly,"  he cried ;  and then I frankly told him he must not wonder I
avoided him,  while he conducted himself in a manner so unaccountable and
singular.

He desired me to explain myself;  looking quite aghast,  and even turning
pale,  while he waited my answer.

I was now wholly at a loss how to analyze my charge.  I could not,  for
shame,  mention his peculiarities personal,  while he seemed unconscious of
them,  and therefore I got into a most disagreeable embarrassment myself.
All I could say,  in a general way,  he either did not or would not under-
stand ;  and after a long perplexed half remonstrance,  scarce intelligible to
myself I rested my expostulation on what I least regarded,  merely because
it  ^yas what I could best dilate upon,  namely,  that he had excited strong sus-
picions in Mrs.  Schwellenberg that he was' ridiculing her,  and that the con-
tinual reference of his eyes to mine must needs make her include me in his
conspiracy,  which gave me so much alarm,  that I must always shun him
till he behaved better.  And then I told him the attack of his  "  looking so
cordial.''''

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  597

Extremely relieved by this account,  he recovered his colour and his spirits,
and laughed violently at the charge,  especially that part of it which belonged
to the  '-'■fourteen or fifteen years.''''

"  Well,"  cried he,  "  if that is all,  I can make no reform :  if I look cor-
dial, it is only that I am so ;  and I will not try to disprove it."

I begged him to rest assured that,  however ridiculous this might seem,  I
should most certainly keep out of his way with my utmost power,  so long
as he continued to give me so much of his notice when I could not escape
him.  But my only answer was a laughing prayer that she might next dis-
cover I looked cordial at liini!

July 26th. — We returned to Windsor the next day,  and I had the joy
to find my sweet Mrs.  Delany delightfully well.  Miss P having an-
other engagement,  she indulged me with a tete-d-tite visit,  and we renewed
our investigation,  &c.,  of the  "  Memoirs."  How I wish my two sisters could
see them  !  They so exactly show the sweet character that has drawn them
up,  and how unaffectedly and innocently she has ever been the same — in
the prime and glow of youth,  and in every danger and every distress.

The good King and his charming little daughter came,  as usual,  to rob me
of my venerable Biographer in the evening.

July 29th. — To-day the King and Queen and Royal Family went to
Eton,  to hear the speeches  ;  and,  as I was invited by Mrs.  Roberts and the
Provost,  1 had the curiosity to go also.

The speeches were chiefly in Greek and Latin,  but concluded with three
or four in English  :  some were pronounced extremely well,  especially those
siDoken by the chief composers of the  "  Microcosm,"  Canning and Smith.

I saw all my Windsor acquaintances — Claytons,  Linds,  Dr.  Herschel,
&c.  ,•  and when the speeches were over,  I went to a great breakfast,  pre-
pared by Mrs.  Roberts.  There I met Lord and Lady Walsingham,  and
received civilities for answering notes they had sent me,  to beg information
whether they might appear,  one in a hat,  the other in a frock.  Lady Rothes
and Sir Lucas Pepys were also there,  and we had much old talk,

598 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

CHAPTER XXIX.

1787.

Arrival of the Duke of York from Holland — Delight of the Royal Family at his Return
— Windsor Terrace — General Grenville — The Duke of Montagu — The Prince of Wales
at W^indsor — A Happy Day — Colonel Hotham — Colonel Lake — General Fawcett — Mr.
Bouverie — Lord Herbert — Lady Mexborough — The Bishop of Salisbury — Visit from
the Duke of York — Princess Amelia — Wedding Letters — Lady Mulgrave — Domestic
Pleasures of the Royal Family — Reunion — A Visit from the Prince of Wales — The
Princesse de Lamballe — Rapid Travelling — Hopes and Fears — Public Reconciliation
of the King and Prince of Wales — The Drawing-room — The Prince's Birthday — A
Solitary Dinner — An Evening Party — Duchess of Ancaster — A Singular Complaint —
The celebrated Harry Bunbury — A Caricaturist at Court — OUa Podrida — Visit from
the Queen — Arrival and Reception of Mrs.  Siddons — Her Manners,  Person,  and Con-
versation— Disappointment — Mrs.  Siddons's desire to act  "  Cecilia" — Table-talk on
Plays and Players — A Scene — Madame de Genlis — A Conversation on Dreams — A
Ball at the Castle — Up all night — Ill-nature — Kew — St.  James's — Remonstrance and
Reply — A difficult Position — A Sermon made expres — Expostulation and Reply — Dr.
Herschel — Miss Herschel,  the female Astronomer — Rome and Versailles — Bunbury,
the Caricaturist — His Manners and Conversation — Mr.  Locke as an Artist — An En-
thusiast — Lady Templetown — A Visit from the Prince of Wales — Memoirs of a Noble
Hindu — A Pleasant Change — A Conversation with the Queen — Newspaper Notoriety
— A Royal Present from Naples — Fairings — A Surprise — A Breach of Etiquette — The
Prince of Wales — Newspaper Reports and their Consequences — Conversation with the
Queen — Difficulties and Explanations — Cruel Treatment — Permission to rebel — How
to bear and forbear — Official Tyranny — Lady Bute — Lady Louisa Stuart — A Pleasant
Evening dearly purchased — New Expedients to obtain Peace — A Change for the Better
—An Irish Compensation — An Enthusiast— Conclusion.

Thursday,  August 2nd. — To-day,  after a seven years'  absence,  arrived
the Duke of York.  I saw him alight from his carriage,  with an eager-
ness, a vivacity,  that assured me of the affectionate joy with which he re-
turned to his country and family.  But the joy of his excellent father? — O
that there is no describing !  It was the glee of the first youth — nay,  of
ardent and innocent infancy, — so pure it seemed,  so warm,  so open,  so
unmi.xed  !

Softer joy was the Queen's — mild,  equal,  and touching;  while all the
Princesses were in one universal rapture.

It was a happy day throughout:  no one could forbear the strongest hopes
that the long-earned,  long-due recompense of paternal kindness and goodness
was now to be amply paid.

To have the pleasure of seeing the Royal Family in this happy assem-
blage, I accompanied Miss P on the Terace.  It was indeed an affect-
ing sight to view the general content  ;  but that of the Kinsj went to my very
heart,  so delighted he looked — so proud of his son — so benevolently pleased
that every one should witness his satisfaction.

The Terrace was very full;  all Windsor and its neighbourhood poured
in upon it,  to see the Prince,  whose whole demeanour seemed promising to
merit his flattering reception;  gay,  yet grateful — modest,  yet unembarrassed.
*  *-  *  *  *  *

I brought in only Miss P to tea ;  her sweet aunt then joined us,  as

did General Grenville,  who had attended the Duke home,  and who is chief
of his establishment.  The Duke of Montagu arrived soon after,  to see his
former pupil,  and was greatly moved with pleasure.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  599

The excellent King came into the tea-room for Mrs.  Delany,  who con-
gratulated him,  most respectfully apologizing,  at the same time,  for ventur-
ing to come to the Lodge on such an occasion.  "  My dear Mrs.  Delany,"
cried he,  "  if you could have stayed away on such a day as this,  I should
have thought it quite unkind !"  And then he bid the Duke of Montagu
hand her to the royal apartment.

Early the next morning arrived the Prince of Wales,  who had travelled
all night from Brighthelmstone.  The day was a day of complete happiness
to the whole of the Royal Family  ;  the King was in one transport of delight,
unceasing,  invariable  ;  and though the newly arrived Duke was its source
and support,  the kindness of his heart extended and expanded to his eldest-
born,  whom he seemed ready again to take to his paternal breast ;  indeed,
the whole world seemed endeared to him by the happiness he now felt in it.

The tea circle was now enlarged with some of the Prince's gentlemen,
and others who came to pay their duty to the Duke.  Colonel Hotham,
Colonel Lake,  General Fawcet,  Mr.  Bouverie,  Lord Herbert,  and some
others,  were here for three evenings,  and General Grenville during the
whole stay of the Duke at Windsor,  as well as General Bude.

Sunday,  August 5th. — The Prince of Wales returned to Brighton.  I
walked again upon the Terrace,  with Miss Egerton,  who had Lady Mex-
borough of her party.  The next day arrived my beloved Fredy's beautiful
work-box for my little Princess.

To our already large party was now added the Bishop of Salisbury,
Major Price's uncle,  who made me some such very kind speeches from Mrs.
Kennicott,  then on a visit at his house,  that I was soon satisfied,  from my
very slight acquaintance with her,  he made her name a mere vehicle for his
own civilities,  For a Bishop,  he is rather too courteous;  I am much better
pleased with Bishop Hurd,  whose civility is all in manner,  not words.

General Grenville brought in the Duke this evening to the tea-room.  I
was very much pleased with his behaviour,  which was modest,  dignified,
and easy.  Might he but escape the contagion of surrounding examples,  he
seems promising of all his fond father expects and merits.

August 7th. — I followed my fair little Princess to the garden,  with her
cacleau,  on this morn of her birth  ;  but she could not then take it.  I saw
her afterwards with the Queen,  and she immediately said,  *'  Mamma,  may
Miss Burney fetch me my box?"

The Queen inquired what it was?  and,  hearing the explanation,  gave
immediate consent.  I fetched it.  The sweet Princess was extremely
delighted,  and her sweet mother admired it almost equally.  It was only too
pretty for so young a possessor.

I had two wedding-letters this morning;  one from Mr.  Cambridge,  with
some account of his son Charles and his bride ;  and the other from a very
sweet bride indeed.  Lady Mulgrave ;  and a letter as sweet as herself —
modest,  kind,  happy,  and affectionate.

We then set off for Kew.

The good Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt came to tea;  and the Princess Elizabeth
came to see them,  and brought her work,  and made us all sit with her for
more than an hour.

The King indulged the little Princess with driving her out in his garden-
phaeton,  which is a double carriage,  and contained the Queen and the Prin-
cess Royal,  Princess Augusta,  and Lady Caroline Waldegrave,  Princess
Amelia,  and one more.

The next day the now happy family had the delight of again seeing the
two Princes in its circle.     They dined here ;  and the Princess Augusta,

600 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

who came to Mrs.  Schwellenberg's room in the evening,  on a message,
said,  "  There never had been so happy a dinner since the world was
created."

The King,  in the evening,  again drove out the Queen and Princesses.
The Prince of Wales,  seeing Mr.  Smelt in our room  (which,  at Kew,  is in
the front of the house,  as well as at Windsor),  said he would come in and
ask him how he did.  Accordingly,  in he came,  and talked to Mr.  Smelt for
about a quarter of an hour;  his subjects almost wholly his horses and his
rides.  He gave some account of his expedition to town to meet his brother.
He was just preparing,  at Brighton,  to give a supper entertainment to
Madame la Princesse de Lamballe, — when he perceived his courier.  "  I
dare say,"  he cried,  "  my brother's come  !"  set off instantly to excuse him-
self to the Princesse,  and arrived at Windsor by the time of early prayers,
at eight o'clock the next morning.

"  To-day,  again,"  he said,  "  I resolved to be in town to meet my brother :
we determined to dine somewhere together,  but had not settled where  ;  so
hither we came.  When I last went to Brighton,  I rode one hundred and
thirty miles,  and then danced at the ball.  I am going back directly  ;  but I
shall ride to Windsor again for the birthday,  and shall stay there till my
brother's,  and then back on Friday.  We are going now over the way :  my
brother wants to see the old mansion."

The Prince of Wales's house is exactly opposite to the Lodge.

The Duke then came in,  and bowed to every one present,  very attentively;
and presently after they went over the way,  arm in arm  ;  and thence
returned to town.

I had a long and painful discourse afterwards with Mr.  Smelt,  deeply
interested in these young Princes,  upon the many dangers awaiting the
newly arrived,  who seemed alike unfitted and unsuspicious for encountering
them.  Mr.  Smelt's heart ached as if he had been their parent,  and the
regard springing from his early and long care of them seemed all revived
in his hopes and fears of what might ensue from this reunion.

How I rejoiced at the public reconciliation with the Prince of Wales,
which had taken place during my illness,  and which gave the greater reason
for hope that there might not now be a division  !

Thursday,  9th. — We went to town for the drawing-room.  It was unu-
sually brilliant for the time of year,  in compliment to the Duke of York.
His Royal Highness came to the Queen's dressing-room before she attired  ;
and the Duchess of Ancaster and Miss Goldsworthy were admitted,  by the
happy King,  to have a sight of his restored darling.  The Prince of Wales
was also at Court.

In my own room I found my dearest father waiting for me,  quite
well,  full of spirits,  full of Handel,  full of manuscripts,  and full of proof
sheets.

The evening finished with the usual party in Mrs.  Schwellenberg's
room.

Des horreuTS — des humeiirs are still all in play  !  I have no account to
give of them,  but those  "  cordial looks"  of that mischievous Mr.  Turbulent,
who certainly has been observed to contrast them strikingly elsewhere.  I
sometimes think 1 must wholly break with that strange man,  to avoid some
actual mischief;  and surely,  were such the alternative,  I should not hesitate
one little instant.

We returned to Windsor next day ;  and all Us horreurs were soothed by
the sweet balmy kindness of my revered Mrs.  Delany.     What may not be

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  601

endured where there is the solace of sympathy  ?     Every thing,  1 think,
save one —

"  Hard unkindness'  alter'd eye."

I know of no endurance for that.

Sunday,  12th. — This was the Prince's real birthday,  though it was cele*
brated on the Monday.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg was ill;  accumulated bile,  I
believe,  disordered her:  she could not come down stairs,  and I dined quite
alone,  upon a most splendid dinner,  fit for the mayor and corporation of a
great trading city.  I entreated the protecting presence of my dear old friend
for the tea-table,  which was crowded.  The Duke of Montagu,  Signer del
Campo,  Generals Grenville,  Bude,  Fawcet,  and Colonels Hulse,  Lake,
Gwynn,  and St.  Leger.

Colonel Gwynn briefly presented the Prince's three Colonels,  St.  Leger,
Hulse,  and Lake,  to me  ;  but the idea I had preconceived of them very much
unfitted me for doing the honours,  and I am sensible I acquitted myself very
ill.  Mrs.  Delany,  the Duke of Montagu,  and Signer del Campo sat near
me,  and with these alone I could attempt any conversation.

To my great amaze,  the celebrated Colonel St.  Leger,  with his friend
Colonel Lake,  sat wholly silent,  with an air of shy distance that seemed to
show them ill at ease.  I had expected they would at least have amused
themselves apart,  which they always do when the right lady is Presidente  ;
but I should not wonder to hear it explained by ih^'w fearing they  ■might be
i7iserted i?i a hook  !  Here,  however,  it may be no bad thing to be little
enough known for so unjust a suspicion.

Monday,  13th. — To-day the gala was kept.  I had a visit from the eldest
Miss Anguish,  which I had promised to receive from her the day before,
when I met her at the entrance of the cathedral.  She is a good-natured
girl,  and so warm in her affections that she seems made up of nothing else.

The rest of the morning was consumed in four dressings, — two of my
Queen's,  two of her Keeper of the Robes.

Tuesday,  14th. — I had a long chatting visit from the Duchess of
Ancaster,  who lamented to me the early hours of this house for her
daughter.  Lady Charlotte Bertie,  with as much pathos as most parents
would have exerted for the late hours of every other.

Mrs.  Delany was early carried off this evening by the King,  but Miss

P remained with me,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg being still loo unwell for the

tea-table.

There we went at the usual time,  and General Bude came in,  with two
strangers,  whom he introduced to us by the names of Bunbury and Crawfurd..

I was very curious to know if this was the Bunbury  ;  and 1 conjectured it
could be no other.  When Colonel Gwynn joined us,  he proposed anew the
introduction  ;  but nothing passed to ascertain my surmise.  The conversa-
tion was general and good-humoured,  but without any thing striking,  or
bespeaking character or genius.  Almost the whole consisted of inquiries
what to do,  whither to go,  and how to proceed  ;  which,  though natural and
sensible for a new man,  were undistinguished by any humour,  or keenness
of expression or manner.

Mr.  Crawfurd spoke not a word.  He is a very handsome young man,
just appointed equerry to the Duke of York.

I whispered my inquiry to Colonel Gwynn as soon as 1 found an oppor-
tunity, and heard  "Yes, — 'tis Harry Bunbury,  sure enough I"

So now we may all be caricatured at his leisure I He is made another of
the equerries to the Duke.     A man with such a turn,  and with talents sa

VOL.  I.  61

602 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

inimitable in displaying it,  was a rather dangerous character to be brought
within a court !

Late at night Mrs.  Delany was handed back to us by Colonel Golds-
worthy,  who began a most unreserved lamentation of being detained all the
evening in the Royal apartments — "Because,"  cried he,  "I heard Mrs.
VVhat-do-you-call-her was ill,  and could not be here;  and I was so glad —
sorry,  I mean  !     Well,  it would come out !  there's no help for it !"

Then he told us his great distress on account of a commission he had
received to order some millinery goods to be sent by his sister from town,
— "  So I knew I could not remember one word about it, — garlands,  and
gauzes,  and ribands, — so I writ to my sister,  and just said,  '  Pray,  sister,
please to send down a whole milliner's shop,  and the milliners with it,  for
directions,  because the Queen wants something.'  And so she did it, — and
to-night the Queen told me the things came quite right  !"

And then,  when obliged to return to the Royals,  he exclaimed,  in de-
camping, "  Well — to-morrow I will not be so seized  !  I am so glad — somj,
I mean  ! — for this illness  !"

Wednesday,  15th. — I shall now have an adventure to relate that will
much — and not disagreeably — surprise both my dear readers.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg's illness occasioned my attending the Queen alone;
and when my official business was ended,  she graciously detained me,  to
read to me a new paper,  called  "  Olla Podrida,"  which is now publishing
periodically.     Nothing very bright — nothing very deficient.

In the afternoon,  while I was drinking coffee with Mrs.  Schwellenberg, —
or,  rather,  looking at it,  since I rarely swallow any, — her Majesty came into
the room,  and soon after a little German discourse with Mrs.  Schwellenberg
told me Mrs.  Siddons had been ordered to the Lodge,  to read a play,  and
desired 1 would receive her in my room.

•  I felt a little queer in the office  ;  I had only seen her twice or thrice,  in
large assemblies,  at Miss Monckton's,  and at Sir Joshua Reynolds's,  and
never had been introduced to her,  nor spoken with her.  However,  in this
dead and tame life I now lead,  such an interview was by no means unde-
sirable.

I had just got to the bottom of the stairs,  when she entered the passage
gallery.  I took her into the tea-room,  and endeavoured to make amends
for former distance and taciturnity,  by an open and cheerful reception.  I
had heard from sundry people  (in old days)  that she wished to make the
acquaintance ;  but 1 thought it,  then,  one of too conspicuous a sort for the
quietness I had so much difficulty to preserve in my ever increasing con-
nexions. Here all was changed ;  I received her by the Queen's commands,
and was perfectly well inclined to reap some pleasure from the meeting.

But,  now that we came so near,  I was much disappointed in my expecta-
tions. I know not if my dear Fredy has met with her in private,  but I
fancy approximation is not highly in her favour.  I found her the heroine
of a tragedy,  sublime,  elevated,  and solemn.  In face and person,  truly
noble and commanding;  in manners,  quiet and stiff;  in voice,  deep and
dragging;  and in conversation,  formal,  sententious,  calm,  and dry.  I
expected her to have been all that is interesting ;  the delicacy and sweetness
with which she seizes every opportunity to strike and to captivate upon the
stage had persuaded me that her mind was formed with that peculiar sus-
ceptibility which,  in different modes,  must give equal powers to attract and
10 delight in common life.  But 1 was very much mistaken.  As a stranger,
I must have admired her noble appearance and beautiful countenance,  and
have regretted that nothing in her conversation kept pace with their promise ;
and,  as a celebrated actress,  I had still only to do the same.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  603

Whether fame and success have spoiled her,  or whether she only possesses
the skill of representing and embellishing materials with which she is fur-
nished by others,  I know not ;  but still I remain disappointed.

She was scarcely seated,  and a little general discourse begun,  before she
told me — all at once — that  "There was no part she had ever so much wished
to act as that of Cecilia."

I made some little acknowledgment,  and hurried to ask when she had
seen Sir Joshua Reynolds,  Miss Palmer,  and others with whom I knew her
acquainted.

The play she was to read was  "  The Provoked Husband."  She appeared
neither alarmed nor elated by her summons,  but calmly to look upon it as
a thing of course,  from her celebrity.

She left me to go to Lady Harcourt,  through whose interest she was
brought hither.  She was on a visit for a week at General Harcourt's,  at
St.  Leonard's,  where there seems to be,  in general,  constant and well-chosen
society and amusement.  I believe Mrs.  Harcourt to have very good taste
in both  ;  and,  were she less girlish and flippant,  I fancy she has parts quite
equal to promote and add to,  as well as to enjoy them.  I am softened
towards her,  of late,  by her consideration for Mrs.  Gwynn,  whom she has
kindly invited to spend the widowhood of her husband's equerryship at St.
Leonard's,  where he can frequently visit her.

3Irs.  Siddons told me that both these ladies,  Mrs.  Harcourt and Mrs.
Gwynn,  had worked for her incessantly,  to assist in fitting her out for
appearing at the Queen's Lodge,  as she had gone to St.  Leonard's with only
undress clothes.

I should very much have liked to have heard her read the play,  but my
dearest Mrs.  Delany spent the whole evening with me,  and I could there-
fore take no measures for finding out a convenient adjoining room.  Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  I heard afterwards was so accommodated,  though not v/ell
enough for the tea-table,  where I had the Duke of Montagu,  Generals Gren-
ville and Bude,  Colonels Goldsworthy and Gwynn,  and Messrs.  Crawfurd
and Bunbury.     Miss P ,  of course.

My sole conversation this evening was with Mr.  Bunbury,  who drew a
chair next mine,  and chatted incessantly,  with great good humour,  and an
avidity to discuss the subjects he started,  which were all concerning plays
and players.  Mrs.  Siddons and Mrs.  Jordan,  Le Tessier and Shakspeare,
— these were fruitful themes,  and descanted upon with great warmth and
animation.

The Princess Amelia came,  with Mrs.  Cheveley,  to order the attendance
of the Duke of Montagu.  General Grenville,  a silent,  reserved valetudi-
nary, went under the same convoy  ;  and General Bude,  Colonel Gwynn,
and Mr.  Crawfurd,  quickly followed.

Presently,  the voice of the Duke of York was heard,  calling aloud for
Colonel Goldsworthy.  Off he ran.  Mr.  Bunbury laughed,  but declared
he would not take the hint  :  "  What,"  cried he,  "  if I lose the beginning'/
— 1 think I know it pretty well by heart! — Why did I  ?7iarnj?"-—And
then he began to spout,  and act,  and rattle away,  with all his might,  till the
same voice called out  "  Bunbury  ! — you'll be too late  !" — And off he flew,
leaving his tea untasted — so eager had he been in discourse.

Tuesday,  16th. — The birthday of the Duke of York.  A day,  to me,  of
nothing but dress and fatigue, — but I rejoiced in the joy it gave to the good
King and family.

Madame la Fite,  in her visit of congratulation,  told me she had received
repeated inquiries after me from Madame de Genlis,  who wondered 1 never
wrote,  as she had written to me while in England.     Acquainted already

604 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

with the opinion of my Royal Mistress,  which,  having myself requested,  I
must regard as a law,  I evaded the discussion,  as much as was in my
power,  and besought her to draw up some civil apology:  but she was unre-
mitting in her entreaties and exhortations  ;  and,  as I did not dare trust her
with what had passed between her Majesty and myself on the subject,  she
seemed,  here,  to have the right on her side so strongly,  that I had no
means to silence her,  and know not,  indeed,  how I may.

Madame de Genlis has wished to make me a present of her new publica-
tion on Religion,  but desires me to ask it.  That,  now,  is impossible  :  but
I am truly vexed to appear so utterly insensible to a woman of such rare
merit and captivating sweetness  ;  and,  as I do not,  cannot believe the tales
propagated to her dishonour,  1 am grieved to return her kindness with such
mortifying neglect.  1 have,  however,  no longer any choice left ;  where
once I have applied to the Queen,  I hold myself bound in duty and respect
to observe her injunctions implicitly.

Mr.  Smelt came with his compliments on the day,  and made me happy
by breakfasting with me.

We had a very long confabulation upon dreams.  To me they are a sub-
ject I wish much to form some satisfactory notion about,  as they leave me
more bewildered than any other,  and always appear to me big with powers
to lead to deeper knowledge of the soul and its immortality than any thing
else that comes within our cognizance unaided by revelation.  I have
many strong ideas about them,  that I should wish extremely to have
elucidated by somebody equally wise and good.  Such people are not every
where to be found.  I regret I never started the subject with Dr.  Johnson.
1 hope yet to do it with Mr.  Locke.  With Mr.  Smelt I have particular
pleasure in opening upon such themes  :  I know not a more religious cha-
racter. But how very,  very few people are there that I do not run from,
the moment a topic of that solemn sort is started  !  Poor Mr.  Turbulent
cannot yet pass over my rejecting so resolutely to hear or answer his
opinions on these matters;  but certainly,  while I have feet to run or ears to
stop,  I shall never stand still nor listen to him upon such occasions.

At the Castle there was a ball.     Mrs.  Delany and Miss P spent the

evening here,  and all of us up stairs.  I sat up all night,  not having the
heart to make Goter,  and not daring to trust to a nap for myself.  But the
morning proved very fine,  and I watched the opening dawn and rising sun,
and enjoyed,  with twinkling eyes,  their blushing splendour.

How tired I felt the next day  !  but I was kindly told 1 must  "Certainly
like sitting up all night,  or for what did I do it? — when the Queen came
not home till near morning,  I might have done what I liked  ;  nobody might
pity me,  when I did such things,  if 1 had been ill for my pains."

I hastened,  when able,  to niy beloved comforter,  whose soothing sweet-
ness softened the depression of hardness and injustice.  Some rudeness,
however,  which even this angel met with from the same quarter,  deter-
mined her not to come this evening to tea.  I invited,  therefore,  Madame la
Fite to assist me at tea ;  when I had a party of gentlemen,  all,  like myself,
so fatigued with the business of the preceding day's diversion,  that our only
conversation was in comfortably comparing notes of complaint.

In the evening Madame la Fite took my place at piquet up stairs,  and I
began Dr.  Beattie's  '<  Evidence of the Christian Religion,"  and there found
the composure I required.

Sunday,  19th. — I had a long morning visit from Lady Harcourt,  who
talked zealously of the present critical time for the King's happiness,  in the
turn yet remaining to be taken by the Duke of York.

My dear Mrs.  Delany would stay away no longer,  seeing me the only

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  605

person punished by her merited resentment.  She came,  though Mrs.
Schwellenberg was again down stairs  ;  and behaved with a softness of
dignity peculiar to herself.

Colonel Gwynn brought with him his beautiful wife to tea.  We renewed
our acquaintance as well as we could in such a presence,  and I had,  at
least,  some pleasure in it,  since her beauty was pleasant to my eye,  and
could not be affected by its vicinage,  save indeed,  by a contrast that doubled
its lustre.

Tuesday,  21st. — We came to Kew without Mr.  De Luc,  who has leave
of absence,  and is gone to enjoy it.  At dinner we had Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,
Miss Planta,  and Mr.  Turbulent.  He appeared very lofty,  and highly
affronted.     I seemed not to notice any change,  and behaved as usual.

Thursday,  23iid. — Miss Planta accompanied me to St.  James's.  In the
way,  she almost remonstrated with me upon giving such vexation to I\Ir,
Turbulent,  who spoke of my silence and distance,  as if possessed,  she
said,  with no other idea.

I was very sorry for this,  every way.  He had told me,  indeed,  that I
knew not how he was surprised by my behaviour  ;  but I had heard it like
the rest of his rattles.  I could give her no satisfaction,  though I saw her
curiosity all awake.  But the point was too delicate for a hint of serious
disapprobation.  I merely said I would amend,  and grow more loquacious  ;
and there it dropped.

At St.  James's,  I read in the newspapers a paragraph that touched me
much for the very amiable Mr.  Fairly :  it was the death of his wife,  which
happened on the Duke of York's birthday,  the 16th.  Mr.  Fairly has
devoted his whole time,  strength,  thoughts,  and cares,  solely to nursing and
attending her during a long and most painful ilness which she sustained.
They speak of her here as being amiable,  but so cold and reserved that
she was little known,  and by no means in equal favour with her husband,
who stands,  upon the whole,  the highest in general esteem and regard of
any individual of the household.     I find every mouth open to praise and

pity,  love and honour him.

******

Upon returning to Kew,  I had a scene for which I was little enough,
indeed,  prepared,  though willing and indeed earnest to satisfy Mr.  Turbu-
lent I wished him to make an alteration of behaviour.  After hastily
changing my dress,  I went,  as usual,  to the parlour,  to be ready for dinner;
but found there no Mrs.  Schwellenberg  ;  she was again unwell  ;  Miss
Planta was not ready,  and Mr.  Turbulent was reading by himself.

Away he flung his book in a moment,  and hastening to shut the door lest
I should retreat,  he rather charged than desired me to explain my late
"  chilling demeanour."

Almost startled by his apparent entire ignorance of deserving it,  I found
an awkwardness I had not foreseen in making myself understood.  I wished
him rather to feel,  than to be told the improprieties I meant to obviate  ;  and
I did what was possible,  by half evasive,  half expressive answers,  to call
back his owm recollection and consciousness.  In vain,  however,  was the
attempt ;  he protested himself wholly innocent,  and that he would rather
make an end of his existence than give me offence.

He saw not these very protestations were again doing it,  and he grew so
vehement in his defence,  and so reproachful in his accusation of unjust
usage,  that I was soon totally in a perplexity how to extricate myself from
a difficulty I had regarded simply as his own.     But what could I do where

51*

606 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

nothing less than a plain charge would be heard  ?  I could not say,  "  Sir,
you are too assiduous — too flattering — too importunate — and too bold  ;"  yet
less seemed to accuse him of nothing.

The moment he saw 1 grew embarrassed,  he redoubled his challenges to
know the cause of my ill-treatment.  I assured him,  then,  I could never
reckon silence ill-treatment.

"  Yes,"  he cried,  "  yes,  from you it is ill-treatment,  and it has given me
the most serious uneasiness."

"  I am sorry,"  I said,  "  for that,  and did not mean it."

"  Not mean it?"  cried he.  "  Could you imagine I should miss your con-
versation, your ease,  your pleasantness,  your gaiety,  and take no notice of
the loss  ?"

Then followed a most violent flow of compliments,  ending with assuring
me my distance made him incapable of all business,  "  from thinking of its
injustice  ;"  and with a fresh demand for an explanation,  made with an
energy that,  to own the truth,  once more quite frightened me.  I
endeavoured to appease him,  by general promises of becoming more
voluble :  and I quite languished to say to him the truth at once ;  that his
sport,  his spirit,  and his society would all be acceptable to me,  would he
but divest them of that redundance of gallantry which rendered them
offensive :  but I could only think how to say this — I could not bring it out;
his attestations of innocence made it seem shocking to me to have to censure
him,  and I felt it a sort of degradation of myself to point out an impropriety
that seemed quite out of his own ideas.

This promised volubility,  though it softened him,  he seemed to receive as
a sort of acknowledgment that I owed him some reparation for the distur-
bance I had caused him.  I stared enough at such an interpretation,  which
I could by no means allow  ;  but no sooner did I disclaim it than all his
violence was resumed,  and he urged me to give in my charge against him,
with an impetuosity that almost made me tremble.  I would fain have made
my escape from him,  and my eyes were continually directed towards the
door ;  but he stood immediately before me,  and I saw in his face and
manner something so determined,  that I was sure any effort to depart would
•occasion a forced detention.

I made as little answer as possible,  finding every thing I said seemed but
the more to inflame his violent spirit ;  but his emotion was such,  and the
cause so inadequate,  and my uncertainty so unpleasant what to think of him
altogether,  that I was seized with sensations so nervous,  I could almost have
cried.  When I thought him going too far in his solicitude and protestations,
1 looked away from him vv-ith horror  ;  when I felt satisfied by his dis-
claiming assertions,  1 became ashamed of such an idea.  In the full
torrent of his offended justification against my displeasure towards him,
he perceived my increasing distress how to proceed,  and,  suddenly
stopping,  exclaimed in quite another tone,  "  Now,  then,  ma'am,  I see your
justice returning;  you feel that you have used me very ill!"

This recovered me in a moment :  my concern all flew away,  from a
misconstruction so forced and so confident ;  and 1 positively assured him
I would neither hear nor speak another word upon the subject,  to one who
would neither say nor understand any thing but what he pleased.

"But you will tell me,"  he cried,  "another time?"

And then,  to my great relief,  entered Miss Planta.  He contrived to say
again,  "  Remember,  you promise to explain all this."

I made him no sort of answer,  and though he frequently,  in the course
•of the evening,  repeated,  "  I depend upon your promise  !  I hutld upon a

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  607

conference,"  I sent his dependence and his building to Coventry,  by not
seeming to hear him.

I determined however to avoid all tite-d-tites with him whatsoever,  as
much as was in my power.  How very few people are fit for them,  nobody
living in trios and quartettos can imagine  !

Though frequently enough more interested,  I have seldom been more
deeply perplexed,  than how to manage with this very eccentric character.
Seriously ill of him I cannot,  and,  indeed,  I do not think  :  if I did,  all
difficulty would subside,  however unpleasantly ;  for the abhorrence with
which I should be filled would remove from me all hesitation and fear.  But
as I do really believe him innocent of all evil intention,  and actuated only
by an impetuous nature,  that seeks confusion and difficulty for its food and
amusement,  without considering their danger or weighing their impropriety,
I find myself extremely at a loss how to point out to him my dislike of his
actual proceedings,  without appearing to harbour doubts which he might
cast,  to my infinite dismay,  upon myself.

To resume,  therefore,  a general behaviour,  such as was customary with
me,  and to keep out of his way,  was all I could settle.  Yet so much was I
disturbed by what had passed,  and so impossible did I feel it to be under-
stood by my Susanna and Fredy without their seeing the very particulars
now before them,  that,  upon returning the next day to Windsor,  I opened
the whole business,  in a private conference,  to my dear Mrs.  Delany  :  she
approved my plan,  and was of opinion,  with myself,  that there was no evil
in the mind,  though there was a world of deficiencies,  errors,  and faults in

the character.

#  *  *  #  %  %

At Windsor,  we found Colonel Gwynn,  General Bude,  and Mr.  Bunbury,
with whom I made no further acquaintance,  as I was no longer Lady of the
Manor.  All the household has agreed to fear him,  except Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg,  who is happy that he cannot caricature her,  because,  she says,  she has
no Hu7np.

Tt*  tF  *  ^  vp tF

Who should find me out now but Dr.  Shepherd.  He is here as canon,
and was in residence.  He told me he had long wished to come,  but had never
been able to find the way of entrance before.  He made me an immense
length of visit,  and related to me all the exploits of his life, — so far as they
were prosperous.  In no farce did a man ever more floridly open upon his
own perfections.  He assured me I should be delighted to know the whole
of his life;  it was equal to any thing;  and every thing he had was got by
his own address and ingenuity.

"  I could tell the King,"  cried he,  "  more than all the Chapter.  I want to
talk to him,  but he always gets out of my way ;  he does not know me ;  he
takes me for a mere common person,  like the rest of the canons here,  and
thinks of me no more than if I were only fit for the cassock  ; — a mere
Scotch priest !  Bless  'em  ! — they know nothing about me.  You have no
conception what things I have done I And I want to tell  'em all this  ; — it's
fitter for them to hear than what comes to their ears.  What I want is for
somebody to fell them what I am."

They know it already,  thought I.

Then,  when he had exhausted this general panegyric,  he descended to
some few particulars;  especially dilating upon his preaching,  and applying
to me for attesting its excellence.

«'  I shall make one sermon every year,  precisely for you  !"  he cried  :  "  I
think I know what will please you.  That on the Creation last Sunday was
just to your taste.     You shall have such another next residence.     I think I

608 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

preach in the right tone — not too slow,  like that poor wretch Grape,  nor too
fast,  like Davis and the rest of 'em  ;  but yet fast enough never to tire them.
That's just my idea of good preaching."

Then he told me what excellent apartments he had here,  and how much
he should like my opinion in fitting them up.  He begged to know if I could
come to a concert,  as he would give me such a one as would delight me.  I
told him it was quite impossible.

Then he said I might perhaps have more time in town ;  and there he had

the finest instruments in the world.     I assured him of his mistake.

*  #  *  *  *-  #

My dear Mrs.  Delany carried me with her again to Stoke,  where what
most pleased me was a housefull of sweet children,  daughters and sons of
Dr.  and Lady Elizabeth Courtney,  and grandchildren of Lady Effingham.

The next day Lady Effingham came to. Windsor,  and,  while I was
present,  said to the Queen,  "  O,  ma'am,  I had the greatest fright this morn-
ing ! — I saw a huge something on Sir George's throat.  '  Why,  Sir George,'
says I, '  what's that  ? — a wen V  '  Yes,'  says he, '  Countess,  I've had it these
twenty years.'  However,  1 hear it's now going about; — so I hope your
Majesty will be careful."

I am sure I was not,  for I laughed irresistibly  !

And now I must finish this month with a scene that closed its 30th day.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg invited Mr.  Turbulent to dinner,  for she said he had
a large correspondence and might amuse her.  He came early  ;  and finding
nobody in the eating-parlour,  begged to wait in mine till Mrs.  Schwellenberg
came down stairs.

This was the last thing I wished ;  but he required no answer,  and
instantly resumed the Kew discussion,  entreating me to tell him what he
had done.

I desired him to desist,  in vain — he affirmed I had promised him an
explanation,  and he had therefore a right to it.

"And when,"  cried I,  "did I make such a promise 1 — never,  I am sure I
— nor ever shall  !"

"  You did promise me,"  cried he  ;  "  not perhaps in so many words  ;  but
you hesitated  :  at one time you had some remorse for your conduct,  and I
fully understood you meant to promise me for another time."

"  You fully mistook me,  then  !"  cried I ;  "  for I meant no such thing then ;
1 mean no such thing now  ;  and I never shall mean any such thing in future.
Is this explicit?"

He cast up his hands and eyes in reproachful and silent astonishment.  But
I thought I would try for once to be as peremptory as himself.

"  Is it really possible,"  cried he,  after this dumbshow,  "  you can have
such an obstinacy in your nature?"

"I think it best,"  cried I,  "to tell you so at once,  that you may expect
nothing more,  but give over the subject,  and talk of something else.  What
is the news  ?"

"  No,  no,  I will talk of nothing else ! — it distracts me  ; — pray tell me  ! — I
call upon your good nature!"

"I have none — about this!"

"Upon your goodness of heart!"

"  'Tis all hardness here  !"

"  I will cast myself at your feet, — 1 will kneel to you  !"

And he was preparing his immense person for prostration,  when Goter
opened the door.  Such an interruption to his heroics made me laugh
heartily;  nor could he help joining himself;  though the moment she was
gone he renewed his importunity with unabated earnestness.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  609

"  I remember,"  he cried,  "  it was upon the Terrace you first showed me
this disdain  ;  and there,  too,  you have shown it me repeatedly since,  with
public superciliousness."

Then,  suddenly drawing up,  with a very scornful look,  he haughtily said,
"  Permit me to tell you,  ma'am, — had it been any body else, — permit me to
tell you, — that had done just so, — aymj body else  ! — they might have gone
their own way,  ever after,  without a question — without a thought ! — But
you  ! — you do any thing with me  !  You turn,  twist,  and wind me just as
you like."

I inquired if he had seen Madame de Genlis's new book.

"  No,  no  !"  cried he impetuously  ; — "  I call upon your justice,  ma'am  ! —
You well know you have treated me ill, — you know and have acknow-
ledged it !"

"  And when  ?"  cried T,  amazed and provoked  :  "  when did I do what could
never be done?"

"  At Kew,  ma'am,  you were full of concern — full of remorse for the treat-
ment you had given me  ! — and you owned it !"

"  Good Heaven,  Mr.  Turbulent,  what can induce you to say this V

"Is it not true?"

"  Not a word of it !     You know it is not !"

"  Indeed,"  cried he,  "  I really and truly thought so — hoped so  ; — I believed
you looked as if you felt your own ill-usage, — and it gave to me a delight
inexpressible !"

This was almost enough to bring back the very same  "  supercilious dis-
tance" of which he complained  ;  but,  in dread of fresh explanations,  I for-
bore to notice this flight,  and only told him he might be perfectly satisfied,
since I no longer persevered in the taciturnity to which he objected.

"  But how,"  cried he,  "  do you give it up,  without deigning to assign one
reason for it?"

"  The greater the compliment !"  cried I,  laughing ;  "  I give it up to your
request."

"  Yes,  ma'am,  upon my speaking, — but why did you keep me so long in
that painful suspense?"

"Nay,"  cried I,  "  could I well be quicker?  Till you spoke,  could I
know if you heeded it?"

"  Ah,  ma'am  ! — is there then no language but of words  ?  Do you pretend
to think there is no other? — Must I teach it you? — to teach it to Miss Bur-
ney,  who speaks,  who understands it so well  ? — who is never silent,  and
never can be silent?"

And then came his heroic old homage to the poor eyebrows,  vehe-
mently finishing with,  "  Do you,  can you affect to know no language but
speech  ?"

"  Not,"  cried I,  coolly,  "  without the trouble of more investigation than I
had taken here."

He called this  "  contempt,"  and,  exceedingly irritated,  desired me,
once more,  to explain,  from beginning to end,  how he had ever offended
me.

"  Mr.  Turbulent,"  cried I,  "  will you be satisfied if I tell you it shall all
blow over?"

"Make me a vow,  then,  you will never more,  never while you live,  re-
sume that proud taciturnity."

"  No,  no, — certainly not ;  I never make vows  ;  it is a rule with me to
avoid them."

"  Give me,  then,  your promise, — your solemn promise, — at least I may
claim that?"

610 DIARY AND LETTERS 1767.

"  I have the same peculiarity about promises ;  I never make them."

He was again beginning to storm,  but again I assured him I would let
the acquaintance take its old course,  if he would but be appeased,  and say-
no more;  and,  after difficuhies innumerable,  he at length gave up the point:
but to this he was hastened,  if not driven,  by a summons to dinner.

In leaving the room,  to attend Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  he turned about at the
door,  and,  with a comic expression of resentment against himself,  he
clenched his fist,  and exclaimed,  "This is without example!  I am actually
going without the smallest satisfaction,  though I came with the most fixed
determination to obtain it !"

How strange and how wild a character!  I often wonder how he lives
with his wife.  How miserable would such a husband render me  !  Yet I
hear he is quite adored by her,  and extremely kind to her.

I again acquainted my beloved old friend with all this afilur;  and she
counselled me to keep upon manifest good terms invariably,  and to avoid
complaints that led to scenes of such violence and impropriety.

September. — My memorandums of this month are so scanty,  that I
shall not give them in their regular dates.

To me the month must needs be sweet that brought to me friends dearest
to my heart ;  and here again let me thank them for the reviving week
bestowed upon me from the 10th to the 17th.

On the evening they left me,  my kind Mrs.  Delany carried me to Dr.
Herschel's.  Madame la Fite said,  afterwards,  that,  nothing remaining upon
earth good enough to console me for les Lockes and Mrs.  Phillips,  I was fain
to travel to the moon for comfort.     I think it was very well said.

And,  indeed,  1 really found myself much pleased with the little excursion.
Dr.  Herschel is a delightful man;  so unassuming,  with his great knowledge,
so willing to dispense it to the ignorant,  and so cheerful and easy in his
general manners,  that were he no genius it would be impossible not to
remark him as a pleasing and sensible man.

I was equally pleased with his sister,  whom I had wished to see very
much,  for her great celebrity in her brother's science.  She is very little,
very gentle,  very modest,  and very ingenuous  ;  and her manners are those
of a person unhackneyed and unawed by the world,  yet desirous to meet
and to return its smiles.  I love not the philosophy that braves it.  This
brother and sister seem gratified with its favour,  at the same time that their
own pursuit is all-sufficient to them without it.

I inquired of Miss Herschel if she was still comet-hunting,  or content now
with the moon?  The brother answ'ered that he had the charge of the moon,
but he left to his sister to sweep the heavens for comets.

Their manner of working together is most ingenious and curious.  While
he makes his observations without-doors,  he has a method of communicating
them to his sister so immediately,  that she can instantly commit them to
paper,  with the precise moment in which they are made.  By this means he
loses not a minute,  when there is any thing particularly worth observing,
by writing it down,  but can still proceed,  yet still have his accounts and
calculations exact.  The methods he has contrived to facilitate this com-
merce 1 have not the terms to explain,  though his simple manner of showing
them made me fully,  at the time,  comprehend them.

The night,  unfortunately,  was dark,  and I could not see the moon  \vith
the famous new telescope.  I mean not the great telescope through which I
had taken a walk,  for that is still incomplete,  but another of uncommon
powers.  I saw Saturn,  however,  and his satellites,  very distinctly,  and their
appearance was very beautiful.

Mrs.  Delany made me the next morning accompany Miss P and Mr.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  611

Lightfoot to see models of Rome and Versailles.  Rome gave me much
satisfaction,  representing so well what I have read and heard of so fre-
quently, and showing very compactly and clearly the general view and
face,  place and distance,  size and appearance,  of all its great buildings;  but
I was not enchanted with Versailles  :  its lavish magnificence was too pro-
fuse for me.

I saw a great deal of Mr.  Bunbury in the course of this month,  as he was
in waiting upon the Duke of York,  who spent great part of it at Windsor,  to
the inexpressible delight of his almost idolizing father.  Mr.  Bunbury did
not open upon me with that mildness and urbanity that might lead me to
forget the strokes of his pencil,  and power of his caricature  :  he early
avowed a general disposition to laugh at,  censure,  or despise all around him.
He began talking of every body and every thing about us,  with the decisive
freedom of a confirmed old intimacy.

"  I am in disgrace here,  already  !"  he cried,  almost exultingly.

"  In disgrace?"  I repeated.

u Yes, — for not riding out this morning! — I was asked — what could I
have better to do? — Ha  !  ha  !"

The next time that I saw him after your departure from Windsor,  he
talked a great deal of painting and painters,  and then said,  "The draftsman
of whom I think the most highly of any in the world was in this room the
other day,  and I did not know it,  and was not introduced to him  !"

I immediately assured him I never did the honours of the room when its
right mistress was in it,  but that I would certainly have named them to
each other had I known he desired it.

"  O,  yes,"  cried he,  "  of all things I wished to know him.  He draws like
the old masters.  I have seen fragments in the style of many of the very
best and first productions of the greatest artists of former times.  He could
deceive the most critical judge.  I wish greatly for a sight of his works,
and for the possession of one of them,  to add to my collection,  as I have
something from almost every body else ;  and a small sketch of his I should
esteem a greater curiosity than all the rest put together."

Moved by the justness of this praise,  I fetched him the sweet little cadeaiis
so lately left me by Mr.  Williams's kindness.  He was very much pleased,
and perhaps thought I might bestow them.  O,  no  ! — not one stroke of that
pencil could I relinquish  !

Another evening he gave us the history of his way of life at Brighthelm-
stone.  He spoke highly of the Duke,  but with much satire of all else,  and
that incautiously,  and evidently with an innate defiance of consequences,
from a consciousness of secret powers to overawe their hurting him.

Notwithstanding the general reverence I pay to extraordinary talents,
which lead me to think it even a species of impertinence to dwell upon
small failings in their rare possessors,  Mr.  Bunbury did not win my good-
will. His serious manner is supercilious and haughty,  and his easy conver-
sation wants rectitude in its principles.  For the rest,  he is entertaining and
gay,  full of talk,  sociable,  willing to enjoy what is going forward,  and ready
to speak his opinion with perfect unreserve.

Plays and players seem his darling theme ;  he can rave about them from
morning to night,  and yet be ready to rave again when morning returns.
He acts as he talks,  spouts as he recollects,  and seems to give his whole
soul to dramatic feeling and expression.  This is not,  however,  his only
subject.  Love and romance are equally dear to his discourse,  though they
cannot be introduced with equal frequency.  Upon these topics he loses
himself wholly — he runs into rhapsodies that discredit him at once as a

612 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

father,  a husband,  and a moral man.  He asserts that love is the first prin-
ciple of life,  and should take place of every other  ;  holds all bonds and
obligations as nugatory that would claim a preference;  and advances
such doctrines of exalted sensations in the tender passion as made me
tremble while I heard them.

He adores Werter,  and would scarce believe I had not read it — still less
that I had begun it and left it off,  from distaste at its evident tendency.  I
saw myself sink instantly in his estimation,  though till this little avowal I

had appeared to stand in it very honourably.

#  *  *  *  *  *

On the anniversary of the coronation T had a note from Lady Temple-
town,  proposing my seeing her ;  and as fortunately it happened during my
presidency,  I made application lo my royal mistress,  and obtained the in-
dulgence of seeing her,  with Mrs.  Delany,  at the Lodge.  She met Miss
Finch,  Madame la Fite,  Signer del Campo,  General Bude,  Colonel Gwynn,
and Dr.  Shepherd, — who again made me a visit,  and not knowing of Mrs.
Schwellenberg's absence,  and my public situation at tea-time,  was quite
thunderstruck in being introduced into such a roomful!  of folks,  when he
expected,  as he told me,  that he should find me alone.

Lady Templetown must have mentioned to you the King's coming in,  and
all that passed ;  but she did me one favour I can never sufficiently acknow-
ledge— she gave me a cutting of my dearest Mrs.  Delany,  so exquisitely
resembling her fine venerable countenance,  that to me it is invaluable,  and
will continue so while I breathe.

One evening,  while I was sitting with this dear lady and her fair niece,
when tea was over,  and the gentlemen all withdrawn,  the door was opened,
and a star entered,  that I perceived presently lo be the Prince of Wales.
He was here to hunt with his Royal Father and Brother.  With great
politeness he made me his first bow,  and then advancing to Mrs.  Delany,
insisted,  very considerately,  on her sitting still,  though he stood himself for
half an hour — all the time he stayed.

He entered into discourse very good-humouredly,  and with much vivacity  ;
described to her his villa at Brighlhelmstone,  told several anecdotes of ad-
ventures there,  and seemed desirous to entertain both her and himself.
#  #  *  *  *

I have mentioned already to Mr.  Locke reading the  "  Memoirs of Eradut
Khan,"  a nobleman of Hindostan,  and how much entertainment I found in
them,  from the curious customs and Oriental style of reasoning and politics
which they display  ;  and the marks they carry of authenticity would render
them,  I should think,  very well worth reading at Norbury.

Signer del Campo was elevated from an Envoy,  or some such things in
this month,  to being Ambassador,  and his rapture at the honour was so
open and so warm,  that I don't know whether I laughed most with him or at
him,  for his honest avowal of unbounded ecstacy.  He represented to us
one night the whole ceremonial of delivering his credentials to the King in
state,  and made General Bude represent his Majesty,  while he went through
all the forms before him,  stopping between each to explain what was due to
his new dignity,  and what honours and distinctions it exacted.

Let me not,  however,  fail to relate,  in the records of this month,  a certain
notable fact.  I became,  in the latter part of it,  so highly in favour with
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  that she threw aside all the harshness and rudeness
with which she had treated me,  and became civil even to kindness  !  I
learned piquet to oblige her,  and to lighten our long evenings  ;  and though
I was a player the most miserable,  she declined all that were better — Miss

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  013

Planta,  Miss Mawr,  Mile.  De Luc,  Madame la Fite — and made them sit by,
while she chose me for her partner.

This might be very flattering,  but it occasioned confinement unremitting
as,  during cards,  I had hitherto taken a little breathing time in my own
room.  However,  civility is worth something ;  and I am so soon discon-
certed by its opposite,  that I contented myself tolerably well with the
purchase.

October. — My brief memorials of this month will all be comprised in a
page or two,  without dates.  Mr.  Fisher,  returned,  married to Windsor,
and enabled to claim any previous promise of making acquaintance with
his wife.     She seems gentle and obliging.

My Royal Mistress was all condescension to me.  She gave me Mrs.
Trimmer's excellent book of the  "  Economy of Charity  ;"  and whenever
she did not go to the early prayers at the chapel,  she almost regularly came
to my room,  and spent the time in gracious converse.  She made me nar-
rate to her the whole history of my knowledge of the ill-fated connexion
formed by Mrs.  Thrale with Mr.  Piozzi.  It is ever a touching,  trying
subject to me  ;  but I wondered more at her long forbearance of question
than at the curiosity such a story might excite.  I was glad,  too,  that since
it must be told,  it was j-elated by one who could clear many falsehoods
and soften many truths  ;  for dear must she always be to my memory at
least.

The newspapers gave me some alarm and much vexation,  in frequently
mentioning me during this month,  regretting my silence,  and exalting;
what had preceded it.  I always tremble throughout my whole frame at
first glance of my name in these publications  ;  and though hitherto I have
met with nothing but panegyric — most inordinate too — I have never felt any
praise recompense the pain of the sight of the name.  One or two of these
paragraphs the King read to Mrs.  Delany,  but no one has mentioned them
to me, — which was at least some comfort.

The only thing that proved at all interesting to me in this month,  was the
very dangerous illness of Mrs.  Turbulent.  She had a putrid fever,  and was
attended by Sir George Baker,  through the orders of the benevolent Queen.
I do not at all know her;  but her character of being sensible,  amiable,  and
gentle,  is universally established by all who are of her acquaintance,  and
during this illness there was a most general praise of her disposition,  and
lamentation for her suffering.

It was now that Mr.  Turbulent appeared to me in his fairest light.  His
rattle,  his flights,  his spirit of gallantry,  were all laid aside  :  depressed,  tame,
and profoundly thoughtful was his whole appearance ;  and when she grew
worse he wrote to Miss Planta to beseech leave of absence from attending
the Princesses,  and declared that  "  Si je la perds,  je me regarderai comme
le plus malheureux des hommes;  il est juste que j'envisage de la sorte un
evenement qui decidera de tout pour moi ;"  and adds something of how well
she merits it from him.  Indeed I hear from all that she has proved a most
exemplary wife to him,  in many and very trying difficulties of situation  ;
and I do really believe she is mistress,  in return,  of all his serious affections
and regard,  though the extreme levity of his nature so frequently leads him
to a species of behaviour that carries strong appearances of a mind dis-
engaged from all the happier and juster ties of conjugal attachment.  This
illness may eventually prove most happy for him,  by not only showing her
worth to him,  but bringing him round to a more proper sense of the deco-
rum due to her,  as well as to his profession.

The Queen received a very beautiful and curious present this month from'
VOL.  I.  52

614 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

the King of Naples,  consisting of a most complete set of china,  and a des-
sert,  representing antique games ;  the figures white,  and apparently from
models of very extraordinary merit and beauty.  The plates gave the curi-
osities of Herculaneum — every plate of the almost innumerable quantity
containing a different representation.  Combats of gladiators and of Amazons,
chiefs victorious returning for their prizes,  old victors instructing youthful
candidates,  cars,  chariots,  men and horses,  all in battle and disorder,  con-
querors claiming crowns of laurel,  and the vanquished writhing in the
agonies of wounds and death — such were the subjects,  and the execution in
general was striking and masterly.

So here I stop — this calm month offering i^hing more to relate  :  save,
what you all know,  that I wrote my little ballad,  "  Willy,"  for Mr.  William
Locke,  and that the writing it was my best amusement upon losing my
dearest friend,  because most congenial with the sad feelings of my mind on
the separation,  when  "  Void was the scene,  blank,  vacant,  drear !"  A
tautology so expressive of the tautology of my life and feelings,  that it was
the first line written of my ballad,  though afterwards inserted in the midst
of it.

Thursday,  November 1st. — I received my beautiful fairings from my
dearest Fredy,  and a noble giornale from my Susanna.  What sweet w^ealth
to me ! — such are the riches I covet,  all meaner coin is thrown aw^ay upon
me.     It suits convenience,  indeed,  a little  ! — that I confess !

I carried up to  ]Mrs.  Schwellenberg the present sent her by my liberal
Fredy.  When I produced it,  she motioned it away with her hand,  and said,
loftily,  •'  For wdiat 1"  "  For civility,  ma'am  !"  answered I,  very coolly.
Nevertheless it was some time ere she could settle it with her notions to
accept it.

No one else,  however,  proved quite so subUme.

Saturday,  3rd. — I carried to the lower Lodge my little offerings for the
Princess Sophia who had been ill some time,  and kept her birthday in bed.
She received them very prettily,  ]\Iiss Goldsworthy being so obliging as to
usher me into her room.  They were much admired by Princess Mary,  and
the Princess Amelia insisted on my making her a separate visit in another
room,  where we played together very sociably.

I also took the Sventurata her fairing ;  and she poured forth bitter com-
plaints to me against the Cerbera.  I could but condole with her,  and
advise a little  "  dignity of absence"  till better received.

Thursday,  8th. — My kindest Fredy's screen arrived on the very moment
of time for presentation to Princess Augusta,  who received it with the utmost
sweetness,  and told me they had all been much diverted,  lately,  by Mrs.
Harcourt,  who very innocently,  had acquainted them there was a new fair
kept at Leatherhead,  where a Mr.  and Mrs.  Locke sent the most beautiful
and elegant toys and ornaments that could be conceived.

The two Princes being here in honour of the day,  their gentlemen were
at the tea-table.  31 r.  Bunbury was amongst them,  but of no more assistance
than any other,  save that he produced an hieroglyphic letter,  and we were
all employed to make it out ;  otherwise he had now already imbibed the
general constraint,  and ventured little more m flash than any other of the
established trained party.  One of his sons has lately been made Page of
Honour to the Queen,  which seems to be a tie on his discretion and his
gratitude,  that lessens that careless defiance v/ith which he began his own
career.

At near one o'clock in the morning,  while the wardrobe woman was pin-
nmg up the Queen's hair,  there was a sudden rap-tap at the dressing-room

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  615

door.  Extremely surprised,  I looked at the Queen,  to see what should be
done ;  she did not speak.  I had never heard such a sound before,  for at
the Royal doors there is always a particular kind of scratch used,  instead
of tapping.  I heard it,  however,  again, — and the Queen called out,  "  What
is that V'^

I was really startled,  not conceiving who could take so strange a hberty
as to come to the Queen's apartment without the announcing of a page  ;  and
no page,  I was very sure,  would make such a noise.

Again the sound was repeated,  and more smartly.  I grew quite alarmed,
imagining some serious evil at hand — either regarding the King or some of
the Princesses.  The Queen,  however,  bid me open the door.  I did — but
what was my surprise to see there a large man,  in an immense wrapping
great coat,  buttoned up round his chin,  so that he was almost hid between
cape and hat !

I stood quite motionless for a moment — but he,  as if also surprised,  drew
back ;  I felt quite sick with sudden terror — I really thought some ruffian
had broke into the house,  or a madman.

"  Who is it  ]"  cried the Queen.

"  I do not know,  ma'am,"  I answered.

"  Who is it 1"  she called aloud ;  and then,  taking off his hat,  entered the
Prince of Wales  !

The Queen laughed very much,  so did I too,  happy in this unexpected
explanation.

He told her,  eagerly,  he merely came to inlorm her there were the most
beautiful northern lights to be seen that could possibly be imagined,  and
begged her to come to the gallery windows.

Wednesday,  14th. — We went to town for the drawing-room,  and I
caught a most severe cold,  by being obliged to have the glass down on my
side,  to suit Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  though the sharpest wind blew in that ever
attacked a poor phiz.  However,  these are the sort of dhagremens I can
always best bear  ;  and for the rest,  I have now pretty constant civility.

My dear father drank tea with me ;  but told me of a paragraph in the
"  World,"  that gave me some uneasiness  ;  to this effect : — "  We hear that
Miss Burney has resigned her place about the Queen,  and is now promoted
to attend the Princesses  :  an office far more suited to her character and
abilities,  which will now be called forth as they merit." — Or to that purpose.

As the  "World"  is not taken in here,  I flattered myself it would not be
known  ;  for I knew how little pleasure such a paragraph would give,  and
was very sorry for it.

The next day,  at St.  James's,  Miss Planta desired to speak to me,  before
the Queen arrived.  She acquainted me of the same  "news,"  and said,
"  Every body spoke of it ;"  and that the Queen might receive twenty letters
of recommendation to my place before night.  Still I could only be sorry.
Another paragraph had now appeared,  she told me,  contradicting the first,
and saying  "The resignation of Miss Burney is premature;  it only arose
from an idea of the service the education of the Princesses might reap from
her virtues and accomplishments."

I was really concerned  ;  conscious how little gratified my Royal Mistress
would be by the whole  : — and,  presently,  Miss Planta came to me again,  and
told me that the Princesses had mentioned it !  They never read any news-
papers;  but they had heard of it from the Duke of York.

I observed the Queen was most particularly gracious with me,  softer,
gentler,  more complacent than ever;  and,  while dressing,  she dismissed her

616 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

wardrobe woman,  and,  looking at me very steadfastly,  said,  "  Miss Burney,
do yo u ever read newspapers 1"

"Sometimes,"  I answered,  "  but not often:  however,  I believe I know
what your Majesty means  !"

I could say no less ;  I was so sure of her meaning.

"  Do you  ?"  she cried.

"  Yes,  ma'am,  and I have been very much hurt by it :  that is,  if your
Majesty means any thing relative to myself?"

"  I do  !"  she answered,  still looking at me with earnestness.

"  My father,  ma'am,"  cried 1,  "  told me of it last night,  with a good deal
of indignation."

"  I,"  cried she,  "  did not see it myself:  you know how little I read the
newspapers."

"  Indeed,"  cried I,  *'  as it was a paper not taken in here,  I hoped it would
quite have escaped your Majesty."

"  So it did :  I only heard of it."

I looked a little curious,  and she kindly explained herself.

"When the Duke of York came yesterday to dinner,  he said almost
immediately,  '  Pray,  ma'am,  what has Miss Burney left you fori'  'Left
me?'  'Yes,  they say she's gone;  pray what's the reason?'  'Gone?'
♦  Yes  ;  it's at full length in all the newspapers :  is not she gone V  '  Not
that 1 know of.'  "

"  All the newspapers"  was undoubtedly a little flourish of the Duke ;  but
we jointly censured and lamented the unbridled liberty of the press,  in thus
inventing,  contradicting,  and bringing on and putting off,  whatever they
pleased.

1 saw,  however,  she had really been staggered  :  she concluded,  I fancy,
that the paragraph arose from some latent cause,  which might end in matter
of fact ;  for she talked to me of Mrs.  Dickenson,  and of all that related to
her retreat,  and dwelt upon the subject with a sort of solicitude that seemed
apprehensive — if I may here use such a word — of a similar action.

It appeared to me that she rather expected some further assurance on my
part that no such view or intention had given rise to this pretended report  ;
and therefore,  when I had next the honour of her conversation alone,  I
renewed the subject,  and mentioned that my father had had some thoughts
of contradicting the paragraph himself.

"  And has he done it  ?"  cried she,  quite eagerly.

"  No,  ma'am  ;  for,  upon further consideration,  he feared it might only
excite fresh paragraphs,  and that the whole would sooner die,  if neglected."

"  So,"  said she,  "  I have been told  ;  for some years ago,  there was a
paragraph in the papers I wanted myself to have had contradicted  ;  but
they acquainted me it was best to be patient,  and it would be forgot the
sooner."

"This,  however,  ma'am,  has been contradicted this morning."
"By your father?"  cried she,  again speaking eagerly.
"  No,  ma'am  ;  I know not by whom."

She then asked me how it was done.  This was very distressing :  but I
was forced to repeat it as well as I could,  reddening enough,  though omitting,
you may believe,  the worst.

Just then there happened an interruption  ;  which was vexatious,  as it pre-
vented a concluding speech,  disclaiming all thoughts of resignation,  which
I saw was really now become necessary for the Queen's satisfaction  ;  and
since it was true — why not say it?

And,  accordingly,  the next day,  when she was most excessively kind to
me,  I seized an opportunity,  by attending her through the apartments to the
breakfast-room,  to beg permission to speak to her.

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  617

It was smilingly granted me.

"  I have now,  ma'am,  read both the paragraphs."

"  Well  ]"  with a look of much curiosity.

"  And indeed I thought them both very impertinent.  They say that the
idea arose from a notion of my being  ^promoted to a place about the Prin-
cesses!"

"  I have not seen either of the paragraphs,"  she answered,  "  but the Prince
of Wales told me of the second yesterday."

"  They little know me,  ma'am,"  I cried,  "  who think I should regard any
other place as a promotion that removed me from your Majest}'."

"  I did not take it ill,  I assure you,"  cried she,  gently.

"  Indeed,  ma'am,  I am far from having a wish for any such lyromotion —
far from it !  your Majesty does not bestow a smile upon me that does not
secure and confirm my attachment."

One of her best smiles followed this,  with a very condescending little bow,
and the words,  "  You are very good,"  uttered in a most gentle voice  ;  a.nd
she went on to her breakfast.

I am most glad this complete explanation passed.  Indeed it is most
true I would not willingly quit a place about the Queen for any place;  and
I was glad to mark that her smiles were to me the whole estimate of its
value.

This little matter has proved,  in the end,  very gratifying to me,  for it has
made clear beyond all doubt her desire of retaining me,  and a considerably
increased degree of attention and complacency have most flatteringly shown
a wish I should be retained by attachment.  I can hardly tell you how sweet
was her whole manner,  nor how marked her condescension.  O,  were there
no Mrs.  Schwellenberg !

Friday,  27th. — I had a terrible journey indeed to town,  Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg finding it expedient to have the glass down on my side,  whence
there blew in a sharp wind,  which so painfully attacked my eyes that they
were inflamed even before we arrived in tov^n.

Mr.  De Luc and Miss Planta both looked uneasy,  but no one durst speak ;
and for me,  it was among the evils that I can always best bear  :  yet before
the evening I grew so ill that I could not propose going to Chelsea,  lest I
should be utterly unfitted for Thursday's drawing-room.

The next day,  however,  I received a consolation that has been some ease
to my mind ever since.  My dear father spent the evening with me,  and was
so incensed at the state of my eyes,  which were now as piteous to behold
as to feel,  and at the relation of their usage,  that he charged me,  another
time,  to draw up my glass in defiance of all opposition,  and to abide by all
consequences,  since my place was wholly immaterial when put in competi-
tion with my health.

I was truly glad of this permission to rebel,  and it has given me an
internal hardiness in all similar assaults,  that has at least relieved my mind
from the terror of giving mortal offence where most I owe implicit obedience,
should provocation overpower my capacity of forbearance.

We wrote jointly to our good and dear Mr.  Twining,  though I was so
blind that my pen went almost its own way,  and for the rest of the evening
my dear father read me papers,  letters,  manuscripts innumerable.

On the Thursday I was obliged to dress,  just as if nothing was the
matter.

The next day,  when we assembled to return to Windsor,  Mr.  De Luc
was in real consternation at sight of my eyes ;  and I saw an indignant
glance at my coadjutrix,  that could scarce content itself without being

52*

618 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

understood.  Miss Planta ventured not at such a glance,  but a whisper
broke out,  as we were descending the stairs,  expressive of horror against
the same poor person — poor person indeed — to exercise a power productive
only of abhorrence,  to those that view as well as to those that feel it!

Some business of Mrs.  Schvvellenberg's occasioned a delay of the journey,
and we all retreated back  ;  and when I returned to my room.  Miller,  the
old head housemaid,  came to me,  with a little neat tin saucepan in her hand,
saying,  "  Pray,  ma'am,  use this for your eyes  ;  'tis milk and butter,  such as I
used to make for Madame Hoggerdorn when she travelled in the winter
with Mrs.  Schwellenberg."

Good Heaven!  I really shuddered when she added,  that all that poor
woman's misfortunes with her eyes,  which,  from inflammation after inflam-
mation, grew nearly blind,  were attributed by herself to these journeys,  in
which she was forced to have the glass down at her side in all weathers,  and
frequently the glasses behind her also  !

Upon my word this account of my predecessor was the least exhilarating
intelligence I could receive  !  Goter told me,  afterwards,  that all the ser-
vants in the house had remarked I ivas going just the sameivay  !

Miss Planta presently ran into my room,  to say she had hopes we should
travel without this amiable being  ;  and she had left me but a moment when
Mrs.  Stainforth succeeded her,  exclaming,  "  O,  for Heaven's sake,  don't
leave her behind;  for Heaven's sake,  Miss Burney,  take her with you  !"

'Tvvas impossible not to laugh at these opposite interests,  both,  from agony
of fear,  breaking through all restraint.

Soon after,  however,  we all assembled again,  and got into the coach.  Mr.
De Luc,  who was my vis d vis,  instantly pulled up the glass.

"  Put down that glass !"  was the immediate order.

He affected not to hear her,  and began conversing.

She enraged quite tremendously,  calling aloud to be obeyed without
.delay.  He looked compassionately at me,  and shrugged his shoulders,  and
said,  "  But,  ma'am — "

"Do it,  Mr.  De Luc,  when I tell you  !  I will have it !  When you been
too cold,  you might bear it !"

"  It is not for me,  ma'am,  but poor Miss Burney."

"  O,  poor Miss Burney might bear it the same I put it down,  Mr.  de Luc  !
without,  I will get out!  put it down,  when I tell you!  It is my coach  !  I
will have it selfs  !  I might go alone in it,  or with one what you call nobody,
when I please !"

Frightened for good Mr.  De Luc,  and the more for being much obliged
to him,  I now interfered,  and begged him to let down the glass.  Very
reluctantly he complied,  and I leant back in the coach,  and held up my
muff*  to my eyes.

What a journey ensued  !  To see that face when lighted up with fury is a
sight for horror  !     I was glad to exclude it by my muff.

Miss Planta alone attempted to speak.  I did not think it incumbent on
me to  "  make the agreeable,"  thus used  ;  I was therefore wholly dumb:  for
not a word,  not an apology,  not one expression of being sorry for what I
suffered,  was uttered.  The most horrible ill-humour,  violence,  and rude-
ness, were all that were shown.  Mr.  De Luc was too much provoked to
take his usual method of passing all off*  by constant talk;  and as I had
never seen him venture to appear provoked before,  I felt a great obligation
to his kindness.

When we were about half way,  we stopped to water the horses.  He then
again pulled up the glass,  as if from absence.  A voice of fury exclaimed,
"  Let it down  !  without I won't go  !"

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  619

"  I am sure,"  cried he,  "  all Mrs.  De Luc's plants will be killed by this
frost !"     For the frost was very severe indeed.

Then he proposed my changing places with Miss Planta who sat opposite
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and consequently on the sheltered side.  "  Yes  !"  cried
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  "  Miss Burney might sit there,  and so she ought  !"

I told her,  briefly,  I was always sick in riding backwards.

*'0,  ver well!  when you don't like it,  don't do it.  You might bear it
when you like it!  what did the poor Haggerdorn bear it!  when the blood
was all running down from her eyes!"

This was too much  !  "  I must take,  then,"  I cried,  "  the more warning!"

After thnt I spoke not a word.  I ruminated all the rest of the way upon
my dear father's recent charge and permission.  I was upon the point of con-
tinually availing myself of both,  but alas  !  I felt the deep disappointment I
should give him,  and I felt the most cruel repugnance to owe a resignation
to a quarrel.

These reflections powerfully forbade the rebellion to which this unequalled
arrogance and cruelty excited me  ;  and after revolving them again and again,

I accepted a bit of cake which she suddenly ofl^ered me as we reached

Windsor,  and determined,  since I submitted to my monastic destiny from
motives my serious thoughts deemed right,  I would not be prompted to
oppose it from mere feelings of resentment to one who,  strictly,  merited
only contempt.

And from this time,  my dear friends,  I have shut out from my sight the
prospect that such rumination was opening.  I pray"God I may persevere
in crushing inferior motives — that I may strengthen such as are better.  But
'tis best to build no castles in the air.  They have so terrible an aptitude,
light as they are,  to shatter their poor constructors in their fall.

I would not have had my tender friends know this conflict at the time !
Now that again my mind is made up to its fate,  I feel sure of their ultimate
approbation,  when I tell them my ultimate opinion,  which 1 must hope,  also,
to make my rule and practice in this,  to me,  momentous decision : — That,
in total disregard to all that belongs to myself,  I must cherish no thought of
retreat,  unless called hence,  by willing kindness,  to the paternal home,  or
driven hence,  by weakness and illness,  from the fatigues of my office.

I am glad I have written this  :  all better resolves have double chance
with me,  when I have communicated them to my Susanna and Fredy.

I gulped as well as I could at dinner;  but all civil fits are again over.
Not a word was said to me  :  yet I was really very ill all the afternoon  ,•  the
cold had seized my elbows,  from holding them up so long,  and I was stiff
and chilled all over.

In the evening,  however,  came my soothing Mrs.  Delany.  Sweet soul I
she folded me in her arms,  and wept over my shoulder !  Mrs.  Ashley had
been with me,  and saw my condition  ;  and this beloved friend could not
contain her grief.  Yet how small a matter this to the whole!  But this
was apparent ;  and the whole,  the tenor of my feelings,  she knows not.  I
cannot abridge the sole satisfaction of my present life,  which consists in the
time it allows me to spend with this earthly angel — I cannot repay her kind
joy in my situation,  by painting,  to her,  its interior sadness.

Too angry to stand upon ceremony this evening,  she told Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg, after our public tea,  she must retire to my room,  that she might speak
with me alone.  This was highly resented,  and I was threatened,  afterwards,
that she would come to tea no more,  and we might talk our secrets always.
Mr.  De Luc called upon me next morning,  and openly avowed his indig-
nation, protesting it was an oppression he could not bear to see used,  and
reproving me for checking him when he would have run all risks.     I

520 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

thanked him most cordially  ;  but assured him the worst of all inflammations
to me was that of a quarrel,  and I entreated him,  therefore,  not to interfere.
But we have been cordial friends from that time forward.

Miss Planta also called,  kindly bringing me some eye-water,  and telling
me she had  "Never so longed to beat any body in her life;  and yet,  I
assure you,"  she added,  "every body remarks that she behaves,  altogether,
better to you than to any body !"

0 Heavens  !

J\Ir.  Turbulent spent almost all this month in attendance upon his
deserving wife,  who relapsed,  but recovered  ;  and his conduct was such as
to give him a higher place in my good graces than he had ever yet secured
himself.  I saw him three or four times;  all civility,  but wholly without
flights and raptures  ;  tamed and composed,  happy in the restoration of his
wife,  and cured of all wild absurdity.  I conducted myself to him just as
when we first grew acquainted — with openness,  cheerfulness,  and ease;
appearing to forget all that had been wrong,  and believing such an appear-
ance the best means to make him forget it also.

Such was this month  :  in which,  but for the sweet support of Mrs.  Delany,
I must almost wholly have sunk under the tyranny,  whether opposed or
endured,  of my most extraordinary coadjutrix.

Saturday,  December 1st. — 'Tis strange that two feelings so very oppo-
site as love and resentment should have nearly equal power in inspiring
courage for or agains,t the object that excites them  ;  yet so it is.  In former
times I have often,  on various occasions,  felt it raised to any thing possible,
by affection,  and now 1 have found it mount to the boldest height,  by dis-
dain. For,  be it known,  such gross and harsh usage I experienced in the
end of last month,  since the inflammation of the eyes,  which I bore much
more composedly than sundry personal indignities that followed,  that I
resolved upon a new mode of conduct — namely,  to go out every evening,  in
order to show that I by no means considered myself as bound to stay at
home after dinner,  if treated very ill ;  and this most courageous plan I flat-
tered myself must needs either procure me a liberty of absence,  always so
much wished,  or occasion a change of behaviour to more decency and
endurability.

J had received for to-day an invita^tion to meet Lady Bute and Lady
Louisa Stuart at my dearest Mrs.  Delany's,  and I should have wished it at
all times,  so much I like them both.  I had no opportunity to speak first to
my Royal Mistress,  but 1 went to her at noon,  rather more dressed than
usual,  and when I saw her look a little surprised,  I explained my reason.
She seemed very well satisfied with it,  but my coadjutrix appeared in an
astonishment unequalled  ;  and at dinner,  when we necessarily met again,
new testimonies of conduct quite without example were exhibited  :  for when
Mrs.  Thackeray and Miss Planta were helped,  she helped herself,  and
appeared publicly to send me to Coventry — though the sole provocation
was intending to forego her society this evening!

1 sat quiet and unhelped a few minutes,  considering what to do  :  for so
little was my appetite,  I was almost tempted to go without dinner entirely.
However,  upon further reflection,  I concluded it v/ould but harden her heart
still more to have this fresh affront so borne,  and so related,  as it must have
been,  through Windsor,  and therefore I calmly begged some greens from
Miss Planta.

Neither she nor Mrs.  Thackeray had had courage to offer me any thing,
my  "disgrace"  being so obvious.  The weakness of my eyes,  which still
would not bear the light,  prevented me from tasting animal food all this time.

A little ashamed,  she then anticipated Miss Planta's assistance,  by offering

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  621

me some French beans.  To curb my own displeasure,  I obliged myself to
accept them instead of the greens,  and they tasted very well by that means,
though they came through such hands.

Unfortunately,  however,  this little softening was presently worn out,  by
some speeches which it encouraged from Mrs.  Thackeray,  who seemed to
seize the moment of permission to acknowledge that I was in the room,  by
telling me she had lately met some of my friends in town,  among whom
Mrs.  Chapone;  and the Burrows family had charged her with a thousand
regrets for my seclusion from their society,  and as many kind compliments
and good wishes.

This again sent me to Coventry for the rest of the dinner.  When it
was over,  and we were all going up stairs to coffee,  I spoke to Columb,  in
passing,  to have a chair for me at seven o'clock.

"  For what,  then,"  cried a stern voice behind me,  "  for what go you up
stairs at all,  when you don't drink coffee?"

Did she imagine I should answer  "  For your society,  ma'am T'  No — 1
turned back,  quick as lightning,  and only saying,  "  Very well,  ma'am,"
moved towards my own room.

Again a little ashamed of herself,  she added,  rather more civilly,  "  For
what should you have that trouble?'

I simply repeated my  •'  Very well,  ma'am,"  in a voice of,  I believe,
rather pique than calm acquiescence,  and entered my own apartment,
unable to enjoy this little release,  however speedy to obtain it,  from the
various,  the grievous emotions of my mind,  that this was the person,  use
me how she might,  with whom 1 must chiefly pass my time!

So pleasant were the sensations that filled me,  that I could recover no
gaiety,  even at the house of my beloved friend,  though received there by her
dear self,  her beautiful niece,  and Lady Bute and Lady Louisa,  in the most
flattering manner.  Yet I stayed till ten o'clock,  though hitherto I had re-
turned at nine.  I was willing to make manifest that I did not make such
sacrifice of my time equally to the extremest rudeness as to common
civility ;  for more than common civility never,  at best,  repays it.

Lady Bute and Lady Louisa were both in such high spirits themselves
that they kept up all the conversation between them,  and with a vivacity,
an acuteness,  an archness,  and an observation on men and manners so clear
and sagacious,  that it would be difficult to pass an evening of greater enter-
tainment. They were just returning from Bath,  and full fraught with
anecdote and character,  which they dealt out their hearers with so much
point and humour,  that we attended to them like a gratified audience of
a public place.

My reception at home was not quite similar;  and I observed,  even in my
Royal Mistress,  a degree of gravity that seemed not pleased.  I conjectured
that mij abse?ice had been lamented.  How hard,  if so,  not to make
known,  in my turn,  how my j^resence is accepted!  However,  I will not
complain of her;  I will only continue to absent myself,  while she behaves
thus intolerably.

Accordingly,  the next evening,  I went to Mrs.  De Luc's,  and there I had a
little music.  Miss Myers,  a poor girl who has been rescued from much
mischief and distress through the benevolence of good Mrs.  De Luc,  played
upon the violin,  and in a very pleasing manner.

The Presidente,  yv?i.s all amazed at this second visit;  but rather less

imperious.     All I regretted was my poor Miss P ,  who had come to tea,

and had no means to get away before me :  I had therefore advised her to
make a virtue of necessity,  and to /aire Pagreable in my absence.  But the
account she gave me,  on my return,  of the extreme haughty ill-breeding she

622 DIARY AND LETTERS 1787.

had experienced sincerely concerned me for her.  She assured me she
would not change situations with me,  to avoid any situation she ever could
conceive;  and the good nature with which she lamented my destiny,  from
this little sample of what it is unassisted,  has really endeared her tome very
much.

The behaviour of my coadjutrix continued in the same strain — really
shocking to endure.  I always began,  at our first meeting,  some little small
speech,  and constantly received so harsh a rebuff at the second word,  that
I then regularly seated myself by a table,  at work,  and remained wholly
silent the rest of the day.

I tried the experiment of making my escape;  but I was fairly conquered
from pursuing it.  The constant black reception depressed me out of
powers to exert for flight ;  and therefore I relinquished this plan,  and only
got off,  as I could,  to my own room,  or remained dumb in hers.

To detail the circumstances of the tyranny and the grossieretc I ex-
perienced at this time would be afflicting to my beloved friends,  and oppres-
sive to myself.  I am fain,  however,  to confess they vanquished me.  I
found the restoration of some degree of decency quite necessary to my quiet,
since such open and horrible ill-will from one daily in my sight even
affrighted me;  it pursued me in shocking visions even when I avoided
her presence;  and therefore I was content to put upon myself the great
and cruel force of seeking to conciliate a person who had no complaint
against me,  but that she had given me an inflammation of the eyes,
which had been witnessed and resented by her favourite Mr.  De Luc.  I
rather believe that latter circumstance was what incensed her so inve-
terately.

I know well,  at a distance,  you may think such conduct,  in common with
such a character,  a mere subject for contempt,  and be amazed at its effect.:
but were you here,  and were you spending in one day a mere anticipation
of every day — alas!  my dearest friends,  you would find,  as 1 find,  peace
must be purchased by any sacrifice that can obtain it.

Mine was,  indeed,  a severe one:  1 gave up either going to my beloved
solace,  or receiving her here,  and offered my service to play at piquet.  At
first,  this was disdainfully refused,  and but very proudly accepted after-
wards. I had no way to compose my own spirit to an endurance of this,
but by considering myself as married to her^  and therefore that all rebellion
could but end in disturbance,  and that concession was my sole chance for
peace  !  O what reluctant nuptials  ! — how often did 1 say to myself — Were
these chains voluntary,  how could I bear them! — how forgive myself that I
put them on  !

The next extraordinary step she took was one that promised me amends
for all:  she told me that there was no occasion we should continue together
after coffee,  unless by her invitation.  I eagerly exclaimed that this seemed
a most feasible way of producing some variety in our intercourse,  and that
I would adopt it most readily.  She wanted instantly to call back her words  :
she had expected I should be alarmed,  and solicit her leave to be buried
with her every evening!  When she saw me so eager in acceptance,  she
looked mortified and disappointed  ;  but I would not suffer her to retract,  and
I began,  at once,  to retire to my room the moment coffee was over.

This flight of the sublime,  which,  being her own,  she could not resent,
brought all around  :  for as she saw me every evening prepare to depart
with the coffee,  she constantly began at that period,  some civil discourse to
detain me.  I always suffered it to succeed,  while civil,  and when there
was a failure,  or a pause,  I retired.

By this means I recovered such portion of quiet as is compatible with a
situation like mine:  for she soon returned entirely to such behaviour as

1787.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  623

preceded the ofTence of my eyes  ;  and I obtained a little leisure at which she
could not repine,  as a caprice of her own bestowed it.

Meanwhile,  however,  the King's Gentlemen,  General Bude and Colonel
Goldsworthy,  who now found only la Fresidente^ — for Mrs.  Delany and
Miss P came only to my room at this time, — were so wearied and pro-
voked, that they merely drank ofTone dish of lea,  and hastened back to the
music-room.  This gave great offence,  and was even complained of to the
higher powers :  but they would not amend  ;  and Colonel Goldsworthy,  who
brought Mrs.  Delany from the Queen into my apartment one night,  begged

leave to enter,  for a little discourse with that lady and Miss P ,  and then

told us all that he was determined to show  "Mrs.  Hiccumbottom"  what a
mistake she made,  in supposing they would any of them come to tea for the
sake of  ^ttte-u-Ute with her.  He therefore made it a rule to sleep all the
few moments he stayed,  and then shake his locks,  and retire.

I then openly entreated that he would take no notice of my absence,  as
the present change of system afforded me a relief which,  though short,  was
inexpressibly great.     He was very good-natured about it.

"  I assure you,  ma'am,"  he said,  "  Bude and I both agreed to do no
mischief;  for,  though we are the sufferers,  we think it but fair you should
be the gainer."

We had all one social and pleasant evening,  as the Presidente went to
spend a day in town,  and I returned to the honours,  with ony honour,  Mrs.
Delany ;  and good Mr.  Lightfoot dined and spent the day with me.  The
Queen came into the room in the evening,  to converse with him herself upon
botanical matters,  in which he has much assisted her.

To finish,  however,  with respect to the Presidente,  I must now acquaint
you that,  as my eyes entirely grew well,  her incivility entirely wore off,  and
I became a far greater favourite than I had ever presumed to think myself
till that time  !  1 was obliged to give up my short-lived privilege of retire-
ment, and live on as before,  making only my two precious little visits to my
beloved comforter and supporter,  and to devote the rest of my wearisome
time to her presence — better satisfied,  however,  since 1 now saw that open
war made me wretched,  even when a victor,  beyond what any subjection
could do that had peace for its terms.

This was not an unuseful discovery,  for it has abated all the propensity
to experiment in shaking off a yoke which,  however hard to bear,  is so
annexed to my place,  that I must take one with the other,  and endure them
as I can.

My favour,  now,  was beyond the favour of all others ;  I was  "  My good
Miss Burney,"  at every other word,  and no one else was listened to if I
would speak,  and no one else was accepted for a partner if I would play 1
I found no cause to which I could attribute this change.  I believe the
whole mere matter of caprice.

During all this time,  and all this disturbance,  the behaviour of my Royal
Mistress was uniformly kind,  gracious,  confidental,  and sweet.  She be-
stowed upon me more and more trust,  by every opportunity ;  and whenever
I was alone with her,  her whole countenance spoke benignity.

A most melancholy event happened this month to a most tender mother,
Lady Louisa Clayton,  who lost her only daughter.  Miss Emily,  by a death
as unexpected as it seems premature.  Every body joined in lamenting her.
She was good and amiable,  and much and generally loved.  Lady Louisa
bears this heavy blow in a manner unequalled for steady fortitude.

I went,  also,  to condole with poor Madame la Fite,  whose affliction was,
I heard,  very great,  as Emily had been the first friend of her own poor
Elize.     I found her weeping,  and much touched :  but she described to me

624 DIARY AND LETTERS OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  1787.

all her feelings with so many picturesque expressions,  and poetical compa-
risons drawn between Emily Clayton and her Elize,  and added so much of
the cruel disappointment she had herself endured,  in the midst of this afflic-
tion, that sa chere Mademoiselle Borni had not come to her house to meet
Mrs.  Roberts and Mrs.  Kennicott — that,  when I weighed the two sorrows
together,  I found my opinion of both all the lighter.

She was so good as to insist upon reading to me,  next,  an  '<  account of
Mademoiselle Borni"  from a periodical paper of M.  de la Blancherie;  where
the M.  M.  M.  is announced to all Paris as  "  a person whose most extraor-
dinary literary talents had so captivated Sa Majestl la Reine de la Grande
Bretagne^  that she had appointed her Surintendante of all her wardrobe !"

It really read so Irish a compensation,  stated in that manner,  that I could
scarce hear it with gravity.

Poor Madame la Fite !  her next visit to me was to request a lock of my
hair for Madame de la Roche,  who would  "  adore"  that as she did its
wearer.

I assured her I really must be excused ;  for,  thinking so little as I think
of Madame de la Roche,  it would have been a species of falsehood to send
such a gift.

Then she begged  "  any thing" — a morsel of an old gown,  the impression
of a seal from a letter,  two pins out of my dress — in short,  any thing;  and
with an urgency so vehement,  I could not laugh it off;  and,  at last,  I was
obliged to let her have one of those poor pattern garlands that I made with
plant impressions,  under the eye and direction of my Fredy and Mr.  Locke.
I really was very unwilling to send any thing;  but she almost wept at my
refusal,  and appeared so much hurt that I was compelled to comply.

What,  however,  was truly comic,  at the same time,  was a certain imita-
tive enthusiasm that was suddenly adopted by poor Mademoiselle De Luc —
for as I happened to drop my needle,  she eagerly insisted upon searching
for it,  and then exclaimed,  "Oil have found it ! — may I have it?"

"  Certainly,  if you like it,"  cried I,  not comprehending her.

"  Then I shall keep it for ever and never !  it was worked by Miss
Beurney !"  And she put it up in her pocket-book,  notwithstanding all my
laughing remonstrances.

The wearying,  lifeless uniformity,  so long since threatened me by Mr.
Turbulent,  now completely took place,  save alone for the relief of my
beloved Mrs.  Delany  ;  but she softened and solaced all.  Two sweet visits a
day unburthened my heart of every day's cares,  and delighted my mind by
soothing instruction  ;  while the warmth,  the animation of her every welcome
gave to my existence,  even here,  a value that at times made me even con-
tent to abide by it.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

FIRST VOLUME.

Agujari,  was a celebrated Italian singer,  wife of Colla,  an Italian composer.  She
was engaged at the Pantheon to sing two songs nightly,  for which she received

Anstey^  Christopher,  was the son of the Rev.  Dr.  Anstey.  He published several
poems after the  "  New Bath Guide,"  none of which attained any celebrity.  He
died at Bath in 1805.

Barclay,  David,  was one of seven sons of the celebrated Apologist of the Quakers,
— all of whom were living fifty years after the death of their father.  David was
the last of them.  He was a wealthy mercer in Cheapside,  and entertained suc-
cessively the three Kings  (George I.,  IL,  and III.)  on their respective visits to
the city on Lord Mayor's day.  He was subsequently the purchaser of Mr.
Thrale's brewery,  and founder of the most famous brewing firm of the present
day,  Barclay,  Perkins,  and Co.

Baretti,  Joseph,  was author of an Italian and English Dictionary,  and other credi-
table works.  He was intimately acquainted with Johnson and most of the wits
of his time.  He was a native of Piedmont,  but came to England in 1753,  and
died in London in 1789.

Bealtie,  James,  LL.D.,  was born at Lawrencekirk in 1735.  He was educated at
Marischal College,  Aberdeen,  and,  having taken the degree there of M.  A.  in
1753,  accepted the office of schoolmaster and parish clerk to the parish of
Fordoun.  In 1758,  he obtained the mastership of the Grammar School of Aber-
deen. His first poems were published in 1761,  in a small volume,  and they led
to his appointment of Professor of Moral Philosophy and Logic at Marischal
College.  His great prose work,  the  "  Essay on Truth,"  was published in 1770,^
and procured for him a pension from George III.  A few months afterwards he
published the first book of his chief poetical work,  "The Minstrel;"  the second
book was not published till 1774,  Dr.  Beattie died at Aberdeen,  in 1803,  his
death being hastened,  if not actually caused,  by the premature loss of his two
sons,  one of them a youth of great promise,  an account of whose  "  Life,  Cha-
racter, and Writings"  was the last literary effort of Dr.  Beattie's pen.

Beauclerk,  Lady Diana,  wife of the Hon.  Topham Beauclerk,  and daughter of the
Duke of Marlborough.  This lady was celebrated in her day as an amateur
artist.  Her beautiful illustrations of Horace Walpole's  "  Mysterious Mother,"
are well known to all who have visited Strawberry Hill.

Beauclerk,  the Hon.  Topham,  was son of Lord Sydney Beauclerk,  and grandson of
the first Duke of St.  Albans.  Of this celebrated man Johnson said,  "Beauclerk's
talents were those of which he had felt himself more disposed to envy than those
of any he had known."  He afterwards said of him,  in a letter to Boswell,  "Such
another will not often be found among mankind."  Beauclerk died about three
months after the notice of him which occurs in this volume.

Berquin,  Arnauld De,  was born at Bourdeaux,  in 1749,  and died at Paris in 1791.
VOL.  I.  53

626 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

Berloni,  was a well-known composer,  who produced many operas to the words of
Metastasio.

Bewley,  William.  '  He was for some time the writer of the articles on science and
natural philosophy in the Monthly Review.  He died at the House of Dr.
Burney in 1783.

Boscawen,  the Hon.  France.?,' daughter of W.  E.  Glanville,  Esq.,  and wife to Ad-
miral Boscawen.  This lady was also mother to the Duchess of Beaufort and
Mrs.  Leveson Gower.  All these three ladies are celebrated in Miss Hannah
More's poem entitled  "  Sensibility."

Browne,  Hawkins,  son of Isaac Hawkins Browne,  author of an elegant Latin poem
entitled  "  De Animi Immortalitate,"  which was translated by Soame Jenyns.

Bryant,  Jacob.  This gentleman was a native of Plymouth.  He was educated at
King's College,  Cambridge,  of which he became a Fellow in 1744.  He was
tutor to the Duke of Marlborough,  who afterwards  (in 1756),  on his appointment
to the Master-Generalship of the Ordnance,  gave Mr.  Bryant a situation in that
department.  He afterwards accompanied the Duke to Germany as his Secre-
tary. On the death of his patron and friend,  Mr.  Bryant devoted the remainder
of his life to literature.  His reputation chiefly rests on his celebrated work,
entitled  "Analysis of Antient Mythology,"  the first two vols,  of which were pub-
lished in 1774,  and the third two years afterwards.     He died in 1804.

Bunbury,  Harry,  was one of the most celebrated caricaturists of his day in Eng-
land, He was especially celebrated on subjects connected with horsemanship.
His best and best known work is a series of caricatures,  with humorous de-
scriptive letter press,  on  "The Art of Horsemanship."

Burgoyne,  General.  He wrote several successful dramas,  one of which — "  The
Lord of the Manor" — is still occasionally performed.

Byron,  Mrs.,  wife of the Hon.  Admiral John Byron,  and grandmother of the poet.
Her daughter,  Charlotte Augusta,  (mentioned by Miss Burney),  married Vice-
Admiral Christopher Parker,  eldest son of the late Sir Peter Parker,  Bart.,  and
died in 1824.

Cagliostro,  Count Alexander,  one of the cleverest and most successful impostors
of modern times.  He was born at Palermo in 1743,  and his real name was
Giuseppe Balsamo.  He lost his father in infancy,  and,  being placed by his
mother as a novice with the Friars of Mercy at Palermo,  he learned those rudi-
ments of chemical science and of medicine which,  aided by great ingenuity and
unbounded assurance,  enabled him to figure throughout Europe as the most
accomplished of modern swindlers.  He is said,  by the assistance of a Neapo-
litan wife,  as clever as himself,  to have obtained jewels of immense value from
several English ladies of distinction,  on pretences connected with the establish-
ment of a Female Order of Freemasonry.  He died in the prison of the Castle of
St.  Angelo,  at Rome,  in 1794,  having been denounced to the Inquisition by his
own wife.

Cambridge,  Richard Owen.  This gentleman,  of an opulent and ancient Glouces-
tershire family,  was distinguished for his wit in conversation,  no less than for
his taste and talents in literature.  He wrote a burlesque poem called  "  The
Scribleriad,"  and was a principal contributor to the periodical paper called  "  The
World."  He died,  aged 85,  at his seat near Twickenham,  on the banks of the
Thames,  in the year 1802,  leaving a widow,  two sons,  and one daughter.  His
works were collected and republished by his younger son,  who prefixed to them
a memoir of Mr.  Cambridge,  which has been justly admired for its elegance and
perspicuity.

Cambridge,  the Rev.  George Owen — second son of R.  O.  Cambridge,  Esq.,  Pre-
bendary of Ely and Archdeacon of Middlesex.  This gentleman is chiefly known
in the literary world by the valuable and interesting memoir of his father,  for
which it is indebted to him;  but the sphere in which he eminently shone,  was
that of public and private benevolence.  He was ever foremost in assisting
and promoting the best charitable institutions,  and employed his long and exem-
plary life in doing good to all that came within the reach of his unwearied be-
nevolence.    He died at Twickenham Meadows,  early in the year 1841.

Carter^  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  the celebrated translator of  "  Epictetus."     At the date of
the passages in which she is referred to in the Diary,  she was about seventy-three
years of age.     She died in 1806,  at the age of eighty-nine years.
Cator,  Mr.,  was chosen Member of Parliament for Ipswich in 1784.     This gentle-

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.  627

man was joint executor and trustee,  with Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.  H.  Smith,  and Mr.
Crutchley,  to Mr.  Thrale's will.     He is described by Dr.  Johnson as having-
"  much good in his character,  and much usefulness in his knowledge."   Johnson
used to visit Mr.  Cator,  at his splendid seat at Beckenham,  in Kent.
Chamier,  Anthony,  was Member of Parliament for Tamworth,  and Under Secre--
tary of State from 1775 till his death in 1780.     He was an original member of
the celebrated Literary Club.
CholmondeJey,  Mrs.,  was wife of the Hon.  and Rev.  Robert Cholmondeley,  and

sister of the celebrated Mrs.  Margaret Woffington.
Conway,  Henry Seymour.      A general in the army,  and ultimately Commander of
the Forces.     He was horn in 1720,  entered the Army,  and served in the Seven
Years'  War ;  on his return to England obtained a seat in the House of Com-
mons; and was joint Secretary of State with the Duke of Grafton,  from 1765 to
1768.      General Conway was the bosom friend of Horace Walpole,  and many
of the most charming of that writer's letters are addressed to him.     He died
in 1795.
Cosway,  Richard.     The most celebrated miniature painter of his day.     He also
displayed great and varied talent in other departments of the art.    He was of ex-
tremely eccentric character and habits,  and professed certain religious and other
opinions which subjected him to the charge of extravagance ;  but he was a man
of sound sense and strong judgment,  in matters appertaining to the business of
life.
Coivley,  Hannah,  authoress of  "  The Belle's Stratagem,"  and other less successful
dramatic works;  and also of some long poetical pieces,  "The Maid of Anjou,"
&c.     She was the daughter of Mr.  Parkhouse,  of Tiverton,  Devonshire,  where
she was born in 1743.     She died at the same place in 1809.
Coxe,  the Rev.  William.     This gentleman,  though at present better known by his
travels in various parts of Europe than by his other works,  contributed very
largely and usefully to the general literature of his day,  chiefly in its biographi-
cal and historical departments.     He was born in 1747,  and was the eldest son
of Dr.  William Coxe,  physician to the king's household.     He was brought up to
the church,  and in 1771 was appointed to the curacy of Denham,  near Uxbridge.
He was for two years tutor to the late Duke of Marlborough.     Afterwards  (in
1775)  he accompanied the late Earl of Pembroke  (then Lord Herbert)  in the
grand tour.     He was afterwards travelling tutor,  in succession,  to the late Sa-
muel Whithead,  the present Lord Portman,  and the son of the Marquis of Corn-
wallis.     He was blind during the last ten years of his life  ;  which circumstance,
however,  did not prevent him for preparing for the press the  "  Private Corre-
spondence of the Duke of Shrewsbury,"  which appeared in 1821,  and  "Memoirs
of the Administration of the Right Hon.  Henry Pelham,"  which were just com-
pleted at the period of his death in 1828.
Crutchley,  Mr.,  was chosen Member of Parliament for Horsham,  in 1784.
Delany,  Mrs.     This lady,  who was born in 1700,  was daughter of John Granville,
Esq.,  and niece of Pope's Lansdowne — "  of every muse the friend."     She be-
came, in 1743,  the second w-ife of Dr.  Patrick Delany,  the intimate friend of
Dean Swift,  and of whom,  after his death,  he wrote a work entitled  "Observa-
tions on Swift."    Her husband was himself promoted to an Irish deanery  (that of
Down)  the year after their marriage,  in 1744.     Mrs.  Delany was left a widow
in 1768,  and was 83 years of age when she is first mentioned in the Diary.
Lord Orford speaks of her skill in painting,  and in imitating flowers in cut and
coloured paper.     For further references to this venerable and interesting lady,
see Sir Walter Scott's  "  Life of Swift."
Douglas,  John.    This learned divine was born in Scotland,  in 1721.     His parents
afterwards kept for many years the British Coffee-house,  in Cockspur Street.    He
was sent to Oxford in 1736,  and in 1744 took Holy Orders,  and became Chap-
lain to the Third Regiment of Foot Guards,  and was present at the Battle of
Fontenoy.     He subsequently obtained successive preferments in the Churchy
until,  in 1787,  he was raised to the See of Carlisle,  and afterwards,  in 1792,  suc-
ceeded Dr.  Shute Barrington as Bishop of Salisbury.     He died at Windsor,  in
1807,  and was interred in St.  George's Chapel.
Eliot,  Mr.,  of Port Eliot,  afterwards,  the first Lord Eliot.     He was father of the

present Earl of St.  Germains.
Garthshore,  Dr.     An eminent physician,  son of the minister of Kirkcudbright,

Q2S BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

in Scotland,  where he was born.  He came to London in 1763,  and practised
there the various branches of his profession,  till his death,  in 1812.  He was the
writer of many valuable medical and physiological papers in the Transactions of
the Royal Society,  &c.

Giardini,  was the most celebrated violinist of his day.  He came to England m
1750,  and was for some years head of the musical department of the Opera.  He
died in great indigence at Moscow in 1793.

Gillies,  Dr.  The learned author of the  "  History of Ancient Greece till the
Division of the Macedonian Empire,"  and several other historical works.  He was
appointed by George III.  Historiographer-Royal for Scotland.  Dr.  Gillies was
born in Forfarshire  (Scotland)  in 1750,  and died in 1824.

Greville,  Mrs.  Author of the celebrated  "  Ode to Indifference."  She was wife
of Fulk Greville,  who was Minister Plenipotentiary at the court of Bavaria.

Gwynn,  Colonel This gentleman was husband of one of the two celebrated beau-
ties, daughters of General Horneck,  who are immortalized by Sir Joshua Rey-
nolds's pencil.

Hamilton,  William Gerrard  (better known as  "Single-speech Hamilton"),  was,  at
the time he is referred to in the foregoing pages,  Chancellor of the Exchequer of
Ireland.

Hamilton,  Sir William,  K.  B.  Was Ambassador at Naples for thirty-six years.
His mother was nurse to George III.,  who,  on coming to the throne,  made young
Hamilton his equerry.  He was a person of excellent taste,  which he chiefly
directed to antiquarian researches connected with the classical vicinity in which
he so long resided.  His collection of antique vases  (which after his death was
purchased by government for the British Museum)  was,  and still remains,  un-
rivalled.    He died in 1803.

Hanway,  Jonas.  Celebrated first as a traveller,  and afterwards as a philanthropist;
the establishment of the Marine Society and the Magdalen Hospital vyas chiefly
due to his exertions.  He was a man of eccentric habits,  and greatly injured his
fortune by his active benevolence.  The Government of the day,  (under Lord
Bute,)  in consequence of solicitation on his behalf from the principal merchants
of London,  appointed him a Commissioner of the Navy,  (which post he enjoyed
for twenty years,  and the salary of it to the end of his life.)  He was born in
1712,  and died in 1786.

Harris,  James,  was a writer of much learning and research.  He was nephew to
Lord Shaftesbury,  author of the  "  Characteristics."  The reputation of Harris
rests chiefly on his  "  Hermes;  or,  a Philosophical Enquiry into Universal Gram-
mar." He became Member of Parliament in 1761,  and was soon afterwards
appointed a Lord of the Admiralty,  and subsequently a Lord of the Treasury,
&c.  He died in 1786.  The present Earl of Malmsbury is grandson to this
gentleman.

Hatsel,  Mr.     Was for many years Clerk of the House of Commons.

Hawkins,  Sir John,  was a member of the celebrated Literary Club,  and in habits
of intimacy with Johnson during his whole life.  He wrote,  among other works,
a  "  General History of Music,"  in five volumes.

Hayes,  Mr.  was supposed to be a natural son of Sir Robert Walpole,  first Earl of
Orford  :  he was a scholar,  a man of sense,  and a passionate lover of books
and prints;  he had a great and pleasant turn for humour,  and a most amiable
and benevolent disposition.  His friendship with Dr.  Burney commenced at
Houghton Hall,  the seat of the third Earl of Orford,  and ended only with his life:
he bequeathed his house in James Street,  Westminster,  to the doctor's eldest
son,  James,  afterwards,  Admiral Burney.
Heberden,  William.  This distinguished physician was born in London,  in 1710,
and educated at Cambridge,  where he became a Fellow of St.  John's,  and after-
wards took the degree of M.D.  He first practised at Cambridge,  and afterwards,
in 1748,  established himself in London.  Dr.  Heberden cultivated polite litera-
ure,  and published one considerable work connected with his own profession  ;
'  Medical Commentaries on the History and Cure of Disease."  He passed much
of the latter part of his life at Windsor,  where he died in 1801.
Herschel,  William,  was the son of a musician of Hanover.  He was intended for
his father's profession,  and followed it for many years,  first in Hanover,  and after-
wards in England.  He was organist successively at Halifax,  and at the Octagon
Chapel,  Bath.    He subsequently abandoned this profession for the study of Astro-

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.  629

nomy,  with a view to which he constructed a five-foot telescope with his own
hands.  His discovery of the Georgium Sidus was made in 1781,  and obtained
for him the liberal patronage of George III,  At a later period he constructed
several larger telescopes,  until,  in 1787,  he completed his great one of forty feet.
He was knighted in 1816,  and died at Slough,  the scene of his great discoveries,
in 1822.  He was father of the present Sir John Herschel.
Hoare,  Mr.  C.  Prince,  is the gentleman alluded to at page 153.  The intended
patronage  (perhaps luckily for its object)  did not take place.  The Lawrences
left Devizes almost immediately after the date of the above notice,  and hence-
forth the whole family were supported by the extraordinary talents of the boy
artist.  They went to Weymouth for a few months,  and then established them-
selves at Bath,  where they remained for about five years, — young Lawrence
advancing every year in public fame.  The family then removed to London,
where young Lawrence's talents — though he was then scarcely sixteen — imme-
diately commanded a handsome income.
Holroyd,  Major.     Afterwards Lord Sheffield.

Hoole,  John.     The Translator of Tasso,  Ariosto,  &c.     He died in 1803.
Hoole,  the Rev.  Samuel.     Son of the above,  author of a poem called  "  Aurelia."
Horneck,  Mrs.,  was the wife of General Horneck.     Her two daughters,  Mrs.  Bun-
bury and Miss Horneck  (afterwards Mrs.  Gwynn),  were celebrated beauties,
and their portraits rank among the best productions of Sir Joshua Reynolds's
pencil.
Hurd,  Richard,  was born in 1720,  at Congreve in Staffordshire.   He was educated
for the Church,  at Emmanuel College,  Cambridge,  where he obtained a fellowship
in 1742.     He took the degree of LL.D.  in 1768,  was made Archdeacon of Glou-
cester in 1767,  and in 1775 was raised to the See of Lichfield and Coventry.
He was afterwards appointed preceptor to the Prince of Wales  (George IV.)  and
the Duke of York  ;  and was,  in 1781,  translated to the See of Worcester,  and
appointed Clerk of the Closet to George III.,  who afterwards,  on the death of
Dr.    Cornwallis,  offered Dr.  Hurd the Primacy,  which he refused.     He lived
more than twenty years after this,  and died in 1808.     Bishop Hurd's name will
ever remain honourably connected with that of Warburton,  his first patron and
firm friend.
Jackson,  William.     Chiefly known as a music composer ;  but he possessed consi-
derable and varied attainments,  both as a writer and an artist.     He was born at
Exeter,  in 1730,  and died in 1804.
Jenyns,  Soame,  was the son of Sir Roger Jenyns,  of Bottisham Hall,  Cambridge-
shire, which county Mr.  Soame Jenyns,  after the death of his father,  represented
in Parliament.    He was a successful writer in the various departments of litera-
ture, but is chiefly known by his work on the  "  Evidences of the Christian
Religion."     He died in 1787.
Jerningham,  Edvjard,  brother of Sir William Jerningham,  Bart.     He published

three volumes of poems.
Kemble,  Miss.     The lady so named in the Diary,  and described as the sister of
Mrs.  Siddons,  afterwards became Mrs.  Twiss,  and was the mother of the present
Horace Twiss,  Esq.
Kennicott,  Dr.  Benjamin.   This celebrated Hebrew scholar was born in 1718.    He
was a Fellow of Exeter College,  Oxford,  and a D.D.      At the instance of Arch-
bishop Seeker he undertook a dollation of all the existing Hebrew MSS.  of the
Old Testament.     Though he commenced this labour in 1759,  his first volume
was not published till 1776.     The work was completed by a second volume,  and
a General Dissertation,  in 1783, — in which year he died.     Dr.  Kennicott was
Canon of Christ Church,  and Radcliffe Librarian.
Langlon,   Bennet,  was one of Dr.  Johnson's most valued friends,  and after his

death succeeded him as Professor of Ancient History,  in the Royal Academy.
La Roche,  Madame de.  This lady was celebrated in her day and country as a
writer of sentimental novels,  and as the  "  first love"  of Wieland,  the German
poet.
Lee,  Charles,  the person alluded to in the Diary,  under the name of the Rebel
General,  was an English officer,  who,  after having served with honour in Ame-
rica, being disappointed of promotion on his return home,  joined the insurgent
colonies,  and is said to have been the first who suggested the idea of a separa-
tion from the mother country.     He died at Philadelphia in 1782.

630 BIOGRAPHICAL iNOTES.

Lennox,  Mrs.  Charlotte,  was a native of New York,  of which her father,  Colonel
James Ramsay,  was governor.  She wrote eeveral novels,  of which the  "  Fe-
male Quixote"  is the-  best known.  She fell into penury during the latter part
of her life,  and was for some years dependent on the Literary Fund Society.
She died in 1804.

Lever,  Sir Ashton.  Known as the collecter of what was long exhibited to the
public as the Leverian Museum,  consisting of natural and artificial curiosities.
He was the son of a Lancashire baronet,  and so impaired his fortune by his^
passion for  "collecting,"  that he was induced to dispose of his museum by
lottery,  in 1785.     He died in 1788.

Leveson,  Mrs.,  alluded to in the Poem.  She was daughter of Mrs.  Boscawen,  and
wife of the Hon.  Leveson Gower.  This lady is celebrated in Miss Hannah More's
poem,  entitled  "  Sensibility."

Lightfoot,  the Rev.  John.  A distinguished botanist of his day.  He published a
botanical work called  "  Flora Scotica,"  and left at his death  (in 1788)  an excel-
lent Herbarium,  which was purchased of his executors by George IlL,  for one
hundred guineas.

Lncan,  Lady.     She was wife of the first Lord Lucan.

Merlin,  Monsieur.  A celebrated French mechanician.  He invented many inge-
nious objects,  some of which were of real utility,  but most were mere play-
things or objects of curiosity.  He was at one period of his career quite  "  the
rage"  in London,  where every thing was a la Merlin — Merlin chairs — Merlin
pianos — Merlin swings,  &c.  He opened a very curious exhibition of automata,
and used to ride about in a strange fantastical carriage,  of his own invention and
construction,

Metcalf,  Mr.,  was chosen Member of Parliament for Horsham in 1784.

Miller,  Lady,  of Bath Easton.  Her  "  Vase"  and its objects are thus alluded to by
Horace VValpole.  "They hold a Parnassus-fair every Thursday,  give out
rhymes and themes,  and all the flux of quality at Bath contend for the prizes.
A Roman vase,  dressed with pink ribbons and myrtles,  receives the poetry,  which
is drawn out every festival.  Six judges of these Olympic games retire and select
the brightest compositions,  which the respective successful ten candidates acknow-
ledge, kneel to Mrs.  Calliope  (Miller),  kiss her fair hand,  and are crowned by it
with myrtle.  You may think this a fiction or exaggeration.  Be dumb,  unbe-
lievers !  The collection is printed — published — yes,  on my faith,  there are bout-
rimes on a buttered muffin,  by her Grace the Duchess of Northumberland,"  &c.
Works,  vol.  v.,  p.  185.

Milles,  Dr.  Jeremiah,  nephew of the Bishop of Waterford.  He was,  at the period
referred to in the Diary,  President of the Antiquarian Society.  The work
alluded to was not published till 1782.

Millico,  an Italian soprano singer,  one of the most celebrated of his time.

Monckto7i,  the Hon.  Miss,  daughter of Viscount Galway,  and afterwards  (in 1786,)
married to the Earl of Cork and Orrery.  The literary parties of this lady,  who
died only a few months ago,  continued to be as singular and as celebrated during
the present day,  as they are described as having been at the date when she is
first referred to in the Diary — sixty years ago.

Montagu,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  writer of the celebrated  "  Essay on the Genius and
Learning of Shakspeare."

Montagu,  Mr.    Afterwards Lord Rokeby.

Musters,  Mrs.     This lady was the mother of J.  Musters,  Esq.  who married Miss
Chaworth,  celebrated by Lord Byron.     To show how little her beauty and
notoriety contributed to her happiness,  we may repeat an anecdote of this lady
related by a gentleman still living at Brighton.     He remembers meeting Mrs.
Musters at the ball mentioned by Miss Burney,  and being requested to give her
a glass of water,  it was turbid and chalky;  upon which she said,  as she drank it,
"  Chalk is thought to be a cure for the heartburn : — /  wonder whether it will
cure the heartache  ?^^
Norris,  the Rev.  John.     "The Theory and Regulations of Love"  (the book re-
ferred to in the Diary),  was one of the many mystical works of this controversial
writer of the 17th century.
Pacchierotti was one of the most celebrated singers of his day.
Palmers,  Misses.     These ladies were nieces ofSir Joshua Reynolds.
Palmerston,  Henry Temple,  Second Viscount,  father of the present Viscount.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.  631

Paoli,  General.  A Corsican officer,  who greatly distinguished himself by his
exertions to preserve the independence of his native country.  He organized a
force which successfully opposed all the efforts of the Genoese oppressors of
Corsica,  for nearly ten years,  and led at length to the cession of the island to
the French by the Genoese.  Paoli refused to concur in this arrangement,  and
fled to England,  where he enjoyed a pension of 1200^.  a-year from the English
government.     Twenty years afterwards,  (at the Revolution of 17S9,)  he agreed

■  to Corsica being declared a province of France  ;  but subsequently,  by his influ-
ence, the island became a dependence of England.  He afterwards returned to
London,  where he died in 1807.

Pembroke,  Lady,  was the second daughter of Charles,  third Duke of Marlborough,
and sister of Lady Diana Beauclerk.  She married Henry,  the tenth Earl of
Pembroke,  and w^as grandmother to the  .present Earl.  Her amiable and exem-
plary character was as remarkable as her beauty.  She lived to a great age,  and
died a very few years ago at her villa in Richmond Park.

Pepys,  William Waller,  a master in chancery.

Perkins,  Mr.  At the period first referred to in the Diary,  Mr.  Perkins was super-
intendent of Mr.  Thrale's brewery ;  he afterwards became partner with Mr.
Barclay,  the wealthy Quaker.

Porteus,  Beilby,  afterwards Bishop of London.     He died in 1808.

Rauzzini.  An Italian singer and composer of some eminence,  who conducted the
concerts at Bath for many years.

Riccoboni,  Madame,  was wife of Anthony Francis Riccoboni,  son of Louis Ricco-
boni,  an Italian actor,  and writer of a  "  History of the Italian Theatre."  Ma-
dame Riccoboni wrote several popular French romances and novels and translated
Fielding's  "  Amelia."     She died in 1792.

Rudd,  Margaret Caroline,  was celebrated only for having been connected with
two brothers,  named Perreau,  in committing a forgery,  for which they were
both executed  (about the year 1776),  she having betrayed and borne witness
against them.  The curiosity which she excited at this period no doubt arose
(as shrewdly conjectured by Mr.  Croker,  in his notes to Boswell's Johnson,)
from it being studiously spread abroad by the friends of her victims,  that they
had been dupes and instruments in her hands.

Sacchini,  Antonio Mario Gasparo.  A distinguished Italian composer.  He was
born at Naples,  in 1735.  He was for some time at the head of the Conservatorio
of L'Ospedaletto,  at Venice.  He afterwards  (in 1772)  came to England,  and re-
mained here several years,  but was driven away by one of those petty cabals to
which the musical world has ever shown itself to be disgracefully liable.  A
report was universally circulated,  and extensively believed,  that many of his best
things were composed by Rauzzini — a man infinitely inferior to Sacchini in
every thing but the mere mechanism of music.  Sacchini finally established
himself at Paris,  where his great talents were duly appreciated,  and rewarded by
a pension from the Queen,  Marie Antoniette.  He died at Paris in 1786.  One
of his best dramatic pieces  (of which he composed more than eighty,)  is on the
subject of  "Evelina."

Sastres,  Mr.  This gentleman is spoken of by Boswell as  "  Mr.  Sastres,  the Italian
Master."  He was on terms of great intimacy with Dr.  Johnson,  some of whose
most pleasant letters were addressed to him,  (see the General Appendix to
«'  Murray's Boswell,"  vol.  10.)

Seward,  William,  was author of"  Anecdotes of Distinguished Persons,"  in 5 vols.,

and  "  Biographiana,"  a sequel to the same,  in 2 vols.
Solander,  Dr.  Daniel,  the Swedish naturalist,  who accompanied Captain Cook in

his first voyage round the world.
Strange,  Mr.     Afterwards Sir Robert Strange,  the most celebrated English en-
graver of his day.     He was born in 1725,  in one of the Orkney Islands.     In early
life he entered the army of the Pretender.     Subsequently he pursued his profes-
sional studies at Paris and in Italy.     He died at London in 1795.
Trimmer,  Sarah,  was born at Ipswich in 1741.     She was the daughter of Mr.
Joshua Kirby,  Clerk of the Works at Kew Palace,  who had instructed some of
the younger branches of the Royal Family in drawing.     Mrs.  Trimmer's works
are exclusively intended for youth.     She died in 1810.
Turner^  Sir George Page,  Bart.,  father of the present Baronet.
Twining,  the Rev.  Thomas.    An accomplished Greek scholar,  and translator of
Aristotle's  "  Poetics."

632 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

Vancouver,  George.  A Captain in the Royal Navy.  He served as midshipman
under Captain Cook,  and was afterwards  (in 1790)  appointed to the command of
an expedition of discovery to the North Pacific Ocean.     He died in 1798.

Vesey,  Mrs.,  was the lady at whose house the celebrated bas bleu meetings of the
time were first held ;  and indeed with her the phrase itself is said to have
originated.  It is related that,  on inviting Mr.  Stillingfleet to one of her literary
parties,  he wished to decline attending it,  on the plea of his want of an appro-
priate dress for an evening assembly.  "Oh — never mind dress,"  said she;
"come in your blue stockings !" — which he was wearing at the time.  He took
her at her word,  and on entering the room,  directed her attention to the fact of
his having come in his blue stockings ;  and her literary meetings retained the
name of bas bleu ever after.

Walker,  Adam.  Long known throughout England as a lecturer on astronomy,  and
as the inventor of the Eidouranion.  In early life he showed an extraordinary
capacity for mechanics,  but was of very eccentric habits,  having,  when quite a
youth,  built himself a hut in a thicket near his father's house,  that he might
pursue his studies uninterruptedly.  He first commenced lecturing on astro-
nomy in London,  in 1778,  and continued to do so every year,  and also at
most of the foundation schools,  up to the period of his death,  in 1821.

Wedderburne,  Alexander,  afterwards Lord Loughborough.  This gentleman is
understood to have been the chief mover in procuring Dr.  Johnson's pension.

Wharton,  Dr.  Joseph,  author of the  "  Essay on the Genius and Writings of Pope."
He was,  at the time referred to in the Diary,  Head Master of Winchester.

Whitehead,  William,  was the son of a baker at Cambridge,  where he was born in
1715.  He was brought up at Winchester,  and afterwards became a Fellow of
Clare Hall,  Oxford.  Whitehead was a graceful and pleasing,  but not a distin-
guished poet.  He spent several years in Germany,  Italy,  Switzerland,  and the
Low Countries,  as travelling tutor to Lord Nuneham,  and to a son of the Earl of
Jersey.  He was afterwards  (on the death of Cibber)  appointed Poet Laureat.
He died in 1785.

Williams,  Anna,  was the daughter of a Welsh physician.  She was,  at the time
referred to,  a widow,  blind,  and in reduced circumstances,  and Dr.  Johnson
gave her an apartment in his house,  where she resided till her death.

Williams,  Sir Charles Hanbury,  was M.  P.  for Monmouth in several parliaments.
He was afterwards Minister at the Courts of Berlin and St.  Petersburg.  He
died in 1759.  He is alluded to in the Diary only as father of the witty and
accomplished Mrs.  Walsingham.

Wraxall,  Nathaniel William.  This gentleman  (who was created a Baronet in
1813)  was a voluminous writer of travels,  historical works,  memoirs,  &c.  He
was the son of a Bristol merchant,  and passed the early part of his life in India,
in the civil service of the Company.  He was afterwards appointed Judge Advo-
cate and Paymaster of the Forces of the Presidency of Bombay.  His latest work,
and that which excited most attention,  was entitled  "  Historical Memoirs of my
own Times,"  &c.  It was published in 1815.  Sir Nathaniel Wraxall died at
Dover in 1831,  on his way to Naples.

END OF VOL.    I.

■VALUABLE BOOKS

RECENTLY PUBLISHED BY

CAREY AND HART,

FOURTH AND CHESTNUT STREETS,  PHILADELPHIA.

KOSCOE's LOREXZO DE'  MEDICI.

THE LIFE OF LORENZO DE'  MEDICI,

CALLED THE MAGNIFICENT.
BY WILLIAM ROSCOE,  ESQ.

A new edition in two vols.  8vo.  with the Appendix and all the Notes in the
original edition.
The publishers deem it proper to state this fact,  as an edition has lately appeared
which contains the text,  but in which the Appendix and a large portion of the
original Notes are entirely omitted.

"But let us return for a moment to our historian,  whose work we cannot dis-
miss without adding our feeble vote to the unbounded applause which it has ob-
tained from the best part of the public.  Mr.  Roscoe,  in our opinion,  possesses a
high rank among the historians of his country.  Notwithstanding the modesty of
the title,  The Life of Lorenzo de'  Medici unites the general history of the times
and the political system of the most memorable country in Europe,  with the cha-
racters of the most celebrated men,  and the rise and progress of science and art.
The greatest praise of the historian and biographer,  impartiality,  might be called
its prominent feature,  were it not excelled by the humanity of the writer,  v./ho
touches with a hand often too gentle,  those blemishes which he scorns to disguise.
It is impossible to read any part of his performance without discovering thai an
ardent love of the true interests of society,  and a fervent attachment to virtue and
real liberty,  have furnished his motives of choice and every where guided his pen."
— FuselVs Review of Lorenzo de'  Medici.

"The Life of Lorenzo de'  Medici quickly attracted the attention and excited the
applause of a discerning public.  The style is pure and elegant — the facts are
interesting and instructive.  I hardly know a work of its kind which evinces
throughout a more delicate taste,  exercised upon a more felicitous subject.  Roscoe
is almost the regenerator,  among Englishmen,  of a love of Italian literature." —
Dibdiji.

TKS HISTORIT OF FICTION.

BEING

A CRITICAL ACCOUNT OF THE MOST CELEBRATED WORKS OF FICTION,

FROM THE EARLIEST GREEK ROMANCES TO THE NOVELS

OF THE PRESENT DAY.

BY JOHN DUNLOP.

AUTHOR OF THE  "  HISTORY OF R03IAN LITERATURE."
Handsomely printed in two vols.  12mo.

By T.  Noon Talfourd.

CONTENTS.

1.  On British Novels and Romances,
introductory to a series of criticisms on
the Living-  Novelists.

2.  Mackenzie.

3.  The Author of Waverley.

4.  Godwin.

5.  Maturin.

6.  Rymer on Tragedy.

7.  Col ley Cibber's Apology for his Life.

8.  John Dennis's Works.

9.  Modern Periodical Literature.

10.  On the Genius and Writings of
Wordsworth.

IL North's Life of Lord Guildford.
12.  Hazlitt's Lectures on the Drama.

13.  Wallace's Prospects of Mankind,
Nature,  and Providence.

14.  On Pulpit Oratory.

15.  Recollections of Lisbon.

16.  Lloyd's Poems.

17.  Oldakeron Modern Improvements.

18.  A Chapter  "  on Time."

19.  On  "  The Profession of the Bar."

20.  The Wine Cellar.

21.  Destruction of the Brunswick
Theatre by Fire.

22.  First Appearance of Miss Fanny
Kemble.

23.  On the Intellectual Character of
the late William Hazlitt.

One vol.  12mo.

3Jottns5ontana:

OR ANECDOTES AND SAYINGS OF DR.  JOHNSON,
(not contained in  "  BOS well's life.")

Mrs.  Piozzi.
Sir John Hawkins,
Thomas Tyers,  Esq.
J.  Hoole,  Esq.
George Stevens,  Esq.
Miss Reynolds,
Mr.  Cumberland,

BY

Mr.  Cradock,
Hannah More.
Mr.  Wickens,
Mr.  Green,
Rev.  Mr.  Parker,
Mr.  Rose,
William Seward,

O.  Humphreys,  R.  A.
Sir Joshua Reynolds,
Mad.  D'Arblay,
Dr.  Beattie,

The Rt.  Hon.  W.  Wind-
ham,
Bishop Home.

EDITED BY J.  WILSON CROKER.

Complete in one volume,  12mo.,  handsomely printed.

With finely engraved Portraits of Dr.  Joliuson,  Boswell)  Madame Piozzif
Toplianx Beauclerk,  and Tlirale*

From the Editor^s Preface.
"  Taken by themselves alone,  these Ana might,  it is presumed,  claim a place
with the best works of that popular description,  in our own or in any other lan-
guage. They form,  it will hardly be disputed,  one of the richest collections of ma-
terials for thinking that can be pointed out in literature;  and constitute eminently
a manual such as Johnson himself was fond of — ^  one of those portable books that
you may carry to the fireside and hold readily in your hand — the most useful after
alV  "

LIFE

EDWARD THE BLACK PRINCE.

BY G.  P.  R.  JAxMES.

Author of"  Darnley,"  "  The Gipsy,"  "  Life of Richard Coeur de Lion,"  &c.

Two volumes,  12mo.

*'  Mr.  James seems to have been inspired by his subject,  and his life of the chi-
valrous prince possesses all the interest of his happiest fictions."

IN ONE VOLUME,  ROYAL OCTAVO,

(in the style of the last LONDON EDITION OF CAMPBELL'S BRITISH POETS,)

THE

POETS AND POETRY OF AMERICA.

Embracing selections from the Poetical Literature of the United States,  from the
time of the Revolution  ;  with a Preliminary Essay,  on the progress and condition
of Poetry in this country ;  and Biographical and Critical Notices of the most
eminent Poets.

BY RUFUS W.  GRISWOLD.

The best works of the following and other authors will appear in this volume,  viz :

Allston,

EUet,

Bryant,

Fields,

Brainard,

Greene,

Brooks,

Gould,

Benjamin,

Gallagher,

Clarke,

Halleck,

Coxe,

Hoffman,

Croswell,

Holmes,

Dana,

Hooper,

Drake,

Hillhouse,

Dawes,

Longfellow,

Doane,

Lawrence,

Embury,

Lunt,

Lowell,

Sands,

Mellen,

Sandford,

M'Lellen,

Simms,

Norton,
Osgood,
Pinkney,
Percival,

Sargent,
Sigourney,
Street,
Tuckerman,

Pierpont,
Prentice,

Very,
Ware,

Pike,

Willis,

Peabody,
Rockwell,

Whittier,
Wilcox.

Sprague,

WITH BEAUTIFULLY ENGRAVED PORTRAITS OF DANA,  HALLECK,  BRYANT,
LONGFELLOW,  ETC.

"  A work of this description has long been needed.  Its preparation could not
have been confided to better hands." — New Yorker.

"No better selection from the poetry of our native bards has ever been made,
and no person could do better with the materials than Mr.  Griswold has done.  The
historical essay preceding the poems,  is a well written production,  evincing
thorough knowledge of the subject,  and a just appreciation of our elder bards." —
Boston Transcript.

"This is a large and beautiful octavo of 500 pages,  elegantly printed in com-
pact double columns.  We regard it as one of the finest specimens of Typogra-
phical Art ever issued from the American Press.  On the whole he has given us
by far the best collection of American Poetry ever published,  and performed a
valuable service to our literature,  which will insure for him the lasting regard and
favour of the public." — New World.

"  The largest and certainly the best collection of American Poetry that has been
made.  The editor has executed his part with industry,  skill and taste.  No man
in this country is probably so familiar with this branch of American literature,  not
only in regard to its most ancient,  but its obscurest authors." — N.  Y.  Evening Post.

"The selections are made with a generally sound judgment.  It forms a very
handsome volume,  which would be a valuable addition to every American library."
— Daily Advertiser.

"  This is one of the finest volumes that has issued from the American Press." —
Courier and Enquirer.

"  It is emphatically an American work,  and is not a little creditable to our litera-
ture."— Pa.  Inquirer.

"  A work entirely without a rival in its department,  and for which there has for
years existed a marked and increased necessity." — Nat.  Intelligencer.

THE TASK AND OTHER POEMS.

BY WILLIAM COWPER.

BEAUTIFULLY PRINTED ON SUPERFINE PAPER,  WITH
Nnmerong l>eautiful Engravings T>y Cheney,  Cnslimau,  &c.  after Gilbert*

One volume.

Travels in Turkey,  Greece,  and the Holy Land,

BY E.   JOY xM O R R I S.
In two vols.  12 ino.

WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS.

"  We conunend it to the public as a sterling work of travel.'"— ?7.  S.  Gazette.

"  The author has contrived to give to his descriptions of places,  scenery,  and events a spirit of fresh-
ness and vraisemblance,  that cannot be too much admired.'— Spirit of the Times.

GEORGE ST.    GEORGE JULIAN,

THE PRINCE.

BY THE AUTHOR OF  "VALENTINE VOX."

WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS,  HANDSOMELY ENGRAVED BY YEAGER.

Complete in One vol.  8vo.

"They who have laughed over the eccentric vagaries of that prince of practical jokers  'Valentine
Vox,'  will find our present hero every way worthy of his illustrious predecessor."— JVarai and Military
Gazette.

"We will not pass the second number of this admirably told tale without some notice,  for its clever-
ness demands our attention.  No member of the Stock Exchange,  no speculator whose fingers have
been bit by foreign bonds,  railway shares,  schemes which promise a thousand per cent,  profit,  should
omit reaoing the two parts that have appeared."— S(ates?na?i.

"The witty and observant author of  '  Valentine Vox'  and  'Stanley Thorn'  has commenced a new
story under the above title;  this idea is a good one,  and Mr.  Cockton has very admirably prepared
us for his hero's adventures.  The scene of his marriage is boldly and well drawn;  and the history of
the Soup Association is given with great power of descripiion.'" — ./3^e.

"  Mr.  Cockton is assuredly one of the most successful of the many competitors w ilh whom Boz
has to cope.

'  He is a shrewd observer,  and he looks
Quite through the deeds of men.'

He seizes promptly upon every trait of the human character,  and he developes it with graphic skill.
His style is clear and forcible;  his humour never obtrusive,  but natural and well sustained.  '  Valentine
Vox'  and  '  Stanley Thorn'  have established for him a reputation which will not easily be shaken  ;  and
if we mistake not,  '  George St.George Julian'  will enhance his well won popularity more than either."
— Salisbury Herald.

THE COMMISSIONER;

OR

DE LUNA T ICO INQUIRENDO.

.   A HUMOROUS PERIODICAL,  NOW APPEARING IN MONTHLY NUMBERS.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY PHIZ.

"We have before us the first number of what appears to be certainly one of the most eccentric works
we have met with for many a long day.  The characters are sketched with a dashing but powerful hand
—well grouped and well contrasted.  The book is one of great and varied power.  Philosophy,  humour,
and pathos encounter you in almost every page,  and win you on,  from the fisrt to the last,  at a single
spell."— W^arder.

"  It is written in a caustic,  satirical style,  and hits hard at men and manners."— Liverpool
Standard.

"  As far as we can form a judgment from the first number of this strangely entitled work,  we ausur
well for its future interest and popularity.  There is in the style a happy blending of the quietly hu-
morous, the grave,  the satirical,  the poetic,  and the descriptive"."— Cor A:  Examiner.

"The first number of  'The Commissioner'  gives ample promise of a periodical well suited to the
light literature of the day.  The plot of the tale is admirably comic,  and admits of endless extension
and variety.  Its author seems  '  i'  the vein'  to make the most of it ;  and the incomparable  '  Phiz'  il-
lustrates to the life the funniest of its scenes.'"— Freeman's Journal.

Zff T5f35
