li')cm'u  :§*'mu>rr5un

A.i

A r\AiiV

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2007

https://archive.org/details/diarylettersofma05burn

P'

♦

p-

%

«

pk

A »r
■ y>u

W

W'.

i'..'

«•>-

a

#

<#

Hf;'^V/tf.,  _ ...  „-V,  _.■■•,  ■

1^.

im^

p#

'4.'-

Sl^.*

t'

<<¥•

4

’V

DIARY

AND

LETTERS

OF

MADAME D’ARBLAY

AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  CECILIA,  &c.

EDITED BY HER NIECE.

‘the spirit walks of every day deceased.” YOUNG.

VOL.  V.

1789—1793.

LONDON:

HENRY"  COLBURN,  PUBLISHER,

GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1843.

THE NEW YOKE

Public ubrart

793795 A

AS'rOU,  1.&MOX AMO
TiUJAM tOUiUmA'iiOlAii

M L

LONDON ;

inted Uj-Wiluam Clowes and Sons,
Staraford-stieet.

PART I.

1789.

CONTENTS.

Court Diary continued — Recovery of the King — Personal Inter-
view with him — Demonstrations of joy on the King’s Reco-
very— Bishop Hurd  — Correspondence  — The Restoration  —
Drawing Room — Return to Windsor — The Tiger — Miss Bur-
ney to Mrs.  Lock — Prince William’s Return from Sea — His
Arrival at Windsor — An Interview with him— The Marquis
del Campo — Thoughts on Death — Royal Visit to Weymouth—-
Dr.  Wart on  — The New Forest Law  — Lyndhnrst  — Village
Loyalty — Reminiscences — Arrival at Weymouth — Lord Cour-
town — Bathing to Music — Correspondence  — Miss Burney to
Dr.  Burney — Angelica Kauffmann — Weymouth Loyalty — Mrs.
Gwynn — Old Recollections — A Royal Visit to the Theatre —
Lord Chesterfield — Mrs.  Siddons — Dr.  Glasse — Mrs.  Siddons
in Rosalind.

VOI.  V

B

DIARY AND LETTERS

OF

THE AUTHOR OF  “ EVELINA.”

PART I.
1789.

Kew Palace.

Sunday,  March 1st. — What a pleasure was mine this
morning!  how solemn,  but how grateful 1 The Queen
gave me the  ' Prayer of Thanksgiving  ’ upon the King’s
recovery.  It was this morning read in all the churches
throughout the metropolis,  and by this day week it will
reach every church in the kingdom.  It kept me in tears
all the morning, — that such a moment should actually
arrive  ! after fears so dreadful,  scenes so terrible.

The Queen gave me a dozen,  to distribute among the
female servants : but I reserved one of them for dear
Mr.  Smelt,  who took it from me in speechless extacy —
his line and feeling eyes swimming in tears of joy.

There is no describing — and I will not attempt it —
the fullness,  the almost overwhelming fullness of this
morning’s thankful feelings  !

B 2

4

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

I had the great gratification to see the honoured object
of this joy,  for a few minutes,  in the Queen’s dressing-
room.  He was all calmness and benevolent gracious-
ness. I fancied my strong emotion had disfigured me ;
or perhaps the whole of this long confinement and most
affecting winter may have somewhat marked my counte-
nance ; for the King presently said to me,

“ Pray,  are you quite well to-day?”

‘‘  I think not quite,  sir,”  I answered.

“ She does not look well,”  said he to the Queen;  ‘‘she
looks a little — yellow y I think.”

How kind,  to think of any body and their looks,  at
this first moment of reappearance  !

I hear Major Price is arrived,  on a visit,  to see his re-
stored old master : with w'hat true joy will he see that
sight ! Mr.  Smelt told me,  also,  there would be no more
private parties,  as the King now sent for all the gen-
tlemen to join the Royal set at the card-table every
evening.

1 have much reason to be glad of this at present.

On my return I found a letter from my dear M ,

written on the day of her marriage  ; which was performed
at Bath,  whence she set out for her father’s house.  Her
letter is dated on the road.

Wednesday,  March 4th. — A message from Mrs.
Schwellenberg this morning,  to ask me to air with her,  re-
ceived my most reluctant acquiescence;  for the frost is
so severe that any air,  without exercise,  is terrible to
me ; though,  were her atmosphere milder,  the rigour of
the season I might not regard.

When we came to the passage,  the carriage was not
ready.  She murmured most vehemently;  and so bitterly
cold was I,  1 could heartily have joined,  had it answered
any purpose.

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

5

While thus bad was making worse,  a party of gentle-
men in uniform passed ; and presently Mr.  Fairly,
looking towards us,  exclaimed,  “ Is that — yes,  it is Miss
Burney:  I must just ask her how she does! — ” and,
quitting the group,  he came to me with a thousand kind
inquiries.

He was then entering still further into conversation  ;
but I drew back,  alarmed,  lest,  not having noticed my
companion,  he should unknowingly incense her by this
distinction.  Still,  however,  he went on,  till I looked full
round at Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who was standing,  loftily
silent,  only a few steps above me.

He then addressed her ; whether he had not seen or
had not cared about her before,  I know not.  She in-
stantly began a proud accusation of her servants,  protest-
ing she had never met such a thing before as to wait for
such people  ; but made no answer to his tardy salutation.

Just as well content,  he heard her without reply,  and,
returning to me,  renewed his attempt at conversation.
More loftily than ever,  she then drew up,  and uttered
aloud the most imperious reproaches,  on the unexampled
behaviour of her people,  who were never while they lived
again to have power to make her wait  “ not one moment.”

Frightened at this rising storm,  I endeavoured to turn
towards her,  and engage her to join in other discourse  ;
but Mr.  Fairly did not second my motion,  and  / ob-
tained no other notice than,  “ O,  ver well  ! when they
will serve me so,  they might see what will become 1 — no !
it is not permit 1 — ” &c.

In the midst of this.  Colonel Goldsworthy appeared  ;
he came forward,  with How dos? — but Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg called him to her,  with unusual civility,  and many
kind inquiries about his sister.

In this cold passage we waited in this miserable man-

6

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

iier a full quarter of an hour  ; all the time scolding the
servants,  threatening them with exile,  sending message
after message,  repining,  thwarting,  and contentious.

Now we were to go and wait in the King’s rooms — now
in the Gentlemen’s — now in Dr.  Willis’s — her own, —
and this,  in the end,  took place.

* * iK  *

In our way we again encountered Mr.  Fairly.  He
asked where we were going.  “To my own parlour!”
she answered.

He accompanied us in ; and,  to cheer the gloom,  seized
some of the stores of Dr.  Willis, — sandwiches,  wine and
water,  and other refreshments, — and brought them to us,
one after another,  in a sportive manner,  recommending to
us to break through common rules,  on such an occasion,
and eat and drink to warm ourselves.

She stood in stately silence,  and bolt upright,  scarce
deigning to speak even a refusal ; till,  upon his saying,
while he held a glass of wine in his hand,  “ Come,  ma’am,
do something eccentric for once — it will warm you  ! — ”
she angrily answ^ered,  “ You been reely — what you call —
too much hospital  ! ”

Neither of us could help laughing, — “ Yes,”  cried he,
“ with the goods of others ; — that makes a wide differ-
ence in hospitality 1 ”

Then he rattled away upon the honours the room had
lately received,  of having had iMr.  Pitt,  the Chancellor,
Archbishop of Canterbury,  &c,,  to wait in it.

This she resented highly,  as seeming to think it more
honoured in her absence than presence.

At length we took our miserable airing,  in which I was
treated with as much fierce harshness as if I was convey-
ing to some jdace of confinement for the punishment of
some dreadful offence !

17S9]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

7

She would have the glass down on my side;  the pierc-
ing wind cut my face;  I put my muff up to it:  this in-
censed her so much,  that she vehemently declared  “she
never,  no never,  would trobhie any won to air with her
again,  but go always seifs.” — And who will repine at
that?  thought I.

Yet by night I had caught a violent cold,  which Hew
to my face,  and occasioned me dreadful pain.

Tuesday,  March 10th. — I have been in too much
pain to write these last five days ; and I became very
feverish,  and universally ill,  affected with the fury of the
cold.

!My Royal Mistress,  who could not but observe me
very unwell,  though I have never omitted my daily three
attendances,  which I have performed with a difficulty all
but insurmountable,  concluded I had been guilty of some
imprudence:  1 told the simple fact of the glass, — but
quite simply,  and without one circumstance.  She in-
stantly said she was surprised I could catch cold in an
airing,  as it never appeared that it disagreed with me
when I took it with Mrs.  Delany.

“ No,  ma’am,”  I immediately answered,  ‘‘  nor with
]\Irs.  Lock;  nor formerly with Mrs.  Thrale : — but they
left me the regulation of the glass on my own side to
myself ; or,  if they interfered,  it was to draw it up for me.”

This I could not resist.  I can be silent ; but when
challenged to speak at all,  it must be plain truth.

I had no answer.  Illness here — till of late — has
been so unknown,  that it is commonly supposed it must
be wilful,  and therefore it meets little notice,  till accom-
panied by danger,  or incapacity of duty.  This is by no
means from hardness of heart — far otherwise  ; there is
no hardness ot heart in any one of them  ; but it is preju-
dice and want of personal experience.

8

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

Tuesday,  March 10th. — This was a day of happi-
ness indeed  ! — a day of such heartfelt public delight as
could not but suppress all private disturbance.

The King sent to open the House of Lords by Coni-
niission.

The general illumination of all London proved the
universal joy of a thankful and most affectionate people,
who have shown so largely,  on this trying occasion,  how
well they merited the monarch thus benignantly pre-
served.

The Queen,  from her privy purse,  gave private orders
for a splendid illumination at this palace  : Rebecca

painted a beautiful transparency;  and Mr.  Smelt had the
regulation of the whole.

The King — Providence — Health — and Britannia,  were
displayed with elegant devices : the Queen and Prin-
cesses, all but the youngest,  went to town to see the illu-
mination there;  and Mr.  Smelt was to conduct the sur-
prise.— It was magnificently beautiful.

When it was lighted and prepared,  the Princess Ame-
lia went to lead her Papa to the front window:  but first
she dropped on her knees,  and presented him a paper
with these lines — which,  at the Queen’s desire,  I had
scribbled in her name,  for the happy occasion  : —

TO THE KING.

Amid a rapt’rous nation’s praise

That sees Thee to their prayers restor’d.

Turn gently from the gen’ral blaze, —

Thy Charlotte woos her bosom’s lord.

Turn and behold where,  bright and clear,

Depictur’d with transparent art,

The emblems of her thoughts appear.

The tribute of a grateful heart.

1789]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  9

O f small the tribute,  were it weigh’d
With all she feels — or half she owes  !

But noble minds are best repaid
From the pure spring whence bounty flows.

P.  S.  The little bearer begs a kiss

From dear Papa,  for bringing this.

I need not,  I think,  tell you,  the little bearer begged
not in vain.  The King was extremely pleased.  He came
into a room belonging to the Princesses,  in which we had
a party to look at the illuminations,  and there he stayed
above an hour;  cheerful,  composed,  and gracious!  all
that could merit the great national testimony to his worth
this day paid him.

Lady Effingham,  Major Price,  Dr.  Willis,  and Mr.
and JMrs.  Smelt,  made the party  ; with the sweet little
Pi incess till her bed-time.  Miss Goinme,  &c.

The Queen and Princesses did not return from town
till one in the morning.  They were quite enchanted with
the glorious scene they had been beholding.

Wednesday,  March 11th. — This morning our be-
loved Sovereign,  reinstated in all his dignities,  received
the Address of the Lords and Commons,  in person,  upon
his recovery.

The Queen,  too,  saw some of the foreign ministers,  on
the same joyful occasion.  All was serene gaiety and
pleasure !

At night the Princess Elizabeth came to call me to the
Queen.  Her Majesty was in the drawing-room,  wdth the
King,  Princesses,  Lady Pembroke,  Mr.  Smelt,  and Dr.
Willis.  She immediately communicated to me her gra-
cious permission that I should spend the next day in
town,  sleep at my father’s,  and return on Friday evening.

On Saturday we are all to take leave of Kew.

10

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

Thursday,  March 12th. — I set out as early as 1
was able,  in a post-chaise,  with Coluinb on horseback.
On the road we overtook the King,  with Mr.  Fairly,  Co-
lonels Manners,  Gwynn,  and Goldsworthy,  and Major
Price.

I stopped the chaise  ; but the King rode up to it,  and
asked me how long I should stay in town,  and how long
it was since I had seen my father?  When I answered five
months,  “ O poor soul ! ” he exclaimed,  and then let
me go on.

How did I rejoice to see my dearest father!

Friday evening I returned to Kew.

Queen's Lodge.  Windsor.

Saturday,  March 14th. — This morning we returned
to Windsor,  with what dift’erent sensations from those with
which we left it!  xVll illness over,  all fears removed,  all
sorrows lightened  ! The King was so well as to go on
horseback,  attended by a large party of gentlemen.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg went to town to spend some days.
ISliss Planta only accompanied me:  JMr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,
on invitation by the King,  came also to Windsor for a
week.  The Queen was all graciousness  : everything and
everybody were smiling and lively.

All Windsor came out to meet the King.  It was a joy
amounting to extacy ; I could not keep my eyes dry all
day long.  A scene so reversed  ! sadness so sweetly ex-
changed for thankfulness and delight !

I had a charming party to dinner;  Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt
and the Bishop of Worcester joining Mr.  De Luc and
IVIiss Planta.  Recovery was all the talk  ; there could be
no other theme.

The town of Windsor had subscribed forty guineas for
fireworks,  to celebrate the return of the King;  the Iloyal

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

11

Family were to see them from Mrs.  Schwellenberg’s bed-
room, which looked directly upon them  ; and  ]\Ir.  Smelt
begged to see them from mine,  wliich is immediately under
that of Mrs.  Schwellenberg.

Sunday,  jMarch 15th. — I’he King this morning re-
newed his public service at church,  by taking the Sacra-
ment at eight o’clock.  All his gentlemen attended him.
The Queen,  Princesses,  and household went at the usual
time.  Bishop Hurd preached an excellent sermon,
with one allusion to the King’s recovery,  delicately
touched and quickly passed over.

The excellent Bishop and Mr.  Smelt again dined with
us.  The Bishop preferred our quiet table to the crowd
now belonging to that of the equerries.  We had some
very good treatises upon society,  between him and Mr.
Smelt.  He protested he never chose to meet more than
six,  and thought all added to that number created con-
fusion and destroyed elegance.

At tea,  they all poured in  ; except that I was deprived
of poor jMrs.  Smelt,  who was not well.  Miss Planta was
my only belle;  my beaux were as numerous as yesterday,
but not as cheerful.  I was completely overset,  in the
very beginning,  by hearing,  from Colonel Manners,  that
the King had actually and publicly declared his intention,
to his gentlemen,  of going to Germany this summer !

A general inquiry went round,  of who would form the
party;  Major Price confessed himself invited.  No one
else knew their destiny,  but Miss Planta expected they
would all go.

We were now joined by Dr.  John Willis,  and the cler-
gyman, Mr.  Thomas,  his brother;  two as amiable men
as live.

Dr.  John came,  and took up my attention for the rest
of the tea-time.

12

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

In the midst of the tea,  entered Madame La Fite.
She approached me with such expressions of delight and
joy,  as my Susan — my Fredy — Miss Cambridge — would
have thought highly unseasonable to utter,  after any
absence whatever,  in so full a company of gentle-
men. “ Ma chere Mademoiselle Beurni ! — ma ti es chere
amie ! — ” &c. : yet all the time,  far from being betrayed
involuntarily into this extacy,  her eyes roved so round to
all the company,  to see if they witnessed her rapture,  that
she truly never found a moment to examine how its ob-
ject received it ! *

This sort of display of sensibility always locks it up in
those who perceive it : I was cold as marble,  and com-
pletely ashamed.

General Grenville,  and the officers of his regiment,  the
Welsh Fusileers,  now quartered at Windsor,  propose
giving a ball next week,  in honour of His Majesty’s re-
covery. He invited all the company,  and most of them
accepted the invitation.

When the Royal Family went to supper,  Humphries
came to tell me Miss Egerton wished to see me  ; — she had
been of the evening party,  and promised to dine with me
next day.  She is amongst the few of undoubted ad-
mission here.

Miss Burney to Mrs. •.

March 16,  1789.

I thought with greatly added satisfaction,

from what the last letter contains,  of Mr.  — — ’s religious
principles.  There,  indeed,  you have given a basis to my
hopes of your happiness,  that no other consideration could
have given me.  To have him good is very important to
me : to have you impressed with his goodness,  I had
almost said,  is yet more so.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

13

1789]

Only guard yourself,  all you can,  froiu mminating,  too
deeply,  and from indulging every rising emotion,  whether
oi pain ox pleasure.  You are all made up with pro-
pensities to both ; I see it with concern,  yet with added
tenderness  : see it also yourself,  and it can do no evil.
We are all more in our own power than we think,  till we
try,  or are tried.  To calm your too agitated mind,  must
be uppermost in your thoughts  : — pray for strength to do
it,  and you will not be denied it: — but pray,  I beg you:
— it will not come without prayer,  and prayer will im-
press you with the duty of exertion.

Miss Burney to the same.

Queen’s Lodge,  Windsor,  March 17,  ’89.

How tranquillizing a letter,  my sweet friend,  have
you at last sent me  ! I read it with the highest satisfac-
tion, and I have dwelt upon it with constant pleasure

ever since.  What you tell me of Mrs. ’s kindness

and attention could not indeed surprise me,  but my best
gratification from them arises in your grateful acceptance.
When you tell me you have not known so much comfort
for time immemorial,  you show that right disposition to
be happy which forms one of the principal powers for
becoming so.  I do indeed flatter myself that now,  since
your destiny in this world is fixed,  your mind will con-
tinue in the same serene state in which you describe it ;
for I know your sense of duty  (may I say so to a
married woman 9),  and I know the excellent resolutions
with which you began your new course of life ; and
contentment and cheerfulness are so much in our own
power,  though high felicity depends upon circumstances,
that whoever is earnestly bent on making the happiness
of others their first care must attain them.  And such,
I know,  was the generous intention with which you set

14

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

out ; an intention which,  well supported,  never,  I believe,
failed of preserving the most grateful affection in the
object towards whom it is directed.  And you,  my dear

M , I well know,  have a thousand powers for keeping

awake at the same time the most lively admiration.
And you will not let them languish because you are
married;  for you require affection and kindness;  they
are necessary to your peace  ; you have enjoyed them in
full sway all the best and happiest part of your life,  and
you could do nothing to diminish them that would not
chiefly end in punishing yourself.  No,  no ; 1 do not fear
this from you,  common as is the fault.  Your poor mind
has been tutored, — tora rather, — in the school of early
adversity,  and you will not yourself roughen the harbour
that brings you to rest.

We h ave lived in much hurry since I wrote last,
though,  thank Heaven,  of a sort the most pleasant.  The
recovery of the King is a blessing unspeakable both in
its extent and force.  He little before knew the general
loyalty and attachment of the nation.  The nation knew
it not,  indeed,  itself.

The Bishop of Worcester has been here to give His
Majesty the Sacrament,  and inquired much about you.

Adieu,  my dearest M ; I entreat to hear from

you as soon and as often as you can.  I know how
much you must be engaged for some time to come,  and
short letters shall content me till you have leisure to
lengthen them.  But tell me where you are as imme-
diately as possible.  Heaven ever bless you  !

F.  B.

Wednesday,  March 18th. — To-day, — suddenly and
unexpectedly,  — returned Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  Our
dinner and coffee were altered sufficiently : only Miss

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

15

Planta attended thena ; and all returned to gloom and
discontent.

But at tea she declined appearing,  not having time to
dress.  I came down to my own room^  about seven o’clock,
to get a little breathing time,  and send to invite Miss
Egerton,  to help me in doing the honours to this last even-
ing of so large a tribe  : I well knew none of the household
ladies would venture without another invitation.

I had just sent off Columb,  when a little rap announced
Mr.  Fairly,  who came in,  saying,  am escaped for a
little while,  to have some quiet conversation with you,
before the general assemblage and storm of company.”

I hastily told him to guess who was above  ; he did
presently, — and not very sorrowfully heard she came not
below.

He then gravely said,  “To-morrow I shall take leave
of you — for a long time !”

He intended setting off to-morrow morning for town,
by the opportunity of the equerries’  coach,  which would
convey him to Kew,  where His Majesty was to receive
an address.

He told me,  with a good deal of humour,  that he sus-
pected me of being rather absent in my official occu-
pation, from little natural care about toilettes and such
things.  I could not possibly deny this, — on the contrary,
I owned I had,  at first,  found my attention unattainable,
partly from flutter and embarrassment,  and partly from
the reasons he so discerningly assigned.  “ I have even,”
I added,  “ and not seldom,  handed her her fan before
her gown,  and her gloves before her cap  ! — but I am
better in all that now !”

“ I should think all tha tvery likely,”  cried he,  smiling ;
“yet it is not very trifling with Her Majesty,  who is so
exact and precise,  such things seem to her of moment.”

16

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

This is truth itself.

I said,  “ No, — she is more gracious,  more kind,  indeed,
to me than ever : she scarce speaks,  scarce turns to me
without a smile.”

“Well,”  cried he,  extremely pleased,  “this must much
soften your employment and confinement.  And,  indeed,
it was most natural to e.xpect this time of distress should
prove a cement.”

In two minutes more Miss Egerton came,  and we went
to the eating parlour,  where we were speedily joined by
the whole party.

Colonel Manners produced me some notes from Dr.
Glasse,  that were meant for the eye of the King,  and con-
sulted how to manage them.  He then showed me a
prayer,  made upon the King’s recovery,  by the clergyman
of his own living,  in Lincolnshire:  Mr.  \Mllis abused it
very much,  as being methodistical,  and assured me so was
its writer.  Lady Robert Manners,  mother of the Colonel,
is a professed Methodist,  and the Colonel has an occa-
sional bias that way,  which T think will end hereafter in
that persuasion.

Thursday,  IMarch 19th. — This morning their Ma-
jesties went to Kew,  to receive addresses from the City,
on the King’s recovery.

* * -Ic Me

Queen’s Lodge,  Windsor.

The rest of this month I shall not give by daily dates,
but by its incidents.

Our party was now much lessened.  Colonel Golds-
worthy made his retreat on the same day with Mr.  Fairly,
and some of the rest dropped oft daily,  till only Colonel
Manners,  who was in waiting,  and General Lascelles,  and
Dr.  John and Mr.  Willis,  with Major Price,  remained.

The officers of the Welsh Fusileers  “ presented their

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

17

compliments  ” to me,  in a card,  to invite me to their ball ;
and as it was given on so joyful an occasion,  and General
Grenville was the commanding officer,  I received her
Majesty’s directions to go.  So did Miss Planta and the
ladies of the Lower Lodge.

Mrs,  Douglas called to carry Miss Planta and me.
Tell me if I have introduced that lady to you  ? She is
wife to the Bishop of Carlisle,  who is also our Dean of
Windsor.

All indsor,  and almost all Berkshire,  assembled on
this occasion  ; of course there was no lack of chattery and
chatterers.  I would not dance.  General Grenville did
the honours in offering partners;  and Colonel Balfour,
colonel of the regiment,  proposed himself.  However,
these were soon answered,  and glad to offer their services
to the rest of their numerous claimants.

All the rest of our household were there.  Lord Har-
court came and showed me a new medallion,  just pre-
sented him by the Queen,  with a Latin inscription in
honour oi the King’s recovery.  He called himself
master ot the order,  from receiving the first in the distri-
bution. “ d hough,”  he added,  “1 am a very singular
courtier,  tor I have been one,  hitherto,  without either
profits or honours.”

Not so singular,  thought I;  for whoever makes a
speech such as that,  is in secret waiting for both.

I asked him,  in a line of his favourite Mason,  if he
meant to  “ weave the light dance,  in festive freedom gay?”

No,”  he said  ; but this opened to much talk upon his
friend,  who is pretty avowedly no courtier at all !

I think I need not mention meeting my beloved Fredy
in town,  on our delightful excursion thither for the Grand
Restoration Drawing Room,  in which the Queen received

VOL.  V.

c

DIARY AND LETTERS

18

[Part I.

the compliments and congratulations of almost all the
court part of the nation.

Miss Cambridge worked me,  upon this occasion,  a suit,
in silks upon tiffany,  most excessively delicate and pretty,
and much admired by her Majesty.

All I shall mention of this town visit is,  that,  the day
after the great drawing-room.  Miss Fuzilier,  for the first
time since 1 have been in office,  called upon me to inquire
after the Queen.  i\Iiss Tryon,  and Mrs.  Tracey,  and
Mrs.  Fielding,  were with her.

She looked serious,  sensible,  interesting.  I thought in-
stantly of the report concerning  ]Mr.  Fairly,  and of his
disavowal : but it was singular that the only time she
opened her mouth to speak was to name him ! Miss
Tryon,  who chatted incessantly,  had spoken of the great
confusion at the drawing-room,  from the crowd  : It

was intended to be better regulated,”  said Miss F.
“ Mr.  Fairly told me.”

She dropped her eye the moment she had spoken his
name.  After this,  as before it,  she said nothing.

On our return to Windsor we soon lost more of our
party.  The excellent Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt left us first.
I was truly sorry to part with them ; and Mr.  Smelt held
a long confidential conference with me on the morning he
went : he told me his plan also of retiring,  to finish his
life in the bosom of his children,  in the north.  When I
expressed my inevitable concern,  though unmixed with a
shadow of remonstrance against a scheme so natural,
right,  and happy,  he spoke to me in warmer terms than
ever before dropped from him,  of kind personal regard;
and he finished it w ith laughingly exclaiming,  “ Your whole
conduct,  in this trying situation,  has appeared to me per-
fection. There ! now it’s all out ! — and I don’t know

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

19

how it came to pass,  for I never mentioned to you before
how much I both love and honour yon.”

This would not lighten the projected separation ; yet
would I not,  for the universe,  even retard either of the
retirements now planned by my two kind and most va-
luable supporters during the confinement I have endured.

Major Price also returned to his cottage : I miss him,
and grieve most to lose him,  as he,  I know,  loves the
sejour,  and wishes to remain near the King.

]\Ir.  George Villiers,  a younger brother of Lord Cla-
rendon, was now here as groom of the bedchamber.  He
is very clever,  somewhat cansliqve,  but so loyal and
vehement in the King’s cause,  that he has the appellation,
from his party,  of The Tiger.  He would not obtain it
for his person,  which is remarkably slim,  slight,  and
delicate.

Miss Turney to Mrs.  Lock.

Kew,  Ajjril,  1789.

My dearest Friends, — I have her Majesty’s commands
to inquire — whether you have any of a certain breed of
poultry  ?

N.B.  kfTat breed I do not remember.

And to say she has just received a small group of the
same herself.

N.B.  The quantity I have forgotten.

And to add,  she is assured they are something very
rare and scarce,  and extraordinary and curious.

N.B.  By whom she was assured I have not heard.

And to subjoin,  that you must send word if you have
any of the same sort.

N.B.  How you are to find that out,  I cannot tell.

And to mention,  as a corollary,  that,  if you have none
of them,  and should like to have some,  she has a cock and

c 2

DIARY AND LETTERS

20

[Part I.

a hen she can spare,  and will appropriate them to Mr.
Lock and my dearest Fredy.

This conclusive stroke so pleased and exhilarated me,
that forthwith I said you would both be enchanted,  and
so forgot all the preceding particulars.

And 1 said,  moreover,  that I knew you would rear
them,  and cheer them,  and fondle them like your chil-
dren.

So now — pray write a very fair answer fairly,  in fair
hand,  and to fair purpose.

My Susanna is just now come — so all is fair with
my dearest Mr.  and Mrs.  Lock’s

F.  B.

Queen's Lodge,  Windsor.

April. — I shall abbreviate this month also of its chro-
nological exactness.

The same gentlemen continued.  Colonel Manners and
Mr.  G.  Villiers.  But Mrs.  Schwellenberg is softened into
nothing but civility and courtesy to me.  To what the
change is owing I cannot conjecture  ; but I do all that in
me lies to support it,  prelerring the entire sacrifice of
every moment,  from our dinner to twelve at night,  to her
harshness and horrors.  Nevertheless,  a lassitude of ex-
istence creeps sensibly upon me.

Colonel Manners,  however,  for the short halt-hour of
tea-time,  is irresistibly diverting.  He continues my con-
stant friend and neighbour,  and,  while he aftects to play
off the coadjulrix to advantage,  he nods at me,  to draw
forth my laughter or approbation,  with the most alarming
undisguise.  I often fear her being affronted;  but natu-
rally she admires him very much for his uncommon share
of beauty,  and makes much allowance for his levity.
However,  the never-quite-comprehended affair of the

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

21

leather bed-cover has in some degree intimidated her ever
since,  as she constantly apprehends that,  if he were pro-
voked, he would play her some trick.

He had been at White’s ball,  given in town upon His
Majesty’s recovery.  We begged some account of it:  he
ranted away with great liuency,  uttering little queer sar-
casms at Mrs.  Schwellenberg by every opportunity,  and
colouring when he had done,  with private fear of enraging
her.  This,  however,  she suspected not,  or all his aim had
been lost ; for to alarm her is his delight.

“ I liked it all,”  he said,  in summing up his relation,

very well,  except the music,  and I like any caw — caw —
caw,  better than that sort of noise, — only you must not tell
the King I say that,  ma’am,  because the King likes it.”

She objected to the word  “ must not,”  and protested
she would not be directed by no one,  and would tell it,  if
she pleased.

Upon this,  he began a most boisterous threatening of
the evil consequences which would accrue to herself,
though in so ludicrous a manner,  that how she could
suppose him serious was my wonder.  “Take care of
yourself,  ma’am,”  he cried,  holding up his finger as if
menacing a child;  “take care of yourself!  I am not to
be provoked twice 1”

This,  after a proud resistance,  conquered her;  and,
really frightened at she knew not what,  she fretfully ex-
claimed, “Ver well,  sir! — I wish I had not comm down!
I won’t no more  ! you might have your tea when you can
get it I”

Returning to his account,  he owned he had been rather
a little musical himself for once,  which was when they all
sang  “ God save the King,”  after the supper ; for then
he joined in the chorus,  as well and as loud as any of them,
“though some of the company,”  he added,  “took the

22

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Fart I.

liberty to ask me not to be so loud,  because they pre-
tended I was out of tune  ; but it was in such a good
cause that I did not mind that.”

She was no sooner recovered than the attack became
personal again ; and so it has continued ever since  : he
seems bent upon  'playing her off"  in all manners;  he
braves her,  then compliments her,  assents to her opinion,
and the next moment contradicts her;  pretends uncom-
mon friendship for her,  and then laughs in her face.  But
his worst manoeuvre is a perpetual application to me,  by
looks and sly glances,  which fill me with terror of passing
tor an accomplice;  and the more,  as I find it utterly im-
possible to keep grave during these absurdities.

And yet,  the most extraordinary part of the story is
that she really likes him  ! though at times she is so angry,
she makes vow's to keep to her own room.

Mr.  George Villiers,  with far deeper aim,  sneers out his
own more artful satire,  but is never understood ; while
Colonel Manners domineers with so high a hand,  he
carries all before him;  and whenever Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg,  to lessen her mortification,  draws me into the ques-
tion, he instantly turns off whatever she begins into some
high-flown compliment,  so worded also as to convey
some comparative reproach.  This ofiends more than
all.

When she complains to me of him,  in his absence,  I
answer he is a mere schoolboy,  for mischief,  without
serious design of displeasing : but she tells me she sees
he means to do her some harm,  and she will let the King
know,  if he goes on at that rate,  for she does not choose
such sort of familiarness.

Once she apologised suddenly for her English,  and
Colonel Manners said,  “ O,  don’t mind that,  ma’am,  for I
take no particular notice as to your language.”

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

23

1789]

But,”  says she,  “ Miss Berner might tell me,  when I
speak it sometimes not quite right,  what you call.”

“ O dear no,  ma’am !”  exclaimed he  ; Miss Burney is
of too mild a disposition for that : she could not correct
you strong enough to do you good.”

“ Oh  ! — ver well,  sir !”  she cried,  confounded by his
effrontery.  ' / ,

One day she lamented she had been absent when there
was so much agreeable company in the house ; “ And
now',”  she added,  “ now that I am comm back,  here is
nobody  ! — not one ! — no society  !”

He protested this was not to be endured,  and told her
that to reckon a//  nobody was so bad,  he should re-
sent it.

What w'ill you do,  my good Colonel  ?”  she cried.

“ O ma’am,  do  ? — I will tell Dr.  Davis.”

“ And who bin he  ?”

“Why,  he’s the master of Eton school,  ma’am!”  with
a thundering bawl in her ears,  that made her stop them.

“No,  sir!”  she cried,  indignantly,  “I thank you for
that ! 1 won’t have no Dr,  schoolmaster,  what you call ! I
bin too old for that.”

“ But,  ma’am,  he shall bring you a Latin oration upon
this subject,  and you must hear it !”

“ O,  ’tis all the sam ! I shan’t not understand it,  so I
won’t not hear it.”

“ But you 7nust,  ma’am.  If I write it,  1 sha’nt let
you off so; — you must hear it!”

“ No,  I won't! — Miss Berner might, — give it her!"

“ Does Miss Burney know'  Latin  ?”  cried Mr.  G.
Villiers.

Not one word,”  quoth I.

“I believe that !”  cried she;  ‘'but she might hear it
the sam  !”

24

DIARY AND LETTERS

[1\\RT I.

* ^ *

The Queen graciously presented me with an extremely
pretty medal of green and gold,  and a motto,  Vive le Roi,
upon the Thanksgiving occasion,  as well as a fan,  orna-
mented with the words — Health restored to one,  and
hapjnness to millions.

May. — I must give the few incidents of this month in
all brevity.

On the 2nd of May I met Colonel Manners,  waiting
at the corner of a passage leading towards the Queen’s
apartments.  ‘Ms the King,  ma’am,”  he cried,  “ there?
because Prince William is come.”

I had heard he was arrived in town, — and with much
concern,  since it was without leave of the King.  It was
in the illness,  indeed,  of the King he sailed to England,
and when he had probably all the excuse of believing
his Royal Father incapable of further governance.  How'
did I grieve for the feelings of that Royal Father,  in
this idea ! yet it certainly offers for Prince William
his best apologJ^

In the evening,  while Mrs.  Scliwellenberg,  Mrs.  Za-
chary, and myself were sitting in the eating parlour,  the
door w’as suddenly opened M r.  Alberts,  the Queen’s
page,  and  “ Prince William”  was announced.

He came to see Mrs.  Scliwellenberg.  He is hand-
some, as are all the Royal Family,  though he is not of
a height to be called a good tigure.  He looked very
hard at the two strangers,  but made us all sit,  very civilly,
and drew a chair for himself,  and began to discourse,  with
the most unbounded openness and careless ease,  of every-
thiiiir that occurred to him.

Mrs.  Sclnvellenberg said she had pitied him for the
grief he must have felt at the news of the King’s illness  :

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

25

1789]

“ Yes,”  cried he,  “ I was very sorry for His Majesty,
very sorry indeed, — no man loves the King better ; of
that be assured.  But all sailors love their King.  And
I felt for the Queen,  too, — I did,  faith.  I was horridly
agitated when I saw the King first.  I could hardly
stand.”

Then Mrs.  Schwellenberg suddenly said,  Miss Ber-
ner, now you might see his Royal Higliness ; you wanted
it so moch,  and now you might do it.  Your Royal
Highness,  that is Miss Berner.”

He rose very civilly,  and bowed,  to this strange freak
of an introduction  ; and,  of course,  I rose and courtsied
low,  and waited his commands to sit again  ; which were
given instantly,  with great courtesy.

“ Ma’am,”  cried he,  ‘‘  you have a brother in the ser-
vice ? ” “ Yes,  Sir,”  I answered,  much pleased with this

professional attention.  He had not,  he ci\illy said,  the
pleasure to know him,  but he had heard of him.

Then,  turning suddenly to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,
Pray,”  cried he,  “ what is become of Mrs. — Mrs. —
Mrs.  Hogentot  ? ”

“ O,  your Royal Highness 1 ’’  cried she,  stilling much
offence,  “ do you mean the poor Haggerdorn? — O your
Royal Highness  ! have you forgot her?”

“ I have,  upon my word!  ” cried he,  plumply;  “ upon
my soul,  I have 1 ” Then turning again to me,  I am
very happy,  ma’am,”  he cried,  “ to see you here  ; it gives
me great pleasure the Queen should appoint the sister of
a sea-officer to so eligible a situation.  As long as she
has a brother in the service,  ma’am,”  cried he to Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  ‘‘  I look upon her as one of us.  O,  faith
I do  ! I do indeed 1 she is one of the corps.”

Then he said he had been making acquaintance with a
new Princess,  one he did not know nor remember — Priu-

26

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I

cess Amelia.  ‘‘Mary,  too,”  he said,  “ I had quite forgot ;
and they did not tell me who she was ; so T went up to
her,  and,  W'ithout in the least recollecting her,  she’s so
monstrously grown,  I said,  ‘ Pray,  ma’am,  are you one of
the attendants  ? ’ ”

Princess Sophia is his professed favourite.  “ I have
had the honour,”  he cried,  “ of about an hour’s conversa,
tion with that young lady,  in the old style ; though I have
given up my mad frolics now.  To be sure,  I had a few
in that style formerly ! — upon my word 1 am almost
ashamed  ! — Ha  ! ha ! ha ! ”

Then,  recollecting particulars,  he laughed vehemently,
but Mrs.  Schwellenberg eagerly interrupted his commu-
nications ; I fancy some of them might have related to
our own sacred person  !

“ Augusta,’’  he said,  “ looks very well, — a good face
and countenance, — she looks interesting, — she looks as if
she knew more than she would say;  and I like that cha-
racter.”

He stayed a full hour,  chatting in this good-hu-
moured and familiar manner.

* * * ^ * ♦

For all the early part of this month I was grievously ill
with a pain in my face.  ] applied for it a blister,  in
vain  ; I had then recourse to leeches,  and one of them
certainly bit a nerve,  for what I sulfered surpasses de-
scription ; it was torture,  it was agony  ! I fully thought
myself poisoned,  and I am most thankful to add that
during that persuasion I felt a freedom from w'hat are
called  ‘‘  the horrors of death,”  which,  at my recovery and
ever since,  has paid me for that exquisite suffering.  All
good,  all patient with human infirmities,  I painted to my-
self that Great Creator before whom I believed myself
prematurely appearing,  and the dread of his wrath was

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

27

sunk in the hope of his mercy through the Redeemer.
Whether 1 should feel this mental calm when not in such
dire bodily pain.  Heaven only knows  ! 1 am the happier
that I have ever felt it,  when I believed the end of all
approaching.

But w'hy do I forget the resolution with which I began
these my chronicles,  of never mixing w'ith them my re-
ligious sentiments — opinions — hopes — fears — belief — or
aspirations  ?

In my books upon those,  which no human eye but my
own has ever been cast over,  I blend nothing mundane —
I mean as to my affairs ; for as to my thoughts and feel-
ings, let me try how I may — and I try with all my might
— to refine them and fit them for sacred subjects — I dare
not presume that I have had such success as really to have
purified them from the worldly dross that forms,  rather
than mingles wdth,  all I scrawl down helter-skelter in my
memorandum chronicles.  However,  I never will jumble

together what I deem holy with what I know to be trivial.

5ff  * * * *

June. — This month,  till our journey to Weymouth
took place,  passed wdthout mark or likelihood,  save one
little token of Spanish gallantry from the Marquis del
Campo,  who,  when he came to Windsor,  after reproving
me very civilly for being absent from his fete,  told me he
had remembered me during the drawing of his lottery
that night,  and  “had taken the liberty to bring me my
prize,”  which was a blue enamel ring with a motto.

Now',  though this remembrance on such an evening
was impossible,  there w'as no refusing,  without affronting
him,  the very good-humoured and polite pretence.

Mrs.  Douglas gave a ball at the Bishop’s Deanery-
house,  on the King’s recovery,  the day before our journey,
and the reason of the affair induced Her Majesty to order

DIARY AND LETTERS

28

[Part I.

me to accept Mrs.  Douglas’s invitation.  It was gay and
pleasant enough.

Thursday,  June 25. — This morning I was called be-
fore live o’clock,  though various packages and business
had kept me up till near three.

The day was rainy,  but the road was beautiful  ; Windsor
Great Park,  in particular,  is charming.

The crowds increased as we advanced,  and at Win-
chester the town was one head.  I saw Dr.  Warton,  but
could not stop the carriage.  The King was everywhere
received with acclamation.  His popularity is greater
than ever.  Compassion for his late sufferings seems to
have endeared him now to all conditions of men.

At Romsey,  on the steps of the Town- Hall,  an or-
chestra was formed,  and a band of musicians,  in common
brown coarse cloth and red neckcloths,  and even in
carters’  loose gowns,  made a chorus of  “ God save the
King,”  in which the countless multitude joined,  in such
loud acclamation,  that their loyalty and heartiness,  and
natural joy,  almost surprised me into a sob before I knew
myself at all affected by them.

The New Forest is all beauty,  and when we approached
Lyndhurst the crowds wore as picturesque an appearance
as the landscapes ; they were all in decent attire,  and,  the
great space giving them full room,  the cool beauty of the
verdure between the groups took away all idea of incon-
venience, and made their live gaiety a scene to joy be-
holders.

Carriages of all sorts lined the road-side  : — chariots,
chaises,  landaus,  carts,  waggons,  whiskies,  gigs,  phaetons
— mi.\ed and intermixed,  tilled within and surrounded
without by faces all glee and delight.

Such was the scenery for miles before we reached

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

29

Lvndhurst.  The old law of the forest,  that His Majesty
must be presented with two milk-white greyhounds,  pe-
culiarly decorated,  upon his entrance into the New Forest,
gathered together multitudes to see the show.  A party,
also,  of foresters,  habited in green,  and each with a bugle-
horn,  met His Majesty at the same time.

Arrived at Lyndhurst,  we drove to the Duke of
Gloucester’s.  The Royal Family were just before us,  but
the two colonels came and handed us through the
crowd.

The house,  intended for a mere hunting-seat,  was
built by Charles II.,  and seems quite unimproved and
unrepaired from its first foundation.  It is the King’s,  but
lent to the Duke of Gloucester.  It is a straggling,  in-
convenient, old house,  but delightfully situated,  in a
village, — looking,  indeed,  at present,  like a populous
town,  from the amazing concourse of people that have
crowded into it.

The bowmen and archers and bugle-horns are to attend
the King while he stays here,  in all his rides.

The Duke of Gloucester was ready to receive the
Royal Family,  who are all in the highest spirits and delight.

I have a small old bedchamber,  but a large and com-
modious parlour,  in which the gentlemen join  ^liss Planta
and me to breakfast and to drink tea.  They dine at the
royal table.  We are to remain here some days.

During the King’s dinner,  which was in a parlour
looking into the garden,  he permitted the people to come
to the window ; and their delight and rapture in seeing
their monarch at table,  with the evident hungry feeling it
occasioned,  made a contrast of admiration and deprivation,
truly comic.  They crowded,  however,  so excessively,  that
this can be permitted them no more.  They broke down
all the paling,  and much of the hedges,  and some of the

30 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PahT I.

windows,  and all by eagerness and multitude,  for they
were perfectly civil and well-behaved.

In the afternoon the royal party came into my parlour ;
and the moment the people saw the star,  they set up
such a shout as made a ring all around the village ; for my
parlour has the same view with the royal rooms into the
garden,  where this crowd was assembled,  and the new rap-
ture was simply at seeing the King in a new apartment !

They all walked out,  about and around the village,  in
the evening,  and the delighted mob accompanied them.
The moment they stepped out of the house,  the people,
with one voice,  struck up  “ God save the King !”  I
assure you I cried like a child twenty times in the day,  at
the honest and rapturous effusions of such artless and
disinterested loyalty.  The King’s illness and recovery
make me tended',  as Count Mannuccia said,  upon every
recollection.

Tliese good villagers continued singing this loyal song
during the whole walk,  without any intermission,  except
to shout huzza  !”  at the end of every stanza.  They
returned so hoarse,  that I longed to give them all some
lemonade.  Probably they longed for something they
would have called better!  ’Twas well the King could
walk no longer;  I think,  if he had,  they would have died
singing around him.

Tuesday,  June 30th, — We continued at Lyndhurst
five days  : and the tranquillity of the life,  and the beauty
of the country,  would have made it very regaling to me
indeed,  but for the fatigue of having no maid,  yet being
always in readiness to play the part of an attendant my-
self.

I went twice to see the house of Sir Phillip Jennings
Clerke,  my old acquaintance at Streatham.  I regretted
he was no more ; he would so much have prided and

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

31

rejoiced in showing his place.  His opposition principles
would not have interfered with that private act of duty
from a subject to a sovereign.  How did I call to mind
Mrs.  Thrale,  upon this spot ! not that I had seen it with
her,  or ever before ; but that its late owner was one of
her sincerest admirers.

Miss Planta and myself drove also to Southampton,
by the Queen’s direction.  It is a pretty clean town,  and
the views from the Southampton Water are highly pic-
turesque : but all this 1 had seen to far greater advantage,
with Mr.  and Mrs.  and Miss Thrale.  Ah,  Mrs.  Thrale !
— In tiiinking her over,  as I saw again the same spot,  how
much did I wish to see with it the same — once so dear —
companion  !

On the Sunday we all went to the parish church  ; and
after the service,  instead of a psalm,  imagine our surprise
to hear the wliole congregation join in  “^God save the
King!’’  Misplaced as this was in a church,  its intent
was so kind,  loyal,  and affectionate,  that I believe there
was not a dry eye amongst either singers or hearers.
The King’s late dreadful illness has rendered this song
quite melting to me.

This day we quitted Lyndhurst;  not without regret,
for so private is its situation,  I could stroll about in its
beautiful neighbourhood quite alone.

The journey to Weymouth was one scene of festivity
and rejoicing.  The people were everywhere collected,
and everywhere delighted.  We passed through Salisbury,
where a magnificent arch was erected,  of festoons of
flowers,  for the King’s carriage to pass under,  and mottoed
with  “The King restored,”  and  “ Long live the King,”
in three divisions.  The green bowmen accompanied the
train thus far ; and the clothiers and manufacturers here
met it,  dressed out in white loose frocks,  flowers,  and

32

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

ribbons,  with sticks or caps emblematically decorated
from their several manufactories.  And the acclamations
with which the King was received amongst them — it was
a rapture past description.

At Blandford there was nearly the same ceremony.

At every gentleman’s seat which we passed,  the owners
and their families stood at the state,  and their oruests or
neighbours were in carriages all round.

At Dorchester the crowd seemed still increased.  The
city had so antique an air,  I longed to investigate its old
buildings.  The houses have the most ancient appear-
ance of any that are inhabited that I have happened to
see ; and inhabited they were indeed  ! every window'-
sash was removed,  for face above face to peep out,  and
every old balcony and all the leads of the houses
seemed turned into booths for fairs.  It seems,  also,  the
most populous town I have seen;  I judge not by the
concourse of the young and middle-aged — those w’e saw
everywhere alike,  as they may gather together from all
quarters — but from the amazing quantity of indigenous
resideis  ; old women and young children.  There seemed
families of ten or twelve of the latter in every house;  and
the old women were so numerous,  that they gave the
whole scene the air of a rural masquerade.

Girls,  with chaplets,  beautiful young creatui'es,  strewed
the entrance of various villages with dowers.

^ ^ 5i5  *

Gloucester House,  which we now inhabit,  at Wey-
mouth, is situated in front of the sea,  and the sands of the
Bay before it are perfectly smooth and soft.

The whole town,  and Melcomb Regis,  and half the
county of Dorset,  seemed assenrbled to welcome their
Majesties.

I have here a very good parlour,  but dull,  from its

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

33

aspect.  Nothing but the sea at Weymouth affords any
life or spirit.  My bed-room is in the attics.  Nothing
like living at a court for exaltation.  Yet even with this
gratification,  which extends to Miss Planta,  the house
will only hold the females of the party.  The two adjoin-
ing houses are added,  for the gentlemen,  and the pages,
and some other of the suite,  cooks,  &c. — but the foot-
men are obliged to lodge still farther off.

The bay is very beautiful,  after its kind  ; a peninsula
shuts out Portland Island and the broad ocean.

The King,  and Queen,  and Princesses,  and their suite,
walked out in the evening ; an immense crowd attended
them — sailors,  bargemen,  mechanics,  countrymen  ; and all
united in so vociferous a volley of God save the King,”
that the noise was stunning.

At near ten o’clock Lord Courtown came into my par-
lour, as it is called,  and said the town was all illuminated,
and invited Miss Planta and me to a walk upon the
sands.  Their Majesties were come in to supper.  We
took a stroll under his escort,  and found it singularly
beautiful,  the night being very fine,  and several boats and
small vessels lighted up,  and in motion upon the sea.
I’he illumination extended through Melcomb Regis and
Weymouth.  Gloucester Row,  in which we live,  is pro-
perly in Melcomb Regis ; but the two towns join each
other,  and are often confounded.

The preparations of festive loyalty were universal.  Not
a child could we meet that had not a bandeau round its
head,  cap,  or hat,  of  “God save the King;’’  all the
bargemen wore it in cockades ; and even the bathing-
women had it in large coarse girdles round their waists.
It is printed in golden letters upon most of the bathing-
machines,  and in various scrolls and devices it adorns
every shop and almost every house in the two towns.

VOL,  V,

D

34

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

Gloucester House,  Weymouth.

Wednesday,  July 8th. — We are settled here com-
fortably enough.  Miss Planta and I breakfast as well as
dine together alone  ; the gentlemen have a breakfast- par-
lour in the adjoining house,  and we meet only at tea,  and
seldom then.  They have all acquaintance here,  in this
Gloucester Row,  and stroll from the terrace or the sands,
to visit them during the tea vacation time,

I like this much:  I see them just enough to keep up
sociability,  without any necessary constraint ; for I attend
the tea-table only at my own hour,  and they come,  or not,
according to chance or their convenience.

The King bathes,  and with great success  ; a machine
follows the Royal one into the sea,  filled with fiddlers,
w’ho play God save the King,”  as his Majesty takes his
plunge  !

1 am delighted with the soft air and soft footing upon
the sands,  and stroll up and down them morning,  noon,
and night.  As they are close before the house,  I can get
to and from them in a moment.

Her Majesty has graciously hired a little maid between
Miss Planta and me,  who comes for the day.  We have
no accommodation for her sleeping here ; but it is an un-
speakable relief to our personal fatigues.

Dr.  Gisburne is here,  to attend his Majesty ; and the
Queen has ordered me to invite him to dine at my table.
He comes regularly.

Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney.

Gloucester House,  Weymouth,  July 13, 1789.
My dearest Padre’s kind letter was most truly welcome
to me.  When I am so distant,  the term of absence or of
silence seems always doubly long to me.

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

35

The bay liere is most beautiful ; the sea never rough,
generally calm and gentle,  and the sands perfectly smooth
and pleasant.  I have not yet bathed,  for I have had a
cold in my head,  which 1 caught at Lyndhurst,  and which
makes me fear beginning ; but I have hopes to be well
enough to-morrow,  and thenceforward to ail nothing
more.  It is my intention to cast away all supertluous com-
plaints into the main ocean,  which I think quite suffici-
ently capacious to hold them;  and really my little frame
will find enough to carry and manage without them.

Colonel Goldsworthy has just sent mein a newspaper
containing intelligence that Angelica Kauffmann is mak-
ing drawings from  ‘ Evelina,’  for the Empress of Russia  !
Do you think the Empress of Russia hears of anything
now besides Turkey and the Emperor  ? And is not An-
gelica Kauffmann dead  ? O what an Oracle ! for such
is the paper called.

His Majesty is in delightful health,  and much-improved
spirits.  All agree he never looked better.  The loyalty
of all this place is excessive  ; they have dressed out every
street with labels of  “ God save the King all the shops
have it over the doors ; all the children wear it in their
caps,  all the labourers in their hats,  and all the sailors
in their voices,  for they never approach the house without
shouting it aloud,  nor see the King,  or his shadow,  with-
out beginning to huzza,  and going on to three cheers.

The bathing-machines make it their motto over all
their window.s ; and tliose bathers that belong to the
royal dippers wear it in bandeaus on their bonnets,  to
go into the sea;  and have it again,  in large letters,  round
their waists,  to encounter the waves.  Flannel dresses,
tucked up,  and no shoes nor stockings,  with bandeaus
and girdles,  have a most singular appearance  ; and when

D 2

DTARY AND LETTERS

36

[Part I.

first I surveyed these loyal nymphs it was with some diffi-
culty I kept my features in order.

Nor is this all.  Think but of the surprise of His Ma-
jesty when,  the first time of his bathing,  he had no sooner
popped his royal head under water than a band of music,
concealed in a neighbouring machine,  struck up  “ God
save great George our King.”

One thing,  however,  was a little unlucky  ; — when the
Mayor and burgesses came with the address,  they re-
quested leave to kiss hands  : this was graciously accorded  ;
but,  the Mayor advancing,  in a common way,  to take the
Queen's hand,  as he might that of any lady mayoress,
Colonel Gwynn,  who stood by,  whispered,  ‘You must
kneel,  sir  !’  He foimd,  however,  that he took no notice
of this hint,  but kissed the Queen’s hand erect.  As he
passed him,  in his  ^vay back,  the Colonel said,  ‘ You
should have knelt,  sir  !’

“ Sir,”  answered the poor Mayor,  “ I cannot.”

“ Everybody does,  sir.”

“ Sir, — I have a wooden leg  ! ”

Poor man  ! ’twas such a surprise  ! and such an excuse
as no one could dispute.

But the absurdity of the matter followed  ; — all the rest
did the same  ; taking the same privilege,  by the exam-
ple, without the same or any cause  !

We have just got Mrs.  Piozzi’s book here.  My Royal
Mistress is reading,  and will then lend it me.  Have you
read it  ?

There is almost no general company here,  as the
proper season does not begin till autumn  ; but the party
attendant on the King and Queen is large,  and the prin-
cipal people of the county, — Lord Digby,  Admiral
Digby,  Mr.  Pitt Darner,  Lord Milton,  Mr.  Rolle,  &c.

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

37

&c., — all are coming to and fro coniinuall}'.  Oiir home
party is just the same as it began.

A thousand thanks for your home news.

I am,  most dear sir,

Attectionately and dutifully,  your

F.  B.

Wednesday,  July 15th. — The Magniticent,  a man-
of-war of 74 guns,  commanded by an old captain of
James’s  (Onslow),  is now stationed at the entrance of the
bay,  for the security at once and pleasure of the King  ;
and a fine frigate,  the Southampton,  Captain Douglas,  is
nearer in,  and brought for the King to cruise about.
Captain Douglas is nephew to Sir Andrew Snape Ham-
mond, who married a cousin of our Mr.  Crisp.

The King and Royal party have been to visit the fri-
gate. Miss Planta and myself went to see the ceremony
from a place called the Look-out, — a beautiful spot.
But 1 have not much taste for sea receptions and honours  :
the firing a salute is so strange a mode of hospitality and
politeness.

I have subscribed to the library here,  which is not a
bad one  ; and 1 have met with a favourite old book of
my dearest Mrs.  Delany,  and bought it from that remem-
brance. It is Bishop Patrick’s  ‘ Pilgrim and common
sense and reason keep so near the enthusiasm of its devo-
tion, that no one,  I think,  can read it without profit.
There is,  in particular,  one part that treats of FTiendship,
in a style and with sentiments so loftily touching and true,
that I must recommend it to my dear sisters,  and w'ill lend
it them whenever we meet.

Mrs.  Gwynn is arrived,  and means to spend the Royal
season here.  She lodges at the hotel just by,  and we have
met several times.  She is very soft and pleasing,  and

38

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

still as beautiful as an angel.  U e have had two or three
long tete-a-tetes,  and talked over,  with great pleasure,
anecdotes of our former mutual acquaintances — Dr.
Johnson,  Sir Joshua Reynolds,  Mrs.  Thrale,  Baretti,  Miss
Reynolds,  Miss Palmer,  and her old admirer,  Dr.  Gold-
smith, of whom she relates — as who does not  ? — a thousand
ridiculous traits.

The Queen is reading Mrs.  Piozzi’s Tour to me,  in-
stead of my reading it to her.  She loves reading aloud,
and in this work finds me an able comtnentator.  How
like herself,  how characteristic is every line! — Wild,  en-
tertaining, flighty,  inconsistent,  and clever  !

Thursday,  July 16th. — Yesterday we all went to
the theatre.  The King has taken the centre front box
for himself,  and family,  and attendants.  The side boxes are
too small.  The Queen ordered places for Miss Planta
and me,  which are in the front row of a box next but one
to the royals.  Thus,  in this case,  our want of rank to be
in their public suite gives us better seats than those high
enough to stand behind them  !

Lady Sydney,  Lady Courtown’s sister,  and Miss
Townshend,  her daughter,  sat in the intermediate box,
and were very sociable.  I have met them here occa-
sionally, and like them very well.

’Tis a pretty little theatre  : but its entertainment was
quite in the barn style;  a mere medley, — songs,  dances,
imitations, — and all very bad.  But Lord Chesterfield,
who is here,  and who seems chief director,  promises all
will be better.

This morning the Royal party went to Dorchester,  and
I strolled upon the sands with Mrs.  Gwynn.  We over-
took a lady,  of a very majestic port and demeanour,  who
solemnly returned Mrs.  Gwynn’s salutation,  and then ad-
dressed herself to me with similar gravity.  I saw a face

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

39

I knew,  and of very uncommon beauty;  but did not im-
mediately recollect it was Mrs.  Siddons.

She is come here,  she says,  solely for her health  : she
has spent some days with Mrs.  Gwynn,  at General Har-
court’s.  H er husband was with her,  and a sw'eet child.

I wished to have tried if her solemnity would have worn
away by length of conversation;  but I was obliged to
hasten home.  But my dearest Fredy’s opinion,  joined to
that of my sister Esther,  satisfies me I was a loser by
this necessary forbearance.

Friday,  July 17th. — The play was again settled for
to-night,  to see jMr.  Quick.

The theatric entertainments were  ‘ The Irish Widow,’
and  ‘The Devil to Pay.’  Mrs.  Wells performed in both,
and admirably.

Sunday,  July 26th. — Yesterday we went again to the
play,  and saw  ‘ The Midnight Hour’  and  ‘ The Commis-
sary.’ The latter,  from the  ‘ Bourgeois Gentilhomme,’  is
comic to convulsion ; and the burlesque of Quick and
Mrs.  Wells united made me laugh quite immoderately.

Dr.  Bell,  one of the King’s chaplains,  gave us to-day
an admirable sermon.

Mr.  Parish,  a brother-in-law of Miss Planta’s,  came in
the evening, — ^just arrived from France,  where all is con-
fusion, commotion,  and impending revolution.

Tuesday,  July 28th. — To-day,  by the Queen’s desire,
1 invited Dr.  Glasse to dinner.  I did not know him,  and
it was awkward enough ; but Dr.  Gisburne was,  for-
tunately, acquainted with him,  and Mr.  Planta,  brother to
my lellow-traveller,  who is here for a few days.

Dr.  Glasse is a famous pedagogue and a celebrated
preacher.  He is gentle and placid,  but rather too sim-
pering and complacent.  Mr.  Planta is sensible,  manly,
and agreeable.

40

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part I.

All went off very well ; and during dinner Mr.  Planta
related a very interesting recent anecdote of a Mr.  Hamil-
ton^ who had been a great sufferer by a false imprison-
ment, and who woidd have been used extremely ill  ‘‘but
for the spirited and humane exertions of Mr.  Cambridge,
the clergyman,  who has done himself great and deserved
credit by his conduct upon the occasion.”

I am never surprised to hear of any good action he per-
forms. I believe,  indeed,  whatever is in his power is done
invariably.

Wednesday,  July 29th. — We went to the play,  and
saw Mrs.  Siddons in Rosalind.  She looked beautifully,
but too large lor that shepherd’s dress ; and her gaiety
sits not naturally upon her, — it seems more like disguised
gravity.  I must own my admiration for her confined to
her tragic powers ; and there it is raised so high that I
feel mortified,  in a degree,  to see her so much fainter at-
tempts and success iu comedy.

Friday,  July 31st. — This afternoon,  when I came
into the parlour,  1 saw a stranger,  but habited in the uni-
form, and of a pleasing appearance.  We bowed and
curtsied — both silent.  1 expected him to announce
his business  ; he expected me to give him some wel-
come; which when I found,  concluding him arrived on
some commands from the King,  I begged him to be
seated,  and took my usual chair.

“ Perhaps,  ma’am,”  he then cried,"  this is your room  ?”
I assented,  a little surprised.

“ I am just come,”  he said,  " with the Duke of Glou-
cester, who is gone to His Majesty.”

" I'lien perhaps,  sir,”  cried 1,  " this is your room  ?”
He laughed,  but disclaimed owning it.  However,  I
found he was the Duke’s  •jentleman in waiting:,  and had
concluded this the apartment destined for the e«jucrries.

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,

41

This retort courteous in our address took otf stillness
from either side,  and we entered into a general conversa-
tion, chieHy upon the French.  1 found him sprightly,
intelligent,  and well-bred.  He stayed with me more
than an hour,  and then parted to look for the equerries,
to whose apartments I sent Columb to conduct him  ; and
neither of us,  probably,  knew the name of the other till
we were separated ; I then found his was Vincent.  He
is a nephew of Sir George Howard.

j

PAirr II.

1789.

CONTENTS.

Royal Visit to Lulworth Castle — A Provincial Audience— Rural
Excursion — Description of Lulworth Castle — Mrs.  Siddons in
Mrs.  Oakley —Their Majesties at the Rooms  — First Sight
of Mr.  Pitt — Lord Chatham,  the Duke of Richmond,  See. —
Royal Tour— Arrival at Exeter— Dr.  Buller— Saltrara— Mount-
Edgecumbe— Plymouth Dock — Admiral La Forey — Anchor-
making— A British Man-of-War — Lords Falmouth and Stop-
ford— Lord Hood — Lord and Lady Mount-Edgecumbe — Lord
Valletort— Miss Harriet Bowdler  — Departure of the Royal
Party from Weymouth- Royal Visits to Sherborne Castle and
Longleat— Marquis of Bath  — Mrs.  Delany  — Old Portraits—
Royal Visit to Lord Aylesbury at Tottenham Park— Return to
Windsor — Horrors of the French Revolution  — Reminiscences
—Queen Elizabeth’s  ‘ Virginal Book’— The Royal Family at
the Theatre— Lord Mountmorr s— Enthusiastic Reception of
the King— The Dramatist — The French Notables — .John
Wilkes — A New Acquaintance — Major Garth — The Bishop
of Salisbury— Bishop Hurd— The Waldegraves.

44

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

PART II.

1789.

Gloucester House,  Weymouth.

Monday,  August 3rd. — The loyalty and obedient
respect of the people here to their King are in a truly primi-
tive style.  The whole Royal party went to see Lulworth
Castle,  intending to be back to dinner,  and go to the play
at night,  which their Majesties had ordered,  with Mrs.
Siddons to play Lady Townly.  Dinner-time,  however,
came and passed,  and they arrived not.  They went by
sea,  and the wind proved contrary ; and about seven
o’clock a hobby groom was despatched hither by land,
with intelligence that they had only reached Lulworth
Castle at five o’clock.  They meant to be certaiidy back
by eight;  but sent their commands that the farce might
be performed first,  and the play wait them.

The manager repeated this to the audience, — already
waiting and wearied  ; but a loud applause testified their
agreeability to whatever could be proposed.

The farce,  however,  was much sooner over than the
passage from Lulworth Castle.  It was ten o'clock when
they landed  ! And all this time the audience — spectators
rather — quietly waited  !

They landed just by the theatre,  and went to the house
of Lady Pembroke,  who is now here in attendance upon
the Queen : and there they sent home for the King’s
page,  u'ith a wig,  &c.  ; and the Queen’s wardrobe-
woman,  with similar decorations  ; and a message to Miss
Planta and me,  that we might go at once to the theatre.

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

45

We obeyed  ; and soon after they appeared,  and were
received with the most violent gusts of joy and huzzas,
even from the galleries over their heads,  whose patience
had not the reward of seeing them at last.

Is not this a charming trait of provincial popularity?

Mrs.  Siddons,  in her looks,  and the tragic part,  was
exquisite.

Tuesday,  August 4th. — To-day all the Royals went
to Sherborne Castle.

My day being perfectly at liberty,  Mrs.  Gw'ynn stayed
and spent it with me.

The weather was beautiful ; the sea-breezes here keep
off intense heat in the warmest season.  We walked first to

see the shrubbery and plantation of a lady,  Mrs.  B ,

who has a very pretty house about a mde and a half out
of the town.  Here we rested,  and regaled ourselves with
sweet flowers,  and then proceeded to the old castle, — its
ruins rather, — which we most completely examined,  not
leaving one stone untrod,  except such as must have pre-
cipitated us into the sea.  This castle is built almost in the
sea,  upon a perpendicular rock,  and its situation,  therefore,
is nobly bold and striking.  It is little more now than
walls,  and a few little winding-  staircases at its four
corners.

I had not imagined my beautiful companion could
have taken so much pleasure from an excursion so ro-
mantic and lonely ; but she enjoyed it very much,  clam-
bered about as unaffectedly as if she had lived in rural
scenes all her life,  and left nothing unexamined.

We then prowled along the sands at the foot of the
adjoining rocks,  and picked up sea-weeds and shells ; but
I do not think they were such as to drive Sir Ashton
Lever,  or the Museum-keepers,  to despair  ! We had the
Queen’s two little dogs,  Badine and Phillis,  for our

46

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

guards and associates.  We returned home to a very late
tea,  thoroughly tired,  but very much pleased.  To me it
was the only rural excursion I had taken for more than
three years.

The Royal party came not home till past eleven o’clock.
The Queen was much delighted with Sherborne Castle,
which abounds with regal curiosities,  honourably ac-
quired by the family.

Saturday,  August Sth. — To-day we went to Lul-
worth Castle;  but not with Mrs.  Gwynn.  Her  ^Majesty
ordered our Royal coach and four,  and directed me to
take the two De Lucs.

Lulworth Castle is beautifully situated,  with a near
and noble view of the sea.  It has a spacious and very
line park,  and commands a great extent of prospect.  It
is the property of Mr.  Weld,  a Roman Catholic,  whose
eldest brother was first husband of Mrs.  Fitzherbert.  A
singular circumstance,  that their Majesties should visit
a house in which,  so few years ago,  she might have re-
ceived them.

There is in it a Roman Catholic chapel that is truly
elegant, — a Pantheon in muiiature, — and ornamented with
immense expense and richness.  The altar is all of finest
variegated marbles,  and precious stones are glittering from
every angle.  The priests’  vestments,  which are very
superb,  and all the sacerdotal array,  were shown us as par-
ticular favours  : and Colonel Goldsworthy comically said
he doubted not they had incense and oblations for a week
to come,  by way of purification for our heretical curiosity.

The castle is built with four turrets.  It is not very
ancient,  and the inside is completely modern,  and filled
up with great elegance.  It abounds in pictures of priests,
saints,  monks,  and nuns,  and is decorated with crosses
and Roman Catholic devices without end.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

17

1789]

They show one room in which two of our Kings have
slept;  Charles II.  and poor James II.

We returned home to dinner,  and in the evening went
to the play.  Mrs.  Siddons performed Mrs.  Oakley.
What pity thus to throw away her talents  ! But the
Queen dislikes tragedy,  and the honour to play before the
Royal family blinds her to the little credit acquired by
playing comedy.

Sunday,  August 9th. — The King had a council
yesterday,  which brought most of the great officers of state
to Weymouth.

This morning so many of them came to church,  that,  for
want of room.  Colonels Gwynn and Goldsworthy asked
to sit in the pew appropriated for Miss Planta and me.

In the evening,  Her Majesty desired Miss Planta and
me to go to the rooms,  whither they commonly go them-
selves on Sunday evenings,  and,  after looking round them,
and speaking where they choose,  they retire to tea in an
inner apartment with their own party,  but leave the
door wide open,  both to see and be seen.

Upon receiving this command,  I called upon Mrs.
Gwynn,  and begged her permission for our joining her.
We agreed to call for her at eight o’clock.

The rooms are convenient and spacious  : we found
them very full.  As soon as the Royal party came,  a
circle was formed,  and they moved round it,  just as before
the ball at St.  James’s,  the King one way with his cham-
berlain, the new-made Marquis of Salisbury,  and the
Queen the other with the Princesses,  Lady Courtown,  &c.
The rest of the attendants planted themselves round in
the circle.

I had now the pleasure,  for the first time,  to se,e Mr.
Pitt : but his appearance is his least recommendation ; it
is neither noble nor expressive.  Lord Chatham,  the Duke

48 DIAUY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

of Richmontl,  Mr.  Villiers,  Lord Delawarr,  &c.  &c.,  were
in the circle,  and spoken to a long lime each.

Monday,  August 10th. — This evening I had a large
party to tea  ; Lord Courtovvn,  the new Marquis of
Salisbury,  Colonels Gvvynn and Goldsworthy,  Miss Planta,
and the two De Lucs.

Wednesday,  August 1'2th. — This is the Prince of
Wales’s birthday ; but it has not been kept.

7'hursday,  August 13th. — We began our Western
tour.  We all went in the same order as we set out from
Windsor.

We arrived at Exeter to a very late dinner.  We were
lodged at the Deanery  ; and Dr.  Puller,  the dean,  desired
a conference with me,  for we came first,  leaving the
Royals at Sir George Young’s.  He was very civil,  and
in hicli slee : I had never seen him before ; but he

told me he introduced himself,  by this opportunity,
at the express desire of IMrs.  Chapoue and Mrs.
Castle,  who were both his relations,  as well as of Dr.
Warton.  I was glad to hear myself yet remembered by
them.

The crowds,  the rejoicings,  the hallooing,  and singing,
and garlanding,  and decorating of all the inhabitants of
this old city,  and of all the country through which we
passed,  made the journey quite charming;  such happy
loyalty as beamed trom all ranks and descriptions of men
came close to the heart in sympathetic joy.

We passed all the next day at the Deanery,  which was
so insufficient to our party,  that not only the gentlemen,
one and all,  lodged at the hotel,  but even Lady Cour-
town and the two Lady Waldegraves.  I saw nothing of
any of them while we stayed at Exeter.  I strolled with
M iss Planta about the town,  which is populous and busy
enough,  but close and ugly.  The principal parade for

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

49

company,  however,  takes in a fine view of the country  ;
and the cathedral is old and curious.

I had already been all this tour,  with Mr.  and Mrs.
Rishton,  on the first year of their marriage,  as my dearest
Susanna may remember.

The excessive and intemperate eagerness of the people
to see the Royal Family here made them crowd so im-
moderately, that,  after the first essay,  they feared going
out amongst tliem.

The next morning,  Saturday the 15th,  we quitted
Exeter,  in which there had been one constant mob sur-
rounding the Deanery from the moment of our entrance.

We proceeded through a country the most fertile,
varied,  rural,  and delightful,  in England,  till we came to
the end of our aim,  Saltram.  We passed through such
beautiful villages,  and so animated a concourse of people,
that the whole journey proved truly delectable.  Arches
of flowers were erected for the Royal Family to pass under
at almost every town,  with various loyal devices,  expres-
sive of their satisfaction in this circuit.  How happy
must have been the King  ! — how deservedly  ! Tlie
greatest conqueror could never pass through his dominions
with fuller acclamations of joy from his devoted subjects
than George III.  experienced,  simply from having won
their love by the even tenor of an unspotted life,  w'hich,
at length,  has vanquished all the hearts of all his subjects.

Our entrance at Saltram was,  personally to Miss Planta
and me,  very disagreeable  : we followed immediately
after the Royals and equerries ; and so many of the
neighbouring gentry,  the officers,  &c.,  were assembled to
receive them,  that we had to make our way through a
crowd of starers the most tremendous,  while the Royals
all stood at the w'indows,  and the other attendants in the
hall.

VOL.  V.

E

50

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II

The house is one of the most magnificent in the king-
dom. It accommodated us all,  even to every footman,
without by any means filling the whole.

The state apartments on the ground floor are superb ;
hung with crimson damask,  and ornamented with pictures,
some few of the Spanish school,  the rest by Sir Joshua
Reynolds,  Angelica,  and some few by other artists.

Its view is noble;  it extends to Plymouth,  Mount-
Edgecumbe,  and the neighbouring fine country.  The
sea at times fills up a part of the domain almost close to
the house,  and then its prospect is complete.

I had a sweet parlour allotted me,  with the far most
beautiful view of any,  on the ground floor,  and opening
upon the state apartments,  with a library for the next
room to it.  It is a very superb apartment in its fitting
up.  Lord Borringdon,  the owner,  is a minor.  Mr.
Robinson,  who married jVIiss Harris,  is one of his ma-
ternal uncles,  and one of his guardians.

Sunday,  August 16th. — This is the birthday of the
Duke of York.  Births and deaths  ! — how do they make
up the calculations of time  !

Lord Courtown brought me a very obliging message
from Lady Mount-Edgecumbe,  who had been here at noon
to kiss hands,  on becoming a Countess from a Baroness.
She sent to invite me to see her place,  and contrive to
dine and spend the day there.  Her Majesty approves the
Mount-Edgecumbe invitation.

Monday,  August 1/th. — The Queen sent for me in
the afternoon,  to hear her own private diary,  and tell her
if it was English.  Indeed there was scarce an expression
that was foreign.

Tuesday,  August 18th. — This morning the Royals
were all at a grand naval review.  I spent the time very
serenely in my favourite wood,  which abounds in seats  ;

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

and then I took a fountain pen,  and wrote my rough
journal for copying to my dear Sorelle.

In the evening,  Lord Courto.wn,  opening my parlour
door,  called out,  ‘^May one come in  ?”

“May owe?”  exclaimed Colonel Goldsworthy;  “may
two, — may three, — may four  ? — I like your one,  indeed  !’’

And in they all entered,  and remained in sociable con-
versation till they were all called,  late,  to cards.

Wednesday,  August 19th. — Again this morning
Mas spent by the Itoyals at Plymouth Dock, — by me in
strolls round the house.  The wood here is truly en-
chanting ; the paths on the slant down to the water re-
semble those of sweet Norbiiry Park.

The tea,  also,  Mas too much the same to be w'orth
detailing.  I will only mention a speech which could not
but divert me,  of Mr.  Alberts,  the Queen’s page.  He
said nobody dared represent to the King the danger of his
present continual exertion in this hot weather, — “unless it
is Mr.  Fairly,”  he added,  “who can say anything,  in his
genteel roundabout way.”

Friday,  August 21st. — To-day the Royals went to
Mount-Edgecumbe,  and Her Majesty had commissioned
Lady Courtowm to arrange a plan for Miss Planta and
me to see Plymouth Dock.  According,  therefore,  to her
Ladyship’s directions,  w’e set off for that place,  and,  after
a dull drive of about five miles,  arrived at the house of the
Commissioner,  Admiral La Forey.

Here Mts.  La Forey and her daughters w'ere prepared
to  .expect us,  dnd take the trouble of entertaining us for
the day.  ,

Three large and populous tOMiis,  Plymouth,  Stockton,
and Dock,  nearly join each other.  Plymouth is long,
dirty,  ill built,  and wholly unornamented with any edifice
M'orth notice.  Stockton is rather neater, — nothing more.

E 2

52 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

Dock runs higher,  and is newer,  and looks far cleaner
and more habitable.

The Commissioner’s is the best-situated house in Dock  :
it is opposite a handsome quay,  on an arm of the sea,
with a pretty paved walk,  or terrace,  before the house,
which seems used as a mall by the inhabitants,  and is
stored with naval offices innumerable.

The two ladies received us very pleasantly.  Mrs.
La Forey is well bred,  in the formal way  ; but her eldest
daughter,  Mrs.  Molloy,  is quite free from stiffness,  yet
perfectly obliging,  very easy,  very modest,  and very
engaging,  and,  when dressed for a ball in the evening,
very handsome.  She does not become a deshabille,  but
cannot look otherwise than pleasing and agreeable,  from
her manners and countenance.

Captain Molloy,  her husband,  was gone to attend in
the naval procession that conducted the Rovals to Mount-
Edgeciimbe,  where he e.xpected to dine  ; but he had left
a younger officer.  Lieutenant Gregory,  to do the honours
of the naval show to us.

Idle Commissioner himself is yet more formal than his
lady,  but equally civil.  An unmarried daughter appeared
next,  who seems sensible and good humoured,  but very
plain.

We sallied forth to the dockyard,  with these two
daughters,  and Lieutenant Gregory,  a very pleasing and
well-bred young officer.  How often I wished my dear
James had happened to be here,  in any employment,  at
this time  !

The dockyard you will dispense with my describing.
It is a noble and tremendous sight,  and we were shown it
with every advantage of explanation.  It was a sort of
sighing satisfaction to see such numerous stores of war’s
alarms  ! — ropes,  sails,  masts,  anchors, — and all in the Huest

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

53

17891

symmetry,  divided and subdivided,  as if placed only for
show.  The neatness and exactness of all the arrange-
ment of those stores for tempests,  filled me with admira-
tion ; so did the whole scene — though not with pleasure
All assurances,  however well to be depended upon,  ol
safety,  are but so many indications of danger.

While we were seeing the anchor business, — ^which
seemed performed by Vulcanic demons,  so black they
looked,  so savage was their howl in striking the red-hot
iron,  and so coarse and slight their attire,  — we were
saluted with three cheers,  from the accidental entrance of
Lord Stopford,  Lord Courtown’s son,  and Mr.  Townshend,
his nephew,  a son of Lord Sydney,  just made a Lord of
the Admiralty.  And the sound,  in those back regions,
where all the light was red-hot fire,  had a very fine de-
moniac effect.  In beating the anchor they all strike at
the same instant,  giving about three quick strokes to one
slow stroke  ; and were they not to time them with the most
perfect conformity,  they must inevitably knock out one
another’s brains.  The sight of this apparently continual
danger gave to the whole the appearance of some wild
rite performed from motives of superstition in some un-
civilised country.

While we were yet in the docky ard we were joined by
two sea-captains.  Captain Molloy and Captain Duckworth.

Captain Molloy is a sensible and agreeable man,  but
somewhat haughty,  and of conscious consequence.  He is
a first cousin of my friend Miss Baker ; and talking of
that excellent person and her worthy mother brought us
soon into acquaintance.

Captain Duckworth is both sensible and amiable in his
style of conversation,  and has a most perfect and kind
openness of manner and countenance  ; but he greatly
amused me by letting me see how much I amused him.

54

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

I never surprised him looking near me,  without seeing on
his face so irresistible a simper,  that I expected him every
moment to break forth  ; never even trying to keep a grave
face,  except when I looked at him in full front.

I found he knew  “ Burney of the Bristol,”  as he called
our James,  and I named and conversed about him by
every opportunity.

Captain iMolloy invited us,  when we had exhausted the
show on land,  to see his shij),  I dislike going anywhere
beyond the reach of the Humane Society,  but could not
be left without breaking up the party:  this was my first
water-excursion,  though two had been proposed to me at
Weymouth,  which I had begged leave to decline.

All,  however,  was smooth and calm,  and we had the
best possible navigators.  We went to the ship in Captain
Molloy’s large boat,  which was very trim and neat,  and
had all its rowers new dressed and smart for royal attend-
ance, as it followed the King in all his water-excursions.

The ship is the  “Bombay Castle,”  of seventy-four
guns.  It had the Admiralty Hag hoisted,  as Lord Chatham
had held a board there in the morning.  It is a very tine
ship,  and I was truly edified by the sight of all its ac-
commodations, ingenuity,  utility,  cleanliness,  and contriv-
ances. A man-of-war,  fitted out and manned,  is a
«>lorious and a fearful sijiht !

In going over the ship we came to the midshipmen’s
mess,  and those young officers were at dinner,  but we
were taken in  : they were lighted by a few candles
fastened to the wall in sockets.  Involuntarily I exclaimed,
“ Dining by candle-light at noon-day  !”  A midshipman,
starling forward,  said,  “ Yes,  ma’am,  and Admiral Lord
Hood did the same for seven years following  ! ”

I liked his spirit so much that I turned to him,  and
said I was very glad they looked forwaid to such an

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

55

example,  for I had a brother in the service,  which gave
me a warm interest in its prosperity.

This made the midshipman so much my friend,  that we
entered into a detailed discourse upon the accommo-
dations of their cabin,  mess,  &.c.,  and various other matters.
I liked him much,  though I know not his name  ;
but my constant Captain Duckworth kept me again
wholly to his own cicerone-ing,  when I turned out of the
cabin.

A little,  however,  he was mortified to find me a coward
upon the w'ater.  I assured him he should cure me if he
could convince me there was no reason for fear.  He
would not allow of any,  but could not disprove it.  “Tell
me,”  I said,  “ and honestly, — should we be overturned
in the boat while out at sea,  what would prevent our
being drowned  ? ”

He would not suppose such an accident possible.

I pre.ssed him,  however,  upon the possibility it might
happen once in a century,  and he could not help laughing,
and answered,  “ O,  we should pick you all up  !”

I desired to know by what means.  “ Instruments,”  he
said.  I forced him,  after a long and comic resistance,  to
show me them.  Good Heaven  ! they were three-pronged
iron forks, — very tridents of Neptune  !

I exclaimed with great horror,  “ These ! — why,  they
w ould tear the body to pieces !”

“O,”  answered he calmly,  ‘^one must not think of
legs and arms when life is in danger.”

I would not,  however,  under such protection,  refuse sail-
ing round Mount-Edgecumbe,  which we did in Captain
Molloy’s boat,  and just at the time when the Royals,  in
sundry garden-chairs,  were driving about the place.  It
was a beautiful view;  the situation is delightful.  But

56

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

Captain Molloy was not in the best harmony with its
owners,  as they had disappointed his expectations of an
invitation to dinner.

The Commissioner did not retort upon us the omission  ;
on the contrary,  he invited to his own table most of the
personages who shared in the mortification of Captain
Molloy;  Lord Stopford,  Mr.  Townshend,  Lord Fal-
mouth,  Lord Hood,  Commodore Goodal,  Sir Richard
liickerton,  and three or four more.

The  (liuuer was very pleasant.  My two neighbours
were Lords Falmouth and Stopford  : the first is heavy,
and unlike his couversible and elegant mother,  Mrs.
Roscawen  ; the other is a cheerful,  lively,  well-bred
young man.  But my chief pleasure was in seeing Lord
Hood,  and all I saw and heard struck me much in
his favour.

Saturday,  August 22nd. — To-day was devoted to
general quiet;  and I spent all I could of it in my sweet
wood,  reading the  ‘ Art of Contentment,’  a delightful old
treatise,  by the author of  ‘The Whole Duty of Man,’
which I have found in the Saltram Library.

Monday,  August 24th. — To-day the Royals went
to Marystow,  Colonel Heywood’s,  and Miss Planta and
myself to Mount-Edgecumbe.  The Queen had desired
me to take Miss Planta,  and I had written to prepare
Lady Mount-Edgecumbe for a companion.

We went in a chaise to the ferry,  and thence in a boat.
I did not like this part of the business,  for we had no
pilot we knew,  nor any one to direct us.  They would
hardly believe,  at Mount-Edgecumbe,  we had adventured
in so unguarded a maimer:  but our superior is too high
to discover difficulties,  or know common precautions;
and we fare,  therefore,  considerably worse in all these

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

57

excursions,  from belonging to crowned heads,  than we
should do in our own private stations,  if visiting at any
part of the kingdom.

Safe,  however,  though not pleasantly,  we arrived on the
opposite shore  ; where we found a gardener and a very
commodious garden-chair waiting for us.  We drove
through a sweet park to the house,  at the gate of which
stood Lord and Lady Mount-Edgecumbe,  who told us
that they had just heard an intention of their Majesties
to sail the next day up the River Tamer,  and therefore
they thought it their duty to hasten olf to a seat they have
near its banks,  Coteil,  with refreshments and accommo-
dations, in case they should be honoured with a visit to
see the place,  which w'as very ancient and curious.  They
should leave Lord Valletort to do the honours,  and ex-
pressed much civil regret in the circumstance  : but the
distance was too great to admit of the journey,  over bad
l oads,  if they deferred it till after dinner.

We then proceeded,  in the chair,  to see the place  : it
is truly noble ; but I shall enter into no description
from want of time  : take a list simply of its particular
points.  The sea,  in some places,  shows itself in its
whole vast and unlimited expanse;  at others,  the jutting
land renders it merely a beautiful basin or canal  ; the
borders down to the sea are in some parts flourishing
with the flnest everorreens and most vivid verdure,  and in
others are barren,  rocky,  and perilous.  In one moment
you might suppose yourself cast on a desert island,  and
the next And yourself in the most fertile and luxurious
country.  In different view's we AVere shown Cawsand
Bay,  the Hamoaze,  the Rocks called The jVIaker,  &c., —
Dartmoor Hills,  Plymouth,  the Dockyard,  Saltram,  and
St.  George’s Channel.  Several noble ships,  manned and
commissioned,  were in the Hamoaze ; amongst them our

DIARY AND LETTERS

58

[Part II.

Weymouth frieiidsj the  “ Magnificent”  and  “ Southamp-
ton.”

A very beautiful fiower-garden is enclosed in one part
of the grounds ; and huts,  seats,  and ornaments in ge-
neral, were well adapted to the scenery of the place.
A seat is consecrated to Mrs,  Darner,  with an acrostic
on her name by Lord Valletort.  It is surprising to see
the state of vegetation at this place,  so close to the main.
Myrtles,  pomegranates,  evergreens,  and flowering shrubs,
all thrive,  and stand the cold blast,  when planted in a
southern aspect,  as safely as in an inland country.  As it
is a peninsula,  it has all aspects,  and the plantations
and dispositions of the ground are admirably and skil-
fully assorted to them.

The great open view,  however,  disappointed me  : the
towns it shows have no prominent features,  the country
is as flat as it is extensive,  and the various branches of
the sea which run into it give,  upon their retreat,  a
marshy,  muddy,  unpleasant appearance.  There is,  be-
sides, a want of some one striking object to arrest the eye,
and fix the attention,  which wearies from the general
glare.  Points,  however,  there are,  both of the sublime
and beautiful,  that merit all the fame which this noble
place has acquired.

In our tour around it we met Lord Stopford,  Mr.
Townshend,  and Captain Douglas;  and heard a tre-
mendous account of the rage of the sea-captains,  on being
disappointed of a dinner at the Royal visit to Mount-
Edgecumbe.

We did not quit these fine grounds till near dinner-
time. The housekeeper then showed us the house,  and
a set of apartments newly fitted up for the Royals,  had
they chosen to sleep at Mount- Edgecumbe.

The house is old,  and seems pleasant and convenient.

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

59

In a very pretty circular parlour,  which had the ap-
pearance of being the chief living room,  I saw amongst
a small collection of books,  ‘ Cecilia.’  I immediately
laid a wager with myself the first volume would open upon
Pacchierotti ; and I won it very honestly,  though I
never expect to be paid it.  The chapter,  “ An Opera
Rehearsal,”  was so well read,  the leaves always flew apart
to display it.

The library is an exceeding good room,  and seems
charmingly furnished.  Here Lord Valietort received us.
His lady was confined to her room by indisposition.  He
is a most neat little beau,  and his face has the roses and
lilies as finely blended as that of his pretty young
wife.  He was extremely civil and attentive,  and appears
to be really amiable in his disposition.

Mr.  Brett,  a plain,  sensible,  conversible man,  who has
an estate in the neighbourhood,  dined with us ; and a
young Frenchman.  The dinner was very cheerful : my
lord,  at the head of the table,  looked only like his lady
in a riding-dress.

However,  he received one mortifying trial of his
temper  ; he had sent to request sailing up the Tamer
next day with Sir Richard Bickerton  ; and he had a blunt
refusal,  in a note,  during our repast.  Not an officer in
the fleet would accommodate him ! their resentment of
the dinner slight is quite vehement.

We returned home the same way we came  ; the good-
natured little lord,  and Mr.  Brett also,  quite shocked we
had no better guard or care taken of us.

Tuesday,  August 25th. — This morning all the
Royals went sailing up the Tamer;  and I had the plea-
sure of a visit from the very amiable and ingenious Miss
Harriet Bowdler,  whom I had not seen since the tea-
party at Mrs.  De Luc’s in my first monastic year.  She

60

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part TI.

is here to see the naval review,  at Captain Fanshaw’s,
and was brought by Captain Duckworth.  Her sister
Frances is now at Teignmouth,  where first I met her;
and rather better,  but in a miserable state of health,  which
I heard with much concern.

Captain Duckworth,  I find,  has both a house and a
mate in this neighbourhood,  and Mrs.  Bowdler is now on
a visit to both.  They made me a long and pleasant visit,
and were scarce gone when Mrs.  Fox was announced.
She was Miss Clayton,  half-sister to poor Emily  ; and
I had not seen her since her marriage to the Colonel,  who
is own brother to Charles Fox.  She is a very pleasing wo-
man. These all came on the strength of the Royals’
absence.  Mrs.  Fox invited me much to her barrack,
wheie she is quartered with her husband  ; and offered to
show JMiss Planta and me the citadel,  &c. ; but we can
arrange nothing for ourselves.

Wednesday,  August 26th. — This was our last day at
Saltram.

The Royals went to see Kitley,  a place of Mr.  Bastard’s;
and at noon I had a visit of inquiry about them all,  from
Lord and Lady Mount-Edgecumbe,  and Lord Valletort  ;
who were all full of the honours done them,  and told me
the obelisks and arches they meant to construct in com-
memora\ion.  Lady Mount-Edgecumbe made me pro-
mise to write to her from Weymouth,  and from Windsor,
irews of Royal healths.

I had a visit also from Admiral La Forey,  who came
to a levee of the King,  and was created a baronet.

From the window,  besides,  I had a call from Captain
Onslow,  who wa waiting the King’s return in the park.
He told me he had brought up a brother of mine for the
sea.  I did not refresh his memory with the severities he
practised in that marine education.

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

G1

Thursday,  August 27th. — VVe quitted Saltram in
the same order we had reached it,  and returned to Exe-
ter, where we spent the rest of the day.

Friday,  August 28th. — We travelled back to Wey-
mouth.

Friday,  September 4th. — Her Majesty made a point
that Miss Planta and myself should go to-night to the ball
of the Master of the Ceremonies;  though,  having no party,
it was so disagreeable to me,  that I ventured to remon-
strate. That is never,  I find,  even in declining favours,
to be done.

Sunday,  September 6th. — This evening,  the Royals
and their train all went again to the rooms to drink their
tea.

Miss Planta and myself were taking ours quietly to-
gether, and I was finishing a charming sermon of Blair,
while she was running over some old newspapers,  when,
suddenly,  but very gently,  the room-door was opened,
and then I heard Will Miss Burney permit me to
come in,  and give me a dish of tea  ?” — Twas Mr.
Fairly.

He said we were to go on Monday se’nnight to Lord
Bath’s,  onW^ednesday to Lord Aylesbury’s,  and on Friday
to return to Windsor.  He was himself to be discharged
some days sooner,  as he should not be wanted on the road.

He said many things relative to court lives and situa-
tions : with respect,  deference,  and regard invariable,  he
mentioned the leading individuals;  but said nothing could
be so weak as to look there,  in such stations,  for such
impossibilities as sympathy,  friendship,  or cordiality !
And he finished with saying,  “ People forget themselves
who look for them  !”  Such,  however,  is not my feeling ;
and I am satisfied he has met with some unexpected

DIARY AND LETTERS

6-2

[Part II.

coldness.  Miss Planta being present,  lie explained only
in generals,

* ^ ★

Monday,  September 14th. — We all left Weymouth.

All possible honours were paid the King on his de-
parture ; lords,  ladies,  and sea-ofRcers lined the way that
he passed,  the guns of the Magnificent and Southampton
fired the parting salute,  and the ships were under sail.

We all set out as before,  but parted on the road.  The
Royals went to breakfast at Redlinch,  the seat of Lord
Ilchester,  where Mr.  Fairly was in waiting for them,  and
thence proceeded to a collation at Sherborne Castle,
whither he was to accompany them,  and then resign his
present attendance,  which has been long and troublesome
and irksome,  I am sure.

Miss Planta and myself proceeded to Longleat,  the
seat of the Marquis of Bath,  late Lord Weymouth  ; where
we were all to dine,  sleep,  and spend the following day
and night.

Longleat was formerly the dwelling of the Earl of
Lansdowne,  uncle to Mrs.  Delany;  and here,  at this seat,
that heartless uncle,  to promote some political views,  sacri-
ficed his incomparable niece,  at the age of seventeen,
marrying her to an unwieldy,  uncultivated,  country esquire,
near si.xty years of age,  and scarce ever sober — his name
Pendarves.

With how sad an awe,  in recollecting her submissive
unhappiness,  did I enter these doors  ! — and with what in-
dignant hatred did I look at the portrait of the unfeeling
Earl,  to whom her gentle repugnance,  shown by almost
incessant tears,  was thrown away,  as if she,  her person,
and her existence xvere nothing in the scale,  where the
disposition of a few boroughs opposed them 1 Yet was
this the famous Granville — the poet,  the fine gentleman.

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

63

the statesman,  the friend and patron of Pope,  of whom
he wrote —

“ What Muse for Granville can refuse to sing  ?”

Mine,  I am sure,  for one.

Lady Bath showed us our rooms,  to which we repaired
immediately,  to dress before the arrival of the Royals.

We dined with the gentlemen,  all but the Marquis,  vvho
was admitted,  in his own house,  to dine with the King and
Queen,  as were all the ladies of his family.  Lord Wey-
mouth, the eldest son,  was our president;  and two of his
brothers.  Lords George and John,  with Lord Courtown
and the two Colonels,  made the party.  The Weymonths,
Thynnes rather,  are silent,  and we had but little talk or
entertainment.

]\ly poor Mrs.  Delany w’as constantly in my mind —
constantly,  constantly ! — I thought I saw her meek image
vainly combating affliction and disgust with duty and
compliance,  and weeping floods of tears,  unnoticed by
her unrelenting persecutor.

We spent all the following day here.  I went to the
chapel ; I felt horror-struck as I looked at the altar  :
what an offering for ambition ! what a sacrifice to
tyranny !

The house is very magnificent,  and of an immense mag-
nitude. It seems much out of repair,  and by no means
cheerful or comfortable.  Gloomy grandeur seems the
proper epithet for the building and its fitting-up.  It had
been designed for a monastery,  and as such was nearly
completed when Henry VIII.  dissolved those seminaries.
It was finished as a dwelling-house in the reign of his
/'son,  by one of the Thynnes,  who was knighted in a field
of battle by the Protector Somerset.

Many things in the house,  and many queer old portraits,
afforded me matter of speculation,  and would have filled

64

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

up more time than I had to bestow.  There are portraits
of Jane Shore and Fair Rosamond,  which have some
marks of originality,  being miserable daubs,  yet from evi-
dently beautiful subjects.  Arabella Stuart is also at full
length,  and King Charleses and Jameses in abundance,
with their queens,  brethren,  and cousins.  There are gal-
leries in this house of the dimensions of college halls.

The state rooms on the ground floor are very hand-
some; but the queer antique little old corners,  cells,
recesses,  passages that lead to nothing,”  unexpected
openings,  and abrnpt stoppages,  with the quaint devices
of various old-fashioned ornaments,  amused me the most.

My bed-room was furnished with crimson velvet,  bed
included,  yet so high,  though only the second story,  that
It made me giddy to look into the park,  and tired to wind
up the tlight of stairs.  It was formerly the favourite
room,  the housekeeper told me,  of Bishop Kenn,  who put
on his shroud in it before he died.  Had I fancied I had
seen his ghost,  I might have screamed my voice away,
unheard by any assistant to lay it ; for so far was I from
the rest of the habitable part of the mansion,  that not the
lungs of Mr.  Bruce could have availed me.  ’Tis the
room,  however,  in which the present Bishop of E.xeter
resides when here,  and he was a favourite of my Mrs.
Delany ; and all that brought her to my mind without
marrying her was soothing to me.

The housekeeper showed me a portrait of Mrs.  Gran-
ville, her mother.  It is handsome,  and not wholly unre-
sembling. Lord Bath was a distant relation of the
Granvilles.

The park is noble and spacious.  It was filled with
country folks,  permitted to enter that they might see their
sovereigns,  and it looked as gay without as it seemed
gloomy within.  The people were dressed in their best.

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

G5

as if tliey came to a fair;  and such shouts and hallooings
ensued,  whenever the King appeared at a window,  that the
wliole building rang again with the vibration.  Nothing
upon earth can be more gratifying than tlie sight of this
dear and excellent King thus loved and received by jhi
descriptions of his subjects.

Wednesday,  September 16th. — We set out,  amidst
the acclamations of a multitude,  from Longleat for Tot-
tenham Park,  the seat of Lord Aylesbury.  The park is
of great extent and moderate beauty.  The house is very
well.

We had only our own party,  the three gentlemen,  at
dinner and breakfast.  These gentlemen only dine with
the King when he keeps house,  and keej)s it incog,  him-
self. At Tottenham Park,  only my Lord Aylesbury,  as
master of the house,  was admitted.  He and his lady
were both extremely desirous to make all their guests
comfortable;  and Lady Aylesbury very politely offered
me the use of her own collection of books.  But I found,
at the top of the house,  a very large old library,  in which
there were sundry uncommon and curious old English
tracts,  that afforded me much entertainment.  ’Tis a
library of long standing.

Here are many original portraits also,  that offer enough
for speculation.  A ‘"Bloody Mary,”  by Sir Anthony
More,  which I saw with much curiosity,  and liked better
than I expected.  The beautiful Duchesses of Cleveland
and Portsmouth,  I fancy by Kneller;  but we had no
cicerone.  A very tine picture of a lady in black,  that I
can credit to be Vandyke,  but who else can I know not.
Several portraits by Sir Peter Lely,  extremely soft and
pleasing,  and of subjects uncommonly beautiful ; many
by Sir Godfrey Kneller,  well enough;  and many more
by Sir Something Thornhill,  very thick and heavy.

VOL.  V.

F

66 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

The good lord of the mansion put up a new bed for
the King and Queen that cost him 900/.

We drove about the park in garden-chairs ; but it is too
flat for much diversity of prospect.

Two things I heard here with concern — that my god-
mother, Mrs.  Greville,  was dead ; and that poor Sir
Joshua Reynolds had lost the sight of one of his eyes.

Friday,  September 18th. — We left Tottenham
Court,  and returned to Windsor.  The Royals hastened
to the younger Princesses,  and I ....  to Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg.  I was civilly received,  however.  But deadly dead
sunk my heart as I entered her apartment.

The next day I bad a visit from my dear brother
Charles — full of business,  letters,  &c.  I rejoiced to see
him,  and to confab over all his affairs,  plans,  and visions,
more at full length than for a long time past.  I was
forced to introduce him to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and he
flourished away successfully enough;  but it was very
vexatious,  as he had matters innumerable for discussion.

♦ * =i!  ¥

Miss Biminj to Dr.  Burney.

Queen's Lodge,  Windsor,  October 27,  1789.

Most dear Sir, — We go on here amazingly well,  though
every day now presents some anniversary of such miseries
as scarce any house ever knew before last year.  They
call back to my mind every circumstance,  with daily ac-
curacy, and a sort of recollective melancholy that I find
always ready to mix with the joy and thanksgiving ot the
most blessed deliverance and change.

Nor is it possible to think more of our escape than of
the sudden adversity of the French.  Truly terrible and
tremendous are revolutions such as these.  There is no-
thing in old history that I shall any longer think fabulous;
the destruction of the most ancient empires on record has

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

67

i789]

nothing more wonderful,  nor of more sounding impro-
bability, than the demolition of this great nation,  which
rises up all against itself for its own ruin — perhaps anni-
hilation. Even the Amazons were but the poissardes of
the day;  I no longer doubt their existence or their
prowess ; and name but some leader amongst the de-
stroyers of the Bastile,  and what is said of Hercules or
Theseus we need no longer discredit.  I only suppose
those two heroes were the many-headed mob of ancient
days.

* *

I had the surprise and pleasure,  a few days since,  of a
note from Mrs.  Lambart : her son is married to a lady
who lived at Windsor,  and they are now all together in this
town.  I contrived,  after encountering my difficulties suc-
cessfully (a very female Hercules I think myself when
I conquer them),  to call upon her.  She lamented losing
the pleasure of your society,  and of my mother’s,  by
quitting Chelsea ; and the cause,  you may easily believe,
she lamented far more deeply.  Much had passed since
I had seen her,  and all bad : she had lost this brother,
with whom she meant to reside frequently,  and she had
lost her other brother.  Sir Philip Jennings Clerke,  and
two nephews;  and the mutual friend through whom we
became acquainted,  and at whose house w'e had alone met,
is lost also.  How much and how melancholy was our
conversation upon that subject!  a subject always sad,
yet invariably interesting and dear to me.

I w'as sorry to see in the papers the death of poor Mr.
Bremner.  I hope he had read,  in your  ‘ History of
Music,’  the honourable mention of his possessing Queen
Elizabeth’s  ‘ Virginal Book V To whom does that book
now devolve  ? I think what you say of the time required
— a month’s practice — to enable any master in Europe to

68

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

play one of the lessons,  will not much stimulate the sale,
amongst the busy professors of these busy days : but a
Dilettante purchaser may yet be tound  : they have gene-
rally most courage,  because less belief in difficulties,  from
being further off from discerning them;  I should else
fear you had ruined the market.

I was told the other day,  by Mrs.  Fisher,  wife of our
canon,  that  “ my friend  ^Ir.  Twining”  was at  \\  indsor.
I did the impossible in order to meet him at her house
for a moment,  and then found it was that good friend s
brother,  with his wife.  I was very glad to see them both,
but not considerably the more for the disappointment and
mistake.

My own dearest friends,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Lock,  have just
paid me their annual visit here.  How grieved was I,  when
it was over,  to think another October must come ere
M indsor had any chance of repeating that felicity tolne!
Yet I shall have the pleasure soon of seeing the lovely
Mrs. ; but her sight,  jioor thing!  is amongst the sen-

sations that are even peculiarly melancholy at mdsor.

e all go on here,  day by day,  night by night,  so pre-
cisely the same,  that monotony cannot be more perfect.

I hope when  \ou come to town you see dear Sir Joshua?

Ever,  dearest Sir,

Most lovingly and dutifully,  your

F.  B.

Novkmber. — Mv memorandums of this month are
very regular;  but I shall beg leave to condense them all
into the days and circumstances essential.

Upon the birthday of the Princess Sophia I had the
honour to present my pretty Lealherhead fairing  , — the
pincushion,  needle-book,  and letter-case of pink salin,and
the inkstand,  so long deferred,  for Princess Mary.

17891

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

69

Early in tliis month I had the solace of three little in-
terviews with my beloved Susanna.  On the birthday of
the Princess Augusta,  the e.xcellent Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,
just arrived from their summer tour to their daughters,
came hither with congratulations.  As it proved,  ’twas the
last visit of that very white-souled and amiable woman,
and the last time I ever beheld her  ; but she was particu-
larly well,  and there appeared no symptom of the fatal
end so near approaching.

The following day Colonel Gwynn came.  He told us,
at tea-time,  the wonderful recovery of Colonel Golds-
worthy, who has had an almost desperate illness  ; and
then added that he had dined the preceding day with him,
and met Mr.  Fairly,  who was coming to Windsor,  and
all prepared,  when he was suddenly stopped,  on the very
preceding evening,  by a fresh attack of the gout.

I heard this with much concern,  and made many in-
quiries, which were presently interrupted by an e.\clama-
tion of Major Garth,  who was now in waiting:  The

gout?’  he cried  : “ nay,  then,  it is time he should get a
nurse  ; and,  indeed,  I hear he has one in view.”

Colonel Gwynn instantly turned short,  with a very signi-
ficant smile of triumph,  towards me,  that seemed to con-
firm this assertion,  while it exulted in his own prediction
at Cheltenham.

The following morning,  while I was alone with my
Royal Mistress,  she mentioned Mr.  Fairly for the first
time since we left Weymouth.  It was to express much
displeasure against him  : he had misled Lord Aylesbury
about the ensuing drawing-room,  by affirming there would
be none this month.

After saying how wrong this was,  and hearing me ven-
ture to answer I could not doubt but he must have had
some reason,  which,  if known,  might account for his mis-

70

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

take,  she suddenly,  and with some severity of accent,
said,  “ He will not come here  ! For some reason or other
he does not choose it ! He cannot bear to come  !’’

How was I amazed  ! and silenced pretty eft'ectually !

She then added,  ‘‘He has set his heart against coming.
I know he has been in town some considerable time,  but
he has desired it may not be told here.  I know,  too,  that
when he has been met in the streets,  he has called out,
‘ For Heaven’s sake,  if you are going to V>  indsor,  do not
say you have seen me.’  ”

Wednesday,  November 18th. — We were to go to
town  : but while I \vas taking my hasty breakfast Miss
Planta flew into the room,  eagerly exclaiming  “ Have you
heard the news  ?”

I saw,  instantly,  by her eyes and manner,  what she
meant;  and therefore answered,  “I believe so.”

“ Mr.  Fairly is going to be married  ! I resolved I
would tell you.”

“I heard the rumour,”  I replied,  “ the other day,  from
Colonel Gwynn.”

“ O,  it’s true  !”  she cried ; “ he has written to ask
leave;  but for Heaven’s sake don’t say so ! ’’

I gave her my ready promise,  for I believed not a sylla-
ble of the matter;  but I would not tell her that.

* » * # #

We went to town not only for the drawing-room on the
next day,  but also for the play on this  \^  ednesday night:
and the party appointed to sit in the Queen’s private box,
as,  on these occasions,  the balcony-box opposite to the
Royals is called,  dined with Mrs.  Schwellenberg, — namely,
Mrs.  Stainforth,  Miss Planta,  Mr.  He Luc,  and Mr
Thomas Willis.

When we arrived at the playhouse we found the lobby
and all the avenues so crowded,  that it was with the ut-

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

71

1789]

most difficulty we forced our way up the stairs.  It was
the first appearance of the good King at the theatre since
his illness.

When we got up stairs,  we were stopped effectually:
there was not room for a fly ; and though our box was
not only taken and kept,  but partitioned off,  to get to it
was wholly impracticable.

Mr.  Willis and Miss Planta protested they would go
down ao-ain,  and remonstrate with iSIr.  Hams,  the ma-
nager;  and I must own the scene that followed was not
unentertaining.  Mrs.  Stainforth and myself were fast fixed
in an angle at the corner of the stairs,  and Mr.  De Luc
stood in the midst of the crowd,  where he began oft'ering
so many grave arguments,  with such deliberation and
precision,  every now and then going back in his reason-
ing to correct his own English,  representing our right to
proceed,  and the wrong of not making way ibr us,  that
it was irresistibly comic to see the people stare,  as they
pushed on,  and to see his unconscious content in their
passing him,  so long as he completed his expostulations
on their indecorum.

^Meanwhile,  poor Mrs.  Stainforth lost her cloak,  and in
her loud lamentations,  and calls upon all present to
witness her distress  (to which,  for enhancing its import-
ance, she continually added,  “ W hoever has found it should
bring it to the Queen’s house,”)  she occupied the atten-
tion of all upon the stairs as completely as it was occu-
pied by Mr.  De Luc for all in the passages : but,  helas  !
neither the philosophic harangue of the one,  nor the royal
dignity of the other,  prevailed ; and while there we stood,
expecting an avenue to be formed,  either for our elo-
quence or our consequence,  not an inch of ground did
we gain,  and those who had neither made their way,  and
got on in multitudes.

72

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

Offended,  at length,  as  ^vell as tired,  Mrs.  Stainforth
proposed our going down,  and waiting in the lobbv,  till
Mr.  Harris arrived.

Here we were joined by a gentleman,  whose manner of
fixing me showed a half-recollection of my face,  which
I precisely returned him,  without being able to recollect
where 1 had seen him before.  He spoke to Mrs.  Stain-
forlh,  who answered as if she knew him,  and then he
came to me and offered to assist in getting me to my box.
I told him the manager had already been sent to.  He
did not,  however,  go off,  but entered into conversation
upon the crow'd,  play,  &c.,  with the ease of an old ac-
quaintance. I took the first opportunity to inquire of
Mrs.  Stainforth who he was,  and heard — Lord Mount-
morres,  whom you may remember I met with at the
theatre at Cheltenham.

Wliat,  however,  was ridiculous enough w’as,  that,  after
a considerable length of time,  he asked me who Mrs.
Stainforth was ! and I afterwards heard he had made the
same inquiry of herself about me ! The difference of a
dressed and undressed head had occasioned,  I suppose,
the doubt.

The moment,  however,  he had completely satisfied
himself in this,  he fairly joined me,  as if he had naturally
belonged to our party.  And it turned out very accept-
able, for we were involved in all such sort of difficulties
as our philosopher was the least adapted to remove.

We now went about,  in and out,  up and down,  but
without any power to make w'ay,  the crowd every instant
thickening.

We then were fain to return to our quiet post,  behind
the side-boxes in the lobby,  where we remained till the
arrival of the King,  and then were somewhat recompensed
for missing the sight of his entrance,  by hearing the

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

73

1789]

sound of his reception  : for so violent an huzzaing com-
menced, such thundering clapping,  knocking with sticks,
and shouting,  and so universal a chorus of  “ God save the
King,”  that not all the inconveniences of my situation
could keep my heart from beating with joy,  nor my eyes
from running over with gratitude for its occasion.

Lord Mountmorres,  who joined in the stick part of the
general plaudit,  exclaimed frequently,  What popularity
is this!  how tine to a man’s feelings!  yet — he must find
it embarrassing.”

Indeed I should suppose he could with difficulty bear
it.  ’Twas almost adoration  ! How much I lament that
I lost the sight of his benign countenance,  during such
glorious moments as the most favoured monarchs can
scarce enjoy twice in the longest life  !

Miss Planta and Mr.  Willis now returned  : they had had
no success  ; Mr.  Harris said they might as well stem the
tide of the ocean as oppose or rule such a crowd.

The play now began  ; and Lord Mountmorres went
away to reconnoitre  ; but,  presently returning,  said,  “If
you will trust yourself with me I will show you your
chance.”  And then he conducted me to the foot of the
stairs leading to our box,  which exhibited such a mass of
living creatures,  that the insects of an ant-hill could
scarce be more compact.

We were passed by Lord Stopford,  Captain Douglas,
and some other of our acquaintance,  who told us of simi-
lar distresses  ; and in this manner passed the first act !
The box-keeper came and told Lord Mountmorres he
could now give his Lordship one seat:  but the humours of
the lobby he now preferred,  and refused the place ;
though I repeatedlv begged that w'e might not detain
him.  But he was determined to see us safe landed before
he left us.

74

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

Mr.  Harris now came again,  and proposed taking us
another way,  to try to get up some back-stairs.  We then
went behind the scenes for this purpose : but here Mr.
Harris was called away,  and we were left upon the stage.
Lord Mountmorres led me to various peep-holes,  where I
could at least have the satisfaction of seeing the King and
Royal Family,  as well as the people,  and the whole was a
sight most grateful to my eyes.

So civil,  however,  and so attentive he was,  that a new
perplexity now occurred to me  : he had given up his
place,  and had taken so much trouble,  that I thought,  if
we at last got to our box,  he would certainly expect to
be accommodated in it.  And to take any one,  without
previous permission,  into the Queen's box,  and

immediately facing their Majesties,  was a liberty I knew
not how to risk;  and,  in truth,  I knew not enough of his
present politics to be at all sure if they might not be even
peculiarly obnoxious.

This consideration,  therefore,  began now so much to
reconcile me to this emigrant evening,  that I ceased even
to wish for recovering our box.

When Mr.  Harris came back,  he said he had nothing
to propose but his own box,  which we readily accepted.

To this our access was easy,  as it was over the King
and Queen,  and consequently not desirable to those who
came to see them.  I too now preferred it,  as it was out
of their sight,  and enabled me to tell Lord Mountmorres,
who led me to it through the crowd with unceasing trou-
ble and attention,  that till he could get better accommo-
dated a place was at his service.

He closed instantly with the offer,  placing himself be-
hind me ; but said he saw some of his relations in the
opposite stage-box.  Lady Mornington and her beautiful
daughter Lady Ann Wellesley,  and,  as soon as the act

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

75

was over,  he would go down and persuade them to make
room for him.

I was sliocked,  however,  after all this,  to hear him own
himself glad to sit down,  as he was still rather lame,  from
a dreadful overturn in a carriage,  in which his leg had
been nearly crushed by being caught within the coach-
door,  which beat down upon it,  and almost demolished
it.

This anecdote,  however,  led to another more pleasant;
for it brought on a conversation which showed me his
present principles,  at least,  were all on the government
side.  The accident had happened during a journey to
Chester,  in his way to Ireland,  whither he was hastening
upon the Regency business,  last winter:  and he went to
the Irish House of Peers the first time he quitted his
room,  after a confinement of three weeks from this terrible
bruise.

“ But how,”  cried I,  “ could you stand?”

“ I did not stand,”  he answered;  they indulged me
with leave to speak sitting.”

What a useful opening,  then,  my Lord,”  cried I,  “ did
you lose for every new paragraph ! ’’

I meant,  the cant of  “ Now I am upon my legs.”  He
understood it instantly,  and laughed heartily,  protesting
it was no small detriment to his oratory.

The play was the Dramatist,”  w'ritten with that spe-
cies of humour in caricature that resembles O’Keefe’s
performances ; full of absurdities,  yet laughable in the
extreme.  We heard very ill,  and,  missing the beginning,
we understood still w'orse  : so that,  in fact,  I was in-
debted to my new associate for all the entertainment I
received the whole evening.

When the act was over,  the place on wdiich he had cast
his eye,  near Lady Mornington,  was seized  ; he laughed,

76

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

put down his hat,  and composed himself quietly for re-
maining where he was.

He must be a man of a singular character,  though of
what sort I knovv not : but in his conversation he showed
much information,  and a spirited desire of interchanging
ideas with those who came in his way.

We talked a great deal of France,  and he related to me
a variety of anecdotes just fresh imported thence.  He
was there at the first assembling of the Notables,  and he
saw,  he said,  impending great events from that assemblage.
The two most remarkable things that had struck him,  he
told me,  in this wonderful revolution,  were — first,  that
the French Guards should ever give up their King;  and
secondly,  that the chief spirit and capacity hitherto shown
amongst individuals had come from the ecclesiastics.

He is very much of opinion the spirit of the times will
come round to this island.  In what,  I asked,  could be its
pretence  ? — The game-laws,  he answered,  and the tithes.

He told me,  also,  a great deal of Ireland,  and enlarged
my political knowledge abundantly, — but I shall not be
so generous,  my dear friends,  as to let you into all these
state matters.

But I must tell you a good sort of quirk of Mr.  Wilkes,
who,  when the power of the mob and their cruelty were
first reciting,  quarrelled with a gentleman for saying the
French government was become a democracy,  and as-
serted it was rather a mohocracy.  'fhe pit,  he said,  re-
minded him of a sight he once saw in Westminster Hall,
— a floor of faces.

H e was a candidate for estminster at that time,
with Charles Fox  ! — Thus do we veer about.

At the end of the farce,  “ God save the King  ” was
most vociferously called for from all parts of the theatre,
and all the singers of the theatre came on the stage to

]789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

77

sing it,  joined by the wliole audience,  who kept it up
till the Sovereign of his people’s hearts left the house.  It
was noble and heart-melting at once to hear and see such
loyal rapture,  and to feel and know it so deserved.

Friday,  November 20th. — Some business sent me to
speak with Miss Planta before our journey back to Wind-
sor. When it was e.xecuted and I was coming away,  she
called out,  "O  ! a propos — it’s all declared,  and the Prin-
cesses wished Miss Fuzilierjoy yesterday in the drawing-
room. She looked remarkably well  ; but said iMr.  Fairly
had still a little gout,  and could not appear.”

Now first my belief followed assertion; — but it was
only because it was inevitable,  since the Princesses could

not have proceeded so far without certainty.

*****

We returned to Windsor as usual,  and there I was,  just
as usual,  obliged to finish every evening with picquet ! — •
and to pass all and every afternoon,  from dinner to mid-
night, in picquet company.

Saturday,  November 28th. — The Queen,  after a
very long airing,  came in to dress,  and summoned me
immediately  ; and in two minutes the Princess Royal
entered,  and said something in German,  and then added,
“ And Mr.  Fairly,  ma’am,  begs he may see you a mo-
ment now,  if possible.”

This is his first coming to the house since her Royal
Highness’s birthday,  just two mouths ago.

“ I am very sorry,”  was answered coolly,  but I am
goinjr to dress.”

He won’t keep you a moment,  mamma,  only he
wants to get on to St.  Leonard’s to dinner.’

Miss Fuzilier is now there.

“ Well,  then,”  she answered,  “ Fll slip on my powder-
ing-gown,  and see him.”

78

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

I found,  however,  they had already met,  probably in
the passage,  for the Queen added,  “ How melancholy he
looks! — does not he.  Princess Royal?  ”

Yes,  indeed,  mamma  ! ’’ — They then again talked in
German.

The Princess then went to call him ; and I hastened
into the next room,  with some caps just then inspect-
ing.

]\Ir.  Turbulent again dined with us,  and said,  “ I find
]\lr.  Fairly is here to-day?  when is he to be married  ? ”

]\Irs.  Schwellenberg reproved him for talking of  “ soch
things she holds it petty treason to speak of it,  as they
are both in office about the Court;  though she confessed
it would be in a fortnight.

At tea,  when the gentlemen — General Bude,  Majors
Price and Garth,  and Mr.  Willis — appeared,  she said,

Where be Mr.  Fairly?”  They all exclaimed,  Is he
here  ? ”

O,  certain,  if he ben’t gone 1 ”

I then said he had gone on to St.  Leonard’s.

They all expressed the utmost surprise that he should
come,  and go,  and see none of them.

When they retired,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg exclaimed,
“ For what not stav one nitrht?  For what not so to the
gentlemen? — It looks like when he been ashamed. — O
fie!  I don’t not like soch ting.  And for what always
say contraire  ? — always say to overybody he won’t not
have her  ! — There mught be someting wrong in all that
— it looks not well.”

I saw a strong desire to have me enter into the merits
of the case  ; but I constantly answer to these exclama-
tions, that these sort of situations are regarded in the
world as licensing denials first,  and truancy from all
others afterwards.

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

79

Sunday,  November 29th. — General Harcourt was
here at tea  ; but not one of our gentlemen inquired after
his guest ; — they are aftronted at his running away from
all.

General Harcourt,  however,  uncalled,  made the fol-
lowing speech.  “ Fairly is not the thing — not at all — very
unwell : an unformed gout — the most disagreeable sensa-
tion I suppose a man can have,  and the most uncomfort-
able ; a real lit would be far preferable ; but it is some-
thing hanging about him that comes to nothing.”

This was heard by all,  even his particular friend Ge-
neral Bude,  without the least expression of care.  To
forget is soon to be forgotten  ! — he has dropped them till
they now drop him,

December. — Most gratefully I met the mild anniver-
saries of this month,  which was so dreadful in the year
’88.  The King's health seems perfect,  and there is a
coolness and composure in his manner that promise its
permanency — God be praised  !

But let me now,  to enliven you a little,  introduce to you
a new acquaintance,  self-made,  that I meet at the chapel,
and who always sits next me when there is room, — Mrs.

J , wife to the Bishop of K : and before the

service begins,  she enters into small talk,  with a pretty
tolerable degree of frankness,  not much repressed by
scruples of delicacy.

Take a specimen.  She opened,  the other morning,
upon my situation and occupation,  and made the most
plump inquiries into its particulars,  with a sort of hearty
good humour that removed all impertinence,  whatever it
left of inelegance  : — and then began her comments.

W ell ; the Queen,  to be sure,  is a great deal better

80

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part II.

dressed tlian slie used to be  ; but for all that,  I really
think it is but au odd thing for you  ! — Dear  ! I think
it’s something so out of the way for you  ! — I can’t think
how you set about it.  It must have been very droll to
vou at first.  A great deal of honour,  to be sure,  to serve
a Queen,  and all that;  but I dare say a lady’s-maid could
do it better;  though to be called about a Queen,  as I say,
is a great deal of honour  : but,  tor my part,  I should not
like it;  because to be always obliged to go to a person,
whether one was in the humour or not,  and to get up in a
morning,  if one was never so sleepy I — dear ! it must be
a mighty hurry-skurry lite  ! you don’t look at all fit for
it,  to judge by appearances,  tor all its great honour,  and
all that.”

Is not this a fit bishop’s wife?  is not here primitive
candour and veracity?  I laughed most heartily, — and we
have now commenced acquaintance for these occasional
meetings.

If this honest dame does not think me fit for this part
of my business,  there is another person,  Madlle.  Mont-
mollin,  who,  with equal simplicity,  expresses her idea of
my unfitness for another part. — “ How you bear it,”  she
cries,  “living with Mrs.  Schwellenberg  ! — 1 like it better
living in prison  ! — ’pon m'honneur,  I prefer it bread and
vvater;  I think her so cross never was.  If I you,  I won’t
bear it — poor Miss Burney! — I so sorry  ! — ’pon m’hon-
neur,  I think to you oftens  ! — you so contined,  you won’t
have no pleasures 1 — ”

Miss Gomni,  less plaintive,  but more solemn,  declared
the other day,  “ I am sure you must go to heaven for
livincT this life  ! ” — So,  at least,  you see,  though in a court,
I am not an object of envy.

Towards the end of the month.  Colonel Wellbred

1789]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

81

came into uaiting,  to my never-failing satisfaction.  Yet
I was sorry to lose Major Garth,  who seems a man of
real worth,  religions principles,  and unatlected honour,
with a strong share of wit and a great deal of litera-
ture.

The Bishop of Salisbury came for the Christmas ser-
mon, and spent some days here.  Bishop Hurd had not
health for coming,  which I lament sinceielv.  I made
much acquaintance with the Bishop of Salisbury ; and,  as
Mrs.  Scliwellenberg passed the holidays in town,  we
were altogether very cheerful and comfortable.  The
Major is kept by the King’s invitation,  and always at
Windsor.

Madame La Fite told me she liked e.xtremmelee dat
Collonel respectable Major Preece.

Poor Lady Caroline Waldegrave was taken very dan-
gerously ill at this time ; and as her sister was absent,  I
devoted to her every moment in my power.  Sir Lucas
l^epys Avas sent for in the middle of the night to her.
'^1 he extreme danger from inflammation soon gave way
to his prescriptions;  but pain and illness were not of
such rapid flight.

How I pitied poor Lady Elizabeth  ! She had but just
lost her eldest brother.  Lord Waldegrave,  and was only
gone on a melancholy visit to his beautiful widow,  who
was one of the House of Waldegrave Graces,  married to
her first cousin.

Sir Lucas wrote to Captain Waldegrave,  the only sur-
viving brother,  who came instantly.

The Queen committed to me the preparing Lady
Caroline to see him.  I was so much head nurse,  that I
had every opportunity to do it gently,  and it was very
essential not to cause her any emotion,  even of joy.  She

VOL.  V.

G

82

DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.

[Part II.

is of so placid a nature,  that the task was not difficult,
though I devised means to save all risks,  which some time
or other may divert you.  Captain aldegrave is a gentle
and interesting young man,  and tenderly affectionate to
his sisters.’

* * * *

PART III.
1790.

CONTENTS.

Home Events — An odd Marriage Ceremony— The Bishop of
Salisbury— A Bridal Visit— Domestic Event— Mr.  Alison— The

Duchess de Biron — Recommencement of Hastings’s Trial

Edmund Burke  — Impromptu by Hastings on Mr.  Grey’s
Speech— Newspaper Gossip— Lords Chesterfield,  Bulkley,  and
Fortescue— Ill-breeding  — A Literary Party— Jacob Bryant—
Scene in the Queen’s Dressing-room— Court Etiquette — Gar-
rick—Mrs.  Piozzi— Easter Party at  'Windsor— Jacob Bryant—
A Patriot King— Reading to the Queen— Mrs.  Piozzi’s Travels
—Memoirs of Cardinal Wolsey— Colonel Manners— A Senator
—Mr.  Pitt’s Tax on Bachelors— A Day at Hastings’s Trial—
Windham and Burke— Sturm’s Meditations— Interview with
Mrs.  Piozzi— Bruce’s, Travels— Madame Benda— Mr.  Twining
—Lady Corke— Lord Valletort— An English Sailor— A Day n't
Hastings s Trial — Speeches of Burke and Windham — Mrs.
Crewe— Lady Mary Duncan— Reading  ‘ The Rivals  ’—Lady
Harcourl— Lady Juliana Penn— Hastings’s Trial— Speech of
his Counsel— Conversation with Windham— Ilis Skill in Greek
His Remarks on Burke — Private and Personal Character of
Hastings-Sir Joshua Reynolds  — His Loss of Sight— The
Duchess de Biron  — Mesdames de Boufflers— Project of Miss
Burney’s Retirement from Court— The Duchess of Dorset—
l\Ir.  Cambridge.

G

O

84

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Paet III.

PART III.

1790.

January. — Mrs.  Smelt was now most dangerously ill,
and her excellent husband wretched in the extreme  : and
this unhap})v circumstance was the leading interest and
occupation of this period.

1 saw my dear and good IMrs.  Ord by every opportu-
nity; indeed,  I made no other visit out of my famdy,  nor
received any other visitor at home.

At Chelsea I saw my dearest father from the time we
settled in town once a-week,  that is,  twice in the month  !
I met there also Pacchierotti,  to my great delight ; and
he sang so liberally and so enchantingly,  that,  just during
that time,  I knew not an ill in the world  !

My Esterina too I visited twice  ! were she but as fat as
slie is dear  ! as stout as she is good  ! — far enough is she
from it ! — yet her sweet spirits keep their native gaiety,  at
least their native propensity;  for they re-illume through all
her thinness and sufferings,  and bring her out,  from time
to time,  such as she was meant to be.  Dearest Esther,  it
saddened me within to see her! — God restore and pre-
serve her  !

Mr.  Eairly was married the 6th. — I must wish happi-
ness to smile on that day,  and all its anniversaries ; it
gave a happiness to me unequalled,  for it was the birth-
dar of my Susanna 1

One evening,  about this time,  ^Ir.  Fisher,  now'  Doctor,
drank tea with us at Windsor,  and gave me an account of
Mr.  Fairly ’s marriage that much amazed me.  He had

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.

85

1790]

been called upon to perform the ceremony.  It was by
special licence,  and at the house of Sir R F .

So religious,  so strict in all ceremonies,  even,  of re-
ligion, as he always appeared,  his marrying out of a
church was to me very unexpected.  Dr.  bisher was him-
self surprised,  when called upon,  and said he supposed it
must be to please the lady.

Nothinji,  he owned,  could be less formal or solemn
than the whole.  Lady C.,  Mrs.  and Miss S.,  and her
father and brother and sister,  were present,  dhey all
dined together at the usual hour,  and then the ladies,  as
usual,  retired.  Some time after,  the clerk was sent for,
and tlien,  with the gentlemen,  joined the ladies,  who were
in the drawing-room,  seated on sofas,  just as at any other
time.  Dr.  Fisher says he is not sure they were working,
but the air of common employment was such,  that he
rather thinks it,  and everything of that sort was spread
about as on any common day — workboxes,  netting-
cases,  &c.  &c.  !

Mr.  Fairly then asked Dr.  Fisher what they were to
do?  He answered,  he could not tell ; lor he had never
married anybody in a room before.

L'pon this,  they agreed to move a table to the upper
end of the room,  the ladies still sitting quietly,  and then
put on it candles and a prayer-book.  Dr.  Fisher says he
hopes it was not a card-table,  and rather believes it was
only a Pembroke work-table.

d’he lady and Sir R.  then came forward,  and Dr.
Fisher read the service.

So this,  methinks,  seems the way to make all things
easy  !

Yet — with so little solemnity — without even a room
prepared and empty — to go through a business of such
portentous seriousness ! — ^’Tis truly amazing from a man

86

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

who seemed to delight so much in religious regulations
and observances.  Dr.  Fisher himself was dissatisfied,
and wondered at his compliance,  though he attributed the
plan to the lady.

The bride behaved extremely well,  he said,  and was all
smile and complacency.  He had never seen her to such
advantage,  or in such soft looks,  before ; and perfectly
serene,  though her sister was so much moved as to go
into hysterics.

Afterwards,  at seven o’clock,  the bride and bridegroom
set off for a friend’s house in Hertfordshire by themselves,
attended by servants with white favours.  The rest of the
party,  father,  sister,  and priest included,  went to the play,
which happened to be Benedict.

I shall say nothing of the Queen’s birthday,  but that I
had a most beautiful trimming worked me for it by Miss
Cambridge,  who half fatigued herself to death,  for the
kind pleasure that I should have my decorations from her
hands.

If in some points my lot has been unenviable,  what a
constant solace,  what sweet and soft amends,  do I find
and feel in the almost unexampled union of kindness and
excellence in my chosen friends  !

The day after the birthday produced a curious scene.
To soften off,  by the air,  a violent headache,  I determined
upon walking to Chelsea to see my dear father.  I knew
I should thus avoid numerous visiters of the household,
who might pay their devoirs to Mrs.  Schwellenberg.

I missed my errand,  and speedily returned,  and found
many cards from bedchamber-women and maids of
honour;  and,  while still reading them,  I was honoured
with a call from the Bishop of Salisbury  ; and in two
minutes my father came himself.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

87

1790]

A pleasant conveisation was commencing,  when Co-
lumb opened the door,  and said,  “ Colonel Fairly begs
leave to ask you how you do.”

He iiad been married but a week before he came into
the midst of all the Court bustle,  which he had regularly
attended ever since !

It was a good while before the door opened again  ; and
I heard a buzz of voices in the passage : but when it w’as
thrown open,  there appeared — the bride herself! — and
alone !

She looked quite brilliant in smiles and spirits.  I never
saw a countenance so enlivened.  I really believe she has
long cherished a passionate regard for Mr.  1‘ airly,  and
brightens now from its prosperity.

1 received her with all the attention in my power,  im
mediately wishing her joy  : she accepted it with a thou-
sand dimples,  and I seated her on the sofa,  and myself by
her side.

Nobody followed;  and I left the Bishop to my father,
while we entered into conversation,  upon the birthday,
her new situation in being e.\empt from its fatigues,  and
other matters of the time being.

I apologised to Mrs.  Fairly for my inability to return
the honour of her visit,  but readily undertook to inform
Her Majesty of her inquiries,  which she earnestly begged
from me.

* * ^

February. — I shall take the liberty to give this month
in loose scraps of anecdotes,  and have done with it.

The safety of my beautiful friend,  Mrs. , I nmst

fust mention,  as it was the most important circumstance
of this period to my mind.  Delighted with a little child,
sli3 wrote me word she could now forget every sorrow,  if
her innocent darling nrght be spared to her.

88

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

My dearest Charlotte also spent this time in town,
and was with me,  as usual,  whenever I could make
opportunity for the happiness of her dear and innocent
society.

The loss of the excellent Mrs.  Smelt,  and all its grief
and distress,  you were informed of at the time.  Her
truly afflicted mate is quite lost without her.  Ilis daugh-
ters behave like angels.  JMrs.  Goulton came in the ill-
ness, and has never left him since his deprivation,  and
means never to part from him more,  except to Mrs.
Cholmley.

I have been introduced to this lady,  and m a melan-
choly correspondence with her upon tins subject,  she
seems very worthy her origin ; which,  from me,  is very
high praise.

I received a good deal of pleasure,  at this time,  from a
letter sent me by  ]Mrs.  Alison,  formerly my old friend
Miss Gregory.  She is married,  and very happy,  and has
four children.  Mr.  Alison lives wholly in Scotland  ; but
she took the opportunity of his having just published a
metaphysical disquisition on Taste,  to renew our long-
dropped acquaintance,  by sending me the work.  I dread
attacking metaphysics,  but I have thanked her cordially
for her kind remembrance.

I had much more difficulty from another call to an old
connection,  Mrs.  North  ; she wrote me quite a warmly-
affectionate regret of losing all sight of me,  but an earnest
invitation,  in the Bishop’s name as well as her own,  to
come one day to meet la Duchesse de Biron and the
French noblesse now in England.

I should reallv have liked it,  as I hear nothing but
commendation of that Duchesse,  and have had already
two or three propositions for meeting her  ; but it was not
approved,  and therefore I was fain to decline it.  I took

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

89

wliat precaution I could to avoid giving offence,  but I
have lieard no more from Mrs.  North.

Tuesday,  February 16th. — Mr.  Hastings’s trial
re-commenced;  and Her Majesty graciously presented
me with tickets for Mr.  Francis,  Cliarlotte,  and myself.
She acknowledged a very great curiosity to know whether
my old friends amongst the managers would renew their
intercourse with a Court friend,  or include me in the dis-
taste conceived against herself,  and drop their visits.  I
had not once been to the trial the preceding year,  nor
seen any of the set since the King’s illness.

AVe were three hours before they entered,  all spent in
a harmony of converse and communication I never for
three hours following can have elsewhere  : no summons
impending — no fear of accidental delay drawing oft‘ atten-
tion to official solicitude.

At the stated time they entered in the usual form,  Mr.
Burke first.  I felt so grieved a resentment of his late
conduct,  that I was glad to turn away from his coun-
tenance. 1 looked elsewhere during the whole procession,
and their subsequent arrangement,  that I might leave
totally to themselves and their consciences whether to
notice a friend from Court or not.  Their consciences
said not.  No one came  ; I only heard through Charlotte
that Mr.  AVindham was of the set.

^Ir.  Anstruther spoke,  and all others took gentle naps  !
I don’t believe he found it out.

AA’hen all was concluded,  I saw one of them ascending
towards our seats:  and presently heard the voice of i\Ir.
Burke.

I wished myself many miles off!  ’tis so painful to see
with utter disapprobation those faces we have met with
joy and pleasure  ! He came to speak to some relations of
Mr.  Anstruther ; was next them,  and,  when recovered

90

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

from my first repugnance,  I thonght it better to turn
round,  not to seem leading the way myself to any breach.
I met his eyes immediately,  and curtsied.  He only said,
“O!  is it you?”  then asked how I did,  said sotnerhing
in praise of Mr.  Anstruther,  partly to his friends and
partly to me — heard from me no reply — and hurried
away,  coldly,  and with a look dissatisfied and uncordial.

I was much concerned  • and we came away soon
after.

Here is an impromptu,  said to have been written by
hlr.  Hastings during Mr.  Grey’s speech,  which was a
panegyric on Mr.  Philip Francis : —

“ It hurts me not,  that Grey,  as Burke’s assessor.
Proclaims me Tyrant,  Robber,  and Oppressor,
Tho’  for abuse alone meant :

For when be call’d himself the bosom friend.
The Friend of Philip Francis, — I contend
He made me full atonement.”

I was called upon,  on my return,  to relate the day’s
business.  Heavy and lame was the relation ; but their

JMajesties were curious,  and nothing better suited truth.

^ ^ ^

Major Price and Colonel Wellbred continued regu-
larly of our Windsor parties,  and their society is most
amiable and pleasing.

The Colonel told me he had several of Smith’s draw-
ings, and expressed a wish to show me the collection,  as
well as the collections of his brother,  if I would jnake a
party of my friends,  and bring them to a little breakfast
at his house,  at any day or hour that would suit me.

I have heard there is much worth seeing in his and
his brother’s repository  ; and I should accept his obliging
proposal with great pleasure if I had opportunity.  I

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

91

1790]

think I should not long hesitate as to the party of friends
I should hope would accompany me.  He has repeated
the request so earnestly and so politely,  that I have half
promised to make the attempt.

Another time Mr.  Thomas Willis was of the set.  Mrs.
Schwellenbers did not leave London all the month.  He
startled me a little by a hint of some newspaper para-
graph concerning me  : he stayed on,  when all were gone
but Miss Planta,  and I then demanded an explanation.

It was a peremptory promise,  he said,  of a new book.

“O yes,”  cried Miss Planta;  “1 have heard of it
some time  : and Mr.  Turbulent says we shall all be in
it.”

“ Why — I have been thinking of that,”  said Mr.  Willis,
in a dry way pecxdiar to himself,  “ and shaking my poor
head and shoulders,  to feel how 1 couid keep them steady
in case of an assault.  And,  indeed,  this thought,  all
along,  has made me,  as you may have observed,  rather
cautious and circumspect,  and very civil.  I hope it has
not been thrown away.”

Well,  anybody’s welcome to me and my character,”
cried Miss Planta ; and that ’s always the answer I make
them when they tell me of it.”

“Upon my word,”  said Mr.  Whllis,  affecting great
solemnity,  “ I cannot say  (juite so much : on the contrary,
I never go out of the room but I think to myself.  How
have I behaved to-nijrht?  Will that do?  Will t’ other
tell well?  No,  no  ; not well! — not well at all! — all in
the wrong there.  But,  hang it ! — never mind  ! — she ’s
very — humane — she won’t be liard upon a trifle  ! ”

I told him I was very glad he had such a trust.

I could learn nothing more of the paragraph ; but it
served for ample play to his dry humour the next even-
ing, when our tea-party was suddenly enlarged by the

92 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IT I.

entrance of the Lords Chesterfield^  Bulkley,  and For-
tescue.

Lord Chesterfield brought in the two latter without any
ceremony,  and never introduced nor named them,  but
chatted on with them apart,  as if they w^ere in a room to
themselves  : and Colonel Wellbred,  to whom all gentle-
men here belong,  was out of the room in search of a
curious snuff-box that he had promised to show to us.
]\Iajor Price,  who by great chance was seated next me,
jumped up as if so many wild beasts had entered,  and
escaped to the other side of the room,  and  ]NIr.  illis was
only a sharp looker-on.

This was awkward enough for a thing so immaterial,
as I could not even ask them to have any tea,  from un-
certainty how to address them  ; and I believe they were
entirely ignorant whither Lord Chesterfield was bringing
them,  as they came in only to wait for a Royal summons.

Flow would that quintessence of high ton,  the late
Lord Chesterfield,  blush to behold his successor ! ^^ho,
with much share of humour,  and of good humour also,
has as little good breeding as any man I ever met with.

Take an instance. — Lord Bulkley,  who is a handsome
man,  is immensely tall ; the Major,  who is middle-sized,
was standing by his chair,  in close conference with him.
— ‘‘Why,  Bulkley,”  cried Lord Chesterfield,  “you are
just the height sitting that Price is standing.

Disconcerted a little,  they slightly laughed ; but Lord
Bulkley rose,  and they walked oil'  to a greater distance.

Lord Chesterfield,  looking after them,  exclaimed,
“What a walking steeple he is! — why,  Bulkley,  you
ought to cut oft your legs to be on a level with society  !”

Colonel Wellbred,  ever elegant in all attentions,  and
uniform in showing them,  no sooner returned,  and per-
ceived that Lord Chesterfield had formed a separate party

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

93

■with his friends,  than he stationed himself at the tea-table,
dividing with the exactest propriety his time and conver-
sation between the two sets.

When they were all summoned away,  except Mr.
Willis,  who has never that honour but in private,  he lifted
up his hands and eyes,  and called out,  “ I shall pity
those men when the book comes out ! — I would not be in
their skins  !”

I understood him perfectly, — and answered,  truly,  that
I was never affronted more than a minute with those by

whom I could never longer be pleased.

* * *

]\Iy dearest readers know that this month I went to
meet my otcn asseinhly,  as it is honourably called,  at Lady
Rothes’ : it was smaller than at Mrs.  Ord’s,  but very
pleasant, — Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.  and Miss
Ord,  the Attorney-General,  Sir Archibald Alacdonald,
his Lady Louisa,  Mr.  Pepys,  Mrs.  Duller,  Lord Leslie,
and my dearest father.

All our talk w'as of France,  the illustrious fugitives
now here,  and poor Sir Joshua Reynolds’s academic
troubles.

Monday,  March 1st. — This morning we went to
Windsor.  Mr.  De Luc was already there;  but Miss
Planta and myself had our former esquire,  Mr.  Turbu-
lent, for the first time these two years.

Her Majesty graciously read to Mr.  De Luc and me
a part of a speech of Mr.  Burke upon the revolution in
France,  and then she lent it me to finish.  It is truly
beautiful,  alike in nobleness of sentiment and animation
of language.  How happy does it make me to see this
old favourite once more on the side of right and reason !
Do I call this side so,  only because it is my own  ?

I had no time,  however,  for going on with old annals ;

94

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

I had a commission from the Queen which demanded all
ray leisure.

Tuesday,  March 2nd. — To-day I invited Mr.  Bry-
ant to dinner,  and had much cause to be glad of his
coming,  from the pleasantry and information he afforded
me.  Mr.  De Luc and Mr.  Turbulent met him,  and we had
philosophy at play with good-humour all the afternoon.

At tea.  Lords Chesterfield and Bulkley joined us with
the equerries.  IVIr.  Thomas Willis would have been
somewhat gratified by their better behaviour.  Lord
Bulkley took a chair next mine,  and talked just enough
to show he was a very loyal subject,  and no more.

But I w’as very sorry to hear from  ^lajor Price that
tliis was his last Windsor excursion this year.  “ I have
stayed,”  he told me,  till all my workmen in the country
are at sixes and sevens,  and in want of my directions ;
and till I have hardly a sixpence in my pocket!  I am
always at the command of their Majesties,  but — I am only
a younger brother,  and cannot afford to live away from
my own little cottage.”

’Tis amazing something is not done for this most de
serving and faithful adherent,  who only relinquished his
post from absolute inability to maintain it.

* * * =is  *

This month lost us Colonel Wellbred,  whose waiting
never finishes but to my regret.  I had much confidential
talk wdth him the last evening of his residence,  in which
he opened to me the whole of his situation,  both with re-
spect to his place and his family,  as far as they are political.
He gave me much concern for him in his statement,  and
the more,  because all he said confirmed my best opinion
of his honour and delicacy.  He has the misfortune to
have two brothers who never meet — solely from dissension
in politics.  He loves them both,  and with both keeps

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

95

well ; but while he has a place that devotes a fourth of
the year to the King,  his residence for the rest of it is with
the brother who is in opposition to Government.  Not
small must be the difficulties of such circumstances,  and
his preferment is probably checked by this determined
fraternal amity ; though his moderation and uprightness
secure him the esteem,  and force the good word,  of both
parties,  as well as of both brothers.

]\Iuch injustice,  how^ever,  has 1 believe accrued to him
from this mild conduct,  which is not calculated for ad-
vantage in a station that demands decisive vigour,  though
in private or retired life it makes the happiness and peace
of all around.  He grew so engaged,  and I was so much
interested for him,  in the coui'se of this explication,  that,
when called away to cards,  he said he would not make
me his final bow,  but see me again the next morning.  I
set olf,  however,  by sudden commands,  so much earlier
than usual,  that I saw him no more ; nor probably may
meet him again till his waiting next year.

In one of our Windsor excursions at this time,  while I
was in Her Majesty’s dressing-room,  with only Mr.
De Luc present,  she suddenly said,  “Prepare yourself.
Miss Burney,  with all your spirits,  for to-night you must
be reader.”

She then added that she recollected what she had
been told by my honoured jMrs.  Delany,  of my reading
Shakspeare to her,  and was desirous that I should read
a play to herself and the Princesses ; and she had lately
heard,  from INIrs.  Schwellenberg,  “ nobody could do it
better,  when I would.”

I assured Her Majesty it was rather vchen I could,  as
any reading Mrs.  Schwellenberg had heard must wholly
have been better or worse according to my spirits,  as she
had justly seemed to suggest."

96

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

The moment coffee was over the Princess Elizabeth
came forme.  I found Her Majesty knotting, the Princess
Royal drawing,  Princess Augusta spinning,  and Lady
Courtown I believe in the same employment,  but I saw
none of them perfectly Avell.

“ Come,  Miss Burney,”  cried the Queen,  “ how are
your spirits  ? — How is your voice  ?”

“ She says,  ma’am,”  cried the kind Princess Elizabeth,

she shall do her best !”

This had been said in attending Her Royal Highness
back.  I could only confirm it,  and that cheerfulhj, —
to hide fearfully.

I had not the advantage of choosing my play,  nor do
I know what would have been my decision had it fallen
to my lot.  Her Majesty had just begun Colman’s works,
and  ‘Polly Iloneycomb’  was to open my campaign.

“I think,”  cried the Queen most graciously,  “Miss
Burney will read the better for drawing a chair and sitting
down.”

“ O yes,  mamma  ! I dare say so  !”  cried Princess Au-
gusta and Princess Elizabeth,  both in a moment.

The Queen then told me to draw my chair close to her
side.  I made no scruples.  Heaven knows I needed not
the addition of standing  ! but most glad I felt in being
placed thus near,  as it saved a constant painful effort of
loud reading.

“ Lady Courtown,”  cried the Queen,  “ you had better
draw nearer,  for IMiss Burney has the misfortune of
reading rather low at first.”

Nothing could be more amiable than this opening.
Accordingly,  1 did,  as I had promised,  my best;  and,  in-
different as that was,  it would rather have surprised you,
all things considered,  that it was not yet worse.  But I
exerted all the courage I possess,  and,  having often read

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

97

to the Queen,  I felt how much it behoved me not to let
her surmise I had any greater awe to surmount.

It is but a vulgar performance;  and I was obliged to
omit,  as well as I could at sight,  several circumstances
very unpleasant for reading,  and ill enough fitted for such
hearers.

It went off pretty flat.  Nobody is to comment,  nobody
is to interrupt ; and even between one act and another
not a moment’s pause is expected to be made.

I had been already informed of this etiquette by Mr.
Turbulent and Miss Planta ; nevertheless,  it is not only
oppressive to the reader,  but loses to the hearers so much
spirit and satisfaction,  that I determined to endeavour,
should I again be called upon,  to introduce a little break
into this tiresome and unnatural profundity of respectful
solemnity.  My own embarrassment,  however,  made it
agree with me for the present uncommonly well.

Lady Courtown never uttered one single word the
whole time  ; yet is she one of the most loquacious of
our establishment.  But such is the settled etiquette.

The Queen has a taste for conversation,  and the Prin-
cesses a good-humoured love for it,  that doubles the
regret of such an annihilation of all nature and all plea-
santry. But what will not prejudice and education in-
culcate? They have been brought up to annex silence
to respect and decorum  : to talk,  therefore,  unbid,  or to
differ from any given opinion even when called upon,  are
regarded as high improprieties,  if not presumptions.

They none of them do justice to their own minds,
while they enforce this subjection upon the minds of
others.  I had not experienced it before  ; for when read-
ing alone with the Queen,  or listening to her reading to
me,  I have always frankly spoken almost whatever has
occurred to me.  But there I had no other examples

VOL.  V.  H

98

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

before me,  and therefore I might inoffensively be guided
by myself ; and Her Majesty’s continuance of the same
honour has shown no disapprobation of my proceeding.
But here it was not easy to make any decision for myself :
to have done what Lady Courtowm forbore doing would
have been undoubtedly a liberty.

So we all behaved alike;  and easily can I now con-
ceive the disappointment and mortification of poor Mr.
Garrick when he read  ‘ Lethe’  to a Royal audience.
Its tameness must have tamed even him,  and I doubt not
he never acquitted himself so ill.

The next evening I had the same summons  ; but  ‘The
English Merchant’  was the play,  which did far better.
It is an elegant and serious piece,  which I read with far
greater ease,  and into which they all entered with far
greater interest.

The Princess Royal was so gracious when the Queen
left the room,  upon our next coming to town,  to pay me
very kind compliments upon my own part of the enter-
tainment, though her brother the Duke of Clarence hap-
pened to be present.  And the two other Princesses were
full of the characters of the comedy,  and called upon me
to say which were my favourites,  while they told me their
own,  at all our subsequent meetings for some time.

This is all I have been able to recollect of March in
which my dearest readers might not themselves be writers.
Chiefly I rejoice they witnessed the long-wished,  long-
dreaded interview with my formerly most dearly loved
Mrs.  Thrale — not writing it saves me much pang.

April. — I have involuntarily let this month creep
along unrecorded till this Tuesday the 20th.  I could not
muster courage for a journal ; but now%  to avoid any
future long arrears,  I determine to put down its poor
shallow memorials.

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

99

On Easter Sunday,  the 4th of April,  when I left my
beloved Susan at St.  James’s,  I left with her all spirit for
any voluntary employment,  and it occurred to me I could
best while away the leisure allowed me by returning to
I my long-forgotten tragedy.  This I have done,  in those
I moments as yet given to my Journal,  and it is well I had
so sad a resource,  since any merrier I must have aimed
at in vain.

It was a year and four months since I had looked at or
thought of it.  I found nothing but unconnected speeches,
and hints,  and ideas,  though enough in quantity,  perhaps,
for a whole play.  I have now begun planning and me-
thodising, and have written three or four regular scenes.
I mention all these particulars of my progress,  in answer
to certain queries in the comments of my Susan and
Fredy,  both of old date.

Well  (for that is my hack,  as however”  is mv dear
Susanna’s),  we set oflP rather late for Windsor, — Mr.
De Luc,  Miss Planta,  and myself;  Mrs.  Schwellenberg
stayed in town.

The Easter party for the Queen consisted of Ladies
Harcourt and Courtown ; for the Princesses,  Ladies
Elizabeth Waldegrave and Mary Howe;  and for the
King,  Lord Courtown,  General Grenville,  Colonels Golds-
worthy and Manners,  General Bude,  and Mr.  Thomas
Willis.  General and Mrs.  Harcourt were at St.  Leo-
nard’s, and came occasionally,  and Lord and Lady
Chesterfield were at their adjoining villa,  and were in-
vited every evening.  Dr.  John Willis also came for one
day.

I invited my old beau,  as Her Majesty calls Mr.
Bryant,  to dinner,  and he made me my best day out of
the ten days of our Windsor sojourn.  He has insisted
upon lending me some more books,  all concerning the

795795 A

100

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

most distant parts of the earth,  or on subjects the most
abstruse.  His singular simplicity in constantly conceiv-
ing that,  because to him such books alone are new,  they
must have the same recommendation to me,  is extremely
amusing ; and though I do all that is possible to clear up
the distinction,  he never remembers it.

The King,  for which I was very sorry,  did not come
into the room.  He made it but one visit,  indeed,  during
this recess.  He then conversed almost wholly with
General Grenville upon the affairs of France  ; and in a
manner so unaffected,  open,  and manly,  so highly su-
perior to all despotic principles,  even while most con-
demning the unlicensed fury of the Parisian mob,  that I
wished all the nations of the world to have heard him,
that they might have known the real existence of a pa-
triot King.

Another reading took place,  and much more comfort-
ably; it was to the Queen and Princesses,  without any
lady-in-waiting.  The Queen,  as before,  condescended to
order me to sit close to her side  ; and as I had no model
before me,  I scrupled much less to follow the bent of my
own ideas by small occasional comments.  And these
were of use both to body and mind  ; they rested the
lungs from one invariable exertion,  as much as they saved
the mind from one strain of attention.

Our play was  ‘ The Man of Business,’  a very good
comedy,  but too local for long life.  And another of
Colman’s which I read afterwards has the same defect.
Half the follies and peculiarities it satirises are wholly
at an end and forgotten.  Humour springing from mere
dress,  or habits,  or phraseology,  is quickly obsolete ;
when it sinks deeper,  and dives into character,  it may
live  /or ever.

To myself I read Mrs.  Piozzi’s  ‘ Travels.’  The

101

1790]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

‘ Travels  ’ are just like herself,  abounding in sallies of
genius.

The  " Memoirs of Cardinal Wolsey,’  with which 1
have been singularly entertained,  from their unconscious
sketches of life and manners in the reign of Henry VIIL,
I obtained licence,  at last,  to return,  though they were
still unperused.  But the mention I chanced to make of
them one morning to Lady Harcourt,  who professes a
particular taste for ancient biography,  made her request
to read them so earnestly,  that I wrote a little note to Mr.
Seward of apology,  and lent them.  He has sent me a
most gallant answer,  desiring me to look upon them as
my own,  either for myself or my friends,  from this time
forward.  I shall by no means,  however,  accept this offer,
though I am much obliged by it.

I took down with me from town a ' Commentary on
the Lord’s Prayer,’  which is just published by Dr.  Lort,
who has had the good-humour to send me a copy from
the author.  1 am always much gratified when I find
myself remembered by old acquaintance after long ab-
sence. It has not much information,  but it is pious and
perfectly good.

Another book fell into my possession through Mrs.
De Luc ; finding 1 had never — strange to tell ! — read
Goldsmith’s Poems,  she sent me a little neat pocket
volume,  which I accept from that valuable friend,  as just
the keep-sake,  I told her,  that could give me only plea-
sure from her hands.

I dedicated my Wednesday evening to a very comfort-
able visit to our dear James,  whose very good and deserv-
ing wife,  and fine little fat children,  with our Esther and
her fair Marianne and Fanny,  all cordially conspired to
make me happy.  We read a good deal of Captain Bligh’s
interesting narrative,  every word of which James has

DIARY AND LETTERS

102

[Part III.

taken as much to heart as if it were his own produc-
tion.

I go on,  occasionally,  with my tragedy.  It does not
much enliven,  but it soothes me.

Windsor.

Friday,  April 23rd. — The anniversary of the Thanks-
giving Day,  a day in which my gratitude was heightened
by making my acknowledgments for its blessing with
my Susan by my side,

* # * *

I shall add nothing at present to my Journal but the
summary of a conversation I have had with Colonel
Manners,  who,  at our last excursion,  was here without
any other gentleman.

Knowing he likes to be considered as a senator,  I
thought the best subject for our discussion would be the
House of Commons ; I therefore made sundry political
inquiries,  so foreign to my usual mode,  that you would
not a little have smiled to have heard them.

1 had been informed he had once made an attempt to
speak,  during the Regency business,  last winter;  I
begged to know how the matter stood,  and he made a
most frank display of its whole circumstances.

“ Why,  they were speaking away,”  he cried,  “ upon the
Regency,  and so, — and they were saying the King could
not reign,  and recover;  and Burke was making some of
his eloquence,  and talking;  and,  says he,  ‘hurled from
his throne,’ — and so I put out my finger in this manner,
as if 1 was in a great passion,  for I felt myself very red,
and I was in a monstrous passion I suppose,  but I was
only going to say  ‘ Hear ! Hear!’  but I happened to lean
one hand down upon my knee,  in this way,  just as Mr.
Pitt does when he wants to speak ; and I stooped for-
ward, just as if 1 was going to rise up and begin  ; but

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,

103

1790]

just then I caught Mr.  Pitt’s eye^  looking at me so piti-
fully; he thought I was going to speaks,  and he was
frightened to death,  for he thought — for the thing was
he got up himself,  and he said over all I wanted to say ;
and the thing is,  he almost always does ; for just as I
have something particular to say,  Mr.  Pitt begins,  and
goes through it all,  so that he don’t leave anything more
to be said about it ; and so I suppose,  as he looked at
me so pitifully,  he thought I should say it first,  or else
that I should get into some scrape,  because I was so
warm and looking so red.”

Any comment would disgrace this;  I will therefore
only tell you his opinion,  in his own words,  of one of our
late taxes.

“ There’s only one tax,  ma’am,  that ever I voted for
against my conscience,  for I’ve always been very parti-
cular about that ; but that is the bachelclor s tax,  and
that I hold to be very unconstitutional,  and I am very
sorry I voted for it,  because it’s very unfair;  for how can
a man help being a bachelclor,  if nobody will have him?
and besides,  it’s not any fault to be taxed for,  because
we did not make ourselves bacheldors,  for we were made
so by God,  for nobody was born married,  and so I think
it’s a very unconstitutional tax.”

Tuesday,  April 27th. — I had the happiness of my
dearest Fredy’s society in Westminster Hall — if happi-
ness and that place may be named together.

The day was mixed ; Evidence and Mr.  Anstruther
weighing it down,  and Mr.  Burke speaking from time to
time,  and lighting it up.  O,  were his purpose worthy his
talents,  what an effect would his oratory produce ! I
always hear him with so much concern,  I can scarce
rejoice even in being kept awake by him.

The day was nearly passed,  and I was eating a biscuit

104

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

to prevent an absolute doze while Mr.  Anstruther was
talking,  when,  raising myself from a listening bend,  I
turned to the left,  and perceived Mr.  Windham,  who had
quietly placed himself by my side without speaking.

My surprise was so great,  and so totally had I given
up all idea of renewing our conferences,  that I could scarce
refrain expressing it.

Probably it was visible enough,  for he said,  as if apo-
logising for coming up,  that so to do was the only regale
their toils allowed them.

He then regretted that it was a stupid day,  and,  with
all his old civility about me and my time,  declared he was
always sorry to see me there when nothing worth attention
was going forw^ard.

This soon brought us round to our former intimacy of
converse ; and,  the moment I was able,  1 ventured at
my usual inquiry about liis own speaking,  and if it would
soon take place.

“ No,”  he answered,  with a look of great pleasure,  “I
shall now not speak at all. — I have cleared myself from
that task,  and never with such satisfaction did I get rid of
any!”

Amazed,  yet internally glad,  I hazarded some further
inquiry into the reason of this change of plan.

They were drawing,  he said,  to a conclusion,  and the
particular charge which he had engaged himself to open
was relinquished.  “ I have therefore,”  he cried,  “ w’ashed
my hands of making a speech,  yet satisfied my con-
science, my honour,  my promises,  and my intentions ;
for I have declined undertaking anything new,  and no
claim therefore remains upon me.”

“ Well,”  quoth I,  I am at a loss whether to be glad
or sorry.”

Vie comprehended instantly, — glad foi Mr.  Hastings,  or

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,

105

1790]

sorry for not hearing him.  He laughed,  but said some-
thing a little reproachful,  upon my continued interest for
that gentleman.

I would not pretend it was diminished ; I determined
he should find me as frank as heretofore,  and go,  or
stay,  as his nerves stood the firmness.

You are never,  then”  (I said afterwards),  “to speak
here  ?”

“ Once,”  he answered,  “ I said a few words ”

“ O when?”  I cried  : “ I am very sorry I did not know
it,  and hear you, — as you did speak !”

“O!”  cried he,  laughing,  “I do not fear this flattery
now,  as I shall speak no more !”

“ But what,”  cried I,  “was the occasion that drew you
forth  ?”

“Nothing very material;  but I saw Burke run hard,
and I wished to help him.”

“That as just,”  cried I,  “what 1 should have ex-
pected from you — and just what I have not been able
not to honour,  on some other occasions,  even where I
have most blamed the matter that has drawn forth the
assistance.”

This was going pretty far : — he could not but instantly
feel I meant the Regency discussions.  He neither made
me any answer,  nor turned his head,  even obliquely,  my
way.

I was not sorry,  however.  ’Tis always best to be
sincere.

Finding him quite silent,  to soften matters as well as
I could with honesty,  1 began an eloge of Mr.  Burke,
both warm and true,  as far as regards his wonderful abi-
lities. But he soon distinguished the rigorous precision
with which,  involuntarily,  I praised the powers,  without
adverting to their use.

106

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III,

Suddenly then,  and with a look of extreme keenness,
he turned his eyes upon me,  and exclaimed,  “Yes, — and
he has very highly,  also,  the faculty of being right!”

I would the friendship that dictated this assertion were
as unwarped as it is animated.

I could not help saying,  rather faintly,  “ Has he?”

Not faintly he answered,  “ He has  ! — but not the world
alone,  even his friends,  are apt to misjudge him.  What
he enters upon,  however,  with earnestness,  you will com-
monly find turn out as he represents it.”

His genius,  his mental faculties,  and the natural good-
ness of his heart,  I then praised as warmly as IMr.  Wind-
ham could have praised them himself;  but the subject
ran me aground a second time,  as,  quite undesignedly,
I concluded my panegyric with declaring that I found it
impossible not to admire — nay,  love him — through all his
wrong.

Finding another total silence and averted head,  I
started something more general upon the trial.

His openness then returned,  with all its customary
vivacity,  and he expressed himself extremely irritated
upon various matters which had been carried against the
managers by the judges.

“ But,  Mr.  Windham  !”  exclaimed I ; “ the judges  ! —
is it possible you can enter into such a notion as to sup-
pose Mr.  Hastings capable of bribing them?”

“ O,  for capable,”  cried he,  “ I don’t know  ! — ”

“Well,  leave that word out,  and suppose him even
willing — can you imagine all the jiidges and all the lords
— for they must concur — disposed to be bribed?”

“No;  but I see them all determined to acquit Mr.
Hastings.”

“Determined? — nay,  that indeed is doing him very
little honour.”

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

107

“ O,  lor honour! — if he is acquitted ”

He stopped, — as if that were sufficient.

I ventured to ask why the judges and the lords should
make such a determination.

“ From the general knavery and villany of mankind,”
was his hard answer;  “which always wishes to abet suc-
cessful guilt.”

“Well!”  cried 1,  shaking my head;  “you have not,  I
see,  relinquished your speech from having nothing to say.
But I am glad you have relinquished it,  for I have always
been most afraid of you ; and the reason is,  those who
know how to hold back will not for nothina come for-

O

ward.  There is one down there,  who,  if he knew how
ever to hold back,  w'ould be great indeed!”

He could not deny this,  but would not affirm it.  Poor
Mr.  Burke! — so near to being wholly right,  while yet
wholly wrong!

When Mr.  Burke mounted the rostrum,  Mr.  Windham
stopped short,  saying,  “ I won’t interrupt you  ;”  and,  in
a moment,  glided back to the managers’  box ; where he
stood behind Mr.  Burke,  evidently at hand to assist in
any difficulty.  His affection for him seems to amount to
fondness.  This is not for me to wonder at.  Who was
so captivated as myself by that extraordinary man,  till he
would no longer suffer me to reverence the talents I must
still ever admire  ?

Saturday,  May 1st. — My dear Susanna will remember
Mrs.  Holroyd,  whom we met at Twickenham,  during our
visit there before the Boulogne e.xpedition.  She is now at
Mrs.  De Luc’s,  and she called upon me while I was in
waiting yesterday,  and this morning I returned the com-
pliment. She has lately translated,  from a French ver-
sion, a German w ork of four thick volumes,  by M.  Sturm,

108

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

consisting of Religious Meditations and Observations for
every Day in the Year.  Miss Cambridge had lent me
the first volume,  with which I was much pleased,  as well
as instructed,  though it is a work both too high and too
low for general use,  rising up to philosophers,  and sink-
ing down to children,  alternately.

We talked this a good deal over,  and she was much
gratified in having heard,  from Miss Cambridge,  that I
had mentioned and shown it to my Royal Mistress,  for
whom she has the most profound veneration,  notsvith-
standing her passionate love for her brother.  Lord Sheffield,
who is in the Opposition.  Of him,  too,  and his lady and
children,  I was glad to hear a good account,  for old
acquaintance sake:  though when she hinted at something
of its being renewed,  I was obliged to fly aloof.  The
OppoHition interest is not quite that of our abode  !

In one speech she a good deal surprised me.  She led
me to speak of the Queen,  and expressed herself satis-
fied how high I must stand in her graciousness,  but added,
she knew not if that was desirable,  since  “ the more,”
she said,  “you become attached,  the greater will be your
pain and difficulty in any future plan of quitting her.”

Was it not odd  ? — I made some general answer,  dis-
claiming any such plan  ; she took no notice of it,  but
enlarged with much pity on my extreme confinement.

Sunday,  May 2nd. — This morning,  in my way to
church,  just as I arrived at the iron gate of our court-
yard, a well-known voice called out,  “ Ah,  there’s Miss
Burney !”

I started,  and looked round — and saw — Mrs.  Piozzi !

I hastened up to her;  she met my held-out hand with
both hers  ; Mr.  Piozzi and Cecilia were with her — all
smiling and good-humoured.

“ You are going,”  she cried,  “ to church? — so am 1.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

109

1790]

I must run first to the inn  : I suppose one may sit —
anywhere one pleases  ?”

“ Yes,”  I cried,  “ but you must be quick,  or you will
sit nowhere,  there will be such a throng.”

This was all ; — she hurried on, — so did I.

1 received exceeding great satisfaction in this little and
unexpected meeting.  She had been upon the F errace,
and was going to change her hat ; and haste on both sides
prevented awkwardness on either.

Yet 1 saw she had taken in good part my concluding
hand-presentation at my dear Mr.  Lock’s  : she met me
no more with that jierte of defiance : it was not — nor
can it ever be — with her old cordiality,  but it was with
some degree of pleasure,  and that species of readiness
which evinces a consciousness of meeting with a good
reception.

4;  -1:  =i!  * *

Dr.  Fisher lent me the first volume of Mr.  Bruce.
But I could only find time to look over the Introduction ;
which,  indeed,  in pompous promise of what is to come,
and satisfied boast of w'hat has been performed,  exceeds
whatever yet the most doughty hero has advanced of his
own faicts et gestes.  Your tvvo little men are quite
undone !

This extraordinary w'ight acquainted my father,  not
long since,  that he should take the liberty to order a set
of his Travels to be finely bound up,  and sent to  ‘‘  his
daughter with the Queen because there had appeared,
some years ago,  an ode,  addressed to himself,  which he
attributed to that person,  and felt eager to acknowledge  !

Much surprised,  my father inquired further,  and heard
there was a great compliment to himself,  also,  which in-
duced this suggestion.  My father said that alone was
sufficient to satisfy him it was not his daughter’s.

110

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

He sent the ode to my father.  It is such a one as I
might be proud enough.  Heaven knows,  to own,  in point
of poetry and idea,  and far superior to anything 1 have a
chance to produce in the Apollo line  ; but I am free to
confess — I rather think I should have chosen another
subject!  It is all panegyric;  no Laureate birthday in-
cense breathes higher flattery.

Thursday,  May 6th. — This being the last Pantheon,
I put in my long-intended claim  ; and it was greatly
facilitated by the circumstance of a new singer,  Madame
Benda,  making her first appearance.  She is just arrived
from Germany,  and has been humbly recommended to
the notice of Her Majesty  : it was on this account my
father engaged her to try her powers at the Pantheon  ;
and the Queen was herself interested I should hear her
success.

My dearest father fetched me from the Queen’s house.
Esther and jMarianne kept me places between them.
Marianne never looked so pretty  ; I saw not a face there
I thought equally lovely.  And,  oh,  how Pacchierotti
sung I — HOW  ! — with what exquisite feeling,  what pene-
trating pathos  ! — I could almost have cried the whole
time,  that this one short song was all I should be able
to hear !

For the short time I was empowered to stay,  I was
most fortunate in my rencounters  ; for who should sit
next my dear Esther but Mr.  Twining?  Glad was I to
see him — most glad indeed, — and the more,  as I have
no other chance to have that gratification.  When I told
him this,  he answered,  “ Oh no I — I know that ! — I know
you zve sight ! I look upon you as z shoic, — just as
I do upon the Lincolnshire ox,  or new American bird  !”

I saw very few of my general acquaintance,  for I sat
near the private door to the chairs,  that I might glide

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

Ill

awa)'  without disturbance.  Amongst the few,  however,
I was claimed by Mrs.  Monckton,  a sister-in-law of the
queerly celebrated Miss Monckton,  now Lady Corke,  at
whose house I had formerly the pleasure to meet her.
Indeed,  she visited me in St.  Martin’s-street.  She tvas
a daughter of the unfortunate Lord Pigot,  and is a very
sensible,  agreeable,  and accomplished woman.  We were
too distantly seated for many words;  but all that we
interchanged were in perfect harmony,  since they sung,
in alternate strains,  the praises of Pacchierotti.

The first person who accosted me on my entrance was
Lord Valletort,  who had so regularly attended this
charming concert as instantly to pronounce to me that
this was my first appearance.

Mrs.  John Hunter,  also,  recollected me  ; I had once
met her at an assembly at Mrs.  Thrale’s.  She is a very
fine woman,  and highly accomplished  ; but with rather
too much glare,  both without and wdthin.

Poor Madame Benda pleased neither friend nor foe  :
she has a prodigious voice,  great powers of execution,
but a manner of singing so vehemently boisterous,  that
a boatswain might entreat her to moderate it.

At the beginning of the second act I was obliged to
decamp.  James,  who had just found me out,  was my
esquire.  “ Well,”  he cried,  in our way to the chair,
will there be war with Spain?”

I assured him 1 thought not.

“ So I am afraid  !”  answered the true English tar.
“ However,  if there is,  I should be glad of a trigate of
thirty-tw’o guns.  Now’,  if you ask for it,  don’t say a
frigate,  and get me one of tw'enty-eight !”

Good Heaven  ! — poor innocent James! —

And just as I reached the chair — “ But how shall you

DIARY AND LETTERS

112

[Part III.

feel,”  he cried,  “ when I ask you to desire a guard-ship
for me,  in about two years’  time  ?”

I could make no precise answer to that !

He then added that he intended coming to court !

Very much frightened,  I besought him first to come
and drink tea with me — which he promised.

In my way home,  as I went ruminating upon this
apparently but just,  though really impracticable demand,

I weighed well certain thoughts long revolving,  and of
late nearly bursting forth ; and the result was this —
to try all,  while yet there is time ! Reproach else may
aver,  when too late,  greater courage would have had
(Treater success.  This idea settled my resolutions,  and
they all bent to one point,  risking all risks.

Monday,  May 10th. — This evening,  by appointment,
came our good James and his wife,  and soon afterwards,
to my great pleasure.  Captain Phillips joined us.

I take it,  therefore,  for granted,  he will have told all
that passed in the business way.  I was very anxious
to gather more intelligibly the wishes and requests of
poor James,  and to put a stop to his coming to court
without taking such previous steps as are customary.  I
prevailed,  and promised,  in return,  to make known his
pretensions.

You may believe,  my dear friends,  this promise was
the result of the same wish of eNperiment,  and sense of
claim upon me of my family to make it while I may,
that I have mentioned.  I did — this very evening.  I did it
gaily,  and in relating such anecdotes as were amusingly
characteristic of a sailor’s honest but singular notions of
things : yet I have done it completely ; his wishes and
his claims are now laid open — ^Heaven knows to what
effect ! The court-scheme I have also told  ; and my

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

113

Ko)al Mistress very graciously informed me,  that if pre-
sented by some superior officer there could be no objec-
tion ; but otherwise,  unless he had some promotion,  it
was not quite usual.

Tuesday,  May 11th. — This morning my Royal Mis-
tress had previously arranged for me that I should go to
the trial,  and had given me a ticket for my little Sarah to
accompany me;  and late last night,  I believe after twelve
o clock,  she most graciously gave me another for James.
Just at this time she could not more have gratified me than
by a condescension to my dear brother.  Poor Columb
was sent with the intelligence,  and directions for our
meeting at seven o’clock this morning,  to Norton-street.

Sarah came early;  but Janies was so late we were
obliged to leave word for him to follow us.

He did, — two hours afterwards  ! by way of being our
esquire ; and then told me he knew it would be in good
time,  and so he had stopped to breakfast at Sir Joseph
Banks’s.

I suppose the truth is,  it saved him a fresh puff of
powder for some other day.

We talked over all affairs,  naval and national,  very
comtortably.  The trial is my only place for long dia-
logues !

I gave him a new and earnest charge that he would
not sj)eak home concerning the prosecution to Mr.  Wind-
ham, should he join us.  He made me a less reluctant
promise than heretofore,  for when last with Charlotta at
A}lshani he had frequently visited Mr.  Windham,  and
had several battles at draughts or backgammon with him;
and there is no such good security against giving offence
as seeing ourselves that our opponents are worth pleasing.
Here,  too,  as I told James,  however we might think all the

managers in the wrong,  they were at least open enemies,

VOL.  V.  ,

114

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

and acting a public part,  and therefore they must fight
it out,  as he would do with the Spaniards,  if,  after all
negotiation,  they came to battle.

He allovA^ed this ; and promised to leave him to the
attacks of the little privateer,  without falling foul of him
with a broadside.

Soon after the trial began Mr.  Windham came up to
us,  and after a few minutes’  chat with me addressed him-
self to James about the approaching war.  “Are you
preparing,”  he cried,  “for a campaign  ?”

“ Not such a one,”  cried James,  “as we had last sum-
mer at Aylsham  !”

“ But what officers you are  !”  he cried,  “ you men of
Captain Cook ; you rise upon us in every trial  ! This
Captain Bligh, — what feats,  what wonders he has per-
formed ! What difficulties got through  ! What dangers
defied  ! And with such cool,  manly skill ! ”

They talked the narrative over as far as Mr.  Windham
had in manuscript seen its sketch ; but as I had not read
it,  I could not enter into its detail.

This over,  he took his seat by my elbow,  and renewed one
of his old style of conversations about the trial  ; each of us
firmly maintaining our original ground.  I believe he has
now relinquished his expectation of making me a convert.

He surprised me soon by saying,  “I begin to fear,
after all,  that what y^ou have been talking about to me
will come to pass.”

1 found he meant his own speaking upon a new charge,
which,  when I last saw him,  he exultingly told me was
given up.  He explained the apparent inconsistency by
telling me that some new change^of plan had taken place,
and that Mr.  Burke was extremely urgent with him to open
the next charge  ; “And I cannot,”  he cried emphatically,
“ leave Burke in the lurch  !”  I both believed and ap-

1790J

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

115

plauded him so far  ; but why are either of them engaged
111 a prosecution so uncoloured by necessity  ?

One chance he liad still of escaping this tremendous
task,  he told me,  which was that it might devolve upon
Grey;  but Burke,  he did not disavow,  wished it to be
himself.  “ However,”  he laughingly added,  “ I think we
may toss up !”

In that case,  how I wish he may lose!  not only from
believing him the abler enemy,  but to reserve his name
from amongst the Active List in such a cause.

He bewailed, — with an arch look that showed his con-
sciousness I should like the lamentation, — that he was
now all unprepared, — all fresh to begin in documents and
materials  ; the charge being wholly new and unexpected,
and that which he had considered relinquished.

“ I am glad,  how'ever,”  cried I,  your original charge
is given up;  for I well remember what you said of it.”

“ I might be flattered,”  cried he,  “ and enough,  that
you should remember anything I say — did I not know
it was only for the sake of its subject,”— looking down
upon Mr.  Hastings.

I could not possibly deny this  ; but added that I
recollected he had acknowledged his charge was to prove
Mr.  Hastings mean,  pitiful,  litde,  and fraudulent.”

The trial this day consisted almost wholly in dispute
upon evidence;  the managers offered such as the counsel
held improper,  and the judges and lords at last adjourned
to debate the matter in their own chamber.

Mr.  Burke made a very fine speech upon the rights
of the prosecutor to bring forward his accusation,  for
the benefit of justice,  in such mode as appeared most
consonant to his own reason and the nature of things,
accordin^  to the ir varying ajipearances as fresh and fresh
matter occurred.

I 2

116

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

The counsel justly alleged the hardship to the client,
if thus liable to new allegations and suggestions,  for
which he came unprepared,  from a reliance that those
publicly given were all against which he need arm
himself,  and that,  if those were disproved,  he was cleared  ;
while the desultory and shifting charges of the managers
put him out in every method of defence,  by making it
impossible to him to discern where he might be attacked.

In the course of this debate I observed Mr.  Wind-
ham so agitated and so deeply attentive,  that it prepared
me for what soon followed  : he mounted the rostrum — for
the third time only since this trial commenced.

His speech was only to a point of law respecting evi-
dence : he kept close to his subject,  with a clearness
and perspicuity very uncommon indeed amongst these
orators.  His voice,  however,  is greatly in his disfavour;
for he forces it so violently,  either from earnestness or a
fear of not being heard,  that,  though it answered the pur-
pose of giving the most perfect distinctness to what he
uttered,  its sound had an unpleasing and crude quality
that amazed and disappointed me.  The command of
his language and fluency of his delivery,  joined to the
compact style of his reasoning and conciseness of his
arguments,  were all that could answer my expectations  :
but his manner — whether from energy or secret terror —
lost all its grace,  and by no means seemed to belong to the
elegant and high-bred character that had just quitted me.

In brief, — how it may happen I know not, — but he
certainly does not do justice to his own powers and
talents in public.

He was excessively agitated : when he had done and
dismounted,  I saw bis pale face of the most fiery red.
Yet he had uttered nothing in a passion.  It must have
been simply from internal effort.

1790J

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

117

The counsel answered him ; and he mounted to reply.
Here,  indeed,  he did himself honour  ; his readiness of
answer,  the vivacity of his objections,  and the instanta-
neous command of all his reasoning faculties,  were truly
striking.  Had what he said not fallen in reply to a
speech but that moment made,  I must have concluded
it the result of study,  and an harangue learnt by heart.

He was heard with the most marked attention.

The second speech,  like the first,  was wholly upon the
laws of evidence,  and Mr.  Hastings was not named in
either.

He is certainly practising against his great day.  And,
in truth,  I hold still to iny fear of it;  for,  however little his
manner in public speaking may keep pace vvith its pro-
mise in private conversation,  his matter was tremendously
pointed and severe.

The trial of the day concluded by an adjournment to
consult upon the evidence in debate,  with the judges,  in
the House of Lords.

Mr.  Windham came up to the seats of the Commons in
my neighbourhood,  but not to me ; he spoke to the Misses
Francis, — daughters of Mr.  Hastings’s worst foe, — and
hurried down.

While Sarah and I were waiting down-stairs in the
Great Hall,  and James w'as gone for Coluinb,  I was ad-
dressed by Mrs.  Crewe,  who most civilly renew'ed old ac-
quaintance, with kind complaints against my immured
life.

I told her,  with a laugh,  that coming to this trial might
reconcile any one to stillness and confinement;  for it gave
but little encouragement to action and exertion.

On my return I was called upon to give an account of
the trial to their Majesties and the Princesses.  ’Tis a
formidable business,  I assure you,  to perform.

118

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part 111.

Thursday,  May 13th. — I went to a musical party at
our Esther’s  : I heard,  as usual,  only the opening of the
concert;  but it was very sweet to me,  I„ady Mary Dun-
can w'as amongst the company,  and I thought her much
altered from her wonted cordiality;  wdiether from resent-
ing my never having waited upon her,  I could not tell ; but
it made me uneasy,  her many kindnesses always combat-
ing her queernesses in my regard  ; and therefore I could
not rest till I made mv peace,  by proposing a visit on my
first attainable Monday.  The offer was very smilingly
accepted,  and all did well,  f must represent my case to
my Royal Mistress,  and manage it if possible,

I had the pleasure also to meet our old acquaintance
Mrs.  Maling,  and some of her grown up daughters;  but
my first pleasure was in seeing Pacchierotii,  that sweetly
gentle old friend and favourite,  whose fascinating talents
would carry me almost anywhere,  without any other in-
ducement.

He was so kind as to sing one song,  and that almost at
the opening,  for my indulgence.  I was forced to fly with-
out thanking him.

Our ever-good James was there,  and*  full of his ship
plans.  I see him quite amazed that he has not had a
vessel,  just such a one as he wished,  instantly given him,
on making known,  through me,  his desire  ! Alas  ! * *

His excellent wife brought me their two tine and jovial
children at St.  James’s,  where w’e all made merry during
the drawing-room.

Friday Morning. — Her Majesty sent the Princess
Elizabeth to summon me to a public reading.  I found,
added to my Royal hearers.  Lady Harcourt and Lady
Juliana Penn  ! However,  the Queen was still so gracious
as to order me to sit dow'ii,  which 1 did close to her
elbow.

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

119

The play chosen was  ‘ The Rivals.’  Mr.  Sheridan does
not,  I presume,  fancy me reading any of his works to Her
Majesty.

These two ladies added much to the solemnity I have
made such efforts to dispel ; Lady Harcourt seemed to
think it would be a liberty to attend to the play,  so far
as to enter at all into its spirit;  and Lady Juliana had
just been set about some spinning,  and I believe was so
absorbed in her work,  either because it was new to her,
ot because it was for the Queen,  that she held it most
respectful to attend to nothing else.  It is terrible to see
how formality annihilates the best faculties  !

Tuesday,  May 18th. — This morning I again went to
the trial of poor Mr.  Hastings.  Heavens  ! who can see
hin sit there unmoved  ? not even those who think him
guilty, — if they are human.

I took with me Mrs.  Bogle.  She had long since
bugged a ticket for her husband,  which I could never
beore procure.  We now went all three.  And,  indeed,
hei original speeches and remarks made a great part of
my entertainment.

Mr.  Hastings and his counsel were this day most vic-
torbus.  I never saw the prosecutors so dismayed.  Yet
botl Mr.  Burke and Mr.  Fox spoke,  and before the con-
clusion so oid Mr.  Windham.  They were all in evident
einbarrassment.  Mr.  Hastings’s counsel finished the day
vith a most noble appeal to justice and innocence,  pro-
hsting that,  if his client did not fairly claim the one,  by
poving the other,  he wished himself that the prosecutors
— that the Lords — that the nation at large — that the
land of God — might fall heavy upon him  !

This had a great and sudden effect, — not a woid w'as
utered.  The prosecutors looked dismayed and asto-
nshed  ; and the day closed.

120

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

Mr.  Windham came up to speak to Misses Francis
about a dinner  ; but he only bowed to me,  and with a
look so conscious — so much saying  “ ’Tis your turn to
triumph now!”  — that I had not the spite to attack
him.

But when the counsel had uttered this animated speech,
Mrs.  Bogle was so much struck,  she hastily arose,  and,
clapping her hands,  called out audibly,  in a broad Scotch
accent,  “O,  chaarming !"  I could hardly quiet her till I
assured her we should make a paragraph for the news-
papers I

I had the pleasure to deliver this myself to their Ma-
jesties and the Princesses ; and as I was called upon
while it was fresh in my memory,  I believe but little of
the general energy was forgotten.  It gave me g?eat
pleasure to repeat so striking an affirmation of the inno-
cence of so high,  so injured I believe,  a character.  Tie
Queen eagerly declared I should go again the next sittitg-

Wednesday,  May 19th. — The real birthday of ny
Royal Mistress,  to whom may Heaven grant many,  many,
and prosperous ! Dressing,  and so forth,  filled up all the
morning  ; and at night I had a tete-a-tete with Chailes,
till twelve.  I got to bed about live in the morning.  The
sweet Princesses had a ball,  and I could not lament my
fatigue.

Thursday,  May 20th. — To-day again to the trial,
to which I took Miss Young,  Her Majesty having givei
me two tickets very late over-night.  Miss Young s
singularly,  as far as I can see,  the reverse of her eccer-
tric parents  ; she is moderation personified.

Mr.  Windham again spoke in the course of this mori-
ing’s business,  which was chiefly occupied in debating m
the admissibility of the evidence brought forward by tie
prosecutors.  The quickness and aptness of his argn-

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

1-21

790]

merits,  with the admirable facility and address with which
he seized upon those of his opponents,  the counsel,  were
strong marks of that high and penetrating capacity so strik-
ingly his characteristic.  The only defect in his speaking
is the tone of his voice,  which,  from exertion,  loses all its
powers of modulation,  and has a crude accent and ex-
pression very disagreeable.

During the examination of Mr.  Anderson,  one of Mr.
Hastings’s best friends, — a sensible,  well-bred,  and gentle-
man-like man, — Mr.  Windham came up to my elbow.

“And can this man,”  cried he,  presently,  “ this man —
so gentle — be guilty  ?”

I accused him of making a point to destroy all admira-
tion of gentleness in my opinion.  “ But you are grown
very good now !”  I added,  “ No,  very bad I mean  !”

He knew I meant for speaking;  and I then gave him
burlesqued,  various definitions of good,  which had fallen
from Mr.  Fox in my hearing ; the most contradictory,  and,
taken out of their place,  the most ridiculous imaginable.

He laughed very much,  but seriously confessed that
technical terms and explanations had better have been
wholly avoided by them all,  as the counsel were sure to
out-technicalise them,  and they were then exposed to
greater embarrassments than by steering clear of the at-
tempt, and resting only upon their common forces.

“ There is one praise,”  I cried,  “ which I am alw^ays sure
to meet in the newspapers whenever I meet with your
name  ; and I begin to quite tire of seeing it for you, —
your skill in logic  !”

“ O,  I thank you,”  he cried,  earnestly ; “ I am indeed
quite ashamed of the incessant misappropriation of that
word.”

“ No,  no,”  cried I;  “I only tire of it because they
seem to think,  when once the word logic and your name

122

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

are combined,  they have completely stated all.  However,
in what little I have heard,  I could have suspected you
to have been prepared with a speech ready written,  had
I not myself heard just before all the arguments which it
answered.”

I then added that I was the less surprised at this
facility of language,  from having heard my brother de-
clare he knew no man who read Greek with that extra-
ordinary rapidity — no,  not Dr.  Parr,  nor any of the
professed Grecians,  whose peculiar study it had been
through life.

This could be nothing,  he said,  but partiality.

“ Not mine,  at least,”  cried I,  laughing,  “ for Greek
excellence is rather out of my sphere of panegyric  !”

‘‘  Well,”  cried he,  laughing too at my disclaiming,  “ ’tis
your brother’s partiality.  However,  ’tis one I must try
not to lose;  I must take to my Greek exercises again.”

They will do you a world of good,  thought I,  if they
take you but from your prosecution-exercises.

We then talked of Mr.  Burke.  “ How finely,”  I
cried,  he has spoken  ! with what fulness of intelligence,
and wliat fervour !”

Pie agreed,  with delighted concurrence.

Yet, — so much  ! — so long  !”  I added.

“True  !”  cried he,  ingenuously,  yet concerned.  “ What
pity he can never stop  !”

And then I enumerated some of the diffuse and un-
necessary paragraphs which had weakened his cause,  as
well as his speech.

He was perfectly candid,  though always with some
reluctance.  “But a man who speaks in public,  ” he said,
“ should never forget what will do for his auditors  : for
himself alone,  it is not enough to think  ; but for what is
fitted,  and likely to be interesting to them.”

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

123

“ lie wants nothing,”  cried I,  “ but a flapper.”

“ Yes,  and he takes flapping inimitably.”

“ Yon,  then,”  1 cried,  “should be his flapper.”

“ And sometimes,”  said he,  smiling,  “ I am.”

“ O,  I often see,”  cried 1,  “ of what use you are to him.
1 see you watching him, — reminding,  checking him in
turn, — at least,  I fancy all this as I look into the ma-
nagers’ box,  which is no small amusement to me, — when
there is any commotion there  !”

He bowed ; but I never diminished from the frank
unfriendliness to the cause with which I began.

I3ul I assured him I saw but too well how important
and useful he was to them,  even without speaking.

“ Perhaps,”  cried he,  laughing,  “more than with speak-
ing.”

O

“ I am not meaning to talk of that now,”  said 1 ; but
yet,  one thing I will tell you : 1 hear you more distinctly
than any one  ; the rest I as often miss as catch,  except
when they turn this way, — a favour which you never
did me  !”

No,  no,  indeed  !”  cried he  ; •*  to abstract myself from
all,  is all that enables me to get on.”

And then,  with his native candour,  he cast aside pre-
judice, and very liberally praised several points in this
poor persecuted great man.

1 had seen.  I said,  an imitation from Horace,  which
had manifested,  I presumed,  his scholarship.

“ O,  ay,”  cried he,  an Ode to Mr.  Shore,  who is one of
the next witnesses.  Burke was going to allude to it,  but
1 begged him not.  I do not like to make their Lord-
ships smile in this grave business.”

“ That is so right !”  cried I : “ Ah,  you know it is you
and your attack I have feared most all along !”

“This flattery”-  cried he.

124

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

Do not use that word any more,  Mr.  Windham,’’
interrupted I ; “if you do,  I shall be tempted to make a
very shocking speech to you — the very reverse of battery,

I assure you  !”

He stared, — and I went on.

“ I shall say, — that those who think themselves flattered
— flatter themselves'^

What  ? — hey  ? — how  ?”  cried he.

“ Nay,  they cannot cohclude themselves flattered,  with-
out concluding they have de qnoi to make it worth while  !”
“Why, — there — there may be something in that;  but
not here  ! — no,  here it must flow simply from general
benevolence, — from a wish to give comfort or pleasure.”
I disclaimed all ; and turned his attention again to
Mr.  Hastings.  “ See  !”  I cried,  “ see but how thin —
how ill — looks that poor little uncle of yours  !’’

Again I upbraided him with being unnatural ; and
lamented Mr.  Hastings’s change since I had known him
in former days.  And shall I tell you,”  I added,  ‘^some-
thing in which you had nearly been involved w'ith
him  ?”

“ Me  ? — with Mr.  Hastings  !’’

“ Yes  ! and I regret it did not happen  ! You may
recollect my mentioning my original acquaintance with
him,  before I lived where I now do.”

Yes  ; but where you 7iow 1 understand you, —

expect ere long you may see him !”

He meant from his acquittal,  and reception at the
Queen’s house.  And I would not contradict him.

“ But,  however,”  I continued,  “ my acquaintance and
regard began very fairly while 1 lived at home at my
father’s  : and indeed I regret you could not then and so
have known him,  as I am satisfied you would have been
pleased with him,  which iiow you cannot judge.  He is so

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

125

1790]

gentle-mannered,  so intelligent,  so unassuming,  yet so
full-minded.”

“ I have understood that,”  he answered ; yet  ’tis
amazing how little unison there may be between manners
and characters,  and how softly gentle a man may appear
without,  whose nature wdthin is all ferocity and cruelty.
This is a part of mankind of which you cannot judge —
of which,  indeed,  you can scarce form an idea.”

After a few comments I continued what I had to say,
which,  in fact,  was nothing but another malice of my own
against him.  I reminded him of one day in a former year
of this trial,  when I had the happiness of sitting at it wdth
my dearest Mrs.  Lock,  in which he had been so obliging,
with reiterated others,  as to propose seeing for my ser-
vant, &c. — “Well,”  I continued,  “I was afterwards ex-
tremely sorry I had not accepted your kindness ; for  ...  .
just as w^e were going away,  who should be passing,  and
turn back to speak to me,  but Mr.  Hastings  ! ‘ O !’  he

cried,  ‘ I must come here to see you,  I find!’  Now,  had
you but been w ith me at that moment 1 I own it would
have been the greatest pleasure to me to have brought you
together ; though I am quite at a loss to know whether I
ought,  in that case,  to have presented you to each other.”

He laughed most heartily, — half,  probablj',  wdth joy at
his escape ; but he had all his wits about him in his
answer.  “ If you”  he cried,  “ had been betw'een us,  we
might,  for once,  have coalesced — in both bowing to the
same shrine  !”

* * * *

My dear Mrs.  Ord was so good as to come to me one
morning at nine o’clock,  to take me to the exhibition,
where I saw,  I fear,  the last works of the first of our
painters.  Sir Joshua Reynolds.  The thought,  and his

DIARY AND LETTERS

126

[Part III.

unhappy loss of eyesight,  made the view of his pictures
very melancholy to me.

I have been very much pleased with Mr.  Jerningham’s
verses to him upon his visual misfortune.

And now,  my dear sisters,  to a subject and narration
interesting to your kind affections,  because important to
my future life.

Friday,  May 28th. — The Princess Augusta conde-
scended to bring me a most gracious message from the
King,  desiring-  to know if I wished to go to Handel’s

O e>

Commemoration,  and if I should like the  ‘ Messiah,’  or
prefer any other day  ?

With my humble acknowledgments for his goodness,
I fixed instantly on the  ‘^IMessiah;’  and the very ami-
able Princess came smiling back to me,  bringing me my
ticket from the King.

This wmuld not,  indeed,  much have availed me,  but that
I fortunately knew my dear father meant to go to the
Abbey.  I despatched Columb to Chelsea,  and he pro-
mised to call for me the next morning.

My  ‘ Visions’  I had meant to produce in a few days  ;
and to know their chance before I left town for the sum-
mer. But I thought the present opportunity not to be
slighted,  for some little opening,  that might lighten the
task of the exordium upon the day of attempt.

He was all himself ; all his native self ; — kind,  gay,
open,  and full fraught with converse.

Chance favoured me  : we found so little room,  that
■w'e were fain to accept two vacant places at once,  though
they separated us from my uncle,  Mr.  Burney,  and his
brother James,  who were all there,  and all meant to be
of the same party.

I might not,  at another time,  have rejoiced in this dis-

OF THK AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

127

1790]

union,  but it was now most opportune  : it gave me three
hours’  conference with my dearest father — the only con-
ference of that length I have had in four years.

Fortune again was kind;  for my father began relating
various anecdotes of attacks made upon him for pro-
curing to sundry strangers some acquaintance with his
daughter,  particularly with the Duchesse de Biron,  and
the Mesdames de Bqnfflers ; to whom he answered,  he
had no power;  but was somewhat struck by a question
of Madame de B.  in return,  who exclaimed,  “ Mais,  mon-
sieur, est-ce possible  ! Mademoiselle votre fille n’a-t-clle
point de vacance  ? ”

This led to much interesting discussion,  and to many
confessions and explanations on my part,  never made be-
fore ; whieh induced him to enter more fully into the
whole of the situation,  and its eircumstances,  than he had
ever yet had the leisure or the spirits to do;  and he re-
peated sundry speeehes of discontent at my seclusion
from the world.

All this encouraged me to much detail  : I spoke my
high and constant veneration for my Royal Mistress,  her
merits,  her virtues,  her condescension,  and her even pecu-
liar kindness towards me.  But I owned the species of
life distasteful to me:  I was lost to all private comfort,
dead to all domestic endearment ; I was worn with want
of rest,  and fatigued with laborious watchfulness and
attendance.  My time vvas devoted to official duties ; and
all that in life was dearest to me — my friends,  my chosen
society,  my best affections — lived now in my mind only by
recollection,  and rested upon that with nothing but bitter
regret.  With relations the most deservedly dear,  uith
friends of almost unequalled goodness,  I lived like an
orphan — like one who had no natural ties,  and must make
her way as she could by those that were factitious.  Me-

128

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part III.

lancholy was the existence where happiness was ex-
cluded, though not a complaint could be made  ! where
the illustrious personages who were served possessed al-
most all human excellence, — yet where those who were
their servants,  though treated with the most benevo-
lent condescension,  could never,  in any part of the live-
long day,  command liberty,  or social intercourse,  or
repose !

The silence of my dearest father now silencing myself,

I turned to look at him;  but liow was I struck to see
his honoured head bowed down almost into his bosom  '
with dejection and discomfort ! — We were both perfectly j
still a few moments ; but when he raised his head I could
hardly keep my seat,  to see his eyes filled with tears  ! —

“ I have long,”  he cried,  been uneasy,  though I have
not spoken  ; . . . . but  ....  if you wish to resign — my  ^
house,  my purse,  my arms,  shall be open to receive you  |
back  ! ” !

The emotion of my whole heart at this speech — this J
sweet,  this generous speech — O my dear friends,  I need  |
not say it ! \

We were mutually forced to break up our conference.

I could only instantly accept his paternal ofi’er,  and tell
him it was my guardian angel,  it was Providence in its
owm benignity,  that inspired him with such goodness.  I
begged him to love the day in which he had given me
such comfort,  and assured him it would rest upon my
heart with grateful pleasure till it ceased to beat.

He promised to drink tea with me before I left towm,
and settle all our proceedings.  I acknowledged my in-
tention to have ventured to solicit this very permission of
resigning. — But I, ’’cried he,  smiling with the sweetest
kindness,  ‘‘  have spoken first myself.”

What a joy to me,  what a relief,  this very circumstance  !

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

129

it will always lighten any evil that may,  unhappily,  follow
this proposed step.

• Monday,  May 30th. — This evening I obtained leave
to make my first visit,  from Court,  to Lady Mary Dun-
can. I was really glad to see her again,  and very kindly
received,  though not with the same cordial openness as
when I came from St.  Martin’s-street.  She is a pro-
fessed enemy of the Court,  and it manifests no little rem-
nant of original kindness that she will any longer even
endure me.

She had an excellent concert,  but I could only hear its
opening  ! I was obliged to return home after the first
song of Pacchierotti,  which he sang in his first manner,
with every sweetness of expression and sensibility that
human powers can give the human voice.

Very few of my old friends were there;  I think only
ISIr.  Nicholls and Miss Farquhar.  My father presented
me to the new Duchess of Dorset,  who seems to assume
nothing upon her new dignity.

* * ♦ *

I have not,  I believe,  mentioned a correspondence in
which I was engaged with Mr.  Cambridge some lime
ago?  It was one extremely pleasant to me;  he sent me
several fragments of poems,  all upon the subject of the
French Revolution,  and wrote the kindest notes or letters
to enclose them.  His very e.xcelient  ‘ Progress of Li-
berty’ I am sure you have seen.  His constant trust,  and
friendship,  and affection,  are amongst my most cherished
comforts,  and,  indeed,  I must own,  amongst my greatest
astonishments;  for so little I now see him,  so seldom,
so precariously,  and with such difficulty to himself,  that
I am perpetually preparing myself for perceiving his
thoughts about me ohlivionised.  I am very happy to find
how far from just has proved hitherto this apprehension.

VOI..  V.

ic

a-.  cfQ

130

DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.

[Part III.

With his daughter I have never that fear  ; reliance can
o no deeper than mine upon her,  founded upon her
rm and steady character,  which deliberately forms its
connexions,  but as warmly as permanently adheres to
them.

PART IV.

1790.

CONTENTS.

Correspondence— Jacob Bryant to Miss Burney — Miss Burney to
Mrs. Anecdote of the Princess Sophia — A Sailor’s no-

tions of Etiquette— Lord Cliatham and Captain Burney — Cha-
racter of the proceedings at Hastings’s Trial — Burke’s Speech
on the French Revolution — Its effect in the House described by
Windham— Conversation with Windham — Mr.  Courtney — His
Pamphlet on the French Revolution — Mrs.  Chapone and Mrs.
Ord — Fox's Speech on Hastings’s Trial — The Thrales — Windsor
Terrace — Mrs.  Gwynn — Mrs.  Trimmer — Letter from Miss Bur-
ney to Mrs. Maternal Solicitude — Tragedy by Miss Burney

— A Royal Birthday at Frogmore — Jacob Bryant — Death of
a faithful Servant — An unpleasant Dilemma — Correspondence
between Miss Burney and Horace Walpole — A friendly Cabal
— Mr.  Windham and the Literary Club— The Oddities of James
Boswell — Edmund Burke — His Work on the French Revolu-
tion— Declining Health of Miss Burney — Her Resignation of
her Situation at Court — Her Memorial to the Queen — Conclu-
sion of the Year 1790.

K

O

13-2

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part TV.

PART IV.

1790.

Mr.  Jacob Bryant to 3Iiss Burney.

Dear Madam,  Cypenham,  June 12, 1790.

Permit me through your hands most gratefully to
make a return to the Queen of the book with which Her
Majesty in her great goodness and condescension was
pleased to intrust me.  It has been read by me with
much care,  and with equal satisfaction and emolument.
For though I trust  (as I took the liberty to mention to
Her Most E.\cellent Majesty)  that my principles are well
founded and determinately fixed,  yet the renovation of
these truths,  and of the arguments in their favour,  affords
a refreshment to the mind,  and is productive of many
happy consequences.  It is like the dew from above
upon herbs and plants ; which,  however verdant and
well rooted before,  yet find a sensible benefit from the
heavenly supply.

In this Treatise we have an address from a father to a
beloved daughter.  But I found at the beginning of it,
in manuscript,  upon a spare leaf,  an address,  by another
hand,  to a daughter equally beloved,  and truly noble and
excellent.  This affected me far more than all the letters
of Baron Haller.  The piety and parental love,  and the
affecting solicitude there displayed,  absolutely brought
tears into my eyes — such tears as flow from a pleasing
sensibility,  and from those heavenly emotions which we
feel when we look up to transcendant goodness dealing
out liappiness to mankind.  Plato says,  “If  ^ irtue

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

133

1790]

could appear in a human form,  what admiration would
she excite  !” — I think I have seen that appearance  ; and
have been affected accordingly.

I am,  dear Madam,

Your most obliged humble servant,
Jacob Bryant.

This month opened with the truly afflicting intelli-
gence of the death of my poor Mrs.  * * ’s little

baby  ! How marked by misfortune is the youth ot that
lovely mourner  ! The poor child died last month,  though
the news reached me the first of this.

Not a little was I surprised by a visit on the same
morning from Miss Payne,  whom I had not seen since
I left St.  Martin’s-street,  nor been able to appoint:
however,  she came now of her own accord,  and brought
also Miss Mathias — not our Charlotte’s acquaintance,  but
her cousin.

She came to execute a commission of IMr.  Bentham,
a stranger to me;  who wished me to read the MS.
Memoirs of his son,  a Colonel in the Russian service,
and present,  if I approved them,  the book to the Queen
for perusal.  There was no refusing ; yet these are al-
ways dangerous commissions.

Miss F.  Burney to Mrs.  *****.

Queen’s Lodge,  Windsor,  June 11,  1790.

You were most kind to write again so soon,  my sweet

]\I ; very anxious was I to hear — yet hardly dared

hope for — words so very good,  of calmness and determined
fortitude.  I scarce know how to direct to you,  but 1
cannot rest easy without writing.

Most earnestly I hope the sea-scheme will take place.
We know,  at the worst,  how we can meet,  and neither ot

134

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

US will be too proud to accept such terms as our fates
allow us to make.  Half the world relinquish small com-
forts because disappointed of great ones  : you and I
must not do that.  Indeed to me it will not be enrolled

amongst the small ones to see my poor afflicted M

in any way or manner whatsoever.

Those thoughts which entered your mind at the sight
of so much agony with innocence,  will not,  I am sure,
dwell there,  and therefore I am not uneasy to hear of
them  : they hardly were thoughts  ; they were rather spon-
taneous feelings,  and so natural at such a period of ma-
ternal wretchedness,  that,  believe me,  my dearest M ,

instead of blaming,  I feel persuaded they are pardonable
even in the sight of the Most High,  so long as they are
involuntary,  and excited by such extreme anguish as
weakens religious principles.  The mind may,  I trust,
be as readily forgiven incapacity at such moments,  when
deprived of its reasoning faculties,  as the body when en-
feebled by sickness and infirmity.

To indulge in ruminations of tliat sort would indeed
be reprehensible and presumptuous in the highest de-
gree ; for how should we,  who never truly'  and candidly
can judge one another,  arraign the dispensations,  as
faulty or needless,  of a Providence to our narrow senses
unsearchable  ?

These are reflections which will bear much diffusion.
I enlarge upon them for my own use,  in every circum-
stance of calamity,  when its first bitterness is past.  My

dearest M will draw them out for herself:  she is able,

from the goodness of her understanding ; and she will be
willing,  from her veneration of one whose brightest
quality',  amid so many that were brilliant,  was resignation
to the will of God.

You are disposed to join in the idea that the little

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

135

angel looks clown upon you  ; and you finish by thanking
God she is now at peace.  These two instances satisfy me
of what I have said,  that the turn of your mind has not
vaiied from right,  in faith or submission,  but that your
feelings were too strongly stimulated to be under their
proper command.

Write to me as soon and as often as you can  ; my sym-
pathising thoughts follow you in this unexpected blow

with unceasing pity, — my dear,  my sweet M ! —

rieaven bless you  !

May I try to make you smile  ? I could not help it
myself w’hen the other day the Princess Sophia came to
my room,  and said,  Dear,  how sorry I am for poor
Mrs.  * * * 1 I’m sure 1 hope she  ’ll soon have an-
other ! ” as if,  so any one was to be had,  it would do  !

The next morning I went again to the trial of poor
Mr.  Hastings:  Mrs.  Ord received from me my compa-
nion ticket,  kindly giving up the Duke of  ^Sewcastle’s box
to indulge me with her company.

But I must mention an extraordinary circumstance that
happened in the last week.  1 received in a parcel — No
I will recite it you as I told it to Mr.  Windham,  who,  for-
tunately, savv and came up to me — fortunately,  I .say,
as the business of the day was very unedifying,  and
as Mrs.  Ord much wished to hear some of his conver-
sation.

He inquired kindly about James and his affairs,  and if
he had yet a ship ; and,  to let him see a person might
reside in a Court,  and yet have no undue influence,  I re-
lated his proceedings with Lord Chatham,  and his laconic
letter and interview.  The first running thus: —

“ My Lord, — I should be glad of an audience ; if your

DIARY AND LETTERS

136

[Part IV.

Lordship will be so good to appoint a time,  I will wait
upon you.

“ I am,  ray Lord,

Your humble servant,

James Burney.”

“ And pray,”  quoth I to James,  when he told me
this,  did you not say the honour of an audience?”

“ No,”  answered he,  “ I was civil enough without that;
I said,  If you will be so good — that was very civil — and
honour is quite left off now.”

How comic  ! to run away proudly from forms and
etiquettes,  and then pretend it was only to be more in the
last mode.

VI r.  Windham enjoyed this characteristic trait very
much  ; and he likes James so well that he deserved it,  as
well as the interview which ensued.

How do you do,  Captain Burney?”

‘‘  My Lord,  1 should be glad to be employed.”

“ You must be sensible.  Captain Burney,  we have many
claimants just now,  and more than it is possible to satisfy
immediately.”

“ 1 am very sensible of that,  my Lord  ; but,  at the
same time,  I wish to let your Lordship know what I should
like to have — a frigate of thirty-two guns.”

‘‘  I am very glad to know’  w hat you wish,  sir.”

He took out bis pocket-book,  made a memorandum,
and wished James a good morning.

Whether or not it occurred to Mr.  indham,  while I
told this,  that there seemed a shorter way to Lord
Chatham,  and one more in his own style,  I know'  not:
he was too delicate to let such a hint escape,  and I would
not for the world intrust him with my applications and
disappointments.

Ol'  THK AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

137

1700]

But I have found/’  cried I afterwards,  another
newspaper praise for you now.  ‘ Air.  Windham,  with his
usual vein of irony.’  ”

O yes,”  cried he,  I saw that ! But what can it
mean  ? — I use no  ^ vein of irony  ; — I dislike it,  except
for peculiar purposes,  keenly handled,  and soon passed
over.”

Yet this is the favourite panegyric you receive con-
tinually ; this,  or logic,  always attends your name in the
newspapers.”

“ But do I use it  ?”

Nav,  not to me,  I own.  As a manner,  I never found
it out,  at least.  However,  I am less averse now than
formerly to the other panegyric — close logic  ; for I own
the more frequently I come hither the more convinced
I find myself that that is no character of commendation
to be given universally.”

He could say nothing to this  ; and really the dilatory,
desultory style of these prosecutors in general deserved
a much deeper censure.

“ If a little closeness of logic and reasoning were ob-
served by one I look at now,  what a man w'ould he be,
and who could compare with him  ! ”

Air.  Burke you are sure was here my object ; and his
entire,  though silent and unwilling,  assent was obvious.

“ What a speech,”  I continued,  has he lately^  made I
how noble,  how energetic,  how enlarged throughout !

“ O,”  cried he,  very unaffectedly,  “ upon the French
Revolution  ? ”

A es  ; and any party might have been proud of it,  for
liberality,  for feeling,  for all in one — genius.  I,  who am
only a reader of detached speeches,  have read none I iiave
thought its equal.”

“ Yet,  such as you have seen it,  it does not do him

138

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

justice.  I was not in the House that day  ; but I am
assured the actual speech,  as he spoke it at the moment,
was highly superior to what has since been printed.  There
w'as in it a force — there were shades of reflection so fine
— allusions so quick and so liappy — and strokes of satire
and observation so pointed and so apt, — that it had ten
times more brilliancy w^hen absolutely extemporary than
when transmitted to paper.”

“Wonderful,  wonderful!  He is a truly wonderful
creature I”  And,  alas,  thought I,  as wonderful in incon-
sistency as in greatness !

In the course of a discussion more detailed upon his
faculties,  I ventured to tell him what impression they had
made upon James,  who was with me during one of the
early long speeches.  “I w'as listening,”  I said,  “with
the most fervent attention to such strokes of eloquence as,
while I heard them,  carried all before them,  when my
brother pulled me by the sleeve to exclaim,  ‘ When will
he come to the point V ”

The justness,  notwithstanding its characteristic con-
ciseness, of this criticism,  I was glad thus to convey.  Mr.
Windham,  however,  would not subscribe to it;  but,  with
a significant smile,  coolly said,  “ Yes,  ’tis curious to hear
a man of war's ideas of rhetoric.”

“ Well,”  quoth I,  to make a little amends,  “ shall I
tell you a compliment he paid you  ? ”

“'^Me  ? ”

“ Yes.  ‘ He speaks to the purpose,’  he cried.”

Some time after,  with a sudden recollection,  he eacreilv
exclaimed,  “ O,  I knew I had something I wished to tell
you I I was the other day at a [)lace to see Stuart’s
Athenian architecture,  and whom do you think I met in
the room  ? ”

I could not guess.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

139

1790]

“ Nay,  ’tis precisely what you will like — Mr.  Hast-
ings ! ”

Indeed  ! ” cried I,  laughing;  “ I must own I am ex-
tremely glad to hear it.  I only wish you could both
meet without either knowing the other.”

“ Well,  we behaved extremely well,  I assure you  ; and
looked each as if we had never seen one another before.
I determined to let you know it.”

“ I,  also,”  quoth I,  “ have something to say to you  ;
something,  too,  which perhaps to you may be intelligible,
though to me perfectly incomprehensible.”

How he stared  !

“ The other day,  when I came home from Westminster
Abbey,  I found upon my table a present ; not from any
friend,  not from any acquaintance,  not even from a person
whom I had ever beheld a moment,  or whom I knew,
even through any third person ; but to you I think it
likely he may be known, — perhaps,  indeed,  intimately.’
He really could not speak for wonderment.

“ It was,  in short,  from Mr.  Courtney; — his  ^ Treatise
on the French Revolution.’  ”

Surprise,  I saw,  did not subside entirely,  though curio-
sity was now no more  ; but he was still silent.

As I have never had the pleasure of meeting Mr.
Courtney,  nor any way of knowing him,  you may suppose
how much I was astonished.  I concluded it some mistake.

“ No one but you would have concluded that,”  was his
civil interruption.

“ Yes,  I thought the printer sent it to a wrong person  ;
but when I saw on the title-page,  ‘ From the Author,’
I was staggered.  Hear,  however,  my mistake in conse-
quence. I read the title-page,  and liiiding it a political
pamphlet,  I next concluded it was sent to me by way of
being laid in sight of the higher powers.”

HO

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

lie began now to look as curious as ever.

But I must here repeat what I have before told you,
which is perfectly true,  though perhaps  }Ou may never
have heard anything so perfectly silly.  I read and in-
quire so little into politics,  that when any parliamentary
debates come in my way I read only the detached speeches
of those who are some way known to me.  From this it
had happened that I was really and actually ignorant of
Mr.  Courtney’s political creed;  I only knew,  in general,
that he was a man of wit and satire ; nothing further.
Think,  then,  of my surprise at my own mistaken conjec-
ture. Believe me,  I had not read through the first page
before I completely acquitted him of any,  the most re-
mote, idea of my presenting his pamphlet to the higher
powers.”

He found it impossible to look grave,  but he would not
speak a word.

I then formed a new’  surmise ; I supposed there
might be occasional episodes from the given subject,  and
such a mixture of general information and literature,  that
he had sent it me for my instruction and entertainment in
the  })arts not political.  I have received an infinity of both
in political speeches of Mr.  Burke,  without any reference
to their main purport.  I began,  therefore,  to look it over
now with this new’ suggestion  ; but no, — I soon found my
second mistake as egregious as my first : ’tis all of one
colour — and such a colour  ! Church,  State,  politics,  and
reliiiion, — I know not which is treated worst.  ’

“ Indeed  ! ” cried he,  frankly  ; “ T do not defend him.
I do not go so far,  not by any means.’’

“ I am glad,”  I cried,  “ to hear it,  but not surprised.
However,  I had soon dotie with it altogether,  when I came
to the passage,  so scoffingly put,  of  ‘ a Prince of the
House of Brunsw ick sufTcring for our sins.’  Away went

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

141

the book in hearty indignation,  and I have looked at it no
more.  Why he should send it to me is truly unfathom-
able to me.  I should again think my name written on
it by mistake,  could I suggest any other person in that
house more likely to be meant ; but really that I cannot
do.”

He looked so archly satisfied of the truth of this,  that
he had no need to speak.

‘‘  All my fear,”  I added,  “ is,  that he thinks me a
rebel at heart.”

Ono,  he only wished you to read him.’’

Indeed ! if he does think so,  he is very much mis-
taken.”

I spoke this very gravely,  not at all caring if he repeats
it to him.  ’Tis all the thanks I shall put in his way  ;
though,  if ever I meet him,  in his own style of sarcasm I
may give him a few more.

We then entered into a criticism upon his manner of
writing.  1 told him it was all irony from period to period,
as far as I had examined ; and it was rather wearisome
than poignant  \vhen thus spun on.  “ True,”  answered
he;  "a lady of my acquaintance admirably said of it,  ’tis
a copy of Banbury’s  ‘ Long Minuet’ — ’tis a long joke.
But I do not like that strain beyond an occasional word
or sentence;  ’tis a perversion of the real use of language,
and the power and right meaning of words in time lose
all their force and justness.  Courtney has acquired this
habit so strongly,  that he ceases to be even aware when
using it or not.”

He was soon after called awav to the managers’
cell by Mr.  Burke,  with wLom I saw him engaged in so
animated^  a conversation,  that I imagined some great
speech or business impending.  How'ever,  ’twas no such
thing  ; nothing was either said or done of any moment.

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

I4-2

My good Mrs.  Ord brought me home,  and I had ap-
pointed to meet her at Mrs.  Chapone’s in the evening
But the Queen was indisposed  ; and though well enough
to see a small party,  I thought it indecorous to propose
going out myself,  and could not stir without licence,  ac-
cording to my bond;  therefore I disappointed myself,
M rs,  Ord,  and Mrs.  Chapone,  and whoever else was kind
enough to expect me with any earnestness.

I was nevertheless called upon to give my narrative of the
trial to their Majesties and the Princesses in a body ; and
then to my Royal Mistress separately,  who declared I should
certainly go again,  wherever 1 might be,  even from Windsor.
I am happy my accounts afford her this little interest.

Her indisposition,  thank Heaven,  was slight,  and the
birthday had its usual splendour.  But I shall not repeat
any descriptions.  I will not be worse than the poet
laureats, — echo and re-echo annual flourishes without
necessity.

In my drawing-room I saw only sundries of the house-
hold, Charles and his Rosette : and at night I went to the
Chamberlain’s Gallery with Charles.

* *

I had two most affectionate little epistles from Mrs.
Chapone before I left town,  relative to the disappointed
evening ; they gave me very sincere pleasure.

The day after the birthday I had again a visit from
Mrs.  Fairly.  I was in the midst of packing,  and break-
fasting, and confusion ; for we left town immediately,  to
return no more till next year,  except to St.  James’s for
the drawing-room.  However,  I made her as welcome as
I was able,  and she was more soft and ingratiating in her
manners than I ever before observed her.  I apologised
two or three times for not waiting upon her,  representing
my confined abilities for visiting.

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

M3

I left town with a very  <leep concern upon my mind for
my poor Columb,  who was very ill,  and unable to accom-
pany me to Windsor.  Dr.  Gisburne and Mr.  Devaynes
mutually promised me to attend him,  and I sent Goter to
give him whatever of comfort or assistance from myself
he could receive.

We fell immediately into our usual Windsor life,  which
I shall not undertake to new-set for your inspection.
'I'he old setting w'ill amply suffice.

Colonel Gw'ynn was in waiting,  and General Bude in
almost constant residence.  Generals Grenville and Har-
court.  Colonels Manners and Goldsworthy,  and once
Mr.  Fairly,  were the occasional visitors.

The Queen sent me to town on the next day’s trial at
Westminster Hall,  to hear the summing up of Mr.  Fox.
I stopped at Flammersmith for Charles,  who accompanied
me.  It was well we were together,  for the business of
the day was extremely heav}^  and disappointed all hearers.

It was an oration without any effect whatsoever,  bring-
ing home neither conviction,  nor delight,  nor information
to my ears.

Soon after the Ascot races began.  The Royal Family
all went,  and Lord Chesterfield good-humouredly oft’ered
his carriage to Miss Planta and me,  which the Queen
bid us accept.  There again I saw Mr.  Crutchley,  and
heard a little of all the Thrales,  whom I am always
glad to inquire after by every possible opportunity.
The daughters were at Tunbridge ; the mother was at
Streatham.  Much I wonder she can there Hatter herself
w ith regaining any happiness.  I should have thought it
the seat of merely bitter recollections.

T he Queen,  in the kindest manner,  when we went to
town for the drawing-room,  lent me her keys,  to get,
from her bookcase at her own house,  Henry’s  ‘ History

DIARY AND LETTERS

144

[Part IV.

of England/  as I had expressed a great disposition to
read it.

There are four volumes quarto,  and may perhaps be
four more;  she has permitted me to keep the whole as
long as I please,  so that I read at my leisure.  I am ex-
tremely satisfied with the plan upon which it is written,
which separates the military from the civil government,
and the history of the church from that of general learn-
ing, arts,  customs,  and manners;  so as to form seven
complete histories of every given period,  each of them
distinct from the other,  though chronologically similar.

Windsor,  Queen’s Lodge.

July. — At the chapel,  about this lime,  while 1 was
hurrying through a crowd to get home in time for the
Queen,  a kind but abrupt voice,  which I instantly recol-
lected as that of Dr.  Lort,  called aloud after me,  "^Elere,
Miss Burney  !”  I turned back,  and saw,  with great plea-
sure, his good and very original physiognomy.  He im-
mediately introduced me to his wife.  She seems a most
light and merry-hearted dame,  who has every quality that
can make the good Doctor happy,  in good humour,  ex-
treme high spirits,  a careless disposition,  and a passionate
fondness for himself.

As I could not request the pleasure of seeing them in
my apartment without previous regulation,  I promised to
meet them upon the Terrace in the evening.

This,  accordingly,  accompanied bv Miss Planta,  I
effected:  Mrs.  Lort joined me instantly;  she was walk-
ing with Mrs.  Douglas,  at whose house,  at the Deanery,
they were now on a visit;  but she passed by the cere-
mony of keeping with her,  and trotted me on,  to chat
more at ease,  and be more at liberty,  leaving poor Mrs.
Douglas to manage her lameness and her stick as well as
she could.  When I remonstrated,  she said it was too

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

145

tiiesoine to drawl along with siicli slow people,  and
begged me not to mind her.  I laughed at her easy
humour,  but now and then contrived an occasional
rejoinder,  till Dr.  Shepherd fell into the suite of Mrs.
Douglas : Mrs.  Lort then said it was quite insupportable
that they weie both so slow,  that they might crawl on
very well together,  but she desired to have nothing more
to do with them,  as she really wished an opportunitv to
make moie acquaintance with me,  which they prodigiously
intenupted.  She knew me already,  she added,  so well,
from Miss Cambridge,  that she had no patience with
letting such slugs come in the way of our progress.

I was really very much diverted with her comical frank-
ness. But her Doctor we lost.  I suppose some old
shattered fragment of a falling chimney or cornice,  in
some unfrequented part of the Round 4'ower,  or ’the
ancient Castle,  had crossed his eye,  curious in every
species of antiquity,  and difficult in none,  and had made
him forget his ap[)ointment.

ho should Madame La Lite bring up to present me
to,  on the Terrace,  but  “ Miss Vilkes  !”  She had en-
gaged her to spend a fortnight at  ^Vindsor,  and would
fain have introduced her here;  but I must have fewer oc-
casions than at present for exertions,  to make any for total
strangers;  though I really respect all I have heard of
]\Iiss M likes,  who seems to have conducted herself with
admirable prudence in situations the most difficult.

The fourth Sunday  ]\Ir.  Hutton appeared,  and he
came to my room at once,  with an honest,  straightforward
security of the welcome he reallv found,
j A far fairer visitor — a better there hardly can be — took
I the same method twice,  in evenings during the absence
! of Madame Schwellenberg,— Mrs.  Gwynn.  This beauti-
I iul woman,  who idolises her husband,  takes every ojipor-
f von.  V.  ,

146

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

tiinily in her power to see him when he is in waiting  :
she made a fortnight’s visit at St.  Leonard’s^  at Mrs.  Har-
court’s,  and thence came to me for these two evenings,
all of which,  except the half-hour or so that the Colonel
joined us,  we spent alone.

She has associated much with certain seditious spirits,
who inveigh against all breaches of freedom;  and she
talked over the confined situation in which she saw'  a
friend of yours,  till she grew quite melancholy.  Her
chief instigator is Sir Joshua Reynolds.

You will wonder to hear that one evening,  at Kew’,  I

received a visit from IMiss . She wrote me most

pressing notes to renew'  acquaintance,  as she could come
to me at any hour and day I would appoint.  There were
reasons,  respecting her connections,  which made this no
difficult matter to arrange.  She came early,  and stayed
late;  we were quite alone;  she flung aside the fine lady
and a world of shallow'  affectation,  and w'as sociable,
good-humoured,  and desirous to please ; so we did
mighty well.  But the cultivation she begged might en-
sue— that indeed requires a larger garden than I have
yet planted.

Mrs.  Trimmer came to Windsor one morning,  and had
a private audience of Her Majesty.  What honour do not
those persons merit from the heads of that nation for
which they forward actual reformation  ! She desired to
see me,  through Miss Planta,  with whom she has been
long acquainted.  I invited her into my room,  and sat
with her till summoned away.  We had begun some in-  <
tercourse a year or two ago,  through an application I I
made to her for a spinuing-wheel for mv dearest Fredy.  '
Phis served to open our discourse:  however,  she is so

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.

147

unaffected,  mild,  pleasing,  and placid in her manners and
conversation,  that there was not the least difficulty in
setting aside our mutual strangeness.  I respect so highly
her benevolence of character,  and beneficence of conduct,
that I was happy to be enrolled in the list of her ac-
quaintances. She has since written to me,  and warmly
expressed her desire of our further meeting,  and of seeing
me at Brentford,  when the Royal Family are so near as
Kew.  If I should be able to settle it,  I shall be very
willing.

Miss Journey to Mrs.

Queen’s Lodge,  Windsor,  August 6th,  1790.

The sad turn of your thoughts softens without sur-
prising me,  the misfortune was so unexpected ; never-
theless, the religious view in which your melancholy places
it convinces me your grief will give way,  when it can,
and not be nourished repiningly or without effort.  How,
how shall I wish and pray,  my dearest M.,  that a scene
of new and permanent maternal comfort may repay,  in
some measure,  your past afflictions,  and aw'aken and
enliven you to new happiness ! I only fear the terror
you will conceive from every possible alarm may lessen
the coming consolation,  by increasing its anxiety.  En-
deavour, my dear friend,  endeavour,  cVavance,  io prepare
your mind for a confidence without which you can enjoy
nothing,  and which,  w’ithout exertion,  will now'  surely
fly you.

A singular instance of the unhappiness of wanting this
confidence has lately fallen under my eyes.  The mother
of a very fine child felt and indulged a solicitude so
great that,  by degrees,  it became a part of her existence;
she was never without it, — in presence,  in absence,  in
sickness,  in health, — no matter which, — prosperity and
adversity made no difference ; and the anxiety grew to

L 2

DIARY AND LETTERS

148

[Part IV.

such a height that she is now threatened with a con-
sumption herself from no other cause.  You know,  and
may perhaps divine her.  She used to walk out by the
side of the nurse with a watch in her hand,  to measure,
to a minute,  the exact time it spent in the air.  She
started forward to meet every passenger,  and examine their
appearance,  before she suffered the child to proceed in
its walk;  and turned it to the right to avoid one face,
and presently back to the left that it might not see
another.  She rose in the dead of night to go and look
at it ; she quitted all society two or three times iu a
visit,  to examine it ; and,  in short,  she made herself,  her
husband,  and all her friends miserable by this constant
distrust and apprehension,  and is now,  in a languishing
and declining state,  sent southward to try the change of
air for herself,  while all the time the child is one of the
most healthy,  beautiful,  and robust I ever saw iu my
life.

What a world is this  ! can one help to exclaim,  when
the first of blessings can thus be rendered a scourge to
our friends and an infelicity to ourselves?  For this lady,
who,  happy in her conjugal fate,  had no wish but for a
child,  has never known a tranquil day since her boon has
been granted.

Heaven shield you from such sufferings henceforth  !

Give my best compliments to Mr. , and write when

you can to vour trulv,  truly affectionate

^ F.  B.

Queen's Lodge,  "Windsor,  August,  1790.

As I have only my almanac memorandums for this
month,  I shall hasten immediately to what I think my
dear partial readers will find most to their taste iu the
course of it.

Know then,  fair ladies,  about the middle of this

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

140

1790]

i^ugust,  1790,  the author finished the rough first drauglit
and copy of her first,  tragedy.  What species of a com-
position it may prove she is very unable to tell;  she
only knows it was an almost spontaneous work,  and
soothed the melancholy of imagination for a while,  though
afterwards it impressed it with a secret sensation of hor-
ror, so like real woe,  that she believes it contributed to
the injury her sleep received about this period.

Nevertheless,  whether well or ill,  she is pleased to
have done something at last,  she had so long lived in all
wavs as nothing.

You will smile,  however,  at my next trust ; but scarce
was this completed, — as to design and scenery I mean,  for
the whole is in its first rough state,  and legible only to
herself, — scarce,  however,  had this done with imagination,
to be consigned over to correction,  when imagination
seized upon another subject for another tragedy.

Ihe first therefore I have deposited in my strong-box,
in all its imperfections,  to attend to the other;  I well
know coriection may always be summoned,  imagination
never will come but by choice.  I received her,  there-
fore, a welcome guest, — the best adapted for softening
weary solitude,  where only coveted to avoid irksome ex-
ertion.

The first day of this month,  Sunday,  I had the two
beautiful sisters,  Mrs.  Gwynn and  ^Irs.  Bunbury,  to tea.
i\Irs.  Schwellenberg w'as absent on a visit to Mrs.  Hast-
ings. These sisters look still in their first bloom.  Their
husbands were both here.  We had a cheerful evening;
bliss Gomme was with me also.  When I am thus in
my reign she comes frequently  ; she has much more mind
than I have commonly observed fall to official lot.

On the Gth was the Princess Amelia's birthday.  It
was ushered in by a breakfast at a new small house which

150

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV^.

the Queen has just purchased at Frogmore,  about half a
mile from Windsor.  The Princess Elizabeth was ordered
there early to prepare for the King’s reception,  Avho,  with
the Queen and the rest of the Princesses,  went to early
prayers.  Miss Planta attended the Princess till the
Royal arrival,  and Her Majesty graciously commissioned
Her Royal Highness to gratify me w'ith a sight of these
preparations.  She is always happy when permitted to
show her native obligingness.  We were there a full hour
before the King,  &c.,  came.  The apartments were
dressed out in flowers,  and made very simply pretty and
gay.  A band of musicians were stationed in a long
bower running across the garden,  who struck up  ‘ God
save the King’  as His Majesty entered the house.  The
whole was very elegant,  and fitted to the innocence and
youth of the sweet little Princess whose birth it cele-
brated.

I placed one of my fairing  -work-baskets,  with its imple-
ments, on a table,  ready for her little Royal Highness,
with the leave of Princess Elizabeth,  who smilingly put
her own cadeau,  a bonbonniere,  into the basket,  that her
sister might see them together.  In whatever she does
there is a most captivating condescension.

I had worked with them all,  the Queen herself super-
intending, the day before,  in forwarding the decorations.

A select party of company were invited upon the oc-
casion to the breakfast : the titled part of the females
were admitted to the Royal table,  the others had a similar
repast in an adjoining apartment.

At noon,  according to a negotiation in which I had
been prime agent,  Mr.  Bryant brought from Cypenham
a beautiful small spaniel,  which he was allowed to carrv
himself to Frogmore,  and present to the Princess.  I
believe she had no cadeau that gave her equal delight.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

151

1790]

We had all much interest about this time in the wel-
fare of the dear little Princess,  who was inoculated.
Thank Heaven  ! all prospered,  and she suffered nothing.

Lord Harcourt,  the Queen’s new Master of the Horse,
spent a week here,  and made me a very long visit one
day,  in which we discussed the merits of Mr.  Mason,
Mrs.  Macaulay,  and divers republicans,  with tolerable
ease for courtiers  ! He was of late a chief of their clan.
I was not surprised to hear afterwards,  from Lady Har-
court, that they had not received a letter from Mr.  Mason
for the last three months ; yet she told it as a matter of
wonder.

Sadly,  and therefore briefly,  shall I conclude the anec-
dotes of this month.  My poor excellent Columb,  half
recovered,  precipitately followed me to Windsor,  where
he grew Avorse and worse;  he was attended by Dr.  Gis-
burne,  who at this time resided in Windsor,  to watch the
Princess Amelia,  just inoculated.  Mr.  Keate,  the sur-
geon, here also for the same reason,  did what was pos-
sible for him  ; but the conclusion was,  sending him,  by
the interest and kindness of Dr.  Gisburne,  to St.  George’s
Hospital,  as his disorder called for the constant attend-
ance of a surgeon  ; it was a SAvelling upon the liver.

He was extremely willing,  nay eager,  to go,  from a
persuasion he should there recover.  I had proposed his
trying the native air of Switzerland,  but he Avas miserable
at the thoughts of going aAvay  ; I had then offered him
a quiet lodging at CleAver,  a village near Windsor,  but
he could not bear to leave the place in Avhich the mis-
tress to Avhom he had so kindly attached himself resided ;
nor would he agree to any plan but that of the hospital.

I obtained permission of Lady Courtown to let her
Lord’s butler accompany him to the hospital.  This butler
is his countryman and intimate friend,  M.  Cuenod,  and

152

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Fart IV.

a very worthy man,  I sent them in a chaise,  with a
charge to travel slow,  and three letters of recommenda-
tion from Dr.  Gisburne.

He had already kept his bed two days,  but I desired
to see him before he went,  and I sent Goter to him,  with
a stamped receipt for settling his wages with her,  that I
might not fatigue him when he came to take leave of
me.  He refused this,  sent me back the receipt,  and told
Goter he wanted no money,  and should beg me to keep
some which he had by him already.

This w’as not pleasant;  all money transactions have
some portion of distaste to me,  though I little foresaw
what would follow a comj)liance I could not refuse.

The poor good creature came to me in his way to the
chaise  ; he looked like death,  yet was in good hopes and
spirits.  I said whatever I could suggest to encourage
and comfort him.  He expressed himself in terms of
such strong attachment that he quite melted me with
sorrow and compassion  ; he again refused his wages,  and
brought me,  in a paper,  ten guineas to keep for him.  I
drew'  up a receipt and acknowledgment of the whole  ;
he would not take it, — I insisted,  tie trembled all over
with emotion and extreme feebleness,  and probably with
pain,  as he said, — “ No,  Ma’am,  I won’t take it ! You
know what it is,  and I know what it is  ; and if I live
I’m sure you won’t wrong me  : and if I don't,  nobody
else sha’n’t have it;  for neither father,  nor mother,  nor
any relation that I have,  has ever been so kind to me as
you have been  !”

In short,  my dear friends,  he left me neither more nor
less than deluged in tears;  for a testimony so simple and
so affecting,  of regard from a poor man scarce able to
stand,  and looking already fit for a shroud  ! It seemed
as if further resistance would break his heart,  in his pre-

f)F THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

153

J/00]

sent enfeebled state.  I only gave him iny best wishes,
with a solemn promise to keep his place open for his
return,  and never to hire any servant but by the week so
long as he lived,  till he was able to come back to me
himself.

This pleased him,  and,  with kindest expressions of
thankfulness,  he set off for the hospital.

I sent after him a message,  however,  that I had sealed
up his wages aud his savings,  and had written upon them
what and whose they were,  that,  if any accident happened
to me,  my sister might restore the money to the right
claimant,  without confusion or doubt.

I heard the next day,  through M.  Cuenod,  that the
poor man bore the journey better than could have been
expected,  and was settled much to his satisfaction.

Dr.  Gisburne promised me to superintend,  and Mr.
Keate to  .see him from time to time.  Mr.  Keate,  also,
to show he meant to take some trouble,  came to me with
a request 1 would canvass the Provost of Eton,  Dr.
Roberts,  concerning a living for his brother.  I told him
my little right to such an application  ; but,  for the sake
of my poor Columb,  I would refuse nothing demanded
of me.  I therefore posted to Eton  ; but though I met
with e\ery civility from the Provost,  I found the request
was of a nature impracticable for consent,  as it opposed
the fixed rules of the College.  So I was only paid for
the difficult,  nay arduoms,  to me,  exertion of asking a
favour,  by manifesting to IMr.  Keate my readiness to
allows claim for claim.

You may imagine I made continual inquiries how the
poor man went on,  but no accounts were promising wdiich
reached me during the month.

September. — I must immediately proceed to the me-
lancholy but only interest of this month — mv poor Co-

154

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

lumb.  After various accounts concerning him,  I received
on the 15tli a letter,  informing me,  in his own name,  that
he was so much recovered he hoped soon to return
to me.

Quite happy in this wished-for news,  I prepared Wil-
liam Moss,  a former servant of Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  whom
I had hired for the present,  to leave me,  and Hattered
myself a few days would restore to me this good and
faithful creature  : but a few days told another tale ! I
was just come in one evening from calling upon Madame
de la Fite,  who was ill,  when Mrs.  Schwellenberg’s man
informed me Columb was dying:  the King's hobby-
groom had called at the hospital,  and heard he was given
over !

Equally disappointed and concerned,  I sent immedi-
ately for  ^I.  Cuenod,  Lord Courtown’s butler,  and en-
treated him to go early the next morning to the hospital,
and to see his poor countryman and hear his last wishes,
and inquire if he was properly attended,  and carry him
my sincerest good wishes,  and earnest desire to know his
own,  both for while he lived and for after,  if he should be
survived by me.  Every caution to prevent giving him
any shock by this message 1 strongly inculcated,  and M.
Cuenod seems a good and tender-hearted man.

At six o'clock the next morning he left Windsor.  He
returned again at night.  He told me poor Columb
Avould not allow himself to be in any such danger,  but
persisted he should soon see me himself ; nor would he
hear of any regulation as to his affairs,  angrily saying
‘‘  Everything was settled,  and if it were a thousand pounds
it should not be altered.”

You will not wonder I was extremely affected by this
persevering manifestation of extraordinary regard.  I had
already shown M.  Cuenod the paper I had drawn up; —

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA-

155

1790]

we agreed nothing more could be now done ; but he told
me of two sisters in Switzerland,  of whom I had not
before heard,  and I determined,  if the poor man died
without further injunctions or directions,  to transmit to
them all he should leave.

He had also,  at my desire,  left orders with a M.
Huguenon,  another Swiss friend,  to superintend his affairs,
and when all was over see that his poor remains were
decently interred,  and every attention paid that seemed
risht and kind.

O

I heard of him still dally for three days more.  The
morning of this third day I had a message from him of
his duty,  and he hoped to see me soon ; in the evening —
another account! — he was dead I

My intelligencer was this M.  Huguenon,  who is a per-
fumer. He told me poor Columb,  in the last quarter of
an hour,  desired to leave everything to his sisters.  He
certainly meant everything of his wearing apparel,
watches,  &c.,  for what money he had lelt in my hands
he would never tell anybody  ; purposely,  M.  Cuenod says,
that no one might have any claim upon me  !

I told M.  Huguenon how it all stood,  and that all
should be forthwith sent over to Switzerland,  when the
clothes,  &c.,  were sold.  I gave him an order to Kew and
the Queen’s house,  as well as here at indsor,  for
searching and collecting all his poor chattels.

A fortnight after we went as usual to Kew previous to
the Thursday’s drawing-room ; and here a letter was
brought me upstairs by Goter from Mr.  Burney,  telling
me he sent another from his friend Mr.  Ftrye,  recom-
mending to my assistance one Peter Bayond,  as heir and
e.xecutor of my late servant,  Jacob Columb!  The ac-
companying letter from Mr.  Ffrye was to the same pur-
pose.

156

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

I can by no means tell you my astonishment at this
Peter Bayond’s hardy attempt,  nor my horror at what I
was completely convinced must be a forgery.  Poor Co-
lumh had no possible motive to make such a will in pri-
vate and in secret;  and in public and openly he had
repeatedly declared all I have already related.

Expecting something unpleasant might ensue,  and
firmly persuaded of this executor’s perjury,  I desired Mr.
De Luc to be so good as to be present at my admitting
him ; for he had brought the letter himself.  At tirst,
indeed,  I was strongly tempted to refuse seeing him  ; hut
when I considered my belief in his baseness was without
proof,  I felt I had no right to decline hearing him speak
for himself.

In he came,  looking precisely like one of the Irish
chairmen in  ‘The Jealous Wife,’ who attempt to smuggle
away old Russet;  black and all black — dress,  hair,  and
countenance ; sturdy,  strong,  decided,  and ill-marked were
his face and figure,  yet perplexed,  stammering,  and un-
certain his speech  ; he had a thick stick in his hand,  and
his whole appearance was really tremendous.

He produced the will;  every word showed its falsehood
more strongly.  It left James Columb,  a cousin,  who
resides with Mr.  Walpole,  joint heir:  it specified nothing ;
the will miofht have served for anv man of anv fortune in
any kingdom.

I asked wdiy he had held it back so long.

He answered,  he had written to me a week ago.

I found he had sjielt my name Burnet,  and the letter
had missed me.

“ Even then,”  I cried,  “ my servant had been dead a
week.  Why did you not immediately send?”

He had waiteil to prove the will.

There could he no occasion for that in so small a

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

157

concern if there were no doubt of its validity.  Proved,
however,  it was,  and signed and sealed at Doctors’
Commons  !

After much discussion the result was,  that he should
meet M.  Huguenon at my apartment at St.  James’s the
ne.xt day.

The next day I had a message from James Columb,
charging me not to pay this man,  whom he believed a
cheat,  and honestly declining to share in any such per-
jury ; but persisting all should go to the sisters.

I was pleased to see my good Columb had left a rela-
tion of worth so like his own.

This miserable being never came.  Pie durst not face
M.  Pluguenon,  who knew him well,  and who besjged me
to pay no regard to him,  as he was a man of the very
worst character,  though also a Swiss.

I then settled,  with this M.  Huguenon and Mr.  De
Luc and my father,  to pay nothing further but to Philip
or James Columb,  both servants of Mr.  Walpole.  Plere
the matter rested till October.

Por the miscellanies of this month I have no memo-
randums. The only pleasant part of it is well known to
you,  unrecorded.

I was obliged to receive Mr.  Bentham in order to soften
returning to him his son’s MS.  iMemoirs nnviewed.
I think I have mentioned Her Majesty declined looking
at them from prudential motives.  He made a very long
visit,  and seemed perfectly good-humoured and well sa-
tisfied ; he appears to be a very worthy,  open-hearted,
cheerful,  and happy character.  He settled much future
acquaintance”  by bringing me acquainted with Mrs.
Bentham  ! — 0,  very much  ! thought I, — nothing so easy  !

]5S

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.  '

Queen’s Lodge,  Windsor.  \

October. — I open again with my poor Columb.  How  !
little did he imagine his singular kindness would involve

D O

me in such difficulties!  but,  as I heard from  ]M.  Cuenod,
he certainly resolved against telling any one what money
was in my hands,  that there might be no claim upon me.
Worthy,  affectionate creature ! — how often and how long j
shall I miss him 1

I had been returned here but a short time when I re-
ceived a letter from an attorney,  Mr.  F.  Matthews,  de-  i
siring me to pay forthwith to Peter Bayond the sum in
my hands of the late Jacob Columb 1

It was now necessary to apply to the cousins.  I there-
fore took the courageous step of addressing myself to
Mr.  Walpole himself,  that through him I might act with
them.  His former kindness to me was a secret stimulus
to assure me he would not take amiss such a call upon
his remembrance and his time.

I opened my cause thus — or to this effect : — i

“If Mr.  Walpole has still the goodness to remember  ‘
an old acquaintance,  long lost to all apparent claim for
that honour,  he is requested to spare his servant,  James
Columb,  to call at her apartment ne.\t Thursday,  at St.
James’s Palace,  about two o’clock  ; as she wishes to learn
from said James Columb what he would have her do
with the small sum of money still remaining in her hands
of her late servant,  Jacob Columb,  his cousin.  She re-
ceived his message ten days ago requiring her not to pay
it to one Peter Bayond,  but this morning she has had a
letter from an attorney with reverse directions.”

Thus you see I came to the point in a very business-
like manner.  But,  as I thought he might have more ac-
quaintance at St.  James’s Palace than one,  I concluded
it would not be amiss to intimate a little who addressed

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

159

him — which I did in a rather quaint way,  somewhat
suited to Strawberry Hill,  as thus:  And now can Mr.

Walpole pardon this abrupt and troublesome intrusion
from one who seemed at least consigned to silence and
quiet  ? she will not say to oblivion,  lest a quotation should
occur for an answer — Seemed,  madam  ? nay,  you were  !’
She trusts,  however,  there can be no local impropriety
in bringing herself again to life,  purely to speak for the
dead  ; yet her courage of renovation does not amount to
expecting a place in the memory of Mr.  Walpole without
calling to its aid that she has the honour to be,  &c.  &c.,
F.  Burney.”

Never was quaintness so successful.  A letter filled
with the most flattering kindness was brought to me at
St.  James’s by his servant,  Philip Columb.  I shall show
it you when we meet,  as it is too long to copy : but there
is one paragraph at the conclusion so striking in this
present juncture,  that I am tempted to put aside my
blushes,  and give it you at once ; especially as it was
read,  with singular opportuneness,  by my dearest father.
After the business part,  this follows: —

“As this will come to you by my servant,  give me
leave to add another word on your most unfounded idea
that I can forget you,  because it is almost impossible for
me even to meet you.  Believe me,  I heartily regret that
privation,  but would not repine,  were your situation,
either in point of fortune or position,  equal in any decree
to your merit.  But were your talents given to be buried
in obscurity?  \ou have retired from the world to a
closet at Court — where,  indeed,  you will still discover
mankind,  though not disclose it ; for if you could pene-
trate its characters in the earliest glimpse of its superficies,
will it escape your piercing eye when it shrinks from your
inspection,  knowing that you have the mirror of truth in

IGO

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

your pocket? — I will not embarrass voii by saying more,
nor would have you take notice of or reply to what I have
said:  judge,  only,  that feeling hearts reflect,  not forget.
Wishes that are empty look like vanity; — my vanity is to
be thought capable of esteeming you as much as you
deserve,  and to be reckoned,  though a very distant,  a
most sincere friend, — and,  give me leave to say,  dear
madam,  your most obedient humble servant,

“ IIoR.  Walpole.

“Strawberry Hill,  October,  '90.'’

It was not only pleasure I received from this extreme
kindness,  but real use  : such an expression as that I have
marked under,  from such a man,  operated most power-
fully upon a loved paternal heart,  that,  from time to
time,  is strengthened in its plans by assurances of ap-
probation from those whose opinion is of weight,  and
worthy of counterbalancing such worldly wights as will
probably start up in censure,  wonder,  and objecting.

In my answer to Mr.  Walpole,  I told him that,  even
from that closet in which he had deposited me,  I could
look for truth in words,  and expect there might be mean-
ing in professions;  therefore,  I ventured to rely upon his
sincerity and crave his advice how to proceed.  I then
stated the case more fully.

I received from him the kindest of answers immedi-
ately, ofthring to join his own security with his servant’s,
to insure me from ever more being troubled upon this
subject,  and  ])rotesting that if,  at any time,  I could
employ him in any great or little service,  it was a lni[)-
piness I owed him,”  and finishing with warmest and most
cordial professions of a regard,  with which I am extremely
flattered.

You will not want to be told that I declined his gene-

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

161

rous offer of security.  I could not bear to involve in any
such possible embarrassment a much nearer and dearer
friend  ; but I thankfully accepted his counsel,  and re-
solved upon paying the whole into the hands of his ser-
vants, the Columbs,  assuring him,  at the same time,  that
I had now in my possession a security much more valu-
able to me than any indemnity in money matters,  namely,
that of the kindness and the remembrance with which he
honoured me.

Would you not,  now,  have supposed this vexatious
business,  as far as it regarded me,  at an end  ? No such
thing!  I had meetings,  writings,  consultations,  torments
about it innumerable;  and this vile Peter Bayond followed
me with incessant menace,  though he was afraid and
ashamed of encountering IM.  Iluguenon,  his country-
man.

I was reduced,  at last,  to entreat my dear father to
beg counsel of Mr.  Batt.  ]\Ir.  Batt was just gone to
Twickenham I He then kindly applied to Mr.  Wood-
cock, whom I know not,  though I was formerly much
acquainted with Lady Shelley,  his sister,  as you may re-
member from my Brighthelinstone journal.

Mr.  Woodcock,  with the most pleasant alacrity,  un-
dertook the business for me,  which he settled,  after much
trouble and a thousand difficulties,  in a manner the most
fiiendly on his own part,  though the most mortifying to
IMi.  Walpole and myself;  for l^eter Bayond obtained
halt the property,  from persisting he would else sustain a
lawsuit,  in which Mr.  Woodcock assured me I must
necessarily be involved in expenses that would double the
whole of what my j>oor servant had left!

The other half the cousin received.

My whole comfort is,  that the poor ill-used sisters,  at
least,  had never expected what they thus lost;  for poor

M

VOL.  V.

IS-  DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IV.

Col limb had been deeply in debt till he lived with me,
and they were not upon good terms.

The great kindness of Mr.  Walpole has been all my
solace for this disturbance.

I could not forbear concluding my letter with telling
him that the opinion I enclosed for him had almost petri-
fied me,  and that,  if such was our chance of justice  ^Yith
law,  we must agree never to relate this little history to
the democrats abroad,  lest we should all be brought
forward to illustrate the necessity of universal Reform,
and the National Assembly should echo with all our
names  !

In his answer he agrees to this in strong terms.

I was ill the whole of this month,  though not once with
sufficient seriousness for confinement,  yet with a diffi-
culty of proceeding as usual so great,  that the day was a
burthen — or rather,  myself a burthen to the day.  A
languor so prodigious,  with so great a failure of strength
and spirit,  augmented almost hourly,  that I several times
thought I must be compelled to excuse my constancy of
attendance  ; but there was no one to take my place,  ex-
cept Miss Planta,  whose health is insufficient for her own,
and Mile.  iMontmollin,  to whom such an addition of duty
is almost distraction.  I could not,  therefore,  but work
on while to work at any rate able.

I now drew up,  however,  my memorial,  or rather,  showed
it now to my dearest father.  He so much approved it,
that he told me he would not have a comma of it altered.
I will copy it for you.  It is as respectful and as grateful
as I had words at command to make it,  and expressive
of strong devotion and attachment ; but it fairly and
firmly states that my strength is inadequate to the duties

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

163

of my charge,  and,  therefore,  that I humbly crave per-
mission to resign it and retire into domestic life.  It was
written in my father’s name and my own.

I had now that dear father’s desire to present it upon
the first auspicious moment : and O ! with what a mi.\-
ture of impatience and dread unspeakable did I look for-
ward to such an opportunity  !

The war was still undecided  : still I inclined to wait
its issue,  as I perpetually brought in my wishes for poor
James,  though without avail.  Major Garth,  our last
Equerry,  was raised to a high post in the West Indies,
and the rank of Colonel.  I recommended James to his
notice and regard if they met;  and a promise most readily
and pleasantly made to seek him out and present him to
his brother,  the General,  if they ever served in the same
district,  was all,  I think,  that my Court residence obtained
for my marine department of interest !

Meanwhile,  one morning at Kew^,  Miss Cambridge
■was so much alarmed at my declining state of health that
she would take no denial to my seeing and consulting
Mr.  Dundas.  He ordered me the bark,  and it strength-
ened me so much for awhile,  that I was too much re-
cruited for presenting my sick memorial,  which I there-
fore cast aside.

Mrs.  Ord spent near a week at Windsor in the begin-
ning of this month.  I was ill,  however,  the whole time,
and suffered so much from my official duties,  that my
good Mrs.  Ord,  day after day,  evidently lost something
of her partiality to ray situation,  from witnessing fatigues
of which she had formed no idea,  and difficulties and dis-
agreeabilities in carrying on a wreck’s intercourse,  even
with so respectable a friend,  wdiich I believe she had
thought impossible.

Two or three times she burst forth into ejaculations

M 2

164

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

strongly expressive of fears for my health and sorrow at
its exhausting calls.  I could not but be relieved in my
own mind that this much-valued,  most maternal friend
should thus receive a conviction beyond all powers of
representation,  that my place was of a sort to require a
strength foreign to my make.

She left me in great and visible uneasiness,  and wrote
to me continually for bills of health.  I never yet so
much loved her,  for,  kind as I have always found her,  I
never yet saw in her so much true tenderness.

In this month,  also,  I first heard of the zealous exer-
tions and chivalrous intentions of Mr.  Windham.
Charles told me they never met without his denouncing
the whole thunders of his oratory against the confine-
ment by which he thought my health injured  ; with his
•opinion that it must be counteracted speedily by elope-
.raent,  no other way seeming effectual.

But with Charlotte he came more home to the point.
Their vicinity in Norfolk occasions their meeting,  though
very’ seldom at the house of Mr.  Francis,  who resents
his prosecution of Mr.  Hastings,  and never returns his
visits  ; but at assemblies at Aylsham and at Lord Buck-
ingham’s dinners they are certain of now and then en-
countering.

This summer,  when Mr.  Windham went to Felbrig,
his Norfolk seat,  they soon met at an assembly,  and he
immediately opened upon his disapprobation of her
sister’s monastic life,  adding,  “ I do not venture to speak
thus freely upon this subject to everybody,  but to you I
think I may;  at least,  I hope it.”

Poor dear Charlotte was too full-hearted for disguise,
and they presently entered into a confidential cabal,  that
made her quite disturbed and provoked when hurried
away.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

165

1790]

From this time,  whenever they met,  they were pretty
much of a mind.  “I cannot see you,”  he always cried,
“without recurring to that painful subject — ^your sister’s
situation.”  He then broke forth in an animated offer of
his own services to induce Dr.  Burney to tinish such a
captivity,  if he could flatter himself he might have any
influence.

Charlotte eagerly promised him the greatest,  and he
gave her his promise to go to work.

AVfliat a noble Quixote  ! How much 1 feel obliged to
him  ! How happy,  when I may thank him 1

He then pondered upon ways and means.  He had
already sounded my father  : “ but it is resolution,”  he
added,  “not inclination,  Dr.  Burney wants.”  After
some further reflection,  he then fixed upon a plan;  “1
will set the Literary Club upon him  ! ” he cried  : “ Miss
Burney has some very true admirers there,  and I am sure
they will all eagerly assist.  We will present him a peti-
tion— an address.”

Much more passed  : Mr.  Windham expressed a degree
of interest and kindness so cordial,  that Charlotte says
she quite longed to shake hands with him;  and if any
success ever accrues,  she certainly must do it.

Frightened,  however,  after she returned home,  she
feared our dearest father might unfairly be overpowered,
and frankly wrote him a recital of the whole,  counselling
him to see Mr.  Windham in private before a meeting at
the Club could take place.

And now for a scene a little surprising.

The beautiful chapel of St.  George,  repaired and
finished by the best artists at an immense expense,  which
was now opened after a very long shutting up for its pre-
parations, brought innumerable strangers to Windsor,
and,  among others,  Mr.  Boswell.

166

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

This I heard,  in my way to the cliapel,  from Mr,  Tur-
bulent, who overtook me,  and mentioned having met Mr.
Boswell at the Bishop of Carlisle’s the evening before.

He proposed bringing him to call upon me;  but this I
declined,  certain how little satisfaction would be given
here by the entrance of a man so famous for compiling
anecdotes.  But yet I really wished to see him again,  for
old acquaintance sake,  and unavoidable amusement from
his oddity and good humour,  as well as respect for the
object of his constant admiration,  my revered Dr.  Johnson.

I therefore told Mr.  Turbulent I should be extremely glad
to speak with him after the service was over.

Accordingly,  at the gate of the choir,  Mr.  Turbulent
brought him to me.  We saluted with mutual glee;  his
comic-serious face and manner have lost nothing of their  |
wonted singularity  ; nor yet have his mind and language,  ^
as you will soon confess.

*^"1 am extremely glad to see you indeed,”  he cried,

but very sorry to see you here.  ^ly dear ma’am,  why j
do you stay  ? — it won’t do,  ma’am  ! you must resign  ! — |

we can put up with it no longer.  I told my good host i
the Bishop so last night;  we are all grown quite out-  j
rageous !”

o

Whether I laughed the most,  or stared the most,  I am
at a loss to say;  but I hurried away from the cathedral,
not to have such treasonable declarations overheard,  for
we were surrounded by a multitude.

He accompanied me,  however,  not losing one moment
in continuing his exhortations:  “If you do not quit,
ma’am,  very soon,  some violent measures,  I assure you,
will be taken.  We shall address Dr.  Burney in a
body  ; I am ready to make the harangue myself.  We
shall fall upon him all at once.”

I stopped him to inquire about Sir Joshua ; he said he

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

167

1790]

saw him very often,  and that his spirits were very good.
I asked about Mr.  Burke’s book.  O,”  cried he,  “ t
will come out next week : ’tis the first book m the world,
except my own,  and that’s coming out also very soon ;
only 1 Avant your help.”

“ My help  ?”

‘'Yes,  madam;  you must give me some of your choice
little notes of the Doctor’s ; we have seen him long
enough upon stilts ; I want to show him in a new light.
Grave Sam,  and great Sam,  and solemn Sam,  and learned
Sam, — all these he has appeared over and over.  Now 1
want to entwine a wreath of the graces across his brow  ;
1 want to show him as gay Sam,  agreeable Sam,  pleasant
Sam ; so you must help me with some of his beautiful
billets to yourself.”

I evaded this by declaring 1 had not any stores at
hand.  He proposed a thousand curious expedients to
get at them,  but 1 was invincible.

Then 1 was hurrying on,  lest 1 should be too late.  He
followed eagerly,  and again exclaimed,  “But,  ma’am,  as I
tell you,  this won’t do — you must resign off-hand!  Why,
I would farm you out myself tor double,  treble the
money I I wish I had the regulation of such a farm, — ^\et
I am no farmer-general.  But I should like to farm you,
and so I will tell Dr.  Burney.  I mean to address him;  I
have a speech ready for the first opportunity.”

He then told me his  ‘Life of Dr.  Johnson’  was nearly
printed,  and took a proof-sheet out of his pocket to show
me ; with crowds passing and repassing,  knowing me well,
and staring well at him  : for we were now at the iron rails
of the Queen s Lodge.

I stopped;  [ could not ask him in  : I saw he expected
it,  and was reduced to apologise,  and tell him I must
attend the Queen immediately.

]68

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

He uttered again stronger and stronger exhortations
for my retreat,  accompanied by expressions which 1 was
obliged to check in their bud.  But finding he had no
chance for entering,  he stopped me again at the gate,  and
said he would read me a part of his work.

There was no refusing this  : and lie began,  with a letter
of Dr.  Johnson’s to himself.  He read it in strong imita-
tion of the Doctor’s manner,  very well,  and not carica-
ture. But Mrs.  Schwellenberg was at her window,  a
crowd Avas gathering to stand round the rails,  and the
King and Queen and Royal Family now approached from
the Terrace.  I made a rather quick apology,  and,  with
a step as quick as my now Aveakened limbs have left in
my pOAver,  I hurried to my apartment.

V on may suppose I had inquiries enough,  from all
around,  of  “Who Avas the gentleman I was talking to at
the rails?”  And an injunction rather frank not to admit
liim beyond those limits.

HoAvever,  I saAv him again the next morning,  in coming
from early prayers,  and he again rencAved his remon-
strances, and his petition for my letters of Dr.  Johnson.

I cannot consent to print private letters,  even of a man
so justly celebrated,  Avhen addressed to myself:  no,  I
shall hold sacred those revered and but too scarce testi-
monies of the high honour his kindness conferred upon
me.  One letter I have from him that is a masterpiece
of elegance and kindness united.  ’TAvas his last.

Nove:\iber. — This month Avill be very brief of annals;
I Avas so ill,  so unsettled,  so unhappy during every day,
that I kept not a memorandum.

All the short benefit I had received from the bark was
noAv at an end  : languor,  feverish nights,  and restless days
were incessant.  My memorial Avas always in my mind  ;
my courage never rose to bringing it from my letter-case.

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

169

Yet the war was over,  the hope of a ship for my brother
demolished,  and my liealth required a change of life.

The Queen was all graciousness ; and her favour and
confidence and smiles redoubled my difficulties.  I saw
she had no suspicion but that I was hers for life ; and,
unimportant as I felt myself to her,  in any comparison
with those for whom I quitted her,  I yet knew not how to
give her the unpleasant surprise of a resignation for which
I saw her wholly unprepared.

It is true,  my depression of spirits and e.\treme altera-
tion of person might have operated as a preface ; for I
saw no one,  except my Royal Mistress and Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg,  who noticed not the change,  or who failed to
pity and question me upon my health and my fatigues  ;
but as they alone saw it not,  or mentioned it not,  that
afforded me no resource.  And thus,  with daily inten-
tion to present my petition and conclude this struggle,
night always returned with the effort unmade,  and the
w'atcbful morning arose fresh to new-  purposes that seemed
only formed for demolition.  And the month expired as
it began,  with a desire the most strenuous of liberty and
peace,  combated by reluctance unconquerable to give
pain,  displeasure,  or distress to my very gracious Royal
Mistress.

For the rest,  all I can mention is in black unison  :
the loss of our very amiable cousin,  one of the first and
greatest favourites of our earliest life,  and the affliction
of all his disconsolate family.  This was the sadly prin-
cipal event of this sadly wearing month.

Poor Dr.  Lort too now'  breathed his last,  from a terrible
accident of an overturn in a carriage.

The worthy and every way meriting Mr.  Thomas Willis
has succeeded him as prebendary of St.  Paul’s.

170

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

Miss Burney to Mrs. .

November 23rd,  ‘90.

* * *

I own myself entirely of Mrs.  Montagu’s opinion
about Mr,  Eurke’s book;  it is the noblest,  deepest,  most
animated,  and exalted work that I think I have ever
read.  I am charmed to hear its eloge from Mrs.  Mon-
tagu ; it is a tribute to its excellence which reflects
high honour on her own candour,  as  .she was one
of those the most vehemently irritated against its author
but a short time since.  How can man,  with all his
inequalities,  be so little resembling to himself at dif-
ferent periods as this man  ? He is all ways a prodigy,
— in fascinating talents and incomprehensible inconsist-
encies.

When I read,  however,  such a book as this,  I am apt
to imagine the whole of such a being must be right,  as
well as the parts,  and that the time may come when the
mists which obscure the motives or incentives to those
actions and proceedings which seem incongruous may be
chased away,  and we may find the internal intention
had never been faulty,  however ill appearances had sup-
})orted any claim to right.  Have you yet read it?  You
will find it to require so deep and so entire an attention,
that perhaps you may delay it till in more established
health ; but read it you will,  and with an admiration you
cannot often feel excited.

M e do not expect to go to town till a day or two before
the birthday,  the 19th of January:  would that time suit

my dear IM ? Indeed I would not for the world it

should be deferred any later;  and that time will suit me,
I believe,  as well as any part of tbe year.  You know
the uncertainty of all things here.  F.  B.

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

171

December. — Leaving a little longer in the lurch the
late months,  let me endeavour to give to my beloved
friends some account of this conclusion of the year while
yet in being.

j\Iy loss of health was now so notorious,  that no part
of the house could wholly avoid acknowledging it ; yet
was the terrible picquet the catastrophe of every evening,
though frequent pains in my side forced me,  three or four
times in a game,  to creep to my own room for hartshorn
and for rest.  And so weak and faint 1 was become,  that
1 was compelled to put my head out into the air,  at all
hours,  and in all weathers,  from time to time,  to recover
the power of breathing,  which seemed not seldom almost
withdrawn.

Her Majesty was very kind during this time,  and the
Princesses interested themselves about me with a sweet-
ness very grateful to me ; indeed,  the whole household
showed compassion and regard,  and a general opinion
that I was falling into a decline ran through the esta-

o o

blishment.  Miss Planta was particularly attentive and
active to afford me help and advice  ; Mdlle.  IMontmol-
lin’s eyes glfstened when we met;  Miss Goldsworthy
declared slie thought my looks so altered as scarcely to
be known again ; Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave enjoined
me earnestly to ask leave for respite and recruit,  lest the
Queen should lose me entirely by longer delay;  IMiss
Gomme honestly protested she thought it became a folly
to struggle on any longer against strength and nature ;
Mr.  De Luc was so much struck with the change as to
tell the Queen herself that a short and complete retire-
ment from attendance seemed essential to my restoration  ;
and even Mr.  Turbulent himself called one day upon me,
and frankly counselled me to resign at once,  for,  in my

DIARY AND LETTERS

172

[Part IV.

present state,  a life such as that I led was enough to
destroy me.

Thus there seemed about my little person a universal
commotion  ; and it spread much further,  amongst those
I have never or slightly mentioned.  \ ou will not,  there-
fore, be surprised to hear that my true and faithful friend
l\Irs.  De Luc partook so largelv in the general alarm as to
come to me,  with her kind eves overtiowing with tears,
to entreat me,  without the risk of farther delay,  to relin-
quish a situation of which the fatigue would else prove
fatal to me.  There seemed.  Indeed,  but one opinion,
that resignation of place or of life was the only remaining
alternative.

There seemed now no time to be lost;  when I saw my
dear father he recommended to me to be speedy,  and my
mother was very kind in urgency for immediate measures.
I could not,  however,  summon courage to present my
memorial ; my heart always failed me,  from seeing the
Queen s entire freedom from such an expectation : for
though I was frequently so ill in her presence that 1 could
hardly stand,  I saw she concluded me,  while life remained,
inevitably hers.

Finding mv inability unconquerable,  I at length de-
termined U[)on consulting Mr.  Francis.  I wrote to
Charlotte a faithful and minute account of myself,  with
all my attacks — cough,  pain in the side,  weakness,  sleep-
lessness, &c. — at full length,  and begged Mr.  Francis's
opinion how I must proceed.  ^ ery kindly he wrote di-
rectly to mv father,  exhorting instantaneous resignation,
as all that stood before me to avert some dangerous ma-
lady.

The dear Charlotte at the same time wrote to me con-
iuring mv prompt retreat with the most affecting earnest-

ness.

1790]

OF THE AITHOR OF EVZUXA-

173

The uneasiness that preyed upon mv spirits in a task
so dilhcult to perform for myself,  joined to mv dailv de-
clension in health,  was now so apparent,  that,  though
I could go no farther,  I paved the wav for an openins:,
by ownini;  to the Queen that Mr.  Francis had been con-
sulted upon my health.

The Queen now frequently inquired concerning his
answer ; but as I knew he had written to mv father,  I
deferred giving the result till I had had a final conference
with that dear parent.  I told Her Majestv mv father
would show me the letter when I saw him.

T.  his I saw raised for the first time a surmise that
something was in asritation,  though I am certain the sus-
picion did not exceed an expectation that leave would be
requested for a short absence to recruit.

My dearest father,  all kindness and goodness,  vet all
alarm,  thought time could never be more favourable;
and when next I saw him at Chelsea,  I wrote a second
memorial to enclose the original one.

iih a beatini;  heart,  and every pulse throbbing,  I re-
turned thus armed to the Queen's house.

M rs.  Schwellenberg sent for me to her room.  I could
hardly articulate a word to her.  My agitation was so
great that I was compelled to acknowledge something
veiy awful was impending in my afikirs,  and to beg she
would make no present inquiries.

I had not meant to employ her in the business,  nor to
name it to her,  but I was too much disturbed for conceal-
ment or evasion.

She seemed really sorry,  and behaved with a humanitv
I had not had much reason to expect.

I spent a terrible time till I went to the Queen at night,
spiriting myself up for mv task,  and vet finding appre-
hension gain ground everw moment.

174

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg had already been some lime with
Her IMajesty when I was summoned.  I am sure she had
already mentioned the little she had gathered.  I could
hardly perform my customary offices from excess of tre-
pidation, The Queen looked at me with the most inqui-
sitive solicitude.  When left with her a moment I tried
vainly to make an opening:  I could not.  She was too
much impressed herself by my manner to wait long.  She
soon inquired what answer had arrived from  ]\Ir.  Francis  ?

That he could notj I said,  prescribe at a distance.

I hoped this would be understood,  and said no more.
The Queen looked much perplexed,  but made no answer.

The next morning I was half dead with real illness,  ex-
cessive nervousness,  and the struggle of what I had to force
myself to perform.  The Queen again was struck with
my appearance,  which I believe indeed to have been
shocking.  When I was alone with her,  she began upon
Mr.  F fancis with more inquiry.  I then tried to articulate
that I had something of deep consequence to myself to
lay before Her Majesty ; but that I was so unequal in my
weakened state to speak it,  that I had ventured to com-
mit it to writing,  and entreated permission to produce it.

She could hardly hear me,  yet understood enough to
give immediate consent.

I then begged to know if I might present it myself,  or
whether I should give it to Mrs.  Schwellenberg.

“ O,  to me!  to me  !”  she cried,  with kind eagerness.

She added,  however,  not then,  as she was going to
breakfast.

This done was already some relief,  terrible as was all
that remained;  but I now knew I must go on,  and that
all my fears and horrors were powerless to sto])  me.

This was a drawing-room day.  I saw the King at St.
James’s,  and he made the most gracious inquiries about

17901

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

175

my health  : so did each of the Princesses,  I found they
were now all aware of its failure.

The Queen proposed to me to see Dr.  Gisburne : the
King seconded tlie proposition.  Tliere was no refusing ;
yet;,  just now%  it was distressing to comply.

The next mornings Friday,  when again I w'as alone
with the Queen,  she named the subject,  and told me she
would rather I should give the paper to the Schwellen-
berg,  who had been lamenting to her my want of conti-
! dence in her,  and saying I confided and told everything
I to the Queen.  “ I answered,”  continued tier Majesty,
that you were always very good  ; but that,  with regard
; to confiding,  you seemed so happy with all your family,

I and to live so well together,  that there was nothing to
; say.”

j I now perceived Mrs,  Schw'ellenberg suspected some
j dissension at home was the cause of my depression.  I
1 was sorry not to deliver my memorial to the principal
I person,  and yet glad to have it to do where I felt so much
less compunction in giving pain.

! I now desired an audience of Mrs.  Schwellenberg.

I With what trembling agitation did I deliver her my paper,

■ requesting her to have the goodness to lay it at the feet
I of the Queen before Her Majesty left towm  ! We w'ere
then to set out for Windsor before tw'elve o’clock.  IMrs.

1 Schwellenberg herself remained in toivn.

! Here let me copy the memorial.

; Most hiimhJy presented to Her Majesty.

!Madam,

With the deepest sense of your IMajesty’s good-
ness and condescension,  amounting even to sweetness —
to kindness — who can wonder I should never have been

DIARY AND LETTERS

176

[Part IV.

able to say what I know not how to write — that I hnd
iny strength and health unequal to my duty  ?

Satisfied that I have regularly been spared and fa-
voured by your INIajesty’s humane consideration to the
utmost,  I could never bring myself to the painful con-
fession of my secret disquietude ; but I have long felt
creeping upon me a languor,  a feebleness,  that makes,  at
times,  the most common attendance a degree of capital
pain to me,  and an exertion that I could scarce have
made,  hut tor the revived alacrity with which your Ma-
jesty’s constant graciousness has inspired me,  and would
still,  I believe,  inspire me,  even to my latest hour,  while
in your Majesty’s immediate presence.  I kept this to
myself while I thought it might wear away, — or,  at least,
I only communicated it to obtain some medical advice:
hut the weakness,  though it comes only in fits,  has of
late so much increased,  that I have hardly known how,
many days,  to keep myself about — or to rise in the
morning,  or to stay up at night.

At length,  however,  as my constitution itself seems
slowly,  yet surely,  giving w'ay,  my father became alarmed.

I must not enter,  here,  upon his mortification and dis-
appointment : the health and preservation of his daugh-
ter could alone he more precious to him than your Ma-
jesty’s protection.

With my own feelings upon the subject it would ill
become me to detain your Majesty,  and the less,  as 1 am
fully sensible my place,  in point of its real business,  may
easily be far better supplied ; — in point of sincere devo-
tion to your Majesty,  I do not so readily yield.  I can
only,  therefore,  most humbly entreat that your Majesty
will deign to accept from my father and myself the most
dutiful acknowledgments for the uniform benignity so
graciously shown to me during the whole of my attend-

OF THK AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

1790]

177

ance.  My Aulier had originally been apprehensive of
my inability,  with regard to strength,  for sustaining any
but the indulgence of u domestic life  : but your Majesty’s
justice and liberality will make every allowance for the
flattered feelings of a parent’s heart,  which could not en-
dure, untried,  to relinquish for his daughter so high an
honour as a personal office about your Majesty.

1 dare not,  iMadam,  presume to hope that your Ma-
jesty’s condescension will reach to the smallest degree of
concern at parting with me ; but permit me.  Madam,
humbly,  earnestly,  and fervently,  to solicit that I may
not be deprived of the mental benevolence of your Ma-
jesty, which so thankfully I have e.xperienced,  and so
gratefully must for ever remember.

That every blessing,  every good,  may light upon your
]\Iajesties here,  and await a future and happier period
hereafter,  will be always amongst the first prayers of,

iSIadam,

\ our Majesty's
Ever devoted,  ever grateful.

Most attached,  and most dutiful
Subject and servant,

Fkances Burxky.

Mhlh this,  though written so long ago,  I only wrote an
explanatory note to accompany it,  which I will also
coj)y  : —

M.vdam,

May I yet humbly presume to entreat your Ma-
jesty’s patience for a few'  added lines,  to say that the
address which I now most respectfully lay at your Ma-
jesty’s feet was drawn up two months ago,  when first I
VOL.  V.

N

178

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

felt so extreme a weakness as to render the smallest ex-
ertion a fatigue  ? While I waited,  however,  for firmness
to present it,  I took the bark,  and found myself,  for some
time,  so much amended,  that I put it aside,  and my father,
perceiving me better,  lost his anxious uneasiness for my
trying a new mode of life.  But the good effect has,  of
late,  so wholly failed,  that an entire change of air and
manner of living are strongly recommended as the best
chance for restoring my shattered health.  We hold it,
therefore,  a point of the grateful duty we owe to your
Majesty’s goodness and graciousness,  to make this melan-
choly statement at once,  rather than to stay till absolute
incapacity might disable me from offering one small but
sincere tribute of profound respect to your Majesty, —
the only one in my power — that of continuing the high  ,
honour of attending your  ]\Iajesty,  till your Majesty’s i
own choice,  time,  and convenience nominate a successor.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg took it,  and promised me her ser-
vices, but desired to know its contents.  I begged vainly
to be excused speaking them.  She persisted,  and I then
was compelled to own they contained my resignation.

How aghast she looked  ! — how inflamed with wrath  ! —
how petrified with astonishment!  It was truly a dreadful
moment to me.

She expostulated on such a step,  as if it led to destruc-
tion : she offered to save me from it,  as if the peace of  ?
my life depended on averting it ; and she menaced me  ^
with its bad consequences,  as if life itself,  removed trom
these walls,  would become an evil.

I plainly recapitulated the suffeiing state in which I
had lived for the last three months  ; the difficulty with
which I had waded through even the most common fa-
tigues of the day ; the constraint of attendance,  however

1790j

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

179

lionourable,  to an invalid  ; and the impracticability of
pursuing such a life,  when thus enfeebled,  with the small-
est chance of ever recovering the health and strength
which it had demolished.

lo all this she began a vehement eulofjinm on the su-
perior happiness and blessing of my lot,  while under such
a protection  ; and angrily exhorted me not to forfeit what
I could never regain.

I then frankly begged her to forbear so painful a dis-
cussion, and told her the memorial was from my father
as well as myself — that I had no right or authority to
hesitate in delivering it— that the Queen herself was pre-
I paied to expect it — and that I had promised mv father not
! to go again to  ^\'indsor till it was presented.  I entreated
her,  therefore,  to have the goodness to show it at once.

1 his  ^\  as unanswerable,  and she left me with the
paper m her hand,  slowly conveying it to its place of des-
tination.

Just as she was gone,  I was called to Dr.  Gisburne^
oi,  lathei,  without being called,  I found him in mv room,
as I returned to it.

. 1 hink if my mind,  now,  wanted not medicine the most !

j I told him,  however,  my corporeal complaints  ; and he
I ordered me opium and three glasses of wine in the dav,

I and recommended rest to me,  and an application to retire
I to my friends for some weeks,  as freedom from anxiety
I vas as necessary to my restoration as freedom from at-
I tendance.

During this consultation I was called to Mrs.  Schwel-

lenberg.  Do you think I breathed as I went alonc^  ^

No ! ‘ ® ■

I She received me,  nevertheless,  with complacency and
I smiles;  , she began a laboured panegyric of her own
I friendly zeal and goodness,  and then said she had a pro-

180

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IV.

posal to make me,  which she considered as the most for-
tunate turn my affairs could take,  and as a proof that I
should ffnd lier the best friend I had in the world.  She
then premised that she had shown the paper, — that the
Queen had read it,  and said it was very modest,  and no-
thing improper.

Her proposal was,  that I should have leave of absence
for six weeks,  to go about and change the air,  to Chelsea,
and Norbury Park,  and Ccvpitan Phillips,  and Mr.  Fran-
cis, and  ]Mr.  Cambrick,  which would get me quite well  ;
and,  durinji that time,  she would eng-age  ^llle.  Mont-
mollin to perform my office.

I w^as much disturbed at this  ; and though rejoiced and
relieved to understand that the Queen had read my me-
morial without displeasure,  I was grieved to see it was not
regarded as final.  I only replied I would communicate
her plan to my father.

Soon after this we set out for Windsor.

Here the first presenting myself before the Queen w'as
a task the heaviest,  if possible,  of any.  Yet I was ill
enough,  Fleaven knows,  to carry the apology of my retreat
in my countenance.  However,  it was a terrible effort.
I could hardly enter her room.  She spoke at once,  and
with infinite softness,  asking me how'  I did after my
journey?  “Not well,  indeed,”  I simply answered.  “But
better?”  she cried  ; “ are you not a little better  ? ”

I only shook my head ; I believe the rest of my frame
shook without my aid.

“ What  ! not a little  ? — not a little bit better  ? ” she
cried,  in the most soothing voice.

“To-day,  ma’am,”  I said,  “ I did indeed not expect to
he better.”

I then muttered something,  indistinctly enough,  of the
pain I had suffered in what I had done  ; she opened,  how-

1790]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

ISl

ever,  upon another subject immediately,  and no more was
said upon this.  But she was kind,  and sweet,  and gentle,
and all consideration with respect to my attendance.

I wrote the proposal to my poor father.  I received,
by return of post,  the most truly tender letter he ever
wrote me.  He returns thanks for the clemency with
which my melancholy memorial has been received,  and
is truly sensible of the high honour shown me in the new
proposition  ; but he sees my health so impaired,  my
strength so decayed,  my whole frame so nearly demo-
lished, that he apprehends anything short of a perma-
nent resignation,  that would ensure lasting rest and re-
cruit, might prove fatal,  lie quotes a letter from Mr.
Francis,  containing his opinion that I must even be
speedy in my retiring,  or risk the utmost danger;  and he
finishes a letter tilled with gratitude towards the Queen,
and affection to his daughter,  with his decisive opinion
that I cannot go on,  and his prayers and blessings on my
retreat.

The term  '‘speedy,”  in Mr.  Francis’s opinion,  deterred
me from producing this letter,  as it seemed indelicate and
unfair to hurry the Queen,  after offering her the fullest
lime.  I therefore waited till Mrs.  Schwellenberg came
to Windsor before I made any report of my answer.

A scene almost horrible ensued,  when I told Cerbera
the offer was declined.  She was too much enraged for
disguise,  and uttered the most furious expressions of in-
dignant contempt at our proceedings.  I am sure she
would gladly have confined us both in the Bastlle,  had
England such a misery,  as a fit place to bring us to our-
selves, from a daring so outrageous against imperial
wishes.

For the rest of this gloomy month and gloomy year,  a
few detached paragraphs must suffice.

DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.

lii'2

[Part IV

]Mr.  'lurbulent,  as I have told you,  won now all my
good will by a visit in this my sinking and altered state,
in which,  with very unafiected friendliness,  he counselled
and exhorted me to resign my office,  in order to secure
my recovery.

He related to me,  also,  his own most afflicting storj" —
his mortilications,  disappointments,  and ill-treatment ;
and perhaps my concern for his injuries contributed to
his complete restoration in my good will.

Another confidence soon followed,  of a sort far more
pleasant:  my good friend  'Port vihonneur, — Mile.  Mont-
mollin, — intorined me of her engagements with M.
d’Hspere-en-Dieu,  and with her hopes of his speedily
coming over to England to claim her,  and carry her to
his chateau en Languedoc.  I sincerely wish her happy,
and her prospects wear all promise of her fulfilling my
wish.  Adieu,  my dear friends  !

Adieu — undear December  !

Adieu — and away for ever,  most painful 1/90  !

PART V.

1791.

CONTENTS.

Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney— The Queen and Madame Sclnvel-
lenbeitj — Verses to Lord Harcourt by Queen Charlotte and
Miss Burney — Serious Illness of Miss Burney — Conference
■with the Queen — Her Opinion of IMiss Burney’s Charac-
ter— Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave and Lord Cardigan — Mrs.
Garrick — Hannah More — Mrs.  Lock — Projected Tour with
Mrs.  Ord — Conference with the Queen on Miss Burney’s Re-
tirement from Office — Mr.  Twining — Haydn — Dr.  "Willis — A
Day at the Trial of Warren Hastings — Defence of Hastings —
Old Acquaintance — Mr.  "Windham — Treatment of Hastings
by the Ministers — The Duke of Clarence — Birthday Etiquette
— Conversations with the King and Queen on Boswell’s  ‘ John-
son’— The Pleasures of Literary Composition — Arrival of IMiss
Burney’s Successor — Her final Retirement— Liberality of the
Queen.

184

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

PART A'.

1791.

Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney.

January,  1791.

Most dear Sir, — I luul no opjiortunity to put in
practice my plan of the montre.  I found,  by circnin-
stances,  a full expectation of some conceding and relent-
ing plan to follow my Chelsea visit.  A blank disappoint-
ment sat on the face I revere  ; a sharper austerity on
that I shrink from.

Comfortless enough this went on till this morn  : an
incident then occurred that enabled me to say I had
shown the montre to you. — “ And how does he like it?”
I was asked,  very gently.  “ It made him,  as me,  almost
melancholy,”  was my true answer.  It was felt and un-
derstood instantly.  But you must not encourage me-
lancholy thoughts,”  was very benignly spoken.  This has
revived me — I was drooping  ; and 1 am not much better in
my strength for this suspensive state  ! \ et,  I trust,  1 am
now finally comprehended,  and that we are mutually be-
lieved to be simple and single in what is proposed,  and,
consequently,  steady and unalterable.

Adieu,  dearest of dear padres  ! — Tins is the sum total
of all  : the detail must await our meeting  ; and we do
not go to town till the day before the birthday. — What
a hurry it will be !

I was asked what I had bought for the birthday  ?
That,  therefore is of course expected  !

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

185

1791]

Well ; “ God’s above all,” — as you love to quote ; so
I must keep up my spirits with that.

I thank Heaven,  there was much softness in the man-
ner of naming you this morning.  I see no ill-will mixed
with the reluctance ; which much consoles me.  I do
what is possible to avoid all discussion ; I see its
danger still so glaring.  How could 1 resist,  should the
Queen condescend to desire,  to ask,  that I would yet try
another year? — and another year would but be use-
lessly demolishing me;  for never could 1 explain to her
that a situation which unavoidably casts all my leisure
into the presence of Mrs.  Schwellenberg must necessa-
rily be subversive of my health,  because incompatible
with my peace,  my ease,  my freedom,  my spirits,  and my
affections.  The Queen is probably kept from any sus-
picion of the true nature of the case,  by the praises of
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who,  with all her asperity and per-
secution, is uncommonly partial to my society  ; because,
in order to relieve myself from sullen gloom,  or appa-
rent dependency,  I generally make my best exertions to
appear gay and chatty ; for when I can do this,  she for-
bears both rudeness and imperiousness.  She then,  I have
reason to believe,  says to the Queen,  as I know she does
to some others,  “ The Bernan bin reely agribble and
the Queen,  not knowing the incitement that forces my
elaborate and painful efforts,  may suppose I am lively at
heart,  when she hears I am so in discourse.  And there is
no developing this without giving the Queen the se-
verest embarrassment as well as chagrin.  I would not
turn informer for the world.  ’Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  too,
with all her faults,  is heart and soul devoted to her Royal
Mistress,  wdth the truest faith and loyaltv.  I hold,  there-
fore, silence on this subject to be a sacred duty.  To
return to you,  my dearest padre,  is the only road that is

186

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

open for my return to strength and comfort,  bodily and
mental.  I am inexpressibly grateful to the Queen,  but
I burn to be delivered from Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and I
pine to be again in the arms of my padre.

]\lost dear Sir,  your F.B.

You may suppose my recovery was not much forwarded
by a ball given at the Castle on Twelfth-Day.  The
Queen condescended to say that I might go to bed,  and
she would content herself with the wardrobe-woman,  in
consideration of my weak state  ; but then she exhorted
me not to mr.ke it known to the Schwellenberg,  who
would be quite wretched at such a thing.

I returned my proper thanks,  but declined the propo-
sal, so circumstanced,  assuring Her Majesty that it would
make me wretched to have an indulgence that could
produce an impropriety which would make Mrs.  Schwel-
Jenberg so through mv^  means.

And now to enliven a little:  what will you give me,
fair ladies,  for a copy of verses written between the
Queen of Great Britain and your most small little
journalist  ?

The morning of the ball the Queen sent for me,  and
said she had a fine pair of old-fashioned gloves,  white,
with stiff tops and a deep gold fringe,  which she meant
to send to her new Master of the Horse,  Lord Harcourt,
vvho was to be at the dance.  She wished to convey them
in a copy of verses,  of which she had composed three
lines,  but could not get on.  She told me her ideas,  and
I had the honour to help her in the metre ; and now I
have the honour to copy them from her own Royal
hand  : —

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

187

To the Earl of Harcourt.

Go,  happy gloves,  bedeck Earl Harcourt’s hand.

And let him know they come from fairy -land,

"Where ancient customs still retain their reign  ;

To modernize them all attempts were vain.

Go,  cries Queen Mab,  some noble owner seek,

"Who has a proper taste for the antique.

Now,  no criticising,  fair ladies  ! — the assistant was nei-
ther allowed a pen nor a moment,  but called upon to
help linish,  as she might have been to hand a fan.  The
Earl,  you may suppose,  w^as sufficiently enchanted.

How,  or by whom,  or by what instigated,  I know not,
but I heard that the newspapers,  this winter,  had taken
up the cause of my apparent seclusion from the world,
and dealt round comments and lamentations profusely.

I heard of this with much concern.

* * *

I have now nothing worth scribbling before my ter-
rible illness,  beginning about four o’clock in the morn-
ing of the day preceding the Queen’s birthday  : and of
that,  and its various adventures,  you,  my kind and tender
nurses,  are fully apprised.

February. — This month,  my dearest Susanna,  has no
memorial but in my heart ; which amply you supplied
Mitli never-dying materials for recollection.

March. — And here may I gratefully say ditto,  ditto,
ditto,  to the above three lines,  inserting the name of
my kindest,  dearest Frederica.

April. — Now,  though I have kept memorandums
since the departure of my dear Fredy,  they are not chro-
nological, and therefore you must pardon the omission

of my former regularity.

******

In the course of this month I liad two conferences

188

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

with my Royal Mistress upon my resignation,  in which
I spoke with all possible openness upon its necessity.
She condescended to speak very honourably of my dear
father to me;  and,  in a long discourse upon my altered
health with Mrs.  De Luc,  she still further condescended
to speak most graciously of his daughter,  saying,  in par-
ticular, these strong words,  in answer to something kind
uttered by that good friend in my favour:  as to

character,  she is what we call in German true as gold
and,  in point of heart,  there is not,  all the world over,
one better” — and added something further upon sincerity
very forcibly.  This makes me very happj’.

She deigned,  also,  in one of these conferences,  to con-
sult with me openly upon my successor,  stating her difii-
culties,  and making me enumerate various requisites.  It
would be dangerous,  she said,  to build upon meeting in
J’higland with one who would be discreet in point of
keeping oflf friends and acquaintances from frequenting
the palace;  and she graciously implied much com-
mendation of my discretion,  in her statement of what she
feared from a new person.

* * * * ^ *

I’his Easter we lost from our house-establishment
Lady Elizabeth  ^Valdegrave  ; her sister.  Lady Caroline,
and Lady Mary Howe,  are united to supply her place,
wliich required more attendance than could reasonably
be expected from one.  Lady Elizabeth is amiable and
gentle and sensible;  I wish her haj)py  ; and as she loves
show and grandeur,  and I believe was extremely worn by
her attendatice,  j)erhaps Lord Cardigan’s fondness and
munificence joined may obliterate in her consideration
his roughness of manner.

Sunday,  Maa'  1st.  to Saturday,  May 7th. — I feel  |
happy in those little occasions,  so seldom occurring,  of

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

189

calling to mind my existence in the bosoms of those
friends from whom my long absence might else banish
it,  or,  at least,  incline a belief that I had myself lost all
care about them.

My sweet Fredy afforded me opportunities of this
kind,  in the frame pattern for roses whicii she left me for
Mrs.  Garrick.  1 waited some time in hopes of convey-
ing it through Mrs.  Ord ; but,  that scheme failing,  I en-
closed it in a letter to Mrs.  Garrick,  in which I expressed
my obligation to my Fredy for thus enabling me to lay
claim to her continued kindness,  by reminding her that
what in me she had excited was unabated.

I had an answer from Miss More,  written at the re-
quest of Mrs.  Garrick;  very affectionate indeed,  full of
thanks to my dear Mrs.  Lock,  and professing all 1 could
wish for myself.  Miss More adds the strongest ex-
pressions of her own regard,  and the most flattering
solicitude about the bad state of my health.

That dear and valuable Mrs.  Ord will now very rarely
come near me.  She fears suspicion of influencing my
proceedings.  I assured her,  as 1 did Miss Cambridge,
how clear I had kept all manner of people from any in-
volvement.

A most kind plan she has since formed,  which still
remains unfixed ; this is to take me on a tour with her,
for the effect of gentle travelling and change of air,  this
summer;  and she said she would put the map of England
in my hand,  if I agreed to her scheme,  and make me
mark our route myself.  Her goodness is indeed of the
most genuine worth and sincerity,  and I love her now*  as
much as I have respected her always.  What a treasure
is such a friend  ! one who has grown in my esteem and
affection by every added year of intimacy  ! In this first
— this essence of human happiness,  how peculiar has

DIARY AND LETTERS

190

[Part V.

been my lot ! and how has it softened all other bitter
ingredients in it !

As no notice whatever was taken,  all this time,  of my
successor,  or my retirement,  after very great harass ot
suspense,  and sundry attempts to conquer it,  I had at
length again a conference with my Royal Mistress.  She
was evidently displeased at again being called upon,  but
I took the courage to openly remind her that the birth-
day was her Majesty’s own time,  and that my father con-
ceived it to be the period of my attendance by her
especial appointment.  And this was a truth which
hashed its own conviction on her recollection.  She
paused,  and then,  assentingly,  said,  “ Certainly.”  I then
added,  that as,  after the birthday,  their  ^Majesties went
to Windsor,  and the early prayers began immediately,  I
must needs confess I felt myself wholly unequal to en-
countering the fatigue of rising for them in my present
weakened state.  She was now very gracious again,  con-
scious all this was fair and true.  She told me her own
embarrassments concerning the successor,  spoke confi-
dentially of her reasons for not engaging an English-
woman, and acknowledged a person was fixed upon,
thou<ih something vet remained unarranged.  She gave
me,  however,  to understand that all would be expedited:
and foreign letters were despatched,  I know,  imme-
diately.

This painful task over,  of thus frequently reminding
my Royal Mistress that my services were ending,  I grew
easier.  She renewed,  in a short time,  all her old confi-
dence and social condescension,  and appeared to treat
me with no other alteration than a visible regret that I
should quit her — shown rather than avowed,  or much
indeed it would have distressed me.

hlrs.  Schwellenberg was now invariable in kindness;

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

191

but witli regard to my servants,  I could obtain no other
satisfaction than that tliey must each have a month’s
wages,  as Her Majesty would not consent to making my
resignation known.  A\  illiani,  she told me,  might pro-
bably become the footman of my successor;  poor little
Goter has little chance  ! and I fear it will be a real tra-
gedy when she knows her doom.  She now improves
daily,  and 1 am quite sorry for her.

From Sunday,  May 8th,  to May 15th. — I have
again been very unwell — low,  faint,  and feeble.  The
sweet Princess Elizabeth has taken an animated interest
about me ; I have been prescribed for by Mrs.  He Luc,
and her Royal Highness has insisted on my performance
of injunctions.  Miss Planla has also been extremely
friendly and assisting.

******

From Sunday,  May 15th,  to Sunday,  i\lAY 2’2nd.
— The trial of the poor persecuted Mr.  Hastings being
now again debating and arranging for continuance,  all
our house,  I found,  e.xpected me now to come forth,  and
my Koval Mistress and Mrs.  Schwellenberg thought I
should find it irresistible.  Indeed it nearly was so,  from
my anxious interest in the approaching defence ; but
when I considered the rumours likely to be raised after
my retreat,  by those terrifying watchers of court transac-
tions who inform the public of their conjectures,  I dreaded
the probable assertion that I must needs be disgusted
or discontented,  for health could not be the true motive
of my resignation,  since I was in public just before it
took place.  I feared,  too,  that even those who promoted
the enterprise might reproach me with my ability to do
what I wished.  These considerations determined me to
run no voluntary risks;  especially as I should so ill know
how to parry Mr.  indham,  should he now attack me

192

DIARY AND LKTTERS

[Part V.

upon a subject concerning which he merits thanks so
nobly,  that I am satisfied my next interview with him
must draw them forth from me.  Justice,  satisfaction in
his exertions,  and gratitude for their spirited willingness,
all call upon me to give him that poor return.  The danger
of it,  however,  now,  is too great to be tried,  if avoidable  :
and I had far rather avoid seeing him,  than either gratify
mvself bv expressing my sense ot his kindness,  or unjustly
withhold from hi)u what I think of it.

These considerations determined me upon relinquishing
all public places,  and all private visits,  lor the present.

The trial,  however,  was delayed,  and the llandelian
commemoration came on.  My beloved Mr.  and Mrs.
Tock will have told my Susan my dilliculties in this busi-
ness, and I will now tell all three how they ended.

The Queen,  unexpectedly,  having given me a ticket,
and enjoined me to go the first day,  that 1 might have
longer time to recruit against the King's birthday,  1 be-
came, as you will have heard,  much distressed what course
to pursue.

I took the first moment I was alone with Her Majesty
to express my father's obligation to her for not suflering
me to sit up on her own birthday,  in this week,  and I
besought her permission to lay before her my father s
motives for hitherto wishing me to keep quiet this spring,
as well as mvown,  adding I was sure Her Majesty would
benignly wish this business to be done as peaceably and
unobserved as possible.

She looked cxtremelv earnest,  and bid me proceed.

I then brjeflv stated that whoever had the high honour
of belonging to their Majesties were liable to comments
upon all their actions;  that,  if the comment was only
founded in truth,  we had nothing to fear,  but that,  as the
world was much less addicted to veracity than to mis-

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

193

l/Ol]

chief,  my father and myself had an equal apprehension
that,  if I should now be seen in public so quickly before
the impending;  change,  reports might be spread,  as soon
as I went home,  that it could not be for health I resigned.

She listened very attentively and graciously,  and in-
stantly acquiesced,  giving me tlie ticket for my own dis-
posal, and another for little Sarah,  who was to have
accompanied me.  The other,  therefore,  I gave to James.
And thus ended,  most favourably,  this dilemma.

My dear Fredy will have mentioned the circumstances
of the Queen’s real birthday,  and her insistance that I
should not sit up for the ball,  and the most kind inter-
ference of the King to prevent my opposing her order,
in which all the three elder Princesses joined,  with looks
of benevolent delight that I should thus be spared an
exertion for which I was really most unequal.  This once,
therefore,  the Queen had only Mrs.  Thielky,  and I had
an admirable night's repose and recruit — most unplea-
santl}^  however,  circumstanced by the consciousness it
was deemed a high impropriety.  I told the Queen
afterwards that,  though I was most sensible of her gracious
consideration in sparing me a fatigue which I believed
Avould wholly have overpowered me,  I yet never more
thoroughly felt the necessity of my retreat,  that my place
might be supplied by one who could better perform its
office.  She was not much pleased with this speech;  but
I owed it to truth and justice,  and could not repress it.

From Sunday,  22nd,  to the end of M.\y. — This
Sunday,  the birthday of the lovely and amiable Princess
Elizabeth,  found me very ill again;  but as I am that
now very frequently,  and always come round to the
same state as before these little occasional attacks,  I will
leave them unmentioned,  except w here they hang to other
circumstances-.

VOL.  v.

o

J94

DIAIIV AND LETTERS

[Part V.

Poor Mr.  Smelt,  who had spent his melancholy winter
at Kew,  with his two deserving daughters,  Mrs.  Cholmley
and Mrs.  Goulton,  was now preparing to return,  for the
summer,  to their dwellings in the north.  It seemed a
species of duty ou my part to acquaint him with my in-
tended resignation,  as he had been employed by Her
Majesty to bring me the original proposition of the office;
Imt I have no permission — on the contrary,  repeated e.\-
hortations to tell no one ; and therefore,  from the time
the transaction has become the Queen’s,  I have made no
new confidence whatsoever.

W'hen the trial actually recommenced,  the Queen grew
anxious for my going to it : she condescended to intimate
that my accounts of it were the most faithful and satis-
factory she received,  and to express much ill-will to
giving them up.  The motives I had mentioned,  how-
ever, were not merely personal ; she could not but see
any comments must involve more than myself,  and there-
fore I abideil steadily by her first agreement to my ab-
senting mvself from all public jilaces,  and only gently
joined in her regret,  which I forcibly enough felt in this
instance,  without venturing any olfer of relinquishing
the prudential plan previously arranged.  She gave me
tickets for Charles Ibr every day that the Hall was
opened,  and 1 collected what I could of information from
him for her satisfaction.

1 had the pleasure,  one evening at Chelsea,  of meeting
our ever-valued Mr.  Twining,  and seeing the justly re-
nowned Haydn.  There was some sweet music of his
performed  ; but Esther,  his best exhibitor,  was not well,
and we all missed her in all ways.

I had a most friendly visit in my apartment from Dr.
Willis,  a mail whom I as cordially like as I admire,  and
whose nohle open heart is as worthy reverence as his

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

195

truly original talents in liis own art.  He came to offer
me his counsel for my health,  telling me he really could
not endure to see me look so wan and altered.  I assured
him very sincerely there was no medical advice I could
receive in the whole world which would have such as-
sistance with me from faith as his ; but that,  as I was the
formal and official patient of Dr.  Gisburne,  I feared he
would be much offended at my indulging my private
opinion by changing my physician.

Why,  now,  I really think,”  cried he,  “ which you’ll say
is very vain,  that I could cure you ; and why should not
we consult without his knowing it?  I give you my word
I would not offend any man  ; but you may take my
word for it,  for all that,  I would affront all the college of
doctors,  and all the world beside,  rather than not do you
good if it is in my power.”

When I thanked him for this exceeding kindness,  which
was uttered with a cordiality of manner that doubled its
warmth,  he said,  “ Why,  to tell you the truth,  I don’t
quite know how I could have got on at Kew,  in the
King’s illness,  if it had not been for seeing you in a
morning.  I assure you they worried me so,  all round,
one way or other,  that I was almost ready to go off.  But
you used to keep me up prodigiously.  Though,  1 give
you my word,  I was afraid sometimes to see you,  with
your good-humoured face,  for all it helped me to keep
up,  because I did not know what to say to you,  when
things went bad,  on account of vexing you.”

He then examined me,  and wrote me a prescription,
and gave me directions,  and told me I must write him
word,  into Lincolnshire,  how his advice agreed.  “ If you
were to do me the honour to send me a letter,”  he cried,
“ I’ll assure you I should be very much pleased ; but you
would give me a very bad opinion of you,  which would

19G

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

be no easy thing to do neither,  if you were to offer me a
fee,  except it be a letter,  and now don’t be stingy of
that.”

I tried his medicines,  but they were too violent,  and
required rest and nursing;  however,  I really believe they
will prove effectual.

Queen's House,  London.

June. — On the opening of this month Her Majesty
told me that the next day Mr.  Hastings was to make his
defence,  and warmly added,  “ I would give the world you
could go to it !”

This was an ex[)ression so unusual in animation,  that
I instantly told her I would write to my father,  who could
not possibly,  in that case,  hesitate,

“ Surely,”  she cried,  ‘"you may wrap up,  so as not to
catch cold that once?”

I told Her Majesty that,  as my father had never thought
going out would be really prejudicial to my health,  he had
only wished to have his motive laid fairly before Her
Majesty,  and then to leave it to her own command.

Her Majesty accepted this mode of consent,  and gave
me tickets for Charles and Sarah to accompany me,  and
gave leave and another ticket for Mr.  De Luc to be of
the party.

After this the Royal Family went to the Abbey,  for
which,  also,  the Queen graciously gave me a ticket for
whom I j)leased.

Thursday,  June 2nd. — I went once more to  ^Vest-
minster Hall.  Charles and Sarah came not to their
time,  and I left directions and tickets,  and set off with
otdy Mr.  De Luc,  to secure our own,  and keep places
for them.

The Hall was more crowded than on any day since the

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

197

trial commenced,  except the first.  Peers,  commoners,
and counsel,  peeresses,  commoneresses,  and the numerous
indefinites crowded every part,  ^Yilh a just and fair curi-
osity to hear one day’s defence,  after seventy-three of
accusation.

Unfortunately I sat too high up to hear the opening,
and when,  afterwards,  the departure of some of my ob-
stacles removed me lower,  I was just behind some of those
unfeeling enemies who have not even tlie decorum due
to themselves,  of appearing to listen to what is offered
against their own side.  I could only make out that this
great and persecuted man,  upon a plan all his own,  and
at a risk impossible to ascertain,  was formally making his
own defence,  not with retaliating declamation,  but by a
simple,  concise,  and most interesting statement of facts,
and of the necessities accompanying them in the situa-
tion to w hich the House then impeaching had five times
called him.  He spoke wdth most gentlemanly temper of
his accusers,  his provocation considered,  yet witii a firm-
ness of disdain of the injustice with which he had been
treated in return for his services,  that was striking and
affecting,  though unadorned and manly.

His spirit,  however,  and the injuries which raised it,
rested not quietly upon his particular accusers  : he ar-
raigned the late minister,  Lord North,  of ingratitude and
double-dealing,  and the present minister,  iMr.  Pitt,  of un-
justifiably and unworthily forbearing to sustain him.

Here Mr.  Fox,  artfully enough,  interrupted him,  to say
the King’s ministers were not to be arraigned for wdiat
passed in the House of Parliament.

Mr.  Burke rose also to enter his protest.

But Mr.  Hastings then lost his patience and his temper:
he would not suffer the interruption  ; he had never,  he
said,  interrupted their long speeches;  and when Mr.

198

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

Burke again attempted to speak,  Air.  Hastings,  in an
impassioned but affecting manner,  extended his arms,  and
called out loudly,  “I throw myself upon the protection
of your Lordships  ! — I am not used to public speaking,
and cannot answer them ; what I wish to submit to your
Lordships I have committed to paper;  but,  if I am
punished for what I say,  I must insist upon being heard  !

I call upon you,  my Lords,  to protect me from this
violence  !”

This animated appeal prevailed;  the managers were
silenced by an almost universal cry of  “ Plear,  hear,  hear!'’
from the Lords ; and by Lord Kenyon,  who represented
the Chancellor,  and said,  “ Mr.  Hastings,  proceed.”

dhe angry orators,  though with a very ill grace,  were
then silenced.  They were little aware what a compliment
this intemperate eagerness was paying to Air.  Hastings,
who for so many long days manifested that fortitude
against attack,  and that patience against abuse,  which
they could not muster,  without any parallel in jirovocation,
even for three short hours.

I rejoiced Avith all my heart to find Air.  Windham was
not in their box.  He did not enter Avitli them in proces-
sion, nor appear as a manager or party concerned,  further
than as a member of the House of Commons.  I could
not distinguish him in so large a group,  and he either saiv
not,  or knew not,  me.

The conclusion of the defence I heard better,  as Air.
Hastings spoke considerably louder from this time;  the
spirit of indignation animated his manner and gave
strength to his voice.  You will have seen the chief parts
of his discourse in the newspapers  ; and you cannot,  I
think,  but grow'  more and more his friend as von peruse
it.  He called pathetically and solemnly for instant judg-
ment; but the Lords,  after an adjournment,  decided to

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

199

hear liis defence by evidence,  and in order,  the next
sessions.  How grievous such continual delay to a man
past sixty,  and sighing for such a length of time for redress
from a prosecution as yet unparalleled in our annals  !

When it was over.  Colonel Manners came round to
speak to me,  and talk over the defence.  He is warmly
for Mr.  Hastings.  He inquired about Windsor ; I should
Imve made him stare a little,  had I told him I never ex-
j)ected to see him there again.

Mrs.  Kenedy and the Miss Coopers knew me as
passed them;  but I saw they read the history of my long
illness in my face,  by the expression of their eyes : and
Mr.  Nicholls,  whom 1 had not met for two or three years,
though I observed him looking hard at me,  let me go on,
without sufficiently recollecting to speak to me.

When we came down-stairs into the large waiting-hall,
!Mr.  De Luc went in search of William and chairs.  Sally
then immediately discerned Mr.  Windham with some
ladies.  He looked at me without at first knowing me.

Mr.  Nicholls,  however,  now'  knew'  my voice:  he came
and chatted with his accustomed good humour and ease,
and frankly ow’ned he had thought it was me,  but felt too
insecure to venture to speak earlier.  He then very
openly exhorted me to take more care of my health,  and
try change of air;  Twickenham,  for example,  he said he
thought would prove serviceable,  for,  ill as I looked in
health,  he thought it was not incurably.

While this was going on,  Sarah whispered me that Mr.
Windham was looking harder and harder;  and presently,
at a pause with Mr.  Nicholls,  he came up to me,  and in
a tone of very deep concern,  and with a look that fully
concurred with it,  he said,  Do I see Miss Burney  .^”

I could not but feel the extent of the interrogation,
and my assent acknowledged my comprehension.

200 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

IndeeO,”  lie cried,  “ I was going to make a speech
— not very — gallant !”

But it is what I should like better,”  I cried,  “ for it
is kind,  if you were going to say I look miserably ill,  as
that is but a necessary consequence of feeling so, — and
miserably ill enough I have felt this long time past.”

He would not allow quite that,  he’'said  ; but I flew
from the subject,  to tell him I had been made very hajipy
by him.

He gave me one of his starts, — but immediately con-
cluded it was by no good,  and therefore would not speak
an inquiry.

“ Why,  I did not see you in the box,”  I cried,  “ and
I had been very much afraid I should have seen you
there.  But now my fears are completely over,  and you
have made me completely happy!”

He protested,  with a comic but reproachful smile,
he knew not how to be glad,  if it was still only in
the support of a bad cause,  and if still I really sup-
ported it.

And then he added he had gone amongst the House
of Commons instead of joining the managers,  because
that enabled him to give his place to a friend,  who was
not a member.

“ You must be sure,”  said I,  “ you would see me here
to-day.”

I had always threatened him with giving fairest play
to the defence,  and always owned I had been most
afraid of his harangue  ; therefore to find the charges end
without his making it saved me certainly a shake, — either
for Mr.  Hastings or himself, — for one of them must
thenceforth have fallen in my estimation.

I believe,  however,  this was a rather delicate point,  as
he made me no answer,  but a grave smile;  but I am

OF THK AUTHOR OF EVELINA,

201

1701]

sure he instantly understood his relinquisliing his intended
charge was my subject of exultation.  And,  to make it
plainer,  1 then added,  “ 1 am really very generous to be
thus made happy,  considering how great has been my
curiosity.”

But,  to have gratified that curiosity,”  cried he,
“ would have been no very particular inducement with
me;  though I have no right to take it for a compliment,
as there are two species of curiosity, — yours,  therefore,
you leave wholly ambiguous,”

“ C),  I am content with that,”  cried I ; ‘'so long as I
am gratified,  I give you leave to take it which way you
please.”

lie murmured something I could not distinctly hear,
of concern at my continued opinion upon this subject  ;
but I do not think,  by his manner,  it much surprised
him.

“ You know,”  cried I,  vvhy,  as well as what,  I feared — ■
that fatal candour,  of which so long ago you warned me
to beware.  And,  indeed,  I was kept m alarm to the
very last moment ; for at every figure I saw start up,  just
now, — Mr.  Ton,  Mr.  Burke,  Mr.  drey, — I concluded
yours would be the next.”

You were prepared,  then,”  cried he,  with no little
malice,  “ for a 'voice issuing from a distant pew.’”

This unexpected turn put me quite out,  whereupon he
seized his opportunity to put himself in.  For,  after a
little laugh at his victory,  he very gravely,  and even
almost solemnly,  said,  ‘‘  But,  there is another subject, —
always rqipermost with me, — which I have not ventured
to speak of to you  ; though,  to others, — you know not
how I have raved and raged  ! But I believe, — I am
sure, — ^you know what I allude to.”

’ I'was imj)ossible,  thus challenged,  to dissemble.  " Yes,”

202

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

I answered,  I own, — I believe, — I understand you ;
and,  indeed,  I should be tempted to say farther, — if you
would forget it when heard,  and make no implications, —
that,  from what has come round to me from different
quarters,  I hold mvself to be very much obliged to
you.

I was sorry,  as things are still circumstanced,  to say
this  ; but it would have been graceless,  after all his zeal
and kindness,  thus called upon,  to say less.

He looked very much pleased,  and,  entering instantly
into the sort of inference I feared,  mildly said,  “But
without any implication,  now, — surely it is time  ! Now,
— obviously, — strikingly, — all implication apart, — there

is reasoti substantial,  uncontrovertible ”

Mr.  De Luc came to sav somethins:  of the chair,  and
I dreaded his hearing what I felt coming,  so turned off;
but Mr.  Windham’s looks strongly finished his meaning
concerning mine,  as announcing a necessity of resigna-
tion. I ventured at no answer whatsoever.

He looked a little blank,  and then I could not resist,
in a very low voice,  saying,"  1 should not have expected,
Mr.  Windham,  from you,  a generosity such as this,  for
one you regard as a captive !”

He was obliged to swallow this allusion ; but began,
with double eagerness,  upon the subject uppermost;  but
I really heanl nothing,  from seeing Mr.  De Luc’s fixed
attention,  and dreading his discovering our topic : I
therefore made the parting courtesy;  he returned it with
a boiv,  but,  as I stood back,  came on,  very earnestly
indeed,  saying,  " When shall I see you again V'

T was sure,  by the expression of his voice,  he meant,
when should I again be visible in the world  ? 1 dared

make no answer,  but a little shook my head and still
retreated.

1791]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  203

“ When  ?”  he cried again,  perseveringly,  and still more
forcibly.

Still no answer could I make.  Upon which,  in a
tone most emphatic,  he answered himself,  exclaiming
“Never!”  and,  with a look that implied ail the raving
and raging he had acknowledged internally reviving,  and
with an air almost in heroics,  he walked away.

I was really very much vexed not to be able to deal
more openly with a champion whose sincere warmth in
my service so much engages my real gratitude,  and gives
me so much real pleasure ; but it was every way impos-
sible. Mr.  De Luc,  much struck with his eager man-
ner, did not let him be out of hearing before he cried,
“Pray,  ma’am,  who is it,  that gentleman?”

I told him.  “ Ha!”  he exclaimed,  astonished to find
him one of that party ; “ and,  really,  he has an honest
face of his ow’n  ! But you both spoke so adroitly,  under
the cover,  that I could not make it out,  very well,  what
you were talking upon it;  but I suppose the French
revolution.”

What gave him this idea I know not,  but I was glad
the adroitness so well succeeded.

When we came home I was immediately summoned to
Her jMajesty,  to Avhom I gave a full and fair account of
all I had heard of the defence  ; and it drew tears from
her expressive eyes,  as I repeated Mr.  Hastings's own
words,  upon the hardship and injustice of the treatment
he had sustained.

Afterwards,  at night,  the King called upon me to re-
peat my account;  and I was equally faithful,  sparing
nothing of what had dropped from the persecuted defend-
ant relative to His Majesty’s Ministers.  I thought offi-
cial accounts might be less detailed there than against the
Managers,  who,  as open enemies,  excite not so much

•204

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

my  “ liigli displeasure”  as the friends of Government,
vvho so insidiously elected and panegyrised him while
they wanted his assistance,  and betrayed and deserted
him when he was no longer in a capacity to serve them.
Such,  at least,  is the light in which the defence places
them.

The King listened with much earnestness and a
marked compassion.  He had already read the account
sent him officially,  but he was as eager to hear all
I could recollect,  as if still uninformed of what had
passed.  The words may be given to the eye,  but the
impression they make can only be conveyed by the ear;
and I came back so eagerly interested,  that my memory
was not more stored with the very words than my voice
with the intonations of all that had passed.

^Vith regard to my bearing this sole unofficial exertion
since my illness,  I can only say the fatigue I felt bore
not any parallel with that of every drawing-room day,
because 1 was seated.

June 4th. — Let me now come to the 4th,  the last
birthday of the good,  gracious,  benevolent King I
shall ever,  in all human probability,  pass under his Royal
roof.

The thought was affecting to me,  in defiance of my'
volunteer conduct,  and I could scarce speak to the Queen
when I first went to her,  and wished to say something
upon a day so interesting.  The King was most gracious
and kind when he came into the State Dressing-
Room at St.  James’s,  and particularly inquired about
my health and strength,  and if they would befriend me
for the day.  I longed again to tell him how hard I
would work them,  rather than let them,  on such a day,
drive me from my office;  but I found it better suited
me to be quiet;  it was safer not to trust to any ex-

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

1701]

2or>

])ressioii of loyalty,  with a mind so full,  and on a day so
critical.

With regard to health,  my side is all that is attended
with any nneasiness,  and that is sometimes a serious bu-
siness. Certainly there is nothing premature in what has
been done.

And — O picquct! — life hardly hangs on earth during
its compulsion,  in these months succeeding months,  and
years creeping,  crawling,  after years.

At dinner Mrs.  Schwellenberg presided,  attired mag-
nificently. Miss Goldsworthy,  Mrs.  Stainforth,  Messrs.
De Luc and Stanhope dined with us  ; and,  while we were
still eating fruit,  the Duke of Clarence entered.

He was just risen from the King’s table,  and waiting for
his equipage to go home and pre[)are for the ball,  lo
give you an idea of the energy of his Royal Highness’s
language,  1 ought to set apart a general objection to
writin'’’,  or rather intimating,  certain forcible words,  and
beg leave to show you,  in genuine colours,  a Royal
sailor.

We all rose,  of course,  upon his entrance,  and the two
gentlemen placed themselves behind their chairs while
the footmen left the room  ; but he ordered us all to sit
down,  and called the men back to hand about some wine.
He was in exceeding high spirits and in the utmost good
humour.  He placed himself at the head of the table,
next Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and looked remarkably well,
gay,  and full of sport and mischief,  yet clever withal as
well as comical.

“ Well,  this is the first day 1 have ever dined with the
King at St.  .James’s on his birthday.  Pray,  have you all
drunk IT is Majesty’s health?”

“ No,  your Roy'l Highness : your Roy'l Highness
might make dem do dat,”  said Mrs.  Schwellenberg.

20G

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

“ 0,  by will I ! Here,  you  (to the footman);  bring

Champagne  ! I’ll drink the King’s health again,  if I die
for it ! \ et,  I have done pretty well already : so has

the King,  I promise you  ! I believe His Majesty was
never taken such good care of before.  We have kept
his spirits up,  I promise you  ; we have enabled him to
go through his fatigues ; and I should have done more
still,  but for the ball and Mary — I have promised to
dance with jMary !’’

Princess JMary made her first appearance at Court
to-day  : she looked most interesting and unaffectedly
lovely : she is a sweet creature,  and perhaps,  in point of
beauty,  the first of this truly beautiful race,  of which
Princess Mary may be called pendant to the Prince
of Wales.

Champagne being now brought for the Duke,  he or-
dered it all round.  M hen it came to me I whispered to
Westerhaults to carry it on  : the Duke slapped his hand

violently on the table,  and called out,  O,  by , you

shall drink it !”

There tvas no resisting this.  We all stood up,  and the
Duke sonorously gave the Royal toast.

‘‘  And now,”  cried he,  making us all sit down again,
‘'where are my rascals of servants  ? I sha’n’t be in time
for the ball ; besides,  Pve got a deuced tailor waiting
to fix on my epaulette  ! Here,  you,  go and see for my
servants!  d’ye hear?  Scamper off!”

Off ran William.

“Come,  let’s have the King’s health again.  De Luc,
drink it.  Here,  Champagne to De Luc  !”

I wish you could have seen Mr.  De Luc’s mixed sim-
per— half pleased,  half alarmed.  However,  the wine
came and he drank it,  the Duke taking a bumper for
himself at the same time.

1/91]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

207

“ Poor Stanhope !”  cried he  : “ Stanhope shall have a
glass too  ! Here,  Champagne!  u’hat are you all about?
AVhy don’t you give Champagne to j)oor Stanhope?”
Mr.  Stanhope,  with great  [)leasure,  complied,  and the
Duke again accompanied him.

“ Come hither,  do you hear?”  cried the Duke to the
servants  ; and on the approach,  slow and submissive,  of
Mrs.  Stainforth’s man,  he hit him a violent slap on the
back,  calling out,  “ Hang you  ! why don't you see for my
rascals  ?”

Away flew the man,  and then he called out to Wester-
haults,  “ Hark’ee I brintj another jjlass of Chamnajine
to Mr.  De Luc 1”

Mr.  De Luc knows these Royal youths too well to
venture at so vain an experiment as disputing with them  ;
so he only shrugged his shoulders and drank the wine.
The Duke did the same.

“ And now,  poor Stanhope,”  cried the Duke  ; “ give
another glass to poor Stanhope,  d’ye hear  ?”

“ Is not your Royal Highness afraid,”  cried Mr.  Stan-
hope, displaying the full circle of his borrowed teeth,  “ 1
shall be apt to be rather up in the world,  as the folks
say,  if I tope on at this rate  ?”

“Not at all!  you can’t get drunk in a better cause.
I’d get drunk myself if it was not for tne ball.  Here,
Champagne  ! another glass for the philosopher 1 I keep
sober for Mary.”

O,  your Royal Highness!”  cried Mr.  De Luc,
gaining courage as he drank,  you will make me quite
droll of it if you make me go on,— quite droll 1”

So much the better  ! so much the better I it will do
you a monstrous deal of good.  Here,  another glass of
Champagne for the Queen’s philosopher  !”

^Ir.  De Luc obeyed,  and the Duke then addressed

208

DIARY AND LETTERS

'Part V.

]\Ii s.  Schwellenberg’s George.  “ Here  ! you  ! you  ! why,
where is my carriage  ^ run and see,  do you hear  ?”

Off hurried George,  grinning irrepressibly.

“ If it was not for that deuced tailor,  I would not stir.
1 shall dine at the Queen’s house on Monday,  Miss
Goldsworthy ; I shall come to dine with Princess
I^oyal.  I find she does not go to indsor with the
Queen.”

The Queen meant to spend one day at Windsor,  on
account of a review which carried the King that  'way.

Some talk then ensued upon the Duke's new carriage,
which they all agreed to be the most beautiful that day
at Court.  I had not seen it,  which,  to me,  was some
impediment against praising it.

lie then said it was necessary to drink the Queen's
health.

'I'he gentlemen here made no demur,  though Mr.  De
Luc arched his eyebrows in expressive fear of conse-
quences.

“A bumper,”  cried the Duke,  “ to the Queen’s gentle-
man-usher.”

They all stood up and drank the Queen’s health.

“Here are three of us,”  cried the Duke,  “all be-
longing to the  (^ueen  : the Queen’s philoso{)her,  the
Queen’s gentleman-usher,  ;ind  (he Queen’s son;  but,
thank Heaven,  I’m nearest!’’

“ Sir,”  cried Mr.  Stanhope,  a little afTrontcd,  “ I am
not now the Queen’s gentleman-usher  ; I am the Queen’s
equerry,  sir.”

“ A glass more of Champagne here 1 What are von all
so slow for?  Where are all my rascals gone  ? Thev’ve
put me in one passion already this morning.  Come,  a
glass of Champagne for the Queen’s gentleman-usher!”

laughing heartily.

o o

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

209

1791]

“ No,  sir,”  repeated Mr.  Stanhope  ; “ I am equerry-
now,  sir.”

“ And another glass to the Queen’s philosopher!”

Neither gentleman objected;  but Mrs.  Scliwellenberg,
■who had sat laughing and happy all this time,  now grew
alarmed,  and said,  “Your Roval Highness,  I am afraid
for the ball 1”

“ Hold you your potato-jaw,  my dear,’’  cried the
Duke,  patting her  ; but,  recollecting himself,  he took her
hand and pretty abruptly kissed it,  and then,  flinging it
hastily away,  laughed aloud,  and called out, “There!  that
■will make amends for anything,  so now I may say what
I will.  So here  ! a glass of Chani])agne lor the Queen’s
philosopher and the Queen’s gentleman-usher!  Hang
me if it will not do them a monstrous deal of good  !”

Here news was brought that the equipage was in
order.  He started up,  calling out,  “Now,  then,  for my
deuced tailor.”

“ O,  your Royal Highness  !”  cried iMr.  De Luc,  in a
tone of expostulation,  “now you have made us droll,  you
go  !”

Off,  however,  he w'ent.  And is it not a curious scene?
All my amaze is,  how any of their heads bore such li-
bations.

In the evening I had by no means strength to en-
counter the ball-room.  I gave my tickets to Mrs.  and
M iss Douglas.

Mrs.  Stainforth was dying to see the Princess Mary
in her Court dress.  Mr.  Stanhope offered to conduct her
to a place of prospect.  She went with him.  I thought
this preferable to an unbroken evening with my fair com-
panion, and,  Mr.  De Luc thinking the same,  we both left
Mrs.  Schwellenberg to unattire,  and followed.  But we
were rather in a scrape by trusting to Mr.  Stanhope after

VOL.  V.

p

210

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

all this Champagne  : he had carried Mrs.  Stainforth to
the very door of the ball-room,  and there fixed her — in a
place which the King,  Queen,  and suite must brush past
in order to enter the ball-room.  I had followed,  how-
ever, and the crowds of beef-eaters,  officers,  and guards
that lined all the state-rooms through which we exhibited
ourselves,  prevented ray retreating alone.  I stood,  there-
fore, next to Mrs.  Stainforth,  and saw the ceremony.

I he j)assage was made so narrow by attendants,  that
they were all forced to go one by one.  First,  all the
King's great state-olllcers,  amongst whom 1 recognised
Lord Courlown,  Treasurer of the Household;  Lord
Salisbury carried a candle ! — ’tis an odd etiquette. —
These being passed,  came the King — he saw us and
laughed;  then the  (Queen’s Master of the Horse,  J^ord
Harcourt,  who did ditto;  then some more.

The Vice-Chamberlain carries the Queen’s candle,  that
she may have the arm of the Lord Chamberlain to lean
on ; accordingly.  Lord Aylesbury,  receiving that honour,
now preceded the Queen  : she looked amazed at sight of
us.  dhe kind Princesses one by one acknowledged
us.  I spoke to Princess Mary,  wishing her Koval
Highness joy:  she looked in a delight and an alarm
nearly equal.  She was to dance her first minuet.  Then
followed the Ladies of the Bedchamber,  and Lady
Harcourt was particularly civil.  Then the Maids of
Honour,  every one of whom knew and spoke to us.  I
peered vainly for the Duke of Clarence,  but none of the
Princes passed us.  M'hat a crowd brought up the rear  !

I was vexed not to see the I’rince of Wales.

^VelI,  God bless the King!  and many and many such
days may he know  !

I was now so tired as to be eager to go back  ; but the
Queen’s philosopher,  the good and most sober and tern-

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

211

perate of men;,  was really a little giddy with all his bum-
pers, and his eyes,  which were quite lustrous,  could not
fix any object steadily ; while the poor gentleman-usher
— equerry,  I mean — kept his mouth so wide open with
one continued grin, — I suppose from the sparkling bever-
age,— that I was every minute afraid its pearly ornaments,
which never fit their case,  would have fallen at our feet.
Mrs.  Stainforth gave me a significant look of making the
same observation,  and,  catching me fast by the arm,  said.
Come,  Miss Burney,  let’s you and I take care of one
another;”  and then she safely toddled me back to Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  who greeted us with saying,  Veil ! bin
you much amused  ? Dat Prince Villiam — oders de
Duke de Clarence — bin raelly ver merry — oders vat you
call tipsy.”

Brief must be my attempt at the remnant of this
month,  my dearest friends ; for it was spent in so much
difficulty,  pain,  and embarrassment,  that I should have
very little to relate that you could have any pleasure to
hear ; and I am weary of dwelling on evils that now,
when I write,  are past ! I thank God  !

June 5th. — The day following the birthday,  you cannot
be surprised to hear that I was really very ill.  I stood
with such infinite difficulty in the Queen’s presence at
noon that I was obliged to be dismissed,  and to go to
bed in the middle of the day.  I soon got better,  how-
ever, and again attended in the evening,  and in a few
days I was much the same as before the gala.

My orders,  which I punctually obeyed,  of informing
n6 one of my impending departure,  were extremely pain-
ful to adhere to,  as almost everybody I saw advised
me strenuously to beg leave of absence to recruit,  and
pressed so home to me the necessity of taking some step
for my health,  that I was reduced to a thousand unplea-

p 2

212

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

sant evasions in my ansAvers.  Buf,  I was bound  ; and I
never disengage myself from bonds imposed by others,  if
once I have agreed to them.

JNIr.  Turbulent at this time outstayed the tea-partv
one evening,  not for his former rhodomontading,  but to
seriously and earnestly advise me to resign.  ]\Iy situation,
he said,  was evidently death to me.

He was eager to inquire of me who was Mrs.  Lenox?
Pie had been reading,  like all the rest of the world,  Bos-
well's ‘ Life of Dr.  Johnson,’  and the preference there
expressed of Mrs.  Lenox to all other females had filled
him with astonishment,  as he had never even heard her
name.

These occasional sallies of Dr.  Johnson,  uttered from
local causes and circumstances,  but all retailed verbatim
by Mr.  Boswell,  are filling all sort of readers with amaze,
except the small party to whom Dr.  Johnson was known,
and who,  by acquaintance with the power of the moment
over his unguarded conversation,  know how little of his
solid opinion was to be gathered from his accidental
assertions.

The King,  who was now also reading this work,  applied  '
ftome for explanations without end.  Every night at this
.period he entered the Queen’s dressing-room,  and de-
tlayed Pier Majesty’s proceedings by a length of discourse
with me upon this subject.  All that flowed from himself
was constantly full of the goodness and benevolence of
his character  ; and I was never so happy as in the op-
portunity thus graeiously given me of vindicating,  in in-
stances almost innumerable,  the serious principles and
vvarious excellences of Dr.  Johnson from the clouds
.60 frequently involving and darkening them,  in nar-
rations so little calculated for any readers who were
strangers to his intrinsic Avorth,  and therefore Avorked

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

213

upon and struck by Avhat was faulty in his temper and
manners.

I regretted not having strength to read tliis work to I ler
Majesty myself.  It was an honour I should else have cer-
tainly received  ; for so much wanted clearing ! so little
was understood  ! However,  the Queen frequently con-
descended to read over  [)assages and anecdotes which
perplexed or offended her;  and there were none I had
not a fair power to soften or to justify.  Dear and excel-
lent Dr.  Johnson  ! I have never forgot nor neglected his
injunction given me when he was ill — to stand hy him
and support him,  and not hear him abused when he was
no more,  and could not defend himself!  but little — little
(lid I think it would ever fall to my lot to vindicate him
to his King and Queen.

At this time Colonel Manners was in vvaiting,  and
('olonel Goldsworthy was on a visit,  as was Mr.  Fairly.
They all little enough thought how near we were to a
separation.  Lords Chesterfield,  Harrington,  and Cath-
cart drank tea with us almost constantly.  The two latter
I liked extremely,  and shall be glad if hereafter I should
meet them.

+ * ♦ * *

Her jMajesty,  the day before we left Windsor,  gave
me to understand my attendance would be yet one more
fortnight requisite,  though no longer.  I heard this with
a fearful presentiment I should surely never go through
another fortnight,  in so weak and languishing and painful
a state of health.  However,  I could but accede,  though
I fear with no very courtly grace.  So melancholy Indeed
was the state of my mind,  from the weakness of my frame,
that I was never alone but to form scenes of  “ foreign
woe,”  when my own disturbance did not occupy me
wholly.  I began — almost whether I would or not — an-

214

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

other tragedy  ! The other three all unGnished  ! not one
read  ! and one of them,  indeed,  only generally sketched
as to plan and character.  But I could go on with no-
thing; I could only suggest and invent.

I'he power of composition has to me indeed proved a
solace,  a blessing!  When incapable of all else,  that,  un-
solicited, unthought of,  has presented itself to my solitarv'
leisure,  and beguiled me of myself,  though it has not of
late regaled me with gayer associates.

J ULY. — I come now to write the last week of my Royal

residence.  The Queen honoured me with the most uni-

•>

form graciousness,  and though,  as the time of separation
approached,  her cordiality rather diminished,  and traces
of internal displeasure appeared sometimes,  arising from
an opinion I ought rather to have struggled on,  live or
die,  than to quit her, — yet I am sure she saw how poor
was my own chance,  e.xcept by a change in the mode of
life,  and at least ceased to wonder,  though she could not
ap[)rove.

The Ki ng was more courteous,  more communicative,
more amiable,  at every meeting ; and he condescended
to hold me in conversation with him by every opportunity,
and with an air of such benevolence and jroodness,  that I
never felt such ease and pleasure in his notice before.  lie
talked over all Mr.  Boswell’s book,  and I related to him
sundry anecdotes of Dr.  Johnson,  all highly to his honour,
and such as I was eajrer to make known,  lie always
heard me with the utmost comj)lacency,  and encouraged
me to proceed in mj accounts,  by every mark of attention
and interest.

lie told me once,  laughing heartily,  that,  having seen
my name in the Index,  he was eager to come to what was
said of me;  but when he found so little,  he was surpiised
and disappointed.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

215

1791]

I ventured to assure him how much I had myself been
rejoiced at this very circumstance,  and with what satisfac-
tion I had reflected upon having'verj seldom met Mr.  Bos-
well, as I knew there was no other security against all
manner of risks in his relations.

I must have told you long since of the marriage of
Mile.  Montmollin to M.  d’Espere-en-Dieu  ? Her niece,
another Mile.  Montmollin,  has succeeded her.  I was
not inclined to make new acquaintance on the eve of my
departure  ; but she came one morning to my room,  in
attendance upon the Princess Mary,  who called in to ask
me some question.  She seems agreeable and sensible.
The Princess Mary then stayed and chatted with me over
her own adventures on the Queen’s birthday,  when she
first appeared at court.  The history of her dancing at
the ball,  and the situation of her partner and brother,  the
Duke of Clarence,  she spoke of with a sweet ingenuous-
ness and artless openness which mark her very amiable
character.  And not a little did I divert her when I
related the Duke’s visit to our party  ! O,”  cried she,

“ he told me of it himself the next morning,  and said,
‘You may think how far I was gone,  for I kissed the
Schwellenberg’s hand !’  ”

About this time Mr.  Turbulent made me a visit at tea-
time when the gentlemen were at the Castle  ; and the
moment William left the room he eagerly said,  “ Is this
true.  Miss Burney,  that I hear?  Are we going to lose
you  ?”

I W'as much surprised,  but could not deny the charge.
He,  very good-naturedly,  declared himself much pleased
at a release which he protested he thought necessary to
my life’s preservation.

I made him tell me the channel through which a busi-

DIARY AND LETTERS

21G

[Part V.

ness I had guarded so scrupulously myself had reached
him  ; but it is too full of windings for writing,

AVilh Mr.  De Luc I was already in confidence upon
my resignation,  and with the knowledge of the Queen,
as he had received the intelligence from Germany,
whence my successor was now arriving.

1 then also beo:sed the indulgence of writing to Mr.

CO o o

Smelt upon the subject,  which was accorded me.

My next attack was from Miss Iolanta.  She expressed
herself in the deepest concern at my retiring,  though she
not only acknowledged its necessity,  but confessed she
had not thought I could have performed my oflTicial duty
even one year ! She broke from me while we talked,
leaving me abruptU’  in a violent passion of tears.

Miss Ihtruey to Dr,  Burney.

13 RAREST Sir,  July3nl,  ’91.

Mademoiselle Jacobi,  rny destined successor,  is
come.  This moment I have been told it by the Queen.
And in truth I am again falling so unwell that I had
fully expected,  if the delay had been yet lengthened,
another dreadful seizure for its termination.  But I
hope now to avoid this:  and my mind is very full,  very
agitated ; nothing has yet been said of my day of dis-
mission.

I conclude I return not till Thursday,  after the draw-
ing-room. I fancy my attendance will be reipiired at
St.  James’s till that ceremony is over.  It will be highly
disagreeable,  and even painfnl,  to conclude in such full
congress and fine trappings,  &c.,  for I know I shall feel
a pang at parting with the Queen,  in the midst of the
soul’s satisfaction w ith which I shall return to my beloved

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

217

1791]

father — that dear parental protection under which,  if my
altered health should even fail of restoration,  my mind
will be composed,  and my best affections cherished,
soothed,  and returned.  My eyes fill while I write ; my
dearest father,  I feel myself already in your kind.  arms.
I shall write instantly to my good Mrs.Ord;  I have many
reasons for knowing her plan of excursion as wise to
follow as it was kind to propose ; and if you go to Crewe
Hall,  we may set off almost at the same moment.

All the sweet Princesses seem sorry I am going.  In-
deed the most flattering marks of attention meet me from
all quarters.  I feel heavy-hearted at the parting scene,
especially with the Queen,  in the midst of all my joy and
relief to return to my beloved father.  And the King — ■
the benevolent King — so uniformly,  ])artially,  and en-
couragingly good to me — I can hardly look at with dry
eyes.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg has been forced to town by ill
health  ; she was very friendly,  even affectionate,  in going  !

The business with my servants is quite a tragedy to
me — they so much liked their places:  they have both
been crying,  even the man  ; Goter cannot keep from
sobbing.

I flatter myself,  dearest sir,  w^e shall still have near a
month together before our first branching off ; and such
rest as that,  with peace,  my long -postponed medical trial of
Dr.  VV.’s prescription,  and my own most wished regimen
of affection in domestic life,  will do all that can be done
towards recruiting my shattered frame ; and the frequent
gentle changes of air,  with such a skilful directress as
Airs.  Ord,  will be giving me,  indeed,  every possible
chance.

Adieu,  most dear sir:  to the world’s end,  and T hope
after the world’s end,  dutifully and affectionately,  your

F.  B.

218

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

I had soon the pleasure to receive Mdlle.  Jacobi.  She
brought with her a young German,  as her maid,  who
proved to be her niece,  but so poor she could not live
when her aunt left Gerinany  ! Mr.  Best,  a messenger of
the King’s,  brought her to Windsor,  and Mrs.  Best,  his
wife,  accompanied him.

I was extremely pleased with Mdlle.  Jacobi,  who is tall,
well made,  and nearly handsome,  and of a humour so
gay,  an understanding so lively,  and manners so frank
and Ingenuous,  that I felt an immediate regard for her,
and we grew mutual good friends.  She is the daughter
of a dignified clergyman of Hanover,  high in theological
fame.

They all dined with me  ; and,  indeed,  Mdlle.  Jacobi,
wanting a thousand informations in her new situation,
which I was most happy to give her,  seldom quitted me
an instant.

* * * * *

Tuesday morning I liad a conversation,  very long
and very affecting to me,  with Her Majesty.  I cannot
pretend to detail it.  I will only tell you she began by
speaking of Mdlle.  Jacobi,  whom I had the satisfaction
to praise,  as far as had appeared,  very warmly  ; and then
she led me to talk at large upon the nature and requisites
and circumstances of the situation I was leaving.  I said
whatever I could suggest that would lend to render my
successor more comfortable,  and had the great happi-
ness to represent with success the consolation and very
innocent pleasure she might reap from the society of
the young relation she had brought over,  if she might
be permitted to treat her at once as a companion,  and
not as a servant.  This was heard with the most humane

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

219

complacency,  and I had leave given me to forward the
plan in various ways.

She then conversed upon sundry subjects,  all of them
confidential in their nature,  for near an hour;  and then,
after a pause,  said,  “ Do I owe you anything,  my dear
Miss Burney  ? ”

I acquainted her with a debt or two amounting to near
70/.  She said she would settle it in the afternoon,  and
then paused again  ; after which,  with a look full of be-
nignity, she very expressively said,  “ As I don't know
your plan,  or what you propose,  I cannot tell what would
make you comfortable,  but you know the size of my
family.”

1 comprehended her,  and was immediately interrupting
her with assurances of my freedom from all expectation
or claim  ; but she stopped me,  saying,  You know what
you now have from me  ; — the half of that I mean to con-
tinue.”

Amazed and almost overpow'ered by a munificence I
had so little expected or thought of,  1 poured forth the
most earnest disclaimin^s of such a mark of her graci-
ousness,  declaring I knew too well her innumerable calls
to be easy in receiving it ; and much more I uttered to
this purpose,  with the unaffected warmth that animated
me at the moment.  She heard me almost silently  ; but,
in conclusion,  simply,  yet strongly,  said,  “ I shall cer-
tainly do that ! ” with a stress on the  “ that”  that seemed
to kindly mean she would rather have done more.

The conference was in this stage when the Princess
Elizabeth came into the room.  The Queen then retired
to the ante-chamber.  My eyes being full,  and my heart
not very empty,  I could not then forbear saying to
her Royal Highness how much the goodness of the
Queen had penetrated me.  The Princess spoke feelings

220

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

I could not expect,  by the immediate glistening of her
soft eyes.  She condescended to express her concern at
my retiring;  hut most kindly added,  “ However,  Miss
liurney,  you have this to comfort you,  go when you will,
that your behaviour has been most perfectly honourable.”

This,  my last day at Windsor,  was fdled with nothing
but packing,  leave-taking,  hills-paying,  and lessoning to
^Idlle.  Jacobi,  who adhered to my side through every-
thing, and always with an interest that made its own way
for her.

All the people I had to settle with poured forth for my
better health good wishes without end  ; hut amongst the
most unwilling for my retreat stood jioor Mrs.  Astley:
indeed she quite saddened me by her sadness,  and by the
recollections of that sweet and angelic being her mistress,
who had so solaced mv early days at that place.

Mr.  Hryant,  too,  came this same morning;  he had an
audience of the  (^uecn  : he knew nothing previously of
my design.  He seemed quite thunderstruck.  “ Bless
me!”  he cried,  in his short and simple hut expressive
manner;  “so I shall never see you again — never have the
lionour to dine in that apartment with you more!”&c.
I would have kept him to dinner this last day,  hut he was
not well,  and would not he persuaded.  He would not.
liowever,  hi<l me adieu,  hut promised to endeavour to see
me some time at Chelsea.

I had then a little note from Miss Gomme,  desiring to
see me in the garden.  She had just gathered the news.
I do not believe any one was more disposed to he sorry,
if the sight and sense of my illness had not checked her
concern.  She highly approved the step I was taking,
and was most cordial and kind.

Miss Plaiita came to tell me she must decline dining
with me,  as she felt slie should erv all dinner-time,  in re-

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.

221

1791]

fleeting upon its being our last meal together at Windsor,
and this might affront Mdlle.  Jacobi.

The Queen deigned to come once more to my apart-
ment this afternoon.  She brought me the debt.  It was
a most mixed feelins:  with which I now saw her.

In the evening came Madame de la Fite.  I need not
tell you,  I imagine,  that her expressions Mere of  “ la
plus vive douleur yet she owned she could not wonder
my father should try what another life would do for me.

My dear Mrs.  De Luc came next;  she,  alone,  knew
of this while impending.  She rejoiced the time of deli-
verance was arrived,  for she had often feared I should
outstay my strength,  and sink while the matter was
arranging.  She rejoiced,  however,  with tears in her
kind eyes ; and,  indeed,  I took leave of her with true
regret.

It was nine o’clock before I could manage to go dowai
the garden to the Lower Lodge,  to pay my duty to the
younger Princesses,  whom I could not else see at all,  as
they never go to town for the court-days.

I went first up-stairs to Miss Gomme,  and had the mor-
tification to learn that the Princess Amelia was already
gone to bed.  This extremely grieved me.  Wlien or how
I may see her lovely little Highness more,  Pleaven only
knows !

Miss Gomme kindly accompanied me to Miss Golds-
worthy’s apartment,  and promised me a few more last
words before I set out the next morning.

I found Mrs.  Cheveley,  at whose door,  and at Miss
Keven’s,  her sister’s,  I had tapped and left my name,
with Miss Goldsworthy and Dr.  Fisher : that pleasing
and worthy man has just taken a doctor’s degree,

I waited with Miss Goldsworthy till the Princesses
Mary and Sophia came from the Upper Lodge,  which

222

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V.

is when the King and Queen go to supper.  Their Royal
Highnesses were gracious even to kindness  ; they shook
my hand again and again,  and wished me better health,
and all happiness,  with the sweetest earnestness.  Prin-
cess Mary repeatedly desired to see me whenever I came
to the Queen’s house,  and condescended to make me as
repeatedly promise that I would not fail.  I was deeply
touched by their goodness,  and by leaving them.

AVednesday. — In the morning Mrs.  Evans,  the house-
keeper, came to take leave of me  ; and the housemaid
of my apartment,  who,  poor girl  ! cried bitterly that
I was going to give place to a foreigner;  for Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg’s severity with servants has made all Germans
feared in the house.

O,  but let me first mention that,  when I came from the
Lower Lodge,  late as it was,  I determined to see my old
friends the equerries,  and not quit the place without
bidding them adieu.  I had never seen them since I had
dared mention my designed retreat.

I told AVilliam,  therefore,  to watch their return from
the castle,  and to give my compliments to either Colonel
Gwynn or Colonel Goldsworthy^,  and an invitation to
my apartment.

Colonel Goldsworthy came instantly.  I told him I
could not think of leaving Windsor wdthout offering first
my good wishes to all the household.  He said that,  w hen
my intended departure had been published,  he and all
the gentlemen then with him had declared it ought to
have taken place six months ago.  He was extremely
courteous,  and I begged him to bring to me the rest of
his companions that w^ere known to me.

He immediately fetched Colonel Gwynn,  General
Grenville,  Colonel Ramsden,  and Colonel Manners.  This
was the then party.  I told him I sent to beg their bless-

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

223

ing upon my departure.  Tliey were all much pleased,
apparently,  that I had not made my exit without seeing
tliem : they all agreed in the urgency of the measure,
and we e.xchanged good wishes most cordially.

My Wednesday morning’s attendance upon the Queen
was a melancholy office.  Miss Goldsworthy as well as
Miss Gomme came early to take another farewell,  I had
not time to make any visits in the town,  but left com-
missions with Mrs.  De Luc and Madame de la Fite.
Even Lady Charlotte Finch I could not call upon,  though
she had made me many kind visits since my illness.  I
wrote to her,  however,  by Miss Gomme,  to thank her,  and
bid her adieu.

Thursday,  July 7th. — This,  my last day of office,
was big and busy, — ^joyful,  yet affecting to me in a high
degree.

In the morning,  before I left Kew,  I had my last
interview with Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  She was very
kind in it,  desiring to see me whenever I could in town,
during her residence at the Queen’s house,  and to hear
from me by letter meanwhile.

She then much surprised me by an offer of succeeding
to her own place,  when it was vacated either by her re-
tiring or her death.  This was,  indeed,  a mark of favour
and confidence 1 had not expected.  I declined,  however,
to enter upon the subject,  as the manner in which she
opened it made it very solemn,  and,  to her,  very af-
fecting.

She would take no leave of me,  but wished me better
hastily,  and,  saying we should soon meet,  she hurried sud-
denly out of the room.  Poor woman  ! If her temper
were not so irascible,  I really believe her heart would be
by no means wanting in kindness.

I then took leave of Mrs.  Sandys,  giving her a token

221

DIAllV AND LETTERS

[Part V.

of remembrance in return for her constant good behaviour,
and she showed marks of regard,  and of even grief,  I was
sorry to receive,  as I could so ill return.

But the tragedy of tragedies was parting with Goter:
that poor girl did nothing but cry incessantly from the
time she knew of our separation.  1 was very sorry to
have no place to recommend her to,  though I believe she
may rather benefit by a vacation that carries her to her
excellent father and mother,  who teach her nothing but
gooil.  1 did what I could to soften the blow,  by every
exertion in my power in all ways;  for it was impossible
to be unmoved at her violence of sorrow.

I then took leave of Kew Palace — the same party
again accompanying me,  for the last time,  in a Hoyal ve-
hicle going by the name ot  .V/.v.?  Burney's coach.

I should mention that the Queen graciously put into
my hands the power of giving every possible comfort
and kind assurances of encouragement to Mile.  Jacobi
and her jioor little Bettiua  ; and all was arranged in
the best manner for their accommodation and ease.
Her Majesty made me also the happy conveyancer of
various presents to them both,  and gave to me the regu-
lation of their proceedings.

\\  hen we arrived in town I took leave of Mr.  De Luc.
I believe he was as much inclined to be sorrv as the
visible necessity of the parting would permit him.  For
me,  I hope to see every one of the establishment here-
after, far more comfortably than ever I have been able to
<lo during the fatigues of a life to which I was so ill
suited.

1 come now near the close of my Court career.

At St.  .fames's all was graciousness;  and my Koval
Mistress gave me to understand she would have me stay
to assist at her toilet after the drawing-room  ; and much

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

2*25

1791,]

delighted me by desiring my attendance on the Thursday
fortnight,  when she came again to town.  This lightened
the parting in the pleasantest manner possible.

When the Queen commanded me to follow her to her
closet 1 was,  indeed,  in much emotion  ; but I told her
that,  as what had passed from Mrs.  Schwellenberg in the
morning had given me to understand Her Majesty was
fixed in her munificent intention,  notwithstanding what I
had most unaffectedly urged against it —

“ Certainly,”  she interrupted,  I shall certainly do it.”
“Yet so little,”  I continued,  “had I thought it right
to dwell upon such an expectation,  that,  in the belief your
Majesty would yet take it into further consideration,  I
had not even written it to my father.”

“ Your father,”  she again interrupted me,  “ has nothing
to do with it ; it is solely from me to i/ou.”

“ Let me then humbly entreat,”  I cried,  “ still in some
measure to be considered as a servant of your Majesty,
either as reader,  or to assist occasionally if Mile.  Jacobi
should be ill.”

She looked most graciously pleased,  and immedi-
ately closed in with the proposal,  saying,  “ When your
health is restored, — perhaps sometimes.”

I then fervently poured forth my thanks for all her
goodness,  and my prayers for her felicity.

She had her handkerchief in her hand or at her eyes
the whole time.  I was so much moved by her conde-
scending kindness,  that as soon as I got out of the closet
I nearly sobbed.  I went to help  ]\llle.  Jacobi to put up
the jewels,  that my emotion might the less be observed.
The King then came into the room.  He immediately ad-
vanced to the window,  where I stood,  to speak to me.  1
was not then able to comport myself steadily.  I was
forced to turn my head away from him.  He stood still
VOL.  V.  o

226

DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.

[Part V.

and silent for some minutes,  waiting to see if I should
turn about ; but I could not recover myself sufficiently
to face him,  strange as it was to do otherwise ; and per-
ceiving me quite overcome he walked away,  and I saw
him no more.

His kindness,  his goodness,  his benignity,  never shall I
forget — never think of but with fresh gratitude and re-
verential affection.

They were now all going — I took,  for the last time,
the cloak of the Queen,  and,  putting it over her shoul-
ders, slightly ventured to press them,  earnestly,  though in
a low voice,  saying,  “ God Almighty bless your Ma-
jesty ! ”

She turned round,  and,  putting her hand upon my un-
gloved arm,  pressed it with the greatest kindness,  and
said,  “ May you be happy  ! ”

She left me overwhelmed with tender gratitude.  The
three eldest Princesses were in the next room  : they ran
in to me the moment the Queen went onward.  Prin-
cess Augusta and Princess Elizabeth each took a hand,
and the Princess Royal put hers over them.  I could
speak to none of them  ; but they repeated,  “ I wish you
happy ! — I wish you health  ! ” again and again,  with the
sweetest eagerness.

They then set off for Kew.

Here,  therefore,  end my Court  .'Xnnals;  after having
lived in the service of Her Majesty five years within ten
days — from  .July 17,  1768,  to July 7,  1791.

PART VI.

1791.

CONTENTS.

Return home — Congratulations — Letter from Mr.  Windham to
Dr.  Burney — Diary of a Southern Tour— Journey to Sidmouth
— A Country Waiting-woman  — Winchester  — The Bishop’s
Castle — The King’s House — A Party of Emigrants — The King
of France and the Aristocrats — Liberty in France — Winchester
Cathedral — The New Forest — Salisbury Plain — Stonehenge —
Wilton House — Blandford — Milton Abbey — Dorchester — Brid-
port  — Lyme  — Sidmouth — Village Loyalty— Exmouth — Pow-
derham Castle— House of Sir Francis Drake— Bridgewater —
Glastonbury Abbey — The Monks’  Kitchen — Abbot Dunstan —
Wells — Bath Fifty Years ago — Remin scences — Dr.  Harring-
ton—Lady Spencer and her Daughters — Lady Duncannon  —
Ladies Georgiana and Harriet Cavendish — Miss Trimmer —
Lord Spencer — The Duchess of Devonshire— Lady Elizabeth
Forster — Gibbon — Bishop of Dromore— Mrs.  Montagu  — Ed-
mund Burke — Miss Burney’s Return toiler Family — Dr.  Bur-
ney to Miss Burney — Mr.  Beckford — Major Rennell — Dr.  Ro-
bertson— Miss Burney’s Literary Pursuits renewed — Mr.  Merry
— Miss Brunton — Sir Joshua Reynolds — Mrs.  Schwellenberg —
Dr.  Gillies — Mrs.  Montagu — Mrs.  Garrick — Lady Rothes — Sir
Lucas Pepys — Mrs.  Chapone.  '

Q

9

228

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

PART VI.

1791.

CbeUca College;

Once more I have tlie blessing;  to address my beloved
friends from the natal home  ! — with a satisfaction^  a se-
renity of heart immeasurable.  All smaller evils shall
now give way to the one great good  ; and I shall not,  I
hope,  be forgetful,  wben the world wags ill,  that scarce
any misfortune,  scarce misery itself,  can so wastefully
desolate the very soul of my existence as a banishment,
even the most honourable,  from those I love.

But I must haste to the present time,  and briefly give
the few facts that occurred before my Susanna came to
greet my restoration,  and the few that preceded my jour-
ney to the south-west afterwards,  in  .luly.

My dear father was waiting for me in my apart-
ment at St.  James’s when their Majesties and their
fair I’oyal daughters were gone.  lie brought me home,
and welcomed me most sweetly.  My heart was a little
sad,  in spite of its contentment.  ^ly joy in quilting my
place extended not to quitting the King and Queen  ; and
the final marks of their benign favour had deeply im-
pressed me.  My mother received me according to my
wishes,  and Sarah most cordially.

My dear James and Charles speedily came to see me  ;
and one precious half-day I was indulged with niv kind
Mr.  l.ock and his Fredy.  If I had been stouter and
stronger in health,  I should then have been almost llightily

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

22'

happy;  but the weakness of the frame still kept th
rest in order.  My ever-kind Miss Cambridge was als
amongst the foremost to hasten with congratulations o
my return to my old ways,  and to make me promise t
visit Twickenham after my projected tour with Mr:
Ord.

I could myself undertake no visiting at this time  ; res
and quiet being quite essential to my recovery.  But m
father did the honours for me amongst those who ha
been most interested in my resignation.  He called ir
stantly upon Sir Joshua Reynolds and Miss Palmer^  an
Mr.  Burke;  and he w'rote to Mr.  Walpole,  Mr.  Sewart
Mrs.  Crewe,  Mr.  Windham,  and my Worcester unch
Mr.  Walpole wrote the most charming of answers,  in th
gallantry of the old court,  and with all its wit,  concludin
with a warm invitation to Strawberry Hill.  Sir Joshu
and Miss Palmer sent me every species of kind exuItE
tion.  Mr.  Burke was not in town.  Mr.  Seward wrot
very heartily and cordially,  and came also when my Si
sanna was here.  Mrs.  Crewe immediately pressed m
to come and recruit at Crewe Hall in Cheshire,  wher
she promised me repose,  and good air and good society.

Mr.  Windham to Dr.  Burney.

Dear Sir,  July,  1791.

I am shocked that circumstances of different son
— among which one has been the hope of visiting you i
Chelsea — should have delayed so long my acknowled^
ments for your very kind letter.  I not only received wit
infinite satisfaction the intelligence which it containei
but I was gratified by being distinguished as one to whoi
such intelligence would be satisfactory.  It was the coir
mon cause of every one interested in the concerns c

230

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

genius and literature.  I have been alarmed of late,  how-
ever, by hearing that the evil has not ended with the oc-
casion, but that Miss B.’s health is still far from being re-
established. I hope the fact is not true in the extent in
which 1 heard it stated.  There are few of those who
only admire Miss Burney’s talents at a distance,  and have
so little the honour of her acquaintance,  who feel more
interested in her welfare ; nor could I possibly be insen-
sible to a concern in which you must be so deeply
affected.

I should be very happy if,  at any time when you are
in this neighbourhood,  you would give me the chance of
seeing you,  and of hearing,  I hope,  a more favourable ac-
count than seemed to be the amount of what I heard
lately.

W.  W.

• * • ♦ #

Siclmouth,  Devoiuhire.

Monday,  August 1st. — I have now been a week out
upon my travels,  but have not had the means or the time,
till this moment,  to attempt their brief recital.

Mrs.  Ord called for me about ten in the morning.  I
left my dearest father with the less regret,  as his own
journey to Mrs.  Crewe was very soon to take place.

It was a terribly rainy morning,  but I was eager not to
postpone the excursion.

As we travelled on towards Staines,  1 could scarcely
divest myself of the idea that I was but making again my
usual journey to Windsor;  and I could with difficulty
forbear calling Mrs.  Ord Miss Planta during the  ^hole
of that well-known road.  I did not,  indeed,  take her
maid,  who was our third in the coach,  for Mr.  De Luc,
or Mr.  Turbulent;  but the place she occupied made me

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

231

think much more of those I so long had had for my
vis-a-vis than of herself.

We went on no farther than to Bagshot : thirty miles
was the extremity of our powers ; but I bore them very
tolerably,  though variably.

We put up at the best inn,  very early,  and then in-
quired what we could see in the town and neighbour-
hood.

“ Nothing  !”  was the concise answer of a staring house-
maid. We determined,  therefore,  to prowl to the church-
yard, and read the tombstone inscriptions  : but when we
asked the way,  the same woman,  staring still more won-
deringly,  exclaimed,  “ Church  ! There’s no church nigh
here  ! — There ’s the Prince of Wales’s,  just past the turn-
ing. You may go and see that,  if you will.”

So on we walked towards this hunting villa : but after
toiling up a long unweeded avenue,  we had no sooner
opened the gate to the parks than a few score of dogs,
which were lying in ambush,  set up so prodigious a variety
of magnificent barkings,  springing forward at the same
time,  that,  content with having caught a brief view of the
seat,  we left them to lord it over the domain they re-
garded as their own,  and,  with all due submission,  pretty
hastily shut the gate,  without troubling them to give us
another salute.  We returned to the inn,  and read
B ’s  ‘ Lives of the Family of the Boyles.’

Tuesday,  August 2nd. — We proceeded to Farnham
to breakfast,  and thence walked to the Castle.  The
Bishop of Winchester,  Mrs.  North,  and the whole family,
are gone abroad.  The Castle is a good old building,
with as much of modern elegance and fashion inter-
mixed in its alterations and fitting up as Mrs.  North
could possibly contrive to weave into its ancient gran-
deur. They date the Castle from King Stephen,  in

232

DIARY AND LETTERS  ’

[Part VI.

whose reign,  as Norbury will tell us,  the land was almost
covered with such strong edifices,  from his imprudent
permission of building them,  granted to appease the
Jiarons,  who were turned aside from the Empress Maud.
I wished I could have climbed to the top of an old tower,
much out of repair,  but so high,  that I fancied I could
thence have espied the hills of Norbury.  However,  I
was ready to fall already,  from only ascending the slope
to reach the Castle.

We arrived early at Winchester ; but the town was so
full,  as the judges were expected the next morning,  that
we could only get one bed-chamber,  in which Mrs.  Ord,
her maid,  and myself reposed.

Just after we had been obliged to content ourselves
w ith this scanty accommodation,  we saw a very handsome
coach and four horses,  followed bv a chaise and outriders,
stop at the gate,  and heard the mistress of the liouse de-
clare she could not receive the company ; and the post-
ilions, at the same time,  protested the horses could go tio
farther.  They inquired for fresh horses;  there Avere
none to be had in the whole city  ; and the party were all
forced to remain,  in their carriages,  Avithout horses,  at
the inn-gate,  for the chance of Avhat might pass on the
road.

\Ve asked who they Avere,  and our pity Avas doubled in
finding them foreignei's.

We strolled about the upper part of the citv,  leaving
the Cathedral for the next morning.  We sarv a large,
uniform,  handsome palace,  Avhich is called by the in-
habitants “The King’s House,  ’ and Avhlch Avas begun
by Charles II.  ^Vc did not.  therefore,  expect the ele-
gant architecture of his father's days,  (^ne part,  thev
told us,  Avas particvdarly designed for Nell CiAvvnn.  It
Avas never finished,  and neglect has taken place of time

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

233

in rendering it a most ruined structure,  though,  as it bears
no marks of antiquity,  it has rather the appearance of
owing its destruction to a fire than to the natural decay
of age.  It is so spacious,  however,  and stands so mag-
nificently to overlook the city,  that I wish it to be com-
pleted for an hospital or infirmary.  I have written Mrs.
Schwellenberg an account of its appearance and state,
which 1 am sure will be read by Her iMajesty.

When vve returned to the inn,  still the poor travellers
were in the same situation : they looked so desolate,  and
conld so indifferently make themselves understood,  that
Mrs.  Old good-naturedly invited them to drink tea with
us.

They most thankfully accepted the offer,  and two ladies
and two gentlemen ascended the stairs with us to our
dining-room.  The chaise had the female servants.

The elder lady was so truly French — so vive and so
triste in turn — that she seemed formed from the written
character of a Frenchwoman,  such,  at least,  as we Eng-
lish write them.  She was very forlorn in her air,  and
very sorrowful in her countenance  ; yet all action and
gesture,  and of an animation w'hen speaking nearly fiery
in its vivacity  : neither pretty nor young,  but neither
ugly nor old  ; and her smile,  which was rare,  had finesse
very engaging  ; while her whole deportment announced a
person of consequence,  and all her discourse told that she
was well-informed,  well-educated,  and well-bred.

The other lady,  whom they called Mademoiselle,  as
the first Madame,  was young,  dark,  but clear and bright
in her eyes and complexion,  though without good features,
or a manner of equal interest with the lady she accom-
panied. Sensible she proved,  however,  and seemed
happy in the general novelty around her.  She spoke
English pretty well,  and was admired without mercy by

234

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

the rest of the party,  as a perfect mistress of the language.
The Madame spoke it very ill indeed,  but pleasingly.

Of the two gentlemen,  one they called only Monsieur,
and the other the Madame addressed as her brother.  The
Monsieur was handsome,  rather tonnish,  and of the high
haughty ton,  and seemed the devoted attendant or pro-
tector of the Madame,  who sometimes spoke to him al-
most wdth asperity,  from eagerness,  and a tinge of wretch-
edness and impatience,  which coloured all she said  ;
and,  at other times,  softened oft her vehemence with a
smile the most expressive,  and which made its way to
the mind immediately,  by coming with sense and meaning,
and not merely from good humour and good spirits,  as the
more frequent smiles of happier persons.

The brother seemed lively and obliging,  and entirely at
the devotion of his sister,  who gave him her commands
with an authority that would not have brooked dispute.

They told us they were just come from Southampton,
which they had visited in their way from seeing the fleet
at the Isle of Wight and Portsmouth,  and they meant to
go on now to Bath.

VV’e soon found they were aristocrats,  which did better
for them with Mrs.  Ord and me than it would have done
with you republicans of Norbury and Mickleham;  yet 1
wish you had all met the Madame,  and heard her indig-
nant unhappiness.  They had been in England but two
months.  They all evidently belonged to Madame,  who
appeared to me a fugitive just before the flight of the
Erench King,  or in consequence of his having been taken.

She entered upon her wretched situation very soon,
lamenting that he was,  in fact,  no King,  and bewailing
his want of courage for his trials.  The Queen she never
mentioned.  She spoke once or twice of son man,  but
did not say who or what he was,  nor where.

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

235

“They say/’ .she cried/' in France they have now liberty!
Who has liberty,  le peuple,  or the mob?  Not les hon-
nHes gens  ; for those whose principles are known to be
aristocratic must fly,  or endure every danger and indig-
nity. Ah  ! est-ce la la liherte?^'

The Monsieur said he had always been the friend of
liberty,  such as it was in England ; but in France it was
general tyranny.  “In England,”  he cried,  “he was a
true democrat,  though hien anstocrate in France.’’

“ At least,”  said the poor Madame,  “ formerly,  in all
the sorrows of life,  we had nos terres to which we could
retire,  and there forget them,  and dance,  and sing,  and
laugh,  and fling them all aside,  till forced back to Paris.
But now our villas are no protection : we may be safe,
but the first offence conceived by le peuple is certain
destruction  ; and,  without a moment’s warning,  we may
be forced to fly our own roofs,  and see them and all we
are worth burnt before our eyes,  in horrible triumph.”
This was all said in French.  But the anguish of her
countenance filled me with compassion,  though it was
scarcely possible to restrain a smile when,  the moment
after,  she said she might be very wrong,  but she hoped I
would forgive her if she owned she preferred Paris in-
comparably to London  ; and pitied me very unreservedly
for never having seen that first of cities.

Her sole hope,  she said,  for the overthrow of that
anarchy in which the unguarded laxity of the King had
plunged the first country in the world, — vo^is me par-
donnerez,  mademoiselle, — was now from the German
Princes,  who,  she flattered herself,  would rise in their
own defence.

She told me,  the next moment,  of les spectacles I
should find at Southampton,  and asked me what she
might expect at Bath of public amusement and buildings.

•236

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

I was travelling,  I said,  for my health,  and should
visit no theatres,  ball-rooms,  &c.,  and could recommend
none.

She did not seem to comprehend me ; yet,  in the
midst of naming these j)laces,  she sighed as deeply from
the bottom of her heart as if she had been torswearing
the world for ever in despair.  But it was necessary,
she said,  when unhap[)y,  to go abroad the more,  j)oiir se
distraire.

In parting,  they desired much to renew acquaintance
with us when we returned to London.  Mrs.  Ord gave
her direction to the Monsieur,  who,  in return,  wrote
theirs — “The French ladies.  No.  30,  Gerrard-street,
Soho.”

They stayed till our early hour of retiring made Mrs.
Ord suffer them to go.  I was uneasy to know what
would become of them.  I inquired of a waiter  : he un-
feelingly laughed,  and said,  “()!  they do well enough  ;
they’ve got a room.”  I asked if he could yet let them
have beds to stay,  or horses to proceed?  “No,”  an-
swered he,  sneeringly ; “but it don’t matter;  for,  now
they’ve got a room,  they are as merry and capering as if
they were going to dance.”

Just after this,  Mrs.  Stephenson,  Mrs.  Ord’s maid,
came running in.  “ La  ! ma’am,”  she cried,  “ I’ve been
so frighted,  you can’t think  : the French folks sent for
me on purpose to ask t’other lady’s name,  they said  ; and
they had asked William before,  so they knew it ; but they
said I must write it down,  ajul where she lived ; so I was
forced to write  ^Miss Burney,  Chelsea,’ and they fell a
smiling so at one another.”

’Twas impossible to help laughing;  but we desired her,
in return,  to send for one of their maids and ask their
names also.

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

237

She came back^  and said she could not understand the
maids,  and so they had called one of the gentlemen,  and
he had written down  “ Madame la Comtesse de Menage,
et Mile,  de Beaufort.”

We found,  afterwards,  they had sat up till two in the
morning,  and then procured horses and journeyed towards
Oxford,

Ah  ! is this liberty,  where one side alone predominates
thus fiercely  ? Liberty  ! the first,  best,  noblest gift for
mankind,  is mutual,  reciprocal for all parties:  in France
it seems to me but a change of despotism.  I rejoice with
my whole heart to see those redressed who have been in-
jured ; but I feel horror,  not joy,  to see those oppressed
who are guiltless.  I have much,  I own,  to learn ere I
can account for the predilection I see taken for a demoli-
tion of tyranny by tyranny.  They say I have heard but
one side:  it appears to me they think there is but one
side.

Wednesday,  August 3rd. — We walked to the Ca-
thedral, and saw it completely.  Part of it remains from
the original Saxon building,  though neglected,  except by
travellers,  as the rest of the church is ample for all uses,
and alone kept in repair.  The bones of eleven Saxon
Kings are lodged in seven curious old chests,  in which
they w'ere deposited after being dug up and disturbed in
civil wars and ensuing confusions.  The small number of
chests is owing to the small proportion remaining of some
of the skeletons,  w'hich occasioned their being united with
others.  The Saxon characters are in many inscriptions
preserved,  though in none entire.  They were washing a
plaster from the w alls,  to discern some curious old paint-
ing, very miserable,  but very entertaining,  of old legends,
which some antiquaries are now endeavouring to dis-

cover.

•238

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI,

William of Wykham,  by whom the Cathedral was
built in its present form,  lies buried,  with his effigy and
whole monument in very fine alabaster,  and probably
very like,  as it was done,  they aver,  before he died.

Its companion,  equally superb,  is Cardinal Beaufort,
uncle of Harry VI.  William Rufus,  slain in the neigh-
bouring forest,  is buried in the old choir : his monument
is of plain stone,  without any inscription or ornament,
and only shaped like a coffin.  Ilardyknute had a much
more splendid monument preserved for him  ; but Harry I.
had other business to attend,  I presume,  than to decorate
the tomb of one brother while despoiling of his kingdom
another.

An extremely curious old chapel and monument re-
main of Archbishop l.angton,  of valuable Gothic work-
manship. The altar,  which is highly adorned with gold,
was protected in Cromwell's time by the address and
skill of the Winton inhahitants,  who ran up a slight wall
before it,  and deceived the Reformists,  .voi-dixnnf.v.  I
could hardly quit this poor dear old building,  so much I
was interested with its Saxon chiefs,  its little queer niches,
quaint images,  damp cells,  mouldering walls,  and mil-
dewed pillars.  One chest contains the bones entire of
Egbert,  our first King.  Edred,  also,  I distinguished.

The screen was given to this church hy King Charles,
and is the work of Inigo Jones.  It is very simple in
point of ornament,  very complete in taste and elegance  ;
nevertheless,  a screen of Grecian architecture in a cathe-
dral of Gothic workmanship was ill,  I think,  imagined.

* * ♦ ♦ ♦

We travelled through a most delicious country in parts
of the New Forest,  to Southampton,  As I have tw ice
been there before,  what I had to say I suppose said.

Thursday,  August 4th, — We proceeded to break-

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

239

fast at Romsey.  What a contrast this journey to that I
took two years ago in attendance upon Her Majesty !
The roads now so empty,  the towns so quiet ; and then,
what multitudes  ! what tumults of joy ! and how gra-
ciously welcomed !

We went on to dine at Salisbury,  a city which,  wdth
their Majesties,  I could not see for people.  It seemed
to have neither houses nor walls,  but to be composed
solely of faces.  We strolled about the town,  but
the Cathedral was shut up to be repaired,  much to our
regret.

Friday,  August 5th. — We went to Stonehenge.
Here I was prodigiously disappointed,  at first,  by the
huge masses of stone so unaccountably piled at the sum-
mit of Salisbury Plain.  However,  we alighted,  and the
longer I surveyed and considered them,  the more aug-
mented my wonder and diminished my disappointment.

We then went on to Wilton.  There I renewed my
delight over the exquisite Vandykes,  and with the statues,
busts,  and pictures,  which again I sighingly quitted,  'with
a longing wish I might ever pass under that roof time
enough to see them more deliberately.  We stopped in the
Hans Holbein porch,  and upon the Inigo Jones bridge,
as long as we could stand,  after standing and staring
and straining our eyes till our guide was quite fatigued.
’Tis a noble collection  ; and how might it be enjoyed
if,  as an arch rustic old labouring man told us,  fine folks
lived as they ought to do  !

Sunday,  August 7th. — We heard the service per-
formed very well at Blandford Church,  which is a very
pretty edifice of late date,  built,  after the old one,  with the
whole town,  had been totally consumed by fire,  about a
century ago.

After an early dinner we set off for Milton Abbey,  the

240

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

seat of Lord Milton.  We arrived,  through very bad roads,
at a village built by his Lordship,  very regularly,  of white
plaster,  cut stone fashion and thatched,  though every
house was square and meant to resemble a gentleman’s
abode : a very miserable mistake in his good Lordship,
of an intended fine effect : for the sight of the common
people and of the poor,  labouring or strolling in and about
these dwellings,  made them appear rather to be reduced
from belter days than ffourishing in a primitive or na-
tural state.

Milton Abbey Chapel,  however,  made amends for all
deficiencies.  It is a beautiful old building, erected in the
reign of Alhelstan,  of whom there is a terrible carv(;d
image in the act of presenting the church to a kneeling
monk,  who takes it into his hand.

J.ord Milton is now restoring this building,  under the
direction of Wyatt.  It is a really sweet strueture,  in the
lightest and most pleasing style of fiolhic taste.

4'he Mansion-house,  partly constructed from the old
Abbey and partly new,  is spacious and superb.  4'here is
a magnificent hall in excellent preservation,  of evident
Saxon workmanship,  and extremely handsome,  though
not of the airy beauty of the chapel.  4'liere are,  also,
some good pictures of the Dutch school,  and some
of admirable architectural perspective;  but the house-
keeper could tell no names of painters.

'I'he situation of this Abbey is truly delicious  : it is in
a vale of extreme fertility and richness,  surrounded by
hills of the most exquisite form,  and mostly covered with
hanging woods,  but so varied in their growth and groups,
that the eye is perpetually fresh caught with objects of
admiration.  'Tis truly a lovely place.

Hence we proceeded to Dorchester,  which again di-
verted me much by its comic,  irregular,  odd old houses.

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

241

But the town,  after having seen it with the King and
Queen,  a[)])eared quite depopvdated.

Monday,  August 8tii. — We proceeded to Bridport,
a remarkably clean town,  with the air so clear and pure,
it seemed a new climate.  Hence we set out,  after dinner,
for Lyme,  and the road through which we travelled is the
most beautiful to which my wandering destinies have
yet sent me.  It is diversified with all that can compose
luxuriant scenery,  and with just as much of the approach
to sublime as is in the  [>rovince of untcrrilic beauty.  The
hills are the highest,  I fancy,  in the south of this country —
the boldest and noblest;  the vales of the finest verdure,
wooded and watered as if only to give ideas of finished
landscapes  ; while the whole,  from time to time,  rises
into still superior grandeur,  by openings between the
heights that terminate the view with the splendour of the
British Channel.

There was no jroing on in the carriage through such

O r?  o

enchanting scenes  ; we got out upon the hills,  and walked
till we could walk no longer.

The descent down to Lyme is uncommonly steep ; and
Indeed is very striking,  from the magnificence of the ocean
that washes its borders.  Chidiock and Charmouth,  two
villages between Bridport and Lyme,  are the very pret-
tiest I have ever seen.

During the whole of this post I was fairly talcen away,
not only from the world but from myself,  and completely
wrapped up and engrossed by the pleasures,  wonders,
and charms of animated nature,  thus seen in fair per-
fection.

l.yme,  however,  brought me to myself ; for the part by
the sea,  where we fixed our abode,  was so dirty and fishy
that 1 rejoiced when we left it.

Tuksday,  August 9th. — We travelled to Sidmouth.

VOL.  v.

11

DIARY AND LETTERS

242

[Part VI.

And here we have taken up our abode for a week.  It
was all devoted to rest and sea-air.

Sidmouth is built in a vale by the sea-coast,  and the
terrace for company is nearer to the ocean than any I
have elsewhere seen,  and therefore both more pleasant
and more commodious.  The little bay is of a most
peaceful kind,  and the sea was as calm and gentle as the
Thames.  I longed to bathe,  but I am in no state now
to take liberties with myself,  and,  having no advice at
hand,  1 ran no risk.

Nothing has given me so much pleasure since I came
to this place as our landlady’s account of her own and
her tow'n’s loyalty.  She is a baker,  a poor widow woman,
she told us,  who lost her husband by his fright in thinking
he saw a ghost,  just after her mother was drowned.  She
carries on the business,  with the help of her daughter,  a
girl about fifteen.  We could get no other lodgings,  so
full was the town  ; and these are near the sea,  though
otherwise not desirable.

I inquired of her if she had seen the Royal Family when
they visited Devonshire  ? “ Yes,  sure,  ma’am  !”  she cried ;
“ there was ne’er a soul left in all this place for going
out to see  ’em.  My daughter and I rode a double horse,
and we went to Sir George Young’s,  and got into the
park,  for we knew-  the housekeeper,  and she gave my
daughter a bit to taste of the King’s dinner when they
had all done,  and she said she might talk on it when she
was a old woman.”

I asked another good woman,  who came in for some
dour,  if she had been of the party  ? No,”  she said,
“ she was ill,  but she had had holiday enough upon the
King’s recovery,  for there was such a holiday then as the
like was not in all England.”

“ 4 es,  sure,  ma’am,”  cried the poor baker-woman,  “ we

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

243

all did our best then,  for there was ne’er a town in all Eng-
land like Sidmouth for rejoicing.  Why,  I baked a hundred
and ten penny loaves for the poor,  and so did every
baker in town,  and there’s three ; and the gentry sub-
scribed for it.  And the gentry roasted a bullock and cut
it all up,  and we all eat it,  in the midst of the rejoicing.
And then we had such a fine sermon,  it made us all cry ;
there was a more tears shed than ever was known,  all for
over-joy.  And they had the King drawed,  and dressed up
all in gold and laurels,  and they put un in a coach and
eight horses,  and carried un about;  and all the grand
gentlemen in the town,  and all ahouts,  come in their own
carriages to join.  And they had the finest band of music
in all England singing  ‘ God save the King,’  and every soul
joined in the chorus,  and all not so much because he was
a King,  but because they said a was such a worthy gen-
tleman, and that the like of him was never known in this
nation before  ; so we all subscribed for the illuminations
for that reason, — some a shilling,  some a guinea,  and
some a penny, — for no one begrudged it,  as a was such
a worthy person.”

The other woman and the daughter then united in the
recital,  and gave it with such heartiness and simplicity,
that at last I was forced to leave them a little abruptly,
for I fairly lost all voice to answer them,  from the lively
sensations of pleasure which such proofs of the popularity
of the good and dear King always give me.  The two
women both cried also,  and that was far more wonderful.

This good Mrs.  Dare has purchased images of all the
Royal Family,  in her great zeal,  and I had them in my
apartment — King,  Queen,  Prince of Wales,  Dukes of
York,  Clarence,  Kent,  Sussex,  Cumberland,  and Cam-
bridge; Princess Royal,  and Princesses Augusta,  Eliza,
Mary,  Sophia,  and Amelia.  God bless them all !

R 2

244

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

Tuesday,  August IGtu. — We quitted Sidmouth,  and
proceeded through the finest country possible to Ex-
mouth, to see that celebrated spot of beauty.

Tlie ne.\t morning we crossed tlie Ex and visited Pow-
derham Castle.  Its appearance,  noble and antique with-
out, loses all that character from French finery and minute
elegance and gay trappings within.  The present owner.
Lord Courtney,  has fitted it up in the true Gallic taste,
and every room has the air of being ornamented for a
gala.  Some few good pictures,  however,  were worth all
the rest,  but the housekeeper knew notlnng of their mas-
ters, though their merit seemed to me highlv and greatly
to deserve approj)riation.  A connoisseur would require
no name,  and 1 am as hajqiy in amusing myself with
turning nomenclator as if I had studied under Mr.  Lock.

In the great room is a family picture by Sir Joshua.
The late Lord and Lady,  and all the present race,  consist-
ing, I think,  of thirteen,  are e.vhibited:  but the picture has
too much glare of beauty,  and beauty of one style and
character,  to make it of great clVect.  Contrast seems so
essential,  that an ugly boy or girl would render the piece
delightful ! 'Tis pity one cannot maim one part of a
family to show off the rest to advantage  !

The iiousekeeper did not let us see half the castle  ; she
only took us to those rooms which the present Lord has
modernized and fitted up in the sumptuous French taste  ;
the old part of the castle she doubtless thought would
disgrace him  ; forgetting — or rather never knowing — that
the old part alone was worth a traveller’s curiositv,  since
the rest might be anticipated by a visit to any celebrated
cabinet-maker.

'I'lience we proceeded to Star Cross to dine  ; and saw’
on the oj)posite coast the house of Sir I'rancis Drake,
which was built by his famous ancestor.

1/91]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

245

Here we saw a sight that reminded me of the drawings
of Webber from tlie South Sea Isles ; women scarce
clothed at all,  with feet and legs entirely naked,  straw
bonnets of uncouth shapes tied on their heads,  a sort of
man’s jacket on their bodies,  and their short coats pinned
up in the form of concise trousers,  very succinct ! and a
basket on each arm,  strolling along with wide mannish
strides to the borders of the river,  gathering cockles.  They
looked,  indeed,  miserable and savage.

Hence we went,  through very beautiful roads,  to Exeter.
That great old city is too narrow,  too populous,  too dirty,
and too ill-paved,  to meet with my applause.  We saw
the cathedral,  in which there is but little to be seen,
though Athelstan was its patron,  who was patron also of
the exquisite chapel of Milton Abbey.

Next morning Me breakfasted at Collumpton,  and
visited its church.  Here Me saw the remains of a once
extremely rich Gothic structure,  though never large.
There is all the appearance of its having been the church
of an abbey before the Reformation.’  It is situated in a
deep but most fertile vale ; its ornaments still retain so
much of gilding,  painting,  and antique splendour,  as could
never have belonged to a mere country church.  The
M'ood carving,  too,  though in ruins,  is most laboriously
well done ; the roof worked in blue and gold,  lighter,
but in the style of the Royal Chapel at St.  James’s.  We
Mere quite surprised to find such a structure in a town so
little knoMii or named.  One aisle Mas added by a clothier
of the toM’n in the reign of Eduard VI.;  probably
upon its first being used as a Protestant and public place
of M'orship.  This is still perfect,  but very clumsy and
inelegant compared M'ith the ancient part.  The man,  to
show he gloried in the honest profession M'hence he de-
rived M’ealth for this good purpose,  has his arms at one

216

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI,

corner,  with his name,  J.  Lane,  in Gothic characters,  and
on the opposite corner his image,  terribly worked in the
wall,  with a pair of shears in one hand,  so large as to cut
across the figure downwards,  almost obscuring all but his
feet.  Till the Cicerone explained this,  1 took the idea for a
design of Death,  placed where most conspicuously he
might show himself,  ready to cut in two the poor objects
that entered the church.

A statue of Edward VI.,  very young,  is in front with-
out. lie repaired the old church.

There was only a poor wretched ragged woman,  a
female clerk,  to show us this church.  She pays a man
for doing the duty,  while she receives the salary,  in right
of her deceased husband  !

Friday,  August PJth. — 'Fo vary the scenery we
breakfasted at Bridgewater,  in as much dirt and noise,
from the judges filling the town,  as at Taunton we had
enjoyed neatness and quiet.  W'e walked beside the river,
which is navigable from the Bristol Channel ; and a stream
more muddy,  and a quay more dirty and tarry and pitchy,
I would not covet to visit again.  It is here called tlie
Perrot.

Thence,  however,  we proceeded to what made amends
for all — the ruins of Glastonbury Abbey.  These are the
most elegant remains of monkish grandeur I have ever
chanced to see, — the forms,  designs,  ornaments, — all that
is left is in the highest perfection of Gothic beauty.  Five
hundred souls,  the people told us,  were supported in this
abbey and its cloisters.

A chapel of  .Toseph of Arimathea has the outworks
nearly entire,  and I was quite bewitched with their antique
beauty.  But the entrance into the main front of the
abbey is stupendous  ; its height is such that the eye aches
to look up at it,  though it is now curtailed,  by no part of

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA

247

its arch remaining,  except the first inclination towards
that form,  which shows it to have been the entrance.  Not
a bit of roof remains in any part.  All the monuments
that were not utterly decayed or destroyed have been re-
moved to Wells.  Mere walls alone are left here,  except
the monks’  kitchen.

This is truly curious  : it is a circular building,  with a
dome as high — higher I fancy — than the Pantheon’s  ; four
immense fireplaces divide it into four parts at the bottom,
and an oven still is visible.  One statue is left in one
niche,  which the people about said was of the abbot’s
chief cook !

If this monastery was built by the famous old cruel
hypocrite abbot,  Dunstan,  I shall grieve so much taste
was bestowed on such a wretch.  We had only labourers
for our informants.  But one boy was worth hearing  : he
told me there was a well of prodigious depth,  which he
showed me  ; and this well had long been dried up,  and
so covered over as to be forgotten,  till his grandfather
dreamed a dream that the water of this well would restore
him from a bad state of health to good ; so he dug,  and
the well was found,  and he drank the water and was
cured  ! And since then the poor came from all parts
who were afflicted with diseases,  and drank the water and
were cured.  One woman Avas now at Glastonbury to try
it,  and already almost well !

What strange inventions and superstitions even the
ruins of what had belonged to St.  Dunstan can yet en-
gender ! The Glastonbury thorn Ave forgot to ask for.

Hence Ave proceeded to Wells.  Here we Avaited,  as
usual,  upon the cathedral,  Avhich received our compli-
ments Avith but small return of civility.  There Avas little
to be seen Avithout,  except old monuments of old abbots
removed from Glastonbury,  so inferior in Avorkmanship

DIARY AND LETTERS

‘24S

[Part VI.

and design to the abbey once containing them,  that I
was rather displeased than gratified by the sight.  They
have also a famous clock,  brought from the abbey at its
general demolition.  This exhibits a set of horses with
riders,  who curvet a dance round a bell by the pulling a
string,  with an agility comic enough,  and fitted to serve
for a puppet-show;  which,  in all probability,  was its
design,  in order to recreate the poor monks at their hours
of play.

There is also a figure of St.  Dunstan,  who regularly
strikes the quarters of every hour by clock-work,  and
w ho holds in his hand a pair of tongs, — the same I sup-
pose as those with which he was wont to pull the devil by
the nose,  in their nocturnal interviews.

The outside of this cathedral is the most perfect of
any I have seen,  for not a niche has lost its  “ unhappy
divinity.”

The old castle of Wells is now the palace for the
bishop.  It is moated still,  and looks dreary,  secluded,
and in the bad old style.

At nigbt,  upon a deeply deliberate investigation in the
medical way,  it was suddenly resolved that we should
proceed to Path instead of Bristol,  and that I should Irv
there first the stream of King Bladud.  So now%  at this
moment,  here we are.

Queen Square,  Bafti.

Saturday,  August 20tii. — Bath is extremely altered
since I last visited it.  I ts circumference is perhaps trebled  ;
but its buildings are so unfinished,  so spread,  so everv-
where beginning and nowhere ending,  that it looks rather
like a space of ground lately fixed upon for erecting a
tow n,  than a tow n itself,  of so many years*  duration.

It is beautiful and wonderful throughout.  The hills
are built up and down,  and the vales so stocked with

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

249

1791J

streets and houses,  that,  in some places,  from the ground-
floor on one side a street,  you cross over to the attic of
your opposite neighbour.  The white stone,  where clean,
has a beautiful effect,  and,  even where worn,  a grand one.
But I must not write a literal Bath Guide,  and a figura-
tive one Anstey has all to himself.  I will only tell you
in brief,  yet in truth,' it looks a city of palaces,  a town of
hills,  and a hill of towns.

O how have I thought,  in patrolling it,  of my poor iNIrs.
Thrale  ! I went to look  (and sigh at the sight)  at the house
on the North Parade where we dwelt,  and almost every
old place brings to my mind some scene in which we
were engaged ; — in the Circus,  the houses then Mrs.
jNIontagu’s and  ]\Irs.  Cholmley’s ; in Brock-street,  Mrs.
Vanbrugh’s;  in Church-street,  i\Irs.  Lambart’s ; in the
Crescent,  Mr.  Whalley’s ; in Alfred-street,  ]\Irs.  Bow’d-
ler’s ; at the Belvidere,  Mrs.  Byron,  Miss Leigh,  and
Lord JMulgrave,  &c.  &c.  &c.

Besides the constant sadness of all recollections that
bring fresh to my thoughts a breach with a friend once so
loved,  how are most of the families altered and dispersed
in these absent ten years  ! From ISIrs.  Montagu’s,  Miss
Gregory,  by a marriage disapproved, is removed for ever;
from Mrs.  Cholmley’s,  by the severer blow of death.  Lady
Mulgrave is separated  ; Mrs.  Lambart,by the same blow',
has lost the brother.  Sir Philip Clerke,  who brought us
to her acquaintance  ; Mr.  Bowdler and his excellent eldest
daughter have yielded to the same stroke  ; Mrs.  Byron
has followed ; Miss Leigh has been married and widowed  ;
Lord iMulgrave has had the same hard lot ; and,  besides
these,  !Mrs.  Cotton,  IMrs.  Thrale’s aunt,  Lady jMillar,
and Mr.  Thrale himself,  are no more.

In another ten years,  another writer,  perhaps,  may
make a list to us of yet deeper interest.  Well,  we live

250

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

but to die,  and are led but to follow.  ’Tis best,  therefore,
to think of these matters till they occur with slackened
emotion.

August 31st. — I have kept no regular memorandums  ;
but I shall give you the history of the Bath fortnight of
this month as it rises in my memory.

I found I had no acquaintance here,  except Dr.  Har-
rington, who is ill,  Mrs.  Hartley,  who is too lame for
visiting,  and the Vanbrughs ; and though Mrs.  Ord,  from
her frequent residence here,  knows many of the settled
inhabitants,  she has kindly complied with my request of
being dispensed from making new visits.

Soon after we came,  while I was finishing some letters,
and quite alone,  Mrs.  Ord’s servant brought me word
Lady Spencer would ask me how I did,  if I was well
enough to receive her.  Of course I begged she might
come up-stairs.

I have met her two or three times at my dearest Mrs.
Delany’s,  where I met,  also,  with marked civilities from
her.  1 knew she was here,  with her unhappy daughter.
Lady Duncannon,  whom she assiduously nurses,  aided
by her more celebrated other daughter,  the Duchess of
Devonshire.

She made a very flattering apology for coming,  and
then began to converse upon my beloved Mrs.  Delany,
and thence to subjects more general.  She is a sensible
and sagacious character,  intelligent,  polite,  and agreeable  ;
and she spends her life in such exercises of active charity
and zeal,  that she would be one of the most exemplary
women of rank of the age,  had she less of show in her
exertions,  and more of forbearance in publishing them.
My dear oracle,  however,  once said,  vainglory must not
be despised or discouraged,  when it operated but as a
human engine for great or good deeds.

1791]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  251

She spoke of Lady Duncamion’s situation with much
sorrow,  and expatiated upon her resignation to her fate,
her prepared state for death,  and the excellence of her
principles,  with an eagerness and feeling that quite over-
whelmed me with surprise and embarrassment.

Her other daughter she did not mention  : but her
grand-daughter.  Lady Georgiana Cavendish,  she spoke
of with rapture.  Miss Trimmer,  also,  the eldest daughter
of the exceeding worthy Mrs.  Trimmer,  she named with
a regard that seemed quite affectionate.  She told me
she had the care of the young Lady Cavendishes,  but was
in every respect treated as if one of themselves.

The name of Mrs.  Trimmer led us to talk of the Sun-
day-schools and Schools of Industry.  They are both in
a very flourishing state at Bath,  and Lady Spencer has
taken one school under her own immediate patronage.

The next day,  of course,  I waited on her;  she was out.
But the following day,  which was Sunday,  she sent me a
message up-stairs to say she would take me to see the
Sunday-school,  if I felt well enough to desire it.

She waited below for my answer,  which,  of course,  I
carried down in my proper person,  ready hatted and
cloaked.

It was a most interesting sight.  Such a number of
poor innocent children,  all put into a way of right,  most
taken immediately from every way of wrong,  lifting up
their little hands,  and joining in those prayers and sup-
plications for mercy and grace,  which,  even if they under-
stand not,  must at least impress them with a general idea
of religion,  a dread of evil,  and a love of good  ; it was,
indeed,  a sight to expand the best hopes of the heart.

I felt very much obliged to my noble conductress,  with
whom I had much talk upon the subject in our walk
back.  Her own little school,  of course,  engaged us the

252

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

most.  She told me that the ne.\t day six of lier little
girls were to be new clothed,  by herself,  in honour of
the birthday of the Duke of Devonshire’s second daughter,
Lady Harriot Cavendish,  who was to come to lier grand-
mamma's house to see the ceremony.  To this sight slie
also invited me,  and I accepted her kindness with plea-
sure.

The following day,  therefore,  Monday,  I obeyed Lady
Spencer’s lime,  and at six o’clock was at her house in
Gay-street.  IMy good IMrs.  C)rd,  to make my leaving
her quite easy,  engaged herself to go at the same hour to
visit Mrs.  Hartley.

Lady Spencer had Mrs.  Mary Pointz and Miss Trim-
mer with her;  and the six children,  just prepared for
l.,ady Harriot,  in their new gowns,  were dismissed from
their examination,  upon my arrival,  and sent down-stairs
to wait the coming of her little Ladysliip,  who,  having
dined with her mamma,  was later than her appointment.

Lady Spencer introduced me to  ]\liss rrimmer,  who is
a pleasing,  but not j)retty young woman,  and seems
born with her excellent mother's amiableness and serenity
of mind.

Lady Georgiana is just eight years old.  She has a
line,  animated,  sweet,  and handsome countenance,  and
the form and figure of a girl of ten or twelve years of
age.  Lady Harriot,  who this day was six years old,  is by
no means so handsome,  but has an open and pleasing
countenance,  and a look of the most hajipy disposition.
Lady Spencer brought her to me immediately.

I inquired after the young Marquis of Hartington.
Lady Spencer told me they never trusted him from the
Upper Malks,  near his house,  in Marlborough-buildings.
He 1 las a house of his own near the Duke's,  and a car-
riage entirely to himself ; but you will see the necessity

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

253

of these appropriations,  when I remind you he is now
fourteen months old.

Lady Spencer had now a lottery — without blanks,  you
will suppose — of playthings and toys for the children.
She distributed the prizes,  and Lady Duncannon held the
tickets.

During this entered Lord Spencer,  the son of Lady
Spencer,  who was here only for three days,  to see his
sister Duncannon.  They had all dined with the little
Lady Harriot.  The Duke is now at Chatsworth,  in
Derbyshire.

I thought of Lord Spencer’s kindness to Charles,  and
I recollected he was a favourite of Mr.  Windham.  I
saw him,  therefore,  with very different ideas to those
raised by the sight of his poor sister Duncannon,  to
whom he made up with every mark of pitying affection  ;
she,  meanwhile,  receiving him with the most expressive
pleasure,  though nearly silent.  I could not help feeling
touched,  in defiance of all obstacles.

Presently followed two ladies.  Lady Spencer,  w’ith a
look and manner warmly announcing pleasure in what
she was doing,  then introduced me to the first of them,
saying,  Duchess of Devonshire,  Miss Burney.”

She made me a very civil compliment upon hoping
my health was recovering ; and Lady Spencer then,
slightly,  and as if unavoidably,  said,  “ Lady Elizabeth
Forster.”

I have neglected to mention,  in its place,  that the six
poor little girls had a repast in the garden,  and Lady
Georgiana earnestly begged leave to go down and see and
speak with them.  She applied to Lady Spencer.  O
grandmamma,”  she cried,  “ pray let me go  ! Mamma says
it all depends upon you.”  The Duchess expressed some
fear lest there might be any illness or disorder amongst

254

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

ttie poor things : Lady Spencer answered for them  ; and
Lady Georgiana,  with a sweet delight,  flew down into
the garden,  all the rest accompanying,  and Lady Spencer
and the Duchess soon following.

It was a beautiful sight,  taken in all its dependencies,
from the windows.  Lord Spencer presently joined them.

To return to the Duchess.  I did not find so much
beauty in her as I e.xpected,  notwithstanding the variations
of accounts ; but I found far more of manner,  politeness,
and gentle quiet.  She seems by nature to possess the
highest animal spirits,  but slie appeared to me not haj)py.
I thought she looked oppressed within,  though there is a
native cheerfulness about her wliich I fancy scarce ever
deserts her.

4'here is in her face,  especially when she speaks,  a
sweetness of good-humour and obligingness,  that seem to
be the natural and instinctive qualities of her disposition ;
joined to an openness of countenance that announces her
endowed,  by nature,  with a character intended wholly for
honesty,  fairness,  and good purposes.

She now conversed with me wholly,  and in so soberly
sensible and quiet a manner,  as I had imagined incom-
patible with her powers.  Too much and too little credit
have variously been given her.  About me and my health
she was more civil than I can well tell you  ; not from
j)rudery' — I have none,  in these records,  methinks  ! — but
from its being mixed into all that passed.  We talke<l
over my’  late tour.  Hath waters,  and the King's illness.
4'his,  which was led to by accident,  was here a tender
subject,  considering her heading the Kegency squadron  ;
however,  I have only one line to pursue,  and from that I
can never vary.  1 spoke of my'  own deep distress from
his suflerings without reserve,  and of the distress of the
(^ueen with the most avowed conq^assion and respect.

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

255

She was e.xtremely well-bred in all she said herself,  and
seemed willing to keep up the subject.  1 fancy no one
has just in the same way treated it with her Grace before  ;
however,  she took all in good part,  though to have found
me retired in discontent had perhaps been more conge-
nial to her.  But I have been sedulous to make them all
know the contrary.  Nevertheless,  as I am eager to be
considered apart from all party,  I was much pleased,  after
all this,  to have her express herself very desirous to keep
up our acquaintance,  ask many questions as to the chance
of my remaining in Bath,  most politely hope to profit
from it,  and,  finally,  inquire my direction.

Poor Mrs.  Ord is quite in dismay at this acquaintance,
and will believe no good of them,  and swallows all that is
said of evil.  In some points,  however,  I have found her
so utterly misinformed,  that I shall never make over into
her custody and management my opinion of the world.
She thinks the worst,  and judges the most severely,  of all
mankind,  of any person I have ever known ; it is the
standing imperfection of her character,  and so ungenial,
so nipping,  so blighting,  it sometimes damps all my
jileasure in her society,  since my living with her has shown
the extent of her want of all charity towards her fellows.

I always wonder how people,  good themselves as she
is,  can make up their minds to supposing themselves so
singular.

Lady Elizabeth,  however,  has the character of being so
alluring,  that Mrs.  Holroyd told me it w'as the opinion of
Mr.  Gibbon no man could withstand her,  and that,  if she
chose to beckon the Lord Chancellor from his woolsack,
in full sight of the world,  he could not resist obedience  !

Not long after our settling at Bath,  I found,  iq)on re-
turning from the Pump-room,  cards left for me of the
Bishop of Dromore  (Dr.  Percy),  Mrs.  and the iSliss

25G

DIARY AND LETTERS

Part VI.

Peicys.  I had met them formerly once at Miss Reynolds’s,
and once visited them when Dr.  Percy was Dean of Car-
lisle. 1’he collector and editor of the beautiful reliques
of ancient English poetry,  I could not but be happy to
again see.  I returned the visit:  they were out;  but the
Bishop soon after came when 1 was at home.  I had a
pleasant little chat with him.  He told me he had heard of
my arrival at Bath by Lady Spencer.  He renewed an
acquaintance after this with Mrs.  Ord,  and we have all
visited and been visited by them.

The Bishop is perfectly easy and unassuming,  very
communicative,  and,  though not very entertaining because
too prolix,  he is otherwise intelligent and of good com-
merce. Mrs.  Percy is ill,  and cannot make visits,  though
she sends her name and receives company at home.  She
IS very uncultivated and ordinary in manners and con-
versation, but a good creature,  and much delighted to talk
over the Royal Family,  to one of whom she was formerly
a nurse.  Miss Percy is a natural and very pleasing
character.

Queen’s Square,  Ratli.

Septemhek. — \\  ith what pleased and full sensations
do I here begin a month I shall end with my^  beloved
readers  ! O that such a time should be really approach-
ing ! when in peace,  with ease,  in natural spirits,  and
with a mind undisturbed,  I may visit Mickleham,  and re-
visit Norbury Park.

I shall attempt now no journal ; but just give a few
memorandums for my own dilating upon at our meeting.

About a week ago 1 was surprised with a visit fiom
Mrs.  ami Miss I’reston.  'Phe former was daughter of
a most intimate friend of Mrs.  Delany.  1 have met
her at the house of that lady,  who also brought her
once to my apartment at the Queen’s Lodge,  that she

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

257

might see the Royal Family from my windows.  Any-
thing that relates to Mrs.  Delany is claim enough for
me;  otherwise she is not pleasing,  and she has too much
])relension,  under a forced veil of humility,  to improve
upon acquaintance.  I was much more satisfied with her
daughter,  who is sister of young Mrs.  Talbot,  in your
neighbourhood.  She is very pretty,  and seems lively and
sensible.  I do not wonder 1 was struck with her,  for 1
have since heard from  ]\lrs.  Vanbrugh that Mr.  Wind-
ham, when at Bath,  was C[uite in love with her;  that is,
such love as beloniis to admiration,  and as leads to flirta-
tion,  and ends in nothing at all.

*****

One evening I spent at an acquaintance of Mrs.
Ord’s when I grew too well for longer refusal;  and this
was to visit Mrs.  Horseman,  a very old,  very little,  very
civil,  very ancient-familied,  good,  quaint old lady.  She
talked to me of nothing but the Court,  having known Mrs.
Schwellenberg and Mrs.  Stainforth when they were at
Bath.

*•**.*  * *

Three days before we left Bath,  as I was coming with
Mrs.  Ord from the Pump-room,  we encountered a chair
from which a lady repeatedly kissed her hand and bowed
to me.  I was too nearsiglited to distinguish who she was,
till,  coming close,  and a little stopjied by more people,
she put her face to the glass,  and said How d’ye do?
How d’ye do  ?”  and I recollected the Duchess of Devon-
shire.

About an hour after I had again the honour of a visit
from her,  and with Lady Dowager Spencer.  1 was
luchily at home alone,  Mrs.  Ord having dedicatetl the
rest of the nioniing to her own visits.  I received tliem,
therefore,  with great pleasure.  I now saw the Duchess

VOL.  v.

s

258

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

far more easy and lively in her spirits,  and,  consequently,
far more lovely in her person.  \ ivacity is so much her cha-
racteristic, that her style of beauty requires it indisj)ensably  ;
the beauty,  indeed,  dies away without it.  I now saw how
her fame for personal charms had been obtained  ; the ex-
pression of her smiles is so very sweet,  and has an inge-
nuousness and openness so singular,  that,  taken in those
moments,  not the most rigid critic could deny the justice
of her personal celebrity.  She was quite gay,  easy,  and
charming  : indeed,  that last epithet might have been

coined for her.

The last person I saw at liath was Lady Spencer,  who,
late in the evening,  and in the midst of our packing,  came
and sat for a very pleasant half-hour.

I'hishas certainly been a singular acquaintance for me —
that the first visit 1 should make after leaving the Queen
should be to meet the head of the opposition public,  the
Duchess of Devonshire  !

Saturday,  Sf.pt emher IOtu. — We left Bath in a
beautiful morning,  in Mrs.  Ord’s coach and four,  and ar-
rived at very good dinner-time at Dunstan Park,  where

my sweet and most lovely Mrs. received us with

open arms.

The next day,  Sunday,  we spent at Sandleford,  the
place of Mrs.  Montagu.  She lives but a few miles from
Dunstan Park,  and sent over to invite us.  \N e found no
company but Mrs.  Mathew,  who continues as much a
favourite with me as ever,  and her four noble little children,
all born since my Royal abode.  e had a delightful day
here;  and here we left Mrs.  Ord.  She was to spend two
nights at Sandleford,  and then to return to Bath.  1 took
leave of her with the most affectionate gratitude for her
extraordinary and most active friendship  ; and the remem-

259

1791]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

brance of the almost only foible she has,  a cynical spirit,
was nearly buried in a better and fuller sense of her
nobler qualities,  as well as of her distinguishing kindness.

Mrs.  Mathew most heartily invited me to spend a.
little time with her and her sposo in Kent,  which,  if it
can be contrived,  I shall do with pleasure.

Monday,  September 12th. — My dear M , as

I still always call her when I speak or write to her,  ac-
companied me near forty miles on my way to Micklehani.

Here I stop. — I came to my dearest Susan, — I was
received by my dearest Fredy, — and,  at length,  just where
I most wished,  1 finished.

N.B.  As our frequent interruptions prevented my
reading you and my Fredy a paragraph from my father
concerning Mr.  Burke,  which,  for my sake,  I know you
will like,  I will here copy it : —

I dined with Sir Joshua last week,  and met Mr.
Burke,  his brother,  Mr.  Malone,  the venerable Bishop of
St.  Pol de Leon,  and a French Abbe or Chevalier.  1
found Mr.  Burke in the room on my arrival,  and after the
first very cordial civilities w'ere over,  he asked me,  with  ,
great eagerness,  whether I thought he might go in his
present dress to pay his respects to Miss Burney j and
was taking up his hat,  till I told him you were out of
town.  He imagined,  I suppose,  you were in St.  Martin's-
street,  where he used to call upon you.  In talking over
your health,  the recovery of your liberty and of society,
he said,  if Johnson had been alive,  your history would
have furnished him with an additional and interesting
article to his  ‘ Vanity of Human Wishes.’  He said he had
never been more mistaken in his life.  He thought the
Queen had never behaved more amiably,  or shown more
good sense,  than in appropriating you to her service  ; but
what a service had it tuiaied out ! — a confinement to such a

s 2

DIAIIV AND I.KTTKUS

[I’AKT VI.

coinpnnion as Mrs.  Scliwullciilu’if^  ! — I 1<tc rxrluiiniDons
of severity iiiid kindm’ss in  (imi liistod n <’ousi(l(M;il)l(^
llmo.”

If cv«T I see Mr.  Hiirke nliere lie speaks to me upon
this siilijecl.  I will openly stale to liim liow Impossilile
it was that the  (^iieen should eoneeive the snl»si‘i\ iency
expected,  so unjustly and unwarrantahly,  hy Mrs.  Schwel-
hmher^  ; to whom I oU}»ht only to luiva*  helon^ed olllei-
ally,  and at idllcial hours,  unless the desirt!  of fuithrr
intercourse had heeu reciprocid.  'I’he  (^ueiMi had imai^iiual
that a vounger and more lively colleague would liavi?
made her faithful old servant ha])pier ; and that idea was
merely amialile in Her Majesty,  who conld little snsjiect
the misery inllicted on that poor new colleague.

I'rom Dr.  lUiruitj lo Mis\  Uiinii’y.

My ni'l.Mt I'ANNY,  Clicl.K’a ColloKCt Hill OcIoImt,  )7!M.

* >K  * «

And so piepare for yonr departure on'I'linrsday  : we shall
expect,  you lierc^  to diniiei hy four. — 'I'lie gieat fj^riihhcry
will be ill nice order for you,  as well as the little;  both
have lately had many accessions of new books,  'i'he ink
is good,  good pens in pleiitv,  and the most pleasant and
smooth paper in the world  !

" Come,  Rosalind,  oh come and see.

What quires are in store for thee,”  &c.

I have sciinbh'd nothing but letters lately,  save a

touch at Mr.  .) n’s pert and arrogant panijihh t.  I’oor

Metastasio lies stock still,  and has ever since I lost mv
amanuensis,  lies.sy  ^ oniig,  now I loole.  I have idly got
into miscellaneous reading — the Correspondence o(  \’ol-
taiie,  Soame  .lenyns’s woiks,  Aikin’s Poems,  Mr.
Heckfoid’s  ‘Jamaica,’  (wo volumes. — Now I want Mr.
Lock lo lead them  ! and how he wants linn to sei>  the

OK I'llK Airmou OK kvkmna.

I7'.H I

2r>  I

<li !i\viii)'s li(!  Iiiid m;i(lr iIk'k;, — in Sir.iiii,  I laly,

Ik;  Ims jin  .sci veil Iruin iIk;  wrcclv ol Ins all  (liinii;'  (lu;
Imi I icaiK;  al  .laiiiaira  ! “ Uiil,’'  nays li<*,  “ Mr.  L.  will

iicvri lliiiik ol roiiiiii;.’ ^ l(»  .siirli a pliua;  as lliis  !”  (llio
I'lcH.  I’nson.)

I intiMiil to liy  (o  ^(;l Sir Joslimi and Sir  .los<;|)li  |{aidvs,
Ills old an|iiaiiitaiic(‘s,  to visit liiiii  (licrr with in<;.  I was
with the dear,  worthy,  and eharniin^  inan,  two hours on
\\  I'dnesday,  and love him and honour him moia;  than
(;ver.  What a placi; — snironnded with Iresh horrors! —
lor the hahitation ol sneh a man!

My mosi woilhy and j^ood ne|ih(.‘w Charles,  of  'I’iteh-
ru'Id'Sl reet,  eo(;s to him  ^emaally onee a we(;k,  and
limes,  and plays to him on a miserahle pianolorte or
livi;  or six hours al a lime.  What a hai};  par(;iitliesis  ! —

M ajor lu'imell has h(;en so kind as to  ^ive na;  a copy ol
the memoir latlon^in^  to his admirahle ina|i ol llmdoo-
slan,  whieh is out ol print.  It leaches mon;  ahont India
than all the hooks hesi(h;s that have.  (;v(W h(‘en wrilhm.  I
think yon w'lll voraciously devour this.  It is Dr.  i\o<
lit'i'lsoirs  ^•n;al,  ri'sonrci;  in the disipiisilioiis he has lately
pnhhshed on India.  I hav(‘  likewise'  jnst  ^<>t Ivochon's
‘ Voyae<>  a Madagascar,  et anx lades  ( )i ientales,*  w hich I
liki;  very mneh.

Say millions ol kindin'sses to ih;ar Snsey lor us all  ; I
havi;  neitlua linu'  nor space to say mou;  mysell than that
I am yours very alVeclionatcly,

C.  It.

( 'lirlm'il  ( tiitlirgc.

( )(/ro It I'.u.  'riioimh another month is he^nn since I

r»  O

left my deaiest of li ii'iids,  I ha\  ('  had no join mil ism;'  spii it  ;
hnl I will  |;ive all heads oT chapti;rs,  and tiv to do hetin'.
My meetiiij'  with Miss  (’amhiidy;e at Kingston I

•262

DIARY AND LETTEItS

[Part VI.

have told already  ; and I soon afterwards set my good
aunts safely down at their new Richmond abode.  I
found my beloved father in excellent health,  spirits,  and
good humour;  my mother tolerably,  and Sarah well
and affectionate.  James was at dinner with them,  and
in perfect good plight,  except when he ruminated upon
his little godson’s having three names;  that I fancy
he regards as rather aristocrat,  for he made as grave
a remonstrance against it as he endeavoured to do at the
very moment they were pronounced in the midst of the
christening.

I have lived altogether in the most quiet and re-
tired manner possible.  My health gains ground,  gra-
dually, but very perceptibly,  and a weakness that makes
me soon exhausted in whatever I undertake is all of
illness now remaining.

I have never been so pleasantly situated at home
since I lost the sister of my heart and my most affec-
tionate Charlotte.  My father is almost constantly wiihin.
Indeed.  I now live with him wholly;  he has himself ap-
propriated me a place,  a seat,  a desk,  a table,  and every
convenience and comfort,  and he never seemed yet so
earnest to keep me about him.  We read together,  write
together,  chat,  compare notes,  communicate projects,
and diversify each other's employments.  He is all good-
ness, gaiety,  and affection  ; and his society and kind-
ness are more precious to me than ever.

Fortunately,  in this season of leisure and comfort,  the
spirit of composition proves active.  The day is never
long enough,  and I could employ two pens almost inces-
santly, in merely scribbling what will not be repressed.
This is a delight to my dear father inexpressibly great  ;
and though T have gone no further than to let him know,
from time to time,  the species of matter that occupies

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

263

me,  he is perfectly contented,  and patiently waits till
something is quite finished,  before he insists upon read-
ing a word.  This  “ suits my humour well,”  as my own
industry is all gone when once its intent is produced.

For the rest,  I have been going on with my third tra-
gedy. I have two written,  but never yet have had
opportunity to read them ; which,  of course,  prevents
their being corrected to the best of my power,  and fitted
for the perusal of less indulgent eyes;  or rather of eyes
less prejudiced.

Believe me,  my dear friends,  in the present composed
and happy state of my mind,  I could never have sug-
gested these tales of woe  ; but,  having only to connect,
combine,  contract,  and finish,  I will not leave them
undone.  Not,  however,  to sadden myself to the same
point in which I began them,  I read more than I write,
and call for happier themes from others,  to enliven my
mind from the dolorous sketches I now draw of my
own.

The library or study,  in wdiich we constantly sit,  sup-
plies such delightful variety of food,  that I have nothing
to wish.  Thus,  my beloved sisters and friends,  you see
me,  at length,  enjoying all that peace,  ease,  and chosen
recreation and employment,  for which so long I sighed
in vain,  and which,  till very lately,  I had reason to be-
lieve, even since attained,  had been allowed me too late.
I am more and more thankful every night,  every morn-
ing, for the change in my destiny,  and present blessings
of my lot ; and you,  my beloved Susan and Fredy,  for
whose prayers I have so often applied in my sadness,
suffering,  and despondence,  afford me now the same
community of thanks and acknowledgments.

November. — I spent one evening with Mrs.  Ord,  and
met our Esther,  and heard sweet music from her sweet

264

DIARY AND LETTERS

^Paut VI.

soiil-toucliing finger.  The respectable Mrs.  Bateman
was there also,  and we had much Wijidsor chattery.
Miss Merry,  too,  was of the party;  she is sister of the
“ Liberty  ” Mr.  Merry,  who wrote the ode for our re-
volution club,  and various other things  ; and a tragedy
called  ^ Lorenzo,’  in which Miss Bruntou performed
his heroine so highly lo his satisfaction,  that he made his
addresses to her,  and forthwith married her.

I'he sister and her aunt,  with whom she lives,  were
much hurt by this alliance;  and especially bv his con-
tinuing his wife on the stage,  and with their own name.
She remonstrated against this indelicacy ; but he an-
swered her,  she ought to he proud he had brought a
woman of such virtue and talents into the family Her
virtue,  his marrying her proved  ; and her talents would
all be thrown away by taking her oil the stage.

Miss Merry seems past thirty,  plain,  but sensible in
her face,  and very mvich the gentlewoman in her man-
ners, with a figure remarkably good and well made.
She sat next me,  and talked to me a great deal.  She
extremely surprised me by entering speedily into French
a (fairs,  which I would not have touched upon for the
world,  her brother’s principles being notorious.  How-
ever, she eagerly gave me to undcrstaml her own were
the reverse:  she spoke of INIr.  Burke’s pamphlets with
the highest praise  ; the first of them,  she said,  though
eloquently Avritten,  could only soothe those who aheady
felt with him;  but the appeal to the  \ew Whigs she
considered as framed to make converts of whoever was
unprejudiced.  Perhaps she is one of the number her-
self. She inveighed against the cruelties of the let-loose
mob of France,  and told me some scenes that had lately
passed in Avignon,  that were so terrible I excused my-
self from dwelling on the subject

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

265

She is a sensible,  cultivated,  and vveli-read woman,  and
very well mannered.

Another evening,  after visiting our Esther,  my father
took me to Sir Joshua Reynolds.  I bad long languished
to see that kindly zealous friend,  but his ill health had
intimidated me from making the attempt;  and now my
dear father went up stairs alone,  and inquired of Miss
Palmer if her uncle was well enough to admit me.  He
returned for me immediately.  I felt the utmost pleasure
in again mounting his staircase.

M iss Palmer hastened forward and embraced me
most cordially.  I then shook hands with Sir Joshua.
He had a bandage over one eye,  and the other shaded
with a green half-bonnet.  He seemed serious even to
sadness,  though e.xtremely kind.  “ I am very glad,”
he said,  in a meek voice and dejected accent,  “ to see
you again,  and I wish I could see you better ! but I
have only one eye now, — and hardly that.”

I was really quite touched.  The expectation of total
blindness depresses him inexpressibly  ; not,  however,  in-
conceivably. I hardly knew how to express,  either my
concern for his altered situation since our meeting,  or
my joy in again being with him:  but my difficulty was
.short ; Miss Palmer eagerly drew me to herself,  and re-
commended to Sir Joshua to go on with his cards.  He
had no spirit to oppose  ; probably,  indeed,  no inclination.

Dr.  Lawrence,  one of the counsel in the impeachment
against Mr.  Hastings,  and Miss Lawrence,  his sister,
Mr.  King,  and Dr.  Blagden,  were the company.  Some
days no one is admitted.

Mr.  King is brother to our lost Captain.

One other time we called again,  in a morning.  Sir
Joshua and his niece were alone,  and that invaluable

266 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

man was even more dejected than before.  How grievous
to me it is to see him thus changed  !

I called also one morning upon Mrs.  Schwellenberg.
She received me with much profession of regard,  and
with more than profession of esteem — since she evinced
it by the confidential discourse into which she soon en-
tered upon the I^oyal Family and herself.  However.  1
easily read that she still has not forgiven my resignation,
and still thinks I failed in loyalty of duty,  by not stay-
ing, though to die,  rather than retire,  though to live.

This,  however,  is so much a part of her very limited
knowledge,  and very extensive prejudice,  that 1 submit
to it without either wonder or resentment.

She trusted me,  nevertheless,  just as usual,  in speak-
ing of the Court atYairs.  I entreated her permission to
venture to trouble her with  ‘‘  laying my humblest duty at
the Queen’s feet ; ” for that is the phrase now allowed.
She told me I had a “ reelly right”  to that,  and promised
to do it,  with great good humour.  When she settled in
town for the winter,  she desired to see me often  ; she said
she should return to Windsor in two days.  The family
were all there,  as usual.  We bad much talk of the Duke
of York and his marriage.  See.

T then called upon  ]Mrs.  Stainforth  : none other of
my friends were in town.  She also received me with
great civility,  and hardly would let me quit her,  opening
lier heart in the old way,  upon her sufferings from the
tyranny of Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  — ’Tis dreadful that
power thus often leads to.  every abuse ! — I grow demo-
cratic at once on these occasions.  Indeed,  1 feel always
democratic where I think power abused,  whether by the
great or the little.

These are all my visits abroad,  except calls upon

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

267

Esther.  At home we saw Dr.  Gillies once  ; he was very
communicative and informing,  and I enjoyed his conver-
sation. He is now occupied in writing a ‘History of the
World to the Decline of the Roman Empire,  from the
Days of Alexander.’  It is a stupendous undertaking.
He allows himself five years  : I shall give him joy if he
completes it in ten.

Mrs.  Bogle dined here another day.  She seems al-
tered much for the worse.  Her playful wit seems turning
into biting sarcasm,  and her affectionate and pleasing
manners are wholly changed.  I was very sorry.  Perhaps
this may wear oflf when I see more of her.

I rejoiced extremely in again meeting with good old
Mr.  Elutton,  whose health and spirits are much better
than when I saw him last.  He has fallen into the hands
of two ladies of fortune and fashion, — Miss Biscoe and
Miss  * * * — who live,  very much at their ease,  toge-

ther, and who call him father,  and treat him with the ten-
derness of children.  How singularly he merits this sin-
gular happy fortune  ! so good,  so active,  so noble,  as he
is in all exertions for the benefit of others,  and so utterly
inattentive to his own interest.  He was heartily glad,
he said,  to see me at home again.

The younger Latrobe and his wife have dined here.
His wife seems a natural,  cheerful,  good character,  rather
unformed,  though with very good and even sharp natural
parts.  She told me she supposed 1 had forgotten her.
1 had never seen her,  I answered.  “ O yes,”  she said,
“ before I was married I met you at Mrs.  Montagu’s.
I was Miss Sellon.  I should have known you again,  be-
cause I took such good note of you,  as Mrs.  Montagu
said you were an authoress,  before you came in,  which
made me look at you.”

2GS

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

INI.  La Blanoherie,  whose note to me,  long ago at
W indsor,  you may remember,  now comes here perpe-
tually, and nearly wears us out with his visits.  Of late,
we have agreed,  since we cannot get rid of him,  to make
him read.  lie has given us Corneille’s  ‘ Rodagune,’
which I found less exquisite than when I read it with my
Susan;  Voltaire’s  ‘ Mort de Cesar,’  which I think far
move feroce than Shakespeare’s  ' .Julius Caesar,’  as Vol-
taire makes Caesar previously acknowledge Brutus for his
son,  which renders the parricide a deed to shock even
democratic ears! — and he has begun  ‘ Polyeucte.’  This
is surely the best thing we can do with the man.

I go on with various writings,  at different times,  and
just as the humour strikes.  I have promised my dear
father a Christmas-box ami a New V’ear’s gift upon my
return from X*)rbury Park  ; and therefore he now kindly
leaves me to my own devices.

December. — I most gladly accepted an invitation to
my good Mrs.  Ord,  to meet a circle of old friends.

d'he day proved extremely pleasant.  We went to din-
ner, my father and 1,  and met  .Mrs.  Montagu,  in good
spirits,  and very unatfectedly agreeable.  No one was
there to awaken ostentation,  no new acquaintance to re-'
quire any surprise from her powers ; she was therefore
natural and easy,  as well as informing and entertaining.

Mrs.  Garrick embraced me again and again,  to ex-
press a satisfaction in meeting me once more in this
social way,  that she would have thought it indecorous to
express by words.  I thanked her exactly in the same
language  ; and,  without a syllable being uttered,  she sairl,

I rejoice you are no longer a courtier;”  and I an-
swered, “ I love you dearly lor preferring me in my old
state  ! ”

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

269

Major Rennell,  whose East India geographical erudition
you must have heard of from Captain Phillips,  was full of
characteristic intelligence,  simply and clearly delivered  ;
and made us all wiser by his matter,  if we remembered it,
and gayer by his manner,  whether we remembered it or
not.  I hope to meet him often.  He is a gay little wizen
old man,  in appearance,  from the eastern climate’s dilapi-
dations upon his youth and health j but I believe not old
in years,  any more than in spirits.

Dr.  Russel,  whose odd comic humour my dear Susan
is acquainted with,  contributed,  by its vein and freedom,
to the general good humour and conviviality of the table.

The two Ords and two Burneys complete the dinner
account:  and much pleasant conversation passed.

In the evening we were joined by Lady Rothes,  W'ith
whom I had my peace to make for a long-neglected letter
upon my  “ restoration to society,”  as she termed it,  and
who was very lively and pleasant.

Sir Lucas Pepys  (whom alone of the party I had ever
met under the Royal auspices — during the King’s illness
how often  ! and during poor Lady Caroline Waldegrave’s
very recently)  frankly told me he could not be surprised
at my resignation,  having seen my declining health,  and
remarked my insufficiency for my occupation.

Mr.  Pepys,  who came just that instant from Twicken-
ham, which he advanced eagerly to tell me,  talked of
Mr.  Cambridge,  and his admirable wit and spirits,  and
Miss Cambridge,  and her fervent friendship for me,  and
the charm and agreeability of the whole house,  with an
ardour so rapid,  there scarce needed any reply.

Lastly,  let me mention Mr.  Batt,  who gave me a most
kindly congratulatory bow upon his entrance.  I knew his
opinion of my retreat,  and understood it  : but I was en-
circled till the concluding part of the evening by the

270

DIAUV AND LKTTKHS

[Part VI.

Pepys and Lady Hollies,  &c. ; and tlieii Mr.  Halt seated
himself by my elbow,  and be^aii,  almost as bad ns Mr.
Wiiidliam — nay,  worse than Mr.  Windham ha.s ventured
to 8[>eak to me.

“ How I rejoice,’’  he cried,  “ to see you at length out
of thraldom  ! ”

“ 'J'hraldoin  ? ” fjiioth I,  “ that ’s rather a strong word  !
1 assure you  'tis the first time I have heard it pro*
nounced.”

“ (),  but,”  ciied he,  laughing,  “ I may bi-  allowed to
say so,  because you know my principles.  You know me
to be loyal — you could not stand it from an opposition'
man — but saints may do much  !”

He is a professed personal friend of Mr.  Pitt.

I then began some excid|mtion of my lute fatigues,
assuring him they were the effect of a situation not under-
stood, and not of any hardness of heart.

Very probably,”  cried he  ; “ but I am glad you have
ended them  : I applaud — I honour the step you have
taken.  'I'ho.ie who sufler,  yet still continue In fetters,  I
never jiity  ; — there is a want of integrity,  as well as spirit,
in such submission.”

“ Tho.se they serve,"  cried I,  “ are not the persons to
blame  ; they are commonly uninformed there is anything
to endure,  and believe all is repaid by the smiles so uni-
versally solicited."

“I know it."  cried he;  “and it Is that general base
subservience that makes me struck with your opposite
conduct.”

“ My conduct,”  rpioth I,  " was very simple  ; though I
btdieve it did not the less sur|>rise  ; but it all consisteti in
not pretending,  when I found myself sinking,  to be swini'
ming.”

He said many other eipially good-natured things,  and

OK THK AUTIIOIt OK KVKMNA.

271

/iiii.slKMl tlirin willi  “ M«it vvlial a plcasiire it is to me to
see you Imre in this manner,  dressed no mor(^  than oHkt
|)(;o|)h:  ! I have not seen you these five years past l)iit
looking dizencd out Idr tln^  drawing-room,  or something
as had!”

'I’his is all the account I can possibly spare of this day,
which was a lively and agreeahle one completely.

A day or two after Mr.  Smelt called,  and sent in his
caid upon Ijemg  <lenied.  lie came to ask me to Kew,
to spend a lew days with Mrs.  (^holndey.  My lather
was at home,  and readily complied.

I lonnd poor Mrs.  Cholndey rather better than I ex-
pected ; soIitnd(!,  and patience,  and religion,  have now
«piieli/ed both father and daughter into tolerable con-
t(*nlment.  I'hey live v\ holly together,  and determine by
de.'ilh alone to be separated.  Miss IMdpps,  the last dying
legacy of Mr.  (Jholmley’s charming danghler.  Lady Mnl-
grav(^  is under their ca.r(! : she is a very tine handsome
lilth^  girl,  ahont three years old,  ami extremely enter-
tainin';.

1 was much gralilied in making lids visit,  because 1
saw this exccdlent liilher and daughter revived from their
late disconsolate state,  and though no longer able to
contribute to i heering life,  very willing to receive what
comfort and alleviation tlu^  cbeerfulness of others can
bestow.  I wish I could see tbem more I'reipiently.

Onr visit lo Mrs.  Montagu turned out very unmarked.

I met my good Mrs.  and Miss Ord,  and a little chut with
them was all my enleitidnment  ; for though Mrs.  lios-
cawcm and Dr.  Kussel were also therti,  the circh;  was
lormalised,  and newer broken into.  The I’epys and Dr.
IMagden were of the party,  but no one ventured to break
the ring.

I was pleased in seeing Miss I'anny Williams,  as she

272

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VI.

is called,  the young person who was left an infant at the
door of Lady Amherst,  and who is reputed to be the
daughter of every woman of rank whose character,  at that
date,  was susceptible of suspicion.  She looks a modest
and pretty young creature,  and Lady Amherst brings her
up with great kindness and propriety.

Mi.s's Burney to Mrs.  Francis.

My beloved Ciiaulotta,

*****

I think you quite right for giving up all mere card
visits that you are able to decline,  for the best of all
reasons of concurrence — that 1 should do the same myself.
’Tis a miserable waste of e.xistence to do what judgment
and reason never ajiprove,  when even inclination and
pleasure are at the same time averse  ; and I am sure by
morning calls,  and open,  though moderated,  confessions
of disaffection to the employment,  you may avoid both
that and offence at once  ; and offence is the only terror
that could spur me into an occupation so distasteful
to me.

We are now in almost daily'  e.vpectation of seeing good
Mr,  Sleepe;  but I feel no haste,  as I think he must be
happier under your roof than,  perhaps,  under any other.
We have again seen his daughter Hetty,  who is quite well,
and as discreet and sensible as any young woman need be
wished to be,  even by a father.

I really stared a little at the pretty broad liint you gave
to Lady V.,  wliich I own I think scarce worth while,  as
it may make you enemies,  yet answer no purpose.  It
will be better to shame them by publishing the contrary
conduct of their superior,  which may niore influence
them.  A lady who was at the late Cumberland House

1791]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

■273

bail told me the Duchess of York never sat down till she
had done every duty of attention to every couple she
danced with.  Yet she is very delicate,  and soon fatigued  ;
and she is a princess born and married.

I called upon poor Mile.  Jacobi yesterday,  at Bromp-
ton.  I found her in a small room,  with a Madame
Warmai,  a German,  who speaks English,  and issues
all orders and directions ; and Mile.  Wincklernann,
whom she calls La Betti,  and who attends her as her
maid,  though she is her niece.  She has had a dreadful
illness ; she has sprained her ankle ; and her vexation,
joined to painful exertion,  threw her into a nervous fever.
She has now conquered the fever,  though her leg is still
on bolsters,  and she cannot put her foot to the ground.
What a misfortune for a Royal attendant !

She told me much of Mr.  D.,  who attends her.  She
says she asked him,  one day,  what she could do  ?

Sit still,”  he smilingly answered.

“ But not always,”  she cried  ; “tell me what I am to
do by-and-by  ? ”

O,”  cried he,  still smiling,  “ I never think of the
future.”

How consoling ! She added,  that he once found her
eating some leveret,  and said he  “ rejoiced to see her
now so well;”  and from that time he had never felt her
pulse nor looked at her tongue.  Tired out with her lin-
gering complaints,  little advance,  and no comfort,  she at
last reproached him with this,  and bluntly said,  “ Sir,
you never can tell how I do ; you never feel my pulse !”
He smiled still more,  and,  putting out his arm,  held it
close to her hand,  and said,  “ Feel mine  ! ”

Quite affronted,  she answered,  “ Never ! so long as I
breathe — never I fee!  that pulse  ! ”

Do you not know him again  ?

VOL.  V.

T

274

DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.

[Part VI.

A/rs.  Chapone to Aliss Burney.

Are you in town,  my dear  ^liss Burney,  and do
you remember an old soul that used to love your com-
pany ? If you will give it me next Thursday evening,  you
will meet Pepys,  Boscawen,  Scc. ; so you may put on
your blue stockings.  If you have got any boots to walk
about in the mornings,  I shall like you as well in them.

I hope all the family are well.  I need not say that
Dr.  Burney's company would be an additional pleasure
on Tliursday.

1 am,  dear Madam,

Your affectionate servant,

II.  Ciiapom:.

No.  17,  Carlisle  .Street,  Dean Street,

December 27.

PART VII.

1792.

CONTENTS.

A Day at St.  James’s Palace — Reception by the Queen and Prin-
cesses— The Royal Family at the Theatre — Interviews witli the
Kins:  and Queen — Court Attendance — Mr.  Jacob Bryant — A
Day at the Trial of Warren Hastings — His Defence by Mr.
Law — A Conversation with Mr.  Windham — Mr.  Beckford —
Lally Tollendal — Death of Sir Joshua Reynolds — His Funeral
— Visit to the Queen — Mrs.  Montagu — Hastings’s Trial — Mr
Windham — Mr.  Plomer — Lord Stormont — Mrs.  Schwellenberg
— The Princess Royal — The Queen — Opinions of Burke,  Fox,
and Windham,  on the French Revolution — Interview with the
King  — Lord Cornwallis  — Major Rennell — Lord Inchiquin —
Madame de Genlis’s strange Establishment at Bury  — Tom
Paine — A Public Breakfast at Mrs.  Montagu’s  — Sir George
Howard — Mr.  Seward — Lord Falmouth — Old Acquaintance —
Mrs.  Hastings — Lord Mulgrave — Michael Angelo Taylor — Mr.
Bosw’ell — The ill Effects of his ‘Life of Johnson’ — His Mimicry
of Dr.  Johnson — Mrs.  Garrick — A Dinner at Mrs.  Ord’s  —
Doings of the National Assembly — Interview with the Royal
Family — Appeal of Warren Hastings — Visit to Mrs.  Crewe —
The Burke Family — Edmund Burke — His Table-talk on the
French Revolution — Fox’s Opinion of Burke — Burke's Opinion
of Fox — Mrs.  Delany  — Burke’s Description of her — A Wild
Irish Girl  — Lord Loughborough — Mr.  Erskine— His Egotism
— Rogers's  ‘ Pleasures of Memory’ — Caen Wood — Lord Mans-
field— Portrait of Pope by himself — Mr.  Pelham — Singular Ad-
venture at the Shakespeare Gallery — Mrs.  Wells the Actress —
Arthur Young to Miss Burney — Jacob Bryant to Miss Bur-
ney— Person.

1

2

276

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

PART VII.

1792.

January. — I had a very civil note from Mrs.  Scliwei-
lenberg,  telling me that Miss Goldsworthy was ill,  which
made Miss Gornme necessary to the Princesses,  and
therefore,  as Mile.  Jacobi was still lame,  Her Majesty
wished for my attendance on Wednesday noon.

I received this little summons with very sincere plea-
sure, and sent a warm acknowledgment for its honour.  I
was engaged for the evening to Mr.  Walpole,  now Lord
Orford,  by my father,  who promised to call for me at the
Queen’s house.

At noon I went thither,  and saw,  bv the carriagfes,  their
Majesties were just arrived from Windsor.  In my way
up-stairs I encountered the Princess Sophia.  1 really
felt a pleasure at her sight,  so great that 1 believe I sa-
luted her;  I hardly know  ; but she came forward,  with
her hands held out.  so good humoured and so sweetly,  I
was not much on my guard.  How do I wish I had gone
that moment to my Royal Mistress,  while my mind was
fully and honestly occupied with the most warm satisfac-
tion in being called again into her presence !

The Princess Sophia desired me to send her Miss
Gornme,  whom she said I should ftnd in my own room.
Thither I went,  and we embraced very cordially;  but she
a little made me stare by saying  “ Do you sleep in yortr
old bed  ?”  “ No,”  1 answered,  “ I go home after

1792]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  277

dinner and she said no more,  but told me she must
have two hours’  conference alone with me,  from the mul-
tiplicity of things she had to discuss with me.

We parted then,  and I proceeded to Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg.  There I was most courteously received,  and told
I w'as to go at night to the play.

I replied I w'as extremely sorry,  but I was engaged.

She looked deeply displeased,  and I w'as forced to
offer to send an excuse.  Nothing,  however,  w'as settled  ;
she went to the Queen,  whither I was most eager to fol-
low, but I depended upon her arrangement,  and could not
go uncalled.

I returned to my own room,  as they all still call it,  and
Miss Gomme and  ]\Iiss Planta both came to me.  We
had a long discourse upon matters and things.

By and by Miss Gomme was called out to Princesses
Mary and Amelia  ; she told them who was in the old
apartment,  and they instantly entered it.  Princess Mary
took my hand,  and said repeatedly,  “ My dear Miss
Burney,  how glad I am to see you again !”  and the lovely
little Princess Amelia kissed me twice,  with the sweetest
air of affection.  This was a very charming meeting to
me,  and I expressed my real delight in being thus allowed
to come amongst them again,  in the strongest and truest
terms.

I had been but a short time alone,  when Westerhaults
came to ask me if I had ordered my father’s carriage to
bring me from the play.

I told him I was engaged,  but w'ould give up that en-
gagement, and endeavour to secure being fetched home
after the play.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg then desired to see me.

“ What you mean by going home  ? ” cried she,  some-
what deridingly  : know you not you might sleep here  ?”

278

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

I was really thunderstruck ; so weak still,  and so un-
equal as 1 feel to undertake night and morning attend-
ance, which I now saw expected.  I was obliged,  however,
to comply ; and I wrote a note to Sarah,  and another
note to be given to my father,  when he called to take me
to Lord Orford.  But I desired we might go in chairs,
and not trouble him for the carriage.

This arrangement,  and my dread of an old attendance
I was so little refitted for renewing,  had so much dis-
turbed me before I was summoned to the Queen,  that 1
appeared before her without any of the glee and spirits
with which I had originally obe}ed her commands.  1 am
still grieved at this circumstance,  as it must have made
me seem cold and insensible to herself,  when I was
merely chagrined at the peremptory mismanagement of
her agent.  Mr.  De laic was with lier.  She w as gracious,
but by no means lively or cordial.  She was oti'ended,
probably, — and there was no reason to wonder,  and yet
no means to clear away the cause.  This gave me much
vexation,  and the more I felt it the less 1 must have ap-
peared to merit her condescension.

Nevertheless,  alter she was dressed she honoured me
with a summons to the White Closet,  where I presently
felt as much at home as if I had never quilted the Royal
residence.  She inquired into my proceedings,  and I
began a little history of my south-west tour;  which she
listened to till word was brought the King was come
from the Levee  : dinner was then ordered,  and I was
dismissed.

At our dinner,  the party,  in the old style,  was Mr.  I)e
Luc,  Miss Planta,  Mrs.  Stainlorlh,  and MissClomme;
Mrs.  Schwellenberg was not well enough to leave her
own apartment,  except to attend the Queen.

We were gay enough,  1 own;  my spirits were not

1792]

OF THE AUTHOiT.  OF EVELINA.

279

very low in finding myself a guest at that table,  where I
was so totally unfit to be at home,  and whence,  neverthe-
less, I should have been very much and deeply con-
cerned to have found myself excluded,  since the displea-
sure of the Queen could alone have procured such a
banishment.  Besides,  to visit,  I like the whole esta-
blishment, however inadequate I found them for sup-
plying the place of all I quitted to live with them.  O,
who could succeed there?

Durino;  the dessert the Princess Elizabeth came into
the room.  I was very glad,  by this means,  to see all this
lovely female tribe.

As soon as she was gone I made off to  [irepare for the
play,  with fan,  cloak,  and gloves.  At the door of my
new old room who should I encounter but Mr.  Stan-
hope ? He was all ra])ture,  in his old way,  at the meet-
ing, and concluded me,  1 believe,  reinstated.  I got off
as fast as possible,  and had just shut myself in,  and him
out,  when I heard the voice of the King,  who passed my
door to go to the dining-room.

I was quite chagrined to have left it so unseasonably,
as my whole heart yearned to see him.  He stayed but
a minute,  and I heard him stop close to my door,  and
speak with Mr.  De Luc.  The loudness of his voice as-
suring me he was saying nothing he meant to be unheard,
I could not resist softly opening my door.  I fancy he
expected this,  for he came up to me immediately,  and
with a look of goodness almost amounting to pleasure —
I believe I may say quite — he inquired after my health,
and its restoration,  and said he was very glad to see me
again.  Then turning gaily to Mr.  De Luc,  “ And you,
Mr.  De Luc,”  he cried,  “ are not you,  too,  very glad to
see Miss Beurni again  ? ”

I told him,  very truly,  the pleasure with which I had

280

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

re-entered his roof. — He made me stand near a lamp,
to examine me,  and pronounced upon my amended
looks with great benevolence : and,  when he was walk-
ing away,  said aloud to Mr.  He Luc,  who attended
him,  “ I dare say she was very willing to come  ! *’

I heard afterwards from Miss Gomme that the King
came to the eating-room purposely to see me,  as he told
the Princesses.  I cannot tell you how grateful I feel for
such condescending goodness ; and how invariably I
e.xperienced it during my w hole residence under his roof.

Our party in the box for the Queen s attendants con-
sisted of Lady Catherine Stanhope,  Miss Planta,  Major
Price,  Greville Upton,  and Mr.  Frank Upton.

'File King and Queen and six Princesses satoppasite.
It was to me a lovely and most charming sight.  7'he
Prince of Wales,  and the Duke of York and his bride,
with the Duke of Clarence,  sat immediately under us.
1 saw the Duchess now and then,  and saw that she has
a very sensible and marked countenance,  but no beauty.
She was extremely well received by the people,  and
smiled at in the most pleasing manner by her opposite
new relations.

The play was  ‘ Cymon,’  with alterations,  »Scc.

.At night 1 once more attended the Queen,  and it
seemed as strange to me as if I had never done it
before.

The next day,  Thursday,  the f^ueen gave up the
drawing-room,  on account of a hurt on her foot.  I
had the honour of another very long conference in the
\N hite Closet,  in which 1 finished the account of my late
travels,  and during which,  though she was very gracious,
she was far less communicative than heretofore,  saying
little herself,  and making me talk almost all.

When I attended the Queen again to-night,  the

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

281

strangeness was so entirely worn away,  that it seemed to
me as if I had never left my office  ! And so again on
Friday morning.

At noon the Royal Family set off for Windsor.

The Queen graciously sent for me before she  ^vent,  to
bid me good by,  and condescended to thank me for my
little services.  I would have offered repetition with all
my heart,  but I felt my frame unequal to such business.
Indeed I was half dead with only two days’  and nights’
exertion.  ’Tis amazing how I ever went through all that
is passed.

February. — I shall begin this month at the 13th,
the day 1 left my dearest friends.

I found our small family at home in much the same
state 1 had left it ; my dear father,  however,  rather worse
than better,  and lower and more depressed about himself
than ever.  To see him dejected is,  of all sights,  to me
the most melancholy,  his native cheerfulness having a
character of such temperate sweetness,  that there is no
dispensing with any of it,  as its utmost vigour never a
moment overpow’ers.

i\mong the tickets I found of visitors during my ab-
sence, 1 was much pleased to see the name of Mr.  Bry-
ant. Good and kind old man ! how much 1 should like
to see him again  !

And I found also,  waiting my return,  a note from Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  w ith an offer of a ticket for Mr.  Hastings’s
trial,  the ne.\t day,  if 1 wished to go to it,

I did wish it exceedingly,  no public subject having ever
so deeply interested me  ; but I could not recollect any
party I could join,  and therefore I proposed to Captain
Phillips to call on his Court friend,  and lay before her my
difficulty.  He readily declared he would do more,  for
he would frankly ask her for a ticket for himself,  and

DIAUV AND 1-KTTKUS

‘J8J

[l‘\KT VII

st:iy iuiotlm'  il;iy,  mnriy to lu’rompiiny me.  V »)»i know
well the kind pleasure and zeal with winrh In*  is alwaNs
leaily to iliscover ainl piopo.se e.\pedients in disliess.

Ills visit piospeied,  and we went to  \N Vstininstt i Hall
lojjetlier.

All llie nianageis attended at the  (»peiiiiig,  Init the at-
teiidanee ol all  (»theis was n nelly slack.  T«»  lu*ai the
attack,  the people came in crow tls  ; to hear the ilereiicj*,
the y scaiccly came in I 'Tis haiharons iheie

shonhl he st>  mnch more picasuie giNcii hy the u «*ilal of
guilt than hy the vindication of innocence!

.Mr.  1 .aw spoke the whole time;  In*  made a geneial
harangne in answer tu the opening geneial haiaiigne td
Mr.  Mnikt*,  and In*  s|>oke many things that hionght Tor*
ward conviction in tavonr  <d Mi.  Ilastnigs;  hnt he was
teiiilieil  (*\(*(*cdmgly,  and his timidity indnceil him to so
lictpicntly heg ipiaitcr iioin his antagonists,  hoth lor
any hhinders ainl any deiicicncics,  that I hit angiv
with even modest egotism,  wln*n I coiisideicd that it was
iatln*r his phu'e to come foiwaid with the shiehi and  .n-
monr ol'tinth,  nndannti d,  and to have di lied,  lathei than
depn catcd,  the lorce ol lah*nts w hen w ithont snch snp|toi t.

None ol the managcis  (putted thin ho.\,  and 1 am
iinccitain wln*tln*r or not any  <d tln*m saw nn*.  Mr.
Windham,  in pailicnlar,  I Icel satisfied  (*itln r saw nn*  not,
or was so ciicnmslanccd,  as manag(  r.  that In*  conid not
come t(»  speak with nn* ; tor els(*,  this my fust app(*aranc(*
Irom that paicntal lool ninler which he has so largely
contrihnt(*d to leplace nn*  would have ln*eii tin*  last turn*
lor his dropping my ac(piaintanc(*.  Mi.  Sln*iidan I hav(*
no longer any amlntion to In*  noticed liy  ; and Mi.  nnik(*,
at this plan*,  I am alVaid I have ali(*adv disp|c:iH«-d,  so
niiavoidahly C(dd and i'ligid did I l(  i*l mvsell wla*n In*  ( aim*
hcie to nn*  I'ormeily.  iXnvwhcie  < ls(*,  I should Itonnd

OK rilK AUTIIOIl OK KVKMNA,

170-2)

2h:{

(oiwiinl lo iiiettl him,  with and alicctioii,  and

^latilndn.

In the  «;v<'nin;4 I wtnil to the  (^in'ini’w lioiiHt;,  I lonnd
Mrs.  Sdiwtdltndnn}.^,  who Instiinlly ailinillfd nu',  at cards
with Mr.  I)c l-nc.  I lci K-ccplion was pci I'cclly kind;

and v\li(‘n I wonid have  ;^ivcn np llic lickets,  .she told
me they were the  (^neen’s,  who desired,  ii 1 wished it,  i
would keep tln in lor the season.

'i his was a pleasant heaiin;'  upon every account,  and
I cume away in hi;>h satislaciion.

A lew days alter,  I went a;»ain to the liial,  and took
another Captain lor my esipine-  my j^ood and ever-
alVectionate  .lames,  'Ihe JIall was slid moie empty,
holh ol l.oids and Commons,  and ol ladies too,  than
the hist ilay ol this session.  I am  (jiiile shocked at the
little desiie tlieie appeals to hear Mr.  Ilastin^'s’s delence.

When the inana|;eis entered,  .lames pre.sently said,
“ lleie’s  .Mr.  Windham coining'  lo speak to you.”  And
he Inoke liom the piocession,  as it was descending to
its cell,  lo give me that pleasure,

llis iiH|nii ies ahont my luallh were not,  as he said,
////'/’C I'ommon in(pmi(‘s;  hnt,  without any other answer
to them lhan a how,  I mterin|)ted their course hy ipuckly
saying  “ N On have heen exenrsioning and travelling all
the world o'ei since I saw yon last.”

lie paid me in my own coin with only a how,  hastily
going hack to inysell  : “ Ihit  )oni tour,”  he ciied,“  to the
West,  alti r all that — ”

I saw what was lollovving,  and,  again ahrnptly stopping
him,  Ihit heie you aie letnrned,”  I cried,  “ to all yonr
old lahonrs and toils again.”

“ No,  no,”  cried he,  hall lunghing,  “ nol lahonrs and
lolls always;  they aie growing into pleasures now.”

*• 'I'hal’s heing very good,  very liheral,  indeed,”  ipioth

284

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

I,  supposing him to mean hearing the defence made the
pleasure  ; but he stared at me with so little concurrence,
that,  soon understanding he only meant bringing their
charges home to the confusion of the culprit,  I stared
again a little  \\  Idle,  and then said, ‘'You sometimes accuse
me of being ambiguous  ; I think you seem so yourself,
now !”

“To nobody but you,”  cried he,  with a rather re-
proachful accent.

“O,  now,”  ciied I,  ‘‘you are not ambiguous,  and I am
all the less pleased.”

“ People,”  cried James,  “ don’t like to be

convinced.”

“Mr.  Hastings,”  said Mr.  Windham,  “does not con-
vince, he does not bring conviction home.”

“ Not to you,”  quoth I,  returning his accent pretty
fully.

“ \Vhy,  true,”  answered he very candidly;  “there may
be something in that.”

“ How is it all to be?”  cried James.  “ Is the defence
to go on long,  and are they to have any evidence ; or
how  ?”

“ We don’t know this part of the business,”  said  !Mr.
^Vindham,  smiling a little at such an upright downright
question;  “it is Mr.  Hastings’s affair now to settle it:
however,  I understand he means to answer charge after
charge as they were brought against him,  first by speeches,
then by evidence : however,  this is all conjecture.”

We then spoke of Mr.  Law,  Mr.  Hastings’s first coun-
sel, and I e.xpressed some dissatisfaction that such at-
tackers should not have had abler and more equal op-
ponents.

“ But do you not think Mr.  Law spoke well  ?"  cried
he  ; “ clear,  forcible  ?”

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

285

“Not forcible,”  cried I.  I would not say not clear.

He was frightened,”  said Mr.  Windham,  “he might
not do himself justice.  I have heard him elsewhere,  and
been very well satisfied with him  ; but he looked pale and
alarmed,  and his voice trembled.”

“ I was very well content with his materials,”  quoth I,
“ which I thought much better than the use he made of
them ; and,  once or twice,  he made an opening that,  with
a very little skill,  might most adroitly and admirably have
raised a laugh against you all.”

He looked a little askew,  I must owm,  but he could not
help smiling : and shall I now lose my privileged sincerity
when I made it the basis of speaking wdth him on this
subject  ? Certainly not.

I gave him an instance in point,  which was the re-
verse given by Mr.  Law to the picture drawm by Mr.
Burke of Tamerlane,  in which he said those virtues and
noble qualities bestowed upon him by the honourable
manager were nowhere to be found but on the British
stage.

Now this,  seriously,  with a very little ingenuity,  might
have placed Mr.  Burke at the head of a company of
comedians.  This last notion I did not speak,  however;
but enough was understood,  and Mr.  Windham looked
straight aw'ay from me,  without answering  ; nevertheless,
his profile,  w'hich he left me,  showed much more disposition
to laugh than to be incensed.

Therefore I proceeded ; pointing out another lost op-
portunity that,  w'ell saved,  might have proved happily
ridiculous against them ; and this was Mr.  Law’s de-
scription of the real state of India,  even from its first dis-
covery by Alexander,  opposed to Mr.  Burke’s flourishing
representation of its golden age,  its lambs and tigers as-
sociating, &c.,  &c.

286

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

Still he looked askew  ; but I believe he is truth itself,
for he offered no defence,  though,  of course,  he would not
enter into the attack.  And surely at this critical period
I must not spare pointing out all he will submit to hear,
on the side of a man of whose innocence I am so fully
persuaded.

“ I must own,  however,”  continued I,  finding him still
attentive,  though silent,  “ Mr.  Law provoked me in one
point — his apologies for his own demerits.  Why should
he contribute his humble mite to your triumphs?  and
how little was it his place to extol your superior talents !
;is if you were not self-sufficient enough already',  without
his aid  !”

Unless you had heard the speech of Mr.  Law,  you can
hardly imagine with what timid flattery he mixed every
exertion he ventured to make in behalf of his client ; and
1 could not forbear this little observation,  because I had
taken notice with what haughty derision the managers
had perceived the fears of their importance,  which were
felt even by the very counsel of their prisoner.  Mr.
Windham,  too,  who himself never looks either insolent or
deriding,  must be sure what I meant for his associates
could not include himself.  He did not,  however,  perfectly
welcome the remark  ; he still only gave me his profile,  and
said not a word, — so I went on.  Mr.  Hastings little thinks
what a pleader I am become in his cause,  against one of
his most powerful adversaries.

“There was still another thing,”  quoth I,  “in which I
felt vexed with Mr.  Law:  how could he be so weak as
to beg quarter from you,  and to humbly hope that,  if any
mistake,  any blunder,  any improvident word escaped him,
you would have the indulgence to spare vour ridicule  ?
O yes,  to be sure  ! when I took notice at the moment of
his supplication,  and before any error committed,  that

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

287

every muscle of every face amongst you was at work from
the bare suggestion.”

lie could not even pretend to look grave now,  but,
turning frankly towards me,  said,  “ Why,  Mr.  Fox most
justly observed upon that petition,  that,  if any man makes
a blunder,  a mistake,  ’tis very well to apologize  : but it
wassingidar to hear a man gravely preparing for his blun-
ders and mistakes,  and wanting to make terms for them
beforehand.”

“1 like him for this,”  cried James again bonnement,
“ that he seems so much interested for his client.”

“Will you give me leave to inquire,”  quoth I,  "one
thing?  You know my old knack of asking strange
questions.”

He only bowed — archly enough,  I assure you.

"Did I fancy,  or was it fact,  that you were a flapper
to Mr.  Burke,  when Mr.  Law charged him with disin-
genuity,  in not having recanted the accusation concerning
Devy Sing?  Fie appeared to me in much perturbation,
and I thought by his see-saw he was going to interrupt
the speech  : did you prevent him  ?”

" No,  no,”  he answered,  "I did not:  I did not think
him in any danger.”-

He rubbed his cheek,  though,  as he spoke,  as if he
did not much like that circumstance.  O that Mr.  Burke
— so great,  so noble a creature — can in this point thus
have been warped  !

I ran off to another scene,  and inquired how he had
been amused abroad,  and,  in particular,  at the National
Assembly  ?

"Indeed,”  he answered,  "it was extremely curious
for a short time;  but there is little variety in it,  and
therefore it will not do long.”

288

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

I was in a humour to be just as sincere here,  as about
the trial ; so you democrats must expect no better.

“ I understand/’  quoth I,  “there is a great dearth of
abilities in this new Assembly;  how then should there be
any variety  ?”

“No,  I cannot say that  : they do not want abilities;
but they have no opportunity to make their way.”

“ O !”  quoth I,  shaking my wise head,  “ abilities,  real
abilities,  make their own way.”

“ Why,  that’s true ; but,  in that Assembly,  the noise,  the
tumult ”

“Abilities,”  again quoth I,  “have power to quell noise
and tumult.”

“Certainly,  in general;  but not in France.  These
new legislative members are so solicitous to speak,  so
anxious to be heard,  that they prefer uttering any tauto-
logy to listening to others  ; and when once they have be-
gun, they go on with what speed they may,  and without
selection,  rather than stop.  They see so many ready to
seize their first pause,  they know they have so little
chance of a second hearing,  that I never entered the As-
sembly without being reminded of the famous old storv
of the man who patiently bore hearing a tedious harangue,
by saying the whole time to himself,  ‘ Well,  well,  ’tis his
turn now  ; but let him beware how he sneezes.’  ”

James now again asked some question of their inten-
tions with regard io the progress of the trial.  He an-
swered, “ We have nothing to do with its present state.
We leave Mr.  Hastings now'  to himself,  and his own
set.  Let him keep to his cause,  and he may say what
he will.  We do not mean to interfere,  nor avail our-
selves of our privileges.”

Mr.  Hastings was just entered;  I looked down at

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

289

him,  and saw his half-motion to kneel;  I could not bear
it,  and,  turning suddenly to my neighbour,  “ O,  Mr.  Wind-
ham,”! cried, “after all, ’tis,  indeed,  a barbarous business!”

This was rather further than I meant to go,  for I said
it with serious earnestness;  but it was surprised from
me by the emotion always excited at sight of that un-
merited humiliation.

He looked full at me upon this solemn attack,  and
W'ith a look of chagrin amounting to displeasure,  saying,
“ It is a barbarous business ire have had to go through.”

I did not attempt to answ'er this,  for,  except through
the medium of sport and raillery,  I have certainly no
claim upon his patience.  But,  in another moment,  in
a tone very flattering,  he said,  “ I do not understand,
nor can any way imagine,  how you can have been thus
perverted  !”

“ No,  no !’’  quoth I,  “ it is you who are perverted I”

H ere Mr.  L aw began his second oration,  and Mr.
Windham ran dow n to his cell.

I fancy this was not exactly the conversation he ex-
pected upon my first enlargement.  However,  though it
would very seriously grieve me to hurt or offend him,  I
cannot refuse my own veracity,  nor Mr.  Hastings’s in-
juries, the utterance of what I think truth.

Mr.  Law was far more aiiimated and less fiightened,
and acquitted himself so as to merit almost as much
eloge as,  in my opinion,  he had merited censure at the
opening.  It was all in answ'er to Mr.  Burke’s general
exordium and attack.

I had the satisfaction some days after to see again the
good,  and much-injured,  and most unfortunate Mr.  Beck-
ford.*  He is at length released from unjust confinement,

* It may be necessary to remind the reader that this is not the
Beckford of FonthiU.

VOL.  V.

u

290

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

but lie has an air of dejection,  a look,  a voice,  a manner,
that all speak the term of his sufferings to have been
too long for his spirits to recruit.  How hard a case  ! I
wish to read his account of Jamaica  ; I hear it much
commended.  He is now writing a History of France.
I understand both to have been compiled in his prison I
How praiseworthy to have made such an exertion of his
abilities,  which sorrow and resentment must else have
soured and corroded for life  !

At Mrs.  Ord's,  one morning,  1 had the happiness to
meet Mr.  Smelt;  he looks again very ill.  He su[)ports,
he told me,  a fevered being,  that will soon dissolve,  to
his ultimate joy.  No man could ever more completely
ilevole his whole mind to the object of his affection  ; his
happiness was all ceiitretl in her life,  and is wliolly
buried with her ashes  !

I met,  that same morning.  Miss Fanshaw  : she had
spent the preceding evening,  she said,  very singularly;
she had heard the famous M.  Lally Tolendahl read a
French tragedy upon an English subject,  written by
himself!  The subject was the death of Strafford.  He
read it to a large but chosen company,  at Lady llerries’s.
I should much like to have heard it.

♦ ***»♦

Upon the day of Sir Joshua Keynolds’s death I was in
my bed,  with two blisters,  and I did not hear of it till
two days after.  1 shall enter nothing upon this subject
here ; our current letters mentioned the particulars,  and
I am not desirous to retrace them.  His loss is as uni-
versally felt as his merit is universally ack.iowledged,  and,
joined to all public motives,  I had myself private ones
of regret that cannot subside.  He was always peculiarly
kind to me,  and he had worked at my deliverance from
a life he conceived too laborious for me,  as if I had been

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

291

his own daughter;  vet,  from the time of my coming forth,

I only twice saw him.  I had not recovered strength for
visiting before he was past receiving me.  I grieve in-
expressibly never to have been able to pay him the
small tribute of thanks for his most kind exertions in my
cause.  I little thought the second time 1 saw him would
be my last opportunity,  and my intention was to wait
some favourable opening.

Miss Palmer is left heiress,  and her unabating attend-
ance upon her inestimable uncle in his sickroom makes
everybody content with her great acquisition.  I am
sure she loved and admired him with all the warmth of
her warm heart.  1 wrote her a few lines of condolence,
and she has sent me a very kind answer.  She went im-
mediately to the Burkes,  with whom she will chiefly,  I
fancy,  associate.

March. — Sad for the loss of Sir Joshua,  and all of
us ill ourselves,  we began this month.  Upon its 3rd day
was his funeral.  My dear father could not attend ; but
Charles was invited and went.  All the Royal Academy,
professors and students,  and all the Literary Club,  at-
tended as family mourners.  !Mr.  Burke,  Mr.  Malone,
and Mr.  Metcalf,  are executors.  Miss Palmer has spared
nothing,  either in thought or expense,  that could render
the last honours splendid and grateful.  It was a very
melancholy day to us;  though it had the alleviation and
softening of a letter from our dear Charlotte,  promising
to arrive the next day.

April. — This wayward month opened upon me with
none of its smiles  ; sickness and depression pervaded our
household.

I shall now pass from the 8tb,  when the combined
forces of Mrs.  Ord’s rhetoric and Charles’s activity re-
moved me from sickness and sinking to the salubrious

292

DIARV AND LETTERS

[Pakt VII.

hills of Norbuiy,  and the balsamic medicine of social
tenderness,  1o mv return to my dear father,  April 18th,
when I found him but little better,  and far Irom such a
state as could have made me happy in absence.  Gra-
dually, however,  he has been recruiting,  though I have no
hope of his entire restoration before the dog-days.

I paid mvduty at tlie Queen's house,  in inquiring after
II er Majesty,  where I was extremely well received by Mrs.
Scliwellenberg,  and saw Miss Planta and Mr.  I)e Luc.

My next visiting opportunity carried me to Mrs.  Mon-
tagu : she let me in,  and showed me her new room,  which
was a double gratification to me,  from the elegant paint-
ings by our ingenious Edward.  ^ on will liave heard
this fine room described by Mr.  Lock;  my Susanna,  aiul
you,  my Fredy,  I hope have seen it.  ’'I'is a very beauti-
ful house indeed,  and now’  completely finished.

There was a lady with Mrs.  Montagu whose name I
Jiever gatherul,  but who freijuently addressed herself to
me,  in talking of my dearest I'redy,  and making iiujuiries
about her health.  So I liked her very well,  though else
she was but a commonish,  non-nothingish soit of a good-
humoured and sensiblish woman  !

T hen I went to Lady Mary Duncan,  who was gro-
tesquely comic,  and remarkably vulgar,  and zealously
kind,  and ludicrously sarcastic,  as usual.

Have vou read Miss Knight’s  ‘ Dinarbas,  or Continua-
tion of Hasselas’ ? If you can forgive the presumption
of the idea,  I think you must be pleased w ith the execu-
tion. She has now just published a new work,  ‘ Marcus
Elaminius,  or the Life of the Romans.’  She has much
surprised me by sending me a very elegantly bound cojiv.
by Mr.  1 loole,  who has been her editor.  I think it a
work of great merit,  though wanting in variety,  and not

OFTHH yMJTHOIl OF KVKUNA.

203

1702]

very  !i<fr:iclive from rriiicli inlcreslin;r tlie i'eeliiigs.  Hut
to itali:iii Iravr^Ilers,  who are classic readeis,  I imagine it
must he exlreiiuly welcome,  in reviving images of all
ihey have seen,  well comhinecl and contrasted with former
times of which th(?y have read.  3’he sentiments inter-
spersed are so good f wish for more ; and the principles
that an;  meant to he recomm(;rided are both pure and
lofty.  It is not a work which yon will read  (juichly
through,  or with ardour,  hut it is one,  I think,  of which
yon will not miss a word.

A l•|{l I.  23i{  n. — I t honght myself eipial to again going
to the trial,  which rc*commenced after six or seven weeks’
<’(;ssation,  on account of the Judges going the circuit.
Sarah went with me  : 1 am now'  so known in the Chani-
bei Iain’s ho.x that tlu;  door-keepers and attendants make
way for me without looking at rnv ticket.  And to he
snie,  the Managers on one side,  and Mr.  Hastings’s
friends and connsel on tlu;  oilier,  must pretty well have
my fac(;  liy heart.  I ha\(;  the faces of all them,  most
certainly,  in full mental possession;  and the figures of
many who.se names I know not aie so familiar now to
my eyes,  that should 1 chance hereafter to meet them,  1
shall h(‘  apt to take them for old acipiainlances.

'I’liere w'as again a full appearance of Managers to
accompany Mr.  Hurke in his entry;  and again Mr.
Windham  (piitted the procession,  as it descended to the
box,  and filed od'to s[ieak with me.

I le made the most earnest iiajuirics after the health
of my dearest father,  as well as after my own.  He has
all tlu*  semblance of real regard and friendship for ns,
and I am given to helieve he wears rio semhlance that
has not a real and sympathetic substance couched be-
neath. His maiuu;r instantly revived in my mind my
intent not to risk,  w'ith l.lm,  the loss of making those

294

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

poor acknowledgments for his kindness,  that I so much
regret omitting to Sir Joshua Reynolds.  In return to
his inquiries about my renovating health,  I answered
that I had again been very ill since I saw him last,  and
added,  “ Indeed,  I believe I did not come away too
soon.”

“ And now,”  cried I,  “ I cannot resist giving niyself
the pleasure of making my acknowledgments for what I
owe to yon upon this subject.  I liave been,  indeed,
very much obliged,  by various things that have come

round to me,  both to you and to Sir Joshua. O what

a loss is that !”

“What a wretched loss 1”  cried he:  and we then
united our warmest suffrages in his favour,  Avith our
deepest regret for our deprivation.

Here I observed poor Mr.  Hastings was brought in.
I saw he was lixing him.  “ And can yovi,”  I cried,  fix-
ing hi?n,  “ can you have so much coni[)assion for one
captive,  and still have none for another  ?’’

“ Have you,  then,  still,”  cried he,  “ the same sen-
timents ?”

“ Have you,’  cried I,  “ heard all thus far of the de-
fence, and are you still unmoved  ?”

“ Unmoved?”  cried he,  emphatically;  “ shall I be
moved by a lion  ? You see him there in a cage,  and
pity him ; look back to when you might have seen him
with a lamb in his claws  !”

I could only look dismayed for a moment.  “ But,  at
least,”  I said,  “ I hope what I hear is not true,  though
I now grow afraid to ask?”

“ If it is anything about me,”  he ansAvered,  “ it is
certainly not true.”

“ I am extremely glad,  indeed,”  cried I,  “ for it has
been buzzed about in the Avorld that you Avere to draAv

179*2]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

295

up tlie final charge.  This I thought most cruel of all;

that you,  who have held back all this time ”

Yes  ! pretty completely,”  interrupted he,  laugh-

ing.

“ No,  not completely,”  I continued  ; “ but yet you
have made no direct formal speech,  nor have come
forward in any positive and formidable manner ; there-
fore, as we have now heard all the others,  and — almost
enough ”

I was obliged to stop a moment,  to see how this ad-
venturous plainness was taken  ; and he really,  though
my manner showed me only rallying,  looked I don’t
know how,  at such unexampled disrespect towards his
brother orators.  But I soon went quietly on:  ‘‘To
come forth now,  after all that has passed,  -with the
eclat of novelty,  and, — for the most cruel part of all, —
that which cannot be answered.”

“You think,”  cried he,  “ ’tis bringing a fresh courser
into the field of battle,  just as every other is com-
pletely jaded  ?”

“ I think,”  cried I,  “ that I am very generous to
Avish against what I should so much wish for,  but for
other considerations.”

“ O,  what a flattering way,”  cried he,  “ of stating it !
however,  I can bear to allow you a little waste of com-
pliments, which you knoAV so well how to make ; but I
cannot bear,  to have you waste your compassion.”

Mr.  Plomer now rose to speak,  and he only added,
“ O ! I must go down to help the show :”  and away
he ran.

Mr.  Plomer spoke in a clear and manly manner,  and
brought forward truths and facts in favour of Mr.
Hastings,  the most satisfactory.  What amends can
that persecuted man ever receive  ?

29G

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part V'II.

May. — The 1st of this month I went again to West-
minster Hall,  with our cousin Elizabeth.  Evidence was
brought forward by the counsel for Mr.  Hastings,  and
Lord Stormont was called upon as a witness.  This jjro-
duced some curious debating among the Lords,  and with
the Chancellor.  They spoke only for the ears of one an-
other, as it was merely to settle some ceremonial,  whether
he was to be summoned to the common place where the
witnesses stood,  or had the claim of a peer to speak in
his place, robed.  This latter prevailed:  and then we ex-
pected his speech  ; but no,  a new debate ensued,  which,
as we gathered from the rumour about us,  was that his
Lordship should have the Prayer Book,  for his oath,  be-
longing to the House of Peers.  Here,  also,  his dignity
was trium[)hant,  though it cost the whole assembly a full
quarter of an hour;  while another Praver Book was offi-
cially at hand,  in the general post for plebeian witnesses.

Well ! aristocrat as I am,  compared with you,  I
laughed heartily at all this mummery;  and yet it was pos-
sibly wise,  at this period of pulling down all law and
order,  all privilege and subordination,  however frivolous
was its appearance.

His testimony was highly favourable to Mr.  Hastings,
with regard to authenticating the intelligence he had re-
ceived of an opening war with France,  upon which hung
much justification of the measures Mr.  Hastings had pur-
sued for raising supplies.

All the rest of the day was upon the same business,
and bringinix forward the same clearinir.

Thence I went to the Queen’s house,  where I have a
most cordial general invitation from Mrs.  Schwcllenberg
to go by all opportunities;  and there is none so good as
after the trial,  that late hour exactly according with her
dinner-time.

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

297

She is just as she was in respect to health;  but in all
other respects,  O how amended  ! all civility,  all obliging-
ness, all courtesy ! and so desirous to have me visit her,
that she presses me to come incessantly,

Mr.  De Luc and Miss Mawer were of the party.

During coffee,  the Princess Royal came into the room.
She condescended to profess herself quite glad to see
me  ; and she had not left the room five minutes before,
again returning,  she said,  “ Mrs,  Schwellenberg,  I am
come to plague you,  for I am come to take away Miss
iiurney.”

1 give you leave to guess whether this plagued me.

¥ # :i:  * Jf:

May 2. — The following week I again went to West-
minster Hall.  Mile.  Jacobi had made a point of ac-
companying me,  that she might see the show,  as James
called it to General Burgoyne,  and I had great pleasure
in taking her,  for she is a most ingenuous and good crea-
ture, though — alas  ! — by no means the same undaunted,
gay,  open character as she appeared at first.  Sickness,
coidinement,  absence from her friends,  submission to her
coadjutrix,  and laborious watching,  have much altered her.

The trial of this day was all written evidence in fa-
vour of Mr.  Hastings,  and violent quarrelling as to its
admissibility on the part of IMr.  Burke.  Mr.  Windham
took his place,  duiiiig some part of the controversy,  and
spoke ably and clearly as to the given point in dispute,
but with the most palpable tremor and internal struggle.
1 wonder,  so  “tremblingly”  as he is  “alive all o’er,”  how
he ever made the first effort to become a public speaker ;
but,  having conquered that opening horror,  I wonder yet
more,  with such ability,  readiness,  knowledge,  facility,  and
command of language,  he has not totally vanquished the
difficulties of public exhibition.  I can only suppose that

298

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

by nature he is extremely clifTulent,  and by inclination
equally ambitious;  and if so,  the conHict may last through
life.

I attended Mile.  Jacobi to the Queen’s house,  where
I dined ; and great indeed was my pleasure,  during
coffee,  to see the Princess Elizabeth,  who,  in the most
pleasing manner and the highest spirits,  came to summon
me to the Queen.

I found Her Majesty again with all her sweet daughters
but the youngest.  She was gracious and disposed to
converse.

We had a great deal of talk upon public concerns,  and
she told me a friend of mine liad spoken very well the
day before,  and so had Mr.  Eurke.  She meant Mr.
Windham.  It was ajjainst the new societies*,  and in
favour of the Proclamation.  Mr.  Buike,  of course,  would
here come forth in defence of his own  ])iedictIons and
opinions;  but Mr.  Windham,  who had rather abided
hitherto with Charles F'ox,  in thinking Mr.  Burke too ex-
treme, well as he loves him personally,  was a new con-
vert highly acceptable.  He does not,  however,  go all
length.s with Mr.  Burke  ; he is only averse to an uncon-
stitutional mode of reform,  and to sanctioning club powers,
so as to enable them,  as in I'rance,  to overawe the state
and senate.

Soon after,  to my infinite joy,  the King entered.  O,
he spoke to me so kindly ! — he congratidated me on the
better looks which his own presence and goodness gave
me,  repeatedly declaring he had never seen me in such
health.  He asked me after my father,  and listened with
interest when I mentioned his depression,  and told him
that all he had done of late to soothe his retirement and
pain had been making canons to solemn words,  and with
* The  “Ix)ridon Corresponding Societies,”  &c.

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

299

such difficulties of composition as,  in better health and
spirits,  would have rather proved oppressive and perplex-
ing than a relief to his feelings.

“ I,  too,”  said the King,  after a very serious pause,
“ have myself sometimes found,  when ill or disturbed,  that
some grave and even difficult employment for my thoughts
has tended more to compose me than any of the supposed
usual relaxations.”

He also condescended to ask after little Norbury,  taking
off the eager little fellow while he spoke,  and his earnest
manner of delivery.  He then inquired about my friends
Mr.  and Mrs.  Lock,  and their expectations of the return
of Mr.  William,

He inquired how I lived,  whom I saw,  what sort of
neighbours I had in the college,  and many other parti-
culars, that seemed to desire to know how I went on,  and
whether I was comfortable.  His looks,  I am sure,  said
so,  and most kindly.

They kept me till they went to the Japan Room,  where
they meet the officers and ladies who attend them in
public.  They were going to the Ancient Music.

This dear King,  nobly unsuspicious w'here left to him-
self, and where he has met no doubleness,  spoke also very
freely of some political matters before me — of the new
association in particular.  It gratified me highly.

^ sjs  * * 4:

One day again,  in the following week,  I went to Mr.
Hastings’s defence  : Sarah was with me.  Just before
us sat Mrs.  Kennedy,  of Windsor,  with whom I renewed
a meeting acquaintance,  but evaded a visiting one.

Soon after a grave man’s voice behind me said,  Is
not that Miss Burney?”  I twdrled round and saw the
Bishop of Dromore,  and Mrs.  Percy and her two

300 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII,

daughters.  We immediately renewed our Bath ac-
quaintance.

The defence to-day was by Mr.  ^larkham,  son of the
Archbishop of York,  wlio has rc])catcdly been sum-
moned, and wlio bears most honourable testimony to
the character,  the conduct,  and tlie abilities of Mr.
Hastings.

Soon after I spent a day with Mrs.  Ord,  by invitation,
for meeting the Percy family.  She had also assembled
Major Pennell,  the Dickensons,  Lady Ilerries,  and Mr.
Selwin.

Mr!  Selwin I had not seen for many years.  Streafham
and Mrs.  'Phrale,  our constant themes,  were upper-
most, first and last,  in all we said and all wc thought.
Ilis most amiable behaviour in j)oor Mr.  Thrale's un-
happy state of health I shall never forget.  I met him
with a glad cordiality from its remembrance,  and it
was very apparently mutual,  lie still visits,  occasion-
ally, at Streatham  ; but he says the place,  the inha-
bitants, the visitors,  the way of life,  arc all so totally
changed,  it would make me most melancholy again to
tread those boards.

All the  ]»ublic talk was upon the East India letters
from J.ord Cornwallis,  and Major Pennell was there our
oracle.  He has a plain,  unadorned way of giving in-
formation, that is both pleasant and masterly.

M rs.  Dickenson told me that Miss Palmer is cer-
tainly engaged to Lord Inchiquin.  He is sixtv-ninc;
but they say he is remarkably  ]>lcasing in his manners,
and soft and amiable in his disposition.  I am sure she
has merited my wishes for her happiness,  by her dec]>
interest,  \ipon all occasions,  in mine,  and I am sure she
has them.

1702]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

301

Mrs.  Bunbury was with her sister,  and looking as
beautiful as she would let herself look  ; for she uses so
much art,  that,  in my eyes,  she loses more by such as-
sistance than she could do,  with features so fine as hers,
by the fading of those years she means to conceal.

The Colonel came in while wo stayed,  and we had
much old talk upon past services in common.

I got home to dinner to meet Mrs.  and Miss Mary
^"oung,  who are in town for a few weeks.  Miss iMary
is sensible,  and quick,  and agreeable.

d'hey give a very unpleasant account of Madame De
Gcnlis,  or De Sillery,  or Brulard,  as she is now called.
They say she has established herself at Bury,  in their
neighbourhood,  with Mile,  la Princesse d’Orleans and
Pamela,  and a Circe,  another young girl under her
care.  They have taken a house,  the master of which
always dines with them,  though Mrs.  Young says he
is such a low man he should not dine with her daughter.
They form twenty with themselves and household.
They keep a botanist,  a chemist,  and a natural histo-
rian always with them.  These are supposed to have
been common servants of the Duke of Orleans in
former days,  as they always walk behind the ladies
when abroad  ; but,  to make amends in the new equal-
ising style,  they all dine together at home.  They visit
at no house but Sir Thomas Gage’s,  where they carry
their harps,  and frequently have music.  They have
been to a Bury ball,  and danced all night ; Mile.
d’Orleans with anybody,  known or unknown to Madame
Brulard.

AVhat a woful change from that elegant,  amiable,
liigh-bred Madame De Genlis 1 knew six years ago  !
the apparent pattern of female perfection in manners,
conversation,  and delicacy.

302

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

Tliere arc innumerable democrats assembled in Suf-
folk ; among them the famous Tom Paine,  who herds
with all the farmers that will receive him,  and there
propagates his pernicious doctrines.

* * -1:  * * *

'Ihe next time I went to Westminster I took Miss
Mary Young.  It was again upon the same evidence
of Mr.  Markham,  which proves very important indeed
in Mr.  Hastiness’s favour.

o

Friday,  May 25th. — This morning I went to a very
fine public breakfast,  giren by Mrs.  Montagu.  The
instant I came into the gallery I had the melancholy
satisfaction of being seen by Sir George Howard.
There is no affectation mixed with his sorrow for poor
Lady Eflingham.  I had not met him since her loss.
He had tears in his eyes immediately;  but he spoke
with cheerfulness,  and asked after my dear father very
kindly.

hlrs.  Montagu I saw next,  and she was extremely
courteous.  1.  hey were all very soit}’  to miss my father,
who,  indeed,  lias everywhere been missed this winter
and spring.

When I came into tlic Feather Room I was accosted
by Mr.  Seward,  and he entered into a gay conversa-
tion upon all sorts of subjects,  which detained me,  agree-
ably enough,  in a very jileasant station by one of tile
windows.  He liad a gentleman wdth him,  wliom I half
recollected,  and whom he soon introduced by the name
of ‘"my friend Mrs.  Boscawen’s son.”  It was Lord
halmoLith,  with whom I had dined at Commissioner
La 1‘orcy s,  at Plymouth Dock.  He was as entertain-
ing here as he liad been there.

I then made for the dining-room,  wliich was filled
for a breakfast,  upon this occasion,  and very splendidly.

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

303

to me,  who liavc so long been familiar to sights
and decorations,  no show of this sort is new or strikinsr.

A siglit that gave me far more pleasure was Mrs.
Ord and her daughter,  and 1 immediately joined them
for the rest of the morning.

d’he table was not a matter of indifference to the
guests at large:  and it was so completely occupied by
company seated round it,  that it was long before one
vacant chair could be seized,  and this fell to the lot of
Miss Ord.

The crowd of company was such that we could only
slowly make way in any part.  Tlicre could not be fewer
than four or five hundred people.  It was like a full
llanclagh by daylight.

\V e now met Mrs.  Porteus ; and who should be with
her but the  ])oor pretty S.  S.,  whom so long I had not
seen,  and who has now lately been finally given up by
her long-sought and very injurious lover.  Dr.  Vyse

She is sadly faded,  and looked disturbed and un-
happy ; but still beautiful,  though no longer blooming ;
and still affectionate,  though absent and evidently ab-
sorbed. \Ve had a little chat together about the
Thralcs.  In mentioning our former intimacy with
them,  “ Ah,  those,”  she cried,  were happy times!”
and her eyes glistened.  Poor thing!  hers has been
a lamentable story! — Imprudence and vanity have
rarely been mixed with so much sweetness,  and good-
humour,  and candour,  and followed with more reproach
and ill success.  AV^c agreed to renew acquaintance
next winter ; at present she will be little more in
town.

We went then round the rooms,  which were well
worth examination and admiration  ; and we met friends
and acquaintance every other stejv Amongst them.

304

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

Major Rcnnell,  wliom I always like to meet ; Miss
Coussmaker;  Lady Rothes,  who has been to Chelsea,
but whom I liave not yet been able to wait upon  ; Dr.
Russel,  who was in high spirits,  and laughed heartily
at seeing the prodigious meal most of the company
made of cold chicken,  liam,  fish,  &c.,  and said he should
like to see Mrs.  Montagu make the experiment of in-
viting all the same parly to dinner at three o'clock.
“O!”  they would cry,  “ three o'clock!  Mdiat docs
she mean  ? — who can dine at three o'clock  ? — one has
no appetite — one can't swallow a morsel — it's altoge-
ther impossible I ’ — ^ ct,  let her invite the same jicople,
and give them a dinner,  while she calls it a breakfast,
and see but how prettily they can find apjietites.

V\  Idle we were examining the noble pillars in the
new room,  I heard an exclamation of  “ Est-ce possible?
suis-jc si heureuse?— Est-cc ma chere Mile.  Bcurni
(juc jc vois  ? ”

Need I say this was Madame dc la Fite f or Mrs.
I'itt,  as,  since the I rcnch Revolution,  of which she is a
favourer,  she is called by some of the household to
wliich I belonged.

I spoke so as to moderate this rapture into some-
thing less calling for allcntion,  which her voice and
manner were engaging not unwillinglv.  I had not
seen her since my retreat,  and,  if she had been less
])ompous,  I should have been glad of the meeting.  She
kept my hand close grasj)cd between both her own,
(though her fan ni])j)cd one of my fingers till I was
ready to make faces,)  with a most resolute cwpre<i.\rmntt,
to the great inconvenience of those who wanted to pass,
for we were at one of the entrances into the great new
room  ; and how long she might have continued this
fond detention I know not,  if a lady,  whose appearance

OF THK AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

30";

]7‘J2]

vied for sliow and parade with Madame de la Fite’s
manner and words,  had not called out aloud,  “ I am
extremely hap])y indeed to see Miss llurney  !”

d'his was Mrs.  Hastings;  and to answer her 1 was
let loose.

I have always been very sorry that Mrs.  Hastings,
who is a pleasing,  lively,  and well-bred w’oman,  with
attractive manners and attentions to those she wishes
to oblige,  should have an indiscretion so peculiarly
unsuited to her situation,  as to aim always at being the
most conspicuous figure wherever she apjiears.  Her
dress now was like that of an Indian princess,  accord-
ing to oxir ideas of such ladies,  and so much the most
s])lendid,  from its ornaments,  and style,  and fashion,
though chiefly of muslin,  that everybody else looked
under-dressed in her presence.  It is for Mr.  Hastings
I am sorry when 1 see this inconsiderate vanity,  in a
W'oman who w'ould so much better mauifest her sensi-
bility of his present hard disgrace,  by a modest and
(piiet appearance and demeanour.

I had a very good beau in Major Kennell,  who took
charge of any catering and regale.  Dr.  Russel also
made uj)  to our little coterie  ; and Lord Mulgrave
surprised,  and also frightened me,  bv his changed ap-
pearance and more than ever hollow voice,  when he
suddenly came to speak to me.  1 had not seen him
since an assembly at Mrs.  Ord’s,  when he was there
W'ith his sweet bride.  He looks  ([uite ghastly,  lie
i.s in an atrophy,  and fast,  I doubt,  quitting this
world.

AVhniNF.soAY,  May 30tii. — To-day 1 went to West-
minster Hall again,  to hear the evidence of Mr.  Mark-
ham, which is so pleasantly in favour of Mr.  Hastings,

VOL.  V.

X

30G

DIAKV AM)  LKITKIIS

[Paht VII.

that all the friends of that persecuted man are gratified
by all he deposes.  Miss Ord accoin])anicd me.

W hen the impetuous and ungovernable Mr.  Burke
was interrupting the Chancellor,  in order to browbeat
Mr.  Hastings’s evidence,  Mr.  M indham involuntarily
exclaimed,  “ Hist !”  just as if he had been at his elbow,
and playing the kind  ]vart of a ila])per.  1 could not
helj)  laughing,  and half joining him  : he echoed back
my laugh,  and with a good humour that took in all its
meaning and acknowledged its sympathy with re-
gard to Mr.  Burke;  nevertlieless,  he sj)oke not a
word.

Afterwards,  however,  he s])oke when 1 had far ra-
ther he had been silent,  for he went to the assistance
of Mr.  Burke.

Michael Angelo Taylor spoke also;  but I observed
with  ])leasure a distinction the Chancellor made to Mr.
Windham  ; for,  when he answered their arguments,  he
singled him out as the jierson w ho had said what alone
he meant ujion that  (juestion to notice,  by saying,  “ U'he
honourable manager who spoke second.”

But I am sure — I think so,  at least — Mr.  Windham
as little a])proves the violence of Mr.  Burke in this
trial as 1 do myself.  I see him evidently and frequently
sutler great pain and mortification when he is so ob-
streperous.

.luNK 1st. — This day had been long engaged for
breakfasting with Mrs.  Dickenson and dining with
Mrs.  Ord.

The breakfast guests were Mr.  Langton,  Mr.  I'oote.
Mr.  Dickenson,  jun.,  a cousin,  and a very agreeable
and  ])leasing man;  Lady Ilerries,  Miss Dickenson,  an-
other cousin,  and Mr.  Boswell.

1792]

OK THK ALTMOll OK KVEMNA.

307

'I'liis last was the object of the morning.  I felt a
strong sensation of that displeasure which his lo(jua-
cious communications of every weakness and infirmity
of Ihc first and greatest good man of these limes has
awakened in me,  at his first sight;  and,  though his ad-
dress to me was courteous in the extreme,  and he made
a ])oint of sitting next me,  I felt an indignant disjiosi-
tion to a nearly forbidding reserve and silence.  ]Io\v
many starts of  ])assion and prejudice has he blackened
into record,  that else might have sunk,  for ever for-
gotten, under the preponderance of weightier virtues
and excellences  !

Angry,  however,  as I have long been with liim,  he
soon insensibly comjuered,  though ho did not soften
me  : there is so little of ill-design or ill-nature in him,
he is so open and forgiving for all that is said in re-
turn, that he soon forced me to consider him in a less
serious light,  and change my resentment against his
treachery into something like commiseration of his
levity;  and before we parted we became good friends.
'I’here is no resisting great good humour,  bo what will
in theopj)Osite scale.

1 le entertained us all as if hired for that purjiose,
telling stories of Dr.  .Johnson,  and acting them with
incessant buffoonery.  I told him frankly that,  if he
turned him into ridicule by caricature,  1 should fly the
])rernises  : he assured me he would not,  and indeed Ids
imitations,  though comic to excess,  were so far from
caricature that he omitted a thousand gesticulations
which I distinctly remember.

Mr.  liangton told some stories himself in imitation
ofJ)r.  .Johnson;  but they became him less than Mr.
Jloswell,  and oidy reminded me of what Dr.  Johnson
himself once saiil to me — “ Every man has,  some time

X 2

308

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

in his life,  an ambition to be a wag.”  If Mr.  Langton
liad repeated anything from liis truly great friend
quietly,  it would far bettor have accorded with his own
serious and respectable character.

After this I went to Mrs.  Ord for the day.  I found
there the charming Mrs.  Garrick,  whom I always cor-
dially delight to see  ; but she was not well,  and could
not stay.

In the evening we had a large and pleasant party  :
]\Irs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Boscawen,  Lady Ilesketh,  Mr.
and Mrs.  Pepys,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Hawkins Brown,  Mrs.
H.  Ilervey,  Dr.  llusscl.  Lady Ilerries,  Mr.  and Mrs.
Dickenson,  Mr.  Bardon,  and Mr.  Batt.

I had much very interesting and informing conver-
sation with Mr.  Batt,  who is among my high favourites.
He is just returned from France,  and he gave me such
an account of the situation and disposition of things,
and of the  ])rocecdings of the National Assembly,  as,
from his authority,  I should certainly write for the
benefit of such democrats as only liear and seek the
presiding powers’  account of themselves  ; if I had not a
sinking within upon the subject,  from the excess of
horror with which my informer made me look forward
to  ]n-obable consequences.

Junk 4tii. — The birthdav of our trulv c:ood Kinir.

As His Majesty had liimsclf given me,  when 1 saw
liim after the Queen's birthday,  an implied reproach
lor not presenting myself at the palace that day,  I de-
termined not to incur a similar censure on this,  espe-
cially as I hold my admission on such a national festival
as a real happiness,  as well as honour,  when it is to see
themselves.

How different was my attire from every other such
occasion the five preceding years!  It was a mere

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,

309

1792]

simple di’cssed undress^  witliout feathers,  flowers,  hoop,
or furbelows.

When I alighted at the porter’s lodge I was stopped
from crossing the court-yard,  by seeing the King,  with
his three sons,  the Prince of Wales,  Duke of York,  and
Duke of Clarence,  who were standing there after alight-
ing from their horses,  to gratify the people who encir-
cled the iron rails.  It was a pleasant and goodly sight,
and I rejoiced in such a detention.

I had a terrible difficulty to find a friend who would
make known to Her Majesty that I was come to pay
my devoirs.

At length,  while watching in the passages to and fro,
I heard a step upon the Princesses’  stairs,  and,  venturing
forward,  I encountered the Princess Elizabeth.  I paid
my respectful congratulations on the day,  which she
most pleasantly received,  and I intimated my great
desire to see Her Majesty.  I am sure the amiable
Princess communicated my petition,  for Mr,  Do Luc
came out in a few minutes and ushered me into the
Koyal presence.

The Queen was in her State Dressing-room,  her head
attired for the Drawing-room superbly;  but her Court-
dress,  as usual,  remaining to be put on at St.  James’s.
She had already received all her early complimenters,
and was prepared to go to St.  James’s  : the Princess
Royal was seated by her side,  and all the other
Princesses,  except the Princess Amelia,  were in the
room,  with the Duchess of York.  Mr.  De Luc,  Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  Madame de la Fite,  and Miss Golds-
worthy were in the background.

The Queen smiled upon me most graciously,  and
every Princess came up separately to speak with me.
I thanked Her Majesty warmly^  for admitting me upon

310 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

such an occasion.  ■“  O !”  cried she,  “ I resolved to see
you the moment I knew you were here.”

She then inquired when I went into Norfolk,  and
conversed upon my summer plans,  &c.,  with more of
her original sweetness of manner than I have seen
since rny resignation.  What pleasure this gave me!
and what pleasure did I feel in being kept by her till
the further door opened,  and the King entered,  accom-
panied by the Dukes of York and Clarence  !

I motioned to retreat,  but,  callino:  out,  What,  Miss
Burney  !”  the King came up to me,  and inquired how
I did  ; and began talking to me so pleasantl}%  so
gaily,  so kindly,  even,  that I had the satisfaction of
remaining and of gathering courage to utter my good
wishes and warm fervent prayers for this day.  He
deigned to hear me very benignly;  or make believe he
did,  for I did not make my harangue very audibly ; but
he must be sure of its purport.

He said I was grown  “ (juite fat”  since he had seen
me,  and appealed to the Duke of V'ork  : he protested
my arm was half as big again as heretofore,  and then
he measured it with his spread thumbs and forefingers;
and the whole of his manner showed his  ])erfect ap])ro-
bation of the step I had taken,  of presenting myself in
the Ixoyal  ])rcsence on this auspicious day.

The Queen soon after walked up to me,  and asked if
I should like to see the ball at night.  I certainly
should much like to have seen them  “ in all their glory,”
after seeing them thus in all their kindness,  as well as
to have been present at the first  ])ublic ap])carance at
Court of the Princess Sophia:  but I had no means to
get from and to Chelsea so late at night,  and was,
therefore,  forced to excuse myself,  and decline her
gracious ju’ojiosition of giving me tickets.

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

311

Princess IVlary came to shake liands with me,  and
Princess Augusta spoke to mo for some time with ex-
treme sweetness ; in short,  I was gratified in every pos-
sible way by the united goodness and condescension of
all the family.

Two days after,  I went again to Westminster Hall
with Miss Ord.  Her p’ood mother has a ticket for

O

the Duke of Newcastle’s box,  in which she was seated.
This day’s business consisted of examining witnesses  :
it was meant for the last meeting during this session  ;
but when it was over,  Mr.  Hastings arose and ad-
dressed the Lords in a most noble and pathetic speech,
praying them to continue their attendance till his de-
fence was heard throughout,  or,  at least,  not to deny
him the finishing his answer to the first charge.

He spoke,  I believe,  to the hearts of everybody,  ex-
cept his prosecutors  : the whole assembly seemed evi-
dently affected by what he urged,  upon the unexampled
delay of justice in his trial;  silence was never more
profound than that which his voice instantly com-
manded. Poor unhappy,  injured gentleman  ! How,
how can such men practise cruelty so glaring as is
manifested in the whole conduct of- this trial !

From hence,  as usual,  1 went to dine at the Queen’s
house ; Mrs.  Schwellenberg took me to the Queen af-
ter coffee.

She was writing to Lady Cremorne  : she talked with
me while she finished her letter,  and then read it to
me,  exactly as in old times.  She writes with a,dmirable
facility,  and peculiar elegance of expression,  as well as
of handwriting.

She asked me,  somewhat curiously,  if I had seen any
of my old friends  ? I found she meant oppositionists.
I told her only at the trial.  She kept me in con-

D1 AH V AND LETTERS

C12

[Part VII.

verse till the clear King came into the room : he had a
grandson of Lord Howe’s with him,  a little boy in
})etticoats,  with whom he was playing,  and who he
thought remembered me.  I had seen him frequently
at  ^^  ey mouth,  and the innocent little fellow insisted
upon making me his bows and reverences,  when told
to make them to the Queen.

The King asked me wdiat had been doing at West-
minster Hall?  I repeated poor Mr.  Hastings's remon-
strance, particularly a part of it in which he had men-
tioned that he had already  '^appealed to His Majesty,
whose justice he could not doubt.”  The Iving looked
a little queer,  but 1 was glad of the opportunity of
putting in a w'ord for poor Mr.  Hastings.

The Queen afterwards g.ave me a message for my
dear Mr.  Lock,  to desire him to Vi'ait upon the Princess
Koyal at Kew'  the following w'eek,  to give her his opi-
nion of a work she had in hand  ; and she spoke with
equally just and kind praise of submitting to his taste.

I went on regularly to the trial till it finished for
this year.  Mr.  Dallas closed his answer to the first
charge,  with great spirit and effect,  and seemed to
make numerous proselytes for Mr.  Hastings.

Tiii'RsnAY,  Ji.NE 18tii. — After many invitations
and regulations,  it was settled I was to accompany my
father on a visit of three days to Mrs.  Crewe at Hamj)-
stead.

The villa at Hampstead is small,  but commo-
dious. We were received by  ^Irs.  Crewe with much
kindness.  The room was rather dark,  and she had a
veil to her bonnet,  half down,  and with this aid she
looked still in a full blaze of beauty.  I was wholly
astonished.  Her bloom,  jierfectly natural,  is as high
as that of  .\ugusta Lock when in ficr best looks,  and

313

1792]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

the form of her face is so exquisitely perfect that my
eye never met it Avithout fresh admiration.  She is
certainly,  in my eyes,  the most completely a beauty of
any woman I ever saw.  1 know not,  even now,  any
female in her first youth who could bcai the compaiison.
She uglifies everything near her.

Her son was with her.  He is just of age,  and looks
like her elder brother ! he is a heavy,  old-looking young
man.  He is going to China with Lord Macartney.

Mv former friend,  young Burke,  was also there.  I
was glad to renew acquaintance with him  ; though I
could see some little strangeness in him:  this,  hoA\e\ei,
completely wore off before the day was over.

Soon after entered Mrs.  Burke,  Miss F , a niece,
and Mr.  Richard Burke,  the comic,  humorous,  bold,
queer brother of the Mr.  Burke,  who,  they said,  was soon
coming,  with  ^Ir.  Elliot.  The Burke family neie in-
vited bv Mrs.  Crewe to meet us.

Mrs.  Burke was just what I have always seen her,
soft,  gentle,  reasonable,  and obliging;  and we met,  I
think,  upon as good terms as if so many years had not
parted us.

At leng-th Mr.  Burke appeared,  accompanied by Mr.
Elliot.

He shook hands with my father as soon as he had
])aid his devoirs to Mrs.  Crewe,  but he returned my
courtesy with so distant a bow,  that I concluded mj self
quite lost Avith him,  from my evident solicitude in poor
Mr.  Hastings’s cause.  I could not Avish that less
obvious,  thinking as I think of it;  but I felt infinitely
grieved to lose the favour of a man Avhom,  in all other
articles,  I so much venerate,  and whom,  indeed,  I
esteem and admire as the A'ery first man of true genius
noAA'  liA’ing in this country.

314

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

Mrs.  Crewe introduced me to Mr.  Elliot : I am sure
we were already personally known to each other,  for I
have seen him perpetually in the Managers’  box,
Avhence,  as often,  he must have seen me in the Great
Chamberlain’s.  He is a tall,  thin young man,  plain in
face,  dress,  and manner,  but sensible,  and possibly much
besides ; he was reserved,  however,  and little else ap-
peared.

The moment 1 was named,  to my great joy I found
Mr.  Burke had not recollected me.  He is more near-
sighted, considerably,  than myself.  “ Miss Burney  !”
he now exclaimed,  coming forward,  and quite kindly
taking my hand,  ‘‘  I did not see you and then he
spoke very sweet Avords of the meeting,  and of my
looking far better than  “ while I was a courtier,”  and
of hoAv he rejoiced to see that I so little suited that sta-
tion. “You look,”  cried he,  quite renewed,  reAuved,
disengaged;  you seemed,  Avhen I conversed Avith you
last,  at the trial,  quite altered ; I never saAV such a
change for the better as quitting a Court has brought
about !”

Ah  ! thought I,  this is simply a mistake,  from rea-
soning according to your own feelings.  I only seemed
altered for the Averse at the trial,  because I there looked
coldly and distantly,  from distaste and disaffection to
your proceedings  ; and I here look changed for the
better,  only because I here meet you Avithout the chill
of disapprobation,  and Avith the gloAV of my first admir-
ation of you and your talents  !

Mrs.  CrcAve gave him her place,  and he sat by me,
and entered into a most animated conversation upon
Lord Macartney and his Chinese expedition,  and the
tAA'o Chinese youths Avho Avere to accompany it.  These
last he described minutely,  and spoke of the extent of

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

315

the undertaking in high,  and perhaps fanciful,  terms,
but with allusions and anecdotes intermixed,  so full of
general information and brilliant ideas,  that I soon felt
the whole of my first enthusiasm return,  and with it a
sensation of pleasure that made the day delicious to me.

After this my father joined us, -and politics took the
lead.  He spoke then with an eagerness and a vehemence
that instantly banished the graces,  though it redoubled
the energies,  of his discourse.  “ The French Revolu-
tion,” he said,  “ which began by authorising and Icgal-
ising injustice,  and which by rapid steps had proceeded
to every species of despotism except owning a despot,
was now menacing all the universe and all mankind
with the most violent concussion of principle and
order.”  My father heartily joined,  and I tacitly as-
sented to his doctrines,  though I feared not with his
fears.

One speech I must repeat,  for it is explanatory of
his conduct,  and nobly explanatoiy.  When he had
expatiated upon the present dangers,  even to English
liberty and property,  from the contagion of havoc and
novelty,  he earnestly exclaimed,  “ This it is that has
made me an abettor and supporter of Kings  ! Kings are
necessary,  and,  if we would preserve peace and pros-
perity, we m.ust preserve them.  We must all put our
shoulders to the work  ! Ay,  and stoutly,  too !”

This subject lasted till dinner.

At dinner Mr.  Burke sat next Mrs.  Crew’c,  and I had
the happiness to be seated next Mr.  Burke  ; and my
other neighbour was his amiable son.

The dinner,  and the dessert when the servants were
removed,  were delightful.  How I wish my dear Su-
sanna and Fredy could meet this wonderful man when
he is easy,  happy,  and with people he cordially likes  !

316

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

But politics,  even on his own side,  must ahvays be ex-
cluded ; his irritability is so terrible on that theme
that it gives immediately to his face the expression of
a man who is going to defend himself from murderers.

I can give you only a few little detached traits of
what passed,  as detail would be endless.

Charles Fox being mentioned,  Mrs.  Crewe told us
that he had lately said,  upon being shown some pas-
sage in Mr.  Burke’s book which he had warmly op-
posed, but which had,  in the event,  made its own justi-
fication, very candidly,  “Well!  Burke is right — but
Burke is often right,  only he is right too soon.”

“ Had Fox seen some things in that book,”  answered
Mr.  Burke,  “ as soon,  he would at this moment,  in all
j)robability,  be first minister of this country.”

“ What !”  cried Mrs.  Crewe,  “ with Pitt  ? — No  ! — no!
— Pitt won’t go out,  and Charles Fox will never make
a coalition with Pitt.”

“And why not?”  said Mr.  Burke,  drily;  “why not
this coalition as well as other coalitions  ?”

Nobody tried to answer this.

“ Charles Fox,  however,”  said Mr.  Burke afterwards,
“can never internally like the French llevolution.  He
is entangled  ; but,  in himself,  if he should find no
other objection to it,  he has at least too much taste for
such a revolution.”

Mr.  Elliot related that he had lately been in a com-
pany of some of the first and most distinguished men
of the French nation,  now fugitives here,  and had
asked them some questions about the new French mi-
nistry ; they had answered that they knew them not
even by name till now  ! “ Think,”  cried he,  “ what a

ministry that must be!  Suppose a new administration
formed here of Englishmen of whom we had never

317

1792]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,

before beard the names!  what statesmen they must
be ! how prepared and fitted for government ! To
begin by being at the helm I ’

Mr.  Richard Burke related,  very comically,  various
censures cast upon his brother,  accusing him of oeing
the friend of despots,  and the abettor of slavery,  be-
cause he had been shocked at the imprisonment of the
King of France,  and was anxious to preserve our own
limited monarchy in the same state in which it so long
had flourished.

Mr.  Burke looked half alarmed at his brother’s open-
ing, but,  when he had finished,  he very good-humom--
edly poured out a glass of wine,  and,  turning to mie,
said,  “ Come then — here’s slavery for ever 1”

This was well understood,  and echoed round the table
with hearty laughter.

“ This would do for you completely,  Mr.  Burke,”
said Mrs.  Crewe,  if it could get into a newspaper !
My.  Burke,  they would say,  has now spoken out ; the
truth has come to light unguardedly,  and his real de-
fection from the cause of true liberty is acknowledged.
I should like to draw up the paragraph  !”

“And add,”  said Mr.  Burke,  “the toast was ad-
dressed to Miss Burney,  in order to pay court to the
Queen !”

This sport went on till,  upon  ]\Ir,  Elliot s again men-
tioning France and the rising Jacobins,  jNlr.  Richard
Burke loudly gave a new toast — “ Come 1 cried he,
“ here’s confusion to confusion 1”

Mr.  Windham,  who was gone into Norfolk for the
summer,  was frequently mentioned,  and abva^s with
praise.  Mr.  Burke,  upon Mr.  Elliot’s saying something
of his being very thin,  warmly exclaimed,  “ He is just
as he should be ! If I were Windham this minute,  I

318

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

should not wish to be thinner,  nor fatter,  nor taller,
nor shorter,  nor any way,  nor in anything,  altered.”

Some time after,  speaking of former days,  you may
believe I was struck enough to hear Mr.  Burke say to
!Mrs.  Crewe,  “I wish you had known Mrs.  Delany !
She,  was a pattern of a perfect fine lady,  a real fine
lady,  of other days  ! Her manners were faultless ;
her deportment was all elegance,  her speech was all
sweetness,  and her air and address all dignity.  I always
looked up to her as the model of an accomplished
woman of former times.”

Do you think I heard such a testimony to my beloved
departed friend unmoved  ?

Afterwards,  still to Mrs.  Crewe,  he proceeded to say
she had been married to Mr.  W3*cherle3%  the author,
d’here I ventured to interru])t him,  and tell him I
fancied that must be some great mistake,  as I had been
well acquainted with her history from her own mouth.
He seemed to have heard it from some jiood authoritv;
but I could by no means accede mj'  belief,  as her
real life and memoirs had been so long in my hands,
written by herself to a certain period,  and,  for some
way,  continued by me.  This,  however,  I did not men-
tion.

When we left the dining-parlour to the gentlemen,
^liss F seized my arm,  without the smallest pre-

vious speech,  and,  with a prodigious Irish brogue,  said
“Miss Burney,  I am so glad you can't think to have
tliis favourable opportunity of making an intimaej^  with
you!  I have longed to know you ever since I became
rational 1”

I was glad,  too,  that nobody heard her ! She made
me walk olf with her in the garden,  whither we had
adjourned for a stroll,  at a full gallop,  leaning upon

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

319

my arm,  and putting her face close to mine,  and sput-
tering at every word from excessive eagerness.

“ I have the honour to know some of your relations
in Ireland,”  she continued  ; “ that is,  if they an’t yours,
which they are very sorry for,  they arc your sisters,
which is almost the same thing,  Mr.  Shirley first lent
me  ‘ Cecilia and he was so delighted to hear my re-
marks ! Mrs,  Shirley’s a most beautiful creature ; she’s
grown so large and so big ! and all her daughters are
beautiful ; so is all the family.  I never saw Captain
Phillips,  but I dare say he's beautiful.”

She is quite a wild Irish girl.

Presently she talked of Miss Palmer.  O,  she loves
you  !”  she cried ; “ she says she saw you last Sunday,
and she never was so happy in her life.  She said you
looked sadly.”

This Miss F is a handsome girl,  and seems very

good humoured.  I imagine her but just imported,  and I
doubt not but the soft-mannered,  and well-bred,  and quiet
Mrs.  Burke w ill soon subdue this exuberance of loquacity.

I gathered afterwards from Mrs.  Crewe,  that my curious
new'  acquaintance made innumerable inquiries concerning
my employment and office under the Queen.  I find many
people much disturbed to know whether I had the place
of the Duchess of Ancaster,  on one side,  or of a chamber-
maid, on the other.  Truth is apt to lie between con-
jectures.

The party returned with tw'o very singular additions to
its number — Lord Loughborough,  and Mr.  and Mrs.
Erskine,  They have villas at Hampstead,  and were met
in the walk ; Mr.  Erskine else would not,  probably,  have
desired to meet Mr.  Burke,  who openly in the House of
Commons asked him if he knew what triendship meant,
when he pretended to call him,  Mr.  Burke,  his friend  ?

320

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

There was an evident disunion of the cordiality of the
party from this time.  My father,  Mr.  Richard Burke,
his nephew,  and Mr.  Elliot entered into some general
discourse;  Mr.  Burke took up a volume of Boileau,
and read aloud,  though to himself,  and with a pleasiire
that soon made him seem to forget all intruders;  Lord
Loughborough joined Mrs.  Burke;  and  ]VIr.  Erskinc,
seating himself next to Mrs.  Crewe,  engrossed her en-
tirely, yet talked loud enough for all to hear who were
not engaged themselves.

Tor me,  I sat next Mrs.  Erskine,  who seems much
a woman of the world,  for she spoke with me just as
freely,  ami readily,  and easily as if we had been old
friends.

Mr.  I'rskine enumerated all his avocations to Mrs.
Crewe,  and,  amongst others,  mentioned,  very calmly,
having to plead against Mr.  Crewe upon a manor business
in Cheshire.  Mrs.  Crewe hastily an<l alarmed inter-
rupted him,  to inquire what he n'.eant,  and what might
ensue to Mr.  Crewe?  “ O,  nothing but the loss of the
lordship upon that spot,”  he coolly answered;  “but I
don’t know’  that it will be given against him:  I only
know I shall have three hundred pounds for it.”

Mrs.  Crewe looked thoughtful;  and Mr.  Erskinc
tlien began to speak of the new Association for Reform,
by tlie friends of the people,  headed by Messrs.  Grey
and Sheridan,  and sustained by Mr.  Fox,  and openly
op])osed by Mr.  M'indham,  as well as Mr.  Burke.  He
said much of the use they had made of his name,
though he had never yet been to the society;  and I
began to understand that he meant to disavow it;  but
]irescntly he added,  “ I don’t know whether I shall
ever attend — 1 have so much to do — so little time:
however,  the people must be su])ported.’’

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

321

1792]

“Pray,  will you tell me,’  said Mrs.  Crewe,  diily,
“what you mean by the people  ? I never knew.’

He looked surprised,  but evaded any answer,  and
soon after took his leave,  with his wife,  who seems by
no means to admire him as much as he admires himself,
if I may judge by short odd speeches which dropped
from her.  The eminence of Mr.  Erskine seems all for
public life ; in private,  his excessive egotisms undo
him.

Lord Loughborough instantly took his seat next to
Mrs.  Crewe;  and presently related a speech which
Mr.  Erskine has lately made at some public meeting,
and which he opened to this effect “ As to me,  gen-
tlemen, I have some title to give my opinions freely.
Would you know what my title is derived from?  I
challenge any man to inquire  ! If he ask my birth, —
its genealogy may dispute with kings  ! If my wealth,
it is all for which I have time to hold out my hand  !
If my talents,— No  ! of those,  gentlemen,  I leave you to
judge for yourselves !”

But I have now time for no more upon this day,
except that Mr.  and Mrs.  Burke,  in making their exit,
gave my father and me the most cordial invitation to
Beaconsfield in the course of the summer or autumn.
And,  indeed,  I should delight to accept it.

]\Irs.  Crewe,  my father,  and myself spent the evening
together,  a little in talking politics,  when she gave me
the pleasure to hear her say Mr.  Windham was looked
up to by all parties,  for his principles as much as for
his abilities.  We read Rogers’s sweet poem on
Memory,  and some other things,  and retired in very
serene good humour,  I believe,  with one another.

Friday,  June 22nd.— Mrs.  Crewe took my father
and myself to see the Hampstead lions.  We went to

Y

VOL.  V.

322

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

Caen Wood,  to see the house and pictures.  Poor Lord
Mansfield has not been down-stairs,  the housekeeper
told us,  for the last four years  ; yet she asserts he is
by no means superannuated,  and frequently sees his
very intimate friends,  and seldom refuses to be consulted
by any lawyers.  He was particularly connected with
my revered Mrs.  Delany,  and I felt melancholy upon
entering his house to recollect how often that beloved

lady had planned carrying thither Miss P and

myself,  and how often we had been invited by Miss
Murrays,  my Lord’s nieces.  I asked after those ladies,
and left them my respects.  I heard they were up-stairs
with Lord  ^lansfield,  whom they never left.

Many things in this house were interesting,  because
historical ; but I fancy the pictures,  at least,  not to have
much other recommendation.  A portrait of Pope,  by
himself,  I thought extremely curious.  It is very much
in the style of most of Jervas’s own paintings.  They
told us that,  after the burning of Lord Mansfield’s
house in town,  at the time of Lord G.  Gordon’s riots,
thousands came to inquire if this original portrait was
preserved.  Luckily it was at Caen Wood.

We spent a good deal of time in the library,  and saw
first editions of almost all Queen Anne’s Classics ; and
lists of subscribers to Pope’s  ‘ Iliad,’  and many such
matters,  all enlivening to some corner or other x)f the
memory.

We then drove through Lord Southampton’s park,
and some other beautiful grounds in the neighbourhood.

We spent the rest of the day quite free from inter-
ruption, and sociably,  rationally,  and  ])lcasantly.  Mrs.
Crewe obligingly promised us the loan,  for reading,  of
a novel begun by her mother,  jNIrs.  Grcvilic,  and left
in her hands unfinished.

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

323

The next day Mrs.  Crewe brought us to her house
in town,  where we made regulations for seeing sights
some day in the next week,  and then finished our very
agreeable visit.

Mrs.  Crewe sent us the little novel the next day.  It
is merely a fragment,  but has much spirit,  knowledge
of human nature,  and gaiety of idea in most of its
parts.  As a whole we cannot judge it,  but I think
it would not have gone on improving,  as the latter
part begins already to seem spun  ; yet this latter con-
tains a story highly pathetic,  and which no one could
well read without tears.  There is much merit and
much entertainment,  and here and there are masterly
strokes  : but Mrs.  Greville,  like Mrs.  Thrale,  seems
to me rather adapted for shining in episodes and
detached pieces than in any regular and long work.
And I believe this owing to writing on as things arise,
without any arranged plan to pursue and bring to
bear.

June 27th. — My father took me again to Mrs.
Crewe in Grosvenor-street.  I had infinite pleasure in
giving warm praise to the little novel,  and discrimi-
nating the parts and passages which seem most worthy
admiration.  I saw the really fond daughter in her
look of listening ; and when we were broken in upon
by the entrance of Mr.  Pelham,  she just named him
and me to one another,  and then said,  ‘"You must ex-
cuse me,  Mr.  Pelham, — but 1 am upon a subject I can-
not drop. — ^You think,  then — such a character, — such
a passage” — &c.  &c.  And then she finished with
“ O dear  ! what would one give,  you would go on
with it ! ”

She spoke this with an eagerness which seldom breaks
out,  but which heightened her beauty indescribably.

Y 2

324

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

Mr.  Pelham smiled his approbation of the idea,  and
internally smiled also,  I doubt not,  at sight of my phiz,
for certainly I did at his ! He is another of the
managers  ! And we have seen one another so very
often without speech,  introduction,  or even knowledge
of each other’s names,  that the meetinof,  like that I had
with Mr.  Elliot,  had something in it almost comic, — our
faces were so familiar,  and our voices so strange to
each other.

We now set out for Long Acre,  to see Lord Macart-
ney’s chariots for the Emperor of China.  Mrs.  Crewe
is particularly interested in all that belongs to this
embassy,  both because her son will acconi])any it,  and
because Lord Macartney is her intimate friend,  as well
as near relation.  I leave to the newspapers your de-
scription of these superb carriages.

^^’e next proceeded to the Shakspeare Gallery,  which
I had never seen.  And here we met with an adven-
ture that finished our morning’s excursions.

There was a lady in the first room,  dressed rather
singularly,  quite alone,  and extremely handsome,  who
was  -[larading about with a nosegay in her hand,  which
she frequently held to her nose,  in a manner that was
evidently calculated to attract notice.  M’e therefore
passed on to the inner room,  to avoid her.  Here we
had but just all taken our stand opposite different
pictures,  when she also entered,  and,  coming jiretty
close to my father,  sniffed at her flowers with a sort of
cxtatic eagerness,  and then let them fall.  ^ly father
picked them up,  and gravely presented them to her.
She curtsied to the ground in receiving them,  and pre-
sently crossed over tlie room,  and,  brushing past Mrs.
Crewe,  seated herself immediately by her elbow.  Mrs.
Crewe,  not admiring this familiarity,  moved away,

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

325

17921

giving her at the same time a look of dignified dis-
tance that was almost petrifying.

It did not prove so to this lady,  Avho presently fol-
lowed her to the next picture,  and,  sitting as close as
she could to where Mrs.  Crewe stood,  began singing
various quick passages,  without words or connexion.

I I saw Mrs.  Crewe much alarmed,  and advanced to
i stand by her,  meaning to whisper her that we had
i better leave the room ; and this idea was not checked
j by seeing that the flowers were artificial.

By the looks we interchanged we soon mutually said.
This is a mad woman.”  We feared irritating her by a

sudden flight,  but gently retreated,  and soon got
quietly into the large room  ; when she bounced up
with a great noise,  and,  throwing the veil of her bon-
net violently back,  as if fighting it,  she looked after us,
pointing at Mrs.  Crewe.

Seriously frightened,  Mrs.  Crewe seized my father’s
arm,  and hurried up two or three steps into a small
apartment.  Here Mrs.  Crewe,  addressing herself to
an elderly gentleman,  asked if he could inform the
people below that a mad woman was terrifying tne
company  ■,  and while he w'as receiving her commission
with the most profound respect,  and with an evident
air of admiring astonishment at her beauty,  we heard
a rustling,  and,  looking round,  saw the same figure
hastily striding after us,  and in an instant at our elbows.

Mrs.  Crewe turned quite pale  ; it was pal[)able she
was the object pursued,  and she most civilly and meekly
articulated,  “ I beg your pardon,  ma’am,”  as she hastily
passed her,  and hurried down the steps.

We were going to run for our lives,  when Miss Towns-
hend whispered  ?vlrs.  Crewe it was only  !Mrs.  vNells the
actress,  and said she was certainly only performing

326 DAIRY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

vagaries to try effect,  which she was quite famous for
doing.

It would have been food for a painter to have seen
Mrs.  Crewe during this explanation.  All her terror
instantly gave way to indignation ; and scarcely any
pencil could equal the high vivid glow of her cheeks.
To find herself made the object of game to the bur-
lesque humour of a bold player,  was an indignity she
could not brook,  and her mind was immediately at
work how to assist herself against such unprovoked
and unauthorized effrontery.

The elderly gentleman who,  with great eagerness,
had followed Mrs.  Crewe,  accompanied by a young
man who was of liis party,  requested more particularly
her commands ; but before Mrs.  Crewe’s astonishment
and resentment found words,  Mrs.  Wells,  singing,  and
throwing lierself into extravagant attitudes,  again
rushed down the steps,  and fixed Jier eyes on Mrs.
Crewe.

This,  however,  no longer served her purpose.  ^Irs.
Crewe fixed lier in return,  and with a firm,  composed,
commanding air and look that,  though it did not make
this strange creature retreat,  somewhat disconcerted
her for a few minutes.

She then presently affected a violent coughing — such
a one as almost shook the room  ; though such a forced
and unnatural noise as rather resembled howling than
a cold.

This over,  and perceiving Mrs.  Crewe still steadily
keeping her ground,  she had the courage to come up
to us,  and,  with a flippant air,  said to the elderly
gentleman,  “ Pray,  sir,  will you tell me what it is
o’clock  ?”

He looked vexed to be called a moment from looking

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

327

1792]

at  ]\Irs.  Crewe,  and,  with a forbidding gravity,  an-
swered her — “ About two.”

No offence,  I hope,  sir cried she,  seeing him turn

eagerly from her.

He bowed without looking at her,  and she strutted
away,  still,  howev^er,  keeping in sight,  and placing
various tricks,  her eyes perpetually turned towards
Mrs.  Crewe,  who as regularly met them,  with an
expression such as might have turned a softer culprit
to stone.

Our cabal w'as again renewed,  and Mrs.  Cre^Ye again
told this gentleman to make know n to the proprietors
of the gallery that this person was a nuisance to the
company,  when,  suddenly re-approaching us,  she called
out,  Sir  ! sir  ! ” to the younger of our new protectors.

He coloured,  and looked much alarmed,  but only
bowed.

Pray,  sir,”  cried she,  “what’s o’clock  ?”

He looked at his watch,  and answered.

“ You don’t take it ill,  I hope,  sir?”  she cried.

He only bowed.

“ I do no harm,  sir,”  said she;  “ I never bite !”

The poor young man looked aghast,  and bowled
low er ; but j\Irs.  Crewe,  addressing herself to the elder,
said aloud,  “ I beg you,  sir,  to go to Mr.  Boydell , you
may name me to him — Mrs.  Crew'e.’

Mrs.  Wells at this walked away,  yet still in sight.

You may tell him what has happened,  sir,  in all
our names.  You may tell him INliss Burney

“ O no  !”  cried I,  in a horrid fright,  “ I beseech I
may not be named  ! And,  indeed,  ma’am,  it may be
better to let it all alone.  It will do no good ; and it
may all get into the newspapers.”

“ And if it does,”  cried Mrs.  Ciwe,  “what is it to

328

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VII.

us  ? We have done nothing ; we have given no offence,
and made no disturbance.  This person has frightened
us all wilfully,  and utterly without provocation ; and now
she can frighten us no longer,  she would brave us.
Let her tell her own story,  and how will it harm us  ?”

“ Still,”  cried I,  “ I must always fear being brought
into any newspaper cabals.  Let the fact be ever so
much against her,  she will think the circumstances all
to her honour if a paragraph comes out beginning
‘Mrs.  Crewe and Mrs.  Wells.’”

Mrs.  Crewe liked this sound as little as I should
have liked it in placing my own name where I put hers.
She hesitated a little what to do,  and we all walked
down-stairs,  where instantly this bold woman followed
us,  paraded up and down the long shop with a dramatic
air while our group was in conference,  and then,  sitting
down at the clerk's desk,  and calling in a footman,  she
desired him to wait while she wrote a note.

She scribbled a feiv lines,  and read aloud her direc-
tion, “To Mr.  To])ham;”  and giving the note to the
man,  said,  “ Tell your master that is something to make
him laugh.  Bid him not send to the press till I see
him.”

Now as Mr.  Topham is the editor of  ‘The  "World,’
and notoriously her protector,  as her having his foot-
man acknowledged,  this looked rather serious,  and
Mrs.  Crewe began to partake of my alarm.  She
therefore,  to my infinite satisfaction,  told her new
friend that she desired he would name no names,  but
merely mention that some ladies had been frightened.

I was very glad indeed to gain this point,  and the
good gentleman seemed enchanted with any change
that occasioned a longer discourse.

We then got into iMrs.  Crewe’s carriage,  and not till

3_9

1792]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

then would this facetious Mrs.  Mells quit the shop.
And she walked in sight,  dodging us,  and playing
antics of a tragic sort of gesture,  till we drove out of
her power to keep up with us.  What a strange

creature !

Mr.  Arthur Young to Miss Burney.

Bradfield Farm,  June 18th,  1792.

What a plaguy business  ’tis to take up one s pen to
write to a person who is constantly moving in a vortex
of pleasure,  brilliancy,  and wit,— whose movements
and connections are,  as it were,  in another world
One knows not how to manage the matter with such
folks,  till you find by a little approximation and fric-
tion of tempers and things that they are mortal,  and
no more than good sort of people in the mam,  only
garnished with something we do not possess ourselves.

Kow,  then,  the consequence—

Only three pages to write,  and one lost in introduc-
tion ! To the matter at last.

It seemeth that you make a journey to Norfolk.
Now do ye see,  if you do not give a call on the farmer,
and examine his ram  (an old acquaintance),  his bull,
his lambs,  calves,  and crops,  he will say but one thing
of you— that you are fit for a court,  but not for a farm  ;
and there is more happiness to be found among my
rooks than in the midst of all the princes and prin-
cesses of Golconda.  I would give an hundred pound
to see you married to a farmer that never saw
with plenty of poultry ranging in a few green fitd s,
and flowers and shrubs disposed where they should be,
around a cottage,  and not around a breakfast-room in
Portman-square,  fading in eyes that know not to
admire them.  In honest truth now,  let me request

330

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIL

your company here.  It will give us all infinite pleasure.
You are habituated to admiration,  but you shall have
here what is much better — the friendship of those who
loved you long before the world admired you.  Come,
and make old friends happy.  »

A.  Young.

Mr.  Jacob Bryant to Miss Burney.

Cypenham,  June 28th,  1792.

My dear ISIadam, — Any intimation from you will
have a great weight with me,  as well as from your
brother,  whose extensive learning I well know,  and for
whom I have all due regard.  Mr.  Person’s case has
been agitated among some persons in these parts who
are acquainted with his literary merit,  and wish well
to him on that account ; and it shall be my endeavour
to promote his interest whenever I see any opportunity.
When Sir George Baker made his collection for the
benefit of Mr.  P.,  I always threw in my mite,  and
always wished to have him more effectually benefited.
You may therefore depend upon my acceding to the
general subscription of 10/.,  and,  if I have any chance
interest,  employing it in his favour.

I am going to publish at large the little treatise
which you were so very good as to accept.  This has
been determined upon in consequence of many solicita-
tions and of letters from persons of rank ; who,  how-
ever, I little thought would have been interested
about religion.  As there are some few variations in
the new impression,  I shall beg of you to let me have
the present copy returned,  and another more correct
shall be sent for your kind acceptance,  and one also
for the acceptance of your brother.  I print seven hun-
dred and fifty copies,  and the whole profit of the im-

1792]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

pression I purpose to present to the Society for the
Propacration of the Gospel-some few copies excepted,
which I shall give away to my select fiends.  As the
whole is designed for a charity,  I should be glad to
have those select friends,  and all my friends,  promote
the sale as far as their influence can prevail.

The times are alarming,  but I hope God will please
to preserve his Church,  and maintain for us our exceb
lent constitution.  One great article of assurance is
the general love of the King ; for there are those who
abound with wickedness and slander,  yet the ge^^a
turn of the nation is to affection and loyalty.  May
Heaven long preserve those excellent personages whom
you love and I love,  and for whose happiness 1 shall

ev^er be solicitous.  I am.

My dear Madam,

Your most affectionate friend and servant.

I beo-an,  oi-  rather returned,  a new visiting acquaint-
ance in Lady Hesketh,  whom I have long and often
met at other houses.  She is a well-informed well-
bred,  sensible woman  ; somewhat too precise and stilt,
but otherwise agreeable.

Charles,  our new doctor,  has set on foot a subscrip-
tion which gives me great pleasure.  It is for his veiy
learned friend Mr.  Person,  a man of the first-rate
erudition,  he tells me,  in Europe.  His promising
talents drew him in childhood from obscurity,  and he
received a learned education by a liberal contribution
of learned men,  under the patronage of Sir George
Baker.  Since this,  sundry circumstances,  too long for
paper,  have occasioned his being suddenly le t at
large without a guinea!  This subscription is in-

332

DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.

[Part VII.

tended to amount to about 1400/.,  which is to be laid
out in an annuity for his life.  It is not designed as
his whole support,  for his talents will be still his for-
tune ; but to enable him to exercise them liberally,
and not to write for daily bread.  Mr.  Kaines,  master
of the Charter House,  Charles’s late competitor,  and
two others whom I forget,  are joint agents and col-
lectors with Charles in this very laudable business.  It
has been undertaken,  and is still conducted,  unknown
to Mr,  Poison.

The four agents each subscribed 50/.,  for they
are all close and intimate and attached friends to
Mr.  Porson.  ]\Ir.  AVindham has given Charles 25/.
towards it from himself,  and the same sum from Lord
Spencer.  I have myself had the pleasure to procure
10/.  from my good Mr.  Bryant.  The subscription is
now nearly completed.  They have been as successful
as active,  and applied only to the rich and learned —
that is,  those who can spare the money,  and appreciate
its destination.

PART YIIl.

1792.

CONTENTS.

Diary continued — Mrs.  Matthew Montagu — Miss Knight’s  ‘ Dinar-
bas’ — Recall of the English Ambassador from France — Corre-
spondence— Miss Burney to Mrs. — Miss Palmer and Lord

Inchiquin — Jacob Bryant to Miss Burney — Mrs.  Phillips to
Miss Burney — Arrival of French Emigrant Noblesse — Miss
Burney to Dr.  Burney — The Reign of Terror — A Meeting with
Old Friends— The Due de Liancourt — Early Incident of the
French Revolution — Anecdotes of the Due de Liancourt — His
Perils and Escape from France — The Due de la Rochefoucault
— Madame de Genlis — Her singular Establishment at Bury St.
Edmund’s — The Duke of Orleans  — A Day with the Due
de Liancourt — His Character of French Literary Ladies —
The Duke of Beaufort — Jacob Bryant to Miss Burney — Mrs.
Phillips to Miss Burney,  describing the French Colony at
IMickleham  — The Due de Montmoreney  — Marquise de la
Chatre  — Count de Narbonne  — Chevalier d’Arblay — His
Anecdotes of Lafayette — M.  de Jancourt and the National
Assembly — Madame de Staid  — Her Conduct during the
Reign of 'Terror — M.  Girardin d’Ermenonville — Merlin — Con-
dorcet — M.  Sicard — A Day with the Emigres — A Romance
of Real Life — Treatment of Lafayette in Prison — Miss Bur-
ney to Mrs.  Phillips  — MM.  Malouet and de Chauvelin —
Holkham — Mrs.  Coke — Mrs.  Phillips to Miss Burney — Move-
ment of the Emigres — M.  Talleyrand — Progress of the Revo-
lution—M.  de la Chatre — His Adventures and Escapes — The
Royalist Army — Miss Burney to Mrs.  Lock — Precarious State
of England — Conduct of Fox and Grey — Reformers Fifty Years
ago— Trial of Louis XVI. — Duelling among the Emigres.

334

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

PART VIII.

1792.

July. — I have kept no memorandums of this month,
which I spent chiefly with our dear Etty,  inTitchfield-
street.  Its history,  though both pleasant and inte-
resting, is not for paper,  and therefore I now glide
past it.

One whole day I spent in it with Mrs.  Matthew
^lontagu,  alone,  except for her tine five babies,  the
eldest not quite five years of age  ! It was a domestic
and pleasant day,  and confirmed my good opinion and
regard for this amiable and very cultivated woman.
iSIy old friend,  her husband,  was gone to the north,  to
forward addresses to our dear King,  upon his pro-
clamation.

Dr.  Shepherd explained to me the motive of my
receiving from Miss Knight her  ^ Marcus Flaminius;’
it was in consequence of her hearing that I had recom-
mended the perusal of her  ‘ Dinarbas  ’ to the Prin-
cesses. ‘Dinarbas’  is dedicated to the Queen,  who
had put it into my hands before she had read it,  for
some account of its merits.  I am sure their Royal
Highnesses could read nothing more chastely fitted
for them.

^ *

Our ambassador is recalled from France ; Russia
has declared war against that wretched kingdom.  But
it may defy all outward enemies to prove in any

1792]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

degree destructive in comparison with its lawless and
barbarous inmates.  AVe shall soon have no authentic
accounts from Paris,  as no English are expected to
remain after the Ambassador,  and no French will dare
to write,  in such times of pillage,  what may carry them
a la lanterned

Miss Burney to Mrs.  — — .

Chelsea College,  July 5th,  1792.

I MUST rejoice to see such long letters from my

dearest M , so much in her old and early style of

openness and communication,  little as I can rejoice to
think of her so distant,  or to see her sympathy in that
point.  However,  though we must take the world as it
is,  filled with contrarieties,  pain balancing pleasure,
and evil hovering over good,  we must not,  we need
not,  I trust,  resist the consolations of kindness for dis-
turbances which we owe neither to misconduct nor to
folly.  Amongst these stands separation from friends  ;
and though such indulgence of sorrow as lessens our
exertions in the duties of life is blamable and selfish,
there can surely be neither crime nor reproach in mo-
derate regret,  even though it should be constant.
Certainly those who in early life have formed no
friendships that cling to their growing,  and wear un-
wasted to their later years,  can be ill deserving to
excite regard in others  ; for the heart that can be shut
up in the first youth must be wanting in all gifts of
social participation for every period of existence.  I
must therefore,  without impeachment of contentment
or of conscience,  continue to lament,  and to hear
lamented,  the distance which situation places between

us.

336

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

I am much better again in health,  my dear friend.
I rejoice your little ones are well.  Do you get at all
stouter yourself  ? Do you drink goat’s milk  ? Does
your place improve in beauty about you  ? Who are
your twelve visiting houses  ? Whether you like them
or not,  give me some idea by whom you are sur-
rounded.

Madame de Gcnlis,  now Madame Brulard,  is in
England,  but I have not seen her.  She seemed to
me,  when here last,  one of the most fascinating and
well-informed of women  ; but such tales arc now circu-
lated to her disadvantage that I am not ambitious of her
notice,  and therefore 1 rejoice she has not renewed our
acquaintance.  Yet,  till of late,  I was disposed both to
love and reverence her  ; and even now,  her works arc
all so highly framed to do her honour,  that,  should I
meet with any one friend who would vindicate her,  I
feel ready to disbelieve,  in her fiivour,  a thousand foes.
^ our ideas and anticipations may be just,  but they
may,  also,  do her wrong;  I would not,  therefore,  take
from her the power of showing a firmer mind in mere
expectation of a weaker.

Adieu,  my ever dear friend — Heaven bless you  !

F.  B.

* * ♦ -s-

Miss Palmer married Lord Inchiquin,  and I wrote
her my good wishes,  which she answered by return of
post,  with an affectionate invitation to introduce me to
lier lord,  and a warm avowal of her happiness.  I
lieartily hope it may be permanent.

1 spared a few minutes — not more — to meet iSIrs.
Chaponc at Mrs.  Ord's one evening,  and to meet

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

337

1792]

Mr.  Smelt and Mrs.  Cholmley another.  The two
latter I know not when I may hope to see again , they
are now gone to settle in the north,  and have relin-
quished entirely their beautiful little house at Kew.  I
am v^ery sorry.  ]\Irs.  Chapone,  who seems unalteiable,
I may yet hope to meet often.

Mr.  Jacob Bryant to Miss Burney.

Cvpenhani,  near  \\  iiidsor,  August 7th,  1792.

Dear Madam, — When I come to town,  which will be
probably soon,  it shall be my first business to wait on
you,  and to beg your acceptance of a copy from the
new impression of my Treatise  “ On the Truth of the
Christian lleligion and if I should have the mis-
fortune, a third time,  not to meet with you,  still this
mark of my true esteem shall be left,  and will meet,

I hope,  with a favourable reception.

I am purchasing a house in town — which news,  how-
ever private and limited,  had not escaped the know-
ledge of some whose wonderful comprehension and
memory scarcely anything within their veige,  however
minute,  escapes.  I was,  with great condescension and
much easy wit,  rallied,  as having certainly views of
hymeneal connections ; or,  in the more common phiase-
oloc^v of the world,  as being determined to alter ray
condition.  That I entertain some prospect of an
alteration is certain;  but it is such a change as must
be expected by a person at my very advanced term of
life.

I told you that the pretty dog Hector,  which I pre-
sented to a most lovely little Princess,  is dead,  and I
a,m commanded to procure another,  as the misfortune
is said to have been attended with many tears and a
great regret.  A.  lady of quality has offered me a

z

VOL.  V.

338

DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

female for this purpose,  whose name is Flirt.  Will it
not be a degradation,  after such an heroic title,  to offer
an animal of so mean and vulgar an appellation,  far
inferior to Miss,  and barely equivalent to Coquet and
Gipsy?  I have no book,  either ancient or modern,
to which I can apply for information.  You may pos-
sibly ease my doubts by saying,  Change the name,  if a
change be requisite,  and for Flirt read Flora,  and
then all will be well.

This inquiry may perhaps be of as much importance
as many that ha\’e been agitated,  such as these —
whether the sea be free to all,  or shut  ? whether men
originally are equal or unequal  ? whether war be
natural or unnatural  ? add to these,  the disputes about
the rights of men,  to which I subjoin — the rights of
fools.  The last of these has not been sufficiently
considered,  and a very large body of respectable per-
sons, including idiots,  naturals,  simpletons,  change-
lings, &c.,  have been passed over with too little notice.
You will perhaps think me prejudiced in favour of a
society to which I may possibly be in some degree
allied,  and bring this rhapsody in full proof of your
opinion.

I am,  my dear Madam,

Your most sincere and

affectionate humble servant,

Jacob Bryant.

Monday,  Sertember 24th. — We set out for Hal-
stead, in Essex, — our Etty,  her lovely hlarianne,  and
I ; and there we were most affectionately welcomed by
Mrs.  Hawkins,  and by il caro s'poso.  Sophia skipped
with joy,  and Cecilia was all smiles,  grace,  and enchant-
ment.

1 1792]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  339

I

i Our time was almost all corroded by the general
! alarm for the political safety of all manner of people ;
the successes of the fiends of France filled us with
incessant horror,  and the necessity of guarding against
i the contagion of plunder and equality,  amongst the
I poor and the wicked,  or the duped and the dupers,
occupied us perpetually.

Mrs.  Phillips to Miss Burney.

Mictleham,  September,  1792.

We shall shortly,  I believe,  have a little colony of
unfortunate  (or rather,  fortunate,  since here they are
safe)  French noblesse in our neighbourhood.  Sunday
evening Ravely informed Mr.  Lock that two or three
families had joined to take Jenkinson’s house.  Juniper
Hall,  and that another family had taken a small
house at Westhumble,  which the people very reluc-
tantly let,  upon the Christian-like supposition that,
being nothing but French papishes,  they would never
pay.  Our dear Mr.  Lock,  while this  \vas agitating,
sent word to the landlord that he wmuld be answerable
for the rent;  however,  before this message arrived,
the family were admitted.  The man said they had
pleaded very hard indeed,  and said,  if he did but know
the distress they had been in,  he would not hesitate.

This house is taken by Madame de Broglie,  daughter
of the Mareschal,  who is in the army with the French
Princes ; or,  rather,  ^Yife to his son,  Victor Broglie,
till very lately General of one of the French armies,
and at present disgraced,  and fled nobody knows
w'here.  This poor lady came over in an open boat,
with a son younger than my Norbury,  and was fourteen
hours at sea.  She has other ladies with her,  and gen-
tlemen, and two little girls,  who had been sent to

z 2

340

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

England some weeks ago ; they are all to lodge in a
sort of cottage,  containing only a kitchen and parlour
on the ground floor.

I long to offer them my house,  and have been much
gratified by finding Mr.  Lock immediately determined
to visit them  ; his taking this step will secure them
the civilities,  at least,  of the other neighbours.

At Jenkinson’s are  — la Marquise de la Chiitre,
whose husband is with the emigrants;  her son  ; 1\I.  de
Narbonne,  lately Ministre de la Guerre ; M.  de
Montmorency;  Charles or Theodore Lameth ; Jau-
court ; and one or two more,  whose names I have for-
gotten, are either arrived to-day,  or expected,  I feel
infinitely interested for all these persecuted persons.
Pray tell me whatever you hear of 1\I.  de Liancourt,
&c.  Heaven bless you  !

Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney.

Halstead,  October 2nd,  '92.

M Y DEARKST Padre, — I havejust got your direction,
in a letter from my mother,  and an account that you
seem to be in health and spirits ; so now I think it
liigh time to let you know a little about some of your
daughters,  lest you should forget you have any such
incumbrances.

In the first place,  two of them,  Esther and F,  B.,
had a safe and commodious journey hither,  in the
midst of flattering showers and cloudy skies,  making
up as well as they could for the deficiencies of the
elements by the dulcet recreation of the concord of
sweet sounds  ; not from tabrets and harps,  but from
the harmony of liearts with tongues.

In the second place,  a third of them,  Charlotte F.,
writes word her caro sposo has continued very tolerably

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

341

1792]

well this last fortnight,  and that she still desires to
receive my visit according to the first appointment.

In the third place,  a fourth of them,  Sarah,  is living
upon French politics and  ^Yith French fugitives,  at
Bradfield,  where she seems perfectly satisfied with
foreign forage.

In the fourth place,  Susanna,  another of them,  sends
cheering histories of herself and her tribe,  though she
conclud'es them with a sighing ejaculation of  “I wish I
did not know there was such a country as hiance .

So much for your daughters.

Mr.  Hawkins's house is pleasantly situated,  and all
that belongs to its mistress is nearly perfect.  Even
its master is more to my gusto than 1 have ever known
him before,  for he is engaged in writing notes for
answers to Paine,  xMackintosh,  House,  Priestley,  Price,
and a score more of Mr.  Burke’s incendiary antago-
nists. I wish to spirit him on to collect them into a
pamphlet and give them to the public,  but he is
doubtful if it would not involve him in some heavy
expense.  I rather think the contrary,  for he has
really written well,  and with an animation that his
style of conversation had not made me expect.  It is
impossible to be under the roof of an English clergy-
man, and to witness his powers of making leisure
useful,  elegant,  and happy,  without continual internal
reference to the miserable contrast of the unhappy
clergy of France.

To-day’s papers teem with the promise of great and
decisive victories to the arms of the Duke of Bruns-
wick. 1 tremble for the dastardly revenge menaced to
the most injured King of Franco and his famil}.  I
dare hardly wish the advance and success of the com-
bined armies,  in the terror of such consequences.

342

DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRtVIII.

Yet the fate and future tranquillity of all Europe
seem inevitably involved in the prosperity or the
failure of this expedition.  The depression or encou-
ragement it must give to political adventurers,  who,  at
all times,  can stimulate the rabble to what they please,
will surely spread far,  deep,  and wide,  according to
the event of French experiment upon the minds,  man-
ners, and powers of men;  and the feasibility of
expunging all past experience,  for the purpose of
treating the world as if it were created yesterday,  and
every man,  woman,  and child w'ere let loose to act from
their immediate susfg'estion,  without reference to what
is past,  or sympathy in anything that is present,  or
precaution for wdiatever is to come.  It seems,  in
truth, ' no longer the cause of nations alone,  but of
individuals;  not a dispute for a form of government,
but for a condition of safety.

^ :ic  * * ^

Ever and ever most dutifully and
affectionately,  your

F.  B.

Friday,  October 5th. — I left Halstead,  and set off,
alone,  for Bradfield Hall,  which was but one stage of
nineteen miles distant.

Sarah,  wdio w'as staying wdth her aunt,  Mrs.  Young,
expected me,  and came running out before thechaise
stopped at the door,  and  ]\Ir.  Young following,  with
both hands fidl of French newspapers.  He welcomed
me with all his old spirit and impetuosity,  exclaiming
his house never had been so honoured since its founda-
tion, nor ever could be again,  unless I re-visited it in
my way back,  even though all England came in the
mean time  !

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

343

1792]

Do you not know him well,  my Susan,  by this open-
ing rhodomontade  ?

! “But where,”  cried he,  “ is Hetty  ? ' O that Hetty  !
j Why did you not bring her with you  ? That wonder-
ful creature  ! I have half a mind to mount horse,  and
gallop to Halstead to claim her!  What is there
there to merit her  ? hat kind of animals have you
left her with?  Anything capable of understanding her?”

During this we mounted up-stairs,  into the dining-
room. Here all looked cold and comfortless,  and no
Mrs.  Young appeared.  I inquired for her,  and heard
that her youngest daughter.  Miss Patty,  had just had
a fall from her horse,  which had bruised her face,  and
occasioned much alarm.

The rest of the day we spoke only of French poli-
tics. ]Mr.  Young is a severe penitent of his democratic
principles,  and has lost even all pity for the Co7istituant
Rh'olutionnairex,  who had  “ taken him in by their
doctrines,  but cured him by their practice,  and who
“ ought better to have known what they were about
before they presumed to enter into action.

Even the Due de Liancourt,  who was then in a small
house at Bury,  merited,  he said,  all the personal mis-
fortunes that had befallen him.  “I have real obliga-
tions to him,”  he added,  “ and therefore I am anxious
to show him any respect,  and do him any service,  in
his present reverse of fortune  ; but he has brought it
all on himself,  and,  what is worse,  on his country.

He wrote him,  however,  a note to invite him to
dinner the next day.  The Duke wrote an answer,  that
he lamented excessively being engaged to meet Lord
Euston,  and dine with the Bury aldermen.

I must now tell you the history of this poor Duke’s
arriving in England for it involves a revival of loyalty

344

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part YIII.

— an effort to make some amends to liis unhappy sove-
reign for the misery into which he had largely contri-
buted to plunge him — which,  with me,  has made his
peace tor ever.

But first I should tell,  he was the man who almost
compelled the every-way-deluded Louis to sanction the
National Assembly by his presence when first it re-
sisted his orders.  The Queen and all her  ])arty were
strongly against the measure,  and prophesied it would
be the ruin of his authority ; but the Duke,  highly am-
bitious of fame,  as Mr.  Young describes him,  and will-
ing to sacrifice everything to the new systems then
pervading all France,  suddenly rushed into his closet,
upon the privilege of being one of the five or seven Pairs
de France who have that licence,  and,  with a strong
and forcible eloquence,  declared nothing but his con-
cession would save the nation from a civil war ; while
his entering,  unarmed,  into the National Assembly,
would make him regarded for ever as the father and
saviour of his people,  and secure him the powerful
sovereignty of the grateful hearts of all his subjects.

He succeeded,  and the rest is public.

Certainly he can never recollect this incident,  with
whatever good or even noble sentiments he had been
wrought up to it,  without the severest pain.  What
might have been the event of an opposite conduct,  no
one can tell ; but it is difficult to figure to the most
terrible imagination anything so dreadful,  anything
indeed not better than what happened.  Mr.  Young is
persuaded that,  but for this manoeuvre of the Duke,  and
some similar acts of his first associates,  none of these
evils would have come to pass ; INI.  de Calonne’s con-
ciliatory articles would have been agreed to by the
King and the people,  and the government gradually

345

1 79’2]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

have been amended,  and blood and villany have
loohed another way.

This incident,  which I have here mentioned,  has set
all the Coblentz party utterly and for ever against the
Duke.  He had been some time in extreme anguish for
the unhappv King,  whose ill treatment on the 20th of
June,  1702,  reached him while commandant at Rouen.
He then first began to see that the Monarch or the
Jacobins must inevitably fall,  and he could scarce sup-
port the prospect of ultimate danger threatening the
former.  1 have since been told,  by a gentleman then
at Rouen,  that he was never surprised in his I’oom,  at
that period,  but he was found mordant his fist,  and in
action of desperation.  Ah  ! — well he might !

When the news reached him of the bloody 10th of
August,  a plan which for some time he had been form-
of iraininir over his regiment to the service of the
King,  was rendered abortive.  Tet all his officers ex-
cept one had promised to join in any enterprise for
their insulted master.  He had hoped to get the King
to Rouen under this protection,  as I gather,  though
this matter has never wholly transpired.  But the
King could not be persuaded to trust any one.  How
should he? — especially a Revolutionnaire ?

No time now was to be lost,  and,  in his first impe-
tuosity of rage and despair,  he instantly summoned his
officers and his troops ; and,  in the midst of them all,
upon the parade or place of assembling,  he took off his
bat,  and called out aloud  “Vive le Roi !”

His officers echoed the sound,  all but one! — yet not
a soldier joined.  Again he waved his hat,  and louder
and louder called out  “ Vive le Roi I”  And then every
soldier repeated it after him.

Enchanted with hope,  he felt one exulting moment.

346

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIIL

when this single dissentient officer called out aloud,  as
soon as the loyal cry w^as over,  As an officer of the
Nation I forbid this! — Vive la Nation!”

The Duke instantly had the man arrested,  and retired
to his apartment to compose his excess of agitation,
and consider how to turn this promise of loyalty to the
service of his now imprisoned King;  but,  in a short
time,  an officer strongly attached to him entered the
room hastily,  and cried,  “ Sanvez voiis,  M.  de Lian-
court! — be speedy — the Jacobin party of Eouen have
heard of your indiscretion,  and a price is this moment
set upon your head  !”

The Duke knew too well with whom he had to act,  for
a moment’s hesitation.  To serve the King was now
impossible,  as he had but to appear in order to be
massacred.  He could only save his own life by flight.

In what manner he effected his escape out of Rouen
he has never mentioned.  I believe he was assisted by
those who,  remaining behind,  could only be named to
be torn in pieces for their humanit}’.  The same French
gentleman whom I have just mentioned,  M.  Jamard,
a French priest,  tells me no human being knows when
or how he got away,  and none suspected him to be
gone for two days.  He went first to Abbeville;  there,
for two days,  he appeared everywhere,  walking about
in his regimentals,  and assuming an air of having
nothing to apprehend.  This succeeded,  as his indis-
cretion had not yet spread at Abbeville ; but,  mean-
while, a youth whom he had brought up from a child,
and on whose fond regard and respect he could rely,
was employed in seeking him the means of passing
over to England.  This was infinitely difficult,  as he
was to leave France without any passport.

How he quitted Abbeville 1 know not ; but he was

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

347

1792]

in another town,  near the coast,  three days,  still waiting
for a safe conveyance;  and here,  finding his danger
increased greatly hy delay,  he went to some common
house,  without dress or equipage or servants that could
hetray him,  and spent his whole time in hed,  under
pretence of indisposition,  to avoid being seen.

At length his faithful young groom succeeded  ; and
he got,  at midnight,  into a small boat,  with only two
men.  He had been taken for the King of France by
one,  who had refused to convey him ; and some friend,
who assisted his escape,  was forced to get him off,  at
last,  by liolding a pistol to the head of his conductor,
and protesting he would shoot him through and
through,  if he made further demur,  or spoke aloud.
It was dark,  and midnight.

Both he and his groom planted themselves in the
bottom of the boat,  and Avere covered with fagots,
lest any pursuit should ensue : and thus wretchedly
they Avere suffocated till they thought themselves at a
safe distance from France.  The poor youth then,  first
looking up,  exclaimed,  Ah ! nous sommes  !

they are carrying us back to our OAvn country  ! The

Duke started up;  he had the same opinion,  but thought
opposition  \*ain ; he charged him to keep silent and
quiet ; and after about another league,  they found this,
at least,  a false alarm,  OAving merely to a thick fog or
mist.

At length they landed — at Hastings,  I think.  The
boatman had his money,  and they Avalked on to the
nearest public-house.  The Duke,  to seem English,
called for  “ Pot Portere.^'  It Avas brought him,  and he
drank it off in tAA’o draughts,  his drought being ex-
treme ; and he called for another instantly.  That
also,  Avithout any suspicion or recollection of conse-

348

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

quences,  was as hastily swallowed ; and what ensued
he knows not.  He was intoxicated,  and fell into a
profound sleep.

His groom helped the people of the house to carry
him up-stairs and put him to bed.

How long he slept he knows not,  but he woke in the
middle of the night without the smallest consciousness
of where he was,  or what had happened.  France alone
was in his head — France and its horrors,  which no-
thing— not even English porter and intoxication and
sleep — could drive away.

He looked round the room with amaze at first,  and
soon after with consternation.  It was so unfurnished,
so miserable,  so lighted with only one small bit of a
candle,  that it occurred to him he was in a maison de
force — thither conveyed in his sleep.

The stillness of everything confirmed this dreadful
idea.  He arose,  slipped on his clothes,  and listened at,
the door.  He heard no sound.  He was scarce yet,  I
suppose,  quite awake,  for he took the candle,  and de-
termined to make an attempt to escape.

Down-stairs he crept,  neither hearing nor making
any noise ; and he found himself in a kitchen : he
looked round,  and the brightness of a shelf of pewter
plates struck his eye;  under them were pots and kettles
shining and polished,  Ah  /”  cried he to himself,
“ je suis en Angleterre!"  The recollection came all
at once at sight of a cleanliness which,  in these ar-
ticles, he says,  is never met with in France.

He did not escape too soon,  for his first cousin,  the
good Due de la Hochefoucault,  another of the first
llevolutionnaires,  was massacred the next month.  The
character he has ifiven of this murdered relation is the
most affecting,  in praise and virtues,  that can possibly

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

349

179-2]

be beard.  Sarah has heard l.im till she could not
keep the tears from her eyes.  They had been elh'es
together,  and loved each other as the tenderest
brothers.

You will all be as sorry as I was myself to hear that
every ill story of la Comtesse de Genlis was confirmed
by the Duke.  She was resident at Bury,  when he ar-
rived, with Mile.  Egalite,  Pamela,  Henrietta Circe,
and several others,  who appeared in various ways,  as
artists,  gentlemen,  domestics,  and equals,  on vaiious
occasions.  The history of their way of life is extra-
ordinary, and not very comprehensible;  probably
owing to the many necessary difficulties which the new
system of equality produces.

The Duke accuses  ^ladame Brulard of being a prin-
cipal instrument of Trench misery.  The Duke d’Or-
leans,  he says,  is indisputably the primary cause of the
long and dreadful anarchy of his country,  and Madame
Brulard had an influence which as indisputably carried
him on,  since it did not stop him.  The Duke adores
the Duchess of Orleans,  whom he describes as one of
the most amiable and exemplary of women;  and he
declares she has not a friend who forbears detesting
J^Iadame Brulard,  who is a woman of the first abilities,
but of inexhaustible intrigue and ambition.  The Due
d’Orleans he has had some personal pique with,  I be-
lieve, as he made no scruple to say that if ho met him
in London he should instantly cane him.  He calls him
a villain and a coward.

A lady of Bury,  a sister of Sir Thomas Gage,  had
been very much caught by Madame Brulard,  who had
almost lived at the house of Sir Thomas.  Upon the
arrival of the Duke he was invited to Sir Thomas

350

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

Gage’s immediately;  and Miss G , calling upon

Madame Brulard,  mentioned him,  and asked if she
knew him? — No,  she answered;  but she had seen him.
This was innocently repeated to the Duke,  who then,  in
a transport of rage,  broke out with  “ Elle m’a vu  ! and
is that all? — Does she forget that she has spoke to me?
that she has heard me too?”  And then he related
what I have Avritten,  and added,  that Avhen all w^as
Avearing the menacing aspect of anarchy,  before it broke
out,  and before he Avas ordered to his regiment at Eouen,
he had desired an audience of Madame Brulard,  for
the first time,  ha\nng been ahvays a friend of Madame
d’Orleans,  and consequently her enemy.  She Avas un-
Avilling to see him,  but he AAmuld not be refused.  He
then told her that France Avas upon the point of ruin,
and that the Due d’Orleans,  aa’Iio had been its destruc-
tion, and  “the disgrace of the Re\mlution,”  could alone
now prevent the impending haA'oe.  He charged her
therefore,  forcibly and peremptorily,  to take in charge
a change of measures,  and left her Avith an exhortation
Avhich he then flattered himself Avould haA’e some cliance
of averting the coming dangers.  But quickly after
she quitted France voluntarily,  and settled in England.
“ And can she have forgot all this  ?”  cried he.

I knoAV not if this Avas repeated to Madame de Bru-
lard ; but certain it is she quitted Bury Avith the utmost
expedition.  She did not CA-en Avait to pay her debts,
and left the poor Henrietta Circe behind,  as a sort of
hostage,  to prevent alarm.  The creditors,  howcA'er,
finding her actually gone,  entered the house,  and poor
Henrietta Avas terrified into hysterics.  Probably she
kneAv not but they Avere Jacobins,  or aa’ouU act upon
Jacobin principles.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

351

1792]

Madame Brulard then sent for her,  and remitted
money,  and proclaimed her intention of returning to
Suffolk no more.

The Duke is now actually in her house.  There was
no other vacant that suited him so well.

I am much interested in Susan’s account of poor
Madame de Broglie.  How terribly,  I fear,  all is pro-
ceeding in France!  I tremble at such apparent tii-
umph to such atrocious cruelty ; and though I doubt
not these wretches will destroy one another while com-
I bating for superiority,  they will not set about that
! crying retribution,  for which justice seems to sicken,

1 till they have first utterly annihilated all manner of
people,  better,  softer,  or more human than themselves.

I The Duke accepted the invitation for to-day,  and
I came early,  on horseback.  He had just been able to
I get over some two or three of his horses from France.

He has since,  I hear,  been forced to sell them.

I Mrs.  Young was not able to appear ; Mr.  Young
came to my room door to beg I would waste no time  ;
Sarah and I,  therefore,  proceeded to the drawing-

room.

The Duke was playing with a favourite dog— the
thing probably the most dear to him in England  ; for
it was just brought him over by his faithful groom,
whom he had sent back upon business to his son.

He is very tall,  and,  were his figure less,  would be
too fat,  but all is in proportion.  His face,  which is very
handsome,  though not critically so,  has rather a
haughty expression when left to itself,  but becomes
soft and spirited in turn,  according to whom he speaks,
and has great play and variety.  His deportment is
quite noble,  and in a style to announce conscious rank
even to the most sedulous equaliser.  His carriage is

352

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

peculiarly upright^  and his person uncommonly well
made.  His manners are such as only admit of com-
parison with what we have read,  not what we have
seen  ; for he has all the air of a man who would wish
to lord over men,  but to cast himself at the feet of
women.

He was in mourning for his barbarously murdered
cousin the Due de la Rochefoucault.  His first address
was of the highest style.  I shall not attempt to re-
collect his words,  but tliey were most elegantly ex-  j
pressive of his satisfaction in a meeting he had long,
he said,  desired.

With Sarah he then shook hands.  She had been his
interpretess here on his arrival,  and ho seems to have
conceived a real kindness for her  ; an honour of which
she is extremely sensible,  and with reason.

A little general talk ensued,  and he^ade a point of
curing Sarah of being afraid of his dog.  He made no
secret of thinking it affectation,  and never rested till
he had conquered it completely.  I saw here,  in the
midst of all that at first so powerfully struck me,  of
dignity,  importance,  and high-breeding,  a true French
jjolisson ; for he called the dog round her,  made it
jump on her shoulder,  and amused himself as,  in Eng-
land, only a schoolboy or a professed fox-hunter would
have dreamt of doing.

This,  however,  recovered me to a little ease,  which
liis compliment had rather overset.  Mr.  Young hung
back,  nearly quite silent.  Sarah was quiet when re-
conciled to the dog,  or,  rather,  subdued by the Duke  ;
and then,  when I thought it completely out of his head,
he tranquilly drew a chair next mine,  and began a sort
of separate conversation,  which he suffered nothing to
interrupt till we were summoned to dinner.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

353

1792]

Ilis subject was  ‘ Cecilia and he seemed not to
have the smallest idea I could object to discussing
it,  an}'  more than if it had been the work of another
person.

I answered all his demands and interrogatories with
a degree of openness I have never answered any other
upon this topic;  but the least hope of beguiling the
misery of an emigre tames me.

Mr.  Young listened with amaze,  and all his ears,  to
the many particulars and elucidations which the Duke
drew from me  ; he repeatedly called out he had heard
nothing of them before,  and rejoiced he was at least
present when they were communicated.

This proved,  at length,  an explanation to the Duke
Iiimself,  that,  the moment he understood,  made him
draw back,  saying,  “ Peut-etre que je suis indiscret?”
However,  he soon returned to the charge ; and w'hen
Mr.  Voung made any more exclamations,  he heeded
them not : he smiled,  indeed,  when Sarah also affirmed
he had procured accounts she had never heard before ;
but he has all the air of a man not new to any mark of
more than common favour.

At length we w’ere called to dinner,  during which he
spoke of general things.

The French of Mr.  Young,  at table,  was very comic  ;
he never hesitates for a word,  but puts English wher-
ever he is at a loss,  with a mock French pronunciation.
Monsieur Due,  as he calls him,  laughed once or twice,
but clapped him on the back,  called him un brave homme,
and gave him instruction as well as encouragement in
all his blunders.

M'hen the servants were gone,  the Duke asked me if
anybody might write a letter to the King  ? I fancy
he had some personal idea of this kind.  I told him

VOL.  V.  2 A

354

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

yes,  but through the hands of a Lord of the Bed-
chamber, or some state officer,  or a Minister.  He
seemed pensive,  but said no more.

He inquired,  however,  if I had not read to the
Queen ; and seemed to wish to understand my office  ;
but here he was far more circumspect than about
' Cecilia.’  He has lived so much in a Court,  that he
knew exactly how far he might inquire wdth the most
scrupulous punctilio.

I found,  however,  he had imbibed the Jacobin no-
tion that our beloved King was still disordered ; for,
after some talk upon his illness,  and very grave and
proper expressions concerning the affliction and terror
it produced in the kingdom,  he looked at me very
fixedly,  and,  with an arching brow,  said,  " Mais,^
jMademoiselle  — apres tout  — le Eoi  — est il bien
gueri  ? ”

I gave him such assurances as he could not doubt,
from their simplicity,  which resulted from their truth.

Mr.  Young would hardly let Sarah and me retreat ;
however,  we promised to meet soon to coffee.

I went away full of concern for his injuries,  and
fuller of amazement at the spirit with which he bore
them.

When at last we met in the drawing-room,  I found
the Duke all altered.  Mr.  Young had been forced away
by business,  and was but just returned,  and he had
therefore been left a few minutes by himself ; the effect
Avas visible,  and extremely touching.  Recollections
and sorrow had retaken possession of his mind;  and
his spirit,  his vivacity,  his power of rallying,  were all
at an end.  He was strolling about the room with an
air the most gloomy,  and a face that looked enveloped
in clouds of sadness and inoroseness.  There*  was a

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

355

1792]

jxerte almost even fierce in his air and look,  as,  wrapped
in himself,  he continued his walk.

I felt now an increasing compassion what must he
not suffer when he ceases to fight with his calamities 1
Not to disturb him we talked with one another,  but he
soon shook himself and joined us;  though he could
not bear to sit down,  or stand a moment in a place.

Sarah spoke of Madame Brulard,  and,  in a little
malice,  to draw him out,  said her sister knew her very

The Duke,  with eyes of fire at the sound,  came up to
me:  ‘^Comment,  Mademoiselle!  vous avez connu
cette coquine de Brulard?”  And then he asked me

what I had thought of her.

I frankly answered that I had thought her charm-
ing; gay,  intelligent,  well-bred,  well-informed,  and

amiable.

He instantly drew back,  as if sorry he had named
her so roughly,  and looked at Sally for thus surprising
him ; but I immediately continued that I could now no
longer think the same of her,  as I could no longer
este^’em her;  but I confessed my surprise had been in-
expressible at her duplicity.

He allowed that,  some years ago,  she might have a
better chance than now of captivation ; for the deeper
she had immersed in politics,  the more she had forfeited
of feminine attraction.  Ah 1 ” he cried,  “ with her
talents — her knowledge  — her parts — had she been
modest,  reserved,  gentle,  what a blessing might she
have proved to her country  ! but she is devoted to in-
trigue and cabal,  and proves its curse.

He then spoke with great asperity against all the
femmes de lettres now known;  he said they i^ere com-

356

DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

Rionly the most disgusting of their sex,  in France,  by
their arrogance,  boldness,  and mavtaises mceurs.

I inquired if Mr.  Young had shown him a letter
from the Duke of Grafton,  which he had let me read
in the morning.  It was to desire Mr.  Young would
acquaint him if the Due de Liancourt was still in
Bury,  and,  if so,  to wait upon him,  in the Duke of
Grafton’s name,  to solicit him to make Euston his
abode while in England,  and to tell him that he should
have his apartments wholly unmolested,  and his time
wholly unbroken ; that he was sensible,  in such a si-
tuation of mind,  he must covet much quiet and freedom
from interruption and impertinence  ; and he therefore
promised that,  if he would honour his house with his
residence,  it should be upon the same terms as if he
were in an hotel — that he would never know if he
were at home or abroad,  or even in town or in the
country  ; and he hoped the Due de Liancourt would
make no more scruple of accepting such an asylum and
retreat at his house than he would himself have done
of accepting a similar one from the Duke in France,  if
the misfortunes of his own country had driven him to
exile.

I was quite in love with the Duke of Grafton for this
kindness.  The Due de Liancourt bowed to my ques-
tion, and seemed much gratified with the invitation ;
but I see he cannot brook obligation ; he would rather
live in a garret,  and call it his own.

He told me,  however,  with an air of some little plea-
sure, that he had received just such another letter from
Lord Sheffield.  I believe both these noblemen had
been entertained at Liancourt some years ago.

I inquired after Madame la Duchesse,  and I had the

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

357

1792]

satisfaction to hear she was safe in Switzerland.  The
Duke told me she had purchased an estate there.

He inquired very particularly after your Juniper
colony,  and M.  de Narbonne,  but said he most wished
to meet with M.  d’Arblay,  who was a friend and fa-
vourite of his eldest son.

Mr.  Jacob Bryant to Aliss Burney.

November 1.5th,  1792.

D EAR Madam, — Your very kind letter afforded me
uncommon satisfaction,  for I had from your silence
formed an opinion that you were very ill ; and,  from
the length of your silence,  that this illness must
necessarily be of an alarming and dangerous nature.
It gives me great pleasure to find that my fears were
vain,  and that I shall be again favoured both with
your correspondence and rational conversation.

I have been,  till very lately,  in continual fears from
the w’ickedness and degeneracy of numbers in this
nation,  and from the treasonable purposes which they
liave dai*ed openly to avow ; but,  thanks to God,  these
sons of sedition are fewer than I imagined,  and their
influence and power not equal to their wishes.  The
sense of the nation is otherwise directed,  and the
])eople’s attachment to the best of kings is not to be
shaken.  His Majesty’s speech,  I think,  is very happily
calculated,  and cannot but please all those wdto are
well affected.

Y^ou are very good in speaking so favourably of my
little treatise;  and as I know that you are always
sincere,  it gives me much satisfaction.  It has cer-
tainly been 5vell received,  as appears by the quick sale,
though the town has been empty,  but more especially
from letters which I have received from some of the

358

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIIL

most eminent of the bishops and clergy,  and by accounts
from the two universities.

When I look upon our two sister kingdoms I see
a cloud which seems to be gathering,  but I trust in
Providence that it will dissolve and vanish,  and that
calm sunshine will be universally restored.  The out-
rageous behaviour and cruelties of the French must
surely awaken all Europe.  I should think that no
power would remain unconcerned.  From the most
early annals to this day we read of nothing similar to
the events which have disgraced these times.  But
these violences are too great to be lasting  ; this wicked-
ness cannot long endure ; and I believe many of our
nation have been shocked by these horrid extrava-
gances, and preserved from a similar corruption.  I
am,  with the truest esteem.

My dear Madam,

Your most affectionate

And obliged humble servant,

Jacob Bryant.

[It is hoped that some pages from  ]Mrs.  Phillips’s
journalizing letters to her sister,  written at this period,
may not be unacceptable ; since they give particulars
concerning several distinguished actors and sufferers in
the French Revolution,  and also contain the earliest
description of M.  d’Arblay.]

Mrs.  Phillips to Miss Burney.

Mickleham,  November,  1792.

It graiihes me very much that 1 have been able to
interest you for our amiable and charming neighbours.
iNIrs.  Lock had been so kind as to pave the way for

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

359

1792]

my introduction to Madame de la CliMre,  and carried
me on Friday to Juniper Hall,  wliere we found dc
IMontmorency,  a ci-devant due,  and one who gave some
of the first great examples of sacrificing personal
interest to what was then considered the public good.

I know not whether you will like him the better when
I tell you that from him proceeded the motion for the
abolition of titles in France  ; but if you do not,  let me,
in his excuse,  tell you he was scarcely one-and-twenty
when an enthusiastic spirit impelled him to this,  I
believe,  ill-judged and mischievous act.  My curiosity
was greatest to see M.  de Jaucourt,  because I remem-
bered many lively and spirited speeches made by him
during the time of the Assenihlee Legislative,  and that he
was a warm defender of my favourite hero,  M.  Lafayette.

Of M.  de Narbonne’s abilities we could have no
doubt from his speeches and letters whilst Ministre de
la Guerre,  which post he did not quit till last May.
By his own desire he then joined Lafayette s army,
and acted under him ; but,  on the 10th of August,  he
was involved,  with perhaps nearly all the most honour-
able and worthy of the French nobility,  accused as a
traitor by the Jacobins,  and obliged to fly from his
country.

hi.  d’Argenson was already returned to France,  and
hladame de Broglie had set out the same day,  Novem-
ber 2nd,  hoping to escape the decree against the
emigrants.

hladame de la Chatre received us with great polite-
ness. She is about thirty-three;  an elegant figure,
not pretty,  but with an animated and exjiressive coun-
tenance ; very well read,  plehie d esprit,  and,  I tliink,
very lively and charming.

\ crentleman was with her whom Mrs.  Liock had not

”*■  to

360

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII

yet seen,  M.  d’Arblay-  She introduced him,  and,  when
he had quitted the room,  told us he was adjutant-
general to M.  Lafayette,  mare dial de camp,  and in
short the first in military rank of those who had accom-
panied that general when he so unfortunately fell into
the hands of the Prussians ; hut,  not having been one
of the Assemblee Constituante,  he was allowed,  with
four others,  to proceed into Holland,  and there M.  de
Narbonne wrote to him.  “ Et comme il I’aime infini-
ment,”  said Madame de la Chatre,  “ il I’a prie de venir
vivre avec lui.”  He had arrived only two days before.
He is tall,  and a good figure,  with an open and manly
countenance  ; about fort}%  I imagine.

It was past twelve.  However,  Madame de la Chatre
owned she had not breakfasted — ces messieurs were not
yet ready.  A little man,  who looked very triste indeed,
in an old-fashioned suit of clothes,  with long flaps to
a waistcoat embroidered in silks no longer very brilliant,
sat in a corner of the room.  I could not imagine who
he was,  but when he spoke was immediately convinced
he was no P’renchman.  I afterwards heard he had
been engaged by M.  de Narbonne for a year,  to teach
him and all the party English.  He had had a place
in some college in France at the beginning of the
devolution,  but was now driven out and destitute.
His name is Clarke.  He speaks English with an
accent tant soil pen Scotch.

Madame do la Chatre,  with great franchise,  entered
into details of her situation and embarrassment,  whether
she might venture,  like Madame de Broglie,  to go over
to France,  in which case she was dans le cas o'u elle
pouvoit toucher sa fortune immediately.  She said she
could then settle in England,  and settle comfortably.
M.  de la Chatre,  it seems,  previous to his joining the

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

361

King’s brothers,  had settled upon her her whole for-
tune. She and all her family w’ere great favourers of
the original Revolution  ; and even at this moment she
declares herself unable to w-ish the restoration of the
old regime,  with its tyranny and corruptions — persecuted
and ruined as she and thousands more have been by
the unhappy consequences of the Revolution.

]\r.  de Narbonne now came in.  He seems forty,
rather fat,  but would be handsome were it not for a
slight cast of one eye.  He was this morning in great
spirits.  Poor man  ! It was the only time I have ever
seen him so.  He came up very courteously to me,
and begged leave de me faire sa cour at Mickleham,
to which I graciously assented.

Then came M.  de Jaucourt,  whom I instantly knew
by Mr.  Lock’s description.  He is far from handsome,
but has a very intelligent countenance,  line teeth,  and
expressive eyes.  I sca,rce heard a word from him,  but
liked his appearance exceedingly,  and not the less for
perceiving his respectful and alfectionate manner of
attending to Mr.  Lock  ; but when Mr.  Lock reminded
us that Madame de la Chatre had not breakfasted,
we took leave,  after spending an hour,  in a manner so
pleasant and so interesting that it scarcely appeared
ten minutes.

^V EDNESDAY,  NOVEMBER 7th. — Phillips was at work
in the parlour,  and I had just stepped into the next
room for some  ]>apers I wanted,  w'hen I heard a man’s
voice,  and presently distinguished these words  : “ Je
ne parle pas trop bien I’Anglois,  monsieur.”  I came
forth immediately to relieve Phillips,  and then found
it was M.  d’Arblay.

I received him de hien hon coeur,  as courteously as I
could.  The adjutant of M.  Lafayette,  and one of those

362

DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

who proved faithful to that excellent general,  could not
but be interesting to me.  I was extremely pleased at
his coming,  and more and more pleased with himself
every moment that passed.  He seems to me a true
militaire,  franc et loyal — open as the day — warmly affec-
tionate to his friends — intelligent,  ready,  and amusing
in conversation,  with a great share of gaiete cle coeur,
and,  at the same time,  of naivete and honne fol.  He
was no less flattering to little Fanny than M.  de Nar-
bonne had been.

We went up into the drawing-room with him,  and
met Willy on the stairs,  and Norbury capered before
us.  ‘‘Ah,  Madame!”  cried M.  d’Arblay,  “ la jolie petite
maison que vous avez,  et les jobs petits botes  !”  looking
at the children,  the drawings.  See.  See,  He took Nor-
bury on his lap and played with him.  I asked him if
he was not proud of being so kindly noticed by the
adjutant-general of M.  Lafayette  ? “ Est-ce qu’il sait

le nom de M.  Lafayette  ?”  said he,  smiling.  I said he
Avas our hero.  “ Ah  ! nous  \mila done bons amis 1 II
n’y a pas de plus braA^e homme sur la terre 1”  Et
comme on I’a traite  !”  cried I.  A little shrug and his
eyes cast up,  Avas the answer.  I said I was thankful
to see at least one of his faithful friends here.  I asked
if M.  Lafayette Avas alloAved to Avrite and receiA’e
letters.  He said yes,  but they Avere always given to
him open.

Norbury now  (still seated on his lap)  took courage
to Avhisper him,  “ Were you,  sir,  put in prison with M.
Lafayette  ?”  “ Oui,  mon ami.”  “ And — Avas it quite

dark  ?”  I Avas obliged,  laughing,  to translate this
curious question.  M.  d’Arblay laughed too:  “Non,

mon ami,”  said he,  “ on nous a mis d’abord dans unc
assez jolie chambre — e’etoit a Nivelle.”  “ Vous y etiez

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

363

17D2]

avcc M.  Lafayette,  monsieur?”  "‘Oui,  madame,  pour
quelfiucs jours,  et puis on nous a separes.  ’

1 lamented the hard fate of the former,  and the rapid
and wonderful revers he had met with alter having
I been,  as he Avell merited to be,  the most popular man
' in France.  3'his led jNI.  d Arblay to speak of iVI.  de
' Narbonne,  to whom I found him passionately attached.
L’pon my mentioning the sacrifices made by the French
nobility,  and by a great number of them voluntarily,
he said no one had made more than  ^I.  de Narbonne;
that,  previous to the Revolution,  he had more wealth
and more yiower than almost any except the Princes ot
the Blood.

For himself,  he mentioned his fortune and his income
from his appointments as something immense,  but I
never remember the number of hundred thousand
IRres,  nor can tell what their amount is without some
consideration.  “ Et me voila,  madame,  reduit a rien,
hormis un peu d'argent comptant,  et encore tres peu.
Je ne sais encore ce que Narbonne pourra retirer des
debris de sa fortune ; mais,  quoique ce soit,  nous le
partagerons ensemble.  Je ne m en fais pas le moindic
scrupule,  puisquenous n’avons eu qu unintei^tcommun,
et nous nous sommes toujours aimes comme freres.”

I wish I could paint to you the m-A.Vi\y franchise with
which these words were s])oken  ; but you will not find
it difficult to believe that they raised MM.  de Narbonne
and d’Arblay very high in my estimation.

The next day Madame de la Chatre was so kind as
to send me the French papers,  by her son,  who made a
silent visit of about five minutes.

Friday Morning. — I sent Norbury with the French
papers,  desiring him to give them to M.  d’Arblay.
He stayed a prodigious while,  and at last came back

364

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

attended by M.  de Narbonne,  M.  de Jaucourt,  and M.
d’Arblay.  M.  de Jaucourt is a delightful man — as
comic^  entertaining,  unaffected,  unpretending,  and
good-humoured as dear Mr.  Twining,  only younger,
and not quite so black.  He is a man likewise of first-
rate abilities — M.  de Narbonne says,  perhaps superior
to Vaublanc — and of very uncommon firmness and
integrity of character.

The account Mr.  Batt gave of the National Assembly
last summer agrees perfectly with that of M.  de Jau-
court, who had the misfortune to be one of the depu-
ties, and who,  upon some great occasion in support of
the King and Constitution,  found only twenty-four
members who had courage to support him,  though a
far more considerable number gave him secretly their
good wishes and prayers.  It was on this that he
regarded all hope of justice and order as lost,  and that
he gave in sa demission from the Assembly.  In a few
days he was seized,  and,  sans forme de  'proces,  having
lost his inviolability as a member,  thrown into the
prison of the Abbaye,  where,  had it not been for the very
extraordinary and admirable exertions of Madame de
Stael  (M.  Necker’s daughter,  and the Swedish ambas-
sador’s wife),  he would infallibly have been massacred.

I must here tell you that this lady,  who w'as at that
time seven months gone with child,  was indefatigable
in her efforts to save every one she knew from this
dreadful massacre.  She walked daily  (for carriages
were not allowed to pass in the streets)  to the Hotel
de Ville,  and was frequently shut up for five hours
together with the horrible wretches that composed the
Comite de Surveillance,  by whom these murders were
directed  ; and by her eloquence,  and the consideration
demanded by her rank and her talents,  she obtained

179*2]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

365

llie deliverance of abov*e twenty unfortunate prisoners,
some of whom she knew hut slightly.

M.  de Narbonne brought me two volumes of new*
‘ Contes Moraux,’  by Marmontel,  who is yet living:
they arc printed at Liege,  and in this year,  1792.  He
was in very depressed spirits,  I saw,  and entered into
some details of his late situation with great openness.
Though honoured by the Jacobins with the title of
traitor,  all his friends here concur in saying he has ever
been truly constitutionnaire,  that is,  of the same party
as Lafayette.  Last May il donna m demission of the
place of Minls'tre de la Guerre,  being annoyed in all
his proceedings by the Jacobins,  and prevented from
serving his country effectually by the instability of the
King,  for whom ho nevertheless y)rofesses a sincere
personal attachment.  “ Mais il ni’a ete impossible de
le servir — il I’a  ^te a tous scs meilleurs amis,  et par ses
vertus ct par ses defauts;  car — il le faut avouer — il ne
pouviiit se fier a lui-meme,  et il etait en consequence
defiant de tout le monde.”

Madame do la Chatre and IM.  de Jaucourt have
since told me that M.  de Narbonne and M.  d’Arblay
had been treated with singular ingratitude by the
King,  whom they nevertheless still loved as w’ell as for-
gave. They likewise say he wished to get rid of  ^1.
de Narbonne from the Ministry,  because he could not
trust liim with his projects of centre revolution.

M.  d’Arblay v;as the ofiicer on guard at the
Tuilerics the night on which the King,  &c.,’  escaped
to  \ arennes,  and ran great risk of being denounced,
and perhaps massacred,  though he had been kept in
the most  ]>crfcct ignorance of the King’s intention.

366

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

The next Sunday,  November 18th,  Augusta and
Amelia came to me after church,  very much grieved at
the inhuman decrees just passed in the Convention,
including as emigrants,  with those who have taken arms
against their country,  all who have quitted it since last
July  ; and adjudging their estates to confiscation,  and
their persons to death should they return to France.

‘^‘^Maam,”  said Mr.  Clarke,  it reduces this family
to nothing : all they can hope is,  by the help of their
parents and friends,  to get together wherewithal to
purchase a cottage in America,  and live as they can.”

I was more shocked and affected by this account
than I could very easily tell you.  To complete the
tragedy,  j\I,  de Narbonne had determined to write an
offer — a request rather — to be allowed to appear as a
witness in behalf of the King,  upon his trial ; and M.
d Arblay had declared he would do the same,  and share
the fate of his friend whatever it might be.

On Tuesday,  the 20th,  I called to condole with our
friends on these new misfortunes.  Madame de la Chatre
received me with politeness,  and even cordiality : she told
me she was a little recovered from the first shock —
that she should hope to gather together a small debris
of her fortune,  but never enough to settle in England
— that,  in short,  h.ev j^arti etait pris — that she must go
to America.  It went to my heart to hear her say so.
Presently came in M.  Girardin.  He is son to the
Marquis de Girardin d’Ermenonville,  the friend of
Kousseau,  whose last days were passed,  and whose re-
mains are deposited,  in his domain.  This M.  Girardin
was a pupil of Rousseau  ; he was a member of the Legis-
lative Assembly,  and an able opponent of the Jacobins.

It was to him that M.  Merlin,  apres bien de gestes
menacans,  had held a pistol,  in the midst of the Assem-

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

367

1792]

bly.  His father was a mad republican,  and never sa-
tisfied with the rational spirit of patriotism that ani-
I mated M.  Girardin ; who,  witnessing the distress of all
I the friends he most esteemed and honoured,  and being
i himself in personal danger from the enmity of the
Jacobins,  had,  as soon as the Assemblee Legislative
broke up,  quitted Paris,  I believe,  firmly determined
never to re-enter it under the present regime.

I was prepossessed very much in favour of this gen-
tleman, from his conduct in the late Assembly and all
we had heard of him.  I confess I had not represented
him to myself as a great,  fat,  heavy-looking man,  with
the manners of a somewhat hard and morose English-
man : he is between thirty and forty,  I imagine;  he had
been riding as far as to the cottage IMr.  Malthouse had
mentioned to him — Vasile de Jean J agues, — and said it
was very near this place  (it is^at the foot of Leith Hill,
Mr.  Lock has since told me).

They then talked over the newspapers which were
come that morning.  ^I.  de St.  Just,  who made a most
fierce speech for the trial and condemnation of the
King,  they said had before only been known by little
madrigals,  romances,  and epitres tendres,  published in
the  ‘Almanac dcs Muses.’  “A cette heure,  said
M.  de Jancourt,  laughing,  “ e’est un fier r^publicain.
Enfin voila I’Abbe Louche qui prend la parole.  Ah,
mjiis il ne s’en tire pas mal.”  “ Oui,  en verite,  said
Madame de la Chatre ; “ il montre de Vesprit ; ses
raisonnemens sont tons justes ce qu’il faut pour per-
suader la Convention.”

For Condorcet.  in despite of his abilities,  they feel a
sovereign contempt.  They spoke of his ingratitude to
the Due de la llochefoucault with great disgust,  and
of the terrible end of that most respectable man with

368

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIIL

a mixture of concern and indignation that left thenr
and us for a few minutes silent and in a kind of con-
sternation.

It appears that there is an exception in the detestable
law concerning the emigrants,  in favour of such persons
as are established in other countries in any trade.  M.
de Jaucourt said,  “11 me parait que j’ai un peu voca-
tion pour la cuisine : je me ferai cuisinicr.  Savez-vous
ce que m’a dit ce matin notre cuisinier?  II me con-
sultait sur les dangers qu’il courrerait,  lui,  en retournant
en France.  ‘ Pourtant,  monsieur,’  il m’a dit,  ‘ily a
une exception pour les artistes.’’  ]\Ioi,  je serai cuisinier
artiste aussi.”

Speaking of the hard-bought liberty his country had.
gained,  “Bah!”  cried M.  Girardin ; “peut-on appeler
cela la liberte  ?”  “ Mais ils I’auront,”  said M.  de

Jaucourt energetically,  “et ce qui mefache le plus c’est
qu’ils ne veulent pas me permettre d’en dire du bien  ;
ils ont gate la cause.”

M.  de Narbonne delighted me by his accounts of
M.  de Lafayette,  who is,  I am now certain,  precisely
the character I took him to be — one whom prosperity
could never have corrupted,  and that misfortune will
never subdue.  “An excess of bonte de occur,'’’  M.
d’Arblay said,  “ was almost the only fault he knew him
to have.”  This made him so unwilling to suspect of
treachery some of those who called themselves his
friends,  that it was almost impossible to put him on
his guard.  “ II caressait ceux qui cherchaient a I’e-
gorger.”

Tuesday,  November 27th. — Phillips and I deter-
mined at about half-past one to walk to Junipere to-
gether.

M.  d’Arblay received us at the door,  and showed

179-2]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

309

the most flattering degree of pleasure at our ar-
rival.

We found with Madame de laChatre anotlier Frencli
gentloman,  M.  Sicard,  who was also an officer of M.
de Lafayette's.

M.  de Xarbonne said he hoped we would be sociable,
and dine with them now and then.  Madame de la
Chatre made a speech to the same effect.  “ Lt quel
jour,  par exemple,”  said  ^I.  de Narbonne,  “ feroit mieux
(|u’aujourd’hui  ?”  Madame de la Chatre took my hand
instantly,  to press in the most pleasing and gratifying
manner imaginable this proposal ; and before I had
time to answer,  M.  d’Arblay,  snatching up his hat,
declared he would run and fetch the children.

I was obliged to entreat Phillips to bring him back,
and entreated him to entendre rai.^on.

“ Mais,  mais,  madame,”  cried M.  de Xarbonne,  ne
soycz pas disgracicuse.”

“Je ne suis pas disgracieuse,’’  answered I,  assez
vriicement,  which occasioned a general comical but not
affronting laugh:  “ sur ce sujet au rnoins;”  I had the
modesty to add.  I pleaded their late hour of dinner,
our having no carriage,  and my disuse to the night air
at this time of the year  ; but  ^I.  de Narbonne said
their cabriolet  (they have no other carriage)  should
take us home,  and that there was a to])  to it,  and Ma-
dame de la Chatre declared she would cover me well
with shawls,  &c.

“ Aliens,  aliens,”  cried M.  d’Arblay voila qui est
fait,  car je parie que Monsieur Phillips n’aura pas le
courage de nous refuser.”

Effectivement,  Monsieur Phillips was perfectly agree-
able ; so that all my efforts were vain,  and I was obliged

VOL.  V.  2 B

DIARY AND LETTERS

>70

[Part VIII.

to submit,  in despite of various worldly scruples,  to pass
a most charmingly pleasant day.

j\I.  d’Arblay scampered olF for the little ones,  Avhom
all insisted upon having,  and Phillips accompanied him,
as it wanted I believe almost four hours to their dinner-
time.

J'eus beau dire que ce seroit une visite comme on
n’en fait jamais.  Co sera,”  said jNIadame de la
Chatre,  “ce qu'il nous faut;  ce sera une journee.”

Then my dress  : Oh,  it was parfaite,  and Avould give
them all the courage to remain as they were,  sans toi-
lette : in short,  nothing was omitted to render us com-
fortable and at our ease,  and I have seldom passed a
more pleasant day — never,  I may fairly say,  with such
new acquaintance.  I was only sorry 1\1.  dc Jaucourt
did not make one of the party.

Whilst M.  d’Arblay and Phillips were gone,  iMadame
de la Chatre told me they had that morning received M.
Necker’s Defense du Hoi,  and if 1 liked it that INI.  de
Narbonne would read it out to us.  You may conceive
my answer.  It is a most eloquent production,  and was
read by M.  de Karbonne with heavconp)  dame.  To-
Vv^ards the end it is excessively touching,  and his emotion
was very evident,  and would have struck and interested
me had I felt no respect for his character before.

I must now tell you the secret of liis birth,  which,
however,  is,  I conceive,  no great secret even in London,
as Phillips heard it at Sir Joseph Banks's.  Madame
Victoire,  daughter of Louis XV.,  was in her youth
known to be attached to the Comte de Narbonne,  fa-
ther of our M.  dc Narbonne.  The consequence of
this attachment was such as to oblige her to a tempo-
rary retirement,  under the pretence ol indisposition  ;

1792]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

O/  I

during which time la Comtcsse dc Narbonne,  who was
one of her attendants,  not only concealed her own
chagrin,  but was the means of preserving her husband
from a dangerous situation,  and the Princess from dis-
grace. She declared herself with child,  and,  in short,
arranged all so well as to seem the mother of her hus-
band’s son ; though the truth was immediately suspected,
and rumoured about the Court,  and Madame de la
Chatre told me,  was known and familiarly spoken of by
all her friends,  except in the presence of M.  de Nar-
bonne, to whom no one would certainly venture to hint
it.  His father is dead,  but la Comtesse de Narbonne,
his reputed mother,  lives,  and is still an attendant on
Madame Victoire,  at Rome.  M.  de Narbonne’s wife
is likewise with her,  and he himself was the person
fixed on by Mesdames to accompany them when they
quitted France for Italy.  An infant daughter was left by
him at Paris,  who is still there with some of his famil}',
and whom he expressed an earnest wish to bring over,
though the late decree may perhaps render his doing
so impossible.  He has another daughter,  of six years
old,  who is with her mother at Rome,  and whom he told
me the Pope had condescended to embrace.  He men-
tioned his mother once  (meaning la Comtcsse de Nar-
bonne) with great respect and afi’ection.

How soiTy I was to find that M.  Sicard and M.
d’Arblay believed the account given in the newspapers,
of the very severe treatment of M.  de Lafayette and
his companions ! They added that the Prussians them-
selves were indignes at the treatment these gentle-
men had received.  M.  Sicard,  who is but just arrived
from Holland,  gave the same account.  Would you
believe it? — a corporal is appointed to call to them and
insist on an ansAver every fifteen minutes,  day and night,

2 B 2

372

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

so that they can never have more than ten minutes of
undisturbed sleep  ! What a barbarity ! — added to this,
depriving them of books,  pen and ink,  pencils,  or any-
thing whatever which might tend to while away their
melancholy moments.  I have been haunted by this
sad account ever since.

:ic  *

S.  P.

Miss Barney to Mrs.  Phillijis.

Aylsliam,  Norfolk,  November 27tb,  "92.

My dearest Susanna’s details of the French colony
at Juniper are truly interesting.  I hope I may gather
from them that M.  de Narbonne,  at least,  has been
able to realise some property here.  I wash much to
hear that poor INIadame de Broglie lias been permitted
to join her husband.

Who is this M.  IMalonet who has the singular cou-
rage and feeling to offer to plead the cause of a fallen
INIonarch in the midst of his ferocious accusers  ? And
how ventures M.  de Chauvelin to transmit such a pro-
posal? I wish your French neighbours could give
some account of this.  I hear that the son for whom the
Due de Liancourt,  has been trembling has been reduced
to subscribe to all Jacobin lengths,  to save his life,  and
retain a little property.  What seasons are these for
dissolving all delicacy of internal honour  !

I am truly amazed,  and half alarmed,  to find this
county filled with little revolution societies,  which
transmit their notions of things to the larger committee
at Norwich,  which communicates the whole to the re-
formists of London.  I am told there is scarce a village
in Norfolk free from these meetings.

I have been again to Thornham to Mrs.  Rishton,

l/"92]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

373

and a week brought so back all old and early attach-
ment and feelings to her bosom,  that our parting was a
tragedy on her side.  On mine,  the calls away predo-
minated too forcibly for such sympathy;  but I was both
glad and sorry,  I have been also,  at last,  introduced
to  ^Irs.  Coke,  and I think her one of the sweetest
women,  on a short acquaintance,  I have ever met with.

My good and brilliant champion in days of old,  IMr.
Windham,  has never been in Norfolk since I have en-
tered it.  He had a call to Bulstrode,  to the installa-
tion of the Duke of Portland,  just as I arrived,  and ho
has been entrao-ed there and at Oxford ever since,  I
regret missing him at Holkham  : I had no chance of
him anywhere else,  as I have been so situated,  from
tlie melancholy circumstances of poor  ]Mr.  Francis’s
illness,  that I have been unable to make acquaintance
where he visits.

I will be very discreet,  my dearest Susan,  in the
])oints that require it ; au reste,  I like to inspire those
I see with an interest for your little colony at Juniper
Hall,  by such recitals as are safe, — especially as all the
constituants arc now reviled as authors and originators
of all the misfortunes of France,  from arrogant sclf-
sufiiciency in their powers to stop as well as begin
when they pleased.

[Miss Burney’s second visit at Aylsham proved a very
mournful one.  Soon after her arrival,  Mr.  Francis,  her
brother-in-law,  was seized with an apoplectic fit,  which
terminafed in his death;  and  !Miss Burnev remained
with her widowed sister,  soothing and assisting her,  till
the close of the year,  when she accompanied the be
reaved family to London.]

374

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

Mrs.  Phillips to Miss Burney.

December 16th,  '92.

Everything that is most shocking may,  I fear,  be
expected for the unfortunate King of France,  his
Queen,  and perhaps all that belong to him.  M.
d’Arblay said it would indeed scarce have been pos-
sible to hope that  ]\L de Narbonne could have es-
caped with life,  had the sauf-conduit requested been
granted him,  for attending as a witness at the King’s
trial.

Mais,’’  said M.  d’Arblay,  il desiroit vivement de
servir le Roi ; il y croyoit meme son honneur interesse ;
et pour lors — ma foi ! Ton ne craint pas la mort.  Si
j’avois espere de pouvoir etre utile an Roi,  je vous jure
que rien ne m’auroit retenu;  mais puisque Ton ne veut
pas qu’il ait des defenseurs,  et qu’enfin on a pousse
I’atrocite jusqu’a un tel exces,  jamais je ne retournerai
en France.”

IMais si fait,”  said Mr.  Lock,  “^si les choses vien-
nent a changer?”

“ Pardonnez moi,  monsieur  ; je ne vois point d’es-
perance de tranquillite dans ma malheureuse patrie
pendant mes jours : le peuple est tellement vitie par
I’impunite du crime,  par les desordres de tout espece,
par I’habitude do voir couler le sang,  qu’entin,  selon
toutes les apparences,  il n’y aura ni paix ni surete de
trente on quarante ans a venir en France.  Heureuse-
ment pour nous,”  he added more cheerfully,  “ vous
nous avez adopte,  etj’espere que nous ne vous quit-
terons plus.”

Speaking of M.  Lafa}'ette,  and of the diatribes that
have been published against him,  he expressed warmly
his concern and indignation,  saying,  his judgment.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

375

1702]

perhaps,  had not been always infallible;  “ mais pour
ses vues,  pour scs intentions,  j’ose en repondre  : il n’y
a pas d’homme plus brave,  ni plus veritablement hon-
nete homine.  11 y a des personnes qui m’ont dit,  et
repete jusqu’a ce que j’en ai ete impatiente,  qu’il avoit
perdu toutes les occasions do faire de grands coups,
lorsqu’il avoit dans tout le royauine autant de pou-
voir que Cromwell en avait de son teins.  A la bonne-
heure — s’il avoit voulu etrc Cromwell ; car il est tres
vrai que,  pour faire le mal,  il en avait tout le pouvoir ;
mais,  pour faire le bien  (et tout ce qu’il desiroit faire
c’etoit le bien),  c’etait,  je vous jure,  une toute autre dif-
ficulte.  Les terns d’ailleurs sont inhniment changes dc-
puis lepoquc do Cromwell.  On ne pent plus mener des
milliers d'hommes commc autant de troupeaux.  Dans
I’armee de M.  Lafayette il y avait des volontaires
innombrables, — auteurs distingues,  homines de lettres,
artistes ; (David,  par exemplc,  le premier de nos ar-
tistes),— tons voulant juger de toutes choses par eux-
inemes;  tirant de cent manieres diflferentes ; ayant
tons leur parties a eux,  et presquc tons des fous ab-
solument,  criant pour la liberte et la patriotisme avec
encore plus de fureur que les gaeux et les Sans-cu-
lottes.  Et pourtant on persistc a dire que M.  La-
fayette aurait pu les tourner de telle maniere qu’il
Tauralt juge a propos ! ^ oila commc on afhrme,  et
commc on decide,  dans ce monde !”

Yesterday,  Saturday,  December 15th,  at about noon,
I was very pleasantly surprised by a visit from M.  do
Narbonne,  who was as gracious and as pleasant as
ever he could be.  We talked over Marmontel’s new
tales,  which I believe I mentioned his having been so
good as to lend me ; he told me the author of them
was in Paris,  unhappy enough in seeing the state of

37G DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT YIII.

public affairs.  ‘^]\Iais pour I’intericur de sa maison,
on ne pent guere voir de bonbeur plus parfait : a soix-
ante ans il a su trouver une femme aimable de trente,
qui a bien voulu I’epouser.  Elle luiest fort attacliee;
et lui- — il scrable toujours amant,  et toujours penetre
d’une reconnaissance sans bornes de ce qu’ellc vent
bien lui permettre de respirer I’air de la meme cbambre
qu’clle.  C’est un homme rempli de sentiment et de
douceur.”

Pie bad beard nothing new from France^,  but men-
tioned, with great concern,  tbe indiscretion of tbe
King,  in having kept all bis letters since tbe Revolu-
tion ; that tbe papers lately discovered in tbe Tuile-
ries would bring ruin and death on hundreds of bis
friends ; and that almost every one in that number
“ s’y trouvoient compliques”  some way or other.  A
decree of accusation had been lance against M.  Talley-
rand, not for anything found from himself,  but because
M.  de la Porte,  long since executed,  and from whom,
of course,  no renseignemens or explanations of any
kind could be gained,  had written to the King that
I’Eveque d’Autun was well disposed to serve him.  Can
there be injustice more flagrant?

hi.  Talleyrand,  it seems,  had purposed returning,
and hoped to settle his affairs in Ph-ance in person,  but
now he must be content Avith life ; and as for his
property  (save what he may chance to have in other
countries),  he must certainly lose all.

Monday,  December 17th,  in the morning,  hir.  and
Mrs.  Lock called,  and with them came Madame de la
Chatre,  to take leave.

She now told us,  perfectly in confidence,  that hla-
dame de Broglie had found a friend in the Mayor of
Boulogne,  that she Avas lodged at his house,  and that

170-2]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

r>  ^ FT

o/  7

she could answer for her  (Madame de la Chatre)
being-  received by him as well as she could desire
(all this must be secret,  as this good Mayor,  if accused
of harboLirinir or befriending:  des cw/o;r.v,  would no
doubt  ]iay for it with his life).  Madame do la Chatre
said,  all licr friends who had ventured upon writing to
licr entreated her not to lose the present moment to
return,  as,  the three months allowed for the return of
those excepted in the decree once  ])ast,  all liope would
be lost for ever.  Madame de Broglie,  who is her
cousin,  was most excessively urgent to her to lose
not an instant in returning.  “ Vous croycz done,
madame,’’  said 1,  rather tristemevt,  “y aller?”  “ Oui,
surement,  je I’cspere ; car,  sans ccla,  tons mes projets
sont aneanties.  Si enfin je n’y pouvois allcr,  je serais
reduite a pres(pie ricn  !”

iNladame de Broglie,  she said,  had declared there
would be no danger.  Madame de la Chatre was put
in spirits by this account,  and the hope of becoming
not destitute of everything;  and 1 tried to hope with-
out fearing for her,  and,  indeed,  most sincerely offer
up my petitions for her safety.

Heaven prosper her  ! Her courage and spirits arc
wonderful.  M.  de Narbonne seemed,  however,  full of
apprehensions for her.  M.  do Jaucourt seemed to have
better hopes;  he,  even he,  has now thoughts of re-
turning, or rather his generosity compels him to think
of it.  Ilis father has rci)rescntcd to him that his
sister’s fortune must suffer unless he ajipears in France
again ; and although he had resisted every other con-
sideration, on this he has given way.

In France they are now  ])rinting,  by order of the
Convention,  all the letters to the King’s brothers
which had been seized at  ^’crdun and in other places ;

378

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

amongst them were some from  “le traitre Narbonne,”
in which he professed his firm and unalterable attach-
ment to royalty,  and made offers of his services to the
Princes.

But the M.  de Narbonne whose letters are printed
is not our M.  de Narbonne,  but a relation of his,  a
man of true honour,  but a decided aristocrat from the
beginning of the Revolution,  who had consequently
devoted himself to the party of the Princes.  The Con-
vention knew this perfectly,  M.  de Narbonne said,  but
it suited their purpose best to enter into no explana-
tions, but to let all who were not so well infonned
conclude that  “ ce traitre de Narbonne,”  and  “ cc
scelerat de Narbonne,”  was the Minister,  in whom such
conduct would really have been a treachery,  though in
the real author of the letters it w'as the simple result
of his principles — principles which he had never sought
to conceal.  He spoke wdth considerable emotion on
the subject,  and said that,  after all his losses and all
that he had undergone,  that which he felt most se-
verely was the expectation of being  “ confondu avec
tons les scelerats de sa malheureuse patrie,”  not only

do son vivant,”  but by posterity.

Friday,  December 21st,  we dined at Norbury Park,
and met our French friends  : ]M.  d’Arblay came in to
coffee before the other gentlemen.  AVe had been talk-
ing of Madame de la Chatre,  and conjecturing conjec-
tures about her sposo : we w^ere all curious,  and all
inclined to imagine him old,  ugly,  proud,  aristocratic,
— a kind of ancient and formal courtier  ; so we ques-
tioned ]M.  d'Arblay,  acknowledging our curiosity,  and
that  ■\ve wished to know,  enjin,  if M.  de la Chatre was
“ digne d’etre I’epoux d’une personne si aimable et si
charraante que IMadame de la Chatre.”  He looked

1792]

OF THE AUTHOIl OF EVELINA.

370

very drolly,  scarce able to meet our eyes  ; but at last,
as lie is la franchise meme^  lie answered,  ‘‘  M.  de la
Cliutre est un bon hoinme — parfaitement bon homme :
au reste,  il est brusque comine un clieval de carrosse.”

We were in the midst of our coffee when St.  Jean
came forward to  ]\I.  de Narbonne,  and said some-
body wanted to speak to him.  He went out of the
room  ; in two minutes he returned,  followed by a gentle-
man in a great-coat,  whom we had never seen,  and
whom he introduced immediately to Mrs.  Lock by
the name of M.  de la Chatre.  The appearance of
]\I.  de la Cluitre was something like a theatre;

for,  despite our curiosity,  I had no idea we should
ever see him,  thinking that nothing could detach him
from the service of the French Princes.

His abord and behaviour answered extremely well
the idea M.  d’Arblay had given us of him,  who in the
word brusque rather meant unpolished in manners
than harsh in character.

He is quite old enough to be father to Madame
de la Chatre,  and,  had he been presented to us as such,
all our wonder would have been to see so little elegance
in the parent of such a woman.

After the first introduction was over,  he turned his
back to the fire,  and began,  sans facon,  a most con-
fidential discourse with M.  de Narbonne.  They had
not met since the beginning of the revolution,  and,
having been of very different parties,  it w’as curious
and pleasant to see them no\v,  in their mutual misfor-
tunes, meet en bans amis.  They rallied each other sur
leurs disf/races very good-humouredly and comically ;
and though poor M.  do la Chatre had missed his wife
by only one day,  and his son by a few hours,  nothing
seemed to give him de Vkumeur.  Ho gave the account

380

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

of his disastrous journey since he had quitted the
Princes^  who are themselves reduced to great distress,
and were unable to pay him his arrears  : he said he
could not get a so2is from France,  nor had done for
two years.  All the money he had,  with his papers
and clothes,  were contained in a little box,  with which
he had embarked in a small boat — I could not hear
whence;  but the weather was tempestuous,  and he,
with nearly all the passengers,  landed,  and walked to
the nearest towm,  leaving his box and tw'o faithful
servants  (who had never,  he sa,id,  quitted him since he
had left France)  in the boat:  he had scarce been an
hour at the auhers;e w’hen news was brou'jht that the
boat had sunk.

At this,  M.  de Narbonne threw'  himself back on his
seat,  exclaiming against the hard fate which pursued
all ses mallieureux amis I “Mais attendez done,”  cried
the good-humoured M.  de la Chritre,  “je n’ai pas
encore fini : on nous a assures que personne n’a peri,
et que meme tout ce qu’il y avait sur le bateau a ete
sauve.”  He said,  however,  that,  being now in danger
of falling into the hands of the French,  he dared not
stop for his box or servants  ; but,  leaving a note of
directions behind him,  he proceeded incofjnito,  and
at length got on board a packet-boat for England,
in which though he found several of his country-
men and old acquaintance,  he dared not discover him-
self till they were en pleine mer.  Et vous voyez bien
qu’il n’y a pas de fin a mes nialheureuses aventures,
puisqu’en arrivant on m’apyirend tout de suite que
ma femme est partie bier pour la France,  et Alfonse
anjourd’hui ; et Dieu sait si je le verrai,  lui,  d’ici a
quarantc ans  !”

How very,  very unfortunate  ! We w'ere all truly

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

381

;i792]

: sorry for him  ; however,  ho went on gaily enough,
laughing at ses ciTtii.f les coustitutionnuircs,  and NI.  dc
Narbonne,  with much more wit,  and not less good
humour,  retorting back his raillery on the j)arti de
JhiniMuick'.

“Eh bien,”  said dc M.  la Chatre  ; “chacun a son
■four  ! — Vous avez ete mines Ics pi^cmicrs chacun a
son tour ! — Vous avez fails unc constitution qui nc
pouvoit tenir.”

“ Pardon  !”  cried d’Arblay,  with quickness  : “ on
ne I’a pas essayeo.”

“ Eh bien,  elle cst tombee tontefois — il n cn est plus
question,”  said  ]\I.  de la C hutre ; “ ct nous na\ons
plus qu’a mourir de faim gaiement ensemble.”

^I.  de Narbonne said he had yet a few bottles of
wine,  and that he should not drink beer whilst he stayed
with him.

M.  de la Chatre mentioned the quinzaine in wliich
the Princes’  army had been paid up,  as the most
wretched ho had ever known.  “Cetoit un desespoir,
une doulcur,  une detresse de tons cotes,  dont vous ne
pouvez vous former une idee.”  Of 22,000 men who
formed the army of the emigrants,  16,000 w'cre gcntlc-
— men of family and fortune : all of w’hom were
now,  with their families,  destitute.  He mentioned tno
of tliese who had engaged themselves lately in some
orchestra,  where they played first and second flute.

“ Ils sont,  je vous jure,  I’envie dc toutc I arm6e,  said
he j “ car cn general nous nc pouvons rien fairc que
nous battre quand on nous cn donne I’occasion.

The Princes,  he said,  had been twice arrested for
debt in different places— that they were now so reduced
that they dined,  themselves,  the Comte d’Artois,
children,  tutors,  See. — eight or nine persons in all

382

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIIT.

upon one single dish  ; and that they burnt de la
chandelle,  “^parceque les bougies coutoient trop cher.”

‘•'Et les dames/’  said M.  de Narbonne,  a demi-
voix,  ‘^que font elles  ? — Madame de Balby et les au-
tres?”

“ Elles n’y sontplus,”  said M.  de la Chatre;  adding,
laughing,  “ C’est une reforme en tout.”

I don’t know whether I need tell you the ladies
meant were the two Princes’  mistresses,  who have
hitherto accompanied them everywhere.

M.  de Narbonne asked how he had been able to
tra\'el on,  since his money and clothes had been left
behind.

J’avois,”  said he,  “ma bourse,  bien heureusement ;
au reste,  j’ai ete oblige,  en arrivant a Londres,  de m’a-
dresser a un tailleur,  car on m’a assure a I’auberge ou
j’etois,  que dans I’habit cpie je portois on me montreroit
au doigt.  Eh bien,  il m’a fait le gilet que tu vois,  ces
culottes”  (in a low voice,  but laughing,  to M.  de Nar-

bonne) They were,  I must tell you,  of the most

common and cheap materials  : but M.  de Narbonne,
interrupting him,  gravely,  but very good-naturedly,
said,

“ Eh bien  ; vous pouvez alter partout comme cela —
ici on pent aller oil Ton veut comme cela.”

“ Cette redingote,”  replied M.  de la Chatre,  who
continued the w’hole evening in it,  “il me I’a fait
aussi.  Mais pour I’habit,  il n’y avoit pas moycn,
puisque je ne voulois pas m’arreter.  Il m’a done —
le siend'

“Quoi?  le tailleur?”

“ Oui,  lui-meme  : tu vois il ne va pas mal.”

There was something so frank and so good humoured
in all this,  that,  added to the deplorable situation to

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

383

179-2]

^vhich he was reduced,  I could almost have cried,  though
i it was impossible to forbear laughing.

Miss Burney io Mrs.  Lock.

Chelsea,  December 20th,  ■92.

I UEJOicE  ^Ir.  Lock will be able to attend the
meeting.  I hope for tolerable weather : but it would
have grieved me to have had sucli a name out of a loyal
list at such a time.

God keep us all safe and quiet!  All now wears a
fair aspect;  but I am told Mr.  Windham says we are
not yet out of the wood,  though wo see the path
through it.  There must be no relaxation.  The pre-
tended friends of the people,  pretended or misguided,
wait but the stilling of the present ferment of loyalty
to come forth.  Mr.  Grey has said so in the House.
Mr.  Fox attended the St.  George’s Meeting,  after
keeping back to the last,  and was nchody there 1
Our Mr.  North was present and amazed.

The accounts from France are thrilling.  Poor  !M.
d’Arblay’s speech should be translated,  and read to all
Eno-lish imitators of French reformers.  M’hat a picture
of the now reformed ! Mr.  Burke’s description of the
martyred Due de la Rochefoucault should be read also
by all the few really pure promoters of new systems.
New systems,  I fear,  in states,  are always dangerous,  if
not wicked.  Grievance by grievance,  wrong by wrong,
must only be assailed,  and breathing time allowed to
old prejudices,  and old habits,  between all that is
done.

I had never heard of any good association six months

384

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part VIII.

ago ; but I rejoice Mr.  Lock had.  I am glad,  too,
your neighbourhood is so loyal.  I am sure such a colony
of sufferers from state experiments,  even with best in-
tentions, ouMit to double all vicrilance for runninir no
similar risks — here too,  where there are no similar
calls  ! Poor M.  d’Arblay’s belief in perpetual banish-
ment is dreadful : but Chabot’s horrible denunciation
of M.  de Narbonne made me stop for breath,  as I read
it in the papers.

I had fancied the letters brought for the King of
France’s trial were forgeries.  One of them,  certainlv,
to M.  Bouille,  had its answer dated before it was
written.  If any have been found,  others w’ill be added,
to serve any evil purposes.  Still,  however,  I hope the
King and his family will be saved.  I cannot but
believe it,  from all I can put together.  If the wmrst of
the Jacobins hear that Fox has called him an  “un-
fortunate Monarch,” — that Sheridan has said  “his
execution would be an act of injustice,” — and Grey,
“that Avc ought to have spared that one blast to their
glories by earlier negotiation and an ambassador,” —
surely the worst of these wretches will not risk losing
their only abettors and palliators in this kingdom  ? I
mean publicly ; they have privately and individually
their abettors and palliators in abundance still,  won-
derfid as that is.

I am glad M.  d’Arblay has joined the set at Juni-
yere.  What miserable Avork is this duelling,  which I
hear of among the emigrants,  after such hair-breadth
’scapes for life and existence ! — to attack one another
on the very spot they seek for refuge from attacks !
It seems a sort of profanation of safety.

I can assure you people of all descriptions are a little

179'2]  OF THK AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  385

alarmed here,  at the successes so unbounded of the
whole Jacobin tribe,  which seem now spreading con-
tagion over the whole surface of the earth.  The
strongest orijjinal favourers of revolutions abroad,  and
reforms at liome,  I see,  are a little scared : they will
not say it;  but they say they are not,  uncalled upon;
which is a constant result of secret and involuntary
consciousness.

^ * -Sfi  *

P.  B.

‘2 c

VOL.  V.

I

P A R T I X.
1793.

CONTENTS.

Correspondence — Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney — Execution of the
French King — Dr.  Burney to Miss Burney — Charles Fox’s
Pamphlet against War with France — Lord Orford — A Dinner
at the Literary Club — Fox,  Windham,  Burke;  the Bishops
of Salisbury,  Peterborough,  Droraore ; Bisliop Marlow,  Duke
of Leeds,  Lord Ossory,  Lord Lucan,  &c. — Miss Burney to Dr
Burney — Madame de Stael at Mickleham — The last Moments
of the French King — His last Words on the Scaffold — Three
English Letters from Madame de Staiil to Miss Burney — Miss
Burney to Dr.  Burney — Account of Madame de Stael — Her
Escape from Massacre — Tallien — Malesherbes — M.  d’Arblay
— Talleyrand — Miss Burney to Mrs.  Lock — M.  Sicard — Con-
versation of Talleyrand — Dr.  Burney to Miss Burney — Barry’s
Discourse on Sir Joshua Reynolds — Miss Burney to Dr.  Bur-
ney— Letter from Madame de Staiil to Miss Burney — Mrs.
Phillips to Mrs.  Lock — M.  de Lally Tolendal — M.  de Talley-
rand and the Society at Juniper Hall — Madame de Stael’s
Opinions on the Revolution — Letter from Madame de Stael
to Miss Burney — Offer of Marriage from General d’Arblay
to Miss Burney — M.  Dumont — Madame de Stael's Work on
the  ‘ Influence of the Passions' — Miss Burney to Mrs.  Lock
— Dr.  Burney to Miss Burney — Marriage of M.  d’Arblay and
Miss Burney — Madame d’Arblay to Mrs. on her Mar-

riage— Madame de Staiil to Madame d’Arblay on her Marriage
— Eloge of Norbury Park by Madame de Stael — Letter from
Lally Tolendal to M.  d’Arblay — Letter from Madame de la Fite
to Madame d’.Arblay.

2 c 2

388

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

PART IX.
1793.

Miss Bvrney to Mrs.  Lock.

January 8fh,  1793.

It is quite out of my power,  my clearest friends,  to
leave town before the birthday,  as I must then present
myself at the Queen’s house.

Xour French colonies are truly attractive — I am
sure they must be so to have caught me,  so substan-
tially, fundamental!}",  the foe of all their proceedings
while in power.  But the Due de Liancourt taught
me how little we can resist distress,  even where self-
incurred.  jM.  de la Chatre,  however,  has my whole
heart.  I am his friend,  not only upon the pleas of
compassion due to all,  but upon the firm basis of prin-
ciple. My heart ached to read of his 22,000 fellow-
sufferers for loyalty,  original sense of duty,  and a cap-
tive and injured master.

I like,  too,  his brusque and franc character.  I have
read the declaration of M.  de Nar bonne.  It is cer-
tainly written witli feeling and energy,  and a good
design  ; but I do not think it becoming,  nor hieni hon-
nete,  in a late minister and servant,  at a time of such
barbarous humiliation,  to speak of the French King’s
weakness,  and let him down so low,  at the moment he
is pleading in his favour.  Yet something there is,
hinting at regret for having possibly contributed to his

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

389

disgrace by not helping to avert it,  which touched me
very much,  from its candour,  though it is a passage
unfinished.

In short,  what of misery can equal the misery of
such a Kevolution  ? — I am daily more and more in
charity with all fixed governments.  “ Let every one
mend one,”  as Will Chip says ; and then states,  as
well as families,  may be safely reformed.  I hope you
like  ' Villag;e Politics?’  It makes much noise in
London,  and is suspected to be written by some capi-
tal author*.

♦ * * *

F.  B.

Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney.

Norbury Park,  Monday,  January 28th,  ’93.

My dearest Padre, — 1 have been wholly without
spirit for writing,  reading,  working,  or even walking or
conversing,  ever since the first day of my arrival.  The
dreadful tragedyf acted in France has entirely absorbed
me.  Except the period of the illness of our own ines-
timable King,  I have never been so overcome with
grief and dismay,  for any but personal and family cala-
mities. O what a tragedy  ! how implacable its villany,
and how severe its sorrows  ! You know,  my dearest
father,  how little I had believed such a catastrophe
possible : with all the guilt and all the daring already
shown,  1 had still thought this a height of enormity
impracticable.  And,  indeed,  without military law
throughout the w’retched city,  it had still not been per-

* ‘ Will Chip,  or Village Politics,’  was written by Mrs.  Hannah
More.

t The execution of Louis XVI.

390

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

petrated.  Good Heaven! — what must have been the
sufferings of the few unhardened in crimes who inhabit
that city of horrors  ! — if an English person,  have been
so deeply afflicted,  that even this sweet house and so-
ciety— even my Susan and her lovely children — have
been incapable to give me any species of pleasure,  or
keep me from a desponding low-spiritedness,  wdiat
must be the feelings of all but the culprits in France  ?

M.  de Narbonne and M.  d’Arblay have been al-
most annihilated  : they are for ever repining that they
are French,  and,  though two of the most accomplished
and elegant men I ever saw,  they break our hearts
with the humiliation they feel for their guiltless birth
in that guilty country! — “ Est-ce vrai,”  cries M.  de
Narbonne,  “ que vous conservez encore quelque amitie,
M.  Lock,  pour ceux qui ont la honte et le malheur
d’etre nes Franqois?” — Poor man! — he has all the
symptoms upon him of the jaundice ; and M.  d’Arblay,
from a very fine figure and good face,  was changed,
as if by magic,  in one night,  by the receipt of this in-
expiable news,  into an appearance as black,  as meagre,
and as miserable as M.  de la Blancherie.

We are all here expecting war every day.  This
dear family has deferred its town journey till next
Wednesday.  I have not been at all at Mickleham,
nor yet settled whether to return to town with the
Locks,  or to pay my promised visit there first.  All
has been so dismal,  so w'retched,  that I have scarce
ceased to regret our living at such times,  and not
either sooner or later.

These immediate French sufferers here interest us,
and these alone have been able to interest me at all.
We hear of a very bad tumult in Ireland,  and near
Captain Phillips’s property ; Mr.  Brabazon writes word

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

391

it is very serious.  Heaven guard us from insurrec-
tions ! What must be the feelings at the Queen’s
house  ? how acute,  and how indignant !

Adieu,  most dear sir;  I am sure we sympathise but
too completely on this subject, —

And am ever your

F.  B.

Dr.  Burney to Miss Burney and Mrs.  Phillips.

Chelsea College,  Thursday,  January 31st,  1793.

]\Iy dearest Girls,  Fanny  .\nd Susy, — I have
little stomach to write.  The horrors of last week’s
news still prey on my spirits,  with the addition of new
political disgusts.  The cry of Charles Fox and his
adherents,  against a war on the French wild beasts,  is
so loud and clamorous,  that I fear it will dismay honest
men and real lovers of their country and consti-
tution. He  (Fox)  has published a pamphlet,  which
furnishes plenty of words,  though not one new argu-
ment. He has merely dilated his late Whig and Par-
liamentary speeches ; still stubbornly denying that there
was any reason for calling Parliament so early,  or for
apprehending the country in the least danger from se-
dition or discontent;  and urges stronger than ever the
necessity of treating with France.

The most subtle and specious argument he uses is
this  : if we go to war,  it cannot be determined that it
shall last for ever ; and peace can never be made,  what-
ever may be the events of the war,  without treating
with France.  To this I answer,  that we neither want
nor wish to meddle with the interior government of
that country within its own limits,  but to check their
conquests and ravages without ; to prevent their spread-

392

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

ing anarchy,  desolation,  and atheism over all Europe  ;
to prevent their sending emissaries into our own coun-
try to detach the King’s subjects from their alle-
giance, and,  by encouraging revolt,  preparing and
hastening a similar revolution here to that within
their own country,  which has been attended with such
misery and horrors to all good men as were never
equalled in any other period of the history of the
world.  God forbid I should wish any human creature
so ill as to have the most distant idea,  at present,  of
placing him on the torturing throne of France! — No,
no  ; it will require ages to make the savages of that
nation human creatures.

But if England does not try to prevent their preying
upon all the rest of the world,  who or what else is
likely to do it  ? They have voted an army of between
500,000 and 600,000 men for the next campaign.
What but our fleet can impede their progress and sub-
sistence ? But,  alas 1 Ireland,  Scotland,  and several
English towns and counties,  are said to be ripe for
open rebellion ; yet they will be more easily kept in
obedience during war than peace.  Government is
most vigorous,  and the laws more strictly executed
against treason and rebellion,  then,  than in the piping
times of peace.  I think there is some chance,  at least,
of preserving our constitution and independence by
opposing French doctrines and conquests;  and none
at all by waiting till they have a fleet and leisure to
attack us.

I made Lord Orford  (Horace Walpole)  another visit
a few days ago  : I did not mention war to him ; but
we talked of nothing else but the French monsters,
and their most saint-like Royal martyr I He says
that France has produced at once in this age the ex-

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

393

tremes of virtue and vice,  in the King and his accui’sed
relation Egalite,  which no other age ever knew.

At the club*,  on Tuesday,  the fullest I ever knew,
consisting of fifteen members,  fourteen seemed all of
one mind,  and full of reflections on the late transaction
in France;  but,  when about half the company was as-
sembled, who should come in but Charles Fox  ! There
were already three or four bishops arrived,  hardly one
of whom could look at him,  I believe,  without horror,
After the first bow and cold salutation,  the conversa-
tion stood still for several minutes.  During dinner
Mr.  Windham,  and Burke,  jun.,  came in,  who were
obliored to sit at a side table.  All w-ere houfonnes,  and

o

not a word of the martyred King or politics of any
kind was mentioned  ; and though the company was
chiefly composed of the most eloquent and loquacious
men in the kingdom,  the conversation was the dullest
and most uninteresting I ever remember at this or
any such large meeting.  Mr.  Windham and Fox,
civil — young Burke and he never spoke.  The Bishop
of Peterborough as sulky as the d — 1 ; the Bishop of
Salisbury,  more a man of the world,  very cheerful ; the
Bishop of Dromore frightened as much as a barn-door
fowl at the sight of a fox ; Bishop Marlow preserved
his usual pleasant countenance.  Steevens in the chair ;
the Duke of Leeds on his right,  and Fox on his left,
said not a word.  Lords Ossory and Lucan,  formerly
much attached,  seemed silent and sulky.

I have not time for more description.

God bless you both,  and all !

C.  B.

The Literary Club.

394

DIARY and letters

[Part IX.

Miss Barney to Dr.  Burney.

Norbury Park,  Monday,  February 4th,  ’93.

How exactly do I sympathise in all you say and
feel,  niy dear sir,  upon these truly calamitous times  !
I hear daily more and more affecting accounts of
the saint-like end of the inart}^red Louis.  Madame
de Stael,  daughter of M.  Necker,  is now at the head
of the colony of French noblesse,  established near
Mickleham.  She is one of the first women I have ever
met with for abilities and extraordinary intellect.  She
has just received,  by a private letter,  many particulars
not yet made public,  and which the Commune and
Commissaries of the Temple had ordered should be
suppressed.  It has been exacted by those cautious
men of blood that riothing should be printed that
could attendrir le  'pevple.

Among other circumstances,  this letter relates that
the poor little Dauphin supplicated the monsters who
came with the decree of death to his unhappy father,
that they would carry him to the Convention,  and the
forty-eight Sections of Paris,  and suffer him to beg
his father’s life.

This touching request was probably suggested to
him by his miserable mother or aunt.  When the King
left the Temple to go to the place of sacrifice,  the cries
of his wretched family were heard,  loud and shrill,
through the courts without! — Good Heaven!  what
distress and horror equalled ever what they must then
experience  ?

When he arrived at the scaffold,  his Confessor,  as if
with the courage of inspiration,  called out to him aloud,
after his last benediction,  “ Fils de Saint Louis,  montez
au ciel ! ” — The King ascended with firmness,  and

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

395

meant to harangue his guilty subjects  ; but the  \vreu.h
Santerre said he was not there to speak,  and the
drums drowned the words,  except to those nearest the
terrible spot.  To those he audibly was heard to say,
“ Citoyens,  je meurs innocent ! Je pardonne a mes
assassins ; et je souhaite que ma mort soit utile a mon

])eu])le.”  . , 1 • f

]\I.  de Narbonne has been quite ill with the griet

of this last enormity ; and M.  d’Arblay is now indis-
posed. This latter is one of the most delightful cha-
racters I have ever met,  for openness,’  probity,  intel-
lectual knowledge,  and unhackneyed manners.  U.  de
Narbonne is far more a man of the world,  and joins
the most courtly refinement and elegance to the quick-
est repartee and readiness of wit.  If anything but
desolation and misery had brought them hither,  we
should have thought their addition to the Norbury
society all that could be wished.  They are bosom
friends.

V/

V F K

Madame de Stael Holstein to Miss Burney*.

Written from Juniper Hall,  Dorking,  Surrey,  1793.

When J learned to read english J begun by milton,
to know all or renounce at all in once.  J follow the
same system in writing my first english letter to Miss
burney  ; after such an enterprize nothing can affright
me.  J feel for her so tender a friendship that it melts
my admiration,  inspires my heart with hope of her
indulgence,  and impresses me with the idea that in a

* As literary curiosities,  these notes from Madame de Stael
have been printed verbatim et literatim : they arc probably her
earliest attempts at English writing.

DIARY AND LETTERS

396

[Part IX.

toHgue even unknown J could express sentiments so
deeply felt.

iny servant will return for a french ansAver.  J
intreat miss burney to correct the words but to pre-
serA'e the sense of that card.

best compliments to my dear protectress,  Madame
Phillipe.

Madame de Stael Holstein to Miss Burney.

Your card in french,  my dear,  has already some-
thing of your grace in Avriting english : it is cecilia
translated,  my only correction is to fill the interrup-
tions of some sentences,  and J put in them kindnesses
for me.  J do not consult my master to Avrite to you  ;
a fault more or less is nothing in such an occasion.
What may be the perfect grammar of J\Ir.  Clarke,  it
cannot establish any sort of equality between you and
J.  then J Avill trust Avith my heart alone to supply the
deficiency,  let us speak upon a grave subject:  do J
see you that morning?  What neAvs from Captain
phillip  ? Avhen do you come spend a large Aveek in
that house  ? every question requires an exact answer ;
a good,  also,  my happiness depends on it,  and J have
for pledge your honour.

good morroAv and farewell.

pray madame phillips,  recollecting all her knoAvledge
in french,  to explain that card to you.

Madame de Stael Holstein to Miss Burney.

January,  1793.

TELL me,  my dear,  if this day is a charming one,  if
it must be a sweet epoch in my life? — do you come to

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

397

1793]

dine here with your lovely sister,  and do you stay
night and day till our sad separation?  J rejoice me
with that hope during this week ; do not deceive my
heart.

J hope that card very clear,  mais,  pour plus de certi-
tude, je vous dis en franqois que votre chambre,  la
maison,  les habitants de Juniper,  tout est pr^t a rece-
voir la premiere femme d’angleterre.

Janvier.

Miss Burney to Dr.  Bimiey,

Micklebam,  February 29tb,  1793.

Have you not begun,  dearest sir,  to give me up as a
lost sheep?  Susanna’s temporary widowhood,  however,
has tempted me on,  and spelled me with a spell I know
not how to break.  It is long,  long since we have passed
any time so completely together ; her three lovely chil-
dren only knit us the closer.  The widowhood,  however,
we expect now quickly to expire,  and I had projected
my return to my dearest father for Wednesday next,
which would complete my fortnight here;  but some
circumstances are intervening that incline me to post-
pone it another week.

Madame de Stael,  daughter of M.  Necker,  and
wife of the Swedish Ambassador to France,  is now
head of the little French colony in this neighbourhood.
M.  de Stael,  her husband,  is at present suspended in his
embassy,  but not recalled ; and it is yet uncertain whe-
ther the Regent Duke of Sudermania will send him to
Paris,  during the present horrible Convention,  or order
him home.  He is now in Holland,  waiting for com-
mands. Madame de Stael,  however,  was unsafe in
Paris,  though an ambassadress,  from the resentment
owed her by the Commune,  for having received and

398

DIARY AND I.ETTERS

[Part IX.

protected in her house various destined victims of the
10th August and of the 2nd September.  She was even
once stopped in her carriage,  which they called aristo-
cratic, because of its arms and ornaments,  and threat-
ened to be murdered,  and only saved by one of the worst
wretches of the Convention,  Tallien,  who feared provok-
ing a Avar Avith Sweden,  from such an offence to the Avife
of its Ambassador.  She Avas obliged to have this same
Tallien to accompany her,  to sav-e her from massacre,
for some miles from Paris,  Avhen compelled to quit if.

She is a Avoman of the first abilities,  I think,  1 have
ever seen ; she is more in the style of Mrs.  Thrale
than of any other celebrated character,  but she has
infinitely more depth,  and seems an evmn profound
politician and metaphysician.  She has suffered us to
hear some of her Avorks in MS.,  Avhich are truly Avon-
derful,  for poAvers both of thinking and expression.
She adores her father,  but is much alarmed at haAnng
had no news from him since he has heard of the mas-
sacre of the martyred Louis  ; and Avho can Avonder it
should have overpoAvered him  ?

EA'^er since her arrival she has been pressing me to
spend some time AAuth her before I return to toAvn.
She Avanted Susan and me to pass a month Avith her,
but,  finding that impossible,  she bestowed all her
entreaties upon mo alone,  and the}'^  are groAvn so
urgent,  upon my preparation for departing,  and ac-
quainting her my furlough of absence Avas OA'er,  that
she not only insisted upon my Avriting to you,  and telling
Avhy I deferred my return,  but declares she will also
Avrite herself,  to ask your permission for the Ausit.  She
exactly resembles Mrs.  Thrale in the ardour and
Avarmth of her temper and partialities.  I find her
impossible to resist,  and therefore,  if your answer to

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

399

lier is sucl\  as 1 conclude it must be,  I shall wait upon
her for a week.  She is only a short walk from hence,
at Juniper Hall.

There can be nothino;  imagined more charniino:,
more fascinatin'^,  than this colony ; between their suf-
ferings and their agreineus they occupy us almost
wholly.  M.  de Narbonne,  alas,  has no 1000^.  a-year !
he got over only 4000/.  at the beginning,  from a most
splendid fortune ; and,  little foreseeing how all has
turned out,  he has lived,  we fear,  upon the principal;
for he says,  if all remittance is withdrawn,  on account of
the war,  he shall soon be as ruined as those companions
of his misfortunes with whom as yet he has shared his
little all.  He bears the highest character for  "ood-
ness,  parts,  sweetness of manners,  and ready wit.  You
could not keep your heart from him if you saw him
only for half an hour.  He has not yet recovered from
the black blow of the King’s death,  but he is better,
and less jaundiced ; and he has had a letter which,  I
hear,  has comforted him,  though at first it was almost
heart-breaking,  informing him of the unabated regard
for him of the truly saint-like Louis.  This is commu-
nicated in a letter from M.  de Malcsherbes.

M.  d’Arblay is one of the most singularly interesting
characters that can ever have been formed.  He has a
sincerity,  a frankness,  an ingenuous openness of nature,
that I had been unjust enough to think could not
belong to a Frenchman.  With all this,  which is his
military portion,  he is passionately fond of literature,  a
most delicate critic in his own language,  well versed in
both Italian and German,  and a very elegant poet.
He has just undertaken to become my French master
for pronunciation,  and he gives me long daily lessons
in reading.  Pray expect wonderful improvements  !

400

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

In return,  I hear him in English ; and for his theme
this evening he has been writing an English address
a Mr.  Burney,  (i.  e.  M.  le Docteur),  joining in Madame
de Stael’s request.

I hope your last club was more congenial?  M.  de
Talleyrand insists on conveying this letter for you.  He
has been on a visit here,  and returns again on Wed-
nesday. He is a man of admirable conversation,  quick,
terse,  and yet deep,  to the extreme of those four
words.  They are a marvellous set for excess of agree-
ability.

Adieu,  most dear sir.  Susanna sends her best love,
and the Fanni and Norbury kisses and sweet words.
I beg ray love to my mother,  and hope she continues
amending.  I am ever,  ever,  and ever.

My dearest Father’s

F.  B.

Miss Burney to Mrs.  Lock.

Mickleham.

Your kind letter,  my beloved Fredy,  was most thank-
fully received,  and we rejoice the house and situation
promise so much local comfort;  but I quite fear with
you that even the has bleu will not recompense the loss
of the Junipere society.  It is,  indeed,  of incontestable
superiority.  But you must burn this confession,  or my
poor effigy will blaze for it.  I must tell you a little of
our proceedings,  as they all relate to these people of a
thousand,

M.  d’Arblay came from the melancholy sight of
departing Norbury to Mickleham,  and with an air the
most triste,  and a sound of voice quite dejected,  as I
learn from Susanna  ; for I was in my heroics,  and could
not appear till the last half-hour.  A headache prevented

OK THK AUTHOR OK EVELINA.

401

1 793]

my wailing upon Madame de Stael that day,  and obliged
me to retreat soon after nine o’clock in the evening,  and
my douce cornpagne would not let me retreat alone.  W e
had only robed ourselves in looser drapery,  when a violent
ringing at the door  .startled us ; we listened,  and heard
the voice of M.  d’Ai blay,  and Jerry answering  “ They’re
tione to bed.”  Comment?  What?”  cried he:  ^‘Cest
impossible I Vhat you say?’’  Jerry then,  to show his
new education in this new colony,  said  “ Alice couchee  /”
It rained furiously,  and we were quite grieved,  but
there was no help.  He left a book for Mile.  Burnet,
and word that Madame de Stael could not come on
account of the bad weather.  M.  Ferdinand was with
him,  and has bewailed the disaster;  and M.  Sicard says
he accompanied them till he was quite wet through his
redingote  ; but this enchanting M.  d’Arblay will muimur
at nothing.

’I'he next day they all came,  just as we had dined,  for
a morning visit,  — Madame de Stael,  M.  Talle\rand,
M.  Sicard,  and M.  d’Arblay;  the latter then made
insisfance upon commencing my master of the lan-
guage, and I think he will be almost as good a one as the
little Don.*

M.  de Talleyrand opened,  at last,  with infinite wit
and capacity.  Madame de Stael whispered me,  “ How'
do you like him?”  ‘'Not very much,”  I answered,
“ but I do not know him.”  “ O,  1 assure you,’’  cried
she,  “ he is the best of the men.”

I was happy not to agree  ; but I have no lime for such
minute detail till we meet.  She read the noble tragedy
of  ‘ Tancrede'  till she blinded us all round.  She is the
most charming person,  to use her own phrase,  “ that
never I saw.”

Mr.  Clarke.

402

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

* * * *

We called yesterday noon upon Madame de Stael,
and sat with her till three o’clock,  only the little Don
being present.  She was delightful ; yet I see much
uneasiness hanging over the whole party,  from the terror
that the war may stop all remittances.  Heaven forbid  !

F.  B.

Miss Burney to Mrs.  Lock.

Thursday,  Mickleham.

I HAVE no heart not to write,  and no time to write.
I have been scholaring all day,  and mastering too;  for our
lessons are mutual,  and more entertaining than can
easily be conceived.  My master of the language says he
dreams of how much more solemnly he shall write to
charming Mrs.  Lock,  after a little more practice.
Madame de Stael has written me two English notes,
quite beautiful in ideas,  and not very reprehensible in
idiom.  But English has nothing to do with elegance
such as theirs — at least,  little and rarely.  I am always
exposing myself to the wrath of John Bull,  when this
coterie come in competition.  It is inconceivable what a
convert M.  de Talleyrand has made of me  ; I think hijn
now one of the first members,  and one of the most
charming,  of this exquisite set:  Susanna is as com-

pletely a proseLte.  His powers of entertainment are
astonishing,  both in information and in raillery.  We
know nothing of how'  the rest of the world goes on.
They are all coming to-night.  1 have yet avoided,  but
with extreme difficulty,  the change of abode.  Madame
de Stael,  how'ever,  will not easily be parried,  and
how I may finally arrange T know not.  Certainly I will

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

403

not offend or hint her,  but otherwise I had ratlier be a
visitor than a guest.

Pray tell Mr.  Lock that  "the best of the men”  grows
upon us at every meeting.  We dined and stayed till
midnight at Jimi'pere on Tuesday,  and I would 1 could
recollect but the twentieth part of the excellent things that
were said.  Madame de Stael read us the opening of
her work  ‘ Sur le Bonhevr it seems to me admirable.
M.  de Talleyiand avowed he had met with nothing better
thought or more ably expressed;  it contains the most
touching allusions to their country’s calamities.

F.  B.

Dr.  Burney to Miss Burney.

Chelsea College,  Tuesday Morning,  February 19th,  1793.

W Hv,  Fanny,  what are you about,  and where are you?
I shall write at you,  not knowing how to write to you,  as
Swift did to the flying and romantic Lord Peter-
borough.

I had written the above,  after a yesteiday’s glimmering
and 'a feverish night as usual,  when behold  ! a letter of
requisition for a further furlough  ! I had long histories
ready for nanation de vive roix,  but my time is too
short and my eyes and head too weak for much writing
this morning.  I am not at all surprised at your account
of the captivating powers of Madame de Stael.  It
corresponds with all I had heard about her,  and with the
opinion I formed of her intellectual and literary powers,
in reading her charming little  ‘ Apologie de Bovsseau.'
But as nothing human is allowed to be perfect,  she has
not escaped censure.  Her house was the centre of revo-
lutionists previous to the 10th of August,  after her father’s
departure,  and she has been accused of partiality to

•2 D ‘2

404

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

M.  de N . But perhaps all may be Jacobinical ma-

lignity. However,  unfavourable stories of her have been
brought hither,  and the Burkes and Mrs.  Ord have
repeated them to me.  But you know that M.  Necker’s
administration,  and the conduct of the nobles who first
joined in the violent measures that subverted the ancient
establishments by the abolition of nobility and the ruin
of the church,  during the first National Assembly,  are
held in greater horror by aristocrats than even the mem-
bers of the present Convention.  I know this will make
you feel uncomfortable,  but it seemed to me right to
hint it to you.  If you are not absolutely in the house
of Madame de Stael when this arrives,  it would perhaps
be possible for you to waive the visit to her,  by a com-
promise, of having something to do for Susy,  and so
make the addendum to your stay under her roof.

I dined yesterday wdth dear  ]Mis.  Crewe,  and,  Mr.  C.
being come to town,  did not go to the house,  whereof
Mrs.  C.  and I rejoiced much.  His brother and Mr.
Hare dined with us,  and all was well and pleasant,  ex-
cept my head.

Barry last night at the Academy read a discourse,  and,
as he had apprised me that he should introduce an eloge
in it upon Sir Joshua,  I determined to go.  On my
mentioning this circumstance at dinner,  Mr.  Hare,  when
he vvas departing in order to attend his friend Charles
Fox’s motion in parliament,  said to Crewe,  “ Dr.  B.
is going to hear the eloge ot his friend Sir Joshua Rey-
nolds, and I am going,  I fear,  to hear the oraison
fimebre d'un homme illustre."

Mrs.  Ord wants me to meet IMr.  Smelt to-morrow
evening,  and you,  if returned.  Lady Hesketh has
written two or three civil notes of invitation to us for
“ blue.”

17^3]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

405

God bless you  ! I must make up for town business.
J.ove to dear Susy and children.

Ever allectionately yours,

C.  13.

Mias Burney to Dr.  Burney.

IMickleham,  Friday,  February 22ud,  ’93.

WiiAT a kind letter is my dearest father s,  and how
kindly speedy  ! yet it is too true it has given me very
uncomfortable feelings.  1 am both hurt and asto-
nished at the acrimony of malice ; indeed,  1 believe all
this  ]>arty to merit nothing but lionour,  compassion,
and  ])raise.  Madame de Stael,  the daughter of M.
Necker — the idolising daughter — of course,  and even
from the best principles,  those of filial reverence,
entered into the opening of the Revolution just as her
father entered into it ; but as to her house having be-
come the centre of Revolutionists before the lOlh of
August,  it was so only for the Constitutionalists,  who,
at that period,  were not only members of the then
established government,  but the decided friends of
the King.  The aristocrats were then already banished,
or wanderers from fear,  or concealed and silent from

cowardice  ; and the Jacobins 1 need not,  after what

1 have already related,  mention how utterly abhor-
rent to her must be that fiend-like set.

The aristocrats,  however,  as you well observe,  and
as she has herself told me,  hold the Constitutionalists
in greater horror than the Convention itself.  This,
howevei’,  is a violence against justice which cannot,  I
hope,  be lasting;  and the malignant assertions which
persecute her,  all of which she has lamented to us,
she imputes equally to the bad and virulent of both
these parties.

406

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

The intimation concerning M.  de N.  was,  how-
ever, wholly new to us,  and I do firmly believe it a
gross calumny.  M.  de N.  was of her society,  which
contained ten or twelve of the first people in Paris,
and,  occasionally,  almost all Paris ; she loves him even
tenderly,  but so openly,  so simply,  so unaffectedly,
and with such utter freedom from all coc|uetry,  that,
if they were two men,  or two women,  the affection could
not,  I think,  be more obviously undesigning.  She is
very plain,  he is very handsome  ; her intellectual en-
dowments must be with him her sole attraction.

M.  de Talleyrand was another of her society,  and
she seems equally attached to him.  M.  le Viscomte
de Montmorenci she loves,  she says,  as her brother ;
he is another of this bright constellation,  and es-
teemed of excellent capacity.  She says,  if she continues
in England he will certainly come,  for he loves her too
well to stay away.  In short,  her whole coterie live to-
gether as brethren.  Madame la Marquise de la Chatre,
who has lately returned to France,  to endeavour to
obtain de quoi vivre en Angleterre,  and who had been
of this colony for two or three months since the 10th
of August,  is a bosom friend of Madame de Stael and
of all this circle : she is reckoned a very estimable
as well as fashionable woman ; and a daughter of
the unhappy Montmorin,  who was killed on the 1st of
September,  is another of this set.  Indeed,  I think you
could not spend a day with them and not see that
their commerce is that of pure,  but exalted and most
elegant,  friendship.

I would,  nevertheless,  give the world to avoid being
a guest under their roof,  now I have heard even the
shadow of such a rumour  ; and I will,  if it be possible
without hurting or offending them.  I have waived

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

107

and waived acceptance almost from the moment of
Madame de Staid’s arrival.  I prevailed with her to let
my letter go alone to you,  and I have told her,  with
regard to your answer,  that you were sensible of the
honour her kindness did me,  and could not refuse to
her request the week’s furlough  ; and then followed
reasons for the compromise you pointed out,  too dif-
fuse for writing.  As yet they have succeeded,  though
she is surprised and disappointed.  She wants us to
study French and English together,  and nothing could
to me be more desirable,  but for this invidious report.

Susanna and her Captain intend going to town on
Friday in next week,  and I have fixed therefore on
the same day for my return ; thus,  at all events,  the
time cannot be long.

M.  d’Arblay,  as well as M.  de Narbonne,  sent over
a declaration in favour of the poor King.  M.  d’A.
liad been commandant at Longwi,  and had been
named to that post by the King himself In the accu-
sation of the infernals,  as Mr.  Young justly calls them,
the King is accused of leaving Longwi undefended,
and a prey to the Prussians.  ^I.  d’Arblay,  who be-
fore that period had been promoted into the regiment
of iVI.  de Narbonne,  and thence summoned to be
Adjutant-General of Lafayette,  wrote therefore,  on
this charge,  to M.  de Malesherbes,  and told him that
the charge was utterly false ; that the King had taken
every precaution for the proper preservation of Longwi,
and that M.  d’Arblay,  the King’s commandant,  had
himself received a letter of thanks and approbation
from Dumouriez,  who said,  nothing would have been
lost had every commandant taken equal pains,  and ex-
erted equal bravery.

d'his original letter M.  d’Arblay sent to M Males-

408

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

herbes,  not as a vindication of himself,  for he had been
summoned from Longwi before the Prussians assailed
it,  but as a vindication of the officer appointed by the
King,  while he had yet the command.  M.  de Males-
herbes wrote an answer of thanks,  and said he should
certainly make use of this information in the defence.
However,  the fear of Dumouriez,  I suppose,  prevented
his being named.

M.  d’Arblay,  in quitting France with Lafayette,
upon the deposition of the King,  had only a little
ready money in his pocket,  and he has been clecrHe
since,  and all he was worth in the world is sold and
seized by the Convention.  M.  de Narbonne loves him
as the tenderest of brothers,  and,  while one has a
guinea in the world,  the other will have half.  “ Ah  !”
cried M.  d’Arblay,  upon the murder of the King,  which
almost annihilated him,  “ I know not how those can
exist who have any feelings of remorse,  when I scarce
can endure my life,  from the simple feeling of regret
that ever I pronounced the word liberty in France!”

I confess 1 w'as much pleased with the oraisonfunebre.
We hear no news here,  except French,  and see no
newspapers,  and not an English newsmonger.  The
Captain is just returned from Colchester.  Babes are
well.  Adieu,  most dear Sir!  Your affectionate

F.  B.

Madame de Sta'el to Miss Burney.

Juniper,  ce 8 Mars.

My dear Miss, — Pour cette fois vous me permettrez
de vous ecrire en Franqois;  il s’agit de m’arranger pour
vous voir,  et je ne veux pas risquer d’equivoques dans
cet important interet.  Mardi entre midi et une heure je
serai a Chelsea College,  avec votre maitre de Francois

409

1793]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

et Mr.  Clarke:  tous les deux causeroiit ensemble,  et
voiis — voiis me parlerez.  Je sais que vous etes j)leine
(ie bonte  [)Our moi,  et  (jue vous mettez meme du cou-
rage contre la reaction de quelques mechancetes Fran-
coises auxquelles les terns de guerre civile doivent ac-
coutumer ; mais totit ce que je vous demande c’est
lu’aimer,  dussiez vous attendre a d’autres terns  [)our le
dire.  II faut laisser I’injustice aux hommes malheureux  ;
il faut qu’ils s’occupeut des personnes quand ils ne peu-
vent lien sur les affaires  ; il faut qu’ils douuent quelques
uus de leurs preventions aux etrangers,  qui n’out pas le
terns de juger les proces des individus;  il faut tout ce qui
est ordinaire et e.xti aordinaire dans une pareille epoque,
et se contier au terns pour l’o[)inion publique — a I’amitie
pour le bonheur particulier.  Ils vous diront que je suis
democrate,  et ils oublieront que raes amis et moi nous
avous ecliappe au fer des Jacobins:  ils vous dirout que
j’aime passionuement les affaires,  et je suis ici quand
M.  de Stael me presse d’aller a Paris,  me meler avec lui
des plus importantes  (ceci pour vous seule)  : enfm ils
chercheront a troubler jusqu’au repos de I’amitie,  et ne
permettront pas que,  fidele a mes devoirs,  j’aye eu le
besoin de partager pendant deux niois le malheur de
celui dont j’avois sauve la vie.  Il y a dans tout cela taut
d’absurdes faussetes,  qu’un jour ou I’autre je cederai au
desir d’en parler.  Mais qui peut maintenant se permettre
d’occuper de soi  ? T1 n’y a pas d'idees generales assez
vastes pour ce moment.  Je suis bien mal ce precepte
en vous ecrivant ; mais,  parceque je vous ai trouve la
meilletire et la plus distiuguee;  parcequ’avant de vous
connoitre,  j’ambitionnois de vous plaire  ; parceque,  depuis
que je vous ai vu,  il m’est necessaire de vous interesser,  je
me persuade que vous devez m’aimer ; je crois bien
atissi que votre bonte pour moi m’a valu quelques en-

410

DIARY AND LETTERS

[ Part IX.

vieux ; ainsi il y a un pen de justice dans ce que vous
faites pour moi.  Je chasse toutes mes idees tristes en
songeant que je vous verrai Mardi,  et  !es jours suivans,
chez Madame Lock — ^en pensaut a votre aimable sceur
Madame Phillips^  qui,  sentant le besoiii que j’avois d’etre
consolee,  a ete doublement aimable pour moi apres votre
depart.  Repondez a ma lettre.  Adieu  !

Mrs.  Phillips to Mrs.  Lock.

Mickleham,  April 2ndj 1793.

* * * *

I MUST,  however,  say something of Juniper,  whence
I had an irresistible invitation to dine,  &c.,  yesterday,
and hear M.  de Lally Tolendal read his Mort de
Strafford,’  which he had already recited once,  and
which Aladame de Stael requested him to repeat for
my sake.

1 had a great curiosity to see AI.  de Lally.  I can-
not say that feeling was gratified by the sight of him,
though it was satisfied,  insomuch that it has left me
without any great anxiety to see him again.  He is
the very reverse of all that my imagination had led
me to expect in him : large,  fat,  with a great head,
small nose,  immense cheeks,  nothing distingue in his
manner;  and en fait d' esprit,  and of talents in conver-
sation, so far,  so very far,  distant from our Jimiperiens,
and from AI.  de Talleyrand,  who was there,  as I could
not have conceived,  his abilities as a writer and his
general reputation considered.  He seems nn bon gar-
con,  un ires honnete gargon,  as M.  Talleyrand says
of him,  et rien de plus.

He is extremely absorbed by his tragedy,  which he
recites by heart,  acting as well as declaiming with
great energy,  though seated,  as Le Texier is.  He

I79.‘5]  OF THK AUTHOR OF KVEUNA.  411

seemed,  j)ievious to the  ])erformanee,  occupied com-
pletely by it,  excej)t while the dinner lasted,  which he
did not neglect;  but hc\vas continually reciting to hirn-
sell’  till we sat down to table,  and afterwards between
the courses.

M.  I’aileyrand seemed much struck with his piece,
which appears to me to have very fine lines and pas-
sages in it,  but which,  altogether,  interested me but
little.  1 confess,  indeed,  the violence of se.s'  gestes,  and
the alternate howlins"  and thunderinj;  of his voice in
declaiming,  fatigued me excessively.  If our Fanny
had been present,  I am afraid I should many times have
been affected as one does not expect to be at a tragedy.

We sat down at seven to dinner,  and had half
finished before M.  d’Arblay appeared,  though repeat-
edly sent for  ; he was profoundly grave and silent,  and
disappeared after the dinner,  which was very gay.  He
was sent for,  after coffee and Norbury were gone,  several
times,  that the tragedy might be begun;  and at last
Madame de S.  impatiently proposed beginning without
him.  Mais cela lui fera de la peine,”  said M.
d’Autun  (Talleyrand),  goodnaturedly ; and,  as she per-
sisted, he rose up and limped out of the room to fetch
him  ; he succeeded in brinffins:  him.

M.  Malouet has left them.  La Princesse d’Henin is
a very pleasing,  well-bred woman  ; she left Juniper the
next morning with M.  de Lally.

S.  P.

Afrs.  PhiJUjya to Mvm Burney.

Mickleham,  April 3rd.

After I had sent off my letter to you on Monday
1 walked on to Juniper,  and entered at the same mo-
ment with Mr.  .Tenkinson and his attorney — a man

412

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

whose figure strongly resembles some of Hogarth’s
most ill-looking personages,  and who appeared to me
to be brought as a kind of spy,  or witness of all that
was passing.  I would have retreated,  fearing to inter-
rupt business,  but I was surrounded,  and pressed to stay,
by Madame de Stael with great emjjressement,  and with
much kindness by M,  d’Arbla}'  and all the rest.  Mr.
Clarke was the spokesman,  and acquitted himself with
great dignity and moderation ; Madame de S.  now and
then came forth with a little coquetterie pour adoucir ce
scmvage Jenkinson.  “^AVhat will you,  Mr.  Jenkinson?
tell to me,  what will you  ?”  M.  de Narbonne,  somewhat
indiqne de la mauvaise foi,  and e.rcede des lonqueurs
de son adversaire,  was not quite so gentle with him
and I was glad to perceive that he meant to resist,  in
some degree at least,  the exorbitant demands of his
landlord.

INIadame de Stael was ver}^  gay,  and M.  de Talley-
rand very cotnique,  this evening;  he criticised,  amongst
other things,  her reading of prose,  with great sang froid  :
“ Vous lisez tres mal la prose  ; vous avez un chant en
lisant,  une cadence,  et puis une monotonie,  qui n’est pas
bien du tout : en vous ecoutant on croit toujours en-
tendre des vers,  et cela a un fort mauvais effet !”

They talked over a number of their friends and ac-
quaintance with the utmost unreserve,  and sometimes
with the most comic humour imaginable, — M.  de Lally,
M.  de Lafayette,  la Princesse d’Henin,  la Princesse
de Poix,  a M.  Guibert,  an author,  and one who was,
Madame de S.  told me,  passionately in love with her
before she married,  and innumerable others.

M.  d’Arblay had been employed almost night and
day since he came from London in writing a Memoire,
which Mr.  Villiers had wished to have,  upon the  ‘ Ar-

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

413

tilleric a Cheval,’  and he had not concluded it till
this morning.

S.  P.

Mrs.  Phillips to Miss Burney.

Tuesday,  May 14tb.

Trusting to the kindness of chance,  I begin at the
top of my paper.  Our Juniperians went to see Paine’s
Hill yesterday,  and had the good-nature to take my little

happy Norbury.  In the evening came Miss F to

show me a circular letter,  sent by the Archbishop of Can-
terbury to all the parishes in England,  authorising the
ministers of those parishes to raise a subscription for
the unfortunate French clergy.  She talked of our neigh-
bours, and very shortly and abruptly said,  “ So,  Mrs.
Phillips,  we hear you are to have Mr.  Norbone and
the other French company to live with you — Pray is
it so  ?”

I was,  I confess,  a little startled at this plain inquiry,  but
answered as composedly as I could,  setting out with in-
forming this bete per sonnaye that Madame de Stael was
going to Switzerland to join her husband and family in a
few days,  and that of all the French company none would
remain but M.de Narbonne and M.  d’Arblay,  for whom
the Captain and myself entertained a real friendship and
esteem,  and whom he had begged to make our house
their own for a short time,  as the impositions they had
had to support from their servants,  &c.,  and the failure of
their remittances from abroad,  had obliged them to resolve
on breaking up housekeeping.

I had scarcely said thus much when our party arrived
from Paine’s Hill ; the young lady,  though she had diiink
tea,  was so obliging as to give us her company for near two
hours,  and made a curious attack on M.  de N.,  upon the

414

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

iirst pause,  in wretched French,  though we had before,  all
ol us,  talked no other language than English  ; — Je vous
prie,  M . Gnawbone,  comment se porte la Heine?”

Her pronunciation was such that 1 thought his under-
standing her miraculous  : however,  he did guess her mean-
ing, and answered,  with all his accustomed douceur and
politeness,  that he hoped well,  but had no means but
general ones of information.

“ I believe,”  said she afterwards,  “nobody was so hurt
at the King’.s death as my papa ! he couldn’t ride on
horseback next day !”

She then told M.  de Narbonne some anecdotes  (very
new to him,  no doubt),  which she had read in the news-
papers, of the Convention  ; and then spoke of M.  Egalile.
“ I hope,”  said she,  flinging her arms out with great vio-
lence, “ he’ll come to be gullytined.  He showed the
King how he liked to be gullytined,  so now I hope he’ll
be gullytined himself! — So shocking!  to give his vote
against his own nephew  !”

If the subject of her vehemence and blunders had been
less just or less melancholy,  I know not how I should
have kept my face in order.

Our evening was very pleasant when she was gone.
Madame de Stael is,  with all her wildness and blemishes,
a delightiul companion,  and M.  de N.  rises upon me in
esteem and affection every time I see him  : their minds in
some points ought to be exchanged,  for he is as delicate
as a really feminine woman,  and evidently suffers w hen
he sees her setting les bienseances aside,  as it often
enough befalls her to do.

Poor Madame de Stael has been greatly disappointed
and hurt by the failure of the friendship and inter-
course she had wished to maintain with you, — of that I
am sure ; I fear,  too,  she is on the point of being offended.

OF THK AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

1793]

4\:i

I am not likely to be her confidante if she is so,  and
only judwe from the nature of things,  and from lier
character,  and a kind of depit in her manner once or
twice in speaking of you.  She asked me if you would
accompany Mrs.  Lock back into the country  .^  I an-
swered that niy father would not wish to lose you for
so long a time at once,  as you had been absent from
him as a nurse so many days.

After a little pause,  Mais est-ce qu’une femme est
en tutelle pour la vie dans ce pays?”  she said.  “II me
paroit  (jue votre socur est comme une demoiselle de
quatorze ans.”

I did not oppose this idea,  but enlarged rather on
the constraints laid u])on females,  some very unneces-
sarily, in England, — hoping to lessen her depit;  it con-
tinued, however,  visible in her countenance,  though she
did not express it in words.

I must go back to Monday,  to tell you something
that passed which struck and affected me very much.
M.  de Talleyrand arrived at Juniper to dinner,  and
Madame de Stael,in a state of the most vehement im-
patience for news,  would scarce give him time to breathe
between her questions ; and when she had heard all he
could tell her,  she was equally impetuous to hear all
his conjectures.  She was evidently elated with hopes
of such success as would give peace,  security,  and hap-
piness to them all,  yet scarce dared give way to all her
flattering expectations.

M.  de Talleyrand’s hopes were alive likewise,  though
he did not,  like her,  lose his composure and comic
placidness of manner.

Madame de Stael,  between jest and earnest,  re-
proached M.  de Narbonne with a number of aristocratic
sentiments,  which she said had that day escaped him.

416

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

He calmly declared lie was willing to repeat and support
every word he had uttered.  She next reproached him
for always resisting her passion for conjectural discus-
sions. He said,  he had for the last half-year found
every one baffled in making conjectures  : ‘‘Mais,”  said
he,  very gravely,  and in a manner much impressed,
“ dans huit jours d’ici il me paroit qu’on pourra voir
assez clair pour former un plan ; et alors — je prendrai
mon parti.”

He said no more,  but dropped into a very deep re-
verie. “ Pour prendre un parti,”  said M.  de Talleyrand,
“ il faut d’abord savoir si celui qui nous conviendroit
sera assez fort pour justifier I’esperance de succes  ; sans
quoi il y auroit de la folie a se meler de la partie.
Mais pour moi,”  continued he,  laughing,  “ j ai grande
envie de me battre,  je vous I’avoue.”

Ah,  mais,  sans doute,”  said Madame de Staffl,  “dans
une situation desesperee comme la votre,  il faut bien
que vous ayiez le besoin de faire des efforts.”

“ Vous le sentez,”  said M.  de N.,  with sadness,
“ parceque vous n’avez pas vecu a Juniper,  proche de
Norbury et de Madame Philippe — parceque vous avez
vecu en Woodstock Street.”

“ Mais,”  said M.  de Talleyrand,  “je vous donne ma
parole que ce me seroit un plaisir de bien battre tons
ces vilains gueux.”

“Eh,  non,”  said M.  de N.,  with a mixture of douceur
and sadness which was very touching,  “ dites moi done
le plaisir qu’il y auroit a donner la mort a ces pauvres
miserables,  dont I’ignorance et la betise out ete les
plus grands crimes.  S’il falloit ne faire la guerre que
centre Marat,  et Danton,  et Robespierre,  et M.  Egalite,
et quelques centaines d’autres infames sefflerats,  j’y
pourrai peut-etre trouver de la satisfaction aussi.”

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

417

1793]

After this he again fell into his reverie,  and the con-
versation was supported by Madame de Stael and M.
dc Talleyrand,  who,  by the way,  is going to sell all his
books,  and who very placidly said to-day,  “ Je vais
quitter ma maison dc Woodstock Street ; ellc est trop
chere.”

* ♦ ♦ ♦ *

S.  P.

Madame de Stael to Miss Burney.

Juniper,  1 1th May.

Je vois bien,  iny dear Miss,  que vous voulez vous ac-
quitter a force de services ; niais si vous voiis etiez pennis
de lire Voltaire,  je vous dirois ces deux vers un peu
changes : —

U n sentiment est cent fois au dessus
Et de I’esprit et de la bonte me me.

Oublions et le bonheur et le inalheur de notre liaison
ensemble,  pour retourner au doux penchant de la recon-
noissaiice.  Les dentelles de mon emigiee peuvent etre
vendues en detail,  parceque  -c’est le seul moyen de les
vendre.  Quant au prix,  c’est un marchand de dentelles
a votre choix qui doit le fixer.  Une tille de chez  ^Madame
Roger,  Duke-street,  Piccadilly,  a estime le tout lOOA
sterling.  Mais je ne sais pas un mot de details,  et la
premiere marchande de dentelles que vous reucontrerez
vous le dira.

(,^uant a the ogly,  tall,  and good servant,  je demande
quatre jours pour repondre a cette grande affaire:  je de-
niande aussi si elle salt ecrire ce qu’il faut pour le bih
d’un dejeuner,  de sucre,  de the,  &c.

Maintenant que je vous ai bleu fatigue de tous les
services que je veux rendre a mes amis,  et que votre ex-

418

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

celient caractere vous fait desirer de partager,  laissez moi
voiis dire que je suis triste de partir peut-etre sans vous
revoir ; et qu’en ecartant tons les linages de mon coeur,
je serai toiijours interessee dans vos succes,  et dans votre
boiilieur.

Soyez assez bonne pour exprimer,  avec I’accent de
Cecilia,  tout le regret que je sens d’avoir ete bannie de la
chambre de nos ainiables malades,  que nia peusee n’a pas
quittee.

[The frequency and intimacy with which Miss Burney
and M.  d’Arblay now met,  ripened into attachment the
high esteem wliich each felt for the other;  and,  after
many struggles and scruples,  occasioned by his reduced
circumstances and clouded prospects,  M.  d’Arbiay wrote
her an offer of his hand;  candidly acknowledging,  how-
ever, the slight hope he entertained of ever recovering the
fortune he had lost by the Revolution.

At this time Miss Burney went to Chesington for a
short period;  probably hoping that the extreme quiet of
that place would assist her deliberations,  and tranquillize
her mind during her present perplexities.]

Mrs.  Phillijjs to Miss Burney at Chesington.

Sunday,  after church,  I walked up to Norbury;  there
unexpectedly I met all our Juniperians,  and listened to
one of the best conversations I ever heard  : it was on
literary topics,  and the chief speakers Madame de Stael,
M.  de Talleyrand,  Mr.  Lock,  and M.  Dumont,  a gentle-
man on a visit of two days at Juniper,  a Genevois,  homrne
d'esprit et de lettres.  I had not a word beyond the first
“how d’yes”  with any one,  being obliged to run home to
my abominable dinner in the midst of the discourse.

On Monday I went,  by invitation,  to Juniper to dine,

1703]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

410

and before I came away at night a letter anived express
to Madame de Stael.  On reading it,  the change in her
countenance made me guess the contents.  It was from
the Swedisli gentleman who had been appointed by her
husband to meet lier at Ostend ; lie wrote from that place
that he was awaiting her arrival.  She had designed
walking home with us by moonlight,  but her spirits were
too much oppressed to enable her to keep this intention.

M.  d’Arblay walked home with Phillips and me.  Every
moment of his time has been given of late to transcribing
a MS.  work of Madame de Staid,  on  ‘ L’lntlueuce des
Passions.’  It is a work of considerable length,  and written
in a hand the most difficult possible to decipher.

On Tuesday we all met again at Norbury,  where we
spent the day.  Madame de Staiil could not rally her
spirits at all,  and seemed like one torn from all that was
dear to her.  I was truly concerned.

After giving me a variety of charges,  or rather entreaties,
to watch and attend to the health,  spirits,  and affairs of the
friends she was leaving,  she said to me,  “ Et dites a Mile.
Burney qne je ne lui en veux pas du tout — que je quitte
le pays I’aimant bien sincerement,  et sans rancune.”

I assured her earnestly,  and with more words than 1
have room to insert,  not only of your admiration,  but
affection,  and sensibility of her worth,  and chagrin at see-
ing no more of her.  1 hope I exceeded not your wishes;
mais il ny ai'oit j)cts moycn de register.

She seemed pleased,  and said,  “Vous etes bien bonne
de me dire cela,”  but in alow and faint voice,  and dropped
the subject.

Before we took leave,  M.  d’Arblay was already gone,
meaning to finish transcribing her MS.  I came home
with Madame de Stael and M.  de Narbonne.  The for-
mer actually sobbed in saying farewell to Mrs.  Lock,  and

2 F.  2

DIARY AND LETTERS

420

[Part IX.

half way down the hill ; her parting from me was likewise
very tender and flattering.

I determined,  however,  to see her again,  and met her
near the school,  on Wednesdav mornino;,  with a short note
and a little offering which I was irresistibly tempted to
make her.  She could not speak to me,  but kissed her
hand with a very speaking and touching expression of
countenance.

It was this morning,  and just as I was setting out to
meet her,  that Skilton arrived from Chesington.  I wrote
a little,  walked out,  and returned to finish as I could.

At dinner came our Tio — very bad indeed.  After it
we walked together with the children to Norbury;  but
little Fanny was so well pleased with his society,  that it
was impossible to get a word on any particular subject.
I,  however,  upon his venturing to question me where-
abouts was the camioagne oh se trouvoit Mile.  Burnet,
ventured de mon cote to speak the name of Chesington,
and give a little account of its inhabitants,  the early love
we had for the spot,  our excellent Mr.  Crisp,  and your
good and kind hostesses.

He listened with much interest and pleasure,  and said,
'^Mais,  ne pourroit-on pas faire ce petit voyage-la?”

I ventured to say nothing encouraging,  at least deci-
sively, in a great measure upon the children’s account,  lest
they should repeat;  and,  moreover,  your little namesake
seemed to me surprisingly attentive and eveillee,  as if
elle se doutoit de quelque chose.

IV hen we came home I gave our Tio some paper to
write to you  ; it was not possible for me to add more than
the address,  much as I wished it.

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

421

Miss Burney to Mrs.  Lock.

Chesiiigton,  1793.

I HAVE been quite enchanted to-day by my dear Susan’s
intelligence that my three convalescents walked to the
wood.  Would I had been there to meet and receive
them.

I have regretted e.\cessively the finishing so miserably
an acquaintance begun with so much spirit and pleasure,
and the dejnt I fear Madame de Stael must have expe-
rienced. I wish the world would take more care of itself,
and less of its neighbours.  I should have been very safe,
I trust,  without such flights,  and distances,  and breaches.
But there seemed an absolute resolution formed to crush
this acquaintance,  and compel me to appear its wilful
renouncer.  All I did also to clear the matter,  and soften
to Madame de Stael any pique or displeasure,  unfortu-
nately served only to increase both.  Had I understood
her disposition better,  I should certainly have attempted
no palliation,  for I rather offended her pride than molli-
fied her wrath.  Yet I followed the golden rule,  for how
much should I prefer any acknowledgment of regret at
such an apparent change,  from any one I esteemed,  to a
seeming unconscious complacency in an unexplained
caprice  !

I am vexed,  however,  very much vexed,  at the whole
business.  I hope she left 2Sorbury Park with full satis-
faction in its steady and more comfortable connection.
1 fear mine will pass for only a fashionable one.

Miss kitty Cooke still amuses me very much by her
incomparable dialect ; and by her kindness and friendli-
ness I am taken the best care of imaginable.

My poor brother,  who will carry this to Mickleham,  is
grievously altered by the loss of his little girl.  It has

422

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

affected his spirits and his health,  and he is grown so
thin and meagre,  that he looks ten years older than when
I saw him last.  I hope he will now revive,  since the
blow is over;  but it has been a very,  very hard one,  after
sucli earnest pains to escape it.

Did the wood look very beautiful  ? I have figured it
to myself with the three dear convalescents wandering in
its winding paths,  and inhaling its freshness and salubrity,
ever since I heard of this walk.  I wanted prodigiously
4o have issued forth from some little green recess,  to have
hailed your return.  I hope Mr.  Lock had the pleasure
of this sight.  Is Jenny capable of such a mounting
journey  ?

Do you know anything of a certain young lady,  who
eludes all my inquiries,  famous for having eight sisters,
all of uncommon talents?  I had formerly some inter-
course with her,  and she used to promise she would renew
it whenever I pleased ; but whether she is oft'ended that I
have slighted her offers so long,  or whether she is fickle,
or only whimsical,  I know not : all that is quite undoubted
is that she has concealed herself so effectually from my
researches,  that I might as well look for justice and cle-
mency in the French Convention,  as for this former
friend in the plains and lanes of Chesington,  where,  erst,
she met me whether I would or no.

* * * *

F.  B.

Miss Burney to Mrs.  Lock.

Chesington,  1793.

How sweet to me was my dearest Fredy’s assurance
that my gratification and prudence went at last hand in
hand!  I had longed for the sight of her writing,  and not
dared wish it.  I shall now long impatiently till I can

1793]  OF THE AUTHOK OF EVELINA.

423

have tlie pleasure of saving  ''  Ma’am,  I desire no more of
your letters.”

I have heard to-day all I can most covet of all my dear
late 7ualades.  I take it for granted this little visit was
made known to m^  dearest sister contidant.  I had pre-
pared for it from the time of my own expectation,  and I
have had much amusement in what the preparation pro-
duced. Mrs.  Hamilton ordered half a harn to he boiled
ready ; and Miss Kitty trimmed up her best cap,  and
tried it on,  on Saturday,  to get it in shape to her face.
She made chocolate also,  which we drank np on Monday
and Tuesday,  because it was spoiling.  “ I have never
seen none of the I'rench quality,”  she says,  “and 1 have
a pnrdigious curosihj ; though as to dukes and dukes’
sons,  and these high top captains,  I know they’ll think
me a mere country bumpkin.  Howsever,  they can’t call
me worse than Fat Kit Square,  and that’s the worst
name I ever got from any of our English pelite bears,
which I suppose these pelite French quality never heard
the like of.”

Unfortunately,  hov\ever,  when all was prepared above,
the French top caj)tain entered while poor Miss Kitty
was in dishbill,  and Mrs.  Hamilton finishing washing up
her china from breakfast.  A maid who was out at the
pump,  and first saw the arrival,  ran in to give Miss Kitty
time to escape,  for she was in her round dress night-cap,
and without her roll and curls.  However,  he followed
too quick,  and Mrs.  Hamilton was seen in her linen
gown and mob,  though she had put on a silk one in ex-
pectation for every noon these four or five days past;  and
Miss Kitty was in such confusion,  she hurried out of the
room.  She soon,  however,  returned,  with  (he roll and
curls,  and the forehead and throat fashionably lost,  in a
silk gown.  And though she had not intended to speak

424

DIAKY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

a word,  the gentle quietness of her guest so surprised and
pleased her,  that she never quitted his side while he
stayed,  and has sung his praises ever since.

Mrs.  Hamilton,  good soul ! in talking and inquiring
since of his history and conduct,  shed tears at the recital.
She says now she has really seen one of the French
gentry that has been drove out of their country by the
villains she has heard of,  she shall begin to believe there
really has been a Revolution!  and Miss Kitty says,  “I
purtest I did not know before but it was all a sham.”
*****

F.  B.

Miss Burney to Mrs.  Phillips.

t Friday,  May 3lst,  Chesington.

My heart so smites me this morning with making no
answer to all I have been requested to weigh and decide,
that I feel I cannot with any ease return to town without
at least complying with one demand,  which first,  at part-
ing yesterday,  brought me to write fully to you,  my Susan,
if I could not elsewhere to my satisfaction.

Much indeed in the course of last night and this morn-
ing has occurred to me,  that now renders my longer si-
lence as to prospects and proceedings unjustifiable to
myself.  I will therefore now address myself to both my
beloved confidants,  and open to them all my thoughts,
and entreat their own wdth equal plainness in return.

M.  d’Arblay’s last three letters convince me he is des-
perately dejected when alone,  and when perfectly na-
tural. It is not that he w'ants patience,  but he wants
rational expectation of better times  ; expectation founded
on something more than mere aerial hope,  that builds one
day upon w'hat the next blasts  ; and then has to build
again,  and again to be blasted.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

4-25

17^3]

Wliat aftects me the most in this situation is,  that his
time may as completely be lost as another’s peace,  by
waiting for the effects of distant events,  vague,  bewilder-
ing, and remote,  and quite as likely to lead to ill as to
good.  The very waiting,  indeed,  with the mind in such
a state,  is in itself an evil scarce to be recompensed.
*!(:*♦*

My dearest Fredy,  in the beginning of her knowledge
of this transaction,  told me that Mr.  Lock was ot opinion
that the 100/.  per annum might do,  as it does for many
a curate.  M.  d’A.  also most solemnly and affectingly
declares that le siitiple necessaire is all he requires,  and
here,  in your vicinity,  would unhesitatingly be preferred
by him to the most brilliant fortune in another sejour.

\{ he can say that,  what must  / be not to echo it?  I,
who in the bosom of my own most chosen,  most darling
friends

I need not enter more upon this;  you all must know
that to me a crust of bread,  with a little roof for shelter,
and a lire for warmth,  near you,  would bring me to peace,
to happiness,  to all that my heart holds dear,  or even in
any situation could prize.  I cannot picture such a late
with dry eyes  ; all else but kindness and society has to
me so always been nothing.

^Vith regard to my dear father,  he has always left me
to myself;  I will not therefore speak to him while thus
uncertain what to decide.

It is certain,  however,  that,  with peace of mind and re-
tirement, I have resources that I could bring forward to
amend the little situation  ; as well as that,  once thus un-
doubtedly established and naturalized,  M.  d’A.  would
have claims for employment.

'Fhese reflections,  with a mutual freedom from ambi-
tion, might lead to a quiet road,  unbroken by the tortures

426

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

of applications,  expectations,  attendance,  disappointment,
and time-wasting liopes and fears ; if there were not ap-
prehensions the 100/.  might be withdrawn.  I do not
think it likely,  but it is a risk too serious in its conse-
quences to be run.  M.  d’A.  protests he could not answer
to himself the hazard.

How to ascertain this,  to clear the doubt,  or to know
the fatal certainty before it should be too late,  ex-
ceeds my powers of suggestion.  His own idea,  to write
to the Queen,  much as it has startled me,  and wild as it
seemed to me,  is certainly less w ild than to take the chance
of such a blow^  in the dark.

Yet such a letter could not even reach her.  His very
name is probably only known to her through myself.

In short,  my dearest friends,  you will think for me,  and
let me know what occurs to you,  and I will defer any
answ'er till I hear your opinions.

Heaven ever bless you  ! And pray for me at this
moment.

F.  B.

Dj-.  Burney to Miss Burney.

May,  1793.

Dear Fanny, — I have for some time seen very
plainly that you are eprise,  and have been extremely
uneasy at the discovery.  Y^ou must have observed my
silent gravity,  surpassing that of mere illness and its
consequent low spirits.  I had some thoughts of writing
to Susan about it,  and intended begging her to do
what I must now"  do for myself — that is,  beg,  warn,  and
admonish you not to entangle yourself in a wild and
romantic attachment,  which offers nothing in prospect
but poverty and distress,  with future inconvenience and
unhappiness.  M.  d’Arblay is certainly a very amiable
and accomplished man,  and of great military abilities

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

4-27

1793]

1 take for granted ; but what employment has lie for
them of which the success is not extremely hazardous  ?
His property,  whatever it was,  has been confiscated —
decrete — by the Convention;  and if a counter-revolu-
tion takes  ])lace,  unless it be exactly such a one as suits
the particular political sect in which he enlisted,  it does
not seem likely to secure to him an establishment in
France.  And as to an establishment in England,  I
know the difficulty which very deserving natives find
in  ])rocuring one,  w’ith every appearance of interest,
friends,  and probability ; and,  to a foreigner,  I fear
the difficulty will be more than doubled.

As M.  d’Arblay is at present circumstanced,  an al-
liance with anything but a fortune sufficient for the
support of himself and partner would be very impru-
dent. He is a mere soldier of fortune,  under great
disadvantaores.  Your income,  if it was as certain as a

o

freehold estate,  is insufficient for the purpose  ; and if
the Queen should be displeased and withdraw her al-
lowance, what could you do  ?

I own that,  if M.  d’Arblay had an establishment in
France sufiicient for him to marry a wife with little or
no fortune,  much as 1 am inclined to honour and es-
teem him,  I should wish to prevent you from fixing
your residence there ; not merely from selfishness,  but
for your own sake.  I know your love for your family,
and know that it is reciprocal ; I therefore cannot help
thinking that you would mutually be a loss to each
other.  The friends,  too,  which you have here,  are of
the highest and most desirable class.  To quit them,
in order to make new friendships in a strange land,  in
which the generality of its inhabitants at present seem
incapable of such virtues as friendshij)  is built upon,
seems wild and visionary.

428

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

If M.  d’Arblay had a sufficient establishment here
for the purposes of credit and comfort,  and determined
to settle here for life,  I should certainly think ourselves
honoured by his alliance ; but his situation is at pre-
sent so very remote from all that can satisfy prudence,
or reconcile to an affectionate father the idea of a
serious attachment,  that I tremble for your heart and
future happiness.  M.  d’Arblay must have lived too
long in the great world to accommodate himself con-
tentedly to the little;  his fate seems so intimately
connected with that of his miserable country,  and that
country seems at a greater distance from peace,  order,
and tranquillity now than it has done at any time since
the I’evolution.

These considerations,  and the uncertainty of what
party will finally prevail,  make me tremble for you
both.  You see,  by what I have said,  that my objections
are not personal,  but wholly prudential.  For Heaven’s
sake,  my dear Fanny,  do not part with your heart too
rapidly,  or involve yourself in deep engagements which
it will be difficult to dissolve  ; and to the last degree
imprudent,  as things are at present circumstanced,  to
fulfil.

As far as character,  merit,  and misfortune demand
esteem and regard,  you may be sure that M.  d’Arblay
will be always received by me with the utmost attention
and respect ; but,  in the present situation of things,  I
can by no means think I ought to encourage  (blind and
ignorant as I am of all but his misfortunes)  a serious
and solemn union with one whose unhappiness would
be a reproach to the facility and inconsiderateness of a
most affectionate father.

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,

429

Memorandum,  this 7tk of May,  1825,

In answer to these apparently most just,  and,  undoubt-
edly, most parental and tender apprehensions,  Susanna,  the
darling child of Dr.  Burney,  as well as tirst chosen friend
of M.  d’Arblay,  wrote a statement of the plans,  and
means,  and purposes of M.  d’A.  and F.  B. — so clearly
demonstrating their power of happiness,  with willing eco-
nomy, congenial tastes,  and mutual love of the country,
that Dr.  B.  gave way,  and sent,  though reluctantly,  a
consent;  by which the union took place the 31st of July,
1793,  in Micklehain church,  in presence of Mr.  and
M rs.  Lock,  Captain and Mrs.  Phillips,  M.  de Narbonne,
and Captain Burney,  who was father to his sister,  as Mr.
Lock was to d’A. ; and on the 1st of August the ce-
remony was re-performed in the Sardinian chapel,  accord-
ing to the rites of the Romish church;  and never,  never
was union more blessed and felicitous;  though,  after the
first eight years of unmingled happiness,  it was assailed
by many calamities,  chiefly of separation or illness,  yet
still mentally unbroken.

F.  d’Arblay.

To Mrs.

August 2nd,  1793.

How in the world shall I begin this letter to my dearest

M ! how save her from a surprise almost too strong

for her weak nerves and tender heart!

After such an opening,  perhaps any communication
may be a relief;  but it is surprise only I would guard
against;  my present communication has nothing else to
fear;  it has nothing in it sad,  melancholy,  unhappy,  but
it has everything that is marvellous and une.xpected.

Do you recollect at all,  when you were last in town,
my warm interest for the loyal part of the French exiles?

430

DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX.

— do you remember my  ^loge of a French officer,  in par-
ticular, a certain M.  d’Arblay?

Ah,  my dear M , you are quick as iiglitning ;

your sensitive apprehension will tell my tale for me now,
without any more aid than some details of circumstance.

The doge I then made,  was with design’to prepare you
for an event I had reason to expect:  such,  however,  was
the uncertainty of my situation,  from prudential obsta-
cles, that I dared venture at no confidence ; though mv
heart prompted it strongly,  to a friend so sweetly sympa-
thising in all my feelings and all niy affairs — so constantly
affectionate — so tenderly alive to all that interests and
concerns me.

My dearest M , you will give me,  I am sure,  your

heart-felt wishes — your most fervent prayers.  The choice
I have made appears to me all j^ou could yourself wish
to fall to my lot — all you could yourself have formed to
have best accorded with your kind partiality.

I had seme hope you would have seen him that even-
ing we went together from Mrs.  M.  Montagu to I\Irs.
Lock’s,  for he was then a guest in Portland-place ; but
some miserable circumstances,  of which 1 knew nothing
till after your departure,  had just fallen out,  and he had
shut himself up in his room.  He did not know we were
there.

Many,  indeed,  have been the miserable circumstances
that have,  from time to time,  alarmed and afflicted in
turn,  and seemed to render a renunciation indispensable.
Those difficulties,  how’ever,  have been conquered  ; and
last Sunday Mr.  and jMrs.  Lock,  my sister and Captain
Phillips,  and my brother Captain Burney',  accompanied
us to the altar,  in Mickleham church  ; since which the
ceremony has been repeated in the chapel of the Sardi-
nian Ambassador,  that if,  by a counter-revolution in

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

431

France,  M.  d’Arblay recovers any of his rights,  his wife
may not be excluded from their participation.

You may be amazed not to see the name of my dear
father upon this solemn occasion  ; but his apprehensions
from the smallness of our income have made him cold
and averse;  and though he granted his consent,  I could
not even solicit his presence.  I feel satisfied,  however,
that time will convince him I have not been so impru-
dent as he now thinks me.  Happiness is the great end
of all our worldly views and proceedings,  and no one can
judge for another in what will produce it.  To me,  wealth
and ambition would always be unavailing;  I have lived
in their most centrical possessions,  and I have always seen
that the happiness of the richest and the greatest has
been the moment of retiring from riches and from power.
Domestic comfort and social atlection have invariably
been the sole as well as ultimate objects of my choice,
and I have always been a stranger to any other species
of felicity.

M.  d’Arblay has a taste for literature,  and a passion
for reading and writing,  as marked as my owm  ; this is a
sympathy to rob retirement of all superfluous leisure,  and
insure to us both occupation constantly edifying or en-
tertaining. He has seen so much of life,  and has suf-
fered so severely from its disappointments,  that retreat,
with a chosen companion,  is become his final desire.

Mr.  Lock has given M.  d’Arblay a piece of ground in
his beautiful park,  upon which we shall build a little neat
and plain habitation.  W'e shall continue,  meanwliile,  in
his neighbourhood,  to superintend the little edifice,  and
enjoy the society of his exquisite house,  and that of my
beloved sister Phillips.  We are now within two miles of
both,  at a farm-house,  where we have what apartments
we require,  and no more,  in a most beautiful and healthy

432

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

situation,  a mile and a half from any town.  The nearest
Is Bookham  ; but I beg that my letters may be directed
to me at Captain Phillips’s,  Mickleham,  as the post does
not come this way,  and I may else miss them for a week.

As I do not correspond with Mrs.  Montagu,  and it
would be awkward to begin upon such a theme,  I beg that
when you write you will say something for me.

One of my first pleasures,  in our little intended home,
will be finding a place of honour for the legacy of Mrs.
Delany.  Whatever may be the general wonder,  and per-
haps blame,  of general people,  at this connexion,  equally
indiscreet in pecuniary points for us both,  I feel sure
that the truly liberal and truly intellectual judgment of
that most venerated character would have accorded its
sanction,  when acquainted with the worthiness of the
object who would wish it.

Adieu,  my sweet friend.  Give my best compliments

to Mr. , and give me your kind wishes,  your kind

prayers,  my ever dear M .

F.  d’A.

Madame de Stael to Madame d' Arblay.

Copet,  9 Aout,  1793.

On me dit une nouvelle qui me fait un extreme
plaisir.  II appartenoit a votre coeur de sentir tout le
prix de I’heroique conduite de notre excellent ami,  et
de justifier le sort en vous donnant a lui,  en assurant
ainsi a sa vertu la recompense que Dieu lui permet sur
cette terre.  A present que vous etes un peu de ma
famille,  j’espere que,  si je revenois en Augleterre,  je
vous verrois tant que je voudrois,  c’est a dire,  sans
cesse  : tons mes regrets,  coinme toutes mes esperances,
me ramenent en Surrey.  C’est-la le paradis terrestre
pour moi — ce le sera pour vous,  je I’espere.  Je ne

1793]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

433

connois pas un caracterc meillcur a vivrc que M.
d’Arblay,  ct je sais depuis long-tcms combien il vous
ainie.  Vous nous dcvez a present de beaucoup wrire.
Je vous deinande de m’informer de vos projets,  de me
confier votre bonlieur;  et,  si jetrouve jamais une inaniere
de vous servir,  de disposer de moi comme d’un bien a
vous.  Adieu,  adieu  !

On Norhvry Park,  by Madame de Stael.

August 30,  1793.

Douce image de Norbury,  venez me rappeler
qu’une felicite vive et pure peut exister sur la terrc  !
la.  Ton jouit egalement de ce qu on inspire,  et de ce
qu'on eprouvc  ; la,  le sentiment est devoue comme la
passion,  et constant comme le devoir ; la,  I’esprit,  les
talens,  la beaute,  tout ce qui sert al’eclat,  a ete consacre
au bonheur.  La vertu,  la raison,  ont ete les guides
fideles d’une telle destinee,  mais on ne s’y gloritie que
d’etre heureux.  Soit que ces ames sensibles,  attachees
a leurs biens naturels par I’attrait de leurs coeurs,  ne
pensent point a s’honorer d’un penchant irresistible;
soit que leur douce philosophic aime a fairc des
proselytes,  contents de la route qu’ils ont parcouru,  ils
cherchent le plus sur moyen d’inviter a leur exemple.
En le considerant,  la vertu admire,  la foiblesse espere,
ct tout ce qui a un coeur se sent penetre par degres
de calme et de bienetre.  Dans cette retraite,  que la
volonte des possesseurs rend obscure,  que le jugement
des hommes eclaires,  que la reconnoissance de ceux
qui soufFrent doit illustrer,  j’ai trouve quelque toms un
asyle loin des crimes de la France,  et des prejuges quo
I'horrcur qu’ils doivent causer inspirent a tous ceux
qui n’ont pas la force de resister aux extremes con-
traires.  T^e respect,  1 ’enthousiasme,  dont mon ame est
VOL.  v.  2 F

434

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

remplie,  en contemplant I’ensemble des vertus morales
et politiques qui constituent I’Angleterre ; — I’admira-
tion d’un tel spectacle,  le repos celeste qu’il me fesoit
gouter  ; ces sentimens,  si doux et si necessaires apr^s la
tourmente de trois ans de revolution,  s’unissent dans
mon souvenir au delicieux sejour,  aux respectables
amis,  pres desquels je les ai eprouv^s.  Jeles remercic
de quatre mois de bonlieur echappes au naufrage de la
vie ; je les remercie de m’avoir aimes.  La felicite dont
ils jouissent s’etendra peut-etre a tout ce qui les
interesse ; leur estime,  du moins,  doit soutenir Tame
abattue  ; et lorsqu’un sentiment melancolique porteroit
a se lasser de combattre les injustes attaques des
fureurs de I’esprit de parti,  I’on se rattache a soi corame
a I’objet de suffrages si purs,  I’on se defend encore pour
honorer ses amis.

Comte de Lally Tolendnl to the Chevalier d' Arblay.

Twickenham,  9 Aout,  1793.

Je m’etais plaint de vous,  mon cher D’ Arblay,  et
puis par reflection j’avais trouve que vous faisiez bie'n
mieux de gouter votre bonheur que de le decrire.
L’amour vous a permis de consacrer un instant a
I’amitie,  et je viens vous demander encore un pour ma
reconnaissance,  et pour I’expression des voeux les  |)lus
ardens qui aient jamais ete formes pour votre bonheur,
et pour celui de I’etre si interessant qui vient de
doubler le votre.  Vous m’otez un bien bon arijument
dans mes disputes politiques.  “ Citez-moi,”  disais-je tou-
jours,  avec une assurance imperturbable,  ‘^un hommc
qui ait gagne a la revolution.”

Au moins,  ne porterai-je plus ce defl dans les envi-
rons de Mickleham.  Les orages vous ont conduit dans
un port qui vaut mieux que la rive natale,  et les demons

OK Tfili AUTHOR OF EVKUINA.

435

1793]

vous ont precipite aux pieds d’un ange qui vous a re-
leve.  Votre roman vaut celui de Miss Burney,  et vous
le faitcs aussi hcureux qu’ellc les ecrit sublimes,  Votre
destine est ecrite dans  ‘ Cecilia,’  mon cher ami,  et vous
aurez autant de cautions et autant dejaloux cjue Cecilia
a eu de lecteurs.  Vous voila possedant la pratique de
ce cocur dont nous avons tant admire etclieri latlieorie,
ces graces de I’esprit qui nous ont tant sdduit,  cette
finesse de jugement qui nous a si fort etonnes,  ces
sentimens delicieuxqui venaient remuer le fond de nos
coeurs,  cette purete de morale qui excitait nos respects,
— tout cela vous etait destine  ! Une si profonde con-
naissance du coeur humain devait conduire a juger le
votre,  a apprecier votre noble caractere,  et ce cliarme
de loyaute qui fait qu’on se sent votre ami quand on a
cause un jour avec vous.

Je suis sur que Miss Burney vous aura entendu
parlor du pauvre Louis XVI.  avec cette emotion qui
tirait les larmes dos yeux de Malouot et des miens la
derniere fois que nous avons chemine ensemble.  Citez
nous tant que vous voudrez,  mon cher D’Arblay  ; vous
nous rendrez justice on vous adressant ii nous pour
obtenir celle qui vous est due.

Le jour oil j’ai recu votre lettre j'avais dine chez le
Chancelier,et pendantune partie du diner votre mariage
avait ete le sujet de I’entretion genth’al.  C’etait a moi
tout naturellement a conter votre histoire,et ii repondre
ii tout ce qui etait lii du sort de Miss Burney.  J’ai
rempli le devoir,  je ne dirai pas d’ami,  mais d’homme
juste  ; c’cst tout ce qu’il vous faut.

Enfin toiite notre colonie n'a qu’un sentiment et
qu’une voix.  Le Prince*  vous ecrit,  Malouet vous
ecrira.  la Princessef se joint a tout ce que nous vous
* be Prince de Poix.  La Princesse d’Henin.

‘2 F 2

43G

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

disons  : vous connaissez son ame,  voiis savez qu’elle se
reflechit dans tout ce qui est beau et dans tout ce qui est
bon  ; vous avez vu son entrainement vers Miss Burney.
Nous jouissons aussi de la part qu’ont eu a cet heureux
evenement M.  et Madame Lock,  de celle qu’y prennent
M.  et Madame Phillips.  Tout ce que I’liumanite peut
atteindre de vertu et obtenir de bonheur est au milieu de
vous tons.  Jouissez en longtemps,  et que votre felicite
soit aussi incorruptible que votre caractere  ! Presentez,
je vous prie,  mon hommage respectueux a Madame d’Ar-
blay,  et comptez toujours sur moi comme sur un ami qui
vous est acquis a jamais.

Lally Tolendal.

P.  S.  Lorsque mon pere commandait dans ITnde il
fut fort mecontent d'un officier qui,  charge d’une mission
chez les Plollandais,  en avait compromis le succes par la
faute la plus grave.  Mon pauvre pere,  le meilleur des
hommes en actions,  mais le plus vif en propos,  lui ecrivit
dans sa colere,  Si vous retombez dans la meme faute,
je vous previens,  qu'eussiez vous la tete de mon fils sur
les epaules de mon pere,  je la ferai sauter.”

Comme il fermait sa lettre,  entre son maitre d’hotel.
“ Que veux tu  ?”  “ Monsieur,  je viens d’entendre dire

que vous envoyez un expres chez les Hollandais,  et,  comme
nous n’aurons bientot plus de cafe,  je suis venu vous
demander si vous ne voudriez pas en faire venir.”  Tu as
raison.”  Et voila que mon pere,  qui ne se souvenait dej^
plus de sa colere,  rouvre sa lettre et mande a son officier,
en post-scriptum au dessous de la belle phrase ci-dessus,
“ Je vous en prie,  faites moi le plaisir de m’envoyer par le
porteur un ballot de cafe.”

Ou tend toute cette histoire?  A justifier par I’exemple
la disparate toute aussi forte que je vais me permettre.
Mon laquais vient d’entrer chez moi,  et m’a dit,  “ Mon-

1703]

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

437

sieur,  on dit qiie vous ecrivez a Micklelmm  : la dernleie
fois que vous y avez ete vous avez oublie iin bonnet de
unit et une palre de petites bottes:  si vous voidiez bien
les demander?”  Solt ; et voila que je termine une
epithalame en prlant I’epoux de vouloir bien donner des
ordres,  je ne sais pas a qui,  alln que ces petites bottes
me soient renvoyes a Londres,  Norton- street,  No.  17.
Oil se cache-t-on quand on ecrit de ces choses-la?

Madame de la Fite to Madame d' Arblay.

Sejiteniber,  1793.

CoMBiF.N vous etes aimable,  ma cheremadame,  et que
votre lettre est ebannante  ! Je vous reinercie et du
plaisir qu’elle m’a fait,  et de celui qu’elle a procure a la
famille de Luc,  et a trois de nos Princesses a qui je I’ai
connnuniquee.

J’ai su depuis que cette lettre,  montree a la Reine,  est
encore dans la poche de sa IMajeste.  Yotre changement
d’etat falsait la nouvelledu jour,  et j’avais un meiite alors;
moi seule dans tout le comte de Berkshire a\oit I’avan-

tage de counoitre M.  d’Arblay.  Miss P entr’

autres m’accabla de questions : “ Est-il grand  ? est-il
beau  ? est-il jeune  ?”  Je parlai de son air noble,  et d'une
impression de tristesse qui m'avoit frap|)ee en le  \oyant,
mais qui devoit ctre effacee par I’amour et son frere.
Si la soiree qu'il a passe chez moi poinoit se renouveler,
je ferais taire la barpe,  et j’empeclicrais un groupe
d’emigres de s'empaier de lui,  et de me piiver du plaisir
de rentendre.  Quant a son merite personnel,  a ses
lumieres,  a ses vertus,  ils sont evidemment prouves par
les sentiinens qu’il a su inspirer a Norbury.

Mais a propos de gens distingues,  il faut vous parler,
ma cliere madame,  de nos deux jcunes Princes.  Celui

I ,

438

DIARY AND LETTERS

[Part IX.

dout voiis faites mention est le plus joli,  le plus gai,  le
plus caressant de tous les heros de dix-neuf ans.*
Comme une blessure sied bien a cet age!  Je I’ai vu
souffrir des siennes,  inais il me semble qu’il en jouissait.
Le Prince i\ugustef est moins vif,  et nullement bruyant;
une affabilite douce rappelle cju’il est le frere cheri de la
Princesse Elizabeth,  et s’il n’a pix exercer ce courage
niilitaire qui fait les heros de I’histoire,  on sait qu’il a
prouve une fermete admirable dans le cours de ses longues
soufFrances  ; et Rousseau pretend que les vertus negatives
sont les plus sublimes.

Notre philosophe,^  pour se consoler du present,  s’oc-
cupe beaucoup du passe,  et d’une histoire de la terre bien
plus ancienne que celle de Moyse.  Perdant de vuepour
un temps les revolutions cpii agitent la surface de notre
globe,  il s’enfonce dans de profondes meditations,  pour
rechercher ce qu’etait I’interieur avant,  bien avant,  que le
genre humain habitat cette planete.  “What are you
about?”  lui demandait quelqu’un  : “I am in the bowels
of the earth,”  fut sa reponse.  Madame de Luc vous
aime toujours tendrement,  ma chere madame  ; mais elle
est moins que jamais en etat d’ecrire,  ses yeux ayant
beaucoup souffert depths qiielques mois.  Mon fils sera
bien sensible au souvenir dont vous I’honorez ; j’ignore si
dans ce moment il traverse la mer,  ou s’ll est arrive en
Hollande.  Il est toujours compte parmi les bons fils,  et
c’est a lui que je dois en partie le retour de ma sante.
Celle de Madame Schwellenberg est toujours etonnante  ;
c’est apres un crachement de sang qu’elle a repris ses
forces.

Vous auriez peine,  madame,  a reconnoitre Frog-
more.  On y construit des mines,  et bientot on aura
acheve un vieux batiment gothique  ; ici s’eleve un petit

* Duke of Cambridge,  t Duke of Sussex.  M.  de Luc.

1793]

OF THE AUTHOll OF EVELINA.

439

temple octogone,  clout le plafond est dessiiie par la Piiii-
cesse Elizabeth  ; la on decouvre un hermitage,  dont elle a
donne le modele,  Sec.,  &c.  : an reste,  nous avons un
spectacle et des acteurs de Londres.  Quick,  suitout y
attirait la cour et la ville.  Madame de la Koche me de-
mande tonjours des nouvelles de Miss Burney  ; je lui ai
marque depuis pen que paimi nos femmes celebres il
n’en est j»as une qui porte ce nom  ; mais pour cju’tlle ne
soupqonnat point que vous avez perdu la vie,  ou moi
l’esj)rit,  j’ai bien vite ajouteque les sentimens dus a I’an-
teur de  ‘ Cecilia  ’ etaient maintenant reserves a Madame
d’Arblay.

J’espere que les devoirs de votre nouvel etat ne vous
empecheront pas d’acquerir de nouveau.x droits a la re-
connaissance du public;  e’est un de mes voeux  ; mais je
souhaite bien plus encore que vous sachiez toujouis
reunir ce qui est si souvent separe — la celebrilect le bon-
heur.  Madame BrCiIard*  habile dans un petit canton de
la Suisse,  ou elle a ete admise,  ainsi que ISIlle.  d’Or-
leans,  sous un nom suj>pose.  Adieu,  mu chere madame!
veuillez me continuer le souvenir et la bienveillance dont
vous m’honorez,  et agreer I’assurance de la haute estime
et du tendre atlacliement de

Votre lies devouee,

M.  E.  DE LA Fite.

Vous connaissez mes sentimens pour les Labitans de
Norbury;  daignez en etre I’inlerprete.  Je crains de ne
pouvoir profiler cette annee de  \olre aimable hospitaliie,
mais je vous conjure cFavance de m’accorder une soiree
c|[uand vous viendrez a Londres.

Madame de Genlis.

UIOGliA]>IIICAL NOTKS

TO TIIK

FIFTH VOLUMK.

Bakry,  Jamks,  vs’as born atOork in 1741.  He was the son of a
shipmaster,  and early exhibited talents for the art in which
he afterwards became so distinguished.  He was taught by
Mr.  West of Dublin,  and after having,  at the age of twenty-
two,  gained the  .Academy’s prize for the best Historical Com-
position, was enabled,  by the liberality of Edmund Burke,  to
study in Italy for four years,  where he was made a Member of
the Academy of Bologna.  He returned to England in 1770,  and
in 1775 published a work in reply to Winckelman’s celebrated
axiom which proclaimed the English people to be naturally
incapacitated,  by their climate,  from attaining any eminence
in the exercise of the tine arts.  In 1 777 he was chosen a Royal
Academician,  and,  in 1 780,  Professor of Painting.  Nineteen
years afterwards he was removed from the Professor’s Chair,
and subsequently expelled from the Academy itself,  through a
cabal of his fellow Academicians,  which was greatly aided by
the eccentricity and violence of his character,  approaching at
times to insaniiy.  His great work,  or rather series of works,
which was painted gratuitously for tlie Society of Arts in the
Adelphi,  was completed in three years.  He died in 1806.

CouRTNAY,  John,  was born in Ireland in 1731.  He was Secretary
to the Marquis of Townshend when Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
and was subsequently chosen Member of Parliament for Tam-
worth in 1 780,  in 1 784,  and 1 790.  In 1 783 he was appointed Sur-
veyor of the Ordnance and Secretary to the Master-General,  and
in 1806 was one of the Commissioners of the Trea.sury.  He was
M.P.  for the borough of Appleby from 1796 to 1812.  In 1816
he died.  Besides his  ‘ Philosophical Reflections on the late
Revolution m France,’  (the work alluded to in the Diary,)  he
published,  in 1786,  ‘ A Poetical Review of the Literary and
Moral Character of Dr.  Johnson,’  and several other woiks,
chiefly in verse.

Gillies,  John,  was born at Brechin,  in Forfarshire,  in 1750.  He
was educated at the University of Glasgow,  and became the
tutor of a son of the Earl of Hopetown,  with whom he tra-

442

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

veiled for some years.  On his return he settled in London.
The work which first  ^ave him celehrily is that in connexion
with which he is still the best known, — his  ‘ History of Antient
Greece,’  &c.  It was published in 1786.  He subsequently
published several other historical works of great merit and
value.  He was made an LL.D.  and a IMember of the Pioyal
and Antiquarian Societies,  and was subsequently appointed
Royal Historiographer for Scotland.  He died in 1824.

Gisborne,  Dr.,  was Physician to his Majesty’s Household at the
period referred to in the  ‘ Diary.’

Glasse,  Dr.  Samuel,  was Rector of Hanwell,  in Middlesex.  It
was to this gentleman that Mrs.  Piozzi once addressed the
questions  : —

“ What is humour  ? What is wit  ?

Thou that master art of it;

And,  how are they related?”

To which he replied, — “As the mushroom is to the dunghill;
and neither of them worth a scholar’s aim or a Christian’s
care !’’

Haydn,  Francis Joseph,  was born in 1732,  at Rhorau,  a small
town in Austria.  His parents were in a very humble station,
but,  like all Germans,  fond of music,  and,  to a certain degree,
skilled in it.  The early talents exhibited by their child were
noticed by a relation,  a schoolmaster at Huimburg,  who ulti-
mately succeeded in placing the boy under a musician named
Reuter,  in the cathedral of Vienna.  With him Haydn re-
mained till the a^e of thirteen,  when he composed a mass.  He
was dismissed from the cathedral at the ageot eighteen,  in con-
sequence of a youthful frolic.  He was early noticed and as-
sisted by the celebrated Porpora,  an Italian musician and
composer,  who visited Vienna in the suite of the  \ enetian am-
bassador. For a considerable period he remained in very
humble circumstances,  lodging at the house of a barber,  whose
daughter he married.  The first work which brought him into
notice was an Opera entitled  ‘ The Devil on Two Sticks.’
In the year 1761 he was attached to the household of Prince
Anthony Esterhazy,  and subsequently,  to that of his successor,
Prince Nicholas.  In 1791 he visited England,  where be re-
ceived great honours,  and made a handsome sum of money by
his composition*.  'The most celebrated of his works,  ‘ The
Creation,’  w'as not commenced till he was in his 60th year.
He died in 1809.

Kauffmann,  Maria Angelica,  one of the few females who have
attained eminence in the art of painting,  was the daughter
of a Swiss painter,  and was born at Coire,  in 1740.  She
studied at Rome and Venice,  and afterwards came to England,
where she enjoyed a brilliant reputation for many yeans,  and

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

4^3

was ultimately elected a Iloyal Academician.  Slie married a
painter named Ziicchi,  a native of Venice,  with whom she re-
sided in Italy till her death,  which took place at Rome in
1807.

Lort,  Dr.  Michael,  was born in Pembrokeshire in 1 725.  He
was brought up at Trinity Colleire,  Cambridge,  of which he
became a Fellow,  and subseiiuently Doctor of Divinity and
Greek Professor.  He was afterwaids Rector successively of
St.  Matthew,  Friday-street,  and of Fulham.  He died in 1790.

Malone,  Edmund,  is chiefly known by his  ‘ Commentaries on
Snakspeare.'  He was born in Dublin in 17 11.  His father was
an Irish judge,  and educated him at Trinity College,  Dublin,
with a view to the Bar,  to which he was called in 17G7 ; but
as,  on the death of his father,  he became possessed of a com-
petent fortune,  he did not pursue his profession,  but devoted
himself to literature.  His edition of Shakspeare was published
in 1790.  He died in 1812.

Merry,  Robert,  the head of the Della Criiscan school of poetry.
He was born at London in 1755,  and received a regular educa-
tion, first at Harrow,  and afterwards at Christ’s Colleire,  Ox-
ford. His father was a merchant,  and intended him for the
Bar,  for which he studied in Lincoln’s Inn, but soon abandoned
that pursuit for the army,  of which he as speedily grew tired,
and subsequently adopted the character of a'man of letters and
of leisure.  Ilis Della Cruscan verses w'ere chiefly written in
Italy,  and rajiidly gained an extensive popularity,  which they
as lapidly lost on the appearance of Gifford's celebrated
‘ Baviad and Maeviad.’  In 1791 Mr.  Merry mariied Miss
Brunton,  an actress,  sister of the late Countess of Craven,
and went with her to America.  He published several diamatic
works,  but none that obtained any marked attention.  He died
in 1798.

Percy,  Thomas,  Bishop of Dromore,  in Ireland,  was born at
Bridgnorth,  in the county of Salop,  in 1728.  He graduated at
Christ Church.  Oxford,  in 1753,  and was in 1756 appointed to
the living of Willbye and Easton Manduit,  Northamptonshire.
In 1769 he was appointed chaplain to George II.;  in 1778 was
raised to the Deanery of Carlisle  ; and in 1783 to the Bishopric
of Dromore.  The  ‘ Reliques of Ancient Poetry,’  by which Dr.
Percy is best known,  is a work that has exercised a marked
and most favourable influence on the poetical taste of our
time.  Dr.  Percy was a very accomplished general scholar,  and
was extensively acquainted with several of the Oriental lan-
guages. He died at Dromore in 1811.

^ NELL,  John,  was born in 1742,  at Chudleigh,  in Devonshire.

e entered the navy at fifteen years of age,  and was present
at the siege of Pondicherry.  At the age of twenty-four he

444

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

quitted the navy and entered the army.  He greatly distin-
guished himself in India,  as an officer of Engineers,  and was
promoted to a Majority.  He subsequently turned his attention
almost exclusively to geographical researches,  and the first
public results of these,  in the form of a chart of tlie bank and
current of Cape Lagullas,  procured him the appointment of
Surveyor-General of Bengal.  He subsequently published
many able works connected with his favourite study,  the chief
of which was entitled  ‘ The Geographical System of Herodo-
tus Explained,’  which appeared in 1800.  He died in 1830.

Robertson,  William,  D.D.,  was born in 1721,  at Borthwick.
He was educated,  first at a grammar-school at Dalkeith,  and
afterwards at the University of Edinburgh.  He commenced
preaching in 1741,  and was shortly afterwards appointed to
the living of Gladmuir,  in East Lothian.  His first literary
production w'as  ‘The History of Scotland during the Reigns of
Queen Mary and James VI.’ — a work which immediately raised
him to eminence as an historian.  It was published in 1759.
His  ‘History of the Reign of the Emperor Charles V.’  and his
‘History of America’— the first published in 1769 and the
latter in 1 777 — raised him still higher in reputation.  His latest
work is that referred to in the Diary.  It is entitled  ‘ An His-
torical Disquisition concerning the Knowledge which the An-
cients had of India,’  &c.  He was a member of the Royal So-
ciety of Edinburgh,  and of several foreign societies.  He died
at his residence near Edinburgh in 1793.

Sturm,  Christopher Christian,  was born at Augsburg in 1740.
He studied at Jena and Stake,  and was in 1767 appointed
pastor of one of the churches of Stake.  His  ‘ Reflections  ’
obtained vast popularity,  and were translated into most modern
languages.  'The French version of them was executed by
Queen Christina,  of Prussia.  Sturm successively filled the
office of pastor at Magdeburg and at Naumburg,  at which
latter place he died in 1786.

Stuart,  James.  This distinguished antiquary and artist did
more to call the attention of Europe to the ivonders of ancient
architectural art existing in his day in Greece,  and particularly
at Athens,  than all other European travellers and antiquarians
united.  He was born in London in 1713,  and,  though wholly
dependent on his own exertions for his support,  he early in life
repaired to Rome,  for the purpose of completing his studies.
There he became acquainted with an English architect named
Revett,  with whom he subsequently travelled through Italy,
and,  in 1751,  visited Athens.  Here they remained for more
than two years,  drawing and measuring all the architectural
and sculptural antiquities they could discover.  He afterwards
travelled for two years more,  chiefly among the Greek islands,
and returned to England in 1755.  The result of these studies

1) I0( i 11 APHIC A L NOT KS.

445

and labours was the joint production of what remains to this
day the most magnificent as well as the most correct and au-
thentic work that has yet been given to the world on the sub-
ject of Athenian antiquities.  The first part of this splendid
work was published  (in folio)  in 17G2.  In the mean time Mr.
Stuart had acquired great reputation as an architect,  and was
appointed Surveyor to Greenwich Hospital,  and chosen l\Iem-
ber of the Royal and Antiquarian Societies.

He married late in life,  and the loss of a child of three years
of age,  by the small pox,  so affected him as to cause his own
death shortly afterwards — in 1783.  Several subsequent parts
of the  ‘ Antiquities of Athens  ’ were published from Stuart’s
drawings,  after his death.

Topham,  Edward,  was the son of Dr-  Topham,  -Tudge of the
Prerogative Court at York.  He received a regular education,
first at Eton,  and afterwards at Trinity College,  Cambridge,  on
quitting which latter place he entered the Guards and attained
the rank of Major.  He for some years filled the equivocal
position of  “ a man of wit and fashion about town,”  in which
character he obtained the materials for his fashionable paper
entitled  ‘The World.’  He died in 1820.

Young,  Arthur,  was the son of a learned divine who held a
prebendal stall in Canterbury Cathedral.  He vvas born in 1741,
and nearly the whole of his long life was devoted to studies and
pursuits connected with the improvement of English agricul-
ture. He first became known to the world in 1770,  by the
publication of a useful work called  ‘The Farmer’s Calendar.’
Subsequently he established and conducted a periodical enti-
tled ‘Annals of Agriculture.’  These publications attracted
the attention of the Government ; and he was emplmed to ob-
tain information for them throughout the country,  which ulti-
mately led to the establishment of the Hoard of Agriculture,  of
which he was appointed Secretary.  He also published two
quarto volumes of his agricultural tours in Ireland and France.
His last publications were two pocket volumes,  containing ju-
dicious and valuable selections from the writings of Baxtvr and
of Owen  : he entitled them,  Baxteriana and Ow'emana.  He
was blind during several of the last years of his life,  but
still continued to employ himself usefully in his favourite pur-
suit, up to the period of his death,  in 1820.

END OF VOL.  V.

Ixiailon  : Printed by William Clowes and Sons,  Stamford Street.

THE SIXTH VOLUME

OF

MADAME D’A RELAY’S DIAR

WILL BE PUBLISHED

EARLY IN DECEMBER.
