l^-U^y  ^y )//  //  r^'l/y.

r

ll)rnru  ^aiu>cn^ini

^>^.  'X

Digitized by the Internet Arciiive

in 2007 witii funding from

IVIicrosoft Corporation

Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/diarylettersofma03burn2

K

^'     S^-  Jt.

DIARY

LETTERS

MADAME D'AEBLAY,

AUTHOR OF EVELINA,  CECILIA,  &c.

EDITED BY HER NIECE.

'THE SPIRIT WALKS OF EVERY DAY DECEASED.  YOUNG.

VOL.  III.

1786  &  1787.

LONDON:

HENEY COLBUEN,  PUBLISHER,

GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.
1843.

K^Ly'

THE NEW YORK-

Tit n?"^'  i-ENOX AND
TILDLN FOUNDATIONS
^  1936 L

LONDON :

rrintcd l)y William Clowes and Sons,

Stamford Street.

PART I.

1786.

CONTENTS.

Letter from the Rev.  Mr.  Twining on Miss Burney's Court
Appointment — Diary Resumed  —  Journey to Windsor — Re-
ception at the Castle — Mrs.  Delany — First Attendance on the
Queen— Kindness and Delicacy of the Queen — Leave-taking
— Mrs.  Schwellenberg— Count Poller— Madame La Fite—
Bishop of Salisbury  —  The King's Equerries —Visit from
Princess Elizabeth  —  Royal Concert — Official Duties — The
Royal Family in Private — Attire of the Queen— The Ladies
Waldegrave — The Princess Royal — Visits of Congratulation
— Mrs.  Fielding— Lady Charlotte Finch — Surprise at Miss
Burney's Appointment— Domestic Details — Visit from Mrs.
Delany— Major Price— A Royal IMessage- A Surprise— The
Queen's Dressing-room — A Difficulty  — Lady Effingham —
Lady Frances Howard — Duke of Saxe Gotha— Visits Re-
turned— Charles Wesley — Music — Routine — A Day at Court
— The Toilet— Early Prayers— The Royal Coiffeur— Dinner—
'J'erracing — The Concert Room — Bed- time — A Royal Visitor
— The Princess Royal— The King— Infant Royalty — Princess
Amelia — Mr.  Mathias — A Court Day — Kew — St.  James's—
Etiquette— Court Toilet— A Private Audience— Duchess of
Ancaster  —  Routine of the Court Day — Sir Richard Jebb—
Doubts and Difficulties— Sir George Howard— Baretti— Mrs.
Hastings — Too Late — General Bude.

DIARY AND LETTERS

OF THE

AUTHOR OF  "EVELINA."

PART I.

1786.

The Rev.  T.  Ttcining to Miss Burney.

Fordham,  July lOtb,  1786.

Pray pardon the embarrassment and gaucherie of my
entrance,  for,  indeed,  I never was at court before in all
my life.  I come to kiss hands — there ! — and Heaven
bless yoUj for I am so pleased  !  "  Goodness me,"  said
a Scotch Lady Somebody one day to Merlin,  after won-
dering- at his pedal tea-table — ^'  goodness me,  Sir !  and
did you make that yourself?"  So I say,  goodness me.
Madam  !  and are you to take care of the robes yourself?

Now pray don't mistake this for a letter of con-
gratulation— it is no such thing — I am only excessively
glad,  and determined to tell you so myself My head

8 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part I.

is full of the cliarminf^  little liistoriette in your father's
letter,  which I rcceircd on Saturday,  not above ten
minutes after the news had accidentally reached me.
You may guess how comfortable it was to me to receive
so immediately the certainty and detail that I was
gaping for :  for to be kept fasting two or three days
upon a general fact,  when one is so interested as to
be dying with hunger for particulars,  is  "  really so
horrid,  you have no notion."

Well,  but now,  one thing disturbs me a little — I fear
you will be so taken up with your courtly attendance,
that you will have no leisure,  or not the kind of leisure,

necessary to —  to —  to — .     Hu sh  !      I dare not

fmish my sentence.  I hope you will not understand it.
Plutarch says,  I think,  that fame is an object to all
mankind  ;  but that some pursue it like rowers in a boat,
with their backs towards it.  Is this your way  ? — Nay,
nay,  it is not the worst way.

Another thing I am afraid of:  when I come to
town I shall never get a peep at you in St.  Martin's
Street,  you will be so taken up with reading or talking
to your royal mistress,  or handing jewels,  and colijichets,
and brwihorions,  baubles,  knick-knacks,  gewgaws,  toys,
&c.  [That word hrimborion is to me delightful ;  there
is a fine twang of nasal dignity in it,  that contrasts
so charmingly with the nothingness of its meaning !]
But I trust you will not fulfil that verse of the psalm,
*•'  forget also thine own people,  and thy father's house."
The best thing you can do will be to get me made a
bishop,  that I may dine now and then at your table ;
but then do not let it come to the cars of their Majesties
that I am a mortal enemy to trumpets and drums,
single or double.     [If music goes on improving in

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  9

noise at this rate,  I am sure the audiences ought to
have double drums to their ears.]

If I had not heard of this business at Colchester,  and
had not received the letter,  I should have read the next
day in our rustic Ipswich journal,  that  '^Mrs.  Berney,
daughter of Dr.  Berney,  was appointed,  &c.,  in the
room of Mrs.  Haggadore;"  and I suppose,  after some
exercise of my sagacity,  I might have guessed it to be
you.  Why is an innocent blunder in the spelling of a
name always so very ridiculous to those who can't spell
it wrong  ?

I must put an end to my impertinence.  Will you
forgive all this foolery  ?  Let me say,  with a little more
composure and gravity,  that your father's account did
really give me very great pleasure.  The manner of the
thing is so handsome,  that I think it cannot but be
much to your satisfaction ;  and as for the satisfaction
of certain other folks,  for other reasons which I will tell
anybody but you,  I have no doubt of it ;  and I see,  or
think I see,  a heap of pleasant circumstances and plea-
sant consequences,  &c.  6cc.

I thank your father heartily for his letter,  and will
write very soon.     We salute you all.

Lawk  !  that I could but see you handing the brimbo-
rions  !  Shall you be frightened  ?  I shall have a thou-
sand curiosities about you;  for I am most sincerely
yours,  T.  Twimng.

P.  S.  What a fine opportunity you will have of stu-
dying "  the philosophy of the human capacity,"  in the
highest sjjere of life  !

10 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part I.

Diary resumed.

Queen's Lodge,  Windsor,  Monday,  July 17th,
1786, — With what liurry of iiiind and body did I rise this
morning!  Everythin<^  had ah'cady been arranged for
Mrs.  Ord's carrying us to Windsor,  and my father's
carriage was merely to go as baggage-waggon for my
clothes.  But I wept not then.  I left no one behind
me to regret ;  my dear father accompanied me,  and all
my dear sisters had already taken their flight,  noYer
more to return.  Even poor little Sarah,  whom I love
very dearly,  was at Chesington.

Between nine and ten o'clock we set off.  We changed
carriage in Queen Ann Street,  and Mrs,  Ord conveyed
us thence to Windsor.  With a struggling heart,  I
kept myself tolerably tranquil during the little journey.
My dear father was quite happy,  and Mrs,  Ord felt the
joy of a mother in relinquishing me to the protection
of a Queen so universally reverenced.  Had I been in
better spirits,  their ecstacy would have been unbound-
ed; but alas  ! — what I was approaching was not in my
mind;  what I was leaving had taken possession of it
solely.

Miss P fiew out to us as the carriage stopped — the

youthful blush of pleasure heightening her complexion,
and every feature shewing her kind happiness.  Mrs.
Delany,  she said,  was gone out with the Queen.  I took
leave of my good Mrs.  Ord,  whose eyes overflowed with
maternal feelings — chiefly of contentment.  Mrs.  Delany
came home in about an hour.  A chastened satisfaction
w^as hers  ;  she rejoiced in the prospect before me  ;  she
was happy we should now be so much united,  but she
felt for m.y deprivations,  she saw the hard conflict with-
in me,  and the tenderest pity checked her delight.

17S6]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  H

It was now debated whether I was immediately to
go to the Lodge,  or Avait for orders.  The accustomed
method for those who have their Majesties'  commands
to come to them is,  to present themselves to the people
in waitmg,  and by them to be announced.  My heart,
however;,  was already sinking,  and my spirits every
moment were growing more agitated,  and my sweet
Mrs.  Delany determined to spare me the additional
task of passing through such awe-striking formalities.
She therefore employed my dear father — delighted
with the employment — to write a note,  in her name.

"  Mrs.  Delany presents her most humble duty to the
Queen ;  she found Dr.  Burney and his daughter at her
house ;  Miss Burney waits the honour of Her Majesty's
commands."

This,  though unceremonious and unusual,  she was
sure the Queen would pardon.  A verbal answer came
that I was to go to the Lodge immediately.

O,  my dear Susan !  in what an agony of mind did
I obey the summons !  I was still in my travelling
dress,  but could not stay to change it.  My father ac-
companied me.  Mrs.  Delany,  anxiously and full of
mixed sensations,  gave me her blessing.  We walked ;
the Queen's Lodge is not fifty yards from Mrs.  Delany's
door.  My dear father s own courage all failed him in
this little step ;  for as I was now on the point of enter-
ing— probably for ever — into an entire new way of life,
and of foregoing by it all my most favourite schemes,
and every dear expectation my fancy had ever indulged
of happiness adapted to its taste — as now all was to be
given up — I could disguise my trepidation no longer —
indeed I never had disguised,  I had only forborne pro-
claiming it.  But my dear father now,  sweet soul !  felt it
all,  as 1 held by his arm,  without power to say one word.

]2 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Pakt I.

hut tliat if he did not hurry along I should drop hy
the way.  I heard in his kind voice that he was now
really alarmed ;  he would have slackened his pace,  or
have made me stop to hreathe  ;  but I could not;  my
breatli seemed gone,  and I could only hasten with all
my might,  lest my strength should go too.

A page was in waiting at the gate,  who shewed us
into Mrs.  liaggerdorn's room,  which was empty.  My
dear father endeavoured here to compose my spirits ;
I could have no other command over them than to for-
bear letting him know the afHicted state of all within,
and to suffer him to keep to his own conclusions,  that
my emotion was all from fear of the approaching audi-
ence. Indeed was it not ! — I could hardly even tliink
of it.  All that I was resigning — there,  and there only
went every fear,  and all reluctance.

The page came in a minute or two to summon me
to the Queen.  The Queen was in her dressing-room.
Mrs.  Schwellenberg was standing behind her :  nobody
else present.

She received me with a most gracious bow of the
head,  and a smile that was all sweetness.  She saw me
much agitated,  and attributed it,  no doubt,  to the awe
of her presence.  O,  she little knew my mind had no
room in it for feelings of that sort !  She talked to me
of my journey,  my father,  my sisters,  and my brothers;
the weatlicr,  the roads,  and Mrs.  Delany — any,  every
thing she could suggest,  that could best tend to compose
and to make me easy  ;  and when I had been with her
about a quarter of an hour,  she desired Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg to shew me my apartment,  and,  with another
graceful bow,  motioned my retiring.

Not only to the sweet Queen,  but to myself let me
here do justice,  in declaring that though I entered her

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  13

presence with a heart filled with everything but her-
self, I quitted it with sensations much softened.  The
condescension of her efforts to quiet me,  and the
elegance of her receiving me,  thus,  as a visitor,  without
naming to me a single direction,  without even the most
distant hint of business,  struck me to shew so much
delicacy,  as well as graciousness,  that I quitted her
with a very deep sense of her goodness,  and a very
strong conviction that she merited every exertion on
m}^  part to deserve it.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg left me at the room door,  where
my dear father was still waiting for me,  too anxious to
depart till he again saw me.

We spent a short time together,  in which I assured
him I would from that moment take all the liappiness
in my power,  and banish all the regret.  I told him how
gratifying had been my reception,  and I omitted no-
thincf I could think of to remove the uneasiness that
this day seemed first to awaken in him.  Thank God !
I had the fullest success ;  his hopes and gay expec-
tations were all within call,  and they ran back at the
first beckoning.

This settled,  and his dear countenance all fresh illu-
mined with returning content,  we went together to
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  where we made a visit of about an
hour,  in which I had the pleasure of seeing them upon
very amicable terms  ;  and then we had one more tete-a-
tete,  all in the same cheering style,  and he left me to
dress,  and went to dine with Mrs.  Delany.

Left to myself,  I did not dare stop to think,  nor look
round upon my new abode,  nor consider for how long
I was taking possession  ;  I rang for my new maid,  and
im.mediately dressed for dinner,

I now took the most vigorous resolutions to observe

14 DIARY 'AND LETTERS  [Part I.

the promise I had made my dear father.  Now all was
finally settled,  to borrow my own words,  I needed no
monitor to tell me it would be foolish,  useless,  even
"wicked,  not to reconcile myself to my destiny.

The many now wishin<^  for just the same — O  !  could
they look within me.  1 am married,  my dearest Susan
— I look upon it in that light — I was averse to forming
the union,  and I endeavoured to escape it ;  but my
friends interfered — they prevailed — and the knot is
tied.  What then now remains but to make the best
wife in my power?  I am bound to it in duty,  and I
will strain every nerve to succeed.

[In Mrs.  Phillips's replies to the Court Journal of
her sister,  she deemed it prudent to give fictitious
names to some of the persons mentioned ;  and in one
or two instances we shall,  for obvious reasons,  adhere
to her nomenclature. — Ed.]

When summoned to dinner,  I found Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg and a German officer.  Colonel Polier,  who is now
an attendant of Prince Charles of Mecklenberg,  the
Queen's brother,  who is on a visit to their Majesties.
I was introduced to him,  and we took our places.

I was offered the seat of Mrs.  Plaggerdorn,  which
was at the head of the table;  ,but that was an under-
taking I could not bear.  I begged leave to decline it ;
and as Mrs.  Schwellenberg left me at my own choice,  I
planted myself quietly at one side.

Colonel Polier,  though a German ofl[icer,  is of a
Swiss family.  He is a fat,  good-humoured man,  exces-
sively fond of eating and drinking.     His enjoyment

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  15

of some of the fare,  and especially of the dessert,  was
really laughable:  he could never finish a speech he
had begun,  if a new dish made its appearance,  without
stopping to feast his eyes upon it,  exclaim something
in German,  and suck the inside of his mouth  ;  but all
so openly,  and with such perfect good-humour,  that it
was diverting without anything distasteful.

After dinner we went upstairs into Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg's room,  to drink coffee.  This is a daily practice.
Her rooms are exactly over mine ;  they are the same
size,  and have the same prospect,  but they are much
more sumptuously fitted up.

Colonel Poller soon left us,  to attend Prince Charles.
We had then a long tete-a-tete,  in which I found her
a woman of understanding,  and fond of conversation.

I was called down afterwards to Miss P ,  who was

eager to see me in my new dwelling,  and dying with im-
patience to know,  hear,  and examine everything about
me.  She ran about to make all the inquiries and dis-
coveries she could for me,  and was so highly delighted
Avith my situation,  it was impossible not to receive some
pleasure even from looking at her.  She helped me to
unpack,  to arrange,  to do everything that came in the
way.

In a short time Madame La Fite entered,  nearly as
impatient as herself to be my first visitor.  She was
quite fanciful and entertaining about my succeeding
to Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  and repeatedly turned round
to look at me fresh and fresh,  to see if it was really
me,  and me in that so long differently appropriated
apartment.

She had but just left me,  when who should enter but
my dear Mrs.  Delany herself.  This was indeed a
sweet regale to me.     She came to welcome me in my

16 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

own a])artmcnt,  and I am sure to teacli me to love it.
What place could I see lier in and hate?  I could
hardly do anything but kiss her soft cheeks,  and dear
venerable hands,  with gratitude for her kindness,  while
she stayed with me,  which was till the royal family
came home from the terrace,  which they walk upon
every fine evening.  She had already been invited to
the King's concert,  which she tlien attended.

Miss P ,  and I now planned that we would drink

tea together.  It was,  indeed,  my dearest Mrs.  Locke's
injunctions that determined me upon making that trial ;
for I knew nothing could more contribute to my future
chance of some happy hours than securing this time
and this repast to myself.  Mrs.  Delany had the same
wish,  and encouraged me in the attempt.

As I knew not to whom to speak,  nor how to give a
positive order,  in my ignorance whether the measure

I desired to take was practicable or not,  ]\Iiss P

undertook to be my agent.  She therefore ran out,  and
scampered up and down the stairs and passages in
search of some one to whom she could apply.  She met
at last Mrs.  Schwellenberg's man,  and boldly bid him
''bring Miss Burney's tea."  "It is ready,"  he an-
swered, "  in the dining parlour."  And then he came to
me,  with his mistress's compliments,  and that she was
come down to tea,  and waited for me.

To refuse to go was impossible ;  it would have been
an opening so oft'ensive,  with a person destined for my
principal companion,  and who had herself begun very
civilly and attentively,  that I could not even hesitate.
I only felt heavy-hearted,  and Miss P made a thou-
sand faces,  and together we went to the eating-room.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg had already made the tea ;  and
four gentlemen were seated at the table.     The Bishop

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         17

of Salisbury,  as I afterwards found he was,  came up to
congratulate me,  and spoke very kindly of my father,
whom he said he had just seen on the terrace.  This is
a brother of Lord Barrington's  :  I had never met him
before.

Next him sat a young clergyman,  Mr.  Fisher,  whom
I did not recollect,  but who said he had seen me once
at Mrs.  Ord's,  and spoke to me of her,  and of Mrs.
Thrale,  whom he had lately left in Italy,  where he has
been travelling.

And next was Major Price,  the Equerry of the King
at present in waiting.  He is the same that all the Bar-
borne family so adored when a Captain.  He men-
tioned them all to me,  with high praise and great good-
breeding.  I am very much pleased with him,  and
happy he should be the Equerry in waiting on my first
arrival.

Colonel Polier was also of the party.

I find it has always belonged to Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg and Mrs.  Haggerdorn to receive at tea whatever
company the King or Queen invite to the Lodge,  as it
is only a very select few that can eat with their Majes-
ties, and those few are only ladies  ;  no men,  of what rank
soever,  being permitted to sit in the Queen's presence.

I mean and hope to leave this business wholly to
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and only to succeed Mrs.  Hag-
gerdorn in personal attendance upon the Queen.

During tea the door opened,  and a young lady en-
tered, upon whose appearance all the company rose,
and retreated a few paces backward,  with looks of high
respect.  She advanced to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and
desired her to send a basin of tea into the music-room
for Mrs.  Delany :  then walking up to me,  with a coun-
tenance of great sweetness,  she said  '*  I hope you are

VOL.    III.  c

IB DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part I.

very well,  Miss Burney?"  I only curtseyed,  and knew
not till she left the room,  which was as soon as she
had spoken a few words to Major Price,  that this was
the Princess Elizabeth.

Immediately after the concert began  ;  the band being
very full,  and the performance on the ground-floor,  as
is the eating-room.  I heard it perhaps better,  because
softer,  than if I had been in the music-room.  I was
very glad of this circumstance.  Nothing was played
but Handel;  but I was pleased to hear any music,  so
much had I persuaded myself I should hear no more.

At night I was summoned to the Queen's apartment.
Mrs.  Schwellenberg was there,  waiting.  We sat toge-
ther some time.  The Queen then arrived,  handed into
her dressing-room by the King,  and followed by the
Princess Royal and Princess Augusta.  None other of
the Princesses slept in the Queen's Lodge.  The Lower
Lodge,  which is at the further end of the Garden,  is
the dwelling-place of the four younger Princesses.

The King,  with a marked appearance of feeling for
the — no doubt evident — embarrassment of my situation
on their entrance,  with a mild good-breeding inquired
of me how I had found Mrs.  Delany ;  and then,  kissing
both his daughters,  left the room.

The two Princesses each took the Queen's hand,
which they respectfully kissed,  and wishing her good
night,  curtseyed condescendingly to her new attendant,
and retired.

The'  Queen spoke to me a little of my father,  my
journey,  and Mrs.  Delany,  and then entered into easy
conversation,  in German,  with Mrs.  Schwellenberg,
who never speaks English but by necessity.  I had no
sort of employment given me.  The Queen was only
waited upon by Mrs.  Schwellenberg and Mrs.  Thielky,

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         19

her wardrobe woman  ;  and when she had put on her
night deshabille,  she wished me good night.

This consideration to the perturbed state of my mind,
that led Her Majesty to permit my presence merely as
a spectatress,  by way of taking a lesson of my future
employment for my own use,  though to her,  doubtless,
disagreeable,  was extremely gratifying to me,  and sent
me to bed with as much ease as I now could hope to
find.

Monday,  July ISth. — I rose at six,  and was called
to the Queen soon after seven.  Only Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg was with her,  and again she made me a mere
looker-on ;  and the obligation I felt to her sent me
somewhat lighter-hearted from her presence.

When she was dressed,  in a simple morning gown,
she had her hat and cloak put on,  to go to prayers at
eight o'clock,  at the King's chapel in the Castle;  and I
returned to my room.

At noon came my dear father,  and spent an hour or
two with me — so happy !  so contented !  so big with
every pleasant expectation ! — I rejoice to recollect that
I did nothing,  said nothing this morning to check his
satisfaction ;  it was now,  suddenly and at once,  all my
care to increase his delight.  And so henceforward it
must invariably continue.

We parted cheerfully on both sides  ;  yet I saw a little
pang in his last embrace,  and felt it in his dear hands :
— but I kept myself well up,  and he left me,  I really
believe,  without a wish un gratified.

At dressing-time the same quiet conduct was still
observed by the Queen — fixed in her benign determi-
nation to permit me to recover breath and ease,  ere she
gave me any other trial than merely standing in her

presence.

c2

20 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PauT I.

At dinner we — I mean Mrs.  Schwellenberg and my-
self— had Miss Planta and Colonel Poller ;  and 1 was
happy to be again diverted with the excess of his satis-
faction at sight of turtle upon the table.

In the evening I had a visit from Lady Elizabeth
Waldegrave,  who brought her sister.  Lady Caroline
Waldegrave,  both to pay congratulatory compliments.
Lady Elizabeth is lady of the bedchamber to the
Princess Royal,  and lives in this Lodge.  Her sister,
by the Queen's goodness,  is permitted to spend some
months of every year with her.  They were left orphans
at about sixteen  :  the Queen instantly took them both
under her protection.  They are gentle and well bred,
and seem very amiable.

They stayed with me till it was time for them to go
into waiting for the Princess Royal,  whom they attend
to the terrace.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany came again,  to visit me
wholly,  and drink tea with me.  We had a thousand
things to discuss,  but were scarce a moment together
before we were interrupted by Madame La Kite,  who,
however,  only stayed to give and receive from Mrs.
Delany congratulations on meeting in my room at
Windsor,  and then she pretty soon took leave.

We had but again arranged ourselves to a little
comfort,  when a tat-tat at my door followed,  and a lady
entered whom I had never seen before,  with a very
courteous air and demeanour,  saying  *'  1 could not
defer paying my compliments to Miss Burney,  and
wishing her much jo3^  which we must all feel in such
an accession to our society :  I must get my daughter to
introduce me."  And then advanced Mrs.  Fielding,  and
I found this was Lady Charlotte Finch.

Mrs.  Fielding is one of the women of the bedchamber.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         21

She lives with her motlier,  Lady Charlotte,  and her
three daughters,  girls from ten to fifteen years of age.

When she also wished me joy,  I saw in her face a
strong mark of still remaining astonishment at my ap-
pointment. Indeed all the people in office here are so
evidently amazed,  that one so unthought of amongst
them should so unexpectedly fill a place to which they
had all privately appropriated some acquaintance,  that
I see them with difficulty forbear exclaiming  "  Hov/
odd it is to see you here  !"

Lady Charlotte's visit was short and very civil ;  she
was obliged to hasten to the Castle,  to attend the
younger Princesses till they went to the terrace.  They
are sent to wait in an apartment of the Castle,  till the
King and Queen and the elders walk out,  and then
they are called to join them,  when the crowd is not
great,  and when the weather is fine.

My Windsor apartment is extremely comfortable.
I have a large drawing-room,  as they call it,  which is
on the ground-floor,  as are all the Queen's rooms,  and
which faces the Castle and the venerable Round Tower,
and opens at the further side,  from the windows,  to the
Little Park.  It is airy,  pleasant,  clean,  and healthy.
My bed-room is small,  but neat and comfortable ;  its
entrance is only from the drawing-room,  and it looks
to the garden.  These two rooms are delightfully in-
dependent of all the rest of the house,  and contain
everything I can desire for my convenience and com-
fort.

In her way to my room,  Mrs.  Delany had met the
King ;  she was a little shocked,  and feared she came at
an improper hour,  or ought to have come in the back
way.  I know not if he had perceived her distress ;  but
he soon removed it,  for when he went out to go to the

22 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT I.

terrace,  he looked towards my windows,  and seeing licr
there,  advanced a fcw^  steps to ask lier how she did.
The Queen turned round and curtseyed to her,  and the
Princess Augusta ran up to speak to her.

I had retired behind her ;  but when they moved on.
Miss Goldsworth}^  tlie sub-governess,  stole from her
charges,  and came to the window to desire Mrs.  Delany
to introduce her to me.

Sweet Mrs.  Delany,  tlnvarted in her kind private
views of an interesting confabulation,  grew fatigued,
and went home  ;  and then Mrs.  Fielding rose to ac-
company her.     Miss P made a second attempt for

tea,  but received for answer that Mrs.  Schwellenberg
would come down and make it as soon as the King and
Queen came from the terrace.

The ceremony of waiting tea till the royal family
return from the terrace,  is in order to make it for any
company they may invite to it.

Major Price and Colonel Poiier were of the party.

At night,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg inquired of me if I
had rather have no supper?  I told her a little fruit
was all I should like ;  and then orders were given,  and
I had some in my own room,  and the great pleasure of
making my good-natured little friend partake of it.

This practice has been kept up ever since,  and has
proved the means of procuring me a little time to
mj'Self,  and to quietness,  before my last summons to
the Queen.

To-night,  like the rest of my attendance,  I was
merely treated as if an accidental visitor.  Sweet Queen !
— she seems as fearful of employing me as I am myself
of being employed.

Wednesday,  July 19th. — The morning and noon
attendance were just the same as I have already men-

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  23

tioned :  but,  when the Queen was dressed,  she said
''  Should you be afraid to go to Mrs.  Delany  ?  "

You may imagine my answer :  she then desired me
to tell her she should be glad to see her,  if she could
come and sit with her while she worked.

I knew myself a welcome messenger,  and away
therefore I tript.  I had determined never to stir out
till I was bid,  that I might do nothing wrong ;  and I
am sure this little commission was given me for my
own private gratification.

My dear Mrs.  Delany received me almost with ac-
clamations of joy,  from satisfaction in finding the Queen
herself had sent me.

Mrs.  Delany came in a chair,  and I walked by its
side.  She went immediately to the Queen's room,  and
stayed with her all the morning.

At dinner to-day we had Mr.  T -,  French reader,

I believe,  to the Queen and Princesses.  He is a well-
bred and sensible man.  He left us after dinner,  to
attend the Princesses.  Major Price again sent to invite
himself to our coffee.  I like him exceedingly.  A man
more unaffectedly a gentleman I have seldom met with.

He regretted the disunion of our tables.  For-
merly, the men belonging to the King dined at the
same table with the women belonging to the Queen.

July 20th. — This morning the Queen enquired of
me if I loved walking  ?  I answered yes ;  and she then
told me I had better not leave off that exercise,  but
walk out every morning.

I called at my dear Mrs.  Delany's,  and took Miss P

with me.  We went together to Lady Louisa Clayton.
We next went to Lady Charlotte Finch,  who is one of
her sisterS;  and governess to the Princesses.

I called also at Madame La Fite^s ;  but she was so

24 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part I.

urgent Avith me to prolong my stay,  that I returned too
late to dress for my noon attendance ;  and just as I
was in the midst of my hair dishevelling,  1 was sum-
moned.

I was obliged to slip on my morning gown,  and a
large morning cap,  and run away as fast as possible.
The Queen,  who was only preparing for her own hair-
dresser, was already e)i peignoir :  she sat down,  the
man was called in,  and then,  looking at me with a
smile,  she said  "  Now,  Miss Burney,  you may go and
finish your dress."

Away I galloY)ped as fast as possible,  to be ready
against her hair-dresser departed :  but when I came
pretty near my own apartment,  I was stopped in the
gallery by a lady,  who coming up to me,  said  '■  ]Miss
Burney V

I started,  and looked at her;  but finding her a
perfect stranger to me,  I only Sciid  "  JMa'am  !" — and my
accent of surprise made her beg my pardon and walk
on.

I was too much in haste to desire any explanation,
and was only quickening my pace,  when I was again
stopped by a gentleman with a star and red ribbon,
who,  bowing very civilly,  said  *'  Miss Burney,  I pre-
sume ? —

"  Sir  ! — "  was again all my answer ;  and again,  like
the lady,  he begged my pardon,  and retreated ;  and I
was too seriously earnest to pursue my business to dare
lose a moment.  On,  therefore,  I again hurried ;  but,
at the very door of my room,  which three steps down
and three up place out of the even line of the gallery,
I was once more stopped,  by a very fat lady :  who,
coming up to me,  also said  ''  Miss Burney,  I be-
lieve ?  "

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  25

''Yes,  ma'am — •'"

''  We have just,"  cried she, "  been to wait upon you, —
but I could find nobody to introduce me;  I  "believe I
must introduce myself, — Lady Eilingham."

I thanked her for the honour she did me, — but Avhen
she proposed returning with me to my room,  in order
to finish her visit,  I was quite disconcerted  ;  and hesi-
tated so much that she said  '•'  Perhaps it is not con-
venient to you? — "

"  Ma'am — I — I was just going to dress — "  cried I ;
I meant to add,  and ought to have added,  to  "  wait
upon the Queen ;"  but I was so unused to such a plea,
that it sounded as a liberty to my mind's voice,  and I
could not get it out.

She desired she might be no impediment to me, —
and we parted ;  I was forced to let her go and to run

into ray own room,  and fly to my toilette ! Not

quite the sort of flight I have been used to making.
However^  all is so new here that it makes but a part in
the general change of system.

The lady who had met me first was her daughter.
Lady Frances Howard  ;  and the gentleman,  her second
husband.  Sir George Howard.

I afterwards saw her ladyship in the Queen's dressing-
room,  where Her Majesty sent for her as soon as she
was dressed,  and very graciously kept me some time,
addressing me frequently while I stayed,  in the conver-
sation that took place,  as if with a sweet view to point
out to this first lady of her bed-chamber I have yet
seen the favourable light in which she considers me.

The Duke de Saxe-Gotha,  first cousin to the King,
came to Windsor to-day,  to spend some time.  Major
Price,  who had the honours to do to his chief attendant.
Baron ,  missed us therefore at coffee  ;  but at tea

26 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

we had tlicm botli,  and my dear  ]Mrs.  Delany,  as well
as the jovial gourmand Colonel,  with whom I became
prodifjiously well acquainted,  by makin<^  him teach
me a few German phrases,  which he always contrives,
let me ask what question I may,  to turn into some
expression relating to eating and drinking.

When all were gone,  except the Duke de Saxe-
Gotha s Baron and Major Price,  I had a very long
conversation with the Major,  while Mrs.  Schwellenberg
was entertaining the Baron in German.  I find,  my
dearest Susan,  he has seen you often at Lady Clarges's ;
Sir Thomas was his first cousin.  He knows my dearest
Mrs.  Locke,  also,  by another cousin.  Lady Templetown ;
and he knows me my own self by my cousins of Wor-
cester. These mutual acquaintances have brought us
into almost an intimacy at once,  and I was quite glad
of this opportunity of a little easy and natural conver-
sation.

July 21st. — I went to the lower lodge to return my
visits from Miss Goldsworthy and Miss Planta;  and
heard not,  till after my return to my constant Madame
La Fite,  that Miss Planta lives under the same roof
with myself.  'Twas ridiculous enough,  for I left my
name for her with the porter ;  but I know nothing of
this lodge,  save my own rooms,  and the Queen's,  and
Mrs.  Schwellenberg s,  and to go to Mrs.  SchwcUen-
berg's I have merely to walk up one flight of stairs,
which commence from the very door of my own room.

July 22nd. — Mrs.  De Luc called upon me this
morning,  and made me a long and very sociable visit.
She is an amiable woman,  and so cordial,  gently,  not
vehemently,  that I take a good deal of pleasure in her
kindness and conversation.

A concert,  I think I have mentioned,  is performed

1786]        OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         27

every night;  and this night,  Mr.  Charles Wesley-
play ed the harpsichord extremely well.

Sunday,  July 23rd. — Charles Wesley played the
organ ;  and after the service was over he performed
six or seven pieces by the King's order.  They were all
of Handel,  and so well suited to the organ,  and so well
performed on a remarkably good instrument,  that it was
a great regale to me to hear them.  The pleasure I
received from the performance led me into being too
late for the Queen.  I found I had ah'eady been en-
quired for to attend at the Queen s toilette.

When I came back the tea-party were all assembled
in the eating-parlour.  Colonel Polier was in the high-
est spirits:  the King had just bestowed some appoint-
ment upon him in Hanover.  He was as happy as
if just feasting his eyes upon pine-apple,  melon,  and
grapes.  I made Mrs.  Schwellenberg teach me how
to wish him joy in German  :  which is the only phrase
I have yet got that has no reference to eating or
drinking.

But imagine,  my Susan,  what a charm to my ears
ensued,  on the opening of this evening's concert,  when
the sweet-flowing,  melting,  celestial notes of Fischer's
hautbois reached them  !  It made the evening pass
so soothingly,  I couid listen to nothing else.

Monday,  July 24. — Having now journalized for one
complete week,  let me endeavour to give you,  more
connectedly,  a concise abstract of the general method
of passing the day^  that then I may only write what
varies,  and occurs occasionally.

I rise at six o'clock,  dress in a morning gown and
cap,  and wait my first summons,  which is at all times
from seven to near eight,  but commonly in the exact
half hour between them.

28 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part I.

The Queen never sends for me till her hair is dressed.
This,  in a morning,  is always done by her wardrobe-
woman,  Mrs.  Thielky,  a German,  but who speaks
English perfectly well.

^Irs.  Schwellenberg,  since the first week,  has never
come down in a morning at all.  The Queen's dress is
finished by Mrs.  Thielky and myself.  No maid ever
enters the room while the Queen is in it.  Mrs.  Thielky
hands the things to me,  and I put them on.  'Tis for-
tunate for me I have not the handhig them  !  I should
never know which to take first,  embarrassed as I am,
and should run a prodigious risk of giving the gown
before the hoop,  and the fan before the neck-ker-
chief.

By eight o'clock,  or a little after,  for she is extremely
expeditious,  she is dressed.  She then goes out to join
the King,  and be joined by the Princesses,  and they all
proceed to the King's chapel in the Castle,  to prayers,
attended by the governesses of the Princesses,  and the
King's equerry.  Various others at times attend;  but
only these indispensably.

I then return to my own room to breakfast.  I make
this meal the most pleasant part of the day  ;  I have
a book for my companion,  and I allow myself an hour
for it.  My present book is Gilpin's description of
the Lakes of Cumberland and Westmoreland.  i\Irs.
Delany has lent it me.  It is the most picturesque
reading I ever met with:  it shows me landscapes of
every sort,  with tints so bright and lively,  I forget I
am but reading,  and fancy I see them before me,
coloured by the hand of Nature.

At nine o'clock I send off my breakfast things,  and
relinquish my book,  to make a serious and steady ex-
amination of everything I have upon my hands in the

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  29

way of business — in which preparations for dress are
always included,  not for the present day alone,  but for
the court-days,  which require a particular dress  ;  for the
next arriving birth-day of any of the Royal Family,
every one of which requires new apparel;  for Kew,
where the dress is plainest ;  and for going on here,  where
the dress is very pleasant to me,  requiring no shew nor
finery,  but merely to be neat,  not inelegant,  and mode-
rately fashionable.

That over,  I have my time at my own disposal till
a quarter before twelve,  except on Wednesdays and
Saturdays,  when I have it only to a quarter before
eleven.

My rummages and business sometimes occupy me
uninterruptedly to those hours.  When they do not,  I
give till ten to necessary letters of duty,  ceremony,  or
long arrears; — and now,  from ten to the times I have
mentioned,  I devote to walking.

These times mentioned call me to the irksome and
quick-returning labours of the toilette.  The hour ad-
vanced on the Wednesdays and Saturdays is for curling
and craping the hair,  which it now requires twice a
week.

A quarter before one is the usual time for the Queen
to.  begin dressing for the day.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg
then constantly attends;  so do I;  Mrs.  Thielky,  of
course,  at all times.  We help her off with her gown,
and on with her powdering things,  and then the hair*
dresser is admitted.  She generally reads the news-
papers during that operation.

When she observes that I have run to her but half
dressed,  she constantly gives me leave to return and
finish as soon as shells seated.     If she is grave,  and

30 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

reads steadily on,  she dismisses me,  whether I am
dressed or not;  but at all times she never forc^ets to
send me away while she is powdering,  with a consider-
ation not to spoil my clothes,  that one would not ex-
pect belonged to her high station.  Neither does she
ever detain me without making a point of reading here
and there some little paragraph aloud.

When I return,  I finish,  if anything is undone,  my
dress,  and then take Baretti's Dialogues,  my dearest
Fredy's Tablet of Memory,  or some such disjointed
matter,  for the few minutes that elapse ere I am again
summoned.

I find her then always removed to her state dressing-
room,  if any room in this private mansion can have the
epithet of state.  There,  in a very short time,  her dress
is finished.  She then says she won't detain me,  and I
hear and see no more of her till bed-time.

It is commonly 3 o'clock when I am thus set at large.
And I have then two hours quite at my own disposal  :
but,  in the natural course of things,  not a moment after  !
These dear and quiet two hours,  my only quite sure
and undisturbed time in the whole day,  after breakfast
is over,  I shall henceforward devote to thus talking
with my beloved Susan,  my Fredy,  my other sisters,
my dear father,  or Miss Cambridge ;  with my brothers,
cousins,  Mrs.  Ord,  and other friends,  in such terms as
these two hours will occasionally allow me.  Hencefor-
ward, I say ;  for hitherto dejection of spirits,  with un-
certainty how long my time might last,  have made me
waste moment after moment as sadly as unprofitably.

At five,  we have dinner.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg and I
meet in the eating-room.  We are commonly tete-a-
tete  :  when there is anybody added,  it is from her invi-

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         31

tation only.  Whatever right my place might afford me
of also inviting my friends to the table I have now
totally lost,  by want of courage and spirits to claim it
originally.

When we have dined,  we go upstairs to her apart-
ment, which is directly over mine.  Here we have
coffee till the terracing is over :  this is at about eight
o'clock.  Our tete-a-tete then finishes,  and we come
down again to the eating-room.  There the equerry,
whoever he is,  comes to tea constantly,  and with him
any gentleman that the King or Queen may have in-
vited for the evening;  and when tea is over,  he con-
ducts them,  and goes himself,  to the concert-room.

This is commonly about nine o'clock.

From that time,  if Mrs.  Schwellenberg is alone,  I
never quit her for a minute,  till I come to my little
supper at near eleven.

Between eleven and twelve my last summons usually
takes place,  earlier and later occasionally.  Twenty
minutes is the customary time then sjjent with the
Queen :  half an hour,  I believe,  is seldom exceeded.

I then come back,  and after doing whatever I can to
forward my dress for the next morning,  I go to bed —
and to sleep,  too,  believe me  :  the early rising,  and a
long day"s attention to new affairs and occupations,
cause a fatigue so bodily,  that nothing mental stands
against it,  and to sleep I fall the moment I have put
out my candle and laid down my head.

Such is the day to your F.  B.  in her new situation
at Windsor ;  such,  I mean,  is its usual destination,  and
its intended course.  I make it take now and then an-
other channel,  but never stray far enough not to re-
turn to the original stream after a little meandering
about and about it.

32 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

I think now 3'ou will be aLlc to sec and to follow me
pretty closel3\

With regard to those summonses I speak of,  I will
now explain myself.  My summons,  upon all regular
occasions — that is,  morning,  noon,  and night toilets — is
neither more nor less than a bell.  Upon extra occa-
sions a page is commonly sent.

At first,  I felt inexpressibly discomfited by this mode
of call.  A bell ! — it seemed so mortifying a mark of
servitude,  I always felt myself blush,  though alone,  with
conscious shame at my own strange degradation.  But
I have philosophized myself now into some reconcile-
ment with this manner of summons,  by reflecting that
to have some person always sent would be often very
inconvenient,  and that this method is certainly less an
interruption to any occupation I may be employed in,
than the entrance of messengers so many tinies in the
day.  It is,  besides,  less liable to mistakes.  So I have
made up my mind to it as well as 1 can  ;  and now I only
feel that proud blush when somebody is by to revive
my original dislike of it.

Tuesday,  July 25tii.  —  I now begin my second
week,  with a scene a little,  not much,  different.  We
were now to go to Kew^  there to remain till Fri-
day.

I had this morning,  early,  for the first time,  a little
visit from one of the Princesses.  I was preparing for
my journey,  when a little rap at my room-door made
me call out  "  Come in !"  and who should enter but the
Princess lloyal !

I apologised for my familiar admittance,  by my little
expectation of such an honour.  She told me she had
brought the Queen's snufl-box,  to be filled with some
snuff which I had been directed to prepare.    It is a very

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  33

fine-scented and mild snuff,  but requires being moist-
ened from time to time,  to revive its smell.

The Princess,  with a very sweet smile,  insisted upon
holdini^  the box while I filled it ;  and told me she had
seen Mrs.  Delany at the chapel,  and that she was very
well ;  and then she talked on about her,  with a visible
pleasure in having a subject so interesting to me to
open upon.

When the little commission was executed,  she took
her leave with as elegant civility of manner as if part-
ing with another King's daughter.  I am quite charmed
with the Princess Royal ;  unaffected condescension and
native dignity are so happily blended in her whole de-
portment.

She had left me but a short time before she again
returned.  "  Miss Burney,"  cried she,  smiling with a
look of congratulation,  '  Mamma says the snuff is ex-
tremely well mixed ;  and she has sent another box to
be filled."

I had no more ready.  She begged me not to mind,
and not to hurry myself,  for she would wait till it was
done.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  Miss Planta,  and myself tra-
velled to Kew together.  I have two rooms there ;  both
small,  and up two pair of stairs ;  but tidy and com-
fortable enougfe'  Indeed all the apartments but the
King's and Queen's,  and one of Mrs.  Schwellenberg's,
are small,  dark,  and old-fashioned.  There are stair-
cases in every passage,  and passages to every closet.
I lost myself continually,  only in passing from my own
room to the Queen's.

Just as I got upstairs,  shown the way first by Mi
Planta,   I heard the King s voice.     I slipped into^^Yn
room;  but he saw me,  and following,  said,

VOL.  III.  D

34 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

"  What !  is Miss Burnoy taking possession  ?"

And then he walked round the room,  as if to see if
it were comfortable for me,  and smiling very good-
humouredly,  walked out again.  A surveyor was with
him  ;  I believe he is giving orders for some alterations
and additions.

When I came in to dress,  John told me Mr.  Dundas
was waiting to see me.  Mr.  Dundas is the household
apothecary at Kcw.  I wanted him not officially ;  but
I knew Miss Cambridge,  who sees him continuall}^,  in-
tended desiring him to call,  that she might hear an ac-
count of me from somebody's  "  live voice."  Though in-
convenient, therefore,  I admitted him  ;  but I did not
ask him to sit down,  nor encourage him to stay a
moment.  He is a sensible and worthy man,  Miss
Cambridge says,  and behaved so well,  so humanely
and attentively to her long-suffering Kitty,  that her
affectionate heart has been bound to him for ever.

When I went to the Queen before dinner,  the little
Princess Amelia was with her ;  and,  though shy of me
at first,  we afterwards made a very pleasant acquaint-
ance. She is a most lovely little thing,  just three years
old,  and full of sense,  spirit,  and playful prettiness :
yet decorous and dignified when called upon to appear
en prince.9se to any strangers,  as if conscious of her
high rank,  and of the importance of J^descendingly
sustaining it.  'Tis amazing what education can do,
in the earliest years,  to those of quick understandings.
This little Princess,  thus in infancy,  by practice and
example taught her own consequence,  conducts her-
self, upon all proper occasions,  with an air of dignity
e^at is quite astonishing,  though her natural charac-
broiscems all sport and humour,
snuffhen we became a little acquainted,   the Queen

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  ^35

desired me to take her by the hand,  and carry her
downstairs to the King,  who was waiting for her in
the garden.  She trusted herself to me with a grave
and examining look,  and shewed me,  for I knew it not,
the way.  The King,  who dotes upon her,  seemed
good-humouredly pleased to see me bring her.  He
took her little hand and led her away.

The next day I had a visit from Mrs.  Tunstall,  the
new housekeeper,  to inquire if I wanted anything  :  she
seems a good sort of woman,  and I have returned her
visit.

Mr.  Mathias also came,  from the'  Queen,  to make
out the warrant for my appointment.  He is uncle to
Charlotte's friend Mr.  Mathias,  who is sub-treasurer
to the Queen,  and he sometimes officiates for him.

I had an exceeding kind,  friendly,  and instructive
letter this morning from Miss Young.  I was quite
happy in this mark of her faithful friendship.  You
may be sure the subject w^as my new situation.

Thursday,  July 27th. — This being a court-day,  we
went to town.  The Queen dresses her head at Kew,
and puts on her drawing-room apparel at St.  James's.
Her new attendant dresses all at Kew,  except tip-
pet and long ruffles,  which she carries in paper,  to
save from dusty roads.  I forgot to tell you,  I believe,
that at St.  James's I can never appear,  even though
I have nothing to do with the drawing-room,  except
in a sacque :  'tis the etiquette of my place.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  Miss Planta,  and myself went
about an hour before the King and Queen.  Mrs.
Schwellenberg went to the Queen's dressing-room to
give orders about the dress.  Miss Planta went to the
Princesses'  room for the same purpose,  and I was shewn
to mine for no purpose.

d2

36 DIARY AND LETTERS        [Part I.

Mine arc two small rooms,  newly and handsomely
furnished,  one of which has a view of the Park,  over
the Stable-yard,  and the other only of the passajrc to
the Park from St.  James"'s-slrcet.

I had now the great satisfaction to find that there
was a private staircase,  from that same passage,  that
leads straight up to my apartments,  and also that I
may appoint any friend to meet me in them on the
court-days.  I hope never to be there again without
making use of this privilege.

Having now neither companion nor book,  I sent
John,  who came with me to town,  to borrow some
writing implements of one of the pages,  and I em-
ployed myself in answering some letters,  till the
Queen arrived,  and 1 was summoned,  by Mrs.  Leve-
rick,  the town wardrobe woman,  to the dressing-room.

There the Queen put on her court dress,  and as
soon as she was attired sent for the Princess Royal
and Augusta,  who came to attend her to the drawing-
room.

Mr.  Nicolay,  the page in waiting,  then came to beg
a little audience for the Duchess of Ancaster.  The
Queen went to her in the ante-room.  The moment I
was left with the Princesses,  they both came up to me,
and began conversing in the most easy,  unaffected,
cheerful,  and obliging manner that can be conceived.

When the Queen returned,  the bell was rung for the
bedchamber woman ;  the etiquette of court-days re-
quiring that one of them should finish her dress.

It happened now to be my acquaintance,  Mrs.
Fielding.  She only tied on the necklace,  and handed
the fan and gloves.  The Queen then leaves the dress-
ing-room, her train being carried by the bedchamber
woman.     The Princesses follow.     She goes to the ante-

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  ^37

room,  where she sends for the Lady of the Bedchamber
in waiting,  who then becomes the first train-bearer,
and the}'  all proceed to the drawing-room.

We returned to Kew to dinner,  very late.  M.
Polier and Miss Planta dined with us  ;  and at the des-
sert I was very agreeably surprised by the entrance of
Sir Richard Jebb,  who stayed coffee.  It seems so odd
to me to see an old acquaintance in this new place
and new situation,  that I hardly feel as if I knew them.

Friday,  July 28th. — We returned to Windsor at
noon.

The Kew life,  you will perceive,  is different from the
Windsor.  As there are no early prayers,  the Queen
rises later ;  and as there is no form or ceremony here
of any sort,  her dress is plain,  and the hour for the
second toilette extremely uncertain.  The Royal family
are here always in so very retired a way,  that they live
as the simplest country gentlefolks.  The King has not
even an equerry with him,  nor the Queen any lady to
attend her when she goes her airings.

Miss Planta belongs here to our table  ;  so does any-
body that comes,  as there is no other kept.

There is no excuse for parting after dinner,  and
therefore I live unremittingly with Mrs.  Schwellenberg
after the morning.

It is a still greater difficulty to see company here than
at Windsor,  for as my apartments are upstairs,  there
is a greater danger of encountering some of the Royal
family  ;  and I find all the household are more delicate
in inviting or admitting any friends here than else-
where, on account of the very easy and unreserved
way in which the family live,  running about from one
end of the house to the other,  without precaution or
care.

38 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part I.

To-day I made my first evening visit,  and,  for the
first time,  failed Mrs.  Schwellcnbcrc^'s tea-table en-
tirely. You will be surprised to hear for whom I
took this effort ; — Lady Effingham I But I found from
Mrs.  Delany she had been a little hurt by the pas-
sage-scene, and seemed to think I meant to avoid her
future visits and civilities.  Mrs.  Delany,  therefore,
advised me to go to Stoke,  her country-seat,  by way
of apologizing,  and to request the Queen's permis-
sion, promising to carry me herself

I never hesitate where she counsels.  I thought it,
too,  a good opportunity of trying my length of liberty,
as Lady Effingham is one of the ladies of the bed-
chamber, and is frequently at the Lodge as a private
visitor.

It was inexpressibly awkward to me to ask leave to
go out,  and awkwardly enough 1 believe I did it,  only
saying that if her Majesty had no objection,  Mrs.
Delany would carry me in the evening to Stoke.  She
smiled immediate approbation,  and nothing more
passed.

I had then to tell my intention to Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg,  who was,  I believe,  a little surprised.  Fortu-
nately, Major Price came upstairs to coffee.  A little
surprised,  too,  I am sure,  was Major Price,  when I
made off for the whole evening.  Everybody had taken
it for granted 1 must necessarily pursue the footsteps
of Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  and never stir out.  But,  thank
God,  I am not in the same situation ;  she had no con-
nections— I have such as no one,  I believe,  ever had
before-

The evening was rainy ;  but,  my leave asked and
obtained,  my kind Mrs.  Delany would not defer the
excursion.     Stoke is about three miles off.

178G]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.'  39

We were received in the civilest manner possible
by Lady Effingham,  and Sir George Howard and
Lady Frances.  There were also several of their rela-
tions with them.

Lady Effingham seems a mighty good-humoured,
friendly woman.  Sir George is pompous,  yet he,
too,  is as good-humoured in his manners as his
Lady.

Sunday,  July 30th. — This morning I received a let-
ter, which,  being short and pithy,  I will copy : —

''  My dear Miss Burney,  or Mrs.  Burney,  as I am told
you must now be called — let your old friend Baretti
give you joy of what has given him as great and as
quick a one as ever he felt in all his days.  God bless
you,  and bless somebody I dare not name,  Amen.
And suppose I add,  bless me too — will that do me any
harm  ?"

July 31st. — I had a very pleasant visit from Mrs.
Hastings this morning,  whose gay good-humour is
very enlivening :  but she detained me from my dress,
and I was not ready for the Queen ;  and I have now
adopted the measure of stationing John in the gallery
wdiile I am at that noble occupation,  and making him
keep off all callers,  by telling them I am dressing for
the Queen.  I have no other way ;  and being too late,
or even the fear of being too late,  makes me nervous
and ill.

Every little failure of this sort,  though always from
causes unknown to her Majesty,  she has borne without
even a look of surprise or of gravity  ;  though she never
waits an instant,  for if Mrs.  Schwellenberg is not with
her,  she employs Mrs.  Thielky,  or goes on with her
dress or her undress without either.

This graciousness,  however,  makes me but the more

40 DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.  [PaRtI.

earnest to grow punctual ;  especially as I am now al-
ways employed,  ^vhen present and in time.

I went in the afternoon to Mrs.  de Luc.  Mr.
de Luc's place here enables me to visit at that liouse
with entire approbation,  whenever I have leisure.
But I can scarce spare a moment of my own from  ^Irs.
Delany.

When I returned here,  to the conclusion of tlic tea-
drinking,  I found a new gentleman,  dressed in the
King's Windsor uniform — which is blue and gold,
turned up with red,  and worn by all the men who belong
to his Majesty,  and come into his presence at Windsor.
Major Price immediately presented us to each other.
]t was General Bude  :  what his post may be I have not
yet learned,  but he is continually,  I am told,  at AVind-
sor,  and always resides in this lodge,  and eats with the
equerries.

I do not quite know what.^to say of General Bude  ;
except that his person is tall and showy,  and his man-
ners and appearance are fashionable.  But he has a
sneer in his smile that looks sarcastic,  and a distance
in his manner that seems haughty.

PART II.

1786.

CONTENTS.

The Young Princesses — The Queen's Lap-dog — A Nice Point —
Royal Visitors — Duchess of Ancaster — Lady Charlotte Bertie
— Attempt on the King's Life by Margaret Nicholson — Be-
haviour of the Royal Family on the Occasion— The King's
Relation of the Circumstances— Consternation of the Queen —
Calm Behaviour of the King — New Details of the Circum-
stances— The Assassin protected by the King — True Courage
evinced by the King — Insanity of the Assassin — Domestic
Details — Alarm for Mrs.  Delany — The Dowager Lady Spencer
— A Royal Favorite — Etiquette of a Palace — The Heberdens
— Visit of the Prince of Wales to Windsor Castle — Coolness
between him and the King — The Newspapers of the Day —
Royal Comments on them — The Coronation Anthem — The
Queen reading Cowper's Task — Lord Walsingham — Lord and
Lady Boston — The Neapolitan Ambassador — Congratulations
—A Bold Request— Royal Table-Talk— The Duke of Montagu
— The King and Mrs.  Delany — An Embarrassment  —  Sir
Francis Drake — A Royal Birthday — Customs of the Day —
The Chapel Royal — A Stair-case Drawing-room — A Walk on
the Terrace — The Infant Princess Amelia— Royal Cortege —
Etiquette of the Terrace at Windsor — An Evening Party —
Official Jealousy — Loyalty of Kew — The Arcana of a Palace
— Royal Gift — A Dilemma — Mrs.  Locke — St.  James's — A
Drawing-room — Court Scandal — Accusation and Defence —
Divorce in Germany — Newspaper Calumny.

42 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PakT II.

PART II.

1786.

Wednesday,  August 2nd. — This morning,  for the
first time,  I made a little sort of acquaintance with the
two younger Princesses.  I was coming from the Queen's
room,  very early,  when I met the Princess Mary,  just
arrived from the Lower Lodge :  she was capering up-
stairs to her elder sisters,  but instantly stopped at sight
of me,  and then coming up to me,  inquired how I did,
with all the elegant composure of a woman of maturcst
age.  Amazingly well are all these children brought
up.  The readiness and the grace of their civilities,
even in the midst of their happiest wildnesses and free-
dom, are at once a surprise and a charm to all who see
them.

The Queen,  when she goes to early prayers,  often
leaves me the charge of her little favourite dog,  Ba-
dine.  To-day,  after her return,  she sent her page for
him ;  and presently after,  I had a rap again at the
door,  and the little Princess Sophia entered.  *'  Miss
Burney,"  cried she,  curtseying and colouring,  ''Mamma
has sent me for the little dog's basket."

I begged her permission to carry it to the Queen's
room  ;  but she would not suffer me,  and insisted upon
taking it herself,  with a mingled modesty and good
breeding extremely striking in one so young.

About half an hour after she returned again,  accom-
panying the Princess Eoyal.     The Queen had given

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         43

me a new collection of German books,  just sent over,
to cut open for her ;  and she employed the Princess
Royal to label them.  She came most smilingly to
the occupation,  and said she would write down their
names,  "  if I pleased,"  in my room.  You may believe
I was not much displeased.  I gave her a pencil,  and
she seized a piece of whity-brown paper,  inquiring  "  If
she might have it?'' — I would fain have got her bet-
ter, but she began writing immediately,  stooping to
the table.

I was now in a momentary doubt whether or not it
would be proper,  or too great a liberty,  to ask her royal
highness to be seated ;  but,  after a moment's hesita-
tion, I thought it best to place her a chair,  and say
nothing.

I did;  and she turned about to me with a most
graceful curtsey,  and immediately accepted it,  with a
most condescending apology for my trouble.

I then,  thus encouraged,  put another chair for the
little Princess Sophia,  who took it as sweetly.

"  Pray sit down too !"  cried the Princess Royal :  ''  I
beg you will.  Miss Burney  !"

I resisted a little while ;  but she would not hear
me,  insisting,  with the most obliging earnestness,  upon
carrying her point.

She writes German with as much facility as I do
English ;  and therefore,  the whole time she was taking
down the titles of the books,  she kept up a conversa-
tion, Mrs.  Delany her well and kindly chosen subject.

When she had done her task,  she quitted me with
the same sweetness,  and the Princess Mary ran in for
her little sister.

The Princess Royal,  not long after,  again returned;
— "There is no end to me,  you will think this morn-

44 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

ing,"  cried she,  on entering  ;  and then desired to have
all the books 1 had cut open :  nor would she suffer me
to carry one for lier,  though they were incommodious,
from their quantity,  for herself.

Such has been the singular condescension of the
Queen,  that every little commission with which she has
yet intrusted me she has contrived to render highly
honourable,  by giving the Princesses some share in
them.

In the evening I had no little difficulty how to
manage to go to Mrs.  Delany, — for I have here to
mention the worst thing that has happened to me at
Windsor, — the desertion of Major Price from the coffee.
The arrival of General Bude,  who belongs to the
equerries'  table,  has occasioned his staying to do the
honours to him till terrace time.  At tea,  they belong
to Mrs.  Schwellenberg.

This has not only lost me some of his society,  the
most pleasant I had had in the Lodge,  but has trebled
my trouble to steal away.  While I left him behind,  the
absconding from a beau was apology all-sufficient for
running away from a belle ;  but now I am doubly
wanted to stay,  and two-doubly earnest to go  !

For this evening,  however,  an opportunity soon
offered.  The Duchess of Ancaster,  who,  with her
daughter.  Lady Charlotte Bertie,  was just come on a
visit to the Queen,  called in upon Mrs.  Schwellenberg;
and,  after an extremely civil salutation and introduc-
tion to me,  and joy-wishing on my appointment,  she
shewed so much agitation,  and seemed so desirous to
speak of something important to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,
that I found it perfectly easy to make my apology for
retiring.

1 went into my own room for my cloak,  and,  as usual.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  45

found Madame La Fite just waiting for me.  She was
all emotion, — she seized my hand, — ''  Have you heard  ?
—  O mon Dieiif — 0 le bon Roil 0 Miss Buriiey I —
what an horreur  /" —

I was very much startled,  but soon ceased to wonder
at her perturbation  ; — she had been in the room with
the Princess Elizabeth,  and there heard,  from Miss
Goldsworthy,  that an attempt had just been made
upon the life of the King  !

I was almost petrified with horror at the intelligence.
If this King is not safe, — good,  pious,  beneficent as
he is, — if his life is in danger,  from his own subjects,
what is to guard the Throne?  and which way is a
monarch to be secure  ?

Mrs.  Goldsworthy had taken every possible precau-
tion so to tell the matter to the Princess Elizabeth as
least to alarm her,  lest it might occasion a return of
her spasms ;  but,  fortunately,  she cried so exceedingly
that it was hoped the vent of her tears would save her
from those terrible convulsions.

Madame La Fite had heard of the attempt only,  not
the particulars ;  but I was afterwards informed of them
in the most interesting manner, — namely,  how they
were related to the Queen.  And as the newspapers will
have told you all else,  I shall only and briefly tell that.

No information arrived here of the matter before
his Majesty's return,  at the usual hour in the afternoon,
from the levee.  The Spanish Minister had hurried
off instantly to Windsor,  and was in waiting,  at Lady
Charlotte Finch's,  to be ready to assure her Majesty
of the King's safety,  in case any report anticipated his
return.

The Queen had the two eldest Princesses,  the
Duchess of Ancaster,  and Lady Charlotte Bertie with

46 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

her when the King came in.  He liastened up to her,
with a countenance of striking vivacity,  and said  "  Here
I am  ! — safe and well, — as you see  ! — but I have very
narrowly escaped being stabbed  !"

His own conscious safety,  and the pleasure lie felt
in thus personally shewing it to the Queen,  made him
not aware of the effect of so abrupt a communication.
The Queen was seized with a consternation that at first
almost stupefied her^  and^  after a most painful silence,
the first words she could articulate were,  in looking
round at the Duchess and Lady Charlotte,  who had
both burst into tears, — "  I envy you  ! — I can't cry  !"

The two Princesses were for a little while in the same
state  ;  but the tears of the Duchess proved infectious,
and they then wept even with violence.

The King,  with the gayest good-humour,  did his
utmost to comfort them  ;  and then gave a relation of
the affair,  with a calmness and unconcern that,  had
any one but himself been his hero,  would have been
regarded as totally unfeeling.

You may have heard it wrong;  I will concisely tell
it right.  His carriage had just stopped at the garden-
door at St.  James's,  and he had just alighted from it,
when a decently-dressed woman,  who had been waiting
for him some time,  approached him with a petition.
It was rolled up,  and had the usual superscription —
•^For the King's Most Excellent Majesty."  She pre-
sented it with her right hand ;  and,  at the same mo-
ment that the Kin 2:  bent forward to take it,  she drew
from it,  with her left hand,  a knife,  with which she
aimed straight at his heart !

The fortunate awkwardness of taking the instrument
with the left hand made her design perceived before it
could be executed; — the King started back,  scarce

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA. '  47

believing the testimony of his own eyes;  and the
woman made a second thrust,  which just touched his
waistcoat before he had time to prevent her; — and at
that moment one of the attendants,  seeing her hor-
rible intent,  wrenched the knife from her hand.

'^  Has she cut my waistcoat  ?"  cried he,  in telling
it, — ''Look  !  for I have had no time to examine."

Thank heaven,  however,  the poor wretch had not
gone quite so far.  "  Though nothing,"  added the King,
in giving his relation,  ''  could have been sooner done,
for there was nothing for her to go through but a thin
linen,  and fat."

While the guards and his own people now surrounded
the King,  the assassin was seized by the populace,  who
were tearing her away,  no doubt to fall the instant sa-
crifice of her murtherous purpose,  when the King,  the
only calm and moderate person then present,  called
aloud to the mob,  ''  The poor creature is mad  ! — Do
not hurt her  !    She has not hurt me !''

He then came forward,  and shewed himself to all
the people,  declaring he was perfectly safe and unhurt ;
and then gave positive orders that the woman should
be taken care of,  and went into the palace,  and had his
levee.

There is something in the whole of his behaviour
upon this occasion that strikes me as proof indisput-
able of a true and noble courage  :  for in a moment so
extraordinary — an attack,  in this country,  unheard of
before — to settle so instantly that it was the effect of
insanity,  to feel no apprehension of private plot or
latent conspiracy — to stay out,  fearlessly,  among his
people,  and so benevolently to see himself to the safety
of one who had raised her arm against his life, — these
little traits,  all impulsive,  and therefore to be trusted.

48 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Paiit II.

have given me an impression of respect and reverence
that I can never forget,  and never think of but with
fresh admiration.

If that love of prerogative,  so falsely assigned,  were
true,  what an opportunity was here offered to exert it !
Had he instantly taken refuge in his palace,  ordered
out all his guards,  stopped every avenue to St.  James's,
and issued his commands that every individual present
at this scene should be secured and examined, — who
would have dared murmur,  or even blame such mea-

sures

The insanity of the woman has now fully been proved  ;
but that noble confidence which gave that instant excuse
for her was then all his own.

Nor did he rest here  ;  notwithstanding the excess of
terror for his safety,  and doubt of further mischief,
with which all his family and all his household were
seized,  he still maintained the most cheerful composure,
and insisted upon walking on the terrace,  with no other
attendant than his single equerry.

The poor Queen went with him,  pale and silent, —
the Princesses followed,  scarce yet commanding their
tears.  In the evening,  just as usual,  the King had his
concert :  but it was an evening of grief and horror to
his family :  nothing w-as listened to,  scarce a word was
spoken  ;  the Princesses wept continually ;  the Queen,
still more deeply struck,  could only,  from time to time,
hold out her hand to the King,  and say  ''I have you yet l"
The affection for the King felt by all his household
has been at once pleasant and affecting to me to ob-
serve :  there has not been a dry eye in either of the
Lodges,  on the recital of his danger,  and not a face but
his own that has not worn marks of care ever since.
I put off my visit to my dear Mrs.  Delany ;  I was

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  49

too 1-nucli horror-struck to see her immediately ;  and
uhcn,  at night,  I went to her^  I determined to spare
iier the shock of this event till the next day.  I was
sure it would soon travel to her house ;  and I cautioned

Miss P and Mrs.    Astley,   if any intelligence

reached them concerning the King,  to conceal it.

I found the Dowager Lady Spencer with her,  whom
i had been invited to meet,  at her repeated desire.
She was easy,  chatty,  and obliging;  she seems to have
a good understanding,  and a perfect assurance of it.
She was most earnestly flattering about cultivating our
acquaintance,  wdiich had begun last winter at Mrs.
Delany's in town.

General Bude and IMajor Price were with Mrs.
Schwellenberg at my return ;  and not a word was
littered by either of them concerning the day's terrific
alarm.  There seemed nothing but general conster-
nation and silence.

When I went to the Queen at night she scarce once
opened her lips.  Indeed I could not look at her with-
out feeling the tears ready to start into my eyes.  But
I was very glad to hear again the voice of the King,
though only from the next apartment,  and calling to
one of his dogs.

August 3kd. — The poor Queen looked so ill that it
Avas easy to see how miserable had been her night.  It
is unfortunately the unalterable opinion of Mrs.
Schwellenberg that some latent conspiracy belongs to
this attempt,  and therefore that it will never rest here.
This dreadful suggestion preys upon the mind of the
Queen,  though she struggles to conquer or conceal it.
I longed passionately this morning,  when alone with
her,  to speak upon the matter,  and combat the opi-
nion ;  but as she still said nothing,  it was not possible.

VOL.  III.  K

50 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

When she was dressed for the chapel,  she desired
me to keep little Badine  ;  but he ran out after her  :  I
ran too,  and in the gallery leading frorfi the Queen's
room to mine,  all the Princesses,  and their governesses,
were waiting for the Queen.  They all looked very ill,
the Princess Royal particularly. — O well indeed might
they tremble!  for a father more tender,  more kind,
more amiable,  I believe has scarcely ever had daugh-
ters to bless.

The Princess Mary assisted me to recover the little
dog,  or,  rather,  took all the trouble herself,  for she
caught him and brought him to me in her arms  ;  and
the Princess Augusta very sweetly came up to mc,  to
say she had just seen Mrs.  Delany pass by to the
chapel,  which must be a proof of her health.

The Queen and Princesses then went into the room
where they usually wait for the King.  Miss Golds-
worthy came forward,  with another lady,  who,  she said,
desired acquaintance with me :  it was Mile.  Monmou-
lin,  one of the governesses.

Major Price,  who was in waiting for the King at
the head of a great staircase just out of the gallery,
made me also his bow,  but is ever scrupulously at-
tentive not to utter a syllable either in the sight or the
hearing of the King or Queen.

I then passed on to my own room,  wdiich terminates
this gallery.  But I have since heard it is contrary to
rule to pass even the door of an apartment in which
any of the royal family happen to be,  if it is open.
However,  these little formalities are all dispensed with
to the ignorant ;  and as I learn better I shall observe
them more.  I am now obliged to fee land find my way
as I can,  having no friend,  adviser,  nor informer in
the whole house.      Accident only gives me any in-

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  51

struction,  and that generally arrives too late to save
an error.  My whole dependence is upon the character
of the Queen;  her good sense and strong reason will
always prevent the unnecessary offence of ranking mis-
takes from inexperience,  with disrespect or inattention.
I have never,  therefore,  a moment's uneasiness upon
these points.  Though there is a lady who from time
to time represents them as evils the most heinous.

I had afterwards a letter from my poor Mrs.  Delany,
written with her own hand,  and with a pencil,  as she is
now too indistinct of sight to see even a word.  She
writes therefore only by memory,  and,  if with pen and
ink,  cannot find her place again when she leaves it,  to
dip the pen in the inkstand.

She had escaped the news at the chapel,  by the care
of Lady Spencer,  who had been cautioned to watch
her;  but she had been told it afterwards by Lady
Spencer herself,  lest it should reach her ears in any
worse manner.  You may imagine how greatly it
shocked her.  I ran to answer her note in person,
determining,  upon such an occasion,  to risk appearing
before the Queen a second time in my morning dress,
rather than not satisfy my dear Mrs.  Delany by word
of mouth.  I gave her all the comfort in my power,
and raised her agitated spirits by dv/elling upon the
escape,  and slightly passing by the danger.

The Queen was so late before her second summons
that I was still in time.  I found her with her eyes
almost swollen out of her head,  but more cheerful and
easy,  and evidently relieved by the vent forced,  at
length,  to her tears.

She now first spoke upon the subject to me  ;  inquir-
ing how Mrs.  Delany had borne the hearing it.  I told
her of the letter sent me in the morning,   and half

E-2

52 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

proposed shewing it,  as it expressed her feelings be-
yond the power of any otlier words.  She bowed her
desire to see it,  and I ran and brought it.  She read
it aloud,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg being present,  and was
pleased and soothed by it.

Almost as soon as I returned to my room,  I had the
honour of a visit from the Duchess of Ancaster,  who
sat with me till dinner time.  She is easy,  obliging,
unaffected,  and well bred.  I am happy to like her eo
well,  and happy in her civility,  as I find she spends the
greatest part of the summer here.

She told me all the particulars I have related already
concerning the Wednesday's alarming business.  You
may easily imagine no other subject can find entrance
here at present.

A little incident happened afterwards that gave me
o^reat satisfaction in perspective.  While I was drink-
ing coffee with Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  a message was
brought to me,  that Mrs.  and Miss Heberden desired
their compliments,  and would come to drink tea with
me if I was disengaged.

To drink tea with me  !  The words made me colour.
I hesitated, — I knew not if I might accept such an
offer.  With regard to themselves,  I had little or no
interest in it,  as they were strangers to me,  but with
regard to such an opening to future potentiality, —
there,  indeed,  the message acquired consequence.

After keeping the man some minutes,  I was so much
at a loss,  still,  to know what step I had power to take,
that I was induced to apply to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,
asking her what I must do.

"  What you please  !  "  was her answer  ;  and I waited
nothing more explicit,  but instantly sent back my
compliments,  and that I should be very glad of their
company.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  53

This was a most happy event to me  :  it first let me
know the possibility of receiving a friend in my own
room to tea.

Both mother and daughter are sensible women.  I had
met them one morning at Mrs.  Delany's,  and they had
then proposed and settled that we were to meet again.

They left me before the tea-party assembled in our
common room.  It was very much crowded,  every-
body being anxious to hear news of the Queen.  Miss
Egerton,  Mrs.  Fielding,  and her three daughters,
Mrs.  Douglas,  wife of the biographical Dr.  Douglas,
and my own dear Mrs.  Delany,  were amongst them.
The General and the Major as usual;  and the rest
were strangers to me.

When they were all gone but Mrs.  Delany,  Mrs.
Schwellenberg made us both very happy by a private
communication that the Prince of Wales was actually
then in the Lodge,  whither he rode post haste,  on the
first news of the alarm given to the Queen.

Friday,  August 4th. — This was an extremely ardu-
ous morning to the poor Queen.  The King again went
to town ;  and her anxiety in his absence,  and fear
how it might end,  oppressed her most painfully.  She
could not take her usual airing.  She shut herself
up with the Princess Augusta ;  but,  to avoid any
rumours of her uneasiness,  the carriage and usual
horsemen were all at the door at the customary time  ;
and the Princess Koyal,  attended by the Duchess of
Ancaster,  went out,  and passed,  driving quick through
the town,  for the Queen herself,  to most of the people.

At her toilette,  before dinner.  Lady Effingham was
admitted.  The Queen had her newspapers as usual,
and she read aloud,  while her hair was dressing,  several
interesting articles concerning the attack,  the noble

54 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

humanity of the King,  his presence of mind,  and the
blessing to the whole nation arising from his preserva-
tion. The spirit of loyalty,  warmth,  and zeal with vrhicli
all the newspapers are just now filled seemed extremely
gratifying to her  :  she dwelt upon several of the strong-
est expressions with marhcd approbation,  exclaiming
from time to time,  as she read particular praises of
his Majesty's worth and importance,  "  That is true  !
— That is true,  indeed  !  " — But suddenly,  afterwards,
coming upon a paragraph beginning with the words of
the coronation anthem,  "Long live the King!  May
the King live for ever !  "  her tears flowed so fast that
they blinded her,  and to hear her read such v>'ords
was so extremely affecting,  that I was obliged to steal
behind her chair to hide myself;  while Lady Effing-
ham took out her handkerchief,  and cried in good
earnest.  I believe her to be warmly and gratefully
attached both to the King and Queen;  and she has
received from the Queen very uncommon assistance,
I am informed^  in some very distressful situations.

The Queen,  however,  read on ;  dispersing her tears
as she could,  and always smiling through them when
the praise,  not the danger,  drew them forth.

Nothing could be more gracious than her manner to
me the whole time :  she did not,  as usual,  dismiss me,
either for her hair-dressing,  or for Lady Effingham:
she was sure I must be interested in what was going
forward,  and she looked at us alternately,  for our com-
ments as she went on.

I rejoiced she had not set me to read these papers.
I expected,  for the first week,  every summons would
have ended in a command to read to her.  But it
never happened,  and I was saved an exertion for which
I am sure I should have had no voice.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  55

One night,  indeed,  I thought the matter inevitable.
Something was mentioned,  by the Queen,  to Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  of Mr.  Cowper s poem of the Task ;
and she said there was one of the most just compli-
ments, without extravagance,  and without coldness,
that could be paid him.  She asked me if I knew the
poem  ?  I told her only by character.  She then desired
me to get the book,  which was only in the window.

I did, — and felt all my breath desert me at the same
moment.  I held it quietly,  by the side of her chair,
fearing every instant her commands to find the pas-
sage, and read it :  but,  very unexpectedly,  she took it
into her own hands,  to look for it,  and then read it
aloud herselfj looking at me as she proceeded,  to ob-
serve and to drav/  from me what I thought of it.

How sweet this was  !  when merely curiosity must have
led her to wish to hear me,  that she might judge whether
or not I could be of any use to her in a capacity in
which she has declared she really wants an assistant.

From this time she frequently read me little para-
graphs out of the papers,  without even appearing to
think of employing me in that way.

Madame La Fite,  in the afternoon,  on my descent
from Mrs.  Schwellenberg to go to Mrs.  Delany,  brought
me Mile.  Monmoulin.  She seems a perfectly good
creature,  and is one of the best and finest work-women
to be met with.  She has taught the little Princesses a
thousand ingenious uses of the needle.

I still had time for a moment or two with my Wind-
sor guardian angel,  and failed not to accept them^

On my entrance into the common room I found it
again filled with company.  The first to speak to me
was Lord Walsingham,  whom I had spent a day or two
with at Thames Ditton.     His Lady,  also,  was there ;

56 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT TI.

and Lord and Lady Boston,  ^liss Ef^erton,  a German
Baron,  M.  del Campo,  the Spanish Ambassador,  and
the General and the Major.

The confusion of the present time,  and the quantity
of company pouring into Windsor to pay their respects
to the King and Queen,  make tlie  ])Uice appear all
crowd and bustle.  I rejoice in the proof it affords of
the universal interest taken in the safely of the King.

The German Baron is an attendant on the Duke de
Saxe Gotha,  who was here for a few days again  :  he
remained therefore after all others were gone,  except
Major Price;  and as he could speak no English,  ^Irs.
Schwcllenberg had him wholly on her own hands,  to
entertain in German.

I had again a very long confabulation with iNIajor
Price,  who seems to make it a part of his business to
do whatever is in his power to assist me over the awk-
wardness of my first passage into a situation so utterly
new to me.  I had,  indeed,  to-day,  made a little step
forward for him.  In my way to the Queen at noon,  he
had stopped me,  in the gallery,  to inquire if I had the
Queen's newspapers? — No,  I said,  I never saw any
but in her own hands.  "  I wanted exceedingly,"  cried
he,  "to look at the Morning Herald,  and see in what
manner they treat this affair there.''  He was going
on,  but I was in too much haste to answer him,  and
only made the best of my way to the dressing-room.
But as I owed him every little civility in my power,  I
determined to make my apology for running off,  by
procuring him the newspaper.  I ventured,  therefore,
to tell the Queen his wish to see the Morning Herald,
and she instantly said,  "  O certainly 1 Let him see
them all."
1 brought them,  therefore,  awaj^  and sent them to

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  57

him by John.  He thanked me this evening,  but was
quite startled when I told him how the matter had
passed,  and that I had made the request for him.  I
believe it was a little out of the usual order of things  ;
but it could not signify.

Sunday,  August 6th. — The private conduct of the
Royal Family is all so good,  so exemplary,  that it is
■with the greatest pleasure I take,  from time to time,
occasion to give my Susan some traits of it.

This morning,  before church.  Miss Planta was sent
to me by the Queen,  for some snuff,  to be mixed as be-
fore :  when I had prepared it,  I carried it,  as directed,
to her Majesty's dressing-room.  I turned round the
lock,  for that,  not rapping at the door,  is the mode of
begging admission ;  and she called out to me to come in.

I found her reading,  aloud,  some religious book,  but
I could not discover what,  to the three eldest Princesses.
Miss Planta was in waiting.  She continued after my
entrance,  only motioning to me that the snuff might
be put in a box upon the table.

I did not execute my task very expeditiously :  for I
was glad of this opportunity of witnessing the maternal
piety with which she enforced,  in voice and expression,
every sentence that contained any lesson that might be
useful to her Royal daughters.  She reads extremely
well,  with great force,  clearness,  and meaning.

Just as I had slowly finished my commission,  the
King entered.  She then stopped,  and rose;  so in-
stantly did the Princesses.  He had a letter in his
hand open :  he said something to the Queen in Ger-
man, and they left the room together;  but he turned
round from the door,  and first spoke to me,  with a
good-humoured laugh,  saying,  ''  Miss Burney,  I hear
you cook snuff very well V

^  DIARY AXD LETTERS  [ParT II.

5i;/'Cook snuff!"  repeated the Princess Augusta,
laughing,  and coming up to me the moment they left
the room.  "  Pray,  Miss Barney,  let me have one pinch  !"

The Princess Elizabeth ran up to me,  also,  exclaim-
ing, ''Miss Burney,  I hope you hate snuff?  I hope
you do,  for I hate it of all things in the world  !"

In the afternoon I had a sweet visit from Mrs.  De-
lany,  who stayed with me till the evening party,  when
she accompanied me into the tea-room,  where we found
the Duke of Montagu,  M.  del Campo,  the German
Baron,  and Mr.  Fisher,  with the two customary beaux.

Just as tea was over,  the door opened,  and the King
entered.  He only seized Mrs.  Delany by the arm,
and,  laughing a little at the enlevement,  instantly car-
ried her away with him to the concert-room.  I was very
glad '^  even to lose her thus,  knowing well the great
gratification she receives from the honours done her
by such sovereigns.

^  The Major and General immediately followed,  but
the Baron stayed,  and while he engrossed Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg — (I wish he would live here  !) — and M.  del
Campo the Duke,  Mr.  Fisher,  for the first time,  en-
tered into conversation with me,  and spoke to me of
Mrs.  Thrale — with whom he had seen me in former
times — with such candour that it quite won my heart.

Durini^r this discourse,  Westerhahl,  one of Mrs.
Schwellenberg's domestics,  called me out of the room.
John waited to speak to me in the gallery.  "  What
time,  ma'am,"  cried he,  ^'  shall you have your supper  ?"

"  What supper  ?"  cried I.  "  I only eat fruit,  as usual."

"  Have not you ordered supper,  ma'am,  for to-night  ?'*

-  No."

"  There is one cooking for you — a fowl and peas."

*'  It 's some great mistake  ;  run down and tell them
so."

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         59

I returned to the company,  and would have related
the adventure,  had I been in spmts;  but voluntary-
speech escaped me not.  Where I am not happy,  or
forced to it,  it never does.  In silence and in quiets,  I
court repose and revival;  and I think,  my dearest
Susan,  I feel that they will come.

Presently I was called out again.

*'  Ma'am,"  cried John,  "  the supper is ordered in your
name.  I saw the order — the clerk of the kitchen gave
it in."

This was the most ridiculous thing I ever heard.  I
desired him to run down forthwith,  and inquire by
whose directions all this was done.

He came back,  and said,  "  By Sir Francis Drake's."

Sir Francis Drake is,  I think,  steward of the house-
hold.

I then desired him to interfere no more,  but let the
matter be pursued in their own way.

As soon as the company was gone,  all but a Miss
Mawer,  who is on a visit to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  I
told my tale.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg said the orders had
been hers,  that a hot supper belonged to my establish-
ment, and that sometimes she might come and eat it
with me.

I had now not a word to add.  At ten o'clock,  both
she and Miss Mawer accompanied me to my room.

Miss Mawer is an old maid;  tall,  thin,  sharp-fea-
tured, hurrying and disagreeable in her manner,  but,
I believe,  good-natured and good-hearted,  from all 1
have observed in her.  The smell of the meat soon,
grew offensive to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who left me
with Miss Mawer.  As I never eat any myself at night,
all I could devise to make the perfume tolerable was
to consider it as an opportunity for a lesson in carving :

60 DIARY AND LETTERS        [PaRT II.

SO I went to work straiglitfonvavd to mangle in}-  unbid-
den guest,  for the use and service of Miss Mawer.

Soon after,  I was delighted and surprised by the
entrance of Mrs.  Dclany,  ushered to my room by
Major Price.  The concert being over,  and the Royal
Family retired to supper,  she would not go away with-
out seeing me.  I thanked the Major for bringing me
so sweet a guest,  but almost fear he expected to be in-
vited in with her.  I am sure I could have had nothing
but pleasure from his joining us ;  but I had made a
rule,  on my thus fu'st setting up for myself,  to invite
no man whatever,  young,  old,  married,  single,  acquaint-
ance or stranger,  till I knew precisely the nature of my
own situation :  for I had been warned by an excellent
friend,  Mrs.  do Luc,  on my first entrance into office,
that there was no drawing back in a place such as this ;
and that therefore I ought studiously to keep back,
till I felt my way,  and knew,  experimentally,  what I
could do,  and what I should wish to leave alone.

This advice has been of singular use to me,  in a
thousand particulars,  li'om the very first to the present
day of my abode in this Lodge.  Mrs.  de Luc trusted
me with several other private hints,  that have proved
of the greatest utility to me.  Indeed,  I never see her
without receiving the most indubitable testimonies of
her confidence and friendship.

Monday,  August 7th. — This has been the first
cheerful day since the memorable and alarming attack
of the 2nd of August.  It was the birthday of the little
Princess Amelia;  and the fondness of the whole family
for that lovely child,  and her own infantine enjoyment
of the honours paid her,  have revived the spirits of the
whole house.

The manner of keeping the birth-days here is very

178G]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.'  61

simple.  All the Royal Family are new-dressed  ;  so —
at least so they appear — are all their attendants.  The
dinners and desserts are unusually sumptuous ;  and
some of the principal officers of state,  and a few of the
ladies of the court,  come to Windsor to make their
compliments  ;  and at night there is a finer concert,  by
an addition from town of the musicians belonging to
the Queen's band.  If the weather is fine,  all the family
walk upon the terrace,  which is crowded with people of
distinction,  who take that mode of showing respect,  to
avoid the trouble and fatigue of attending at the fol-
lowing drawing-room.

Another method,  too,  which is taken to express joy
and attachment upon these occasions,  is by going to the
eight o'clock prayers at the Royal Chapel.  The con-
gregation all assemble,  after the service,  in the open-
ing at the foot of the great stairs which the Royal
Family descend from their gallery;  and there those
who have any pretensions to notice scarce ever fail to
meet with it.

To-day,  this Staircase Drawing-room,  as it is named
by Major Price,  was very much crowded;  and it was a
sweet sight to me,  from my windows,  to see that the
royal group — respectfully followed by many people of
distinction,  who came on the occasion,  and,  at a still
greater distance,  encircled by humbler,  but not less
loyal congratulators — had their chief attention upon my
dear,  aged,  venerable Mrs.  Delany,  who was brought
in by the King and Queen,  to partake with them the
birth-day breakfast.

In the evening,  for the first time since my arrival,  I
went upon the terrace,  under the wing and protection
of my dear Mrs.  Delany,  who was tempted to walk
there herself,  in order to pay her respects on the little

62 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

Princess's birth-day.  She was carried in her chair to
the foot of the steps.

Mrs.  Delany was desirous to save herself for the
royal encounter :  she therefore sat down on the first
seat till the royal joarty appeared in sight :  we then,  of
course,  stood up.

It was really a mighty pretty procession.  The little
Princess,  just turned of three years old,  in a robe-coat
covered with fine muslin,  a dressed close cap,  white
gloves,  and a fan,  walked on alone and first,  highly
delighted in the parade,  and turning from side to side
to see everybody as she passed  :  for all the terracers
stand up against the walls,  to make a clear passage for
the Royal Family,  the moment they come in sight.
Then followed the King and Queen,  no less delighted
themselves with the joy of their little darling.  The
Princess Royal,  leaning on Lady Elizabeth Walde-
grave,  followed at a little distance.

This Princess,  the second female in the kingdom,
shews,  I think;  more marked respect and humility to-
wards the King and Queen than any of the family.

Next the Princess Augusta,  holding by the Duchess
of Ancaster;  and next the Princess Elizabeth,  holding
by Lady Charlotte Bertie.  OflSce here takes place of
rank,  which occasioned Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave,  as
lady of her bedchamber,  to walk with the Princess
Koyal.

Then followed the Princess Mary with Miss Golds-
worthy,  and the Princess Sophia with Mademoiselle
Monmoulin and Miss Planta ;  then General Bude and
the Duke of Montagu ;  and,  lastly.  Major Price,  who,
as equerry,  always brings up the rear,  walks at a dis-
tance from the group,  and keeps off all crowd from the
Hoyal Family.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  63

On sight of Mrs.  Delany,  the King instantly stopped
to speak to her.  The Queen,  of course,  and the little
Princess,  and all the rest,  stood still,  in their ranks.
They talked a good while with the sweet old lady ;
during which time the King once or twice addressed
himself to me.  I caught the Queen's eye,  and saw in it
a little surprise,  but by no means any displeasure,  to
see me of the party.

The little Princess went up to Mrs.  Delany,  of whom
she is very fond,  and behaved like a little angel to her :
she then,  with a look of inquiry and recollection,  slowly,
of her own accord,  came behind Mrs.  Delany to look
at me.  "  I am afraid,"  said I,  in a whisper,  and stoop-
ing down,  ''your Royal Highness does not remember
me?"

What think you was her answer?  An arch little
smile,  and a nearer approach,  with her lips pouted out
to kiss me.  I could not resist so innocent an invi-
tation; but the moment I had accepted it,  I was
half afraid it might seem,  in so public a place,  an
improper liberty  :  however,  there was no help for it.
She then took my fan,  and,  having looked at it on
both sides,  gravely returned it me,  saying,  ''  O  !  a
brown fan ! "

The King and Queen then bid her curtsey to Mrs.
Delany,  which she did most gracefully,  and they all
moved on ;  each of the Princesses speaking to Mrs.
Delany as they passed,  and condescending to curtsey
to her companion.

We afterwards met the Heberdens,  Fieldings,  Eger-
tons.  Lord Walsingham,  and Dr.  Lind.  Lord Wal-
singham gave me a pretty palpable hint or two of
being willing to honour me with a call;  but I pre-
tended not to understand him.     I am forced to that

64 DIARY AND LETTERS       [PaRT II.

incUiod of slnck comprcliension continually,   to save
myself from more open and awkward declinings.

Mrs.  Dclany was too much fatigued to return to the
Lodge to tea:;  but Mrs.  Fielding and her three
daughters.  Lord Courtown,  Mr.  Fisher,  the General,
and the Major,  made up our set.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg was very ill.  She declined mak-
ing tea,  and put it into the hands of the General.  I
had always kept back from that office,  as well as
from presiding at the table,  that I might keep the
more quiet,  and be permitted to sit silent ;  which,  at
first,  was a repose quite necessary to my depressed
state of spirits,  and which,  as they grew better,  I found
equally necessary to keep off"  the foul fiends of Jealousy
and Kivality in my colleague ;  who,  apparently,  never
wishes to hear my voice but when we are tete-atete,
and then never is in good-humour when it is at rest.
I could not,  how^ever,  see this feminine occupation in
masculine hands,  and not,  for shame,  propose taking it
upon myself.  The General readily relinquished it,
and I was fain to come forth and do the honours.

Lord Courtown sat himself next me,  and talked
with me the whole time,  in well-bred and pleasant dis-
course. The Major waited upon me as assiduously as
if he had been as much my equerry as the King's,  and
all M'ent smooth,  well,  and naturally,  except that the
poor sick lady grew evidently less and less pleased with
the arrangement of things,  and less and less in humour
with its arrangers :  so obvious,  indeed,  was the dis-
pleasure that the cipher should become a number,  that
had my own mind been easy,  I should have felt much
vexed to observe what a curb was placed over me :  for
hitherto,  except when she has been engaged herself,
and only to iNIajor Price and Mr.  Fisher,  that cipher

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  65

had  ''word spoke never one."  'Tis wonderful,  my
dearest Susan,  what wretched tempers are to be met
with — wretched in and to themselves — wretched to
and for all that surround them.  However,  while only
to be stupid and silent will do,  we shall not be at va-
riance. Were I happier,  perhaps I might comply with
more difficulty ;  so be not sorry,  my Susan,  nor you,
my sweet Fredy,  if,  by-and-bye,  you should hear me
complain.     It will be a very good sign.

August 8th. — An exceeding pretty scene was ex-
hibited to-day to their Majesties.  We came,  as usual
on every alternate Tuesday,  to Kew.  The Queen's
Lodge is at the end of a long meadow,  surrounded
with houses,  which is called Kew Green  ;  and this was
quite filled with all the inhabitants of the place — the
lame,  old,  blind,  sick,  and infants,  who all assembled,
dressed in their Sunday garb,  to line the sides of the
roads through which their Majesties passed,  attended
by a band of musicians,  arranged in the front,  who began
'  God save the King ! '  the moment they came upon
the Green,  and finished it with loud huzzas.  This was
a compliment at the expense of the better inhabitants,
who paid the musicians themselves,  and mixed in with
the group,  which indeed left not a soul,  I am told,  in
any house in the place.

This testimony of loyal satisfaction in the King's
safe return,  after the attempted assassination,  affected
the Queen to tears  :  nor were they shed alone ;  for al-
most everybody's flowed that witnessed the scene.
The Queen,  in speaking of it afterwards,  said,  "  I shall
always love little Kew for this !  "

At the second toilette to-day,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg,
who left the dressing-room before me,  called out at the

VOL.   III.  F

66 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

door,  "  Miss Bernar,  when vou have done from the
Queen,  come to my room.''

There was something rather more peremptory in the
order than was quite pleasant to me,  and I rather drily-
answered,  "  Very well,  Mrs.  Schwellcnberg."

The Queen was even uncommonly sweet and gracious
in her manner after this lady's departure,  and kept me
with her some time after she was dressed.  1 never go
from her presence till I am dismissed  ;  no one does,
not even when they come in only with a hurried mes-
sage,— except the pages,  who enter merely as messen-
gers, and Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  whose place and illness
together have given her that privilege.

The general form of the dismission,  which you may
perhaps be curious to hear,  is in these words,  "  Now I
will let you go ;"  which the Queen manages to speak
with a grace that takes from them all air of authority.

At first,  I must confess,  there was something inex-
pressibly awkward to me,  in waiting to be told to go,
instead of watching an opportunity,  as elsewhere,  for
taking leave before I thought myself de trop :  but I
have since found that this is,  to me,  a mark of honour ;
as it is the established custom to people of the first
rank,  the Princesses themselves included,  and only not
used to the pages and the wardrobe-women,  who are
supposed only to enter for actual business,  and there-
fore to retire when it is finished,  without expectation of
being detained to converse,  or beyond absolute ne-
cessity.

I give you all these little details of interior royalty,
because they are curious,  from opening a new scene of
life,  and can only be really known by interior resi-
dence.

When I went to Mrs.   Schwellenberg,    she said.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  67

"  You might know I had something to say to you,  by
my calling you before the Queen."  She then pro-
ceeded to a long prelude,  which I could but ill com-
prehend, save that it conveyed much of obligation on
my part,  and favour on hers ;  and then ended with,  "  I
might tell you now,  the Queen is going to Oxford,  and
you might go with her  ;  it is a secret — you might not
tell it nobody.  But I tell you once,  I shall do for you
what I can;  you are to have a gown."

I stared,  and drew back,  with,  a look so undisguised
of wonder and displeasure at this extraordinary speech,
that I saw it was understood,  and she then thought it
time,  therefore,  to name her authority,  which,  Avith
great emphasis,  she did thus  :  "  The Queen will give
you a gown  !    The Queen says you are not rich,"  &c.  g

There was something in the manner of this quite in-
tolerable to me ;  and I hastily interrupted her with
saying,  "  I have two new gowns by me,  and therefore
do not require another."

Perhaps a proposed present from her Majesty was
never so received before  ;  but the grossness of the
manner of the messenger swallowed up the gracious-
ness of the design in the principal ;  and I had not even
a wish to conceal how little it was to my taste.

The highest surprise sat upon her brow :  she had
imagined that a gown — that any present — would have
been caught at with obsequious avidity;  but indeed
she was mistaken.

Seeing the wonder and displeasure now hers,  I
calmly added,  "  The Queen is very good,  and I am
very sensible of her Majesty's graciousness  ;  but there
is not,  in this instance,  the least occasion for it."

"Miss Bernar,"  cried she,  quite angrily,  "  I tell you
once,  when the Queen will give you a gown,  you must

F 2

68 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

be humble,  thankful,  when you are Duchess of An-
caster!"

She then enumerated various ladies to whom her
Majesty had made the same present,  many of them of
the first distinction,  and all,  she said,  great secrets.
Still I only repeated again the same speech.

I can bear to be checked and curbed in discourse,
and would rather be subdued into silence — and even,
if that proves a gratification that secures peace and
gives pleasure,  into apparent insensibility ;  but to re-
ceive a favour through the vehicle of insolent ostenta-
tion— no  !  no !  To submit to ill-humour rather than
argue and dispute I think an exercise of patience,  and
I encourage myself all I can to practise it :  but to ac-
cept even a shadow of an obligation upon such terms
I should think mean and unworthy ;  and therefore I
mean always,  in a Court as I would elsewhere,  to be
open and fearless in declining such subjection.

When she had finished her list of secret ladies,  I
told her I must beg to speak to the Queen,  and make
my own acknowledgments for her gracious intention.

This she positively forbid ;  and said it must only-
pass through her hands.  "  When I give you the
gown,"  she added,  ''  I will tell you when you may
make your curtsey."

I was not vexed at this prohibition,  not knowing
what etiquette I might offend by breaking it ;  and the
conversation concluded with nothing being settled.

I might have apprehended some misrepresentation
of this conference  ;  but I could not give up all my own
notions of what I think everybody owes to themselves,
so far as to retract,  or apologise,  or say anything further.
I determined to run the risk of what might be related,
and wait the event quietly.    In situations entirely new.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  69

where our own ideas of right and wrong are not strictly
and courageously adhered to from the very beginning,
we are liable to fall into shackles which no after time,
no future care and attention,  can enable us to shake
oiT.

How little did the sweet Queen imagine that this her
first mark of favour should so be offered me as to raise
in me my first spirit of resistance  !  How differently
would she have executed her own commission herself !
To avoid exciting jealousy was,  I doubt not,  her mo-
tive for employing another.

At night,  however,  this poor woman was so ill,  so
lost for want of her party at cards,  and so frightened
with apprehensions of the return of some dreadful spas-
modic complaints,  from which she has many years suf-
fered the severest pain,  that I was induced to do a thing
you will wonder at,  and against which I had resolved
to struggle unrelentingly.  This was to play at cards
with her.  She had frequently given me broad hints of
desiring me to learn  ;  but I had openly declared I dis-
liked cards,  and never wished nor meant to learn a
single game.  However,  to-night's sufferings conquered
me,  and I proposed it myself.  The offer was plumply
accepted,  and Miss Planta was sent for to help to
teach me.  Irksome enough is this compliance;  but
while I stand firm in points of honour,  I must content
myself to relinquish those of inclination.  Miss Golds-
worthy and Miss Planta spent the day with us.

August 9th. — I had my dearest Mrs.  Locke to tea
and supper.  I need give no account to my Susan of
particulars she must long since have heard from the so
much better way of conversation.

August 10th. — I journeyed to to^vn,   with Mrs.
Schwellenberg and Miss Planta  ;  and this morning I

70 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

•was employed for tlie first time on a message to the
Queen.  I was in the ante-room,  when Mr.  Nicolay,  her
Majesty's page at St.  James's,  came and told me the
Duchess of Ancaster sent her humble duty to the
Queen,  and begged an audience before the drawing-
room.  I told the Queen,  who,  when dressed,  all but
her necklace,  received the Duchess in the ante-room.

I mention all these little ceremonies as they occur,
that hereafter I may have no occasion,  when they lead
to other matters,  to explain them.

When the Queen left the dressing-room,  the two
eldest Princesses,  who had been summoned at the same
time,  both came to speak with me.

"  I'm so glad.  Miss Burney,"  cried the Princess
Royal,  '■  that you have seen Mrs.  Locke to-day.  I be-
lieve I saw her going away from your room."

The bedchamber woman was rung for on the Queen's
return.  So you see I am not the only one to answer a
bell.  It was Mrs.  Fielding,  who looked at me with an
attention that will not leave her much in doubt as to
my dress,  at least,  though she could not speak.  I have
told you,  I believe,  that no one,  not even the Prin-
cesses, ever speak in the presence of the King and
Queen,  but to answer what is immediately said by
themselves.  There are,  indeed,  occasions in which this
is set aside,  from particular encouragement given at
the moment ;  but it is not less a rule,  and it is one very
rarely infringed.

When the drawing-room began,  I went to my own
room ;  and there I had the great happiness of finding
my father,  who had contrived to be in town purposely,
and to whom I had sent John,  in St.  Martin's Street,
that he might be shown the straight way to my apart-
ment.   He had determined upon going to the drawing-

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  71

room himself,  to manifest,  amongst the general zeal of
the times,  his loyal joy in his Majesty's safety.

The drawing-room was over very late indeed.  So
anxious has been the whole nation to shew their affec-
tionate attachment to the King,  that this,  the first
drawing-room since his danger^  was as splendid,  and
as much crowded,  as upon a birthday.  When the
Queen summoned me,  upon returning to her dressing-
room,  and mentioned how full and how hot it had been,
I ventured to say,  ''  1 am very glad of it,  ma'am ;  it
was an honest crowd to-day."

At tea I found a new uniform.  Major Price imme-
diately introduced me to him  ;  he was Colonel Fairly.
He is a man of the most scrupulous good-breeding,  dif-
fident, gentle,  and sentimental in his conversation,  and
assiduously attentive in his manners.     He married

Lady ,  and 1 am told is a most tender husband to

her.

A very unfortunate subject happened to be started
during our tea ;  namely,  the newspaper attacks upon
Mrs.  Hastings.  The Colonel,  very innocently,  said he
was very sorry that lady was ever mentioned in the
same paragraph with her Majesty.  Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg indignantly demanded  "  Why  ? — where  ? — when  ?
and what?"

Unconscious of her great friendship for Mrs.  Hast-
ings, the Colonel,  unfortunately,  repeated his concern,
adding,  "  Nothing has hurt me so much as the Queen's
being ever named in such company."

The most angry defence was now made,  but in so
great a storm of displeasure,  and confusion of language,
that the Colonel,  looking utterly amazed,  was unable
to understand what was the matter.

Major Price and myself were both alarmed;  Miss

72 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

P longed to laugh ;    Miss Mawer sat perfectly

motionless;  Mr.  Fisher decidedly silent.     No one else
was present.

The Colonel,  whenever he could be heard,  still per-
sisted in his assertion,  firmly,  though gently,  explain-
ing the loyalty of his motives.

This perseverance increased the storm,  which now
blew with greater  \^olence,  less and less distinct as
more fierce.  Broken sentences were all that could be
articulated.  ''You might not say such thing!" —
'^  Upon my vord!" — *'I tell you once!" — ''Colonel
what-you-call, — I am quite warm  !  " — "  Upon my vord I
— I tell you the same 1 " — "  You might not tell me
such thing  !" — "  What for you say all that  ?"

As there was nothing in this that could possibly clear
the matter,  and the poor Colonel only sunk deeper and
deeper,  by not understanding the nature of his offence.
Major Price now endeavoured to interfere  ;  and,  as he
is a great favourite,  he was permitted not only to speak,
but to be heard.

"  Certainly,"  said he,  "  those accounts about Mrs.
Hastings,  and the history of her divorce,  are very un-
pleasant anecdotes in public newspapers ;  and I am
sorry,  too,  that they should be told in the same
paragraph that mentions her being received by the
Queen."

Nothing could equal the consternation with which
this unexpected speech was heard.  "  Upon my vord !
You sorprise me ! "  was all that could now be got
out.

As I found them now only running further from ge-
neral comprehension,  I felt so sorry that poor INIrs.
Hastings,  whom I believe to be a most injured woman,
should so ill be defended,  even by her most zealous

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  73

friend,  that I compelled myself to the exertion of
coming forward,  now,  in her behalf myself;  and I
therefore said,  it was a thousand pities her story should
not be more accurately made known :  as the mode of a
second marriage from a divorce was precisely the con-
trary here of what it was in Germany ;  since here it
could only take place upon misconduct,  and there,  I
had been told,  a divorce from misconduct prohibited a
second marriage,  which could only be permitted where
the divorce was the mere effect of disagreement from
dissimilar tempers.  Mrs.  Hastings,  therefore,  though
acquitted of ill-behaviour by the laws of her own coun-
try, seemed,  by those of England,  convicted ;  and I
could not but much regret that her vindication was not
publicly made by this explanation.

'*  So do I,  too,"  cried Major Price;  ''for I never
heard this before."

"Nor I,"  cried the Colonel;  '*^and indeed it ought
to be made known,  both for the sake of Mrs.  Hastings,
and because she has been received at Court,  which,
gave everybody the greatest surprise,  and me,  in my
ignorance,  the greatest concern,  '  on account of the
Queen.' "

This undid all again,  though my explanation had

just stilled the hurricane ;  but now it began afresh*

*  You might not say that.  Colonel Fairly ;  you might

not name the Queen  ! — O,   I can't bear it ! — I tell you

once it is too moch ! — What for you tell me that  ? "

"  Ma'am,  I — I only said — It is not me,  ma'am,  but
the newspapers — "

"  What for you have such newspapers  ? — I tell you
the same — it is — what you call — I don't like such
thing!"

"But,  ma'am— "

74 DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.  [ParT II.

"  O,  •upon my vord,  I might tell you once,  when you
name the Queen,  it is — what you call — I can't bear it !
— when it is nobody else,  with all my heart ! — I might
not care for that — but when it is the Queen, — I tell
you the same.  Colonel Fairly — it makes me — what
you call — perspire."

The Major again interfered,  saying it was now all
cleared up,  by the account of the difference of the
German customs,  and therefore that it was all very
well.  A certain quiet^  but yet decisive way,  in which
he sometimes speaks,  was here very successful ;  and as
the lady stopped,  the Colonel saw all explanation too
desperate to aim at further argument.

PART III.

1786.

CONTENTS.

The Prince of Wales — A Royal Visit to Oxford — Preparations-
Advice — The Queen's Dressing-room — Journey to Nuneham
— Arrival at Lord Harcourt's — A Dilemma — The Royal Suite
— Lord and Lady Harcourt — The Miss Vernons — Amiability
of the Princess Royal — More Embarrassments — A Rencontre
with the King — A Strange Message — The King's Equerries
— The Amende — The Royal Coiffeur — Explanations — Depar-
ture for Oxford — Spectators of the Royal Cortege — Arrival at
Oxford — Reception by the Vice- Chancellor — Duke and
Duchess of Marlborough  —  Marquess of Blandford  —  The
Ladies Spencer  —  Procession in the Theatre  —  Etiquette —
Address and Reply — Kissing Hands — Visits to all the Col-
leges— Christchurch— Ceremony at the Town-hall — Excuses
and Explanations  —  Walking backwards  —  Practice makes
Perfect  —  Politeness thrown away — A Surprise — Return to
Nuneham — A New Acquaintance — Royal Visit to Blenheim
— Mr.  Mason's Garden — Peace-making.

76 _ DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT III.

PART III.

1786.

August 12th,  Saturday. — The Prince of Wales's
birthday.  How I grieve at whatever may be the cause
which absents him from his family  ! — a family of so
much love,  harmony,  and excellence,  that to mix with
them,  even rarely,  must have been the first of lessons
to his heart;  and here,  I am assured,  his heart is good,
though,  elsewhere,  his conduct renders it so suspicious.

I come now to the Oxford expedition.

The plan was to spend one day at Lord Harcourt's,
at Nuneham,  one at Oxford,  and one at Blenheim ;
dining and sleeping always at Nuneham.

I now a little regretted that I had declined meeting
Lady Harcourt,  when invited to see her at Mrs.  Vesey's
about three years ago.  I was not,  just then,  very happy
— and I was surfeited of new acquaintances ;  when the
invitation,  therefore,  came,  I sent an excuse.  But now
when I was going to her house,  I wished I had had
any previous knowledge of her,  to lessen the diffi-
culties of my first appearance in my new character,
upon attending the Queen on a visit.

I said something of this sort to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,
in our conversation the day before the journey;  and
she answered that it did not signify :  for,  as I went
with the Queen,  I might be sure 1 should be civilly
treated.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  71

Yes,  I said,  I generally had been ;  and congratulated
myself that at least I knew a little of Lord Harcourt,
to whom I had been introduced,  some years ago,  at Sir
Joshua Reynolds's,  and whom I had since met two or
three times.  "  O,"  she cried,  '^'^it is the same, — that is
nothing, — when you go with the Queen,  it is enough  ;
they might be civil to you for that sake.  You might
go quite without no,  what you call,  fuss  ;  you might take
no gown but what you go in  : — that is enough, — you
might have no servant, — for what  ? — ^You might keep
on your riding-dress.  There is no need you might be
seen.  I shall do everything that I can to assist you to
appear for nobody."

I leave you to imagine my thanks.  But the news
about the servant was not very pleasant,  as I thought
it most likely I could never more want one than in a
strange house added to a strange situation.  However,
I determined upon assuming no competition in com-
mand, and therefore I left the matter to her own
direction.

Their Majesties went to Nuneham to breakfast.
Miss Planta and myself were not to follow till after an
early dinner.  Princess Elizabeth,  in a whisper,  after
the rest left the room,  advised me to go and lie down
again as soon as they were gone.  And,  indeed,  I was
sufficiently fatigued to be glad to follow the advice.

My dear Mrs.  Delany came to sit with me while I
packed up.  What a pleasure to me is her constant
society,  and the reciprocal confidence of all our conver-
sations! She intrusts me with every thing in the
world — I intrust her with every thing that now happens
to me.

Our early dinner was with Mrs.  Schwellenberg and

78 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT III.

Miss Mawcr.  We set out at three o'clock,  and took
with us Mrs.  Thiclky,  the Queen's wardrobe woman,
and the comfort of my life in the absence of Mrs.
Schwellcnberg,  for she is the real acting person,  though
I am the apparent one  :  and she is also a very good sort of
woman, — plain,  sensible,  clear-headed,  mild-mannered,
sedate,  and steady.  I found her in this journey of in-
linite service,  for she not only did almost every thing
for the Queen,  but made it her business to supply also
the place of maid to me,  as much as ever I would suffer
her.  How fortunate for me that the person so imme-
diately under me should be so good a creature  !  The
other person we took was a Miss Mhaughendorf,  a
dresser to the Princesses Royal and Augusta,  a very
pleasing young woman,  gentle and interesting,  who is
just come from the King's German dominions to this
place,  to which she has been recommended by her
father,  who is clerk of the kitchen to the Duke of York.
The Princesses have a German in this office,  to assist
their study of that language,  which,  in their future des-
tinations, may prove essential to them.

Miss Planta's post in the court-calendar is that of
English teacher,  but it seems to me,  that of personal
attendant upon the two eldest Princesses.  She is with
them always when they sup,  work,  take their lessons,  or
walk.

We arrived at Nuneham at about six o'clock.

The house is one of those straggling,  half new,  half
old,  half comfortable,  and half forlorn mansions,  that
are begun in one generation and finished in another.
It is very pleasantly situated,  and commands,  from
some points of view,  all the towers of Oxford.

In going across the park to the entrance,  we saw not

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         79

a creature.  All were busy,  either in attendance upon
the royal guests,  or in finding hiding-places from
whence to peep at them.

We stopped at the portico, — but not even a porter
was there  ;  we were obliged to get out of the carriage
by the help of one of the postilions,  and to enter the
house by the help of wet grass,  which would not suffer
me to stay out of it,  otherwise,  I felt so strange in go-
ing in uninvited and unconducted,  that I should have
begged leave to stroll about till somebody appeared.

Miss Planta,  more used to these expeditions,  though
with quite as little taste for them,  led the way,  and
said we had best go and see for our own rooms.

I was quite of the same opinion,  but much at a loss
how we might find them.  We went through various
passages,  unknowing whither they might lead us,  till at
length we encountered a prodigious fine servant.  Miss
Planta asked him for Lady Harcourt's maid ;  he bowed
slightly,  and passed on without making any answer.

Very pleasant this  ! — I then begged we might turn
back,  not caring for another adventure of the same
sort.  Miss Planta complied ;  and we met two more of
the yellow-laced saunterers,  with whom she had pre-
cisely the same success.

I think I never remember to have felt so much shame
from my situation as at that time.  To arrive at a house
where no mistress nor master of it cared about receiv-
ing me ;  to wander about,  a guest uninvited,  a visitor
unthought of;  without even a room to go to,  a person
to inquire for,  or even a servant to speak to I It was
now I felt the real want of either a man or maid,  to
send forward,  and find out what we were to do with
ourselves;  and indeed I resolved,  then,  I would not
another time be so passive to unauthorized directions.

80 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT III.

The fault of this strange reception was certainly in
the lady of the house,  whose affair it was to have given
orders,  previous to our arrival,  that some of her people
should shew us to whatever apartment she destined for
us.  The Queen herself had sent word that we were to
attend her;  and however impossible it was that she
could receive us herself,  which her own attendance upon
their Majesties made really impracticable,  it was in-
cumbent upon her to have taken care that we should
not have been utterly neglected.

We strayed thus,  backwards and forwards,  for a full
quarter of an hour,  in these nearly deserted straggling'
passages ;  and then,  at length,  met a French woman,
whom Miss Planta immediately seized upon :  it was
Lady Harcourt's woman,  and Miss Planta had seen her
at Windsor.

*'  Pray shew us,"  cried Miss Planta,  *'  where we are
to go."

She was civil,  and led us to a parlour looking very
pleasantly upon the park,  and asked if we would have
some tea.  Miss Planta assented.  She told us the
King and Queen were in the park,  and left us.

As there was a garden- door to this room,  I thought
it very possible the royal party and their suite might
return to the house that way.  This gave great addition
to my discomposure,  for I thought that to see them all
in this forlorn plight would be still the worst part of
the business ;  I therefore pressed Miss Planta to let us
make another attempt to discover our own rooms.

Miss Planta laughed exceedingly at my disturbance,
but complied very obligingly with my request.

The wardi'obe women had already been shewn to the
rooms they were to prepare for the Queen and the
Princesses.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  81

The King and Queen's suite,  then in the house,  were
the Duchess of Ancaster,  Lady Charlotte Bertie,  Colonel
Fairly,  and Major Price ;  with pages whose names I
know not,  and footmen,  and two hairdressers.

The family party in the house were,  the Lord and
Lady ;  two Miss Vernons,  sisters of Lady Harcourt ;
General Harcourt,  brother to Lord Harcourt,  and aide-
de-camp to the King ;  and Mrs.  Harcourt,  his wife.

In this our second wandering forth we had no better
success than in the first ;  we either met nobody,  or only
were crossed by such superfine men in laced liveries,
that we attempted not to question them.  My constant
dread was of meeting any of the royal party,  while I
knew not whither to run.  Miss Planta,  more inured
to such situations,  was not at all surprised by our diffi-
culties and disgraces,  and only diverted by my distress
from them.

We met at last with Mhaughendorf,  and Miss Planta
eagerly desired to be conducted to the Princesses'  rooms,
that she might see if every thing was prepared for them.

When they had looked at the apartments destined
for the Princesses,  Miss Planta proposed our sitting
down to our tea in the Princess Elizabeth's room.  This
was extremely disagreeable to me,  as I was sensible it
must seem a great freedom from me,  should her Royal
Highness surprise us there ;  but it was no freedom for
Miss Planta,  as she has belonged to all the Princesses
these nine years,  and is eternally in their sight.  I could
not,  therefore,  persuade her of the difference ;  and she
desired Mhaughendorf to go and order our tea up-
stairs.

Miss Planta,  followed by poor me,  then whisked
backwards and forwards,  from one of the apartments to
another,  superintending all the preparations ;  and,  as

VOL.  III.  G

^2 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

wc were crossing a landing-place,  a lady appeared upon
the stairs,  and Miss Planta called out  ''  It's Lady Har-
court,"  and ran down to meet her.

They talked together a few minutes.  "  I must get
you.  Miss Planta,"  said she,  looking up towards me,
"  to introduce me to Miss Burney."

She then came up the stairs,  said she was glad to
see me,  and desired I would order any thing I wanted,
either for the Queen or for myself

Cold enough was my silent curtsey.

She talked again to Miss Planta,  who,  already know-
ing her,  from seeing her frequently when in waiting,  as
she is one of the ladies of the bedchamber,  was much
more sociable than myself.

She afterwards turned to me,  and said,  "  If there is
anything you want.  Miss Burney,  pray speak for it."
And she added,  ''  My sisters will attend you presently;
— you will excuse me, — I have not a moment from their
Majesties."     And then she curtseyed,  and left us.

We returned to the Princess Elizabeth's room,  and
there the tea followed,  but not the promised sisters.

I never saw Miss Planta laugh so heartily before nor
since  ;  but my dismay was possibly comical to behold.

The tea was but just poured out,  when the door
opened,  and in entered all the Princesses.  I was very
much ashamed,  and started up,  but had no asylum
whither to run.  They all asked us how we did after
our journey;  and I made an apology,  as well as I
could,  to the Princess Elizabeth,  for my intrusion into
her apartment ;  confessing I did not know where to
find my own.

The Princess Royal,  eagerly coming up to me,  said,
"  I thought you would be distressed at first arriving,
and I wanted to help you ;  and I inquired where your

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  83

room was,  and said I would look at it myself;  and I
went round to it,  but I found the King was that way,
and so,  you know,  I could not go past him ;  but indeed
I wished to have seen it for you."

There was hardly any thanking her for such infinite
sweetness ; — they then desired us to go on with our tea,
and went into the Princess Royal's room.

I was now a little revived;  and soon after the
Princess Elizabeth came back,  and asked if we had
done,  desiring us at the same time not to hurry.

Yes,  we said;  and ashamed of thus keeping pos-
session of her room,  I was gliding out,  when she flew to
me,  and said,  "  Don't go  ! — pray come and stay with
me a little."  She then flew to another end of the
room,  and getting a chair,  brought it herself close up
to me,  and seating herself on another,  said,  "  Come,  sit
down by me,  Miss Burney."

You may suppose how I resisted and apologised, —
truly telling her that I had not opposed her Royal
Highness's design,  from being ashamed of even sus-
pecting it.  She only laughed good-humouredly,  and
made me take the chair she had thus condescended to
fetch me.

''  Well,"  cried she,  drawing quite close to me, — "  so
you have had Mrs.  Locke with you? — how happy that
must have made you !"

And then she went on,  in a manner that seemed
desirous of being comfortable,  till,  in a very few minutes,
the other Princesses came for her.

The Princess Royal then told me she was quite sorry
to hear we had been so much distressed ;  and I found
Miss Planta had recounted our adventures.

I was not glad of this,  though greatly gratified by
the goodness of the Princess.    But I know how quickly

g2

84 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT III.

complaints circulate,  and I wish not even for redress by-
such means,  which commonly,  when so obtained,  is
more humiliating than the oifencc which calls for it.

When the Princesses left us,  we were again at a loss
what to do with ourselves;  we saw several passing
servants,  maids as well as men,  and Miss Planta
applied to them all to shew me my room,  which I was
anxious to inhabit in peace and solitude :  however,  they
all promised to send some one else,  but no one came.
Miss Planta,  in the midst of the diversion she received
from my unavailing earnestness to get into some re-
treat, had the good-nature to say,  "■  I knew how this
would turn out,  and wished the visit over before it
began;  but it must really be very new to j^ou,  unused
as you are to it,  and accustomed to so much attention
in other places."

At length she seized upon a woman servant,  who
undertook to conduct me to this' wished-for room.  Miss
Planta accompanied me,  and off we set.

In descending the stairs,  a door opened which led to
one of the state rooms,  in which were the Royal Family.
We glided softly past ;  but the Princess Royal,  attended
by the Duchess of Ancaster,  came out to us.  We
soon found her Royal Highness had told our tale.
*'  Miss Vernons,"  said the Duchess,  *'  will come to take
care of you ;  you must both go and take possession of
the eating-parlour,  where you will sup ;  and the equer-
ries will be of your party."

I said not a word,  but of general thanks,  still longing
only to go to my own room.  I whispered this to Miss
Planta,  who obligingly,  though rather reluctantly,  con-
sented to pursue our first scheme.  But when the
Duchess observed that we were turning off,  she called
out,  "  I see you do not know your way,  so I'll come

1786]  OF THE 'AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  85

and shew you to the eating-parlour."  The Princess
Royal said she would come with us also ;  and,  accord-
ing to direction,  we were therefore necessitated to
proceed.

When we got to the hall leading to this parlour,  we
were suddenly stopped by the appearance of the King,
who just then came out of that very room.  Lord Har-
court attended,  with a candle in his hand,  and a group
of  £:entlemen followed.

We were advanced too far to retreat,  and therefore
only stood still.  The King stopped,  and spoke to the
Duchess of Ancaster ;  and then spoke very graciously
to Miss Planta and me,  inquiring when we set out,  and
what sort of journey we had had.  He then ascended
the stairs,  the Princess Royal accompanying him,  and
all the rest following ;  the Duchess first pointing to the
door of the eating-parlour,  and bidding us go there,
and expect Miss Vernons.

Lord Harcourt,  during this meeting,  had contrived
to slip behind the King,  to make me a very civil bow ;
and when His Majesty moved on,  he slid nearer me,
and whispered a welcome to his house,  in very civil
terms.     This was all he could do,  so situated.

We now entered the eating-room.  We sat down, —
but no Miss Vernons !  Presently the door opened, —
I hoped they were coming, — but a clergyman,  a stranger
to us both,  appeared.  This gentleman,  I afterwards
found,  was Mr.  Hagget,  chaplain to Lord Harcourt,
and rector of a living in his lordship's gift and neigh-
bourhood ;  a young man,  sensible,  easy,  and remark-
ably handsome,  in very high favour with all the family.

With nobody to introduce us to each other,  we could
but rise and bow,  and curtsey,  and sit down again.

In a few minutes,  again the door gave hopes to me

86 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PahT III.

of Miss Vernons; — but there only appeared a party of
gentlemen.

Major Price came foremost,  and immediately intro-
duced me to General Harcourt.  The General is a
very shy man,  with an air of much haughtiness ;  he
bowed and retreated,  and sat down,  and was wholly
silent.

Colonel Fairly followed him,  and taking a chair next
mine,  began some of the civilest speeches imaginable,
concerning this opportunity of making acquaintance
with me.

Just then came in a housemaid,  and said she would
shew me my room.  I rose hastily.  Miss Planta,  who
knew every body present except the clergyman,  was
now willing to have sat still and chatted;  but nothing
short of compulsion could have kept me in such a situa-
tion, and therefore I instantly accompanied the maid ;
and poor Miss Planta could not stay behind.

The truth is,  the non-appearance of any of the
ladies of the house struck me to be so extremely un-
civil, that I desired nothing but to retire from all the
party.

I felt quite relieved when I once took possession of
a room that,  for the time,  I might call my own ;  and I
could not possibly listen to Miss Planta's desire of re-
turning to the company.  I told her frankly,  that it
was a situation so utterly disagreeable to me,  that I
must beg to decline placing myself in it again.

She was afraid,  she said,  that,  as the Duchess of
Ancaster had taken the trouble to shew us the room,
and to tell us what to do,  in the presence of the Princess
Royal,  the Queen might hear of our absconding and
not be pleased with it.

"  I must risk that,"  I answered ;  "  I shall openly tell

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  87

my reasons,  if questioned,  and I firmly believe they will
be satisfactory.  If not questioned,  I shall say nothing ;
and indeed I very much wish you would do the same."

She agreed, — consented,  rather; — and I was the
more obliged to her from seeing it was contrary to her
inclination.  I was sorry,  but I could not compliment
at the expense of putting myself again into a situation
I had been so earnest to change.  Miss Planta bore it
very well,  and only wished the maid farther,  for never
finding us out till we began to be comfortable without
her.

Here we remained about two hours,  unsummoned,
unnoticed,  unoccupied, — except in forcing open a box
which Mrs.  Thielky had lent me for my wardrobe,  and
of which I had left the key,  ingeniously,  at Windsor.

At ten o'*clock a maid came to the door,  and said
supper was ready.

"  Who sent you?"  I called out.

"  Who do you come from  ?  "  cried Miss Planta.

She was gone; — we could get no answer.

About a quarter of an hour after,  one of those gentle-
men footmen for whom you must already have dis-
covered my partiality,  called out,  from the stairs,
without troubling himself to come to the door,  ''  The
supper waits."

He was already gone ;  but Miss Planta darted after
him,  calling out,  "  Who sent you  ? — who did you come
to?"

She was not heard by this gentleman,  but what she
said was echoed after him by some other,  and the
answer that reached our ears was,  "  The Equerries want
the ladies."

This was enough ;  Miss Planta returned quite in-
dignant, after hastily replying,  "  We don't choose any
suppef."

88 DI.VRY AND LETTERS  [ParT III.

We were now precisely of an opinion.  Miss Planta,
indeed,  was mudi more angry than myself;  for I was
very sure the equerries had sent a very diflercnt
message,  and therefore thought nothing of the words
used by the servant,  but confined all my dissatisfaction
to its first origin, — the incivility in the ladies of the
house,  that they came not themselves,  or some one from
them,  to invite us in a manner that might be accepted.

From this time,  however,  we became more comfort-
able, as absconding was our mutual desire ;  and we
were flung,  by this means,  into a style of sociability we
might else never have arrived at.

We continued together till Miss Planta thought it
right to go and see if Mhaughendorf had prepared
every thing for the Princesses;  and then I was left to
myself — the very companion I just at that time most
wished a tete-a-tete with — till I was summoned to the
Queen.

In this tete-a-tete,  I determined very concisely upon
my plan of procedure ;  which was to quietly keep my
own counsel,  unless I found my conduct disapproved;
and,  in that case,  to run all risks in openly declaring
that I must always prefer solitude to society upon
terms to which I was unaccustomed.

A little after the scenes I have described,  I was sur-
prised, when,  late at night,  my summons was brought
me by Lady Harcourt,  who tapped gently at my door,
and made me a little visit,  previously to telling me her
errand.  She informed me,  also,  that the Queen had
given her commands for Miss Planta and me to belong
to the suite the next day,  in the visit to Oxford ;  and
that a carriage was accordingly ordered for us.

The Queen said not a word to me of the day's
adventures ;  and I was glad to have them passed over.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  89

especially as Lady Harcourt's visit,  and the civility
which accompanied it,  appeared a little conscious of
remissness.  But when,  in speaking of Oxford,  Her
Majesty condescended to ask what gown I had brought
with me,  how did I rejoice to answer,  a new Chamberry
gauze,  instead of only that which I have on,  according
to my Cerbera's advice.

My next difficulty was for a hair- dresser.  Nuneham
is three or four miles from Oxford ;  and I had neither
maid to dress,  nor man to seek a dresser.  I could only
apply to Mrs.  Thielky,  and she made it her business to
prevail with one of the royal footmen to get me a
messenger,  to order a hair-dresser from Oxford at
six o'clock in the morning.  The Queen,  with most
gracious consideration,  told me,  over night,  that she
should not want me till eight o'clock.  *

Thus ended the first night of this excursion.

August 13th. — At six o'clock my hair-dresser,  to my
great satisfaction,  arrived.  Full two hours was he at
work,  yet was I not finished,  when Swarthy,  the Queen's
hair-dresser,  came rapping at my door,  to tell me Her
Majesty's hair was done,  and she was waiting for me.
I hurried as fast as I could,  and ran down without any
cap.  She smiled at sight of my hasty attire,  and
said I should not be distressed about a hair- dresser the
next day,  but employ Swarthy's assistant,  as soon as he
had done with the Princesses ;  "  You should have had
him,"  she added,  ^'to-day,  if I had known you wanted
him."

When Her Majesty was dressed,  all but the hat,  she
sent for the three Princesses ;  and the King came also.
I felt very foolish with my uncovered head ;  but it was
somewhat the less awkward,  from its being very much
a custom,  in the Royal Family,  to go without caps ;

90 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT III.

though none that appear before them use such a
freedom.

As soon as the hat was on, — ''  Now,  Miss Burney,"
said the Queen,  "  I won't keep you ;  you had better go
and dress too."

While I was dressing,  a footman came to my door,
with a formal messaw,  that Miss Vernons bce^o^ed I
would come to breakfast.  I immediately promised to
make haste,  glad to find something more resembling
civility at length coming round to me.

Presently after entered Miss Planta,  in high spirits
and great enjoyment.  She told me she had been ac-
quainting the Queen with the whole affair,  and that
the Queen quite approved of our staying upstairs.  She
had been,  also,  with the equerries,  and had a fine laugh
with them about their  "wanting the ladies;"  they
declared they had sent no message at all,  and that the
servant had simply received orders to tell us that Miss
Vernons desired our company to supper.

I thought it mighty unnecessary to have acquainted
the equerries with what could only furnish a laugh
against ourselves :  however,  the thing was done,  and
down we went together.

The two Miss Vernons,  General Harcourt,  Colonel
Fairly,  Major Price,  and Mr.  Hagget were all at
breakfast.  The Miss Vernons immediately began an
apology about the supper the preceding night,  declar-
ing themselves extremely sorry we should not have had
any,  which they found was entirely owing to a blunder
in the message given by the servants.

The gentlemen were all dying to make a laugh about
the equerries  "  wanting the ladies ;"  and Colonel Fairly
began  :  but the gravity of my behaviour soon quieted
him.     Mr.  Hagget was content to be observant of a

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         91

new person;  General Harcourt scarce ever speaks but
from necessity;  and Major Price was as grave as
myself.

The eldest Miss Vernon is plain,  and a little old-
maidish;  but I found her,  afterwards,  sensible,  well
read,  and well bred :  but not quite immediately did she
appear so,  as you will soon see.

The youngest is many years her junior,  and fat and
handsome,  good-humoured,  and pleasing in her smiles,
though high and distant till they are called forth.

After breakfast,  when we were all breaking up,  to
prepare for church,  I had a short explanatory conver-
sation with Major Price,  who came to speak to me
concerning the preceding evening,  and to confess his
extreme surprise at our shutting ourselves up from
their society.  He had had a great mind,  he said,  to
have come himself to see for us,  but did not know whether
it would be right.  They waited,  he added — Miss Ver-
nons and all of them — a quarter of an hour after the
supper was upon the table,  and then a servant came in,
from us,  to tell the equerries that we would not have
any supper; — '"And indeed,"  continued he,  a little
forcibly,  "  I must own I was rather hurt by the
message."

*'Hurt?"  cried I, — "what a gentle word! — I am
sure I think you might rather have been angry."

"  Why — to own the truth — I believe I was."

I was interrupted before I could explain more fully
how the matter stood ;  nor have I ever found oppor-
tunity since.  However,  1 think it very likely he sug-
gested the truth himself.  Be that as it may.  Miss
Vernons went for their cloaks,  and Miss Planta ran to
the Princesses,  and therefore I was obliged to be  »
little abrupt,  and retreat also.  "^^

92  \ DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

When Miss Planta was ready,  she came to fetch me.
We went downstairs,  but knew not whither to proceed.
In the eating-parlour we had left only the gentlemen,
and they were waiting to attend the King.  There was
no other place to which we could turn,  and we had
another of those wandering distresses that had made
me so comfortless the night before.  My wish was to
find Miss Vernons ; — my expectation was to be found
by them.  Neither,  however,  happened ;  and the first
time we met any body that could give us any informa-
tion, we were told they had been gone some time.

Very agreeable news !

I could not,  however,  bear to give up going to
church,  for I knew that the thanksgiving was to be
that morning for the preservation of the King from
assassination  ;  and to let pique at this unaccount-
able behaviour,  after all the apologies just passed,
prevent my hearing and joining in a prayer of such a
nature,  in which now I am peculiarly interested,  would
have been ill worth the while.  I therefore proposed to
Miss Planta that we should go by ourselves,  and desire
one of the servants to show us at once into Mr.  Hagget's
pew :  for that we had already heard offered to the use
of Miss Vernons,  as Lord Harcourt's w^as reserved for
their Majesties.  She agreed;  and we proceeded,  fol-
lowing such stragglers as shewed us our way:  the
servant to whom we applied having soon deserted
us.

The church is in a very beautiful situation in the
park,  and built in the form of a Grecian temple.  I
admired it very much for its plainness and elegance.

When we got to it,  the very first step we took in it
shewed us the Miss Vernons,  very composedly seated
hinja large pew at the entrance.     I now led the way.

1 786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         93

and took a place next to Miss Vernons,  as much with-
out apology as without invitation.

Mr.  Hagget both read and preached.  I was a good
deal touched by the occasional thanksgiving,  chiefly
from knowing how much it must affect the Queen and
the Princesses.  Cause enough,  indeed,  is there for
thanksgiving and rejoicing in the safety of so mild and
exemplary a sovereign.

When the service was over,  and the Royal Family
were gone,  I thought it but right,  in such a place,  to
subdue my proud feelings so far as to say to the Miss
Vernons,  I hoped we had not disturbed them.

I was very glad I took this little step down,  for Miss
Vernon,  colouring,  apologised for not waiting for us,
which she said was owing to the fear of not getting
into the chapel before the Royal Family.  And then she
asked if we should like to look at the altar-pieee,  which
was the work of Mr.  Mason.

And now for the Oxford expedition.

How many carriages there were,  and how they were
arranged,  I observed not sufficiently to recollect;  but
the party consisted of their Majesties,  the Princesses
Royal,  Augusta,  and Elizabeth,  the Duchess of An-
caster,  Lord and Lady Harcourt,  Lady Charlotte Ber-
tie, and the two Miss Vernons.

These last ladies are daughters of the late Lord Ver-
non, and sisters of Lady Harcourt.

General Harcourt,  Colonel Fairly,  and Major Price,
and Mr.  Hagget,  with Miss Planta and myself,  com-
pleted the group.  Miss Planta and I,  of course,  as the
only undignified persons,  brought up the rear.  We
were in a chaise of Lord Harcourt.

The city of Oxford afforded us a very noble view on
the road,  and its spires,  towers,  and domes soon made

94 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

me forget all the little objects of minor spleen that had
been crossing me as I journeyed towards them ;  and
indeed,  by the time I arrived in the midst of them,
their grandeur,  nobility,  antiquity,  and elevation im-
pressed my mind so forcibly,  that I felt for the first
time since my new situation had taken place a rushing
in of ideas that had no connection with it whatever.

The roads were lined with decently dressed people,
and the high street was so crowded we  \vere obliged to
drive gently and carefully,  to avoid trampling the peo-
ple to death.  Yet their behaviour was perfectly respect-
ful and proper.  Nothing could possibly be better
conducted than the whole of this expedition.

We all drove straight to the Theatre,  in procession.
Here,  in alighting from the carriages,  there was some
difficulty,  on account of the pressure of the people to see
the King and Queen,  and Princesses :  however,  even
then,  it was still the genteelest and most decent crowd
I ever saw.

Here it was that Major Price signalised that part of
his character I have so strongly marked,  of his being
truly a gentleman.  It was his business to attend and
guard the King ;  but he was determined to take almost
equal care of some of his Majesty's subjects  :  he was
every body's equerry during the whole expedition,  as-
sisting and looking after every creature,  seeing us all
out of our carriasics and into them,  and addressine:  the
people,  when they pressed too forward,  with a steadiness
and authority that made them quicker in retreat than
all the staves of all the constables,  who were attend-
ing by dozens at the entrance of every college.

At the outward jjate of the theatre,  the Vice- Chan-
cellor.  Dr.  Chapman,  received their Majesties.  All the
Professors,  Doctors,  &c.,   then in Oxford,  arrayed in

1786  ]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  95

their professional robes,  attended liim. — How I wished
my dear father amongst them  !

The Vice- Chancellor then conducted their Majesties
along the inner court,  to the door of the theatre,  all
the rest following;  and there,  waiting their arrival,
stood the Duke and Duchess of Marlborough,  the
Marquis of Blandford,  in a nobleman's Oxford robe,
and Lady Caroline and Lady Elizabeth Spencer.

After they had all paid their duties,  a regular pro-
cession followed,  which I should have thought very
pretty,  and much have liked to have seen,  had I been
'a mere looker on  ;  but I was frequently at a loss what
to do with myself,  and uncertain whether I ought to
proceed in the suite,  or stand by as a spectator ;  and
Miss Plantawas still,  if possible,  more fearful.

The theatre was filled with company,  all well dressed,
and arranged in rows around it.  The area below them
was entirely empty,  so that there was not the least
confusion.  The Chancellor's chair,  at the head of
about a dozen steps,  was prepared for the King ;  and
just below him,  to his left,  a form for the Queen and
the Princesses.

The King walked foremost from the area,  con-
ducted by the University's Vice-Chancellor.  The
Queen followed,  handed by her own Vice-Chamberlain.
The Princess Royal followed,  led by the King's Aide-
de-camp,  General Harcourt ;  and Princess Augusta,
leaning on Major Price.  Princess Elizabeth walked
alone,  no other servant of the King being present,  and
no rank authorising such a conduct,  without office.

Next followed the Duke and Duchess of Marl-
borough ;  then the Duchess of Ancaster,  and Marquis
of Blandford ;  next,  Lord and Lady Harcourt,  then
the two Lady Spencers and Lady Charlotte Bertie,

96 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

then the Miss Vcrnons,  and then Miss Planta and a
certain F.  B.

Wc were no sooner arranged,  and the door of the
theatre shut,  than the King,  his head covered,  sat
down ;  the Queen did the same,  and then the three
Princesses.

All the rest,  throughout the theatre,  stood.

The Vice-Chanccllor then made a low obeisance to
the King,  and producing a written paper,  began the
Address of the University,  to thank his Majesty for
this second visit,  and to congratulate him and the
nation on his late escape from assassination.  He read
it in an audible and distinct voice  ;  and in its conclu-
sion, an address was suddenly made to the Queen,
expressive of much concern for her late distress,  and
the highest and most profound veneration for her ami-
able and exalted character.

An address,  to me so unexpected,  and on a subject
so recent and of so near concern,  in presence of the
person preserved,  his wife,  and his children,  was infi-
nitely touching.

The Queen could scarcely bear it,  though she had
already,  I doubt not,  heard it at Nuneham,  as these
addresses must be first read in private,  to have the
answers prepared.  Nevertheless,  this public tribute
of loyalty to the King,  and of respect to herself,  went
gratefully to her heart,  and filled her eyes with tears —
which she would not,  however,  encourage,  but,  smiling
through them,  dispersed them with her fan,  with which
she was repeatedly obliged to stop their course down
her cheeks.

The Princesses,  less guarded,  the moment their
father's danger was mentioned,  wept with but little
control ;  and no wonder,  for I question if there was

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  07

one dry eye in the theatre.  The tribute,  so just,  so
honourable,  so elegant,  paid to the exalted character
of the Queen,  affected everybody,  with joy for her
escape from affliction,  and with delight at the reward
and the avowal of her virtues.

When the address was ended,  the King took a paper
from Lord Harcourt,  and read his answer.  The King
reads admirably  ;  with ease,  feeling,  and force,  and
without any hesitation.  His voice is particularly full
and tine.     I was very much surprised by its effect.

When he had done,  he took off his hat,  and bowed to
the Chancellor and Professors,  and delivered the an-
swer to Lord Harcourt,  who,  walking backwards,  de-
scended the stairs,  and presented it to the Vice-Chan-
cellor.

All this ceremony was so perfectly new to me,  that I
rejoiced extremely in not missing it.  Indeed I would
not have given up the pleasure of seeing the Queen
on this occasion for any sort of sight that could have
been exhibited to me.

Next followed music :  a good organ,  very well
played,  anthem-ed and voluntary-ed us for some time.
After this,  the Vice-Chancellor and Professors
begged for the honour of kissing the King's hand.
Lord Harcourt was again the backward messenger;
and here followed a great mark of goodness in the
King :  he saw that nothing less than a thorough-bred
old courtier,  such as Lord Harcourt,  could walk back-
wards down these steps,  before himself,  and in sight of
so full a hall of spectators  ;  and he therefore dis-
pensed with being approached to his scat,  and walked
down himself into the area,  where the Vice-Chancellor
kissed his hand,  and was imitated by every Professor
and Doctor in the room.

VOL.  III.  H

98 DIARY AND LETTERS  [pART III.

Notwithstanding this considerate good-nature in his
Majesty,  the sight,  at times,  was ver}' ridiculous.  Some
of the worthy coUegiates,  unused to such ceremonies,
and unaccustomed to such a presence,  the moment they
had kissed the King's hand,  turned their backs to him,
and walked away as in any common room ;  others,  at-
tempting to do better,  did still worse,  by tottering and
stumbling,  and falling foul of those behind them;
some,  ashamed to kneel,  took the King s hand straight
up to their mouths ;  others,  equally off their guard,
plumped down on both knees,  and could hardly get up
again;  and many,  in their confusion,  fairly arose by
pulling his Majesty's hand to raise them.

As the King spoke to every one,  upon Lord Har-
court's presenting them,  this ceremonial took up a
good deal of time  ;  but it w-as too new and diverting
to appear long.

It w as vacation time  ;  there were therefore none of
the students present.

When the whole w^as over,  we left the theatre in
the same form we had entered it.  The Duke and
Duchess of Marlborough,  the Marquis and the Ladies
Spencer,  attended the King and Queen to their car-
riages, and then went back to the theatre,  to wait for
their own.

I cannot now go on with our progress regularly,
for I do not remember it.  I will only,  therefore,  in
general,  say,  that I was quite delighted with the city,
and so entertained and so pleased with such noble
buildings as it presented to me,  that I felt,  as I have
told you,  a consciousness to pleasure revived in me,
which had long lain nearly dormant.

We went to all the colleges in the same order that
we came to the theatre.     I shall attempt no descrip-

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  99

tions  ;  I shall only mention a few little personal circum-
stances, and some of those court etiquettes which,
from their novelty to me,  will,  I judge,  be new also to
my Susan;  and what is new in customs or manners
is always worth knowing.

At Christ Church College,  where we arrived at
about three o'clock,  in a large hall there was a cold
collation prepared for their Majesties and the Prin-
cesses. It was at the upper end of the hall.  I could
not see of what it consisted,  though it would have been
very agreeable,  after so much standing and sauntering,
to have given my opinion of it in an experimental
way.

Their Majesties and the Princesses sat down to this
table ;  as well satisfied,  I believe,  as any of their sub-
jects so to do.  The Duchess of Ancaster and Lady
Harcourt stood behind the chairs of the Queen and
the Princess Royal.  There were no other ladies of suf-
ficient rank^  to oflSciate for Princesses Augusta and
Elizabeth.  Lord Harcourt stood behind the King's
chair;  and the Vice- Chancellor^  and the head master of
Christ Church,  with salvers in their hands,  stood near
the table,  and ready to hand,  to the three noble waiters,
whatever was wanted :  while the other Reverend
Doctors and Learned Professors stood aloof,  equally
ready to present to the Chancellor and the Master
whatever they were to forward.

We,  meanwhile,  untitled attendants,  stood at the
other end of the room,  forming a semi-circle,  and all
strictly facing the royal coUationers.  We consisted of
the Miss Vernon s,  thrown out here as much as their
humble guests — Colonel Fairly,  Major.  Price,  General
Harcourt,  and,  —  though I know not why,  —  Lady
Charlotte Bertie; — with all the inferior Professors,  in

79579yA

ICO DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

their gowns,  and some,  too much frightened to advance,
of the upper degrees.  These,  with Miss PI ant a,  Mr.
Hagget,  and myself,  formed tliis attendant semi-circle.

The time of this collation was spent very pleasantly
— to me,  at least,  to whom thenovelty of the scene ren-
dered it entertaining.  It was agreed that we must
all he absolutely famished unless we could partake of
some refreshment,  as we had breakfasted early,  and
had no chance of dining before six or seven o'clock.  A
whisper was soon buzzed through the semi-circle,  of the
deplorable state of our appetite apprehensions;  and
presently it reached the ears of some of the worthy
Doctors.  Immediately a new whisper was circulated,
which made its progress with great vivacity,  to offer us
whatever we would wish,  and to beg us to name what
we chose.

Tea,  coffee,  and chocolate,  were whispered back.

The method of producing,  and the means of swallow-
ing them,  were much more difficult to settle than the
choice of what was acceptable.  Major Price and Colonel
Fairly,  however,  seeing a very large table close to the
wainscot behind us,  desired our refreshments might
be privately conveyed there,  behind the semi-circle,
and that,  while all the group backed very near it,  one
at a time might feed,  screened by all the rest from ob-
servation.

I suppose I need not inform you,  my dear Susan,
that to eat in presence of any of the Royal Family is as
much liors cVusage as to be seated.

This plan had speedy success,  and the very good
Doctors soon,  by sly degrees and with watchful caution,
covered the whole table with tea,  coffee,  chocolate,
cakes,  and bread and butter.

The further plan,  however,  of one at a time feasting

178G]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  101

and the rest fasting and standing sentinels,  was not
equally approved;  there was too much eagerness to
seize the present moment,  and too much fear of a
sudden retreat,  to give patience for so slow a proceed-
ing. We could do no more,  therefore,  than stand in a
double row,  with one to screen one throughout the
troop  ;  and,  in this manner,  we were all very plenti-
fully and very pleasantly served.

The Duchess of Ancaster and Lady Harcourt,  as
soon as the first serving attendance was over,  were
dismissed from the royal chairs,  and most happy to
join our group,  and partake of our repast.  The
Duchess,  extremely fatigued with standing,  drew a
small body of troops before her,  that she might take
a few minutes'  rest on a form by one of the doors ;
and Lady Charlotte Bertie did the same,  to relieve aa
ankle which she had unfortunately sprained.

^'  Poor Miss Burney  !'  cried the good-natured Du-
chess, "I wish she could sit down,  for she is unused to
this work.  She does not know yet what it is to stand
for five hours following,  as we do."

The beautiful window of Sir Joshua Reynolds and
IMr.  Jervis,  in New College,  would alone have recovered
me,  had my fatigue been infinitely more serious.

In one of the colleges I sta^^ed so long in an old
chapel,  lingering over antique monuments,  that all the
party were vanished before I miissed them,  except
Doctors and Professors ;  for we had a train of those
everywhere ;  and I was then a little surprised by the
approach of one of them,  saying,  "  You seem inclined to
abide with us.  Miss Burney  ?'' — and then another,  la
an accent of facetious gallantry,  cried  "  No,  no,  don't let
us shut up jNIiss Burney among old tombs ! — No,
no !"

102 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

After this,  man}'  of the good Doctors occasionally
spoke to me,  Avlien there happened to be opportunity.
How often did I wish my dear father amongst them  !
They considered me as a Doctor's daughter,  and
were all most excessively courteous, — handing,  and
pointing,  and shewing me about as much as possible.

In another college,  while Miss Planta and myself
were hanging a little back,  at the entrance into a small
cedar chapel,  that would not much more than hold the
Royal Family and their immediate suite,  the Duchess of
Ancaster,  who took every opportunity to shew me civi-
lities, and distinguish me,  came down the steps,  and
made me ascend them,  to return with her,  when she called
to her daughter,  and in the most obliging terms intro-
duced me to her,  with many kind speeches of her wish
that we should cultivate much acquaintance.

Lady Charlotte is very handsome,  and has a very
good figure  :  she unfortunately lisps very much,  which,
at first,  never prejudices in favour of the understand-
ing ;  but I have conversed with her too little to know
anything more of her than that she is well bred,  and
seems to have a large portion,  internally,  of the
good-natured and obliging disposition of her mother.

At the Town Hall,  an Address w^as presented by the
Mayor and Corporation of the city of Oxford to the
King,  which the INIayor read,  while the same ceremony
of the sitting and standing was practised that I have
described at the theatre.  The King took off his hat,
and bowed,  and received the Address,  after hearing it,
but returned no answer.  Nor has his Majesty made
any except to the Oxford University,  though they
have,  since,  poured in upon him from every part of
the kingdom.

The Mayor was then knighted.

1786]  AUTHOR OF EVELINA 103

I think it was in Trinity College that we saw the
noblest library I have ever happened to enter.  For
'tis but little,  my dear Susan,  I have seen of sights.
Here we had new court scenery,  in which I acted but
an uncourtier-like part.  The Queen and Princess
had seats prepared for them,  which,  after a stroll
up and down the library,  they were glad,  I believe,  to
occupy.  The ladies of their suite were then graciously
ordered by her Majesty to be seated,  as there was not
here the state or public appearance that was observed
at the theatre,  and in the college where the refresh-
ments were given.

As to the poor men,  they never must sit in the pre-
sence of the Queen,  be they whom they will,  or what
they will :  so they were fain to stand it out.

Miss Planta glided awa}^,  behind a pillar,  and,  being
there unseen,  was able to lounge a little.  She was
dreadfully tired.  So was everybody but myself.  For
me,  my curiosity was so awake to every thing,  that I
seemed insensible to all inconvenience.

I could not,  in such a library,  prevail with myself to
so modest a retirement as Miss Planta' s  :  I considered
that the Queen had herself ordered my attendance in
this expedition,  and I thought myself very well privi-
leged to make it as pleasant as I could.  I therefore
stole softly down the room,  to the further end,  and
there amused myself with examining what books were
within reach of my eyes,  and with taking down and
looking into all such as were also within reach of my
understanding.  This was very pleasant sport to me ;
and had we stayed there till midnight v/ould have
kept me from weariness.

In another college  (we saw so many,  and in such
quick succession,  that I recollect not any by name.

104 DIARY AND LETTPT.S  [ParT III.

though all by situation)  I saw a performance of courtly
etiquette,  by Lady Charlotte Bertie,   that seemed to
me as difficult as any feat I ever beheld,  even at
Astley's or Hughes's.     It was in an extremely large,
long,  spacious apartment.     The King always led the
way out,  as well as in,  upon all entrances and exits :
but here,  for some reason that I know not,  the Queen
was handed out first ;  and the Princesses,  and the Aide-
de-camp,  and Equerry followed.     The King was very
earnest in conversation with some Professor ;  the at-
tendants hesitated whether to wait or follow the Queen  ;
but presently the Duchess of Ancastcr,  being near the
door,  slipped out,  and Lady Harcourt after her.      The
Miss Vernons,  who were but a few steps from them,  went
next.     But Lady Charlotte,  by chance,  happened to
be very high up the room,  and near to the King.    Had
I been in her situation,  I had surely waited till his
Majesty went first ;  but that would not,  I saw,  upon
this occasion,    have been etiquette; — she therefore
faced the King,  and began a march backwards, — her
ankle already sprained,  and to walk forward,  and even
leaning upon an arm,  was painful to her :  nevertheless,
back she went,  perfectly upright,  without one stumble,
without ever lookinrr once behind to see what she miofht
encounter ;  and with as graceful a motion,  and as easy
an air,  as I ever saw anybody enter a long room,  she
retreated,  I am sure,  full twenty yards backwards out of
one.

For me,  I was also,  unluckil}',  at the upper end of
the room,  looking at some portraits of founders,  and
one of Henry VHL in particular,  from Holbein.
However,  as soon as I perceived what was going for-
Avard, — backward,  rather, — I glided near the wainscot,
(Lady Charlotte,  I should mention,  made her retreat

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  105

along the very middle of the room,)  and having paced
a few steps backwards,  stopped short to recover,  and,
while I seemed examining some other portrait,  dis-
entangled my train from the heels of my shoes,  and
then proceeded a few steps only more:  and then,
observing the King turn another way,  I slipped a yard
or two at a time forwards  ;  and hastily looked back,  and
then was able to go again according to rule,  and in
this manner,  by slow and varying means,  I at length
made my escape.

Miss Planta stood upon less ceremony,  and fairly
ran off.

Since that time,  however,  I have come on prodigi-
ously, by constant practice,  in the power and skill of
walking backwards,  without tripping up my own heels,
feeling my head giddy,  or treading my train out of the
plaits — accidents very frequent among novices in that
business ;  and I have no doubt but that,  in the course
of a few months,  I shall arrive at all possible perfection
in the true court retrograde motion.

In another College,  in an old Chapter House,  I had
the opportunity to see another court-scene.  It was
nearly round in shape,  and had various old images
and ornaments.  We were all taken in by the Doctors
attendant,  and the party,  with Doctors and all,  nearly
filled it:  but,  finding it crowded,  everybody stood
upon the less ceremony,  and we all made our examina-
tions of the various contents of the room quite at our
ease  •  till suddenly the King and Queen,  perceiving two
very heavy old-fashioned chairs were placed at the head
of the room for their reception,  graciously accepted them,
and sat down.  Nothing could exceed the celerity with
which all confusion instantly was over^  and the most
solemn order succeeded to it.   Chairs were presented to

106 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

the three Princesses by the side of the Queen,  and the
Duchess of Ancaster and Lady Harcourt planted
themselves at their backs ;  while Lady Charlotte
instantly retreated close to the wall,  and so did every
creature else in the room,  all according to their rank
or station,  and the Royal Family remained conspicuous
and alone,  all crowd dispersed,  and the space of almost
the whole room unoccupied before them,  so close to
the walls did every body respectfully stand.

The last college we visited was Cardinal Wolsey's,
— an immense fabric.  While roving about a very spa-
cious apartment,  Mr.    F came behind me,    and

whispered that I might easily slip out into a small
parlour,  to rest a little while  ;  almost everybody hav-
ing taken some opportunity to contrive themselves a
little sitting but myself.  I assured him,  very truly,  I
was too little tired to make it worth while  ;  but poor
Miss Planta was so woefully fatigued that I could not,
upon her account,  refuse to be of the party.  He con-
ducted us into a very neat little parlour,  belonging to
the master of the college,  and Miss Planta flung herself
on a chair,  half dead with weariness.

Mr.  Y was glad of the opportunity to sit for a

moment also ;  for my part,  I was quite alert.  Alas !
my dear Susan,  'tis my mind that is so weak,  and so
open to disorder ; — my body,  I really find,  when it is
an independent person,  very strong,  and capable of
much exertion without suffering from it.

]\lr.  F now produced,  from a paper repository

concealed in his coat pocket,  some apricots and bread,
and insisted upon my eating  ; — but I was not inclined
to the repast,  and saw he was half famished himself; —
so was poor Miss Planta  :  however,  he was so per-
suaded I must both be as hungry and as tired as him-

17S6]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  107

self,  that I  \Yas forced to eat an apricot to appease
him.

Presently,  while we were in the midst of tliis regale,
the door suddenly opened,  and the Queen came in  ! —
followed by as many attendants as the room would con-
tain.

Up we all started,  myself alone not discountenanced ;
for I really think it quite respect sufficient never to sit
down in the royal presence,  without aiming at having
it supposed I have stood bolt upright ever since I have
been admitted to it.

Quick into our pockets was crammed our bread,  and
close into our hands was squeezed our fruit ;  by which
I discovered that our appetites were to be supposed
annihilated,  at the same time that our strength was to
be invincible.

Very soon after this we were joined by the King,
and in a few minutes w^e all paraded forth to the car-
riages, and drove back to Nuneham.

I have been very minute in this Oxford account,
because it presented scenes so new to me,  and because
I conclude that,  after you have had a month or two of
general journal,  you will have nothing more to be new
to either of us.

This Oxford expedition was,  altogether,  highly en-
tertaining to me ;  but I ought not to close it without
telling you the sweetness of all the Princesses,  who
each made a point of speaking to Miss Planta and to
me upon entering or quitting every college,  as we
stood in the ranks,  while they passed.

I stayed in my own room till a message from  ^Jiss
Vernons brought me down to dinner ;  and from this
time forward those ladies exerted themselves to the
utmost in being attentive,  sociable,  and civil.     I found

108 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

the Major,  Mr.  F ,  Mr.  Ha^cret,  Miss Planta,  and

themselves ;   and Ave had a very pleasant dinner,  talk-
ing over the sights just seen.

All the afternoon was spent in the samepart3^  ^^^
■went into Lord Harcourt's library to tea and coffee,
and there we had short visits irom his Lordship and
the Duchess of Ancaster.

In the evening Lady Harcourt came also,  and was
amazingly courteous.  The Queen then sent for the
Miss Vernons into the drawing-room,  and Miss Planta
and myself left the gentlemen to take care of them-
selves, and retired for the evening to our own rooms.

You must know,  wherever the King and Queen are,
nobody comes into their sight imsent for,  not even the
master and mistress of the house,  unless they are
publicly acquainted that their Majesties arc coming,
and mean to see them.

Monday,  August 14th. — I come now to introduce
to you a new acquaintance.

I did not get down to breakfast till it was almost
over,  as I was detained with the Queen,  and as every-
body was obliged to make what haste they could,  in
order to insure a meal before a summons.

I found Miss Planta,  and the Aid-de-Camp,  Vice-
Chamberlain,  and Equerry;  Lady Harcourt had already
breakfasted with them,  but made off as soon as the
Queen was visible,  to wait upon her JNIajesty.  Miss
Vernons lay in bed,  from yesterday's fatigues.

The extreme silence and gravity of the Aide-de-camp
threw a reserve and constraint on all the party,  and
we were all nearly dumb,  when a new lady suddenly
rushed into the room.  This was Mrs.  Harcourt,  the
Aid-de-camp's wife,  who had been ill the preceding
day,  and therefore had not ventured to Oxford.     She

17S6]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  109

is a showy,  handsome woman,  extremely talkative,
with quick parts,  high spirits,  and a rattUng vein of
humour.

Miss Planta,  who had taken Lady Harcourt's place,
in order to pour out the tea,  instantly moved to ano-
ther. Mrs.  Harcourt hurried into that just vacated,
without ceremony,  calling out,  "  How monstrous late
you all are  ! — though I need not talk,  for 1 hate getting
up early.  I was so vastly ill yesterday I could not
stir,  but I am vastly well to-day,  so I am going to
Blenheim."

This day had been previously dedicated to seeing
Blenheim.

*^  To Blenheim  ?"  repeated General Harcourt,  in a
low voice.

*•'  Yes,  Sir,  to Blenheim  !  So no grave faces,  for my
plan is fixed."

He half articulated a fear of her being ill again,  but
she stopped him with  *•  O,  no matter,  leave that to the
Fates  ; — the Queen has been so gracious as to say I
may go,  and therefore go I shall :  so say nothing about
it^  ifor that's settled and unalterable."

'*  After being so ill yesterday,"  said Mr.  F ,  ''  I

think it will be rather too much for you.''

*'  Not at all ! — and what's more,  you must carry
me."

''  I am very glad to hear it,"  cried he.  ''if go you
will."

''  Yes,  that I will,  certainly  ;  and some of you must
talje me.  I have no coach ordered, — and there is not
one to spare  :  so,  amongst you,  you equerries,  you must
carry me.  I have never been to Blenheim since I
married."

"  Were you before  ?'"  said the General.

110 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRtIII.

"Yes,  Sir,  and you took me."

*^Didl?"

•'Yes,  Sir,  you had that honour;  and I think you
have never taken that trouble since/'

All this,  though uttered in a voice as peremptory as
the language,  was spoken with very becoming smiles,
and an air of*  saucy good-humour.

The breakfast all this while had stood quite still  :
indeed there was nobody butmysclf that had not nearly
done.  Major Price handed me roll and butter and
bread across the table,  by way of hint,  I believe ;  all

which 1 declined:  at last Mr.    F said,    ''Miss

Burney,  which is your cup  ?"

Upon this,  Mrs.  Harcourt,  abruptly turning to me,
exclaimed  "  O dear,  you've got no tea!"  Then
pouring out a dish of slop,  added,  "  Can you drink it  ?
It looks very melancholy?'

"No,"  I said,  "  I had had enough."

Have not you also,  my Susan,  had enough of this
scene  ?

The Blenheim visit being considered as a private
one,  nobody went but of the Marlborough acquaint-
ance :  though,  in all royal parties,  the whole company
is always named by the Royals,  and the Lords and
Ladies of the mansions liave no more right to invite a
guest than a guest has to come uninvited.

I spent this day very pleasantly,  in walking over the
grounds,  which are extremely pretty,  seeing a flower-
garden planned by Mr.  Mason,  and the pictures in the
house.  Tlie two Miss Vcrnons,  Miss Planta,  and Mr.
Hagget,  were all that remained at Nuneham.  And it
was now I wholly made peace with those two ladies;
especially the eldest,  as I found her,  the moment she
^vas removed from rays so bright that they had dazzled

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  HI

her,  a rational,  composed,  obliging woman.  She took
infinite and unwearied pains to make amends for the
cold and strange opening of our acquaintance,  by the
most assiduous endeavours to give me pleasure and
amusement.  And she succeeded very well.  I could
blame nobody but the Countess'  sister for our recep-
tion ;  I plainly saw these ladies had been unprepared
to look upon us as any charge to themselves.

In the flower-garden,  there are some very pretty and
unpublished verses by Mr.  Whitehead.

The Royal excursioners did not return till b etween
six and seven o'clock,  when we dined with the same
party as the preceding day.  The evening,  too,  had
just the same visitors,  and passed in just the same
manner.

PAUT IV.

1786.

CONTENTS.

Return to Windsor — Mrs.  Hastings— Miscliief-makin;^— Birth-
day of the Duke of York— The Terrace— Dr.  Warton— Dr.
Roberts,  Provost of Eton — Bryant the Mythologist — An Alarm
— A Failure— Conversation with the Queen — A Mistake —
Mrs.  Delany and the King— A Perplexity  —  Letter from
Miss Burney to her Sister — Mrs.  Locke — Resolutions and
Struggles  —  Duty versus Inclination  —  Diary Resumed — M.
Argant — Madame de Genlis — Doubt and Difficulties con-
cerning her  —  Mrs.  Delany— Confession and Advice — The
Queen — A Nice Point of Casuistry — Dr.  Herschel — His
Modesty and Simplicity — The King's Patronage of him —
Miss Herschel  —  Comet  —  Miss Bowdler  —  The Duchess
of Ancaster — Madame La Roche — German Enthusiasm —
A Scene for a Melodrama— Literary Conversation — The Sights
of London — Lord George Gordon,  and Count Cagliostro —
Visit from the Princess Royal— More Enthusiasm — M.  Wie-
land— A Romance of Real Life— A trying Question— A Trio
of Friends  —  An awkward Dilemma — The Queen's Dislike to
JVovels and Novel-writers — Visit to Kew— St.  James's — A
Visit from the King  —  A singular Contretemps  —  Visit of
the Archduke Ferdinand and the Duchess of Modena — The
Queen's Diamonds.

VOL.  III.

114 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

PART IV.

1786.

Tuesday,  August IStii. — This morning  ^ve all break-
fasted together,  and at about twelve o'clock we set oflf
again for Windsor.

Lord Harcourt came into the breakfast- room with
abundance of civil speeches upon his pleasure in re-
newing our acquaintance^  and the Miss Vernons parted
with me like wholly different people from those I
met.

As soon as I returned to the Queen's Lodge at
Windsor,  I called upon Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  I found
her still occupied concerning the newspaper business
about Mrs.  Hastings.  She was more than ever irri-
tated against Mr.  F for his information,  and told

me she was sure he must have said it to her on pur-
pose, and that she wished people might hold their
tongue  :  but that she was bont upon having satisfac-
tion, and therefore she had sent for Mrs.  Hastings,  and
informed her of the whole business.

I was not only sorry,  but frightened,  lest any mis-
chief should arise through misrepresentations and

blunders,  between Mr.    F and Mr.    Hastings :

however,  this imprudent step was taken already,  and
not to be called back.

She protested she was determined to insist that Mr.
F should produce the very paper that had men-

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  115

tioned the Queen,  which she should shew,  and have
properly noticed.

I,   on the other side,  instantly resolved to speak

myself to Mr.    F ,   to caution him by no means

to be led into seeking any such paper,  or into keep-
ing such a search awake :  for,  with the best inten-
tions in the world,  I saw^  him on the point of being
made the object of vindictive resentment to Mr.  Has-
tings, or of indignant displeasure to the Queen herself,
— so wide-spreading is the power of misapprehension
over the most innocent conversation.

I saw,  however,  nothing of Mr.  F till tea-time  :

indeed,  except by very rare chance,  I never see any of

the King's people but at that meeting.     Mrs.  Schwel-

lenberg was then present,   and nothing could I do.

Major Price and Mr.  Fisher were of the party.     Mr.

F fortunately had letters to write,  and hastily left

us,  after taking one dish of tea.  The moment he was
gone Mrs.  Schwellenberg said she had forgot to speak
to him about the newspaper,  and told Major Price to
ask him for it.  Major Price assented with a bow only,
and the matter dropped.

I,  however,  who best knew the danger of its going
any farther,  now determined upon speaking to Major
Price,  and making him contrive to hush it up.  I knew
I had but to hint my apprehensions to a man such as
him,  to animate him to every exertion for preventing
what I feared.

Utterly impossible,  nevertheless,  proved this scheme ;
Major Price was too great a favourite to be an instant
disengaged.     I was obliged therefore to be quiet.

Wp:dM':sday,  August 16th — Was the birthday of
Prince Frederick,  Duke of York.  The Queen sent me
in the morning to my dear Mrs.  Delany,  whom I had

i2

116 DIARY AND LETTP^RS  [ParT IV.

but just found a moment to Hy to the preceding day,
and I was commanded to brin<i:  her,  if well enouirh,
just as she was,  in her home mornini^  cUtss,  to her
Majesty.

This I did with great delight ;  and that most vene-
rable of women accepted the invitation with all the
alacrity of pleasure she could have fflt at fifteen.

The Queen,  in the late excursion,  had made many
purchases at Woodstock;  and she now made some little
presents from them to this dear lady.

In the evening,  as it was again a birthday,  I resolved
upon going to the terrace,  as did INIrs.   Delany,  and

with her and Miss Mawer,  and jNIiss P ,  I sallied

forth.  To avoid the high steps leading to the terrace
from the lodge,  we went through a part of the castle.

The terrace was much crowded,  though so windy we
could hardly keep our feet ;  but I had an agreeable
surprise in meeting there with Dr.  AVarton.  He joined
Mrs.  Delany instantly,  and kept with us during the
whole walk.  He congratulated me upon my appoint-
ment, in terms of rapture:  his ecstacies are excited so
readilv,  from the excessive warmth of his disposition,
and its proneness to admire and wonder,  that my new
situation was a subject to awaken an enthusiasm the
most high-flown.

Presently after we were joined by a goodly priest,
fat,  jovial,  breathing plenty,  case,  and good living.  I
soon heard him whisper Mrs.  Delany to introduce him
to me.  It was Dr.  lloberts.  Provost of Eton  :  I had
already seen him at Mrs.  Delany's last winter,  but no
introduction had then passed.  Pie is a distant relation
of Mr.  Cambridge.  His wife was with him,  and intro-
duced also.

These also joined us;  and in a few minutes more a

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  117

thin,  little,  wizen old gentleman,  with eyes that scarce
seemed to see,  and a rather tottering gait,  came up to
Mrs.  Delany,  and after talking with her some time,  said
in a half whisper,  "Is that Miss Burney?"  and then
desired a presentation.  It was Mr.  Bryant,  the My-
thologist.  I was very glad to see him,  as he bears a very
high character,  and lives much in this neighbourhood.
He talks a great deal,  and with the utmost good-
humour and ease,  casting entirely aside his learning,
which I am nevertheless assured is that of one of the
most eminent scholars of the age.

We had now a very good party,  and seated ourselves
in a sort of alcove,  to be sheltered from the wind ;  but
it was so very violent that it deterred the Koyal Family
from walking.  They merely came on the terrace to
shew themselves to those who were eager to pay their
compliments upon the day,  and then returned to the
Castle.  Dr.  Warton insisted upon accompanying me
home as far as the iron rails,  to see me enter the royal
premises.  I did not dare invite him in,  without previous
knowledge whether I had any such privilege ;  otherwise,
with all his parts,  and all his experience,  I question
whether there is one boy in his school at Winchester
who would more have delighted in feeling himself
under the roof of a sovereign.

Wednesday,  August IZtii. — From the time that the
Queen condescended to desire to place me in immediate
attendance upon her own person.  I had always secretly
concluded she meant me for her English reader;  since
the real duties of my office would have had a far greater
promise of being fulfilled by thousands of others than
by myself.  This idea had made the prospect of reading
to her extremely awful to me :  an exhibition,  at any rate,
is painful to me,  but one in which I considered Her

lis DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

Majesty as a judge,  interested for herself in the sentence
she should pronounce,  and gratified or disappointed
according to its tenor — this was an exhibition formid-
able indeed,  and must have been considered as such by
anybody in similar circumstances.

Not a book,  not a pamphlet,  not a noAvspaper,  had I
ever seen near the Queen,  for the first week,  without feel-
ing a panic;  I always expected to be called upon.  She
frequently bid me give her the papers  ;  I felt that they
would be the worst reading I could have,  because full
of danger,  in matter as well as manner  :  however,  she
always read them herself.

To-day,  after she was dressed,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg
went to her own room;  and the Queen,  instead of
leaving me,  as usual,  to go to mine,  desired mo to follow
her to her sitting dressing-room.  She then employed
me in helping her to arrange her work,  which is chair
covers done in ribbon  ;  and then told me to fetch her
a volume of the Spectator.  I obeyed with perfect tran-
quillity. She let me stand by her a little while with-
out speaking,  and then,  suddenly,  but very gently,  said
"  Will you read a paper while I work  ?"

I was quite  "  consternated  !  "  I had not then the
smallest expectation of such a request.  I said nothing,
and held the book unopened.

She took it from me,  and pointed out the place where
I should begin.  She is reading them regularly through,
for the first time.  I had no choice :  I was forced to
obey ;  but my voice was less obedient than my will,
and it became so husky,  and so unmanageable,  that
nothing more unpleasant could be heard.  The paper
was a curious one enou":h — all concerning:  a court fa-
vourite.  I could hardly rejoice when my task was over,
from my consciousness how ill it was performed.     The

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  119

Queen talked of the paper,  but forbore saying anything
of any sort about the reader.  I am sorry,  however,  to
have done so ill.

General Harcourt came here to tea,  but I went to
my good Mrs.  de Luc,  and was there very comfortable,
and told her of my disastrous essay.  She assured me
Mr.  de Luc himself,  in reading French,  began little
better.

August 18th.  —  The Queen again,  when Mrs.
Schwellenberg was retired,  ordered me to follow her,
and gave me a little employment about her work,  which
I saw meant nothing but to detain without alarming
me ;  for she soon began such topics as necessarily called
me forth beyond monosyllables.  She named two ladies
of my acquaintance,  and asked me a few questions,  very
delicately,  of my connection with them.  Mrs.  W.  was
one.  I answered very charily in words,  and merely that
she had been pleased to desire the acquaintance herself.

Here this dropped.  The other was Miss .  I know

not where she had heard of my knowing that lady ;  but
I had again to say the same thing,  and I said it with
less scruple,  because I soon found the tales to that
lady's disadvantage,  which are spread about the town,
have been heard,  and not wholly discredited at Court :
therefore,  as vindicate her I cannot,  I had only to de-
clare my connection there was formed by something
little short of compulsion; — which is the real and
simple fact.

This frankness made her speak out ;  and she told me
that,  unless I wished it,  I need not,  under that roof,
keep up such an acquaintance any longer.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany was with me in the evening;
and the King,  when going on the terrace,  came into
my room to speak to her.     He scarce stayed a minute

120 DIARY AXD LETTERS  [Pa::t IV.

but it Avas a very odd sensation to me,  that it should be
my room in uhich I saw tlie Kint^.

Saturday,  August 19tit. — This morning I  \vas put
into a very unexpected perplexity.  While 1 was dress-
ing, John called to inform Scourfield that Miss Baker
was in a carriage at tlic gate,  and had asked to sec me.
I knew not what to say or do  ;  1 had formed a resolu-
tion, since the little confVrence I have mentioned,  to
sec nobody whatsoever,  till 1 could gain some intelli-
gence with respect to the Queen's own intentions or de-
sire upon the subject of my visitors :  yet to refuse see-
ing one who came in pure affection,  and who I well
know feels it very unfeignedly towards me,  was impos-
sible ;  and after a most hurried deliberation  (to put
together two words of apparent contradiction),  I was
determined to see her at all events.

I desired John to ask her into the eating-parlour,
and apologize for my finishing my dress.  I am forced
to deny all admission to my toilette,  as it has never
taken place without making me too late.

The hurry I dressed in,  joined to much doubt if my
compliance was right,  and a secret sadness that the
thought of meeting any friend then gave me,  made me
dreadfully nervous  ;  and by the time I was ready,  and
admitted her,  I was in a state that could little make her
sensible of the mark of real regard 1 was shewing her.
Unconscious of any difficulty or etiquette,  she came to
me because she had power herself,  without the smallest
idea any was exerted on my part to receive her.  There
is an innocence and heedlessness in her character,  ex-
tremely amiable,  though at times rather distressing.

I was now very eager to leave her:  I told her the Queen
was waiting for me,  but she still began upon some-
thing else,  not in tlie least conceiving that it could be

178G]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  121

of an}^  consequence wliether I went ten minutes sooner
or later.  To know the value and weight of ten minutes
it is needful and sufficient to reside in a Court.

Miss Burney to Airs.  Phillips.

August 20.

Has my dear Susan thought me quite dead  ? — not
to write so long !  and after such sweet converse as she
has sent me.  O my beloved Susan,  'tis a refrac-
tory heart I have to deal with  ! — it struggles so hard
to be sad — and silent — and fly from you entirel}^  since
it cannot fly entirely to you.  I do all I can to conquer
it,  to content it,  to give it a taste and enjoyment
for what is still attainable  ;  but at times I cannot
manage it,  and it seems absolutely indispensable to
my peace to occupy myself in anything rather than
in writing to the person most dear to me upon earth  !
— 'Tis strange, — but such is the fact, — and I now do
best when I get with those who never heard of you,
and who care not about me.

My dearest Mrs.  Locke's visit to Kew had opened all
my heart to its proper channels,  and your dear — your
soothing narrative had made it yearn to see you  ;  but
the cruel stroke of Mr.  and Mrs.  Locke both coming to
Windsor in my absence,  has turned my mortification
back into the same dry course again.

If to you alone I shew myself in these dark colours,
can you blame the plan that I have intentionally been
forming — namely,  to wean myself from myself — to
lessen all my afl'ections — to curb all my wishes — to
deaden all my sensations  ? — This design,  my Susan,  I
formed so long ago as the first day my dear father
accepted my off'ered appointment :  I thought that what

1'22 DIARY AND LETTERS  [P ART IV.

demanded a complete new system of life,  required,  if
attainable,  a new set of feelings for all enjoyment of
new prospects,  and for lessening regrets at what were
quitted,  or lost.  Such being my primitive idea,
merely from my grief of separation,  imagine but how
it was strengthened and confirmed when the interior of
my position became known to me  ! — when I saw myself
expected by Mrs.  Schwellcnbcrg,  not to be her colleague,
but her dependent deputy  !  not to be her visitor at my
own option,  but her companion,  her humble companion,
at her own command !  This has given so new a cha-
racter to the place 1 had accepted under such different
auspices,  that nothing but my horror of disappointing,
perhaps displeasing,  my dearest father,  has deterred
me,  from the moment that I made this mortifying dis-
covery, from soliciting his leave to resign.  But oh my
Susan, — kind,  good,  indulgent as he is to me,  I have
not the heart so cruelly to thwart his hopes — his views
— his happiness,  in the honours he conceived awaiting
my so unsolicited appointment.  The Queen,  too,  is
all sweetness,  encouragement,  and gracious goodness
to me,  and I cannot endure to complain to her of her
old servant.  You see,  then,  my situation  ;  here I must
remain! — The die is cast,  and that struggle is no
more. — To keep off every other,  to support the loss
of the dearest friends,  and best society,  and bear,  in
exchange,  the tyranny,  the exigeance,  the ennui,  and
attempted indignities of their greatest contrast, — this
must be m}^  constant endeavour.

My plan,  in its full extent,  I meant not to have told ;
but since so much of it,  unhappily,  burst from me
in the hurry of that Friday morning,  I have forced out
the rest,  to be a little less mysterious.

Amongst my sources of unhappiness in this extra-

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        123

ordinary case is,  the very favour that,  in any other,
might counteract it — ^namely,  that of the Queen :  for
while,  in a manner the most attractive,  she seems in-
viting my confidence,  and deigning to wish my happi-
ness, she redoubles my conflicts never to shock her
with murmurs against one who,  however to me noxious
and persecuting,  is to her a faithful and truly devoted
old servant.  This will prevent my ever having my
distress and disturbance redressed  ;  for they can never
be disclosed.  Could I have,  as my dear father con-
ceived, all the lime to myself,  my friends,  my leisure,
or my own occupations,  that is not devoted to my offi-
cial duties,  how different would be my feelings,  how far
more easily accommodated to my privations and sacri-
fices !  Little does the Queen know the slavery I must
either resist or endure.  And so frightful is hostility,
that I know not which part is hardest to perform.

What erasures!  Can you read me?  I blot,  and
re-write — yet know not how to alter or what to send  ;
I so fear to alarm your tender kindness.

Diary Resumed,

Windsor,  Monday Evening. — Madame La Fite,
who calls upon me daily,  though I am commonly so
much engaged I can scarce speak to her for a moment,
came to desire I would let her bring me M.  Argant,
who was come to Windsor to shew some experiment
to the King.

I was very well pleased with him  :  his extreme in-
genuity, and the oppressive usage he has met with,
notwithstanding the utility and success of his projects,
made him a quick interest in my good opinion ;  and
he gave me very great pleasure by telling me he had

124 DIARY AND LETTERS       [Part IV.

just ventured to mention to liis Majesty a plan for
procurin<2^  himself some recompense for his losses,
which Mr.  Locke had either started or approved,
and that the King immediately said,  "  If it has Mr.
Locke's approbation,  I look upon him in such a light
that I will do any thing to forward it that lies in my
power."

A noble Sovereign this is,  my dearest Susan  ;  and
when justice is done him,  he will as such be acknow-
ledged. To think so highly,  and speak so liberally,
of a subject whom he has never seen,  and whose ab-
sence from Court has been represented,  once,  in no
very flattering manner,  redounds greatly to his honour,
and shews the fair impartiality of his judgment.

Madame La Fite has long pressed me with great
earnestness to write to Madame de Gcnlis,  whose
very elegant little note to me I never have answered.
Alas !  what can I do  ? — I think of her as of one of
the first among women — I see her full of talents and of
charms — I am willing to believe her good,  virtuous,
and dignified ; — yet,  with all this,  the cry against her
is so violent and so universal,  and my belief in her
innocence is wholly unsupported by proof in its favour,
or any other argumient than internal conviction,  from
what I observed of her conduct and manners and con-
versation when I saw her in London,  that I know not
how to risk a correspondence with her,  till better able
to satisfy others,  as well as I am satisfied myself:  most
especially,  I dare not enter into such an intercourse
through Madame La Fite,  whose indiscreet zeal for
us both would lead her to tell her successful mediation
to everybody she could make hear her.  Already she
has greatly distressed me upon this subject.  Not con-
tent with continual importunity to me to write,  ever

178G]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  125

since my arrival,  which I have evaded as gently as
possible,  to avoid giving her my humiliating reasons,
she has now written Madame de Genlis word that I
am here,  belonging to the same Royal Household as
herself;  and then came to tell me,  that as we were now
so closely connected,  she proposed our writing jointly,,
in the same letter.

All this,  with infinite difficulty,  I passed over, —
pleading my little time;  which indeed she sees is true.
But when M.  Argant was here,  she said to me,  in
French,  "M.  Argant will immediately wait upon
Madame de Genlis,  for he is going to Paris;  he will
tell her he saw us together,  and he will carry her a
letter from me ;  and surely Miss Burncy will not re-
fuse M.  Argant the happiness of carrying two lines
from one lady so celebrated to another  ?"

I was quite vexed ;  a few lines answer the same pur-
pose as a few sheets  ;  since,  once her correspondent,  all
that I am hesitating about is as completely over,  right
or wrong,  as if I wrote to her weekly.  I made as little
answer as possible ;  but Madame La Fite said that he
did not go before Thursday or Friday,  and therefore
that I should have time for a few little words,  which
she would keep her own letter open for,  to the last
moment.

As soon as they left me,  I hastened to my dear Mrs.
Delany,  to consult with her what to do.

"  By all means,"  cried she,  *'  tell the affair of your
difficulties whether to write to her or not,  to the Queen  :
it will unavoidably spread,  if you enter into such a cor-
respondence, and the propcrest step you can take,  the
safest and the happiest,  is to have her opinion,  and be
guided by it.  Madame de Genlis is so public a cha-
racter;  you can hardly correspond mih.  her in private.

126 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

and it would be better the Queen should hear of such
an intercourse from yourself than from any other."

I entirely agreed in the wisdom of her advice,
though I very much doubted my power to exert suffi-
cient courage to speak,  unasked,  upon any affair of my
own.  You may be sure I resolved to spare poor
Madame La Fite in my application,  if I made it:  "to
write,  or not to write,"  was all I wanted to determine ;
for the rest,  I must run any risk rather than complain
of a friend who always means well.

The day following,  which was Prince  "William's birth-
day, was very melancholy.  Princess Elizabeth had been
very unwell ever since the Oxford expedition,  and was
now so much worse as to be quite in an alarming state ;
and she is so much beloved,  that her illness grieved the
whole house as sincerely as if she had been the private
relation of every individual.  The account of her dan-
ger, however,  and of her sufferings,  I shall here only
mention,  as her recovery is now perfectly established,
and not one of the Royal Family seems more healthy.

While I was at Mrs.  Delany's,  this evening,  I was

called down stairs to Mr.  F .    I found him in great

haste,  and much agitated,  with a paper in his hand,
I instantly concluded some mischief belonging to the
Hastingses  :  but he explained to me,  briefly,  that his
wife was ill,  and had sent for him ;  that he had
taken a hasty leave of their Majesties,  and had
only stopped for a moment to speak to me,  while the
chaise was at the door,  to beg me to deliver to the
Queen a paper he had forgot,  and to hope that in the
winter we should renew and alignment an acquaintance
that,  on his part,  &c.,  &c.

I found,  upon returning to the Queen's Lodge,  that
Mv.  F had taken no leave of Mrs.  Schwellenberg ;

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  127

he had left his compliments for her with Major Price.
I was extremely glad to hear it,  and resolved to speak
to Mr.  Fisher the first moment I could,  and so finish
the affair.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg again regretted she
had not attacked him,  but said she had no idea he
would liave gone so suddenly.  I kept my paper to
deliver when she was not present,  lest she should be
angry he had not called to leave it with her.

An opportunity offered the next morning,  for the
Queen again commanded me to follow her into her
saloon  ;  and there she was so gentle,  and so gracious,
that I ventured to speak of JNIadame de Genlis.

It was very fearfully that I took this liberty.  I dread-
ed lest she should imagine I meant to put myself under
her direction,  as if presuming she would be pleased to
direct me.  Something,  I told her,  I had to say,  by the
advice of Mrs.  Delany,  which I begged her permission
to communicate.  She assented in silence,  but with a
look of the utmost softness,  and yet mixed with strong
surprise.  I felt my voice faltering,  and I was with
difnculty able to go on, — so new to me was it to beg
to be heard,  who,  hitherto,  have always been begged to
speak.  There is no absolutely accounting for the forci-
ble emotions which every totally new situation and
new effort will excite in a mind enfeebled,  like mine,
by a long succession of struggling agitations.  I got
behind her chair,  that she might not see a distress she
might wonder at :  for it was not this application itself
that affected me :  it was the novelty of my own situa-
tion, the new power I was calling forth over my pro-
ceedings, and the — O my Susan ! — the all tha-t I was
changing from — relinquishing — of the past,— and
hazarding for the future  !

With many pauses,  and continual hesitation,  I then

128 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PakT IV.

told her that I had been earnestly pressed by Madame
de Genlis to correspond with her ;  that I admired her
with all my heart,  and,  with all my heart,  believed all
good of her  ;  but that,  nevertheless,  my personal know-
led<^e of her was too slight to make me wish so intimate
an intercourse,  which I had carefully shunned upon all
occasions but those where my affection as well as my
admiration had been interested  ;  though I felt such a
request from such a woman as Madame de Genlis as
an honour,  and therefore not to be declined without
some reason stronger than my own general reluctance
to proposals of that sort ;  and I found her unhappily,
and I really and sincerely believed undeservedly,  en-
circled wath such powerful enemies,  and accused with
so much confidence of having voluntarily provoked
them,  that I could not,  even in my own mind,  settle if
it were right to connect myself with her so closely,  till
I could procure information more positive in her favour,
in order to answer the attacks of those who asperse
her,  and who would highly blame me for entering into
a correspondence with a character not more unquestion-
ably known to me.  I had been desirous to wait,  sus-
pended, till this fuller knowledge might be brought
about;  but I was now^  solicited into a decision,  by M.
Argant,  who was immediately going to her,  and who
must cither take her a letter from me or shew her,  by
taking none,  that I was bent upon refusing her request^

The Queen heard me with the greatest attention,
and then said, "  Have you yet writ to her  ?'

No,  I said  ;  I had had a little letter from her,  but
I received it just as the Duchess of Portland died,  when
my whole mind was so much occupied by Mrs.  Delany,
that I could not answer it.

"  I will speak to you then,"  cried she,  "  very honestly ;

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         129

if you have not yet writ,  1 think it better you should
not write.  If you had begun,  it would be best to go
on ;  but as you have not,  it will be the safest way to let
it alone.  You may easily say,  without giving her any
offence,  that you are now too much engaged to find
time for entering into any new correspondence."

I thanked her for this open advice as well as I was
able,  and I felt the honour its reliance upon my pru-
dence did me,  as well as the kindness of permitting
such an excuse to be made.

The Queen talked on,  then,  of Madame de Genlis
with the utmost frankness  ;  she admired her as much
as I had done myself,  but had been so assaulted with
tales to her disadvantage,  that she thought it unsafe
and indiscreet to form any connection with her.  Against
her own judgment,  she had herself been almost tor-
mented into granting her a private audience,  from the
imprudent vehemence of one of Madame de G.'s friends
here,  with whom she felt herself but little pleased for
what she had done,  and who,  I plainly saw,  from that
vmfortunate injudiciousness,  would lose all power of
exerting any influence in future.  Having thus unre-
servedly explained herself,  she finished the subject,
and has never started it since.  But she looked the whole
time with a marked approbation of my applying to
her.

Poor Madame de Genlis I how T grieve at the cloud
which hovers over so much merit,  too bright to be hid
but not to be obscured.

In the evening Mr.  Herschel came to tea.  I had
once seen that very extraordinary man at Mrs.  de
Luc's,  but was happy to see him again,  for he has not
more fame to awaken curiosity,  than sense and modesty
to gratify it.     He is perfectly unassuming,  yet openly

VOL.  III.  K

130 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

happy ;  and liappy in the success of tliosc studies which
would render a mind less excellently formed presump-
tuous and arrogant.  The King has not a happier
subject than this man,  who owes wholly to His Majesty
that ho is not wretched :  for such was his eagerness to
quit all other pursuits to follow astronomy solely,  that
he was in danger of ruin,  when his talents,  and great
and uncommon genius,  attracted the King's patronage.
He has now not only his pension,  which gives him the
felicity of devoting all his time to his darling study,
but he is indulged in licence from the King to make a
telescope according to his new ideas and discoveries,
that is to have no cost spared in its construction,  and
is wholly to be paid for by His Majesty.

This seems to have made him happier even than the
pension,  as it enables him to put in execution all his
wonderful projects,  from which his expectations of
future discoveries are so sanguine as to make his
present existence a state of almost perfect enjoyment.
Mr.  Locke himself would be quite charmed with him.
He seems a man without a wish that has its object in
the terrestrial globe.

At night,  Mr.  Herschel,  by the King's command,
came to exhibit to His Majesty and the Koyal Family
the new comet lately discovered by his sister.  Miss
Herschel;  and while I was playing at piquet with
Mrs.  Schwellenbcrg,  the Princess Augusta came into
tlie room,  and asked her if she chose to go into the
garden and look at it.  She declined the otlcr,  and the
Princess then made it to me.  I was glad to accept it,
for all sorts of reasons.

We found him at his telescope,  and I mounted some
steps to look through it.  The comet was very small,
and had nothing grand or striking in its appearance ;

17S6]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         131

but it is the first lady's comet,  and I was very desirous
to see it,  Mr.  Herschel tlien shewed me some of his
new- discovered universes^,  with all the good humour with
which he vvould have taken the same trouble for a
brother or a sister-astronomer:  there is no possibility
of admirin":  his 2:enius more than his o;entleness.

>;:  *  *  ^  *  *

Friday,  August 25th. — To-day I had the happiness
of seeing my dear Charlotte,  for the first time since I
parted with her almost at the altar.

The dear girl stayed a week and a day,  and came to
me constantly every morning,  and almost every after-
noon :  even when I did not venture to keep her to tea,
but was forced to part from her when it was announced.
She was introduced to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and dined
with us once,  as also Mr.  Francis ;  and once I begged
permission for meeting her at Mr.  Hastings's,  at Beau-
mont Lodge,  where I passed an agreeable evening
with that very intelligent and very informing man,
whom I pity at my heart,  for the persecutions he under-
goes, and whom I think the man the most oppressed
and injured of modern times.  His lively and very
pleasing wife contributed largely to the afternoon's
well-doing.

I shall put the little occurrences of this week of her
stay together,  without journalising.

I had one day a visit from Miss Gomme,  who was
brought by Madame la Fite.  Miss Gomme was but
lately settled at the Lower Lodge,  where she is one of
the governesses to the Princesses,  Mary and Sophia.
She is short and plain,  but sensible,  cultivated,  and
possessed of very high spirits.

Another day — or rather night — I met accidentally
Major Price in the gallery,  and he stopped me to talk

K 2

132 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

over the F affair,  which wc mutually flatter cair-

selves is wholly blown over since his absence.  This led
on to other matters,  and he frankly told me that there
was not a man in the establisluucnt that did not fear
even speaking to me,  from the apparent jealousy my
arrival had awakened ;  and after a little longer talk,
opening still more,  he confessed that they had all
agreed never to address me,  but in necessary civilities
that were unavoidable.

How curious !  I applauded the resolution,  which I
saw might save me from ill-will,  as well as themselves.
Yet he owned himself extremely surprised at my ma-
nagement, and acknowledged they had none of them
expected I could possibly have done so well.

*'Nay,"  cried I,  "I only do nothing  ;  that's all I"

*'But that,"  answered he,  "is the difficulty;  to do
nothing is the hardest thing possible."

Much more passed, — for when he could speak he
resolved to make himself amends for former silence.

This curious conference has been productive of an
almost total reserve and taciturnity at our tea-meetings ;
for now the Major has satisfied himself that I am in-
formed of their motives,  he and all of them think their
scheme may go on with my concurrence;  which,  ac-
cordingly, I give it,  by more scrupulously keeping aloof
than ever.

Monday,  September 4Tn. — This morning Mrs.  do
Luc called,  and brought Miss Harriet Bowdler,  who
was on a visit at her house,  and,  under Mrs.  de Luc's
wing,  ventured to the Lodge.  They did not stay two
minutes.  Mrs.  de Luc knows my situation thoroughly;
but she invited me to tea for the evening,  to meet Miss
Harriet,  and begged me to invite Mr.  Fisher,  who
sleeps here while his houte is fitting up.     He is in

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         133

very high and very deserved favour with all the Royal
Family,  and the King grants him the same apartment,
I believe,  that he inhabited when a preceptor of Prince
Edward,  till his canon of Windsor's residence is fur-
nished and fitted up.

We had a very sociable and sensible evening.  There
was no other company,  and Miss Bowdler consented to
shew us several books of drawings,  which she had taken
from nature,  chiefly in Wales,  and which were ex-
tremely pretty and interesting.

Mr.  Fisher himself takes landscapes in a most pleas-
ing manner,  and travelled all through Italy and Swit-
zerland with a pencil in his hand.

The evening was tranquil and rational.  I lo\'e Mrs.
de Luc ;  Miss Harriet Bowdler is very amiable ;  and
Mr.  Fisher was full of intelligence,  communicated in
the gentlest and simplest manner.  It was quite comic,
after such an excess of shyness on both sides,  to see
how easy and natural we mutually became.

*  *  H:  *  *  *

On returning to Windsor I had the same solace as
heretofore,  of going every morning to Mrs.  Delany,
and the same entertainment every evening of sitting
dumb and unnoticed.  To me,  as I have explained,
this was no hardship  ;  but to Mrs.  Delany,  when she
joined the set,  it was quite afflicting.  Accustomed to
place me herself so high,  to see me,  now,  even studi-
ously shunned,  had an effect upon her tender mind that
gave me uneasiness to observe ;  and indeed,  she told
me it was so painful a scene to her,  that she would
positively come no more,  unless T would exert and
assert myself into a little more consequence.

I have promised to do what I can to comfort her for
the apprehensions she conceives of my depression;  but

134 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

in truth I lilcc tlic present state of things better than
at present I should any reform in them. — But I never
say this to my dear Mrs.  Dclany;  her fervent,  pure,
and tender joy in seeing me situated where we can
daily meet would all be damped,  destroyed rather,
if she read as far into my heart as she suffers me to
read into liers. — Our confidence cannot be mutual:
there is nothing,  I believe,  that she conceals from me  ;
she tells me every occurrence of her long life,  and even
every feeling,  shews me all her letters,  confides to me
all her own papers,  and,  through the soft subdued
colours of the most timid humility,  lets me see,  since
she cannot hide it,  the purest tints of the most exalted
nature.  These she sees not herself,  but 1,  who do,
find them tlie most edifying contemplation of which
my present life admits.

One day in this week I saw my beloved Fredy and
Mr.  Locke,  and I tried to feel happy;  but I hardly
know^  how to describe — nor wish to do it — how far I am
from all the sweet peace that belongs to liappincss,
when I see that sweet friend who brings me almost
piercingly near what she has not power to make me
reach.

JMoNDAY,  Septembeii LIth. — Mr.  Fisher sent me
"Coxe's Travels in Russia,  Sweden,  Poland,  and Den-
mark," two thick quarto volumes ;  and I hpvve been
reading them almost ever since.  The style is far from
either elegant or pleasing,  but they are full of informa-
tion and historic anecdotes,  and seem written with the
strictest intention of veracity  : — intention,  I say,  for a
foreign traveller can rarely be certain of the truth and
justice even of his own observations,  much less of those
he gathers as he runs.

The Duchess of Ancaster made me a long visit before

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         135

tea,  and was extremely communicative upon her own
travels,  which made her conversation very well worth
hearing;  for she has lately resided some time in France
and Italy,  and it is always curious to knov/  how people
and things strike the various minds of various ranks in
society.

I come now to introduce to you,  with a new character,
some new perplexities from my situation.  Madame la
Fite called the next morning,  to tell me she must take
no denial to forming me a new acquaintance — Madame
de la Roche,  a German by birth,  but married to a
Frenchman ; — an authoress,  a woman of talents and dis-
tinction, a character highly celebrated,  and unjustly
suffering from an adherence to the Protestant religion.
"  She dies with eagerness to see you,"  she added,  in
French,  "  and I have invited her to Windsor,  where I
have told her I have no other feast prepared for her
but to shew her Dr.  Herschel and Miss Burney."

I leave you to imagine if I felt competent to fulfil
such a promise :  openly,  on the contrary,  I assured her
I was quite unequal to it.

She had already,  she said,  written to Madame la
Eoche,  to come the next day,  and if I would not meet
her she must be covered with disgrace.

Expostulation was now vain  ;  I could only say that
to answer for myself was quite out of my own power.

"  And why? — and wherefore? — and what for? — and
surely to me  ! — and surely for Madame de la Roche ! —
une femme cV esjjrit — mon cmde — Vamie de Madame de
Genlis,'"  &c.  &c.  filled up a hurried conference in the
midst of my dressing for the Queen,  till a summons
interrupted her,  and forced me,  half dressed,  and all too

136 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IV.

late,  to run away from her,  with an extorted promise to
wait upon her if I possibly could.

Accordingly I went,  and arrived before Madame la
Roche.  Poor Madame La Fite received me in tran-
sport; and I soon witnessed another transport,  at least
equal,  to Madame la llochc,  which happily was re-
turned with the same warmth ;  and it was not till after
a thousand embraces,  and the most ardent professions —
*'  Ma lUgne amie  ! — es^t il possible  ? — te vois-je  ?^'  &c. —
that I discovered they had never before met in their
lives  ! — they had corresponded,  but no more I

This somewhat lessened my surprise,  however,  when
my turn arrived;  for no sooner was I named than all
the emhrassades were transferred to me — "  La digne
Miss Borni! — Vaideur de Ceclle  ? — d' Evelina? — noUf
ce nest pas possible ! — sids-je si heurevse  ! — otii,  je le vois
a ses yeux  ! — Ah !  que de honhcur  .'"'  &c.

As nobody was present,  I had not the same confusion
from this scene as from that in which I first saw Ma-
dame la Fite,  when,  at an assembly at Miss Streat-
field's,  such as these were her exclamations aloud,  in
the midst of the admiring bystanders.

But soon after there entered Mrs.  Fielding and Miss
Finch,  both invited by INladame la Fite to witness
these new encounters.  A literary conversation was
then begun,  opened by Madame la Fite,  and kept alive
by Mrs.  Fielding.

Madame la Roche,  had I met her in any other wa}^
miglit have pleased me in no common degree  ;  for
could I have conceived her character to be unaffected,
her manners have a softness that would render her ex-
cessively engaging.  She is now bien pcissec — no doubt
fifty — yet has a voice of touching sweetness,  eyes of
dove-like gentleness,  looks supplicating for favour,  and

178G]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         137

an air and demeanour the most tenderly caressinof.  I
can suppose she has thought herself all her life the
model of the favourite heroine of her own favourite
romance,  and 1 can readily believe that she has had
attractions in her youth nothing short of fascinating.
Had I not been present,  and so deeply engaged in this
interview,  I had certainly been caught by her myself ;
for in her presence I constantly felt myself forgiving
and excusing what in her absence I as constantly found
past defence or apology.

Poor Madame la Fite has no chance in her presence  ;
for though their singular enthusiasm upon  "  the people
of the literature,"  as Pacchierotti called them,  is equal,
Madame la Fite almost subdues by her vehemence,
while Madame la Roche almost melts by her softness.
Yet I fairly believe they are both very good women,
and both believe themselves sincere.

In the midst of a warmth the most animated for
whatever she could approve,  how admirably did Madame
de Genlis steer clear of both these extremes,  of violence
and of languor,  and confer honour by her praise,  even
where most partial and unmerited,  by the dignity min-
gled with sweetness that accompanied it !

I returned still time enough to find Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg with her tea-party ;  and she was vcr}'  desirous
to hear something of Madame la Roche.  I was led by
this to give a short account of her :  not such a one as
you have heard,  because I kept it quite independent
of all reference to poor Madame la Fite;  but there
was still enough to make a little narration.  Madame
la Roche had told me that she had been only three days
in England,  and had yet made but a beginning of seeing
les sjjectacles,  and les gens celebres ; — and what do you
think was the first,  and,  as yet,  sole spectacle to which

138 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IV.

slic had been carried  ? — Bedlam  ! — And who the first,
and,  as yet,  only homme cclebre she had seen — Lord
George Gordon  ! — whom she called  /e famnux George
Gordon,  and with whom she had dined,  in company
with Count Cagliostro  !

When foreigners come hither without proper recom-
mendations, how strange is their fare !  General Bude
found himself so excessively diverted with this account,
intermixed,  at the time,  with several circumstances I
have now forgot,  and with the novelty of hearing any-
thing beyond a grave monosyllable from my mouth,
that it surprised him off all guard,  and he began,  for
the first time since the day of his arrival,  to venture
coming forward to converse with me ;  and though it
was soon over,  from that time he has never seen me
without the amazing temerity of speaking a few words
to me !

At night the Princess Royal came into my room,
sent by the Queen for little Badine's basket.  I begged
her permission to carry it myself,  but she Avould not
suffer me.  She stayed a few minutes,  conversing chiefly
upon Mrs.  Delany,  and when,  as she was going away,
I could not forbear saying a word or two of the many
little marks of favour  ^-he had shewn me,  she came back,
and took hold of my hand to make me a kind answer.
Charming indeed is it to see the goodness,  native and
acquired,  of this lovely young Princess.

Sunday,  Sept.  17th. — At the chapel this morning,
Madame la Fitc placed Madame la Iloche between
herself and me,  and proposed bringing her to the
Lodge,  "to return my visit."  This being precisely
what I had tried to avoid,  and to avoid without shock-
ing Madame la Fite,  by meeting her correspondent at
her own house,  I was much chagrined at such a pro-

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  139

posal,  but had no means to decline it,  as it was made
across Madame la Roclie herself.

Accordingly,  at about two o'clock,  when I came from
the Queen,  I found them both in full possession of my
room,  and Madame la Fite occupied in examining my
books.  The thing thus being done,  and the risk of
consequences inevitable,  I had only to receive them Avith
as little display of disapprobation of their measures
as I could help  ;  but one of the most curious scenes fol-
lowed I have ever yet been engaged in or witnessed.

As soon as we were seated,  Madame la Fite began
with assuring me,  aloud,  of the  "  conquest "  I had
made of Madame la Roche,  and appealed to that lady
for the truth of what she said.  Madame la Roche
answered her by rising,  and throwing her arms about
me,  and kissing my cheeks from side to side repeatedly.

Madame la Fite,  as soon as this was over^  and we
had resumed our seats,  opened the next subject,  by
saying Madame la Roche had read and adored
"  Cecilia :"  again appealing to her for confirmation of
her assertion.

"  O,  Old,  Old f cried her friend, ''  mats la vraie Cecile,
gest Miss Bond !  charmante Miss Borni!  digne,  douce,
et aimable I Coom to me arms  !  que je vous emhrasse
mille fois  /"

Again we were all deranged,  and again the same
ceremony being performed,  we all sat ourselves down.

"  Cecilia  "  was then talked over throughout,  in de-
fiance of every obstacle I could put in its way.

After this,  Madame la Fite said,  in French,  that
Madame la Roche had had the most extraordinary life
and adventures that had fallen to anybody's lot ;  and
finished with saying,  "  Eh  !  ma chere amie,  contez nous
U7i ideu.r

140 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaKT IV.

They were so connected,  she answered,  in their early
part with M.  Wieland,  the famous author,  that they
would not be intelligible without his story.

''Eh hicn!  ma tres-chere,  contez nous,  done,  un jjctt
de ses aveiitures ;  ma chere Miss Biirney,  cetoit son
amant,  et Vhomme le plus extraordinaire — d'un genie !
d^un feul Eh bien,  ma chere?  oh favez vous recontre?
oil est-ce quil a commence a vous aimer  ?  contez nous un
peu de tout ca.''

Madame la Roche,  looking-  down upon her fan,
began then the recital.  She related their first inter-
view, the gradations of their mutual attachment,  his
extraordinary talents,  his literary fame and name  ;  the
breach of their union from motives of prudence in their
friends ;  his change of character from piety to volup-
tuousness, in consoling himself for her loss with an
actress  ;  his various adventures,  and various transform-
ations from good to bad,  in life and conduct ;  her own
marriage with M.  de la Roche,  their subsequent meet-
ing when she was mother of three children,  and all the
attendant circumstances.

This narrative was told in so touching and pathetic
a manner,  and interspersed with so many sentiments
of tenderness and of heroism,  that 1 could scarcely be-
lieve I was not actually listening to a Clelia or a Cas-
sandra, recounting the stories of her youth.

When she had done,  and I had thanked her,  Madame
la Fite demanded of me what I thought of her,  and if
she was not delightful?  I assented,  and  ^ladame la
Roche then,  rising,  and fixing her eyes,  filled with tears,
in my face,  while she held both my hands,  in the most
melting accents,  exclaimed,  *'  Miss Borni !  la plus chere,
la plus digne des Anyloises  !  dites moi — m'aimez vous  .^"

I answered as well as I could,  but what I said was

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         141

not very positive.  Madame la Fite came up to us,
and desired we might make a trio of friendship,  which
should bind us to one-another for life.

And then they both embraced me,  and both wept
for joyful fondness  !  I fear I seemed very hard-hearted  ;
but no spring was opened whence one tear of mine
could flow.

The clock had struck four some time,  and Madame
la Fite said she feared they kept me from dinner.  I
knew it must soon be ready,  and therefore made but a
slight negative.

She then,  with an anxious look at her watch,  said
she feared she was ah-eady too late for her own little
dinner.

I was shocked at a hint I had no power to notice,
and heard it in silence — silence unrepressing !  for she
presently added,  "  You dine alone,  don't you  ?"

*'Y — e — s, — if Mrs.  Schwellenberg is not well
enough to com.e down stairs to dinner."

"And can you dine,  ma chere Mademoiselle — can
you dine at that great table alone  ?"

'*  I must ! — the table is not mine."

*'  Yes,  in Mrs.  Schwellenberg's absence it is.''

"It has never been made over to me,  and I take no
power that is not given to me."

*'But the Queen,  my dearest ma'am — the Queen,  if
she knew such a person as Madame la Eoche was here."

She stopped,  and I was quite disconcerted.  An
attack so explicit,  and in presence of Madame la Roche,
was beyond all my expectations.  She then went to the
window,  and exclaimed,  "  It rains  ! — Mon D'leu I que
ferons nous  ? — My poor littel dinner  ! — it will be all
spoilt !  —  La  'paiivre Madame la Roche I une telle
femme r

142 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

I was now really distressed,  and wished much to in-
vite them both to stay  ;  but I was totally helpless  ;  and
could only look,  as I felt,  in the utmost embarrassment.

The rain continued.  Madame la Roche could un-
derstand but imperfectly what passed,  and waited its
result with an air of smiling patience.  I endeavoured
to talk of other things ;  but Madame la Fite was rest-
less in returning to this charge.  She had several
times given me very open hints of her desire to dine at
Mrs.  Schwellenberg s table ;  but I had hitherto ap-
peared not to comprehend them :  she was now deter-
mined to come home to the point ;  and the more I saw
her determination,  the less liable I became to being
overpowered by it.

At length John came to p^nn ounce dinner.

Madame la Fite looked at me in a most expressive
manner,  as she rose and walked towards the window,
exclaiming that the rain would not cease  ;  and IMadame
la Roche cast upon me a most tender smile,  while she
lamented that some accident must have prevented her
carriage from coming for her.

I felt excessively ashamed,  and could only beg them
not to be in haste,  faithfully assuring them I was by
no means disposed for eating.

Poor Madame la Fite now lost all command of her-
self, and desiring to speak to me in my own room,
said,  pretty explicitly,  that certainly I might keep any-
body to dinner,  at so great a table,  and all alone,  if I
wished it.

I was obliged to be equally frank.  I acknowledged
that I had reason to believe I might have had that
power,  from the custom of my predecessor,  Mrs.  Hag-
gerdorn,  upon my first succeeding to her ;  but that I
was then too uncertain of any of my privileges to

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         143

assume a single one of them unauthorised by the
Queen  ;  and I added that I had made it the invariable
rule of my conduct,  from the moment of my entering
into my present office,  to run no risk of private blame,
by any action that had not her previous consent or
knowledge.

She was not at all satisfied,  and significantly said,
*'But you have sometimes Miss Planta?"
"  Not I ;  Mrs.  Schwellenberg invites her."
"  And M.  de Luc,  too, — he may dine with you  !"
''He also comes to Mrs.  Schwellenberg.     Mrs.  De-
lany alone,  and her niece,  come to me;  and they have
had the sanction of the Queen's own desire."

''  Mais,  enfin,  ma chere Miss Burney, — when it rains,
— and when it is so late, — and when it is for such a
woman as Madame la Roche !"

So hard pressed,  1 was quite shocked to resist her ;
but I assured her that when my own sisters,  Phillips
and Francis,  came to Windsor purposelj'  to see me,
they had never dined at the Lodge but by the express
invitation of Mrs.  Schwellenberg;  and that when' my
father himself was here,  I had not ventured to ask him.
This,  though it surprised,  somewhat appeasedjier ;
and we w^ere called into the other room to Miss Planta,
who was to dine with me,  and who,  unluckily,  said the
dinner would be quite cold.

They begged us both to go,  and leave them till the
rain was over,  or till Madame la Roche's carriage
arrived.  I could not bear to do this,  but entreated
Miss Planta,  who was in haste,  to go and dine by her-
self.

This,  at last,  was agreed to,  and I tried once again
to enter into discourse upon other matters.  But how
greatly did my disturbance at all this urgency increase,

144 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

whcu Madame La Fitc said she was so hunirrv she

must beg a Lit of bread and a glass of water

I was now,  indeed,  upon the point of giving way  ;
but wlien I considered,  while I hesitated,  what must
follow — my own necessary apology,  which would in-
volve Madame La Fite in much blame,  or my own con-
cealing silence,  which would reverse all my plans of
openness with the Queen,  and acquiescence with my
own situation — I grew firm again,  and having assured
her a thousand times of my concern for my little power,
I went into the next room :  but I sent her the roll and
water by John ;  I was too much ashamed to carry them.
Miss Planta was full of good-natured compassion for
the scene in which she saw me enij^aiied,  but confessed
she was sure I did right.

When I returned to them again,  Madame La Fite
requested me to go at once to the Queen,  and tell her
the case.  Ah,  poor Madame la Fite !  to see so little
a way for herself,  and to suppose me also so every way
short-sighted  !  I informed her that I never entered the
presence of the Queen unsummoned.

"  But why not,  my dear Ma'am  ? — Mrs.  Haggerdorn
went out and in whenever she pleased."

*'  So I have heard ;  but she was an old attendant,
and only went on in her old way  :  I am new,  and have
yet no way marked out."

"  But Miss Planta does also."'

"  That must have been brought about by the Queen's
directions."

She then remonstrated with me upon my shyness,
for my own sake  ;  but I assured her I was more disen-
gaged, and better pleased,  in finding myself expected
only upon call,  than I could be in settling for myself
the times,  seasons,  and proprieties of presenting myself
of mv o^Yn accord.

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         145

Again she desired to speak to me in my own room  ;
and then she told me that Madame la Roche had a
most earnest wish to see all the Royal Family  ;  she
hoped,  therefore,  the Queen would go to early prayers
at the chapel,  where,  at least,  she might be beheld  :
but she gave me sundry hints,  not to be misunder-
stood, that she thought I might so represent the merits
of Madame La Roche as to induce the honour of a
private audience.

I could give her no hope of this,  as I had none to
give ;  for I well knew that the Queen has a settled
aversion to almost all novels,  and something very near
it to almost all novel-writers.

She then told me she had herself requested an inter-
view for her with the Princess Royal,  and had told her
that if it was too much to grant it in the Royal apart-
ments, at least it might take place in Miss Burney's
room  !  Her Royal Highness coldly answered that she
saw nobody without the Queen's commands.

How much I rejoiced in her prudence and duty !  I
would not have had a meeting in my room unknown to
the Queen for a thousand worldv But poor mistaken
Madame La Fite complained most bitterly of the
deadness of the whole court to talents and genius.

In the end,  the carriage of Madame La Roche ar-
rived, about tea-time,  and Madame La Fite finished
with making me promise to relate my difficulties to the
Queen,  that she might give me such orders as to enable
me to keep them any other time.  And thus ended
this most oppressive scene.  You may think I had no
very voracious appetite after it.

To give you the result at once,  Miss Planta,  of her
own accord,  briefly related the affair to the Queen ^
dwelling upoa my extreme embarrassment,  with the

VOL.  III.  L

14G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

most good-natured applause of its motives.  The
Queen graciously joined in commendation of my steadi-
ness, expressed her disapprobation of the indelicacy of
poor Madame La Fite,  and added that if I had been
overcome,  it would have been an encouragement to her
to bring foreigners for ever to the Lo gc,  wholly con-
trary to the pleasure of the King.

Friday,  September 20th. — A grand incident,  for
my new life,  happened.  Mrs.  Schwellenbcrg finding
herself very unwell,  and wishing for advice from a
physician,  went on to toAvn,  and I remained,  for the
first time,  with the Queen by myself

Nothing could be more gracious and encouraging
than her behaviour upon this occasion.  We were at
Kew only two days,  and her sv>eetness,  in sundry par-
ticulars, rendered them,  with respect to my attendance,
the most pleasant of any I had witnessed.

Friday,  September 22nd. — We all went to town for
keeping the anniversary of the King's coronation,  on
which there is always a drawing-room.  We found
Mrs.  Schwellenberg still very unwell,  and uncertain
whether she should be able to return with us to Windsor
the next day.

Early the following morning.  Miss Pianta sent to
me,  to know whether we went back alone,  or with Mrs.
Schwellenberg :  I could give her no satisfaction.  Soon
after she came herself;  but,  while she was apologising
for her inquiries,  a message came to me,  to let me
know that Mrs.  Schwellenberg meant to continue in
town.  Miss Pianta took a hasty leave,  to prepare for
our journey;  but,  turning round as she opened the
door,  she made a sort of involuntary exclamation,  "  Ah
Miss Burncy,  if Mrs.  Schwellenberg was not so sick —
and so cross — how happily we might all live ! "

17S6]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         147

Secure of the Queen's approbation,  the moment I
arrived at Windsor,  I sent to entreat to see my dearest
Mrs.  Delany and her niece to dinner.  They came ;
and,  in the evening,  Mr.  Fisher alone added to our
party  :  the rest were attending the King at the castle
whence His Majesty was viewing some experiments of
signals.

This was the first tolerable evening I spent in our
eating-room.  Mr.  Fisher produced the drawings he
had sketched in Italy and Switzerland:  views from
well-chosen prospects,  very happily,  I believe,  executed.
With the help of his verbal description,  Mrs.  Delany
saw them pretty well ;  and we were both indebted to
him for much entertainment.  The quietness of the
evening pleased him as much as it did ourselves ;  and
I was only sorry that Major Price,  who was never
obliged to be absent before,  should not partake of it.

The next day passed in the same manner,  only with
the addition of Major Price and General Bude.  The
tranquillity of the evening was evidently enjoyed by
all ;  and I could not forbear thinking of the words of
Miss Planta upon our leaving London.

I was quite glad to have once again some natural
conversation with the Major,  who of late had carried
his circumspection to such a height as never to speak a
word to me after his first salutation.  Whether his
fear of exciting displeasure towards me,  or towards
himself,  was strongest,  I cannot tell;  but it is extremely
provoking to see the universal mischief spread by partial
ill-humour.

September 25th. — This morning,  after sundry diffi-
culties, I received my first visit here from Miss Cam-
bridge. Mrs.  Hemming brought her to Windsor,
v/here she had a visit to make herself

l2

148 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

While slic was  \vith mc,  a gentle tap at the door
made mc call out  "  Come in  !  "  It opened — and enter
Princess Royal ! — who stood quietly at it,  upon sight of
a stranger,  saying,  in a low voice,  that the Queen
desired I would go to her.  I answered,  I would follow
immediately,  and she made,  with her usual grace,  a
curtseying exit.

*'  Who was that  ?  "  cried Miss Cambridge  ;  and when
I told her,  she exclaimed,  with the greatest surprise,
"  Good Heaven !  the Princess Royal ! — with a manner
so modest and gentle? — Then I see,  by her standing at
the door to deliver her message,  that the very highest
in rank think it right to be as humble in their appear-
ance as the lowest !  "

Mrs.  Delany came to me to dinner,  and we promised
ourselves the whole afternoon tete-a-tete,  with no otlier
interruption than what we were well contented to allow
to Major Price and General Bude.  But before we were
well settled in my room,  after our late dinner in the
next,  a visitor appeared, — Miss Finch.

We were both sadly vexed at this disappointment;
but you will wonder to hear that I became,  in a few
minutes,  as averse to her going as I had been to her
coming:  for the Princess Amelia was brought in,  by
Mrs.  Cheveley,  to carry away Mrs.  Delany to the
Queen.  I had now,  therefore,  no one,  but this chance-
comer,  to assist me in doing the honours to my two
beaus;  and well as I like their company,  I by no means
enjoyed the prospect of receiving them alone  :  not,  I
protest,  and am sure,  from any prudery,  but simply
from thinking that a single female,  in a party,  either
large or small,  of men,  unless very much used to the
world,  appears to be in a situation awkward and un-
becoming.

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         149

I was quite concerned,  therefore,  to hear from Miss
Finch that she meant but a short visit,  for some rea-
sons belonging to her carriage  ;  and when she rose to
go,  I felt my distaste to this new mode of proceeding
so strong,  that I hastily related to her my embarrass-
ment, and frankly begged her to stay and help to
recreate my guests.  She was very much diverted with
this distress,  which she declared she could not compre-
hend, but frankly agreed to remain with me ;  and pro-
mised, at my earnest desire,  not to publish what I had
confessed to her,  lest I should gain,  around Windsor,
the character of a prude.

I had every reason to be glad that I detained her»
for she not only made my meeting with the equerries
easy and pleasant,  but was full of odd entertainment
herself.  She has a large portion of whimsical humour,
which,  at times,  is original and amusing,  though always
eccentric,  and frequently,  from uttering whatever comes
uppermost,  accidental.

Among many other flights,  she very solemnly de-
clared that she could never keep any body's face in her
mind when they were out of her sight.  "  I have quite
forgot,"  cried she,  "  the Duhe of York already,  though
I used to see him so continually.  Really it's quite
terrible,  but I cannot recollect a single trait of anybody
when they are the shortest time out of my sight ;  espe-
cially if they are dead ; — it's quite shocking,  but really
I can never remember the face of a person the least in
the world when once they are dead ! "

The Major,  who knows her very well,  and who first
had introduced her to me on my settling here,  was
much amused with her rattle ;  and General Bude is
always pleased with anything bordering upon the ridi-
culous.    Our evening therefore turned out very well.

1^0 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PatiT IV.

In the next I was not so succcssfal :  uncertain whether
or not j\Irs.  Schwellenberg would return,  I could make
no invitations in the morninj^,  though I knew that
Mrs.  Delan}' was to be with the Queen.  I dined alone;
and then gave up my companion,  and took courage to
send and invite  ^Irs.  and Miss Hebcrden  : — they had
company at liome  !  I sent to Madame La File  : — she
was engaged with company abroad  !

It was too late to send any further, — and I was forced
to make my entree into the tea-room aola.  It was
really very awkward to me,  at first ;  though the ease of
General Bude,  and the gentleness and good breeding
of Major Price,  made me soon tolerably comfortable, —
till the door opened,  and His Majesty appeared at it !

"  What !  "  cried lie,  smiling,  "  a trio  ? — only you
three?"

Two bows,  and one curtsey,  was the answer.

He then came in,  and talked for some time upon
general subjects,  chiefly with Major Price,  who stands
extremely high in his favour and esteem.  Afterwards
he spoke much of Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  and commended
her resignation of employment,  and timely retirement.
This,  by various steps,  led to some ludicrous stories of
an old servant who had belonged to her for,  I think,
seventeen years,  and,  having stayed behind,  was mar-
ried to a woman of some fortune,  though old,  much
wanting in sobriety,  and of unwieldy corpulency.  While
this was relating,  the King advanced to me,  and said,
"  Should you have thought Draugher would have had
such success  ? "

*'  I never saw him,  Sir,"  I answered.

"  Never saw him  ? — O yes,  you must have seen him
a hundred times :  he was here when you came."

*'  But I saw nothing then,  Sir ! "  quoth I,  which little

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         151

truism diverted him,  and led him to talk on with me
some time longer,  still upon Mrs.  Haggerdorn and
this Draugher.

When he went away,  he took both the gentlemen
with him:  the Major to backgammon,  the General to

his concert-room.

*  *  *  *

I have something to relate now that both my dearest
friends will take great Yjleasure in hearing,  because it
appertains to my dignity and consequence.  The Queen,
in the most gracious manner,  desired me this morning
to send an invitation to M.  MithofF,  a German clergy-
man, to come to dinner ;  and she added,  "  I assure you
he is a very worthy man,  of very excellent character,
or I would not ask you to invite him."

Was not this a very sweet manner of making over to
me the presidency of the table in Mrs.  Schweilenberg's
absence  ?

It was for the next day,  and I sent John to him im-
mediately;— rather av;kward,  though,  to send my com-
pliments to a man I had never seen,  and invite him to
dine with me.  But there was no other mode — I could
notname the Queen.  Iknev/Miss P — —  would be happy
to make us a trio,  and I begged her not to fail me.

But alas ! — if awkwardness was removed,  something
worse was substituted in its place  ;  my presidency was
abolished on the very day it was to be declared,  by
the sudden return of its rightful superseder.  I ac-
quainted her with the invitation I had been desired to

send,  and I told her I had also engaged Miss P .  I

told of both as humbly as possible,  that I might raise
no alarms of any intention of rivalry in pov/er.

Mr.  Mithoff was not yet come when dinner was an-
nounced, nor yet 3.1iss P ;  we sat down tete-a-tete,

lo2 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

myself in some pain for my invitations,  my companion
well content to shew she would wait for none of my
makini^.

At length came Miss P ,  and presently after

a tall German clergyman entered the room.  I was a
little confused by his immediately making up to me,
and thanking me in the strongest terms for the
honour of my invitation,  and assuring me it was the
most nattering one he had ever received.

I answered as short as I could,  for I was quite con-
founded by the looks of Mrs.  Schwelleiiberg.  Towards
me they were directed with reproach,  and towards the
poor visitor with astonishment :  why I could not ima>
gine,  as I had frequently heard her speak of M.
Mithoff with praise.

Finding nothing was said to him,  I was obliged to
ask him to take a place at the table myself,  which he
did ;  still,  and with great glee of manner,  addressing
himself wholly to me,  and never finishing his warm ex-
pressions of gratitude for my invitation.

I quite longed to tell him I had Her Majesty's
orders for what I had done,  that he might cease his
most unmerited acknowledgments;  but 1 could not at
that time.  The dinner went oft"  very ill ;  nobody said
a word but this gentleman,  and he spoke only to do
himself mischief.

When we all adjourned to  ^Irs.  Schwellenberg's
room upstairs,  for coft'ee,  my new guest again poured
forth such a torrent of thanks,  that I could not resist
taking the first opportunity to inform him he owed me
no such strong obligation,  as I had simply obeyed the
commands of the Queen.

"  The Queen  ! "  he exclaimed,  with yet greater en-
chantment ;  "^  then I am very happy indeed,  Madam  ;

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         153

I had been afraid at first there was some mistake in
the honour you did me."

"  It might have seemed a mistake indeed.  Sir,"  cried
I,  "  if you supposed I had taken the liberty of making
you such an invitation,  without the pleasure of knowing
you myself."

Mrs,  Schwellenberg,  just after,  calling me aside,  said,
''  For what have you brought me this man  ? "

I could make no answer,  lest he should hear me,  for
I saw him look uneasily towards us ;  and therefore,  to
end such interrogations,  I turned to him,  and asked how
many days he should continue at Windsor.

He looked surprised,  and said he had no thought of
leaving it.

It was my turn to look surprised now;  I had heard
he only came upon Her Majesty's commands,  and was
to stay but a day or two.

I now began to suspect some mistake,  and that my
message had gone to a wrong person.  I hastened,
therefore,  to pronounce the name of Mithoff,  and my
suspicion was changed into certainty,  by his telling me,
with a stare,  that it was not his.

Imagine but my confusion at this information ! — the
Queen's commission so ill executed,  M.  Mithoff neg-
lected, and some one else invited whose ver}''  name I
knew not ! — nor did he,  though my mistake now was
visible,  tell it me.  Yet he looked so much disappointed,
that I thought it incumbent upon me,  since the blunder
must have been my servant's,  to do what I could to
comfort him.  I therefore forced myself forward to talk
to him,  and pass over the embarrassment ;  but he was
modest,  and consequently overset,  and soon after took
his leave.

I then cleared myself to Mrs.  Schwellenberg of any

154 DIARY AND LETTERS        [PaRT V.

voluntary deed in bringing her this man,  and inquired
of John how it had happened.  He told me lie had
forgot the gentleman's name,  hut as I had said he was
a German clergyman,  he had asked for him as such,
and thought this must be the right person.  I heard
afterwards that this is a  ]M.  Schrawdor,  one of the mas-
ters of the German language to the Princesses.  I made
all the apologies in my power to him for the error.

In the evening,  our party was the General,  Mr.
Fisher,  and Major Price;  and I was tempted to tell
them my disaster,  upon Mrs.  Schwellenbcrg's being
suddenly called out of the room  ;  and the account in-
terested them so much,  from their knowledge of all
the parties,  that when the lady's return interrupted it,
they were all taken with fits of suUenness that made
them nearly as dumb as myself.

The Queen,  at night,  with great good humour,  laughed
at the mistake,  and only desired it might be rectified
for the next day.  Accordingly it was ;  and M.  Mithoff
had an invitation for the next day,  in proper order :
that is,  from Mrs.  Schwellenberg.

It was a day of festivity for the Eoyal Family.  The
Archduke Ferdinand,  brother to the Emperor,  and
his Duchess,  Princess of Modena,  with their train,  were
invited here to dine with their Majesties.  They had
already had the honour of breakfasting with them,  at
Kew.     The dinner was at the Castle.

In the morning,  at the doorof my room,  I met Major
Price ;  he told me he was very unwell,  and felt quite
unequal to the fatigue of attendance on a day of such
ceremony;  he had therefore begged that Colonel
Goldsworthy might be his deputy, — "  And I,'  added
he,  "  shall stay quietly at the Lodge,  and dine with
you."'  With Mrs.  Schwellenberg!  thought I,  —  in
■whose presence little i am fairly as one annihilated.

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         155

Colonel Goldswortliy had been invited to Windsor
for the Princess Eoyal's birth- day,  which was the next
day;  Mr.  Fisher,  also,  was of the dinner-party ;  yet it was
as heavy as if we had been our usual tete-a-tete:  more
so,  indeed,  for then one at least exerts herself,  namely,
F.  B. :  nov/  every one seemed to do their worst.

When we went up stairs to coffee,  upon Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg's leaving us a few minutes,  and M.  Mithoff's
looking at her Indian paper,  Mr.  Fisher and the Major
pressed me to finish my account of ray hapless guest
and erroneous invitation ;  but,  upon a re-entrance,  we
all suddenly parted,  like detected conspirators.

At night,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg told Major Price she
would give him a treat ;  he is quite her first favourite
among the equerries.  This was to shew him all the
Queen's jewels ;  and Mr.  Fisher and myself were allowed
to partake in it.  Nothing could be more superb,  more
dazzling.

Would you know how the evening concluded  ?— look
at the account of the dinner.

PART V.

1786.

CONTENTS.

Birthday of the Princess Royal — Birthday Gifts of the King and
Queen— The Princess Amelia — Birthday Concert — Arduous
Duties of the Equerries — Official Jealousy — Visit from the
King — The Queen's Jewels — Royal Governesses  —  Visit to
Kew — Return to Windsor — The Princess Royal  —  Amiable
Conduct of the Queen — Her Opinions on Dress and State —
The Inconveniences of Grandeur — A strange Mistake — The
Equerries — Explanations and Apologies— The Hardships of a
Royal Equerry— A Day's Hunting with the King — Barley
Water — Abstemiousness of George III. — Correspondence of
Mrs.  Delany — Visit from the King  —  Mrs.  Montagu's Cha-
racter in the  "  Observer  " — Vanessa— Mrs.  Wright,  the Wax-
modeller  —  Characters of Hume and Lord George Sackville
in the  "Observer" — Letter from Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney
— An Awkward Predicament  —  Dr.  Burney's Opinions on
Germany  —  Curiosity and Explanation  —  Diary Resumed —
More Mistakes  —  Anecdote of the Queen  —  Colonel Fox  —
Wedding Presents  —  The Duke of Montague — A nice Point
— This Century or the Last? — Visits to Kew  —  A Trait of
Character  —  An Escapade  —  Benjamin West— His Cartoon of
the Painted Window at St.  George's Chapel — Simplicity of
West's Character— Death of the King's Aunt;

158 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

PART V.

1786.

Friday,  September,  29tii. — This day the Princess
Royal entered her twenty-first year.  I had the plea-
sure of being in the room with the Queen when she
sent for her,  early in the morning.  Her  ^Majesty Lid
me stop,  while she went into another apartment to
fetch her birth-day gifts.  The charming Princess
entered with so modest,  so composed an air,  that it
seemed as if the day,  with all its preparations for
splendour,  was rather solemn than elevating to her.
I had no difficulty,  thus alone with her,  in offering my
best wishes to her.  She received them most gracefully,
and told me,  with the most sensible pleasure,  that the
King had just been with her,  and presented to her a
magnificent diamond necklace.

The Queen then returned,  holding in her hands two
very pretty portfolios for her drawings,  and a very fine
gold etui.  The Princess,  in receiving them with the
lowest curtsey,  kissed her hand repeatedly,  while the
Queen gave back her kisses upon her cheeks.

The King came in soon after,  and the three youngest
Princesses.  They all flew to kiss the Princess Royal,
who is aflfectionately fond of them all.  Princess Amelia
shewed how fine she was,  and made the Queen admire
her new coat and frock;  she then examined all the
new dresses of her sisters,  and then looking towards

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         159

me with some surprise,  exclaimed^  "  And won't Miss
Burney be fine,  too  ?  "

I shall not easily forget this little innocent lesson.
It seems all the household dress twice on these birth-
days— for their first appearance,  and for dinner — and
always in something distinguished.  I knew it not,  and
had simply prepared for my second attire only,  wear-
ing in the morning my usual white dimity great coat.

I was a little out of countenance ;  and the Queen
probably perceiving it,  said —

*•  Come hither,  Amelia ;  who do you think is here — in
Miss Burney's room  ?"

''  Lany,"  answered the quick little creature ;  for so
she calls Mrs.  Delany,  wdio had already exerted herself
to come to the Lodge with her congratulations.

The King,  taking the hand of the little Princess,
said they would go and see her ;  and turning to the
Queen as they left the room,  called out

•^^  What shall we do with Mrs.  Delany?"

"  What the King pleases,"  was her answer.

I followed them to my room,  where his Majesty
stayed some time,  giving that dear old lady a history
of the concert of the preceding evening for the Arch-
duke and Duchess,  and that he had ordered for this
day for the Princess Royal.  It is rather unfortunate
Her Royal Highness should have her birth-day cele-
brated by an art which she even professes to have no
taste for,  and to hear almost with pain.

The King took Mrs.  Delany to breakfast with him-
self and family.

Poor Major Price was really ill.  I did not see him
all day,  and believe he kept his bed.  It has been to
me a most serious concern to see how little his strength
is suited to his office,  the duties of which are quite la-

160 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

borlous to any but the most robust constitutions.  The
equerry in waiting must be dressed and ready to attend
by six o'clock in summer,  and by seven in the winter ;
and he must be constantly prepared either for hunting,
riding,  or walking,  the whole day through.  The King,
however,  is the kindest master,  and exacts from his
equerries no more than he performs himself,  save in
watching and waiting,  which arc highly fatiguing  ;  but
His Majesty has the most vigorous health,  and accus-
toms himself to none of the indulgences which almost
all his subjects regard as indispensable.

For his own sake^  therefore,  I could not be sorry that
the waiting of Major Price was to expire on the 1st of
October ;  though for mine I could not help it,  nor have
helped it ever since.  He was my first friend in this
house — the first who ventured to speak to me with any
trust,  of the situation of things,  and the first,  of course,
from whom I received any solace or pleasure.

I wore my memorable present-gown this day,  in
honour of the Princess Royal.  It is a lilac tabb}-.  I
saw the King for a minute at night,  as he returned
from the Castle,  and he graciously admired it,  calling
out  "  Emily should sec Miss Burney's gown now,  and
she would think her fine enough."

All the day's entertainment was again at the Castle.
The following evening I first saw the newly-arrived
equerry,  Colonel Golds worthy.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg
was ill,  and sent for Mr.  de Luc,  and told me to go
into the eating-room,  and make the tea for her.  I in-
stantly wrote to Miss P ,  to beg she v;ould come to

assist me  :  she did,  and Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  changing
her plan,  came downstairs at the same time.  The
party was Major Price,  General Bude,  Mr.  Fisher,  and
the Colonel.  Major Price immediately presented uis
to each other.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         161

"  Upon my word  !"  cried Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  "you
do the honour here in my room  ! — you might leave
that to me.  Major Price!"

"What!  my brother equerry?"  cried he;  "No,
ma'am,  I think I have a right there."

Colonel Goldsworthy's character stands very high
for worth and honour,  and he is warmly attached to the
King,  both for his own sake,  and from the tie that
binds him to all the Eoyal Family,  of regard for a sister
extremely dear to him,  Miss Golds worthy,  whose re-
sidence here brings him frequently to the Palace.  He
seems to me a man of but little cultivation or litera-
ture, but delighting in a species of dry humour,  in
which he shines most successfully,  in giving up him-
self for its favourite butt.

He brought me a great many compliments,  he said,
from Dr.  Warton of Winchester,  where he had lately
been quartered with his regiment.  He rattled away
very amusingly upon the balls and the belles he had
seen there,  laughing at his own gallantry,  and pity-
ing and praising himself alternately for venturing to
exert it.

The party was the same as the day before.  The
King came into the room at tea-time,  and endeavoured
to laugh the Major out of his opinion of his own ill-
health,  which His Majesty thinks all a fancy,  as he has
a very good colour,  and looks strong and well.  He
could not succeed:  the Major smiled at the raillery,
but could not allow it to be just.  The King then
suddenly applied to me,  saying —

"  What think you,  Miss Burney,  is it not all mere
fancy,  or is anything the matter with him  ?"

"  Indeed,   Sir,  1 don't know,"  was all the answer I

VOL.  III.  M

1G2 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaUT V-

could inalvG ;  and he went from me to repeat it to the
Major,  as an argument against him.

jNIonday,  October 2nd. — Major Price left Windsor.
He took leave of nobody  :  everybody,  I believe,  re-
gretted him  ;  the sweet little Princess Amelia cried
when told he was gone.

The next day we were all to go to Kew;  but Mrs.
Schwellenberg was taken ill,  and went by herself to
town.

The Queen sent for me after breakfast,  and delivered
to me a long box,  called here the jewel box,  in which her
jewels are carried to and from town that are worn on
the drawing-room days.  The great bulk of them re-
main in town all the winter,  and remove to Windsor
for all the summer,  with the rest of the family.  She
told me,  as she delivered the key into my hands,  that as
there was always much more room in the box than her
travelling jewels occupied,  I might make what use I
pleased of the remaining part;  adding,  with a very ex-
pressive smile,  "  I dare say you have books and letters
that you may be glad to carry backwards and forwards
with you."

I owned that nothing was more true,  and thankfully
accepted the offer.  It has proved to me since a com-
fort of the first magnitude,  in conveying all my choice
papers and letters safely in the carriage with me,  as
well as books in present reading,  and numerous odd
thins^s.

She then said that as the King had resolved upon
taking the Princess Amelia to Kew this time,  ?^Irs.
Cheveiey,  her nurse and governess,  must go also ;  and
she desired to have her travel in the same coach in
which 1 went,  as well as Mr.  de Luc and  ^liss Planta.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        163

"  Do you,"  she said,  "  send to tliem all,  and appoint
the time for their coming to you."

In this gentle,  but expressive manner,  she made over
to me the presidency of the carriage in Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg s absence,  in the same manner as she had done
of the table.  I sent accordingly my compliments to
them all,  naming eleven o'clock.

Mrs.  Cheveley is rather handsome,  and of a shewy
appearance,  and a woman of exceeding good sense,
whose admirable management of the young Princess
has secured her affection without spoiling her.  She
always treats her with respect,  even when reproving
her,  yet gives way to none of her humours where it is
better they should be conquered.  Fewer humours,  in-
deed, I never in any child saw  ;  and I give the greatest
credit to Mrs.  Cheveley for forbearing to indulge them.

At Kew the Smelts were just arrived.  The King has
presented them with one of the prettiest little houses
upon the banks of the Thames that I have ever seen.
I was impatient to wait upon them,  but could not,  after
my journey,  find time:  much was I gratified,  therefore,
when the Princess Royal came to me,  and said the
Queen had sent her to acquaint me that she had invited
Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt to dine with me.

They did not,  however,  find me overflowing with
spirits at our meeting.  I had not seen them since the
critical period of my arrangement with the Queen took
place ;  and their sight now revived so many recollec-
tions that then were bitter to me,  that I felt a sinking
at my heart unconquerable.  Melancholy,  therefore,
was the day to me ;  though heretofore I had always
found pleasure in meeting with Mr.  Smelt.  But I will
not go back so far,  except to facts and circumstances.
Sufficient for the day are the reflections thereof!

m2

1G4 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

Again I waited alone,  Mrs.  Schwellcnbcrg being in
town.  Nothing could be sweeter than the Queen in
these my first single essays ;  and she bid me the next
day send an invitation again to Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt to
dine with me,  if I wished it.  She translated to me also
the whole story of a German play,  which she had just
been reading,  and narrated it so well,  and with obser-
vations so just of its characters,  that she filled me with
fresh admiration at the keenness of her penetration
into people and things so remote from her own sphere
of life.

She lent me an old Scotch ballad to read,  that had
lately been printed in Germany,  with an introductory
essay upon the resemblance still subsisting between
the German and Scotch languages.  The ballad is
entitled the  "  Gaberlunzie Man."  It had to me no
recommendation,  save its curiosity in a vocabulary and
glossary,  that pointed out the similitude of the two
languages.

The lovely little Princess Amelia w^as brought by
Mrs.  Cheveley to our tea-room,  to sec Mrs.  Smelt,
and stayed all the evening.  We are become very great
friends by this long visit,  and she has promised  "  always
to come and drink tea with me at Kevv^."

Thursday,  October 5th,  was my first waiting at St.
James's without Mrs.  Schwellenberg  ;  and Mr.  and Mrs.
Locke came to me in my rooms,  and at night they car-
ried me to Tancred and Sigismunda.  I saw also my
father and my dear brother James.

Friday,  October 6th. — We returned to Windsor
without Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who stayed in town for her
physician's advice.  The Queen went immediately to
Mrs.  Delany ;  the Princess Royal came into my room.

"  I beg pardon,"'  she cried,  "  for what I am going to

I78G]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  165

say  ;  I hope you will excuse my taking such a liberty
with you — but,  has nobody told you that the Queen is
always used to have the jewel-box carried into her bed-
room ?"

''  No,  ma'am,  nobody mentioned it to me.  I brought
it here because I have other things in it."

''  I thought,  when I did not see it in mamma's room,"
cried she,  "  that nobody had told you of that custom,
and so I thought I would come to you myself:  I hope
you will excuse it  ?"

You may believe how I thanked her,  while I pro-
mised to takeout my own goods and chattels,  and have
it conveyed to its proper place immediately.  I saw
that she imagined the Queen might be displeased  ;  and
though I could never myself imagine that,  for an omis-
sion of ignorance,  I felt the benevolence of her inten-
tion, and received it with great gratitude.

"  My dear ma'am,"  cried she,  "  I am sure I should
be most happy to do anything for you that should be
in my power,  always ;  and really Mrs.  Schwellenberg
ought to have told you this."

Afterwards I happened to be alone with this charm-
ing Princess,  and her sister Elizabeth,  in the Queen's
dressing-room.     She then came up to me,  and said,

"  Now will you excuse me.  Miss Burney,  if I ask you
the truth of something I have heard about you?"

*'  Certainly,  ma'am."

*'  It's such an odd thing,  I don't know how to men-
tion it ;  but I have wished to ask you about it this great
■while.  Pray is it really true that,  in your illness last
year,  you coughed so violently that you broke the
whalebone of your stays in two  ?"

"As nearly true as possible,  ma'am  ;  it actually split
with the force of the almost convulsive motion of a cougrli

166 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

that seemed loud and powerful enough for a giant.  I
could hardly myself believe it  \vas little I that made so
formidable a noise."

''  Well,  I could not have given credit to it if I had
not heard it from yourself!  I wanted so much to know
the truth,  that I determined,  at last,  to take courage
and ask you."

*'  And pray.  Miss Burney,"  cried the Princess Eliza-
beth, "had you not a blister that gave you great
torture  ?"

''Yes,  ma'am — in another illness."

•'  O  ! — I know how to pity you ! — I have one on at
this moment !"

"  And pray.  Miss Burney,"  cried the Princess Royal,
"  were not you carried out of town,  when you were in
such a weak condition that you could not walk  ?"

"  Where could your Royal Highness hear all this  ?"

"  And were you not almost starved by Sir Richard
Jebb?"  cried Princess Elizabeth.

''  And did not you receive great benefit from asses'
milk  ?"  exclaimed the Princess Royal.

Again I begged to know their means of hearing all
this;  but the Queen's entrance silenced us all.

Her  ^Majesty lent me a new little book,  just translated
from the German into French,  called  "  Le Nouvcau
Robinson."  I found it a very ingenious lesson of in-
dustry for young male readers.  'Tis an imitation,  with
improvements,  of our Robinson Crusoe.

While I was dressing I heard something in my next
room move  :  I opened the door of my bed-room,  to see
what it might be,  and who should I perceive but Ma-
dame la Roche at the window,  and Madame la Fitc
tossing over and examining my books  ! — One of them
slipped from her hands,  or they had been so gentle that
they would not have disturbed me.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         167

They besought me not to hurry myself,  but go on
just as if they were not there.  I was abeady hurrying
to be ready for the Queen,  and this visit was not so
timed as to compose me.  I made what apologies I
could,  and then returned to my bed-room.  Madame
la Fite,  however,  followed me ;  she said she came only
to request I would drink tea with her,  to meet some
German baron,  whose name I have forgotten,  who
belonged to Madame la Roche.

I made all the excuses I could suggest,  but none
were accepted.  She told me she would never make
such a petition to me again,  if I would but this last
time comply,  and that it was necessary to save her from
disgrace,  as she had written to him,  and promised him
this interview.  If he would but come to Windsor,  in-
stead of sending for Madame la Eoche to join him in
London,  she had promised him a meeting avec le grand
Herschel and Mile.  Bonii !

1 was less than ever inclined to go where I had been
so injudiciously,  so unduly offered,  and where I must
give as much disappointment to, the Earon as he could
embarrassment to me.  I retreated,  however,  in vain  :
she was inflexible in entreaty  ;  I was obliged to tell her
fairly that I had made a resolution never to begin any
accpaintance designedly,  or make any evening visit
beyond a mere call,  without first telling the Queen I
had such an intention.  I was very much vexed to be
forced to say to her things that opposed her own plans
too strongly for any chance of her concurrence ;  and she
was,  notwithstanding my being thus explicit,  so dis-
satisfied and so urgent,  that she compelled me to pro-
mise I would endeavour to mention her invitation,  and
accept it.

i had no opportunity for my forced acquiescence that

168 DIARY AND LKTTEliS  [Part V.

evening,  and dranlc lea quietly with Colonel Golds-
worthy,  General Bude,  and Miss Planta,  whom I in-
vited to stay with me.  But the next morning,  fearing to
quite hurt this poor Madame la Fite,  I ventured to her
house,  and breakfasted with her ;  and was introduced
to her baron,  and to two other gentlemen,  one of them
a son of Madame la Roche.  Much of civilities passed,
and I feel that I could really like  ^Madame la lloche,
were she less flattering;  which,  perhaps,  rather means
were she more so :  for much flattery given makes one
fear much is thought acceptable.

I have seen her no more;  she was going immediately
to town,  and thence soon back to the continent.  She
wept in parting with me,  as if we had been friends of
long standing  ! — If I w^re likely to see her often,  I
should be at some  ]}ains to try at discovering what is
sensitive from what is affected.  As it is,  she has left
me in such doubt of her real character,  I scarce know
whether I most should i)ity,  admirO;  or laugh.

In the evening the sweet little Princess Amelia came
to fetch Mrs.  Delany to the Queen,  and promised mc
she would then return to play with me :  she did,  and
her innocent facility to be pleased dchghted me ex-
tremely. Fondly as she is beloved,  and universally
indulged,  there is not the least difficulty in finding
entertainment for her.  Capt.  Phillips's beautiful little
strawberry fork is much in favour :  she asks for it
regularly when I see her,  and for something to eat with
it ;  but the play is so much more her object than the
food,  that a piece of dry bread,  or anything that will
but serve to show the fork has real prongs,  satisfies her
as well as fruit or sweetmeat.

I shall now give the rest of October without daily
dates,  though all from daily memorandums,  and try if

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  169

that will briiio^  me on a little faster :  for to be sure I
am terribly belated.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg came no more either to Windsor
or Kew :  she found her health better at the Queen's
house in town.

The Queen was unremittingly sweet and gracious,
never making me sensible of any insufficiency from my
single attendance;  which,  to me,  was an opportunity
the most favourable in the world for becoming more
intimately acquainted with her mind and understand-
ing. For the excellency of her mind I was fully pre-
pared ;  the testimony of the nation at large could not
be unfaithful  ;  but the depth and soundness of her un-
derstanding surprised me  :  good sense I expected  ;  to
that alone she could owe the even tenor of her conduct,
universally approved,  though examined and judged by
the watchful eye of multitudes.  But I had not im-
agined that,  shut up in the confined limits of a court,
she could have acquired any but the most superficial
knowledge of the world,  and the most partial insight
into character.  But I find,  now^  I have only done
justice to her disposition,  not to her parts,  which are
truly of that superior order that makes sagacity in-
tuitively supply the place of experience.  In the course
of this month I spent much time quite alone with her,
and never once quitted her presence without fresh ad-
miration of her talents.

There are few points I have observed with more
pleasure in her than all that concerns the office which
brings me to her in this private and confidential manner.
All that breaks from her,  in our tete-a-tetes,  upon the
subject of dress,  is both edifying and amiable.  She
equips herself for the drawing-room with all the atten-
tion in her power;    she neglects nothing that she

170 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

thinks becoming to her appearance upon those occa-
sions, and is sensibly conscious that her high station
makes her attire in pubhc a matter of business.  As
such,  she submits to it without murmuring ;  but a yet
stronger consciousness of the real futility of such mere
outward grandeur bursts from her,  involuntarily,  the
moment the sacrifice is paid,  and she can never refuse
herself the satisfaction of expressing her contentment
to put on a quiet undress.  The great coats arc so
highly in her favour,  from the quickness with which
they enable her to finish her toilette,  that she sings
their praise with fresh warmth every time she is
allowed to wear them,  archly saying to me,  with most
expressive eyes,  "  If I could Vvrite — if I could but write I
— how I would compose upon a great coat !  I wish I
were a poetess,  that I might make a song u]}on it —
I do think something very pretty might be said about
it."

These hints she has given me continually ;  but the
Muse was not so kind as ever to make me think of the
matter again when out of her sight — till,  at last,  she one
day,  in putting on this favourite dress,  half gravely,
said,  "  I really take it a little ill you won't write some-
thing upon these great coats  !"

I only laughed,  yet,  when I left her,  I scribbled a
few stanzas,  copied them very fairly,  and took them,  as
soon as they were finished,  into her room ;  and there
kept them safely in my pocket-book,  for I knew not
how to produce them,  and she,  by odd accident,  forbore
from that time to ask for them,  though her repeated
suggestion had,  at last,  conquered my literary indo-
lence.

I cannot here help mentioning a very interesting
little scene at which I was present,  about this time.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA 171

The Queen had nobody but myself with her,  one morn-
ing, when the King hastily entered the room,  with
some letters in his hand,  and addressing her in German,
which he spoke very fast,  and with much apparent
interest in what he said,  he brought the letters up to
her,  and put them into her hand.  She received them
with much agitation,  but evidently of a much pleased
sort,  and endeavoured to kiss his hand as he held them.
He would not let her^  but made an effort,  with a coun-
tenance of the highest satisfaction,  to kiss hers.  I saw
instantly in her eyes a forgetfulness,  at the moment,
that any one was present,  while,  drawing away her
hand,  she presented him her cheek.  He accepted her
kindness with the same frank affection that she offered
it ;  and the next moment they both spoke English,  and
talked upon common and general subjects.

What they said I am far enough from knowing ;  but
the whole was too rapid to give me time to quit the
room;  and I could not but see with pleasure that the
Queen had received some favour with which she was
sensibly delighted,  and that the King,  in her acknow-
ledgments, was happily and amply paid.

#  ♦         *         *         *         *         '1:

No sooner did I find that my coadjutrix ceased to
speak of returning to Windsor,  and that I became,  by
that means,  the presidentess of the dinner and tea table,
than I formed a grand design — no other than to obtain
to my own use the disposal of my evenings.

From the time of my entrance into this court,  to
that of which I am writing,  I had never been informed
that it was incumbent upon me to receive the King's
equerries at the tea-table ;  yet I observed that they
always came to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and that she ex-
pected them so entirely as never to make tea till their

172 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

arrival.  Ncvcrtliclcss,  nothing of that sort Imd ever
been intimated to mc,  and I saw no necessity of falhng
into all her ways,  without commands to that purpose  :
nor could 1 conclude that the Kinji's frentlemen would
expect from mc either the same confinement,  or readi-
ness of reception,  as had belonged to two invalid old
ladies,  glad of company,  and without a single connec-
tion to draw them from home.

The first week,  however,  of my presidency,  my dear

JNIrs.  Delany,  with Miss P ,  came to dine and spend

the rest of the day with me regularly ;  and though
Mrs.  Delany was generally called away to the royal
apartments,  her niece always remained with me.
This not only obviated all objections to the company of
the equerries,  but kept me at home naturally,  and for
my own society and visitors.

I could not,  however,  but be struck with a circum-
stance that shewed me,  in a rather singular manner,
my tea-making seemed at once to be regarded as in-
dispensable :  this was no other than a constant sum-
mons, which John regularly brought me every evening,
from these gentlemen,  to acquaint me they were come
upstairs to the tea-room,  and waiting for me.

I determined not to notice this :  and consequently,
the first time Mrs.  Delany was not well enough to give
me her valuable society at the Lodge,  I went to her
house,  and spent the evening there  ;  without sending
any message to the equerries,  as any apology must
imply a right on their part that must involve me in
future continement.

This I did three or four times,  always with so much
success as to gain my point for the moment,  but never
Avith such happy consequences as to ensure it me for
the time to come ;  since every next meeting shewed an

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        173

air of pique,  and since every evening had still,  unre-
mittingly, the same message for John.

I concluded this would wear away by use,  and there-
fore resolved to 2;ive it that chance.  One evening,
however,  when,  being quite alone,  I was going to my
loved resource,  John,  ere I could get out,  hurried to
me,  "  Ma'am,  the gentlemen are come up,  and they
send their compliments,  and they wait tea for you."

"  Very well,"  was my answer to this rather cavalier
summons,  which I did not wholly admire ;  and I put
on my hat and cloak,  when I was called to the Queen.
She asked me whether I thought Mrs.  Delany could
come to her,  as she wished to see her?  I offered to go
instantly,  and inquire,

"  But don't tell her I sent you,"  cried the most con-
siderate Queen,  "  lest that should make her come when
it may hurt her  :  find out how she is,  before you men-
tion me."

I promised implicit obedience ;  and she most graci-
ously called after me,

''  Will it hurt you.  Miss Burney,  to go — is it a fine
evening  ?"

I assured her it was.

"  Well,  put on your clogs,  then,  and take care,"  was
her kind injunction.

As I now knew I must return myself,  at any rate,  I
slipped into the tea-room before I set off.  I found there
Colonel Goldsworthy,    looking quite glum.    General

Bude,  Mr.   Fisher,   Mr. Fisher,  his brother,  and

Mr.  Blomberg,  chaplain to the Prince of Wales.

The moment I opened the door.  General Bude pre-
sented Mr.  Blomberg to me,  and Mr.  Fisher his bro-
ther ;  I told them,  hastily,  that I was running away to
Mrs.  Delany,  but meant to return in a quarter of an

174 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

hour,  when I should be happy to hiive their company,
if they could wait so long  ;  hut if they were hurried,
my man should bring their tea.

They all turned to Colonel Goldsworthy,  who,  as
equerry in waiting,  Avas considered as head of the
party;  but he seemed so choked with surprise and
displeasure,  that he could only mutter something too
indistinct to be heard,  and bowed low and distantly.

'^  If Colonel Goldsworthy can command his time,
ma'am,"  cried Mr.  Fisher,  "  we shall be most happy to
wait yours."

General Bude said the same :  the Colonel a^rain
silently and solemnly bowed,  and I curtsied in the same
manner,  and hurried away.

Mrs.  Delany was not well ;  and I would not vex her
with the Queen's kind wish for her.  I returned,  and
sent in,  by the page in waiting,  my account :  for the
Queen was in the concert-room,  and I could not go to
her.

Neither would I seduce away Miss P from her

duty ;  I came back,  therefore,  alone,  and was fain to
make my part as good as I was able among my beaus.

I found them all waiting.  Colonel Goldsworthy re-
ceived mc with the same stately bow,  and a look so
glum and disconcerted,  that I instantly turned from
him to meet the soft countenance of the good Mr.
Fisher,  who took a chair next mine,  and entered into
conversation with his usual intelligence and mildness.
General Bude was chatty and w^ll bred,  and the two
strangers wholly silent.

I could not,  however,  but see that Colonel Golds-
worthy orew less and less pleased.  Yet what had I
done? — I had never been commanded to devote my
evenings to him,  and,  if excused officially,  surely theer

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  175

could be no private claim from either his situation or
mine.  His displeasure therefore appeared to me so
unjust,  that I resolved to take not the smallest notice
of it.  He never once opened his mouth,  neither to me
nor to any one else.  In this strange manner we drank
our tea.  When it was over,  he still sat dumb  ;  and
still I conversed with Mr.  Fisher and General Bude.

At length a prodigious hemming showed a prepara
tion in the Colonel for a speech :  it came forth with
great difficulty,  and most considerable hesitation.

*'  I am afraid,  ma'am, — I am afraid you — you — that
is — that we are intruders upon you."

"  N — o,"  answered I,  faintly,  "  why so  ?"

*•  I am sure,  ma'am,  if we are — if you think — if we
take too much liberty — I am sure I would not for the
world  ! — I only — your commands — nothing else — "

"  Sir  !"  cried I,  not understanding a word.

''  I see,  ma'am,  we only intrude upon you  :  however,
you must excuse my just saying we would not for the
world have taken such a liberty,  though very sensible
of the happiness of being allowed to come in for half
an hour, — which is the best half-hour of the whole day ;
but yet,  if it was not for your own commands — "

"  What commands,  sir  ?"

He grew still more perplexed,  and made at least a
dozen speeches to the same no purpose,  before I could
draw from him any thing explicit ;  all of them listen-
ing silently the whole time,  and myself invariably
staring.  At last,  a few words escaped him more intel-
ligible.

"Your messages,  ma'am,  were what encouraged us
to come."

'*  And pray,  sir,  do tell me what messages'^ — 1 am
very happy to see you,  but I never sent any messages
at all!"

176- '"  DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

"  Indeed,  ma'am  !"  cried he,  staring in his turn  ;  "why
your sorvant,  little John there,  came rappini^  at our
door,  at the equerry room,  l)efore we had well swallowed
our dinner,  and said,  *'  My lady is waiting tea,  sir."

I was quite confounded.  I assured him it was an
entire fabrication of my servant's,  as I had never sent,
nor even thought of sending him,  for I was going
out.

*^'Why to own the truth,  ma'am,"  cried he,  brighten-
ing up,  ''I did really think it a little odd to send for
us in that hurry, — for we got up directly from table,
and said,  if the lady is waiting,  to be sure we must not
keep her;  and then — when we came — to just peep in,
and say you were going out !"

How intolerable an impertinence in John ! — it was
really no wonder the poor Colonel was so glum.

Again I repeated my ignorance of this step  ;  and he
then said  "Why,  ma'am,  becomes to us regularly every
afternoon,  and says his lady is waiting  ;  and we are very
glad to come,  poor souls that we are,  with no rest all
the livelong day but what we get in this good room  !
— but then — to come,  and see ourselves only intruders
— and to find you going out,  after sending for us !"

I could scarce fmd words to express my amazement
at this communication.  I cleared myself instantly from
having any the smallest knowledge of John's proceed-
ings, and Colonel Goldsworthy soon recovered all his
spirits and good humour,  when he was satisfied he had
not designedly been treated with such strange and
unmeaning inconsistency.  He rejoiced exceedingly that
he had spoke out,  and I thanked him for his frankness,
and the evening concluded very amicably.

j\Iy dearest friends will easily conceive how vexed
I must feel myself with my foolish servant,  for taking

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         177

SO great a liberty in my name ;  and liovv provoked
to have had these gentlemen,  and all others that liad
occasionally dined at their table,  persuaded that I sent
them so pressing a call,  for the mere impertinent ca-
price of running away from them after they obeyed it.

Colonel Goldsworthy had been quite seriously af-
fronted with me ;  General Bude is of a disposition too
placid and unconcerned for pique,  and had therefore
taken the matter very quietly  ;  but Mr.  Fisher,  as he
has since owned to me,  suspected some mistake the
whole time,  and never believed I had sent them any
such message.  It was owing to his interference,  and
at his earnest request,  that the Colonel had been pre-
vailed upon to state the case to me.

As I have the greatest aversion to seeing servants
exposed or reprimanded before witnesses,  I would not
summon John till I could speak to him alone.  I then
desired him to explain to me the reason of carrying
messages never given to him.  At first he positively
denied the fact ;  but when I assured him my intelli-
gence came from Colonel Goldsworthy himself,  he only
said  "  Law,  ma'am,  I'm sure I did not do it for any
harm  !  I did not know as I did any thing wrong ;"  nor
could I get any further satisfaction from him.  I can
only conclude that he acted from officious folly,  simply
fancying he added to his own importance,  by carrying
messages from one party to the other.  His want of
truth,  indeed,  is a mischief beyond folly,  and made me
see him quite unfit for the place I had given him.

The evening after,  I invited Miss P ,  determined

to spend it entirely with my beaus,  in order to wholly
explain away this impertinence.  Colonel Goldsworthy
now made me a thousand apologies for having named
the matter to me at all.  I assured him I was extremely

VOL.    III.  N

178 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

glad he had afforded me an opportunity of clearing it.
In the course of the discussion,  I mentioned the con-
stant summons brought me by John every afternoon.
He Hfted up his hands and eyes,  and protested most
solemnly he had never sent a single one.

"  I vow,  ma'am,"  cried the Colonel,  ''  I would not
have taken such a liberty on any account;  though all
the comfort of my life,  in this house,  is one half-hour
in a day spent in this room.  After all one's labours,
riding,  and walking,  and standing,  and bowing — what
a life it is  ?  Well  !  it's honour  !  that's one comfort ;  it's
all honour  !  royal honour ! — one has the honour to
stand till one has not a foot left;  and to ride till one's
stiff,  and to walk till one's ready to drop, — and then
one makes one's lowest bow,  d'ye see,  and blesses one's
self with joy for the honour!"

This is his style of rattle,  when perfectly at his ease,
pleased with every individual in his company,  and
completely in good humour.  But the moment he sees
any one that he fears or dislikes,  he assumes a look of
glum distance and sullenness,  and will not utter a
word,  scarcely even in answer.  He is warmly and
faithfully attached to the King and all the Royal
Family,  yet his favourite theme,  in his very best moods,
is complaint of his attendance,  and murmuring at all
its ceremonials.  This,  however,  is merely for sport
and oddity,  for he is a man of fortune,  and would cer-
tainly relinquish his post if it were not to his taste.

His account of his own hardships and sufferings
here,  in the discharge of his duty,  is truly comic.  '^How
do you like it,  ma'am  ?"  he says to me,  "though it's hardly-
fair to ask you yet,  because you know almost nothing
of the joys of this sort of life.  But wait till November
and December,  and then youll get a pretty taste of

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        179

tliem !  Running along in these cold passages ;  then
bursting into rooms fit to bake you ;  then back again
into all these agreeable puffs ! — Bless us !  I believe in my
heart there's wind enough in these passages to carry a
man of war !  And there you'll have your share^  ma'am,
I promise you that !  you'll get knocked up in three
days,  take my word for that."

I begged him not to prognosticate so much evil for
me.

''O ma'am,  there's no help for it !"  cried he  ;  "you
won't have the hunting,  to be sure,  nor amusing your-
self with wading a foot and a-half through the dirt,  by
way of a little pleasant walk,  as we poor equerries do  !
It's a wonder tome we outlive the first month.  But the
agreeable puffs of the passages you will have just as
completely as any of us.  Let's see,  how many blasts
must you have every time you go to the Queen  ?  First,
one upon your opening your door;  then another,  as
you get down the three steps from it,  which are exposed
to the wind from the garden door downstairs ;  then a
third,  as you turn the corner to enter the passage ;
then you come plump upon another from the hall door;
then comes another,  fit to knock you down,  as you turn
to the upper passage ;  then,  just as you turn towards
the Queen's room,  comes another ;  and last,  a whiff from
the King's stairs,  enough to blow you half a mile off!"

''  Mere healthy breezes,"  I cried,  and assured him I
did not fear them.

"  Stay till Christmas,"  cried he,  with a threatening
air,  "  only stay till then,  and let's see what you'll say to
them ;  you'll be laid up as sure as fate  !  you may take
my word for that.  One thing,  however,  pray let me
caution you about — don't go to early prayers in Novem-
ber ;   if you do,  that will completely kill you !    Oh

n2

180 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

ma'am,  you know nothing yet of all tliesc matters  ! — ■
only pray,  joking apart,  let me have the honour just to
advise you this one thing,  or else it's all over with you,
I do assure you  !"

It was in vain I begged him to be more merciful in
his prophecies;  he failed not,  every night,  to administer
to me the same pleasant anticipations.

**  When the Princesses,"  cried he,  '^  used to it as
they are,  get regularly knocked up before this business
is over,  off they drop,  one by one : — first the Queen
deserts us;  then Princess Elizabeth is done for;
then Princess Koyal begins coughing;  then Princess
Augusta gets the snuffles;  and all the poor attendants,
my poor sister at their head,  drop off*,  one after another,
like so many snuffs of candles :  till at last,  dwindle,
dwindle,  dwindle — not a soul goes to the chapel but
the King,  the parson,  and myself;  and there we three
freeze it out together  !"

One evening,  when he had been out very late hunt-
ing with the King,  he assumed so doleftd an air of

weariness,  that had not Miss P exerted her utmost

powers to revive him,  he would not have uttered a
word the whole night ;  but when once brought forward,
he gave us more entertainment than ever,  by relating
his hardships.

^'  After all the labours,"  cried he,  "  of the chase,  all
the riding,  the trotting,  the galloping,  the leaping,  the
— with your favour,  ladies,  I beg pardon,  I was going
to say a strange word,  but the — the perspiration, — and
— and all that — after being wet through over head,  and
soused through under feet,  and popped into ditches,
and jerked over gates,  what lives we do lead!  Well,
it's all honour  !  that's my only comfort I Well,  after
all this,  fagging away like mad from eight in the morn-

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        181

ing to live or six in the afternoon,  home we come,  look-
ing like so many drowned rats,  with not a dry thread
about us,  nor a morsel within us — sore to the very bone,
and forced to smile all the time  !  and then after all
this what do you think follows  ?  —  '  Here,  Golds-
worthy/  cries his Majesty :  so up I comes to him,
bowing profoundly,  and my hair dripping down to my
shoes  ;  '  Goldsworthy,'  cries his Majesty.  '  Sir,'  says 1,
smiling agreeably,  with the rheumatism just creeping
all over me !  but still,  expecting something a little
comfortable,  I wait patiently to know his gracious plea-
sure, and then,  '  Here,  Goldsworth}-,  I say !'  he cries,
*  will you have a little barley water?'  Barley water in
such a plight as that !  Fine compensation for a wet
jacket,  truly  ! — barley water  !  I never heard of such a
thing in my life  !  barley water after a whole day's hard
hunting!"

"  And pray did you drink it  ?"

'•'  I drink it  ? — Drink barley water  ?  no,  no ;  not come
to that neither  !  But there it was,  sure enough  ! — in a
jug fit for a sickroom;  just such a thing as you put
upon a hob in a chimney,  for some poor miserable soul
that keeps his bed  !  just such a thing as that! — And,
'Here,  Goldsworthy,'  says his Majesty,  'here's^tlie
barley water  !'  "

'^  And did the King drink it himself?"

''  Yes,  God bless his Majesty  !  but I was too humble
a subject to do the same as the King ! — Barley water,
quoth I  ! — Ha  !  ha  ! — a fine treat truly  ! — Heaven
defend me  !  I'm not come to that,  neither !  bad enough
too,  but not so bad as that."

This sort of sport and humour,  however,  which,  when
uttered by himself,  is extremely diverting,  all ceases
wholly if the smallest thing happens to disconcert him.

182 DIARY AND LETTERS  [P.VKT V.

The entrance of any person unexpected by him was
always sufficient not merely to silence,  but obviously
to displease him.  If Madame de la Fite came,  his
mouth was closed,  and his brows were knit,  and he
looked as if even ill used by her entrance.

I have now to mention an affair — a secret one —
which relates to Mrs,  Delany.  That dear and very ex-
traordinary lady,  in our long and many meetings,  has
communicated to me almost all the transactions of her
life,  and as nearly as she can remember them,  almost
all the thoughts.  The purity and excellence of her
character have risen upon me in every circumstance
and in every sentiment that has come to my know-
ledge; but the confidence most delightful that she has
placed in me has been of her transactions with her
darling friend,  the late Duchess of Portland.  That
friend,  some years ago,  had prevailed with Mrs.  De-
lany, by her earnest entreaties,  to write down the
principal events of her life.  This she did in the form
of letters,  and wdth feigned names :  these letters,
invaluable both from their contents and their writer.
Lady Weymouth,  upon her mother's death,  most ho-
nourably restored to Mrs.  Delany.  She has permitted
me to see them,  and to read them to her.

In reading them to her,  she opened upon several
circumstances which were omitted,  or slightly men-
tioned ;  and related so many interesting anecdotes
belonging to the times,  which,  being known already to
the Duchess,  she had not inserted,  that I proposed
filling up the chasms,  and linking the whole together.
She was pleased with the thought,  and accordingly we
began.  I have commenced from the earliest time to
which her incomparable memory reaches,  and,  if her
health permits our meeting for this purpose,  I shall

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  183

complete,  with the help of these letters,  a history of
her whole life.  Its early part was entirely left out,  and
its latter,  of course,  had never been related.

All the time,  therefore,  that we were able to pass by
ourselves was regularly appropriated to this new work.
We have not advanced very far,  for our interruptions
are almost continual ;  but I hope,  nevertheless,  we shall
not conclude till the design is completed.

The first night that we began this business,  when all
the letters,  and sundry papers relative to them,  were
spread upon the table,  the King entered my room  !
Dear Mrs.  Delanywas quite frightened,  and I felt my-
self pretty hot in the cheeks.  He immediately asked
what we were about  ?  Neither of us answered.  ''  Sort-
ing letters  ?"  cried he,  tome.  ''Reading some.  Sir,"
quotii I.  And there the matter dropped for that time :  but
not long after he surprised us again.  We were then
prepared with a double employment,  and therefore had
one ready for avowal.  This was,  selecting and exa-
mining letters from eminent persons,  or from chosen
friends,  and burning all that contained anything of a
private nature,  and preserving only such as were in-
genious, without possible hazard to the writers or their
family.

This has been a pleasant,  painful task — pleasant
from the many admirable letters it gave me opportunity
to read,  andpainful from the melancholy retrospections
they occasioned dearest Mrs.  Delany.

The King,  from this time,  grew used to expecting
to find us encircled with papers when he came into my
room for this highly,  justly favoured lady  (which was
almost every evening that we spent at Windsor dur-
ing this month),  and only said — "  Well,  who are you
reading now  ?"

184 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

I went through Swift's letters to her,  Dr.  Young's,
jind Mr.  Mason's ;  and destroyed all that could not be
saved every way to their honour.  And we proceeded
n the memoirs pretty well through the infantine part.
'Twas a sweet occupation for our private hours,  and I
would not have exchanged it for any that could have
been offered me.

About this time,  the Queen one day,  taking up a
book,  said,  "Now don't answer Avhat I am going to
ask if you have any objection to it. — This book^  I have
been told,  contains the character of Mrs.  Montagu  ?"

It was the  "  Observer  ;"  I could not deny it;  and she
opened at the account of Vanessa,  and read it out to
me,  stopping upon every new name,  for a key from me.
I could give it to but very few — Mrs.  Wright,  the wax
modeller.  Dr.  Johnson,  and I have forgot what others  ;
but when she came to a complimentary passage of a
young lady icith an Arcadian air,  to whom Vanessa says,
"  My dear,  I am in your third volume,""  she looked
towards me,  with an archness that did not make me
feel very pale,  as she added,  "  Who is meant by that?"
I truly answered I knew not.

How infinitely severe a criticism is this Vanessa upon
Mrs.  Montagu  !  Do you remember hearing Mr.  Cam-
bridge read it at Twickenham?  I think it a very in-
jurious attack in Mr.  Cumberland;  for whatever may
be Mrs.  Montagu's foibles,  she is free,  I believe,  from
all vice,  and as a member of society she is magnificently
useful.  This,  and much more to this purpose,  I in-
stantly said to her Majesty,  defending her,  as well as 1
was able,  from this illiberal assault.  The Queen was
very ready to liear me,  and to concur in thinking suck

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         185

usage very cruel.  She told me that the character of
Hume was also given under another fictitious name,
and of Lord George Sackville ;  and asked me if I
wished to read the work.  The book was the Princess
Royal's,  but she would borrow it for me.

I could not but accept such graciousness ;  and I have
consequently read over the three volumes.  I am heartily
averse to any work,  of any species,  that contains such
hard personalities ;  and I think the  "Observer,"  besides,
little more than a compilation from some classic scholar s
commonplace book  :  for all that is not personal is cri-
ticism on Greek authors and customs.

Miss Burncy to Dr.  Burney.

Queen's House,  October IGtb,  17S6.

1 have now,  dearest Sir,  an adventure for you that
if it serves you as it served me,  will make you start in-
deed, and  "  each particular hair to stand on end  !"

Yesterday evening my dear Mrs.  Delany was sitting
with me in my own room,  when,  for the first time,  the
Princess EHzabeth entered it.  She told me that the
Queen desired to speak to me.  I instantly obeyed the
summons,  and found Her Majesty with only Mr.  Bolton,
who teaches the Princesses geography ;  she was study-
ing with him herself,  as he stood before her with a book
in his hand.  The Princesses have no masters,  except the
maitre de danse,  from whom she does not occasionally
receive instructions — so indefatigable and so humble is
her love of knowledge.

Well — she looked up very smilingly,  and said she
believed I had something she wished for,  and which
she doubted not I would let her have.      You mav

1S6 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

imagine my answer ;  but how was I struck,  and thun-
der-struck, when she said it was your  "  German Tour !"

0  !  all those  "  hundcrt tausend sacrements  /"  How
did I start !  I felt all within hubble bubble round me,
as if whirled by a wheel.  I made no answer — I could
not get out a word.

A little surprised at this backwardness about a matter
which I saw was expected to give me pleasure,  she
added — "  My set is at Kew  ;  but I wish to lend it Eli-
zabeth :  I think it w ill amuse her ;  and I should like
she should read it."

This a little revived me.  I had fancied it was to look
for some passage herself,  and immediately concluded it
must be that upon German Genius ! — and then,  thought
I,  ^tis all over with us for ever I

1 now hesitated out that I was not sure if I had it at
Windsor ;  and that I had only been in possession of it
since my last going to town,  when you had been so
kind as to bring me a set.  I added not a word of the
'perche !

Still,  I am sure,  surprised at this unwillingness,  she
said that  "  the greatest care should be taken of it,  and
she w^ould answer for no injury coming to it if I would
lend it."

Quite ashamed of this misapprehension of my reluc-
tance, I said I would go and see if I had brought it to
Windsor or not;  and away I ran.

It then occurred to me that it would be best to take
this opportunity to mention your j^^ntimento fairly and
openly,  and your intention,  upon a future edition,  to
correct some of the severities which you regretted.  I
therefore took back the book— out of breath,  both with
fear and consciousness.

She looked much pleased at seeing me return wdth

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        187

it.  I immediately proposed sending it to the Princess,
who I was sure would not read it with half the attention
to its national strokes that her royal mother would;
but she held out her hand to take it from me.

I was all in a quiver,  but gathered courage now to
say  "  Ma'am,  this is a set my father was preparing for
some amendment ;  as he wrote in haste,  and with the
very recent impression of much personal suffering and
ill-usage on his journey;  and therefore he now thinks
he was led to some rash declarations and opinions,
which he is earnest to correct."

I was ready to clap myself for this speech the moment
I had got it out.

She smiled with much approbation of the design,
and said most good-humouredly,  "  Indeed it is but true
that the travelling in Germany is very bad and pro-
voking."

How I longed to kiss her hand  !

She then opened at Frankfort,  and read about the
street-musicians aloud,  and was going on in a tone of
l^leasure,  when — the King entered I Not to interrupt
the Queen,  he spoke to me:  "What are you about? —
What have you got there  ?"

I was now in a worse twitter than ever.  I hemmed
and hawed — but the Queen stopped reading,  and an-
swered, "'Tis her fathers tour;  I wish Elizabeth to
read it,  and my set is at Kew."

*•  O,"  cried he,  "  mine is here."

Ah,  ah  !  my dearest daddy  !  here was some comfort
at least.  I found my holding back the book,  which
my surprise made impossible,  would have answered no
purpose,  since it was so near at hand.

He sat down and took up a volume.

1S8 DIARY AND lettp:rs  [Part V.

I now,  in the best way I could,  forced out a repeti-
tion of the same speech I made before.

He opened at the beginning-,  and read out  "  From
the Author/'  with a laughing face,  and turning to look
at me.     I laughed too — a little  !

The Queen,  turning over to another place,  said
*'  Here are marks with a pencil !"

'•Yes,  ma'am,"  cried I,  in a horrid hurry,  "those
arc only of places to be altered — but my father would
be very sorry your Majesty should look at what he
gives up himself!"

She felt this,  and turned from the paragraph.

The King,  looking very wickedly droll indeed,  and
eyeing me to see how I took it,  turned over his volume
•with great rapidity,  calling out  ''  Why,  I can't find a
mark  ! — where are they all?"

"The marked places,  Sir,"  said I,  "  are just what "

"  I would not have you find,"  I meant — but,  though I
stopped,  I saw he understood me;  for he laughed very
cx^jressively,  and still watching me,  looked on,  and I
expected every minute he would meet with that terrible
sentence.

At last his eye was caught by  "  Guadagni,"  and he
stopped and read a word or two of his being hissed olF
the stage,  and then proceeded,  to himself,  through the
rest of the paragraph,  finishing with calling out aloud
**  Very true indeed! — and very just!  He says an
actor or a singer are the only people never allowed to
have a cold or tooth-ache.  But pray,"  cried he,  again
laughing,  "  what does your father send you this set
for  ? — to give your opinion of his alterations  ?"

I was as hot as fire at this question.

"  To see.  Sir,  what places he meant to alter."

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         189

''  She used to copy for her father/'  said the Queen;
"  indeed I think her father has a great loss of her."
Was not that sweet  ? — Pray,  dear Sir,  say yes  !
"' And who copies for him now?"  cried the King.
"  I don't know.  Sir."
"  Have not you any sister left behind  ?'*
"Yes,  Sir,  one — but she has been so much of her
time abroad that she forgot her English,  and has not
yet recovered it sufficiently for such an employment."
"  What does he do then  ?"
''  I fancy he copies for liimself !"
*'  Suppose he should send any to you here  ?"
"  I — I should endeavour to find time to copy it."
Here there was an interruption,  and in a few minutes
they both went to the concert-room :   the Queen assu-
ring me,  in parting,  that the Princess should take the
utmost care of the books.     Since then nothing more
has passed,  but that the books were sent to the Lower
Lodge,  where the Princess lives.     And happy was I
when 1 heard they were so far removed  !     Was it not
a most difficult transaction  ?    I am glad,  however,  I had
this set,  since else the King would have given his,  with-
out the marks or any signs of contrition or intended
amendment.     As soon as it is all over and returned
I will certainly write again.

Diary Resumed.

I have written my father an account of the Queen's
borrowing his  "  German Tour  "  for the Princess Eliza-
beth, and of my panic at placing the books in Her
Majesty's hands,  though I was in hopes they would be
sent to the Princess without further examination.

l^^O DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

And so I believe they were,  as I never heard them
mentioned any more ;  but a most ridiculous mistake
followed,  from the marks made by my dear father :  the

Princess Elizabeth told Miss P she was iroins:  to

read Dr.  Burney's German Tour;  *' And I am quite
delighted,"  she added,  "  that I have Miss Burney's set,
with all the marks of her favourite passages  !"

I was now doubly shocked ;  first for my father,  that
he should be thought so prejudiced a writer,  and
secondly for myself,  that his hardest reflections should
seem what were most pleasing to me.  I had an oppor-
tunity, however,  afterwards,  of explaining this matter
to Her Royal Highness,  who was highly diverted w^ith
her own conclusions,  and my consternation upon them.
I made at the same time an apology for my dear father,
which she accepted very sweetly ;  and I entreated her
to forbear pointing out the parts she had imagined I
preferred.  She laughed,  but I am sure she will re-
member my request.

*  -i=  *  *  -1;  *

I must now tell a little thing for my dear Fredy,  for
'tis about a flower;  though my Susan will equally feel
how much more grateful it w-as to me than the fine robe
sent by other hands.

The Queen received one morning from Stoke some
of the most beautiful double violets I ever saw ;  they
were with other flowers,  very fine,  but too powerful for
her,  and she desired me to carry them into another
room :  but,  stopping me as I was going,  she took out
three little bunches of the violets,  and said  "  This you
shall send to JNIrs.  Delany ;  this I will keep ;  and this
— take for yourself."

I quite longed to tell her how^  much more I valued

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        191

such a gift,  presented by her own hand,  than the richest
tabby in the world by a deputy !  She knows,  however,
that,  be the intrinsic worth small as it may,  the honour
of any thing that comes immediately from herself is
always great :  she does such things,  therefore,  charily,
and always in a manner that marks them for little traits
of favour.

I have mentioned to you,  I think,  the eldest Miss
Clayton. — I believe,  indeed,  my dearest Susanna saw
her at the tea- drinking when at Windsor.  She left this
place in this month,  to prepare for changing her name
as well as dwelling,  and to bestow herself upon Colonel
Fox,  brother to the famous Charles.  She called upon
me the last morning of her stay,  with her sister.  Miss
Emily.  She seemed very happy,  and she seems,  also,
so amiable,  that she had my best wishes for continuing
so.  She had just been receiving little parting tokens
from the Queen and the Princesses,  with whom she was
in such favour that Her Majesty had permitted her to
take lessons of drawing at the Lodge,  at the same time
with their Royal Highnesses.  The Queen had given
her a pincushion in a gold case ;  the Princess Royal a
belt of fine steel;  and the Princess Augusta an ivory
tooth-pick case,  inlaid with gold.  She is really a loss
to Windsor,  where there are not many young women
of equal merit and modesty.

The Duke of Montagu came for some days to Wind-
sor, and always took his tea with us.  He is Governor
of Windsor Castle,  in which he has apartments ;  but he
comes to them only as a visitor,  for he cannot reside
here without a degree of royal attendance for which he
is growing now rather unable.     Long standing and

192 DIARY AND LETTERS        [PaRT V.

long  ^vaiting•  will not,  after a certain time of life,  agree
either with the strength or the spirits.  He spealcs to
me always much of Mr.  Cambridge,  whom he has a
most neighbourly regard for.

One evening poor Madame la Fite,  even from Colonel
Goldsworthy,  brought forth much entertainment.    The

party at that time consisted of herself and Miss P ,

the Colonel,  the General,  Mr.  Fisher,  and Mr.  Blom-
berg — a Chaplain to the Prince of Wales,  whom I
believe I have named before.  A general silence was
just threatening us,  when Madame la Fite suddenly,
in her broken English,  exclaimed she had been having
a great dispute whether Mrs.  Delany was born in this
century or the last.  The Colonel,  surprised out of his
glumness,  called out  "  In the last century,  ma'am ! —
W'hat do you mean by that?  Would you make the
good old lady out to be two hundred years old  ?"

She explained herself so extremely ill,  that not a
creature was brought over to her opinion,  though it was
afterwards proved that she was right,  and that the
year 1700,  in which Mrs.  Delany was born,  belonged
to the last century.

Mr.  Fisher and Mr.  Blomberg both said that the year
]  700 must be the first of the  ])resent century.  Madame
la Fite declared she had made it clearly belong to the
last,  and that Mr.  Turbulent was as well convinced of
it as herself.

'^  1700 belong to 1600!"  cried the Colonel indig-
nantly—  "why then I suppose Friday belongs to Thurs-
day, and Wednesday to Tuesday  !  Bless us !  here's
such a set of new doctrines,  a man won't know soon
whether he's alive now or was alive the last age  !"

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        193

Madame la Fife now attempted a fuller explana-
tion, but was so confused in her terms,  and so much at
a loss for words,  that,  though perfectly right,  the
Colonel looked at her as if he thought her half mad.

"  O dear,  yes,  ma'am !  yes,"  cried he,  bowing with
mock submission,  "  I dare say it's all very right !  only
it's a little new— that's all!— 1700 makes 1600!— O,
vastly right !     A little like Mr.  Kust !"

"  No,  Sir :  give me leave only just to say "

"  O,  no,  ma'am 1"  cried he,  turning away in haste,
*'  I don't understand an\nhing of these matters  ! —
they're too deep for me  ! — I know nothing about them."

*'  Mais,  monsieur — Sir — if you will give me leave —
si monsieur veut bien me i^ermettre — "

"O,  no,  ma'am,  don't trouble yourself!  I am not
worth the pains ;  I am quite in the dark in these things.
I was franking a parcel of letters yesterday,  and 1
thought I franked them all for this year ;  but I suppose
now I franked them all in the last century I"

******

I met Princess Elizabeth coming into the Lodge,
with Miss Goldsworthy,  on the morning of her de-
parture for Kew ;  and she seemed so little happy in
the journey,  so extremely delicate in her constitution,
and so sweet and patient in submitting to her des-
tiny, that I was quite affected by her sight.  She per-
ceived me at some distance,  in the gallery,  and turned
back to speak to me,  and receive my good wishes for
the effect of the change of air.

******

The Kew visits,  which took place from Tuesday to
Friday in every other week,  grew now less irksome to
me.     I could not but be pleased at journeys that united

VOL.  III.  0

194 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

the sick and the well of an affectionate family,  and I
conquered by degrees— or at least lessened — the sad-
ness of recollection that at first embittered my meetings
with Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt.  Mrs.  Delany,  also,  in one
of these excursions,  spent the three days at their house  ;
and I had the pleasure of drinking tea with them all
on her arrival.

During our tea the King himself suddenly arrived :
we all rose,  and stood,  according to royal etiquette,  as
much aloof from him and from one another as the
room permitted,  so as to leave all the space possible
for His Majesty,  who moved from Mrs.  Delany to
Mr.  Smelt almost every other speech.  He was in ex-
cellent spirits,  and full of good-humoured gaiety.  IVIr.
Smelt and Mrs.  Delany are perhaps the man and
woman in the world the most to his taste,  of any per-
sons out of his own family.  And what honour upon his
taste do two such choices reflect ! — To me he never
looks so amiable as when in society so chosen.

My dear father came over to me there one morning,
from Chesington.  I met him at Mr.  Smelt's.  I then
had the happiness of conveying him to my little apart-
ment in the Lodge;  and he stayed with me till I was
summoned to the Queen.

I told Her Majesty what a gratification I had had ;
and she instantly and most graciously desired me to
ask him to stay and dine with me.  I flew to write him
the invitation— but he was already gone.  I was very
much disappointed,  and the sweet Queen was so sorry
for me,  that she immediately promised me a visit to
Chesington,  to see him there,  in recompense :  an offer,
indeed,  most highly acceptable to me,  and which I
gratefully acceded to;  as you will behcve,  without
much stretch of crcduhty.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         195

After this,  the Smelts,  at royal motioning,  returned
the visit of Mrs.  Delany,  and came to her house at
Windsor for four days.

Shall I make you smile with a little trait — as you
will call it — of my own character,  during their stay at
Windsor  ?

M.  Mithoff,  at the Queen's desire,  had again been
asked to dinner ;  and we had left him with Mr.  Smelt
in the eating-room,  while we went to my drawing-room
for coffee.  As they did not join us,  we concluded they
were gone to the equerries ;  and as Mrs.  Delany hap-
pened to be thirsty,  she wished for some tea before she
was carried away from me.  My great and constant
distress how to order anything at that time was insur-
mountable, for I had no bell for my man,  and his room
is at the further end of a long range of offices.  I rang
vainly for my maid to summon him;  she was gos-
siping out of hearing.  I then went into the passage-
gallery,  to seek for somebody to help me.  I could find
no one.  I opened the eating-room door,  to see if it
was ready for tea,  but saw,  to my surprise,  a party of
uniforms.  I shut it hastily,  with the guilt of intrusion
so strong upon me,  that I could distinguish none of
them.  They called after me,  and one of them opened
the door,  entreating me to come back.  I apologised
for breaking in upon them,  retreating all the time,  as
fast as I could,  to my own room  ;  when,  looking back,
I perceived a star,  and saw it belonged to the Duke of
Montagu.  He again asked me in,  and again I assured
him I knew not anybody was there when I opened the
door,  and curtsied myself into my own room.

Mr.  Smelt now followed me,  saying,  **WhyMo you
run away from the Duke of Montagu  ?"

o2

190 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

*  I did not mean to run away,"  cried I,  "  but I was
asliamed of breaking in upon you in that manner."

**  Why we were only waiting for you !"  cried he  :
"  the Duke came purposely to pay his respects to you,  he
said,  and expected to find you in the room,  not that you
would run away from it !"

I was quite ashamed,  now,  the other way,  and was
hastening back with an explanation,  when I met the
King at the door,  and was forced to retreat again  ;  and
as His Majesty came to carry the Duke to the Queen's
rooms,  I had no opportunity of making any after
apology.  I could only do it by never repeating the
flight.  But I knew not,  then,  that no one entered that
room in Mrs.  Schwellenberg's absence,  but as a visitor
of mine.  These are things I had no one to tell me:  I
was left to find them out as I could.

*  *  >i«  «  -^t  *

The Queen,  one morning,  told me she was going a
long excursion,  and that I therefore might make Avhat
use I pleased of my time.  I accepted the kind intima-
tion, by telling her I would go to the cathedral with
Mrs.  Delany,  who was waiting my opportunity,  to see
the painted window.  The next moment I sent to
Mrs.  Delany,  with this proposal.  An answer was
brought me,  that Mrs.  Delany could not then go out,
as the three young Princesses were with her ;  but that
she had their orders for my coming immediately to her
house.

As this message came only through John,  I con-
cluded it was one of his forward mistakes,  and did not
obey the summons,  but wrote to Miss P ■  for an ex-
planation. She wrote me for answer,  that Princess
Mary and Princess Sophia wanted to know me ex-

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        197

tremely,  and complained that they never saw me^
though Princess Amelia did very often  ;  and they
wanted to do so too,  '^  Because/'  said Princess Mary,
"Mamma likes her mightily  !'*

I went instantly to the Princesses,  who,  when I came,
were ashamed,  and silent.  They have a modesty and
sweetness that represses all consequence from their
rank.

After they were gone,   Mrs.   Delany carried Miss

P and me to the cathedral.    We were met there by

Mr.  West,  whose original cartoon for the painted win-
dow was to be exhibited.  The subject is the Resur-
rection. The Guiding Angel is truly beautiful in it,
but our Saviour is somewhat too earthly;  he seems
athletic as an Hercules,  and rather as if he derived his
superiority from strength of body than from influence
of divinity.     The window itself was not yet to be seen.

Mr.  West,  whom I had once met at Sir Joshua Rey-
nolds's, was exceeding civil,  shewing the cartoon him-
self, and explaining his intentions in it.  He spoke of
the performance with just such frank praise and open
satisfaction as he might have mentioned it with,  if the
work of any other artist;  pointing out its excellences,
and expressing his happiness in the execution — yet all
with a simplicity that turned his self commendation
rather into candour than conceit.

On the last day of this month we left Windsor,  and
at Kew were met by intelligence of the death of Prin-
cess Amelia,  the King's aunt.  On this account the
drawing-room was put off,  and we were informed we
should remain at Kew till after the funeral.

PART VI.

1786.

CONTENTS.

A poor Petitioner — Etiquette of petitioning Royalty— Anecdote
of the Queen— The Tattler and the Prince of Wales— The
King and the Princess Amelia — A Conversation with the
Queen — The Queen's Reminiscences of her Youth— Mrs.  De-
lany— Anecdotes of the Queen — A Visit to Chesington — Pain-
ful Recollections — Surprise — A Warm Reception— Doing the
Honours— A Dilemma — Stanzas on a Royal Dishahille — Em-
barrassment— A Sunday at Kew — Too late — Excuses and Ex-
planations— Anecdotes of the King and Queen — Fairings — A
Royal Birthday — Est-il permis?  —  The burnt Finger — Man-
ners of the Chinese— Travellers'  Tales — Vanessa again — Re-
turn to Kew — An Anecdote — The Duchess of Beaufort and the
Quaker — St.  James's — Visit from the Queen — A Present —
Mrs.  Trinnner — Visits and Calls— An Evening Party— The
Provost of Eton — Jacob Bryant — Anecdotes of him — Lord
CourtOAvn— A Discourse on the Female Character — Paradox —
Madame de Genlis — Horace Walpole's  "  Mysterious Mother  "
— Anecdote of the Princess Amelia — Mrs.  Kennicott — Lady
Bute — Studies in Shakspeare — A Surprise and Detection —
•'  C ecilia  "  pirated— Strange Application — New Mode of Intimi-
dation— Tea-table Talk — A Visit from the Queen — Dr.  Hurd
— Anecdote of the Queen — Female Frailty — Christmas-day
at Court — Tea- table Talk — Facetiee of the Equerry's Room —
The Duties of an Equerry — Mr.  Mathias — Anecdotes of the
Princesses — Traits of Mrs.  Delany— Dr.  Burney no Courtier
— Visit to Dr.  Herschel — His great Discoveries — The King,
Princess Amelia,  and Dr.  Burney  —  The King and Jacob
Bryant.

200 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

PART VI.

1786.

November 1st. — We began this month by steadily
settlin£i^  ourselves at Kew,  Miss Planta,  Miss Gomme,
Mile.  Monmoulin,  and Mr.  de Luc,  and Mrs.  Cheveley.
Miss Goldsworthy resided at the Princess Elizabeth's
house on Kew Green.

A very pleasant circumstance happened to me on
this day,  in venturing to present the petition of an un-
fortunate man who had been shipwrecked ;  whose pe-
tition was graciously attended to,  and the money he
solicited w-as granted him.  I had taken a great in-
terest in the poor man,  from the simplicity and distress
of his narration,  and took him into one of the parlours
to assist him in drawing up his memorial.

The Queen,  when,  with equal sweetness and hu-
manity, she had delivered the sum to one of her pages
to give to him,  said to me,  "  Now,  though your account
of this poor man makes him seem to be a real object,  I
must give you one caution :  there are so many impos-
tors about,  who will try to speak to you,  that,  if you are
not upon your guard,  you may be robbed yourself
before you can get any help :  I think,  therefore,  you
had better never trust yourself in a room alone with
anybody you don't know."

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        201

I thanked her for her gracious counsel,  and promised,
for the future,  to have my man always at hand.

I was afterwards much touched with a sort of uncon-
scious confidence with which she relieved her mind.
She asked me my opinion of a paper in the  "  Tatler,"
which I did not recollect;  and when she was dressed,
and seated in her sitting-room,  she made me give her
the book,  and read to me this paper.  It is an account
of a young man of a good heart and sweet disposition,
who is allured by pleasure into a libertine life,  which ho
pursues by habit,  but with constant remorse,  and cease-
less shame and unhappiness.

It was impossible for me to miss her object:  all the
mother was in her voice while she read it,  and her
glistening eyes told the application made throughout.
My mind sympathised sincerely,  though my tongue did
not dare allude to her feelings.  She looked pensively
down when she had finished it,  and before she broke
silence,  a page came to announce the Duchess of An-
caster.

-■i'  *  *  *  j)^  *

In the evening the King brought the Princess Ame-
lia to fetch me,  for she had signified her pleasure that
I should undress her,  or she would not go to bed  !  I
was quite ready for so endearing an office with the sweet
child,  and attended her upstairs,  and stayed with her
till her most expert nurse,  Mrs.  Cheveley,  managed to
soothe her to rest.

The next morning the Queen said to me  "  I have
just been reading a long letter from Madame la Fite,
and you are its heroine."

The Princess Royal,  who was present,  laughed ex-
ceedingly ;  and the Queen then proceeded to say that
there were friends whose panegyric was sometimes

202 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

less judicious than their silence.  I agreed in this,
protesting,  sincerely,  that I was always grieved when
I found myself its object where I knew it would be
more fervent than just,  for I could only feel alarmed,
not gratified,  by praise so much beyond desert and
reason.

Her Majesty then bid me not be alarmed,  for there
was nothing that could seriously hurt me  :  yet I saw
her fully of the same opinion ;  and I found the letter
was from Norbury Park,  and written to the Princess
Elizabeth.  I am sure I am extremely obliged to
Madame la Fite for her kindness ;  but I cannot for-
bear wishing it were of a nature more quiet.

November 3rd. — In the morning I had the honour
of a conversation with the Queen,  the most delightful,
on her part,  I had ever yet been indulged with.  It was
all upon dress,  and she said so nearly what I had just
imputed to her in my little stanzas,  that I could scarce
refrain producing them ;  yet could not muster courage.
She told me,  with the sweetest grace imaginable,  how
well she had liked at first her jewels and ornaments as
Queen, — "But how soon,"  cried she,  "was that over!
Believe me.  Miss Burney,  it is a pleasure of a week, —
a fortnight,  at most, — and to return no more  !  I
thought,  at first,  I should always choose to wear them ;
but the fatigue and trouble of putting them on,  and
the care they required,  and the fear of losing them, —
believe me,  ma'am,  in a fortnight's time I longed
again for my own earlier dress,  and wished never to
see them more !"

She then still more opened her opinions and feelings.
She told me she had never,  in her most juvenile years,
loved dress and shew,  nor received the smallest pleasure
from any thing in her external appearance beyond

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  203

neatness and comfort :  yet did not disavow that the
first week or fortnight of being a Queen,  when only
in her seventeenth year,  she thought splendour suffi-
ciently becoming her station to believe she should
thenceforth choose constantly to support it.  But her
eyes alone were dazzled,  not her mind ;  and therefore
the delusion speedily vanished,  and her understanding
was too strong to give it any chance of returning.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany came to-day,  to remain at
Mr.  Smelt's for the rest of our Kew sojourn ;  and in
the evening she joined our tea-party,  and stayed with
us till she was fetched to the Queen by the Princess
Augusta.  The King also came for Mr.  Smelt.  The
rest,  as usual,  dispersed,  and I had again a long tete-
a-tete with Mrs.  Smelt ;  whom the more I am with,  the
more,  from her real goodness both of heart and under-
standing, I am satisfied.

November 4th. — This morning,  when I attended the
Queen,  she asked me if I should like to go and see my
father at Chesington  ?  and then gave orders immedi-
ately for a chaise to be ready without delay — "  And
there is no need you should hurry yourself,"  she added,
•'  for it will do perfectly well if you are back to dinner ;
when I dress,  I will send for Miss Planta."

I thanked her very much,  and she seemed quite de-
lighted to give me this gratification.

"  The first thing I thought of this morning when I
woke,"  said she,  '*  and when I saw the sun shining in
upon the bed,  was that this would be a fine morning
for Miss Burney to go and see her father."

And soon after,  to make me yet more comfortable
she found a deputy for my man as well as for myself,
condescending to give orders herself that another per-

204 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VL

son might lay the cloth,  lest I should be hurried home
on that account.

I need not tell my two dear readers how sensibly I
felt her goodness,  when I acquaint them of its effect
upon me;  which was no less than to induce,  to impel
me to trust her with my performance of her request.
Just as she was quitting her dressing-room,  I got be-
hind her,  and suddenly blurted out —

"Your Majesty's goodness to me,  ma'am,  makes mc
venture to own that there is a command which I received
some time ago,  and which I have made some attempt
to execute."

She turned round with great quickness, — ''  The great
coat?"  she cried,  "is it that  ?"

I was glad to be so soon understood,  and took it
from my pocket book — but holding it a little back,  as
she offered to take it.

"For your Majesty alone  !  "I cried  ;  "  I must entreat
that it may meet no other eyes,  and I hope it will not
be looked at when any one else is even in sight !"

She gave me a ready promise^  and took it with an
alacrity and walked off with a vivacity that assured mc
she would not be very long before she examined it;
though,  when I added another little request,  almost a
condition,  that it might not be read till I was far away,
she put it into her pocket unopened,  and,  wishing me
a pleasant ride,  and that I might find my father well,
she proceeded towards the breakfast parlour.

My dear friends will.  I know,  wish to see it, — and so
they shall ;  though not this moment,  as I have it not
about me,  and do not remember it completely.

My breakfast was short,  the chaise was soon ready,
and forth I sallied for dear — once how dear  ! — old

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        205

Chesington  !  Every step of the road brought back to
my mind the first and most loved and honoured friend
of my earliest years,  and I felt a melancholy almost
like my first regret for him,  when I considered what
joy,  what happiness I lost,  in missing his congratula-
tions on a situation so much what he would have chosen
for me — congratulations which,  flowing from a mind
such as his,  so wise,  so zealous,  so sincere,  might almost
have reconciled me to it myself — I mean even then —
for now the struggle is over,  and I am content enough.

Ah,  my dearest Susan,  till within these very few
months,  how unquiet has been my life from the time
of that great calamity,  the loss of that noble-minded
friend  ! — whose abilities to this moment I have never
seen excelled,  whose counsel,  to his last hour,  was the
only one that,  out of my own family,  I had ever sought,
and whose early kindness for me won,  and must ever
retain,  my latest gratitude.

I must have done,  however,  with this.

John rode on,  to open the gates ;  the gardener met
him  ;  and 1 believe surprise was never greater than he
carried into the house with my name.  Out ran dear
Kitty Cooke,  whose honestly affectionate reception
touched me very much, — "  0,"  cried she,  "had our best
friend lived to see this day when you came to poor
old Chesington from Court !"

Her grief,  ever fresh,  then overflowed in a torrent,
and I could hardly either comfort her,  or keep down
the sad regretful recollections rising in my own memory.
O my dear Susan,  with what unmixed satisfaction,  till
that fatal period when I paid him my last visit,  had I
ever entered those gates — where passed the scenes of
the greatest ease,  gaiety,  and native mirth that have
fallen to my lot !

20G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PartVI.

Mrs.  James Burncy next,  all astonishment,  and our
dear James himself,  all incredulity,  at the report car-
ried before me,  came out.  Their hearty welcome and
more pleasant surprise recovered me from the species
of consternation with which I had approached their
dwelling,  and the visit,  from that time,  turned out per-
fectly gay and happy.

My dearest father was already gone to town  ;  but I
had had much reason to expect I should miss him,  and
therefore I could not be surprised.

Poor Mrs.  Hamilton had been ill,  and still kept her
room,  and was so much overcome by her surprise,
though I did not go to her till she sent for me,  that
she could not refrain from crying,  repeatedly declaring
she had never thought to see me more.  I did not
venture to tell her how much our opinions had coin-
cided.

I left them all with great reluctance.  I had no time
to walk in the garden, — no heart to ascend the little
mount,  and see how Norbury hills and woods looked
from it !

I set out a little the sooner,  to enable me to make
another visit,  which I had also much at heart — it was to
our aunts at Kingston.  I can never tell you their as-
tonishment at sight of me  ;  they took me for my own
ghost,  I believe,  at first,  but they soon put my sub-
stance to the proof,  and nothing could better answer
my motives than my welcome,  which I need not paint
to my Susan,  who never sees them without experi-
encing it.  To my great satisfaction,  also,  my nieces
Fanny and Sophy happened to be there at that time.

My return was just in time for my company,  which I
found increased by the arrival of two more gentlemen,
Mr.  Fisher and Mr.  Turbulent.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  207

Mr.  Fisher had been ordered to come,  that he might
read prayers the next day,  Sunday ;  as none of the
Eoyal Family were to go out,  not even to church,  till
after the funeral.

Mr.  Turbulent was summoned,  I suppose,  for his
usual occupations  ;  reading with the Princesses,  or to
the Queen.

Shall I introduce to you this gentleman such as I
now think him at once  ?  or wait to let his character
open itself to you by degrees,  and in the same manner
that it did to me  ?  I wish I could hear your answer  !
So capital a part as you will find him destined to play,
hereafter,  in my concerns,  I mean,  sooner or later,  to
the best of my power,  to make you fully acquainted
with him — as fully as I am myself,  let me add :  for
even yet I could not delineate him with precision,  nor
be certain that the very next time I see him may not
change the whole progress of the texture I should
weave.  For a while,  therefore,  at least,  I will leave him
to make his own way with you,  by simply recounting
the gradations of our acquaintance,  and the opinions,
as they arose,  that I conceived of him.

He took his seat next mine at the table,  and assisted
me,  while Mr.  Fisher sat as chaplain at the bottom.
The dinner went off extremely well,  though from no
help of mine.  Unused to doing the honours to any
party,  so large a one found me full employment in at-
tending to their grosser food,  without any space or
power to provide for their mental recreation.  To take
care of both,  as every mistress of a table ought to do,
requires practice as well as spirits,  and ease as well as
exertion.  Of these four requisites I possessed not
one !

However,  I was not missed ;  the three men and the

208 DIARY AND LETTERS PaRT VI.

three females were all inlimately acquainted with one
another,  and the conversation,  altogether,  was equal,
open,  and agreeable.

You may a little judge of this,  when I tell you a
short speech that escaped Miss Planta.  Mr.  Turbu-
lent said lie must go early to town the next morning,
and added,  he should call to see Mrs.  Schwellcnberg,
by order of the Queen.  ''  Now for Heaven's sake,
Mr.  Turbulent,"  cried she,  eagerly,  "don't you begin
talking to her of how comfortable we arc here ! — it
will bring her back directly  !"

This was said in a half wliisper  ;  and I hope no one
else heard it.  I leave you,  my dear friends,  to your
own comments.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt and Mrs.  Delany came to us at
tea-time.  Then,  and in their societ}^  I grew more easy
and disengaged.

The sweet little Princess Amelia,  who had promised
me a visit,  came during tea,  brought by Mrs.  Cheve-
ley.  I left every body to play with her,  and  ]\Ir.  Smelt
joined in our gambols.  We pretended to put her in
a phaeton,  and to drive about and make visits with
her.  She entered into the scheme with great spirit
and delight,  and we waited upon Mrs.  Delany and
Mrs.  Smelt alternately.  Children are never tired of
playing at being women;  and women there are who
are never tired,  in return,  of playing at being children  !
In the midst of this frolicking,  which at times was
rather noisy,  by Mr.  Smelt's choosing to represent a
restive horse,  the King entered !  We all stopped
short,  guests,  hosts,  and horses ;  and all,  with equal
celerity,  retreated,  making the usual circle for his
Majesty to move in.
The little Princess bore this interruption to her sport

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  209

only while surprised into quiet by the general respect
inspired by the King.  The instant that wore off,  she
grew extremely impatient for the renewal of our gam-
bols, and distressed me most ridiculously by her in-
nocent appeals.  ''  Miss Burney  ! — come  ! — why don't
you play  ? — Come,  Miss Burney,  I say,  play with me  !
— come into the phaeton again  ! — why don t you.  Miss
Burney  ?''

After a thousand vain efforts to quiet her by signs,
I was forced to whisper her that I really could play no
lon2:er.

''  But why  ?  why.  Miss Burney  ? — do  !  do come and
play with me ! — You must.  Miss Burney 1"

This petition growing still more and more urgent,  I
was obliged to declare my reason,  in hopes of appeas-
ing her,  as she kept pulling me by the hand and gown,
so entirely with all her little strength,  that I had the
greatest difficulty to save myself from being suddenly
jerked into the middle of the room :  at length,  there-
fore, I whispered  "We shall disturb the King,  ma'am!"

This was enough  ;  she flew instantly to his Majesty,
who was in earnest discourse with Mr.  Smelt,  and called
out,  ''  Papa,  go  !"

"  What  ?"  cried the King.

*'  Go  !  papa, — you must go  !"  repeated she eagerly.

The King took her up in his arms,  and began kissing
and playing with her ;  she strove with all her might to
disengage herself,  calling aloud '' Miss Burney!  Miss
Burney !  take me  ! — come,  I say.  Miss Burney  ! — O
Miss Burney,  come 1"

You may imagine what a general smile went round
the room at this appeal :  the King took not any notice
of it,  but set her down,  and went on with his discourse.

She was not,  however,  a moment quiet till he retired ;

VOL.  III.  p

210 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

and then we renewed our diversions,  which lasted to
her Led-timc.  The Princess Augusta soon after came
for Mrs.  Delany,  and a page for Mr.  Smelt.

*  5!=  Jj:  -1;  :ic

At night when I went to the Queen hut I believe

my most intelhgible plan will be to here leave a space for
copying my little rhyming,  when I find the original.

THE GREAT COAT.

Thrice honour'd Robe  !  couldst thou espy
The form that deigns to shew thy worth ;

Hear the mild voice,  view the arch eye,
That call thy panegyric forth  ;

Wouldst thou not swell with vain delight  ?

With proud expansion sail along  ?
And deem thyself more grand and bright

Than aught that lives in ancient song  ?

Than Venus'  cestus,  Dian's crest,

Minerva's helmet,  fierce and bold,
Or all of emblem gay that dress'd

Capricious goddesses of old  ?

Thee higher honours yet await : —

Haste,  then,  thy triumphs quick prepare,

Thy trophies spread in haughty state,
Sweep o'er the earth,  and scoff the air.

Ah no ! — retract !— retreat ! — oh stay !

Learn,  wiser,  whence so well thou  'st sped  ;
She whose behest produc'd this lay

By no false colours is misled.

Suffice it for the buskin'd race

Plaudits by pomp and shew to win ;
Those seek simplicity and grace

Whose dignity is from within.

The cares,  or joys,  she soars above

That to the toilette's duties cleave  ;
Far other cares her bosom move,

Far other joys those cares relieve.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  211

The garb of state she inly scorn' d,

Glad from its trappings to be freed,
She saw thee humble,  unadorn'd,

Quick of attire, — a child of speed.

Still,  then,  thrice honour'd Robe !  retain

Thy modest guise,  thy decent ease  ;
Nor let thy favour prove thy bane

By turning from its fostering breeze.

She views thee with a mental eye,

And from thee draws this moral end  : —

Since hours are register'd on high,
The friend of Time is Virtue's friend.

You may easily believe I did not approach the
Queen that night with much of a sleepy composure.
She inquired very sweetly after my little excursion,  and
was quite disappointed for me when she heard I had
not seen my father;  and all the Princesses,  afterwards,  as
I chanced to be in their way,  expressed their concern
for me.  When Mrs.  Thielky left the room,  the Queen,
with a smile very expressive,  half arch,  half ashamed,
thanked me for the little poem,  adding,  "  Indeed it is
very pretty — only  !  I don't deserve it."

I made no answer whatever;  and nothing more passed.

I afterwards heard from Mrs.  Delany that as soon
as I was set off for Chesington,  the Queen went to
Mrs.  Smelt's,  and there called Mrs.  Delany into another
room.  She then ashed her if she was not in the secret  ?
and soon finding,  with some surprise,  that I had not
made her my confidant,  she produced the little stanzas,
and said she was sure 1 should never regara any com-
munication to Mrs.  Delany as treachery,  and therefore

she would read them to her.

p2

212 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

November 5th. — Mr.  Fisher read the service to us
this morning,  which was Sunday  ;  and I must now tell
3^ou the manner of its being performed,  which is rather
singular,  and,  I suppose,  only Royal.

There is no private chapel at Kew Lodge  :  tlielving
and Queen,  consequently,  except by accident,  as now,
never pass the Sabbath there.  The form,  therefore,
stands thus  : — Their Majesties and the five Princesses
go into an inner room by themselves,  furnished with
hassocks,  &c.  like their closet at church  :  by the door of
this room,  though not within it,  stands the clergyman
at his desk  :  and here were assembled Mrs.  Delany,
Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,  Miss Goldsworthy,  Miss Gomme,
Miss Planta,  Mile.  Montmoulin,  M.  de Luc,  and I  ;
the pages were all arranged at the end of the room  ;
and,  in an outer apartment,  were summoned all the
servants,  in rows,  according to their stations.

November Gtii. — I'his morning happened my first
disgrace of being too late for the Queen — this noon,
rather ;  for in a morning  'tis a disaster that has never
arrived to this moment.

The affair thus came to pass.  I walked for some
time early in Kew gardens,  and then called upon Mrs.
Smelt.  I there heard that the King and Queen were
gone,  privately,  to Windsor,  to the Lodge :  probably
for some papers they could not intrust with a messen-
ger. Mr.  Smelt,  therefore,  proposed taking this op-
portunity for shewing me Richmond gardens,  offering
to be my security that I should have full time.  I ac-
cepted the proposal with pleasure,  and we set out upon
our expedition.  Our talk was almost all of the Queen.
Mr.  Smelt wishes me to draw up her character.  I
owned to him that should it appear to me,  on nearer

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         213

and closer inspection,  what it seemed to me then,  the
task could not be an unpleasant one.

He saw me safe to the Lodge,  and there took his
leave :  and I was going leisurely upstairs,  when I
met the Princess Amelia and Mrs.  Cheveley;  and
while I was playing with the little Princess,  Mrs.
Cheveley announced to me that the Queen had been
returned some time,  and that I had been sent for im-
mediately.

Thunderstruck at this intelhgence,  I hastened lo
her dressing-room  ;  when I opened the door,  I saw she
was having her hair dressed.  To add to my confusion,
the Princess Augusta,  Lady Effingham,  and Lady
Frances Howard were all in the room.

I stood still at the door,  not knowing whether to
advance,  or wait a new summons.  In what a new situ-
ation did I feel myself ! — and how did I long to give
way to my first impulse,  and run back to my own room  !

In a minute or two,  the Queen not a little drily said,
*^  Where have you been.  Miss Burney  ?"

I told her my tale, — that hearing she was gone to
Windsor,  I had been walking in Richmond gardens
with Mr.  Smelt.

She said no more,  and I stood behind her chair.
The Princess and two ladies were seated.

What republican feelings were rising in my breast,
till she softened them down again,  when presently,  in
a voice changed from that dryness which had wholly
disconcerted me,  to its natural tone,  she condescended
to ask me to look at Lady Frances Howard's gown,
and see if it was not very pretty.

This made a dutiful subject of me again in a moment.
Yet I felt a discomposure all day,  that determined me

214 in ARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

upon using the severest caution to avoid such a surprise
for the future.  The Windsor journey having been
merely upon business,  had been more brief than was
believed possible.

When I left the Queen,  I was told that Mrs.  Delany
was waiting for me in the parlour.  What a pleasure
and relief to me to run to that dear lady,  and relate to
her my mischance,  and its circumstances  !  Mr.  Smelt
soon joined us there;  he was shoclvcd at the accident;
and I saw strongly by his manner how much more
seriously such a matter was regarded,  than any one,
unused to the inside of a court,  could possibly imagine.

This discovery added not much to my satisfaction
—on the contrary,  I think from that time I did not,
till long — long after — see noonday approach,  without
the extremest nervousness,  if not entirely prepared for
my summons.

While we were talking this over,  the Queen's car-
riage passed the window,  and she came into the hall.
She had been visiting the Princess Elizabeth.  In
another minute the parlour- door was opened by a page,
and her Majesty entered.  She was all smiles and
sweetness.

"  O,  are you here,  Mrs.  Delany  ?"'  cried she,  laughing ;
"  I had only seen Mr.  Smelt and Misis Burney from the
window,  and I came in on purpose to accuse them of
flirting !''

I understood well the favour meant me by this little
gay sally,  and I brightened up upon it to the utmost
of my power.

In the evening,  early,  I made my offering to the
sweet little Princess Amelia,  who came to fetch Mrs.
Delany,  of the prettiest toy I ever saw,  the pincushion
and its contents sent me by my dear and most ingenious

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         215

Fredy.    Her delight was excessive  ;  and she was eager
to go off with it,  to shew it to the Queen.

November 7th. — When I rang,  this morning,  at
the garden-door at Mr.  Smelt's,  I was informed the
King was upstairs  :  of course I instantly retreated,  and
was walking back through the garden,  hardly able to
make my w^ay,  through the violence of the wind,  blow-
ing hard from the Thames,  when I heard a tapping
from a window upstairs :  I looked up, — and thought I
saw the King ; — but too uncertain to trust to eyes so
short-sighted as mine,  I hastily looked down again,  and
affecting not to hear the rap-tapping,  though it was
repeated,  and louder,  I proceeded on my way.

'Tis almost inconceivable the inconvenience I suffer,
thus placed among the Royals of the land,  from my utter
inability to confide in my own sight.  I never know
whether they look at me,  or at some one beyond me,
nor whether they notice me,  or pass me regardlessly.

In a few instants,  my footsteps were hastily pursued,
with a loud call.  I then thought I might venture to
turn,  and beheld Mr.  Smelt,  quite out of breath with
running,  but highly delighted to bring me word that
the King had ordered me back,  and into the room
where they all were assembled,  that I might not have
two such walks in so high a wind,  without rest.

How gracious this  !  I found his Majesty in a little
circle,  composed of Mrs.  Delany,  Mrs.  Smelt,  and Mr.
Hayes,  a gentleman who was formerly a tutor to one
of the younger Princes.

When I went to the Queen at noon,  she made many
inquiries concerning the Norbury fairings  :  the little
Princess had excited her curiosity by the full-fraught
pincushion.  She desired me to bring my whole cargo  :
she admired it exceedingly,  and asked me if I had any

216 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

objection to Icttin*^  her have some of the tilings?  and
then she selected several from my store.  1 had much
wished to present them to her,  but could not venture
at such a liberty.

November 8tii. — This was the birth-day of the
Princess i\ugusta,  now eighteen.  I could not resist this
opportunity of presenting her one of my fairings,
though I had some little fear she might think herself
past the age for receiving birth-day gifts,  except from
the Royal Family  :  however they had arrived so seem-
ingly cq^rojjos,  and had been so much approved by the
Queen,  that I determined to make the attempt.  I
took one of the work-boxes,  and wrote with a pencil^
round the middle ornament,  *'  Est il 2^ermis  ?'" — and
then I sent for Miss Makentomb,  the Princess's ward-
robe woman,  and begged her to place the box upon
her Royal Highness's table.

At the Queen's dressing-time,  as I opened the door.
Her Majesty said,  "  O,  here she is? — Est il j^crmis I
— Come,  come in to Augusta;"  and made me follow
her into the next room,  the door of which was open,
where the Princess was seated at a writing-desk,  pro-
bably answering some congratulatory letters.

Immediately,  in a manner the most pleasing,  she
thanked me for the little cadecm,  saying,  ''Only one
thing I must beg — that you will write the motto with
a pen."

The Queen seconded this motion,  smilingly repeating
"  Est il yeiinis  ?  "

Andafterwards,  in the evening,  the Princess Augusta
came to the parlour,  to fetch Mrs.  Delany and Mrs.
Smelt,  and again said,  "  Now,  will you.  Miss Burney —
will you write that for me with a pen  ? "

The King brought in the Princess Amelia during

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        217

tea.  "Here/'  cried he,  "we shall all be jealous of
Miss Burney!  Amelia insists upon coming to her
again ;  and says she won't go to bed if Miss Burney
does not take her  ! "

The sweet little child then called upon me to play
with her.  I did what was possible to quiet her,  but to
no purpose.  "  Come,  Miss Burney,"  she cried,  "  come
and sit down with me ; — sit down,  I say  ! — why won't
you sit down?"

Nothing can be so pretty as this innocence of her

royal station and her father's rank :  though she gave

me a thousand small distresses,  I longed to kiss her

for every one of them.

«  *  «  *  *

This long visit at Kcw made me more acquainted
with much of the household than any other mode of life
could have done.  At Windsor I mix with quite an-
other set.  I liked them all passing well,  and was
pleased to see that they all appeared persons of worth,
sense,  and cultivation.  But my only real satisfaction,
except from the arrival of Mrs.  Delany,  was in the
society of Mr.  Smelt.  That very excellent,  amiable,
and most high-bred gentleman shewed a disposition to
render our acquaintance more intimate,  that was ex-
tremely flattering to me.  His universal courtesy had
hitherto forbid my attributing his civilities to any re-
gard ;  but I now received them with fuller confidence,  as
I found in him an increasing openness in every meeting,
and a readiness to bestow his time upon me,  that made
me receive and accept it with very grateful pleasure.
His conversation,  when he is wholly easy,  is both,
fanciful and instructive ;  and his imagination is filled
with systems of his own,  that make his discussions of
almost all subjects both new and enlightening.     What

2 IB DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

an acquisition,  in a situation so confined,  is the power
of such frequent intercourse with so amiable,  so intelli-
gent, and so useful a friend  !

Saturday,  November 11 til — All the party returned
to Windsor but Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who still con-
tinued in London.

I had the honour of a very long and confidential dis-
course with the Queen at noon ;  the subject,  Mrs.  D ,

formerly Miss H ,  and an attendant upon the elder

Princesses.  I gave her a narration of the beginning
and the progress of our acquaintance,  and she opened
with the utmost frankness,  in giving her opinions and
thoughts.  When they are upon characters living,  I
will never commit them to paper,  except where so closely
blended with my own affairs as to be of deeper interest
to myself than to her ;  or except,  also,  where they are
mentioned with praise unmixed — which is rarely the
case where a judge so discerning speaks with entire
openness.

Miss Planta and Miss P dined Avith me,  and JNIrs.

Del any came to cofFee.  Miss Planta,  you must under-
stand, regularly goes into waiting as soon as she has
drunk her coffee:  we therefore again took out our
papers,  which had lain dormant during the Kew resi-
dence, and were just opening them as the King entered
the room.

He asked immediately how our letter-sorting went
on ;  and Mrs.  Delany,  who was in excellent spirits,
answered his questions with an archness and gaiety
that extremely entertained him.     He carried her away,

and Miss P and I returned to the eating-parlour,

where we found Colonel Goldsworthy and General
Bude,  eager to resume old stories and mock lamenta-
tions,— when the entrance of poor JNIadame de la Fite

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  219

abruptly closed the lips of our ever-wliimsical colonel,
which were no more to be opened that evening.

After tea I had a visit from the sweet little Princess
Amelia.  She had burnt one of her poor little fingers,
by playing with some wax,  which she got from her sister
Mary,  and was in great pain.  The King followed,  to
see how she bore it ;  and Dr.  Lind was sent for,  who
made a mixture,  of which oil was the principal ingre-
dient, and stroked her finger with a feather from it for
a considerable time.  The King watched the abatement
of her pain with great solicitude,  and she sustained it
with the firmness of a little heroine,  making many in-
voluntary grimaces,  but resisting her evident inclina-
tion to cry.

''  She w^anted to come to you,"  said the King,  "  very
much ; — she would not be denied ;  Miss Burney is now
the first in favour with her."

"  At Kew,  Sir !"  cried I.  "  I fear I shall lose all my
favour at Windsor,  where I see her Royal Highness so
seldom."

"  No,  no,  you won't, — she asked to come to you her-
self,— it was all her own motion."

When the operation was over,  and the Princess was
retired,  I invited Dr.  Lind to stay with us;  and he
made us amends for the glumness of Colonel Golds-
worthy,  by various singular relations of customs and
manners among the Chinese,  with whom he has lived
very much.  Some of his anecdotes,  particularly his
accounts of the animals they kill for food,  appeared so
strange to Colonel Goldsworthy,  that I saw he thought
his assertions deserved no more attention than those of
Madame de la Fite about the century in which Mrs.
Delany was born.  And when he mentioned that rats
and cats were among their table-cattle,   he actually

220 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

heaved a groan of despair that said,  ''  What hes these
travellers do tell !  "

Agam,  the next day,  the Queen kept me with her all
the morning.  I must here mention that  ]Mrs.  Dclany
had just received a letter from Mrs.  Montagu,  which was
filled with the strongest expressions of delight at the
recovery of the Princess Elizabeth,  worded so dutifully
and loyally,  that it was not difficult to perceive they
were meant for the royal eye ;  though they were fol-
lowed by something peculiarly unfit for it,  namely,  an
eloge on a certain person you know,  conceived in very
flattering terms,  but ending with a hope that that
person would not fail applying her thoughts and her
time to delineating the characters of the exalted per-
sonages with whom she lived ;  and the whole finishing
with much rejoicing that opportunity should so happily
be bestowed !

This letter the dear Mrs.  Delany ventured to shew
to the Queen, — as I found upon entering her dressing-
room at noon,  when she was surrounded by the three
eldest Princesses ;  for she almost instantly said,  "  I
have seen a letter of Vanessa's !  "

I was really half frightened,  lest she should con-
clude such a desire from such a lady might lead me to
a work that must render my near approach to her ex-
tremely disagreeable.  I acknowledged I knew what
letter she meant.

"You have read it?"  she said,  with a little ear-
nestness.

"  Yes,  INIa'am,"  I answered ;  ''  and had it been less
civil,  I might have been much flattered by it ;  but it
goes such lengths,  that it puts me in no danger."

She said nothing more,  nor I either.

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         221

I thought it best,  unless she had herself pursued the
subject,  not to speak of what related to her and the
King.  I am always glad to avoid professions and
promises,  even where I feel the fullest confidence of
the safety with which I might make them ;  they are
chains,  that,  however loosely fastened,  may,  eventually,
be grievous shackles.

The Queen has a nobleness of mind that sets her
above all false fears or vague suspicions :  she is ex-
tremely quick of discernment,  yet never trusts herself,
but waits the slow test of time and trial before she
risks her favour or confidence.

Two days afterwards we again went to Kew,  though
not in so large a party,  as our stay was only from Tues-
day to Friday.  None of the younger Princesses,  there-
fore, nor their governesses,  made this journey.

Just before we set out,  the Queen sent for me to her
dressing-room,  and there^  in the most gracious manner
possible,  she presented me with a mahogany writing
box and desk,  made after particular directions of her
own.  I am at this moment writing upon it,  and I have
found it the most useful,  compact^  and comfortable
piece of furniture that I am worth.

She told me then that Mr.  Turbulent was to accom-
pany me this time to Kew,  as well as Miss Planta and
Mr.  de Luc ;  and the motion of her head when she
named him,  shewed me instantly that she considered
herself as bestowing a pleasure upon me in joining him
to our party.

Accordingly,  at about ten o'clock they all assembled
in my room,  and we set off together.  But we did not
make much progress in our acquaintance,  he talking but
little,  and I less.

222 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

Immediately upon arriving'  I made a visit to Mrs.
Smelt,  and engaged her and her excellent mate to
dinner.  With the latter I had the satisfaction to pass
all the evening tete-a-iete ;  Miss Planta going to her
Princesses^  Mrs.  Smelt to the Queen,  Mr.  Turbulent to
make some visit at Kew,  and Mr.  do Luc to his writings.

Our discourse took a very serious turn,  falling almost
wholly upon religious subjects.  I am particularly happy
to discuss them with Mr.  Smelt,  whose piety is warm
and zealous,  rational and refined ;  and whose reliance
upon the goodness of Providence is striking and edifying.
I must give you a little trait of it,  in a speech he made
me this evening that extremely struck me ; — he had
related to me a tale wdiich had for its theme the sudden
death of a gentleman who left a large family of children,
all in the earliest season of life.  ''  Poor things  !  "  I ex-
claimed, ''  what will become of them  ?  "

''Poo?'  things?''  he repeated,  expressively, — ''as if
there was nobody to take care of them ! "

This speech,  as I told him,  reminded me of one of
the same striking sort,  made by a Quaker to the
Duchess Dowager of Beaufort,  who,  on the death of
her Duke,  shut herself up in a room hung with black,
and refused all comfort.  This Quaker found means to
enter her apartment,  where he found her all discon-
solate, in the deepest mourning,  and with scarce a
glimmering light suffered to enter the room  :  he stopped
to examine her,  while she stared at him in amazement,
and then he ejaculated,  ''What! — hast thou not for-
given God Almighty yet  ?  "

The next day the same party assembled again,  and
the day following we went to town.  Miss Planta and
Mr.  de Luc were of course to accompany me ;  and as I
heard Mr.  Smelt talk of going,  I proposed to him being

1786]     •  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         223

of our party.  He consented,  with his usual ready good-
breeding,  and I named what I had done to the Queen,
with that confidence in my proceedings that always
belono;s to whatever I have to do in reference to Mr.
Smelt.

I was,  however,  a little startled by an immediate
answer of — ''  Does Mr.  Turbulent not go with you?  '*

I had never thought of him upon this occasion,  not
having the smallest idea,  at that time,  of his belonging
to our party,  except by accident.  I made some hesi-
tating half answer,  and she added  "  Certainly,  if Mr.
Turbulent does not desire to have a place with j^ou,
you can accommodate Mr.  Smelt."

I now saw,  by her manner,  not only how high Mr.
Turbulent had the honour to stand with her,  but a sort
of solicitude that he should stand equally high with
little me ;  and this appeared still stronger afterwards.
I had seen,  however,  too little of him to form any fur-
ther opinion than what I have already told you, — that
he was serious,  silent,  quiet,  and observant ; — and that.
Heaven knows,  is an opinion that has changed often
enough since !

At St.  James's my dear father came to me,  and our
James,  and,  in the midst of our family comfort,  enters

Mr.  S .     Nothing can be more obliging than this

gentleman,  who will come to me with offers of services
always refused,  and with efforts for sociability constantly
repelled !

As we slept in town,  I inhabited,  for the first time,
my own apartments :  hitherto I had used those of Miss
Gomme,  for mine were now papering,  painting,  and
furnishing.  They are very neat and comfortable.  My
father came again in the evening;  but James had
been quite satisfied with Mr.  S in the morning !

224 DIARY AND LETTERS       [PaRT VI.

I believe lie concluded I was always to be ohsede by
some such  ''  court chap,"  and therefore would trust
himself to visit me no more.  Indeed if that gentleman
was to serve as a specimen of my new colleagues,  he
would do right well to stay away.

Friday,  Novkmijer 17th. — We returned to Windsor,
Miss Planta and myself tete-a-tete.

In the Queen's room,  while Her Majesty left it for
some minutes,  I was seized upon with great eagerness
by the elder Princesses,  to tell them how I liked my
new furniture,  and to describe to them every part of it.
They seemed vying with each other in good-humoured
interest,  about my having it ail comfortable and to my
liking.

Sunday,  November 19th. — While 1 was at break-
fast, the door was suddenly opened,  and the Queen
entered the room.  I started up,  and went to meet her.
She smiled,  asked me what book I was reading,  and
then told me to write a note to Mrs.  Delany  ;  *'  Tell
her,"  said she,  "that this morning is so very cold and
wet,  that I think she will suffer by going to church; —
tell her,  therefore^  that Doctor Queen is of opinion she
had better stay and say her prayers at home."

I always feel ready to thank her for these instances
of goodness to my most venerable friend,  and am
afraid lest,  some time or other,  without weiHiins:  the
self-important inference,  I shall involuntarily do it.
'Tis so sweet in her,  1 can scarcely refrain.

Afterwards,  when I attended her at noon,  she spoke
to me a great deal of  ]\Irs.  Trimmer,  that excel-
lent instructress and patroness of children and the
poor  ;  and she made me a present of her last two little
books,  called '  The Servant's Friend,'  and  '  The Two
Farmers.'

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         225

Miss Gomme,  by direction of the Queen,  who wanted
her early in the afternoon,  dined with me.  She came
an hour before the rest of the party,  and 1 had a long
discourse with her upon Prussia,  where she has passed
the greater part of her life.  She is very sensible,  and,
I fancy,  well informed  ;  but her manner is not pleasing
to strangers,  and her conversation,  perhaps from great
inequality of spirits,  has no flow,  nothing gliding — it is
either abrupt and loquacious,  like the rush of a torrent,
or it is lost and stagnant,  like the poor little round old-
fashioned garden-pond.

Monday,  November 20th. — Just before I w^ent to
the Queen at noon,  I had a visit from Lady Effingham.
I was obliged to run away from her,  but she stopped
me a moment in the passage,  to introduce me to Mr.
Howard,  her second son.  I could not even see him for
hurry,  but less regard flying from that family than from
almost any,  as their frequent intercourse with this
house makes them well acquainted with all its eti-
quettes.

When I told the Queen they were there,  as soon as
I had helped her on with hex peignoir,  she ordered her
hair-dresser,  and sent me to fetch Lady Effingham,
after which she said,  ''And now do you go.  Miss Bur-
ney,  and entertain Mr.  Howard."

I had a long visit from the Duchess of Ancaster,  and
a tete-a-tete dinner with Miss Planta,  who now,  in an
hour we spent by ourselves at coffee,  could not forbear
a few very open confessions.  She told me that she
knew the Queen much approved of her alwa3^s dining
at our table,  because it made her more certainly in the
way,  if suddenly wanted:  she has,  besides,  no table

VOL.  III.  Q

226 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

allowed her,  but is forced to dine at some friend's,  or
to get her own maid to cook for her ;  which,  in a house
such as this,  is infinitely disagreeable  :  nevertheless,  she
had quite given up this table,  from the desagrcmeii.s at-
tending it,  and had resolved never to come to it more,
but by particular and civil invitation.  She had there-
fore dined alternately with Miss Goldsworthy and  ^Nlr.

and Mrs.  T ,  both whose tables she had constant

requests to consider as her own.  Now,  however,  she
said,  she would resume the privilege given by Her
Majesty,  and if it was not inconvenient to me,  dine
with me always when the table was mine, — but no
longer.

Thursday,    November 23rd. — I paid a morning

visit to Miss E ,  the bedchamber woman.     She is

not wanting in parts,  nor in a desire of shewing them :
for a lady artist,  she paints remarkably well,  I
believe,  and I could look at her pictures with pleasure,
Avould she display them with less vehemence for ex-
citing it.

In the evening I had a large party of new acquaint-
ance; the Provost of Eton,  Dr.  Koberts,  his lady,  Mr.

Dewes,  Miss P ,  the Duke of Montagu,  General

Bude,  Colonel Goldsworthy,  and Madame de La Fite.

The party had the Royal sanction,  I need not tell
you.  The King and Queen are always well disposed
to shew civihty to the people of Eton and Windsor,
and were therefore even pleased at the visit.

The Provost is very fat,  with a large paunch and
gouty legs.  He is good-humoured,  loquacious,  gay,
civil,  and parading.  I am told,  nevertheless,  he is a
poet,  and a very good one.  This,  indeed,  appears
not,  neither in a person such as I have described,  nor
in manners such as have drawn from me the character
Just given.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  227

Mrs.  Roberts is a fine woman,  though no longer
very young  ;  she is his second wife,  and very kind to
all his family.     She seems good-natured and sensible.

The evening turned out very well :  they were so
delighted with maldng a visit under the royal roof,  that
everything that passed pleased them;  and the sight
of that disposition helped me to a little more spirit than
usual in receiving them.

The King came into the room to fetch Mrs.  Delany,
and looked much disappointed at missing her ;  never-
theless, he came forward,  and entered into conversation
with the Provost,  upon Eton,  the present state of the
school,  and all that belongs to its establishment.  His
Majesty takes a great interest in the welfare and pros-
perity of that seminary.

The Provost was enchanted by this opportunity of a
long and private conference,  and his lady w^as in raptures
in witnessing it.  She concluded,  from that time,  that
the door would never open but for the entrance of some
of the Royal Family ;  and when the equerries came,
she whispered me,  "Who are they?"  And again,  on
the appearance of a star on the Duke of Montagu,  she
said,  ''  Who can that be.  Miss Burney  ?"

However,  I had not always to disappoint her expec-
tations, for soon after,  the sweet little Princess Amelia
was permitted to come and pay me a visit ;  and that
was a motive to delight that we all felt equally.  She
had not yet forgot her Kew partiality,  and continued,  at
that time,  to frequently beg the Queen's leave for com-
ing to me.

Sunday,  November 26th. — The King,  whom I sav,r
in the Queen's room before the early prayers,  gave me
the same kind message to Mrs.  Delany about church
that I had had from the Queen that day week.

q2

228 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

To-day,  having found at last my opportunity for
obtaining permission,  I invited Mr.  Bryant to dinner.

Mrs.  Dclany,  Mr.  Dcwes,  Miss P ,  and Miss Planta,

were the rest of the party,  and it all passed very well.

The King and Queen were both much pleased with
this visit.  I saw it by the manner of the Queen when
I proposed it,  and the King shewed it still more
strongly,  by coming into the tea-room in the evening,
and chatting with him for a considerable time.  He
lives at Cypcnham,  a village near Salt Hill,  about two
miles and a-half from Windsor ;  and his character is so
highly respectable,  that their  ^[ajesties,  in their morning
excursions,  have several times made him little visits at
his own house.

There is,  indeed,  something very peculiar and very
pleasant in his discourse.  He is fidl of little anecdotes,
and gives his facts and his opinions upon them with a
quaint kind of brevity and simplicity,  extremely ori-
ginal, and very entertaining.  His learning,  deep as it
is,  taints no part of his conversation,  when he bestows it
upon those who could not keep pace with it :  on the
contrary,  whatever he has to say is uttered with a plain-
ness and humility that seem rather to imply a notion
of his own inferiority than of the ignorance of others.

Lord Courtown,  General Bude.  and Colonel Golds-
worthy came to tea.  Lord Courtown is always well bred
and pleasing,  but Colonel Goldsworthy was quite set
aside by the presence of Mr.  Bryant,  and retired,
taking with him the General and Lord Courtown,  the
moment he was able.     The King carried off'  ]Mrs

Delany ,  and Mr.  Dewes,  ]\Iiss P ,  and Mr.  Bryant

remained v;ith me the rest of the evenins:,  durin";  which
not a minute passed without producing something
amusing or instructive from my new acquaintance

17861 OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  229

The talk was all on natural and revealed religion,
and on natural history.  My share,  you may well be-
lieve, was simply that of leading to these subjects,  upon
which I had no power to speak but in question.  I
knew them to be themes well studied by Mr.  Bryant,
and I was happy to reap,  from the good-natured
readiness of his communications,  as much intelligence
upon them as I could comprehend,  and more than I
could have gathered from books in a year's reading.

As I was just then deeply engaged in Coxe's Travels,
I was enabled to lead the wav to much curious discus-
sion upon the state of the earth at the creation,  and
its condition after the Deluge ;  subjects which Mr.
Bryant has been all his life investigating,  and recon-
ciling to the Mosaic system.  Mr.  Coxe relates many
things of the interior parts of Siberia that illustrate
and confirm his general ideas,  and I felt myself much
enlightened by his fair and explicit manner of develop-
ing them.  He is a man of the most orthodox princi-
ples in religion,  and the whole of his learning and his
inquiries tends to elucidate the Scriptures,  and to clear
the perplexities of unbelievers.

So notorious is his great fondness for studying and
proving the truths of the creation according to Moses,
that he told me himself,  and with much quaint humour,
a pleasantry of one of his friends in giving a character
of him  ; — "  Bryant,"  said he,  "  is a very good scholar,
and knows all things whatever up to Noah,  but not a
single thing in the world beyond the Deluge !"

Tuesday,  November 28th. — Miss Planta and Mr.
de Luc accompanied me to Kew,  where,  as soon as I
arrived,  I had the honour of a little call from the
Princess Koyal,  with a most gracious message from
the Queen,  to desire me to invite my friends the Smelts

230 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaTIT VI.

to dinner.  You may imagine with what pleasure I
obeyed.

They came, — as did,  afterwards,  Mr.  Turbulent,  and
the dinner was enlivened with very animated conver-
sation, in which this gentleman took a part so princi-
pal, that 1 now began to attend,  and now,  first,  to be
surprised by him.

The subject was female character.  JMiss Planta de-
clared her opinion that it was so indispensable to have
it without blemish,  that nothing upon earth could com-
pensate^ or make it possible to countenance one who
wanted it.  Mrs.  Smelt agreed that compassion alone
was all that could be afforded upon such an occasion,
not countenance,  acquaintance,  nor intercourse.  Mr.
de Luc gave an opinion so long and confused,  that I
could not sufficiently attend to make it out.  Mr.
Smelt spoke with mingled gentleness and irony,  upon
the nature of the debate.  I said little,  but that little
was,  to give every encouragement to penitence,  and
no countenance to error.

The hero,  however,  of the discourse was Mr.  Turbu-
lent. With a warmth and fervour that broke forth inta
exclamations the most vehement,  and reflections the
most poignant,  he protested that many of the women
we were proscribing were amongst the most amiable
of the sex — that the fastidiousness we recommended
•was never practised by even the best part of the world
— and that we ourselves,  individually,  while we spoke
with so much disdain,  never acted up to our doctrines,
by using,  towards all fair failers,  such severity.

This brought me forth.  I love not to be attacked
for making professions beyond my practice ;  and I as-
sured him,  very seriously,  that I had not one voluntary
acquaintance,  nor one with whom I kept up the small-

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        231

est intercourse of my own seeking or wilful concurrence,
that had any stain in their characters that had ever
reached my ears.

"Pardon me,  ma am/'  cried he,  warmly,  "there are
amongst your acquaintance,  and amongst everybody's,
many of those the most admired,  and most charming,
that have neither been spared by calumny,  nor been
able to avoid reproach and suspicion."

I assured him he was mistaken ;  and Mrs.  Smelt and
Miss Planta protested he was wholly in an error.

He grew but the more earnest,  and opened,  in vindi-
cation of his assertions and his opinions,  a flow of lan-
guage that amazed me,  and a strain of argument that
struck and perplexed us all.  He felt the generosity
of the side he undertook,  and he could not have been
more eagfer nor more animated had the fair dames in
whose cause he battled been present to reward him
with their smiles.

In the end,  finding himself alone,  and hard pressed,
he very significantly exclaimed  ''  Be not too triumphant,
ladies ! — I must fight you with weapons of your own
making for me.  There is a lady,  a lady whom you all
know,  and are proud to know,  that stands exactly in
the place I speak of"

"I'm sure I don't know whom you mean!"  cried
Miss Planta.

"  You know her very well, — at least,  as well as you
can,"  answered he,  drily.

Mrs.  Smelt,  laughing,  said she might know many
unfortunate objects,  but she was unconscious of her
knowledge.

I boldly protested I knew not,  as an acquaintance of
my own,  a single person his description suited.  Those
whom I mio^ht see or meet or know at the houses of

232 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part YT.

others,  I could r.ot pretend to assert might all he
blameless;  but however 1 might compassionate,  or even
admire,  some who could not he vindicated,  I began no
such acquaintances — I wished them well,  and wished
them better, — but I distanced them to the best of my
power,  as I had not weight enough to do good to them,
and avoided,  therefore,  the danger of being supposed
to approve them.

"  Yes,  ma'am,"  cried he,  in a high tone,  "you also
know,  visit,  receive,  caress,  and distinguish a lady in
this very class !"

"  Do I  ?"  cried I,  amazed.

"  You do,  ma am  !     You all do  !"

Fresh general protestations followed,  and  ]Mr.  de
Luc called eagerly for the name.

♦•■  I do not wish to name her,"  answered he,  coolly,
"  after what I have said,  lest it seem as if I were her
censurer  ;  but,  on the contrary,  I think her one of the
most charming women in the world  ! — amiable,  spirited,
well informed,  and entertaining,  and of manners the
most bewitching !"

"  And with all this,  sir,"  cried I, — and I stopped.

*' And with all this,  ma'am,"  cried he,  (comprehend-
ing me immediately,)  "she has not escaped the lash of
scandal ;  and,  with every amiable virtue of the mind,
she has not been able to preserve her reputation,  in
one sense,  unattacked."

''  And — I know her  ?"

"Yes,  ma'am! — know her,  and do her justice;  and
I have heard you,  in common with all this company,
sing her praises as she deserves to have them sung."

I assured him I was quite in a wood,  and begged him
to be more explicit.  He hung back,  but we all called
upon him,  and I declared I should regard the descrip-

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         233

tion as fabulous unless he spoke out,  and tliis piqued
liim to be categorical ;  but what was my concern to hear
him then name — ahuost whispering with his own re-
luctance— Madame de Genlis !  I was quite thunder-
struck, and every body was silent.

He was then for closino'  the discourse,  but I could
not consent to it.  I told him that I pretended not to
say the character of that lady had never,  in my hear-
ing, been attacked ;  but that I could,  and would,  and
hoped I ever should,  say I believed her perfectly in-
nocent of the charges brought against her.

He smiled a little provokingly,  and said  "  We agree
here,  ma'am, — I think her innocent too."

"  No,  sir,  we do not agree  ! — I should not think her
innocent if I believed the charge!"

"Circumstances,"  cried he,  "^may make her mind
innocent."

I could say nothing to this,  I think it so true;  but
I would not venture such a concession,  where my wishes
led me to aim at a full defence.  Accordingly,  with all
the energy in my power,  I attempted it ;  assuring him
that there was an evidence of her untainted worth ia
her very countenance,  and written there so strongly,
tliat to mistake the characters was impossible.

"True,"  cried he,  again smiUng,  ''the countenance
speaks all that captivating sweetness that belongs — if
she has them — to the very frailties of her character."

I could not bear this.  ''  No,  sir,"  I cried,  as warmly
as himself,  "'tis a countenance that announces nothing
but the openness of virtue and goodness!  There
would be more reserve and closeness if she failed in
them.  I saw her myself,  at first,  with a prejudice in
her disfavour,  from the cruel reports I had heard ;  but
the moment I looked at her,  it was removed.     There

234 DIARY AND LETTERS       [PaKT VI.

was a dignity with her sweetness,  and a frankness with
her modesty,  that assured,  that convinced me,  beyond
all power of report,  of her real worth and innocence."

Nobody else spoke a word,  and his fervour was all at
an end ;  he only smiled,  and protested that,  admiring
her so very much himself,  it made him happy to hear I
was so warmly her admirer also.

Here the matter was forced to drop.  I was vexed at
the instance he brought,  and grieved to have nothing
more positive than my own opinion to bring forward
in her defence :  for it is most true I do believe her in-
nocent, though I fear she has been imprudent.

JjC Tpf Jjl  ^<  "Jt JjJ

The Queen,  in looking over some books while I was
in waiting one morning,  met with  "  The Mysterious
Mother,"  Mr.  Walpole's tragedy,  which he printed at
Strawberry Hill,  and gave to a few friends,  but has
never suffered to be published.  I expressed,  by looks,
I suppose,  my wishes,  for she most graciously offered
to lend it me.  I had long desired to read it,  from so
well knowing and so much liking the author  ;  and he
had promised me,  if I would come a second time to
Strawberry Hill,  that I should have it.  Excursions of
that sort being now totally over for me,  I was parti-
cularly glad of this only chance for gratifying my
curiosity.

I had had it in my possession some days without
reading it.  I had named it to Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,
and they were eager to see it :  the loan,  however,  be-
ing private,  and the book having been lent to Her
Majesty by Lord Harcourt,  I knew not under what
restrictions,  I could not produce it without leave  :  this
morning I asked and obtained it ;  and promised it
should be forthcominir.

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         235

A difficulty arose about the reader,  till at last Mrs.
Smelt,  with a sensible and good-humoured scolding,
told her husband that if he resisted any longer,  she
would read herself,  in defiance of her asthmatic com-
plaints.

This determined him,  and the curtain drew up.

The opening of the play contains a description of
superstitious fear^  extremely well,  and feelingly,  and
naturally depicted:  it begins,  too,  in an uncommon
style,  promising of interest and novelty  :  but my praise
will soon be ended,  swallowed up all in the heaviest
censure.

Dreadful was the whole !  truly dreadful !  A story of
so much horror,  from atrocious and voluntary guilt
never did I hear  !  Mrs.  Smelt and myself heartily re-
gretted that it had come in our way,  and mutually
agreed that we felt ourselves ill-used in having ever
heard it.  She protested she would never do herself
so much wrong as to acknowledge she had suffered the
hearing so wicked a tale,  and declared she would drive
it from her thoughts as she would the recollection of
whatever was most baneful to them.

For myself,  I felt a sort of indignant aversion rise
fast and warm in my mind,  against the wilful author of
a story so horrible :  all the entertainment and pleasure
I had received from Mr.  Walpole seemed extinguished
by this lecture,  which almost made me regard him
as the patron of the vices he had been pleased to
record.

Mr.  de Luc had escaped from the latter part of this
hateful tragedy,  protesting,  afterwards,  he saw what
was coming,  and Avould not stay to hear it out.

Mr.  Smelt confessed,  with me,  it was a lasting dis-
grace to Mr.  Walpole to have chosen such a subject.

230 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

and tliouglit  ]iim descrvini^  even of punishment for
such a painting of human wickedness  ;  and the more as
the story throughout was forced and improbable.

But the whole of all that could be said on this sub-
ject was summed up in one sentence by Mr.  Turbulent,
which,  for its masterly strength and justice,  brought to
my mind my ever-revered Dr.  Johnson. — "  Mr.  Wal-
pole/'  cried he,  "has chosen a plan of which nothing
can equal the abomination but the absurdity 1"

When I returned it to the Queen I professed myself
earnest in my hopes that she would never deign to
cast her eye upon it.

The next day I found my beloved Mrs.  Dclany ill.
I spent the whole afternoon with her,  in defiance of all
equerries.  I had the Queen's sanction for eloping,  as
she gave me a message about bleeding,  for my dear
sick Mrs.  Delany.

The following day,  thank God,  she was so much better
that my solicitude about her pretty much ceased.  I
read once more,  in the morning,  to the Queen,  a paper
of the Microcosm,  which I forget wdiether I have men-
tioned ;  it is a periodical imitation of other periodical
papers,  and written by a set of Eton scholars.  It has
great merit for such youthful composers."^'

Let me mention the sw^eetness of the lovely little
Princess Amelia.  Hearing Mrs.  Delany was ill,  of her
own accord,  when saying her prayers at night to  ^Irs.
Cheveley,  she said  "  Pray God make Lany well again  !"

At Eton College I made an invitation for the follow-
ing week.     A sister of Mrs.  Roberts,  Mrs.  Kennicott,

*  This work afterwards became famous as the vehicle of Can-
nings first literary efforts.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  237

was then on a visit to her,  and Madame de la Fite
had brought me sundry messages from her,  of her civil
desire about making my acquaintance.  Mrs.  Kenni-
cott,  who was a Miss Chamberlayn,  is widow of the
famous Hebraist,  Kennicott,  and has rendered herself
famous also,  by having studied that language,  after
marriage,  in order to assist her husband in his edition
of the Bible ;  she learnt it so well as to enable herself
to aid him very essentially in copying,  examining,  and
revising.  She was much acquainted with many of my
friends,  from whom I have frequently heard of her,
particularly Mr.  Cambridge,  Mrs.  Garrick,  and Miss
More ;  and I had received similar messages while I yet
lived in the world,  through their means ;  and therefore,
to avoid the eclat of an introduction at Madame de la
Fite's,  I obtained permission from the Queen to invite
her here,  with the Provost and Mrs.  Roberts.

7p  ^  ij^  ijj Jjc  ^

One morning at this time,  Mrs.  Delany had a long
visit from Lady Bute and Lady Louisa Stuart,  and I
went to her house to meet them.  I had frequently
been of the same party with them in town,  and I was
glad to see them again.  Lady Bute,  with an exterior
the most forbidding to strangers,  has powers of con-
versation the most entertaining and lively,  where she
is intimate.  She is full of anecdote,  delights in strokes
of general satire,  yet with mere love of comic,  not in-
vidious ridicule.  She spares not for giving her opi-
nions, and laughs at fools as well as follies with the
shrewdest derision.

Lady Louisa Stuart,  her youngest daughter,  has
parts equal to those of her mother,  with a deportment
and appearance infinitely more pleasing :  yet she is far
from handsome,  but proves how well beauty may be

238

DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

occasionally missed when understanding and vivacity
unite to fill up her place.  I had conceived much liking
to her formerly in town,  and had been much flattered
by marks of kindness received from her.  She and her
mother both sent to me now,  and I spent an hour — all
I had to command — very pleasantly with them.  They
told a thousand anecdotes of Mrs.  North,  whom they
had just parted from at Bath.  They seem both to in-
herit an ample portion of the wit of their mother and
grandmotiier.  Lady Mary Wortley Montagu,  though I
believe them both to have escaped all inheritance of
her faults.  I wish I had it in my power to meet
with them more frequently — spirited conversation with
agreeable people falls now so rarely to my lot.

During my dear Mrs.  Delany's confinement she de-
sired me to read to her something of Shakspeare.  We
had purposed going through his works,  which I had
begun to her in that eventful visit I made her at Wind-
sor, whence arose my present situation :  for had I not
just so met the Queen,  most probably I had never been

known to her.    Miss P now fixed upon Hamlet,  and

whenever we had not too much to say,  that was our
regale.  How noble a play it is,  considered in parts ;  how
wild and how improbable taken as a whole  !  But there
are speeches,  from time to time,  of such exquisite beauty
of language,  sentiment,  and pathos,  that I could wade
through the most thorny of roads to arrive at them,
especially when,  in meeting with them,  I meet at the
same time with a sympathy like INIrs.  Dclany's in feel-
ing and enjoying them.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  239

Again I read a little to the Queen — two  ''  Tatlers ;"
both happened to be very stupid ;  neither of them
Addison's^  and therefore reader and reading were
much on a par :  for I cannot arrive at ease in this ex-
hibition to Her Majesty;  and where there is fear or
constraint,  how deficient,  if not faulty,  is every per-
formance !

December 10th. — This evening I had my appointed
party,  the Provost,  Mrs.  Roberts,  Miss Roberts,  Mrs.
Kennicott,  and my dearest Mrs.  Delany,  quite re-
covered. We were soon joined by the General,  the
Colonel,  and Mr.  Fisher.

Mrs.  Kennicott is a middle-aged woman,  neither
ugly nor handsome.  She must certainly be very esti-
mable, for she is sought and caressed by a large circle
of friends,  among people whose friendship is most
honourable.  I saw too little of her to form any inde-
pendent judgment.

The best part of my evening was the honour done
to it by the entrance of His Majesty to fetch Mrs.
Delany.  He knew of the party,  and stayed to converse
with the Provost for a considerable time.  This was a
gratification that made all else immaterial.

Mrs.  Delany,  upon her recovery,  had invited the
General and Colonel to come to tea any evening.  For
them to be absent from the Lodge was contrary to all
known rules ;  but the Colonel vowed he would let the
matter be tried,  and take its course.  Mrs.  Delany
hoped by this means to bring the Colonel into better
humour with my desertion of the tea-table,  and to re-
concile Mm to an innovation of which he then must
become a partaker.

On tho day when this grand experiment was to be
made,  that we might not seem all to have eloped clan-

240 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

destine!}-,  in case of inquiry,  I previously made known
to the Queen my own intention,  and had her permis-
sion for my visit.  But the gentlemen,  determining to
build upon the chance of returning before they were
missed,  gave no notice of their scheme,  but followed
me to Mrs.  Delany's as soon as they quitted their own
table.

I had sent to speak with General Bude in the morn-
ing, and then arranged the party  :  he proposed that
the Colonel and hhnself should esquire me,  but I did
not dare march forth in such bold defiance ;  I told him,
therefore,  I must go in a chair.

Mrs.  Delany received us with her usual sweetness.
We then began amusing ourselves with surmises of
the manner in which we should all be missed,  if our
rooms were visited in our absence ;  and the Colonel,
in particular,  drew several scenes,  highly diverting,  of
■what he supposed would pass^- — of the King's surprise
and incredulity,  of the hunting up and down of the house
in search of him,  and of the orders issued throughout
the house to examine to what bed-post he had hanged
himself, — for nothing less than such an act of despera-
tion could give courage to an Equerry to be absent
without leave !

Further conjectures were still starting,  and all were
engaged in aiding them and enjoying them,  when sud-
denly a violent knocking at the door was followed by
the most unexpected entrance of the Queen and the
Princess Amelia !

Universal was the start,  and most instantaneous and
solemn the silence  !  I felt almost guilty,  though not
for myself:  my own invariable method of avowing all my
proceedings saved me from the smallest embarrass-
ment on my own account in this meeting ;  but I was

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  241

ashamed to appear the leader in a walk so new as that
of leaving the Lodge in an evening,  and to have induced
any others to follow my example.  The Queen looked
extremely surprised,  but not at me,  whom she knew she
should encounter ;  and the two gentlemen hardly could
settle whether to make humble explanations,  or frank
ridicule,  of the situation in which they were caught.
The Queen,  however,  immediately put them at their
ease,  speaking to them with marked civility,  and evi-
dently desirous not to mar what she found intended as
a private frolic,  by any fears of her disapprobation.

She did not stay long,  and they soon followed her
to the Lodge.  I also returned,  and at night the Queen
owned to me,  but very good-humouredly,  that she had
never been more astonished than at sight of the Equer-
ries that evening,  and asked me how it came to pass.

"Mrs.  Dclany,  ma'am,"  I answered,  "as she had
taken away their tea-maker,  thought she could do no
less than offer them tea for once at her own table."

And here the matter rested.  But the enterprise has
never been repeated.

Tuesday,  December 12rH. — We made now our last
excursion for this year,  and indeed for half of the next,
to Kew.  The party was Miss Planta,  Mr.  Turbulent,
and Mr.  de Luc.

The Queen,  immediately on my waiting upon her
after our arrival,  asked me if I had sent to invite Mr.
and Mrs.  Smelt  ?  I was most glad so to do,  and most
pleased by her gracious manner of investing me with
powers so much to my wish.

They came,  and the dinner and the coffee were very
pleasant,  for Mr.  Smelt,  and Mr.  Turbulent,  and Mr.
de Luc took the whole talk,  and supported a conver-
sation extremely instructive and lively.     The subject

VOL.  III.  R

242 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

was monks and convents.  Mr.  Turbulent found all the
materials for the discourse,  with a fulness of memory
and knowledge that tauglit me very highly to respect
his abilities and acquirements;  Mr.  Smelt descanted
upon them with a fertility of fancy that furnished mc
with many new ideas  ;  and Mr.  de Luc broke forth into
digressions,  explanations,  and discussions,  so extrane-
ous, yet so ingenious,  that they could not but entertain,
though they sometimes tease,  by constantly retarding
the progress of what is being pursued.  Mr.  de Luc
is one of the most retrograde conversers and disputants
I ever met with.

Just about this time I put a finishing stroke to an
affair which cost me a very unexpected disturbance.  I
had a letter from Mr.  Foss,  the attorney,  written in
the name of Messrs.  Cadell and Payne,  to inform mc
that  "  Cecilia"  was then printing in Ireland or Scotland,
I forget which,  illegally ;  and that they desired me to
sign a letter,  which Mr.  Foss enclosed,  in which I
threatened,  jointly with these booksellers,  to prosecute
to the utmost extent of the law any person or persons
who should dare thus pirate my work.

Equally astonished and dissatisfied at such a demand,
I wrote for answer that I had wholly done with the
book,  that I would enter into no prosecution for any
consideration,  and that I wished them well through a
business that was entirely their own.

To this refusal succeeded fresh applications.  I was
made so uneasy,  that I confided in Mr.  Smelt,  and
begged his counsel.  He happened to be present when
one of the letters came to me.  He advised me by no
means to give way to a request so big with conse-
quences wliich I could not foresee^  and^  since the pro-

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  ^43

perty and the profit were now alike made over to them,
to persevere in leaving to their own sole conduct so
disagreeable a contest.

I did very thankfully follow this advice ;  but they
next had recourse to my father,  and offered to indem-
nify me of all costs,  if I would only give them my name
and sanction.

My name and sanction were just what I most wished
to keep to myself;  but so importunate they continued
that my father asked the opinion of Mr.  Batt.  He
said he conceived that they had actually a claim to my
concurrence in prosecuting any false editors.  A softer
paper was drawn up than the first,  and,  little as I
liked it,  I was obliged to sign myself,  with the utmost
reluctance,  their assistant in the proceedings.

I know not when I have been more astonished than
in finding myself in a situation so unlike any into
which I had ever meant to place myself.  I have heard
nothing of the matter since:  I flatter myself,  there-
fore, that this signature,  fierce as it was constrained,
has frightened those who have received,  as much as it
did her who writ it.  Otherwise,  to be involved in a
prosecution, — a lawsuit!  — I know few things indeed
that could more heartily have disturbed me.

A most troublesome letter,  also,  arrived to me from
Ireland.  A Mrs.  Lemman wrote me her whole history,
which was very lamentable,  if true,  but which concluded
with requesting me to pay her debts,  amounting to
about thirty or forty pounds,  and to put her and her
family into some creditable way of business  :  otherwise,
as I was now her sole resource,  she must inevitably
put an end to her existence  !

I wrote an immediate answer,  to assure her I had
no power to comply with her demand,  and frankly to

R 2

244 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PakT VI.

own that if my  ])o\vcr were greater,  my claims nearer
home must first be satisfied  :  I was sorry for a reliance
so misplaced,  but as we were wholly strangers to each
other,  I could never suppose myself a resource on which
she had placed much dependence.  And I concluded
■with a severe — I thought it right — reprehension of her
threat,  assuring her that I held such an action in too
much horror to suffer it to move my compassion at the
expense of my prudence,  and,  indeed,  ability;  and I
strongly advised her to take an opposite method in the
next plan she formed,  than that of using a menace that
must rob her of pity by provoking displeasure.  To
this I added such counsel as her letter enabled me to
draw out for her,  and sent it ofi".

Soon after came another letter from the same person.
She told me she had just read  "  Cecilia,''  and was satis-
fied whoever could write it must save and deliver her ;
and she added that she was then compiling her own
memoirs,  and woidd mention to the world,  in the
highest terms,  all I would do for her.

Simple artifice  ! — to suppose flattery so grossly pro-
mised could so dearly be bought ! — vexed was I,  how-
ever, to have written at all to a person who then was
in the act of committing to tlie press probably whatever
she could gather.  I made no further answer, — I only
wish,  now,  I had a copy of what she has already.
Doubtless her threat originated from a scheme like
that she supposes in Mr.  Harrel.  She thought where
Cecilia had been frightened,  I also must give way.
She forgot that she was no wife of my earliest friend,
no guardian to myself,  that I saw not the instrument of
death in her hand,  and that I possessed not three
thousand pounds a year from which to borrow her
release.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  245

Ar.cl now for the last day of Kew.

Wednesday,  December 13th. — The Queen,  in the
morning,  spoke to me of Mrs.  Hayes,  wife of the gen-
tleman I have already mentioned,  and said she was a
very pretty kind of woman,  and that she wished me to
invite her to tea.

Our dinner was as usual,  the Smelts,  Messrs.  de Luc
and Turbulent,  and Miss Pianta;  and the last only
was gone when Mr.  and Mrs.  Hayes arrived.

Mrs.  Hayes is a really pretty as well as a pretty sort
of woman,  and modest,  well-bred,  and sensible ;  and
the afternoon,  with the assistance of Mr.  Smelt,  did very
welL They went early home,  and both the Smelts were
called to the Queen's rooms;  M.  de Luc said he must
retire to write down  "  some thoughts upon an experi-
ment in his head,"  and only Mr.  Turbulent remained.

I found the partner of my confinement a man of un-
common capacit}^  but something there was hung about
him,  or hung about me,  that prevented my assimilat-
ing with him in anything.  I saw he was endowed
with great powers of agreeability ;  but I thought him
obtrusive ;  and that alone is a drawback to all merit,
that I know not how to pass over.  He spoke his
opinions with great openness,  equally upon people and
things ;  but it seemed rather from carelessness than
confidence,  and I know him too little to feel obliged in
his trust.  The whole trouble of the discourse fell upon
him ;  somethino;  between fear of his abilities,  and doubts
of his turn of mind,  keeping me entirely grave and re-
served. It was a trouble,  however,  he was highly capa-
ble of taking,  for he was never at a loss,  yet uttered not
a word that was superfluous.

The talk was chiefly upon mere general subjects,
till by some accident the approaching birth-day of the

24G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VL

Queen was mentioned.  He then inf|uired of mc liow I
should like the state business of that day  ?

I told him I knew nothing of what I had to expect
from it.  He undertook readily to inform me.  He said
I was to be sumptuously arrayed,  to sit in one of the
best rooms at St.  James's,  and there to receive all the
ladies of the Queen in particular,  and to do the honours
to all the  "gentlemen also,  bclonirin":  to the establish-
ment.

I laughed,  and told him he had painted to me a
scene of happiness peculiarly adapted to my taste !

He did not concern himself to examine whether or
not I was serious,  but said he supposed,  of course,  the
dignity of such a matter of state could not be disagree-
able to me,  and added,  he should take the liberty to
wish mc joy of the day,  among the rest,  when it arrived,
and to see me in my glory.

After this he said,  "  You have now nearly seen the
Avhole of everything that will come before you:  in a
very short time you will have passed six months here,
and then you will know your hfe for as many,  and twice
and thrice as many years.  You will have seen everybody
and everything,  and the same round will still be the
same,  year after year,  without intermission or alteration."

-1:  *  *  --K  *  ;ic

Saturday,  December 23rd. — I had a sweet and
most gracious visit from the Queen in my own apart-
ment. She had opened the door to let herself in,  and
I did not know her till she advanced near me,  and kept
my seat very composedly,  hardly looking up,  but con-
cluding it must be Miss P ,  as no one else enters

without rapping first.  She laughed when she saw my
surprise ;  and I laughed too,  for the circumstance ex-
plained itself too obviously to need any apology ;  and

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  247

mj near-sightedness is now pretty generally known,
from the various mistakes it has occasioned me.

One of these had just led the King to make inquiry
if I were not short-sighted,  for,  in returning to the
Lodge from Mrs.  Delany's,  I met His Majesty,  Mr.
Smelt,  General Bude,  and Colonel Goldsworthy,  and
by not distinguishing who they were till I approached
them,  I had advanced straight forward till 1 came up
to them;  a matter contrary to all etiquette,  Avhich
exacts a dead stand-still,  and retiring to the side of the
walls or houses,  when any of the Royal Family appear,
and till they are passed.  However,  his own good
sense instantly pointed out to him whence my misde-
meanor must arise,  and his good-nature led him to
make me easy under it,  by turning to me very gra-
ciously, and taking off his hat while he asked me how I
had left Mrs.  Delany.  He has a true benevolence of
nature,  and never fancies ill or evil without manifest
and undoubted provocation.

The Queen,  when in my room,  looked over all my
books — a thing pretty briefly done,  as I have scarce
any of my own but a few dictionaries,  and such works
as have been the gifts of their own authors.  My
father's most delightful library,  as I then told her,  with
my free access to it,  had made it a thing as unnecessary
as,  in fact,  it would have been impracticable,  for me to
buy books of my own.  I believe she was a little disap-
pointed; for I could see,  by her manner of turning
them over,  she had expected to discover my own choice
and taste in the collection I possessed.

The day after,  she increased my little store herself,
in the sweetest manner imaginable.  She presented me
a set of Ogden s Sermons,  asking me first if I had read
them.     No,  I said: — "The Bishop of Worcester,"  she

24S DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

answered,  "approves themmucli,  and recommends tliem
so I give you nothing bad for you."

You may easily suppose what would follow on my
part on such a speech,  and when I had returned my
thanks I said,  "  These Sermons,  ma'am,  were great fa-
vourites vdth Dr.  Johnson ;  he thought of them very
highly,  and frequently quoted them."

''O,  I am glad of that!"  cried she,  smiling archly,
"  for now I am sure you will like them  !"  and indeed I
do  :  as many as I have yet read of them,  I find in-
structive and excellent.

We had scarce left the dining-parlour for my apart-
ment when the Princess Royal followed us,  to fetch
Mrs.  Smelt to the Queen ;  and then,  while I was left in
a tete-a-tete I always prize with her husband,  the King
entered.  He dehghts in Mr.  Smelt,  and seems to
meet and to converse with him with  '^  pleasure ever
new."  He stayed talking upon many subjects,  several
of them so confidential with respect to business and
business matters,  that I was almost tempted to leave
the room.  But when I considered it was my own pri-
vate apartment,  and not the eating-room,  in which he
had voluntarily entered into this conference,  I conceived
I might more properly stay,  especially as he never
lowered his voice,  nor seemed to intend excluding my
attention.  At last,  having said all his say,  and stayed
about an liour,  he went away,  and called to  ^Mr.  Smelt
to follow him.

In the morning of this day,  the Bishop of Worcester,
Dr.  Hurd,  arrived at the Lodge,  to spend the Windsor
week.  I was told that he had always dined with  ]Mrs.
Schwellenberg and Mrs.  Haggcrdorn,  upon these visits,
which it seems he has made annually at Christmas for

1786]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         249

some years.  As I had not any acquaintance with him,
I had neither spirits nor pretensions to the honour of
receiving him.  His character and his works would
have made me think it a good fortune to have met with
him,  on any other terms,  but those of presiding at a
table;  and to avoid that,  I took as much pains as any
one else,  thinking equally well of him,  would have
taken to obtain it.  I mentioned to the equerries my
respectful disinclination to the encounter,  and begged
they would immediately invite him to their table upon
his arrival.  To this they gladly assented,  as he was
well known,  and highly regarded by them all,  and they
had always thought it an infringement of their right
that he had hitherto belonged to the female table.

Having taken this previous step,  to prevent any mis-
chief arising from it,  I next told the Queen frankly
what I had done,  expressing at the same time my re-
spect for the Bishop,  whom I had once met at Mrs.
Delany's,  but who,  I doubted not,  would be much better
pleased by this new arrangement than by coming to a
person almost wholly a stranger to him.

The Queen made no sort of comment,  but I had
spoken,  and was therefore easy.

When Mr.  Smelt arrived he spoke to me at once of
the Bishop,  with whom he has always maintained the
most intimate friendship,  from the time of being Sub-
Governor to the Prince of Wales,  when the Bishop
was preceptor.  I told him openly what I had done ;
but I was sorry to see that he was vexed and disap-
pointed. He loves the Bishop,  and had flattered him-
self with the expectation of dining and spending the
afternoon in his company during his whole Royal
visit ;  and I was sorry also for my shyness,  and frankly
blamed it.

t^50 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

At tea-time,  when I returned to the caling-parlour,
I found the General and the Colonel,  and they told me
that the Bishop had desired them to introduce him to
me,  and was just coming to my room when the King
sent for him.  I was glad to find by this civility he
had taken in good part my relinquishing him to the
equerries.

At the same moment that they left me to go to the
concert-room Mr.  Smelt found his way back.  He
came,  he said,  to beg a little tea with me ;  and we were
beginning a conversation that was reviving to my
spirits,  when General Bude opened the door,  and an-
nouncing the Bishop of Worcester,  ushered him in,
and returned to the concert-room.

His appearance and air are dignified,  placid,  grave,
and mild,  but cold,  and rather distancing.  He is ex-
tremely well bred,  nevertheless,  and his half-hour's
visit passed off without effort or constraint.  I was in-
debted, indeed,  for all its agreeability,  to the presence
of Mr.  Smelt.

December 24th. — When 1 attended the Queen to-
day after church,  she kept me with her the whole morn-
ing, and spoke with more openness and trust upon
various matters than 1 had yet observed.  Chiefly the
subject was the unhappy and frail Lady C.  The Queen
had known her all her life,  and particularly interested
herself in all her proceedings  :  she had frequently re-
ceived her in private,  and had taken pains as well as
pleasure in shewing a marked,  a useful,  and a partial
regard for her.  What a disappointment,  Avhat a shock,
then,  did she not receive by her fall 1 She spoke of the
whole transaction,  gave me her character,  her story,
her situation — all at large ;  and at last,  in speaking of
her utter ruin,  and all its horrors,  the tears ran down

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  251

her face,  and she held her handkerchief to her eyes
some time before she could dry them.

How amiable and how touching did such sorrow
appear in a mind so rigidly a stranger to every frail
sensation that could lead to similar guilt !  I never
admired the Queen more.  In characters the most ex-
alted, not all the severity of virtue,  however nobly sus-
tained, strikes me with so much admiration as a soft
commiseration of vice.

My dear Mrs.  Delany to-day joined us at coffee  ;  but
the King,  staying first near an hour to converse with
her and Mr.  Smelt,  took her to the Queen's rooms as
well as Mrs.  Smelt and her charming husband.

Christmas-Day. — Miss Planta and I went together
to the Chapel Royal this morning,  where we attended
two complete services.  The first concluded with a ser-
mon by Dr.  Wilson,  one of the canons;  after which
we received the sacrament from Dr.  Lockman,  senior
canon,  and Mr.  Majendie  ;  and then returning to our
seats,  stayed on,  after the communion service was over,
till the arrival of the Royal Eamil}^  when the prayers,
read by Mr.  Fisher,  began again,  and were ended with
a sermon by the Bishop of Worcester ;  after which
everybody left ti;ie chapel except the Royal Family,  of
■whom the King,  Queen,  Princess Royal,  and Princess
Augusta remained to take the sacrament.

Immediately after so awful a solemnity,  to go through
the whole service a second time was just what I liked.
The mind,  by this sacred ceremon}-,  is fitted solely for
devotion,  and I was happy in recapitulating prayers
and praises here rather than in my chamber.

The sermon of the Bishop was excellent — plain,
simple,  devout,  instructive  ;  v.ritten manifestly for the
Ro}al ears,  yet carefully and without disguise level-

^52 DIARY AND LETTERS       [PaRT VI.

liiif^  tlicm,  on this lioly occasion,  with other creatures
of the dust,  ahke and throughout the world dependent,
frail,  and unimportant.

When I came home I read some of my Queen's gift,
''Ogden's Sermons."  Some may sound odd,  but they
are so short that a common sermon would at least
comprise three — in quantity,  I mean,  not in matter ;
for indeed they are admirable.

My dear Mrs.  Delany could not come to-day,  and I
was sorry,  though I wanted her not,  nor any of those
who did,  to wish me what was so far from possibility —
a merry Christmas !

Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt dined with me,  and,  as usual.
Miss Planta,  and when we came to my apartment for
coffee,  the King soon entered,  and stayed long in con-
versation with Mr.  Smelt;  and now,  finding by his
manner nothing was wrong,  1 had no longer any scru-
ples with regard to remaining in the room.  My dear
friends will both wonder I ever should have had any ;
but there are so many peculiarities and unaccount-
abilities here,  that I can feel sure of nothing but by-
long and repeated trial.

The Queen sent for the Bishop,  and ordered him tea
in the concert-room,  that he might be nearer at hand.
He is,  and justly,  most high in her favour.  In town
she has his picture in her bedroom,  and its companion
is Mrs.  Delany.  How worthily paired !  what honour
to herself such honour to them  !  There is no other por-
trait there but of royal houses — her own mother,  one
of her brothers,  His Majesty,  the late Queen of Den-
mark, Princess Elizabeth when a baby,  and two of the
youngest Princes when children.

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  253

The Queen presented me this morning with two
pieces of black stuff,  very prettily embroidered,  for
shoes.  These little tokens of favour she has a manner
all her own,  in its grace and elegance,  of bestowing.

The next day the Bishop again came to my tea-table,
where he found Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,  and a very de-
sirable discourse was beginning,  when the Queen sent
for him.  She is very right,  for how seldom can she
enjoy conversation so worthy of her,  from those whose
rank and station enable her to call for them thus
publicly  !

The King just after fetched Mr.  Smelt ;  and the
equerries and Miss P came to tea.  Colonel Golds-
worthy was in one of his most facetious humours,  and
invited us to a supper at his house in town,  giving a
really comic account of his way of life,  the great power
of his domestics,  their luxurious manner of living,  and
the ascendency they had gained over their master.

Mrs.  Smelt was to be the head lady,  he said,  of the

party,  to which she readily agreed.     Miss P made

inquiries into every particular of the entertainment he
was to give us ;  and he uttered a very solemn charge
to her,  not to offend one of his maids,  an elderly per-
son, so extremely tenacious of her authority,  that she
frequently took up a poker,  and ran furiously about
with it,  after any of her fellow-servants,  who thwarted
her will.  To me also he gave a similar charge — ''I
have a poor old soul of a man,  ma'am,"  says he,  ^'  that
does his business very well for such a forlorn poor
fellow as me ;  but now,  when you want a glass of wine
or so,  don't be in too great a hurry with him — that's
all I beg ;  don't frighten him,  poor fellow,  with calling
to him hastily,  or angrily,  or that — for if you once do
that he won t know a single hing he says or does all

254 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

the rest of the time i— he'll quite lose his wits at a
stroke !"

Some one now by cliance named Mrs.  Ariana Egcrton,

the bedchamber woman  ;  and Miss P said she now

sent in her name in that manner,  as she must no longer
be called Miss,  from her present office.

''Mrs.  what?"  cried Colonel Goldsworthy,  "Mrs.
Ariana  ?  what name is that  ?"

^'  Why,  it's her name,"  said Miss P ;  ''  she writes

it upon her cards."

"Ariana?"  repeated he,  '' I never heard the like in
my life  !  Why I no more believe — what will these folks
tell us next !  It's nobody's name under the sun,  I'll
be bound for it.  All the world put together shan't
make me believe it.  Ariana,  forsooth  !  why it must be
a nick-name !  depend upon it it's nothing else.  There,
at my poor miserable bachelor's cell in the Mews,
I've got a boy that says his name is Methusalem ;  he
comes from Windsor,  too !  Heaven help the poor
people  !  if they are but near a court,  it turns their heads
directly.  I had the boy only out of the stable,  just by
the bottom of the garden,  yet he told me his name was
Methusalem  !  A likely matter,  truly  !  ha I ha  !  I'll be
sworn his name is no other than Jack  !"

"  Pray,"  cried I,  "  what do you call him for short  ?"

"Why,  ma'am,  that was a great difficulty to me at
first ;  I'd have called him Me,  for shortest,  but I thought
the people would all laugh,  and say.  Ah,  poor gentle-
man, it's all over with him now  !  he's calling himself
when he wants his man  !  and then I thought of Thusy.
Thusy sounds soft and pretty enough ;  but I thought
it is like a woman's name — Susy ;  to be sure,  thinks I,
they'll all suppose I mean one of the maids ;  and then
again,  ah,  say they,  the poor gentleman's certainly

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  255

cracked !  nothino^  else would make him behave so
comical !  And then I thought of Lem.  But it's quite
too much for me to settle such a set of hard long
names !"

In this manner he ran on,  till General Bude reminded
him it was time they should appear in the concert-
room.

"  Ay,"  cried he,  reluctantly,  "  now for the fiddlers  !
There I go,  plant myself against the side of the
chimney,  stand first on one foot,  then on the other^
hear over and over again all that fine squeaking,  and
then fall fast asleep,  and escape by mere miracle from
flouncing down plump in all their faces  !"

"  What would the Queen say if you did that  ?  "

"  O,  ma'am,  the Queen would know nothing of the
matter ;  she'd only suppose it some old double bass
that tumbled."

"  Why,  could not she see what it was  ?"

"  O no  !  ma'am^  we are never in the room with the
Queen  !  that's the drawing-room,  beyond,  where the
Queen sits ;  we go no farther than the fiddling-room.
As to the Queen,  we don't see her week after week
sometimes.  The King,  indeed,  comes there to us,  be-
tween whiles,  though that's all as it happens,  now Price
is gone.     He used to play at backgammon with Price."

"  Then what do you do there  ?"

"Just what I tell you — nothing at all,  but stand as
furniture  !  But the worst is,  sometimes,  when my
poor eye-peepers are not quite closed,  I look to the
music-books to see what's coming ;  and there I read
'  Chorus of Virgins  :'  so then,  when they begin,  I look
about me.  A chorus of virgins,  indeed  !  why there's
nothing but ten or a dozen fiddlers  !  not a soul beside !
it's as true as I'm alive !    So then,  when we've stood sup-

'25G DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

porting the clnmncy-])iecc about two liours,  why then,
if I'm not called upon,  1 shufHe back out of the room,
make a profound bow to the harpsichord,  and Fm off."

So was he again then,  with the General ;  but the
evening was not concluded,  for the Bishop returned,
accompanied by Mr.  Smelt.

•'  Her Majesty,  ma'am,''  said he,  with a tone and look
extremely pleasing,  "has been so gracious as to order
me tea,  which I have drunk,  but I was determined still
not to be disappointed of having some with Miss
Burney."

Mr.  Smelt spoke of the Christmas Day sermon,  and
gave it,  delicately,  yet pointedly,  its due praise.  I could
not take that liberty,  except by small,  little assents.  The
Bishop,  with a very expressive smile,  turning towards
me,  said, ''  Mrs.  Delany has been making me a request
to have a copy of the sermon to read ;  no,  I told her,  it
'would not do for her — it was a mere plain,  simple
Christian sermon,  made for the King and Queen,  but
it would not do for a bel-esprit .'"

No further summons arriving to hasten them,  the
Bishop,  with Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,  stayed rather later,
and the quietness,  with the solidity of the conversa-
tion, joined to my real reverence of the Bishop's piety,
made this evening more tranquil and less strained than
any I had passed for a long Avhile.

I think I have omitted to mention,  in its place,  IMr.
Mathias.  My first official visit from Mr.  Gabriel,  uncle
to our,  or rather Charlotte's Mr.  Mathias,  I remem-
ber telling;  but my second quarterly meeting was with
the nephew.  Greatly to my advantage was the change.
He really deserved our Charlotte's good opinion,  in its
fullest possible extent.  He stayed with me more than
an hour,  though he came only for a minute ;  but so

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         257

much he found to say,  and all so lively and well worth
hearing,  that I was pleased with his stay,  and en-.
couraiz:ed him to leno-then it.  His first recommenda-
tion with me was a secret pleasure in receiving a
favourite of my dear Charlotte.  How widely may we
spread the chains of true affection  !  when absent from
its objects,  how tenderly do we bind them round every-
thing those objects could have intercourse with !  how
fantastically,  yet how soothingly weave tliem into all
our actions,  of our own choice,  by fond though ima-
ginary concatenations in our ideas  !

If you will not laugh at me too much,  I will also ac-
knowledge that I liked Mr.  Mathias all the more for
observing him as awkward and embarrassed how to pre-
sent me my salary as I felt myself in receiving it.

There is something,  after all,  in money,  by itself
money,  that I can never take possession of it without a
secret feeling of something like a degradation  :  money
in its effects,  and its produce,  creates far different and
more pleasant sensations.  But here it made m.e feel
so like — what I am,  in short — a servant !  We are all
servants,  to be sure,  in the red book,  but still

Well !  to the Christmas week again.

December 27th. — This morning I had the very
grateful employment of going to my dear Mrs.  Delan}^
to prepare her for seeing,  in two days'  time,  my be-
loved fa,ther :  he had promised me a Windsor visit in
these holydays,  and she had most kindly insisted her
house might be his home.  I also told the Queen,  who
appeared quite pleased for me that I had such a
pleasure in view.

While I v/as yet at Mrs.  Delany's,  arranging mat-
ters, the Princess Augusta,  attended by Lady Eliza-
beth Waldegrave,  came to make her a visit.     I would

VOL,  III.  s

258 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

then have retreated,  but the Prmcess desired me to
stay,  and immediately and most condescendingly made
me take my seat in the little part}^  consisting only of

themselves,  Miss P ,  and the venerable lady oi"  the

house.

Mrs.  Delany ordered a breakfast ;  her Royal High-
ness took some of it im.mediately,  and desired Lady
Elizabeth,  and asked every body else,  one after another,
by name :  all declined,  and she exclaimed,  with great
naivete,  "  But I can't eat alone  !  I really cannot do it.
I never did in my life I"  Lady EHzabeth then took
some chocolate.

The conversation was all upon common topics,  only
rendered interesting by a sweetness and most un-
affected simplicity of manners in the amiable Princess,
who is the general,  the almost universal first favourite
even among those who are every one highly approved.
The next morning I met the Bishop of Worcester
at Mrs.  Delany 's  :  he was very serious,  unusually so,  but
Mrs.  Delany was cheerful.  He soon left us  ;  and she
then told me she had been ill in the night,  and had
been led to desire some very solemn conversation with
the good Bishop,  who is her friend of many years'
standing,  and was equally intimate with her lost darling,
the Duchess of Portland.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany had been discoursing upon
the end of all things wiih this good and pious Bishop;
and she went on with the conversation,  in a manner so
content with her fair expectations,  yet so meek u]  on
her deserts,  that she inspired me,  at once,  with double
pain in the prospect of losing so inestimable a friend.
O how shall I now do without her  ?  1 felt so sorrowed
in the talk,  that she sweetly and benignly glided into
other and less affecting matters,  yet not till first she

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  259

had given me this serious exhortation,  tenderly at the
same time folding me to her loved heart, — "  You must
let me,  my dear Fanny,  you must let me go quietly  !"
I understood her,  and promised all the composure I
could gather.  O could I but cling to her wings  !  how
willingly would they waft me,  if to her indulgent par-
tiality my future lot were given in charge  !

All gay and all alive,  her mind relieved and her
sweet spirits cheered by the conference with the
Bishop,  who had spoken peace to her fears and joy to
her best hopes,  this evening came again my revered
JNIrs.  Delany,  With what admiration did I look at
her — what admiration and what tenderness  !  I knew
what was passing in her mind ;  I knew well she be-
lieved her dissolution approaching,  and I saw with
what pious,  what edifying faith she was resigning her-
self to everlasting mercy.

This,  however,  has passed away,  and her precious
life is yet spared us.

Friday,  December 29th. — This da}-,  by long
arrangement,  1 expected to receive a visit from my
father.  He had engaged himself to me for three days,
and was to reside at Mrs.  Delany's.

I acquainted the Queen with my hopes,  which she
heard with the most pleased and pleasing expression
of approbation.  She told them to the King,  who in-
quired, with an air of real satisfaction in my happiness,
when he would come  ?

Afterwards,  while the Queen was at her toilette,  and
asking me kind cjuestions of my father and all the
family,  the King entered.  He inquired if my father
Avas arrived.     I was delighted to see,  by their natural

s 2

260 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

behaviour,  how right,  as well as sweet,  was this parental
visit.

Before this,  however,  she had desired that my father
should dine with me ;  and then asked me to invite,
also,  Mile.  MontmouUin,  because she w^as wanted early
in the afternoon;  and she condescended to add  "I
would not else have her with you to-day ;  but she will
not stay long,  and I hope it won't be troublesome to
you."

At three o'clock our dearest Padre arrived — well,
gay,  and sweet — and we spent near two hours wholly
alone,  and truly happy.

At dinner the party was enlarged by the presence
of Mrs.  Delany and Mr.  Smelt ;    to these were added

the lovely and lively Miss P ,  the gentle Mile.

MontmouUin,  and the friendly Miss Planta.

My dear father was the principal object to all,  and
he seemed to enjoy himself,  and to be enjoyed through-
out.

We returned to my own apartment to our coffee,
and the two governess ladies retired ;  and then came
the King for Mrs.  Delany ;  and not for that solely,
though ostensibl}^  for his behaviour to my father
proved his desire to see and converse with him.

He began immediately upon musical matters,  and
entered into a discourse upon them wdth the most ani-
mated wish of both hearing and communicating his
sentiments ;  and my dear father was perfectly ready
to meet his advances.  No one,  at all used to the court
etiquettes,  could have seen him without smiling ;  he
was so totally unacquainted with the forms usually
observed in the royal presence,  and so regardless or
thoughtless of acquiring them,  that he moved,  spoke,
acted,  and debated,  precisely with the same ease and

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         261

freedom that he would have used to any other gentle-
man whom he had accidentally met.

A certain flutter of spirits,  which always accompa-
nies these interviews,  even with those who are least
awed by them,  put my dear father off the guard which
is the customary assistant upon these occasions,  of
watching what is done by those already initiated in
these royal ceremonies  :  highly gratified by the open-
ness and good-humour of the King,  he was all energy
and spirit,  and pursued every topic that was started,
till he had satisfied himself upon it,  and started every
topic that occurred to him,  whether the King was ready
for another or not.

While the rest,  retreating towards the wainscot,
formed a distant and respectful circle,  in which the
King alone moves,  this dear father came forward into
it himself,  and,  wholly bent upon pursuing whatever
theme was begun,  followed the King when he moved
away,  and came forward to meet his steps when he
moved back  ;  and while the rest waited his immediate
address ere they ventured to speak a word,  he began
and finished,  sustained or dropped,  renewed or de-
clined, every theme that he pleased,  without consult-
ing anything but his feelings and understanding.

This vivacity and this nature evidently pleased the
King,  whose good sense instantly distinguishes what is
unconscious from what is disrespectful ;  and his stay in
the room,  which I believe was an hour,  and the perfect
good-humour with which he received as well as returned
the sprightly and informal sallies of my father,  were
proofs the most convincing of his approbation.

December 30th. — This morning my dear father
carried me to Dr.  Herschel.  That great and very
extraordinary man received us with almost open arms.

-62 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaTIT VI.

He is very fond of my father,  who is one of tlie Council
of the Royal Society this year,  as well as himself,  and
he has much invited me when we have met at the
Lodge or at Mr.  de Luc's.

At this time of day there was nothing to see
but his instruments:  those,  however,  are curiosities
sufficient.  His immense new telescope,  the largest
ever constructed,  will still,  I fear,  require a year or two
more for finishing,  but 1 hope it will then reward his
labour and ingenuity by the new views of the heavenly
bodies,  and their motions,  which he flatters himself
will be procured by it.  Already,  with that he has
now in use,  he has discovered fifteen hundred universes  !
How many more he may find who can conjecture  ?
The moon,  too,  which seems his favourite object,  has
already afforded him two volcanoes ;  and his own
planet,  the Georgium Sidus,  has now shewn two satel-
lites. From such a man what may not astronomy ex-
pect, when an instrument superior in magnitude to any
ever yet made,  and constructed wholly by himself or
under his own eye,  is the vehicle of his observation  ?

T wished very much to have seen his sister,  whose
knowledge in his own science is so extraordinary,  and
who herself was the first discoverer of the last comet ;
but she had been up all night,  and was then in bed.

Mr.  Smelt joined us,  by appointment;  and the
Bishop of Worcester came afterwards,  with Dr.
Douglas,  to whom I was then introduced.  He is the
famous editor,  who has published and revised and
corrected so many works  :  among them,  the last voyage
round the world.

By the invitation of Mr.  Herschel,  I now took a
walk which will sound to you rather strange :  it was
through his telescope  !  and it held me quite upright.

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         263

and without the least inconvenience  ;  so would it have
done had 1 been dressed in feathers and a bell hoop
— such is its circumference.  Mr.  Smelt led the way,
walking also upright;  and my father followed.  After
we were gone,  the Bishop and Dr.  Douglas were
tempted,  for its oddity,  to make the same promenade.

Again my dear father,  by the Queen's command,
dined with me ;  and Mv.  Smelt and Miss Planta met
him.     Mrs.  Delany could not come till the afternoon.

After coffee,  the sweet Princess iVmelia was brought
by the King himself,  to fetch Mrs.  Delany.  The King
shewed her to my father,  who could not but most un-
affectedly admire so lovely a child.

Then,  sportively pointing to my father,  the King
whispered her,  ''Do you know who that is,  Emily?"
-No."

''  Is it Miss Burney's papa?"
-No!"

"JVhy not?  is he too young  ?''
-Yes!"

This mightily entertained the King,  who repeated
it to my father,  as a great compliment to his youthful
looks.

The little Princess then,  taking Mrs.  Delany by the
hand,  pulled her on,  to go to her mamma,  saying,  ^'Comev
Mrs.  Delany,  come to mamma;  take care,  Mrs.  Delany I
— Papa,  come and take care of Mrs.  Delany down the
steps  ! — Don't you come alone,  Mrs.  Delany  !"

The King,  though I believe he had meant to stay
and converse again with my father,  was too much the
father himself to resist this bewitchino^  little claimant;
and away they all went ;  though he turned round first,
and in answer to her  -  Take care of Mrs.  Delany  !"  said,
"  And who shall we leave to take care of Miss Bur-
ney  ?"

264 DIARY AND LETTERS  [P AKT VI.

*'Why — Thru  /"'  cried she,  comically,  and pointing to
my father.

When Mrs.  Delany came back,  to take my father to
her hospitable house,  she whispered me that she had
been requesting the Queen to allow her a copy of the
verses on a Great Coat :  and the Queen had referred
her to me ;  saying at the same time, —

*^  I would give you them,  and I would shew and pro-
duce them often,  and to many,  but I cannot,  because of
what belongs to myself in them."

Very true,  my conscious Queen  !  thought conscious
F.  B.,  for on that very reliance did I compose and
present them.

Sunday,  December 31st. — This morning my dear
father breakfasted with me previous to his departure :
most reluctantly I parted with him,  my present pre-
eminence enabling nie to see him so constantly and so
irreproachably,  that my enjoyment in his society had
no mixture of thwartini]^  ino^redients.  He made his
last bow at the chapel,  where the King condescended
to ask if he Avould not stay another day  ?  and the
Queen told me,  at noon,  she would surely have seen
my father,  had she not imagined he would have re-
mained longer.

I consulted with my oracle,  Mr.  Smelt,  upon these
gracious hints,  and he was fully of opinion ray father
ouirht to come airain.     I wrote him this,  and he pro-

■o"~  '^ *-o^

mised compliance.  I had already told the Queen how
much he wished to express his grateful sense of her
goodness to his daughter,  and she seemed willing and
pleased to give him the opportunity ;  for I instantly
communicated to her the project of his returning.

I finished the old year in excellent society,  thoufrh
damped by my father's departure.     1 had invited Mr.

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         265

Bryant to dinner,  to meet Mr.  Smelt,  and tlie}^  were
both so well pleased with each other,  that each ap-
peared to great advantage.

The King,  who is always much entertained with Mr.
Bryant's conversation,  came into my room at cofFee-
time,  and stayed talking with him near an hour.

And here ends December,  1786.

PART VII.
17S7.

CONTENTS.

Good Resolutions— West's Picture — St.  George's Chapel — The
King's Offering as Sovereign of the Garter  —  The Bishop
of Worcester — Benjamin West— Simplicity of his Character
and Manners— St.  James's — New Year's Gift of the Queen —
Dr.  Burney at Court — Kindness of the Queen — Visit from the
King — Reflections in Sickness — Resolution — A Ball at the
Palace — Duchess of Ancaster — Courtesy of the Queen — An
Adventure — A Fright — A Difficulty — Official Visit and Civili-
ties— A Travelling Companion — A Dissertation on Morals and
Religion — Cross-questioning— Conference with the Queen —
Colonel Welbred — Tete-a-tete with the Queen — The Inconve-
niences of a Place at Court — An unexpected Pleasure — Illness
of Mrs.  Delany — Mr.  Jerningham— The Bishop of Worcester-
Misanthropy — Anecdote of Dr.  Charles Burney — Memoirs of
Warren Hastings,  by Himself— The Mogul's Son— A Visitor
— Remonstrance — Badinage— A Rencontre — Return to Wind-
sor— The Troubles of Royalty— Claims on the Royal Bounty.

268 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII,

PART YII.

1787.

Monday,  January 1st. — I opened the new year with
what composure I could acquire.  I considered it as
the first year of my being settled in a permanent situ-
ation, and made anew the best resolutions I was equal
to forming,  that I would do what I could to curb all
spirit of repining,  and to content myself calmly — unre-
sistingly, at least — with my destiny.

For this end I kept myself more than ever employed,
not suffering a moment to be wasted by meditation,
save what,  perforce,  was borrowed from my sleep.  This
measure,  indeed,  I had pursued from my first settle-
ment, and without it I had never,  I am sure,  been able
to support myself.  Even with it,  for what a length of
time must I have appeared to the Queen  (all ignorant

of the state of my mind)  cold,  shy,  and inaccessible  !

*  *  *  't-  *

Mr.  Smelt and Mr.  de Luc called only to make their

congratulations on the new year ;  and then  ^liss P

went with me to St.  George's Chapel,  which was this
morning opened,  with West s picture of the Resurrec-
tion, on Jarvis's painted glass.  I have already said my
say upon it,  and can only add that this solemn old
chapel is extremely beautified  ("  a vile phrase  !  "j by
this superb window.

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  269

The crowd was so great,  that we had difficulty to get
entrance ;  and but for Mr.  Battiscomb,  who perceived
us,  and assisted us to pass on,  we might have been left
in the midst of the mob.  And even when admitted,  we
had still no seats,  and the people said none were to be

had :  but on Miss P "s speaking to me aloud,  by my

name,  a clergyman went up to her,  and said,  "  Is Miss
Burney here  ?  "  and immediately offered me a seat in
his own stall.  It proved to be a canon,  Mr.  Majendie.
I sat very near his handsome wife,  whom I took this
opportunity to address,  begging her to make my thanks.
She talked to me then of Norbur}^  and we formed just
the acquaintance for which alone I have time or incli-
nation— that of a little intercourse upon accidental
meetings,  without any necessary consequence of ap-
pointed interviews.

The King was to make an offering,  as Sovereign of
the Garter.  He was seated in the Dean of Windsor's
stall,  and the Queen sat by his side.  The Princesses
were in the opposite seats,  and all of them at the end of
the church.

When the service was over,  the offering ceremony
began.  The Dean and the Senior Canon went first to
the communion table :  the Dean then read aloud,
"Let your light scJ shine before men,  &c."  The organ
began a slow and solemn movement,  and the King
came down from his stall,  and proceeded,  with a grave
and majestic walk,  towards the communion table>
When he had proceeded about a third of the way,  he
stopped,  and bowed low to the altar  :  then he moved
on,  and again,  at an equal distance,  stopped for the
same formality,  which was a third and last time re-
peated as he reached the steps of the altar.  Then he
made his offering,  which,   according to the order of

270 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

the original institution,  was ten pounds in gold and
silver,  and delivered in a purse  :  he then knelt down,
and made a silent  ])rayer,  after which,  in the same
measured steps,  he returned to his stall,  when the whole
ceremony concluded by another slow movement on the
organ.

The air of piety,  and the unaffected grace and dig-
nity, with which the King performed this rite,  surprised
and moved me ;  Mr.  Smelt,  the most affectionate of his
many loyal subjects,  even shed tears from emotion,  in
looking at him in this serious office.  The King,  I am
told,  always acquits himself with true majesty,  where
he is necessarily to appear in state as a monarch.

The very great crowd detained Miss P and me

some time in the chapel ;  we parted at the iron rails,
and I ran on to the Lodge Gate,  but there,  seeing
some uniforms,  I stopped,  and peeping in,  discerned
the King,  with his equerries,  in the passage.  I was re-
treating, but he graciously came forward,  saying,  "  How
do you do,  Miss Burney  ? — Come in  ! — come out of that
sharp air.    Do you find it too hot?  "

General Bude and Colonel Goldsworthy,  with the
Bishop of Worcester,  were standing against the wall.
Thither went my little figure,  also,  for I knew not how
to pass the King,  who was walking up and down,  and
waiting for the Queen,  who,  with the Princesses,  soon
arrived.  She looked towards me with great surprise;
and then,  laughing,  said,  "  Well — I did not know
Miss Burney  !  "  She might well not be aware of seeing
me in such a circle  !  I said,  as she passed me,  it was
by the King's orders I had entered,  and her smile
shev.ed her approval.

Afterwards,  in her dressing-room,  she presented
me with a new almanac for the year 17S7, — the  "  Al-
manac Atlas.'

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  271

Tuesday,  January 2xd. — The Bishop of Worcester
made me a visit this morning whilst I was at breakfast,
but damped the pleasure I received from his company,
by telling me he came to take leave,  as he returned to
town at noon.  There is no chance of his again visiting
Windsor till this time twelvemonth,  and I felt very sorry
to lose sight of him for such a length of time.  Piety
and goodness are so marked on his countenance,  which
is truly a line one,  that he has been named,  and very
justly,  "  The Beauty of Holiness."  Indeed,  in face,
manner,  demeanour,  and conversation,  he seems pre-
ciseh^  what a bishop should be,  and what would make
a looker-on,  were he not a bishop,  and a see vacant,
call out — Take Dr.  Hurd ! — that is the man  !

He had not long left me when another visitor came
to take leave also, — iNIr.  AVest.  He has done,  for the
present,  with Windsor,  but returns to his great work in
the summer.  We talked over,  of course,  his window;
and he spoke of it in the highest terras of praise and
admiration.  Another man would be totally ridiculous
who held such language about his own performances ;
but there is,  in Mr.  West,  a something of simplicity in
manner,  that makes his self-commendation seem the
result rather of an unaffected mind than of a vain or
proud one.  It may sometimes excite a smile,  but can
never,  I think,  offend or disgust.

Mr.  Smelt came also,  and much brightened the dis-
course; for though he continued the subject, — and Mr.
West could have talked upon no other, — he varied and
animated it by fanciful suggestions on the painting art ;
which happily drew the artist into a more open field,
and seduced him,  from time to time,  to leave his indi-
vidual work,  and discuss more general rules,  and con-
sider more extensive possibilities.

272 DIARV AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

When Mr.  West rose to go,  he inquired if he might
first wait on the Bishop of W^orcester.  Mr.  Smelt
offered to find out if he were visible ;  and presently,  to
my great gratification,  he returned,  attended by the
reverend prelate himself,  who was so good as to ask
me if he might receive Mr.  W^est's visit in my room
instead of his own.

By this means I had a little coterie highly desirable.
The talk,  still,  was all of the window ;  but I could not
be tired,  nor could that or any subject be exhausted,
while Mr.  Smelt and the Bishop were the talkers.

At night we came to town.  I found Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg better ;  and she presented me,  from Her Ma-
jesty, with a new year's gift.  The Queen makes one
annually to all her household :  I mean all of the upper
class.  Mine was very elegant:  a complete set of very
beautiful white and gold china for tea,  and a coffee-pot,
tea-pot,  cream-jug,  and milk-jug of silver,  in forms re-
markably pretty.

At night,  as well as I was able,  I thanked the gracious
giver of my gift ;  and ventured to hint my wishes that
Her Majesty would deign to look in at my apartment
in its new state  :  for all is quite renovated there since
poor Mrs.  Haggerdorn's departure.  She readily pro-
mised me the honour I solicited.

The next day,  though the fourth of the month,  was
kept at Court as New Year's Day.  I cannot but re-
late a little trait of the Princess Elizabeth this morning,
which is strongly expressive of the modest ingenuous-
ness of her character,  and the simplicity of her educa-
tion. Her Royal Highness was with the Queen during
the duties of the toilette ;  when they were over.  Her
Majesty went to another apartment ;  I was then re-
tiring, but the Princess,  who had been desired to wait

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  273

the Queen's return,  insisted that I shoukl stay with
her,  and bade me sit down.  I begged to decUne that
honour,  as I expected the Queen every moment,  and
was not tired.  She then would not sit herself,  but
came and stood by me at the window,  and entered into
an easy and cheerful chattery,  till the return of the
Queen.  Her Majesty gave her a commission to write
to Lady Courtown,  about a present intended her,  of a
screen,  and again quitted the room.

Once more I was retreating,  but the Princess charged
me to stay,  and to help her ;  and while she was wri-
ting, applied to me continually about her expressions ;
and,  having finished,  said,  "Now,  Miss Burney, — as I
am sure nobody knows so well, — will you look at this,
and tell me if it is proper  ? "  She then put it into my
hand.

What truly amiable modesty and humility!  The
letter was quite without fault,  short,  and well-bred.

Friday,  January 5th. — I was preparing to journey
back to Windsor,  when Mrs.  Thielky came to inquire
if I was alone;  and immediately disappearing,  her
place was supplied by the Queen,  who,  vrith the three
eldest Princesses,  came to visit my new fitted up apart-
ment. I shewed every thing off to the best advantage,
and they were all much pleased with my content.  I
produced my royal gift to their Royal Highnesses,  who
take the most sweet interest in every thing done by
the Queen for the gratification of any part of the
household.

Mr.  de Luc and Miss Planta accompanied me to
Windsor.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg had no\v finally given
up all thoughts of going there during the winter.

Colonel Welbred was arrived,  and was,  at this time,
the only attendant upon the King at Windsor.

VOL.  III.  T

274 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

There seemed to be no opportunity in the power of
chance so favourable as the present for the execution
of my long-wished project of liberatin^^  my evenings
from official trammels.  My plan having long been re-
volving in my head,  I had ventured,  in the last week,
to hint at it to General Bude,  and to beg him to take
no notice to the succeeding equerries that I gave tea,
as I had not the honour to know them.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany came to coffee.  I then in-
formed her of my new plan,  by which I hoped to spend
every evening with her,  either at her own house or in
my own room,  quite undisturbed,  during the rest of
her stay at Windsor.  But how surprised was I to find
she totally disapproved it !  Without the concurrence
of the Queen,  she said,  no innovations ought to be
risked;  and as the King's attendants for so many years
had drank their tea with the Queen's,  she thought it
could only pass for dissatisfaction,  with their Majesties,
to break the custom,  and probably,  for prudery with
the gentlemen themselves.

I then resolved,  in obedience to Mrs.  Delany,  to
make tea constantly in the usual way,  and,  after it,  to
retire to my own room,  or go to her house when she
was not at the Lodge.

Saturday,  January Gth. — To-day arrived again
my dearest father,  in consequence of the gracious
speeches that had passed about his lengthened stay
when here last.  Sweet,  hospitable Mrs.  Delany re-
ceived him  ;    but he came to me to dinner, — at the

Queen's suggestion.   Miss P and Miss Planta were

of our party ;  Mrs.  Delany could only join us at coffee.

This evening proved indeed a pleasant one;  the
honours paid my dear father gladdened my heart.  The
King came into my room to see Mrs.  Delany,  and

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        275

conversed with liim so openly,  so gaily,  and so readily,
that it was evident he was pleased with his renewed
visit,  and pleased with his society.  Nor was this all ;
soon after,  the Queen herself came also,  purposely to
see him.  She immediately sat down,  that she might
seat Mrs.  Delany,  and then addressed herself to my
father,  with the most winning complacency.  Eepeatedly,
too,  she addressed herself to me,  as if to do me honour
in my father's eyes,  and to shew him how graciously she
was disposed towards me.  I had previously entreated
my father to snatch at any possible opportunity of ex-
pressing his satisfaction in all that related to me,  as I
knew it would not only give pleasure to her benevo-
lence, but was a token of gratitude literally expected
from him.

My Susan,  however,  knows our dear father,  and will
know him by the following trait :  he had planned his
speech,  and was quite elevated with the prospect of
making it,  and with the pleasure of my pointing it out,
and being so happy !  Dearest father  !  how blessed in
that facility of believing all people as good and as
happy as he wishes them !  Nevertheless,  no sooner did
the King touch upon that dangerous string,  the history
of music,  than all else was forgotten  !  Away flew the
speech, — the Queen herself was present in vain, —
eagerly and warmly he began an account of his pro-
gress, and an enumeration of his materials, — and out
from his pockets came a couple of dirty books,  which
he had lately picked up,  at an immense price,  at a
sale,  and which,  in shewing to the King,  he said were
equally scarce and valuable,  and added,  with energy,
"I would not take fifty pounds for that!"  Just as if
he had said — little as he meant such meaning — ''Don't
hope for it to your own collection  ! "

t2

27C  '    DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

Was not this a curious royal scene  ?

-i=  *  ;i=  H-  «

They carried Mrs.  Delany away with them.  I ol)eyccl
her,  however,  by returning to the eating-parlour,  to
make tea for my father and Miss P .

Back again we hurried,  my apparent duty over,  to
my own room ;  and thither we were soon follow^ed by
the King and the Princess Amelia:  the Princess,  and
her Mrs.  Cheveley,  he left with me ;  but my father,  to
my infinite satisfaction,  he ordered to follow him,  and
kept in the concert-room with him all the evening.

This was the height of my father's Windsor am-
bition. Could I help feeling really happy to see it
gained  ?

The next day Mrs.  Delany was unusually unwell ;
the Queen took alarm for her,  and consulted with the
King whether Dr.  Turton ought not to be sent for.  His
Majesty gave immediate sanction to the proposal,  and
I had orders to wTite to him,  in the Queen's name,  and
command his attendance.

.  Wednesday,  January 10th. — This morning my
dear Mrs.  Delany was better.  When I was hurrying
to the Queen I met Mr.  Fairly,  who said he was wait-
ing to see me.  Very melancholy he looked — very
much changed from what I had seen him.  His lady,
to whom he is much attached,  is suffering death by
inches,  from the most painful of all complaints,  a cancer.
His eldest son,  who seems about twelve years old,  was
with him.  He was going,  he said,  to place him at Eton.

The day following I was taken very ill myself;  a
bilious fever,  long lurking,  suddenly seized me,  and a
rheumatism in my head at the same time.  I was forced
to send to Mr.  Battiscomb for advice,  and to Miss
Planta to officiate for me at night with the Queen.

17l7]  of the author of EVELINA.  277

Early the next mornini^  Miss Planta came to me
from the Queen,  to desire I would not be uneasy in
missing my attendance,  and that I would think of no-
thing but how to take care of myself.  This,  however,
was not all,  for soon after she came herself,  not onl}^  to
my room,  but to my bedside,  and,  after many inquiries,
desired me to say sincerely what I should do if I had
been so attacked at home.

A blister,  I said,  was all I could devise ;  and I had
one accordingly,  which cured the head,  and set me at
ease.  But the fever had been lonorer scatherinir,  and
would not so rapidly be dismissed.

I kept my bed this day and the next.

The third day I was sufficiently better to quit my
bed and bed-room  ;  and then I had not only another
visit from the Queen,  but also from the two eldest
Princesses ;  and Princess Mary sent to me from the
Lower Lodge,  to inquire,  in her own name,  how I did.

Tuesday,  January IGth, — Was the day appointed
for removing to town for the winter ;  from which time
we were only to come to Windsor for an occasional day
or two every week.

I received a visit,  just before I set out,  from the
King.  He came in alone,  and made most gracious
inquiries into my health,  and whether I was sufficiently
recovered for the journey.

The four days of my confinement,  from the fever
after the pain,  were days of meditation the most useful:
I reflected upon all my mental sufferings in the last
year ;  their cause seemed inadequate to their poig-
nancy. In the hour of sickness and confinement,  the
world,  in losing its attractions,  forfeits its regrets : —
a new train of thinking,  a new set of ideas,  took pos-
session of all my faculties ;  a steady plan,  calm,  yet no

278 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

longer sad,  deliberately formed itself in my mind;  my
afiiiction was already subsided ;  I now banished,  also,
discontent.  I found myself as well off,  upon rejection,
as I could possibly merit,  and better,  by comparison,
tban most of those around me.  The beloved friends of
my own heart had joined me unalterably,  inviolably to
theirs ; — who,  in number,  who,  in kindness,  has more  ?

Now,  therefore,  I took shame to myself,  and Re-
wheel to he Jiaj^pij.  And my success has shewn me
how far less chimerical than it appears is such a reso-
lution.

To be patient under two disappointments new no
longer recent ; — to relinquish,  without repining,  fre-
quent intercourse with those I love  ; — to settle myself
in my monastery,  without one idea of ever quitting it; —
to study for the approbation of my lady abbess,  and
make it a principal source of content,  as well as spring
of action ; — and to associate more cheerily with my
surrounding nuns and monks ; — these were the articles
which were to support my resolution.

I thank God I can tell my dearest friends I have ob-
served them all ;  and,  from the date of this illness to
the time in which I am now drawing out my memo-
randums, I can safely affirm I know not that I have
made one break with niyself in a single promise here
projected.

And now,  I thank God,  the task is at an end ; —
what I began from principle,  and pursued from reso-
lution, is now a mere natural conduct.  My destiny is
fixed,  and my mind is at ease ; — nay,  I even think,  upon
the whole,  that my lot is,  altogether,  the best that can
betide me,  except for one flaw in its very vitals,  which
subjects me,  at times,  to a tyranny wholly subversive
of all power of tranquillity.

1 787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         279

I go back to the IGtli,  when I went to town,  accom-
panied only by Mr.  de Luc.  I saw my dear father the
next morning,  who gave me a poem on the Queen's
birth-day,  to present.  It was very pretty ;  but I felt
very awkward in offering it to her,  as it was from so near
a relation,  and v/ithout any particular reason or motive.
Mr.  Smelt came and stayed with me almost all the
morning,  and soothed and solaced me by his charming
converse.  The rest of the day was devoted to milli-
ners, mantua-makers,  and such artificers,  and you may
easily conjecture how great must be my fatigue.  Never-
theless, when in the midst of these wasteful toils,  the
Princess Augusta entered my room,  and asked me,
from the Queen,  if I should wish to see the ball the
next day.  I preferred running the risk of that new
fatigue,  to declining an honour so offered :  especially as
the Princess Augusta was herself to open the ball.

A chance question this night from the Queen,  whom
I now again attended as usual,  fortunately relieved me
from my embarrassment about the poem.  She in-
quired of me if my father was still writing?  "  A little,"
I answered,  and the next morning,

Thursday,  January 18th,  when the birth-day was
kept,  I found her all sweetness and serenity;  mum-
bled out my own little compliment,  which she re-
ceived as graciously as if she had understood and heard
it;  and then,  when she was dressed,  I followed her
through the great rooms,  to get rid of the wardrobe
woman,  and there taking the poem from my pocket,  I
said  "  I told your Majesty yesterday that my father
had written a little ! — and here — the little is !"     ,

She took it from me with a smile and a curtsey^,  and
I ran off.  She never has named it since  ;  but she has
spoken of my father with much sweetness and com-

280 DL\RV AND LETTERS  [ParT VII.

placency.  The modest dignity of tlic Queen,  upon all
subjects of panegyric,  is truly royal and noble.

I had now,  a second time,  the ceremony of being
entirely new dressed,  I then went to St.  James's,
where the Queen gave a very gracious approbation of
my gewgaws,  and called upon the King to l)estow tlie
same  :  which his constant good-humour makes a matter
of great ease to him.

The Queen's dress,  being for her own birth-day,  was
extremely simple,  the style of dress considered.  The
King was quite superb,  and the Princesses Augusta
and EUzabeth were ornamented with much brilliancy.

Not only the Princess Koyal was missed at this ex-
hibition, but also the Prince of Wales.  He wrote,
however,  his congratulations to the Queen,  though the
coldness then subsisting between him and his Majesty
occasioned liis absence from court.  I fear it was
severely felt by his Royal mother,  though she ap-
peared composed and content.

The two Princesses spoke very kind words,  also,  about
my frippery on this festival ;  and Princess Augusta laid
her positive commands upon me that I should change
my gown before I went to the Lord Chamberlain's box,
where only my head could be seen.  The counsel
proved as useful as the consideration was amiable.

"When the Queen was attired,  the Duchess of An-
caster was admitted to the drcssinijc-room,  where she
stayed,  in conversation with their ISIajesties and the
Princesses,  till it was time to summon the bed-chamber
women.  During this,  I had the office of holding the
Queen's train.  I knew,  for me,  it was a great honour,
yet it made me feel,  once more,  so like a mute upon
the stage,  that I could scarce believe myself only per-
forming my own real character.

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         281

Mrs.  Stainforth and I had some time to stand upon
the stau's before the opening of the doors.  We joined
Mrs.  Fielding and her daughters,  and all entered toge-
ther, but the crowd parted us  ;  they all ran on,  and got
in as they could,  and I remained alone by the door.
They soon found me out,  and made signs to me,  which
I saw not^  and then they sent me messages that they
had kept room for me just by them.  I had received
orders from the Queen to go out at the end of the
second country dance ;  I thought,  therefore,  that as I
now was seated by the door,  I had better be content,
and stay where I could make my exit in a moment,
and without trouble or disturbance.  A queer-looking
old lady sat next me,  and I spoke to her now and
then,  by way of seeming to belong to somebody.  She
did not appear to know whether it were advisable for
her to answer me or not,  seeing me alone,  and with
high head ornaments  ;  but as I had no plan but to
save appearances to the surrounders,  I was perfectly
satisfied that my very concise propositions should meet
with yet more laconic replies.

Before we parted,  however,  finding me quiet and in-
offensive, she became voluntarily sociable,  and I felt so
much at home,  by being still in a part of the palace,
that I needed nothing further than just so much notice
as not to seem an object to be avoided.

The sight which called me to that spot perfectly
answered all my expectations :  the air,  manner,  and
countenance of the Queen,  as she goes round the circle,
are truly graceful and engaging :  I thought I could
understand,  by the motion of her lips,  and the expres-
sion of her face,  even at the height and distance of the
Chamberlain's box,  the gracious and pleasant speeches
she made to all whom she approached.     With my

282 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

glass,  you know,  1 can see just as other people see with
the naked eye.

The Princesses looked extremely lovely,  and the
whole court was in the utmost splendour.

At the appointed moment I slipped through the door,
leaving my old lady utterly astonished at my sudden
departure,  and I passed,  alone and quietly,  to Mr.
Rhamus's apartment,  which w^as appropriated for the
company to wait in.  Here I desired a servant I met
with to call my man  :  he was not to be found.  I went
down the stairs,  and made them call him.  aloud,  by my
name;  all to no purpose.  Then the chairmen were
called,  but called also in vain  !

What to do I knew not ;  though I was still in a part
of the palace,  it was separated by many courts,  ave-
nues, passages,  and alleys,  from the Queen's or my
own apartments ;  and though I had so lately passed
them,  I could not remember the v»'ay,  nor at that late
hour could I have walked,  dressed as I then w as,  and
the ground wet with recent rain,  even if I had had a
servant :  I had therefore ordered the chair allotted
me for these days ;  but chair and chairmen and foot-
men were alike out of the way.

JMy fright lest the Queen should wait for me was
very serious.  I believe there are state apartments
through which she passes,  and therefore I had no
chance to know when she retired from the ball-room.
Yet could I not stir,  and was forced to return to the
room whence I came,  in order to wait for John,  that I
might be out of the way of the cold winds which in-
fested the hall

I now found a young clergyman,  standing by the
iire.  I suppose my anxiety was visible,  for he in-
stantly inquired if he could assist me.     I declined his

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         283

offer,  but walked up and down,  making frequent ques-
tions about my chair and John.

He then very civilly said^  "  You seem distressed,
ma'am ;  would you permit me the honour to see for
your chair,  or,  if it is not come,  as you seem hurried,
would you trust me to see you home  ?"

I thanked him,  but could not accept his services.
He was sorry,  he said,  that I refused him,  but could
not wonder,  as he was a stranger.  I made some
apologising answer,  and remained in that unpleasant
situation till,  at length,  a hackney-chair was procured
me.  My new acquaintance would take no denial to
handing me to the chair.  When I got in,  I told the
men to carry me to the palace.

''  We are there now  !"  cried they ;  ''  what part of the
palace  ?"

I was now in a distress the most extraordinary  :  I
really knew not my own direction  !  I had always gone
to my apartment in a chair,  and had been carried by
chairmen officially appointed  ;  and,  except that it was
in St.  James's Palace,  I knew nothing of my own situ-
ation.

"Near the park,"  I told them,  a,nd saw my new
esquire look utterly amazed at me.

*'  Ma'am,"  said he,  '•  half the palace is in the park I"

''I don't know how to direct,"  cried I,  in the greatest
embarrassment,  ^'but it is somewhere between Pall
Mall and the Park."

"  I know where the lady lives well enough,"  cried
one of the chairmen,  "  'tis in St.  James's-street."

"  No,  no,"  cried I,  ^'  'tis in St.  James's Palace."

"  Up with the chair !"  cried the other man,  "  I know
best — 'tis in South Audley-street ;  I know the lady well
enough.'*

284 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

Thinlc wliat a situation at the moment !  I found they
had both been drinking the Queen's health till they
knew not what they said,  and could with difficulty
stand.  Yet they lifted me up,  and though I called in
the most terrible fright to be let out,  they carried me
down the steps.

I now actually screamed for help,  believing they
"would carry me off to South Audley-street ;  and now
my good genius,  who had waited patiently in the crowd,
forcibly stopped the chairmen,  who abused him violently,
and opened the door himself,  and I ran back to the hall.

You may imagine how earnestly I returned my thanks
for this most seasonable assistance,  without which I
should almost have died with terror,  for where they
might have taken or dropped me,  or how or where left
me,  who could say  ?

He begged me to go again upstairs,  but my appre-
hension about the Queen prevented me.  I knew she
was to have nobody but me,  and that her jewels,  though
few,  were to be intrusted back to the Queen's house
to no other hands.  I must,  I said,  go,  be it in what
manner it might.  All I could devise was to summon
Mr.  l^hamus,  the page.  I had never seen him,  but my
attendance upon the Queen would be an apology for
the application,  and I determined to put myself under
his immediate protection.

Mr.  Rhamus was nowhere to be found ;  he was al-
ready supposed to be gone to the Queen s house,  to
wait the arrival of his Majest}'.  This news redoubled
my fear ;  and now ni}'-  new acquaintance desired me to
employ him in making inquiries for me as to the direc-
tion I wanted.

It was almost ridiculous,  in the midst of my distress,
to be thus at a loss for an address to myself 1 I felt

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  285

averse to speaking my name amongst so many listeners,
and only told him he would much oblige me by find-
ing out a direction to Mrs.  Haggerdorn's rooms.

He went upstairs ;  and returning,  said he could
now direct the chairmen,  if I did not fear trusting them.

I did fear — I even shook with fear ;  yet my horror of
disappointing the Queen upon such a night prevailed
over all my reluctance,  and I ventured once more into
the chair,  thanking this excellent Samaritan,  and beg-
ging him to give the direction very particularly.

Imagine,  however,  my gratitude and my relief,
when,  instead of hearing the direction,  I heard only
these words,  '"  Follow me."  And then did this truly
benevolent young man himself play the footman,  in
walking by the side of the chair till we came to an
alley,  when he bid them turn  ;  but they answered him
with an oath,  and ran on with me,  till the poles ran
against a wall,  for they had entered a passage in which
there was no outlet  !

I would fain have got out,  but they would not hear
me ;  they would only pull the chair back,  and go ou
another way.  But my guardian angel told them to
follow him,  or not,  at their peril;  and then walked
before the chair.

We next came to a court where we were stopped by
the sentinels.  They said they had orders not to admit
any hackney chairs.  The chairmen vowed they would
make way ;  I called out aloud to be set down ;  the sen-
tinels said they would run their bayonets through the
first man that attempted to dispute their orders.  I then
screamed out again to be set down,  and my new and
good friend peremptorily forced them to stop,  and open-
ing the door with violence,  offered me his arm,  saying,
"  You had better trust yourself with me,  ma'am  !"

Most thankfully I now accepted what so fruitlessly

2S6 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaPxT VII.

I had declined,  and I held by his arm,  and we walked
on together — but neither of us knew whither,  nor the
right way from the wrong!  It was really a terrible
situation.

The chairmen followed us,  clamorous for money,
and fall of abuse.  They demanded half a crown;
my companion refused to listen to such an imposition :
my shaking hand could find no purse,  and I begged
him to pay them what they asked,  that they might
leave us.  He did;  and when they Avere gone,  I shook
less,  and was able to pay that one part of the debt I
was now contracting.

We wandered about,  heaven knows where,  in a way
the most alarming and horrible to myself imaginable  :
for I never knew where I was. — It was midnight.  I
concluded the Queen waiting for me. — It was wet.  My
head was full dressed.  I was under the care of a total
stranger ;  and I knew not which side to take,  wherever
we came.  Inquiries were vain.  The sentinels alone
were in sight,  and they are so continually changed that
they knew no more of Mrs.  Haggerdorn than if she
had never resided here.

At length I spied a door open,  and I begged to
enter it at a venture,  for information.  Fortunately a
person stood in the passage who instantly spoke to me
by my name  ;  I never heard that sound with more glee  :
to me he was a stranger,  but I suppose he had seen
me in some of the apartments.  I begged him to direct
me straight to the Queen's rooms :  he did ;  and I then
took leave of my most humane new friend,  with a thou-
sand acknowledgments for his benevolence and services.

Was it not a strange business  ?  I can never say
■what an agony of fright it cost me at the time,  nor ever
be sufficiently grateful for the kind assistance,  so pro-
videntially afforded me.

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         287

I found myself just in time  ;  and I desired immedi-
ately to speak with Mr.  Nicolay,  the page,  of whom I
requested a direction to my own rooms.

Friday,  Jan.  19th. — The good stranger called upon
Scourfield,  to ask her how I did,  but left no name,  and
did not ask to see me.  I was really quite sorry not to
see and to know him.

I had visits from some of the Queen's ladies that
were entire strangers to me — Mrs.  Tracy and Mrs.  Her-
bert, two bedchamber w^omen ;  the former a motherly,
good sort of woman  ;  the latter mighty good humoured,
but immeasurably heavy.  Mrs.  Chetwyn also, — who,
though a nobleman's daughter,  is the Queen's laun-
dress,— and Miss Boscawen,  one of the maids of honour,
came while I was dressing.  I fear I shall never go
through so arduous an undertaking as that of returning
all these official civilities.

I had two notes from Lady Rothes,  both very em-
barrassing to me.  The first was an invitation to her
own home,  the second an offer to visit me in mine.
I knew not at all what I might,  or might not do,  with
respect to visits,  either at home or abroad.  Hitherto
I had gone nowhere,  and received nobody but a few
of my relations,  my dear Mr.  and Mrs.  Locke,  Miss
Cambridge,  and Mrs.  Ord.  Spirits I had wanted,  as
much as knowledge and opportunit}^  for going further.
Something,  however,  must be answered to this double
proposition,  and it compelled me to form some imme-
diate plan.  I determined,  therefore,  to speak openly
to the Queen,  upon the visiting subject,  and to learn,  if
possible,  my proper privileges,  and her own desires con-
cerning them.  The next day we were to go to Wind-
sor, and then I expected opportunity to open my suit.
Meanwhile I sent no answer whatever to Lady Rothes.

288 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT YII.

Saturday,  Jan.  20th. — To-day began our short
■weekly visits for the winter to Windsor.  I travelled
■with  ]Mr.  Turbulent,  and with him only.  lie says that
he and his lady were acquainted with our step- sister,
Mrs.  llishton,  at Geneva;  and I have some idea that
both you and I once saw him.  He speaks English
perfectly well.  Do you remember our hearing a
younger sister of his wife sing a fine French air,  with
all true French cadenzas  ?

The journey was rather awkward.  To be three hours
and a half tete-a-tete with a person so little known to
me,  and of whom I had been unable to form any pre-
cise opinion,  while still in a feeble state of healtli,  and
still feebler of spirits,  was by no means desirable  ;  and
yet the less as there was something in the uncertainty
of my notions that led me to fear him,  though I knew
not exactly why.

The conversation that ensued did not remove these
difficulties :  wholly brought on and supported by him-
self, the subjects were just such as I least Avisli to
discuss with him — religion and morality.

With respect to morality,  his opinions seemed upon
rather too large a scale for that perfect measurement
which suited my more circumscribed ideas.  Nothing
faulty fell from him,  but much was thrown out that,
though not positively censurable,  had far better never
be uttered.  He again revived the subject of Madame
de Genlis ;  again I defended her,  and again,  while he
palliated all the wrong with which he charged her,  he
chose to disbelieve the seriousness of my assertions in
her favour.  True,  however,  it is,  I do believe her inno-
cent of all crime but indiscretion,  and of that I know not
how to clear her,  since to nothing softer can I attribute
the grounds upon which so much calumny has been

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         289

raised.  I imagine her,  and so I told him,  to have fallen
at an early and inexperienced period into designing
and depraved hands,  and not to have been able,  from
cruel and distressed circumstances,  to give up the un-
worthy protection of a profligate patron,  though her
continuino^  under it has stained her fair fame for ever-
more  !  Perhaps her husband,  himself worthless,  would
not permit her — perhaps she feared the future ruin of
her two children — perhaps,  in a country such as France,
she did not,  in that first youth,  dare even to think of
relinquishing the protection of a Prince of the blood.
She was only fifteen when she was married — she told
me that herself.  How hard do I think her lot,  to fall
into hands she must ever have despised,  and so to be
entangled in them as not to dare shew to the world,  in
the only way the world would believe her,  the abhor-
rence of her mind to the character of her patron,  by
quitting a roof under which she could not live without
censure !

The subject,  however,  was so nice,  it was difficult to
discuss,  and I wished much to avoid it,  since there was
so much that I could not explain without apparent con-
cessions against my own case,  which he instantly seized,
and treated as actual concurrences.  He praised her as
much as I praised her myself,  and I found he admired
her with as sincere a warmth  :  but though we agreed
thus far,  and yet farther,  in thinking all that might be
wrong in her was venial,  we diff"ered most essentially
in our opinions of what that wrong might be.  He
thought her positively fallen,  yet with circumstances
claiming every indulgence.  I thought her positively
saved,  yet with circumstances authorising suspicion.

I tried what was possible to fly from this disquisition,
but I found I had one to deal with not easy to control.'

VOL.  III.  u

290 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

He kept it up,  forcibly and steadily,  till I was com-
pelled to be silent to his assertions,  from want of proof
beyond opinion for answering them.

He then proceeded to a general vindication of the
victims to such sort of situations,  in which I could by
no means concur ;  but when I resisted he startled mc
by naming as individuals amongst them some charac-
ters of whom I had conceived far superior notions.  I
heard him quite with grief,  and I will not write their
names.  I cannot look upon him as a detractor,  and I
saw him by no means severe in his exactions from female
virtue  :  I gave,  therefore,  and give,  implicit credit to his
information,  though I gave not,  and give not,  any to
his inferences and general comments.

"Depend upon it,"  said he,  "with whatever pre-
judice, and even just prejudice,  you may look upon
these fallen characters at large,  and considered in a
class,  you will generally find them,  individually,  amongst
the most amiable of your sex  :  I had almost said amongst
the most virtuous  ;  but amongst those who possess the
greatest virtues,  though not every virtue,  undoubtedly.
Their own sweetness and sensibility will generally have
been the sole source of their misconduct."

I could neither agree nor dispute upon such a sub-
ject with such an antagonist,  and I took my usual re-
source, of letting the argument die away for want of
food with which to nourish it.

I did not fare the better,  however,  by the next theme,
to which the death of this led us :  Religion.

There is no topic in the world upon which I am so
careful how I speak seriously as this.  By  "  seriously"
I do not mean gravely,  but wdth earnestness ;  mischief
here is so easily done,  so difficultly reformed.  I have
made it,  therefore,  a rule through my life never to talk

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        291

in detail upon religious opinions,  but with those of
whose principles I have the fullest conviction and
highest respect.  It is therefore very,  very rarely I
have ever entered upon the subject but with female
friends or acquaintances,  whose hearts I have well
known,  and who would be as unlikely to give as to re-
ceive any perplexity from the discourse.  But with re-
gard to men,  I have known none with whom I have
willingly conferred upon them,  except Dr.  Johnson,
Mr.  Lock,  and Mr.  Smelt,  and one more.

My companion was urgent to enter into a controversy
which I was equally urgent to avoid ;  and I knew not
whether most to admire or to dread the skill and capa-
city with which he pursued his purpose,  in defiance of
my constant retreat.  When,  in order to escape,  I
made only light and slight answers to his queries
and remarks,  he gravely said I led him into  "  strange
suspicions"  concerning my religious tenets  ;  and when
I made to this some rallying reply,  he solemnly de-
clared he feared I was a  ''  mere philosopher*'  on these
subjects,  and totally incredulous with regard to all re-
vealed religion.

This was an attack which even in pleasantry I liked
not,  as the very words gave me a secret shock.  I there-
fore then spoke to the point,  and frankly told him that
subjects which I held to be so sacred,  I made it an in-
variable rule never to discuss in casual conversations.

"  And how,  ma'am, '  said he,  suddenly assuming the
authoritative seriousness of his professional character
and dignity,  "  and how,  ma'am,  can you better discuss
matters of this solemn nature than now,  with a man to
whom their consideration peculiarly belongs  ? — with a
clergyman  ?"

True,  thought I ;  but I must better be apprised of

u 2

292 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

your principles,  ere I trust you witli debating mine I —
Yet,  ashamed to decline so serious a call,  I could only-
make a general answer,  that as I was very well satisfied
at present,  I did not wish to make myself unnecessary
difficulties by any discussions whatsoever.

"  And why unnecessary,  ma'am  ?  Do you fear to sift
your opinions  ?"

"  No — but I want them not to be sifted by others."
**  And upon what principle do you decline to have
them examined?"

"  Because I see not any good in such an exam.ination
to others  ;  and for myself,  I am clear and satisfied — and
■what shoidd I aim at more  ?"

"  Upon what grounds are you satisfied,  ma am  ?"
Fairly afraid of him,  and conscious that one serious
answer would draw on as many more as he pleased,  I
honestly told him I must beg to decline at once a sub-
ject in which no good could accrue to him,  and none
that I knew was likely to accrue to myself.

A little affronted,  he somewhat haughtily said,
"You disdain then,  ma'am,  to enter into this topic
with me?"

"  No,  sir,  not with you particularly ;  but I love not
to talk upon controversial points with anybody."
"  Are you a Catholic,  ma'am?"
''  No,  indeed !"

''  If you take your religion upon faith,  and without
venturing at any investigation,  what else can you call
yourself?"

Again I made what slight answ^crs I could suggest,
struggling with all my might to fly from the theme
entirely ;  and when at last I fairly assumed courage to
declare I would say no more upon it,  he raised his
hands and eyes,  and with an air of being greatly con-
sternated protested —

]  787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         293

"By all,  then,  that I can gather,  I see and can infer
but one of these two things — either that you are a
Roman Catholic,  or an esprit fort  /"

Even this,  however,  would not provoke me to the
controversy — though it provoked me with the logician,
I frankly confess;  and nothing but predetermined
steadiness upon this point could have guarded me,  in
such an attack,  from any intricacy or labyrinth into
\vhich he might have amused himself by leading me.

These were the principal features of our tete-a-tete,
which left me unsettled as ever in my notions of my
companion.

When,  afterwards,  I attended the Queen,  she inquired
of me particularly how the journey had passed,  and if
it was not very pleasant?  I made some short and
general answer;  and she cried  "  Did you read  ?  Did
Mr.  Turbulent read to you?"

"  No,  ma'am,  we had no provision of that sort :  I
heartily wish I had thought of it ;  I should have liked
it exceedingly."

''But surely you do not like reading better than
conversation !"

"  No,  ma'am — not better than some conversation."

"  Surely not better than Mr.  Turbulent's  ?  Nobody
converses better than Mr.  Turbulent ;  nobody has more
general knowledge,  nor a more pleasing and easy way
of communicating it."

Fearing to do mischief,  I assented — but faintly
however,  for indeed he had perplexed far more than
he had pleased me.  The Queen again made his pane-
gyric, and in very warm terms,  and seemed quite dis-
appointed at the coldness of my concurrence.

Good there must be,  I was sure,  in a man so honoured,
who for many years has been tried in his present try-

'294 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRtVII.

in^^:  situation,  of teacher to the elder Princesses,  and
occasionally to her Majesty herself.  I resolved,  there-
fore, to suspend the judgment which was inclining on the
evil side,  and to wait undecided till further opportunity
gave me fairer reasons for fixing my opinions.

The Princess Royal was nearly recovered on our
return.  Miss Planta came to dinner with me :  so did
Mr.  Turbulent.  Much was said about Colonel Welbred.
I made such answers when he was named as left it still
in the dark that we had never met,  for I dreaded some
introducing scheme from Mr.  Turbulent that might
seize out of my hands the only remaining chance of
gaining to my own disposal the evenings spent at Wind-
sor in Mrs.  Schwellenberor's absence.

He left us after dinner to visit this Colonel,  who
stands in his favour the highest of all the equerries.

At tea-time Mr.  Turbulent returned in very high
spirits,  and quite a different man from the importunate
casuist who had alarmed and tormented me in the coach.

When the tea was brought,  and I was preparing to
make it, —

''Have you sent,  ma'am,''  he cried,  ''to Colonel
Welbred?"

"  No,  I have not the pleasure of his acquaintance."

*'  But,  do you not know,  ma'avn,  the honourable cus-
toms of this house,  and that the gentlemen here are
always invited to tlie ladies?"

I tried to laugh this off";  but he pursued it,  till Miss
Planta,  quite teazed,  begged he would not trouble his
head about the matter,  but leave me to manage as I
pleased.

Turning upon her very short,  "  What is your objec-
tion," he cried.  "Miss Planta?"

Miss Planta,  surprised,  and a little intimidated,  dis-
claimed having any.

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EA^ELINA.  295

Mercy  !  thought I^  what an imperious esquire is this
to whom we are committed!  And this was just the
thought that gave me courage to determine against
yielding to him.

Turnins:  then ai^ain to me,  he said,  with a verv
courteous bow,- —

*'Will you depute me,  ma'am,  to fetch the Colonel?"

"  By no means,  sir  !  I would not give you that
trouble."

"  Shall you send him a message,  then,  ma'am  ?"

*"  No,  sir,"  cried I very steadily.

*'  And why not,  ma'am  ?"  cried he in the same tone.

Miss Planta then again broke forth,  asking him why
in the world he could not be content with minding his
own affairs  ?

With an adroitness of raillery,  against which she had
not the smallest chance,  he retorted the question upon
her.  Again she was silenced ;  and again he renewed
his application.

"  You will not make the tea,  ma'am,  and leave the
Colonel out  ?"

"  I have never had the Colonel in.  Sir,  and therefore
there is nothing peculiar in the omission."

"And why,  ma'am? — why have you not?  There
cannot be a more amiable man — a man of manners,
person,  address,  appearance,  and conversation — more
pleasing — more enchanting,  ma'am."

"I dont at all doubt it,  sir."

-  Shall I fetch him,  then  ?"

''  No,  sir."

^'  Vous avez do7ic peiir F''

"  Now,  if you would but let him alone  !"  cried jMiss
Planta;  "  he does not want to  -ome."

*'  And how do you know that.  Miss Peggy Planta  ?'  *

29G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

Again poor Miss Planta\vas silenced;  but soon after,
with an impatience tliat slic could not repress,  she de-
clared that if Colonel Welbred had wished to come he
would have made his appearance the first evening.

This was a most unfortunate speech.  Mr.  Turbulent
seized upon it eagerly,  and said he now perceived the
motive to so much shyness,  which was all the eli'ect of
resentment at the Colonel's apparent backwardness.

I protested against this warmly,  but to no purpose ;
and all that fell from the too eager zeal of Miss Planta
in my service seemed but to confirm his pretended
new explanation.

"  However,  ma'am,"  he continued,  "if you will suffer
me to fetch him,  he will soon satisfy you with his apo-
logies. I do assure you he only waits an invitation  :
when I asked him if he was not coming up to tea,  he
said he had not the pleasure to know Miss Burney,  and
could not take the liberty to intrude upon her."

I was now satisfied that General Bude had given
him a hint of the new construction of the tea-table  :
I therefore earnestly begged Mr.  Turbulent to permit
me to have my own arrangement in my own way,  and
only to be quiet,  and forbear any interference of any
sort in the business ;  and after much opposition he
submitted to my recpiest.

-1=  *  *  *  *

At night I had an opportunity to speak to the
Queen upon the subject of my visits and acquaintance,
but I knew not how to introduce it abruptly;  and
therefore,  only just as she had wished me good night,
with her usual  ";racious bow of the head,  I bei^ired to
know whether,  when she should be a little at leisure,
she would condescend to allow me to make her a little
harangue,  all about my own little self? — She seemed

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         297

surprised and curious,  but gave an immediate assent,
and in a manner extremely encouraging.

Su>DAY,  January 21st. — To-day I had the honour
of a very long conference with her Majesty,  upon my
own affairs and proceedings.  She sent for me at noon,
and with the greatest complacency desired me to ex-
plain what I had meant the preceding evening.

I came immediately to the point :  I told her that there
was nothing I more earnestly coveted than the high
honour of her own personal directions,  with regard to
the acquaintance it might now be proper for me to
keep or decline,  and,  for the time to come,  to make or
to refuse.

I saw instantly by her manner the importance she
annexed to this subject :  she treated it,  at once,  as a
matter of serious concern,  and entered upon it with
the most ready concurrence to discuss it fully.  My
acquaintance,  hitherto,  I frankly told her,  was not only
very numerous,  but very mixed,  taking in not only
most stations in life,  but also most parties.

To this last word she gave the deepest attention,
and gave me,  upon that subject,  the most open opinions.
I must not here enter into them,  as they were all neces-
sarily interspersed with names and characters of whom
she could not speak with unmixed praise,  if with praise
at all.  But I found her liberal and noble-minded,
beyond what I had conceived her rank and limited
connections could have left her,  even with the fairest
endowments from her early nature  ;  and many things
dropped from,  her,  in relation to parties and their con-
sequences, that shewed a feeling so deep upon the
subject,  joined to a lenity so noble towards the indi-
viduals composing it,  that she drew tears from my eyes
in several instances.

298 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PakT VI L

I begged her permission to assure her that,  for
myself,  I  ^vouldform no connection,  and make no ac-
quaintance, but with lier consent ;  nor even maintain
those ah-eady made and formed,  but by her knowledge  :
and I entreated her leave to constantly mention to her
whomsoever I saw,  or desired to see,  that I might have
the undoubted satisfaction of a security that I could run
no risk,  in the only way I feared it — that of ignorance.

She gave a pleased,  though only tacit assent,  but I
saw that the proposal met with her entire approvance.

I told her of the two notes of Lady Rothes  ;  and she
cheerfully assured me her acquaintance was perfectly
what she should approve my cultivating.

In the conclusion,  with a high and just panegyric
upon Mr.  Smelt,  she desired that whenever I had any
perplexity with respect to this subject,  I would consult
■with him,  and abide by his counsel.

This was extremely pleasant to me ;  his wisdom,  his
goodness,  and his long experience in a court,  all con-
curring to make him the most desirable,  as well as able,
adviser that,  in this situation,  I can have.  And here,
most graciously on her side,  and much satisfied on
mine,  the conference ended.

January 22nd. — We returned early to town,  ]\Ir.  Tur-
bulent, MissPlanta,  and myself;  and I had the gratifi-
cation of a very long visit from  ■Mr.  Smelt,  to whom I
communicated,  in full detail,  my whole conference with
her Majesty.  The important charge devolving on
himself in its conclusion made it necessary to acquaint
him with all its circumstances.

You may imagine him not insensible to such a trust
from the Queen.  I ran over to him,  in brief,  the names
of all those who yet desired,  openly,  the renewal or
continuance of  ^intercourse,  and wc discussed at large

17S7]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        299

their several recommendations or defects for visiting
under the Royal roof.

I name none now,  the Queen's opinions being deeply
involved in all that passed ;  but the general directions
and counsel of Mr.  Smelt,  which I have scrupulously
observed ever since,  were,  in abridgment,  these : —

That I should see nobody at all but by appointment.
This,  as he well said,  would obviate,  not only numer-
ous personal inconveniences to myself,  but prevent
alike surprises from those I had no leave to admit,
and repetitions of visits from others who might inad-
vertently come too often.  He advised me to tell this
to my father,  and beg it might be spread,  as a settled
part of my situation,  among all who inquired for me.

That I should see no fresh person whatsoever with-
out an immediate permission from the Queen,  nor any
party,  even amongst those already authorised,  without
apprising her of such a plan.

That I should never go out without an immediate
application to her,  so that no possible inquiry for me
might occasion surprise or disappointment.

These,  and other similar ties,  perhaps,  had my
spirits been better,  I might less readily have acceded
to  :  as it was,  I would have bound myself to as many
more.

At length,  however,  even then,  I was startled when
Mr.  Smelt,  with some earnestness,  said,  "  And,  with
respect to your parties,  such as you may occasionally
have here,  you have but one rule for keeping all things
smooth,  and all partisans unoffended,  at a distance —
which is,  to have no men — none .'"

I stared a little,  and made no answer.

''Yes,"  cried he,  ''  Mr.  Locke may be admitted;  but
him singly.     Your father,  you know,  is of course."

300 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaUT VIL

Still I Avas silent :  after a  ])ausc of some length,  he
plumply — yet with an evidently aflfccted unmeaning-
ncss,  said,  "  Mr.  Cambridge — as to Mr.  Cambridge" —

I stopped him short at once ;  1 dared not trust to
what might follow,  and eagerly called out  "  Mr.  Cam-
bridge, sir,  I cannot exclude!  So much friendship and
kindness I owe,  and have long owed him,  that he would
go about howling at my ingratitude,  could I seem so
suddenly to forget it !"  ,;

My impetuosity in uttering this surprised,  but
silenced him  ;  he said not a w^ord more,  nor did I.

I agreed to invite Lady Rothes for next Thursday,
and only Mrs.  and Miss Ord to meet her.  And then,
with a repetition of the rules I have mentioned,  our
conference concluded.

Jamuary 23rd. — A singular circumstance happened
this evening,  and one which.  I am sure will please you
both to hear.  While I w^as in Mrs.  Schwellenberg's
room,  with only Mrs.  Planta and herself,  Mr.  Griffith
was announced,  and who should I see enter but the
very clergyman to whom I had been so much obliged
on the birth-night !

I started,  and so did he,  and he could not make
his bow to Mrs.  Schwellenberg till he received my
compliments,  of thanks for his good offices,  and of
pleasure in this opportunity to make them to him.

The accident that brought him here wiU,  J hope,
turn cut to his advantage.  He has a sister in the
household,  as laundress to the Princesses ;  and she is a
great favourite with Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  This brother
has some small living,  but greatly requires something
more ;  and he came to-night to read to Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg, that she might make some report of him, — to
whom or how I know not,  but surely my best wishes

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         301

must accompany him.  He had not at all,  he said,
known me,  till he went upstairs'  to inquire Mrs.  Hag-
gerdorn's direction,  and then he heard my own name,
which had much surprised him.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg speedily desired him to read;
and had a standing desk procured him,  such as is
•used by the readers to the Queen,  who are not,  of
course,  allowed to sit down.

''What book is it to be,  ma'am,"  cried he  ;  "  some-
thing interesting,  I hope !"

'' No,"  cried she,  "  1 wont have nothing what you
call novels,  what you call romances,  what you call his-
tories— I might not read such what you call stuff, —
not I !"

The good Mrs.  Planta,  who is an excellent old
woman,  a Swiss or Italian by birth,  and chcerfal,  gay,
social,  and good-humoured,  evidently feared I should
look upon this speech as a personal reflection;  and
therefore,  to soften it,  said  "  O Miss Burney !  what
pretty book you write  !  I cry at it !  I cry just like littel
baby ! — And then I laugh so  ! — Oyou would think me
mad,  for an old woman to laugh so !"

I tried to stop her,  but Mr.  Griffith seized the mo-
ment to exclaim,  "  How little did 1 think,  the other
night,  that the lady I had the honour to attend to her
chair was the Miss Burney from whom I had received
such pleasure 1''

I begged him to read,  and the book was brought :
it was Josephus,  which is the only book in favour at
present,  and serves for all occasions,  and is quoted to
solve all difficulties.

January 24th. — I went in the morning to see my
sweet Mrs.  Delany,  whom I had not for a long,  long
time been able to behold.    I found her in bed and ill.

302 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part YII.

I was cruelly alarmed ;  she wept bitterly — bitterly I say,
for her tears of kind joy in my return to her were
embittered indeed by personal sorrows and afflictions
of the most poignant sort.  Dear and venerable Mrs.
Delany  ! — what on earth can be so affecting as to see
excellence and age such as hers bowed down by per-
sonal ill-usage and ingratitude,  from those who are
most bound to cherish and revere her I — yet such has
been her hard lot through all the latter period of her
long and exemplary life  !

I stayed to my last moment,  and left her more calm,
and promised to see her,  now I was myself well again,
almost daily.  For,  since the birth-day,  I had been
much indisposed till now.

The Queen,  in the morning,  when I chanced to be
alone with her,  read to me a new poem of Mr.  Jerning-
ham's,  upon the death of his mother.    It is very pretty.

The King,  whom I saw at St.  James's,  was so graci-
ous as to tell me the concern the Queen had expressed
at seeing me frightened and low-spirited for dear Mrs.
Delany.  How doubly welcome to me her condescen-
sion when so communicated  !  They were both of them
in the greatest anxiety about her.

Friday,  January 2Gffi. — After a short but very
pleasing visit this morning from the Bishop of Wor-
cester, I accompanied Miss Planta and Mr.  Turbulent
to Windsor.

The journey was very different to the last,  and Mr.
Turbulent appeared in anew character.  Lamentation
and murmuring upon the ill-condition of human life
filled up the sum of all that he troubled himself to say.
Youth,  he averred,  was the only season of possible
happiness,  and that,  once flown,  nothing but pain,
mortification,  and sorrow,  remained for mortal man.

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         303

Every tendency to misanthropy makes me sad or
angry,  and Mr.  Turbulent,  for whose happmess I was
not sufficiently interested,  though I wished him well,
to be sad,  nor with whose circumstances I was suffici-
ently acquainted to know his sitViation well enough to
be angry,  gave me a feeling something between con-
cern and disapprobation,  that by no means helped to
lighten the present journey,  or to brighten the prospects
of those to come.

Miss Planta said almost nothing ;  she has a very
useful understanding,  but no powers of entertain-
ment.

Saturday,  January 27th. — To-day,  in the Queen's
room,  Mr.  Turbulent most suddenly and unexpectedly
made his peace with me for all his hitherto offences.
While her Majesty's hair was dressing,  the King re-
turned from his hunt,  and entered her dressing-room.
He began talking of the death of Mr.  Maty,  and the
vacancy at the Museum.  He sent in for Mr.  Turbulent
and M.  de Luc,  who were both in waiting for the
Queen's commands.  He then talked over the affair
with them both,  as both were much acquainted with
Mr.  Maty.

The first moment there was a pause,  Mr.  Turbulent,  in
French,  which they always choose he should speak with
them,  said  ^'that there had been une belle action per-
formed, upon the death of Mr.  Maty,  by M.  Burney,
frere de Mademoiselle.'''

The King eagerly asked what it was,  looking sud-
uenly towards me  ;  and the Queen,  instantly rising,  and
casting upon me one of her sweetest smiles,  approached
him to hear more distinctly.

Mr.  Turbulent then related the little circumstance,
that Charles,  on the death of Mr.  Maty,  and the distress

304 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V I.

of his widow,  insisted upon taking the only son under
his care,  without any recompense but his pleasure in
l)rin":in<>:  up the son of an eminent scholar,  who be-
queatlicd not fortune sufficient for his education.

I knew the fact,  but never hoped to have had it so
proclaimed.  Poor Charles  ! — I trembled and glowed
alternately with surprise and pleasure at this recital.
It was received with every mark of approbation,  and
I know it will not be forgotten when his name recurs.

Mr.  Turbulent told it,  also,  in terms the most fiatter-
ins:,  adornini^  the little narration with his best orna-
ments of language and manner.

Is it,  thought I,  from the misanthrope of yesterday
that flows this good-nature to-day? — For no one knows
better the weight of a little anecdote thus told,  and
nobody knows more how rarely,  for the relatives of
others,  such anecdotes are told at all.

At last,  then,  thought I,  the good is coming.  I
did well to wait a little patiently,  I see now it is at
hand.

In the evening I read Mr.  Hastings's Memoirs of
India,  and the Memoir of the Son of the Mogul in his
visit to Mr.  Hastings,  when Governor-General of Ben-
gal. Mr.  Hastings's Memoirs are too imperfect and
unfinished to be satisfactory,  and seem by no means
meant for publication  :  in parts they are nervous and
interesting,  but upon the whole obscure,  and insuffi-
cient for their purpose and promise.

The Memoir of the Mogul's Son,  which is subjoined,
is truly curious,  and paints the notions and gives the
terms of the Eastern Court,  in a stronger and more
minute manner than any tract I have chanced to meet

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         305

with before.  I am sure Mr.  Locke would be pleased
with reading it.

Sunday,  January 28th. — I was too ill to go to
church.  I was now,  indeed,  rarely well enough for any
thing but absolute and unavoidable duties  ;  and those
were still painfully and forcibly performed.

I had only Miss Planta for my guest,  and when she
went to the Princesses I retired for a quiet and soli-
tary evening to my own room.  But here,  while read-
ing, I was interrupted by a tat-tat at my door.  I
opened it,  and saw Mr.  Turbulent.  I saw upon his
face,  at the first glance,  a look of doubt as to his recep-
tion :  but it soon vanished,  for though he,  at that mo-
ment, forgot,  /  instantly recollected,  his good office
concerning Charles  ;  and I gave him,  therefore,  the
first smile of welcome he ever received from me.

He was not backward in perceiving or accepting it  :
he came forward,  and began a gay and animated con-
versation, with a flow of spirits and good-humour
which I had never observed in him before.

His darling Colonel was the subject that he still
harped upon ;  but it was only with a civil and amusing
raillery,  not,  as before,  with an overpowering vehe-
mence to conquer.  Probably,  however,  the change
in myself might be as observable as in him, — since I
now ceased to look upon him with that distance and
coldness which hitherto he had uniformly found in me.

I must give you a little specimen of him in this new
dress.

After some general talk,

"When,  ma'am,"  he said,  *^'am I to have the honour
of introducing Colonel Welbred to you?"

"  Indeed,  I have not settled that entirely !  "

YOL.  III.  X

30G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

"  Reflect a little,  then,  ma'am,  and tell me.  I only
wish to know when."

"  Indeed to tell you that is somewhat more than I
am able to do ;  I must fmd it out myself,  first."

"  Well,  ma'am,  make the inquiry as speedily as pos-
sible, I beg.  What say you to now  ?  shall I call him
up?"

'*No,  no, — pray let him alone."

"'  But will you not,  at least,  tell me your reasons for
this conduct  ? "

"Why,  frankly,  then, — if you will hear them and be
quiet,  I will confess them."

I then told him,  that t had so little time to myself,
that to gain even a single evening was to gain a trea-
sure; and that I had no chance but this.  "Not,"  said
I,  "  that I wish to avoid him,  but to break the custom
of constantly meeting with the Equerries."

"But it is impossible to break the custom,  ma'am;
it has been so always  :  the tea-table has been the time
of uniting the company,  ever since the King came to
Windsor."

*'  Well,  but every thing now is upon a new construc-
tion. I am not positively bound to do every thing Mrs.
Haggerdorn did,  and his having drank tea with her
will not make him conclude he must also drink tea with
mc."

"No,  no,  that is true,  I allow.  Nothing that be-
longed to her can bring conclusions round to you.  But
still,  why begin with Colonel Welbred?  You did not
treat Colonel Goldsworthy so  ?  "

"  I had not the power of beginning with him.  I did
what I could,  I assure you."

'*  INIajor Price,  ma am  ? — I never heard you avoided
him."

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  307

"  No ;  but I knew him before I came,  and he knew
much of my family,  and indeed I am truly sorry that I
shall now see no more of him.  But Colonel Welbred
and I are mutually strangers."

"All people are so at first;  every acquaintance must
have a beginning."

"  But this,  if you are quiet,  we are most willing
should have none."

"  Not he,  ma'am — he is not so willing ;  he wishes to
come.     He asked me,  to-day,  if I had spoke about it."

I disclaimed believing this ;  but he persisted in as-
serting it,  adding  "  For he said if I had spoke he would
come."

"He is very condescending,"  cried I,  "but I am
satisfied he would not think of it at all,  if you did not
put it in his head."

" Upon my honour you are mistaken;  we talk just
as much of it down there as up here."

^'  You would much oblige me if you would not talk
of it, — neither there nor here,''

"  Let me end it,  then,  by bringing him at once !"

*'  No,  no,  leave us both alone  :  he has his resources
and his engagements as much as I have  ;  we both are
best as we now are."

*'  But what can he say,  ma'am  ?  Consider his confu-
sion and disgrace  !  It is well known,  in the world,  the
private life that the Royal Family live at Windsor,  and
who are the attendants that belong to them ;  and when
Colonel Welbred quits his waiting  —  three months*
waiting — and is asked how he likes Miss Burney,  he
must answer he has never seen her!  And what,  ma'am,
has Colonel Welbred done to merit such a mortifica-
tion?"

It was impossible not to laugh at such a statement

x2

308 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VII.

of the case ;  and again he requested to bring liim di-
rectly. "  One quarter of an hour will content me  ;  I
only wish to introduce him — for the sake of his credit
in the world ;  and when once you have met,  you need
meet no more ;  no consequences whatever need be
drawn to the detriment of your solitude  ! ''

I begged him to desist,  and let us both rest.

"  But have you,  yourself,  ma'am,  no curiosity — no
desire to see Colonel Welbred  ?  "

"  None in the world."

''If,  then,  hereafter you admit any other equerry — "

•'  No,  no,  I intend to carry the ncio construction
throughout."

"  Or if you suffer any one else to bring you Colonel
Welbred."

''Depend upon it I have no such intention."

"  But if any other more eloquent man prevails — "

"Be assured there is no danger  !  "

"Will you,  at least,  promise I shall be present at
the meeting?"

"  There will be no meeting."

*'You are certainly,  then,  afraid of him?  "

I denied this,  and,  hearing the King's supper called,
he took his leave;  though not before I very seriously
told him that,  however amusinc:  all this mii^^ht be as
pure badinage,  I should be very earnestly vexed if he
took any steps in the matter without my consent.

Mo^'DAY,  January 29th. — This morning an un-
usually early summons to the Queen made me scamper
out of my room without any cap on,  with my hair just
dressed,  no gloves,  and my girdle in my hand,  which
I meant to buckle as I ran along the gallery ;  and in
this manner,  as I d?rted out of my room,  full speed,  to

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        309

gallop on,  I was suddenly met by one of the Windsor
Uniforms ! — Colonel Welbred,  I conclude.

Ashamed both of my violent speed,  and my un-
finished appearance,  instantly and involuntarily I
turned round,  and ran back to my own room.  What he
might think of such a flight I know not ;  but it was
provoking altogether.

When Miss Planta came to me,  previous to our
journey back,  she spoke very seriously about Mr.  Tur-
bulent, and said she saw he was bent upon thwarting
all my schemes of privacy,  and that she had been ar-
guing with him,  in the other room,  till she was quite
weary,  in vain.  She advised me to be more peremptory
with him ;  but I knew my attempt was a real innova-
tion, and 1 could not therefore proceed in so authori-
tative a mode.  I saw,  too,  by yesterday's dialogue,
that he was far more conquerable by an easy kind of
raillery than by argument and opposition  ;  and now
that I saw this,  I began to wish she would quiet her
zeal,  kind as it was,  and leave the matter to me.

At the appointed hour of departure he came,  and
almost instantly exclaimed  "  Have you seen Colonel
Welbred,  ma'am  ? "

"  What should make you think I have  ?  "  cried I.

"Because he just now ran after me,  saying,  'Pray
do tell me what Miss Burney is dressed in  !' — so I pre-
sumed you had met."

I gave him no satisfactory answer,  and he now very
sedately said he should make the introduction as we
went to the carriage,  for Colonel Welbred was in wait-
ing in the gallery.

I was glad to be informed of his intention,  for now I
resolved not to move till he should be out of the way.

Miss Planta entered into my scheme,  and even went

310 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part YII.

out,  from time to time,  to see if he were still in the
way :  nor would I stir till she assured me the coast was
clear.

Mr.  Turbulent,  thus defeated,  was almost provoked
into running to the Equerry-room to call him,  after
handing us into the carriage ;  but we forced him to
follow.  He repined all the way,  accusing me of mere
coquetry or singularity ;  and compelling me to laugh,
through all his complaints and charges,  by very ear-
nestly exclaiming  "  When we are all so agreeable,  why
should we not live together  ? "

He protested,  further,  that as he now liked not to
quit either of the tea-tables,  it was a weighty distress
to him what to do in the evenings ;  and there was no
way to make him content but by uniting them.  He
talked incessantly the whole way of the Colonel,  who,
he told us,  had invited him to go in the Equerry-coach,
but he would not leave us.  I entreated him never to
stand upon that ceremony,  but,  since Colonel Welbred
was as desirous of his company as he could be of the
Colonel for a companion,  I begged him,  without scru-
ple, to attend him in future.

No,  he declared himself as free from Avish as from
intention to make any such change :  yet the name of
Colonel Welbred was never out of his mouth.

When our horses stopped at Hounslow,  to water,
the Equerry-coach overtook us,  and stopped also.  Mr.
Turbulent protested there could be no better spot for
the interview,  and that he would fetch the Colonel to
the coach door.  I absolutely refused to let him even
put down the glass at my side.  He let down the glass
at the opposite side,  and stood up,  to look out from it ;
and then,  as I heard afterwards from Miss Planta,  he
beckoned the Colonel to advance to us.     The Colonel,

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        311

however,  had more grace than to accept such an invita-
tion.

When,  afterwards,  the carriages passed each other,
he wanted again to let down the glass :  but I positively
forbade it.  He was not,  however,  to be kept in order  :
he not only bowed,  with a most expressive smile,  to the
passing Colonel,  but kissed his hand to him,  and mo-
tioned it towards me,  as if pointing me out to him  !

I was a good deal provoked,  yet the whole was too
ridiculous for any thing but laughter.

And thus,  during this whole journey,  in a nother
new character appeared Mr.  Turbulent !  For nothing
did he seem,  more or less,  than a mere mischievous
polisson,  from its beginning to its end !

January 30th. — I had a visit,  extremely distressing
to me,  from a stranger,  who came with a petition for the

Queen.     The petition was from Elinor de C ,  the

last of one of the oldest English noble families,  who
was confined at Exeter for debt.  The story,  with
many interesting circumstances,  was related to me by
Lady Lumm,  who had been this unfortunate lady's
friend from her earliest years.  I promised to do what
I could,  and I gave her the best counsel my little ex-
perience in these matters furnished me with,  for alter-
ing the petition,  and adding and omitting such things
as I conceived,  from her narration,  might do good or
mischief to her cause.

Lady Lumm prepared and brought me the petition  :
but I found I had done wholly wrong in accepting and
presenting it.  The Queen,  though with great gentle-
ness, informed me of my error,  and now frankly told
me,  that of the many I had presented her,  there was
not one that I ought not to have refused,  as it was

312 DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.  [Part VII.

singly the place of the Lord Chamberlain to receive
and mention them.

I was extremely sorry lor this intelligence,  though
given with every lenient expression to soften its prohi-
bition ;  but I considered with grief the disappointment
and mortification of which it must be productive to so
many solicitors.

When I saw poor Lady Lumm,  this information was
a thunderbolt to her.  However,  she carried the peti-
tion, by my advice,  to Lord Aylesbury ;  and thither I
now directed all who applied to me.

She has had,  however,  no success :  the petition was
for a pension,  and a pension can now only be granted
by the Parliament,  which has already a list of expect-
ants too long for present addition.

Since this time I have ventured no more to interfere
— but I have had several very afflicting scenes with
those whom I have been compelled to refuse.  Nothing
can be more painful :  yet the poor Queen is so over-
whelmed with these prayers and pleadings,  that she
touched me much by saying,  upon this very occasion
— ''If I listen to many more I must want a pension for
myself!"

The calls and claims upon their Majesties are indeed
tremendous,  and how they answer to them in any de-
gree according to the expectations with which they are
made,  is a real surprise to me,  since I have lived under
their roof,  and seen their expenses,  and been somewhat
informed of the insufficiency of their means.

PAllT VIII.

1787.

CONTENTS.

Mrs.  Montagu — Sir Robert Strange — Colonel Welbred — The
Reward of Perseverance — A Conference with the Queen —
The Sventurata — An injudicious Friend — Advice and Cau-
tion— Treachery — The Paston Letters — Returning Tranquillity
— Visit from the Princess Royal — Another Conversation with
the Queen — On the Use and Abuse of Time— Family Affairs —
A Dinner with Jacob Bryant — The Mosaic Law — Doctrines
of Voltaire— Jacob Bryant's Mode of Composition — The King
and Jacob Bryant — Bryant when at School — His Prowess as
a Fighter  —His Pet Dogs — The Marlborough Family  —  The
Ladies Spencer  —  Dr.  Heberden  —  A Debate — Slavery and
Freedom  —  An Enthusiast  —  Colonel Welbred — Wild Beast
Spectacles in Germany  — A Royal Party to the Play —  "  Such
things are !" — Visitors — M.  Bonneville — A Conference with
the Queen — A Pleasant Party — A Visit from the King — Lent
at St.  James's Palace — Ill-assorted Companions — Traits of
Character— James Boswell — Anecdote of Him — Visit from the
King — His Opinion of Hawkins's Life of Johnson — A turbu-
lent Companion — An unexpected Meeting— A Visit from the
King and Queen  —  A new Office,  Backgammon-player to
the King — Remonstrance and Reply — French Plays — Visit
from the King — Lord Templeton— Errors of Female Educa-
tion— Inconveniences of Argumentation — Badinage and Rho-
domontade — Travelling Small-talk — A Quarrel and Recon-
ciliation— Anecdotes — Jacob Bryant — An awkward Predica-
ment— Meeting with old Acquaintance.

314  ,  DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

PART VIII.

1787.

Thursday,  February 1st. — During the drawing-
room,  Mr.  Smelt called upon me ;  he informed me
that Mrs.  Montagu had applied to him for instructions
how she might come to me.  To be sure application
was never more judiciously made.  He answered,  ac-
cording to our covenant,  that I was only visible by
appointment;  and he promised me to meet her at my
apartment when I should be able to name a time.  I
determined to wait the arrival of Mr.  Locke and my
Fredy,  that I might have something to recompense her
civdlity and kindness when she honoured me with her
company.

February 2nd. — In the morning I had a visit from
the new knight.  Sir Robert Strange,  who was so kind
as to give me a proof plate of his print of the two little
Princes,  Octavius and Alfred.

Miss Planta came to tea,  and we went together to
the eating-parlour,  which w^e found quite empty.  Mr.
Turbulent's studious table was all deserted,  and his
books laid waste  ;  but in a very few minutes he en-
tered again,  with his arms spread wide,  his face all
glee,  and his voice all triumph,  calling out,  ''  Mr.  Smelt
and Colonel Wclbred desire leave to wait upon Miss
Burney to tea '( "

A little provoked at this determined victory over my

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  315

will and my wish,  I remained silent, — but Miss Planta
broke forth into open upbraidings  :

''  Upon my word,  Mr.  Turbulent,  this is really abo-
minable ;  it is all your own doing — and if I was Miss
Burney I would not bear it I" — and much more,  till he
fairly gave her to understand she had nothing to do
with the matter.

Then,  turning to me,  "  What am I to say,  ma'am  ?
am I to tell Colonel Welbred you hesitate  ?  "

"  No,  no ;  but why in the world have you done this
— so seriously as I begged you to be quiet  ?"

'^And what harm have I done?  It will be but for
once — and what mischief can there be in your giving
Colonel Welbred a dish of tea one single evening  ? "

"  But will it be one single evening  ?"

"  Unless you make it more,  ma'am !  "

''Indeed,  Miss Burney,"  cried Miss Planta,  "if I
were you,  I would not consent !  "

"And what reason would you assign,  Miss Peggy  ?  "

This silenced poor Miss Planta;  and I then ques-
tioned him whether he was not inventing this message,
or whether it was really sent  ?

He protested he came upon the embassy fairly em-
ployed.

'''^oi fairly,  I am sure,  Mr.  Turbulent !  The whole
is a device and contrivance of your own I Colonel
Welbred would have been as quiet as myself,  had you
left him alone."

"  Don't throw it all upon me,  ma'am  ;  'tis Mr.  Smelt.
But what are they to think of this delay?  are they to
suppose it requires deliberation whether or not you can
admit a gentleman to your tea-table  ?  "

I begged him to tell me,  at least,  how it had passed,
and in what manner he had brought his scheme about.

31G

DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

But he would give me no satisfaction  ;  lie only said
'^  You refuse to receive liim,  ma'am  ? — shall I go and
tell him you refuse to receive him  {  "

*'0,no/'

This was enough :  he waited no fuller consent,  but
ran off.  Miss Planta began a good-natured repining for
me.  I determined to fetch some work before they ar-
rived ;  and in coming for it to my own room,  I saw Mr.
Turbulent,  not yet gone downstairs.  I really believe,
by the strong marks of laughter on his countenance,
that he had stopped to compose himself before he
could venture to appear in the Equcrry-room  !

I looked at him reproachfully,  and passed on  ;  he
shook his head at me in return,  and hied down
stairs.

I had but just time to rejoin Miss Planta when he
led the way to the two other gentlemen :  entering first,
with the most earnest curiosity,  to watch the scene.
Mr.  Smelt followed,  introducing the Colonel.

I could almost have laughed,  so ridiculous had the
behaviour of Mr.  Turbulent,  joined to his presence
and watchfulness,  rendered this meeting ;  and I saw in
Colonel Welbred the most evident marks of similar
sensations :  for he coloured violently on his entrance,
and seemed in an embarrassment that,  to any one who
knew not the previous tricks of Mr.  Turbulent,  must
have appeared really distressing.  And,  in truth,  Mr.
Smelt himself,  little imagining what had preceded the
interview^  was so much struck with his manner and
looks,  that he conceived him to be afraid of poor little
me,  and observed,  afterwards,  with what  "  blushing
diffidence"  he had begun the acquaintance  !

I,  who saw the true cause through the effect,  felt
more provoked than ever with Mr.  Turbulent,  since I

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  317

was now quite satisfied he had been as busy with
the Colonel about me,  as with me about the Colonel.

He is tall,  his figure is very elegant,  and his face
very handsome  :  he is sensible,  well-bred,  modest,  and
intelligent.  I had always been told he was very ami-
able and accomplished,  and the whole of his appear-
ance confirmed the report.

The discourse was almost all Mr.  Smelt's;  the
Colonel was silent and reserved,  and Mr.  Turbulent had
resolved to be a mere watchman.  The King entered
early and stayed late,  and took away with him,  on
retirino^,  all the  "gentlemen.

Certainly,  were no consequences of future constraint
to be apprehended,  no one could be otherwise than
pleased by the acquisition of such an acquaintance as
Colonel Welbred ;  but my fears of other times told me
that the exclusion to which he might have submitted
contentedly,  those who were every way his inferiors
might always resent,  unless such a precedent stood
before them.     However,  it was over,  and past remedy.

February 3rd. — As the tea hour approached,  to-day,
Mr.  Turbulent grew very restless.  I saw what was pass-
ing in his mind,  and therefore forbore ordering tea ;  but
presently,  and suddenly,  as if from some instant im-
pulse, he gravely came up to me,  and said  "  Shall I go
and call the Colonel,  ma'am  ?  "

**  No,  sir ! "  was my Johnsonian reply.

"What,  ma'am  ! — won't you give him a little tea?"

"No,  no,  no  !~I beg you will be at rest !  "

He shrugged his shoulders,  and walked away ;  and
Mr.  Smelt,  smiling,  said,  "Will you give vs any?"

"  O yes,  surely ! "  cried I,  and was going away to
ring for the man.

I believe I have already mentioned that I had no

318 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

bell at all,  except in my bed-room^  and that only for
my maid,  whom I was obliged to summon first,  like
Smart's monkey —

"  Here,  Betty  !— Nan  !—
Go call the maid,  to call the man  !"

For Mrs.  Haggerdorn had done without,  twenty -six
years,  by always keeping her servant in waiting at the
door.  I could never endure inflicting such a hardship,
and therefore had always to run to my bed-room,  and
wait the progress of the maid's arrival,  and then of her
search of the man,  ere ever I could give him an order.
A mighty tiresome and inconvenient ceremony.

Mr.  Turbulent insisted upon saving me this trouble,
and went out himself to speak to John.  But you will
believe me a little amazed,  when,  in a very few minutes,
he returned again,  accompanied by his Colonel !

My surprise brought the colour both into my own
cheeks and those of my guests.  Mr.  Smelt looked
pleased;  and Mr.  Turbulent,  though I saw he was half
afraid of what he was doing,  could by no means restrain
a most exulting smile,  which was constantly in play
during the whole evening.

Mr.  Smelt instantly opened a conversation,  with an
ease and good breeding which drew every one into
sharing it.  The Colonel was far less reserved and
silent,  and I found him very pleasing,  very unassuming,
extremely attentive,  and sensible and obliging.

The moment,  however,  that we mutually joined in
the discourse,  Mr.  Turbulent came to my side,  and,  seat-
ing himself there,  whispered that he begged my pardon
for the step he had taken.

I made him no answer,  but talked on with the Colo-
nel and J\Ir.  Smelt.

1787]  ■  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        319

He then whispered me again,  "  I am now certain of
your forgiveness,  since I see your approbation ! "

And when still I said nothing,  he interrupted every
speech to the Colonel with another little whisper,  say-
ing that his end was obtained,  and he was now quite
happy,  since he saw he had obliged me !

At length he proceeded so far^  with so positive a
determination to be answered,  that he absolutely
compelled me to say I forgave him,  lest he should go
on till the Colonel heard him.

The King came soon after tea,  and stayed,  convers-
ing chiefly with Mr.  Smelt,  for some time ;  he then
summoned Mr.  Turbulent to read to the Queen,  and
called the two gentlemen to join the audience.

February 4th. — I spent the evening most sweetly
with my beloved Mrs.  Delany.

At night I chanced to be alone with the Queen
and I had a very long and interesting conversation
with her,  on the subject of society and acquaintances.
The poor Sventnrata was much involved in it ;  and the
Queen told me,  with a marked displeasure towards her,
that she was a friend to do more mischief than an
enemy,  by her extreme injudiciousness and officious-
ness  ;  and then explained it was to myself she meant,
whom her Majesty considered as injured rather than
exalted by the style of praise which she bestows upon
me in my absence.

I was very much surprised ;  and she soon  ^conde-
scended to be more explicit :  acquainting me that this
ill-judging friend,  extolling me to all she could induce
to hear her,  constantly offered me to their acquaint-
ance, of her own accord,  and told them that the char-
mante auteur de Cecile was vraime7it Vherome d'un
roman I And this,  which to the Queen's cool judgment

320 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

sounds a character of romantic affectation and flighti-
ness,  was what she asserted of me so strongly after my
first meeting with her,  at Norbury Park,  that her
Majesty frankly told me she had conceived,  from that
time,  an idea of me so little to her satisfaction,  that it
had taken from her all desire ever to see me,  till she
heard of me again from Mrs.  Delany.

How curious an incident this to come to my know-
ledge, and how little did I imagine,  when first I saw
her Majesty at Mrs.  Delany's,  that a prejudice had
been conceived against me so greatly disadvantage-
ous !  and how much less could I then foresee that it
was so soon to give place to so voluntary a distinction !
She then added,  that she thought such a character
in the world as the heroine of a romance,  so unjust
and so injurious to me,  that she designed interfering
herself,  and speaking to the Sventnrata,  in order to put
a stop to such mistaken panegyric.

After this,  which gave me real concern for the poor
panegyrist,  she questioned me concerning certain pro-
positions which had been made to me by her,  for en-
larging my acquaintance,  by adding to them her own.
I am all amazed,  and all in the dark to this moment,
who can have given her Majesty all this information  !

I very honestly related,  in brief,  all that belonged to
this subject;  and received a candid caution,  in return,
to repulse these offers with uniform distance,  lest I
should be involved in a coterie of successive foreigners,
dangerous in the consequences of their acquaintance,
which might be productive of numberless inconveni-
ences, and a variety of accounts of myself,  that might
travel abroad,  and,  however erroneous,  beconi public,
and gain general credit.
Poor M.  Bonneville,  the poet,  was here included.

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         321

and I readily promised,  with regard to him and to all
others,  never to make or to receive an acquaintance
that I did not first mention to her Majesty,  that no
one,  through my means,  might ever be brought under
the Royal roof,  from whom any danger might be previ-
ously apprehended.

In all this,  my chief concern was for the poor Svert"
turata,  whose imprudence has thus largely brought her
into discredit and distrust.  Who there is that thus
betrays her I know not ;  but certainly she has some
enemy who spares not to recount her failings.

Friday,  February 9th. — This morning I performed
my self-promise with regard to Mr.  Turbulent,  for I
made an application to the Queen that he might be
permitted to travel,  occasionally,  with the Equerries.

She seemed so much surprised,  that I hardly knew
how to account for my request.  I could not tell the
fact,  that he really was too boisterous for my spirits in
their present state,  nor yet that I wished to repress his
self-consequence with respect to his services  :  I could
only,  therefore,  put it upon his attachment to Colonel
A^^elbred.  She seemed to think it quite strange that
I should be content to part with him,  and spoke of his
agreeable and entertaining faculties in conversation
with very partial admiration.  I concurred in allowing
them,  but accepted her tacit consent to the occasional
separation.

I had now something to say to my Knight that I
knew would keep him in some order.  He came,  at the
usual hour of journey,  with Miss Planta :  1 instantly
expostulated on his not accompanying his Colonel,
but added nothing more at that time,  as I saw he was
again in his humour de misanthrojje,  and could not

VOL.  III.  \

322 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

take such a moment to give him a dismission,  which,
unless enbadinant,  must be rude and affronting.

-;«  ^'  -"f  *  *

I am now reading the  "Paston Family Original
Letters,"  written in the wars of York and Lancaster.
I had borrowed the first volume of my dear father :
the second,  by accident,  I have not yet seen,  I am
much entertained with them.  They do not bring forth
anything very new in facts,  or very striking in senti-
ments ;  but they contain much information on the
manners and customs of the times,  by the anecdotes
and observations and directions incidentally interwoven
with them.  As they were not written for the public,
no professed or formal instruction must be expected
from them  ;  and much allowance for insignificance and
tautology must be made :  but their antique air,  their
unstudied communication of the modes of those old
times,  not only 'in diction and in action,  but in think'
ing ;  with their undoubted authenticity,  render them,
to me at least,  interesting,  curious,  and informing.

Saturday,  February 10th. — This little  'partie will
not be the least welcome to my beloved readers,  for it
opens upon the first day that,  since my abode royal,  1
was sensible of an internal sensation of returning tran-
quillity— the first day in which a little leisure was
found,  yet not seized upon for the indulgence of sad-
ness.

I have,  indeed,  I thank God,  now fairly and tho-
roughly formed my mind to my situation.  I even
think I now should do ill to change it :  for though my
content with it has been factitious,  I believe it,  in the
main,  suited to save me from more disturbance than it
gives me.

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         323

This morning,  soon after my breakfast,  the Princess
Royal came to fetch me to the Queen.  She talked of
Mrs.  Delany all the way^  and in terms of affection that
can never fail to raise her in the minds of all who hear
her.

The Queen was alone ;  and told me she had been
so much struck with the Duke of Suffolk's letter to
his son,  in the Paston collection,  that she wished to hear
my opinion of it.  She then condescended to read it
to me.  It is indeed both instructive and interesting.
A conversation then took place,  which lasted almof5t all
the morning,  and in which the Queen spoke at once
so rationally and so feelingly,  so openly and so wisely,
upon the use and abuse of time,  that she filled me with
new admiration both of her parts and her disposition.

She was then so gracious,  when she dismissed me,  as
to lend me the book,  desiring me to have it sent back
to her apartment when I went to dinner.

So great was her complacency,  that I even ventured
to speak to her of my own family concerns ;  namely,  of
the state of my household.  John has become quite ir-
reclaimable in foppery and forwardness,  and a German,
Frederic Ebers,  had been-recommended to me,  who
the Queen promised me should have his character in-
vestigated, by the means of one of her own pages.

I had invited Mr.  Bryant to dinner.  He came an
hour before,  and I could not read Paston,  but rejoiced
the more in his living intelligence.  We talked upon
the Jew's Letters,  which he had lent me.  Have I men-
tioned them  ?  They are a mighty well written defence
of the Mosaic law and mission,  and as orthodox for
Christians as for Jews,  with regard to their main tenor,
which is to refute the infidel doctrine of Voltaire up to
the time of our Saviour.

Y 2

324 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

Before our dinner we were joined by Mr.  Smelt;
and the conversation was then very good.  The same
subject was continued,  except where it was interrupted
by Mr.  Bryant's speaking of his own works,  which was
very frequently,  and with a droll sort of simplicity
that had a mixture of nature and of humour extremely
amusing.  He told us,  very frankly,  his manner of
writing ;  he confessed that what he first committed to
paper seldom could be printed without variation or
correction,  even to a single line:  he copied everything
over,  he said,  himself,  and three transcribings were the
fewest he could ever make do;  but,  generally,  nothing
went from him to the press under seven.

Afterwards,  whilst we were in the midst of another
subject,  he suddenly made an interruption,  to ask Mr.
Smelt if he had got his work on Mythology  ?

Mr.  Smelt,  a little ashamed,  confessed himself with-
out it.     'Tis in four volumes quarto.

''I'll send it you,  sir!"  cried he with quickness,  "III
give it you !"

Mr.  Turbulent and Miss Planta came to dinner,  and
it was very cheerful.  Ere it was over John told me some-
body wanted me.  I desired they might be shewn to my
room till the things were removed ;  but,  as these were
some time taking away,  I called John to let me know
who it was.  *'  The Princess Royal,  ma am,"  was his
answer,  with perfect ease.

Up I started,  ashamed and eager,  and flew to her
Royal Highness instantly  :  and I found her calmly and
quietly waiting,  shut up in my room,  without any can-
dles, and almost wholly in the dark,  except from the
light of the fire  !

I made all possible apologies,  and doubled and
trebled them upon her smilingly saying,  "I would not

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  325

let them tell you who it was,  nor hurry you,  for I know
'tis so disagreeable to be called away in the middle of
dinner  !"  And then,  to reconcile me to the little acci-
dent, she took hold of both ray hands.

She came to me from the Queen,  about the Paston
Letters,  which John had not carried to the right page.

*  4:  *  *  *  *

Very soon after came the King,  who entered into
a gay disquisition with Mr.  Bryant upon his school
achievements ;  to which he answered with a readiness
and simplicity highly entertaining.

"  You were an Etonian,  Mr.  Bryant/'  said the King ;
"  but pray,  for what were you most famous at school  ?''

We all expected,  from the celebrity of his scholar-
ship, to hear him answer his — Latin Exercises:  but no
such thing !

"  Cudgelling,  sir.     I was most famous for that."

While a general laugh followed this speech,  he very
gravely proceeded to particularize his feats ;  though
imless you could see the diminutive figure,  the weak,
thin,  feeble,  little frame,  whence issued the proclama-
tion of his prowess,  you can but very inadequately judge
the comic effect of his big talk.

"  Your Majesty,  sir,  knows General Conway  ?  I broke
his head for him,  sir."

The shout which ensued did not at all interfere with
the steadiness of his further detail.

"And there's another man,  sir,  a great stout fellow
sir,  as ever you saw — Dr.  Gibbon of the Temple :  I
broke his head too,  sir. — I don't know if he remembers
it."

The King,  afterwards,  inquired about his present
family,  meaning his dogs,  which he is famed for breed
ing and preserving.

32G DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII .

"Why,  sir,"  ho answered,  "I have now only twelve.
Once,  I recollect,  when your Majesty was so gracious as
to ask me about them,  I happened to have twenty-two ;
and so I told you,  sir.  Upon my word,  sir,  it made me
very uneasy afterwards when I came to reflect upon
it:  I was afraid your Majesty might think I presumed
to joke!"

The King then asked him for some account of the
Marlborough family,  with which he is very particularly
connected;  and desired to know which among the
young Lady Spencers was his favourite.

"  Upon my word,  sir,  I like them all !  Lady Eliza-
beth is a charming young lady — I believe,  sir,  I am
most in her favour  ;  I don't know why,  sir.  But I hap-
pened to write a letter to the Duke,  sir,  that she took
a fancy to ;  I don't know the reason,  sir,  but she begged
it.  1 don't know what was in the letter,  sir — I coald
never find out ;  but she took a prodigious fancy to it,  sir."

The King laughed heartily,  and supposed there
might be some compliments to herself in it.

"  Upon my word,  sir,"  cried he,  "  I am afraid your
Majesty will think I was in love with her !  but indeed,
sir,  I don't know what was in the letter?"

Dr.  H ,  also,  was talked over,  and some of his

peculiarities,  of which it seems he has many,  in matters
of religion.

"  L^pon my word,  sir,"  cried Mr.  Bryant,  "  he is
never of the same mind upon these points for four days
together; — now he's one way,  now another,  always un-
settled and changing,  and never satisfied nor fixed.  I
tell him,  as his religion was made before him,  and not
he before his religion,  he ought to take it as he finds it,
and be content to fit himself to that,  not expect that to
fit itself to him."

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.        327

The converse went on in the same style,  and the
King was so much entertained by Mr.  Bryant,  that he
stayed almost the whole evening.  The Queen sent for
Mr.  Bryant,  and all the party dispersed soon after.

Friday,  February 16th. — The usual trio assembled
in ray room for the usual expedition back to Windsor.

While I was dressing for dinner,  I heard a step ad-
vancing in my parlour.  I hastily shut my bedroom-
door,  and then heard the sweet voicve of the Princess
Augusta,  saying,  "It's only me,  Miss Burney;  I won't
come in to disturb you."  Out I rushed,  all bepow-
dered,  entreating her pardon :  she said she only came
for little Badine,  but stayed chatting on some time,
merely to recover me from the confusion of having
seemed to shut her out.

The instant I was left alone with Mr.  Turbulent he
demanded to know my  '■" project for his happiness ;''
and he made his claim in a tone so determined,  that I
saw it would be fruitless to attempt evasion or delay.

'-  Your captivity,  then.  Sir,"  cried I — ""for such I must
call your regarding your attendance to be indispensable
— is at an end :  the Equerry-coach is now wholly in your
power.  I have spoken myself upon the subject to the
Queen,  as you bid — at least,  braved me to do ;  and I
have now her consent to discharging you from all ne-
cessity of travelling in our coach."

He looked extremely provoked,  and asked if I really
meant to inform him I did not choose his company  >

I laughed the question off,  and used a world of civil
argument to persuade him I had only done him a good

328 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

office :  but I was fain to make the whole debate as
sportive as possible,  as I saw him disposed to be
seriously affronted,

A long debate ensued.  I had been,  he protested,
excessively ill-natured to hiin.  "  What an impression,"
cried he,  "  must this make upon the Queen  !  After
travelling,  with apparent content,  six years with tliat
oyster Mrs.  Haggerdorn — now — now that travelling is
become really agreeable — in that coach — I am to be
turned out of it !  How must it disgrace me in her
opinion  !"

She was too partial,  I said,  to  "  tliat oyster,'^  to look
upon the matter in such a degrading light ;  nor would
she think of it at all,  but as an accidental matter.

I then added;,  that the reason he had hitherto been
destined to the female coach was,  that Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg and Mrs.  Haggerdorn were always afraid of tra-
velling by themselves ;  but that as I had more courage,
there was no need of such slavery.

*'  Slavery  ! " — repeated he,  with an emphasis that
almost startled me, — "  Slavery is pleasure — is happi-
ness— when directed by our wishes  !  "

And then,  with a sudden motion that made me quite
jump,  he cast himself at my feet,  on both his knees —

"Your slave,"  he cried,  "  I am content to be  !  your
slave I am ready to live and die !  "

I begged him to rise,  and be a little less rhapsodic.
"  I have emancipated you,"  I cried ;  "  do not,  therefore,
throw away the freedom you have been six years sigh-
ing to obtain.  You are now your own agent — a volun-
teer— "

"  If I am,"  cried he,  impetuously,  ''  I dedicate my-
self to you  ! — A volunteer,  ma'am,  remember that !  I
dedicate myself to you,  therefore,  of my own accord.

1787}  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         329

for every journey  !  You shall not get rid of me these
twenty years."

I tried to get away myself — but he would not let
me move ;  and he began,  with still increasing vio-
lence of manner,  a most fervent protestation that he
would not be set aside,  and that he devoted himself
to me entirely.  And,  to say the simple truth,  ridicu-
lous as all this was,  I really began to grow a little
frightened by his vehemence and his posture ;  till,  at
last,  in the midst of an almost furious vow,  in which he
dedicated himself to me for ever,  he relieved me,  by
suddenly calling upon Jupiter,  Juno,  Mars,  and Her-
cules, and every god,  and every goddess,  to witness his
oath.     And then,  content with his sublimity,  he arose.

Was it not a curious scene  ?  and have I not a curious
fellow-traveller for my little journeys  ?

This sample of his behaviour in a tete-a-tete will not
invite me to another with him  :  for though I think his
ihodomontading as innocent as that of our cousin
Richard,  there is something in it now and then a little
more violent than suits either my taste or my nerves.

The next day I had a very large evening party.
Miss Emily Clayton I had invited,  as Miss Planta was
engaged;  and she brought an aunt.  Lady Harriet Con-
yers,  who,  with Lady Louisa Clayton,  made me a visit
previous to going to the Queen's rooms.  Mr.  Smelt
brought not only the Colonel,  but a nephew of the
Colonel,  who is at Eton,  on the last form.  Colonel
Welbred,  in the mildest manner,  made many apologies,
but declared Mr.  Smelt had uro^ed him to bring:  this
nephew.  I assured him Mr.  Smelt had done perfectly
well,  and he came and sat by me;   and an open and

330 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIIL

pleasant converse,  with Mr.  Smelt for leader,  passed
during the rest of the evening.  I liked him very
much.  I found him by no means the reserved cha-
racter he had been represented :  he is only shy in
making and beginning an acquaintance,  not backward
in supporting it.

He spoke to me now of Captain Phillips  ;  and told
me he had been very much indebted to him for pro-
curing him one of the best copies he ever saw of one of
the portraits he most esteemed :  it was Edward's,  of
his brother,  from Romney.

He then gave a very entertaining account of some of
the wild-beast spectacles in Germany.  He had been
to several at Vienna.  My father speaks of them in his
*^  German Tour.'  Several things which he told served
to exalt the brute so much above the mortal man,  that
I almost sighed to hear him.  The beasts are so urged,
so provoked,  to the combat,  which by the man is under-
taken deliberately and wilfully,  that there w as no list-
ening to his relation without a conscious acknowledg-
ment that the term brute,  in those fights,  might better
have suited the animal with two feet.  Unless they are
just starved with forced hunger,  they never,  he de-
clared, were the aggressors in these encounters.

Monday,  February 19th. — This morning I pro-
posed to my fellow-  travellers that we should begin our
journey on foot.  The wonderment with which they
heard a proposal so new was diverting :  but they all
agreed to it ;  and though they declared that my pre-
decessor, Mrs.  H agger dorn,  would have thought the
person fit for Bedlam who should have suggested such
a plan,  no one could find any real objection,  and off
we set,  ordering the coach to proceed slowly after us.
The weather was delightful,  and the enterprise served

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        331

to shorten and enliven the expedition^  and pleased
them all.

Mr.  Turbulent began,  almost immediately,  an attack
about his Colonel :  upon quite a new ground^  yet as
restless and earnest as upon the old one.  He now re-
proached my attention to him,  protesting I talked to
him continually,  and spun out into an hour's discourse
what might have been said in three minutes.

"And was it my spinning?"  I could not forbear
saying.

"  Yes,  ma'am  ;  for you might have dropped it."

"  How? — by not answering when spoken to?"

*'  By not talking to him,  ma'am,  more than to any
one else."

"  And pray,  Mr.  Turbulent,  solve me,  then,  this dif-
ficulty:  what choice has a poor female with whom she
may converse?  Must she not,  in company as in danc-
ing, take up with those who choose to take up with
her?"

He was staggered by this question,  and while he
wavered how to answer it,  I 2:)ursued my little advan-
tage—

"  No man,  Mr.  Turbulet,  has any cause to be flattered
that a woman talks with him,  while it is only in
reply ;  for though he may come,  go,  address or neg-
lect, and do as he will, — she,  let her think and wish
what she may,  must only follow as he leads."

He protested,  with great warmth,  he never heard
any thing so proudly said in his life.  But I would not
retract.

*' And now,  ma'am,"  he continued,  "  how wondrous
intimate you are gro^vn  !  After such averseness to a
meeting — such struggles to avoid him — what am I to
think of the sincerity of that pretended reluctance  ?  "

332 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

"  You must think the truth,"  cried I ;  "  that it was
not the Colonel,  but the Equerry,  I wished to avoid  ;
that it was not the iiidividi/al,  but the official necessify
of receiving company,  that I wished to escape."

Monday,  February 19th  {continued). — The Queen
sent for me as soon as we arrived in town,  and told
me she had ordered the Box,  that we might go to the
Play.  There is a Box appropriated for this purpose,
whenever her Majesty chooses to command it :  'lis
the Balcony-Box,  just opposite to the King's Equer-
ries, and consequently in full view of their Majesties
and all their suite.  Miss Goldsworth}',  Miss Gomme,
and Miss Planta,  made the party,  and Colonel Golds-
worthy was our esquire.

The play was new,  "  Such Things Are,"  by Mrs.
Inchbald ;  and it has great merit,  I think,  both in the
serious and the comic parts.

It was a great pleasure to me to see the reception
given by the public to the Royal Family :  it was al-
ways, indeed,  pleasant to me ;  but now it has so strong
an additional interest,  that to be in the house when
they are present makes them become half the enter-
tainment of the evening to me.

I had also,  this day,  a very gracious message from
the King,  to inquire if I should like to have my name
down among the subscribers to the Tottenham Street
Oratorio.  Doubtless I accepted this condescension
very willingly.

At night I had the gratification of talking over the
play,  in all its parts,  with the Queen,  who has a libe-
rality and a justice in her judgments that make all dis-
cussions both easy and instructive with her.

I found many invitations awaiting me in town ;
among them from Lady Mary Duncan,  Mrs.  North,

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         333

Mrs.  Robinson  (who was Miss Harris),  Miss Bowdler,
Miss Bulls,  and Lady Harris.

Madame La Fite called upon me,  and renewed her
pleadings for M.  Bonneville in the most urgent and
distressing manner.  I really cannot,  if I would,  receive
foreigners or strangers,  without a painful application
for a reluctant leave,  which I have neither courage nor
inclination to solicit.

So far,  however,  I went,  as to name this M.  Bonne-
ville to Her Majesty ;  but an immediate look of
anxiety,  and a general remark upon the extreme cir-
cumspection necessary to be observed with respect to
all persons who were admitted under this roof,  made
me eagerly close my opening,  by a protestation of the
most scrupulous exactness upon that subject ;  and,
with that,  poor M.  Bonneville was dropped  !  There
might,  she wisely said,  be no harm in him  ;  but we
knew nothing of him,  and there was no foreseeing the
use that might be made,  or the designs that might be
formed,  from visits of people who were strangers,  and
might mean to gather or invent intelligence,  for pur-
poses the most dangerous.

^  H^  *  5i=  *  *

I made a visit at this time to Mrs.  Ord ;  and met
Miss More,  Miss Cholmley,  Mr.  Smelt,  Captain Phil-
lips, and my father :  a very sweet i^arty,  and sweet
evening.

I forget if I have mentioned that I had the satisfac-
tion of settling to accompany Mrs.  Ord to the Oratorios,
during their whole six performances.  The night before
they began,  His Majesty surprised me much by coming
into ray room,  where he gave me a commission for Mr.
Smelt respecting some tickets,  and then inquired of
me very particularly with whom I should go,  and some

334 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

other questions,  all kindly gracious and condescending.

Sunday,  Feb.  25th. — This was the first Sunday I
spent in town.  We never keep the Sabbath there,  I
find,  but for the six Sundays in Lent,  and during these
the fatigue is very great,  as I am obliged to be full
dressed,  in order to be at the Queen's apartment at St.
James's between ten and eleven o'clock,  though I have
to prepare for two waitings upon the Queen before I go.

Monday,  Feb.  26th. — To-day — our travelling day
— I was drawn into a species of trust with my com-
panions that I had resolved from prudence steadily to
avoid  ;  but I was not proof against the discoveries of
Mr.  Turbulent.  With respect to a certain lady,  I had
hitherto uniformly declined all discussion.  The hard
or coarse treatment I occasionally met with I had kept
to m3^self,  and accepted the intermediate better usage
without making any remark whatsoever.  Mr.  Turbu-
lent, however,  this last week,  had told Miss Pianta he
was in much concern,  at a sight he had accidentally
obtained of my poor phiz,  when tete-a-tete in one of the
Queen's rooms with this lady,  and when I knew not,
from short-sightedness,  even that a door was ajar;
though he,  long-sighted and observant,  had seen
through it sufficiently to read all the depression of
countenance which some immediate disagreeability had
brought on.

Miss Pianta had already informed me of this acci-
dent, which was vexatious enough.  I had hitherto
always tried to make them suppose that either I did
well enough,  or was unconcerned in doing otherwise.
But there was no combating ocular proof.  He put
aside all his flights and his violences,  and seemed hurt
for me more than I could have supposed.  I passed it
all off as gaily as I could,  but he touched me,  I own.

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         335

when in a tone of the most compassionate regret at my
lot,  he exclaimed,  "  This,  ma'am,  is your colleague  ! —
Who could ever have imagined it would have been Miss
Burney's fate to be so coupled?  Could you ever,
ma'am,  foresee,  or suspect,  or believe you should be
linked to such a companion  ?"

No,  thought I,  indeed did I not !  But to recover
myself from the train of thoughts to which so home a
question led,  I frankly narrated some small circum-
stances, of a ludicrous and unimportant nature,  which
regarded this lady,  with some of her domestics.

They were almost in fits of laughter  ;  and Mr.
Turbuient's compassion so fleeted away from the diver-
sion of this recital,  that he now only lamented I had not
also known the other original colleague,  that she too
might have lived in my memory.     I thank him much 1

He had lately,  he told me,  had much conversation
concerning me with Mr.  Bos well.  I feel sorry to be
named or remembered by that biographical,  anec-
dotical memorandummer,  till his book of poor Dr.
Johnson's life is finished and published.  What an
anecdote,  however,  did he tell me of that most extra-
ordinary character !  He is now an actual admirer and
follower of Mrs.  Rudd ! — and avows it,  and praises
her extraordinary attractions aloud  !

The King came into the room during coffee,  and
talked over Sir John Hawkins's  "  Life of Dr.  Johnson"
with great candour and openness.  I have not yet
read it.

******

I have parted with my man John.  His fopperies
and forwardness were become even dangerous,  in a
situation such as mine,  where the conduct of the ser-
vant may always be ascribed to the directions,  the

33G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

approbation at least,  of the mistress.  He was very
urgent to stay,  offering any submission or reformation  ;
but after repeated trials,  and promises made and
broken,  I hired another man in the middle of this month
— a German,  named Frederick Ebers,  and strongly re-
commended to me from various quarters.

I had but just got to my own room when this Fre-
derick brought me compliments from Colonel Welbred
and Major Price,  with a request for admittance.  I
had already,  and with great pleasure,  heard that
Major Price was just arrived,  upon an invitation from
the King,  to spend a few days at the Lodge.  I most
readily desired to see them,  and gave orders to have
tea in the next room in half an hour's time  ;  but I
guessed not they were already at my own door,  and
Frederick,  who knew nothing of my contrivances for
keeping my own room to myself,  brought them in-
stantly in.

I was quite glad to see the Major,  and told him how
much I had regretted his resignation.  We talked it
all over very socially,  and he protested nothing on
earth but the visible decline of his health,  and insulH-
ciency of his strength for his office,  could have induced
him to a resignation which the King's constant gra-
ciousness to him had made particularly painfid.  He
now lives entirely in the country,  and keeps a small
farm close to his eldest brother's estate.

When tea was ready I summond Miss Planta,  and we
adjourned,  luckily before Mr.  Turbulent returned from a
walk.  Had he surprised the two Equerries in my room,
whence I so frequently turn him out,  how would he
have rioted  !  For I am now fairly obliged to turn him
out two or three times in a day,  so frequent are his
visits,  so little else has he to do ii?.  these short excur-

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        337

sions,  and so much does he love to make,  give,  or take
a httle disturbance  !  I think this last sentence pictures
him exactly.

We had a very cheerful evening,  and one that re-
newed my concern for the loss of Major Price.  He is
so good,  so upright,  so sincere even in trifles,  that it
will not be easy to find him a successor who shall merit
equal esteem.

Feb.  27th. — To-day I had obtained leave for in-
viting Mr.  Lightfoot to dinner again.  Mr.  de Luc,
coming by accident,  I believe,  into my room,  met him
there  ;  and imagine their mutual surprise and satisfac-
tion when they saw each other,  and told me that they
had made acquaintance on the mountains of Wales,
v»here both had been natural is in g thirteen years ago,
and had never seen each other since till this chance
encounter in my room !

In the afternoon the Queen,  accompanied by the
Princess Royal,  came into my room to have some bota-
nical conversation with Mr.  Lightfoot,  who was made
as happy as if he had been nominated Archbishop of
Canterbury.

The moment they retired came a message with com-
pliments from Major Price and Colonel Welbred,  and
a request from the latter to have leave to bring his
nephew and Dr.  Lind to tea with me.

After some general conversation.  Colonel Welbred
told me he had been much concerned at observing my
frequent difficulties about a Bell,  the want of which for
my man occasioned me frequently to run into my own
room to ring for my maid ;  and he had therefore taken
the liberty to speak to Mr.  Gray,  the Surveyor-General
upon the subject.

I thanked him for so very obliging and unexpected

VOL.  Ill,  z

338 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VIII.

an attention,  but told him I had already vainly applied
to Mr.  Gray,  who had declined doing any thing with-
out the leave of the King,  which I had not yet found
an opportunity to beg.

*'I know all that,"  answered he,  smiling;  and then
added,  tltat the whole ivas settled,  for he had started
the subject again with Mr.  Gray in the King's hear-
ing, and so made an opportunity of mentioning the
difficulty.

Imagine my pleasure and amazement at this step  :
I assured him nothing possibly could be more useful
to me ;  that there was nothing I had so long wished
for with respect to convenience,  and that I was very
essentially obliged to him.

He then communicated to me various schemes he
had been projecting for conducting this bell-wire to the
man's apartment,  "' which you are not,  perhaps,''  said
he,  '*  aware,  is jiear half a mile off!''  without causing
any disturbance by the way.

When the King came he condescended to take much
notice of Mr.  Lightfoot ;  and I believe that worthy and
very ingenious man has seldom passed so pleasant a
day.  The Major,  however — and well he deserves the
distinction — had His Majesty's chief attention.  Indeed
the King is quite grieved at losing him.  I told Colonel
Welbred I wanted to find out some new place of less
fatigue,  to bring him back again to the family;  but I
could think of nothing to propose,  except Backgam-
mon i^layer to His Majesty — a post which no one fills
so much to the King's satisfaction.

I had a little discussion with Mr.  de Luc  :  he began,
upon our being left together one day,  a very warm ex-

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        339

Iiortation,  upon my not spending more time with Mrs.
Schwellenberg.  I immediately answered that I spent
far more than,  upon my entering under the royal roof,
I had ever meant to do.  Extremely surprised,  he
hinted to me that I ought to be more guarded,  and
to attend better to my interest,  which,  he need not tell
me,  must hang upon her good will.  I could not stand
this  :  I assured him,  with spirit and with truth,  I had no
interest in the matter.  I had not sought the situation
in which I had been placed :  I owed nothing to Mrs.
Schwellenberg but such civility as her civility might
claim;  and far from trembling at her power,  I consi-
dered myself wholly out of it,  and must frankly declare
that while I relinquished so much in all my nearest
and dearest connections,  from the duties and confine-
ments properly and inevitably requisite to my place
and attendance,  I could by no means consent to sacri-
fice the little leisure I might call my own,  to dedicate
it where I could so little regard it as due.

I am very glad to have said all this openly at once,
though it was heard with an amazement and disap-
pointment that half hurt me for poor Mr.  de Luc,  who
had imagined till then he bad a right to a partner in
his assiduous attentions.

March 1st. — With all the various humours in which
I had already seen Mr.  Turbulent,  he gave me this
evening a surprise,  by his behaviour to one of the Prin-
cesses, nearly the same that I had experienced from
him myself The Princess Augusta came,  during coffee,
for a knotting shuttle of the Queen's.  While she v^as
speaking to me,  he stood behind and exclaimed,  a demi
voix,  as if to himself,  ''  Comme elle est jolie ce soir,  son
Altesse Royale I "      And then,  seeing her blush ex-

z 2

340 DIARY AXD LETTERS  [r.VRT VIII.

tremely.  he clasped liis hands,  in hii^h pretended con-
fusion, and hiding his head,  called out  "  Que ferai-je  ?
The Princess has heard me !''

"^Pray,  Mr.  Turbulent,"  cried she,  hastily,  '"what
play are you to read to-nii^ht?'

"You shall choose,  ma'am  ;  cither La Coquette cor-
rigee,  or — "  [he named another 1 have forj^ottcn.]

"  O no  !"  cried she,  "  that last is shocking!  don't let
me hear that !"

"I understand you,  ma'am.  You fix,  then,  upon
La Coquette  ?  La Coquette is your Royal Highness'^
taste  ?"

"^No,  indeed,  I am sure I did not say that."

''  Yes,  ma'am,  by implication.  And certainly,  there-
fore, 1 will read it,  to please your Royal High-
ness!"

*'  No,  pray don't ;  for I like none of them  !"

"None of them,  ma am  ?"

*'  No,  none  ; — no French idays at all !"

And away she was running,  with a droll air,  that
acknowledged she had said something to provoke
him.

'^  This is a declaration,  ma'am,  I must beg you to
explain !"  cried he,  gliding adroitly between the
Princess and the door,  and shutting it with his back.

'•  No,  no,  I can't explain it ;  so pray,  Mr.  Turbulent,
do open the door."

''  Not for the world,  ma'am,  with such a stain un-
cleared upon your Royal Highness's taste and feel-
ing!"

She told him she positively could not stay,  and
begged him to let her pass instantly.

But he would hear her no more than he has heard

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  341

me^  protesting he was too much shocked for her,  to
suffer her to depart without clearing her own credit !

He conquered at Last,  and thus forced to speak,  she
turned round to us and said,  "Well — if I must,  then —
I will appeal to these ladies,  who understand such
things far better than I do,  and ask them if it is not
true about these French plays,  that they are all so
like one to another,  that to hear them in this manner
every night is enough to tire one?"

*'  Pray,  then,  madam,"  cried he,  "  if French plays
have the misfortune to displease you,  what National
Plays have the honour of your preference  ?"

I saw he meant something that she understood
better than me,  for she blushed again,  and called out
"  Pray open the door at once  !  I can stay no longer ;
do let me go,  Mr.  Turbulent."

"  Not till you have answered that question,  ma'am  !
what Country has l)lays to your Royal Highnesses
taste  ?"

"  Miss Burney,"'  cried she impatiently,  yet laugh-
ing, "  pray do you take him away  ! — Pull him  !"

He bowed to me very invitingly for the office ;  but I
frankly answered her,  '-Indeed,  ma'am,  I dare not
undertake him  !     I cannot manage him at all."

''  The Country I the Country I Princess Augusta !
name the happy Country  /"  was all she could gain.

''Order him away.  Miss Burney,"  cried she;  '"tis
your room  :  order him away from the door."

''Name it,  ma am,  name it 1"  exclaimed he ;  ^'  name
but the chosen nation  /"

And then,  fixing her with the most provoking eyes,
^'  Est-ce la Danemarc  ?''  he cried.

She coloured violently,  and quite angry with him,
called out,  "Mr.  Turbulent,  how can you be such a fool !"

342 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

And now I found  .  .  .  the Prince Royal of Denmark
was in his meaning,  and in lier understanding  !

He bowed to the ground,  in gratitude for the term
fooJ,  but added with pretcndec)  submission to her will,
*' Very well,  ma'am,  s'il ne faut lire que les comedies
DanoisesJ'

"  Do let me go  !"  cried she,  seriously  ;  and then he
made way,  with a profound bow as she passed,  saying,
"  Very well,  ma'am.  La Coquette,  then  ?  your Royal
Highness chooses La Coquette corrigee  ?''

"  Corrigee  ?  That never was done  !''  cried she,  with
all her sweet good-humour,  the moment she got out ;
and off she ran,  like lightning,  to the Queen's apart-
ments.

What say you to Mr.  Turbulent now  ?
For my part,  I was greatly surprised.  I had not
imagined any man,  but the King or Prince of Wales,
had ever ventured at a badinage of this sort with any
of the Princesses  ;  nor do I suppose any other man
ever did.  Mr.  Turbulent is so great a favourite with all
the Royal Family,  that he safely ventures upon what-
ever he pleases,  and doubtless they find,  in his courage
and his rhodomontading,  a novelty extremely amusing
to them,  or they would not fail to bring about a change.
For myself,  I own,  when I perceived in him this
mode of conduct with the Princesses,  I saw his flights,
and his rattling,  and his heroics,  in a light of mere
innocent play,  from exuberance of high spirits  ;  and I

looked upon them,  and upon him,  in a fairer light.

******

The King came in just as the tea was pouring out.
He made a long stay,  and then,  coming up to the tea-
table,  said  "  How far are you got  ?"

I knew he meant to know if he might carry off Major

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        343

Price ;  but while I hesitated,  the Major,  with his usual
plainness,  said  ''  Sir,  we had not begun.''

His Majesty then went away,  without giving any
commands to be followed;  and Major Price had the
thanks and compliments of all the company for his
successful hardiness.

When Major Price was sent for to the King,  to play
at backgammon,  he asked me if he might bring Lord
Templeton to drink tea with me on our next meeting.
I was very happy in the proposal,  and in thinking I
could name Norbury,  and tell my dear Fredy I had
seen her friend's son.

Tuesday^  March 6th. — I spent almost all this
morning with her Majesty,  hearing her botanical lesson,
and afterwards looking over some prints of Hercula-
neum,  till the Princess Augusta brought a paper,  and
a message from Mr.  Turbulent,  with his humble request
to explain it himself to her Majesty.  It was something
he had been ordered to translate.

"  O yes  !"  cried the Queen readily,  "  let him come ;
I am always glad to see him."

He came immediately  ;  and most glad was T when
dismissed to make way for him  :  for he practises a
thousand mischievous tricks,  to confuse me,  in the
Royal presence ;  most particularly by certain signs
w^iicli he knows I comprehend,  made by his eyebrows ;
for he is continually assuring me he always discovers
my thoughts and opinions by the motion of mine,
which it is his most favourite gambol to pretend con-
stantly to examine,  as well as his first theme of gallan-
try to compliment,  though in a style too high flown
and rhodomontading to be really embarrassing,  or seri-
ously offensive.  Nevertheless,  in the Royal presence,
my terror lest he should be observed,  and any quei-

344 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

lions sliould be asked of tlic meaning;  of his sig-ns and
tokens,  makes it seriously disagreeable to me to con-
tinue there a moment  ^vhen he is in tlie room.

He and Miss Planta both dined with me;  and they
entered into a very long-  dispute upon female educa-
tion, which he declared was upon the worst of plans,
teaching-  young girls nothing but disguise,  double-
dealing,  and falsehood  ;  and which she maintained
was upon no other plan than decorum and propriety
dictated.  In all essential points she was undoubtedly
right ;  but in all the detail he conquered — crushed her,
rather,  as forcibly by his arguments,  as he disconcerted
her by his wit.  It was no disgrace to Miss Planta that
she was no match for him,  though she answered him with
a degree of vexation,  when overset,  that made her lose
the advantages she might have kept.  Both of them
called frequently upon me,  but I declined the discus-
sion :  I should have been happy to have assisted Miss
Planta,  who,  in the main,  was right,  but that she de-
fended all,  every thing,  on her own side,  whether right
or wrong,  and sought to oppose the domineering powers
of her adversary by allowing no quarter to any thing
he advanced.  Candour in argument is the most rare of
all things,  and Truth is for ever sacrificed to the love
of victory and the fear of disgrace.

At length,  she went for her work :  he then attacked
me most vehemently,  insisting on my opinion.  But I
never professedly argue  :  I may be drawn in by cir-
cumstances, or from the interest and feeling of the
moment,  or from an earnest desire to bring forward
conviction,  in some  ])oint of serious consequence to the
principles or conduct cither of another or my own ;
but deliberately and designedly I never enter into that
mode of conversation,  which,  except arising from the

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        345

sudden animation of the moment,  I have always
thought and found either wearisome or irritating.

He tried whatever was possible to urge me to the
battle.  "  Come/'  he cried,  "  speak out your real senti-
ments now we are alone."

'' Assure yourself/'  quoth I,  ""you v/ill never have
an}^  other,  whether alone or before millions  !"

"O yes,  I beg your pardon;  ladies are never so
sincere,  with one another,  as with us  : — tell me,  there-
fore, now,  the truth of your opinions upon this
matter/'

Even this would not do.  I told him I was in no dis-
putative humour.

"  You are unwilling to own it,"  cried he,  "  but I see
you are precisely of my way of thinking  !  You would
not say so before poor Peggy,  who is but a bad logi-
cian, but I saw which way you turned."

This also failed.  I assured him I was seized with
a silent fit,  and he might spare himself further
trouble.

He would not allow this plea,  and grew quite vio-
lent in his remonstrances,  protesting I ought not to be
silent,  and he would not suffer it.

I worked on very qidetly,  only informing him that
to be silent was a privilege I had everywhere claimed,
and that though he had heard me talk probably as
much as my neighbours,  it was merely because I gene-
rally appeared before him as Lady of the Ceremonies,
either at table or in the carriage,  where I thought it
incumbent on me to help forward all I could ;  but that,
otherwise,  and where I considered myself at liberty to
do as I pleased,  I had a general character,  am.ong
strangers and short acquaintance,  of the most impene-
trable taciturnity.

346

DIARY AND LETTERS  [PartVIII

He vowed lie could not believe it.  ''It would be a
shame,"  he cried,  "  and not only a shame,  but an
impossibility  ;  you cannot be taciturn  ! — I defy you !
Your eyebrow  !"

And then broke forth one of his most flighty
rants of compliments,  with expressions really beyond
hadinage.  He made me a little grave,  and I told him,
that however he might amuse himself with conning fine
speeches to me,  I should desire and hope he would at
least confine them to my own ears,  and say nothing of
me in any way in my absence.

He was a little affronted,  and asked why  ?  but he
had given me a feeling I could not quite explain,  even
to myself,  and which,  however,  he almost immediately
dissipated by a more moderate mode of proceeding.

"  I should be glad,"  said he,  ''  you should yourself
have heard howl have mentioned you."

"  I should be far more glad,"  cried I,  ''to hear you
never mentioned me at all."

"  And why,  ma'am  ?  why that distrust or disdain V"

"Because — shall I tell you the truth? — I do not
believe you would speak of me so well as  /  think any-
body else would  !  This may be vain about others,
perhaps !"

This occasioned a vehement outcry,  and professions
of superior devotion to all the world  ;  but they afforded
me the very opportunity I was waiting for,  and,  with
some circumlocution,  I frankly acknowledged I should
be sorry to be spoken of by one whose manner had
taught me to fear he thought,  in fact,  less well of me
than I had ever had reason to believe any one else had
done.

I was almost concerned this escaped me,  it produced
such asseverations ;  but I was glad afterwards,  when I

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        347

found,  in its effect,  it distanced that manner for the
rest of the conference.

Some time after,  "  I want,"  cried he,  a little thought-
fully, ''to hear more of you from your older acquaint-
ances ;  I want to meet somebody who has known you
long,  and to converse with them about you :  those I
meet tell me nothing but what I already know,  and
what everybody knows,  that Miss Burney is very''
&:c.  &c.  &;c.  ;  "but I want to see some of her Intimates,
and to hear them speak to particulars.  I had heard
much of her before I saw her,  and I wished much to
see her,  and her Majesty was so gracious as to order
me to dine here one day,  last summer,  on purpose to
give me that satisfaction ;  and now — "

His speeches were all stopped short by the return
of Miss Planta.

I find no further memorandums of my winter Wind-
sor expeditions of this year.  I will briefly record some
circumstances which I w^ant no memorandums to recol-
lect, and then tie my accounts concisely together till
I find my minutes resumed.

Mr.  Turbulent became now every journey more and
more violent in his behaviour.  He no longer sued
for leave to bring in his Colonel,  who constantly
sent in his own name to ask it,  and invariably pre-
served that delicacy,  good-breeding,  and earnestness
to oblige,  which could not but secure the welcome he
requested.

I saw no more of Major Price,  which I sincerely re-
gretted.    He returned to his farm in Herefordshire.

We were travelling to Windsor — Mr.  Turbulent,  Miss
Planta,  and myself,  the former in the highest spirits,
and extremely entertaining,  relating various anecdotes

348 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII

of his former life,  and gallantly protesting he was con-
tent to close the scene by devoting himself to the ser-
vice of the ladies then present.

All this for a while did mighty well,  and I was fore-
most to enter into the spirit of his rhodomontading  :
but I drew a little back when he said we did not live
half enough together during these journeys,  and desired
he might come to breakfast with me.  "  Why should
we not,"  he cried,  "  all live together  ?  I hate to break-
fast alone.  What time do you rise?"
"At six o'clock,"  cried I.

*'Well,  I shall wait upon you then — call you,  no
doubt,  for you can never be really up then.     Shall I
call you  ?     AVill you give me leave  ?"
*'  No,  neither leave,  nor the trouble."
*'  Why not  ?     I used to go to Miss Planta's room
before she rose,  and wander about as quiet as a lamb."
Miss Planta was quite scandalized,  and exclaimed
and denied with great earnestness.     He did not mind
her,  but went on —

"I shall certainly be punctual to six o'clock.  If I
should rap at your door to-morrow morning early,
should you be very angry? — can you be very angry?"
An unfortunate idea this,  both for him and for me,
and somewhat resembling poor Mrs.  Vesey's,  which
she expressed once in the opening of a letter to me in
these words  —  "  You look as if you could forgive a
liberty I "     I fear Mr.  Turbulent thought so,  too.

His vehemence upon the eternal subject of his
Colonel lasted during the whole journey,  and when we
arrived at Windsor he followed me to my room,  utter-
ing such high-flown compliments,  mixed with such bitter
reproaches,  that sometimes I was almost tempted to be
quite serious with him,  especially as that manner which

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         349

had already so little pleased me returned,  and with
double force,  so as to rise at times to a pitch of gallantry
in his professions of devotion and complaints of ill-
usage that would have called for some very effectual
exertion to subdue and crush,  had I not considered all
the circumstances of his situation,  and the impossibility
of his meaning to give me cause for gravity.

All his murmurs at the weariness of these winter
journeys,  and all his misanthropical humours,  were now-
vanished.  He protested he longed for the return of the
Windsor days ;  and when he got into my room upon
our arrival,  he detained me in a sort of conversation
hard to describe,  of good-humoured raillery and sport,
mixed with flighty praise and protestations,  till I was
regularly obliged to force him away,  by assurances that
he would disgrace me,  by making me inevitably too
late to be dressed for the Queen.  Nevertheless,  till
this evening,  to which I am now coming,  I was alto-
gether much amused with him,  and though sometimes
for a moment startled,  it was only for a moment,  and
I felt afterwards constantly ashamed I had been startled
at all.

I must now,  rather reluctantly I own,  come to recite
a quarrel,  a very serious quarrel,  in which I have been
involved with my most extraordinary fellow-traveller.
One evening at Windsor Miss Planta left the room
while I was winding some silk.  I was content to stay
and finish the skein,  though my remaining companion
was in a humour too flighty to induce me to continue
with him a moment longer.  Indeed I had avoided
pretty successfully all tete-a-tetes with him since the
time when his eccentric genius led to such eccentric
conduct in our long conference in the last month.

This time,  however,  when I had done my work,  he

350 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

protested I should stay and chat with him.  I pleaded
business — letters — hurry — all in vain  :  he would listen
to nothing,  and when I offered to move was so tumul-
tuous in his opposition,  that I was obliged to re-seat
myself to appease him.

A flow of compliments followed,  every one of which
I liked less and less ;  but his spirits seemed uncon-
trollable, and,  I suppose,  ran away with all that ought
to check them.  I lauc^hed and rallied as lono-  as I
possibly could,  and tried to keep him in order,  by not
seeming to suppose he wanted aid for that purpose :
)^et still,  every time I tried to rise,  he stopped me,  and
uttered at last such expressions of homage — so like
what Shakspeare says of the school-boy,  w^ho makes  "  a
sonnet on his mistress'  eyebroioj'  which is always his
favourite theme — that I told him his real compliment
was all to my temper,  in imagining it could brook such
mockery.

This brought him once more on his knees,  with such
a volley of asseverations of his sincerity,  uttered with
such fervour and violence,  that I really felt uneas}^,  and
used every possible means to get away from him,  rally-
ins^  him however all the time,  and diss^uisins:  the con-
sciousness I felt of my inability to quit him.  More and
more vehement,  however,  he grew,  till I could be no
longer passive,  but forcibly rising,  protested I would
not stay another minute.  But you may easily imagine
my astonishment and provocation,  when,  hastily rising
himself,  he violently seized hold of me,  and compelled
me to return to my chair,  with a force and a freedom
that gave me as much surprise as offence.

All now became serious.  Railler}^  good-humour,
and even pretended case and unconcern,  were at an
end.     The positive displeasure I felt I made positively

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         351

known ;  and the voice,  manner,  and looks with which I
insisted upon an immediate release were so changed
from what he had ever heard or observed in me before,
that I saw him quite thunderstruck with the alteration ;
and,  all his own violence subsiding,  he begged my
pardon with the mildest humility.

He had made me too angry to grant it,  and I only
desired him to let me instantly go to my own room.
He ceased ail personal opposition,  but going to the
door,  planted himself before it,  and said  "  Not in
wrath  !     I cannot let you go away in  \vrath  !"

''  You 7mist,  Sir,"  cried I,  "  for I am in wrath !"

He began a thousand apologies,  and as many pro-
mises of the most submissive behaviour in future ;  but
I stopped them all,  with a peremptory declaration that
every minute he detained me made me but the more
seriously angry.

His vehemence now was all changed into strong
alarm,  and he opened the door,  profoundly bowing,
but not speaking,  as I passed him.

I am sure I need not dwell upon the uncomfortable
sensations I felt,  in a check so rude and violent to the
gaiety and entertainment of an acquaintance which
had promised me my best amusement during our
winter campaigns.  I was now to begin upon quite a
new system,  and instead of encouraging,  as hitherto I
had done,  everything that could lead to vivacity and
spirit,  I was fain to determine upon the most distant
and even forbidding demeanour with the only life of
our parties,  that he might not again forget himself

This disagreeable conduct I put into immediate
practice.  I stayed in my own room till I heard every
one assembled in the next :  I was then obliged to pre-
pare for joining them,  but before I opened the door

352 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

a gentle rap at it made me call out  "  Who's there  ?"
and Mr.  Turbulent looked in.

I hastily said I was coming instantly,  but he ad-
vanced softly into the room,  entreating forgiveness at
every step.  I made no other answer than desiring he
would go,  and saying I should follow.  He went back
to the door,  and,  dropping on one knee,  said  "  Miss
Burney!  surely you cannot be seriously angry? — 'tis
so impossible you should think I meant to offend
you  !"

I said nothing,  and did not look near him,  but opened
the door,  from which he retreated to make way for me,
rising a little mortified,  and exclaiming,  "  Can you
then have such real ill-nature?  How little I suspected
it in you  !"

"  'Tis you,"  cried I,  as I passed on,  ''  that are ill-
natured  !"

I meant for forcing me into anger ;  but I left him to
make the meaning out,  and walked into the next room.
He did not immediately follow,  and he then appeared
so much disconcerted that I saw Miss Planta inces-
santly eyeing him,  to find out what was the matter.  I
assumed an unconcern I did not feel,  for I was really
both provoked and sorry,  foreseeing what a breach this
folly must make in the comfort of my Windsor expe-
ditions.

He sat down a little aloof,  and entered into no
conversation all the evening ;  but just as tea was over,
the hunt of the next day being mentioned,  he suddenly
asked Miss Planta to request leave for him of the
Queen to ride out with the party.

*'I shall not see the Queen,"  cried she;  ''you had
much better ask  ^liss Burney."'

This was very awkward.     I was in no humour to act

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        353

for him at this time,  nor could he muster courage to
desire it ;  but upon Miss Planta's looking at each of
us with some surprise,  and repeating her amendment
to his proposal,  he faintly said,  "  Would Miss Burney
be so good as to take that trouble  ?"

I felt he was forced to ask this to avoid exciting
fresh wonder,  and the same reason forced me to answer,
though most unwillingly,  that I would mention it to
Her Majesty,  if I found an opportunity.

I rose to retire to my room at the same moment with
Miss Planta,  and he let us both pass without molesta-
tion. He v/ill not,  however,  again ask if I can be
angry,  but I was truly vexed he should have put me
to such a test.

An opportunity offering favourably,  I spoke at night
to the Queen,  and she gave leave for his attending the
chase.  I intended to send this permission to Miss
Planta,  but I had scarce returned to my own room
from her Majesty,  before a rap at my door was followed
by his appearance.  He stood quite aloof,  looking
grave and contrite.  I immediately called out  "  I have
spoken,  sir,  to the Queen,  and you have her leave to go.'*

He bowed very profoundly,  and thanked me,  and
was retreating,  but came back again,  and advancing,
assumed an air of less humility,  and exclaimed  "  Allons,
done.  Mile. ;  jespere que vous n'etes plus si mechante
qiihier cm soir  ?'''

I said nothing ;  he came nearer,  and,  bowing upon
his own hand,  held it out for mine,  with a look of most
respectful supplication.  I had no intention of cutting
the matter so short,  yet from shame to sustain resent-
ment, I was compelled to hold out a finger :  he took it
with a look of great gratitude,  and very reverently
touching the tip of my glove with his lip,  instantly let

VOL.  III.  2 A

354 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

it go,  and very solemnly said,  "  Soyez sur que je nai
jamais eu la moindre idee de vous offense^-  /"  and then
he thanked me again for his licence,  and went his way.

I was not sorry to have our war end here apparently
though I was obliged to resolve upon a defensive con-
duct in future,  that would prevent any other attack.

And now for a few general anecdotes that belong to
this month.

I had the pleasure of two or three visits from Mr.
Bryant,  whose loyal regard for the King and Queen
makes him eagerly accept every invitation,  from the
hope of seeing them in my room  ;  and one of the days
they both came in to speak to him,  and w^ere accom-
panied by the two eldest Princesses,  who stood chatting
with me by the door the whole time,  and saying comi-
cal things upon royal personages in tragedies,  par-
ticularly Princess Augusta,  who has a great deal of
sport in her disposition.  She very gravely asserted
she thought some of those Princes on the stage looked
really quite as well as some she knew off it.

Once about this time I went to a play myself,  which
surely I may live long enough and never forget.  It
was  "  Seduction/'  a very clever piece,  but containing
a dreadful picture of vice and dissipation in high life,
written by Mr.  Miles Andrews,  with an epilogue — O,
such an epilogue  !  I was listening to it with uncom-
mon attention,  from a compliment paid in it to Mrs.
Montagu,  among other female writers;  but imagine
what became of my attention when I suddenly was
struck with these lines,  or something like them  : —

"  Let sweet Cecilia gain your just applause.
Whose every passion yields to Reason's laws."

To hear,  wholly unprepared and unsuspicious,  such

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        355

lines in a Theatre — seated in a Eoyal Box — and with
the whole Eoyal Family and their suite immediately
opposite me — was it not a singular circumstance  ?  To
describe my embarrassment would be impossible.  My
whole head was leaning forward,  with my opera-glass
in my hand,  examining Miss Farren,  who spoke the
epilogue.  Instantly I shrunk back,  so astonished and
so ashamed of my public situation,  that I was almost
ready to take to my heels and run,  for it seemed as if
I were there purposely in that conspicuous place —

"  To list attentive to my own applause."

The King immediately raised his opera-glass to
look at me,  laughing heartily — the Queen's presently
took the same direction — all the Princesses looked up,
and all the attendants,  and all the maids of honour  !

I protest I was never more at a loss what to do with
myself:  nobody was in the front row with me but Miss
Goldsworthy,  who instantly seeing how I was discon-
certed, prudently and good-naturedly forbore taking
any notice of me.  I sat as far back as 1 could,  and
kept my fan against the exposed profile for the rest of
the night,  never once leaning forward,  nor using my
glass.

None of the Eoyal Family spoke to me upon this
matter till a few days after ;  but I heard from Mrs.
Delany they had all declared themselves sorry for the
confusion it had caused me.  And some time after the
Queen could not forbear saying  "  I hope.  Miss Burney,
you minded the epilogue the other night?"

And the King,  very comically,  said  "  I took a peep

at you ! — I could not help that.     I wanted to see how

you looked when your father first discovered your

writing — and now I think I know !"

2 a2

356 DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.  [PaRT VIII.

The Princesses all said sometliing-,  and the kind
Princess Elizabeth,  in particular,  declared she had
pitied inc with all her heart,  for being so situated
when such a compliment was made.

My Frcdy will have told our visit to Mrs.  Cholmley,
where I met sundry old acquaintances,  amongst whom
were Sir Joshua Reynolds,  Mrs.  Montagu,  the Bishop
of Chester,  and Mrs.  Porteus.

But what was most interesting,  and,  alas !  most
melancholy to me in this month,  was news of the re-
turn of Mrs.  Piozzi to England  !  I heard it first from
Mr.  Stanhope,  but my dear Fredy will have told all
that also,  since she spent with me the same evening.

The waiting of Colonel Welbred finished with this
month,  and it finished with leaving me very sorry it
was over,  especially as I had an entirely new acquaint-
ance to form with his successor.

His elder brother made him a visit during one of
our last journeys for three days,  and the Colonel sent
to request leave to bring him to my tea-table,  before
he made his appearance.  I need say nothing of him,
as you all know him;  but I had a good deal of vcrth
talk with him,  and an opportunity of feeling very
thankful to the consideration of the Colonel,  who,
when called away himself after tea to attend the King,
whispered his brother that he must not stay longer in
that room than nine o'clock.

The elder,  without asking a question,  observed the
injunction,  and the moment the clock struck nine
started up and led the way to the rest of the party
in retiring.

And here closes March.

PAST IX.

1787.

CONTENTS.

Illness of the Diarist — Visits — Recovery — Leave-taking — Con-
sistencies of the Inconsistent — A Surprise — Windsor Terrace
— Gratitude — The Queen and Mrs,  Locke — Lady Bute and
Lady Louisa Stuart — Mrs.  Delany and the Princess Augusta
— A Review — Partiality of the King and Queen to Mrs.  Delany
— A Philosopher turned Fly-catcher — Pet Frogs — Bruce's
Travels— Dr.  Douglas — General Gary — Congratulations — A
Classical Spot — An Enthusiastic Traveller — A Presentation
Copy — Liberties of the Newspapers — The King's Birth-day
at St.  James's — Toilet Etiquette — Attendance on the Queen —
Routine of the day in the Queen's Apartments — Overpower-
ing Effects of Music at a Public Ceremony — Grand Toilette —
The Queen's Diamonds— Visit to Mrs.  Vesey— Horace Wal-
pole — A Cure for Spleen — Lady Herries — Lady Juliana Penn
— Lady Clanbrassil — Colonel Ramsden — M.  del Campo —
Colonel Hotham— Equerries'  Small-talk — Ascot Races — Jacob
Bryant — Windsor Terrace — A high-flown Compliment — The
Miseries of an Equerry — Volcanoes in the Moon— Conversa-
tion on Costume — The Duke and Duchess de Polignac —
Windsor Terrace — The Prince of Wales — His Reconciliation
■with the King— Time the only Re warder of Genius — Singing
Extraordinary — A Counter-tenor — A Singing Lesson— Sir
Richard Jebb— Lord Mulgrave— The Toils of the Toilette—
Much-ado about Nothing — A Tale of a Leather Trunk —
Mystification— Alarming Illness of Mrs.  Delany — Mrs.
SchAvellenberg s Tame Frogs — M.  de la Blancherie — The
three M's — Mrs.  Piozzi — A German Family — Dr.  Beattie —
His Person,  Manners,  and Conversation — His Family Mis-
fortunes— Anecdote of Dr.  Johnson— Dr.  Beattie's Minstrel
— Another Book of it Written,  but Destroyed — Jacob Bryant
and his Dogs — His House and Library — Persecution — Good
Resolutions — A Day at Eton — Canning and the Microcosm.

358 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

PART IX.

1787.

April. —  Colonel Manners now came into waiting,
and the very first day,  as if generously to mark the
superior elegance of his predecessor — he came into my
tea-room with General Bude,  who was at Windsor by
invitation — without any previous message or ceremony
of any sort whatever.  The King himself was already
there,  and Mr.  Smelt,  with whom His Majesty was
conversing;  but as soon as he retired,  General Bude
named us to each other,  and from that time Colonel
Manners came every evening,  without the smallest
trouble of arrangement,  either for himself or for me.

Fortunately Miss Planta or Miss Emily Clayton at
this time were constantly of my party,  which took off
from the awkwardness of these visits.

Colonel Manners is a tall and extremely handsome
young man,  well enough versed in what is immediately
going forward in the world  ;  and though not very deep
in his knowledge,  nor profound in his observations,  he
is very good-humoured,  and I am told well principled.
I saw,  however,  but little of him at this time,  as my

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  359

illness so soon took place,  and I shall mention nothing
more of this month except to have the pleasure of say-
ing that my very strange fellow-traveller gave me no
further uneasiness after the scene I have mentioned.
I continued grave and distant,  in defiance of the piqued
air with which he received my change,  till I saw all
his own flights subside into quiet and common beha-
viour. I then by degrees suffered my stiffness to wear
away,  and before the time of my illness he had recon-
ciled me to him pretty entirely,  by a general propriety
of conduct.  This caused me very great satisfaction.
Yet from the moment of my provocation to that of my
fever I could never bring myself to venture to be one
moment alone with him.  He remonstrated on my
constantly running away when he only remained ;  but
though he remonstrated,  now,  with gentleness,  I could
not change my plan.  I saw all was then right,  and I
thouo^ht it most wise to run no risks.

I need say nothing to my dear friends of my illness —
they and my dear Esther nursed me out of it,  and I
shall skip useless recollections upon unpleasant sub-
jects ;  though never will my memory's best tablet skip
the records of their kindness and goodness.

May. — A fresh beginning now of journal to the
kindest of sisters,  and of friends,  from the date of my
parting with them as nurses and companions.

When I could see no more of my Susan's hat,  and
lost all sight of my Fredy's carriage,  I drew in my
head,  and shut down my window,  and walked slowly
up and down the room,  to keep myself from stagnation ;
and then I determined to set about — all I was equal to
undertaking — an inspection of some of my drawers.

I had but just unlocked one of them when a smart

560

DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

rap at my door startled me.  Goter was up stairs with
her mother and sister — I was unwilhng,  and indeed
unfit,  to sec anybody.  1 made no answer — a second
rapping followed;  I was forced to call out  "Who's
there  ?"  "  May I pay my compliments for a moment
to Miss Burney  ?"  was the answer,  in the voice of Mr.
Turbulent.

Of all the whole household he was just the last per-
son I then wished to see.  Those who have never been
ill themselves know nothing of the gentleness which an
invalid requires.  Afraid,  therefore,  of his visit,  I ear-
nestly called out  ''  No,  not now ;  I am not visible ;  I
can see no company!"

He entered,  notwithstanding,  crying  "  Why  ?"  in
answer to all I could say to stop him,  though I was so
little disposed for his society that I fairly turned away
from him,  when I could not prevail,  with almost serious
peevishness.

He must at least,  he said,  ask me after Mrs.  Phillips,
with whom he had been extremely struck,  whom he
much wished to know more,  and thought a very un-
commonly charming woman.

I was softened a little in my spleen by this,  for I saw
he spoke it with all his heart :  "  She was gone !  "  I an-
swered,— "  I had lost both my nurses but that moment."

"  Indeed?"  said he;  ''  I had had hopes of seeing —
under your protection — Mrs.  Locke ;  I long to know
that lady — what pity to part you from them  !  "

I had now a good mind to shake hands with him.
His soothing fit,  however,  was soon over,  for he pre-
sently added, — "  But since that inust have been — why
this was as good a way to begin as any other."  He
then insisted upon it that I must dine with them again :

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        361

*'  We have Miss Goldsworthy,"  said he,  "  Miss Planta,
and Mile.  Montmoulin,"  and ran on with most vehe-
ment protestations that I not only could come,  but
ought to come,  to join the party.

I assured him I was quite unequal to so much com-
pany ;  and T told him if he would but go then,  I would
see him again in the evening.  This bribery,  as he
called it,  made him consent to depart,  and he got vip
immediately.

I have told you so much,  in brief,  of the singularities
of this gentleman,  that I enter afresh into detail,  in
order to prove to you the consistency of the incon-
sistencies of my accounts of him.  And take now a
most characteristic trait.

You will naturally suppose he did not spare for
length of visit in the evening,  when privileged to come
by my own invitation: — he never came at all!  You
will conclude he was kept away by business or ne-
cessity : — no ;  for in that case,  when we met next he
w^ould not have spared for complaints.  The simple
fact is,  he forgot before night all he had been so eager
for at noon !

After dinner,  while I v/as standing  (for practice !)  at
the window,  to see the Royal Family go to the Terrace,
I heard my door open,  and,  concluding only Goter
would enter without rapping,  I also heard it shut
•without turning to look round:  but,  when at last
another step than Goter's caught my ear,  and my eye
followed it,  judge my surprise to see the Queen!
Taking the Princess Royal for her,  I had no doubt of

362 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX.

her being of the Terrace party;  but she told me she
had a little hurt her foot,  and would not walk.

Nothing could be sweeter than this unexpected
second visit in the same day.  I eagerly seized the op-
portunity of expressing thanks in my Fredy's and
my Susan's names,  as well as my own,  and then in
my dear Esther's also,  for the marks of favour so re-
cently received;  and I endeavoured to tell her,  in
stronger words than I had yet attempted,  my sense of
her goodness to me throughout my whole illness :  but I
did not succeed very well,  and was not half heard or
understood ;  for when, — in despair, — I gave up the
point,  and ventured to say I hoped she would herself
feel for me, — she turned towards me with a compas-
sionate sweetness in her countenance,  and answered,
"  Indeed I do ! "  and I found she had misconceived me
to mean for my siiffcrings,  when I had thought only of
my gratitude.

She told me she had really longed to see Mrs.  Locke,
and spoke in just praise of her charming countenance..
Yet she could not,  she owned,  agree with her in
one thing, — that there was any likeness between my
sister Phillips and me, — and I owned myself  "  of her
advice.'"

She asked me if I had found my sister's children
much grown and improved.  "  Yes,"  I answered,  and
was indulging myself in an eulogy upon my dear little
Fanny,  when the arrival of Lady ISute and Lady Louisa
Stuart,  who were invited by the Queen,  cut off our
conference,  much to my regret,  and she returned to
her own rooms to receive them.

At night I had a few minutes from Mrs.  Delany,  by
means of the sweet Queen,  who kept Lady Bute and

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  363

Lady Louisa till ten o'clock,  but dismissed her at nine,
saying she was sure she would like to come to me for
the rest of the evening.  The Princess Augusta in-
sisted upon taking care of her to my room,  and when
she begged to be made over to a page,  said,  "  No,  no
— I want to see Miss Burney again this evening
myself."

Monday, — My kind Mrs.  Delany came to me at my
breakfast,  and stayed with me almost all the morning.
We had much to talk over of her affairs.  The sweet-
ness, the patience with which she bears the wrongs
she receives,  even while feeling them with the most
poignant sensibility,  is so touching a sight,  that the
hardest heart might melt to look in her soft,  suffering
countenance,  and the worst might be edified by read-
ing what is written in it.

The Royal Family had all been to review Colonel
Goldsworthy's regiment.  Upon their return,  they saw,
through my windows,  that Mrs.  Delany was with me,
and the King and Queen both came in to speak to her.
How they love her !  and what mutual honour does such
love confer on all three  !  The King counselled me to
be as much as possible in the air,  for the recovery of my
strength,  graciously naming to me that I should walk
in the garden for that purpose, — giving me,  in those
words,  the licence with the advice.  You may believe
I would not let the day pass without accepting both.

I had advice,  too,  from the dinner-party in the next
room,  afterwards^  to invigorate myself in another way.
Goter brought me Mr.  Turbulent's compliments,  and
that Miss Goldsworthy had ordered champagne in
honour of her brother's review ;  and he was sure it
would do me a great deal of good to permit him to

364 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

send me a glass,  that I might drmk the toast he had
just given, — ''  Colonel Goldsworthy and all his dra-
goons!" I sent him word,  I had just eaten a whole
chicken,  and therefore thought it best to put off my
champagne -drinking to another day.  My appetite,
3^ou see,  continues of the same voracious cast as at
dear Norbury.

When I had done this feat,  I prepared and cloaked
myself for my walk in the garden  ;  I heard a rap at the
door of my drawing-room ;  I sent Goter to it,  who
brought me word she saw the Princess Elizabeth going
away.  I made what haste I could to stop her,  and
thank her for her condescension.  She assured me I
looked quite spruce again,  and stayed chatting at the
door till Mr.  Turbulent,  hearing our voices from the
eating-parlour,  came out,  followed by Miss Golds-
worthy and Mile.  Montmoulin.

Mr.  Turbulent seized the opportunity to enter my
room,  whence I could with difficulty get rid of him  ;
for he told me he had something to communicate to my
private ear that I ought to know.  And when I begged
him to proceed,  he said he must inform me  ....  "  That
Philosopher de Luc was now turned fly-catcher for
Mrs.  Schwellcnber":'s froo^s  !  "

'Twas impossible not to laugh,  though the news was
far enough from being new to me;  but he made a sport
of it that I assured him was quite too obstreperous,
and I fairly entreated his departure.

If this,  he said,  was a subject too gay for me,  he
had at hand one perfectly fitted for quiet investigation.
This was an account of the travels of IMr.  Bruce in
Abyssinia,  which,  at last,  arc actually in the press.
The MS.  is now with Dr.  Doucrlas,  who had lent Mr.

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        365

Turbulent the frontispiece and advertisement to sliew
to his Majesty,  with a map of the journey of Mr.  Bruce
to the source of the Nile.

Tuesday. — My kindest Mrs.  Delany came to me
again for all the morning  ;  and she desired that I would
pee General Gary,  who is here on some reviewing
business,  as he had wished it,  and is some sort of re-
lation to her.  He came accordingly  ;  he is a mighty
good-humoured,  rattling,  gay old man :  he knows my
father extremely well,  and was the first,  I believe,  who
assisted him in putting our James out to sea.

Soon after followed,  both here and in town,  con-
gratulatory visits on my recovery,  from most of the
household with whom I am acquainted.  You may sup-
pose Mr.  Tvirbulent would not alone be omitted ;  but
you can hardly suppose how he made me stare when
he assured me,  most solemnly,  that he was now plan-
ning, for his first leisure,  a ride to Norbury Park  !

I begged to know what had occasioned that resolu-
tion?

"  I go,"  he cried,  "  to see the spot,  the very spot,
where Madame La Fite first beheld you."

I thought him ranting ;  and not less when he pro-
ceeded,— "  I must see the very,  the identical piece of
earth  ! — I shall want no one to tell me which it is — I
must needs feel it by inspiration,  when once I approach
that hallowed ground ;  and who knows what may follow,
or what blessing may be in store for me  !  That spot
which blessed Madame La Fite may bless me also ;
that look — for you loved one another at first sight —

36G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

that look which she describes,  when you met at Lord
Locke's ! — "

I asked him whether he was really in his senses  ?
And he then positively assured me that Madame La
Fite had just published a book,  in which she had re-
counted the origin of her friendship with Miss Burney,
whom she met at Lord and Lady Locke s I —

I must own I did not believe one word of this ;  at-
tributing it all to his fertile invention,  till he resumed
the subject at dinner,  in presence of Miss Planta,  by
whom it was partly confirmed.

I was really vexed for all parties,  well knowing my
beloved Fredy and Mr.  Locke would contemn such an
ill-judged frivolite as much as I could myself.  Miss
Planta — and I did not wonder — could not resist a most
hearty laugh at it ;  but Mr.  Turbulent protested I had
no right to find fault,  as that single passage was the
only one in the book that had any salt or spirit !  "  I
read that,"  he cried ;  "  but when I opened it elsewhere,
I fell asleep involuntarily."

They then joined in giving a general notion of the
composition ;  to which Mr.  Turbulent put a finishing
stroke by suddenly exclaiming,  "  I,  however,  person-
ally, am very angry with Madame La Fite  !  She has
related so many things that can interest nobody,  and
she has left out all mention of my little Thisbe !  "

This was a favourite dog,  given him by Mr.  Bryant,
and which fell out of a window about this time.

In town I found Madame La Fite's book upon my
table,  de la part de Vauteur,  and speedily followed by

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        367

a visit.  Cold enough were my thanks for the present ;
and,»to avoid any necessity of comment,  since expostu-
lation would now have been too late,  I told her,  with
truth,  I had not yet had time to read it.

How simple the mistake to suppose flattery so easy !

Eut if Mr.  Turbulent and his Thisbe here escaped
mention,  he had not,  for himself,  the same good fortune
in the newspapers.  Miss Planta told me that an
account had been drawn up of all the Royal House-
hold who appeared at the last Commemoration,  and he
came in thus : — ''Mr.  Turbulent,  who takes care always
to be seen — • — "

Poor Mr.  Turbulent laughed,  but said,  ''  Pray how
can a man six feet high be hid?"

St.  James's Palace,  June 4th. — I have had a dread
of the bustle of this day for some weeks,  and every
kind friend has dreaded it for me  :  yet am I at this
moment more quiet than I have been any single mo-
ment since I left my dearest Susan at that last gate of
sweet Norbury Park.  Till we meet again,  I shall feel
as if always seeing that beloved sister on that very
spot.

Take a little of the humours of this day,  with respect
to myself,  as they have arisen.  I quitted my downy
pillow at half-past six o'clock ;  for bad habits in sick-
ness have lost me half an hour of every morning  ;  and
then,  according to an etiquette I discovered but on
Friday night,  I was quite new dressed :  for I find that,
on the King's birthday,  and on the Queen's,  both real
and nominal,  two new attires,  one half,  the other full
dressed,  are expected from all attendants that come
into the royal presence.

This first labour was happily achieved in such good

368 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IX.

time,  tliat I was just seated to my breakfast— a delicate
bit of roll half-eaten,  and a promising dish of tea well
stirred — when I received my summons to attend the
Queen.

She was only with her wardrobe-  woman,  and ac-
cepted most graciously a little murmuring congratula-
tion upon the day,  which I ventured to whisper while
she looked another way.  Fortunately for me,  she is
always quick in conceiving what is meant,  and never
wastes time in demanding what is said.  She told me
she had bespoke Miss Planta to attend at the grand
toilette at St.  James's,  as she saw my strength still di-
minished by my late illness.  Indeed it still is,  though
in all other respects I am perfectly well.

The Queen wore a very beautiful dress,  of a new
manufacture,  of worked muslin,  thin,  fme,  and clear,  as
the Chambery gauze.  I attended her from the Blue
Closet,  in which she dresses,  through the rooms that
lead to the breakfast apartment.  In one of these,
while she stopped for her hair-dresser to finish her
head-dress,  the King joined her.  She spoke to him
in German,  and he kissed her hand.

The three elder Princesses came in soon after ;  they
all went up,  with congratulatory smiles and curtsies,
to their royal Father,  who kissed them very aftection-
ately ;  they then,  as usual every morning,  kissed the
Queen's hand.  The door was thrown open to the
breakfast-room,  which is a noble apartment,  fitted up
with some of Vandyke's best works  ;  and the instant
the King,  who led the way,  entered,  I was surprised by
a sudden sound of music,  and found that a band of
musicians were stationed there to welcome him.  The
Princesses followed,   but Princess Elizabeth turned

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR 0F_ EVELINA.  369

round to me to say she could hardly bear the sound  :
it was the first mornhiir of her coming down to break-
fast for many months,  as she has had that repast in
her own room ever since her dangerous illness.  It
overcame her,  she said,  more than the dressing,  more
than the early rising,  more than the whole of the
hurry and fatigue of all the rest of a public birthday.
She loves the King most tenderly;  and there is a
something in receiving any person who is loved,  by
sudden music,  that I can easily conceive to be very
trying to the nerves.

Princess Augusta came back to cheer and counsel
her ;  she beo^g-ed her to look out at the window,  to
divert her thoughts,  and said she would place her
■where the sound misrht be less affectinj^  to her.

A lively  ''How d'  ye do.  Miss Burney  ?  I hope you
are quite well now?"  from the sweet Princess Mary,
who was entering the ante-room,  made me turn from
her two charming sisters  ;  she passed on to the break-
fast, soon followed by Princess Sophia,  and then a train
of their governesses,  Miss Goldsworthy,  Mademoiselle
Montmoulin,  and Miss Gomme,  all in full dress,  with
fans.  We reciprocated little civilities,  and I had then
the pleasure to see little Princess Amelia,  with Mrs.
Cheveley,  who brought up the rear.  Never,  in tale or
fable,  w^ere there six sister Princesses more lovely.

As I had been extremely distressed upon the Queen's
birthday,  in January,  where to go or how to act,  and
could obtain no information from my coadjutrix,  I now
resolved to ask for directions from the Queen herself;
and she readily gave them,  in a manner to make this
gala-day far more comfortable to me than the last.
She bade me dress as fast as I could,  and go to St.

VOL.   in.  2 B

370 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

James's by eleven o'clock;  but first come into the
room to her.

Then followed my grand toilette.  The hair-dresser
was waiting for me,  and he went to work first,  and I
second,  with all our might and main.

When my adorning taslcs were accomplished,  I went
to^the Blue Closet.  No one was there.  I then hesi-
tated whether to go back or seek the Queen.  I have a
dislike insuperable to entering a Royal presence,  ex-
cept by an immediate summons :  however,  the direc-
tions I had had prevailed,  and I went into the adjoining
apartment.  There stood Madame la File!  she was
talking in a low voice with M.  dc Luc.  They told me
the Queen was in the next room,  and on I went.

She was seated at a glass,  and the hair-dresser was
putting in her jewels,  while a clergyman in his canon-
icals was standing near,  and talking to her.

I imagined him some bishop unknown to me,  and
stopped ;  the Queen looked round,  and called out  "  O,
it's Miss Burney  ! — come in.  Miss Burney."  In I came,
curtseying respectfully to a bow from the canonicals ;
but I found not out till he answered somethino:  said
by the Queen,  that it was no other than Mr.  Tur-
bulent.

Madame la Fite then presented herself at the door
(which was open for air)  of the ante-room.  The Queen
bowed to her,  and said she would see her presently  :
she retired,  and Her Majesty,  in a significant low voice,
said to me,  "  Do go to her,  and keep her there a
little!"

I obeyed,  and being now in no fright nor hurry,
entered into conversation with her sociably and com-
fortably.

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  371

I then went to St.  James's.  The Queen was most
brilliant in attire ;  and when she was arrayed,  Mr.
West was allowed to enter the dressing-room,  in order
to give his opinion of the disposition of her jewels,
which indeed were arranged with great taste and
effect.

The three Princesses,  Princess Royal,  Augusta,  and
Elizabeth,  were all very splendidly decorated,  and looked
beautiful.  They are indeed uncommonly handsome,
each in their different way — the Princess Royal for
figure,  the Princess Augusta for countenance,  and the
Princess Elizabeth for face.

The Duchess of Ancaster,  on these gala-days,  is al-
ways admitted to the dressing-room before the Bed-
Chamber-Women are summoned.  I quite forget if I
have told you that ceremonial.''  If not,  I will in some
future pacquet.

I made a visit to poor Mrs.  Vesey,  whom I had not
been able to see since my Court residence.  I had let
her know my intention,  by the kind means of Captain
Phillips;  she had therefore prepared a party for me,
among whom I had the pleasure to meet Mr.  Walpole,
who had come from Strawberry Hill,  purposely;  and
that,  I suppose,  made me forget the spleen I had con-
ceived against him upon reading his tragedy,  which had
been so great as to make me wish never more to behold
his face.  He was very civil and very entertaining.  My
good Mrs.  Ord met me also ;  the rest that I can re-
collect were Lady Herries,  Lady Juliana Penn,  Lady
Clanbrassil,  and the Miss Clarks.

2 B 2

372 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

Frida-Y,  June 8tii. — This day we came to Windsor
for the summer,  during which we only go to town for a
drawing-room once a fortnight,  and to Kcw in the
way.

Mrs.  Schwcllenbcrg remained in town,  not well
enough to remove.  That poor unhappy woman has an
existence truly pitiable.  Mr.  de Luc and Miss Planta
were my travelling companions.  Mr.  Turbulent never
belongs to the summer excursions :  he is then a fixed
inhabitant of Windsor,  where his wife keeps house.
In the winter she lives in London,  and he only comes
as a royal attendant,  and therefore belongs wholly to
the Queen's suite.

The house now was quite full,  the King having or-
dered a party to it for the Whitsun holidays.

This party was Colonel Manners,  the Equerry in
waiting ;  Colonel Ramsden,  a good-humoured and well-
bred old officer of the King's household ;  Colonels
W^elbred and Goldsworthy,  and General Bude.

I shall not give these days in separate articles,  bat
string their little events under one head.

One evening I tried vainly for Miss Planta,  and,  for
any other person,  my notice was too short.  I could not
persuade myself to remain singly wdth so large a party
of men,  and therefore I even ventured to go for the
whole evening to my venerable friend,  and sent an
apology to the gentlemen,  by my man,  that I could
not have the honour of their company to drink tea
with me.

My dear Mrs.  Delany was a little frightened at this
step ;  but I preferred its novelty to its only alternative,
and spent three or four hours most delightfully for my
pains.

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  373

Colonel Hotham,  also,  a brother of Sir Charles
Hotham Thompson,  came for a part of these ten days  :
he belongs to the Prince of Wales ;  and for two or
three of them,  M.  del Campo.

The party proved too large to be generally pleasant
unless Mr.  Smelt,  or some good leader in society,  had
been present  :  for as to myself,  I am truly insufficient
to doing the honours of a mixed company,  unless
formed of intimate acquaintance.

Colonel Ramsden is gentle and pleasing,  but very
silent ;  General Bude is always cheerful,  but rises not
above a second ;  Colonel Hotham has a shyness that
looks haughty,  and therefore distances  ;  Colonel Golds-
worthy reserves his sport and humour for particular
days and particular favourites ;  and Colonel Welbred
draws baclc into himself unless the conversation pro-
mises either instruction or quiet pleasure  ;  nor would
any one of these,  during the whole time,  speak at all,
but to a next neighbour,  nor even then,  except when
that neighbour suited his fancy.

You must not,  however,  imagine we had no public
speakers :  M.  del Campo harangued aloud to whoever
was willing to listen,  and Colonel Manners did the
same,  without even waiting for that  'proviso.

Colonel Manners,  however,  I must introduce to you
by a few specimens :  he is so often,  in common with all
the Equerries,  to appear on the scene,  that I wish you
to make a particular acquaintance with him.

One evening,  when we were all,  as usual,  assembled,
he began a discourse upon the conclusion of his wait-
ing, which finishes with the end of June  : — "  Now I
don't think,"  cried he,  "  that it's well managed :  here

374 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX

we're all in waiting for three months at a time,  and
then for nine months there's nothing ! "

"  Cry your mercy  !  "  cried Colonel Goldsworthy,  "  if
three months — three whole months  ! — are not enough
for you,  pray take a few more from mine to make up
your market !  "

"  No,  no,  I don't mean that ; — but why can't wc
have our waitings month by month  ? — would not that
be better?"

"  I think not ! — we should then have no time un-
broken."

"  Well,  but would not that be better than what it is
now  ?  Why,  weVe here so long,  that when one goes
away nobody knows one ! — one has quite to make a
new acquaintance !  Why,  when I first come out of
waiting,  I never know where to find anybody  !  "

The Ascot races were held at this time ;  the Royal
Family were to be at them one or two of the days.

Colonel Manners earnestly pressed Miss P to be

there.  Colonel Goldsworthy said it was quite imma-
terial to him who was there,  for when he was attending
royalty he never presumed to think of any private
comfort.

*'  Well,  I don't see that !  "  cried Colonel Manners, —
"  for if I was you,  and not in my turn for waiting,  I
should go about just as I liked; — but now,  as for me,
as it happens to be my own turn,  why I think it right
to be civil to the King."

We all looked round; — but Colonel Goldsworthy
broke forth aloud, — "  Civil,  quotha  ? "  cried he :  ''  Ha !
ha!  civil,  forsooth! — You're mighty condescending! —
the first Equerry I ever heard talk of his cimlity to the

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  375

King ! — '  Duty/  and  ' respect,'  and  'humble reverence/
— those are words we are used to, — but here come
you with your civility ! — Commend me to such affa-
bility ! "

You see he is not spared ;  but Colonel Goldsworthy
is the wag professed of their community,  and privileged
to say what he pleases.  The other,  with the most per-
fect good-humour,  accepted the joke,  without dreaming
of taking offence at the sarcasm.

Another day I invited Mr.  Bryant to dinner,  and de-
tained him for the evening party,  to meet his favourite
Colonel Welbred.  Before tea,  as he wished to go on
the Terrace,  I accompanied him thither,  where we met
the Heberdens,  Fieldings,  &c.,  and Colonel Welbred,
joined us to tell me an incomparable courtier speech just
made,  by a foreign lady of distinction on the Terrace,
to the King: — she had rejoiced in the fineness of the
day,  which indeed,  she said,  was so perfect,  it was easy to
see who had ordered it!  The King himself turned
round,  and repeated this ridiculous flight to all his
attendants.

The tea,  with the present addition of Mr.  Bryant for
leader,  was extremely pleasant.  He was,  as he con-
stantly is,  communicative and instructive,  and Colonel
Welbred was just the man to draw him forth,  and keep
him in employ,  by judicious observations and modest
inquiries.  Mr.  Bryant was quite delighted with him,
and gave me to understand he should be very much
gratified by an opportunity of making a further ac-
quaintance with him.  I am sure I shall be very happy
to find it him.

The subjects with Mr.  Bryant are almost always an-
tiquities, or odd accidents  •  but this night Dr.  Her-

376 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

sclicl and his newly-discovcrcd volcanoes in the moon
came in for their share.

The following evening,  when the same party,  Mr.
Bryant excepted,  were assembled,  the King sent for
Colonel Ramsden to play at backgammon.  "  Happ}^
happy man  ! "  exclaimed Colonel Goldsworthy,  exult-
ingly;  but scarce had he uttered the words ere he
was summoned to follow himself.  "  What !  already  !  "
cried he, — ''  without even my tea !  Why this is worse
and worse  ! — no peace in Israel ! — only one half hour
allowed for comfort,  and now that's swallowed !  Well,
I must go; — make my complaints aside,  and my bows
and smiles in full face  !"

Off he went,  but presently,  in a great rage,  came
back,  and,  while he drank a hot dish of tea which I
instantly presented him,  kept railing at his stars for
ever bringing him under a royal roof.  ''  If it had
not been for a pnppy,"  cried he,  "  I had never got off
even to scald my throat in this manner  !  But they've
just got a dear little new ugly dog :  so one puppy gave
way to t'other,  and I just left them tg kiss and hug
it,  while I stole off to drink this tea!  But this is
too much ! — no peace for a moment ! — no peace in
Israel !"

When this was passed.  Colonel Welbred renewed some
of the conversation of the preceding day with me  ;  and,
just as he named Dr.  Ilcrschel,  Colonel Manners broke
forth with his dissenting opinions.  "  I don't give up to
Dr.  Herschel at all,"  cried he;  "he is all system;  and
so they are all :  and if they can but make out their
systems,  they don't care a pin for anything else.  As
to Herschel,  I liked him well enough till he came to
his volcanoes in the moon,  and then I gave him up :  I

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  377

saw he was just like the rest.  How should he know
anything of the matter  ?  There's no such thing as pre-
tending to measure at such a distance as that."

Colonel Welbred,  to whom I looked for an answer,
instead of making any,  waited in quiet silence till he
had exhausted all he had to say upon the subject,  and
then,  turning to me,  made some inquiry about the
Terrace,  and went on to other general matters.  But,
some time after,  when all were engaged,  and this topic
seemed quite passed,  he calmly began,  in general
terms,  to lament that the wisest and best of people
were always so little honoured or understood in their
own time,  and added that he had no doubt but Sir Isaac
Newton had been as much scoffed and laughed at
formerly as Herschel was now;  but concluded,  in
return,  Herschel,  hereafter,  would be as highly reve-
renced as Sir Isaac was at present.

This quiet reproof,  though not at all comprehended
as such by the one to whom it was addressed,  satisfied
me at once of his justness of judgment upon the sub-
ject, and his good sense in making it so tardily known,
to avoid a vain argument that could have turned to
so little purpose.

We had then some discourse upon dress and fashions.
Colonel Welbred regretted that wc had not had little
figures,  dressed in the habits of the times,  preserved
from every century ;  and proceeded with enumerating
various changes in the modes,  from square shoes to
peaked,  from the mantle to the coat,  the whiskers to
the smooth chin,  &c.,  till Colonel Manners interrupted
him with observing,  "  Why,  you may wear things of
all times now,  ever so far back; — buckles of four years
ago,  if you will! '

There was certainl-y no gaining further ground here !

378 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaiiT IX.

Virtuosos being next,  unfortunately,  named,  Colonel
Manners inveighed against them quite violently,  pro-
testing they all wanted common honour and honesty ;
and,  to complete the haj)py subject,  he instanced,  in
particular,  Sir William Hamilton,  who,  he declared,
had absolutely robbed both the King and State of
Naples I

After this,  somebody related that,  upon the heat in
the air being mentioned to Dr.  Heberden,  he had
answered that he supposed it proceeded from the last
eruption in the volcano in the moon : — "  Ay;'  cried
Colonel Manners,  "  I suppose he knows as much of the
matter as the rest of them :  if you put a candle at the
end of a telescope,  and let him look at it,  he'll say,
what an eruption there is in the moon  !  I mean if Dr.
Herschel would do it to him ;  I don't say he would
think so from such a person as me."

''  But Mr.  Bryant himself has seen this volcano from
the telescope."

"  Why,  I don't mind Mr.  Bryant any more than Dr.
Heberden:  he's just as credulous as t'other."

I wanted to ask by what criterion he settled these
points in so superior a manner ; — but I thought it best
to imitate the silence of Colonel Welbred,  who con-
stantly called a new subject,  upon every pause,  to avoid
all argument and discussion;  while the good-humoured
Colonel Manners was just as ready to start forward in
the new subject,  as he had been in that which had
been set aside.

One other evening I invited Madame La Fite  :  but
it did not prove the same thing;  they have all a really
most undue dislike of her,  and shirk her conversation,
and fly to one another,  to discourse on hunting and
horses.

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  379

Poor Madame La Fite cordially returns,  without
knowing,  their aversion ;  for she concludes them always
the same,  and bemoans my lot in spending any time
with them.  She stayed with me all the rest of the
evening.  She read me some of Madame de Genlis*
new work upon Religion :   it seems an excellent one.

The following Sunday,  June 17th,  I was tempted to go
on the Terrace,  in order to see the celebrated Madame
de Polignac,  and her daugliter,  Madame de Guiche.
They were to be presented,  with the Duke de Po-
lignac, to their Majesties,  upon the Terrace.  Their
rank entitled them to this distinction ;  and the Duchess
of Ancaster,  to whom they had been extremely courteous
abroad,  came to Windsor to introduce them.  They
were accompanied to the Terrace by Mrs.  Harcourt
and the General,  with whom they were also well ac-
quainted.

They went to the place of rendezvous at six o'clock ;
the royal party followed about seven,  and was very
brilliant upon the occasion.  The King and Queen led
the way,  and the Prince of Wales,  who came purposely
to honour the interview,  appeared at it also^  in the
King's Windsor uniform.  Lad}^  Weymouth was in
waiting upon the Queen.  The Duchess of Ancaster,
Lady Charlotte Bertie,  and Lady Elizabeth Walde-
grave,  with some other ladies,  I think,  attended :  but
the two eldest Princesses,  to the very great detriment
of the scenery,  were ill,  and remained at home.  Prin-
cesses Elizabeth and Mary were alone in the Queen's
suite ;  and to the gentlemen I have already mentioned
there were added Sir George Howard and some
others.

1 went with Miss P and Mrs.   and Miss Heber-

den.     The crowd was so great,  it was difficult to move.

380 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

Their Majesties and their train occupied a hirgc space,
and their attendants had no easy task in keeping them
from being incommoded by the pressing of the people.
They stopped to converse with these noble travellers
for more than an hour.  Madame la Duchcsse dc Po-
lignac is a very well-looking woman,  and Madame de
Guiche is very pretty.  There were other ladies and
gentlemen in their party.  But I was much amused by
their dress,  which they meant should be entirely
a VAngloise  ;  for which purpose they had  |)ut on plain
undress gowns,  with close ordinary black silk bonnets !
I am sure they must have been quite confused when
they saw the Queen and Princesses,  with their ladies,
who were all dressed with uncommon care,  and very
splendidly.

But I was glad,  at least,  they should all witness,  and
report,  the reconciliation of the King and the Prince of
Wales,  who frequently spoke together,  and were both
in good spirits.

Miss P and myself had,  afterwards,  an extremely

risible evening with Colonels Goldsworthy,  Welbred,
and Manners :  the rest were summoned away to the
King,  or retired to their own apartments.  Colonel
Welbred began the sport,  undesignedly,  by telling me
something new relative to Dr.  Herschel's volcanoes.
This was enough for Colonel Manners,  who declared
aloud his utter contempt for such pretended discoveries.
He was deaf to all that could be said in answer,  and
protested he wondered how any man of common sense
could ever listen to such a pack of stuff.

Mr.  de Luc's opinion upon the subject being then
mentioned — he exclaimed,  very disdainfully,  "O,  as
to Mr.  de Luc,  he's another man for a system himself,
and I'd no more trust him than anybody:  if you was

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         381

only to make a little bonfire,  and put it upon a hill a
little way off,  you might make him take it for a volcano
directly ! — And Herschel's not a bit better.  Those
sort of philosophers are the easiest taken in in the
world."

A smile from Colonel Welbred led me to say to him,
*'  We must wait Sir Isaac's round for Dr.  Herschell ! "
And I owned to him I had been a little startled at his
silence the other evening,  till he had explained his
notions,  that Tune only could bring  ?i(yo\xi justice.

"  O yes,"  cried he,  "  this is all as it should be — in
the mere regular progress of things;  all great dis-
coverers must be abused and disbelieved in their life-
time :  I should doubt the skill and science of Dr.
Herschel myself,  if he escaped any better at present."

Colonel Manners was talking on during this,  and
quite inattentive to what might be said in answer.

Our next topic was still more ludicrous.  Colonel
Manners asked me if I had not heard something very
harmonious at church in the morning  ?  I answered I
was too far off,  if he meant from himself.

"  Yes,"  said he ;  ''^  I was singing with Colonel
Welbred ;  and he said he was my second. — How did I
do that song?"

"  Song  ? — Mercy  '.  "  exclaimed Colonel Goldsworthy ;
"  a song at church  ! — why it was the 104th Psalm  ! "

^'  But how did I do it,  Welbred ;  for I never tried
at it before  ? "

"■  V/hy, — pretty well,"  answered Colonel Welbred,
very composedly ;  *'  only now and then you run me a
little into  '  God save the Kini^:.'  "

o

This dryness discomposed every muscle but of Co-
lonel Manners,  who replied,  with great simplicity,
*'  Why,  that's because that's the tune I know best ! "  ^

382 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX

''  At least/'  cried I,  '''twas a happy mistake to make
so near their Majesties  !  "

"  Buf pray,  now.  Colonel Welbred,  tell me sincerely,
— could you really make out what I was singini^?  "

''  O yes,"  answered Colonel Welbred ;  "  with the
words. '"

"  Well,  but pray,  now,  what do you call my
voice?"

*'  Why — a — a — a counter-tenor."

''  Well,  and is that a good voice  ?  "

There was no resisting, — even the quiet Colonel
Welbred could not resist laughing out here.  But Co-
lonel Manners,  quite at his case,  continued his self-
discussion.

"  I do think,  now,  if I was to have a person to play
over a thing to me again and again,  and then let me sing
it,  and stop me every time I was wrong,  I do think I
should be able to sing  '  God save the King '  as well
as some ladies do,  that have always people to shew
them."

*^  You have a good chance then here,"  cried I,  "of
singing some pieces of Handel,  for I am sure you hear
them again and again."

"  Yes,  but that is not the thing;  for though I hear
them do it so often over,  they don't stop for me to sing
it after them,  and then to set me right.  Now I'll try
if you'll know what this is."

He then began humming aloud,  "  My soul praise,
&c.,  so very horribly,  that I really found all decorum

at an end,  and laughed,  with Miss P ,  a qui m'leux

miciix.  Too much engaged to mind this,  he very
innocentl}^  when he had done,  applied to us all round
for our opinions.

Miss P begged him to sing another,  and asked

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         383

for that he had spouted the other day,  ''  Care,  thou
bane of love and joy."

He instantly complied ;  and went on,  in such shock-
ing, discordant,  and unmeaning sounds,  that nothing in
a farce could be more risible :  in defiance,  however,  of
all interruptions,  he continued till he had finished one
stanza ;  when Colonel Goldsworthy loudly called out, —
"  There, — there's enough  ! — have mercy  !"
"  Well,  then,  now I'll try something else."
''  O,  no  ! "  cried Colonel Goldsworthy,  hastily ;  "  thank
you,  thank you for this, — but I won't trouble you for
more — I'll not hear another word  ! "

Colonel Welbred then,  with an affected seriousness,
begged to know,  since he took to singing,  what he
should do for a shake,  which was absolutely indis-
pensable.

"  A shake  ?  "  he repeated,  "  what do you mean  ?  "
"  Why — a shake with the voice,    such as singers
make."

"  Why,  how must I do it  ? "
''  O,  really,  I cannot tell you !  "
''  Why then Fll try myself, — is it so .  .  .  ? "
And he began such a harsh hoarse noise,  that Colonel
Goldsworthy exclaimed,  between every other sound, —
"  No,  no, — no more  !  "     While Colonel Welbred pro-
fessed teaching him,  and gave such ridiculous lessons
and directions, — now to stop short,   now to swell, —
now to sink the voice,  &c.,  &c., — that,  between the
master and the scholar,  we were almost demolished.

Afterwards,— ^^  I think,"  cried Colonel Welbred,  turn-
ing to me,  "  we might make a little concert among
ourselves when Major Price comes."

This was the last day of freedom for the whole live-
lons:  summer ! — Were we not risrht to laugh while we

384 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IX.

-were able  ?  The next day — to dinner — arrived Mrs.
Schwellenberg.

Tuesday,  June 19tii. — ]\Ir.  Smelt came early to
Windsor^,  to inquire after the Princesses,  who all
had now the measles,  except Princesses Elizabeth and
Amelia;  but,  thank  (j!od,  all did well,  thougli the
Princess Royal was once in much danger.  Sir llichard
Jebb attended them ;  and I was quite happy to see
that excellent old friend and physician again,  to whom
I had already been so frequently obliged.

Mr.  Smelt was so kind as to breakfast with me;  and
then he hastened back to his family,  all in happy com-
motion. Miss Cholmley was to be married to Lord
Mulgrave on Wednesday:  she is most amiable;  he
must be happy — may he but make her so too !

I had many visits at this time,  with measles-in-
quiries concerning the Princesses;  and,  amongst them,
one to-day from a lad}^  who,  entering my room witli
an air of friendly freedom,  asked me how I did,  as if
we had been old acquaintances of great intimacy,  taking
my hand,  and nodding and laughing all the time.

I just recollected the face and manner,  but not the
name,  till she said,  "  What !  don't you know me  .''
O,  you naughty child  !  I thought we were to have
been good neighbours  ! "

I then saw it was Mrs.  Harcourt.  I apologised as
well as I could,  and begged her to be seated.

"  No,"  cried she,  ''I cant;  for I have a man out
there waiting for me — my uncle — he brought me."

Ha  !  ha  !  do not you know her again,  though I had
forgot her  ?

A few more sj)cechcs followed,  and then she went
her way — and I went mine,  to my toilette — that eternal
business — never ending,  and never profiting  !    I think

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         385

to leave the second syllable out,  for the future ;  the
etle is superfluous,  the first is all-sufficient.

My dearest Mrs.  Delany came to me early,  and was
fetched away by the King and the Princess Amelia.

At tea we had INIiss P ,  Madame La Fite,  Colonel

Manners,  and,  of course,  now,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who
presides.

We were scarcely all arranged when the Colonel
eagerly said,  "  Pray,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  have you
lost any thing?"

"Me?— no,  not 11"

"  No  ? — what,  nothing  ?  "

^^Notl!"

''^  Well,  then,  that's very odd  !  for I found something
that had your name writ upon it."

"  My name  ?  and where did you find that  ? "

*'  Why — it was something I found in my bed."

''  In your bed  ? — O,  ver well !  that is reelly comeecal  ?"

''  And pray what was it  ?"    cried Miss P .

"  Why — a great large,  clumsy,  lump of leather."

"  Of leadder.  Sir  ? — of leadder  ?  What was that for
me  ^  "

"  Why,  ma'am,  it was so big and so heavy,  it was
as much as I could do to lift it !  "

"  Well,  that was nothing from me I when it was so
heavy,  you might let it alone  ! "

"  But,  ma'am,  Colonel Welbred said it was somewhat
of yours."

"  Of mine  ? — O,  ver well !  Colonel Welbred might
not say such thing  !  I know nothing.  Sir,  from your
leadder,  nor from your bed.  Sir, — not I !  "

"  Well,  ma'am,  then your maid does.  Colonel Wel-
bred says he supposes it was she."

VOL.  III.  2 c

386 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX.

*'  Upon my vord !  Colonel Wclbred might not say
such things from my maid  !     I won't not have it so !  "

*'  O yes,  ma'am ;  Colonel Welbred says she often
does so.     He says she  's a very gay lady."

She was quite too much amazed to speak :  one of her
maids,  Mrs.  Arline,  is a poor humble thing,  that would
not venture to jest,  I believe,  w'ith the kitchen-maid;
and the other has never before been at Windsor.

"  But what was it  ?"  cried Miss P .

''  Why,  I tell you — a great,  large lump of leather,
with  'Madame Schwellenberg '  wrote upon it.  How-
ever, I  've ordered it to be sold."

''To be sold?  How will you have it sold.  Sir  ?  You
might tell me that,  when you please."

"Why,  by auction,  ma'am."

"  By auction.  Sir  ?  "What,  when it had my name
upon it  ?  Upon my vord  ! — how come you to do dat^
Sir  ?    Will you tell me,  once  ?  "

"  Why,  1 did it for the benefit of my man,  ma'am,
that he might have the money."

"  But for what is your man to have it,  when it is
mine?"

"  Because,  ma'am,  it frightened him so."

'•'  O,  ver well !  Do you rob.  Sir  ?  Do you take wdiat
is not your own,  but others'.  Sir,  because your man is
frightened?"

"  O yes,  ma'am  !  We military men take all we can
get!"

"  What !  in the King's house.  Sir  ?  ''

"Why then,  ma'am,  what business had it in my
bed  ?  My room 's my castle  :  nobody has a right there.
My bed must be my treasury ;  and here they put me a
thing into it big enough to be a bed itself."'

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         387

"  O  !  veil !  (much alarmed)  it might be my bed-case,
then ! "

(Whenever Mrs.  Schwellenberg travels,  she carries
her bed,  in a large black leather case,  behind her ser-
vants' carriage.)

"Very likely,  ma'am."

"Then,  Sir,"  very angrily,  ''how come you by it?'*

*'Why,  I'll tell you,  ma'am.  I was just going to
bed ;  so my servant took one candle,  and I had the
other.  I had just had my hair done,  and my curls
were just rolled up,  and he was going away ;  but I
turned about,  by accident,  and I saw a great lump in
my bed;  so I thought it was my clothes.  'What do
you put them there for?'  says I.  'Sir,'  says he,  'it
looks as if there was a drunken man in the bed  ! '  'A
drunken man  ? '  says I ;  '  Take the poker,  then,  and
knock him o'  the head  ! — '  "

"  Knock him o'  the head  ? ''  interrupted Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg.  "  What !  v/hen it might be some innocent
person  ?  Fie !  Colonel Manner !  I thought you had
been too good-natured for such thing — to poker the
people in the King's house  ! "

"  Then what business have they to get into my bed,
ma'am  ?  So then my man looked nearer,  and he said,
'  Sir,  why here 's your night-cap  ! — and here's the pil-
low ! — and here  's a great,  large lump of leather  ! '
'  Shovel it all out ! '  says I.  '  Sir,'  says he,  '  it 's Ma-
dame Sch Wallenberg's ;  here 's her name on it.'  'Well,
then,'  says I,  'sell it,  to-morrow,  to the saddler."

"  What !  when you knew it was mine.  Sir  ?  Upon
my vord,  you been ver good!''  (Bowing very low.)

"  Well,  ma'am,  it 's all Colonel Welbred,  I dare say ;
so,  suppose  )'ou and I were to take the law of him  ?  "

"  Not I,  Sir  ! "  (scornfully.)

2c2

3S8 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaHT IX.

"  Well,  but let.  's write him a letter,  then,  and frii^hten
him:  let's tell him it's sold,  and he must make it
good.     You and I  '11 do it together."

"No,  Sir;  you might do it yourself!  I am not so
familiar to write to gfentlemens."

"Why then,  you shall,  only sign it,  and I  "11 frank
it."

Here the entrance of some new person stopped the
discussion.

Happy in his success,  he began,  the next day,  a
new device :  he made an attack in politics,  and said,
he did not doubt but Mr.  Hastings would come to be
hanged ;  though,  he assured us,  afterwards,  he was
firmly his friend,  and believed no such thing.

Even with this not satisfied,  he next told her that
he had just heard Mr.  Burke was in Windsor.

Mr.  Burke is the name in the world most obnoxious,
both for his Reform Bill,  which deeply affected all the
household,  and for his prosecution of Mr.  Hastings;
she therefore declaimed against him very warmly.

*'  Should you like to know him,  ma'am V cried he.

"  Me  ?— No  ;  not I."

"  Because,  I dare say,  ma'am,  I have interest enough
with him to procure you his acquaintance.  Shall I
bring him to the Lodge,  to see you  ?"

"  Wlicn you please.  Sir,  you might keep him to your-
self!"

*' Well,  then,  he shall come and dine with me,  and
after it drink tea with you."

*'  No,  no,  not I  !  You might have him all to your-
self."

'*  O,  but if he comes,  you must make his tea."

'-  There is no such must.  Sir  !  I do it for my plea-
sure only — when I please,  Sir!"

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        389

At night,  when we were separating,  he whispered

Miss P that he had something else in store for the

next meeting,  when he intended to introduce mag-
netizing.

I was stopped on the terrace by Madame La Fite,
to introduce me to Monsieur Tremblai,  who had seen
my sister and Monsieur and Madame Locke at Nor-
bury.  The recommendation was great to me ;  but the
florid speech accompanying it made me involuntarily
draw back,  and,  the moment I was able,  retreat.  Mrs.
Turbulent was also in the party,  and we were intro-
duced to each other for the first time.  She looks very
pleasing.

There were also several other foreigners ;  and Co-
lonel Manners expressed a warm disapprobation of
them,  saying,  "  Why,  now these people take to coming
on the Terrace so,  I suppose every thing one says
will be put in the Brussels Gazette  ! "

July 1st,  Sunday. — Alarming to my heart was the
opening of this month !  As soon as I came from
church,  I found a note from Miss P ,  that my be-
loved Mrs.  Delany was taken extremely ill.  O how
did I suffer in not instantly flying to her !  I was com-
pelled only to write,  and to stay for my noon attend-
ance ;  but the moment I then acquainted the Queen
with my intelligence,  which indeed she saw untold,  she
most sweetly and kindly dispensed with my services,
said Mrs.  Schwellenberg should wait alone,  and per-
mitted me to be absent for the whole day.

The sweet soul — all heart,  all sensibility,  unhack-
neyed by the world,  uninjured by age and time — had
suffered a mental distress,  and to that solely was her
illness owing.     Something had gone very wrong,  and

390 DIARY AND LETTERSJ  [PaRT IX.

SO deeply was she wounded,  that she had been seized
with cruel nervous spasms,  that ended in a high fever.
]\]r.  Young,  her town apothecary,  had been sent for.
1 went to her bedside as calmly as was in my power,
and there I spent the precious day.

How edifying,  betweenVhiles,  was the conversation
she held with me !  how prepared for the last scene I
— with what humble,  yet fervent joy,  expecting its ap-
proach !  It seemed almost wdcked to pray for its dela}^
■ — yet,  while destined to stay in the world,  can we help
devoutly wishing to detain those who best can fit us for
quitting it  ?

We sent for Dr.  Hcberden ; — he saw no immediate
danger ;  Mr.  Young soon arrived,  and gave hope of
recover}'.  With what exquisite sensations of delight
did I hear that sound  !

The Queen herself presently came to the house,  and
sent for me downstairs to the drawing-room.  She
was equally surprised and pleased that so fair a pros-
pect was once again opening.     She then ordered Miss

P to her,  and I returned to this most honoured

friend,  whose sweet soft smiles never a moment forsook
her when she saw me approach,  or permitted me to be
seated by her side.

The King,  also,  came himself,  in the evening,  and
sent for me.  I delighted his benignant heart with a
still fairer account,  for all went better and better  ;  and
before I was forced,  at night,  to tear myself away,  she
was so happily revived,  that I left her with scarce a
tear,  though I would have given the world not to have
left her at all.

Monday,  July 2nd. — When I returned home in
the evening from my beloved friend,  with whom I had
spent the morning and the evening,  I waited upon

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        391

Mrs.  Scliwellenberg,  whom I found alone,  and much
out of sph'its.  She informed me that Sir Richard
Jebb;,  who had been in close attendance at the Lodge,
upon the Princesses who had the measles,  was himself
very dangerously ill,  and not likely ever to be better.
I heard this with great concern ;  and the prophecy
turned out but too true.

While we were talking this over.  Colonel Manners
entered the room,  followed by another uniforin ;  and
coming straight up to m.e,  said,  ''Miss Burney,  will
you give me leave to introduce Colonel Gwynn to you
— the new Equerry,  and my successor  ?"

A few bows and curtsies ensued,  and we entered
into a little formal discourse,  till they said they must
shew themselves in the music-room,  and retreated.

Colonel Gwynn is reckoned a remarkably handsome
man,  and he is husband to the beautiful eldest daugh-
ter of Mrs.  Horneck.     More of him anon.

Afterwards we heard a little humming in the pas-
sage. My companion said she would soon know who
dared do that in the King's house ;  and desired me to
look.  But I declined the office,  for I knew the voice ;
and she therefore went herself,  and returned with a
smile ;  "  O,  'tis only the Madger  /"  and invited him in.

For a few minutes he complied,  but hurried off as
soon as possible.

*  »  ^  ♦  *

What a stare was drawn from our new Equerry the
following evening,  by Major Price's gravely asking
Mrs.  Schwellenberg after the health of her Frogs!
She answered they were very well,  and the Major said,
''  You must know.  Colonel Gwynn,  Mrs.  Schwellenberg
keeps a pair of Frogs."

S92 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX.

"  Of Frogs  ? — pray what do they feed upon  ?"

"Flics,  sir,"  she answered.

"  And pray,  ma'am,  what food have they in winter T'

"  Nothing other."

The stare was now still wider.

"But I can make them croak when I will,"  she
added;  ''when I only go so to my snuff-box,  knock,
knock,  knock,  they croak all v/hat I please."

^' Very pretty,  indeed 1"  exclaimed Colonel Golds-
worthy.

"I thought to have some spawn,"  she continued;
*'but Lady  ^laria Carlton,  what you call Lady Don-
caster,  came and frightened them  ;    I was never so

an

gry

I  "

"  I am sorry for that,"  cried the  ]Major,  very seri-
ously, "  for else I should have begged a pair."

"So you meant,  ma'am,  to have had a breed of
them,"  cried Colonel Goldsworthy;  "a breed of
young frogs  ?    Vastly clever,  indeed !  "

Then followed a formal enumeration of their virtues
and endearing little qualities,  which made all laugh
except the new Equerry,  who sat in perfect amaze.

Then,  suddenly,  she stopped short,  and called out
"  There !  now I have told you all this,  you might tell
something to me.  I have talked enoff;  now you
might amuse  ;/ze."

INIajor Price,  to humour the demand,  instantly said
he would tell a story  ;  and so he did,  and such a story
as truly won my surprise at his courage  !  It was of a
Sir Joseph something,  who was walking by the side of
a pond,  and fell plump in,  and being well soused,  got
out again  !  It diverted,  however,  so well,  that Colonel
Goldsworthy was desired to do as much.     And so he

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  393

did,  and Justin the same style  ;  and,  had I not been
yet low from Mrs.  Delany's continued confinement,  I
must have laughed at this intrepid absurdity.

Poor Colonel Gwynn,  expecting the next summons,
could not laugh at all ;  but he was happily relieved by
the appearance of the Princess Amelia,  who came to
order him and Colonel Goldsworthy to attend her to
the lower Lodge.

July 7th. — This morning I received so urgent a
note from Mrs.  de Luc,  to invite me to meet M.  de la
Blancherie,  a foreign man of letters,  just come over,
that I could not refuse her.  Indeed 1 do not love to
refuse her.  She is so gentle and quiet in her manage-
ment of those sort of encounters,  that,  even though I
know them designed and arranged,  she contrives to
malce me feel them carried off as if they were acci-
dental.

I was not much cliarmee with M.  de la Blancherie :
he is lively,  full of talk,  ready to take the lead,  and
perfectly satisfied everybody is ready that he should.

Poor Madame la Fite was there,  and looked much
surprised at sight of me.  I cannot bring her to un-
derstand that an old acknowledged friend,  like Mrs.
de Luc,  has a claim upon me that any other acquaint-
ance must make before they should demand.

M.  de la Blancherie has a scheme of a periodical
work that I do not think likely to succeed.  He by no
means strikes me to have abilities equal to support-
ing such an undertaking after its first novelty is over.
He invited me to Paris,  and with a torrent of com-
pliments acquainted me I was expected there  ;  and
then followed another torrent upon other expectations.

Dry was the gulf into which these torrents poured
— no stream met them,  no emotion stirred them, — and

394 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

SO they soon grew stagnant.  Indeed,  I often wonder
with myself if ever while I live this right hand will
find other employment than writing to you.

I w^as obliged to write two letters for M.  de la Blan-
cherie,  one to my father,  and one to Charles,  whom he
had met in his little Paris excursion.

A note from M.  de la Blancherie,  which I received
the next morning,  I shall copy.

A Miss

Miss Burney,  To Vindsor.

M.  de la Blancherie presente son respect a Miss
Burney,  et tous les autres hommages qui lui sont dus,
et il a I'honnear de la remercier des deux lettres
qu'elle a bien voulu lui donner pour M.  son pere et
M.  son frere.  II sera tres empresse de les porter,  et
de jouir de tous les avantages qu'il s'en promet.  II
sera tres heureux s'il pent encore etre a portee de
faire sa cour a Tunc des Muses Angloises,  et s'il a
I'occasion de remplir envers elle les obligations de
Tagent de correspondance.  II prend la liberte de
joindre a ce billet un petit prospectus de I'etablisse-
ment qui lui a procur^^  I'honneur de connoitre Miss,  et
d'etre couvert de son Egide.

Windsor,  le 8 Juillet,  1787.

Thus,  being in the same note a Muse,'  Minerva,
and a Miss,  Mrs.  Delany has called me M.  M.  M.
ever since.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg had a German family to dine
here — M.  and Madame Freuss,  and some young men :
they talked nothing but German,  and I vmderstood
not a word.     I liked it very well.

July 10th. — We came to Kew — Mrs.  Schwellenberg,

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        395

Miss Plant a,  Mr.  de Luc,  and myself.  Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg was extremely angered against tlie equerries,
wlio had wholly neglected all conversation with her,
and hurried out of the room the moment they had
drunk their tea.  She protested that if they did not
mind,  she would have them no more,  but let them
malfe their tea for themselves.  "  O yes,  I will put an
end to it !  your humble servant !  when they won't talk
to me,  they may stay ;  comical men  !  they bin bears 1"

Mr.  Fisher said to me,  "  A friend of yours,  ma'am,
drank tea with me lately — one who did not ask after
you !"

'^  And who was that  ?"

''  There can be but one of that description in the
universe 1"

He meant,  I found,  poor Mrs.  Piozzi.  May she be
happy !  She has had her share of making me other-
wise— a share the world holds not power to give to
her again.  Alas  !  she has lost what gave that as-
cendance !  And those cannot long give great pain
who have forfeited their power to give pleasure.  I
find this truth more and more strongly every time I
think of her ;  but where I find its strength the most,
is that I think of her,  any way,  less and less.

The same German family dined with us again at
Kew ;  and now I had my share in the company.  They
no longer confined themselves to their own language  :
they eagerly came up to me,  as I entered the room,
to tell me,  in broken English,  that they had not
known who I was when they were at Windsor.  The
lady told me she had read my book in German,  and
liked it  ''  best of any book,''  adding,  warmly,  "  Ujjon

396 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IX.

vnj vord,  if- is so vat I sink,  (hit I tviss I had wrote it
selfs r The gentleman,  in French,  told me he was
charmed to know my name,  but said he had little
enough imagined himself in a room with one  "  Si bien
conmie"  by him alread}'',  "^^co-  la renormnee."'

So you see,  my dear friends,  here is a little of the
old flummery coming round to me again.

Madame de Freuss took me by the hand and the
arm,  and charged me to sit by her,  and talk to her,  and
not to esquiver so continually  :  however,  I coidd not
help it,  for when her hand was off me,  there was no-
thing else to draw me.

The next day,  at St.  James's,  when I retired from
the Queen's apartments to my own,  who should I find
there but Madame de Freuss !  waiting for me,  with
Mrs.  Farman the mantua-maker,  and a couple of mil-
liners !  I despatched them soon ;  but not my new
friend.  My dear father came ;  "  She was glad to see
him."  Mrs.  and Miss Ord called — that did not disturb
her.  Mr.  Stanhope peeped in, — that had no sort of
effect.  My two Worcester cousins came, — and  ^'  She
liked to see any of my family.''

Well — she outstayed every one of them !

Well !  she is gone back to German^-,  so no matter.
Poor Mrs.  Ord was in deep dejection at the loss of Sir
Richard Jebb; — she was going to Bath,  and took
leave of me till November — sadly on both sides.

The Queen,  in the sweetest manner in the world,
gave me this morning a little pocket inkstand,  with a
gold pen.  Was it not almost an invitation to make
some visible use of it  ?

JuLY^lSxii, — We returned to Windsor;  and I flew,

17 S7]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         397

as usual,  to my beloved Mrs.  Delany,  to spend there
my customary hour between the coffee and tea time.
O,  how sweet to me that hour !

This most beloved friend told me Dr.  Beattie was in
Windsor,  and had desired to meet me at her house.  I
was very glad of such an opportunity,  and fixed the
next evening.

Our tea-party now consisted of Colonel Gwynn and
General Bude.  It was impossible not to smile a little,
when,  upon my taking my work to the window,  aloof,
as usual,  my companion,  after their departure,  said she
never saw such rude people in her life,  and added
"You been right to despise them so,  and I will do
it the same  !"

Her Majesty lent me Mrs.  Scott's  ''  Filial Duty"  to
read.  I think I have seldom perused anything that
has contained less to surprise.

I kept my appointment with Dr.  Beattie,  and was
much gratified by so doing.  I found him pleasant,
unaffected,  unassuming,  and full of conversible intel-
ligence;  with a round,  thick,  clunch figure,  that pro-
mises nothing either of his works or his discourse  ;  yet
his eye,  at intervals,  and when something breaks from
him pointed and sudden,  shoots forth a ray of genius
that instantly lights up his whole countenance.  His
voice and his manners are particularly and pleasingly
mild,  and seem to announce an urbanity of character
both inviting and edifying.

My very high admiration of his two principal pro-
ductions, ''The Minstrel"  and the  ''Immutability of
Truth,"  made it a real satisfaction to me to see their
author ;  and finding him such as I have described,  I
felt a desire to be acquainted with him that made mc

398 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX.

regret my little likelihood of meeting with him again.
His present errand to Windsor was to see Mrs.  Delany.

The  ^'Immutability of Truth"  is full of religious
instruction,  conveyed with such a rare mixture of pre-
cision and of wit as to carry amusement hand in hand
with conviction  :  at least such it appeared to me when
I read it,  at the desire of Mrs.  Chapone,  who lent it
me.  Yet the opening,  I remember,  was so obscure and
metaphysical,  that I had nearly abandoned the book,
in despair of comprehending it :  Mrs.  Chapone would
not suffer me to give it up,  and I have felt much
obliged ever since to her persevering exhortations.

Once before,  when I lived in the world,  I had met
with Dr.  Beattie,  but he then spoke very little,  the
company being large ;  and for myself,  I spoke not at
all.  Our personal knowledge of each other therefore
sunk not very deep.  It was at the house of Miss Rey-
nolds. My ever -honoured Dr.  Johnson was there,  and
my poor Mrs.  Thrale,  her daughter,  Mrs.  Ord,  Mrs.
Horncck,  Mrs.  Gwynn,  the Bishop of Dromore,  and
Mrs.  Percy,  and Mr.  Boswell,  and Mr.  Seward,  with
some others.

Many things do I recollect of that evening,  par-
ticularly one laughable circumstance.  I was coming
away at night,  without having been seen by Dr.  John-
son, but knowing he would reproach me afterwards,  I
begged my father to tell him I wished him good night.
He instantly called me up to him,  took both my hands,
which he extended as far asunder as they would go,
and just as I was unfortunately curtseying to be gone,
he let them loose and dropped both his own on the
two sides of my hoop,  with so ponderous a weight,  that
I could not for some time rise from the inclined posture

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        399

into which I had put myself,  and in which,  though quite
unconscious of what he was about,  he seemed forcibly
holding me.

I liked my little encounter so well,  that the next day
I not only repeated it,  but as Dr.  Beattie was so kind
as to give up an appointment for the next day,  that
the same little party might again take place,  I made
my customary preparations,  and went for the whole
evening instead of my ordinary hour.

He was very pleasant,  and in better spirits than the
preceding day.  He was gayer,  as I found afterwards,
wdth me,  as a stranger,  than with any of his old ac-
quaintances, for his mind was sad and wounded by
domestic misfortunes.

Mrs.  Delany,  in the course of the evening,  was called
out of the room  :  he then,  in a low voice,  and looking
another way,  very gently said — '^I must now,  ma'am,
seize an opportunity for which I have long wished,  to
tell you of the equal amazement and pleasure I have
received from you."

And then,  without further preamble,  he entered upon
the old subject,  and uttered such flattering things as
were now,  from a person such as him,  become almost
new to my ears,  and I was really ready to run away.

When my dear Mrs.  Delany returned he was so kind
and so delicate as to suffer her to change the subject,
which she,  with her never-failing indulgence to my
every inclination,  immediately attempted.

She asked him if there were any hopes of anything
new from him.  No,  he said,  he had been otherwise
employed.  I then ventured a wish for a conclusion to
the  ''  Minstrel."  He owned he had written another
book,  but that he had disapproved and burned it.

400 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

*^'0!"  I exclaimed in parody from liis  ''Edwin/'
"then may wc say of Dr.  Bcattie  —

*  Some thought him wondrous odd;  and some believed liim mad !' "

He laughed heartily,  and said to Mrs.  Delany,  "  Miss
Burney,  ma'am,  vanquishes me with my own weapons  !"
And then w^e went on to other subjects,  till I was
forced to decamp.

In coming away he told me he heard that Lady
Pembroke was at the Queen's Lodge,  and asked me
to e:ive him directions how he mis^ht see her.  I offered
to convey a note to her,  for I could venture at nothing
further  ;  but I added,  that when she had made her
appointment,  if he would call at my door I should
think myself much honoured,  though I could not have
had the courage to solicit his coming to the house
purposely to see me.

"  Not purposely  !"  cried he,  with the utmost good-
humour and vivacity,  ''  why,  I would go to the Land's
End !"

He then positively and undeniably insisted I should
name my own time for seeing him,  without any refer-
ence to Lady Pembroke,  or any other lady,  or any
other thing whatsoever.  I thanked him,  and accepting
his kindness,  mentioned three o'clock for the next day.

I determined to acquaint the Queen with my assig-
nation, but felt so certain of her indisputable appro-
bation, that I could not be uneasy at not speaking to
her first.

I like Dr.  Beattie extremely.  I am quite happy he
made this visit.  My dearest Mrs.  Delany told me he
had been formerly amongst the first of men in his
social powers;  but family calamities had greatly altered

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        401

him.  I was truly sorry to hear of his sad fate,  but as
I had not known him in his happier days,  I found him
now all 1 could wish him.

Mrs.  Delany,  according to an almost general custom,
came for me the next morning early,  in her chaise,  to
air  \vith her.  She was met by the King,  who rode up
to her,  and asked whither she was going.  "  Only to
spend one quarter of an hour with Miss Burney,  sir,"
was her answer.  "  But you may keep her two hours,'*
cried he,  "  this morning — or as long as you will."  And
then he rode up to the Queen's carriage,  and having
spoken to her,  returned again to Mrs.  Delany,  with a
confirmation of the permission.  They were going to
Kew.

We made use of the licence,  by driving to Mr.
Bryant,  at Cypenham.  We found him in his garden,
encompassed with his numerous family of dogs.  His
fondness for these good animals is quite diverting  ;  he
makes them his chief companions,  and speaks to them
as if they were upon terms of equality with him.  He
says they regularly breakfast with him,  and he then
gives them his principal lesson how to behave them-
selves.

After all,  where is the philosopher wise enough to
be all-sufficient to himself?  A man had better arrange
himself with a family of human beings,  after the com-
mon mode,  at once.

It was extremely amusing to see his anxiety that his
children should not disgrace themselves.  My dear
Susan is not more solicitous for her Fanny and Nordia.
''  Come,  now,  be good  !  Be good,  my little fellows  ! —
don t be troublesome  !  Don't jump up on Mrs.  Delany !
Miss Burney,  I'm afraid they are in your way.     Come,

VOL.  III.  2 D

402 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

my little fellows,  keep back! — pray do.  There! —
there's good dogs  ! — keep back  !"

And then,  when they persevered in surrounding
Mrs.  Delany — too kind and too easy to mind them —
he addressed them quite with pathos:  ''My sweet
dogs! — O,  my s\veet dogs  ! — don't ! — don't ! — my sweet
dogs!"

Well ! — we are all born to have some recreation,
and I should certainly do the same,  had I nothing else
alive about me.

We returned in very good time,  and I was just
dressed as Dr.  Beattie arrived.  I had taken all proper
measures,  and therefore received him very comfortably.

He was very cheerful and very charming.  He seems
made up of gentleness and benevolence,  yet with a
disposition to decent mirth,  and an enjoyment of
humour and sport,  that give an animation to his mild-
ness truly engaging.  You would be surprised to find
how soon you would forget that he is ugly and clums}^,
for there is a sort of perfect good-will in his counte-
nance and liis smile,  that is quite captivating.

I told him of my visit to Mr.  Bryant and his dogs.
He laughed very heartily,  but outdid my account by
another — of a gentleman who always partook a mess
of hasty pudding with a favourite hound,  w^iichwas the
breakfast of both.  "  And when,"  said he,  "  the dog
happened to infringe on his share,  he only gave him a
knock on the nose,  to set him right,  and then ate
quietly on with him !"

This introduced many other little contea a rive,
which chiefly occupied the time he had to bestow^  upon
me,  or rather the time I had to solicit his stay,  for he
went not till that was over.

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        403

I longed to have spoken of his  ''  Immutability of
Truth,"  which I truly think a glorious work,  but I had
not courage.  I feared it might look like a return of
compliment,  which I could not bear.  For,  to be sure^
I had it to return !  I have heard nothing like what
fell from him since under this roof I came ;  and I will
not refrain,  as his good opinion was equally gratifying
and surprising to me,  telling you what he most dwelt
upon.  "  What most,"  cried he,  "  has struck me,  is all
that concerns a species of distress the most common
in life,  yet most neglected in representation — that of
people of high cultivation and elegance forced to asso-
ciate with those of gross and inferior capacities and
manners.  'Tis a most just and most feeling distress  ;
yet you,  as you have stated,  have it now''

Whether he meant Evelina with the Braughtons,  or
Henrietta with her mother and Mr.  Hobson,  I know
not.     Will you say,  Why could not you ask  ?

I saw no more of him,  to my great regret.  He left
Windsor the next day.

July 18th. — This morning I received the very
alarming letters — very afflicting,  rather,  for the alarm
was,  thank God,  passed — of my dear and most valued
Mr.  Locke's illness.  How kindly had my generous
Fredy spared me all anxiety but of retrospection,  of
what I might have shared!- — but no,  I can share
nothing.     I can but feel,  and be felt for,  apart !

July 19th. — The election of a member for Windsor,
who proved to be Lord Mornington,  determined his
Majesty to spend the day at Kew with the Queen
and all the Princesses.  By appointment,  therefore,  the
vacation was destined to Mr.  Bryant,  to whose house
I accompanied my dearest Mrs.  Delany.  We found
Mr.  Turbulent waiting for us,  with the good old gentle-

2d 2

404 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IX.

man,   and an ample breakfast prepared for our re-
ception.

The morning was very pleasant.  Mr.  Bryant was
quite delighted with the visit,  and did the honours with
the utmost activity and spirit,  regaling us at once with
his excellent anecdotes and excellent brown bread,
&c.  He gave me carte blanche to choose and to take
whichever of his books I pleased,  and put his keys into
my hand,  that I might examine his store,  and send for
whatever I wished,  at any time that I desired.  I ac-
cepted his liberal offer with great thanks ;  but,  un-
happily, his books are very few of them such as I could
covet.  They are chiefly very antique and voluminous
accounts of voyages and travels,  books of science,  or
authors in the dead languages.

He took us all over his house,  which has books in
every part.  He begged me to follow him,  when in his
own room,  to a small neat case,  which he desired me
to examine.  I complied very readily,  but you may be-
lieve my surprise when I there saw,  very elegantly
bound,  "  Cecilia,"  and  "  Evelina  !"

He laughed very heartily at my start ;  how,  indeed,
could I suspect such a compliment from this good old
Grecian  ?  "  Cecilia  "  and  '•  Evelina  "  were not written
before the Deluge !

He then lent me some curious old newspapers,  print-
ed just before the Revolution;  v/ith various tracts upon
that sera,  not very interesting to me.

We stayed very late,  and returned well pleased with
our expedition.  Mr.  Bryant was eager in displaying
his collection to Mrs.  Delany,  who accepts every atten-
tion not as a due,  but a favour,  and who excuses every
omission with an indulgence that seems to put pardon
out of the question.

I 787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        405

In the afternoon,  while I was working in Mrs.
Schwellenberf^'s room,  Mr.  Turbulent entered,  to sum-
mon Miss Planta to the Princesses ;  and,  in the little
while of executing that simple commission,  he made
such use of his very imgovernable and extraordinary
eyes,  that the moment he was gone,  Mrs.  Schwellen-
berg demanded  /or ichat he looked so at me  ?

I desired to know what she meant.

"Why,  like when he was so cordial with you  ?  Been
you acquainted  ?"

''^O yes  !"  cried I,  ''I spent three hours twice a-week
upon the road with him and Miss Planta,  all the
winter ;  and three or four dinners and afternoons be-
sides."

"  O that's nothing  !  that's no acquaintance at all.
I have had people to me,  to travel and to dine,  four-
teen and fifteen years,  and yet they been never so
cordial !"

This was too unanswerable for reply  ;  but it deter-
mined me to try at some decided measure for restrain-
ing or changing looks and behaviour that excited such
comments.  And I thought my safest way would be
fairly and frankly to tell him this very inquiry.  It
might put him upon his guard from such foolishness,
without any more serious effort.

July 20th. — This evening Mrs.  Schwellenberg was
not well,  and sent to desire I would receive the gentle-
men to tea,  and make her apologies.  I immediately
summoned my lively and lovely young companion.
Miss P ,  who hastens at every call with good-
humoured delight.

We had really a pleasant evening,  though simply
from the absence of spleen and jealousy,  which seemed
to renew and invigorate the spirits of all present:

40G DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX.

namely.  General Bude,  Signer del Campo,  and Colonel
Gwynn.

They all stayed very late  ;  but when they made their
exit,  I dismissed my gay assistant,  and thought it in-
cumbent on me to shew myself upstairs.  But what a
reception was awaiting me  !  —  so grim  !  O Heaven  !
how depressing,  how cruel,  to be fastened thus on an
associate so exigcante,  so tyrannical,  and so ill-disposed !

I feared to blame the Equerries for having detained
me,  as they were all already so much out of favour.  I
only,  therefore,  mentioned M.  del Campo,  who,  as a
Foreign Minister,  might be allowed so much civility as
not to be left to himself:  for I was openly reproached
that I had not quitted them to hasten to her  !  Nothing,
however,  availed ;  and after vainly trying to appease
her,  I was obliged to go to my own room,  to be in at-
tendance for my royal summons.

July 21st. — I resolved to be very meek and patient,
as I do,  now and then,  when I am good,  and to bear
this hard trial of causeless offence without resentment ;
and therefore I went this afternoon as soon as I had
dined,  and sat and worked,  and forced conversation,
and did my best,  but with very indifferent success ;  when,
most perversely,  who should be again announced but
Mr.  Turbulent.

As I believe the visit was not,  just after those
*'  cordiaV looks,  supposed to be solely for the lady of
the apartment,  his reception was no better than mine
had been the preceding days.  He did not,  however,
regard it,  but began a talk,  in which he made it his
business to involve me,  by perpetual reference to my
opinion.  This did not much conciliate matters ;  and his
rebuffs,  from time to time,  were so little ceremonious,
that nothing but the most confirmed contempt could

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        407

have kept off an angry resentment.  I could sometimes
scarcely help laughing at his utterly careless returns
to an imperious haughtiness,  vainly meant to abash
and distance him.

I took the earliest moment in my power to quit the
room  ;  and the reproach with which he looked at my
exit,  for leaving him to such a tete-a-tete,  was quite
risible.  He knew he could not,  in decency,  run away
immediately,  and he seemed ready to commit some des-
perate act for having drawn himself into such a diffi-
culty. I am always rejoiced when his flights and fol-
lies bring their own punishment.

In my own room I found my beloved Mrs.  Delany,
but I had only the contrast of her sweet looks,  not of
her society,  as the Princess Amelia fetched her away
almost immediately.

Miss P remained;    and Madame de la Fite

joined us ;  and,  not long after,  Mr.  Turbulent.  He was
in a humour that nothing could daunt ;  he began the
warmest reproaches that I had left the room,  and for
my little notice of him while in it.  I could not make
a serious lecture,  such as I wished,  and such as he
wanted,  in the presence of these two ladies,  though he
endeavoured to make me speak to him apart,  heedless
of their observation.  I gave him,  however,  to under-
stand, that he was upon the brink of making himself an
enemy of the most dangerous sort,  if he did not pay a
little more attention where his attentions were more
expected,  "  And a little less,"  I added^  with a laugh,
*' where they are not expected."

"  AW that,"  cried he,  scornfully,  "  all danger and all
consequences are indifferent to me.  I despise them
from my soul !  Nor do I care how steep or how deep the

408 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PakT IX.

precipice from which I may fall,  if I could but draw you
down with me from its summit  !"

I made Iiim a very low curtsey,  and begg'ed to
be excused so sublime an obli<:ation.  I could only
laugh,  though internally I own I almost shuddered,
but it was only for a moment.  I soon saw him merely
ridiculous and burlesque  :  indeed,  could I have taken
such a speech seriously,  I must have considered him
as a savage.

A summons to tea parted us.  He went his way,  as
I did not invite him to stay,  and we adjourned to the
eating-parlour.

July 22nd. — A very painful transaction,  which had
employed my mornings for a little while past,  was very
painfully concluded to-day.  A captain,  of the name of
Pike,  an officer severely and unjustly injured in the
American war,  represented to me with so much dis-
tress his situation,  that I could not hesitate a moment
in laying it before Her Majesty,  to be submitted to the
King.  She most graciously accorded her consent :  but
on stating the particulars,  she found it w^as a case in
which prerogative had no power;  and,  in short,  though
with infinite lenity towards the efforts I had presumed
to malce,  at sundry times,  for distressed petitioners,  I
was finally given to understand that I had better never
undertake such commissions,  but make it known,  by
every opportunity,  that I must no longer venture to
step out of my department,  as it only belonged to the
Lord Chamberlain to present any petitions.

I was very sorry,  and I have since been far more so,
by the many disappointments I have unavoidably
given ;  for I  'must not dare disobey an injunction so
general and so positive.

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        409

So great was the poor man's distress,  that I did not
dare send him this ill-news in a common manner :  I
employed Mr.  Gray,  a kind of surveyor and carpenter,
and head mechanic for all sort of things in the house-
hold, to go to him,  and carry a note from me,  in answer
to sundry urgent letters,  in which I tried what I could
to soften the disappointment,  and to give him some
counsel,  such as I could,  about two daughters,  who were
very ingenious,  and copied from nature landscapes in
needle-work.

In the end,  the poor man determined to go with
these industrious poor things to Bath,  there to set
their talents to advantage,  and sell their works.  And
such was his indigence,  that the poor mites of this Mr.
Gray and myself were even treasures to him.

*  *  *  ^  *

Mrs.Delany was not well.  I made her two little visits :
her eyes,  she said,  failed more and more  ;  but with such
resignation,  such piety,  she spoke of their threatened
loss,  that I know not which I felt most at heart,  sorrow
or admiration.

♦  *  *  fj;  *

July 24th. — This day we came to Kew.

AVhile Miss Planta and I were waiting in the parlour
for Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  Mr.  Turbulent entered:  invol-
untarily affrighted at the thought of his accompanying
us,  in his present flighly humour,  and in the carriage
with one whom it had already offended,  I earnestly
exclaimed,  "  Good Heaven,  Mr.  Turbulent,  I hope you
are not going with us  ?"

"Upon my word,"  answered he,  "you are a most
flattering lady  !  What compliments you pay me  !  You
don't like I should travel with you in the summer, —
you declared against it in the spring, — it was disagree-

410 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

able to you in the winter, — and you arc affected by it

in the autumn !" — And off he went,  half angry.

*****

July 25th. — Mr.  Turbulent amused himself this
morning with giving me yet another panic.  He was
ordered to attend the Queen during her hair-dressing,  as
was Mr.  de Luc.  I remained in the room  :  the Queen
conversed with us all three,  as occasions arose,  with
the utmost complacency ;  but this person,  instead of
fixing there his sole attention,  contrived,  by stand-
ing behind her chair,  and facing me,  to address a lan-
guage of signs to me the whole time,  casting up his
eyes,  clasping his hands,  and placing himself in various
fme attitudes,  and all with a humour so burlesque,  that
it was impossible to take it either ill or seriously.  In-
deed, when I am on the very point of the most alarmed
displeasure with him,  he always falls upon some such
ridiculous devices of affected homage,  that I grow
ashamed of my anger,  and hurry it over,  lest he should
perceive it,  and attribute it to a misunderstanding he
might think ridiculous in his turn.

How much should I have been discountenanced had
her Majesty turned about and perceived him !  yet by
no means so much disconcerted as by a similar Ccrberic
detection  ;  since the Queen,  who,  when in spirits,  is
gay and sportive herself,  would be much farther re-
moved from any hazard of misconstruction.

I saw him afterwards,  just before dinner,  alone.  He
began a vehement expostulation at my conduct in
shunning him ;  but I stopped him short in his career,
by seriously assuring him I had something of moment
for his attention.

Surprised and alarmed,  he exclaimed,  ''Is it good or
bad?"

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        411

"  I hope it may be good  !"  I answered,  not to in-
flame his curiosity,  as I could not now have time to go
on.

"  If,"  cried he,  with great abatement of violence from
an answer milder than he expected,  "  if it were bad,
from such a channel — ""  but the entrance of Mr.  de
Luc spared me the rest of the compliment.    •

No opportunity of an explanation offering,  I had
not long stole to my room,  for a little breathing,  before
he followed me,  tapping at my door,  but entering with-
out waiting for any leave.

I did not much like his pursuit,  but resolved to make
the fullest use of the conference  ;  and just as he began
his usual round of reproaches for my elopements and
shynesses,  I desired him to desist,  and hear me.  ''  Most
willingly,"  he cried ;  and then I frankly told him he
must not wonder I avoided him,  while he conducted
himself in a manner so unaccountable and singular.

He desired me to explain myself;  looking quite
aghast,  and even turning pale,  while he waited my answer.

I was now wholly at a loss how to analyse my charge.
I could not,  for shame,  mention his peculiarities per-
sonal, while he seemed unconscious of them,  and there-
fore I got into a most disagreeable embarrassment
myself.  All I could say,  in a general way,  he either
did not or would not understand ;  and after a long per-
plexed half remonstrance,  scarce intelligible to myself,
I rested my expostulation on what I least regarded,
merely because it was what I could best dilate upon,
namely,  that he had excited strong suspicions in Mrs.
Schwellenberg that he was ridiculing her,  and that the
continual reference of his eyes to mine must needs
make her include me in his conspiracy,  which gave me
so much alarm,  that I must always shun him till he

412 DIARV AND LETTERS  [ParT IX.

behaved better.     And then I told him the attack of his
"  looking so cordial.''

Extremely relieved by this account,  he recovered his
colour and his spirits,  and laughed violently at the
charge,  especially that part of it which belonged to the
"fourteen or fifteen years.''''

"Well,"  cried he,  "if that is all,  I can make no re-
form :  if I look cordial,  it is only that I am so ;  and I
will not try to disprove it."

I begged him to rest assured that,  however ri-
diculous this might seem,  I should most certainly keep
out of his way with my utmost power,  so long as he
continued to give me so much of his notice when I
could not escape him.  But my only answer was a
laughing prayer that she might next discover  /  looked
cordial at him !

*  *  *  -i:  *  ♦

July 26th. — We returned to Windsor the next day,
and I had the joy to find my sweet Mrs.  Delany de-
lightfully well.  Miss P having another engage-
ment, she indulged me with a tete-a-tete visit,  and we
renewed our investigation  &c.,  of the  "  Memoirs.'*
How I wish my two sisters could see them  !  They so
exactly shew the sweet character that has drawn them
up,  and how unaffectedly and innocently she has
ever been the same — in the prime and glow of youth,
and in every danger and every distress-

The good King and his charming little daughter
came,  as usual,  to rob me of my venerable Biographer
in the evening.

July 29th. — To-day the King and Queen and Royal
Family went to Eton,  to hear the speeches  ;  and,  as I
was invited by Mrs.  Roberts and the Provost,  I had
the curiosity to go also.

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.    ^  413

The speeches were chiefly in Greek and Latin,  but
concluded with three or four in English :  some were
pronounced extremely well,  especially those spoken by
the chief composers of the  "  Microcosm,"  Canning and
Smith.

I saw all my Windsor acquaintances — Claytons,
Linds,  Dr.  Herschel,  &c. ;  and when the speeches were
over,  I went to a great breakfast,  prepared by Mrs.
Roberts.  There I met Lord and Lady Walsingham,
and received civilities for answering notes they had
sent me,  to beg information whether they might ap-
pear, one in a hat,  the other in a frock.  Lady Rothes
and Sir Lucas Pepys were also there,  and we had much
old talk.

PART X.

1787.

CONTENTS.

Arrival of the Duke of York from Holland— Delight of the
Royal Family at his Return— Windsor Terrace— General
Grenville— The Duke of Montagu— The Prince of Wales at
Windsor — A Happy Day — Colonel Hotham — Colonel Lake —
General Fawcett  —  Mr.  Bouverie  —  Lord Herbert  —  Lady
Mexborough — The Bishop of Salisbury — Visit from the Duke
of York — Princess Amelia — Wedding Letters — Lady Mul-
grave — Domestic Pleasures of the Royal Family — Re-union
— A Visit from the Prince of Wales — The Princesse de Lam-
balle — Rapid Travelling — Hopes and Fears — Public Recon-
ciliation of the King and Prince of Wales — The Drawing-
room— The Prince's Birth-day— A Solitary Dinner— An Even-
ing Party — Duchess of Ancaster — A Singular Complaint —
The celebrated Harry Bunbury — A Caricaturist at Court —
Olla Podrida — Visit from the Queen— Arrival and Reception
of Mrs.  Siddons— Her Manners,  Person,  and Conversation —
Disappointment — Mrs.  Siddons's desire to act  "  Cecilia" —
Table-talk on Plays and Players— A Scene— Madame de
Genlis— A Conversation on Dreams— A Ball at the Castle —
Up all night— Ill-nature— Kew— St.  James's— Remonstrance
and Reply — A Difficult Position— A Sermon made exprcs —
Expostulation and Reply— Dr.  Herschel— Miss Herschel,
the female Astronomer— Rome and Versailles— Bunbury,  the
Caricaturist— his Manners and Conversation— Mr.  Locke as
an Artist— An Enthusiast — Lady Templetown — A Visit from
the Prince of Wales — Memoirs of a Noble Hindu — A Pleasant
Change— A Conversation with the Queen— Newspaper Noto-
riety—A Royal Present from Naples— Fairings— A Surprise
—A Breach of Etiquette— The Prince of Wales— Newspaper
Reports and their Consequences — Conversation with the
Queen— Difficulties and Explanations— Cruel Treatment-
Permission to rebel— How to bear and forbear— Official
Tyranny— Lady Bute— Lady Louisa Stuart— A Pleasant
Evening dearly purchased — New Expedients to obtain Peace —
A Change for the Better— An Irish Compensation— An En-
thusiast—Conclusion.

416 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

PART X

1787.

Thursday,  August 2nd.  —  To-day,  after a seven
years'  absence,  arrived tlie Duke of York.  I saw him
alight from his carriage,  with an eagerness,  a vivacity,
that assured me of the affectionate joy with which he
returned to his country and family.  But the joy of his
excellent father ! — O that there is no describincr !  It
•was the glee of the first youth — nay,  of ardent and in-
nocent infancy, — so pure it seemed,  so warm,  so open,
so unmixed !

Softer joy was the Queen's — mild,  equal,  and touch-
ing ;  while all the Princesses were in one universal
rapture.

It was a happy day throughout :  no one could for-
bear the strongest hopes that the long- earned,  long-
due recompense of paternal kindness and goodness was
now to be amply paid.

To have the pleasure of seeing the Royal Family in

this happy assemblage,  I accompanied Miss P on

the Terrace.  It was indeed an affecting sight to view
the general content ;  but that of the King went to my
ver}'  heart,  so delighted he looked — so proud of his son
— so benevolently pleased that every one should wit-
ness his satisfaction.

The I'errace was very full ;  all Windsor and its
neighbourhood poured in upon it,  to see the Prince

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        417

whose whole demeanour seemed promising to merit his
flattering reception;  gay,  yet grateful — modest,  yet
unembarrassed.

I brought in only Miss P to tea ;   her sweet

aunt then joined us,  as did General Grenville,  who had
attended the Duke home,  and who is chief of his esta-
blishment. The Duke of Montagu arrived soon after,
to see his former pupil,  and was greatly moved with
pleasure.'

The excellent King came into the tea-room for Mrs.
Delany,  who congratulated him,  most respectfully
apologising,  at the same time,  for venturing to come
to the Lodge on such an occasion.  "My dear Mrs.
Delany,"  cried he,  "  if you could have stayed away on
such a day as this,  I should have thought it quite un-
kind!"  And then he bid the Duke of Montagu hand
her to the royal apartment.

Early the next morning arrived the Prince of Wales,
who had travelled all night from Brighthelmstone.
The day was a day of complete happiness to the whole
of the Koyal Family ;  the King was in one transport of
delight,  unceasing,  invariable  ;  and though the newly-
arrived Duke was its source and support,  the kindness
of his heart extended and expanded to his Eldest-
Born,  whom he seemed ready again to take to his
paternal breast ;  indeed,  the whole world seemed en-
deared to him by the happiness he now felt in it.

The tea circle was now enlarged with some of the
Prince's gentlemen,  and others who came to pay their
duty to the Duke.  Colonel Hotham,  Colonel Lake,
General Fawcet,  Mr.  Bouverie,  Lord Herbert,  and
some others,  were here for three evenings,  and Ge-

VOL.  III.  2 E

418 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

neral Grenville during the whole stay of the Duke at
Windsor,  as well as General Bude.

Sunday,  August 5th. — The Prince of Wales re-
turned to Brighton.  I walked again upon the Ter-
race, with Miss Egerton,  who had Lady Mexborough
of her part)'.  The next day arrived my beloved
Fredy's beautiful work-box for my little Princess.

To our already large party was now added the
Bishop of Salisbury,  Major Price's uncle,  who made
me some such very kind speeches from Mrs.  Kennicott,
then on a visit at his house,  that I was soon satisfied,
from my very slight acquaintance with her,  he made
her name a mere vehicle for his own civilities.  For a
Bishop,  he is rather too courteous ;  I am much better
pleased with Bishop Hurd,  whose civility is all in
manner,  not words.

General Grenville brought in the Duke this even-
ing to the tea-room.  I was very much pleased with
his behaviour,  which was modest,  dignified,  and easy.
Might he but escape the contagion of surrounding
examples,  he seems promising of all his fond father
expects and merits.

August 7th. — I followed my fair little Princess to
the garden,  with her cadeau,  on this morn of her birth  ;
but she could not then take it.  I saw her afterwards
"with the Queen,  and she immediately said,  ''  Mamma,
may Miss Burney fetch me my box  ?  "

The Queen inquired what it was  ?  and,  hearing the
explanation,  gave immediate consent.  I fetched it.
The sweet Princess was extremely delighted,  and her
sweet Mother admired it almost equally.  It was only
too pretty for so young a possessor.

I had two wedding-letters this morning ;  one from
Mr.  Cambridge,  with some account of his son Charles

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        419

and his bride ;  and the other from a very sweet bride
indeed.  Lady  ]\Iulgrave ;  and a letter as sweet as her-
self—modest, kind,  happy,  and affectionate.
We then set off for Kew.

The good Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt came to tea ;  and the
Princess Elizabeth came to see them,  and brought her
work,  and made us all sit with her for more than an
hour.

The King indulged the little Princess with driving
her out in his garden-phaeton,  which is a double car-
riage, and contained the Queen and the Princess Royal,
Princess Augusta and Lady Caroline Waldegrave,
Princess iVmelia,  and one more.

The next day the now happy family had the delight
of again seeing the two Princes inj its circle.  They
dined here ;  and the Princess Augusta,  who came to
Mrs.  Schwellenberg's room in the evening,  on a mes-
sage, said,  "  There never had been so happy a dinner
since the world was created."

The King,  in the evening,  again drove out the
Queen and Princesses.  The Prince of Wales,  seeing
Mr.  Smelt in our room  (which,  at Kew,  is in the front
of the house,  as well as at Windsor),  said he would
come in and ask him how he did.  Accordingly,  in
he came,  and talked to Mr.  Smelt for about a quarter
of an hour ;  his subjects almost wholly his horses and
his rides.  He gave some account of his expedition to
town to meet his brother.  He was just preparing,  at
Brighton,  to give a supper entertainment to Madame
la Princesse de Lamballe, — when he perceived his
courier.  "  I dare say,"  he cried,  "  my brother 's
come  ! "  set off instantly to excuse himself to the Prin-
cesse, and arrived at Windsor by the time of early
prayers,  at eight o'clock the next morning.

2 E 2

420 DIARY AND LETTERS        [PaRT X.

*'  To-day,  again,"  he said,  "  I resolved to be in town
to meet my brother :  we determined to dine  'some-
where together,  but had not settled where  ;  so hither
we came.  When I went last to Brighton,  I rode one
hundred and thirty miles,  and then danced at the ball.
I am going back directly ;  but I shall ride to Windsor
again for the. birthday,  and shall stay there till my
brother's,  and then back on Friday.  We are going
now over the way  :  my brother wants to see the old
mansion."

The Prince of Wales's house is exactly opposite to
the Lodge.

The Duke then came in^  and bowed to every one
present,  very attentively;  and presently after,  they
went over the way,  arm in arm  ;  and thence returned
to town.

I had a long and painful discourse afterwards with
Mr.  Smelt,  deeply interested in these young Princes,
upon the many dangers awaiting the newly-arrived,
who seemed alike unfitted and unsuspicious for en-
countering them.  Mr.  Smelt's heart ached as if he
had been their parent,  and the regard springing from
Lis early and long care of them seemed all revived in
his hopes and fears of what might ensue from this re-
union.

How I rejoiced at the public reconciliation with the
Prince of Wales,  which had taken place during my
illness,  and which gave the greater reason for hope
that there might not now be a division  !

Thursday,  9th. — We went to town for the Drawing-
room.  It was unusually brilliant for the time of year,
in compliment to the Duke of York.  His Koyal
Highness came to the Queen's dressing-room before
she attired ;  and the Duchess of Ancaster and Miss

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        421

Goldsworthy were admitted,  by the happy King,  to
have a sight of his restored darling.  The Prince of
Wales was also at Court.

In my own room I found my dearest father waiting
for me,  quite well,  full of spirits,  full of Handel,  full of
manuscripts,  and full of proof sheets.

The evening finished with the usual party in Mrs.
Schwellenberg's room.

Des horreurs — des humeurs are still all^  in play I I
have no account to give of them,  but those  "  cordial
looks"  of that mischievous Mr.  Turbulent,  who cer-
tainly has been observed to contrast them strikingly
elsewhere.  I sometimes think I must wholly break with
that strange man,  to avoid some actual mischief;  and
surely,  were such the alternative,  I should not hesitate
one little instant.

,  We returned to Windsor next day  ;  and all les lior-
reurs were soothed by the sweet balmy kindness of my
revered Mrs.  Delany.  What may not be endured
where there is the solace of sympathy  ?  Every thing,
I think,  save one —

"  Hard unkindness'  alter'd eye."

I know of no endurance for that.

Sunday,  12th. — This was the  ^Prince's real birth-
day, though it was celebrated on the Monday.  Mrs.
Schwellenberg was ill ;  accumulated bile,  I believe,
disordered her:  she could not come downstairs^  and
I dined quite alone,  upon a most splendid dinner,  fit
for the mayor and corporation of a great trading city.

422 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

I entreated the protecting presence of my dear old
friend for the tea-table,  which was crowded.  The
Duke of IMontagu,  Signer del Campo,  Generals Gren-
ville,  Bude,  Fawcet,  and Colonels Hulse,  Lake,  Gwynn,
and St.  Leger.

Colonel Gwynn briefly presented the Prince's three
Colonels,  St.  Leger,  Hulse,  and Lake,  to me  ;  but the
idea I had pre-conceived of them very much unfitted
me for doing the honours,  and I am sensible I acquit-
ted myself very ill.  Mrs.  Delany,  the Duke of Mon-
tagu, and Signor del Campo sat near me,  and with
those alone I could attempt any conversation.

To my great amaze,  the celebrated Colonel St.  Leger,
with his friend Colonel Lake,  sat wholly silent,  with
an air of shy distance that seemed to shew them ill at
ease.  I had expected they would at least have amused
themselves apart,  which they always do when the
right lady is Presidente  ;  but I should not wonder to
hear it explained by their fearing they might be in-
serted in a book  !  Here,  however,  it may be no bad
thing to be little enough known for so unjust a suspi-
cion.

^Monday,  13th. — To-day the gala was kept.  I had
a visit from the eldest Miss Anguish,  which I had
promised to receive from her the day before,  when I
met her at the entrance of the cathedral.  She is a
good-natured girl,  and so warm in her aiFections,  that
she seems made up of nothing else.  The rest of the
morning was consumed in four dressings, — two of my
Queen's,  two of her Keeper of the Robes.

Tuesday,  14tii. — I had a long chatting  ^^sit from
the Duchess of Ancaster,  who lamented to me the
early hours of this house for her daughter.  Lady

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        423

Charlotte Bertie,  with as much pathos as most parents
would have exerted for the late hours of every other.
Mrs.  Delany was early carried off this evening by

the King,   but Miss P remained with me,  Mrs.

Schwellenberg being still too unwell for the tea-
table.

There we went at the usual time,  and General Bude
came in,  with two strangers,  whom he introduced to
us by the names of Bunbury and Crawfurd.

I was very curious to know if this was the Bun-
bury;  and I conjectured it could be no other.  When
Colonel Gwynn joined us,  he proposed anew the
introduction;  but nothing passed to ascertain my
surmise.  The conversation was general and good-
humoured,  but without anything striking,  or bespeak-
ing character or genius.  Almost the whole consisted
of inquiries what to do,  whither to go,  and how to pro-
ceed ;  which,  though natural and sensible for a new-
man,  were undistinguished by any humour,  or keenness
of expression or manner.

Mr.  Crawfurd spoke not a word.  He is a very
handsome young man,  just appointed Equerry to the
Duke of York.

I whispered my inquiry to Colonel Gwynn as soon
as I found an opportunity,  and heard  "Yes, — 'tis
Harry Bunbury,  sure enough l"

So now we may all be caricatured at his leisure!
He is made another of the Equerries to the Duke.  A
man with such a turn,  and with talents so inimitable
in displaying it,  was a rather dangerous character to
be brought within a Court!

Late at night Mrs.  Delany was handed back to us
by Colonel Goldsworthy,  who began a most unreserved
lamentation of being detained all the evening in the

424 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT X.

Royal apartments — ''Because/'  cried he,  ''I Iicard
Mrs.  What-do-you-call-her was ill,  and could not be
here ;  and I was so glad — sorry,  I mean  !  Well,  it
would come out !  there's no help for it  !  "

Then he told us his great distress on account of a
commission he had received to order some millinery
goods to be sent by his sister from town, — "  So I knew
I could not remember one word about it, — garlands,
and gauzes,  and ribbons, — so I writ to my sister,  and
just said,  'Pray,  sister,  please to send down a whole
milliner's shop,  and the milliners with it,  for directions,
because the Queen wants something.'  And so she did
it, — and to-night the Queen told me the things came
quite right !''

And then,  when obliged to return to the Royals,  he
exclaimed,  in decamping,  "  Well — to-morrow I will not
be so seized !  I am so glad — sorry,  I mean  ! — for this
illness !"

Wednesday,  15th. — I shall now have an adventure
to relate that will much — and not disagreeably — sur-
prise both my dear readers.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg's illness occasioned my attend-
ing the Queen alone ;  and when my official business
was ended,  she graciously detained me,  to read to me
a new paper,  called  "  OUa Podrida/'  which is now
publishing periodically.  Nothing very bright — no-
thing very deficient.

In the afternoon,  while I was drinking coffee with
Mrs.  Schwellcnberg, — or,  rather,  looking at it,  since I
rarely swallow any, — her Majesty came into the room,
and soon after a little German discourse with Mrs.
Schwellcnberg told me Mrs.  Siddons had been or-
dered to the Lodge,  to read a play,  and desired I
would receive her in my room.

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        425

I felt a little queer in the office ;  I had only seen
her twice or thrice,  in large assemblies,  at Miss
Monckton's,  and at Sir Joshua Reynolds's,  and never
had been introduced to her,  nor spoken with her.
However,  in this dead and tame life I now lead,  such
an interview was by no means undesirable.

I had just got to the bottom of the stairs,  when she
entered the passage gallery.  I took her into the tea-
room, and endeavoured to make amends for former
distance and taciturnity,  by an open and cheerful re-
ception. I had heard from sundry people  (in old
days)  that she wished to make the acquaintance  ;  but
I thought it,  then,  one of too conspicuous a sort for
the quietness I had so much difficulty to preserve in
my ever increasing connections.  Here all was changed ;
I received her by the Queen's commands,  and was per-
fectly well inclined to reap some pleasure from the
meeting.

But,  now that we came so near,  I was much dis-
appointed in my expectations.  I know not if my dear
Fredy has met with her in private,  but I fancy ap-
proximation is not highly in her favour.  I found her
the Heroine of a Tragedy, — sublime,  elevated,  and
solemn.  In face and person,  truly noble and com-
manding; in manners,  quiet and stiff;  in voice,  deep
and dragging;  and in conversation,  formal,  senten-
tious, calm,  and dry.  I expected her to have been all
that is interesting;  the delicacy and sweetness with
which she seizes every opportunity to strike and to
captivate upon the stage had persuaded me that her
mind was formed with that peculiar susceptibility
which,  in different modes,  must give equal powers to
attract and to delight in common life.  But I was very
much mistaken.     As a stranger,  I must have admired

42G DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

her noble appearance and beautiful countenance,  and
have regretted that nothing in her conversation kept
pace with their promise ;  and,  as a celebrated actress,
I had still only to do the same.

Whether fame and success have spoiled her,  or
whether  ^rhe only possesses the skill of representing
and embellishing materials with which she is furnished
by others,  I know^  not ;  but still I remain disappointed.

She was scarcely seated,  and a little general discourse
begun,  before she told me — all at once — that  "  There
was no part she had ever so much wished to act as that
of Cecilia."

I made some little acknowledgment,  and hurried to
ask when she had seen Sir Joshua Reynolds,  Miss
Palmer,  and others with whom I knew her acquainted.

The play she was to read was  "  The Provoked Hus-
band." She appeared neither alarmed nor elated by
her summons,  but calmly to look upon it as a thing of
course,  from her celebrity.

She left me to go to Lady Harcourt,  through whose
interest she was brought hither.  She was on a visit
for a week at General Harcourt's,  at St.  Leonard's,
where there seems to be,  in general,  constant and
well-chosen society and amusement.  I believe Mrs.
Harcourt to have very good taste in both ;  and,
were she less girlish and flippant,  I fancy she has
parts quite e(jual to promote and add to,  as well as to
enjoy them.  I am sottened towards her,  of late,  by
her consideration for Mrs.  Gwynn,  whom she has
kindly invited to spend the widowhood of her hus-
band's Equcrryship at St.  Leonard's,  where he can
frequently visit her.

Mrs.  Siddons told me that both these ladies,  Mrs.
Harcourt and Mrs.  Gwynn,  had worked for her inces-

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  427

santly,  to assist in fitting lier out for appearing at the
Queen's Lodge^  as she had gone to St.  Leonard's with
only undress clothes.

I should very much have liked to have heard her
read the play,  but my dearest Mrs.  Delany spent the
whole evening with me,  and I could therefore take no
measures for finding out a convenient adjoining room.
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  I heard afterwards,  was so accom-
modated, though not well enough for the tea-table,
where I had the Duke of Montagu,  Generals Gren-
ville and Bude,  Colonels Goldsworthy and Gwynn,

and Messrs.  Crawfurd and Bunbury.     Miss P ,  of

course.

My sole conversation this evening was with Mr.
Bunbury,  who drew a chair next mine,  and chatted
incessantly,  with great good humour,  and an avidity
to discuss the subjects he started,  which were all con-
cerning plays and players.  Mrs.  Siddons and Mrs.
Jordan,  Le Tessier and Shakspeare, — these were fruit-
ful themes,  and descanted upon with great warmth
and animation.

The Princess Amelia came,  with Mrs.  Cheveley,  to
order the attendance of the Duke of Montagu.  Ge-
neral Grenville,  a silent,  reserved valetudinary,  went
under the same convoy ;  and General Bude,  Colonel
Gwynn,  and Mr.  Crawfurd,  quickly followed.

Presently,  the voice of the Duke of York was heard,
calling aloud for Colonel Goldsworthy.  Off he ran.
Mr.  Bunbury laughed,  but declared he would not take
the hint :  "  What,"  cried he,  "  if I lose the beginning?
— I think I know it pretty well by heart! — Why did I
many  .^" — And then he began to spout,  and act,  and
rattle away,  with all his might, — till the same voice
called out  "  Bunbury ! — you'll be too late  !" — And off

428 DIARY AND LETTERS fl^ART X.

he flew,  leaving his tea untastcd — so eager had he been
in discourse.

Tuesday,  IGth. — The birth-day of the Duke of
York.  A day,  to me,  of nothing but dress and
fatigue, — but I rejoiced in the joy it gave to the good
King and family.

Madame la Fite,  in her visit of congratulation,  told
me she had received repeated inquiries after me from
Madame de Gcnlis^  who wondered I never wrote,  as
she had written to me while in England.  Acquainted
already with the opinion of my Royal IMistress,  which,
having myself requested,  I must regard as a law,  I
evaded the discussion as much as was in my power,
and besought her to draw up some civil apology :  but
she was unremitting in her entreaties and exhortations ;
and,  as I did not dare trust her with what had passed
between her Majesty and myself on the subject,  she
seemed,  here,  to have the right on her side so strongly,
that I had no means to silence her^  and know not,  in-
deed, how I may.

Madame de Genlis has wished to make me a present
of her new publication on Religion,  but desires me to
ask it.  That,  now,  is impossible :  but I am truly vexed
to appear so utterly insensible to a woman of such rare
merit and captivating sweetness ;  and,  as I do not,
cannot,  believe the tales propagated to her dishonour,
I am grieved to return her kindness with such a morti-
fying neglect,  I have,  however,  no longer any choice
left ;  where once I have applied to the Queen,  I hold
myself bound in duty and respect to observe her in-
junctions implicitly.

Mr.  Smelt came with his compliments on the day,
and made me happy by breakfasting with me.

We had a very long confabulation upon dreams.

17S7]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA 429

To me they arc a subject I wisli much to form some
satisfactory notion about,  as they leave me more be-
wildered than any other,  and always appear to me big
with powers to lead to deeper knowledge of the soul
and its immortality than anything else that comes
within our cognizance unaided by revelation.  I have
many strong ideas about them,  that I should wish ex-
tremely to have elucidated by somebody equally wise
and good.  Such people are not everywhere to be
found.  I regret I never started the subject with Dr.
Johnson.  I hope yet to do it with Mr.  Locke.  With
Mr.  Smelt I have particular pleasure in opening upon
such themes  :  I know not a more religious character.
But how very,  very few people are there that I do not
run from,  the moment a topic of that solemn sort is
started  !  Poor Mr.  Turbulent cannot yet pass over my
rejecting so resolutely to hear or answer his opinions
on these matters ;  but certainly,  while I have feet to
run or ears to stop,  I shall never stand still nor listen
to him upon such occasions.

At the Castle there was a ball.  Mrs.  Delany and
Miss P spent the evening here,  and all of us up-
stairs. I sat up all night,  not having the heart to
make Goter,  and not daring to trust to a nap for my-
self. But the morning proved very fine,  and I watched
the opening dawn and rising sun,  and enjoyed,  with
twinkling eyes,  their blushing splendour.

How tired I felt the next day  !  but I was kindly told
I must ''  Certainly like sitting up all night,  or for what
did I do it  ? — when the Queen came not home till near
morning,  I might have done what I liked ;  nobody
might pity me,  when I did such things,  if 1 had been
ill for my pains."

I hastened,  when able,  to my beloved comforter

430 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT X.

whose soothing sweetness softened the depression of
hardness and injustice.  Some rudeness,  however,
which even this angel met with from the same quarter,
determined her not to come this evening to tea.  I
invited,  therefore,  Madame la Fite to assist mc at tea  :
when I had a party of gentlemen,  all,  like myself,  so
fatigued with the business of the preceding day's diver-
sion, that our only conversation was in comfortably
comparing notes of complaint.

In the evening Madame la Fite took my place at
piquet up stairs,  and I began Dr.  Beattie's  ''  Evidence
of the Christian Religion,"  and there found the com-
posure I required.

Sunday,  19th. — I had a long jmorning visit from
Lady Harcourt,  who talked zealously of the present
critical time for the King's happiness,  in the turn yet
remaining to be taken by the Duke of York.

My dear Mrs.  Delany would stay away no longer,
seeing me the only person punished by her merited
resentment.  She came,  though Mrs.  Schwellcnberg
was again downstairs ;  and behaved with a softness of
dignity peculiar to herself.

Colonel Gwynn brought with him his beautiful wife
to tea.  We renewed our acquaintance as well as we
could in such a presence,  and I had,  at least,  some
pleasure in it,  since her beauty was pleasant to my eye,
and could not be affected by its vicinage,  save,  indeed,
by a contrast that doubled its lustre.

Tuesday,  21st. — We came to Kcw without Mr.  de
Luc,  who has leave of absence,  and is gone to enjoy it.
At dinner we had Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,  Miss Planta,
and Mr.   Turbulent.     He appeared very lofty,    and

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         431

highly affronted.     I seemed not to notice any  [change,
and behaved as usual.

Thursday,  23rd. — Miss Planta accompanied me to
St.  James's.  In the way,  she almost remonstrated with
me upon giving such vexation to Mr.  Turbulent,  who
spoke of my silence and distance,  as if possessed,  she
said,  with no other idea.

I was very sorry for this,  every way.  He had told
me,  indeed,  that I knew not how he was surprised by
my behaviour  ;  but I had heard it like the rest of his
rattles.  I could give her no satisfaction,  though I saw
her curiosity all awake.  But the point was too delicate
for a hint of serious disapprobation.  I merely said I
would amend,  and grow more loquacious  ;  and there it
dropped.

At St.  James's,  I read in the newspapers a para-
graph that touched me much for the very amiable Mr.
Fairly :  it was the death,  of his wife,  which happened
on the Duke of York's birth-day,  the 16th.  Mr.  Fairly
has devoted his whole time,  strength,  thoughts,  and
cares,  solely to nursing and attending her during a
long and most painful illness which she sustained.
They speak of her here as being amiable,  but so cold
and reserved,  that she was little known,  and by no
means in equal favour with her husband,  who stands,
upon the whole,  the highest in general esteem and
regard of any individual of the household.  I find every
mouth open to praise and pity,  love and honour him.
*  *  *  *

Upon returning to Kew,  I had a scene for which I
was little enough,  indeed,  prepared,  though willing,
and indeed,  earnest to satisfy Mr.  Turbulent I wished
him to make an alteration of behaviour.  After hastily
changing my dress,  I went,  as usual,  to the parlour,  to

432 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

be ready for dinner ;  but found there no Mrs.  Schwel-
lenbcrg;  she was again unwell ;  Miss Planta Avas not
ready,  and Mr.  Turbulent was reading by himself

Away he flung his bookln a moment,  and hastening
to shut the door lest I should retreat,  he rather charged
than desired me to explain my late  ''  chilling demea-
nour."

Almost startled by his apparent entire ignorance of
deserving it,  I found an awkwardness I had not fore-
seen in making myself understood.  I wished him
rather to feel,  than be told,  the improprieties I meant
to obviate ;  and I did what was possible,  by half evasive,
half expressive answers,  to call back his own recollec-
tion and consciousness.  In vain,  however,  was the at-
tempt ;  he protested himself wholly innocent,  and that
lie would rather make an end of his existence than
give me offence.

•  He saw not these very protestations were again
doing it,  and he grew so vehement in his defence,  and
so reproachful in his accusation of unjust usage,  that
I was soon totally in a perplexity how to extricate my-
self from a difficulty I had regarded simply as his own.
But what could I do wdiere nothing less than a plain
charge would be heard  ?  I could not say,  "  Sir,  3'ou are
too assiduous — too flattering — too importunate — and
too bold  ;"  yet less seemed to accuse him of nothing.

The moment he saw I grew embarrassed,  he re-
doubled his challenges to know the cause of my  "' ill-
treatment."  I assured him,  then,  I could never reckon
silence ill-treatment.

"Yes,"  he cried,  ''yes,  from 3'ou it is ill-treatment,
and it has given me the most serious uneasiness."

"  I am sorry,"  I said,  "  for that,  and did not mean it."

"Not mean it?"  cried he.    "Could you imagine I

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         433

sliould miss your conversation,  your ease,  your pleasant-
ness, your gaiety,  and take no notice of the loss  ?"

Then followed a most violent flow of compliments,
ending wdth assuring me my distance made him inca-
pable of ail business,  ''from thinking of its injustice  ;"
and with a fresh demand for an explanation,  made
■with an energy that,  to own the truth,  once more quite
frightened me.  I endeavoured to appease him,  by-
general promises of becoming more voluble  :  and I
quite languished to say to him the truth at once ;  that
his sport,  his spirit,  and his society would all be ac-
ceptable to me,  would he but divest them of that
redundance of gallantry which rendered them offensive :
but I could only think how to say this — I could not
bring it out ;  his attestations of innocence made it seem
shocking to me to have to censure him,  and I felt it a
sort of degradation of myself to point out an impropri-
ety that seemed quite out of his own ideas.

This promised volubility,  though it softened him,
he seemed to receive as a sort of acknowledgment
that I owed him some reparation for the disturbance I
had caused him.  I stared enough at such an interpre-
tation, which I could by no means allow ;  but no sooner
did I disclaim it than all his violence was resumed,  and
he urged me to give in my charge against him,  with an
impetuosity that almost made me tremble.  I would
fain have made my escape from him,  and my eyes were
continually directed towards the door;  but he stood
immediately before me,  and I saw in his face and man-
ner something so determined,  that I was sure any ef-
fort to depart would occasion a forced detention.

I made as little answer as possible,  finding every-
thing I said seemed but the more to inflame his violent
spirit ;  but his emotion was such,  and the cause so in-

VOL.  III.  2 V

434 DIARY AND LETTERS'  [PaRT X.

adequate,  and my uncertainty so unpleasant what to
think of him altogether,  that I was seized with sensa-
tions so nervous,  I could almost have cried.  When I
thought him going too far in his solicitude and protes-
tations, I looked away from him with horror ;  when I
felt satisfied by his disclaiming assertions,  I became
ashamed of such an idea.  In the full torrent of his
offended justification against my displeasure towards
him,  he perceived my increasing distress how to pro-
ceed, and,  suddenly stopping,  exclaimed in quite another
tone,  "  Now,  then,  ma'am,  I see your justice return-
ing ;  you feel that you have used me very ill !"

This recovered me in a moment :  my concern all flew
away,  from a misconstruction so forced and so confi-
dent ;  and I positively assured him I would neither hear
nor speak another word upon the subject,  to one who
would neither say nor understand anything but what
he pleased.

**But you will tell me,"  he cried,  ''another time?"

And then,  to my great relief,  entered Miss Planta.
He contrived to say again,  '•  Remember,  you promise to
explain all this."

I made him no sort of answer,  and though he fre-
quently, in the course of the evening,  repeated,  ''  I
depend upon your promise  !  I build upon a confer-
ence," I sent his dependence and his building to Co-
ventry, by not seeming to hear him.

I determined,  however,  to avoid all tete-a-tetes with
him whatsoever,  as much as was in my power.  How
very few people are fit for them,  nobody living in
trios and quartettes can imagine 1

Though frequently enough more interested,  I have
seldom been more deeply perplexed,  than how to ma-
nage with this very eccentric character.     Seriously ill

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.        435

of him I cannot,  and,  indeed,  I do not think:  if I did,
all difficulty would subside,  however unpleasantly ;  for
the abhorrence with which I should be filled would re-
move from me all hesitation and fear.  But as I do
really believe him innocent of all evil intention,  and
actuated only by an impetuous nature,  that seeks con-
fusion and difficulty for its food and amusement,  with-
out considering their danger or weighing their impro-
priety, I find myself extremely at a loss how to point
out to him my dislike of his actual proceedings,  with-
out appearing to harbour doubts which he might cast,
to my infinite dismay,  upon myself.

To resume,  therefore,  a general behaviour,  such as
was customary with me,  and to keep out of his way,
was all I could settle.  Yet so much was I disturbed
by what had passed,  and so impossible did I feel it to
be understood by my Susanna and Fredy without
their seeing the very particulars now before them,  that,
upon returning the next day to Windsor,  I opened the
whole business,  in a private conference,  to my dear
Mrs.  Delany  :  she approved my plan,  and was of opi-
nion, with myself,  that there was no evil in the mind,
though there was a world of deficiencies,  errors,  and

faults in the character.

******

At Windsor,  we found Colonel Gwynn,  General Bud^,
and Mr.  Bunbury,  with whom I made no further
acquaintance,  as I was no longer Lady of the Manor.
All the household has agreed to fear him,  except Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  who is happy that he cannot caricature

her,  because,  she says,  she has no Hump.

*  *  *  *

Who should find me out now but Dr.  Shepherd.
He is here as canon,  and was in residence.     He told

2f2

436 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

me he had long wished to come,  but had never been
able to find the way of entrance before.  He made mo
an immense length of visit,  and related to me all the
exploits of his life, — so far as they were prosperous.
In no farce did a man ever more floridly open upon
his own perfections.  He assured me I should be de-
lighted to know the whole of his life ;  it was equal to
anything ;  and everything he had was got by his own
address and ingenuity.

*'  I could tell the King,"  cried he,  "  more than all
the Chapter.  I want to talk to him,  but he always
gets out of my way ;  he does not know me ;  he takes
me for a mere common person,  like the rest of the
canons here,  and thinks of me no more than if I were
only fit for the cassock ; — a mere Scotch priest !  Bless
'em I — they know nothing about me.  You have no
conception what things I have done  !  And I want to
tell  'em all this ; — it's fitter for them to hear than what
comes to their ears.  What I want is for somebody to
tell them what I am."

They know it already,  thought I.

Then,  when he had exhausted this general pane-
gyric, he descended to some few particulars ;  especially
dilating upon his preaching,  and applying to me for
attesting its excellence.

''  I shall make one sermon every 3'ear,  precisely for
you  ! "  he cried :  "  I think I know what will please you.
That on the Creation last Sunday was just to your
taste.  You shall have such another next residence.
I think I preach in the right tone — not too slow,  like
that poor wretch Grape,  nor too fast,  like Davis and
the rest of  'em ;  but yet fast enough never to tire
them.     That's just my idea of good preaching."

Then he told me what excellent apartments he had

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        437

here,  and how much he should Uke my opinion in fitting
them up.  He begged to know if I could come to a
concert,  as he would give me such a one as would
delight me.     I told him it was quite impossible.

Then he said I might perhaps have more time in
town ;  and there he had the finest instruments in the
world.     I assured him of his mistake.

My dear Mrs.  Delany carried me with her again
to Stoke,  where what most pleased mo was a house-
full of sweet children,  daughters and sons of Dr.  and
Lady Elizabeth Courtney,  and grand-children of Lady
Effingham.

The next day Lady Eifingham came to Windsor,  and,
while I was present,  said to the Queen,  "  O,  ma'am,  I
had the greatest fright this morning ! — I saw a huge
something on Sir George's throat.  Why,  Sir George,
says I,  what's that?— a wen?  'Yes,'  says he,  'Countess,
I've had it these twenty years.'  However,  I hear it*s
now going about; — so I hope your Majesty will be
careful."

I am sure I was not,  for I laughed irresistibly !

And now I must finish this month with a scene that
closed its 30th day.

Mrs.  Schwellenberg invited Mr.  Turbulent to dinner,
for she said he had a large correspondence,  and might
amuse her.  He came early ;  and finding nobody in
the eating-parlour,  begged to wait in mine till Mrs.
Schwellenberg came downstairs.

This was the last thing I wished ;  but he required
no answer,  and instantly resumed the Kew discussion,
entreating me to tell him what he had done.

I desired him to desist — in vain,  he affirmed I had

438 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Pakt X.

promised him an explanation,  and he had tliercforc a
right to it.

"  And when,"  cried I,  "  did I make such a promise?
— never,  I am sure! — nor ever shall!"

"  You did promise me,"  cried he,  ''  not,  perhaps,  in
so many words ;  but you hesitated :  at one time you
had some remorse for your conduct,  and I fully under-
stood you meant to promise me for another time."

"You fully mistook me,  then!"  cried I ;  "for I
meant no such thing then  ;  I mean no sucli thing now  ;
and I never shall mean any such thing in future.  Is
this explicit  ?  "

He cast up his hands and eyes in reproachful and
silent astonishment.  But I thought I would try,  for
once,  to be as peremptory as himself

"  Is it really possible,"  cried he,  after this dumb
shew,  "'  3^ou can have such an obstinacy in your
nature  ?"

"  I think it best,"  cried I,  "  to tell you so at once,
that you may expect nothing more,  but give over the
subject,  and talk of something else.  What is the
news  ?  "

"  No,  no,  I will talk of notliing else ! — it distracts
me; — pray tell me I — I call upon your good-nature  !  "

"  I have none — about this  !"

"  Upon your goodness of heart!"

'*  'Tis all hardness here  ! "

"  I will cast myself at your feet, — I will kneel to
you!"

And he was preparing his immense person for pros-
tration, when Goter opened the door.  Such an inter-
ruption to his heroics made me laugh heartily;  nor
could he help joining himself;  though the moment she
was gone he renewed his importunity with unabated
earnestness.

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         439

'*  I remember/*  he cried,  '•'  it was upon the Terrace
you first shewed me this disdain ;  and there,  too,  you
have shown it me repeatedly since^,  with pubHc super-
cihousness."

Then,  suddenly drawing up,  with a very scornful
look,  he haughtily said,  "  Permit me to tell you,  ma'am,
— had it been anybody else, — permit me to tell you, —
that had done just so, — anybody else! — they might
have gone their own way,  ever after,  without a ques-
tion— without a thought! — But you! — you do anything
with me !  You turn,  twist,  and wind me just as you
like."

I inquired if he had seen Madame de Genlis'  new
book.

''  No,  no  ! "  cried he impetuously ; — "  I call upon
your justice,  ma'am  ! — You well know you have treated
me ill, — you know and have acknowledged it !  "

"  And when?"  cried I,  amazed and provoked :  "  when
did I do what could never be done  ?  "

"  At Kew,  ma'am,  you were full of concern — full
of remorse for the treatment you had given me  ! — and
you owned it !  "

"  Good Heaven,  Mr.  Turbulent,  what can induce you
to say this  ?  "

"  Is it not true?"

"  Not a word of it !     You know it is not ! "

"  Indeed,"  cried he,  "  I really and truly thought so —
hoped so ; — I believed you looked as if you felt your
own ill-usage, — and it gave to me a delight inexpres-
sible ! "

This was almost enough to bring back the very same
''  supercilious distance  "  of which he complained ;  but,
in dread of fresh explanations,  I forbore to notice this
flight,  and only told him he might be perfectly satisfied.

440 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

since I no longer persevered in the taciturnity to which
he objected.

"  But how,"  cried he,  ''  do you give it up,  without
deigning to assign one reason for it?"

"  The greater the compliment !  "  cried I,  laughing ;
*'  I give it up to your request."

'•  Yes,  ma'am,  upon my speaking, — but why did
you keep me so long in that painful suspense  ?  "

"  Nay,"  cried I,  "  could I well be quicker?  Till you
spoke,  could I know if you heeded it?  "

"Ah,  ma'am! — is there then no language but of
words  ?  Do you pretend to think there is no other  ? —
Must I teach it you? — teach it to Miss Burney,  who
speaks,  who understands it so well? — who is never
silent,  and never can be silent?"

And then came his heroic old homage to the poor-
eyebrows,  vehemently finishing with,  *'  Do you,  can you
affect to know no language but speech?"

"  Not,"  cried I,  coolly,  ''  without the trouble of
more investigation than I had taken here."

He called this  "  contempt,"  and,  exceedingly irri-
tated, desired me^  once more,  to explain,  from begin-
ning to end,  how he had ever offended me.

"  Mr.  Turbulent,"  cried I,  *'  will you be satisfied if I
tell you it shall all blow over? "

"  Make me a vow,  then,  you will never more,  never
while you live,  resume that proud taciturnity."

"  No,  no, — certainly not ;  I never make vows ;  it is a
rule with me to avoid them."

"  Give me,  then,  your promise, — your solemn pro-
mise,— at least I may claim that  ?  "

"  I have the same peculiarity about promises  ;  I never
make them."

He was again beginning to storm,    but again I

1787]  OF TxHE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  441

assured him I would let the acquamtance take its old
course,  if he would but be appeased,  and say no more ;
and,  after difficulties innumerable,  he at length gave
up the point :  but to this he was hastened,  if not driven,
by a summons to dinner.

In leaving the room,  to attend Mrs.  Schwellenberg,
he turned about at the door,  and,  with a comic expres-
sion of resentment against himself,  he clenched his fist,
and exclaimed,  "  This is without example !  I am
actually going without the smallest satisfaction,  though
I came with the most fixed determination to obtain
it!"

How strange and how wild a character!  I often
wonder how he lives with his wife.  How miserable
would such a husband render me !  Yet I hear he is
quite adored by her,  and extremely kind to her.

I again acquainted my beloved old friend with all
this affair ;  and she counselled me to keep upon mani-
fest good terms invariably,  and to avoid complaints that
led to scenes of such violence and impropriety.

September. — My memorandums of this month are
so scanty,  that I shall not give them in their regular
dates.

To me the month must needs be sweet that brought
to me friends dearest to my heart ;  and here again let
me thank them for the reviving week bestowed upon
me from the 10th to the 17th.

On the evening they left me,  my kind Mrs.  Delany
carried me,  to Dr.  Herschel's.  Madame la Fite
said,  afterwards,  that,  nothing remaining upon earth
good enough to console me for les Lockes and Mrs
Phillips,  I was fain to travel to the moon for comfort.
I think it was very well said.

And,  indeed,  I really found myself much pleased with

442 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

the little excursion.  Dr.  Herscliel is a delightful man  ;
so iinassuminf^,  with his great knowlcd£!:e,  so willing to
dispense it to the ignorant,  and so cheerful and easy in
his general manners,  that were he no genius it would
be impossible not to remark him as a pleasing and
sensible man.

I was equally pleased with his sister,  whom I had
wished to see very much,  for her great celebrity in her
brother's science.  She is very little,  very gentle,  very
modest,  and very ingenuous  ;  and her manners are
those of a person unhackneyed and unawed by the
world,  yet desirous to meet and to return its smiles.
I love not the philosophy that braves it.  This brother
and sister seem gratified with its favour,  at the same
time that their ow^n pursuit is all-sufficient to them
without it.

I inquired of Miss Herschel if she was still comet-
hunting,  or content now with the moon?  The brother
answered that he had the charge of the moon,  but he
left to his sister to sweep the heavens for comets.

Their manner of working together is most ingenious
and curious.  While he makes his observations with-
out-doors,  he has a method of communicating them to
his sister so immediately,  that she can instantly com-
mit them to paper,  with the precise moment in which
they are made.  By this means he loses not a minute,
when there is anything particularly worth observing,  by
writing it down,  but can still proceed,  yet still have his
accounts and calculations exact.  The methods he has
contrived to facilitate tliis commerce I have not the
terms to explain,  though his simple manner of shewing
them made me fully,  at the time,  comprehend them.

The night,  unfortunately,  was dark,  and I could
not see the moon w^ith the famous new telescope.     I

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,         443

mean not the great telescope through which I had
taken a walk,  for that is still incomplete,  but another
of uncommon powers.  I saw Saturn,  however,  and his
satellites,  very distinctly,  and their appearance was very
beautiful.

Mrs.  Delany made me the next morning accompany

Miss P and Mr.  Lightfoot to see models of Rome

and Versailles.  Rome gave me much satisfaction,  repre-
senting so well what I have read and heard of so fre-
quently, and shewing very compactly and clearly the
general view and face,  place and distance,  size and ap-
pearance, of all its great buildings ;  but I was not
enchanted with Versailles  :  its lavish magnificence was
too profuse for me.

I saw a great deal of Mr.  Bunbury in the course of
this month,  as he was in waiting upon the Duke of
York,  who spent great part of it at Windsor,  to the
inexpressible delight of his almost idolizing father.
Mr.  Bunbury did not open upon me with that mild-
ness and urbanity that might lead me to forget the
strokes of his pencil,  and power of his caricature  :  he
early avowed a general disposition to laugh at,  censure
or despise all around him.  He began talking of every-
body and everything about us,  with the decisive free-
dom of a confirmed old intimacy.

"  I am in disgrace here,  already I "  he cried,  almost
exultingly.

"  In disgrace?"  I repeated.

"  Yes, — for not riding out this morning ! — I was
asked — what could I have better to do? — Ha!  ha!"

The next time that I saw him after your departure
from Windsor,  he talked a great deal of painting and

444 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT X.

painters,  and then said,  *'  The Draftsman of whom I
think the most highly of any in the world was in this
room the other day,  and I did not know it,  and was
not introduced to him  !"

I immediately assured him I never did the honours
of the room when its right mistress was in it,  but that
I would certainly have named them to each other had
I known he desired it.

''  O,  yes,"  cried he,  "  of all things I wished to know
him.  He draws like the old masters.  I have seen
fragments in the style of many of the very best and
first productions of the greatest artists of former times.
He could deceive the most critical judge.  I wish
greatly for a sight of his works,  and for the possession
of one of them,  to add to my collection,  as I have
something from almost everybody else ;  and a"  small
sketch of his I should esteem a greater curiosity than
all the rest put together."

Moved by the justness of this praise,  I fetched him
the sweet little cadeaus so lately left me by Mr.  Wil-
liams's kindness.  He was very much pleased,  and per-
haps thought I might bestow them.  O,  no  ! — not one
stroke of that pencil could I relinquish  !

Another evening he gave us the history of his way
of life at Brighthelmstone.  He spoke highly of the
Duke,  but with much satire of all else,  and that incau-
tiously, and evidently with an innate defiance of con-
sequences, from a consciousness of secret powers to
overawe their hurting him.

Notwithstanding the general reverence 1 pay to ex-
traordinary talents,  which lead me to think it even a
species of impertinence to dwell upon small failings in
their rare possessors,  ^Nlr.  Bunbury did not win my
good-will.     His serious manner is supercilious and

1787]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         445

haughty,  and his easy conversation wants rectitude in
its principles.  For the rest,  he is entertaining and
gay,  full of talk,  sociable,  willing to enjoy what is
going forward,  and ready to speak his opinion with
perfect unreserve.

Plays and players seem his darling theme ;  he can
rave about them from morning to night,  and yet be
ready to rave again when morning returns.  He acts
as he talks,  spouts as he recollects,  and seems to give
his whole soul to dramatic feeling and expression.
This is not,  however,  his only subject.  Love and ro-
mance are equally dear to his discourse,  though they
cannot be introduced with equal frequency.  Upon
these topics he loses himself wholly — he runs into
rhapsodies that discredit him at once as a father,
a husband,  and a moral man.  He asserts that love
is the first principle of life,  and should take place of
every other ;  holds all bonds and obligations as nuga-
tory that would claim a preference;  and advances such
doctrines of exalted sensations in the tender passion
as made me tremble while I heard them.

He adores Werter,  and would scarce believe I had
not read it — still less that I had begun it and left it
off,  from distaste at its evident tendency.  I saw myself
sink instantly in his estimation,  though till this little

avowal I had appeared to stand in it very honourably.

*  *  ♦  *  «  ^1

On the anniversary of the coronation I had a note
from Lady Templetown,  proposing my seeing her;  and
as fortunately it happened during my presidency,  I
made application to my royal mistress,  and obtained
the indulgence of seeing her,  with Mrs.  Delany,  at the
Lodge.  She met Miss Finch,  INladame la Fite,  Signer
del Campo,  General Bude,  Colonel Gwynn,  and Dr.

446 DIARY AND LETTERS       [Paut X.

Shepherd, — who again made me a visit,  and not know-
ing of Mrs.  Schwcllcnberg's absence,  and my public
situation at tea-time,  was quite thunderstruck in being
introduced into such a roomfull of folks,  when he ex-
pected, as he told me,  that he should find me alone.

Lady Templetown must have mentioned to you the
King's coming in,  and all that passed;  but she did
me one favour I can never sufficiently acknowledge —
she gave me a cutting of my dearest Mrs.  Delany,  so
exquisitely resembling her fine venerable countenance,
that to me it is invaluable,  and will continue so while
I breathe.

One evening,  while I was sitting with this dear lady
and her fair niece,  when tea was over,  and the gentle-
men all withdrawn,  the door was opened,  and a star
entered,  that I perceived presently to be the Prince
of Wales.  He was here to hunt with his Royal Father
and Brother.  With great politeness he made me his
first bow,  and then advancing to Mrs.  Delany,  insisted,
very considerately,  on her sitting still,  though he stood
himself for half an hour — all the time he stayed.

He entered into discourse very good-humouredl}^
and with much vivacity ;  described to her his villa at
Brighthelmstone,  told several anecdotes of adventures
there,  and seemed desirous to entertain both her and

himself.

******

I have mentioned already to Mr.  Locke reading the
*'  Memoirs of Eradut Khan,"  a nobleman of Hindostan,
and how much entertainment I found in them,  from
the curious customs and Oriental style of reasoning
and politics which they display ;  and the marks they
carry of authenticity would render them,  I should
think,  very well worth reading at Norbury.

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        447

Signer del Campo was elevated from an Envoy,  or
some such thing,  in this month,  to being Ambassador,
and his rapture at the honour was so open and so
warm,  that I don't know whether I laughed most with
him or at him,  for his honest avowal of unbounded
ecstacy.  He represented to us one night the whole
ceremonial of delivering his credentials to the King in
state,  and made General Bude represent His Majesty,
while he went through all the forms before him,  stop-
ping between each to explain what was due to his new
dignity,  and what honours and distinctions it exacted.

Let me not,  however,  fail to relate,  in the records of
this month,  a certain notable fact.  I became,  in the
latter part of it,  so highly in favour with Mrs.  Schwel-
lenberg,  that she threw aside all the harshness and
rudeness with which she had treated me,  and became
civil even to kindness  !  I learned Piquet to oblige her,
and to lighten our long evenings  ;  and though I was a
player the most miserable,  she declined all that were
better— Miss Planta,  Miss Mawr,  Mile,  de Luc,  Ma-
dame la Fite — and made them sit by,  wdiile she chose
me for her partner.

This might be very flattering,  but it occasioned con-
finement unremitting,  as,  during cards,  I had hitherto
taken a little breathing time in my own room.  How-
ever, civility is worth something;  and I am so soon
disconcerted by its opposite,  that I contented myself
tolerably well with the purchase.

October. — My brief memorials of this month will
all be comprised in a page or two,  without dates.  Mr.
Fisher returned,  married,  to Windsor,  and enabled to
claim my previous promise of making acquaintance
with his wife.     She seems gentle and obliging.

My Royal Mistress was all condescension to me.

448 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

She gave mc Mrs.  Trimmer's excellent book of the
*'  Economy of Charity;"  and  ^vhenever she did not go
to the early prayers at the chapel,  she almost regularly
came to my room,  and spent the time in gracious con-
verse. She made me narrate to her the whole history
of my knowledge of the ill-fated connexion formed by
Mrs.  Thrale with Mr.  Piozzi.  It is ever a touching,
trying subject to me ;  but I wondered more at her long
forbearance of question than at the curiosity such a
story might excite.  I was glad,  too,  that since it must
be told,  it was related by one who could clear many
falsehoods,  and soften many truths ;  for dear must she
always be to my memory at least.

The newspapers gave mc some alarm and much
vexation,  in frequently mentioning me during this
month,  regretting my silence,  and exalting what had
preceded it.  I always tremble throughout my whole
frame at first glance of my name in these publications ;
and though hitherto I have met with nothing but
panegyric — most inordinate too — I have never felt any
praise recompense the pain of the sight of the name.
One or two of these paragraphs the King read to Mrs.
Delany,  but no one has mentioned them to me, — which
was at least some comfort.

The only thing that proved at all interesting to me
in this month,  was the very dangerous illness of Mrs.
Turbulent.  She had a putrid fever^  and was attended by
Sir George Baker,  through the orders of the bene-
volent Queen.  I do not at all know her;  but her cha-
racter of being sensible,  amiable,  and gentle,  is uni-
versally established by all who are of her acquaintance,
and during this illness there was a most general praise
of her disposition,  and lamentation for her suffering.

It was now that Mr.  Turbulent appeared to me in

17S7]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         449

his fairest light.  His rattle,  his flights,  his spirit of
gallantry,  all were laid aside  :  depressed,  tame,  and
profoundly thoughtful was his whole appearance ;  and
when she grew worse he wrote to Miss Planta to
beseech leave of absence from attending the Prin-
cesses, and declared that  "Si je Iwperds,  je me regar-
deraicomme le 'plus malheureux des hommes  ;  il est juste
que f envisage de la sorte un evenemeiit qui decidera
de tout pour moi y^  and adds something of how well
she merits it from him.  Indeed I hear from all that
she has proved a most exemplary wife to him,  in many
and very trying difficulties of situation ;  and I do really
believe she is mistress,  in return,  of all his serious affec-
tions and regard,  though the extreme levity of his
nature so frequently leads him to a species of beha-
viour that carries strong appearances of a mind dis-
engaged from all the happier and juster ties of con-
jugal attachment.  This illness may eventually prove
most happy for him,  by not only shewing her worth to
him,  but bringing him round to a more proper sense
of the decorum due to her,  as well as to his profession.
The Queen received a very beautiful and curious
present this month from the King of Naples,  consist-
ing of a most complete set of china,  and a dessert,
representing antique games ;  the figures white,  and
apparently from models of very extraordinary merit
and beauty.  The plates gave the curiosities of Her-
culaneum — every plate of the almost innumerable quan-
tity containing a different representation.  Combats
of gladiators and of Amazons,  chiefs victorious return-
ing for their prizes,  old victors instructing youthful
candidates,  cars,  chariots,  men and horses,  all in battle
and disorder,  conquerors claiming crowns of laurel,
and the vanquished writhing in the agonies of wounds

VOL.  III.  2 G

450 DIARY AND LETTERS       [ParT X.

and death — such were the subjects,  and the execution
in general was striking and masterly.

So here I stop — this calm month offering nothing
more to relate :  save,  what you all know,  that I wrote
myhttle ballad,  ''Willy,"  for Mr.  WiUiam Locke,  and
that the writing it was my best amusement upon losing
my dearest friend,  because most congenial with the
sad feelings of my mind on the separation,  when  "  Void
was the scene,  blank,  vacant,  drear !''  A tautology
so expressive of the tautology of my life and feelings,
that it was the first line written of my ballad,  though
afterwards inserted in the midst of it.

Thursday,  November 1st. — I received my beauti-
ful fairings from my dearest Fredy,  and a noble
giornale from my Susanna.  What sweet wealth to
me  ! — such are the riches I covet ;  all meaner coin is
thrown away upon me.  It suits convenience,  indeed,  a
little  ! — that I confess  !

I carried up to Mrs.  Schwellenberg the present sent
her by my liberal Fredy.  When I produced it,  she
motioned it away with her hand,  and said,  loftily,
''For what?"  "For civility,  ma'am!"  answered I,
very coolly.  Nevertheless,  it was some time ere she
could settle it with her notions to accept it.

No one else,  however,  proved quite so sublime.
Saturday,  3rd. — I carried to the lower Lodge my
little offerings for the Princess Sophia,  who had been
ill some time,  and kept her birth- day in bed.  She re-
ceived them very prettily.  Miss Goldsworthy being so
obliging as to usher me into her room.  They were
much admired by Princess  ^lary,  and the Princess
Amelia insisted on my making her a separate visit in
another room,  where we played together very sociably.
I also took the Scenturata her fairing ;   and she

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  451

poured forth,  bitter complaints to me against the
Cerbera.  1 could but condole with her,  and advise a
little  "  dignity of absence  "  till better received.

Thursday,  8th.— My kindest Fredy's screen arrived
on the very moment of time for presentation to Prin-
cess Augusta,  who received it with the utmost sweet-
ness, and told me they had all been much diverted,
lately,  by Mrs.  Harcourt,  who,  very innocently,  had ac-
quainted them there was a new fair kept at Leather-
head,  w^here a Mr.  and Mrs.  Locke sent the most beau-
tiful and elegant toys and ornaments that could be
conceived.

The two Princes being here in honour of the day,
their gentlemen were at the tea-table.  Mr.  Bunbury
was amongst them,  but of no more assistance than
any other,  save that he produced an hieroglyphic
letter,  and we were all employed to make it out;
otherwise he had now already imbibed the general
constraint,  and ventured little more in flash than any
other of the established trained party.  One of his
sons has lately been made Page of Honour to the
Queen,  which seems to be a tie on his discretion and
his gratitude,  that lessens that careless defiance with
which he began his own career.

At near one o'clock in the morning,  while the ward-
robe woman was pinning up the Queen's hair,  there
was a sudden rap-tap at the dressing-room door.  Ex-
tremely surprised,  I looked at the Queen,  to see what
should be done;  she did not speak.  I had never
heard such a sound before,  for at the Royal doors
there is always a particular kind of scratch used,
instead of tapping.  I heard it,  however,  again,— and
the Queen called out,  ''  What is that  ?"

I was really startled,  not conceiving who could take

2g2

452 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Paut X.

SO stranfijc a liberty as to come to the Queen's apart-
ment without the announcing of a page  ;  and no page,
I was very sure,  would make such a noise.

Again the sound was repeated,  and more smartly.  I
grew quite alarmed,  imagining some serious evil at
hand — cither refjardin^j the Kinoj or some of the
Princesses.  The Queen,  however,  bid me open the
door.  I did — but what was my surprise to see there a
large man,  in an immense wrapping great coat,
buttoned up round his chin,  so that he was almost hid
between cape and hat !

I stood quite motionless for a moment — but he,  as if
also surprised,    drew back  ;    I felt quite sick v;ith
sudden terror — I really thought some ruffian had
broke into the house,  or a madman.
"  Who is it  ?"  cried the Queen.
"  I do not know,  ma'am,"  I answered.
'*  Who is it  ?"  she called aloud  ;  and then,  taking off
his hat,  entered the Prince of Wales  !

The Queen laughed very much,  so did I too,  happy
in this unexpected explanation.

He told her,  eagerly,  he merely came to inform her
there were the most beautiful northern lights to be
seen that could possibly be imagined,  and begged her
to come to the gallery windows.

Wednesday,  Htie — We went to town for the draw-
ing-room, and I caught a most severe cold,  by being
obliged to have the glass down on my side,  to suit
Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  though the sharpest wind blew
in that ever attacked a poor phiz.  However,  these
are the sort of desagr emeus I can always best bear ;
and for the rest,  I have now pretty constant civility.

My dear father drank tea with me ;  but told me of
a paragraph in the  *' World/'  that gave mc some un-

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         453

easiness;  to this effect : — ''We hear that Miss Barney
has resigned her place about the Queen,  and is now
promoted to attend the Princesses :  an office far more
suited to her character and abilities,  which will now be
called forth as they merit." — Or to that purpose.

As the  "  World"  is not taken in here,  I flattered
myself it would not be known ;  for I knew how little
pleasure such a paragraph would give,  and was very
sorry for it.

The next day,  at St.  James's,  Miss Planta desired
to speak to me,  before the Queen arrived.  She ac-
quainted me of the same  ''  news,"  and said,  '•'  Every-
body spoke of it ;"  and that the Queen might receive
twenty letters of recommendation to my place before
night.  Still I could only be sorry.  Another para-
<^raph had now appeared,  she told me,  contradicting
the first,  and saying  "  The resignation of Miss Burney
is premature ;  it only arose from an idea of the service
the education of the Princesses might reap from her
virtues and accomplishments."

I was really concerned ;  conscious how little grati-
fied my Royal Mistress would be by the whole  : — and,
presently,  Miss Planta came to me again,  and told me
that the Princesses had mentioned it!  They never
read any newspapers ;  but they had heard of it from
the Duke of York.

I observed the Queen was most particularly gracious
with me,  softer,  gentler,  more complacent than ever ;
and,  while dressing,  she dismissed her wardrobe -
woman,  and,  looking at me very steadfastly,  said,
"  Miss Burney,  do you ever read newspapers?"

''  Sometimes,"  I answered,  ''  but not often  :  how-
ever, I believe I know what your Majesty means  ! "

454 DIARY AND LETTERS        [PaRtX.

I could say no less ;  I was so sure of her meaning.

"  Do you?"  she cried.

'^'Yes,  ma'am,  and I have been very much hurt by
it:  that is,  if your Majesty means anything relative to
myself?"

'^^  I do I"  she answered,  still looking at me with
earnestness.

"  My father,  ma'am,"  cried I,  "  told me of it last
night,  with a good deal of indignation."

*' I,"  cried she,  "did not see it myself:  you know
how little I read the newspapers."

''  Indeed,"  cried I,  "  as it was in a paper not taken
in here,  I hoped it would quite have escaped  }our
Majesty."

"  So it did  :  I only heard of it."

I looked a little curious,  and she kindly ex-
plained herself.

"  When the Duke of York came yesterday to dinner,
he said almost immediately,  '  Pray,  ma'am,  what has
JNIiss Burney left you for  ?'  'Left me  ? '  "^  Yes,  they say
she's gone  ;  pray what's the reason  ? '  '  Gone  ? '  '  Yes ;
it's at full length in all the newspapers:  is not she
gone  ?'    '  Not that I know of.'  "

-'All the newspapers"  was undoubtedly a little flou-
rish of the Duke ;  but we jointly censured and la-
mented the unbridled liberty of the press,  in thus
inventing,  contradicting,  and bringing on and putting
off,  whatever they pleased.

I saw,  however,  she had really been staggered :  she
concluded,  I fancy,  that the paragraph arose from
some latent cause,  which might end in matter of fact ;
for she talked to me of Mrs.  Dickenson,  and of all
that related to her retreat,  and dwelt upon the subject

17S7]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         455

with a sort of solicitude that seemed apprehensive — if
I may here use such a word — of a similar action.

It appeared to me that she rather expected some
further assurance on my part that no such view or
intention had given rise to this pretended report;
and therefore^  when I had next the honour of her
conversation alone,  I renewed the subject,  and men-
tioned that my father had had some thoughts of con-
tradicting the paragraph himself.

"And has he done it?"  cried she,  quite eagerly.

"No,  ma'am;  for,  upon further consideration,  he
feared it might only excite fresh paragraphs,  and that
the whole would sooner die,  if neglected."

"  So,"  said she,  "  I have been told ;  for,  some years
ago,  there was a paragraph in the papers I wanted
myself to have had contradicted ;  but they acquainted
me it was best to be patient,  and it would be forgot
the sooner."

"  This,  however,  ma'am,  has been contradicted this
morning."

"By your father?"  cried she,  again speaking eagerly.

"  No,  ma'am ;   I know not by whom."

She then asked how it was done.  This was very
distressing :  but I was forced to repeat it as well as I
could,  reddening enough,  though omitting,  you may
believe,  the worst.

Just then there happened an interruption;  which
was vexatious,  as it prevented a concluding speech,
disclaimino^  all thou2:hts of resicrnation,  which I saw
was really now become necessary for the Queen's satis-
faction ;  and since it was true — why not say it  ?

And,  accordingly,  the next day,  when she was most
excessively kind to me,  I seized an opportunity,  by

456 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

attending her through the apartments to the break-
fast-room, to hcg permission to speak to her.

It was smilingly granted me.

"  I have now,  ma'am,  read both the paragraphs."

'^  Well  ?"  with a look of much curiosity.

"And indeed I thought them both very impertinent.
They say that the idea arose from a notion of my being
promoted to a place about the Princesses  ! "

"  I have not seen either of the paragraphs,"  she
answered,  "  but the Prince of Wales told me of the
second yesterday."

"  They little know mo,  ma'am,"  I cried,  "  who think
I should regard any other place as a  'promotion that
removed me from your Majesty."

"  I did not take it ill,  I assure you,"  cried she,
gently.

"  Indeed,  ma'am,  I am far from having a iclsh for
any such promotion — far from it!  your Majesty does
not bestow a smile upon me that does not secure and
confirm my attachment."

One of her best smiles followed this,  with a very
condescending little bow,  and the words,  "  You are very
good,"  uttered in a most gentle voice  ;  and she went
on to her breakfast.

I am most glad this complete explanation passed.
Indeed it is most true I would not willingly quit a
place about the Queen for any place  ;  and I was glad
to mark that her smiles were to me the whole estimate
of its value.

This little matter has proved,  in the end,  very gra-
tifying to me,  for it lias made clear beyond all doubt
her desire of retaining me,  and a considerably increased
degree of attention and complacency have most flat-

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         457

teringly shewn a wish I should be retained by attach-
ment. I can hardly tell you how sweet was her whole
manner^,  nor how marked her condescension.  O,  were
there no Mrs.  Schwellenberg !

Friday^  27th. — I had a terrible journey indeed to
town,  Mrs,  Schwellenberg finding it expedient to have
the glass down on my side,  whence there blew in a
sharp wind,  which so painfully attached my eyes that
they were inflamed even before we arrived in town.

Mr.  de Luc and Miss Planta both looked uneasy,
but no one durst speak  ;  and for me,  it was among the
evils that I can always best bear :  yet before the even-
ing I grew so ill that I could not propose going to
Chelsea,  lest I should be utterly unfitted for Thurs-
day's drawing-room.

The next day,  however,  I received a consolation that
has been some ease to my mind ever since.  My dear
father spent the evening with me,  and was so incensed
at the state of my eyes,  which were now as piteous to
behold as to feel,  and at the relation of their usage,
that he charged me,  another time,  to draw up my
glass in defiance of all opposition,  and to abide by all
consequences,  since my place was wholly immaterial
when put in competition with my health.

I was truly glad of this permission to rebel,  and it
has given me an internal hardiness in all similar as-
saults, that has at least relieved my mind from the
terror of giving mortal offence where most I owe im-
plicit obedience,  should provocation overpower my ca-
pacity of forbearance.

We wrote jointly to our good and dear Mr.  Twi-
ning, though I was so blind that my pen went almost
its own way,  and for the rest of the evening my dear
father read me papers,  letters,  manuscripts innume-
rable.

458 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

On tlic Thursday I was obliged to dress,  just as if
nothing was the matter.

The next day,  when we assembled to return to
Windsor,  Mr.  de Luc was in real consternation at
sight of my eyes ;  and I saw an indignant glance at
my coadjutrix,  that could scarce content itself without
being understood.  Miss Planta ventured not at such
a glance,  but a whisper broke out.  as we were de-
scending the stairs,  expressive of horror against the
same poor person — poor person indeed — to exercise
a power productive only of abhorrence,  to those that
view as well as to those that feel it !

Some business of Mrs.  Schwellenberg's occasioned
a delay of the journey,  and we all retreated back;
and when I returned to my room,  jNliller,  the old head
housemaid,  came to me,  with a little neat tin saucepan
in her hand,  saying,  "  Pray,  ma'am,  use this for your
eyes;  'tis milk and butter,  such as I used to make for
Madame Hoggerdorn when she travelled in the winter
with Mrs.  Schwellenberg."

Good Heaven !  I really shuddered when she added,
that all that poor woman's misfortunes with her eyes,
which,  from inflammation after inflammation,  grew
nearly blind,  were attributed by herself to these jour-
neys, in which she was forced to have the glass down
at her side in all weathers,  and frequently the glasses
behind her also !

Upon my word this account of my predecessor was
the least exhilarating intelligence I could receive I
Goter told me,  afterwards,  that all the servants in the
house had remarked  /  vas going just the same ivay I

JNIiss Planta presently ran into my room,  to say she
had hopes we should travel without this amiable being ;
and she had left me but a moment when Mrs.  Stainforth

17S7]  OF THE  :aUTHOR OF EVELINA.  459

succeeded her,  exclaiming,  "^'O,  for Heaven's sake^  don't
leave her behind;  for Heaven's sake.  Miss Burney,  take
her with you !"

'Twas impossible not to laugh at these opposite in-
terests, both^  from agony of fear,  breaking through all
restraint.

Soon after,  however,  we all assembled again,  an
got into the coach.     Mr.  de Luc,  who was my vis a vis,
instantly pulled up the glass.

''  Put down that glass !"  was the immediate order.

He affected not to hear her,  and began conversing.

She enraged quite tremendously,  calling aloud to be
obeyed without delay.  He looked compassionately at
me,  and shrugged his shoulders,  and said,  "But,
ma'am — "

"  Do it,  Mr.  de Luc,  when I tell you  !  I will have it !
"When you been too cold,  you might bear it !''

''It is not for me,  ma'am,  but poor Miss Burney."

"  O,  poor Miss Burney might bear it the same !  put it
down,  Mr.  de Luc  !  without,  I will get out !  put it down,
when I tell you  !  It is my coach  !  I will have it selfs  !
I might go alone in it,  or with one,  or with what you
call nobody,  when I please  !"

Frightened for good Mr.  de Luc,  and the more for
being much obliged lohim,  I now interfered,  and
begged him to let down the glass.  Very reluctantly
he complied,  and I leant back in the coach,  and held up
my muff to my eyes.

What a journey ensued!  To see that face when
lighted up with fury is a sight for horror  !  I was glad
to exclude it by my muff.

Miss Planta alone attempted to speak.  I did not
think it incumbent on me to  "make the agreeable,"
thus used ;  I was therefore wholly dumb ;  for not a

400 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

word,  not an apology,  not one expression of being sorry
for what I suffered,  was uttered.  The most horrible
ill-humour,  violence,  and rudeness,  were all that were
shewn.  Mr.  de Luc was too much provoked to take his
usual method of passing all off by constant talk;  and
as I had never seen him venture to appear provoked
before,  I felt a great obligation to his kindness.

When we were about half way,  we stopped to water
the horses.  He then again pulled up the glass,  as if
from absence.  A voice of fury exclaimed,  *'Let it
down  !  without I won't go  !"

*'  I am sure,"  cried he,  ''  all Mrs.  de Luc's plants
will be killed by this frost !"

For the frost was very severe indeed.

Then he proposed my changing places with Miss
Planta,  who sat opposite Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  and con-
sequently on the sheltered side.  "  Yes  !"  cried Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  "  Miss Burney might sit there,  and so
she ought !"

I told her,  briefly,  I was always sick in riding back-
wards.

"  O,  ver well !  when you don't like it,  don't do it.
You might bear it when you like it !  what did the poor
Haggerdorn bear it !  when the blood was all running
down from her eyes  !"

This was too much  !  "  I must take,  then,''  I cried,
"  the more warning  !"

After that I spoke not a word.  I ruminated all the
rest of the way upon my dear father's recent charge and
permission.  I was upon the point continually of avail-
ing myself of both,  but alas  !  I felt the deep disap-
pointment 1 should give him,  and I felt the most cruel
repugnance to owe a resignation to a quarrel.

These reflections powerfully forbade the rebellion to

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        461

which this unequalled arrogance and cruelty excited

me  ;  and after revolving them again and again,  I

accepted a bit of cake which she suddenly offered me
as we reached Windsor,  and determined,  since I sub-
mitted to my monastic destiny from motives my serious
thoughts deemed right,  I would not be prompted to
oppose it from mere feelings of resentment to one
who,  strictly,  merited only contempt.

And from this time,  my dear friends,  I have shut
out from my sight the prospect that such rumination
was opening.  I pray God I may persevere in crushing
inferior motives — that I may strengthen such as are
better.  But  'tis best to build no castles in the air.
They have so terrible an aptitude,  light as they are,  to
shatter their poor constructors in their fall.

I would not have had my tender friends know this
conflict at the time !  Now that again my mind is
made up to its fate,  I feel sure of their ultimate appro-
bation, when I tell them my ultimate opinion,  which I
must hope,  also,  to make my rule and practice in this,
to me,  momentous decision : — That,  in total disregard
to all that belongs to myself,  I must cherish no thought
of retreat,  unless called hence,  by willing kindness,
to the paternal home,  or driven hence,  by weakness
and illness,  from the fatigues of my office.

I am glad I have written this  :  all better resolves
have double chance with me,  when I have commu-
nicated them to my Susanna and Fredy.

I gulped as well as I could at dinner ;  but all civil
fits are again over.  Not a word was said to me  :  yet I
was really very ill all the afternoon  ;  the cold had seized
my elbows,  from holding them up so long,  and I was
stiff and chilled all over.

In the evening,  however,  came my soothing IVlrs,

462 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

Delany.  Sweet soul !  she folded me in her arms,  and
wept over my shoulder  !  Mrs.  Ashley had been with
me,  and saw my condition;  and this beloved friend
could not contain her grief.  Yet how small a matter
this to the whole !  But this was apparent ;  and the
whole,  the tenour of my feelings,  she knows not.  I
cannot abridge the sole satisfaction of my present life,
which consists in the time it allows me to spend with
this earthly angel — I cannot repay her kind joy in my
situation,  by painting,  to her,  its interior sadness.

Too angry to stand upon ceremony this evening,
she told Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  after our public tea,  she
must retire to my room,  that she might speak with me
alone.  This was highly resented,  and I was threatened,
afterwards,  that she would come to tea no more,  and we
might talk our secrets always.

Mr.  de Luc called upon me next morning,  and openly
avowed his indignation,  protesting it was an oppression
he could not bear to see used,  and reproving me for
checking him when he would have run all risks.  I
thanked him most cordially  ;  but assured him the worst
of all inflammations to me was that of a quarrel,  and I
entreated him,  therefore,  not to interfere.  But we
have been cordial friends from that time forward.

Miss Planta also called,  kindly bringing me some
eye-water,  and^^telling me she had  "  Never so longed to
beat anybody in her life ;  and yet,  I assure you,''  she
added,  "  everybody remarks that she behaves,  altoge-
ther, better to you than to anybody  !''

O Heavens !

Mr.  Turbulent spent almost all this month in attend-
ance upon his deserving wife,  w^ho relapsed,  but reco-
vered ;  and his conduct was such as to give him a higher
place in my good graces than he had ever yet secured

1787]     OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  463

himself.  I saw him three or four times ;  all civility,
but wholly without flights and raptures ;  tamed and
composed,  happy in the restoration of his wife,  and
cured of all wild absurdity.  I conducted myself to
him just as when we first grew acquainted — with open-
ness, cheerfulness,  and ease ;  appearing to forget all
that had been wrong,  and believing such an appearance
the best means to make him forget it also.

Such was this month :  in which,  but for the sweet
support of Mrs.  Delany,  I must almost wholly have
sunk under the tyranny,  whether opposed or endured,
of my most extraordinary coadjutrix.

Saturday,  December 1st. — 'Tis strange that two
feelings so very opposite as love and resentment should
have nearly equal power in inspiring courage for or
against the object that excites them  ;  yet so it is.  In
former times I have often,  on various occasions,  felt it
raised to anything possible,  by affection,  and now I have
found it mount to the boldest height,  by disdain.  For,
be it known,  such gross and harsh usage I experienced
in the end of last month,  since the inflammation of the
eyes,  which I bore much more composedly than sundry
personal indignities that followed,  that I resolved
upon a new mode of conduct — namely,  to go out every
evening,  in order to shew that I by no means consi-
dered myself as bound to stay at home after dinner,  if
treated very ill ;  and this most courageous plan I flat-
tered myself must needs either procure me a liberty of
absence,  always so much wished,  or occasion a change
of behaviour to more decency and endurability.

I had received for to-day an invitation to meet Lady
Bute and Lady Louisa Stuart at my dearest Mrs.  De-
lany's,  and I should have wished it at all times,  so
much I like them both.      1 had no opportunity to

464 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT X.

speak first to my Royal Mistress,  but I Avcnt to her at
noon,  rather more dressed than usual,  and when I saw
her look a little surprised,  I explained my reason.
She seemed very well satisfied with it,  but my coad-
jutrix apyjearcd in an astonishment unequalled ;  and at
dinner,  when we necessarily met again,  new testimonies
of conduct quite without example were exhibited :  for
when Mrs.  Thackeray and Miss Planta were helped,
she helped herself,  and appeared publicly to send me
to Coventry — though the sole provocation was intend-
ing to forego her society this evening !

I sat quiet and unhelped a few minutes,  considering
what to do  :  for so little was my appetite,  I was almost
tempted to go without dinner entirely.  However,
upon further reflection,  I concluded it would but
harden her heart still more to have this fresh affront
so borne,  and so related,  as it must have been,  through
Windsor,  and therefore I calmly begged some greens
from Miss Planta.

Neither she nor Mrs.  Thackeray had had courage
to offer me anything,  my  "  disgrace  "  being so obvious.
The w^eakness of my eyeS;,  which still would not bear
the light,  prevented me from tasting animal food all
this time.

A little ashamed,  she then anticipated Miss Planta's
assistance,  by offering me some French beans.  To
curb my own displeasure,  I obliged myself to accept
them instead of the greens,  and they tasted very well
by that means,  though they came through such hands.

Unfortunately,  however,  this little softening was
presently worn out,  by some speeches which it encou-
raged from Mrs.  Thackeray,  who seemed to seize the
moment of permission to acknowledge that T was in
the room,  by telling me she had lately met some of

J 787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         465

my friends in town,  among whom Mrs.  Chapone ;  and
the Burrows family had charged her with a thousand
regrets for my seclusion from their society,  and as
many kind compliments and good wishes.

This again sent me to Coventry for the rest of the
dinner.  When it was over,  and we were all going up-
stairs to coffee,  I spoke to Columb,  in passing,  to have
a chair for me at seven o'clock.

"For W'hat,  then,"  cried a stern voice behind me,
"  for what go you upstairs at all,  when you don't drink
coffee  ?"

Did she imagine I should ans\ver  "  For your society,
ma'am?"  No — I turned back,  quick as lightning,  and
only saying  "  Very well,  ma'am,"  moved towards my
own room.

Again a little ashamed of herself,  she added,  rather
more civilly,  "  For what should you have that trouble  ?"
I simply repeated my  '"Very well,  ma'am,"  in a
voice of,  I believe,  rather pique than calm acquiescence,
and entered my own apartment,  unable to enjoy this
little release,  however speedy to obtain it,  from the
various,  the grievous emotions of my mind,  that this
was the person,  use me how she might,  with whom I
must chiefly pass my time !

So unpleasant were the sensations that fdled me,
that I could recover no gaiety,  even at the house of my
beloved friend,  though received there by her dear self,
her beautiful niece,  and Lady Bute and Lady Louisa,
in the most flattering manner.  Yet I stayed till ten
o'clock,  though hitherto I had returned at nine.  I
was willing to make manifest that I did not make
such sacrifice of my time equally to the extremest
rudeness as to common civility  ;  for more than common
civility never,  at best,  repays it.

VOL.  III.  2 H

466 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

Lady Bute and Lady Louisa Averc botli in such high
spirits themselves that they kept up all the conversa-
tion between them,  and  \vith a vivacity,  an acuteness,
an archness,  and an observation on men and manners
so clear and sagacious,  that it would be difficult to
pass an evening of greater entertainment.  They were
just returning from Bath,  and full fraught with anec-
dote and character,  which they dealt out to their
hearers with so much point and humour,  that we at-
tended to them like a gratified audience of a public
place.

My reception at home was not quite similar ;  and I
observed,  even in my Royal Mistress,  a degree of gra-
vity that seemed not pleased.  I conjectured that my
absence had been lamented.  How hard,  if so,  not to
make known,  in my turn,  how my inesence is accepted !
However,  I will not complain of her;  I will only con-
tinue to absent myself,  while she behaves thus in-
tolerably.

Accordingly,  the next evening,  I went to Mrs.  de
Luc's,  and there I had a little music.  Miss Myers,  a
poor girl who has been rescued from much mischief
and distress through the benevolence of good  ]Mrs.
de Luc,  played upon the violin,  and in a very pleasing
manner.

The Presidente,  was all amaze at this second visit ;
but rather less imperious.     All I regretted was my

poor Miss P ,  who had come to tea,  and had no

means to get away before me:  I had therefore advised
her to make a virtue of necessity,  and to faire lagreable
in my absence.  But the account she gave me,  on my
return,  of the extreme haughty ill-breeding she had
experienced sincerely concerned me for her.  She
assured me she would not change situations with me,  to

,1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  467

avoid any situation she ever could conceive  ;  and the
good nature with which she lamented my destiny,  from
this little sample of what it is unassisted,  has really
endeared her to me very much.

The behaviour of my coadjutrix continued in the
same strain — really shocking to endure.  I always
began,  at our first meeting,  some little small speech,
and constantly received so harsh a rebuff at the second
word,  that I then regularly seated myself by a table,  at
worlv,  and remained wholly silent the rest of the day.

I tried the experiment of making my escape ;  but I
was fairly conquered from pursuing it.  The constant
black reception depressed me out of powers to exert for
flight ;  and therefore I relinquished this plan,  and only
got off,  as I could,  to my own room,  or remained dumb
in hers.

To detail the circumstances of the tyranny and the
grosslerete I experienced at this time would be afflicting
to my beloved friends,  and oppressive to myself I am
fain,  however,  to confess they vanquished me.  I found
the restoration of some degree of decency quite necessary
to my quiet,  since such open and horrible ill-will from
one daily in my sight even affrighted me:  it pursued
me in shocking visions even when I avoided her pre-
sence ;  and therefore I was content to put upon myself
the great and cruel force of seeking to conciliate a
person who had no complaint against me,  but that she
had given me an inflammation of the eyes,  which had
been witnessed and resented by her favourite Mr.  de
Luc.  I rather believe that latter circumstance was
what incensed her so inveterately.

I know wellj,  at a distance,  you may think such con-
duct, in common with such a character,  a mere subject

2h2

468 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

for contempt,  and be amazed at its effect :  but were you
here,  and were you spending in one day a mere antici-
pation of every day — alas !  my dearest friends,  you
would find,  as I find,  peace must be purchased by any
sacrifice that can obtain it.

Mine was,  indeed,  a severe one :  I gave up either
going to my beloved solace,  or receiving her here,  and
offered my service to play at piquet. — At first,  this was
disdainfully refused,  and but very proudly accepted
afterwards.  I had no way to compose my own spirit to
an endurance of this,  but by considering myself as
married to lier^  and therefore that all rebellion could
but end in disturbance,  and that concession was my
sole chance for peace !  O what reluctant nuptials! —
how often did I say to myself — Were these chains
voluntary,  how could I bear them  ! — how forgive my-
self that I put them on  !

The next extraordinary step she took was one that
promised me amends for all :  she told me that there
was no occa,sion we should continue together after
coffee,  unless by her invitation.  I eagerly exclaimed
that this seemed a most feasible way of producing some
variety in our intercourse,  and that I would adopt it
most readily.  She wanted instantly to call back her
words :  she had expected I should be alarmed,  and
solicit her leave to be buried with her every evening !
When she saw me so eager in acceptance,  she looked
mortified and disappointed ;  but I would not suffer her
to retract,  and I began,  at once,  to retire to my room
the moment coffee was over.

This flight of the sublime,  which,  being her own,  she
could not resent,  brought all round :  for as she saw me
every evening prepare to depart with the coffee,  she

1787]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         469

constantly began,  at that period,  some civil discourse
to detain me.  I always suiFered it to succeed,  while
civil,  and when there was a failure,  or a pause^  I
retired.

By this means I recovered such portion of quiet
as is compatible with a situation like mine :  for she
soon returned entirely to such behaviour as preceded
the offence of my eyes ;  and I obtained a little leisure
at which she could not repine,  as a caprice of her own
bestowed it.

Meanwhile,  however,  the King's Gentlemen,  General
Bude and Colonel Goldsv.^orthy,  who now found only

la Presidente, — for Mrs.  Delany and Miss P came

only to my room at this time, — were so wearied and
provoked,  that they merely drank off"  one dish of tea,
and hastened back to the music-room.  This gave
great offence,  and was even complained of to the higher
powers:  but they would not amend;  and Colonel Golds-
worthy,  who brought Mrs.  Delany from the Queen into
my apartment one night,  begged leave to enter,  for a

little discourse with that lady and Miss P ,  and

then told us all that he was determined to show  ^'  Mrs.
Hiccumbottom"  what a mistake she made,  in supposing
they would any of them come to tea for the sake of a
tete-a-tete with her.  He therefore made it a rule to
sleep all the few moments he stayed,  and then shake
his locks,  and retire.

I then openly entreated that he would take no notice
of my absence,  as the present change of system afforded
me a relief which,  though short,  was inexpressibly great.
He was very good-natured about it.

"  I assure you.  Ma'am,"  he said,  "  Bude and I both
agreed to do no mischief;  for,  though we are the suf-
ferers, we think it but fair you should be the gainer."

470 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PAIiT X

We had all one social and pleasant evening,  as the
Presidente went to spend a day in town,  and I returned
to the honours,  with my honour,  Mrs.  Delany;  and
good Mr.  Lightfoot dined and spent the day with me.
The Queen came into the room in the evening,  to
converse with him herself upon botanical matters,  in
which he has much assisted her.

To finish,  however,  with respect to the Presidente,
I must now acquaint you that,  as my eyes entirely grew
well,  her incivility entirely wore off,  and I became a
far greater favourite than I had ever presumed to think
myself till that time !  I was obliged to give up my
short-lived privilege of retirement,  and live on as-
before,  making only my two precious little visits to my
beloved comforter and supporter,  and to devote the rest
of my wearisome time to her presence — better satisfied,
however,  since I now saw that open war made me
wretched,  even when a victor,  beyond what any sub-
jection could do that had peace for its terms.

This was not an unuseful discovery,  for it has abated
all propensity to experiment in shaking off a yoke
which,  however hard to bear,  is so annexed to my place,
that I must take one with the other,  and endure them
as I can.

My favour,  now,  was beyond the favour of all others ;
I was  "  My good Miss Berner,"  at every other word,
and no one else was listened to if I would speak,  and
no one else was accepted for a partner if I would
play  !  I found no cause to which I could attribute
this change.  I believe the whole mere matter of
caprice.

During all this time,  and all this disturbance,  the
behaviour of my Koyal Mistress was uniformly kind,
gracious,  confidential,  and sweet.     She bestowed upon

17S7]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        471

me more and more trust,  by every opportunity ;  and
whenever I was alone with her,  her whole countenance
spoke benignity.

A most melancholy event happened in this month
to a most tender mother,  Lady Louisa Clayton,  who
lost her only daughter.  Miss Emily,  by a death as un-
expected as it seems premature.  Everybody joined
in lamenting her.  She was good and amiable,  and
much and generally loved.  Lady Louisa bears this
heavy blow in a manner unequalled for steady forti-
tude.

I went,  also,  to condole with poor Madame la Fite,
whose affliction was,  I heard,  very great,  as Emily had
been the first friend of her own poor Elize.  I found
her weeping,  and much touched:  but she described
to me all her feelings with so many picturesque ex-
pressions, and poetical comparisons drawn between
Emily Clayton and her Elize,  and added so much of
the cruel disappointment she had herself endured,  in
the midst of this affliction,  that sa chere Mademoiselle
Borni had not come to her house to meet Mrs.  Roberts
and Mrs.  Kennicott — that,  when I weighed the two
sorrows together,  I found my opinion of both all the
lighter.

She was so good as to insist upon reading to me,
next,  an  "  account of Mademoiselle Borni"  from a pe-
riodical paper of M.  de la Blancherie ;  where the M.  M.
M.  is announced to all Paris as  ''  a person whose most
extraordinary literary talents had so captivated Sa Ma~
jeste la Heine de la Grande Brefagne,  that she had ap-
pointed her Surint end ante of all her wardrobe  !  "

It really read so Irish a compensation,  stated in that
manner,  that I could scarce hear it with gravity.

472 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

Poor Madame la File  !  lier next visit to me was to
request a lock of my hair for Madame de la Roche,
\vho would  '•  adore"  that as she did its wearer.

I assured licr I really must be excused  ;  for,  think-
m<r so little as I think of  ^Madame de la lloche,  it
would have been a species of falsehood to send such a

gift.

Then she begged  "anything'' — a morsel of an old
gown,  the impression of a seal from a letter,  two pins
out of my dress— in sliort,  anything;  and with an
urgency so vehement,  I could not laugh it oil' ;  and,  at
last,  I was obliged to let her have one of those poor
pattern garlands that 1 made with plant impressions,
under the eye and direction of my Fredy and Mr.
Locke.  1 really was very unwilling to send anything;
but she almost wept at my refusal,  and appeared so
much hurt that I was compelled to comply.

What,  however,  was truly comic,  at the same time,
was a certain imitative enthusiasm that was suddenly
adopted by poor JMademoisellc de Luc — for as I hap-
pened to drop my needle,  she eagerly insisted upon
searching for it,  and then exclaimed,  "  O  !  I have found
it ! — may I have it?''

"  Certainly,  if you like it,"  cried I,  not comprehend-
ing her.

"  Then I shall keep it for ever and never  !  it was
w^orked by Miss Beurney f And she put it up in lier
pocket-book,  notwithstanding all my laughing remon-
strances.

The wearying,  lifeless uniformity,  so long since
threatened me by Mr.  Turbulent,  now completely took
place,   save alone for the relief of my beloved Mrs.

1787]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  473

Delany ;  but she softened and solaced all.  Two
sweet visits a day unburtliened my heart of every
day's cares,  and delighted my mind by soothing in-
struction; while the warmth,  the animation of her every
welcome gave to my existence,  even here,  a value that
at times made me even content to abide by it.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

THIRD VOLUME.

Beattie,  James,  LL.D.,  was born at Lawrencekirk in 1735.
He was educated at Marischal College,  Aberdeen,  and,  having
taken tlie degree there of M.  A.  in 1753,  accepted the office of
schoolmaster and parish clerk to the parish of Fordoun.  In
1758,  he obtained the mastership of the Grammar School
of Aberdeen.  His first poems were published in 1761,  in a
small volume,  and they led to his appointment of Professor of
Moral Philosophy and Logic at Marischal College.  His great
prose work,  the  "  Essay on Truth,"  was published in 1770,
and procured for him a pension from George III.  A few
months afterwards,  he published the first book of his chief
j)oetical work,  "The Minstrel ;"  the second book was not pub-
lished till 1774.  Dr.  Beattie died at Aberdeen,  in 1803,  his
death being hastened,  if not actually caused,  by the prema-
ture loss of his two sons,  one of them a youth of great promise,
an account of whose  "  Life,  Character,  and Writings"  was the
last literary effort of Dr.  Beattie's pen.

Bryant,  Jacob.  This gentleman was a native of Plymouth.
He v.'as educated at King's College,  Cambridge,  of which he
became a Fellow in 1744.  He was tutor to the Duke of
Malborough,  who afterwards  (in 1756),  on his appointment to
the Master- Generalship of the Ordnance,  gave Mr.  Bryant a
situation in that department.  He afterv/ards accompanied
the Duke to Germany as his Secretary.  On the death of his
patron and friend,  Mr.  Bryant devoted the remainder of his
life to literature.  His reputation chiefly rests on his cele-
brated work,  entitled  "  Analysis of Antient Mythology,"  the
first two vols,  of which were published in 1774,  and the third
two years afterwards.     He died in 1804.

Caoliostro,  Count Alexander,  one of the cleverest and most
successful impostors of modern times.  He was born at
Palermo in 1743,  and his real name was Giuseppe Balsamo.
He lost his father in infancy,  and,  being placed by his mother
as a novice with the Friars of Mercy at Palermo,  he learned
those rudiments of chemical science and of medicine which,
aided by great ingenuity and unbounded assurance,  enabled
him to figure throughout Europe as the most accomplished of
modern swindlers.  He is said,  by the assistance of a Neapoli-
tan wife,  as clever as himself,  to have obtained jewels of im-
mense value from several English ladies of distinction,  on

47G BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

])r('tenrcs connected  "vvitli the cstaLlislnnent of a female Order
of Freemasonry.  He died in the prison of the Castle of St.
An';elo,  at Rome,  in 17D-i,  having been denounced to the In-
quisition by his own wife.

Conway,  IIknry Seymol'R.  A general in the army,  and ulti-
mately Connnander of the Forces.  He was born in 172iJ,  en-
tered the Aimy,  and served in the Seven Years'  War ;  on
liis return to England obtained a seat in the House of Com-
mons; and was joint Secretary of State with the Duke of
Grafton,  from 1705 to 1708.  General Conway w^as the bosom
friend of Horace Walpole,  and many the most charming of
that writer's letters are addressed to him.     He died in 1705.

Douglas,  .John.  This learned divine was born in Scotland,  in
1721.  His parents afterwards kept for many years the British
Cotfee-house,  in Cockspur Street.  He was sent to Oxford in
1730,  and in 1744 took Holy Orders,  and became Chaplain to
the Third Regiment of Foot Guards,  and was present at the
Battle of Fontenoy.  He subsequently obtained successive pre-
ferments in the Church,  until,  in 1787,  he was raised to ihe
See of Carlisle,  and afterwards,  in 1792,  succeeded Dr.  Shute
Barrington as Bishop of Salisbury.  He died at Windsor,  in
1807,  and was interred in St.  George's Chapel.

GwYNN,  CoLOXEL.  Tliis gentleman was husband of one of the
two celebrated beauties,  daughters of General Horneck,  who
are immortalized by Sir Joshua Reynolds's pencil.

Heberden,  William.  This distinguished physician was born
in London,  in 1710,  and educated at Cambridge,  where he
became a Fellow of St.  John's,  and afterwards took the degree
of M.D.  He first practised at Cambridge,  and afterwards,  in
1748,  established liimsclf in London.  Dr.  Heberden culti-
vated polite literature,  and published one considerable work
connected with his own profession:  "Medical Commentaries
on the History and Cure of Disease."  He passed much of the
latter part of his life at Windsor,  where he died in 1801.

Heusciiel,  William,  Avas the son of a musician of Hanover.  He
was intended for his father's profession,  and followed it for
many years,  first in Hanover,  and afterwards in England.  He
was organist successively at Halifax,  and at the Octagon
chapel,  Bath.  He subsequently abandoned this profession for
tlie study of Astronomy,  with a view to which he constructed
a live-foot telescope with his own hands.  His discovery of
the Georgium Sidus was made in 1781,  and obtained for him
the liberal patronage of George IIL At a later period he con-
structed several larger telcscojies,  until,  in 1787,  he completed
liis great one of forty feet.  He was knighted in 1810,  and
died at Slough,  the scene of his great discoveries,  in 1822.  He
w^as father of tlie present Sir John Herschel.

HuKD,  Richard,  was born in 1720,  at Congreve in Staffordshire.
He was educated for the Church,  at Emmanuel College,  Cam-

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.  477

bridge,  where he obtained a fellowship in 1742,  Ho took the
degree of LL.D.  in 1768,  Avas made Archdeacon of Gloucester
in 1767,  and in 1775 was raised to the See of Lichfield and
Coventry.  He was afterwards appointed preceptor to the
Prince of Wales  (George IV.)  and the Duke of York:  and
was,  in 1781,  translated to the See of Worcester,  and appointed
Clerk of tlie Closet to George III.,  who afterwards,  on the
death of Dr.  Cornwallis,  offered Dr.  Hurd the Primacy,
which he refused.  He lived more than twenty years after tliis,
and died in 1808.  Bishop Hurd's name will ever remain
honourably connected with that of Warburton,  his first patron
and firm friend.

Kennicott,  Dr.  Benjamix.  This celebrated Hebrew scholar
was born in 1718.  He was a Fellow of Exeter College,  Oxford,
and a D.D.  At the instance of Archbishop Seeker he under-
took a collation of all the existing Hebrew MSS.  of the Old
Testament.  Though he commenced this labour in 1759,  his
first volume was not published till 1776.  The work was com-
pleted by a second volume,  and a general Dissertation,  in 1783,
— in which year he died.  Dr.  Kennicott was Canon of Christ
Church,  and Radcliffe Librarian.

La Roche,  Madame de.  This lady was celebrated in her day
and country as a writer of sentimental novels,  and as the  "  first
love"  of Wieland the German poet.

Trimmer,  Sarah,  was born at Ipswich in 1741.  She was the
daughter of Mr.  Joshua Kirby,  Clerk of the Works at Kew
Palace,  who had instructed some of the younger branches of
the Royal Family in drawing.  Mrs.  Trimmer's works are ex-
clusively intended for youth.     She died in 1810.

Whitehead,  William,  was the son of a baker at Cambridge,
where he was born in 1715.  He was brought up at Win-
chester, and afterwards became a Fellow of Clare Hall,  Ox-
ford. Whitehead was a graceful and pleasing,  but not a dis
tinguished poet.  He spent several years in Germany,  Italy
Switzerland,  and the Low Countries,  as travelling tutor to
Lord Nuneham,  and to a son of the Earl of Jersey.  He was
afterwards  (on the death of Gibber)  appointed Poet Laureat.
He died in 1785.

end of vol.  III.

London  :  Printed by William Clowes and Sons,  Stamford-street.

€

t^

OV 6  "    194^
