NYPL RESEARCH LIBRARIES

3 3433 08237092 9

>C/y?J-^-'  '^^^6fy//UA

Il)rni*ii  §aui>rr;5uu

f)

Digitized by tine Internet Arciiive

in 2007 witii funding from

IVIicrosoft Corporation

Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/diarylettersofma07burn2

r^'

V

v^

"^y^^^^       ^cJa

Vy66yzxn^z

IvTUS  ;  DO C  :    OX;

DIARY

LETTERS

MADAME D'ARBLAY,

AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  CECILL\.  &«.

EDITED BY HER NIECE.

"the spirit walks of EVEUY day deceased.'' YOUNG.

VOL.  VII.

1813—1840.

LONDON:
HENRY COLBURN,  PUBLISHER,

GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.
1846.

THE NEW YORK
,  PUBLIC LfBRARy

795797A

i ;^  1935 r  ,

London  :  Printed by William Clowes and Sons,  Stamford Street,

PART 1.

1813.

Madame d'Arblay at St.  James's — Her son obtains the Tancred
scholarship — Attempt of a mad woman to enter the Queen's
apartment— Kindness of Her Majesty and the Princesses to
Madame d'Arblay — 'The King's health — Lady Crewe  —
Early introduction of young ladies into society — Madame de
Staiil — Party at the house of Mr.  Rogers — Conversation with
Mr.  Wilberforce — Madame d'Arblay's arrangements for a new
work— Death of General Latour Maubourg — Publication of
'The Wanderer'  —  Peace between France and England  —
Death of Dr.  Burney — Grillon's hotel — Mr.  Grattan and his
family — John Bull seen to great advantage — Madame la Baronne
de M  *  +  *— The Prince de Conde— Levee of Louis XVIIL at
Grillon's hotel— Presentation of Madame d'Arblay — The King's
speeches to her — Letter from the Count de Lally Tolendul to
Madame d'Arblay — Arrival of M.  d'Arblay.

VOL.  VI r.

DIARY AND LETTERS

THE AUTHOR OF  ''  EVELINA."

PART I.

1813.
Madame d'Arhlay to Dr.  Bimiey.

Chenies Street,  London,  February 8,  1813.  ^

Your kind invitation,  my dearest Padre,  I should
instantly have answered,  and not with my pen,  had all
been as favourable as my inclination and the weather;
but this last week has been wholly dedicated to the
Queen and the Princesses :  a letter came to me from
Windsor to prepare me for their arrival,  and,  conse-
quently, to keep me always in readiness for the honour
of a summons  ;  and,  out of their five days'  residence in
town,  they have had the gracious indulgence to admit
me three,  and,  upon those occasions,  I never quitted
the palace till they went to one of the Princes'  to din-
ner, between seven and eight o'clock.  Nor then,
neither,  in fact,  for I still stayed to dine myself,  with
my successor.

b2

4 DIARY AND LETTERS         [ParT I.

But why,  my clearest father may say,  not hasten to
Chelsea now?  The fact is,  I have been obliged to
omit various precautionary measures during the whole
of this week,  and I now feel an absolute necessity to
nurse again and refit.  To-day I have entirely kept
quiet and silent upstairs in my room,  and as,  these
other days,  I have kept wholly the reverse,  my lungs,
strength,  and spirits,  all demand the recruit.  I fear
that for some days I must go on doctoring myself after
these late excesses  ;  but bad weather alone,  after Wed-
nesday, shall withhold me from embracing my dearest
father.

Madame d'Arhlay to Dr.  Burne7j.

March 16,  1813.
How will my kindest father rejoice for me !  for my
dear partner — for my boy !     The election is gained,
and Alexander has obtained the Tancred scholarship.

He had all the votes  :  the opponent retired.   Sir D

behaved handsomely,  came forward,  and speechified for
us.  Sir Francis Milman,  who was chairman,  led the
way in the harangue.

Dr.  Davy,  our supporter,  leader,  inspirer,  director,
^eart and head,  patron and guide,  spoke also.

Mr.  H spoke,   too ;  but nothing,  they tell me,

to our purpose,  nor yet against it.  He gave a very
long and elaborate history of a cause which he is to
plead in the House of Lords,  and which has not the
smallest reference whatsoever to the case in point.
Dr.  Davy told me,  in recounting it,  that he is con-
vinced the good  .and wary lawyer thought this an

1813]        a OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  5

opportunity not to be lost for rehearsing his cause,
which would prevent loss of time to himself,  or hin-
drance of business,  except to his hearers :  however,  he
gave us his vote.     'Tis a most glorious affair.

Madame d'Arhlay to Dr.  Burneij,

May 11,  1813.  '
My own inclination and intention kept in mind
your charge,  my dearest Sir,  that as soon as I
was able I w^ould wait upon Lady Crewe ;  fortu-
nately, I found her at home,  and in her best style,
cordial as well as good-humoured,  and abounding in
acute and odd remarks.  I had also the good fortune
to see my lord,  who seems always pleasing,  unaffected,
and sensible,  and to possess a share of innate modesty
that no intercourse with the world,  nor addition of
years,  can rob him of.  I was much satisfied with my
visit ;  but what I shall do for time,  now once I have
been launched from my council,  or sick chamber,  I wot
not.

What a terrible alarm is this which the poor tor-
mented Queen has again received  !  *  I wrote my con-
cern as soon as I heard of it,  though I have not yet
seen the printed account,  my packet of papers reaching
only to the very day before that event.  My answer
has been a most gracious summons to the Queen's
house for to-morrow.  Her Majesty and two of the
Princesses come to town for four days.     This robs me

*  An attempt to enter her apartment by a crazy woman.

6 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

of my Chelsea visit for this week,  as I keep always
within call during the town residences,  when I have
royal notice of them  ;  and,  indeed,  there is nothing I
desire more than to see her Majesty at this moment,
and to be allowed to express what I have felt for her.
My letter from Madame BeckersdorfF says that such an
alarm would have been frightful for anyhody,  but how
much more peculiarly so for the Queen,  who has ex-
perienced such poignant horror from the effects of dis-
ordered intellects  !  who is always suffering from them,
and so nearly a victim to the unremitting exercise of
her duties upon that subject and these calls.

I have had a visit this morning from Mrs.  Piozzi,
^vho is in town only for a few days upon business.  She
came while I was out ;  but I must undoubtedly make
a second tour,  after my royal four days are passed,  in
order to wait upon and thank her.

I have been received more graciously than ever,  if
that be possible,  by my dear and honoured Queen and
sweet Princesses Eliza and Mary.  The Queen has
borne this alarm astonishingly,  considering how great
was the shock at the moment ;  but she has so high a
character,  that she will not suffer anything personal
to sink her spirits,  which she saves wholly for the calls
upon them of others,  and great and terrible have been
those calls.  The beloved King is in the hest state
jjossihle for his present melancholy situation ;  that is,
wholly free from real bodily suffering,  or imaginary
mental miser}-,  for he is persuaded that he is always
conversing with angels.

1813]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.

Madame d'Arhlay to Di\  Burney.

Chenies Street,  Alfred Place,  May 23,  1813.  ]
Oh,  how teased I am,  my dearest Padre,  by this
eternal unwalkable weather !  Every morning rises so
fairly,  that at every noon I am preparing to quit my
conjuring,  and repair,  by your kind invitation,  to pre-
lude my promised chat by a repast with Sarah ;  when
mizzling falls the rain,  or hard raps the hail,  and the
day,  for me,  is involved in damps and dangers that fix
me again to my dry,  but solitary conjurations.  I am
so tired now of disappointments,  that I must talk a
little with my Padre in their defiance,  and in a man-
ner noic,  thank God !  out of their reach.  Ah,  how
long will letters be any safer than meetings !  The
little world I see all give me hope and comfort from
the posture of affairs ;  but I am too deeply interested
to dare be sanguine while in such suspense.

Lady Crewe invited me to her party that she calls
Noah's ark ;  but I cannot yet risk an evening,  and a
dressed one too.  She then said she would make me a
small party with the Miss Berrys,  and for a morning;
and now she has written to Charles to make interest
icith me to admit Lord Lansdowne,  at his own earnest
request !  I am quite non comjws to know how I shall
make my way through these honours,  to my strength
and re-establishment,  for they clash with my private
plan and adopted system of quiet.  However,  she says
the meeting shall be in the country,  at Brompton,  and
without fuss or ceremony.     Her kindness is inexpres-

8 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT 1.

siblc.  therefore I liavc not courage to refuse her.  She
has offered me her little residence at Brompton for my
dwelling,  for a week or so,  to restore me from all my
influenzas  :  she may truly be called a faithful family
friend.  I hope dear Sarah and Fanny Raper will be of
the party.  If they are,  charge them,  dear Sir,  to let
me hear their voices,  for I shall never find out their
faces.

AVhat weather!  what weather  !  when shall I get to
Chelsea,  and embrace again my beloved father  ?

T)\\s free-horn weather of our sea-girt isle of liberty is
very incommodious to those who have neither carriages
for wet feet,  nor health for damp shoulders.

If the farmers,  however,  are contented,  I must be
patient.  We may quarrel with all our wishes better
than with our corn.

Adieu,  my most dear father,  till the sun shines drier.
Ever and ever most dutifully

And affectionately yours,

F.  B.  d'A.

Madame cCArhlay to a Friend.

London,  August 20,  1813.

*  *  *  *  Your charming girl,  by what I can
gather,  has seen,  upon the whole,  a great deal of this
vast town and its splendours ;  a little more might,  per-
haps, have been better,  in making her,  with a mind
such as hersj regret it a little less.  Merit of her
sort can here be known with difficulty.     Dissipation is

1813]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  9

SO hurried,  so always in a bustle,  that even amusement
must be prominent,  to be enjoyed.  There is no time
for developement ;  nothing,  therefore,  is seen but what
is conspicuous;  and not much is heard but what is
obstreperous.  They who,  in a short time,  can make
themselves known and admired now in London,  must
have their Cupids,  in Earl Dorset's phrase —

Like blackguard boys,
Who thrust their links full in your face.

I had very much matter that I meant and wished to
say to you upon this subject ;  but in brief — I do not
myself think it a misfortune that your dear girl cannot
move in a London round,  away from your own wing :
you have brought her up so well,  and she seems so
good,  gentle,  and contented,  as well as accomplished,
that I cannot wish her drawn into a vortex where she
may be imbued with other ideas,  views,  and wishes
than those that now constitute her happiness — and hap-
piness !  what ought to be held more sacred where it is
innocent — what ought so little to risk any unnecessary
or premature concussion  ?  With all the deficiencies and
imperfections of her present situation,  which you be-
wail but which she does not find out,  it is,  alas !  a
million to one whether,  even in attaining the advan-
tages and society you wish for her,  she will ever again,
after any change,  be as happy as she is at this moment.
A mother whom she looks up to and doats upon — a
sister whom she so fondly loves — how shall they be
replaced  ?  The chances are all against her  (though the
world has,  /know,  such re-placers),  from their rarity.

10 DIARY xVND LETTERS  [Part I.

I am truly glad you had a gratification you so
earnestly coveted,  that of seeing Madame de Stael :
your account of her was extremely interesting to me.
As to myself,  I have not seen her at all.  Various
causes have kept me in utter retirement ;  and,  in truth,
with respect to Madame de Stael,  my situation is really
embarrassing.  It is too long and difficult to write
upon,  nor do I recollect whether I ever communicated
to you our original acquaintance,  which,  at first,  was
intimate.  I shall always,  internally,  be grateful for the
partiality with which she sought me out upon her
arrival in this country before my marriage  ;  and still,
and far more,  if she can forgive my dropping her,  which
I could not help ;  for none of my friends,  at that time,
would suffer me to keep up the intercourse  !  I had
messages,  remonstrances,  entreaties,  representations,
letters,  and conferences,  till I could resist no longer;
though I had found her so charming,  that I fought the
hardest battle I dared fight against almost all my best
connexions.  She is now received by all mankind ;
■ — but that,  indeed,  she always was — all womankind,  I
should say; — with distinction and pleasure.  I wish
much to see her  '  Essay on Suicide  ;'  but it has not yet
fallen in my way.  When will the work come out for
which she was,  she says,  chassee de la France  ?  Where
^j(j  *;[:*;}:  hear her a whole evening  ?  She is,
indeed,  most uncommonly entertaining,  and animating
as well as animated,  alm.ost beyond anybody.  '  Les
Memoires de  !Madame de Stael '  I have read long ago,
and with singular interest and eagerness.  They are so
attaching,  so evidently original and natural,  that they

1813]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  li

stand very high,  indeed,  in reading that has given me
most pleasure.  My boy has just left me for Greenwich.
He goes in October to Cambridge;  I wish to install
him there myself.  My last letter from Paris gives me
to the end of October to stay in England.  There is a
wish the present campaign should be over before my
return,  that I may go by Calais or Dunquerque.  I
dread inexpressibly the long passage by Morlaix.
Adieu,  my ever dear friend.

Madame d'Arhlay to Dr.  Bumey,

August 24,  1813.    ■

Your seal,  my dearest Padre,  waits but for opportunity
to throw itself at your feet.  I have brought it twice
to you,  in my little green bag,  but I have found always
so little time,  and so much to hear and say,  that I have
never recollected my poor fellow-voyager till my re-
turn ;  and he never put me in mind of my neglect.
He w^as sulky,  perhaps ;  and no wonder,  for he certainly
is not used to be treated with such apathy.  His ap-
pearance, he well knows,  is accustomed to excite grati-
tude, and aw^aken hope and pleasure,  as the sure
herald of wit,  humour,  information,  or kindness  ;  who,
then,  can be surprised that he should resent being de-
nied the light,  which only shines upon him for other
people's profit  ?  But,  how could I help beginning with
an Hurrah  !  to your patriotism  ?  What glorious intelli-
gence !  How big w^di hope as well as honour  !  I was
delighted by meeting Lady Wellington,  not long since.

12 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PakT I.

at Lady Tcmpletown's.  Her very name electrified me
with emotion.  I dined at Mr.  Rogers's,  at his beautiful
mansion in the Green Park,  to meet Lady Crewe ;  and
Mrs.  Barbauld was also there,  whom I had not seen
many,  many years,  and alas,  should not have known !
^Ir.  Rogers was so considerate to my sauvageine as to
have no party,  though Mr.  Sheridan,  he said,  had ex-
pressed his great desire to meet again his old friend
Madame d'Arblay !  Lady Crewe told me she certainly
would not leave tow^n without seeking another chattery
with her old friend.  Dr.  Barney,  whom she always saw
with fresh pleasure.

Adieu  !  my most dear Padre  !

Ever most dutifully,

F.  B.  d'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Sandgate,  Sept.,  1813.

Let me steal a moment to relate a singular gratifica-
tion, and,  in truth,  a real and great honour I have had
to rejoice in.  You know,  my Padre,  probably,  that
Marianne Francis was commissioned by Mr.  Wilberforce
to bring about an acquaintance with your F.  d'A.,
and that,  though highly susceptible to such a desire,
my usual shyness,  or rather consciousness of inability
to meet the expectations that must have made him
seek me,  induced my declining an interview.  Eh bien —
at church at Sandgate,  the day after my arrival,  I saw
this justly celebrated man,  and was introduced to him
in the churchyard,  after the service,  by Charles.     The

1813]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  13

ramparts and martellos around us became naturally
our theme,  and Mr.  Wilberforce proposed showing
them to me.  I readily accepted the offer,  and Charles
and Sarah,  and Mrs.  Wilberforce and Mrs.  Barrett,
"went away in their several carriages,  while Mr.  Barrett
alone remained,  and Mr.  Wilberforce gave me his arm,
and,  in short,  we walked the round from one to five
o'clock !  Four hours of the best conversation I have,
nearly,  ever enjoyed.  He was anxious for a full and
true account of Paris,  and particularly of religion and
infidelity,  and of Bonaparte and the wars,  and of all
and everything that had occurred during my ten years'
seclusion in France ;  and I had so much to communi-
cate, and his drawing out and comments and episodes
were all so judicious,  so spirited,  so full of information
yet so unassuming,  that my shyness all flew away and
I felt to be his confidential friend,  opening to him upon
every occurrence and every sentiment,  with the frank-
ness that is usually won by years of intercourse.  I
was really and truly delighted and enlightened by him  ;
I desire nothing more than to renew the acquaintance,
and cultivate it to intimacy.  But,  alas  !  he was going
away next morning.  That his discourse should be
edifying,  could not,  certainly,  surprise me ;  I expected
from him all that was elevated in instruction ;  but
there was a mixture of simplicity and vivacity in his
manner that I had not expected,  and found really cap-
tivating. In contemplating the opposite,  and alas,
hostile shore which,  to our fancy's eye,  at least,  was
visible,  I could not forbear wafting over to it a partial
blessing,  nor refuse myself beseeching one from Mr.

14 DIARY AND LETTERS         [Part I.

Wilberforce  ;   and the smiling benevolence with which
he complied has won my heart for ever.

Addio,  Padre mio.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arhlay to Dr.  Burneij.

Richmond Hill,  Oct.  12,  1813.    '

My most dear Padre will^  I am sure,  congratulate me
that I have just had the heartfelt delight of a few lines
from M.  d'Arblay,  dated September 5th.  I had not
had any news since the 17th of August,  and I had the
melancholy apprehension upon my spirits that no more
letters would be allowed to pass till the campaign was
over.  It has been therefore one of the most welcome
surprises 1 ever experienced.

He tells me,  also,  that he is perfectly well,  and quite
accabU with business.  This,  for the instant,  gives me
nothing but joy  ;  for,  were he not essentially necessary
in some department of civil labour and use,  he would
surely be included in some levee en masse.  Every way,
therefore,  this letter gives me relief and pleasure.

I have had,  also,  this morning,  the great comfort to
hear that my Alexander is  "  stout and well"  at Cam-
bridge, where his kind uncle Charles still remains.

I am indescribably occupied,  and have been so ever
since my return from Ramsgate,  in giving more and
more last touches to my work,  about which I begin to
grow very anxious.  I am to receive merely 500Z.  upon
delivery of the MS. ;  the two following 500/.  by instal

1813]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  15

ments from nine months to nine months,  that is,  in a
year and a half from the day of publication.

If all goes well,  the whole will be 3000Z.,  but only at
the end of the sale of eight thousand copies.  Oh,  my
Padre,  if you approve the work,  I shall have good
hope.

At my return from Ramsgate,  my purpose was to
claim your permission for my so long delayed fort-
night; Alex,  wished it also;  but the sudden and
unexpected arrival of Clement made Alex,  so earnest
to gather documents and hints,  for conducting him-
self at Cambridge,  that he thought it absolutely in-
dispensable to his initiation in college etiquettes to stay
and consult and confer with his cousin.  A lady,  Mrs.
Aufrere,  whom I know not even by name,  has just sent
me word that she desires to see me de la part de M.
d'Arhlay,  whom she saw in Paris,  the 1st of August.  I
have entreated her to hasten the interview,  for which I
am very impatient;  it will probably decide my fate
with respect to the time of my return to France.
Most affectionately yours,

F.  B.  D A.

Madame d'Arhlay to Mrs.  Lock.

Dec.  16,  1813.

Ah,  my dearest friend,  how is my poor cottage — how
are my proofs — how is everything forced from my
mind,  except what necessity drives there,  by this cruel
stroke to my suffering partner I The world had power

16 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PahT 1.

only in tico instances to have given him quite so deadly
a blow,  dear to his heart of love as are some,  nay,  many
others  ;  but here — for M.  de Narbonne,  it was a passion
of admiration,  joined to a fondness of friendship,  that
were a part of himself How he will bear it,  and in
our absence,  perpetually occupies my thoughts.  And
I have no means to hear from,  or to write to him  ! —
none,  absolutely none !

Just before this wound was inflicted,  I was already
overwhelmed with grief for my poor Madame de Mai-
sonneuve,  for M.  d'Arblay himself,  and for my own
personal loss,  in the death — premature and dreadful,
nay,  inhuman — of the noble,  perfect brother of that
Madame de Maisonneuve;  General Latour Maubourg,
a man who,  like my own best friend was — is signalized
among his comrades by the term of a vrai Chevaliei'
Frangais.  He was without a blot ;  and his life has been
thrown away merely to prevent his being made a pri-
soner !  He had received a horrible wound on the first
of the tremendous battles of Leipzic,  and on the second
he suffered amputation  ;  and immediately after was
carried away to follow the retreating army  !  In such
a condition,  who can wonder to hear that,  a very few
miles from Leipzic,  he expired?

Oh my poor Madame de Maisonneuve  !  she loved
him with that perfect esteem and tenderness united,
that I love one in whom,  as in him,  I never saw a
blemish.  Oh my sweet friends;  how must we think
of times to come,  of blessed futurity,  to bear these
strokes!

What a war is this  !     When,  when will it terminate  ?

1814]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         17

I struggle hardly to bear up,  for I am utterly power-
less to offer any species of consolation to my dear,
unhappy,  absent sufferers.

F.  D^\.

1814.

[In the beginning of this year Madame d'Arblay pub-
lished her fourth work,  The Wanderer,  and nearly at
the same time Peace was declared between France
and England.  Her satisfaction at an event so long
wished for,  was deeply saddened by the death of her
father,  Dr.  Burney ;  whom she nursed and attended
to the last moment with dutiful tenderness.

Soon after the Restoration of the French Royal
Family,  Monsieur d'Arblay was placed by the Duke
de Luxembourg in the French  **  Gardes du Corps."
He obtained leave of absence towards the close of the
year,  and came to England for a few weeks  ;  after
which Madame d'Arblay returned with him to Paris,
leaving their son to pursue his studies at Cambridge.]

Madame d^Arhlay to Mrs.  *****

March 19,1814.

Be not uneasy for me,  my tender friend :  my afflic-
tion is heavy,  but not acute ;  my beloved father had
been spared to us something beyond the verge of
the prayer for his preservation,  which you must have
read,  for already his sufferings had far surpassed his
enjoyments.     I could not have wished him so to linger,

VOL.  VII.  c

1-8 DIARV AND LETTERS  [ParT I.

though I indulged ahiiost to the last hour a hope lie
might yet recover,  and bo restored to comfort.  I last
of all gave him up,  but never wished his duration such
as-  I saw him on the last few days.  Dear blessed
parent !  how blest am.  I that I came over to him while
he was yet susceptible of 'pleasure —  of happiness  !  My
best comfort in my grief,  in his loss,  is that I watched
by his side the last night,  and hovered over him
two hours after he breathed no more  ;  for though much
suffering had preceded the last hours,  they were so
quiet,  and the final exit was so soft,  that I had not
perceived it though I was sitting by his bedside,  and
would not believe when all around announced it.  1
forced them to let me stay by him,  and liis revered
form became stiff before I could persuade myself that
he was gone hence for ever.

Yet neither then nor now has there been any vio-
lence, anything to fear from my grief:  his loss was too
Indubitably to be expected ;  he had been granted too
long to our indulgence to allow any species of repining
to mingle with my sorrow ;  and it is repining that
makes sorrow too hard to bear with resignation.     Oh,

I have known it !

F.  d\A.

Madame d'ArUai/  to Mrs.  Lock.

April 3,  1814.

I HASTEN to impart to my kind and sympathising
friend that I received last night good tidings of my
best friend of friends ;  they have been communicated
cto me,  oddly enough,  through the Alien Office!     Mr.

1814]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  19

Reeves wrote them to my reverend brother,  by the
desire of an English lady now resident in Paris —
Madame Solvyns  (wife of a Frenchman),  at the request
of M.  d'Arblay  ;  they assure me of his perfect health.
They are dated Paris,  18th of February.  It will not
seem any recent news to me in a few days,  but now it
appears yesterday ;  my last intelligence,  and that cir-
cuitous, being of the 16th of January ;  and my last
direct information,  the end of December.

At a time like this,  when all public news,  good or
bad,  of a warlike nature,  fills me with almost equal
alarm,  though by no means equal joy or sorrow,  an
assurance such as this is more precious than words can
say.     I have had no hope of any information at all till

the dire contest was over.     When will that be?

Say the bells — not  ''  at Stepney  "  but the whole world
over,  and the whole world over may answer

'•'  I do not know  ! ''

as well as the great bell at Bow.

Nothing could be so well timed as this intelligence,
for my inquietude was beginning to be doubly restless
from the accession of time that has fallen to me by
having got rid of all my proofs,  &c.  ;  it is only real and
indispensable business that can force away attention
from suspensive uneasiness.  Another comfort of the
very first magnitude,  my sweet friend will truly,  I know,
participate in  —  my Alexander begins to listen to
reason.  He assures me he is now going on with very
tolerable regularity ;  and I have given hin),  for this
term,  to soberize and methodize him a little,  a private

c 2

20 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Paut I.

tutor;  and this tutor has won his heart by indulging
him in his problem passion.  They work together,  he
says,  with a rapidity and eagerness that makes the hour
of his lesson by far the most delightful portion of his day.
And this tutor,  he tells me,  most generously gives him
problems to w^ork at in his absence  :  a favour for which
every pupil,  perchance,  would not be equally grateful,
but which Alexander,  who loves problems algebraic as
another boy loves a play or an opera,  regards as the
heiofht of indulirence.  He comes to me next week,  to
stay till the 20th of April.

No one is so unsettled in her prospects,  so uncer-
tain in her fate,  as I am at this period.  Upon public
events my very private destiny is entirely hanging  !
When,  where will the conflict end  ?  and how  ?

F.  D'A.

[Soon after the publication of  *  The Wanderer/  Ma-
dame d'Arblay wrote as follows to a friend  : — ]

I beseech you not to let your too ardent friendship
disturb you about the reviews and critiques,  and I
quite supplicate you to leave their authors to their own
severities or indulgence.  I have ever steadily refused
all interference with public opinion or private criticism.
I am told 1 have been very harshly treated;  but I
attribute it not to what alone would affect me,  but
which I trust I have not excited,  personal enmity.
I attribute it to the false expectation,  universally
spread,  that the book would be a picture of France,
as well as to the astonishing eclat of a work in five
volum.es being all bespoken before it was published.

181 1]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  21

The booksellers,  erroneously and injudiciously con-
cluding thebaic would so go on,  fixed the rapacious
price of two guineas,  which again damped the sale.
But Avhy say damped:,  when it is only their unreasonable
expectations that are disappointed?  for they acknow-
ledge that 3,600 copies are positively sold and paid
for in the first half year.  What must I be,  if not
far more than contented?  I have not read or heard
one of the criticisms  ;  my mind has been wholly occu-
pied by grief for the loss of my dearest father,  or
the inspection of his MSS.  and my harassing situation
relative to my own proceedings.  Why,  then,  make
myself black bile to disturb me further?  No;  I will
not look at a word till my spirits and time are
calmed and quiet,  and I can set about preparing a
corrected edition.  I will then carefully read all ;  and
then,  the blow to immediate feelinsfs beins;  over,  I can
examine as well as read,  impartially and wiih profit,
both to my future surveyors and myself.

Presentation to Louis XVIII.

1814.

While I was still under the almost first impression
of grief for the loss of my dear and honoured father
I received a letter from Windsor Castle,  written by
Madame Beckersdorff,  at the command of Her Ma-
jesty, to desire I would take the necessary measures for
being presented to Son Altesse Royale Madame Du-
chesse d'Angouleme,  who was to have a drawing-room
in London,  both for French and English,  on the day
preceding her departure for France.      The letter

2'i DIARY AND LETTKRS  [PakT I.

added,  thai I must waive all objections relative to my

recent loss,  as it would be im])roper,  in  ^hc  ])resent

state of things,  that the wife of a  (Jeneral OHiccr should

not be presented ;  and,   moreover,  that I should be

personally expected and well received,   as I had been

named to Son Altesse Royale by the Queen herself.

In conclusion,  I was charijed not to mention this cir-
cs

cumstancc,  from the applications or jealousies it might
excite.

To hesitate was out of the question  ;  and to do honour
to my noble absent partner,  and in his name to receive
honour,  were precisely the two distinctions my kind
father would most have enjoyed for me.

I had but two or three days for preparation.  Lady
Crewe most amiably came to me herself,  and missing
me in person,  wrote me word she would lend me her
carriage,  to convey me from Chelsea to her house in
Lower Grosvenor Street,  and thence accompany me
herself to the audience.  When the morning arrived
I set off with tolerable courage.

Arrived,  however,  at Lady Crewe's,  when I entered
the room in which this dear and attached friend of my
father received me,  the heaviness of his loss proved
quite overpowering to my spirits;  and in meeting the
two hands of my hostess,  I burst into tears and could
not,  for some time,  listen to the remonstrances against
unavailing grief with which she rather chid than
soothed me.  But I could not contest the justice of
what she uttered,  though my grief was too fresh for its
observance.  Sorrow,  as my dearest father was wont to
say,  requires time,  as well as wisdom and religion,  to.

IS 14]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  23

digest itself;  and till that time is both accorded and
well employed,  the sense of its uselcssness serves but
to augment,  not mitigate,  its severity.

Lady Crewe purposed taking this opportunity of
paying her own respects,  with her congratulations,  to
Madame la Duchesse d'Angouleme.  She had sent me
a note from Madame do Gouvello,  relative to the time,
&c.  for presentation,  which was to take place at
Grillon's hotel,  in Albemarle Street.

"We went very early,  to avoid a crowd.  But xAlbe-
marle Street was already quite full,  though quiet.  We
entered the hotel without difficulty,  Lady Crewe,
having previously demanded a private room of Grillon,
who had once been cook to her lord.  This private
room was at the back of the house,  with a mere yard or
common garden for its prospect.  Lady Crewe de-.
clared this was c|uite too stupid,  and rang the bell for
waiter after waiter,  till she made M.  Grillon come him-
self. She then,  in her singularly open and easy
manner,  told him to be so good as to order us a front
room,  where we might watch for the arrival of the
Royals,  and be amused ourselves at the same time by
seeing the entrances of the Mayor,  Aldermen,  and
Common Councilmen,  and other odd characters,  wlio-
%yould be coming to pay their court to these Frenck
princes and princesses.

]\L Grillon gave a nod of acquiescence,  and we were
instantly shown to a front apartment just over the
street door,  which v/as fortunately supplied with a
balcony.

I should have been much entertained by all this,.

24 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part I.

and particularly with the originality,  good humour,
and intrepid yet intelligent odd fearlessness of all
remark,  or even consequence,  which led Lady Crewe to
both say and do exactly what she pleased,  had my heart
been lighter;  but it was too heavy for pleasure;  and
the depth of my mourning,  and the little,  but sad
time that was yet passed since it had become my
gloomy garb,  made me hold it a matter even of de-
cency, as well as of feeling,  to keep out of sight.  I left
Lady Crewe,  therefore,  to the full enjoyment of her
odd figures,  while I seated myself,  solitarily,  at the
further end of the room.

In an instant,  however,  she saw from the window
some acquaintance,  and beckoned them up.  A gentle-
man, middle-aged,  of a most pleasing appearance and
address,  immediately obeyed her summons,  accom-
panied by a young man with a sensible look;  and a
young lady,  pretty,  gentle,  and engaging,  v.ith lan-
guishing, soft eyes;  though with a smile and an
expression of countenance that showed an innate dis-
position to archness and sport.

This uncommon trio I soon found to consist of the
celebrated Irish orator,  Mr.  Grattan,  and his son and
daughter.

Lady Crewe welcomed them with all the alertness
belonging to her thirst for amusement,  and her delight
in sharing it with those she thought capable of its par-
ticipation. This she had sought,  but wholly missed in
me ;  and could neither be angry nor disappointed,
though she was a little vexed.  She suffered me not,
however,  to remain long in my seclusion,  but called

1S14J OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  25;

me to the balcony,  to witness the jolting out of their
carriages of the aldermen and common council men,
exhibiting",  as she said,  *'  Their fair round bodies with
fiit capon lined;"  and wearing an air of proudly
hospitable satisfaction,  in visiting a King of France
who had found an asylum in a street of the city of
Westminster.

The crowed,  however,  for they deserve a better name
than mob,  interested my observation still more.  John
Bull has seldom appeared to me to greater advantage.
I never saw him en masse behave with such impulsive
propriety.  Enchanted to behold a king of France in
liis capital ;  conscious that le grand Monarque was fully
in his power;  yet honestly enraptured to see that
*'  The king would enjoy his own again,"  and enjoy it
through the generous efforts of his rival,  brave,  noble
old England  ;  he yet seemed aware that it was fitting
to subdue all exuberance of pleasure,  which,  else,  might
annoy,  if not alarm,  his regal guest.  He took care,
therefore,  that his delight should not amount to exulta-
tion ;  it was quiet and placid,  though pleased and
curious :  I had almost said it was gentlemanlike.

And nearly of the same colour,  though from so infe-
rior an incitement,  were the looks and attention of the
Grattans,  particularly of the father,  to the black
mourner whom Lady Crewe called amongst them.
My garb,  or the newspapers,  or both,  explained the
dejection I attempted not to repress,  though I carefully
forbade it any vent ;  and the finely speaking face of
Mr.  Grattan seemed investigating the physiognomy,
while it commiserated the situation of the person

26 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT I.

brought thus before him.  His air had something
foreign in it,  from the vivacity that accompanied his
politeness;  I should have taken him for a well-bred
man of fashion of France.  Good breeding,  in Eng-
land, amongst the men,  is ordinarily stiff,  reserved,  or
cold.  Among the exceptions to this stricture,  how
high stood Mr.  Wyndham  !  and how high in gaiety
with vivacity stood my own honoured father  !  Mr.  Lock,
Avho was elegance personified in his manners,  v.as lively
only in his own domestic or chosen circle.

A new scene now both astonished and discomposed
me.

A lady,  accompanied humbly by a gentleman,  burst
into the room with a noise,  a self-sufficiency,  and an
assuming confidence of superiority,  that would have
proved highly oflensive,  had it not been egregiously
ridiculous.  Her attire was as flaunting as her air and
her manner;  she was rouged and beribboned.  But
English she was not;  she w^as Irish,  in its most flaunt-
ing and untamed nature,  and possessed of so boisterous
a spirit,  that she appeared to be just caught from the
woods — the bogs,  I might rather say.  '

When she had poured forth a volley of words,  with a
fluency and loudness that stunned me.  Lady Crewe,
with a smile that seemed to denote she intended to
give her pleasure,  presented me by name to INIadame'
la Baronne de M  *   *  *.

She made me a very haughty courtesy,  and then,'
turning rudely away,  looked reproachfully at Lady
Crewe,  and screamed out,  '^  Oh,  fie !  fie,  fie,  fie ! "
Lady Crewe,  astonished and shocked,  seemed struck

1814]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         27-

speechless,  and I stood still with my e^-es wide open,
and my mouth probably so also,  from a sort of stupor,
for 1 could annex no meaning nor even any idea to
such behaviour.  She made not,  however,  any scruple
to develop her motives,  for she vehemently inveighed
against being introduced to such an acquaintance/
squalling out,  ^^  She has writ against the emigres! —
she has writ against the Great Cause  !  O fie !  fie !
fie ! "

When she had made these exclamations,  and uttered.'
these accusations,  till the indulged vent to her rage
began to cool it,  she stopped of her own accord,  and,
finding no one spoke,  looked as if she felt rather silly;
while M.  le Baron de M  *  *  *,  her very humble
sposo,  shrugged his shoulders.  The pause was suc-
ceeded by an opening harangue from Lady Crewe,
begun in a low and gentle voice,  that seemed desirous
to spare me what might appear an undue condescen-
sion, in taking any pains to clear me from so gross an
attack.  She gave,  therefore,  nearly in a whisper,  a
short character of me and of my conduct,  of which I
heard just enough to know that such was her theme:
and then,  more audibly,  she proceeded to state,  that
far from writing against the emigrants,  I had addressed
an exhortation to all the ladies of Great Britain in
their favour.

"  Oh,  then,"  cried Madame de M  *  *  *,  ''  it was
somebody else — it was somebody else  !"

And then she screamed out delightedly,  "  I'm so
glad I spoke out,  because of this explanation  ! — I  'm
so glad  ! — I never was so glad  !  "

28 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT I.

She now jumped about the room,  quite crazily,  pro-
testing she never rejoiced so much at anythinj^  she
had ever done in her life.

But when she found her joy,  like her assault,  was all
her own,  she stopped short,  astonished,  I suppose,  at my
insensibility,  and said to me,  ''  How lucky I spoke out!
the luckiest thing in the world  !  I  'm so glad !  A'n't
you  ?     Because of this eclair cisscmcnt.''''

''  If I had required any cclaircissement,''^  I drily
began;

''  O,  if it was not you,  then,"  cried she,  ''  'Iwas
Charlotte Smith."

Lady Crewe seemed quite ashamed that such a scene
should pass where she presided,  and  ]\Ir.  Grattan
quietly stole away.

Not quietly,  nor yet by stealth,  but with evident
disappointment that her energies were not more ad-
mired, Madame la Baronne now called upon her at-
tendant sposo,  and strode off herself.  I found she was
a great heiress of Irish extraction and education,  and
that she had bestowed all her wealth upon this emi-
grant Baron,  who might easily merit it,  when,  besides
his title,  he gave her his patience and obsequious-
ness.

Some other friends of Lady Crewe now found her
out,  and she made eager inquiries amongst them re-
lative to Madame la Duchesse d'Angouleme,  but could
gather no tidings.  She heard,  however,  that there
were great expectations of some arrivals down stairs,
where two or three rooms were filled with company.

She desired Mr.  Grattan,  junior,  to descend into this

JS14]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  29

crowd,  and to find out where the Duchess was to be
seen,  and when,  and how.

He obeyed.  But,  when he returned,  what w^as the
provocation of Lady Crewe,  what my own disappoint-
ment, to hear that the Duchess was not arrived,  and
was not expected I She was at the house of Monsieur
Ic Comte d'Artois,  her father-in-law.

*'  Then what are we come hither for  ? "  exclaimed
her ladyship :  ''  expressly to be tired to death for no
purpose I Do pray,  at least,  Mr.  Grattan,  be so good
as to see for my carriage,  that we may go to the right
house."

Mr.  Grattan was all compliance,  and with a readi-
ness so obliging and so well bred that 1 am sure he is
his father's true son in manners,  though there was no
opportunity to discover whether the resemblance ex-
tended also to genius.

He was not,  however,  cheered when he brought
word that neither carriage nor footman were to be
found.

Lady Crewe then said he must positively go down,
and make the Due de Duras tell us what to do.

In a few minutes he was with us again,  shrugging
his shoulders at his ill success.  The king,  Louis
XVni.,  he said,  was expected,  and M.  le Due was
preparing to receive him,  and not able to speak or
listen to any one.

Lady Crewe declared herself delighted by this in-
formation, because there would be an opportunity for
having me presented to his Majesty.     '^  Go to M.  de

30 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PauT I.

Duras,"  she cried,  ''  and tell him Madame d'Arblay
wishes it."

"  For heaven's sake I  "  exclaimed I,  ''  do no such
thing 1 I have not the most distant thought of the
kind  !  It is Madame la Duchesse d'Angouleme alone
that I "

''  O,  pho,  pho  !^t is still more essential to be done
to the king — it is really important :  so go,  and tell the
Duke,  Mr.  Grattan,  that Madame d'Arblay is here,
and desires to be presented.  Tell him  'tis a thing
quite indispensable."

I stopped him again,  and quite entreated that no such
step might be taken,  as I had no authority for presen-
tation but to the Duchess.  However,  Lady Crewe was
only provoked at my backwardness,  and charged Mr.
Grattan not to heed me.  "  Tell the Duke,"  she cried,
"  that Madame d'Arblay is our Madame de Stael ! —
tell him we are as proud of our Madame d'Arblay as
he can be of his Madame de Stael."

Off she sent him,  and off I flew again to follow him ;
and whether he was most amused or most teased by our
opposing petitions,  I know not;  but he took the dis-
creet side of not venturin«:  ao^ain to return amon^  us.

Poor Lady Crewe seemed to think I lost a place at
Court,  or perhaps a peerage,  by my untameable shy-
ness, and was quite vexed.  Others came to her nov>^,
who said several rooms below were filled with ex-
pectant courtiers.  Miss Grattan then earnestly re-
quested me to descend with her,  as a chaperon,  that she
might see something of what was going forwards.

1814]        OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         31

I could not refuse so natural a request,  and do\Yn wc
went,  seeking one of the commonly crowded rooms,
that we might not intrude where there was preparation
or expectation rel alive to the king.

And here,  sauntering or grouping,  meditating in
silence or congratulating each other in coteries,  or
waiting with curiosity,  or self-preparing for presenta-
tion with timidity,  we found a multitude of folks in an
almost unfurnished and quite unadorned apartment.
The personages seemed fairly divided between the
nation at home and the nation from abroad ;  the Eng-
lish and the French ;  each equally,  though variously,
occupied in expecting the extraordinary sight of a
monarch thus wonderfully restored to his rank and his
throne,  after misfortunes that had seemed irremediable,
and an exile that had appeared hopeless.

Miss Grattan was saluted,  en passant,  by several ac-
quaintances, and amongst them by the son-in-law of
her dear country's Viceroy Lord Whitworth,  the young
Duke of Dorset ;  and Lady Crewe herself,  too tired to
abide any longer in her appropriated apartment^  now
descended.

We patjvled about,  zig-zag,  as we could;  the crowd,
though of very good company,  having no chief or re-
gulator, and therefore making no sort of avenue or
arrangement for avoiding inconvenience.  There was
neither going up nor coming down  ;  we were all hustled
together,  without direction and without object,  for
nothing whatsoever was present to look at or to
create any interest,  and our expectations were merely
kept awake by a belief that we should know in time

32 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

when and where something or somebody was to be
seen.

For myself,  however,  I was much tormented during
this interval from being named incessantly by Lady
Crewe.  My deep mourning,  my recent heavy loss,
and the absence and distance of my dear husband made
me peculiarly wish to be unobserved.  Peculiarly,  I
say ;  for never yet had the moment arrived in which
to be marked had not been embarrassing and discon-
certing to me,  even when most flattering.

A little hubbub soon after announced something
new,  and presently a whisper was buzzed around the
room of ''  The Prince de Conde."

His Serene Highness looked very much pleased —
as no wonder — at the arrival of such a day ;  but he
was so surrounded by all his countrymen who were
of rank to claim his attention,  that I could merely see
that he was little and old,  but very unassuming and
polite.  Amongst his courtiers were sundry of the
French noblesse that were known to Lady Crewe ;  and I
heard her uniformly say to them,  one after another,
"  Here is Madame dArblay,  who must be presented
to the king."

Quite frightened by an assertion so wide from my
intentions,  so unauthorised by any preparatory cere-
monies, unknown to my husband,  and not,  like a pre-
sentation to the Duchesse d'Angouleme,  encouraged by
my Queen,  I felt as if guilty of taking a liberty the
most presumptuous,  and with a forwardness and as-
surance the most foreign to my character.  Yet to con-
trol the zeal of Lady Crewe was painful from her

1814]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  33

earnestness,  and a^:)pearcd to be ungrateful to her
kindness ;  I therefore shrunk back,  and presently
suffcred the crowd to press between us so as to find
myself wholly separated from my party.  This would
have been ridiculous had I been more happy  ;  but
in my then state of affliction,  it was necessary to my
peace.

Quite to myself,  how I smiled inwardly at my adroit
cowardice,  and was contemplating the surrounding
masses of people,  when a new and more mighty hub-
bub startled me,  and presently I heard a buzzing
whisper spread throughout the apartment of  "  The
King  !— Le Roi !  "

Alarmed at my strange situation,  I now sought to
decamp,  meaning to wait for Lady Crewe up stairs  :
but to even approach the door was impossible.  I
turned back,  therefore,  to take a place by the window,
that I might see his Majesty alight from his carriage,
but how great w^as my surprise when,  just as I reached
the top of the room,  the King himself entered it at the
bottom  !    ^

I had not the smallest idea that this was the cham-
ber of audience ;  it was so utterly unornamented.  But
I now saw that a large fauteuil was being conveyed to
tlie upper part,  exactly where I stood,  ready for his
reception and repose.

Placed thus singularly,  by mere accident,  and freed
from my fears of being brought forward by Lady Crewe,
I felt rejoiced in so fair an opportunity of beholding
the King of my honoured husband,  and planted myself
immediately behind,  though not near to his prepared

VOL.  VJI.  D

34 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

seat;  and,  as 1  -was utterly unknown and must be
utterly unsuspected,  1 indulged myself  "vvlth a full
examination.  An avenue had instantly been cleared
from the door to the chair,  and the King-  moved along
it slowly,  slowly,  slowly,  rather dragging his large and
weak limbs than walking ;  but his face was truly
engaging;  benignity was in every feature,  and a smile
beamed over them that showed thankfulness to Provi-
dence in the happiness to which he was so suddenly
arrived  ;  with a courtesy,  at the same time,  to the
spectators,  who came to see and congratulate it,  the
most pleasing and cheering.

The scene was replete with motives to grand reflec-
tions ;  and to me,  the devoted subject of another
monarch,  whose melancholy alienation of mind was a
constant source to me of sorrow,  it was a scene for
conflicting feelings and profound meditation.

His Majesty took his seat,  with an air of mingled
sweetness and dignity.  I then,  being immediately
"behind him,  lost sight of his countenance,  but saw that
of every individual who approached to be presented.
The Due de Duras stood at his left hand,  and was le
Grand Maitre des Ceremonies ;  Madame de Gouvello
stood at his right side  ;  though whether in any capacity,
or simply as a French lady known to him,  I cannot tell.
In a whisper,  from that lady,  I learned more fully the
mistake of the hotel,  the Duchesse d'Angouleme never
having meant to quit that of her heau-j^ere.  Monsieur
le Comte d'Artois,  in South Audley Square.

The presentations were short,  and without much
mark or likelihood.     The men bowed low,  and passed

1814]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  35

on  ;  the ladies courtsicd,  and did the same.  Those
^Yho were not known gave a card,  I think,  to the Due
de Duras,  who named them  ;  those of former acquaint-
ance with his Majesty simply made their obeisance.

M.  de Duras_,  wdio knew how much fatigue the King
had to go through,  hurried every one on,  not only with
speed but almost with ill-breeding,  to my extreme
astonishment.  Yet the English,  by express command
of his Majest}',  had always the preference and always
took place of the French  ;  which was an attention of
the King in return for the asylum he had here founds
that he seemed delighted to display.

Early in this ceremony came forward Lady Crewe,
who being known to the King from sundry previous
meetings,  was not named  ;  and only,  after courtsying,
reciprocated smiles with his Majesty,  and passed on.
But instead of then moving off,  though the Duke,  who
did not know her,  waved his hand to hasten her away,
she whispered,  but loud enough for me to hear,
''Voila Madame d'Arblay;  ilfaiit qiielle soit presentee.'"
She then went gaily off,  without heeding me.

The Duke only bowed,  but by a quick glance recog-
nised me,  and by another showed a pleased acquiescence
in the demand.

Ketrcat,  now,  was out of the question  ;  but I so
feared my position was wrong,  that I was terribly dis-
turbed, and felt hot and cold,  and cold and hot,  alter-
nately, with excess of embarrassment.

I was roused,  however,  after hearing for so long a
time nothing but French,  by the sudden sound of
English.     An address,  in that language,  was read to

D 2

3G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaKT I.

his Majesty,  wliich was presented by iho Noblemen
and Gentlemen of the county of Buckingham,  congra-
tulatory upon his happy restoration,  and filled with
cordial thanks for the graciousness of his manners,  and
the benignity of his conduct,  during his long residence
amongst them;  warmly proclaiming their participation
in his joy,  and their admiration of his virtues.  The
reader was Colonel Nugent,  a near relation of the
present Duke of Buckingham.

But,  if the unexpected sound of these felicitations
delivered in English,  roused and struck me,  how much
greater arose my astonishment and delight when the
French Monarch,  in an accent of the most condescend-
ing familiarity and pleasure,  uttered his acknowledg-
ments in English also — expressing his gratitude for
all their attentions,  his sense of their kind interest in
his favour,  and his eternal remembrance of the obli-
gations he owed to the whole county of Buckingham-
shire, for the asylum and consolations he had found in
it during his trials and calamities !

I wonder not that Colonel Nugent was so touched
by this reyjly,  as to be led to bend the knee,  as to his
own Sovereign,  when the King held out his hand;  for
I myself,  though a mere outside auditress,  was so
moved,  and so transported with surprise by the dear
English language from his mouth,  that I forget at once
all my fears,  and dubitations,  and,  indeed,  all myself ,
my poor little self,  in my pride and exultation at such
a moment for my noble countr5^

Fortunately for me,  the Due de Duras made this
the moment for my presentation,  and,  seizing my hand

1814]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  37

and drawing me suddenly from behind the chair to
theTio3'al presence,  he said,  "  Sire,  Madame d'Arblay."

How singular a change,  that what,  but the instant
before,  would have overwhelmed me with diffidence and
embarrassment,  now found me all courage and anima-
tion !  and when his Majesty took my hand— or,  rather,
took hold of my fist — and said,  in very pretty English,
''  I am very happy to see you,"  I felt such a glow of
satisfaction,  that,  involuntarily,  I burst forth with its
expression,  incoherently,  but dehghtedly and irresisti-
bly, though I cannot remember how.  He certainly
w\^s not displeased,  for his smile was brightened and
liis manner was most flattering,  as he repeated that he
\vas very glad to see me,  and added that he had known
me,  "  though without sight,  very long  :  for I have read
you — and been charmed with your books — charmed
and entertained.  I have read them often,  I know
them very well indeed ;  and I have long wanted to
know you  /" —

I was extremely surprised, — and not only at these
unexpected compliments,  but equally that my presenta-
tion, far from seeming,  as I had apprehended,  strange,
was met by a reception of the utmost encouragement.
When he stopped,  and let go my hand,  I courtsied re-
spectfully, and was moving on  ;  but he again caught my
Jist,  and,  fixing me,  with looks of strong though smiling
investigation,  he appeared archly desirous to read the
lines of my face,  as if to deduce from them the qualities
of my mind.  His manner,  however,  was so polite and
so gentle that he did not at all discountenance me ;
and though he resumed the praise of my little

'38 DIARY Ai\D LETTERS  [PaRT I.

avoiks,  he uttered the panegyric with a benignity so gay
as well as flattering,  that I felt enlivened,  nay,  elevated,
with a joy that overcame maiLvaise Jionte.

The Due de Duras,  who had hurried on all others,
-seeing he had no chance to dismiss me with the same
sans cereinonie speed,  now joined his voice to exalt
my satisfaction,  by saying,  at the next pause,  '^'Et M.
d'Arblay,  Sire,  bon et brave,  est un des plus devoues
et fideles serviteurs de votre Majeste."

The King,  with a gracious little motion of his head,
and with eyes of the most pleased benevolence,  ex-
pressively said,  '' Je le crois'^  And a third time he
stopped my retiring courtesie,  to take my hand.

This last stroke gave me such delight,  for my absent
l)est ami,  that I could not again attempt to speak.
'The King pressed my hand — wrist,  I should say,  for it
was that he grasped, — and then saying,  "Bon jour,
Madame la Comtesse,''let me go.

My eyes were suffused with tears,   from mingled

emotions;    I glided nimbly through the crowd to a

corner at the other end of the room,  where Lady Crewe

joined me almost instantly,  and w^ith felicitations the

most amiably cordial and lively.

We then repaired to a side-board,  on which w^e con-
trived to seat ourselves,  and Lady Crewe named to me
the numerous personages of rank who passed on before
'Us for presentation.  But every time any one espied
her and approached,  she named me also ;  an honour
to which I v/as very averse.  This I intimated,  but to
.no purpose ;  she went on her own way.  The curious
•stares this produced,  in my embarrassed state of spirits,

1814]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  39

from recent grief,  were really painful to sustain ;  but
when the seriousness of my representation forced her to
see that I was truly in earnest in my desire to remain
unnoticed,  she was so much vexed,  and even provoked,
that she very gravely begged that,  if such were the
case,  I would move a little further from her ;  saying,
"  If one must be so ill-natured to people as not to
name you,  1 had rather not seem to know who you are
myself"

When,  at length,  her ladyship's chariot was an-
nounced, we drove to Great Cumberland Place,  Lady
Crewe being so kind as to convey me to Mrs.  Anger-
stein.

As Lady Crewe was too much in haste to alight,  the
sweet Amelia Angerstein came to the carriage to speak
to her,  and to make known that a letter had arrived
from M.  de la Chatre relative to my presentation,
which,  by a mistake of address,  had not come in time
for my reception.

I must here copy the note which was written in
answer to Mrs.  Angerstein's inquiries relative to my
mode of proceeding.

A Madame Angerstein.

Ce 22 Avril,  1814.

Je n'ai pu prendre que ce matin les ordres de
Madame la Duchesse d'Angouleme,  qui sera tres aise
de recevoir Madame d'Arblay entre trois heures et trois
heures et demie.     II faudra demander en arrivant au

40 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT L

No.  72,  South Audlcy Street,  Madame la Duclicsse
do Scrrcnt.

Le Roi,  qui desira voir Madame d'Arblay,  et qui la
recevra avec grand plaisir,  sous le double rapport de
son iiom actuel et de celui du cliarmant auteur de
*  Cecilia,'  &c.,  vcrra du monde dcpuis quatre lieures
jusqu'a cinq.  II faudra demander le Due de Duras,
senior geiitilhomme de la chambre du Roi,  bien connu
de Madame d'Arblay.

M.  de la Chatre a I'lionneur de presenter scs hom-
inages a Madame Aiigerstein,  et de la prior de I'ex-
cuscr de n'avoir pu lui faire plutot reponse.

This note dispelled all of astonishment that had en-
veloped with something like incredulity my own feel-
ings and perceptions in my unexpected presentation
and reception.  The King himself had personally
desired to bestow upon me this mark of royal favour.
What difficulty,  what embarrassment,  what confusion
should I have escaped,  had not that provoking mistake
vrhich kept back my letter occurred  !

Fro7n tlic Comte de Lally Tolendal to 3Iadame d'Arblay.

Paris,  25 Avril,  1814.

Oui,  chere Madame,  je vous ecris de ce Paris d'ou
j'etais exile depuis un an,  avec defense d'en approcher
de plus de soixante lieues.  Pour quel delit  ?  allez
vous dire.  Pour avoir ecrit dans la biographie,  et lu
dans un cercle d'amis,  I'article de Charles I. ;  pour avoir
eu,   en composant et en lisant cet article,   Tintention

1814]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  41

maligne de ravivre I'interet public sur la memoire,  Ics
malheurs,  les vertiis,  les heritiers de Louis XVI.  Je
n'avoue pas la malignite,  mais je ne puis nier Vintcn-
tion;  cette fois du moins les delateurs n'ont pas ca-
lomnie  !  Enfin je vais le voir sur son trone Theritier de
Louis XVI.,  de Henri IV.,  de Louis XII.,  de Charles
le Sage,  de Louis le Saint !  je vais voir la fille de
Louis XVI.  adoree dans le palais de ses peres apres
avoir ete plongee dans le donjon de son pere.  Je vais
m'unir a ses actions de grace dans la memo chapellc
ou j'ai vu son coeur se briser la surveille du 10 Aout;
et dans ma soixante et quatrieme anneeje chanterai
le Cantique de Simeon.  Vous vous souvenez que mon
petit fils est ne le 21 Janvier,  1808,  qu'en le benissant
dans son berceau je lui ai dit ;  je te voue a venger
Tauguste victime de ce jour.  Vous verrez dans la lettre
que je vous envoye comme deja il repond a mon voeu.
Vous y verrez aussi comme ma fille est bien de mon
sang,  comme mon gendre est bien selon mon ccEur,  et
comme M.  le Due d'Angouleme,  comme le gendre de
Louis XVI.,  est bien selon tons les coeurs.  Je I'attends
et je les attends avec une impatience que vous pouvez
concevoir.  Ne serez vous done pas ici pour partager,
pour savourer toute cette felicitepublique,  et toutes ces
joyes particulieres,  pour augmenter encore celles-ci
dans le cceur de tons vos amis et de tous vos servi-
teurs  ?  Mais ou vous etes,  vous avez aussi des jouis-
sances qu'on voudrait partager avec vous.  Cette
Angleterre,  votre premiere patrie et ma seconde,  elle
a ete la grande ame de cette grande coalition ;  et I'ame
de cette ame,  c'est la vertu courageuse et perseverante

^  DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

de George III.,  dont T impulsion lui survivra;  c'est la
magnaiiimite chevalcresquc dii Prince Regent;  c est la
generosite,  la grandeur,  la force,  et la sagessc Britan-
niques,  portees au plus haut degre dans les liommes
d'etat et dans les hommes de guerre,  dans les grands
et dans le peuple.  Les Anglais ont cree toutes ces
merveilles,  etles contemplant,  ils ont le droit de se dire
que cela est bon,  comme TEternel se le disait a lui-meme
a chaque oeuvre de sa creation.

La Providence aussi avait dispose sur le Continent
les coeurs des princes coalises,  pour qu'ilsfussent dignes
par leurs vertus,  autant qu'ils etaient capables par leur
puissance,  d'etre avec vous les liberateurs du monde.
Faites-vous raconter en detail,  par M.  d'Arblay,  le
moment ou les souverains dont on avait incendie et
detruit les capitales,  furent baignes dans leurs larmes
parcequ'ils crurent qu'on allait les forcer a detruire
Paris — le mouvement qui,  devant leurs armees pleurant
comme eux,  les precipita dans les bras I'un de I'autre
a la premiere nouvelle que Paris capitulait — 1' accent
avec lequel ils s'ecrierent — ''  La cause de Vhumanite est
gagnee  ! "  Le doigt de Dieu est la,  chere Madame.
En faisant renaitre la paix du monde,  il a voulu res-
susciter I'empire de la vertu.  Celte epoque est sans
pareille dans les annales du genre humain :  jc vous
ecrirais sans fin,  mais c'est cette nuit que mon ami
d'Arblay est venu me dire qu'il partait ce matin,  et la
bonne princesse me fait appellor pour son dejeuner.
Main tenant,  chere Madame,  vous si bonne,  si pure,
si noble,  si elevee en tout,  priez pour que la sagesse
ne nous abandonne pas dans le triomphe,    pour

1814]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  ^

qu'a toutes les vertus de coeur qui caracterisent les
princes FraiiQais,  aux lumiercs de leur esprit,  aux
graces de Icurs persoiines,  se joigne une force de
raison,  une impartialite de justice,  une purete d'en-
tourage,  une fidelite aux promesses,  bicn necessaires a
la gravite des circonstances et a la stabilite de leur
restauration.  Adieu,  cliere Madame ;  de quel cote de
I'eau nous reverrons-nous pour la premiere fois?
J'aurais bien envie de vous visiter a Londres,  mais
cette terrible loi qui rend responsable,  qui tout bonne-
ment et tout cruement fait emprisonner un mari pour
les dettes de sa femme !  or je suis la-dessus dans une
profonde obscurite.  Feu Lord Lougiiborough m'avait
preserve une fois,  et il le devait bien en conscience.
Qui me preserverait aujourd'hui?  J'ai passe deux
jours avec les Lords Castlereagh et Catlicart.  S'ils
pouvaient me charger d'une petite depeche minis-
terielle,  cela me rendrait peut-etre inviolable.  Je verrai.
lis m'ont dit que mon ami Lord Whitworth etait
Viceroi d'lrlande.  J'espere qu'il ne m'otera pas ma
pension  ;  je vis a la lettre des bienfaits de George
III.,  et vous savez si j'ai ete fidele a mon allegeance
envers lui,  et en face de qui je I'ai deux fois professe
imperturbablement.  Tous mes amis se portent bien,
m'ont dit les deux ambassadeurs ;  Lord Sheffield,  Lord
Glenbcrvie,  Mr.  Keene,  Mr.  et Madame Trevor,  la
Duchesse de Devonshire,  Lady Besborough,  etc.  lis
n'ont pas pu me donner des nouvelles de Lady Lucy
Stuart,  soeur de Lord Tiaquair,  et que j'aime frater-
nellement dcpuis trente a quarante ans.  Je prie mon
ami d'Arblay de s'informer de M.  Dundas,  Chirurgien

44 DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.  [PakT I.

du Roi,  ct de toute sa famille.  Tous Ics Franqals,  et
moi en particulier,  qui avons demeurd a Richmond,
nous devons tant a Mr.  Dundas.  Quelles expressions
employer,  ])Our vous prier de porter a  ^ladame Lock
le tribut de tous mes respects et de toutcs mes ten-
dresses.  Etendez les a toute son angelique famille,  je
vous en conjure;  et conservez-moi,  chere Madame,
conservez-moi toujours vos precieuses et gloricuses
bontes :  vous ne les accorderez jamais a un serviteur
plus respectueux,  a un admirateur plus vrai,  ni a un
ami plus passionne.

Madame cVArUay to Mrs.  Lock.

April 30,  1814.    '

My own dearest friend must be the first,  as she
will be among the warmest,  to participate in my hap-
piness— M.  d'Arblay is arrived.  He came yesterday,
quite unexpectedly as to the day,  but not very much
quicker than my secret hopes.  He is extremely
fatigued with all that has passed,  yet well ;  and all
himself,  i.  e.  all that is calculated to fill my heart with
gratitude for my lot in life.

How would my beloved father have rejoiced in his
sight,  and in these glorious new events !

PART II.

1814-15.

The Emperor of Russia — The King of Prussia and the Foreign
Princes in England — M.  d'Arblay appointed an ofl&eer of the
Corps de Garde du Roi — Rejoicings for peace — Paris almost peo-
pled with English — The Royal Family of France and the Duke
of Wellington — Presentation of Madame d'Arblay to the Duchesse
d'Angouleme — The Duchesse d'Angouleme's opinion of the
Prince Regent and his family — Return of Bonaparte from Elba
— Effects of this intelligence in Paris — The Prince de Poix —
Ai)prehensions created by Bonaparte's approach to the Capital —
Conductof Madame d'Arblay 's French friends at this juncture —
Indecision of the Princesse d'Henin — M.  d'Arblay prepares to
take the field with the King's body-guard.

46 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

PART II.

1814.

Madame d'Arblay to Monsieur d'Arhlay.

June 18,  1814.

Ah,  mon ami!  j-ou are really,  then,  well?  —  really
in Paris? — really without hurt or injury?  What I
have suffered from a suspense that has no name from
its misery shall now be buried in restored peace,  and
hope,  and happiness.  With the most fervent thanks
to Providence that my terrors are removed,  and that I
have been tortured by only false apprehensions,  I will
try to banish from my mind all but the joy,  and grati-
tude to heaven,  that your safety and health inspire.
Yet still,  it is difficult to me to feel assured that all is
well !  I have so long been the victim to fear and
anguish,  that my spirits cannot at once get back their
equilibrium.

Your letter,  mon ami,  had not its tardiness so ter-
ribly distressed me,  is all I could wish — interesting,
full of intelligence,  satisfactory,  instructive,  and amus-
ing ;  while full of kindness and feeling.  You make
me aimer not un pen,  as she is so good,  in her letter,  as
to desire,  but heaucoup,  ct de ban ca^ur,  -Madame de

1814]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  47

Laval ;  her aniitie for you has an activity of zeal,  and
a delicacy of tact,  with a spirit of constancy that are
truly charming.

Hier,  j'ai quitte ma rctraite,  Ires volontiers,  pour
indulge myself with the sight of the Emperor of Russia.
How was I charmed with his pleasing,  gentle,  and so
perfectly unassuming air,  manner,  and demeanour!
I was extremely gratified,  also,  by seeing the King
of Prussia,  who interests us all here,  by a look that
still indicates his tender regret for the partner of his
hopes,  toils,  and sufferings,  but not of his victories
and enjoyments.  It was at the Queen's palace I saw
them,  by especial and most gracious permission.  The
Prussian Princes,  six in number,  and the young Prince
of Mecklenburg,  and the Duchess of Oldenbourg,  were
of the party.  All our Royal Dukes assisted,  and the
Princesses Augusta and Mary.  The Princess Char-
lotte looked quite beautiful.  She is wonderfully im-
proved. It was impossible not to be struck with her
personal attractions,  her youth,  and splendour.  The
assemblage was highly magnificent.  The invitation
was confined to Sovereigns,  Princes,  Princesses,  and
the immediate officers of the Crown and the Court.
The Duchess of York looked amongst the happiest;
the King of Prussia is her brother.  I was admirably
placed for the view,  where every one passed close to
me,  yet without my being en evidence.

F.  d'A.

48 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PakT II.

Madame dCArhlay to Mrs.  Lock.

London,  July,  1814,

After a most painful suspense I have been at length
relieved b}^  a letter from Paris.  It is dated the
18th of June,  and has been a fortnight on the road.
It is,  he says,  his fourth letter,  and he had not then
received one of the uneasy tribe of my own.

The Consul -Generalship is,  alas,  entirely relin-
quished, and that by M.  d'Arblay himself,  who has
been invited into the Corjis de Garde by the Due de
Luxembourg,  for his own Compagnie  ;  an invitation he
deemed it wrong to resist at such a moment ;  and he
has since been named one of the officers of the Corps
de Garde by the King,  Louis XVIII.,  to whom he had
taken the customary oath that very day — the 18th.

The season,  however,  of danger over,  and the throne
and order steadily re-established,  he will still,  I trust
and believe,  retire to civil domestic life.  May it be
speedily  !  After twenty years'  lying by,  I cannot wish
to see him re-enter a military career at sixty years of
age,  though still young in all his faculties and feelings,
and in his capacity of being as useful to others as to
himself.  There is a time,  however,  when the poor
machine,  though still perfect in a calm,  is unequal to a
storm.  Private life,  then,  should be sought while it
yet may be enjoyed;  and M.  d'Arblay has resources
for retirement the most delightful,  both for himself and
his friends.    He is dreadfully worn and fatigued by the

IS 14]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  49

last year ;  and he b'egan his active services at thirteen
years of age.  He is now past sixty.  Every propriety,
therefore,  will abet my w-ishes,  when the King no longer
requires around him his tried and faithful adherents.
And,  indeed,  I am by no means myself insensible
to what is so highly gratifying to his feelings as
this mark of distinction  :  hien plus honorable,  cependant,
as he adds,  than lucrative.

I m.ust remain here till my own many affairs are
settled,  and till he sees the turn likely to accelerate or
retard his final projects abroad.  But he will obtain a
short leave of absence in the autumn,  should matters
wear a procrastinating aspect.

I shall quite grieve if you have never been tempted
from your retirement to view the good and therefore
really great Emperor.  I delight in the unpretending
simplicity of his manner and conduct.  The King of
Prussia made friends of all who most nearly approached
him.  Bliicher is still the general idol ;  and he seems
to enjoy as well as merit so being.  PlatofF is the only
one of the noble set I have not had the pleasure to see.
Nothing else has yet taken me forth.  But my own
kind Princess Augusta graciously asks me to see the
fireworks from her Royal Highness*s apartment,  and ta
that I gladly consent.     Rejoicings for Peace  !

Madame cCArblay to Mrs.  Loch

August 9,  1814.

The friends of M.  d'A.  in Paris are now preparing-
to claim for him his rank in the army,  as he held it

VOL.  VII.  E

50 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRtII.

under Louis XVI.,  of Marechal de Camp;  and as the
Due de Luxembourg will present,  in person^  the
demand au Roi,  there is much reason to expect it will
be granted.

M.  de Thuisy,  who brought your letter from
Adrienne,  has given a flourishing account of M.  d'A.
in his new uniform,  though the uniform itself,  he says,
is very ugly.  But so sought is the Company of the
Corps de Gardes du Hoi that the very privates,  M.  de
T.  says,  are gentlemen.  M.  d'A.  himself has only the
place of Sous-lieutenant;  but it is of consequence suffi-
cient, in that Company,  to be signed by the King,  who
had rejected two officers that had been named to him
just before he gave his signature for M.  d'A.

I need not say what spirits and what pleasure this has
occasioned to him.  I have heard much of him — all of
cheerful import  —  lately through Miss Planta,  whose
sister has just accompanied Lady Rolle to Paris  ;  that
favoured capital seems to be half peopled by English.
'The rage for Parisian excursions is almost incre-
dible.

August 24,  1814.

M.  d'Arblay has obtained his rank,  and the kind
King has dated it from the sera when the original
BreA'et was signed by poor Louis XVL in 1792.

Monsieur d'Arhlay to Madame d^Arblay.

Paris,  ce 30 Aouf,  1814.

Il n'y a que deux jours,    ma bonne Fann}^,    que
j'ai passe plus de huit heures entieres a m'entretenir

1814]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  51

avec toi,  sans meme me douter que la position dans
laquelle j'ecrivais me faisait beaucoup de mal.  N'im-
porte — aujourd'hui je ne puis resister au plaisir de
venir te confier I'extreme satisfaction que me fait
eprou\  er la maniere dont la fete donnee hier au Roi
par la Yillc s'est passe'e.  Tout a ete non seulement bien,
mais a merveille ;  et cela est d'autant plus important,
que je n'ai actuellement aucune doute que notre reunion
au mois de Novembre ne souifrira pas la moindre dif-
ficulte ;  puisque la seule chose qui pouvait s'y opposer,
c'est a dire le moindre doute sur la stabilite du  ^ou-
vernement paternel qui nous a ete rendu si miraculeuse-
mentj n'est plus meme admissible.  Ce n'est pas sim-
plement avec plaisir,  mais avec transport,  avec la plus
expansive effusion de coeur,  que le Roi,  Madame la
Ducliessed'Angouleme,  etnos Princes,  ont ete accueillis
a rhotel de Ville.  Si I'entliousiasme du peuple a ete
comprim^  dans la route,  g'a ete uniquement parcequ'en
ne voyantque des voitures tout a fait simples,  personne
n'a imagine qu'elles renfermassent notre Pere,  qu'on
s'attendait a voir dans la voiture surmontee d'une
couronne.  II est presumable qu'on ne s'en est pas
servi parce que cette couronne est imperiale et non
Roy ale.

Louis XYIII.  n'a pas fait sur tout cela le moindre
changement ;  et son palais est encore tel qu'il etaitily
a six mois,  parseme d'abeilles,  de N,  et d'aigles,  qu'on
aurait pu au moins,  ce me semble,  faire disparaitre du
trone sur lequel siegeait Sa Majeste le jour oil elle a
recu le Lord Wellington,  d'une maniere si flatteuse
pour ce lieros.     Apres lui avoir temoigne combien elle

e2

52 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

etait satisfaite des sentimens qu'il venait de lui ex pri-
mer de la part du Prince Regent,  et lui avoir dit qu'elle
desirait infiniment de voir etablie sur les bases solides
la paix qui vient d'etre si heureusement conclue,  Sa
Majeste a ajoute,  "  J'aurai beaoin pour cela de la co-
operation puissante de Son Altesse Eoyale.  Le cboix
qu'elle a faitde vous.  Monsieur,  rn'ondonneTesperance.

//  m honor e Je suisjier de voir que le premier Am-

hassadeur que menvoye V Angleterre soil le justement
celehre Lord Due de Wellington'''  Ce qui est entre
deux guillemets est mot a mot.

Tout ce que je viens de souligner a ete prononce
d'une voix fortes,  et tellement accentuee qu'elle portait
a Tame,  et qu'elle a touche,  memo les marechaux,  un pen
honteux des succes constans de leur maitre a tous.
Quant au discours du heros,  dont j'etais pres comme de
ton lit a ta cheminee,  je n'en ai pas entendu un mot ;
tant il parait bas,  et d'une voix presque tremblante.
Deja je crois t'avoir mande que nous avons I'ordre du
Roi de ne pas avoir egard a I'etiquette,  des qu il s'agit
des Anglais,  qui sont admis de quelque maniere et a
quelqu'  heure qu'ils se presentent :  mais la maniere
dont il traite celui qui represente ici leur nation ne
peut se decrire.  Des que le Due de Wellington parait,
on en est instruit par I'extreme satisfaction qu'on voit
repandue sur tous les traits du visage deja si bon du
Roi.  Je voudrais que tu eusses ete temoin,  hier soir,
de la physionomie si expressive du heros qui etait sur
la premiere marche de I'estrade d'un trone dont il
parait etre le principal soutien.  II avait bien un peu
la mine de se dire,Je nai pas peu contrihue a son reta-

1814]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  53

blissement ;  mais cela d\in air si modeste,  qu'a peine
pouvait on saisir au passage,  cette idee fugitive ;  tandis
qu'on trouvait toujours bien prononcee la plus sincere
et la plus vive satisfaction du succes qu'ont eu les efforts
si constans et si genereux de sa brave nation.  Per-
sonne dans toute la sallc n'a pu mieux le voir ni Tex-
aminer que moi indigne qui occupais a la gauche du
tione a peu pres la meme place que celle qu'il remplis-
sait si noblement a la droit e.  Je crois bien qu'il a du
iin peu m'envier les jolies voisines qui s'etaient fait
jour jusqu'a moi,  et qu'a la verite j'avais un peu aidees
dans les soins qu'elles s'etaient donnes pour y parvenir.
La plus pres sur tout etait bien digne d'etre remarquee.
Que j'etois la,  cela,  au rcste,  n'a pas ete la faute de
Monsieur le Due de Luxembourg,  dont je ne puis me
refuser a te transcrire ici le billet arrive la vcille chez
moi une demi-heure apres mon depart pour aller
prendre le commandement de la garde montante.

"  Paris,  ce 24 Aout,  1814.

*^'Le Due de L.  souhaite le bon jour a M.  d'A.,  et
lui fait demander de ses nouvelles en lui recommandant
exprcssement de ne pas sortir que son genou ne soit
gueri.  Cette recommandation est I'ordre le plus
positif,  au nom de I'amitie et de I'interet qu'il lui porte.

"  Le Due de L.  prie Monsieur le Chevalier d'Arblay
de recevoir ses tendres complimens."

Dis-moi,  ma chere Fanny,  si tu peux jamais rien
imaginer de plus aimable,  toi qui n'est pas tout-a-fait
bete,  et que j'ai la kindness de desirer avoir at my side,
quand pareille chose m'est adressee j dis-moi si dans la

54 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

situation dc nos affaires,  et avec I'csperance bicn fondee
de passer ensemble paisiblement et honorablement,  les
jours quclquefois nebulcux d'une vieillcsse qui entraine
avec soi Ic besoin d'une certaine aisancc,  ce no serait
pas le comble de I'extravagance de quitter ce qui peut
et doit me I'assurer  ?

Embrasse pour moi Alex.,  et embrassez-moi tous
deux comme par vous memo.

Le Chev.  d'A.

Presentation of Madame cVArhlay to Her Royal Highness
the Duchess of Angouleme.

I COME now to my audience with Madame,  Duchesse
d'Angouleme.  As I had missed,  through a vexatious
mistake,  the honour she had herself intended me,  of
presentation in England,  my own condescending royal
mistress,  Queen Charlotte,  recommended my claiming
its performance on my return to Paris.  JNI.  d'Arblay
then consulted with Le Viscomte d'Agoult,  his inti-
mate early friend,  how to repair in France m}^  English
deprivation.  M.  d'Agoult was ecuyer to her Royal
Highness,  and high in her confidence and favour.  He
advised me simply to f aire ma cour as the wife of a su-
perior officer in the Garde du Corps du Roi,  at a public
drawing-room ;  but the great exertion and publicity,
joined to the expense of such a presentation,  made me
averse,  in all ways,  to this proposal;  and when M.
d'Arblay protested I had not anything in A^iew but to
pay my respectful devoirs to her Royal Highness,  M.

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  55

d' A goult undertook to make known my wish.  It soon
proved that this alone was necessary for its success,  for
Madame la Duchesse instantly recollected what had
passed in England,  and said she would name,  with
pleasure,  the first moment in her power;  expressing an
impatience on her own part that an interview should
not be delayed which had been desired by her Majesty
Queen Charlotte of England.

Of course,  this both encouraged 'and gratified me  ;
but,  fearful of committing any mistake in etiquette^  from
my utter ignorance of the French court,  I entreated
M.  d'Arblay to inquire of M.  Matthieu de Montmo-
rency whether there were any peculiarities in such an
introduction that I ought to study or learn.

M.  de Montmorency,  now M.  le Due,  with whom wc
were all much acquainted,  and who was then in wait-
ing upon La Duchesse,  kindly promised to be at hand,
when the time should be fixed,  for obviating all em-
barrassment by presenting me himself

But I have omitted to mention that on the Sunday^
preceding,  the Duchess d'Angouleme,  at court,  had
deigned to tell my best friend that she was reading,
and with great pleasure,  Madame cVArhlaifs last icork.
He expressed his gratification,  and added that he
hoped it was in English,  as her Altesse Roy ale so well
knew that language.  No,  she answered,  it was the
translation she read;  the original she had not been
able to procure.

On this,  M.  d'Arblay advised me to send a copy.  I
had none bound,  but the set which had come back to
me from my dear father.     This,   however,   M.  d'A.

56 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

carried to the Yiscumtc d'Agoult,  with a note from me
in which,  tlirough the medium of M.  d'Agoult,  I sup-
pheated leave from her Royal Highness to lay at her
feet this only English set I possessed.  In the most
gracious manner possible,  as the Viscomte told M.
d'Arblay,  her Royal Highness accepted the worh,  and
deigned also to keep the billet.  She had already,  un-
fortunately, finished the translation,  but she declared
her intention to read the original.

Previously to my presentation,  M.  d'Arblay took me
to the salon of the exhibition of pictures,  to view a por-
trait of Madame d'Angouleme,  that I might make some
acquaintance with her face before the audience.  This
portrait was deeply interesting,  but deeply melanchol)'.

All these precautions taken,  I went,  at the appointed
^our and morning,  about the end of February,  1815,
to the palace of the Tuileries,  escorted by the most
indulgent of husbands :  we repaired instantly to the
apartment of La Duchesse de Serrent,  who received
us with the utmost politeness ;  she gave us our lesson
how to proceed,  and then delivered us over to some
page of her Royal Highness.

We were next shown into a very large apart-
ment. I communicated to the page a request that
he would endeavour to make known to M.  de Mont-
morency that I was arrived,  and how much I wished to
see him.

In a minute or two came forth a tall,  sturdy dame,
who immediately addressed me by my name,  and spoke
with an air that demanded my returning her compli-
ment.    I could not,  however,  recollect her,  till she said

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  57

she had formerly met me at the Princesse d'Henm's.  I
then recognised the Dowager Duchesse de Duras,
whom,  in fact,  I had seen last at the Princesse de Chi-
may's,  in the year 1812,  just before my first return to
England  ;  and had received from her a commission to
acquaint the Royal Family of France that her son,  the
Duke,  had kept aloof from all service under Bonaparte,
though he had been named in the gazettes as having
accepted the place of chamberlain to the then emperor.
Yet such was the subjection,  at that time,  of all the old
nobility to the despotic power of that mighty ruler,
that M.  de Duras had not dared to contradict the
paragraph.

She then said that her Altesse Royale was expecting
me ;  and made a motion that I should pursue my way
into the next room,  M.  d'Arblay no longer accompa-
nying me.  But before I disappeared she assured me
that I should meet with a most gracious reception,,  for
her Altesse Royale had declared she would see me with
marked favour,  if she saw no other English whatso-
ever; because Madame d'Arblay,  she said,  was the
only English person who had been peculiarly recom-
mended to her notice by the Queen of England.

In the next,  which was another very large apart-
ment, I was received by a lady much younger and more
agreeable than Madame de Duras,  gaily and be-
comingly dressed,  and wearing a smiling air with a
sensible face.  I afterwards heard it was Madame de
Choisy,  who,  a few years later,  married Ic Viscomte
d'Agoult.

Madame dc Choisy instantly began some compli-

58 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

ments,  but finding she only disconcerted me,  she soon
said she must not keep me bach,  and curtsied me on
to another room,  into which she sluit me.

I here imagined I was to find M.  de Montmorency,
but I saw only a lady,  who stood at the upper end of
the apartment,  and slightly curtsied,  but without mov-
ing or speaking.  Concluding this to be another dame
de la cotcr,  from my internal persuasion that ultimately
I w^as to be presented by M.  de Montmorency,  I ap-
proached her composedly,  with a mere common in-
clination of the head,  and looked wistfully forward to
the further door.  She inquired politely after my
health,  expressing good-natured concern to hear it had
been deranged,  and adding that she was bien aise de me
voir.  I thanked her,  with some expression of obliga-
tion to her civility,  but almost without looking at her,
from perturbation lest some mistake had intervened to
prevent my introduction,  as I still saw nothing of M.
de Montmorency.

She then asked me if I would not sit down,  taking a
seat at the same time herself I readily complied  ;  but
"was too much occupied with the ceremony I was await-
ing to discourse,  though she immediately began what
was meant for a conversation.  I hardly heard,  or an-
swered, so exclusively was my attention engaged in
watching the door through which I was expecting a
summons  ;  till^  at length,  the following words rather
surprised me  (I must write them in English,  for my
greater ease,  though they were spoken in French) —
"  I am quite sorry to have read your last charming
•work in French."

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  59

My eyes now changed their direction from the door
to her face,  to which I hastily turned my head,  as she
added —

*'  Puis-je le garder,  le livre que vous m'avez en-
voye?"

Startled,  as if awakened from a dream,  I fixed her
and perceived the same figure that I had seen at the
salon.  I now felt sure I was already in the royal pre-
sence of the Duchesse d'Angouleme,  with whom I had
seated myself almost cheek hy jowl,  without the smallest
suspicion of my situation.

I really seemed thunderstruck.  I had approached
her with so little formality,  I had received all her
graciousness with so little apparent sense of her con-
descension, I had taken my seat,  nearly unasked,  so
completely at my ease,  and I had pronounced so un-
ceremoniously the plain voiis,  without softening it off
with one single Altesse Royale,  that I had given her
reason to think me either the most forward person in
my nature,  or the worst bred in my education,  existing.

I Avas in a consternation and a confusion that robbed
me of breath  ;  and my first impulse was to abruptly
arise,  confess my error,  and offer every respectful
apology I could devise ;  but as my silence and strange-
ness produced silence,  a pause ensued that gave me a
moment for reflection,  which represented to me that
Son Altesse Roj^ale might be seriously hurt,  that no-
thing in her demeanour had announced her rank;
and such a discovery might lead to increased dis-
tance and reserve in her future conduct upon other
extra audiences,  that could not but be prejudicial to

60 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

lier popularity,  which already was injured by an
opinion extremely unjust,  but very generally spread,
of her haughtiness.  It was better,  therefore,  to be
quiet,  and to let her suppose that embarrassment,  and
English awkwardness and mauvaise horde,  had occa-
sioned my unaccountable manners.  I preserved,  there-
fore, my taciturnity,  till,  tired of her own,  she gently
repeated,  ''  Puis-je le garder,  cette copie que vous
m'avez envoyee?"  civilly adding that she should be
happy to read it again when she had a little forgotten
it,  and had a little more time.

I seized this fortunate moment to express my grate-
ful acknowledgments for her goodness,  >vith the most
unaffected sincerity,  yet scrupulously accompanied with
all the due forms of profound respect.

What she thought of so sudden a change of dialect
I have no means of knowing ;  but I could not,  for a
long time afterwards,  think of it myself wuth a grave
countenance.  From that time,  however,  I failed not to
address her with appropriate reverence,  though,  as it
was too late now,  to assume the distant homage per-
taining, of course,  to her very high rank,  T insensibly
suffered one irregularity to lead to,  nay to excuse
another ;  for I passed over all the etiquette d'usage,  of
never speaking but en rcponse ;  and animated myself to
attempt to catch her attention,  by conversing with
fulness and spirit upon every subject she began,  or led
to  ;  and even by starting subjects myself,  when she was
silent.  This gave me an opportunity of mentioning
many things that had happened in Paris during my
long ten years'  uninterrupted residence,  which wxre

1815]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  61

evidently very interesting to her.  Had she become
grave,  or inattentive,  I should have drawn back ;  but,
on the contrary,  she grew more and more eveillee,  and
her countenance was lighted up with the most encou-
raging approval.

She was curious,  she said,  to know how I got over
to England in the year 1812,  having been told that
I had effected my escape by an extraordinary dis-
guise. I assured her that I had not escaped at
all ;  as so to have done must have endangered the
generous husband and father,  who permitted mine
and his son's departure.  I had procured a passport
for us both,  which was registered in the ordinary
manner,  chez le Ministre de Police for foreign affairs ;
chez one,  I added,  whose name I could not pro-
nounce in her Koyal Highness's hearing ;  but to
whom I had not myself applied.  She well knew I
meant Savary,  Due de Rovigo,  whose history with re-
spect to the murdered Due d'Enghien has,  since that
period,  been so variously related.  I was then embar-
rassed, for I had owed my passport to the request of
Madame d'A.,  who was distantly connected with
Savary,  and who had obtained it to oblige a mutual
friend;  I found,  however,  to my great relief,  that the
Duchesse possessed the same noble delicacy that
renders all private intercourse with my own exem-
plary princesses as safe for others as it is honourable
to m}self ;  for she suffered me to pass by the names
of my assistants,  when I said they were friends who
exerted themselves for me in consideration of my heavy
grief,  in an absence of ten jears from a father whom I

62 DIARY AND LKTTEUS  [P.\UT II.

had left at tlie advanced age of seventy-five;  joiiietl to
my tenor lest my son should remain till lie attained the
period of the conscription,  and be necessarily drawn
into the military service of Bonaparte.  And,  indeed,
these two points coidd alone,  \Yith all my eagerness to
revisit my native land,  have induced me to make the
journey by a separation from my best friend.

This led me to assume courage to recount some of
the prominent parts of the conduct of M.  d'Arblay
during our ten years'  confinement,  rather than resi-
dence, in France  ;  I thought this necessary,  lest our
sojourn during the usurpation should be misunder-
stood. I told her,  in particular,  of three high military
appointments which he had declined.  The first was to
be head of Tetat major of a regiment under a general
whose name I cannot spell — in the army of Poland  ;  a
post of which the offer was procured for him by M.  de
Narbonne,  then aide-de-camp to Bonaparte.  The
second was an offer,  through General Gassendi,  of
being Commander of Palma Xuova,  whither M.  d'A.
might carry his wife and son,  as he was to have the
castle for his residence,  and there was no war with
Italy at that time.  The third offer was a very high
one :  it was no less than the command of Cherbourg,
as successor to M.  le Comte de la Tour jNIaubourg,
who was sent elsewhere,  by still higher promotion.
Steady,  however,  invariably steady was M.  d'Arblay
never to serve against his liege sovereign.  General
Gassendi,  one of the most zealous of his friends,  con-
trived to cover up this dangerous rejection ;  and M.
d'Arblay continued in his humbler but far more meri-

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  63

torioiis office of sons chef to one of the Bureaux de
YInterieur.

I had now the pleasure to hear the Princess say, ''  II
a acji hicn nohlemcnt.'"  ''  For though he would take no
part,"  I added,  ''a la Guerre,  nor yet in the Diplomatie,
he could have no objection to making plans,  arrange-
ments, buildings,  and so forth,  of monuments,  hospi-
tals, and palaces;  for at that period palaces,  like
princes,  were eleves tous les jours''

She could not forbear smiling ;  and her smile,  which
is rare,  is so peculiarl}^  becoming,  that it brightens her
countenance into a look of youth and beauty.

"  But why,"  I cried,  recollecting myself,  "  should I
speak French,  when your Royal Highness knows
English so well?"

"  O,  no  !"  cried she,  shaking her head,  "  very bad !"

From that time,  however,  I spoke in my own tongue,
and saw myself perfectly understood,  though those two
little words were the only English ones she uttered
herself,  replying always in French.

*'  Le Roi,"  she said,  ^'  se rappelle tres bien de vous
avoir vu a Londres."

''  O,  je n'en doute nullement !"  I replied,  rather
Tiaively,  ''  for there passed a scene that cannot be forgot-
ten, and that surprised me into courage to come for-
ward, after I had spent the whole morning in endea-
vouring to shrink backward.  And I could not be sorry
— for I felt that his Majesty could not be offended at
a vivacity which his own courtesy to England ex-
cited."

The Princess smiled,  with a graciousness that as-

64 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

surcci me I had not mistaken the King's benevolence,
of which she evidently partook.     The conversation
then turned upon the Ro3^al Family of England,  and
it was inexpressibly gratifying to me to hear her just
appreciation of the virtues,    the intellectual endow-
ments,   the sweetness of manner,  and the striking
grace of every one,  according to their different character,
that w^as mentioned.     The Prince Regent,  however,
was evidently her favourite.     The noble style in which
he had treated her and all her family at his Carlton
House Fete,  in the midst of their misfortunes,  and while
so much doubt hung against every chance of those
misfortunes being ever reversed,  did so much honour
to his heart,  and proved so solacing to their woes and
humiliation,  that she could never revert to that public
testimony of his esteem and goodwill without the most
glowing gratitude.

"  O  !"  she cried,  "  il a ete parfait !"
The Princesse Elise,  with whom she was in corre-
spondence, seemed to stand next.     ''  C'est elle,"  she
said,  "  qui fait les honneurs de la Famille Royale,  and
with a charm the most enlivening and delightful."

The conference was only broken up by a summons to
the King's dinner.  My audience,  however,  instead of
a few minutes,  for which the Duchesse de Duras had
prepared me,  was extended to three quarters of an
hour,  by the w-atch of my kind husband,  w^ho waited,
with some of his old friends whom he had joined in
the palace,  to take me home.

The Princess,  as she left me to go down a long
corridor to the dining apartment,  took leave of me in a

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  G5

manner tlie most cfracious,  honouring^  me with a mcssao-e
to her Majesty the Queen of England,  of her most
respectful homage,  and with her kind and affectionate
remembrance to all the Princesses,  with warm assu-
rances of her eternal attachment.  She then moved
on,  but again stopped when going,  to utter some sen-
tences most grateiul to my ears,  of her high devotion
to the Queen and deep sense of all her virtues.

I little thought that this,  my first,  would prove also
my last,  meeting with this exemplary princess,  whose
worth,  courage,  fortitude,  and piety are universally
acknowledged,  but whose powers of pleasing seem
little known.

iVfter an opening such as this,  how little could I
foresee that this intervie\v was to be a final one!  .  .  .
Alas !  in a day or two after it had taken place,  Son
Aitesse Royale set out for Bordeaux.  .  .  .  And then
followed the return of Bonaparte from Elba,  and then
the Hundred Days.

Narrative of Bonaparte's Return from Elba — Flight from Paris —
Residence at Brussels — Battle of Waterloo.

[The following Narrative was written some time after the events
described took place.  It is judged better to print it in a connected
form :  a few of the letters written on the s})ot being subsequently
given.]

I HAVE no remembrance how I first beard of the return
of Bonaparte from Elba.  Wonder at his temerity
was the impression made by the news,  but wonder un-
mixed with apprehension.  This inactivity of foresight
VOL.  Yir.  F

66 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

was universal.  A torpor indescribable,  a species of
stupor utterly indefinable,,  seemed to liavc enve-
loped the capital with a mist that was impervious.
Ever3'bod3^  went about their affairs,  made or received
visits,  met,  and parted,  without speaking,  or,  I suppose,
thinkin^^  of this event as of a matter of any import-
ance. My own participation in this improvident blind-
ness is to myself incomprehensible.  Ten years I had
lived under the dominion of Bonaparte ;  I had been
in habits of intimacy with many friends of those who
most closely surrounded him  ;  I was generously trusted,
as one with whom information,  while interesting and
precious,  would be inviolably safe  — as one,  in fact,
whose honour was the honour of her spotless husband,
and therefore invulnerable  :  well,  therefore,  by narra-
tions the most authentic,  and by documents the most
indisputable,  I knew the character of Bonaparte ;  and
marvellous beyond the reach of my comprehension is
my participation in this inertia.  Yet it was less owing
to a supine confidence in the so recently established
government,  or even to my wishes for its permanence,
than to the state of exhaustion into which all my politi-
cal faculties had fallen,  in consequence of the eff'er-
vescence in which they had been kept during ten
years in Paris and the two that followed in England.
Every forced stretch of intellect,  whatever be its direc-
tion, must end either by suddenly snapping short the
overpressed powers of thought,  or by causing that
non-elastic relaxation that totally defeats all super-
vehement exertions.  In the ten years I have men-
tioned my mind was a stranger to rest,  though the

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         67

rare domestic felicity which had fallen to my lot held a
counter-balance against my anxieties that saved me
from being overwhelmed by their weight.  In those
ten years,  so eventful,  so fearful,  so astonishing,  the
idea of Bonaparte was blended with all our thoughts,
our projects,  our actions.  The greatness of his power,
the intrepidity of his ambition,  the vastness of his con-
ceptions, and the restlessness of his spirit,  kept sus-
pense always breathless,  and conjecture always at
work.  Thus familiar,  therefore,  to his practices,  thus
initiated in his resources,  thus aware of his gigantic ideas
of his own destiny,  how could I for a moment suppose
he would re-visit France without a consciousness of
success,  founded upon some secret conviction that it
was infallible,  through measures previously arranged  ?
I can only,  I repeat,  conclude that my understanding,
such as it is,  was utterly tired out by a long harass of
perpetual alarm and sleepless apprehension.  Un-
moved, therefore,  I remained in the general apparent
repose which,  if it were as real in those with whom
I mixed as in myself,  I now deem a species of
infatuation.  Whether or not M.  d'Arblay was in-
volved in the general failure of foresight I have
mentioned,  I never now can ascertain.  To spare
me any evil tidings,  and save me from even the shadow
of any unnecessary alarm,  was the first and constant
solicitude of his indulgent goodness.  I cannot,  there-
fore, be sure whether our apathy upon this point were
mutual,  though certainly there is no other point,  from
the beginning to the end of our coimexion,  to which
the word apathy could to either of us be applied.

f2

63 DIARY AND LETTERS  [FaUT II.

At this period he returned to Paris to settle various
matters for our Senlis residence.  We both now knew
the event that so soon was to monopolize all thought
and all interest throughout Europe  :  but we knew it
Vtithout an}^  change in our way of life  ;  on the contrary,
we even resumed our deliglitful airings in the Bois de
Boulogne,  whither the General drove me every morn-
ing in a light caleche,  of which he had possessed
himself upon his entrance into the King's body-
guard the preceding year;  and I have no retrospection
that causes me such amazement as the unapprehensive
state of mind that could urge either of us to the en-
joyment of those drives wlien aware that Bonaparte
had effected an invasion into France.

Brief,  however,  was this illusion,  and fearful was the
light by which its darkness was dispersed.  In a few
days we heard that Bonaparte,  whom we had concluded
to be,  of course,  either stopped at landing and taken
prisoner,  or forced to save himself b}'  flight,  was,  on
the contrary,  pursuing unimpeded his route to Lyons.

From this moment disguise,  if any there had been,
was over with the most open and frank of human
beings,  who never even transitorily practised it but to
keep off*  evil,  or its apprehension,  from others.  He
communicated to me now his strong view of danger ;
not alone that measures might be taken to secure my
safety,  but to spare me any sudden agitation.  Alas!
none was spared to himself!  More clearly than any
-one he anticipated the impending tempest,  and fore-
boded its devastating effects.  He spoke aloud and
strenuously,  with prophetic energy,  to all with whom

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  69

he was then officially associated ;  but the greater part
eitlvcr despaired of resisting the torrent,  or disbelieved
its approach.  What deeply interesting scenes crowd
upon niv remembrance,  of his noble,  his dea'ing,  but
successless exertions!  The King's body-guard imme-
diately de service,  at that time,  was the compagnie of the
Prince dc Poix,  a man of the most heartfelt loyalty,
but who had never served,  and who was incapable of
so great a command at so critical a juncture,  from utter
inexperience.  Nevertheless,  his real affection for the
King,  Louis XVII I.,  and his still greater ardour for
the royal cause,  would have indued him with personal
courage to have sacrificed his life to the service of the
Crown,  if his life would have sufficed,  without military
skill,  for its preservation.

At this opening of the famous Hundred Days it
seemed to occur to no one that Bonaparte would make
any attempt upon Paris.  It was calmly taken for
granted he would speedily escape back to Elba,  or re-
main in the south a prisoner;  and it was only amongst
deep or restless politicians that any inquietude was
manifested with respect to either of these results.
Madame la Princesse d'Henin,  indeed,  whom I was in
the habit of frequently meeting,  had an air and manner
that announced perturbation ;  but her impetuous
spirit in politics kept her mind always in a state of
energy upon public affairs.  M.  le Comte de Lally
Tolendal I do not remember seeing at this period;
but I conclude,   from his deep intellect and warm

70 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

loyalty,  he must have been among the earliest to
open his eyes to the coming mischief.

I often reflected upon the difl*erence that would have
appeared in the two nations of France and England
under similar circumstances :  had an invader of any
name or renown effected a footing on any part of our
coast,  what a ferment would instantly have been excited
in our metropolis  !  Not a street but would have rung
with cries of news,  true or false  ;  not a mail coach
would have appeared,  but the populace would have
stopped it for information ;  and not an hour would
have passed without some real or pretended courier,
let loose upon the multitude,  to convey or to invent
intelligence.  Few,  at such momentous periods,  are
fastidious with respect to truth;  something fresh to
feed conjecture suffices to appease the famine of igno-
rance ;  for,  on such occasions,  we loathe taciturnity far
more than falsehood.

But when Bonaparte actually arrived at Lyons the
face of aff'airs changed.  Expectation was then awakened
—consternation began to spread ;  and report went
rapidly to her usual work,  of now exciting nameless
terror,  and now allaying even reasonable apprehension.

To me,  every moment became more anxious,  I saw
General d'Arblay imposing upon himself a severity of
service for which he had no longer health or strength,
and imposing it only the more rigidly from the fear
that his then beginning weakness and infirmities should
seem to plead for indulgence.  It was thus that he
insisted upon going through the double duty of artil-
lery officer at the barracks,  and of officier superieur in

1815]        OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  71

the King's Body-Guards at the Tuileries.  The
smallest representation to M.  le Due de Luxembourg,
who had a true value for him,  would have procured a
substitute  :  but he would not hear me upon such a
proposition ;  he would sooner,  far,  have died at his
post.

He now almost lived either at the Tuileries or at
the barracks.  I only saw him when business or mili-
tary arrangements brought him home ;  but he kindly
sent me billets to appease my suspense every two or
three hours.

Le Marquis General Victor de la Tour Maubourg
was now appointed by the King,  Louis XV III.,  to raise
a troop of volunteers for the cavalry,  while the same
commission was entrusted to M.  le Comte de Viomenil
for the infantry.

The project upon Paris became at length obvious ;
yet its success was little ieared,  though the horrors of
a civil war seemed inevitable.  M.  d'Arblay began to
wish me away ;  he made various propositions for en-
suring ray safety ;  he even pressed me to depart for
England to rejoin Alexander and my family :  but 1
knew them to be in security,  whilst my first earthly tie
was exposed to every species of danger,  and I besought
him not to force me away.  He was greatly distressed,
but could not oppose my urgency.  He procured me,
however,  a passport from M.  le Comte de Jaucourt,  his
long attached friend,  who was minister aax affaires
etraiKjcres ad interim,  while Talleyrand Perigord was
with the Congress at Vienna.  M.  de Jaucourt gave
this passport  ''pour Madame d'Arhlaij,  nee BurneyT

72 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

avoiding to speak of mc as the wife of a general officer
of the King,  lest that might eventually impede my
progress,  sliould I be reduced to escape from Paris ;
while on the other hand,  to facilitate my travelling
with any friends or companions,  he inserted,  ct les jwr-
sonnes cle sa suite.     This is dated 15 Mars,  1815.

I received it most unwillingly:  I could not endure
to absent myself from the seat of government, — for I
little divined how soon that government was to change
its master.

Nevertheless,  the prudence of this preparatory mea-
sure soon became conspicuous,  for the very following-
day I heard of nothing but purposed emigrations from
Paris — retirement,  concealment,  embarrassments,  and
difficulties.  My sole personal joy was that m^^  younger
Alexander was far away,  and safely lodged in the only
country of safety.

But,  on the 17th,  hope again revived.  I received
these words from my best friend,  written on a scrap of
paper torn from a parcel,  and brought to me by his
groom from the palace of the 1 uileries,  where their
writer had passed the night mounting guard: —

'•  Nous avons de meilleures nouvelles.  Je ne puis
entrer dans aucun detail ;  mais sois tranquille,  et aime
bien qui t'aime uniquement.  God bless you."

This news hung upon the departure of Marshal
Ney to meet Bonaparte and stop his progress,  with
the memorable words uttered publicly to the King,
that he would bring him to Paris in an iron cage.
The King at this time positively announced and

IS 15]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  7o

protested that lie would never abandon his throne
nor quit his capital,  Paris.

Various of my friends called upon me this day,  all
believinir the storm was blowin";  over.  Madame
Chastel and her two daughters were calm,  but,  never-
theless, resolved to visit a small terre which they pos-
sessed, till the metropolis was free from all contradic-
tory rumours.  Madame de Cadignan preserved her
imperturbable gaiety and carelessness,  and said she
should stay,  happen what might ;  for what mischief
could befal a poor widow  ?  Her sportive smiles and
laughing eyes displayed her security in the power of
her charms.  Madame de Maisonneuve was filled with
apprehensions for her brothers,  who were all in highly
responsible situations,  and determined to remain in
Paris to be in the midst of them.  The Princcsse
d'Henin came to me daily to communicate all the in-
telligence she gathered from the numerous friends and
connexions through whom she was furnished with sup-
plies. Her own plans were incessantly changing,  but
her friendship knew no alteration;  and in every various
modification of her intentions she always offered to
include me in their execution,  should my affairs reduce
me,  finally,  to flight.

Flight,  however,  was intolerable to my thoughts.  I
weighed it not as saving me from Bonaparte ;  I could
consider it only as separating me from all to which my
heart most dearly clung.  Madame d'Henin was unde-
cided whether to go to the north or to the south — to
Bordeaux or to Brussels ;  I could not,  therefore,  even
give a direction to M.  d'Arblay where I could receive

74 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

any intelligence,  and the Body-Guard of the King was
held ill utter suspense as to its destination.  This,  also,
was unavoidable,  since the King himself could only be
guided by events.

The next day,  the 18th of March,  all hope disap-
peared. From north,  from south,  from east,  from
west,  alarm took the field,  danger flashed its lightnings,
and contention growled its thunders :  yet in Paris
there was no rising,  no disturbance,  no confusion — all
was taciturn suspense,  dark dismay,  or sullen passive-
ness.  The dread necessity which had reduced the
King,  Louis XVIII.,  to be placed on his throne by
foreigners,  would have annihilated all enthusiasm of
loyalty,  if any had been left by the long underminings
of revolutionary principles.

What a day was this of gloomy solitude !  Not a
soul approached me,  save,  for a few moments,  my active
Madame d'Henin,  who came to tell me she was pre-
paring to depart,  unless a successful battle should
secure the capital from the conqueror.  I now^  promised
that if I should ultimately be compelled to fly my
home,  I would thankfully be of her party;  and she
grasped at this engagement with an eagerness that
gave proof of her sincere and animated friendship.
This intimation was balm to the heart of my dearest
partner,  and he wished the measure to be executed and
expedited;  but I besought him,  as he valued my exist-
ence, not to force me away till every other resource
was hopeless.

He passed the day almost wholly at the barracks.
When he entered his dwelUng,  in La Rue de Miro-

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  75

menil^  it was only upon military business,  and from
that he could spare me scarcely a second.  He was
shut up in his library with continual comers and goers  ;
and though I durst not follow him,  I could not avoid
gathering,  from various circumstances,  that he was now
preparing to take the field,  in full expectation of being
sent out with his comrades of tlie Guard,  to check the
rapid progress of the invader.  I knew this to be his
earnest wish,  as the only chance of saving the King
and the throne ;  but he well knew it was my greatest
dread,  though I was always silent upon the subject,
well aware that while his honour was dearer to him
than his life,  ray own sense of duty was dearer to me
also than mine.  While he sought,  therefore,  to spare
me the view of his arms and warlike equipage and ha-
biliments, I felt his wisdom as well as his kindness,  and
tried to appear as if I had no suspicion of his proceed-
ings, remaining almost wholly in my own room,  to avoid
any accidental surprise,  and to avoid paining him with
the sight of my anguish.  I masked it as well as I could
for the little instant he had from time to time to spare
me ;  but before dinner he left me entirely,  having to
pass the night a cheval at the barracks,  as he had done
the preceding night at the Tuileries.

The length of this afternoon,  evening,  and night
was scarcely supportable :  his broken health,  his
altered looks,  his frequent sufferings,  and diminished
strength,  all haunted me with terror,  in the now ad-
vancing prospect of his taking the field.  And where  ?
And how?  No one knew!  Yet he was uncertain
whether he could even see me once more the next day !

76 DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.  [PaRT II.

These lines — these valued,  these invaluable lines —
were the only break into my utter solitude,  and the
wretchedness of my ignorance of what was going for-
ward . —

"  Les nouvelles ne sont pas rassurantes.  M.  le Uuc
d'Orlcans a fait partir sa femme et ses enfans.  Madame
de Blacas est aussi partie.  Rien ne tient — ou,  plutot,
tout nous trahit.  Si mon amie pouvoit partir aussi,  je
le regarderai plus froidement ;  car il est presumable
que nous ne pourrons faire aucune resistance !  ou
que nous n'en ferons quune bien pcu heureuse,  et
bien courte^  si nous partons dc Paris!  Vois,  et juge
de mon embarras,  de mon inquietude  !  Tout parait
perdu,  *hors Thonneur,'  qu'ii faut conserver.  Le
mien sera sans tache ;  et si je meurs victime de mon
devoir,  je ne perdrai pas pour cela Tespoir de tc re-
joindre dans un meilleur monde  ;  puisqu'en mourant ce
sera la mon dernier voeu,  ma demande a I'Eternel,  que
je supplie de me rejoindre a mon fils et a sa mere,  que
j'embrasse de toutes les puissances de mon ame.  Je
parais calme,  et tie le suis guere;  mais je suis,  et serai
ferme."

PART III.

1815.

Laborious military duties of M.  d'Arblay — He urges Madame
d'iirblay to quit Paris without delay— Her terror at seeing
liini leaving home to join his regiment— Her arrangements
for quitting France — A hurried visit to the Marquis de La
Tour Maubourg— News of M.  d'Arblay — Louis XYIIL quits
Paris with his body-guard — Conduct of the Princesse d'Henin
and M.  ieComte de LallyTolendal at this crisis— La Comtcsse
d'Auch — Madame d'Arblay on the road to Brussels with the
Princesse d'Henin — Desolate appearance of the country —
Arrival of the fugitives at Amiens — The Prefect,  M.  Lamctli
— The journey resumed at night — Arrival at Arras — Recep-
tion of the party by M. ,  the Prefect — A friend of M,

d'Arblay's— Disturbed state of the country — An accident —
Hospitality and kindness of a stranger — Polish lancers scour-
ing the country for Bonaparte — Madame d'Arblay and her
party remain at Tournay — News of Louis XVI I L

78 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT III.

PART III.
1815.

X A R R A Ti V E — contin ued.

I COME now to the detail of one of the most dreadful
days of my existence,  the 19th of March,  1815,  the last
whicli preceded the triumphant return of Bonaparte to
the capital of France.  Little,  on its opening,  did I
imagine that return so near,  or believe it would be
brought about without even any attempted resistance.
General d'Arblay,  more in the way of immediate intel-
ligence, and more able to judge of its result,  was
deeply affected by the most gloomy prognostics.  He
came home at about six in the morning,  harassed,
worn,  almost wasted with fatigue,  and yet more with a
baleful view of all around him,  and wdth a sense of
w^ounded military honour in the inertia which seemed
to paralyze all effort to save the King and his cause.
He had spent two nights following armed on guard,
one at the Tuileries,  in his duty of Garde du Corps
to the King  ;  the other on duty as artillery captain at
the barracks.  He went to bed for a few hours ;  and
then,  after a wretched breakfast,  in which he briefly
narrated the state of things he had witnessed and his
apprehensions,   he conjured me,  in the most solemn

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  79

and earnest manner,  to yield to the necessity of the
times,  and consent to quit Paris with Madame d'Henin,
should she ultimately decide to depart.  I could not,
when I saw his suiferinj^s,  endure to augment them by
any further opposition;  but never was acquiescence
so painful !  To lose even the knowledge whither he
went,  or the means of acquainting him whither I
might go myself — to be deprived of the power to join
him,  should he be made yjrisoner — or to attend him,
should he be wounded.  .  .  .  T could not pronounce
my consent ;  but he accepted it so decidedly in my
silence,  that he treated it as arranged,  and hastened
its confirmation by assuring me I had relieved his
mind from a weight of care and distress nearly in-
tolerable. As the wife of an officer in the King's
Body- Guard,  in actual service,  I might be seized,  ho
thought,  as a kind of hostage,  and might probably
fare all the worse for being also an Englishwoman.

He then wrote a most touching note to the Princessc
d'Henin,  supphcating her generous friendship to take
the charge not only of my safety,  but of supporting and
consoling me.

After this,  he hurried back to the Tuileries for
orders,  apparently more composed ;  and that alone en-
abled me to sustain my so nearly compulsory and so
repugnant agreement.  His return was speedy :  he
came,  as he had departed,  tolerably composed,  for he
had secured me a refuge,  and he had received orders
to prepare to march —

To Melun,  he concluded,  to encounter Bonaparte,
and to battle ;    for certain news had arrived of the

80 D I A R V AND LETTERS  [  P A K T III.

invader's rapid approach.  All attempt to conceal this
from me must now be vain ; — he acted more nobly by
himself,  and by liis wife  ;  for in openly,  and cheer-
fully, and with rising hope,  acknowledging it was for
the field that he now left me,  he called upon me to
exert my utmost courage lest I should enervate his
own.

To such a plea had I been deaf,  I had indeed been
unworthy his honoured choice,  and I should have for-
feited for ever the high opinion it was my first pride
to see him cherish of his grateful partner.       Tiic
event,  therefore,  seeming inevitable,  I suddenly called
myself to order,  and curbing every feeling that sought
vent in tenderness or in sorrow,    I resolved that,
since I must no longer hang upon him for protec-
tion or for happiness,  I would,  at least,  take care not
to injure him in his honour or his spirits.     At half-
past two at noon it was expected that the body-guard
M'ould be put in motion.     Having told me his his-
tory, he could not spare me another moment till that
which preceded his leaving home to join the Due dc
Luxembourg's company.      He then came to me,  with
an air of assumed serenity,    and again,  in the most
kindly,  soothing terms,  called upon me to r/ive him an
example of courage.      I obeyed his injunction with my
best ability — yet how dreadful was our parting!     Wc
knelt together,  in short but fervent prayer to heaven
for each other's preservation,  and then separated.     At
the door he turned back,    and with a smile which,
though forced,   had inexpressible sweetness,   he balf-
gaily exclaimed,  "  A'ive le Roi!"      I instantly cauglit

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  81

his uise wish that we should part with apparent cliecr-
fuhiess,  and re-echoed his words — and then he darted
from my sight.

This had passed in an ante-room  ;  but I then re-
tired to my bedchamber,  where,  all effort over,  I
remained for some minutes abandoned to an affliction
nearly allied to despair,  though rescued from it by fer-
vent devotion.

But an idea then started into my mind that yet
again I might behold him.  I ran to a window which
looked upon the inward court-yard.  There,  indeed,
behold him I did,  but oh,  with what anguish !  just
mounting his war-horse,  a noble animal,  of which he
was singularly fond,  but which at this moment I
viewed with acutest terror,  for it seemed loaded with
pistols,  and equipped completely for immediate service
on the field of battle  ;  while Deprez,  the groom,  pre-
pared to mount another,  and our cabriolet was filled
with baggage and implements of war.

1 could not be surprised,  since I knew the destina-
tion of the General;  but so carefully had he spared
me the progress of his preparations,  which he thought
would be killing me by inches,  that I had not the most
distant idea he was thus armed and encircled with in-
struments of death — bayonets,  lances,  pistols,  guns,
sabres^  daggers! — what horror assailed me at the
sio'ht!  I had only so much sense and self-control lel't
as to crawl softly and silently away,  that I might not
inflict upon him the suffering of beholding my distress  ;
but when he had passed the windows,  I opened them
to look after him.     The street was empty;   the gay,

VOL.  VII.  G

82  .        DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

constant gala of a Parisian Sunday was changed into
fearful solitude :  no sound was heard,  but that of
here and there some hurried footstep,  on one hand
hastening for a passport to secure safety by flight ;  on
the other,  rushing abruptly from or to some conceal-
ment, to devise means of accelerating and hailing the
entrance of the Conqueror.  Well in tune with this air
of an impending crisis was my m.iserable mind,  which
from grief little short of torture sunk,  at its view,  into
a state of morbid quiet,  that seemed the produce of
feelings totally exhausted.

Thus I continued,  inert,  helpless,  motionless,  till the
Princesse d'Henin came into my apartment.  Her first
news was,  that Bonaparte had already reached Com-
piegne,  and that to-morrow,  the 20th of March,  he
might arrive in Paris,  if the army of the King stopped
not his progress.

It was now necessary to make a prompt decision ;
my word was given,  and I agreed to accompany her
whithersoever she fixed to go.  She was still hesi-
tating; but it was settled I should join her in the
evening,  bag and baggage,  and partake of her desti-
nation.

Everything now pressed for action and exertion ;
but my ideas were bewildered ;  my senses seemed be-
numbed; my mind was a chaos.  This species of vague
incapacity was broken in upon by the entrance of M.
Le Noir  ;  and the sight of a favourite of M.  d' Arbla}^,
with whom he was in constant intercourse at the Mi-
nistere de Tlnte'rieur,  awakened me to some conscious-
ness of my situation.

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  83

In recounting to him what had passed,  I drew my
wandering thoughts to a point,  and in satisfying his
friendly solicitude,  I recovered my scared senses.  I
then determined to take with me whatever Madame
d'Henin could admit into her carriage,  that was valu-
able and portable,  and to lock up what remained,  and
entrust to M.  Le Noir my keys.  He consented to take
them in charge,  and promised to come from time to
time to the house,  and to give such directions as might
be called for by events.  I gave to him full power of
acting,  in presence of Deprez,  our femme de charge,  who
was to carry to him my keys when I had made my
arrangements ;  and I besought him,  should he see no
more either of the General or of myself,  never to part
with his trust but to our son.  He solemnly ratified
the enoragement with his word of honour,  and,  with
feelings for us all nearly as deep as my own,  he took
leave.

I was now sufficiently roused for action,  and my first
return to conscious understanding was a desire to call
in and pay every bill that might be owing,  as well as
the rent of our apartments up to the present moment,
that no pretence might be assumed from our absence
for disposing of our goods,  books,  or property of any
description.  As we never had any avoidable debts,
this was soon settled  \  but the proprietor of the house
was thunderstruck by the measure,  saying,  the King
had reiterated his proclamation that he would not
desert his capital.  I could only reply that the General
w as at his Majesty's orders,  and that my absence would be
short.    I then began collecting our small portion of plate,

g2

84 DIARY AND LETTERS      [PaKT III.

Szc. ;  but while thus occupied,  I received a message from
Madame d'Henin,  to tell me I must bring nothing but
a small change of linen,  and one band-box,  as by the
news she had just heard,  she was convinced we should
be back again in two or three days,  and she charged
me to be with her in an hour from that time.  I did
what she directed,  and put what I most valued,  that
was not too large,  into a hand-basket,  made by some
French prisoners in England,  that had been given me
by my beloved friend Mrs.  Lock.  I then swallowed,
standing,  my neglected dinner,  and,  with Madame
Dcprcz,  and my small allowance of baggage,  I got into
a fiacre,  and drove to General Victor de la Tour i\Iau-
bourg,  to bid adieu to my dearest Madame de Maison-
neuve,  and her family.

It was about nine o'clock at night,  and very dark.
I sent on Madame Deprcz to the Princesse,  and
charored her not to return to summon me till the last
moment.     The distance w^as small.

I found the house of the Marquis Victor de la Tour
};Iaubourg in a state of the most gloomy dismay.  No
Ijortier w\is in the way,  but the door of the jmrte cochcre
was ajar,  and I entered on foot,  no fiacre being ever
admitted into les cours des hotels.  Officers and strangers
were passing to and fro,  some to receive,  others to
resign commissions,  but all with quick steps,  though in
dead silence.  Not a servant was in the way,  and
hardly any light ;  all seemed in disorder.  I groped
along till I came to the drawing-room,  in which were
several people,  Avaiting for orders,  or for an audience ;
but in no communication with each other,    for here.

IS15]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  85

also,  a dismal taciiurnity prevailed.  From my own
disturbance,  joined to my short-sightedness,  I was
some time ere I distinoruished Madame Victor de la
Tour Maubourg,  and when at last I saw her,  I ven-
tured not to address or to approach her.  She was at a
table,  endeavouring to make some arrangement,  or
package,  or examination,  with papers and boxes before
her,  but deluo^ed in tears,  which flowed so fast that she
appeared to have relinquished all effort to restrain
them.  And this was the more affecting to witness,  as
she is eminently equal and cheerful in her disposition.
I kept aloof,  and am not certain that she even perceived
me.  The General was in his own apartment,  trans-
acting military business of moment.  But no sooner
was I espied by my dearest Madame do Maisonneuve,
than I was in her kind arms.  She took me apart to
reveal to me that the advance of the late emperor was
still more rapid than its report.  All were quitting
Paris,  or resigning themselves to passive submission.
For herself,  she meant to abide by whatever should be
the destination of her darling brother Victor,  who was
now finishing a commission that no longer could be
continued,  of raising volunteers — for there w^as no
longer any royal army for them to join  !  Whether the
King would make a stand at the Tuilcries,  as he had
unhappily promised,  or whether he would fly,  was yet
unknown  ;  but General Victor de Maubourg was now
going to equip himself in full uniform,  that he might
wait upon his Majesty in person,  decidedly fixed to take
his orders,  be they what they might.

With danger thus before him,  in his mutilated state

86 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT III.

having undergone an amputation of the leg and thigh
on the field of battle,  who can wonder at the desolation
of Madame Victor when he resolved to sustain the risk
of such an offer  !  Presently,  what was my emotion at
the sudden and abrupt entrance into the room of an
officer of the King's Garde du Corps!  in the self-same
uniform as that from which I had parted Avith such
anguish in the morning!  A transitory hope glanced
like lightning upon my brain,  with an idea that the
body-guard was all at hand  ;  but as evanescent as bright
was the flash  !  The concentrated and mournful look of
the officer assured me nothing genial was awaiting me;
and when the next minute we recognized each other,  I
saw it was the Count Charles de la Tour Maubourg,
the youngest brother of Madame de Maisonneuve;
and he then told me he had a note for me from M.
d'Arblay.

Did I breathe then?  I think not!  I grasped the
paper in my hand,  but a mist was before my eyes,  and
I could not read a word.  Madame de Maisonneuve
held a hurried conference with her brother,  and then
informed me that the body-guard was all called out,
the whole four companies,  with their servants,  equipage,
arms and horses,  to accompany and protect the King in
his flight from Paris !  But whither he would go^  or
with what intent,  whether of battle or of escape,  had
not been announced.  The Count Charles had ob-
tained leave of absence for one hour to see his wife
(Mademoiselle de la Fayette)  and his children;  but
M.  d'Arblay,  who belonged to the artillery company,
could not be spared even a moment.     He had there-

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  87

fore seized a cover of a letter of M.  de Bethizy,  the
commandant,  to write me a few words.
I now read them,  and found —

"^  Ma chere amie — Tout est perdu  !  Je ne puis
entrer dans auciin detail — de grace,  partez  !  le plutot
sera le mieux.

"  A la vie et a la mort,

"  A.  d'A."

Scarcely had I read these lines,  when I was told that
Madame d'Henin had sent me a summons.

I now could but embrace my Madame de Maison-
neuve in silence,  and depart.  I ventured not to speak
to poor  ^Madame Victor.  Madame de  ^laisonneuve
accompanied or rather led me down stairs,  with a dis-
interestedness of regard the most rare.  She seemed
to forget herself wholly in her tender anxiety for her
parting friend.  We could say nothing of writing,
neither of us knowing where a letter might be ad-
dressed, nor under what government received.  Not
a syllable was spoken by either of us as we descended.
She passed the conr with me,  and then went on with
me to the fiacre.  Tender then was her silent pressure,
and mv return to it :   and I drove off.

Arrived at Madame la Princesse d'Henin's,  all was in
a perturbation yet greater than what I had left,  though
not equally afflicting.  Madame d'Henin was so little
herself,  that every moment presented a new view of
thino^s,  and urged her impatiently,  nay imperiously,  to
differ from whatever was offered.

88 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

Now she saw instantly impending danger^  and was
for precipitate flight ;  now she saw fearless securit}^,
and determined not to move a step ;  the next moment
all was alarm again,  and she wanted wings for spjeed  ;
and the next,  the smallest apprehension awakened
<]erision and contempt.

I,  who had never yet seen her hut all that was ele-
gant, rational,  and kind,  was thunderstruck by this
effect of threatening evil upon her high and susceptible
spirit.  Prom manners of dignified serenity,  she so lost
all self-po«session as to answer nearly with fury what-
ever was not acquiescent concurrence in her opinion  :
fi-om sentiments of the most elevated nobleness she
was urged,  by every report that opposed her expecta-
tions, to the utterance of wishes and of assertions that
owed their impulse to passion,  and their foundation to
prejudice  ;  and from having sought,  with the most
flattering partiality,  to attach me to her party,  she gave
me the severe shock of intimating that my joining her
confused all her measures.

To change my plan now was impossible  :  my husband
and my best friends knew me to be with her,  and could
seek me,  or bestow information upon me,  in no other
direction;  I had given up my own home,  and to return
thither,  or to stay any where in Paris,  was to consti-
tute myself a prisoner:  nevertheless,  it was equally
a sorrow and a violence to my feelings to remain
with her another moment after so astonishinc)^    a

o

reproach.

Displeasure at it,  however,  subsided,  when I found
that it proceeded neither from weakened regard,  nor a

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  89

wanton abuse of power,  but from a mind absolutely
disorganized.

M.  le Comte de Lally Tolendal,  the Cicero of
France,  and most eloquent man of his day,  and one of
the most honourable,  as well as most highly gifted,
was,  I now found,  to be of our fugitive party.  He was
her admiring and truly devoted friend,  and by many
believed to be privately married to her.  I am myself
of that ojjinion,  and that the union,  on account of prior
and unhappy circumstances,  was forborne to be avowed.
Certainly their mutual conduct warranted this con-
clusion. Nevertheless,  his whole demeanour towards
her announced the most profound respect as well as
attachment ;  and hers to him the deepest considera-
tion, with a delight in his talents amounting to an
adoration that met his for her noble mind and winning
qualities.  She wanted,  however,  despotically to sway
him  ;  and little as he might like the submission she
required,  he commonly yielded,  to avoid,  as I conceive,
the dangerous conjectures to which dissension might
make them liable.

But at this moment,  revolutionary terrors and con-
flicting: sensations robbed each of them of that self-
command which till now had regulated their public
intercourse.  She,  off all guard,  let loose alike the
anxious sensibility and the arbitrary impetuosity of
her nature :  he,  occupied with too mighty a trouble to
have time or care for his wonted watchful attentions,
heard alike her admonitions or lamentations with an
air of angry,  but silent displeasure;  or,  when urged
too pointedly for maintaining his taciturnity,  retorted

90 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part 111.

her reproaches or remarks with a vehemence that
seemed the echo of her own.  Yet in the midst of this
unguarded contention,  which had its secret incitement,
I doubt not,  from some cruelly opposing difference of
feelings — of ideas upon the present momentous crisis,
nothing could be more clear than that their attachment
to each other,  though it could not subdue their violent
tempers,  was,  nevertheless,  the predominant passion
of their souls.

The turbulence of these two animated characters
upon this trying occasion was strongly contrasted by
the placid suffering and feminine endurance of Madame
la Comtesse d'Auch,  the daughter and sole heiress and
descendant of M.  de Lally.     Her husband^  like mine,
was in the body-guard of Louis XVIII. ,  and going,  or
gone,  no one knew whither,  nor with what intent ;  her
estate and property were all near Bordeaux,  and her
little children were with her at Paris.     The difficult
task,  in the great uncertainty of events,  was now her's
to decide,  whether to seek the same refuge that her
father and Madame Henin should resolve upon seeking,
or whether to run every personal risk in trying to save
her lands and fortune from confiscation,  by traversing,
with only her babies and servants,  two or three hun-
dred miles,   to reach her chateau at Audi ere it
might be seized by the conquering party.     Quietly,
and in total silence,  she communed with herself,  not
mixing in the discourse^  nor seeming to heed the dis-
turbance around her ;  but,  when at length applied to,
her resolution,  from her own concentrated meditations,
was fixedly taken,  to preserve,  if possible,  by her exer-

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         91

tions and courage,  the property of her absent and
beloved husband,  for his hoped return and for her
children.

This steadiness and composure called not forth any
imitation.  M.  de Lally breathed hard with absolute
agony of internal debate;  and Madame d'Henin now
declared she was sure all Avould blow over in a false
alarm,  and that she would not hesitate any longer
between Brussels and Bordeaux,  but remain quietly in
Paris,  and merely sit up all night to be on the watch.

M.  de Lally determined to go now in person to the
Tuileries,  to procure such information as might decide
his shattered and irresolute friend.

When he was gone,  a total silence ensued.  Madame
d'Auch w^as absorbed in her fearful enterprise,  and
Madame d'Henin,  finding no one opposed her  (for mrj
thoughts were with no one present),  walked up and
down the room,  with hasty movement,  as if performing
some task.  Various persons came and went,  messen-
gers, friends,  or people upon business.  She seized
upon them all,  impatiently demanding their news,  and
their opinions ;  but so volubly,  at the same time,  utter-
ing her own,  as to give them no time to reply,  though
as they left her,  too much hurried themselves to wait
her leisure for listening,  she indignantly exclaimed
against their stupidity and insensibility.

But what a new and terrible commotion was raised
in her mind,  in that of Madame d'Auch,  and in mine,
upon receiving a pencil billet from M.  de Lally,
brought by a confidential servant,  to announce that
Bonaparte was within a few hours'  march of Paris  !

92 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Pakt III.

He begged her to hasten off,  and said he would follow
in his cabriolet when he had made certain arrange-
ments, and could gain some information as to the mo-
tions of the King.

She now instantly ordered horses to her Berlin,
which had long been loaded,  and calling up all her
people and dependants,  was giving her orders with
the utmost vivacity,  when intelligence was brought
her that no horses coidd now be had,  the Government
having put them all in requisition.

I was struck with horror.  To be detained in Paris,
the seat of impending conquest,  and the destined
capital of the conqueror — detained a helpless priso-
ner, where all would be darkly unknown to me,  where
Truth could find no entrance,  Falsehood no detection
— where no news could reach me,  except news that
was fatal — oh !  what dire feelings were mine at this
period !

Madame d'i^uch,  who had taken her precautions,
instantly,  though sadly,  went away,  to secure her own
carriage,  and preserve her little babies.

Madame d'Henin was now almost distracted,  but
this dreadful prospect of indefinite detention,  with all
the horrors of captivity,  lasted not long:  Le Roy,  her
faithful domestic from his childhood,  prevailed upon
some stable friend to grant the use of his horses for
one stage from Paris,  and the Berlin and four was at
the Porte Cocliere in another moment.  The servants
and dependants of Madame d'Henin accompanied her
to the carriage in tears;  and all her fine qualities were
now unmixed,  as she took an affectionate leave of them.

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  93

with a sweetness the most engaging,  suffering the
women to kiss her cheek,  and smiHng kindly on the
men,  who kissed her robe.  Vivacity like hers creates
alarm,  but,  in France,  breeds no resentment ;  and
where,  like hers,  the character is eminently noble and
generous,  it is but considered as a mark of conscious
rank,  and augments rather than diminishes personal
devotion.

We now rushed into the carriage,  averse,  yet eager,
between ten and eleven o'clock at night,  19th March,
1815.

As Madame d'Henin had a passport for herself et sa
famille,  we resolved to keep mine in reserve,  in case of
accidents or separation,  and only to produce hers,
while I should be included in its privileges.

The decision for our route was for Brussels  ;  the
femme de chambre of Madame d'Henin within,  and
the valet,  Le Ro)^  outside the carriage,  alone accom-
panied us,  with two postilions for the four horses.

Madame d'Henin,  greatly agitated,  spoke from time
to time,  though rather in ejaculations upon our flight,
its uncertainties and alarms,  than with any vicAV to
conversation  ;  but if she had any answer,  it was of
simple acquiescence from her good and gentle femme
de chambre  ;  as to me  ....  I could not utter a word —
my husband on his war-horse — his shattered slate of
health — his long disuse to military service,  yet high-
wrought sense of military honour — all these v/ere
before me.     I saw,  heard,  and was conscious of nothing

94 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT 111.

else,  till we arrived at Bourget,  a long,  straggling,
small town.  And here,  Madame d'Henin meant to
stop,  or at least change horses.

But all was still,  and dark,  and shut up.  It was
the dead of night,  and no sort of alarm seemed to dis-
turb the inhabitants of the place.  We knocked at the
first inn  :  but after waiting a quarter of an hour,  some
stable-man came out to say there was not a room va-
cant. The same reply was wdth the same delay given
us at two other inns  ;  but,  finally,  we were more suc-
cessful, though even then we could obtain only a single
apartment,  w^ith three beds.  These Ave appropriated
for Madame d'Henin,  myself,  and her maid  ;  and the
men-servants were obliged to content themselves with
mattresses in the kitchen.  The town,  probably,  was
filled with fugitives from Paris.

A supper w^as directly provided,  but Madame
d'Henin,  who now again repented having hurried oiF,
resolved upon sending her faithful Le Roy back to the
metropolis,  to discover w^iether it were positively
true that the King had quitted it.

He hired a horse,  and we then endeavoured to re-
pose but oh,  how far from me was all possibility

of obtaining it  !

About three in the morning  !M.  de Lally overtook
us.  His information was immediately conveyed to the
Princcsse d'Henin.  It was gloomily affrighting.  The
approach of Bonaparte was wholly unresisted ;  all
bowed before,  that did not spring forward to meet
him.

Le Eoy returned about six in the morning.     The

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF KVELINA.  95

King,  and his guards,  and his famil}^  had all suddenly
left Paris,  but whither had not transpired.  He was
preceded,  encircled,  and followed by his four companies
of body-guards ;  i.  e.  those of the Prince de Poix,  the
Due de Grammont,  the Due de Luxembourg,  and the
Due d'Aumale;  the Fifth or New Compagnie,  under
the Due de Reggio,  Marshal Oudinot,  was also,  I be-
lieve, of the procession.

Horror and distress at such a flight and such un-
certainty were not mine only,  though circumstances
rendered mine the most poignant ;  but M.  de Lally
had a thousand fears for the excellent and loved
husband of his daughter,  M.  le Comte d'Auch;  and
Madame d' Hen in trembled,  for herself and all her
family,  at the danger of the young Hombert La Tour
du Pin.

No longer easy to be so near Paris,  we hastily pre-
pared to get on for Brussels,  our destined harbour.
!M.  de Lally now accompanied us,  followed b}-  his valet
in a cabriolet.

Our journey commenced in almost total silence on
allYJarts;  the greatness of the change of government
thus marvellously effecting,  the impenetrable uncer-
tainty of coming events,  and our dreadful ignorance of
the fate of those most precious to us,  who were involved
in the deeds and the consequences of immediate action,
filled every mind too awfully for speech ;  and our sole
apparent attention was to the passengers we overtook,
or by whom we were overtaken.

These were so few,  that I think we could not count
half a dozen on our way to Senlis,  and those seemed

96 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

absorbed in dcadl}^  thought and silence,  neither looking
at us,,  nor caring to encounter our looks.  The road,
the fields,  the hamlets,  all appeared deserted.  Deso-
late and lone was the universal air.

I have since concluded that the people of these parts
had separated into two divisions;  one of which liad
hastily escaped,  to save their lives and loyalty,  wliile
the other had hurried to the capital to greet the Con-
queror;   for this was Sunday,  the 20th of March.

Oh,  what were my sensations on passing through
Senlis  ! — Senlis,  so lately fixed for my three months'
abode with my General,  during his being de service.
When we stopped at a nearly empty inn,  during the
change of horses,  I enquired after Madame Le Quint,
and some other ladies who had been prepared to
kindly receive me — but they were all gone  !  hastily
they had quitted the town,  which,  like its environs,
had an air of being generally abandoned.

The desire of obtaining intelligence made Madame
d'Hcnui most unwilling to continue a straightforward
journey,  that must separate her more and more from
the scene of action.  M.  de Lally wished to see his
friend the young Due d'Orleans,  who was at Peronnc,
with his sister and part of his family ;  and he was pre-
paring to gratify this desire,  when a discussion relative
to the danger of some political misconstruction,  the
Duke being at that time upon ill terms with Monsieur,
Comte d'Artois,  made him relinquish his purpose.
V/e wandered about,  however,  I hardly know where,
save that we stopped from time to time at small hovels
in which resided tenants of the Prince or of the

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  97

Princess de Poix,  who received Madame d'Henin with
as much devotion of attachment as they could have
done in the fullest splendour of her power to reward
their kindness;  though with an entire familiarity of
discourse that,  had I been new to French customs,  would
have seemed to me marks of total loss of respect.  But
after a ten years'  unbroken residence in France,  I was
too well initiated in the ways of the dependants upon
the great belonging to their own tenantry,  to make a
mistake so unjust to their characters.  We touched,
as I think,  at Noailles,  at St.  Just,  at Mouchy,  and at
Poix — but I am only sure we finished the day by ar-
riving at Roy,  where still the news of that day was
unknown.  What made it travel so slowly I cannot
tell ;  but from utter dearth of all the intelhgence by
which we meant to be guided,  we remained,  languidly
and helplessly,  at Roy till the middle of the following-
Monday,  the 21st March.

About that time some military entered the town and
our inn.  We durst not ask a single question,  in our
uncertainty to which side they belonged ;  but the four
horses were hastily ordered,  since to decamp seemed
what was most necessary.  But Brussels was no longer
the indisputable spot,  as the servants overheard some
words that implied a belief that Louis XVIII.  was
quitting France to return to his old asylum,  England.
It was determined,  therefore,  though not till after a
tumultuous debate between La Princesse and M.  de
Lally,  to go straight to Amiens,  where the Prefect,
M.  Lameth,  was a former friend,  if not connexion,  of
the princess.

VOL.    VII.  H

98 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT 111.

We had now to travel by a cross-road,  and a very-
bad one,  and it  ^vas not till night that we arrived at
the suburbs.  It was here first we met with those diffi-
culties that announced,  by vigilance with disturbance,
a kind of suspended government ;  for the officers of
the police who demanded our passports were evidently
at a loss whether to regard them as valid or not.
Their interrogatories,  meanwhile,  were endless;  and,
finally,  they desired us,  as it was so late and dark,  to
find ourselves a lodging in the suburbs,  and not enter
the city of Amiens till the next morning.

Clouded as were alike our perceptions and our in-
formation, we could not but be aware of the danger of
to-morrow,  when our entrance might be of a sort to
make our exit prohibited.  Again followed a tu-
multuous debate,  which ended in the hazardous resolve
of appealing to the prefect and casting ourselves upon
his protection.  This appeal ended all inquisition:
we were treated with deference,  and accommodated
in a decent room,  while the passports of Madame
d'Henin and of M.  de Lally were forwarded to the
prefecture.

We remained here some time in the utmost stillness,
no one pronouncing a word.  We knew not who might
listen,  nor with what ears!  But far from still was all
within,  because far from confident how the prefect
might judge necessary to arrest,  or to suffer our pro-
ceeding further.

The answer was,  at length,  an order to the police
officers to let us enter the city and be conducted to
an hotel named by M.  Lameth.

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  99

My passport being held back,  I only made one of la
famille of la Princesse.

We had an immensely long drive through the city
of Amiens ere we came to the indicated hotel.  But
here Madame d'Henin found a note that was delivered
to her by the secretary of the prefecture,  announcing
the intention of the prefect to have the honour of
waiting upon her;  and when M.  Lameth was an-
nounced, M.  de Lally and I retired to our several
chambers.

Her tete-a-tete with him was very long,  and ended in
a summons to M.  de Lally to make it a trio.

This interview was longer still,  and my anxiety for
the news with which it might terminate relative to the
King,  the Body- Guard,  and our detention or pro-
gression, was acute.

At length I also was summoned.

Madame d'Henin came out to me upon the landing-
place,  hastily and confusedly,  to say that the prefect
did not judge proper to receive her at the prefecture,
but that he would stay and sup with her,  and that I
was to pass for her premiere femme de chamhre,  as it
would not be prudent to give in my name,  though it
had been made known to M.  Lameth;  but the wife
of an officer so immediately in the service of the
King must not be specified as the host of a prefect,
if that prefect meant to yield to the tide of a
new government.  Tide  ?  Nay,  torrent it was at this
moment ;  and any resistance that had not been pre-
viously organized,  and with military force,  must have
been vain.      1 made,    however,   no enquiry.     I was

II 2

u»j  <^-\   r-  i*^  /"k  "^y A

100 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT III.

simply acquiescent;  and,  distantly followiiifr Madame
d'Henin,  remained at the end of the room while the
servants and the waiters adjusted matters for supper.

In a situation of such embarrassment I never before
was placed.  I knew not which way to look,  nor what
to do.  Discovery at such a crisis might have been
fatal^  as far as might hang upon detention  ;  and deten-
tion, which would rob me of all means of hearing of
M.  d'Arblay,  should I gather what was his route,  and
be able to write to him,  was death to my peace.  I
regretted I had not demanded to stay in another room  ;
but,  in such heart-piercing moments,  to be in the way
of intelligence is the involuntary first movement.

When all was arranged,  and Madame d'Henin was
seated,  M.  de Lally set a chair for me,  slightly bowing
to me to take it.  I complied,  and supper began.
I was helped,  of course,  the last,  and not once spoken
to by any body.

The repast was not very gay,  yet by no means de-
jected. The conversation was upon general topics,
and M.  de Lameth was entirely master of himself,
seeming wholly without emotion.

I was afterwards informed that news had just reached
him,  but not officially,  that Bonaparte had returned
to Paris.  Having heard,  therefore,  nothing from
the new government,  he was able to act as if there
were none such,  and he kindly obliged Madame
d'Henin by giving her new passports,  which,  should
the conquest be confirmed,  would be safer than pass-
ports from the ministers of Louis XVIIL at Paris.  I
was here merely included in her family,  and he advised

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  101

that my name should be concealed.  There was pecu-
liarly less danger for Madame d'Henin,  to whom
Talleyrand,  while he held the seals of Bonaparte,  had
accorded the preservation of her title^  as being hers
from a prince of the Low Countries,  or La Belgique,
and therefore not necessarily included in the revo-
lutionary sacrifice of rank.  Her claim,  therefore,  to
the honours of her name having,  of course,  never been
disputed on the King's side,  and having been rati-
fied on that of Bonaparte while in power,  made her
now one of the persons least liable to involve any
magistrate in difficulty for being allowed to pass
through his domain,  whatever might be the issue of
the present public conflict.

M.  Lameth^could not,  however,  answer for retaining
his powers,  nor for what might be their modification
even from hour to hour :  he advised us,  therefore,  by
no means to risk his being either replaced or re-
strained, but to get on as fast as possible with his
passports while certain they were efficient.  He thought
it safer,  also,  to make a circuit than to go back again
to the high-road we had quitted.  Our design of fol-
lowing the King,  whom we imagined gaining the sea-
coast to embark for Enjjland,  was rendered abortive
from the number of contradictory accounts which had
reached M.  Lameth as to the route he had taken.
Brussels,  therefore,  became again our point of desire;
but M.  Lameth counselled us to proceed for the mo-
ment to Arras,  where M.  (I forget his name)

would aid us either to proceed,  or to change,  according
to circumstances,  our destination.      Not an instant.

302 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Paht III.

however,  was to be lost,  lest M.  Lameth should be
forced himself to detain us.  Horses,  therefore,  he
ordered for us,  and a guide across the country for
Arras.

I learnt nothing of this till we re-entered our car-
riage. The servants and waiters never quitted the
room,  and the Prefect had as much his own safety to
guard from ill construction or ill report as ours.  Ma-
dame d'Henin,  though rouged the whole time with
confusion,  never ventured to address a word to me.
It was,  indeed,  more easy to be silent than to speak to
me either with a tone of condescension or of command,
and any other must have been suspicious.  M.  de
Lally was equally dumb,  but acti\^  in holding out
every plat to me,  though always looking another way.
M.  Lameth eyed me with curiosity,  but had no re-
source against surmise save that adopted by Madame
d'Henin.  However,  he had the skill and the polite-
ness to name,  in the course of the repast,  M.  d'Arblay,
as if accidentally,  yet with an expression of respect
and distinction,  carefully,  as he spoke,  turning his eyes
from mine,  though it was the only time that,  volun-
tarily, he would have met them.

The horses being ready,  M.  Lameth took leave.

It was now about eleven at night.  The road was of
the roughest sort,  and we  -were jerked up and down
the ruts so as with difficulty to keep our seats  :  it was
also very dark,  and the drivers could not help fre-
quently going out of their way,  though the guide,
groping on upon such occasions on foot,  soon set them
right.     It was every way a frightful night.     Misery,

1815J OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        103

both public and private,  oppressed us all,  and the fear
of pursuit and captivity had the gloomy effect of
causing general taciturnity  ;  so that no kind voice,  nor
social suggestion,  diverted the sense of danger,  or ex-
cited one of hope.

At what hour we arrived at Arras on Wednesday,
the 22nd March,  I cannot tell ;  but we drove straight
to the Prefecture,  a very considerable mansion,  sur-
rounded with spacious grounds and gardens,  which to
me,  nevertheless,  had a bleak,  flat,  and desolate air,
though the sun was brightly shining.  We stopped at
the furthest of many gates on the high road,  while

Madame sent in to M. (I forget his name)  the

note with which we had been favoured by M.  Lameth.
The answer was a most courteous invitation of en-
trance, and the moment the carriage stopped at the
great door of the portico,  the Prefect,  M. ,  has-
tened out to give Madame d'Henin le bras.  He was
an old soldier and in full uniform,  and he came to us
from a battaHon drawn out in array on one side the
park.  Tall,  and with still a goodly port,  though with
a face worn and weather-beaten,  he had the air of a
gentleman as well as of a general officer;  and the open
and hospitable smile with which he received the Prin-
cesse,  while bareheaded and baldheaded he led her
into his palace,  diffused a welcome around that gave an
involuntary cheeriness even to poor dejected me.  How
indescribably gifted is  ''  the human face divine,"  in

104 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part TIT.

those who are invested with power,  to transmit or to
blifjht comfort even b}'  a glance  !

As Madame d'Henin demanded a private audience,
I know not what passed  ;  but I have reason to believe
we were the first who brought news to Arras that
approached to the truth of the actual position of
Paris.  M.  Lameth,  for political reasons,  had as stu-
diously avoided naming M.  de Lally as myself in his
note;  but M.  de Lally was treated by the mistress of
the house with the distinction due to a gentleman
travelling with La Princesse ;  and as to me,  some of the
3^ounger branches of the family took me under their
protection,  and very kind they were,  showing me the
garden,  library,  and views of the surrounding country.

Meanwhile,  an elegant breakfast was prepared for a
large company,  a review having been ordered for that
morning,  and several general officers being invited by
the Prefect.

This repast had a cheerfulness that to me,  an Eng-
lishwoman, was unaccountable and is indefinable.
The King had been compelled to fly his capital ;  no
one knew where he was seeking shelter;  no one
knew whether he meant to resign his crown in hope-
less inaction,  or whether to contest it in sanguinary
civil war.  Every family,  therefore,  with its every con-
nexion in the whole empire of the French,  was involved
in scenes upon which hung prosperity or adversity,
reputation or disgrace,  honour or captivit}^;  yet at
such a crisis the large assembled family met with
cheerfulness,  the many guests were attended to with
politeness,  and the goodly fare of that medley of re-

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         105

fresh ments called a dejeuner in France was met with
appetites as goodly as its incitements.

This could not be from insensibility ;  the French
are anything rather than insensible :  it could not bo
from attachment to Bonaparte,  the Prefect loudly de-
claring his devotion to Louis XVIII.  I can only,
therefore,  attribute it to the long revolutionary state
of the French mind,  as well as nation,  which had
made it so familiar to insurrection,  change,  and incer-
titude, that they met it as a man meets some unplea-
sant business which he must unavoidably transact,  and
which,  since he has no choice to get rid of,  he resolves
to get through to the best of his ability.

We were still,  however,  smelling sweet flowers and
regaled with fine fruits,  when this serenit}'  was some-
what ruffled by the arrival of the commander of the
forces which had been reviewed,  or destined for review,
I know not which.  He took the Prefect aside,  and
they were some time together.  He then,  only bowing
to the ladies of the house,  hastened off.  The Prefect
told us the news that imperfectly arrived was very
bad,  but he hoped a stand would be made against any
obstinate revolt;  and he resolved to assemble every
officer and soldier belonging to his government,  and
to call upon each separately to take again,  and so-
lemnly, his oath of allegiance.

While preparing for this ceremony the commander
again returned,  and told him he had positive informa-
tion that the defection was spreading,  and that whole
troops and companies were either sturdily waiting in
inaction,  or boldly marching on to meet the conqueror.

106      ,  DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

Our tabic was now Lrokcn vip,  and wc were wishing
to depart ere official intimation from the capital might
arrest our further progress  ;  but our horses were still
too tired,  and no others were to be procured.  We be-
came again very uneasy,  and uneasiness began to steal
upon all around us.  The Prefect was engaged in per-
petual little groups of consultation,  chiefly with general
officers,  who came and went with incessant bustle,  and
occasionally and anxiously were joined by persons of
consequence of the vicinity.  The greater the danger
appeared,  the more intrepidly the brave old Prefect
declared his loyalty ;  yet he was advised by all parties
to give up his scheme till he knew whether the King
himself made a stand in his own cause.

He yielded reluctantly ;  and when Madame d'Henin
found his steady adhesion to his King,  she came up to
him and said,  that,  finding the firmness of his devotion to
Louis XVIII.,  she was sure it would give him pleasure
to know he had at that moment under his roof the
w^ife of a general officer in the actual escort of his
Majesty.  He instantly came to me with a bene-
volent smile,  and we had a conversation of deep in-
terest upon the present state of things.  I had the
heartfelt satisfaction to find that my honoured hus-
band was known to him,  not alone by reputation,  but
personally;  and to find that,  and to hear his praise,
has always been one and the same thing.  Alas !  those
sounds on these sad ears vibrate no more !

During this discourse,  thus rendered enlivening to
me,  I discovered that my worthy host had not an idea
of possessing M.  de Lally under his roof;  and I had

1815]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         107

the very great pleasure of procuring to that valued
and honourable friend a welcome such as he merited ;
for no sooner had I mentioned him,  than the Prefect
became almost young again from the extacy of his joy.
"  What !"  he cried,  «  De Lally  ?  De Lally Tolendal  ?
That excellent citizen,  that exalted character,  that
iirst-rate man of parts and virtues united ! — Is he
here?  is he my guest?"

M.  de Lally,  who was taking a ruminating stroll,
was no sooner thus apostrophized,  than the hearing,
which is never obtuse where our own names are men-
tioned, became sufficiently acute to bring him to our
side ;  though not a word,  save that which,  identified
with ourselves,  is caught even from a whisper,  where
the loudest call might pass unheeded,  reached his ear.
And pleasant it was to contemplate the honest delight
in his open face,  when he saw himself suddenly drawn
from a depressing and subaltern place,  to be elevated
to that distinction which was so justly his due,  and
%vhich he enjoyed as highly as he deserved.  Ten years,
at least,  seemed snatched from his complexion,  and
twenty from the weight upon his spirits.  The Prefect,
repeatedly embracing him,  protested that his house
had,  that day,  received its greatest honour.

Our impatience to be gone now lost its eagerness,
though nothing had intervened to take away its pru-
dence; but we keep small account of time where we
are pleased — ah,  why does that oblivious neglect of its
calculation occur so seldom  ?

At length,  however,  about noon,  we set off,  accom-

108 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT III.

panied by the Prefect and all his family to our car-
riage.

I have forgotten to mention that,  from the com-
mencement of our flight,  we made a common travel-
ling purse,  each contributing six Napoleons,  to be
replenished as they were expended,  of which Ma-
dame d'Henin was Treasurer.  The servants,  as I had
none with me,  were kept by a separate account.

We were all somewhat roused from our dejection,  by
observing the general tendency to loyalty at the Pre-
fecture of Arras,  and by the personal kindness as well
as allegiance of the brave Prefect ;  though we grieved
to have returned his hospitality by leaving him so
much less happy than we had found him.

At Douay,  we had the satisfaction to see still
stronger outward marks of attachment to the King and
his cause,  for in every street through which we passed,
the windows were decked with emblems of faithfulness
to the Bourbon dynasty,  white flags,  or ribands,  or
handkerchiefs.  All,  however,  without commotion,  all
was a simple manifestation of respect.  No insurrection
was checked,  for none had been excited ;  no mob was
dispersed,  for scarcely any one seemed to venture from
his house.

Our intention was to quit the French territory that
night,  and sleep in more security at Tournay  ;  but
the roads became so bad,  and our horses grew so
tired,  that it was already dark before we reached
Orchies.  M.  de Lally went on from Donay in his
cabriolet,  to lighten our weight,  as Madame d'Henin

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  109

had a good deal of baggage.  We were less at our
ease,  while thus perforce travelling slower,  to find the
roads,  as we proceeded from Douay,  become more
peopled.  Hitherto they had seemed nearly a blank.
We now began,  also,  to be met,  or to be overtaken,  by
small parties of troops.  We naturally looked out with
earnestness on each side,  to discover to whom or to
what they belonged ;  but the compliment of a similar
curiosity on their part was all we gained.     Sometimes

they called out a  '^  Vive!  "  but without finishing

their wish ;  and we repeated — that is,  we bowed to —
the same hailing exclama^on,  without knowing or
daring to enquire its purport.

At Orchies,  where we arrived rather late in the
evening,  we first found decided marks of a revolution-
ary state of things.  No orders were sent by either
party.  The King and his government were too immi-
nently in personal danger to assert their rights,  or
retain their authority for directing the provinces;
Bonaparte and his followers and supporters were too
much engrossed by taking possession of the capital,
and too uncertain of their success,  to try a power which
had as yet no basis,  or risk a disobedience which they
had no means to resent.  The people,  as far as we could
see or learn,  seemed passively waiting the event ;  and
the constituted authorities appeared to be self-sus-
pended from their functions till the droit du plus fort
should ascertain who were their masters.

Nevertheless,  while we waited at Orchies for horses,
news arrived by straggling parties which,  though only
whispered,  created evidently some disturbance ;  a sort

110^  DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

of wondering expectation soon stared from face to face,
asking by the eye what no one durst pronounce by the
voice ;  what does all this portend  ?  and for what ought
we to prepare  ?

It was past eleven o'clock,  and the night was dark
and damp,  ere we could get again into our carriages;
but the increasing bustle warned us off,  and a nocturnal
journey had nothing to appal us equally with the
danger of remaining.  We eagerly,  therefore,  set off,
but we were still in the suburbs of Orchies,  when a call
for help struck our ears,  and the beriin stopped.  It
was so dark,  we could not at first discern what was the
matter,  but we soon found that the carriage of M.  de
Lally had broken down.

Madame d'Henin darted out of the beriin with the
activity of fifteen.  Her maid accompanied her,  and I
eagerly followed.

Neither M.  de Lally nor his man had received any
injury,  but the cabriolet could no longer proceed
without being repaired.  The groom was sent to dis-
cover the nearest blacksmith,  who came soon to examine
the mischief,  and declared that it could not be
remedied before daylight.  We were forced to submit
the vehicle to his decree ;  but our distress what to do
with ourselves was now very serious.  We knew there
was no accommodation for us at the inn we had just
quitted,  but that of passing the night by the kitchen
fire,  exposed to all the hazards of suspicious observa-
tion upon our evident flight.  To remain upon the
high road stationary in our beriin might,  at such a
period,  encompass us wdth dangers yet more serious.

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  Ill

We were yet unresolved,  when a light from the
windows of a small house attracted our attention,  and
a door was opened,  at which a gentlewoman some-
what more than elderly stood,  with a candle in her
hand,  that lighted up a face full of benevolence,  in
which was painted strong compassion on the view of
our palpable distress.  Her countenance encouraged
us to approach her,  and the smile with which she saw
us come forward soon accelerated our advance ;  and
when we reached her threshold^,  she waited neither for
solicitation nor representation,  but let us into her
small dwelling without a single question,  silently,  as if
fearful herself we might be observed,  shutting the street
door before she spoke.  She then lamented,  as we
must needs,  she said,  be cold and comfortless,  that she
had no fire,  but added that she and her little maid
were in bed and asleep,  when the disturbance on the
road had awakened her,  and made her hasten up,  to
enquire if any one were hurt.  We told as much of our
story as belonged to our immediate situation,  and she
then instantly assured us we should be welcome to
stay in her house till the cabriolet was repaired.

Without waiting for our thanks,  she then gave to
each a chair,  and fetched great plenty of fuel,  with
which she made an ample and most reviving fire,  in a
large stove that was placed in the middle of the room.
She had bedding,  she said,  for two,  and begged that,
when we were warmed and comforted,  we would decide
which of us most wanted rest.  We durst not,  how-
ever, risk,  at such a moment,  either being separated
or surprised ;   we entreated her,   therefore,  to let us

112:  DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.:

remain together,  and to retire herself to the repose her
humanity had thus broken.  But she would not leave
us.  She brought forth bread,  butter,  and cheese,  with
wine and some other beverage,  and then made us each
a large bowl of tea.  And when we could no longer
partake of her hospitable fare,  she fetched us each a
pillow,  and a double chair,  to rest our heads and our feet.

Thus cheered and refreshed,  we blessed our kind
hostess,  and fell into something like a slumber,  when
we were suddenly roused by the sound of trum-
pets, and warlike instruments,  and the trampling of
many horses,  coming from afar,  but approaching
with rapidity.  We all started up alarmed,  and pre-
sently the group,  perceiving,  I imagine,  through the
ill-closed shutters,  some light,  stopped before the
house,  and battered the door and the window,  demand-
ing admission.  We hesitated whether to remain or
endeavour to conceal ourselves ;  but our admirable
hostess bid us be still,  while,  calm herself,  she opened
the street door,  where she parleyed with the party,
cheerfully and without any appearance of fear,  and
telling them she had no room for their accommodation,
because she had given up even her own bed to some
relations who were travelling,  she gained from them an
applauding houza and their departure.

She then informed us they were Polish Lancers,  and
that she believed they were advancing to scour the
country in favour of Bonaparte.  She expressed her-
self an open and ardent loyalist for the Bourbons,  but
said she had no safety except in submitting,  like all
around her,  to the stronger powers.

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        113

Again,  by her persuasion,  we sought to compose
ourselves;  but a second party soon startled us from
our purpose,  and from that time we made no similar
attempt.  I felt horrified at every blast of the trum-
pet, and the fear of being made prisoner,  or pillaged,
assailed me unremittingly.

At about five o'clock in the morning our carriages
were at the door.  We blessed our benevolent hostess,
took her name and address,  that we might seek some
means of manifesting our gratitude,  and then quitted
Orchies.

For the rest of our journey till we reached the fron-
tiers, we were annoyed with incessant small military
groups or horsemen  ;  but though suspiciously regarded,
we were not stopped.  The fact is,  the new government
was not yet,  in those parts,  sufficiently organised to
have been able to keep if they had been strong enough
to detain us.  But we had much difficulty to have our
passports honoured for passing the frontiers ;  and if
they had not been so recently renewed at Amiens,  I
think it most probable our progress would have been
impeded till new orders and officers were entitled to
make us halt.

Great,  therefore,  was our satisfaction when,  through
all these difficulties,  we entered Tournay — where,  being
no longer in the lately restored kingdom of France,  we
considered ourselves to be escaped from the dominion
of Bonaparte,  and where we determined therefore to
remain till we could guide our further proceedings by
tidings of the plan and the position of Louis XVIII.

We went to the most considerable inn,  and all retired

VOL.  VII.  I

114 DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.  [Part III.

to rest,  which,  after so much fatigue,  mental and
bodily,  we required,  and happily obtained.

The next day we had the melancholy satisfaction of
hearing that Louis XVIII.  also had safely passed the
frontiers of his lost kingdom.

As we were less fearful,  row,  of making inquiries,
M.  de Lally soon learnt that his Majesty had halted at
Lille,  where he was then waiting permission and direc-
tions for a place of retreat from the King of Holland,
or the Netherlands.  But no intelligence whatsoever
could we gain relative to the Body Guards,  and my
disturbance increased every moment.

There was far more commotion at Tournay than at
-any other town through which we passed  ;  for as the
people here were not under the French government,
either old or new,  they were not awed into waiting to
know to which they should belong,  in fearful passive-
ness  :  yet they had all the perplexity upon their minds
of disquieting ignorance whether they were to be
treated as friends or foes,  since if Bonaparte pre-
^vailed they could not but expect to be joined again to
liis dominions.  All the commotion,  therefore,  of divided
interests and jarring opinions w^as awake,  and in full
operation upon the faculties and feelings of every
Belgian at this critical moment.

PART IV.

1815.

Anxiety of Madame d'Arblay respecting her husband — Endea-
vours to communicate with him by letter — Arrival of the
Prince de Conde— Madame d'Arblay's accidental meeting with
M.  de Chateaubriand— Her opinion of his works — Her de-
scription of M.  and Madame Chateaubriand— His popularity
in France — Napoleon's arbitrary conduct towards him — Ar-
rival of the fugitives at Brussels— La Comtesse de Maurville
—Character of the Belgians— Madame de la Tour du Pin —
The Duchess de Duras endeavours to obtain intelligence for
Madame d'Arblay— Dispersion of the King's body-guard on
the frontiers— News of M.  d'Arblay— Improved prospects of
Madame d'Arblay— Arrival of her husband at Brussels— En-
trance into his capital of the new King of the Netherlands —
M.  dArblay summoned to Gand— He is employed on a com-
mission to collect volunteers for Louis XVHL— Returns to
Brussels — His companions— Visit to the Palace of Lachen —
Madame Catalani— Lord Wellington— The Protestant Church

— Catholic Processions — Lady C L De Lally Tolen-

dal's farewell to public life— Madame d'Arblay's occupations
at this anxious period — The army of Brunswick on the march
— Progress of Bonaparte — Rumours at Brussels of his conflict
with the Allies — Colonel Jones,  the military commandant.

1815]  DIARY OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  117

PART IV.

1815.

N A R RAT I V E—  continued.

The horror of my suspense relative to the safety and
the fate of Monsieur d'Arblay reduced my mind to a
sort of chaos,  that makes it impossible to recollect
^Yhat was our abode at Tournay.  I can but relate my
distress and my researches.

My first thought was to send a letter to my General
at Lille,  which if he was there would inform him of my
vicinity,  and if not,  might perhaps find its way to his
destination.  At all events,  I resolved only to write
what would be harmless should it fall even into the
hands of the enemy.  I directed those few lines to M.
le Chevalier d'Arblay,  Officier Superieur du Corps dc
Garde de Sa Majeste Louis XVIII.

But when I would have sent them to the post,  I was
informed there was no post open to Lille.  I then
sought for a messenger,  but was told that Lille was
inaccessible.  The few letters that were permitted to
enter it were placed in a basket,  the handle of which
was tied to a long cord,  that was hooked up to the top
of the walls,  and thence descended to appointed ma-
gistrates.

118 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaUT IV.

Vainly I made every effort in my power to avail my-
self of this method ;  no one of my party,  nor at the
inn,  knew or could indicate any means that promised
success,  or even a trial.  "Worn at length by an anxiety
I found insupportable,  I took a resolution to go forth
myself,  stranger as I was to the place,  and try to get
my letter conveyed to the basket,  however difficult or
costly might be its carriage.  Quite alone,  therefore,  I
sallied forth,  purposing to find,  if possible,  some sturdy
boy who would be glad of such remuneration as I could
offer,  to pass over to Lille.

Again,  however,  vain was every attempt.  I entered
all decent poor houses;  I sauntered to the suburbs,
and entered sundry cottages;  but no inquiry could
procure either a man or a boy that would execute my
commission.  French was so generally known that I
commonly made myself understood,  though I only
received a shake of the head,  or a silent walking off,
in return to my propositions.  But,  in the end,  a lad
told me he thought he had heard that Madame la
Duchesse de St.  Agnes had had some intercourse with
Lille.  Delighted,  I desired him to show me the house
she inhabited.  We walked to it together,  and I then
said I would saunter near the spot while he entered,
with my earnest petition to know whether Madame
could give me any tidings of the King's Body-Guard.
He returned with an answer that Madame would reply
to a written note,  but to nothing verbal.  I bid the
boy hie with me to the inn ;  but as I had no writing
tackle,  I sent him forward to procure me proper
implements at the stationer's.     How it happened I

1815]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         119

know not,  but I missed the boy,  whom I could never
regain  ;  and 1 soon after lost my way myself.  In much
perplexity I was seeking information which way to
steer,  when a distant sound of a party of horse caught
my attention.  I stopped.  The sound approached
nearer ;  the boys and idle people in the street ran for-
ward to meet it,  and presently were joined or followed
by the more decent inhabitants.  I liad not the teme-
rity to make one among them,  yet my anxiety for news
of any sort was too acute to permit me to retire.  I
stood therefore still,  waiting for what might arrive,  till I
perceived some outriders galloping forward in the royal
livery of France.  Immediately after,  a chariot and
four with the arms of France followed,  encircled by
horsemen,  and nearly enveloped by a continually in-
creasing crowd,  whence,  from time to time,  issued a
feeble cry of ''  Vive le Roi !"  while two or three other
carriages brought up the rear.  With difficulty now
could I forbear plunging into ih^  midst of them,  for
my big expectations painted to me Louis XVI II.
arrived at Tournay,  and my bigger hopes pictured
with him his loyal guard.  They had soon however
passed by,  but their straggling followers showed me
their route,  which I pursued till I lost both sight and
sound belonging to them.  1 then loitered for my
errand boy,  till I found myself,  by some indications that
helped my remembrance,  near the spot whence I had
started.  Glad,  for safety's sake,  to be so near my then
home,  though mourning my fruitless wandering,  I
hastened my footsteps ;  but what was my emotion on
arriving within a few yards of the inn,  to observe the

120 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

royal carriage which had galloped past mc,  the horse-
men, the royal livery,  and all the appearance that had
awakened my dearest hopes.  The crowd was dispersed,
but the porter's lodge,  or perhaps bookkeeper's,  was
filled with gentlemen,  or officers in full uniform.  I
hurried on,  and hastily inquired who it was that had
just arrived.     My answer was,  Le Prince de Conde.

A thousand projects now occurred to me for gaining
intelligence from such high authority,  but in the large
court-yard I espied Madame d'Henin sauntering up
and down,  while holding by the arm of a gentleman I
had never before seen.  Anxious to avoid delay,  and
almost equally desirous to escape remonstrances on my
-enterprise,  since I could listen only to my restless
anxiety,  I would have glided by unnoticed;  but she
called after me aloud,  and 1 was compelled to approach
her.  She was all astonishment at my courage in thus
issuing forth alone,  I knew not where nor whither,  and
declared that I was meconnoissaUe ;  but I only answered
by entreating her to inquire the names of some of the
gentlemen just arrived,  that I might judge whether
.any among them could give me the information for
u'hicli I sighed.

No sooner did I hear that M.  le Comte de Viomenil
was of the number,  than,  recollecting his recent
appointment at Paris,  in conjunction with Victor de
Maubourg,  to raise volunteers for the King,  I decided
upon seeking him.  Madame d'Henin would have
given me some counsel,  but I could not hear her ;  as I
hurried off,  however,  the gentleman whose arm she held
offered me his assistance in a tone and with a look of

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         121

SO much benevolence,  that I frankly accepted it,  and
we sallied in search of a person known to me only by
name.  My stranger friend now saved me every exer-
tion, by making every inquiry,  and led me from corridor
to corridor,  above,  below^  and to almost every apart-
ment, asking incessantly if M.  le Comte de Viomenil
was not in the inn.

At length we learned that M.  de Viomenil was
dining quite alone in an upper chamber.

My kind-hearted conductor led me to the door of the
room assigned,  and then tapped at it;  and on an
answer of  "  Entrez  !  "  he let go my arm,  and with a
bow silently left me.

I found M.  de Viomenil at table :  he said he could
give no possible account of his Majesty,  save that he
was at Gand,  but that of the Body- Guard he knew
positiv^ely nothing.

I afterwards learnt that my benevolent strange
chevalier was no other than the celebrated M.  de
Chateaubriand.

I saw nothing more of him,  save for a moment,  when,
in passing by a small staircase that led to my chamber,
a door was suddenly opened,  whence Madame d'Henin
put out her head to invite me to enter,  when she pre-
sented me to him and to Madame de Chateaubriand,  a
very elegant woman,  but of a cold,  reserved demeanour.

I expressed eagerly the pleasure I had experienced
in seeing the author of  '  The Itinerary to Jerusalem,'  a
work I had read in Paris with extraordinary interest
and satisfaction ;  but I believe the  '  Genie du Chris-
tianisme,'  and perhaps the  '  Atala,'  were works so much

122 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

more prized by that author as to make my compliment
misplaced.  However,  I so much more enjoy the
natural,  pleasing,  instructive,  and simple,  though in-
genious style and matter of the  'Itinerary'  than I do
the overpowering sort of heroic eloquence of those
more popular performances,  that the zest of dear
hallowed truth would have been wanting had I not
expressed my choice.  The  'Itinerary'  is,  indeed,  one
of the most agreeable books I know.

M.  de Chateaubriand hung back,  whether pleased or
not,  with an air of gentlemanly serenity.

I had opportunity for no further effort:  we left
Tournay to proceed to Brussels,  and heavy was my
heart and my will to quit,  thus in ignorance,  the vicinity
of Lille.

At the town at which we stopped to dine,  which,  I
think,  was Atot,  we again met M.  et Madame de Cha-
teaubriand. This was a mutual satisfaction,  and w'e
agreed to have our meal in common.  I now had more
leisure,  not of time alone,  but of faculty,  for doing
justice to M.  de Chateaubriand,  whom I found amiable,
unassuming,  and,  though somewhat spoilt by the egre-
gious flattery to which he had been accustomed,  wholly
free from airs or impertinent self-conceit.  Excessive
praise seemed only to cause him excessive pleasure
in himself,  without leading to contempt or scorn of
others.  He is by no means tall,  and is rather thick-
set; but bis features are good,  his countenance is very
fine,  and his eyes are beautiful,  alike from colour,
shape,  and expression ;  while there is a striking be-
nevolence in his look,  tone of voice,  and manner.

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         123

Madame de Chateaubriand also gained ground by-
farther acquaintance.  She was faded^,  but not passee,
and was still handsome,  and of a most graceful car-
riage, though distant and uninviting.  Her loftiness
had in it something so pensive mixed with its haughti-
ness, that though it could not inspire confidence,  it did
not create displeasure.  She possessed also a claim to
sympathy and respect in being the niece of M.  de
Malesherbes,  that wise,  tender,  generous,  noble de-
fender of Louis XVI.

The conversation during and after dinner was highly-
interesting.  M.  de Chateaubriand opened upon his
situation with a trusting unreserve that impressed me
with an opinion of the nobleness of his mind.  Bona-
parte had conceived against him,  he said,  a peculiar
antipathy,  for which various motives might be assigned  :
he enumerated them not,  however,  probably from the
presence of his wife ;  as his marriage with a niece of
that martyr to the service of the murdered King,
Louis XVL,  I conclude to be at their head.  The
astonishing and almost boundless success of his works,
since he was dissatisfied with his principles,  and more
than suspicious of his disaffection to the Imperial go-
vernment, must have augmented aversion by mixing
with it some species of apprehension.  I know not what
were the first publications of M.  de Chateaubriand,
but they were in such high estimation when first I heard
him mentioned,  that no author was more celebrated in
France ;  when his  '  Martyres '  came out,  no other
book was mentioned ;  and the famous critic GeolFroy,
who guided the taste of Paris,  kept it alive by criticisms

124 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

of alternate praise and censure without end.  '  Atala,'
the pastoral heroic romance,  bewitched all the reading
ladies into a sort of idolatry of its writer,  and scarcely
a page of it remained unadorned by some represen-
tation in painting.  The enthusiasm,  indeed,  of the
draughtsmen and of the fair sex seemed equally
emulous to place the author and the work at the head
of celebrity and the fashion.

Of all this,  of course,  he spoke not;  but he related
the story of his persecution by Napoleon concerning
his being elected a member of the French Institute.
I was in too much disturbance to be able to clearly
listen to the narrative,  but I perfectly recollect that
the censor,  to soften Napoleon,  had sent back the
manuscript to M.  de Chateaubriand,  with an intimation
that no public discourse could be delivered that did
not contain an eloge of the Emperor.  M.  de Chateau-
briand complied with the ordonnance ;  but whether the
forced praise was too feeble,  or whether the aversion
was too insuperable,  I know not :  all that is certain is,
that Napoleon,  after repeated efforts from the Institute
of re-election,  positively refused to ratify that of M.  de
Chateaubriand.

Another time a cousin of this gentleman was re-
puted to be engaged in a conspiracy against the
Emperor.  M.  de Chateaubriand solemnly declared he
disbelieved the charge ;  and,  as his weight in public
opinion was so great,  he ventured to address a sup'
jjlique to Napoleon in favour of his kinsman  .  .  •  .  ;
but the answer which reached him the following day
was an account of his execution !

1S15]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         125

Madame de Chateaubriand spoke very little,  and
rarely said even a word save to her husband,  for whom
her eyes spoke an attachment the most tender,  yet
unquiet.  He,  in return,  treated her with deference
and softness.

We separated from this interesting pair with regret,
and the rest of our journey to Brussels was without
event,  for,  to passport difficulties we became accustomed,
and grew both adroit and courageous in surmounting
them.

Arrived at Brussels,  we drove immediately to the
house in which dwelt Madame la Comtesse de Maur-
ville.  That excellent person had lived many years in
England an emigrant,  and there earned a scanty main-
tenance by keeping a French school.  She had now
retired upon a very moderate pension,  but was sur-
rounded by intimate friends,  who only suffered her to
lodge at her own home.  She received us in great dis-
may, fearing to lose her  ^little all by these changes of
government.  I was quite ill on my arrival :  excessive
fatigue,  affright,  and watchfulness overwhelmed me.
I kept my bed a day or two ;  but with the aid of
Dr.  James's medicines,  and my own earnest efforts to
employ every faculty as well as every moment in re-
searches, I then recovered and again went to work.

At Brussels all was quiet and tame.  The Belgians
had lost their original antipathy to Bonaparte,  without
having yet had time to acquire any warmth of interest
for the Bourbons.     Natively phlegmatic,  they demand

126 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

great causes or strong incitement to rouse them from
that sort of passiveness that is the offspring of philo-
sophy and timidity — philosophy,  that teaches them to
prize the blessings of safety ;  and timidity,  that points
out the dangers of enterprise.  In all I had to do with
them I found them universally worthy,  rational,  and
kind-hearted ;  but slow,  sleepy,  and uninteresting.

Exceptions,  however,  to this general observation I
had the happiness to meet with,  and perhaps they may
be numerous.  My sojourn was too short,  and my life
was too obscure,  to authorise any positive opinion.

In the sick room to which I was immediately con-
signed, I met with every sort of kindness from Madame
de Maurvilie,  whom I had known intimately at Paris,
and who had known and appreciated my beloved,  exem-
plary sister PhiUips in London.  Madame de Maurville
was a woman that the Scotch would call long-headed ;
she was sagacious^  penetrating,  and gifted with strong
humour.  She saw readily the vices and follies of man-
kind, and laughed at them heartily,  without troubling
herself to grieve at them.  She was good herself,  alike
in heart and in conduct,  and zealous to serve and
oblige  ;  but with a turn to satire that made the defects
of her neighbours rather afford her amusement than
concern.

I was visited here by the highly accomplished
Madame de la Tour du Pin,  wife to the favourite
nephew of Madame d'Henin;  a woman of as much
courage as elegance,  and who had met danger,  toil,
and difficulty in the Revolution with as much spirit,
and nearly as much grace,  as she had displayed in

IS 15]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        127

meetino^  universal admiration and homage at the court
of Marie-Antoinette,  of which she was one of the most
brilHant latter ornaments.  Her husband was at this
time one of the French ministers at the Congress at
Vienna ;  whence,  as she learned a few da3^s after my
arrival at Brussels,  he had been sent on an embassy of
the deepest importance and risk,  to La Vendee or Bor-
deaux. She bore the term of that suspense w^ith an
heroism that I greatly admired,  for I well knew she
adored her husband.  M.  la Tour du Pin had been
a prefect of Brussels under Bonaparte,  though never
in favour,  his internal loyalty to the Bourbons
being well known.  But Bonaparte loved to attach
great names and great characters to his govern-
ment, conscious of their weiorht both at home and
abroad,  and he trusted in the address of that mental
diving-machine,  his secret police,  for warding off any
hazard he might run,  from employing the adherents
of his enemies.  His greatly capacious,  yet only half-
formed mind,  could have parried,  as w^ell as braved,
every danger and all opposition,  had not his inordi-
nate ambition held him as arbitrarily under control
as he himself held under his own control every other
passion.

Madame de Maurville soon found us a house,  of which
we took all but the ground floor :  the rez de chaussee
was mine,  the first-floor was Madame d'Henin's,  and
that above it was for M.  de Lally.  It was near the
cathedral,  and still in a prolongation of Madame de
Maurville's street,  la Rue de la Montague.

Nothino^  was known at Brussels,  nothing at all,   of

128 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IV.

the fate of the Body-Guard,  or of the final destination
of Louis XVIII.  How circumstances of such moment,
nay,  notoriety,  could be kept from public knowledge,
I can form no idea ;  but neither in the private houses
of persons of the first rank,  in which,  through Madame
d'Henin,  I visited,  nor in any of the shops,  nor by
any other sort of intercourse^,  either usual or accidental,
could I gather any intelligence.

Madame la Duchesse de Duras,  ci-devant Mademoi-
selle Kersaint,  who had visited me in Paris,  and who
was now in hasty emigration at Brussels,  with her
youngest daughter.  Mademoiselle Clara de Duras,
seemed sincerely moved by my distress,  and wrote to
various of her friends,  who were emigrating within her
reach,  to make inquiry for me.  I visited her in a
shabby hotel,  where I found her without suite or equi-
page, but in perfect tranquillity at their loss,  and not
alone unmurmuring,  but nearly indifferent to her pri-
vations; while Mademoiselle Clara ran up and down
stairs on her mother's messages,  and even brought in
wood for the stove,  with an alacrity and cheerfulness
that seemed almost to enjoy the change to hardships
from grandeur.  Indeed,  to very young people,  such
reverses,  for a certain time,  appear as a frolic.  Novelty,
mere novelty,  during the first youth,  can scarcely be
bought too dear.

From M.  de la Feronaye,  Madame de Duras pro-
cured me intelligence that the Body-Guard had been
dispersed and disbanded by the Duke de Berry,  on the
frontiers of La Belgique ;  they were left at liberty to
remain in France,  or to seek other asylums,  as his

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  129

Majesty Louis XVIII.  could not enter the kingdom
of Holland with a military guard of his own.

This news left me utterly in the dark which way to
look for hope or information.  Madame de Duras,
however,  said she expected soon to see the Due de
Richelieu,  whose tidings might be more precise.

In one of my visits to this lady,  I again met M.  and
Madame de Chateaubriand ;  but my mind was too
much pre-occupied to take the pleasure I might other-
wise have felt from their acquaintance.  Madame de
Duras really entered into the subject of my miser}^
and seemed capable to fully comprehend it.

Ten wretched days passed on in this ignorance,
from the 19th to the 29th of March,  1815,  when
Madame de Maurvilleflew into my apartment,  with all
the celerity of fifteen,  and all the ardour of twenty
years of age,  to put into my hands a letter from
General d'Avblay,  addressed to herself,  to enquire
whether slie had any tidings to give him of my exist-
ence, and whether I had been heard of at Brussels,  or
was known to have travelled to Bordeaux,  as Madame
d'Henin,  cousin to Madame de Maurville,  had been
uncertain,  when M.  d'Arblay left me in Paris,  to
which of those cities she should go.

The joy of that moment.  Oh !  the joy of that moment
that showed me again the handwriting that demon-
strated the life and safety of all to which my earthly
happiness clung,  can never be expressed,  and only
by our meeting,  when at last it took place,  could
be equalled.  It was dated Ypres,  27 Mars.  I wrote
directly thither,  proposing to join him,  if there were
VOL.  vn.  K

130 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

any impediment to his coming on to Brussels,  I had
already written,  at hazard,  to almost every town in the
Netherlands.  The very next day,  another letter from
the same kind hand arrived to Madame la Duchesse
d'Hurste.  This was succeeded by news that the King-,
Louis XVII I.,  had been followed to Gand by his Body-
Guard,  Thither,  also,  I expedited a letter,  under cover
to the Due de Luxembourg,  capitaine of tbe company
to which M.  d'Arblay belonged.

I lived now in a hurry of delight that scarcely al-
lowed me breathing- time,  a delight that made me
forget all ray losses,  my misfortunes — my papers,  keep-
sakeSj valuables of various sorts,  with our goods,  clothes,
money-bonds,  and endless et ceteras,  left,  as I had
reason to fear,  to seizure and confiscation upon the
entry of the Emperor into Paris — all,  all was light,  was
nothing in the scale  ;  and I wrote to my Alexander,
and my dearest friends,  to rejoice in my joy,  and
that they had escaped my alarm.

Next day,  and again the next,  came a letter from
M.  d'Arblay himself.  The first was from Ypres,  the
second was from Bruges,  and brought by the post,  as
my beloved correspondent had been assured of my
arrival at Brussels by the Due de Luxembourg,
a Ghistelle,  near Ostend,  which M.  d'Arblay was
slowly approaching on horseback,  when he met the
carriage of Louis XV III.,  as it stopped for a relay of
horses,  and the Due,  espying him,  descended from
the second carriage of the King's suite,  to fly to
and embrace him,  with that lively friendship he has
ever manifested towards him.     Thence they agreed

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         131

that the plan of embarkation should be renounced,
and,  instead of Ostend,  M.  d'Arblay turned his horse's
head towards Gand,  where he had a rendezvous with
the Due.

There he remained,  to renew the offer of his services
to his King",  and there he was most peculiarly distin-
guished by M.  le Due de Feltre  (General Clarke),  who
was still occupying the post assigned him on the
restoration of Louis XVIII.  of Ministre de la Guerre.

Relieved now — or rather blest — I was no longer
deaf to the kindness of those who sought to enliven
my exile ;  I not only visited Madame la Duchesse de
Duras,  but also cultivated an intercourse with the
charming Madame de la Tour du Pin,  whom I was the
more glad to find delightful from her being of English
origin;  a Mademoiselle Dillon,  whose family was
transplanted into France under James II.,  and who
was descended from a nobleman whose eminent accom-
phshments she inherited with his blood ;  the famous
Lord Falkland,  on whose tomb in Westminster Abbey
is carved

"  Here lies the friend of Sir Philip Sidney."

Her sister,  Miss Fanny Dillon,  had been married by
Bonaparte to General Bertrand ;  and thus,  while one
of them was an emigrant following the fortunes of
the Bourbons,  the other was soon after destined to
accompany Bonaparte himself into exile.  Le Colonel
de Beaufort,  also,  a warm,  early friend of General
d'Arblay,  belonging to the garrison of Metz or of
Toul,  I forget which,    had married a lady of great

K 2

132 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

wealth in La Belgique ;  a woman rather unhappy in
her person,  but possessed of a generous and feeling
heart :  and this she instantly demonstrated by seeking
and cultivating an acquaintance with the wandering
wife of her husband's early camarade.  I found her so
amiable,  and so soothing in her commiseration during
my distress,  that I warmly returned the partiality she
showed me.

Four days passed thus serenely,  when,  on that which
completed a fortnight's absence from my best friend,
the Due de Duras came to convoy his wife to Gand,
where he was himself in waiting upon Louis XVIII.,
and shortly afterwards M.  de Chateaubriand was made
a privy counsellor and settled there also.  And within
a day or two after this my door was opened by General
d'Arblay!  Oh,  how sweet was this meeting!  this
blessed reunion  ! — how perfect,  how exquisite  !

Here I must be silent.

General d'Arblay was only with me by the permis-
sion of the Due de Luxembourg,  and liable to receive
orders daily to return to Gand;  for I found,  to my
speechless dismay,  yet resistless approbation,  that
General d'Arblay had made a decision as noble as it
was dangerous,  to refuse no call,  to abstain from no
effort,  that might bring into movement his loyalty to
his King and his cause,  at this moment of calamity to
both.  Yet such was the harassed,  or rather broken
-state of his health,  that his mental strength and un-
conquerable courage alone preserved the poor shat-
tered frame from sinking into languor and inertion.

At this time we boarded and lodged by pic-nic con-

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  133

tract with the Princesse d'Henin,  as did also M.  de
Lallj,  when he was not at Gand,  in attendance as
privy counsellor upon Louis XVIII.  We exerted our-
selves to visit and receive my new pleasing friend —
such she sought to be — Madame de Beaufort.  We
reciprocated,  also^  morning visits with Madame de la
Tour du Pin and her young married daughter,  Ma-
dame de Liedekirke ;  with the good and gay Madame
de Maurville,  and Madame de Merode,  ci-devant Ma-
demoiselle de Grammont;  and we waited upon La
Duchesse d'Urseh a woman of the highest manners
and of very good discourse;  M.  d'Arblay received
M.  de Carbonniere and other gentlemen,  and I began
an acquaintance with the Boyd family.

About this time I saw also the entry of the new
King,  William Frederick,  of the new kingdom of the
Netherlands.  Tapestry,  or branches of trees,  were
hung out at all the windows,  or,  in their failure,  dirty
carpets,  old coats and cloaks,  and even mats — a motley
display of proud parade or vulgar poverty^  that always,
to me,  made processions on the continent appear bur-
lesque.

On the 22nd of April opened a new source,  though
not an unexpected one,  of inquietude that preyed the
more deeply upon my spirits from the necessity of con-
cealing its torments The military call for M.

d'Arblay arrived from Gand.  The summons was
from M.  le Comte de Roch.

The immediate hope in which we indulged at this
call was,  that the mission to which it alluded need not
necessarily separate us,  but tliat I might accompany

134 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

my honoured husband and remain at his quarters.
But,  alas  !  he set out instantly for Gand,  whence he
wrote me,  on the instant he had had his audi-
ence of the Ministre de la Guerre,  Clarke,  Due de
Feltre  :—

*'  Nous nous sommes trompes,  cruellement trompes.

ce qu il y a de plus facheux c'est que nous ne

serons pas ensemble,  car je ne crois ni prudent,  ni
meme possible,  pour toi de me suivre sur I'extreme
frontiere ou Ton m'envoye.  Cette mission,  tres deli-
cate et en meme terns tres difficile,  est encore plus
embarrassante puisque il ne s'agit de rien moins que
d'agir avec les Prussiens,  auxquels il ne sera pas aise de
faire entendre raison.  Et qui aurai-je a commander  ?
des gens qui jusqu'a present sont a trouver, — des de-
serteurs,  dans lesquels je n'aurai aucune confiance.  .  .  .
C'est bien a present qu'il faut rassembler tout notre
courage!'

The next day,  April 23rd,  brought me a letter much
less dispirited :  the mission was to Luxembourg.  His
adjoint was the Colonel Comte de Mazancourt,  his
aide-de-camp M.  de Premorel,  and also that gentle-
man's son.  The plan was to collect and examine all
the soldiers who were willing to return from the army
of Bonaparte to that of Louis XVIII.  Eleven other
general officers were named to similar posts,  all on
frontier towns,  for the better convenience of receiving
the volunteers.

On the 24th April M.  d'Arblay again joined me
revived by his natively martial spirit,  and pleased to
be employed !

1S15]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  135

At the head of this mission stood INI.  le General de
Beurnonville.

The necessity of having apartments to ourselves,
with a dining-room for the adjoint and the aides-de-
camp, made us now relinquish our jnc-nic with Madame
d'Henin and M.  de Lally,  to go to a dwelling in the
Marche aux Bois.

April 26,  we left La Rue de La Montague,  after,  on
my part,  exactly a month's residence.  Our new apart-
ments were au premier,  and commodious and pleasant.
One drawing-room was appropriated solely by M.
d'Arblay for his military friends or military business;
the other was mine.

Here we spent together seventeen days ;  and not to
harass my recollections,  I will simply copy wdiat I
find in my old memorandum-book,  as it was written
soon after those days were no more  : — "  Seventeen days
I have passed with my best friend;  and,  alas  !  passed
them chiefly in suspense and gnawing inquietude,
covered over with assumed composure ;  but they have
terminated,  Heaven be praised  !  with better views,  with
softer calm,  and fairer hopes.  Heaven realize them I
I am much pleased with his companions.  M.  le
Comte de Mazancourt,  his adjoint,  is a gay,  spirited,
and spirituel young man,  remarkably well bred,  and
gallantly fond of his profession.  M.  de Premorel,  the
aide-de-camp,  is a man of solid worth and of delicate
honour,  and he is a descendant of Godefroy de Bou-
illon. To this must be added,  that he is as poor as
he is noble,  and bears his penury with the gentlemanly
sentiment of feeling it distinct from disgrace.     He is

136 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

married,  and lias ten or eleven children :  he resides
with a most deserving  \vifc,  a  \Yoman also of family,
on a small farm,  Avhich he works at himself,  and which
repays him by its produce.  For many days in the
year,  potatoes,  he told me,  were the only food they
could afford for themselves or their offspring !  But
they eat them with the proud pleasure of indepen-
dence and of honour and loyalty,  such as befits their
high origins,  always to serve,  or be served^  in the
line of their legal princes.  As soon as Louis XVIII.
was established on his throne,  M.  de Premorel made
himself known to the Due de Luxembourg,  who placed
him in his own company in the Garde du Corps,  and
put his son upon the supernumerary list "

This young man is really charming.  He has a
native noblesse of air and manner,  with a suavity as well
as steadiness of serene politeness,  that announce the
Godefroy blood flowing with conscious dignity and in-
born courage through his youthful veins.  He is very
young,  but tall and handsome,  and speaks of all his
brothers and sisters as if already he were chef defamille,
and bound to sustain and protect them.  I dehghted
to lead him to talk of them,  and the conversation on
that sui)ject always brightened him into joy and lo-
quacity. He named every one of them to me in par-
ticular repeatedly,  with a desire I should know them
individually,  and a warm hope I might one day verify
his representations.

This youth,  Alphonse,  and his father dined with us
daily at this period.  All the mornings were devoted
to preparations for the ensuing expected campaign.

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         137

When,  however,  all was prepared,  and the word of
command alone was waited for from the Marechal Due
de Feitre,  my dearest friend indulged in one morning's
recreation,  which proved as agreeable as anything at
such a period could be to a mind oppressed like mine.
He determined that we should visit the Palais de
Lachen,  which had been the dwelling assigned as the
palace for the Empress Josephine by Bonaparte at the
time of his divorce.  My dearest husband drove me
in his cabriolet,  and the three gentlemen whom he in-
vited to be of the party accompanied us on horseback.
The drivO;,  the day,  the road,  the views,  our neic horses
— all were delightful,  and procured me a short relaxa-
tion from the foresight of evil.

The palace of Lachen was at this moment wholly un-
inhabited, and shown to us by some common servant.
It is situated in a delicious park a VAnglaise,  and with
a taste,  a polish,  and an elegance that clears it from the
charge of frippery or gaudiness,  though its ornaments
and embellishments are all of the liveliest gaiety.
There is in some of the apartments some Gobelin
tapestry,  of which there are here and there parts and
details so exquisitely worked that I could have  "  hung
over them enamoured."

Previously to this reviving excursion my dearest
friend had driven me occasionally in the famous allee
verte,  which the inhabitants of Brussels consider as the
first promenade in the world ;  but it by no means an-
swered to such praise in my eyes :  it is certainly very
pretty,  but too regular,  too monotonous,  and too flat
to be eminently beautiful,  though from some parts the

138 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT TV.

most distant from the city there are views of cottages
and hamlets that afford great pleasure.

Our last entertainment here was a concert in the
public and fine room appropriated for music or
dancing.  The celebrated Madame Catalani had a
benefit;,  at which the Queen of the Netherlands was
present,  not,  however,  in state,  though not incognita;
and the king of warriors.  Marshal Lord Wellington,
surrounded b}'  his staff and all the officers and first
persons here,  whether Belgians,  Prussians,  Hanove-
rians, or English.  I looked at Lord Wellington watch-
fully, and was charmed with every turn of his coun-
tenance, with his noble and singular physiognomy and
his eagle eye.  He was gay even to sportiveness all
the evening,  conversing with the officers around him.
He never was seated,  not even a moment,  though I
saw seats vacated to offer to him frequently.  He
seemed enthusiastically charmed with Catalani,  ar-
dently applauding whatsoever she sung,  except the
Rule Britannia ;  and there,  wdth sagacious reserve,
he listened in utter silence.  Who ordered it I know
not,  but he felt it was injudicious in every country but
our own to give out a chorus of  'Kule,  Britannia!
Britannia,  rule the Waves ! '

And when an encore began to be vociferated from
his officers,  he instantly crushed it by a commanding
air of disapprobation,  and thus offered me an oppor-
tunity of seeing how magnificently he could quit his
convivial familiarity for imperious dominion when oc-
casion might call for the transformation.

J 815]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         139

When the full order arrived from Gand,  establishing
the mission of M.  d'Arblay at Luxembourg,  he decided
upon demanding an audience of the Duke of Welling-
ton, with whom he thought it necessary to concert his
measures.  The Duke received him without difficulty,
and they had a conference of some length,  the result
of which was that his Grace promised to prepare
Blucher,  the great Prussian general,  then actually at
Luxembourg,  for aiding the scheme.

M.  d'Arblay himself also wrote to Bliicher;  but
before any answer could be returned,  a new ordonnance
from the Due de Feltre directed M.  d'Arblay to
hasten to his post without delay.

May 13,  1815. — My best friend left me to begin his
campaign ;  left me,  by melancholy chance,  upon his
birthday.  I could not that day see a human being ;
I could but consecrate it to thoughts of him who had
just quitted me ;  yet who from me never was,  never
can be,  mentally absent ;  and to our poor Alexander,
thus inevitably,  yet severely cast upon himself.

The next day the gentle and feeling Madame de
Beaufort spent the morning with me,  using the most
engaging efforts to prevail with me to dine constantly
at her table,  and to accompany her in a short time to
her villa.  Without any charms,  personal or even in-
tellectual, to catch or fascinate,  she seemed to have so
much goodness of character,  that I could not but try
to attach myself to^  her,  and accept her kindness as
the  "  cordial drop  "  to make the cup of woe of my sad
solitude go down ;  for Madame d'Henin,  who,  to equal
sensibility,  joined the finest understanding,  was now

140 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

SO absorbed in politics that she had no time for any
expansion of S3^mpathy.  She came,  nevertheless,  to
see me in the evening,  and to endeavour to draw me
again into human life !  And her kind effort so far
conquered me,  that I called upon her the next day,  and
met Madame de Vaudreuil,  for whom I had a still
unexecuted commission from the Duchess-Dowager of
Buccleuch,  upon whom I had waited at the request
of the Princesse de Chimay,  to entreat the interest of
her Grace with the Prince-Regent,  that the English
pension accorded to the Duchess of Fitzjames might
be continued to the Duke,  her husband,  who remained
a ruined widower with several children.  I failed in
my attempt,  the natural answer being,  that there was
no possibility of granting a pension to a foreigner who
resided in his own country while that country was at
open war with the land whence he aspired at its ob-
tention,  a word I make for my passing convenience.
I exchanged visits also with Madame de la Tour da
Pin,  the truly elegant,  accomplished,  and high-bred
niece,  by marriage,  of Madame la Princesse d'Henin.
Her husband,  M.  de la Tour du Pin,  was at that time
at Vienna,  forming a part of the renowned Congress,
by which he was sent to La Vendee;  to announce there
the resolution of the assembled Sovereigns to declare
Bonaparte an outlaw,  in consequence of his having
broken the conditions of his accepted abdication.  And
I was discovered and visited by M.  le Comte de Bour-
sac,  one of the first officers of the establishment of the
Prince de Conde,  with whom he was then at Brussels  ;
a man of worth and cultivation.     At Paris he visited

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  141

US SO often,  that he took up the name at the door of
''^Le Voisin/'  thinking it more safe to be so designated
than to pronounce too frequently the name of a known
adherent to the Bourbons.  The good Madame de
Maurville I saw often,  and the family of the Boyds,
with whicli my General had engaged me to quit Brus-
sels, should Brussels become the seat of war.

The Protestant church was here open to me,  and the
King and Queen of the Netherlands went to it them-
selves, with their family,  but w^itliout the smallest state.
They both look good,  but too meek and unimportant to
answer to the representative dignity of their high
station,  of which they inspire not an idea.  The Prince
hereditary was there also,  and his air was rather more
appropriate to his rank,  though utterly unassuming.
The Princess of Orange also,  the Kino^'s mother,  whose
demeanour w^as perfectly in character with her situation.
She is sister to the King of Prussia and to the Duchess
of York.  The Dutch ladies then in w^aitino"  were even
comically fearful of making themselves of any conse-
quence, and they ran skidding down the aisle of the
chapel,  tip tap,  tip tap,  like frightened hares^  making
no sound in their progress,  from apprehension of ex-
citing notice,  yet looking mean rather than timid;  as
their Royal Mistress looked humble rather than grate-
ful, in bowing her way dow^n the same aisle.  I thought
of our Princess Charlotte,  and how little her high spirit
would accord with such obsequious gentleness.

I had no application to make for a ticket,  or a seat ;
all who presented themselves at the door were admitted
without difficulty,   and took the best place vacant.

142 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

There were no pews for the congregation at large,
merely rows of forms on each side of the unadorned
edifice,  with room left between them for walking down
to enter them,  and to proceed to the altar.

Brussels in general,  nevertheless,  was then inhabited
by Catholics,  and Catholic ceremonies were not unfre-
quent.  In particular,  la Fete Dieuw^is kept with much
pomp,  and a procession of priests paraded the streets,
accompanied by images,  pictures,  paintings,  tapestry,
and other insir/nia of outward and visible worship ;
and the windows were hung with carpets,  and rugs,
and mats,  and almost with rags,  to prove good will,  at
least,  to  "what they deem a pious show.  Ludicrous
circumstances without end interrupted,  or marred the
procession,  from frequent hard showers,  during which
the priests,  decorated with splendid robes and petti-
coats, and ornaments the most gaudy,  took sudden
refuge at the doors of the houses by which they were
passing,  and great cloths,  towels,  or coarse canvas,
were flung over the consecrated finery,  and the relics
were swaddled up in flannels,  while dirt,  splashes,  run-
ning, scampering,  and ludicrous wa-appings up,  broke
at once and disfigured the procession.  Madame de
Beaufort oSered to take me to see all that was curious
or beautiful in Brussels ;  but I had not sufficiently re-
covered from my consternation at this new separation
before that kind new friend was taken dangerously ill
of a pleurisy,  which in a very short time deprived her
of life.  A hard blow I felt this,  and from that time I
thought no more of examining this celebrated city;
my spirits,  already oppressed,  were utterly sunk;  and

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         143

though I saw not unfrequently my dear Madame
d'Henin,  and also Madame la Tour du Pin,  and
Madame Maurville,  I only twice was induced to
join ia any social meeting at the houses of eny of
them.  At Madame d'Henin's I saw the Marechal
Marmont,  Due de Raguse,  and M.  Mounier,  whom I
had known when he was private secretary to Bonaparte,
M.  Louis,  Ministre de Finance,  and M.  L'Anglaise,
Pere of the Senate,  as well as Hombert de la Tour du
Pin,  and many others ;  but with no intimacy,  for poli-
tics were then so absorbing,  that save to be all on
fire with those who were inflamed,  or all in despair
with those who were gloomy,  there was not the
smallest amity in any intercourse.  At Madame de la
Tour du Pin's I kept the Fete of Madame de Maurville,
with a large and pleasant party;  and I just missed

meeting the famous Lady C L ,  who had been

there at dinner,  and whom I saw,  however,  crossing the
Place Royale,  from Madame de la Tour du Pin's to the
Grand Hotel ;  dressed,  or rather not dressed,  so as to
excite universal attention,  and authorise every boldness
of starino-,  from the General to the lowest soldier,
among the military groups then constantly parading
La Place, — for she had one shoulder,  half her back,  and
all her throat and neck,  disx)layed as if at the call of
some statuary for modeUing a heathen goddess.  A
slight scarf hung over the other shoulder,  and the rest
of the attire was of accordant lightness.  As her Lady-
ship had not then written,  and was not,  therefore,  con-
sidered as one apart,  from being known as an eccentric
authoress,  this conduct and demeanour excited some-

144 BIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

thing beyond surprise,  and in an English lady provoked
censure,  if not derision,  upon the whole English nation.

Very soon after his return to Brussels,  M.  de Lally
paid me a long visit,  in which he read to me a Fare-
well to Public Life,  addressed to Louis XVIII.,  in
something between a letter and a memorial.  It was
written with all the spirit,  the nobleness,  and the high
sentiment belonging to his eloquence ;  yet I sin-
cerely regretted his resignation,  which I saw was the
effect of some disappointment ;  but which I had the
great pleasure,  not very long afterwards,  to find relin-
quished, in consequence of which he became one of the
most useful,  as he was always the most exalted,  of the
diplomatic orators.

Another visit of an interest that came yet more
home to my business and bosom,  I received from
Monsieur le Due de Luxembourg,  who came to inform
me that he was on the point of negotiating with the
Duke of WelUngton and Prince Bliicher,  upon raising
a royal corps to accompany their army into France,
should the expected battle lead to that result ;  and he
desired me to prepare M.  d'Arblay,  should such be the
case,  for a recal from Treves,  that he might resume his
post in the body-guards belonging to the Compagniede
Luxembourg.  He spoke of my beloved in terms of
such high consideration,  and with expressions so amia-
ble of regard and esteem,  that he won my heart.  He
could by no means,  he said,  be again under active
military orders,  and consent to lose so distinguished an
officer from his corps.  I had formerly met the Duke
in Paris,  at Madame de Laval's;    and he had honoured

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  145

me with a visit chez moi immediately after my return
from England:  and in consequence of those meetings,
and of his real friendship for M.  d'Arblay,  he now
spoke to me with the unreserved trust due to a tried
confidante in case of peril and urgency.  He stayed with
nie nearly two hours — for when once the heart ven-
tured to open itself upon the circumstances,  expecta-
tions, or apprehensions of that eventful period,  subjects,
opinions,  and feelings pressed forward with such eager-
ness for discussion,  that those who upon such conditions
met,  found nothing so difficult as to separate.

I wrote instantly to M.  d'Arblay  ;  but the Due's
plan proved abortive,  as the Duke of Wellington and
Prince BUicher refused all sanction to the junction of a
French army with that of the allies.  They thought,
perhaps — and perhaps justly,  that by entering France
with natives against natives,  they might excite a civil
war,  more difficult to conduct than that of only
foreigners against foreigners.

Suspense,  during all this period,  was frightfully mis-
tress of the mind;  nothing was known,  everything was
imagined.  The two great interests that were at war,  the
Bourbonists and Bonapartists,  were divided and sub-
divided into factions,  or rather fractions,  without end,
and all that was kept invariably and on both sides
alive w^as expectation.  Wanderers,  deserters,  or cap-
tives, from France,  arrived daily at Brussels,  all with
varying news of the state of that empire,  and of the
designs of Bonaparte amongst them.  The Chevalier
d'Argy made me a visit,  to deliver me a letter from
M.  de Premorel,  for M.  d'Arblay.     This gentleman

VOL.  VI.  L

146 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

was just escaped from Sedan,  in the disguise of a
jiaysan,  and assisted by a jmysanjie,  belonging to liis
family.  She conducted him through bye-paths and
thick forests,  that she knew to be least frequented by
the troops,  police,  or custom-house officers of Bonaparte.
He was going to offer his services to the King,  Louis
XVIII.  I had much interesting public news from M.
d'Argy :  but I pass by all now except personal detail,
as I write but for my nearest friends ;  and all that
was then known of public occurrence has long been
stale.

About this time I made myself some happiness in
witnessing that of Madame de la Tour du Pin and of
Madame d'Henin,  in the safe return of M,  de la Tour
du Pin from his perilous undertaking in La Vendee,  of
announcing the outlawry of Bonaparte.  His life had
been in the most imminent danger,  and he owed his
escape from fearful captivity at least,  to the private
good services of the famous General,  Marechal
Massena.

During this melancholy period,  when leisure,  till
now a delight,  became a burthen to me,  I could not
call my faculties into any species of intellectual service ;
all was sunk,  was annihilated in the overpowering pre-
dominance of anxiety for the coming event.  I endured
my suspense only by writing to or hearing from him
who was its object.  All my next dear connexions were
well.  I heard from them satisfactorily,  and I was also
engaged in frequent correspondence with the Princess
Elizabeth,  whose letters are charming,  not only from
their vivacity,  their frankness,  and condescension,  but

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         147

from a peculiarity of manner,  the result of having
mixed little with the world,  that,  joined to great fer-
tility of fancy,  gives a something so singular and so
genuine to her style of writing,  as to render her letters
desirable and interesting,  independent of the sincere
and most merited attachment which,  their gracious
kindness inspires.

I subscribed to the best library,  and obtained some
books of amusement to endeavour to dissipate my lonely
hours — but I had no success,  save in a History of La
Belgique,  by Dewitz,  and that,  as it treated not only
of Brussels,  which I inhabited in person,  but also of
Triers,  which I inhabited in heart and imagination,
drew me from my reveries,  and engaged me in making
an abridgment from it,  which I meant for my best
friend — but which I never looked over,  nor have even
thought of till this moment,  from the weight of cares,
sorrows,  and anxieties,  which absorbed my feelings
and faculties.

I COME now to busier scenes,  and to my sojourn at
Brussels during the opening of one of the most famous
campaigns upon record;  and the battle of Waterloo,
upon which,  in great measure,  hung the fate of Europe.

Yet upon reflection,  I will write no account of these
great events,  which have been detailed so many hun-
dred times,  and so many hundred ways,  as I have
nothing new to offer upon them ;  I will simply write
the narrative of my own history at that awful period.

I was awakened in the middle of the night by con-

l2

148 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

fused noises in the house,  and runnini^  up and down
stairs.  I listened attentively,  but heard no sound of
voices,  and soon all was quiet.  I then concluded the
persons who resided in the apartments on the second
floor,  over my head,  had returned home late,  and I
tried to fall asleep again .

I succeeded ;  but I was again awakened at about
five o'clock in the morning,  Friday,  16th June,  by the
sound of a bugle horn in the Marche aux Bois;  I
started up,  and opened the window.  But I only per-
ceived some straggling soldiers,  hurrying in ditferent
directions,  and saw lights gleaming from some of the
chambers in the neighbourhood ;  all again was soon
still,  and my own dwelling in profound silence,  and
therefore I concluded there had been some disturbance
in exchanging sentinels at the various posts,  which
was already appeased ;  and I retired once more to my
pillow,  and remained till my usual hour.

I was finishing,  however,  a letter for my best friend,
when my breakfast was brought in,  at my then cus-
tomary time of eight o'clock  ;  and,  as mistakes and
delays and miscarriages of letters had caused me
much unnecessary misery,  I determined to put what I
was then writing in the post myself,  and set off with it
the moment it was sealed.

In my way back from the Post-office,  my ears were
alarmed by the sound of military music,  and my eyes
equally struck with the sight of a body of troops
marching to its measured time.  But I soon found that
what I had supposed to be an occasionally passing
troop,  was a complete corps ;  infantry,  cavalry,  artillery.

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         149

bag and bag-gage,  with all its officers in full uniform,
and that uniform was black.

This gloom}?-  hue gave an air so mournful to the
procession,  that,  knowing its destination for battle,  I
contemplated it with an aching heart.  On inquir}^
I learned it was the army of Brunswick.  How much
deeper yet had been my heartache had I foreknown
that nearly all those brave men,  thus marching on in
gallant though dark array,  with their valiant royal
chief at their head,  the nephew of my own king,  George
the Third,  were amongst the first destined victims to
this dreadful contest,  and that neither the chief,  nor
the greater part of his warlike associates,  would,  within
a few short hours,  breathe again the vital air  !

My interrogations were answered with brevity,  yet
curiosity was all awake and all abroad  ;  for the pro-
cession lasted some hours.  Not a door but was open;
not a threshold but was crowded,  and not a window
of the many-windowed Gothic,  modern,  frightful,  hand-
some, quaint,  disfigured,  fantastic,  or lofty mansions
that diversify the large market-place of Brussels,  but
was occupied by lookers on.  Placidly,  indeed,  they
saw the warriors pass ;  no kind greeting welcomed
their arrival;  no warm wishes followed them to combat.
Neither,  on the other hand,  was there the slightest
symptom of dissatisfaction ;  yet even while standing
thus in the midst of them,  an unheeded,  yet observant
stranger,  it was not possible for me to discern,  with
any solidity of conviction,  whether the Belgians were,
at heart,  Bourbonists or Bonapartists.  The Bona-
partists,  however,  were in general the most open,  for

150 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

the opinion on both sides,  alike with good will and
with ill,  was nearly universal that Bonaparte was in-
vincible.

Still,  I knew not,  dreamt not,  that the campaign was
already opened ;  that Bonaparte had broken into La
Belgique on the 15th,  and had taken Charleroi ;  thoup^h
it was news undoubtedly spread all over Brussels
except to my lonely self.  My own disposition,  at this
period,  to silence and retirement,  was too congenial
with the taciturn habits of my hosts to be by them
counteracted,  and they suffered me,  therefore,  to re-
turn to my home as I had quitted it,  with a mere
usual and civil salutation ;  while themselves and their
house were evidently continuing their common avoca-
tions with their common composure.  Surely our
colloquial use of the word Phlegm must be derived
from the character of the FLEMings.

The important tidings now,  however,  burst upon me
in sundry directions.  The Princess d'Henin,  Colonel
de Beaufort,  Madame de Maurville,  the Boyd Family,
all,  with intelligence of the event,  joined offers of
service,  and invitations to reside with them during
this momentous contest,  should I prefer such protection
to remaining alone at such a crisis.

What a day of confusion and alarm did we all spend
on the 1 7th  !  In my heart the whole time was Treves  !
Treves  !  Treves  !  That day,  and June 1 8th,  I passed
in hearing the cannon !  Good Heaven !  what inde-
scribable horror to be so near the field of slaughter !
such I call it,  for the preparation to the ear by the
tremendous sound was soon followed by its fullest

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  151

effect,  in the view of the wounded,  the bleeding martyrs
to the formidable contention that was soon to terminate
the history of the war.  And hardly more afflicting
was this disabled return from the battle,  than the
sight of the continually pouring forth ready-armed and
vigorous victims that marched past my windows to
meet similar destruction.

Accounts from the field of battle arrived hourly ;
sometimes directly from the Duke of Wellington to
Lady Charlotte Greville,  and to some other ladies who
had near relations in the combat,  and which,  by their
means,  were circulated in Brussels ;  and at other times
from such as conveyed those amongst the wounded
Belgians,  whose misfortunes were inflicted near enough
to the skirts of the spots of action,  to allow of their
being dragged away by their hovering countrymen to
the city :  the spots,  I say,  of action,  for the far-famed
battle of Waterloo was preceded by three days of
partial engagements.

During this period,  I spent my whole time in seeking
intelligence,  and passing from house to house of the
associates of my distress,  or receiving them in mine.

Ten times,  at least,  I crossed over to Madame
d'Henin,  discussing plans and probabilities^  and inter-
changing hopes and fears.  I spent a considerable
part of the morning with Madame de la Tour du Pin,
who was now returned from Gand,  where Louis XVIII.
supported his suspense and his danger with a coolness
and equanimity which,  when the eclat surrounding the
glory of his daring and great opponent shall no longer
by its overpowering resplendence keep all around it

]52 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

in tliG shade,  will carry him down to posterit_v as the
monarch precisel}-  formed,  by the patient good sense,
the enlightened liberality,  and the immoveable com-
posure of his character,  to meet the perilous per-
plexities of his situation,  and,  if he could not combat
them with the vigour and genius of a hero,  to sustain
them at least with the dignity of a prince.

Madame d'Henin and Madame de la Tour du Pin
projected retreating to Gand,  should the approach of
the enemy be unchecked  ;  to avail themselves of such
protection as might be obtained from seeking it under
the wing of Louis XVIII.  M.  de la Tour du Pin
had,  I believe,  remained there with his Majesty.

M.  de Lally and the Boyds inchned to Antwerp,
where they might safely await the fate of Brussels,
near enough for returning,  should it weather the
storm,  yet within reach of vessels to waft them to the
British shores should it be lost.

Should this last be the fatal termination,  I,  of course,
had agreed to join the party of the voyage,  and resolved
to secure my passport,  that,  while I waited to the
last moment,  I might yet be prepared for a hasty
retreat.

I applied for a passport to Colonel Jones,  to whom
the Duke of Wellington had deputed the military com.-
mand of Brussels in his absence;  but he was unwilling
to sanction an evacuation of Brussels which he deemed
premature.  It was not,  he said,  for us,  the English,  to
spread alarm,  or prepare for an overthrow  :  he had not
sent away his own wife or children,  and he had no
doubt but victory would repay his confidence.

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  153

I was silenced,  but not convinced ;  the event was yet
uncertain,  and my stake was,  with respect to earthly
happiness,  my existence.

A compromise occurred to me,  which suggested my
dispensing with a new passport,  and contenting myself
with obtaining his signature to my old one,  accorded
by M.  le Chevalier de Jaucourt.  He could not refuse
to sign it ;  and we then separated.  I promised him,
nevertheless,  that I would remain to the last extremity  ;
and I meant no other.

I was now better satisfied,  though by no means at
case.

Yet the motive of Colonel Jones was,  that all should
yield to the glory of the British arms and the Duke of
Wellington.  And I had the less right to be surprised,
from the dreadful soldier's speech I had heard him
utter when I first saw him,  to the Princess d'Henin  :
complaining of the length of time that was wasted in
inaction,  and of the inactivity and tameness of the
Bourbons,  he exclaimed,  "  We want blood,  Madam !
what we want is blood  ! "

PART V.

1815.

State of public feeling in Brussels — Wounded officers from the
field of Waterloo — The ISlh of June — Preparations of Madame
d'Arblayfor instant flight— Contradictory reports — A prisoner
of war — A false alarm — The Duke of Wellington in battle —
News of victory — The wounded in Brussels — French prisoners
— Fears of contagion in Brussels from the immense number
of wounded brought into the city — Humanity of Madame
d'Arblay to the wounded — Congratulations on the cessation of
hostilities — Te Deum for the victory at the Protestant chapel
— Appearance of the wounded Prince of Orange — News of
the re-enthronement of Louis XVIII. — Suggestions on a na-
tural style in epistolary writing — Personal expenditure —
Madame d'Arblay's recapitulation of late events to her son —
Account of the French King's recent flight from Paris on the
approach of Bonaparte — Anticipated collision of the Garde
Imperiale and the Gardes du Corps— Serious illness of M.
d'Arblay in consequence of his laborious services — Marshal
Bliicher's letter to M.  d'Arblay.

1815]         DIARY OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  157

PART V.
1815.

Narrative — continued.

I FOUND upon again going my rounds for information,
that though news was arriving incessantly from the
scene of action,  and with details always varying,
Bonaparte was always advancing.  All the people
of Brussels lived in the streets.  Doors seemed of
no use,  for they were never shut.  The individuals,
when they re-entered their houses,  only resided at the
windows :  so that the whole population of the city
seemed constantly in public view.  Not only business
as well as society was annihilated,  but even every
species of occupation.  All of which we seemed capable
was,  to inquire or to relate,  to speak or to hear.  Yet
no clamour,  no wrangling,  nor even debate was inter-
mixed with either question or answer ;  curiosity,  though
incessant,  was serene  ;  the faces were all monotony,
though the tidings were all variety.

I could attribute this only to the length of time
during which the inhabitants had been habituated to
change both of masters and measures,  and to their
finding that,  upon an average,  they neither lost nor
gained by such successive revolutions.     x\nd to this

I

158 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

must be joined their necessity of submitting,  be it what
it might,  to the result.  This mental consciousness
probably kept their passions in order,  and crushed all
the impulses by which hope or fear is excited.  No
love of liberty buoyed up resistance  ;  no views of inde-
pendence brightened their imagination ;  and they bore
even suspense with the calm of apparent philosophy,
and an exterior of placid indifference.

The first intelligence Madame d'Henin now gave
me was,  that the Austrian jNIinister Extraordinary,  M.
le Comte de Vincent,  had been wounded close by the
side of the Duke of Wellington;  and that he was just
brought back in a litter to her hotel.  As she was much
acquainted with him,  she desired me to accompany her
in making her personal inquiries.  No one now sent
servants,  cards,  or messages,  where there was any
serious interest in a research.  There was too much
eagerness to bear delay,  and ceremony and etiquette
always fly from distress and from business.

Le Comte de Vincent,  we had the pleasure to hear,
had been hurt only in the hand ;  but this wound after-
wards proved more serious than at first was appre-
hended, threatening for many weeks either gangrene
or amputation.

News^  however,  far more fatal struck our ears soon
after  :  the gallant Duke of Brunswick was killed I and
by a shot close also to the Duke of Wellington  !

The report now throughout Brussels was that the
two mighty chiefs,  Bonaparte and Wellington^  were
almost constantly in view of each other.

But what a day was the next — June ISth — the great-

1815]        OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        159

est,   perhaps,  in its result,    in the annals of Great
Britain I

My slumbers having been tranquillized by the close
of the 17th:,  I was calmly reposing,  when J was
awakened by the sound of feet abruptly entering my
drawing-room.  I started,  and had but just time to see
by my watch that it was only six o'clock,  when a rap-
ping at my bed-room door so quick as to announce as
much trepidation as it excited,  made me slip on a long
kind of domino always,  in those times,  at hand,  to
keep me ready for encountering surprise,  and demand
what was the matter  ?  *'  Open your door !  there is
not a moment to lose  !"  was the answer,  in the voice of
Miss Ann Boyd.  I obeyed,  in great alarm,  and saw
that pretty and pleasing young woman,  with her mo-
ther, Mrs.  Boyd,  who remembered having known and
played with me when we were both children,  and whom
I had met with at Passy,  after a lapse of more than
forty years.  They both eagerly told me that all their
new hopes had been overthrown by better authen-
ticated news,  and that I must be with them by eight
o'clock,  to proceed to the wharf,  and set sail for Antwerp,
whence we must sail on for England,  should the taking
of Brussels by Bonaparte endanger Antwerp also.

To send off a few lines to the post,  with my direc-
tion at Antwerp,  to pack and to pay,  was all that I
could attempt,  or even desire  ;  for I had not less time
than appetite for thinking of breakfast.  My host and
my maid carried my small package,  and I arrived be-
fore eight in the Rue d' Assault.  We set off for the
wharf on foot,  not a fiacre or chaise being procurable.

160 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Boyd,  five or six of their family,  a
governess,  and I believe some servants,  with bearers of
our baggage,  made our party.

Thouffh the distance was short,  the walk was lone:,
because rugged^  dirty,  and melancholy.  Now and then
we heard a growling noise,  like distant thunder,  but
far more dreadful.

When we had got about a third part of the way,  a
heavy rumbhng sound made us stop to listen.  It was
approaching nearer and nearer,  and we soon found that
we w^ere followed by innumerable carriages,  and a mul-
titude of persons.

All was evidently military,  but of so gloomy,  taci-
turn, and forbidding a description,  that when we were
overtaken w^e had not courage to offer a question to
any passer by.  Had we been as certain that they be-
longed to the enemy as we felt convinced that,  thus
circumstanced,  they must belong to our own interests,
we could not have been awed more effectually into
silent passiveness,  so decisively repelling to inquiry
was every aspect.  In truth,  at that period,  when every
other hour changed the current of expectation,  no one
could be inquisitive without the risk of passing for a
spy,  nor communicative without the hazard of being
suspected as a traitor.

Arrived at the wharf,  Mr.  Boyd pointed out to us
our barge,  which seemed fully ready for departure;
but the crowd already come and still coming so incom-
moded us,  that  ^Ir.  Boyd desired we would enter a
large inn,  and wait till he could speak with the master,
and arrange our luggage and places.     We went,  there-

LSI 5]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  101

fore,  into a spacious room and ordered breakfast,  wlien
the room was entered by a body of military men of all
sorts;  but we were suffered to keep our ground
till My.  Boyd came to inform us that we must all
decamp I

Confounded,  but without any interrogatory,  we va-
cated the apartment,  and i\Ir.  Boyd conducted us not
to the barge,  not to the wharf,  but to the road back to
Brussels  ;  telling us,  in an accent of depression,  that
he feared all was lost — that Bonaparte was advancing
— that his point was decidedly Brussels — and that the
Duke of Wellington had sent orders that all the maga-
zines, the artillery,  and the warlike stores of every
description,  and all the wounded,  the maimed,  and the
sick,  should be immediately removed to Antwerp.  For
this purpose he had issued directions that every barge,
every boat should be seized for the use of the army,
and that everything of value should be conveyed away,
the hospitals emptied,  and Brussels evacuated.

If this intelligence filled us with the most fearful
alarm,  how much more affrighting still was the sound
of cannon which next assailed our ears  !  The dread
reverberation became louder and louder as we pro-
ceeded. Every shot tolled to our imaginations the death
of myriads;  and tlie conviction that the destruction
and devastation were so near us,  with the proba-
bility that if all attempt at escape should prove abor-
tive, we might be personally involved in the carnage,
gave us sensations too awful for verbal expression;
we could only gaze and tremble,  listen and shudder.

Yet,  strange to relate I on re-entering the city,  all

VOL.  VII.  M

162 DIARY AM)  LETTERS        [PaKT V.

seemed quiet and tranquil as usual !  and thou^^h it was
in this imminent and immediate danj^er of being in-
vested, and perhaps pillaged,  I saw no outward mark
of distress or disturbance,  or even of hurry or curiosity.

Havinir re-lodo:ed us in the Rue d'Assault,  Mr.
Boyd tried to find some land carriage for our removal.
But not only every chaise had been taken,  and every
diligence secured  ;  the cabriolets,  the calcches,  nay,
the waggons and the carts,  and every species of
caravan,  had been seized for military service.  And,
after the utmost efforts he could make,  in every hind
of way,  he told us we must wait the chances of the da.y,
for that there was no possibility of escape from Brus-
sels either by land or water.

Remedy there was none  ;  nor had wc any other
resource  ;  we were fain,  therefore,  quietly to submit.
Mr.  Boyd,  however,  assured me that,  though no land
carriage was likely to find horses during this furious
contest,  he had been promised the return of a barge
for the next morning,  if he and his party would be at
the wharf b}^  six o'clock.

We all therefore agreed that,  if we were spared any
previous calami t}^,  we would set out for the wharf at
five o'clock,  and I accepted their invitation to be with
them in the evening,  and spend the night at their
house.

We then separated  ;  I was anxious to get home,  to
watch the post,  and to write to Trev^es.

My reappearance produced no effect upon my hosts  ;
they saw my return with the same placid civility tliat
they had seen my departure.

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         IGo

But even apathy,  or equanimity, — which shall I call
it  ?-— like thcir's was now to be broken  ;  I was seated at
my bureau and writing,  when a loud  "hurrah!"
reached my ears from some distance,  while the
daughter of my host,  a girl of about eighteen,  gently
opening my door,  said the fortune of the day had sud-
denly turned,  and that Bonaparte was taken prisoner.

At the same time the  "  hurrah  !"  came nearer.  I
flew to the window  ;  my host and hostess came also,
crying,  *'  Bonapai^te est pris I le voila  !  le voila I  "

I then saw,  on a noble war-horse in full equipment,
a general in the splendid uniform of France  ;  but
visibly disarmed,  and,  to all appearance,  tied to his
horse,  or,  at least,  held on,  so as to disable him from
making any effort to gallop it off,  and surrounded,
preceded,  and followed by a crew of roaring wretches,
who seemed eager for the moment when he should be
lodged where they had orders to conduct him,  that
they might unhorse,  strip,  pillage him,  and divide the
spoil.

His high,  feathered,  glittering helmet he had pressed
down as low as he could on his forehead,  and I could
not discern his face ;  but I was instantly certain he
was not Bonaparte,  on finding the whole commotion
produced by the rifling crew abovementioned,  which,
though it might be guided,  probably,  by some subaltern
officer,  who might have the captive in charge,  had left
the field of battle at a moment when none other could
be spared,  as all the attendant throng were evidently
amongst the refuse of the army followers.

I was afterwards informed that this unfortunate

m2

164 DIARV AND LETTERS  [P.AIIT V.

frencr;il was the Count Lobau.  He met with sinG^uhu*
consideration daring his ca])tivity in the Low Countries,
having thence talvcn to himself a wife.  That wife I had
met wlien last in Paris,  at a ball given by Madame la
Princessc de Bcauvau.  She was quite young,  and
extremely pretty,  and the gayest of the ga}^,  laughing,
chatting the whole evening,  chiefly with the fat and
merry,  good-humoured Duchesse de Feltrc  (Madame
la Marechale Clarke)  ;  and her husband,  high in office,
in fame,  and in favour,  was then absent on some official
duty.

The dearth of any positive news from the field of
battle,  even in the heart of Brussels,  at this crisis,  when
every thing that was dear and valuable to cither party
was at stake,  was at one instant nearly distracting in
its torturing suspense to the wrung nerves,  and at
another insensibly blunted them into a kind of amal-
gamation with the Belgic philosophy.  At certain
houses,  as well as at public offices,  news,  I doubt not,
arrived;  but no means were taken to promulgate it ;
no gazettes,  as in London,  no bulletins,  as in Paris,
were cried about the streets ;  we were all left at once
to our conjectures and our destinies.

The delusion of victory vanished into a merely passing
advantage,  as I gathered froni the earnest researches
into which it led me ;  and evil only met all ensuing
investigation;  retreat and defeat were the words in
every mouth around me !  The Prussians,  it was
asserted,  were completely vanquished on the 15th,  and
the English on the 16th,  while on the day just passed,
the 17th,  a day of continual fio^hting and bloodshed.

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         165

drawn battles on both sides left each party proclaiming
what neither party could prove — success.

It was Sunday  ;  but Church service was out of the
question,  though never were prayers more frequent,
more fervent.  Form,  indeed,  they could not have,  nor
union,  while constantly expecting the enemy with tire
and sword at the gates.  Who could enter a place of
worship,  at the risk of making it a scene of slaughter?
But who,  also,  in circumstances so awful,  could require
the exhortation of a priest or the example of a con-
gregation, to stimulate devotion?  No!  in those fearful
exigencies,  where,  in the full vigour of health,  strength,
and life's freshest resources,  we seem destined to
abruptly quit this mortal coil,  we need no spur — all is
spontaneous  ;  and the soul is unshackled.

Not above a quarter of an hour had I been restored
to my sole occupation of solace,  before I was again
interrupted and startled  ;  but not as on the preceding-
occasion by riotous shouts  ;  the sound was a howl,
violent,  loud,  affrighting,  and issuing from many
voices.  I ran to the window^  and saw the Marclie aux
Bois suddenly filling with a populace,  pouring in from
all its avenues,  and hurrying on rapidly,  and yet as if
unconscious in what direction ;  while women with
children in their arms,  or clinging to their clothes,
ran screaming out of doors;  and cries,  though not a
word was ejaculated,  tilled the air,  and from every
house,  I saw windows closing,  and shutters fastening:
all this,  though long in writing,  was presented to my
eyes in a single moment,  and was followed in another

166 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaUT V.

by a burst into my apartment,  to announce that tlie
French were come  !

I know not even who made this declaration  ;  rny
liead was out of the window,  and the person who made
it scarcely entered the room and was gone.

How terrific was this moment 1 My perilous situation
urged me to instant flight;  and,  without waiting to
speak to the people of the house,  I crammed my
papers and money into a basket,  and throwing on a
shawl and bonnet,  I flew down stairs and out of doors.

My intention was to go to the Boyds,  to partake,  as
I had engaged,  their fate  ;  but the crowd were all
issuing from the way I must have turned to have
gained the Rue d'Assault,  and I thought,  therefore,
I might be safer with Madame de Maurville,  who,  also,
not being English,  might be less obnoxious to the
Bonapartists.  To la Rue de la Montague I hurried,
in consequence,  my steps crossing and crossed by an
affrighted multitude  ;  but I reached it in safety,  and
she received me with an hospitable welcome.  I found
her calm,  and her good humour undisturbed.  Inured
to revolutions,  under which she had smarted so as she
could smart no more,  from the loss of all those who
had been the first objects of her solicitude,  a husband
and three sons 1 she was now hardened in her feelings
upon public events,  though her excellent heart was
still affectionate and zealous for the private misfortunes
of the individuals whom she loved.

What a dreadful day did I pass !  dreadful in the
midst of its glory!  for it was not during those opera-

1S151 OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  167

tions that sent details partially to our ears that we
could judge of the positive state of affairs,  or build
upon any pennanency of success.  ^  et here I soon
recovered from all alarm for personal safety,  and lost
the horrible apprehension of being in the midst of a
city that was taken,  sword in hand,  by an enemy — an
apprehension that,  while it lasted,  robbed me of breath,
chilled my blood,  and gave me a shuddering ague that
even now in fancy ret\u-ns as I seek to conimit it to
paper.

The alerte which had produced this effect,  I after-
wards learnt,  though not till the next day,  was utterly
false  ;  but whether it had been produced by mistake or
by deceit I never knew.  The French,  indeed,  were
coming  ;  but not triumphantly ;  they were prisoners,
surprised and taken suddenly,  and brought in,  being
disarmed,  by an escort ;  and,  as they were nume-
rous, and their French uniform was discernible from
afar,  the almost universal belief at Brussels that Bona-
parte was invincible,  might perhaps,  without any
intended deception,  have raised the report that they
were advancing as conquerors.

I attempt no description of this day,  the grandeur
of which was unknown,  or unbelieved,  in Brussels till
it had taken its flight,  and could only be named as
time past.  The Duke of WelHngton and Prince Blii-
cher were too mightily engaged in meriting fame to
spare an instant for either claiming or proclaiming it.

I was fain,  therefore,  to content myself with the in-
telligence that reached Madame de jVIaurville fortui-
tously.    The crowds in the streets,  tlie turbulence,  the

I^jS diary and letters  [Part v.

inquietude,  the bustle,  the noise,  the cries,  the almost
yells,  kept up a perpetual expectation of annoyance.
The door was never opened,  but I felt myself pale and
chill with fear of some sanguinary attack or military
sur])rise.  It is true that as Brussels was not fortified,
and could,  in itself,  offer no resistance,  it could neither
be besieged nor taken by storm  ;  but I felt certain that
the Duke of Wellington would combat for it inch by
inch,  and that in a conflict between life and death,
every means would be resorted to that could be sug-
gested by desperation.

Madame de Maurvillc now told me that an English
commissary was just arrived from the army,  who had
assured her that the tide of success was completely
turned to the side of the Allies.  She offered to con-
duct me to his apartment,  which was in the same hotel
as her own,  and in which he was writing and transact-
ing business ;  gravely assuring me,  and I really be-
lieve, herself,  that he could not but be rejoiced to give
me,  in person,  every particular I could wish to hear.
I deemed it,  however,  but prudent not to put his po-
liteness to a test so severe.

Urgent,  nevertheless,  to give me pleasure,  and not
easily set aside from following her own conceptions,
she declared she would go down stairs,  and inform Mr.
Saumarez that she had a countrywoman of his in her
room,  whom he would be charme to oblige.  I tried
vainly to stop her;  good humour,  vivacity,  curi-
osity, and zeal were all against my efforts ;  she
went,  and to my great surprise returned escorted by
Mr.  Saumarez himself.     His narration was all trium-

JSI5]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  IGO

phant,  and his account of the Dulcc of Wellington
might alinost have seemed an exaggerated panegyric
if it had painted some warrior in a chivahrsque ro-
mance. He was everywhere,  he said ;  the eye could
turn in no direction that it did not perceive him,  either
at hand or at a distance  ;  galloping to charge the
enemy,  or darting across the field to issue orders.
Every ball also,  he said,  seemed fired,  and every gun
aimed at him  ;  yet nothing touched him  ;  he seemed
as impervious for safety as he was daimtless for cou-
rage :  while danger all the time relentlessly environed
him,  and wounds or death continually robbed him of
the services of some one of the bravest of those who
were near to him.  But he suffered nothing to check
or engage him that belonged to personal interest or
feeling;  his entire concentrated attention,  exclusive
aim,  and intense thought were devoted impartially,  im-
perturbably,  and grandly to the Whole,  the All.

I could not but be proud of this account ;  and pen-
dant from its glory m.y revived imagination hung the
blessed laurels of peace.

But though Hope was all alive,  Ease and Serenity
were not her companions :  Mr.  Saumarez could not
disguise that there was still much to do,  and conse-
quently to apprehend ;  and he had never,  he said,
amongst the many he had viewed,  seen a field of battle
in such excessive disorder.  Military carriages of all
sorts,  and multitudes of groups unemployed,  occupied
spaces that ought to have been left for manoeuvring
or observation.  I attribute this to the various nations
who bore arms on that great day in their own manner;

170 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

thouii^h the towcrinf]:  <reneralissimo of all cleared the
ground,  and dispersed what was unnecessary at every
moment that was not absorbed by the fight.

When the night of this memorable day arrived,  I
took leave of Madame de Maurville to join the Boyds,
according to my engagement :  for though all accounts
confirmed the victory of the Duke of Wellington,  we
liad so little idea of its result,  that wc still imagined
the four days already spent in the work of carnage
must be followed by as many more,  before the dreadful
conflict could terminate.

Madame de Maurville lent me her servant,  with
whom I now made my way tolerably well,  for though
the crowd remained,  it was no longer turbulent.  A
general knowledge of general success to the Allies was
everywhere spread;  curiosity therefore began to be
satisfied,  and inquietude to be removed.  The concourse
were composedly — for no composure is like that of the
Flemings — listening to details of the day in tranquil
groups,  and I had no interruption to my walk but
from my own anxiet}"  to catch,  as I could,  some part
of the relations.  As all these have long since been
published,  I omit them,  though the interest with which
I heard them was,  at the moment,  intense.  Three or
four shocking sights intervened during my passage,  of
officers of high rank,  either English or Beige,  and
either dying or dead,  extended upon biers,  carried by
soldiers.  The view of their gay and costly attire,  with
the conviction of their suffering,  or fatal state,  joined
to the profound silence of their bearers and attendants,
was truly saddening ;  and if my reflections were mo-

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELLNA.         371

rally dejecting,  what,  oli what were my personal feelings
and fears,  in the utter uncertainty whether this victory
were more than a passing triumph 1

In one place we were entirely stopped by a group
that had gathered round a horse,  of which a British
soldier was examining one of the knees.  The animal
was a tall w^ar-horsc,  and one of the noblest of his
species.  The soldier was enumerating to his hearers
its high qualities,  and exultingly acquainting them it
was his own property,  as he had taken it,  if I un-
derstood right,  from the field.  He produced also a
very fine ring,  which was ail he had taken of spoil.
Yet this man gravely added that pillage had been for-
bidden by the Commander-in-Chief!

I found the Boyds still firm for departure.  The
news of the victory of the day,  gained by the Duke
of Weliino-ton and Prince Bliicher,  had raised the
highest delight;  but further intelligence had just
reached them that the enemy,  since the great battle,
was working:  to turn the ri":ht wing:  oi'  the Duke of
Wellington,  who was in the most imminent danger ;
and that the capture of Brussels was expected to take
place tlie next morning,  as everything indicated that
Brussels was the point at which Bonaparte aimed,  to
retrieve his recent defeat.  Mr.  Boyd used every pos-
sible exertion to procure chaises or diligence,  or any
sort of land conveyance,  for Antwerp,  but every horse
was under military requisition;  even the horses of the
farmers,  of the nobility and gentry,  and of travellers.
The hope of water-carriage was all that remained.

172 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

We were to set off so early,  that wc agreed not to
retire to rest.

A gentleman,  however,  of their acquaintance,  pre-
sently burst into the room with assurances that the
enemy was flying in all directions.

This better news reanimated my courage for Brussels
and my trust in the Duke of Wellington  ;  and when
the Boyd family summoned me the next morning at
four or five o'clock to set off with them for Antwerp,
I permitted my repugnance to quitting the only spot
where I could receive letters from Treves to conquer
every obstacle,  and begged them to excuse my changed
purpose.  They wondered at my temerity,  and pro-
bably blamed it ;  but there was no time for discussion,
and we separated.

It was not till Tuesday,  the 20th,  I had certain and
satisfactory assurances how complete was the victory.
At the house of Madame de Maurville I heard con-
firmed and detailed the matchless triumph of the
matchless Welhngton,  interspersed with descriptions
of scenes of slaughter on the field of battle to freeze
the blood,  and tales of woe amon2:st mournin<i:  survivors
in Brussels to rend the heart.

While listening with speechless avidity to these re-
lations, we were joined by M.  de la Tour du Pin,  who
is a cousin of Madame de Maurville,  and who said the
Duke of Wellington had galloped to Brussels from
Wavre to see the Prince of Orange and enquire in
person after his wounds.  Prince Bliicher was in close
pursuit of Bonaparte,  who was totally defeated,  his
baggage all taken,    even his private equipage and

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.         173

personals,  and who was a fugitive himself,  and in dis-
guise !  The Duke considered the battle to be so
decisive,  that wliilc Prince Bliicher was posting after
the remnant of the Boiiapartian army,  be determined
to follow bimself as convoy to Louis XV' III.  ;  and lie
told M.  de la Tour du Pin and tbc Duke de Fitz-
james,  wbom be met at the palace of the King-  of
Holland,  to acquaint their King with this his proposal,
and to beg bis Majesty to set forward without delay to
join liim ibr its execution.  The Duke de Fitzjames
was gone already to Gand with this commission.

How daring a plan was this,  while the internal state
of France was so little known,  while les places fortes
were all occupied,  and while the corps of Grouchy was
still intact,  and the bidden and possible resources of
Bonaparte were un fathomed  !

The event,  however,  demonstrated that the Duke of
Wellington had judged with as much quickness of
perception as intrepidity of valour.

'Twas to Tournay be bad desired that the King of
France would repair.

The Duke now ordered that the hospitals,  invalids,
magazines,  &:c.  Sec.  should all be stationed at Brussels,
which be regarded as saved from invasion and com-
pletely secure.

It is not near the scene of battle that war,  even with
victory,  wears an aspect of felicity — no,  not even in
the midst of its highest resplendence of glory.  A
more terrific or afflicting sojourn than that of Brussels
at this period can hardly be imagined.  The universal
voice declared that so sanguinary a battle as that

17-1 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PahT V.

whicli Avas foui^ht almost in its neighbourhood,  and
quite within its liearing,  never yet had spread the
plains with slaughter;  and though exultation can-
not ever have been prouder,  nor satisfaction more
complete,  in the brilliancy of success,  all my senses
were shocked in viewins:  the effects of its attainment.
For more than a week from this time I never ap-
proached my window but to witness sights of wretched-
ness. IMaimcd,  wounded,  bleeding,  mutilated,  tortured
victims of this exterminating contest passed by every
minute:  the fainting,  the sick,  the dying,  and the
dead,  on brancards,  in carts,  in waggons,  succeeded
one another without intermission.  There seemed to
be a whole and a large army of disabled or lifeless
soldiers  !  All that was intermingled with them bore
an aspect of still more poignant horror  ;  for the Bona-
partian prisoners,  who were now poured into the city
by hundreds,  had a mien of such ferocious desperation,
where they were marched on,  uninjured,  from having
been taken by surprise or overpowered by numbers ;
or faces of such anguish,  where they were drawn on in
open vehicles,  the helpless victims of gushing wounds
or horrible dislocations,  that to see them without com-
miseration for their sufferings,  or admiration for the
heroic,  however misled enthusiasm,  to which they were
martyrs,  must have demanded an apathy dead to all
feeling but what is personal,  or a rancour too un-
generous to yield even to the view of defeat.  Both"
the one set and the other of these unhappy warriors
endured their calamities with haughty forbearance of
complaint.       The maimed and lacerated,  while their

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  175

ghastly visages spoke torture and death,  bit their own
clothes,  perhaps their flesh  !  to save the loud utterance
of their groans ;  while those of their comrades who had
escaped these corporeal inflictions seemed to be
smitten with something between remorse and madness
that they had not forced themselves on to destruction
ere thus they were exhibited in dreadful parade through
the streets of that city they had been sent forth to
conquer.  Others of these wretched prisoners had,  to
me,  as I first saw them,  the air of the lowest and most
disgusting of Jacobins,  in dirty tattered vestments of
all sorts and colours,  or soiled carters'  frocks ;  but
disgust was soon turned to pity,  when I afterwards
learnt that these shabby accoutrements had been cast
over them by their conquerors after despoiling them
of their own.

Everybody was wandering from home ;  all Brussels
seemed living in the streets.  The danger to the city,
which had imprisoned all its inhabitants except tlie
rabble or the military,  once completely passed,  the
pride of feeling and sliowing their freedom seemed to
stimulate their curiosity in seeking details on wliat
had passed and was passing.  But neither the pride
nor the joy of victory was anywhere of an exultitig
nature.  London and Paris render all otlier places
that I,  at least,  have dwelt in,  tame and insipid.  Bul-
letins in a few shop-windows alone announced to the
general public that the Allies had vanquished and
that Bonaparte was a fugitive.

I met at the Embassade an old English officer who
gave me most interesting and curious information.

176 DIARV AND LETTERS  [PAIiT V.

assurinii;  mc that in the carriage of Bonaparte,  ^vhich
liad been seized,  there were proclamations ready
printed,  and even dated from the jmlace of Lachen,
announcinii^  the downfall of the Allies and the triumph
of Bonaparte  !

But no satisfaction could make me hear without
deadly dismay and shudderini^  his description of the
field of battle.  Piles of dead  ! — Heaps,  masses,  hills
of dead bestrewed the plains  !

I met also Colonel Jones;  so exulting in success!
so eairer to remind me of his assurances that all was
safe!

And I was much interested in a narration made to
me by a wounded soldier,  who was seated in the court-
yard of the Embassade.  He had been taken prisoner
after he was severely wounded,  on the morning of the
18th,  and forced into a wood with many others,  where
he had been very roughly used,  and stripped of his
coat,  waistcoat,  and even his shoes  ;  but as the fortune
of the day began to turn,  there wks no one left to
^vatcll him,  and he crawled on all-fours till he got out
of the wood,  and was found by some of his roving com-
rades.

The most common adventure of this sort,  when
heard at the moment of action,  and from the principal
in what is narrated,  has an interest.

Thousands,  I believe I may say without exaggeration,
were employed voluntarily at this time in Brussels in
dressing wounds and attending the sick beds of the
wounded.  Humanit}^  could be carried no further  ;  for
not alone the Bcl2:ians and Enjjlish were thus nursed

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         177

and assisted,  nor yet the Allies,  but the prisoners also  ;
and this,  notwithstanding the greatest apprehensions
being prevalent that the sufferers,  from their multitude,
^vould bring pestilence into the heart of the city.

The immense quantity of Enghsh,  Belgians,  and
Allies,  who were first,  of course,  conveyed to the hos-
pitals and prepared houses of Brussels,  required so
much time for carriage and placing,  that although the
carts,  "waggons,  and every attainable or seizeablc
vehicle were unremittingly in motion — now coming,
now returning to the field of battle for more, — it was
nearly a week,  or at least five or six days,  ere the un-
happy wounded prisoners,  who were necessarily last
served,  could be accommodated.  And though I was
assured that medical and surgical aid was adminis-
tered to them wherever it was possible,  the blood
that dried upon their shins and their garments,
joined to the dreadful sores occasioned by this
neglect,  produced an effect so pestiferous,  that,  at
every new entry,  eau de Cologne,  or vinegar,  was re-
sorted to by every inhabitant,  even amongst the shop-
keepers, even amongst the commonest persons,  lor
averting the menaced contagion.

Even the churches were turned into hospitals,  and
every house in Brussels was ordered to receive or find
an asylum for some of the sick.

The Boyds\\  ere eminently good in nursing,  dressing
wounds,  making slops,  ?nd administering comfort
amongst the maimed,  whether friend or foe.  Madame
d'lienin sent her servants,  and money,  and cordials

VOL.  VII.  N

178 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

to all the French that came within her reach  ;  Madame
de la Tour du Pin was munificent in the same atten-
tions ;  and Madame de Maurville never passed by an
opportunity of doing good.  M.  de Beaufort,  being far
the richest of my friends at this place,  was not spared ;
he had officers and others quartered upon him without
mercy.

We were all at work more or less in making lint.
For me,  I was about amongst the wounded half the
day,  the Britisli,  sentend  !  The rising in France for the
honour of the nation now,  and for its safety in inde-
pendence hereafter,  was brilliant and delightful,  spread-
ing in some directions from La Manche to La Medi-
terranee :  the focus of loyalty was Bordeaux.  Le
Eoi left Gand the 22nd.  All Alost,  «5cc.,  surrounded,
followed,  or preceded him.  The noble Bliicher entered
France at Mortes le Chateau.  "  Suivez les vite,""  he
cried,  "  mes enfans I ou demain nous les aurons encore sur
les bras  !  "  On dit that the Duke of Wellington avowed
he more than once thought the battle lost !  The efforts
made by Bonaparte were stupendous,  and his Imperial
Guards fought with a devouement,  an enthusiasm,  that
showed they thought victory and their leader must be
one.  It was not till six o'clock that the Duke felt his
real advantage.  He was everywhere in the field,  and
ran the most terrible risks,  for which he is equally
blamed and admired  :  but the stake was so prodigious  !
the victory or defeat so big with enormous conse-
quences !

Meanwhile,  to put a stop as much as possible to the

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        179

alarming'  putrid exhalations,  three thousand peasants
were employed all at once in burying the heaps of
dead on the plains  !

This,  at least,  was the current account at Brussels.

It was not till June 26th that the blessed news
reached me of the cessation of hostilities.  Colonel
Beaufort was the first who broui^ht me this intellio^enc e
smiling kindly himself at the smiles he excited.  Next
came la Princesse d'Henin,  escorted by my and her
highly valued M.  de Lally Tolendal.  With open
arms that dear princess reciprocated congratulations.
Madame de Maurville next followed,  always cordial
where she could either give or behold happiness.  The
Boyds hurried to me in a body to wish and be wished
joy.  And last,  but only in time,  not in kindness,  came
Madame la Yicomtesse de Laval,  mother to the justly
honoured philanthropist,  or,  as others — but not I — call
him,  bigot,  M.  Mathieu de Montmorency,  who,  at this
moment,  is M.  le Due de Montmorency.  Madame de
Laval had emigrated to England at the breaking out
of the Bonapartian irruption,  and was now returned to
the Continent,  in the hope it was extinguished.

She made me a visit of considerable length,  and of
yet more considerable agreeability.  Her conversation
was pecuharly pleasing to me  ;  her manners were mild,
high bred,  and dignified.  She had not the vehement
vivacity so usual amongst ks Femmes cf Esprit of France,
or,  at least,  it never burst forth when 1 was with her.
Her observations were sagacious,  and her satire,  which
was piquant^  was too just to be ill-natured.  She had
a flow,  not alone of words but of ideas,  upon whatever

n2

ISO DIARY AND LETTERS  [Pakt V.

topic conversation might turn.  She was above all the
hackneyed resources for chat,  of the weather,  public
places,  or even the news ;  for she  ^vas one of the very
few who,  in the language of my old friend Sir William
Pepys,  could originate a discourse.

Brussels now,  which had seemed for so many days,
from the unremitting passage of maimed,  dying,  or
dead,  a mere out-doors hospital,  revived,  or,  rather,
was invigorated to something above its native state;
for from uninteresting tameness it became elevated to
spirit,  consequence,  and vivacity.

On the following Sunday I had the gratification of
hearing,  at the Protestant chapel,  the Te Deumfor the
grand victory,  in presence of the King and Queen of
the Low Countries — or Holland,  and of the Dowager
Princess of Orange,  and the young warrior her grand-
son. This prince looked so ill,  so meagre,  so weak,
from his half-cured wounds,  that to appear on this
occasion seemed another,  and perhaps not less danger-
ous effort of heroism,  added to those which had so
recently distinguished him in the field.  What enthu-
siasm would such an exertion,  with his pallid appear-
ance, have excited in London or Paris  !  even here,  a
little gentle huzza greeted him from his carriage to
the chapel ;  and for the same short passage,  back
again.  After which,  he drove off as tranquilly as any
common gentleman might have driven away,  to return
to his home and his famil}^  dinner.

Every hour now,  in July,  brought some fresh intelli-
gence of the security of the restoration of Louis
XVIII. ,  with details of the deepest interest.

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        ISl

About the middle of July — but I am not clear of
the date — the news was assured and confirmed of the
brilliant re-enthronement of Louis XVIII.,  and that
Bonaparte had surrendered to the English.

Brussels now became an assemblage of all nations,
from the rapturous enthusiasm that pervaded all to
view the field of battle,  the famous Waterloo,  and
gather upon the spot details of the immortal victory of
Wellington.

Madame dArhknj to Alex,  d Arhlay,  Esq.

April 26,  1815.

At length,  my long expecting eyes meet again your
handwriting,  after abroach of correspondence that I can
never recollect without pain.  Revive it not in my mind
by any repetition,  and I will dismiss it from all future
power of tormenting me,  by considering it only as a
dreami of other times.  Cry  "Done!"  my Alex.,  and I
will skip over the subject,  not perhaps as lightly,  but as
swiftly as you skip over the hills of Norbury Park.  I
delight to think of the good and pleasure that sojourn
may do you  ;  though easil}^  too easily,  I conceive the
melancholy reflections that were awakened by the sight
of our dear,  dear cottage  ;  yet your expressions upon its
view lose much of their effect by being overstrained,
rechcrchcs,  and designing to be pathetic.  We never
touch others,  my dear Alex.,  where we study to show
we are touched ourselves.  I beg you,  when you write
to me,  to let your pen paint your thoughts as they rise,
not as you seek or labour to embellish them.     I re-

182 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

member 3^011 once wrote me a letter so very fine from
Cambridge,  that,  if it had not made me laugh,  it would
certainly have made me sick.  Be natural,  my dear
boy,  and you will be sure to please your mother without
wasting your time.  Let us know w^hat you have
received,  what you have spent,  what you may have still
unpaid,  and what you yet want.  But for this last
article,  we both desire you will not wait our permission
to draw upon your aunt,  whom we shall empower to
draw upon Mr.  Hoare in our names.  We know you to
have no wanton extravagances,  and no idle vanity ;  we
give you,  therefore,  dear Alex.,  carte hlanche to apply
to 3^our aunt,  only consulting with her,  and begging
her kind,  maternal advice to help your inexperience in
regulating your expenses.  She knows the difference
that must be made between our fortune and that of
Clement ;  but she knows our affection for our boy,  and
our confidence in his honour and probity,  and will treat
him with as much kindness,  though not with equal
luxury.  Your father charges you never to be without
your purse,  and never to let it be empty.  Your aunt
will counsel you about your clothes.  About your books
we trust to yourself.  And pray don't forget,  Avhen
you make sleeping visits,  to recompense the trouble you
must unavoidably give to servants.  And if you join
any party to any public place,  make a point to pay for
yourself.  It will be far better to go seldom,  and with
that gentlemanly spirit,  than often,  with the air of a
hanger-on.  How infinitely hospitable has been your
uncle James !  But hospitality is his characteristic.
We had only insisted upon your regularity at chapel

1815]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         183

and at lectures,  and we hear of your attention to them
comparatively,  and we are fixed to be contented en
attendant.  Don't lose courage^  dear,  dear Alex. ;  the
second place is the nearest to the first.  I love you
with all my heart and soul !

So much,  my Alex.,  from your mother respecting
yourself:  let me now satisfy your own feelings in
speaking of ourselves.  My last told you I had had
news,  at length,  of our best friend  ;  and my letter from
Ypres was followed by one from Menin,  which told me
to join him at Ostende,  as he was so ill,  so exhausted
by the fatigues of the shortest but most laborious of
campaigns,  that he would take leave there of Le
Roi,  Louis XVIII.,  and by permission of Monsieur,
embark to re-establish his health in England.  At that
time it was expected that Le Roi was at Ostende to
embark himself.  From Bruges,  however,  I had another
letter — but ere I come on to the present moment,  I
will give you a succinct history of this painful cam-
paign, certain that nothing upon earth can so greatly
interest you.  I have related already that,  at two
o'clock on the 19th March,  we separated;  he then
thought he was going forth to Melun,  with a party of
la maison du Roi,  to join the army collecting to oppose
the further progress of the invading enemy.  At the
Chainp de Mars there was a general review,  at which
the King was present;  but there,  we now know,  his
Majesty received the fatal news of the desertion of all
the troops of the line.  Your father,  with the artillery
under his command,  of the company of Luxembourg,
returned to the Caserne,   and thence wrote me the

184 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

terrible note I have copied for you.  Charles de Mau-
bourg delivered it to me chez son frere.  I will beg
your father to write you himself a brief account of the
campaign,  for I have been with him too little to have
learnt it completely.

May 2d. — Endless perplexities and difficulties have
kept my pen from my hand till now,  joined to an ex-
pectation of an answer to my long letter sent to you
through your uncle James.  I wdll wait,  however,  now,
no longer,  to thank you for your two most welcome half
sheets from Norbury Park,  and to beg a full reply to
the first two pages of this letter.  Your dearest father
has not a moment now to comply wdth my desire of
indulging you with the narration I wish to give you  ;
but when he has time,  he will not — oh no ! — w^ant incli-
nation. Meanwhile,  I can only tell you he set out en
retraite,  about midnight,  from the Chateau des Tui-
leries,  with the rest of the company of the Duke of
Luxembourg,  and the other five companies of Gram-
mont,  de Poix,  d'Auvray,  Wagram,  and Marmont,  with
les Cents Suisses,  les Gardes de la Porte,  les mous-
quetaires,  &c.  ;  in short,  all la maison dii Roi,  who went
himself in a carriage with le Prince de Poix,  le Due de
Duras,  M.  de Blacas,  and le Marechal Due de Wagram,
followed by Monsieur,  Le Due de Berry,  &c.  The King
proceeded straight to Lille,  which none of la Garde du
Corps could reach ;  for none could change horses,  and
many had no horses to change,  and the roads were
bad,  and the rain poured almost continually.  Your
father was very unwell,  indeed,  when he began the
journey,  from the havoc made on his mind and his

1815]  OF THE AUTHOll OF EVELINA.  185

healtli by the suspensive fortnight  ^vhicli preceded it.
Arrived at Bethunc,  he had just dismounted,  sent
his horse to be fed,  and ordered an omelette,  having
tasted nothing but a crust of bread dipped into brandy
all the route,  and hiwuacked only upon straw,  in boots
and spurs,  and casque ;  but the regale had not
reached his lips,  wli^n a cry of  "To arms!''  called
liim away,  and he could not even await the return
of his fine war-horse,  a most beautiful animal,  which
he loved a la folie;  but v.'as obliged to mount a
Jiorse of the company,  and casting off his mantcau,
which he thought might embarrass him in the combat,
]ic was amongst the foremost to answer the call.  It
proved,  however,  nugatory  ;  a party of the Garde Imi)e-
riale had insulted les Gardes du Corps by cries of Vive
V Empereur  !  but when,  by order of the Due de Berr}',
the latter would have begun an attack,  they turned
round and galloped off;  whether,  naturally,  from
their inferior number,  or whether to draw the Gardes
du Corps into an ambuscade,  is not certain.  The risk
was at all events too great to be run,  and the Due
desisted from the attempt.  But here,  tln'ougli some
error or mystery that has never yet been cleared,  there
Avas generally heard and understood a Licenciement of
la maison du Roi,  given by order of Monsieur and the
Due de Berry,  with thanks for their devotion and
services,  and permission that they might return to
their families and estates,  if they pleased,  as the King
was forced to quit his kingdom for the moment,  and
was unable to maintain any body of troops ;  those,
iieverthcless,   who were rich enough to provide for

186 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

themselves,  or disposed to run the chances of other
provision,  his Majesty would see among his followers
with great satisfaction.  I need not tell you that your
father unhesitatingly left all he was worth in France
to pursue the call of honour,  and fly from the irruption
of new t3Tanny and usurpation.  But there was no
returning to Bethune,  and,  besides abandoning all he
possessed in Paris,  he now lost his horses,  his w^ar equi-
pao^e,  baggage,  manteau,  domestic,  and whatever was
not immediately upon his person.  And in this starved,
spoliated,  and sleepless condition,  he arrived,  with diffi-
culties all but insurmountable,  at Yj^j^es,  where the
commandant kept him several hours upon a bridge,  in
the most pouring rain,  and his slight petit uniforme,
before he would resolve upon opening the gates !  He
■was then hardly alive ;  and but for a party of L'Ecole
de Droit,  w^ho had gallantly followed the maison on foot,
he must have remained,  he thinks,  to perish upon his
horse  !  but these youths helped him off,  put him to bed,
and w^aited upon him during two days,  in which he was
in a hicrh fever,  unremittins^lv and with the tenderness
they would have shown to a father.  Heaven bless
them  !  With what pleasure you will hear that the
w^hole of this noble little party have been made sous-
lieutenants by le Roi I Every thing at this moment
promises prosperity to the Royal cause.  Deserters,  or
rather adherents,  arrive daily from France.  Your
father has just received a new commission,  and is pre-
paring to fulfil it.  Alas  !  were his health and strength
like his zeal and loyalty  !  When I know his destination
I will write ag-ain.     I am aware how great will be your

1815]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         187

impatience.  Oh,  durst I but press you hither!  but
that would be madness.  Direct to Madame de Burneij,
No.  1358,  Marche aux Bois,  Bruxelles,

Madame d'Arhlay to Alex.  d'Arblay,  Esq.

'  Bruxelles,  June 12,  IS 15.

Your full,  satisfactory,  and interesting letter,  or rather
your five letters in one,  my dearest Alex.,  is just ar-
rived, and has given me the more pleasure that it
arrives before my last,  filled with uneasy remonstrances
at your silence,  had reached you ;  or even,  perhaps,
left les Pays Bas.  I will now instantly let you see the
value of your  '^scrawl,  such as it is,"  by narrating all
you must most want to know,  and putting you,  by a
brief retrospectionij in clear possession of your dear
father's situation.  You know the whole history of his
accompanying Le Roi with sa maison in the retreat
from Paris,  begun March 19th,  at midnight,  or there-
abouts ;  for to disguise the intention,  the different
companies of la maison were ordered off at different
hours,  though all embodying the King.  You know,
too,  that a particular commission from the Capitaine
of his compagnie.  Monsieur le Due de Luxembourg,
kept him at Brussels afterwards for some weeks,  seek-
ing horses,  maps,  &c.  He was then summoned by the
Ministre de la Guerre,  le Due de Feltrc,  to Gand,  to
receive a new and important mission,  by order of the
King.  He there found that his Majesty had appointed
ten officers of known fidelity to be fixed on ten frontier

iSS DIARY AND LETTERS         [Part V.

places,  in order to receive,  select,  or recruit deserters
from Bonaparte,  and form them into battalions,  and
give an account of them to the Due de Feltre — a post
of extreme difficulty and delicacy.     This is the list  : —

Fames,  Vicomte de Saillant.
Courtraij,  Chevalier Berthier.
Kell,  Le Capitaine Boissack.
Tournay,  Chevalier de Gouvello.
Mons,  Chevalier de la Poterie.
Namur,  Marquis de Castries.
Bale,  Le Comte de la Rochefoucault.
Luxembourg,  Chevalier d'Arblay.
Deux-Ponts,  Baron de Vassemont.
Spire,  Chevalier de Guirasonne.

The Minister then named M.  le Comte de Mazan-
court adjoint to your father,  and M.  de Premorel his
aide-de-camp.  Alphonse de Premorel^  son of the latter,
was joined as a volunteer to the little group of which
your father is chief.

Notre ami then,  upon his return to Brussels,  by
order of the Due de Feltre,  demanded an audience of
the Duke of Wellington,  to concert upon measures,
&c.  The Duke said he would himself write upon the
subject to Prince Marshal Bliicher,  and desired notre
ami to remain here till the answer arrived.  Notre
ami wrote to the Marshal also himself Nevertheless,
no answer came,  and he spent ten days here vainly
awaiting it.  In this time,  the two Messrs.  de Premo-
rel dined with us daily,  andM.le Chevaher de Mazan-
court occasionally.     Your father,  you may believe,  was

iSlo]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  ISO

put immediately upon full pay,  or else the whole parly,
ourselves included,  must have made interest to dine
with Duke Humphrey — a Duke of whose convivial en-
tertainments you have perhaps never heard — but your
uncle James will give you the explanation when you
see him ;  no one of ours,  or of any other family,  keeps
a table of more hospitable contrast to that of his
starving Grace.

This delay,  though to me,  you will believe,  a secret
reprieve and benediction,  inquieted notre ami,  and made
his party impatient.  He therefore sent his aide-de-
camp to Gand to confer with the Due de Fellre and
the Due de Luxembourg.  The answer,  however,  was
that Marshal Bllicher's reply must be awaited,  as
Luxembourg was entirely under Prussian orders.  At
the end of a few days more,  notre ami,  more and
more disturbed,  sent off M.  de Mazancourt to Liege,
to endeavour to see the Marshal ;  and dispatched les
Messrs.  de Premorel chez-eux,  which is in the duchy
of Luxembourg,  to pick up deserters en attendant.  But
Marshal Bliicher was gone to Namur,  and M.  de
Mazancourt wrote word that the superior officer re-
maininc:  at Lie^re assured him the Marshal had an-
swered the letter.  M.  de Mazancourt then followed,
and got a conference with Prince Bliicher himself,  who
repeated that he had answered M,  le Marechal de
Camp d'Arblay's letter ;  and when M.  de M.  told
him not a line had arrived,  he gave a tremendous
stamp with his foot,  and uttered a little gentle volley
of soft words that 1 leave you to conjecture.     Upon

190 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

this intelligence,  notre ami set off at once for Liege.
He sent his three horses,  loaded with baggage of mili-
tary equipment,  with his servant,  to go gently,  and
travelled himself,  to save time and arrive more quickly,
in the night diligence.  His servant,  Francois,  is a
German,  of Cologne,  w^hom he takes as interpreter;
for he has another,  Henri,  for his horses.  Fran-
cois had travelled with Mr.  Grattan,  jun.,  and he seems
to be an excellent creature.

Notre ami had not left his forlorn and sorrowing
partner two days when an order came from the Post-
office,  directing him to go thither,  or send a public no-
tary, to receive an official letter.  I took courage to go
myself,  declaring who I was,  and his departure.  They
then delivered me the so long awaited letter of Prince
Marshal Bliicher,  which had remained three weeks at
the Post-office,  from a wrong direction I The mistake
was discovered by accident.

Your dear father writes me word that the letter is
perfect;  polite,  gentlemanlike,  and military^  yet hu-
manely entering into your father's conciliatory mission,
and promising to abet it;  but declining to let him
enter Luxembourg,  and desiring he would go to Treves.
Thither he went,  and there he has been ever since
with his party.  And I have the pleasure to inform
you that he has had,  upon the whole,  far better success
in his mission than he had expected.

You have not answered one word of all I have said
of your studies,  residence,  ccc.  You will be more re-
spected by everybody for taking a little more of Cle-

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         191

meiit in your application and diligence !  The name
•dXidifame,  my boy,  are still in your reach;  but I fear
you will let them pass by,  and only live to regret
always looking at your watch in time to see that you
are too late  !  Your fond father,  however,  will not have
you constrained ;  he thinks you required some dissipa-
tion, and is glad to have you gain Vusage du monde,  and
make yourself friends,  and enjoy,  for an interval,  your
happy existence.  From that relaxation,  he says,  you
will spring into assiduity,  and return to College to make
a brilliant entree,  even after the necessary mode and
fashion of the Dons themselves,  since no other will
lead you to independence,  and a power of choice for
your way of life,  and for your life's partner.  When
young himself,  he always,  he says,  worked harder and
more profoundly after any dissipation,  in order to ob-
tain his own forgiveness and good opinion.  I shall
see,  he pretends,  that you will do the same.

P.S.  June 2?)rd. — Ah,  my dear Alex.,  what terrible
times !  This letter,  begun the moment I had yours,
has been packed up,  and almost taken to Anvers,  in our
late affright.  But all is safe hei^e,  now,  I trust ;  though
I have passed a fearful week,  and am in pain for our
dearest and best of friends.  I had a letter yesterday
— still from Treves,  but he was prepared to depart —
he says not whither.  He knew nothing then of the
irruption of the f leau into these parts,  within nine
miles of Brussels  !  ^^  e are now — /  am now — for I
am nearly left alone — in all the horror and hojje of

I9'2 DIARY,  See.  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  [PaUT V.

perpetual expectation of news.  All ni}^  friends went
off.

My next family letter must be to dear aunt Hetty.
You,  my Alex.,  know how and when to get another
at your own pleasure.

Adieu,  my son.

PART VI.

1815.

The Duke of Wellington not  ^comprehended— His first news of
Bonaparte's invasion of Belgium — Intelligence from the seat
of war — Distinguished officers wounded — M,  d'Arblay's com-
mission— The fugitives from Brussels — Bonaparte and a Pa-
risian mob — Apathy of the Belgians — Bonaparte's proposals
of abdication — Proceedings in Paris — Happiness of Madame
d'Arblay in the prospect of a general peace — Reports respect-
ing the Maison du Roi — Distrust of the Belgian troops — Ap-
proach of the Second Restoration — M.  d'Arblay seriously
injured by a kick from a horse— Difficulties of Madame d'Ar-
blay in procuring a conveyance to him — Delays on the journey
— Cologne — Kindness of a French lady to Madame d'Arblay —
Her impressions of the Rhine — Her first interview with her
husband at Treves — Their departure from Treves — Indigna-
tion of M.  d'Arblay on being stopped at the gates of Thion-
ville by a Prussian officer — The Russians in France — The
Emperor — Paris in the hands of the English — M.  de Talley-
rand— M.  d'Arblay determines to reside with his wife and son
in England.

VOL,  VII.

IS 1 5]         DIARY OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  195

PART VI.

1815.

BATTLE OF WATERLOO.

Madame cVArblay to General d'Arhlay.

Monday,  June 19,  1815.

The sitting up all night,  however little merrily,  made
me,  I know not how,  seem to have lived a day longer
than real time,  for I thought to-day the 20th when I
finished my letter of this morning.     I have now,  there-
fore, to rectify that mistake,  and tell you that there is,
therefore,  no chasm in the known history of the Duke^
of Wellington.     But,  to my infinite regret,  with all the
great,  nay marvellous feats he has performed,  he is less,
not more,  in public favour,  from not being approved,  or
rather,   I think,  comprehended,  in the opening of this
tremendous business.     As I am sure the subject must
be of deeper interest to you than any other,  at such an
instant,  I will tell you all I know — all I have heard
and gathered,  for 1 know nothing,   and add my own
consequent conjectures,  as soon as I have first ac-
quainted you that I separated from the Boyds at about
half past seven in the morning,  too much satisfied with
the news of Lord Wellington's victory to endure to
distance myself still further from all I love most upon
earth.     They,  therefore,  still alarmed,  went to Anvers,

o2

196 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

and I am again at the little bureau,  upon which my
dearest ami has sometimes written in la iNIarche aux
Bois.

The first news the Duke of Wellington was known
to receive of the invasion of les Pays Bas was at a ball
at the Duchess of Richmond's.  He would not break
up the party,  more than half of which was formed of
his officers^  nor suffer any interruption.  Some time
after,  how^ever,  he went out,,  and when he returned
distributed cards of orders to the several commanding
officers.  But he stayed to supper ;  after which fifty
red-coats retired abruptly.  Not so the Duke — and he
is now much

Ah,  mon ami,  two letters arrive at the same instant,
that curtail all subjects but what belong to themselves.
Nous allons commencer I — Fleaven preserve and prosper
the beloved partner of my soul.  I dare enter upon
nothing  ;  I can only say the first of the two letters,
written before the order of commencer was issued,  is
one of the fullest and dearest I have in my possession  ;
and I shall read and re-read its interesting contents
with heart-felt pleasure.

Tell,  tell me,  my beloved ami,  ichere,  ivhen you w^ould
have me remove  ?  I will not ask Itoiu — I will find that
out.  To be nearer to you — to hear more frequently —
oh,  what a solace  !

But I fear making some mistake,  without a direction
more positive.  If the King fixes in Germany,  there is
no doubt we shall have our mutual communications far
more readily and safely than by my remaining in any
other place.

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         197

The Prince Hereditary of Orange has been wounded,
and the Duke of Wellington has galloped hither to
see him.

Napoleon,  in complete deroute^  is returning to Paris  ;
and he has lost all his baggage.

Almost all la maison du Hoi is now come hither
from Alost.  It is supposed to be embodied for La
Vendee.

O what times  !  I dare not write upon them.  I dare
but'  hope,  and pray,  and love,  oh heaven,  how ten-
derly ! — Adieu,  adieu  !

The maimed,  wounded,  bleeding,  fainting,  arrive
still every minute.  There seems a whole,  and a large
army of mutilated soldiers.  Jerome is said to be
killed,  and Vandamme to have lost both legs.  Our loss
is yet incalculable.

Every creature that was moveable is gone to Anvers,
or England,  but myself;  but my intense desire not to
lose ground or time in my letters made me linger to
the last,  and now,  thank Heaven,  all danger here is at
an end,  and all fugitives are returning.

The Imperial Guard is almost annihilated.  They
fought like demons.  Napoleon cried out continually
to them,  the prisoners say,  "  A Bruxelles,  mes enfans !
a Bruxelles  !  a Bruxelles  !  "

They were reported one day to be actually arrived
here.  I never saw,  never,  indeed,  felt such con-
sternation. Not only money,  jewels,  and valuables of
pecuniary sorts were shut up,  but hahies from the arms
of their terrified mothers and nurses.  I flew out my-
self, to take refuge in the apartments of Madame dc

198 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PartVI.

Maurvillc,  and I never witnessed such horror and
desolation.

I liave left this for a word at the last minute.  This
•  is Wednesday,  June 21 5^.  I shall hold m3^self in readi-
ness to follow your instructions,  but not move without
them,  as this great immortal victory may change them.
Every body is expected back again here,  to await the
issue of the entrance into France.  But I have now
positive news to give you of the King,  who is not to go
to Bareuth,  but to Tournay  ;  and thence,  as fast as an
opening can be made for him,  into France itself.  I
have this immediately from a person to whom the com-
mission was half given :  half,  I say,  for the Duke of
Wellington spoke it to tico  :  but the one w^ho is to carry
it to Gand is Monsieur le Due de Fitzjames.  It is
Monsieur de hi Tour du Pin who himself told it me
yesterday at Madame de Maurville's.  It is now
thought the maison du Roi will accompany his Majesty.

Mr.  Kirkpatrick tells me Murat is dead of his
wounds;  Vandamme lost his tw^o thighs,  and is dead
also  ;  Jerome died of a cannon-ball at once.  Poor M.  de
Vincent,  the Austrian,  has a ball still in his arm,  which
they cannot extract.  Lord Fitzroy Somerset has an
arm shot off;  Lord Uxbrido^e a leg:.  Col.  Hamilton is
killed.  Lobau is here a prisoner.  I shall continue to
write all the particulars I can gather.  It has been the
most bloody battle that ever was fought,  and the vic-
tory the most entire.

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  199

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Loch

Brussels,  June 25,  1815.

'Tis a solace indeed — at a period of unintermitting
alarm and incertitude for what is most dear to me
upon earth — 'tis indeed a solace to hear the voice of
happiness,  and to hear it from a source that makes it
vibrate through ever}^  terror to my heart.  My beloved
friend's letter of the 26th May reached me only a week
ago — ^just,  just before this last affrighting,  afflicting,
murderous invasion.  I began a letter immediately,
but ere I had sent it these new horrors arrived,  and it
was packed up with my small luggage for Antwerp.

But before I go on with myself,  let me first do that
which you will first desire,  speak of my other moitie.  I
told you our history to our last separation,  which took
him to Liege.  Thence he passed to Treves,  where he
has been stationed ever since.  His mission is to re-
ceive, and examine,  &c.,  deserters from Bonaparte ;
les fideles,  plutot,  au Roi ;  a business of infinite
delicacy,  so many are the spies and emissaries that are
ready to insinuate themselves on this side,  to gather
information under every possible form and pretence.
However,  to serve the cause and the King in whatever
manner it may be prescribed,  is the fullest desire of
M.  d'Arblay.  Nine other officers have the same com-
mission, all upon frontier towns.  This station he has
never quitted,  though he has made various efforts to
place himself more actively.  But his mission has been
successful,  and I,  you will easily believe,  am well
contented it has not been changed.      Le Comte de

200 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

Gouvcllo,  husband to Lady Crewe's friend,  has the
same mission at Tournay.  At Mons — whither now all
the royal family are going — M.  d'Auvergne has just
been sent on the same errand,  to replace M.  le Comte
de la Poterie.  M.  dArblay has an aide-de-camp,  an
adjoint,  and a volunteer officer of the maison du Roi,
compagnie de Luxembourg,  always with him — and
others occasionally.  This small party,  of which he is
chief,  follow his suggestions and directions in aiding
his purpose.  His table is theirs  ;  and he is therefore,
you will justly conclude,  upon full pay :  otherwise —
^Yith two domestics,  four horses,  a voiture de campagne
(i.e.  a half cart),  and,  as the superior officer at Treves,
in active service for Louis XVI IL,  forced to innumer-
able convenahle expenses — otherwise he must try to make
debts for which,  there,  he could make no credit.  And,
indeed,  the expenses of such situations are so great,
that unless some happy suite takes place,  he will be
apt,  in the end,  to say to those who have thus dis-
tinguished him,  like Swift to Harley and Bolingbroke —

"  Well,  friends,  since you have done your worst,
Pray leave me — where you found me first."'

He,  however,  while able to go on at all,  thinks not,
at this awful period,  either of gain or loss.  The cause,
so good ;  his country,  so culpable and unhappy — these
alone are the subjects that occupy his mind.  And his
letters upon the latter,  on the devastation he sees pre-
paring all around him,  are as melancholy as mine are
from my perpetual apprehensions for his personal
safety.  He has written and printed a proclamation,
inviting his countrymen to join him,  which is to be

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        201

thrown by every means into France,  and which he has
signed with his name.  This I think much too rash —
so does Monsieur de Lally,  who has sis^ned his own,  but
who is away from the frontiers,  and not military,  nor
enfrasred in the scene of hostilities.  You must have
been pleased,  I am sure,  with the manifesto of M.  de
Lally,  from whom I had a visit but lately.  He resides
at Ghent,  near the King,  but comes occasionally to
Brussels.  Every body ran away at the late invasion —
Madame d'Henin,  Madame la Tour du Pin and her
daughter,  Mademoiselle,  and her married daughter
Madame de Liedekerke,  the Boyd family,  and in short
every person I know except Madame de Maurville,
who determined to wait the event.  For myself,  I began
the flight ;  but after sitting up all Sunday night in a
house whence I was to depart at four in the morning
surrounded by my little packets — for baggage here
have I none — the carriage failed the party with which
I was to travel ;  and at seven o'clock an English
officer who came to conduct us to a barge that was to
take us to Antwerp,  told me Bonaparte would have
too much to do to be at Brussels that day  (Monday
the 19th).  "Then he will not come at all,"  I cried;
"  for if he cannot take Brussels by a coup de mam at
once,  to stay another day will be to risk Paris  ;  for the
Allies will enter France in his absence."  On this pre-
sumption I ventured to return,  packets and all,  to my
apartments,  though my friends went on.  And here I
am,  though in a most unpleasant,  unsettled state.

I was somewhat entertained by the recital of a gentle-
man just come from Paris that reached me.    Bonaparte

202 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

had again given out his expectations of the arrival of
his Empress and son :  a mob gathered round the
Tuileries,  shouting,  "  Vive V Imperatrice  !  Vive Marie
Louise!''  till he appeared at the window,  to thank
them,  saying she was not yet arrived,  but he doubted
not would soon come.  A wag^  among the crowd sud-
denly sung to his next neighbour,  "  Va-t-en voir selle
vient,  Jean  !  " — the neighbour repeated the verse — it
was caught by a third  ;  and presently became a chorus,
which Bonaparte could not help hearing,  as,  looking
furious with indignation,  he shut his window.  But the
chorus was too general to be dangerous ;  there was no
one,  tw^o,  iQw,  twenty,  or fifty to be marked and arrested,
and therefore all laughed,  but all sung on,  and all
escaped with impunity.

June 26th. — I have now j ust had a letter from M.
d'Arblay,  dated June 19th,  in which he expects orders
to move every minute ;  but when he had not heard of
the invasion of les Pays Bas.  The odd slowness and
apathy,  or philosophy,  of these perfectly good and
worthy,  sleepy souls,  is really astonishing.

P.S. — We know the victory of the Duke of Wei-'
lington quite complete — and Bonaparte hopeless.  But
what else is to ensue — whether civil war,  alas !  or what
- — all here are ignorant.

Madame d'Arblay to General d'Arblay.

Bruxelles,  ce blessed Lundi,  June 26,  1815.

Why have I not a balloon to be the first to tell you
this enchanting news ! — or,  rather,  wings to fly to you

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  '203

with it myself!  Bonaparte has yielded to Lord Wel-
lington !

The particulars — how,  which way,  &c. — are told too
variously for building upon their correctness ;  but the
fact seems undoubted  : — seems,  I am compelled to say,
for nothing official has been here printed.  The sleepi-
ness of this quiet and good,  but most drowsy and hum-
drum people,  exceeds belief,  especially when I consider
que les Francs et les Beiges came I'rom one parent
stock,  i.  e.  the Germains.

O mon ami!  will not peace now re-visit us?  My
hand shakes,  and my spirits are agitated past de-
scription, with an inward fear that all this will not be
confirmed.     O for an English Gazette !

The whole cit3%in spite of its apathy,  looked smiling,
and even,  some few,  grinfiing with contented joy,  as I
walked out early.  I except some others,  evidently and
gloomily overset ;  but these last are few.  The people
of this house and every shopkeeper had heard the
news,  though without any positive authority.

But about noon I had a visit from M.  de Beaufort,
who came,  kindly smiling himself,  to bring me the first
of the news.  He had just learnt it at the commandant's.
Colonel Jones.  His account was,  that Bonaparte had
sent to the Duke propositions by an officier general: —
1st,  to abdicate in favour of his son and a regency;
or,  2dly,  in favour of Prince Eugene,  the great favourite
of the Emperor of Russia ;  or,  Sdl}^,  in favour of the
Duke of Orleans.

The Duke sent him word he must yield at discretion,
or fight :  he had nothing to do with abdicatmg,  for he

204 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

was nothing  !  He Itad already abdicated when he was
Emperor.

The army then sent a deputation^  demanding a truce
for sparing the further effusion of human blood.

The Duke answered,  their King might spare it when
re- seated on his throne ;  but that for tkem,  and
FROM THEM,  the application was now too late.

After all this,  in the park,  whither I went to breathe
an instant at its epoch of real emptiness,  five o'clock,
I met our old friend le voisin,  M.  de Boursac,  Le
Voisin tells me le Due de Bourbon has been all this
time in Spain,  but is now certainly in La Vendee.  M.
d'Angoulem.e was still in Spain at the last news.  He had
escaped the same day that w^e did;  but ces dames sont
toujour s a Paris.  I believe he is with M.  le Prince de
Conde.  He told me further news  : — That in les chamhres
various voices had demanded army intelligence,  and
where was the Emperor.  At first the ministers present
said les nouvelles were not mauvaises,  and the Empereur
was with his army ;  but being hard and hardily pressed.
Carnot acknowledged all to le lad,  and the Emperor in
Paris  !  After much discussion,  contention,  and violence,
a majority took imperious lead,  and declared Bonaparte
dechu.

A committee was then formed to make a proposal to
the Allies.  Three took the lead,  and said they would
offer any sacrifice to recover peace — resign the Em-
peror, become a republic,  take another and new form
of government,  or revert to a free monarchy — anything
for peace,  except reinstating the late power !  O mon
ami !  I hope this is exaggerated  ;  and surtout that it

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        205

is false,  entirely false,  that one of these three is one of
our most valued friends,  M.  de la Fayette !

Difficulties,  contrarieties,  factions,  mischiefs,  we
must expect and meet with fortitude;  but one voice,
clear and universal,  in a chorus angelical,  cries,  affirms,
and confirms,  that the armies fight no more !

If you were to see me in this happy,  happy moment,
you would not know me.      I have not felt so blithe

since since when? — since the evening you

came home from the first short and frightful campaign ;
when happiness,  after long,  long journeying elsewhere,
suddenly and sweetly made me a visit.

Tuesday^  June 27th. — I have again seen M.  de
Boursac,  and I have been to the Boyds,  but no new
news is afloat to-day.  The King is at Cateau Cam-
bresis,  under the immediate protection of Lord Wel-
lington, whose proclamation,  if I can possibly procure,
I will copy for you to-morrow early.  How amusing,
that on the 21st you should not have heard at Treves
of the invasion of les Pays Bas 1 I am truly sorry for
General Kleist;  but oh,  how happy to think and hope
you still at Treves !

Wednesday,  June 2Sth. — I cannot get the proclama-
tion till next post !  I hope it will reach you other-
wise. I have no room to relate the pourquoi,  for I
have another thing to tell you.  I inquired of our
voisin how it happened that you had received no order
to move,  when one of your colleagues,  M.  de Castres,
certainly had,  since he had been at Bruxellcs.  He
answered me,  that M.  de Castres had received no
order,  for he had seen him,  and believed he was even

206 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

here still ;  but when the French arrived,  or were un-
doubtedl}^  arriving before Namur,  he came away of his
own accord,  as a thing of course,  and of common sense,
since,  had he been taken,  he must instantly have been
shot by the Bonapartists on account of his mission;
and that without serving any purpose,  as he had no
troops,  and no command.  The maison du Roi is,  or is
to be,  dissoute.  I asked what was become of its mem-
bers ?  He replied,  those w^ho had leave or orders ac-
companied the King:  the others addressed M.  de
Feltre,  and waited where was most convenahle for direc-
tions. But all,  of all descriptions,  have left Gand.
At Alost there is still a depot.      With respect to the

person fusille for M.    de L 's manifesto,   it was

M.   de L himself who told it me;    but happily

it has proved a misinformation.  Nothing at this mo-
ment must be quite credited but upon joroof:  is it not,
therefore,  that you quite credit the tender faith of

your unalterable

r.  B.  d'A.  ?

Madame d^Arhlay to a Friend.

Bruxelles,  July 3,  1815.

How is it that my dear can thus on one side

be fascinated by the very thing that,  on the other,
revolts her  ?  How be a professed and ardent detester
of tyranny,  yet an open and intrepid admirer of a
tyrant?  O,  had you spent,  like me,  ten years within-
the control of his unlimited power,  and under the iron
rod of its dread,  how would you change your language^

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        207

by a total reverse of sentiment !  Yet was I,  because
always inoffensive,  never molested ;  as safe there,  ano-
ther would say,  as in London  ;  but you will not say so  ;
the safety of deliberate prudence,  or of retiring timi-
dity, is not such as would satisfy a mind glowing for
freedom like yours  :  it satisfies,  indeed,  no mind,  it
merely suffices for bodily security.  It was the choice
of my companion,  not of my taste,  that drew me to such
a residence.  Personally,  for the reason I have as-
signed, I was always w^ell treated,  and personally I
was happy  :  but you know me,  I am sure,  better than
to suppose me such an egotist as to be really happy
or contented where corporal liberty could only be pre-
served by mental forbearance,  ?'.  e.  subjection.

The panic impressed upon all the inhabitants,  whe-
ther natives or visitors,  by the late invasion,  and its
consequences,  would have cured any one not absolutely
incurable,  of a revolutionary taste  ;  and you are too
fair and too liberal ever wilfully to blind yourself
against visible facts,  or to resist powerful conviction.
The Belgians have for so many centuries been accus-
tomed to sanguinary conflicts,  and violent or mercenary
change of masters,  that I really tbouoht,  from the placid
state in which,  when seeking here an asylum,  I found
them,  that they were utterly indifferent to the result of
the neighbouring struggle,  and would just as willingly
fall again into the hands of Bonaparte as not.  They
never,  of their own accord,  opened upon the subject,  nor
considered or treated us poor fugitives but as common
visitors.  I imagined they had gone through too many
political changes to dpem one or two,  more or less

208 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

an addition worth ruffling their serenit}'.  And Bona-
parte, whether from hearing of this passive philosoph}-,
or whether from motives yet unknown,  certainly ex-
pected not merely that they would not oppose,  but
that they would join him.  This idea,  with respect to
the Belgian troops,  was indeed spread,  most alarm-
ingly, here.  The Duke of Wellington was warned by
several persons not to trust them  ;  and it is generally
understood that he determined they should neither be
trusted in front,  lest they should join the enemy;  nor
in the rear,  lest they should run away from their friends.
Nevertheless,  when the day of battle arrived,  I found
I had taken the calm of their natures for indifference
to their fate ;  for when a cry was shouted through the
streets that the French were come ! — that Bonaparte et
les Frangais etaient a la porte de la ville — the conster-
nation that ensued,  the horror that was depicted
on every countenance,  showed they were alive at
least to the evils that menaced themselves — and how
few,  hoxv very few,  are really awake to any other  !  We
do not appear to be asleep,  because our eyes are wide
open;  but dormant lies every feeling that belongs to
whatever is not animated^  in some shape or other,  by
self;  except in the very,  very few whom Nature has
gifted — or condemned — ''  to feel for others'  woes."

It is now within three days of two months since I
last saw M.  d'A.  He has been sent upon a mission
of the King's,  first to Liege,  next to Luxembourg,
and then to Treves,  where he has passed six weeks  :
he has now left it,  but I know not yet for what other
destination.     You will not believe me very tranquil in

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,         209

the ignorance  ;  but I am tranquil in nothing during
this wandering,  houseless,  emigrant life.  This is no
siecle for those who love their home,  or who have a
home to love.  'Tis a siecle for the adventurous,  to
whom Ambition always opens resources ;  or for the
New,  who guess not at the catastrophes that hang on
the rear,  while the phantom Expectation allures them
to the front.

The second restoration seems now fast advancing.  I
have just had a letter from the quartier-general of the
King from Roye^  written by a friend in the King's
suite,  who says his Majesty has been received there
with enthusiasm.  I,  yoU well know,  must hear that
with pleasure,  for my only consolation during the tre-
mendous conflicts,  and eternally varying prospects,  in
which of late I have lived,  has been that the principles
and feelings of M.  d'A.  have coincided with his duty.
You were quite right  "  not to have had a doubt as to
the line he would pursue:"  belonging to the maisoii die
Roi,  and having always refused to support Bonaparte,
he must not only have been perfidious,  but incompre-
hensible, to have hesitated.  I am extremely glad,
therefore,  you would take no measure for my affairs but
with my concurrence ;  for whoever,  at that period,  re-
mained in Paris,  and in power,  must both think and
act so very differently from M.  d'A.,  that he w^ould
have been offended to have owed to them a benefit.
He is tres what those on the other side the question
call exalte ;  and oh,  what painful scenes must w^e go
through if we get back to our deserted home  !  You
will wonder to hear me say if — prosperous as all now

VOL.  VII.  p

510 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

seems;  but the changes which this country has for
so long a time gone through,  have been so astonish-
ing, so sudden,  so unexpected,  that they take away
at least all presumption,  if not all confidence in
public transactions.  The various parts,  from various
circumstances as well as propensities,  taken upon the
late eruption of Mount Corsica,  will have severed
asunder half the families amongst my best friends  !  In
particular,  she who is most dear to me — a very sister
in tender affection,  useful friendship,  and endearing
sympathy — will stand between two brothers,  each
equally loved by her,  who have decidedly and actively
taken two opposite sides  !

Narrative — continued.

On the I9th of July,  1815,  during the ever memo-
rable Hundred Days,  I was writing to my best friend,
when I received a visit from la Princesse d'Henin and
Colonel  *  de Beaufort,  wdio entered the room with a
sort of precipitancy and confusion that immediately
struck me as the effect of evil tidings which they came
to communicate.  My ideas instantly flew to the ex-
pectation of new public disaster,  when Madame d'He-
nin faintly pronounced the name of M.  d'Arblay.
Alarmed,  I turned from one to the other in speechless
trepidation,  dreading to ask,  while dying to know what
awaited me.  Madame d'Henin then said,  that M.  de
Beaufort had received a letter from M.  d'Arblay  :
and I listened with subdued,  yet increasing terror.

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        211

while they acquainted me that M.  d'Arblay had re-
ceived on the calf of his leg a furious kick from
a wild horse,  which had occasioned so bad a wound
as to confine him to his bed;  and that he wished
M.  de Beaufort to procure me some travelling guide,
that I might join him as soon as it would be possible
with safety and convenience.

But what was my agony when I saw that the letter
was not in his own hand  !  I conjured them to leave
me,  and let me read it alone.  They offered,  the one
to find me a clever femme de chambre,  the other to
inquire for a guide to aid me to set out,  if able,  the
next day;  but I rather know this from recollection
than from having understood them at the time :  I
only entreated their absence ;  and,  having consented
to their return in a few hours,  I forced them away.

No sooner were they gone,  than,  calming my spirits
by earnest and devout prayer,  which alone supports
my mind,  and even preserves my senses,  in deep ca-
lamity, I ran over the letter,  which was dated the
fourth day after the wound,  and acknowledged that
three incisions had been made in the leg unnecessarily
by an ignorant surgeon,  which had so aggravated the
danger,  as well as the suffering,  that he was now in
bed,  not only from the pain of the lacerated limb,  but
also from a nervous fever  !  and that no hope was held
out to him of quitting it in less than a fortnight or
three weeks.

I determined not to wait,  though the poor sufferer
himself had charged that I should,  either for the
femme do chambre of Madame d'Henin or the guide

p2

212 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VT.

of M.  de Beaufort,  which they could not quite promise
even for the next day ;  and to me the next hour seemed
the delay of an age.  I went,  therefore,  to order a
chaise at six on the road to Luxembourg.

The answer was,  that no horses were to be had !

Almost distracted,  I flew myself to the inn ;  but the
answer was repeated !  The route to Luxembourg,
they told me,  was infested with straggling parties,
first,  from the wandering army of Grouch}^  now ren-
dered pillagers from want of food  ;  and next,  from the
pursuing army of the Prussians,  who made themselves
pillagers also through the rights of conquest.  To
travel in a chaise would be impracticable,  they assured
me,  without a guard.

I now resolved upon travelling in the diligence,  and
desired to secure a place in that for Triers  (Treves).

There was none to that city !

"  And what is the nearest town to Triers,  whence I
might go on in a chaise  ?"

''Luxembourg."

I bespoke a place but was told that the

diligence had set off the very day before,  and that
none other would go for six days,  as it only quitted
Brussels once a week.

My friend the Baroness de Spagen next told me
that,  if travel I would,  I had but to go by Liege,
which,  though not a direct,  was the only safe road;
that then she would put me under the protection of
her brother-in-law,  the Comte de Spagen,  who was
himself proceeding to that city by the ensuing night-
coach.

1815]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         213

I accepted this kindness with rapture.  I flew mj--
self to the book keeper I had so abruptly quitted,  and
instantly secured a place in the Liege diligence for
night ;  and I was taking leave of my hosts,  a Brussels
fiacre being at the door,  laden with my little luggage,
when I was told that Le Roi,  the confidential servant of
Madame d'Henin,  besought to speak a word to me
from his mistress.  He told me that the Princesse was
quite miserable at my hazardous plan,  which she had
gathered from Madame de la Tour du Pin,  and that
she supplicated me to postpone my purpose only till
the next day,  when I should have some one of trust to
accompany me.

I assured him that nothing now could make me risk
procrastination,  but begged him to still the fears of
the excellent Princesse by acquainting her I should be
under the protection of the Comte de Spagen.

I arrived at the inn  ....  after this last unprepared-
for impediment,  three or four minutes too late  !

What was the fermentation of my mind at this
news !  A whole week I must wait for the next dili-
gence, and even then lose the aid and countenance of
le Comte de Spagen.

Le Roi,  who,  through some short cut of footpaths and
alleys,  had got to the inn before me,  earnestly pressed
me,  in the style of the confidential old servants of the
French nobility,  to go and compose myself chez la
Princesse.  Even my host and hostess had pursued
to wish me again good bye,  and now expressed their
warm hopes I should return to them.  But the book-
keeper alone spoke a language to snatch me from

214 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaktVI.

despair,  by saying my fiacre might perhaps catch the
diligence two miles off,  in the AUee Verte^  where it
commonly stopped for fresh passengers or parcels.

Eagerly I promised the coachman a reward if he
could succeed,  and off he drove.  The diligence was at
the appointed place^  and that instant ready to pro-
ceed !

I rushed into it with trepidation of hurry,  and when
more composed,  I was eager to find out w^hich of my
fellow travellers might be the Comte de Spagen ;  but
I dared risk no question.     I sat wholly silent.

We arrived at Liege about nine in the morning.  I
now advanced to the bookkeeper,  and made inquiries
about the Comte de Spagen.

He had arrived in the earlier coach,  and  .  .  .was
gone on in some other to his estates.

As calmly as was in my power,  I then declared my
purpose to go to Treves,  and begged to be put on my
way.

I was come wrong,  the bookkeeper answered;  the
road was by Luxembourg.

And how was I to get thither  ?

By Brussels,  he said,  and a week hence,  the dili-
gence having set off the day before.

Alas,  I well knew that !  and entreated some other
means to forward me to Triers.

He replied that he knew of none from Liege;  but
that if I would go to Aix,  I might there,  perhaps,
though it was out of the road,  hear of some conveyance ;
but he asserted it was utterly impossible I could leave
Liege without a passport from the Prussian police-

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         215

office,  where I should only and surely be detained if I
had not one to show from whence I came.

This,  happily,  reminded me of the one I had from
M.  de Jaucourt in Paris,  and which was fortunately,
though accidentally,  in my hand-basket.

Arrived at Aix,  I earnestly enquired for a convey-
ance to Treves  :  none existed I nor could I hear of
any at all,  save a diligence to Juliers,  which was to
set out at four o'clock the next morning.

To lose thus a whole day,  and even then to go only
more north instead of south,  almost cast me into
despair.  But redress there was none,  and I was
forced to secure myself a place to Juliers,  whence,  I
was told,  I might get on.

At any more tranquil period I should have seized
this interval for visiting the famous old cathedral and
the tomb of Charlemagne ;  but now I thought not of
them ;  I did not even recollect that Aix-la-Chapelle
had been the capital of that Emperor.  I merely saw
the town through a misty,  mizzling rain,  and that the
road all around it was sandy and heavy,  or that all wa&
discoloured by my own disturbed view.

I laid down,  in a scarcely furnished apartment,  with-
out undressing.  I suffered no shutter or curtain to be
closed,  lest I should lose my vehicle ;  and such was
my anxiety,  that at three o'clock,  by my own watch,  I
descended to inquire if we were not to set off.  1 wan-
dered about by the twilight of a season that is never
quite dark,  but met no one.  I returned to my cham-
ber, but,  always in terror of being forgotten,  de-
scended again in a quarter of an hour,  though still

216 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT YI.

without success.  An hour,  says Dr.  Johnson,  may be
tedious,  but it cannot be long :  four o'clock at last
struck,  and I ran into a vehicle then ready in the
court-yard of the Auberge.

I found myself alone,  which,  at first,  was a great
relief to my mind,  that was overburthened with care
and apprehension,  and glad of utter silence.  Ere
long,  however,  I found it fed my melancholy,  which it
was my business rather to combat ;  and I was not,
therefore,  sorry when a poor woman with a child w^as
admitted from the outside through the charity of the
coachman,  as the rain grew heavier.

At Juliers we stopped at a rather large- inn,  at the
head of an immensely long market-place.  It was nearly
empty,  except where occupied by straggling soldiers,
poor,  lame,  or infirm labourers^  women,  and children.
The universal war of the Continent left scarcely a man
unm aimed to be seen in civil life.  The women who
met my eyes were all fat,  with very round and very
brown faces.  Most of them were barefooted,'nay,  bare-
legged, and had on odd small caps,  very close round
their visages.  The better sort,  I fancy,  at that critical
time,  had hidden themselves or fled the town.

We entered Cologne through an avenue,  said to be
seven miles in length,  of lime-trees.  It was evening,
but very light,  and Cologne had a striking appear-
ance, from its magnitude and from its profusion of
steeples.

The better sort of houses were white and looked
neat,  though in an old-fashioned style,  and elaborately
ornamented.     But,  between the ravages of time and of

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         217

war,  the greater part of them seemed crumbling away,
if not tumbling down.

But while I expected to be driven on to some
auberge,  a police officer,  in a Prussian uniform,  came to
the coach-door_,  and demanded our passports.  My
companion made herself known as a native,  and was
let out directly.  The officer,  having cast his eye
over my passport^  put his head through the window of
the carriage,  and,  in a low whisper,  asked me whether
I were French  ?

French by marriage,  though English by birth,  I
hardly knew which to call myself;  I said,  however,
''  Ozn'."  He then,  in a voice yet more subdued,  gave
me to understand that he could serve me.  I caught
at his offer,  and told him I earnestly desired to go
straight to Treves,  to a wounded friend.  He would
do for me what he could,  he answered,  for he was
French himself,  though employed by the Prussians.
He would carry my passport for me to the magistrate
of the place and get it signed without my having any
further trouble  ;  though only,  he feared,  to Bonn,  or,  at
farthest,  to Coblentz,  whence I might probably proceed
unmolested.  He knew also,  and could recommend me
to a most respectable lady and gentleman,  both French,
and under the Prussian hard gripe,  where I might
spend the evening en famille,  and be spared entering
any auherge.

He conducted me,  in silence,  passing through the
cloisters,  to a house not far distant,  and very retired
m its appearance.  Arrived at a door at which he
knocked or rang,  he still spoke not a word ;  but when

218 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

an old man came to open it,,  in a shabby dress,  but
with a good and lively face,  he gave him some
directions in German and in a whisper,  and then,
entrusted with my passport,  he bowed to me and
harried away.

The old man led me to a very large room,  scarcely
at all furnished.  He pulled out of a niche a sort of
ebony arm-chair,  very tottering and worn,  and said he
would call Madame,  for whom he also placed 2ifauteuU,
at the head of an immense and clumsy table.  I was
then joined by an elderly gentlewoman,  who was led
in ceremoniously by a gentleman still more elderly.
The latter made me three profound obeisances,  which I
returned with due imitation,  while the lady approached
me with good breeding,  and begged me to take my
seat.

The old man then,  who I found was their domestic,
served the tea.  I know not whether this was their
general custom,  or a compliment to a stranger.  But
when we had all taken some,  they opened into a little
conversation.  It was I,  indeed,  who began,  by apolo-
gising for my intrusion,  and expressing at the same
time my great relief in being spared going to an
aubero^e,  alone as I was  ;  but I assured them that
the gentleman who had brought me to their dwelling
had acted entirely by his own uninfluenced authority.

They smiled or rather tried to smile,  for melancholy
was seated on their countenances in its most fixed colours;
and they told me that person was their best friend,  and
lost no opportunity to offer them succour or comfort.
He had let them know my situation,   and had desired

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  219

they would welcome and cheer me.  Welcome me,  the
lady added in French,  they did gladly,  since I was in
distress;  but they had httle power to cheer me,  involved
as they  'were themselves in the depths of sorrow.

Sympathy of compassion soon led to sympathy of
confidence;  and when they heard to whom I belonged^
and the nature of my terrible haste,  they related their
own sad history.  Death,  misfortune,  and oppression
had all laid on them their iron hands ;  they had lost
their sons while forcibly fighting for a usurpation
which they abhorred  ;  they had lost their property by
emigration  ;  and they had been treated with equal
harshness by the Revolutionists because they were
suspected of loyalty,  and by the Royalists because
their children had served in the armies of the Revolu-
tionists. They v;ere now living nearly in penury,  and
owed their safety and peace solely to the protection of
the officer who had brought me to them.

With communications such as these,  time passed so
little heavily,  however sadly,  that we were ill-disposed
to separate ;  and eleven o'clock struck,  as we sat over
their economical but well served and well cooked little
supper,  ere the idea of retiring was mentioned.  They
then begged me to go to rest,  as I must be at the
diligence for Coblentz by four o'clock the next
morning.

To another large room,  nearl}^  empty except the old,
high,  and narrow bed,  the domestic now conducted me,
promising to call me at half-past three o'clock in the
morning,  and to attend me to the dili<2:ence.

I did not dare undress  ;  I tied my watch,  which was

'i20 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

a small repeater,  round 1113'  wrist,  and laid down in my
clothes — but to strike my watch,  and to pray for my
beloved invalid,  and my safe restoration to him,  filled
up,  without,  I believe,  three minutes of repose,  the
interval to my conductor's return.

At half-past three we set out,  after I had safely depo-
sited all I durst spare,  where my disinterested,  but most
poor host would inevitably find m.y little offering,  which,
if presented to him,  he would probably have refused.
I never heard his name,  which he seemed studious to
hold back ;  but I have reason to think he was of the
ancient provincial noblesse.  His manners,  and those
of his wife,  had an antique etiquette in them that can
only accord with that idea.

The walk was immensely long ;  it was through the
scraggy and hilly streets I have mentioned,  and I
really thought it endless.  The good domestic carried
my luggage.  The height of the houses made the light
merely not darkness ;  we met not a creature  ;  and the
painful pavement and barred windows,  and fear of
being too late,  made the walk still more dreary.

I w-as but Justin time;  the diligence was already
drawn out of the inn-yard,  and some friends of
the passengers were taking leave.  I eagerly secured
my place ;  and never so much regretted the paucity of
my purse as in my inability to recompense as I wished
the excellent domestic whom I now quitted.

I found myself now in much better society than I
had yet been,  consisting of two gentlemen,  evidently of
good education,  and a lady.  They were all German,
and spoke only that language one to another,  though

1S15]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  221

they addressed me in French as often as my ab-
sorption in my own ruminations gave any opening
for their civility.

And this was soon the case^  by my hearing them
speak of the Rhine ;  my thoughts were so httle geo-
graphical that it had not occurred to me that Cologne
was upon that river ;  I had not,  therefore,  looked for
or perceived it the preceding evening:  but upon my
now starting at the sound of its name,  and expressing
my strong curiosity to behold it,  they all began to
watch for the first point upon which it became clearly
visible^  and all five with one voice called out presently
after,  '^  Ah^  le voila T But imagination had raised
expectations that the Rhine,  at this part of its stream,
would by no means answer.  It seemed neither so
v/ide,  so deep,  so rapid,  nor so grand as my mind had
depicted it ;  nor yet were its waters so white or bright
as to suit my ideas of its fame.

At last my heart became better tuned.  I w^as now
on my right road;  no longer travelling zig-zag,  and as
I could procure any means to get on,  but in the straight
road,  by Coblentz,  to the city which contained the
object of all my solicitude.

And then it was that my eyes opened to the beauties
of nature;  then it w^as that the far-famed Rhine found
justice in those poor little eyes,  which hitherto,  from
mental pre-occupation,  or from expectations too high
raised,  had refused a cordial tribute to its eminent
beauty ;  unless indeed its banks,  till after Bonn,  are of
inferior loveliness.     Certain it is,  that from this time

222 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

till my arrival at Coblentz,  I thought myself in regions
of enchantment.

At first,  we had constantly TJie Seven Movntains to
form a noble repose for our eyes as the boundary of
the principal prospect;  afterwards,  the Rhine and its
banks,  which constituted our road,  made the whole of the
valley,  while stately rocks of striking forms,  and hanging
woods of exquisite beauty,  invited on one side our gaze
and admiration ;  and prospects eternally diversifying
varied our delighted attention on the other.  Now,
mounting some steep ascent,  we saw this fine river
winding perpendicularly beneath us;  now descending
again,  the rocks and woods seemed to embower us.
Almost every eminence was crowned with an ancient
castle or fortress,,  whose falling turrets and scattered
fragments gave as great a charm to the scene as they
caused,  on the other hand,  sorrow,  resentment,  and even
horror to the reflections  ;  for these ruins were not the
inevitable effect of all-conquering,  irresistible time,  to
which we all bow,  but of wanton,  ao^ojressive,  invading^
w^ar,  and of insatiable ambition.

From Coblentz to Treves I was two days travelling,
though it might with ease have been accomplished in
less than half that time.

We no longer journeyed in any diligence that may be
compared with one of France or of England,  but in a
queer German carriage,  resembling something mixed
of a coach,  a chaise,  and a cart.

At Treves,  at length,  on Monday evening,  the 24th
of Jul}^,  1815,  I arrived in a tremor of joy and terror

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        223

indescribable.  But my first care was to avoid hazard-
ing any mischief from surprise  ;  and my first measure
was to obtain some intelhgence previously to risking
an interview.  It was now six days since any tidings
had reached me.  My own last act in leaving Brussels
had been to write a few lines to M.  de Premorel,  my
General's aide-de-camp,  to announce my journey,  and
prepare him for my arrival,

I now wrote a few lines to the valet of Monsieur
d'Arblay,  and desired he would come instantly to the
inn for the baggage of Madame d'Arblay,  who was
then on the road.

Hardly five minutes elapsed ere Francois,  running
like a racehorse,  though in himself a staid and com-
posed German,  appeared before me.

How I shook at his sight with terrific suspense!
The good-natured creature relieved me instantly — ■
though with a relief that struck at my heart with a
pang of agony — for he said that the danger was over,
and that both the surgeons said so.

He was safe,  I thanked God !  but danger,  positive
danger had existed !  Faint I felt,  though in a tumult
of grateful sensations  :  I took his arm,  for my tottering
feet would hardly support me  ;  and M.  de Premorel,
hastening to meet me at the street-door,  told me that
the General was certain I was already at Treves ;  I
therefore permitted myself to enter his apartment at
once.

Dreadfully suffering,  but still mentally occupied
by the duties of his profession,  I found him.  Three
wounds had been inflicted on his leg by the kick of a

224 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

wild horse,  which he liad bought at Treves,  with intent
to train to military service.  He was felled by them to
the ground.  Yet,  had he been skilfully attended,  he
might have been completely cured  !  But all the best
surgeons,  throughout every district,  had been seized
upon for the armies ;  and the ignorant hands into
which he fell aggravated the evil,  by incisions hazard-
ous, unnecessary,  and torturing.

The Adjoint of M.  d'Arblay,  M.  le Comtc de Ma-
zancourt,  had been sent to Paris by M.  d'Arblay,  to
demand leave and passports for returning to France,
the battle and peace of Waterloo having ended the
purpose for which he had been appointed by Louis
XVIII.,  through the orders of the Marechal Due de
Feltre,  Minister at War,  to raise recruits from the
faithful who wished to quit the Usurper.

My poor sufferer had been quartered upon M.  Nell,
a gentleman of Treves  ;  but there was no room for me
at M.  Nell's,  and I was obliged — most reluctantly —
to be conducted to an hotel at some distance.  But
the next day M.  d'Arblay entered into an agreement
with Madame de la Grange,  a lady of condition who
resided at Treves,  to admit me to eat and lodge at her
house,  upon the pic-nic plan,  of paying the overplus
of that expense I should cause her,  with a proper
consideration,  not mentioned,  but added by my dear
General,  for my apartment and incidental matters.
This sort of plan,  since their ruin by the Revolution,
had become so common as to be called fashionable
amongst the aristocratic noblesse,  who were too
much impoverished to receive their friends under their

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         225

roofs but hy communitji of fortune during- their junction.
Every morning after breakfast one of the family con-
ducted me back to M.  Nell's,  where I remained till
the hour of dinner.  \\li<  n M.  Godcfroy de Premorel
commonly gave me le hras for returning,  and Francois
watched for me at the end of the repast.  This was to
me a cruel arrangement,  forcing my so frequent ab-
sences ;  but I had no choice.

It was not till after reiterated applications by letter,
and by MM.  de Mazancourt and Premorel in per-
son, that my poor General could obtain his letters of
recall ;  though the re- establishment of Louis XVIII.
on his throne made the mission on the frontiers null,
and though the hapless and helpless state of liealth
of M.  d'Arblay would have rendered him incapable of
continuing to fulfil its duties if any yet were left to
perform.  The mighty change of affairs so completely
occupied men's minds,  as well as their hands,  that
they could work only for themselves and the present :
the absent were utterly forgotten.  The Due de
Luxembourg,  however,  at length interfered,  and pro-
cured passports,  with the ceremonies of recall.

On the morning of our departure from Treves,  all
the families of Nell and La Grange filled the court-yard,
and surrounded the little carriage in which we set out,
with others,  unknown to nie,  but acquainted with the
General,  and lamenting to lose sight of him — as who
that ever knew him failed doing?  M.  de Mazancourt
and the De Premorels had preceded us.  The diffi-
culty of placing the poor wounded  ]c<y was great and
grievous,  and our journey  ^^as anything but gay;  the
VOL.  vii.  Q

226 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

rurc,  alas,  was so much worse than incomplete !  The
spirits of the poor worn invalid were sunk,  and,  like
his bodily strength,  exhausted  ;  it was so new to him
to be helpless,  and so melancholy  !  xVfter being always
the most active,  the most cntgrprising,  the most in-
irenious in difficulty and mischance,  and the most
vivacious in conquering evils,  and combating acci-
dents ; — to find himself thus suddenly bereft not only
of his powers to serve and oblige all around him,  but
even of all means of aiding and sufficing to himself,
was profoundly dejeciing;  nor,  to his patriot-heart,
was this all :  fc?r otherwise.  We re-entered France by
the permission of foreigners,  and could only re-enter
at all by passports of All the Allies  !  It seemed as
if all Europe had freer egress to that country than its
natives !

Yet no one more rejoiced in the victory of Waterloo
— no one was more elated by the prospect of its glo-
rious results :  for the restoration of the nionarchy he
was most willing to shed the last drop of his blood.
But not such was the manner in which he had hoped
to see it take place  ;  he had hoped it would have been
more spontaneous,  and the work of the French them-
selves to overthrow the usurpation.  He felt,  there-
fore, severely shocked,  when,  at the gates of Thion-
ville,  upon demanding admittance by giving his name,
his mihtary rank,  and his personal passport,  he was
disregarded and unheard by a Prussian sub-officer — a
Prussian to repulse a French gcnerab in the imme-
diate service of his King,  from entering France  !  His
choler rose,  in defiance of sickness and infirmity;  but

1815]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  '2'17

neither indignation nor representation were of any
avail,  till lie condescended to search his portefeuillc
for a passport of All the Allies,  which the Due de
Luxembourg-  had wisely forwarded to Treves,  joined to
that of the Minister at War.  Yet the Prussian was
not to blame,  save for his uncourteous manners :  the
Kin^r of France was only such,  at that moment,  through
Bliicher and Wellington.

One feeling of a softer and compensating sort my
poor traveller was indulged with,  however,  almost the
next minute — he was suddenly recognized by a fa-
vourite old friend,  M.  de Serre  ;  and a most atlecting
yet delightful meeting took place.  They had not
seen each other since the Revolution  ;  and though only
brought together by accident,  they knew not how
to separate  ;  such fullness of matter occurred to both,
equally on past events and future prospects.  M.  de
Serre was one of the most pleasing,  the best bred,  and
most amiable of men.

Three or four days,  I think,  we passed at Metz,,
where the General put himself into the hands of a sur-
geon of eminence,  v/lio did what was now to be done to
rectify the  <;ross mismanafi'ement at Treves.  In this
time I saw all that was most worth remark in the old
and famous city of Metz.  But all looked dreary and
abandoned;  as everywhere during my journey.  Xo-
thing was yet restored,  for confidence was wanting in
the state of thinirs.  Wellington and BUich r,  the
Lords of the Ascendant,  seemed alone gifted with the
power of foreseeing,  as they had been instrumentally

of rei^ulatinsr,  events.

q2

i^28 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VI.

Not long after,  I forget exactly where,  we came
under new,  yet still foreign masters — the Russians;
who hept posts,  like sentinels,  along the high road,  at
stated distances.  They were gentle and well behaved,
in a manner and to a degree that was really almost
edifying.  On the plains of Chalons there was a grand
Kussian encampment.  We stopped half a day for
rest at some small place in its neighbourhood ;  and I
walked about,  guarded by the good Fran(;ois,  to view
it.  But,  on surveying a large old house,  which at-
tracted ray notice by a group of Russian officers that
I observed near its entrance,  how was I struck on beinjr
told by Francois,  that the Emperor of all the Russias
was at that moment its inhabitant !  At the entrance
of the little gate that ojiened the palisade stood a lady
with two or three gentlemen.  There was no crowd,
and no party of guards,  nor any sign of caution or
parade of grandeur,  around this royally honoured
dwelling.  And,  in a few minutes,  the door was quietly
opened and the Emperor came out,  in an undress uni-
form, wearing no stars nor orders,  and with an air of
gay good humour,  and unassuming ease.  There was
something in his wdiole appearance of hilarity,  free-
dom, youthfulness.  and total absence of all thought of
state and power,  that would have led me much sooner
to suppose him a jocund young Lubin,  or country
esquire,  than an emperor,  a warrior,  or a statesman.

The lady curtsied low,  and her gentlemen bowed
profoundly as he reached the group.  He instantly
recognized them,  and seemed enchanted at their sight.
A sprightly conversation ensued,  in which he addressed

1815]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  229

himself chiefly to the lady,  wlio seemed accustomed
to his notice,  yet to receive it with a species of rapture.
The gentlemen also had the easy address of conscious
welcome to inspirit them,  and 1 never followed up a
conversation I could not hear,  with more certainty of
its being agreeable to all parties.  They all spoke
French,  and I was restrained only by my own sense of
propriety from advancing within hearing of every word  -^
for no sentinel,  nor guard of any kind,  interfered to
keep the few lookers on at a distance.

This discourse over,  he gallantly touched his hat
and leaped into his open carriage,  attended by a Rus-
sian officer,  and was out of sight in a moment.

How far more happy,  disengaged,  and to his advan-
tage, was this view of his Imperial Majesty,  than that
which I had had the year before in England,  where
the crowds that surrounded,  and the pressure of unre-
strained curiosity and forwardness,  certainly embar-
rassed, if they did not actually displease him  !

At Meaux I left again my captive companion for a
quarter of an hour to visit the cathedral of the sub-
limely eloquent Bossuet.  In happier moments I should
not have rested without discovering and tracing the
house,  the chamber,  the library,  the study,  the garden
which had been as it were sanctified by his virtues,  his
piety,  his learning,  and his genius :  and oh,  how
eagerly,  if not a captive,  would my noble-minded com-
panion have been my conductor  !

A new change again of military control soon fol-
lowed, at which I grieved for my beloved companion.
I almost felt ashamed to look at him,  though my heart.

230 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

involuiitarlly,  irresistibly palpitated with emotions
which had little,,  indeed,  in unison with cither grief or
shame:  for the sentinels,  the guards,  the camps,  be-
came English.

All converse between us now stopped involuntarily,
and as if by tacit agreement.  M.  d'Arblay was too
sincere a loyalist to be sorry,  yet too high-spirited a
freeman to be satisfied.  I could devise nothing to say
that might not cause some painful discussion or afflict-
ing retrospection,  and we travelled manv miles in pen-
sive silence — each nevertheless intenselv observant of
the astonishing new scene presented to our view,  on
re-entering the capital of France,  to see the vision of
Henry V.  revived,  and Paris in the hands of the
English !

I must not omit to mention that,  notwithstanding
this complete victory over Bonaparte,  the whole of the
peasantry and common people,  converse with them
when or where or how I might during our route,  with
one accord avowed themselves utterly incredulous of
his defeat.  Thev all believed he had only given w'ay
in order that he mio^ht come forward with new forces
to extirpate all opposers,  and exalt himself on their
ashes to permanent dominion.

On the eve of settini^:  out for Eng^land,  I went round
to all I could reach of ni}^  intimate acquaintance,  to
make — as it has proved — a List farewell !

^I.  de Talleyrand came in to Madame de La-val's
drawing-room during my visit of leave-taking.  He
was named upon entering ;  but there is no chance he
could recollect me,  as I had not seen him since the first

1815]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        231

month or two after my marriage,  when he accompanied
M.  de Narbonne and M.  de Beaumetz to our cottage
at Bookham.  I could not forbear whispering to
Madame de Laval,  how many souvenirs his sight
awakened !  M.  de Narbonne was gone,  who made so
much of our social felicity during the period of out
former acquaintance ;  and Mr.  Lock was gone,  who
made its highest intellectual delight;  and Madame de
Stael,  who gave it a zest of wit,  deep thinking,  and
light speaking,  of almost unexampled entertainment;
and my beloved sister Phillips,  whose sweetness,  in-
telligence, grace,  and sensibility won every heart;
these were gone,  who all,  during the sprightly period
in which I was known to M.  Talleyrand,  had almost
always made our society.  Ah !  what parties were
those !  how select,  how refined though sportive,  how
investigatingly sagacious though invariably well-bred  !

Madame de Laval sighed deeply,  without answering
me,  but I left M.  de Talleyrand to Madame la Duchesse
de Luynes,  and a sister of M.  le Due de Luxembourg,
and another lady or two,  while I engaged my truly
amiable hostess,  till I rose to depart :  and then,  in
passing the chair of M.  de Talleyrand,  who gravely and
silently,  but politely,  rose and bowed,  I said,  ''  M.  de
Talleyrand m'a oublie:  mais on n'oublie pas M.  de
Talleyrand."  I left the room with quickness,  but saw
a movement of surprise by no means unpleasant break
over the habitual placidity,  the nearly imperturbable
composure of his made-up countenance.

Our journey was eventless,  yet sad ;  sad,  not solely,
though chiefly,  from the continued sufferings of my

232 DIARY,  &c.,  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.   [Part VI.

Avounded companion,  "but sad,  also,  that I quitted so
many dear friends,  who had wrought themselves,  by-
innumerable kindnesses,  into my affections,  and who
knew not,  for we could not bring ourselves to utter
words that must have reciprocated so much pain,  that
our intended future residence was England.  Tlie most
tender and generous of fathers had taken this difficult
resolution for the sake of his son,  whose earnest wish
had been repeatedly expressed for permission to esta-
blish himself in the land of his birth.  That my wishes
led to the same point,  there could be no doubt,  and
powerfully did they w^eigh with the most disinterested
and most indulgent of husbands.  All that could be
suggested to compromise what was jarring in our feel-
ings, so as to save all parties from murmuring or regret,
was the plan of a yearly journey to France.

PART VII.

1815,  16,  17.

Arrival of M.  and Madame' d'Arblay in Enj^land — Madame de
Stael's  '  Germany  ' — Madame d'Arblay's son at Cambridge —
BlUcher and Wellington — Honours accorded to M.  d'Aiblay
by his Sovereign on retiring from his service — The English
abroad — Sentence by the French courts on Sir R.  Wilson and

'  his associates — Sale of the Streatham Portraits — General
d'Arblay visits France to return thanks for his promotion —
Character of his son — General d'Arblay leaves him the choice
of studying in England or entering upon a military career in
France — Madame d'Arblay's preference of Bath — Her son
about to take a degree at Cambridge — Indisposition of General
d'Arblay — Theatrical reminiscences — Visit to Mrs.  Piozzi —
Old friends — Ilfracombe — A Spanish vessel — Her captain ,
doctor,  and cook — Appearance of ships in a storm — Indispo-
sition of General d'Arblay at Paris.

18151 DIARY OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  235

PART VII.
1815.

Madame tVArblay to Mrs.  Loch and Mrs.  Angerstein,

Dover,  Oct.  IS,  1815.

Last night,  m^^ever dear friends,  we arrived once more
in Old England.

I write this to send the moment I land in London.
I cannot boast of our health,  our looks,  our strength ;
but 1 hope we may recover a part of all when our
direful fatigues,  mental and corporeal,  cease to utterly
weigh upon and wear us.

AVe shall w^inter in Bath.  The waters of Plombieres
have been recommended to my poor Loiteux,  but he has
obtained a con(/e that allov.'s this change.  Besides his
present utter incapacity for military service,  he is now
vmavoidably on the retraitelist,  and the King of France
permits his coming over,  not alone without diff.culty,
but with wishing him a good journey,  through the Due
de Luxembourg,  his captain in the Gardes du Corps.
'■•Adieu,  dearest both  ! —Almost I embrace you in
dating from Dover.  Had you my letter from Treves?
J suspect not,  for my melancholy new history would
have brought your kind condolence  :  or,  othci'wisc,  ^//a^
missed me.     Our letters were almost all intercepted by

236 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

the Prussians while we were there.     Not one answer
arrived to us from Paris,  save by private hands.

M}'  kindest love to my dear Lady Martin.  I waited
a happy moment to write her my congratulations.
Alas  !  I have been persecuted by disaster almost from
the time I left England.  Flights,  illness,  terrors,  and
grievous accidents have followed,  or met me at every
step.

*****

December 24,  1815.    "

My heart has been almost torn asunder,  of late,  by the
dreadful losses which the newspapers have communi-
cated to me,  of the two dearest friends  *  of my absent
partner ;  both sacrificed in the late sanguinary conflicts.
It has been with difficulty I have forborne attempting
to return to him  ;  but a winter voyage might risk giving
him another loss.  The death of one of these so un-
timely departed favourites,  how will Madame de Stael
support  ?  Pray tell me if you hear any thing of her,  and
Avhat.  In beginning her  '  Germany,'  in which I am
only advanced to about a third of the first volume,  I per-
petually longed to write to her,  but imperious obstacles
are in the wa}* ;  and next,  to you,  to tell you as the
person most likely to sympathise with me sincerely —
the pleasure,  the transport rather,  with which I read
nearly every phrase  :  such acuteness of thought,  such
vivacity of ideas,  and such brilliancy of expression,  I
know not where I have met before.     I often lay the

*  The Comte de Narbonne and Comte F.  de la Tour Maubourg.

1816]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.        237

book dovm to enjoy for a considerable time a single
sentence.  I have rarely,  even in the course of my
whole life,  read any thing with so glowing a fulness of
applause ;  but there I now stop.  These two heavy
misfortunes reached me,  and I have not had my mind
enough at ease,  nor my intellects enough at liberty,  to
take up the book since.  Whether it will carry me on,
hereafter,  with the same charm,  I know not.

[With the year 181C a new section of Madame d'Ar-
blay's correspondence may be said to commence in her
letters to her son,  the late Rev.  A.  d'Arblay,  w::o was
then pursuing his studies at Caius College,  Cambridge.
It has been thought advisable to be more sparing in
publication from this,  than from the earlier portions
of Madame d'Arblay's correspondence.  Without,  how-
ever, a few of these letters to her son,  "  the child of
many hopes,"  this picture of her mind,  with all its ten-
derness, playfulness,  and sound sense,  would scarcely
be complete.]

Madame cVArblay to Mrs.  Lock.

Bath,  February 15,  1816.

Incredible is the time I have lost without giving in
that claim which has never been given in vain for news
of my own dear friend ;  but I have been — though not
ill,  so continually unwell,  and though not,  as so recently.

238 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VII.

ill disordered and disorganizing difficulties,  yet so
incessantly occupied with small,  but indispensable oc-
cupations, that the post hour has always gone by to-
day to be waited for to-morrow.  Yet my heart lias
never been satislicd — I don't mean with itself,  for with
that it can never quarrel on tliis subject, — but with
my pen — my slack,  worn,  irregular,  fugitive,  fatigued,
yet ever faithful,  though never punctual pen.  My
dearest friend forgives,  I knovv,  even that ;  but her
known and unvarying lenity is the very cause I cannot
forgive it myself.

We have had our Alexander for six weeks ;  he left
us three days ago,  and I won't tell my dear friend
whether or not we miss him.  He is precisely such as
he was — as inartificial in his character,  as irregular in
his studies.  He cannot bring himself to conquer his
disgust of the routine of labour at Cambridge;  and
while he energetically argues upon the innocence of a
preference to his own early practice,*  which he vin-
dicates, I believe unanswerably,  with regard to its real
superiority,  he is insensible,  at least forgetful,  of all
that crai be urged of the mischiefs to his prospects
in life that must result from his not conquering his
inclinations.  I have nearly lost all hope of his taking
ihe high degree adjudged to him by general ex-
pectation at the University,  from the promise of his
opening.

Of old friends here,  I have found stationary,  Mrs.

*  Ke had studied mathematics in Paris according to the analytical
method,  instead of the geometrical,  which was at that time exclusively-
taught at Cambridge.

1816]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         239

Ilolroyd,  and Mrs.  Frances and Harriet Bowdler.
Mrs.  Holioyd still gives parties,  and tempted me to
hear a little medley music,  as she called it.  ^Irs.  F.
Bowdler lives on Lansdowne Crescent,  and scarcely
ever comes down the hill;  Mrs.  Harriet I have missed,
though wc have repeatedly sought a meeting on both
sides ;  but she left Bath for some excursion soon after
my arrival.  Another new resident here will excite,  I
am sure,  a more animated interest — Mrs.  Piozzi.

The Bishop of Salisbury,  my old friend,  found me
out,  and came to make me a long and most amiable

visit,  which was preceded by Mrs.  F ,  and we all

spent an evening with them very sociably and plea-
santly.

F.B.  d'A.

Postscript by General d'Arhlay.

NoN,  non,  chere et tres chere Madame ;  vous ne
devcz rien ajouterk Tadresse de votre ancienne amie.
Voila le titrc auqucl ma compagne et moi nous
attachons et attacherons toujours le plus grand prix.
Quand a celui de Cumte que j'ai rccu dans la dernicre
mission dont le Roi m'a honore,  de memo que dans le
passeport que m'a fait cxpedier son ministre pour me
lendre ici,  je n'en ai fait usage que pendant le cours
de cette memo mission,  qui,  par I'e'venement,  c'cst a
dire,  par I'entetcment qu y a mis Bliicher,  dont je n'ai,
malgre cela,  eu qu'a me louer personnellement,  a ete
beaucoup moins importante qu'elle n'eut du Tetre,  et
qu'elle no I'eut ete effect ivement,  si le vicux Pandour
eut pcnse comme mon heros;,  le Due de Wellington.

240 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

Lc Due dc Luxembourg et moi,  aurions eu,  sans cela,
rhonncur d'accompagner ce dernier a Waterloo^  car
j'avois deja tcrmine avec les Prussiens tout ce dont
j'avois ete charge.  Pour revenir au titre de Comte,  ce
n'cst point par suite d'un diplomc ni par un brevet
particulier que je I'ai regu,  mais uniquement par une
sorte d'usage de Tancienne regime,  et les 99™*^  au
moins des gentilshommes Francais qui s'en targuent,
n'ont pas d'autres titres.  Je ne crois pas qu'il en
cxiste vingt a qui dans un proces on ne put la faire
quitter comme ne provenant point d'une terre portant
leur nom et qui a ete erigee en Comte.

Pardon,  mille et mille fois pour ce long eclaircisse-
ment.  J'ajouterai que sa Majeste,  en m'accordant le
titre et les prerogatives,  honneurs,  &c.,  de Lieutenant
General de ses armees,  comme une preuve de sa satis-
faction, a faitbeaucoup plus que je n'aurois demande,
et que meme je n'aurois voulu accepter,  si j'avois pu
continuer mes services.  II a par la recompense mon
zele et ce que j'aurois voulu faire,  plutot que ce que j'ai
fait reellement.

Que de remercimens ne vous devons nous pas pour
toutes vos bontes pour Alex.  !  mais si j'entamois une
fois le chapitre des obligations que je vous ai,  je ne
fmirois jamais! !  !

Madame d'Arblay to Iter Son.

Bath,  Friday,  April 2,  18] 6.
*  *  *  *

Thk Oppositionists,  and all their friends,  have now a

ISIG]        OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.       241

dread of France,  and bend their way to Italy.  But
the example now given at Paris,  in the affair of Messrs.
Wilson and Co.,  that Englishmen are as amenable to
the laws and customs of the countries which they
inhabit,  as foreigners while in England are to ours,
will make them more careful,  both in spirit and con-
duct, than heretofore they have deemed it necessary to
be,  all over the globe.  It is a general opinion that
there will be a great emigration this summer,  because
John Bull longs to see something beyond the limited
circumference of his birthrio-ht :  but that foreign na-
tions will be now so watchful of his proceedings,  so
jealous of his correspondence,  and so easily offended
by his declamation or epigrams,  that he will be glad to
return here,  where liberty,  when not abused,  allows a
real and free exercise of true independence of mind,
speech,  and conduct,  such as no other part of the world
affords.

I am truly happy not to be at Paris at such a junc-
ture;  for opinions must be cruelly divided,  and society
almost out of the question.  Our letters all confess
that scarcely one family is d^accord even with itself.
The overstraining royalists make moderate men appear
Jacobins.  The good King must be torn to pieces
between his own disposition to clemency,  and the
vehemence of his partisans against risking any more
a general amnesty.  All that consoles me for the
length of time required for the cure of your padre's leg
is the consequence,  in its keeping off"  his purposed visit.
A cold has forced him to relinquish the pump till to-
day, when he is gone to make another essay.     He is

VOL.  VII.  R

242 DlAllV AND LETTERS  [ParT VII.

SO popular in Bath,  that lie is visited here by ever}-
body that can make any pretext for calling.  I have
this moment been interrupted by a letter to invite nie
with my  -'bewitching husband"'  to a villa near Prior
•Park.  He is not insensible to the kindness he meets
"with ;  an contraire,  it adds greatly to his contentment
in the steadiness of a certain young sprig that is in-
ducing him here to plant his final choux ;  and the
more,  as we find that,  as far as that sprig has been
seen here,  he,  also,  has left so favourable an impression,
that we are continually desired to introduce him,  on
his next arrival,  wherever we go.

Your kind father,  upon your last opening of  '-illl
here is well,"  instantly ran down stairs,  with a hop,
skip,  and a jump,  and agreed to secure our pretty
lodgings for a year.

General  (TArljlay to his Son.

Friday,  April 5,  1816.

Je te remercie de ma part,  mon cher Alexandre,  de
Texactitude avec laquelle tunous as tenu parole jusqu'a
present.

J'ai lu avec plaisir dans les journaux,  que les quatre
regicides de la Convention,  qui s'etaient flattes de
trouver un refuge en Angleterre,  ont regu I'ordre d'en
sortir.  D'un autre cote la voix publique m'apprend qu a
la suite d'un repas donne par Sebastiani a Cambaceres,
on a porte,  avec entliousiasme,  dit-on,  la Sante de Napo-
leon.    Je sais ce que c'est qu un rassemblement de

1816]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  243

jeunes gens,  et a qnoi entrainent souvent ces sortes de
parties.  Xeanmoiiis,  je suis sans inquietude  ;  parceque
je te crois assez raisonnable pour etre sur de ta con-
duite en pareil cas.  Mon altacliement pour la per-
Sonne du Roi,  et ma position,  ne me permettent pas
d'en douter un instant ;  et d'ailleurs je sais que tes
amis qui sont instruits de Tun et de I'autre,  doivent te
sauver tout cmbarras a cet egard.  Ceux qui ne se
plaisent que dans le desordre,  et qui afFectaient de
mepriser une bonte qu'ils taxaient de foiblesse,  donnent
a present les noms les plus odieux a la conduite con-
traire,  et veulent faire passer pour une tirannie in-
supportable ce quin'estque I'effet d'unefermete que les
circonstances rendent indispensable  !  !  !  J'espere que
notre ami Jones est encore a Cambridge,  et Mr.
Herschel,  et Mr.  Jacob.  Dieu soit en aide I — Amen  !

Madame d'ArbJay to her Son.

Bath,  April 30,  ISlG.

The three chevaliers have all been condemned as
culpable of aiding a state-criminal to escape,  but not
accused of any conspirr.cy against the French Go-
vernment. They are,  therefore,  sentenced merely to
three months'  imprisonment.

Certainly,  if their logic were irrefutable,  and if the
Treaty of Paris included the royal pardon with the am-
nesty accorded by the allied generals,  then,  to save those
who ought not to have been tried would have been
meritorious rather than illegal;  but the King had no

244 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

share in that treaty,  wliich could only hold good in a
military sense,  of security from military prosecution or
punishment from tlie Allies.  These Allies,  however,
did not call themselves conquerors,  nor take Paris,  nor
judge the Parisians ;  but so far as belonged to a capi-
tulation, meant,  on both sides,  to save the capital and
its inhabitants from pillage and the sword.  Once
restored to its rightful monarch,  all foreign inter-
ference was at an end.  Having been seated on the
throne by the nation,  and having never abdicated,
though he had been chased by rebellion from his king-
dom, he had never forfeited his privilege to judge which
of his subjects were still included in his original am-
nesty, and which had incurred the penalty or chances
of being tried by the laws of the land  ;  and by them,
not by royal decree,  condemned or acquitted.

A false idea seems encouraged by all the King's
enemies,  that his amnesty ought to have secured
pardon to the condemned :  the amnesty could only
act up to the period when it was granted and accepted  ;
it could have nothing to do with  «/?er- offences.

I am grieved to lose my respect and esteem for a
character I had considered so heroical as that of Sir
R.  Wilson ;  but to find,  through his intercepted cor-
respondence, that the persecution of the Protestants
was to be asserted,  true or false,  to blacken the reign-
ing dynasty  ....  to find this truly diabolic idea pre-
sented to him by a brother of whom he speaks as the
partner of all his thoughts,  &c.,  has consumed every
spark of favour in which he was held throughout the
W'hole nation,  except,  perhaps,  in those whom party

1816]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        '-^45

"vvill make deaf and blind for ever to  ^vhat opposes
their own views and schemes.  I do not envy Lord
Grevfor being a third in such an intercourse^  an inter-
course teeming-  with inventive plots and wishes for new
rev^ohitions !

Your uncle has bought the picture of my dearest
father at Streatham.  I am truly rejoiced it will come
into our famil)-,  since the collection for which it was
painted is broken up.  Your uncle has also bought
the Garriclv,  which was one of the most agreeable and
delightful of the set.  To what recollections,  at once
painful and pleasing,  does this sale give birth !  In
the library,  in which those pictures were hung,  we
always breakfasted;  and there I have had as many
precious conversations with the great and good Dr.
Johnson as there are days in the year.  Dr.  Johnson
sold the highest of all !  'tis an honour to our age,
that I — 360/. !  My dear father would have been
mounted higher,  but that his son Charles was there to
bid for himself,  and,  everybody must have seen,  was
resolved to have it.  There was besides,  I doubt not,  a
feeling for his lineal claim and pious desire.

Madame cVArhlay to a Friend.

Bath,  August 17,  1S1().
I HAVE been in a state of much uncertainty and dis-
turbance since I wrote last with respect to one of the
dearest possible interests of life,  the maternal:    the
uncertainty,  however,  for this epoch is over,  and I will

246 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VII.

hasten to communicate to 3-ou its result,  that I may
demand further and frequent accounts of your own
plans,  and of their execution or change,  success or
failure.  All that concerns you,  must to me always be
near and dear.

General d'Arblay is gone to France,  and here at
Bath rest so femme et soiifih.  There was no adjusting
the excursion but by separation.  Alexander would
have been wilder than ever for his French mathematics
in re- visiting Paris;  and,  till his degree is taken,
we must not contribute to lowering it by feasting
his opposing pursuits with fresh nourishment.  ^>I.
d'Arblay nevertheless could by no means forego his
intention,  which a thousand circumstances led him to
consider as right.  He could not,  indeed,  feel himself
perfectly a sa place without paying his devoirs to his
King,  notwithstanding he has been put by his Majesty
himself,  not by his own desire,  en retraite.  The exi-
gencies of the treasury demand this,  for all who are not
young enough for vigorous active service;  but his
wounded leg prevented his returning thanks sooner
for the promotion with which the King finished and
recompensed his services ;  and therefore he deems
it indispensable to present himself at the foot of the
throne for that purpose now that he is able to  "  hear
his body more seemly  "  (like Audrey)  in the royal pre-
sence. He hopes also lo arrange for receiving here
his half-pay,  when sickness or affairs or accident may
prevent his crossing the Channel.  Choice and happi-
ness will,  to his last breath,  carry him annually to
France;  for,  not to separate us from his son,  or,  in the

181GJ OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  247

bud of life,  to force that son's inclination in fixing his
place or mode of residence,  alone decides his not fixing
there his own last staff.  But Alexander,  young as he
left that country,  has seen enough of  \|;  to be aware
that no line is open there to ambition or importance,
but the military,  most especially for the son of an offi-
cer so known and marked for his military character :
and I need not tell you that,  with my feelings and
sentiments,  to see him wield a sword that could onh^
lead him to renown bv beine:  drawn ao^ainst the
country of his birth and of jnine,  would demolish my
heart,  and probably my head;  and,  to believe in any
war in which England and France will not be rivals,
is to entertain Arcadian hopes,  fit only for shepherds
and shepherdesses of the drama.

Equally,  I fear,  would be romantic all expectation of
a really permanent peace,  though I am persuaded we
shall certainly enjoy a long one.

Enjoy,  did I say  ?  What do we enjoy  ?  Every
seeming and coveted good only arrives,  only is
granted,  to be transformed into evil.

Madame cVArhlau to General cVArhJay.

Bath,  October 28,  ISlG.

Certainement,  et tros certainement,  mon bien cher
ami,  your beautiful strictures upon la connoissance et
V usage da mondc would have given  "  un autre tours a
mes idees'''  were the object of our joint solicitude less
singular;  but our Alexander,  mon ami,  dear as he is

248 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

to US,  and big as are my hopes jwiir Vavenir,  our Alex-
ander is far different from what you were at his age.
More innocent,  I grant,  and therefore highly estimable,
and worthy of our utmost care,  and  \yorthy of the
whole heart of her to whom he shall permanently
attach himself.  But O,  how far less aimahh !  He
even piques himself upon the difference,  as if that
difference were to his advantage.  He is a medley of
good qualities and of faults the most extraordinary
and the most indescribable.  Enfin,  except in years,
in poetr}^  and in mathematics,  il nest encore quiin
enfant.

Were he so only as to la connoissance,  et meme
Viisage du monde,  I should immediately subscribe to the
whole of your really admirable dissertation upon the
subject in the letter now before me,  for I should then
sympathise in your idea that a lovely young companion
might mould him to her own excellence,  and polish
him to our wishes ;  but O,  nous nen sommes pas  /a  !
When he is wholly at his ease,  as he is at present,
with his mother,  and as he would soon inevitably be
with his wife,  he is so uncouth,  so negligent,  and ab-
sent, that his frightened partner would either leave
him in despair to himself,  or,  by reiterated attempts
to reason with him,  lose her bridal power,  and raise
the most dangerous dissensions.  He exults rather
than blushes in considering himself ignorant of all
that belongs to common life,  and of everything that is
deemed useful.  Even in mathematics he disdains
whatever is not abstract and simply theoretical.
•^•'  Troulle I hate  "  he calls his motto.     You will easily

IS 16]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  249

conceive that there are moments,  nay,  clays,  in which
he is more reasonable ;  I should else be hopeless :  nor
■will he ever dare hold such language to you;  but it is
not less the expression of his general mind.  Some-
times, too,  he wishes for wealth,  but it is only that he
might be supine.  Poor youth  !  he little sees how soon
he would then become poor !  Yet,  while thus open to
every dupery,  and professedly without any sense of
order,  he is so fearful of ridicule,  that a smile from
his wife at any absurdity would fill him with the most
gloomy indignation.     It does so now from his mother.

A wife,  I foresee you will reply,  young and beautiful,
sera hien autre chose;  mais je crois que vous vous
trompcz  :  a mistress,  a bride — oui!  a mistress,  and a
bride would see him her devoted slave ;  but in the
year following year,  when ardent novelty is passed
away,  a mother loved as I am may form"  much judg-
ment what will be the lot of the wife,  always allowing
for the attractions of reconciliation which belong ex-
clusively to the marriage state,  where it is happy.

Nevertheless,  I am completely of your opinion,
that a good and lovely wife will ultimately soften his
asperity,  and give him a new taste for existence,  by
opening to him new sources of felicity,  and exciting,  as
you justly suggest,  new emulation to improvement,
when he is wise enough to know how to appreciate,  to
treat,  and to  ])reserve such a treasure.  But will four
months fit him for beginning such a trial?  Think of
her,  mon ami,  as well as o^  him.  The  ''responsibility"
in this case would be yours for both,  and exquisite
would be your agony sliould either of them be unhappy.

250 DIARY AXD LETTERS  [PauT VII.

A darlinj^  daughter — an only cliild,  nursed in the lap
of soft prosperity — sole object of tenderness and of
happiness to both her parents ;  rich,  \yell-born,
stranger to all care,  and unused to any control;
beautiful as a little angel,  and  (be very sure)  not
unconscious she is born to be adored ;  endowed with
talents to create admiration,  independently of the eclat
of her personal charms,  and indulged from her cradle

in every wish,   every fantaisie Will such a

young creature as this be happy with our Alexander
after her bridal supremacy,  with the extacy of his first
transports,  are on the wane  ?  That a beauty such as you
describe might bring him^  even from a first interview^
to her feet,  notwithstanding all his present prejudices
against a French wife,  I think probable enough,  though
he now thinks his taste in beauty different from yours  ;
for he has never,  he says,  been struck but by a com-
manding air.  All beauty,  however,  soon finds its own
way to the heart.  But could any permanent amend-
ment ensue,  from working upon his errors only through
his passions  ?  Is it not to be feared that as they,  the
passions,  subside,  the errors would all peep up again  ?
And she,  who so prudently has already rejected a
nearly accepted pretendarit for his want of order !  I !
(poor Alexander !)  how will she be content to be a
monitress,  where she will find everything in useful life
to teach,  and nothing in return to learn?  And even if
he endure the perpetual tutoring,  will not site sicken of
her victories ere he w^earies of his defeats  ?

And wilt Alexander be fit or willing to live under
the eye,  which he will regard as living under the sub-

1816]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  251

jection,  of his wife's relations  ?  In this country there
is no notion of that mode of married life;  and our
proud Alexander,  the more he may want counsel and
guidance,  will the more haughtily,  from fearing to pass
for a baby,  resent them.  Let me add,  that nothing
can be less surprising than that he should have fixed
his own expectation of welfare in England.  Recollect,
mon ami,  it is now nearly three years ago since you
gave him,  in a solemn and beautiful letter,  his choice
between Cambridge and la compagnie de Luxembourg,
into which you had entered him  ;  saying that your
position exacted that you should take your son back
to serve,  or not at all.  You have certainly kept his
definitive answer,  from which he has never wavered.
And again,  only at your last departure,  this xVugust,
you told us positively that you could not take your son
to France at twenty-one years of age with any honour
or propriety but to enter him in the arm3^  I vvould
else,  you know,  have shut myself up with him in some
cottage au Lys,  merely for the great pleasure of accom-
panying you.

Alexander,  therefore,  now annexes an idea of degra-
dation to a residence non-military in France.  He
would deem himself humbled by the civil place at
which you hint,  even if you could bring him,  which I
doubt above all,  to submit to its duties.  He regards
himself,  from peculiar circumstances,  as an established
Englishman  (though born of a French father),  with your
own full consent,  nay,  by your own conditions.  I by
no means believe he will ever settle out of England,
though he delights to think of fravelhng.

252       '  DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

And such,  mon ami,  appeared to be your own senti-
ments when we parted,  though thev are changed no^v,
or overpowered by the new view that is presented to
you of domestic felicity for Alexander.  I have written
thus fully,  and after the best meditation in my power,
according to your desire ;  and every reflection and ob-
servation upon the subject,  and upon Alexander,  unites
in making me wish,  with the whole of my judgment
and feeling at once,  to keep back,  not to forward,  any
matrimonial connexion,  for years,  not nionths,  unless
months first produce the change to his advantage that
I dare only expect from years.

31adame cVArhlay to Mrs.  Loca,

Bath,  November 10,  ISIG.
*  ^  *  ^  ^

I WISH to live at Bath,  wish it devoutly;  for at Bath
we shall live,  or no longer in England.  London will
only do for those who have two houses,  and of the real
country I may say the same;  for a cottage,  now Mon-
sieur d'Arblay cannot,  as heretofore,  brave all the
seasons,  to work,  and embellish his wdntry hours,  by
embellishing anticipatinghj his garden,  would be too
lonely,  in so small a family,  for the long evenings of
cold and severe weather ;  and would lose us Alexander
half the year,  as we could neither expect nor wish to
see him begin life as a recluse from the world.  Bath,
therefore,  as it eminently agrees with us all,  is,  in
England,  the only place for us,  since here,  all the year

181G]  OF TFIE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  253

round,  there is always town at command,  and al\va3-s
the country for prospect,  exercise,  and delight.

Therefore,  my dear friend,  not a word but in favour
of Bath,  if you love me.  Our own finishin^i^  finale will
soon take root here,  or yonder  ;  for Alex,  will take his
degree in January,  and then,  his mind at liberty,  and
his faculties in their full capacity for meditating upon
his lot in life,  he will come to a decision what mountain
he shall cliynh,  upon which to fix his staff;  for all that
relates to worldly prosperity will to him be up-hill toil,
and labour.  Never did I sec in youth a mind so quiet,
so philosophic,  in mundane matters,  with a temper so
eager,  so impetuous,  so burningly alive to subjects of
science and literature.  The Tancred Scholarship is
still in suspense.  The Vice-Chancellor is our earnest
friend,  as well as our faithful Dr.  Davy,  but the trustees
have come to no determination;  and Alex,  is my com-
panion— or rather,  I am Alex. 's flapper — till the learned
doctors can agree.  At all events,  he will not come out
in Physic  ;  we shall rather enter him at another college,
Avith all the concomitant expenses,  than let him,  from
any economy,  begin his public career under false colours.
"When he entered this institution,  I had not any notion
of this difficulty  ;  I was ignorant there would be any ob-
jection against his turning which way lie pleased when
the time for takinjr the de<2:ree should arrive.

I am now in almost daily hope of the return of my
voyager.  His last letter tells me to direct no more to
Paris.

[After this time General d'Arblay made frequent
journeys to Paris.]

254 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

Madame d'Arhlay to Iter Son.

Bath,  Friday,  April 25,  1817.

Why,  what a rogue you arc  !  four days in town !  As
there can be no scholarship — helas  !  it matters not ;
but who knew that circumstance when they played
truant?  Can you tell me that,  hey!  jMr.  Cantab.  ?
Why you disli me as if I were no more worth than Paley
or Newton,  or such like worthies !

Your dear Padre is very considerably better,  surtout
in his looks,  but by no means re-estabhshed ;  for cold
air — too much exertion — too little — and all sorts of
nourishment or beverage that are not precisely adapted
to the present state of the poor shattered frame,  pro-
duce instant pain,  uneasiness,  restlessness,  and suffer-
ing. Such,  however,  is the common condition of
convalescence,  and therefore I observe it with much
more concern than surprise;  and  ]Mr.  Hay assures me
all is as well as can possibly be expected after so long
and irksome an illness.

"•  The scholarship is at an end —
So much for that 1  "

pretty cool,  my friend  !

Will it make you double your diligence for what is
not at an end  ?  hey,  men petit monsieur  .''

But I am sorry for your disappointment in the affair
you mention,  my dear Alex. :  though your affections
were not so far engaged,  methinks,  but that your
amour irro-pre is still more hles&e than your heart !  hey  ?
However,  'tis a real loss,  though little more than of an

1817]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         255

ideal friend,  at present.  But no idea is so flattering
and so sweet,  as that which opens to expectation a
treasure of such a sort.  I am really,  therefore,  sorry for
you,  my dear Alex.

Your determination to give way to no sudden impulse
in future is quite right.  Nothing is so pleasant as
giving way to impulse  ;  nothing so hazardous.

But this history must double your value for Messrs.
Jones,  Musgrave,  Jacobs,  Ebden,  Theobald,  and
Whewell.

"  Cling to those who cling to you  !"  said the immortal
Johnson to your mother,  when she uttered something
that seemed fastidious relative to a person whose par-
tiality she did not prize.

Your padre was prevailed upon to go to the play.
We were both very well pleased with H.  Payne in certain
parts;  in some instances I even thought him excellent,
especially in the natural,  gentlemanly,  and pensive
tones in which he went through the  ^ravedio^fi^er's and
other scenes of the last act.  But,  for the soliloquies,
and the grand conference with the mother  !  oh,  there,
Garrick rose up to my remembrance with an eclat of
perfection that mocks all approach of approbation for
a successor  :

But you,  M.  Keanite,  permit a little hint against
those looks that convey your resentment.  They may
lead to results that may be unpleasant.  It is best to
avoid displaying a susceptibility that shows the regret
all on your own side !  Let the matter die away as
though it had never been.  Assume your cool air ;  your
"  so much for tliat !"  but do not mark a dt'iiit that will

256 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

rather flatter than vex.  At first,,  it was well:  you j^ave
^vay to Nature and to truth,  and made apparent you had
been sincere :  but there,  for your dignity's sake.,  let all
drop ;  and be civil as well as cool,  if you would keep
the upper hand.

Madame cVArblaii to General d'ArUay.

1817.

My last great epistle finished with Alex.'s return,  or
rather with your letter relative to him Vvritten from
Dover.  Did I mention the extreme kindness of Amine
in writinj]^  me an account of your breakfastinor and
dining together with her?  and of the sweet old icatj in
■wdiich she talks of you,  and the new way in which she
speaks of Alex.,  whom she seems to think a prodigy of
talents and merit.  Oil !  may he deserve such delightful
partiality  !

Did 1 tell you,  too — for I have been so terribly
hurried and busied,  I scarcely know what I have
written,  or omitted, — how pleased I was with the open-
ing of your second letter,  "  Bonjowr,honne ceuvre f such
■will it ever be when your day commences with a
causerie with her who prefers it to all things that
can be offered to her.  And this No.  2 is truly a
hoii ceiivre,  full of interestins:  matter:  I was" charmed
fop Alex.,  that 3'ou had been able to call on Talma.
The account of the ambassador and le grand air that
you thought necessary to assume,  with all the attend-
ant ceremonies and difBculties^  amused me much^  from

IS 17]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        257

being so characteristic !  I should have held it quite
immaterial if it retarded my route;  but you were pro-
bably right in being tenacious of your dignity,  en cas
d'evenement.  After this Dover epistle,  I had only two
days to wait ere I received the letter from Calais,  No.
4.  How welcome it was,  how necessary to my peace,
and how dear to my heart,  need I say  ?  dear,  indeed I
There is a phrase at the opening that I repeat,  to lull
me tranquilly to sleep at night,  and repeat,  to urge me
to spirit and exertion in the morning  ;  i.  e.  ''  L,si mer
est entre nous,  mais hientot,  je Vesphre,  nous serons
reunis,  et d'ailleurs,  rien ne sera jamais entre nos
ca3urs — ^j'en jure par le mien,"  &c.  Amen  !  Amen  !

How short and prosperous was your passage !  Your
Mr.  Herbert I imagine to be a relation of Lord Pem-
broke, a family very generally,  nay eminently agree-
able.    To return to Bath.

After Alex,  arrived,  we jointly spent an evening
with Miss Maltby to meet the two Mrs.  Bowdlers and
a young man who is celebrated for a poem called
'  Greece,'  which he has published ;  and for  '  Letters to
his Friends/rom Greece,'  which are z^zpublished,  but
highly esteemed.  He added,  however,  nothing to the
entertainment of the evening,  for he avoids making a
parade of his travels and knowledge,  by a contrary ex-
treme ;  that of a reserve that leads him only to speak
when spoken to,  and only to answer concisely to the
proposition presented to him  ;  so that all conversation
drops with his first answer,  or is to be renewed at the
expense of a fresh interrogatory.

June ISth. — I made a morning visit to Mrs,  Piozzi,

VOL.  VII.  S

258 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI L

•whom I found with Dr.  Minchin,  an informed,  sensible
physician.  She was strange,  as usual,  at first ;  but ani-
mated, as usual,  afterwards.  The sisters,  Mrs.  Frances
and Mrs.  Harriet Bowdler,  called upon me,  and were
admitted,  for I heard their names in time;  and we had
much good old talk ;  that is,  Frances and I  ;  for Har-
riet is ever prim and demure and nearly mute before
her elder sister.  I must now skip to June 2bth,  when
I received No.  5 from Paris ;  and instantly sent off my
No.  3,  which had been waitin^:  a^es for a direction how
to reach you.  I long to hear of its arrival,  that you
may see at least how we go on,  and how your letters
delight me.

And now fixing the last day of the month for my
journey,  I set seriously to work to hasten my prepara-
tions. What a business it was !  You have no con-
ception how difficult,  nor how laborious,  tt is to place so
many books,  such a quantity of linen,  such a wardrobe,
and such a mass of curiosities,  in so small a compass.
How fagged and fatigued I retired to rest every night,
you may imagine.  Alex,  vigorously carried heavy
loads at a time from the study to the garret,  but only
where he might combine and arrange and order all for
himself.  However,  he was tolerably useful for great
luggages.

June 26th. — We spent the afternoon at Lark Hall
Place,  to meet there  ]Maria and Sophy.  My dear
sister was all spirit and vivacity.  Mr.  Burney,  all
tranquil enjoyment— peace,  rest,  leisure,  books,  music,
drawing,  and walking fill up his serene days,  and repay
the long toils of his meritorious life.     And my sister.

1817]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        259

who happily foresees neither sickness nor ennui,  is the
spirit and spring of the party.

June 2Sth. — I devoted all day to leave-taking visits,
for so many houses were opened,  and claimed long
confabulations,  from their rarity,  that I had not finished
my little round till past ten o'clock at night.  Yet of
these hosts,  Mrs.  Frances Bowdler,  Mrs.  Piozzi,  Mrs.
Morgan,  and Mrs.  Andre were out.  Two of the three
latter ladies are now in France,  and they have written
word,  that the distress in their province exceeds all
they have left in this country  !  Madame de Sourches
has written a similar melancholy account ;  and Mrs.
Holroyd,  who received my longest call this morning,
read me a letter from Lady B.  with words yet stronger
of the sufferings in the Low Countries !  O baleful
effects of  '  Belia^  horrida bella I'  I sat an hour also with
Mrs.  Harriet Bowdler,  in sober chat and old histories.
She has not — il s'enfaut — the exhilaration and enter-
tainment of her clever sister;  but there is all the soft
repose of good sense,  good humour,  urbanity,  and
kindness.  One cannot do better than to cultivate wdth
both ;  for if,  after the spirited Frances,  the gentle Har-
riet seems dull,  one may at least say that after the
kind Harriet,  the satirical Frances seems alarming.
But my longest visit was to the excellent Mrs.  Ogle,
who is the oldest acquaintance with whom I have any
present connexion in the world.  It was at her house I
first saw Mrs.  Chapone,  who washer relation  ;  I visited
her,  with my dear father,  my mother-in-law,  and my
sisters  ;  though from circumstances we lost sight of each
other,  and met no more till I had that happy encounter

s2

260 DIARY AND LKTTERS  [Pakt VII.

with her at Chcltcnliam,  wlien I l)rou2:]it her to the irooJ
and dear King.  -My respect for her age,  her virtues,
and this old connexion,  induced me to stay with her till
it was too late to present myself elsewhere.  I merely
therefore called at the door of Madame deSommery to
inquire whether they could receive me sa7is ccrcmom'e
for half an hour in the evening.  This was agreed to ;
and Alex,  accompanied or rather preceded me to Ma-
dame de Sommery,  who had her two j'oh'es daughters,
Stephanie and Pulcherie,  at work by her side,  the tea-
table spread a VAnglaise,  and four of your theatres
upon the table,  wdth Alex,  just beginning Dido as I
entered.  I was never so pleased with them before,
though they have always charmed me;  but in this
private,  comfortable style they were all ten times more
easy,  engaging,  and lively than I had ever yet seen
them.  We have made a compact for next winter,  and
for readings,  both with father and son,  of my Alexan-
ders ;  and they seem to enjoy the expectation with
delight.  Madame de Sommery is much pleased with
the Garden possession^  and full of amity and courtesy
and agr emeus.

Madame d''Arblay to General d' Arhlay.

Ilfracombe,  Devonshire,  June 31,  IS 17.
*  *  *  *  Jj:

This very day of our arrival,  before Alex,  had had
time to search out  ]\Ir.  Jacob,  somebody called out to
him in the street,  ''  Ah,  d' Arblay !"  who proved to be
his man.     They strolled about the town,  and then

1S17]        OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.       261

Jacob desired to be brought to me.  Unluckil}^  I  ^vas
unpacking,  and denied.  He has appointed Alex,  for
a lesson to-morrow.  May he put him a little en train  !
July  ?ird. — Alexander began with Mr.  Jacob,  and
was enchanted at his method of instruction as well as
by his kindness.

July bill,  Saturday. — I must now give you some ac-
count of this place.     We are lodged on the harbour.
The mistress of our apartments is widoAv to some
master of a  'vessel that traded at Ilfracombe,  with
Ireland chiefly.     She has three or four children :  the
eldest,  but twelve years old,  is the servant of the
lodgers,  and as adroit as if she were thirty.     Our
situation is a very amusing one ;    for the quay is
narrow,  and there are vessels just on its level,  so close
that even children walk into them all day long.    When
the sea is up,  the scene is gay,  busy,  and interesting ;
but on its ebb the sands here are not clean and in-
viting,  but dark and muddy,   and the contrary of
odoriferous.    But the entrance and departure of vessels,
the lading,  unlading,  and the management of ships and
boats,  offer constantly something new to an eye accus-
tomed only to land views and occupations.     But chiefly
I wish for you for the amusement you would find from
a Spanish vessel,  which is close to the quay,  immediately
opposite to our apartments,  and on a level with the
parlour of the house.     It has been brought in under
suspicion of piracy,  or smuggling,  or aiding the slave
trade.     What the circumstances of the accusation are I
know not ;  but the captain is to be tried at Exeter on
the ensuing western circuit.     Meantime,  his goods are

262 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

all sequestered,  and he has hhnself dismissed all his
sailors and crew,  to rejoin him when the trial is over.
He is upon his parole,  and has liberty to go whither-
soever he will ;  but he makes no use of the permission,
as he chooses not to leave his cargo solely under the
inspection of the excisemen and custom officers here,
who have everything under lock and key and seal.  He
is a good-looking man,  and,  while not condemned,  all
are willing to take his word for his innocence.  Should
that be proved,  what compensation will be sufficient
for repairing his confinement  ?  He has retained with
him only his physician,  his own servant,  his cook,  and
a boy,  with another lad,  who is an American.  I see
him all day long,  walking his quarter-deck,  and rumi-
nating upon his situation,  with an air of philosophy
that shows strong character.  His physician,  who is
called here the Doctor,  and is very popular,  is his in-
terpreter ;  he speaks English and French,  has a
spirited,  handsome face,  and manners the most cour-
teous, though with a look darkly shrewd and Spanish.
But the person who would most entertain you is the
cook,  who appears the man of most weight in the little
coterie;  for he lets no one interfere with his manoeuvres.
All is performed for the table in full sight,  a poele
being lighted with a burning fierce fire upon the deck,
where he officiates.  He wears a complete white dress,
and has a pail of water by his side,  in which he washes
everything he dresses,  and his own hands to boot,  with
great attention.  He begins his pot au feu soon after
seven every morning,  and I watch the operation from
my window :  it is entirely French,  except that he puts

1817]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         263

in more meat,  and has it cut,  apparently,  into pounds ;
for I see it all carved into square morsels,  seemingly of
that weight,  which he inserts bit by bit^  with whole
bowls,  delicately cleaned,  washed and prepared,  of
cabbages,  chicory,  turnips,  carrots,  celery,  and small
herbs.  Then some thick slices of ship ham,  and another
bowl of onions and garlick ;  salt by a handful,  and
pepper by a wooden spoon full.  This is left for many
hours;  and in the interval he prepares a porridge of
potatoes well mashed,  and barley well boiled,  with some
other ingredient that,  when it is poured into a pan,
bubbles up like a syllabub.  But before he begins,  he
employs the two lads to wash all the ship.  To see all
this is the poor captain's only diversion  -,  but the cook
never heeds him while at his professional operations ;
he even motions to him to get out of the way if he ap-
proaches too near,  and is so intent upon his grand
business that he shakes his head without answering,
when the captain speaks to him,  with an air that says,
"  Are you crazy to try to take off my attention  ?"  And
when the doctor,  who often advances to make some ob-
servation, and to look on,  tries to be heard,  he waves
his hand in disdain,  to silence him.  Yet,  when all is
done,  and he has taken off his white dress,  he becomes
all obsequiousness,  respectfully standing out of the way,
or diligently flying forward to execute any command.

July 6th. — Alex,  and I went to church this morning,
and heard a tolerable sermon.  In the evening there
was a storm,  that towards night grew tremendous.
The woman of the house called us to see two ships in
distress.     AVe went to the top of the house for a view

264 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII.

of the sea,  which was indeed frightful.  One ship was
endeavouring to gain the harbour;  the other,  to steer
further into the main ocean ;  but both appeared to be
nearly swamped by the violence of the winds and
waves.  People mounted to the lighthouse with lights ;
for at this season the lantern is not illuminated ;  and a
boat was sent out to endeavour to assist,  and take any
spare hands or passengers,  if such there were,  from the
vessel ;  but the sea was so boisterous that they could
not reach the ship,  and were nearly lost in the attempt.
Alex,  ran up to the lighthouse,  to see what was doing ;
but was glad to return,  as he could with difficulty keep
his feet,  and was on the point of being lifted off them
down the precipice into the sea.  I never was so hor-
rified as when,  from the top of the house,  I perceived
his danger.  Thank God,  he felt it in time,  and came
back in safety.  It requires use to sustain the feet in
such a hurricane,  upon a rock perpendicularly standing
in the ocean.

Juir/  7th. — We have heard that one of the vessels got
off;  but no tidings whatsoever have been received of
the other.  It is suspected to be a passage vessel from
Bristol to Ireland.  I have had Mr.  Jacob to tea;  I
could not yet arrange a dinner,  and he was impatient
for an introduction.  I like him extremely:  he has
everything in his favour that can be imagined ;  sound
judgment without positiveness,  brilliant talents with-
out conceit,  authority with gentleness,  and consum-
mate knowledge of science with modesty.  What a
blessing that such a character should preside over these
inexperienced youths I Mr.  Jacob has aided us to re-

1S17]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         265

move.  Time is a plaything to the diligent and obliging,
though a thief to the idle and capricious  :  the first find
it,  in the midst of every obstacle,  for what they icish,
while the latter lose it,  though surrounded by every
resource,  for all that they icant.  I had such success
that I now write from my new dwelling,  which I will
describe to-morrow.

July 9th. — Quelle joie  !  this morning I receive a wel-
come to my new habitation,  to make it cheer me from
the beginning.  'Tis begun June 28th,  and finished
July 2nd.  How a-propos is what I had just written of
time in the hands of the diligent and obliging!  yet
how it is you can bestow so much upon me is my
admiration.

I have not mentioned a letter I have received from
Mrs.  Frances Bowdler.     She tells me of the marriage

of Miss to a Prussian gentleman,  and expresses

some vexation at it,  but adds,  *' Perhaps I ought not
to say this to you,''  meaning on account of the objection
to a foreigner ;  and then elegantly adds,  "  but one
person's having gained the great prize in the lottery
does not warrant another to throw his whole wealth
into the wheel."     Not very bad English that  ?

Madame d'Arhlay to Mrs.  Broome.

Ilfracombe,  Post Office,  July 23,  1817.

*****

I HAVE letters very frequently from Paris,  all assuring
me M.  d'A.  is re-establishing upon the whole ;  yet
all letting me see,  by collateral accounts,  anecdotes,  or

266 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

expressions,  that he is constantly in the hands of his
physician,  and that a difficulty of breathing attacks
him from time to time,  as it did before his journey ;
with a lassitude,  a weakness,  and a restlessness which
make him there^  as licre they made him since his ill-
ness, unfit for company,  and incapable,  but by starts
and for moments^  to have any enjoyment of mixed
society !  I do not therefore feel comfortable about
him,  though,  thank Heaven,  not alarmed.  And at all
events I am glad he tries the change of air.  Change
of scene also was advised for him by all ;  but he is too
kind to find that beneficial when we are separated ;
and he writes me frequent avowals of seizures of de-
jection and sadness that reduce him to a state of great
suffering.  The parting,  while he was in a situation so
discouraging,  was very cruel;  but Alexander had,  and
has,  no chance of taking a tolerable degree without a
friend constantly at hand to remind him of the passage
of Time.  He never thinks of it :  every day seems a
day by itself,  which he may fill up at pleasure,  but
which opens to him no prospect of the day that will
succeed!  So little reflection on the future,  with so
good capacity for judging the present,  were never
before united.  We are very well lodged for pleasant-
ness, and for excellent people.  We have a constant
view of the sea from our drawing-room,  which is large
and handsome;  our bed-rooms also are good;  but our
minor accommodations,  our attendance,  dinner equi-
page, cooking,  &c.,  would very ill have contented my
General had he been here.  The best men,  the most
moderate and temperate,    are difficult,    nay,  dainty.

1817]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         267

compared with icomen.  When he comes,  if I am so
happy as to see him return while we are here,  I must
endeavour to ameliorate these matters.

Ilfracombe is a long,  narrow town,  consisting of only
one regular street,  though here and there small groups
of houses hang upon its skirts,  and it is not destitute
of lanes and alleys.  The tow^n part or side is ugly,  ill
paved,  and ill looking :  but the backs of the habitations
offer,  on one side the street,  prospects of fine hills,  and
on the other,  noble openings to the sea.  The town is
built upon a declivity,  of which the church is at the
summit,  and the harbour makes the termination.  It
was in the harbour,  that is upon the quay,  that we
were at first lodged ;  and our apartments were by no
means without interest or amusement ;  but just as we
were comfortably settled in them,  we were told the
ebbs and flows,  &c.  of the tides left occasionally,  or
brought,  odours not the most salubrious.  To this re-
presentation I thought it right to yield so implicitly,
that I sought a new abode,  and changed my quarters
instantly.

PART VIII.

1817.

Gerard's Entry of Henri Quatre into Paris — Louis the Eighteenth's
patronage of art — The Chevalier de Ronsac — An Epigram —
Madame de Stael— Madame d'Arblay's son — Mr.  Bowdler the
best chess-player in England — Bleu parties — Fanny Bowdler —
Madame d'Arblay's ramble on the coast at Ilfracombe — The
Capstan — Searching for pebbles — The Wildersmouth — Madame
d'Arblay surprised by the rising of the tide — Her dangerous situa-
tion— Her eflbrts to escape — Climbs a steep rock — The sea
approaches,  and encompasses her — A storm — Sunset — Night
approaches — Her perilous position discovered by her son — His
exertions for her rescue are at last successful — General d'Arblay's
severe indisposition — Lord Mulgrave — Death of the Princess
Charlotte  —  The Queen at Bath  —  Her popularity  —  Effect on
the Royal Family of the distressing intelligence of the Princess's
death — The Queen — The Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of
Clarence — Mr.  Mathias at Rome.

1817]  DIARY OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  271

PAET VIII.

1817.

General d'Arhlay to Madame d'Arhlay.

August 3,  1817.

*     ^     *     *     -^     Je ne me rappelle pas en ce moment
si j'ai fait mention dans mes lettres du superbe tableau
de Gerard,  sur I'Entree d'Henri IV.  a Paris.      Ce
tableau,  commande par Louis XVIII.,  a trente pieds
de long sur dix-huit de hauteur.   J'ai etequatre a cinq
fois pour le voir;  mais je n'ai jamais pu etre qu'en
passant,    tant la foule etait grande,    et la chaleur
excessive  :  mais cliaque fois j'y decouvrais un nouveau
genre de beaute.     L'opinion generale parait etre qu'il
efface tout ce qui a ete fait en ce genre depuis plus d'un
siecle.     Ainsi David doit a present s'applaudir de sa
residence hors de France.     Ce tableau devalt etre paye
40,000 fr. ;  mais le Roi,  qui va souvent le voir,  a porte
cette somme a 100,000 fr.,  et a nomme Gerard son
premier peintre,  avec le titre de Baron.     Hier encore
Sa Majeste est alle admirer ce chef-d'oeuvre,   et recon-
naissant Giraudet,    qui n'a rien expose cette annee,
mais qu'on dit occupe d'un superbe tableau  ;  elle I'a
fait approcher,  et lui a dit :  "  Monsieur Giraudet !  les
succes d'Alcibiade ont,  dit on,  trouble pendant quelque

2H2 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

temsThemistocle dans son sommeil;  mais Salamine ne
tarda point a suivre Marathon  :  que ce trait d'histoire
vous soit present,  et faites comme Themistocle T' —
"  Sire/'  a repondu Giraudet,  "  Charles V.  en ramassant
le pinceau du Titien,  et la remettant lui-meme a ce
grand peintre,  n'a pu Thonorcr et I'encourager d'avan-
tage,  et d'une maniere plus glorieuse pour cet artiste
celebre,  que votre Majeste ne vient de le faire en me
comblant de tant de bontes."

Lundi Matin. — Cette anecdote,  dont j'ui voulu te
faire part sur le champ,  m'a ete certifiee exacte et cer-
taine par Monsieur Artaud.

Combien j'ai regrette,  ainsi que tous les convives,  de
ce que tu n'etais pas a diner avec nous Jeudi chez Mon-
sieur de Grandmaison !  Son beau-frere,  qui comme
je te I'ai mande est plus des trois-quarts dans la
fosse,  est neanmoins d'une gaiete reellement admirable.
Voici une des histoires qu'il nous a conte,  et que je suis
fache que tu n'ayes que de la seconde mam.  On parlait
du mecontentement des officiers actuels a demi paye;
sibien traites par comparaison aux pensions si modiques
de I'ancien regime.  Millin cita a ce sujet le Chevalier
de Ronsac,  officier Gascon,  retire capitaine d'infanterie,
avec la croix de St.  Louis,  et vingt-cinq louis de pension,
qui formaient tout son avoir ;  et loge,  nourri,  chaufFe et
eclaire,  pour les deux-troisiemes a peu pres de cette
somme ;  c'est-a-dire,  400 fr. :  le reste suffisait a son
cntretien,  et le mettait meme dans le cas de faire
quelques epargnes,  qui,  au bout de quelques annees,  lui
devinrent tres utiles,  par le retard qu'eprouva le paye-
ment des pensions militaires.     Un an entier s"etait

]817]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVILINA.         273

ecoule sans qu'il eut recu un sol de la sicnne ;  trois
mois,  six meme se passent encore,  et il ne prefere pas la
moindre plainte ;  a la fin du septieme,  ou plutot du
dix-neuvieme mois,  toutes ses ressourccs etant epuisees,  il
va trouver M.  le Comte d'Espaibos,  gouverneur de la
province,  et apres lui avoir expose brievenient sa situa-
tion, il lui dit d'un ton fernie: — ''En parcil cas,  M.  le
Comte,  que peut et que doit faire un homme comme moi "
(il etait convert de blessures,  et jouissait d'une repu-
tation militaire excellente)  ?  ''  Rien de plus simple,"
repond M.  d'E. ;  "  un liomme comme vous,  M.  le
Chevalier,  vient tout bonncment s'etablir chez un
homme comme moi,  qu'il honore par cette marque de
confiance."  Deux heures apres,  le Chevalier de Kohsac
etait installe au gouvernement,  oil Ton eut toujours pour
lui tons les egards et les attentions possibles.  Tres
reconnaissant comme il devait Tetre,  mais en meme
tems impatient de toucher sa pension et de recouvrer
son independance,  il vint au bout de quelque tems
trouver le gouverneur dans son cabinet: — '^  J'ai envie,
M.  le Comte,  d'ecrire au ministre;  auriez vous la bonte
de lui faire parvenir ma lettre  ?"  La lettre etait concue
a peu pres dans ces termes : —

''  Monseigneur, — II y a pres de trois ansque je n'a}e
touche a ma pension.  Si elle a ete accaparee par
d'autres ;  que ce soit,  ou par vos maitresses ou par de
bas valets  (vos flatteurs),  je pense qu'il serait juste,  et
qu'il est tout a fait tems,  de me la faire payer."

"Quelle extravagance!"  dit M.  d'Espaibos au Che-
valier, en lui remettant sa lettre  :  **  Serieusement,  avez-
vous pu croire que je pouvois envoyer une telle epitre

VOL.  VII.  T

274 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VITI.

au ministre  ?  Etes vous fou  ?"  Sans rien repondrc,  le
Chevalier sort,  apres avoir rcmis la lettre dans sa poche.
Elle n'y resta pas long terns,  et le courrier fut charge de
la porter a son adressc.  La huitaine etait a peine
ecoulee quand ce meme courrier en rapporte la reponse
sous le couvertdu gouverneur,  qui,  tres surpris,  la remit
au Chevalier de Ronsac,  et montra la plus grande im-
patience d'en entendre le contenu,  que voici : — "  II faut,
M.  le Chevalier,  qu'un brave officier comme vous soit
reduit efFectivement a un etat de denuement absolu
dont je m'accuse,  et queje me reproche amerement,
pour que vous ayiez pu vous laisser aller a m'ecrire
d'une maniere aussi inconvenante.  Je n'ai voulu voir
dans votre lettre que ce qu'elle a du couter a un brave
officier comme vous  ;  et ne me rappellant que les services
distinguees que vous avez rendu au Roi,  j'en ai rendu
compte a Sa Majeste,  qui a decide cj^ue I'arriere de
votre pension vous seroit paye sur-le-champ^  et qu'il y
serait ajoute une gratification de 1800 fr."

M.  d'Espaibos,  enchante de ce denouement qui lui
faisoit presqu'autant de plaisir qu'au Chevalier^  Ten
felicita cordialement,  et voulut ensuite lui faire quelques
representations sur ce qu'il y avoit effectivement de
dcplace dans la lettre,  qui n'a si heureusement reussi que
parceque le Due de Choiseul avoit eu le bon esprit
de bien juger I'original qui I'avoit ecrite;  "  Deplace,''
s'ecria celui-ci,  '' deplace"^  c'est comme cela quil faut
parler a ces animaux la  !  !  !  "  Adieu,  ma bonne amie.
Si tu ne trouves pas cette histoire plaisantc,  ce ne sera
pas la faute de Millin.

1817]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  275

General d'Arblay to Madame d'Arhlay.

August 27,  IS 17.

Voici une epigramme'que je ne connaissais point.    Elle
est intitulee Les 3Ioeuis: —

"Ah  !  que je hais les moeurs,  disait Chateaubrillant ;

II faut que ma femme revienne  !  "
"  Ah!  que j'aime les mosurs,  s'ecria Talleyrand  ;

Je puis done renvoyer la mienue !  "

Tu as sans doute lu dans les joiirnaux,  que,  dans le
royaume des Pays Bas,  tons les Francais dits refugies
ont requ I'ordre de sortir de ce royaume  ;  et cela,  dit-on,
en execution d'une convention des puissances allies,  et
sur la demande faite par ces puissances de mettre a
execution Tarticle qui y est relatif.  Lorsqu'on a
signifie au ci-devant senateur Vericour qu'il eut a
partir,  il a represente que I'article cite,  et qui concerne
les Francais designes par le Roi peu de terns apres son
ret our de Gand,  ne pouvait le regarder,  lui dont le nom
n'etait porte sur aucune des listes alors existantes  ;  et il
a fini par dire :  '^  Je ne siiis que regicide  !"'  et en effet
ce n'est que sur la demande des deputes du corps
legislatif que les regicides ont ete bannis de France.
L'officier de police s'est en consequence retire,  en disant :
"' Pardon,  monsieur,  je ne savais pas cela  !'  J'aivoulu
t'ecrire ceci tout de suite,  de peur de Toublicr.  Bon
soir.

Je passe a ta question sur Madame de Stael.  Rien
de plus vrai que tout ce que tu en dis d'apres vos jour-
naux  ;  et il est inconcevable que je ne t'en aye pas
parle plutot ;  d'autant que,  Ic jour memc de la mort

T 2

276 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VIII.

de cet etre si extraordinaire,  j'ai su dans le plus grand
detail tout ce qui la concernait ;  ct de beaucoup plus
que n'en ont rapporte vos journaux,  a en jugcr par
ce que tu m'en dis.  Apprends,  done,  que sentant sa
fin approclier,  elle a fait venir pres de son lit,  son fils,
sa fille,  et son gendre,  le Due de Broglie.  La,  apres
leur avoir parle avec onction et vivacite de la douceur
que repandrait sur ses derniers momens,  la certitude
qu'elle reqevrait d'eux que sa famille apres elle vivrait
dans une union que rien ne troublerait,  elle leur a fait
Taveu qu'elle avait epouse M.  Rocca,  et que,  de ce
mariage secretement contracte,  etait ne un enfant
qu'elle leur recommandait.

Ce que tu me mandes d'elle,  c'est-a-dire ce qu'en
disent vos journaux,  n*est pas encore selon moi ce que
j'en condamne le plus.  D'abord je vois dans son mari-
age, tout extravagant qu'il doive paraitre a tout etre
sense,  une sorte d'hommage a la morale,  et un etat
donne au fruit innocent d'un commerce clandestine.
Quant au secret garde sur ce mariage,  je n'y vois
encore qu'une foiblesse,  dont je trouve facilement I'expli-
cation,  dans ma connoissance intime du caractere de feue
Madame Rocca,  dont la vanite eut trop soufFert de voir
substituer cette modeste adressc a celle de Madame
la Baronne de Stael Holstein.  Ce que je blame le
plus dans ce dernier acte,  c'est la non-communication
d'un pareil secret a son gendre,  a I'epoque du mariage
de sa fille,  dont la fortune par la se trouve reduite de
moitie ;  car,  I'enfant Rocca reconnu,  a de droit sa part,
et son pere,  le Seigneur Rocca,  en a une autre,  que le
testament de  ^Madame Rocca lui a assuree.     On pent

1817]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  277

dire,  au surplus,  que cette conduite,  dont bcaucoup dc
gendres ne manqueraient pas de se plaindre avec
amertiime,  a eu pour M.  de Broglie un tres bon
resultat,  en ce qu'elle I'a mis a meme de se faire bien
jeune encore une reputation de desinteressement et de
noblesse,  que la plus longue vie permet rarement
d'acquerir,  a celui meme qui emploierait tous les
instans a la rechercher.  Loin de se plaindre,  et de
temoigner,  ou meme donner a deviner,  la plus legere
desapprobation,  il n a cesse,  avant et depuis la mort de
sa belle mere^  d'agir,  dans tout ce qui pouvait avoir
rapport a sa situation,  avec le devouement et la deli-
catesse les plus louables et les plus rares.

Madame cVArblay to General cCArllay.

Friday,  September 12,  1817.

Friday,  Sejit.  I2th. — I have so much to say to mv
dearest friend,  that I open my new sheet at the moment
of finishing the old one,  though I shall not send it for
a  \\eek;  and let me begin by quieting your poor
nerves relative to La ChapeUe,  in assuring you I neglect
no possible means to follow,  substantially and effectu-
ally, your injunctions,  though I dare not tell him that
you would never pardon the smallest infraction of our
new treaty.  He is not capable,  mon ami,  of an exacti-
tude of that undeviating character.  To force further
solemn promises from so forgetful,  so unreflecting,  yet
so undesigning and well-meaning a young creature^  is
to plunge him and ourselves into the culpability of

278 DIARY AXD LETTERS  [PaRtYIII.

which we accuse him.  To attempt in that manner to
coiiper court,  &c.,  instead of frifjhtening him into right,
would harden him into desperation.  His disgust to his
forced stud}^  is still so vehement,  that it requires all I
can devise of exhortation,  persuasion,  menace,  and sooth-
ing, tour a tour,  to deter him from relinquishing all
effort !  The times,  mon ami,  are  '^  out of joint:"  we
must not by exir/eance precipitate him to his ruin,  but try
patiently and prudently,  every possible means,  to rescue
him from the effects of his own wilful blindness and
unthinking,  idle eccentricity.  If we succeed,  how will
he bless us when his maturer judgment opens his
eyes to the evils he will have escaped !  but if we fail
....  why should ice lie down and die because he
might have obtained fame and riches,  yet obstinately
preferred obscurity with a mere competence  ?  Put not
your recovery and yowv happiness upon such a cast !
My own struggles to support the disappointment for
which I am forced to prepare myself,  in the midst of
all my persevering,  unremitting efforts to avert it,  are
sufficiently severe;  but the manner in which I see
your agitation threaten  'your health,  makes his failure
but secondary to my apprehensions!  Oh,  mon ami,
ought we not rather to unite in comforting each other
by sustaining ourselves  ?  Should we not have done
so mutually,  if the contagious fever at Cambridge had
carried him off?  And what is the mortification of a
bad degree and a lessened ambition,  with all the mun-
dane humiliation belonging to it,  compared with the
total earthly loss of so dear an object,  who may be
good and happy in a small circle,  if he misses,  by his

1S17]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  279

own fault,  moanting into a larger?  Take courage,
my dearest ami,  and relieve me from the double crush
that else may wholly destroy mine.  Let us both,
while we yet venture to hope for the best,  prepare for
the worst.  Nothing on my part shall be wanting to
save this blow;  but should his perversity make it in-
evitable, we must unite our utmost strength,  not alone
to console each other,  but to snatch from that  "  sombre
decouragement "  you so well foresee,  the wilful,  but ever
fondly-loved dupe of his own insouciance.  Mon ami,
mon ami !  revive me,  at least,  from my fears for you I
and come over Men decide io practise^  if called upon,
the philosophy you have so often preached — the tant
mieux you used with such liveliness to cherish.  Let
not a sword hang thus over ray head,  in different ways,
for both my Alexanders at once !  Let the elder be
doubl}^  reasonable,  to make amends for the want of
common sense in the other.

And now to lighter matters.  I hope I have gained
a smile from you by my disclosure that I lost my
journal time for my usual post- day by successive dissi-
pation? What will you have conjectured?  That I
have consented at last to listen to Mr.  Jacob's recom-
mendation for going to the Ilfracombe ball,  and danced
a fandango with him !  or waltzed,  au moins I or that
I have complied with his desire of going to the cricket-
ground,  just arranged by the Cantabs and some officers
who are here,  in subscribino:  three oruineas for the use
of a field  ?  Vous n^y etes pas ;  for though I should
like,  in itself,  to see a cricket-match,  in a field which
Mr.  Jacob says is beautifully situated,  and where the

280 DIARY AiND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

Bishop of Ossory and his lady,  Mrs.  Fowler,  go fre-
quently, as two of their sons are amongst the players ;
yet,  as Jacob evidently thinks our poor Alexander
ought not to spare time for being of the party,  I can-
not bear to quit my watchful place by his side,  and go
thither without him.  Mais — Vous vous rendez,  n^est-
ce-pas  ?  Eh Men — to go back to Sept.  2nd.  Alexander
and I were nearly finishing our evening,  tea being
over,  and nine o'clock having struck,  while he was
reading the  '  Spjiritual Quixote  '  for a little relaxation  ;
when Miss Elizabeth Ramsay came to tell me that a
gentleman was just arrived at Ilfracombe who begged
leave to wait upon me,  if 1 would admit him ;  and she
gave me a card with the name of Mr.  Bowdler.  Of
course I complied,  and Alexander was wild with joy
at the thought of such an interview,  as Mr.  Bowdler is
acknowledged the first chess-player in England,  and was
the only man,  when Philidore was here,  who had the
honour of a drawn battle with him :  a thing that Phili-
dore has recorded by printing the whole of the game
in his treatise on chess.  I was not glad to bring back
his ideas to that fascination,  yet could not be sorry he
should have so great a pleasure.  Mr.  Bowdler pre-
sented himself very quickly,  though not till he had
made a toilette of great dress,  such as would have
suited the finest evening assembly at Bath.  He was
always a man of much cultivation,  and a searcher of
the has hleus all his life.  He is brother to our two
Mrs.  Bowdlers,  and was now come to escort Mrs.
Frances from his house in Wales,  where she has spent
the summer,  to Ilfracombe.     I had formerly met this

1817]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         281

gentleman very often at bleu parties,  and once at a
breakfast at his own house,  given in honour of Mrs.
Frances,  where I met Sophy Streat field,  then a great
beauty and a famous Greek scholar,  of whom the
Literary Herald says : —

''  Lovely Streatfield's ivory neck,
Nose and notions a la Grecque."

He was extremely civil to Alex.,  whom he had longed,
he said,  to see ;  and Alex,  listened to every word that
dropped from him,  as if it would teach some high move
at chess.  We had much talk of old times.  We had not
met since we parted in St.  James's Place,  in the last
illness of my dear Mrs.  Delany,  whom he then attended
as a physician.  He stayed till past ten,  having left his
sister at the hotel,  too tired with a sea passage to come
out,  or to receive chez elle.  But he entreated me to
dine with them next day,  the only day he should spend
at Ilfracombe,  with such excess of earnestness,  and
Alex,  seconded the request with so many  ''  Oh,
mamma's  !  "  that he overpowered all refusal ;  assuring
me it could not interfere with my Bath measures,  as it
was a dinner,  j>our ainsi dire,  on the road,  for he and
his sister were forced to dine at the hotel.  He also
declared,  in a melancholy tone,  that he might probably
never see me more,  unless I made a tour of Wales  ;  as
he began to feel himself too old for the exertion of a
sea voyage.  The next morning,  immediately after
breakfast,  I waited upon my old friend and namesake,
Fanny Bowdler,  and sat with her two hours tete a tcte,
for her brother was unwell,  and she is admirable in
close dialogue.     I had hardly got home ere she fol-

282 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Paiit YIII.

lowed me,  and stayed till it was time to dress for
dinner ;  when again we met,  and only parted for our
downy pillows.  Her strong sense,  keen observation,
and travelled intelligence and anecdotes,  made the
day,  thus devoted to her,  from ten in the morning to
ten at night,  pass off with great spirit and liveliness  :
but Alex.,  oh  !  he was in Elysium.  Mr.  Bowdler took
a great fancy to him,  and indulged his ardent wHsh of
a chess talk to the full ;  satisfying him in many difficult
points,  and going over with him his ow^n famous game
with Philidore ;  and,  in short,  delivering himself over
to that favourite subject with him entirely.  It will not,
however,  be mischievous,  for Mr.  Bowdler's own en-
thusiasm is over,  and he has now left the game quite
off,  not having played it once these seven years.

Di A R Y — contimied.

The term for Alexander's studies with Mr.  Jacob was
just finishing,  and a few days only remained ere the
party was to be dispersed,  when I determined upon
devoting a morning to the search of such curiosities as
the coast produced.  I marched forth,  attended only
by M.  d'Arblay's favourite little dog,  Diane,  with a
large silk bag,  to see what I could find that I might
deem indigenous,  as a local offering to the collec-
tion of my General,  who was daily increasing his
mineralogical stores,  under the skilful direction of his
friend,  the celebrated naturalist,  M.  de Bournon.

1817]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  283

I began my perambulation by visiting the pro-
montory called the Capstan — or rather attempting that
visit ;  for after mounting to nearly its height,  by a cir-
cuitous path from the town^  by which alone the ascent
is possible,  the side of the promontory being a mere
precipice overlooking the ocean,  a sudden gust of wind
dashed so violently against us,  that in the danger of
being blown into the sea,  I dropped on the turf at full
length,  and saw Diane do the same,  with her four paws
spread as widely as possible,  to flatten her body more
completely to the ground.

This opening to my expedition thus briefly set aside,
I repaired to the coast,  where there are pebbles,  at
least,  in great beauty as well as abundance.  The coast
of Ilfracombe is broken by rocks,  which bear evident
marks of being fragments of some one immense rock,
which,  undermined by the billows in successive storms,
has been cast in all directions in its fall.  We went
down to the edge of the sea,  which was clear,  smooth,
and immoveable as a lake,  the wind having subsided
into a calm so quiet,  that I could not tell whether
the tide were in or out.  Not a creature was in
sight ;  but presently a lady descended,  with a book in
her hand,  and passed on before us to the right,  evi-
dently to read alone.  Satisfied by this circumstance
that the tide was going out,  and all was safe,  I began
my search,  and soon accumulated a collection of beau-
tiful pebbles,  each of which seemed to merit being set
in a ring.  The pleasure they afforded me insensibly
drew me on to the entrance of the Wildersmouth,
which is the name driven to a series of recesses formed

284 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

by the rocks,  and semicircular,  open at the bottom to
the sea,  and only to be entered from the sands at low
tide.  I coasted two or three of them,  augmenting my
spoil as I proceeded ;  and perceiving the lady I have
already mentioned composedly engaged with her book,
I hurried past to visit the last recess,  whither I had
never yet ventured.  I found it a sort of chamber,
though with no roof but a clear blue sky.  The top was
a portly mountain,  rough,  steep,  and barren;  the left
side was equally mountainous,  but consisting of layers
of a sort of slate,  intermixed with moss  ;  the right side
was the elevated Capstan,  which here was perpendicular ;
and at the bottom were the sands by which I entered
it,  terminated by the ocean.  The whole was altogether
strikingly picturesque,  wild,  and original.  There was
not one trace of art,  or even of any previous entrance
into it of man.  I could almost imagine myself its first
human inmate.

My eye was presently caught by the appearance,
near the top,  of a cavern,  at the foot of which I per-
ceived something of so brilliant a whiteness that,  in
hopes of a treasure for my bag,  I hastened to the spot.
What had attracted me proved to be the jawbone and
teeth of some animal.  Various rudely curious things
at the mouth of the cavern invited investigation;
Diane,  however,  brushed forward,  and was soon out of
sight ;  but while I was busily culling,  hoarding,  or re-
jecting whatever struck my fancy,  she returned with
an air so piteous,  and a whine so unusual,  that,  con-
cluding she pined to return to a little puppy of a week
old that she was then rearing,  I determined to hasten;

1817]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         285

but still went on with my search,  till the excess of her
distress leading her to pull me by the gown,  moved
me to take her home ;  but when I descended,  for this
recess was on a slant,  how was I confounded to find
the sands at the bottom,  opening to the recess,
whence I had entered this marine chamber,  were co-
vered by the waves  ;  though so gentle had been their
motion,  and so calm was the sea,  that their approach
had not caught my ear.  I hastily remounted,  hoping
to find some outlet at the top by which I might escape,
but there was none.  This was not pleasant ;  but still I
was not frightened,  not conceiving or believing that I
could be completely enclosed :  the less,  as I recol-
lected, in my passage to the cavern,  having had a
glimpse of the lady who was reading in the neighbour-
ing recess.  I hastily scrambled to the spot to look for
her,  and entreat her assistance ;  but how was I then
startled to find that she was gone,  and that her recess,
which was on less elevated ground than mine,  was fast
filling with water  !

I now rushed down to the sea,  determined to risk a
wet jerkin,  by wading through a wave or two,  to secure
myself from being shut up in this unfrequented place :
but the time was past !  The weather suddenly changed,
the lake was gone,  and billows mounted one after the
other,  as if with enraged pursuit of what they could
seize and swallow.

I eagerly ran up and down,  from side to side,  and
examined every nook and corner,  every projection and
hollow,  to find any sort of opening through which I
could pass — but there was none.

286 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

Diane looked scared  ;  she whined,  she prowled about ;
her dismay was evident,  and filled me with compassion
— but I could not interrupt my affrighted search to
console her.  Soon after,  however,  she discovered a
hole in the rock at the upper part,  which seemed to
lead to the higher sands.  She got through it,  and
then turned round to bark,  as triumphing in her suc-
cess, and calling upon me to share its fruits.  But in
vain  ! — the hollow w^as too small for any passage save
of my head,  and I could only have remained in it as if
standing in the pillory.  I still,  therefore,  continued my
own perambulation,  but I made a motion to my poor
Diane to go,  deeming it cruel to detain her from her
little one.  Yet I heard her howl as if reduced to de-
spair, that I w^ould not join her.  Anon,  how^ever,  she
was silent — I looked after her,  but she had dis-
appeared.

This was an alarming moment.  Alone,  without the
smallest aid,  or any knowledge how high the sea might
mount,  or what was the extent of my danger,  I looked
up wistfully at Capstan,  and perceived the iron sal-
mon ;  but this angle of that promontory was so steep
as to be utterly impracticable for climbing by human
feet ;  and its height was such as nearly to make me
giddy in considering it from so close a point of view.
I went from it,  therefore,  to the much less elevated
and less perpendicular rock opposite ;  but there all
that was not slate,  which crumbled in my hands,  was
moss,  from which they glided.  There was no hold
whatsoever for the feet.

I ran therefore to the top,  where a large rock,  by

1817]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  287

reaching from the upper part of this slated one to
Capstan,  formed the chamber in which I was thus un-
expectedly immured.  But this was so rough,  pointed,
sharp,  and steep that I could scarcely touch it.
The hole through which Diane had crept was at an
accidentally thin part,  and too small to afford a passage
to anything bigger than her little self.

The rising storm,  however,  brought forward the
billows with augmented noise and violence ;  and my
wild asylum lessened every moment.

Now,  indeed,  I comprehended the fullness of my
danger.  If a w^ave once reached my feet,  while coming
upon me with the tumultuous vehemence of this storm,
I had nothing I could hold by to sustain me from
becoming its prey  ;  and must inevitably be carried away
into the ocean.

I darted about in search of some place of safety,
rapidly,  and all eye;  till at length I espied a small tuft
of grass on the pinnacle of the highest of the small
rocks that were scattered about my prison ;  for such
now appeared my fearful dwelling-place.

This happily pointed out to me a spot that the waves
had never yet attained ;  for all around bore marks of
their visits.  To reach that tuft would be safety,  and I
made the attempt with eagerness  ;  but the obstacles I
encountered were terrible.  The roughness of the rock
tore my clothes;  its sharp points cut,  now my feet,
and now my fingers ;  and the distances from each
other of the holes by which I could gain any footing
for my ascent,  increased the difficulty.  I gained,  how-
ever, nearly a quarter of the height,  but I could climb

288 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Pakt VIII.

no further ;  and then found myself on a ledge where it
was possible to sit down ;  and I have rarely found a
little repose more seasonable.  But it was not more
sweet than short :  for in a few minutes a sudden gust
of wind raised the waves to a frightful height,  whence
their foam reached the base of my place of refuge,  and
threatened to attain soon the spot to which I had ascended.
I now saw a positive necessity to mount yet higher,
coute qui coiite ;  and,  little as I had thought it possible,
the pressing danger 'gave me both means and fortitude
to accomplish it :  but with so much hardship that I
have ever since marvelled at my success.  My hands
were wounded,  my knees were bruised,  and my feet
were cut ;  for I could only scramble up by clinging to
the rock on all fours.

When I had reached to about two-thirds of the
height of my rock,  I could climb no further.  All above
was so sharp and so perpendicular that neither hand
nor foot could touch it without being wounded.  My
head,  however,  was nearly on a level with the tuft
of grass,  and my elevation from the sands was very
considerable.  I hoped,  therefore,  I was safe from
being washed away by the waves  ;  but I could only
hope ;  I had no means to ascertain my situation ;  and
hope as I might,  it was as painful as it was hazardous.
The tuft to which I had aimed to rise,  and which,  had
I succeeded,  would have been security,  was a mere
point,  as unattainable as it was unique,  not another
blade of grass being anywhere discernible.  I was re-
joiced, however,  to have reached a spot where there
was sufficient breadth to place one foot at least without

1817]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         289

cutting it,  though the other was poised on such un-
friendly ground that it could bear no part in sustaining
me.  Before me was an immense slab,  chiefly of slate,
but it was too slanting to serve for a seat — and seat
I had none.  My only prop,  therefore,  was holding by
the slab,  where it was of a convenient height for my
hands.  This support,  besides affording me a little rest,
saved me from becoming giddy,  and enabled me from
time to time to alternate the toil of my feet.

Glad was I,  at least,  that my perilous clambering
had finished by bringing me to a place where I might
remain still ;  for with aftright,  fatigue,  and exertion I
was almost exhausted.  The wind was now abated,
and the sea so calm,  that I could not be sure
whether the tide was still coming in.  To ascertain
this was deeply necessary for my tranquillit}-,  that I
might form some idea what would be the length of
my torment.  I fixed my eyes,  therefore,  upon two
rocks that stood near the sea entrance into my recess,
almost close to the promontory,  from which they
liad probably been severed by successive storms.  As
they were always in the sea I could easily make my
calculation by observing whether they seemed to
lengthen or shorten.  With my near-sighted glass I
watched them;  and great was my consternation when,
little by little,  I lost sight of them.  I now looked
wistfully onward to the main ocean,  in the hope of
espying some vessel,  or fishing-boat,  with intention of
spreading and waving my parasol,  in signal of distress,
should any one come in sight.  But nothing appeared.
All was vacant and vast !     I was wholly alone — wholly

VOL.  VII.  u

290 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

isolated.     I feared to turn my head lest I should be-
come giddy,  and lose my balance.

In this terrible state,  painful,  dangerous,  and,  more
than all,  solitary,  who could paint my joy,  when sud-
denly, re-entering by the aperture in the rock through
vrhich she had quitted me,  I perceived my dear
little Diane  !  For the instant I felt as if restored to
safety — I no longer seemed abandoned.  She soon
leaped across the flat stones and the sands which
separated us,  but how great was the difficulty to make
her climb as I had climbed !  Twenty times she ad-
vanced only to retreat from the sharp points of the
rock,  till ultimately she picked herself out a passage
by help of the slate,  and got upon the enormous table,
of which the upper part was my support ;  but the slant
was such,  that as fast as she ascended she slipped down,
and we were both,  I believe,  almost hopeless of the
desired junction,  when,  catching at a favourable moment
that had advanced her paws within my reach,  I con-
trived to hook her collar by the curved end of my
parasol and help her forward.  This I did with one
hand,  and as quick as lightning,  dragging her over the
slab and dropping her at my feet,  whence she soon
nestled herself in a sort of niche of slate,  in a situation
much softer than mine,  but in a hollow that for me was
impracticable.  I hastily recovered my hold,  which I
marvel now that I had the temerity to let go ;  but
to have at my side my dear little faithful Diane was a
comfort which no one not planted,  and for a term
that seemed indefinite,  in so unknown a solitude,  can
conceive.      What cries of joy the poor little thing

1817]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         291

uttered when thus safely lodged  !  and with what ten-
derness I sought to make her sensible of my gra-
titude for her return !

I was now,  compared with all that had preceded,  in
Paradise;  so enchanted did I feel at no longer con-
sidering myself as if alone in the world.  O,  well I can
conceive the interest excited in the French prisoner by a
spider,  even a spider  !  Total absence of all of animation
in a place of confinement,  of which the term is unknown,
where volition is set aside,  and where captivity is the
work of the elements,  casts the fancy into a state of
solemn awe,  of fearful expectation,  which I have not
Vv ords to describe ;  while the higher mind,  mastering at
times that fancy,  seeks resignation from the very sub-
limity of that terrific vacuity whence all seems exiled,
but self:  seeks,  and finds it in the almost visible security
of the omnipresence of God.

To see after my kind little companion was an occu-
pation that for awhile kept me from seeing after
myself;  but when I had done what I could towards
giving her comfort and assistance,  I again looked
before me,  and saw the waters at the base of my rock
of refuge,  still gradually rising on,  while both my rocks
of mark were completely swallowed up!

My next alarm was one that explained that of Diane
when she came back so scared from the cavern ;  for the
waves,  probably from some subterraneous passage,
now forced their way through that cavern,  threatening
inundation to even the highest part of my chamber.
This was horrific.     1 could no longer even speak to

u2

292 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

Diane — my eyes  \vere riveted upon this unexpected
gulf,  and in a few moments an immense breaker
attacked my rock,  and,  impeded by its lieiglit from
going straight forward,  was dashed in two directions,
and foamed onward against each side.

I did not breathe — I felt faint — I felt even sea-sick.
On,  then^  with added violence came two wide-spread-
ing waves,  and,  being parted by my rock,  completely
encompassed it,  meeting each other on the further and
upper ground.  I now gave up my whole soul to prayer
for myself and for my Alexander,  and that I might
mercifully be spared this watery grave,  or be endowed
with courage and faith for meeting it with firmness.

The next waves reached to the uppermost end of
my chamber,  which was now all sea,  save the small
rock upon which I was mounted !

How I might have been subdued by a situation so
awful at once,  and so helpless,  if left to its unmixed
contemplation,  I know not ;  had I not been still called
into active service in sustaining my poor Diane.  No
sooner were we thus encompassed than she was seized
with a dismay that filled me with pity.  She trembled
violently,  and rising and looking down at the dreadful
sight of sea,  sea,  sea all around,  and sea still to the
utmost extent of the view beyond,  she turned up her
face to me,  as if appealing for protection  ;  and when I
-spoke to her with kindness,  she crept forward to my
feet,  and was instantly taken with a shivering fit.

I could neither sit nor kneel to offer her any comfort,
but I dropped down as children do when they play at

1817]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  293

hunt the shpper,  for so only conld I loose my hold of
the slab without falling,  and I then stroked and
caressed her in as fondling a way as if she had been a
child ;  and I recovered her from her ague-fit by rub-
bing her head and back Avith my shawl.  She then
looked up at me somewhat composed,  though still
piteous and forlorn,  and licked my hands with grati-
tude.

While this passed the sea had gained considerably
in height,  and,  a few minutes afterwards,  all the horrors
of a tempest seemed impending.  The wind roared
around me,  pushing on the waves with a frothy velocity
that,  to a bystander,  not to an inmate amidst them,
would have been beautiful.  It whistled with shrill and
varying tones from the numberless crevices in the three
immense rocky mountains by whose semicircular ad-
hesion I was thus immured  ;  and it burst forth at times
in squalls,  reverberating from height to height or
chasm to chasm,  as if  "the big-mouthed thunder'*

"  Were bellowing through the vast and boundless deep."

A wave,  at length,  more stupendous than any which had
preceded it,  dashed against my rock as if enraged at
an interception of its progress,  and rushed on to the
extremity of this savage chamber,  with foaming impe-
tuosity. This moment I believed to be my last of
mortality  !  but a moment only it was  ;  for scarcely had
I time,  with all the rapidity of concentrated thought,  to
recommend myself,  my husband,  and my poor iVlex-
ander,  humbly but fervently to the mercy of the Al-
mighty, when the celestial joy broke in upon me of

294 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VIII.

perceiving  (hat this wave,  which had bounded forward
with such fury,  was the last of the rising tide  !  In its
rebound,  it forced back witli it,  for an instant,  the whole
body of water that was lodged nearest to the upper
extremity of my recess,  and the transporting sight was
granted me of an opening to the sands  ;  but they were
covered again the next instant,  and as no other breaker
made a similar opening,  I was still,  for a considerable
length of time,  in the same situation:  but I lost hope
no more.  The tide was turned;  it could rise therefore
no higher ;  the danger was over of so unheard-of an
end  ;^  of vanishing no one knew how or where — of
leaving to my kind,  deploring friends an unremitting
uncertainty of my fate — of my re-appearance or dis-
solution. I now^  w^anted nothing but time,  and cau-
tion, to effect my deliverance.

The threat of the tempest,  also,  Avas over ;  the air
grew as serene as my mind,  the sea far more calm,  the
sun beautifully tinged the west,  and its setting upon
the ocean was resplendent.  By remembrance,  how^-
ever,  alone,  I speak of its glory,  not from any pleasure I
then experienced in its sight :  it told me of the waning
day;  and the anxiety I had now dismissed for my-
self redoubled for my poor Alexander.

I now turned to considering how I might be placed
less painfully  ;  for what I had supported while in such
imminent danger seemed now insupportable,  and when
my eyes and my whole faculties were no longer mono-
polized by immediate care of life,  in watching the tide,
I was able to devise various contrivances for my better
accommodation.     I found out crevices for holding my

1817]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  295

feet so as to allow of my standing upright,  and I dis-
covered a spot of the slab upon which I could occa-
sionally lean one of my elbows.  Not small were these
solaces ;  I felt them to be almost invaluable,  so
cramped had been my position.  But no possible means
could I discover for procuring myself a seat,  and this I
have since regarded as providential ;  for,  had I been a
little more at my ease,  the fatigue I had undergone,
the profound silence all around luc,  the heaviness of
solitude,  and the vast monotony of the view,  joined to
the necessity of remaining motionless,  must inevitably
have invited sleep.  I should then have lost my balance,
and my waking start must have plunged me into the
sea.  I have reason,  therefore,  to bless the various
torments which saved me from any possibility of
drowsiness.

With my bag of curiosities I made a cushion for
Diane,  which,  however little luxurious,  was softness
itself compared with her then resting-place.  She,  also,
could take no repose,  but from this period I made her
tolerably happy,  by caresses and continual attentions.

But no sooner had the beams of the sun vanished
from the broad horizon,  than a small,  gentle rain began
to fall,  and the light as well as brightness of the day
became obscured by darkling clouds.

This greatly alarmed me,  in defiance of my joy and
my philosophy  ;  for I dreaded being surprised by the
night in this isolated situation.  I was supported,  how-
ever, by perceiving that the sea was clearly retro-
grading, and beholding,  little by little,  the dry ground
across the higher extrcmitv of my apartment.     How

2S6 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

did I bless tlic sight!  the sands and clods of sca-mire
^ve^e more beautiful to my eyes than the rarest mosaic
pavement of antiquity.  Nevertheless,  the return was
so gradual,  that I foresaw I had still many hours to
remain a prisoner.

The night came on — there was no moon;  but the
sea,  by its extreme whiteness,  afforded some degree of
pale light,  when suddenly I tliought I perceived some-
thing in the air.  Affrighted,  I looked around me,  but
nothing was visible  ;  yet in another moment something
like a shadow flitted before my eyes.  I tried to fix it,
but could not develope ax\y form :  something black
was all I could make out;  it seemed in quick motion,
for I caught and lost it alternately,  as if it was a shadow
refxccted by the waters.

I looked up at Capstan  :  nothing was there,  but the
now^  hardly discernible iron salmon.  I then looked at
the opposite side  ....  ah,  gracious Heaven,  what
were my sensations to perceive two human figures  !
Small they looked,  as in a picture,  from their distance,
the height of the rock,  and the obscurity of the night;
but not less certainly from their outline,  human figures.
I trembled — I could not breathe — in another minute I
was espied,  for a voice loud,  but unknown to my ears,
called out  ''  Holloa!"  I unhesitatingly answered,  "  I
am safe !"

*' Thank God!"  was the eager reply,  in a voice
hardly articulate,  *'  Oh,  thank God !"  but not in a
voice unknown,  though convulsed with agitation — it
w^as the voice of my dear son!  Oh what a quick tran-
sition from everv direful apprehension to joy and de-

IS 17]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        297

light !  yet knowing;  his precipitanc}'^  and fearing a rash
descent to join me,  in ignorance of the steepness and
dangers of the precipice which parted us,  I called out
with all the energy in my power to conjure him to await
patiently,  as I would myself,  the entire going down of
the tide.

He readily gave me this promise,  though still in
sounds almost inarticulate.

I was then indeed in Heaven while upon Earth.

Another form then appeared,  while Alex,  and the
first companion retired.  This form,  from a gleam of
light on her dress,  I soon saw to be female.  She called
out to me that Mr.  Alexander and his friend were gone
to call for a boat to come round for me by sea.

The very thought made me shudder,  acquainted as
I now was with the nature of my recess,  where,  though
the remaining sea looked as smooth as the waters of a
lake,  I well knew it was but a surface covering pointed
fragments of rock,  against which a boat must have
been overset or stranded.  Loudly,  therel'ore,  as I
could raise my voice,  I called upon my informant to fly
after them,  and say I was decided to wait till the tide
was down.  She replied that she would not leave me
alone for the world.

The youths,  however,  soon returned to the top of
the mountain,  accompanied by a mariner,  who had dis-
suaded them from their dangerous enterprise.  I
cheerfully repeated that I was safe,  and begged reci-
procated patience.

They now wandered about on the heights,  one of
them always keeping in view.

298 DIARV AND LETTERS  [P.VRT VIII.

Meanwhile,  I had now the  ])leasurc to descend to
the sort of halfway-house which I had first hoped
would serve for my refuge.  The difficulty was by no
means so arduous to come down as to mount,  especially
as,  the waters being no longer so high as my rock,
there was no apprehension of destruction should my
footing fail me.

Encouraged by this exploit,  Diane contrived to get
down entirely to the bottom ;  but though she found
not there the sea,  the sands were so wet that she
hastily climbed to rejoin me.

Some time after I descried a fourth figure on the
summit,  bearing a lantern.  This greatly rejoiced me,
for the twilight now was grown so obscure that I had
felt much troubled how I might at last grope my way
in the dark out of this terrible Wildersmouth.

They all now,  from the distance and the dimness,
looked like spectres  :  we spoke no more,  the effort being
extremely fatiguing.  I observed,  however,  v»'ith great
satisfaction^  an increase of figures,  so that the border
of the precipice seemed covered with people.  This
assurance that if any accident happened,  there would
be succour at hand,  relieved many a fresh starting
anxiety.

Not long after,  the sea wholly disappeared,  and the
man with the lantern,  who was an old sailor,  descended
the precipice on the further part,  by a way known to
him ;  and placing the lantern where it might give him
light,  yet allow him the help of both his hands,  he was
coming to me almost on all fours  ;  when Diane leaped
to the bottom of the rock,  and began a barking so loud

1817]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         299

and violent that the seaman stopped short,  and I had
the utmost difficulty to appease my little dog,  and pre-
vail with her,  between threats and cajolements,  to suffer
his approach.

He then brought me a coat from my son.  It rained
incessantly.

*•'  Is it his own  ?  "  I cried.

"  Yes."

"  Take it then bach,  and entreat him to put it on.
The wind is abated,  and I can hold my parasol."

I would take to this no denial;  and my son's com-
panion, Mr.  Le Fevre,  as I afterwards heard,  sent then
to the house for another.

For this,  however,  we waited not;  my son no sooner
perceived that the seaman had found footing,  though
all was still too watery and unstable for me to quit my
rock,  than he darted forward by the way thus pointed
out,  and clambering,  or rather leaping up to me,  he
was presently in my arms.  Neither of us could think
or care about the surrounding spectators — we seemed
restored to each other,  almost miraculously,  from de-
struction and death.  Neither of us could utter a word;
but both,  I doubt not,  were equally occupied in return-
ing the most ardent thanks to Heaven.

Alexander had run wildly about in every direction ;
visited hill,  dale,  cliff,  bye-paths,  and public roads,  to
make and instigate inquiry — but of the Wildersmouth
he thought not,  and never,  I believe,  had heard ;  and
as it was then a mere part of the sea,  from the height
of the tide,  the notion or remembrance of it occurred
to no one.     Mr.  Jacob,  his cool-headed and excellent

300 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

hearted friend,  was most unfortunately at Barnstaple  ;
but he at length thought of Mr.  Jolin Lc Fevre,  a
young man wlio was eminent!}^  at the head of the II-
fracombe students,,  and had resisted going to the ball at
Barnstaple,  not to lose an hour of his time.  Recollect-
ing this,  Alex,  went to his dwelling,  and bursting into
his apartment,  called out,  "  My mother is missing!  "

The generous youth,  seeing the tumult of soul in
which he was addressed,  shut up his bureau without
a word,  and hurried off with his distressed comrade,
giving up for that benevolent purpose the precious
time he had refused himself to spare for a moment's
recreation.

Fortunately,  providentially,  Mr.  Le Fevre recollected
Wildersmouth,  and that one of his friends had nar-
rowly escaped destruction by a surprise there of the
sea.  He no sooner named this than he and Alexander
contrived to climb up the rock opposite to Capstan,
whence they looked down upon my recess.  At first
they could discern nothing,  save one small rock un-
covered by the sea:  but at length,  as my head moved,
Le Fevre saw something like a shadow — he then called
out,  *' Holloa  !"  <Scc.

To Mr.  Le Fevre,  therefore,  I probably owe my
life.

Two days after,  I visited the spot of my captivity,
but it had entirely changed its appearance.  A storm
of equinoctial violence had broken off its pyramidal
height,  and the drift of sand and gravel,  and fragments
of rocks,  had given a new face to the whole recess.  I
sent for the seaman to ascertain the very spot  :  this he

1817]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         SOI

did  ;  but told nie tliat a similar chang'c took place com-
monly twice a year ;  and added,  very calmly,  that two
days later I could not have been saved from the
waves.

3Iadamc cV Arhlay to a Friend.

Batli,  November 9,  1817.

Can I still hope,  my dear friend,  for that patient
partiality which will await my tardy answer ere it
judges my irksome silence  ?  Your letter of Sept.  27th
I found upon my table when I returned,  the 5th of
October,  from lifracombe.  I returned,  with Alexan-
der, to meet General d'A.  from Paris.  You will be
sorry,  I am very sure,  and probably greatly surprised,
to hear that he came in a state to occupy every faculty
of my mind and thoughts — altered — thin — weak — de-
pressed— full of pain — and disappointed in every ex-
pectation of every sort that had urged his excursion  !

I thank God the fever that confined him to his bed
for three days is over,  and he yesterday went down
stairs ;  and his repose now is the most serene and re-
viving. The fever,  Mr.  Hay assured me,  was merely
symptomatic  ;  not of inflammation or any species of
danger,  but the effect of his sufferings.  Alas  !  that
is heavy and severe enough,  but still,  where fever
comes,  'tis of the sort the least cruel,  because no ways
alarming.

Nov.  loth. — I never go out,  nor admit any one
within  ;  nor shall I,  till a more favourable turn will let
me listen to his earnest exhortations that I should do

302 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

both.  Mr.  Hay gives me strong hopes that that will
soon arrive,  and then I shall not vex him by perse-
vering in this seclusion  :  yon know and can judge how
little this part of my course costs me^  for to quit the
side of those we prize when they are in pain,  would be
a thousand times greater sacrifice than any other pri-
vation.

You are very right as to Lady Murray ;  not only,  of
course,  I am honoured by her desire of intercourse,  but
it can never be as a new acquaintance I can see the
daughter of Lord and Lady Mulgrave.  I have been
frequently in the company of the former,  who was a
man of the gayest wat in society I almost ever knew.
He spread mirth around him by his sprightly ideas
and sallies,  and his own laugh was as hearty and frank
as that he excited in others ;  and his accomplished and
attachini^  wife was one of the sweetest creatures in the
w^orld.  Alas  !  how often this late Tragedy in the un-
fortunate Royal Family has called her to my remem-
brance! She,  however,  left the living consolation of a
lovely babe to her disconsolate survivor ; — the poor
Prince Leopold loses in one blow mother and child
The Royal visit here has been a scene of emotion ; —
first of joy and pleasure,  next of grief and disappoint-
ment. The Queen I thought looked well till this sud-
den and unexpected blow;  after which,  for the mourn-
ful day she remained,  she admitted no one to her
presence,  but most graciously sent me a message to
console me.  She wrote instantly,  with her own hand,
to Prince Leopold — that Prince who must seem to
have had a vision of celestial happiness,  so perfect it

1817]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  303

was,  so exalted,  and so transitory.  The poor Princess
Charlotte's passion for him had absorbed her,  yet was
so well placed as only to form her to excellence,  and it
had so completely won his return,  that like herself,  he

coveted her alone Princess Elizabeth is much

altered personally^  to my great concern ;  but her man-
ners, and amiability,  and talents,  I think more pleasing
and more attaching than ever.  How delighted I was
at their arrival !

Madame d'Arhlay to Alex.  cVArhlay,  Esq.

Bath,  November 9,  1817.

We have here spent nearly a week in a manner the
most extraordinary,  beginning with hope and pleasure,
proceeding to fear and pain,  and ending in disappoint-
ment and grief.

The joy exhibited on Monday,  when Her Majesty
and Her Royal Highness arrived,  was really extatic  ;
the illumination was universal.  The public offices were
splendid  ;  so were the tradespeople's who had promises
or hopes of employment ;  the nobles and gentles were
modestly gay,  and the poor eagerly put forth their
mite.  Butallwasflattering,  because voluntary.  Nothing
was induced by power,  or forced by mobs.  All was left
to individual choice.  Your padre and I patroled the
principal streets,  and were quite touched by the uni-
versality of the homage paid to the virtues and merit
of our venerable Queen,  upon this her first progress
through any part of her domains by herself Hitherto
she has only accompanied the poor King,  as at Wey-

304 DIARY AND LKTTERS  [PAirrYIII.

mouth  ;ind Cheltenham,  Worcester and Exeter,  Ply-
mouth and Portsinouth,  &c. ;  or the Prince Keirent.
as at Brighthehustone.  But here,  called by her
health,  she came as principal,  and in her own cha-
racter of rank and consequence.  And,  as Mr.  Ilay
told me,  the inhabitants of Bath were all even vehement
to let her see the light in which they held her individual
self,  after so many years witnessing her exemplary con-
duct and distinguislied merit.

She was very sensible to this tribute ;  but much
affected,  nay,  dejected,  in receiving it,  at the beginning ;
from coming without the King where the poor King had
always meant himself to bring her;  but just as he
had arranged for the excursion,  and even had three
houses taken for him in the Royal Crescent,,  he was
afflicted by blindness.  He would not then come  ;  for
what,  he said,  was a beautiful city to him who could not
look at it  ?  This was continually in the remembrance
of the Queen during the honours of her reception  ;  but
she had recovered from the melancholy recollection,
and was cheering herself by the cheers of all the inha-
bitants, when the first news arrived of the illness of the
Princess Charlotte.  At that moment she was having
lier diamonds placed on her head for the reception of the
mayor and corporation of Bath,  with an address upon
the honour done to their city,  and upon their hopes
from the salutary spring she came to quaff.  Her first
thought was to issue orders for deferring this ceremony  ;
but when she considered that all the members of the
municipality must be assembled,  and that the great
dinner they had prepared to give to the Duke of Clarence

i

1817]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  305

could only be postponed at an enormous and useless
expense,  she composed her spirits,  finished her regal
decorations,   and admitted the citizens of Bath,  who
were highly gratified by her condescension,  and struck
by her splendour,  which was the same as she appeared
in on the greatest occasions in the capital.      The
Princess Elizabeth was also a blaze of jewels.     And
our good little mayor  (not four feet high)  and aldermen
and common councilmen were all transported.     The
Duke of Clarence accepted their invitation,  and was
joined by the Marquis of Bath and all the Queen's
suite.     But the dinner was broken up.     The Duke re-
ceived an express with the terrible tidings:    he rose
from table,  and struck his forehead as he read them,
and then hurried out of the assembly with inexpressible
trepidation and dismay.     The Queen also was at table
when the same express arrived,  though only with the
Princess and her own party  :  all were dispersed in a
moment,  and she shut herself up,  admitting no one but
her Royal Highness.     She would have left Bath the
next morning;  but her physician.  Sir Henry Halford,
said it would be extremely dangerous that she should
travel so far,  in her state of health,  just in the first
perturbation of affliction.     She would see no one but
her immediate suite all day,  and set out the next for
Windsor Castle,  to spend the time previous to the
last melancholy rites,  in the bosom of her family.     All
Bath wore a face of mourning.     The transition from
gaiety and exultation was really awful.     What an ex-
tinction of youth and happiness  !     The poor Princess
Charlotte had never known a moment's suffering since

VOL.  VII.  X

306 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

licr marriage.  Her lot seemed perfect.  Prince Leopold
is,  indeed,  to be pitied.  I have left no room for your
padre  ;  but the turn was fairly mine ;  and both are so
delighted with your new spirit of correspondence that
whichever holds the pen,  the heart of both writes in
truest affection to the dearest of sons.

Madame d'Arhlay to Mrs.  Broome.

Bath,  November 25,  1817.

*  *  *  *  \Ye are all here impressed with the mis-
fortunes of the Koyal house,  and chiefly with the deadly
blow inflicted on the perfect conjugal happiness of the
first young couple in the kingdom.  The first couple
not young had already received a blow yet,  perhaps,
more frightful :  for to have,  yet lose — to keep,  yet never
enjoy the being we most prize,  is surely yet more tor-
turing than to yield at once to the stroke which we
know awaits us,  and by which,  at last,  we must neces-
saril}^  and indispensably fall.  The Queen supports
herself with the calm and serenity belonging to one
inured to misfortune,  and submissive to Providence.
The Princess Elizabeth has native spirits that resist
all woe after the first shock,  though she is full of kind-
ness, goodness,  and zeal for right action.  The Duke
of Clarence was strongly and feelingly affected by the
sudden and.  unexpected disaster,  and he looks much
changed by all he has gone through in the solemn
ceremonies of the interment.  All is so altered from
the gay,  brilliant scene with which this Bath excursion

1817]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         307

had opened,  that the meanest person and most un-
educated character reads a moral in the vicissitude that
requires no commentary.

Daily I go with my respectful and most warm
enquiries to Sydney Place,  to know how the Bath
beverage agrees with her Majesty,  whose weakened
and disordered stomach terribly wants ameliorating.
We are flattered with the hope that the progress is all
on the right side,  though slow.  But she looks better,
and is much more like her native self,  than upon her
second arrival.  The Princess,  the dear,  sweet,  and
accomplished Princess Elizabeth,  is visibly better for
bathing in the Bath waters ;  and I sometimes permit
myself to hope they may sufficiently profit from
these springs to be tempted to return to them another
year.  I have just read a letter from Miss Knight,
dated Rome,  in which she mentions,  with great regard
and intimacy,  Mr.  Mathias,  and speaks of him as be-
longing to her select society,  without any reference to
the alarming stroke and attack which preceded his
journey,  and simply as one who enlivens the Italian
coterie.     How delightful is such a recovery  !

PART IX.

1818-1819.

Mrs.  Piozzi renews her correspondence with Madame d'Arblay —
Continued indisposition of General d'Arblay — Madame d'Arblay 's
narrative of his last illness — His presentation to Queen Charlotte
at Bath — Presents from the Queen and Princess Elizabeth — Visit
of a Roman Catholic priest — Death of General d'Arblay — Letter
of condolence from Mr.  Wilberforce — Dr.  Elloi,  the Roman
Catholic priest,  desires the conversion of Madame d'Arblay — She
convinces him of its hopelessness — Friendly visits and condo-
lences— Approaching dissolution of the Queen — Madame d'Ar-
blay's son a deacon of the Church of England — The Queen's
death— Sketch of her character by Madame d'Arblay— Funeral
Sermon.

1818]         DIARY OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  311

PAET IX.

1818.

From Mrs.  Piozzi to Madame d^Arhlaij.

Bath,  Thursday,  February 26,  1S18.

My DEAR Madam,

I HAD company in the room when Lady K

note arrived,  desiring 1 would send you some papers of
her's by the person who should bring it.  1 had offered
a conveyance to London by some friends of my own,
but she preferred their passing through your hands.
Accept my truest wishes for the restoration of complete
peace to a mind which has been so long and so justly
admired,  loved,  and praised by,

Dear Madam,

Your ever faithful,

H.  L.  P.
Who attends the General .''  and why do you think
him so very bad  ?

Madame d^Arhlay to Mrs.  Piozzi.

Bath,  February 26,  1818.

There is no situation in which a kind remem-
brance from you,  my dear Madam,  would not awaken
me to some pleasure;  but my poor sufferer was so very

312 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IX.

ill when your note came,  that it was not possible for
me to answer it.  That I think him so very had,  is that
I see liim perpetually in pain nearly insupportable ;
yet I am assured it is local,  and unattended with
danger while followed up with constant care and
caution.  This supports my spirits,  which bear me
and enable me to help him through a malady of an-
guish and difficulty.  It is a year this very month since
he has been in the hands of Mr.  Hay as a regular
patient.  Mr.  Hay was recommended to us by Mrs.
Lock and Mrs.  Angcrstein,  whom he attends as physi-
cian, from their high opinion of his skill and discern-
ment. But,  alas  !  all has failed here ;  and we have
called in Mr.  Tudor,  as the case terminates in being
one that demands a surgeon.  Mr.  Tudor gives me
every comfort in prospect,  but prepares me for long
suffering,  and slow,  slow recovery.

Shall I apologise for this wordy explanation  ?  No ;
you will see by it with what readiness I am happy to
believe that our interest in each other must ever be
reciprocal.

Lady K by no means intended to give me the

charge of the papers;  she only thought they might
procure some passing amusement to my invalid.  I
must,  on the contrary,  hope you will permit me to
return them you,  in a few days,  for such conveyance as
you may deem safe  ;  I am now out of the way of seek-
ing any.

Believe me,  dear Madam,  with unaherable affection,
Your ever obliged and obedient,

F.  d'Arblay.

1819]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         313

I hope you were a little glad that my son has been
among the high Wranglers.

Narrative of the Illness and Death of General  (TArhkuj.

Bolton Street,  Berkeley Square,  November 17,  1819.

It is now the 17th]  of November,  1819.  A year and
a half have passed since I was blessed with the sight
of my beloved husband.  I can devise no means to
soothe my lonely woe,  so likely of success as devoting
my evening solitude to recollections of his excellences,
and of every occurrence of his latter days,  till I bring
myself up to the radiant serenity of their end.  I think
it will be like passing with him,  with him himself,  a
few poor fleeting but dearly-cherished moments.  I will
call back the history of my beloved husband's last
illness.  Ever present as it is to me,  it will be a relief to
set it down.

In Paris,  in the autumn of 1817,  he was first attacked
with the deadly evil by which he was finally consumed.
I suspected not his danger.  He had left me in June,
in the happy but most delusive persuasion that the
journey and his native air would complete his recovery
from the jaundice,  which had attacked him in February,
1817.  Far from ameliorating,  his health went on daily
declining.  His letters,  which at first were the delight
and support of my existence,  became disappointing,
dejecting,  afflicting.  I sighed for his return  !  I be-
lieved he was trying experiments that hindered his
recovery  ;  and,  indeed,  I am persuaded he precipitated
the evil by continual changes of system.     At length

314 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

his letters became so comfortless,  that I almost expired
with desire to join him;  but he positively forbade my
quitting our Alexander,  who was preparing for his
grand examination at Cambridge.

On the opening of October,  1817,  Alex,  and I
returned from Ilfracombe to Bath to meet our best
friend.  He arrived soon after,  attended by his fcivourite
medical man,  Mr.  Hay,  whom he had met in Paris.
We found him extremely altered — not in mind,  tem-
per, faculties — oh,  no  ! — but in looks and strength  :
thin and weakened so as to be fatigued by the smallest
exertion.  He tried,  however,  to revive  ;  we sought to
renew our walks,  but his strength w^as insufficient.
He purchased a garden in the Crescent Fields,  and
w^orked in it,  but came home always the worse for the
effort.  His spirits w^ere no longer in their state of
native,  genial cheerfulness  :  he could still be awakened
to gaiety,  but gaiety was no longer innate,  instinctive
w^ith him.

In this month,  October,  1817,  I had a letter from
the Princess Elizabeth,  to inform me that Her Majesty
and herself were coming to pass four weeks in Bath.

The Queen's stay was short,  abruptly and sadly
broken up by the death of the Princess Charlotte.
In  .twenty-four hours after the evil tidings,  they has-
tened to Windsor to meet the Prince Regent;  and
almost immediately after the funeral,  the Queen and
Princess returned,  accompanied by the Duke of Cla-
rence. I saw them continually,  and never passed a day
without calling at the Roval abode by the Queen's
express permission ;  and during the whole period of

1819]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        315

their sta}^  my invalid appeared to be stationary in his
health.  I never quitted him save for this Royal visit,
and that only of a morning.

He Iiad always purposed being presented to Her Ma-
jesty in the pump-room,  and the Queen herself deigned
to say  "  she should be very glad to see the General."
Ill he was  !  suffering,  emaciated,  enfeebled  !  But he
had always spirit awake to every call ;  and just before
Christmas,  1817,  we went together,  between seven and
eight o'clock in the morning,  in chairs,  to the pump-
room.

I thought I had never seen him look to such ad-
vantage. His fine brow so open,  his noble countenance
so expressive,  his features so formed for a painter's
l^encil !  This,  too,  was the last time he ever wore his
military honours — his three orders of  *'  St.  Louis,"
"the Legion of Honour,"  and  ''Du Lys,"  or  *'De la
FideUte ;"  decorations which singularly became him,
from his strikingly martial port and character.

The Queen was brought to the circle in her sedan-
chair,  and led to the seat prepared for her by her vice-
chamberlain,  making a gracious general bow to the
assembly as she passed.  Dr.  Gibbs and Mr.  Tudor
waited upon her with the Bath water,  and she con-
versed with them,  and the mayor and aldermen,  and
her own people,  for some time.  After this she rose to
make her round with a grace indescribable,  and,  to
those who never witnessed it,  inconceivable  ;  for it was
such as to carry off age,  infirmity,  sickness,  diminutive
stature — and to give her,  in defiance of such disad-
vantages, a power of charming that rarely has been

316 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

equalled.  Her face had a variety of expression that
made her features soon seem agreeable  ;  the intona-
tions of her voice so accorded with her words ;  her
language was so impressive,  and her manner so en-
gaging and encouraging,  that it was not possible to be
the object of her attention without being both struck
with her uncommon abilities and fascinated by their
exertion.  Such was the effect which she produced
upon General d'Arblay,  to whom she soon turned.
Highly sensible to the honour of her distinction,  he
forgot his pains in his desire to manifest his gratitude  ;
— and his own smiles — how winning they became I
Her Majesty spoke of Bath,  of Windsor,  of the Con-
tinent; and while addressing him,  her eyes turned to
meet mine with a look that said,  "  Now I know I am
making you happy  !  "  She asked me,  archly,  whether
I was not fatigued by coming to the j)ump-room so
early  ?  and said,  "  Madame d'Arblay thinks I have
never seen you before  !  but she is mistaken,  for I peeped
at you through the window as you passed to the terrace
at Windsor."  Alas  !  the Queen no sooner ceased to
address him than the pains he had suppressed became
intolerable,  and he retreated from the circle and sunk
upon a bench near the wall ;  he could stand no longer,
and we returned home to spend the rest of the day
in bodily misery.

Very soon after the opening of this fatal year 1818,
expressions dropped from my beloved of his belief of
his approaching end  :  they would have broken my
heart,  had not an incredulity — now my eternal wonder I
— kept me in a constant persuasion that he was hypo-

1819]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  317

chondriac,  and tormented with false apprehensions.
Fortunate,  merciful,  as wonderful was that incredulity,
which,  blinding me to my coming woe,  enabled me to
support my courage by my hopes,  and helped me to
sustain his own.  In his occasional mournful prophecies,
which I always rallied off and refused to listen to,  he
uttered frequently the kind words,  **^  Et jamais je n'ai
tant aime la vie  !  Jamais,  jamais,  la vie ne m'a ete
plus chere !"  How sweet to me were those words,
which I thought — alas,  how delusively  ! — would soothe
and invigorate recovery !

The vivacity with which I exerted all the means in
my power to Hy from every evil prognostic,  he was
often struck with,  and never angrily  ;  on the contrary,
he would exclaim,  "  Comme j'admire ton courage  !'*
while his own,  on the observation,  always revived.
"  My courage  ?  "  I always answered,  "  What courage  ?
Am I not doing what 1 most desire upon earth — re-
maining by your side?  When you are not well,  the
whole universe is to me,  there  !'*

Soon after,  nevertheless,  recurring to the mournful
idea ever uppermost,  he said,  with a serenity the
most beautiful,  "  Je voudrois que nous causassions sur
tout cela avec calme, — doucement, — cheerfulhj meme,
as of a future voyage — as of a subject of discussion —
simply to exchange our ideas and talk them over."

Alas,  alas I how do I now regret that I seconded not
this project,  so fitted for all pious Christian minds,
whether their pilgrimage be of shorter or longer dura-
tion !  But I saw him ill,  oh,  how ill !  I felt myself
well ;  it was,  therefore,  apparent who must be the sur-

318 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PAIIT IX.

vivor in case of sunderment ;  and,  tliercforc,  all power
of generalizing the subject was over.  And much and
ardently as I should have rejoiced in treating such a
theme when lie was well,  or on his recovery,  1 had no
power to sustain it thus situated.  I could only attend
his sick couch  ;  I could only live by fostering hopes of
his revival,  and seeking to make them reciprocal.

During this interval a letter from my affectionate
sister Charlotte suggested our taking further advice to
aid Mr.  Hay,  since the malady was so unyielding.

On January the 24th  ]Mr.  Tudor came,  but after an
interview and examination,  his looks were even for-
bidding. Mr.  Hay had lost his air of satisfaction
and complacency  ;  Mr.  Tudor merely inquired whether
he should come again?  ''Oh,  yes,  yes,  yes!"'  I cried,
and they retired together.  And rapidly I flew,  not
alone from hearing,  but from forming any opinion,  and
took refuge by the side of my beloved,  whom I sought
to console and revive.  And this very da}-,  as I have
since found,  ho began his Diary for the year.  It con-
tains these words  : —

*' Jamais je n'ai tant aime la Vie que je suis en si
grand danger de perdre ;  malgre que je n'aye point do
fievre,  ni le moindre mal a la tete;  et que j aye non
seulement I'esprit libre,  maisle coeur d'un contentement
parfait.  La yolonte de Dieu soit faite  !  J^attends
pour ce soir ou demain le resultat d'une consultation."

On this same day Madame de Soyres brought me
a packet from her Majesty,  and another from the Prin-
cess Elizabeth.  The kind and gracious Princess sent
me a pair of silver camp candlesticks,  with peculiar con-

1819]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         319

trivances which she wrote me word mis^ht amuse the
General as a military man,  while they might be em-
ployed by myself to light my evening' researches among
the MSS.  of my dear father,  which she wished me to
collect and to preface by a Memoir.

Her mother's offering was in the same spirit of
benevolence ;  it was a collection of all the volumes
of  '  L'Hermite dela Chaussee d'Antin/  with Chalmers'
Astronomical Sermons,  and Drake's two quartos on
Shakespeare ;  joined to a small work of deeper personal
interest to me than them all,  which was a book of
prayers suited to various circumstances,  and printed at
her Majesty's own press at Frogmore.  In this she had
condescended to write my name,  accompanied bywords
of peculiar kindness.  My poor Ami looked over every
title-page with delight,  feeling as I did myself that the
gift was still more meant for him than for me — or
rather,  doubly,  trebly for me in being calculated to be
pleasino^  to him  ! — he was to me the soul of all pleasure
on earth.

What words of kindness do I find,  and now for the
first time read,  in his Diary dated 2nd February!
After speaking — helas,  helas  ! — "  de ses douleurs inouies,'^
he adds,  "  Quelle etrange maladie  !  et quelle position
que la mienne  !  il en est une,  peut-etre plus facheuse
encore,  c'est cellede ma malheureuse compagne — avec
quelle tendresse elle me soigne !  et avec quelle courage
elle supporte ce qu'elle a a souffrir !  Je ne puis que
repeter,  La Volonte de Dieu soit faite !"

Alas  !  the last words he wrote in February were most
melancholy: — ''20 Fevrier,  Je sens que je m'affoiblis

320 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX.

horriblement — jc nc crois pas que ccci puisse etre en-
core bien long.  Chere Fanny  .  .  .  cher Alex. !  God
bless you  !  and unite us for ever,  Amen  !"

Oh my beloved !  Delight,   Pride,  and Happiness of

my heart !     May Heaven in its mercy hear this prayer  !

*****

In March he revived a little,  and Mr.  Tudor no
longer denied me hope;  on the 18th Alex,  came to our
arms and gratulations on his fellowship;  which gave
to his dearest father a delight the most touching.

I have no Diary in his honoured hand to guide my
narrative in April ;  a few words only he ever wrote
more,  and these,  after speaking of his sufferings,  end
with  '^  Pazienza  !  Pazienza T' — such was his last written
expression  !     'Tis on the 5th of April

On the 3rd of May he reaped,  I humbly trust,  the
fair fruit of that faith and patience he so pathetically
implored and so beautifully practised!

At this critical period in April I was called down one

day to Madame la Marquise de S ,  who urged me

to summon a priest of the Roman Catholic persuasion
to my precious sufferer.  I was greatly disturbed every
way ;  I felt in shuddering the danger she apprehended,
and resisted its belief;  yet I trembled lest I should be
doing wrong.  ...  I was a Protestant,  and had no
faith in confession to man.  I had long had reason to
believe that my beloved partner was a Protestant,  also,
in his heart ;  but he had a horror of apostacij,  and
therefore,  as he told me,  would not investigate the dif-
ferences of the two religions;  he had besides a tie
which to his honour and character was potent and per-

1819]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        321

suaslvc ;  he had taken an oath to keep the Catholic
faith when he received his Croix de St.  Louis,  which
was at a period when the preference of the simplicity of
Protestantism was not apparent to him.  All this made
me personally easy for him^  yet,  as this was not known,
and as nothing definitive had ever passed between us
upon this delicate subject,  I felt that he apparently
belonged still to the Roman Catholic Church;  and
after many painful struggles I thought it my absolute-
duty to let him judge for himself,  even at the risk of
inspiring the alarm I so much sought to save him ! .
....    I compelled myself therefore to tell him the

wish of Madame de S ,  that he should see a priest.

*^  Eh bien,"   he cried,   gently yet readily,   *'je ne m y

oppose pas Qu'en penses tu?"     I begged to

leave such a decision wholly to himself.

Never shall I forget the heavenly composure with
which my beloved partner heard me announce that the
priest,  Dr.  EUoi,  was come.  Cheerfully as I urged
myself to name him,  still he could but regard the visit
as an invitation to make his last preparations for
quitting mortal life.  With a calm the most gentle
and genuine,  he said he had better be left alone with
him,  and they remained together,  I believe,  three
hours.  I was deeply disturbed that my poor patient
should be so long without sustenance or medicine;  but
I durst not intrude,  though anxiously I kept at hand
in case of any sudden summons.  \\'hen,  at length,  the
priest re- appeared,  I found my dearest invalid as
placid as before this ceremony,  though fully convinced

VOL.  VII.  Y

322 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX.

it was meant as the annunciation of his expected and
approaching departure.

Dr.  Elloi now came not only every day,  but almost
every hour of the day,  to obtain another interview;
but my beloved,  though pleased that the meeting had
taken place,  expressed no desire for its repetition.  I
w^as cruelly distressed;  the fear of doing wrong has
been always the leading principle of my internal gui-
dance, and here I felt incompetent to judge what was
right.  Overpowered,  therefore,  by my own inability to
settle that point,  and my terror lest I should mistake
it,  I ceased to resist;  and Dr.  Elloi,  while my patient
was sleeping from opium,  glided into his chamber,
and knelt down by the bed side with his Prayer Book
in his hand.  Two hours this lasted;  but when the
doctor informed me he had obtained the Generals
promise that he should administer to him the last
Sacrament,  the preparations were made accordingly,
and I only entreated leave to be present.

This solemn communion,  at which I have never in
our own church attended with unmoistened eyes,  was
administered the same evening.  The dear invalid was
in bed ;  his head raised with difficulty,  he went through
this ceremony with spirits calm,  and a countenance and
voice of holy composure.

Thenceforth he talked openly,  and almost solely,  of
his approaching dissolution,  and prepared for it by
much silent mental prayer.  He also poured forth his
soul in counsel for Alexander and myself.  I now-
dared no longer oppose to him my hopes of his

1819]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  323

recovery ;  the season was too awful.  I heard him only
with deluges of long-restrained tears,  and his generous
spirit seemed better satisfied in thinking me now
awakened to a sense of his danger^  as preparatory for
supporting its consequence.

''  Parle de moi  /"  He said,  afterwards,  "  Parle —
et^  souvent.  Surtout a Alexandre ;  qu il ne m'oubHe
pas !"

"  Je ne parlerai pas d'autre chose  !"  I answered  .  .  .
and I felt his tender purpose.  He knew how I forbore
ever to speak of my lost darling sister,  and he thought
the constraint injurious both to my health and spirits  :
he wished to change my mode with regard to himself
by an injunction of his own.  '•^  Nous ne parlerons pas
d'autre chose  !"  I added,  "  Mon Ami ! — mon Ami ! —
Je ne survivrai que pour cela !"  He looked pleased,
and with a calm that taught me to repress my too
orreat emotion.

He then asked for Alexander,  embraced him warmly,
and half raising himself with a strength that had
seemed extinct but the day before,  he took a hand of
Alexander and one of mine,  and putting them together
between both his own,  he tenderly pressed them,  ex-
claiming, "  How happy I am !  ....  I fear I am too
happy  !"....

Kindest of human hearts!  His hajipiness was in
seeinof-  us together ere he left us ;  his fear was lest he
should too keenly regret the quitting us !

From the time that my dearly beloved had received
the last Sacrament,  and made his confession,  his mind
was perfectly at ease with respect to all public offices

y 2

324 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

of relig-ion  ;  tlic religion of his heart and of liis faitli
v.as often,  nay,  continually,  at  ^vo^k in prayer and
pious meditation.  Dr.  Elloi,  however,  and Madame
de S ,  wera incessant in their demands for admis-
sion and further ceremonies  ;  and with such urgency
of remonstrance,  that at length I could not answer to
myself further resistance without layinf^  the case once
more before my poor invalid.  This Avas a barbarous
task ;  I saw him devoutly at rest with God and man,
a.nd I was miserable lest I should risk shaking his
settled spiritual calm;  but he readily and instantly
answered,  "  J'ai recu les saints sacremens;  je me suis
confesse, — je n'ai rien en arriere!  Ainsi il me semble
— si moi j'etois Madame d'Arblay,  je dirois tout bon-
iiement,  que j'avois fait tout ce que Ton m'avait de-
mande des le commencement,  et que Ton doit se
contenter."

Thus strengthened,  I sent them word that I had
complied with all their original requests ;  but that,  a
Protestant myself,  zealously and upon principle,  they
must not expect me to make a persecution for the per-
formance of a Catholic rite that might impede all chance
of restoration by its appalling solemnities.

At this time he saw for a few minutes my dear sister
Esther and her Maria,  who had always been a great
favourite with him.  When they retired,  he called upon
me to bow my knees as he dropped upon his own,  that
he might receive,  he said,  my benediction,  and that we
might fervently and solemnly join in prayer to Almighty
God for each other.  He then  [consigned himself to
uninterrupted meditation  ;  he told me not to utter one

1819]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         325

Avorcl to liim,  even of reply,  beyond the most laconic
necessity.  He desired tlmt wlien I brought him his
medicine or nutriment,  I would give it without speech
and instantly retire;  and take care that no human
being addressed or approached him.  This awfid com-
mand lasted unbroken during the rest of the evening,
the whole of the night,  and nearly the following day.
So concentrated in himself he desired to be  ! — yet
always as free from irritation as from despondence —
always gentle and kind even when taciturn,  and even
Avhen in torture.

When the term of his meditative seclusion seemed
to be over,  I found him speaking with Alexander,  and
pouring into the bosoin of his w^eeping son the balm of
parental counsel and comfort.  I received at this time
a letter from my affectionate sister Charlotte,  pressing
for leave to come and aid me to nurse my dearest in-
valid. He took the letter and pressed it to his lips,
saying,  "  Je Taime bien;  dis le lui.  Et elle m'aime."
But I felt that she could do me no good.  We had a
nurse whose skill made her services a real blessing;
and for myself,  woe,  such as he believed approaching,
surpassed all aid but from prayer and from heaven —
lonely meditation.

When the morning dawned,  he ordered Payne to
open the shutters and to undraw the curtains.  The
prospect from the windows facing his bed was pic-
turesque, lively,  lovely  :  he looked at it with a bright
smile of admiration,  and cast his arm over his noble
brow,  as if hailing one more return of clay,  and light,

326 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX.

and life with those he loved.  But when,  in the course
of the da}',  somethin^r broke from me of my reverence

at his heavenly resignation, ^^  Redgnef he

repeated,  with a melancholy half smile;  ^'mais  .  .  .  .
comme ga  /"  and then in a voice of tenderness
the most touching,  he added,  "  Te quitter I "  I
dare not,  even yet,  hang upon my emotion at those
words !

That night passed in tolerable tranquillity,  and
without alarm,  his pulse still always equal and good,
though smaller.  On Sunday,  the fatal 3rd of Maj%
my patient was still cheerful,  and slept often,  but not
long.  This circumstance was delightful to my observa-
tion, and kept off the least suspicion that my misery
could be so near.

My pen lingers now  ! — reluctant to finish the little
that remains.

About noon,  gently awaking from a slumber,  he
called to me for some beverage,  but was weaker than
usual,  and could not hold the cup.  I moistened his
lips with a spoon several times.  He looked at me
with sweetness inexpressible,  and pathetically said,
"  Qui  ....?"  He stopped,  but I sav/  he meant
"  Who shall return this for yon  ?*'  I instantly answered
to his obvious and most touching meaning,  by a
cheerful exclamation of  "  You  !  my dearest Ami !  You
yourself !  You shall recover,  and take your revenge.'*
He smiled,  but shut his eyes in silence.

Thus ever awake was his tender solicitude for me  !
— and in the midst of all his sufferings,  his intellects

1819]  OF THE AUTHOR _0F EVELINA.  327

had a clearness^  nay,  a brightness,  that seemed as if
already they were refined from the dross of worldly
imperfection.

After this,  he bent forward^  as he was supported
nearly upright by pillows in his bed  ....  and taking
my hand,  and holding it between both his own,  he im-
pressively said,  ''  Je ne sais si ce sera le dernier mot
.  .  .  mais ce sera la derniere pensee — Notre reunion .'"
....  Oh,  words the most precious that ever the
tenderest of husbands left for balm to the lacerated
heart of a surviving wife !  I fastened my lips on his
loved hands,  but spoke not.  It was not then that
those words were my blessing  !  They aw^ed — they
thrilled — more than they solaced me.  How little knew
I then that he should speak to me no more  !

Towards evening I sat watching in my arm-chair,
and Alex,  remained constantly with me.  His sleep was
so calm,  that an hour passed in which I indulged the
hope that a favourable crisis was arriving ;  that a turn
would take place by which his vital powers would be
restored but  ....  when the hour was suc-
ceeded b}"  another hour,  when I saw a universal still-
ness in the whole frame,  such as seemed to stagnate all
around,  I began to be strangely moved.  ''  Alex.  !  "  I
whispered,  "this sleep is critical!    a crisis arrives!

Pray God— Almighty God  !— that it be fav ."     I

could not proceed.  Alex,  looked aghast,  but firm.  I
sent him to call Payne.  I intimated to her my opinion
that this sleep was important,  but kept a composure
astonishing,  for when no one would give me encourage-

328 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IX.

mexit,  T compelled myself to appear not to want it,  to
deter them from glvin<^  me despair.

Another hour passed of concentrated feelings,  of
breathless dread.

His fiice had still its unruffled serenit}',  but me-
thouglit the hands were turning cold ;  I covered them  ;
I watched over the head of my beloved;  I took new
flannel to roll over his feet ;  the stillness grew more
awful ;  the shin became colder.

Alex.,  my dear Alex.,  proposed calling in Mr.
Tudor,  and ran off for him.

I leant over him now with sal volatile to his temple,
his forehead,  the palms of his hands,  but I had no
courage to feel his pulse,  to touch his lips.

Mr.  Tudor came ;  he put his hand upon the heart,
the noblest of hearts,  and pronounced that all was over  !

How I bore this is still marvellous to me  !  I had
always believed such a sentence w^ould at once have
killed me.  But his sight — the sight of his stillness,
kept me from distraction !  Sacred he appeared,  and
his stillness I thought should be mine,  and be in-
violable.

I suffered certainly a partial derangement,  for I cannot
to this moment recollect anything that now succeeded,
with truth or consistency  :  my memory paints things
that were necessarily real,  joined to others that could
not possibly have happened,  yet so amalgamates the
whole together as to render it impossible for me to
separate truth from indefinable,  unaccountable fiction.

Even to this instant I always see the room itself

J 818]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  329

charged with a medley of silent and strange figures
grouped against the wall just opposite to me.  Mr.
Tudor,  methought,  was come to drag me by force
away  ;  and in this persuasion,  which w^as false,  I re-
mem.ber supplicating him to grant me but one hour,
telling him I had solemnly engaged myself to pass it
in watching

Eut why go back to my grief?  Even yet,  at times,
it seems as fresh as ever,  and at all times weighs on
me with a feeling that seems stagnating the springs of
life.  But for Alexander — our Alexander  ! — I think I
could hardly have survived.  His tender sympath}',
wit^  his claims to niv love,  and the solemn injunctions
^liL i me to preserve for him,  and devote to him,  my
remnant of life — these,  through the Divine mercy,  sus-
tained me.

May that mercy,  w^ith its best blessings,  daily in-
crease his resemblance to his noble father.

March 20,  1S20.

Extracts from Pocket-Book Diary.

May 17,1818.

This melancholy second Sunday since my irreparable
loss I ventured to church.  I hoped it might calm my
mind and subject it to its new state — its lost — lost
happiness.  But I suffered inexpressibly  ;  I sunk on
my i^nces,  and could scarcely contain my sorrows —
scarcely rise any more  !  but I prayed — fervently — and
I am glad I made the trial,  however severe.  Oh mon
ami I mon tendre ami !  if you looked down  !  if that be

330 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IX.

permitted,  how benignly will you wish my participation
in A'our blessed relief!

Mr.  JFilherforce to Madame iX Arhlay.

Near London,  May 18,  1818.

My dear  ]Madam,

It is perhaps well for you,  as well as for me,  that
I happen to be so extremely straitened for time,  that it
is next to impossible for me to detain you for more
than two or three minutes  ;  for otherwise,  the con-
sciousness I feel that I am taking I fear an unwarrant-
able liberty,  would probably lead me into a prolixity
at once distressing to you and injurious to myself,  in
consequence of a complaint in my ejx's of some months'
continuance,  w^hich allows me to write very little  (ex-
cept by an amanuensis),  and scarcely to read at all.

I think,  however,  that you would do justice to the
friendly motive which prompts me to beg leave to put
into your hands a sweet little piece,*  written many
years ago,  by a friend of mine now no more,  a man of
talents,  learning,  and piety,  but to which,  as it has
attracted little notice,  you are probably a stranger.  J
am encouraged to speak favourably of it by remember-
ing that the last Archbishop of Canterbury thanked
me,  under the erroneous impression that I had sent it
to him,  for having introduced him to a little tract from
which,  as he said,  he had derived comfort and he hoped
benefit also.

*  Cecil's Friendly Visit to the House of Mourning.

1818]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  331

I hope I need not assure you that after the kindness
with which you treated me during our too short per-
sonal intercourse,  I could not but take an interest in
what so materially concerned you as the melancholy
event which lately happened  ;  and cordially wishing
that it may please God to support you under the
severe blow his Providence has inflicted,  and to render
it,  under that gracious influence,  which,  we are assured
in Holy Writ,  educes good out of evil,  ultimately even to
your own judgment a kindness,  and conducive to your
spiritual improvement and your never-ending happi
ness,  is the sincere wish of.

My dear Madam,
Once more apologizing for my liberty.
Yours very truly,

W.   WiLBERFORCE.

Monday,  May 30th. — I had a long,  affectionate,  and

affecting letter from my friend,   Mrs.  S — —  B .

My excellent friend.  Miss  '^  *  *  ^^  ^vho still lives to
occasional revivals of kind remembrance,  heard and
understood the calamity with which 1 have been visited,
and pronounced  "  God help her !  no one else can  !"
Who,  in the proudest day of unclouded intellect,  could
speak more truly  ?

Sunday,  May 3lsf. — This was the fourth Sunday
passed since 1 have seen and heard and been blessed
with the presence of my angel husband.  Oh loved and
honoured daily more and more  !  Yet how can that be  ?
No  !  even now,  in this cruel hour of regret and mourn-
ing it cannot be !  for Love and Honour could rise no

332 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IX.

liiglicr tlian mine have risen long-,  long since,  in my
happiest days.

June 3)yL — This day,  this 3rd of June,  completes a
calendar month since I lost the beloved object of all
my tcnderest affections,  and all my views and hopes
and even ideas of happiness on earth.

Yesterday Dr.  Elloi,  who administered the last Sa-
crament to my beloved husband,  sent to desire an in-
terview. I received him with the profound respect I
owe to one who had performed that last holy office,  and
I prevailed with him to take the disposal of the appro-
priated sum to dispose of in charity.  I feel sure he
will do it faithfully and piously.

June 7th. — The fifth sad Sunday this of earthly sepa-
ration !  oh heavy,  heavy parting !  I w^ent again to
church.  I think it right,  and I find it rather conso-
latory— rather only,  for the effort against sudden risings
of violent grief at peculiar passages almost destroys
me  ;  and no prayers do me the service I receive from
those I continually offer up in our apartment — by the
side of the bed on which he breathed forth his last
blessing.  Oh words for ever dear!  for ever balsamic!
*•'  Je ne sais si ce sera le dernier mot :  mais ce sera bieii
la derniere i^ensee — Notre reunion V

Thursday,  June Wth. — Good Dr.  Elloi again spent
the morning with me.  We were chiefly tete-a-tete,  Alex,
having w^dked out.  The worthy man,  with many gen-
tle apologies,  entered upon religious topics.  I heard
him with real reverence,  but took the first opportunity
to let him see clearly that I was a hopeless subject as a
convert;  that I was a Protestant upon principle,   and

1818]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        333

that such I should remain.  He openly regretted not
having had opportunity to instil into the spirit of my
departed angel a desire to charge his son to follow the
Roman Catholic faith and practice.  Witli equal open-
ness I assured him that he was so far from,  adverse to
Protestantism that he had consented freely to his
son's choice of entering the ecclesiastical state of the
Churchof England  ;  and added,  that such was his high
integrity,  that had he thought our religion unscriptural,
he would have preferred beholding his son a beggar
to lifting him to a throne by means unfitting.  But
he was himself a Catholic because so born and so bred,
without having weighed or considered the difference
between the two religions,  which difference to him ap-
peared merely to consist in forms.

June  \^th. — Mrs. spent an hour with me this

evening.  She tried to enliven,  and therefore doubly
saddened me.  How few have hearts or comprcJicnsion
to aid the sick of soul !

With Alex,  read part of St.  Mark's Gospel.

Friday,  June I9th. — My oldest friend to my know-
ledge living,  Mrs.  Frances Bowdler,  made a point of
admission this morning,  and stayed with me two hours.
She was friendly and good,  and is ever sensible and
deeply clever.  Could I enjoy society,  she would en-
liven and enlighten it,  but I now can only enjoy sym-
pathy ! — sympathy and pity  !

Alex,  and I had both letters from M.  de la Fayette.

Tuesday,  June 23rd. — To-day I have written my first
letter since my annihilated happiness — to my tenderly
sympathising Charlotte.     I covet a junction with that

334 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

dear and partial sister for ending together our latter
days.     I ho])e we shall bring it to bear.

With Alex,  read part of St.  Luke.

Monday,  June 29th. — To-day I sent a letter,  long in
writing and painfully finished,  to my own dear Madame
de Maisonneuve.  She will be glad to see my hand,
o^rieved as she will be at what it has written.

With Alex,  read part of St.  Luke.

Tuesday,  30fh. — I wrote — with many sad struggles
— to Madame BeckersdorfF,  my respectful devoirs to her
Majest}^  with the melancholy apology for ray silence
during the Royal nuptials of the Dukes of Clarence,
Kent,  and Cambridge :  and upon the departure of
dear Princess Eliza,  and upon her Majesty's so frequent
and alarming attacks of ill health.

With Alex,  read the Acts of the Apostles.

JVednesday,  1st July. — Frances Bowdler had the kind-
ness to come again from Lansdowne this hot morning
to pass an hour or two wdth me in good and religious
discourse.

With Alex,  finished the Acts of the Apostles.

Saturday,  July 4th. — Received my sister Burney,
and aimed at being comprehended in my own distinc-
tion between sorrow^ — deep,  indelible — and repining.
I hope I a little succeeded;  for her eyes moistened
with affectionate compassion.

With Alex.  I have read St.  Paul's Epistle to the
Romans,  the Epistles 1st and 2nd to the Corinthians,
to the Thessalonians  ;  those to the Philippians,  Gala-
tians,  Ephesians,  Colossians^  to Timothy the 1st and
2nd j to the Hebrews.

1818]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        335

Jiihj 7t]i. — I received the good Dr.  Elloi,  and more
and more I am pleased with him,  and his conversation
and sentiments.  He sees me fixed in my rehgion,  iind
no longer attempts shaking it;  but he does not,  there-
fore, give me up or contemn me.  He discourses in a
truly Christian style,  as conceiving the path of salva-
tion open to both rehgions.

Read with Alex,  the Epistle of St.  James  ;  the first
and second of Peter.

Wednesday,  July Sth. — A letter from my dearly
loved Madame de Maisonneuve,  with tenderest solicitude
for my desolate anguish !  Ah,  sweet friend  !  though
never blessed with knowing how I am stricken,  thy
feeling and penetrating heart was made for just such
enjoyment and just such misery !  Yet I envy not thy
escape  !  I would not lose my remembrance of my long
possessed happiness to be spared even my actual woe 1
No,  my beloved,  no  !   I am thine in sorrow^  as in joy!

Alex,  these last two days has read to mc Isaiah.

I have given to Alex,  the decision of where
we shall dwell.  Unhappy myself everywhere,  why
not leave unshackled his dawning life  ?  To quit
Bath — unhappy Bath ! — he had long desired  :  and,
finally,  he has fixed his choice in the very capital itself.
I cannot hesitate to obliae him.

August 2Sth. — My admirable old friend,  jNIrs.  Frances
Bowdler,  spent the afternoon with me.  Probably we shall
meet no more  ;  but judiciously,  as suits lier enlightened
understandings and kind!}',  as accords with her long
yjartiality,   she forborc any hint on that point.     Yet

336 DIAIIV AND LETTERS  [ParT IX.

her eyes swam in tears,  not ordinary to lier,  when she
bade me adieu.

August 30th. — The seventeenth week's sun rises on
my deplorable change  !  A very hind,  cordial,  bro-
therly letter,  arrives from my dear James.  An idea of
comfort begins to steal its way to my mind,  in renewing
my intercourse with this worthy brother,  who feels for
me,  I see,  with sincerity and affection.

September 5th. — A letter from Dowager Lady Har-
court,  on the visibly approaching dissolution of my
dear honoured Royal mistress  !  written by desire of my
beloved Princess Mary,  Duchess of Gloucester,  to save
me the shock of surprise,  added to that of grief.

Sunday,  August 6th. — A fresh renewal to me of woe
is every returning week !  The eighteenth this of the
dread solitude of my heart ;  and miserably has it
passed,  augmenting sorrow weighing it in the approach-
ing loss of my dear Queen  !

Again I took the Sacrament at the Octagon,  pro-
bably for the last time.  Oh,  how earnest were ray
prayers for re-union in a purer world I

Prayers were offered for a person lying dangerously
ill.  I thought of the Queen^  and prayed for her fer-
vently.

Sunday,  September 27th. — This day,  the twenty-first
Sunday of my bereavement,  Alexander,  I trust,  is
ordained a deacon of the Church of England.  Heaven
propitiate his entrance  !  I wrote to the good Bishop of
Salisbury to beseech his pious wishes on this opening
of clerical life.

1818]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        337

September 28th. — Still my preparations to depart from
Bath take up all of time that grief does iiot seize irre-
sistibly ;  for,  oh !  what anguish overwhelms my soul
in quitting the place where last he saw and blessed
me ! — the room,  the spot on which so softly,  so holily,
yet so tenderly,  he embraced me,  and breathed his
last!

Wednesday,  September SOth. — This morning I left
Bath with feelings of profound affliction  ;  yet,  re-
flecting that hope was ever open — that future union
may repay this laceration — oh,  that my torn soul could
more look forward with sacred aspiration !  Then better
would it support its w^eight of woe  !

My dear James received me with tender pity;  so did
his good wife,  son,  and daughter.

Tuesday,  October 6th. — My dear Alexander left me
this morning for Cambridge.  How shall I do,  thus
parted from both !  My kind brother,  and his worthy
house,  have softened off the day much ;  yet I sigh for
seclusion — my mind labours under the weight of as-
sumed sociability.

Thursday,  October Sth. — I came this evening to my
new and probably last dwelling,  No.  11,  Bolton-street,
Piccadilly.  My kind James conducted me.  Oh,  how
heavy is my forlorn heart !  I have made myself very
busy all day;  so only could I have supported this first
opening to my baleful desolation  !  No adored husband I
No beloved son!  But the latter is only at Cambridge.
Ah!  let me strugfcrle to think more of the other,  the first,
the chief,  as also only removed from my sight by a
transitory journey !

VOL.  VII.  z

338 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

Wednesday,  October lith. — Wrote to my — erst —
dearest friend,  Mrs.  Piozzi.  I can never forget my
long love for her,  and many obligations to her friend-
ship, strangely as she had been estranged since her
marriage.

Friday,  Oct.  SOth. — A letter from my loved Madame
de  ]\Iaisonneuve,  full of feeling,  sense,  sweetness,  inform-
ation to beguile me back to life,  and ofj sympathy to
open my sad heart to friendship.

Saturday,  Nov.  1th. — A visit from the excellent Har-
riet Bowdler,  who gave me an hour of precious society,
mingling her commiserating sympathy with hints sage
and right of the duty of revival from every stroke of
heaven.

Oh,  my God,  Saviour  !  To thee may I turn more and
more !

Tuesday,  Nov.  I7th. — This day,  at one o'clock,
breathed her last the inestimable Queen of England.
Heaven rest and bless her soul !

Sketch of Queen Charlottes Character ,  from a Memo-
randum Book of Madame d^Arhlay.

Her understanding was of the best sort  -,  for while it
endued her with powers to form a judgment of all
around her,  it pointed out to her the fallibility of ap-
pearances, and thence kept her always open to con-
viction where she had been led by circumstances into
mistake.

From the time of my first entrance into her house-

1818]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        339

hold her manner to me was most kind and encouraging,
for she had formed her previous opinion from the
partial accounts of my beloved Mrs.  Delany.  She saw
that,  impressed with real respect for her character,  and
never-failing remembrance of her rank,  she might
honour me with confidence without an apprehension of
imprudence,  invite openness without incurring freedom,
and manifest kindness without danger of encroach-
ment.

If INIrs.  Delany's goodness made her trust me,  my
own interior view of her made the trust reciprocal,  for
I had the firmest reliance,  not alone on her prudence,
but on her honour,  which was so inviolate,  it might
justly be called religious.

When I was alone with her she discarded all royal
constraint,  all stiffness,  all formality,  all pedantry of
grandeur,  to lead me to speak to her with openness
and ease ;  but any inquiries which she made in our
tete-a-tetes never awakened an idea of prying into
affairs,  diving into secrets,  discovering views,  inten-
tions, or latent wishes,  or causes.  No,  she was above
all such minor resources for attaining inteUigence ;
what she desired to know she asked openly,  though
cautiously if of grave matters,  and pla3'fully if of mere
news or chit-chat,  but always beginning with,  "  If
there is any reason I should not be told,  or any that
you should not tell,  don't answer me."  Nor were
these w^ords of course,  they were spoken with such
visible sincerity,  that I have availed myself of them
fearlessly,  though never without regret,  as it was a de-

z 2

340 DIARV AND LETTERS  [PaUT IX.

light to mc to be explicit and confidential in return
for her condescension.  But whenever she saw a ques-
tion painful,  or that it occasioned even hesitation,  she
promptly and generously started some other subject.

Wednesday,  Dec.  2nd. — The Queen,  the excellent
exemplary Queen,  was this day interred in the vault of
her royal husband's ancestors,  to moulder like his sub-
jects, hodihj into dust ;  but mentally,  not so  !  She will
live in the memory of those who knew her best,  and be
set up as an example even by those who only after her
death know,  or at least aclinoidedge^  her virtues.

I heard an admirable sermon on her departure and
her character from Mr.  Repton in St.  James's Church.
I wept the whole time,  as much from gratitude and
tenderness to hear her thus appreciated as from grief
at her loss — to me a most heavy one !  for she was
faithfully,  truly,  and solidly attached to me,  as I
to her.

Saturday,  Dec.  12tli. — A letter from the Duchess of
Gloucester,  to my equal gratification and surprise.  She
has deigned to answer my poor condolence the very
moment,  as she says,  that she received it.  Touched to
the heart,  but no longer with pleasure in any emotion,
I wept abundantly.

Saturday,  I9th, — Yesterday was the twenty-fourth
birthday of my dear fatherless Alex. !  Oh,  how far
from a day of gratulation,  as for twenty-three years has
been its other anniversaries  !

Dec.  2Dth,  Christmas Day. — Oh,  most melancholy!
My Alex. — who alone gives me a sense of life — for all

1818]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         341

ethers that I love arc dispersed,  Alex,  left me for
Richmond.  I favoured his goiiiij,  yet what am I  ^vith-
oiit him  ?

I took the Sacrament from the Reverend and excel-
lent Dr.  Andrews.  Oh,  how was I affected at his siorht
and the sound of his voice I He knew,  and highly
esteemed,  my beloved.     I wept at the altar irresistibly.

PART X.

1819-1840.

Alexander d'Arblay ordained a priest by the Bishop of Chester —
Visit to Princess Augusta — Letter to Mr.  Wilberforce — His reply
-while forwarding his work — Return of Queen Caroline to England
— Her extraordinary conduct — Anticipations of insurrection —
Letter from Mrs.  Piozzi — Dr.  Burney's verses on October — Feli-
citations on Mrs.  Piozzi's birth-day— Old friends — TheS.  S. — Ma-
terials for a bonfire — Submarine mine at Botallock — Streatham
Park — The Welshman in Calabria— Mrs.  Piozzi opens a ball on her
eightieth birthday — Comparison between her and Madame de Stael
— Her death  —  Madame d'Arblay's early recollections of her sister
— Pacchierotti's latter days — The Reverend Alexander d'Arblay
named preacher for the fifth Sunday in Lent — Madame d'Arblay's
failing health — She destroys confidential letters — Sir Walter Scott
pays her a visit — Her Memoir of her Father — Letter respecting
this work from the Bishop of Limerick and Mr.  Southey — Rev.
Alexander d'Arblay nominated minister of Ely Chapel — Is taken
ill — His death — Madame d'Arblay's affliction — Her increased de-
bility—  Her death  —  Observations on her character and dis-
position.

1819]        DIARY OF THE AUTHOR OF EVl;LI^'A.  345

PART X.

1819.

Simdai/,  April 11. — This morning my dearest Alex-
ander was ordained a priest by the Bishop of Chester
in St.  James's Church.  I went thither with my good
EHz.  Ramsay,  and from the gallery witnessed the
ceremon)'.  Fifty-two were ordained at the same time.
I fervently pray to God that my son may meet this his
decided calling with a disposition and conduct to sanc-
tion its choice!  and with virtues to merit his noble
father's name and exemplary character  !  Amen  !  Amen I

TJau'sday,  July 15. — A message from H.  R.  H.
Princess Augusta,  with Avhom I passed a mornhig as
nearly delightful as any,  now,  can be  !  She played
and sang to me airs of her own composing — uncon-
scious, medley reminiscences,  but very pretty,  and
prettily executed.  I met the Duke of York,  who
greeted me most graciously ;  saying,  as if with regret,
how long it was since he had seen me.

In coming away,  1 met,  in the corridor,  my sweet
Duchess of Gloucester,  who engaged me for next
Sunday to herself.

Monday,  26th. — Her Royal Highness presented me
to the Duke,  whom I found well-bred,  poHte,  easy,
unassuming,  and amiable;  kind,  not condescending.

346 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Pakt X.

liolton Street,  Berkeley Square,  Nov.  12,  1819.

*  *  *  *  I MYSELF,  to whom liappincss in this nether
sphere is cut off for ever,  am now beginning,  or rather
trying to begin,  to drag myself out of my seclusion,
from the earnest representations of my family and
friends,  and  ....  far,  far more from the agitating im-
patience of Alexander,  who thinks that my retirement
is killing to myself,  while it is cruel to him.

Such motives there is no obstinately withstanding :
for,  though I have withstood them so long,  it has been
from incapacity to do otherwise,  almost as much as
from repugnance.  Time,  even in a woe like mine,
w^ears away^  through the operations of religion and of
resignation,  the acutencss of grief: — but the weight of
sadness,  the sick heaviness of a wholly changed inside,
Time itself,  with all its aids and all its concomitants,
never can wear away.  I have a constant feeling as if
half my internal composition were transmuted to literal
lead.

Madame cVArblay to W.  Wilberforce,  Esq.,  M.P,

January 25,  1820.

Nearly on the commencement of the dread visitation
which on the 3rd of May,  1818,  tore up by the root my
earthly happiness,  Mr.  Wilberforce,  ever watchfully
alive to promote the cause of Religion,  and soothe
himself in soothing others,  had the kindness to send
me a pious tract,  to aid me to support a blow,  the
weight of which he is amongst the very fcw^  that I
believe capable of even conceiving  ; — for my bereave-

1820]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         347

meiit can only be fairly judged by such as have some
criterion by which to know what is  (human)  excellence.
No insensibility to your kindness occasioned my si-
lence ;  on the contrary,  it was balsamic to me  ;  but

I had no spirit to tell you so !    I could not urge

myself to write  :  and afterwards,  when better able,  I
was distressed how to make my tardy apology.

Is it not now^  more tardy still  ?  you will ask. — Yes ;
but extremes are so ever prone to meet,  that your
felicity at this moment seems oftering its hand to my
sorrow  :  and I cannot recollect how you felt for my
affliction,  without experiencing a kindred feeling for
what,  I hope,  is your joy.  Forgive then,  1 entreat,
both my long taciturnity and its abrupt cessation,  and
accept my cordial wishes that this young lady may
merit the high distinction of being brought under such
a paternal roof — et cest tout dire.
And believe me,  dear Sir,

With the truest sentiments of esteem.
Yours very sincerel}^,

r.  d'Arblav.

Mr.  Wilherforce to Madame dHArhlay.

Kensington Gore,  Feb.  10,  1820.

My dear Madam,

Though a complaint in my eyes allows me to write
but little,  and scarcely to read at all,  I must take the
pen into my own hand from that of my amanuensis,  in
order to return you my cordial thanks for your kind
congratulations.     It was kind also to do justice to the

348 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT X.

motive which prompted the freedom I used with you
formerl}'',  for to you I need not remark,  that it rcquiies
more real good will to like to receive an act of kind-
ness, than to do it.

My dear Madam,  may you be led by the loss of
earthly comforts to seek more solicitously for that
heavenly treasure which will never deserve the cha-
racter of deceitful riches,  and which,  when we do
endeavour after it in the prescribed way,  we shall never
fail to obtain.

I am disposed,  you will perhaps think,  to presume
on the kind construction you put on my last little
present,  by begging your acceptance of my own re-
ligious publication.  I assure you unaffectedly,  that no
one is more sensible than myself of its faults as a
composition.  But perhaps the middle and latter part
of it may not be unworthy of your perusal,  from the
sentiments they contain.

]\Iy work was written for the purpose of explaining
to a numerous circle of friends the cause of a great
change which they witnessed in my course of life  ;  and
to some,  I bless God,  it has been made useful.

Cordially wishing you that peace which religion,  or
rather the divine cordials of which true religion speaks,
can alone impart,

I remain,  my dear  ^ladam,

Yours sincerely,

W.  WlLBERFORCE.

[An interval of four months elapsed between the pre-
ceding and following letters,   during which the mind

1820]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         349

of Madame d'Arblay became more resigned to licr
great affliction.  At this time the public attention was
much occupied by the return of Queen Caroline,  to
which event Madame d'Arblay alludes in the following-
letter.]

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Loclt.

Wednesday,  June 7,  1S20.
*****

**>!'*  ^jL London now is wild about the newly
arrived royal traveller.*  As she is in this neighbour-
hood, our part of the town is surprised and startled
every other hour by the arrival of some new group of
the curious rushing on to see her and her  'squire the
Alderman,  at their balcony.  Her  'squire,  also,  now
never comes forth unattended b}^  a vociferous shouting
multitude.  I suppose Augusta,  who resides still nearer
to the dame and the  'squire of dames,  is recreated in
this lively way yet more forcibly.

The 15th of this month is to be kept as King's
hirthday at Court.  Orders have been issued to the
Princesses to that effect,  and to tell them they must
appear entirely out of mourning.  They had already
made vip dresses for half mourning,  of white and black.
I should not marvel if the royal traveller should choose
to enter the apartments,  and offer her congratulations
upon the festival.

*  Queen Caroline.

350 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

Madame cVArhlay to Mrs.  Lock.

Elliot Vale,  London,  August 15,  1820.

How long it seems

"  Seems,  Madam  !  nay,  it is  !"' —

since I have heard from my most loved friend  ! — I
have had,  however,  I thank Heaven,  news of her,  and
cheering news,  though I have lost sight of both her

dear daughters :

*  *  *  *  *

We are all,  and of all classes,  all opinions,  all ages,
and all parties,  absolutely ahsorhed by the expectation
of Thursday.  The Queen has passed the bottom of our
street twice this afternoon in an open carriage,  with
Lady Ann and Alderman Wood ! — How very in-
conceivable that among so many adherents^  she can
find that only Esquire  ! — And why she should have any,
in her own carriage and in London,  it is not easy to
say.  There is a universal alarm for Thursday  ;  the
letter to the King breathes battle direct to both
Houses of Parliament as much as to His Majesty.
Mr.  Wilberforce is called upon,  and looked up to,  as
the only man in the dominions to whom an arbitration
should belong.  Lord John Russell positively asserts
that it is not with Lord Castlereagh and the Ministers
that conciliation or non-conciliation hang,  but with
Mr.  Wilberforce and his circle.  If I dared hope such
was the case,  how much less should I be troubled by
the expectance awakened for to-morrow — it is now Wed-
nesday that I finish my poor shabby billet.  Tremen-
dous is the general alarm at this moment;    for the

1820]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         351

accused turns accuser,  public and avowed,  of King-,
Lords,  and Commons,  declaring she will submit to no
award of any of them.

What would she say should evidence be imperfect or
wanting,  and they should acquit her  ?

It is,  however,  open war,  and very dreadful.  She
really invokes a revolution in every paragraph of her
letter to her Sovereign and lord and husband.

I know not what sort of conjugal rule will be looked
for by the hitherto Lords and Masters of the World,
if this conduct is abetted by them.

Lord K.  being past seventy,  is exempt from the
appel ;  but though fearful of the heat and crowd,  he
will stay the first two days to prove his loyalty,  if ne-
cessary ;  and at all events,  to fulfil his duty as a peer
in attending the opening of this great and frightful
cause  :  and then retire to his magnificent new building
in Scotland.

The heroine passed by the bottom of our street
yesterday,  in full pomp and surrounded with shouters
and vociferous admirers.  She now dresses superbly
every day,  and has always six horses and an open car-
riage. She seems to think now she has no chance but
from insurrection,  and therefore all her harangues in-
vite it.  Oh Dr.  Parr ! — how my poor brother would
have blushed for him !  he makes these orations with
the aid of Cobbett ! — and the council,  I suppose.  Of
course,  like Croaker in  "  The Goodnatured Man,"  I
must finish with  "  1 wish we may all be well this day
three months  ! "

352 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PakT X.

From Mrs.  Piozzi to Madame cTArhlay.

Bath,  October 20.

It was A'ery gratifying,  dear Madam,  to find myself so
Ivindly remembered,  and with all my heart I thank you
for your letter.  My family are gone to Sandgate for the
purpose of bathing in the sea,  this wonderfully beau-
tiful October ;  and were you not detained in London
by such a son as I hear you are happy in,  I should wish
you there too.  Apropos to October,  I have not your
Father's admirable verses upon that month;  those
upon June,  I saw when last in Wales  ;  could you get
me the others  ?  it would be such a fcivoar,  and you used
to like them best.

How changed is the taste of verse,  prose,  and paint-
ing !  since le hon vieux temps,  dear Madam  !  Nothing
attracts us but what terrifies,  and is within — if within
— a hair's breadth of positive disgust.  The picture of
Death on his Pale Horse,  however,  is very grand cer-
tainly— and some of the strange things they ivrite
remind me of Squoire Richard's visit to the Tower
Menagerie,  when he says  "  Odd,  they are jmre grim
devils," — particularly a wild and hideous tale called
Frankenstein.  Do you ever see any of the friends we
used to live among  ?  ]Mrs.  Lambart is yet alive,  and in
prosperous circumstances  ;  and Fell,  the Bookseller in
Bond Street,  told me a fortnight or three weeks ago,
that Miss Streatfield lives where she did in his neigh-
bourhood,—Clifford Street,  S.  S.  still.

Old Jacob and his red night -cap are the only live
creatures,  as an Irishman would sav,  that come about

1820]       OF THH AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        353

me of those you remember,  and death alone will part
lis, — he and I both lived longer with Mr.  Piozzi than
we had done with Mr.  Thrale.

Arcndeacon Thomas is,  I think,  the only friend you
and I have now quite in common :  he gets well ;  and
if there was hope of his getting clear from entangle-
ment, he would be young again, — he is a valuable
mortal.

Adieu !  Leisure for men of business,  you know,  a7id
hisijicss for men of leisure,  would cure many com-
plaints.

Once more.  Farewell !  and accept my thanks for your
good-natured recollection of poor

H.  L.  P.

Madame d'Arhlay to Mrs.  Piozzi.

Bolton Street,  December 15,  1S20.

Now at last,  dear Madam,  with a real pen I venture
to answer your kind acceptance of my Bath leave-
taking address,  of a date I would wish you to forget —
but the letter is before me,  and has no other word I
should like to relinquish.  But more of grief at the
consequence of my silence,  namely your own,  hangs
upon the circumstance than shame,  for I have been so
every way unwell, — unhinged,  shattered,  and unfitted
for any correspondence that could have a chance of re-
ciprocating pleasure,  that perhaps I ought rather to
demand your thanks than your pardon for this delay.
I will demand,  however,  which you please,  so you will

VOL.  VI!.  2 A

354 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PartX.

but tell mc  \vliicli you will grant,  for then I shall hear
from you again.

I must,  nevertheless,  mention,  that my first intention,
upon reading the letter with which you favoured me,
was to forward to you the verses on October,  of my
dear father,  which you honoured with so much appro-
bation ;  but I have never been able to find them,
unless you mean the ode,  written in that month,  on the
anniversary of his marriage with my mother-in-law,
beginning : —

"  Hail,  eldest offspring of the circling year,
October!  bountiful,  benign,  and clear,
"Whose gentle reign,  from all excesses free,
Gave birth to Stella — happiness to me."

If it be this,  I will copy it out with the greatest
alacrity,  for the first opportunity of conveyance.

So here,  again,  like the dun of a dinner card,  I
entitle myself to subjoin  "  An answer is required."

And now,  I must,  and will add,  that I was very far
from insensible to the known approach of your last
birth-day,  fully purposing to take that occasion for
making my peace-oft'ering,  with my most sincere felici-
tations, and warmest wishes for your happiness  ;  and,
mentally,  I prepared at least twenty letters for that
day : — but they were commonly composed in the night,
when no substantial pen was in the way,  and though
the broad light faded nothing of my intentions,  it
withered their expression,  and a general dimness of
general dejection made me feel quite unequal to
coming forward at an epoch of joy,  when faint phrases
might have seemed cold,  and rather have damped than

18*20]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  355

exhilarated the spirits required for the fete, — and
which,  my nieces write word,  had the effect of exciting
them all around.

You enquire if I ever see any of the friends v,e used
to live amongst :— almost none  ;  but I may resume
some of those old ties this winter,  from the ardent de-
sire of my son.  I have^  till very lately,  been so utterly
incapable to enjoy society,  that I have held it as much
kindness to others as to myself,  to keep wholly out of
its way.  I am now,  in health,  much better,  and conse-
quently more able to control the murmuring propen-
sities that were alienating me from the purposes of life
while yet living, — this letter,  indeed,  will show that I
am restored to the wish,  at least of solace,  and that the
native cheerfuhiessof my temperament is opening from
the weight of sadness by which I had long believed it
utterly demolished.  But Time,  "uncalled,  unheeded,
unawares," — works as secretly upon our spirits as upon
our years,  and gives us as little foresight into what we
can endure,  as into how long we shall exist. — I am sure
you will have been very sorr}",  and very sorry was I,
for him whom you call  "  the only friend we now have
in common  " — Archdeacon Thomas.  And I am told
his valuable life was lost through a neglect of attention
to the regimen prescribed by Dr.  Gibbs, — to whose
prescriptions I,  for one,  should always be ready to bow
down.  I think he has much of that sort of sagacity
that so charmed us in our favourite Sir Richard Jebb.
Yet I only saw him once  ;  but that was in a tete-a-tete;,
alternized with a trio by my son,  that lasted a whole
afternoon.     I am told by Mrs.  H.  Bowdler,  that S.  S,

2a2

356 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

now resides in Queen Street,  ^lay Fair;  but I have
not seen her,  nor Sir W.  W.  Pepys,  though the latter
made sundry kind efforts to break the spell of my ob-
scurity on my first arrival in Bolton Street.

Your oblisred and affectionate

F.  d'Arblay.

My son is at Cambridge,  far,  alas,  from robust ;  but
free from complaint.

Fi'om Mrs.  Piozzi to Madame d'Arhlay.

^  Penzance,  Thursday,  January 18,  1821.

Dear Madame d'Arblay was very considerate in giving
me something to ansirer,  for something original to say
would be difEcult to find at Penzance  ;  but your letter
has no date,  and I am not sure that Bolton Street is
sufficient.  Poor Mrs.  Byron,  wdio used to inhabit it,
would have enjoyed her grandson's reputation,  would
not she  ?  had it pleased God to lengthen her life like
that of Mrs.  Lambart,  who died only last week,  but a
few days short of her expected centenary — as did Fon-
tenelle.  You are truly fortunate,  dear Madam,  so was
your father,  in leaving those behind who knew and
could appreciate your merits — every scrap will properly
be valued — but those verses belons-not to the October

o

I meant.

Have no fears for the health of your son  ;  a slight
frame escapes many ills that beset a robust one  ;  water-
gruel and spinach were all you ever wanted  :  and if
Sir Georo^e Gibbs would live as our beloved Sir Richard

1821]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         257

did,  he would last for ever.  The dear Archdeacon's
disorders were less amenable to diet,  and he was still
more careless.

The once charming S.  S.  had enquired for me of Nor-
naville,  and Fell,  the Old Bond Street booksellers,  so I
thought she meditated writing,  but was deceived.
Mrs.  H.  Bowdler lives,  however ;  and the ever affec-
tionate and kind Pepyses.  Your constant admirer
Doctor Whalley,  too,  keeps Ids tall figure and high
head above water,  spite of many efforts to hold him
down — but the list of dead acquaintance has been
frightful of late,  and lowered my spirits cruelly.  This
air to which wise mortals recommended me,  is beyond
all belief contrary to consolation.  Fogg}^  and plileg-
matic — neither hot nor cold — my mountain-born lungs
feel its effects but too plainly;  and the first primroses
shall find me picking them upon Clifton Hill.

Mrs.  Bourdois and her sisters — all true Burneys —
will be angry I don't live wholly at Bath,  and their
society would prove a strong temptation ;  but Bath is
too much for me,  who am now unwilling to encounter
either crowds or solitude :  I feared neither for three-
score years of my life,  and earnestly now join my too
disinterested solicitations to those of your son,  that you
will no longer bury your charming talents in seclusion.
Sorrow,  as Dr.  Johnson said,  is the mere rust of the
soul.     Activity will cleanse and brighten it.

You recollect the  *****  'g  ;  Fanny married Sir
Something  *  *  *  *  *^  and is a widowed mother.  The
young man,  of whom high expectations were formed,
took to the gaming table,  forged for 5000/.,  and was

SpS DIAUV AND LETTERS  [Part X.

saved out of prison by the dexterity of liis servant : — a
complete coup de theatre.  That I call sorrow scarce pos-
sible to be borne.  You saw the story in the newspapers,
but possibly were not aware who was the sufferer.

Will it amuse you to hear that fine Mr.  Daniel,  as
you used to call my showy butler,  died an object of
disgust and horror,  whilst old Jacob,  with whose red
nightcap you comically tlircatened the gay dandy —
lived till the other day,  and dying,  left 800Z.  behind
him  !     Such stuff is this world made of!

The literary world is to me terra incognita,  far more
deserving of the name  (now Parry and Ross are re-
turned) than any part of the polar region;  but the first
voyage amused me most ;  and when I had seen red
snow,  and heard of men who wanted our sailors to fl}-,
because they perceived they could swim,  I really
thought it time to lie down and die ;  but one cannot
die when one will,  so I have hung half on,  half off,
societ}'  this last half year ;  and begin 1821 by thanking
dear Madame d'Arblay for her good-natured recol-
lection of poor

H.  L.  Piozzi.

Madame d'Arhlay to Mrs.  Piozzi.

Bolton Street,  Berkeley Square,  Feb.  6,  1S21.

You would be repaid,  dear Madam,  if I still,  as I
believe,  know you,  for the great kindness of your
prompt answer,  had you witnessed the satisfaction with
v.hlcli it was received  ;  even at a time of new and
dreadful solicitude;  for mv son returned from Cam-

1821]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         359

bridge unwell,  and in a few days after liis arrival at
home was seized with a feverish cold which threatened
to fasten upon the whole system of his existence,  not
with immediate danger,  but with a perspective to leave
but small openings to any future view of health,
strength,  "or longevity.  I will not dwell upon this
period,  but briefly say,  it seems passed over.  He is
now^  I thank Heaven,  daily reviving,  and from looking
like — not a walking,  but a creeping spectre,  he is gain-
ing force,  spirit,  and flesh visibly,  and almost hour by
hour;  still,  however,  he requires the utmost attention,
and the more from the extreme insouciance,  from being
always absorbed in some mental combinations,  with
which he utterly neglects himself I am therefore
wholly devoted to watching him.  I am quite vexed
not to find the right October.  However,  I do not yet
despair,  for in the multitude of MSS.  that have fallen
to my mournfully surviving lot to select,  or destroy,
&c.,  chaos seems come again ;  and though I have
worked at them during the last year so as to obtain a
little light,  it is scarcely more than darkness visible.
To all the vast mass left to my direction by ray dear
father,  who burnt nothing,  not even an invitation to
dinner,  are added not merely those that devolved to
me by fatal necessity in 1818,  but also all the papers
possessed from her childhood to her decease of that
sister you so well,  dear Madam,  know to have been my
heart's earliest darling.  When on this pile are heaped
the countless hoards which my own now long life has
gathered together,  of my personal property,  such as it
is,  and the correi^pondence of my family and my friends.

3G0 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaKT X.

and innumerable incidental windfalls,  the whole forms
a body that might make a bonfire to illuminate me
nearly from hence to Penzance.  And such a bonfire
might perhaps be not only the shortest,  but the wisest
way to dispose of such materials.  This enormous ac-
cumulation has been chiefly owing to a long unsettled
home,  joined to a mind too deepl}"  occupied by im-
mediate affairs and feelings to have the intellect at
hbcrty for retrospective investigations.

What a lono^  detail !  I know not what has urored me
to write it — yet I feel as if you would take in it some
interest ;  and an instinct of that flattering sort is
always pleasant,  though far from always infallible.
And in truth,  in this case,  Bolton Street offers not
much more choice of subject than Penzance;  for if you
have nobody to see,  I see nobody,  which amounts to the
same thing.  It is not that my intentions are changed
from those I mentioned in my last,  of seeking revival,
in some measure,  to social life for the remaining acts
of my worldly drama ;  my quick acceptance of the
assistance to that purpose for which I called from Pen-
zance, and Avhich has been accorded me with such
generous vivacity,  may show my steadiness,  as well as
my gratitude  :  but I had not taken into my self-bar-
gain this illness of my son.  However,  as he gets
better,  I shall do better.  I am much obliged by Dr.
AVhalley's kind remembrance;  he often called upon
me,  but never till m}^  doors were shut to all occasional

visitors,  alas !  I shall soon be very glad to see Sir

Wm.  Pepys,  who has a constancy in his attachments-
as rare as it is honourable.    The  '^  once charming S.  SJ*

18'21]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  3G1

I have never met with since I last saw her under the
roof where first we made acquaintance.  I hope the
P  *****  's have been more fortunate than the
*****  's.  Oh  !  yes ! — well do you say for my
serious consolation,  a sorrow such as that son has given
makes ani/  other lighter  !  Edifying,  however,  as well
as satisfactory,  is the contrasted termination of the two
servants whose lives merited such equally exemplary
justice.  Adieu,  dear Madam,  and believe me with
faithful attachment.

Your obliged,  affectionate,  and
obedient servant,

F.  d\A.

From Mrs.  Piozzi to Madame cCArblay.

Sion Row,  Clifton,  near Bristol,  March 15,  1821.

I FEEL quite happy in being able to reply to dear
Madame d'Arblay's good-natured inquiries,  from this,
the livins:  world.  Such we cannot term Penzance — not
with propriety — much like Omai,who said to you.  *'  No
mutton there,  missee,  no fine coach,  no clock upon the
stairs,"  &c. ;  but en revanche here is no Land's End,  no
submarine mine of Botallock  !  What a wonderful thing
is that extensive cavern  !  stretching out half a mile
forward under the roaring ocean,  from whence  'tis pro-
tected only by a slight covering,  a crust of rock,  which,
if by any accident exploded,

*'  Would let in light on Pluto's dire abodes,
Abhorr'd by men,  and dreadful ev'n to Gods."

Flatus,  however,  not Pluto,   is professed proprietor ;

362 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT X .

'tis an immense vacuity filled with the vapours of tin
and copper,  beloni^ing to Lord Falmouth and a com-
pany of miners,  where sixty human beings work night
and da}',  and hear the waves over their heads ;  some-
times regularly beating the Cornish cliffs,  sometimes
tossing the terrified mariner upon the inhospitable
shore  ;  where shipwreck is,  even in these civilized days,
considered as a Godsend.

I am glad I saw it,  and that I shall see it no more.
You Avould not know poor Streatham Park.  I have been
forced to dismantle and forsake it ;  the expenses of the
present time treble those of the moments you remember  ;
and since giving up my Welsh estate,  my income is
greatly diminished.  I fancy this will be my last resi-
dence in this world,  meaning Clifton,  not Sion Row,
where I only live till my house in the Crescent is ready
for m.e.  A high situation is become necessary to my
breath,  and this air will agree with me better than Bath
did.

You ask how the Pitches family went on.  Jane
married a rough man,  quarter-master to a marching
regiment,  and brought him three sons :  the first a
yjrodigy of science,  wit,  and manners ;  he died early :
the second I know nothing of:  the third,  a model of
grace and beauty,  married the Duke of Marlborough's
sister.  Peggy is Countess Coventr}-,  you know,  and
has a numerous progeny.  Emily is wife to Mr.  Jolliffe,
M.P.  for some place,  I forget what.  Penelope married
Sir John Sheffield,  but died before he came to the title.
I dined with them all last time I was in London,  at
Coventry House.     Poor old Davies's departure grieved

1821]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         363

me,  so  (lid that of good Mr.  Embry ;  aii reste,  the
village of Streatham is full of rich inhabitants,  the
common much the worse for being so spotted about
with houses,  and the possibility of avoiding constant
intercourse with their inhabitants  (as in Mv.  Thrale's
time)  wholly lost.
*  *    *    *    The Denbighshire people will be half a year

talking of a Mr.  G ,  that was detained two months

in the mountains of Calabria for ransom,  with a sword
at his breast,  and the Welsh relations had 200/.  to
raise for the purpose of gaining his release.  Adieu,
dear Madam,  and accept my best wishes for your health
and your son's ;  and if you ever see Marianne Francis,
beg of her not quite to give up as reprobate

Yours,  and her affectionate servant,
H.  L.  P.

May,  1821.    ;

I HAVE lost now,  just lost,  my once most dear,  in-
timate, and admired friend,  Mrs.  Thrale Piozzi,  v,'ho
preserved her fine faculties,  her imagination,  her
intelligence,  her powers of allusion and citation,  her
extraordinary memory,  and her almost unexampled
vivacity,  ^to the last of her existence.  She was in her
eighty-second year,  and yet owed not her death to age
nor to natural decay,  but to the effects of a fall in a
journey from Penzance to Clifton.  On her eightieth
birthday she gave a great ball,  concert,  and supper,  in
the public rooms at Bath,  to upwards of two hundred
persons,  and the ball she opened herself.     She was,  in

264 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

triuli,  a most wonderful character for talents and eccen-
tricil}^  for wit,  genius,  generosity,  spirit,  and powers
of entertainment.  She had a great deal both of good
and not good,  in common with Madame dc Stael Hol-
stein.  They had the same sort of highly superior
intellect,  the same depth of learning,  the same general
acquaintance with science,  the same ardent love of
literature,  the same thirst for universal knowledge,
and the same buoyant anim.al spirits,  such as neither
sickness,  sorrow,  nor even terror,  could subdue.
Their conversation was equally luminous,  fioni the
sources of their own fertile minds,  and from their
splendid acquisitions from the works and acquirements
of others.  Both were zealous to serve,  liberal to be-
stow, and graceful to oblige  ;  and both were truly
high-minded in prizing and praising whatever was ad-
mirable that came in their way.  Neither of them was
dehcate nor polished,  though each was flattering and
caressing;  but both had a fund inexhaustible of good
humour,  and of sportive gaiety,  that made their inter-
course with those they wished to please attractive,
instructive,  and delightful ;  and though not either of
them had the smallest real malevolence in their com-
positions, neither of them could ever withstand the
pleasure of uttering a repartee,  let it wound whom it
might,  even though each would serve the very person
they goaded with all the means in their power.  Both
were kind,  charitable,  and munificent,  and therefore
beloved ;  both were sarcastic,  careless,  and daring,  and
therefore feared.  The morality of Madame de Stael
was by far the most faulty,  but so was the society to

1821]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        365

which she belonged ;  so  \vere the general manners of
those by whom she was eMcirclecI.

Madame d'Arhlay to Mrs.  Burney.

October 21,  1821.    \

****''  Your mind,"  my dearest Esther,  was always
equal to literary pursuits,  though your time seems only
now to let you enjoy them.  I have often thought that
had our excellent and extraordinary own mother been
allowed longer life,  she would have contrived to make
you sensible of this sooner.  I do not mean in a com-
mon way,  for that has never failed,  but in one striking
and distinguished;  for she very early indeed began to
form vour taste for readin^j,  and delis^hted to find
time,  amidst all her cares,  to guide you to the best
authors,  and to read them with you,  commenting and
pointing out passages worthy to be learned by heart.
I perfectly recollect,  child as I was,  and never of the
party,  this part of your education.  At that very juve-
nile period,  the difference even of months makes a
marked distinction in bestowing and receiving instruc-
tion. I,  also,  was so peculiarly backward,  that even
our Susan stood before me ;  she could read when I
knew not my letters.  But though so sluggish to learn,
I was always observant :  do you remember Mr.  Seaton's
denominating me,  at fifteen,  the silent,  observant Miss
Fanny  ?  Well I recollect your reading with our dear
mother all Pope's Works and Pitt's  '^neid.'  I re-
collect, also,  your spouting passages from Pope,  that I

36G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X,

learned from hearing you recite them before — many
years before I read them myself.  But after you lost,
so young,  that incomparable guide,  you had none left.
Our dear father was always abroad,  usefully or orna-
mentally ;  and,  after giving you a year in Paris with
the best masters that could be procured,  you came
home at fifteen or sixteen to be exclusively occupied
by musical studies,  save for the interludes that were

"  Sacred to dress and beauty's pleasing cares  :"

for so well you played,  and so lovel}^  you looked,  that
admiration followed alike your fingers and your smiles;
and the pianoforte and the world divided your first
youth,  which,  had that exemplary guide been spared
us,  I am fully persuaded would have left some further
testimony of its passage than barely my old journals,
written to myself,  which celebrate your wit and talents
as highly as your beauty.  And I judge I was not
mistaken,  by all in which you have had opportunity to
show your mental faculties,  i.  e.  your letters,  which
have always been strikingly good and agreeable,  and
evidently unstudied.

When Alex,  comes home I will try to  <^^t Crabbe,
and try to hear it with pleasure.  The two lines you
have quoted are very touching.

Thus much,  my dear Etty,  I wrote on the day I
received your last ;  but

******
******

Novemher. — I write now from Eliot Vale,  under the
kind and elegant roof of sweet Mrs.  Lock,  who charges

1821]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  367

me v/itli her most affectionate remembrances.  Perhaps
I may meet here with your favourite Crabbc :  as I
subscribe to no library,  I know not how else I shall
get at him.  I thank you a thousand times for the good
bulletin of your health,  my dearest Esther;  and I know
how kindly you will reciprocate my satisfaction when
I tell you mine is inconceivably ameliorated,  moycimant
great and watchful care :  and Alex,  keeps me to that
with the high hand of peremptory insistance,  according
to the taste of the times;  for the  ''^  rising:  g-eneration"
expects just as much obedience to orders as they with-
hold. If you were to hear the young gentleman deli-
vering to me his lectures on health,  and dilating upon
air,  exercise,  social intercourse,  and gay spirits,  you
would be forced to seek a magnifying glass to believe
that your eyes did not deceive you,  but that it was
really your nephew haranguing his mother.  How-
ever, we must pass by the exhorting impetuosity,  in
favour of the zealous anxiety that fires it up in his
animated breast.

I was kept in town by a particular circumstance —
I might sa}',  like the play-bills,  hy particular desire ;
for it was a fair royal personage who condescended to
ask me to remit my visit to Eliot Vale,  that I might
attend her sittings for her picture,  her two ladies being
at that time absent on conge.  You may believe how
much I was gratified,  because you know my sincere and
truly warm attachment for all those gracious person-
ages ;  but you may be surprised your poor sister
could now be pitched upon,  where so much choice

3G8 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

must always be at liand,  for whiling away the tedious-
iicss of what slic,  the Princess,  calls the odious occupa-
tion of sitting still for this exhibition  ;  but the fact is,
I was able to fulfil her views better than most people
could,  in defiance of my altered spirits and depressed
faculties,  by having recourse simply to my memory iu
relating things I saw,  or heard,  or did,  during the long
ten years,  and the eventful-added one year more,  that
I spent abroad.  Only to name Bonaparte in any posi-
tive, trait that I had witnessed or known,  was sufficient
to make her open her fine eyes in a manner extremely
advantageous to the painter.

How pleased I have been,  and you will be,  to hear
that Pacchierotti is living,  and spending his latter
days rationally,  elegantly,  and benevolently in Padua,
Avhere our niece,  Sarah Payne,  saw him  !  She wrote
him a note in English to ask his acquaintance;  he
received her instantly,  and with much pleasure.  He
spoke of our dear father,  and of his early mistress of
English,  with enthusiasm of kind remembrance.  I
had thought him dead,  having heard and believed a
report that asserted his departure ;  and I had grieved
for him sincerely.  He expressed to Sarah the most
earnest desire to renew our correspondence.  It was
not easy to me to do so,  after a chasm of so many
years,  which had included on my part a bereavement
of such unutterable and never-ending sorrow  ;  but
still,  the pleasure of his remembrance,  and the thoughts
of his many excellences,  conquered my difficulties;
and I wTote him a very long,  explanatory,  melancholy
letter.  He returned me an answer immediately,  written

1823]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         269

by his nephew,  but dictated and signed by himself.
It was in English,  and very refined English,  poetical
and elevated,  such as he had imbibed from tlie lessons
of his first master,  the poet Mason,  who esteemed his
character as much as he admired his talents.  This
nephew,  who is his adopted son,  was brought up in
England,  whither he was sent by his uncle,  in grati-
tude, he told Sarah,  to the spot where he had passed
his happiest days.  The young man seems deserving
the adoption,  by his cheerful and assiduous attention
to his parental uncle.  Poor Pacchierotti's health —
there  's the other side of the picture  ! — his health is
miserable.  He has some dropsical complaint of the
extremest suffering,  which he bears with a patient
resignation truly affecting,  as his good nephew told
Sarah.  He receives every evening in Padua all that
is most elegant and literary of society I

3Iadame  (TArhlay to Mrs.  Bnrney.

February 29,  1823.

*  «  *  ;jc  •

Thanks for that kind jump of joy for the success of
Alex,  at Lee,  and for my hopes from St.  PixuFs.  You
ask who named him Preacher for the btli Sunday in
Lent :  How could I omit telling you  'twas the Bishop
of London himself? — This has been brought about by
a detail too long for paper,  but it is chiefly to my
iaithful old friends Bishop Fisher of Salisbury and
the Archdeacon of  }^Iiddlcsex that we owe this mark

2 B

370 DIAllV AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

of attention  ;  for Alex,  lias never been presented to the
Bishop of London.

You still ask about my health,  Sec.  I thought the
good result  \vould have sufficed ;  but thus stands the
detail :  I was packing up a hoard of papers to carry
with me to Richmond,  many months now ago,  and
employed above an hour,  bending my head over the
trunk,  and on my knees ; — when,  upon meaning to
rise,  I was seized with a giddiness,  a glare of sparks
before my eyes,  and a torturing pain on one side of
my head,  that nearly disabled me from quitting my
posture,  and that was followed,  when at last I rose,  by
an inability to stand or walk.  My second threat of
seizure was at Eliot Vale,  while Alex,  was at Tunbridge.
I have been suddenly taken a third time,  in the middle
of the night,  with a seizure as if a hundred windmills
were turning round in my head  :  in short, — I had now
recourse to serious medical help,  .  .  .  and,  to
come to the sum total,  I am now so much better that I
believe myself to be merely in the common road of
such gentle,  gradual decay as,  I humbly trust,  I
have been prepared to meet with highest hope,
though with deepest awe — for now many years back.

The chief changes,  or reforms,  from which I reap
benefit are,  1st.  Totally renouncing for the evenings,  all
revision or indulgence in poring over those letters and
papers whose contents come nearest to my heart,  and
work upon its bleeding regrets.  Next,  transferring to
the evening,  as far as is in my power,  all of sociality,
with Alex.,  or my few remaining friends,  or the few he
will present to me of new ones.     '3rd.  Constantly going

1823]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        371

out every day — either in brisk walks in the morning-,
or in brisk jumbles in the carriage of one of my three
friends who send for me,  to a  ''  tete-a-tete/'  tea-con-
verse.     4.th.  Strict attention to diet.

I feel vexed at your disappointment in your pretty
house,  but not surprised  ;  as I feared it was too remote
for a winter residence.  As to its being:  ^' worth while,
or not,  to make experiment of a change/'  I should hold
not to do it a species of suicide :  for w^hy are observa-
tions and experience recorded us,  if not to direct us in
combining circumstances that may guide us for the
future  ;  by recollecting and weighing mistakes that had
led us to judge wrongly in the past  ?  Certainly,  st our
time of life,  we cannot have such superfluous health as
to make us indifferent to guarding or losing any part
of that commodity.

I ought to have told you the medical sentence upon
which I act.  These were the words — "  You have a
head over- worked,  and a heart over-loaded."  This
produces a disposition to fulness in both that causes
stagnation,  &c.,  w^ith a consequent want of circulation
at the extremities,  that keeps them cold and aching.

Knowing this,  I now act upon it as warily as I am
able.

The worst of all is,  that I have lost,  totally lost,  mv
pleasure in reading  !  except when Alex,  is my lecturer,
for whose sake my faculties are still alive to what —
erst!  gave them their greatest delight.  But alone;  I
have no longer that resource  !  I have scarcely looked
over a single sentence,  but some word of it brings to
my mind some mournful recollection,  or acute re<Tct,

2 B 2

372 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PakT X.

and fakes from one all attention — my eyes thence
glance vainly over pages that awaken no ideas. — This
is melancholy in the extreme ;  yet I have tried every
species of writing and writer — but all pass by me me-
chanically, instead of instructing or entertaining me
intellectual!}-.  But for this sad deprivation of my
original taste,  my evenings might always be pleasing
and reviving — but alas  !

You ask me the history of the Rev.  Dr.  Vyse. — He
pensioned off his ill-taken rib ;  a connection formed
in a luckless hour,  and repented ever after,  and never
made known but by the provisions of his will,  as he
survived her  !  Sir William and Sir Lucas Pepys,  who
alone,  of all the Streatham set,  have lived,  and found
me out in Bolton-street,  except the three daughters of
the house,  now and then give me the pleasure of an
hour's social recollection of old time,  that is interesting
to us all.

Adieu,  my dearest Esther — remember me kindly to
all who kindly remember me — if such,  after tiiis long-
absence,  be found.

God bless you ever,  prays your ever affectionate and
faithful,

F.  D A.

2Iadame cVArllcuj to Mrs.  Burnetj.

August,  IS 23.
AVhat an interesting letter is this last,  my truly dear
Hetty;    't is a real sister's letter,  and such a one as I
am at this time frequently looking over of old times!

1823]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  373

For the rest of my life I shall take charge and save my
own executor the discretionary labours that with myself
are ahnost endless ;  for I now regularly destroy all
letters that either may eventually do mischief,  however
clever,  or that contain nothing of instruction or enter-
tainment, however innocent.  This,  which I announce
to all my correspondents who write confidentially,
occasions my receiving letters that are real conver-
sations ....  Were 1 younger I should consent to this
condition with great reluctance — or perhaps resist it :
but such innumerable papers,  letters,  documents,  and
memorandums have now passed through my hands,
and,  for reasons prudent,  or kind,  or conscientious,
have been committed to the llames,  that I should hold
it wrong to make over to any other judgment than my
own,  the danger or the innoxiousness of any and every
manuscript that has been cast into my power.  To you,
therefore,  I may now safely copy a charge delivered
to me by our dear vehement Mr.  Crisp,  at the opening
of my juvenile correspondence with him.— "  Harkee,
you little monkey  ! — dash away whatever comes upper-
most ;  if you stop to consider either wliat you say,  or
what may be said of you,  1 would not give one fig for
your letters." — How little,  in those days,  did either he
or 1 fear,  or even dream of tlie press !  What became
of letters,  jadis,  I know not;  but they were certainly
both written and received with as little fear as wit.
Now,  ever}'  body seems obliged to take as much
care of their writing desks as of iheir trinkets or
purses, — for thieves be abrord of more descriptions
than belong to the penniless  ])ilfcrers.

374 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part X.

Madame cVArhlay to Mrs.  Lock.

11,  Bolton Street,  Nov.  1824.

I HAVE missed ni}^  bulletin to my beloved friends,  and
this time I have missed it without self-reproach ;  not
merely through that amiable lenity which is so ready
to exculpate us from all failings and defects of our own,
but because I cannot in conscience send off two or
three lines as far as Suffolk;  and more I could not
write,  unless I had made them of that cast which is
least congenial with that dear couleur de rose I wish
you to keep unfading.

I have been grieved at heart by the loss of my dear
Sophy Hoare — a loss so utterly unexpected  ;  I thought
her built to outlive my whole remnant circle.  All of
letters I have written for this last fortnight have been
of condolence, — long—painful — difficult.  An oppor-
tunity offering for Paris,  I wrote to poor Madame de
-Maurville,  who is every way a dreadful sufferer by the
departure of dear Madame d'Henin. — Another Mr.
Fauntleroy on a smaller scale immediately disappeared
on the death of the Princesse,  taking with him every
renseignement by which the will could be executed,
every document for the pension of Madame deMaurville,
as well as of money she possessed,  which had been
placed with le Men of Madame d'Henin  !  This wretch
was the liomme de confiance of the Princesse,  and she had
trusted to him everything.

This detail of facts,  my dearest friends,  is not gay, —
bow should it be  ? — but  'tis less depressing than to have
detailed the sentiments they caused.

1824J OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  375

Now then for a more cheerful winding-up.  I came
from Camden Town very unwillinglv, — but Alex,  was
called lo Cambridge to an audit,  and so I took that
opportunity to malce a break-up.  But the day before
I quitted it I received the highest resident honour that
can be bestowed upon me — namely,  a visit from one
of ni}^  dear and condescending Princesses.  She came
by appointment, —  yet her entrance was so quick that
Alex,  had not time to save himself — However,  she took
the incident not only without displeasure but with
apparent satisfaction,  saying she was very glad to
renew her acquaintance with him.  She had not seen
him since the time of his spouting,  "  The spacious
firmament on high" — "  Ye shepherds so cheerful and
gay/'  &c., — all of which she remembers hearing.  Ah  —
I have never recollected till this instant that I ought
to have gone to her the next day  ! — how shocking! —
and now that I have the consciousness,  I can do
nothing,  for I am lame from a little accident. — Well!
— she is all goodness — and far more prone to forgive
than I,  I trust,  am to offend.

Although Madame d'Arblay's intercourse with society
was now usually confined to that of her relations and
of old and established friends,  she yet greeted w^ith
admiration and pleasure Sir Walter Scott,  who was
brought to her by Mr.  Rogers.  Sir Walter,  in his
Diary for Nov.  18th,  1826,  thus describes the visit: —
''  I have been introduced to  ^fadame d'xYrbla}",  the cele-
brated authoress of  '  Evelina'  and  '  Cecilia', — an elderly
lady with no remains of personal beauty,  but with a

^^7(j DIAUV AND LETTERS  [l^AlIxX.

simple and gentle manner,  and  ])leaslng expression of
countenance,  and apparently quick feelings.  She told
me she liad  ^vished to see two persons — mvself.  of
course,  being one,  the other,  George Canning.  This
was really a compliment to be pleased  \vith — a nice
little handsome pat of butter made up by a neat-handed
Phillis of a dairy-maid,  instead of the grease fit only
for cartwheels which one is dosed with by the pound.
''  I trust I shall see this lady again."

From the year 1828 to 1832 Madame d'Arblay was
chiefly occupied in preparing for the press the Memoirs
of her father ;  and on their publication,  she had the
yjleasure to receive the following letters from Dr.
Jebb,  Bishop of Limerick,  and from Mr.  Southey,  the
poet : —

The Bishop of Limerick to 3Iadame d'Arhlay.

East Hill,  Wandswortl),  December 12,  1832.

My dear Madame d'Arblay,

This moment 1 have finished your most touch-
ing memoir of your admirable father.  I cannot now
attempt to describe my feelings ;  but you have laid
the friends of virtue,  of genius,  of goodness,  under a
lasting obligation.  Ho\v far it may,  in all respects,  be
suited to the temper of this frivolous,  pretending,  and
most self-sufficient age,  I cannot undertake to judge;
hut your work assuredly gives new and valuable ma-
terials for the history of the human mmd  ;  and ils
occasional defects in point of style are valuable,   as

1833]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         377

additional evidences of its genuineness and truth to
nature.  All that you say of tlie greatest man of his
time.  Dr.  Johnson,  is deeply interesting-;  and much
as Ave already know of the last age,  you have brought
niany scenes of it,  not less animated than new,  gra-
phically before our eyes,  whilst I now seem familiar
with many departed worthies who were not before
known to me,  even so much as by name.

But what can I say of your excellent mother?  It is
impossible for any one with a heart to read of her
without strong emotions.  I was withheld by indis-
position for some days from your pages,  and afterwards
by the imperative claims of the press;  but now that it
is completely finished,  I make over my purchased copy
to one that will know how to appreciate it— Miss
Laura Thornton.  Mr.  Forster will be unable to ac-
company me to-day in my drive ;  but he is ever with
you in spirit and affection.

Believe me,  my dear iMadame,

Your truly faithful and obliged
friend and servant,

JoH^  Limerick.

From Dr.  South cy to the Rev.  A.  P.  d'Arblaij.

Keswick,  March 13,  1S33.

Sir,

I AM very much oblifjed to you for the Memoirs
of Dr.  Burney,  not the less so,  though I have been
thus late in acknowledoini2:  and thankini^:  you for the
book.

378 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaKT X.

'  Evelina '  did not give me more pleasure Avlien I was
a schoolboy,  than these memoirs have given me now  ;
and this is saying a great deal.

Except BoswelFs,  there is no other work in our lan-
guage which carries us into such society,  and makes us
fancy that we are acquainted with the persons to whom
we are there introduced.

I am.  Sir,
Your oblio^ed and obedient servant,

Robert Southey.

Among the less favourable criticisms of her work,
the only one which gave Madame d'Arblay serious
pain was an attack  (in a periodical publication)  upon
her veracity — a quality which,  in her.  Dr.  Johnson
repeatedly said  "  he had never found failing,"  and for
which she had been through life trusted,  honoured,  and
emulated.

1835 to 1838.

Madame d'Arblay's letters were now very few.  A
complaint in one of her eyes,  which was expected to
terminate in a cataract,  made both reading and writing
difficult to her.  The number of her correspondents
had also been painfully lessened by the death of her
eldest sister,  Mrs.  Burney,  and that of her beloved
friend,  Mrs.  Lock;  and she had sympathised with
other branches of her family in many similar afflictions,
for she retained in a peculiar degree not only her in-
tellectual powers,  but the warm and generous affec-
tions of her vouth

1837]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         379

''Though now her eightieth year was past,''  she
took her wonted and vivid interest in the concerns,  tlie
joys,  and sorrows of those she loved.

At this time her son formed an attachment which
promised to secure his happiness,  and to gild his
mother's remaining days with affection and peace ;
and at the close of the year 1836 he was nominated
minister of Ely Chapel,  which afforded her consider-
able satisfaction.  But her joy was mournfully short-
lived. That building,  having been shut for some years,
was damp and ill-aired.  The Rev.  Mr.  d'Arblay began
officiating there in winter,  and during the first days of
his ministry he caught the influenza,  which became so
serious an illness as to require the attendance of two
phj'sicians.  Dr.  Holhand and Dr.  Kingston exerted
their united skill with the kindest interest ;  but their
patient,  never robust,  was unable to cope with the
malady,  and on the 19th of January,  1837,  in three
weeks from his first seizure,  the death of this beloved
son threw Madame d'Arblay again into the depths of
affliction.  Yet she bore this desolating stroke with
religious submission,  receiving kindly every effort
made to console her,  and confining chiefly to her own
private memoranda the most poignant expressions of
her anguish and regret,  as also of the deeply religious
trust by which she was supported.

The following paragraph is taken from her private
note-book : —

*^  1837. — On the opening of this most mournful — most
earthly hopeless,  of any and of all the years yet com-
menced of my long career !     Yet,  humbly I ble^s my

380 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PakT X.

God and Saviour,  not hopeless ;  but full of gentU'-
Leamin*]^  lio})cs,  countless and fraught with aspirations
of the time that may succeed to tlie dread infliction of
this last irreparable privation,  and bereavement of my
darling loved,  and most touchingly loving,  dear,  soul-
dear Alex."

At this period some letters on religious subjects
passed between Madame d'Arblay and her excellent
friend Archdeacon Cambridge,  who proposed,  as her
increased deafness and infirmity prevented her attend-
ing the public worship of the church,  to administer the
Holy Sacrament to her at her own dwelling;  and  ''her
devout,  earnest,  and composed manner of going through
this sacred duty,  gave much comfort"  to her pious and
venerable friend.

r\Iuch as Madame d'Arblay had been tried by the
severest penalty of lengthened days,  the loss of those
who were dearest to her,  one more such sorrow
remained in her cup of life.  Her gentle and tender
sister Charlotte,  many years younger than herself,  was
to precede her in that eternal world for which they
were both preparing;  and in the autumn of the year
1838,  a short illness terminated in the removal of that
beloved sister.

1839.

I>Iad.\mk d'Arblay*s long and exemplary life was
now drawing to a close  ;  her debility increased,  her sight
and hearing nearly failed her;  but in these afflictions
she was enabled to look upw^ards with increasing faith

1839]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         381

and resignation.  In a letter on the otli of March,
1839,  she wrote the following paragraph,  which was
perhaps the last ever traced by her pen  : —

To Mrs.  Barrett.

March 5,  1&39.'  ]

Ah  !  my dearest !  how changed,  changed I am,  since
the irreparable loss of your beloved mother!  that last
orijjinal tie to native ori<rinal affections !

*  *  *  *  -i:

Wednesday. — I broke off,  and an incapable unwil-
lingness seized my pen  ;  but I hear you are not well,
and I Jiasten — if that be a word I can ever use again —
to make personal inquiry how you are.

I have been very ill,  very little apparently,  but with
nights of consuming restlessness and tears.  I have
now called in Dr.  Holland,  who understands me mar-
vellously, and I am now much as usual ;  no,  not that —
still tormented by nights without repose — but better.

My spirits have been dreadfidly saddened of late by
whole days — nay weeks — of helplessness for any em-
ployment. They have but just revived.  How merciful
a reprieve  !  How merciful is all we know!  The icays
of Heaven are not dark and intricate,  but unhioicn and
unimagiiicd till the great teacher.  Death,  devclopes
them.

*  *  *  »  *

In November,  1839,  Madame d'Arblay was attacked
by an illness which showed itself at tirst in sleepless
nights and nervous imaginations.     Spectral illusions.

382 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PAIIT X.

such as Dr.  ALcrcrombie has described,  formed part of
her disorder ;  and though after a time Dr.  Holland's slvill
removed tliese nervous impressions,  yet her debiht}-  and
cough increased,  accompanied by constant fever.  For
several weeks hopes of her recovery were entertained  ;
her patience assisted the remedies of her kind physi-
cian ;  and the amiable young friend,  '^  who was to her
as a daughter,"  watched over her with unremitting care
and attention  ;  but she became more and more feeble,
and her mind wandered ;  though at times every day
she was composed and collected,  and then given up to
silent prayer,  with her hands clasped and eyes uplifted.

During the earlier part of her illness she had listened
with comfort to some portions of St.  John's Gospel,
but she now said to her niece,  "  I would ask you to
read to me,  but I could not understand one word — not
a syllable  !  but I thank God my mind has not waited
till this time."

At another moment she charged the same person
with affectionate farewells and blessings to several
friends,  and with thanks for all their kindness to her-
Soon after she said,  "  I have had some sleep."  ''That
is well,"  was the reply  ;  "  you wanted rest."  ''  I shall
have it soon,  my dear,''  she answered emphatically  :  and
thus,  aware that death was approaching,  in peace with
all the world,  and in holy trust and reliance on her
Redeemer,  she breathed her last on the 6th of January,
1840;  the anniversary of that day she had long con-
secrated to prayer,  and to the memory of her beloved
sister Susanna.

1840]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         383

Hitherto Madame d'Arblay has been known chiefly
as an Author.  These Journals and Letters may
show the merits and peculiarities of her individual
character,  and the bright example she gave in the
most important relations of life.  If any one was
entitled to confide in talents or 3'ield to the guidance
of imagination,  she might have claimed that privilege:
but her own words were,  "  A fear of doing wrong has
always been the leading principle of my internal guid-
ance ;"  and hers was not the fear which shrinks from
efforts or responsibility.  She pursued the straight
path of duty in defiance of difficulty or distaste,  and
employed the best means with wliich she Avas ac-
quainted, for bringing her feelings into accordance
with her judgment.

Thus,  when enduring at the Queen's house daily
discomforts,  which not even the penetration and bene-
volence of her royal mistress could prevent,  she  "  re-
solved to be happy,"  and from that time she never
allowed herself to ponder on days gone by or on any
subject that could lead to repining  ;  and by such dis-
cipline she established herself in a state of calm
content,  though her fatigues and the tyranny of
Madame Schwellenberg continued in full force.  Her
strict economy during many years was another proof
of this inflexible purpose.  For a considerable time
the income on which she,  her husband,  and her child
subsisted,  did not exceed 125/.  a year.  They were too
independent in spirit to accept assistance from friends  ;
too upright to rely on contingencies  ;  and Madame
d'Arblay pursued,    especially for herself,    in all the

o84 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

miniitiffi of domestic life,  a course of self-denial sucli
as,  she wrote to her Susanna,  "  would make you laugh
to see,  though perhaps cry to hear."  With all this,
her mind and thoughts were never shut up in her
economy.  The friends who visited Camilla Cottage
(and they were among the distinguished and excellent
of two countries)  were made welcome to its frugal fare ;
and the hand and purse of the  *'  hermits  "  were always
open to distress.  Madame d'Arblay used to say,  there
was no merit in any charity unaccompanied by some
privation.  It was at this period that she originated
the invitation sent by her and  ]M.  d'Arblay,  to  |^his
friend the Comte de Narbonne,  to make their cottage
his home  ;  and it was also during these straitened cir-
cumstances that she withdrew her comedy of  '  Love and
Fashion'  from rehearsal,  in dutiful compliance with
the wishes of her father:  althou2:h the manairer of
Covent Garden had promised her  £400 for the manu-
script.

Queen Charlotte's expression,  that she was  *'  true
as gold,"  was abundantly verified in her friendships.
Faithful in the duty of private admonition,  generous in
never betraying to others the faults her penetration
had discovered,  she was Vise in counsel and cordial in
sympathy,  devoting her best  -powers to the service of
those she loved.

It has been elegantly said"  of Madame d'Arblay,
that  "  she lived to be a classic  ;"  but she attained this
distinction only by surviving all that could give it
value.  Yet at this period,  when she spoke of herself
as one  "  from whom happiness^  in this nether sphere,

1840]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         385

was cut off for ever,"  she still interested herself warmly
for many whose distress was their only claim to the
never-tirin<r patience with which she heard their lon<^
histories,  and the judicious advice and benefactions with
which she sought to relieve them.

Some readers of this journal may perhaps have
wished to find Madame d'Arblay's sentiments on
religious subjects more fully detailed.  The friends
most intimate with her knew that she was actuated by
a strong and abiding religious principle,  founded on a
serious study of the Holy Scriptures.  What else,
indeed,  could have formed and sustained such a cha-
racter ?  But while this was the main -spring of her
thoughts and actions,  a feeling of reverential awe made
her fearful of introducing religious subjects into con-
versation, and also led her to preserve in a separate
journal those devotional impressions which she deemed
too sacred for admixture with the trifles and amuse-
ments of every-day life.  Respect for what it is pre-
sumed would have been her desire,  now forbids the
publication of these private meditations.

In conclusion,  may we not find throughout these
memoirs a confirmation of General d'Arblay's parting
testimony,  that those who knew her only from the
public reputation were unacquainted with the best and
most valuable parts of her character  ?

And this is no slight praise when given to the
Author of Evelina,  Cecilia,  and Camilla.

END OF THE SEVENTH AND LAST VOLUME.

VOL.  vir.  2 c

GENERAL INDEX.

N.B. — The second impression of Vols.  I.  and II.  differs from the first in
the arrangement of the pages.  The Index is made in accordance with the
first;  but the second impression will be found to correspond with the
numbers given within three or four pages.

Addington,  Dr.,  attends tlie King,
vol.  iv.  336.

"  Adele et Theodore,"  ii.  185,  400.

Aikin,  Dr.,  vi.  201.

Aix-la-Chapelle,  vii.  215.

Akenside,  his  ''  Pleasures of Imagi-
nation," iv.  218.

Alison,  Mrs.,  v.  88.

Althorp,  Lord,  i.  360.

Amelia,  the Princess,  iii.  34;  her
birthday,  60  ;  168,  201,  20S,  263;
iv.  5;  her birthday,  v.  149;  her
personal appearance,  vi.  166;  her
illness,  206  ;  her death,  355.

Ancaster,  Duchess of,  iii.  44,  131 ;  iv.
54.

Angouleme,  Due de,  vii.  41;  Du-
chesse de,  54.

Anstey,  Mr.,  author of the  "  Bath
Guide,"  i.  330,  349,  359.

Archer,  Lady,  ii.  236.

Argaiit,  M.,  iii.  123.

Argy,  Chevalier d',  his escape from
Sedan,  vii.  145.

Arras,  the Prefect of,
jeuner at his house,
alty,  106.

Arundel,  Lord,  i.  403.

Asaph,  St.,  IJishop of,  i

Auch,  Comtesse de,  vii

Aufrere,  Mrs.,  vii.  15.

Augusta,  the Princess,

iii.   216  ;  scene with IMr.    Turbu-
lent,   339 ;   conversation with,   vi.
VOL.  vir.

vii.   103;  de-
10 i;  hisloy-

1.  114.
90.

her birthday,

137  ;  on mutiny at the Nore,  139  ;
her indifference to dress,   l4l,  238;
her musical compositions,  vii.  345.
Aurelia,"  a poem by Mr.  Hoole,  ii.
272.

B.

Bachmeister,    Mdlle.,    successor to

Mrs.  Schwellen berg,  vi.  173,  183.
Baker,  Sir George,  attends the Kiug^

iv.  315.
Baldwin,  Miss,  vi.  219.
Baltimore,  Lord,  iv.  14.
Banks,  Sir Joseph,  iv.  128.
Barbauld,  Mrs.   and Mr.,   visit Ma-
dame d'Arblay at Bookham,    vi.

115—199.
Barclay,  David,  ii.  138.
Barrett"],  his    "  Dialogues,"  ii.   263 ;

note from,  iii.  39;  his strictures on

Mrs.  Tlirale,  iv.  185.
Barry,  Mr.,  verses upon his painting,

ii.   2S0;     his separation from the

Royal Academy,  vi.  218.
Bath,  visits to,  i.  3*04  ;  v.  248 ;  Queen

Charlotte's visit to,  vii.  304,  314.
Baft,  Mr,,  v.  269  ;  his account of the

state of France,  308.
Beattie,  Dr.,  iii.  397,  402.
Heauclerk,  Lady Diana,  i.  261.
Beaufort,  Madame de,  vii.  131.
Beaufremont,  Madame de,  vi.  318.
Beaiiveau,  Prince de,  and familv,  vi.

2P0.
Beckibrd,  Mr.,  v.  260,  2S9.

2d

388

INDEX.

Benda,  Madame,  v.  110.

Eerquiii,  M..  ii.  292.

Bertrand,  Madame,  vii.  131.

Bertie,  Lady Charlotte,  iii.  lOi.

Bircli,  Miss.  i.  2J5.

"  Birtli  (»f Love,"  a poem witli en-
gravings from drawings by Princess
Elizabeth,  vi.  G8.

Blaizeau.  Madame,  vi.  277.

Blanclierie,  M.  de la,  iii.  393  :  v.  268.

Bliiciier,  Field-Marshal,  vii.  49,  178,
189.

Blue Club,  vi.  246.

'•  Bombay Castle,'"  tl^e,  v.  54.

Bonaparte,  Louis,  vi.  316.

Bonaparte,  Na])oleon,  anecdotes of,
vi.  251,  255,  273  :  his  |)ersonal ap-
pearance, 310;  his return from
Ell)a,  vii.  65  ;  arrival at Lyons,  70  ;
at Paris,  78  ;  his treatment of M.
de Chateaubriand,  124;  his sur-
■  render,  181,  203;  his reception at
Paris after  "Waterloo,  201  ;  severity
of his government,  206.

Boscawen,  Mrs.,  her house at Rich-
mond, vi.  74  ;  visit to,  185.

Boswell,  James,  conversation with at
the Castle rails,  v.  166;  his  "Life
of Johnson,"'  212,  306.

Bouchier,  Captain,  i.  358.  368,  378.

JBoulogne,  society at,  ii.  322.

Bourdois,  M.,  vi.  196.

Bowdler,  Mr.,  his chess-playing,  vii.
280.

-iJowdler,  Mrs.,  i.  309,  325 ;  Miss F.,
308,  350  ;  vii.  259,  281,  333,  335  ;
Miss H.,  i.  355;  iii.  132;  vii.  259,
338.

Brighton,  i.  259;  society at,  ii.  169.

Brisbane,  Captain,  i.  378.

Broglie,  Due de,  vii.  275.

Broglie,  Madame de,  her escape from
France,  v.  339.

Broome,  Mr.,  his  "Simkln's Let-
ters," vi.  181;  description of him,
193.

Broome,  Mr?.,  letter to,  vii.  3C6  ;  her
death.  380.

Brown.  Miss Fanny,  i.  166,  191,  215.

JJruce,  Mr.,  letter to Mr.  H.  Seaton,
i.  351:  his travels,  v.  109.

Brunswick,  army of,  vii.  148  ;  Duke

of,  his death,  153.
Brussels,  apathy of its inhabitants,  vii.
125;  Palais deLachen,  137;  Allee

verte,  137  ;  Fete Dieu,  1 42 ;  wound-
ed arrive at.  from  "Waterloo,  173 ;
fear of pestilence,  177.

Brvant,  Jacob,  iii.  1 17,  228,  323,  375  ;
his dogs,  401  ;  his books.  403  ;  iv.
13;  letters from,  v.  330,  337,  357.

Bude,  General,  iii.  40.

Bulkier,  Lord,  v.  92.

Bull,  the Misses,  ii.  203,  206,  230.

Buller,  Mrs.,  ii.  243.

Bim})ury,  H.,  iii.  423,  443  ;  Mrs.,  v.
301.

Burgovne,  Lady Frances,  and familv,
ii.  81.

Burke,  Edmund,  sits up all night to
read  "  Evelina,'"  i.  89;  description
of him,  ii.  145;  his letter to Miss
Burney about  ''Cecilia,"  148;  his
conversation,  193,  314;  at Mr.
Hastings"  trial,  iv.  59 ;  his speech,  95;
conversation with,  113;  his speech
on the French Revolution,  v.  93;
at Hastings'  trial,  115;  his con-
versation at Mrs,  Crewe"s,  313  ;  his
brother's deatli,  vi.  19;  death of
his son,  30  ;  his own funeral,  113  ;
his character,  114,

Burney,  Admiral,  obtains a ship,  i.
295 ;  appointed Captain of the
Latona,  429  ;  at Hastings'  trial,
iv.  94  ;  makes application for a
frigate,  v.  Ill;  his interview with
Lord Chatham,  135.

Burney,  Miss Cliarlotte,  her account
of the Gordon riots,  i.  404.  (See
Mrs.  Francis.)

Burney,  Reverend Charles,  D.D.,  iii.
303  :  sets on foot a subscription for
Dr.  Porson,  v.  331  ;  vi.  195.

Buniev,  Charles,  Mus.  Doc,  reads
'•Evelina,"  i.  14;  tells Mrs.  Thrale
that Miss F.  Burney is the author,
28  ;  his lines on literary ladies,  ii.
134  ;  letters to Miss F.  Burney on
the death of Mr.  Crisp,  267,  268  ;
is appointed organist to Chelsea
College,  293 ;  his Gerinan tour,
iii.  186;  interviews with the King,
260,  274  ;  letters from,  v.  260  ;  vi.
3,  8,  41  ;  his translation of Metas-
tasio,  vi.  36  ;  death of his second
wife,  80,  85  ;  his  "  Poetical History
of Astronomy,"  98;  letter from,
describing Burke's funeral,  112;
his tour,    120;    visit to Herschel,

INDEX.

389

125  ;  reads his poem at Mrs,
Crewe's,  189  ;  and to Madame
d'Arblay,  195  ;  HersclieVs criticism
upon,  210;  meets the King on
Windsor Terrace,  221 ;  reads Ids
})oem to Herschel.2l9  ;  attends the
King's concert,  222  ;  dines with the
Prince of Wales at Lord Mel-
bourne's, 333  ;  is made member of
tlie French Institute,  338,  342;  the
break-up of his health,  374  ;  his
death,  vii.  17.

Burney,  E.  F.,  his paintings,  ii.  92  ;
Miss F.  Burney sits to him,  150  ;
his  ])aintings for Mrs.  Montague,
V.  292.

Burney,  Miss Frances,  her birth and
education,  i.  v.  ;  description of,  as
a child,  ix. ;  bums her INISS.  at
fifteen,  xv. ;  publication of  "  Eve-
lina," XX.  ;  plan of her journal,  1 ;
is afraid tliat,  from the characters in
"Evelina,"'  she may be thought to
{lave ke])t low company,  20  ;  is de-
lighted by the unexpected success
of-  Evelina,''  22;  meets Dr.  Jolm-
fton at Streatham,  48 ;  meets Sir
Joshua Reynolds,  86  ;  her horror of
personal abuse,  1 09 ;  sends her
comedy to Mr.  Crisp and Dr.
Burney,  238  ;  veracity of her jour-
nal, 290  ;  her conversation with a
sceptic,  370  ;  letters to Mrs.  Thrale,  I
407,  409,  412,  417, 418,  428,  430;  ii.  |
9  ;  and on the death of Mr.  Thrale,  I
15,  17,  110  ;  letter to Mr.  Crisp on  |
death of Mr.  Thrale,  18  ;  proposes
to visit Mr.  Crisp,  108;  letters to
Mr.  Crisp about  "Cecilia,"  136,
141;  visits Brigliton,  158;  resolves
on going out less,  210  ;  letter to
Mrs.  Phillips,  281  ;  visit to Dr.
Johnson,  2S2 ;  letter to Mrs.  Lock,
350 ;  to Mrs.  Gast,  354  ;  is pre-
sented to the King and Queen,
371  ;  describes the etiquette,  405  ;
is oflered the situation of Keeper of
the Robes,  415  ;  letters on the sub-
ject, 410,  422,  421;  accepts the
office,  421  ;  enters upon her office,
iii.  10  ;  her daily routine,  28  ;  ac-  ,
compardes the Queen to Nuneham,  |
76  ;  begins reading to the Queen,  |
118;  letter to Mrs.  Phillips de-
scribing discomforts of her situation,

121;  her illness and resolutions,
217;  hears  "Cecilia"  alluded to
on the stage,  354  ;  newspaper para-
graphs, 452 ;  iv.  37 ;  her fatigue
on drawing-room days,  257 ;  is in-
trusted with the daily reports of the
King's health,  349  ;  refuses to leave
the Queen during the King's ill-
ness, 376  ;  accidentally meets the
King in Kew Gardens,  400  ;  keeps
a separate journal for religious sub-
jects, v.  27  ;  newspaper paragraphs,
91  ;  asks her father's leave to resign,
127;  finishes a tragedy,  149;  her
illness,  171 ;  her  '•  Memorial,"  175  ;
takes leave of the royal family and
household,  222  ;  congratulations of
friends on rejoining her family,
229;  travels for health,  230;  her
life at home,  262 ;  attends the
Queen during Mademoiselle Ja-
cobi's illness,  270  ;  visit to the
royal family,  308  ;  to Mrs.  Crewe
312;  consults Mrs.  Phillips about
her marriage,  424  ;  her father's ob-
jections, 426 ;  her marriage with
General d'Arblay,  429.  {See Ma-
dame d'Arblay.)

Burney,  Miss Susan,  her intended
marriage,  ii.  6.  (See Mrs.  Phillips.)

Burney,  Mr.,  vii.  258.

Burney,  Mrs.,  her pianoforte playing,
iv.  6 ;  V.  84  ;  vii.  258  ;  her death,
378.

Bute,  Lady,  iii.  237.

Byron,  Admiral,  ii.  4.

Byron,  Mrs.  and Miss,  i.  310,  324.

c.

Cadignan,  Madame de,  vii.  73.

Caen Wood,  v.  332.

Calais,  description of,  vi.  278.

"Caleb Williams,"  vi.  89.

Cambaceres,  vi.  309.

Cambridge,  Duke of,  v.  438.

Cambridge,  Richard Owen,    ii.  213,

241  ;  his verses on Barry's painting,

280  ;  his poems,  v.  129.
Cambridge,   Rev.  George Owen,  ii.

214,  229.
Cambridge,  Miss,  her illness,  ii.  301,

316.
i'  Camilla,"  beginning of,  vi.  29  ;  plan
2d2

390

INDEX.

of publishing by subscription,   45,  '
46;    publication of,  53;    i-reseiita-
tiou of,  to the King and Queen,  54 ;
sale of,  76  ;  review of,  78,  83.
Camilla Cottage,  building of,  vi.  S3,
86,  8S,  92 ;    expense of building,
119;  is finished,  162.
Campo,  Signor del,  iii.  417.
Canning,  George,  at Eton,  iii.  413;

his first speech,  vi,  19.
Canterbury,  Archbishop of,  desired to
issue public prayers for the King's
recovery,  iv.  312.
Carnevale,  Madame,  ii.  227.
Carnot,  character of,  vi.  203.
Caroline,  Queen,  lier return to Eng-
land, vii.  349.
Carter,  Mrs.,  i.  366;  her conversation,

ii.  12.
Cary,  General,  iii.  365.
Catalani,  Madame,  vii.  133.
Cator.  Mr.,  ii.  47.

"  Cecilia,"  account of Its progress,  ii.
114;  Mr.  Crisp"s advice about,
124;  plan of the work,  127;  dis-
cussions about,  136,  139,  141,  180  ;
it is pirated,  iii.  242.
"  Cerulia,''    a tale in dialogue,    by

Madame d'Arblay,  vi.  99.
Chapone,  Mrs.,    an evening at her
house,  ii.  222,   294;  note from,  v.
:     274  ;  visit to,  vi.  184  ;  letter from,
on death of her niece,    214;    her
death,  24 G.
Charlotte,  the Princess,   anecdotes of,
V.  147  ;   vii.  47;    her death,  302,
304.
Chastel,  Madame,  vii.  73.
Chateaubriand,   M.   de,  vii.    121  ;  is
made privy councillor,    132  ;  Ma-
dame de,  121.
Chatham,  Lord,  Admiral Burney's in-
terview with,  V.  135.
Chatre,  M.  de la,  v.  378  ;  Madame

de la,  359.
Chavagnac,  Mademoiselle de,  vi.  274.
Cheltenham,  Royal visit to,  iv.  156  ;
King and Queen visit the theatre
at,  213.
Chesterfield,  Lord,  v.  92.  ;__,'•■

Cheveley,  Mrs.,  iii.  163.
Choiseul,  Due de,  vii.  274.
Choisy,  INIadame de,  vii.  57.
Cholmley,  Mrs.,  i.  311,  355.
Cholmoudeley,  Mrs.,  i.  154.

'<  Cimene,"'  an' opera,  by Bertoni,  ii.
226.

Claremont,  iv.  59.

Clarence,  Duke of,  v.  24,  205 ;  vi.
153;  his character,  154.

"  ClarentJne,"  vi.  89.

Clayton.  Miss,  marries Colonel Fox,
iii.  191.

Clergy,  the French emigrant,  fund for
relief of,  vi.  4,  7,  10,  11.

Clerke,  Sir Philip Jennings,  conver-
sation with Dr.  Johnson,  i.  180;
his Bill,  ii.  138 ;  his death,  v.  57.

Clery,  M.,  vi.  190,  192.

Clinton,  Lord John,  ii.  12.

Collumpton,  V.  "245.

Cologne,  vii.  216;  French family at,
217.

Colunib  (Miss Burney's servant),  his
death,  v.  155;  his will,  155;  Ho-
race Walpole's assistance on the
subject,  158.

Conde,  Prince de,  vii.  32;  arrival at
Tournai,  119.

Condorcet,  v.  367.

Cook,  Captain,  death of,  i.  296.

Cooke,  Kittv,  i.  25  ;  ii.  110,  354  ;  iii.
305;  V.  421,423;  vi.  125,  153.

Courtney,  Mr.,  his  "  French Revolu-
tion," V.  139.

Courtown,  Lady,  is made Lady in
Waiting in the country,  iv.  252.

Coxe,  Mr.,  his Travels,  iii.  134.

"  Creole,  The,"  vi.  89.

Crewe,  Mrs.  (afterwards Lady),  iv.
113;  her beauty,  v.  312;  party at
her house,  313  ;  her plan for the re-
lief of the French clergy,  vi.  4  ;  de-
jeuner at house of,  42 :  her plan for
a periodical paper,  100  ;  offers her
house to Madame d'Arblay,  vii.  5,
7 ;  attends the drawing-room of
Louis XVIII.,  23.
Crewe,  Lord,  vii.  5.
Crisp,  Mr.,  reads  -'Evelina,"  i.  12;
letters to Miss Burney,  44, 144,  299,
319  ;  letter of advice to Miss Bur-
ney, 118;  dissuades her from writ-
ing a comedy,  130;  letter to Miss
Burney on Mr.  Thrale's death,  ii.
20;  upon criticism,  134;  on the
publication of  '-Cecilia,"'  151;  his
illness,  264  ;  his death,  267.
"  Critic,  The,"  i.  427.
Crutchlev,   Mr.,    i.    114;  ii.  22 ;  his

INDEX.

391

character,  23  ;  friendly disjnite with
Mr.  Seward,  53  ;  his love of hunt-
ing, 59;  conversation with,  about
pride,  63  ;  his park at Sunninghill,
77  ;  iv.  65,  84,  96,  148.

Cumberland,  Duke of,  his wound,  vi.
63  ;  anecdote of,  151.

Cumberland,  Mr.,  i.  52,  168,  264,
267  ;  offers his assistance to Ma-
dame d'Arblay in a new tragedy,
vi.  3-5  ;  his twofold character,  40.

Cumberland,  Lady Albinia,  vi.  207.

D.

D'Alembert,  his  "Eloges,"  iv.  252.

Darner,  Mrs.,  vi.  291.

Daniel,  Mr.,  vi.  202.

D'Arblay^  Rev.  Alexander,  his birth,
vi.  17  ;  his childhood,  39,  104,
.  114,  197,  205,  343;  is taken to
visit the royal family,  175;  is
taken to Paris,  274 ;  is brought
back to England to avoid the con-
scription, 355  ;  obtains the Tancred
scholarship,  vii.  4  ;  goes to Cam-
bridge, 14  ;  his love of mathematics,
19  ;  his aversion to studying on the
Cambridge plan,  238,  277  ;  his de-
gree at Cambridge,  313  ;  is ordained
deacon,  336  ;  and priest,  345  ;  ap-
pointment to Ely Chapel,  and
death,  379.

D'Arblay,  General,  is introduced to
Mrs.  Phillips,  v.  360,  365;  oilers
to appear as evidence in favour of
the French king,  36G  ;  gives lessons
in French to Miss Burney,  399  ;
his attempted defence of the French
king,  407  ;  his marriage to Miss
Burney,  418 ;  offers to join the
Toulon expedition,  vi.  5  ;  is refused,
14  ;  his gardening,  23,  26,  28,  115,
239  ;  his character,  27  ;  lines to his
wife,  31  ;  receives news of his rela-
tions, 116;  determines to bring up
his son a Protestant,  165  ;  his wish
to be naturalized in England,  165;
is erased from the list of emigrants,
244  ;  his visits to France to recover
his property,  214,  250;  requests to
be apjjointed Commercial Consul,
256  ;  fails,  264  ;  appointed to St.
Domingo,  264 ;  appointment can-

celled from his refusing to take arms
against England,  264  ;  his relations
at Joigny,  314 ;  obtains bis retraite,
329 ;  appointed to a government
office,  332 ;  made officer of the
Royal Garde de Corps,  vii.  48;
made field-marshal,  50 ;  refuses
three military appointments under
Napoleon,  62 ;  obtains a passport
for Madame d'Arblay,  71 ;  his mi-
litary employments,  74  ;  joins the
army,  80 ;  meets his wife at
Brussels,  132  ;  accompanies Louis
XVIIL to Lille,  183  ;  his mission
to Treves,  199;  is injured by the
kick of a horse,  210  ;  stopped by
foreigners at the French frontier,
226  ;  receives the title of Comte,
239  ;  beginning of his illness,  301,
311 ;  Madame d'Arblay's narrative
of his illness and deatli,  313.
D'Arblay,  Madame,  writes a pam-
phlet in behalf of the French clergy,
vi.  12;  profits of,  43;  letters from,
describing her marriage and resi-
dence at Bookham,  14,21;  birth
of her son,  17;  begiiis  ''Camilla,"
29 ;  letter to M.  de Narbov)ne,  after
his losses,  48  ;  representation of her
tragedy,  32,  40  ;  visit to royal
family to present  "  Camilla,'"  54,
64  ;  plans for building Camilla
Cottage,  76  ;  reviews of  ''  Camilla,"
80  ;  letter to Dr.  Burney on plan for
a periodical paper,  102  ;  letter ex-
cusing herself from lengthy corre-
spondence, 109;  description of her
menage,  129  ;  removal to Camilla
Cottage,  131  ;  visits to the royal
family,  137,  163;  obtains leave for
her father to continue at Chelsea,
1 66  ;  receives an anonymous present,
188;  visits the Princess Amelia,
206  ;  letter to Mrs.  Chapone,  215  ;
withdraws her comedy in compli-
ance with her fathers wishes,  241,
242 ;  letter on education,  259 ;  re-
[  grets at the prospect of leaving
Camilla Cottage,  261  ;  joins her
:  husband in Paris,  274,  275.  283  ;
I her lite at Passy,  331  ;  difficulty of
communicating with her family,
i 336,  339  ;  imdergoes an operation,
j 347  ;  attempts to return to England,
I 352;    succeeds in the second at-

392

INDEX.

tempt,  355  :  detained at Dunkirk,
358  ;  receives coinmissioiis iVom
friends in Paris,  358 ;  makes ac-
quaintance with Spanish prisoners,
302;  is examined by the police in
consequence,  366 ;  voyage  (o Eng-
land, 370-2  ;  letter to a friend,  vii.
8 ;  is introduced to Mr.  Wilher-
force,  12;  presented to Louis
XVIII.,  36  ;  to the Duchess d'An-
gouleme,  54  ;  leaves Paris with
Madame dHenin,  93;  is obliged
to pass for a femme-de-chambre,
99;  arrives at Tournai,  113  ;  sus-
pense concerning her husband's
safety,  117  ;  arrives at Brussels,
125  ;  her residence at Brussels dur-
ing tlie battle of Waterloo,  147  ;
attends on the wounded.  178  ;  letter
to her son,  181  ;  goes to meet her
husband,  at Treves,  212;  returns to
England with her husband,  232;
settles at Bath,  235;  the French
marriage proposed for her son.  217;
letter of advice to her son,  254 ;
dangerous adventure at Ilfracombe,
282,  301  :  returns to London,  337  ;
letters to Mrs.  Thrale,  353,  358  ;  to
Mrs.  Burney,  365,  372;  her first
seizure,  370;  publishes her father's
memoirs,  376 ;  her illness and death,
381.

Davenant,  Mrs.,  description of,  ii.
43.

Delanev.  Mr?.,  her paper flowers,  ii.
208,  249,  272,  279,  298 ;  her grief
for the death of Lady Mansfield,
312  ;  is presented with a house by
the king,  346 ;  Miss Burney visits
her at Windsor,  316,  411;  begins
the history of her life,  iii.  182;
her death,  iv.  130:  her housekeeper
pensioned by the king,  134.

Delap,  Dr.,  i.  201 ;  his tragedv,  204,
207  ;  ii.  182.

Delaporte,  'Mr.,  ii.  261.

Devonshire,  Duchess of,  ii.  57 ;  v.
253,  257.

Devonshire,  Duke of,  ii.  180.

Dickenson,  Jlr.  and Mrs.,  vi.  202.

Ditclier,  xtliss,  grand-daughter of
Richardson,  i.  346.

Dobson.  Mrs.,  her translation of Pe-
trarch, i.  336,  342.

Douay,  its loyalty,  vii.  lOS.

Douglas,  Mrp,,  v.  17.
^  Duckworth,  Captain,  v.  53.
I Duncan,   Lady Mary,  ii.  2G7,  286  ;
her joy at Admiral Duncan's suc-
cess, vi.  145,  151.
I Duncannon,  Lady,  v.  250.
Diindas,  iMr.  (afterwards Sir David),

iii.  34.
Duras,  Due de,  goes to France incog.,

vi.  253.
Duras,  Duchesse de,  vii,  56,  128.

E.

"  Edwy and Edilda,"  a tale,  i.  323.

Effingham,  Lady.  iii.  24,  38.

Egeiton,  Mrs.  Ariana,  iii.  254;  v.  12;
vi.  183.

Eliot,  Mr.,  ii.  13.

Elizabeth,  the Princess,  iii.  17,  S?,
193;  iv.  56:  her apartment at
Windsor,  vi.  65;  vii.  64 ;  her let-
ters, 146,  303.

Elliot,  Mr.,  V.  314.

EUoi,  Dr.,  vii.  321,  332.

Erskine,  Mr.,  v.  319  ;  his speeches,  vi.
19:  conversation on Reform,  42.

Espaibos,  Comte de,  vii.  273.

Eton College,  "Speeches"  at,  iii.  412.

"  Etruria,"  V»'edgewood*s manufactory
at,  vi.  120.

"Evelina,"  publication of,  i.  xx,  and
5;  0}jinions of,  8  ;  reviews of,  11;
its success,  22.

Exeter,  royal visit to,  v.  48.

Fairly,  Colonel,  iii.  71  ;  illness of his
wife,  27G;  her death,  431  ;  conver-
sations with,  iv.  28,  163,  169,  183,
233,  378;  fit of the gout,  194;  is
made Master of St.  Catherine's,  ir.
239;  his inlluence over the King
during his derangement,  300  ;  mar-
ries Miss Fuzilier,  v.  77,  84;  re-
turns to Court with Mrs.  Fairlv,  87,
142.

Falmoutli,  Lord,  v.  56,

Famham Castle,  v.  231.

Farren,  Miss,  marries the Earl of
Derbv,  vi.  152.

INDEX.

393

Fauconberg Hall,  lent to the King

and Queen,  iv.  159,  1G7.
Feltre,  Due de,  vii.  131.
Fenars,  Lord and Lady de,  ii.  180.
Ferrv,  Mr.,  his house and garden,  i.

364.
Fielding,  Mrs.,  iii.  20.
Finch,  Dr.,  i.  376,  390.
Finch,  Lady Charlotte,  iii.  20.
Finch,  Miss,  iii,  149.
Fisher,  Rev.  Mr.,  iii.  132,  147.
rite,   Madame la,  ii.  362  ;  iii.   135,

16G,   201  ;    her book,    3(i6,  471  ;

letter from,  v.  137.
Fitzgerald,    Colonel and IMrs.,   their

visit to Camilla Cottage,  vi.  231.
Fitzgerald,  Lady Henrv,  vi.  198.
Flint,  Bet,  i.  64.
Forster,  I^dy Elizabeth,  v.  253.
Fouche,  M.,  vi.  353,  357.
Fox,  Charles,  liis speeches at Hastings"

trial,  iv.  112;  V,  143,  393.
Francis,  Mrs.,  iii.  131 ;  v.  272;  death

ofher Imsband,  373;  her second mar-
riage, vi.  129.     {See jMrs.  Broome.)
Francis,  Sir Philip,  iv.  75.
Franklin,  Benjamin,  i.  138.
French lands,  vi.  IGS.
Freuss,  M.  and Madame,  iii.  395.
Fruirmore,   alterations at,   v.  43S  ;   vi.

145.
Fuller,   Captain,    5.   201,   205,    20S,

217.
Fuller,  Rose,  i.  61,69,  112,  2i7.
Fuzilier,  Miss,  iv.   109,  251  ;   v.   77.

(See Mrs.  Fairly.)

Galway,  Lady,  ii.  1S9.

Garde Cunsulaire,  vi.  256.

Garrick,  David,  monument to^  at
Lichfield,  vi.  122.

Garrick,  Mrs.,  iv.  41.

Garter,  the Order of,  iii.  269.

Gartli,  Miijor,  v.  1G3.

Genlis,  Madame de,  a note from,  ii.
344;  iii.  124,  231  ;  her estuhlisli-
ment at Bury witli Mdlle.  d'Or-
leans,  V.  30 1,  336,  349,  439.

George the Third,  visits Mrs.  Delany,
ii.  360;  conversation with Miss
Burney,  394;  attempt upon his
life,    iii.    45,    70 ;    his ofiering as

Sovereign of the Garter,  269;  his
birthday,  367  ;  beginning of his
illness,  iv.  272 ;  his first delirium,
284 ;  contirmation of his illness,
285  ;  pojjular anxiety about,  336,
346;  his removal to Kew,  340;
amendment and recovery,  411,  414;
public thanksgiving,  v.  3  ;  illumi-
nation and addresses,  ^  ;  returns to
Windsor,  10;  his birthday,  204;
his complete mental derangement,
vi.  355.

Gerard,  his picture of  *' L'Kntree
d'Henri lY.,'  vii.  271.

Gibbon,  Mr.,  notefiom,  ii.  278.

Gillies,  Dr.,  V.  267.

Girardin,  M.,  v.  366.

Giraudet,  M.,  vii.  271.

Glasse,  Dr.,  v.  39.

Glastonbury Abl>ey,  v.  24G.

Gloucester,  iv.  179.

Gloucester,  Duke of,  vii.  345.

Goldsmith,  Dr.,  i.  59.

Goldsworthy,  Colonel,  iii.  161,  ITS;
his dispute with Madame la Fite,
192,239;  his domestic arrange-
ments, 253  ;  at the King's concert,
255,  376,  423  ;  vi.  207.

Goldsworthy,  Miss,  iii.  22;  v5.  207.

Gomme,  Miss,  iii.  131.

Goodenough,  Dr.,  vi.  220.

Gordon,  Lord George,  his I'wts,  i.  3S6.

Grattan,  Mr.,  vii.  24.

"  Greatcoat,  The,"  iii.  210.

Gregory,  Miss,  i.  102 ;  marries Mr.
Alison,  ii.  339.

Grenville,  General,  iv.  35,  267,  277.

Greville,  Mr.,  i.  419.

Greville,  Mrs.,  novel by,  v.  322.

Guest,  Miss,  her piano-forte playing*,
i.  335.

Guiche,  Madame de,  iii.  379.

Gwynn,  Colonel,  iii.  391.

Gwynn,  Mrs.,  ii.  12;  v.  37,  145.

H.

Haggerdorn,    Mrs.,   resigns her oflice,

ii.  415.
Hamilton,  Mr.,  i.  2S6.
Hampden.  Mrs.,  ii.  I'JO.
Handwriting,    characters told by.   ii.

91.
Hanway,  Jonas,  ii.  231.

394

INDEX.

the King,
iii.  52.

IV.

i.  84  ;  visit to
69;
i her

Harcourt,  Karl of,  i.  109;  v.  17.

Ilarconrt,  Mrs.,  iii.  lO::^,  384.

Harrington.  Dr.,  i.  332.

H.istings,  Mr.,  meets Miss Buniey,  ii.
353.  414  ;  his  "  Memoirs of India,"
iii.  304;  his trial,  iv.  50,  93,  108,
137;  V.  89,  103,  113,  135,  2^1,
293,  300 ;  his impromptu durinij
Mr.  Grey's speech,  90 ;  efl'ective
speecli of liis counsel,  119;  his de-
fence, 19G;  his speech,  311;  iiis
acquittal,  vi.  36  ;  readiness to assist
in circulation of  "  Camilla,"'  48.

Hastings,  Mrs.,  ii.  414;  iii.  39,  71  ;
V.  305.

Hawke,  Ladv,  ii.  118;  her novel,  iv,
147.

Hawkins,  Mr.,  v.  341.

Heberden,  Dr.,  attends
315  ;  Mrs,  and Miss,

"Heir at Law,"  vi.  174

Henin,    Princesse d',  v'

Camilla Cottage,    135;    vii.
her Ihght from Paris,  73,  87  ,
death,  vii.  374.

Henry,  las History of England,  v.  143.

Herscliel,  Dr.,  iii.  129;  his telescope,
261,  441;  iv.  267;  Dr.  Buniey's
visit to,  vi.  125  ;  liis criticism on
Dr.  Burney's poem,  210;  visit to
his house described,  219.

Herschel,  Miss,  her comet,  iii.  130,
442.

Hesketh,  Ladv,  i.  421 ;  v.  331.

Hill,  Mrs.,  vi.  84.

Holroyd,  Mrs.,  her translation of
Sturm's Reflections,  v.  107.

Hood,  Lord,  v.  56.

Hoole,  Mr.,  his attempts at conversa-  !
tion with General d'Arblav,  vi.  j
27.  '  j

Horneck,  Mrs.,  i.  151,  |

Howard,  Sir George,  iii.  24,  25,  39.

Hulin,  General,  vi.  302.  |

"  Humourist,  The,"  a farce,  iv.  51.        j

Hunter,  his Biographical Commentary,
iv.  274.  '     ;

Hurd.  Dr.,  Bishop of Worcester,  iii.
248,271  ;  V.  11.

Hutton,  Mr.,  v.  267.  j

Ilfracombe,  vii.  261 ;  ships in distress

at,   203;    tiie Wildersmouth,  283;

and dangerous adventure at,  284.
Impey,  Sir Elijah,  iv.  91.
Ireland,     threatened invasion of,   vi.

97,  101  ;   secret exj>edition,  227.

Jackson,  Mr.,  of Exeter,  ii.  232.

Jacob.  Mr.,  vii.  261.

Jacobi,  Mdlle.,  succeeds Miss Buniey
as Keeper of the Robes,  v.  210.

Jaucourt,  M.  de,  v.  301  ;  his escape
to Switzerland,  vi.  14.

Jebb,  Sir Richard,  M.D.,  ii.  9.

.Jeniiiijgs,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  44.

Jenvns,  Soame,  ii.  242.

Jerningham,  Mr.,  i,  327,  333.

Johnson,  Samuel,  LL.D.,  his praise
of  '"Evelina,''  i.  31:  meets Miss
Bumey at Streatham,  38  ;  describes
Garrick and Sir John Hawkins,
40 ;  his opinion on ladies'  dress,
02  ;  on  "  Evelina,''  71  ;  reproves
Hannah More for flattering him,
81  ;  his domestic arrangements,  93  ;
his  "  Life of Cowley,"  99  ;  his love
of nonsense,  193;  opinion of Pope's
"  Windsor Forest,''  22S  ;  teaches
Miss Bumey Latin,  235  ;  made
executor to Mr.  Thrale,  ii.  22 ;
quarrels with Mr.  Pepys,  45  ;  is
reconciled,  82;  his deafness,  99;
panegyric on Miss Burney,  102  ;
his illness,  107;  argument with
Mr.  Pepys,  103,  198;  his illness,
228,  295 ;  his paralytic stroke,
269  ;  note from,  283  ;  conversation
with Miss Burney on genius,  327  ;
his illness,  332;  death,  338;  his
character,  342;  his  ''Meditations,"
353 ;  monument to,  at Lichfield,
vi.  122;  anecdotes of,  162;  vii.
255.

Jones,  Colonel,  in command at Brus-
sels, vii.  152.

Jordan,  Mrs  ,  in the  '•'  Romp,"  iv.  34  ;
in the  "Country Girl,''  200;  in
"Sir Harry Wildair,"  207.

Juliers,  vii.  216.

Juniper Hall,  rented by the French
emigrants,  v.  339  ;  society at,  399,
411.

INDEX.

395

K

Kennlcott,  Mrs.,  iii.  236.

Kew,  Miss Barney's apartments at,
iii.  33,  37:  loyalty of,  65;  visit
to,  193',  arrangements at,  during
the King's illness,  iv.  347.

Killaloe,  Bishop 'of,  ii.  24.

Klopstock,  his  "Messiah,"'  ii.  401.

Knight,  Miss,  her  "Dinorbas''  and
"  Marcus Flaminius,"  v.  292  ;  vii.
307.

Knowle,  description of,  i.  249.

L.

Ladd,  Lady.  i.  122,  125.

Lafayette,  M.  de,  his character,  v.
368  ;  and treatment of,  371—375  ;
vi.  22 ;  letter from,  describing his
imprisonment,  128.

Lafayette,  Madame de,  vi.  296.

Lafayette,  Mademoiselle de,  vi.  298.

La Forey,  Admiral,  and his family,
v.  51  ;  created a baronet,  60.

Lajard,  M..  vi.  195.

Lalande,  M.  de,  iv.  245.

Lally Tolendal,  Comte de,  his tra-
gedy, V.  290,410;  letter from,
434  ;  his  ''  Letters to the Electors,"'
and  "  Pieces Justificatives,"  vi.  30  ;
his pleading for the emigrants,  85  ;
conversation,  90;  his literary com-
positions, 248 ;  letter about the
restoration,  vii.  40,  69 ;  his fliglit
from Paris,  89,  110;  his farewell
to public life,  144.

Lambart,  Mrs.,  i.  337;  v.  57;  her
death,  vii.  356.

Lameth,  M.  de,  prefect of Amiens,
vi.  254  ;  vii.  99.

Langton,  Mr.,  v.  307.

I^ansdowne,  Earl of,  v.  62.

Latrol)e,  the Messieurs,  ii.  32i,  333;
v.  2ti7.

Lauriston,  General,  vi.  303,  327.
329.

Laval,  Madame de,  vii.  47,  179.

Law,  Mr.,  counsel for Mr.  Hastings,
V.  2S2.

Lawrence,  Sir Thomas,  his boyhood,
i.  303.

Lee,  Mrs.  Sydney,  i.  303.

Lee,  Mr.,  in  *•'  Pierre,"  i.  328.

Le Fevre,  Mr.,  vii.  299.

Leigh,  Mrs.  and Miss,  i.  332.

Lennox,  Charlotte,  i.  67.

Le Tessier,  ii.  274.

Lever,  Sir John Ashton,  ii.  222.

Liancourt,  Due de,  v.  343  ;  his es-
cape, 316.

Lichfield,  vi.  120,  121  ;  monuments
to Johnson and Garrick,  122.

Lightfoot,  Blr.,  iii.  337;  his death,
iv.  137.

Lind,  Dr.  and Mrs.,  ii.  359,  365,  393  ;
iii.  219.

Linley,  Miss,  i.  167.

Literary Club,  vi.  37.

Lobau,  Count,  is taken prisoner,  vii.
163.

Locke,  Mr.,  his benevolence,  ii.  324,
389;  iii.  124;  iv.  17;  vi.  30;  mu-
nificent contribution to the Pitt
fund,  92  ;  ofters ground for building
Camilla Cottage,  76  ;  his visit to
Camilla Cottage,  163,  24S  :  his
death,  355.

Locke,  Mrs.,  ii.  311 ;  iii.  134  ;  v.  19 ;
her death,  vii.  378.

Locke,  William,  his drawings,  ii.  353,
390;  iii.  444.

Longleat,  royal visit to,  v.  62.

Lort,  Dr.,  i.  73  ;  ii.  23  ;  his commen-
tary on the Lord's Prayer,  v.  101  ;
his'death,  169.

Lort,  :\rrs„  v.  144.

Louis XVI.,  enters the National As-
sembly unarmeJ,  v.  344 ;  M.  de
Narbonne's account of,  365  ;  his
execution,  389,  394.

Louis XVIII.,  his levee at Grill on  "s
hotel,  vii.  21  ;  his speech in Eng-
lish, 36;  his reception of the Duke
of Wellington,  51  ;  resolves not to
quit Paris on Napoleon's return,  72  ;
is forced to fly,  86  ;  reaches Lille,
114;  disbands his garde de corps,
128,  151  ;  restored to his throne,
iSl  ;  anecdote of,  271.

Lowe,  Mr.,  portrait painter,  ii.  41.

Luc,  M.  and Madame de,  ii.  3i)2 ;
advice to Miss Burney,  iii.  60.

Lul worth Castle,  v.  44,  46.

Luxembourg,  Due de,  note to M.
d"Arblay,  vii.  53;  his negotiation
witii tlie allied troops,  144.

Lyme,  v.  241.

39G

INDEX.

Lyndliurst,  royiil visit to,  v.  28,  29.
Lyttelton,  I^^rd,  his Lil'e l)y Dr.  Juliii-
son,  ii.  45.

M.

Macartney,  Lonl,  false report of his
death,  vi.  211.

Maisoniieiive.  Madame de,  vii.  73.

Malouet de Maleslierbes,  !M.,  olVers to
plead for Louis XVI.,  v.  372.

Manners,  Colonel,  iii.  3.3S,  373;  his
singing,  3S1  ;  his electioneering,
iv.  218,  325  ;  dispute with Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  v.  20;  in parlia-
ment, 102.

IMarie Antoinette,  her execution,  vi.
13.

^Markham,  Mr.,  defends Mr.  Hastings,
v.  300.

Mary,  the Princes?,  iii.  42:  her first
appearance at court,  v.  206.

Mason,  Rev.  William,  his  "  Essay on
Church Music,"  vi.  41  ;  his hymns,
89  ;  letters to Mrs.  Delanv,  91.

Mathias Mr.,  iii.  256;  vii.  307.

]Maurville,  Madame de,  vii.  125.

Mawer,  Miss,  iii.  59.

Mazancourt,  Comte de,  vii.  135.

Meaux,  vii.  229.

"Medonte,"  an opera,  ii.  184.

Melmoth,  Mrs.,  i.  341.

Merlin,  ii.  6,  52.

Merry,  Mr.  and Miss,  v.  264.

Metastasio,  his works,  v.  385.

Mhaughendorf,  Miss,  iii.  78.

"  Microcosm,  The,"  iii.  236.

Miller,  Lady,  i.  357,  391.

Millin,  M.,  vii.  272.

Milton Abbey,  v.  239.

"Moeurs,  Les,"  an epigram,  vii.  275.

Molloy,  Captain,  v.  53,  55.

Monckton,  Hon.  !Miss,  ii.  179;  assem-
bly at her house,  188.

Monmoulin,  Mile.,  iii.  55  ;  her mar-
riage, v.  215.

Monso,  Dr.,  ii.  277.

Montague,  Duke of,  iii.  191.

Montagu,  Matthew,  ii.  237.

Montagu,  Mrs.,  i.  101,  309,  318,  321 ;
description of,  ii.  8,  9;  letter from,
403;  is criticised in tde  '"Ob-
server," iii.  184  ;  letter to Mrs.  De-
lanv,  220;  V.   292;    breakfast at

her house,  302 ;  lier age aiid infir-
mities, vi.  21 1.
Montmorenci,    Due de,   v.    359 his

escape to Switzerland,  vi.  14.
More,  Hannah,   her  "  IJiis Bleu«,"  ii.

284  ;  her  "  Manners of the Great,"

iv.  lOS  ;  her  "  Will Chip,"  v.  389;

her illness,  vi.  10,
Morellet,  Abbe,  vi.  340,  348.
''  Morning Herald,  Ti)e,"  paragraph in,

on tiie King's illness,  iv.  280.
Mount Kdgcumbe,  v.  56.
Mount Edgcumbe,  Lord and J^dy,

V.  07.
Mountmorris,  Lord,  iv.  210 ;  v.  72.
Mulgrave,  Lord,  i.  313,  328,  350.  377;

his marriage with Miss Cholmley,

iii.  3S4  ;  v.  305  ;  vii.  302.
Mulgrave,  Ladv,  iv.  37;  her death,

146;  vii.  302.
Murphy,  Mr.,    i.    183;  advises Miss

Burney to write a comedy,   185;

which he reads,  197,  297  ;  'iv.  151.
Musgrave,   Mr.,   ii.  82 ;  his comedy,

93  ;  his conversation,  100.
"Music,    History of,"   Dr.    Burney's

conversation about,  with the King,

iii.  275.
Musters,  Mrs.,  i.  261.

N.

Napoleon.     (.See Bonaparte.)

Nai bonne,  M.  de,  v.  359 ;  requests
leave to a])pear as evidence for the
French King,  366  ;  his parentage,
370;  letter of thanks to M.  and
Madame d'Arblay.  vi.  52, 227, 25 1 ;
his death,  vii.  15,  236.

Netherlands,  King and Queen of,  vii.
141.

Ney,  Marshal,  departs to meet Napo-
leon, vii.  72.

"  Noah's Ark,"  a  "  Mystery,"  iv.  14.

Norbury Park,  description of,  ii.  323,
330 ;  vi.  229.

Nore,  the,  mutiny at,  vi.  139.

Norfolk,  Duke of,  name erased from
the Privv Council,  and why,  vi.
167.

North,  Mrs.,  i.  350;  ii.  239,  271.
I Nugent,  Colonel,  presents an address
J to the French King,  vii.  36.
''  Nunebam,  royal visit to,  iii.  7G.

INDEX.

397

o.

Ogle,  Mrs.,  iv.  201.

Onslow,  Captain,  v.  60.

Orange,  Prince of,  vi.  119;  vil.  141,
180.

Orange,  Princess of,  congratulates
Princess Elizabeth on the naval vic-
tories, vi.  141;  description of,  150.

Orel,  Mrs.,  assemblies at her house,  ii.
242,301;  iv.  41.

Orford,  Lord,  vi.  43.

Ossory,  Dean of,  i.  316.

Owhyhee,  pattern of a court dress from,
ii.  7.

Oxford,  royal visit to,  iii.  93.

P.

Pacchierotti,  i.  136.  429;  in  "  Ri-
naldo,"*  323 ;  conversation with
Mr.  Cambridge,  ii.  248.  278;  his
residence at Padua,  vii.  3G8.

Paine,  Thomas,  v.  302.

Palmer,  Miss,  heiress to Sir Joshua
Reynolds,  v.  291  ;  marries Lord
Inchiquin,  300,  336.

Paoli,  General,  ii.  15').

Paradise,  ]Mr.  and Mrs.,  party at their
house,  ii.  116.

Paris,  Opera Bufla at,  vi.  291,292;
"  La Folie de Chartres,"  295 ;  re-
view at the Tuileries,  300  ;  mor-
tality from la grippe,  325 ;  is
crowded with English,  vii,  50;
ieie to Louis XVIII.,  50;  oc-
cupied by the allies,  230.

Parr,  Dr.,  ii.  228.

Parry,  the Misses,  vi.  219.

"  Pa'ston Letters,  the,"  iii.  322.

Pembroke,  Countess of,  i.  2G1.

Pepys,  Sir Lucas,  ii.  9  ;  attends tlie
King,  iv.  315,  331,  336  ;  vi.  197.

Pepys,  Mr.,  ii.  45,  82;  vi.  215.

Percv,  Dr.,  v.  255.

Peterborough,  Bishop of,  i.  318,  362.

Phillips,  Captain,  ii.  5,  111.

Phillips,  Mrs.,  goes abroad,  ii.  317;
lier descrij)tion of French emigres,
V.  339,  3o8,  374;  goes to Ireland,
vi.  75;  her illness,  226,  231  ;  re-
turns to England,  233  ;  her death,
23G.

Phipps,  Edmund,  i.  lo'l.

"Pilgrim,  The,"  by Bishop Patrick,
v.  37.

Piozzi,  Signor,  his singing,  ii.  76,  166.

Piozzi,  Mrs.,  publishes Dr.  Johnson's
letters,  iv.  5,  15  ;  her Italian tour,
v.  38,  108;  meeting with Dr.  Bur-
ney,  vi.  25,  335;  letters from,  vii.
352,  356,  361  ;  her death and cha-
racter, 363.    {See also Mrs.  Thrale.)

Pitt,  William,  v.  47;  vi.  92.

Planta,  Miss,  iii.  26  ;  her office,  78.

Planta,  Mr.,  v.  39.

Plymouth dockyard,  v.  42.

Plymouth,  Lord,  iv.  14.

Poggi,  fans painted by,  ii.  13.

Poix,  Prince de,  vii.  69.

Poller,  Colonel,  iii.  14,  27.

Polignac,  Madame de,  iii.  379.

Porson,  Dr.,  his circumstances,  v.  330.

Porteus,  Dr.,  Bishop of Chester,  i.
334,  310.

Portland,  Duchess of,  ii.  251;  her
death,  346.

Portland,  Duke of,  ii.  316.

Powderliam Castle,  v.  244.

"  Pursuits of Literature,"  guess at its
author,  vi.  88.

Premorel,  M.  de,  vii.  135.

Price,  Major,  iii.  17,  159.

Prussia,  King of,  vii.  47,  49.

Q.

Queen Charlotte,  her kindness to Mrs.
Delany,  ii.  298  ;  desires that Miss
Burney may be brought to Wind-
sor, 35S ;  conversation with,  399  ;
appoints Miss Burney Keeper of the
lloltes,  415;  her talents,  iii.  169;
conversations with,  202,  297;  her
birt!i-da\',  279  ;  kindness during
Mis<3 Buruey's illness,  362 ;  con-
versation with,  iv.  20  ;  her conduct
during the King's illness,  285 ;  is
visited by her suns,  293 ;  her illu-
mination on the King's recovery,
V.  8;  consults INIiss Burney about
her successor in ollice,  ISS  ;  settles
a pension on Miss Burney,  219;
approves of her marriage with Ge-
neral d'Arblay,  vi.  224  ;  is alarmed
by a madwoman,  vii.  5;  her visit
to Bath,   303,   315;    receives the

398

INDEX.

news of the Princess Charlotte's
illiieis and death,  304  ;  her own ill-
ness, 336  ;  her death,  338  ;  sketch
of her character,  338-340.

R.

Raikes,  Mr.,  founder of the Sunday-
schools,  iv.  179.

Rauzziiii,  his Opera,  ii.  132.

Rayinoiid,  Madame,  vi.  276.

Regency HiW,  the,  iv.  410 ;  is post-
])oned on account of the kings re-
covery, 414.

Regent,  the Prince.  (See Prince of
Wales.)

Rennell,  Major,  his map of Hindostan,
V.  261,  269.

Revolution,  the French ;  destruction
of the Bastille,  v.  66  ;  beginning of,
described by French fugitives,  233  ;
recall of the English ambassador,
334;  the National Assembly,  344,
364  ;  decree of the Convention
.  against the emigrants,  366  ;  hard-
ships undergone by the French
princes^  381 ;  letters about,  383,
391  ;  progress of,  vi,  5 ;  re-
newal of,  124;  pecuniary embar-
rassments of the Directory,  203.  (See
Louis XVI.,  Bonaparte,  French
clergv,  &c.)

Reynolds,  Mrs.,  ii.  219.

Reynolds,  Sir Joshua,  sits up all night
to read  '•  Evelina,"  i.  43 ;  party at
his house,  150 ;  his portrait of Dr.
Burney,  ii.  6 ;  his pictures for the
exhibition,  13  ;  dinner at his house,
143  :  is threatened with blindness,
v.  265;  his death,  290.

Rhine,  tlie scenerv of,  vii.  221,  222.

Ricci,  Count de,vi.  196.

Richmond,  Duchess of,  her ball at
Brussels,  vii.  196.

Roberts,  Dr.,  Provost of Eton,  iii.  116,
22G.

Roche,  Madame de la,  iii.  135,  166.

Rogers,  Samuel,  vi.  195  ;  dinner at his
house,  vii.  12.

Ronsac,  the Chevalier de,  vii.  272.

Rothes,  Lady,  ii.  168  ;  vi.  197.

Rousseau,  Jean Jacques,  ii.  396,

Royal,  the Princess,  iii.  32,  42,  82,
14S  ;  her birth-day,  158;  conversa-  ,

tion with,  165;  her first interview
with the Prince of Wirtemberg,  vi.
77;  and marriage with,  13S.

Roye,  its loyalty,  vii.  209.

Russia,  Emperor of,  vii.  47,  49,  228.

Rutland,  Duchess of,  ii.  57.

s.

Sacchini,  the composer,  ii.  75.

Saltrim,  royal visit to,  v.  49.

Sangro,  Duca di,  ii.  185  ;  his mimicry,
205.

Sauerkraut,  M.  de Narbonne's re-
ceipt for,  vi.  229.

Save and Sele,  Ladv,  ii.  117  ;  Lord,
120.

Schwellenberg,  Mrs.,  iii.  12;  her dis-
])osition,  64  ;  dispute with Colonel
Manners,  385  ;  her pet frogs,  391  ;
her ill-lmmour,  457  ;  her attack on
]Mrs,  Piozzi,  iv.  19  ;  her illness,  50,
391  ;  airings with,  v.  4.

Scott,  Major,  iv.  74.

Scott,  Sir Walter,  his visit to  ^Madame
dArblay,  vii.  375.

Sebastiani,  entertainment given bv,
vii.  242.

Selwin,  Mr.,  i.  277;  v.  300.

Senate,  the French,  vi.  255.

Sevigne,  Madame de,  her Letters,  ii.
323

Seward,  Mr.,  i.  37,  81.  121,  223  ;  his
ennui,  218  ;  his amateur doctoring,
ii.  71  ;  his plan of travelling,  S8  ;
sends Miss Burnev an engraving of
Dr.  Johnson,  233',  324;  iv.  173;
his  "  Anecdotes of Distinguished
Characters,'"  vi.  187 ;  his death,
217.

Sheffield,  Lord and Ladv,  ii.  12.

Shelley,  Lady,  i.  422.

Sliepherd,  Dr.,  iii.  435  ;  iv.  242.

Sherborne Castle,  royal visit to,  v.  45.

Sheridan,  Mrs.,  i.  167.

Sheridan,  Richard Brinsley,  i.  170,
293  ;  iv.  127.

Sliipley,  Miss Georgina,  ii.  144.

Siddons,  j\Irs.,  her manners,  ii.  201  ;
the King's praise of her,  397  ;  reads
to the Queen,  iii,  424  ;  her perform-
ance in  "Portia,"  iv.  50;  in  ''Rosa-
lind," V.  40  ;  in  "  Ladv Townley,"'
44;    in  "Mi-s.  Oakley,"  47:    her

INDEX.

399

stately manner,  3S  ;  buys Sadler's
Wells,  vi.  152.

Sldmouth,  V.  242.

Smelt,  Mr.,  ii.  313,  410;  the King
gives him a house at Kew,  iii.  163,
217,  222;  his advice to Miss Bur-
ney,  298 ;  wishes to become page to
the King during his illness,  iv.  300  ;
his plan of retirement,  v.  18  ;  death
of his wife,  88.

Smith,  Charlotte,  her son wounded at
Dunkirk,  vi.  3.

Smith,  Sir Sidney,  his escape,  vi.  320.

Solander,  Dr.,  i.  297.

Soloyns,  Madame,  vi.  348,

Sommery,  Madame de,  vii.  260.

Sophia,  the Princess,  anecdote of,  ii.
387 ;  iii.  42.

Sophia,  Princess,  of Gloucester,  vi.
155.

Souza,  Madame de,  vi.  317.

Spencer,  Lord,  vi.  23,  36.

Spencer,  Lady,  v.  250 ;  description of,
vi.  36,

Stael,  Madame de,  her efforts to save
lives in the French Revolution,  v,
364  ;  her residence at Juniper Hall,
394 ;  letters from,  395,  408,  417,
432  ;  her escape from Paris,  397  ;
rumours about,  403  ;  returns to the
Continent,  419  ;  her description of
Norbury Park,  433  ;  saves the lives
of two emigrants,  vi,  14,  293  ;  vii.
10 ;  her  "  Germany,"  236 ;  her
marriage to M.  Rocca acknow-
ledged, 275  ;  her death,  275.

St.  James's,  court days at,  iii.  35,

St.  Just,  M.  de,  V.  367.

Sfopford,  Lord,  v.  56.

Stormont,  Lord,  takes his oath at
Hastings'  trial,  v.  296.

Strachan,  Mr.,  vi.  202.

Strange,  Lady,  vi.  186.

Streatfield,  Miss Sophy,  i.  85  ;  cries
when requested,  192,  220  ;  opinions
of her,  213;  ii.  89;  visits Mi-ss
Burney,  232,  32G ;  v.  303;  vii.
352,  357.

Streataeld,  Mrs.,  i.  252.

Streatham,   sale of portraits at,   vii.

245.
Stuart,  Lady Louisa,  iii.  237.
Sussex,  Duke of,  v.  438.

Talleyrand de Perigord,  M.  de,  v.
376,  400,  402;  is ordered to quit
England,  vi,  17  ;  letters from,  to
Mrs.  Phillips and General d'Arblay,
20;  takes part against England,
161  ;  vii.  230.

Taylor,  Michael Angelo,  iv.  139.

Templetown,  Lady,  vi.  199.

Tewkesbury,  iv.  "214.

Thielky,  Mrs.,  iii.  28,  78.

Thornton,  Mr,,  ii.  186.

Thrale,  Mr.,  his illness,  i.  211,  423;
forbidden to go abroad by his phy-
sicians, ii,  15  ;  his death,  15,

Thrale,  Mrs.,  recommends  •'  Evelina"
to Mrs.  Burney,  i.  21  ;  invites
Miss Burney to Streatham,  36  ;
conversation with,  77,  129;  letters
from,  139,  406,  414,  431 ;  iu 3,  5,
6,  7 ;  intends going abroad,  1 1  ;
letters from,  108,  122,  137,  139,
140,  285,  299,  305,  307  ;  marries
Signor Piozzi,  318,  (See Mrs.
Piozzi.)

Thurlow,  Lord,  his opening speech at
Hastings'  trial,  iv.  62.

Tidy,  Mr.,  i,  277.

"  Timoleon,"  a tragedy,  i,  337,

Tottenham Park,  Roval visit to,  v.
65,

Toulon,  description of,  vi.  9.

Tour du Pin,  Madame de la,  vi,  327  ;
vii,  126,

Tour du Pin,  Monsieur de la,  returns
from La Vendee,  vii.  146,

Tour Maubourg,  General de la,  death
of,  vii.  16.

Tour Maubourg,   General Victor de
la,  appointed to raise volunteers for
Louis XVIII.,  vii,  71,84.
Tour Maubourg,  Comte F.  de la,  vii,

236.
Tournai,  perplexity of its inhabitants
during the Hundred Days,  vii.  114.
Townsend,  Mr.  vi.  L'^S,
Trenck,  Baron,  his Memoirs,  iv.  256.
Trimmer,  Mrs.,  v.  146.
Tucker,  Dr.,  iv.  182,
Tunbriilge Wells,  i.  253.
Turbulent,    Mr.,    iii.    207.   245;    his
opinion of Madame de Genlis,  288  ;
his vehemence,  328,  343  ;  illness of

400

INDEX.

Ills wife,   448;  conversations with,

iv.  23,  38.
Twickenham,  Miss Barney's visit to,

ii.  274.
Twining,  Rev.  T.,  letter to Mis?  Bnr-

nev on her appointment,   iii.  7  ;  iv.

44';  vi.  193.

Valletovt,  Lord,  v.  50.

A'c'riconr,  M.,  ordered to quit the
Netherlands,  vii.  275.

Vernon,  the Misses,  iii.  107.

Vesev,  Mrs.,  i.  23G  ;  a party at her
house,  ii.  286,  302.

Villheurnois,  Madame la,  vi.  320.

Villiers,  George,  v.  19.

Vincent,  Comte de,  wounded at Wa-
terloo, vii.  158.

Viomenil,  Comte de,  appointed to
raise volunteers for Louis X\  III.,
vii.  71  ;  interview with,  12].

Virginal Book,  Queen Elizabeth's,  v.
67.

Vyse,  Rev.  Dr.,  vii.  372.

w.

Waldegrave,  Lady Caroline,  iii.  20;  I
her illness,  v.  81.

"Waldegrave,  Lady Elizabeth,  iii.  20;
iv.  317;  marries Lord Cardigan,
V.  188.

Wales,  Prince of,  iii.  417  ;  takes upon
himself the management of the
household diiring the King's illness,
iv.  304 ;  his talents and accom-
plishments, vi.  333 ;  honourable
reception of the French royal family,
vii.  64.

Wales,  Princess"  of,  vi.  225.  (See
also Queen Caroli).e.)

Wallace,  Mr.  Attorney-General,  ii.
50.

Wallis,  Miss,  marries Mr.  Campbell,
vi.  152.

Vt'alpole,  Horace,  ii.  270,272;  bon
mots of 293 :  his  "  Mysterious
Mother,"  iii.  234  ;  letter from,  v.
159.

Walsingham,  Honourable Captain,  i.
295.

Walsingham,  Mrs.,  ii.  200  ;  her pic-
ture, 207.

"  Wanderer,  Tlie,"  arrangements con-
cerning, vii.  14  ;  publication of,
17;  critiques upon,  20;  sale of,
21.

"\^'a^,  the donations of royal family
to the fund for maintaining,  vi.  169  ;
high  ])rice3 during,  241  :  renewal
of,  326.

"  Warley,"  a satire,  i.  142,  163.

Warren,  Dr.,  attends the King,  iv.
315.

Warren,  Lady,  ii.  165.

AVarton,  Dr.,'ii.  236;  iii.  116.

Wartou,  Thomas,  ii.  237.

Waterloo,  battle of,  false report ar-
rives at Brussels,  vii.  165;  is con-
tradicted. 168  ;  imperfect accounts
of the victory,  171  ;  full extent
known,  172;  thanksgiving for,  at
Brussels,  180;  description of the
wounde(l,  198.

Webber,  Mr.,  his South Sea drawings,
ii.  13.

Wedderburn,  Alexander,  i.  254.

Wellbred,  Colonel,  iii.  316,  329,  337,
376;  iv.  10.

Wellington,  Duke of,  vii.  138;  re-
fuses to effect a junction with the
French royalists,  145;  at Waterloo,
1G9;  issues his orders during the
ball at Brussels,  196.

Wells Cathedral,  v.  247.

Wells,  Mrs.,  v.  39;  her eccentricity,
324.

"Wesley,  Charles,  iii.  27,

West,  Benjamin,  ii.  216  ;  his Cartoon
of the Resurrection,  iii.  197,  271.

Weston,  Miss,  i.  356.

Weymouth,  royal visit to,  v.  31  ;  King
saluted by tiddlers in a bathing-
machine,  34;  presentation of the
Mayor,  36.

Wilberforce,  William,  vii.  12;  letter
of condolence on death of General
d'Arblay,  vii.  330  ;  letter from,  with
a copy of his work,  347.

William Frederick,  King of the Ne-
therlands, vii.  133.

Williams,  Miss Fanny,  v.  271.

Willis,  Dr.,  attends the King,  iv.  358,
367,  371.

Willis,  Dr.  John,  attends the King,
iv.  359,37).

INDEX.

401

Willis,  Rev.  Thomas,  attends the King,
iv.  365  ;  is made prebendary of St.
Paul's,  V.  169.

Wilson,  Sir Robert,  vii.  241,  244.

Wilton,  V.  239.

Winchester,  v,  232 ;  its cathedral,  237.

Windsor,  Kin>?  and Queen on the Ter-
race, ii.  412;  Miss Burneys apart-
ment at,  iii.  21.

"  Witlings,  The,"  a comedy by Miss
Burney,  i.  239.

Wolsey,  Cardinal,  Memoirs of,  v.  101.

Worcester,  royal visit to,  iv.  225 ;
music meeting at,  227.

Wyndham,  Mr.,  conversations with at
Hastings'  trial,  iv.  66,   85,  97,  HO,

13S;  v.  104,    114;    his speech at,
116;  conversations with,  199,283.

York,  Duchess of,  v.  2S0  ;  her kind-
ness to Madame d'Arblay's nephew,
vi.  73  ;  description of,  by the Queen,
146.

York,  Duke of,  arrives at Windsor,  iii.
416;  iv.  54;  at Cheltenham,  212.

Young,  Arthur,  letter from,  v.  329 ;
visit to,  342.

Young,  Professor,  vi.  I9i.

London  ;  Printed by William Clowes  &  Sons,  Stamford-street.

/

J*/

«iK
