E'lH

ilil

I

London.  Henry Colbum,  1854.

/,  \.

DIAEY

AHD

LETTERS

MADAME D'AR  ?  L A Y;

AUTHOR OF  "EVELINA,"  "CECILIA,"  &c.

EDITED BY HER NIECE.

THE SPIRIT WALKS OF EVERY DAY DECEASED.  — YOUNG.

IN SEVEN VOLUMES.

VOL.  VI.
1793-1812.

LONDON:

PUBLISHED FOR HENRY COLBURN,

BY HIS SUCCESSORS,  HURST AND BLAGKETT,

GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1854.

PR

DIARY AND LETTERS

IflAl^lYJ.^     ^XXXt^JUZX*.

PART I.

1793.

Charlotte Smith and her son — Mrs.  Crewe's exertions in favour
of the exiled French clergy seconded by Mr.  Windham —
M.  d'Arblay an amateur gardener — Terrible state of France —
M.  d'Arblay desires to go to Toulon — Offers his services to Mr.
Pitt — The French Clergy— State of Toulon— Hannah More —
Subscription for the French clergy — Death  [of the Queen. of
France— M.  d'Arblay's offer of service declined— Thoughts on
marriage — The Royal Family felicitate Madame d'Arblay on her
nuptials — Madame d'Arblay gives birth to a son — Letter from
the Comte de Narbonne — Talleyrand commanded to quit
England — Fox and Canning — Talleyrand takesleave of Madame
d'Arblay — La Fayette  —  Gardening at Bookham  —  Mrs.
Thrale— News from the Continent— Visit  [from Mr.  Hoole —
Work for the sabre — Death of Edmund Burke's son — M.  de
Lally Tolendal — Poems by M.  d'Arblay — Madame d'Arblay's
tragedy— Cumberland — Acquittal of Warren Hastings — Lord
and Lady Spencer — Metastasio — Erskine and reform of Par
liament  —  English nuns  —  Publishing prospects  —  Prejudice
against the word  " novel" — Invitation to the Comte de Nar-
fconne.

Dr.  Eurney to Madame d'Arblay.

September 12th,  1793.

DEAR FANNY, — In this season of leisure I am as fully
occupied as ever your friend Mr.  Delcile was.  So
many people to attend,  so many complaints to hear,  and

VOL.  VI.  B

2 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

so many grievances to redress,  that it has been impossible
for me to write to you sooner.  I have been out of town
but one single day,  I believe,  since you were here — that
was spent at Richmond with my sisters.  But every day
produces business for other people,  which occupies me as
much as ever I found myself in days of hurry about my
own affairs.

I have had a negotiation and correspondence to carry
on for and with Charlotte Smith,  of which I believe I told
you the beginning,  and I do not see the end myself.  Her
second son had his foot shot off before Dunkirk,  and has
undergone a very dangerous amputation,  which,  it is much
feared,  will be fatal.

Mrs.  Crewe,  having seen at Eastbourne a great number
of venerable and amiable French clergy suffering all the
evils of banishment and beggary with silent resignation,
has for some time had in meditation a plan for procuring
some addition to the small allowance the committee at
Freemasons'  Hall is able to allow,  from the residue of
the subscriptions and briefs in their favour.  Susan will
show you the plan.  Mr.  Windham undertook to lay it
while in MS.  before the committee,  to be sanctioned by
their approbation,  lest it should be regarded as a rival or
hostile scheme to their establishment.  I caught him just
stepping into his chaise for Norfolk,  when I carried him
the plan from Mrs.  Crewe.  He wrote immediately to
Mr.  Wilmot,  the president I believe,  or,  at least,  a leading
person in the Committee at the Freemasons'  Tavern ;  but
left me to find him and to carry on the business.  This
has Delviled me not a little ;  for Mr.  Wilmot is at Ly-
mington,  Hants,  and all the rest of the Committee out of
town  :  so that the whole is transacted in that snail's pace
with which business is done by letters between persons
residing at a great distance from each other.

Well,  but you say that M.  d'Arblay is not only his
own architect,  but intends being his own gardener.  I
suppose the ground allotted to the garden of your mai
sonnette is marked out,  and probably will be enclosed and

1793]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  3

broken up before the foundation of your mansion is laid  ;
therefore,,  to encourage M.  d'Arblay in the study of hor
ticulture,  I have the honour to send him Miller's  '  Gar
deners'  Dictionary/ — an excellent book,  at least for the
rudiments of the art.

I send you,  my dear Fanny,  an edition of Milton,
which I can well spare,  and which you ought not to live
without;  and I send you both our dear friend Dr.  John
son's  'Rasselas.'

This is sad news from Dunkirk,  at which our own
Jacobins will insolently triumph.  Everything in France
seems to move in a regular progression from bad to
worse.  After near five years'  struggle and anarchy,  no
man alive,,  with a grain of modesty,  would venture to
predict how or when the evils of that country will be
terminated.  In the mean time the peace and comfort of
every civilised part of the globe is threatened with similar
calamities.

Your mother and Sarah join their compliments to M.
d'Arblay,  and love to yourself,  with those of

Yours affectionately,

CHAS.  BURNEY.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  September 29th,  1793.

WHEN I received the last letter of my dearest father,
and for some hours after,  I was the happiest of all human
beings.  I make no exception,  for I think none possible  :
not a wish remained to me  ;  not a thought of forming
one.

This was just the period — is it not always so? — for a
blow of sorrow to reverse the whole scene:  accordingly,
that evening M.  d'Arblay communicated to me his
desire of going to Toulon.

He had intended retiring from public life :  his services
and his sufferings in his severe and long career,  repaid

B 2

4 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

by exile and confiscation.,  and for ev?er embittered to his
memory by the murder of his Sovereign,  had justly satis
fied the claims of his conscience and honour ;  and led
him,  without a single self-reproach,  to seek a quiet re
treat in domestic society:  but the second declaration
of Lord Hood no sooner reached this little obscure
dwelling,— no sooner had he read the words Louis XVII.
find the Constitution to which he had sworn united,  than
his military ardour rekindled,  his loyalty was all up in
arms,  and every sense of duty carried him back to wars
and dangers.

I dare not speak of myself,  except to say that I have
forborne to oppose him with a single solicitation :  all the
felicity of this our chosen and loved retirement would
effectually be annulled by the smallest suspicion that it
was enjoyed at the expense of any duty ;  and therefore,
since he is persuaded it is right to go,  I acquiesce.

He is now writing an offer of his services,  which I am
to convey to Windsor,  and which he'  means to convey
himself to Mr.  Pitt As I am sure it will interest my
dear father,  I will copy it for him.

This total break into all my tranquillity incapacitates
me from attempting at this morrient to compose any ad
dress for the poor suffering clergy  ;  but,  as nothing could
give me greater comfort than contributing the smallest
mite in their favour,  I beseech my dear father to let me
know in what manner I should try — whether as a letter,
and to whom;  or how:  besides,  I know so little what has
already been said,  that I am at a loss where to look,  or
where to shun  ;  yet I would gladly make any experiment in
my possible power,  and M.  d'Arblay particularly wishes
it

How flattering and kind Mrs.  Crewe !  and how de
lightful to me what is said by Mr.  Burke  !  I entreat you
to take the first opportunity to thank them warmly,  and
to assure them their kindness of remembrance is a true
joy to me,  and to return my most grateful thanks to the
very amiable Mrs.  Burke.

1793]  •     OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  5

I have had congratulatory letters every day this week.

Miss Ellerker has written,  and begs to be introduced to
M.  d'Arblay.  Are we not coming into high fashion  ?

Ah !  if peace would come without,  what could equal
my peace within  ?

Let me not forget to say that even M.  De Luc sends
me his felicitations,  in an ardent letter of friendly kindness
written by his excellent wife,  and his joy for M.  d'Arblay
in the late affair of Toulon and acknowledgment of the
Constitution.

My dearest father,  before this tremendous project broke
into our domestic economy,  M.  d'Arblay had been em
ployed in a little composition,  which,  being all in his
power,  he destined to lay at your feet,  as a mark of his
pleasure in your attention to his horticultural pursuit.  He
has just finished copying it for you,  and to-morrow it goes
by the stage.

Your hint of a book from time to time enchanted him :
it seems to me the only present he accepts entirely with
out pain.  He has just requested me to return to Mrs.
Lock herself a cadeau she had brought us.  If it had
been an old court-calendar,  or an almanac,  or anything in
the shape of a brochure,  he would have received it with
his best bow and smile.

This Toulon business finally determines our deferring
the maisonnette till the spring.  Heaven grant it may be
deferred no longer !  Mr.  Lock says it will be nearly as
soon ready as if begun in the autumn,  for it will be better
to have it'aiied and inhabited before the winter seizes it.
If the memoire which M.  d'Arblay is now writing is
finished in time,  it shall accompany the little packet;  if
not,  we will send it by the first opportunity.

Meanwhile,  M.  d'Arblay makes a point of our in
dulging ourselves with the gratification of subscribing one
guinea to your fund,  and Mrs.  Lock begs you will trust
her and insert her subscription in your list,  and Miss
Lock and Miss Amelia Lock.  Mr.  Lock is charmed
with your plan.  M,  d'Arblay means to obtain you Lady

•6 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

Burrel and Mrs.  Benn.  If you think I can write to any
purpose,  tell me a little hint how and of what,  dearest sir;
tor I am in the dark as to what may remain yet unsaid.
Otherwise,  heavy as is my heart just now,  I could work
for them and your plan.

Adieu,  dearest,  dearest sir:  ever and ever most affec
tionately,  most dutifully yours,

F.  D'A.

Dr.  Burney to Madame d'Arblay.

October 4th,  1793.   *

DEAR FANNY, — This is a terrible coup,  so soon after
your union ;  but I honour M.  d'Arblay for offering his
service on so great an occasion,  and you for giving way
to what seems an indispensable duty.  Common-place
reflections on the vicissitudes of human affairs would
afford you little consolation.  The stroke is new to
your situation,  and so will be the fortitude necessary
on the occasion.  However,  to military men,  who,  like
M.  d'Arblay,  have been but just united to the object
of their choice,  and begun to domesticate,  it is no un
common thing for their tranquillity to be disturbed by
"  the trumpet's loud clangor."  Whether the offer is
accepted or not,  the having made it will endear him to
those embarked in the same cause among his country
men,  and elevate him in the general opinion of the
English public.  This consideration I am sure will
afford you a satisfaction the most likely to enable you
to support the anxiety and pain of absence.

I have no doubt of the offer being taken well at
Windsor,  and of its conciliating effects.  If his Majesty
and the Ministry have any settled plan for accepting
or rejecting similar offers I know not;  but it seems very
likely that Toulon will be regarded as the rallying
point for French royalists of all sects and denomina
tions.  The restoration of the constitution of 1791

1793]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  7

being the condition proposed by the natives them
selves,  and the proposition having been acceded to by
Lord Hood,  removes all scruples and difficulties for
loyal constitutionalists at least ;  and is the only chance
which those can ever have of being restored to their
country and possessions,  who wish to place some in
termediate power between the King and the mob,  to
prevent his being dragged in a month's time to the
scaffold,  like poor Louis XVI.

If monarchy,  however limited,  is to triumph over
anarchy,  and brutal savage tyranny over the property
and lives of the wretched inhabitants of France,  it
seems most likely to be accomplished in the southern
provinces,  from the stand that has been made at
Toulon.

I shall be very anxious to know how the proposition
of M.  d' Arblay has been received ;  and,  if accepted,  on
what conditions,  and when and how the voyage is to
be performed ;  I should hope in a stout man of war  ;
and that M.  de Narbonne will be of the party,  being
so united in friendship and political principles.

Has M.  d'Arblay ever been at Toulon  ?  It is sup
posed to be so well fortified,  both by art and nature,
on the land side,  that,  if not impregnable,  the taking it
by the regicides will require so much time that it is
hoped an army of counter-revolutionists will be assem
bled from the side of Savoy,  sufficient to raise the siege,
if unity f measures and action prevail between the
Toulonnais and their external friends.  But even if the
assailants should make such approaches as to render it
necessary to retreat,  with such a powerful fleet as that
of England and Spain united,  it will not only be easy
to carry off the garrison and inhabitants in time,  but
to destroy such ships as cannot be brought away,  and
ruin the harbour and arsenal for many years to
come.

You promised me,  dear Fanny,  a copy of M.  d'Ar-
blay's requete.  When you have leisure,  and can tell

8 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

me what turn things are likely to take,  perhaps you
will enclose it in a future letter.

I have written to Mrs.  Crewe all you have said on the
subject of writing something to stimulate benevolence
and commiseration in favour of the poor French eccle
siastics,  amounting to 6000 now in England,  besides
400 laity here and 800 at Jersey,  in utter want.  The
fund for the laity was totally exhausted the 27th of
last month,  and the beginning of the next that raised
by former subscriptions and briefs will be wholly ex
pended  !

I have been working with my pen night and day for
more than this last fortnight,  in correspondence with
Mrs.  Crewe,  Mr.  Wilmot,  Mr.  Huter the secretary of
the Committee,  and have written single letters innume
rable to others — as Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Garrick,
Hannah More,  &c.  The two first of these ladies have
not yet answered my letters.  Poor H.  More has
written a letter that has drawn tears from me.  She
has been dangerously ill for a twelvemonth,  is now
seldom able to get up,  and incapable of reading or
writing:  she approves very highly of the ladies'  plan,
and has sent some papers to Bath ;  but laments ex
tremely her inability to act as she would have done both
with hand and head,  if her health would have per
mitted.

The expense,  in only allowing the clergy 8,y.  a- week,
amounts to about 7500/.  a-month,  which cannot be
supported long by private subscription,  and must at last
be taken up by Parliament ;  but to save the national
disgrace of suffering these excellent people to die of
hunger,  before the Parliament meets and agrees to do
something for them,  the ladies must work hard.  The
list of these whom Mrs.  Crewe has interested in the
cause is now become very illustrious and honourable —
the Marchioness of Buckingham,  Lady Spencer,  Lady
Payne,  Lady Cotton,  Lady Charlotte Greville,  Lady
Ann Dashwood,  Lady C.  Douglas,  Lady Hartley,  Lady

1793]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  9

Macartney,  Lady Gray,  Lady Camelford,  Miss Trimmer,
Hon.  Miss Fox,  Mrs.  Whitbread,  Mrs.  H.  Greville,
Miss Crewe,  Mrs.  Cooke,  Miss Smith,  Lady Pelham,
Lady Webster,  Mrs.  Pierrepoint,  &c.  &c.  We have
contrived at Chelsea to enlist Lady Cremorne and others.
Mrs.  and Miss Locks are charming acquisitions — I beg
my best thanks for them.

Your mother works hard in packing and distributing
papers among her friends in town and country,  and
Sally in copying letters.  You and M.  d'Arblay are
very good in wishing to contribute your mite;  but I did
not intend leading you into this scrape.  If you subscribe
your pen,  and he his sword,  it will best answer Mr.
Burke's idea,  who says,  "  There are two ways by which
people may be charitable — the one by their money,
the other by their exertions."  Now,  it has just struck me
that,  if you felt any impulse to use your pen,  it should be
in an eloge on female benevolence.  The ladies whom
I have recollected above do it so cheerfully and with so
much zeal,  though hoaxed and scouted by the men,  who
call it  "  Ladies'  nonsense,"  that I think it says a great
deal in favour of religion,  whose precepts still remain
among the female part of Christendom,  while the men
seem to have given up every idea of it,  and with it of
every virtue and moral sentiment which all religions
recommend.  Pensez-y.  The good Bishop of St.  Pol
de Leon has heard of my zeal as secretary to the Ladies,
from M.  Jumard,  I suppose,  and has inquired my di
rection,  arid wished for my acquaintance.  1 shall wait
on this venerable prelate to-morrow.

I have so much writing on my hands that I fear I shall
not have time now to thank M.  d'Arblay for his kind
ness in sending me so nice a copy of his nice translation
of your  '  Willey ;'  but pray do you,  en attendant my
getting a little leisure,  say mille et millejolies choses for
Yours,  affectionately,

C.  B.

10 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Sunday noon,  October 21st,  1793.

MY dearest father will think I have been very long
in doing the little I have done;  but my mind is so anxi
ously discomfited by the continued suspense with regard
to M.  d'Arblay's proposition and wish,  that it has not
been easy to me to weigh completely all I could say,  and
the fear of repeating what had already been offered upon
the subject has much restrained me,  for I have seen
none of the tracts that may have appeared.  However,  it
is a matter truly near my heart ;  and though I have not
done it rapidly,  I have done it with my whole mind,  and,
to own the truth,  with a species of emotion that has
greatly affected me,  for I could not deeply consider the
situation of these venerable men without feeling for them
to the quick.  If what I have written should have power
to procure them one more guinea,  I shall be paid.

I shall send the scrawl to you by the stage on Tuesday.
I have still to copy it.  And I have the pleasure to give
you another subscriber,  Mrs.  Hume,  a lady who has
listened to the eloquence of Mrs.  Lock,  who never sees
any one without producing the plan.  Mrs.  Lock begs
you to trust her for the guineas.  Mr.  Lock enters into
this business with the warmest approbation.

If you think what I have drawn up worth printing,  I
should suppose it might make a little sixpenny paper,
and be sold for the same purpose it is written.  Or will
it only do to be printed at the expense of the acting
ladies,  and given gratis?  You must judge of this.
Adieu,  ever most dear sir  !

P.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  October 27th,  1793*

MY MOST DEAR FATHER, — The terrible confirmation
of this last act of savage hardness of heart has wholly
overset us again.  M.  d'Arblay had entirely discredited

1793]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  11

its probability,  and,  to the last moment,  disbelieved the
report ;  not from milder thoughts of the barbarous rulers
of his unhappy country,  but from seeing that the death
of the Queen could answer no purpose,  helpless as she
was to injure them,  while her life might answer some as a
hostage with the Emperor.  Cruelty,  however,  such as
theirs,  seems to require no incitement whatever  ;  its own
horrible exercise appears sufficient both to prompt and to
repay it.  Good Heaven !  that that wretched Princess
should so finish sufferings so unexampled  !

With difficulties almost incredible,  Madame de Stael has
contrived,  a second time,  to save the lives of M.  de Jau-
court and M.  de Montmorenci,  who are just arrived in
Switzerland.  We know as yet none of the particulars  ;
simply that they are saved is all :  but they write in a style
the most melancholy to M.  de Narbonne,  of the dreadful
fanaticism of licence,  which they dare call liberty,  that
still reigns unsubdued in France.  And they have pre
served nothing but their persons!  of their vast properties
they could secure no more than pocket-money,  for tra
velling in the most penurious manner.  They are there
fore in a state the most deplorable.  Switzerland is filled
with gentlemen and ladies of the very first families and
rank,  who are all starving,  but those who have had the
good fortune to procure,  by disguising their quality,  some
menial office !

No answer comes from Mr.  Pitt ;  and we now expect
none till Sir Gilbert Elliot makes his report of the state
of Toulon and of the Toulonnese  ;  till which,  probably,  no
decision will be formed whether the Constitutionals in
England will be employed or not.

#          *******

F.  D'A.

[M.  d'Arblay's offer of serving in the expedition to
Toulon was not accepted,  arid the reasons for which it
was declined do not appear.]

12 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  «

THE account of your surprise,  my sweet friend,  was
the last thing to create mine  :  I was well aware of the ge
neral astonishment,  and of yours in particular.  My own,
however,  at my very extraordinary fate,  is singly greater
than that of all my friends united.  I had never made
any vow against marriage,  but I had long,  long been
firmly persuaded it was for me a state of too much
hazard and too little promise to draw me from my indi
vidual plans and purposes.  I remember,  in playing at
questions and commands,  when I was thirteen,  being
asked when I intended to marry  ?  and surprising my
playmates by solemnly replying,  "  When I think I shall
be happier than I am in being single."  It is true,
I imagined that time would never arrive ;  and I have per
tinaciously adhered to trying no experiment upon any
other hope ;  for,  many and mixed as are the ingredients
which form what is generally considered as happiness,  I
was always fully convinced that social sympathy of cha
racter and taste could alone have any chance with me ;
all else I always thought,  and now know,  to be immate
rial.  I have only this peculiar, — that what many con
tentedly assert or adopt in theory,  I have had the cou
rage to be guided by in practice.

We are now removed to a very small house in the
suburbs of a very small village called Bookhara.  We
found it rather inconvenient to reside in another person's
dwelling,  though our own apartments were to ourselves.
Our views are not so beautiful as from Phenice Farm,
but our situation is totally free from neighbours and in
trusion.  We are about a mile and a half from Norbury
Park,  and two miles from Mickleham.  I am become
already so stout a walker,  by use,  and with the help of u
very able supporter,  that I go to those places and return
home on foot without fatigue,  when the weather is kind.
At other times I condescend to accept a carriage from
Mr.  Lock;  but it is always reluctantly,  I so much pre-

1793]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  53

fer walking where,  as here,  the country and prospects

are inviting.

I thank you for your caution about building :  we shall
certainly undertake nothing but by contract ;  however,  it
would be truly mortifying to give up a house in Nor-
bury Park  ;  we defer the structure till the spring,  as it
is to be so very slight,  that Mr.  Lock says it will be
best to have it hardened in its first stage by the sum
mer's sun.  It will be very small,  merely an habitation
for three people,  but in a situation truly beautiful,  and
within five minutes of either Mr.  Lock,  or my sister
Phillips:  it is to be placed just between those two loved
houses.

My dearest father,  whose fears and drawbacks have
been my sole subject of regret,  begins now to see I have
not judged rashly,  or with romance,  in seeing my own
road to my own felicity.  And his restored cheerful con
currence in my constant principles,  though new station,
leaves me,  for myself,  without a wish.  ISennui,  which
could alone infest our retreat,  I have ever been a stranger
to,  except in tiresome company,  and my companion
has every possible resource against either feeling or in
spiring it.

As my partner is a Frenchman,  I conclude the won
der raised by the connexion may spread beyond my own
private circle;  but no wonder upon earth can ever arrive
near my own in having found such a character from that
nation.  This is a prejudice certainly,  impertinent and
very John Bullish,  and very arrogant ;  but I only share
it with all my countrymen,  and therefore must needs for
give both them and myself.  I am convinced,  however,
from your tender solicitude for me in all ways,  that you
will be glad to hear that the Queen and all the Royal
Family have deigned to send me wishes for my happi
ness through Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  who has written me
"  what you call "  a very kind congratulation.

F.  D A.

14 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

1794.

[In the year 1794,  the happiness of the  "  Hermitage"
was increased by the birth of a son,  who was christened
Alexander Charles Louis Piochard d'Arblay ;  receiving
the names of his father,  with those of his two godfathers,
the Comte deNarbonne and Dr.  Charles Burney.]

Letter from the Comte de Narbonne to Mrs.  Phillips,
on the order sent by the English Government to
Charles Maurice de Talleyrand Perigord,  ci-devant
Bishop of Autun,  to quit England in five days.

Janvier,  1794.

Vous avez bien voulu,  avec votre bonte accoutumee,
m'ordonner de vous envoyer tous les details que je
pourrois avoir,  sur le malheur qui nous accablc :  voici
au juste tout ce que nous savons,  et tout ce qui a etc
fait.

Mardi,  a cinq heures,  un messager d'etat est venu
chez Talleyrand,  lui apporter un ordre de quitter le
royaume avant cinq jours,  c'est a dire,  avant Dimanche
prochain ;  en y ajoutant qu'il etoit charge de le pre-
venir que si,  au jour indique,  il n'dtoit pas parti,  il
seroit dans le cas de la deportation,  et deporte sur le
champ.

Talleyrand a fait tout de suite parvenir une note
a MM.  Pitt et Dundas.  M.  Windham a etc parler
au dernier,  et pretend n' avoir pas pu seulement savoir
de lui si c'etoit pour une raison generale ou particu-
liere :  M.  Pitt a garde la meme reserve vis-a-vis un
membre du parlement,  de ses amis.

II a ecrit hier a Lord Grenville et a M.  Pitt des
lettres dont il n'a pas,  et il n'aura probablement pas,
de reponse.  11 a ecrit aussi au Roi une lettre que
j'esperois faire parvenir par le Due de Gloucester,
raais il a refuse de me voir.

1794]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  15

Vous voyez qu'il ne nous reste a peu pres aucune
esperance  :  le secret dont on s'enveloppe est la preuve
que 1'on ne veut entendre a rien.  II est renvoye avec
un Comte Zenobia,  qu'il n'a jamais vu de sa vie  ;  un
Comte de Vaux,  dont il ne savoit pas plus le nom que
celui d'un nomme Simon,  sellier de Bruxelles.

Concevez vous un malheur pareil  ?  Aujourd'hui,  a
midi,  il ne salt pas seulement si c'est en Amerique ou
en Dannemarc qu'il ira ;  et nous venons de lire dans
les papiers qu'il a ete fait rapport a la Convention de
sept prises,  dont deux Americaines et une Danoise.
Tous les chemins par terre sont impraticables pour
lui ;  et,  avec cela,  rien n'egale son calme,  son courage,
et,  presque,  sa gaiete.  La votre,  et celle de nos
adorables amis de Norbury,  n'auroit-elle pas un peu
plus souffert encore s'il s'etoit trouve vrai que j'avois
rec,u un pareil ordre?  Cela avoit ete dit,  et,  j'imagine,
invente,  par les aristocrates.  Helas  !  je ne suis ni plus
coupable ni plus innocent que mon malheureux ami,
qui me charge de vous parler a tous de son eternel
attachement.*  Demain je vous donnerai 1'histoire
d'aujourd'hui ;  et pourrai vous instruire de sa marche
et de la mienne.  Ne penserez-vous pas avec un peu de
douceur que c'est a votre inepuisable bonte a tous que
je dois d'avoir vecu loin de Londres,  et d'avoir ainsi
e'chappe aux regards de la haine et de la calomnie  ?

Madame d'Arblay to Doctor Burney.

Bookham,  February 8,  1794.

THE times are indeed,  as my dearest father says,
tremendous,  and reconcile this retirement daily more
and more to my Chevalier — Chevalier every way,  by
birth,  by his order,  and by his character ;  for to-day
he has been making his first use of a restoration to his

*  Probably M.  de Talleyrand received permission to remain in
England a few weeks longer,  as his letter to take leave of M.  and
Madame d'Arblay is dated from London,  March 2nd. — ED.

1G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

garden in gathering snowdrops for his fair Dulcinea—
you know 1 must say fair to finish the phrase with any
effect.

I am very sorry for the sorrow I am sure Mr.  Burke
will feel for the loss of his brother,  announced in Mr.
Cooke's paper yesterday.  Besides,  he was a comic,
good-humoured,  entertaining man,  though not bashful.

What an excellent opening Mr.  Canning has made
at last !  Mitre nous soil dit,  I remember,  when at
Windsor,  that I was told Mr.  Fox came to Eton pur
posely to engage to himself that young man,  from the
already great promise of his rising abilities  ;  and he
made dinners for him and his nephew,  Lord Holland,
to teach them political lessons.  It must have had an
odd effect upon him,  I think,  to hear such a speech
from his disciple.  Mr.  Lock now sends us the papers
for the debates every two or three days ;  he cannot
quicker,  as his own household readers are so numerous.
1 see almost nothing of Mr.  Windham in them ;  which
vexes me  :  but I see Mr.  Windham in Mr.  Canning.
*  *  *  *  *

F.  D'A.

P.S.  So you have got Mr.  Erskine's speeches  ?  cer
tainly they were not at present likely to be de trop from
any duplicates in your library  !  I divert myself with
the thought of seeing you running them over with that
sort of toleration which recent eating and drinking
with a man always breeds,  even in causes the most
un genial.

M.  de Talleyrand to Mrs.  Phillips.

Londres,  1794.

MADAME, — II faut qu'il y ait eu de 1'impossibilite pour que
ce matin je n'aie pas eu 1'honneur de vous voir ;  mais 1'im
possibilite la plus forte m'a prive du dernier plaisir que
je pouvois avoir en Europe.  Permettez moi,  madame,
de vous remercier encore une fois de toutes vos bontes,

1794]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  17

de vous demander un peu de part dans votre souvenir,
et laissez moi vous dire que mes voeux se porteront dans
tous les terns de ma vie vers vous,  vers le Capitaine,  vers
vos enfans.  Vous allez avoir en Amerique un serviteur
bien zele ;  je ne reviendrai pas en Europe sans arriver
dans le Surry :  tout ce qui,  pour mon esprit et pour mon
cosur,  a quelque valeur,  est la.

J'ai 1'honneur de vous renouveler,  madame,  1'assu-
rance du plus respectueux devouement.

TALLEYRAND.

Voulez-vous bien presenter tous mes complimens au
Capitaine  ?

M.  de Talleyrand to M.  and Madame  $  Arblay.

;  Londres,  2 Mars,  1794.

ADIEU,  mon cher D'Arblay :  je quitte votre pays
jusqu'au moment ou il n'appartiendra plus aux petites
passions des homines.  Alors j'y reviendrai ;  non,  en
verite,  pour m'occuper d'affaires,  car il y a long terns que
je les ai abandonnees pour jamais;  mais pour voir les
excellens habitans du Surry.  J'espere savoir assez
d'Anglais pour entendre Madame d' Arblay ;  d'ici a
quatre mois je ne vais faire autre chose que 1'etudier :  et
pour apprendre le beau et bon langage,  c'est  '  Evelina '
et  '  Cecilia'  qui sont mes livres d'etude et de plaisir.  Je
vous souhaite,  mon cher ami,  toute espece de bonheur,
et vous  £tes en position de remplir tous mes souhaits.

Je ne sais combien de terns je resterai en Amerique  :
s'il se referoit quelque chose de raisonnable et de stable
pour notre malneureux pays,  je reviendrois ;  si 1'Europe
s'abirne dans la campagne prochaine,  je preparerai en
Amerique des asyles  £  tous nos amis.

Adieu :  mes hommages a Madame d' Arblay et a
Madame Phillips,  je vous en prie :  je vous demande et
vous promets amitie pour la vie.

TALLEYRAND.

VOL.  VI.  C

,-•

18 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

Madame d'Arblay to Doctor Burney.

Bookham,  March 22, 1794.

MY DEAR FATHER,  —  I am this moment returned
from reading your most welcome and kind letter at
our Susanna's.  The account of your better health
gives me a pleasure beyond all words ;  and it is the
more essential to my perfect contentment on account
of your opinion of our retreat.  I doubt not,  my dear
est father,  but you judge completely right,  and I may
nearly say we are both equally disposed to pay the
most implicit respect to your counsel.  We give up,
therefore,  all thoughts of our London excursion for the
present,  and I shall write to that effect to our good
intended hostess very speedily.

I can easily conceive far more than you enlarge upon
in this counsel :  and,  indeed,  I have not myself been
wholly free from apprehension of possible embarras,
should we,  at this period,  visit London  ;  for though
M.  d'Arblay not only could stand,  but would court,  all
personal scrutiny,  whether retrospective or actual,  I
see daily the extreme susceptibility which attends his
very nice notions of honour,  and how quickly and
deeply his spirit is wounded by whatever he regards as
injustice.  Incapable,  too,  of the least trimming or
disguise,  he could not,  at a time such as this,  be in
London without suffering or risking,  perhaps hourly,
something unpleasant.  Here we are tranquil,  un
disturbed and undisturbing.  Can life,  he often says,
be more innocent than ours,  or happiness more in
offensive  ?  He works in his garden,  or studies English
and mathematics,  while I write.  When I work at my
needle,  he reads to me ;  and we enjoy the beautiful
country around us in long and romantic strolls,  during
which he carries under his arm a portable garden-chair,
lent us by Mrs.  Lock,  that I may rest as I proceed.
He is extremely fond,  too,  of writing,  and makes,  from
time to time,  memorandums of such memoirs,  poems,

1794]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  19

and anecdotes as he recollects,  and I wish to have
preserved.  These resources for sedentary life are cer
tainly the first blessings that can be given to man,  for
they enable him to be happy in the extremest obscurity,
even after tasting the dangerous draughts of glory and
ambition.

The business of M,  de Lafayette has been indeed
extremely bitter to him.  It required the utmost force
he could put upon himself not to take some public
part in it.  He drew up a short but most energetic
defence of that unfortunate general,  in a letter,  which
he meant to print and send to the editors of a news
paper which had traduced him,  with his name at full
length.  But after two nights'  sleepless deliberation,
the hopelessness of serving his friend,  with a horror
and disdain of being mistaken as one who would lend
any arms to weaken Government at this crisis,  made
him consent to repress it.  I was dreadfully uneasy
during the conflict,  knowing,  far better than I can make
him conceive,  the mischiefs that might follow any in
terference at this moment,  in matters brought before
the nation,  from a foreigner.  But,  conscious of his own
integrity,  I plainly see he must either wholly retire,  or
come forward to encounter whatever he thinks wrong.
Ah — better let him accept your motto,  and cultiver son
jardin !  He is now in it,  notwithstanding our long
walk to Mickleham,  and working hard and fast to
finish some self-set task that to-morrow,  Sunday,  must
else impede.

I am glad you meet Lord Spencer at Lady Lucan's  :
what an acquisition,  a man of his character,  to Govern
ment  !  M.  d'Arblay sometimes says,  "  I cannot con
ceive how there can be two minds amongst honest men
as to this war!"  though as to its causes he can con
ceive but too well a thousand !

M.  d'Arblay,  to my infinite satisfaction,  gives up all
thoughts of building,  in the present awful state of
public affairs.  To show you,  however,  how much he is

c 2

20 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

"of your advice"  as to sonjardin,  he has'  been draw
ing a plan for it,  which I intend to beg,  borrow,  or
steal  (all one),  to give you some idea how seriously he
studies to make his manual labours of some real
utility.

This sort of work,  however,  is so totally new to him,
that he receives every now and then some of poor
Merlin's  "  disagreeable compliments ;"  for,  when Mr.
Lock's or the Captain's gardeners favour our grounds
with a visit,  they commonly make known that all has
been done wrong.  Seeds are sowing in some parts
when plants ought to be reaping,  and plants are run
ning to seed while they are thought not yet at ma
turity.  Our garden,  therefore,  is not yet quite the
most profitable thing in the world;  but M.  d'A.  as
sures me it is to be the staff of our table and exist
ence.

A little,  too,  he has been unfortunate ;  for,  after im
mense toil in planting and transplanting strawberries
round our hedge,  here at Bookham,  he has just
been informed they will bear no fruit the first year,
and the second we may be  "  over the hills and far
away !"

Another time,  too,  with great labour,  he cleared a
considerable compartment of weeds,  and,  when it looked
clean and well,  and he showed his work to the gar
dener,  the man said he had demolished an asparagus-
bed  !  M.  d'A.  protested,  however,  nothing could look
more like des mauvaises herbes.

His greatest passion is for transplanting.  Every
thing we possess he moves from one end of the garden
to another,  to produce better effects.  Roses take
place of jessamines,  jessamines of honeysuckles,  and
honeysuckles of lilacs,  till they have all danced round
as far as the space allows  ;  but whether the effect may
not be a general mortality,  summer only can deter
mine.

Such is our horticultural history.     But I must not

1794]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  21

omit that we have had for one week cabbages from our
own cultivation every day  !  O,  you have no idea how
sweet they tasted !  We agreed they had a freshness
and a gout we had never met with before.  We had
them for too short a time to grow tired of them,  be
cause,  as I have already hinted,  they were beginning
to run to seed before we knew they were eatable.

F.  D'A.

Madame cCAMay to Doctor Burney.

Bookham,  April,  1794.

WHAT a charming letter was your last,  my dearest
father  !  How full of interesting anecdote and enliven
ing detail !  The meeting with Mrs.  Thrale,  so sur
rounded by her family,  made me breathless ;  and
while you were conversing with the Signor,  and left
me in doubt whether you advanced to her or not,  I
almost gasped with impatience and revived old feel
ings,  which,  presently,  you reanimated to almost all
their original energy.  How like my dearest father to
find all his kindness rekindled when her ready hand
once more invited it !  I heard her voice in  "  Why
here  *s Dr.  Burney as young as ever ! "  and my dear father
in his parrying answers.  No scene could have been
related to me more interesting or more welcome.  My
heart and hand,  I am sure,  would have met her in the
same manner.  The friendship was too pleasant in its
first stage,  and too strong in its texture,  to be ever
obliterated,  though it has been tarnished and clouded.
I wish few things more earnestly than again to meet
her.

Miss T must,  I am sure,  have been gratified by

what you said to her of her reverend proteges,  the emi
grant French priests :  and how sincerely I congratu
late you upon the noble success your indefatigable
measures and cares in their favour have produced !  I

22 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

did not know Dean Marley was made a bishop.  I am
very glad to hear it at the same moment that I hear of
his beneficence.

I am almost ashamed to use the word fortunate in
speaking of Toulon.  Yet,  good Heaven,  what an es
cape from how useless a sacrifice must I ever look back
to Mr.  Pitt's not accepting M.  d'Arblay's services  !
For I never could buoy myself up with those sanguine
expectations of the constitutional spirit of all the south
of France,  that made M.  d'Arblay believe the risk,  be
whatever the personal event,  well worth running for
his unhappy country.

Adieu,  dearest Sir !  with a thousand thanks for your
"heart dear"  letter.

Ever,  most affectionately,
Your dutiful

F.  D'A.

Think of our horticultural shock last week,  when
Mrs.  Bailey,  our landlady,  "  entreated M.  d'Arblay
not to spoil her fruit-trees!" — trees he had been
pruning with his utmost skill and strength.  However,
he has consulted your  "  Millar  "  thereupon,  and finds
out she is very ignorant,  which he has gently intimated
to her.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  May 9, 1794.

How kind is my dearest Father,  and how straight to
my heart comes his kindness !  The Chanterelles and
Mandoline have vibrated to that of M.  d'Arblay.
"The Cunning Man''*  he is reading with great plea
sure,  and,  from its simplicity,  and his remembrance of
the French,  with as much facility as prose.  It will be
an exceeding good lesson with his Mandoline.

*  Dr.  Burney's translation in  (verse)  of Rousseau's  '  Devin du
Village.'

1794]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  23

How often — O how often — do I regret that my be
loved father cannot for some time de suite see the sun
rise and set with a character so formed to become
every way dear to him  ! — so replete with every resource
for cheerful solitude and happy retirement ! — so very
like himself in disposition,  humour,  and taste,  that the
day never passes in which I do not,  in its course,  ex
claim,  "  How you remind me of my father ! "

We were anxious that Mr.  L should have an

interview with Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  as M.  d' Arblay had
been informed that some one had told the King he
had  "  served in America against England,  as secretary
to M.  de Lafayette."  Who could have invented such

a complete falsehood?  M.  d' Arblay begged Mr.  L

simply and roundly to make known,  first,  that he
never was in America  ;  secondly,  that he had never any
connexion with M.  de Lafayette but as his equal,
except with respect alone to military precedence  ;  and
thirdly,  that,  having been an officer in the Royal Ar
tillery from twelve years of age,  he had never served

any man whatever  (officially)  but his King.

*****

Is not this news from the Continent as well as from
the West Indies very excellent  ?  We wanted to make
ourselves Tower and Park guns for a little rejoicing.
However,  not having cannon or powder,  M.  d'A.  has
contented himself with only making me another new
walk in our orchard,  which must serve instead.

I forgot to mention in my late letters that I have
seen good Mr.  Hoole.  I heard he had visited our
worthy neighbours,  the clergyman and his wife ;  and
Mrs.  Cooke meant to oblige me by discouraging him
from calling.  I desired her to rectify that mistake if
he came again ;  for my resolute declining of all new
acquaintance,  to avoid dress,  &c.,  is very remote from
involving seclusion from old friends.  He accordingly
presented himself soon after,  and I was very glad to
see him.  As he spoke French with as much difficulty

24 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

as M.  d'Arblay speaks English,  M.  d'A.,  on hearing he
had translated Ariosto and Tasso,  attacked him in
Italian,  but was much surprised to find himself not
even understood.  How very different to know and to
speak a language !  M.  d'A.  is himself an instance,  for
he hesitates in pronouncing  "  How do do  ?"  yet he
wants no assistance in reading Hume,  or even a news
paper,  which is far more difficult,  because more diffuse,
and subject to local cant.

I see your name,  my dearest father,  with generals,
statesmen,  monarchs,  and Charles Fox,  in a collection
of bons mots !  I am dying for the work.  If you have
it,  I beseech a peep at it by some opportunity.  I will
carefully return it.

F.  D'A.

From Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Barney after his fast
visit to her at Bookham.

Bookham,  August,  '94.

IT is just a week since I had the greatest gratifica
tion of its kind I ever,  I think,  experienced  : — so kind a
thought,  so sweet a surprise as was my dearest father's
visit !  How softly and soothingly it has rested upon
my mind ever since  !

"  Abdolomine'5*  has no regret but that his garden
was not in better order ;  he was a little pique,  he con
fesses,  that you said it was not very neat — and,  to be
shor ! — but his passion is to do great works  :  he under
takes with pleasure,  pursues with energy,  and finishes
with spirit;  but,  then,  all is over!  He thinks the
business once done always done  ;  and to repair,  and
amend,  and weed,  and cleanse, — O,  these are drudgeries
insupportable to him  !

However,  you should have seen the place before he
began his operations,  to do him justice;  there was then

*  Name of a gardener in a drama of Fontenelle's.

1794]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  25

nothing else but mauvaises herbes ;  now,  you must at
least allow there is a mixture of flowers and grain  !  I
wish you had seen him yesterday,  mowing down our
hedge — with his sabre,  and with an air and attitudes
so military,  that,  if he had been hewing down other
legions than those he encountered — I e.  of spiders —
he could scarcely have had a mien more tremendous,
or have demanded an arm more mighty.  Heaven
knows,  I am  "  the most contente personne in the world  "
to see his sabre so employed !

You spirited me on in all ways ;  for this week past
I have taken tightly to the grand ouvrage.*  If 1 go
on so a little longer,  I doubt not but M.  d'Arblay will
begin settling where to have a new shelf for arranging
it !  which is already in his rumination for Metastasio  ;
I imagine you now seriously resuming that work ;  I
hope to see further sample ere long.

We think with very great pleasure of accepting my
mother's and your kind invitation for a few days.  I
hope and mean,  if possible,  to bring with me also a little
sample of something less in the dolorous style than
what always causes your poor shoulders a little shrug. f

Mr.  and Mrs.  Lock were very sorry to have missed
you.  Mr.  Lock was gratified,  even affected,  by my
account of the happiness you had given me.  He
says,  from the time of our inhabiting this maison
nette,  one of his first wishes had been that you should
see us in it ;  as no possible description or narration
could so decidedly point out its competence.  He,  who
knew the uncommon character which was to be its
master,  expected all that has followed of its sufficiency ;
but he can easily conceive the anxiety of all who had
not had so near a view of it upon an experiment so
great.  How thankfully did I look back,  the 28th of
last month,  upon a year that has not been blemished
with one regretful moment !

*  '  Camilla,'  then lately begun,
t  '  Edwy and Elgiva,'  a tragedy by Madame d'Arblay.

26 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

How truly grieved was I to hear from Mr.  Lock of
the death of young Mr.  Burke  !  What a dreadful
blow upon his father and mother !  to come at the in
stant of the son's highest and most honourable ad
vancement,  and of the father's retreat to the bosom
of his family from public life !  His brother,  too,  gone
so lately !  I am most sincerely sorry,  indeed,  and quite
shocked,  as there seemed so little suspicion of such an
event's approach,  by your account of the joy caused by
Lord Fitzwilliam's kindness.  Pray tell me if you hear
how poor Mr.  Burke and his most amiable wife endure
this calamity,  and how they are.

*****

F.  D'A.

Madame dArblay to Mrs.  Phillips.

Bookham,  1794.

I GRIEVE to return M.  de Lally's incomparable book ;
I have been delighted and enlightened by the  '  Letters
to the Electors,'  and the  '  Pieces Justificatives ;'  I think
never more by any writing I ever read:  there is a
nobleness of mind and of style,  of thought and of ex
pression,  so strikingly combined,  that eloquence has
rarely seemed to me so natural,  and never more pene
trating.  That any country can voluntarily throw away
such a statesman,  such an orator,  such a citizen  !  You
know how forcibly T was struck by M.  de Lally To-
lendal from the first :  you will therefore not wonder I
am now quite enthusiastic for him.  Warmth and sen
sibility such as his,  joined to a candour that seems
above all prejudice on any side,  or for any party,  or
purpose,  or even wish,  make me reverence now as be
fore I admired him.

Always,  when you can,  remember me to him and to
your beloved Princesse d'Henin.  How I wish you
could spend more time with such consolatory beings !

We are seeking everywhere,  in the Dorking vicinity,

1794]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  27

anew dwelling;  but the difficulty of finding anything
is immoderate.  Nevertheless,  as this is the sole period
in which we can hope to bear the expense of removing,
we are ardent in the search  ;  for the dearness of pro
visions,  and the difficulty of obtaining the common
comforts of the family board,  milk,  butter,  &c.,  make
us unwilling to establish ourselves here for life ;  and
the sight of Mrs.  Lock oftener is well worth a few
guineas a-year.

F.  D'A.

Lines to Madame d'Arblay on her Birthday.

Aimer sa femme est un travers,

La chanter est un ridicule  ;
Et,  de plus,  ce raonde pervers

Sur cet article est pen credule.
Ton e"poux,  libre dans tes fers,

Loin des bourreaux que la licence
Dechame centre 1'univers,
Airae a consigner dans ces vers

Qu'il te doit son ind6pendance
Et son bonheur  !     Oui ;  tous les ans'

Je proraets aux mauvais plaisants,
Qu'en ce jour heureux ma Constance

Les fera rire a mes d6pens.
A cette douce jouissance

Puissent-ils se livrer long terns  !

A.  A.

Inscription for the Portrait of his Wife,  by A.  d'Arblay.

La Raison,  si souvent tranchante,  atrabilaire,
Toujours dans ses ecrits plait autant qu'elle eclaire  ;
L'Indulgence,  1' Amour allument son flambeau :
C'est la Sagesse enfin,  non 1'Ennui peint en beau.

Westhamble.

28 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

1795.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs. .

Bookham,  April 15,  1795.

So dry a reproof from so dear a friend !  And do
you,  then,  measure my regard of heart by my remiss-
ness of hand  ?  Let me give you the short history of
my tragedy,  fairly and frankly.

I wrote it not,  as your acquaintance imagined,  for
the stage,  nor yet for the press.  I began it at Kew
Palace,  and,  at odd moments,  I finished it at Windsor ;
without the least idea of any species of publication.

Since I left the Royal household,  I ventured to let
it be read by my father,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Lock,  my
sister Phillips,  and,  of course,  M.  d'Arblay,  and not
another human being.  Their opinions led to what
followed,  and my brother,  Dr.  Charles,  showed it to
Mr.  Kemble while I was on my visit to my father last
October.  He instantly and warmly pronounced for
its acceptance,  but I knew not when Mr.  Sheridan
would see it,  and had not the smallest expectation of
its appearing this year.  However,  just three days
before my beloved little infant came into the world,
an express arrived from my brother,  that Mr.  Kemble
wanted the tragedy immediately,  in order to show it to
Mr.  Sheridan,  who had just heard of it,  and had
spoken in the most flattering terms of his good will
for its reception.

Still,  however,  I was in doubt of its actual accept
ance till three weeks after my confinement,,  when I
had a visit from my brother,  who told me he was,  the
next morning,  to read the piece in the green-room.

This was a precipitance for which I was every way
unprepared,  as I had never made but one copy of the
play,  and had intended divers corrections and alter
ations.  Absorbed,  however,  by my new charge,  and
then growing ill,  I had a sort of indifference about the
matter,  which,  in fact,  has lasted ever since.

1795]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  29

The moment I was then able to hold a pen I wrote
two short letters,  to acknowledge the state of the affair
to my sisters  ;  and to one of these epistles I had an im
mediate laughing answer,  informing me my confidence
was somewhat of the latest,  as the subject of it was
already in all the newspapers!  I was extremely
chagrined at this intelligence ;  but,  from that time,
thought it all too late to be the herald of my own
designs.  And this,  added to my natural and incurable
dislike to enter upon these egotistical details unasked,

has caused my silence to my dear M ,  and to

every friend I possess.  Indeed,  speedily after,  I had
an illness so severe and so dangerous,  that for full
seven weeks the tragedy was neither named nor
thought of by M.  d'Arblay or myself.

The piece was represented to the utmost disad
vantage,  save only Mrs.  Siddons and Mr.  Kemble;
for it was not written with any idea of the stage,  and
my illness and weakness,  and constant absorbment,  at
the time of its preparation,  occasioned it to appear
with so many undramatic effects,  from my inexperience
of theatrical requisites and demands,  that,  when I saw
it,  I myself perceived a thousand things I wished to
change.  The performers,  too,  were cruelly imperfect,
and made blunders I blush to have pass for mine, —
added to what belong to me.  The most important
character after the hero and heroine had but two lines
of his part by heart !  He made all the rest at random,
and such nonsense as put all the other actors out as
much as himself;  so that a more wretched performance,
except Mrs.  Siddons,  Mr.  Kemble,  and Mr.  Bensley,
could not be exhibited in a barn.

All this concurred to make it very desirable to with
draw the piece for alterations,  which I have done.

And now you have the whole history — and now —
are you appeased  ?

F.  o'A.

30 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

Dr.  Burney to Madame d'Arblay.

May 7, 1795.

MY DEAR FANNY, — What a while has our correspond
ence slept !  Let me see — where shall I begin?  Why,
at my resuscitation,  I think.  I began to stir and
rub my eyes,  as I remember,  ere you left these parts ;
and I no sooner got on my legs but it was  "  Mungo
here and Mungo there."  Engagements, — scholars, —
printers, — proofs, — revises,  &c.  &c.  Within this fort
night or three weeks that I have been quite out of my
room,  my hurry has been,  to my present feelings and
strength,  greater than ever I can remember.  The
best part of the story is,  that I have been gathering
strength and spirits through all this bustle,  faster than
I did by nursing and inquiries after my own health.
But during the late tremendous winter I find that
almost all my acquaintance have fared no better than
myself;  so that,  like Swift and his old woman,  we do
nothing but  "con ailments together."

One of my dinners,  since my going out,  was at
Charlotte's,  with the good Hooles.  After dinner Mr.
Cumberland came in,  and was extremely courteous,  and
seemingly friendly,  about you and your piece.  He
took me aside from Mrs.  Paradise,  who had fastened
on me and held me tight by an account of her own and
Mr.  Paradise's complaints,  so circumstantially nar
rated,  that not a stop so short as a comma occurred in
more than an hour,  while I was civilly waiting for a
full period.  Mr.  Cumberland expressed his sorrow at
what had happened at Drury-lane,  and said that,  if he
had had the honour of knowing you sufficiently,  he
would have told you d'avance what would happen,  by
what he had heard behind the scenes.  The players
seem to have given the play an ill name.  But,  he
says,  if you would go to work again,  by reforming
this,  or work with your best powers at a new plan,  and
would submit it to his inspection,  he would,  from the
experience he has had,  risk his life on its success.

1795]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  31

This conversation I thought too curious not to be

mentioned.

*          *          *         *          *

Well,  but how does your petit and pretty monsieur
do  ?  'Tis pity you and M.  d'Arblay don't like him,
poor thing !  And how does horticulture thrive  ?
This is a delightful time of the year for your Floras
and your Linnsei :  I envy the life of a gardener in
spring,  particularly in fine weather.

And so dear Mr.  Hastings is honourably acquitted !
and I visited him the next morning,  and we cordially
shook hands.  I had luckily left my name at his door
as soon as I was able to go out,  and before it was
generally expected that he would be acquitted.

The young Lady Spencer and I are become very
thick ;  I have dined with her at Lady Lucan's,  and
met her at the blue parties there.  She has in
vited me to her box at the opera,  to her house in
St.  James's Place,  and at the Admiralty,,  whither the
family removed last Saturday,  and she says I must
come to her the 15th,  22nd,  and 29th of this month,
when I shall see a huge assembly.  Mrs.  Crewe says
all London will be there.  She is a pleasant,  lively,
and comical creature,  with more talents and discern
ment than are expected from a character si foldtre.
My lord is not only the handsomest and best inten-
tioned man in the kingdom,  but at present the most
useful and truly patriotic.  And then,  he has written
to Vienna for Metastasio's three inedited volumes,
which I so much want ere I advance too far in the
press for them to be of any use.

I am hallooed on prodigiously in my Metastasio
mania.  All the critics — Warton,  Twining,  Nares,  and
Dr.  Charles — say that his Estratto dell'  Arte Poetica
d'Aristotile,  which I am now translating,  is the best
piece of dramatic criticism that has ever been written.
"  Bless my heart !"  says Warton,  "  I,  that have been
all my life defending the three unities,  am overset."

32 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

"  Ay,"  quoth I,  "  has not he made you all ashamed
of  'em  ?  You learned folks are only theorists in
theatrical matters,  but Metastasio had sixty years'  suc
cessful practice.  There! — Go to."  My dear Fanny,
before you write another play,  you must read Aris
totle and Horace,  as expounded by my dear Metastasio.
But,  basta.  You know when I take up a favourite
author,  as a Johnson,  a Haydn,  or a Metastasio,  I
do not soon lay him down or let him be run down.

The club has been very much crowded this season.
Mr.  Fox was at the last,  and Windham  !  who,  coming
late,  did not put a good face on the discovery :  how
ever,  all were very loquacious and good humoured.
We have vacancies.  Poor Sir William Jones has
occasioned one — but black balls have been plenty.
Three or four d — lish democrats,  Dieu merci!  have
had the door shut upon  'em.

Here it strikes three o'clock  :  the post knell,  not bell,
tolls here,  and I must send off my scrib :  but I will
tell you,  though I need not,  that,  now I have taken up
Metastasio again,  I work at him in every uninterrupted
moment.  I have this morning attempted his charming
pastoral in  "  il Re Pastore :" —

Alia Selva,  al Prato,  al'  fonte

lo rvandro'  col gregge amato  :
E alia selva,  al fonte,  al prato

L'  idol mio con me verra.

In quel rozzo angusto tetto,

Che ricetto a noi dara,
Con la gioja e col diletto

L'  innocenza alberghera.  \

I'll give you the translation,  because the last stanza
is a portrait : —

To meadows,  woods,  and fountains

Our tender flocks I'll lead  :  n

In meads beneath the mountains
.    .    .  ,  My love shall see them feed.

1795]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAV.  ;  33

Our simple narrow mansion

Will suit our station well ;
There 's room for heart expansion

And peace and joy to dwell.

God bless you  !    A thousand compliments and loves
to M.  d'Arblay.

C.  B.

From Madame  $ArUay to Dr.  Burneij.

Hermitage,  Bookham,  May 13,  1795.

You have not one letter to translate,  my dear father,
from your favourite Metastasio,  more gaily,  more kindly
amiable,  than this last original you have bestowed
upon me.  Mr.  Cumberland is curious and surprising, — •
Mrs.  Paradise,  the very woman, — Mr.  Hastings,  re
viving, — Fox and Windham,  good dramatic encounter
ing  ;  but the best of all is the story of resuscitation,
and the happy effect of bustle and exertion.  My
dearest father is so made for society-^-that is the truth
and moral of the fable — and society is always disposed
to be so just towards him,  that it is impossible,  when
he is shaken back to it,  he should not,  like the man
of Sicily,  find himself put to rights.  For bustle and
exertion,  like f<  tobacco hie  "  (how learned and grand I
am in my illustrations !),  if you are well,  may,  by over-
draughting,  make you sick ;  but,  after a short repose,
and a little discipline to boot,  if you are sick,  they are
just the things to make you well.  The mind wants
pulling out a little,  to recognise its own elasticity.

Horticulture prospers beyond all former even ideas
of prosperity.  How,  how I do wish you could come
and take an hour's work here !  it would mingle so well
with Metastasio ! — the employment — the fragrant sur
rounding air — the sweet refreshing landscape — and
vour partner in labour, — all would be congenial with
Metastasio,  and,  consequently,  with you;  for you know,

VOL.    VI.  D

34 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

when we were all to choose who we would be if not
our dear identical and always all-preferable selves,
you fixed upon Metastasio ;  and indeed,  in many,  nay
most respects,  it would hardly be a change.

To be sure,  as you say,  't is pity M.  d'A.  and
his rib should have conceived such an antipathy to the
petit monsieur  !  O if you could see him now !  My
mother would be satisfied,  for his little cheeks are
beginning to savour of the trumpeter's,  and Esther
would be satisfied,  for he eats like an embryo alder
man.  He enters into all we think,  say,  mean,  and
wish!  His eyes are sure to sympathize in all our
affairs and all our feelings.  We find some kind reason
for every smile he bestows upon us,  and some gene
rous and disinterested motive for every grave look.
If he wants to be danced,  we see he has discovered
that his gaiety is exhilarating to us ;  if he refuses to
be moved,  we take notice that he fears to fatigue us.
If he will not be quieted without singing,  we delight
in his early gout for les beaux arts.  If he is immove-
able to all we can devise to divert him,  we are edified
by the grand serieux of his dignity and philosophy  :
if he makes the house ring with loud acclaim because
his food,  at first call,  does not come ready warm into
his mouth,  we hold up our hands with admiration at
his vivacity.

Your conversation with Mr.  Cumberland astonished
me.  I certainly think his experience of stage effect,
and his interest with players,  so important,  as almost
instantly to wish putting his sincerity to the proof.
How has he got these two characters — one,  of Sir Fret
ful Plagiary,  detesting all works but those he owns,
and all authors but himself;  the other,  of a man too
perfect even to know or conceive the vices of the world,
such as he is painted by Goldsmith in  '  Retaliation  ?'
And which of these characters is true  ?

I am not at all without thoughts of a future revise of
'  Edwy and Elgiva,'  for which I formed a plan on the

1795]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  35

first night,  from what occurred by the representation.
And let me own to you,  when you commend my
'*"  bearing so well a theatrical drubbing,"  I am by no
means enabled to boast I bear it with conviction of
my utter failure.  The piece was certainly not heard,
and therefore not really judged.  The audience finished
with an unmixed applause on hearing it was withdrawn
for alterations^  and I have considered myself in the
publicly accepted situation of having at my own option
to let the piece die,  or attempt its resuscitation — its
reform,  as Mr.  Cumberland calls it.  However,  I have
not given one moment to the matter since my return
to the Hermitage.

F.  D'A.

P.S. — I should be very glad to hear good news of
the revival of poor Mr.  Burke.  Have you ever seen
him since this fatality in his family  ?  I am glad,  never
theless,  with all my heart,  of Mr.  Hastings's honourable
acquittal.

Dr.  Burney to Madame cFArblay.

Chelsea College,  June 9,  1795.

MY DEAR FANNY, — I have been such an evapore
lately,  that,  if I were near enough to accost you,  it
would be in Susey's exclamation,  when she was just
arrived from France,  and had stayed at Mrs.  Lewis's
till ten o'clock at night — "  Que je mis libertine,  papa  .'"
and Que je suis libertin,  ma fille  !  Three huge assem
blies at Spencer House ;  two dinners at the Duke of
Leeds' ;  two clubs  ;  a dejeuner at Mrs.  Crewe's villa
at Harnpstead ;  a dinner at Lord Macartney's ;  two
ditto at Mr.  Crewe's ;  two philosophical conversaziones
at Sir Joseph Banks's ;  Haydn's benefit ;  Salomon's
ditto,  &c.  &c.  What profligacy!  But what argufies-
all this festivity  ? — 't is all vanity and exhalement of
spirit.  I am tired to death of it all,  while your do
mestic and maternal joys are as fresh as the roses in

r»  9.

36 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

your garden.  And here let me congratulate your honest
gardener on  "  the clouds dropping fatness," — "  visiting
each plant,  and feeding

"  Flowers,  worthy Paradise
To-morrow,  ere fresh morning streak the east
With first approach of light,  he now will rise,
And at his pleasant labour,  to reform
His flowery arbours and his alleys green
That mock his scant manuring,  and require
More hands than his to lop their wanton growth  :
Those blossoms also,  and those dropping gums,
That lie bestrewn,  unsightly and unsmooth,
Ask riddance,  if ye mean to tread with ease."

Mason has sent me his  '  Essays on Church Music  *
(the only book he gave away,  according to Mr.  Stone-
hewer).  He is very civil to me in all parts of his
book ;  but is more tolerant to parochial psalmody than
I have been in my life,  or ever shall be ;  but for this
he apologises,  and I laugh at the cause of our differ
ence.

I must tell you what happened at Mrs.  Crewe's
dejeuner.  I arrived late,  and met many people coming
away,  but still found the house and gardens full of
fashionables.  It was a cold-lunch day,  and,  after eat
ing was over,  people went into the bit of a garden to a
lottery,  or to take a turn.  Among the peripatetico-
politicians,  there was Lord Sheffield,  the Master of the
Kolls,  Canning,  with abundance of et ceteras,  and
Mr.  Erskine.  On meeting him and Mrs.  Erskine,  we
renewed last year's acquaintance.  After we had passed
each other several times,  we got into conversation,  and
what do you think about,  but the reform of parliament  ?
He told me his whole plan of virtuous representation  ;
— what new county members were to be added,  what
rotten boroughs destroyed ;  and his ideas of keeping
down corruption from ruining the state.  It is not to
be quite universal suffrage at elections,  which are to be
triennial,  &c.  &c.

1795]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  37

"  Well,  but/'  says I quietly, (i can government go on
without influence,  or a majority when its measures are
good?"

"  Oh,  yes :  the people will be in good humour,  and
easily governed."

"  But,  my good Sir  ! — you,  who understand these
things so much better than I,  be so good as to tell me,
what is the ultimate end of Reform,  if the present Con
stitution of King,  Lords,  and Commons is allowed to
subsist,  but to make it easy to pull down a minister,  at
least  ?  and if it is rendered easy to pull down Mr.  Pitt,
will it not be easy,  likewise,  to pull down Mr.  Fox,  or
any successor  ?"

He did not seem prepared for so queer a question  ;
he shuffled about,  and gave me an equivocal No,  which
more clearly said Yes.  All this while he had hold of
my arm,  and people stared at our intimacy,  while that
rogue Mrs.  Crewe and the Marchioness of Buckingham
were upstairs,  sitting at a window,  wondering and
laughing at our confabulation.

I have been able to call on Lord Orford but twice
since my illness.  He was at Strawberry Hill the first
time ;  the second I found him alone,  and he was very
cordial,  quaint,  and pleasant ;  made great inquiries
after you ;  and seemed main eager about my Metas-
tasio,  and, — would you think it  ? — charged me to give
plenty of translations from his poetry.

I have seen nothing of Mr.  Cumberland since my
last, — not even one of his three successful new plays in
one season.

I received of Cadell's son,  about a fortnight ago,  the
balance of your pamphlet in favour of the destitute
French Priests,  which I immediately put into the
hands of Mrs.  Crewe, — '201.  7s.  She insisted on your
mother's having the pleasure of relieving with 10/.  of it
some of her numerous poor emigrant acquaintances,
but since has had it refunded to her for some poor
miserable English nuns lately come from Holland,  who

38 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

are literally starving with hunger,  and in want of every
necessary of life.  Lady Buckingham and Mrs.  Crewe
visit them at Bayswater,  and administer to them every
assistance in their power.  God bless you !

C.  B.

Madame d'ArUay to Mrs. .

Bookham,  June 1 5,  '95.'^

No,  my dear M ,  no; — "this poor intercourse"

shall never cease,  while the hand that writes this as
surance can hold a pen!  I have been very much
touched with your letter,  its affection,  and its — every
thing.  Do not for the world suffer this our only com
munication to  "  dwindle away  :"  for me,  though the
least punctual of all correspondents,  I am,  perhaps,  the
most faithful of all friends ;  for my regard,  once ex
cited,  keeps equal energy in absence as in presence,
and an equally fond and minute interest in those for
whom I cherish it,  whether I see them but at the dis
tance of years,  or with every day's sun.  Sun it is,  even
in winter,  that shines upon sights so sweet as of per
sons beloved.  My dear and darling sister Phillips will
now once more experience this truth,  for last Monday
she left Mickleham — Norbury Park — Bookham — every
spot most dear to her,  to go and live in London  !  Will
she,  think you,  for that,  be ever absent from my mind  ?
Will my new ties,  dear almost to adoration as they are
to me,  ever obliterate my former ones  ?  No,  my dear

M ,  all those whom I best love have something,

more or less,  of resemblance one to another;  each,
therefore,  rather helps than mars my affection for the
rest.  I love nobody for nothing  •  I am not so tindery  !
therefore there must be change in the object before
there can be any in me.

I have much to say to you.- —

*  *  *  *

And lastly,  let me hasten to tell you something of

1795]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  39

myself that I shall be very sorry you should hear from
any other,  as your too susceptible mind would be hurt
again,  and that would grieve me quite to the heart.

I have a long work,  which a long time has been in
hand,  that I mean to publish soon — in about a year.
Should it succeed,  like  *  Evelina '  and  '  Cecilia/  it may
be a little portion to our Bambino.  We wish,  there
fore,  to print it for ourselves in this hope ;  but the ex
penses of the press are so enormous,  so raised by these
late Acts,  that it is out of all question for us to afford
it.  We have,  therefore,  been led by degrees to listen
to counsel of some friends,  and to print it by sub
scription.  This is in many — many ways unpleasant
and unpalatable to us both;  but the real chance of
real use and benefit to our little darling overcomes all
scruples,  and,  therefore,  to work we go !

You will feel,  I dare believe,  all I could write on this
subject ;  I once rejected such a plan,  formed for me by
Mr.  Burke,  where books were to be kept by ladies,  not
booksellers, — the Duchess of Devonshire,  Mrs.  Bos-
cawen,  and Mrs.  Crewe ;  but I was an individual then,
and had no cares of times  'to come :  now,  thank
Heaven  !  this is not the case ; — and when I look at my
little boy's dear,  innocent,  yet intelligent face,  I defy
any pursuit to be painful that may lead to his good.

Adieu,  my ever dear friend  !

F.  D'A.

Madame dArblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,June 18, '95.

MY DEAREST FATHER, — How I rejoice my business
letter did not arrive an hour or two sooner !  It might
have so turned your thoughts to itself as to have
robbed me of  "  'fore George  !  a more excellent song
than t'other ! "  I would not have lost it — I had almost
said — for all my subscription ;  and I should quite have
said it,  if I listened more to impulse than to interest.

40 DIARY AND LETTERS         [PART I.

r How I should have enjoyed being with  "that rogue,'*
as you call Mrs.  Crewe,  and Lady Buckingham,  peering
at you and Mr.  Erskine confabbing so lovingly  !  .  .  .
But I must fly from all this,  and from our garden,  and
our Bambino,  to write first upon business, — or this,
and those,  will presently swallow all my paper by
dearer,  more congenial attraction.

All our deliberations made,  even after your dis
couraging calculations,  we still mean to hazard the
publishing by subscription.  And,  indeed,  I had pre
viously determined,  when I changed my state,  to set
aside all my innate and original abhorrences,  and to
regard and use as resources,  myself,  what had always
been considered as such by others.  Without this idear
and this resolution,  our hermitage must have been
madness.  With them, — I only wish my dear and kind
father could come and work at it,  with Abdolomine,  to
cure his lumbago,  as Abdolomine says it would surely
do ;  and he would then see its comforts,  its peace,  its
harmony,  and its little  "perennial plant,"  and see
many a view of retired life which he may have read
as romantic,  yet felt as desirable,  realized.  But here
1 am running away from this same business again  !

I am extremely glad you mean to communicate with
Mrs.  Crewe.  Her former great kindness,  in voluntary
propositions of exertion upon a similar plan,  I have
never forgotten,  and consequently never ceased to be
grateful for,  though my then shyness and peculiarly
strung nerves made its prospect terrific,  not alluring,
to me.  Now,  when I look at my dear baby,  and see
its dimpling smiles,  and feel its elastic springs,  I think
how small is the sacrifice of such feelings for such a
blessing.  You enchant me by desiring more infantile
biography.  With what delight I shall obey such a
call,  and report progress of his wonders from letter to
letter !

But — to business again.  I like well the idea of
giving no name at all, — why should not I have my

1795]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  41

mystery as well as Udolpho  ? — but,.  .  .  "  now,  don't
fly,  Dr.  Burney !  " — I own I do not like calling it a
novel;  it gives so simply the notion of a mere love-
story,  that I recoil a little from it.  I mean this work
to be sketches of characters and morals put in action,  —
not a romance.  I remember the word novel was long
in the way of '  Cecilia/  as I wras told at the Queen's
house ;  and it was not permitted to be read by the
Princesses till sanctioned by a Bishop's recommenda
tion,— the late Dr.  Ross of Exeter.

Will you then suffer mon amour propre to be saved
by the proposals running thus  ? — Proposals for print
ing by subscription,  in six volumes duodecimo,,  a new
work by the author of '  Evelina'  and  '  Cecilia.'

How grieved I am you do not like my heroine's
name  !  * — the prettiest in nature  !  I remember how
many people did not like that of Evelina,  and called
it  "  affected"  and  "  missish,"  till they read the book,
and then they got accustomed in a few pages,  and
afterwards it was much approved.

I must leave this for the present untouched  ;  for the
force of the name attached by the idea of the character,
in the author's mind,  is such,  that I should not know
how to sustain it by any other for a long while.  In
'  Cecilia'  and  *  Evelina'  't was the same  :  the names of all
the personages annexed,  with me,  all the ideas I put in
motion with them.  The work is so far advanced,  that
the personages are all,  to me,  as so many actual ac
quaintances,  whose memoirs and opinions I am com
mitting to paper.  I will make it the best I can,  my
dearest father.  I will neither be indolent,  nor neg
ligent,  nor avaricious.  I can never half answer the
expectations that seem excited.  1 must try to forget
them,  or I shall be in a continual quivering.

Mrs.  Cooke,  my excellent neighbour,  came in just
now,  to read me a paragraph of a letter from Mrs.
Leigh,  of Oxfordshire,  her sister.  .  .  .  After much

*  The name was then Ariflla,  changed afterwards to Camilla.

42 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART I.

of civility about the new work and its author,  it finishes
thus : — "  Mr.  Hastings I saw just now  :  I told him
what was going forward ;  he gave a great jump,  and
exclaimed,  'Well,  then,  now 1 can serve her,  thank
Heaven,  and I will !  I will write to Anderson to engage
Scotland,  and I will attack the East Indies myself!'  "

F.  D'A.

P.S. — The Bambino is half a year old this day.
N.B. — I have not heard the Park or Tower guns.
I imagine the wind did not set right.

Madame d'Arblay to the Comte de Narbonne  (written
during his embarrassments from the French Revolu
tion,  and in answer to a letter expressing bitter
disappointment from repeated losses).

Bookham,  26th December,  1795.

WHAT a letter,  to terminate so long and painful a
silence!  It has penetrated us with sorrowing and
indignant feelings.  Unknown to M.  d'Arblay,  whose
grief and horror are upon the point of making him
quite ill,  I venture this address to his most beloved
friend  ;  and before I seal it,  I will give him the option
to burn or underwrite it.

I shall be brief in what I have to propose  :  sincerity
need not be loquacious,  and M.  de Narbortne is too
kind to demand phrases for ceremony.

Should your present laudable but melancholy plan
fail,  and should nothing better offer,  or till something
can be arranged,  will you,  dear sir,  condescend to
share the poverty of our Hermitage  ?  Will you take
a little cell under our rustic roof,  and fare as we
fare  ?  What to us two hermits is cheerful and happy,
will to you,  indeed,  be miserable  ;  but it will be some
solace to the goodness of your heart to witness our
contentment; — to dig with M.  d'A.  in the garden will

1795]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

43

be of service to your health ;  to nurse sometimes with
me in the parlour will be a relaxation to your mind.
You will not blush to own your little godson.  Come,
then,  and give him your blessing  ;  relieve the wounded
feelings of his father — oblige his mother — and turn
hermit at Bookham,  till brighter suns invite you else
where.

F.  D'ARBLAY.

You will have terrible dinners,  alas  ! — but your god
son comes in for the dessert.

44 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

PART II.

1796.

Letter of Comte de Narbonne to Madame d'Arblay— Publication
of Camilla — Madame d'Arblay's visit to Windsor — Interview
with the Queen — Interest of the King in Madame d'Arblay's
new work — Conversation with his Majesty — Another interview
with the Queen — Conversation with her Majesty,  the Princesses
Elizabeth and Augusta — Munificence of their Majesties— Con
versation with the Princesses — The Royal Family on the terrace
— The King's reception of M.  d'Arblay — The Queen and the
Duchess of York — Sale of Camilla compared with that of the
writer's previous works — The Princess Royal and the Prince
of Wurtembere: — Criticism on Camilla — Death of Dr.  Barney's
second wife — Visit to Norbury Park — The Pursuits of Literature
— Unfavourable opinion of Caleb Williams — The Comte de
Lally Tolendal and his daughter — Mason's name struck out
of Mrs.  Delany's will — The Pitt subscription.

The Comte de Narbonne to Monsieur and Madame
dArblay.

Gleresse,  ce 24 Janvier,  1796.

LE sort aura beau faire  :  mon aimable soeur,  il me
paroit impossible que je sois jamais bien malheureux
tant qu'il ne m'otera pas le bien inexprimable de rece-
voir des lettres comme celles que vous vous reunissiez
pour m'ecrire.  Quel tresor a trouve mon d'Arblay  !
Vous croyez peut-etre que c'est de vous dont je parle?
Je ne dis pas tout a fait non — mais je parle aussi de
ses richesscs,  que je partagerai surement,  avec encore
plus de bonheur que de reconnaissance,  des qu'il sera
bien decide qu'il taut que vous vous chargiez de moi.
Mais je vais lui expliquer comme quoi votre adorable
amitie s'est trop vivement alarmee,  et que je ne suis
pas tout a fait encore sans quelques petites ressources
et esperances.  A vous,  ma sceur,  je ne veux vous parler

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY,  45

que de mon filleul,  vous prier de lui apprendre a pro-
noncer mon nom— -a le confondre avec celui de nos amis
de Norbury.  Quel paradis vous faites etvous habitez  !
et que je serai heureux,  si le sort peut jamais m'y
donner une place oil je ne vous sois pas par trop in
commode.

Je ne vous remercie pas,  mon ami,  niais je vous dirai
que rien dans la vie ne m'a fait une plus douce sen
sation de bonheur que votre lettre  ;  aussi,  ne doutez
pas que je n'accepte tout — tout ce que vous voudriez
1'aire pour moi,  quand il ne me restera que vous dans
le inonde ;  car je suis bien sur que vous ne me man-
querez jamais.  Mais,  au vrai,  je n'ai,  pour le moment,
aucun besom de vous,  et je suis meme un peu plus
pres de quelques esperances  :  d'abord,  Ferdinand,  qui
•est revenu en France,  a deja trouve le inoyen de me
faire passer quelques louis,  et il m'en promet quelques
autres sous peu de terns.  Voila done pour le present,
— et quant a 1'avenir,  il vient d'etre rendu une loi,  qui,
en otant a mon pere les deux tiers de son bicn attendu
I'emigration de ses deux enfans,  assure,  au moins,
1'autre tiers a son heritier naturel,  qui est ma rille,  et
qui,  heureusement,  je n'ai pas fait sortir ;  ainsi vous
voyez que son avenir et le mien n'est pas tout a fait
desespere.  Mais,  pour veiller a tout cela,  vous voyez
que je ne dois pas m'eloigner des irontieres de la
France  :  ainsi,  quelque appetit que vous me donniez
d'etre pauvre avec vous,  il faut que je le sois tout seul
encore quelque temps.

Ne vous effrayez done pas sur moi,  mon ami;  je
passe ici assez doucement ma vie entre Madame de la
Chartre,  que vous aimez,  et Madame de Laval,  que
vous aimeriez.  Nous nous etourdissons sur 1'avenir,
et je suis aussi heureux que ma situation le comporte.
D'ailleurs en verite,  est-il permis de se plaindre,  lors-
qu'il existe tant d infortunes sans aucun espoir  ?

DE NARBONNE.

46 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

[During the years 1794 and 1795,  Madame d'Ar-
blay finished and prepared for the press her third
novel,  '  Camilla,'  which was published partly by sub
scription in 1796;  the Dowager Duchess of Leinster,
the Hon.  Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.  Crewe,  and Mrs.  Lock,
kindly keeping lists,  and receiving the names of sub
scribers.

This work having been dedicated by permission to
the Queen,  the authoress was desirous of presenting
the first copy to her Majesty,  and made a journey to
Windsor for that honour.]

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  July 10,  1796.

IF I had as much of time as of matter,  my dear
father,  what an immense letter should I write you  !
But I have still so many book oddments of accounts,
examinations,  directions,  and little household affairs to
arrange,  that,  with baby -kissing included,  I expect I can
give you to-day only part the first of an excursion which
I mean to comprise in four parts  :  so here begins.

The books were ready at eleven or twelve,  but not so
the tailor !  The three Miss Thrales came to a short
but cordial hand-shaking at the last minute,  by appoint
ment  ;  and at about half-past three we set forward.  I
had written the day before to my worthy old friend
Mrs.  Agnew,  the housekeeper,  erst,  of my revered Mrs.
Delany,  to secure us rooms for one day and night,  and
to Miss Planta to make known I could not set out till
late.

When we came into Windsor at seven o'clock,  the way
to Mrs.  Agnew's was so intricate that we could not find
it,  till one of the King's footmen recollecting me,  I ima
gine,  came forward,  a volunteer,  and walked by the side
of the chaise to show the postilion the house. — N.B.  No
bad omen to worldly augurers.

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  47

Arrived,  Mrs.  Agnew came forth with faithful attach
ment,  to conduct us to our destined lodgings.  I wrote
hastily to Miss Planta,  to announce to the Queen that
I was waiting the honour of her Majesty's commands ;
and then began preparing for my appearance the next
morning,  when I expected a summons ;  but Miss Planta
came instantly herself from the Queen,  with orders of
immediate attendance,  as her Majesty would see me
directly  !  The King was just gone upon the terrace,  but
her Majesty did not walk that evening.

Mrs.  Agnew was my maid,  Miss Planta my arranger ;
my landlord,  who was a hairdresser,  came to my head,
and M.  d'Arblay was general superintendent.  The haste
and the joy went hand in hand,  and I was soon equipped,
though shocked at my own precipitance in sending before
I was already visible.  Who,  however,  could have ex
pected such prompt admission?  and in an evening?

M.  d'Arblay helped to carry the books as far as to the
gates.  My lodgings were as near to them as possible.
At the first entry towards the Queen's lodge we en
countered Dr.  Fisher and his lady :  the sight of me
there,  in a dress announcing indisputably whither I was
hieing,  was such an astonishment,  that they looked at
me rather as a recollected spectre than a renewed ac
quaintance.  When we came to the iron rails poor Miss
Planta,  in much fidget,  begged to take the books from
M.  d'Arblay,  terrilied,  I imagine,  lest  [French feet
should contaminate the gravel within ! — while he,  in
nocent of her fears,  was insisting upon carrying them
as far as to the house,  till he saw I took part with Miss
Planta,  and he was then compelled to let us lug in ten
volumes as we could.

The King was already returned from the terrace,  the
page in waiting told us.  "  O,  then,"  said Miss Planta,
"  you are too late  !"  However,  I went into my old
dining-parlour ;  while she said she would see if any
one could obtain the Queen's commands for another
time.  I did not stay five minutes ruminating upon the

48 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

dinners,  "  gone where the chickens,"  &c.,  when Miss
Planta returned,  and told me the Queen would see me
instantly.

The Queen was in her dressing-room,  and with only
the Princess Elizabeth.  Her reception was the most
gracious imaginable  ;  yet,  when she saw my emotion in
thus meeting her again,  she was herself by no means
quite unmoved.  I presented my little — yet not small —
offering,  upon one knee,  placing them,  as she directed,
upon a table by her side,  and expressing,  as well as I
could,  my devoted gratitude for her invariable good-
uess to me.  She then began a conversation,  in her old
style,  upon various things and people,  with all her
former graciousness of manner,  which soon,  as she per
ceived my strong sense of her indulgence,  grew into
<rven all its former kindness.  Particulars I have now
no room for  ;  but when,  in about half an hour,  she said,
*•'  How long do you intend to stay here,  Madame
d'Arblay  ? "  and I answered,  "  We have no inten
tions,  ma'am,"  she repeated,  laughing,  "  You have no
intentions! — Well,  then,  if you can come again to-mor
row morning,  you shall see the Princesses."

She then said she would not detain me at present ;
and,  encouraged by all that had passed,  I asked if I
might presume to put at the door of the King's apart
ment a copy of my little work.  She hesitated,  but
with smiles the most propitious ;  then told me to
fetch the books ;  and whispered something to the
Princess Elizabeth,  who left the room by another
door at the same moment that I retired for the other
set.

Almost immediately upon my return to the Queen and
the Princess Elizabeth,  the King entered the apartment,
and entered it to receive himself my little offering.

*' Madame D'Arblay,"  said her Majesty,  "tells me
that Mrs.  Boscawen is to have the third set;  but the first
— your Majesty will excuse me — is mine."

This was not,  you will believe,  thrown away upon me.

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  49

The King,  smiling,  said,  "  Mrs.  Boscawen,  I hear,  has
been very zealous."

I confirmed this,  and the Princess Elizabeth eagerly
called out,  "Yes,  Sir!  and while Mrs.  Boscawen kept a
book for Madame d'Arblay,  the Duchess of Beaufort
kept one for Mrs.  Boscawen."

This led to a little discourse upon the business,  in
which the King's countenance seemed to speak a benign
interest;  and the Queen then said,

"This book was begun here,  Sir."  Which already I
had mentioned.

"  And what did you write of it here  ?"  cried he.  "  How
far did you go  ? — Did you finish any part  ?  or only form
the skeleton  ?  "

"  Just that,  Sir,"  I answered ;  "  the skeleton was
formed here,  but nothing was completed.  I worked it up
in my little cottage."

"  And about what time did you give to it  ?'*

" All my time,  Sir;  from the period I planned pub
lishing it,  1 devoted myself to it wholly.  I had no episode
but a little baby.  My subject grew upon me,  and in
creased my materials to a bulk that I am afraid will be
more laborious to wade through for the reader than for
the writer."

"  Are you much frightened  ?"  cried he,  smiling  ;  "  as
much frightened as you were before  ?"

"  I have hardly had time to know yet,  Sir.  I received
the fair sheets of the last volume only last night.  I have,
therefore,  had no leisure for fear.  And sure I am,
happen what may to the book from the critics,  it can
never cause me pain in any proportion with the pleasure
and happiness I o\ve to it."

I am sure I spoke most sincerely;  and he looked
kindly to believe me.

He asked if Mr.  Lock had seen it;  and,  when I said
no,  seemed comically pleased,  as if desirous to have it in
its first state.  He asked next it'  Dr.  Burney had overlooked
it ;  and,  upon the same answer,  looked with the same satis-

VOL.  VI.  £

50 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

faction.  He did not imagine how it would have passed
current with my dearest father:  he appeared only to be
glad it would be a genuine work:  but,  laughingly,  said,
"  So you kept it quite snug  ?"

"  Not intentionally,  Sir,  but from my situation and my
haste  ;  I should else have been very happy to have con
sulted my father and Mr.  Lock;  but I had so much,  to
the last moment,  to write,  that I literally had not a moment
to hear what could be said.  The work is longer by thje
whole fifth volume than I had first planned  ;  and I am
almost ashamed to look at its size,  and afraid my readers
would have been more obliged to me if I had left so much
out than for putting so much in."

He laughed;  and inquired who corrected my proofs  ?
•'  Only myself,"  I answered.

"Why,  some authors have told me,"  cried he,  "that
they are the last to do that work for themselves.  They
know so well by heart what ought to be,  that they run
on without seeing what is.  They have told me,  besides,
that a mere plodding head is best and surest for that
it work ;  and that the livelier the imagination,  the less
it should be trusted to."

I must not go on thus minutely,  or my four parts will
be forty.  But a full half-hour of graciousness,  I could
almost call kindness,  was accorded me,  though the King
came from the concert to grant it ;  and it broke up by the
Queen saying,  "  I have told Madame d'Ai blay that,  if she
can come again to-morrow,  she shall see the Princesses.  '
The King bowed gently to my grateful obeisance for
this offer,  and told me I should not know the Princess
Amelia,  she was so much grown,  adding,  "  She is taller
than you!"

I expressed warmly my delight in the permission of
seeing their Royal Highnesses;  and their Majesties
returned to the concert-room.  The Princess Elizabeth
stayed,  and flew up to me,  crying,  "  How glad I am
to see you here again,  my dear Miss Burney! — I beg
your pardon,  Madame d'Arblay I mean — but I always

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  51

call all my friends by their maiden names when I first
see them after they are married."

I warmly now opened upon my happiness in this
return to all their sights,  and the condescension and
sweetness with which it was granted me  ;  and confessed I
could hardly behave prettily and properly at my first en
trance after so long an absence.  "  O,  I assure you I felt
for you !"  cried she;  "I thought you must be agitated;
it was so natural to you to come here — to Mamma  !  "

You will believe,  my dearest father,  how light-hearted
and full of glee I went back to my expecting companion  :
Miss Planta accompanied me,  and stayed the greatest
part of the little remaining evening,  promising to let
me know at what hour I should wait upon their Royal
Highnesses.

The next morning,  at eight or nine o'clock,  my old
footman,  Moss,  came with Mile.  Jacobi's compliments to
M.  and Madame d'Arblay,  and an invitation to dine at
the Queen's Lodge.

Miss Planta arrived at ten,  with her Majesty's com
mands that I should be at the Queen's Lodge at twelve.
I stayed,  meanwhile,  with good Mrs.  Agnew,  and M.
d'Arblay made acquaintance with her worthy husband,
who is a skilful and famous botanist,  and lately made
gardener to the Queen for Frogmore ;  so M.  d'Arblay
consulted him about our cabbages!  and so,  if they have
not now a high flavour,  we are hopeless.

At eleven M.  d'Arblay again ventured to esquire me
to the rails round the lodge,  whence I showed him my
ci-devant apartment,  which he languished to view nearer.
I made a visit to Mile.  Jacobi,  who is a very good
creature,  and with whom I remained very comfortably
till her Majesty and the Princesses returned from Frog-
more,  where they had passed two or three hours.  Almost
immediately I was summoned to the Queen by one of
the pages.  She was just seated to her hair-dresser.

She conversed upon various public and general topics
till the friseur was dismissed,  and then I was honoured,

E 2

52 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

with an audience,  quite alone,  for a full hour and
a half.  In this,  nothing could be more gracious
than her whole manner and discourse.  The particulars
as there was no pause,  would fill a duodecimo volume at
least.  Among them was Mr.  Windham,  whom she
named with great favour;  and gave me the opportunity
of expressing my delight upon his belonging to the
Government.  We had so often conversed about him
during the accounts I had related of Mr.  Hastings's trial,
that there was much to say upon the acquisition to the
administration,  and my former round assertions of his
goodness of heart and honour.  She inquired how you
did,  my dearest father,  with an air of great kindness  ;  and,
when I said well,  looked pleased,  as she answered,  "  I
was afraid he was ill,  for I saw him but twice last year at
our music."

She then gave me an account of the removal of the
concert to the Haymarket since the time I was admitted
to it.  She talked of some books and authors,  but found
me wholly in the clouds as to all that is new.  She then
said.  "  What a very pretty book Dr.  Burney has brought
out upon Metastasio!  I am very much pleased with it,
Pray  (smiling)  what will he bring out next  ?"

"  As yet,  Madam,  I don't know of any new plan."
"But he will bring out something else ?"
"  Most probably;  but he will rest a little first,  I fancy.1*
"  Has he nothing in hand  ?"
"  Not that I now know of,  Madam."
"  O,  but he soon will !"  cried she,  again smiling.
"  He has so active a mind,  Ma'am,  that I believe it
quite impossible to him to be utterly idle;  but,  indeed,  I
know of no present design being positively formed."

We had then some discourse upon the new connexion
at Norbury park — the FitzGeralds,  &c. ;  and I had the
opportunity to speak as highly as I believe her to deserve
of Mrs.  Charles.  The Queen had thought Miss Anger-
stein was dead.  From this she led to various topics of our
former conferences,  both in persons and things,  and gave

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  53

me a full description of her new house at Frogmore,  its
fitting up,  and the share of each Princess in its decoration.

She spoke with delight of its quiet and ease,  and her
enjoyment of its complete retirement.  "  I spend,"  she
cried,  "there almost constantly all my mornings.  I rarely
come home but just before dinner,  merely to dress;  but
to-day I came sooner."

This was said in a manner so flattering,  I could scarce
forbear the air of thanking her ;  however,  I checked the
expression,  though I could not the inference which
urged it.

At two o'clock the Princess Elizabeth appeared.  "  Is
the Princess Royal ready  ?"  said the Queen.  She
answered,  "Yes:"  and her Majesty then told me I might
go to her,  adding,  "  You know the way,  Madame d'Ar-
blay."  And,  thus licensed,  I went to the apartment
of her Royal Highness upstairs.  She was just quitting
it.  She received me most graciously,  and told me she
was going to sit for her picture,  if I would come and
stay with her while she sat.  Miss Bab Planta was in
attendance,  to read during this period.  The Princess
Royal ordered me a chair facing her ;  and another for
Miss Bab and her book,  which,  however,  was never
opened.  The painter was Mr.  Dupont.  She was very
gay and very charming;  full of lively discourse and
amiable condescension.

In about an hour the Princess Augusta came in  :  she
addressed me with her usual sweetness,  and,  when she had
looked at her sister's portrait,  said,  "  Madame D'Arblay,
when the Princess Royal can spare you,  I hope you will
come to me,"  as she left the room.  I did not rlout her;
and when I had been an hour with the Princess Royal,
she told me she would keep me no longer from Augusta,
and Miss Planta came to conduct me to the latter.

This lovely Princess received me quite alone  ;  Miss
Planta only shut me in ;  and she then made me sit by
her,  and kept me in most bewitching discourse more
than an hour.  She has a gaiety,  a charm about her,

54 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

that is quite resistless;  and much of true,  genuine,  and
very original humour.  She related to me the history of all
the feats,  and exploits,  and dangers,  and escapes of her
brothers during;  last year  ;  rejoicing in their safety,  yet
softly adding,  '<  Though these trials and difficulties did
them a great deal of good."

We talked a little of France,  and she inquired of me
what I knew of the late unhappy Queen,  through M.
d'Arblay ;  and spoke of her with the most virtuous
discrimination between her foibles and her really great
qualities,  with her most barbarous end.

She then dwelt upon Madame Roy ale,  saying,  in her
unaffected manner,  "It's very odd one never hears what
sort of girl she is."  I told her all I had gathered from
M.  d'Arblay.  She next spoke of my Bambino,  in
dulging me in recounting hisfaiUetgestes;  and never
moved till the Princess Royal came to summon her.  They
were all to return to Frogmore to dinner.  "\\e have
detained Madame d'Arblay between us the whole morn-
ins:,"  said the Princess Royal,  with a gracious smile.
"Yes,"  cried Princess Augusta,  "and I am afraid I have
bored her to death ;  but when once I begin upon my poor
brothers,  I can never stop without telling all my little bits
of glory."  She then outstayed the Princess Royal to tell
me that,  when she was at Plymouth,  at church,  she saw
so many officers'  wives,  and sisters,  and mothers, helping
their maimed husbands,  or brothers,  or sons,  that she
could not forbear whispering to the Queen,  "  Mamma,  how
lucky it is Ernest is just come so seasonably with that
wound in his face  !  I should have been quite shocked,  else,
not to have had one little bit of glory among ourselves !"

When forced away from this sweet creature,  I went to
Mile.  Jacobi,  who said,  "  But where is M.  d'Arblay?"
Finding1 it too late for me to go to my lodging to dress
before dinner,  I wrote him a word,  which immediately
brought him to the Queen's Lodge:  and there I shall
leave my dear father the pleasure of seeing us,  mentally,
at dinner,  at my ancient table, — both invited by the

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  55

Queen's commands.  Miss Gomm was asked to meet me,
and the repast was extremely pleasant.

Just before we assembled to dinner Mile.  Jacobi de
sired to speak with me alone;  and,  taking me to another
room,  presented me with a folded little packet,  saying,
"  The Queen ordered me to put this into your hands,
and said,  'Tell Madame d'Arblay it is from us both.'  '*  It
was an hundred guineas.  1 was confounded,  and nearly
sorry,  so little was such a mark of their goodness in my
thoughts.  She added that the King,  as soon as he came
from the chapel in the morning,  went to the Queen's
dressing-room just before he set out for the levee,  and
put into her hands fifty guineas,  saying,  "This is for my
set !"  The Queen answered,  "  I shall do exactly the same
for mine,"  and made up the packet herself.  "  'T is only,
she said,  for the paper,  tell Madame d'Arblay — nothing
for the trouble  !"  meaning she accepted that.

The manner of this was so more than gracious,  so
kind,  in the words us both,  that indeed the money at the
time was quite nothing in the scale of my gratification;  it
was even less,  for it almost pained me.  However,  a de
lightful thought that in a few minutes occurred made all
light and blithesome.  if We will come,  then,"  I cried,
"  once a year to Windsor,  to walk the Terrace,  and see
the King,  Queen,  and sweet Princesses,  This will enable
us,  and I shall never again look forward to so long a de
privation of their sight."  This,  with my gratitude for
their great goodness,  was what I could not refrain com
missioning her to report.

Our dinner was extremely cheerful;  all my old friends
were highly curious to see M.  d'Arblay,  who was in spirits,
and,  as he could address them in French,  and at his ease,
did not seem much disapproved of by them.  I went to
my lodging afterwards to dress,  where I told my Monsieur
this last and unexpected stroke,  which gave him exactly
my sensations,  and we returned to tea We had hopes
of the Terrace,  as my Monsieur was quite eager to see

56 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

all this beloved Royal House.  The weather,  however,
\vas very unpromising.  The King came from the lodge
during our absence  ;  but soon after we were in the levee
three Royal coaches arrived from Frogmore :  in the
first was the Queen,  the Princesses Royal and Augusta,
and some lady in waiting.  M.  d'Arblay stood by me
at a window to see them  ;  her Majesty looked up and
bowed to me,  and,  upon her alighting,  she looked up
again.  This,  I am sure,  was to see M.  d'Arblay,  who could
not be doubted,  as he wore his croix the whole time he was
at Windsor.  The Princesses bowed also,  and the four
younger,  who followed,  all severally kissed their hands to
me,  and fixed their eyes on my companion with an equal
expression of kindness and curiosity;  he therefore saw
them perfectly.

In a few minutes a page came to say  "  The Princesses
desire to see Madame d'Arblay,"  and he conducted me to
the apartment of the Princess Elizabeth,  which is the
most elegantly and fancifully ornamented of any in the
Lodge,  as she has most delight and most taste in pro
ducing good effects.

Here the fair owner of the chamber received me,  en
circled with the Princesses Mary and Amelia,  and no at
tendant.  They were exactly as I had left them — kind,  con
descending,  open,  and delightful,  and the goodness of the
Queen,  in sparing them all to me thus,  without any allay
of ceremony,  or gene of listening mutes,  I felt most deeply.

They were all very gay,  and I not very sad,  so we en
joyed a perfectly easy and even merry half-hour in divers
discourses,  in which they recounted to me who had been
most anxious about  "  the book,"  and doubted not its
great success,  as everybody was so eager about it.  "  And
I must tell you one thing,"  cried the Princess Elizabeth;
"the King is very much pleased with the dedication."

This was,  you will be sure,  a very touching hearing to
me ;  and Princess Mary exclaimed,  "  And he is very dif
ficult!"

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  57

(i O,  yes,  he  's hardly ever pleased with a dedication,"
cried one of the Princesses.  "  He almost always thinks
them so fulsome."

"  I was resolved I would tell it you,"  cried Princess
Elizabeth.

Can you imagine anything more amiable than this

pleasure in giving pleasure  ?

*  *  *  *  *

I now explained that politics were always left out;
that once I had had an idea of bringing in such as suited
me,  but that,  upon second thoughts,  I returned to my
more native opinion  .they were not a feminine subject for
discussion,  and that I even believed,  should the little
work sufficiently succeed to be at all generally read,  it
would be a better office to general readers to carry them
wide of all politics to their domestic fire-sides,  than to
open new matter of endless debate.

Soon after the Princess Augusta came in,  smiling and
lovely.  Princess Royal next appeared ;  Princess Augusta
sat down and charged me to take a chair next her.
Princess Royal did not stay long,  and soon returned to
summon her sister Augusta downstairs,  as the concert was
begun;  but she replied she could not come yet;  and
the Princess Royal went alone.  We had really a most
delicious chat then.

They made a thousand inquiries about my book,  and
when and where it was written,  &c.,  and how I stood as
to fright and fidget.  I answered all with openness,  and
frankly related my motives for the publication.  Every
thing of housekeeping,  I told them,  was nearly doubled
in price at the end of the first year and half of our mar
riage,  and we found it impossible to continue so near our
friends and the capital with our limited income,  though
M.  d'A.  had accommodated himself completely,  and even
happily,  to every species of economy,  and though my
dearest father had capitally assisted us ;  I then,  therefore,
determined upon adopting a plan I had formerly rejected,
of publishing by subscription.  I told them the former

58 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

history of that plan,  as Mr.  Burke's,  and many particu
lars that seemed extremely to interest them.  My garden,
our way of life,  our house,  our Bambino, — all were in
quired after and related.  I repeatedly told them the
strong desire M.  d'Arblay had to be regaled with a sight
of all their House — a House to which I stood so every
way indebted, — and they looked kindly concerned that
the weather admitted no prospect of the Terrace.

I mentioned  (o the Princess Augusta my recent new
obligation to their Majesties,  and my amaze and even
shame at their goodness.  "  O,  I am sure,"  cried she,
"they were very happy to have it in their power."

"  Yes,  and we were so glad  !''

"  So glad  !"  echoed each of the others.

"  How enchanted should I have been,"  cried I,  "to
have presented my little book to each of your Royal
Highnesses if I had dared  !  or if,  after her Majesty has
looked it over,  I might hope for such a permission,  how
proud and how happy it would make me !"

"O,  I dare say you may,''  cried the Princess Augusta,
eagerly.

I then intimated how deeply 1 should feel such an
honour,  if it might be asked,  after her Majesty had read
it;  and the Princess Elizabeth gracefully undertook the
office.

She related to me,  in a most pleasant manner,  the
whole of her own transaction,  its rise and cause and pro
gress,  in  '  The Birth of Love  :'*  but I must here abridge,  or
never have done.  I told them all my scheme for coming
again next July,  which they sweetly seconded.  Princess
Amelia assured me she had not forgotten me  ;  and when
another summons came for the concert,  Princess Augusta,
comically sitting still and holding me by her side,  called
out,  f(  Do you little ones go  !"

But they loitered also ;  and we went on,  on,  on,  with
our chat, — they as unwilling as myself to break it up, — till

*  '  The Birth of Love  ;'  a Poem  :  with engravings,  from designs
by Her Royal Highness the Princess Elizabeth.

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  59

staying longer was impossible ;  and then,  in parting,
they all expressed the kindest pleasure in our newly-
adopted plan of a yearly visit.

f(  And pray,"  cried Princess Elizabeth,  "  write again
immediately  !"

"  O,  no,"  cried Princess Augusta,  ff wait half a year —
to rest ;  and then — increase your family — all ways  /"

"  The Queen,"  said Princess Elizabeth,  "  consulted
me which way she should read  '  Camilla  ;'  whether quick,
at once,  or comfortably at Weymouth :  so I answered,
'  Why,  mamma,  I think,  as you will be so much interested
in the book,  Madame d'Arblay would be most pleased you
should read it now at once,  quick,  that nobody may be
mentioning the events before you come to them ;  and
then again at Weymouth,  slow and comfortably.' "

In going,  the sweet Princess Augusta loitered last but
her youngest sister,  Amelia,  who came to take my hand
when the rest were departed,  and assure me she should
never forget me.

We spent the remnant of Wednesday evening with my
old friends,  determining TO quit Windsor the next day,  if
the weather did not promise a view of the Royal Family
upon the Terrace for M.  d'Arblay.

Thursday morning was lowering,  and we determined
upon departing,  after only visiting some of my former ac
quaintances.  We met Miss Planta in our way to the
Lodge,  and took leave;  but when we arrived at Mile.
Jacobi's we found that the Queen expected we should
stay for the chance of the Terrace,  and had told Mile.
Jacobi to again invite us to dinner.

*****

We left the friendly Miss Goldsworthy for other visits  ; —
first to good old Mrs.  Planta ;  next to the very respectable
Dr.  Fisher and his wife.  The former insisted upon doing
the honours himself of St.  George's Cathedral to M.
d'Arblay,  which occasioned his seeing that beautiful
antique building to the utmost advantage.  Dr.  Fisher
then accompanied us to a spot to show M.  d'Arblay
Eton in the best view.

60 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

Dinner passed  «s before,  but the evening lowered,  and
all hopes of the Terrace were weak,  when the Duke and
Duchess of York arrived.  This seemed to determine
against us,  as they told us the Duchess never went upon
the Terrace but in the finest weather,  and the Royal
Family did not choose to leave her.  We were hesi
tating therefore whether to set off for Rose Dale,  when
Mile.  Jacob!  gave an intimation to me that the King,
herself,  and the Princess Amelia,  would walk on the
Terrace.

Thither instantly we hastened,  and were joined by Dr.
and Mrs.  Fisher.  The evening was so raw and cold that
there was very little company,  and scarce any expectation
of the Royal Family ;  and when we had been there about
half an hour the musicians retreated,  and everybody was
preparing to follow,  when a messenger suddenly came
forward,  helter skelter,  running after the horns and cla
rionets,  and hallooing to them to return.  This brought
back the straggling parties,  and the King,  Duke of York,
and six Princesses soon appeared.

I have never yet seen M.  d'Arblay agitated as at this
moment ;  he could scarce keep his steadiness,  or even his
ground.  The recollections,  he has since told me,  that
rushed upon his mind of his own King and Royal House
were so violent and so painful as almost to disorder
him.

His Majesty was accompanied by the Duke,  and Lord
Beaulieu,  Lord Walsingham,  and General Manners  ;  the
Princesses were attended by Lady Charlotte Bruce,  some
other lady,  and Miss Goldsworthy.  The King stopped
to speak to the Bishop of Norwich and some others at the
entrance,  and then walked on towards us,  who were at the
further end.  As he approached,  the Princess Royal said,
loud enough to be heard by Mrs.  Fisher,  "Madame
d'Arblay,  Sir ;"  and instantly he came on a step,  and then
stopped and addressed me,  and,  after a word or two of the
weather,  he said,  "Is that M.  d'Arblay?"  and most gra
ciously bowed to him,  and entered into a little conver
sation  ;  demanding how long he had been in England,

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  61

how long iii the country,  &c.  &c.,  and with a sweetness,
an air of wishing us well,  that will never,  never be erased
from our hearts.

M.  d'Arblay recovered himself immediately upon this
address,  and answered with as much firmness as
respect.

Upon the King's bowing and leaving us,  the Com-
mander-in-Chief most courteously bowed also to M.
d'Arblay,  and the Princesses all came up to speak to me,
and to curtsy to him  ;  and the Princess Elizabeth cried,
"  I  've got leave  !  and mamma says she won't wait to read
it first!"

After this the King and Duke never passed without
taking off their hats,  and the Princesses gave me a smile
and a curtsy at every turn  :  Lord Walsingham came to
speak to me,  and Mr.  Fairly,  and General Manners,  who
regretted that more of our old tea-party were not there to-
meet me once more.

As soon as they all re-entered the Lodge we followed
to take leave of Mile.  Jacobi;  but,  upon moving towards
the passage,  the Princess Royal appeared,  saying,  "  Ma
dame d'Arblay,  I come to waylay you !"  and made me
follow her to the dressing-room,  whence the voice of the
Queen,  as the door opened,  called out,  in mild accents,
"  Come in,  Madame d'Arblay  !"

Her Majesty was seated at the upper end of the room,
with the Duchess of York on her right,  and the Princesses
Sophia and Amelia on her left.  She made me advance,
and said,  "I have just been telling the Duchess of York
that I find her Royal Highness'sname the first upon this
list," — producing  '  Camilla.'

"Indeed,"  said the Duchess,  bowing to me,  "I was so
very impatient to read it,  I could not but try to get it as
early as possible.  I am very eager for it,  indeed  !"

"  I have read,"  said the Queen,  "  but fifty pages yet;
but I am in great uneasiness for that poor little girl,  that
I am afraid will get the small-pox  !  and I am sadly afraid
that sweet little other girl will not keep her fortune  !  but
I won't peep !  I read quite fair.  But I must tell Ma-

62 DIARY AND LETTERS        [PART II.

dame d'Arblay I know a country gentleman,  in Meck
lenburg,  exactly the very character of that good old man
the uncle !"

She seemed to speak as if delighted to meet him upon
paper.

The King now came in,  and I could not forbear making
up to him,  to pour forth some part of my full heart for his
goodness !  He tried to turn away,  but it was smilingly  ;
and I had courage to pursue him,  for I could not help it.

He then slightly bowed it off,  and asked the Queen to
repeat what she had said upon the book.

"  O,  your Majesty,"  she cried,  "I must not antici
pate  !"  yet told him of her pleasure in finding an old
acquaintance.

"  Well !"  cried the King archly,  "  and what other cha
racters have you seized  ?"

None,  I protested,  from life.

"  O !"  cried he,  shaking his head,  "you must have
some !"

"  Indeed your Majesty will find none !"  I cried.

"  But they may be a little better,  or a little worse,"  he
answered,  "  but still,  it they are not like somebody,  how
can they play their parts?"

"  O,  yes,  Sir,"  I cried,  "as far as general nature goes,
or as characters belong to classes,  I have certainly tried
to take them.  But no individuals!"

My account must be endless if I do not now curtail.
The  .Duke of York,  the other Princesses,  General
Manners,  and all the rest of the group,  made way to
the room soon after,  upon hearing the cheerfulness of
the voice of the King,  whose graciousness raised me
into spirits that set me quite at my ease.  He talked
much upon the book,  and then of Mrs.  Delany,  and
then of various others that my sight brought to his
recollection,  and all with a freedom and goodness that
enabled me to answer without difficulty or embarrass
ment,  and that produced two or three hearty laughs
from the Duke of York.

After various other topics,  the Queen said,  "  Duchess,

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  63

Madame d'Arblay is aunt of the pretty little boy you
were so good to."

The Duchess understood her so immediately,  that I
fancy this was not new to her.  She bowed to me
again,  very smilingly,  upon the acknowledgments this
encouraged me to offer ;  and the King asked an ex
planation.

"  Sir,"  said the Duchess,  "  I was upon the road near
Dorking,  and I saw a little gig overturned,  and a little
boy was taken out,  and sat down upon the road.  I
told them to stop and ask if the little boy was hurt,
and they said yes ;  and I asked where he was to go,
and they said to a village just a few miles off;  so I
took him into my coach,  Sir,  and carried him home."

"  And the benedictions,  Madam,"  cried I,  "of all his
family have followed you ever since  !"

"  And he said your Royal Highness called him a very
pretty boy,"  cried the Queen,  laughing,  to whom I had
related it.

"  Indeed,  what he said is very true,"  answered she,
nodding.

"  Yes ;  he said/'  quoth I,  again to the Queen,  "  that
he saw the Duchess liked him."

This again the Queen repeated,  and the Duchess
again nodded,  and pointedly repeated,  "It is very true."

"He was a very fine boy — a very fine boy indeed!"
cried the King ;  "  what is become of him  ?"

I was a little distressed in answering,  "He is — in
Ireland,  Sir."

"  In Ireland !  What does he do in Ireland  ?  what
does he go there for?"

"  His father took him,  Sir,"  I was forced to answer.

"  And what does his father take him to Ireland for  ?"

"Because — he is an Irishman,  Sir,"  I answered,  half
laughing.

When at length,  every one deigning me a bow of
leave-taking,  their Majesties,  and sons and daughters,
retired to the adjoining room,  the Princess Amelia

64 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

loitered to shake hands,  and the Princess Augusta
returned for the same condescension,  reminding me of
my purpose for next year.

While this was passing,  the Princess Royal had re
paired to the apartment of Mile.  Jacobi,  where she had
held a little conversation with M.  d'Arblay.

We finished the evening very cheerfully with Mile.
Jacobi and Mile.  Montmollin,  whom she invited to meet
us,  arid the next morning left Windsor and visited Rose
Dale.*

Mrs.  Boscawen received us very sweetly,  and the
little offering as if not at all her due.  Mrs.  Levison
Gower was with her,  and showed us Thomson's temple.
Mrs.  Boscawen spoke of my dearest father with her
usual true sense of how to speak of him.  She invited
us to dinner,  but we were anxious to return to Bambino,
and M.  d'Arblay had,  all this time,  only fought off being
ill with his remnant cold.  Nevertheless,  when we came
to Twickenham,  my good old friend Mr.  Cambridge was
so cordial and so earnest that we could not resist him,
and were pressed in to staying dinner.

At a little before eleven we arrived at our dear cottage,
and to our sleeping Bambino.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  Friday,  October,  1796.

How well I know and feel the pang of this cruel day
to my beloved father!      My heart seems visiting him

*  Rose Dale,  Richmond,  Surrey.  This place was formerly
the residence of the poet Thomson,  and afterwards became* the
property of the Honourable Mrs.  Boscawen.

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  65

almost every minute in grief and participation  ;  yet I was
happy to see it open with a smiling aspect.,  and encourage
a superstition of hoping it portentous of a good con
clusion.

I am almost afraid to ask how my poor mother bore
the last farewell.  Indeed,  I hope she was virtuously
cheated of a leave-taking.  I advised Susan to avoid it if
possible,  as the parting impression would be lighter by
such management;  and,  much as she is recovered from
her very terrible state,  she cannot be too cautious of
emotions of almost any sort,  much less of such a separa
tion.  Our sorrow,  however,  here,  has been very consider
ably diminished by the major's voluntary promises to
Mrs.  Lock of certain and speedy return.  I shall expect
him at the peace — not before.  I cannot think it possible
he should appear here during the war,  except,  as now,
merely to fetch his family.

But I meant to have begun with our thanks for my
dear kind father's indulgence of our extreme curiosity
and interest in the sight of the reviews.  I am quite
happy in what I have escaped of greater severity,  though
my mate cannot bear that the palm should be contested
by t Evelina'  and  *  Cecilia;'  his partiality rates the last as
'so much the highest;  so does the newspaper I have
mentioned,  of which I long to send you a copy.  But
those immense men,  whose single praise was fame and
security — who established,  by a word,  the two elder
sisters — are now silent.  Dr.  Johnson and Sir Joshua
are no more,  and Mr.  Burke is ill,  or otherwise engrossed ;
yet,  even without their powerful influence,  to which I
owe such unspeakable obligation,  the essential success
of  '  Camilla'  exceeds that of the elders.  The sale is truly
astonishing.  Charles has just sent to me that five hun
dred only remain of four thousand,  and it has appeared
scarcely three months.

The first edition of  '  Evelina'  was of eight hundred,  the
second of five hundred,  and the third of a thousand.
What the following have been I have never heard.  The

VOL.  vi.  F

66 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

sale from that period became more flourishing than the
publisher cared to announce.  Of  '  Cecilia '  the first
edition was reckoned enormous at two thousand  ;  and
as a part of payment was reserved for it,  1 remember
our dear Daddy Crisp thought it very unfair.  It was
printed,  like this,  in July,  and sold in October,  to every
one's wonder.  Here,  however,  the sale is increased in
rapidity more than a third.  Charles says, —

"  Now heed no more what critics thought  'em,
Since this you know,  all people bought  ?em/'

We have resumed our original plan,  and are going
immediately to build a little cottage for ourselves.  We
shall make it as small and as cheap as will accord with
its being warm and comfortable.  We have relinquished,
however,  the very kind offer of Mr.  Lock,  which he has
renewed,  for his park.  We mean to make this a property
saleable or letable for our Alex.,  and in Mr.  Lock's park
we could not encroach any tenant,  if the youth's circum
stances,  profession,  or inclination should make him not
choose the spot for his own residence.  M.  d'Arblay,
therefore,  has fixed upon a field of Mr.  Lock's,  which
he will rent,  and of which Mr.  Lock will grant him a
lease of ninety years.  By this means,  we shall leave
the little Alex,  a little property,  besides what will be in
the funds,  and a property likely to rise in value,  as the
situation of the field is remarkably beautiful.  It is in the
valley,  between Mr.  Lock's park and Dorking,  and
where land is so scarce,  that there is not another possessor
within many miles who would part,  upon any terms,  with
half an acre.  My kindest father will come and give it,
I trust,  his benediction.  I am now almost jealous of
Bookham for having received it.

Imagine but the extacy of M.  d'Arblay in training,  all
his own way,  an entire new garden.  He dreams now of
cabbage-walks,  potato-beds,  bean-perfumes,  and peas-
blossoms.  My mother should send him a little sketch
to help his flower-garden,  which will be his second
favourite object.

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  67

Alex,  has made no progress in phrases,  but pronounces
single words a few more.  Adieu,  most dear Sir.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arllay to Mrs.  Lock.

1796.

You are too good,  my dearest friend,  almost literally
too good ;  which,  you know,  like all extremes,  is naught.
My mate wants to send you a daisy,  but says he will
carry it.  What can I send you  ?  Only what you have
got already,  which is very Irish,  for I have but my old
heart,  with not one new thing in it for you these many
years.

I have had this morning a letter thai,  has quite melted
me with grateful sensations,  written b|  command.  I
will show it you when these eternal rains will take a little
rest.

A private letter from Windsor tells me the Prince of
Wurtemberg has much pleased in the Royal House,  by his
manners and address upon his interview  ;  but that the
poor Princess Royal was almost dead with terror,  and
agitation,  and affright,  at the first meeting.  She could
not utter a word.  The Queen was obliged to speak her
answers.  The Prince said he hoped this first would be
the last disturbance his presence would ever occasion
her.  She then tried to recover,  and so far conquered
her tumult as to attempt joining in a general discourse
from time to time.  He paid his court successfully,  I am
told,  to the sisters,  who all determine to like him;  and
the Princess Royal is quite revived in her spirits again,
now this tremendous opening sight is over.

You will be pleased,  arid my dearest Mr.  Lock,  at
the style of my summons  :  'tis so openly from the Queen
herself.  Indeed,  she has behaved like an angel to me,
from the trying time to her of my marriage with a
Frenchman.  "  So odd,  you know,"  as Lady Inchiquin

said.

#  #  #  #  *

F.  D'A.

F2

68 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

Dr.  Burney to Madame cCArUay.

Wednesday night,  November,  1796.

MY DEAR FANNY, — I must thank you for your prompt
letter and  'Babiniana,'  though I am too tired and languid
to say much.  I have been writing melancholy heart
rending letters this day or two,  which have oppressed me
sadly;  yet I am still more heartless and miserable in
doing nothing.  The author of the poem on the spleen,
says,  "Fling but a stone,  the giant dies;'*  but such
stones as I have to fling will not do the business.

James and Charles dined here,  and kept the monster
at a little distance,  but he was here again the moment
they were gone.  I try to read,  and pronounce the words
"  without understanding one of them/*  as Johnson said
in reading my dissertation on the music of the ancients.

The  '  Monthly Review'  has come in to-day,  and it
does not satisfy me,  or raise my spirits,  or anything but
my indignation.  James has read the remarks in it on
*  Camilla,'  and we are all dissatisfied.  Perhaps a few
of the verbal criticisms may be worth your attention
in the second edition ;  but these have been picked out
and displayed with no friendly view,  and without necessity,
in a work of such length and intrinsic sterling worth.
J' enrage !  Morbleu  !

I thought when I began that I should not be able to
write three lines,  but this subject has been both a whip
and a spur to me.  God bless you,  my dear Fanny !
Pray,  always remember me kindly and cordially to
our dear chevalier,  and talk of me at least to the cherub.
I want some employment that will interest me like my
canons during the rheumatism,  and make me forget
myself and my sorrows;  but I have not yet found such
an opiate.  Once more,  God bless you,  my ever dear
Fanny !

C.  B.

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  69

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  November,  1796.

I HAD intended writing to my dearest father by a
return of goods,  but I find it impossible to defer the
overflowings of my heart at his most kind and generous
indignation with the Reviewer.  What censure can ever
so much hurt as such compensation can heal  ?  And,  in
fact,  the praise is so strong that,  were it neatly put toge
ther,  the writer might challenge my best enthusiasts to
find it insufficient.  The truth,  however,  is,  that the criti
cisms come forward,  and the panegyric is entangled,  and
so blended with blame as to lose almost all effect.

The Reviews,  however,  as they have not made,  will
not,  I trust,  mar me.  'Evelina'  made its way all by
itself;  it was well spoken of,  indeed,  in all the Reviews,
compared with general novels,  but it was undistinguished
by any quotation,  and only put in the Monthly Cata
logue,  and only allowed a short single paragraph.  It
was circulated only by the general public,  till it reached,
through that unbiased medium,  Dr.  Johnson and Mr.
Burke,  and thence it wanted no patron.  Works of this
kind are judged always by the many;  works of science,
history and philosophy,  voyages and travels,  and poetry,
frequently owe their fate to the sentiments of the first
critics who brand or extol them.

Miss Cambridge asked me,  early,  if I should not take
some care about the Reviews  ?  "  No,"  I said,  "  none.
There are two species of composition which may nearly
brave them — politics and novels  ;  for these will be sought
and will be judged by the various multitude,  not the fasti
dious few.  With the latter,  indeed,  they may be aided
or injured,  by criticism,  but it will not stop their being
read,  though it may prejudice their readers.  They want
no recommendation for being handed about but that of
being new,  and they frequently become established,  or
sunk into oblivion,  before that high literary tribunal has
brought them to a trial."

70 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

She laughed at my composure ;  but,  though I am a
good deal chagrined,  it is not broken.  If I had begun
by such a perusal I might,  indeed,  have been disturbed,
but it has succeeded to so much solace and encourage
ment that it cannot penetrate deeply.

F.  D*A.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Phillips.

Bookham,  November 7,  1796.

YES,  my beloved Susan safe landed at Dublin
was indeed all-sufficient for some time;  nor,  indeed,
could I even read any more for many minutes.  That,
and the single sentence at the end  "  My Norbury is
with me," — completely overset me,  though only with joy.
After your actual safety,  nothing could so much touch
me as the picture I instantly viewed of Norbury in your
arms.  Yet I shall hope for more detail hereafter.

The last letter I had from you addressed to myself
shows me your own sentiment of the fatal event  *  which
so speedily followed your departure,  and which my dear
father has himself announced to you,  though probably
the newspapers will anticipate his letter.  I am very
sorry,  now,  I did not write sooner ;  but while you were
still in England,  and travelling so slowly,  I had always
lurking ideas that disqualified me from writing to
Ireland.

The minute I received,  from Sally,  by our dearest
father's desire,  the last tidings,  I set out for Chelsea.
I was much shocked by the news,  long as it has been
but natural to look forward to it.  My better part spoke
even before myself upon the propriety of my instant
journey,  and promised me a faithful nursing attendance
during my absence.  I went in a chaise,  to lose no
time;  but the uncertainty how I might find my poor
father made me arrive with a nervous seizure upon my
voice that rendered it as husky as Mr.  Rishton's.

*  The death of Dr.  Burner's second wife.

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  71

While I settled with the postilion,  Sally,  James,
Charlotte,  and Marianne,  came to me.  Esther and
Charles had been there the preceding day ;  they were
sent to as soon as the event had happened.  My
dearest father received me with extreme kindness,  but
though far,  far more calm and quiet than I could
expect,  he was much shaken,,  and often very faint.
However,  in the course of the evening,  he suffered me
to read to him various passages from various books,
such as conversation introduced,  and,  as his nature is as
pure from affectation as from falsehood,  encouraged in
himself,  as well as permitted in us,  whatever could lead
to cheerfulness.

Let me not forget to record one thing that was truly
generous in my poor mother's last voluntary exertions
She charged Sally and her maid both not to call my
father when she appeared to be dying ;  and not disturb
him if her death should happen in the night,  nor to let
him hear it till he arose at his usual time.  I feel sen
sibly the kindness of this sparing consideration and true
feeling.

Yet,  not so would I be served !  O never should I
forgive the misjudged prudence that should rob me of
one little instant of remaining life in one who was truly
dear to me !  Nevertheless,  I shall not be surprised to
have his first shock succeeded by a sorrow it did not
excite,  and I fear he will require much watching and
vigilance to be kept as well as I have quitted him.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  November 14,  '96.

I COVET much to hear that the melancholy task of
ransacking,  examining,  depositing,  or demolishing regret
ful records is over.  Sometimes I wish this search could
be mixed with collecting for copying your numerous —

72 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

and so many of them beautiful — manuscript poems.
Some particular pursuit is absolutely necessary.  How I
wish we could engage in any conjointly !  If Mr.
Twining and two or three other such — (only,  where are
they to be found  ?) — would bear a part,  I know nothing
that might better interest my dearest father,  nor in which
he would more,  and in a thousand ways,  excel,  than in
superintending some periodical work.

Upon a second reading the  '  Monthly Review  '  upon
'  Camilla/  I am in far better humour with it,  and
willing to confess to the criticisms,  if I may claim by
that concession any right to the eulogies.  They are
stronger and more important,  upon re-perusal,  than I
had imagined,  in the panic of a tirst survey and an un-
prepared-for disappointment in anything like severity
from so friendly an editor.  The recommendation at the
conclusion of the book,  as a warning guide to youth,
would recompense me,  upon the least reflection,  for what
ever strictures might precede it.  I hope my kind father
has not suffered his generous — and to me most cordial
— indignation against the reviewer to interfere with his
intended answer to the affectionate letter of Dr.  Grif
fiths.

I must now inform you of a grand event :  Alex,  has
made his entrance into the polite circle.  Last week he
accompanied me in returning about the sixth visit for
one of Lady Rothes.  I left him in Mr.  Lock's carriage,
which I had borrowed for the occasion,  till I was pre
paring to take leave,  and then I owned I had a little
beau in waiting.  You will suppose he was immediately
demanded.

The well,  for water,  seems impervious.  I grow rather
uneasy about it ;  it is now at near ninety feet depth.
M.  d'Arblay works all day long at his new garden and
orchard,  and only comes home to a cold spoiled dinner,  at
tea-time.  Baby and I are just going to take a peep at him
at his work,  which various affairs of menage,  joined to
frequent evenings at Norbury,  to meet the excellent and

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  73

most worthy Count de Lally Tolendal,     have hitherto
prevented.

Adieu,  my dear,  dear father !

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Phillips.

Bookham,  November 25,  1796.

NEVER was a sweeter letter written,  my dearest
Susanna,  than that L have this moment read ;  and
though my quinze jours are hut half over,  I cannot for
bear answering it immediately,  to tell you of my delight
in all your accounts,  especially of the Kiernan family,
which is so peculiarly interesting to you.  I was well
prepared to love it from the fine branch I saw atMickle-
harn ;  pray make her remember me,  and assure her she
has a friend in England who,  though but of a few hours'
growth,  thinks of her always with pleasure,  and every
sort of presentiment of good.

The anxiety I have been in to know how the weather
agreed with you,  in so trying a journey,  makes what you
say a relief,  though,  alas  !  anxiety must still live in such
a season  !  I want to know more of Belcotton  ;  a descrip
tion of every room,  when nothing else occurs more
pressing,  would much gratify me,  by giving me a nearer
view,  in idea,  of how and where my dearest Susan is
seated,  standing,  or walking.  The interview,  as you
describe it,  with Mrs.  Hill,  brings fresh to me my tend
ency of loving that respectably singular and amiable cha
racter.

You will have heard that the Princesse d'Henin and
M.  de Lally have spent a few days at Norbury Park.
We went every evening regularly to meet them,  arid they
yet contrive to grow higher and higher in our best opi
nions and affections;  they force that last word  ;  none
other is adequate to such regard as they excite.

M.  de Lally read us a pleading for emigres of all
descriptions,  to the people and government of France,  for

74 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

their re-instalment in their native land,  that exceeds in
eloquence,  argument,  taste,  feeling,  and every power of
oratory and truth united,  anything I ever remember to
have read.  It is so affecting in many places,  that I was
almost ill from restraining my nearly convulsive emotions.
My dear and honoured partner gives me,  perhaps,  an
interest in such a subject beyond what is its mere natural
due and effect,  therefore I cannot be sure such will be
its universal success;  yet I shall be nothing less than
surprised to live to see his statue erected in his own
country,  at the expense of his own restored exiles.  'Tis,
indeed,  a wonderful performance.  And he was so easy,
so gay,  so unassuming,  yet free from condescension,  that
I almost worshipped him.  M.  d'Arblay cut me
off a bit of the coat in which he read his pleading,  and
I shall preserve it,  labelled  !

The Princess was all that was amiable and attractive,
and she loves my Susanna so tenderly,  that her voice was
always caressing when she named her.  She would go to
Ireland,  she repeatedly said,  on purpose to see you,
were her fortune less miserably cramped.  The journey,
voyage,  time,  difficulties,  and sea-sickness,  would be
nothing for obstacles.  You have made,  there,  that
rare and exquisite acquisition — an ardent friend for
life.

I have not heard very lately of my dearest father;  all
accounts speak of his being very much lower in spirits
than when I left him.  I sometimes arn ready to return to
him,  for my whole heart yearns to devote itself to him;
but the babe,  and the babe's father — and there is no
going en famille uninvited — and my dear father does not,
feel equal to making the invitation.

One of the Tichlield dear girls seems to be constantly
with Sally,  to aid the passing hours ;  but our poor father
•wants something more than cheerfulness and affection,
though nothing without them could do  ;  he wants some
one to find out pursuits — to entice him into reading,  by
bringing books,  or starting subjects;  some one to lead
him to talk of what he thinks,  or to forget what he thinks

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  75

of,  by adroitly talking of what may catch other attention.
Even where deep sorrow is impossible,  a gloomy void
must rest in the total breaking up of such a long and
such a last connexion.

I must always grieve at your absence at such a period.
Our Esther has so much to do in her own family,  and
fears so much the cold of Chelsea,  that she can be only
of day and occasional use,  and it is nights and mornings
that call for the confidential companion that might best
revive him.  He is more amiable,  more himself,  if pos
sible,  than ever.  God long preserve him to bless us
all !

Our new house is stopped short in actual building,
from the shortness of the days,  &c.,  but the master sur
veyor has still much to settle there,  and three workmen
to aid preparing the ground for agricultural purposes.
The foundation is laid,  and on the 1st of March the little
dwelling will begin to be run up.  The well is just
finished ;  the water is a hundred and odd feet deep,  and
it costs near 221.  which,  this very morning,  thank
Heaven !  has been paid.

Your old acquaintance,  Miss ,  has been passing

ten days in this neighbourhood.  She is become very
pleasingly formed in manners,  wherever she wishes to
oblige,  and all her roughnesses and ruggednesses are
worn off.  I believe the mischief done by her education,
and its wants,  not cured,  if curable,  au fond  ;  but much
amended to all,  and apparently done away completely to
many.  What really rests is a habit of exclusively con
sulting just what she likes best,  not what would be or
prove best for others.  She thinks,  indeed,  but little of
anything except with reference to herself,  and that gives
her an air,  and will give her a character,  for incon
stancy,  that is in fact the mere result of seeking her
own gratification alike in meeting or avoiding her con
nexions.  If she saw this,  she has understanding suffi
cient to work it out of her ;  but she weighs nothing
sufficiently to dive into her own self.  She knows she is
a very clever girl,  and she is neither well contented with

76 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

others,  nor happy in herself,  but where this is evidently
acknowledged.

We spent an evening together at Norbury Park;  she
was shown all Mr.  William's pictures and drawings.
I knew her expectations of an attention she had no
chance of exciting,  and therefore devoted myself to look
ing them over with her ;  yet,  though Mr.  Lock himself
led the way to see them,  and explained several,  and
though Amelia addressed her with the utmost sweetness,
and Mrs.  Lock with perfect good breeding,  I could not
draw from her one word relative to the evening,  or the
family,  except that she did not think she had heard Mr.
William's voice once.  A person so young,  and with
such good parts,  that can take no pleasure but in per
sonal distinction,  which is all her visit can have wanted,
will soon cut all real improvement short,  by confining her
self to such society alone as elevates herself.  There she
will always make a capital figure,  for her conversation is
sprightly and entertaining,  and her heart and principles
are both good :  she has many excellent qualities,  and
various resources in herself;  but she is good enough to
make me lament that she is not modest enough to be yet

better.

*  *  #  *  #

F.  D A.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  Nov.  29,  1796.

OUR cottage-building stops now,  from the shortness
of the days,  till the beginning of March.  The founda
tion is laid,  and it will then be run up with great speed.
The well,  at length,  is finished,  and it is a hundred and
odd feet deep.  The water is said to be excellent,  but
M.  d'Arblay has had it now stopped to prevent acci
dents from hazardous boys,  who,  when the field is
empty of owners,  will be amusing themselves there.
He has just completed his grand plantations;  part of
which are in evergreens,  part in firewood for future
time,  and part in an orchard.

1796]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

77

But,  my dearest sir,  I think I would risk my new
cottage against sixpence,  that I have guessed the au
thor of  *  The Pursuits of Literature.'  Is it not Mr.
Mason  ?  The verses I think equal to anybody ;  those
on Shakspeare,  "  His pen he dipt in mind,"  are demi-
divine.  And who else could so well interweave what
concerns music  ? — could so well attack Dr.  Parr for his
severity against Dr.  Hurd,  who had to himself ad
dressed his Essay on the marks of imitation? — Who be
so interested,  or so difficult to satisfy,  about the ex
quisite Gray? — Who know so well how to appreciate
works upon gardening? — Who,  so singularly,  be for
the sovereign — the government,  yet,  palpably,  not for
George the Third,  nor for William Pitt?  And then,
the lines which form his sort of epitaph seem for him
(Mason)  alone designed.  How wickedly he has flogged
all around him,  and how cleverly !

But I am very angry about the excellent Mar
chioness of Buckingham.  The fear of popery in these
days seems to me most marvellous  ;  the fears of infi
delity seem a thousand times more rational.  'Tis,  how
ever,  a very first-rate production.  The hymns,  in his
open name,  are most gratefully accepted by my excel
lent neighbour,  Mr.  Cooke.

We have not yet read Le Vaillant.  We are not
much struck with  '  The Creole :'  it is too full of trite
observations introduced sententiously.  '  Clarentine '  is
written with much better taste.  We have just been
lent  '  Caleb Williams,  or Things as they are.'  Mr.
Lock,  who says its derign is execrable,  avers that one
little word is omitted in its title,  which should be thus
— "  or Things as they are NOT."

Adieu,  most dear sir ;  I shall be very unquiet till I
have some news of your health.

Most dutifully and affectionately,
Ever yours,

F.  D'A.

78 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  December 16,  1796.

WHAT cruel and most unnecessary disturbance might
I have been spared if accident had not twice stood my
enemy!  All's well that ends well,  however;  and I will for
get the inquietude,  and all else that is painful,  to dwell
upon the sweet meeting in store,  and the sight that my
eye's mind,  equally with my mind's eye,  presents to me
continually of my innocent Alic.  restoring,  by his playful
spirits,  the smiles of his dearest grandfather,  whose heart,
were it as hard as it is soft,  could not resist what all
mankind consent to find irresistible — the persuasive gaiety
of happy childhood.

M.  le Comle de Lally Tolendal,  who has been on a
visit to Norbury Park,  says he can never forgive me the
laugh I have brought against him by the scene of Sir
Hugh on the birthday,  'tis so exactly the description of
himself when an amiable child comes in his way.  He
left an only daughter in Paris,  where she is now at school,
under the superintendence of la Princesse de Poix,  whose
infirmities and constant illness have detained her in that
wretched city during-  the whole Revolution,  though under
the compulsion of a pretended divorce from le Prince,
who is in London.  M.  de Lally had just received,  by a
private hand,  a letter from his daughter,  now eleven
years old,  extremely pretty and touching,  half in French,
half in broken English,  which language he has par
ticularly ordered she may study,  and enclosed a ribbon
with her height and breadth.  She tells him she has just
learnt by heart his translation of Pbpe's e Universal
Prayer,'  and she hopes,  when he comes to fetch her,  he
will meet her upon the1 Terrace,  where she walks with
her companions,  and know her at once from every
body.

I,  too,  thought the prose of the  '  Pursuits of Litera
ture  '  too spirited and good for Mr.  Mason,  when com
pared with what I have seen of his general letters ;  but

1796]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  79

he has two styles,  in prose as well as poetry,  and I have
seen compositions,  rather than epistles,,  which he wrote
formerly to Mrs.   Delany,  so full of satire,  point,   and
epigrammatic severity and derision,  upon those of their
mutual acquaintance whom he confidentially named,  that
I feel not the least scruple for my opinion.     In those
letters with which that revered old friend intrusted me,
when her eye-sight failed for reading them herself,  there
were also many ludicrous sketches of certain persons,
and caricatures as strong of the pencil as of the pen.   They
were written in his season of democracy,  and my dear
Mrs.  Delany made me destroy all that were mischiev
ous.     The highest personages,  with whom she was not
then peculiarly,  as afterwards;  connected,   were held up
to so much ridicule,  that her early regard and esteem di
minished as her loyalty increased  ;  and immediately upon
taking possession of the house given her at Windsor by
the King,  she struck the name of Mr.  Mason from her
will,  in which she had bequeathed him her  '  Sacharissa,'
which he had particularly admired,    and left it to
me.     I did not know this till she was no more,  when
Mrs.  Agnew informed me of the period of the altera
tion.

My little man waits for your lessons to get on in elo
cution  :  he has made no further advance but that of
calling out,  as he saw our two watches hung on two op
posite hooks over the chamber chimney-piece,  "  Watch,
papa, — watch,  mamma ;''  so,  though his first speech is
English,  the idiom is French.  We agree this is to avoid
any heartburning in his parents.  He is at this moment
so exquisitely enchanted with a little penny trumpet,  and
finding he can produce.such harmony his own self,  that
he is blowing and laughing till he can hardly stand.  If
you could see his little swelling cheeks,  you would not
accuse yourself of a misnomer in calling him cherub.  I
try to impress him with an idea of pleasure in going to
see grandpapa ;  but the short visit to Bookham is for
gotten,  and the permanent engraving remains,  and all

80 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART II.

his concurrence consists in pointing up to the print over
the chimney-piece,  and giving it one of his concise little
bows.

Are not people a little revived in the political world
by this unexampled honour paid to Mr.  Pitt  ?  Mr.  Lock
has subscribed 3000/.

How you rejoiced me by what you say of poor Mr.
Burke  !  for I had seen the paragraph of his death with
most exceeding great concern.

The Irish reports are,  I trust,  exaggerated ;  few things
come quite plainly from Hibernia  :  yet what a time,  in
all respects,  to transport thither,  as you too well term it,
our beloved Susan !  She writes serenely,  and Norbury
seems to repay a world of sufferings :  it is delightful to
see her so satisfied there,  at least ;  but they have all,  she
says,  got the brogue.

Our building is to be resumed the 1st of March;  it
will then soon be done,  as it is only of lath and plaster,
and the roof and wood-work are already prepared.  My
indefatigable superintendent goes every morning for two,
three,  or four hours to his field,  to work at a sunk fence
that is to protect his garden from our cow.  I have sent
Mrs.  Boscawen,  through Miss Cambridge,  a history of
our plan.  The dwelling is destined by M.  d'Arblay to
be called the Camilla Cottage.

F.D'A.    '

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  81

PART III.

1797.

Perils of Travelling — Invasion of Ireland — Dr.  Burney's Lines to
Madame d'Arblay— Her drama of Cerulia — Illness of Lord
Orford  —  Dr.  Burney's poem  "Astronomy" — Vaccination
School founded by Mr.  Burke for the sons of French emigrants
— His funeral — Character of Edmund Burke — News of M.
d'Arblay's relatives — Etruria — Visit to Lichfield — Dr.  James,
inventor of the Fever powder — Visit to Dr.  Herschel — Con
versations on Astronomy — Letter of Lafayette — Removal of
M.  and Madame d'Arblay to their new house — Visit from the
Princess d'Henin and  "M.  de Lally Tolendal  —  Madame
d'Arblay visits the Royal Family — The mutiny and the honest
sailor — Admiral Duncan's victory — Interview with the Queen
— Conversation with her Majesty — The Princess and the King
— The Prince of Orange— Prince Ernest  (King:  of Hanover)
— Miss Farren  —  Mrs.  Siddons and Sadler's Wells — Prince
William  (William IV.) — Condescension of the Royal Family.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  January 8,  '97.

I WAS extremely vexed at missing our uncertain
post yesterday,  and losing,  unavoidably,  another to-day,
before I return my dearest father our united thanks for
the kind and sweet fortnight passed under his roof.

Our adventures in coming back were better adapted
to our departure than our arrival,  for they were rather
rueful.  One of the horses did not like his business,  and
wanted to be off,  and we were stopped by his gambols
continually,  and,  if t had not been a soldier's wife,  I
should have been terribly alarmed ;  but my soldier does
not like to see himself disgraced in his other half,  and so

VOL.  VI.  G

82 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

I was fain to keep up my courage,  till,  at length,  after
we had passed Fetcham,  the frisky animal plunged till
he fastened the shaft against a hedge,  and then,  little
Betty beginning to scream,  I inquired of the postilion if
we had not better alight.  If it were not,  he said,  for the
dirt,  yes.  The dirt then was defied,  and I prevailed,
though with difficulty,  upon my chieftain to consent to a
general dismounting.  And he then found it was not too
soon,  for the horse became inexorable to all menace,
caress,  chastisement,  or harangue,  and was obliged to be
loosened.

Meanwhile,  Betty,  Bab,  and I trudged on,  vainly
looking back for our vehicle,  till we reached our little home
— a mile and a-half.  Here we found good fires,  though
not a morsel of food  ;  this,  however,  was soon procured,
and our walking apparel changed for drier raiment ;  and
I sent forth our nearest cottager,  and a young butcher,
and a boy,  towards Fetcham,  to aid the vehicle,  or its
contents,  for my Chevalier had stayed on account of our
chattels  :  and about two hours after the chaise arrived,
with one horse,  and pushed by its hirer,  while it was half
dragged by its driver.  But all came safe  ;  and we drank
a dish of tea,  and ate a mutton-chop,  and kissed our
little darling,  and forgot all else of our journey but the
pleasure we had had at Chelsea with my dearest father
and dear Salkin.

And just now I received a letter from our Susanna,
which tells me the invasion has been made in a part of
Ireland where all is so loyal there can be no apprehen
sion from any such attempt  :  but she adds,  that if it had
happened in the north everything might have been feared.
Heaven send the invaders far from all the points of the Irish
compass  !  and that's an Irish wish for expression,  though
not for meaning.  All the intelligence she gathers is en
couraging,  with regard to the spirit and loyalty of all that
surround her.  But Mr.  Brabazon is in much uneasi
ness for his wife,  whose situation is critical,  and he hesi
tates whether or not to convey her to Dublin,  as a place

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  83

of more security than her own habitation.  What a period
this for the usual journey of our invaluable Susan

*  *  *  *

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr Burney.

BooKftam,  January 26,  '97.

How is it,  my dearest,  kindest father,  you have made
me so in love with my own tears that no laughter ever
gave my heart such pleasure as those I have shed — even
plentifully — over these sweet lines  ?  How do they en
dear to me my little books — which,  with the utmost truth
I can aver,  never,  in all their circle of success,  have pro
cured me any satisfaction I can put on a par with your
approbation of them !  My little boy will be proud here
after,  however poor a gentleman now,  to read such lines,
addressed by such a grandfather to his mother.  M.
d'Arblay himself could not keep the tears within his eyes
— hard as is his heart — when he perused what so much
touched me.  He confesses your English grows upon
him  ;  and he does not much wonder if I,  like Mr.  Court
ney,  class it with the very first class — though I cannot
boast quite as disinterested a generosity as that demo-
cratical friend.

By the way,  I hope soon to receive some copies of
some of the early effusions of my partner.  After he had
left you yesterday,  he saw a lady formerly very high in
his good graces,  who told him she had brought over with
her,  in her flight from her unhappy country,  several of his
juvenile pieces ;  and he begged them for his hermit.
She thought him,  probably,  horribly John Bullified,  yet
promised to look them out.  Indeed,  she asked him if he
did not find her bien changee  ?  and he replied, ( ( Ma foi,
je ne peux pas vous le cacher"

I delight in the reference my dearest father has made
to the Queen's trust for her daughters in his most

o2

84 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

sweet lines.  I am quite enchanted to hear of the two
hundred additional to my very favourite poem on Astro
nomy,  or rather its history.  Yet I am provoked you
have found no scattered verses to help on ;  for so many
could never have been completed and refined without
many more sketched and imagined — at least,  not if you
compose like anybody else.  Pope had always myriads
half-finished,  and dispersed,  for future parts,  while he
corrected and polished the preceding.  Dr.  Johnson told
me that.

I am very glad indeed you proceed with this design,
which is likely,  according to the best of my judgment,
such as it is,  to add very considerably to the stock of
literature,  and in a walk perhaps the most unhackneyed.
To conduct to any science by a path strewed over with
flowers is giving beauty to labour,  and making study a
luxury.

When left alone the other day with the  "  poor gentle
man,"  in the interval of our sports I took it into my mind
to look at a certain melancholy ditty of four acts,  which
1 had once an idea of bringing forth upon the stage,  and
which you may remember Kemble had accepted,*  but
which I withdrew before he had time to show it to Sheri
dan,  from preferring to make trial of  '  Edwy and Elgiva,'
because it was more dramatic — but which  *  Edwy and
Elgiva,'  I must always aver,  never was acted.  This other
piece you have seen,  and it lost you,  you told me,  a night's
rest — which,  in the spirit of the black men in the funeral,
made me all the gayer.  However,  upon this re- perusal,
after near three years'  interment,  I feel fixed never to
assay it for representation.  I shall therefore restore it to
its first form,  that of a tale in dialogue,  and only revise
and endeavour to make it readable for a fire- side.  And
this will be my immediate occupation in my episodical
moments taken from my two companions and my mai
sonnette  :  for since  '  Camilla '  I have devoted myself,  as

*  Cerulia.

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  85

yet,  wholly to them,  as the solace of the fatigue that my
engagement with time occasioned me — an engagement
which I earnestly hope never more to make ;  lor the
fright and anxiety attending it can scarce be repaid.

I rejoice Mrs.  Crewe is in town.  I hope you will see
her often.  No one can be more genial to you.  I re
joice,  too,  Mr.  Coxe has got hold of you.  I know his
friendly zeal will be at work to do all that is in his power
to cheer you,  and my dearest father has all the kind con
sideration for others that leads to accepting good offices.
Nothing is so cruel as rejecting them.  My Monsieur
was very sorry to see so little of you,  but he would not
disappoint my expectations of his return.  He did not
imagine what a gem he brought me into the bargain.
My own 4<  little gem,"  as Etty  (ill-naturedly)  calls the
poor gentleman,  is blithe and well.

F.  D'A.

Dr.  Burney to Madame cFArblay.

Monday,  February 6,  '97,

MY DEAR FANNY, — I shall prepare a scrap for parcel-
lina,  which will contain a communication of Mrs.  Crewe's
further ideas about a periodical paper.  You have her first
sketch,  and here she displays great fertility of resources.
All I ever said to her about your notions was that you
thought her plan a good one,  and pregnant with much
matter for putting it in execution.  She is very eager about
it,  and talks to Windham,  the Duchess of Portland,  &c.,
about it;  and thinks,  without being political,  it may im
prove taste,  morals,  and manners.  Her notion is that Sir
Hugh would be an admirable successor to Sir Roger de
Goverley.  He is quite popular ;  and traits of his cha
racter,  and benevolence and simplicity,  sayings and
"  bothers,"  now and then would be delightful.  I told her
that I thought you would never have courage or activity
sufficient to be the principal editor of such a paper  ;  but
that,  if well arranged and under an able conductor,  you

86 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

would have no objection to contribute your mite now and
then  :  did I go too far?

The answer to inquiries of poor Lord Orford on Sa
turday were bad,  and to-day the papers say there is little
hope of his recovery.  His papers are left  (say the news-
writers)  to the care of Lord Cholmondely,  Mr.  Owen
Cambridge,  and Mr.  Jerningham.

I am glad you like my varses.  If they should be good
for anything,  people would say,  "  you have met with your
desert."

I shall like to see some of our Chevalier's effusions be
fore he was John Bullified — I believe I have a few in an
old  '  Almanac des Muses.'

I think I can report  (a little)  progress in my astro
nomic poem,  but am more and more frightened every
day in seeing more of the plan of the building I have to
construct,  of which little more than a corner had caught
my eye at first.  Above six hundred lines are now added
to what I read to you,  and yet I am now only arrived at
Ptolemy.  To describe his system in verse will be very
difficult,  as technical Greek words are unwieldy in our
monosyllabic measures.  I think,  if I could a little get up
my spirits and perseverance,  this business would fasten
on me.  But,  alas,  'tis too late in the day for amendment
of any sort !

I am glad you have taken up your tale in dialogue.
It pleased me,  I remember,  but seemed too simple for
our stage ;  but,  as a tale,  I have no doubt but you will
make it most pleasantly interesting.  On  !  On  !

How does the poor dear little gentleman  ?  You can
not be so dull with him as we are without him.  How
ever backward in speech,  he is certainly eloquent in
countenance and tones of voice.  Give him,  with my be
nediction,  as many kisses as you think his due,  and as I
should give him if on my knee.

C.  B,

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  87

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  February,  '97.

I HARDLY know whether I am most struck with the
fertility of the ideas Mrs.  Crewe has started,  or most gra
tified by their direction  :  certainly I am flattered where
most susceptible of pleasure,  when a mind such as hers
would call me forth from my retirement to second views
so important in their ends,  and demanding such powers
in their progress.  But though her opinion would give
me courage,  it cannot give me means.  I am too far re
moved from the scene of public life to compose anything
of public utility in the style she indicates.  The  ^man
ners as they rise,"  the morals or their deficiencies,  as they
preponderate,  should be viewed,  for such a scheme,  in
all their variations,  with a diurnal eye.  For though it
may not be necessary this gentleman-author should be a
frequenter himself of public places,  he must be sufficiently
in the midst of public people,  to judge the justice of what
is communicated to him by his correspondents.  The
plan is so excellent it ought to be well adopted,  and
really fulfilled.  Many circumstances would render its
accomplishment nearly impossible for me :  wholly to
omit politics would mar all the original design ;  yet
what would be listened to unabused from a writer who is
honoured by a testimony such as mine of having resigned
royal service without resigning royal favour?  Personal
abuse would make a dreadful breach into the peace of
my happiness ;  though censure of my works I can en
dure with tolerable firmness :  the latter I submit to as
the public right,  by prescription ;  the former I think
authorised by no right,  and recoil from with mingled fear
and indignation.

I could mention other embarrassments as to politics —
but they will probably occur to you,  though they may es
cape Mrs.  Crewe,  who is not so well versed in the history
and strong character of M.  d'Arblay,  to whom the mis-

88 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

fortunes of his general and friend are but additional motives
to invincible adherence.  And how would Mr.  Windham,
after his late speech,  endure a paper in which M.  de La
fayette could never be named but with respect and pity  ?
You will feel,  I am sure,  for his constancy and his ho
nour;  his profession de foi in politics is exactly,  he says,
what you have so delightfully drawn in what you call
your Lilliputian verses,  and his attachment,  his reverence,
his gratitude for our King,  are like my own.  His arm,
his life is at his service — as I have told the Princess
Augusta,  and he has told Lord Leslie.

To a paper of such a sort,  upon a plan less extensive,
I feel no repugnance,  though much apprehension.  I
have many things by me that should I turn my thoughts
upon such a scheme,  might facilitate its execution ;  and
there my admirable mother's — and,  let me proudly say,
her admirable godmother's — work might and should,  as
I know she wishes,  appear with great propriety ;  but
even this is a speculation from which my agitated and
occupied heart at present turns aside,  from incapability
of attention  ;  for I am just now preparing our little dar
ling for his first sufferings and first known danger  :  he is
to be inoculated about a week hence.

Do,  I entreat,  dearest Sir,  tell Mrs.  Crewe I am made
even the happier by her kind partiality.  Had matters
been otherwise situated,  how I should have delighted in
any scheme in which she would have taken a part !

I long to see the six hundred lines :  pray work up
Ptolemy,  but don't ask me how !  I can hardly imagine
anything more difficult for poetrv.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  March 16,  '97,

MY DEAREST PADRE, — Relieved at length from a
terror that almost from the birth of my little darling has

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  89

hung upon my mind,  with what confidence in your
utmost kindness do I call for jour participation in my
joy that all alarm is over,  and Mr.  Ansel has taken his
leave  !  I take this large sheet,  to indulge in a Babiana
which  "dea gandpa"  will,  I am sure,  receive with par
tial pleasure,  upon this most important event to his poor
little gentleman.

When Mr.  Ansel came to perform the dreaded opera
tion,  he desired me to leave the child to him and the
maid  :  but my agitation was not of that sort.  I wished
for the experiment upon the most mature deliberation  ;
but while I trembled with the suspense of its effect,  I
could not endure to lose a moment from the beloved little
object for and with whom I was running such a risk.

He sat upon my lap,  and Mr.  Ansel gave him a bit of
barley- sugar,  to obtain his permission for pulling off one
sleeve of his frock and shirt.  He was much surprised at
this opening to an acquaintance — for Mr.  Ansel made no
previous visit,  having sent his directions by M.  d'Arblay.
However,  the barley-sugar occupied his mouth,  and inclined
him to a favourable interpretation,  though he stared with
upraised eyebrows.  Mr.  Ansel bid Betty hold him a play
thing at the other side,  to draw off his eyes from what was
to follow ;  and I began a little history to him of the mis
fortunes of the toy we chose,  which was a drummer,  maimed
in his own service,  and whom he loves to lament,  under the
name of  "  the poor man that has lost his face."  But all my
pathos and all his own ever-ready pity were ineffectual to
detain his attention when he felt his arm grasped by Mr.
Ansel ;  he repulsed Betty,  the soldier,  and his mamma,
and turned about with a quickness that disengaged him
from Mr.  Ansel,  who now desired me to hold his arm.
This he resisted  ;  yet held it out himself,  with uncon
scious intrepidity,  in full sight of the lancet,  which he
saw hovering over it,  without the most remote suspicion
of its slaughtering design,,  and with a rather amused look
of curiosity to see what was intended.  When the in
cision was made he gave a  -little scream,  but it was

90 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

momentary,  and ended in a look of astonishment at such
an unprovoked infliction,  that exceeds all description,  all
painting; — and in turning an appealing eye to me,  as if
demanding at once explanation and protection.

My fondest praises now made him understand that
non-resistance was an act of virtue,  and again he held
out his little arm,  at our joint entreaty,  but resolutely re
fused to have it held by any one.  Mr.  Ansel pressed
out the blood with his lancet again and again,  and wiped
the instrument upon the wound for two or three minutes,
fearing,  from the excessive strictness of his whole life's
regimen,  he might still escape the venom.  The dear
child coloured at sight of the blood,  and seemed almost
petrified with amazement,  fixing his wondering eyes upon
Mr.  Ansel with an expression that sought to dive into his
purpose,  and then upon me,  as if inquiring how I could
approve of it.

When this was over,  Mr.  Ansel owned himself still ap
prehensive it might not take,  and asked if I should object
to his inoculating the other arm.  I told him I com
mitted the whole to his judgment,  as M.  d'Arblay was
not at home.  And now,  indeed,  his absence from this
scene,  which he would have enjoyed with the proudest
forebodings of future courage,  became doubly regretted ;
for my little hero,  though probably aware of what would
follow,  suffered me to bare his other arm,  and held it out
immediately,  while looking at the lancet ;  nor would he
again have it supported or tightened  ;  and he saw and
felt the incision without shrinking,  and without any
marks of displeasure.

But though he appeared convinced by my caresses
that the thing was right,  and that his submission was
good,  he evidently thought the deed was unaccountable
as it was singular ;  and all his faculties seemed absorbed
in profound surprise.  I shall never cease being sorry his
father did not,  witness this,  to clear my character from
having adulterated the chivalric spirit and courage of his
race.  Mr.  Ansel confessed he had never seen a similar

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  91

instance in one so very young,  and,  kissing his forehead
when he had done,  said,  "  Indeed,  little Sir,  I am in love
with you."

Since this,  however,  my stars have indulged me in the
satisfaction of exhibiting his native bravery where it gives
most pride as well as pleasure ;  for his father was in the
room when,  the other day,  Mr.  Ansel begged leave to
take some matter from his arm for some future experi
ments.  And the same scene was repeated.  He presented
the little creature with a bonbon,  and then showed his
lancet :  he let his arm be bared unresistingly,  and suf
fered him to make four successive cuts,  to take matter
for four lancets,  never crying,  nor being either angry or
frightened;  but only looking inquisitively at us all in
turn,  with eyes you would never have forgotten had you
beheld,  that seemed disturbed by a curiosity they could
not satisfy,  to find some motive for our extraordinary
proceedings.

Immediately before the inoculation,  the faculty of
speech seemed most opportunely accorded him,  and that
with a sudden facility that reminds me of your account
of his mother's first,  though so late,  reading.  At noon
he repeated after me,  when I least expected it,  "  How
do do  ?"  and the next morning,  as soon as he awoke,  he
called out,  "How do,  mamma?  How do,  papa?"  I
give you leave to guess if the question was inharmonious.
From that time he has repeated readily whatever we
have desired  ;  and yesterday,  while he was eating his dry
toast,  perceiving the cat,  he threw her a bit,  calling out,
<f Eat it,  Burl I  "  Just now,  taking the string that fastens
his gown round the neck,  he said,  <e Ett's  [Let's]  tie it
on,  mamma."  And when,  to try him,  I bid him say,
Naughty papa,  he repeated,  "  Naughty papa,"  as if me
chanically  ;  but the instant after,  springing from mine to
his arms,  he kissed him,  and said,  "  Dood papa,"  in a

voice so tender it seemed meant as an apology.

*****

F.  D'A.

92 DIAHY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

Madame d'Arllay to Mrs.  Burney.

April 3,  '97.

LAUNCF.LOT GOBBO — or Gobbo Launcelot — was never
more cruelly tormented by the struggles between his con
science and the fiend than I between mine and the pen.
Says my conscience,  "  Tell dear Etty you have con
quered one of your worst fears for your little pet."  Says
my pen,  "  She will have heard it at Chelsea."  Says my
conscience,  "  She knows what you must have suffered,
call,  therefore,  for her congratulations."  Says my pen,
"  I am certain of her sympathy  ;  and the call will be only
a trouble to her."  Says my conscience,  "  Are you sure
this is not a delicate device to spare yourself?"  Says my
pen,  "  Mr.  Conscience,  you are a terrible bore.  1 have
thought so all my life,  for one odd quirk or another that
you are always giving people when once you get pos
session of them,  never letting them have their own way,
unless it happens to be just to your liking,  but pinching
and grating,  and snarling,  and causing bad dreams,  for
every little private indulgence they presume to take with
out consulting you.  There is not a more troublesome
inmate to be found.  Always meddling and making,  and
poking your nose into everybody's concerns.  Here 's me,
for example ;  I can't be four or five months without an
swering a letter,  but what you give me as many twitches
as if I had committed murder ;  and often and often you
have consumed me more time in apologies,  and cost me
more plague in repentance,  than would have sufficed for
the most exact punctuality.  So that either one must
lead the life of a slave in studying all your humours,  or
be used worse than a dog for following one's own.  I tell
you,  Mr.  Conscience,  you are an inconceivable bore."

Thus they go on,  wrangling and jangling,  at so in
decent a rate I can get no rest for them  — one urging you
would like to hear from myself something of an event so
deeply interesting to my happiness;  the other assuring
me of the pardon of perfect coincidence in my aversion to

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  ^3

epistolary exertion.  And,  hitherto,  I have listened,
whether I would or not,  to one,  and yielded,  whether I
would or not,  to the other.  And how long the contest
might yet have endured I know not,  if Mrs.  Lock
had not told me,  yesterday,  she should have an oppor
tunity of forwarding some letters to town to-morrow.
So now —

"I wish you were further!"  I hear you cry;  so now
you get out of your difficulties just to make me get into
them.

"  But consider,  my dear Esther,  the small-pox '*

"  I have considered it at least six times,  in all its stages,
Heaven help me!"

'*  But then so sweet a bantling  ! "

c»  I have half a dozen,  every one of which would make
three of him."

I was interrupted in this my pathetic appeal,  and now
I must finish off-hand,  or lose my conveyance.

I entreat,  whenever you see Mrs.  Chapone,  you will
present my affectionate respects to her,  and ask if she
received a long letter I directed to her in Francis Street,
#  *  *  *

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs. .

June,  1797,

IT was a very sweet thought to make my little
namesake write to me,  and I beg her dear mamma to
thank her for me,  and to tell her how pleased I should
have been at the sight of her early progress,  had it not
proved the vehicle of anxious intelligence.

It is but lately I have thought my little boy entirely
recovered,  for his appetite had never returned since the
eruptive fever till this last fortnight.  Thank Heaven  !
he is now completely restored to all his strength and
good looks,  and to all my wishes,  for  'tis the gayest and
most companionable little soul I ever saw.

94 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

And now,  what shall I tell you  ?  You ask me  "  what
information any of my late letters have given you,  except
of my health and affection  ?"  None,  I confess  ! — Yet
they are such as all my other friends have borne with,  since
my writing-weariness has seized me,  and such as I still,  and
upon equally shabby morsels of paper,  continue to give
them.  Nor have I yet thought,  that to accept was to
abuse their indulgence.  When they understood that
writing was utterly irksome to me,  except as a mere
vehicle to prevent uneasiness on their part,  and to obtain
intelligence on mine,  they concurred not to make my
silence still more oppressive to me than my writing,  by a
kind reception of a few words,  and returning me letters
for notes.

And why are you so much more severe and tenacious  ?

Why,  rather,  you will perhaps ask,  should you,  because
you see me thus spoilt,  join in spoiling me?

My faithful attachment I am sure you cannot doubt;
and why should that affection in your estimation be so
little,  which in mine,  where I dare believe I possess it,  pre
dominates over all things,  save my opinion of the worth
of the character from which I may receive it  ? — by little,
I only mean little satisfactory,  unless unremittingly and
regularly proved by length of letters.  I do not imagine
you to slight it in itself;  but I see you utterly dissatisfied
without its constant manifestation.

It appears to me,  perhaps wrongly,  you have wrought
yourself into a tit of fancied resentment against a succes
sion of short letters,  which could only have been merited
by letters that were unfriendly.  You forget,  meanwhile,
the numerous letters I have,  at various epochs,  received
from yourself,  not merely of half-pages,  but of literally
three lines  ;  and you forget them because they were never
received with reproach,  nor answered with coldness.  By
me they were equally valued with the longest,  though
they gave me not equal entertainment,  for I prized them
as marks of affection,  and I required them as bulletins of
health.  Entertainment,  or information,  I never con-

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  95

sidered as a basis of correspondence,  though no one,  you
may believe,  can more delight to meet with them.  The
basis of letters,  as of friendship,  must be kindness,
which does not count lines or words,  but expressions and
meaning  ;  which is indulgent to brevity,  puts a favourable
construction upon silence,  grants full liberty to inclination,
and makes every allowance for convenience.  Punctuality,
with respect to writing,  is a quality in which I know
myself deficient ;  but which,  also,  I have to no one ever
promised.  TVtwo persons only I have practised it, — my
lather,  and my sister Phillips ;  there is a third whose
claims are still higher;  but uninterrupted intercourse has
spared all trial to my exactness.  My other friends,  how
ever near,  and however tender,  have all accepted my
letters,  like myself,  for better and for worse,  and,  finding
my heart unalterable,  have left my pen to its own pro
pensities.

Nor am I quite aware what species of  "information"
you repine at not receiving.  An elaborate composition,
written for admiration,  and calculated to be exhibited to
strangers,  I should not be more the last to write than you
— quick and penetrating to whatever is ridiculous — would
be the first to deride and despise.  A gay and amusing
rattle,  you must be sensible,  can flow only from the
humour of the moment,  which an idea of raised expectation
represses rather than promotes.  A communication of
private affairs  *  *  no, — the very letter which

produced this complaint contained a statement of personal
concerns the most important I have had to write since
my marriage.

From all this,  which reluctantly,  though openly,  I have
written,  you will deduce,  that,  while you think me unkind
(as I apprehend),  I think you unjust.

But I have written,  now,  as well as read, — and have
emptied my mind of all ungenial thoughts ;  hasten,  then,
dear  -  — ,  to fill up the space once more with those
iairer materials which the estranged style of your late
letters has wofully compressed.  You will think of me,

96 DJARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

you say,  always as you ought :  if you do,  I may venture to
send you again the shabby paper,  or wide margin,  you have
received so indignantly,  by reminding you,  in the first
place,  that the zealous advocate for public liberty must not
be an imposer of private exactions  ;  and in the second,
that,  though the most miserable of correspondents,  I am
the most unchangeable of friends.

And now,  if I could draw,  1 would send you the olive-
branch,  with our arms mutually entwining it.  Enclose
me the design,  and I will return you its inscriptions.

F.  D'A.

I find my father has heard just the same high character
of the supereminent powers and eloquence of the Abbe
Legard that you sent me in a former letter.

The Lock family have not yet returned from town.
They did not go thither till late in April.  Have you seen
Mr.  Williams's beautiful sketch of Lady Templetown's
two eldest daughters  ?

We have begun,  at last,  the little Hermitage we have
so long purposed rearing for our residence ;  and M.
d'Arblay,  who is his own architect and surveyor,  is con
stantly with his workmen,  whom Bab and I do not spare
visiting and admiring.  God bless you  !

Dr.  Burney to Madame d'Arblay.

Saturday Night,  July 20.  1797.

MY DEAR FANNV, — The close of the season is always
hurry-scurry.  I shall begin a letter to-night,  and leave it
on the stocks,  that is,  the table,  to stare me in the face,  lest
in the hurry I am and shall be in,  you should lose your
turn.  I was invited to poor Mr.  Burke's funeral,  by Airs.
Crewe and two notes from Beaconsfield.  Malone and I
went to Bulstrode together in my car,  this day sevennight,
with two horses added to mine.  Mrs.  Crewe had invited me
thither when she went down first.  We found the Duke
of P.  there ;  and the Duke of Devonshire and Wind-
ham came to dinner.  The Chancellor and Speaker of

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  97

the House o'f Commons could not leave London till
four o'clock,  but arrived a little after seven.  We all set
oft'  together for Beaconsfield,  where we found the rest of
the pall-bearers — Lord Fitzwilliam,  Lord Inchiquin,  and
Sir Gilbert Eliot,  with Drs.  King and Lawrence,  Fred
North,  Dudley North,  and many of the deceased's private
friends,  though by his repeated injunction the funeral was
to be very private.  We had all hatbands,  scarfs,  and
gloves ;  and he left a list to whom rings of remembrance
are to be sent,  among whom my name occurred ;  and a
jeweller has been here for my measure.  I went back to
Btilstrode,  by invitation,  with the two Dukes,  the Chan
cellor,  and Speaker,  Windham,  Malone,  and Secretary
King.  I stayed there till Sunday evening,  and got home
jtist before the dreadful storm.  The Duke was extremely
civil and hospitable, — pressed me much to stay longer
and go with them,  the Chancellor,  Speaker,  Windham,
and Mrs.  Crewe,  to Finn,  to see the school,  founded by
Mr.  Burke,  for the male children of French emigrant
nobles  ;  but I could not with prudence stay,  having a
couple of ladies waiting for me in London,  and two extra
horses with me.

So much for poor Mr.  Burke,  certainly one of the
greatest men of the present century ;  and I think I
might say the best orator and statesman of modern
times.  He had his passions and prejudices to which I
did not subscribe ;  but I always admired his great abilities,
friendship,  and urbanity ;  and it would be ungrateful in
you and me,  to whom,  he was certainly partial,  not to

feel and lament his loss.

#  *  *  #

C.  B.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  July 27,  '97.

MY DEAREST PADRE,— A letter of so many dates is
quite delicious to me ;  it brings me so close to you from

VOL.  VI.  H

98 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

day to day,  that it seems nearest to verbal intercourse.
How  "  agreeable"  I should be to your keeping one upon
the stocks for me thus in your journey !  And how I
should like to receive a letter from Shrewsbury  !  Never
theless,  I am sensible Shrewsbury will be but a melan
choly view now,  but interest does not dwell alone with
merriment,  merry as we all like to be.

Your most kind solicitude for Alex,  makes me never
like to take a letter in hand to you when his health gives
me inquietude ;  his health alone can do it,  for his dispo
sition opens into all our fondest hopes could form,  either
for our present gratification or future prospects.  T is the
most enjoyable little creature,  Norbury Phillips excepted,
I ever saw at so early an age.

I was surprise,d and almost frightened,  though at the
same time gratified,  to find you assisted in paying the last
honours to Mr.  Burke.  How sincerely I sympathise in
all you say of that truly great man !  That his enemies
say he was not perfect is nothing compared with his im
mense superiority over almost all those who are merely
exempted from his peculiar defects.  That he was upright
in heart,  even where he acted wrong,  I do truly believe ;
and it is a great pleasure to me that Mr.  Lock believes
it too,  and that he asserted nothing he had not persuaded
himself to be true,  from Mr.  Hastings's being the most
rapacious of villains,  to the King's being incurably in
sane.  He was as generous as kind,  and as liberal in his
sentiments as he was luminous in intellect and extraor
dinary in abilities and eloquence.  Though free from
all little vanity,  high above envy,  and glowing with zeal
to exalt talents and merit in others,  he had,  I believe,  a
consciousness of his own greatness,  that shut out those
occasional and useful self-doubts which keep our judg
ment in order,  by calling our motives and our passions to
account.  I entreat you to let me know how poor Mrs.
Burke supports herself in this most desolate state,  and
who remains to console her when Mrs.  Crewe will be far
off.

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  99

Our cottage is now in the act of being rough cast.  Its
ever imprudent and temeraire builder made himself very
ill t'other day,  by going from the violent heat of ex
treme hard work in his garden to drink out of a fresh-
drawn pail of well-water,  and dash the same over his
face.  A dreadful headache ensued ;  and two days'  con
finement,  with James's powders,  have but just reinstated
him.  In vain I represent he has no right now to make-
so free with himself — he has such a habit of disdaining
all care and precaution,  that,  though he gives me the
fairest promises,  I find them of no avail.  Mr.  Angerstein
went to see his field lately,  and looked everywhere for him,
having heard he was there ;  but he was not immediately
to be known,  while digging with all his might and main,
without coat or waistcoat,  and in his green leather cap.

Imagine my surprise the other day,  my dearest Padre,
at receiving a visit from Mr.  and Mrs.  Barbauld !  We
had never visited,  and only met one evening at Mr.  Bur-
rows's,  by appointment,  whither I was carried to meet her
by Mrs.  Chapone.  They are at Dorking,  on a visit to
Dr.  Aikin,  her brother,  who is there at a lodging for his
health.  I received them with great pleasure,  for I think
highly both of her talents and her character,  and he seems
a very gentle,  good sort of man.

I am told,  by a French priest who occasionally visits
M.  d'Arblay,  that the commanding officer at Dorking
says he knows you very well,  but I cannot make out his,
name.

F.   o'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  August 10,  '97.

MY dearest Father will,  I know,  be grieved at any
grief of M.  d'Arblay's,  though he will be glad his own
truly interesting letter should have arrived by the same
post.  You know,  I believe,  with what cruel impatience
and uncertainty my dear companion has waited for so me

H2

100 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III-

news of his family,  and how terribly his expectations were
disappointed upon a summons to town some few months
since,  when the hope of intelligence carried him thither
under all the torment of his recently wounded foot,  which
he could not then put to the ground ;  no tidings,  however,
could he procure,  nor has he ever heard from any part of
it till last Saturday morning,  when two letters arrived by
the same post,  with information of the death of his only
brother.

Impossible as it has long been to look back to France
without fears amounting even to expectation of horrors,
he had never ceased cherishing hopes some favourable
turn would,  in the end,  unite him with this last branch of
his house ;  the shock,  therefore,  has been terribly severe,
and has cast a gloom upon his mind and spirits which
nothing but his kind anxiety to avoid involving mine
can at present suppress.  He is now the last of a family
of seventeen,  and not one relation of his own name now
remains but his own little English son.  His father was
the only son of an only son,  which drives all affinity on
the paternal side into fourth and fifth kinsmen.

On the maternal side,  however,  he has the happiness,
to hear that an uncle,  who is inexpressibly dear to him,
who was his guardian and best friend through life,  still
lives,  and has been permitted to remain unmolested in
his own house,  at Joigny,  where he is now in perfect
health,  save from rheumatic attacks,  which though pain
ful are not dangerous.  A son,  too,  of this gentleman,
who was placed as a commiss air e-de- guerre by M.
d'Arblay during the period of his belonging to the War
Committee,  still holds the same situation,  which is very
lucrative,  and which M.  d'A.  had concluded would have
been withdrawn as soon as his own flight from France was
known.

He hears,  too,  that M.  de Narbonne is well and safe,
and still in Switzerland,  where he lives,  says the letter,
"  tres modestement,  obscurement,  et tranquillement,"
with a chosen small society forced into similar retreat.

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  101

This is consolatory,  for the long and unaccountable si
lence of this his beloved friend had frequently filled him
with the utmost uneasiness.

The little property of which the late Chevalier d'Arblay
died possessed,  this same letter says,  has been  "  vendu
pour la nation/'  because his next heir was an emigre  ;
though there is a little niece,  Mile.  Girardin,  daughter
of an only sister,  who is in France,  and upon whom the
succession was settled,  if her uncles died without imme
diate heirs.

Some little matter,  however,  what we know not,  has
been reserved by being bought in by this respectable
uncle,  who sends M.  d'Arblay word he has saved him
what he may yet live upon,  if he can find means to re
turn without personal risk,  and who solicits to again see
him with urgent fondness,  in which he is joined by his
aunt with as much warmth as if she,  also,  was his relation
by blood,  not alliance.  The letter is written from Switz
erland by a person who passed through Joigny,  from
Paris,  at the request of M.  d'Arblay,  to inquire the fate
of his family,  and to make known his own.  The com
mission,  though so lately executed,  was given before the
birth of our little Alex.  The letter adds that no words
can express the tender joy of this excellent uncle and his
wife in hearing M.  d'Arblay was alive and well.

The late Chevalier,  my M.  d'A.  says,  was a man of the
softest manners and most exalted honour ;  and he was so
tall and so thin,  he was often nicknamed Don Quixote ;
but he was so completely aristocratic with regard to the
Revolution,  at its very commencement,  that M.  d'A.  has
heard nothing yet with such unspeakable astonishment as
the news that he died near Spain of his wounds from a
battle in which he had fought for the Republic.  "  How
strange,"  says M.  d'A.,  "  is our destiny  !  that that Re
public which I quitted,  determined to be rather an hewer
of wood and drawer of water all my life than serve,  he
should die for."  The secret history of this may some day
come out,  but it is now inexplicable,  for the mere fact,

102 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

without the smallest comment,  is all that has reached us.
In the period,  indeed,  in which M.  d'A.  left France,  there
were but three steps possible for those who had been bred
to arms — flight,  the guillotine,  or fighting for  [the Re
public.  "The former this brother,"  M.  d'A.  says,  "  had
not energy of character to undertake in the desperate
manner in which he risked it himself,  friendless and for
tuneless,  to live in exile as he could.  The guillotine no
one could elect ;  and the continuing in the service,  though
in a cause he detested,  was,  probably,  his hard compul
sion.  No one was allowed to lay down his arms and retire."
A gentleman born in the same town as M.  d'A.,
Joigny,  has this morning found a conductor to bring him
to our Hermitage.  He confirms the account that all in
that little town has been suffered to remain quiet,  his own
relations there still existing undisturbed.  M.  d'Arblay is
gone to accompany him back as far as Ewell.  He has
been evidently much relieved by the visit,  and the power
of talking over,  with an old townsman as well as country
man,  early scenes and connexions.  It is a fortunately
timed rencounter,  and I doubt not but he will return less
sad.

F.  D'A.

Our new habitation will very considerably indeed ex
ceed our first intentions and expectations.  I suppose it
has ever been so,  and so ever must be ;  for we sought as
well as determined to keep within bounds,  and M.  d'A.
still thinks he has done it ;  however,  lam more aware of
our tricks upon travellers than to enter into the same
delusion.

The pleasure,  however,  he has taken in this edifice is
my first joy,  for it has constantly shown me his heart has
invariably held to those first feelings which,  before our
union,  determined him upon settling in England.  O  !  if
you knew how he has been assailed,  by temptations of
every sort that either ambition,  or interest,  or friendship

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  103

could dictate,  to change his plan, — and how his heart
sometimes yearns towards those he yet can love in his
native soil,  while his firmness still remains unshaken,
nay,  not even one moment wavering or hesitating, — you
would not wonder I make light of even extravagance in a
point that shows him thus fixed to make this object a part
of the whole system of his future life.

Dr.  Burney to Madame

Friday Night,  September 13,  1797.

MY DEAR FANNY, — Where did I leave off? — hang me
if I know  ! — I believe I told you,  or all when with you,  of
the Chester and Liverpool journey and voyage.  On
Saturday,  26th August,  the day month from leaving
London,  M.  le President de Frondeville and I left Crewe
Hall on our way back.  The dear Mrs.  Crewe kindly
set us in our way as far as Hetruria.  We visited
Trentham Hall,  in Staffordshire,  the famous seat of the
Marquis of Stafford, — a very fine place — fine piece of
water — fine hanging woods, — the valley of Tempe — and
the river Trent running through the garden.  Mrs.  C.  in
troduced us to the Marchioness,  who did us the honour of
showing us the house herself;  it has lately been improved
and enlarged by Wyatt : — fine pictures,  library,  &c.

After a luncheon here,  we went to Hetruria,  which I
had never seen.  Old Mr.  Wedgwood is dead,  and his
son and successor not at home ;  but we went to the pot
tery manufacture,  and saw the whole process of forming
the beautiful things which are dispersed all over the uni
verse from this place.  Mrs.  C.  offered to send you a
little hand churn for your breakfast butter ;  but I should
have broke it to pieces,  and durst not accept of it.  But if
it would be of any use,  when you have a cow,  I will get
you one at the Wedgwood warehouse in London.  Here
we parted.

104 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

The President and I got to Lichfield by about ten
o'clock that night.  In the morning,  before my companion
was up,  I strolled about the city with one of the waiters,
in search of Frank Barber,  who I had been told lived there ;
but on inquiry I was told his residence was in a village
three or four miles off.  I however soon found the house
where dear Dr.  Johnson was born,  and his father's shop.
The house is stuccoed,  has five sash-windows in front,  and
pillars before it.  It is the best house thereabouts,  near
St.  Mary's Church,  in a broad street,  and is now a gro
cer's shop.

I went next to the Garrick House,  which has been
lately repaired,  stuccoed,  enlarged,  and sashed.  Peter
Garrick,  David's eldest brother,  died about two years
ago,  leaving all his possessions to the apothecary that had
attended him.  But the will was disputed and set aside
not long since,  it having appeared at a trial that the tes
tator was insane at the time the will was made ;  so that
Mrs.  Doxie,  Garrick's sister,  a widow with a numerous
family,  recovered the house and 30,000/.  She now lives
in it with her family,  and has been able to set up a car
riage.  The inhabitants of Lichfield were so pleased with
the decision of the Court on the trial,  that they illumi
nated the streets,,  and had public rejoicings on the occa
sion.

After examining this house well,  I tried to find the re
sidence of Dr.  James,  inventor of the admirable fever
powders,  which have so often saved the life of our dear
Susey,  and others without number.  But the ungrateful
inhabitants knew nothing about him.  I could find but
one old man who remembered that he was a native of
that city  ! — that man  "  who has lengthened life,  whose
skill in physic will be long remembered,"  to be forgotten
at Lichfield  !  I felt indignant,  but went round the ca
thedral,  which has been lately thoroughly repaired in*
ternally,  and is the most complete and beautiful Gothic
building I ever saw.  The outside was ires mal traite
by the fanatics of the last century;  but there are throe

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  105

beautiful spires still standing,  and more than fifty whole-
length figures of saints in their original niches.  The
choir is exquisitely beautiful.  A fine new organ is erected,
and was well played,  and I never heard the cathedral ser
vice so well performed to that instrument only before.
The services and anthems were middle-aged music,  neither
too old and dry,  nor too modern and light ;  the voices sub
dued,  and exquisitely softened and sweetened by the build
ing.

While the lessons were reading,  which I could not
hear,  I looked for monuments,  and found a beautiful one
to Garrick,  and another just by it to Johnson ;  the former
erected by Mrs.  Garrick,  who has been daily abused for
not erecting one to her husband in Westminster Abbey ;
but sure that was a debt due to him from the public,
and that due from his widow best paid here.  Johnson's
has been erected by his friends  : — both are beautiful,  and
alike in every particular.

There is a monument here to Johnson's first patron,
Mr.  Walmsley,  whose amplitude of learning and copious
ness of communication were such,  that our revered friend
said  "  it might be doubted whether a day passed in which
he had not some advantage from his friendship."  There
is a monument likewise to Lady M.  W.  Montagu,  and
to the father of Mr.  Addison,  &c.

We left Lich field about two o'clock,  and reached Da-
ventry that night,  stopping a little at Coventry to look at
the great church and Peeping Tom.  Next day got to
St.  Alban's time enough to look at the church and neigh
bouring ruins.  Next morning breakfasted at Barnet,
where my car met me,  and got to Chelsea by three o'clock,
leaving my agreeable compagnon de voyage,  M.  le Pre
sident,  at his apartments in town.

I only stayed at home a week,  after which I went to
Richmond for four or five days  ; — slept at Charlotte's,  but
dined with her but once  ;  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  with dear
good Mrs.  Boscawen;  visiting,  first,  Mrs.  Gell,  at Twick
enham,  and Dr.  Morton ;  Mrs.  Garrick,  at Hampton ;

106 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

and Lady Polly,  at Hampton Court,  with whom Hetty
and I dined and spent a very laughing and agreeable day
on Thursday,  hearing the band of the llth regiment play
in the gardens to the Prince and Princess of Orange dur
ing their lonchon — then saw the palace,  in which Lady
M.  performed the part of cicerone.

Thursday dine with Mrs.  Ord in Sir Joshua Reynolds's
house ;  on Friday morning go with her and Mrs.  Otiey,
a sister of Sir W.  Young,  to see Mrs.  Garrick,  but she
was gone to London  ;  however,  Mrs.  Ord being a privi
leged person,  we saw the house,  pictures,  and gardens.

I visited the Cambridges,  and they me.  Mr.  C.  is as
active and lively as ever.  Dined again with Mrs.  Bos.
on Saturday.

On Sunday went with Hetty and Mrs.  B.  to Richmond
Gardens to see the kangaroos,  then carried them to town,
and carried to Chelsea,  myself,  a miserable cold,  which
I have been nursing ever since.  But I am now thinking
of my visit to Lord Chesterfield and Herschel.  I have
just received a very polite and friendly letter from the
latter,  just returned from Ramsgate,  who  "  will be happy
to talk over with me any subject of astronomy that I may
be pleased to lead him to."

But when is your Windsor visit to take place  ?  The
Royal Family return,  'tis said,  the 16lh.  A levee is an
nounced for Wednesday next week,  and a drawing-room
on Thursday.  If this very dreadful weather does not
continue,  I think of going to Bailie next week.  If we
should meet at Windsor,  how nice it would be  !  Pensez-y.

C.  B.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Bookham,  September 25,  '97.

I MUST not vex my dearest Padre with my vexation,
especially as the season is so much farther advanced
than when we had regaled our fancies with seeing him,

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  107

that many fears for what is still more precious to me
than his sight, — his health — would mix with the joy of
his presence.

The return of Lord M.  has been a terrible stroke to
every fond hope of M.  d'Arblay of embracing his vene
rable uncle.  Not even a line,  now,  must again pass between
them  !  This last dreadful revolution shook him almost
as violently as the loss of his brother ;  but constant exer
cise and unremitting employment are again,  thank
Heaven!  playing the part of philosophy.  Indeed,  he has
the happiest philosophy to join to them — that of always
endeavouring to balance blessings against misfortunes.
Many for whom he had a personal regard are involved
in this inhuman banishment,  though none with whom he
was particularly connected.  Had the Parisians not all
been disarmed in a former epoch,  it is universally
believed they would have risen in a mass to defend the
legislators from this unheard-of proscription.  Such is
the report of a poor returned emigre.  But such measures
had been taken,  that there is little doubt but that military
government will be now finally established.  M.  d'Arblay
had been earnestly pressed to go over,  and pass les
vendanges at Joigny,  and try what he could recover from
the shipwreck of his family's fortune :  but.  not,  thank
God !  by his uncle :  that generous,  parental friend
crushes every personal wish while danger hangs upon

its indulgence.

*    '  *  *  *  *

Dear,  kind,  deserving Kitty Cooke  !  I was struck
quite at heart with concern at her sudden and unex
pected death.

I pity Mrs.  R.  with all my soul.  She could have
been so happy under your protection  !  And now two
are unhappy,  for those tyrants who rob others wilfully
of all comfort take what they never enjoy.  1 question
if even a vicious character is as internally wretched
as an ill-natured one.

F.  D'A.

108 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

Dr.  Burney to Madame d'Arblay.

Chelsea College,  Thursday,  2 o'clock,  September 28.

MY DEAR FANNY, — I read your letter pen in hand,
and shall try to answer it by to-day's post.  But first
let me tell you that it was very unlikely to find me at
home,  for on Tuesday I went to Lord Chesterfield's at
Bailie's,  and arrived there in very good time for a four
o'clock dinner ;  when behold !  I was informed by the
porter that  "  both my Lord and Lady were in town,  and
did not return till Saturday  !"  Lord Chesterfield had
unexpectedly been obliged to go to town by indisposition.
Though I was asked to alight and take refreshment,  I de
parted immediately,  intending to dine and lie at Windsor,  to
be near Dr.  Herschel,  with whom a visit had been arranged
by letter.  But as I was now at liberty to make that visit
at any time of the day I pleased,  I drove through Slough
in my way to Windsor,  in order to ask at Dr.  Herschel's
door when my visit would be least inconvenient to
him — that night or next morning.  The good soul was
at dinner,  but came to the door himself,  to press me to
alight immediately and partake of his family repast;  and
this he did so heartily that I could not resist.  I was
introduced to the family at table,  four ladies,  and a little
boy about the age and size of Martin.  I was quite shocked
at seeing so many females  :  I expected  (not knowing that
Herschel was married)  only to have found Miss
Herschel ;  but there was a very old lady,  the mother,  I
believe,  of Mrs.  Herschel,  who was at the head of the
table herself,  and a Scots lady  (a Miss Wilson,  daugh
ter of Dr.  Wilson,  of Glasgow,  an eminent astronomer),
Miss Herschel,  and the little boy.  I expressed my con
cern and shame at disturbing them at this time of the
day  ;  told my story,  at which they were so cruel as to
rejoice,  and went so far as to say they rejoiced at the
accident which had brought me there,  and hoped I would
send my carriage away,  and take a bed with them.  They
were sorry they had no stables for my horses.  I thought
it necessary,  you may be sure,  iofaire la petite bouclie,

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  109

but in spite of my blushes I was obliged to submit to my
trunk being taken in,  and the car sent to the inn just by.

We soon grew acquainted, — I mean the ladies and I ;
and before dinner was over we seemed old friends just
met after a long absence.  Mrs.  Herschel is sensible,
good- humoured,  unpretending,  and well-bred;  Miss
Herschel all shyness and virgin modesty ;  the Scots lady
sensible and harmless  ;  and the little boy entertaining,
promising,  and comical.  Herschel,  you know,  and every
body knows,  is one of the most pleasing and well-bred
natural characters of the present age,  as well as the
greatest astronomer.

Your health was drunk after dinner  (put that into your
pocket)  ;  and after much social conversation and a few
hearty laughs,  the ladies proposed to take a walk,  in
order,  I believe,  to leave Herschel and me together.  We
walked and talked round his great telescopes till it grew
damp and dusk,  then retreated into his study to philoso
phize.

I had a string of questions ready to ask,  and astrono
mical difficulties to solve,  which,  with looking at curious
books and instruments,  filled up the time charmingly till
tea,  which being drunk with the ladies,  we two retired
again to the starry.  Now having paved the way,  we
began to talk of my poetical plan,  and he pressed me to
read what I had done.  Heaven help his head !  my
eight books,  of from 400 to 820 lines,  would require two
or three days to read.  He made me unpack my trunk
for my MS.,  from which I read him the titles of the
chapters,  and begged he would choose any book or cha
racter of a great astronomer he please'd.  "Oh,  let us have
the beginning."  I read him the first eighteen or twenty
lines of the exordium,  and then said I rather wished to
come to modern times;  I was more certain of my ground
in high antiquity than after the time of Copernicus,  and
began my eighth chapter,  entirely on Newton and his
system.  He gave me the greatest encouragement. ;  said
repeatedly that I perfectly understood what I was writing

110 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

about;  and only stopped me at two places  :  one was at a
word too strong for what I had to describe,  and the other
at one too weak.  The doctrine he allowed to be quite
orthodox,  concerning gravitation,  refraction,  reflection,
optics,  comets,  magnitudes,  distances,  revolutions,  &c.  &c.?
but made a discovery to me which,  had I known sooner,
would have overset me,  and prevented my reading any
part of my work  :  he said he had almost always had
an aversion to poetry,  which he regarded as the arrange
ment of fine words,  without any useful meaning or
adherence to truth ;  but that,  when truth and science
were united to these fine words,  he liked poetry very well ;
and next morning,  after breakfast,  he made me read as
much of another chapter on Des Cartes,  &c.,  as the time
would allow,  as I had ordered my carriage at twelve.
I read,  talked,  asked questions,  and looked at books and
instruments till near one,  when I set off for Chelsea.

C.  B.

General de Lafayette to the CJievalier d'Arblay.

Trilmuld pies Ploeo,  16me Oct.  1797.

JE savois bien d'avance que votre interet nous
suivroit partout,  mon cher d'Arblay,  et je n'ai pas etc
surpris d'apprendre que vous avez ete sans cesse oc-
cupe de vos amis prisonniers  ;  ils ne vous oublioient
pas dans leur captivite,  et soit dans les premiers terns
ou nous fumes quelquefois reunis,  soit pendant les der-
niers quarante mois ou nous avons ete totalement et
constamment separes, — Maubourg etmoi pensions avec
la plus tendre amitie au sentiment que vous nous con-
serviez,  et au bonheur dont vous jouissiez.

C'est dans la prison de Magdebourg que nous ap-
primes votre manage.;  j'avois joint au tribut de 1'ad-
miration universelle pour Miss Burney,  un hommage de
reconnoissance particulier pour celle qui presque seule
avoit pu me faire oublier inomentanement mon sort ;
c'est au milieu des jouissances de cette illusion en-

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  Ill

chanteresse que j e SQUS tout a coup les nouveaux droits
qu'elle avoit a raon sentiment pour elle,  et qui me don-
naient a moi-meme quelques droits a ses bontes.
Toute ma famille serait bien heureuse de lui etre pre
sentee,  et la prie de vouloir bien agreer le voeu qu'elles
forment toutes trois de meriter son amitie.  Recevez
aussi,  mon cher d'Arblay,  les tendres complimens de
ma femme et de mes filles.

Nous sommes pour quelques jours chez Madame de
Tesse  ;  Maubourg et Puzy sont restes a Altona,  mais
Maubourg arrivera ici aujourd'hui ou demain,  et nous
allons passer 1'hiver dans une campagne solitaire,  a
vingt-deux lieues d'Hambourg,  sur le territoire Danois
du Holstein,  ou nous soignerons tranquillement nos
santes delabrees.  Celle de ma femme est surtout dans
le plus deplorable etat.  Maubourg a beaucoup souffert,
mais se retablit depuis la delivrance;  et quoique j'aie
ete a la mort,  j'ai resiste mieux que personne aux
epreuves de la captivite,  et je crois que bientot,  a
la maigreur pres,  il n'y paroitra plus.  Mon fils etoit
en Amerique,  mais va,  je pense,  arriver avec la Co-
lombe,  parce que sur la nouvelle des premieres pro-
messes donnees il y a plusieurs mois par la Cour de
Vienne a la Republique.,  ils se sont determines a venir
nous trouver.

Adieu,  mon cher d'Arblay ;  presentez mes hommages
a Madame d'Arblay  ;  donnez-moi de vos nouvelles,  et
aimez toujours votre ancien compagnon d'armes et
ami,  qui vous est a jamais bien tendrement attache.

LAFAYETTE.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Francis.

West Hamble,  November 16,  1797.

YOUR letter was most welcome to me,  my dearest
Charlotte,  and I am delighted Mr.  Brooine and my dear
father will so speedily meet.  If they steer clear of poli
tics,  there can be no doubt of their immediate exchange

112 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

of regard and esteem.  At all events,  I depend upon
Mr.  B.'s forbearance of such subjects,  if their opinions,
clash.  Pray let me hear how the interview went off.

I need not say how I shall rejoice to see you again,
nor how charmed we shall both be to make a nearer
acquaintance with Mr.  Broome ;  but,  for Heaven's sake,
my dear girl,  how are we to give him a dinner  ? — unless
he will bring with him his poultry,  for ours are not yet
arrived from Bookham ;  and his fish,  for ours are still at
the bottom of some pond we know not where ;  and his
spit,  for our jack is yet without one  ;  and his kitchen grate,
for ours waits for Count Rumford's next pamphlet ; —
not to mention his table-linen; — and not to speak of
his knives and forks,  some ten of our poor original
twelve having been massacred in M.  d'Arblay's first
essays in the art of carpentering ; — and to say no
thing of his large spoons,  the silver of our plated ones
having feloniously made off under cover of the whiten
ing-brush  ; — and not to talk of his cook,  ours being
not yet hired ; — and not to start the subject of wine,
ours,  by some odd accident,  still remaining at the wine-
merchant's  !

With all these impediments,  however,  to convivial hila
rity,  if he will eat a quarter of a joint of meat  (his share,  I
mean),  tied up by a packthread,  and roasted by a log of
wood on the bricks, — arid declare no potatoes so good as
those dug by M.  d'Arblay out of our garden, — and protest
our small beer gives the spirits of champagne, — and make
no inquiries where we have deposited the hops he will
conclude we have emptied out of our table- cloth, — and
pronounce that bare walls are superior to tapestry, — and
promise us the first sight of his epistle upon visiting a
new-built cottage, — we shall be sincerely happy to receive
him in our Hermitage ;  where I hope to learn,  for my
dearest Charlotte's sake,  to love him as much as,  for his
own,  I have very long admired him.

Manage all this,  my dear girl,  but let us know the
day,  as we have resumed our Norbury Park excursions,

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  113

wnere we were yesterday.     God bless you,  my love,  and
grant that your happiness may meet my wishes !
Ever and ever yours most affectionately,

"P.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Phillips.

West Hamble,  December,  '97.

THIS moment I receive,  through our dearest friend,  my
own Susanna's letter.  I grieve to find she ever waits
anxiously for news;  but always imagine all things essen
tial perpetually travelling to her,  from so many of our
house,  all in nearly constant correspondence with her.
Tiiis leads me to rest quiet as to her,  when I do not
write more frequently  ;  but as to myself,  when I do not
hear I am saddened even here,  even in my own nevv para
dise, — for such I confess it is to me ;  and were my
beloved Susan on this side the Channel,  and could I see
her dear face,  and fold her to my breast,  1 think 1 should
set about wishing nothing but to continue just so.  For
circumstances — pecuniary ones I mean — never have povxer
to distress me,  unless I fear exceeding their security;
and that fear these times will sometimes inflict.  The
nevv threefold assessment of taxes has terrified us rather
seriously ;  though the necessity,  and therefore justice,  of
them,  we mutually feel.  My father thinks his own
share will amount to 80/.  a-year !  We have,  this very
morning,  decided upon parting with four of our new win
dows, —  a great abatement of agremens to ourselves,  and
of ornament to our appearance  ;  and a still greater sacri
fice to r amour propre of my architect,  who,  indeed, — his
fondness for his edifice considered, — does not ill deserve
praise that the scheme had not his mere consent,  but his
own free proposition.

Your idea that my builder was not able to conduct us
hither,  1 thank God,  is unfounded.  His indiscretion was
abominable,  but so characteristic that I will tell it you.
Some little time before,  he brought me home a dog,  a

VOL.    VI.  I

114 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

young thing,  he said,  which had hit his fancy at Ewell,
where he had been visiting M.  Bourdois,  and that we
should educate it for our new house-guard.  It is a barbette,
and,  as it was not perfectly precise in cleanliness,  it was
destined to a kitchen residence till it should be trained
for the parlour :  this,  however,  far from being resented
by the young stranger as an indignity,  appeared to be
still rather too superb  ;  for  "  Muff"  betook to the coal
hole,  and there seemed to repose with native ease.  The
purchaser,  shocked at the rueful appearance of the curled^
coat,  and perhaps piqued by a few flippancies upon the
delicacy of my present,  resolved one night to prepare
me a divine surprise the following morning ;  and,  when
I retired to my downy pillow,  at eleven o'clock,  upon a
time severely cold,  he walked forth with the unfortunate
delinquent to a certain lake,  you may remember,  nearly
in front of our Bookham habitation,  not very remarkable
for its lucid purity,  and there immersed poor Muff,  and
stood rubbing him,  curl by curl,  till each particular one
was completely bathed.  This business was not over till
near midnight,  and the impure water which he agitated,
joined to the late hour and unwholesome air,  sent him in
shivering with a dreadful pain in the head and a violent
feverish and rheumatic cold.

This happened just as we were beginning to prepare for
our removal.  You will imagine,  untold,  all its alarm and
all its inconveniences :  I thank God,  it is long past,  but
it had its full share,  at the moment,  of disquieting and
tormenting powers.

We quitted Bookham with one single regret — that of
leaving our excellent neighbours the Cookes.  The father
is so worthy,  and the mother so good,  so deserving,  so
liberal,  and so infinitely kind,  that the world certainly
does not abound with people to compare with them.  They
both improved upon us considerably since we lost our
dearest Susan — not,  you will believe,  as substitutes,  but
still for their intrinsic worth and mo friendly partiality
and regard.

3797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  U5

We languished for the moment of removal with almos
infantine fretfulness at every delay that distanced it ;  and
when at last the grand day came,  our final packings,  with
all their toil and difficulties and labour and expense,  were
mere acts of pleasantry :  so bewitched were we with the
impending change,  that,  though from six o'clock to three
we were hard at work,  without a kettle to boil the break
fast,  or a knife to cut bread for a luncheon,  we missed
nothing,  wanted nothing,  and were as insensible to fatigue
as to hunger.

M.  d' Arblay set out on foot,  loaded with remaining relics
of things,  to us precious,  and Betty afterwards with a
remnant glass or two  :  the other maid had been sent two
days before.  I was forced to have a chaise for my Alex,
and me,  and a few looking-glasses,  a few folios,  and not
a few other oddments ;  and then,  with dearest Mr.  Lock,
our founder's portrait,  and my little boy,  oft*  I set ;  and I
would my dearest Susan couid relate to me as delicious
a journey.

My mate,  striding over hedge and ditch,  arrived first,
though he set out after,  to welcome me to our new
dwelling ;  and we entered our new best room,  in which I
found a glorious fire of wood,  and a little bench,  borrowed
of one of the departing carpenters:  nothing else.  We
contrived to make room for each other,  and Alex,  dis
dained all rest.  His spirits were so high upon finding
two or three rooms totally free for his horse  (alias any
stick he can pick up)  and himself,  uiiincumbered by
chairs and tables and such-like lumber,  that he was as
merry as a little Andrew and as wild as twenty colts.  Here
we unpacked a small basket containing three or four
loaves,  and,  with a garden-knife,  fell to work ;  some eggs
had been procured from a neighbouring farm,  and one
saucepan had been brought.  We dined,  therefore,  ex
quisitely,  and drank to our new possession from a glass of
clear water out of our new well.

At about eight o'clock our goods arrived.  We had our
bed put up in the middle of our room,  to avoid risk of

i  -2

116 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IIL

damp walls,  and our Alex,  had his dear Willy's crib at
our feet.

We none of us caught cold.  We had fire night and
day in the maids'  room,  as well as our own — or rather in
my Susan's room ;  for we lent them that,  their own
having a little inconvenience against a fire,  because it is
built without a chimney.

We continued making fires all around us the first
fortnight,  and then found wood would be as bad as an
apothecary's bill,  so desisted ;  but we did not stop short,
so soon as to want the latter to succeed the former,  or
put our calculation to the proof.

Our first week was devoted to unpacking,  and exulting
in our completed plan.  To have no one thing at hand,
nothing to eat,  nowhere to sit — all were trifles,  rather,  I
think,  amusing than incommodious.  The house looked
so clean,  the distribution of the rooms and closets is so
convenient,  the prospect everywhere around is so gay and
so lovely,  and the park of dear Norbury is so close at
hand,  that we hardly knew how to require anything else
for existence than the enjoyment of our own situation.

At this period I received my summons.  I believe I
have already explained that I had applied to Miss Planta
for advice whether my best chance of admission would be
at Windsor,  Kew,  or London.  I had a most kind letter
of answer,  importing my letter had been seen,  and that
her Majesty would herself fix the time when she could
admit me.  This was a great happiness to me,  and the
fixture was for the Queen's house in town.

The only drawback to the extreme satisfaction of such
graciousness as allowing an appointment to secure me
from a fruitless journey,  as well as from impropriety and
all fear of intrusion,  was,  that exactly at this period the
Princesse d'Henin and M.  de Lally were expected at
Norbury.  1 hardly could have regretted anything else,
I was so delighted by my summons ;  but this I indeed
lamented.  They arrived to dinneron Thursday  :  I was
involved in preparations,  and unable to meet them,  and

1797]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY

117

my mate would not be persuaded to relinquish aiding
me.

The next morning,  through mud,  through mire,  they
came 1o our cottage.  The poor Princesse was forced to
change shoes and stockings.  M.  de Lally is more ac
customed to such expeditions.  Nothing could be more
sweet than they both were,  nor indeed,  more grateful
than I felt for my share in their kind exertion.  The
house was re-viewed all over,  even the little pot au feu
was opened by the Princesse,  excessively curious to see
our manner of living in its minute detail.

I have not heard if your letter has been received by M.
de Lally  ;  but I knew not then you had written,  and there
fore did not inquire.  The Princesse talked of nothing so
much as you,  and with a softness of regard that quite
melted me.  I always tell her warmly how you feel about
her.  M.  de Lally was most melancholy about France  :
the last new and most barbarous revolution has disheart
ened all his hopes — alas  !  whose can withstand it  ?  They
made a long and kind visit,  and in the afternoon we went
to Norbury Park,  where we remained till near eleven
o'clock,  and thought the time very short.

Madame d'Henin related some of her adventures in this
second flight from her terrible country,  and told them
with a spirit and a power of observation that would have
made them interesting if a tale of old times  ;  but now,  all
that gives account of those events awakens the whole mind
to attention.

M.  de Lally after tea read us a beginning of a new
tragedy,  composed upon an Irish story,  but bearing allu
sion so palpable to the virtues and misfortunes of Louis
XVI.  that it had almost as strong an effect upon our
passions and faculties as if it had borne the name of that
good and unhappy Prince.  It is written with great pa
thos,  noble sentiment,  and most eloquent language.  I
parted from them with extreme reluctance — nay,  vex
ation.

J set off for town early the next day,   Saturday.     My

118 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

time was not yet fixed for my Royal interview,  but I had
various preparations impossible to make in this dear,  quiet,
obscure cottage.  Mon ami could not accompany me,  as
we had still two men constantly at work,  the house with
out being quite unfinished ;  but I could not bear to leave
his little representative,  who,  vuith Betty,  was my com
panion to Chelsea.  There I was expected,  and our
dearest father came forth with open arms to welcome us.
He was in delightful spirits,  the sweetest humour,  and
perfectly good looks and good health.  My little rogue
soon engaged him in a romp,  which conquered his
rustic shyness,  and they became the best friends in the
world.

Thursday morning I had a letter from Miss Planta,
written with extreme warmth of kindness,  and fixing the
next day at eleven o'clock for my Royal admission.

I went up-stairs to Miss Planta's room,  where,  while I
waited for her to be called,  the charming Princess Mary
passed by,  attended by Mrs.  Cheveley.  She recollected
me,  and turned back,  and came up to me with a fair
hand graciously held out to me.  "  How do you do,  Ma
dame d'Arblay  ?"  she cried  :  "  I am vastly glad to see
you again;  and how does your little boy do?"

I gave her a little account of the rogue,  and she pro
ceeded to inquire about,  my new cottage,  and its actual
state.  I entered into a long detail of its bare walls and
unfurnished sides,  and the gambols of the little man unin-
cumbered by cares of fractures from useless ornaments,
that amused her good-humoured interest in my affairs
very much;  and she did not leave me till Miss Planta
came to usher me to Princess Augusta,

That kind Princess received me with a smile so gay,
and a look so pleased at my pleasure in again seeing her,
that I quite regretted the etiquette which prevented a
chaste embrace.  She was sitting at her toilette having
her hair dressed.  The Royal Family were all going at
night to the play.  She turned instantly from the glass
to face me,  and insisted upon my being seated immedi-

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  H9

ately.  She then wholly forgot her attire and ornaments
and appearance,,  and consigned herself wholly to conver
sation,  with that intelligent animation which marks her
character.  She inquired immediately how my little boy
did,,  and then with great sweetness after his father,  and
after my father.

My first subject was the Princess Royal,  and I ac
counted for not having left my Hermitage in the hope of
once more seeing her Royal Highness before her depar
ture.  It would have been,  I told her,  so melancholy a
pleasure to have come merely for a last view,  that I could
not bear to take my annual indulgence at a period which
would make it leave a mournful impression upon my
mind for a twelvemonth to come.  The Princess said
she could enter into that,  but said it as if she had been
surprised I had not appeared.  She then gave me some
account of the ceremony ;  and when I told her I had
heard that her Royal Highness the bride had never
looked so lovely,  she confirmed the praise warmly,  but
laughingly added,  "  'T was the Queen dressed her !  You
know what a figure she used to make of herself,  with her
odd manner of dressing herself;  but mamma said,  (  Now
really,  Princess Royal,  this one time is the last,  and I
cannot suffer you to make such a quiz of yourself;  so I will
really have you dressed properly.'  And indeed the Queen
was quite in the right,  for everybody said she had never
looked so well in her life."

The word quiz,  you may depend,  was never the
Queen's.  I had great comfort,  however,  in gathering,
from all that passed on that subject,  that the Royal
Family is persuaded this estimable Princess is happy.
From what I know of her disposition I am led to believe
the situation may make her so.  She is born to preside,
and that with equal softness and dignity ;  but she was
here in utter subjection,  for which she had neither spirits
nor inclination.  She adored the King,  honoured the
Queen,  and loved her sisters,  and had much kindness
for her brothers  ;  but her style of life was not adapted to

120 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

the royalty of her nature,  any more than of her birth ;
and though she only wished for power to do good and
to confer favours,  she thought herself out of her place
in not possessing it.

I was particularly happy to learn from the Princess
Augusta that she has already a favourite friend in her
new court,  in one of the Princesses of Wirtemberg,  wife
of a younger brother of the Hereditary Prince,  and who is
almost as a widow,  from the Prince,  her husband,  being
constantly with the army.  This is a delightful circum
stance,  as her turn of mind,  and taste,  and employments,
accord singularly with those of our Princess.

I have no recollection of the order of our conversation,
but will give you what morsels occur to me as they arise
in my memory.

The terrible mutiny occupied us some time.  She told
me many anecdotes that she had learnt in favour of
various sailors,  declaring,  with great animation,  her secu
rity in their good hearts,  however drawn aside by harder
and more cunning heads.  The sweetness with which
she delights to get out of all that is forbidding in her
rank is truly adorable.  In speaking of a sailor on board
the St.  Fiorenzo,  when the Royal Family made their ex
cursion by sea from Weymouth,  she said,  "  You must
know this man was a great favourite of mine,  for he had
the most honest countenance you can conceive,  and I have
often talked with him,  every time we have been at Wey
mouth,  so that we were good friends ;  but I wanted now
in particular to ask him concerning the mutiny,  but I
knew I should not get him to speak out while the King
and Queen and my sisters were by ;  so I told Lady
Charlotte Bellasyse to watch an opportunity when he
was upon deck,  and the rest were in the cabin,  and then
we went up to him and questioned him ;  and he quite
answered my expectations,  for,  instead of taking any merit
to himself from belonging to the St.  Fiorenzo,  which was
never in the mutiny,  the good creature said he was
sure there was not a sailor in the navy that was not sorry

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  121

to have belonged to it,  and would not have got out of it
as readily as himself,  if he had known but how."

We had then a good deal of talk about Weymouth,
but it was all local ;  and as my Susan has not been
there,  it would be too long to scribble.

"  One thing,"  cried she,  her eyes brightening as she
spoke,  "  I must tell you,  though I am sure you know it
a great deal better than me,  that is about Mr.  Lock's
family,  and so I think it will give you pleasure.  General
and Mrs.  Harcourt went lately to see Norbury Park,  and
they were in the neighbourhood somewhere near Guild-
ford some time,  the General's regiment being quartered
thereabouts;  and the family they were with knew the
Locks very well,  and told them they were the best people
in the world.  They said Mr.  Lock was always em
ployed in some benevolent action,  and all the family were
good ;  and that there was one daughter quite beautiful,
and the most amiable creature in the world,  and very like
Mrs.  Lock."

"  The very representative,"  cried I,  "  of both parents;"
and thus encouraged I indulged myself,  without restraint
or conciseness,  in speaking of the sweet girl and her most
beloved and incomparable parents,  and Mr.  William,  and
all the house in general.

The Princess Elizabeth now entered,  but she did not
stay.  She came to ask something of her sister relative to
a little fete she was preparing,  by way of a collation,  in
honour of the Princess Sophia,  who was twenty this day.
She made kind inquiries after my health,  &c.,  and,  being
mistress of the birthday fete,  hurried off,  and I had not
the pleasure to see her any more.

I must be less minute,  or I shall never have done.

My charming Princess Augusta renewed the conversa
tion.

Admiral Duncan's noble victory became the theme,
but it was interrupted by the appearance of the lovely
Princess Amelia,  now become a model of grace,  beauty
and sweetness,  in their bud.  She gave me her hand

122 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

with the softest expression of kindness,  and almost im
mediately began questioning me concerning my little boy
and with an air of interest the most captivating.  But
again Princess Augusta declined any interrupters :  "You
shall have Madame d'Arblay all to yourself,  my dear,
soon,"  she cried,  laughingly ;  and,  with a smile a little
serious,  the sweet Princess Amelia retreated.

It would have been truly edifying to young ladies living
in the great and public world to have assisted in my
place at the toilette of this exquisite Princess Augusta.
Her ease,  amounting even to indifference,  as to her or
naments and decoration,  showed a mind so disengaged
from vanity,  so superior to mere personal appearance,
that I could with difficulty forbear manifesting my admi
ration.  She let the hair-dresser proceed upon her head
without comment and without examination,  just as if it
was solely his affair ;  and when the man,  Robinson,
humbly begged to know what ornaments he was to
prepare the hair for,  she said,  "  O,  there are my feathers,
and my gown is blue,  so take what you think right."
And when he begged she would say whether she would
have any ribbons or other things mixed with the feathers
and jewels,  she said,  "  You understand all that best,
Mr.  Robinson,  I'm sure;  there are the things,  so take
just what you please."  And after this she left him wholly
to himself,  never a moment interrupting her discourse or
her attention with a single direction.

She had just begun a very interesting account of an
officer that had conducted himself singularly well in the
mutiny,  when Miss Planta came to summon me to the
Queen.  I begged permission to return afterwards for my
unfinished narrative,  and then proceeded to the White
Closet.

The Queen was alone,  seated at a table,  and working.
Miss Planta opened the door and retired without enter
ing.  I felt a good deal affected by the sight of her Ma
jesty again,  so graciously accorded to my request ;  but
my first and instinctive feeling was nothing to what I

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  123

experienced when,,  after my profoundly respectful reve
rence,  I raised my eyes,  and saw in hers a look of sen
sibility so expressive of regard,  and so examining,  so
penetrating into mine,  as to seem to convey,  involuntarily,
a regret 1 had quitted her.  This,  at least,  was the idea
that struck me,  from the species of look which met me,
and it touched me to the heart,  and brought instantly,
in defiance of all struggle,  a flood of tears into my eyes.
J was some minutes recovering;  and when I then entreated
her forgiveness,  and cleared up,  the voice with which she
spoke,  in hoping 1 was well,  told me she had caught a
little of my sensation,  for it was by no means steady.
Indeed,  at that moment,  I longed to kneel and beseech
her pardon for the displeasure I had felt in her long re
sistance of my resignation ;  for I think,  now,  it was from
a real and truly honourable wish to attach me to her for
ever.  But I then suffered too much from a situation so
ill adapted to my choice and disposition,  to do justice
to her opposition,  or to enjoy its honour to myself.
Now that I am so singularly,  alas !  nearly singularly
happy,  though wholly from my perseverance in that re
signation,  I feel all I owe her,  and I feel more and more
grateful for every mark of her condescension,  either re
collected or renewed.

She looked ill,  pale,  and harassed.  The King was but
just returned from his abortive visit to the Nore,  and the
inquietude she had sustained during that short separa
tion,  circumstanced many ways alarmingly,  had evidently
shaken her :  I saw with much,  with deep concern,  her
sunk eyes and spirits ;  I believe the sight of me raised
not the latter.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg had not long been
dead,  and I have some reason to think she would not
have been sorry to have had me supply the vacancy  ;
for I had immediate notice sent me of her death by Miss
Plant a,  so written as to persuade me  *t was a letter by
command.  But not all my duty,  all my gratitude,  could
urge me,  even one short fleeting moment,  to weigh any

124 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

interest against the soothing serenity,  the unfading feli
city,  of a Hermitage such as mine.

We spoke of poor Mrs.  Schwelly, — and of her suc
cessor,  Mile.  Backmeister, — and of mine,  Mrs.Bremvere;
and I could not but express my concern that her Majesty
had again been so unfortunate,  for Mile.  Jacobi had just
retired to Germany,  ill and dissatisfied with everything
in England.  The Princess Augusta had recounted to
me the whole narrative of her retirement,  and its cir
cumstances.  The Queen told me that,  the King had
very handsomely taken care of her.  But such frequent
retirements are heavy weights upon the royal bounty.  I
felt almost guilty when the subject was started ;  but not
from any reproach,  any allusion, — not a word was dropped
that had not kindness and goodness for its basis and its
superstructure at once.

"  How is your little boy?*'  was one of the earliest
questions.  "  Is he here  ?"  she added.

"  O yes,'*  I answered,  misunderstanding her,  "  he is
my shadow  ;  I go nowhere without him."

"  But here,  I mean  ?"

"  O no !  ma*am,  I did not dare presume "

I stopped,  for her look said it would be no presump
tion.  And Miss Planta had already desired me to bring
him to her next time ;  which I suspect was by higher
order than her own suggestion.

She then inquired after my dear father,  and so gra
ciously,  that I told her not only of his good health,  but
his occupations,  his new work,  a  '  Poetical History of
Astronomy,'  and his consultations with Herschel.

She permitted me to speak a good deal of the Prin
cess of Wirtemberg,  whom they still all call Princess
Royal.  She told me she had worked her wedding gar
ment,  and entirely,  and the real labour it had proved,
from her steadiness to have no help,  well knowing that
three stitches done by any other would make it imme
diately said it was none of it bv herself.  "  As the bride

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  125

of a widower/'  she continued,  "  I know she ought to be
in white and gold  ;  but as the King's eldest daughter
she had a right to white and silver,  which she pre
ferred."

A little then we talked of the late great naval victory,
and she said it was singularly encouraging to us that the
three great victories at sea had been  "  against our three
great enemies,  successively:  Lord Howe against the
French,  Lord St.  Vincent against the Spaniards,  and
Lord Duncan against the Dutch."

She spoke very feelingly of the difficult situation of the
Orange family,  now in England,  upon this battle ;  and
she repeated me the contents of a letter from the Princess
of Orange,  whose character she much extolled,  upon the
occasion,  to the Princess Elizabeth,  saying she could not
bear to be the only person in England to withhold her
congratulations to the King upon such an occasion,  when
no one owed him such obligations;  but all she had to
regret was that the Dutch had not fought with,  not
against,  the English,  and that the defeat,  had not fallen
upon those who ought to be their joint enemies.  She
admired and pitied,  inexpressibly,  this poor fugitive
Princess.

I told her of a note my father had received from Lady
Mary Duncan,  in answer to his wishing her joy of her
relation's prowess and success,  in which he says,  "  Lady
Mary has been,  for some days past,  like the rest of the
nation,  drunk for joy."  This led to more talk of this sin
gular lady,  and reciprocal stories of her oddities.

She then deigned to inquire very particularly about our
new cottage, — its size,  its number of rooms,  and its
grounds.  I told her,  honestly,  it was excessively com
fort able,  though unfinished and unfitted up,  for that it had
innumerable little contrivances and conveniencies,  just
adapted to our particular use and taste,  as M.  d'Arbiay
had been its sole architect and surveyor.  " Then I dare
say,"  she answered,  "  it is very commodious,  for there
are no people understand enjoyable accommodations more

126 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

than French gentlemen,  when they have the arrang
ing them themselves."

This was very kind,  and encouraged me to talk a good
deal of my partner,  in his various works and employments ;
and her manner of attention was even touchingly con
descending,  all circumstances considered.  And she then
related to me the works of two French priests,  to whom
she has herself been so good as to commit the fitting up of
one of her apartments at Frogmore.  And afterwards she
gave me a description of what another French gentleman
— elegantly and feelingly avoiding to say emigrant — had
done in a room belonging to Mrs.  Harcourt,  at Sophia
Farm,  where he had the sole superintendence of it,  and
has made it beautiful.

When she asked about our field,  I told her we hoped
in time to buy it,  as Mr.  Lock had the extreme kindness
to consent to part with it to us,  when it should suit our
convenience to purchase instead of renting it.  I thought
I saw a look of peculiar satisfaction at this,  that seemed
to convey pleasure in the implication thence to be drawn,
that England was our decided,  not forced or eventual
residence.  And she led me on to many minute particu
lars of our situation and way of living,  with a sweetness
of interest I can never forget.

Nor even here stopped the sensations of gratitude and
pleasure she thus awoke.  She spoke then of my beloved
Susan ;  asked if she were still in Ireland,  and how the
"  pretty Norbury"  did.  She then a little embarrassed
me by an inquiry  "why Major Phillips went to Ire
land?"  for my answer,  that he was persuaded he should
improve his estate by superintending the agriculture of
it himself,  seemed dissatisfactory ;  however,  she pressed
it no further.  But I cannot judge by what passed whe
ther she concludes he is employed in a military way there,
or whether she has heard that he has retired.  She
seemed kindly pleased at all I had to relate of my dear
Norbury,  and I delighted to call him back to her remem
brance.

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  127

She talked a good deal of the Duchess of York,  who
continues the first favourite of the whole Royal Family.
She told me of her beautiful works,  lamented her indif
ferent health,  and expatiated upon her admirable distri
bution of her time and plan of life,  and charming quali
ties and character.

She asked me about Mr.  Lock and his family,  and
honoured me with an ear of uninterrupted attention
while I made an harangue of no small length upon the
chief in particular,  and the rest in general.  She seems
always to take pleasure in the quick gratification this sub
ject affords me.

Of her own Royal daughters she permitted me also to
talk,  especially of my two peculiar idols.  And she gave me
a copious description of the new improvements still going
on at Frogmore,  with a detail of some surprises the King
had griven her,  by orders and buildings erected in the
gardens during her absence.

But what chiefly dwells upon me with pleasure is,
that she spoke to me upon some subjects and persons
that I know she would not for the world should be
repeated,  with just the same confidence,  the same reliance
upon my grateful discretion for her openness,  that she
honoured me with while she thought me established in
her service for life.  I need not tell my Susan how this
binds me more than ever to her.

Very short to me seemed the time,  though the whole
conversation was serious,  and her air thoughtful almost
to sadness,  when a page touched the door,  and said some
thing in German.  The Queen,  who was then standing
by the window,  turned round to answer him,  and then,
with a sort of congratulatory smile to me,  said,  "  Now
you will see what you don't expect — the King  !"

I could indeed not expect it,  for he was at Blackheath
at a review,  and he was returned only to dress for the

levee.

#          *          #          *  *          *

The King related very pleasantly a little anecdote of

128 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

Lady .  "  She brought the lit.tle Princess Charlotte,'*

he said,  "  to me just before the review.  '  She hoped,'
she said,  *  I should not take it ill,  for,  having men
tioned it to the child,  she built so upon it that she
had thought of nothing else!'  Now this,"  cried he,
laughing heartily,  "  was pretty strong !  How can she
know what a child is thinking of before it.  can speak?"

I was very happy at the fondness they both expressed
for the little Princess.  "A sweet little creature,"  the King
called her;  "A most lovely child,"  the Queen turned to
me to add;  and the King said he had taken her upon
his horse,  and given her a little ride,  before the regiment
rode up to him.  '•  'T is very odd,"  he added,  "  but she
always knows me on horseback,  and never else."  "  Yes,"
said the Queen,  "when his Majesty comes to her on
horseback she claps her little hands,  and endeavours to
say  '  Gan-pa  !'  immediately."  I was much pleased that
she is brought up to such simple and affectionate acknow
ledgment of relationship.

The King then inquired about my father,  and with a
look of interest and kindness that regularlv accompanies
his mention of that most dear person.  He asked after
his health,  his spirits,  and his occupations,  waiting for
long answers to each inquiry.  The Queen anticipated my
relation of his astronomic work,  and he seemed much
pleased with the design,  as well as at hearing that his
prolegc,  Dr.  Herschel,  had been consulted.

I was then a little surprised by finding he had heard
of  '  Clarentine.'  He asked me,  smilingly,  some questions
about it,  and if it were true,  what he suspected,  that my
youngest sister had a mind to do as I had done,  and
bring out a work in secret?  I was very much pleased
then when the Queen said,  "  I have seen it,  sir,  and it is
very pretty."

There was time but for little more,  as he was to change
his dress for the levee;  and I left their presence more
attached to them,  I really think,  than ever.

I then,  by her kind appointment,  returned to my lovely

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  129

and loved Princess Augusta.  Her hair-dresser was
just gone,  and she was proceeding in equipping her
self.  "  If you can bear to see all this work,"  cried
she,  "  pray,  come and sit with me,  my dear Madame
d'Arblay.*

Nothing could be more expeditious than her attiring
herself, — nothing more careless than her examination
how it succeeded.  But judge my confusion and embar
rassment,  when,  upon my saying I came to petition for
the rest of the story she had just begun,  and her answer
ing by inquiring what it was about,  1 could not tell !  It
had entirely escaped my memory ;  and though I sought
every way I could suggest to recall it,  I so entirely failed,
that,  after her repeated demands,  I was compelled honestly
to own that the commotion I had been put in by my in
terview with their Majesties had really driven it from my
mind.

She bore this with the true good humour of good sense  ;
but I was most excessively ashamed.

She then resumed the reigning subject of the day,  Ad
miral Duncan's victory ;  and this led to speak again of
the Orange family ;  but she checked what seemed occur
ring to her about them,  till her wardrobe-woman had
done and was dismissed  ;  then,  hurrying her away,  while
she sat down by me,  putting on her long and superb dia
mond earrings herself,  and without even turning towards
a glass,  she said,  "  I don't like much to talk of that
family before the servants,  for I am told they already
think the King too good to them."

The Princess of Orange is,  I find,  a great favourite
with them all ;  the Prince Frederick also,  I believe,  they
like very much ;  but the Prince himself,  she said,  "  has
never,  in fact,  had his education finished.  He was mar
ried quite a boy ;  but,  being married,  concluded himself
a man,  and not only turned off all his instructors,  but
thought it unnecessary to ask,  or hear,  counsel or advice
of any one.  He is like a fallow field, — tliat is,  not of a
soil that can't be improved,  but one that has been left

VOL.    VI.  K

130 DIARY AND LETTERS      [PART III.

quite to itself,  and therefore has no materials put in it for
improvement"

She then told me that she had hindered him,  with
great difficulty,  from going to a great dinner,  given at the
Mansion-house,  upon the victory of Admiral Duncan.
It was not,  she said,  that he did not feel for his country
in that defeat,  but that he never weighed the impropriety
of his public appearance upon an occasion of rejoicing at
it,  nor the ill effect the history of his so doing would
produce in Holland.  She had the kindness of heart to
take upon herself preventing him ;  "for no one,"  says she,
"  that is about him dares ever speak to him,  to give him
any hint of advice ;  which is a great misfortune to him,
poor man,  for it makes him never know what is said or
thought of him."  She related with a great deal of hu
mour her arguments to dissuade him,  and his naive
manner of combating them.  But though she conquered
at last,  she did not convince.

The Princess of Orange,  she told me,  had a most supe
rior understanding,  and might guide him sensibly and
honourably ;  but he was so jealous of being thought led
by her counsel,  that he never listened to it at all.  She

fave me to understand that this unhappy Princess had
ad a life of uninterrupted indulgence and prosperity till
the late revolution ;  and that the suddenness of such ad
versity had rather soured her mind,  which,  had it met
sorrow and evil by any gradations,  would have been equal
to bearing them even nobly ;  but so quick a transition
from affluence,  and power,  and wealth,  and grandeur,  to
a fugitive and dependent state,  had almost overpowered
her.

A door was now opened from an inner apartment,
where,  1 believe,  was the grand collation for the Princess
Sophia's birthday,  and a tall thin young man appeared
at it,  peeping and staring,  but not entering.

"How do you do,  Ernest?"  cried the Princess;  "I
hope you are well ;  only pray do shut the door."

He did not obey,  nor move,  either forwards or back-

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  131

wards,  but kept peering and peeping.  She called to him
again.,  beseeching him to shut the door ;  but he was de
termined to first gratify his curiosity,,  and,  when he had
looked as long as he thought pleasant,  he entered the
apartment ;  but Princess Augusta,  instead of receiving
and welcoming him,  only said,  "  Good by,  my dear Er
nest;  I shall see you again at the play."

He then marched on,  finding himself so little desired,,
and only saying,  "  No,  you won't ;  I hate the play."

I had risen when I found it one of the Princes,  and
with a motion of readiness to depart ;  but my dear Prin
cess would not let me.

When we were alone again,  "  Ernest,"  she said,  "  has
a very good heart ;  only he speaks without taking time
to think."

She then gave me an instance.  The Orange family
by some chance were all assembled with our Royal Fa
mily when the news of the great victory at sea arrived ;
or at least upon the same day.  <c We were all,"  said
she,  "distressed for them upon so trying an occasion:
and at supper we talked,  of course,  of every other sub
ject;  but Ernest,  quite uneasy at the forbearance,  said
to me,  '  You don't think I won't drink Admiral Duncan's
health to-night  ?  '  <  Hush  !  '  cried I.  '  That 's very hard
indeed ! '  said he,  quite loud.  I saw the Princess of
Orange looking at him,  and was sure she had heard him  ;
I trod upon his foot,  and made him turn to her.  She
looked so disturbed,  that he saw she had understood him,
and he coloured very high.  The Princess of Orange,
then said,  f I hope my being here will be no restraint
upon anybody :  I know what must be the subject of
everybody's thoughts,  and I beg I may not prevent its
being so of their discourse.'  Poor Ernest now was so
sorry,  he was ready to die,  and the tears started into his
eyes ;  and he would not have given his toast after this for
all the world."

The play they were going to was  '  The Merchant of
Venice,'  to*  see a new actress,  just now much talked of —

K2

132 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

Miss Betterton  ;  and the indulgent King,  hearing she

was extremely frightened at the thoughts of appearing

before him,  desired she might choose her own part for

'  the first exhibition in his presence.     She fixed upon

'  Portia.

In speaking of Miss Farren's marriage with the Earl
of Derby,  she displayed that sweet mind which her state
and station has so wholly escaped sullying ;  for,  far from
expressing either horror,  or resentment,  or derision at an
actress being elevated to the rank of second countess of
England,  she told me,  with an air of satisfaction,  that she
was informed she had behaved extremely well since
her marriage,  and done many generous and charitable
actions.

She spoke with pleasure,  too,  of the high marriage made
by another actress,  Miss Wallis,  who has preserved a spot
less character,  and is now the wife of a man of fortune
and family,  Mr.  Campbell.

In mentioning Mrs.  Siddons,  and her great and affect
ing powers,  she much surprised me by intelligence that
she had bought the proprietorship of Sadler's Wells.  I
could not hear it without some amusement ;  it seemed,  I
said,  so extraordinary a combination — so degrading a
one,  indeed, — that of the first tragic actress,  the living
Melpomene,  and something so burlesque as Sadler's
Wells.  She laughed,  and said it offered her a very lu
dicrous image,  for  "Mrs.  Siddons and Sadler's Wells,"
•said she,  "  seems to me as ill fitted as the dish they call
a toad in a hole ;  which I never saw,  but always think of
•with anger, — putting a noble sirloin of beef into a poor,
paltry batter-pudding !  "

The door now again opened,  and another Royal per
sonage put in his head ;  and upon the Princess saying,
«  How d'ye do,  William  ?  "  I recollected the Duke of
Clarence.

I rose,  of course,  and he made a civil bow to my courtsy.
The Princess asked him about the House of Lords the
preceding evening,  where I found he had spoken very

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  133

handsomely and generously in eulogium of Admiral
Duncan.

Finding he was inclined to stay,  the Princess said to
me,  "  Madame d'Arblay,  I beg you will sit down."

"  Pray,  madam,"  said the Duke,  with a formal motion
of his hand,  "  let me beg you to be seated."

"  You know — you recollect.  Madame d'Arblay,  don't
you,  William  ?  "  said the Princess.

He bowed civilly an affirmative,  and then began talk
ing to me of Chesington.  How I grieved poor dear
Kitty was gone  !  How great would have been her gratifi
cation to have heard that he mentioned her,  and with an
air of kindness,  as if he had really entered into the solid
goodness of her character.  I was much surprised and
much pleased,  yet not without some perplexity and some
embarrassment,  as his knowledge of the excellent Kitty
was from her being the dupe of the mistress of his aide-
de-camp.

The Princess,  however,  saved me any confusion be
yond apprehension,  for she asked not one question.  He
moved on towards the next apartment,  and we were again
alone.

She then talked to me a great deal of him,  and gave
me,  admirably,  his character.  She is very partial to him,
but by no means blindly.  He had very good parts,  she
said,  but seldom did them justice.  "  If he has some
thing of high importance to do,"  she continued,  "he will
exert himself to the utmost,  and do it really well ;  but
otherwise,  he is so fond of his ease,  he lets everything
take its course.  He must do a great deal,  or nothing.
However,  I really think,  if he takes pains,  he may make
something of a speaker by and by in the House."

She related a visit he had made at Lady Mary Dun
can's,  at Hampton Court,  upon hearing Admiral Duncan
was there ;  and told me the whole and most minute par
ticulars of the battle,  as they were repeated by his Royal
Highness from the Admiral's own account.  But you will
dispense with the martial detail from me.  "  Lady
Mary,"  cried she,  "  is quite enchanted with her gallant

134 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

nephew.  '  I used to look,'  says she, '  for honour and glory

from my other side,  the T s ;  but I receive it only

from the Duncans!  As to the T s,  what 'good do

they do their country  ? — why,  they play all day at tennis,
and learn with vast skill to notch and scotch and go one  !
And that 's what their country gets from them  !  '

I thought now I should certainly be dismissed,  for a
page came to the door to announce that the Duke of
York was arrived  :  but she only said,  "  Very well ;  pray
shut the door  ;"  which seemed her gentle manner of hav
ing it understood she would not be disturbed,  as she used
the same words when messages were brought her from
the Princesses Elizabeth and Mary.

She spoke again of the Duchess of York with the same
fondness as at Windsor.  "  I told you before,"  she said,
"  I loved her like one of my own sisters,  and I can tell
you no more :  and she knows it ;  for one day she was
taken ill,  and fainted,  and we put her upon one of our
beds,  and got her everything we could think of ourselves,
and let nobody else wait upon her  ;  and when she re
vived she said to my brother,  '  These are my sisters — I
am sure they are  !  they must be my own !  '

Our next and last interruption,  I think,  was from a
very gentle tap at the door,  and a  "  May I come in  ?  "
from a soft voice,  while the lock was turned,  and a youth
ful and very lovely female put in her head.

The Princess immediately rose,  and said,  "O yes,"  and
held out her two hands to her ;  turning at the same time
to me,  and saying,  "  Princess Sophia."

I found it was the Duke of Gloucester's daughter.
She is very fat,  with very fine eyes,  a bright,  even daz
zling bloom,  fine teeth,  a beautiful skin,  and a look of
extreme modesty and sweetness.

She courtesied to me so distinguishingly,  that I was
almost confused by her condescension,  fearing she might
imagine,  from finding me seated with the Princess Au
gusta,  and in such close conference,  I was somebody.

"  You look so fine and so grand,"  cried she,  examining
the Princess's attire,  which was very superb in silver

1797]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  135

and diamonds,  "  that I am almost afraid to come near
you  !"

Her own dress was perfectly simple,  though remark
ably elegant.

"  O ! — I hate myself when so fine  ! "  cried Princess
Augusta  ;  "  I cannot bear it ;  but there is no help — the
people at the play always expect it."

They then conversed a little while,  both standing  ;  and
then Princess Augusta said,,  "Give my love to the Duke"
(meaning of Gloucester),  "  and I hope I shall see him
by and by;  and to William"  (Meaning the Duke's
son).

And this,  which was not a positive request that she
would prolong her visit,  was understood ;  and the lovely
cousin made her courtsy and retired.

To me,  again,  she made another,  so gravely low and
civil,  that I really blushed to receive it,  from added fear
of being mistaken.  I accompanied her to the door,  and
shut it for her ;  and the moment she was out of the room,'
and out of sight of the Princess Augusta,  she turned
round to me,  and with a smile of extreme civility,  and a
voice very soft,  said,  "  I am so happy to see you I — I have
longed for it a great,  great while — for I have read you
with such delight and instruction,  so often  !  "

I was very much surprised indeed :  I expressed my
sense of her goodness as well as I could ;  and she court-
sied again,  and glided away.

"  How infinitely gracious is all your Royal Highness's
House to me !  "  cried I,  as I returned to my charming
Princess ;  who again made me take my seat next her
own,  and again renewed her discourse.

I stayed on with this delightful Princess till near four
o'clock,  when she descended to dinner.  I then accom
panied her to the head of the stairs,  saying,  "  I feel quite
low that this is over  !  How I wish it might be repeated
in half a year instead of a year  !  "

"  I'm sure,  and so do I!  "  were the last kind words
she condescendingly uttered.

136 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART III.

I then made a little visit to Miss Planta,  who was ex
tremely friendly,  and asked me why I should wait an
other year before I came.  1 told her I had leave for an
annual visit,  and could not presume to encroach beyond
such a permission.  However,  as she proposed my call
ing upon her,  at least when I happened to be in town
or at Chelsea,  I begged her to take some opportunity to
hint my wish of admission,  if possible,  more frequently.

In the evening I went to the play with James and Ma
rianne.  It was a new comedy called '  Cheap Living,'  by
Reynolds or Morton,  and full of absurdities,  but at
times irresistibly comic.

Very soon afterwards I had a letter from Miss Planta,
saying she had mentioned to her Majesty my regret of
the long intervals of annual admissions;  and that her
Majesty had most graciously answered,  "  She should be
very glad to see me whenever I came to town."

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  137

PART IV.

1798.

DIARY RESUMED.

Talleyrand— Madame d'Arblay's interview wifh the Queen in
behalf of her father— The Princesses— The Duke of Norfolk
and the majesty of the people— Queen Charlotte's benevolence
— Royal contributions in support of the war — Madame Schwel-
lenberg's successor — The royal party at the theatre — Secrets
worth knowing — Mrs.  Chapone  —  Lady Strange — Mysterious
donation — Sheridan seconding Dundas — Last moments of Louis
XVI. — Professor Young — Rogers,  the poet — French emigrants
— Sir Lucas Pepys and Lady Rothes— Mr.  and Mrs.  Barbauld
— Mr.  Strachan,  the printer — Carnot's pamphlet— Madame
d'Arblay visits the Princess Amelia — Her Royal Highness's
condescension— Herschel— Lord Macartney.

Addressed to Mrs.  Phillips.

WestHamble.  '

JANUARY 18xH. — I am very impatient to know if
the invasion threat affects your part of Ireland.  Our
'  Oracle'  is of opinion the French soldiers will not go to
Ireland,  though there flattered with much help,  because
they can expect but little advantage,  after all the ac
counts spread by the Opposition of its starving condition ;
but that they will come to England,  though sure of
contest,  at least,  because there they expect the very road
to be paved with gold.

Nevertheless,  how I wish my heart's beloved here !  to
share with us at least the same fears,  instead of the divi
sion of apprehension we must now mutually be tormented

138 DIAHY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

with.  I own I am sometimes affrighted enough.  These
sanguine and sanguinary wretches will risk all for the
smallest hope of plunder ;  and Barras assures them they
have only to enter England to be lords of wealth un
bounded.

But Talleyrand! — how like myself must you have felt
at his conduct!  indignant — amazed — ashamed!  Our
first prepossession against him was instinct — he con
quered it by pains indefatigable to win us,  and he suc
ceeded astonishingly,  for we became partial to him almost
to fondness.  The part he now acts against England may
be justified,  perhaps,  by the spirit of revenge;  but the
part he submits to perform of coadjutor with the worst of
villains — with Barras — Rewbel — Merlin — marks some in
ternal atrocity of character that disgusts as much as dis
appoints me.  And now,  a last stroke*;  which appears in
yesterday's paper,  gives the finishing hand to his por
trait in my eyes.  He has sent  (and written)  the letter
which exhorts the King of Prussia to order the Duke of
Brunswick to banish and drive from his dominions all the
emigrants there in asylum ;  and among these are the
Archbishop of Rennes  (his uncle)  and — his own mother !

Poor M.  de Narbonne !  how will he be shocked and
let down !  where he now is we cannot conjecture :  all
emigrants are exiled from the Canton of Berne,  where he
resided  ;  I feel extremely disturbed about him.  If that
wretch Talleyrand has not given him some private
intimation to escape,  and where to be safe,  he must
be a monster.

We have no further news from France of any sort.

This very day,  I thank God  !  we paid the last of our
workmen.  Our house now is our own fairly  ;  that it is our
own madly too you will all think,  when I tell you the
small remnant of our income that has outlived this pay
ment.  However,  if the Carmagnols do not seize our walls,
we despair not of enjoying,  in defiance of all straitness
and strictness,  our dear dwelling to our hearts'  content.
But we are reducing our expenses and way of life,  in

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  139

order to go on,  in a mariner you would laugh to see,
though almost cry to hear.

But I never forget Dr.  Johnson's words.  When some
body said that a certain person  "  had no turn for eco
nomy,"  he answered,  "  Sir,  you might as well say that
he has no turn for honesty."

We know nothing yet of our taxes — nothing of our as
sessments  ;  but we are of good courage,  and so pleased
with our maisonnette,  we think nothing too dear for it,
provided we can but exist in it.

I should like much to know how you stand affected
about the assessment,  and about the invasion.

0 that all these public troubles would accelerate your
return  !  private blessings they would then,  at least,  prove.
Ah,  my Susan,  how do I yearn for some little ray upon
this subject !

Charles and his family are at Bath,  arid Charlotte is
gone to them for a fortnight.  All accounts that reach
me of all the house and race are well.  Mr.  Lock gives
us very frequent peeps indeed,  and looks with such bene
volent pleasure at our dear cottage and its environs !  and
seems to say,  "  I brought all this to bear!"  and to feel happy
in the noble trust he placed in our self-belief that he
might venture to show that kind courage without which
we could never have been united,  All this retrospection
is expressed by his penetrating eyes at every visit.  He
rarely alights ;  but I frequently enter the phaeton,  and
take a conversation in an airing.  And when he comes
without his precious Amelia,  he indulges my Alex,  in

being our third.

******  *

And now I have to prepare another Court relation for
my dearest Susanna.

1 received on Wednesday morn a letter from our
dearest father,  telling me he feared he should be forced
to quit his Chelsea apartments,  from a new arrangement
among the officers,  and wishing me to represent his dif
ficulties,  his books,  health,  time of life,  and other circum-

140 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

stances,  through Miss Planta,  to the Queen.  M.  d'Arblay
and I both thought that,  if I had any chance of being of
the smallest use,  it would be by endeavouring to obtain
an audience — not by letter;  and as the most remote hope
of success was sufficient to urge every exertion,  we settled
that I should set out instantly for Chelsea;  and a chaise,
therefore,  we sent for from Dorking,  and I set off at
noon.  M.  d'A.  w ould not go,  as we knew not what accom
modation I might find ;  and I could not,  uninvited and
unexpected,  take my little darling boy ;  so I went not
merrily,  though never more willingly.

My dear father was at home,  and,  I could see,  by no
means surprised by my appearance,  though he had not
hinted at desiring it.  Of course he was not very angry
nor sorry,  and we communed together upon his appre
hensions,  and settled our plan.  I was to endeavour to
represent his case to the Queen,  in hopes it might reach
his Majesty,  and procure some order in his favour.

I wrote to Miss Planta,  merely to say I was come to
pass three days at Chelsea,  and,  presuming upon the gra
cious permission of her Majesty,  I ventured to make
known my arrival,  in the hope it might possibly procure
me the honour of admittance.

The next morning,  Thursday,  I had a note from Miss
Planta,  to say that she had the pleasure to acquaint me
her Majesty desired I would be at the Queen's house
next day at ten o'clock.

Miss Planta conducted me immediately,  by order,  to
the Princess Elizabeth,  who received me alone,  and kept
me tete-a-tete till I was summoned to the Queen,  which
was near an hour.  She was all condescension and open
ness,  and inquired into my way of life and plans,  with a
sort of kindness that I am sure belonged to a real wish to
find them happy and prosperous.  When I mentioned
how much of our time was mutually given to books and
writing,  M.  d'Arblay being as great a scribbler as myself,
she good-naturedly exclaimed,  ""  How fortunate he should
have so much the same taste  ! "

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  HI

"  It was that,  in fact,"  I answered,  "  which united us  ;
for our acquaintance began,  in intimacy,  by reading
French together,  and writing themes,  both French and
English,  for each other's correction/'

tc Pray,"  cried she,  "  if it is not impertinent,  may I
ask to what religion you shall bring up your son?'*

"  The Protestant,"  I replied ;  telling her it was M.
d'Arblay's own wish,  since he was an Englishman born,
he should be an Englishman bred, — with much more upon
the subject that my Susan knows untold.

She then inquired why M.  d'Arblay was not natural
ised.

This was truly kind,  for it looked like wishing our per
manently fixing in this his adopted country.  I answered
that he found he could not be naturalised as a Catholic,
which had made him relinquish the plan ;  for though he
was firmly persuaded the real difference between the two
religions was trifling,  and such as even appeared to him,
in the little he had had opportunity to examine,  to be in
favour of Protestantism,  he could not bring himself to study
the matter with a view of changing that seemed actuated
by interest ;  nor could I wish it,  earnest as I was for his
naturalisation.  But he hoped,  ere long,  to be able to be
naturalised as an Irishman,  that clause of religion not
being there insisted upon ;  or else to become a denizen,
which was next best,  and which did not meddle with re
ligion at all.  She made me talk to her a great deal of
my little boy,  and my father,  and M.  d'Arblay;  and
when Miss Planta came to fetch me to her Majesty,  she
desired to see me again before my departure.

The Queen was in her White Closet,  working at a
round table,  with the four remaining Princesses,  Augusta
Mary,  Sophia,  and Amelia.  She received me most
sweetly,  and with a look of far better spirits than upon
my last admission.  She permitted me,  in the most gra
cious manner,  to inquire about the Princess Royal,  now
Duchess of Wirtemberg,  and gave me an account of her
that I hope is not flattered ;  for it seemed happy,  and

142 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

such as reconciled them all to the separation.  When
she deigned to inquire,  herself,  after my dear father,  you
may be sure of the eagerness with which I seized the
moment for relating his embarrassment and difficulties.
She heard me with a benevolence that assured me,  though
she made no speech,  my history would not be forgotten,
nor remembered vainly.  I was highly satisfied with her
look and manner.

The Princesses Mary and Amelia had a little opening
between them ;  and when the Queen was conversing with
some lady who was teaching the Princess Sophia some
work,  they began a whispering conversation with me about
my little boy.  How tall is he  ? — how old is he  ? — is he
fat or thin? — is he like you or M.  d'Arblay?  &c.  &c. —
with sweet vivacity of interest, — the lovely Princess Amelia
finishing her listening to my every answer with a  "  dear
little thing!"  that made me long to embrace her as I
have done in her childhood.  She is now full as tall as
Princess Royal,  and as much formed ;  she looks seven
teen,  though only fourteen,  but has an innocence,  an
Hebe blush,  an air of modest candour,  and a gentleness
so caressingly inviting,  of voice and eye,  that I have seldom
seen a more captivating young creature.

Then they talked of my new house,  and inquired about
every room it contained  ;  and then of our grounds,  and
they were mightily diverted with the mixtures of roses
and cabbages,  sweet briers and potatoes,  &c.

The Queen,  catching the domestic theme,  presently
made inquiries herself,  both as to the building and the
child,  asking,  with respect to the latter,  f<  Is he here?''
as if she meant in the palace.  I told her I had come so
unexpectedly myself upon my father's difficulties,  that I
had not this time brought my little shadow.  I believed,
however,  I should fetch him,  as,  if I lengthened my stay,
M.  d'Arblay would come also.  "To be sure  !"  she said,
as if feeling the trio's full objections to separating.

She asked if I had seen a play just come out,  called
'  He  's much to Blame;'  and,  on my negative,  began to

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  143

relate to me its plot and characters,  and the representa
tion and its effect ;  and,  warming herself by her own ac
count and my attention,  she presently entered into a very
minute history of each act,  and a criticism upon some
incidents,  with a spirit and judiciousness that were charm
ing.  She is delightful in discourse when animated by
her subject,  and speaking to auditors with whom,  neither
from circumstance nor suspicion,  she has restraint.  But
when,  as occasionally she deigned to ask my opinion of
the several actors she brought in review,  I answered I had
never seen them, — neither Mrs.  Pope,  Miss Betterton,
Mr.  Murray,  &c., — she really looked almost concerned.
She knows my fondness for the theatre,  and I did not
fear to say my inability to indulge it was almost my only
regret in my hermit life.  "  I,  too,5'  she graciously said,
"  prefer plays to all other amusements."

By degrees all the Princesses retired,  except the Prin
cess Augusta.  She then spoke more openly upon less
public matters, — in particular upon the affair,  then just
recent,  of the Duke of Norfolk,  who,  you may have heard,
had drunk,  at the Whig Club,  "  To the majesty of the
people ;"  in consequence of which the King had erased
his name from the Privy Council.  His Grace had been
caricatured drinking from a silver tankard,  with the
burnt bread still in flames touching his mouth,  and ex
claiming,  (l Pshaw  !  my toast has burnt my mouth."

This led me to speak of his great brick house,  which is
our immediate vis-a-vis.  And much then ensued upon

Lady  ,  concerning whom she opened to me very

completely,  allowing all I said of her uncommon excel
lence as a mother,  but adding,  "  Though she is certainly
very clever,  she thinks herself so a little too much,  and
instructs others at every word.  I was so tired with her
beginning everything with  '  I think,'  that,  at last,  just as
she said so,  I stopped her,  and cried,  •  O,  I know what

you think,  Lady ! '  Really,  one is obliged to be

quite sharp with her to keep her in her place."

144 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

Lady C ,  she had been informed,  had a consider
able sum in the French funds,  which she endeavoured
from time to time to recover;  but upon her last effort,
she had the following query put to her agent by order
of the Directory:  how much she would have deducted
from the principal,  as a contribution towards the loan
raising for the army of England?

If Lady C were not mother-in-law to a mi
nister who sees the King almost daily,  I should think this
a made story.

When,  after about an hour and a half's audience,  she
dismissed me,  she most graciously asked my stay at
Chelsea,  and desired I would inform Miss Planta before
I returned home.

This gave me the most gratifying feeling,  and much
hope for my dearest father.

Returning then,  according to my permission,  to Prin
cess Elizabeth,  she again took up her netting,  and made
me sit by her.  We talked a good deal of the new-married
daughter of Lady Templetown,  and she was happy,  she
said,  to hear from me that the ceremony was performed
by her own favourite Bishop of Durham,  for she was sure
a blessing would attend his joining their hands.  She
asked me much of my little man,  and told me several things
of the Princess Charlotte,  her niece,  and our future
Queen  ;  she seems very fond of her,  and says  't is a lovely
child,  and extremely like the Prince of Wales.  "  She is
just two years old,"  said she,  "  and speaks very prettily,
though not plainly.  I flatter myself Aunt Liby,  as she
calls me,  is a great favourite with her."

My dearest Princess Augusta soon after came in,  and,
after staying a few minutes,  and giving some message to
her sister,  said,  "And when you leave Elizabeth,  my dear
Madame d'Arblay,  I hope you'll come to me."

This happened almost immediately,  and I found her
hurrying over the duty of her toilette,  which she presently
despatched,  though she was going to a public concert of
Ancient Music,  and without scarcely once looking in the

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  145

glass,  from haste to have done,  and from a freedom from
vanity I never saw quite equalled in any young woman of
any class.  She then dismissed her hairdresser and ward
robe-woman,,  and made me sit by her.

Almost immediately we began upon the voluntary con
tributions to the support of the war;  and when I men
tioned the Queen's munificent donation of five thousand
pounds a-year for its support,  and my admiration of it,
from my peculiar knowledge,  through my long residence
under the Royal roof,  of the many claims which Her Ma
jesty's benevolence,  as well as state,  had raised upon her
powers,  she seemed much gratified by the justice I did
her Royal mother,  and exclaimed eagerly,  "  I do assure
you,  my dear Madame d'Arblay,  people ought to know
more how good the Queen is,  for they don't know it half."
And then she told me that she only by accident had
learnt almost all that she knew of the Queen's bounties.
"And the most I gathered,"  she continued,  laughing,
"  was,  to tell you the real truth,  by my own impertinence  ;
for when we were at Cheltenham,  Lady Courtown  (the
Queen's lady-in-waiting for the country)  put her pocket-
book down on the table,  when I was alone with her,  by
some chance open at a page where mamma's name was-
written  :  so,  not guessing at any secret commission,  I took
it up,  and read — Given by Her Majesty's commands —
so much,  and so much,  and so much.  And I was quite
surprised.  However,  Lady Courtown made me promise
never to mention it to the Queen  ;  so I never have.  But
I long it should be known,  for all that;  though I would
not take such a liberty as to spread it of my own judg
ment."

I then mentioned my own difficulties formerly,  when
Her Majesty,  upon my ill state of health's urging my re
signing the honour of belonging to the Royal household,
so graciously settled upon me my pension,  that I had been
forbidden to name it.  I had been quite distressed in not
avowing what I so gratefully felt,  and hearing questions
and surmises and remarks I had no power to answer.

VOL.  vi.  L

H6  .  DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

She seemed instantly to comprehend that my silence
might do wrong,  on such an occasion,  to the Queen,  for
she smiled,  and with great quickness cried,  "  O,  I dare
say you felt quite guilty in holding your tongue."  And
she was quite pleased with the permission afterwards
granted me to be explicit.

When I spoke of her own and her Royal sisters'  con
tributions,  100/.  per annum,  she blushed,  but seemed
ready to enter upon the subject,  even confidentially,  and
related its whole history.  No one ever advised or named
it to them,  as they have none of them any separate esta
blishment,  but all hang upon the Queen,  from whose
pin-money they are provided for till they marry,  or have
an household of their own granted by Parliament.  "  Yet
we all longed to subscribe,"  cried she,  "and thought it
quite right,  if other young ladies did,  not to be left out.
But the difficulty was,  how to do what would not be im
proper for us,  and yet not to be generous at mamma's
expense,  for that would only have been unjust.  So we
consulted some of our friends,  and then fixed upon
100/.  a-piece;  and when we asked the Queen's leave,
she was so good as to approve it.  So then we spoke
to the King;  and he said it was but little,  but he wished
particularly nobody should subscribe what would really
distress them ;  and that,  if that was all we could con
veniently do,  and regularly continue,  he approved it more
than to have us make a greater exertion,  and either
bring ourselves into difficulties or not go on.  But he
was not at all angry."

She then gave me the history of the contribution of
her brothers.  The Prince of Wales could not give
in his name without the leave of his creditors.  "  But
Ernest,"  cried she,  "  gives 300/.  a-year and that 's a tenth
of his income,  for the King allows him 3000/."

All this leading to discourse upon loyalty,  and then its
contrast,  democracy,  she narrated to me at full length
a lecture of Thelwall's,  which had been repeated to
her by M.  de Guiffardiere.  It was very curious from

1 798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  147

her mouth.  But she is candour in its whitest purity,
wherever it is possible to display it,  in discriminating
between good and bad,  and abstracting rays of light
even from the darkest shades.  So she did even from
Thelwall.

She made me,  as usual,  talk of my little boy,  and was
much amused by hearing that,  imitating what he heard
from me,  he called his father  "  mon ami,"  and tutoye'd
him,  drinking his health at dinner,  as his father does to
me — "  a ta sante"

When at length the Princess Augusta gave me the bow
of conge,  she spoke of seeing me again soon :  I said I
should therefore lengthen my stay in town,  and induce
M.  d'Arblay to come and bring my boy.

"We shall see you then certainly,"  said she,  smiling;
"and do pray,  my dear Madame d'Arblay,  bring your
little boy with you."

"And don't say anything to him,"  cried she,  as I was
departing;  "let us see him quite natural."

I understood her gracious,  and let me say rational,
desire,  that the child should not be impressed with any
awe of the Royal presence.  I assured her I must obey,
for he was so young,  so wild,  and so unused to present
himself,  except as a plaything,  that it would not be even

in my power to make him orderly.

*  *  *  *  #

My dear father was extremely pleased with what I had
to tell him,  and hurried me back to West Hamble,  to
provide myself with baggage for sojourning with him.
My two Alexanders,  you will believe,  were now warmly
invited to Chelsea,  and we all returned thither together,
accompanied by Betty Nurse.

I shall complete my next Court visit before I enter
upon aught else.

I received,  very soon,  a note from Madame Bremyere,
who is my successor.  [I have told you poor Mile.  Jacobi
is returned to Germany,  I think ;  and that her niece,  La
Bettina,  is to many a rich English merchant and settle

L2

148 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

in London.]  This note says;  "Mrs.  Bremyere has re
ceived the Queen's commands to invite Madame d'Arblay
to the play to-morrow night'* — with her own desire I
would drink coffee in her apartment before we went
to the theatre.

Could anything more sweetly mark the real kindness of
the Queen than this remembrance of my fondness for
plays  ?

My dear father lent me his carriage,  and I was now
introduced to the successor of Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  Mile.
Bachmeister,  a German,  brought over by M.  De Luc,
who travelled into Germany to accompany her hither.
I found she was the lady I had seen with the Queen and
Princesses,  teaching some work.  Not having been to
the so-long-known apartments since the death of Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  I knew not how they were arranged ,  and
had concluded Madame Bremyere possessed those of
Mrs.  Schwellenberg.  Thither,  therefore,  I went,  and was
received,  to my great surprise,  by this lady,  who was
equally surprised by my entrance,  though without any
doubt who I might be,  from having seen me with the
Queen,  and from knowing 1 was to join the play-party to
my ci-devant box.  I inquired if 1 had made any mis
take  ;  but though she could not say no,  she would not
suffer me to rectify it,  but sent to ask Madame Bremyere
to meet me in her room.

Mile.  Bachmeister is extremely genteel in her figure
though extremely plain in her face ;  her voice is gentle
and penetrating ;  her manners are soft,  yet dignified,  and
she appears to be both a feeling and a cultivated cha
racter.  I could not but lament such had not been the
former possessor of an apartment I had so often entered
with the most cruel antipathy.  I liked her exceedingly;
she is a marked gentlewoman in her whole deportment
though whether so from birth,  education,  or only mind,  I

am ignorant.

Since she gave me so pleasant a prejudice in her
favour,  you will be sure our acquaintance began with

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  149

some spirit.  We talked much of the situation she filled ;
and I thought it my duty to cast the whole of my resig
nation of one so similar upon ill health.  Mrs. Bremyere
soon joined us,  and we took up Miss Barbara Planta in
our way to the theatre.

When the King entered,  followed by the Queen and
his lovely daughters,  and the orchestra struck up ee God
save the King,"  and the people all called for the singers,
who filled the stage to sing it,  the emotion I was suddenly
filled with so powerfully possessed me,  that I wished I
could,  for a minute or two,  have flown from the box,  to
have sobbed ;  I was so gratefully delighted at the sight
before me,  and so enraptured at the continued enthusiasm
of the no longer volatile people for their worthy,  revered
sovereign,  that I really suffered from the restraint I felt
of being forced to behave decorously.

The play was the  '  Heir at Law,'  by Colman the
younger.  I liked it extremely.  It has a good deal of
character,  a happy plot,  much interest in the under parts,
and is combined,  I think,  by real genius,  though open to
innumerable partial criticisms.

I heard a gentleman's voice from the next box call
softly to Miss Barbara Planta,  "  Who is that lady  ?"  and
heard her answer my name,  and him rejoin  "  I thought
so."  I found it was Lord Aylesbury,  who also has re
signed,  and was at the play only for the pleasure of sitting

opposite his late Royal Mistress.

*****

About a week after this theatrical regale,  I went to the
Queen's house,  to make known I had only a few more
days to remain at Chelsea.  I arrived just as the Royal
Family had set out for Windsor;  but Miss Bachmeister,
fortunately,  had only ascended her coach to follow.  1
alighted,  and went to tell my errand.  Mrs.  Bremyere,
Mrs.  Cheveley,  and Miss Planta were her party.  The
latter promised to speak for me to the Queen  ;  but,
gathering I had my little boy in my father's carriage,  she
made me send for him.  They took him in,  and loaded

150 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

him with bonbons and admiration,  and would have loaded
him  \\ith caresses to boot,  but the little wretch resisted
that part of the entertainment.

Upon their return from Windsor,  you will not suppose
me made very unhappy to receive the following billet : —

March 8th,  1798.

MY DEAR FRIEND, — The Queen has commanded me
to acquaint you that she desires you will be at the Queen's
house on Thursday morning at ten o'clock,  with your
lovely boy.  You are desired to come up stairs in
Princess Elizabeth's apartments,  and Her Majesty will
send for you as soon as she can see you.  Adieu !
Yours most affectionately,

M.  PLANTA.

A little before ten,  you will easily believe,  we were
at the Queen's house,  and were immediately ushered
into the apartment of the Princess Elizabeth,  who,  to
show she expected my little man,  had some playthings
upon one of her many tables ;  for her Royal Highness
has at least twenty in her principal room.  The child,
in a new muslin frock,  sash,  &c.,  did not look to much
disadvantage,  and she examined him with the most
good-humoured pleasure,  and,  finding him too shy to
be seized,  had the graciousness,  as well as sense,  to
play round,  and court him by sportive wiles,  instead of
being offended at his insensibility to her Royal notice.
She ran about the room,  peeped at him through chairs,
clapped her hands,  half caught without touching him,
and showed a skill and a sweetness that made one
almost sigh she should have no call for her maternal
propensities.

There came in presently Miss D ,  a young lady

about thirteen,  who seems in some measure under the
protection of her Royal Highness,  who had rescued

her poor injured and amiable mother,  Lady D ,

from extreme distress,  into which she had been involved
by her unworthy husband's connexion with the in-

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  151

famous Lady W ,  who,  more hardhearted than

even bailiffs,  had forced certain of those gentry,  in an

execution she had ordered in Sir H.  D 's house^  to

seize even all the children's playthings!  as well as

their clothes,  and that when Lady D had but just

lain in,  and was nearly dying!  This charming Prin
cess,  who had been particularly acquainted with Lady

D during her own illness at Kew Palace,  where

the Queen permitted the intercourse,  came forward
upon this distress,  and gave her a small independent
house,  in the neighbourhood of Kew,  with every ad
vantage she could annex to it.  But she is now lately
no more,  and,  by the sort of reception given to her
daughter,  I fancy the Princess transfers to her that
kind benevolence the mother no longer wants.

Just then,  Miss Planta came to summon us to the
Princess Augusta.

She received me with her customary sweetness,
and called the little boy to her.  He went fearfully
and cautiously,  yet with a look of curiosity at the
state of her head,  and the operations of her friseur,
that seemed to draw him on more powerfully than her
commands.  He would not,,  however,  be touched,  al
ways flying to my side at the least attempt to take his
hand.  This would much have vexed me,  if I had not
seen the ready allowance she made for his retired life,
and total want of use to the sight of anybody out of our
family,  except the Locks,  amongst whom I told her his
peculiar preference for Amelia.  "  Come then/'  cried
she,  "  come hither,  my dear,  and tell me about her,
— is she very good to you? — do you like her very
much  ?"

He was now examining her fine carpet,  and no
answer was to be procured.  I would have apologised,
but she would not let me.  <f  'Tis so natural,"  she
cried,  "that he should be more amused with those
shapes and colours than with my stupid questions."

Princess Mary now came in^  and,  earnestly looking

152 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

at him,  exclaimed,  "He  's beautiful ! — what eyes ! — do
look at his eyes !  "

"  Come hither,  my dear,"  again cried Princess Au
gusta,  "  come hither ;"  and,  catching him to her for a
moment,  and,  holding up his hair,  to lift up his face
and make him look at her,  she smiled very archly,  and
cried,  "  O  !  horrid eyes  ! — shocking eyes ! — take them
away !"

Princess Elizabeth then entered,  attended by a page,
who was loaded with playthings,  which she had been
sending for.  You may suppose him caught now !
He seized upon dogs,  horses,  chaise,  a cobbler,  a
watchman,  and all he could grasp ;  but would not give
his little person or cheeks,  to my great confusion,  for
any of them.

I was fain to call him a little savage,  a wild deer,  a
creature just caught from the woods,  and whatever
could indicate his rustic life,  and apprehension of new
faces, — to prevent their being hurt ;  and their excessive
good nature helped all my excuses,  nay,  made them,
needless,  except to myself.

Princess Elizabeth now began playing upon an organ
she had brought him,  which he flew to seize.  "  Ay,  do !
that's right,  my dear!"  cried Princess Augusta,  stopping
her ears at some discordant sounds  :  "  take it to mon
ami,  to frighten the cats out of his garden.  "

And now,  last of all,  came in Princess Amelia,  and,
strange to relate !  the child was instantly delighted with
her  !  She came first up to me,  and,  to my inexpressible
surprise and enchantment,  she gave me her sweet beauti
ful face to kiss  ! — an honour I had thought now for ever
over,  though she had so frequently gratified me with it
formerly.  Still more touched,  however,  than astonished,
1 would have kissed her hand,  but,  withdrawing it,  say
ing,  "  No,  no, — you know I hate that !"  she again pre
sented me her ruby lips,  and with an expression of such
ingenuous sweetness and innocence as was truly capti
vating.  She is and will be another Princess Augusta.

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  153

She then turned to the child,  and his eyes met hers
with a look of the same pleasure that they were sought.
She stooped down to take his unresisting hands,  and,  ex
claiming,  "  Dear little thing  !"  took him in her arms,  to
his own as obvious content as hers.

"  He likes her  !"  cried Princess Augusta ;  "  a little
rogue  !  see how he likes her !"

"Dear little thing!"  with double the emphasis,  re
peated the young Princess,  now sitting down and taking
him upon her knee  ;  te and how does M.  d'Arblay do  ?"

The child now left all his new playthings,  his admired
carpet,  and his privilege of jumping from room to room,
for the gentle pleasure of sitting in her lap and receiving
her caresses.  I could not be very angry,  you will believe,
yet I would have given the world if I could have made
him equally grateful to the Princess Augusta.

This last charming personage,  I now found,  was going
to sit for her picture — 1 fancy to send to the Duchess of
Wurtemberg.  She gave me leave to attend her,  with my
bantling.  The other Princesses retired to dress for court.

It was with great difficulty I could part my little love
from his grand collection of new playthings,  all of which
he had dragged into the painting-room,  and wanted now
to pull them down-stairs to the Queen's apartment.  I
persuaded him,  however,  to relinquish the design without
a quarrel,  by promising we would return for them.

I was not a little anxious,  you will believe,  in this pre
sentation of my unconsciously honoured rogue,  who en
tered the White Closet totally unimpressed with any awe,
and only with a sensation of disappointment in not meet
ing again the gay young party,  and variety of playthings,
he had left above.  The Queen,  nevertheless,  was all
condescending indulgence,  and had a Noah's ark ready
displayed upon the table for him.

But her look was serious and full of care,  and,  though
perfectly gracious,  none of her winning smiles brightened
her countenance,  and her voice was never cheerful.  I
have since known that the Irish conspiracy with France

154 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

was just then discovered,  and O'Connor that very morn
ing taken.  No wonder she should have felt a shock that
pervaded her whole mind and manners !  If we all are
struck with horror at such developments of treason,
danger,  and guilt,  what must they prove to the Royal
Family,  at whom they are regularly aimed  ?  How my
heart has ached for them in that horrible business !

"  And how does your papa do  ?"  said the Queen.

"  He  's at Telsea,"  answered the child.

"  And how does grandpapa do  ?'*

<f He  's in the toach,"  he replied.

"  And what a pretty frock you've got on !  who made
it you,  mamma,  or little aunty  ?"

The little boy now grew restless,  and pulled me about,
with a desire to change his situation.  I was a good deal
embarrassed,  as I saw the Queen meant to enter into con
versation as usual ;  which I knew to be impossible,  unless
he had some entertainment to occupy him.  She per
ceived this soon,  and had the goodness immediately
to open Noah's ark herself,  which she had meant he
should take away with him to examine and possess at
once.  But he was now soon in raptures ;  and,  as the
various animals were produced,  looked with a delight that
danced in all his features ;  and when any appeared of
which he knew the name,  he capered with joy  ;  such as,
"  O  !  a tow  [cow]  !"  But,  at the dog,  he clapped his
little hands,  and running close to her Majesty,  leant upon
her lap,  exclaiming,  "  O ;  it's bow wow  !"

"  And do you know this,  little man  ?"  said the Queen,
showing him a cat.

t(  Yes,"  cried he,  again jumping as he leant upon her,
"  its name is tailed pussey  !"

And,  at the appearance of Noah,  in a green mantle,
and leaning on a stick,  he said,  "  At's  [that's]  the shep
herd's boy 1"

The Queen now inquired about my dear father,  and
heard all I had to say relative to his apartments,  with an
air of interest,  yet not as if it was new to her.  I have

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  155

great reason to believe the accommodation then arrang
ing,  and since settled,  as to his continuance in the Col
lege,  has been deeply influenced by some Royal hint.  I
know they are extremely kind to my dear father,  and,
though they will not openly command anything not im
mediately under their control,  I have no doubt they have
made known they wished such an accommodation might
be brought about.

I imagine she had just heard of the marriage of Char
lotte,  for she inquired after my sister Frances,  whom she
never had mentioned before since I quitted my post.  I
was obliged briefly to relate the transaction,  seeking to
adorn it,  by stating Mr.  Broome's being the author of
f Simkin's Letters.'  She agreed in their uncommon wit
and humour.

My little rebel,  meanwhile,  finding his animals were
not given into his own hands,  but removed from their
mischief,  was struggling all this time to get at the Tun-
bridge-ware of the Queen's work-box,  and,  in defiance of
all my efforts to prevent him,  he seized one piece,  which
he called a hammer,  and began violently knocking the
table with it.  I would fain have taken it away silently ;
but he resisted such grave authority,  and so continually
took it back,  that the Queen,  to my great confusion,  now
gave it him.  Soon,  however,  tired also of this,  he ran
away from me into the next room,  which was their Ma
jesties'  bed-room,  and in which were all the jewels ready
to take to St.  James's,  for the court attire.

I was excessively ashamed,  and obliged to fetch him
back in my arms,  and there to keep him.  "  Get down,
little man,"  said the Queen ;  "  you are too heavy for your
mamma."

He took not the smallest notice of this admonition.

The Queen,  accustomed to more implicit obedience
repeated it ;  but he only nestled his little head in my neck,
and worked about his whole person,  so that I with diffi
culty held him.

The Queen now imagined he did not know whom she

156 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

meant,  and said,  "  What does he call you  ?  Has he any
particular name for you  ?"

He now lifted up his head,  and,  before I could answer,
called out,  in a fondling manner,  "  Mamma,  mamma  !"

"  O  !"  said she,  smiling,  "  he knows who I mean  !"

His restlessness still interrupting all attention,  in defi
ance of my earnest whispers for quietness,  she now said,
"  Perhaps he is hungry  ?"  and rang her bell,  and or
dered a page to bring some cakes.

He took one with great pleasure,  and was content to
stand down to eat it.  I asked him if he had nothing to
say for it ;  he nodded his little head,  and composedly
answered,  "  Sanky,  Queen  !"

This could not help amusing her,  nor me,  neither,  for
I had no expectation of quite so succinct an answer.

The carriages were now come for St.  James's,  and the
Princesses Augusta and Elizabeth came into the apart
ment.  The little monkey,  in a fit of renewed lassitude
after his cake,  had flung himself on the floor,  to repose at
his ease.  He rose,  however,  upon their appearance,  and
the sweet Princess Augusta said to the Queen,  "  He has
been so good,  up-stairs,  mamma,  that nothing could be
better behaved."  I conld have kissed her for this
instinctive kindness,  excited by a momentary  \fiew of
my embarrassment at his little airs and liberties.

The Queen heard her with an air of approving,  as well
as understanding,  her motive,  and spoke to me with the
utmost condescension of him,  though I cannot recollect
how,  for I was a good deal fidgeted lest he should come to
some disgrace,  by any actual mischief or positive rebellion.
I escaped pretty well,  however,  and they all left us with

smiles and graciousness.

*****

You will not be much surprised to hear that papa
came to help us out of the coach,  at our return to Chelsea,
eager to know how our little rebel had conducted himself,
and how he had been received.  The sight of his play
things,  you will believe,  was not very disagreeable.  The

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  157

ark,  watchman,  and cobbler I shall keep for him till he
may himself judge their worth beyond their price.

I returned to the Queen's house in the afternoon to
drink coffee with Mile.  Bachmeister,  whom I found
alone,  and spent a half-hour with very pleasantly,  though
very seriously,  for her character is grave and feeling,  and
I fear she is not happy.  Afterwards we were joined by
Madame Bremyere,  who is far more cheerful.

The play was called  '  Secrets Worth Knowing  ;*  a new-
piece.  In the next bo-x to ours sat Mrs.  Ariana Egerton,
the bedchamber-woman to her Majesty,  who used so
frequently to visit me at Windsor.  She soon recollected
me,  though she protested I looked so considerably in
better health,  she took me for my own younger sister  ;
and we had a great deal of chat together,  very amicable
and cordial.  I so much respect her warm exertions for
the emigrant ladies,  that I addressed her with real
pleasure,  in pouring forth my praises for her kindness
and benevolence.

When we returned to the Queen's house my father's
carriage was not arrived,  and I was obliged to detain Mile.
Bachmeister in conversation for full half an hour,  while I
waited ;  but it served to increase my good disposition to her.
She is really an interesting woman.  Had she been in
that place while I belonged to the Queen,  Heaven knows
if 1 had so struggled for deliverance  ;  for poor Mrs.
Schwellenberg so wore,  wasted,  and tortured all my little
leisure,  that my time for repose was,  in fact,  my time of
greatest labour.  So all is for the best  !  I have escaped
offending lastingly the Royal Mistress I love and honour,
and  —  1 live at West Hamble with my two precious

Alexanders.

*****

I have not told you of my renewed intercourse with
Mrs.  Chapone,  who had repeatedly sent me kind wishes
and messages,  of her desire to see me again.  She was
unfortunately ill,  and I was sent from her door without
being named  •  but she sent me a kind note to Chelsea,

158 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

which gave me very great pleasure.  Indeed,  she had
always behaved towards me  \vilh affection as well as
kindness,  and I owe to her the blessing of my first ac
quaintance with my dear Mrs.  Delany.  It was Mrs.
Chapone who took me to her first,  whose kind account
had made her desire to know me,  and who always ex
pressed the most generous pleasure in the intimacy she
had brought about,  though it soon took place of all that
had preceded it with herself.  I wrote a very long
answer,  with a little history of our way of life,  and traits
of M.  d'Arblay,  by which her quick discernment might
judge both of that and my state of mind.

When we came again to Chelsea at this period,  our
Esther desired,  or was desired by Mrs.  Chapone,  to
arrange a meeting.

I was really sorry I could not call upon her with my
urchin;  but I could only get conveyed to her one evening,
when I went with our Esther,  but was disappointed of
M.  d'Arblay,  who had been obliged to go to West
Hamble.  This really mortified me,  and vexed Mrs.
Chapone.

We found her alone,  and she received me with the
most open affection.

Mrs.  Chapone knew the day I could be with her too
late to make any party,  and would have been profuse in
apologies if I had not truly declared I rejoiced in seeing
her alone.  Indeed,  it would have been better if we had
been so completely,  for our dearest Esther knew but few
of the old connexions concerning whom I wished to
inquire and to talk,  and she knew too much of all about
myself and my situation of which Mrs.  Chapone wished
to ask and to hear.  I fear,  therefore,  she was tired,
though she would not say so,  and though she looked and
conducted herself with great sweetness.

Mrs.  Chapone spoke warmly of  '  Camilla,'  especially of
Sir Hugh,  but told me she had detected me in some
Gallicisms,  and pointed some out.  She pressed me in a
very flattering manner to write again ;  and dear Hetty,

1798]  OF MADAME D'  A RELAY.  159

forgetting our relationship's decency,  seconded her so
heartily you must have laughed to hear her hoping we
could never furnish our house till I went again to the
press.  When Mrs.  Chapone heard of my father's diffi
culties about Chelsea,  and fears of removal,  on account of
his twenty thousand volumes, — "  Twenty thousand vo
lumes  !"  she repeated  ;  "  bless me  !  why,  how can he so
encumber himself?  Why does he not burn half?  for
how much must be to spare that never can be worth his
looking at from such a store  !  And can he want to keep
them all  ?  I should not have suspected Dr.  Burney,  of

all men,  of being such a Dr.  Orkborne !"

******

The few other visits which opportunity and inclination
united for my making during our short and full fortnight
were —

To Mrs.  Boscawen,  whither we went all three,  for I
knew she wished to see our little one,  whom I had in the
coach with Betty,  ready for a summons.  Mrs.  Boscawen
was all herself, — that is,  all elegance and good-breeding.
Do you remember the verses on the blues which we at
tributed to Mr.  Pepys? —

Each art of conversation knowing,
High-bred elegant Boscawen.

To Miss Th rales,  where I also carried my little Alex.

To Lady Strange,  whom I had not seen for more years
than I know how to count.  She was at home,  and alone,
except for her young grandchild,  another Bell Strange,
daughter of James,  who is lately returned from India
with a large fortune,  is become Member of Parliament,
and has married,  for his second wife,  a niece of Secretary
Dtindas's.  Lady Strange received me with great kind
ness,  and,  to my great surprise,  knew me instantly.  I
found her more serious and grave than formerly ;  I had
not seen her since Sir Bobert's death,  and many events of
no enlivening nature ;  but I found,  with great pleasure,
that all her native fire and wit and intelligence were still
within,  though less voluntary and quick in flashing out,

160 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

for every instant I stayed she grew brighter and nearer
her true self.

Her little grandchild is a delightful little creature,  the
very reverse of the other Bell in appearance and disposi
tion,  for she is handsome and open and gay ;  but I hope,
at the same time,  her resemblance in character,  as Bell
is strictly principled and upright.

Lady Strange inquired if I had any family,  and,  when
she gathered I had a little one down stairs in the carriage,
she desired to see it,  for little Bell was wild in the request.
ft But — have nae mair  /"  cried she;  "the times are bad
and hard, — ha'  nae mair!  if you take my advice,  you'll
ha'  nae mair !  you  've been vary discreet,  and,  faith,  I
commend you  !"

Little Bell had run down-stairs to hasten Betty and the
child,  and now,  having seized him in her arms,  she sprang
into the room with him.  His surprise,  her courage,  her
fondling,  her little form,  and her prettiness,  had astonished
him into consenting to her seizure ;  but he sprang from
her to me the moment they entered the drawing-room.

I begged Lady Strange to give him her blessing.  She
looked at him with a strong and earnest expression of ex
amining interest and pleasure,  and then,  with an arch
smile,  turning suddenly about to me,  exclaimed,  "Ah!
faith and troth,  you mun ha'  some mair  !  if you can make
'em so pratty as this,  you mun ha'  some mair !  sweet
bairn  !  I gi'  you my benediction  !  be a comfort to your
papa and mamma!  Ah,  madam!"  (with one of her deep
sighs)  "I must gi'  my consent to your having some mair !
if you can make  'em so pratty as this,  faith and troth I
mun let you have a girl !"

I write all this without scruple to my dearest Susan,
for prattiness like this little urchin's is not likely to spoil
either him or ourselves by lasting.  'T is a juvenile flower,
yet one my Susan will again,  I hope,  view while still in

its first bloom.

******

I was extremely pleased in having an interview again

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  161

with my old,  and I believe very faithful,  friend Mr.  Se-
ward,  whom I had not seen since my marriage,  but who
I had heard,  through the Locks,  was indefatigable in
inquiries and expressions of good-will upon every occa
sion.  He had sent me his compilation of anecdotes of
distinguished characters,  and two little letters have passed
between us upon them.  I was unluckily engaged the
morning he was at Chelsea,  and obliged to quit him
before we had quite overcome a little awkwardness which
our long absence and my changed name had involuntarily
produced at our first meeting;  and I was really sorry,
as I have always retained a true esteem for him,  though
his singularities and affectation of affectation always struck
me.  But both those and his spirit of satire are mere
quizziness ;  his mind is all solid benevolence and worth^

*  if  *  *  *  *

Good Mr.  punning Townshend called upon us twice,  and
showed me the telegraph that is fixed up at Chelsea,  and
was as simple,  and sensible,  and gentle,  and odd,  as ever.

And now I must finish this Chelsea narrative,  with its
most singular,  though brief,  adventure.  One morning,  at
breakfast,  my father received a letter,  which he opened,
and found to be only a blank cover,  with a letter enclosed,
directed  "  A Madame,  Madame d'Arblay."

This,  upon opening,  produced a little bank-note of
five pounds,  and these words  : —

"Madame d'Arblay need not have any scruple in ac
cepting the enclosed trifle,  as it is considered only as a
small tribute of gratitude and kindness,  so small,  indeed,
that every precaution has been taken to prevent the least
chance of discovery ;  and the person who sends it even
will never know whether it was received or not.  Dr.
Burney is quite ignorant of it."

This is written evidently in a feigned hand,  and 1 have
not the most remote idea whence it can come.  But for
the word gratitude I might have suggested many;  but,
upon the whole,  I am utterly unable to suggest any one
creature upon earth likely to do such a thing.  I might

VOL.  VI.  M

162 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV,

have thought of my adorable Princess,  but that it is so
little a sum.  Be it as it may,  it is certainly done in great
kindness,  by some one who knows 5/.  is not so small a
matter to us as to most others  ;  and after vainly striving
to find out or conjecture whence it came,  we deter
mined to devote it to our country.  There  's patriotism  !
we gave it in voluntary subscription for the war;  and it
was very seasonable to us for this purpose.

This magnificent patriotic donation was presented to
the Bank of England by Mr.  Angerstein,  through Mr.
Lock,  and we have had thanks from the Committee which
made us blush.  Many reasons have prevented my nam
ing this anecdote,  the principal of which were fears that,
if it should be known such a thing was made use of,  and,
as it chanced,  when we should otherwise have really
been distressed how to come forward or hold back,  any
other friend might adopt the same method,  which,  grate
fully as I feel the kindness that alone could have instigated
it,  has yet a depressing effect,  and I would not have it be
come current.  Could I,  or should I,  ever trace it,  I
must,  in some mode or other,  attempt retaliation.

Behold us now back again at our dear West Hamble.

Dr.  Burney to Madame d'Arblay.

April 24,  '98.
********

I HAVE terminated the twelfth book of my poem,
and transcribed it fair for your hearing or perusal.
Mrs.  and Miss Crewe,  and Miss Hayman  (now Privy-
purse to the Princess of Wales),  have been attending
Walker's astronomical lectures,  and wanted much to
hear some at least of my  "  Shtqff"  read to Windham
and Canning.  An evening was fixed,  when after dinner
Windham was to read us his Balloon-journal,  Canning a
MS.  poem,  and I a book of my Astronomy.

The lot fell on me to begin.     When I had finished the

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  163

first book,  "  Tocca lei"  quo'  I to Mr.  Windham.  "  No,
no,  not yet ;  another of your books first."  Well,  when that
was read,  ';  Tocca lei"  said I to Mr.  Canning.  "  No,
no,"  they all cried out,  "  let us go on, — another book."
Well,  though hoarse,  I read on;  Mrs.  Crewe relieved me,
and then Miss Hayman,  and then supper was announced j
and so I was taken in:  the rest,  and the  'Balloon'  and
MS.  poem,  are to be read comfortably at Mrs.  Crewe's
villa at Hampstead,  as soon as finished.

C.  JB.

Madame d*A.rblay to Dr.  Burney.

West Hamble,  Dorking,  April 25,  '98.

"Bonder"  my dearest Father?  —  But I am sure you do
not think it,  therefore I will not disgrace myself with a
defence.  But I have intended writing every day,  and
the constant glimmering hope that to-morrow I should
hear,  with the idea that you were always packing up and
removing,  have made another to-morrow and to-morrow
always keep off to-day.  Indeed,  that is the cruel trick
of to-morrow,  which does more mischief to one's fair re
solves than any philosophy of to-day ever rectifies.

I delight in the account of your conviviality ;  nobody
was ever so formed for society,  in its best state,  as my
dearest father.

How interesting is your account of M.  Clery !  I should
like extremely to meet with him.  If your list is not
closed of scrip,  my chevalier begs you will have the
goodness to trust him with the 6,y.  and enter his name.
Your description of him is just what his conduct had
made my mind describe him.

I am very glad to hear of your sweethearts,  old and
new,  but of Mrs.  Garrick chiefly.  I rejoice Mrs.  Carter
is so well again.  Does Lady Rothes tell you how nearly
we are neighbours  ?  We see her house whenever we see
our own  ;  it is a constant object.  But we have not yet
been very sociable,  for the weather would not do for my

164 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

carriage,  though hers,  before she went to town,  kindly
found its way to us three times.

Pray,  when next you can indulge me,  tell me how the
dinner went off at Lady Inchiquin's,  and if she seems
happy.  All you find time to name of those my old con
nexions is peculiarly interesting to me.

I have some hope the public affairs may now wear a
better aspect,  from the tremendous danger so narrowly
escaped of utter destruction,  and so notorious as to defy
the plausibility and sophistry of contest.

We have had papers,  through dear Charles,  up to
Monday,  and the King's message made me thrill through
every vein;  but the sign of Mr.  Sheridan seconding
Dundas struck me as a good to undo many an evil.  M.
d'A.  thinks it will show the Carmagnols the species of
friends who were to abet them,  beyond all the speeches
of all the ministers ;  for if even the opposition,  even the
supporters of the war being our aggression,  and the
Republic so glorious,  &c.,  point out the real aim of our
enemies, — that our money and credit is all they want,  that
their pretences of giving us liberty,  &c.,  are incapable
of duping even their admirers, — surely they must see that
their chance of reception here,  through our own means,  is
shallow and unfounded.  No very late news from our Susan.

I am so little generous or noble that I feel almost
vexed,  instead of glad,  that the twelfth book is finished  ;
for I had made a sort of regale to myself that something
should have been written of it in our chaumierc.  Don't
forget what we build upon this summer :  we shall dare
you with our fare and tackle,  our Alex.,  and our pro
spects — with our true joy in your sight ;  and your own
view of my virtuous companion at the daily cultivation of
his garden will supply to your kind paternal heart all
deficiencies,  and make you partake of our pleasure.
Adieu,  most dear Sir!  My mate embraces you with cor
dial respect.

F.  D'A.

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  165

Madame dArblay to Dr.  Burney.

West Hamble,  June 7,  '98.

INDEED,  my dearest.  Father,  M.  Clery's book has half
killed us ;  we have read it together,  and the deepest tra
gedy we have yet met with is slight to it.  The extreme
plainness and simplicity of the style,  the clearness of the
detail,  the unparading yet evident worth and feeling of
the writer,  make it a thousand times more affecting than
if it had been drawn out with the most striking eloquence.
What an angel — what a saint,  yet breathing-,  was Louis
XVI. ! — the last meeting with the venerable M.  de Males-
herbes,  and the information which,  prostrate at his feet,
he gives of the King's condemnation,  makes the most
soul-piercing scene,  and stopped us from all rending a
considerable time ;  frequently,  indeed,  we have been
obliged to take many minutes'  respite before we could
command ourselves to go on.  But the last scene with
the Royal Family,  the final parting,  is the most heart
breaking picture that ever was exhibited.

How much we are obliged to you for it,  dearest Sir,
infinitely as it has pained and agitated us!  It arrived by
the very same messenger that took my last letter to you,
with an account of our sweet Susanna.  How interested
it leaves one for the good writer,  the faithful,  excellent
modest M.  Clery !  I want a second part ;  I want to
know if he was able to deliver the ring and seal — if he
saw any more the unhappy Queen,  the pious Princess
Elizabeth,  the poor Madame Royale whom he left paint
ing,  and that fair lovely blossom the sweet Dauphin.
I feel extremely dissatisfied to be left in the dark about
all this.

I am shocked not to see your name in the subscrip
tion,  after an interest such as you have both felt and
shown for this worthy man ;  it is infinitely provoking
you knew not in time of the publication.  M.  d'Arblay
is vexed,  too,  not to have his own name there,  in testi
mony of respect to this faithful creature,  who will be

166 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

revered to his last hour by whoever has any heart for
fidelity,  gratitude,  and duty.

Have you Mr.  Twining still?  O that he would come
and mortify upon our bread and cheese,  while he would
gladify upon our pleasure in his sight!  The weather
now is such as to make bare walls rather agreeable,  and
without he would see what he loves in fair views,  and
what he so strikingly denominates  "  God's gallery of pic
tures  ;"  and our one little live piece would not,  I think,
excite in him much black bile.  If he is still with you,
do speak for us.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay io Mrs.  Phillips.

AFTER sundry abortive proposals of our new brother-
in-law,  Mr.  Broome,  for our meeting,  he and Charlotte
finally came,  with little Charlotte,  to breakfast and spend
a day with us.  He has by no means the wit and
humour and hilarity his  'Simkin's Letters' prepare for ;
but the pen and the tongue are often unequally gifted.  He
is said to be very learned,  deeply skilled in languages,  and
general erudition,  and he is full of information upon most
subjects that can be mentioned.  We talked of India,
and he permitted me to ask what questions I pleased
upon points and things of which I was glad to gather
accounts from so able a traveller.

Another family visit which took place this summer
gave us pleasure of a far more easy nature,  because
unmixed with watchful anxiety  ;  this was from Charles
and his son,  who,  by an appointment for which he begged
our consent,  brought with him also Mr.  Professor Young,
of Glasgow,  a man whose learning sits upon him far
lighter than Mr.  Broome's !  Mr.  Young has the bon
homie of M.  de Lally,  with as much native humour as
he lias acquired erudition  :  he has a face that looks all
honesty and kindness,  and manners gentle and humble;
an enthusiasm for whatever he thinks excellent,  whether

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  167

in talents or character,  in art or in nature ;  and is alto
gether a man it seems impossible to know,  even for a day,
and not to love and wish well.  This latter is probably
the effect of his own cordial disposition to amity.  He
took to us,  all three,  so evidently and so warmly,  and was
so smitten with our little dwelling,  its situation and simpli
city,  and so much struck with what he learned and saw of
M.  d'Arblay's cultivating literally his own grounds,  and
literally being his own gardener,  after finding,  by conver
sation,  what a use he had made of his earlier days in
literary attainments,  that he seemed as if he thought him
self brought to a vision of the golden age, — such was the
appearance of his own sincere and upright mind in
rejoicing to see happiness where there was palpably no
luxury,  no wealth.

It was a most agreeable surprise to me to find such a
man in Mr.  Professor Young,  as I had expected a sharp
though amusing satirist,  from his very comic but sar
castic imitation of Dr. Johnson's  'Lives,'  in a criticism
upon Gray's  '  Elegy/

Charles was all kind affection,  and delighted at our
approbation of his friend,  for the Professor has been such
many years,  and very essentially formerly — a circum
stance Charles is now gratefully and warmly returning.
It is an excellent part of Charles's character that he
never forgets any kind office he has received.

I learned from them that Mr.  Rogers,  author of the
*  Pleasures of Memory,'  that most sweet poem,  had ridden
round the lanes about our domain to view it,  and stood —
or made his horse stand, — at our gate a considerable time,
to examine our Camilla Cottage, — a name I am sorry to
find Charles,  or some one,  had spread to him ;  and he
honoured all with his good word.  I should like to meet
with him.

Our beloved father came to us in August for five days,
to our inexpressible delight.  He brought his present
work,  a poetical history of Astronomy,  with him,  and
read it throughout to us.  It seems to me a work to do

168 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV-

him great honour,  as well as to be highly useful to the
young in astronomical knowledge.

He brought Alex,  six little golden-covered books,  to
begin his library,  but he is grown now so extremely stu
dious,  that,  when not engaged with company,  or in dis
course upon literary matters,  it is evident he is impatient
of lost time.  Alex.,  therefore,  had not the chance of
occupying or amusing him he would have had some time
since;  this is easily accounted for by his way of life.

M.  la Jard spent nearly a week with M.  d'Arblay.
He was Minister-of-War at the unhappy 10th of
August;  and his account of his endeavours to save the
unhappy oppressed King on that fatal day,  by dis
suading him from going to the cruel Assembly,  and to
defend himself in his palace,  is truly afflictive.  His
own escape after his failures was wonderful :  he was
concealed a fortnight in Paris.  He is now tolerably
easy,  with regular economy,  in his circumstances,
receiving help privately through Hamburg from his
mother and brother.  He is a steady,  upright,
respectable character,  and wins and wears esteem.
He had a principal command,  before he was raised to
the ministry,  in the National Guard under Lafayette,
and with M.  d'Arblay.

M.  Bourdois,  also,  spent a week here twice.  He
was born and bred at Joigny,  and therefore is dear to
M.  d'Arblay by earliest juvenile intimacy,  though the
gradations of opinions in the Revolution had separated
them :  for he remained in France when M.  d'A.
would serve there no longer.  He became aide-de
camp to Dumourier,  and is celebrated for his bravery
at the battle of Jemappe.  He is a very pleasant and
obliging character,  and dotingly fond of little Alex.,
from knowing and loving and honouring all his family
from his birth ;  and this you will a little guess is some
thing of an avenue to a certain urchin's madre.  Be
sides,  I like to see anybody who has seen Joigny.

I was really quite sorry when he came again to take

-798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  169

leave,  upon voyaging to the Continent ;  but before that
time he brought hither M.  le Comte de Ricce,  the
officer whom M.  d'Arblay immediately succeeded at
Metz,  and a gentleman in manners,  deportment,  and
speech,  such as rarely is to be met with ;  elegantly
polite and well bred;  serious even to sadness,  and
silent and reserved ;  yet seizing all attention by the
peculiar interest of his manner.

As soon as he entered our book-room,  he exclaimed
"Ah,  de Narbonne  !"  looking at our drawing;  and this
led me to speak of that valued person,  with whom I found
he had always been much connected.  He corresponds
with him still,  and made me happy in talking of his hard
fate and difficulties,  when he told me he had some money
of his still in his hands,  which he could call for at plea
sure,  but never demanded,  though frequently reminded of
the little deposit.  But when I mentioned this to M.
d'Arblay,  he said he fancied it was only money that M.
de Ricce insisted upon appropriating as a loan for him  ;
for that De Ricce,  who,  by a very rich marriage,  and
entering into a commercial business with his wife's rela
tions  (Dutch people),  is himself as rich as if not an emi
grant,  is the most benevolent of human beings,  and lives
parsimoniously in every respect,  to devote all beyond
common comforts to suffering emigrants  !  His rich wife
is dead,  and he has married a cousin of hers,  who was
poor.  M.  d'Arblay says he knows of great and incredible
actions he has done in assisting his particular friends.  I
never saw a man who looked more like a chevalier of old
times.  He accompanied M.  Bourdois here again when
he came to take leave,  and indeed they left us quite sad.

He was going to Hambro'.

*  *  *  *

Lady Rothes,  constant in every manifestation of regard,
came hither the first week of our establishment,  and came
three times to denials,  when my gratitude forced open my
doors.  Her daughter,  Lady Harriet,  was with her :  she
is a pretty and pleasing young woman.  Sir Lucas

170 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

came another morning,    bringing my old friend Mr.
Pepys.

Alex,  was in high spirits and amused them singularly.
He had just taken to spelling ;  and every word he heard,
of which he either knew or could guess the orthography,
he instantly,  in a little concise and steady manner,  pro
nounced all the letters of,  with a look of great but very
grave satisfaction at his own performances,  and a familiar
nod at every word so conquered,  as thus: —

Mr.  Pepys.  You are a fine boy,  indeed  !

Alex.  B,  O,  Y,  boy.  (Every letter articulated with
strong,  almost heroic emphasis.)

Mr.  P.  And do you run about here in this pleasant
place all day long  ?

Alex.  D,  A,  Y,  day.

Mr.  P.  And can you read your book,  you sweet
little fellow  ?

Alex.  R,  E,  A,  D,  read.     &c.  &c.

He was in such good looks that all this nonsense won
nothing but admiration,  and Mr.  Pepys could attend to
nothing else,  and only charged me to let him alone.  "  For
mercy's sake,  don't make him study,"  cried Sir Lucas also;
"  he is so well disposed that you must rather repress than
advance him,  or his health may pay the forfeit of his ap
plication."

"  Of leave him alone  !"  cried Mr.  Pepys  :  tf take care
only of his health and strength  ;  never fear such a boy as
that wanting learning."

I forget if I have mentioned that Lady Rothes and Sir
Lucas  (the wife will come first here)  have bought Juniper
Hall — not Hole ;  as,  from its being lower,  the residence
M.  de Narbonne had was called ; — nor am I sure if
they had not made the purchase before you left us.  When
we returned our many visits,  we were let in by Lady
Rothes,  who was with only her daughter,  Lady Harriet,
and who told us the Princess Amelia had just passed by
with her suite,  in her way to Worthing.  I was so much
vexed not to have been a little earlier that I might have

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  171

had a glance of her lovely countenance,  that it quite
spoiled my visit,  by occupying me with regret.

Fatigue,  joined to a kind reception,  led us to make a
long visit at Lady Templetown's ;  and while we were
there,  Lady Henry Fitzgerald arrived.  You know,  I
dare say,  she was my old acquaintance Miss Boyle,
daughter to my friend Mrs.  Walsingham.  I had never seen
her since she was a mere girl  ;  but she recollected me the
moment she looked at me.  She had purposed repeatedly
coming to our cottage,  but Mrs.  Lock,  fearing it might
be inconvenient to us,  had deterred her.  I was very glad
to see the happiness and hilarity that beamed in her eyes
and spoke in her voice and manner.

The younger Lady Templetown seemed enchanted
with the view of our simple dwelling,  and all the more in
the romance of early youth,  unhackneyed and unspoiled ;
for seeing it unfinished and unfurnished,  and conceiving
that we could be happy and gay in such a state,  she ran
up-stairs,  uninvited,  and seemed longing to visit the
kitchen,  the bed-chambers,  and the tool-house.  The
name of a cottage had interested her,  and to know people
who inhabited one appeared to give her a romantic plea
sure that,  in her rank and situation,  seemed very amiable.

Amongst the Norbury visitors of this summer were the

V s,    now emigrated from Holland;    and reduced

from their splendid establishment to so small a little
dwelling,  at Islington,  that they call ours a great estate in
its comparison !  What lamentable changes has that
eventful and dreadful revolution brought to bear!  I
never hear but of one good change it has caused,  which
is that of name in a certain sister of yours.

*  *  *  *

I was extremely surprised to be told by the maid a
gentleman and lady had called at the door,  who sent in a
card and begged to know if I could admit them ;  and to
see the names on the card were Mr.  and Mrs.  Barbauld.
I had never seen them more than twice ;  the first time
by their own desire,  Mrs.  Chapone carried me to meet

72 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

them at Mr.  Burrows's  :  the other time,  I think,  was at
Mrs.  Chapone's.  You must be sure I could not hesitate
to receive,  and receive with thankfulness,  this civility from
the authoress of the most useful books,  next to Mrs.
Trimmer's,  that have been yet written for dear little
children  ;  though this with the world is probably her very
secondary merit,  her many pretty poems,  and particularly
songs,  being generally esteemed.  But many more have
written those as well,  and not a few better;  for children's
books she began the new walk,  which has since been
so well cultivated,  to the great information as well as
utility of parents.

Mr.  Barbauld is a dissenting minister — an author also,
but I am unacquainted with his works.  They were in
our little dining-parlour — the only one that has any chairs
in it — and began apologies for their visit ;  but I inter
rupted and finished them with my thanks.  She is much
altered,  but not for the worse to me,  though she is for
herself,  since the flight of her youth,  which is evident,  has
taken also with it a great portion of an almost set smile,
which had an air of determined complacence and pre
pared acquiescence that seemed to result from a sweetness
which never risked being off guard.  I remember Mrs.
Chapone's saying to me,  after our interview,  "  She is a
very good young woman,  as well as replete with talents  ;
but why must one always smile so  ?  It makes my poor
jaws ache to look at her."

We talked,  of course,  of that excellent lady ;  and you
will believe I did not quote her notions of smiling.  The
Burrows family,  she told me,  was quite broken up  ;  old
Mrs.  Amy alone remaining alive.  Her brother,  Dr.
Aiken,  with his family,  were passing the summer at
Dorking,  on account of his ill health,  the air of that town
having been recommended for his complaints.  The Bar-
baulds were come to spend some time with him,  and
would not be so near without renewing their acquaintance.
They had been walking in Norbury Park,  which they
admired very much  ;  and Mrs.  Barbauld very elegantly

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  1/3

said,  "  If there was such a public officer as a legislator
of taste,  Mr.  Lock ought to be chosen for it."

They inquired much about M.  d'Arblay,  who was
working in his garden,  and would not be at the trouble of
dressing to appear.  They desired to see Alex.,  and I
produced him ;  and his orthographical feats were very
well-timed here,  for as soon as Mrs.  Barbauld said
What is your name,  you pretty creature?"  he sturdily
answered,  "  B,  O,  Y,  boy."

Almost all our discourse was upon the Irish rebellion.
Mr.  Barbauld is a very little,  diminutive figure,  but well-
bred and sensible.

I borrowed her poems,  afterwards,  of Mr.  Daniel,  who
chanced to have them,  and have read them with much
esteem of the piety and worth they exhibit,  and real ad
miration of the last amongst them,  which is an epistle to
Mr.  Wilberforce in favour of the demolition of the slave-
trade,  in which her energy seems to spring from the real
spirit of virtue,  suffering at the luxurious depravity which
can tolerate,  in a free land,  so unjust,  cruel,  and abomi
nable a traffic.

We returned their visit together in a few days,  at Dr.
Aiken's lodgings,  at Dorking,  where,  as she permitted
M.  d'Arblay to speak French,  they had a very animated
discourse upon buildings,  French and English,  each sup
porting those of their own country with great spirit,  but
my monsieur,  to own the truth,  having greatly the advan
tage both in manner and argument.  He was in spirits,
and came forth with his best exertions.  Dr.  Aiken looks
very sickly,  but is said to be better :  he has a good coun
tenance.

The poor Mr.  Daniel,  whom you may remember,  as a
very good and melancholy French priest,  visiting us at
Bookham,  ventured over to France before the barbarous
4th of September,  believing he might be restored to
his friends ;  but he was seized,  imprisoned many months,
and then turned adrift into fresh exile,  penniless and
hopeless.  He returned so mournful,  so depressed,  that

174 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PARTl\.

we have,  perforce,  made much more intimacy with him
from compassion for his undeserved sufferings.  He lives
at Mr.  Swaine's,  the apothecary,  at Dorking,  upon the
little pittance he obtains from Government and a few
scholars to whom he teaches French.  He is now much
revived and cheered with the hope of a new turn in
affairs.

One new acquaintance we have found it impossible to
avoid.  The only house in West Hamble village which is
not occupied by farmers or poor people is now inhabited
by a large family from the City,  of the name of Dickenson.
They called here immediately upon our establishing our
selves in our cottage.  It was indispensable to return a
first visit.  You have been at the house,  my dearest Susan,
to see Madame de Broglie ;  it is now,  they say,  greatly im
proved.  Mr.  Dickenson,  or Captain Dickenson,  as his
name- card says,is a very shy but seems a sensible man,  and
his lady is open,  chatty,  fond of her children,  and anxious
to accomplish them.  She seems between thirty and
forty,  and very lively.  She is of French origin,  though
born here,  and of parents immediately English;  but her
grandfather was a M.  de Brissac.

A gentleman,  who seemed to belong to them but whom
we knew not,  meanwhile,  was yet more assiduous than
themselves to make acquaintance here.  He visited M.
d'Arblay while working in his garden,  brought him
newspapers,  gazettes extraordinary,  political letters with
recent intelligence,  and exerted himself to be acceptable
by intelligence as well as obligingness.  M.  d'Arblay,
at length,  one very bitterly cold morning,  thought it in
cumbent upon him to invite his anonymous acquaintance
into the house.  He knew not how to name him,  but,
opening the door where I was waiting breakfast for him
with Alex.,  he only pronounced my name.  The gentle
man,  smilingly entering,  said,  <f I must announce mine
myself,  I believe — Mr.  Strachan :"  and we then found
it was the printer to the King,  who is a Member of
Parliament,  son of the Andrew Strachan who was

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  175

the friend of Johnson and the principal printer of  '  Ca
milla/

Much recollection of the many messages of business
which had passed between us,  while unknown,  during the
printing of that long work,  made me smile also at his
name,  and we easily made acquaintance.  He has all the
appearance of a very worthy,  sensible,  unpretending man,
well-bred and good-natured.  Long connected with the
Dickensons,  he seems to have an apartment at pleasure
in their house,  and to love their children as if they were
his own.  He told us he had known Mrs.  Dickenson from
the time she was seven years old.

I have been eagerly,  though with great disgust,  wadinc*
through Carnot's pamphlet.  I think Mr.  Pitt might pay
in letters of gold for such authentic intelligence of the
frequent pecuniary distresses of the Directory,  as well as
for the many dissensions and evil propensities which must
be excited between the civil and military powers,  by the
anecdotes he has related and disclosures he has made.
He seems but few degrees less wicked than Barras,  Rew-
bel,  &c. ;  and those few,  perhaps,  only because a few
degrees less powerful.  Certainly there is nothing to im
press his readers with any respect for his superiority of
virtue upon more solid grounds.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Phillips.

West Hamble,  August 28,  '98.

IF I could find words, — but the language does not afford
any, — my dearest,  dearest Susan,  to tell what this final
blow has been to me,  I am sure I should be a brute to
make use of them ;  but after so much of hope,  of fear,
of doubt,  of terror,  to be lifted up at length to real
expectation,  and only to be hurled down to disappoint
ment  !  And you — sweetest soul ! — that can think of any
body else in such a situation  ! — for though your neigh
bours are so good,  Ireland is so unsettled,  in our estima-

176 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

tion,  that I believe there is hardly one amongst us would
not at least have parted with a little finger by the hatchet
to have possessed you for a few months in England.

I write because I must write,  but I am not yet fit for
it ;  I can offer no fortitude to my Susan,  and it is wrong
to offer anything else:  but I must write,  because I must
let her see my hand,  to tempt a quicker sight again of
her own to eyes which yearn after it incessantly.  Why
did the Major desire me to look after our old cottage at
Bookham?  and so obligingly,  so pleasantly,  so truly say
he was certain of the pleasure he gave me by the com
mission  ? — Can you tell  ?

M.  d'Arblay is at this time spending two days chez
M.  la Jard,  the last Minister of War to poor Louis XVI.
If he should return before Mrs.  Lock sends off the
packet,  1 am sure he will add a line.

I have many things to say and talk of,  but they all get
behind the present overbearing,  engrossing disappoint
ment,  which will take no consolation or occupation,  ex
cept my dear boy,  who fortunately was out of the way
when I first received it  ;  for else he would have used the
letter very ill :  when I got that which announced that
you were coming,  the one before the last,  in which the
Major himself wrote to James,  and which James most
kindly forwarded to me instantly,  saying,  <(  We may now
expect to see dear Susan in a few days ;"  those words from
him,  less easily elated than most of us,  so transported
me,  that I appeared to my poor Alex,  in deep grief
from a powerful emotion of surprise and joy,  which
forced its way down my cheeks.

The little creature,  who was playing on the sofa,  set
up a loud cry,  and instantly,  with a desperate impulse,
ran to me,  darted up his little hands,  before I could
imagine his design,  and seized the letter with such vio
lence,  that I must have torn it to have prevented him :
and then he flew with it to the sofa,  and,  rumpling it up
in his little hands,  poked it under the cushions,  and then
resolutely sat down upon it.  I was too happy at that

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  177

moment to oppose his little enterprise,  and he sat still till
my caresses and evident re-establishment brought him to
my lap.  However,  when I put him down and made up to
the sofa for my letter,  he began crying again,  and flying
to his booty,  put himself into such an agony that I was
fain to quiet him by waiting till I could take it unob
served  ;  yet he could not express himself better in words
than by merely saying,  "  I don't ike ou to ead a letter,
mamma !  " — He had never happened to see me in tears
before  :  happy boy  ! — and,  oh,  happy mother  !

The little soul has a thousand traits of character that
remind me of Norbury,  both in what is desirable and
what is fearful  ;  for he is not only as sweet,  but as im
petuous,  and already he has the same desire to hear me
recount to him his own good and bad conduct at the end
of the day that dear Norbury had when I visited Mickle-
ham.  Just now,  when we took leave for the night,
he said,  "  And what was I to-day,  mamma  ?  "  "  Good,
my dear.",  "But what was I to dinner?''  "A little
rude."  He then looks down very conscious,  but raises
his brightened eyes,  to say,  "And what are I now,  mam
ma?"  "  Quite good,  my love."

*  *  *  *  *

And now,  my beloved Susan,  I will sketch my last
Court history of this year.

The Princess Amelia,  who had been extremely ill since
my last Royal admittance,  of some complaint in her knee
which caused spasms the most deadfully painful,  was now
returning from her sea-bathing at Worthing,  and I heard
from all around the neighbourhood that her Royal
Highness was to rest and stop one night at Juniper Hall,
whither she was to be attended by Mr.  Keate the sur
geon,  and by Sir Lucas Pepys,  who was her physician
at Worthing.

I could not hear of her approaching so near our ha
bitation,  and sleeping within sight of us,  and be contented
without an effort to see her ;  yet I would not distress
Lady Rothes by an application she would not know how

VOL.  vi.  N

178 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

either to refuse or grant,  from the established etiquette
of bringing no one into the presence of their Royal High
nesses but by the Queen's permission.  So infinitely
sweet,  however,  that young love of a Princess always is
to me,  that I gathered courage to address a petition to
her Majesty herself,  through the medium of Miss Planta,
for leave to pay my homage. — I will copy my answer,
sent by return of post.

MY DEAR FRIEND, — I have infinite pleasure in ac
quainting you that the Queen has ordered me to say
that you have her leave to see dear Princess Amelia,
provided Sir Lucas Pepys and Mr.  Keate permit it.  &c.
£c.  &c.

With so complete and honourable a credential,  I now
scrupled not to address a few lines to Lady Rothes,  telling
her my authority,  to prevent any embarrassment,  for en
treating her leave to pay my devoirs to the young Prin
cess on Saturday morning, — the Friday I imagined she
would arrive too fatigued to be seen.  I intimated also
my wish to bring my boy,  not to be presented unless de
manded,  but to be put into some closet where he might
be at hand in case of that honour.  The sweet Princess's
excessive graciousness to him gave me courage for this
request.  Lady Rothes sent me a kind note which made
me perfectly comfortable.

It was the 1st of December,  but a beautifully clear
and fine day.  I borrowed Mr.  Lock's carriage.

Sir Lucas came to us immediately,  and ushered us to
the breakfast-parlour,  giving me the most cheering ac
counts of the recovery of the Princess.  Here I was
received by Lady Rothes,  who presented me to Lady
Albinia Cumberland,  widow of Cumberland the author's
only son,  and one of the ladies of the Princesses.  I
found her a peculiarly pleasing woman,  in voice,  manner,
look,  and behaviour.

This introduction over,  I had the pleasure to shake
hands with Miss Goldsvvorthy,  whom I was very glad to
see and who was very cordial and kind;  but who is be-

1798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  179

come,  alas !  so dreadfully deaf,  there is no conversing
with her,  but by talking for a whole house to hear every
word !  With this infirmity,  however,  she is still in her
first youth and brightness compared with her brother;
who.,  though I knew him of the party,  is so dreadfully
altered,  that I with difficulty could venture to speak to
him by the name of General Golds worthy.  He has had
three or four more strokes of apoplexy since I saw him.

I fancy he had a strong consciousness of his alteration
for he seemed embarrassed and shy,  and only bowed to
me,  at first,  without speaking.  But I wore that off after
wards,  by chatting over old stories with him.

The Princess breakfasted alone,  attended by Mrs.
Cheveley.  When this general breakfast was over,  Lady
Albinia retired.  But in a very few minutes she returned,
and said,  "  Her Royal Highness desires to see Madame
d'Arblay and her little boy."

The Princess was seated on a sofa,  in a French gray
riding-dress,  with pink lapels,  her beautiful and richly
flowing and shining fair locks unornamented.  Her break
fast was still before her,  and Mrs.  Cheveley in waiting.
Lady Albinia announced me,  and she received me with
the brightest smile,  calling me up to her,  and stopping my
profound reverence,  by pouting out her sweet ruby lips
for me to kiss.

She desired me to come and sit by her ;  but,  ashamed
of so much indulgence,  I seemed not to hear her,  and
drew a chair at a little distance.  ft No,  no,"  she cried,
nodding,  "  come here ;  come and sit by me here,  my dear
Madame d'Arblay."  I had then only to say  't was my
duty to obey her,  and I seated myself on her sofa.  Lady
Albinia,  whom she motioned to sit,  took an opposite
chair,  and Mrs.  Cheveley,  after we had spoken a few
words together,  retired.

Her attention now was bestowed upon my Alex.,  who
required not quite so much solicitation to take his part
of the sofa.  He came jumping and skipping up to her
Royal Highness,  with such gay and merry antics,  that it

N2

180 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

was impossible not to be diverted with so sudden a
change from his composed and quiet behaviour in the
other room.  He seemed enchanted to see her again,
and I was only alarmed lest he should skip upon her
poor knee in his caressing agility.

I bid him,  in vain,  however,  repeat Ariel's  '  Come unto
these Yellow Sands/  which he can say very prettily ;  he
began,  and the Princess,  who knew it,  prompted him to
go on  ;  but a fit of shame came suddenly across him — or
of capriciousness — and he would not continue.

Lady Albinia soon after left the room ;  and the Prin
cess,  then,  turning hastily and eagerly to me,  said,  "  Now
we are alone,  do let me ask you one question,  Madame
cl'Arblay — Are you — are you  —  [looking with strong
expression to discover her answer]  writing anything?  "
I could not help laughing,  but replied in the negative.
"  Upon your honour  ?  "  she cried earnestly,  and look
ing disappointed.  This was too hard an interrogatory for
evasion ;  arid I was forced to say — the truth — that I was
about nothing I had yet fixed if or not I should ever
finish,  but that I was rarely without some project.  This
seemed to satisfy and please her.

I told her of my having seen the Duke of Clarence at
Leatherhead fair.  "  What,  William?"  she cried,  sur
prised.  This unaffected,  natural way of naming her
brothers and sisters is infinitely pleasing.  She took a
miniature from her pocket,  and said,  "  I must show you
Meney's picture,"  meaning Princess Mary,  whom she
still calls Meney,  because it was the name she gave her
when unable to pronounce Mary — a time she knew I
well remembered.  It was a very sweet miniature,  and
extremely like.  "  Ah  !  what happiness,"  I cried,  "  your
Royal Highness will feel,  and give,  upon returning to
their Majesties and their Royal Highnesses,  after such
an absence,  and such sufferings  ! !>  "  O  !  yes ! — I shall
be so glad!"  she cried,  and then Lady Albinia came in
and whispered her it was time to admit Lady Rothes,  who
then entered with Lady Harriet and the Miss Leslies.

3798]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  181

When she was removing,  painfully lifted from her
seat between Sir Lucas and Mr.  Keate,  she stopped to
pay her compliments and thanks to Lady Rothes with a
dignity and self-command extremely striking.

F.  D'A.

Dr.  Burney to Madame cTArblay.

December 10th,  1798.

*  #  *  *

HKRSCHEL has been in town for short spurts,  and back
again,  two or three times,  leaving1 Mrs.  Herschel behind
(in town)  to transact law business.  I have had him here
during two whole days.  I read to him the first five
books without any one objection,  except a little hesita
tion at my saying,  upon Bailly's authority,  that,  if the
sun was to move round the earth,  according to Pto
lemy,  instead of the earth round the sun,  as in the Co-
pernican system,  the nearest fixed star in every second
must constantly run at the rate of  "  near a hundred thou
sand miles.'' — "  Stop a little,"  said he ; "  T fancy you have
greatly underrated the velocity required — but I will cal
culate it at home.'*  And at his second visit he brought
me a slip of paper,  written by his sister,  as I suppose he
had dictated — "  Hence we see that Sinus,  if it revolved
round the earth,'  would move at the rate of 1426 millions
of miles per second.  Hence the required velocity of
Sirius in its orbit would be above 7305 times greater
than that of light."  This was all that I had to correct
of doctrine in the first five books  :  and he was so
humble as to confess that I knew more of the history of
astronomy than he did,  and had surprised him with the
mass of information I had got together.

He thanked me for the entertainment and instruction
I had given him — "  Can anything be grander  ?" — and
all this before he knows a word of what I have said of
himself — all his discoveries,  as you may remember,  being

182 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IV.

kept back for the twelfth and last book.     Adad  !  I begin
to be a little conceited.

Mrs.  M.  Montagu has been singing our ditty at home
and abroad.  I have been at one bit of blue there.  Mrs.
M.  so broke down as not to go out — almost wholly blind,
and very feeble.

Did you know of Princess Amelia being at Sir
Lucas Pepys's,  in your neighbourhood,  time enough to
pay your respects to her Royal Highness?  I hear a good
account of her going on,  which gratifies me much.

You will probably see in last week's papers that Lord
Macartney is dead at the Cape of Good Hope.  But I
called myself at his house in town on Saturday,  to"  inquire
if any news had lately been received from his Lordship  ;
and Lady M.,  who happened to be at home,  sent her
compliments and thanks for inquiring;  and,  suppos
ing it occasioned by the report,  said that what had
appeared in the newspaper was not true;  there had
been no such account come to the India House as had
been said — nor to any one else.

God bless you,  and the dear gardener,  and the Alex-
andretto  !

C.  B.

1799'

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

183

PART V.

1799.

Mrs.  Chapone on a recent domestic affliction — Madame d'Ar-
blay's consolation— Death of Mr.  Seward-— Wesley— Visit to
Dr.  Herschel — The Royal Family on Windsor terrace — The
King's recognition of Dr.  Burney  —  His Majesty's music-
room — Conversation of the King — the Queen's kindness to

Madame d'Arblay — The Princess of W s — News from

France — State of Ireland — Letter from the Cornte de Narbonne
to the Chevalier d'Arblay— The Emperor's Hymn and Su-
warrow's march — Dancing Legislators.

Mrs.  Chapone to Madame d'Arblay.

MY DEAR MADAM, — If you have heard of the most
recent of all my afflictions, — the death of my darling
niece in childbirth  (which happened not quite a month
after the loss of my dearest brother), — you will not wonder
that I have not been able to thank you for your last kind
favour.  It grieves me to think of the anxiety you have
suffered for your lovely boy,  nor shall I ever forget the
tenderness you showed for me before you knew how com
pletely all hopes of comfort respecting this world for my
latter days were taken from me :  but the hopes of an
other,  I thank God,  draw every day into a nearer view,
and I trust will supply me with  "  patience,  sovereign o'er
transmuted ill."

I had,  with the folly and ignorance of human schemes,
thought of seeking an asylum from the aching void I
must every hour feel in London,  by changing my abode
to Winchester,  where I expected my two kind nieces
would soothe my heart and close my eyes ;  but this un-

184 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

expected and most afflicting stroke,  by taking away the
next dearest object of my affection,  has shown me where
only I can look for support,  and where 1 have hitherto
found it in as great a degree as I could have ex
pected.

Though I have still a niece,  for whom I have great love
and esteem,  I know not yet what her own plans may be,
nor whether Winchester will not now be the most melan
choly scene for us both that we could fix on  :  so that I
am inclined to no other exertion but waiting where I
am,  with humble submission and acquiescence,  for

"  Kind Nature's signal of retreat."

In the meantime I should be ungrateful for your kind
solicitude if I did not mention the comfort I receive from
that excellent man Mr.  Pepys,  whom you esteem,  but
whose worthy heart you do not half know,  and whom
compassion has improved,  from a delightful companion
and intimate old acquaintance,  to the most tender,  atten
tive,  and affectionate son to me.  All my other friends,
too,  have exceeded all my expectations in their attentions
to me.

I hope soon to hear that your heart is quite at rest
about M.  d'Arblay and your son.  Writing is at present
so difficult and painful to me that I must bid you adieu,
with the most grateful sense of your compassion for me
and every kind wish for yourself and M.  d'Arblay.

Ever,  dear Madam,
Your sincerely affectionate and obliged,

H.  CHAPONE.

Have you yet read Mrs.  H.  More's new work  ?  Don't
you be idle.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Chapone.

West Hamble,  April 4th,  "99.

IT was from your own affecting account,  my dear
Madam,  that I learned your irreparable loss,  though a

1799]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  185

letter by the same post from my sister Burney confirmed
the melancholy intelligence.  I will not attempt to say
with what extreme concern I have felt it.  Your  "  darling
niece,"  though I must now be glad I had never seen,  I
had always fancied I had known,  from the lively idea
you had enabled me,  in common with all others,  to form
of what she ought to be.  If this second terrible trial,
and the manner in which you have supported it,  had not
shown me my mistake,  I should have feared,  from the
agonized expression of your countenance — which I cannot
forget — in our last mournful interview,  that the cup was
already full !  But it is not for nothing you have been
gifted, — or that so early you were led to pray  "  the ill you
might not shun,  to bear."  Misfortunes of this accumu
lated — I had nearly said desolating — nature,  always of late
years sharpen to me the horrors of that part of the
French Revolution which,  to lessen the dread of guilt,
gives death to eternal,  sleep.  What alleviation can there
be for sufferers who have imbibed such doctrine  ?  I want
to disperse among them an animated translation of the
false principles,  beautiful conviction,  and final consolations
of Fidelia.  For since,  in this nether sphere,  with all our
best hopes alive of times to come,

"  Ev'n Virtue sighs,  while poor Affection mourns
The blasted comforts of the desert heart,"

what must sorrow be where calamity sees no opening to
future light  ?  and where friends,  when separated,  can mark
no haven for a future reunion,  but where all terminates
for ever in the poor visible grave  ? — against which all our
conceptions and perceptions so entirely revolt,  that I,  for
one,  can never divest the idea of annihilation from de
spair.

I read with much more pleasure than surprise what
you say of Mr.  Pepys :  I should have been disappointed
indeed had he proved a  "  summer friend."  Yet I have
found many more such,  I confess,  than I had dreamed of
in my poor philosophy,  since my retirement from the
broad circle of life has drawn aside a veil which,  till then,

186 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

had made profession wear the same semblance as friend
ship.  But few,  I believe,  escape some of these lessons,
which are not,  however,  more mortifying in the expecta
tions they destroy than gratifying in those they confirm.
You will be sure,  dear Madam,  but I hope not angrily,
of one honour I am here venturing to give myself.

Yours,  &c.

F.  D'A.
M.  d'A.  entreats you to accept his sincerest respects,

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Lock.

West Hamble,  May 2nd,  1799.

POOR Mr.  Seward !  I am indeed exceedingly con
cerned — nay,  grieved — for his loss to us :  to us I trust I
may say ;  for I believe he was so substantially good a
creature,  that he has left no fear or regret merely for
himself.  He fully expected his end was quickly approach
ing.  I saw him at my father's at Chelsea,  and he spent
almost a whole morning with me in chatting of other
times,  as he called it ;  for we travelled back to Streatham,
Dr.  Johnson,  and the Thrales.  But he told me he knew
his disease incurable.  Indeed,  he had passed a quarter
of an hour in recovering breath,  in a room with the
servants,  before he let me know he had mounted the
College stairs.  My father was not at home.  He had
thought himself immediately dying,  he said,  four days
before,  by certain sensations that he believed to be fatal,
but he mentioned it with cheerfulness ;  and though active
in trying all means to lengthen life,  declared himself
perfectly calm in suspecting they would fail.  To give
me a proof,  he said he had been anxious to serve Mr.
Wesley,  the Methodist musician,  and he had recommended
him to the patronage of the Harnmersleys,  and begged
my father to meet him there to dinner ;  but as this was
arranged,  he was seized himself with a dangerous attack,
which he believed to be mortal.  And during this belief,

1799]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  187

"  willing to have the business go on/'  said he,  laughing,
"  and not miss me,  I wrote a letter to a young lady,  to
tell her all I wished to be done upon the occasion,  to
serve Wesley,  and to show him to advantage.  I gave
every direction I should have given in person,  in a complete
persuasion at the moment I should never hold a pen in
my hand again."

This letter,  I found,  was to Miss Hammersley.

I had afterwards the pleasure of introducing M.
d'Arblay to him,  and it seemed a gratification to him to
make the acquaintance.  I knew he had been  "  curious'*  to
see him,  and he wrote my father word afterwards he
had been much pleased.

My father says he sat with him an hour the Saturday
before he died ;  and though he thought him very ill,  he
was so little aware his end was so rapidly approaching,
that,  like my dearest friend,  he laments his loss as if by
sudden death.

I was sorry,  too,  to see in the newspapers the expul
sion of Mr.  Barry from the Royal Academy.  I suppose
it is from some furious harangue.  His passions have no
restraint,  though I think extremely well of his heart,  as

well as of his understanding.

*****

Your affectionate

F.  D'A.

Dr.  Burney to Madame tf

Slough,  Monday morning,  July 22nd,  1799,
in bed at Dr.  Herschel's,  half-past five,
where I can neither sleep nor lie idle.

MY DEAR FANNY, — I believe 1 told you on Friday
that I was going to finish the perusal of my astronomical
varses to the great astronomer on Saturday.  Here I
arrived at three o'clock, — neither Dr.  nor Mrs.  H.  at
home;  went to London on Thursday on particular
business.  This was rather discouraging,  as poor Mrs.
Arne used to say when she was hissed ;  but all was set

188 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

to rights by the appearance of Miss Baldwin,  a sweet,
timid,  amiable girl,  Mrs.  Herschel's niece,  who told me
that if I was Dr.  B.  she was to entreat me to come in,  as
her uncle and aunt expected me,  and would be back at
dinner,  half-past three.

When we had conversed about ten minutes,  in came
two other sweet girls,  about the same age  (from fifteen
to seventeen),  the daughters of Dr.  Parry of Bath,  on
a visit here.  More natural,  obliging,  charming girls
I have seldom seen;  and,  moreover,  very pretty.  We
soon got acquainted.  I found they were musical,  and
in other respects very well educated.  It being a quarter
past four,  and the lord and lady of the mansion not re
turned,  Miss Baldwin would have dinner served,  accord
ing to order,  and an excellent dinner it was,  and our chat-
tation no disagreeable sauce.

After an admirable dessert,  I made the Misses Parry
sing and play,  and sang and played with them so delight
fully,  "you can't think!"  Mr.  and Mrs.  H.  did not
return till between seven and eight ;  but when they came,
apologies for being out on pressing business,  cordiality
and kindness,  could not be more liberally bestowed.

After tea Dr.  H.  proposed that we two should retire
into a quiet room,  in order to resume the perusal of my
work,  in which no progress had been made since last
December.  The evening was finished very cheerfully  ;
and we went to our bowers not much out of humour with
each other,  or with the world.

We had settled a plan to go to the chapel at Windsor
in the morning,  the King and Royal Family being there,
and the town very full.  Dr.  H.  and Mrs.  H.  stayed at
home,  and I was accompanied by the three Graces.  Dr.
Goodenough,  the successor of Dr.  Shepherd,  as canon,
preached.  I had dined with him at Dr.  Duval's.  He is a
very agreeable man,  and passionately fond of music,  with
whom,  as a professor,  a critic,  and an historian of the art,
I seem to stand very high  ;  but I could not hear a single
sentence of his sermon,  on account of the distance.  After the

1799]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  189

service I got a glimpse of the good King,  in his light-grey
farmer-like morning Windsor uniform,  in a great crowd,
but could not even obtain that glance of the Queen and
Princesses.    The day was charming.   The chapel is admi
rably repaired,  beautified,  and a new west window painted
on glass.     All was cheerfulness,  gaiety,  and good humour,
such as the subjects of no other monarch,  I believe,
on earth enjoy at present ;  and except return of creepings
now and then,  and a cough,  I was as happy as the best,  j
At dinner we all agreed to go to the Terrace, — Mr.,
Mrs.,  and Miss H.,  with their nice little boy,  and the
three young ladies.     This plan we put in execution,  and
arrived on the Terrace a little after seven.     I never saw
it more crowded or gay.     The Park was almost full of
happy people — farmers,  servants,  and tradespeople, — all
in Elysium.     Deer in the distance,  and dears unnumbered
near.     Here I met with almost everybody I wished and
expected to see previous to the King's arrival in the part
of the Terrace where I and my party were planted.    Lord
Harrington ;   Sir Joseph,  Lady,  and Miss Banks ;  the
Bishop of Salisbury ;  Dr.  Goodenough,  who invited me
to his house  (the Bishop of S.  pressed me to take a bed
at his palace in Salisbury,  where I visited my friend Mr.
Cox)  ;  Miss Egerton,  sweet Lady Augusta Lowther,  and
Sir William,  my great favourite,   with a long list of
et cceteras — all seemed glad to see the old Doctor,  even
before he was noticed by Royalty.

But now here comes Will,  and I must get up,  and
make myself up to go down to the perusal of my last
book,  entitled HERSCHEL.  So good morrow.

Chelsea,  Tuesday,  three o'clock.

NOT a moment could I get to write till now;  and I
am afraid of forgetting some part of rny history,  but I
ought not,  for the events of this visit are very memorable.
When the King and Queen,  arm in arm,  were ap
proaching the place where the Herschel family and I
had planted ourselves,  one of the Misses Parry heard the

190 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

Queen say to His Majesty,  "There's Dr.  Barney/*
when they instantly came to me,  so smiling and gracious
that I longed to throw myself at their feet.  "  How do
you,  Dr.  Burney?"  said the King.  (e Why,  you are grown
fat and young."  "  Yes,  indeed,''  said the Queen ;  "  I was
very glad to hear from Madame d'Arblay how well you
looked."  "  Why,  you used to be as thin as Dr.  Lind,"
says the King.  Lind was then in sight — a mere lath ;
but these few words were accompanied with such very
gracious smiles,  and seemingly affectionate good-humour
— the whole Royal Family,  except the Prince of Wales,
standing by — in the midst of a crowd of the first people
in the kingdom for rank and office — that I was afterwards
looked at as a sight.  After this the King and Queen
hardly ever passed by me without a smile and a nod.
The weather was charming;  the Park as full as the
Terrace,  the King having given permission to the farmers,
tradesmen,  and even livery servants,  to be there during
the time of his walking.

Now I must tell you that Herschel proposed to me to
go with him to the King's concert at night,  he having
permission to go when he chooses,  his five nephews
(Griesbachs)  making a principal part of the band.
"  And,"  says he,  "  I know you will be welcome."  But
I should not have presumed to believe this if His Ma
jesty had not formerly taken me into his concert-room
himself from your apartments.  This circumstance,  and
the gracious notice with which I had been just honoured,
emboldened me.  A fine music-room in the castle,  next
the Terrace,  is now fitted up for His Majesty's evening
concerts,  and an organ erected.  Part of the first act
had been performed previous to our arrival.  There were
none but the performers in the room,  except the Duchesses
of Kent and Cumberland,  with two or three general
officers backwards.  The King seldom goes into the
music-room after the first act ;  and the second and part
of the third were over before we saw anything of him,
though we heard His Majesty,  the Queen,  and Princesses

1799]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  191

talking in the next room.  At length he came directly
up to me and Herschel,  and the first question His Majesty
asked me was, — "  How does Astronomy go on  ?"  I,  pre
tending to suppose he knew nothing of my poem,  said,
4t Dr.  Herschel will better inform your Majesty than I
can."  "  Ay,  ay,"  says the King,  "  but you are going to
tell us something with your pen ;"  and moved his hand
in a writing manner.  "  What — what — progress have
you made?"  "  Sir,  it is all finished,  and all but the last
of twelve books have been read to my friend Dr.  Herschel."
The King,  then looking at Herschel,  as who would say,
"  How is it  ?"  "  It is a very capital work,  Sir/'  says H.
*'  I wonder how you find time  ?''  said the King.  ( '  I make
time,  Sir."  "  How,  how  ?"  "I take it out of my sleep,
Sir."  When the considerate good King,  "  But you  '11
hurt your health.  How long,"  he adds,  "  have you
been at it?"  "Two or three years,  at odd and stolen
moments,  Sir."  "Well,"  said the King  (as he had said
to you before),  "  whatever you write,  I am sure will be
entertaining/'  I bowed most humbly,  as ashamed of
not deserving so flattering a speech.  "  I don't say it to
flatter you,'*  says the King ;  "  if I did not think it,  I
would not say it."

After this he talked of his concert,  and the ar
rangement of the pieces performed that evening from
the oratorio of  'Joseph.'  His Majesty always makes
the list himself,  and had made a very judicious change
in the order of pieces,  which I told His Majesty,  as there
were no words in question which,  as a drama,  might re
quire the original arrangement.  He gave me his opinion
very openly upon every musical subject started,  and talked
with me full half an hour.  He began a conversation
with General Harcourt and two other general officers,
\vhich lasted a full hour,  and we durst not stir till
it was over,  past eleven.  All this Windsor and Slough
visit has turned out delightfully.  I have not room to
say anything more,  only God bless you all !

C.  B.

192 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V.

Madame cTArblay to Doctor Burney.
"  Fore George,  a more excellent song than t'other !"

West Hamble,  July 25th,  '99.

WHY,  my dearest Padre,  your subjects rise and rise, —
till subjects,  in fact,  are no longer in question.  I do not
wonder you felt melted by the King's goodness.  I am
sure I did in its perusal.  And the Queen  ! — her naming
me so immediately went to my heart.  Her speeches
about me to Mrs.  Lock in the drawing-room,  her interest
in my welfare,  her deigning to say she had never been
amongst those who had blamed my marriage,  though she
lost by it my occasional attendances,  and her remarking
*'  I looked the picture of happiness,"  had warmed me to
the most fervent gratitude,  and the more because her
saying she had never been amongst those who had blamed
me shows there were people who had not failed to do me
ill offices in her hearing;  though probably,  and I firmly
believe,  without any personal enmity,  as I am unconscious
of having any owed me ;  but merely from a cruel malice
with which many seize every opportunity,  almost involun
tarily,  to do mischief,  and most especially to undermine
at Court any one presumed to be in any favour.  And,
still further,  I thought her words conveyed a confirmation
of what her conduct towards me in my new capacity
always led me to conjecture ;  namely,  that my guardian
star had ordained it so that the real character and prin
ciples of my honoured and honourable mate had,  by some
happy chance,  reached the Royal ear before the news of
our union.  The dear King's graciousness to M.  d'Arblay
upon the Terrace,  when the Commander-in-Chief,  just
then returned from the Continent,  was by his side,  made
it impossible not to suggest this :  and now,  the Queen's
again naming me so in public puts it,  in my conception,
beyond doubt.  My kindest father will be glad,  I am
sure,  to have added to the great delight of his recital a
strength to a notion I so much love to cherish.

1799]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  193

The account of the Terrace is quite enlivening.  I am
very glad the weather was so good.  It was particularly
kind of it,  for I am sure it has been very un-Julyish
since.

How sweet what the King said of my dearest father's
writing  !  You see how consistent and constant is his
opinion:  but still more I love his benevolent solicitude
lest your method of making time should injure your
health.  Think of that,  dear Master Brooke  !  your creep-
ings are surely the effect of over-labour of the brain and
intense application.

I want excessively to hear how the Herschel book went
off;  whether there was much to change,  as 1 think it im
possible there should not be certain modes peculiar to
every man's own conceptions of his own studies that no
other can hit without consulting him ;  and whether the
sum total seemed to give the last and living hero of the
poem the satisfaction it ought to do.  Pray,  let me hear
about this as soon as you can,  dearest Sir ;  but,  pray,  only
make notes of any alterations ;  and let the alterations
themselves wait to be accomplished in our quiet retreat,
at the given period of our indulgence,  wrhich I presume
to continue fixed for the end of August,  as you do not;
again touch the subject.

I am very anxious,  meanwhile,  for your trying the hot
well — and that before you go to Dover  ;  for I think it im
possible — unnatural — you should resist Mrs.  Crewe,  who,
next to your immediate family,  seems most truly and
affectionately to know how to value possessing you.

The visit to the P ss of W.  is charming.     I am

charmed she now lives so cheerfully and pleasantly.    She
seemed confined,  not merely as a recluse,  but a culprit,

till quite lately ;  and now your visit has just been

succeeded by Mr.  Pitt's !  How can the Premier be so
much his own enemy in politics as well as happiness  !
for all the world,  nearly,  take her part ;  and all the world
wholly agree she has been the injured person,  though
some few think she has wanted retenue and discretion in
VOL.  vi.  o

194 DIARY AND LETTERS        [PART V.

her resentment,  the public nature of her connexion con
sidered,  which does not warrant the expectance of the
same pure fidelity a chosen wife might look for.

F.  D'A.

Madame cTArblay to Mrs.  Phillips.

August 14lb,  '99.

I KNOW that my beloved Susan did not mean I
should see her true account of her precious health;
but it arrived at West Hamble while Esther was there,
and it has been engraven on my heart in saddest cha
racters ever since.  The degree in which it makes rne
— I had almost said — wretched,  would be cruel to dwell
upon ;  but had the letter finished as it began,  I must
have surely applied for a passport,  without which there
is now no visiting Ireland.  In case,  my sweet soul,
you are relapsed,  or do not continue improving,  tell me if
there is any way I can manage to make a surprise give
no shock of horror where I have no expectation of giving
pleasure  ?  I would not offend,  nor add to my beloved's
hard tasks,  God knows !  Should I write there,  in that
case,  for leave  ?  or what do  ?  At all events,  and if the
recovery continues,  give me a hint or two,  I entreat.  I
consult no one here ;  I must do such a deed by storm ;  I
am sure of consent to everything that my happiness and
peace demand,  from the only one who can lawfully control
me, — and that is enough.

Where poor M.  de Narbonne has been driven we know
not.  One of the French Princesses is dead,  but not
Princess Adelaide.  We have just heard that M.  de N.
is now in actual correspondence with Louis XVIII.  :  I am
very glad,  though excessively astonished how it has been
brought about.  WThen we hear particulars,  you shall
have them.

People here are very sanguine that Ireland is quiet,
and will remain so  ;  and that the combined fleets can
never reach it.  How are your own politics upon that

1799]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  195

point?  Mine will take their colour,  be it what it may.
Our dear father is visiting about,  from Mr.  Cox's to
Mrs.  Crewe,  with whom he is now at Dover,  where Mr.
Crewe has some command.  We are all in extreme dis
turbance here about the secret expeditions.  Nothing
authentic is arrived from the first armament ;  and the
second is all prepared for sailing.  Two of Lady Temple-
town's sons are gone,  Greville and Arthur  :  Lady Rothes'
younger son is going,  John Leslie  :  Mr.  Boncheritte has a
brother-in-law gone,  Captain Barnes.  Both officers and men
are gathered from all quarters.  Heaven grant them speedy
safety,  and ultimate peace  !  God bless my own dearest
Susan,  and strengthen and restore her.  Amen  !  Amen.

F.  D'A.

From the Comte de Narbonne to the Chevalier

Tubingen,  ce ler 7bre,  1799.

Vous voyez,  mon ami,  par la date de ma lettre,  que
]'ai le besoin de m'assurer au moins un instant de bon-
heur pour cette annee,  en m'associant aujourd'hui a vous,
et a tous les anges qui vous entourent.  Depuis celle que
j'ai reque de vous,  et qui m'a fait autant de bien que vous
pouvez m'en desirer,  il n'est pas un jour ou je n'aie voulu
vous ecrire,  et ou je n'aie efe arrgte par 1'idee qu'il
fallait au moins savoir ou vous demander de me re-
pondre.  Plus de trois semaines avant la declaration de
guerre de Naples,  a tous les momens nous nous attendions
a une rupture entre la France et 1'Empereur,  qui ne
permettait pas de rester ici,  et qui m'envoyait je ne
sais pas ou.  Les evenemens ont beau se succeder ;
il regne toujours la meme incertitude ;  et je me lasse d'un
silence dont j'espere que vous me boudez tous un peu.
lls sont done finis bien heureusement ces troubles d'Irlande,
si cruels et si effrayants ;  et comrne ii est en verite presque
permis a un Franqais de s'occuper,  avant tout,  du salut de
ses amis,  par toutes les especes de dangers auxquels
ils sont exposes depuis si longtems,  je vois d'abord dans

o 2

196 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V."

cet heureux evenement que je n'ai plus a trembler,  ni vous
non plus,  sur voire adorable helle-sceur,  et que je n'ai
plus a craindve pour elle que the boisterous weather.
Mon ami,  donnez-moi en detail des nouvelles de sa
position.  Mon Dieu!  que je voudrais la savoir reunie a
vous  !  dut elle prendre monchaiubre dans UTL petit palais
enchante que je vois avec peine,  cependant qui n'a pas etc
fait d'un coup de baguette.  A quoi vous sert done la
douce magicienne qui vous a donne sa vie?  Comment
elle ne s'entend pas seulement en maqonncrie  ?  Quelle
education va-t-elle donncr a mon petit Louis?  Heu-
reusement que je repaierai tout cela !  Savez-vous bien
qu'iln'est pas impossible que ce soit bien tot.  Vos erazettes
(qui,par parenthese,  n'arrivent pas depuis un mois)  par-
lent positivement d'un traite de commerce entre 1'An-
gleterre et St.  Domingue,  qui me rendrait du moins le
terrein de mon habitation.  Mandez-moi,  je vousprie,  tout
ce qui est sur,  et ce que Ton espere,  de cela :  si les nego-
ciants tournent leurs speculations de ce cote,  et y sont
encourages parle gouvernement; — si les colons ont deja
trouve les moyens de faire quelque arrangement.  Je
voudrais bien en faire un qui fit vivre mes tilles pendant
que vous me donnerieza manger.  Mais m'est-il permis
seulement de rever au bonheur  ?  Depuis un mois je suis
bourrelle par Tidee de ce qui peut arriver a Naples a
Mesdames,  a ma mere,  a ma fille.  Je tremble que les pre
miers succes de Mack ne leur aient inspire une securite
malheureusement absurde,  puisqu'il parait decide que
1'Empereur,  s'il s'en mele,  ne s'en melera que troptard.
Je ne connaisplus sur laterre de bonheur que dans le
point que vous habitez;  mais qui dans le monde a ses
droits au bonheur comme les habitans de Norbury?
D'apres le tableau que vous nVen faites,il n'y a done rien
de change dans ce delicieux Norbury.  Transportez-vous
done,  mon ami,  a gauche de la cheminee ;  embrassez
pour moi bien tendrementle premier des hommeset le
plus sensible des sages;  vous trouverez a sa droite son
fils,  que vous embrasserez presque comme son pere,  et que

1799]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  197

vous prierez de ma part de vouloir bien epouser une de
ses soeurs,  parceque je voudrais bien qu'ii eiit bien vite
une femme digne de lui.  S'ii aime mieux,  cependant,
epouser Madame Lock,  je ne m'y oppose pas du tout.
Vous voyez que me voila de 1'autre cote de la cheminee ;
vous y baiserez la poussiere des pieds de i'ange que vous
y trouverez,  et vous lui direz que jusqu'au tombeau je
prendrai la liberte de 1'adorer.

Je ne conqois pas,  mon ami,  comment tout cela a pu
me detourner du principal objet de ma lettre,  de Vart
de faire de la choucroute ;  et m'y voila.  Augustin,  qui
me 1'a fait depuis quatre ans,  dit que vos choux sont
excellents pour cela.  Les plus tendres sont les meii-
leurs.  On les coupe en tranches les plus minces pos
sibles,  au moyen d'un couteau ressemblant en grand
a celui pour les concombres,  et dont le dit Augustin est
sur d'avoir vu dans la cite.  On les entasse,  et on les foule
dans un petit tonneau  ;  par dessus on met une planche
qui couvre a peu pres toute la superficie,  et sur laquelle
doit peser une grosse pierre.  De 1'eau sur tout cela,  de
maniere que la planche,  etpar consequent les choux,  soient
ton jours dans 1'eau.  Cette eau doit etre renouvelee tous
les quinze jours,  et Ton ne doit pas se laisser effrayer
de rhorrible puanteur.  Au bout de deux mois la chou
croute est mangeable,  et voild tout Vart de la faire. —
Pour la manger,  la faire d'abord cuire et recuire dans de
1'eau simple ;  cela fait,  bien exprimer 1'eau,  et y sub-
stituer soil du beurre,  du sain-doux,  de la graisse
d'oie,  &c.,  et laisser bien mitonner.

Adieu,  adieu  !  Je t'embrasse du fond de mon cceur,  et
ta femme,  et ton fils.  Pour eviter que mon nom ne
traverse peut-etre des armees,  mettez celui de Frederic
sous le couvert de M.  Cotta,  libraire,  a Tubingen.

Madame dArblay to Dr.  Burney.

West Hamble,  October 1st,  '99.
WHAT a sumptuous feast have you given me,    my

198 DIARY AN7D LETTERS  [PART V.

kindest father  /  It was our whole morning's regale,  so
slowly we cou\d bear to read,  for fear of too soon ending
it.  I wish some kind friend or other would always be
giving you a letter to enclose for me,  and that you would
always forget so to do,  that always you might be stimu
lated to make amends by preparing a parcel for the
coach.  I must,  however,  mention that my mate and
I can ill brook this shabby hint of shirking ;  that he still
rears young peas,  and houses beautiful carnations,  for
you;  and that I had determined to wait only for the first
fair day to put in my rightful claim.  This very one
upon which I write is the first in which we have escaped
rain for a fortnight ;  and now,  therefore,  we may surely
hope for a fine autumn.

What,  then,  says my dearest father?  Will he not
think of us  ?  Who can he think of to quite so much de
light with his sight?  In England no one.  In Ireland
I own there is one to whom it must be yet more precious,
because so cruelly long withheld.  Ireland,  my dearest
padre,  leads to the immediate subject of this letter.

Whether gaily or sadly to usher what I have to say
I know not,  but your sensations,  like mine,  will I am sure
be mixed.  The Major has now written to Mrs.  Lock that
he is anxious to have Susan return to England.  She is
"  in an ill state of health,"  he says,  and he wishes her to
try her native air ;  but the revival of coming to you and
among us all,  and the tender care that will be taken of
her,  is likely to do much for her ;  therefore,  if we get her
but to this side the Channel,  the blessing is comparatively
so great,  that I shall feel truly thankful to Heaven.

How you have made me fall in love with your ladies,
Susan Ryder,  and Jane Dundas,  and the whole family of
Greys !  I was enchanted with your reception and inti
macy amongst such sweet mannered and minded people
as you describe.  But Mr.  Pitt !  I am really in alt when
I see you presenting him your letter from Dr.  Herschel.

Solemn,  yet heart-warming,  is your account of the em
barkation.  God send us more good news of its result !

1799]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  199

Like you,  we are sadly alarmed by the second affair,
after being so elated by the first.  Yet the taking the
Dutch fleet must always remain a national amends for
almost any loss.

Mrs.  Milner,  of Mickleham,  who has a son by a
former husband,  now Colonel Fitzgerald,  and aide-de
camp to the Duke of York  (and probably of the staff you
met at Walmer Castle),  has sent me lately a message to
desire we should make acquaintance.  It came through
Lady Rothes,  and consequently I expressed proper acknow
ledgments.  Two days ago she came to make her first
visit.  Her present husband,  who is also a colonel,  called
at the same time on M.  d'Arblay,  with whom he had
made a speaking acquaintance while we were building
our cottage.  We found them very agreeable people,
well bred,  well cultivated,  and pleasing.  The Colonel is
serious,  she is lively;  but they seem happy in each other.
I am the more disposed to think well of them,  because
not only the Duke but the Duchess of York twice break
fasted with them,  in journeying from Brighthelmstone.
This has put them in high fashion in this neighbourhood.
She tells me she is the worst of visitors ;  and I assured
her that having heard that character of her was one of
my first inducements to venture at her acquaintance,  not
only from the flattery of her selection,  but from the sym
pathy I felt in that defect.

They walked all round our grounds — the wood,  copse,
meadow;  ate one of our apples just gathered from our
virgin orchard;  and found all M.  d'Arblay's flowers of
the first fragrance.  Could they fail being pleasant people  ?
Pray,  wish well to Colonel Fitzgerald for their sake.

I was happy not to see his name amongst the killed
and wounded;  nor that of the Hon.  John Leslie,  Lady
Rothes'  son;  nor those of Greville nor Arthur Upton,
Lady Templetown's sons ;  nor Mr.  Nixon,  late of Book-
ham  ;  nor General Burrard,  now of Dorking.  What an
anxious period,  through relations or connexions,  inde
pendent of general humanity,  does this expedition make !

200 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART V

Heaven prosper it !  What is Mr.  J.  Crewe called  ? —
Captain  ?  I hope it is not he who is named amongst the
wounded.

You make me wild to hear the Emperor's hymn and
Suwarrow's march.  Their popularity at Dover and
Walmer Castle was most seasonable and delightful ;  they
quite set my heart a-beating with pleasure and exultation
for my dearest father,  only in hearing of them.  But you,
forsooth,  to preside over the bottle !  Ha !  ha !  Mr.  'Pitt,
however,  could not risk his intellects*  so he chose well for
preserving them.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Philips.

West Hamble,  December 10th,  '9&

0 MY Susan,    my heart's dear sister!   with what bitter
sorrow have I read this last account !     With us,   with
yourself,  your children, — all, — you have trifled in respect
to health,  though in all things else you are honour and
veracity personified ;    but nothing had prepared me to'
think you in such a state as I now find you.     Would to-
God I could get to you !     If Mr.  Keirnan-  thinks you:
had best pass the winter in Dublin,  stay,  amt let me:
come to you.     Venture nothing against his opiniorty for'
mercy's sake !     Fears for your health take place of all
impatience to expedite your return  ;    only go not back to
Belcotton,  where you cannot be under his direction,  and
are away from the physician he thinks of so highly.

I shall write immediately to Charles about the carriage.

1 am sure of his answer beforehand, — so must you be.
Act,  therefore,  with regard to the carriage,  as if already
it were arranged.     But I am well aware it must not set
out till you are well enough to nearly fix your day of
sailing.     I say nearly,   for we must always allow for
accidents.     I shall write to our dear father,  and Etty,  and
James,  and send to Norbury Park ;  but I shall wait till
to-morrow,  not to infect them with what I am infected.

How I love that charming Augusta! — tell her so;  I

1799]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  201

am almost tempted to write to her,  and to Mrs.  Disney,
and to Mr.  Keirnan.  I expect everybody to love and be
kind to rny Susan ;  yet I love and cherish them for it as
if it were my wonder.

O my Susan !  that I could come to you  !  But all
must depend on Mr.  Keirnan's decision.  If you can
come to us with perfect safety,  however slowly,  I shall
not dare add to your embarrassment of persons and
package.  Else,  Charles's carriage — O,  what a tempta
tion to air it for you all the way  !  Take no more large
paper,  that you may write with less fatigue,  and,  if pos
sible,  oftener ; — to any one will suffice for all.

Yours affectionately,

F.  D'A.

202 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

PART VI.

1800.

Death of Mrs.  Phillips— Letter of Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Lock
on the recent loss of her Sister — Interview with the Royal
Family — Extreme amiability of the Princess Augusta — Marauders
in the Garden — Madame d'Arblay's Comedy of  '  Love and
Fashion,'  in rehearsal at Covent Garden — Withdrawn by the
Author — Her remarks on the subject — M.  d'Arblay leaves Eng
land to look after his property in France — The Lord Chancellor's
reprimand to Mr.  Sheridan — News of M.  d'Arblay — Love Offer
ings — Visit to Norbury Park — Madame d'Arblay's projected
Journey to France — Perils of M.  d'Arblay's Voyage — His Let
ters to Madame d'Arblay — Her thoughts on Religious Instruction
— Her letter to her Husband.

Madame cCArUay to Doctor Burney.

9th January,  1800.

MY MOST DEAR PADRE, — My mate will say all say, — so
I can only offer up my earnest prayers I may soon be
allowed the blessing — the only one I sigh for — of em
bracing my dearest Susan in your arms and under
your roof.  Amen.

F.  o'A.

These were the last written lines of the last period
— unsuspected as such — of my perfect happiness on
earth  ;  for they were stopped on the road by news that
my heart's beloved sister,  Susanna Elizabeth Phillips,
had ceased to breathe.  The tenderest of husbands —
the most feeling of human beings — had only reached
Norbury Park,  on his way to a believed meeting with
that angel,  when the fatal blow was struck ;  and he

1800]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  203

came back to West Hamble — to the dreadful task of
revealing the irreparable loss which his own goodness,
sweetness,  patience,  and sympathy could alone have
made supported.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Lock.

9th January,  1800.

"  As a guardian angel  /" — Yes,  my dearest Fredy,  as
such in every interval of despondence I have looked
up to the sky to see her ;  but my eyes cannot pierce
through the thick atmosphere,  and I can only repre
sent her to me seated on a chair of sickness,  her soft
hand held partly out to me as I approach her ;  her
softer eyes so greeting me as never welcome was ex
pressed before ;  and a smile of heavenly expression
speaking the tender gladness of her grateful soul that
God at length should grant our re-union.  From our
earliest moments,  my Fredy,  when no misfortune hap
pened to our dear family,  ice wanted nothing but each
other.  Joyfully as others were received by us — loved
by us — all that was necessary to our happiness was
fulfilled by our simple junction.  This 1 remember
with my first remembrance  ;  nor do I recollect a single
instance of being affected beyond a minute by any-
outward disappointment,  if its result was leaving us
together.

She was the soul of my soul ! — and  't is wonderful to
me,  my dearest Fredy,  that the first shock did not
join them immediately by the flight of mine — but that
over — that dreadful,  harrowing,  never-to-be-forgotten
moment of horror that made me wish to be mad —
the ties that after that first endearing period have
shared with her my heart,  come to my aid.  Yet I was
long incredulous ;  and still sometimes I think it is not
— and that she will come — and I paint her by my side
— by my father's — in every room of these apartments,

204 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

destined to have chequered the woes of her life with
rays of comfort,  joy,  and affection.
,  O,  my Fredy  !  not selfish is the affliction that repines
her earthly course of sorrow was allowed no shade  !
— that at the instant soft peace and consolation awaited
her she should breathe her last !  You would under
stand all the hardship of resignation for me were you
to read the joyful opening of her letter,  on her land
ing,  to my poor father,  and her prayer at the end to
be restored to him.

O,  my Fredy  !  could you indeed think of me — be
alarmed for me on that dreadful day ! — I can hardly
make that enter my comprehension ;  but I thank you
from my soul;  for that is beyond any love I had
thought possible,  even from your tender heart.

Tell me you all keep well,  and forgive me my dis
traction.  I write so fast I fear you can hardly read ;
but you will see I am conversing with you,  and that
will show you how I turn to you for the comfort of
your tenderness.  Yes,  you have all a loss,  indeed !

F.  D'A.

Madame  (TArblay to Mrs.  Lock.

Greenwich,  Friday,  February,  1800.

HERE we are,  my beloved friend.  We came yesterday.
All places to me are now less awful than my own so
dear habitation.

My royal interview took place on Wednesday.  I
was five hours with the Royal family,  three of them
alone with the Queen,  whose graciousness and kind
goodness I cannot express.  And each bf the princesses
saw me with a sort of concern and interest 1 can never
forget.  I did tolerably well,  though not quite as
steadily as I expected;  but with my own Princess
Augusta 1 lost all command of myself.  She is still
wrapt up,  and just recovering from a fever herself;

1800]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  '205

and she spoke to me in a tone — a voice so commise
rating — I could not stand it — I was forced to stop
short in my approach,  and hide my face with my muff.
She came up to me immediately,  put her arm upon my
shoulder,  and kissed me. — I shall never forget it. —
How much more than thousands of words did a con
descension so tender tell me her kind feelings  ! — She
is one of the few beings in this world that can be,  in
the words of M.  de Narbonne,  "  all that is douce and
all that is spirituelle^ — his words upon my lost dar
ling  !

It is impossible more of comfort or gratification
could be given than I received from them all.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Doctor Burney.

West Harable,  March 22,  1800.

DAY after day I have meant to write to my dearest
father ;  but I have been unwell ever since our return,
and that has not added to my being sprightly.  1 have
not once crossed the threshold since 1 re-entered the
house till to-day,  when Mr.  and Mrs.  Lock almost
insisted upon taking me an airing.  I am glad of it,
for it has done me good,  and broken a kind of spell
that made me unwilling to stir.

M.  d'Arblay has worked most laboriously in his
garden  ;  but his misfortunes there,  during our absence,
might melt a heart of stone.  The horses of our next
neighbouring farmer broke through our hedges,  and
have made a kind of bog of our meadow,  by scamper
ing in it during the wet;  the sheep followed,  who
have eaten up all our greens,  every sprout and cabbage
and lettuce,  destined for the winter ;  while the horses
dug up our turnips and carrots  ;  and the swine,  pur
suing such examples,  have trod down all the young
plants,  besides devouring whatever the others left of

206 DIARY AND LETTERS    "  [PART VI.

vegetables.  Our potatoes,  left,  from our abrupt de
parture,  in the ground,  are all rotten or frost-bitten,
and utterly spoilt ;  and not a single thing has our
whole ground produced us since we came home.  A
few dried carrots,  which remain from the in-doors col
lection,  are all we have to temper our viands.

What think you of this for people who make it a
rule to owe a third of their sustenance to the garden  ?
Poor M.  d'A.'s renewal of toil,  to supply future times,  is
exemplary to behold,  after such discouragement.  But
he works as if nothing had failed  ;  such is his patience
as well as industry.

My Alex.,  I am sure you will be kindly glad to hear,
is entirely well ;  and looks so blooming — no rose can
be fresher.  I am encouraging back his spouting pro
pensity,  to fit him for his royal interview with the sweet
and gay young princess who has demanded him,  who
will,  I know,  be diverted with his speeches and gestures.
We must present ourselves before Easter,  as the Court
then adjourns to Windsor for ten days.  My gardener
will not again leave his grounds to the four-footed
marauders ;  and our stay,  therefore,  will be the very
shortest we can possibly make it ;  for though we love
retirement,  we do not like solitude.

I long for some further account of you,  dearest Sir,
and how you bear the mixture of business and com
pany,  of/a<7 and frolic,  as Charlotte used to phrase it.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arllay to Doctor Burney.

West Hamble,  April 27,  1800.

MY Alex,  improves in all that I can teach,  and my
gardener is laboriously recovering from his winter
misfortunes.  He is now raising a hillock by the gate,
for a view of Norbury Park from our grounds,  and he
has planted potatoes upon almost every spot where
they can grow.  The dreadful price of provisions

1800]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  207

makes this our first attention.  The poor people
about us complain they are nearly starved,  and the
children of the journeymen of the tradesmen at Dork
ing1 come to our door to beg halfpence for a little
bread.  What the occasion of such universal dearth
can be we can form no notion,  and have no information.
The price of bread we can conceive from the bad
harvest ;  but meat,  butter,  and shoes  ! — nay,  all sorts
of nourriture or clothing seem to rise in the same pro
portion,  and without any adequate cause.  The im
puted one of the war does not appear to me sufficient,,
though the drawback from all by the income-tax is
severely an underminer of comfort.

What is become of the campaign?  are both parties
incapacitated from beginning?  or is each waiting a
happy moment to strike some definitive stroke  ?  We
are strangely in the dark about all that is going on,
and unless you will have the compassion to write us
some news,  we may be kept so till Mr.  Lock returns.

F.  D'A.

[Towards the close of the preceding year Dr.  Charles
Burney had placed in the hands of Mr.  Harris,  the
manager of Covent Garden Theatre,  a comedy by
Madame d'Arblay,  called  "Love and Fashion."  Mr.
Harris highly approved the piece,  and early in the
spring put it into rehearsal;  but Dr.  Burney was
seized with a panic concerning its success,  and,  to
oblige him,  his daughter and her husband withdrew
it.  The following letter announced their generous
compliance with his wishes.]

Madame d'Arblay to Doctor Burney.

Monday.

I HASTEN to tell you,  dearest Sir,  Mr.  H.  has at
length listened to our petitions,  and has returned me
my poor ill-fated  ,  wholly relinquishing all claim

208 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

to it for this season.  He has promised also to do his
utmost,  as far as his influence extends,  to keep the
newspapers totally silent in future.  We demand,
therefore,  no contradictory paragraph,  as the report
must needs die when the reality no more exists.  No
body has believed it from the beginning,  on account
of the premature moment when it was advertised.
This release gives me present repose,  which,  indeed,  I
much wanted ;  for to combat your,  to me,  unaccount
able but most,  afflicting displeasure,  in the midst of
my own panics and disturbance,  would have been
ample punishment to me had I been guilty of a crime,
in doing what I have all my life been urged to,  and
all my life intended, — writing a comedy.  Your good
ness,  your kindness,  your regard for my fame,  I know
have caused both your trepidation,  which doomed me
to certain failure,  and your displeasure that I ran,  what
you thought,  a wanton risk.  But it is not wanton,  my
dearest father.  My imagination is not at my own
control,  or I would always have continued in the walk
you approved.  The combinations for another long
work did not occur to me;  incidents and effects for a
drama did.  I thought the field more than open— in
viting to me.  The chance held out golden dreams.—
The risk could be only our own  ;  for,  permit me to
say,  appear when it will,  you will find nothing in the
principles,  the moral,  or the language that will make
you blush for me.  A failure upon those points only,
can bring disgrace;  upon mere cabal or want of dra
matic powers,  it can only cause disappointment.

1 hope,  therefore,  my dearest father,  in thinking
this over you will cease to nourish such terrors and
disgust at an essay so natural,  and rather say to your
self,  with an internal smile,  "  After all,  't is but like
father like child;  for to what walk do I confine myself?
She took my example in writing — she takes it in
ranging.  Why then,  after all,  should I lock her up in
one paddock,  well as she has fed there,  if she says she

1 800]  OF MADAME D' ARBLAY.  209

finds nothing more to nibble  ;  while  /find all the earth
unequal to my ambition,  and mount the skies to con
tent it  ?  Come on,  then,  poor Fan  !  the world has
acknowledged you my offspring,  and I will disencourage
you no more.  Leap the pales of your paddock — let us
pursue our career ;  and,  while you frisk from novel to
comedy,  I,  quitting Music and Prose,  will try a race
with Poetry and the Stars."

I am sure my dear father will not infer,  from this
appeal,  I mean to parallel our works.  No one more
truly measures her own inferiority,  which,  with re
spect to yours,  has always been my pride.  I only
mean to show,  that if my muse loves a little variety,
she has an hereditary claim to try it.

F.  D'A.

Madame cCArblay to Doctor Burney.

West Hamble,  November 7,  1800.

I THINK it very long not to hear at least of you,  my
dearest padre.  My tranquil and happy security,  alas  !
has been broken in upon by severe conflicts since I
wrote to my dearest father last,  which I would not
communicate while yet pending,  but must now briefly
narrate.

My partner,  the truest of partners,  has been erased
from the list of emigrants nearly a year ;  and in that
period has been much pressed and much blamed by
his remaining friends in France,  by every opportunity
through which they could send to him,  for not imme
diately returning,  and seeing if anything could be yet
saved from the wreck of his own and family's fortune ;
but he held steady to his original purpose never to re
visit his own country till it was at peace with this  ;  till
a letter came from his beloved uncle himself,  conveyed
to him through Hambro',  which shook all the firmness
of his resolution,  and has kept him,  since its receipt,

VOL.  VI.  P

210 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

in a state of fermentation,  from doubts and difficulties,
and crossing wishes and interests,  that has much
affected his health as well as tranquillity.

All,  however,  now,  is at least decided  ;  for a few days
since he received a letter from M.  Lajard,  who is re
turned to Paris,  with information from his uncle's
eldest son,  that some of his small property is yet
unsold,  to about the amount of 1000/.,  and can still be
saved from sequestration if he will immediately go
over and claim it ;  or,  if that is impossible,  if he will
send his procuration to his uncle,  from some country
not at war with France.

This ended all his internal contest ;  and he is gxme
this very morning to town to procure a passport and a
passage in some vessel bound to Holland.

So unused are we to part,  never yet for a week
having been separated during the eight years of our
union,  that our first idea was going together,  and
taking our Alex. ;  and certain I am nothing would do
me such material and mental good as so complete a
change of scene ;  but the great expense of the voyage
and journey,  and the inclement season for our little
boy,  at length finally settled us to pray only for a
speedy meeting.  But I did not give it up till late
last night,  and am far from quite reconciled to relin
quishing it even now.

He has no intention to go to France,  or he would
make an effort to pass by Calais,  which would delight
fully shorten the passage ;  but he merely means to
remain at the Hague while he sends over his procura
tion,  and learns how soon he may hope to reap its
fruits.

I can write upon nothing else just now,  my dearest
father  ;  the misfortune of this call at such a boisterous,
dangerous season,  will oppress and alarm me,  in de
fiance of all I can oppose of hope ;  yet the measure is
so reasonable,  so natural,  I could no longer try to
combat it.  Adieu,  dearest Sir.  If any news of him

1800]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  211

reaches me before his return,  I will not enjoy it five
minutes previous to communicating it to my dear
father.  He hopes at all events to be able to embrace
you,  and beg your benediction before he departs,  which
nothing but the very unlikely chance of meeting a
vessel just sailing for Holland immediately can pre
vent.  He is well — and,,  oh,  what a support to me !

F.  D'A.

Madame d'ArUay to Doctor Burney.

13th December,  1800.

YOUR commission is arrived just as I am going to
write to my dear Chevalier,  I hope for the last letter
upon this separation.  But he is not certain yet of his
return.  What a dreadful fright the  '  True Briton'
gave me one day last week of a new mouvementiu Paris !
God keep all quiet there! — but him — and may he be
restless till he quits it !

I was going to begin-  a letter to you the other day,
in the fulness of my heart,  to exult,  with you,  on a
testimony of respect and veneration which are so
highly honourable,  paid to the wisdom and authority
of our dear Dr.  Johnson,  by the Lord Chancellor,
in his reprimand to Mr.  Sheridan.  I hope you
had the same words I read.  I was really lifted up by
them.  The Chancellor gave in the Doctor's language
the rebuke he could not,  perhaps,  give to an M.  Jr.,
and so powerful an antagonist as Mr.  Sheridan,  in his
own.  But I have been much grieved for the loss of
my faithful as well as honoured friend,  Mrs.  Chapone,
and very sorry for good Mr.  Langton.

How is our Blue Club cut up  !  But Sir William
Pepys told me it was dead while living;  all such society
as that we formerly belonged to,  and enjoyed,  being
positively over.

F.  D'A.

p 2

212 f DIARY AXD LETTERS  [PART VI.

Madame d?  Arblay to Doctor Burney.

West Hamble,  16th December,  1800.

HE is returned,  my dearest father,  already  !  My joy and
surprise are so great I seem in a dream.  I have just
this moment a letter from him,  written at Gravesend.

What he has been able to arrange as to his affairs,
I know not ;  and just now cannot care,  so great is my
thankfulness for his safety and return.  He waits in
the river for his passport,  and will,  when he obtains it,
hasten,  I need not say,  to West Hamble.

This blessed news my dearest father will,  I am sure,
be glad to receive ;  I am sure,  too,  of the joy of my
dear,  affectionate Fanny.  He will be here,  I hope,  to
keep his son's sixth birthday,  on Thursday.  He is
well,  he says,  but horribly fatigued.  Heaven bless and
preserve you,  dearest Sir.

Your ever dutiful and affectionate,

F.  o'A.

1801.
Madame tfArllay to Dr.  Burney.

West Hamble,  September 1,  180L

MY dearest — kindest — cruellest father! — That so long
and so interesting,  and so dear a letter should give me
so great a disappointment!  and that fish so admirable
should want its best sauce  !  Indeed,  I cannot help a
little repining,  though when I think of damps and rheu
matisms,  I am frightened out of murmuring :  for in
this lone cottage I would not have you indisposed for
the universe.  But  't is very provocas — yet I have so
much to be thankful for,  and so thankful I feel for
that much,  that I am ashamed of seeming discon
tented  ...  so I don't know what for to do  !  .  .  .

And the carpet !  how kind a thought !  Goodness
me!  as Lady Hales used to say,  I don't know what for
to do more and more  !  But a carpet we have — though

1801]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  213

not yet spread,  as the chimney is unfinished,  and
room incomplete.  Charles brought us the tapis — so
that,  in fact,  we have yet bought nothing for our best
room — and meant, — for our own share — to buy a
table  .  .  .  and if my dearest father will be so good —
and so naughty at once,  as to crown our salle d' Audience
with a gift we shall prize beyond all others,  we can
think only of a table.  Not a dining one,  but a sort of
table for a little work and a few books,  en gala — with
out which,  a room looks always forlorn.  I need not
say how we shall love it ;  and I must not say how we
shall blush at it ;  and I cannot say how we feel obliged
at it — for the room will then be complete in love-
offerings.  Mr.  Lock finished glazing or polishing
his impression border for the chimney on Saturday.
It will be,  I fear,  his last work of that sort,  his eyes,
which are very long-sighted,  now beginning to fail and
weaken at near objects.  But dedommagement for early
blindness is in later years — when all the short-sighted
become objects of envy to those for whom,  in juvenile
years,  they are objects of pity or sport.

My Alex,  intends very soon,  he says,  to marry —
and,  not long since,  with the gravest simplicity,  he
went up to Mr.  William Lock,  who was here with his
fair bride,  and said,  "How did you get that wife,
William?  because I want to get such a one — and I
don't know which is the way."  And he is now actually
employed in fixing sticks and stones at convenient
distances,  upon a spot very near our own,  where he
means to raise a suitable structure for his residence,
after his nuptials.  You will not think he has suffered
much time to be wasted before he has begun deliber
ating upon his conjugal establishment.

We spent the greatest part of last week in visits at
Norbury Park,  to meet M.  de Lally,  whom I am very
sorry you missed.  He is delightful in the country ;
full of resources,  of gaiety,  of intelligence,  of good
humour;  and mingling powers of instruction with en-

214 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

tertainment.  He has read us several fragments of
works of his own,  admirable in eloquence,  sense,  and
feeling ;  chiefly parts of tragedies,  and all referring to
subjects next his heart,  and clearest in his head ;
namely,  the French Revolution and its calamities,  and
filial reverence and enthusiasm for injured parents.

F.  D'A.

Madame tfArblay to Doctor Burney.

West Hamble,  October 3,  1801.

OOD avert mischief from this peace,  my dearest
father  !  For in our hermitage you may imagine,  more
readily than I can express,  the hopes and happiness it
excites.  M.  d'Arblay now feels paid for his long for
bearance,  his kind patience,  and compliance with my
earnest wishes not to revisit his native land while we
were at war with it.  He can now go with honour as
well as propriety;  for every body,  even the highest
personages,  will rather expect he should make the
journey as a thing of course,  than hear of it as a pro
position for deliberation.  He will now have his heart's
desire granted,  in again seeing his loved and respect
able uncle, — and many relations,  and more friends,
and his own native town,  as well as soil ;  and he will
have the delight of presenting to that uncle,  and those
friends,  his little pet Alex.

With all this gratification to one whose endurance
of such a length of suspense,  and repetition of disap
pointment,  I have observed with gratitude,  and felt
with sympathy — must not I,  too,  find pleasure?
Though,  on my side,  many are the drawbacks  ;  but I
ought not,  and must not,  listen to them.  We shall
arrange our affairs with all the speed in our power,
after the ratification is arrived,  for saving the cold
and windy weather ;  but the approach of winter is
unlucky,  as it will lengthen our stay,  to avoid travel-

1801]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  215

ling and voyaging during its severity  ;  unless,  indeed,
any internal movement,  or the menace of any,  should
make frost and snow secondary fears,  and induce us to
scamper off.  But the present is a season less liable
in all appearance to storms,  than the seasons that may
follow.  Fetes,  joy,  and pleasure,  will probably for
some months occupy the public in France ;  and it will
not be till those rejoicings are past,  that they will set
about weighing causes of new commotion,  the rights
of their governors,  or the means,  or desirability of
changing them.  I would far rather go immediately,
than six months hence.

I hope,  too,  this so long wished view of friends and
country gratified,  my life's partner will feel a tran
quillity without which,  even our little Hermitage and
Great Book Koom cannot make him completely happy.

F.  D'A.

[The projected journey of Madame d'Arblay with
her husband did not take place this year  ;  the season
being already advanced,  and their little boy not strong
enough to bear the fatigue of such an expedition.
Monsieur d'Arblay went alone to France.]

Madame d'Arblay to Doctor Burney.

West Hamble,  November 11,  1801.

I DID not purpose writing to my dearest father till
my suspense and inquietude were happily removed
by a letter from France;  but as I find he is already
anxious himself,  I will now relate all I yet know of my
dearest traveller's history.  On Wednesday the 28th
of October,  he set off for Gravesend.  A vessel,  he
was told,  was ready for sailing ;  and ivould set off the
following day.  He secured his passage,  and took up
his abode at an inn,  whence he wrote me a very long
letter,  in full hope his next would be from his own
country.  But Thursday came,  and no sailing — .

216 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

though the wind was fair,  and the weather then calm :
he amused his disappointment as well as he could by
visiting divers gardeners,  and taking sundry lessons for
rearing and managing asparagus.  Friday,  also,
came — and still no sailing!  He was more and more
vexed ;  but had recourse then to a chemist,  with
whom he revised much of his early knowledge.  Satur
day followed — no sailing!  and he found the people
waited on and on,  in hopes of more passengers,  though
never avowing their purpose.  His patience was now
nearly exhausted,  and he went and made such vifs re-
montrances that he almost startled the managers.  They
pretended the ballast was all they stayed for :  he offered
to aid that himself;  and actually went to work,  and
never rested till the vessel was absolutely ready :  orders,
erifin,  were given for sailing next morning,  though he
fears,  with all his skill,  and all his eloquence,  and all
his aiding,  they were more owing to the arrival of four
passengers than to his exertions.  That night,  October
the 31st,  he went on board  ;  and November the 1st he
set sail at five o'clock in the morning.

You know how high a wind arose on Sunday the 1st,
and how dreadful a storm succeeded,  lasting all night,
all Monday,  and all night again.  How thankful,
how grateful am I to have heard of his safety since so
terrifying a period.  They got on,  with infinite diffi
culty and danger,  as far as Margate ;  they there took
anchor,  and my kind voyager got a letter for me sent
on shore,  "  moyennant un schelling"  To tell you my
gratitude in knowing him safe after that tempest — no
I cannot !  Your warm affections,  my dearest father,
will easily paint to you my thankfulness.

Next,  they got on to Deal,  and here anchored again,
for the winds,  though they abated on shore,  kept
violent and dangerous near the coast.  Some of the
passengers went on shore,  and put two letters for me
in the post,  assuring me all was safe.  These two pas
sengers,  who merely meant to dine on shore,  and see

1801]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

217

the town,  were left behind.  The sea rose so high,  no
boat could put off to bring them back ;  and,  though the
captain hoisted a flag to announce he was sailing,  there
was no redress.  They had not proceeded a league be
fore the sea grew yet more rough and perilous,  and the
captain was forced to hoist a flag of distress.  Every
thing in the vessel was overset :  my poor M.  d'Arblay's
provision-basket flung down,  and its contents demo
lished  ;  his bottle of wine broken by another toss,  and
violent fall,  and he was nearly famished.  The water
now began to get into the ship,  all hands were at work
that could work,  and he,  my poor voyager,  gave his
whole noble strength to the pump,  till he was so ex
hausted,  so fatigued,  so weakened,  that with difficulty
he could hold a pen to repeat that still — I might be
tranquille,  for all danger was again over,  A pilot came
out to them from Dover,  for seven guineas,  which the
higher of the passengers subscribed for  [and here poor
M.  d'A.  was reckoned of that class],  and the vessel was
got into the port at Dover,  and the pilot,  moyennant un
autre schelling,  put me again a letter,  with all these par
ticulars,  into the post.

This was Thursday the 5th.  The sea still so boister
ous,  the vessel was unable to cross the water.  The
magistrates at Dover permitted the poor passengers
all to land;  and M.  d'Arblay wrote to me again,  from
the inn,  after being regaled with an excellent dinner,
of which he had been much in want.  Here they met
again the two passengers lost at Deal,  who,  in hopes
of this circumstance,  had travelled post from thence to
Dover.  Here,  too,  M.  d'A.  met the Duke de Duras,
an hereditary officer of the crown,  but who told him,
since peace was made,  and all hope seemed chased of a
proper return to his country,  he was going,  incognito,  to
visit a beloved old mother,  whom he had not seen for
eleven years.  "I have no passport,"  he said,  "for
France  ;  but I mean to avow myself to the Commissary
at Calais,  and tell him I know I am not erased,  nor do

218 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

I demand to be so.  I only solicit an interview with a
venerable parent.  Send to Paris,  to beg leave for it.
You may put me in prison till the answer arrives  ;  but,
for mercy,  for humanity's sake,  suffer me to wait in
France till then  !  guarded as you please !"  This is his
purposed address — which my M.  d'A.  says he heard,
avec les larmes aux yeux.  I shall long to hear the
event.

On Friday,  November 6th,  M.  d'A.  wrote me two
lines — "  Nov.  G,  1 801 . — Je pars  !  the wind is excel
lent — au revoir"  This is dated ten o'clock in the
morning.

I have not had a word since.  F.  o'A.

Monsieur ff Arblay to Madame cTArblay.

Paris.

IL m'est impossible,  ma chere Fanny,  d'entrer dans
beaucoup de details,  vu que je n'ai qu'un instant dont
je puisse profiter pour t'envoyer ceci par une occasion
sure.  La fete du 18 Brumaire a du surpasser tout ce
qu'on pouvait s'etre flatte d'y voir  ;  et quoique je sois
bien malheureusement arrive trop tard pour en jouir,
c'est avec 1'interet le plus vif que j'ai examine depuis
tout ce qui en reste.  II est impossible de se faire une
idee du gout qui a preside a 1'ensemble,  et de 1'agre-
ment de tous les details.  Je ne sais point encore posi-
tivement quand il me sera possible d'aller voir mon
oncle.  L'affaire de mon traitement de reforme n'est
rien moins qu'avancee,  et il est faux que Isnard et La
Colombe 1'ayent obtenu.

Demain matin j'ai rendez-vous avec Du Taillis,  aide-
de-camp de Berthier.  En sortant de chez lui,  j'espere
voir Talleyrand ;  mais ce que je desire infiniment,  c'est
de ne pas partir avant d' avoir au moins entrevu le Pre
mier Consul,  cet homme si justement celebre.  La fete
a donne lieu a beaucoup d'inseriptions en vers,  faits a

1801]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  219

sa louange ;  mais,  en general,  ils m'ont paru fort au-
dessous du sujet.  Relativement a 1'obligation que
nous ci-devants portes sur la liste des emigres lui
avons,  Narbonne me disait aujourd'hui,  "  II a mis
toutes nos tetes sur ses epaules."  J'aime cette ex
pression.

M.  de N.  et les Lameth sont les seuls qui ayent ob-
tenu un traitement.  Les derniers,  imprudens et im-
prevoyans,  a leur ordinaire,  ont excite la jalousie de
1'armee,  ce qui nuit beaucoup au succes de ma de-
mande.  II semble que je sois destine a les trouver
dans mon chemin d'une maniere facheuse,  car tu sais
combien,  dans le cours de la revolution,  nos^opinions
ont peu ete en mesure.  Apres avoir obtenu leur traite
ment de reforme,  ils ont voulu etre presentes a Bona
parte,  et ont cru se faire valoir en lui vantant la part
qu'ils avaient prise a la revolution.  Le Consul,  apres
les avoir ecoutes patiemment,  leur a dit,  du ton le plus
glacial,  "  Je vous crois honnetes ;  et^d'apres tout ce
que je viens d'entendre,  vous devez etre profondement
malheureux :"  et il les a quittes.  Tu peux compter
sur cctte anecdote telle que je te la rapporte;  et tu
vois que Bonaparte est le meme en tout.  N.,  de qui
je la tiens,  dit que sa capacite en tout genre est au-
dela de tout ce qu'on peut se figurer dans les limites
du possible.

from Le Chevalier  <£Arblaij to Madame cTArblay.

Paris,  Novembre 16,  1801.

DERNIEREMENT,,  il etait question de savoir au Senat si
les membres qui le composent seraient ou non armes
ou pares d'un sabre.  Tous les militaires pensaient que
rien n'etait moins en mesure avec les fonctions des
senateurs.  Cette reflexion etait vivement combattue
par Volney.  Le General Lefevre,  dans la chaleur de
la discussion,  lui dit,  "  Si vous avez un sabre,  ilfautdonc
quejenporte deux,  moi"

Bonaparte a nomme Pusy prefet;  et lorsqu'il lui est

220 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

venu faire ses remerciemens,  il lui a dit,  "  C'est bien
peu,  raais il faut bien commencer par quelque chose
qui vous mette a,  meme de deployer de nouveau cet
excellent esprit que vous avez montre dans 1'Assem-
blee Constituante."

Voici un autre trait de lui plus aimable encore.

La Tour Maubourg,  Tun des compagnons du General
Lafayette,  voulait marier sa fille a un Emigre non raye.
II avait obtenu du Premier Consul un rendez-vous,  dans
lequel il etait entre dans beaucoup de details sans lui-
cacher les raisons qu'on pouvait objecter centre la radia
tion demandee.  Bonaparte Tinterroinpt et lui dit,  "  Le
jeune homme convient-il a Mademoiselle votre fille  ?"
"  Oui,  General." — "  Vous convient-il a vous,  M.  de
Maubourg?"  "Beaucoup,  General." —  "Eh bien!
1'homme que vous jugez digne d'entrer dans tine famille
comme la votre,  est surement digne aussi d'etre citoyen
Franqais."

La Garde Consulaire est en honneur tout ce que
Ton peut se figurer de plus remarquablement beau ;
a 1'exception des officiers generaux,  qui sont tout cha-
marres  (Tor,  rienn'est plus simple etplus veritablement
noble.  Les simples gardes ont d'ailleurs des preuves
bien autrement difficiles a faire que celles exigees des
«i-devant Gardes du Corps,  dont ils font le service.
Maubourg m'a assure que pour etre admis dans ce
corps,  il fallait avoir requ trois blessures,  ou prouver
quelque action d'eclat.  Aussi quiconque parmi ces
gardes est coupable d'un duel,  est sur-le-champ chasse;
ordonnance par laquelle Bonaparte donnera probable-
raent le dementi a ceux qui ont pretendu qu'il etait
impossible d'abolir parmi les Franqais cette coutume
barbare.  De mon terns la crainte du deshonneur etait
bien plus forte que la crainte de la mort,  dont les loix
punissaient le duel.  Mais ici quel deshonneur pre
tendu peut atteindre de tels braves?  Depuis ma con
versation a ce sujet,  je n'en vois pas passer un sans
etre tente d'aller shake hands avec lui.

1801]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  221

Monsieur d'Arblay to Madame cCArllay.

15th Frimaire  (December 6),  1801.

SUIVANT toute apparence,  ma chere amie,  je n'ob-
tiendrai point le traitement que je demande.  Tout
le monde dit que rien n'est plus juste,  mais tant de
personnes qui ont fait toute la guerre se trouvent a
present reform es,  que je meurs de peur qu'il n'en soit
de mes services passes comme des proprietes de toute
ma famille,  et cela par la meme raison,  par I'impossi-
bilite de faire droit aux demandes,  toutes fondees
qu'elles sont.  Cependant,  ma bonne amie,  il est im
possible de nous dissimuler que depuis plusieurs
annees nous n'avons vecu,  malgre toute notre economic,
que par le moyen de ressources qui sont ou epuisees
ou bien pretes a 1'etre.  La plus grande partie de
notre revenu n'est rien moins qu'assuree,  et cependant
que ferions-nous si elle venait a nous manquer  ?  La
morale de ce sermon est,  que tandis que je suis propre
a quelque chose,  il est de mon devoir,  comme epoux et
comme pere,  de tacher de tirer parti des circonstances
pour nous menager,  s'il est possible,  une vieillesse
totalement independante ;  et a notre petit un bien-
etre qui ne nous fasse pas renoncer au notre.  Ne vas
pas t'effrayer de ce preambule  ;  car tu dois savoir que
rien au monde ne me fera devier de la ligne que j'ai
constamment suivie depuis que j'existe.  Je n'ai pas
plus d'ambition que lorsque je suis entre avec toi dans
Phosnix Farm,  et certes je ne porte envie au sort de
qui que ce soit.  Le mien,  ma bonne amie,  n'est-il pas
mille et mille fois au-dessus?  Mais nous serions
coupables de ne pas profiter des lumieres de 1'experi-
ence.  L'espoir de nous partager entre ton pays et le
mien,  tant que nous ne seron pas plus aises,  est une
chimere a laquelle il ne m'est plus permis de songer  ;
et comme certainement je suis loin de vouloir renoncer
a un pays qui m'a donne une Fanny,  et qui renferme
d'autres etres qui me sont bien chers,  voici 1'idee qui

222 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

m'est venue pour me procurer cette aisance si neces-
*aire.

On n'a point encore nomine les commissaires des
relations comrnerciales en Angleterre.  Cette place a
Londres sera tres bonne,  et peut-etre,  quoiqu'elle soit
tres demandee,  ne me serait-il pas impossible de 1'ob-
tenir.  II est au moins probable que j'en pourrais avoir
une dans un des ports.  Mais je ne m'en soucierais
pas infiniment,  parceque le traitement serait beaucoup
moindre,  et tout au plus suffisant.  D'ailleurs,  quoi-
que la place de Londres fut en chef,  je crois,  sans trop
me flatter,  que je serais fort en etat de la remplir,  apres
m'etre consulte avec le chef dans cette partie,  homme
aimable qui a ete longtems consul general en Espagne.
II y a vingt ans que nous sommcs lies ensemble,  et le
ministre d'ailleurs appuyerait volontiers ma demande.

Repons moi sur-le-champ,  je t'en conjure.  Vois si
cela ne contrarie aucun de tes gouts ;  car tu sais qu'il
n'est pour moi qu'un seul bonheur possible.  Ai-je
besoin d'en dire davantage  ?

II y a quelques jours que me trouvant dans une
societe,  la conversation torn ha sur mon ancien metier,
et sur les droits que je pouvais faire valoir pour ob-
tenir le traitement que je demandais.  Le surlende-
main le maitre de la maison me dit :  "  Savez-vous
devant qui vous parliez avant-hier?"  "  Non  !" — "  C'e-

tait le General N ."— "  En verite  !"— "  Quand vous

futes parti,  il demanda votre nom,  et desqu'on vous cut
nomme,  *  Quoi !  dit-il,  cclui du comite central  ?  '  '  Oui.'

e Eh bien  !  je dois etre commandant-gene'ral de .

S'il veut s'embarquer avec moi,  je me fais fort de le
faire employer dans son grade d'officier general,  et de
le prendre pour mon second,'  "  &c.  &c.  &c.

II est tres possible qu'il se soit un peu avance ;
quoique,  son etat-major laisse a sa nomination,  il est pro
bable qu'il reussirait.  Dans tous les cas je lui devais
une reponse polie,  et ce devoir je m'en suis acquitte
en refusant.

1801]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

223

Je te quitte pour aller a fameuse revue que la
Premier Consul ne fait plus que les 15 de chaque
mois.  J'ai la plus vive impatieuce de voir tout a mon
aise cet etre qui remplit Tunivers entier de son nom.
Au revoir,  mon amie;  mes tendres respects a Norbury.
Consulte 1'ange des anges,  et embrasse-le pour moi,
ainsi que sa tres digne letter half.

J'embrasse de toute mon ame et de toutesmes forces
Alex,  et sa mere.  J'ai pleure de joie en lisont la lettre
de ce cher petit.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Burney.

West Hamble,  December,  1801.

WITH respect to the grand subject of your letter,

religious instruction for dear little E ,  I would I

could help you better than I can !  Had my Alex,
been a girl,  I could have had a far greater chance of
hitting upon something that might serve for a hint ,
for then I should have turned my thoughts that way,
and have been prepared with their result ;  but 1 have
only weighed what might be most serviceable to a boy.
And this is by no means the same thing,  though religion
for a man and a woman must be so precisely.  Many
would be my doubts as to the Old Testament for a girl,
on account of the fault of the translators in not guard
ing it from terms and expressions impossible — at least
utlerly improper,  to explain.  With respect,  to Alex.,
as I know he must read it at school,  I think it best to
parry off the danger of his own conjectures,  questions,
or suggestions,  by letting him read it completely with
me,  and giving such a turn to all I am sorry to let
him read as may satisfy his innocent and unsuspicious
mind for the present,  and,  perhaps — 't is my hope —
deter him from future dangerous inquiries,  by giving
him an internal idea.  He is already well informed
upon the subject.  So much,  however,  I think with

224 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

you that religion should spring from the heart,  that
my first aim is to instil into him that general venera
tion for the Creator of all things,  that cannot but ope
rate,  though perhaps slowly and silently,  in opening
his mind to pious feelings and ideas.  His nightly
prayers I frequently vary ;  whatever is constantly re
peated becomes repeated mechanically :  the Lord's
"Prayer,  therefore,  is by no means our daily prayer ;  for
as it is the first and most perfect composition in the
universe,  I would not have it lose its effect by fami
liarity.  When we repeat it,  it is always with a com
mentary.  In general the prayer is a recapitulation of
the errors and naughtiness,  or forbearance and hap
piness,  of the day ;  and this I find has more success in
impressing him with delight in goodness,  and shame
in its reverse,  than all the little or great books upon the
subject.

Mrs.  Trimmer I should suppose admirable for a
girl;  I have told you my motive for taking the Scrip
ture at large for a boy :  I would rather all risks and
dangers should be run with than without me.  We are
not yet far enough advanced for such books as you talk
of for E ;  but I will inquire what those are,  if pos
sible,  and let you know.  I think,  however,  conversation
and prayer are the great means for instruction on this
subject ;  there is no knowing when they read on what
is so serious,  what they understand,  or' how they under
stand  ;  and they should be allured,  not frightened,  into
a religious tendency.

Madame  (TArblay to Monsieur cCArblay.

West Ramble,  December 15,  1801.

THE relief,  the consolation of your frequent letters I
can never express,  nor my grateful sense of your find
ing time for them,  situated as you now are ;  and yet
that I have this moment read,  of the 15 Frimaire,  has
made my heart ache heavily.  Our hermitage is so dear

1801]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

225

to me — our book-room so precious,  and in its retire
ment,  its beauty of prospect,  form,  convenience,  and
'comforts,  so impossible to replace,  that I sigh,  and
deeply,  in thinking of relinquishing it.

Your happiness,  however,  is now all mine ;  if deli
berately,  therefore,  you wish to try a new system,  I will
surely try it with you,  be it what it may.  I will try
-any thing but what I try now — absence!  Think,  how
ever,  well,  mon tres cher ami,  before you decide upon
any occupation that robs you of being master of your
•own time,  leisure,  hours,  gardening,  scribbling,  and reading.

In the happiness you are now enjoying,  while it is
so new to you,  you are perhaps unable to appreciate
your own value of those six articles,  which,  except in
moments of your bitter regret at the privation of your
first friends and beloved country,  have made your life
so desirable.  Weigh,  weigh it well in the detail.  I
cannot write.

Should you find the sum total preponderate in favour
of your new scheme,  I will say no more.  All schemes
will to me be preferable to seeing you again here,  with
out the same fondness for the place,  and way of life,
that has made it to me what it has been.  With regard
to the necessity or urgency of the measure,  I could say
much that I cannot write.  You know now,  I can live
with you,  and you know I am not without views,  as well
as hopes,  of ameliorating our condition.

I will fully discuss the subject with our oracle.  His
kindness,  his affection for you !  Yesterday,  when I
produced your letter,  and the extracts from M.  Neckar,
and was going to read some,  he said,  in that voice
that is so penetratingly sweet,  when he speaks from
his heart — "  I had rather hear one line of d'Arblay's
than a volume of M.  Neckar's," — yet at the same time
begging to peruse the MS.  when I could spare it.  I
wish you could have heard the tone in which he pro
nounced those words :  it vibrated on my ears all day.

I have spent near two hours upon this theme with

VOL.    VI.  Q

226 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VI.

our dearest oracle and his other half.  He is much af
fected by the idea of any change that may remove us
from his daily sight ;  but,  with his unvarying disinter
estedness,  says he thinks such a place would be fully
acquitted by you.  If it is of consul here,  in London,
he is sure you would fill up all its functions even admi
rably.  I put the whole consideration into your own
hands;  what,  upon mature deliberation,  you judge to
be best,  I will abide by.  Heaven guide and speed
your determination !

1802]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

227

PART VII.

1802.

Disappointment to M.  d'Arblay — His negotiations with the French
Government — His claims disallowed  —  Letter from Madame
d'Arblay to Miss Planta,  acquainting her with the particulars —
Letter of M.  d'Arblay,  informing his wife of the determination
of the French Government — Reply of Madame d'Arblay — Letter
of M.  d'Arblay,  desiring that his wife and child should follow
him to Paris — Madame d'Arblay sets out on her Journey — Her
companions in the Diligence — Monsieur Anglais — Madame Ray
mond — Madame Blaizeau — First impressions of France — The
Commissaire — God Save the King in Calais — The Market-Placo
— Costume of the Market- Women — Demands at the Custom
House— Country between Calais and Paris— Restoration of the
Dimanche — Sunday Night Dance.

[THE beginning of this year was attended with much
anxiety to Madame d'Arblay.  Her husband,  disap
pointed in the hopes suggested by his friends,  of his
receiving employment as French Commercial Consul
in London,  directed his efforts to obtaining his half-
pay on the retired list of French officers.  This was
promised,  on condition that he should previously serve
at St.  Domingo,  where General Leclerc was then en
deavouring to put down Toussaint's insurrection.  He
accepted the appointment conditionally on his being
allowed to retire as soon as that expedition should be
ended.  This,  he was told,  was impossible,  and he
therefore hastened back to his family towards the end
of January.

In February,  a despatch followed him from General
Berthier,  then Minister at War,  announcing that his

o  -2

228 DIARY AND LETTERS      [PART VII.

appointment was made out,  and on his own terms.
To this M.  d'Arblay wrote his acceptance,  but re
peated a stipulation he had before made,  that while he
was ready to fight against the enemies of the Republic,
yet,  should future events disturb the peace lately esta
blished between France and England,  it was his unal
terable determination never to take up arms against
the British Government.  As this determination had
already been signified by M.  d'Arblay,  he waited rot
to hear the result of its repetition,  but set off again for
Paris to receive orders,  and proceed thence to St.  Do
mingo.

After a short time he was informed that his stipula
tion of never taking up arms against England could not
be accepted,  and that his military appointment was,  in
consequence,  annulled.  Having been required at the
Alien Office,  on quitting England,  to engage that he
would not return for the space of one year,  he now
proposed that Madame d'Arblay,  with her little boy,
should join him in France: — and among the following
letters will be found several in which she describes her
first impressions on reaching that country,  and the
society to which she was introduced.  ]

Madame d'Arblay to Miss Planta.

Camilla Cottage,  West Hamble,  February 11,  1802.

A MOST unexpected,  and,  to me,  severe event,  draws
from me now an account I had hoped to have reserved
for a far happier communication,  but which I must beg
you to endeavour to seek some leisure moment for
making known,  with the utmost humility,  to my royal
mistress.

Upon the total failure of every effort M.  d'Arblay
could make to recover any part of his natural inherit
ance,  he was advised by his friends to apply to the
French Government for half pay,  upon the claims of
his former military services.  He drew up a memoir,

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  229

openly stating his attachment and loyalty to his late
King,  and appealing for this justice after undeserved
proscription.  His right was admitted;  but he was
informed it could only be made good by his re-entering
the army ;  and a proposal to that effect was sent him
by Berthier,  the Minister of War.

The disturbance of his mind at an offer which so
many existing circumstances forbade his foreseeing,
was indescribable.  He had purposed faithfully retiring
to his hermitage,  with his fellow-hermit,  for the remain
der of his life ;  and nothing upon earth could ever in
duce him to bear arms against the country which had
given him asylum,  as well as birth to his wife and
child; — and yet a military spirit of honour,  born and
bred in him,  made it repugnant to all his feelings to
demand even retribution from the Government of his
own country,  yet refuse to serve it.  Finally,  there
fore,  he resolved to accept the offer conditionally; —
to accompany the expedition to St.  Domingo,  for the
restoration of order in the French colonies,  and then,  re
stored thus to his rank in the army,  to claim his retraite.
This he declared to the Minister of War,  annexing a
further clause of receiving his instructions immediately
from the Government.

The Minister's answer to this was,  that these con
ditions were impossible.

Relieved rather than resigned — though dejected to
find himself thus thrown out of every promise of pro
sperity,  M.  d'Arblay hastened back to his cottage,  to
the inexpressible satisfaction of the recluse he had left
there.  Short,  however,  has been its duration !  A
packet has just followed him,  containing a letter from
Berthier,  to tell him that his appointment was made out
according to his own demands  !  and enclosing another
letter to the Commander-in- Chief,  Leclerc,  with the
orders of Government for employing him,  delivered in
terms,  the most distinguished,  of his professional cha
racter.

230 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

All hesitation,  therefore,  now necessarily ends,  and
nothing remains for M.  d'Arblay but acquiescence and
despatch, — while his best consolation is in the assurance
he has universally received,  that this expedition has
the good wishes and sanction of England.  And,  to avert
any misconception or misrepresentation,  he has this day
delivered to M.  Otto a letter,  addressed immediately to
the First Consul,  acknowledging the flattering manner
in which he has been called forth,  but decidedly and
clearly repeating what he had already declared to the
War Minister,  that though he would faithfully fulfil the
engagement into which he was entering,  it was his
unalterable resolution never to take up arms against
the British Government.

I presume to hope this little detail may,  at some
convenient moment,  meet her Majesty's eyes — with
every expression of my profoundest devotion.

I am,  &c.

My own plans during the absence of M.  d'Arblay
are yet undetermined.  I am,  at present,  wholly con
signed to aiding his preparations — to me,  I own,  a
most melancholy task — but which I have the consola
tion to find gives pleasure to our mutual friends,  glad
to have him,  for a while,  upon such conditions,  quit
his spade and his cabbages.

Monsieur d'Arblay to Madame d'Arblay.

Paris,  ce 17 Ventose,  an 10  (Mars 8,  1802).

JE t'ecris par triplicata ma position actuelle:  c'est-
a-dire,  le parli que le Gouvcrnement a cru devoir
prendre de ne plus m'employer,  et 1'ordre que j'airegu
de regarder comme non avenues les lettres que m'avait
ecrites le Ministre de la Guerre.  La cause qu'il as-
signe a cette disgrace,  a laquelle je n'etais rien moins
que prepare,  est ma declaration de ne point servir contre
la patrie de ma femme,  qui pent encore ctre armee contre
la Republique.

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

231

1802]

Pardon,  ma bonne amie,  je t'avoue que j'ai ete de-
puis huit jours d'une melancolie a inquieter mes amis.
Tu en seras peu surprise quand tu reflechiras a tous
les sacrifices auxquels je m'etais resigne,  a toutes les
depenses a present inutiles qu'il m'a fallu faire,  aux
caquets qu'il m'a fallu supporter — enfin a 1'esperance a
jamais detruite d'un meilleur avenir,  dans lequel j'au-
rais ete pour quelque chose,  mais plus que tout cela a
I'lmpossibilite de voler pres de toi,  et a la necessite de
ne te faire part de ma position actuelle que lorsque
j'aurais une presque certitude qu'elle ne pouvait chan
ger.  A present,  ma bonne amie,  je te promets de m'oc-
cuper uniquement du bonheur que nous avons encore
devant nous.  Tu sais que lorsque j'ai une fois pris
mon parti,  je sais etre ferme.  He bien,  je t'assure que
ma plus grande soufFrance est venue de 1'incertitude
ou j'etais forcement plonge.  Comme il ne m'en reste
plus,  je veux m'arreter sur 1'idee si douce de te revoir
bientot.  Deja,  moi,  qui lorsqu'il a ete question de mon
depart m'etais persuade que je jouirais a St.  Domingue
de la meilleure sante,  vu mon age,  ma sobriete,  et le
soin que je comptais prendre de moi,  sans pour cela
faire moins qu'aucun autre relativement a mon service,
je cherche deja a me persuader que,  vu mon tempera
ment bilieux,  et mon desir — que dis-je? — mon besoin
de faire plus qu'un autre,  j'aurais fort bien pu succom-
ber a 1'influence presque pestilentielle d'un climat que
je commen^ais a regarder comme infiniment sain et
agreable !

Dans mon acces de melancolie,  qui en honneur se
dissipe depuis que j'ai cru pouvoir t'en dire la cause,
j'ai ete d'une telle sauvagerie que je m'etais mis dans
1'esprit,  et encore plus dans la tete qu'ainsi que le bouc
d'Israel je portais partout la marque de la reprobation.
En consequence,  je fuyais tout le monde,  et n'en etais
pas plus heureux,  ne pouvant causer librement avec
toi,  et ne t'ecrivant que des balivernes,  jepassais a faire
du mauvais sang en pure perte,  un terns,  qu'il m'eut

232 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII-

ete si doux d'employer aux epanchemens accoutumes
dc ma tendressc et de ma confiance pour toi.  Sans
cesse j'avais devant les ycux le Sieur Lullin,  de 1'Alien
Office,  et la promesse que j'ai ete contraint de fairc,
pour obtenir mon passeport,  d'etre au moins un an
avant de retourner en Angleterre.  L'insolence de ce
Lullin me fait encore bouillir le sang.  Quelques per-
sonnes en font cependant 1'eloge.  En ce cas 1'excep-
tion dont il m'a honore est flatteuse  !  Comine en tout
etat de cause il m'est impossible de t'aller trouver,  que
d'ailleurs tu devais toujours venir au printems,  j'cspere
que tu voudras bien consentir a me venir joindre avec
notre cher petit.  Prends done tes arrangemens en con
sequence.  Taclies de louer la maison pour un an ;  et
si tu as un logement a Richmond,  cherches a le ceder.
Adieu,  ma chere amie,  a revoir bientot toi et notre
cher,  bien cher Alex. !  Mes tendres respects a nos ex-
cellens amis,  ainsi qu'a nos bons parens.

Madame  (TArblay to Monsieur cCArblay.

West Hamble,  March 14,  1802.

0 MY DEARKST FRIEND,  —  Can the intelligence I
have most desired come to me in a form that forbids
my joy at it  ?     What tumultuous sensations your letter
of the 8th has raised !     Alas !  that to relinquish this
purpose should to you be as great unhappiness as to
me was its suggestion  !    I know not how to enter upon
the subject — how to express a single feeling.     I fear to
seem ungrateful to Providence,  or to you ungenerous.

1 will only,  therefore,  say,  that as all your motives have-
been the most strictly honourable,  it is not possible
they should not,  ultimately,  have justice done them-
by all.

That  /  feel for your disappointment I need not tell
you,  when you find it has power to shake to its found
ation what would else be the purest satisfaction of my

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  233

soul.  Let us — let us hope fairer days will ensue;  and
do not let the courage which was so prompt to support
you to St.  Domingo tail you in remaining at Paris.

What you say of the year's probation 1 knew not be
fore.  Would you have me make any inquiry if it be
irreversible?  I should think not;  and am most ready
and eager to try by every means in my power,  if you
will authorize me.  If not,  to follow you,  whithersoever
you will,  is much less my duty than my delight !  You
have only to dictate whither,  and how,  and every doubt,
every fear,  every difficulty,  will give way to my eager
desire to bring your little boy to you.  Would I not
have left even him to have followed you and your fate
even to St.  Domingo?  'T is well,  however,  you did not
listen to me,  for that poor little susceptible soul could
not,  as yet,  lose us both at once,  and be preserved him
self,  lie has lived so singularly alone with us,  and for
us,  that he does not dream of any possible existence in
which we should be both separated from him.

But of him — our retreat — our books — our scribbling
— our garden — our unique mode of life — I must not
talk to you now,  now that your mind,  thoughts,  views,,
and wishes are all distorted from themes of peace,,
domestic life,  and literary pursuits ;  yet time,  I hope,
reflection,  your natural philosophy of accommodating
yourself to your fate,  and your kindness for those who
are wholly devoted to you,  will bring you back to the
love of those scenes,  modes,  and sentiments,  which for
upwards of eight years have sufficed for our mutual
happiness.  1 had been negotiating for apartments at
Twickenham,  opposite Richmond,  ever since you went,
and on Friday I wrote to close with the engagement.
This very morning I have two letters,  full of delight
at our approaching neighbourhood.  Miss C.  her
self writes in tears,  she says,  of joy,  that I should be
so near her,  and that you should have wished it,  and
blesses you for your confidence in her warm friendship.
It is quite impossible to read of such affection and zeal

234 DIARY AND LETTERS  [P.ART VII.

and goodness with dry eyes.  I am confounded how to
disenchant her — yet so generous and disinterested she
is,  that,  however disappointed,  she will be sure to
rejoice for me in our re-union — for you,  my dearest
friend!  ah!  who can rejoice?  Your mind was all
made up to the return of its professional pursuits,  and
I am frightened out of all my own satisfaction by my
dread of the weight of this chagrin upon your spirits.
What you can do to avert depression,  that cruel under-
miner of every faculty that makes life worth sustaining,
I beseech you to call forth.  Think how  /  have worked
for fortitude since Feb.  1 5th.  Alas  !  vainly I have tried
what most I wished — my poor pen ! — but now  "  occupe-
toi pour realiser Tesperance"  Those words will operate
like magic,  I trust ;  and I will not close my eyes this
night till I have committed to paper some opening to
a new essay.  Be good,  then,  and don't let me be as
unhappy this way as I have been the other.  Direct
always to me,  Norbury Park,  Dorking.  Heaven bless
— bless you  !

M.  d'Arblay to Madame d'Arblay.

Ce 21 Ventose,  an 10  (12 Mars,  1802}

IL me semble,  ma bonne amie,  qu'il y a un siecle
que je n'ai eu de tes nouvelles ;  et tu peux juger avec
quelle impatience j 'en attends.  L'assassinat pretendu
du moins de Toussaint,  en me donnant les plus vives
inquietudes sur les alarmes que cette nouvelle n'aura
pas manque de te causer,  m'a beaucoup calme sur le
contr'ordre que j'ai requ  ;  et je te jure qu'actuellement
je suis presque reconcile sur mon desappointement.
Comme je t'ai ecrit par quatre voies differentes,  je ne
te repeterai point ici ce que je t'ai mande a ce sujet.

Tu as sans doute fait part a Norbury des lettres que
je t'ai envoy ees.

T'ai-je mande que j'avais envoye copie de ces memes

1802]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

235

lettres a M.  de Lafayette?  Je les accompagnais de
quelques reflexions a peu pres semblables a celles que
je t'ai ecrites.

M.  de Lafayette vint sur le champ a Paris,  et de-
manda un rendezvous a Bonaparte,  qui le lui accorda
sur le champ.  En 1'abordant,  M.  de Lafayette lui dit,
"  Je viens vous parler d'un de mes amis et com-
pagnons — de D'Arblay."  "  Je connais cette affaire,"
dit le Premier Consul,  d'un ton qui marquait plus de
bienveillance que je n'osais 1'esperer,  ou du moins
qu'on ne me 1'avait fait craindre.

"  Je vous assure,''  me dit le lendemain M.  de La
fayette,  "  que vous avez pres du Premier Consul de
bons amis qui lui avaient deja parle de votre affaire.
II m'a paru,  des le premier instant,  plutot dispose en
votre faveur que fache contre vous.  II a ecoute avec
attention et bonte tout ce que j'ai eu a dire,  a rendu
justice a votre loyaute ;  et,  sur ce que je lui ai parle de
la crainte qu'on vous avait inspiree relativement a
rimpression facheuse qui pouvait lui rester sur cette
affaire,  m'a repondu positivement,  que cela ne nuirait en
aucune maniere a vos droits acquit,  et quil ne considererait
dans cette demarche que le mari de  'Cecilia'  "

J'espere que tu ne seras pas tres mecontente de la
maniere dont finit cette affaire,  qui m'a donne beaucoup
de chagrin.  Je crois meme pouvoir t'ajouter en confi
dence que je ne suis pas,  peut-etre,  fort eloigne d'avoir
ma retraite.

Viens done me trouver,  ma bonne amie.  Comment
se porte Maria  ?  Pourras-tu t'arranger pour venir
avec elle?  ou bien preferes-tu venir a Douvre avec
Alex.,  sous la garde d'un de tes freres,  pour t'y em-
barquer et arriver a Calais,  ou j'irais t'attendre?  Cet
arrangement serait bien plus selon mon coeur  ;  mais
outre que je voudrais bien que tu eusses un homme
dans le passage,  cela serait bien plus cher.  Ne manque
pas surtout de prendre un passeport de Monsieur Otto,
et de te munir non seulement de nos actes de mariage,

236 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

mais de celui de naissance de notre cher petit,  le tout
lien legalise par la signature non seulement du juge de
paix,  mais  &un notaire public.

Madame d?Arblay to Doctor Bumey.

March 30,  1802.

Now,  indeed,  my dearest father,  I am in an excess of
hurry not to be exceeded by even any of yours.  I have a
letter from M.  d'Arblay,  to tell me he has already
taken us an apartment,  and he dates from the 5th of
April,  in Paris,  where he has reasons for remaining*
some time,  before we go to his good uncle,  at Joigny.

I am to take the little sweet child with me you saw
here one day,  Mile,  de Chavagnac,  whose father,
le Comte de Chavagnac,  has desired her restoration.
My kind Mrs.  Lock is almost in affliction at parting*
with her,  though glad of an opportunity of sending
her with friends the poor thing knows and loves.

I fear,  I have so very much to do here,  that I shall
have a very,  very short enjoyment of my beloved father
at Chelsea;  but I shall get there as soon as possible,
and stay there to my last moment.  I have a thousand
things,  and very curious ones,  to tell you ;  but I must
defer them for vive voix.  I am really bewildered and
almost trembling with hurry,  and with what I am going
to undertake  !  Yet through all,  I bless God every mo
ment of my life that M.  d'Arblay went not to that pes
tilential climate !

I do all — all I can to keep up my courage — or rather,
to make up ;  and when I feel faltering,  I think of St.
Domingo  !  Every body that knows St.  Domingo now
owns that he had hardly a chance for safety,  independ
ent of tempests in the voyage,  and massacres in the
mountains.  May I but be able to console him for all
he has sacrificed to my peace and happiness!  and no-
privation will be severe,  so that at our stated period,
Michaelmas twelvemonth,  we return to my country,

1802]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

237

and to my dearest father,  whom Heaven bless and
preserve,  prays his dutiful,  affectionate and grateful,
and devoted daughter,

F.  o'A.

P.S.  Monsieur de Lally has put off his journey ;  I
shall therefore not wait for him,  but set out with my
two children.

DIARY RESUMED.

(Addressed to Dr.  Burney.}

*****

I SEIZE,  at length,  upon the largest paper I can pro
cure,  to begin to my beloved father some account of
our journey,  and if I am able,  I mean to keep him a
brief journal of my proceedings during this destined
year or eighteen months'  separation, — secure of his
kindest interest in all that I may have to relate,  and
certain he will be anxious to know how I go on in a
strange land  :  't is my only way now of communicating
with him,  and I must draw from it one of my dearest
worldly comforts,  the hopes of seeing his loved hand
with some return.

Thursday,  April 15,  1802.

William and John conducted my little boy and me
in excellent time to the inn in Piccadilly,  where we
met my kind Mrs.  Lock,  and dear little Adrienne de
Chavagnac.  The parting there was brief and hurried ;
and I set oft'  on my grand expedition,  with my two
dear young charges,  exactly at five o'clock.

*****

Paris,  April 15,  1802.

"  The book-keeper came to me eagerly,  crying  "  vite,
vite,  Madame,  prenez votre place dans la diligence,  car
void un Monsieur Anglais,  quisurement vaprendre la meil-
leureT — en effet,  ce Monsieur Anglais did not disap
point his expectations,  or much raise mine ;  for he not

238 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

only took the best place,  but contrived to ame
liorate it by the little scruple with which he made
every other worse,  from the unbridled expansion in
which he indulged his dear person,  by putting out his
elbows against his next,  and his knees and feet against
his opposite neighbour.  He seemed prepared to look
upon all around him with a sort of sulky haughtiness,
pompously announcing himself as a commander of dis
tinction who had long served at Gibraltar and various
places,  who had travelled thence through France,  and
from France to Italy,  who was a native of Scotland,
and of proud,  though unnamed genealogy;  and was
now going to Paris purposely to behold the First
Consul,  to whom he meant to claim an introduction
through Mr.  Jackson.  His burnt complexion,  Scotch
accent,  large bony face and figure,  and high and distant
demeanour,  made me easily conceive and believe him
a highland chief.  I never heard his name,  but I think
him a gentleman born,  though not gently bred.

The next to mention is a Madame Raymond or
Grammont,  for I heard not distinctly which,  who seemed
very much a gentlewoman,  and who was returning to
France,  too uncertain of the state of her affairs to know
whether she might rest there or not.  She had only
one defect to prevent my taking much interest in her;
this was,  not merely an avoidance,  but a horror of
being touched by either of my children ;  who,  poor little
souls,  restless and fatigued by the confinement they
endured,  both tried to fling themselves upon every
passenger in turn;  and though by every one they were
sent back to their sole prop,  they were by no one
repulsed with such hasty displeasure as by this old
lady,  who seemed as fearful of having the petticoat of
her gown,  which was stiff,  round,  and bulging,  as if
lined with parchment,  deranged,  as if she had been
attired in a hoop for Court.

The third person was a Madame Blaizeau,  who
seemed an exceeding good sort of a woman,,  gay,  vo~

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  239

luble,  good humoured,  and merry.  All we had of
amusement sprang from her sallies,,  which were uttered
less from a desire of pleasing others,  her very natural
character having none of the high polish bestowed by
the Graces,  than from a jovial spirit of enjoyment
which made them produce pleasure to herself.  She
soon and frankly acquainted us she had left France to
be a governess to some young ladies before the Revo
lution,  and under the patronage,  as I think,  of the
Duke of Dorset ;  she had been courted,  she told us,  by
an English gentleman farmer,  but he would not change
his religion for her,  nor she for him,  and so,  when
every thing was bought for her wedding,  they broke off
the connexion ;  and she afterwards married a French
man.  She had seen a portrait,  set richly in diamonds,
of the King,  prepared for a present to the First Con
sul  ;  and described its superb ornaments and magnifi
cence,  in a way to leave no doubt of the fact.  She
meant to stop at St.  Denys,  to enquire if her mother
yet lived,  having received no intelligence from or ot
her,  these last ten eventful years  !

At Canterbury,  while the horses were changed,  my
little ones and 1 went to the cathedral ;  but dared merely
seize sufficient time to view the outside and enter the
principal aisle.  I was glad even of that much,  as its
antique grandeur gave me a pleasure which I always
16ve to cherish in the view of fine old cathedrals,  those
most permanent monuments of what our ancestors
thought reverence to God,  as manifested in munifi
cence to the place dedicated to his worship.

At Dover we had a kind of dinner- supper in one,
and my little boy and girl and I retired immediately
after it,  took some tea in our chamber,  and went to rest.

Friday,  April 16.

As we were not to sail till twelve,  I had hoped to
have seen the Castle and Shakspeare's Cliff,  but most
unfortunately it rained all the morning,  and we were
confined to the inn,  except for the interlude of the

240 v DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VII.

custom-house,  where,  however,  the examination was so
slight,  and made with such civility,  that we had no other
trouble with it than a wet walk and a few shillings.

Our passports were examined ;  and we then went to
the port,  and,  the sea being perfectly smooth,  were
lifted from the quay to the deck of our vessel with as
little difficulty as we could have descended from a
common chair to the ground.

The calm which caused our slow passage and our
sickness,  was now favourable,  for it took us into the
port of Calais so close and even with the quay,  that we
scarcely accepted even a hand to aid us from the vessel
to the shore.

The quay was lined with crowds of people,  men,
women,  and children,  and certain amphibious females,
who might have passed for either sex,  or anything else
in the world,  except what they really were,  European
women !  Their men's hats,  men's jackets,  and men's
shoes ;  their burnt skins,  and most savage-looking
petticoats,  hardly reaching,  nay,  not reaching their
knees,  would have made me instantly believe any ac
count I could have heard of their being just imported
from the wilds of America.

The vessel was presently filled with men,  who,
though dirty and mean,  were so civil and gentle,  that
they could not displease,  and who entered it so softly
and quietly,  that,  neither hearing nor seeing their ap
proach,  it seemed as if they had availed themselves
of some secret trap-doors through which they had
mounted to fill the ship,  without sound or bustle,  in a
single moment.  When we were quitting it,  however,
this tranquillity as abruptly finished,  for in an instant
a part of them rushed round me,  one demanding to
carry Alex.,  another Adrienne,  another seizing my
ecritoire,  another my arm,  and some one,  I fear,  my
parasol,  as I have never been able to find it since.

We were informed we must not leave the ship till
Monsieur le Commissaire arrived to carry us,  I think,

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  241

to the municipality of Calais to show our passports.
Monsieur le Commissaire,  in white with some red trap
pings,  soon arrived.,  civilly hastening himself quite out
of breath to save us from waiting.  We then mounted
the quay,  and I followed the rest of the passengers,
who all followed the commissary,  accompanied by two
men carrying the two children,  and two more carrying,
one my ecritoire,  and the other insisting on conducting
its owner.  The quantity of people that surrounded
and walked with us,  surprised me ;  and their decency,
their silence,  their quietness astonished me.  To fear
them was impossible,  even in entering France with all
the formed fears hanging upon its recent though past
horrors.

But on coming to the municipality,  I was,  I own,  ex
tremely ill at ease,  when upon our gouvernante's de
siring me to give the commissary my passport,  as the
rest of the passengers had done,  and my answering it
was in my ecritoire,  she exclaimed,  "  Vitel vite !
cherchez-le,  ou vous serez arretee  /"  You may be sure I was
quick enough  ! — or at least tried to be so,  for my fingers
presently trembled,  and I could hardly put in the key.

In the hall to which we now repaired,  our pass
ports were taken and deposited,  and we had new
ones drawn up and given us in their stead.  On
quitting this place we were accosted by a new crowd,
all however as gentle,  though not as silent,  as our
first friends,  who recommended various hotels to us,
one begging we would go to Grandsire,  another to
Duroc,  another to Meurice — and this last prevailed with
the gouvernante,  whom I regularly followed,  not from
preference,  but from the singular horror my otherwise
worthy and well-bred old lady manifested,  when,  by
being approached by the children,  her full round coats
risked the danger of being modernized into the flimsy,
falling drapery of the present day.

At Meurice's our goods were entered,  and we heard
that they would be examined at the custom-house in

VOL.  vi.  R

242 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIT.

the afternoon.  We breakfasted,  and the crowd of fees
which were claimed by the captain,  steward,  sailors,
carriers,  and heaven knows who besides,  are inconceiv
able.  I gave whatever they asked,  from ignorance of
what was due,  and from fear of offending those of
whose extent still less of whose use of power I could
form no judgment.  I was the only one in this predica
ment;  the rest refusing or disputing every demand.
They all,  but us,  went out to walk ;  but I stayed to
write to my dearest father,  to Mrs.  Lock,  and my ex
pecting mate.

We were all three too much awake by the new scene
to try for any repose,  and the hotel windows sufficed for
our amusement till dinner ;  and imagine,  my dearest
sir,  how my repast was seasoned,  when I tell you that,
as soon as it began,  a band of music came to the window
and struck up  "  God save the King'*  I can never tell
you what a pleased emotion was excited in my breast
by this sound on a shore so lately hostile,  and on
which I have so many,  so heartfelt motives for wishing
peace and amity perpetual !

This over,  we ventured out of the hotel to look at
the street.  The day was fine,  the street was clean,
two or three people who passed us,  made way for the
children as they skipped out of my hands,  and I saw
such an unexpected appearance of quiet,  order,  and
civility,  that,  almost without knowing it,  we strolled
from the gate,  and presently found ourselves in the
market-place,  which was completely full of sellers,  and
buyers,  and booths,  looking like a large English fair.

The queer,  gaudy jackets,  always of a different colour
from the petticoats of the women,  and their immense
wing-caps,  which seemed made to double over their
noses,  but which all flew back so as to discover their
ears,  in which I regularly saw large and generally
drop gold ear-rings,  were quite as diverting to myself
as to Alex,  and Adrienne.  Many of them,  also,  had
gold necklaces,  chains,  and crosses  ;  but ear-rings all :

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  243

even the maids who were scrubbing or sweeping,
ragged wretches carrying burdens on their heads or
shoulders,  old women selling fruit or other eatables,
gypsey-looking creatures with children tied to their
backs-— all wore these long,  broad,  large,  shining ear
rings.

Beggars we saw not — no,  not one,  all the time we
stayed or sauntered ;  and for civility and gentleness,
the poorest and most ordinary persons we met or
passed might be compared with the best dressed and
best looking walkers in the streets of our metropolis,
and still to the disadvantage of the latter.  I cannot
say how much this surprised me,  as I had conceived an
horrific idea of the populace of this country,  imagining
them all transformed into bloody monsters.

Another astonishment I experienced equally pleasing,
though not equally important to my ease  ;  I saw innu
merable pretty women and lovely children,  almost all
of them extremely fair.  I had been taught to expect
nothing but mahogany complexions and hideous fea
tures instantly on crossing the strait of Dover.  When
this,  however,  was mentioned in our party afterwards,
the Highlander exclaimed,  "But Calais was in the
hands of the English so many years,  that the English
race there is not yet extinct."

The perfect security in which I now saw we might
wander about,  induced us to walk over the whole town,
and even extend our excursions to the ramparts sur
rounding it.  It is now a very clean and pretty town,  and
so orderly that there was no more tumult or even noise
in the market-place,  where the people were so close
together as to form a continual crowd,  than in the bye-
streets leading to the country,  where scarcely a pas
senger was to be seen.  This is certainly a remark
which,  I believe,  could never be made in England.

When we returned to the hotel,  I found all my
fellow-travellers had been to the custom-house  !  I had
quite forgotten,  or rather neglected to enquire the hour

B 2

244 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART

for this formality,  and was beginning to alarm myself
lest I was out of rule,  when a young man,  a commis
sary,,  I heard,  of the hotel,  came to me and asked if I
had anything contraband to the laws of the Republic.
T answered as I had done before.  "  Mais,  Madame,
avez-vous quelque chose de neuf  ?"  "  Oui,  Monsieur.'r
—  "  Quelques jupons?"  "  Beaucoup,  Monsieur.'' —
"  Quelques bas de coton  ?"  "  Plusieurs,  Monsieur."
— "  Eh bien  !  Madame,  tout cela sera saisi." — "  Mais,
Monsieur  !  quand ce n'est pas du tout pour vendre,
seulement pour porter  ?  "  "  C'est egal,  Madame,  tout
ga sera saisi." — "  Eh !  mais que faut-il done faire  ?"
"  II faut,  Madame,  payer genereusement ;  et si vousetes
bien sure qu'il n'y a rien a vendre,  alors peut-etre —

I entreated him to take charge himself as to what
was right and generous,  and he readily undertook to go
through the ceremony for me without my appearing.
I was so much frightened,  and so happy not to be called
upon personally,  that I thought myself very cheaply off
in his after-demand of a guinea and a half.  I had two
and a half to pay afterwards for additional luggage.

We found reigning through Calais a general joy and
satisfaction at the restoration of Dimanche and abolition
of Decade.  I had a good deal of conversation with the
maid of the inn,  a tall,  fair,  extremely pretty woman,
and she talked much upon this subject,  and the delight
it occasioned,  and the obligation all France was under
to the Premier Consul for restoring religion and wor
ship.

Sunday,  April 1 8.

We set off for Paris at five o'clock in the morning.  The
country broad,  flat,  or barrenly steep — without trees,
without buildings,  and scarcely inhabited — exhibited a
change from the fertile fields,  and beautiful woods and
gardens,  and civilization of Kent,  so sudden and un
pleasant that I only lamented the fatigue of my position,
which regularly impeded my making use of this chasm
of pleasure and observation for repose.  This part of

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  245

France must certainly be the least frequented,  for we
rarely met a single carriage,  and the villages,  few and
distant,  seemed to have no intercourse with each other.
Dimanche,  indeed,  might occasion this stiffness,  for we
saw,  at almost all the villages,  neat and clean peasants
going to or coming from mass,  and seeming indescrib
ably elated and happy by the public permission of divine
worship on its originally appointed day.

I was struck with the change in Madame Ray
mond,  who joined us in the morning from another
hotel.  Her hoop was no more visible;  her petti
coats were as lank,  or more so,  than her neighbours' ;
and her distancing the children was not only at an end,
but she prevented me from renewing any of my cau
tions to them,  of not incommoding her  ;  and when we
were together a few moments,  before we were joined by
the rest,  she told me,  with a significant smile,  not to
tutor the children about her any more,  as she only
avoided them from having something of consequence
to take care of,  which was removed.  I then saw she
meant some English lace or muslin,  which she had
carried in a petticoat,  and,  since the Custom-house
examination was over,  had now packed in her trunk.

Poor lady  !  I fear this little merchandise was all her
hope of succour on her arrival !  She is amongst the
emigrants who have twice or thrice returned,  but not
yet been able to rest in their own country.

What most in the course of this journey struck me,
was the satisfaction of all the country people,  with
whom I could converse,  at the restoration of the Di
manche i and the boasts they now ventured to make of
having never kept the Decade,  except during the dread
ful reign of Robespierre,  when not to oppose any of
his severest decrees was insufficient for safety,  it was
essential even to existence to observe them with every
parade of the warmest approval.

The horrible stories from every one of that period of
wanton as well as political cruelty,  I must have judged

ART VIL

246 DIARY AND LETTERS  [P.

exaggerated,  either through the mist of fear or the heats
of resentment,  but that,  though the details had innu
merable modifications,  there was but one voice for the
excess of barbarity.

At a little hamlet near Clermont,  where we rested
some time,  two good old women told us that this
was the happiest day  ('t was Sunday)  of their lives  ;  that
they had lost le bon Dieu for these last ten years,  but
that Bonaparte had now found him !  In another cot
tage we were told the villagers had kept their own
Cure all this time concealed,  and though privately and
with fright,  they had thereby saved their souls through
the whole of the bad times !  And in another,  some
poor creatures said they were now content with their
destiny,  be it what it might,  since they should be
happy,  at least,  in the world to come ;  but that while
denied going to mass,  they had all their sufferings ag
gravated by knowing that they must lose their souls
hereafter,  besides all that they had to endure here !

O my dearest father !  that there can have existed
wretches of such diabolical wickedness as to have
snatched,  torn,  from the toiling indigent every ray even
of future hope  !  Various of these little conversations
extremely touched me ;  nor was I unmoved,  though
not with such painful emotion,  on the sight of the
Sunday night dance,  in a little village through which
we passed,  where there seemed two or three hundred
peasants engaged in that pastime ;  all clean and very
gaily dressed,  yet all so decent and well behaved,  that,
but for the poor old fiddlers,  we might have driven on,
and not have perceived the rustic ball.

Here ends the account of my journey,  and if it has
amused my dearest father,  it will be a true delight to
me to have scribbled it.  My next letter brings me to
the capital,  and to the only person who can console me
for my always lamented absence from himself.

Witness,  F.  D'ARBLAY.

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  247

PART VIII

Letter of Madame d'Arblay to Miss Planta,  describing her recent
Journey — Popularity of Bonaparte — Visits and Visitors — La
Maison a Vendre at the Theatre Feydeau — Mrs.  Darner and

Miss B A Party to the Opera Butfa — Assembly at Madame

d'Henin's — Character of Madame de Stael — Note from her to
Madame d'Arblay — Her reply — La Folie de Chartres — A Visit
from Madame de Lafayette— Visit to the Tuileries — Etiquette in
the Palace — M.  d'Arblay 's old Comrades — Waiting for the First
Consul — The Prince of Orange — Second Consul,  Cambaceres —
Bonaparte at the Tuileries — The Review— The First Consul
receiving a Petition — M.  d'Arblay's relatives at Joigny — Louis-
Bonaparte — Madame de Souza — Sir Sidney Smith.

Madame d'Arblay to Miss Planta.

Paris,  April 27,  1802.

A WEEK have I been here,  my dear Miss Planta,  so
astonishingly engaged,  so indispensably occupied,  or
so suffering from fatigue,  that I have not been able
till now to take up my pen,  except to satisfy my dear
father of our safe arrival.  To give you some idea of
these engagements,  occupations,  smd fatigues,  I must begin
with the last.

We were a whole long,  languid day,  a whole restless,
painful night,  upon the sea ;  my little Alex,  sick as
death,  suffering if possible yet more than myself,,
though I had not a moment of ease and comfort.  My
little Adrienne de Chavagnac was perfectly well all
the time,  singing and skipping about the cabin,  and
amusing every one by her innocent enjoyment of the
novelty of the scene.

At Calais we spent a day,  and half a night to refit ;
and pray try to imagine my pleased emotion and sur-

248 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

prise,  when,  as soon as we were seated to dinner at the
hotel,  a band of musicians came to the window,  with
French horns and other instruments,  and struck up
"  God save the King."  So unexpected a sound in a
foreign country,  and a country so lately hostile,  affected

me with uncommon pleasure.

*  *  *  #  *

As to my occupations; — my little apartment to ar
range,  my trunks and baggage to unpack and place,
my poor Adrienne to consign to her friends,  my Alex,
to nurse from a threatening malady ;  letters to deliver,
necessaries to buy ;  a femme de chambre to engage  ;
and,  most important of all !  my own sumptuous ward
robe to refit,  and my own poor exterior to reorganize  !
I see you smile,  methinks,  at this hint ;  but what smiles
would brighten the countenance of a certain young
lady called Miss Rose,  who amused herself by antici
pation,  when I had last the honour of seeing her,  with
the changes I might have to undergo,  could she have
heard the exclamations which followed the examination
of my attire  !  "  This won't do !  That you can never
wear !  This you can never be seen in  !  That would
make you stared at as a curiosity! — Three petticoats!
no one wears more than one ! — Stays  ?  everybody has
left off even corsets! — Shift-sleeves?  not a soul now
wears even a chemise  !  "  &c.  &c.  In short,  I found all
that I possessed seemed so hideously old fashioned,  or
so comically rustic,  that as soon as it was decreed I
must make my appearance in the grand monde,  hopeless
of success in exhibiting myself in the costume Frangais,
I gave over the attempt,  and ventured to come forth
as a Gothic Anglaise,  who had never heard of,  or never

heeded,  the reigning metamorphoses.

*  *  *  *  *

As to my engagements ; — when should I finish,  should
I tell of all that have been made or proposed,  even in
the short space of a single week  ?  The civilities I
have met with,  contrary to all my expectations,  have

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  249

not more amazed me for myself,  than gratified me for
M.  d'Arblay,  who is keenly alive to the kind,  I might
say distinguished,  reception 1 have been favoured with
by those to whom my arrival is known.

Your favourite hero is excessively popular at this
moment from three successive grand events,  all occur
ring within the short time of my arrival, — the Ratifi
cation of the Treaty of Peace — the Restoration of Sun
day,  and Catholic Worship — and the amnesty of the
Emigrants.  At the Opera Buffa,  the loge in which I
sat was exactly opposite to that of the First Consul;
but he and his family are all at Malmaison.

Adieu,

My dear Miss P.,  and believe me ever,
Your affectionate friend and servant,

F.  D'ARBLAY.

JOURNAL RESUMED.
(Addressed to Dr.  Burney.}

Paris,  April 1,  1802.

ALMOST immediately after my arrival in Paris,  I was
much surprised by a visit from the ci-devant Prince de
Beauveau,  Madame his wife,  and Mademoiselle de
Mortemar her sister,  all brought by Madame d'Henin.
If gratified in the first instance by a politeness of at
tention so little my due and so completely beyond my
expectations,  how was my pleasure enhanced when I
found they all three spoke English with the utmost
ease and fluency,  and how pleased also at the pleasure
I was able to give them in reward of their civility,  by
a letter I had brought from Mrs.  Harcourt,  which was
received with the warmest delight by Mademoiselle de
Mortemar ;  and a message from a young lady named
Elizabeth,  with the profouudest gratitude.

April 24.

This morning Madame d'Henin was so kind as to
accompany us in making our visit to Madame de

250 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

Beauveau her niece,  and Mademoiselle de Mortemar.
We found them at home with M.  de Beauveau,  and
they indulged me with the sight of their children,
who are the most flourishing and healthy possible,  and
dressed and brought up with English plainness and
simplicity.

The visit was very pleasant,  and Madame d'Henin
made a party for us all to meet again the next day,
and go to the Opera Buffa.

Upon our entrance into the Hotel Marengo,  we met
M.  Lajard,  who came to introduce one of his brothers
to me,  and to offer us places in a loge to the Theatre
Feydeau.  We went late,  and arrived in the middle of
an opera of which I know not the name,  but which was
quite in the heroics,  though the airs were mixed with
speeches not recitative.  All my pleasure,  I confess,
was from the after-piece,  in which the heroics were
omitted.  It is called La Maison a Vendre,  and two
very agreeable singers and charming actors,  Martin
and Elleviou,  delighted the whole audience,  and would
have had me amongst their strongest admirers if I
were capable of following them in the words which
make so much the chief charm of their performance ;
but I have not yet acquired the use of listening with
much profit to the sense conveyed by lengthened tones
in the French language.

M.  Charles de Poix announced to us that Paesiello
was just arrived in Paris.

I have heard much of the visit of Mrs.  Darner and

the Miss B s to Paris,  and their difficulty to get

introduced to the First Consul.  A lady here told us
she had been called upon by Miss B ,  who had com
plained with much energy upon this subject,  saying,
"  We have been everywhere — seen everything — heard
everybody — beheld such sights !  listened to such dis
course  !  joined such society !  and all to obtain his no
tice  !  Don't you think it very extraordinary that he
should not himself desire to see Mrs.  Darner  ?"

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  251

"  Madame,"  replied the lady,  "  perhaps if you had
done but half this,  the First Consul might have de
sired to see you both."

"  But you don't imagine,"  answered she,  laughing,
"  we came over from England to see you ci-devants  ?
We can see such as you at home  !"

She was gone before our arrival ;  and,  as I under
stand,  succeeded at last in obtaining an introduction.

They were both,  Mrs.  Damer and Miss B ,  as I am,

told,  very gay and agreeable,  as well as enterprising,
and extremely well repandues.

April 25.

I was not much better in the evening,  but the party
for the Opera Bufia being formed by Madame d'Henin
on my account,  my going was indispensable.  She had
borrowed the loge of M.  de Choiseul,  which,  being en
tailed upon the family a perpetuite,  has in a most extra
ordinary manner continued unalienated through the
whole course of massacres and proscriptions to the pre
sent day,  when the right owner possesses it.  It is the
largest and best box,  except that which is opposite
to it,  in the theatre.

M.  and Madame de Beauveau.  Mademoiselle de

,  and M.  Malhouet,  made the party invited ;

but M.  Malhouet failing,  M.  de Guignes,  formerly
ambassador in England,  took his place.  You remem
ber him,  my dear padre,  at one of your concerts,  and
ses gens.  Do you think I could help recollecting his
haste  ?

The opera was Le Nozze di Dorina,  by Sarti,  and
extremely pretty  ;  though I wished it had been as new

to M.  C de P as to myself,  for then he would

not have divided my attention by obligingly singing-
every note with every performer.  In truth,  I was still so
far from recovered from the fatigue of my journey,  that
I was lulled to a drowsiness the most distressing before
the end of the second act,  which being but too obvious.

252 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

Madame d'Henin and M.  d'Arblay took me away before
I risked a downright nap by waiting for the third.

April 26.

The assembly at Madame d'Henin's was one of the
most select and agreeable at which I was ever present.
Assembly,  however,  I ought not to call a meeting
within the number of twenty.  But I was uneasy for
my poor Alex.,  and therefore stole away as soon as
possible ;  not,  however,  till Madame de Tesse made a
party for us for the following Thursday at her house,
nor till I had held a private discourse with Made
moiselle de upon my embarrassment as to

Madame de Stael,  from the character she held in
England ;  which embarrassment was not much light
ened by her telling me it was not held more fair in
France !  Yet,  that everywhere the real evil is highly
exaggerated by report,  envy,  and party-spirit,  all
allow.  She gives,  however,  great assemblies at which
all Paris assist,  and though not solicited or esteemed
by her early friends and acquaintance,  she is admired,
and pitied,  and received by them.  I would she were
gone to Copet !

Madame de Grand maison,  a very favourite friend of
M.  d'Arblay,  came to visit me.  She is a very hand
some woman,  and thought very clever and agreeable  ;
but I was too much disturbed either to enjoy or judge
of her conversation.  What most perplexed me at
this period was the following note from Madame de
Stael  :—

From Madame de Stael to Madame d'ArUay.

je voudrois vous temoigner mon empressement,
Madame,  et je crains d'etre indiscrette.*  j'espere que
vous aurez la bonte de me faire dire quand vous serez
assez remise des fatigues de votre voyage pour que je

*  Madame de Stael's orthography is here preserved.

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  253

puisse avoir 1'honneur de vous voir sans vous impor-
tuner.

NECKER STAEL DE H.
Ce 4 florial.

How is it possible,  when even the common civility
of a card for her card is yet unreturned,  that she can
have brought herself thus to descend from her proud
heights to solicit the renewal of an acquaintance broken
so abruptly in England,  and so palpably shunned in
France?  Is it that the regard she appeared to con
ceive for me in England was not only sincere but con
stant?  If so,  I must very much indeed regret a waste
of kindness her character and conduct make it impos
sible for me to repay,  even though,  on this spot,  I am
assured all her misfortunes are aggravated,  nay cari
catured,  by report,  and that she exerts her utmost
influence,  and calls forth her best talents,  upon every
occasion which presents itself for serving those who
have been her friends  ;  and that,  notwithstanding cir
cumstances and disunion,  either in politics or morals,
may have made them become her enemies.  Her gene
rosity is cited as truly singular upon this head,  and I
have heard histories of her returning,  personally,  good
for evil that would do honour to any character living.
What a strangely complex mixture,  my dearest father,
is that mixture which forms human nature !  That
good,  or rather grand qualities,  may unite with almost
every frailty  !

After much deliberation and discussion,  my French
master composed the following answer  : —

"  Madame d'Arblay ne pent qu'etre infiniment
flatt.ee de 1' extreme bonte de Madame la Comtesse
de Stael.  Elle aura tres certainement 1'honneur de
se presenter chez Madame de Stael aussitot que pos
sible."

Cooler than this it was not easy to write,  and the

254

DIARY AND LETTERS

[PART

nepeutquetre is a tournure that is far enough from
flattering.  I hope,  however,  it will prepare her for the
frozen kind of intercourse which alone can have place
between us.

Madame d'Henin took us to a place called La folie
de Chartres,  formerly belonging to the Due d'Orleans,
but now a public garden.  It is in a state of ruin,  com
pared with what it formerly boasted of grandeur  ;  the
river cut through it is nearly dried up from neglect of
the fountains;  the house is turned into cake-rooms,
and common benches are placed in the most open parts
of the garden,  while a multitudes of little bridges are
half broken.  Nevertheless,  with all this,  M.  d'Arblay
and I,  with our West Hamble rusticity,  thought it was
probably more beautiful,  though less habitable,  than
in its pristine state ;  for the grass wildly growing was
verdant and refreshing,  the uncut lilacs were lavish of
sweets,  and Nature all around seemed luxuriantly to
revel over the works of art.

As I wished much to see the parade,  or review,  which
was to take place on the 5th,  and is only once a month,
we were forced to devote the preceding day to visits,  as
it was decreed in our council of etiquette that I could
not appear in a place where I might be seen by those
who had shown me the civility of beginning an ac
quaintance,  till I had acknowledged my debt to them.
******

I was so thoroughly tired when I returned from all
these visits,  that 1 was forced to rest upon a bed for
the remainder of the day,  to my no small discomposure
before the evening was closed ;  for,  in a close cap,  my
feet in their native,  undraperied state,  hidden by a
large,  long,  wrapping morning gown,  your daughter,
my dearest Sir,  lay reclined on a bed,  when,  rather
late in the evening,  I was told Madame d'Henin was
in the salon.  I was going to send in my excuses,  while
I rose to get ready for waiting upon her;  but Alex.
flung open the door,  and seeing where I was,  and how

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  255

fatigued,  she insisted on my keeping still,  and came to
my bedside,  and sat in friendly converse,  listening to
the history of my morning excursion,  till a ring at the
bell of our ante-room made me desire to have nobody
admitted.  Alex,  again,  however,  frisking about,  pre
vented Pauline,  my little femme de chambre,  from
hearing me,  and she announced Madame de Lafayette!

You may easily believe this name,  and my present
situation,  put me into no small commotion.  I was be
seeching Madame d'Henin to go to the saloon with my
apologies,  when Alex.,  whose illness,  though it bus
diminished his strength and his flesh,  has left his spirits
as wild as ever,  called out to proclaim where I was,  and
while Madame Lafayette was gently moving on,  flung
the bed-room door wide open,  saying,  "  Mamma is
here  !"  Madame Lafayette,  concluding,  I suppose,
that 1 received du monde in the French manner,  imme
diately presented herself at the door,  where I had no
resource but to entreat Madame d'Henin,  who is her
intimate friend,  to receive her,  for I was wholly power
less,  with my unsandaled feet,  from rising.

Madame d'Henin now brought her to my bedside,
where nothing could have been more awkward than my
situation ;  but that the real reverence I had conceived
for her character and her virtues made the sight of so
singular a person,  her condescension in the visit,  and
her goodness,  though lame,  in mounting three pair of
stairs,  give me a sensation of pleasure,  that by ani
mating my spirits,  endowed me with a courage that
overcame all difficulties both oflanguage and position,
and enabled me to express my gratitude for her kind
ness and my respect for her person,  with something
far nearer to fluency and clearness than anything in
speech I have yet attempted.  My mind instantly pre
sented her to me,  torn from her beloved family,  and
thrown into the death-impending prison of Robes
pierre  ;  and then saved by his timely destruction from
the scaffold,  and then using her hardly-recovered

256 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

liberty only by voluntarily sacrificing it to be immured
with her husband in the dungeon of Olmutz.  Various
as may be the opinions of the politics of M.  de La
fayette,  all Europe,  I believe,  concur in admiration of
the character and conduct of his virtuous and heroic
wife.  Indeed,  nothing since my arrival has so sensibly
gratified me,  from without,  as this visit.

Madame Lafayette is the daughter of the ci-devant
Due d'Ayen,  and consequently niece of Madame de
Tesse,  the Due's sister.  She was married to M.  de
Lafayette when she was only seventeen years of age.
By some cold,  or mismanagement,  and total want of
exercise in the prison of Olmutz, 4 some humour has
fallen into one of her ancles,  that,  though it does not
make her absolutely lame,  causes walking to be so
painful and difficult to her that she moves as little us
possible,  and is always obliged to have a stool for her
foot.  She now resides with M.  Lafayette and their
three children entirely in the country,  at a chateau
which has descended to her since the revolutionary
horrors and therefore has not been confiscated,  called
La Grange.  They never come to Paris but upon busi
ness of positive necessity.  She had arrived only this
morning on a visit to her aunt,  Madame de Tesse,  to
make some preparations for the approaching marriage
of her only son.

Her youngest daughter,  Mademoiselle de Lafayette,
accompanied her.  She is a blooming young creature
of English fairness — as we English choose to say — with
a bright native colour,  and beautiful light hair ;  other
wise with but indifferent features,  and not handsome ;
yet her air,  though modest even to the extreme that
borders upon bashfulness,  is distinguished,  and speaks
her to be both sensible and well brought up.

Madame de Lafayette,  also,  is by no means hand
some  ;  but has eyes so expressive,  so large,  and so
speaking,  that it is not easy to criticise her other fea
tures,  for it is almost impossible to look at.  them.  Her

1802]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

257

manner is calm and mild,  yet noble.  She is respected
even by surrounding infidels for her genuine piety,
which,  in the true character of true religion,  is severe
only for herself,  lenient and cheerful for all others.  I
do not say this from what I could see in the hour she
was so good as to pass with me,  but from all I have
heard.

I regretted extremely that M.  d'Arblay was not
within,  as Madame Lafayette is most deservedly one of
the beings he reveres,  and as he has the happiness to
be enlisted amongst those who are honoured with her
regard.

She warmly invited me to La Grange,  and requested
me to name an early day for passing some time there.
I proposed that it might be after the marriage had
taken place,  as till then all foreign people or subjects
might be obtrusive.  She paused a moment,  and then
said,  "  Apres? — c'est vrai! — we could then more com
pletely enjoy Madame d'Arblay's society;  for we must
now have continual interruptions,  surrounded as we are
by workmen,  goods,  chattels,  and preparations  ;  so that
there would be a nail to hammer between almost every
word  :  and yet,  as we are going to Auvergne,  after the
ceremony,  it will be so long before a meeting may be
arranged,  that I believe the less time lost the better."

I knew M.  d'Arblay desired this acquaintance for me
too earnestly to'  offer any opposition ;  and I was too
much charmed with its opening to make any myself :  it
was therefore determined we should go the following
week to La Grange.

(May 5.)  Again a full day.  M.  d'Arblay had pro
cured us three tickets for entering the apartments at
the Tuileries to see the parade of General Hulin,
now high in actual rank and service,  but who had been
a sous-qfficier under M.  d'Arblay 's command  ;  our third
ticket was for Madame d'Henin,  who had never been
to this sight — nor,  indeed,  more than twice to any
spectacle since her return to France — till my arrival ;

VOL.  vi.  s

258 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

but she is so obliging and good as to accept any,
to seek,  every thing that can amuse,  of which I can
profit.  We breakfasted with her early,  and were ap
pointed to join the party of M.  le Prince deBeauveau,
who had a General in his carriage,  through whose aid
and instructions we hoped to escape all difficulties.

Accordingly the coach in which they went was desired
to stop at Madame d'Henin's door,  so as to let us get
into our fiacre,  and follow it straight.  This was done,
and our precursor stopped at the gate leading to the
garden of the Tuileries.  The De Beauveaus,  Made
moiselle de Mortemar,  and their attending General,
alighted,  and we followed their example and joined
them,  which was no sooner done than their General,
at the sight of M.  d'Arblay,  suddenly drew back from
conducting Madame de Bcauveau,  and flew up to him.
They had been ancient camarades,  but had not met
since M.  d'A.'s emigration.

The crowd was great,  but civil and well dressed  ;  and
we met with no impediment till we came to the great
entrance.  Alas,  1 had sad recollections of sad read
ings in mounting the steps  !  We had great difficulty,
notwithstanding our tickets,  in making our way — I
mean Madame d'Henin and ourselves,  for Madame de
Beauveau and Mademoiselle de Mortemar having an
officer in the existing military to aid them,  were ad
mitted and helped by all the attendants ;  and so for
warded that we wholly lost sight of them,  till we
arrived,  long after,  in the apartment destined for the
exhibition.  This,  however,  was so crowded that every
place at the windows for seeing the parade was taken,
and the row formed opposite to see the First Consul as
he passes through the room to take horse,  was so thick
and threefold filled,  that not a possibility existed of
even a passing peep.  Madame d'Henin would have
retired,  but as the whole scene was new and curious to
me,  I prevailed with her to stay,  that I might view a
little of the costume of the company ;  though I was

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  259

sorry I detained her,  when I saw her perturbed spirits
from the recollections which,  I am sure,  pressed upon
her on re-entering this palace :  and that her sorrows
were only subdued by her personal indignation,  which
was unconscious,  but yet very prominent,  to find her
self included in the mass of the crowd in being refused
all place and distinction,  where,  heretofore,  she was
amongst the first for every sort of courtesy.  Nothing
of this,  however,  was said ;  and you may believe my
pity for her was equally unuttered.

We seated ourselves now,  hopeless of any other
amusement than seeing the uniforms of the passing
officers,  and the light drapery of the stationary ladies,
which,  by the way,  is not by any means so notorious
nor so common as has been represented  ;  on the con
trary,  there are far more who are decent enough to
attract no attention,  than who are fashionable enough
to call for it.

During this interval M.  d'Arblay found means,  by a
ticket lent him by M.  de Nar bonne,  to enter the next
apartment,  and there to state our distress,  not in vain
to General Hulin ;  and presently he returned,  accom
panied by this officer,  who is,  1 fancy,  at least seven
feet high,  and was dressed in one of the most showy
uniforms I ever saw.  M.  d'Arblay introduced me to
him.  He expressed his pleasure in seeing the wife of
his old comrade,  and taking my hand,  caused all the
crowd to make way,  and conducted me into the apart
ment adjoining to that where the First Consul receives
the ambassadors,  with a flourish of manners so fully
displaying power as well as courtesy,  that I felt as if
in the hands of one of the seven champions who meant
to mow down all before him,  should any impious elf
dare dispute his right to give me liberty,  or to show
me honour.

He put me into the first place in the apartment
which was sacred to general officers,  and as many ladies
as could be accommodated in two rows only at the

s 2

260 DIARY AND LETTERS  [?ART VIII.

windows.  M.  d'Arblay,  under the sanction of his
big friend,  followed with Madame d'Henin  ;  and we
had the pleasure of rejoining Madame de Beauveau
and Mademoiselle de Mortemar,  who were at the same
windows,  through the exertions of General Songis.

The scene now,  with regard to all that was present,
was splendidly gay and highly animating.  The room
was lull,  but not crowded,  with officers of rank in
sumptuous rather than rich uniforms,  and exhibiting a
martial air that became their attire,  which,  however,
generally speaking,  was too gorgeous to be noble.

Our window was that next to the consular apartment,
in which Bonaparte was holding a levee,  and it was close
to the steps ascending to it ;  by which means we saw
all the forms of the various exits and entrances,  and
had opportunity to examine every dress and every
countenance that passed and repassed.  This was
highly amusing,  I might say historic,  where the past
history and the present office were known.

Sundry footmen of the First Consul,  in very fine
liveries,  were attending to bring or arrange chairs for
whoever required them ;  various peace-officers,  su
perbly begilt,  paraded occasionally up and down the
chamber,  to keep the ladies to their windows and the
gentlemen to their ranks,  so as to preserve the passage
or lane through which the First Consul was to walk
upon his entrance,  clear and open  ;  and several gentle
manlike looking persons,  whom in former times I
should have supposed pages of the back stairs,  dressed
in black,  with gold chains hanging round their necks,
and medallions pending from them,  seemed to have
the charge of the door itself,  leading immediately to
the audience chamber of the First Consul.

But what was most prominent in commanding notice,
was the array of the aides-de-camp of Bonaparte,  which
was so almost furiously striking,  that all other vest
ments,  even the most gaudy,  appeared suddenly under
a gloomy cloud when contrasted with its brightness.

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  261

We were long viewing them before we could discover
what they were to represent,  my three lady companions
being as new to this scene as myself;  but afterwards
M.  d'Arblay starting forward to speak to one of them,
brought him across the lane to me,  and said  "  General
liauriston."

His kind and faithful friendship to M.  d'Arblay,  so
amiably manifested upon his late splendid embassy to
England,  made me see him with great pleasure.  It
was of course but for a moment,  as he was amongst
those who had most business upon their hands.
General d'Hennezel also came to me for a few minutes,
and three or four others whom M.  d'Arblay named,
but whom I have forgotten.  Indeed,  I was amazed at
the number of old friends by whom he was recognised,
and touched far more than I can express,  to see him
in his old coat and complete undress,  accosted by his
fine  (former)  brethren,  in all their new and beautiful cos
tume,  with an eagerness of regard that,  resulting from
first impulse,  proved their judgment,  or rather know
ledge of his merits,  more forcibly than any professions,
however warm,  could have done.  He was indeed,
after the aides-de-camp,  the most striking figure in the
apartment,  from contrasting as much with the general
herd by being the plainest and worst dressed,  as they
did by being the gayest and most showy.

General Lauriston is a very handsome man,  and of
a very pleasing and amiable countenance ;  and his
manly air carried off'  the frippery of his trappings,  so
as to make them appear almost to advantage.

While this variety of attire,  of carriage,  and of physi
ognomy amused us in facing the passage prepared for
the First Consul,  we were occupied,  whenever we
turned round,  by seeing from the window the garden
of the Tuileries filling with troops.

In the first row of females at the window where we
stood,  were three ladies who,  by my speaking English
with Mademoiselle de Mortemar and Madame de

262 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

Beauvcau,  discovered my country,  and,  as I have since
heard,  gathered my name ;  and here I blush to own
how unlike was the result to what one of this nation
might have experienced from a similar discovery in
England;  for the moment it was buzzed  "  cest une
etrangcre,  cest une Anglaise"  every one tried to place,
to oblige,  and to assist me,  and yet no one looked
curious,  or stared at me.  Ah,  my dear Padre,  do you
not a little fear,  in a contrasted situation,  no one would
have tried to place,  oblige,  or assist,  yet every one
would have looked curious and stared  ?  Well,  there
are virtues as well as defects of all classes ;  and
John Bull can tight so good a battle for his share
of the former,  that he need not be utterly cast
down in acknowledging now and then a few of the
latter.

The best view from the window to see the marching
forwards of the troops was now bestowed upon me,  and
I vainly offered it to the ladies of my own party,  to
whom the whole of the sight was as new as to myself.
The three unknown ladies began conversing with me,
and,  after a little general talk,  one of them with sudden
importance of manner,  in a tone slow but energetic,
said,

"  Avez-vous vu,  Madame,  le Premier Consul?"

"  Pas encore,  Madame."

"C'est sans doute ce que vous souhaitez le plus,
Madame?"

"  Oui,  Madame."

"Voulez-vous le voir parfaitement bien,  et tout
a fait a votre aise  ?  "

"  Je le desire beaucoup,  Madame."

She then told me to keep my eyes constantly upon
her,  and not an instant lose sight of her movements ;
and to suffer no head,  in the press that would ensue
when the First Consul appeared,  to intervene between
us.  "  Faites comme cela,  Madame,"  continued she;
"  et vous le verrez bien,  bien  ;  car,"  added she,  solemnly

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  263

and putting her hand on her breast, — "  moi — je vais
lui parler  !"

I was very much surprised.,  indeed,  and could only
conclude I was speaking to a wife,  sister,  or cousin at
least,  of one of the other consuls,  or of some favourite
minister.  "  Et lui,  Madame,  il me repondra ;  vous
1'entendrez parler,  Madame,  oui,  vous 1'entendrez  !  car
il est bon,  bon  ! — bon homme tout a fait et affable ! —
O affable ! — oui,  vous 1'entendrez parler."

I thanked her very much,  but it was difficult to ex
press as much satisfaction as she displayed herself.
You may suppose,  however,  how curious I felt for
such a conversation,  and how scrupulously I followed
her injunctions of watching her motions.  A little
squat good-humoured lady,  with yellow flowers over a
mob cap upon her hair ;  who had little sunken eyes,
concise nose,  and a mouth so extended by perpetual
smiling,  that,  hardly leaving an inch for the cheek,  it
ran nearly into the ear,  on my other side now de
manded my attention also,  and told me she came regu
larly every month to the great review,  that she might
always bring some friend who wanted to see it.  I
found by this she was a person of some power,  some
influence,  at least,  and not entirely averse to having it
known.  She was extremely civil to me;  but as my
other friend had promised me so singular a regale,  I
had not much voluntary time to spare for her  ;  this,
however,  appeared to be no impediment to that she
was so obliging as to determine to bestow upon me,
arid she talked on,  satisfied with my acquiescence to
her civility,  till a sort of bustle just before us making
me look a little sharp,  she cried —

"  Vous le voyez,  Madame  !  "

"  Qui?"  exclaimed I,  "  Le Premier Consul?1'

"  Mais non ! — pas encore  ; — mais — ce — ce monsieur
la!  "

I looked at her to see whom I was to remark,  and
her eyes led me to a tall,  large figure,  with a broad

264 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

gold-laced hat,  who was clearing the lane which some
of the company had infringed,  with a stentorian voice,
and an air and manner of such authority as a chief
constable might exert in an English riot.

"  Oui,  Madame,"  I answered,  not conceiving why I
was to look at him ;  "  je le vois ce Monsieur ;  il est
bien grand ! "

"  Oui,  Madame,"  replied she,  with a yet widened
smile,  and a look of lively satisfaction ;  "  il est bien
grand !  Vous le voyez bien  ?  "

"  Mais oui :  et il est tres bien mis  ! "

"Oui surement!  vous etes sureque vous le voyez?  "

"  Bien sure,  Madame, — mais,  il a un air d'autorite,  ii
me semble."

•'  Oui,  Madame ;  et bient6t,  il ira dans 1'autre ap-
partement !  il verra le Premier Consul !  "

"  O,  fort bien  ! "  cried I,  quite at a loss what she
meant me to understand,  till at last,  fixing first him,
and then me,  she expressively said —

"  Madame,  c'est mon mari!"

The grin now was distended to the very utmost limits
of the stretched lips,  and the complacency of her
countenance forcibly said,  "  What do you think of
me now  ? "  My countenance,  however,  was far more
clever than my head,  if it made her any answer.  But,
in the plenitude of her own admiration of a gentleman
who seemed privileged to speak roughly,  and push
violently whoever,  by a single inch,  passed a given
barrier,  she imagined,  I believe,  that to belong to
him entitled her to be considered as sharing his
prowess ;  she seemed even to be participating in the
merits of his height and breadth,  though he could
easily have put her into his pocket.

Not perceiving,  as I imagine,  all the delight of feli
citation in my countenance that she had expected,  her
own fell,  in a disappointed pause,  into as much of
length as its circular form would admit of;  it reco
vered,  hovrever,  in another minute,  its full merry

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  265

rotundity,  by conjecturing,  as I  .have reason to think,
that the niggardliness of my admiration was occasioned
by my doubt of her assertions ;  for,  looking at me with
an expression that demanded my attention,  she poked
her head under the arm of a tall grenadier,  stationed
to guard our window,  and trying to  [catch the eye of
the object of her devotion,  called out,  in an accent of
tenderness,  "  M'Ami !  M'Ami !  "

The surprise she required was now gratified in full,
though what she concluded to be excited by her happi
ness,  was simply the effect of so caressing a public
address from so diminutive a little creature to so
gigantic a big one.  Three or four times the soft
sound was repeated ere it reached the destined ear,
through the hubbub created by his own loud and rough
manner of calling to order  ;  but,  when at last he caught
the gentle appellation,  and looked down upon her,  it
was with an eyebrow so scowling,  a mouth so pouting,
and an air that so rudely said,  "  Wliat the D —  do you
want  ?  "  that 1 was almost afraid he would have taken
her between his thumb and finger,  and given her a
shake.  However,  he only grumbled out,  "  Qu'est-ce
que c'est done?"  A little at a loss what to say,  she
gently stammered,  "  M'Ami, — le — le Premier Consul,
ne vient-il pas?  "  "  Oui !  oui !  "was blustered in reply,
with a look that completed the phrase by  "  you fool?
you  /"  though the voice left it unfinished.

Not disconcerted even yet,  though rather abashed,
she turned to me with a pleased grin that showed her
proud of his noble ferociousness,  and said,  "  C'est mon
mari,  Madame  !  "  as if still fearful I was not fully con
vinced of the grandeur of her connexion.  "  M'ami "
having now cleared the passage by ranging all the
company in two direct lines,  the officers of highest rank
were assembled,  and went in a sort of procession into
the inner apartment to the audience of the First
Consul.  During the time this lasted,  some relaxation
of discipline ensued,  and the gentlemen from the oppo-

266 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

site row ventured to approach and peep at the win
dows with the ladies ;  but as soon as the generals
descended from the steps they had mounted,  their
short conference being over,  "  M'ami"  again appeared,
to the inexpressible gratification of his loving little
mate,  again furiously hustled every one to his post ;
and the flags,  next,  as I think,  were carried in procession
to the inner apartment,  but soon after brought back.

The Prince of Orange then passed us to enter the
audience chamber,  with a look so serious,  an air so de
pressed,  that I have not been at all suprised to hear
he was that very night taken very ill.

The last object for whom the way was cleared was
the Second Consul,  Cambaceres,  who advanced with
a stately and solemn pace,  slow,  regular,  and conse
quential  ;  dressed richly in scarlet and gold,  and
never looking to the right or left,  but wearing a mien
of fixed gravity and importance.  He had several
persons in his suite,  who,  I think,  but am not sure,
were ministers of state.

At length the two human hedges were finally formed,
the door of the audience chamber was thrown wide
open with a commanding crash,  and a vivacious officer
— sentinel — or I know not what,  nimbly descended the
three steps into our apartment,  and placing himself at
the side of the door,  with one hand spread as high as
possible above his head,  and the other extended hori
zontally,  called out in a loud and authoritative voice,
«  Le Premier Consul !  "

You will easily believe nothing more was necessary
to obtain attention ;  not a soul either spoke or stirred
as he and his suite passed along,  which was so quickly
that,  had I not been placed so near the door,  and had
not all about me facilitated my standing foremost,  and
being least crowd-obstructed,  I could hardly have seen
him.  As it was,  I had a view so near,  though so brief,
of his face,  as to be very much struck by it.  It is of a
deeply impressive cast,  pale even to sallowness,  while

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  267

not only in the eye but in every feature — care,  thought,
melancholy,  and meditation are strongly marked,  with
so much of character,  nay,  genius,  and so penetrating a
seriousness,  or rather sadness,  as powerfully to sink into
an observer's mind.

Yet,  though the busts and medallions I have seen
are,  in general,  such good resemblances that I think I
should have known him untold,  he has by no means the
look to be expected from Bonaparte,  but rather that
of a profoundly studious and contemplative man,  who
"  o'er books consumes  "  not only the  "  midnight oil "
but his own daily strength,  "  and wastes the puny body
to decay"  by abstruse speculation and theoretic plans,
or rather visions,  ingenious but not practicable.  But the
look of the commander who heads his own army,  who
fights his own battles,  who conquers every difficulty by
personal exertion,  who executes all he plans,  who per
forms even all he suggests  ;  whose ambition is of the
most enterprising,  and whose bravery is of the most
daring cast : — this,  which is the look to be expected
from his situation,  and the exploits which have led to
it,  the spectator watches for in vain.  The plainness,
also,  of his dress,  so conspicuously contrasted by the
finery of all around him,  conspires forcibly with his
countenance,  so  "  sicklied o'er with the pale hue of
thought,"  to give him far more the air of a student than
a warrior.

The intense attention with which I fixed him in this
short but complete view made me entirely forget the
lady who had promised me to hold him in conference.
When he had passed,  however,  she told ine it was upon
his return she should address him,  as he was too much
hurried to be talked with at the moment of going to
the parade.  I was glad to find my chance not over,
and infinitely curious to know what was to follow.

The review I shall attempt no description of.  I
have no knowledge of the subject,  and no fondness for
its object.  It was far more superb than anything I had

268 DIARY AND LETTERS          [PART VIII.

ever beheld  ;  but while all the pomp and circumstance
of war animated others,  it only saddened me  ;  and all
of past reflection,  all of future dread,  made the whole
grandeur of the martial scene,  and all the delusive
seduction of martial music,  fill my eyes frequently with
tears,  but not regale my poor muscles with one single
smile.

Bonaparte,  mounting a beautiful and spirited white
horse,  closely encircled by his glittering aides-de-camp,
and accompanied by his generals,  rode round the ranks,
holding his bridle indifferently in either hand,  and
seeming utterly careless of the prancing,  rearing,  or
other freaks of his horse,  insomuch as to strike some
who were near me with a notion of his being a bad
horseman.  I am the last to be a judge upon this sub
ject  ;  but as a remarker,  he only appeared to me a man
who knew so well he could manage the animal when he
pleased,  that he did not deem it worth his while to keep
constantly in order what he knew,  if urged or provoked,
he could subdue in a moment.

Precisely opposite to the window at which I was
placed,  the Chief Consul stationed himself after making
his round ;  and thence he presented some swords of
honour,  spreading out one arm with an air and mien
which changed his look from that of scholastic severity
to one that was highly military and commanding.

Just as the consular band,  with their brazen drums
as well as trumpets,  marched facing the First Consul,
the sun broke suddenly out from the clouds which had
obscured it all the morning  ;  and the effect was so
abrupt and so dazzling that I could not help observing
it to rny friend,  the wife of mami,  who,  eyeing me with
great surprise,  not unmixed with the compassion of
contempt,  said, —

"  Est-ce que vous ne savez pas cela,  Madame  ?  Des
que le Premier Consul vient d la parade,  le soleil vient
aussi !  II a beau pleuvoir tout le matin ;  c'est egal,
il n'a qu'a paroitre,  et tout de suite il fait beau."

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  269

I apologized for my ignorance ;  but doubt whether
it was forgiven.

The review over,  the Chief Consul returned to the
palace.  The lines were again formed,  and he re-entered
our apartment with his suite.  As soon as he approached
our window,  I observed my first acquaintance start a
little forward.  1 was now all attention to her perform
ance of her promise ;  and just as he reached us she
stretched out her hand to present him — a petition  !

The enigma of the conference was now solved,  and I
laughed at my own wasted expectation.  Lui parler,
however,  the lady certainly did ;  so far she kept her
word;  for when he had taken the scroll,  and was pass
ing on,  she rushed out of the line,  and planting herself
immediately before him so as to prevent his walking
on,  screamed,  rather than spoke,  for her voice was
shrill with impetuosity to be heard and terror of failure,
"  C'est pour mon fils  !  vous me 1'avez promis  !"

The First Consul stopped and spoke  ;  but not loud
enough for me to hear his voice ;  while his aides-de
camp and the attending generals surrounding him
more closely,  all in a breath rapidly said to the lady,
"  Votre nom,  Madame,  votre nom  !"  trying to disengage
the Consul from her importunity,  in which they suc
ceeded,  but not with much ease,  as she seemed pur
posing to cling to him till she got his personal answer.
He faintly smiled as he passed on,  but looked harassed
and worn ;  while she,  turning to me,  with an exulting
face and voice,  exclaimed,  "  Je 1'aurai!  je 1'aurai !''

meaning what she had petitioned for — "car

tous ces Generaux m'ont demande mon nom!"  Could
any inference be clearer  ?

The moment the Chief Consul had ascended the
steps leading to the inner apartment,  the gentlemen in
black with gold chains gave a general hint that all the
company must depart,  as the ambassadors and the
ministers were now summoned to their monthly public
audience with the Chief Consul.  The crowd,  however,

270 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

was so great,  and Madame d'Henin was so much in
commoded,  and half ill,  I fear,  by internal suffering,
that M.  d'Arblay procured a pass for us by a private
door down to a terrace leading to a quiet exit from the
palace into the Tuileries'  garden.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Buniey.

Paris,  1802.
*  *  *  *  #

WITH the nearest relatives now existing of M.
d'Arblay I am myself more pleased than I can tell
you.  We have spent a fortnight at Joifjny,  and found
them all awaiting us with the most enthusiastic deter
mination to receive with open arms and open heart the
choice and the offspring of their returned exile.  Their
kindness has truly penetrated me ;  and the heads of
the family,  the uncle and the aunt,  are so charming as
well as so worthy,  that I could have remained with
them for months had not the way of life which their
residence in a country town has forced them to adopt,
been utterly at war with all that,  to me,  makes peace,
and happiness,  and cheerfulness,  namely,  the real do
mestic life of living with my own small but all-sufficient
family.  I have never loved a dissipated life,  which it is no
virtue in me,  therefore,  to relinquish  ;  but I now far less
than ever can relish it,  and know not how to enjoy any
thing away from home,  except by distant intervals ;  and
then with that real moderation,  I am so far from being
a misanthrope or sick of the world,  that I have real
pleasure in mixed society.  It is difficult,  however,  in
the extreme,  to be able to keep to such terms.  M.
d'Arblay has so many friends,  and an acquaintance so
extensive,  that the mere common decencies of esta
blished etiquettes demand,  as yet,  nearly all my time;
and this has been a true fatigue both to my body and
my spirits.

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

I am now endeavouring to make an arrangement,
after a fashion of my own,  to put an end to these
claims,  at least,  to their being fulfilled.  I am sure I
shall have a far better chance to do well by those I mix
with,  as well as by myself,  if I succeed  ;  for my voice
is as wearied of pronouncing as my brain is wearied in
searching words to pronounce.  All I experienced,
however,  from company,  interruption,  and visiting at
Paris was so short of what I found at Joigny,  that,  in
the comparison,  I seemed completely mistress of my
time ;  for at Joigny I can truly affirm I never had one
hour,  or even half a one,  to myself.  By myself I mean
to our three selves.

M.  d'Arblay is related,  though very distantly,  to a
quarter of the town,  and the other three-quarters are
his friends or acquaintance  ;  and all of them came,
first,  to see me ;  next,  to know how I did after the
journey  ;  next,  were all to be waited upon in return  ;
next,  came to thank me for my visit ;  next,  to know
how the air of Joigny agreed with me  ;  next,  to make
a little further acquaintance ;  and,  finally,  to make a
visit of conge.  And yet all were so civil,  so pleasant,
and so pleased with my Monsieur's return,  that could
I have lived three lives,  so as to have had some respite,
I could not have found fault ;  for it was scarcely ever
with the individual intruder,  but with the continuance
or repetition of interruption.

F.  D'A.

Addressed to Miss Plantafor the Queen and Princesses.

Passy,  December 19,  1802.

RARELY,  indeed,  my dear Miss Planta,  I have re
ceived more pleasure than from your last most truly
welcome letter,  with assurances so unspeakably season
able.  I had it here at Passy the 5th day after its date.

272 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

I thank you again and again,  but oh !  how I thank

God!

####*#

Permit me now to go back to Joigny,  for the purpose
of giving some account of two very interesting acquaint
ances we made there.  The first was Colonel Louis
Bonaparte,  youngest  'brother but one  (Jerome)  of the
First Consul.  His regiment was quartered at Joigny,
where he happened to be upon our last arrival at that
town,  and where the first visit he made was to M.  Ba-
zille,  the worthy maternal uncle of M.  d'Arblay.  He
is a young man of the most serious demeanour,  a grave
yet pleasing countenance,  and the most reserved yet
gentlest manners.  His conduct in the small town  (for
France)  of Joigny was not merely respectable,  but ex
emplary  ;  he would accept no distinction in conse
quence of his powerful connexions,  but presented him
self everywhere with the unassuming modesty of a
young man who had no claims beyond what he might
make by his own efforts and merits.  He discouraged
all gaming,  to which the inhabitants are extremely
prone,  by always playing low himself;  and he discoun
tenanced parade,  by never suffering his own servant
to wait behind his chair where he dined.  He broke up
early both from table and from play ;  was rigid in his
attentions to his military duties,  strict in the discipline
of his officers as well as men,  and the first to lead the
way in every decency and regularity.  When to this I
add that his conversation is sensible,  and well bred,
yet uncommonly diffident,  and that but twenty-three
summers have yet rolled over his head,  so much good
sense,  forbearance,  and propriety,  in a situation so open
to flattery,  ambition,  or vanity,  obtained,  as they me
rited,  high consideration and perfect good will.

I had a good deal of conversation with him,  for he
came to sit by me both before and after his card-party
wherever I had the pleasure to meet him ;  and his
quiet and amiable manners,  and rational style of dis-

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  273

course,  made him a great loss to our society,  when he
was summoned to Paris,  upon the near approach of the
event which gave him a son and heir.  He was very
kind to my little Alex.,  whom he never saw without em
bracing,  and he treated M.  d'Arblay with a marked
distinction extremely gratifying to me.

The second acquaintance to which I have alluded is.
a lady,  Madame de Souza.*  She soon found the road
to my good will and regard,  for she told me that she,
with another lady,  had been fixed upon by M.  del
Campo,  my old sea-visitor,  for the high honour of aiding
him in his reception of the first lady of our land and
her lovely daughters,  upon the Grande Fete which he
gave upon the dearest and most memorable of occa
sions  ;  and she spoke with such pleasure and grati
tude of the sweet condescension she then experienced,
that she charmed and delighted me,  and we struck
up an intimacy without further delay.  Our theme
was always ready,  and I only regretted that I could
see her but seldom,  as she lived two or three miles out
of Joigny,  at Cesy,  in the small chateau of la ci-devant
Princesse de Beaufremont,  a lady with whom I had had
the honour of making acquaintance in Paris,  and
who is one of those who suffered most during the
horrors of the revolution.  At the dreadful period when
all the rage was to burn the property and title-deeds,
of the rich and high-born,  her noble chateau,  one of the
most considerable in France,  was utterly consumed,
and all her papers,  that no record of her genealogy
might remain,  were committed,  with barbarous triumph,,
to the flames :  yet was this,  such is her unhappy fate,
the least of her misfortunes  ;  her eldest daughter,  a
beautiful young creature,  upon whom she doated,  was
in the chateau at this horrible period,  and forced to
make her escape with such alarm and precipitance,  that
she never recovered from the excess of her terror,  which

*  Authoress of  '  Adele de Senange/  &c.
VOL.  VI.

274 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

robbed her of her life before she was quite seventeen
years of age !

Around the small and modest chateau de Cesy,  in
which Madame de Beaufremont and her youngest and
now only daughter,  Madame de Listenois,  at present
reside,  the grounds have been cultivated in the English
style;  and the walks,  now shady,  now open,  now rising,
now descending,  with water,  bridges,  cascades,  and
groves,  and occasional fine picturesque views from the
banks of the Yonne,  are all laid out with taste and
pretty effects.  We strolled over them with a large
party,  till we came to a little recess.  Madame de
Beaufremont then took me by the arm,  and we sepa
rated from the company to enter it together,  and she
showed me an urn surrounded with cypress-trees and
weeping willows,  watered by a clear,  small,  running
rivulet,  and dedicated to the memory of her first-born
and early-lost lamented daughter.

Poor lady!  she seems entirely resigned to all the
rest of her deprivations,  but here the wound is incu
rable  !  yet,  this subject apart,  she is cheerful,  loves so
ciety,  or rather social discourse,  with a chosen few,  and
not only accepts with pleasure whatever may enliven
her,  but exerts herself to contribute all that is in her
power to the entertainment of others.  She has still
preserved enough from the wreck of her possessions to
live elegantly,  though not splendidly  ;  and her table is
remarkably well served.  She has a son-in-law,  M.  de Lis
tenois,  whom I did not see  ;  but her remaining daughter,
Madame de Listenois,  is a very fine young woman.
Madame de Souza has spent the whole summer with
these ladies.  She told me she liked England so very
much,  and was so happy during the six weeks she
passed there,  that she wept bitterly on quitting it.  She
was received,  she says,  at court in the most bewitching
manner,  and she delights in retracing her honours,  and
her sense of them.  She is still so very handsome,
though sickly and suffering,  that I imagine she must

1802]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  275

then have been exquisitely beautiful.     I am told,  by a
French officer who has served in Spain,  M.  de Meulan,
that when she left that country she was reckoned the
most celebrated beauty of Madrid.
"""  I had another new acquaintance at Joigny,  also,  in a
lady who came from Auxerre,  as she was pleased to say
to see me,  Madame La Villheurnois,  widow of M.  La
Villheurnois,  who was amongst the unhappy objects
deportes,  by the order of the Directory,  a la Guyane.  As
soon as the first civilities were over,  she said,  "  Per-
mettez,  Madame!  connaissez-vous Sidney?"*     I could
not doubt who she meant,  though there is no avoiding
a smile at this drolly concise way of naming a man by
his nom de bapteme.     She was extremely surprised
when I answered no;  telling me she had concluded
"  que tout le monde en Angleterre"  must know Sidney !
\es,  I said,  by character certainly;  but personally I
had never the gratification of meeting with him.     She
told me she was intimately acquainted with him her
self,  from seeing him continually when he was confined
in the Temple,  as she attended there her  "  malheureux
epoux;"  and she saw also,  she said,  "  son valet,  et son
jockey/'   whom she never suspected to be disguised
emigrants,  watching to aid his escape.     "Surtout,"
she added,   "  comme le jockey avait^des trous aux
bas terribles ;"  which induced her daughter to buy him
a new pair of stockings for charity.     A gentleman who
accompanied her to Joigny,  her secretary,  told me he
had played at ball with Sidney every day for six months,
while he also attended upon poor M.  La Villheurnois.
When we parted,  she begged me,  as soon as I re
turned to England,  "  d'aller voir Sidney pour lui faire
ses reproches de ce qu'il n'avait pas repondua sa lettre,"
though she was sure it ha4 been delivered to him,  be
cause her son had given it lui-meme to  "  Spencer,"
when he passed through Paris on his return from Con
stantinople.,

*  Sir Sidney Smith.

T2

276 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART VIII.

Shall I never have done,  you will say,  with Joigny?
Nay,  you don't yet know what I could add  ;  I could
give you lists of the dinners with which M.  d'Arblay's
return was celebrated,  that might grace a Lord Mayor's
feast.  But basta,  basta.

F.  D'A.

1803]  •  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  277

PART IX.

1803.

La Grippe,  a prevailing Disease in France — Apprehensions of War
—  General Lauriston  —  War inevitable between England and
France — M.  d'Arblay's prospects in France — His retraite — Ma
dame d'Arblay at Passy — M.  d'Arblay receives Civil employ
ment from the French Government — Dr.  Burney dines with the
Prince of Wales at Lord Melbourne's — Accomplishments of his
Royal Highness— Dr.  Burney's meeting with Mrs.  Piozzi at Bath
— Difficulties of Correspondence — Anxiety of Madame d'Arblay
respecting her Friends in England — Her desire for a re-union —
Dr.  Burney a corresponding Member of the French Institute —
Recollections of May-Day — Hopes of Peace — Joy of Madame
d'Arblay on receiving a Letter from her Father — Her description
of her Son — A delicious Banquet — Madame d'Arblay's fortitude
— An Octogenarian Vocalist.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Passy,  March 23,  1803.

No,  my dearest Padre,  bumptious ! — no  !  I deny the
charge in toto.  I had not such a thought — or rather
such a feel in the world  ;  but 't was  "  very disencouraging,
Tommy"  to receive none of that coin which urged
forth my merchandise ! — for I had hoped some return
in some of your narratory letters in which I so de
light,  and which nobody writes in so interesting a
manner to my gusto,  and which you used to enliven my
retirement with occasionally in our tight little island.
However,  if it must not be expected,  I will make up
my mind the best I can to the good of the world,  in
this public monopolizer of a dictionary,*  to which I

*   Dr.  B.  was then writing for the  '  Encyclopedia Britannica.'

278 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

should feel,  I doubt not,  less grudge,  if it were more in
my way.

I have been anxious to write since I received your
last kind inquiries,  my dearest Padre ;  but so tedious
has been my seizure,  that I have not yet got from its
wraps or confinements.  I feel,  however,  as if this were
their last day,  and that to-morrow would have the
honour to see me abroad.  I have had no fever,  and
no physician,  and no important malady ;  but cold has
fastened upon cold,  so as utterly to imprison me.
La grippe,  however,  I escaped,  so has Alex.,  and our
maid and helpers — and M.  d'Arblay,  who caught
it latterly in his excursions to Paris,  had it so slightly,
that but for the fright attached to the seizure  (which
I thought would almost hate demolished me at first,
from the terror hanging on its very name at that fatal
period)  I should have deemed it a mere common cold.
It is now universally over,  but the mischief it has done
is grievously irreparable.  M.  de la Harpe I mourn
the most,  and much regret never having seen.  The
Abbe Ricard,  who had just published about half his
translation of Plutarch,  I was also very sorry for.  I
had dined in his company once,  and he was my next
neighbour ;  and so gentle,  so quiet,  so modest,  so
reserved,  that he appeared an almost singular character
in these times.  Do you know his poem called La
Sphere?  I am really sorry he is gone, — and by an
illness so insidious,  that appeared to have so little
authority for the havoc it made.  Madame Trimouille,
the lady of the house at Mousseau of which we occu
pied one pavilion,  sank under it also,  as did the

mother-in-law of B 's brother the doctor.    It was a

disastrous and frightful time.  The streets of Paris
were said to be as full of funerals as of cabriolets.  For
my own part,  I have not once been able to enter that
capital since I left it at the end of October.  But I
cannot help attributing much of the mortality winch
prevailed in consequence of this slight disease,  to the un-

1803]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  279

wholesome air occasioned by the dreadful want of clean
liness in that city,  which,  but for the healthiness of the
beautiful and delicious walks around it,  i.  e.,  Les Boule
vards,  must surely have proved pestilential.  The air
of our house at Passy is perfectly pure and sweet.

By never going1 to Paris,  1 have never,  of course,
seen our ambassador or his duchess.  The very only
thing that I regret not residing in Paris for,  is my in
ability to go to his Excellency's chapel.

I send you a newspaper,  to let you see titles can be
bestowed here,  as well as taken away.

M.  d'Arblay is now making a last effort with respect
to his retraite,  which has languished in adjournment
above a year.  He has put it into the hands of a faith
ful and most amiable frierfd,  now in high esteem with
the Premier Consul,  General Lauriston,  who so kindly
renewed an ancient friendship with his former camarade
when he was on his splendid short embassy in Eng
land.  If through him it should fail,  I shall never think
of it more.

To Mrs.  Lock.

No.  54,  Rue Basse,  Passy,  near Paris,  April 30,  1803.

How to write I know not,  at a period so tremendous
— nor yet how to be silent.  My dearest,  dearest
friends  !  if the war indeed prove inevitable,  what a
heart-breaking position is ours  ! — to explain it fully
would demand folios,  and yet be never so well done as
you,  with a little consideration,  can do it for us.  Who
better than Mr.  Lock and his Fredy — who so well
can comprehend,  that,  where one must be sacrificed,
the other will be yet more to be pitied  ? — I will not go
on — I will talk only of you,  till our fate must be de
termined.  And M.  d'Arblay,  who only in the wide
world loves his paternal uncle as well  (we always
except ourselves at Westminster),  how tenderly does he

280 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

join in my every feeling !  and how faithfully keep
unimpaired all our best and happiest sympathies !

May 2nd.  Better appearances in the political hori
zon now somewhat recruit my spirits,  which have been
quite indescribably tortured,  rather than sunk,  by the
impossibility of any private arrangement for our mutual
happiness in the dread event of War.  God Almighty
yet avert it !  And should it fall to the lot of Lauriston
to confirm the Peace,  what a guardian angel upon
earth I shall deem him  !  How I wish he could meet
with you !  he is so elegant in his manners he would
immediately give you pleasure  ;  and his countenance
is so true in announcing him amiable,  that you might
look at him with trust as well as satisfaction.

He fills his very high a"nd powerful post in this
country with a modesty and moderation that keep
aloof from him all the jealousy,  envy,  and calumny
that usually attend such stations.  He receives M.
d'Arblay upon exactly the same terms of intimacy,
regard,  and equality as formerly,  and always admits
him,  be his engagements ever so pressing,  be who will
present,  or be the moment he can accord him ever so
short or hurried.

M.  de Lally has long been gone to Bordeaux,  and
with whom should he travel thither but Sir John
Coghill !  I saw that dear M.  de Lally but very sel
dom,  yet I regret his immense distance.  My greatest
regret is,  however,  for the Princesse d'Henin,  who set
off for Bordeaux eight months ago,  and is not re
turned.  I have had a charming and most feeling
account from her of Madame La Tour du Pin,  and her
admirable,  exemplary manner of passing her time,  in
the regulation of her family,  the education of her
children,  and the exertion of almost every virtue.
Madame d'Henin finishes her letter with charging me
to call her to the remembrance of those friends whom
she so highly venerates,  and whom she always flatters
herself she yet shall visit again.

1803]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  281

May 13.  Ah,  my dearest,  friends — what a melan
choly end to my hopes and my letter.  I have just
heard that Lord Whitworth set off for Chantilly last
night ;  war therefore seems inevitable  ;  and my grief,
I,  who feel myself now of two countries,  is far
greater than I can wish to express.  While posts are
yet open,  write to me,  my beloved friend,  and by Mam-
burgh.  I trust we may still and regularly correspond,
long as the letters may be in travelling.  As our letters
never treat but of our private concerns,  health,  and
welfare,  neither country can object to our intercourse.
Let me not therefore lose a solace I shall more than
ever require in this lengthened absence — an absence
for which I was so little prepared,  and to which I am
so little able to reconcile myself.  I can but pray for
peace.  My dearest friends will join the prayer,  made
with the whole troubled soul of their tenderly affec
tionate

F.  D'A.

Madame tfArllay to Dr.  Burney.

Passy,  May 6,  1803.

IF my dearest father has the smallest idea of the
suspense and terror in which I have spent this
last fortnight,  from the daily menace of war,  he
will be glad,  I am sure,  of the respite allowed me —
if no more — from a visit I have just received from
Mrs.  Huber,  who assures me the Ambassador has post
poned his setting off,  and consented to send another
courier.  To say how I pray for his success would
indeed be needless.  I have hardly closed my eyes
many nights past.  My dearest father will easily con
ceive the varying conflicts of our minds,  and how mutual
are our sufferings.  We have everywhere announced
our intention to embrace you next October,  the state
of M.  d'Arblay's affairs makes it impossible for him to
indulge me sooner ;  but if the war takes place,  the

282 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

difficulties of procuring licence,  passports,  passage,
and the ruinous length of travelling through Ham
burgh,  as well as the deadly sickness of so long a
voyage — all these thoughts torment me night and day,
and rest will,  I fear,  be a stranger to my eyes till the
conflict is terminated  ;  and then,  whether it will bring
me  'back rest,  or added rest-robbing materials for
destroying it,  who can tell  ?  At all events,  let me
intreat to hear from you,  my beloved padre,  as speedily
as possible.  Our last accounts of you were good,  with
regard to your recovery from the influenza.  God grant
you may be'able to confirm the assurance of your re-
establishment  !

We were buoyed up here for some days with the
hope that General Lauriston was gone to England as
plenipo,  to end the dread contest without new effusion
of blood  :  but Paris,  like London,  teems with hourly
false reports,  and this intelligence,  unhappily,  was of
the number.  The continued kindness and friend
ship of that gentleman for M.  d'Arblay make me take
a warm interest in whatever belongs to him.  About
ten days ago,  when M.  d'Arblay called upon him,
relative to the affair so long impending of his retraite,
he took his hand,  and said,  "  Fais-moi ton compliment"
You are sure how heartily M.  d'Arblay would be
ready to comply — "  but what,"  he demanded,  "  can be
new.  to you of honours  ?"  "  I have succeeded,"  he
answered,  "  for you ! — the First Consul has signed your
memoire."  When such delicacy is joined to warm
attachment,  my dearest father will not wonder I should
be touched by it.  The forms of the business,  how
ever,  are not yet quite completed,  but it has passed all
the difficulties which could impede its conclusion.  At
any other time I should have announced this with
far more spirit,  but my heart is at present so oppressed
with the still remaining fear of hostilities,  that I can
merely state the fact;  and rejoice that — small,  very
small as it proves — M.  d'Arblay has now something in

1804]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  283

his native country,  where all other claims are vain,  and
all other expectations completely destroyed.  He had
been flattered with recovering some portion,  at least,
of his landed property near Joigny  ;  but those who
have purchased it during his exile add such enormous
and unaccountable charges to what they paid for it at
that period,  that it is become,  to us,  wholly unattain
able.

Madame d'ArUay to Dr.  Burney.

May 14,  1803.

MY DEAREST FATHER,

THE enclosed missed the opportunity for which
it was written,  and now — the ambassador is gone.  I
am offered a place for this in a conveyance that
follows him ;  and it is well something was ready,  for
I am incapable of writing now,  farther than express
ing my ceaseless prayers for a speedy restoration of
peace.  My dearest father! — how impossible to de
scribe my distress.  Had I any other partner upon
earth I could hardly support it at all :  but he suffers
nearly as much as myself.  He has just received the
ret.raite,  which is a mark of being under government
protection,  and that is much.  You will easily,  how
ever,  conceive how completely it makes it impossible
for him to quit his country during a war.  I need
write nothing explanatory ;  and I cannot,  in the dis
ordered state of my nerves,  from this bitter stroke,
do more now than pray Heaven to bless and preserve
my beloved father,  and to restore the nations to peace,
and me to his arms.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Passy,^  April 11,  1804.

WE live in the most quiet,  and,  I think,  enviable
retirement.     Our house is larger than we require,  but

284 DIARY AND LETTERS      [PART IX.

not a quarter furnished.  Our view is extremely pretty
from it,  and always cheerful ;  we rarely go out,  yet
always are pleased to return.  We have our books,  our
prate,  and our boy — how,  with all this,  can we,  or ought
we to suffer ourselves to complain of our narrowed and
narrowing income?  If we are still able to continue at
Passy,  endeared to me now beyond any other residence
away from you all,  by a friendship I have formed here
with one of the sweetest women I have ever known,
Madame de Maisonneuve,  and to M.  d'Arblay by
similar sentiments for all her family,  our philosophy
will not be put to severer trials than it can sustain.
And this engages us to bear a thousand small priva
tions which we might,  perhaps,  escape,  by shutting
ourselves up in some spot more remote from the
capital.  But as my deprivation of the society of
my friends is what I most lament,  so something that
approaches nearest to what I have lost affords me the
best reparation.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

Passy,  May 29th,  1805.

BEFORE I expected it,  my promised opportunity for
again writing to my most dear father is arrived.  I
entirely forget whether,  before the breaking out of the
war stopt our correspondence,  M.  d'Arblay had already
obtained his retraitc  ;  and,  consequently,  whether that
is an event I have mentioned or not.  Be that as it
may,  he now has it — it is 1500 livres,  or  £62.  10s.  per
annum.  But all our resources from England ceasing
with the peace,  we had so little left from what we had
brought over,  and M.  d'Arblay has found so nearly
nothing remaining of his natural and hereditary claims
in his own province,  that he determined upon applying
for some employment that might enable him to live
with independence,  however parsimoniously.  This he
has,  with infinite difficulty,  &c.,  at length obtained

1805]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  285

and he is now a redacteur in the civil department of les
Batimens,  &c.  This is no sinecure.  He attends at his
bureau from half past nine to half past four o'clock
every day ;  and as we live so far off as Passy he is
obliged to set off for his office between eight and nine,
and does not return to his hermitage till past five.
However,  what necessity has urged us to desire,  and
made him solicit,  we must not,  now acquired,  name or
think of with murmuring or regret.  He has the hap
piness to be placed amongst extremely worthy people;
and those who are his chefs in office treat him with
every possible mark of consideration and feeling.

We continue steady to our little cell at Passy,  which
is retired,  quiet,  and.  quite to ourselves,  with a mag
nificent view of Paris from one side,  and a beautiful
one of the country on the other.  It is unfurnished —
indeed,  unpapered,  and every way unfinished ;  ibr our
workmen,  in the indispensable repairs which preceded
our entering it,  ran us up bills that compelled us to
turn them adrift,  and leave every thing at a stand,
when three rooms only were made just habitable.

Dr.  Burney to Madame d'Arblay.

July 12,  1805.

*****

YOUR brother,  Dr.  Charles,  and I,  have had the honour
last Tuesday of dining with the Prince of Wales
at Lord Melbourne's,  at the particular desire of
H.R.H.  He is so good-humoured and gracious to
those against whom he has no party prejudice,  that it
is impossible not to be flattered by his politeness and
condescension.  I was astonished to find him,  amidst
such constant dissipation,  possessed of so much learn
ing,  wit,  knowledge of books in general,  discrimination
of character,  as well as original humour.  He quoted
Homer in Greek to my son as readily as if the beauties

DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

of Dryden or Pope had been under consideration.
And as to music,  he is an excellent critic ;  has an en
larged taste — admiring whatever is good in its kind,  of
whatever age or country the composers or performers
may be ;  without,  however,  being insensible to the
superior genius and learning necessary to some kinds
of music more than others.

The conversation was general and lively,  in which
several of the company,  consisting of eighteen or
twenty,  took a share,  till towards the heel of the even
ing,  or rather the toe of the morning ;  for we did not
rise from table till one o'clock,  when Lady Melbourne
being returned from the opera with her daughters,
coffee was ordered  ;  during which H.R.H.  took me aside
and talked exclusively about music near half an hour,
and as long with your brother concerning Greek lite
rature.  He is a most excellent mimic of well-known
characters :  had we been in the dark any one would
have sworn that Dr.  Parr and Kemble were in the
room.  Besides being possessed of a great fund of
original humour,  and good humour,  he may with truth
be said to have as much wit as Charles II.,  with much
more learning — for his merry majesty could spell no
better than the bourgeois gentil-lwmme.

Dr.  Burney to Madame d'Arblay.

June 12,  1808.

MY DEAR FANNY,

THE complaint made in one of two
short notes I have received,  of letters never answered,
old Charles returns,  as his account of family affairs,
he finds,  has never readied you.  Indeed,  for the last
two or three years,  I have had nothing good to say of
own self,  and I peremptorily charged all the rest of the
family to say nothing bad on the subject of health,  for
I never understood the kindness of alarming distant
friends with accounts of severe illness,  as we may be
recovered or dead before the information reaches them.

1807]  OF MADAME^D'ARBLAY.    ]"  287

Last autumn I had an alarming seizure in my left
hand ;  and,  mine being pronounced a Bath case,  on
Christmas Eve 1 set out for that city,  extremely weak
and dispirited — put myself under the care of Dr.  Parry,
and after remaining there three months I found my
hand much more alive,  and my general health con
siderably amended.

During my invalidity at Bath I had an unexpected
visit from your Streatham friend,  of whom I had lost
sight for more than ten years.  I saw very few people,
but none of an evening nor of a morning,  on the days
my hand was pumped on.  When her name was sent
in I was much surprised,  but desired she might be ad
mitted  ;  and I received her as an old friend with whom
I had spent much time very happily,  and never wished
to quarrel.  She still looks well,  but is grave,  and
candour itself;  though still she says good things,  and
writes admirable notes and letters,  I am told,  to my

fraud daughters C.  and M.,  of whom she is very fond.
^e shook hands very cordially,  and avoided any allu
sion to our long separation and its cause ;  the Caro
Sposo still lives,  but is such an object from the gout
that the account of his sufferings made me pity him
sincerely ;  he wished,  she told me,  "  to see his old and
worthy friend,"  and,  un beau matin,  I could not refuse
compliance with his wish.  She nurses him with great
affection and tenderness,  never goes out or has com
pany when he is in pain.  God bless you and yours,
prays—

Your very affectionate Padre.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney,  Chelsea.

ce 16 Septembre,  1807.
MY MOST DEAR FATHER,

I HAVE just received a kind offer to send a
few lines to the spot whence my most ardent wishes

288 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

are to receive many,  but whence the handwriting
that most of all I sigh to behold has not blessed
my sight since the return of Madame de Cadignan.
Nor have I ever heard whether the last six letters I
have written have as yet been received.  Two of
them were antiques that had waited three or four
years some opportunity;  a third was concerning the
Institute,  and M.  le Breton's wish to see you installed
one of the foreign members and correspondents ;  the
two last were to reach you through a voyage by
America,  and therefore may not yet be arrived.  I
do not count the few lines sent by Maria,  though to
obtain even a smaller mite myself would fill me with
joy and thankfulness.

21 AoUt,  1808. — The expected opportunity for which
I had strung this lamentable list of unacknowledged
claims,  nearly a twelvemonth since,  failed ;  another at
this moment offers — may it prove more propitious !
Could it but rebound to me with news of your health,
such as it conveys from hence of ours,  how should I
bless it !  But an intercourse such as that must wait
for other blessings than mine — the blessings of peace
—  and those,  the whole wounded universe would
surely join to hail.  My paper is so stinted,  and my
time so limited,  that 1 can begin no regular account of
our proceedings,  which,  indeed,  have but little varied
since we lost Maria.  O that any one could give me
here the history of yours !  I am in such terrible
arrears of all such knowledge that I know not who will
ever undertake to pay me.  My last intelligence was
that you were well,  my dearest father,  and that the
family at large,  in that at least,  imitated you.  But
details — none,  none reach me  !  I have a bitter anxiety
of suspense upon some subjects very near my heart.
Not even the loved names of any of my family now
reach me  ;  Esther,  James,  Charles,  Charlotte,  Sally,
with all their younger selves,  and Richard and his
boys,  all are sounds strange to my ears,  and my be-

1810]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  289

loved friends of Norbury are banished thence with the
same rigour!  I am sad,  sad indeed,  at this depri
vation  ;  though in all else I am still and constantly
happy,  for in iny two faithful companions I tind sympathy
in all my feelings,  and food,  sweet food for all my hopes.

F.  D'A.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Eurney.

September,  1808.  "."

AFTER being so long robbed of all means of writing
to my beloved father,  I seize,  with nearly as much
surprise as gratitude,  a second opportunity of address
ing him almost before the first can have brought my
hand to his sight.  When t"will some occasion offer
to bring me back — not my revenge,  but my first and
most coveted satisfaction  ?  With how much more
spirit,  also,  should I write,  if I knew what were received
of what already I have scrawled  !  Volumes,  however,
must have been told you,  of what in other times I should
have written,  by Maria.  For myself,  when once a re
union takes place,  I can scarcely conceive which will be
hardest worked,  my talking faculties or my listening
ones.  O what millions of things I want to inquire and
to know!  The rising generation,  methinks,  at least,
might keep me some letters and packets ready for
occasional conveyances.  I should be grateful beyond
measure.  M.  d'Arblay writes — "  how desired is,  how
happy shall be,  the day,  in which we shall receive your
dearest blessing and embrace  !  Pray be so kind not to
forget the mate,  always remembering your kindness for
him and his.  A thousand thousand loves to all."

Madame tfArblay to Dr.  Burney.

March 28,  1810.

HAVE you received,  my dearest father,    the honour
designed you by the Institute?     The worthy M.  le
VOL.  vi.  u

290 DIARY AND LETTERS    .  [PART IX.

Breton,  Secretaire Perpetuel,  entered your name upon
the first vacancy the moment we informed him you
would be sensible to such a distinction.  I have never
but once,  as yet,  been to the Institution  ;  and that once
was upon the occasion of the reception of M.  de Tracy,
with whom and with all his amiable family we are very
much connected.  He made a very good discourse,
which he sent me a day or two after ;  and it was re
plied to by M .  de Segur,  now Grand Maltre des Cei'C'
monies,  admirably in a discourse,  which he also has had
the goodness to send me in a very elegant letter from
his charming wife,  a lady who,  though now a grand
mother,  retains the beauty of twenty-five,  and the grace
and attraction of eighteen years of age.  You are
always remembered here,  and named with pleasure,  by
M.  Suard and M.  1'Abbe Morellet,  both of whom we
meet chez Madame de Tesse,  one of the most spiri-
tuelle and instruite,  and charming of women,  though so
little in her bloom that she has been married a second
time to her first husband after a trial how she liked
the state with him of fifty years.  Adieu,  dearest,  most
dear Sir!  Oh that our approaching rejoicings may
announce us some prospect of peace  !  I entreat to be
remembered most affectionately to all my dear family
and my friends,  and to be kept always warm in the
heart of my beloved father,  who preserves an unalter
able place in that of his dutiful and devoted

F.  D'A.

P.S.  M.  d'Arblay conjures you to retain all your
goodness for him.  It cannot easily,  dear Sir,  be better
bestowed.

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney.

No.  13,  Rue d'Anjou,  Paris,  May 1,  1810.

A HAPPY May-day to my dearest father!     Sweet-
scented be the cowslips which approach his nostrils !

1810]  'OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  291

lovely and rosy the milkmaids that greet his eyes,  and
animating as they are noisy the marrow-bones and
cleavers that salute his ears  !  Dear,  and even touch
ing,  are these anniversary recollections where  ^distance
and absence give them existence only in the memory !
and,  at this moment,  to hear and see them I would
exchange all the Raphaels in our Museum,  and the
new and beautiful composition of Paesiello in the
chapel.  The pleasure of admiration is so relative that
no intrinsic merit can awaken it like our proper inter
ests.  Yet I need not fear you will think me insensible
to the noble works here exhibited.  Oh,  no!  You,
my dearest father,  will unfold all my meaning,  and
enter into every feeling that makes even excellence
vapid,  which we can only witness through separation
from those we love.

Could you but send me a little food for the hope
now in private circulation that the new alliance of the
Emperor may perhaps extend to a general alliance of
all Europe,  oh,  heaven !  how would that brighten
my faculties of enjoyment !  I would run about to see
all I have hitherto omitted to seek,  with the ardent
curiosity of a traveller newly arrived ;  and I should
hasten to review and consider all I have already beheld,
with an alertness of vivacity that would draw informa
tion from every object I have as yet looked at with un-
discerning tameness.  Oh,  such a gleam of light would
new-model or re-model me,  and I should make you
present to all my sights and partake of all the wonders
that surround me  !

Were not this cruel obscurity so darkening to my
views,  and so depressing to my spirits,  I could tell my
dearest father many things that might amuse him,  and
detail to him,  in particular,  my great and rare happi
ness in a point the most essential,  after domestic com
forts,  to peace of mind and cheerfulness,  namely,  my
good fortune in my adopted friends in this my adopted
country.  The society in which I mix,  when I can pre-

202 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX-

vail with myself to quit my yet dearer fireside,  is all
that can be wished,  whether for wit,  wisdom,  intelli
gence,  gaiety,  or politeness.  The individuals with
whom I chiefly mix,  from being admired at first for
their talents or amiability,  are now sincerely loved for
their kindness and goodness.  Could I write more
frequently,  or with more security that I write not to
the winds and the waves,  I would characterise the
whole set to you,  and try to make us yet shake hands
in the same party.  I have heard of this opportunity
so suddenly that I have not a moment for extending
my use of it to my dear sisters,  brothers,  and friends,
except through your goodness,  which must again fabri
cate messages to all and every one from the materials
you well know to be in my neart,  and which no one
can draw forth and disseminate with equal justness.

M .  d'Arblay is at his office,  and knows nothing of
this offer;  he is well,  but thinner,  much,  and over
worked,  terribly,  at this moment.  Alex,  is writing on
the same table,  but not quite so familiarly nor so
glibly ;  for he is preparing twenty lines of Euripides
for his master.  Heaven bless my ever dear father,
prays his

F,  D'A.

Madame cCArblay to Dr.  Burney.

,1 No.  13,  Rue d'Anjou,  Paris,  ce 16 Sept.  1810.    x

CAN I tell you,  my dearest father ! — oh,  no!  lean
never tell you — the pleasure,  the rapture with which
I received your letter by Madame Solvyns.  It had
been so cruelly long since I had heard from you,  so
anxious and suffering a space since I had seen your
handwriting,  that,  when at last it came,  I might have
seemed,  to one who did not know me,  rather penetrated
by sudden affliction than by joy.  But how different
was all within to what appeared without !  My partner-

1810]  MADAME D'ARBLAY.  293

in-all received it at his bureau,  and felt an impatience
so unconquerable to communicate so extreme a pleasure
that he quitted everything to hasten home;  for he was
incapable of going on with his business.  How satis
factory,  also,  is all the intelligence  !  how gaily,  with
what spirit written !  I have not been able to give the
joy to Madame Solvyns,  whom I have not the pleasure
to know,  nor have ever even seen,  though I am well
disposed to admire,  after your agreeable picture of her,
and the great obligation I owe to her.  I have sent
your message to M.  Suard by a lady with whom he is
particularly acquainted,  and who assures me quil a
ete bien touche by your remembrance.  With regard to
the Institute,  my dearest Sir,  you are nominated cor
respondent in the class  '  des Beaux Arts.'  The Secre
taire Perpetuel,  M.  le Breton,  has been so good as to
bring to me himself the form of your nomination.  He
has received the letter you wrote of acceptance,  and
with perfect approvance.  I am soon to meet M.  Suard
at the house of the lady I have mentioned,  and I shall
then make the enquiries you desire,  of books and
authors.  I do nothing of late but dream of seeing
you,  my most dear father.  I think I dream it wide
awake,  too  ;  the desire is so strong that it pursues me
night and day,  and almost persuades me it has some
thing in it of reality  :  and I do not choose to discourage
even ideal happiness.  But my poor mate dreams no
such dreams  :  his bureau is of a business too substan
tial to allow of castle-building in the air.  My castles
are rather upon the sea ;  pray for me that they be not
all drowned.

Adieu,  most dear Sir,

Your own

F.  o'A.

P.S.  Alex,  will venture to write for himself.  My
married nieces,  with all their charms,  and all their
merits,  and all their bambinos,  are most unnatural

294 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

little chits never to ask my consent first,  nor my bene
diction afterwards.  Will they wait till their little ones
give them a better example  ?

Madame cTArblay to Mrs.  Lock.

No.  13,  Rue d'Anjou,  Paris,  16 Sept.  1810.

SHOULD this reach you,  my ever dearest friend,  may
it urge you to prepare me at least a similar slip,  and
my Amine another,  for the first possible oppor
tunity to be left at my dear father's.  It is so long,
so dreadfully long,  since I have had the blessing to
see your beloved handwritings,  that methinks if your
names only arrived I should feel a joy past description.

When,  when,  may I embrace you again !  I think
of late of nothing else.  I form projects,  and dream
dreams.  Oh,  dearest friends,  give me your prayers I
may not dream only always  !

My excellent mate,  toujours the same,  has not less
desire,  but is still wider from probability.  His health
is not all I could wish — it is preserved with watchful
ness,  but cannot bear neglect.  Alex,  is thin and pale,
but strong and without complaint.  He is terribly sin
gular,  and more what they here call sauvaye than any
creature I ever beheld.  He is untameably wild,  and
averse to all the forms of society.  Where he can have
got such a rebel humour we conceive not ;  but it costs
him more to make a bow than to resolve six difficult
problems of algebra,  or to repeat twelve pages from
Euripides ;  and as to making a civil speech, he would
sooner renounce the world.

How should I delight to see my dearest friends en
circled by all their lovely tribes !  Two letters I have
received,  but long,  long since,  from my indulgent
Amine ;  so sweetly satisfactory,  so duelling on inter
esting details,  so descriptive of all I most wish to see
and know,  that for many months even,  after reading

1811]

OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.

295

them,  I thought and felt myself au fait with all that
passed,  and no longer a stranger to all your proceed
ings,  your interests,  your affairs,  and your bosom-feel
ings.  But why have I not my dear Augusta's letter  ?
I beseech that it may be sent to Chelsea ;  occasions
there present themselves sometimes ;  rarely,  indeed,
but yet sometimes.  How kind of her to have written !
No matter for the date  ;  all will still,  alas  !  to me be
new  ;  for I hear so seldom,  and after such chasms,  that
a letter of six years ago will stand a chance to give me
as much intelligence as one written last week.

F.  D'A.

Madame cfArblay to Dr.  Burney.

No.  13,  Rue d'Anjou,  14th April,  1811.

MANY,  or rather countless,  as are the times that the
sight of the handwriting of my dearest father has
brought joy to my heart,  it never yet,  methinks,  proved
so truly a balsam as this last time of its blessing me.

Seated round our wood fire by one,  by two,  by three,
we gave to it a whole evening,  stopping upon every
phrase,  commenting upon every paragraph,  and I,  the
reader,  indulging them and myself by expounding and
dilating upon every allusion,  quotation,  and family
story or saying.  It was therefore a long and delicious
banquet ;  and we have agreed to lock it up,  and take
it out again once in every three months for another
family reading,  till another arrives.

I yield,  dearest Sir,  implicitly to your decision,  and
my dear sisters and brothers,  with respect to the
worthy Letty,  upon one condition — that you do not let
a too delicate consideration for us deprive the good
soul of our little assistance should any change of cir
cumstances,  or any unfortunate increase of infirmity or
ill health,  make the mite of more consequence.  I beg,
through your means,  to put the management of this

296 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

solution,  as Mr.  Tyers called every doubt,  into the hands
of our just and feeling Esther,  who sees her the oftenest,
and will soon find if the small addition,  eventually,
may become more important ;  and pray tell my dear
Esther that we graciously forgive her  "  worldly and
grovelling  "  spirit for us,  if we may depend upon her
accepting carte blanche for amending it,  should occasion
invite any change.

Have you received the letter in which I related that
your diploma has been brought to me by the perpetual
secretary of the class of the Fine Arts of the Institute
of Frarce?  I shall not have it conveyed but by some
very certain hand,  and that,  now,  is most difficult to
find.  M.  le Breton has given me,  also,  a book of the
list of your camarades,  in which he has written your
name.  He says it will be printed in next year's regis
ter.  He has delivered to me,  moreover,  a medal,
which is a mark of distinction reserved for peculiar
honour to peculiar select personages.  Do you suppose
I do not often — often — often think who would like,  and
be fittest to be the bearer to you of these honours  ?

I am heartily glad Mrs.  Hawkins has recovered her
property,  though I had never heard it had been lost
or disputed.  So many letters have failed to reach me,
that some seem like the second volume of a book which
comes to hand before the first.  Lady Keith  —  is it
Miss Thrale,  or one of her sisters?  Whichever it is,  I
am glad of her kind remembrance,  and most cordially
hope she is happy.  If sho would write,  and leave a
letter with you,  some favourable packet might en
close it.

I have not met M.  Suard for many months,  but I
have sent him and his lady your kind words by M.
Lally Tolendal,  and they have both expressed them
selves highly gratified by your remembrance.  The
Abbe Morellet,  now 85 or 86,  walks about Paris like a
young man,  and preserves his spirits,  memory,  and
pleasure in existence,  and has a bookery in such elegant

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  297

order that people beg to go and see it,  as they do to
visit that of a certain other member of les beaux arts of
our Institute.

How kind was the collection of letters you made
more precious by endorsing !  I beseech you to thank
all my dear correspondents,  and to bespeak their pa
tience for answers,  which shall arrive by every wind
that I can make blow their way ;  but yet more,  beseech
their generous attention to my impatience for more,
should the wind blow fair for me before it will let me
hail them in return.  Difficultly can they figure to
themselves my joy — my emotion at receiving letters
from such dates as they can give me  !

1811.

[DURING this year Madame d'Arblay's correspondence
with her English connexions was interrupted not only
by the difficulty of conveying letters,  but also by a dan
gerous illness and the menace of a cancer,  from which
she could only be relieved by submitting to a painful
and hazardous operation.  The fortitude with which she
bore this suffering,  and her generous solicitude for
Monsieur d'Arblay and those around her,  excited the
warmest sympathy in all who heard of her trial,  and
her French friends universally gave her the name of
ISAnge;  so touched were they by her tenderness and
magnanimity.]

Madame d'Arblay to Dr.  Burney,  Chelsea.

Rue d'Anjou,  No.  8,  Paris,  May 29,  1812.

A FRIEND of Maria's has just promised me to convey
to her a letter which I may direct.  I snatch the happy
opportunity to enclose it in a few lines to my dearest
father,  who will forward it to Bath Easton with my
best love.

Immense as is the distance between a letter and an

298 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

interview,  where the dearer is unattainable,  its succe-
daneum becomes more precious than those who enjoy
both can believe,  or even conceive.  O my dearest
father,  let no possible conveyance pass without giving
me the sight of your hand,  if it be but by your sig
nature.

We are well,  and Alex.,  latterly,  has taken the good
turn of approaching nearer in personal resemblance to
his father;  for,  from being extremely little ^of his age,
he is now suddenly grown to a goodly size.

I have seen,  at length,  Madame Solvyns;  I think
her charming,  gay,  spirited,  natural,  and agreeable.
Various circumstances had prevented our meeting till
the other day ;  and then,  how did we talk of my dearest
father !  She is truly worthy of the subject,  for she
says she sees nothing perfect without recollecting him.
"  He is so French in his manners  !  so attentive,  so po
lite,  so pleasing ! — it 's so rarely one sees an Englishman,
however good and excellent,  so charmingly well bred
and engaging."

Monsieur Guinguine,  whom you inquired after in one
of your letters,  is well and flourishing.  I have never
seen him,  which I regret,  since you have known him ;
but he is much acquainted at a house where I visit
with very particular pleasure,  M.  de Tracy's,  and where
I hope one day to meet him.  I have all my old horror
of arranged encounters,  or Madame de Tracy would
instantly contrive one ;  but they always seem to me
formidable,  and I leave all my meetings to chance.

M.  d'A.  saw lately our justly celebrated De Lille,
and amongst other subjects he mentioned his know
ledge of my dear father,  and spoke of him in warm
terms of admiration and regard.  This leads me to
inquire after Mrs.  Crewe.  It is very long since I have
heard of her.

Monsieur Suard is still as active in literature,  as much
sought in society,  and as alive in the world as when
you knew him.  The Abbe Morellet,  about five years

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  299

ago,  sang me a ballad of his own composition,  at the
house of Madame de Tesse,  that he made upon com
pleting his 80th year ;  it was gay,  touching,  amusing,
and informing.  I will endeavour to get you a copy.
He is now member of the Corps Legislatif,  and,  to
the entertainment of his numerous friends,  wears,
when in grand costume,  a sword.  He is quite well,
cheerful,  spirited,  and chattily agreeable ;  and still
tall and upright.  I am charmed to see how literature,
as well as astronomy,  is long of life.

Adieu,  my most dear Sir.     My old visions of again
seeing you,  and being blest with your blessing,  revisit
again my slumbers.     O give them your prayers !
For your devotedly affectionate and dutiful,

F.  D'ARBLAY.

My tenderest love to all my dears :  my two that are
my constant consolation and support send you theirs
with the most dutiful respect.

300 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

PART X.

Madame d'Arblay desirous of visiting her Friends in England —
Fouche — A Disappointment — She prepares to take her Son with
her — Commissions — Detained at Dunkirk — The French Govern
ment permit her Manuscripts to be forwarded to her — Spanish
Prisoners — Her sympathy towards them — Examination at the
Police Office— Sails from Dunkirk — The Vessel captured by the
English — Landing in England — Recognition of her Brother —
Arrival at Chelsea — Saddening change in Dr.  Burney.

JOURNAL FROM PARIS TO LONDON.

Dunkirk,  1812.

THERE are few events of my life that I more regret
not having committed to paper while they were
fresher in my memory,  than my police-adventure
at Dunkirk,  the most fearful that 1 have ever ex
perienced,  though not,  alas,  the most afflicting,
for terror,  and even horror,  are short of deep affliction ;
while they last they are,  nevertheless,  absorbers ;
but once past,  whether ill or well,  they are over,
and from them,  as from bodily pain,  the animal spirits
can rise uninjured :  not so from that grief which
has its source in irremediable calamity ;  from that there
is no rising,  no relief,  save in hopes of eternity :  for
here on earth all buoyancy of mind that might produce
the return of peace,  is sunk for ever.  I will now,  how
ever,  put down all that recurs to me of my first return
home.

In the year 1810,  when I had been separated from
my dear father,  and country,  and native friends,  for
eight years,  my desire to again see them became so
anxiously impatient that my tender companion pro-

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  301

posed my passing over to England alone,  to spend
a month or two at Chelsea.  Many females at that
period,  and amongst them the young Duchesse de
Duras,  had contrived to procure passports for a short
similar excursion;  though no male was permitted,
under any pretence,  to quit France,  save with the
army.

Keluctantly — with all my wishes in favour of the
scheme — yet most reluctantly,  I accepted the generous
offer ;  for never did I know happiness away from that
companion,  no,  not even out of his sight !  but still,  I
was consuming with solicitude to see my revered father
— to be again in his kind arms,  and receive his kind
benediction.

For this all was settled,  and I had obtained my pass
port,  which was brought to me without my even going
to the police office,  by the especial favour of M.  le
Breton,  the Secretaire Perpetuel a Vlnstitut.  The
ever active services of M.  de Narbonne aided this pe
culiar grant ;  though,  had not Bonaparte been abroad
with his army at the time,  neither the one nor the other
would have ventured at so hardy a measure of assist
ance.  But whenever Bonaparte left Paris,  there was
always an immediate abatement of severity in the po
lice  ;  and Fouche,  though he had borne a character
dreadful beyond description in the earlier and most
horrible times of the Revolution,  was,  at this period,
when Ministre de la Police,  a man of the mildest man
ners,  the most conciliatory conduct,  and of the easiest
access in Paris.  He had least the glare of the new
imperial court of any one of its administration  ;  he
affected indeed all the simplicity of a plain Repub
lican.  I have often seen him strolling in the most
shady and unfrequented parts of the Elysian Fields
muffled up in a plain brown rocolo,  and giving le Iras
to his wife,  without suite or servant,  merely taking the
air,  with the evident design of enjoying also an unmo
lested tete-a-tete.  On these occasions,  though he was

302 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART 1

universally known,  nobody approached him;  and he
seemed,  himself,  not to observe that any other person
was in the walks.  He was said to be remarkably
agreeable in conversation,  and his person was the best
fashioned and most gentlemanly of any man I have
happened to see,  belonging to the government.  Yet,
such was the impression made upon me by the dreadful
reports that were spread of his cruelty and ferocity at
Lyons,  that I never saw him but I thrilled with horror.
How great,  therefore,  was my obligation to M.  de
Narbonne and to M.  le Breton,  for procuring me a
passport,  without my personal application to a man
from whom I shrunk as from a monster.

I forget now for what spot the passport was nomi
nated — perhaps for Canada,  but certainly not for Eng
land;  and M.  le Breton,  who brought it to me himself,
assured me that no difficulty would be made for me
either to go or to return,  as I was known to have lived
a life the most inoffensive to government and perfectly
free from all species of political intrigue,  and as I
should leave behind me such sacred hostages as my
husband and my son.

Thus armed,  and thus authorized,  I prepared,  quietly
and secretly,  for my expedition,  while my generous
mate employed all his little leisure in discovering where
and how I might embark  :  when,  one morning,  when I
was bending over my trunk to press in its contents,  I
was abruptly broken in upon by M.  de Boinville,  who
was in my secret,  and who called upon me to stop  !  He
had received certain,  he said,  though as yet unpublished
information,  that a universal embargo was laid upon
every vessel,  and that not a fishirfg-boat was permitted
to quit the coast.

Confounded,  affrighted,  disappointed,  and yet re
lieved,  I submitted to the blow,  and obeyed the injunc
tion.  M.  de Boinville then revealed to me the new
olitical changes that occasioned this measure,  which
e had learned from some confiding friends in office ;

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  303

but which I do not touch upon,  as they are now in every
history of those times.

I pass on to my second attempt,  in the year 1812.
Disastrous was that interval 1 All correspondence
with England was prohibited under pain of death !
One letter only reached me,  most unhappily,  written
with unreflecting abruptness,  announcing,  without
preface,  the death of the Princess Amelia,  the new
and total derangement of the King,  and the death of
Mr.  Lock.  Three such calamities overwhelmed me,
overwhelmed us both,  for Mr.  Lock,  my revered Mr.
Lock,  was as dear to my beloved partner as to myself.
Poor Mrs.  *  *  *  *  concluded these tidings must have
already arrived,  but her fatal letter gave the first in
telligence,  and no other letter,  at that period,  found its
way to me.  She sent hers,  I think,  by some trusty
returned prisoner.

She little knew my then terrible situation  •  hovering
over my head was the stiletto of a surgeon for a menace
of cancer ;  yet,  till that moment,  hope of escape had
always been held out to me by the Baron de Larrey —
hope which,  from the reading of that fatal letter,  be
came extinct.

When I was sufficiently recovered for travelling,
after a dreadful operation,  my plan was resumed ;  but
with an alteration which added infinitely to its interest,
as well as to its importance.  Bonaparte was now
engaging in a new war,  of which the aim and intention
was no less than — the conquest of the world.  This
menaced a severity of conscription to which Alexander,
who had now spent ten years in France,  and was
seventeen years of age,  would soon become liable.
His noble father had relinquished all his own hopes
and emoluments in the military career,  from the epoch
that his king was separated from his country ;  though
that career had been his peculiar choice,  and was
suited peculiarly to the energy of his character,  the
vigour of his constitution,  his activity,  his address,

304 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

his bravery,  his spirit of resource,  never overset by
difficulty nor wearied by fatigue — all which combi
nation of military requisites —

"  The eye could in a moment reach,

And read depicted in his martial air."

But his high honour,  superior to his interest,  supe
rior to his inclination,  and ruling his whole conduct
with unremitting,  unalienable constancy,  impelled him
to prefer the hard labour and obscure drudgery of work
ing at a Bureau of the Minister of the Interior,  to any
and every advantage or promotion that could be offered
him in his own immediate and favourite line of life,
tvhen no longer compatible with his allegiance and
loyalty.  To see,  therefore,  his son bear arms in the
very cause that had been his ruin — bear arms against
the country  ^  which had given himself as well as his
mother,  birth,  would indeed have been heart-breaking.
We agreed,  therefore,  that Alexander should accom
pany me to England,  where,  I flattered myself,  I might
safely deposit him,  while I returned to await,  by the
side of my husband,  the issue of the war,  in the fervent
hope that it would prove our restoration to liberty and
re-union.

My second passport was procured with much less
facility than the first.  Fouche was no longer Minister
of Police,  and,  strange to tell,  Fouche,  who,  till he be
came that minister,  had been held in horror by all
France — all Europe, — conducted himself with such con
ciliatory mildness to all ranks of people while in that
office,  evinced such an appearance of humanity,  and
exerted such an undaunted spirit of justice in its execu
tion,  that at his dismission all Paris was in affliction and
dismay !  Was this from the real merit he had shown
in his police capacity  ?  Or was its from a yet greater
fear of malignant cruelty awakened by the very name
of his successor,  Savary,  Duke of Rovigo  ?*

*  The reputed assassin of the Duke d'Eughien.     ^

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  305

Now,  as before,  the critical moment was seized by
my friends to act for me when Bonaparte had left
Paris to proceed towards the scene of his next destined
enterprise;  and he was,  I believe,  already at Dresden
when my application was made.  My kind friend Ma
dame de T here took the agency which M.  de

Narbonne could no longer sustain,  as he was now
attending the Emperor,  to whom he had been made
aide-de-camp,  and through her means,  after many
difficulties and delays,  1 obtained a licence of de
parture for myself and for Alexander.  For what
place,  nominally,  my passport was assigned,  I do
not recollect;  I think,  for Newfoundland,  but cer
tainly for some part of the coast of America.  Yet
everybody at the police office saw and knew that
England was my object.  They connived,  nevertheless,
at the accomplishment of my wishes,  with significant
though taciturn consciousness.

From all the friends whom I dared trust with my
secret expedition,  I had commissions for London  ;
though merely verbal,  as I was cautioned to take no
letters.  No one,  at that time,  could send any to Eng
land by the post.  I was charged by sundry persons to
write for them,  and in their names,  upon my arrival.
Madame de Tracy begged me to discover the address
of her sister-in-law,  Madame de Civrac,  who had emi
grated into the wilds of Scotland,  and of whom she anxi
ously wished for some intelligence.  This occasioned
my having a little correspondence with her,  which I now
remark because she is named as one of the principal
Dames de la Socicte by Madame de Genlis.  Madame
d' Astorre desired me to find out her father,  M.  le Comte
de Cely,  and to give him news of her and her children.
This I did,  and received from the old gentleman some
visits,  and many letters.  Madame la Frineesse de
Chimay entrusted me with a petition — a verbal one,  to
the Prince of Wales,  in favour of the Due de Fitz-
james,  who,  in losing his wife,  had lost an English

VOL.  VI.  X

£06 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

pension.  This I was to transmit to his Royal High
ness by means of the Duchess Dowager of Buccleugh ;
\vho was also entreated to make known the Duke's
situation to M.  d'Escars,  who was in the immediate
service of Louis XVIII. ;  for M.  d'Escars I had a sort
of cipher from Madame de Chimay,  to authenticate
my account.

Our journey — Alexander's and mine — from Paris to
Dunkirk was sad,  from the cruel separation which it
exacted,  and the fearful uncertainty of impending
events ;  though I was animated at times into the live
liest sensations,  in the prospect of again beholding my
father,  my friends,  and my country.

General d'Arblay,  through his assiduous researches,
aided by those of M.  de Boinville and some others,
found that a vessel was preparing to sail from Dunkirk
to Dover,  under American colours,  and with American
passports and licence;  and,  after privately landing
such of its passengers as meant but to cross the Chan
nel,  to proceed to the western continents.  M.  d'Ar
blay found,  at the same time,  six or seven persons of
his acquaintance who were to embark in this vessel,
namely,  Madame and Mademoiselle de Cocherelle,
Madame de Carboniere,  Madame de Roncherolle,  Ma
dame de Caillebot and her son and daughter,  the two
Miss Potts,  and Mrs.  Gregory.

We all met,  and severally visited at Dunkirk,  where
I was compelled,  through the mismanagement and
misconduct of the captain of the vessel,  to spend the
most painfully wearisome six weeks of my life,  for they
kept me alike from all that was dearest to me,  either in
France or in England,  save my Alexander.  I was
twenty times on the point of returning to Paris;  but
whenever I made known that design,  the captain pro
mised to sail the next morning.  The truth is,  he
postponed the voyage from day to day and from week
to week,  in the hope of obtaining more passengers ;
and,  as the clandestine visit he meant to make to Dover,

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  307

in his way to America,  was whispered about,  reinforce
ments very frequently encouraged his cupidity.

The ennui of having no positive occupation was now,
for the first time,  known to me ;  for though the first
object of my active cares was with me,  it was not as if
that object had been a daughter,,  and always at my
side ;  it was a youth of seventeen,  who,  with my free
consent,  sought whatever entertainment the place could
afford,  to while away fatigue.  He ran,  therefore,  wildly
about at his pleasure,  to the quay,  the dockyard,  the
sea,  the suburbs,  the surrounding country  ;  but chiefly,
his time was spent in skipping to the  '  Mary Ann,'  our
destined vessel,  and seeing its preparations for de
parture.

To stroll about the town,  to call upon my fellow-
sufferers,  to visit the principal shops,  and to talk
with the good Dutch people while I made slight
purchases,  was all I could devise to do that required
action.

When I found our stay indefinitely protracted,  it
occurred to me that if I had the papers of a work
which I had then in hand,  they might afford me an oc
cupation to while away my truly vapid and uninterest
ing leisure.  I wrote this idea to my partner in all — as
M.  de Talleyrand had called M.  d'Arblay ;  and,  with a
spirit that was always in its first youth where any
service was to be performed,  he waited on M.  de Saul-
nier at the police office,  and made a request that my
manuscripts might be sent after me,  with a permission
that I might also be allowed to carry them with me on
board the ship.  He durst not say to England,  whither
no vessel was supposed to sail;  but he would not,  to
M.  de Saulnier,  who palpably connived at my plan
and purpose,  say America.  M.  de Saulnier made
many enquiries relative to these papers  ;  but on being
assured upon honour,  that,  the work had nothing in
it political,  nor even national,  nor possibly offensive to
the government,  he took the single word of M.  d'Ar-

x2

3C8 DIARY AND LETTERS

[PARTX.

blay,  whose noble countenance and dauntless openness
of manner were guarantees of sincerity that wanted
neither seals nor bonds,  and invested him with the
power to send me what papers he pleased,  without de
manding to examine,  or even to see them  —  a trust so
confiding and so generous,  that I have regretted a
thousand times the want of means to acknowledge it
according to its merit.

This work was  '  The Wanderer,  or Female Difficul
ties,'  of which nearly three volumes were finished.
They arrived,  nevertheless,  vainly for any purpose at
Dunkirk;  the disturbance of my suspensive state inca
pacitating me for any composition,  save of letters to
my best friend,  to whom I wrote,  or dictated by Alex
ander,  every day ;  and every day was only supported
by the same kind diurnal return.  But when,  at length,
\\e wore summoned to the vessel,  and our goods
and chattels were conveyed to the custom-house,
and when the little portmanteau was produced,
and found to be filled with manuscripts,  the police
officer who opened it began a rant of indignation and
amazement at a sight so unexpected and prohibited,
that made him incapable to enquire or to hear the
meaning of such a freight.  He sputtered at the mouth,
and stamped with his feet,  so forcibly and vociferously,
that no endeavours of mine could induce him to stop
his accusations of traitorous designs,  till,  tired of the
attempt,  I ceased both explanation and entreaty,  and
stood before him with calm taciturnity.  Wanting,
then,  the fresh fuel of interruption or opposition,  his
fire and fury evaporated into curiosity to know what 1
could offer.  Yet even then,  though my account stag
gered his violence into some degree of civility,  he
evidently deemed it,  from its very nature,  incredible ;
and this fourth child of my brain had undoubtedly
been destroyed ere it was born,  had I not had recourse
to an English merchant,  Mr.  Gregory,  long settled at
Dunkirk,  to whom,  happily,  I had been recommended,

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  309

as to a person capable,  in any emergence,  to afford me
assistance ;  he undertook the responsibility ;  and the
letter of M.  d'Arblay,  containing the licence of M.  de
Saulnier,  was then all-sufficient for my manuscripts and
their embarkation.

The second event I have to relate T never even yet
recollect without an inward shuddering.  In our walks
out of the town,  on the borders of the Ocean,  after
passing beyond the dockyard or wharf,  we frequently
met a large party of Spanish prisoners,  well escorted
by gens d'armes,  and either going to their hard destined
labour,  or returning from it for repast or repose.  I felt
deeply interested by them,  knowing they were men
with and for whom our own English and the im
mortal Wellington were then fighting :  and this in
terest induced me to walk on the bank by which they
were paraded to and fro,  as often as I could engage
Alexander,  from his other pursuits,  to accompany me.
Their appearance was highly in their favour,  as well as
their situation  ;  they had a look calmly intrepid,  of con
centrated resentment,  yet unalterable patience.  They
were mostly strong-built and vigorous  ;  of solemn,
almost stately deportment,  and with fine dark eyes,  full of
meaning,  rolling around them as if in watchful expecta
tion of insult ;  and in a short time they certainly caught
from my countenance an air of sympathy,  for they gave
me,  in return,  as we passed one another,  a glance that
spoke grateful consciousness.  I followed them to the
place of their labour ;  though my short-sightedness
would not let me distinguish what they were about,
whether mending fortifications,  dykes,  banks,  parapets,
or what not :  and I durst not use my glass,  lest I should
be suspected as a spy.  We only strolled about in their
vicinity,  as if merely visiting and viewing the sea.

The weather — it was now August — was so intensely
hot,  the place was so completely without shade,  and
their work was so violent,  that they changed hands
every two hours,  and those who were sent off to recruit

310 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

were allowed to cast themselves upon the burnt and
straw-like grass,  to await their alternate summons.
This they did in small groups,  but without venturing
to solace their rest by any species of social intercourse.
They were as taciturn with one another as with their
keepers and taskmasters.

One among them there was who wore an air of supe
riority,  grave and composed,  yet decided,  to which they
all appeared to bow down with willing subserviency,
though the distinction was only demonstrated by an
air of profound respect whenever they approached or
passed him,  for discourse held they none.  One morn
ing,  when I observed him seated at a greater distance
than usual from his overseers,  during his hour of re
lease,  I turned suddenly from my walk as if with a view
to bend my way homewards,  but contrived,  while talk
ing with Alexander and looking another way,  to slant
my steps close to where he sat surrounded by his mute
adherents,  and to drop a handful of small coin nearly
under the elbow upon which,  wearily,  he was reclining.
We proceeded with alertness,  and talking together
aloud;  but Alexander perceived this apparent chief
evidently moved by what I had done,  though forbear
ing to touch the little offering,  which,  however,  his
companions immediately secured.

After this I never met him that he did not make me
a slight but expressive bow.  This encouraged me to
repeat the poor little tribute of compassion,  which I
soon found he distributed,  as far as it would go,  to the
whole set,  by the kindly looks with which every one
thenceforward greeted me upon every meeting.  Yet
he whom we supposed to be some chief,  and who pal
pably discovered it was himself I meant to distinguish,
never touched the money,  nor examined what was
taken up by the others,  who,  on their part,  nevertheless
seemed but to take charge of it in trust.

We were now such good friends,  that this became
more than ever my favourite walk ;  and these poor

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  311

unhappy captives never saw me without brightening
up into a vivacity of pleasure that was to me a real
exhilaration.

We had been at Dunkirk above five weeks,  when
one evening,  having a letter of consequence to send to
Paris,  I begged Alexander to carry it to the Post
himself,  and to deposit me upon the quay,  and there
to join me.  As the weather was very fine I stood near
the sea,  wistfully regarding the element on which de
pended all my present hopes and views.  But presently
my meditations were interrupted,  and my thoughts
diverted from mere self by the sudden entrance,  in a
large body,  of my friends the Spanish prisoners,  who all
bore down to the very place where I was stationed,  evi
dently recognising me,  and eagerly showing that it was
not without extreme satisfaction.  I saw their approach,
in return,  with lively pleasure,  for,  the quay being,  I sup
pose,  a place of certain security,  they were unencum
bered by their usual turnkeys,  the gens d'armes,  and
this freedom,  joined to their surprise at my sight,  put
them also off their guard,  and they flocked round
though not near me,  and hailed me with smiles,  bows,
and hands put upon their breasts.  I now took courage
to speak to them,  partly in French,  partly in English,
for I found they understood a little of both those lan
guages.  I inquired whence they came,  and whether
they knew General Wellington.  They smiled and
nodded at his name,  and expressed infinite delight in
finding I was English;  but though they all,  by their
head movements,  entered into discourse,  my friend the
chief was the only one who attempted to answer me.

When I first went to France,  being continually em
barrassed for terms,  I used constantly to apply to M.
d'Arblay for aid,  till Madame de Tesse charged him
to be qijiet,  saying that my looks filled up what my
words left short,  "  de sorte que^  she added,  "  nous la
devinons  ;  "  this was the case between my Spaniards and
myself,  and we devine-d one another so much to our

312 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

mutual satisfaction,  that while this was the converse
the most to my taste of any I had had at Dunkirk,  it
was also,  probably,  most to theirs of any that had
fallen to their lot since they had been torn from their
native country.

While this was going on I was privately drawing
from my purse all that it contained of small money
to distribute to my new friends;  but at this same
moment a sudden change in the countenance of
the chief from looks of grateful feeling to an ex
pression of austerity,  checked my purpose,  and,  sorry
and alarmed lest he had taken offence,  I hastily drew
my empty hand from my reticule.  I then saw that
the change of expression was not simply to austerity
from pleasure,  but to consternation from serenity ;  and
I perceived that it was not to me the altered visage
was directed ;  the eye pointed beyond me,  and over my
head;  startled,  I turned round,  and what,  then,  was
my own consternation when I beheld an officer of the
police,  in full gold trappings,  furiously darting forward
from a small house at the entrance upon the quay,  which
I afterwards learned was his official dwelling.  When
he came within two yards of us he stood still,  mute and
erect;  but with an air of menace,  his eyes scowling
first upon the chief,  then upon me,  then upon the whole
group,  and then upon me again,  with looks that
seemed diving into some conspiracy.

My alarm was extreme  ;  my imprudence in convers
ing with these unhappy captives struck me at once
with foreboding terror of ill consequences.  I had,
however,  sufficient presence of mind to meet the eyes
of my antagonist with a look that showed surprise
rather than apprehension at his wrath.

This was not without some effect.  Accustomed,
probably,  to scrutinize and to penetrate into secret
plots,  he might be an adept in distinguishing the fear
of ill-treatment from the fear of detection.  The latter
I certainly could not manifest,  as my compassion had

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  313

shown no outward mark beyond a little charity ;  but
the former I tried,  vainly,  perhaps,  to subdue  ;  for I
well knew that pity towards a Spaniard would be
deemed suspicious,  at least,  if not culpable.

We were all silent,  and all motionless ;  but when
the man,  having fixed upon me his eyes with intention
to petrify me,  saw that I fixed him in return with an
open though probably not very composed face,  he
spoke,  and with a voice of thunder,  vociferating re
proach,  accusation,  and condemnation all in one.  His
words I could not distinguish ;  they were so confused
and rapid from rage.

This violence,  though it secretly affrighted me,  I
tried to meet with simple astonishment,  making no
sort of answer or interruption to his invectives.    When
he observed my steadiness,  and that he excited none
of the humiliation of discovered guilt,  he stopped short
and,  after a pause,  gruffly said, —
Qui etes-vous  ?"
'  Je me nomme d'Arblay."
Etes-vous mariee  ?"
Oui."

Ou est votre mari  ?"
A Paris."
Quiest-il?"

'  II travaille aux Bureaux de 1'Interieur."
'  Pourquoi le quittez-vous  ?"

I was here sensibly embarrassed.  I durst not avow
I was going to England  ;  I could not assert I was
really going to America.  I hesitated  ;  and the sight
of his eyes brightening up with the hope of mischief,
abated my firmness ;  and,  while he seemed to be
staring rne through,  I gave an account,  very imperfect,
indeed,  and far from clear,  though true,  that I came
to Dunkirk to embark on board the  '  Mary Ann '
vessel.

"  Ah ha !"  exclaimed he,  "  Vous etes Anglaise  ?"
Then,  tossing back his head with an air of triumphant

314 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

victory,  "  Suivez-moi !"  he added,  and walked away,
fast and fierce,  but looking back every minute to see
that I followed.

Never can I forget the terror with which I was
seized at this command  ;  it could only be equalled by
the evident consternation and sorrow that struck me,
as I turned my head around to see where I was,  in
•my poor chief and his group.  Follow I did,  though
not less per force than if I had been dragged by chains.
When I saw him arrive at the gate of the little dwell
ing I have mentioned,  which I now perceived to belong
to him officially,  I impulsively,  involuntarily stopped.
To enter a police-office,  to be probably charged with
planning some conspiracy with the enemies of the state,
my poor Alexander away,  and not knowing what must
have become of me  ;  my breath was gone  ;  my power
of movement ceased ;  my head,  or understanding,
seemed a chaos,  bereft of every distinct or discrimi
nating idea ;  and my feet,  as if those of a statue,  felt
riveted to the ground,  from a vague but overwhelm
ing belief I was destined to incarceration in some
dungeon,  where I might sink ere T could make known
my situation to my friends,  while Alex.,  thus unac
countably abandoned,  might be driven to despair,  or
become the prey to nameless mischiefs.

Again the tiger vociferated a  "Suivez-moi!"  but
finding it no longer obeyed,  he turned full round as he
stood upon his threshold,  and perceiving my motion
less and speechless dismay,  looked at me for two or
three seconds in scornful,  but investigating taciturnity.
Then,  putting his arms a-kimbo,  he said,  in lower,  but
more taunting accents,  "  Vous ne le jugez done pas a
propos de me suivref

This was followed by a sneering,  sardonic grin that
seemed anticipating the enjoyment of using compul
sion.  On,  therefore,  I again forced myself,  and with
tolerable composure I said,  "  Je n'ai rien,  Monsieur,
je crois a faire ici  ?"

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  315

"Nous verrons!"  he answered,  bluffly,  and led the
way into a small hovel rather than parlour  ;  and then
haughtily seated himself at a table,  on which were
pen,  ink,,  and paper;  and,  while I stood before him,
began an interrogation,  with the decided asperity of
examining a detected criminal,  of whom he was to
draw up the proccs verbal.

When I perceived this,  my every fear,  feeling,  nay,
thought,  concentrated in Alexander,  to whom I had
determined not to allude,  while I had any hope of self-
escape,  to avoid for us both the greatest of all perils,
that of an accusation of intending to evade the ensuing
conscription,  for which,  though Alex,  was yet too young,
he was fast advancing to be amenable.

But now that I was enclosed from his sight,  and
there was danger every moment of his  ^  suddenly
missing me,  I felt that our only chance of safety
must lie in my naming him before he should return.
With all the composure,  therefore,  that I could
assume,  I said that I was come to Dunkirk with
my son to embark in the  '  Mary Ann,'  an Ameri
can vessel,  with a passport from M.  de iSaulnier,
secretary to the Duke de Rovigo,  Minister of the
Police.

And what had I done with this son  ?

I had sent him to the post-office with a letter for his
father.

At that instant I perceived Alexander wildly run
ning past the window.

This moment was critical.  I instantly cried,  "  Sir,
there is my son  !"

The man rose,  and went to the door,  calling out
"  Jeune homme !"

Alex,  approached,  and was questioned,  and though
much amazed,  gave answers perfectly agreeing with
mine.

I now recovered my poor affrighted faculties,  and
calmly said that if he had any doubt of our veracity,  I

316 DIARY AND LETTERS  [?AUT X.

begged he would send for Mr.  Gregory,  who knew us
well.  This,  a second time,  was a most happy refer
ence.  Mr.  Gregory was of the highest respectability,
and he was near at hand.  There could be no doubt of
the authenticity of such an appeal.  The brow of my
ferocious assailant was presently unbent.  I seized the
favourable omen to assure him,  with apparent indiffer
ence,  that I had no objection to being accompanied
or preceded to i'Hotel Sauvage,  where I resided,  nor to
giving him the key of my portmanteau and portfolio,
if it were possible 1 had excited any suspicion by merely
speaking,  from curiosity,  to the Spanish prisoners.

No,  he answered,  he would not disturb me ;  and
then,  having entered the name of Alexander by the
side of mine,  he let us depart.

Speechless was my joy,  and speechless was the surprise
of Alexander,  and we walked home in utter silence.

Happily,  this incidentoccurred but just before we set
sail,  for with it terminated my greatest solace at Dun
kirk,  the seeing and consoling those unhappy prisoners,
and the regale of wandering by the sea-coast.

Six weeks completely we consumed in wasteful wea
riness at Dunkirk ;  and our passage,  when at last we
set sail,  was equally,  in its proportion,  toilsome and
tedious.  Involved in a sickening calm,  we could make
no way,  but lingered two days and two nights in this
long-short passage.  The second night,  indeed,  might
have been spared me,  as it was spared to all my
fellow voyagers.  But when we cast anchor,  I was so
exhausted by the unremitting sufferings I had endured,
that I was literally unable to rise from my hammock.

Yet was there a circumstance capable to have
aroused me from any torpidity,  save the demolishing
ravage of sea-sickness ;  for scarcely were we at anchor,
when Alex.,  capering up to the deck,  descended with
yet more velocity than he had mounted,  to exclaim,
"  Oh,  maman  !  there are two British officers now upon
deck !"

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  317

But,  finding that even this could not make me re
cover speech or motion,  he ran back again to this new
and delighting sight,  and again returning,  cried out in
a tone of rapture,  "  Mam an,  we are taken by the Bri
tish  !  We are all captured by British officers !"

Even in my immoveable,  and nearly insensible state,
this juvenile ardour,  excited by so new and strange an
adventure,  afforded me some amusement.  It did not,
however,  afford me strength,  for I could not rise,  though
I heard that every other passenger was removed.
With difficulty,  even next morning,  I crawled upon
the deck,  and there I had been but a short time,
when Lieutenant Harford came on board to take pos
session of the vessel,  not as French,  but American
booty,  war having been declared against America the
preceding week.

Mr.  Harford,  hearing my name,  most courteously ad
dressed me,  with congratulations upon my safe arrival
in England.  These were words to rewaken all the
happiest purposes of my expedition,  and they reco
vered me from the nerveless,  sinking state into which
my exhaustion had cast me,  as if by a miracle.  My
father,  my brothers,  my sisters,  and all my heart-
dear friends,  seemed rising to my view and springing
to my embraces,  with all the joy of renovating re
union.  I thankfully accepted his obliging offer to
carry me on shore in his own boat;  but when I turned
round,  and called upon Alexander to follow us,  Mr.
Harford,  assuming a commanding air,  said,  "  No,
madam,  I cannot take that young man.  No French
person can come into my boat without a passport and
permission from Government."

My air now a little corresponded with his own,  as I
answered,  "  He was born,  Sir,  in England !"

ie Oh !"  cried he,  "  that 's quite another matter  ;  come
along,,  Sir !  we  '11 all go together."

I now found we were rowing to Deal,  not Dover,  to
which town we had been destined by our engagement :

318 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART

but we had been captured,  it seems,  chemin faisant,
though so gently,  and with such utter helplessness of
opposition,  that I had become a prisoner without any
suspicion of my captivity.

We had anchored about half a mile,  I imagine,  from
the shore ;  which I no sooner touched than,  drawing
away my arm from Mr.  Harford,  I took up on one knee,
with irrepressible transport,  the nearest bright pebble,
to press to my lips in grateful joy at touching again
the land of my nativity,  after an absence,  nearly hope
less,  of more than twelve years.

Of the happiness that ensued — my being again in
the arms of my dearly loved father — in those of
my dear surviving sisters — my brothers — my friends,
some faint details yet remain in a few letters to my
heart's confidant that he preserved :  but they are truly
faint,  for my satisfaction was always damped in re
cording it to him who so fondly wished to partake of
it,  and whose absence from that participation always
rendered it incomplete.

And,  on one great source of renovated felicity,  I
did not dare touch even by inference,  even by allusion
— that of finding my gracious royal mistress and her
august daughters as cordial in their welcome,  as trust
ingly confidential,  and as amiably condescending,  I
had almost said affectionate,  as if I had never departed
from the royal roof under which,  for five years,  I had
enjoyed their favour.  To have spoken of the Royal
Family in letters sent to France under the reign of
Bonaparte,  might have brought destruction on him
for whom I would a thousand times sooner have suffered
it myself.

Madame d'Arblay to Mrs.  Broome.

Aug.  15,  1312.    '

IN a flutter of joy such as my tender Charlotte will
feel in reading this,,  I write to her from England  !     I

1812]  OF MADAME D'ARBLAY.  319

can hardly believe it ;  I look around me in constant
inquiry and doubt ;  I speak French to every soul,  and
I whisper still if I utter a word that breathes private
opinion.

We set off for Canterbury,  where we slept,  and on
the 20th proceeded towards Chelsea.  While,  upon
some common,  we stopped to water the horses,  a gen
tleman on horseback passed us twice,  and then,  looking
in,  pronounced my name ;  and I saw it was Charles,
dear Charles  !  who had been watching for us several
hours and three nights following,  through a mistake.
Thence we proceeded to Chelsea,  where we arrived
at nine o'clock at night.  I was in a state almost
breathless.  I could only demand to see my dear father
alone :  fortunately,  he had had the same feeling,  and
had charged all the family to stay away,  and all
the world to be denied.  I found him,  therefore,  in
his library,  by himself — -but oh  !  my dearest,  very
much altered indeed — weak,  weak and changed — his
head almost always hanging down,  and his hearing
most cruelly impaired,  i was terribly affected,  but
most grateful to God for my arrival.  Our meeting,
you may be sure,  was very tender,  though I roused
myself as quickly as possible to be gay and cheering.
He was extremely kind to Alex.,  and said,  in a tone
the most impressive,  "  I should have been very glad to
have seen M.  d'Arblay !"  In discourse,  however,  he
re-animated,  and was,  at times,  all himself.  But he
now admits scarcely a creature but of his family,  and
will only see for a short time even his children.  He
likes quietly reading,  and lies almost constantly upon
the sofa,  and will never eat but alone !  What a change I

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

TO THE

SIXTH VOLUME.

AIKIN,  JOHN,  M.D.,  a voluminous author of the last century,  and
contributor to periodicals.  He published or brought out new edi
tions of many of the principal English poets :  but is now chiefly
remembered by his  "  Evenings at Home."

BARBAULD,  ANNA LETITIA,  sister to Dr.  Aikin :  a name familiar
to every reader by several works she wrote for the use of

-  children.  She also published numerous volumes,  in prose and
poetry,  between the years 1773 and 1812,  among which she edited
the correspondence of Richardson,  in 6 vols. ;  the British Novelists,
in 50 volumes ;  Selections from the British Essayists  ;  the Poetical
Works of Collins  ;  and Akenside's Pleasures of Imagination.

CHAPONE,  HESTER,  Authoress of  "  Letters on the Improvement
of the Mind,"  and one or two works of less merit,  published
towards the conclusion of the last century.  She died in 1801.

CUMBERLAND,  RICHARD,  an author in various departments of litera
ture,  particularly criticism,  poetry,  the drama,  and prose fiction.
He was employed in 1780 in a diplomatic capacity,  when he
visited the courts of Lisbon and Madrid.  His residence in Spain
furnished him with materials for his  "  Anecdotes of Spanish
Painters/'  He was the editor of the London Review,  and
author of a collection of essays called  "  The Observer,"  and he
wrote several novels and poems long since forgotten  :  but of his
numerous plays,  "  The West Indian,"  "The Jew,"  and  "The
Wheel of Fortune,"  still support his reputation.  lie was born in
1732,  and died in 1811.

DUNCAN,  ADMIRAL VISCOUNT,  the hero of the great naval victory of
Camperdown,  over the Dutch.  He was born in 1731  ;  entered
the service at an early age,  was promoted till he attained the rank
of Post Captain,  in 1761.  In 1762,  he was at the taking of the
Havannah  ;  in 1779,  was present at Rodney's victory over the
Spaniards  ;  became Rear- Admiral of the Blue in 1789,  and Vice-
Admiral of the White in 1794,  and was honoured with a peerage
and a pension after the battle of Camperdown.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.  321

ERSKINE,  THOMAS LORD,  the admirable advocate and judge,
youngest son of David Henry Erskine,  tenth Earl of Buchan.
He wrote a political romance,  in two volumes,  called  '  Armata,'
and some political pamphlets ;  but his fame rests upon the
ability he displayed in the several legal offices he filled from
1778,  when he was called to the bar,  till he ceased to hold the
dignity of Lord Chancellor.  He died in 1823,  at the age of 73.

LALLY TOLENDAL,  LE MARQUIS DE.  The father of this nobleman,
the Comte de Lally Tolendal and Baron Tullendally in Ireland,
was the French governor of Pondicherry,  when that place
was taken by the English.  The Comte de Lally returning to
France,  said,  "  J'apporte ici ma tete et mon innocence  ;"  but in
1766,  he was unfairly tried and unjustly executed for the sur
render,  and in 1778,  his son,  the Marquis de Lally Tolendal,
by great perseverance and exertions,  obtained a reversion of
the attainder,  and cleared his father's memory.  This Marquis
de Lally Tolendal was,  in 1 780,  deputed to the Etats Gentraux.
He emigrated to England in 1792 in company with Madame de
Stael,  the Princesse d'Henin,  Talleyrand,  M.  de Narbonne,  and
the Chevalier d'Arblay.  He returned to Paris in 1801,  was called
to the Chambredes Pairs in 1815,  and in 1816 to the Academic
Frangaise.  His principal literary works were,  *  Lettres k Ed-
mond Burke,'  'Plaidoyer pour Louis XVI.'  in 1795,  and
'Essai sur la Vie de Stratford/  His eloquence obtained for
him the appellation of  "  The French Cicero,"  but Madame de
Stael called him  "  Le plus gras des hommes sensibles."  He
died at Paris in the year 1820.

MASON,  THE REV.  WILLIAM,  author of several poems,  of various
satirical pieces,  and of  '  An Essay on Church Music/  He was
born in 1 725  ;  obtained the living of Aston,  in his native county,
Yorkshire,  and was appointed one of the royal chaplains  ;  but
from the latter office he was dismissed for his republican opi
nions.  The excesses of the French Revolution,  however,  very
much cooled his enthusiasm for liberty,  and towards the con
clusion of his life,  which terminated in 1797,  his sentiments had
undergone a decided change.  The works by which he is now
remembered are, '  The English Garden,'  a poem in four books,
Iiis edition of the works of Gray,  and his beautiful Elegy on the
Death of Lady Coventry.

MORELLET,  THE ABBE.  Andre Morellet,  born in 1727,  was the
son of a stationer at Lyons,  and studied in the Jesuits'  College
in that city ;  after which he was admitted to the Sorbonne,
where he formed a friendship with D'Alembert and Diderot.
In 1762,  he wrote his  'Manuel des Inquisitions;'  but having

VOL.    VI.  Y

322 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

offended the Princesse de Robecq by a passage in one of bis
pamphlets,  he was shut up in the Bastille at her instigation,  and
after two months'  confinement he owed bis liberty chiefly
to the interference of J.  J.  Rousseau.  His most important
works were,  ;  Theorie du Paradoxe,'  '  Refutation des Dia
logues sur le Commerce des Bleds par Galiani,'  'Analyse de
1'Ouvrage sur la Legislature et le Commerce des Grains,  par
Neckar,'  and  *  Melanges de Litterature et de Philosophic du
ISmeSiecle.'  In 1772,  the Abbe Morellet visited England,
where he became intimate with Lord Shelburne and Franklin.
He opposed alike the abuses of the French aristocracy and the
excesses of the Revolutionists,  and was called by Voltaire  "  the
Abbe Mords-les."  He died in 1 8 1 9.

NARBONNE,  Louis,  COMTE DE,  was Minister at War under Louis
XVI.;  and emigrating to England at the French Revolution,
he was for a time settled with Madame de Stael and her party
at Juniper Hall,  in Surrey.  He accepted employment under
Bonaparte,  by whom he was created a Lieutenant-General,  and
sent as ambassador to Vienna.  He accompanied the Frenol*
army to Moscow,  and died in the retreat,  at Torgau,  1813.  M
de Narbonne's manners and conversation are said to have
abounded in grace and finesse;  some of his repartees are pre
served,  though without his name being given,  in M.  de Jouy's
work, '  L'Hermite dela Chaussee d'Antin.'  V

ROGERS,  SAMUEL,  ESQ.  It may be recorded that the first pro
duction of this elegant poet,  'An Ode to Superstition,  with
other Poems,' bears the date of 1786;  just sixty years since;
and we are happy to say its accomplished author,  so well known
by his  'Pleasures of Memory,'  still survives.

WEDGWOOD,  JOSIAH,  famous for the vast improvement made by
him in the manufacture of English china,  and founder of the
extensive potteries atEtruria.  He died in 1795.

END OF VOL.    VI.

London :  Printed by WILLIAM CLOWSS and SOKS,  Stamford Street.

BINDING LIST OCT15J94B

PR

3316

MZ5

1854

v.6

Arblay,   Frances   (Burney)  df
Diary and letters

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY
