?j±.^

5 4 rv^  <>.IE  '

i^cnru  ^auitri-i^uu

Digitized by tine Internet Arciiive

in 2007 witii funding from

IVIicrosoft Corporation

Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/diarylettersofma02burn2

V    '-

Ixu

y

^-.t^,,z

LanaoD:Hei2r^CoTbrum,Kb]is]ier,  fe-eatJiariteTOTx^,  K'

DIARY

ANiy

LETTERS

OF

MADAME D'ARBLAY,

AUTHOR OF EVELINA,  CECILIA,  &c.

EDITED BY HER NIECE.

"THE SPIRIT WALKS OF EVERY DAY DECEASED." — YoUNG.

VOL.  IT.     ^;-      ■     :     .-
1781 TO 1786.  ^  -i  •

LONDON:
HENRY COLBURN,    PUBLISHER,

GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.
1842.

THE NEW YORK
PUBLIC LIBRARY

795793 A

ASTOR,  LENOK AND

T1LD£^1 FOUNDATION!

a 19S6 L

PART I.

1781.

CONTENTS.

Correspondence between Miss Burney and Mrs.  Thrale  —  Good
Things — ]\Ir.  Crisp — The War — Admiral Byron  —  Origin of
our Affections  —  Merlin — His Mill to Grind Old Ladies Young

—  Dr.  Johnson — Bartolozzi — An Owhyhee Dress  —  Conver-
sazione—  Characters — INIrs.  Montagu — Dinner at Mrs.  Thrale's

—  Lord Sheffield — Lord John Clinton — ^Two Beauties and a
Fright — Mrs.  Carter — Webber's South SeaDra^Yings — Curious
Fans — The Duchess of Devonshire — Sir Joshua Eeynolds  —
A Dinner Party — A Character — Sudden Death of Mr.  Thrale  —
Correspondence between IMr.  Crisp and Miss Burney — The
Three Warnings — Diary Resumed — Visitors  —  Misconceptions
— A Dinner Party — A Quarrel  —  Perseverance and Obstmacy
— Reconciliation — Sale of Mr.  Thrale's Brewery — Mv.  Barclay,
the Rich Quaker — Dr.  Johnson — Newspaper Scandal — A Poor
Artist — An Odd Adventure — Anecdote of Dr.  Johnson — Sit-
ting for One's Portrait — Visit to Streatham — A Subject for
Harry Bunbury — The Wits at War  —  Johnson's  "Life of Lord
Lyttleton" — Singular Scene  —  Johnson in a Savage Fit — A
Peace-maker — ]Merlin,  the Mechanician.

o

X

VOL.  II,

S

DIARY AND LETTERS

OF THE

AUTHOR OF  *^  EVELINA."

PART I.
1781.

Mrs,  Thrale to Miss F.  Burney.

Streatham,  Saturday,

My Dear Miss BuiTiey,
And so here comes your sweet letter.  And so I
pleased Mr,  Crisp,  did I  ?  and yet he never heard,  it
seems,  the only good things I said,  which were very
earnest,  and very honest,  and very pressing invitations
to him,  to see Streatham nearer than through the
telescope.  Now,  that he did not hear all this was your
fault,  mademoiselle;  for you told me that Mr.  Crisp
was old,  and Mr.  Crisp vfas infirm ;  and,  if I had
found those things so,  I should have spoken louder^
and concluded him to be deaf:  but,  finding him very

4 DIARY AXD LETTERS  [Part 1.

amiable,  and very elegant,  and very polite to me,  and
very unlike an old man,  I never thought about his
being deaf;  and,  perhaps,  was a little coquettish too,
in my manner of making the invitation.  I now repeat
it,  however,  and give it under my hand,  that I should
consider such a visit as a very,  very great honour,  and
so would Mr.  Thrale.

And now for dismal !

I have been seriously ill ever since I saw you.  Mrs.
Burney has been to me a kind and useful fi'iend,
—  has suffered me to keep her here all this time — is
here still — would not go to Sir Joshua's,  though she
was asked,  because I could not ;  and has been as
obliging,  and as attentive,  and as good to me as possible.
Dick is happy,  and rides out with my master,  and his
mamma and I look at them out of the dressing-room
window.     So much for self.

In the midst of my own misery I felt for my dear
Mrs.  Byron's  ;  but Chamier has relieved that anxiety
by assurances that the Admiral behaved quite unexcep-
tionably,  and that,  as to honour in the West Indies,  all
goes well.  The Grenadas are a heavy loss indeed,  nor
is it supposed possible for Byron to protect Barbadoes
and Antigua.  Barrington has acted a noble part ;  he
and Count d'Estaing remind one of the heroic con-
tentions of distant times.  The Lyon,  on our side,
commanded by a Welshman,  and the Languedoc,  on
the side of the French,  fought with surprising fury,  and
lost a great number of men ;  it was a glorious day,
thouo:h on our side unfortunate.

D'Orvilliers has left our Channel after only cutting
a few ships out of Torbay,  and chasing Sir Charles to
Spithead.  Many suppose the home campaign quite
over for this vear.

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  5

I have had very kind letters from Dr.  Delap.  I
love the Sussex people somehow,  and they are a mighty
silly race too.  But  'tis never for their wisdom that one
loves the wisest,  or for their wit that one loves the
wittiest;  'tis for henevolence,  and virtue,  and honest
fondness,  one loves people  ;  the other qualities make
one proud of loving them too.

Dear,  sweet,  kind Burney,  adieu  ;  whether sick or
sorry,  ever yours,

H.  L.  T.

Mrs.  Thrale to Miss.  F.  Burney.

Streatham,  Thursday,  -Ith January .

Don't I pick up franks prettily  ?  I sent a hundred
miles for this,  and the churl enclosed hut one — "cer-
tain that Miss Burney could not live long enough
away from me to need two."  Ah,  cruel Miss Burney  !
she will never come again,  I think.

Well!  but I did see Philips written in that young
man's honest face,  though nobody pronounced the
word;  and I boldly bid him  ''  Good morrow.,  Cap-
tain^^  at the door,  trusting to my own instinct when I
came away.  Your sweet father,  however,  this day
trusted me with the whole secret,  and from my heart
do I wish every comfort and joy from the match.

'Tis now high time to tell you that the pictures are
come home,  all but mine^ — which my master don't like.
He has ordered your father to sit to-morrow,  in his
peremptory way ;  and I shall have the dear Doctor
every morning at breakfast.  I took ridiculous pains
to tutor him to-day,  and to insist,  in my peremptory
way,    on his forbearing to write or read late this

6 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

evening,  that my picture might not have blood-shot
t'yes.

Merlin has been here to tune the fortepianos.  He
told Mrs.  Davenant and me that he had thoughts of
inventing a particular mill to grind old ladies young,
as he was so prodigiously fond of their company.  I
suppose he thought we should bring grist.  Was that
the way to put people in tune?  I asked him.

Doctor Burney says your letters and mine are alike,
and that it comes by writing so incessantly to each
other.  I feel proud and pleased,  and find I shall slip
pretty readily into the Susannuccia's place,  when she
^oes to settle on her 700Z.  a-year ;  of which God give
her joy seven hundred times over,  dear creature!  I
iiiever knew how it was to love an incognita but Susan
Burney :  my personal acquaintance with her is actually
nothing — is it  ?  and yet we always seem to understand
one another.

H.  L.  T.

Mrs,  Thrale to Miss F.  Burney.

Streatham,  Thursday,  llth.

I never was so glad of a letter from you before  :  the
dear Doctor had been in the room just half-an-hour,
and had frighted me with an account of your fever.
Thank God there is no harm come to my sweet little
friend ;  her spirits and her affection are as strong as
ever,  for all Dr.  Johnson, — who says nobody loves
each other much when they have been parted long.
How well do you know him,  and me,  and all of us, —
and talk of my penetration  !

Your father sits for his picture in the Doctor of
music's gown ;    and Bartolozzi makes an engraving

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  7

from it to place at the head of the book.  Sir Joshua
delights in the portrait,  and says  'twill be the best
among them.  I hope it will ;  and by this time,  per-
haps, you may have begun thinking of the miniature too ;
but it is not touched yet,  I assure you.  Sweet Susan-
nuccia !  I will slide into her place  ;  I shall get more of
your company,  too,  and more — is there any more to
be had?  —  of your confidence.  Yes,  yes,  there is a
little,  to be sure ;  but dear Mrs.  Thrale shall have it
all now.  Oh,  'tis an excellent match!  and he has
700Z.  a-year — that is,  he will have:  it is entailed,  and
irrevocable.

I send this by your father,  who will put it in the
post;  not a frank to-day for love or money.  I did
not intend to have written so soon.  He and I shall
meet at St.  James's this day se'nnight.  The Owhyhee*
is to be trimmed with grebeskins and gold to the tune
of 65Z.  —  the trimming only.  What would I give to
shew it to you! — or shew you any thing,  for that
matter,  that would shew how affectionately I am yours !
#  #  #  ^  #

J)r.  Burney says you carry bird-lime in your brains,
for every thing that lights there sticks.  I think you
carry it in your heart,  and that mine sticks very close
to it.     So adieu I

H.  L.  T.

Mrs.  Thrale to Miss Burney,

Grosvenor Square,  Tuesday,  Feb.  7,  1781.
This moment Dick Burney tells me how ill you are.
My dear,  how shall I keep from stepping into a post-

*  Mrs.  Thrale had a court dress woven at Spitalfields,  from a
pattern of Owhyhee manufacture,  brought thence by Captain
Burney.

8 DIAllV AND LETTERS  [Part L

chaise,  and sousing*  through Gascoyne Lane to look
after you  ?  Comphcated as my engagements are,  be-
tween business and flash,  I shall certainly serve you
so,  if you do not make haste and be well.

Yesterday I had a conversazione.  Mrs.  Montagu
was brilliant in diamonds,  solid in judgment,  critical
in talk.  Sophy smiled,  Piozzi sung,  Pepys panted with
admii-ation,  Johnson was good-humoured,  Lord John
Clinton attentive.  Dr.  Bowdler lame,  and my master
not asleep.  Mrs.  Ord looked elegant,  Lady Rothes
dainty,  Mrs.  Davenant dapper,  and Sir Philip's curls
were all blown about by the wind.  Mrs.  Byron re-
joices that her Admiral and I agree so well ;  the way
to his heart is connoisseurship it seems,  and for a
back-ground and contorno,  who comes up to Mrs.
Thrale,  you know.

Captain Fuller flashes away among us.  How that
boy loves rough merriment!  the people all seem to
keep out of his way for fear.

Aunt Cotton died firmly persuaded that Mrs.  Dave-
nant was a natural,  and that I wrote her letters for
her — how odd  !

Many people said she was the prettiest woman in
the room last night, — and that is as odd  ;  Augusta
Byron,  and Sophy Streatlield,  and Mrs.  HinchlifFe,
being present.

Mrs.  Montagu talked to me about you for an hour
t'other day,  and said she was amazed that so delicate
a girl could write so boisterous a book.

Loveliest Burney,  be as well as ever you can,  pray
do.  When you are with me,  I think I love you from
habit;  when you are from me,  I fancy distance
endears you :  be that as it may,  your own father
can alone love you better,  or wish you better,    or

1781 OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  9

desire the sight of you more sincerely,    than does
your

H.L.  T.

Dr.  Johnson is very good and very cluhhable,  but
Sir R.  Jebb is quite a scourge to me.  Who now would
believe that I cannot make a friend of that man,  but
am forced to fly to Dr.  Pepys for comfort  ?  He is
so haughty,  so impracticable a creature  ;  and yet I
esteem and honour him,  though I cannot make him
feel any thing towards me but desire of downing,  &c.

Miss Burney to Mrs.  Thrale,

Cliesington,  February 8th,  1781.

This moment have two sweet and most kind letters
from my best-loved Mrs.  Thrale made amends for no
little anxiety which her fancied silence had given me.
I know not what is now come to this post ;  but there
is nothing I can bear w^ith so little patience as being
tricked out of any of your letters.  They do,  indeed,
give me more delight than I can express;  they seem
to me the perfection of epistolary writing ;  for,  in Dr.
Johnson's phrase,  all that is not kindness is wit,  and
all that is not wit is kindness.

What you tell me of Mrs.  Montagu and Mrs.  Carter
gives me real concern  ;  it is a sort of general disgrace
to us ;  but,  as you say,  it shall have nothing to do
with you and I.  Mrs.  Montagu,  as we have often
agreed,  is a character rather to respect than love,  for
she has not that don d'ahner by which alone love r  ^^"^
be made fond or faithful  ;  and many as are the  ^'^^^^Y

JO DIARV AND LETTERS  [Part I.

by which respect may be lessened,  there are very few
by which it can be afterwards restored to its first
dignity.  But where there is real affection,  the case is
exactly reversed;  few things can weaken,  and every
trifle can revive it.

Yet not for forty years,  in this life at least,  shall we
continue to love each other  ;  I am very sure I,  for one,
shall never last half that time.  If you saw but how
much the illness of a week has lowered and injured
me,  considering in what perfect health I came hither,
you would be half astonished  ;  and that in spite of the
utmost care and attention from every part of this kind
family.  I have just,  with great difficulty,  escaped a
relapse,  from an unfortunate fresh cold with which I
am at this time struggling.  Long last you,  dearest
madam!  —  I am sure in the whole world I know not

such another.

#  ^  #  #  *-

I think I shall always hate this book*^  which has

kept me so long away from you,  as much as I shall

always love  "  Evelina,"  who first comfortably introduced

me to you  ;  an event which I may truly say opened a

new,  and,  I hope,  an exhaustless source of happiness

to your most gratefully affectionate

F.  B.

Journal Resumed.

(Addressed to Mr.  Crisp.)

March 23d,  1781. — I have very narrowly escaped a
return of the same vile and irksome fever which with

enu  '^  Cecilia,"  which Miss Burney had been long employed in
can aTij.and which made its appearance shortly afterwards.

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  II

sucli difficulty has been conquered,  and that all from
vexation.  Last week 1 went to dinner in Grosvenor
Square.  I ran up-stairs,  as usual,  into Mrs.  Thrale's
dressing-room,  and she there acquainted me that Mr.
Thrale had resolved upon going abroad :  first to Spa,
next to Italy,  and then whither his fancy led him !
that Dr.  Johnson was to accompany them,  but that,
as their journey was without limit either of time or
place,  as Mr.  Thi-ale's ill state of health and strange
state of mind would make it both melancholy and
alarming,  she could not in conscience think of taking
me from my own friends and country without know-
ing either whither,  or for w^hat length of time.  She
would wTite to me,  however,  every post ;  leave me the
keys of all she left of any value,  and,  in case of any evil
to herself,  make me her executrix !

Oh,  what words!  and what a scheme!  I was so
infinitely shocked,  surprised,  and grieved,  that I was
forced to run away from her,  and insist upon hearing
no more  ;  neither could I sufficiently recover even to
appear at dinner,  as Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.  Seward,  and
Mr.  Ingram,  were of the party ;  I was obliged,  there-
fore, to shut myself up all the afternoon.

You will not,  I am sure,  wonder that I should be
utterly disconcerted and afflicted by a plan so wild in
itself,  and so grievous to me.  I was,  indeed,  hardly
able to support myself with any firmness all day  ;  and
unfortunately,  there was in the evening a great rout.
I was then obliged to appear,  and obliged to tell every
body I was but half recovered from my late indis-
position.

The party was very large,  and the company very
brilliant.  I was soon encircled by acquaintances,  and
forced to seem as gay as my neighbours.     My steady

12 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

companions were Miss Coussmaker,  Augusta Byron,
Miss Ord,  and Miss Thrale  ;  and the S,  S.  never
quits me.

I had a Ions:  conversation with the new Lord Shef-
field ;  and,  as I had never seen him since he was
Colonel Holroyd,  I was ridiculously enougli embar-
rassed with his new title,  blundering*  from my lord to
sir,  and from sir to uii/  lord-  He gave me a long
account of his Coventry afiairs,  and of the commitment
of the sheriffs to Newgate.  He is a spirited and
agreeable man,  and,  I doubt not,  will make himself
conspicuous in the right way.  Lady Sheffield was
also very civil ;  and,  as she came second,  I w^as better
prepared,  and therefore gave her ladyship her title
with more readiness;  which was lucky enough,  for I
believe she would much less have liked the omission.

Mrs.  Thrale took much pains to point out her friend
Lord John Clinton to me,  and me to him :  he is
extremely ugly,  but seems lively and amiable.

The greatest beauty in the room,  except the S.  S.,
was Mrs.  Gwynn,  lately Miss Horneck ;  and the
greatest fright was Lord Sandys.

I have time for nothing more about this evening,
which,  had not my mind been wholly and sadly occu-
pied by other matters,  would have been very agreeable
to me.

The next day I again spent in Grosvenor Square,
where nothing new had passed about this cruel jour-
ney. I then met a very small party,  consisting only
of Mrs.  Price,  who was a 31iss Evelyn,  Miss Benson,
Dr.  Johnson,  and Mrs.  Carter.

The latter,  as there were so few folks,  talked a good
deal,  and was far more sociable and easy than I had
yet seen her.     Her talk,  too,  though all upon books

1781]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         13

(for life and manners she is as ignorant of as a nun),
was very unaffected and g'ood-humoured,  and I liked
her exceedingly.  Mrs.  Price is a very sensible,
shrewd,  lofty,  a,nd hard-headed woman.  Miss Benson
not very unlike her.

Tuesday.  —  I passed the whole day at Sir Joshua
Reynolds's with Miss Palmer,  who,  in the morning,
took me to see some most beautiful fans,  painted by
Poggi,  from designs of Sir Joshua,  Angelica,  West,
and Cipriani,  on leather;  they are,  indeed,  more de-
lightful than can well be imagined :  one was bespoke
by the Duchess of Devonshire,  for a present to some
woman of rank in France,  that was to cost 30Z.

We were accompanied by Mr.  Eliot,  the knight of
the shire for Cornwall,  a most agreeable,  lively,  and
very clever man.

We then went to Mr.  Webber's,  to see his South
Sea drawings.  Here we met Captain King,  who chiefly
did the honours in shewing the curiosities and ex-
plaining them.  He is one of the most natural,  gay,
honest,  and pleasant characters I ever met with.  We
spent all the rest of the morning here,  much to my
satisfaction.  The drawino's are extremelv well worth
seeing ;  they consist of views of the country of Ota-
heite,  New Zealand,  New Amsterdam,  Kamschatka,
and parts of China ;  and portraits of the inhabitants
done from the life.

When we returned to Leicester Fields we were
heartily welcomed by Sir Joshua.  Mr.  Eliot stayed
the whole day ;  and no other company came but Mr.
Webber,  who was invited to tea.  Sir Joshua is fat
and well.  He is preparing for the Exhibition a new
"Death of Dido;"  portraits of the three beautiful Lady
t Waldegraves,  Horatia,  Laura,  and Maria,  all in one

14 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

picture,  and at work with the tambour ;  a Thais,  for
which a Miss Emih/,  a celebrated courtesan,  sat,  at
the desire of the Hon.  Charles Greville  ;  and what
others I know not :  but his room and gallery are both
crowded.

Thursday.  —  I spent the whole day again in Gros-
yenor Square,  whei-e there was a very gay party to
dinner;    Mr.  Boswell,  Dudley Long,   Mr.  Adair,  Dr.

Delap,  Mr.  B ,  Dr.  Johnson,  and my father;  and

much could I write of wiiat passed,  if it were possible

for me to get time.     Mr.  B was just as absurdly

pompons as at Brighton  ;  and,  in the midst of dinner,
without any sort of introduction,  or reason,  or motive,
he called out aloud, —

"  Sweet are the shimbers of the charming maid  ! "

A laugh from all parties,  as you may imagine,  fol-
lowed this exclamation ;  and he bore it with amazing
insensibility.

"What's all this laugh for?"  cried Dr.  Johnson,
who had not heard the cause.

*'  Why,  sir,"  answered Mrs.  Thrale,  when she w^as

able to speak,  "  Mr.   B just now called out, —

nobody knows why,  —  '  Sweet are the slumbers of the
virtuous maid  !'  "

*'  No,  no,  not virtuous,''  cried Mr.  Boswell,  "  he
said charming ;  he thought that better!"

"Ay,  sure,  sir,"  cried Mr.  B ,  unmoved;   "  for

why say virtuous  ?  —  can we doubt a fair female's
virtue? — oh fie,  oh ne!  'tis a superfluous epithet."

"  But,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  in the original it is
the virtuous man;  why do you make it a inaicl of the
sudden,  Mr.  B ?"

"1 was alarmed at first,"  cried Dr.  Delap,  "and

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  15

thought he had caught Miss Burney napj^lng ;  but
when I looked at her,  and saw her awake,  I was at a
loss,  indeed,  to find the reason of the change."

"  Here,  sir!  my lad!"  cried Mr.  B to the ser-
vant ;  ''  why,  my head's on fire  !  What !  have you got
never a screen  ?  Why,  I shall be what you may call
a hot-headed fellow  !     1 shall be a mere rod  .'"

In the afternoon we were joined by Mr.  Crutchley,
Mr.  Byron,  and Mr.  Selwin ;  and then we had a
thousand private conferences and consultations con-
cerning the Spa journey.

I have been so often and so provokingly interrupted
in writing this,  that I must now finish it by lumping
matters at once.  Sir Richard J ebb and Dr.  Pepys
have both been consulted concerning this going
abroad,  and are both equally violent against it,  as
they think it even unwarrantable,  in such a state of
health as Mr.  Thrale's  ;  and,  therefore,  it is settled
that a great meeting of his friends is to take place
before he actually prepares for the journey,  and they
are to encircle him in a body,  and endeavour,  by re-
presentations and entreaties,  to prevail with him to
give it up  ;  and I have little doubt myself but,  amongst
us,  we shall be able to succeed.

Miss F.  Burney to Mrs.  Thrale.^

Wednesday evening.

You bid me write to you,  and so I will;  you bid
me pray for you,    and so,    indeed,    I do,    for the

*  This letter  ^yas written in reply to a few words from Mrs.
Thrale,  in which,  alluding to her husband's sudden death,  she begs
Miss Burney to  "  write to me — pray for me ! "     The hurried note

16 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT I.

restoration of your sweet peace of mind.  I pray for
your resignation to this hard blow,  for the continued
union and exertion of your virtues with your talents,
and for the happiest reward their exertion can meet
with,  in the gratitude and prosperity of your children.
These are my prayers for my beloved Mrs.  Thrale  ;
but these are not my only ones ;  no,  the unfailing
warmth of her kindness for myself I have rarely,  for a
-long time past,  slept without first petitioning.

I ran away without seeing you again when I found
you repented that sweet compliance with my request
which I iiad won from you.  For the world would I
not have pursued you,  had I first seen your pro-
hibition, nor could I endure to owe that consent to
teasing which I only solicited from tenderness.  Still,
however,  I think you had better have suffered me to
follow you ;  I might have been of some use  ;  I hardly
could have been in your way.  But I grieve now to
have forced you to an interview which I would have
spared myself as well as you,  had I foreseen how little
it would have answered my purpose.

Yet though I cannot help feeling disappointed,  I am
not surprised  ;  for in any case at all similar,  I am sure
I should have the same eagerness for solitude.

I tell you nothing of how sincerely I sympathise in
your affliction  ;  yet I believe that JNIr.  Crutchley and
Dr.  Johnson alone do so more earnestly ;  and I have
some melancholy comfort in flattering myself that,
allowing for the difference of our characters,  that true

from Mrs.  Thrale is thus endorsed by Miss Burney :  —  "Written
a few hours after the death of  ]Mr.  Thrale,  which happened by a
sudden stroke of apoplexy,  on the morning of a day on which half
the fashion of London had been invited to an intended assembly
at his house in Grosvenor Square."

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  17

regard which 1 felt was as truly returned.  Nothing
but kindness did I ever meet with;  he ever loved to:
have me,  not merely with his famil}',  but with him-
self; and gratefully shall I ever remember a thousand
kind expressions of esteem and good opinion,  which are
now crowding upon my memory.

Ah,  dearest madam !  you had better have accepted
me ;  I am sure,  if unfit for yov,  I am at this time unfit
for every body.  Adieu,  and Heaven preserve my
heart's dearest friend !  Don't torment yourself to
write to me,  nor will I even ask Queeny,  though she is
good,  and I believe w^ould not deny me ;  but what can
you say but that you are sad and comfortless  ?  and do
I not know that far too well  ?  I will write again to
you,  and a thousand times again,  for nothing am I
more truly than your

F.  B.

Idiss F.  Burney to Mrs.  TJiraJe.

Saturday,  April 6th.

I would I had some commission,  some business,
some pretence for writing to my best-loved friend ;  for
write I must,  while I have the faintest hope my letters
will be received without aversion.  Yet I have nothing
on earth to say,  but how^  much I love and how truly I
am grieved for her.  To you,  dearest madam,  I can offer
nothing by way of comfort or  ^consoiation,  w'liatever I
might do to many others  ;  but what could I urge which
you have not a thousand times revolved in your ov/n
mind  ?  Dr.  Johnson alone could offer any thing nevf,  or
of strength to deserve attention from Mrs.  Thj-ale.  The
rectitude and purity of your principles,  both religious
and moral,  Lhave often looked up to with reverence,

VOL.   II.  c

18 DIARY AND LETTEIlb  [Part I.

and I now no more doubt their firmness in this time of
trial than if I witnessed their operation.  Queeny,  too,
I saw was bent upon exerting the utmost fortitude
upon this first,  and I believe,  indeed,  most painful
occasion to her that could call for it.  May she now
for her sweet mother unite all the affection and atten-
tion which hitherto have deserved to be divided I

Many friends call and send here to inquire after
you ;  but I have myself avoided them all.  I cannot
yet bear the conversation which is to follow every
meeting-.  To be with you I would wrap myself up in
misery ;  but,  without such a motive,  no one more
hasty to run away from all that is possible to be fled
from.

Dr.  Johnson,  I hear,  is well.  I hear nothing else I
have any wish to communicate.

Adieu,  most dear madam ;  and still love,  when you
have time and composure to again think of her,  the
sincerest,  the gratefullest,  the fondest of your friends,
in F.  B.  who,  though she first received your affection
as an unmerited partiality,  hopes never to forfeit,  and
perhaps some time to deserve it.

I do not even request an answer ;  I scarce ivish for
it ;  because I know v»diat it must be.  But I will write
again in a few davs.     My kind love to IMiss Thrale.

F.  B.

Miss F.  Blimey to Mr.  Crisp.

Streatham,  April 29th,  1781.

Have you not,  my dearest daddy,  thought me utterly
lost?  and,  indeed,  to all power of either giving or taking
comfort,  I certainly have been for some time past.  I
did not,  it is true,  hoj)e that poor Mr.  Thrale could live

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  19

very long,  as the alteration I saw in him only daring
my absence while with you had shocked and astonished
me.  Yet,  still the suddenness of the blow gave me a
horror from which I am not even now recovered.  The
situation of sweet Mrs.  Thrale,  added to the true con-
cern I felt at his loss,  harassed my mind till it affected
my health,  which is now again in a state of precarious-
ness and comfortless restlessness that w^ill require
much trouble to remedy.

You have not,  1 hope,  been angry at my silence  ;
for,  in truth,  I have had no spirits to write,  nor.
latterly,  ability of any kind,  from a headach that has
been incessant.

I now begin to long extremely to hear more about
yourself,  and whether you have recovered your sleep
and any comfort.  The good nursing you mention is
always my consolation when I have the painful tidings
of your illness  ;  for I have myself experienced the
kindness,  care,  and unwearied attention of the ever-
good and friendly Kitty,  who,  indeed,  as you well say,
can by no one be excelled in that most useful and most
humane of all sciences.

Mrs.  Thrale flew immediately upon this misfortune
to Brighthelmstone,  to Mr.  Scrase — her Daddy Crisp —
both for consolation and counsel ;  and she has but j ust
quitted him,  as she deferred returning to Streatham till
her presence was indispensably necessary upon account
of proving the will.  I offered to accompany her to
Brighthelmstone ;  but she preferred being alone,  as
her mind was cruelly disordered,  and she saw but too
plainly I w^as too sincere a mourner myself to do much
besides adding to her grief.  The moment,  however,
she came back,  she solicited me to meet her, — and I
am now here with her,  and endeavour,  by every possible

20 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part 1.

exertion,  to be of some use to her.  She looks wretch-
edly indeed,  iind is far from well ;  but she bears up,
thouu:h not with calm intrepidity,  yet with flashes of
spirit that rather,  I fear,  spend than relieve her.  Such,
however,  is her cliaracter,  and were tliis exertion
repressed,  she would probably sink quite.

Miss Thrale is steady and constant,  and very sin-
cerely grieved for her father.

The four executoi-s,  Mr.  Cator,  Mr.  Crutchley,  Mr.
Henry Smith,  and Dr.  Johnson,  have all behaved
generously and honourably,  and seem determined to
give Mrs.  Thrale all the comfort and assistance in their
power.  She is to carry on the business jointly with
them.  Poor soul!  it is a dreadful toil and worry to
her.

Adieu,  my dearest daddy.  I will write again in a
week's time.  I have now just been blooded;  but am
by no means restored by that loss.  But well and ill,
equally and ever,

Your truly affectionate child,

F.  B.

Mr.  Crisp to Miss F.  Barney,

Chesington,  May loth,  1781.
My Dear Fannikin,
1 was neitlier cross nor surprised at not hearing
from you so long,  as I was at no loss for the cause of
your silence.  I know you have a heart,  and on a late
occasion can easily imagine it was too full to attend to
forms,  or,  indeed,  to any but the one great object imme-
diately before you.  To say the truth,  I should be sorry
to have your nature changed,  for the sake of a letter or
two moi'e or less from vou ;  because I can now with

1781]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         21

confidence say to myself,  ^'  The girl is really sincere^
and,  as she does profess some friendship and regard
for me,  I can believe her,  and am convinced that,  if
any evil were to befall me,  she would be truly sorry
for me."

There is a pleasure in sucli a thought,  and I will
indulge it.  The steadiness and philosophy of certain
of our friends is,  perhaps,  to be admired ;  but I wish
it not to be imitated by any of my friends.  I would
have the feelings of their minds be keen and even
piercing,  but stop there.  Let not the poor tenement
of clay give way  :  —  if that goes,  how shall they abide
the peltings of these pitiless storms?  Your slight
machine is certainly not made for such rough en-
counters;— for which I am truly sorry.  You did not
make yourself;  allowed! — agreed!  —  But you may
mend yourself,  and that is all I require of you.

If I had you here,  I should talk to you on this
head ;  but at present I ought not to wish it.  Mrs.
Thrale has an undoubted right to you,  nor should I
wish to tear you from her.  When the wound is healed,
and nothing but the scar remaining,  the plaster ought
to be removed, —  and then I put in my claim.

Let me hear from you soon that your health and
spirits are mended — greatly mended.  I sincerely wish
the same to your beloved friend,  to whom you must
present my best respects.  I am glad she is connected
with such worthy people in her affairs.  I have more
than once observed that the unavoidable necessity of
attending to business of indispensable consequencCj
and that,  with strict,  unabated perseverance,  has con-
tributed more to divert,  and dissipate,  and finally
to cure deep sorrow,   than all the wise lessons of

22 DIAKV AND LETTERS  [Part I.

philosophers,  or the well-meant consolations of friends.
May she prove an instance to confirm this observ-
ation !

As for my own shattered frame,  I have had a pretty
long and convincing proof that it is not immortal.
Gout,  rheumatism,  indigestion,  want of sleep,  almost
ever since I saw you,  I think,  may amount pretty
nearly to the sum total of Mrs.  Thrale's  "  Three Warn-
ings." If I don't take the hint the fault is my own —
Nature has done her part.

Bad as I have been though,  I now hobble about the
garden with a stick,  and for this fortnight past have
been gradually mending,  though slowly.

Ham and Kate are constantly inquiring after you,
and when you will come.  I am sure they love you,  or
I should not love them.     AdieU;  my Fannikin,

Your affectionate daddy,     ^
S.C.

Journal Resumed,

Streatham,  May,  1781. — Miss Owen and I arrived
here without incident,  which,  in a journey of six or
seven miles,  was really marvellous !  Mrs.  Thrale
came from the Borough with two of the executors,
Dr.  Johnson and Mr.  Crutchley,  soon after us.  She
had been sadly worried,  and in the evening frightened
us all by again fainting away.  Dear creature !  she
is all agitation of mind and of body :  but she is
now wonderfully recovered,  though in continual fevers
about her affairs,  w^hich are mightily difficult and
complicate indeed.      Yet the behaviour of all the

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  23

executors is exactly to her wish.  Mr.  Crutchley,  in
particular,  was he a darling son or only brother,  could
not possibly be more truly devoted to her.  Indeed,  I am
very happy in the revolution in my own mind in favour
of this young man,  whom formerly I so little liked ;
for I now see so much of him,  business and inclination
uniting to bring him hither continually,  that if he were
disagreeable to me,  I should spend my time in a most
comfortless manner.  On the contrary,  I both respect
and esteem him very highly;  for his whole conduct
manifests so much goodness of heart and excellence of
principle,  that he is fairly un homme comme il y en a
pen;  and that first appearance of coldness,  pride,  re-
serve, and sneering,  all wears off upon further acquaint-
ance, and leaves behind nothing but good -humour
and good-will.  And this you must allow to be very
candid,  when I tell you that,  but yesterday,  he affronted
me so much by a piece of impertinence,  that I had a
very serious  ([uarrel with him.     Of this more anon.

Dr.  Johnson was charming,  both in spirits and
humour.  I really think he grows gayer and gayer
daily,  and more ductile and pleasant.

Mr.  Crutchley stayed till Sunday,  when we had
many visitors, — Mrs.  Plumbe,  one of poor Mr.Thrale's
sisters ;  Mrs.  Wallace,  wife to the Attorney-General,
a very ugly,  but sensible and agreeable woman ;  Sir
Philip Jennings Gierke,  and Mr.  Selwin.

Monday Miss Owen left us.

Tuesday came Lord and Lady Westcote,  and after-
wards Dr.  and Mrs.  Parker,  Dr.  Lort,  and the Bishop
of Killaloe.  Dr.  Parker is a terrible old proser,  and
wore me out;  Mrs.  Parker is well-bred and sensible;
nay friend Dr,  Lort was comical and diverting;  and

24 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part 1.

the Bishop of Killaloe is a gay,  sprightly,  polite,  and
ready man  :   1 liked him  %Tell.

Sunday morning nohody went to church but Mr.
Crutchley,  Miss Thrale,  and myself;  and some time
after,  when I was sauntering upon the lawn before the
house,  Mr.  Crutchley joined me.  We were returning
together into the house,  when Mrs.  Thrale,  popping her
head out of her dressing-room window,  called out,
"  How nicely these men domesticate among us,  Miss
Burney!     Why,  they take to us as natural as life!"

"  W^ell,  well,"  cried Mr.  Crutchley,  "  I have sent
for my horse,  and I shall release you early to-morrow
morning.     I think yonder comes Sir Phihp."

"Oh!  you'll have enough to do with Idm^'  cried
she,  laughing ;  'Mie is well prepared to plague you,  I
assure you."

''  Is he?  — and what about?"

"  Why,  about Miss Burney.  He asked me the
other day what was my present establishment.  '  Mr.
Crutchley and Miss Burney,  I answered.'  '  How well
those two names go together,'  cried he ;  '  I think they
can't do better than make a match of it :  /  will con-
sent, I am sure,'  he added ;  and to-day,  I dare say,
you will hear enough of it."

I leave you to judge if I was pleased at this stuff
thus communicated  ;  but Mrs.  Thrale,  with all her
excellence,  can give up no occasion of making sport,
however unseasonable,  or even painful.

"  I am very much obliged to him,  indeed!"  cried I,
dryly;  and Mr.  Crutchley called out,  ''Thank him!  —
thank him 1 "  in a voice of pride and of pique that
spoke him mortally angry.

I instantly came into the house,  leaving him to talk

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  25

it out with Mrs.  Thrale,  to whom I heard him add,
*' So this is Sir Philip's kindness!"  and her answer,
**  I wish you no worse luck!"

Now,  what think you of this?  was it not highly
insolent? — and from a man who has behaved to me
hitherto w^ith the utmost deference,  good nature,  and
civility,  and given me a thousand reasons,  by every
possible opportunity,  to think myself very high in-
deed in his good opinion and good graces?  But these
rich men think themselves the constant prey of all por-
tionless girls,  and are always upon their guard,  and
suspicious of some design to take them in .  This sort of
disposition I had very early observed in Mr.  Crutchley,.
and therefore I had been more distant and cold with
him than with any body I ever met with ;  but latterly
his character had risen so much in my mind,  and his
behaviour was so much improved,  that I had let things
take their own course,  and no more shunned than I
sought him  ;  for I evidently saw his doubts concerning
me and my plots were all at an end,  and his civility
and attentions were daily increasing,  so that I had
become very comfortable with him,  and well pleased
with his society.

I need not,  I think,  add that I determined to see a&
little of this most fearful and haughty gentleman in
future as was in my power,  since no good qualities can
compensate for such arrogance of suspicion ;  and,
therefore,  as I had reason enough to suppose he would,
in haste,  resume his own reserve,  I resolved,  without
much effort,  to be beforehand with him in resuming
mine.

At dinner we had a large and most disagreeable
party of Irish ladies,  whom Mrs.  Thrale was necessi-
tated to invite from motives of business and various

2t)  DIARY AND LETTERS  [pART I.

connexions.  We were in all fourteen,  viz.  Sir Philip
Gierke ;  Mrs.  Lanibart and her son,  a genteel young
youth  ;  Miss Owen  ;  INIr.  and Mrs.  Perkins  ;  Mrs.  Vin-
cent; Mrs.  O'Riley,  and Miss O'Riley,  her sister-in-
law  ;  Mr.  Crutchley ;  Mrs.  and Miss Thrale ;  and
myself.

I was obliged,  at dinner,  to be seated between Miss
O'Riley and Mr.  Crutchley,  to whom you may believe
I was not very courteous,  especially as I had some ap-
prehensions of Sir Philip.  Mr.  Crutchley,  however,
to my great surprise,  was quite as civil as ever,  and
endeavoured to be as chatty ;  but there I begged to be
excused,  only answering upon the reply,  and that very
dryly,  for I was indeed horribly provoked with him.

Indeed,  all his behaviour would have been natural
and good-humoured,  and just what T should have
liked,  had he better concealed his chagrin at the first
accusation ;  but that,  still dw^elling by me,  made me
very indiiFerent to what followed,  though I found he
had no idea of having displeased me,  and rather sought
to be more than less sociable than usual.

I w^as much diverted during dinner by this Miss
O'Riley,  who took it in her humour to attack Mr.
Crutchley repeatedly,  though so discouraging a beau
never did I see!  Her forwardness,  and his excessive
and inordinate coldness,  made a contrast that,  added
to her brogue,  wdiich was broad,  kept me in a grin
irrepressible.

In the afternoon,  we had also Mr.  Wallace,  the
Attorney- General,  a most squat and squab -looking
man;  and further I saw not of him.

In the evening,  when the Irish ladies,  the Per-
kinses, Lambarts,  and Sir Philip,  were gone,  Mrs.
Thrale walked out with Mr.  Wallace,  w^hom she had

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  27

some business to talk over with ;  and then,  when only
Miss Owen,  Miss T.  and I remained,  Mr.  Crutchley,
after repeatedly addressing me,  and gaining pretty dry
answers,  called out suddenly,  ''Why,  Miss Burney!
why,  what's the matter?"

"  Nothing."

"  Why,  are you stricken,  or smitten,  or ill?"

"None of the three."

"  Oh,  then,  you are setting down all these Irish folks!"

''  No,  indeed,  I don't think them worth the trouble."

"Oh,  but I am sure you are;  only I interrupted
you."

I went on no farther with the argument,  and Miss
Thrale proposed our walking out to meet her mother.
We all agreed ;  and Mr.  Crutchley would not be satis-
tied without walking next me,  though I really had no
patience to talk with him,  and wished him at Jericho.

''What's the matter?"  said he;  "have you had a
quarrel?"

"  No."

"  Are you affronted?"

Not a word.    Then again he called to Miss Thrale, — ■

"  Why,  Queeny — why,  she  's quite in a rage !  What
have you done to her?"

I still sullied on,  vexed to be teased  ;  but,  though,
with a gaiety that shewed he had no suspicion of the
cause,  he grew more and more urgent,  trying every
means to make me tell him what was the matter,  till
at last,  much provoked,  I said, —

"  I must be strangely in want of a confidant,  indeed,
to take you for one  !"

"Why,  what an insolent speech!"  cried he,  half
serious and half laughing,  but casting up his eyes and
hands with astonishment.

28 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part I.

He then let iiie be quiet some time,  but in a few
minutes renewed his inquiries witli added eagerness,
besfCfinii^  me to tell h'nn if"  nobodv else.

A likely matter!  thought I ;  nor did I scruple to tell
him,  when forced to answer,  that no one had so little
chance of success in such a request.

*'  Why so?"  cried he;  '*for I am the best person in
the world to trust with a secret,  as I always forget it."

He continued working at me till we joined Mrs.
Thrale and the Attorney -General.  And then Miss
Thrale,  stimulated by him,  came to inquire if I had
really taken any thing amiss of her.  No,  I assured
her.

''Is it of 7ne,  then?"  cried Mr.  Crutchley,  as if sure
I should say 710 ;  but I made no other answer than
desiring him to desist questioning me.

'^So I will,"  cried he;  "only clear me, — only say it
is not me."

"  I shall say nothing about the matter ;  so do pray
be at rest."

•'Well,  but it can't be 7ne,  I know:  only say that.
It's Queeny,  I dare say."

"  No,  indeed."

*'  Then it 's you,''  cried Miss Thrale  ;  *'  and I'm glad
of it,  with all my heart!"

He then grew quite violent,  and at last went on w^ith
his questions till,  by being quite silent to them,  he
could no longer doubt w^ho it was.  He seemed then
wholly amazed,  and entreated to know what he had
done;  but I tried only to avoid him,  and keep out of
his way.

Soon after the Attorney -General took his leave,
during which ceremony Mr.  Crutchley,  coming be-
hind me,  exclaimed, —

1781]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  29

'^  Who'd think of this creature's having any venom
in her!"

'•  Oh yes,"  answered I,  "  when she's provoked."

''  But have  /  provoked you  ?"

Again I got off.  Taking Miss Thrale by the arm,
we hurried away,  leaving him with Mrs.  Thrale and
Miss Owen.  He was presently,  however,  with us
again ;  and when he came to my side,  and found me
really trying to talk of other matters with Miss Thrale,
and avoid him,  he called out, —

"  Upon my life,  this is too bad!  Do tell me,  Miss
Burney,  what is the matter?  If you won't,  I protest
I'll call Mrs.  Thrale,  and make her work at you her-
self."

I now,  in my turn,  entreated he would not;  for I
knew she was not to be safely trusted with any thing
she could turn into ridicule.  I was,  therefore,  impa-
tient to have the whole matter dropped ;  and after
assuring him very dryly,  yet peremptorily,  that I should
never satisfy him,  I started another subject with Miss
Thrale,  and we walked quietly on.

He exclaimed,  with a vehemence that amazed me in
return,  '*  Why will you not tell me?  Upon my life,
if you refuse me any longer,  I'll call the whole house
to speak for me  !"

"I assure you,"  answered I,  "that will be to no
purpose ;  for I must offend myself by telling it,  and
therefore I shall mention it to nobody."

"  But what in the world have I done?"

"  Nothing;  you have done nothing."

"What have I said,  then?  Only let me beg your
pardon,  —  only let me know what it is,  that I may beg
your pardon."

I then took up the teasing myself,  and quite insisted

30 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT I.

upon his leaving us and joining-  Mrs.  Thrale.  He
begged me to tell Miss Thrale,  and let Jier mediate,
and entreated her to be his agent ;  which,  in order to
get rid of him,  she promised;  and he then slackened
his pace,  though very reluctantly,  while we quickened
ours.

Miss Thrale,  however,  asked me not a question,
which I was very glad of,  as the affair,  trifling as it is,
would be but mortifying to mention ;  and though I
could not,  when so violently pressed,  disguise my re-
sentment, I was by no means disposed to make any
serious complaint.  I merely wished to let the gentle-
man know I was not so much his humble servant as to
authorise even the smallest disrespect from him.

He was however,  which I very little expected,  too
uneasy to stay long away ;  and w^hen we had walked
on quite out of hearing of Mrs.  Thrale and Miss Owen,
he suddenly galloped after us.

''How odd it is of you,"  said Miss Thrale,  "  to come
and intrude yourself in this manner upon any body
that tries so to avoid you !"

*'  Have you done any thing for me?''  cried he;  "  I
don't believe you have said a word."

"Not I,  truly!"  answered she;  "  if I can keep my
own self out of scrapes,  it's all I can pretend to."

''Well,  but do tell me,  Miss Burney, — pray tell me  !
indeed,  this is quite too bad ;  I sha'n't have a wink of
sleep all night.  If I have offended you,  I am very
sorry indeed ;  but I am sure I did not mean "

"No,  sir!"  interrupted I,  "  I don't suppose you did
mean to offend me,  nor do I know why you should.  I
expect from you neither good nor ill,  —  civility I think
myself entitled to,  and that is all I have anv desire
for/'

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  31

"  Good Heaven!"  exclaimed he.  "  Tell me,  how-
ever, but what it is,  and if I have said any thing un-
guardedly, I am extremely sorry,  and I most sincerely
beg your pardon."

Is it not very strange that any man,  in the same
day,  could be so disdainfully proud and so condescend-
ingly humble?  I was never myself more astonished,
as I had been firmly persuaded he would not have
deigned to take the smallest notice of me from the
moment of his hearing Sir Philip's idle raillery.

I now grew civiller,  for I dreaded his urgency,
as it was literally impossible for me to come to the
point.

I told him,  therefore,  that I was sorry he took so
much trouble,  which I had by no means intended to
give him,  and begged he w^ould think of it no more.

He was not,  however,  to be so dismissed.  Again he
threatened me with Mrs.  Thrale,  but again I assured
him nothing could less answer to him.

'^  Well,  but,"  cried he,  "  if you will not let me know
my crime,  why,  I must never speak to you any more."

"Very well,"  answered I,  "if you please we will
proclaim a mutual silence henceforward."

"Oh,"  cried he,  "yo?^,  1 suppose,  will be ready
enough ;  but to me that would be a loss of very great
pleasure.  If you would tell me,  however,  I am sure I
could explain it off,  because I am sure it has been done
undesignedly."

"  1^0,  it does not admit of any explanation ;  so pray
don't mention it any more."
•  "Only tell me what part of the day it was."

Whether this unconsciousness was real,  or only to
draw me in so that he might come to the point,  and
make his apology with greater ease,  I know not ;  but

32 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part 1.

I assured him it was in vain he asked,  and again
desired him to puzzle himself with no furtlier recollec-
tions.

*'0h,"  cried he,  "but I shall think of every thing
I have ever said to you for this half year.  I am
sure,  whatever it was,  it must have been unmeant and
unguarded."

"  That,  sir,  I never doubted ;  and probably you
thought me hard enough to hear any thing without
minding it."

"  Good Heaven,  Miss Burney !  why,  there is nobody
I would not sooner offend, — nobody in the world!
Queeny knows it.  If Queeny would speak,  she could
tell you so.     Is it not true,  Miss Thrale?"

'^  I shall say nothing about it ;  if I can keep my own
neck out of the collar,  it's enough for me."

"But won't it plead something for me that you are
sure,  and must be sure,  it was by blunder,  and not
design?"

"  Indeed I am sorry you take all this trouble,  which
is very little worth your while ;  so do pray say no
more."

"  But will you forgive me?"
"Yes."

"  It seems to come very hard from you.  Will you
promise to have quite forgiven it by the time I return
next Thursday?"

"Oh,  I hope I shall have no remembrance of any
part of it before then.  I am sorry you know any thing
about it;  and if you had not been so excessively
earnest,  I should never have let you;  but I could not
say an untruth when pushed so hard."

"  I hope,  then,  it will be all dissipated by to-morrow
morninci."

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  33

"Oh,  surely!  I sliould be very much surprised if it
out-lasted the nio-ht."

"Well,  but then will you be the same?  I never
saw such a chano;e.     If vou are serious "

"  Oh,  no,  I'll be wondrous merry!"

^'  I heg you will think no more of it.  I — I believe I
know what it is;  and,  indeed,  I was far from meaning
to give you the smallest offence,  and I most earnestly
beg your pardon.  There is nothing I would not do to
assure you how sorry I am.  But I hope it will be all
over by the time the candles come.  I shall look to see,
and I hope  —  I beg  —  you will have the same counte-
nance again."

I now felt really appeased,  and so I told him.

We then talked of other matters till A^e I'eached
home,  though it was not without difficulty I could
even yet keep him quiet.  I then ran up-stairs with
my cloak,  and stayed till supper-time,  when I returned
without,  I hope,  any remaining appearance o^  dudgeon
in my phiz  ;  for after so much trouble and humiliation,
it would have been abominable to have shewn any.

I see,  besides,  that Mr.  Crutchley,  though of a cold
and proud disposition,  is generous,  amiable,  and deli-
cate, and,  when not touched upon the tender string of
gallantry,  concerning which he piques himself upon
invariable hardness and immovability,  his sentiments
are not merely just,  but refined.

*  #  #  #  #

After supper,  Mr.  Crutcliley,  though he spoke to me
two or three times with an evident intention to observe
my looks and manner in answering him,  which were
botli meant to be much as usual,  seemed still dissatis-
fied both with his own justification and my appease-
ment;  and when we all arose to go to bed,  he crossed

VOL.   II.  D

34 DIARY AXD LETTERS  [Part I.

over to iiic,  antl said in a whisper,  ^'  I liave begged
Miss Thrale to intercede for me ;  slie will explain all ;

and I hope "

*'  Very well  —  very well/'    said T,   in a horrible
hurry  ;   "  there is no occasion for any thing more."

For Mrs.  and JMiss Thrale,  and Miss Owen,  were
all standing waiting for me:  he put himself,  however,
before me,  so that I could not get away,  and went
on  : —

"  Only hear me, — 2)ra2/  hear me.  Is it what she
(jDointing to Mrs.  Thale)  put about in the morning? "

**  I'll tell you another time,"  cried I,  in fifty ago-
nies to see how they were all ready to titter,  which he,
■whose back was to them,  perceived not.

*'  I have told Miss Thrale what I thought it was,"
he continued,  "  and she will explain it all,  and tell you
how very impossible it was I could think of offending
you.  Indeed,  I beg your pardon  !  I do,  indeed,  most
sincerely.  I hope you w^ill think of it no more,  —  I
hope it will be all over."

"  It is all over,"  cried I,  still trying to get aw^ay.

"  Well,  but— stop  — only tell me if it w^as that "

"  Ay  —  ay — to-morrow^  morning  ;"  and then I forced
myself into the midst of them,  and got off.

Stp.eatha:^!,  Thursday. — This was the great and
most important day to all this house,  upon which the
sale of the Brewery w^as to be decided.  Mrs.  Thrale
went early to town,  to meet all the executors,  and
Mr.  Barclay,  the Quaker,  who was the bidder.  She
was in great agitation of mind,  and told me if all went
well she would wave a white pocket-handkerchief out
of the coach window.

Four o'clock came and dinner was ready^  and no
Mrs.  Thrale.       Five o'clcck followed,    and no Mrs.

1781]  Oi'  THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  35

Tliraie.  Qiieeny and I v/ent out upon the lawn,  where
we sauntered,  in eager expectation,  till near six,  and
then the coach appeared in sight,  and a white pocket-
handkerchief was waved from it.

I ran to the door of it to meet her,  and she jumped
out of it,  and gave me a thousand embraces while I
gave my congratulations.  We went instantly to her
dressing-room,  v/here she told me,  in brief,  how the
matter had been transacted,  and then we went down
to dinner.

Dr.  Johnson and Mr.  Grutchley had accompanied
her home.  I determined to behave to Mr.  Grutchley
the same as before our quarrel,  though he did not so
to me,  for he hardly spoke a word to me.  An ac-
cident, however,  happened after dinner,  which made
him for a while more loquacious.  Mrs.  Thrale,  in
cutting some fruit,  had cut her iinger,  and asked me
for some black sticking-plaster,  and as I gave it her
out of my pocket-book,  she was struck with the beau-
tiful glossiness of the paper of a letter which peeped
out of it,  and rather loaggishly asked me who wrote to
me with so much elegant attention  ?

"  Mrs.  Gast,"  answered I.

"  Oh,"  cried she,  ^'  do pray then let me see her
hand." '

I shewed it her,  and she admired it very justly,  and
said, —

"  Do shevr it to Mr.  Grutchley;  'tis a mighty gen-
teel hand indeed."

I complied,  but took it from him as soon as he had
looked at it.  Indeed,  he is the last man in the world
to have even desired to read any letter not to him-
self.

Dr.  Johnson now,  who,  too deaf to hear what was

3G DIAllY AND LETTERS  [Part I.

saying,  wondered wliat we were thus handing about,
asked an explanation.

"  Wh}^  we are all,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  admiring*
the hand of Fanny's Mr.  Crisp's sister."
''  x\nd mayn't I admire it too  ?  "  cried he.
"  Oh,  yes,"  said she  ;  "  sliew it him.  Burney."
I put it in his hand,  and he instantly opened and
began reading it.     Now though there was nothing in
It but what must reflect honour upon Mrs.  Gast,  she
had charged nie not to shew it;  and,  also,  it was so
very flattering to me,  that I was quite consternated at
this proceeding,  and called out, —

"  Sir,  it was only to shew you the hand-writing,  and
you have seen enough for that."

"  I shall know best myself,"  answered he,  laughing,
*'  when I have seen enough."

And he read on.  The truth is I am sure he took it
for granted they had all read it,  for he had not heard
^  word that had passed.

I then gave Mrs.  Thrale a reproachful glance for
what she had done,  and she jumped up,  and calling
out, —

"  So I have done mischief,  I see!"  and ran out of
the room,  followed by Queeny.  I stayed hovering over
the Doctor to recover my property  ;  but the minute
the coast was clear,  Mr.  Crutchley,  taking advantage
of his deafness,  said, —

*'  Well,  ma'am,  I hope we are now friends  ?"
"  Yes!"  cried I.
''  And is it all quite over?"
"  Entirely."

''  Why then,  do pray,"  cried he,  laughing,  "be so
good as to  \Q,t me know what was our quarrel?''

''  No  —  no,  I sha'nt!"  (cried i,  laughing too,  at the

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  37

absurdity of qiiarrelling and seeming not to know ivhat
for)  :   "  it is all over,  and that is enough."

"  No,  by no means enough  :  I must really beg you
to tell me  ;  I am uneasy till I know.  Was it that silly
joke of mine at dinner?"

'^  No,  I assure you,  it was no joke  !"

"  But was it at dinner,  or before dinner  ?"

^'  Is it not enough that it is over  ?  I am sorry you
knew any thing of the matter,  and I am obliged to
you for taking so much trouble about it ;  so there let
it rest."

"  But pray do tell me!  —  if only that I may be more
on my guard another time."

"  No,  pray,"  cried I,  in my turn,  "  don't be on your
guard ;  for if you are,  I shall suppose you have takeii
the resentment up where I have laid it down."

'*  That I won't do,  indeed,"  said he  ;  '*  but I merely
wish to beg your pardon  :  and I think my earnestness
must at least have convinced you how very sorry I am
to have given you any offence."

Here Dr.  Johnson returned me my letter,  with very
warm praise of its contents.  Mrs.  Gast would not
only have forgiven me,  but have been much delighted
had she heard his approbation of all she had written
to me.

Mr.  Crutchley,  never satisfied,  again began his en*
treaties that I would  "  come to the point,"  while
I was putting up my letter  ;  but 1 hurried out of the
room without any new answer,  though he called after
me, —

"  I shan't rest.  Miss Burney,  till you tell me!"

It cannot be,  all this time,  that he does not know }
he merely wants me to mention the matter myself,  that
with a better grace he may apologise about it.     How-

38 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaUT I.

ovti*,  J  .shall certainly not i>;ive him that assistance,
tliough far iVoni bearing liim any malice.  I think of
liini as well as I did before  [ho fracas ;  for however his
pride of indiii'erence urged him so to fly out,  it is
evident he could halfniiirder himself with self-anfrer
that he has given any cause of displeasure.

Friday. — Miss Thrale,  Dr.  Johnson,  Mr.  Crutchley,
and myself,  went to town;  and,  having set dow^n Dr.
Johnson at his own house,  w^c went to Bond Street for
Miss Owen,  and proceeded to the exhibition.  I think
I need not describe the pictures.

Miss Owen returned with us to Streatham ;  Mr.
Crutchley recovered his spirits,  and we all did very
■well.  But in the afternoon,  just as we had finished
tea,  Mr.  Crutchley said to Mrs.  Thrale, —

''  Ma'am,  I must beg a private conference with you."

"With me?"  cried she;  "I thought now I had
parted with my brewliouse,  all our conferences were
over."

"  No,"  said he,  "  one more,  just to take leave of
them."

Away they w^ent,  and when they returned he said
it was something about Queeny,  who,  however,  never
inquired what.  I should not have mentioned this,  but
that the next morning  —

Saturday — Mrs.  Thrale,  who sleeps in the next
room to mine,  called me to her bed-side,  and said, —

"  Now,  my dearest Tyo,*  you know not how I hate

*  When Lieutenant Biirney accompanied Captain Cook to
Otaheite,  each of the English sailors was adopted as a brother
by some one of the natives.  The ceremony consisted in rubbing
noses together,  and exchanging the appellation of Tyo,  or Taio,
w^hich  -signified chosen friend.  This title was sometimes playfully
given to Miss Burney by Mrs.  Thrale.

1781]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  39

to keep from yon any thing.  Do you love nie well
enough to bear to hear something you will mortally
dislike,  without hating  ???e for it?"

"  What on earth coidd I hate you for?"  cried I.

"  Nay,  'tis no fault of mine  ;  but still it is owing to
me,  and I dread to tell you lest it should make you
sorry for your kindness to me."

I was quite out of breath at this preparation ;  and
though I warmly and truly,  I am sure,  protested that
nothing upon earth could lessen my affection for her,
I was really afraid to ask  \vhat was next to follow.

"I am as sorry,"  continued she,  "  as I can live,  that
any thing should give you any disturbance,  but most
especially any thing that relates to me.  I w^ould give
you,  if I could,  nothing but pleasure,  for I am sure I
receive nothing else from you.  Pray,  then,  don't let
any malice,  or impertinence,  or ridicule,  make you
hate me ;  for I saw,  and you know told you long ago,
the world would be ill-natured enough to try to part
us ;  but let it not succeed,  for it is worth neither of
our attentions."

"  On my part,  I am sure,  it cannot succeed,"  cried
I,  more and more alarmed  ;  "  for I am yours for ever
and for ever,  and now almost whether I will or not."

'^  1 hope so,"  cried she,  '^  for I am sure no one can
love you more  ;  and I am sorry,  and grieved,  and
enraged that your affection and kindness for me should
bring you any uneasiness.  We are all sorry,  indeed  ;
Queeny is very sorry,  and Mr.  Crutchley is very
sorry

"  You make me more and more afraid,"   said I ;
''  but pray tell me what it all means  ?"

"  Why you know Mr.  Crutchley yesterday called

40 DIAllV AND LKTTERS  [PaRT I.

ii]C out ol'tlie room to toll iiie  ;i secret  ;  well,  this  ^vas
to shew lue a pariigruph he liad just read in the news-
paper, '  And do,  nui'ani,'  says he,  '  have tlie newspaper
burnt,  or put somewhere safe out of Miss Burney's
way  ;  for I am sure it will vex her extremely.'"

Think if this did not teriify me pretty handsomely.
I turned sick as death.  She gave me the paper,  and I
read the following paragraph  :  —

"  Miss Burney,  the sprightly writer of the elegant
novel,  *  Evelina,'  is now domesticated with Mrs.  Thrale,
in the same manner that Miss More is with Mrs.
Garrick,  and  ]Mrs.  Carter with Mrs.  Montagu."

The preparation for this had been so very alarming,
that little as I liked it,  I was so much afraid of some-
thing still worse,  that it really was a relief to me to
see it ;  and Mrs.  Thrale's excess of tenderness and
delicacy about it was such as to have made me amends
for almost any thing.  I promised,  therefore,  to take
it like a man;  and,  after thanking her with the sin-
cerest gratitude for her infinite kindness,  we parted
to dress.

It is,  however most insufferably impertinent to be
thus dragged into print,  notwithstanding every possible
effort and caution to avoid it.  There is nothing,
merely concerning myself,  that can give me greater
uneasiness ;  for there is nothing I have always more
dreaded,  or more uniformly endeavoured to avoid.

I think myself,  however,  much obliged to Mr.
Crutchley for his very good-natured interference and
attempt to save me this vexation,  which is an attention
I by no means expected from him.  He has scolded
Mrs.  Thrale since,  she says,  for having told me,  be-
cause he perceived it had lowered my spirits ;  but she

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  41

thought it most likely I should hear it from those who
would tell it me with less tenderness,  and,  therefore,
had not followed his advice.

Sunday. — We had Mr.  and Mrs.  Davenant here.
They are very lively and agreeable,  and I like them
more and more.  Mrs.  Davenant is one of the saucy
women of the ton,  indeed  ;  but she has good parts,  and
is gay and entertaining ;  and her sposo,  who passion-
ately adores her,  though five years her junior,  is one of
the best-tempered and most pleasant-charactered young
men imaginable.

I had new specimens to-day of the oddities of Mr.
Crutchley,  whom I do not yet quite understand,  though
I have seen so much of him.  In the course of our
walks to-clay we chanced,  at one time,  to be somewhat
before the rest of the company,  and soon got into a
very serious conversation ;  though we began it by his
relating a most ludicrous incident which had happened
to him last winter.

There is a certain poor wretch of avillanous painter,
one Mr.  Lowe,  who is in some measure under Dr.
Johnson's protection,  and whom,  therefore,  he recom-
mends to all the people he thinks can afford to sit for
their pictures.  Among these,  he made Mr.  Seward
very readily,  and then applied to Mr.  Crutchley.

"  But now,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  as he told me the
circumstance,  "  I have not a notion of sitting for my
picture, —  for who wants it  ?  I may as well give the
man the money without ;  but no,  they all said that
would not do so well,  and Dr.  Johnson asked me to
give Mm my picture.  '  And I assure you,  sir,'  says he,
'  I shall put it in very good company,  for I have por-
traits of some very respectable people in my dining-
room.'     *  Ay,  sir,'  says I,  'that's sufficient reason why

42 jjiAn\  AM)  jj:ni:us  [Part I.

you should not have mine,  for I am sure it has no
business in such society.'  So ihen Mrs.  Thrale asked
me to give it to Iter.  '  Ay sure,  ma'am,'  says 1,  '  you
do me great honour ;  but pray,  first,  will you do me the
favour to tell me what door you intend to put it be-
hind V However,  after all I could say in opposition,  I
was obliged to go to the painter's.  xA.nd I found him
in such a condition!  a room all dirt and filth,  brats
squalling and wrangling,  up two pair of stairs,  and a
closet,  of which the door was open,  that Seward well
said was quite Pandora's box  —  it was the repository
of all the nastincss,  and stench,  and filth,  and food,

and drink,  and oh,  it Avas too bad to be borne  !

and  '  Oh !'  says I,  '  Mr.  Lowe,  I beg your pardon for
running away,  but I have just recollected another en-
gagement ;'  so I poked the three guineas in his hand,
and told him I would come again another time,  and
then ran out of the house with all my might.''

Well,  when we had done laughing about this poor
unfortunate painter,  the subject turned upon portraits
in genera],  and our conference grew very grave:  on
his part it soon became even melancholy.  I have not
time to dialogue it ;  but he told me he could never
bear to have himself the picture of any one he loved,
-as,  in case of their death or absence,  he should go dis-
tracted by looking at it ;  and that,  as for himself,  he
never had,  and never would sit for his own,  except
for one miniature by Humphreys,  which his sister
begged of him,  as he could never flatter himself there
was a human being in the world to whom it could be
of any possible value:  "And now,"  he added,  "less
than ever !"

This,  and various other speeches to the same pur-
pose, he spoke with a degree of dejection that surprised

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  43

me,  as the coldness of liis character,  and his continu-
ally boasted insensibility,  made me believe him really
indifferent both to love and hatred.

After this we talked of Mrs.  Davenant.

"She is very agreeable,"  said I,  "I like her much.
Don't you?"

"Yes,  very much,"  said he;  "  she is lively and en-
tertaining;" and then a moment after,  " 'Tis v/onder-
ful,"  he exclaimed,  "that such a thing as that can
captivate a man  ! "

"  Nay,"  cried I,  "  nobody more,  for her husband
quite adores her."

"So I find,"  said he:  "and Mrs.  Thrale savs men
in general like hei"."

"  They certainly do,"  cried 1 ;  "  and all the oddity
is in you who do not,  not in them who do."

"  May be so,"  answered he,  "but it don't do for me,
indeed."

We then came to tvv'o gates,  and there I stopped
short,  to wait till they joined us ;  and Mr.  Crutchley,
turning about and looking at Mrs.  Davenant,  as she
came forward,  said,  rather in a muttering voice,  and to
himself than to me,  "  What a thing for an attachment !
No,  no,  it would not do for wel — too much glare!  too
much flippancy  !  too much hoop  !  too much gauze  !  too
much slipper!  too much neck!  Oh,  hide it!  hide it!
—  muffle it up!  muffle it up!  If it is but in a fur
cloak,  I am for muffling it all up I"

And thus he diverted himself till they came up to
us.  But never,  I believe,  was there a man who could
endure so very few people.  Even Mrs.  and Miss
Thrale,  of whom he is fond to excess,  he would rather
not see than see with other company !

Is he not a strange composition  ?

44 DIAllV AM)  LETTERS  [ParT T.

Streatiiam,  June. — I found Dr.  Jolinson in ahnir-
able good-humour,  and our journey hither was ex-
tremely pleasant.  I thanked him for the last batch
of his poets,  and we talked them over almost all
the way.

Sweet Mrs.  Thrale received me with her wonted
warmth of affection,  but shocked me by her own ill
looks,  and the increasing alteration in her person,
which perpetual anxiety and worry have made.  I
found with her INIrs.  Lambart and the Rev.  Mr.  Jen-
nings, a young brother of Sir Philip Gierke,  and  ]Mr.
Seward.

Mrs.  Lambart I was much pleased with again meet-
ing, for she is going in a few days to Brussels with her
son,  in order to reside for two years.  Mr.  Jennings I
was not much charmed with ;  but he may be a good
sort of man for all that,  and for all he was somewhat
over-facetious,  or would have been  ;  foi*  Mrs.  Thrale,
after running to kiss me,  introduced me to Sir Philip's
brother,  who said, —

"  Pray,  ma'am,  may not that fashion go round?"

*'  No,  no,  there's no occasion for that,"  cried I.

*'0h,  yes,  there is,"  returned he;  ''it may be an
old-fashioned custom,  but I am an old-fashioned man,
and therefore I rather like it the better.  Come,  Mrs.
Thrale,  may I not be introduced properly to Miss
Burney?"

''  No,  no,"  cried she,  while I took care to get out
of the way,  "  nobody kisses Miss Burney in this house
but myself."

"  I have ventured,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  ''  to some-
times touch the tip of Miss Burney 's little finger-
nail ;  but never farther."

I then gave Mrs.  Thrale some account of my visit to

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELTXA.  45

Mrs.  Bj^ron,  which turned the conversation  ;  and pre-
sently entered Mr.  Crutchley.

We had a good cheerful day,  and in the evening Sir
Richard Jebb came ;  and nothing can I recollect,  but
that Dr.  Johnson forced nie to sit on a very small sofa
with him,  which was hardly hirge enough for himself;
and which w^ould have made a subject for a print by
Harry Bunbury that would have diverted all London;
ergo,  it rejoiceth me that he was not present.

Wednesday. — We had a terrible noisy day.  Mr.
and Mrs.  Cator came to dinner,  and brought with
them Miss Collison,  a niece.  Mrs.  Nesbitt vras also
here,  and Mr.  Pepys.

The long war which has been proclaimed among the
wits concerniug Lord Lyttelton's  "  Life,"  by Dr.  John-
son, and which a whole tribe of blues,  with Mrs.
Montagu at their head,  have vowed to execrate and
revenge,  now broke out with all the fury of the first
actual hostilities,  stimulated by long-concerted schemes
and much spiteful information.  Mr.  Pepys,  Dr.  John-
son well knew,  was one of Mrs.  ^lontagu's steadiest
abettors ;  and,  therefore,  as he had some time de-
termined to defend himself with the first of them he
met,  this day he fell the sacrifice to his wrath.

Li a long tUe-a-tke v/hich I accidentally had with
Mr.  Pepys before the company was assembled,  he told
me his apprehensions of an attack,  and entreated me
earnestly to endeavour to prevent it ;  modestly avowing
he was no antagonist for Dr.  Johnson  ;  and yet de-
claring his personal friendship for Lord Lyttelton made
him so much hurt by the  "  Life,"  tliat he feared he
could not discuss the matter without a quarrel,  which,
especially in the house of  .Mrs.  Thrale,  he wished to
avoid.

46 DIARY AND LETTEllS  [pART I.

It was,  however,  utterly impossible for me to serve
him.  I could have stopped Mrs.  Thrale with ease,
and Mr.  Seward wdth a hint,  had either of them begun
the subject;  but,  unfortunately,  in the middle of dinner
it was begun by Dr.  Johnson himself,  to oppose whom,
especially as he spoke with great anger,  would have
been madness and folly.

Never before have I seen Dr.  Johnson speak with so
much passion.

"  Mr.  Pepys,"  he cried,  in a voice the most enraged,
*'  I understand you are offended by my  '  Life of Lord
Lyttelton.'  What is it you have to say against it  ?  Come
forth,  man !  Here am I,  ready to answer any charge
you can bring ! "

"  No,  sir,"  cried Mr.  Pepys,  "  not at present ;  I
must beg leave to decline the subject.  I told Miss
Burney before dinner that I hoped it would not be
started."

I was quite frightened to hear my ow-n name men-
tioned in a debate which began so seriously ;  but Dr.
Johnson made not to this any answ^er  :  he repeated his
attack and his challenge,  and  (a violent disputation
ensued,  in which this great but mortal man did,  to own
the truth,  appear unreasonably furious and grossly
severe.  I never sav/  him so before,  and I heartily
hope I never shall again.  He has been long provoked,
and justly enough,  at the snealiing complaints and
murmurs of the Lytteltonians ;  and,  therefore,  his
long-excited wrath,  which hitherto had met no object,
now burst forth wdth a vehemence and bitterness
almost incredible.

Mr.  Pepys meantime never appeared to so^  much
advantage ;  he preserved his temper,  uttered all that
belonged merely to himself with modesty,  and all that

17S1]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  47

more immediately related to Lord Lyttelton with spirit.
Indeed,  Dr.  Johnson,  in tbe very midst of the dispute,
had the candour and liberality to make him a personal
compliment,  by saying, —

"teir,  all that you say,  Avhile you are vindicating
one who cannot thank you,  makes me only think
better of you than I ever did before.  Yet still I think
you do me wrong,"/ &c.  &c.

I Some time after,  in the iieat of the argument,  he
called out  —

"The more my  ^  Lord Lyttelton'  is incpiired after,  the
worse he wall appear;  Mr.  Seward has just heard two
stories of him,  which corroborate all I have related.'l

\He then desired Mr.  Seward to repeat them.  *  Poor
Mr.  Seward llooked almost as frightened as myself at
the very mention of his name ;  but he quietly and
immediately  \told the stones,  which consisted of fresh
instances,  from good authorities,  of Lord Lyttelton's
illiberal behaviour to Shenstone  ;  /  and then he flung
himself back in his chair,  and spoke no more during
the whole debate,  which I am sure he was ready to
vote a bore.

One happy circumstance,  however,  attended the
quarrel,  vrhicli was the presence of Mr.  Cator,  who
would by no means be prevented talking himself,
either hj reverence for Dr.  Johnson,  or ignorance of
the subject in question ;  on the contrary,  he gave his
opinion,  quite uncalled,  upon every thing that was
said by either party,  and that with an importance and
pomposity,  yet with an emptiness and verbosity,  that
rendered the whole dispute,  when in his hands,  nothing
more than ridiculous,  and compelled even the dis-
putants themselves,  all inflamed as they were,  to laugh.
To give a specimen — one speech will do for a thousand.

48 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part I.

**  As to this here question of Lord Lyttelton I can't
speak to it to the purpose,  as I have not read his  '  Life,'
for I have only read the  '  Life of Pope  ;'  I have got the
books thou2:h,  for I sent for them last week,  and they
came to me on Wednesday,  and then I began them  ;  but
I have not yet read  '  Lord Lyttelton.'  '  Pope'  I have
be2:un,  and that is what I am now readino^.  But
what I have to say about I^ord Lyttelton is this liere :
Mr.  Seward says that Lord Lyttelton 's steward dunned
Mr.  Shenstone for his rent,  by which I understand he
was a tenant of Lord Lyttelton's.  Well,  if he was a
tenant of Lord Lyttelton's,  why should not he pay his
rent?"

iWho could contradict this?
When dinner was quite over,  and we left the men to
their wine,  we hoped they would finish the affair;  but
Dr.  Johnson was determined to talk it through,  and
make a battle of it,  though Mr.  Pepys tried to be off
continually.  1 When they were all summoned to tea,
tliey enterecl still warm and violent.  Mr.  Cator had
the book in his hand,  and was reading the  "  Life of
Lyttelton,"  that he might better,  he said,  understand
the cause,  though not a creature cared if he had never
heard of it.

Mr.  Pepys came up to me and said, —

"  Just what I had so much wished to avoid  !  I have
been crushed in the very onset."

I could make him no answer,  for Dr.  Johnson im-
mediately called him off,  and harangued and attacked
him with a vehemence and continuity that quite con-
cerned both Mrs.  Thrale and myself,  and that made
Mr.  Pepys,  at last,  i-esolutely silent,  however called
upon.
\  Th!s now grew more unpleasant than ever ;    till

J 781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  49

Mr.  Cator,  having some time studied his book,  ex-
claimed,—

"What I am now going to say,  as I have not yet
read the  '  Life of Lord Lyttelton'  quite through,  must
be considered as being only said aside,  because what I
am going to say "

"  I wish,  sir,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  it had been all
said aside  ;  here is too much about it,  indeed,  and I
should be very glad to hear no more of it."/

This speech,  which she made with great s|)irit and
dignity,  had an admirable effect.  Every body was
silenced.  Mr.  Cator,  thus interrupted in the midst of
his proposition,  looked quite amazed  ;  Mr.  Pepys was
much gratified by the interference  ;  and i Dr.  Johnson,
after a pause,  said, —  '

"  Well,  madam,  you shall hear no more of it;  yet
I will defend myself in every part and in every atom  !  I'

And from this time the subject was wholly droppedl
This dear violent Doctor was conscious he had been
wrong,  and therefore he most candidly bore the re4
proof.

Mr.  Cator,  after some evident chagrin at having his
speech thus rejected,  comforted himself by coming up
to Mr.  Seward,  who was seated next me,  to talk to
him of the changes of the climates from hot to could
in the countries he had visited  ;  and he prated so much,
yet said so little,  and pronounced his words so vulgarly,
that I found it impossible to keep my countenance,  and
was once,  when most unfortunately he addressed him-
self to me,  surprised by him on the full grin.  To
soften it off as well as I could,  I pretended unusual
complacency,  and instead of recovering my gravity,  I
continued a most ineffable smile for the whole time he
talked,  which was indeed no difficult task.     Poor Mr.

VOL.  II.  E

50 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT I.

Seward was as much off"  his guard as myself,  having
his mouth distended to its fullest extent every other
minute.

\  \A'hen the leave-taking time arrived,  Dr.  Johnson
called to Mr.  Pepys to shake hands,  an invitation
which was most coldly and forcibly accepted .\  Mr.
Cator made a point of Mrs.  Thrale's dining kt his
house soon,  and she could not be wholly excused,  as
she has many transactions with him  ;  but she fixed the
day for three weeks hence.  They have invited me so
often,  that I have now promised not to fail making one.
)  Thursday Morni>g. —  Dr.  Johnson went to town
for some days,  but not before Mrs.  Thrale read him a
very serious lecture upon giving way to such violence ;
which he bore with a patience and quietness that even
more than made his peace with me ;  for such a man's
confessing himself wrono^  is almost more amiable than
another man being steadily right.

Friday,  June 14th.  —  We had my dear father and
Sophy Streatfield,  who,  as usual,  was beautiful,  caress-
ing, amiable,  sweet,  and  —  fatiguing.

Sunday,  June 16th. — This morning,  after church,
we had visits from the Pitches,  and afterwards from
the Attorney-General and Mrs.  Wallace,  his wife,  who
is a very agreeable woman.  And here I must give
you a little trait of Mr.  Crutchley,  whose solid and
fixed character I am at this moment unable to fathom,
much as I have seen of him.

He has an aversion,  not only to strangers,  but to
the world in general,  that I never yet saw quite
equalled.  I at first attributed it to shyness,  but I now
find it is simply disgust.  To-day at noon,  while I was
reading alone in the library,  he came in,  and amused
himself very quietly in the same manner;  but,  upon a

1781]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         51

noise which threatened an intrusion,  he started up,  and
as the Pitches entered,  he hastened away.  After this,
the Wallaces came,  from whom he kept equally distant ;
but when we all went out to shew the Attorney-General
the hot -houses and kitchen-gardens,  he returned,  I
suppose,  to the library,  for there,  when we came back,
we found him reading.  He instantly arose,  and was
retreating,  but stopped upon my telling him in passing
that his particular enemy,  Mr.  Merlin,  was just ar-
rived ;  and then some nonsense passing among us
concerning poor Merlin and Miss Owen,  he conde-
scended to turn back and take a chair.  He sat then,  as
usual when with much company,  quite silent,  till Mr.
Wallace bes-an talkino-  of the fatii^ue he had endured
at the birth-day,  from the weight and heat of his
clothes,  which were damask and gold,  belonging to
his place,  and of the haste he was in to get at the
Queen,  that he might speak to her Majesty,  and make
his escape from so insufferable a situation as the heat,
incommodiousness,  and richness of his dress,  had put
him into.

"  Well,  sir,"  interrupted Mr.  Crutchley,  in the
midst of this complaint,  to which he had listened wath
evident contempt,  "  but you had at least the pleasure
of shewing this dress at the levee  ! "

This unexpected sarcasm instantly put an end to the
subject,  and when I afterwards spoke of it to Mr.
Crutchley,  and laughed at his little respect for an
"officer of the state—"

''Oh!"  cried he,  "nothing makes me so sick as
hearing such ostentatious complaints !  The man has
but just got the very dress he has been all his life
working for,  and now he is to parade about its in*
convenience ! "

62 DIARY AND Li:nERS  [Part I.

This is certainly a good and respectable spirit,  though
not much calculated to make its possessor popular.

We had afterwards a good deal ol'sportwith Merlin,
who Hgain stayed dinner,  and was as happy as a
prince  ;  but Mr.  Crutchley plagued me somewhat by
trying to set him upon attacking me;  which,  as I
knew^  his readiness to do better than I chose to con-
fess, was not perfectly to my taste.  Once,  when Piozzi
was making me some most extravagant compliments,
upon Heaven knows what of accomplishments and per-
fections, which he said belonged to the whole famille
Bornij and was challenging me to speak to him in
Italian,  which I assured him I could not do,  Merlin
officiously called out, —

''  O,  je vous assure,  jMlle.  Burney n'ignore rien  ;
mais elle est si modeste qu'elle ne veut pas,  c'est a dire,
parler."

And soon after,  when a story was told of some-
body's sins,  which I have forgotten,  MerUn,  encou-
raged again by some malicious contrivance of Mr.
Crutchley 's to address himself to me,  called out aloud,
and very malapropos,  '■'  Pour Mile.  Burney,  c'est une
demoiselle qui n'a jamais peche du tout."

"  No,  I hope not,"  said I,  in a low voice to Miss
Thrale,  while they were all holloaing at this oddity  ;
"at least,  if I had,  I think I would not confess."

"Tell him so,"  cried Mr.  Crutchley.

"  No,  no,"  cried I,  "  pray let him alone."

"Do you hear,  Mr.  Merlin,"  cried he then aloud;
^'  Miss Burney says if she has sinned,  she will not
confess."

"O,  sir!"  answered Merlin,  simpering,  "for the
modest ladies,  they never do confess,  because,  that is,
they have not got nothing to confess."

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  53

During the dessert,  mention was made of ray father's
picture,  when this ridiculous creature exclaimed, —

''  Oh !  for that picture of Dr.  Burney,  Sir Joshua
Reynhold has not taken pains,  that is,  to please me t
I do not like it.  Mr.  Gainsborough has done one
much more better of me,  which is A'-ery agreeable in-
deed. I wish it had been at the Exhibition,  for it
w^ould have done him a great deal of credit indeed. "^
There was no standing the absurdity of this  "  agree-
able," and we all laughed heartily,  and Mrs.  Thrale
led the way for our leaving the room.

"  Oh!"  cried Merlin,  half piqued,  and half grinning
from sympathy,  ''  I assure you there is not nothing
does make me so happy,  that is,  as to see the ladies
so pleased !"

Monday,  June 17th. — There passed,  some time
ago,  an agreement between Mr.  Crutchley and Mr.
Seward,  that the latter is to make a visit to the former,
at his country-house in Berkshire;  and to-day the
time was settled  :  but a more ridiculous scene never
was exhibited.  The host elect and the guest elect
tried which should shew least expectation of pleasure
from the meeting,  and neither of them thought it at
all worth w^hile to disguise his terror of being weary
of the other.  Mr.  Seward seemed quite melancholy
and depressed in the prospect of making,  and Mr.
Crutchley absolutely miserable in that of receiving,
the visit.  Yet nothing so ludicrous as the distress
of both,  since nothing less necessary than that either
should have such a punishment inflicted.  I cannot
remember half the absurd things that passed ;  but a
few,  by way of specimen,  I will give.

"  How long do you intend to stay with me,  Seward?"

64 DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.  [PaRT I.

cried Mr.  Crutchley  ;  *'  how long do you think you can
bear it?"

*'  O,  I don't know ;  I sha'n't fix,"  answered the
Other  :  "just as I find it."

•'Well,  but  —  when shall you come?  Friday or
Saturday?  I think you'd better not come till Satur-
day."

''Why yes,  I believe on Friday."

*'  On Friday  !  Oh,  you'll have too much of it !  what
shall I do with you?"

"  Why on Sunday we'll dine at the Lyells.  Mrs.
Lyell is a charming woman  ;  one of the most elegant
creatures I ever saw."

'* Wonderfully so,"  cried Mr.  Crutchley;  "I like
her extremely — an insipid idiot !  She never opens her
mouth but in a whisper ;  I never Jieard her speak a
word in my life.  But what must I do with you on
Monday  ?  will you come away  ?  "

"  Oh,  no  ;   Fll stay and see it out."

"  Why,  how long shall you stay  ?  Why I must come
away myself on Tuesday."

''  O,  I sha'n't settle yet,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  very
dryly.  "  I shall put up six shirts,  and then do as I
ifind it."

*' Six shirts!"  exclaimed Mr.  Crutchley;  and then,
with equal dryness added — "  Oh,  I suppose you wear
two a-day."

And so on.

PART 11.
1781.

CONTENTS.

Streatham Diary continued — Dr.  Johnson — The Rival Duchesses,
Rutland and Devonshire — Happiness and  ]Misery — Nobody dies
of Grief — Fox-hunting Mania — Table-talk on Indecision —
Sherlock's Letters — Pride and Humility — A Discussion on Va-
nity— Delicate Distinctions — Vanity and Pride — Merlin,  the
Mechanician — Hunting Idiots — Anecdote — Raillery — Johnson's
Lives — Pope and Martha Blount — An Amateur Physician  —
Cure for Indigestion  —  An Act of Generosity — Despondency —
The Inefficacy of Worldly Goods to give Happiness — Sacchini
— His Improvidence  —  His exquisite Singing — A Tete-a-tete —
Pride or no Pride — Dr.Burney — Signs of Long Life — Imaginary
Evils — A Dinner Party — Montague Burgoyne — Dr.  Johnson —
His Generosity — The Amende Honorable — Mr.  Pepys — A New
Acquaintance — An Irish Member — A Strange jMixture — A
Caricature of a Caricature — Boswell — A Character — Volubility
— An Irish Rattle — Mr.  Seward's Mode of finding a Cicerone.

56 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

PART II.
1781.

Diary continued.

Streatham,  June 25. —  I sent you off a most sad
morsel,  my clearest Susy,  but receiving no news of
James bad really so much sunk me,  that I could
hardly support my spirits with decency.  Nothing
better has happened since;  but as all help of evil
is out of my power,  I drive from my mind the ap-
prehension of it as much as I am able,  and keep,  and
will keep,  my fears and horrors in as much subjection
as possible.  You will let me know,  I am sure,  when
you get any intelligence,  and you will,  I earnestly
hope,  keep your own mind quiet till it arrives.  There
is never such a superfluity of actual happiness as to
make it either rational or justifiable to feed upon ex-
pected misery.  That portion of philosophy which
belongs to making the most of the present day,  grows
upon me strongly ;  and,  as I have suffered infinitely
from its neglect,  it is what I most encourage,  and,
indeed,  require.

I will go on with a little journaHsing,  though I have
now few things,  and still fewer people,  to mention.

Wednesday,  June 26th. — Dr.  Johnson,  who had
been in town some days,  returned,  and Mr.  Crutchley
came also,  as well as my father.  I did not see the two
latter till summoned to dinner  ;  and then Dr.  Johnson

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  57

seizing my band,  while with one of his own he gave me
a no very gentle tap on the shoulder,  half drolly and
half reproachfully called out, —

"  Ah,  you little baggage,  you  !  and have you known
how long I have been here,  and never to come to me  ?"

And the truth is,  in whatever sportive mode he ex-
presses it,  he really likes not I should be absent from
him half a minute whenever he is here,  and not in his
own apartment.

Mr.  Crutchley said he had just brought Mr.  Seward
to town in his phaeton,  alive.  He gave a diverting
account of the visit,  which I fancy proved much better
than either party pretended to expect,  as I find Mr.
Seward not only went a day sooner,  but stayed two days
later,  than was proposed  ;  and Mr.  Crutchley,  on his
part,  said he had invited him to repeat his visit at any
time when he knew not in what other manner  *'  to
knock down a day or two."  What curious characters
these are  !  Mr.  Crutchley,  however,  continues the
least fathomable,  not only of these,  but of all the men I
have seen.  I will give you,  therefore,  having,  in-
deed, nothing better to offer,  some further specimens to
judge of.

Dr.  Johnson,  as usual when here,  kept me in chat
with him in the library after all the rest had dis-
persed ;  but when Mr.  Crutchley returned again,  he
went up-stairs,  and,  as I was finishing some work I had
in hand,  Mr.  Crutchley,  either from civility or a sud-
den turn to loquacity,  forbore his books,  to talk.

Among other folks,  we discussed the two rival
duchesses,  Rutland and Devonshire.  '^The former,"
he said,  "  must,  he fancied,  be very weak and silly,  as
he knew that she endured being admired to her face,
and complimented perpetually,  both upon her beauty

58 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

and her dress  :*'  and when I asked whether he was one
who joined in trying her  —

'*Me!"  cried he;  "no,  indeed!  I never com-
plimented any hody  ;  that is,  I never said to any body
a thing I did not tliink,  unless I was openly laughing
at them,  and making sport for other people."

"  Oh,"  cried I,  "if every body went by this rule,  what
a world of conversation would be curtailed !  The
Duchess of Devonshire,  I fancy,  has better parts."

"Oh yes;  and a fine,  pleasant,  open countenance.
She came to my sister's once,  in Lincolnshire,  when I
was there,  in order to see hare-hunting,  which was
then quite new to her."

"She is very amiable,  I believe,"  said I ;  "  for all
her friends love and speak highly of her."

"Oh,  yes,  very much so;  perfectly good-humoured
and unaffected.  And her horse was led,  and she was
frightened  ;  and we told her that was the hare,  and that
was the dog ;  and the dog pointed at the hare,  and the
hare ran away from the dog ;  and then she took cou-
rage, and then she was timid  ; — and,  upon my word,  she
did it all very prettily  !  For my part,  I liked it so well,
that in half an hour I took to my own horse,  and rode
away."

After this,  w^e began more seriously to talk upon
happiness and misery ;  and I accused him of having
little sense of either,  from the various strange and des-
perate speeches which he is continually making  ;  such
as those I told you,  of his declaring he cared not il*  he
was to be shut up in the Exchequer for the rest of his
life ;  and as to Mrs.  Piumbe  —  the stupidest of all
women  —  he had as lieve as not pass the rest. of his
days with her  :  and during this last visit,  when the
horrors of a convent w^ere enumerating by Mrs.  Thrale,

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  59

he asserted that there was nothing but prejudice in
preferring any other mode of life,  since every mode was,
in fact,  alike.

"  Well,"  said he,  '^  and custom will make any thing
endured ;  though a great deal of all this must be given
to mere talk without meaning ;  for as to living with
Mrs.  Plumbe,  I protest I would not spend an hour with
her to save me from ruin,  nor with any body I did not
like.  I cannot even make common visits to people
unless I like them.  But the few I do like,  perhaps
nobody ever liked equally.  I have,  indeed,  but one
wish or thought about them ;  and that is,  to be with
them not only every day,  but every hour.  And I never
change,  and never grow tired  :  nobody in the world
has less taste for variety."

Afterwards he asserted that nobody ever died of
grief.  I did not agree with him;  for I do,  indeed,
believe it is a death but too possible.

''  I judge,"  said he,  "  as people are too apt to judge,
by myself;  I am sure  /  have no affections that can
kill me."

"  I can easily believe that,"  said I,  ''  and I fancy
very few people have ;  but,  among them,  I should
certainly never number those who settle themselves
into a philosophic coldness and apathy that renders all
things equal to them,  and the Convent or the Exchequer
the same as any other places."

"  Why,  a little use would make them so,"  said he,
lauohins:.  "  However,  I believe I have had as much
delight one way as any man breathing ;  and that is,  in
hunting.  I have pursued that with an enthusiasm that
has been madness.  I have been thrown from my horse
and half killed,  and mounted her again and gone on.
I have been at it till every one has been tired out ;  but

60 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

myself never.     I have juiiiped from my horse to catch
a dh-ty hound in my arms and kiss it !"

"  Well,"  cried I,  "  and does this last  ?"

"Why,  no,"  cried he,  "  thank Heaven!  not quite so
bad now.  To be sure,  'tis the most contemptible
delight that ever man took,  and 1 never knew three
men in the world who pursued it with equal pleasure
that were not idiots.  Those,  however,"  said he after-
wards, "  are,  I believe,  the most happy who have most
affections  ;  even the pain of such has pleasure with it."

This from a man whose evident effort is to stifle
every affection,  nay,  every feeling,  of the soul !

*'  I do not,"  continued he,  "  believe that any grief in
the world ever out-lasted a twelvemonth."

"  A twelvemonth,"  said I,  '^  spent in real sorrow is a
long,  long time indeed.  I question myself if it almost
can last or be supported longer."

After this,  upon my saying I supposed him hardly a
fair judge of affliction,  as I believed him a man deter-
mined to extinguish every feeling that led to it,  he
grew very unexpectedly grave and communicative,  and
told me he had had two calamities as heavy and as
bitter as any body could have or could feel.

'*  And yet,"  said he,  "I found I got the better of
them.  I was ill  —  I lost my appetite  —  I could not
sleep  —  I had a fever  ;  yet in time all these complaints
were gone,  and I got well,  and lived on much as
usual."

One of these calamities he then explained to have
been the loss of his mother,  whom I find he quite
adored  ;  and he seems still to wonder how he survived
her.  The other he seemed half inclined to mention,
but I did not venture to lead to it,  as it occurred to me
that it was possibly an affair of the heart ;  in which,  if,

178]]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         61

notwithstanding all his assertions of ignorance of /a helle
passion,  he has had a disappointment,  I think much of
the strangeness of his character accounted for.

At dinner he appeared in his riding dress,  prepared
for his  .journey;  and,  during the dessert,  his phaeton
was announced.  Mrs.  Thrale at that time had stepped
out of the room.  He soon after called Miss Thrale
aside,  and proposed taking her two sisters,  Susan and
Sophy,  who are still at home for the bolydays,  a ride in
his phaeton !  He bid her mention it to her mother,
saying,  that if she liked it,  he would defer going till
next morning,  that he might give the little girls this
frolic.

Mrs.  Thrale instantly returned,  and,  thanking him
for his good-nature,  most readily agreed to the pro-
posal ;  though she could not but laugh at it,  after his
sullen refusal to stay at her request.

Friday. — The moment breakfast was over,  Mr.
Crutchley arose,  and was taking leave ;  but Mrs.
Thrale told him,  with an arch laugh,  he had better
stay,  for he would not get mended by going.  He
protested,  however,  that he must certainly go home.

*'  And why?"  cried she  ;    "  what do you go for  ?"

"  Nay,"  cried he,  hesitating,  "  I don't know,  I am
sure  ! "

*'  Never mind him,  madam,"  cried Dr.  Johnson  ;  ''  a
man who knows not why he goes,  knows not why he
stays ;  therefore never heed him."

"Does any body expect you?"  said Mrs.  Thrale.
"  Do you want to see any body  ?"

"Not a soul!"

"Then why can't you stay  ?"

"  No  ;  I can't stay now ;  I'll meet you on Tuesday."

"  If you know so little why you should either go or

62 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

stay,"  said Dr.  Johnson,  "never think about it,  sir;
toss up — that's the shortest way.  Heads or tails!  —  let
that decide."

"  No,  no,  sir,"  answered he  ;  *'  this is but talk,  for I
cannot reduce it to that mere indifference in my own
mind."

*^  What!  must you go,  then?"  said Mrs.  Thrale.

*^I must go,"  returned he,  "upon a system of eco-
nomy."

"  What !  to save vour horses comino:  again  ?"

"  N o ;  but that I may not weary my friends quite
out."

''Oh,  your friends are the best judges for them-
selves," said Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "do you think you can go
any where that your company will be more desired  ?"

"Nay,  nay,"  cried Dr.  Johnson,  "after such an
excuse as that,  your friends have a right to practise
Irish hospitality,  and lock up your bridle."

The matter was still undecided when Mrs.  Thrale
called him to walk out with her.

In about two hours,  and when I thought he was
certainly gone,  he came into the library,  where I was
reading Sherlock's flippant but entertaining letters,
and said, —

"  A good morning to you,  ma'am."

"  Are you going at last,"  cried I,  "in all this heat ?"

"  No/'  cried he  ;  "  I am upon a new plan now.  I
have sent my man to Sunning-hill,  and I am going
now to see if I can stop him ;  for,  in spite of all my
resolves,  I find tl^ere is no resisting the pleasures of
this place."

"  There is,  indeed,  no resisting Mrs.  Thrale,"  said
I ;  "  but wh}^  indeed,  should you resist her  ?"

Oh,"  cried he,  in atone half vexed,  half laughing^

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  63

*'  I wish with all my heart I was at Jericho at this
very moment."

He then wished me good-by,  and was ofF;  leaving
me,  indeed,  little better able to judge his actual cha-
racter than the first day I saw him.

At dinner,  accordingly,  he returned,  and is now to
stay till Tuesday.

^'  ^  ^  ^  ^

I have very often,  though I mention them not,  long
and melancholy discourses with Dr.  Johnson,  about our
dear deceased master,  whom,  indeed,  he regrets inces-
santly ;  but I love not to dwell on subjects of sorrow
when I can drive them away,  especially to you,  upon
this account,  as you were so much a stranger to that
excellent friend,  whom you only lamented for the sake
of those who survived him.

#  #  #  *  #

The receipt of your second letter,  ray dearest Susy,
has so much animated and comforted me,  that I can
now go back to give you a better account of what
passed here after the receipt of the first.

While we were at church on Sunday morning,  we
heard a sermon,  upon which,  by means of a speech I
chanced to make,  we have been talking ever since.
The subject was treating of humility,  and declaiming
against  /^nWe;  in the midst of which,  Mrs.  Thrale
whispered, —

*'  This sermon is all against us ;  that is,  four of us  :
Queeny,  Burney,  Susan,  and I,  are all as proud as
possible  —  Mr.  Crutchley and Sophy are humble
enough."

"  Good heavens  !"  cried I,  "  Mr.  Crutchley  !  —  why
he is the proudest among us ! "

This speech she instantly repeated,  and just at that

64 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

moment the preacher said,  —  "Those who are the
weakest are ever tlie soonest puffed up."

He instantly made me a bow,  with an expressive
laugh,  that thanked me for the compliment.  To be
sure it happened most untimely.

As soon as we came out of church,    he called

out,

"Well,  Miss Buriiey,  this is what I never can for-
give !     Am  /  so proud  ?  "

^^  I am sure if you are,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  you
have imposed upon me,  for I always thought you the
humblest man I knew.  Look how Burney casts up
her eyes!  Why are you so proud,  after all,  Mr.
Crutchley?"

"I hope not,"  cried he,  rather gravely;  "but I
little thought of ever going to Streatham Church to
hear I was the proudest man in it."

"Well,  but,"  said I,  "  does it follow you certainly
are so because  /  say so  ? "

"  Why yes,  I suppose I am if you see it,  for you are
one that see all things and people right."

"  Well,  it's very odd,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I wonder
how she found you out."

"/wonder,"  cried I,  laughing,  "  how t/om missed
finding him out."

"  Oh !  worse and worse  ! "  cried he.  "  Why there  's
no bearing this  !"

"  I protest,  then,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  he has always
taken me in ;  he seemed to me the humblest creature
I knew  ;  always speaking so ill of himself — always
depreciating all that belongs to him."

"  Why,  I did not say,"  quoth I,  "  that he had more
vanity than other men  ;  on the contrary,  I think he
has none."

1781]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         65

*' Well clistinguislied,"  cried she;  '^a man may be
proud enough,  and yet have no vanity."

"  Well,  but what is this pride?"  cried Mr.  Crutch-
ley — "  what is it shewn in?  —  what are its symptoms
and marks?"

"  A general contempt,"  answered I,  undaunted,  "  of
every body and of every thing."

"  Well said.  Miss Burney  ! "  exclaimed Mrs.  Thrale.
"  Why that 's true enough,  and so he has."

*' A total indiiference,"  continued I,  "of what is
thought of him by others,  and a disdain alike of hap-
piness or misery."

"  Bravo,  Burney  !"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  *' that's true
enough ! "

"  Indeed,"  cried Mr.  Crutchley,  "  you are quite mis-
taken. Indeed,  nobody in the world is half so anxious
about the opinions of others  ;  I am w^retched — I am
miserable if I think myself thought ill of;  not,  indeed,
by every body,  —  not by Mr.  Cator,  nor Mr.  Perkins,
nor Mr.  Barclay,  —  but by those whose good opinion I
have tried:  —  there if I fail,  no man can be more un-
happy."

''  Oh,  perhaps,"  returned I,  "  there may be two or
three people in the world you may wish should think
well of you,  but that is nothing to the general cha-
racter."

"  Oh,  no  !  man}^  more.  I am now four-and-thirty,
and perhaps,  indeed,  in all my life I have not tried to
gain the esteem of more than four-and-thirty people,
but "

"  Oh,  leave out the thirty !"  cried I,  "  and then you
may be nearer the truth."

''  No,  indeed  ;  ten,  at least,  I daresay I have tried
for,  but,  perhaps,  I have not succeeded with two.    How-

YOL.  II.  ,  F

66 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

ever,  I am thus even with the workl ;  for if it likes me
not,  I can do without it,  — I can live alone  ;  and that,
indeed,  I prefer to any thing- 1 can meet with  ;  for those
with whom I like to live are so much ahove me,  that
I sink into nothing-  in their society  ;  so I think it best
to run away from them."

*'  That is to say,"  cried I,  "  you are angry you can-
not yourself excel,  —  and this is not pride  !"

"  Why no,  indeed  ;  but it is mekuiclioly to be always
behind  — to licar conversation in wliicli one is unable
to join "

"  Unwilling,"  quoth I,  "you mean."

"  No,  indeed,  but really unable  ;  and therefore what
can I do so well as to run home  't As to an inferior,  1
hope I think that of nobody  ;  and as to my equals,  and
such as I am on a par with,  Heaven knows I can ill
bear them! — I would rather live alone to all eternity  !"

This conversation lasted till we got home,  when Mrs.
Tlirale said, —

"Well,  Mr.  Crutchley,  has she convinced you?"

"  I don't know,"  cried I,  "  but he has convinced me."

"Why how you smote him,"  cried  ^Irs.  Thrale ;
"  but I tliink you make your part good as you go on."

"  The great difference,"  said 1,  "  which I think there
is between Mr.  Seward and Mi-.  Crutchley,  who in
some things are very much alike,  is this,  —  ]Mr.  Seward
has a great deal of vanity and no pride,  lSh\  Crutchley
a great deal of pride and no vanity."

"  Just,  and true,  and wise  !"  said dear Mrs.  Thrale,
"for Seward is always talking of himself,  and always
with approbation  ;  Mr.  Crutchley seldom mentions
himself,  and when he does,  it is with dislike.  And
which have  /,  most pride or most vanity?"

"  Oh,  most vanity,  ccrio  !"  quoth I.

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  67

''  And which have you  ? "  said Mr.  Crutchley to
Qiieeny.

"  I don't know,"  answered she.

^  ^  •7?  ^  Tl*

Some time after,  while I was again reading Sher-
lock's "Letters"  in the library,  Mr.  Crutchley came
in.

"  Well,  ma'am,"  cried he,  "  I have not forgiven
this yet ;  though I confess you somewhat softened off
the charge,  by all that distinction about the pride and
vanity ;  but still I suppose even that was only pre-
tence.''

"  No,  no,"  cried I,  "  all I said I think;  though all
I think to be sure I did not say  ! "

And I went on with my book.

"Well,"  cried he,  "I shall take Johnson's  *  Life of
Pope,'  and go to the green bench in the wood,  and get
it by heart.  If I have no ideas of my own,  I can do
nothing better than get some of his.  This part of
pride I am ready to own,  and I wish nothing more
than to cultivate it — and that is — from those who recede
from me,  to recede yet faster from them.  This much
I would always vvish to do."

"  I can very easily credit it,"  cried L

"Why,  I don't know neither,"  cried he;  "I don't
think I do it as much as I ought to do  ;  I think I
begin to grow more cringing,  and sneaking,  and
worldly."

"  How ridiculous!"  cried I ;  for certainly cringing,
sneaking,  and worldly,  are three things most distant
from him.

"  But as to all this pride of which you accuse me,  T
declare I believe no man has so little."

"*  Look here,"  interrupted I,  "  Mr.  Sherlock liimself

68 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

says be is  *  modeste a Texces.'  See Ijut by tbat bow
people know tbeir own cbaracters."

Tbis was a finisbing stroke  ;  for tbe vanity and
flippancy and conceit of Sberlock we bave all been
railing at ever since we took to reading bis book,
wbicb was about a week ago ;  and Mr.  Crutcbley
himself bas been tbe most struck witb it.

He laugbed and went off,  not,  I believe,  affronted,
but I fancy somewbat disturbed,  wbicb was more tban
I meant he should be,  though,  in fact,  all I said I
believe to be strictl}^  true ;  for though,  in the strange
composition of his character,  there is a diffidence of
himself,  the most unaffected I ever,  except in Ed-
ward Burney,  saw,  —  a diffidence Avbich makes the
misery of his life,  by inducing him to believe himself
always de trap,  —  he has yet a contempt of almost all
others,  which,  however free from vanity,  can possibly
have no other spring than pride.

At dinner we bad Sir Philip Gierke and Piozzi ;
and Mr.  Crutcbley told me  "  my friend"  Mr.  Merlin
was come.

**  Is he my friend?"  cried I  ;  "be says you are his
particular enemy ! "

,.  And this,  indeed,  is now become our hack speech
to Mr.  Crutcbley,  whose supposed enmity to Merlin
is,  indeed,  a stretch of that absurd creature's imagina-
tion, even more than usually ridiculous.

When Merlin came in I gave the hint of your story
about Sir Christopher Whitchcott,  whom Mr.  Crutcbley
knows,  and says is  "^  one of his hunting idiots,"  and,
therefore,  he endeavoured to draw him into telling the
tale,  by talking of drinking.  Merlin was quiet a long
time,  but when at last Mr.  Crutcbley said, —

"  In England no man is ever obliged to drink more

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  69

than he pleases ! "  he suddenly called out,  and with a
most raeful face, —

*'  Oh,  certainly I beg your pardon  !  there is a person,
Sir Christopher Whitchcott,  which certainly does do it !"

"Do what,  Mr.  Merlin?"

"  Why certainly,  sir,  he does give,  that is,  a very
great reprimand,  to any person that does not drink as
much as himself."

They then questioned him,  and he gave several of
the particulars of his disgrace ;  though,  being sepa-
rately dragged from him,  they were by no means so
diverting as when you told them me.

^  vf*  ^  ^  ^

At supper we had only Sir Philip and Mr.  Crutchley.
The conversation of the morning was then again re-
newed.

"Oh!"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "what a smoking did
Miss Burney give Mr.  Crutchley  !"

"A smoking,  indeed!"  cried he.  "  Never had I
such a one before  !  Never did I think to get such a
character  !     I had no notion of it."

'^Nay,  then,"  said I,  "  why should you,  now?"

•' But what is all this?"  cried Sir Philip,  delighted
enough at any mischief between Mr.  Crutchley and
me,  or between any male and female,  for he only wishes
something to go forward,  and thinks a quarrel or dis-
pute next best to fondness and flirting.

"  Why,  Miss Burney,"  answered she,  "  gave Mr.
Crutchley this morning a noble trimming.  I had
always thought him very humble,  but she shewed me
my mistake,  and said I had not distinguished pride
from vanity."

"  Oh,  never was I so mauled in my life!"  said he.

*  W W  ^  ^

70 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

Enougli,  however,  of this rattle,  which lasted till we
all went to bed,  and which Mrs.  Thrale most kindly
kept up,  by way of luoting me from thinking,  and
which Mr.  Crutchley himself bore with the utmost
good nature,  from having noticed that I was out of
spirits.

Monday,  July 2d. —  In a ttte-a-ttt.e I chanced to
have with Mr.  Crutchley,  he again gave me reason
to recollect the notion he lately put in my head,  that
he is still suffering in his own mind from some former
bitter disappointment.

We were talking over Johnson's  "  Life of Pope,"
and after mutually giving our opinions upon various
passages,  and agreeing to prefer it altogether to any
other of the Lives,  he asked me if I had remarked how
beautifully he had written upon Pope's fondness for
Patty Blount.  And then he looked out the paragraph
and read it : —

*'  Their acquaintance began early  ;  the life of each
was pictured on the other's mind  ;  their conversation,
therefore,  was endearing,  for when they met there was
an immediate coalition of congenial notions.  Perhaps
he considered her unwillingness to approach the bed of
sickness,  as female weakness or human frailty;  perhaps
he was conscious to himself of peevishness and impa-
tience, or,  though he was offended by her inattention,
might yet consider her merit as overbalancing her fault;
and,  if he had suffered his heart to be alienated from
her,  he could have found nothing that might fill her
place;  he could only have shrunk within himself;  it
was too late to transfer his confidence or his fondness.''

The manner in which he read this paragraph was
so strikingly tender and feeling,  that it could not,
I think,  proceed merely from the words;   and when

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  71

he came to  "he might consider her merit as orer-
halancing her fault,"  he exclaimed,  "  How impos-
sihle that a thing one loves can ever for a moment
offend one ! "  And when he had done it,  he read it all
over again,  with 3^et more sensibility  ;  and,  not yet
satisfied,  he repeated it a third time.

Poor Mr.  Crutchley  !  I begin to believe his heart
much less stubborn than he is willing to have it
thought ;  and I do now really but little doubt either
that some former love sits heavy upon it,  or that he is
at this moment suffering the affliction of a present and
hopeless one  :  if the latter is the case,  Miss  *^=^'^%  I
am next to certain,  is the object.  I may possibly,
however,  be mistaken in both conjectures,  for he is too
unlike other people to be judged by rules that will suit
them.

We had much literary chat upon this occasion,  which
led us to a general discussion,  not only of Pope's
Life,  but of all his works,  which we tried who should
out-praise.  He then got a book to take to his favourite
bench,  and made me,  as he left the room,  an apology
the most humble,  for having interrupted or taken up
any part of my time,  which could not otherwise have
but been spent better  ;  though again,  he assured me
that he had not yet forgiven my charge against him.

Two minutes after he came back for another book,
and while he was seeking it Mr.  Evans came in.  They
then both of them sat down to chat,  and Mr.  Seward was
the subject.  iMr.  Evans said he had met him the day
before in the Park,  with Mrs.  Nesbitt and another lady,
and that he was giving INIrs.  Nesbitt a pi-escription.  In
his medical capacity he seems to rise daily :  'tis a most
strange turn to take merely for killing ennui!  But,
added to quacking both himself and his friends,  he has

72 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

lately,  I hear,  taken also to making a rather too liheral
use of his bottle,  thinking-,  I suppose,  tliat generous
wine will destroy even tlie blue devils.  I am really
sorry,  though,  for this,  as it may be attended with
serious evil to him.

'^  When he was at my place,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,
"  he did himself up pretty handsomely  ;  he ate cherries
till he complained most bitterly of indigestion,  and he
poured down Madeira and Port most plentifully,  but
without relief Then he desired to have some pepper-
mint-water, and he drank three glasses ;  still that
would not do,  and he said he must have a large quan-
tity of ginger.  We had no such thing in the house.
However,  he had brought some,  it seems,  with him,
and then he took that,  but still to no purpose.  At last,
he desired some brandy,  and tossed off a glass of that ;
and,  after all,  he asked for a dose of rhubarb.  Then
we had to send and inquire all over the house for this
rhubarb,  but our folks had hardly ever heard of such
a thing.  I advised him to take a good bumper of gin
and gunpowder,  for that seemed almost all he had left
untried."

In the afternoon Mrs.  Byron came;  and Mr.
Crutchley,  who has a violent aversion to her,  not-
withstanding she is particularly courteous to him,  con-
trived, the moment he could,  to make his escape,  and
hid himself till she was gone.

^::  #  ^=  ^  #

Mrs.  Thrale's sweetness to me is inexpressible ;  but
the generosity she is practising at this time to Mr.
Perkins,  whom she does not like,  though she thinks
herself obliged to him,  exalts her character yet more
highly than her kindness to me.  Every thing in her
power is she doing to establish him comfortably in the

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  73

brewhouse,  even to the lending all her own money that
is in the stocks.

The other morning she ran hastil}^  into my room,
her eyes full of tears,  and cried, —

"  What an extraordinary man is this Crutchley !
I declare he has quite melted me  !  He came to me
just now,  and thinking I was uneasy I could do no
more for Perkins,  though he cared not himself if the
man were drowned,  he offered to lend him a thousand
pounds,  merely by way of giving pleasure to me  !"

His fondness,  indeed,  for Mrs.  Thrale and her daugh-
ter is the most singular I have ever seen ;  he scarcely
exists out of their sight,  and holds all others so inferior
to them,  that total solitude seems his dearest alter-
native to their society.  Dr.  Johnson,  indeed,  he
honours and reveres ;  and myself I believe he very
■well esteems  ;  but I question,  nevertheless,  whether
he would desire to see either of us but for our con-
nexion in this house.

#  #  #  ^  *

When Mrs.  Thrale came back,  she brought with her
Mr.  Henry Smith,  who dined here,  as did also that
ridiculous Merlin,  who contrived to divert Miss Thrale
and me with his inconceivable absurdities.

Wednesday,  June 4th. — Mrs.  Thrale was obliged to
go to town again to-day upon business with the ex-
ecutors, and she brought back an account of Mr.
Crutchley that has really given me very much con-
cern ;  he was very far,  she says,  from well,  and ex-
tremely feverish.  She begged him to stay in town
and have a physician,  but he declared he would go
instantly to Sunning- hill.  She then asked him tcf
come hither and be nursed ;  but that also he declined  ;
and when she urged him to take great care of himself,

74 DIARY AND LETTEIIS  [PaRT II.

he said it was of small matter whether he did or not,
since he cared not whether he lived or died,  as life
was of no value to him,  for he had no enjoyment
of it.

How strange,  sad,  and perverse  !  With every pos-
sible means of happiness,  as far as speculation reaches,
to be thus unaccountably miserable.  He has goodness,
understanding,  benevolence,  riches,  and independence,
and with all these a something is wanting without
which they are all as nothing.

He acknowledo-ed to her readily that he was never
so well pleased as wdien at Streatham,  and spoke of its
four inmates,  Mrs.  and Miss Thrale,  Dr.  Johnson,  and
F.  B.  in terms of praise bordering upon enthusiasm;
protesting he believed the world contained not four
other such folks,  and that it was a society which made
all other insupportable.  Yet,  he would not be pre-
yailed upon to come again,  though he knew not,  he
said,  how he should forbear,  before the week was out,
hanging or drowning himself!

In ten days'  time,  hovrever,  he is obliged to be again
in town,  in order to meet  ]\Jrs.  Thrale at the brew-
house,  and then he expects his two sisters,  of whom he
is excessively fond,  to come from Lincolnshire on a visit
to him of some months.  His mind then will,  I hope,
be easier,  and more of that happiness which his cha-
racter deserves,  and his situation in life offers,  will be
enjoyed by him.

^::  #  #  #  *

Streatham,  July 16th.  —  I will give you now,  my
dear girls,  some little account how the world goes
with me;  but,  in return,  if you do not both communi-
cate something,  I shall take it for the  "hint of an in-
sult,"  and not,    like poor    ]Merlin,   proceed just the

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  75

same as if no such  "  disagreeable compliment"  had
been paid me.

You will believe I was not a little surprised to see
Sacchini.  He is going to the Continent with Piozzi,
and Mrs.  Thrale invited them both to spend the last
day at Streatham,  and from hence proceed to Margate.

Sacchini is the mere ghost of what he was,  in almost
every respect ;  so altered a man in so few years I never
saw.  I should not even have known him had his
name not been spoken  ;  and the same ill health which
has so much impaired his person,  and robbed him of
more beauty than any other man ever possessed,  seems
also to have impaired his mental faculties.  He is no
longer pleasant now,  even when he tries to be gay;
and that p'ood-breedino-  we so much admired in him
is degenerated into too much obsequiousness.  The
change in his circumstances,  and his continual distress
for money,  no doubt have much contributed to this
general decadence.

He is obliged to steal away privately,  lest his cre-
ditors should stop him.  He means to try his fortune
at Paris,  where he expects to retrieve it,  and then to
return to London,  and begin the world anew.

That a man of such extraordinary merit,  after so
many years giving to this country such works as must
immortaHse him,  should at last be forced to steal away
from it,  made me,  I must own,  feel more compassion
for him than a man whose own misconduct has been
the sole occasion of his distresses has any fair claim
to.  But to see talents which to all the world can
give such delight,  so useless to the owner,  is truly
melancholy.

I pressed him very much to sing,  and,  though some-
what reluctantly,  he complied.     He seemed both gra-

76 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

tified and surprised by my civility and attention to
liim,  wliicli lie must long have observed were with-
drawn, and which nothing but my present pity for
him would have revived.  He inquired after all the
family,  and  "  Miss Susanne"  twice,  and reminded me
of many things which had passed upon the commence-
ment of our acquaintance with him — his one pea,  his
German story,  and his Watchman and the Olives ;
and we had much talk about sweet Millico.

The first song he sang,  beginning  "  En quel amabil
volto,"  you may perhaps know,  but I did not :  it is a
charming mezza bravura.  He and Piozzi then sung
together the duet of the  "  Amore Soldato ;"  and no-
thing could be much more delightful ;  Piozzi taking
pains to sing his very best,  and Sacchini,  with his soft
but delicious whisper,  almost thrilling me by his ex-
quisite and pathetic expression.  They then went
through that opera,  great part of  '*  Creso,"  some of
"  Erifile,"  and much of '^  Rinaldo."

Sacchini also sung  "  Poveri affetti miei,"  and most
divinely indeed.  I begged him to sing  "  Dov'  e s'af-
fretti per me la morta ;"  he could hardl}^  recollect it,
and what he recollected he could hardly sing;  it
required more exertion than he can now use without
pain and fatigue.  I have not,  however,  had so much
pleasure from music since Pacchierotti left England,
and I am sure I shall have none like it till he again
returns.

#  #  ^  #  *

Streatham,  August.  —  I fear you will think me a
long time,  my dearest Susy,  without giving any sign
of life ;  but your letter of yesterday,  for which I much
thank you,  has given me suflacient compunction for
my silence to cause my seizing my pen,  and go back to

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  77

Monday,  July 30th. — Mrs.  Thrale ran out to meet
me upon my return,  in the court-yard ;  and then we
explicated about the letters,  and the coach,  and so
forth,  and,  as I came,  all went well.  Then,  leadmg
the way into the library,  she called out, —

^'  Mr.  Crutchley,  I have got my Tyo again!"

I was somewhat surprised to find him here,  as I
had only expected him to meet the great party the
next day  ;  but it seems he escorted his guests,  Mrs.
and Miss Thrale,  and Dr.  Johnson,  from Sunning-
hill Park"  on Saturday,  and was not yet returned
thither.

His park and house,  Mrs.  Thrale says,  are extremely
fine  ;  his sister is a sensible and unaffected woman ;  he
entertained them quite magnificently;  and his character
among his own people,  and in his own neighbourhood,
is so high,  that she has left his place with double the
esteem,  if possible,  that she entered it.  He is indeed,
I believe sincerely,  one of the worthiest and most
amiable creatures in the world,  however full of sjjleen,
oddities,  and minor foibles.

#  ^-  #  #  #

In the afternoon we had walking and music ;  and
in the evening my father and Mrs.  Thrale seated
themselves out of doors,  just before the Blue-room
windows,  for coolth and chat ;  and then Mr.  Crutchley
came up to me,  and we had a very long conversation
together.

I have not time to scribble it all ;  but it began by
talking of the late party at his house at Sunning-hill ;
and I told him  —  for I believed nothing could give him
greater pleasure — how well satisfied Mrs.  and Miss
Thrale had returned from it.  And then he said how
high an honour he had thought it,  both from them and

78 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaHT II.

from Dr.  Johnson,  and added,  that he had never been
happier in his life than during these two days.

But as lie has never forgotten,  and never,  I believe,
will forget,  the conversation I had with him so long
ago about his pride,  and to which he has alluded
twenty times a-day every time I have sir.ce been in his
company,  so now,  though how I do not remember,  he
presently,  and quite naturally,  according to custom,
recurred to it.

"Well,"  cried I,  "  I can really hardly tell myself
what made me say all that stuff to you  ;  but this
I must own,  had I then doubted its justice,  I should
not now,  it dwells so with you !"

"Oh,  but,"  cried he,  "it does not d^vell with me
from consciousness,  but only because I am afraid it
must be true,  as you say it;  for I take it for granted
you know,  and must be right."

"  No,  no,"  cried I,  "  'tis merely from feeling it.  If
I had said you were very mean,  illiberal,  ill-natured,
you would never have thought of it again."

"  Oh,  yes,  I should  —  I should have thought you
knew what you said."

"  No,  I beg your parfton  ;  you would have known it
was a mere jest,  and have thought of it no more than
if I had said you were but three feet high,  and kept a
cobbler's stall."

"  But you could not have said that,"  answered he,
laughing,  "  or if you could,  you would not."

"The other,  however,"  said I,  "comes home,  and
therefore you think so much of it."

"  I hope,"  said he,  very seriously,  "you have mis-
taken me."

"  Nay,"  cried I,  a little shocked at the unexpected
impi'GssioTi iriy ca«ua.l and unpremeditated lecture has

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  79

made,  "  you must remember I told you at the same
time,  that,  though what I said I thought,  I did not say
all I thought."

"  But all,"  cried he,  "that remains behind,  I take
it for o'ranted is so much worse."

This was a net — but I saw it ;  so it was S2^read in
vain.

"  My liking to live so much alone,"  continued he,
^*  which is,  perhaps,  what seems proud,  proceeds
merely from the great difficulty there is to meet with
any society that is good."

"  But that difficulty,"  quoth I,  "  is a part of the
pride  ;  were you less fastidious,  you would find society
as other people find it."

"  Nay,  now,"  said he,  '^  but even about horses I am
not proud  "  [you must know he is very curious about
his horses],  "  for I care not what looking horse I have  ;
I never think of his appearance,  nor mind if half the
people I meet think how ill I am mounted."

"  Yes/'  returned I,  "provided those who are judges
knev/  him to be good."

^'  Why,  yes;  I should not choose to ride a horse
that people who knew any thing of the matter would
call a bad one."

"Ah!"  cried I,  reproachfully,  "and this is not
pride ! "

This,  again,  was coming home,  and he had little to
answer,  but said,  in a laughing way, —

"  Now I'll tell you when I can be happy enough:
when I have nobody at all at my place but workmen ;
and then I niggle after them up and down,  and say to
myself — Weil,  I think I am somewhat better than
these!''

"  Hov/  ridiculous!"  cried I;  "  but such speeches as

80 DIARY AM)  LETTERS  [ParT II.

these,  instead of proving-  your liuniility,  are so absurd
and overstrained,  tliey pass literally for nothing."

^-  *  #  ^c  *

Miss Thrale went away to have her hair dressed,
and I stayed in the library reading*.  Mr.  Crutchley,
in about half an hour,  returned there again,  saying, —

"  So,  I have prevailed upon Miss Thrale at last to
go and spend her time better?''

"  She's gone,"  said I,  "  to have her hair dressed,  if
that is better."

"  I suppose it is what she likes,"  answered he.  '^  Is
that a long business with you ladies?"

"  O yes,  terribly long !  1 only w^ish all our hair was
combed as straight as yours was some time ago,  fright-
ful as I thought it."

We afterwards talked of my father,  whom he knows
but very slightly ;  he said of him,  however,  things
more pleasing for me to hear than any other upon any
subject in the world would have been  ;  for he told me
he never saw any man he thought more likely to live
long than Dr.  Burney.

"  He is strong-built,"  said he,  "  stout,  and well-knit.
I looked at him particularly,  and never saw an appear-
ance of more true muscular strength,  unencumbered
with flesh  ;  for flesh and bulk have nothing to do
with strength.  I dare say he will be a very long
liver."

^' And what may contribute to that,"  said I,  "will
be the equanimity of his temper ;  for,  with all his
gaiety and sprightliness,  he has more patience,  and
even cheerfulness,  than any body in the world.  And
he is one of those who makes no distresses for himself,
and those he meets with,  whether he will or not,  he
drives away as soon as he possibly can."

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  81

I am not sure I did not mean this ratlier pointedly ;
and so,  I believe,  he took it,  for he exclaimed, —
"  How unlike me  !     /  make every thing a woe  !"
*'That is nothing,"  cried I,  "  but the want of real
evils.     Imaginary woes always follow people who have
no other."

"  Imaginary woes  !  Good Heaven I"  he repeated,
half between his teeth.

A servant at the same time coming in to announce
his phaeton,  he then hoped I shoukl keep well till he
had the pleasure of seeing me again,  and went away.

I have some notion he is half inclined to tell me all
his affairs ;  for,  whenever we are alone together,  he
almost constantly leads to some subject that draws out
melancholy hints of his unhappiness,  though in com-
pany he always pretends to laugh at all feeling,  and
despise all misfortune.  Could I do him any possible
service,  I should be sincerely glad  ;  but as that is very
improbable,  I think such a confidence better avoided
than sought.

At dinner we had a large party of old friends of Mrs.
Thrale.  Lady Frances Burgoyne,  a mighty erect old
lady of the last age,  lofty,  ceremonious,  stiff,  and con-
descending.

Montague Burgoyne,  her son,  and as like any other
son as ever you saw.

Mrs.  Burgoyne,  his wife,  a sweet,  pretty,  innocent,
simple young girl,  just married to him.

Miss Burgoyne,  his eldest sister,  a good,  sensible,
prating old maid.

Miss Kitty Burgoyne,  a younger sister,  equally prat-
ing, and not equally sensible.

Mr.  Ned Hervey,  brother to the bride.

To these were added Mr.  Pepys and Sophy Streat-

VOL.  II.  G

82 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

field  ;  tlie former as entertaining,  the latter as beautiful,
as ever.  We had a very 2:ood day,  but not of a writing
sort.

Dr.  Johnson,  ^vhom I had not seen since hisSunning-
hill expedition,  as he only returned from town to-day,
gave me almost all his attention,  which made me of no
little consequence to the Burgoynes,  v.lio all stared
amain when they saw him make up to me the moment
I entered the room,  and talk to me till summoned to
dinner.

Mr.  Pepys had desired this meeting,  by way of a
sort of reconciliation after the Lyttelton quarrel ;  and
Dr.  .Johnson now made amends for his former vio-
lence, as he advanced to him as soon as he came in,
and liolding cut his hand to him,  received him v>ith a
cordiality he had never shewn him before.  Indeed,
he told me himself,  that  '•  he thought the better of
Mr.  Pepys for all that had passed."  He is as great
a sovled man as a bodied one,  and,  were he less furious
in his passions,  he vrould be demi-diviiie.

Mr.  Pepys also behaved extremely well,  politely
casting aside all reserve or coldness that might be
attj-lbuccd to a lurking ill-will for what had passed.

Steeatiiam. — My poor journal is now so in arrears,
that I forget v.-lioily the date of what I sent you last.
I have,  however,  minutes by me of things,  though
not of times,  and,  therefore,  the chronology not being
very important,  take them,  my dear girls,  promiscu-
ously»      I am still,  I know,  in Angust,  ei voilci tout.

We have now a new character added to our set,  and
one of no small diversion, — Mr.  ]Musgrave,  an Irish
gentleman of fortune,  and member of the Irish Parlia-
ment.    He is tall,  thin,  and agreeable in his face and

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  83

figure ;  is reckoned a good scholar,  has travelled,  arxd
been very well educated.  His manners are impetuous
and abrupt;  his language is high-flown and hyperbo-
lical ;  his sentiments are romantic and tender ;  his
heart is warm and generous ;  his head hot and wrong!
And the whole of his conversation is a mixture the
most uncommon,  of knowledge and triteness,  simplicity
and fury,  literature and folly I

Keep this character in your mind,  and,  contradictory
as it seems,  I will give you,  from time to time,  such
specimens as shall remind you of each of these six
epithets.

He was introduced into this house by Mr.  Seward,
with whom,  and Mr.  Graves of Worcester,  he travelled
into Italy :  and some years ago he was extremely
intimate here.  But,  before my acquaintance was made
at Streatham,  he had returned to Ireland;  v/here,
about a vear since,  he married Miss Cavendish.  Thev
are now,  by mutual consent,  parted.  She is gone to a
sister in France,  and he is come to spend some time
in England by way of diverting his chagrin.

Mrs.  Thrale who,  though open-eyed enough to his
absurdities,  thinks well of the goodness of his heart,
has a real regard for him ;  and he quite adores her,
and quite worships Dr.  Johnson  —  frequently declaring
(for v.diat he once says,  he says continually),  that he
would spill his blood for him, —  or clean his shoes, — or
go to the East Indies to do him any good!  "  I am
never,"  says he,  "  afraid of him;  none but a fool or a
rogue has any need to be afraid of him.  What a fine
old lion  (looking up at his picture)  he is  !  Oh  !  I love
him, —  I honour him, —  I reverence him!  I would
black his shoes for him.  I v»ish I could give him my
night's sleep !"

84 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

These are exclamations  ■svliicli he is makiiio-  con-
tinually.  Mrs.  Thrale lias extremely well said that he
is a caricature of Mr.  Boswell,  who is a caricature,  I
must add,  of all other of Dr.  Johnson's admirers.

The next great favourite he has in the world to our
Doctor,  and the person whom he talks next most of,
is Mr.  Jessop,  who was his school-master,  and whose
praise he is never tired of singing in terms the most
vehement, — quoting his authority for every other thing
he says,  and lamenting our misfortune in not knowing
him.

His third favourite topic,  at present,  is  "  The Life
of Louis XV."  in 4 vols.  Svo.,  lately translated from
the French  ;  and of this he is so extravagantly fond,
that he talks of it as a man might talk of his
mistress,  provided he had so little wit as to talk of her
at all.

Painting,  music,  all the fine arts in their turn,  he
also speaks of in raptures.  He is himself very accom-
plished, plays the violin extremely well,  is a very good
linguist,  and a very decent painter.  But no subject
in his hands fails to be ridiculous,  as he is sure,  by the
abruptness of its introduction,  the strange turn of his
expressions,  or the Hibernian twang of his pronuncia-
tion, to make every thing he says,  however usual or
common,  seem peculiar and absurd.

When he first came here,  upon the present renewal
of his acquaintance at Streatham,  Mrs.  Thrale sent a
summons to her daughter and me to come down-stairs.
We went together  ;  I had long been curious to see him,
and was glad of the opportunity.  The moment Mrs.
Thrale introduced me to him,  he began a warm tloge
of my father,  speaking so fast,  so much,  and so Irish,
that I could hardly understand him.

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  85

That over,  he began upon this book,  entreating Mrs.
Thrale and all of us to read it,  assuring us nothing
could give us equal pleasure,  minutely relating all its
principal incidents with vehement expressions of praise
or abhorrence,  according to the good or bad he men-
tioned ;  and telling us that he had devoted three days
and nio'hts to makino-  an index to it himself!

Then he touched upon his dear school-master,  Mr,
Jessop,  and then opened upon Dr.  Johnson,  whom he
calls  ''  the old lion,"  and who lasted till we left him to
dress.

When we met again at dinner,  and were joined by
Dr.  Johnson,  the incense he paid him,  by his solemn
manner of listening,  by the earnest reverence with
which he eyed him,  and by a theatric start of admira-
tion every time he spoke,  joined to the Doctor's utter
insensibility to all these*  tokens,  made me find infinite
difficulty in keeping my countenance during the whole
meal.  His talk,  too,  is incessant;  no female,  however
famed,  can possibly excel him for volubility.

He told us a thousand strange staring stories,  of
noble deeds of valour and tender proofs of constancy,
interspersed with extraordinary,  and indeed incredible
accidents,  and with jests,  and jokes,  and bon-mots,
that I am sure must be in Joe Miller.  And in the
midst of all this jargon he abruptly called out,  "  Pray,
Mrs.  Thrale,  what is the Doctor's opinion of the
American war?"

Opinion of the American war at this time of day !
We all laughed cruelly ;  yet he repeated his question
to the Doctor,  who,  however,  made no other answer
but by laughing too.  But he is never aiironted with
Dr.  Johnson,  let him do what he will ;  and he seldom
ventures to speak to him till he has asked some other

86 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part ll.

person present for advice 1io\y lie will take such or such
a question.

At night he left us,  and Mr.  Crutchley arrived,
■who came to spend two or three days,  as usual.  Sir
Philip Gierke also was here ;  but I have no time now
to write any account of what passed,  except that I must
and ought to mention that Mr.  Crutchley,  in the pre-
sence of Sir Philip,  is always more respectful to me
than at any other time  ;  indeed,  only then,  for he
troubles not himself with too much ceremony.  But I
believe he does this from a real delicacy of mind,  by
way of marking still more strongly it was the raillery,
not the object of it,  he was so strangely piqued about.

But I told you I thought I had secured his never
more mentioning my charge of his pride.  There I was
mistaken,  as,  for his life,  he cannot forbear.  The day
he ended his visit.  Sir Philip also ended his,  having
only come from Hampshire for a few days ;  and,  as I
wanted much to go down and see my sister,  Mrs.
Thrale ordered her coach,  and took us all thither
herself.

In our way Mr.  Crutchley,  who was in uncommon
spirits,  took it in his head to sing the praises of wine,
(though no man drinks less)  and afterwards of smok-
ing; Mrs.  Thrale all the time combating all he said,
Sir Philip only laughing,  and I,  I suppose,  making
faces.     At last he called out, —

'^  Look at Miss Burney,  how she sits wondering at
my impudence ! "

He expected,  I fancy,  I should contradict this ;  but
not a word did I say  :  so then,  with a little dcqni^  he
added, —

'*  I suppose,  now,  I shall have Impudence added to
the  —  the vanity you gave my character before."

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  87

This mistake I am pretty sure was a wilful one,
by way of passing fur only slightly remembering the
accusation.

"  Vanity  !"  cried I ;  "  when did I charge you with
vanity?"

*'  Well,  what was it then  ? — pride!"

I said nothincr ;  neither choosing to confirm what he
has taken so seriously to heart,  nor to contradict what
I think as strongly as ever.

'^  Pride and impudence!"  continued he,  with a look
at once saucy and mortified  —  '^  a pretty composition,
upon my life  ! "

"  Nay,  nay,"  said I,  "  this is an addition of your
own.  I am sure I never called,  or thought,  you
impudent."

It would be strange if I had ;  for,  on the contrary,
he is an actual male prude  !

"  No,  no  ;  she gave you nothing but the pride,"
said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  she left all the vanity for me!
Saucy that she is !  So you have,  at least,  the higher
fault ;  for vanity is much the meaner of the two.  Lord
Bacon says,  '  A beggar of bread is a better man than a
beggar of a bow;  for the bread is of more worth.'  So
see if you are not best off."

*'  Me best off! "  cried he — ^^  no,  indeed  ;  Miss Burney
thinks better of vanity than pride,  by her giving one
to vou and t'  other to me."

To this,  again,  I would not speak ;  for I could not
well without a new argument,  and the old one is so
long remembered that I am determined to have no
more.

"  If Miss Burney,"  said he presently,  "  thought as
well of me as of you,  I believe I should have reason to
be very well contented.     Should not I?"

88 DIAKY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

"As well of you as of me!"  cried Mrs.  Thrale;
''  why,  if ever I heard such a speech !  No,  indeed,  I
hope not !  I have ahvavs licard her called a very wise
girl!"

*  #  #  #  *

Mrs.  Thrale set me down at home,  and I ran to dear
Etty's,  and saw and kissed lier and her dear haby,
and promised to return to town soon to spend a week
with her.  Mrs.  T.  called for me again at three o'clock,
and I returned to Streatham,  and I spent two days
with only ourselves ; — cest a dire,  Mrs.  and Miss T.  and
Dr.  Johnson,  who is so earnest to have me here always,
that I assure you we know not how to break to him my
intended week's absence !  You may laugh if you
please,  but I can tell you my importance with him
seems continually increasing.  And,  seriously,  I am
sure my gratitude for his kindness goes on crescendo^  in
the same manner.

Well  —  it was,  I think,  Saturday,  August 25th,
that Mrs.  Thrale brought me back.  But first,  we went
together to see Sir Joshua's pictures,  which is always
a feast to me,  and afterwards to see Pine's,  vv^here is
one of Mrs.  Thrale herself;  not like,  I think,  but a
mighty elegant portrait.  We then took up Mr.
Crutchley,  who had come to his town -house upon
business,  and who accompanied us thither for a visit of
three days.

In the evening Mr.  Seward also came.  He has
been making the western tour,  and gave us,  with a
seriousness that kept me continually grinning,  some
account of a doctor,  apothecary,  or chemist,  belonging
to every town at which he had stopped.     And when

1781]  0"F THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  89

we all laughed at his thus following up the faculty,  he
imdauntedly said, —

"  I think it the best way to get information;  I
know no better method to learn what is o:oino;  forward
any where than to send for the chief physician of the
place ;  so I commonly consult him the first day I stop
at a place,  and when I have fee'd him,  and made
acquaintance,  he puts me in a way to find out what is
worth looking at."

A most curious mode of picking up a cicerone !

After this,  still pursuing his favourite topic,  he began
to inquire into the particulars of Mr.  Crutchley's late
illness ;  but that gentleman,  who is as much in the
opposite extreme,  of disdaining even any decent care of
himself,  as Mr.  Seward is in the other,  of devoting
almost all his thoughts to his health,  cut the matter
very short,  and would not talk upon it at all.

"  But,  if I had known sooner,"  said Mr.  Seward,
''  that you were ill,  I should have come to see you."

"Should you?"  cried Mr.  Crutchley,  with a loud
laugh;  "very kind,  indeed!  —  it would have been
charming to see you when I am ill,  when I am afraid
of undertaking you even when well!"

Some time after Sophy Streatfield was talked of, —
Oh,  with how much impertinence !  as if slie was at the
service of any man who would make proposals to her  !
Yet Mr.  Seward spoke of her with praise and tender-
ness all the time,  as if,  though firmly of this opinion,  he
was warmly her admirer.  From such admirers and
such admiration Heaven guard me !  Mr.  Crutchley
said but little  ;  but that little was bitter enough.

"  However,"  said Mr.  Seward,  "  after all that can
be said,  there is nobody whose manners are more
engaging,  nobody more amiable than the little Sophy ;

90 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

and she is certainly very pretty ;  I must own I have
always been afraid to trust myself with her."

Here  ^Ir.  Crutchley looked very sneeringly.

"  Nay,  'squire,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  '^  she is very
dangerous,  I can tell you ;  and if she had you at a fair
trial,  she would make an impression that would soften
even your hard heart."

"  No need of any further trial,"  answered he,  laugh-
ing, "  for she has done that already ;  and so soft  ^vas
the impression that it is absolutely all dissolved!  —
melted quite away,  and not a trace of it left !  "

iMr.  Seward then proposed that she should marry
Sir John Miller,  who has just lost his wife;  and very
gravely said,  he had a great mind to set oat for Tun-
bridge,  and carry her wath him to Bath,  and so make
the match without delay  !

*'  But surely,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  '^  if you fail,  you
will think yourself bound in honour to marry her
yourself?''

"Why,  that's the thing,"  said he;  "no,  I can't
take the little Sophy myself ;  I should have too many
rivals ;  no,  that won't do."

How abominably conceited and sure these preity
gentlemen are !  However,  Mr.  Crutchley here made a
speech that half won my heart.

"  1 wish,"  said he,  "  Miss Streatfield was here at
this moment to cuff you,  Seward  !"

**  Cuff me  !"  cried he.  "  What,  the Httle Sophy  !  —
and wdiy  ?  "

"  For disposing of her so freely.  I think a man
deserves to be cuffed for saying any lady w^U marry
him."

I seconded this speech with much approbation.

Mr.  Crutchley then told us of a painter,  with whom

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  91

he is well acquainted,  and to whom he has been very
kind,  that professes the art of discovering  ??zor«Z cha-
racters from written ones;  and he told us that if we
w^ould write something,  he w^ould carry the paper to
the man,  and bring us word what he had said of us
without letting him know who we were.

Mrs.  Thrale immediately started up and wrote in a
very fine hand, —

*'  The character of the writer of this is earnestly
desired."

Mr.  Seward was called upon next,  and proposed
adding, —

"  The greatest secrecy must be depended upon."

But I objected to this mode,  because such sentences
might help the conjuror to our characters without
much assistance ;  whereas,  he ought to decipher them
merely from the hand-writing.

Mr.  Crutchley then proposed that we should take
some book,  and each of us write two lines,  and then
the man could have nothing to judge by but our
several scrawls.

*'  Wisely said,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  "  for judgment
Mr.  Crutchley excels us all."

We took,  therefore,  Mr.  Crabbe's  "  Library,"  and
Mrs.  Thrale,  Mr.  Seward,  Miss Thrale,  and myself,
copied two lines each.  Mr.  Crutchley put the paper
in his pocket,  and promised to bring us an account of
ourselves on Monday.  I charged him repeatedly to be
very honourable,  and not make characters of us himself,
and then pretend to pass them off for this painter's.
When I give you the characters,  you must judge your-
self whether he was faithful,  or only,  as I told him I
expected he would,  took the opportunity to give us all
a smoking.

92 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

Sunday. — To tliese two gentlemen was added a
third, —  Mr.  ]Musgrave.  I did not see him till we all
met in the dinner-parlour ;  and then he immediately-
addressed me w^ith so vociferous a rapidity that I could
not catch above one word in ten of what he said ;  but
I found his purport w^as to tell me he had been at
Worcester,  where he had seen my uncle,  and seen
divers of Edward's performances,  and he very warmly-
declared he would make a very great and capital
painter;  and,  in the midst of this oration,  iNIr.  Seward
very dryly called out, —

*'  Pray,  Musgrave,  whom are you talking of?"

''  Her cousin,"  cried he,  with the same eagerness,
"  Miss Burney's cousin.  I assure you he will be so
great a painter that "

"  Why,  when and where,"  interrupted Mr.  Seward,
**  are these Burne3^s to stop?"

"  Nowhere,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  till they are tired ;
for they go on just as long as they please,  and do what
they please,  and are what they please."

''  Here,  ma'am,  is a mark of their power and genius,"
said INIr.  INIusgrave,  pointing to me ;  "  and I assure
you this young man is another.  And when I told old
Mr.  Burney I thought so,  I assure you I thought he
would have wrung my arm out of joint."

''Old Mr.  Burney!"  said Mrs.  Thrale;  "pray,
do you call our yowig Doctor's brother old Mr.
Burney 1 "

"  Oh,  ma'am,  I assure you I have the greatest re-
spect for him in the world  ;  he is a worthy old gentle-
man, I assure vou.  He and I shook hands together for
a quarter of an hour.  He was vastly pleased.  I told
him his son would be a great painter.  And,  indeed,
so he will.     He'll be quite at the head."

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  93

"  Ay,  liow should lie be Miss Burney's cousin else?"
said Mrs.  Tiirale.

"  Miss Barney will be so elated,"  said Mr.  Seward,
"  if you go on tlius with all her family,  that she will
not condescend to take notice of us."

"  Oh,  yes,  she will,"  said the literal Mr.  Musgrave;
"  where there is true merit there is always modesty^
Miss Burney may hear praise without danger."

I called for water,  munched bread,  and did what I
could to pass the time;  but though Mr.  Musgrave
made me laugh,  I found it pretty warm work to sit
all this.

In the evening,  Mr.  Seward,  who plays off Mr.  Mus-
grave most unmercifully,  called out to him, —

*'  Musgrave,  how goes on your play?"

"  My play,  sir!"  cried he,  a little alarmed;  "sir,
I assure you I have not thought about it."

''  No! — why,  I suppose you would have finished it
in your last fit of sickness.  Do,  Musgrave,  pray go
on vv^ith it when you are tied by the heel next.  We  '11
get Miss Burney to write a prologue for it."

'^  Miss Burney will do me a great deal of honour,"
said he,  not suspecting he was laughed at,  ''  if she
will be so good as to look at it."

^'  And pray,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  "  what do you
call it?"

^'  Oh,  I shall beg the favour of Miss Burney to
name it."

He then told us the plan and story of this comedy,
which was so trite,  and yet so flaming,  that I cannot
imagine how any man can have read so much to so
little advantage as to suppose it could be listened to.

Mr.  Seward,  however,  protests he has altered it
from what he originally intended ;  and no great mis-

94 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

chief,  I think,  could any alteration do to such a plan
as Mr.  Seward says he had first formed,  which was to
make a hishop be discovered by his own chaplain in
a house of ill-fame !  a dtiLouement he had devised for
the purpose of making the bishop come down with his
money and consent for the marriage of his daughter,
the heroine of the piece,  with the man of her choice!

Monday.  —  We were to have Mr.  Cator and other
company to dinner ;  and all breakfast Mr.  Seward
kept plaguing poor Mr.  Musgrave,  who is an incessant
talker,  about the difficulty he would have in making
his part good with Mr.  Cator,  who,  he assured him,
would out-talk him if he did not take care.  And xMr.
Crutcldey recommended to him to  "  wait for a sneeze,"
in order to put in ;  so that he was almost rallied into
a passion,  though,  being very good-natured,  he made
light of it,  and it blew over.

Our company was Mr.  and Mrs.  Cator,  Mrs.  Byron
and her daughter Augusta,  Mr.  Jenkinson,  Mr.  Lewis,
a friend who is on a visit at his house,  and the three
gentlemen already here.

Mr.  Crutchley rode to town in the morning,  and
told us at dinner that he had been to the painter's for
our characters,  but refused to let us know what they
were  ;  only telling us in general that Miss Thrale had
fared the v^'orst.

"I have written it all down,"  cried he;  "and oh!
what a noble trimming is there for Queeny!"

"  Axud pray,"  cried she,  "  how has Miss Burney
fared?"

"Oh!  pretty well."

"And Seward?"

"Why pretty well,  too."

"  And my mother?"

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  95

^'  Vvby ill — very ill; — but not so ill as you."

"  Upon my word  !  And what,  pray,  lias he said
of me  ?"

"  I have all the particulars upon a paper in my
pocket."

I plagued him,  however,  without ceasing till he told
me all the items;    which were  —

Of Mrs.  Thrale  :  That she v/as very unsteady in her
affections,  a great lover of pleasure,  and had no dis-
like to living in the country.

*  #  -^  =??:  #  ^

Of Mr.  Seward:  That he was a man quite without
genius,  and that all the accomplishments he possessed
resulted from labour and application.

Of me :  That I was very steady,  very apt to be
sullen,  grave myself,  but fond of those who were gay.

I think I did come pretty well off,  considering the
villanous things said of the rest ;  but I battled with
him warmly the character of 3Ir.  Seward,  which his
calling  "  pretty well"  vras very unjust,  as he has really
more original v.it and humour than one man in five
hundred.

In the middle of dinner I vvTtS seized with a violent
laughing fit,  by seeing Mr.  Musgrave,  who had sat
quite silent,  turn very solemnly to Mr.  Seward and
say,  in a reproachful tone, —

'^  Seward,  you said I should be fighting to talk all
the talk,  and here I have not spoke once."

*'  Vv ell,  sir,"  cried Mr.  Seward,  nodding at him,
"  why don't you put in  ?"

"Yv^hy,  I lost an opportunity just now,  when Mr.
Cator talked ox climates ;  I had something I could have
said about them very well."

After this,  however,  he made himself amends  ;    for

96 DIAHV AND LETTERS  [PaRT IL

when we left the men to their wine,  he began such a
violent dispute with Mr.  Cator,  that Mr.  Jenkinson
and Mr.  Crutchley left the field of battle,  and went
out to join the ladies in their walk round the grounds ;
and that breaking up the party,  the rest soon fol-
lowed.

By the way,  I happened not to walk myself,  which
was most ludicrously noticed by Mr.  Musgrave ;  who,
while we were at tea,  suddenly crossed the circle to
come up to me,  and say, —

"You did not walk.  Miss Burney?"

"  No,  sir."

"  Very much in the right  —  very much in the right,
indeed!  You were studying?  Oh,  very right !  never
lose a moment!  Such an understanding as yours it
would be a shame to neglect ;  it ought to be cultivated
every moment."

And then he hurried back to his seat.

In the evening,  when all the company was gone but
our three gentlemen,  Seward,  Crutchley,  and Mus-
grave, we took a walk round the grounds by moon-
light; and Mr.  Musgrave started with raj^ture at the
appearance of the moon,  now full,  now cloudy,  now
clear,  now obscured,  every three yards we moved.

w  ^  ^  w tP tF

We have had some extra diversion from two queer
letters.  The first of these was to Dr.  Johnson,  dated from
the Orkneys,  and costing him  \s.  6d.  The contents were,
to beg the Doctor's advice and counsel upon a very
embarrassing matter ;  the writer,  who signs his name
and place of abode,  says he is a clergyman,  and labours
under a most peculiar misfortune,  for which he can give
no account ;  and which is, — that though he very often
writes letters to his friends and others,  he never gets

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  97

any answers ;  he entreats,  therefore,  that Dr.  Johnson
will take this into consideration,  and explain to him
to what so strange a thing may be attributed.

Hejthen gives his direction.

The other of these curious letters is to myself;  it
is written upon fine French-glazed and gilt paper.

•'  Miss F.  Burney,

''  At Lady Thrales,

''  Streatham,  Surrey,
"  Madam, —  I lately have read the three elegant
volumes of  '  Evelina,'  w^hich were penned by you  ;  and
am desired by my friends,  which are very numerous,
to entreat the favour of you to oblige the public with
a fourth.

''  Now,  if this desire of mine should meet with your
approbation,  and you will honour the public w^ith
another volume  (for it will not be ill-bestowed time),
it will greatly add to the happiness of,

"  Honoured madam,  a sincere admirer

''Ofvouand  'Evelina."'
"  Snow Hill."

Now don't our two epistles vie well with each other
for singular absurdity?  Which of them shews least
meaning,  who can tell?  This is the third queer
anonymous letter I have been favoured with.  The date
is more curious than the contents  ;  one would think
the people on Snow Hill might think three volumes
enough for what they are the better,  and not desire a
fourth to celebrate more Smiths and Branghtons.

Monday,  Sept.  3d.  —  Our solitude was interrupted
by a visit from Mr.  Crutchley,  wdiich afforded me,  as
usual,  subject-matter of debate upon his never-ending
oddities.     Take the follovring patterns:  —

VOL.  II.  K

98 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT II.

My dear Mrs.  Thrale had been ill of a rash for some
days,  tliough not confined,  and Sir Richard Jebb came
this evening to see her.  He stayed and drank tea
with us,  and was,  as to me he always is,  very agree-
able. After having written for Mrs.  Thrale and given
her his general directions,  he charged her very ear-
nestly not to suffer her spirits to be agitated,  and to
be very careful to keep quiet.

When he was gone,  she repeated this in laughing,
and said,  "  I suppose he meant I should not pat my-
self in a Welsh passion,  and fiame and spit."

'^  Nay,  nay,"  cried Mr.  Crutchley,  "  that you do all
day long."

"  Wliat!"  cried she,  going out of the room,  and not
well hearing him,  while I turned round to laugh at his
assurance.

"  Why Miss Burney,"  answered he,  "  says you
always spit."

"  I !"  cried I,  amazed.     *^  When did I say so?"

"Wliy,  just this moment."

"Mercy!"  cried Miss Thrale,  "  that is too bad!"

"  iS ay,  she said it,  I'll swear  ! "  said he,  very coolly.

I only turned up my eyes at him,  and Miss Thrale
followed her mother out of the room.

'^Well,  now,"  said he,  very gravely,  ''did you say
it,  or did you not?"

"Why not,  to be sure!"  returned I,  staring at his
effrontery.

"  You did not say it?"

"  No ;  you know I did not."

"  Nay,  I don't know for the icords,  but you looked it.
I am sure,  and that  's the same.  I always hold it ex-
actly the same.  I see,  indeed,  no difference between
saying and looking."

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  99

"  Yes,  but I did not look it ;  my look was only at
you,  and marvelling at your saying it."

"  Nay,  but you know very well that she does spit."

*'  No,  indeed,  I don't;  or if I do,  I know also,
and very certainly,  that it is only w4ien she is pro-
voked."

"  Yes,  yes;  nobody,  I suppose,  does it z^^provoked ;
but what will provoke one will not provoke another  ;
that is all the real difference."

I had no time to answer this,  as the dear spitter
returned ;  but I was all amazement at his persisting
in such an attack,  and insisting that I was of the same
mind.

^F  %•  'T?  ^T?  ^  ^

At dinner.  Dr.  Johnson returned,  and Mr.  Musgrave
came with him.  I did not see them till dinner was
upon the table ;  and then Dr.  Johnson,  more in earnest
than in jest,  reproached me with not coming to meet
him,  and afterwards with not speaking to him,  which,
by the way,  across a large table,  and before company,
I could not do,  w^ere I to be reproached ever so so-
lemnly. It is requisite to speak so loud in order to
be heard by him,  and every body listens so attentively
for his reply,  that not all his kindness will ever,  I
believe,  embolden me to discourse with him willingly
except ttte-a-ttte,  or only with his family or my own.

Mr.  Crutchley,  who has more odd spite in him than
all the rest of the world put together,  enjoyed this call
upon me,  at which Mr.  Musgrave no less wondered !
He seemed to think it an honour that raised me to
the highest pinnacle of glory,  and started,  and lifted
up his hands in profound admiration.

This,  you may imagine,  was no great inducement to
me to talk more  ;  and when in the evening w^e all met

^95792 4

100 DIAKY AND LEJ TKHS  [ParT 11.

again in tlie library,  Dr.  J(jlin.son still continuing his
accusation,  and vowinsT:  I cared nothino-  for him,  to fret
rid of tlie matter,  and the grinning of Mr.  Crutchley,
and the theatrical staring of Mr.  Musgrave,  1 pro-
posed to Miss Thrale,  as soon as tea was over,  a walk
round the grounds.

The next morning,  the instant I entered the lil)rary
at breakfast-time,  where nobody was yet assembled
but Messrs.  Musgrave and Crutchley,  the former ran
up to me the moment I opened the door with a large
folio in his hand,  calling out, —

"  See here,  Miss Burney,  you know what I said
about the Racks "

"  The what,  sir  ?"  cried I,  having forgot it all.

"Why the Racks;  and here you see is the very
same account.  I must shew it to the Doctor pre-
sently;    the old lion hardly believed it."

He then read to me I know not how much stuff,  not
a word of which could I understand,  because Mr.
Crutchley sat laughing slyly,  and casting up his eyes
exactly before me,  though unseen by Mr.  Musgrave.

As soon as I got away from him,  and walked on to
the other end of the room,  Mr.  Crutchley followed
me,  and said, —

"  You went to bed too soon last night;  you should
have stayed a little longer,  and then you would have
heard such a panegyric as never before was spoken."

'•So I suppose,"  quoth I,  not knowing what he
drove at.

•'Oh,  yes!"  cried Mr.  Musgrave,  "Dr.  Johnson
pronounced such a panegyric upon  ^liss Burney as
would quite have intoxicated any body else  ;  not hej\
indeed,  for she can bear it,  but nobody else could.'*

"  Oh I such praise,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  "  never

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  101

did I hear before.  It kept me awake,  even me,  after
eleven o'clock,  wlien nothing else could, — poor drowsy
wretch that I am  !"

They then both ran on praising this praise  («  qui
mieux mieux),  and trying which should distract me
most with curiosity to hear it ;  but I know Mr.  Crutch-
ley holds all panegyric in such infinite contempt and
ridicule,  that I felt nothing but mortification in finding
he had been an auditor to my dear Dr.  Johnson's par-
tiality.

"  Woe to him,"  cried he at last,  "  of whom no one
speaks ill!  Woe,  therefore,  to you in this house,  I
am sure ! "

"No,  no,"  cried I,  ^' you,  I believe,  will save me
from that woe."

In the midst of this business entered Miss Thrale.
Mr.  Musgrave,  instantly flying up to her with the
folio,   exclaimed,  "  See,   Miss Thrale,  here's all that

about the origin of Racks,  that "

'*  Of what r cried she.  "  Of rats r
This set us all grinning ;  but Mr.  Crutchley,  who
had pretty well recovered his spirits,  would not rest a
moment from plaguing me about this praise,  and began
immediately to tell Miss Thrale what an oration had
been made the preceding evening.

The moment Mrs.  Thrale came in,  all this was
again repeated,  Mr.  Musgrave almost blessing himself
wdth admiration while he talked of it,  and Mr.  Crutch-
ley keeping me in a perpetual fidget,  by never suffering
the subject to drop.

When they had both exhausted all they had to say
in a general manner of this tloge,  and Dr.  Johnson's
fondness for me,  for a little while we were allowed to
rest;    but scarce had I time to even hope the matter

102 DIARY AXJ)  J.ETTJCUS  [Part II.

would be clrop}itj(J,  wlien Mr.  Crutchley said to Mr.
Musgrave, —

''  Well,  sir,  but now we have paved the way,  1 think
you might as well go on."

"  Yes,"  said Miss Thrale,  never backward in pro-
moting mischief,  "  methinks you might now disclose
some of tlie particulars."

'^  Ay,  do,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  "  pray repeat what
he said."

'*  Oh!  it is not in my power,"  cried Mr.  IMusgrave;
*'  I have not the Doctor's eloquence.  However,  as well
as I can remember,  I will do it.  He said that her
manners were extraordinarily pleasing,  and her lan-
guage remarkably elegant ;  that she had as much virtue
of mind as knowledge of the world  ;  that with all her
skill in human nature,  she was at the same time as
pure a little creature "

This phrase,  most comfortably to me,  helped us to
a laugh,  and carried off in something like a joke
praise that almost carried me off,  from very shame not
better to deserve it.

"  Go on,  go on!"  cried Mr.  Crutchley ;  "you have
TiOt said half."

"I am sensible of that,"  said he,  very solemnly;
"  but it really is not in my power to do him justice,
else I would say on,  for Miss Burney I know would
not be intoxicated."

"No,  no;  more,  more,"  cried that tiresome crea-
ture ;    "  at it again."

"  Indeed,  sir ;  and upon my word I would if I
could  ;  but only himself can do the old lion jus-
tice."

"  'And what light is,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "  'tis only
light can shevr.'     However,  let him love her as much as

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  103

he will,   he will never love her half enough,  for he
knows not half how good she is."

"Upon my word!"  cried Miss Thrale,  drolly ;  '^do
you think I sha'n't take some sly opportunitv to poison

you?"_

"  Miss Burney wants no incentive to virtue,"  said
Mr.  Musgrave,  "  or else,  to any body else such a cha-
racter as Dr.  Johnson has given her would be enough
to stimulate her to it."

Ay,  thought I,  that is the best way for me — to take
all this in sober seriousness.  And I assure you,  though
I tried to laugh all this off as if I did not believe it,
I knew so well his readiness and pleasure in speaking
highly of me,  that I was inwardly quite melted by his
kindness,  and my sense of the honour I receive from it.

We had half done breakfast before he came down  ;
he then complained he had had a bad night and was
not well.

'*  I could not sleep,"  said he,  laughing  ;  ''  no,  not
a wink,  for thinking of Miss Burney ;  her cruelty de-
stroys my rest."

"  Mercy,  sir!"  cried Mrs.  Thrale  ;  '•'  what,  beginning
again already? — why,  we shall all assassinate her.
Late at night,  and early at morn, — no wonder you
can't sleep!"

"Oh!  what would I give,"  cried he,  "that Miss
Burney would come and tell me stories all night long !
— if she would but come and talk to me  ! "

"That would be delightful,  indeed!"  said I;  "but
when,  then,  should I sleep?"

"Oh,  that's your care!  I should be happy enough
in keeping you awake."

"  I wish,  sir,"  cried Mr.  Musgrave,  with vehemence,
"  I could give you my own night's sleep!"

104 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part II.

"  I would have you,"  continued Dr.  Johnson to me
(taking no notice of this flight),  ''  come and talk to
me of Mr.  Smith,  and then tell me stories of old
Branghton,  and then of his son,  and tlien of your
sea-captain."

"And pray,  sir,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  "don't forget
Lady Louisa^  for I shall break my heart if you do."

'^  Ay,"  answered he,  "  and of Lady Louisa,  and of
Evelina herself as much as you please,  but not oi Mr.
Macartney^ — no,  not a word of him!"

"I assure you,  ma'am,"  said Mr.  Musgrave,  "the
very person who first told me of that book was Mr.
Jessop,  my school-master.  Think of that I — was it not
striking?  'A daughter,'  says he,  '  of your friend Dr.
Burney has written a book,  and it does her much
credit.'  Think of that!  (lifting up his hands to enforce
his admiration);  and he desired me to read it  —  he
recommended it to me;  —  a man of the finest taste, —
a man of great profundity, — an extraordinary scholar,
— living in a remote part of Ireland, — a man I esteem,
upon my w^ord  ! "

"  But,  sir,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale to Dr.  Johnson,
"why,  these men tell such wonders of what you said
last night !  Why,  you spoke quite an oration in favour
of Miss Burney."

"  Ay,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  *^  the moment it was
over I went to bed.  I stayed to hear the panegyric ;
but I thought I could bear nothing after it,  and made
off."

'*  I would you were off now,"  cried I,  "  and in your
phaeton in the midst of this rain!"

'*  Oh,  sir  !  "  cried Mr.  Musgrave,  "  the Doctor went
on with it again after you went ;  I had the honour to
hear a great deal more."

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  105

"Why,  tliis is very fine indeed!"  said Mrs.  Thrale;
"  why,  Dr.  Johnson, — why,  what is all this?"

"These young fellows,"  answered he,  '^play me
false;  they take me in;  they start the subject,  and
make me say something-  of that Fanny Burney,  and
then the rogues know that when I have once begun I
shall not know when to leave off."

"We are glad,  sir,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  "to hear
our own thoughts expressed so much better than we
can express them ourselves."

I could only turn up my eyes at him.

"  Just so,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,

"  ^  What oft was thought,  but ne'er so well expressM.'  "

Here,  much to my satisfaction,  the conversation
broke up.

"  I hope,"  said Miss Thrale,  comically bowing to
me,  "  you have approved this discourse.  For my part,
I wonder you will speak to 7ne again."

"  I wonder,"  said Mr.  Crutchley,  "  she could eat!''

"Nay,"  quoth I,  "this is no way to take off my
appetite ;  though,  perhaps,  you think I ought to be
too sublime to eat."

His phaeton was now announced,  and,  regardless of
the rain,  he took leave.

Mr.  Musgrave stayed with us two or three days
longer ;  but he is so infinitely more quiet when neither
Mr.  Seward nor Mr.  Crutchley is here,  that he left
me nothing to write about him.

Friday,  Sept.  14th. — And now,  if I am not mis-
taken, I come to relate the conclusion of Mr.  Crutch-
ley's most extraordinary summer career at Streatham^
w^iich place,  I believe,  he has now left without much
intention to frequently revisit.     However,  this is mere

J 00 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

conjecture  ;  ])ut lie really had a run of ill-luck not vory
inviting to a man of his cold and splenetic turn,  to play
the same game.

When we were just going to supper,  we heard a
disturbance among the dogs;  and Mrs.  and Mis3
Thrale went out to see what was the matter,  while Dr.
Johnson and I remained quiet.  Soon returning,  ''A
friend!  a friend!"  she cried,  and was followed by Mr.
Cratchley.

He would not eat with us,  but was chatty and in
good-humour,  and as usual,  when in spirits,  saucily
sarcastic.  For instance,  it is generally half my employ-
ment in hot evenings here to rescue some or other
poor buzzing idiot of an insect from the flame of a
candle.  This,  accordingly,  I was performing with a
Harry Longlegs,  which,  after much trial to catch,
eluded me,  and escaped,  nobody could see how.  Mr.
Crutchley vowed I had caught and squeezed him to
death in my hand.

"  No,  indeed,"  cried I,  "  when I catch them,  I put
them out of the window."

"Ay,  their bodies,"  said he,  laughing;  "but their
legs,  I suppose,  you keep."

"  Not I,  indeed  ;  I hold them very safe in the palm
of my hand."

"Oh!"  said he,  "the palm of your hand!  why,  it
would not hold a fly 1 But what have you done
with the poor wretch  —  thrown him pnder the table
slyly?"

"  What good would that do  ?"

"  Oh,  help to establish your full character for
mercy."

Now,  was not that a speech to provoke Miss Grizzle
herself?     However,  I only made up a saucy lip.

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  107

"  Come,"  cried he,  offering to take my hand,  "  where
is he  ?     Which hand is he in  ?     Let me examine  ?  "

"  No,  no,  I thank you  ;  I sha'n't make you my con-
fessor, whenever I take one."

He did not much like this ;  but I did not mean he
should.

Afterwards he told us a most unaccountably ridicu-
lous story of a crying wife.  A gentleman,  he said,  of
his acquaintance had married lately his own kept mis-
tress ;  and last Sunday he had dined with the bride
and bridegroom  ;  but,  to his utter astonishment,  with-
out any apparent reason in the world,  in the middle of
dinner or tea,  she burst into a violent fit of crying,  and
went out of the room,  though there was not the least
quarrel,  and the sposo seemed all fondness and atten-
tion !

"  What,  then,"  said I,  somewhat maliciously,  I
grant,  "  had you been saying to her?"

"Oh,  thank you!"  said he,  with a half-affronted
bow,  "  I expected this!  I declare I thought you would
conclude it was me  !  "

#  *=  #  ^  *

Dr.  Johnson has been very unwell indeed.  Once I
w- as quite frightened about him ;  but he continues his
strange discipline  —  starving,  mercury,  opium ;  and
though for a time half demolished by its severity,  he
always,  in the end,  rises superior both to the disease
and the remedy, — which commonly is the most alarming
of the two.  His kindness for me,  I think,  if possible,
still increased  :  he actually hores every body so about
me that the folks even complain of it.  I must,  how-
ever, acknowledge I feel but little pity for their fatigue.

108 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT II.

From Miss F.  Burney to Mr.  Crisp.

Streatliam,  Wednesday morning,
22d September.

At length,  my dear daddy,  I hope to have a peep at
you.  Mrs.  Thrale is much better,  though not well,
but so kindly desirous to give me this indulgence,  as
well as to see you and my father,  that she will venture
to promise for next Monday  ;  and,  therefore,  if nothing
unlucky intervenes,  and you send no prohibition,  early
on Monday morning you will see us.  I cannot tell you
half how glad I feel in the prospect of being again at
dear Chesington,  which I do indeed love at the bottom
of my heart — and top too,  for the matter of that.

Bid all the Misses look pretty,  and Mrs.  Hamilton
be quite well.  Tell dear Kitty not to prim up as if we
had never met before,  and charge Jem to be the pink
of gallantry.  Beg my dear father to  "  get from behind
la harha"  before breakfast ;  and do you,  my dear daddy,
put on my favourite vig.

I have time for no more,  as I have an opportunity
to send this to town now,  and if it goes by Streatham
post,  you may not receive it before you receive your
ever and ever oblis^ed and loving child,

F.  B.

My duty,  love,  and compliments to all.

Mrs.  Thrale's best compliments.

Miss Thrale will accompany us,  but not Dr.  Johnson.

From Mrs.  Thrale to Miss F.  Burney.

Sunday,  12th November,  1781.
Sweet Burney,
Your little scrap to my Tit was the most delightful
thing I ever read— better than forty letters.      Now

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  109

that my stomach is lightened by doses of emetic tartar,
and my heart pacified by a Paris letter,  I can try for
flash again  —  at least rake up some old embers.

Our journal would be yet emptier and more com-
pressible than yours,  for not a living thing have we
seen since Crutchley left us late on Monday night,  till
Seward visited us yester noon  :  but the poor lady of
the manor tried all she could to keep from tormenting
the only creature in her reach with ill-humour;  and
for that creature's comfort the house will now soon be
full.

Sir Richard Jebb has done Peggy Pitches so much
good,  she is enchanted with him.  A physician can
sometimes parry the scythe of death,  but has no power
over the sand in the hourglass.

How happy Mr.  Crisp is in his Pannikin !  Take
care of yourself for all our sakes,  and do not go to
church such weather as this  ;  but keep the fear of the
churchyard before your eyes.

I'm glad the little book or volume goes on  ;  my
notion is that I shall cry myself blind over the con-
clusion— it runs in my head — 'tis so excessively pathetic.
I saw your sweet father on Thursday,  but he came
alone.

''  Not a ship on the ocean,"  says my last letter from
Ashbourne,*  "goes out with more good wishes than
that which carries the fate of Burney.  I love/'  con-
tinues he,  "  all of the race which I do know,  and some
that I do not,  and love them for loving each other."

Of this consanguineous fondness I have had little ex-
perience myself,  but 1 consider it as one of the lenitives
of life.     It has,  however,  this deficiency  —  that it is

*  Dr.  Johnson was then at Ashbourne.

IJO DIAIIV AND LETTKRS  [PartII.

never foiiiul  ^vherc distress is mutual.  He  \vbo lias
less than enougli has nothing to spare.  Prosperous
people only love each other.  May you and I,  my love,
be ever prosperous !

Miss Kitty may well think this the surprisiugest
world that ever was.  I have long been of her mind.
Cavendish Squaie is the place appointed for me to
perform in next winter,  I perceive by every body ;  and
though matters look cloudy just at present,  I find we
are to hope for a  "  little bit of Burney"  in the spring.
Did I say that bright thing before  ?

Somebody told me  (but not your father)  that the
Opera singers would not be likely to get any money
out of Sheridan this year.  "  Why,  that fellow grows
fat,"  says I,  "  like Heliogabalus,  upon the tongues of
nightingales."  Did I tell you that bright thing before?
Ah,  Burney !  if I was well I would make a little fun
yet,  but I cannot get well.  The next time I see Sir
Richard I will coax him to let me go in the cold bath
again,  I am so low,  so lamentable !

I am,  however,  most sincerely yours in all affection,

H.  L.  T.

Respects to Mr.  Crisp.

Miss F.  Burneij to Mrs.  Thrale,

Chesington,  December 10th.

TP T'P 9l*  w w

And so Mrs.  Shirley,  Captain Phillips'  sister,  has
been visiting Susan in form,  and Susan has returned
the courtesy with the j^roper formalities ;  and that
awkward business being over,  they begin to take to
one another,  and are already upon kind,  open,  and
sisterly terms,  visiting to and fro without ceremony.
This is a very comfortable circumstance.

1781]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  Ill

The Capitano has lately been promoted,  and is now
very earnest to accelerate matters ;  but my father,  very
anxious and fearful for poor Susanne,  does not think
there is de quoi manger very plentifully,  and is as
earnest for retarding them.  For my own part,  I think
they could do very well.  I know Susan is a very
good economist,  and I know there is not any part of
our family that cannot live upon very little as cheer-
fully as most folks upon very much.  Besides,  who
knows how long poor imncle may live,  and keep the
estate to himself?  And why should he not live?  I
detest living upon no hopes but those of other people's
losing all  —  I mean pour le monde,  which we have no
right to despise for others,  while so anxious to fare
well in it ourselves.

All this,  dearest madam,  you must at present keep
w^holly to yourself.  My father,  all the while,  is so
much pleased with the disinterestedness of Phillips,
that it is painful to his kind heart to oppose him,  and,
between friends,  I have little doubt but he will give
way ere long.

#  #  *  #  #

All these things put together,  you may believe I am
called enough for home;  very  —  very little,  therefore,
shall I be able to see of dear Streatham before next
summer ;  but what I can I will.

IMr.  Crisp is much gratified by your so kindly and
constantly remembering him.  He is vastly well this
year,  and has had no gout since I came ;  he is,  there-
fore, grown somewhat unruly,  and if I hint but at
going away,  storms and raves with such a vengeance
you would stare to see,  and start to hear him.  We
keep to  "fun-making"  though,  very gaily.  Every
thing here is so new that has passed elsewhere,  that

112 DIARY AiNJ)  LETTERS  [Part II.

nothing can be mentioned that has not the air of an
anecdote,  and the credit of peculiar observation upon
matters and manners.

Adieu,  my ever dearest Mrs.  Thrale,  and long,  long
preserve the health,  spirits,  and kindness,  which mark
your last letter to F.  B.

May we be prosperous,  you say,  —  and Amen!  say I,
without a devotion particularly extraordinary  ;  but yet
I am by no means of opinion that there is no kindness
where distress is mutual;  on the contrary,  I think,  and
once I found,  that mutual distress gives mutual en-
dearment.

PART III.

1782.

CONTENTS.

Progress of  "Cecilia"  through the Press — Dr.  Burney's Opinion of
it — The Author's Fears — Barry — Hoole — a Rout — Dr.  Solauder
— Coxe,  the traveller — Sir Sampson Gideon — Count Zenobia —
Lady Say and Sele — An Amateur Novelist — Lady Hawke —
Literary Gossip — Sir Gregory Page Turner.  Correspondence : —
Mrs.  Thrale to  ]\Iiss Burney — JNL:.  Crisp to INIiss Burney — His
Opinion of"  Cecilia" — Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp — Her Inten-
tions in writing  "  Cecilia" — Literary Ladies — Poetical Description
of them by Dr.  Burney  —  General Paoli  — ISIrs.  Garrick — Lite-
rary Forgery — Conversazione at JMrs.  Thrale's — ISIiss Burney
to Mrs.  Phillips— Mrs.  Garrick — The Female Wits— ]SL.\  Crisp
to Mss Burney — Voltaire versus Shakespeare — Advice to a
Young Author — JMiss Burney to Mr.  Crisp — Alterations in
"  Cecilia"  —  INIrs.  Thrale to Miss Burney — Odd Eeason for
Marrying — Mrs.  Thrale and  "Cecilia"  —  Miss Burney to INIr.
Crisp — Diary Resumed — Edmund Burke — Dinner at Sir Joshua
Reynolds's — Lord Corke — The Bishop of St.  Asaph — Gibbon,
the Historian — Person and Manner of Burke — Lady Di.  Beau-
clerk — Goldsmith's Blundering — Letter from Edmund Burke to
Miss Burne}^ — Visit to Chesington  —  Sitting for one's Portrait
— Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney  —  Criticism  —  Good Advice  —  jMiss
Burney to JNIrs.  Thrale — Miss Burney to INL*.  Crisp  —  General
Paoli— Bos^yell— The Irish Giant.

VOL.  II.

114 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT III.

PART III.
1782.

3Iiss F.  Burney to Mrs.  PJdlUps.

February  '2b,  1782.

Are you quite enragte with me,  my clearest Susy  ?
Indeed,  I think I am w ith myself,  for not sooner and
oftener writing to you ;  and every night when I go to
bed,  and every morning when I wake,  I determine
shall be the last I will do either again till I have
written to you.  But,  helas !  my pens get so fagged,
and my hands so crippled,  when I have been up two or
three hours,  that my resolution wavers,  and I sin on,
till the time of rest and meditation,  and then I repent
again.  Forgive me,  however,  my dearest girl,  and
pray pay me not in kind  ;  for,  as Charlotte would say,
kind that would not be,  however deserved and just.

ISIy work is too long in all conscience for the hurry
of my people to have it produced.  I have a thousand
million of fears for it.  The mere copying,  v/ithout
revising and correcting,  would take at least ten weeks,
for I cannot do more than a volume in a fortnight,
unless I scrawl short hand and rough hand,  as badly
as the original.  Yet my dear father thinks it will be
published in a month  !  Since you vrent I have copied
one volume and a quarter — no more  !  Oh,  I am sick to
think of it !     Yet not a little reviving is my father's

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EYELIXA.  115

very high approbation of the first volume,  which is all
he has seen.  I totally forget whether,  in my last,  I
told you I had presented it to him  ?  but I am sure you
would never forget,  for the pleasure you would have
felt for me,  had you seen or heard him reading any
part of it.

Would you ever believe,  bigoted as he was to
*'  Evelina,"  that he now says he tliinks this a superior
design and superior execution  ?

You can never half imagine the delight this has
given me.  It is answering my first wish and first
ambition in life.  And though I am certain,  and though
he thinks himself,  it will never be so popular as  "  Eve-
lina," his so warm satisfaction will make me amends
for almost any mortification that may be in store
for me.

I v/ould to Heaven it were possible for me to have a
reading de suite of it with you,  my Susy,  more than
with anybody;  but I could not admit Captain Phillips,
dearly as I love him;  I could not for my life read
myself to Mr.  Burney,  and was obliged to make Etty.
It is too awkward a thing to do to any human beings
but my sisters,  and poor auntys,  and Kitty Cooke.  I
have let the first tome also run the gauntlet with Mrs.
Thrale.

^  ^  ^  9s»  ^

One thing frets me a good deal,  which is,  that my
book afitiir has got wind,  and seems almost every where
known,  notwithstanding my earnestness and caution to
have it kept snug till the last,  l-.lr.  Bari-y,  t'other day,
told me he had heard from Miss Mudge what,  &c.  &c.
he had soon to expect from me.  The Hooles have
both told Charlotte how glad they are in the good
news they hear  ;    and Mrs.  Boyle and the strangers

116 DIARY AM)  LETTERS  [Part III.

take it for granted,  tliey say,  that I am too busy for
visiting !  31rs.  (3rd,  also,  attacked me very openly
about it,  and I have seen nobody else.  It is easy to
guess whence this comes,  but not easy to stop its course,
or to prevent the mischief of long expectation,  any
more than the great dtsugrcment of being continually
interrogated upon the subject.

Miss F.  Burney to Mrs.  P/ullips.

I thank you most heartily for your two sweet letters,
my ever dearest Susy,  and equally for the kindness they
contain and the kindness they accept.  And,  as I have
a frank and a subject,  I will leave my bothers,  and write
you and my dear brother Molesworth a little account
of a rout I have just been at,  at the house of Mr.
Paradise.

You wdll w^onder,  perhaps,  in this time of hurry,
why I went thither  ;  but when I tell you Pacchierotti
was there,  you will not think it surprising.

There w^as a crowd of company  ;  Charlotte and I
vrent together  ;  my father came afterwards.  Mrs.
Paradise received us very graciousl}^  and led me imme-
diately up to Miss Thrale,  who was sitting by the Pac.
The Miss Kirwans,  you may be sure,  were not far off,
and so I did pretty well.  There was nobody else I
knew but Dr.  Solander,  Mr.  Coxe the traveller,  Sir
Sampson and Lady Gideon  (Streatham acquaintances),
Mr.  Sastres,  and Count Zenobia,  a noble Venetian,
whom I have often met lately at Mrs.  Thrale's.

We were very late,  for we had waited cruelly for
the coach,  and Pac.  had sung a song out of  "  Arta-
xerxes,"  composed for a tenor,  wdiich we lost,  to my
infinite regret.     Afterwards he sang  "  Dolce speme,"

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  117

set by Bertoni,  less elegantly than by Sacchini,  but
more expressively for the words.  He sang it delight-
fully. It was but the second time I have heard him in
a room since his return to England.

After this he went into another room,  to try if it
would be cooler;  and Mrs.  Paradise,  leaning over the
Kirwans and Charlotte,  who hardly got a seat all night
for the crowd,  said she begged to speak to me.  I
squeezed my great person out,  and she then said, —

"  Miss Burney,  Lady Say and Sele desires the honour
of being introduced to you."

Her ladyship stood by her side.  She seems pretty
near fifty — at least turned forty  ;  her head was full of
feathers,  flowers,  jewels,  and gew-gaws,  and as high as
Lady Archer's;  her dress was trimmed with beads,  silver,
persian sashes,  and all sort of fine fancies ;  her face is
thin and fiery,  and her whole manner spoke a lady all
alive.

'^  Miss Burney,"  cried she,  with great quickness,  and
a look all curiosity,  "  I am very happy to see you  ;  I
have longed to see you a great while ;  I have read your
performance,  and I am quite delighted with it.  I think
it's the most elegant novel I ever read in my life.  Such
a style  !  I am quite surprised at it.  I can't think
where you got so much invention!"

You may believe this was a reception not to make
me very loquacious.  I did not know which way to
turn my head.

"  I must introduce you,"  continued her ladyship,  "  to
my sister ;  she'll be quite delighted to see you.  She
has written a novel herself;  so you are sister au-
thoresses. A most elegant thing it is,  I assure you  ;
almost as pretty as yours,  only not quite so elegant.
She has written two novels,  only one is not so pretty as

118 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Pakt III.

the other.  But I shall insist upon your seeing them.
One is in letters,  like yours,  only yours is  ])rettiest ;
its called the  '  Mausoleum of Julia  !'  "

What unfeeling things,  thought I,  are imj sisters!
I'm sure I never heard them go about thus praising me!

Mrs.  Paradise then again came forward,  and taking
my hand,  led me up to her ladyship's sister,  Lady
Hawke,  saying aloud,  and with a courteous smirk,
"  Miss Burney,  ma'am,  authoress of  '  Evelina.'"

'^  Yes,"  cried my friend.  Lady Say and Sele,  who
followed me close,  "  it's the authoress of  *  Evelina ;'
so you are sister authoresses !  "

Lady Hawke arose and curtsied.  She is much
younger than her sister,  and rather pretty ;  extremely
languishing,  delicate,  and pathetic ;  apparently accus-
tomed to be reckoned the genius of her family,  and well
contented to be looked upon as a creature dropped
from the clouds.

I was then seated between their ladyships,  and Lady
S.  and S.,  drawing as near to me as possible,  said, —

"Well,  and so you wrote this pretty book! — and
pray did your papa know of it  ?"

^'  No,  ma'am ;  not till some months after the pub-
lication."

"So I've heard  ;  it's surprising!  I can't think how
you invented it ! — there's a vast deal of invention in it !
And you've got so much humour,  too  !  Now my sister
has no humour  —  hers is all sentiment.  You can't
think how I was entertained with that old grandmother
and her son !"

I suppose she meant Tom Branghton for the son.

"  How^  much pleasure you must have had in writing
it ;  had not you  ?"

"  Y — e — 5,  ma'am."

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  119

"  So has my sister;  she's never vrithout a pen in her
hand  ;  she can't help writing for her life.  When Lord
Hawke is travelling about with her,  she keeps vrriting
all the way."

^'  Yes,"  said Lady Hawke ;  '*  I really can't help
writing.  One has great pleasure in writing the things  ;
has not one,  Miss Burney?"

'^  Y — e — s,  ma'am."

"  But your novel,"  cried Lady Say and Seie,  "is in
such a style  ! — so elegant !  I am vastly glad you made
it end happily.     I hate a novel that don't end happy."

"  Yes,"  said Lady Hawke,  with a languid smile,  "I
was vastly glad when she married Lord Orville.  I was
sadly afraid it would not have been."

"My sister intends,"  said Lady Say and Sele,  "to
print her  '  Mausoleum,'  just for her own friends and
acquaintances."

"  Yes,"  said Lady Hawke  ;  "  I have never printed
yet."

"  I saw Lady Hawke's name,"  quoth I to my first
friend,  "ascribed to the play of*  Variety.'"

"  Did you indeed?"  cried Lady Say,  in an ecstasy.
"  Sister !  do you know Miss Buniey saw your name in
the newspapers,  about the play  !"

''Did she?"  said Lady Hawke,  smiling compla-
cently. "  But I really did not write it ;  I never wrote
a play in my life."

"  Well,"  cried Lady Say,  "but do repeat that sweet
part that I am so fond of — you know what I mean;
Miss Burney must hear it,  —  out of your novel,  you
know  ! "

Lady H. — No,  I can't ;   I have forgot it.

Lady S.  —  Oh,  no!  I am sure you have not;  I
insist upon it.

120 DIARY AND LKTTERS  [Part III.

Lady H.  —  But I know you can repeat it yourself;
you liave so fine a memory  ;  1 am sure you can re-
peat it.

Lad}/  S.  —  Oh,  but I should not do it justice!
that's all, — 1 should not do it justice  !

Lady Hawke then bent forward,  and repeated — "  '  If,
when he made the declaration of his love,  the sensibility
that beamed in his eyes was felt in his heart,  what
pleasing-  sensations and soft alarms might not that
tender avowal awaken  !'  "

*^  x\nd from what,  ma'am,"  cried 1,  astonished,  and
imagining 1 had mistaken them,  ''is this taken?"

"  From my sister's novel!"  answered the delighted
Lady Say and Sele,  expecting my raptures to be equal
to her own;  "it's in the  'Mausoleum,'  —  did not you
know that  ?  Well,  1 can't think how you can write
these sweet novels  !  And it's all just like that part.
Lord Hawke himself says it's all poetry.  For my part,
I'm sure I never could write so.  I suppose,  iMiss
Burney,  you are producing another, — a'n't you?"
"No,  ma'am."

"Oh,  I dare say you are.  I dare say you are writing
one at this very minute ! "

Mrs.  Paradise now came up to me again,  followed
by a square man,  middle-aged,  and hum-drum,  who,  I
found,  was Lord Say and Sele,  afterwards from the
Kirwans ;  for though they introduced him to me,  1 was
so confounded by their vehemence and their manners,
that I did not hear his name.

"  Miss Burney,"  said Mrs.  P.,  presenting me to him,
"  authoress of  '  Evelina.' "

"Yes,"  cried Lady Say and Sele,  starting up,  "'tis
the authoress of  '  Evelina ! ' "
"  Of what?"  cried he.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  121

"  Of  *  Evelina.'  You'd never think it, — she looks so
young,  to have so much invention,  and such an eleg-ant
style  !  Well,  I could write a play,  I think,  but I'm
sure I could never write a novel."

"Oh,  yes you could,  if you would try,"  said Lady
Hawke.

''Oh,  no,  I could not,"  answered she;  ''  I could not
get a style — that's the thing — I could not tell how to
get a style !  and a novel's nothing without a style,  you
know!"

"  Why no,"  said Lady Hawke  ;  *'  that's true.  But
then you write such charming letters,  you know!"

'^  Letters!"  repeated Lady S.  and S.  simpering ;  "do
you think so?  Do you know I wrote a long letter to
Mrs.  Ray just before I came here,  this very afternoon,
— quite a long letter  !     I did,  I assure you  !  "

Here Mrs.  Paradise came forward with another gen-
tleman, younger,  slimmer,  and smarter,  and saying to
me,  "  Sir Gregory Page Turner,"  said to him,  "  Miss
Burney,  authoress of  '  Evelina.'  "

At which Lady Say and Sele,  in fresh transport,
again arose,  and rapturously again repeated — "  Yes,
she's authoress of  '  Evelina !'     Have you read it  ?"

'*No;  is it to be had?"

"  Oh dear,  yes !  it's been printed these two years !
You'd ne\'er think it !  But it's the most elegant novel
I ever read in my life.     Writ in such a style  !"

"  Certainly,"  said he,  very civilly  ;  "I have every
inducement to get it.  Pray where is it to be had  ?
every where,  I suppose?"

'*  Oh,  no where,  I hope!"  cried I,  wishing at that
moment it had been never in human ken.

My square friend.  Lord Say and Sele,  then putting his
head forward,  said,  very solemnly,  "  I'll purchase it!"

122 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT HI.

His lady tlicii mentioned to me a hundred novels
that I had never heard of,  asking my opinion of them,
and whether I knew the authors ;  Lady liawke only
occasionally and languidly joining in the discourse  :
and then Lady S.  and S.,  suddenly arising,  begged me
not to move,  for she should be back again in a minute,
and flew to the next room.

I took,  however,  the first opportunity of Lady
Hawke's casting down her eyes,  and reclining her
delicate head,  to make away from this terrible set;  and,
just as I was got by the piano-forte,  where I hoped
Pacchierotti would soon present himself,  Mrs.  Paradise
again came to me,  and said, —

"  Miss Burney,  Lady Say and Sele wishes vastly to
cultivate your acquaintance,  and begs to know if she
may have the honour of your company to an assembly
at her house next Friday? — and I will do myself the
pleasure to call for you,  if j^ou will give me leave."

**  Her ladyship)  does me much honour,  but I am
unfortunately engaged,"  was my answer,  w-ith as much
promptness as I could command.

F.  B.

Airs.  Thrale to Miss F,  Burney.

Wednesday Niglit,  Going to Bed.
My Dearest Burney,
May I venture,  do you think,  to call a little company
about me on St.  Taffy's day?  or,  will the world in
general,  and the Pepyses in particular,  feel shocked
at my  *' dissipation"  and my  "haste to be married?"
They came last night and found me alone with  ^Murphy.
There was an epoch  !  The Bishop of Peterborough
came in soon after.     Queenv was  ^one to Mrs.  Dave-

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  123

uant's,  with Miss Owen and Dr.  Delap.  What
dangers we do go through  !  But I have not gone out
to meet mine halfway,  at least.

Pray come on Friday se'nnight,  if you never come
again .

I was very near you yesterday,  but I put a con-
straint upon myself,  and pressed forward,  for I should
only have dirtied the house,  and hindered you,  and
been wished at York by the Padrona di casa.

I went to dear Dr.  Johnson's,  rassegnarlo la solita
servitu,  but at one o'clock he was not up,  and I did
not like to disturb him.  I am very sorry about him  —
exceeding sorry  !  When I parted from you on Monday,
and found him with Dr.  Lawrence,  I put my nose into
the old man's wig and shouted  ;  but got none except
melancholv answers, — so melancholv,  that I was forced
to crack jokes for fear of crying.

"There is gout at the bottom,  madam,"  says Law-
rence.

'^  I wish it were at the bottom!"  replied saucebox,
as loud as she could bawl,  and pointing to the pedestals,

''  He complains of a general gravedo,"  cries the
Doctor;  "  but he speaks too good Latin for us."

"  Do you take care,  at least,  that it does not increase
long J'  quoth I.  (The w^ord gravedo,  you know,  makes
gravedlnis,  and is,  therefore,  said to  "  increase long in
the genitive case.")  I thought this a good,  stupid,
scholar-like pun,  and Johnson seemed to like that
Lawrence was pleased.

This morning I was with him again,  and this even-
ing Mrs.  Ord's conversation and Piozzi's cara voce
have kept away care pretty well.  Mr.  Selwyn helped
us to be comfortable.  My Tit went with her Coz.  to
Abel's concert.

]24 DIARV AM)  LETTERS  [PaRT III.

Good night,  sweetest  ;  I am tired and want to 2:0 to
bed.

Good nii;-lit once more,  tbroui^li the door at
Streatham,  for thither imagination carries your affec-
tionate

H.  L.  T.

M7\  Crisp to Miss F.  Burney.

Chesington,  February 25.
Our own Fannikin,

I do acquiesce  ('tis true),  but not in calm acqui-
escence (as Dr.  Johnson does with Pope),  that you
should remain where you are instead of Chesington ;
but still I do say that,  if you could have returned hither
in Suzette's chaise,  safe and warm,  your undisturbed,
unbroken,  assiduous minding your lesson w^ould have
overbalanced the time you gain by being upon the spot
to correct proofs,  &c.*

I am not of your other Daddy's mind,  who w^ould
have it sent off to Mr.  Payne just as it is.  You have
so much to lose,  you cannot take too much care.  Tv'ot
that I would have you file,  and polish,  and refine,  till
the original fire and spirit of the composition flies off
in vapour,  —  and that,  I dare say,  is what he would
guard against ;  and so should I if I were not convinced
there is no danger of that kind to be apprehended ;

—  that belongs to your half geniuses  ;  —  a true — a real

—  a great one,  cannot be otherwise than highly luxu-
riant, and must be pruned.  The finest apricots I ever
tasted were the produce of a tree on the side of a
house,  that liad on it,  at one time,  eighteen hundred

*  The allusions throughout this letter are to  "Cecilia,"  then in
the press.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  125

dozen,  and were thinned to about seven hundred,  from
twenty-one thousand six hundred  !  You may imagine
this enormous quantity were mostly not bigger than
peas.  What then 'if  —  it demonstrates the monstrous
force and vigour of the tree.

You  "  wish I had never seen the book in the rough."
There you are in the wrong.  If ever the hints or ob-
servations of others can be worth listening to,  that is
the time;  and I have already told you one opinion
and piece of advice of mine,  the truth and solidity of
which every day of my life I am more and more con-
vinced of.  Whoever you think fit to consult,  let their
talents and taste be ever so great,  hear what they say, —
allowed  ! — agreed  ! — but never give up or alter a tittle
merely on their authority,  nor unless it perfectly
coincides with your own inward feelings.  I can say
this to my sorrow and to my cost.  —  But mum!  The
original sketches of works of genius,  though ever so
rude and rough,  are valuable and curious monuments,
and well worth preserving.

I am truly glad you have resolution enough of your
own,  and are permitted by others to stand your ground
manfully,  and sustain the siege of visitors that would
overwhelm you with their numbers and incessant
attacks.  I perfectly concur with your Doctor Daddy
in his selection of particulars,  so far as he has read,
and with his sentiments in general of the work and the
plan,  which  (by what he has already seen)  he cannot
but have conceived an idea of.  The unreasonable hurry
with which I was obliged to gallop over such a book
has disabled me from making,  or even forming,  obser-
vations, other than general ones.  But by my imperfect
recollection of particulars,  and what I felt at the time,
I think nothing struck me more forcibly than the

126 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part HI.

Foxhall*  scene;  it is finely  —  it is powerfully ima-
gined; it is a noble piece of morality!  the variety  —
the contrast of the different characters quite new and
unhackneyed,  and yet perfectly in nature  ;  and the
dreadful catastrophe that concludes the whole makes it
a masterpiece.  What a subject for that astonishing lad,
Edward,  to make a finished drawing,  and Bartolozzi
a print of!  The scene of Foxhall illuminated  —  the
mangled,  bleeding body carried along  —  the throng
of spectators crowding  'after,  filled with various ex-
pressions of horror,  wonder,  eager curiosity,  and in-
quiry ;  and many other particulars,  which the perusal
of the passage itself,  and his genius,  would suggest.  I
like Cecilia much better than Albina,  which I never was
fond of,  though not of much consequence.

I long to see Mrs.  Thrale's letter,  which I do most
faithfully promise to return  ;  and I do hereby summon
you to despatch it to me immediately.  To own to you
the real truth,  it was wholly owing to my impatience
to get at it that I so directly answered your last.

As to your lovely Greek,  I most earnestly recom-
mend to you,  notwithstanding your five sheets of
paper,  to put her down  (while she is strong and warm
in your memory and imagination)  in a finished draw-
ing in black and white.  I don't mean this merely to
satisfy curiosity,  but as a wonderful academy figure,
which may be of powerful use to you hereafter,  to
design from,  in some future historical composition.
Such opportunities don't offer every day ;  perfect no-
velty, united to such uncommon excellence,  is a prize
indeed  ;  don't let her slip,  but like Lothario,
"  Seize the golden,  glorious opportunit3%''

*  The old mode of spelling Vauxliall.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  127

I am in thorough,  serious earnest,  and seriously for the
reason I have given.

Your loving Daddy,

s.  c.

P.S. — You say the book is to be printed vol.  by
Yol.,  as fast as you can get it out.  Sure,  I hope,  you
don't mean by that that it is to come out in single,
separate volumes 1 I can't bear the thoughts of it.
All published at once,  or  "  Chaos is come again!"

2d P.  S.  —  I have not the conscience  (o demand Ions:
letters now in return;  only send Mrs.  Thrale's and to
Kit.

Miss F.  Burneij to Mr.  Crisjy.

loth March.

Your letter,  my dear daddy,  which I have just re-
ceived, has given me so much uneasiness that I may as
well answer it immediately,  as I can do nothing for
thinking of it.

The conflict scene for Cecilia,  between the mother
and son,  to which you so w^armly object,  is the very
scene for which I wrote the whole book,  and so en-
tirely does my plan hang upon it,  that I must abide by
its reception in the world,  or put the whole behind the
fire.

You will believe,  then,  with the opinion I have of
your judgment,  and the anxious desire I have to do
nothing quite contrary to your approbation,  if I can
now be very easy.  I would it w^ere in my power to
defer the whole publication to another spring,  but I
am sure my father vv^ould run crazy if I made such a
proposal.

Let me not,  however,  be sentenced without making

J 28 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part 111.

ray defence,  and at least explaining to you my own
meaning in the part you censure.

I meant in Mrs.  Delville to draw a great,  but not a
perfect character ;  I meant,  on the contrary,  to blend
upon paper,  as I have frequently seen blended in life,
noble and rare qualities with striking and incurable
defects.  I meant,  also,  to shew how the greatest
virtues and excellences may be totally obscured by the
indulgence of violent passions and the ascendancy of
favourite prejudices.

This scene has yet been read by no human creature
but yourself and Charlotte,  who would not let me rest
till I let her go through the book.  Upon Charlotte's
opinion 3'ou will easily believe I put no solid reliance ;
but yet I mention to you the effect it had on her,  be-
cause, as you told me about dear Kitty Cooke,  the
natural feelings of untaught hearers ought never to be
slighted ;  and Dr.  Johnson has told me the same a
thousand times.  Well,  she prefers it to any part of
the book,  and cried over it so vehemently that she
could eat no dinner,  and had a violent headach all
day.

I would rather,  however,  have had one good word
from you than all the tears of the tender,  and all
the praises of the civil.

The character of Mrs.  Delville struck you in so
fa-vourable a light,  that you sunk,  as I remember I
privately noticed to myself,  when you mentioned her,
all the passages to her disadvantage previous to this
conflict,  else it would have appeared to you less incon-
sistent, for the way is paved for it in several places.
But,  indeed,  you read the whole to cruel disadvantage ;
the bad writing,  the haste,  the rough copy,  all were
against me.      Your anger at  ]Mrs.  Delville's violence

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  129

and obduracy are nothing but what I meant to excite ;
your thinking it unnatural is all that disturbs me.

Yet,  when I look about me in the world,  such
strange inconsistencies as I see,  such astonishing con-
trariety of opinions,  and so bigoted an adherence of all
marked characters to their own way of thinking,  I
really know not how to give up this point.

Another thing gives me some comfort — the part
you have selected to like best,  Foxhall,  is what I
read to you myself,  and the whole of the residence at
Delvile Castle,  which I also read to you,  I remember
well you were pleased with more than with any other
part of the book.  I cannot,  therefore,  but hope the
bad copy and difficulty of reading did me as much
mischief as the bad and unequal composition.

But what are you thinking of,  my dear daddy,  when
you desire me to send you the two last vols,  imme-
diately 1 Did I not tell you I am still actually at work
upon the second  ?  And as to sending you again the
rough draft;  it would both be soliciting and establishing
your disapprobation.

The first volume seems to grow,  by recollection,  both
on my father and Mrs.  Thrale.  It is not to be ex-
pressed how fond they are of it,  especially my father.

Have you seen the verses in the newspaper,  where
they poked me in with all the belles esprits?^  Tvi^o
days ago,  at Mr.  Pepys'  I met them almost all.  Mrs.
Boscawen,  Mrs.  Chapone,  Hannah More,  Mrs.  Carter,
Sophy Streatfield,  Mrs.  Buller,  famous for writing
Greek notes in Greek books.  Miss Georgiana Shipley
(Mrs.  tVashinghani's friend),  famous for construing
Horace after a year's studying Latin,  Mr.  Wraxall,  the

*  See p.  134.

VOL.  II.  K

130 DIARY AXD LETTERS  [Part III.

northern historian,  General Paoli,  Dr.  Cadogan,  Sir
Joshua Reynolds,  <fcc.  &c.  But the greatest pleasure I
received  ^vas from meetino;  Mrs.  Garriek afiain.  She
had almost forgot me,  but was very kind,  and looked
very well,  very sweet,  and very elegant.  I was also
gratified by meeting with the lady of the late young
Lord Lyttelton,  who was made very celebrated by the
book called the  ''  Correspondents,"  which was asserted
to be written by her and the old Lord Lyttelton,  but
proves to be a very impertinent forgery.  She is still
pretty,  though a little jyasste^  and very elegant and
pleasing in her manners.  Mrs.  and Miss Ord,  Mr.
Burrows,  and many others,  were there also.

This is but the second large assembly I have been to
this vear,  thouo-h I have been invited to a hundred.
The other was at Mrs.  Thrale's,  who first invited a
large party about a week ago.  There I met again the
fair Greek,  the Hales,  Mr.  Jenkinson,*  Lord and Lady
Sandys,  the Burgoynes,  Mr.  Seward,  Mr.  Murphy,
Dr.  Delap,  Mrs.  Byron,  and fifty more at least.

I wish,  my dear daddy,  I had time to write you
some of the flash that passes upon these occasions ;  but
it is totally impossible.

#  #  ih  -^'^  =JP

Every body knows that I am about something ;  and
the moment I put my head out of doors,  I am sure to
be attacked and catechised.  Oh,  that I were but as
sure of the success as of the sale of this book !  but,
indeed,  I am now more discomfited and alarmed than
I have ever been yet.

Adieu,  my dear daddy.  I would I could do better  ;
but to love you and your most kind sincerity more

*  Since Earl of Liverpool.

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        131'

truly is not possible.     Never,  therefore,  spare it.  till

you cease to love,  or cease to esteem,  your ever af"-

fectionate

F.  B.

3Ilss F.  Buiiiey to Mrs,  Phillips.

Saturday,  March 19,  1782.

But that I am myself in continual disgrace aboufr
writing,  how should I murmur to hear so very,  very
seldom from my beloved Susy !  yet,  when your letters
do come,  to tell you half the pleasure with which I
read them,  would almost tempt you,  culprit as I am,
to let me see them oftener.  The serenity of happiness
you seem now to enjoy,  my ever dearest girl,  makes
me ready to cry over your letters with fulness of con-
tent for you ;  and were it otherwise,  how to forbear
repining at your absence I am sure I should not
know ;  for I miss you here so seriously,  so cruelly,  so
perpetually,  that nothing in the v/orld short of your
established happiness could make me any mental amends
for your loss.  The house seems so strange without
you,  my room so unoccupied,  and my affairs and in-
terests and thoughts so uncomfortable,  in wanting
your participation.

I don't well know what sullen fit of selfishness makes
me write all this ;  so,  to have done with it,  give to
your sweet captain my kindest love,  and tell him,  let
me murmur as I will by fits,  I would not,  if I could,
change your destination,  nor reverse the decree that
was given by IMr.  Shirley in St.  Martin's Church  ;  and
repeat to him  —  if you can  —  vvhat I once told him my-
self,— that never,  till I knew him,  did I see the person
to whom I could so cheerfully resign my first,  longest^
best,  and dearest friend.     So now  —  let's have a dance!

I had a very agreeable evening last Tuesday at Mr,

132 DIAllV AND LETTERS  [Part III.

Pepys',  AvIiCM'e I met Mrs.  Garrick,  wlioiu I rojoiced
much to see.  She had all but forgot me  ;  but when I
was introduced to her,  by her half recollecting and
asking who I was,  she was extremely kind and oblig-
ing. She looks very well,  rind very elegant.  She was
cheerfully grave,  did not speak much,  but was followed
and addressed by every body.  I could not help being
quite melancholy myself at sight of lier,  from remem-
brance of dear Mr.  Garrick.

Do you know they have put me again into the news-
papers, in a copy of verses made upon literary ladies, —
where are introduced Mrs.  Carter,  Chapone,  Cowley,
Hannah More,  Mrs.  Greville,  Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.
Thrale,  Mrs.  Crewe,  Sophy Streatlield,  and Mrs.  Mon-
tagu ?  In such honourable company,  to repine at being
placed,  would,  perhaps,  be impertinent;  so I take it
cpiietly enough ;  but I would to Heaven I could keep
clear of the whole !  However,  my dear father is so
delighted,  that,  though he was half afraid of speaking
to me at all about them at first,  he carries them con-
stantly in his pocket,  and reads them to every body!
I have a great suspicion they were w^ritten by Mr.
Pepys,  as tliey are just what I have heard him say of
all the people,  and as every creature mentioned in
them,  but Mrs.  Cowley,  Greville,  and Crewe,  w^ere
invited to be at his house on the very day they were
printed.

Yesterday I went,  with Charlotte and the two Kir-
wans,  to a rehearsal of Rauzzini's new opera.  I was
not at all enchanted,  though very well entertained.  The
music is pretty,  and the accompaniments pleasant;
but there is such a struggle for something uncommon,
and such queer disappointments of the ear in the differ-
ent turcs given to the passages from what it expects,
that it appears to have far more trick than genius in

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.         13S

the composition  ;  and every song is so very near being
comic,  that the least change in the workl woukl make
it w^holly so.

Pacchierotti was in better spirits than I have seen
him for some time,  and very earnest to help Rauzzini,
acting as maestro for him,  and singing like twenty
angels;  bat his songs are so unworthy of him,  I think,
that I never found out by the symphonies whether
they were meant for him  ;  and I never was at an opera
rehearsal before without knowing;  the first sino-er's.
airs long enough before he began them.  Yet I really
expect this will be the favourite opera for the season,  as
there are Scoticisms and oddities in it of all sorts,  to catch
popularity.     Pacchierotti came and spoke and said, —

*'  I have not seen you for a great age.  Miss Burni.'*

*'  No,"  quoth 1,  "  you never come."

"  I beg your pardon,  ma'am,"  said he,  "  never you
are at home,  and then you say never I come."

For I have been denied to him,  perforce,  repeatedly.

*^  Well,"  said I,  "  I am obliged to be a great deal
with Mrs.  Thrale,  but if you will fix a time,  I will be
sure to be in the way."

"Ah!"  said he,  "always you are to Mrs.  Thrale?
Well,  I only say,  Heaven forgive her ! "

However he could not fix a positive time ;  but next
Tuesday,  Wednesday,  or Friday,  he will come,  and the
Kirwans are to come and watch for him till he does.
They are sweet girls,  but this is a most inconvenient
arrangement for me at present.

Adieu,  my Susy,  —  write very soon.*  p,   -^

*  The following are the lines alluded to in this letter ;
they appeared in the  "Morning Herald"  for March 12,  1782.
Some years afterwards.  Sir W.  W.  Pepys denied having written
these lines  ;  and in the year 1822,  a MS.  copy of them was found
among Dr.  Burney's papers,  with so many erasures,  interlinea-

134 D1A1;V AND LKliKRS  [PaHT III.

From Mr.  Crisp to Miss F.  Burney.

Chesingtoii,  Friday,  A])ril  ;">,  1782.

#  #  #  #  *

In works of genius,  fancy,  imagination,  'tis not the

-tions,  and changes,  as to give the most direct internal evidence
that they were the doctor's own composition.

"ADVICE TO THE HERALD.
"  Herald,  wherefore thus proclaim

Nought of woman but the shame?

Quit,  oh,  quit,  at least awhile,

Perdita's too luscious smile  ;

Wanton Worsley,  stilted Daly,

Heroines of each blackguard alley  ;

Better sure record in story

Such as shine their sex's glory  !

Herald  !  haste,  with me proclaim

Those of literary fame.

Hannah More's pathetic pen.

Painting high th'  inipassion'd scene  ;

Carter's piety and learning,

Little Burney' s quick discerning  ;

Cowley's neatly pointed wit,

Healing those her satires hit ;

Smiling Streatfield's iv'ry neck.

Nose,  and notions  —  a la Grecque!

Let Chapone retain a place.

And the mother of her Grace,

Each art of conversation knowing,

High-bred,  elegant Boscaweu  ;

Thrale,  in whose expressive eyes
Sits a soul above disguise,
Skill'd with wit and sense t'  impart
Feelings of a generous heart.
Lucan,  Leveson,  Greville,  Crewe ;
Fertile-minded Montague,
AA'ho makes each rising art her care,
'  And brings her knowledge from afar !'
Whilst her tuneful tongue defends
Authors dead,  and absent friends  ;
Brio-lit in genius,  pure in fame  : —
Herald,  haste,  and these proclaim  !"

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  135

long,  learned argumentations of critics,  pro and con,
that come with the compass and line in their hands,  to
measure right and wrong,  that will decide;  no,  'tis
the genuine,  unbiassed,  uninfluenced,  inward feelings
of mankind that are the true,  infallible test,  ultimately,
of sterling merit.  In vain comes Voltaire,  with all the
powers of wit,  satire,  learning,  and art,  to knock down
Shakspeare,  and turn him into ridicule  ;  when he has
finished his harangue,  Shakspeare stands just where he
did — like a rock in the sea;  and the universal voice of
high and low,  from their own impressions,  without
attempting to answer him in his own way,  give him
the lie,  and send him about his business.

And now,  Fannv,  after this severe lecturino-,  I shall
give you a sweetener to make it up with you  ;  after
assuring you it comes from the same sincerity that
dictated what I have said already ;  and I shall do it
in the very words I made use of to Daddy Burney on
Tuesday morning last  —  that I would ensure the rapid
and universal success of this work for half-a-crown ;
that nothing like it had appeared since Fielding and
Smollett ;  and that you bid fair for becoming the first
writer of the age in compositions of this kind.

I have nothing farther to add,  but this piece of
advice — not to let success intoxicate you,  and in-
fluence you to remit your ardour and industry to be
perfect.  There have been more instances than one,
where writers have wrote themselves down,  by sloven-
liness, laziness,  and presuming too much on public
favour for what is past.

Your loving daddy,

S.  C

136 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT III.

Miss F.  Burney to Mr.  Crisp.

April G,  17»-2.

Heartily do I thank yoii,  my ever dear daddy,  for
your kind and honourable dealing with me.  A lec-
turing do you call tliis?  Believe me,  I am,  as yet,  so
far from being  "  intoxicated with success,"  that I read
it with gratitude and wonder  ;  for I expected much
more severity,  and when I received your letters,  I was
almost sick with painful prognostics of your disapproba-
tion. I shall do the utmost in my power to profit from
your criticisms,  but I can speak to no particulars till I
come to the places themselves.

With respect,  however,  to the great point of Cecilia's
fortune,  I have much to urge in my own defence,  only
now I can spare no time,  and I must frankly confess
I shall think I have rather written a farce than a
serious history,  if the whole is to end,  like the hack
Italian operas,  with a jolly chorus that makes all par-
ties good and all parties happy !  The people I have
ever met with who have been fond of blood and family,
have all scouted title when put in any competition
with it.  How then should these proud Delviles think
a new-created peerage any equivalent for calling their
sons'  sons,  for future generations,  by the name of
Beverley?  Besides,  I think the book,  in its present
conclusion,  somewhat original,  for the hero and he-
roine are neither plunged in the depths of misery,  nor
exalted to u^y/nunan happiness.  Is not such a middle
state more natural,  more according to real life,  and
less resembling every other book of fiction  ?

Besides,  my own end v/ill be lost if I change the con-
clusion, which was chiefly to point out the absurdity
and short-sightedness of those 7iame-compeUing wills,

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  137

which make it always presumed a woman marries an
inferior,  since he,  not she,  is to leave his own family
in order to be incorporated into hers.

You find,  my dear daddy,  I am prepared to fight a
good battle here ;  but I have thought the matter much
over,  and if I am made to give up this point,  my whole
plan is rendered abortive,  and the last page of any
novel in Mr.  Noble's circulating library may serve for
the last page of mine,  since a marriage,  a reconciliation,
and some sudden expedient for great riches,  concludes
them all alike.  In every thing else you have pointed
out I shall either wholly change,  or greatly alter.  And
I will be very diligent to improve and mend the whole.
Pray,  if any thing more occurs to you,  write it,  and
believe me with the truest gratitude and affection your

F.  B.

Mrs,  Thrale to Miss Burney.

Streatham,  April 24,  1782.

I thought to have seen my sweet Fanny in London
to-day,  instead of her father here,  for I was engaged
to meet my fellow-executors at Robson's upon busi-
ness ;  but  'tis all put off till to-morrow,  and so Mr.
Johnson and Crutchley came home with me then.

How does dear Cecilia do at Del vile Castle  ?  and
how does my poor Henrietta get letters to kiss from
him who seems wholly engaged to her best friend and
most dangerous rival  ?  What becomes of Lady Ho-
noria without scandal and flirtation  ?  and when does
Mr.  Monckton bury peevish Lady Margaret and fill
us with fresh confusion  ?

Oh  !    write away,  sweet Burney !      I wish I could

138 DIAKV AND LETTERS  [FakT III.

help you In tlic niamial  ]);irt.  I think I could submit
to be printer's devil,  to get a sight of the next volume,
verily.

My last  ^\ord puts me in mind of David Barclay.
He lias sent me the  "  Apology for the Quakers,"  and
thinks to convert me,  I believe.  I have often been
solicited to change my religion by Papists.  Why do
all the people think me foolisher than I am  ?

So Sir Philip's bill^-'  is past,  and I am no glad  !  Why
your father says that there would have been a rebellion
if his bill had not past.  A rebellion  !  and all about
our dear innocent sweet Sir Philip ;  who,  while his
humanity is such that he would scruple no fatigue to
save the life of a lamb,  would have drenched the na-
tion in blood without ever foreseeing,  or ever repenting,
the consequences!  What a world do we live in!  and
how such things justly operate to make Johnson and
you,  and all observers of life,  despise us readers of the
Punic War,  in which,  perhaps,  the agents we learn the
names of in Latin,  French,  and English,  were people
not a whit more respectable than Sir Harbord Harbord
and Sir Philip Jennings Gierke.

Miss Sharp will marry the old schoolmaster too  !
Did you ever talk to Baretti,  or bear him talk,  of the
Tromba Marino man,  that the girl in Venice would
absolutely marry for the comfort of combing his beard  ?

Adieu,  my love,  I only disturb the Doctor and my
Tit,  and they plague me.

Adieu,  and love your

H.  L.  T.

*  Probably the bill alluded to in the remarkable conversation
between Sir Philip Gierke and Dr.  Johnson,  reported at pp.  180, 1,
vol.  i.

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        139

Mrs.  Thrale to Miss F.  Barney.

Thursday,  25,  1782.

Upon my honour then,  my dear,  I have not said half
of what my heart is full.  The Delviles,  since I wrote
last,  efface every thing else.  When I read the lady's
character in my own dressing-room,  I catch myself
looking at my mother's picture every moment ;  yours
is so like her in many things.  Hobson and Simkins
are Borough men,  and I am confident they were both
canvassed last year ;  they are not representations of
life,  they are the life itself Even Mr.  Briggs,  cari-
cato as he certainly is,  won all my esteem by his scene
with Don Puff end orff,  whose misty magnitude was
never shewn so despicably dropsical before.  I was
happy to see Briggs have the better of him.

But poor Henrietta!  some harm will come to her,  I
see,  and break my heart,  for she has won it strangely ;
her innocent love of a character superior in rank and
fortune to herself,  shews her taste and proves her
merit;  while the delicacy of her mind,  the diffidence

arising from I am just ready to order the coach,

in short,  and fetch her away to Streatham,  from that
most inimitably painted mother,  whom Queeny does so
detest.  But she has seized Lady Honoria for her fa-
vourite, and her saying how Cecilia's fortune should
patch up the old fortifications there about West Wood
enchanted us both.

Oh,  lovely Burney  !  ma che talento mat !  I will trust
myself no further on a subject that makes me wild.

And so your father don't come to-day  ;  and so I
must send Daniel back with your sweet manuscript in
the morning.  Very well,  he shall take the greatest
-care of it.     I had never one in my possession that I

140 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT III.

valued lialf so niucli before.     Seward only have I said
any thins:  about it to.

Do yon believe that I am steadily set to read  "  Mar-
montel"  all over again,  to see whether,  in variety of
character,  comprehension of genius,  and elegance of
touch,  he at all equals this third volume of my Bar-
ney's ?

Here comes your father.  What can make him so
late?  Adieu,  ever more and more your admirer!
Can I be more vour friend  ?

H.  L.  T.

Mrs.  llirale to Miss F.  Biirney.

Tuesday Night.

My eyes red with reading and crying,  I stop everj-
moment to kiss the book and to wish it was my Bur-
ney !  'Tis the sweetest book,  the most interesting,  the
most engaging.  Oh  !  it beats every other book,  even
your own other vols.,  for  "  Evelina"  was a baby to it.

Dear charming creature  !  do I stop every six pages
to exclaim  ;  and my Tit is no less delighted than I ;  she
is run out of the room for a moment.  But young Del-
ville is come and Queeny returned,  so I leave the pen
and seize the MSS.

Such a novel !  Indeed,  I am seriously and sensibly
touched by it,  and am proud of her friendship who so
knows the human heart.  May mine long bear the in-
spection of so penetrating,  so discriminating an eye  !

This letter is written by scraps and patches,  but
every scrap is admiration,  and every patch thanks you
for the pleasure I have received.  I will say no more  ;
I cannot say half I think with regard to praise.

I am sorry Pacchierotti does not come on Thursday,

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        141

for on Thursday se'nnight I am engaged.  In your
book his praises will be recorded,  and by it they will
be diffused.

The Belfields are my joy,  my delight.  Poor Hen-
rietta !  how I adore her !  How easily was her sweet
heart engaged by that noble friend !  But I have not
finished my book yet ;  'tis late now,  and I pant for
morning.  Nothing but hoarseness made me leave off
at all.

My most ingenious,  my most admirable friend,  adieu  !
If I had more virtue than  ''  Cecilia,"  I should half fear
the censures of such an insight into the deepest re-
cesses of the mind.  Since I have read this volume,  I
have seriously thanked Heaven that all the litter of
mine was in sight;  none hoarded in holes,  nor hastily
stufled.  into closets.  You have long known the worst
of your admiring

H.  L.  T.

31iss F.  Burner)  to Mr.  Crisp.

May,  1782.

Who in the world has a daddy so kind as mine  ?  I
cannot,  indeed,  say half how grateful I am for your
solicitude for me.  All you say about the annuity and
the money appears to me unanswerably right.

#  #  #  #  ^

If I had made a request to you for the sum total of
my wishes upon your reading this trash,  it would have
been precisely what you have promised voluntarily at
the end of your letter, —  to let me have your real
opinion,  yet not insist,  if that opinion is condemnation,
upon my forbearing to try that of the public  :  which I
now must do,  and which my former success makes me

142 diahy and letters  [Part III.

hope obtainable.  But tliough I can now do little in
consequence of your objections,  I may in future profit
from remembering them.

With regard to the second volume,  every body has
seemed to prefer it to the first,  except IVIrs.  Thrale,
who was so fond of the ton parties in the beginning,
and of Miss Larolles,  Mr.  Meadows,  and the Captain,
that she lamented not having more of them.  Mr.
Gosport,  too.  she is so fond of,  that she declares if I
don't provide for him,  "  she will have him herself."
Mrs.  Belfield,  however,  has quite enchanted her, —  she
knows,  she says,  so many like her in the Borough.

Etty much prefers the second volume,  because there
is so much more incident ;  Mrs.  Thrale is more partial
to character.

My father's present favourite is the old crazy moralist,

Albany.     He is quite delighted with him  ;  and no one

else has taken any notice of him.     Next to him,  he is

fondest of Belfield.     The tradesman manquty he says,

is new,  and may be not uninstructive,  and he is much

pleased with his various struggles,  and the agrtmens of

his talents,  and the spirit,  yet failure,  of his various

fiishts and experiments.

F.  B.

Journal Resumed.

June,  1782. — At length,  my ever dearest Susan,  my
long-neglected journal and long-promised renewal be-
hold at your feet — for thither shall I speed them with
all the expedition in my power.

So much has passed since I lost you  —  for I cannot
use any other word  —  that I hardly know what first to
record  ;  but I think  'tis best to begin with what is
uppermost in my mind,  Mr.  Burke.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  143-

Among the many I have been oblig-ed to shirk this-
year,  for the sake of living almost solely with  "  Cecilia,'*
none have had less patience with my retirement than
Miss Palmer,  who,  bitterly believing I intended never
to visit her again,  has forborne sending me any invita-
tions :  but,  about three weeks ago,  my father had a
note from Sir Joshua Reynolds,  to ask him to dine at
Richmond,  and meet the Bishop of St.  Asaph:  and,
therefore,  to make my peace,  I scribbled a note ta
Miss Palmer to this purpose, —

"  After the many kind invitations I have been obliged
to refuse,  will you,  my dear Miss Palmer,  should I
offer to accompany my father to-morrow,  bid me re-
member the old proverb, —

^  Those wlio will not  -when they niay,
When they will,  thev shall have nav?'

F.  B."

This w^as graciously received  ;  and the next morning
Sir Joshua and Miss Palmer called for my father and
me,  accompanied by Lord Corke.  We had a mighty
pleasant ride.  Miss Palmer and I made up,  though
she scolded most violently about my long absence,  and
attacked me about the book without mercy.  The
book,  in short,  to my great consternation,  I find is
talked of and expected all the town over.  My dear
father himself,  I do verily believe,  mentions it to every
body ;  he is fond of it to enthusiasm,  and does not
foresee the danger of raising such general expectation,
which fills me with the horrors every time I am tor-
mented with the thouo;ht.

Sir Joshua's house is delightfully situated,  almost at
the top of Richmond Hill.  We walked till near dinner-
time upon the terrace,  and there met Mr.  Richard

144 JJIAPvV AND LETTERS  [Part III.

Burke,  the brother of the orator.  Miss Palmer,  stop-
pmg him,  said, —

"  Are you coming to dine witli us?"

""  Xo,"  he answered  ;  "  I shall dine at the Star and
Garter."

"  How did you come — with oNIrs.  Burke,  or alone?"

"  Alone."

"  What,  on horseback?"

"  Ay,  sure!"  cried he,  laughing;  ^^  up and ride!
Now  's the time.''

And he made a fine flourish with his hand,  and passed
us.  He is just made under-secretary at the Treasury.
He is a tall and handsome man,  and seems to have
much dry drollery  ;  but we saw no more of him.

After our return to the house,  and wdiile Sir Joshua
and I were ttte-a-ttte^  Lord Corke and my father
being still walking,  and Miss Palmer having,  I suppose,
some orders to give about the dinner,  the  '^  Knight of
Plympton"  was desiring my opinion of the prospect
from his window,  and comparing it with Mr.  Burke's,
as he told me after I had spoken it, — when the Bishop
of St.  Asaph and his daughter,  INliss Georgiana Shipley,
were announced.  Sir Joshua,  to divert himself,  in
introducing me to the bishop,  said,  "  Miss Burney,
my lord  ;  otherwise,  '  Evelina.'  "

The bishop is a well-looking man,  and seemed grave,
quiet,  and sensible.  I have heard much more of him ;
but nothing more appea,red.  Miss Georgiana,  how-
ever, was showy enough for two.  She is a very tall,  and
rather handsome girl ;  but the expression of her face
is,  to me,  disagreeable.  She has almost a constant
smile,  not of softness,  nor of insipidity,  but of self-
sufficiency and internal satisfaction.  She is very much
accomplished,    and her fame for painting and for

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        145

scholarship,  I know you are well acquainted with.  I
believe her to have very good parts and much quick-
ness ;  but she is so full of herself,  so earnest to obtain
notice,  and so happy in her confidence of deserving it,
that I have been not less charmed with any young
lady I have seen for many a day.  I have met with
her before,  at Mrs.  Pepys',  but never before was intro-
duced to her.

Miss Palmer soon joined us ;  and,  in a short time,
entered more company, —  three gentlemen and one
lady ;  but there was no more ceremony used of intro-
ductions. The lady,  I concluded,  was Mrs.  Burke,
wife of the Mr.  Burke,  and was not mistaken.  One
of the gentlemen I recollected to be young Burke,  her
son,  whom I once met at Sir Joshua's in town,  and
another of them I knew for Mr.  Gibbon  :  but the third
I had never seen before.  I,  had been told that the
Burke was not expected ;  yet I could conclude this
gentleman to be no other;  he had just the air,  the
manner,  the appearance,  I had prepared myself to look
for in him,  and there was an evident,  a striking-
superiority in his demeanour,  his eye,  his motions,  that
announced him no common man.

I could not get at Miss Palmer to satisfy my doubts,
and we were soon called down-stairs to dinner.  Sir
Joshua and the unlmoicn stopped to speak with one
another upon the stairs ;  and,  when they followed us,
Sir Joshua,  in taking his place at the table,  asked me
to sit next to him  ;  I willingly complied.  '*  And then,"
he added,  '^  Mr.  Burke shall sit on the other side of
you."

"  Oh,  no,  indeed!"  cried Miss Georgiana,  who also
had placed herself next Sir Joshua;  "I won't con-
sent to that;   Mr.  Burke must sit next mc ;  I won't

VOL.  II.  L

146 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

agree to part witli him.  Pray,  come and sit down
quiet,  Mr.  Burke."

Mr.  Burke, — for him it was, —  smiled and obeyed.

*'  I only meant,"  said Sir Joshua,  "  to have made
my peace w^ith Mr.  Burke,  by giving liim that place,
because he has been scold ins^  me for not introducins^
him to Miss Burney.  However,  I must do it now;  —
Mr.  Burke!— Miss Burney!"

We both half rose,  and Mr.  Burke said, —

"  I have been complaining to Sir Joshua that he left
me wholly to my own sagacity ;  however,  it did not
here deceive me."

*'  Oh dear,  then,"  said Miss Georgiana,  looking a
little consternated,  "  perhaps you won't thank me for
calling you to this place  ! "

Nothing was said,  and so we all began dinner, —
young Burke making himself my next neighbour.

Captain Phillips knows Mr.  Burke.  Has he or has
he not told you how delightful a creature he is?  If he
has not,  pray,  in my name,  abuse him without mercy ;
if he has,  pray ask if he will subscribe to my account
of him,  which herewith shall follow.

He is tall,  his figure is noble,  his air commanding,
his address graceful :  his voice is clear,  penetrating,
sonorous,  and powerful;  his language is copious,  yarious,
and eloquent;  his manners are attractive,  his conver-
sation is delightful.

What says Captain Phillips?  Have I chanced to see
him in his happiest hour?  or is he all this in com-
mon? Since we lost Garrick I have seen nobody so
enchanting.

I can give you,  however,  very little of what was said,
for the conversation was not suivie,  Mr.  Burke darting
from subject to subject with as much rapidity as enter-

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  147

tainment.  Neither is the charm of his discourse more
in the matter than the manner  ;  all,  therefore,  that is
related from him loses half its effect in not being
related hy him.  Such little sketches as I can recollect
take however.

From the window of the dining-parlour,  Sir Joshua
directed us to look at a pretty white house which
belonged to Lady Di.  Beauclerk.

"  I am extremely glad,"  said Mr.  Burke,  ^'  to see
her at last so well housed  ;  poor woman !  the bowl
has long rolled in misery;  I rejoice that it has now
found its balance.  I never,  myself,  so much enjoyed
the sight of happiness in another,  as in that woman
when I first saw her after the death of her husband.  It
was really enlivening to behold her placed in that
sweet house,  released from all her cares,  a thousand
pounds a-year at her own disposal,  and  —  her husband
was dead!  Oh,  it was pleasant,  it was delightful to
see her enjoyment of her situation  !"

*'  But,  without considering the circumstances,"  said
Mr.  Gibbon,  "this may appear very strange,  though^
when they are fairly stated,  it is perfectly rational and
unavoidable."

<■(■  Very true,"  said Mr.  Burke,  *'  if the circumstances
are not considered,  Lady Di.  may seem highly repre-
hensible."

He then,  addressing himself particularly to me,  as
the person least likely to be acquainted with the cha-
racter of Mr.  Beauclerk,  drew it himself in strong and
marked expressions,  describing the misery he gave his
wife,  his singular ill treatment of her,  and the necessary
relief the death of such a man must give.

He then reminded Sir Joshua of a day in which they
had dined at Mr.  Beau clerk's,  soon after his marriage

148 DIAKY AND LETTERS  [Part III.

■with Lord Bolingbroke's divorced wife,  in company
with Goldsmith,  and tokl a new story of poor Gold-
smith's eternal bUmderina".

From the Rig Jit Honour  (ihie Edmund Burke to

Miss F.  Burney.
Madam,
I should feel exceedingly to blame if I could refuse
to myself the natural satisfaction,  and to you the just
but poor return,  of my best thanks for the very great
instruction and entertainment I have received from the
new present you have bestowed on the public.  There
a3'e feAv  —  I believe 1 may say fairl}^  there are none at
all  —  that will not find themselves better informed con-
cerning human nature,  and their stock of observation
enriched,  by reading your  "  Cecilia."  They certainly
wdll,  let their experience in life and manners be what
it mav.    The arroofance of ao'e must submit to be tauo'ht

.,00 o

by youth.  You have crowded into a few^  small volumes
an incredible variety of characters  ;  most of them well
planned,  well supported,  and well contrasted with each
other.  If there be any fault in this respect,  it is one
in which vou are in no oreat dano-er of beino-  imitated.
Justly as your cliaracters are draw"n,  perhaps they are
too numerous.  But I beg pardon ;  I fear it is quite
in vain to preach economy to those who are come
young to excessive and sudden opulence.

I might trespass on your delicacy if I should fill my
letter to you with what I fill my conversation to others.
I should be troublesome to you alone if I should tell
you all I feel and think on the natural vein of humour,
the tender pathetic,  the comprehensive and noble
moral,  and the sagacious observation,  that appear quite

o'jghout that extraordinary performance.

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EV^ELINA.         149

In an age distinguished by producing extraordinary
women,  I hardly dare to tell you where my opinion
would place you amongst them.  I respect your mo-
desty, that will not endure the commendations which
your merit forces from every body.

I have the honour to be,  with great gratitude,  respect,

and esteem,    madam,    your most obedient and most

humble servant,

Edm.  Burke.
Whiteliall,  July 29,  1782.

My best compliments and congratulations to Dr.
Burney on the great honour acquired to his family.

Journal Resumed.

Chesington,  Monday,  August 12th.  —  I set out
for this ever dear place,  accompanied by Edward,  who
was sent for to paint Mr.  Crisp for my father.  I am.
sure you will rejoice in this.  I was a little dumpish
in the journey,  for I seemed leaving my Susan again.
However,  I read a  *'  Rambler"  or two,  and  '*  composed
the harmony of my temper,"  as well as I could,  for the
sake of Edward,  who was not only faultless of this,  but
who is,  I almost think,  faultless of all things.  I have
thought him more amiable and deserving than ever,
since this last sojourn under the same roof with him;
and,  as it happened,  I have owed to him almost all the
comfort I have this time met with here.

We came in a chaise,  which was well loaded with
canvasses,  pencils,  and painting materials ;  for Mr.
Crisp was to be three times painted,  and Mrs.  Gast
once.  My sweet father came down Gascoign Lane to
meet us,  in very good spirits and very good health.
Next came dear Daddy Crisp,  looking vastly well,  and.

150 DIARY AM)  LETTKRS  [PaHT III.

as usual,  liigli in Lilec and kindness at the meeting.
Then the affectionate Kitty,  tlie good Mrs.  Hamilton,
tlie gentle Miss Young,  and the enthusiastic Mrs.  Gast.
The instant dinner was over,  to my utter surprise
and consternation,  I was called into the room ap-
propriated for Edward and his pictures,  and informed
I was to sit to him for  ^Ir.  Crisp!  Remonstrances
were unavailing,  and declarations of aversion to the
design were only ridiculed ;  both daddies interfered,
and,  when I ran off,  brought me back between them,
and compelled my obedience;  —  and from that time to
this,  nothing has gone forward but picture-sitting.

*  *c  #  *  *

!\ow to the present state of things and people.

My father is all himself — gay,  facile,  and sweet.
He comes to all meals,  writes without toiling,  and
gives us more of his society than he has done many
years.  His third volume he is not tied down to pro-
duce at any stated time,  and he has most wisely re-
solved not to make any promises to the public about
it,  nor to take in any subscriptions,  but to keep free
from all eno-ao-ement.

A serious piece of intelligence has given,  does give,
and long must give me the utmost concern and sorrow.
My dear Mrs.  Thrale,  the friend,  though not the viost
dear friend of my heart,  is going abroad for three
years certain.  This scheme has been some time in
a sort of distant agitation,  but it is now brouo^ht to
a resolution.  Much private business belongs to it
relative to her detestable lawsuit ;  but much private
inclination is also joined with it relative to her long
wishing to see Italy.  I have determined,  therefore,  to
do all in my power to bear this blow steadily ;  and the
remembrance how very much I suffered when such an

1782]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         151

one was formerly thought of,  makes me suppress all
my regret,  and drive the subject from my mind by
every method in my power,  that I may save myself
from again experiencing such unavailing concern.  The
thought,  indeed,  that she wishes to go,  would reconcile
me to a yet longer absence,  by making me feel that my
own sorrow is merely selfish.

Streatham,  —  my other home,  and the place where I
have long thought my residence dependent only upon
my own pleasure,  and where,  indeed,  I have received
such as my father and you alone could make greater, —
is already let for three years to Lord Shelburne.  If I
was to begin with talking of my loss,  my strangeness,
I had almost said,  for these three years,  I should never
have done,  and only make us both melancholy ;  so
nothing will I say about the matter,  but that you,
tender and liberal as you are,  will be almost my only
friend who will not rejoice in this separation,  as the
most effectual means of keeping me more in London  ;
though you,  my Susy,  will be,  perhaps,  the most
sincerely gratified by what additional time it may

M7\  Crisp to Miss Burney.
My dear Fannikin,
I deferred a return of my most sincere thanks and
acknowledgments,  both for your highly agreeable pre-
sent and your two kind short notes,  till I had twice read
over,  and thoroughly,  nay,  severely considered the
first.  Don't be surprised at so harsh an adverb.  I
was resolved to put myself in the place of an unin-
fluenced, yawning,  fastidious reader,  that takes up a
new book with careless indifference,  expecting from
a novel nothing more than the usual common-place
trash they abound with.

152 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PartIII.

In this slate of mind I endeavoured at divesting
myself,  as well as I could,  of all remendjrance of the
work,  and all partiality for the author.  To do this
completely was indeed impossible ;  but still it was
something to be continually saying to myself,  after I
had read a chapter.  How will this go down  ?  What
will the multitude,  who care not a straw for author or
bookseller,  or any thing but their own immediate
amusement,  say of it  ?  These were my queries to
myself.  If I could have given a positive and certain
answer to them,  that answer would have determined
the fate of the book,  and the character of the author's
abilities  ;  for these are the people  (not a few,  nay,  even
a numerous partial set of friends)  that ultimately can
and do decide.

The tribunal of the Inquisition itself is not more
inflexible than I endeavoured to be on this occasion.
Every other mode of proceeding is only delusive,  and
what is called making one's market at home.

What w^as the result of these my meditations  ?  To
enter into particulars would be endless  ;  but the sum
total amounts to this  —  a full,  unlimited confirmation
of my warm approbation of the whole work together,
and a positive declaration of the improvements it has
received,  beyond all expectation:  —  greatly and judi-
ciously compressed  ;  long conversations curtailed  ;  se-
veral incidents much better managed  ;  and the winding
up beyond all compare,  more happy,  more judicious,
more satisfactory.  Many particulars,  which I did
not quite relish are softened off to a degree that,
if I do not perfectly assent to,  I hardly know how
to condemn,  particularly in the instance of Old Del-
vile,  in whom  (without departing from his oi'iginal
character,  which would have been unpardonable)
you have found means,  fairly accounted for,  to melt

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  153

clown some of that senseless,  obstinate,  inherent pride,
which,  if still kept np to its height,  would have ren-
dered miserable those who ought to have been dearest
to him,  and have established him  (which would have
been a great impropriety)  without any necessity,
(young Delvile's father,  and the excellent Mrs.  Del-
vile's husband)  the most hateful of beings.

These,  my dear Fannikin,  without the least favour
or affection,  are my sincere sentiments  ;  and,  if I know
myself,  would be such if I had met with the book
without any name to it.  At the same time,  to evince
my sincerity,  and that you may not think I mean,
sycophant-like,  to turn about and recant,  in order to
swim with the wind and tide that brings you  (as I
hear)  clouds of incense from every quarter — to avoid
this scandalous imputation,  I do declare that I must
adhere to my former sentiments on some parts of the
work,  particularly the loss of Cecilia's estate.

But don't think I pretend to set up against the public
voice my trumpery objection,  which,  even if well
founded,  would be a mere dust in the balance.  So
much at present for  ''  Cecilia."

Now,  Fannikin,  I must remind you of your promise,
which was to come to your loving daddy when you
could get loose.  Look ye,  Fanny,  I don't mean to
cajole you hither with the expectation of amusement or
entertainment.  You and I know better than to hum
or be hummed in that manner.  If you come here,
come to work,  —  work hard — stick to it.  This is the
harvest-time of your life ;  your sun shines hot ;  lose
not a moment,  then,  but make your hay directly.
"Touch the yellow boys,"  as Briggs says,  —  "grow
warm ;"  make the booksellers come down handsomely
—  count the ready  —  the chink.     Do but secure this

154 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT 111.

one point while it is in your power,  and all things else
shall be added unto thee.

I talked to your doctor daddy on the subject of dis-
posing of your money ;  and we both agreed in the
project of a well-secured annuity  ;  and in the mean-
time, till that could be procured,  that the ready should
be vested in the three per cent annuities,  that it might
produce something ;  and he promised to advance,  to
make even money.

s.  c.

Miss Burney to Mrs.  TJirale.

August 1782.

I have been kept in hot water,  in defiance of snow,
till I heard from my dearest Tyo  ;  and if you do like
the book,  I am gratified to my heart's content ;  and if
you only say you do,  to have it so said is very delight-
ful, for your w4sh to give me pleasure w^ould give it,  if
you hated all I ever wrote.

So you are all for the heroine and Miss Larolles?
Mr.  Crisp was for the heroine and Mrs.  Delvile.  My
father likes the imperious old gentleman  ;  my mother
is all for the Harrels.  Susan and Charlotte have not
seen a word.  If it does but attract,  as dear Dr.  J.
says,  I am happy,  be it which way it will.  Why do
you lament Gosport?  he is clever,  but an elderly man
from the first,  and no rival.

Adieu,  my sweetest of friends.     To-morrow I spend

wath Mrs.  Ord.     Friday,  if there comes a dry frost,  to

you will run your own

F.  B.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOK OF EVELINA.  155

3Iiss Burney to Mr.  Crisp.

Oct.  15,  1782.

^  *«*  "^  ^?  ^

I am very sorry you could not come to Streatham
at the time Mrs.  Thrale hoped to see you,  for when
shall we be likely to meet there again  ?  You would
have been much pleased,  I am sure,  by meeting with
General Paoli,  who spent the day there,  and was ex-
tremely communicative and agreeable.  I had seen
him in large companies,  but was never made known to
him before ;  nevertheless,  he conversed with me as if
well acquainted not only with myself,  but my con-
nexions,—  inquiring of me when I had last seen Mrs.
Montagu?  and calling Sir Joshua Reynolds,  when he
spoke of him,  my friend.  He is a very pleasing man,
tall and genteel in his person,  remarkably well bred,
and verj'-  mild and soft in his manners.

I will try to give you a little specimen of his con-
versation, because I know you love to hear particulars
of all out-of-the-way persons.  His English is blunder-
ing, but not unpretty.  Speaking of his first acquaint-
ance with Mr.  Boswell, —

"  He came,"  he said,  "  to my country,  and he
fetched me some letter of recommending him;  but I
was of the belief he might be an impostor,  and I sup-
posed, in my minte,  he wa.s an espy  ;  for I look away
from him,  and in a moment I look to him again,  and I
behold his tablets.  Oh  !  he was to the work of writing
down all I say !  Indeed I was angry.  But soon I dis-
cover he was no impostor and no espy;  and I only
find I was myself the monster he had come to discern.
Oh,  —  is a very good man;   I love him indeed;    so

156 DIAKV AND LETIKRS,  Sec.         [Part III.

cheerful !  so gay !  so pleasant !  but at the first,  oli !   I
was indeed ano-rv."

After this he told us a story of an expectation he had
had of being robbed,  and of the protection he found
from a very large dog that he is very fond of.

"  I walk out,"  he said,  '*  in the night ;  I go towards
the field;  I behold a man — oh,  ugly one!  I proceed —
he follow;  I go on  —  he address me,  '  You have one
'  dog,'  he says.  '  Yes,'  say I to him.  ^  Is a fierce dog?'
he says  ;  '  is he fiery?'  ^  Yes,'  reply I,  '  he can bite.'
'  I would not attack in the night,'  says he,  '  a house to
have such dog in it.'  Then I conclude he was a
breaker ;  so I turn to him — oh,  very rough  !  not gentle
—  and I say,  very fierce,  '  He shall destroy you,  if you
are ten!'"

Afterwards,  speaking of the Irish giant,  who is now
shewn in town,  he said, —

"  He is so large I am as a baby!  I look at him  —
oh !  I find myself so little as a child !  Indeed,  my
indignation it rises when I see him hold up his hand so
high.  I am as nothing ;  and I find myself in the
power of a man who fetches from me half a crown."

This language,  which is all spoke very pompously by
him,  sounds comical from himself,  though I know not
how it may read.

Adieu,  my dear and kind daddy,  and believe me
your ever obliged and ever affectionate

F.  B.

PART IV.
1782.

CONTENTS.

J
Dr.  Johnsoft — The Pepyses  — The Rooms at Brighton  —  Mr.  Coxe

— A Literary ISIilliner — A Ball— Dr.  Johnson and  ]\Ir.  Pepys —
Discussion on Wit — Confounding Words with Things  —  Sar-
castic Repartees  —  Lady Borlase Warren  —  A Story  :  Way to
Preserve 50,000Z. — A Cool Request— Bringing up a Child Stout

—  Character of Lady Rothes  —  Dr.  Johnson— ''Consequences of
his Severity — His Hatred of being Alone  —  Lord and Lady De
Ferrars  —  Mss Ellerker — Dr.  Johnson's Declaration that he
never saw a Word of  "Cecilia"  till it was Printed  — Mr.  Met-
calfe— Xewmarket Hill  —  INIiss Monckton,  afterwards Countess
of Cork — Her Parties — Description of Her  —  Anecdote of the
Duke of Devonshire — Madame de Genlis's  "Adele et Theodore"

—  Party at jMrs.  Thrale's — Watching for a Snug Chat.

158 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

PART IV.
1782.

Journal Resumed.

Brighthelmstone,  Oct.  26th.  —  My journey was
incidentless ;  but the moment I came into Brightlielm-
stone I was met by Mrs.  Thrale,  who had most eagerly
been waiting for me a long while,  and therefore I
dismounted,  and walked home with her.  It would
be very superfluous to tell you how she received me,
for you cannot but know,  from her impatient letters,
what I had reason to expect of kindness and welcome.

I was too much tired to choose appearing at dinner,
and therefore eat my eat up-stairs,  and was then deco-
rated a little,  and came forth to tea.

Mr.  Harry Cotton and Mr.  Swinerton were both
here.  Mrs.  Thrale said they almost lived with her,
and therefore were not to be avoided,  but declared she
had refused a flaming party of blues,  for fear I should
think,  if I met them just after my journey,  she was
playing Mrs.  Harrel.

Dr.  Johnson received me too with his usual good-
ness, and with a salute so loud,  that the two young
beaus,  Cotton and Swinerton,  have never done laugh-
ing about it.

Mrs.  Thrale spent two or three hours in my room,
talking over all her affairs,  and then we wished each

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  159

other hon reyos,  and — retired.  Grandissima con-
clusion !

Oh,  but let me not forget that a fine note came from
Mr.  Pepys,  who is here with his family,  saying he was
presst de viv7'e,  and entreating to see Mrs.  and Miss T.,
Dr.  Johnson,  and Cecilia,  at his house the next day.
I hate mightily this method of naming me from my
heroines,  of whose honour I think I am more jealous
than of my own.

Oct.  27th. — The Pepyses came to visit me in form,
but I was dressing ;  in the evening,  however,  Mrs.
and Miss T.  took me to them.  Dr.  Johnson would
not go ;  he told me it was my day,  and I should be
crowned,  for Mr.  Pepys was wild about  "  Cecilia."

'-'  However,"  he added,  "  do not hear too much of it;
but w^hen he has talked about it for an hour or so,  tell
him to have done.     There is no other way."

A mighty easy w' ay,  this !  however,  't is what he
literally practises for himself.

We found at Mr.  Pepys'  nobody but his wife,  his
brother.  Dr.  Pepys,  and Dr.  Pepys'  lady.  Countess of
Rothes.  Mr.  Pepys received me  -with such distinction,
that it was very evident how much the book,  with the
most flattering opinion of it,  was in his head ;  how-
ever, he behaved very prettily,  and only mentioned it
by allusions ;  most particularly upon the character of
Meadows,  which he took various opportunities of pro-
nouncing to be the  "  best hit possible"  upon the
present race of fine gentlemen.  He asked me whether
I had met with Mrs.  Chapone lately;  and when I said
no,  told me he had two letters from her,  all about me,
which he must communicate to me.

We did not stay with them long,  but called upon
Miss Benson,  and proceeded to the Rooms.    Mr.  Pepys

160 DIAKV A\D LETTERS  [PaRT IV.

was very unwilling to part with us,  and wanted to
frighten nie from going,  by saying, —

"  And has Miss Burney courage to venture to the
Rooms 1 I wonder she dares ! "

I did not seem to understand him,  though to mistake
him was impossible.  However,  I thought of him again
when I was at the lOoms,  for most violent was the
staring and vrhispei'ing as I passed and repassed  ;  inso-
much that I shall by no means be in any haste to go
again to them.  Susan and Sophy Thrale,  who were
with their aunt,  INIrs.  Scot,  told Queeny,  upon our re-
turn, that they heard nothing said,  whichever way
they turned,  but  "  Tliat  's she !"  "  That 's the famous
Miss Burney !"  I shall certamly escape going any
more,  if it is in my power.

Lady Shelley and Lady Poole were there,  and were
very civil,  and looked very pretty.  There was also a
Mr.  Coxe,  brother to the writer,  a very cultivated man,
a great scholar,  a poet,  a critic,  and very soft-mannered
and obliging.  He is,  however,  somewhat stiff and
affected,  and rather too plaintive in his voice.

Monday,  Oct.  28x11.  —  Mr.  Pepys had but just left
me,  when  ^Irs.  Thrale sent Susan with a particular
request to see me in her dressing-room,  where I found
her with a milliner.

"Oh,  Miss Burney,"  she cried,  ''I could not help
promising I\Irs.  Cockran that she should have a siglit
of you  —  she has begged it so hard."

You may believe 1 stared  ;  and the Vv'oman,  whose
eyes almost looked ready to eat me,  eagerly came up
to me,  exclaiming, —

"  Oh,  ma'am,  you don't know what a favour this is,
to see you  !  I have longed for it so long I It is quite
a comfort to me,  indeed.     Oh,  ma'am,  how clever you

1782]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         161

must be !  All the ladies I deal with are quite dis-
tracted about  'Cecilia,' — and I got it myself.  Oh,
ma'am,  how sensible you must be !  It does my heart
good to see you.''

Did you ever hear the like?  'Twas impossible not
to laugh,  and Mrs.  Thrale has done nothing else ever
since.

At dinner,  we had Dr.  Delap and Mr.  Selwyn,  who
accompanied us in the evening to a ball  ;  as did also
Dr.  Johnson,  to the universal amazement of ail who
saw him there ;  —  but he said he had found it so dull
being quite alone the preceding evening,  that he deter-
mined upon going with us ;  "  for,"  he said,  "  it cannot
be worse than being alone."

Strange that he should think so I I am sure I am
not of his mind.

Mr.  H.  Cotton and Mr.  Swinerton of course joined
us immediately.  We had hardly been seated five mi-
nutes before Mr.  Selwyn came to me,  from some other
company he had joined,  and said, —

*'  I think you don't choose dancing,  ma'am?"

"  No,"  I answered.

"  There is a gentleman,"  he added,  ^^who is very
ambitious of the honour of dancing with you;  but
I told him I believed you would not dance."

I assured him he was right.  •

There was,  indeed,  no need of my dancing by way of
attraction,  as I saw,  again,  so much staring,  I scarce
knew which way to look  ;  and every glance I met was
followed by a whisper from the glancer to his or
her party.  It was not,  indeed,  quite so bad as on
Sunday,  as the dancers were something to look at
besides me ;  but I was so very much watched,  and
almost pointed at,   that I have resolved to go no

VOL.  II.  M

1G2 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

more,  neither to balls nor Rooms,  if I can possibly
avoid it.

Lady Shelley,  who spied us out,  sent us an invitation
to her party,  and we all paraded to the top of the
room,  which in these places is the post of honour.
There we found also Mrs.  Hatsel,  Mrs.  Dickens,  and
INIiss Benson,  and we all drank tea together.  Dr.
Johnson was joined by a friend of his own,  Mr.  Met-
calf,  and did tolerably w^ell.

Oct.  29Tn.  —  We had a large party at home in
the evening,  consisting of Lady Shelley,  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Hatsel,  Mrs.  and Miss Dickens,  Miss Benson,
H.  Cotton,  Mr.  Swinerton,  Mr.  Pepys,  and Mr.  Coxe.
Mr.  Selwyn is gone away to town upon business.  I
was presently engaged by Mr.  Pepys,  and he was
joined by Mr.  Coxe,  and he by Miss Benson.  Poor
Miss Dickens was also in our circle;  but if I had not
made her some sport by occasional ridiculous whis-
pei's,  she would certainly have gone to sleep,  as no one
else noticed her,  and as not a word was said in which
she had any chance of taking any interest.  Mr.  Pepys
led the conversation,  and it was all upon criticism
and poetry,  and such subjects as she had no chance
to care for.  But I kept her awake by applying to her
from time to time,  to give us an epigram of Martial,
a quotation from Ovid,  a few lines of Homer,  and such,
sort of impracticable requests,  which served to divert
her lassitude and ennui of all else that was said.  The
conversation,  however,  grew so very bookish,  I w^as
ashamed of being one in it,  and not without reason,  as
every body,  out of that party,  told me afterwards,
*'  they had been afraid of approaching me,  I was so
well engaged;"  and the odd Dr.  Delap told me the
next morning,  that Lady Shelley had complained she

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  163

could not venture to sj3eak with me,  I was  '^  sur-
rounded by so many,  and all prostrate  ! "

This is just the sort of stuff I wish to avoid,  and,  as
far as I can,  I do avoid  ;  but wholly it is not possible.

Mr.  Coxe repeated several of his own compositions
in verse,  and in such melting strains,  I thought he
would have wept over them!  When I got from that
set,  Mr.  Hatsel said to me, —

"  Pray,  Miss Burney,  what was all that poetry
you have been repeating?  I was quite grieved to be
out of the way of hearing it.'*

''  Not me,  sir,  it was Mr.  Coxe."

*'  And what was the poem?"

^'  Something of his own,  sir."

Oh,  how he stared and looked!  I saw he longed
to say wicked things,  but I would not encourage
him,  for the poems were pretty,  though the man was
conceited.

Poor Mr.  Pepys had,  however,  real cause to bemoan
my escape ;  for the little set was broken up by my
retreat,  and he joined Dr.  Johnsoh,  with whom he
entered into an argument upon some lines of Gray,
and upon Pope's definition of v.dt,  in which he was so
roughly confuted,  and so severely ridiculed,  that he
was hurt and piqued beyond all power of disguise,
and,  in the midst of the discourse,  suddenly turned
from him,  and,  wishing Mrs.  Thrale good night,  very
abruptly withdrew.

Dr.  Johnson was certainly right with respect to the
argument and to reason ;  but his opposition was so
warm,  and his wit so satirical and exulting,  that I
was really quite grieved to see how unamiable he
appeared,  and how greatly he made himself dreaded
by all,  and by many abhorred.     V/hat pity that he

164 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV

will not curb the vehouience of his love of victory and
superiority !

The sum of the dispute was this.  Wit being talked
of,  Mr.  Pepys repeated, —

"  True Avit is Xature to advantage dress'd;
What oft was tlioiight,  but ne'er so well express'd."

'^  That,  sir,"  cried Dr.  Johnson,  "  is a definition
both folse and foolish.  Let wit be dressed how it will,
it will equally be wit,  and neither the more nor the
less for any advantage dress can give it."

Mr.  P.  But,  sir,  may not wit be so ill expressed,
and so obscure,  by a bad speaker,  as to be lost  ?

Dr.  J.  The fault,  then,  sir,  must be with the
hearer.  If a man cannot distinguish wit from words,
he little deserves to hear it.

Mr.  P.  But,  sir,  what Pope means

Dr.  J.  Sir,  what Pope means,  if he means what
he says,  is both false and foolish.  In the first place,
*  what oft was thought,'  is all the worse for being often
thought,  because to be wit,  it ought to be newly
thought.

Mr.  P.  But,  sir,  't is the expression makes it
new.

Dr.  J.  How can the expression make it new?  It
may make it clear,  or may make it elegant ;  but how
new?     You are confounding words with things.

31r.  P.  But,  sir,  if one man says a thing very ill,
may not another man say it so much better that

Dr.  J.  That other man,  sir,  deserves but small
praise for the amendment ;  he is but the tailor to the
first man's thoughts.

Mr.  P.  True,  sir,  he may be but the tailor;    but

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  165

then the difference is as o-reat as between a man in a
gold lace suit and a man in a blanket.

Dr.  J.  Just so,  sir,  I thank you for that :  the differ-
ence is precisely such,  since it consists neither in the
gold lace suit nor the blanket,  but in the man by whom
they are worn.

This was the summary ;  the various contemptuous
sarcasms intermixed would fill,  and very unpleasantly,
a quire.

Wednesday,  Oct.  30th. — In the evening we all went
to Mrs.  Hatsel's,  where there was a large party :  the
Countess Rothes,  Lady Shelley,  Lady Warren,  formerly
Miss Clavering,  Miss Benson,  Mrs.  and Miss Dickens,
H.  Cotton,  Mr.  Swinerton,  two Bartons,  the Hatsels,
and Mrs.  and Miss Thrale.  Dr.  Johnson was not in-
vited. We had a very good evening ;  but that I had a
vile cold,  and could not quit the fire a moment.

Lady Warren is immensely tall,  and extremely beau-
tiful :  she is now but just nineteen,  though she has been
married two or three years.  She is giddy,  gay,  chatty,
good-humoured,  and a little affected ;  she hazards all
that occurs to her,  seems to think the world at her
feet,  and is so young,  and gay,  and handsome,  that
she is not much mistaken.  She is,  in short,  an inferior
Lady Honoria Pemberton :  somewhat beneath her in
parts and understanding,  but strongly in that class of
character.  I had no conversation with her myself;
but her voice is loud and deep,  and all she said was for
the whole room.

Take a trait or two,  which I think will divert my
daddy Crisp.     Marriages being talked of, —

"  I'll tell you,"  cried she,  "  a story;  that is,  it sha'n't
be a story,  but a fact.  A lady of my acquaintance,
who had 50,000/.  fortune,  ran away to Scotland with a

16(j DIARY AND LOTLRS  [I\UiT IV.

gentleman she liked vastly  ;  so she was a little doubt-
ful of him,  and had a mind to try him  :  so when they
stopped to dine,  and change horses,  and all that,  she
said,  '  Now,  as I have a great regard for you,  I dare
say you have for me ;  so I will tell you a secret :  I
have got no fortune at all,  in reality,  hut only 5000/. ;
for all the rest is a mere pretence  :  but if you like me
for myself,  and not for my fortune,  you won't mind
that.'  So the gentleman said,  '  Oh,  I don't regard it at
all,  and you are the same charming angel that ever you
was,'  and all those sort of things that people say to
one,  and then went out to see about the chaise.  So he
did not come back ;  but when dinner was ready,  the
lady said,  *  Pray,  where is he?'  '  Lor,  ma'am,'  said
they,  '  why,  that gentleman has been gone ever so
long!'  So she came back by herself;  and now she's
married to somebody else,  and has her 50,000/.  fortune
all safe."

Lady Warren was extremely smitten with Mrs.
Thrale,  and talked to her almost incessantly,  though
they had never before met;  but in the end of the even-
ing, when Mrs.  T.  mentioned that she was going the
next morning to make a visit at Lewes

"  Oh,"  cried her ladyship,  "  I have a great mind to
beg a favour of you then."

"  Pray do,  ma'am,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  I shall
think it an honour to grant it."

"  Oh,  but it's such an odd thing — it's quite an odd
request ;  but it is for a place in your coach."

"  My coach shall be very much at your ladyship's
service  ;  I beg:  vou will make what use of it vou
please."

^'  Why,  you must know it is to carry a little dog for
me to Lewes.     It belongs to Dr.  Poole,  and he  '11 quite

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  167

break his heart if I don't send it him  ;  so I  '11 part with
it at once before I grow too fond of it."

This was,  indeed,  an odd request to a new acquaint-
ance, and to a Welsh woman,  as Mrs.  Thrale said
afterwards.  The look of her eye the moment she heard
it made Lady Warren colour violently ;  but she an-
swered with orreat o:ood humour, —

'*  Suppose your ladyship was to do me the honour
to go too,  and so carry your little dog yourself?"

Lady Warren evidently understood her,  and began
many apologies ;  but said she was engaged herself to
spend the morning at Lady Dashwood's.

^'  I had hoped,"  said Mrs.  Thrale,  "  your ladyship
had meant your little boy;  for I should have been
very proud to have been trusted with him  ;  but I
suppose you could not spare him so long."

She has one child,  often weeks old,  of which she is
doatingly fond.

"  Oh,  no,"  she answered eagerly,  "  not for half an
hour.  I shall never trust him away from me till he is
eight years old,  and then I shall send him to sea.  He
shall be true blue.  I bring him up very stout.  He
sucked a hare-bone for dinner to-day."

"  A hare-bone for a child of ten weeks old  ! "

''  Oh,  he liked it vastly.  He laughed and crowed
the whole time.  I often have veal stewed into good
strong broth for him."

Her husband,  Sir John Borlase Warren,  is in the
navy.  Mrs.  Thrale soon saw that though she wa^
careless and unthinking,  she did not mean to be in-
solent, so that she afterwards very gracefully offered to
carry the dog,  and assured her nobody would more
carefully perform her commission.  She thought,,
however,   better of the matter than to send him^

168 DIARY A.\D LETTERS  [pART IV.

unci she told Mrs.  Hatsel she found she was  "  in a
scrape."

My own chat was all with Mrs.  Hatsel or Lady
Rothes,  with whom I never spoke before,  though I
have often seen her.  The talk was by no means
writable  ;  but very pleasant.  Lady Rothes is sociable,
lively,  sensible,  gentle,  and amiable.  She,  Lady
Shelley,  and Mrs.  Hatsel,  are all of the same cast;  but
Lady Rothes in understanding seems to have the ad-
vantage. In manners it would be hard to say which
excelled.

Thursday,  Oct.  31st.  —  A note came this morning
to invite us all,  except Dr.  Johnson,  to Lady Rothes's.
Dr.  Johnson has tortured poor Mr.  Pepys so much
that I fancy her ladyship omitted him in compliment
to her brother-in-law.  She mentions me in the civilest
terms  ;  and,  as I like her much,  I will hide my blushes
and recollect them.

"  May I flatter myself that Miss Burney will do me
the favour to accompany you  ?  I shall be much obliged
and particularly happy to cultivate so charming an
acquaintance."

There  's a Countess for you !  Does not she deserve
being an Earl?  for such in fact she is,  being Countess
in her own right,  and giving her own name to her
children,  who,  though sons and daughters of Mr.
Evelyn and Dr.  Pepys,  —  for she has been twice
married, —  are called,  the eldest Lord Lesley,  and the
rest the Honourable Mr.  Lesleys,  and Lady Harriet and
Lady Mary.

At noon,  Mr.  Pepys called and found only me,  and
sate with me till dressing-time.  He brought me a
book I was very glad to see.  He has collected into one
volume all the political works of Mr.  Burke,  and has

1762]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  169

marked in the margin all the passages that will be
entertaining or instructive to non-politicians.  They
are indeed charming,  eloquent,  spirited,  rational,  yet
sentimental.  He told me he had two long letters from
Mrs.  Chapone to shew me,  all about me and mine,  but
he had them not in his pocket.

At Lady Rothes's we met only her doctor,  and Mr.
and Mrs.  Pepys.  The talk was all literary,  but not
pedantic ;  and the evening was very agreeable.

Friday,  Nov.  1st. — We spent at home with only
our two young beaus.  I was quite glad of not going
out;  for,  though the places have done very well,  and
been very lively when we have assembled at them,  I
have been heartily tired of such perpetual preparation,
dressing,  and visiting.

Saturday,  Nov.  2d. — We went to Lady Shelley's.
Dr.  Johnson,  again,  excepted in the invitation.  He is
almost constantly omitted,  either from too much respect
or too much fear.  I am sorry for it,  as he hates being
alone,  and as,  though he scolds the others,  he is well
enough satisfied himself;  and,  having given vent to all
his own occasional anger or ill-humour,  he is ready to
begin again,  and is never aware that those who have
so been  "  downed  "  by him,  never can much covet so
triumphant a visitor.  In contests of wit,  the victor is
as ill off in future consequences as the vanquished in
present ridicule.

Monday,  Nov.  4th. — This was a grand and busy
day.  Mr.  Swinerton has been some time arranging a
meetiug for all our house,  with Lady De Ferrars,  whom
you may remember as Charlotte Ellerker,  and her lord
and sisters :  and this morning it took place,  by mutual
appointment,  at his lodgings,  where we met to break-
fast.   Dr.  Johnson,  who already knew Lord De Ferrars,

170 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

and Mrs.  and iMiss Thrale,  and myself,  arrived first;
and then came the Lord and Lady,  and Miss Ellerker
and her youngest sister,  Harriet.  Lord De Ferrars is
very ugly,  but extremely well-bred,  gentle,  unassum-
ing, sensible,  and pleasing.  His lady is much im-
proved since we knew her in former days,  and seems
good-humoured,  lively,  and rather agreeable.  Miss
Ellerker is nothing:  altered.

I happened to be standing by Dr.  Johnson when all
the ladies came in  ;  but,  as I dread him before strangers,
from the staring attention he attracts both for himself
and all with whom he talks,  I endeavoured to change
my ground.  How^ever,  he kept prating a sort of comical
nonsense that detained me some minutes whether I
would or not ;  but when we were all taking places at
the breakfast-table I made another effort to escape.  It
proved vain  ;  he drew his chair next to mine,  and went
rattling on in a humorous sort of comparison he was
drawing of himself to me, —  not one word of which
could I enjoy,  or can I remember,  from the hurry I
was in to get out of liis way.  In short,  I felt sa
awkward from being thus marked out,  that 1 was
reduced to whisper a request to Mr.  Swinerton to put
a chair between us,  for which I presently made a
space:  for I have often known him stop all conver-
sation with me,  when he has ceased to have me for his
next neighbour.  I\Ir.  Swinerton,  who is an extremely
good-natured young man,  and so intimate here that I
make no scruple with him,  instantly complied,  and
placed himself between us.

But no sooner was this done,  than Dr.  Johnson,  half
seriously,  and very loudly,  took him to task.

"  How now,  sir !  what do you mean by this?  Would
you separate me from Miss Burney  ?"

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  171

Mr.  Swinerton,  a little startled,  began some apologies,
and Mrs.  Tlirale winked at liim to give up tlie place ;
but he was willing to oblige me,  though he grew
more and more frightened every minute,  and coloured
violently as the Doctor continued his remonstrance,
which he did with rather unmerciful raillery,  upon his
taking advantage of being in his own house to thus
supplant him,  and crow ;  but when he had borne it for
about ten minutes,  his face became so hot with the fear
of hearing something worse,  that he ran from the field,
and took a chair between Lady De Ferrars and Mrs.
Thrale.

I think I shall take warning by this failure,  to trust
only to my own expedients for avoiding his public
notice in future.  However it stopped here;  for Lord
De Ferrars came in,  and took the disputed place with-
out knowing of the contest,  and all was quiet.

All that passed afterwards was too general and too
common to be recollected.

I walked out afterwards,  up Newmarket Hill,  with
Mrs.  Thrale and Mr.  Swinerton.  This young man is
very sweet-tempered,  and good,  and soft-hearted ;  but
alas !  he is also soft-headed.

We met,  upon the Newmarket Hill,  a large troop of
horse and a pack of hounds returning from hunting.
Among the gentlemen one stopped Mr.  Swinerton,  who,
we were told,  is the object here at this time, —  Mr.
Kaye of the Dragoons, —  a baronet's son,  and a very
tall,  handsome,  and agreeable -looking young man;
and,  as the folks say,  it is he for whom all the belles
here are sighing.  I was glad to see he seemed quite
free from the nonchalante impertinence of the times.

At dinner we had Mr.  Swinerton and Mr.  Selwyn,
who is just returned.

172 DIARY A.\D LKTTLRS  [I^iliT IV.

MissThrale,  who had met with Miss Benson,  brought
nie a long message from her,  that I had used her very
ill,  and would make her no reparation  ;  for she had
been reading my book till she was so blind with crying,
she had disfigured herself in such a manner she could
not dress,  and must give up going to the ball in the
evening,  though it was the last ;  and though she had
not yet near come to the end,  she was so knocked up
with blubbering,  she must give up every engagement
in order to go on with it,  being quite unfit for any
thing else  ;  but she desired Miss Thrale to tell me she
thought it very unwarrantable in me to put her nerves
in such a state !

"  Ay,"  cried Dr.  Johnson,  *'  some people want to
make out some credit to me from the little rogue's
book.  I was told by a gentleman this morning,  that
it was a very fine book,  if it was all her own.  '  It is
all her own,*  said I,  '  for me,  I am sure,  for I never
saw^  one word of it before it w^as printed.'"

This gentleman I have good reason to believe is
Mr.  Metcalf.  Capt.  Phillips I dare say remembers that
he supped with us at Sir Joshua Reynolds the evening
that James came from Portsmouth.  He is much with
Dr.  Johnson,  but seems to have taken an unaccountable
dislike to Mrs.  Thrale,  to whom he never speaks.  I
have seen him but once or twice myself ;  and as he is
dry,  and I am shy,  very little has passed between us.

When all our company was gone,  late as it was,  it
was settled we should go to the ball,  the last for the
season being this night.  My own objections about
going not being strong enough to combat the ado my
mentioning them would have occasioned,  I joined in
the party without demur.  We all went but Dr.
Johnson.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  173

The ball was half over,  and all the company seated
to tea.  Mr.  Wade*  came to receive us all,  as usual,
and we had a table procured for us,  and went to tea
ourselves,  for something to do.  When this repast was
over,  the company returned to their recreation.  The
room was very thin,  and almost half the ladies danced
with one another,  though there were men enough pre-
sent, I believe,  had they chosen such exertion ;  but the
Meadowses at balls are in crowds.  Some of the ladies
were in riding habits,  and they made admirable men.
'Tis tonnish to be so much undressed at the last ball.

None of our usual friends,  the Shelleys,  Hatsels,
Dickens,  or Pepys,  were here,  and we,  therefore,  made
no party ;  but Mrs.  Thrale and I stood at the top of
the room to look on the dancing,  and as we were thus
disengaged,  she was seized with a violent desire to
make one among them,  and I felt myself an equal in-
clination. She proposed,  as so many w^omen danced
together,  that we two should,  and nothing should I
have liked so well ;  but I begged her to give up the
scheme,  as that would have occasioned more fuss and
observation than our dancing with all the men that
ever were born.

While we were debating this matter,  a gentleman
suddenly said to me,  — "  Did you walk far this morn-
ing, Miss Burney?"  And,  looking at him,  I saw^  Mr.
Metcalf,  whose graciousness rather surprised me,  for
he only made to Mrs.  Thrale a cold and distant bow,
and it seems he declares,  aloud and around,  his aver-
sion to literary ladies.  That he can endure,  and even
seek me,  is,  I presume,  only from the general perverse-
ness of mankind,  because he sees I have always turned

*  The master of the ceremonies.

174 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

from liim  ;  not,  however,  from disliking-  him,  for he is
a shrewd,  sensible,  keen,  and very clever man ;  but
merel}^  from a dryness on his own side that has ex-
cited retaliation.

"  Yes,"  I answered,  ''we walked a good way."

"  Dr.  Johnson,"  said he,  "  told me in the morning
you were no walker ;  but I informed him then I had
had the pleasure of seeing you upon the Newmarket
Hill."

"  Oh,  he does not know,"  cried I,  "  whether I am a
walker or not — he does not see me walk,  because he
never walks himself."

"  He has asked me,"  said he,  "to go with him to
Chichester,  to see the cathedral,  and I told him I would
certainly go if he pleased;  but why,  I cannot imagine,
for how shall a blind man see a cathedral  ? "

"  I believe,"  quoth I,  *'  his blindness is as much the
effect of absence as of infirmity,  for he sees wonderfully
at times."

''Why,  he has assured me he cannot see the colour
of any man's eyes,  and does not know what eyes any
of his acquaintance have."

"I am sure,  however,"  cried I,  "he can see the
colour of a lady's top-knot,  for he very often finds fault
with it."

"  Is that possible?"

"Yes,  indeed;  and I was much astonished at it at
first when I knew him,  for I had concluded that the
utmost of his sight would only reach to tell him whether
he saw a cap or a wig."

Here he was called away by some gentleman,  but
presently came to me again.

"  3Iiss Burney,"  he said,  "  shall you dance?'*

"  jN'o,  sir,  not to-night."

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  1%

"  A gentleman,"  he added,  "  has desired me to speak
to you for him."

Now,  Susanna,  for the grand moment!  —  the height
—  the zenith of my glory in the to7i meridian!  I again
said I did not mean to dance,  and to silence all objec-
tion, he expressively said, —

"  'Tis Captain Kaye who sends me."

Is not this magnificent  ?     Pray congratulate me !

I was really very much surprised,  but repeated my
refusal,  with all customary civilities to soften it.  He
was leaving me with this answer,  when this most flashy
young officer,  choosing to trust his cause to himself,
came forward,  and desired to be introduced to me.
Mr.  Metcalf performed that ceremony,  and he then,
with as much respect and deference as if soliciting a
countess,  said, —

"  May I flatter myself you will do me the honour of
dancing with me  ?"

I thanked him,  and said the same thing over again.
He looked much disappointed,  and very unwilling to
give up his plan.

''  If you have not,"  he said,  *'  any particular dislike
to dancing,  it will be doing,  not only me,  but the
whole room much honour,  if you will make one in a
set."

"  You do me much honour,  sir,"  I answered,  "  but I
must beg you to excuse me."

"  I hope not,"  cried he ;  '^  I hope out of charity you
will dance,  as it is the last ball,  and the company is so
thin."

''  Oh,  it will do very well without me;  Mr.  Wade
himself says he dies to-night a very respectable death  ?"

"  And will you not have the goodness to help it on a
little in its last stage  ?  "

176 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

"  No,"  said I,  laughing  ;  "  why should we wish it to
be kept lingering?"

"  Lingering  !"  repeated he,  looking round at the dan-
cers; "no,  surely it is not quite so desperate;  and if
you will but join in,  you will give it new existence."

I was a little thrown off my guard at this unexpected
earnestness,  so different to the ton of the day,  and I
began hardly to know what to answer,  my real objec-
tion being such as I could by no means publish,  though
his urgency and his politeness joined would have made
me give up any other.

**  This is a very quiet dance,"  he continued  ;  "  there
is nothino;  fatifruine:  in it."

"  You are very good,"  said I,  "but I cannot really
dance to-night."

I was sorry to seem so obstinate,  but he was just
the man to make every body inquire whom he danced
with  ;  and any one who wished for general attention
could do no better than to be his partner.

The ever-mischievous Mrs.  Thrale,  calling to Mr.
Selwyn,  who stood by us,  said, —

*^  Why,  here  's a man in love  !  —  quite,  downright in
love with Miss Burney,  if ever I saw one ! "

"  He is quite mortified,  at least,"  he answered;  "  I
never saw a man look more mortified."

"  Well,  he did not deserve it,"  said she ;  "he knew
how to beg,  and he ought not to have been so served." "%

I begged her to be silent,  for Mr.  ]Metcalf returned    *
to me.  ^

"Were you too much tired,"  he said,  "with your
walk this morning,  to try at a dance?"

I excused myself as well as I could,  and we presently
went into the card-room to vary the scene.  When
we returned to the ball-room I was very glad to see

1782]  OF TPIE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  177

my new captain bad just taken out Lady Anne Lindsay,
who is here with Lady Margaret Fordyce,  and who
dances remarkably well,  and was every way a more
suitable partner for him.  He was to leave the town,
with his regiment,  the next day.

Tuesday.  —  Mrs.  Thrale took me out to walk with
her.  We met Lady De Ferrars and Miss Ellerker in
our ramble,  and the very moment the ball was men-
tioned, this dear and queer creature called out, —

*'  Ay,  there was a sad ado,  ladies dancing with ladies,
and all sorts of odd things  ;  and that handsome and fine
Mr.  Kaye broke his heart almost to dance with Miss
Burney  ;  but she refused him,  and so,  in despair,  he
took out Lady Anne Lindsay."

Wednesday.  —  Dr.  Delap called to-day and brought
a play with him for Mrs.  Thrale and me to read,  and
he has most vehemently and repeatedly begged me to
write a critique upon it.  I will not,  however,  under-
take any such thing,  v/hich I not only do not hold
myself equal to,  but which would be a most disagreeable
and thankless task.  I shall,  nevertheless,  mark such
places and passages as I think would be obviously
mended by some change,  for he is so very earnest,  it
would be either ill-nature or treachery to refuse him.

At night we had Dr.  Pepys and Lady Rothes,  and
were very sociable and pleasant.

Thursday.  —  Mr.  Metcalf called upon Dr.  Johnson,
and took him out an airinsi:.  Mr.  Hamilton is o:one,
and Mr.  Metcalf is now the only person out of this
house that voluntarily communicates with the Doctor.
He has been in a terrible severe humour of late,  and
has really frightened all the people,  till they almost
ran from him.  To me only I think he is now kind,
for Mrs.  Thrale fares worse than any body.     'Tis very

YOL.  II.  N

178 DIARY AND LETTERS  [l^ART IV.

strange and very melancholy that he will not a little
more accommodate his manners and language to those
of other people.  He likes Mr.  Metcalf,  however,  and
so do I,  for he is very clever and entertaining when he
pleases.  Capt.  Phillips will remember that was not
the case when we saw him at Sir Joshua's.  He has,
however,  all the de rjuoi.

Poor Dr.  Delap confessed to us,  that the reason he
now came so seldom,  though he formerly almost lived
with us when at this place,  was his being too unwell to
cope with Dr.  Johnson.  And the other day Mr.  Sel-
wvn having refused an invitation from Mr.  Hamilton
to meet the Doctor,  because he preferred being here
upon a day when he was out,  suddenly rose at the time
he was expected to return,  and said he must run away,
'"'  for fear the Doctor should call him to account."

Friday.  —  We strolled all the morning,  and spent
the evening with Lady S.,  where we met Miss Benson,
Dr.  Delap,  and Mr.  Selwyn.  Sir John is very civil
to me,  and,  as it is the ton to do here,  he,  among the
rest,  has discovered a new excellence.  Dr.  Delap,  in
his odd manner,  said here the other morning, —

"  Sir John S.  told me he had met yesterday Miss
Burney,  but he neither said she talked well nor wrote
well ;  he only said she walked well ;  he never,  he said,
saw any woman walk so well !"

Comic enough ;  but this is a mere specimen,  by the
by,  of the various new discoveries made in the polite
-world,  of my endowments — discoveries which would
make vou sfrin amain,  if I had room to write them.
It is not modesty stops me,  for they are far too sub-
lime for vanity,  and,  consequently for shame.

Saturday. — We had IMiss Benson and Mr.  Sel-
^iryn,  and a very good chatty quiet day.     Miss Benson

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         179

has given me a little commission to do for her with
Dr.  Delap,  concerning some books belonging to Louisa
Harris,  on purpose,  she says,  to make me call upon her
when I return to town.  I like the office very well,  for
her hardness and disagreeableness wear off more and
more,  and there is so much of that rare quality,  sound
sense,  in her composition,  that it makes amends for
much deficiency in her address and manner.

Sunday,  Nov.  10th,  brings in a new person.  The
Honourable Miss Monckton,*  who is here with her
mother,  the Dowager Lady Galway,  has sent various
messages of her earnest desire to be acquainted with
Mrs.  Thrale and your humble servant to command.
Dr.  Johnson she already knew,  for she is one of those
who stand foremost in collecting all extraordinary or
curious peojole to her London conversaziones,  which,
like those of Mrs.  Vesey,  mix the rank and the litera-
ture, and exclude all beside.  Well  —  after divers inti-
mations of this sort,  it was at last settled that Lady De
Ferrars should bring her here this morning.

In the evening came Lady De Ferrars,  Miss Monck-
ton,  and Miss Ellerker.  Miss Monckton is between
thirty and forty,  very short,  very fat,  but handsome ;
splendidly and fantastically dressed,  rouged not un-
becomingly, yet evidently and palpably desirous of
gaining notice and admiration.  She has an easy levity
in her air,  manner,  voice,  and discourse,  that speak all
within to be comfortable  ;  and her rage of seeing any
thing curious may be satisfied,  if she pleases,  by look-
ing in a mirror.

I can give you no account of the conversation,  as it
was broken,   and not entertaining.      Miss Monckton

*  Afterwards the Countess of Corke and Orrery,  —  lately de-
ceased.

180 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

went early,  having nnother engagement,  but the other
ladies stayed very late.  She told us,  however,  one
story extremely well worth recording.  The Duke
of Devonshire was standing near a very fine glass
lustre in a corner of a room,  at an assembly,  and in a
house of people who,  Miss Monckton said,  were by no
means in a style of life to hold expense as immaterial ;
and,  by carelessly lolling back,  he threw the lustre
down and it was broke.  He shewed not,  however,  the
smallest concern or confusion at the accident,  but coolly
said,  "  I wonder how I did that!"  He then removed
to the opposite corner,  and to shew,  I suppose,  he had
forgotten what he had done,  leaned his head in the
same manner,  and down came the opposite lustre I
He looked at it very calmly,  and,  with a philosophical
dryness,  merely said,  "This is singular enough!"  and
walked to another part of the room,  without either
distress or apology.

After Miss Monckton was gone.  Lady De Ferrars
drew a chair next mine,  and began talking of  "  Cecilia."

*' We have plagued my lord,"  said she,  "to death
about it,  because he always says that old Delvile was
in the I'ight not to give up a good family name ;  but I
was never so glad as when I found the old gentleman's
own name was my Lord De Ferrars  ;  for he,  you know,
is a Compton ;  so I told him I was sure it was himself,
and he owned that if he had been a Delvile,  he should
have done the same with a Beverley."

Is not this triumph for me,  my dearest Susy  ?  Pray^
let my daddy Crisp hear it,  and knock under.  Mr.
Bewley,  too,  shall be told it,  who has made the same
objection with my daddy to the improbability of relin-
quishing a fortune for a name.  jXeither my daddy,  my
father,  nor oMr.  Bewley,  are here judges to ojDpose to

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         181

Lord De Ferrars,  who,  being a man of rank,  and hav-
ing a cherished name himself,  is more fit to decide
upon this question than wit,  understanding,  judgment,
or general knowledge,  can make any others who have
not the power to so well feel the temptation of family
pride in exciting such obstacles to reason and happi-
ness. I never meant to vindicate old Delvile,  whom I
detested and made detestable;  but I always asserted
that,  his character and situation considered,  he did
nothing that such a man would hesitate in doing.

Mrs.  Thrale has since met Lord De Ferrars,  and
talked over all the book to him ;  and he told her that
he thought its great merit was the reasonableness of
the Delvilian distress with respect to changing their
name!

I felt,  however,  a little ashamed when Lady De
Ferrars told me her lord's name,  which he has,  with
his title,  in rio:ht of his mother  ;  but as I had tied it to
a family celebrated for its antiquity,  I saw they were
none of them displeased.  Lord De Ferrars told Mrs.
Thrale himself that he is descended from Elfrida,  and
has the castle of Tamworth,  originally built by her,
now in his possession.  So here is a Delvilian ancestry
with great exactness.  I always told my dear daddy
that his reasoning against the Delvile prejudice,  how-
ever unanswerable for truth,  by no means disproved
the existence of such prejudice,  as all those very high-
born and long genealogists agree.  Mrs.  Thrale herself
Bays that her own mother would have acted precisely as
Mrs,  Delvile acted.  And Mrs.  Thrale's father was
descended from Adam of Salsbury.

*'  I assure,  you,  however,"  continued her ladyship,
^'  my lord was so fond of the book,  he could never part
with it,  and so much interested in the story he could

182 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IV.

think of nothing else.  He cried,  violently,  too,  I
assure you ;  so I hope that will give you a good idea of
his heart."

Mrs.  Thrale and Miss Ellerker then joined in the
conversation,  and much discussion followed about
family names and family honour.  Lady De Ferrars
said —

"  This is very rude,  I confess,  to talk so of the book
before Miss Burney  ;  but when once one has begun
there is no dropping the subject."

I was glad,  however,  when it was dropped,  as I
think it as little my business to vindicate as to censure
my characters  ;  and,  therefore,  from caring to do nei-
ther, I am always at a loss and uncomfortable when
they are mentioned.

Tuesday. — We went in a party to breakfast w^ith
Dr.  Delap,  at Lewes,  by his earnest desire.  Mr.  Sel-
wyn accompanied us.  The Doctor again urged his
request that I would write a criticism upon his new
play;  but I assured him,  very truly,  I was too ignorant
of stage business and stage effects to undertake offering
any help or advice to him ;  yet I pointed out several
lines that I thought wanted alteration,  and proposed a
change in two or three scenes,  for he would not let me
rest without either praising what I did not like,  or
giving explicit reasons why I did not praise.  Mrs.
Thrale has promised him an epilogue.

I am now so much in arrears that I must be more
brief in my accounts.  We spent this evening at Lady
De Ferrars,  where Dr.  Johnson accompanied us,  for
the first time he has been invited of our parties since
my arrival.  The company was select,  but dull.  Miss
Monckton,  Sir Henry Dashw^ood,  Mr.  Manners — son
of Lord Robert — Mr.  Musgrave — a buckish kind of

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELfNA.         183

young man of fashion — the two Miss Ellerkers,  and
ourselves.  Miss Monckton only confirmed my first
notions of her,  and the rest gave me no notions worth
mentioning.

Monday and Tuesday. — I have no time,  except to tell
you a comical tale which Mrs.  Thrale ran to acquaint
me with.  She had been calling upon Mr.  Scrase,  an
old and dear friend,  who is confined with the gout;
and while she was inquiring about him of his nurse and
housekeeper,  the woman said, —

"  Ah,  madam,  how happy are you to have Minerva
in the house with you !"

*^  Oh,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  '^  you mean my dear Miss
Burney,  that wrote  *  Cecilia.'  So you have read it ;
and what part did you like  ?"

"  Oh,  madam,  I liked it all better than any thing^
I ever saw in my life ;  but most of all I liked that good
old gentleman,  Mr.  Albany,  that goes about telling
people their duty,  without so much as thinking of their
fine clothes."

When Mrs.  Thrale told us this at dinner.  Dr.  John-
son said, —

*'  I am all of the old housekeeper's mind ;  Mr,
Albany I have always stood up for;  he is one of my first
favourites.     Very fine indeed are the things he says.''

My dear Dr.  Johnson ! — what condescension is this I
He fully,  also,  enters into all my meaning in the high-
flown language of Albany,  from his partial insanity and
unappeasable remorse.

So here concludes Brighthelmstone for 1782.

Wednesday,  Nov.  20th,  Mrs.  and the three Miss
Thrales and myself all arose at six o'clock in the morn-
ing, and  * '  by the pale blink of the moon  "  we went to
the sea-side,  where we had bespoke the bathing-women

184 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part IV.

to be ready for us,  and into tlie ocean we plung-ed.  It
"vvas cold,  but pleasant.  I have bathed so often as to
lose my dread of the operation,  which now gives me
nothing but animation and vigour.  We then returned
home,  and dressed by candle-light,  and,  as soon as
we could get Dr.  Johnson ready,  we set out upon our
journey,  in a coach and a chaise,  and arrived in Argyll
Street at dinner time.  Mrs.Thrale has there fixed her
tent for this short winter,  which will end with the be-
ginning of April,  when her foreign journey takes place.

St.  Martin's Street. — The day after my return
home,  Pacchierotti came and spent part of the after-
noon here.  Mr.  Sastres also was with us.  The Pac.  was
very sweet and amiable,  in exceeding good humour,
and tolerably in spirits.  But what was my delight to
receive,  by Charlotte,  a message from Mrs.  Fitzgerald,
to invite me to a place in her box at the Opera!  She
called for us,  and we both went.  Her box is a new one,
only up two pair of stairs,  the fourth from the stage,
and holds six.  It is,  indeed,  the most delightful box in
the house,  from not being so much in sight as to render
very much dress necessary,  yet enough to have every
convenience of seeing both performers and company.

The opera was the new serious one,  '^  Medonte."  I
am not enchanted with it ;  there is a general want of
something striking or interesting.  Pacchierotti sang
most sweetly,  without force,  effort,  or pain to himself,
but with an even excellence he is seldom well enough
to keep throughout a whole opera.  He is but too
perfect;  for how we shall bear his successors I cannot
guess.

He found me out,  and gave me several smiles during
the performance  ;  indeed,  he could never look either to
the right or left without a necessity of making some

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  185

sort of acknowledgment in return to the perpetual bows
made him from almost every box in the house.

Nov.  24th. — Mrs.  Thrale was with me all the morn-
ing, up-stairs in my cold bedchamber ;  and all the
evening I spent with my mother,  in reading  "  Adele
and Theodore ;"  a book you must purchase,  for there
are so many good directions about education,  that,
though the general plan is impracticable,  except to
very rich and very independent people,  there are a
thousand useful hints for folks in real life.  Its worst
fault seems tediousness,  much repetition and minute-
ness, making it necessary to skip,  from time to time,  in
order to keep up any attention ;  but the whole,  as a
work,  has great merit indeed,  both in design and exe-
cution. Some of the episodes are pretty,  but the plot
of the stories is commonly either trite or unnatural,
though the circumstances attending them are very
interesting and very well told.

Dec.  2d. — This evening Mrs.  Thrale had a large
party,  and invited Charlotte to it,  vv^hich I was very
glad of,  as she was much delighted.  My father took
us both,  for I could not go to dinner,  and we were very
late.

Dear Mrs.  Thrale received me,  as usual,  as if I was
the first person of her company.  There was not a
creature there with whom I was not acquainted,  except
the Duca di Sangro,  a Neapolitan nobleman,  very
much in fashion at present among the young ladies
comme ilfaut^  with two or three of whom he has trifled
not very honourably.  He is very young and very
handsome,  and very insinuating in his address and
manners.

The rest were Lady Rothes,  who very politely and
obligingly apologised for not having waited upon me
in town,   and Dr.  Pepys,  Mrs.  Ord,  who made me

186 DIARV AND LETTERS,  ice.  [Part IV.

promise to spend Thursday with her,  to meet a relation
of hers lately come to town,  Mrs.  Byron,  who asked
me for the same day,  and whom I rejoiced in  ])eing
able to refuse without affronting  ;  Mr.  and Mrs.  Dave-
nant,  Harry Cotton,  Mr.  Swinerton ;  Piozzi,  who sang
very well,  and whose voice is this year in very good
order;  Mr.  Evans,  Mr.  Seward,  Mr.  Sastres ;  Mr.
Thornton,  the new member for the borough,  a man
of Presbyterian extraction,  upon which he has grafted
of late much ton and nonchalance,  and who was pleased
to follow me about with a sort of hard and unmeaning
curiosity,  very disagreeable to me,  and to himself very
much like nothing;  Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys,  Mrs.  Scot,
and Dr.  and Mrs.  Parker.

Tuesday.  —  Pacchierotti called in the morning,  and
was very sweet and amiable.  I received,  also,  a most
perfumed note,  on French paper,  gilt,  bordered,  glazed,
inclosed in a finely decorated cover,  and sealed with a
miniken figure,  from Miss Monckton,  to invite me for
the 8th,  to meet Mrs.  Thrale.  I accepted the invita-
tion with pleasure ;  her parties are the most brilliant
in town,  and she is acquainted with many people I
wish to meet.  In small parties,  or intimate acquaint-
ances, it is necessary to like the mistress of the house  ;
but in large assemblies,  it is but like going to a better
regulated public place.

Wednesday.  —  I called in the morning upon Miss
Palmer,  with whom I sat some time.  Her uncle has
been very dangerously ill,  but is now quite recovered.
I then went and spent all the day with sweet Mrs.
Thrale,  who shut out all company,  and gave me herself
to myself,  and it was much the happiest time I have
spent,  away from my father,  since I left Brighton.  Dr.
Johnson was at home,  and in most excellent good
humour and spirits.

PART V.

1782.

CONTENTS.

An Assembly at the Hon.  Miss Monckton's  —  Singular Style of
Eeception — Lady Galway — Dr.  Johnson  —  Chit-chat — Female
Costume — Edmund Burke  —  Sir Joshua Keynolds — The old
Duchess of Portland — Mrs.  Greville — Flirtation — Conversation
with Burke— The Old Wits  — Gibbon— Mrs.  Siddons— Truth
and Romance — Dr.  Johnson and  ]\Irs.  Siddons  —  Table-talk —
Dr.  Johnson at the Play — A Party at INIrs.  Walsingham's — Sir
Charles Hanbury Williams — Mrs.  Montagu — INIr.  Percy — In-
troduction to Mrs.  Siddons — Erskine — Lady Lucan — Dinner at
Mrs.  Thrale's — The Opera — AUegrante — Assembly at Lady
Gideon's — Sir Sampson Gideon  —  Lady Margaret Fordyce —
Lady Anne Lindsay — Lord Gage — Sir Hugh Dalrym^ple — The
Duca di Sangro — Lady Clarges — iVIrs.  Walsingham's Paintings
— Queen Charlotte  —  Her Remarks on  "Cecilia"  —  Party at
Lady Rothes — Lord Falmouth — Dr.  Cadogan — ]\Ir.  Wraxall —
The Inconveniences of Popularity — Visit to Dr.  Johnson  —
Christmas Day — A Party at Mrs.  Ord's— Dr.  Johnson's Advice
to a Young Lady on her  "  Coming Out " — Mrs.  Chapone — ]Mrs.
Delany — Chit-chat  —  Character of IMr.  Crisp  —  Dinner at Sir
Joshua's — West,  the Painter — Jackson of Exeter — Table-talk
Anecdotes of  ^Mrs.  Reynolds — A Hum-drum Evening — IMrs.
Delany and Mrs.  Chapone — Sir Ashton Lever — His Museum —
NoUekens,  the Sculptor.

188 DIARY A\D LETTERS ParT V.

PART V.

1782.

Dec.  8th.  —  Now for Miss Monckton's assembly.

I had begged Mrs.  Thrale to call for me,  that I
might have her countenance and assistance upon my
entrance.  Miss Thrale came also.  Every thing was
in a new style.  We got out of the coach into a hall
full of servants,  not one of which inquired our names,
or took any notice of us.  We proceeded,  and went up-
stairs, and when we arrived at a door,  stopped and
looked behind us.  No servant had followed or pre-
ceded us.  We deliberated what was to be done.  To
announce ourselves was rather awkward,  neither could
■we be sure we were going into the right apartment.
I proposed our going up higher,  till we met with some-
body ;  Miss Thrale thought we should go down and
call some of the servants;  but Mrs.  Thrale,  after a
ridiculous consultation,  determined to try her fortune
by opening the door.  This being done,  we entered a
room full of — tea-things,  and one maid-servant!

"  Well,"  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  laughing,  "what is to
be done now  ?  I suppose we are come so early that
nothing is ready."

The maid stared,  but said, — "  There's company in
the next room."

Then we considered again how to make ourselves

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        189

known ;  and then Mrs.  Tlirale again resolved to take
courage and enter.  She therefore opened another door,
and went into another apartment.  I hekl back,  but
looked after,  and observing that she made no courtsey,
concluded she was gone into some wrong place.  Miss
Thrale followed,  and after her  ^vent little I,  wondering
who was to receive,  or what w^as to become of us.

Miss Monckton lives with her mother,  the old Dow-
ager Lady Galway,  in a noble house in Charles Street,
Berkeley Square.  The room was large and magni-
ficent. There was not much company,  for w^e were
very early.  Lady Galway sat at the side of the iire,
and received nobody.  She seems very old,  and was
dressed with a little round white cap,  and not a single
hair,  no cushion,  roll,  nor any thing else but the little
round cap,  which was flat upon her forehead.  Such
part of the company as already knew her m.ade their
compliments to her where she sat,  and the rest were
never taken up to her,  but belonged wholly to Miss
Monckton.

Miss Monckton's own manner of receiving her guests
was scarce more laborious ;  for she kept her seat when
they entered,  and only turned round her head to nod
it,  and say  "  How do do?"  after which they found
what accommodation they could for themselves.

As soon,  how^ever,  as she perceived Mrs.  and Miss
Thrale,  which w^as not till they had been some minutes
in the room,  she arose to welcome them,  contrary to
her general custom,  and merely because it was their
first visit.  Our long trains making my entrance some
time after theirs,  gave me the advantage of being im-
mediately seen by her,  and she advanced to me with
quickness,  and very politely thanked me for coming,
and said, —

190 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

''  I fear you think me very rude for taking the
liberty of sending to you."

'*  No,  indeed,  you did me much honour,"  quoth I.

She then broke further into her general rules,  by
making way for me to a good place,  and seating me
herself,  and then taking a chair next me,  and begin-
ning a little chat.  I really felt myself much obliged to
her for this seasonable attention,  for I was presently
separated from Mrs.  Thrale,  and entirely surrounded
by strangers,  all dressed superbly,  and all looking
saucily;  and as nobody's names were spoken,  I had
no chance to discover any acquaintances.  Mr.  Met-
calf,  indeed,  came and spoke to me the instant I
came in,  and I should have been very happy to have
had him for my neighbour ;  but he was engaged in
attending to Dr.  Johnson,  w^ho was standing near the
fire,  and environed with listeners.

Some new people now coming in,  and placing them-
selves in a regular way.  Miss Monckton exclaimed, —
*' My whole care is to prevent a circle;"  and hastily
rising,  she pulled about the chairs,  and planted the
people in groups,  with as dexterous a disorder as you
would desire to see.

The company in general were dressed with more
brilliancy than at any rout I ever was at,  as most of
them were going to the Duchess of Cumberland's,
and attired for that purpose.  Just behind me sat
Mrs.  Hampden,  still very beautiful,  but insufferably
affected.  Another lady,  in full dress,  and very pretty,
came in soon after,  and got herself a chair just be-
fore me ;  and then a conversation began between
her and Mrs.  Hampden,  of which I will give you a
specimen.

*'  How disagreeable these sacques are  !     I am so

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  191

incommoded with these nasty raffles !     I am going to
Cumberland House — are you?"

'*  To be sure,"  said Mrs.  Hampden  ;  ''  what else,  do
you think,  would make me bear this weight of dress?
I can't bear a sacque."

"  Why,  I thought you said you should always wear
them?"

"  Oh,  yes,  but I have changed my mind since then
—  as many people do."

"  Well,  I think it vastly disagreeable indeed,"  said
the other ;  "  you can't think how I'm encumbered
with these ruffles!"

"  Oh,  I am quite oppressed with them,"  said Mrs.
Hampden  ;  "  I can hardly bear myself up."

"•  And I dined in this way!"  cried the other;  "  only
think — dining in a sacque  !"

"  Oh,"  answered Mrs.  Hampden,  "  it really puts me
quite out of spirits."

Well,  have you enough?  —  and has my daddy raved
enough  ?

After this they found some subject less popular,  and
the lady unknown leaned over me,  without any cere-
monv,  to whisper with Mrs.  Hampden.  I should have
offered her my place if she had made any apology,  but
as it was,  I thought she might take her own way.  In
the course of the evening,  however,  I had the pleasure
to observe a striking change in her manners ;  for as
soon as she picked up,  I know not how,  my name,  she
ceased her whispering,  looked at me with the civilest
smiles,  spoke to me two or three times,  and calling to
a fine beau,  said, —

"  Do pray sit this way,  that you may screen Miss
Burney as well as me from that fire."

192 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

I did not,  however,  sufficiently like lier beginning,
to accept her challenge of talking,  and only coldly
answered by yes,  no,  or a bow.

Mrs.  and Miss Thrale had other engagements,  and
soon went away.  Miss Monckton then took a chair
again next to me,  which she kept till we both started
at the same voice,  and she cried out,  — "  Oh,  it's Mr.
Burke I"  and she ran to him with as much joy as,  if it
had been our house,  I should.  Cause the second for
liking her better.

I grew now in a violent fidget,  both to have his
notice,  and for what his notice would be  ;  but I sat
very still,  and he was seized upon by scores,  and taken
to another part of the room.

Then came in Sir Joshua Reynolds,  and he soon
drew a chair near mine,  and from that time I was
never without some friend at my elbow.

"  Have you seen,"  said he,  "  Mrs.  Montagu lately?'*

"  No,  not very lately."

^'  But within these few months  ?"

'*  No,  not since last year.^'

"  Oh,  you must see her,  then.  You ought to see
and to hear her — 'twill be worth your while.  Have
you heard of the fine long letter she has written  ?"

*'  Yes,  but I have not met with it."

*'  I have."

''And who is it to?"

**  The old Duchess of Portland.  She desired Mrs.
Montagu's opinion of  '  Cecilia,'  and she has written it
at full length.  I was in a party at Her Grace's,  and
heard of nothing but you.  She is so delighted,  and so
sensibly,  so rationally,  that I only wish you could have
heard her.     And old Mrs.  Delany had been forced to

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  193

begin it,  though she had said she should never read
any more ;  however,  when we met,  she was reading it
already for the third time.

Pray tell my daddy to rejoice for me in this conquest
of the Duchess,  his old friend,  and Mrs.  Delany,  his
sister's.

Sir Joshua is extremely kind  ;  he is always picking
up some anecdote of this sort for me,;  yet,  most deli-
cately, never lets me hear his ow^n praises but through
others.  He looks vastly well,  and as if he had never
been ill.

After this Mrs.  Burke saw me,  and,  with much civility
and softness of manner,  came and talked with me,
while her husband,  without seeing me,  went behind my
chair to speak to Mrs.  Hampden.

Miss Monckton,  returning to me,  then said, —

"  Miss Burney,  I had the pleasure yesterday of see-
ing Mrs.  Greville."

I suppose she concluded I was very intimate with her.

''  I have not seen her,"  said I,  "  many years."

*'  I know,  however,"  cried she,  looking surprised,
''  she is your godmother."

"  But she does not do her duty and answer for me,
for I never see her."

^'  Oh,  you have answered very well for yourself!
But I know by that your name is Fanny."

She then tripped to somebody else,  and Mr.  Burke
very quietly came from Mrs.  Hampden,  and sat down
in the vacant place at my side.  I could then wait no
longer,  for I found he was more near-sighted thai!
myself;  I,  therefore,  turned towards him and bowed :
he seemed quite amazed,  and really made me ashamed,
however delighted,  by the expressive civility and dis-
tinction with which he instantly rose to return my bow,

VOL.  II.  o

194

^'^-e DIAKV AND LETTEKS  [Part V.

and stood the  \vliole time lie was making his compli-
ments upon seeing me,  and calling himself the blindest
of men for not findinfi'  me out sooner.  And Mrs.
Burke,  who was seated near me,  said,  loud enough for
me to hear her, —

"  See,  see !  what a flirtation Mr.  Burke is beginning
with Miss Burney!  and before my face too!"

These ceremonies over,  he sate down hy me,  and
hegan a conversation which you,  my dearest Susy,
would be glad to hear,  for my sake,  word for word  ;  but
which I really could not listen to with sufficient ease,
from shame at his warm eulogiums,  to remember with
any accuracy.  The general substance,  however,  take
as I recollect it.

After many most eloquent compliments upon the
book,  too delicate either to shock or sicken the nicest
ear,  he very emphatically congratulated me upon its
most universal success  ;  said,  '*  he was now too late to
speak of it,  since he could only echo the voice of the
whole nation;"  and added,  with a laugh,  ''I had
hoped to have made some merit of my enthusiasm  ;  but
the moment I went about to hear what others say,  I
found myself merely one in a multitude."

He then told me that,  notwithstanding his admira-
tion, he was the man who had dared to find some
faults with so favourite and fashionable a work.  I
entreated him to tell me what they were,  and assured
him nothing would make me so happy as to correct
them under his direction.  He then enumerated them  :
and I will tell you what they are,  that you may not
conclude I write nothing but the fairer part of my
adventures,  which I really always relate very honestly,
though so fair they are at this time,  that it hardly seems
possible they should not be dressed up.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,  195

The masquerade he thought too long,  and that some-
thing might be spared from Barrel's grand assembly ;
he did not like Morrice's part of the pantheon  ;  and he
wished the conclusion either more happy or more
miserable;  '^  for in a work of imagination,"  said he,
*'  there is no medium."

I was not easy enough to answer him,  or I have much,
though perhaps not good for much,  to say in defence of
following life and nature as much in the conclusion as
in the progress of a tale ;  and when is life and nature
completely happy or miserable  ?

"  But,"  said he,  when he had finished his comments,
^'  what excuse must I give for this presumption  ?  I
have none in the world to offer but the real,  the high
esteem I feel for you ;  and I must at the same time
acknowledge it is all your own doing that I am able to
find fault ;  for it is your general perfection in writing
that has taught me to criticise where it is not quite
uniform."

Here 's an orator,  dear Susy !

Then,  looking very archly at me,  and around him,
he said, —

"  Are you sitting here for characters?  Nothing,  by
the way,  struck me more in reading your book than
the admirable skill with which your ingenious cha-
racters make themselves known by their own words."

He then went on to tell me that I had done the most
wonderful of wonders in pleasing the old wits,  particu-
larly the Duchess of Portland and Mrs.  Delany,  who
resisted reading the book till they were teased into it,
and,  since they began,  could do nothing else  ;  and he
failed not to point out,  with his utmost eloquence,  the
difficulty of giving satisfaction to those who piqued
themselves upon being past receiving it.

196 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

*'  But,"  said he,  ''  I have one otlier fault to find,  and
a far more material one than any I have mentioned."

^'  I am the more obliged to you.     What is it?"

*'  The disposal of this book.  I have much advice to
offer to you upon that subject.  Why did not you send
for your own friend out of the city  ?  he would have
taken care you should not part with it so much below
par."

He meant  ^Nlr.  Brio-o^s.

Sir Joshua Reynolds now joined us.

"Are you telling her,"  said he,  "of our conversa-
tion wuth the old wits  ?  I am glad you hear it from
Mr.  Burke,  Miss Burney,  for he can tell it so much
better than I can,  and remember their very words."

"  Nothing else vrould they talk of for three w^liole
hours,"  said he,  "  and we w^re there at the third read-
ing of the bill."

'^  I believe I was in good hands,"  said J,  '*  if they
talked of it to you?"

"  Wh}^,  yes,"  answered Sir Joshua,  laughing,  "  vre
joined in from time to time.  Gibbon says he read the
whole five volumes in a day."

"  Tis impossible,"  cried Mr.  Burke,  "  it cost me
three days ;  and you know I never parted with it from
the time I first opened it."

Here are laurels,  Susy !  My dear daddy and Kitty,
are you not doubly glad you so kindly hurried me up-
stairs to write when at Chesington  ?

Mr.  Burke then went to some other party,  and Mr.
Swinerton took his place,  with whom I had a davrdling
conversation upon dawdling subjects  ;  and I was not a
little enlivened,  upon his quitting the chair,  to have it
filled by Mr.  Metcalfe,  who,  with much satire,  but
much entertainment,  kept chattering wdth me till Dr.

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        197

Johnson found me out,  and brought a chair opposite
to me.

Do you laugh,  my Susan,  or cry at your F.  B.'s
honours?

"  So,"  said he to Mr.  Metcalfe,  "  it is you,  is it,  that
are engrossing her thus  ?  "

''  He's jealous,"  said Mr.  Metcalfe,  dryly.

"  How these people talk of Mrs.  Siddons!"  said the
Doctor.  "  I came hither in full expectation of hearing
no name but the name I love and pant to hear, — when
from one corner to another they are talking of that jade
Mrs.  Siddons !  till,  at last wearied out,  I went yonder
into a corner,  and repeated to myself Burney  !  Burney !
Burney  !  Burney  ! "

"  Ay,  sir,"  said Mr.  Metcalfe,  "  you should have
carved it upon the trees."

"  Sir,  had there been any trees,  so I should ;
but,  being none,  I was content to carve it upon my
heart."

Soon after the parties changed again,  and young
Mr.  Burke came and sat by me.  He is a very civil
and obliging,  and a sensible and agreeable young man.
I was occasionally spoken to afterwards by strangers,
both men and women,  whom I could not find out,
though they called me by my name as if they had
known me all my life.  Old Lady Galway trotted from
her corner,  in the middle of the evening,  and leaning
her hands upon the backs of two chairs,  put her little
round head through two fine high dressed ladies on
purpose to peep at me,  and then trotted back to her
place!     Ha,  ha!

Miss Monckton now came to us again,  and I con-
gratulated her upon her power in making Dr.  Johnson

198 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

sit in a group ;  upon whicli she immediately said to
him, —

'*  Sir,  Miss Burney says you like best to sit in a
circle."

"  Does she?"  said he,  laughing;  "  Ay,  never mind
what she says.  Don't you know she is a writer of
romances  ?  *'

"  Yes,  that I do,  indeed!"  said Miss Monckton,  and
every one joined in a laugh that put me horribly out of
countenance.

"  She may write romances and speak truth,"  said
my dear Sir Joshua,  who,  as well as young Burke,  and
Mr.  Metcalfe,  and two strangers,  joined now in our
little party.

"But,  indeed,  Dr.  Johnson,"  said Miss Monckton,
''  you viust see Mrs.  Siddons.  Won't you see her in some
fine part  ?  "

"  Why,  if I must,  madam,  I have no choice."

"  She says,  sir,  she shall be very much afraid of you."

"  Madam,  that cannot be true."

"  Not true,"  cried Miss Monckton,  staring,  "  yes
it is."

"  It cannot be,  madam."

"  But she said so to me  ;   I heard her say it myself."

"  Madam,  it is not possible!  remember,  therefore,
in future,  that even fiction should be supported by
probability."

Miss Monckton looked all amazement,  but insisted
upon the truth of what she had said.

**  I do not believe,  madam,"  said he,  warmly,  '^  she
knows my name.''

*'  Oh,  that is rating her too low,"  said a gentleman
stranger.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  199"

"  By not knowing my name,"  continued he,  "  I do
not mean so literally ;  but that,  when she sees it
abused in a new^spaper,  she may possibly recollect that
she has seen it abused in a newspaper before."

''  AVel],  sir,"  said Miss Monckton,  "  but you must
see her for all this."

"  Well,  madam,  if you desire it,  I will go.  See
her I shall not,  nor hear her ;  but I'll go,  and that wall
do.  The last time I was at a play,  I was ordered there
by Mrs.  Abington,  or Mrs.  Somebody,  I do not w^ell
remember who,  but I placed myself in the middle
of the first row of the front boxes,  to shew that when
I was called I came."

The talk upon this matter went on very long,  and
with great spirit ;  but I have time for no more of it.
I felt myself extremely awkward about going away,  not
choosing,  as it was my first visit,  to take French leave,
and hardly knowing how to lead the way alone among
so many strangers.

At last,  and with the last,  I made my attempt.  A
large party of ladies arose at the same time,  and I
tripped after them  ;  Miss Monckton,  however,  made me
come back,  for she said I must else wait in the other
room till those ladies'  carriages drove away.

When I returned,  Sir Joshua came and desired he
might convey me home ;  I declined the offer,  and he
pressed it a good deal,  drolly saying, —

'^  Why,  I am old enough,  a'n't IV

And when he found me stout,  he said to Dr.  John-
son,—

"Sir,  is not this very hard?  Nobody thinks me
very young,  yet Miss Burney won't give me the pri-
vilege of age in letting me see her home  ?  She says
I a'n't old enough."

200  ])IARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

I had never said any such thing.

"Ay,  sir,"  said the Doctor,  "  did I not tell you she
was a writer of romances?"

Again I tried to run away,  but the door stuck,  and
Miss Monckton prevented me,  and begged I w^ould stay
a little longer.  She then went and whispered some-
thing to her mother,  and I had a notion from her man-
ner she wanted to keep me to supper,  which I did not
choose,  and,  therefore,  when her back was turned,  I
prevailed upon young Burke to open the door for me,
and out I went.  Miss Monckton ran after me,  but I
would not come back.  I was,  however,  and I am,  much
obliged by her uncommon civility and attentions to me.
She is far better at her own house than elsewhere.

Dec.  15th. — To-day,  by an invitation of ten days
standing,  I waited upon Mrs.  Walsingham.  She is a
w^oman high in fame for her talents,  and a wit by birth,
as the daughter of Sir Charles Hanbury Williams.

She has the character of being only civil to people
of birth,  fame,  or wealth,  and extremely insolent to
all others.  Of this,  however,  I could see nothing,
since she at least took care to invite no company to
her own house vrhom she was disposed to disdain.  Her
reception of me appeared rather singular.  She was vio-
lently dressed,  —  a large hoop,  flowers in her small and
full dressed cap,  ribands and ornaments extremely
shown,  and a fan in her hand.  She was very polite,
said much of her particular pleasure in seeing me,  and
kept advancing to me so near,  that involuntarily 1
retreated from her,  not knowing her design,  and kept,
therefore,  o-ettins;  further and further back as she came
forward,  till I was stopped from any power of moving
by the wainscot.  I then necessarily stood still,  and
she saluted me.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  201

We then quietly sat down,  and my father began a
very lively conversation upon various subjects ;  she
kept it up with attention and good breeding,  often re-
ferring to me,  and seeming curious to know my no-
tions.

The rest of the company who came to dinner were
Mrs.  Montagu,  Mr.  Percy,  Speaker of the Irish House
of Commons,  his lady and daughter,  and Sir Joshua
Reynolds and Miss Palmer.  I was excessively glad to
see the latter,  who clung to me all the visit,  and took
off from its formality and grandeur by her chatting and
intimacy.

Mrs.  Walsingham lives in a splendid house in Strat-
ford Place,  elegantly fitted up,  chiefly by her own
paintings and drawings,  which are reckoned ex-
tremely clever.  I hate that word,  but cannot think
of another.

We did not stay late,  for my father and I were
both engaged to Miss Monckton's ;  so was Sir Joshua,
who accompanied us.  Miss Palmer had not been in-
vited, which she much regretted.  Mrs.  Walsingham
begged to see me again,  and very much pressed me to
call some morning.

I was extremely happy to have my dear father with
me at Miss Monckton's.  We found Mrs.  Siddons,  the
actress,  there.  She is a woman of excellent character,
and therefore I am very glad she is thus patronised,
since Mrs.  Abington,  and so many frail fair ones,  have
been thus noticed bv the srreat.  She behaved with
great propriety  ;  very calm,  modest,  quiet,  and un-
affected. She has a very fine countenance,  and her
eyes look both intelligent and soft.  She has,  however,
a steadiness in her manner and deportment by no
means engaging.    Mrs.  Thrale,  w^ho was there,  said, —

202 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

"  Why,  this is a leaden goddess we are all worshipping!
however,  we shall soon gild it."

A lady who sat near me then began a dialogue with
Mr.  Erskine,  who had placed himself exactly o])posite
to jNIrs.  Siddons ;  and they debated together upon her
manner of studying her parts,  disputing upon the point
with great warmth,  yet not only forbearing to ask
Mrs.  Siddons herself which was right,  but quite over-
powering her with their loquacity,  when she attempted,
unasked,  to explain the matter.  Most vehement praise
of all she did followed,  and the lady turned to me,  and
said, —

"  What invitation,  Miss Burney,  is here for genius to
display itself! — Every body,  I hear,  is at work for Mrs.
Siddons  ;  but if you would work for her,  what an in-
ducement to excel you would both of you have  !  —  Dr.
liurney ."

"  Oh,  pray,  ma'am,"  cried I,  "don't say to him "

"  Oh,  but I will !  —  if my mfluence can do you any
mischief,  you may depend upon having it!"

She then repeated what she had said to my father,
and he instantly said, —

"  Your ladyship may be sure of my interest."

I whispered afterwards to know who she was,  and
heard she was Lady Lucan.

Monday. — There w^as a very full assembly at Mrs.
Thrale's,  where I dined and spent the day.

The evening proved very gay and very agreeable,
though I have but a short account to give of it,  as the
conversation was only in parties,  and never for more
than a few minutes with the same people.  I had some
chat with every body in turn,  and therefore I had not
one moment unoccupied.  What gave me,  however,  the
most pleasure was the discourse of the two Mr.  Cam-

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  203

bridges,  father and son,  who both,  though at different
times,  sang to me the praises of Capt.  Phillips with
so much energy and heartiness,  that I was ready to
shake hands with them,  and cry,  '^  Gentlemen,
agreed!"

Mr.  Seward made me known to Mrs.  Hunter,  who is
extremely pretty,  and reckoned very ingenious.  Dr.
Parker introduced me to Mr.  Hutton,  a clergyman,  at
his desire  ;  but I saw nothing of him that made it
mine.

My father told me that Miss Catherine Bull had
desired her compliments to  "  Cecilia,"  and begged her
acceptance of her opera ticket for the next night,  to see
Anfossi's new opera,  if it would be of any use.  Miss
Bull then called out, —

"  And pray give my compliments,  too,  —  though I
should be dreadfully afraid of her  ! "

How provoking that they have this simple notion  !
as my father himself once answered them, —

"  So tame a Hon,  who can say fie on  ?  '^

I am glad,  however,  there seems a little opening to an
acquaintance I so much desire.  I accepted the ticket,
and should if I had not wished for it,  merely that I
might have to thank her for it.

Thursday. — We were all invited to Sir Joshua Rey-
nolas',  to dinner,  but I was engaged to Mrs.  Thrale.  In
the morning.  Miss Benson returned my visit,  and Miss
Streatfield called also,  and sate hours,  and Mrs.  Hat-
sell called too,  and sat only minutes.  I am increasing
my acquaintance daily,  and that,  whether T will or not,
with new folks of all sorts.

At Mrs.  Thrale's,  we were comfortable and alone.
She and her daughter carried me to the opera house.

204 DTAJIY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

and tried to entice me to sit in the pit with them ;  but I
had already engaged a place in Mrs.  Fitz's box.  I can
give you but little account of the opera,  for I was much
disappointed in it.  My expectations had planned an-
other Buona Figliuola,  or Fraschetana,  from Anfossi,
—  but it is a pretty opera,  simply,  and nothing more.
Allegrante sung very well,  but  —  but  —  but — oh,  how
has Pacchierotti spoilt me  !

Friday. — There was a grand assembly at Lady Gi-
deon's ;  and every thing in the house,  both of decora-
tions, refreshments,  and accommodation,  vras in greater
magnificence than I have yet seen.  Lady Gideon is
still very pretty,  and extremely gentle,  well bred,  at-
tentive, and amiable.  Sir Sampson seems all good-
nature, and his desire to oblige is unremitting,  and
there is even a humility in the manners of both that
makes it impossible to quarrel with them for such other
brighter qualities as they have missed.

The moment my reception was over,  and my dear
father being with me,  1 felt no awkwardness in my
entrance.  Mrs.  V/alsingham came up to me,  and in-
vited me to her house for the next Monday morning,
to meet Lady Gideon,  who was to go and see her paint-
ings. There was no refusing,  and,  indeed,  I wished to
see them,  as they are of great fame in the world,  and,  I
fancy,  very well worth seeing.

The next who found me out was Sir Joshua,  and the
instant I told him of the engagement I had made,  he
said he would go too,  for he was invited to call some
morning,  so he would choose Monday.  He kept with
me,  to my great satisfaction,  the principal part of the
evening.  He is so pleasant,  unaffected,  and agreeable,
that there is no one,  among those w^ho are of celebrity,
I can converse with half so easily and comfortably.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  205

Late in the evening came in Lady Margaret For-
dyce,  and Lady Anne Lindsay  :  I had hopes they would
have sung,  but I was disappointed,  for they only looked
handsome.  Mrs.  Hampden,  also,  did that,  and was
much less in her airs.

Among my acquaintance,  were Lord Gage,  Miss
Monckton,  Mr.  Selwyn,  Mr.  Swinerton,  Harry Cotton,
Mr.  H.  Shelley,  Mrs.  Walsingham,  the Thrales,  and
Sir Joshua.  Among those at whom I looked,  were Sir
Hugh Dalrymple,  author of the Memoirs,  a very re-
spectable looking man,  Mr.  Erskine,  and Soame
Jenyngs.

Sir Joshua desired me to speak to Soame Jenyngs,
for he said he was now of an age to be entitled to such
an attention.  You may suppose I complied readily.
Another time,  w^hen he had strolled away for a few
minutes,  he hastened back to me,  and exclaimed, —

"  I have just found out Mr.  Simkins  !  "

"Where?  which is he  ?  "

"There, — that gentleman,  who is bowing to Lady
Juliana Penn."

"Mercy!"  cried I,  perceiving,  to my great dis-
may, Mr.  Selwyn,  "Why,  that is one of our intimate
friends!"

"0,  is he so?"  cried he,  with great readiness,
"  Why,  then,  that,  I suppose,  is the reason of the re-
semblance ! "

Wicked enough!  however,  by no means true.

Afterwards I had some talk with the Duca di San-
gro,  a Neapolitan nobleman ;  very young,  excessively
handsome,  and very gay,  talkative,  sportive,  and fro-
licsome. He took off the French manner of singing
in general,  then M.  le Gros in particular;  he acted,
capered,  talked comical bad English,  sang,  languished,

206 DIARY AND LETTEIIS  [Part V.

laughed and mimicked ;  and,  in short,  was an admi-
rable and most diverting buffoon.

A small part of the company,  consisting of about
thirty,  were kept to supper;  my father and self were
of the number.  The entertainment given was superb,
and most elegantly costly.  Twenty-four had seats at
our table  ;  the rest stood round,  till another supper
was prepared in another room.  But I shall give no
further particulars,  as the evening,  altogether,  was but.
tiresome.

Su^'DAY,  Dec.  22. — I went to the French chapel in
the morning,  and found  ^Nlr.  Seward here when I re-
turned. He was followed by Barry,  and succeeded by
Pacchierotti,  who,  in rather better spirits than I have
lately seen him,  told me he had been admitted for half-
an-hour the day before to Lady Clarges,  as poor Sir
Thomas was a little better.  She told him that Sir
Thomas,  though often delirious,  never failed,  in his
intervals of reason and of ease,  to inquire for Pacchi-
erotti, and to call out,  "Has Pacchierotti been here
to-day? " — "  Does Pacchierotti call always to ask how
I do himself?"  This affected the feeling of Pacchi-
erotti very strongly.

Lady Clarges,  in this short interview,  inquired very
much about you,  and whether you were coming to
tow^n,  and liow your health was,  and what were your
designs.  "  Indeed,"  added the Pac,  "is a very true
regard which Lady Clarges she has always for Mrs.
Phillips."

I asked him if he had heard that Miss Catherine Bull
had lent me an Opera ticket — and told him I very much
wished to be acquainted with her family.  He looked
much pleased,  and called out,  "Then,  I am sure,  it is
in your own power,  for Doctor Burney can "    He

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  207

stopped,  as if suddenly recollecting,  and cliecking liim-
self,  and added,  "  I don't know,  ma'am,  liow it is;  but
you have made,  indeed,  all the people,  not only for the
young,  but at the same time for the old,  quite afraid of
you.  Indeed,  is their just veneration which is the cause
of such a thintr."

This always much vexes me,  but I know not how to
conquer so unfair a prejudice,  while I never can get
sight of these folks,  except through an opera-glass  :  in
which way they most assiduously view me in return,
whenever I am in Mrs.  Fitzgerald's box.  By his say-
ing the old,  as well as the young,  I suspected he meant
Lady Mary Duncan  ;  and upon sounding my father,
he acknowledged she professed the same ridiculous
fear.  'Tis horribly provoking,  and thwarts my most
favourite views.

Monday. — I waited upon Mrs.  Walsingham.  I
found Lady Gideon and two of her daughters,  and
Lady Middleton,  and two other ladies,  all assembled
to see these pictures.  I was,  indeed,  extremely pleased
with the exhibition.  They appear to me surprisingly
well executed,  and the subjects are admirably chosen
and selected.  They are chiefly copies from old pictures,
or from Sir Joshua Reynolds.  Two were lent her by
the King himself,  at Windsor, — a Silence,  a beautiful
picture of Caracci,  and a Madonna and Child of Guido.
The others are chiefly from the Devonshire collection,
of Sir Joshua ;  she has the Fishing Boys,  the noble
Angel viewing the Cross,  two Samuels,  a beautiful
Child,  and one other I cannot recollect.  She has,
also,  copied Gainsborough's sweet Shepherd's Boy :
and there are originals,  by herself,  of Capt.  Walsing-
ham, and her son,  and Miss Boyle.  These are all in
oils.      There were also some heads in Crayons,  and

208 DIARY AND LETTERS  [pART V.

several small figures in Plaster of Paris by Miss
Boyle,  who inherits her mother's genius and fondness
for painting,  and who behaved with great modesty and
politeness.  They shewed me,  also,  a work of Mrs.
Delany,  which they have framed.  'Tis from an inven-
tion of her own,  a Geranium — composed of paper
stained different colours,  cut out very delicately,  and
pasted upon paper,  so as to look in relief,  and the
effect is extremely pretty.  This she did at eighty-two !
I would have made my exit at the same time with
the rest of the company,  but Mrs.  Walsingham would
not suffer me,  and made me stay and chat with her for
I believe two hours.  She insisted upon my telling her
the whole history of my writing and pubhshing  ^*  Eve-
lina," and was curious for the most minute particulars.
When this curiosity was satisfied,  she gave me a
long history of herself,  and her painting,  with equal
openness,  and then said, —

^'  But do pray,  now,  Miss Burney,  let me ask one
thing more  —  how came you to write that book that is
my first darling — Cecilia?  did the idea come to you by
chance?  or did you regularly sit down to wTite by
design?"

I had then to satisfy her about this,  and she sj^jared
not for praises in return,  but said one thing which ex-
tremely astonished me.

"The character/'  cried she,  *'  which I most delight
in is Mr.  Briggs.  I think it the most admirable and
entertaining in the book."

"  I am very glad to hear it,  ma'am,  for he has very
few friends."

"  Oh,  I know many people think him too low,  but
that is merely from choosing onh^  to look in the upper
circle.     Now,  I am not at all surprised to find that the

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  209^

queen objects to him ; — a foreigner,  and in so exalted a
station,  may well not understand so vulgar a miser ;
"but why people in common life should object to what
in common life is to be found,  I don't understand.
For myself,  while I paint,  or work,  I can divert myself
with thinking of him,  and,  if I am quite alone,  I
can burst out a-laiighing by recollecting any of his
speeches."

You will easily believe I was by no means so sorry
at the queen's objection,  as I was glad and surprised
that her majesty should ever have met with the book.

"  But how wonderfully you have contrived,"  she
added,  "  to make one love Mrs.  Delvile for her sweet-
ness to Cecilia,  notwithstanding all her pride,  and
always to hope the pride is commanded by the hus-
band."

"  No,  ma'am,"  answered I,  "I merely meant to
shew how differently pride,  like every other quality^
operates upon different minds,  and that,  though it is so
odious when joined with meanness and incapacity,  as
in Mr.  Delvile,  it destroys neither respect nor affec-
tion when joined with real dignity and generosity of
mind,  as in Mrs.  Delvile."

I had much more to have said of my meaning and
purpose in these characters ;  but she has so much esta-
blished in the world an opinion of her own pride,  that
I was glad to leave the subject.

In the evening I went to Lady Rothes's with my
father.  I found her,  as I had left her at Brighton,
amiable and sociable.  I never tell you when the invi-
tations come,  for I rather fancy you will not conclude
I am likely to go without them.  The party was a
good one,  —  Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.  Walsingham,  Mr.
and Mrs.  Pepys,  sweet Mrs.  Thrale  ^nd her daughter,

VOL.  II.  p

210 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

Dr.  Cadogan,  Miss Streatfield,  Mr.  Wraxall,  Lord Fal-
inoiitli,  Mr.  Seward,  Mrs.  Ord,  and some others I did
not know  ;  but the evening was a most melancholy
one,  for 1 soon heard,  Irom Mi's.  Ord,  that poor Sir
Thomas Clarges was dead !  How^  sorry was I for his
lady,  for Pacchierotti,  and for you !  I could never get
you a moment out of my head ;  and from the time that
I heard it,  I could do nothing but wish myself at
home.

The next morning,  Tuesday,  I wrote a little note of
consolation and good wishes to poor Pacchierotti.  My
father called on the  ]Miss Bulls,  and found them in
deep affliction.  I long to hear if Lady Louisa Nugent
can go to Lady Clarges.  I believe she is now out of
town.

I called upon Bessy Kirwan,  and stayed with her a
couple of hours  ;  and all our talk was of poor Pacchi-
erotti and his loss,  and dear Susy and her health.  As
I had the coach,  I then s'pit cards at Mrs.  Chapone's,
who has sent me an invitation.  I declined ;  for so I
do by at least half I receive,  much as I go out; — and
at Mrs.  Katsell's,  and Mrs.  Paradise's,  and Lady
Gideon's.

When I came here,  I found Mrs.  Wilkinson,  who
insists upon again renewing our long-dropped acquaint-
ance. She is somewhat improved,  I think,  and much
less affected.  Mrs.  Ord also called,  at the desire of
Secreta"y Ord's lady,  to make a tender of acquaintance
with me.

I begin to grow most heartily sick and fatigued of
this continual round of visiting,  and these eternal new
acquaintances.  I am now arranging matters in my
mind for a better plan  ;  and I mean,  henceforward,
never to ao out more than three davs in the w^eek ;

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  211

and,  as I am now situated,  with Mrs.  Thrale to seize
every moment I do not hide from her,  it will require
all the management I can possibly make use of to
limit my visits to only half the week's days.  But yet,
I am fixed in resolving to put it in practice,  except
upon some very singular and unforeseen occasions,  as I
really have at present no pleasure in any party,  from
the trouble and tiresomeness of being engaged to so
many.

For my own part,  if I wished to prescribe a cure for
dissipation,  I should think none more effectual than to
give it a free course.  The many who have lived so
from year to year amaze me now more than ever;  for
now more than ever I can judge what dissipation has
to offer.  I would not lead a life of daily engagements
even for another month,  for any pay short of the most
serious and substantial benefit.  I have been tired some
time,  though I have only now broke out:  but I will
restore my own spirit and pleasure by getting more
courage in making refusals,  and by giving that zest to
company and diversion which can only be given by
making them subservient to convenience,  and by taking
them in turn with quietness and retirement.

This is my intention,  and I shall never,  by inclina-
tion, alter it.

Now,  to return to Tuesda}^,  one of my out-days.

I Vv-ent in the evening to call on Mrs.  Thrale,  and
tore myself away from her to go to Bolt Court to see
Dr.  Johnson,  who is very unwell.  lie received me
with great kindness,  and bade me come oftener,  which
I will try to contrive.  He told me he heard of nothing
but me,  call upon him v/ho would  ;  and,  though he
pretended to growl,  he was evidently delighted for me.
His usual set,  Mrs.  Williams and Mrs.  De MuUins

212 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT V.

were with him ;  and some queer man of a parson who,
after grinning at me some time,  said, —

**  Pray,  Mrs.  De Mullins,  is the fifth volume of
'  Cecilia'  at home yet?  Dr.  Johnson made me read it,
ma'am."

*'  Sir,  he did it mvich honour "

*^  Made you,  sir?"  said the Doctor,  '^  you give an
ill account of your own taste or understanding,  if you
wanted any making to read such a hook as  '  Cecilia.'  "
"  Oh,  sir,  I don't mean that;  for I am sure I left
every thing in the world to go on with it."

A shilling was now wanted for some purpose or
other,  and none of them happened to have one  ;  1
begged that I might lend one.

"  Ay,  do,"  said the Doctor,  '•  I will borrow of
you ;  authors are like privateers,  always fair game for
one another."

*'  True,  sir,"  said the parson,  '^  one author is always
robbing another."

"  I don't know that,  sir,"  cried the Doctor;  "  there
sits an author who,  to my knowledge,  has robbed
nobody.  I have never once caught her at a theft.  The
rogue keeps her resources to herself!"

Christmas Day. — And a merry one be it to my
Susy !  I went to Oxendon chapel,  and heard a very
good sermon,  by a Mr.  Lazard,  against infidelity ;  and
I came home and repeated it for divers purposes.  I
was soon followed by Miss Palmer;  and,  just as she
took her leave,  came Pacchierotti,  looking so ill — so
thin — so dejected!  He came to thank me for my con-
solatory note,  and he stayed till dinner-time.  Our
whole talk was of poor Sir Thomas and his lady.  I
was happy,  however,  to keep him,  and to make him
talk;  for he says that v,hen he is at home he is in a

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        213

state so deplorable it cannot be described.  He pressed
me to make use both of Lady Mary's tickets and her
box for the next comic opera ;  but I refused both,  as I
intend to go but once or twice more to the comic
opera,  and then can make use of Mrs.  Crewe's ticket.

Thursday. —  In the morning Mr.  Cambridge came,
and made a long visit.  He is entertaining,  original,  and
well-bred;  somewhat formal,  but extremely civil and
obliging,  and,  I believe,  remarkably honourable and
strict in his principles and actions.

I wished I could have been easy and chatty with
him,  as I hear he is so much my friend,  and as I like
him very much ;  but,  in truth,  he listens to every
syllable I utter with so grave a deference,  that it in-
timidates and silences me.  When he was about taking
leave,  he said, —

"  Shall you go to Mrs.  Ord's to-morrow?"

'^  Yes,  sir."

**  I thought so,"  said he,  smiling,  ''  and hoped it.
Where shall you go to-night?"

^'  No w^her6, —  I shall be at home.'*

"  At home?     Are you sure?"

*'  Yes."

<f Why,  then,  Mrs.  Burney,  my son,  and I dine
to-day in your neighbourhood,  at the Archbishop of
York's,  and,  if you please,  we will come here in the
evening."

This was agreed to.  And now I am writing up to the
very moment ;  for it is just seven o'clock,  and we are
going to tea,  as these gentlemen are not expected till
nine.  He talked much of Capitano,  and said several
times how happy he should be to know Mrs.  Phillips.

Our evening was really a charming one.  The two
Mr.  Cambridges came at about eight o'clock,  and the

214 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT V.

good Mr.  Hoole was here.  My father came down-
stairs to them in high spirits and good humour,  and
he and the elder Mr.  Cambridge not only talked
enough for us all,  but so well and so pleasantly that no
person present had even a wish to speak for himself.
Mr.  Cambrido-e has the best stock of good stories I
almost ever heard ;  and,  though a little too precise in
his manner,  he is always well-bred,  and almost always
entertaining.  Our sweet father kept up the ball with
him admirably,  whether in anecdotes,  serious disquisi-
tions, philosophy,  or fun  ;  for all which Mr.  Cambridge
has both talents and inclination.

The son rises extremely in my opinion and liking.  He
is sensible,  rational,  and highly cultivated  ;  very modest
in all he asserts,  and attentive and pleasing in his beha-
viour ;  and he is wholly free from the coxcombical airs,
either of impertinence,  or negligence and nonchalance,
that almost all the young men I meet,  except also young
Burke,  are tainted with.  What chiefly,  however,
pleased me in him was observing that he quite adores
his father.  He attended to all his stories with a face
that never told he had heard them before  ;  and,  though
he spoke but little himself,  he seemed as well enter-
tained as if he had been the leading person in the
company, —  a post which,  nevertheless,  I believe he
could extremely well sustain;  and,  no doubt,  much
the better for being in no haste to aspire to it.  I have
seldom,  altogether,  had an evening with which I have
been better pleased.

And now,  for once,  I leave off a packet at the end
of a day's adventures.  So bless you,  my Susy,  and all
your hearers.

Friday.  —  I dined with Mrs.  Thrale and Dr.  John-

1782]       OF THE AUTHOK OF EVELINA.        215

son,  who was very comic and good humoured.  Susan
Thrale had just had her hair turned up,  and powdered,
and has taken to the womanly rohe.  Dr.  Johnson
sportively gave her instructions how to increase her
consequence,  and to  "  take upon her"  properly.

"  Begin,"  said he,  "  Miss Susy,  with something
grand — something to surprise mankind!  Let your
first essay in life be a warm censure of  '  Cecilia.'  You
can no way make yourself more conspicuous.  Tell the
world how ill it was conceived,  and how ill executed.
Tell them how little there is in it of human nature,
and how well your knowledge of the world enables
you to judge of the failings in that book.  Find fault
without fear ;  and if you are at a loss for any to find,
invent whatever comes into your mind,  for you may
say what you please,  with little fear of detection,  since
of those who praise  '  Cecilia'  not half have read it,  and
of those who have read it,  not half remember it.  Go
to work,  therefore,  boldly  ;  and particularly mark that
the character of Albany is extremely unnatural,  to
your own knowledge,  since you never met with such a
man at Mrs.  Cummyn's School."

This stopped his exhortation,  for we laughed so
violently at this happy criticism that he could not
recover the thread of his harangue.

Mrs.  Thrale,  who was to have gone with me to
Mrs.  Ord's,  gave up her visit in order to stay with
Dr.  Johnson ;  Miss Thrale,  therefore,  and I went
together.  We found there Charlotte,  who had been
invited to dinner,  and who looked very pretty and
very innocent ;  Mrs.  Chapone,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys
Mr.  Mulso,  and young Mr.  Cambridge.  There came
afterwards Mr.  Burrows,  Lady Rothes,  Miss Bur-
goyne.  Dr.  Pepys,  Mr.  Seward,  and a lady I knew not.

•21G DIARY AXD LETTERS  [Part V.

Mrs.  Orel received us with her usual good breeding.
Mrs.  Chapone was more civil than ever,  and,  after a
little general discourse,  she asked me if 1 had yet heard
that Swift's jNIrs.  Delany was among my unknown
friends.

"  I have a letter,"  she said,  "  which I must beg to
shew you from her,  for I think it will be worth your
running over.  It is in answer to one I wrote,  begging
to know whether she had met with  '  Cecilia.'  She
tells me that both she and the old Duchess of Portland
are I'eading it for the third time,  and that they desire
nothing so much as an acquaintance with the amiable
writer."

There,  Miss Susanna,  there,  daddy,  the Old Wits
have begun the charge !  This was very pleasant to
me indeed,  for if they have curiosity as well as I,  we
shall all have some end to answer in meeting.

Saturday,  Dec.  28th.  —  My father and I dined
and spent the day at Sir Joshua Reynolds',  after many
preceding disappointments.  Our dinner party con-
sisted merely of Mr.  West,*  the jDainter,  Mr.  Jackson
of Exeter,  and Miss Reynolds.  Mr.  West had,  some
time ago,  desired my father to invite him to our house,
to see that lion,  your sister,  saying to him  "  you will
be safe,  Dr.  Burney,  in trusting to our meeting,  for
I am past forty,  and married."

My father,  however,  has had no time,  and therefore
I believe he applied to Sir Joshua,  for the servant
who brought our card of invitation said he was to
carry no other till ours was answered.

The moment Miss Palmer had received me with a
reproachful  ^'  At last we are met,"  Sir Joshua took my

*  Benjamin West,  afterward President of the Royal Academy.

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  217

hand,  and insisted upon wishing me a merry Christmas
according to old forms,  and then presenting me to
Mr.  West,  he said, —

^'You must let me introduce to you one of your
greatest admirers."

Mr.  West is a very pleasing man,  gentle,  soft-
mannered,  cheerful,  and serene.  Mr.  Jackson you
may remember our formerly seeing ;  he is very hand-
some, and seems possessed of much of that ardent
genius which distinguishes Mr.  Young;  for his ex-
pressions, at times,  are extremely violent,  while at
other times he droops,  and is so absent that he seems
to forget not only all about him,  but himself.

They were both exceedingly civil to me,  and dear
Sir Joshua is so pleasant,  so easy,  so comfortable,  that
I never w^as so little constrained in a first meeting with
people who I saw came to meet me.

After dinner Mr.  Jackson undertook to teach us all
how to write with our left hands.  Some succeeded,
and some failed;  but both he and Mr.  West wrote
nothing but my name.  I tried,  and would have written
Sir Joshua,  but it was illegible,  and I tore the paper ;
Mr.  Jackson was very vehement to get it from me.

"  I have done the worst,"  cried I,  '^  and I don't like
disgracing myself."

"  Pho!"  cried he,  just with the energy and freedom
of Mr.  Young,  ^'let me see it at once;  do you think
you can do any thing with your left hand that wil
lessen the credit of what you have done with your
right?"

This,  however,  was all that was hinted to me upon
that subject by him.  I had afterwards one slight touch
from Mr.  West,  but the occasion was so tempting I
could not possibly wonder at him.     Sir Joshua had two

218 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

snufF-boxes in use,  a gold and a tin one ;  I examined
them,  and asked why he made use of sucli a vile
and shabby tin one.

'*  Why,"  said he laughing,  "  because I naturally
love a little of the blackguard.  Ay,  and so do you
too,  little as you look as if you did,  and all the people
all day long are saying,  where can you have seen
such company as you treat us with?"

"  Why you have seen such.  Sir Joshua,"  said Mr.
West,  taking up the tin snuff-box,  "  for this box you
must certainly have picked up at Briggs's sale."

You may believe I was eager enough now to call a
new subject ;  and Sir Joshua,  though he loves a little
passing speech or two upon this matter,  never insists
upon keeping it up,  but the minute he sees he has
made me look about me or look foolish,  he is most
good-naturedly ready to give it up.

But how,  my dearest Susy,  can you wish any wishes
about Sir Joshua and me?  A man who has had two
shakes of the palsy !  What misery should I sujffer
if I were only his niece,  from a terror of a fatal re-
petition of such a shock  !  I would not run volun-
tarily into such a state of perpetual apprehension for
the wealth of the East.  Wealth,  indeed,  per se,  I
never too much valued,  and my acquaintance with its
possessors has by no means increased my veneration
for it.

Sir Joshua has a plan in consideration for instituting
a jubilee in honour of Raphael,  who,  this Easter,  will
have been dead 300 years.  He is not yet determined
what ceremonies to have performed,  but he charged me
to set my  *'  little brain"  to work in thinking for him,
and said he should insist upon my assistance.

I had afterwards a whispering conversation with

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  219

Mrs.  Reynolds,  which made me laugh,  from her ex-
cessive oddness and absurdity.  It beo-an about Ches-
ington.  She expressed her wonder how I could have
passed so much time there.  I assured her that with
my own will I should pass much more time there,  as I
know no place where I had had more,  if so much,
hapj)iness.

"  Well,  bless me  !"  cried she,  holding*  up her hands,
*'  and all this variety comes from only one man  !  That's
strange indeed,  for,  by what I can make out,  there  's
nothing but that one Mr.  Quip there!"

*'  Mr.  Crisp,''  said I,  '*  is,  indeed,  the only man,  but
there are also two ladies,  very dear friends of mine,
who live there constantly."

"What!  and they neither of them married that
Mr.  —  that same gentleman?"

"  No,  they never married any body  ;  they are single,
and so is he."

''  Well,  but if he is so mighty agreeable,"  said she,
holding her finger up to her nose most significantly,
"  can you tell me how it comes to pass he should never
have got a wife in all this time  ?  "

There was no answering this but by grinning ;  but
I thought how my dear Kitty would again have called
her the old sifter.

She afterwards told me of divers most ridiculous
distresses she had been in with Mrs.  Montagu and
Mrs.  Ord.

"  I had the most unfortunate thing in the world
happen to me,"  she said,  *'  about Mrs.  Montagu,  and
I always am in some distress or misfortune with that
lady.  She did me the honour to invite me to dine with
her last week, — and I am sure there is nobody in the
world can be more obliged to Mrs.  Montagu for taking

220 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part V.

such notice of any body;  —  but just when tlie day came
I was so unlucky as to be ill,  and that,  you know,
made it quite improper to go to dine with Mrs.  Mon-
tagu, for fear of any disagreeable consequences.  So
this vexed me very much,  for I had nobody to send to
her that was proper to appear before Mrs.  Montagu  ;
for,  to own the truth,  you must know I have no servant
but a maid,  and I could not think of sending such a
person to Mrs.  Montagu.  So I thought it best to
send a chairman,  and to tell him only to ring at the
bell,  and to wait for no answer  ;  because then the
porter might tell Mrs.  Montagu my servant brought
the note,  for the porter could not tell but he might be
my servant.  But my maid was so stupid,  she took the
shilling I gave her for the chairman,  and went to a
green-shop,  and bid the woman send somebody with
the note,  and she left the shilling with her  ;  so the
green-woman,  I suppose,  thought she might keep the
shillino;,  and instead of sendins,"  a chairman she sent
her own errand-girl ;  and she was all dirt and rags.
But this is not all ;  for,  when the girl got to the house,
nothing would serve her but she would give the note
to Mrs.  Montagu,  and wait for an answer ;  so then,
you know,  Mrs.  Montagu saw this ragged green-shop
girl.  I was never so shocked in my life,  for when she
brought me back the note I knew at once how it all
was.  Only think what a mortification,  to have Mrs.
Montagu see such a person as that !  She must think
it very odd of me indeed to send a green-shop girl to
such a house as hers !  "

Now for a distress equally grievous with Mrs.  Ord  : —

'^  You must know Mrs.  Ord called on me the other

day when I did not happen to be dressed ;  so I had a

very pretty sort of a bed-gown,  like a jacket,  hanging

1782]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  221

at the fire,  and I had on a petticoat,  with a border on
it of the same pattern  ;  but the bed-gown I thought was
damp,  and I was in a hurry to go down to Mrs.  Ord,
so I would not stay to dry it,  but went down in another
bed-gown,  and put my cloak on.  But only think what
Mrs.  Ord must think of it,  for I have since thought
she must suppose I had no gown on at all,  for you
must know my cloak was so long it only shewed the
petticoat."

If this makes you grin as it did me,  you will be glad
of another specimen of her sorrows:  —

"  I am always/'  said she,  "  out of luck with Mrs.
Ord ;  for another time when she came there hap-
pened to be a great slop on the table  ;  so,  while the
maid was going to the door,  I took up a rag that I
had been wiping my pencils with,  for I had been paint-
ing, and I wiped the table ;  but as she got up-stairs
before I had put it away,  I popped a white handker-
chief upon it.  However,  while we were talking,  I
thought my handkerchief looked like a litter upon the
table,  and,  thinks I,  Mrs.  Ord will think it very untidy,
for she is all neatness,  so I whisked it into my pocket ;
but I quite forgot the rag with the paint on it.  So,
when she was gone, — bless me! — there I saw it was
sticking out of my pocket,  in full sight.  Only think
what a slut Mrs.  Ord must think me,  to put a dish-
clout in my pocket !"

I had several stories of the same sort,  and I fear I
have lost all reputation with her for dignity,  as I
laughed immoderately at her disasters.

December 29th.  —  In the morning called Pacchi-
erotti,  rather in better spirits,  but still looking very ill.
I did not dare mention Lady Clarges,  though I much
wished to have gathered some information,  in order to

222 DIARY AND LETJEIIS  [PaRT V.

liave sent it to you  ;  but he is now so depressed by the
loss of his friend,  that he cannot,  without a sadness too
mucli well to endure,  talk or think of him.

Monday,  Dec.  30th.  —  I spent all the morning at
my aunt's.  In the evening I went,  by appointment,  to
Mrs,  Chapone,  where I met Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys,  Mr.
and Mrs.  INIulso,  and Mr.  Burrows and his old maiden
sister.  We had rather a hum-drum evening.  I cannot
bring myself to be well enough acquainted with this
set to try at enlivening it,  because I cannot help being
half afraid of them  ;  otherwise,  a little rattling would
prodigiously mend matters,  and,  though they might stare
a little,  I am sure they would like it.

Mrs.  Chapone shewed me a head of Mrs.  Delany;
I admired it much  ;  there looks much benevolence and
sense in it.

'*!  am glad,"  said I,  ''to see even thus much of
her."

"  I hope,  then,"  said Mrs.  Chapone,  "  you will give
me the pleasure of introducing you to know more of
her."

Tuesday,  Dec.  31st. — I went this morning with my
dear father to Sir John Ashton Lever's,  where we could
not but be entertained.  Sir Ashton came and talked
to us a good while.  He may be an admirable naturali^^,
but I think if in other matters you leave the ist out,
you will not much wrong him.  He looks full sixty
years old,  yet he had dressed not only tv/o young men,
but himself,  in a green jacket,  a round hat,  with green
feathers,  a bundle of arrows under one arm,  and a
bow in the other,  and thus,  accoutred as a forester,
he pranced about;  while the younger fools,  who were in
the same garb,  kept running to and fro in the garden,
carefully contriving to shoot at some mark,  just as any

1782]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        223

of the company appeared at any of the windows.  After
such a spechnen of his actions,  you will excuse me if I
give you none of his conversation.

We met with Mr.  Nollekens and Miss Welsh.

As soon as I came home I went to Mrs.  Thrale's,
where I bargained for having nobody admitted,  and I
stayed till eleven o'clock,  spending as quietly,  sociable
a day as I could wish.  But I was much vexed I had
not returned somewhat sooner w^hen I heard that young
Mr.  Cambridge had been here,  just arrived from Ches-
ington.  I would have given the world to have heard
his immediate account of what had passed,  and whether
the place and people had answered his expectations.

PART VI.

1783.

CONTENTS.

A Quiet Day — A Busy Day — An Opera Rehearsal — Bertoni asi^  ■
Sacchini — Carnevale,  the Singer  —  A Dinner Party at Dr.  Bor-
ney's — Dr.  Parr and Dr.  Johnson — Loose Morality — Table-tallw
Mrs.  Chapone  —  Pacchierotti  —  Mrs.  Siddons in Belvidera  —
Jackson of Exeter — Anecdotes of Dr.  Johnson — The Bishop oC'
Chester — A Dainty Gentleman — A Strange Question — Beauty
thrown away — A Dinner at Mrs.  Walsingham's — The Walloon
— Walker,  the Lecturer on Astronomy — Lady Charlotte Fkieli
— Soame Jenyns — Mrs.  Carter — The Bishop of Winchester—
Mrs.  North — Sir Henry Clinton — Mrs.  Delany — jMrs.  Chapoog
— A Conversazione — Meeting between Soame Jenyns and  'Misj-
Burney — Mrs.  Ord — Foreign Impressions of English Climate—
The Hooles — Miss Burney's first Introduction to Mrs.  Delanj-r.
and the Duchess of Portland — Singular art of Flower-makiiag— -
The Etiquette of the Old School  — "Clarissa"  and Sir Cbaite-
Grandison — Lord Weymouth — The Bishop of Exeter— Mr^
Lightfoot.

VOL.  II.

22G J)]AKV AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

PART VI.

1783.

Wednesday,  Jan.  1st,  1783. — This  "svas one of my
quiet days at home,  upon the new construction I men-
tioned to you.  Pacchierotti called for a few minutes in
the morning,  to wish us a happy new year,  and desired
I would not forget making-his compliments to Mrs.
Phillips upon such an account.

Thursday.  —  I again spent at home.

Friday,  Jax.  3d,  Was a very busy day.  In the
mornino;  there was a  ^rand rehearsal of a nevY serious
opera.  Mrs.  Fitzgerald had engaged to go with me,
but sent me suddenly an excuse.  I,  therefore,  wrote
to ask Mrs.  Ord,  for she had said she should like it a
few days before.  She sent me a very kind answer,
and called for me at twelve o'clock.

We got into a very good box,  though so much in the
dark that Pacchierotti did not know me.  There was
very little company.  The famous old dilettante,  Mrs.
French,  was in the next box to ours,  and put her head
in to ask if I was not  "  Miss Mee?"  Mrs.  Ord had a
good mind to answer no,  Miss B.  However,  when I
told her of her mistake,  she entered,  nevertheless,  into
chat,  asking my opinion of the opera,  and what was
the story,  and the new singer,  Carnevale,  &:c.

The opera is called  ''  Cimene,"   and the story is

1783]  OF THE AUTHOK OF EVELINA.  227

the  "  Cid."  The music Bertoni's.  Some is very
pretty,  some very trite,  and a good many passages bor-
rowed from Sacchini.  Many things,  however,  in the
scheme of the opera were,  to me,  quite new.  The
duet they begin and end together,  without one solo bit
for either singer.  It is extremely pretty,  and if Piozzi
had the upper part would have been beautiful.  The
conclusion is a long historic finale,  such as we have
been only used to in comic operas ;  and just before the
last chorus Pacchierotti has a solo air,  accompanied
by the mandoline,  which has a mighty pretty effect ;
but,  not being expected,  John Bull did not know
whether it would be right or not to approve it,  and,
therefore,  instead of applauding,  the folks only looked
at one another.

The new singer,  Carnevale,  has a loud,  violent voice,
very harsh and unpleasing,  and as little manageable or
flexible as if she had sung all her life merely by ear,
and without teaching of any sort.  She has all the
abilities to be a great singer,  and she is worse than any
little one.  Pacchierotti's first song is a sweet mezza
bravura,  or sweet,  at least,  he made it,  with the same
words Millico had,  '  Placa lo sdegno,  O cara."  His
second is  '^  una vera cantabile."  Oh,  such singing!  —
so elegant!  —  so dignified!  —  so chaste!  —  so polished!
I never hear him sing without Avishing for you,  who
only feel his singing as ray father and I do ;  for my
father seems more and more delighted with it ewevy
time he hears him.

Friday,  4th Jan. — We had an invited party at
home,  both for dinner and the evening.  The occasion
was in honour of Dr.  Parr,  of Norwich,  Mr.  Twininic's
friend ;  and who has been very kind about our Charles.
He had been asked to dinner,  to meet Dr.  Johnson,

OOJ

DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

but could not come till the evening.  Mr.  Seward and
Mr.  Sasti'es came early.  Charles,  also,  came from Chis-
wick.

Dr.  Johnson came so very late,  that we had all given
him up  :  he was,  however,  very ill,  and only from an
extreme of kindness did he come at all.  When I went
up to liim,  to tell how sorry I was to find him so un-
well,—

"Ah!"  he cried,  taking my hand and kissing it,
''  who shall ail any thing when  *  Cecilia'  is so near?
Yet you do not think how poorly I am!"

This was quite melancholy,  and all dinner time he
hardly opened his mouth but to repeat to me, — "Ah!
you little know how ill I am."  He was excessively
kind to me,  in spite of all his pain,  and indeed I was so
sorry for him,  that I could talk no more than himself.
All our comfort w^as from Mr.  Seward,  who enlivened
us as much as he possibly could by his puns and his
sport.  But poor Dr.  Johnson was so ill,  that after
dinner he went home.

Very early in the evening came Mrs.  Fitzgerald,
wdio has all her life been dying to see Dr.  Johnson,  and
wdio,  I am sure,  was extremely disappointed in missing
hhn.  Soon after came Mrs.  Ord,  w^ho was less pro-
voked, because her curiosity has often been gratified.
Then came young Mr.  Cambridge,  who had had the
same inducement sent him.     Charles also came,  and

Mr.  P the only accidental caller-in of the party.

My father now came up to me,  followed by Dr.
Parr,  and said, —

"  Fanny,  Dr.  Parr wishes to be introduced to you."
I got up,  and made my reverence.
"  Dr.   Parr,"  said my father,  *^  gives us hopes of
seeing Mr.  Twining this year,"

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  229

"  If Miss Barney,"  cried the Doctor,  "  would write
to him,  success would be certain.  I am sure he could
resist nothing from her hand.  Tell him he must come
and see Mrs.  Siddons."

"  Ay,"  said my father,  "  and hear Pacchierotti."

"  Whatever Miss Burney tells him,  will do  —  one
line from her would do.  And if she makes use even of
any false pretences,  as they will be for so good a pur-
pose, I will absolve her."

I hate,  even in jest,  this loose morality from a cler-
gyman. I only curtsied,  and so forth,  but attempted
no answer;  and he grew tired,  and went on with my
father and Mr.  Seward.

Mr.  Cambridge then asked me concerning this Mr.
Twinino;,  and I gave him a little history of his cha-
racter, but not so animated a one as of my Daddy,  lest
he should order his horse,  and set off for Colchester.
His enthusiasm for any thing he supposes admirahle
would never have stopped short of such an expedition.
We then went on chatting about Mrs.  Siddons,  Mr.
Garrick,  Dr.  Johnson,  and sundries,  till Mrs.  Ord
broke up the party by taking leave.  Mrs.  Fitzgerald,
too,  went at the same time.

Mr.  P ,  at last,  spied me out,  and came sqidnying

up to me.  His eyes are smaller than ever,  and he is
more blind than ever,  and he pokes his nose more into
one's face than ever.  Mrs.  Fitzgerald could not look
at him without bursting into an almost horse laugh  ;
which really made me hardly able to speak to him  :
but he talked to me with his usual prolific powei'S of
entertainment.  Dr.  Parr,  Mr.  Seward,  my father,  and
Mr.  Sastres kept in a clump.

#  #  -^  #  #

Young Mr.  Cambridge need not complain of my

230 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

taciturnity,  whatever his father may do.  Who,  indeed,
of all my new acquaintances,  has so well understood
me?  The rest all talk of  "  Evelina"  and  '*  Cecilia,"  and
turn every other word into some compliment ;  while he
talks of Chesington,  or Captain Phillips,  and pays me,
not even by implication,  any compliments at all.  He
neither looks at me with any curiosity,  nor speaks to
me with any air of expectation  ;  two most insufferable
honours,  which I am continually receiving.  He is
very properly conscious he has at least as much to say
as to hear,  and he is above affecting a ridiculous defer-
ence to which he feels I have no claim.  If I met with
more folks who would talk to me upon such rational
terms, — considering,  like him,  their own dignity of full
as much value as my ladyship's vanity, — with how infi-
nitely more ease and pleasure should I make one in
those conversations  !

Saturday.  —  I made visits this morning to Miss

E' and Mrs.  Chapone,  and found only the last at

home  ;  but as she was not only last,  but best,  it ac-
corded extremely well with my wishes.  I then went
on to Mrs.  Thrale,  with whom I spent the day — always
with all my heart.

Monday.  —  Mrs.  Fitzs^erald called for me in the
morning,  to go to the last rehearsal of  "  Cimene."  I
have nothing new to say about it.  Mr.  Fitzgerald
brought Pacchierotti,  for a few moments,  into our box.
He was not in spirits,  but could not help singing
sweetly.

As we were coming out of the Opera house,  just at
the door leading to the Haymarket,  I saw the two Miss
Bulls.  Lady Mary Duncan,  whom they had been with,
had gone on.  Miss Catherine Bull accidentally looked
round,  and,  thinking now or never to put an end to the

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  231

awkwardness of our acquaintance and no acquaintance,
I ventured to instantly curtsy,  tliougli rather uncer-
tain whether I was known.  Miss Catherine returned
my reverence with much alacrity,  and most eagerly
called after her sister,  —  "Sister!  sister!  here's Miss
Burney!"  Miss Bull came back,  and more curtsies
followed.  Miss Catherine Bull then began a most warm
tloge of Pacchierotti.

'^  I hope,"  cried she,  "  the new opera will be ap-
plauded ! — If Pacchierotti is not applauded,  I shall die 1
He is so unhappy about it ! "

*'  It is very unfortunate,"  said I,  ''  that even those
friends he has made,  small as the number is to what I
wish it,  he is not conscious that he possesses ;  for they
are,  in general,  the most quiet and attentive part of the
audience,  and though they listen to him with as much
pleasure as we do,  they hardly think of applauding
him;  and therefore he concludes they do not like him."

"  Yes,"  cried Miss Catherine,  '^  and one may talk
one's self out of breath before he will believe one,  when
one tells him how many people admire him."

Mrs.  Fitzgerald then made me go with her to Cos-
way's,  to see her little girl's picture.  I saw also
some sweet things there,  especially a miniature of the
Duchess of Rutland,  that is beauty itself.  I passed the
rest of the day chez nous.

Tuesday. — I was all the morning with Mrs.  Thrale,
and then went with my father to dinner at Mrs.  Ord's.
We met the Denoyers,  and Jonas Hanway,  the old
traveller.  He is very loquacious,  extremely fond of
talking of what he has seen and heard,  and would be
very entertaining,  were he less addicted to retail anec-
dotes and reports from newspapers.  Mr.  Selwyn also
was there.

1232 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

Thursday. — Again at home,  though Mrs.  Thrale
vaine to me to offer me a place in her side-box,  to see
Mrs.  Siddoiis in  "  Belvidera."  I could refuse that
without offence,  though not without surprise,  as it was
^so generally a desirable thing,  that it shewed how
wauch I really and sincerely coveted a little respite
€rom dress and bustle.  I had,  however,  seen and been
Jialf killed by Mrs.  Siddons in  "  Belvidera,"  or I could
mot have been so heroic in my domesticity.

Friday. — Again at home,  but not alone,  for we had
visitors all day.  Mr.  Jackson,  of Exeter,  came in the
morning,  and brought,  as he had begged leave to do,
his daughter.  She seems sensible,  but she is rather
-conceited,  and fond of talking,  and talking as if well
•satisfied she deserved hearers.

Before they went came Miss Streatfield,  looking
jpale,  but very elegant and pretty.  She was in high
£|jirits,  and I hope has some reason.  She made,  at
le&st,  speeches that provoked such surmises.  When
the Jacksons went, —

''  That,"  said I,  "  is the celebrated Jackson of
;Sxeter ;  I dare say you would like him if you knew
liim."

"  I dare say I should,"  cried she,  simpering,  "  for he
has the two requisites for me, — he is tall and thin."

To be sure,  this did not at all call for raillery !  Dr.
¥yse has always been distinguished by those two epi-
thets. I said,  however,  nothing,  as my mother was
present  ;  but she would not let my looks pass un-
noticed.

"  Oh  !"  cried she,  '' how wicked you look!  —  No
need of seeing Mrs.  Siddons,  for expression  !  —  How-
.-ijver,  you know how much that is my taste,  —  tall and
thin  ! — but you don't know how apropos it is just now!"

1783]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        233

She was here interrupted by the entrance of young
Mr.  Cambridge,  who then came into the room.

He had a good deal of talk with Miss Streatfield
about her darling Bishop of Chester,  at whose house
he has often met her.  She talked of him with her
usual warmth of passionate admiration,  and he praised
him very much also,  and said, —

"  I know no house where conversation is so well
understood as the Bishop of Chester's, —  except this, —
where,  from the little I have seen  —  and much more I
hope to see — I think it is more pleasantly and desirably
managed than any where."

Friday. — Mr.  Jackson and his daughters came to
tea in the evening,  and Miss Mathias,  as a visitor of
Charlotte's.  Mr.  Jackson,  unfortunately,  was in one
of his gloomy humours,  and would not talk with my
mother;  as to me,  I never hardly,  when the party is
so small,  can talk with any comfort or spirit.  I gave
the evening wholly,  therefore,  to Miss Jackson,  who
could give me back nothing in payment,  but that I
had merely done what was fitting to do.

I made a visit to poor Dr.  Johnson,  to inquire after
his health.  I fcrund him better,  yet extremely far from
well.  One thing,  however,  gave me infinite satisfac-
tion. He was so good as to ask me after Charles,  and
said,  "  I shall be glad to see him ;  pray tell him to
call upon me."  I thanked him very much,  and said
how proud he would be of such a permission.

'^  I should be glad,"  said he,  still more kindly,  "to
see him,  if he were not your brother;  but were he a
dog,  a cat,  a rat,  a frog,  and belonged to you,  I must
needs be glad to see him  ! "

Mr.  Seward has sent me a proof plate,  upon silver
paper,    of an extremely fine impression of this dear

234 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

Doctor,  a niezzotinto,  by Doughty,  from Sir Joshua's
picture,  and a very pretty note to heg my acceptance
of it.  I am much obliged to him,  and very glad to
Lave it.

Saturday,  Jan.  11th. — I went early to my dear
Mrs.  Thrale's to spend the whole day with her,  which
I did most comfortably,  and nobody was let in.  In
the evening,  as I had Mrs.  Crewe's ticket,  I went
with her and Miss Thrale into the pit at the Opera.  It
was Medonte.  Pacchierotti was charmingly in voice,
and we sat near the orchestra,  and I heard him to all
possible advantage.

In our way we passed througb the coffee-room.

There we were recognised by Mr.  J .    He was very

civil,  and soon after we had taken our places,  Mrs.
Thrale being between her daughter and me,  he took
the outward seat next to mine,  where he sat during
the whole opera.  He is affected and dainty,  but he
knows music Yerj well,  and is passionately an ad-
mirer of Pacchierotti,  which made me very glad of
having him in my neighbourhood.  A gentleman,  too,
of his acquaintance,  who sat between us,  was quite a
vehement admirer of the sweet Pac's.,  yet I observed
that neither of them gave him any applause, —  so indo-
lent people are even in their pleasures.

Mr.  J ,  though he talked to me very much,  never

did it while the Pac.  was singing,  or while any thing
else was going forward that w^as worth attention.

"  Have you read,"  he said,  '^the new book that has
had such a run in France,  ^  Les liaisons dangereuses?^ "

*'  No,"  answered I,  not much pleased at the name,
'*  I have not even heard of it."

''Indeed! — it has made so much noise in France I
am quite surprised at that.     It is not,  indeed,  a work

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  235

that recommends very strict morality  :  but you,  we all
know,  may look into any work without being hurt
by it."

I felt hurt then,  however,  and very gravely an-
swered,—

"  I cannot give myself that praise,  as I never look
into any books that could hurt me."

He bowed,  and smiled,  and said,  that was  *'  very
right,"  and added, —

*'This book was written by an officer  ;  and he says,
there are no characters nor situations in it that he has
not himself seen."

"That,  then,"  cried I,  "will with me always be a
reason to as little desire seeing the officer as his
book."

He looked a little simple at this,  but pretended to
approve it very much.  However,  I fancy it will save
him the trouble of inquiring into my readings any-
more. I was really provoked with him,  however,  and
though he was most obsequiously civil to me,  I only
spoke to him in answer,  after this little dialogue.

When the opera was over,  he took leave of us to go
into some better place,  I fancy,  for seeing a new dance,
which was to follow.  But 1 was very much surprised,
when,  while I was speaking to Mrs.  Thrale,  a voice
said,  "How do you do,  Miss Burney?"  and turning

about,  I saw Mr.  J 's place had been taken by Mr.

George Cambridge.  You may easily believe I was not
sorry at the change.  I like him,  indeed,  extremely.
He is both elegant and sensible,  and almost all the
other folks I meet deserve,  at best,  but one of those
epithets.

When the dance was over,  he joined some other
ladies,  and we met with my father,  and Harry Cotton,

236 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

and proceeded to the coffee-room.  It  \vas,  liowever,  so
crowded,  we could not make way to the door.

Among the fine folks was Lady Archer,  whom I had
never before seen so near  :  and,  notwithstanding all her
most unnatural cake of white and red,  her features
were so perfect and so lovely,  I could not help saying, —

"  What pity so much beauty should be thrown
away ! "

"  Beauty"  repeated H.  Cotton,  "  if any there be,  I
must own it lies too deep for me to see it."

I went to-day to Lady H's.,  who has been here.  She
looks extremely ill,  and is very ill ;  and MissC.  looked
extremely ugly,  and is very ugly  ;  and the other Misses
looked extremely affected and conceited,  and are affected
and conceited:   so looks and facts were well suited.

I then called on Mrs.  Fitzgerald,  and had a hearty
and robust halloo with her,  comically in contrast with
the languor I had just left,  and then came home,  where
I stayed with my mother the rest of the day.

Monday,  Jan.  13th. — This proved,  and unexpect-
edly, a very agreeable day to me.  I went with my
father to dine at Mrs.  Walsingham's,  where I only
went so soon again because he wished it,  but where I
passed my time extremely well.  The party was small,
—Dr.  Warton,  Mr.  T.  Warton,  Mr.  Pepys,  Mr.  Mon-
tagu, Mr.  Walker the lecturer,  and my dear Sir Jo-
shua Reynolds,  with my father,  were all the men  ;  and
Mrs.  Montagu was the only other female besides myself.

Dr.  Warton made me a most obsequious bow  ;  I had
been introduced to him,  by Sir Joshua,  at Mrs.  Chol-
mondeley's.  He is what Dr.  Johnson calls a rapturist,
and I saw plainly he meant to pour forth much civility
into my ears,  by his looks,  and watching for opportu-
nities to speak to me :  I so much,  however,  dread such

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  237

attacks,  that every time I met his eye,  I turned another
way,  with so frigid a countenance,  that he gave up his
design.  He is a very communicative,  gay,  and plea-
sant converser,  and enlivened the whole day by his
readiness upon all subjects.

Mr.  Tom Warton,  the poetry historiographer,  looks
unformed in his manners,  and awkward in his gestures.
He joined not one word in the general talk,  and,  but for
my father,  who was his neighbour at dinner,  and entered
into a ttte-a-ttte conversation with him,  he would
never have opened his mouth after the removal of the
second course.

Mr.  Montagu is Mrs.  Montagu's nephew,  and
adopted son.  He is young,  and well enough look-
ing, has an uncommon memory for all he has read,
is extremely civil in his behaviour,  and seems ex-
tremely well-formed in his mind,  both with respect
to literature,  and to principle.  He affects,  however,
talking French rather too much,  and has a something
finical in his manners,  that,  with me,  much lessens
their power of pleasing.

Mr.  Walker,  though modest in science,  is vulgar
in conversation.  The rest I have nothino-  new to
say about.

I was placed at dinner between Sir Joshua and Mr.
Montagu.  I had a great deal of exceeding comfort-
able and easy chat with Sir Joshua,  as I always have,
which makes his very sight enliven me in all these
places.  I had intended not speaking at all with Mr.  Mon-
tagu, as I thought him so fine ;  but he was so very civil,
and so perpetually addressed me,  that before dinner was
over we seemed quite well acquainted.

When we left the gentlemen,  Mrs.  Montagu and
Mrs.  W^alsingham began a conversation upon Lady

238 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

Charlotte Finch's late excursion to Spain,  and then
talked upon foreign places and foreign people with
much spirit and entertainment.  When the gentlemen
joined us,  the same subject continued,  and was ex-
tremely well treated.  Mrs.  Montagu was particularly
cheerful,  and said many very good things.  Indeed,
nothino;  was said that deserved not attention.

Once,  however,  I was a little startled  :  the conversa-
tion, by degrees,  fell upon books,  and every body
agreed that Sir Roger de Coverley was,  perhaps,  the
first character ever drawn,  for perfection of deline-
ation.

"  But I cannot help suspecting,"  said Dr.  Warton,
'*  it is taken from the life,  as there are certain traits in
it too excellent to have been merely invented :  parti-
cularly that singularity,  that wherever he visited he
always talked to the servants the whole way he went
up stairs."

Mr.  Montagu here arose,  and walking round to the
back of my chair,  said,  in a whisper, —

"  Miss Burney,  pray how is this?  must a character,
to be excellent,  be drawn from the life?  I beg you
would tell me?"

Malicious enough,  this !

'^  O,"  answered I,  as easily as I could,  ^'  unless we
knew what characters are,  and what are not,  drawn
from the life,  'tis impossible to decide.''

Tuesday. — I spent at Mrs.  Thrale's all the after-
noon, but had two engagements for the evening ;  one
with Mrs.  Ord,  who had written me the finest of pane-
gyrics from Soame Jenyns,  who had charged her to
contrive a meeting for him,  and she begged to see me
on Saturday.  I had no heart for such an encounter,
and sent an excuse.     She then insisted upon seeing

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  239

me,  and,  wlien I went,  declared I should fix my own
day,  and shewed me Mr.  Jenyns'  notes upon the subject,
all expressing his violent impatience for the interview.
I was obliged to agree for Friday ;  but indeed with no
good will,  for I am not at all equal to such formal en-
gagements. If I had met him accidentally I should
have been much pleased  ;  but arranging a meeting,  pro-
fessedly to hear his compliments,  nothing in the world
but an inability of resisting Mrs.  Ord's importunity
should have made me consent to.

Mrs.  Carter was with her.  I could not,  however,
stay,  though so quiet a trio would much better have
suited me.

We had a note to day from Hetty,  who is just re-
turned from Farnham,  with a request from the Bishop
of Winchester and Mrs.  North that they might come
here to tea the next day.  Mrs.  North has long made
advances to me of acquaintance  ;  however,  Hetty wrote
me word from Farnham,  that she said she saw I shirked
her,  but she was determined to conquer me,  if human
powers could do it.

My dear father was delighted,  and readily agreed to
their coming.  He would have had nobody 'invited to
meet them  ;  but my mother,  of her own accord,  and
without telling him,  sent to invite Mr.  George Cam-
bridge, whose civility to her has won her heart,  and
most especially his bringing her the print of Mrs.
Siddons.

They came very early,  the Bishop,  Mrs.  North,  Mr.
Burney,  and Hetty,  who had dined with them.  Mrs.
North a ologised,  with an easy gaiety,  to my mother,
for the liberty she had laken,  and then bid Hetty intro-
duce her to Charlotte and me.  She spoke to me at
once with a freedom and fa etionsness which she meant

240 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

to inspire me with the same,  and make me shake off
the shyness she had heard belonged to me with stran-
gers ;  but her flightiness,  like that of Mrs.  Cholmon-
deley,  which it a good deal resembled,  only served to
make me feel foolish,  and wish her to address some-
body else.  The Bishop was quiet and gentle,  and
talked only with my father.

I was sitting by myself upon the sofa,  when Hetty,
crossing over to me,  said, —

**  Mrs.  North declares she sees you are going into a
lethargy,  and she has sent me to rouse you."

INIrs.  North then followed herself,  and began a vehe-
ment charge to me not to be formal.  She reproached
me,  with great good humour,  for so long shirking her
acquaintance ;  said she was sure I had conceived an
aversion to her,  but gave me her word I should like
the Bishop of all things.  Then calling him up to us,
she*  said, —

''  Did not I tell you as we came along that I knew
she would like you vastly,  and me not at all?"

"  I beg your pardon,"  cried I,  *'  but perhaps I may-
be less afraid of the Bishop from expecting less of his
notice."

"  There now— that 's abominable  !  She  's afraid of
me,  and not of you."

**  Because I,"  cried the Bishop,  "  am afraid of her,
that's all."

My mother now summoned them to look at Mrs.
Siddons'  print,  and I was glad of the opportunity to
remove,  as this rattling requires more intimacy and
congeniality to make it to me pleasant.

Mrs.  North,  being satisfied with the print,  again
placed me next her on the sofa.  She shewed us all a
very beautiful bouquet,  half natural and half artificial,

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  241

and then,  taking it out of her bosom,  she insisted upon
fastening it in mine ;  and when I would have declined
it,  cried out, —

"Come,  you little toad,  don't be absurd.  Let me
fix it for you at once."

And afterwards,  when I did not instantly understand
some queer speech she made,  and which might be taken
many ways,  she exclaimed, —

"  Come,  now,  don't be dull !"

When they were taking leave,  Monday was fixed
upon for all of us but my mother,  who was allowed to
excuse herself,  to dine at the Bishop's.  I was engaged
in the evening to an assembly at Mrs.  Thrale's.

Thursday. — This morning we had a visit from the
elder Mr.  Cambridge.  I cannot,  however,  be at all
easy with the father,  though I admire him more and
more,  and think all that is formal in him wears, off
upon acquaintance,  and all that is pleasant grows more
and more conspicuous.  But he behaves to me with a
kind of deference that kills me  ;  he listens to what I
say,  as you would listen to Dr.  Johnson,  and leans
forward with an air of respect that,  from a man such
as him,  half petrifies me ;  for what upon earth could I
find to say that would answer high-raised expectations
from Mr.  Cambridge  ?  I feel with him as I did with
Mr.  Burke — an admiration that makes me delighted to
hear him ;  but that makes me,  at the same time,  dread
to hear myself.  If they took less notice of me,  I should
do better.

He told us he had had great pleasure in seeing again
his old acquaintance Mr.  Crisp, —

"  But for Mrs.  Phillips,"  he cried,  "  I am in love
with her — I want to marry her —  I never was so much
charmed in so short a time before."

VOL.  II,  B

OJO

DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

1 believe 1 did look a little more at my ease when he
said tliis.  His praise of my Susy is  -worth having;  and
he sjioke it Avitli a warmtli and pleasure that made me
almost long to embrace him.  I think that would have
put an end to this distance I complain of pretty com-
plerely.

Friday. — Now for this grand interview with Soame
Jenyns.  I went with my dear father,  who Was quite
enchanted at the affair.  Dear soul,  how he feeds upon
all that brings fame to Cecilia !  his eagerness upon
this subject,  and his pleasure in it,  are truly enthusi-
astic, and,  I think,  rather increase by fulness than
o;row satiated.

We were late ;  there was a good deal of company,
not in groups,  nor yet in a circle,  but seated square
round the room,  in order following, — Miss Ellerker,
Mrs.  Soame Jenyns,  ]Mrs.  Thrale,  her daughter,  Mrs.
Buller,  Mr.  Cambridge,  sen.,  IMr.  Soame Jenyns,  Mr.
Selwin,  Mr.  Cambridge,  jun.,  Miss Burgoyne,  a lady
or two I knew not,  and three or four men.

Mrs.  Ord almost ran to the door to receive us,  and
every creature of this company,  contrary to a,ll present
custom in large meetings,  stood up.

'' V/hy have you been so late?"  cried iMrs.  Ord;
''  we have been waiting for you this hour.  I was
afraid there was some mistake."

"  ]My father could not come sooner."

"  But wliy would not you let me send my coach for
vou  ?  Mr.  Soame Jenyns lias been dvin^'  witli im-
patience  ;  some of us thought you would not come  ;
others thought it only coquetry  ;  but couie,  let us
repair the time as we can,  and introduce you to one
another without further delay."

You may believe bow happy I felt at this   "some

f

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  243

thought/'  and  "  others,"  which instantly betrayed that
every bod}^  was apprised they were to see this famous
rencounter ;  and lest I should mark it less,  every body
still stood up.

Mr.  Jenyns now,  with all the speed in his power,
hastened up to me,  and began a long harangue of
which I know hardly a word,  upon the pleasure and
favour,  and honour,  and w^hat not,  of meeting me,
and upon the delight,  and information,  and amusement
of reading  "  Cecilia."

I made all possible reverences,  and tried to get to a
seat,  but Mrs.  Ord,  wdien I turned from him,  took my
hand,  and leading me to the top of the room,  pre-
sented me to Mrs.  Jenyns.  Reverences were repeated
here,  in silence,  however,  so they did very w^ell.  I
then hoped to escape to Mrs.  Thrale,  who held out her
hand to me,  pointing to a chair by her own,  and
saying,—

"  Must I,  too,  make interest to be introduced to
Miss Burney?"

This,  however,  was not allowed  ;  Mrs.  Ord again
took my hand,  and parading me to the sofa,  said, —

"  Come,  Miss Burney,  and let me place you by
Mrs.  Bidler."

I was glad,  by this time,  to be placed any where,
for not till then did the company seat themselves.

Mr.  Cambridge,  sen.  then came up to speak to me,
but had hardly asked how I did before Mrs.  Ord
brought  ]\Ir.  Jenyns to me again,  and made him my
right-hand neighbour,  saying, —

"  There!  now I have put you fairly together,  1 have
done with you."

Mrs.  Buller is tall and elegant in her person;  she
is a famous Greek scholar,  a celebrated traveller upon

244 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

the Continent to see customs and manners  ;  and a
woman every way singular,  for lier knowledge and
enterpiising way of life.

Mr.  Soame Jenyns then,  thus called upon  —  could
he do less? — began an eulogy unrivalled,  I think,  for
extravagance of praise.  All creation was open to me  ;
no human being ever began that book and had power
to put it down  :  pathos,  humour,  interest,  moral  —  O
Heavens  !  I heard,  however,  but the leading words  ;
though every body else,  the whole room being silent,
doubtless heard how they hung together.  Had I been,
carried to a theatre to hear an oration upon my own
performances,  I could hardly have felt more con-
founded.

I bowed my head during the first two or three
sentences,  by way of marking that I thought them
over ;  but over they were not the more.  I then turned
awav,  but I only met Mrs.  Buller,  who took up the
panegyric where Mr.  Jenyns stopped for breath.

In short,  the things that were said,  with the attention
of the whole company,  would have drawn blushes into
the cheeks of Agujari or Garrick.  I was almost upon
the point of running away.  I changed so often from
hot to cold that I really felt myself in a fever and an
ague.  I never even attempted to speak to them,  and
I looked with all the frigidity I possibly could,  in
hopes they would tire of bestowing such honours on a
subject so ungrateful.

One moment I had hopes that Mr.  G.  Cambridge,
in Christian charity,  was coming to  ©O'er some inter-
ruption ;  for,  when these speeches were in their height,
he came and sate down on a chair immediately oppo-
site Miss Thrale,  and equally near,  in profile,  to^  me  ;
but he merely said,  "  I hope Dr.   Burney has not

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  245

wanted his pamphlet  ?  "  Even Mrs.  Thrale would not
come near me,  and told me afterwards it had been
such a settled thing,  before my arrival,  that I was to
belong to Mr.  Soame Jenyns,  that she did not dare.

At length,  however,  the people,  finding there was
no chance of amusement from me,  and naturally con-
cluding Mr.  Jenyns could say little more,  began to
entertain themselves in a more general way ;  and then
Mr.  Cambridge,  sen.  entered into an argument with
Mrs.  Buller upon foreign customs opposed to English,
and upon the difficulty of getting good conversation,
from the eternal intervention of politics or dissipa-
tion.

Mrs.  Buller was clever and spirited,  but bold and
decisive ;  Mr.  Cambridge was entertaining and well
bred,  and had all the right,  I thought,  on his side.  I
had more relief,  however,  than pleasure in the con-
versation; for my joy in being no longer the object of
the company was such as not to leave me quite at
liberty for attending to what was said.

The moment they were gone,  "  Well,  Miss Burney,'*
said Mrs.  Ord,  "  have you and Mr.  Jenyns had a great
deal of conversation together  ?  "

'^  O yes,  a great deal on my part !"

"  Why you doa't look quite recovered from it yet —
did not you like it?"

''  O yes,  it was perfectly agreeable to me!"

"  Did he oppress you?"  cried Mr.  Cambridge,  and
then began a very warm praise of him for his talents,
wit,  and understanding,  his knowledge,  writings,  and
humour.

I should have been very ready to have joined with
him,  had I not feared he meant an implied reproach
to me,  for not being more grateful for the praise of a

246 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

man such as he described.  1 am sorry he was present
if that is tlie case ;  but the truth is,  the evening was
not merely disagreeable but painful to me.  It became
now,  however,  quite the contrary ;  Mr.  Cambridge
took the lead,  and told some stories,  that for humour
and comicality I tliink unequalled.

When we all broke up upon Mrs.  and Miss Thrale's
going,  Mr.  George Cambridge,  very good-naturedly,
said to me, —

*'  How sorry I have been for you to-night ! "

*'  O,  I shall take care how I come here again,"
answered I ;  '^  I have often tied Mrs.  Ord up to pro-
mise I should find her alone,  and I don't much think
I shall be in haste to come again without making the
same agreement."

Mrs.  Ord herself,  then coming up to me,  regretted
that Mrs.  Boscawen had been at the house  ;  but,
though she came on purpose,  could not stay my arrival,
I was so late !  I wished to have remonstrated against
her making this silly interview thus public,  and in-
viting witnesses  ;  but I saw she meant me so much
kindness,  that I had not courage to tell her how very
utterly she had failed.  I shall not,  therefore,  complain
or scold,  but only try to guard against any more such
scenes in future.

Even my father himself,  fond as he is of this ado
about  "  Cecilia,"  was sorry for me to-night,  and said I
looked quite ill one time.

Saturday.  —  I felt so fagged with the preceding
day's fuss,  that I really wanted quieting and refitting.
Mr.  George Cambridge,  in the morning,  brought
home my father's pamphlet,  and asked me how I did
after Mr.  Soame Jenyns.

"  O,  pretty well,  now!"  cried I,  "but I must own

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  247^

I most heartily wished myself at plain,  quiet,  sober
Chesington the whole of the evening."

"  Well !'' said he,  "you concealed your uneasiness
extremely well,  for my father never saw it.  I saw it^
and was very much concerned at it ;  but when I men-
tioned something of it to him this morning,  he was
quite astonished."

"  I doubt not,"  said I ;  "  he only thought I received
a great deal of honour."

*'  No,  no,  it was not that ;  but he has no idea of
those sort of things.  I am sorry,  however,  you saw
Soame Jenyns to such disadvantage,  for he is worth
your knowing.  His conversation is not flowing nor
regular,  but nobody has more wit in occasional sallies."

"  Well,  all my comfort was from Mr.  Cambridge  ;
when he began that argument with Mrs.  Buller I was
in heaven !  "

"  My father hates argument,  too,"  said he ;  "  it was
a mere accident that he would enter into one.  For
my own part,  I was quite sorry not to hear Soame
Jenyns talk more."

"Were you?"  quoth I,  shaking ray head a little
piteously.

"Not to you  —  I don't mean to you,"  cried he,
laughing;  "  but I assure you you would find him ex-
tremely entertaining.  However,  was not Mrs.  Ord
herself,  though she is a sweet woman,  a little to blame?
Nothing could be so natural as that Soame Jenyns,
having himself so much humour,  should have been
charmed with  *  Cecilia,'  and should wish to know
you  ;  but if there had not been so many people,  or if
there had been as many,  and they had been set to
conversing with one another,  it might all have done
very well."

248 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

AVhile lie was liere Pacchierotti called — very grave,
but very sweet.     Mr.  G.  C.  asked if he spoke English.

"  O,  very well,"  cried I,  "  pray try him  ;  he is very
amiable,  and I fancy you will like him."

Pacchierotti began with complaining of the variable
w^eather.

*'  I cannot,"  he said,  "  be well such an inconsistent
day."

We laughed at the word  "  inconsistent,"  and Mr.
Cambridge said, —

'^  It is curious to see what new modes all languages
may take in the hands of foreigners.  The natives dare
not try such experiments ;  and,  therefore,  we all talk
pretty much alike  ;  but a foreigner is obliged to hazard
new expressions,  and very often he shew^s us a force
and power in our words,  by an unusual adaptation of
them,  that we were not ourselves aware they would
admit."

And then,  to draw Pacchierotti out,  he began a
dispute,  of the different merits of Italy and England ;
defending his own country merely to make him abuse
it ;  while Pacchierotti most eagerly took up the gaunt-
let on the part of Italy.

''  This is a climate,"  said Pacchierotti,  "  never in
the same case for half an hour at a time ;  it shall be
fair,  and wet,  and dry,  and humid,  forty times in a
morning in the least.  I am tired to be so played
with,  sir,  by your climate."

"  We have one thing,  however,  Mr.  Pacchierotti,"
he answered,  "  which I hope you allow makes some
amends,  and that is our verdure  ;  in Italy you cannot
boast that."

"  But it seem to me,  sir,  to be of no utility so much
ever-green  ;  is rather too much for my humble opinion."

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  249

"  And then your insects,  Mr.  Pacchierotti ;  those
alone are a most dreadful drawback upon the comfort
of your fine climate."

''  To Mr.  Cambridge,"  cried I,  meaning his father,
^'  I am sure they would ;  for his aversion to insects is
quite comical."

He wanted me to explain myself,  but I dare not tell
a story after Mr.  Cambridge,  especially to his son.

''  I must own,"  said Pacchierotti,  "  Italy is rather
disagreeable for the insects  ;  but is not better,  sir,
than an atmosphere so bad as they cannot live in it  ?  "

"  Why,  as I can't defend our atmosphere,  I must
shift my ground,  and talk to you of our fires,  which
draw together society."

"  O,  indeed,  good sir,  your societies are not very
invigorating !  Twenty people of your gentlemen and
ladies to sit about a fire,  and not to pronounce one
word,  is very dull !"

We laughed heartily at this retort courteous,  and
Mr.  G.  C.  was so much pleased with it,  that he kept
up a sportive conversation with him the whole time he
stayed,  much to my satisfaction ;  as most of the people
the poor Pac.  meets with here affect a superiority to
conversing with him,  though he has more intelligence,
ay,  and cultivation too,  than half of them.

The entrance of young Mr.  Hoole,  and afterwards of
Mrs.  Meeke,  interrupted them,  and Pacchierotti took
leave.     I then made his eloge to Mr.  G.  C,  who said, —

"  I was very glad to meet with him ;  I had heard
he applied very much to our language,  and there is a
softness in his manner,  and at the same time a spirit
in his opinions,  extremely engaging,  as w^ell as en-
tertaining."

Sunday,  Jan.  19. — And now for Mrs.  Delany.     I

250 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

spent one hour with Mrs.  Thrale,  and then called for
Mrs.  Chapone,  and we proceeded together to St.
James's Place.

Mrs.  Delany was alone in her drawing-room,  which
is entirely hung round with pictures of her own paint-
ing, and ornaments of her own designing.  She came
to the door to receive us.  She is still tall,  though
some of her height may be lost  :  not much,  however,
for she is remarkably upright.  She has no remains of
beauty in feature,  but in countenance I never but once
saw more,  and that was in my sweet maternal grand-
mother. Benevolence,  softness,  piety,  and gentleness
are all resident in her face  ;  and the resemblance with
which she struck me to my dear grandmother,  in her
first apj^earance,  grew so much stronger from all that
came from her mind,  which seems to contain nothing
but purity and native humility,  that I almost longed
to embrace her  ;  and I am sure if I had,  the recollec-
tion of that saint-like woman would have been so
strong that I should never have refrained from crying
over her.

Mrs.  Chapone presented me to her,  and taking my
hand,  she said, —

"  You must pardon me if I give you an old-fashioned
reception,  for I know nothing new."

And she saluted me.  I did not,  as with iNIrs.  Wal-
singham,  retreat from her.

"  Can you forgive,  Miss Burney,"  she continued,
"  this great liberty I have taken with you,  of asking
for your company to dinner  ?  I wished so impatiently
to see one from whom I have received such extraor-
dinary pleasure,  that,  as I could not be alone this
morning,  I could not bear to put it off to another day  ;
and,  if you had been so good to come in the evening.

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  251

I might,  perhaps,  have had company  ;  and I hear so
ill that I cannot,  as I wish to do,  attend to more than
one at a time  ;  for age makes me stupid even more
than I am by nature ;  and how grieved and mortified
I must have been to know I had Miss Burney in the
room,  and not to hear her  !"

She then mentioned her regret that we could not
stay and spend the evening with her,  which had been
told her in our card of accepting her invitation,  as w^e
were both engaged,  which,  for my part,  I heartily
regretted.

''  I am particularly sorry,"  she added,  "  on account
of the Duchess Dowager of Portland,  who is so good
as to come to me in an evening,  as she knows I am
too infirm to wait upon her Grace myself:  and she
washed so much to see Miss Burney.  But she said she
would- come as early as possible,  and you won't,  I
hope,  want to go very soon  ?  '*

My time,  I answered,  was Mrs.  Chapone's,  and
Mrs.  Chapone said she could not stay later than half-
past seven.

"Fie,  fie!"  cried Mrs.  Delany,  smiling;  "why
Miss Larolles would not for the world go before eight.
However,  the Duchess will be here by seven,  I dare
say,  for she said nothing should detain her."

Mrs.  Chapone then made me look at the paintings,
which I greatly admired ;  particularly a copy of Sac-
charissa,  from Vandyke.  There was also a portrait]  of
Madame de Sevigne,  which struck me very much;  andy
while I was noticing the gaiety of its countenance,
Mrs.  Delany,  with an arch look,  said, —

"  \  es,  it is very enjoute,  as Captain Areshy would say."

And afterwards of some other,  but I have forgot
what,  she said, —

252 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

*'  I don't know liow it is,  Mrs.  Cliapone,  but I can
never look at tliat picture without thinking of poor
Belfield.  You must forgive us,  Miss Burney  ;  it is not
right to talk of these people ;  but we don't know how
to speak at all now without,  they are so always in our
minds ! "

Soon after  .we went to dinner,  which was plain,
neat,  well cooked,  and elegantly served.  When it
was over,  I began to speak ;  and now,  my Chesington
auditors,  look to yourselves  !

^'  Will you give me leave,  ma'am,  to ask if you re-
member any body of the name of Crisp  ?  "

*'  Crisp  ?  "  cried she  ;  ''  what !  Mrs.  Ann Crisp  ?  "

"  Yes,  ma'am."

"  O surely!  extremely well!  a charming,  an ex-
cellent woman she was  ;  we were very good friends
once ;  I visited her at Burford,  and her sister Mrs.
Gast."

Then came my turn,  and I talked of the brother ;
but I won't write what I said.

Mrs.  Delany said she knew him but very little;
and by no means so much as she should have liked.
I reminded her of a letter he wrote her from abroad,
which she immediately recollected ;  and I told her
that the account I had heard from him and from Mrs.
Gast,  of her former friendship for Mrs.  Ann Crisp,
had first given me a desire to be acquainted with her.

''  I am sure,  then,"  said she,  '*  I am very much
obliged to them both ;  but how Mr.  Crisp can so long
have remembered so insignificant a body I don't
know.  I beg,  however,  when you write to him,  you
will give my compliments and thanks to him,  and
also to Mrs.  Gast,  for being so good as to think of
me."

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  253

Mrs.  Chapone tlien asked me a hundred questions
about Mr.  Crisp,  and said, —

"  Pray is he a Doctor LysterV

"  I don't know Dr.  Lyster,  ma'am,"  cried I,  very
simply,  for the book was so wholly out of my head at
the time,  that I really thought she meant some living-
character.  They both laughed very much,  and as-
sured me they should fsoon teach me to remember
names better,  if I lived with them.

This Chesingtonian talk lasted till we went up-
stairs, and then she shewed me the new art which she
has invented.  It is staining paper of all possible
colours,  and then cutting it out,  so finely and deli-
cately, that when it is pasted on paper or vellum^  it
has all the appearance of being pencilled,  except that,
by being raised,  it has still a richer and more natural
look.  The effect is extremely beautiful.  She in-
vented it at seventy-five !  She told me she did four
flowers the first year ;  sixteen the second ;  and the
third,  160;  and after that many more.  They are all
from nature,  and consist of the most curious flowers,
jDlants,  and weeds,  that are to be found.  She has been
supplied with patterns from all the great gardens^  and
all the great florists in the kingdom.  Her plan was to
finish 1000;  but,  alas!  her eyes now fail her,  though
she has only twenty undone of her task.

She has marked the places whence they all came,  on
the back,  and where she did them,  and the year ;  and
she has put her cypher,  M.D.,  at the corner of each,  in
different coloured letters for every different year — such
as red,  blue,  green,  &:c.

"  But,"  said she,  "  the last year,  as I found my eyes
grew very dim,  and threatened to fail before my work
was completed,  I put my initilas in white,  for I seemed
to myself already working in my winding sheet."

254 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI.

I could almost have cried at the mingled resi2:na-
tion and spirit with which she made this melancholy
speech.

Mrs.  Chapone asked her whether any cold had lately
attacked her eyes  ?

"  No,"  said she,  smiling,  "  nothing but my reigning
malady,  old age  !  'Tis,  however,  what we all wish to
obtain  ;  and,  indeed,  a very comfort;ible state I have
found it.  I have a little niece coming to me soon,
who will see for me.

At about seven o'clock,  the  ^Duchess Dowager of
Portland came.  She is not near so old as Mrs.  De-
lany,  uor,  to me,  is her face by any means so pleasing;
but yet there is sweetness,  and dignity,  and mtelligence
in it.  Mrs.  Delany received her with the same re-
spectful ceremony as if it was her first visit,  though
she regularly goes to her every evening.  But what
she at first took as an honour and condescension,  she
has so much of true humility of mind,  that no use can
make her see in any other light.  She immediately
presented me to her.  Her Grace courtesied and smiled
with the most flattering air of pleasure,  and said she
was particularly happy in meeting with me.

We then took our places,  and Mrs.  Delany said, —

"  MissBurney,  ma'am,  is acquainted with Mr.  Crisp,
whom your Grace knew so well ;  and she tells me he
and his sister have been so good as to remember me,
and to mention me to her."

The Duchess instantly asked me a thousand ques-
tions about him; — where he lived,  how he had his
health,  and whether his fondness for the polite arts
still continued.  She said he was one of the most in-
genious and agreeable men she had ever known,  and
regretted his having sequestered himself so much from
the society of his former friends.

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  255

This conversation lasted a long while,  for it was one
upon which I could myself be voluble.  I spared not
for boasting of my dear daddy *s kindness to me  ;  and
you can hardly imagine the pleasure,  ease,  and happi-
ness it was to me,  to talk of him to so elegant a judge,
who so well knew I said nothing that was not true.
She told me,  also,  the story of the poor Birmingham
boy,  and of the sketches which Mr.  Crisp,  she said,
had been so good as to give her.

In the course of this conversation I found her very
charming,  high-bred,  courteous,  sensible,  and spirited ;
not merely free from pride,  but free from affability — its
most mortifying deputy.

After this she asked me if I had seen Mrs.  Siddons,
and what I thought of her.  I answered that I admired
her very much.

"  If Miss Burney approves her,"  said the Duchess,
"no approbation,  I am sure,  can do her so much
credit ;  for no one can so perfectly judge of characters
or of human nature."

"  Ah,  ma'am,"  cried Mrs.  Delany,  archly,  '^  and
does your Grace remember protesting you would never
read  '  Cecilia T  "

''Yes,"  said she,  laughing;  "I declared that five
volumes could never be attacked ;  but since I began I
have read it three times."

"  O terrible  !"  cried I,  '^to make them out fifteen  !"

"  The reason,"  continued she,  "  I held out so long
against reading them,  was remembering the cry there
was in favour of '  Clarissa'  and  '  Sir Charles Grandison,'
vfhen they came out ;  and those I never could read.
I was teased into trying both of them ;  but I was dis-
gusted with their tediousnes-,  and could not read
eleven letters,  with all the effort I could make :  so

256 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VI.

much about my sisters and my brothers,  and all my
uncles and my aunts!"

*'  But if your Grace had gone on with  '  Clarissa/  '*
said  ]\Irs.  Chapone,  "  the latter part must certainly
have affected you,  and charmed you."

*^  O,  I hate any thing so dismal !  Every body that
did read it had melancholy faces for a week.  '  Ce-
cilia' is as pathetic as I can bear^  and more some-
times ;  yet,  in the midst of the sorrow,  there is a spirit
in the writing,  a fire in the whole composition,  that
keep off that heavy depression given by Richardson.
Cry,  to be sure,  we did.  O Mrs.  Delany,  shall you
ever forget how we cried  ?  But then we had so much
laughter to make us amends,  we were never left to
sink under our concern."

I am really ashamed to write on.

"  For my part,"  said Mrs.  Chapone,  "  when I first
read it,  I did not cry at all ;  I was in an agitation
that half killed me,  that shook all my nerves,  and
made me unable to sleep at nights,  from the suspense
I was in ;  but I could not cry,  for excess of eager-
ness.

"  I only wish,"  said the Duchess,  "  Miss Burney
could have been in some corner,  amusing herself with
listening to us,  when Lord Weymouth,  and the Bishop
of Exeter,  and Mr.  Lightfoot,  and Mrs.  Delany,  and I,
were all discussing the point of the name.  So earnest
we were,  she must have been diverted with us.  ]Xo-
thing,  the nearest our own hearts and interests,  could
have been debated more warmly.  The Bishop was
quite as eager as any of us ;  but what cooled us a
little,  at last,  was Mr.  Lightfoot's thinking we were
seriously going to quarrel ;  and while Mrs.  Delany and
I were disputing about Mrs.  Delvile,  he very gravely

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  257

said,  "  Why,  ladies,  this is only a matter of imagina-
tion ;  it is not a fact :  don't be so earnest."

"  Ah,  ma'am,"  said Mrs.  Delany,  "  how hard your
Grace was upon Mrs.  Delvile :  so elegant,  so sensible,
so judicious,  so charming a woman."

"  O,  I hate her,"  cried the Duchess,  "  resisting that
sweet Cecilia  ;  coaxing her,  too,  all the time,  with such
hypocritical flattery."

'^  I shall never forget,"  said Mrs.  Delany,  '•  your
Grace's earnestness when we came to that part where
Mrs.  Delvile bursts a blood-vessel.  Down dropped the
book,  and just with the same energy as if your Grace
had heard some real and important news,  you called
out,  '  I'm glad of it with all my heart !'  "

''  What disputes,  too,"  said Mrs.  Chapone,  "  there
are about Brio-o-s.  I was in a room some time a^'o
where somebody said there could be no such cha-
racter; and a poor little mean city man,  who was
there,  started up and said,  '  But there is though,  for
I'se one myself!' "

"The Harrels! — 0,  then the Harrels  !"  cried Mrs.
Delany.

*'  If you speak of the Harrels,  and of the morality of
the book,"  cried the Duchess,  with a solemn sort of
voice,  '^  we shall,  indeed,  never give Miss Burney her
due  :  so striking,  so pure,  so genuine,  so instructive."

"  Yes,"  cried Mrs.  Chapone,  "  let us complain how
we will of the torture she has given our nerves,  we
must all join in saying she has bettered us by every
line."

'^  No book,"  said Mrs.  Delany,  "  ever w^as so useful
as this,  because none other that is so good was ever so
much read."

I think I need now write no more.    I could,  indeed,

VOL.  II.  S

258 DIARY AND LETTERS,  &c.  [Part VI.

hear no more  :  for this last so serious praise,  from cha-
racters so respectable,  so moral,  and so aged,  quite
affected me ;  and tliough I had wished a thousand
times during the discourse to run out of the room,
when they gave me finally this solemn sanction to the
meaning and intention of my writing,  I found it not
without difficulty that I could keep the tears out of
my eyes  ;  and when I told what had passed to our
sweet father,  his quite ran over.

Of all the scenes of this sort in which I have been
engaged,  this has been the least painful to me,  from
my high respect for the personages,  from their own
elegance,  in looking only at one anotlier while they
talked,  and from having no witnesses to either watch
me or to be wearied themselves  :  yet I still say only
least painful;  for pleasant nothing can make a con-
versation entirely addressed to one who has no means
in the world of taking any share in it.

This meeting had so long been in agitation,  and so
much desired by myself,  that I have not spared for
being circumstantial.

The Duchess had the good sense and judgment to
feel she had drawn up her panegyric to a climax,  and
therefore here she stopped ;  so,  however,  did not we,
for our coach was ready.

^  ^  ^  w  ^

PART VII.
1783.

CONTENTS.

An Assembly at Mrs.  Tlirale's  —  Owen Cambridge and Dr.  John-
son—  Mr.  Bowles — His Enthusiasm about Johnson — An Even-
ing Party — Pacchierotti and Bertoni  —  Mr.  Twining — A Cha-
racter—  Dr.  Johnson's carelessness of his Writings — Baretti's
Dialogues  —  Mrs.  Byron  —  Correspondence  —  ^Miss Burney to
jVIr.  Crisp  —  Dr.  Burney to Mr.  Crisp  —  Illness and Death of
Mr.  Crisp  —  Dr.  Burney to  ]Miss Burney  —  Sorrow and Con-
dolence—  Diary Resumed — Illness of Dr.  Johnson  —  Affecting
Anecdote of him  —  A Party at Mrs.  Vesey's — IVIrs.  Garrick,
JVIiss More,  Horace Walpole  —  Mss Burney's Introduction to
Horace Walpole  —  Another Party at Mrs.  Vesey's  —  Walpole,
Burke,  Sir Joshua Reynolds  —  The Abbe Berquin  —  L'Ami
des Enfans  —  A Day ydth.  jNIts.  Delany  —  A Party at Dr.
Burney's  —  Strange,  the celebrated Engraver  —  Dr.  Garthshore
— Hoole,  the translator of  "Tasso" — A Party at the Bishop of
Winchester's — A Day at Twickenham — Owen Cambridge  —
Thoughts on Dying  —  A Pleasant Tete-d-tete  —  Anecdotes — •
Gibbon,  the Historian  —  His Ducking in the Thames  —  Dinner
at Lady Mary Duncan's  —  Mrs.  Lock,  of Xorbury Park  —  A
Musical Idol  —  ]\Irs.  Delany — Letter from Dr.  Johnson to Miss
Burney  —  A Visit to Dr.  Johnson  —  His Conversation  —  The
Bas Bleus — Mrs.Thrale — A Little Mystery — A Party at jVIrs.
Vesey's  —  Chit-chat  —  Owen Cambridge  —  INIrs.  Walsingham  —
Lady Spencer  —  Sir William Hamilton  —  Table  -  talk  —  Lord
Lyttleton and Dr.  Johnson  —  Johnson in a Passion  —  Curious
Anecdote of him  —  Singular Scene  —  Johnson and Mrs.  Mon-
tagu —  Anecdotes of Horace Walpole  —  Party at the Pepys's  —
A Party at Mrs.  Chapone's  —  Anecdote of Burke.

260  •       DIARY AND LETIERS  [Part VII.

PART YII.

1788.

Thursday,  Feb.  23d. — How sorry I have been,  ray
sweetest Susy,  not to have had a moment for writing
till to-day.

In our journey to town I was not very gay ;  though
I had turned from my best loved Susy without one
chaste embrace to keep myself hardy.  But the minute
I had got into the coach,  I felt provoked that I had
done it,  and I wished I had bid all things defiance for
the pleasure which I had denied myself.

Mr.  Cambridge talked a great deal,  and as well,
and with as much spirit,  as any man could who had so
mucli toil upon his hands.  Miss Cambridge,  indeed,
talked also ;  but I found it out of my power to support
my own part with any chance of dividing the labour.

He began talking of Dr.  Johnson,  and asking after
his^present health.

*'  He is very much recovered,"  I answered,  "  and
out of town,  at Mr.  Langton's.  And there I hope he
will entertain him with enough of Greek."

''  Yes,"  said Mr.  Cambridge,  ''  and make his son
repeat the Hebrew alphabet to him."

"  He means,"  said I,  "  to go,  when he returns,  to
Mr.  Bowles,  in  ^Viltshire.      I told him I had heard

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  261

that Mr.  Bowles was very much delighted with the
expectation of seeing him,  and he answered me, —
"  He is so delighted,  that it is shocking! — it is really
shocking to see how high are his expectations."  I
asked him why;  and he said, — ''  Why,  if any man is
expected to take a leap of twenty yards,  and does
actually take one of ten,  every body will be disap-
pointed, though ten yards may be more than any
other man ever leaped  !"

#  #  #  #  *

London,  April 2d. —  I have much,  very much to
write to you already,  my sweet Susy,  though we parted
so lately ;  but nothing that lam more interested in
than in what I want to hear of my beloved daddy.
You will indulge me,  I am sure,  and therefore I will
resume my journal, — in which there is a gap that will
make my accounts,  for some time at least,  fully intel-
ligible only to yourself;  but when and wdiat you read
to your coterie you must stop and explicate as w^ell as
you can.  If I help to furnish you with matter of con-
versation, my little obscurities will be as useful and
amusing as my copiousness.     Tell them so.

The next day Mr.  Cambridge and his son called.
After some general conversation,  ]Mr.  C.  said, —

"  I am perfectly satisfied with the reason you gave
me that night at Mrs.  Thrale's for Albany's rising
madness.  I have been reading that part all over
again,  and I find nothing can be better done.  I like
it more and more.  But I was startled at the character
at first ;  but George has got an account of exactly such
a man.     George shall tell it you."

"  The man,"  said Mr.  G.  C.,  "  is an old half-pay
officer.  His name,  I think,  is De la Port ;  he almost
lives in St.  James's Park,  where he wanders up and

262 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VI L

down,  looking about him for any objects he thinks in
distress.  He then gives them all the money he can
spare,  and he begs for them of his friends.  He once
borrowed a sum of money of Mr.  L.  from whom
I had this account ;  and,  some time after,  he paid him
half,  and said,  *  I return you all I spent upon myself, —
the rest you will be paid in another place!'  He com-
poses prayers for poor and sick people ;  he wears a
very shabby coat,  that he may spend no more upon
himself than is absolutely necessary;  and,  in his bene-
volence and singularity,  there is an undoubted mixture
of insanity.  Mrs.  L.,  when she talked of him to
me,  said,  '  the resemblance to the character of Albany
was so very strong,  that she thought it must certainly
be meant for him,'  and desired me to ask Miss Burney
if she did not know him.  I ventured,  however,  to
immediately answer,  I was sure she did not,  merely
from that circumstance,  as I was certain she would not
have put him in her book if she had known him."

''  I am very much obliged to you,"  cried I,  "  for
giving her that answer."

Mr.  Cambridge continued  :  —

*^  That which makes the wonderful merit of your
book  —  if you  '11 excuse my just mentioning it — is that
you see with such exact discrimination all classes of
characters,  and let the individuals pass unnoticed."

Some time after we talked about Dr.  Johnson,  for
Mr.  G.  C.  is one of his warmest admirers.  He has
requested me to get him a list of his miscellaneous
"works,  as he wishes to collect them :  and I have pro-
mised I will as soon as I have a fair opportunity.

"  Though,  indeed,"  I added,  "  it will be very diffi-
cult, as I dare say he hardly knows himself what he
has written;  for he has made numerous prefaces,  dedi-

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  263

cations,  odd chapters,  and I know not what,  for other
authors,  that he has never owned,  and probably never
will own.  But I was sure,  when I read it,  that the
preface to  '  Baretti's Dialogues '  was his  ;  and that I
made him confess."

"  '  Baretti's Dialogues?' — What are they about?"

"  A thimble,  and a spoon,  and a knife,  and a fork !
They are the most absurd,  and yet the most laughable
things you ever saw.  I would advise you to get them.
They were written for Miss Thrale,  and all the dia-
logues are between her and him,  except,  now and then,
a shovel and a poker,  or a goose and a chair,  happen to
step in.'*

We talked,  Mr.  Cambridge and I,  next,  upon the
effect of manner,  in a beginning acquaintance  ;  and
what power some people had,  by that alone,  of imme-
diate captivation.

"  Wliat a charm,"  cried he,  "  is that in your sister,
Mrs.  Phillips  ! — what a peculiar felicity she has in her
manner !  She cannot even move  —  she cannot get up,
nor sit down,  but there is something in her manner
that is sure to give pleasure."

At this I flew into a great passion  !

April 6th. — My dear Mrs.  Thrale spent all the
morning in my room with me ;  and Mr.  Twining dined
and stayed all the day with us.  In the evening,  you
know,  I had an engagement.  My father sent me first,
as he determined to stay till the last moment with Mr.
Twining.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys received me very civilly,  and
would have carried me to a seat near the fire  :  but
I was glad,  as I always am where I go alone,  to catch
at the first chair in my way,  and take possession of it,
merely to sink from notice.    They disputed the matter

"264 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

with me some time,  but I fastened upon a cliair,  and
tliey then gave it over.

Not long after this,  my dear Mrs.  Thrale,  with whom
I had not had one word,  said she must go to take leave
of Mrs.  Byron,  and vrould then come back,  and carry
me to Argyll Street,  where I had promised to spend an
hour or two,  as it was her last evening,  for early on
Monday morning she was to set out for Bath.  This
circumstance gave a melancholy cast to the whole
evening,  and nothing but the recollection of how nar-
rowly I had escaped losing her for a longer time,  and
at a greater distance,  could have made me bear it with
sufficient composure for observation.  As it was,  how-
ever, I took it cheerfully enough,  from the contrast of
the greater evil.

Mr.  Pepys began an tloge of Mrs.  Thrale ;  but my
heart was too full of more serious affection to give vent
to it,  just then,  in praise  :  and soon after my father
came.  Mrs.  Thrale still was the topic.  And soon
after that a note was brought me.  It was from Mrs.
Thrale,  to beg I would join her at Mrs.  Byron's,  as she
could not return to take a formal leave.  Her note was
a very affecting one.  It was meant for the rest of the
company,  as well as myself;  but I felt that either to
read or hear it would overset me,  and I had no inclin-
ation for a tragedy scene before witnesses.  I therefore
only begged my father's leave to go to her.

Miss Burney to 2Ir.  Crisp.

April 12,  1783.
My clearest — dearest daddy,
I am more grieved at the long and most disap-
pointiiio"  continuation of your illness than I know how

1783]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        265

to tell you  ;  and though my last account,  I thank
Heaven,  is better,  I find you still suffer so much,  that
my congratulations in my letter to Susan,  upon what I
thought your recovery,  must have appeared quite crazy,
if you did not know me as well as you do,  and were not
sure wdiat affliction the discovery of my mistake would
bring to myself.

I think I never yet so much wished to be at Ches-
ington,  as at this time,  that I might see how you go
on,  and not be kept in such painful suspense from post
to post.

Why did you tell me of the Delanys,  Portlands,
Cambridges,  &c.,  as if any of them came into compe-
tition with yourself?  When you are better,  I shall
send you a most fierce and sharp remonstrance upon
this subject.  At present I must be content with
saying,  I will undoubtedly accept your most kind in-
vitation as soon as I possibly can.  Meantime,  if my
letters will give you any amusement,  I will write of-
tener than ever,  and supply you with all the prog I get
myself.

Susan,  who is my reader,  must be your writer,  and
let me know if such tittle-tattle as I can collect serves
to divert some of those many moments of languor and
weariness that creep between pain and ease,  and that
call more for mental food than for bodily medicine.
Your love to your Fannikin,  I well know,  makes all
trash interesting to you that seems to concern her;  and
I have no greater pleasure,  when absent,  than in letting
you and my dear Susan be acquainted with my pro-
ceedings. I don't mean by this to exclude the rest of
the dear Chesington set  —  far from it — but a sister and
a daddy must come first.

God bless and restore you,  my most dear daddy  !  You

266 DIARY AND LETTERS Part VII.

know not how kindly I take your thinking of me,  and
inquiring about me,  in an illness that might so well
make you forget us all :  but Susan assures me your
heart is as affectionate as ever to your ever and ever
faithful and loving child,

F.  B.

D7\  Burner/  to Mr,  Crisp.

Saturday Night,  12tli April,  1783.
(Written on the same sheet Avith the foregoing.)
My dear friend,

Though the incessant hurry I have for some time
been in has exceeded that of former years,  which I
then thought impossible to be exceeded,  yet I have
hardly ever had your sufferings and situation a mo-
ment out of my mind  ;  and the first question I have
constantly asked at my coming jaded home of a night,
has been,  —  *'  What news from Chesington?"  I do
hope most fervently that you will still weather this ter-
rible attack,  and that in a very few months I shall see
you alive and happy in my favourite retreat,  which
has been always rendered so superior to all others by
your presence.

Susy was desired to ask you if I had any kind of
book that was likely to afford you any amusement,  and
it is with extreme pleasure that her answer is in favour
of  "  Memoires de Petrarque."  I will not only send
that with the greatest pleasure,  but a cart-load of the
choicest and best books in my collection,  if you will but
furnish a list.

Adieu my ever dear and honoured friend  !  may your
recovery be not only sure,  but speedy  !  is the most
hearty wish of him to whom your loss would be the

1783]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        267

most painful and severe amputation which misfortune
could perform upon my affections.

My wife,  as well as all around me,  have been greatly
alarmed for you,  and entreat me to send their warmest
and most affectionate wishes for your speedy recovery.

C.  B.

The illness of Mr.  Crisp now became so alarming
that Miss Burney hastened to Chesington,  where she
had been only a few days when her valued friend
breathed his last.  The annexed letter from Dr.  Burney
was in answer to her account of Mr.  Crisp's increasing
sufferings ;  that which follows it was intended to con-
dole with her on his death,  and at the same time to
rouse her fortitude to bear the affliction with which
she was overwhelmed.]

From Dr.  Burney to Miss F.  Burney.

Ah !  my dear Fanny,  your last letter has broke all
our hearts !  your former accounts kept off despair  ;  but
this brings it back in all its horrors.  I wish,  if it were
possible^  that you would let him know how much I
loved him,  and how heavily I shall feel his loss when
all this hurry subsides,  and lets me have time to brood
over my sorrows.  I have always thought that,  in many
particulars,  his equal was not to be found.  His wit,
learning,  taste,  penetration,  and,  when well,  his con-
viviality, pleasantry,  and kindness of heart to me and
mine,  will ever be thought of with the most profound
and desponding regret.

I know not what to say that will not add to your
own affliction and all around you.  What in the way
of comfort can be said at present?  or at least be be-

26S DIARY A\D LETTFKS  [ParT VII.

lieved and received  ?  I can only wish you all possessed
of fortitude sufficient to bear what now appears inevit-
able, and almost immediate.  'Tis ten-ible,  when no
good can be done,  to be in the way of such scenes,  and
yet we console ourselves with tlie belief of its being
right.  C.  B.

From T>r,  Tourney to Miss F.  Barney.

I am much more afflicted than surprised at the vio-
lence and duration of your sorrow for the terrible
scenes and events at Chesington,  and not only pity
you,  but participate in all your feelings.  Not an hour
in the day has passed,  as you will some time or other
find,  since the fatal catastrophe,  in which I have not
felt a pang for the irreparable loss I have sustained.
However,  as something is due to the living,  there is,  per-
haps, a boundary at which it is right to endeavour to stop
in lamenting the dead.  It is very hard,  as I have found
it all my life,  to exceed these bounds in our duty or
attention,  without its being at the expense of others.  I
have lost in my time persons so dear to me,  as to throw
me into the utmost affliction and despondency which
can be suffered without insanity ;  but I had claims on
my life,  my reason,  and activity,  which drew me from
the pit of despair,  and forced me,  though with great
difficulty,  to rouse and exert every nerve and faculty in
answering them.  It has been very well said of mental
w^ounds,  that they must digest,  like those of the body,
before they can be healed.  Necessity can alone,  per-
haps, in some cases,  bring on this digestion  ;  but we
should not prevent it by caustics or corrosion ;  let the
wound be open a due time,  but not treated with vio-
lence.    To quit all metaphor,  we must,  alas !    try to

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  269

diminish our sorrow for our calamity,  to enable us to
support another ;  as a national peace is but time to
refit,  a mental is no more.  So far,  however,  am I
from blaming your indulgence of sorrow on the present
occasion,  that I both love and honour you for it ;  and
therefore shall add no more on that melancholy subject..
#  #  #  *  %

C.  B.

[When the last mournful duties had been per-
formed at Chesington,  Miss Burney returned to her
father's house in St.  Martin's Street;  but some time
elapsed ere she recovered composure sufficient to
resume her journal.

The next entry relates to an alarming paralytic
seizure of Dr.  Johnson.]

Journal resumed.

Thursday,  June 19th. — We heard to-day that Dr.
Johnson had been taken ill,  in a way that gave a dread^
ful shock to himself,  and a most anxious alarm to his
friends.  Mr.  Seward brought the news here,  and my
father and I instantly went to his house.  He had
earnestly desired me,  when we lived so much together
at Streatham,  to see him frequently if he should be ill.
He saw my father,  but he had medical people with
him,  and could not admit me up stairs,  but he sent me
down a most kind message,  that he thanked me for
calling,  and when he was better should hope to see me
often.  I had the satisfaction to hear from Mrs.  Wil-
liams that the physicians had pronounced him to be in
no danger,  and expected a speedy recovery.

270 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

The stroke was confined to his tongue.  Mrs.  Wil-
liams told me a most striking;  and touchins:  circum-
stance that attended the attack.  It was at about four
o'clock in the morning :  he found himself with a
paralytic affection ;  he rose,  and composed in his own
mind a Latin prayer to the Almighty,  "  that whatever
were the sufferings for w4iich he must prepare himself,
it would please Him,  through the grace and mediation
of our blessed Saviour,  to spare his intellects,  and let
them all fall upon his body."  When he had composed
this,  internally,  he endeavoured to speak it aloud,  but
found his voice was gone.

I went to Mrs.  Vesey's in the evening,  for I had
promised to meet at her house Mrs.  Garrick,  who
came to town that day from Hampton.  I found her
and Miss More,  and Lady Claremont,  and Horace
Walpole,  Mr.  Pepys,  Miss Hamilton,  and Miss G. ;
no one else.

Mrs.  Garrick was very kind to me,  and invited me
much to Hampton.  Mrs.  Vesey would make me sit
by Horace Walpole ;  he was very entertaining.  I
never heard him talk much before ;  but I was seized
with a panic upon finding he had an inclination to talk
with me,  and as soon as I could I changed my place.
He was too well-bred to force himself upon me,  aud
finding I shied,  he left me alone.  I was very sociable,
however,  with Mrs.  Garrick.

Lady Claremont,  Mr.  Pepys,  and I,  outstayed the
rest near an hour.  Mrs.  Vesey would not permit me
to go  ;  but when the others were gone she exclaimed, —

"  Mr.  Walpole is sadly vexed that Miss Burney
won't talk with him ! "

'*  If she had any thing to say,"  cried I,  "  she vrould
be very proud that he would give her lieariug."

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  271

"  Why,  dear ma'am,"  said Mr.  Pepys, good-naturedly,
"  wlio can talk,  so called upon?  I,  who am one of the
greatest chatterers in the world,  if set upon  ^in that
manner,  why,  I could not say a word."

"What,  then,"  cried she,  alarmed,  "is it,  do you
think,  my fault that Miss Burney does not talk?"

Friday,  June 20th. — I went in the morning to Dr.
Johnson,  and heard a good account of him.  Dr.  Rose,
Dr.  Dunbar,  and Sam Rose,  the Doctor's son,  dined
with us.  We expected the rest of our party early  ;
though the absence of Dr.  Johnson,  whom they were
all invited to meet,  took off the spirit of the evening.

Wednesday,  July 1st. — I was again at Mrs.  Ve-
sey's,  where again I met Mr.  W^alpole,  Mr.  Pepys,
Miss Elliott,  Mr.  Burke,  his wife and son,  Sir Joshua
Reynolds,  and some others.

Mr.  Burke was extremely kind to me,  but not at all
in spirits.  He is tormented by the political state of
affairs  ;  and loses,  I really believe,  all the comfort of his
life,  at the very time he is risen to the station his am-
bition has long pointed out to him.

I had the satisfaction to hear from Sir Joshua that
Dr.  Johnson had dined with him at the Club.  I look
upon him,  therefore,  now,  as quite recovered.  I called
the next morning to congratulate him,  and found him
very gay and very good-humoured.

Saturday,  July 5th. — My father and I went to
dinner at Winchester House,  Chelsea.  Mrs.  North
was rather cold at first,  and reproached me with my
long absence,  but soon made up,  and almost forced
from me a promise to go to Farnham,  as the only
condition of her forgiveness.  She is clever,  bright,
pleasing,  eccentric,  and amusingly whimsical ;  and she

272 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

is also beautiful :  but her manner has something in it
alarming,  that seems always upon the qui vivc.

Sunday,  July 6th. — We have now a new man who
is always at our house,  M,  Berquin,  a French author,
who came here a week or two since to present to  ''  Mile.
Berni,"  his work,  which is called L'Ami des Enfans.
We had a droll interview enou2:h,  but I cannot o:ive
the time for writing it :  but he desired my mother to
deliver me the books,  with a thousand fine speeches,
and never once suspected  /  was the Mile.,  though I
was in the room all the time.  I have since made some
acquaintance with him ;  but his rapture wdien I talk to
him is too great to be excited often,  therefore I am
chary of my words.  O you would laugh to see how
enchantt he thinks fit to appear.  His book,  however,
is extremely pretty,  and admirably adapted to its pur-
pose,—  that of instructing not only in French,  and in
reading, — but in morals,  all the children wdio meet
this their true ami.

July 7th. — I spent the whole day with sweet Mrs.
Delany,  whom I love most tenderly.  I always long
to ask for her blessing.  We had no company but Mrs.
Sandford,  an old lady who was formerly her eltve,
and who seems well  ^vorthy that honour.  In the
evening,  indeed,  came in Mr.  Walpole,  gay,  though
caustic ;  polite,  though sneering ;  and entertainingly
epigrammatical.  I like and admire,  but I could not
love,  nor trust him.

I have always forgot to mention to you a Poem,  by
young Hoole,  called  "  Aurelia,  or the Contest."  He sent
it me,  and I soon found the reason.  His  '^Aurelia"
runs through the hackneyed round of folly and dissipa-
tion, and then appears suddenly to her,  in a vision,

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  273

"  The guardian power,  whose secret sway
The wiser females of the world obey/'

This guardian power tells her what he has done for
his favourites, — that he gave to Dudley's wife

^'  A nobler fortitude than heroes reach,
And virtue greater than the sages teach. '^

Then,  skipping suddenly to modern times,  that he
instructed

'-  Streatfield,  the learn'd,  the gay,  in blooming years,"

to assist the poor,  to attend the sick,  and watch over
her dying old tutor,  Dr.  Collier.     Then,  that he di»

rected

"  Carter's piercing eyes
To roll inquisitive through starry skies."

That he

'^  To Chapone th'  important task assigned
To smooth the temper and improve the mind.""

That he told More

"  To guide unthinking youth,"  &c.

And then he says, —

^'  I stood,  a favouring muse,  at Burney's side,
To lash unfeeling  "Wealth and stubborn Pride,
Soft Affectation,  insolently vain.
And wild Extravagance,  with all her sweeping train  ;
Led her that modern Hydra to engage,
And paint a Harrel to a mad'ning age ;
Then bade the moralist,  admired and praised,
Fly from the loud applause her talent raised."

And then the coterie concludes with Mrs.  Montagu»
What think you of this our guardian genius?

Saturday,  July 12th.  —  My father and Charlotte
and I went again to spend the day at Winchester

VOL.  II.  T

^74 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

House.  We met Dr.  and Mrs.  Warren,  and two of
t-heir sons,  and Mr.  Sayre,  an agreeable young man.

In the evening my father,  Hetty,  Charlotte,  and I,
^arent to Le Tessier's.  To-night he charmed me more
ihan ever by  "  Le Roi a la Chasse."  His talents are
truly wonderful,  and I have never,  but from Garrick
^d Pacchierotti,  received equal pleasure in public.

July 15th. — To-day my father,  my mother,  and I,
•went by appointment to dine and spend the day at
Tmckenham with the Cambridges.  Soon after our
i^TTival Mr.  C.  asked if we should like to walk,  to
Tflriiicli we most readily agreed.

Vv'e liad not strolled far befoi'e we were followed by
3Ir.  George.  No sooner did his father perceive him,
ihan,  hastily coming up to my side,  he began a sepa-
^nate conversation with me ;  and leaving his son the
.ijkarge of all the rest,  he made me walk off with him
h'oin them all.  It was really a droll manoeuvre,  but
^e seemed to enjoy it highly,  and though he said not
^  word of his design,  I am sure it reminded me of his
^wn old trick to his son,  when listening to a dull
■story,  in saying to the relator,  —  "Tell the rest of that
ibO George."  And if George was in as good-humour
-^vith his party as his father was with his ttte-a-tttef
^'hj,  all vreie v/ell pleased.  As soon as we had fairly
got  {iway from them,  Mr.  Cambridge,  with the kindest
smiles of satisfaction,  said,  — "  I give you my word
I never v^-as more pleased at any thing in my life than
1 am now at having you here to-day."

I told him that I had felt so iilad at seeino^  him
•*igain,  after so long an absence,  that I had really half
^,^i]j.n54 to, have made up to him myself,  and shook

"  You cannot iraas-me,"  ^--aid he,  "  how you flatter

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  275

me! — and there is nothing,  I do assure you,  of which
I am prouder,  than seeing you have got the better of

your fear of me,  and feeling that I am not afraid of

J)
you.

"  Of me,  sir? — but how should you be?"

"  Nay,  I give you my word,  if I was not conscious
of the greatest purity of mind,  I should more fear you
than any body in the world.*'

Which had the greatest compliment,  Susy  —  he or
me  ?

"  You know every thing,  everybody/'  he continued,
"  so wonderfully well!"

Afterwards,  when we were speaking of illness and
of dying,  he assured me that,  however pleasant his life
was just now,  he should feel nothing in giving it up ;
for he could not tell what misery he might be saved by
death,  nor what sin.  And when this led me on to say
I had never an illness in my life,  without thinking,
"  probably I had better die now,"  he joined in it with
sucli Christian reasoning as almost surprised as much
as it edified me.

We then,  I know not how,  fell into discussing the
characters of forward and flippant women  ;  and I told
him it was my fortune to be,  in general,  a very great
favourite with them,  though I felt so little gratitude
for that honour,  that the smallest discernment would
shew them it was all thrown away.

"Why,  it is very difficult,"  said he,  "for a woman
to get rid of those forward characters without making
them her enemies.  But with a man it is different.
Now I have a very peculiar happiness,  which I will
tell you.  I never took very much to a very amiable
woman but I found she took also to me,  and I have
the good,  for time to be in the perfect jcontdcnce of

276 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VII.

some of tlie first women in this kingdom  ;  but tlien
there are a great many women that I dislike,  and tliink
very impertinent and foolish,  and,  do you know,  they
all dislike me too!  —  they absolutely cannot bear me!
IN^ow,  I don't know,  of those two things,  which is the
greatest happiness."

How characteristic this  !  —  do you not hoar him say-
ing it?

We now renewed our conversation upon various of
our acquaintances,  particularly Mr.  Pepys,  Mr.  Lang-
ton,  and Mrs.  Montagu.  We stayed in this field,
sitting and sauntering,  near an hour.  We then went
to a stile,  just by the river side,  where the prospect is
very beautiful,  and there we again seated ourselves.
IVothing could be more pleasant,  though the wind was
so hijrli I was almost blown into the w^ater.

He now traced to me great part of his life and con-
duct in former times,  and told me a thousand excellent
anecdotes of himself and his associates.  He summed
them all up in a way that gave me equal esteem and
regard for him,  in saying he found society the only
thing for lasting happiness ;  that,  if he had not met a
woman he could permanently love,  he must,  with every
other advantage,  have been miserable;  but that such
was his good fortune,  that  "  to and at this moment,"
he said,  "there is no sight so pleasing to me as seeing-
Mrs.  Cambridge enter a room ;  and that after having
been married to her for forty years.  And the next
most pleasing sight to me is an amiable woman."

He then assured me that almost all the felicity of his
life both had consisted,  and did still consist,  in female
society.  It was,  indeed,  he said,  very rare,  but there
was nothing like it.

"And if agreeable women,"   cried I,    "are rare.

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  277

much more so,  I think,  are agreeable men  ;  at least,
among my acquaintance they are very fe\y,  indeed,
that are highly agreeable."

"Yes,  and when they are so,"  said he,  '^it is diffi-
cult for you to have their society with any intimacy or
comfort ;  there are always so many reasons why you
cannot know them."

He very kindly regretted seeing so little of me,  and
said, —

"This is nothing — such a visit as this.  If you could
come now,  and spend a month with us,  that is what I
want.     If you could but come for a month."

We continued chatting till we came to the end of
the meadow,  and there we stopped,  and again were
joined by the company.

Mr.  Cambridge now proposed the water,  to which I
eagerly agreed.

We had an exceeding pleasant excursion.  We went
up the river beyond the Duke of Montagu's,  and the
water was smooth and delightful.  Methinks I should
like much to sail from the very source to the mouth of
the Thames.

T?*  ^  ^  w  ^

Mr.  Cambridge told an absurd story of Dr.  Monso,
a strange,  gross man,  who,  at Mr.  Garrick's table,
called out to a very timid young woman to help him
to some greens.  She did her office slow and awk-
wardly, and he called out again,  in a loud voice,  "  You
Trollop,  some greens,  I say!"  The man,  it seems,  was
a humorist.  Oh,  from such humorists Heaven shield
us !     I would rather live with the dullest of the dull.

After dinner we again repaired to the lawn,  in a
general body  ;  but we had scarce moved ten paces,
"before Mr.  Cambridge again walked off with me,  to a

278 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

seat that had a very fine view of Petersham wood,  and
there we renewed our confabulation.

He now shewed me a note from Mr.  Gibbon,  sent to
engage himself to Twickenham on the unfortunate day
he got his ducking.  It is the most affected little piece
of writing I ever saw.  He shall attend him,  he says,
at Twickenham,  and upon the water,  as soon as the
weather is propitious,  and the Thames,  that amiable
creature,  is ready to receive him.

Nothing,  to be sure,  could be so apt as sucli a re-
ception as that  "  amiable creature"  happened to give
him!  Mr.  Cambrido;e said it was  "  God's revenue
against conceit."

Thursday,  July 17th. — I went wuth my dear father
to-day to dine and spend the evening at Lady IMary
Duncan's.  How^  vexatious never to have made this
visit till it was necessarily the last in which I could
see Pacchierotti there !  He was in good humour,  and
more tolerable spirits than I have lately seen him in.
Lady Shaub,  mother to Mrs.  Locke,  and Miss Shaub,
her sister,  and Sir John Elliot,  made all the dinner
party.     The two Miss Bulls came in the evening.

Pacchierotti did not sing one song accompanied,  but
he sang several little airs and ballads,  English,  Scotch,
French,  and Italian,  most deliciously.  I had a very-
agreeable day,  and I saw he was quite delighted that
I made one of the party,  and that added to my de-
light almost its sum total, — though add is a little Irish
there.  Oh how the Miss Bulls do idolise him !  They
profess thinking him quite angelic,  and declared they
should even look upon it as a favour to be beat by
him !  I laughed violently at this extravagance,  and
vowed I would tell him.  They desired no better.  We
called him to us;    but I was reallv ashamed mvself

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  2-'^,

.i"S

when I found they were not.  He leaned down Ijisj
head very patiently for an explanation.  ^        ?

"  Do tell him!"  cried they,  both together.       ,,j  ^^^

*' What!"  cried he:  "what does the sweet Mlg^-
Burney say?"

"Oh,  oh!"  cried one;  —  "Oh dear!"  cried tkf:
other;  "how he speaks to Miss Burney!"  ,...f

"  Miss Burney,"  cried he,  quite warmly and ji^
dauntedly,  "  is a treasure!"  .  I   ^.^

"Oh dear!  —  only hear him.  Lady Mary!"  ^dis-
claimed Miss Catherine Bull ;  "  he says Miss Burnejf
is a treasure!"  r^

"  Well,  and is it not true?"  said she,  graciousl.^^^-^

"Oh,  yes!"  answered she,  half laughing,  yet in v^
repining voice  ;  "[but I don't like to hear him say so."^

This was our sort of chat almost all the everiiBg:,^
with various imitations,  and light summer singing,  froim
Pacchierotti.  Miss Bulls made me make many pro-
mises about our future acquaintance,  and Lady Marj
was all graciousness and intimacy.

Friday,  July 18th. — I called in the morning upom-
my dear Mrs.  Delany,  who received me with  '^be
utmost kindness,  and whom I really love even mor^
than I admire.  I appointed to spend Tuesday wilfe
her.  And so I would any other day she had named^.
or even any week.  It is sweet,  it is consolatory to me
to be honoured with so much of her favour as to see
her always eager to fix a time for our next and ne:st
meetinof.  I feel no cares with her.  I think mv5eJf
with the true image and representative of my loveJ
grandmother,  and I seem as if I could never do wroug-
while I keep her in my mind,  and as if to suffer it
were immaterial,  if only in worldly considerations.

These thoughts,  and this composure,  alas!  will not

280 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

last long ;  but it is pleasant to feel it even if for a few
hours.  I wish you knew her.  I would not give up
my knowledge of her for the universe.  Nothing has so
truly calmed my mind since its late many disturbances
as her societv  :  the religious turn which kindness and
wisdom from old age,  give to all commerce with it,
brings us out of anxiety and misery a thousand times
more successfully than gaiety or dissipation have power
to do.

Saturday,  July 19th. — This morning a letter was
brought into my room,  and the maid said it came from
Mr.  Cambrido:e,  but that the messenger was p:one.  I
opened,  and will copy it.  The lines were suggested
hy my father's portrait in Barry's great painting.

"  AVhen Cliloe's picture was to Venus shewn,

Surprised,  the goddess took it for her own." — Prior.

"  When Burney's picture was to Gibbon shewn,
The pleased historian took it for his own  ;
'  For who,  with shoulders dry,  and powdered locks,
E'er bathed,  but I  ?'  he said,  and rapp'd his box."

Barry replied, —

^'  My lasting colours shew
What gifts the painter's pencil can bestow.
With nymphs of Thames,  those amiable creatures,
I placed the charming minstrel's smiling features  :
And let not,  then,  his bonne fortune concern ye,
For there are nymphs enough for you and Burney."

Pacchierotti is gone  ;  and I most provokingly missed
seeing him at his leave-taking visit ;  which has vexed
me exceedingly.

1783]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        281

Miss JBurney to Mrs.  Phillips.

October 3d,  1783.

Ah,  my Susy,  how I miss you ah'eady ! — how I want
you by my side !  I have been repeating,  internally,  all
day long,  these heartfelt lines, —

^'  I prized ev'ry hour that passed by
Beyond all that had pleased me before.
But now they are gone  ! — and I sigh
And I grieve that I prized them no more.''

For I seem dissatisfied with myself,  and as if I had not
made the most of being with you.  Yet I am sure I
cannot tell how I could have made more.  Were I but
certain of meeting you again in any decent time — •
but I have a thousand fears that something will inter-
fere and prevent that happiness  ;  and there is nothing
like being with you,  my Susy  —  to me,  nothing in the
world.

That kind Kitty !  — I found a basket filled with all
sort of good things from her.  I believe she has deter-
mined I never shall be ill again,  or at least have no
illness for which she has not prepared a remedy.
Really,  between her medicines,  and the dearCapitano's
cosmetics,  I shall expect to become stout and beautiful.
I don't know which will happen first,  and I am deter-
mined not to ask which is most probable.

My father and I began first upon Berquin,  to drive
you all a little out of our heads  ;  and then,  when we
were a little soothed by his feeling and elegant writing,
we had recourse to Pasquin,  to put us in better spirits.
And so we laughed.  But I must own I too frequently
meet with disgust in all Fielding's dramatic works,  to
laugh with a good heart even at his wit,  excellent as it

282 DIARY A\D LETTERS  [ParT VII.

is ;  and I should never myself think it worth wading
through so much dirt to get at.  Where any of his best
strokes are picked out for me,  or separately quoted,  I
am always highly pleased,  and can grin most cor-
dially ;  but where I hear the bad with the good,  it
preponderates too heavily to suffer my mind to give
the good fair play.

F.  B.

Journal Resumed.

Thursday,  Oct.  29th. — This morning,  at breakfast,
Mr.  Hoole called.  I wanted to call upon Dr.  Johnson,
and it is so disagreeable to me to go to him alone,  now
poor Mrs.  Williams is dead,  on account of the quantity
of men always visiting him,  that I most gladly ac-
cepted, and almost asked,  his  'squireship.

We went together.  The dear Doctor received me
with open arms.

"  Ah,  dearest of all dear ladies !"  he cried,  and made
me sit in his best chair.

He had not breakfasted.

"  Do vou foro'ive mv comino-  so soon?"  said I.

"  I cannot forgive your not coming sooner,"  he
answered.

I asked if I should make his breakfast,  which I have
not done since we left Streatham;  he readily consented.

*'  But,  sir,"  quoth I,  "I am in the wrong chair."
For I was away from the table.

''  It is so difficult,"  said he,  ''for any thing to be
wrong that 'belongs to-you,  that it can only be I am in
the wrong chair,  to keep you from the right one."

And then we changed.

You will see by this how good were his spirits and
his health.

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  28S

I stayed with him two hours,  and could hardly get
away ;  he wanted me to dine with him,  and said he
would send home to excuse me ;  but I could not pos-
sibly do that.     Yet I left him with real regret.

Wednesday,  Nov.  19th.  —  I received a letter from
Dr.  Johnson,  which I have not by me,  but will try to
recollect.

'*  To Miss JBurnei/.

"  Madam, — You have now been at home this long
time,  and yet I have neither seen nor heard from you.
Have we quarrelled  ?

"  I have met with a volume of the  '  Philosophical
Transactions,'  w^hicli I imagine to belong to Dr.  Bur-
ney.     Miss Charlotte will please to examine.

''  Pray send me a direction where Mrs.  Chapone
lives  ;  and pray,  some time,  let me have the honour of
telling you how much I am,  madam,  your most humble
servant,  Sam.  Johnson.

"  Bolt Court,  Nov.  19th,  1783."

Now if ever you read any thing more dry,  tell me.
I was shocked to see him undoubtedly angry,  but took
courage,  and resolved to make a serious defence ;  there-
fore thus I answered, —

^'  To Dr Johnson.
*'  Dear Sir,  —  May I not say dear?  for quarrelled I
am sure we have not.  The bad weather alone has kept
me from waiting upon you ;  but now you have conde-
scended to give me a summons,  no lion shall stand in
the way of my making your tea this afternoon,  unless
I receive a prohibition from yourself,  and then I must
submit ;  for what,  as you said of a certain great lady.

284 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

signifies the barking of a lap-dog,  if once the lion puts
out his paw  ?

'^  The book was very right.  Mrs.  Chapone lives at
either No.  7 or 8 in Dean Street,  Soho.

"  I beg you,  sir,  to forgive a delay for which I can
only  '  tax the elements with unkindness,'  and to re-
ceive, with your usual goodness and indulgence,  your
ever most obliged and most faithful humble servant,

"   F.  BURNEY.

"  St.  Martiu's Street,  Nov.  19th,  1783."

My dear father spared me the coach,  and to Bolt Court
therefore I went,  and with open arms was I received.
Nobody was there but Charles and Mr.  Sastres,  and
Dr.  Johnson was,  if possible,  more instructive,  enter-
taining, good-humoured,  and exquisitely fertile,  than
ever.  He thanked me repeatedly for coming,  and was
so kind I could hardly ever leave him.

^^  #  ^  #  #

In the evening I accompanied Mrs.  Ord to Mrs.
Pepys.  There we met Dr.  Pepys,  and Lady Rothes,
and Mr.  Hawkins Brown,  and had a very sociable
evening.

Mr.  Pepys read to us Miss More's  "  Bas Bleu"  again.
I longed to ask for a copy,  but did not dare,  to send to
Twickenham.

Dr.  Pepys had a long private conference with me
concerning Mrs.  Thrale,  with w^hose real state of health
he is better acquainted than any body  ;  and sad,  indeed,
was all that he said.

There are some ne-w lines added to the  "  Bas Bleu,'*
upon wit and attention ;  and Mr.  Pepys chose to insist
upon it I had sat to Miss More for the portrait of
Attention,  w^hich is very admirably drawm ;    but the

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  285

compliment is preposterous,  because the description is
tlie most flattering.

Saturday,  Nov.  22d, — I passed in nothing but sor-
row—  exquisite sorrow,  for mv dear unhappy friend,
who sent me one letter,  that came early by the Bath
Diligence,  and another by the post.  But of these things
no more.

I am sorry not to be more explicit,  but I should not
give you more pleasure if I were.  I can only now tell
you that I love Mrs.  Thrale with a never-to-cease
affection,  and pity her more than ever I pitied any
human being ;  and,  if I did not blame her,  I could,  I
should,  I believe,  almost die for her !

I am extremely sorry,  my dearest Susy,  that in the
late distress of my mind about poor Mrs.  Thrale,  I
mentioned any thing that has so much interested you
to know more.  It is too true that many know all, —
but none from me.  I am bound,  and should be miser-
able not to say,  if called upon,  and not to know,  if not
called upon,  that no creature,  not even you to whom I
communicate every thing else,  nor to the trusty Char-
lotte with whom I live,  and who sees my frequent dis-
tress upon the subject,  has tempted me to an explana-
tion. General rumour I have no means to prevent
spreading.

*  #  #  #  #

I am still as much bent as ever to go to her,  if I can
obtain leave  ;  but I will mention no more of the matter,
since the difficulties under which I labour not to offend
or afflict that beloved friend,  and yet to do nothing
wrong,  are by no means new,  though of late they have
grown doubly painful.  I will only say further,  that
though her failings are unaccountable and most un-
happy, her virtues and good qualities,  the generosity

^86 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

and feeling of lier licai't,  tlic liberality and sweetness of
her disposition,  would counterbalance a thousand more.

This I say,  lest you should think something*  worse
than the truth — something stranger you cannot.  I am
very sorry not to satisfy you more ;  but wdien you
weigh what I have said,  you wdll be sensible I have
reasons to preserve silence ;  though to myself,  believe
nie,  'tis by far most painful,  and has long been most
cruel.

Tuesday,  Nov.  25th. —  I went this morning to Lady
Mary Duncan,  wdiose visit my father grew angry that
I did not return.  She admitted me,  and kept me full
two hours.  She is really entertaining,  very entertaining,
though not veiy respectably always,  as every thing she
says has some mixture of absurdity in the manner,
even when the idea is faultless.  She much invited me
to frequent visits,  and was excessively civil and court-
eous. Our talk was all of her late Sir William and
Pacchierotti.  She runs from one to the other with a
most ludicrous facility,  as if well content they should
share her favour,  divide her thoughts,  and keep the
use of her tongue wholly to themselves.

Tuesday,  Dec.  9. — This evening I went to Mrs.
Vesey's at last.  I w^as obliged to go alone,  as my
father would not be earlier than nine o'clock ;  an hour
too fine-ladyish for me to choose visiting at.  But as I
cannot bear entering a room full of companj^  sola,  I
went soon after seven.

I found,  as I wished,  no creatui-e but Mrs.  Vesey
and Mrs.  Hancock,  who lives w^ith her.  I soon made
my peace,  for several delays and excuses I have sent
her,  as she is excessively good-natured,  and then we
had near an hour to ourselves.  And then,  the first
person who came, —  who do you think it

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  287

Cambridge,  sen^  I leave you to guess whether or
not I felt glad  ;  and I leave you,  also,  to share in my
surprise upon finding he was uninvited and unex-
pected ;  for Mrs.  Vesey looked at him with open
surprise.

As soon as the salutations were over,  jMrs.  Vesey,
with her usual odd simplicity,  asked him what had
put him upon calling  ?

"The desire,"  cried he,  ''to see you.  But what!
are there only you three? — nothing but women  ?"

"  Some more are coming,"  answered she,  "  and
some of your friends;  so you are in luck."

'*  They are men,  I hope,"  cried he,  laughing  ;  "  for
I can't bear being with only women  !"

"  Poor Mr.  Cambridge,"  cried I,  "  what will become
of him?  I know not,  indeed,  if the three women now
present overpower him."

"  To be sure they do,"  cried he,  "  for I like nothing
in the world but men  !  So if you have not some men
coming,  I declare off."

Mrs.  Vesey and Mrs.  Hancock stared,  and I laughed;
but neither of us could discover what he was aiming
at,  though he continued this raillery some time,  till he
exclaimed, —

"  Well,  I am sure of one friend,  however,  to stick
by me,  for one has promised me to come."

"  And who is that?"  said Mrs.  Vesey,  staring
more.

"  Why a Christian-maker!"

"  A Christian-maker  !— who's that  ?"

"  Why one who is gone to-night to make two
Christians,  and when they are made,  will come to see
if he can make any more here."

"Who is it?"

288 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

*'  My son."

**  O  ! — well,  I am always glad to see him."

Mr.  Cambridge then ran on with other such
speeches  ;  but Mrs.  Vesey sat gravely pondering,  and
then called out, —

''  Pray how did your son know I should be at
home  ?"

^'  Why he does not know it,"  answered Mr.  C. ;
"  but he intends coming to try."

She said no more,  but I saw she looked extremely
perplexed.

Soon after Miss E entered.     She is a sort of yea

and nay young gentlewoman,  to me very wearisome.
Mr.  Cambridge,  during the reception,  came up to me,
and whispered with a laugh, —

"  I called upon your friend,  Mrs.  Ord,  this morn-
ing, and she told me you would be here to-night."

I laughed,  too,  but thanked him,  and we were going
on with our own chat when Mrs.  Vesey,  as if from a
sudden thought,  came up to us,  and patting Mr.  Cam-
bridge on the arm,  said, —

'^  I dare say you came to meet Miss Burney  ?"

*'Me? — no,"   cried he,  "I came to meet Miss

E ;"  and,  immediately quitting me,  he went to

talk wdth her.

This was rather a home stroke to be sure,  yet I
really believe accidental.

Soon after came Mrs.  Walsingham,  and insisted
upon sitting next me,  to whom she is most marvellous
civil.

Then came Mr.  Vesey,  with Sir Joshua Reynolds
and Mr.  Kichard Burke,  from dinner.  I was very
glad to see Sir Joshua,  who came up to shake hands
with me ;  while Mr.  Richard Burke called out aloud.

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  289

from the other end of the room,  in his Irish facetious
way,—

^'  Oho !  I shall go round to sj3eak with Miss
Burney  ! "

I so hate these public addresses,  that I received
him with the most chilling gravity  ;  and,  after he had
leant over my chair a minute or two,  with inquiries
about my health and my father,  he quietly went away,
and liked his reception too little to return.

The next w^ere Mrs.  Burke and her son.  I should
have liked much to have sat by the former,  who
sjDoke to me with the greatest politeness;  but I was
hemmed in between Mrs.  Walsingham and Miss
E .

Lady Spencer brought with her a collection of silver
ears,  to serve instead of trumpets,  to help deafness.
They had belonged to the late Lord,  and she pre-
sented them to Mrs.  Vesey,  who,  with great naivete,
began trying them on before us all ;  and a more
ludicrous sight you cannot imagine.

Sir William Hamilton followed ;  and then a coterie
was formed at the other side the room,  by all the men
but young Burke,  who would not quit my elbow.

Miss E then came next to me again,  and wor-
ried me with most uninteresting prosing,  never al-
lowing me to listen for two minutes following to either
Sir William Hamilton or my dear Mr.  Cambridge,
though they were both relating anecdotes the most
entertaining.

During this came Mr.  George Cambridge.  The
sight of Mrs.  Vesey,  rising to receive him with one
of her silver ears on,  and the recollection of several
accounts given me of her wearing them,  made me
unable to keep my countenance.

VOL.  II.  u

290 DIARY AND LETTERS             [ParT VII.
Mrs.  Vesey offered him a cliair next to Miss E ;

but,  while she was moving to make way for him,  down
dropped her ear.

#  *  ^-  #  #

Mr.  G.  C.  was going to speak,  w^hen Mrs.  Vesey
interrupted him,  by saying,  '^  Did you know Mr.
Wallace,  Mr.  Cambridge  ? "

"  No,  ma'am."

"  It's a very disagreeable thing,  I think,"  said she,
"  when one has just made acquaintance wdth any body,
and likes them,  to have them die."

This speech set me grinning so irresistibly,  that I
was forced to begin filliping off the crumbs of the
macaroon cake from my muff,  for an excuse for look-
ing dowai.

Just then my father came in  :  and then Mr.  G.  C.
came,  and took the chair half beside me.

I told him of some new members for Dr.  John-
son's club.

"  I think,"  said he,  "  it sounds more like some club
that one reads of in the  '  Spectator/  than like a real
club in these times  ;  for the forfeits of a whole year will
not amount to those of a single night in other clubs.
Does Pepys belong to if?''

"  Oh,  no  !  he is quite of another party  !  He is head
man on the side of the defenders of Lord Lyttelton.
Besides,  he has had enough of Dr.  Johnson  ;  for they
had a grand battle upon the Life of Lyttelton,  at Streat-
liam."

"  And had they really a serious quarrel?  I never
imagined it had amounted to that."

"  Oh,  yes,  serious enough,  I assure you.  I never
saw^  Dr.  Johnson really in a passion but then  :  and
dreadful,  indeed,  it was to see.     I wished myself away

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELIXA.  29 i

a thousand times.    It was a frightfui scene.    He so red^
poor Mr.  Pepys so pale !"

"  But how did it begin?  What did he say  ?"
"  Oh,  Dr.  Johnson came to the point without much
ceremony.  He called out aloud,  before a large corn-
pany,  at dinner,  '  What have you to say,  sir,  to me or
of me  ?  Come forth,  man  !  I hear you object to my
'  Life of Lord Lyttelton.'  What are your objections?
If you have any thing to say,  let's hear it.  Come forth^
man,  when I call you  !'  "

''  What a call,  indeed  !  Why then he fairly bullied
him into a quarrel ! "

"  Yes.  And I w'as the more sorry,  because Mr,
Pepys had begged of me,  before they met,  not to let
Lord Lyttelton be mentioned.  Now^  I had no more
power to prevent it than this macaroon cake in my
hand."

^'  It was behaving ill to Mrs.  Thrale,  certainly,  to
quarrel in her house."

*'  Yes;  but he never repeated it;  though he wdshed
of all things to have gone through just such another
scene with Mrs.  Montagu,  and to refrain was an act of
heroic forbearance."

*'  Why,  I rather wonder he did not;  for she was the
head of the set of Lytteltonians."

''  Oh,  he knows that;  he calls Mr.  Pepys only her
prime minister."

''  And wdiat does he call her?"

''  ^  Queen,'  to be sure  !  •  Queen of the Blues !'  She
came to Streatham one morning,  and I saw he was
dying to attack her.  But he had made a promise to
Mrs.  Thrale to have no more quarrels in her house,
and so he forced himself to forbear.  Indeed he was
very much concerned,  when it was over,  for what had

292 DIARY AND LEiTP:RS  [PaRT VII.

passed  ;  and very candid and generous in acknow-
ledging,- it.      lie is too noble to adhere to wrong."

''  And how did Mrs.  Montagu herself behave  ? "

•*  A'ery stately,  indeed,  at first.  She turned from
him very stiffly,  and with a most distant air,  and with-
out even courteseying to him,  and with a firm intention
to keep to what she had publicly declared — that she
would never speak to liim more  !  However,  he went
up to her himself,  longing to begin  !  and very roughly
said,—'  Well,  madam,  whats become of your fine new
house?     I hear no more of it.'"

"  But how did she bear this  ?"

"  Why she was obliged to answ^er him  ;  and she soon
grew so frightened — as evei'y body does — that she was
as civil as ever."

He laughed heartily at this account.  But I told liim
Dr.  Johnson was now much softened.  He had ac-
quainted me,  when I saw him last,  that he had written
to her upon the death of Mrs.  Williams,  because she
had allowed her something yearly,  which now ceased.

"  'And I had a very kind answer from her,'  said he.

"  '  Well then,  sir,'  cried I,  '  I hope peace now will
be again proclaimed.'

"  '  Why,  I am now,'  said he,  '  come to that time
when I wish all bitterness and animosity to be at an
end.  I have never done her any serious harm  —  nor
would I;  though I could give her a bite!  —  but she
must piovoke me much first.  In volatile talk,  indeed,
I may have spoken of her not much to her mind ;  for
in the tumult of conversation malice is apt to grow
sprightly  ;   and there,  1 hope,  I am not yet decrepid  !'  "

He quite laughed aloud at this characteristic speech.

"  I most readily assured the Doctor that I had never
yet seen him limp  !"

1783]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  29S

Mr.  G.  C.  told me next a characteristic stroke of Mr.
"Walpole's.  It is the custom,  you know,  among the
Macaronies,  to wear two watches,  which,  it is always
observed,  never go together :  "  So I suppose,"  says he,
in his finical way,  "  one is to tell us what o'clock it is,
and the other what o'clock it is not.''

Another Walpolian Mr.  G.  C.  told me,  upon the
Duke de Bouillon,  who tries to pass for an English-
man, and calls himself Mr.  Godfrey.  ^'  But I think,"
says Mr.  Walpole,  *'he might better take an English
title,  and call himself the Duke of Mutton BrotliJ'

Tuesday. — I spent the afternoon with Dr.  JohnsoUy
who indeed is very ill,  and whom I could hardly tell
how to leave.  But he is rather better since,  though
still in a most alarming way.  Indeed,  I am very
much afraid for him  !  He was very,  very kind  !  —  On,
what a cruel,  heavy loss will he be !

You have heard the whole story of Mr.  Burke,  the
Chelsea Hospital,  and his most charming letter?  To-
day he called,  and,  as my father was out,  inquired for
me.  He made a thousand apologies for breaking in
upon me,  but said the business was finally settled at.
the Treasury.  Nothing could be more delicate,  more
elegant than his manner of doing this kindness.  I
don't know whether he was most polite or most friendly
in his whole behaviour to me.  I could almost have-
cried when he said,  *'  This is my last act in office  :"*  he
said it witli so manly a cheerfulness,  in the midst of
undisguised regret.     What a man he is  !

Friday,  Dec.  19th. — This morning,  Mr.  Cambridge.

*  This alludes to Dr.  Barney's api3ointment to the office of-
organist to the chapel of Chelsea Hospital,

"294 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VII.

sen.,  came again,  and I had a charming ttte-a-ttte with
him.  He most comically congratulated himself upon,
finding me alone  :  "  for now,"  says he,  ''  you will talk
to me."  He then repeatedly hoped he did not disturb
me,  which I assured him he could never do,  and then
we began our usual conversation upon every sort of
thing that came uppermost.

Some time after he said, —

^'  Gay as you may think me,  I am always upon the
watch for evil :  only I do not look for it,  like the
croakers,  to be miserable,  but to prevent it.  And,  for
this purpose,  I am constantly turning about in my own
mind every possible evil than can happen,  and then I
make it my whole business to guard against it."
#  ^  #  #  ^  *

I went afterwards,  by long appointment,  to Mr.  Bur-
rows's,  to meet Mr.  and Mrs.  Barbauld.  Mrs.  Chapone
carried me.

Mrs.  Chapone herself is the most superiorly un-
affected creature you can conceive,  and full of agremens
from good sense,  talents,  and conversational powers,  in
defiance of age,  infirmities,  and uncommon ugliness.  I
really love as well as admire and esteem her.

Dec.  27th. — We went at night,  according to ap-
pointment, to the Pej)ys.  We found only Lady
Rothes,  Sir Lucas Pepys,  for Dr.  Pepys has just been,
made a baronet.  Lord Leslie,  a youth of about eighteen,
son of Lady Rothes,  Mr.  Montagu,  Mr.  Wraxal,  and
the master and mistress.  Mrs.  Walsingham and iNIiss
Boyle went to one side of the room,  and I was placed
next Lady Rothes on the other.

All the Pepys were in good humour and good spi-
rits ;  their new dignity has elated without making
them impertinent.

1783]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        295

Tuesday,  Dec.  30.  —  I went to Dr.  Johnson,  and
spent the evening with him.  He was very indifferent,
indeed.  There were some very disagreeable people
with him  ;  and he once ajffected me very much,  by
turning suddenly to me,  and grasping my hand,  and
saying,—

"  The blister I have tried for my breath has betrayed
some very bad tokens  ;  but I will not terrify myself
by talking of them  :  ah,  priez Dieu pour moi .'"

You may believe I promised that I would !  —  Good
and excellent as he is,  how can he so fear death  ?  —
Alas,  my Susy,  how awful is that idea !  —  He was quite
touchingly affectionate to me.  How earnestly I hope
for his recovery !

PART VIII.

1784.

CO^'TENTS.

Mrs.  Delany  —  A Visit to her  —  Kindness of Queen Charlotte  —
Mrs.  Carter — The Duchess of Portland  —  jMiss Twining  —  Let-
ter from Mrs.  Thrale  —  II.  OAven Cambridge  —  Chit-chat  —  A
Conversazione at Mrs.  Vesey's  —  Mr.  Jemingham  —  Literary
Ladies  -JCMrs.  Montagu and Mrs.  Carter  —  Sir W.  Hamilton  —
The Hamilton Vase  —  Party at Mr.  Pepys's  —  Letter from Mrs.
Thrale — Bath Society  —  Dinner at Mrs.  Fitzgerald's -^  Mrs.
Montagu,  Mrs.  Garrick,  the Bishop of St.  Asaph  — >  Visit to Dr.
Johnson  —  Sir Philip Clarke  —  R.   Owen Cambridge  —  The

;.   Dulness of Set Parties  —  Mrs.  Lock — Party at Mrs.  Thrale's —

'/Mrs.  Montagu,  Islis.  Garrick,  Hannah More,  IVIrs.  Chapone  —
A Day with Mrs.  Delany — Her Correspondence with Swift and
Young  —  The Loss of Friends  —  Age and Youth  —  Lady An-
dover  —  A Literary Breakfast  —  Flying Visits  —  Dinner at the
Bishop of Winchester's  —  Evening Party at Sir Joshua Rey-
nolds's—  Letter from Mrs.  Thrale  —  More Dinner Parties  —
Resignation — Sad Anticipations  —  Marriage of Mrs.  Thrale  —
Visit to Mrs.  Lock at Norbury Park  —  Madame de Genlis  —
Happy News  —  Boulogne Sixty Years Ago  —  Life at Xorbury
Park  —  Madame de Sevigne  —  Domestic Adventures  —  Mo-
ravians—  Defence of Mrs.  Piozzi -r Blness of Dr.  Johnson  —
Anecdote  -j Johnson's Opinion of Mrs.  Piozzi's Marriage  —  The

/Bristol  ^lilk-woman—t Johnson's Definition of Genius — Visit to
Norbury Park  —  Letters from iSliss Burney to Dr.  Burney and
Mrs.  Lock  —  Lord George Gordon  —  The Duchess of Devon-
shire, and Blanchard the Aeronaut — Dr.  Johnson's last Illness —
Anecdotes of his last Days  —  His Death.

298 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

PART vni.

1784.

Tuesday,  Jan.  6th. — I spent the afternoon with Dr.
Johnson,  and had the great satisfaction of finding him
better.

Thursday,  Jan.  8th. —  I dined with Mrs.  Delany.
The venerable and excellent old lady received me with
open arms,  and w^e kissed one another as if she had
been my sweet grandmother,  whom she always re-
minds me of.  She looks as well as ever,  only rather
thinner;  but she is as lively,  gay,  pleasant,  good-hu-
moured, and animated,  as at eighteen.  She sees,  she
says,  much worse;  "  but I am thankful,"  she added,
cheerfully,  ''  I can see at all at my age.  My greatest
loss is the countenance of my friends ;  however,  to
see even the light is a great blessing."

She shewed me a most elegant and ingenious loom,
which the Queen made her a present of last summer
at Windsor,  for making fringe  ;  and a gold knitting
needle given her by the King.  And she told me the
whole history of their manner of presenting them,  with
a sort of grateful simplicity that was quite affecting.
Did I ever tell you of the letter the Queen wrote her,
when she gave her a beautiful case of instruments for
her curious works  ?  She signed it her  "affectionate
Queen."  I quite reverence the Queen for her sense of
Mrs.  Delany's merit.

1784]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  299

We had,  however,  but half an hoar alone,  and it
seemed to me much shorter.  Mrs.  Carter and Miss
Hamilton came to dinner.

Mrs.  Carter is a charming woman  ;  I never liked her
so much before  ;  but I never before saw so much of her
to like.  Miss Hamilton I have nothing new to say-
about  ;  I had no opportunity to ask her for the Bas
Bleu,  as I had never been near her,  and was much re-
proached, and had peace to make for myself.

In the evening the Duchess of Portland came,  and
was very gracious and very agreeable.  Lady Dart-
mouth, also,  who seems a very plain,  unaffected,  wor-
thy woman  ;  Mrs.  Levison,  one of Mrs.  Boscawen's
daughters,  and Miss G.  a maid of honour,  whom
I have been invited three days following to meet at
Mrs.  Walsingham's.  She has had,  it seems,  a man's
education;  yet she is young,  pretty,  and,  at times,
very engaging.  She seems unequal,  and,  I am told,
can be very saucy and supercilious.

The evening did very well,  but the first half hour
was worth the whole day.

Mrs.  Thrale to Miss F.  Burney.

Bath,  January 15,  1784.

Well,  my dearest Burney — now Mrs.  Byron is ill,
and all my tenderness returns.  Do send her the in-
closed, and let me know whether she is bad or no.
Poor soul !  she loves me dearly in her way,  and if I
do not like her method,  'tis no reason for rejecting
her regard.

I have got a world of franks,  and shall torment you
accordingly.

Sir Lucas Pepys received a letter from me the other

300 DIAKY AND LETTERS  [Part VIIL

day,  all about my health  ;  perhaps he  '11 answer it ;  and
Seward hears all the particulars as if he were an old
nurse.

As for being well in this weather,  it  'were as rational
to bid me calm the heats of Parliament as my own
agitated nerves  :  but,  as the man in  *'  The Rambler"
says,  "  perhaps I shall mend in the spring."

Air balloons go no faster than post-horses at last !  I
caught my death almost by looking at one the other
day,  which went to Bristol in an hour from hence.  I
dare say Sir John Lade's phaeton would have beaten
our Icarus out of sio:ht.

Adieu,  my love,  and may God bless you but as is
"wished and praved for by vour own

H.  L.  T.

Diary Resumed.

Thursday,  January 15th.  —  My Bath journey,  my
dear Susy,  I know not what to say about ;  could I go
for one fortnight,  nothing could so much rejoice me ;
for I even languish,  I pine to see again my beloved
and very — oh,  very unhappy Mrs.  Thrale  !  I know
well the meeting,  as things are at present situated,
would half kill her with joy,  and me with a thousand
feelings I keep off as well as I can  ;  but I cannot tell
how to arrange matters for this purpose.  The ex-
pense of such an expedition,'  for so short a time,  I
know^  not how even to name to my father,  who has a
thousand reasons against my going,  all founded on
arguments unanswerable.

I had a very long conference with dear Mr.  Cam-
bridge, who returned to town with undiminished kind-
ness for me,  as he shewed in a manner that will amaze

1784]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  301

you.     Charlotte was with us at first,  but soon reth-ed  ;
and we had then an hour or two by ourselves.

He began by talkmg of the preceding evening at
Mrs.  Ord's,  and its heaviness.  I was half ready to
laugh, —  there vras something so ndifm the complaint.

"  But I must tell you,"  said he,  "  how I made
George laugh,  though without intending it,  after w^e
got into Mortimer Street last night.  ^  Why,  George,'
says I,  '  what an evening we have had here !  Why,
there  's neither been mirth nor instruction  !  *  "

"  Mrs.  Ord,"  cried I,  "  is a very friendly woman,  and
very sensible ;  and,  indeed,  I go to see her because I
have a real regard for her,  and she has the warmest
regard for me ;  but I don't go expecting entertainment
from her brilliancy."

*'  Oh,  it is quite right for you,  and quite another
thing for you ;  but for me,  w^ho come seldom to town,
it does not answer ;  for I always want either to hear
something that is new,  or something that is pleasant.
But it is very w^ell for you who live in town,  and I
would have you go."

We had then a little further talk about the evening,
after which,  in a very serious tone,  Mr.  Cambridge
said, —

''  And now I have something very interesting to
say to you.  I hardly know how to tell it you;  but
you must bear it as well as you can,  and not suffer it
to prey upon your spirits."

And then,  while I listened aghast,  he told me that
the sweet Kitty vvas in so dangerous a way he could
not but look forward to the most fatal conclusion of her
malady.

I was truly concerned  —  concerned at my ver}^  heart
to hear such sounds from him  ;  but when he proceeded

302 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

to comfort me, — to beg me to bear up, —  I was really
obliged to go and poke at the fire with all my might
to hide from him the effect of such generosity of
sentiment.  I cannot write you the particulars of what
he said,  because,  things being since a little mended,
I hope there is less occasion to think over such sad
admonitions :  but he charged me to bear up against
this misfortune as lie did.

"  You,"  said he,  "  must remind me hereafter,  should
you see me sinking at last in sorrow when all is over,
of what I say to you now,  and of all her sufferings,
which now I think worse than all."

Again he charged me to be cheerful myself,  and said
he had given the same charge to Sally Baker.

'' You'two,''  added he,  "and my two girls,  have,
among you all four but one fault, —  and that is too
much feeling.  You must repress that,  therefore,  as
much as you can.'

And when he had repeated these injunctions,  he
said, —

''  And now we will talk of it no more.  I have
prepared you for what may happen  ;  so now think of
it as little as you can,  and forgive me for giving you so
much pain ;  and the less we say upon this subject in
future the better."

#  #  #  #  #

I went alone to Mrs.  Vesey's,  which was very dis-
agreeable to me.  There was a very full meeting too,
and most of the company were already arrived ;  and,
to add to the pleasure of my entree,  Mrs.  Vesey was in
an inner room :  so my name was spoke aloud at the
door,  and then nobody was ready to receive me.  I
stood so awkward ;  till at last Sir Joshua Reynolds
smilingly called out, —

1784]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        303

*'  Miss Burney,  you had better come and sit by me,
for here  's no Mrs.  Vesey."

I instantly obeyed the droll summons.

*'  Why don't Dr.  Burney come with you?"  cried he,
good-naturedly ;  '*  you should make him,  for it is very
distressing to you to come in alone."

I ne\er will go alone again unless I can go much
earlier.

I now soon saw folks enough that I knew.  Mr.
Jerningham first came up to me,  and offered to fetch
Mrs.  Vesey,  w^hich,  though I declined,  he would do.
She received me most kindly,  and told me I had a little
party of friends in the boudoir who desired I would
join them  •  but I had had enough of exhibiting myself,
and begged leave to sit still.

''  But you can't think,  my dear ma'am,"  cried she,
'^  how happy you will make me,  if you will be quite at
your ease here,  and run about just as you like."

How well she sees what would make me happy !  —
to run about in rooms full of company !

As soon as she was called off,  Mr.  Jerningham took
her jDlace,  civilly declaring he would not give it up,
come who might.

Soon after came Mr.  Montagu with another message
from the boudoir ;  but I was now by the Burrows
and Mrs.  Pepys,  and did not like parading away.
They sent a bad messenger,  however;  for he got a
chair in our circle,  and took back no answer.  After-
wards Miss Hamilton herself came,  and,  taking my
hand,  insisted upon carrying me back with her.

The boudoir party was Mrs.  Carter,  Miss Gregory,
Miss Hamilton,  Lady Wake,  Miss Ann Clarke,  and
Mr.  Montagu.     I was introduced by Miss Hamilton to

304 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

the two ladies whose names are new to you.     I stayed
with this party all the evening.

Mrs.  Carter talked more than any hody ever heard
her talk before ;  and Mr.  Montagu declared he was
sure it was for me.  I should desire nothing more
than such influence,  were it so ;  for her talk was all
instruction.  Were I to see much of her,  I really think
we should be exceeding good friends.  Mrs.  Vesey,
Dr.  AVarton,  and Mr.  Jerningham,  joined us occasion-
ally. In the other rooms were Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.
Buller,  Sir William Hamilton,  and crowds more,  with
dear,  amiable,  unaffected Sir Joshua.

Mr.  Cambridge came very late,  and ventured not
into our closet,  which seemed a band exclusive.

There w as a world of regret in the boudoir,  about my
not going to see the Hamilton Vase next day  ;  for most
of that set Avere to form the party.

Saturday,  January 17th. — To-day,  by long in-
vitation, I was to spend the evening at the Pepys.

Vv'e kept up,  panong our own group,  a general con-
versation, but not a very lively one  ;  for Miss G.
whispered me she wished Miss O.  away,  she could
say so little :  and Mr.  M.  told me,  in another w^hisper,
he could not bear looking at Miss H.  there was some-
thing so disagreeably languishing in her eyes !  The
two ladies had no opportunity,  as I vvas seated,  to
whisper a return of these compliments  ;  but I found
that none of them desired the affinity of the others.

The evening rubbed on and rubbed off till it began
to break up.  Mrs.  Montagu was the first who rose to
take leave,  and,  in passing by to go out,  suddenly
perceived me,  and eagerly advancing,  put both her
hands upon my shoulders,  and good-humouredly ex-

1784]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  305

claimed,  "Oh,  have I found you out at last?"  And
then she said many very obliging things,  which she
finished with an invitation for the next Wednesday
evening with my father.

3Irs.  Thrale to Miss F.  Burney.

Batii,  Wednesday,  February 18,  1784.

Thanks,  thanks,  a thousand,  my prettiest,  dearest
Burney !  This charming letter makes amends for all.
And you remember last winter,  do you  ?  and remember
it with tenderness  ?  What then must have passed in
my mind,  on the dreadful anniversary of a day which,
instead of killing me as it ought to have done,  gave to
two innocent,  unfortunate people,  a cruel and lingering
death,  —  like the arrows tipped with African poison,
which slow^ly and gradually retarding the vital powers,
at length  (in about three years I think)  wholly put a
stop to their  ^ertion  !

You are vastly good-natured about the little Dobbina,
who is my fond and humble adorer ;  though somewhat
jealous of her husband's being  (as he truly is)  a greater
favourite with me than her.  The means she takes to
supplant him are truly comical,  and would make you
laugh most heartily  ;  but so might twenty undescribable
situations if you were on the spot, — the only clean,
and warm,  and wholesome spot in England at this
time.  Oh,  I would not quit dear Bath just now for
any place in King George's dominions!

Pray,  is Baretti sick or in distress?  The Italians
think him dead  ;  but 1 suppose all is well with him,
a'n't it?

Johnson is in a sad way,  doubtless;  yet he may still
with caie last another twelveniouth,  and every week's

VOL.  II.  X

306 DIARY Ax\D LETTERS  [Part VIII.

existence is gain to him,  avIio,  like good Hezekiah,
wearies Heaven with entreaties for life.  I wrote him a
very serious letter the other clay.

The Methodists do certainly reconcile one to death,
by rendering all temporal enjoyments obtuse,  or re-
presenting them as illicit.  ^Vhoever considers this
world as a place of constant mortification,  and incessant
torment,  will be well enough contented to leave it ;  but
I can scarcely think our Saviour,  who professed his
yoke to be easy and his burden to be light,  will have
peculiar pleasure in their manner of seiTing Him.  My
principles are never convinced by their arguments,
though my imagination is always fluttered by their
vehemence.  AVe must do the best we can at last,  and
as King David says,  ''  Let us fall into the hands of
God,  and not into the hands of men ;  for they are
severe and cruel judges of each other."

Ajjropos — Mr.  Seward's disapprobation is merely ex-
ternal, and by no means like yours,  the growth of his
heart ;  but the coarseness of his expressions he has to
himself,  and I cannot guess how I have deserved them.
Sir Lucas Pepys writes very tenderly to me.  Live or
die,  he shall not find me ungrateful.

Why do you catch these horrible fevers,  dear Burney  ?
They will demolish you some day before you are aware.

Well,  you have lost some of the old treason-plotters,
to be sure,  by whom you were and are dearly loved
and valued ;  but when friends are once parted in this
wide world,  'tis so strange if they ever meet again,
that no one ought to wonder should they see each
other no more.  There is a place,  however,  where we
shall meet those we love,  and enjoy their society in
peace and comfort.  To such as have fully experienced
the agonies of absence,  sure that will be heaven enough.

1784]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,        307

Adieu,  my precious friend,  and don't forget one on
whose heart time and distance have no other effect
than to engrave affection and affliction the deeper.
Adieu !  I am really almost drawn together from empti-
ness and sinking.  Love me,  however,  while I am  ■
your

H.  L.T.

3Irs.  Thrale to Miss Barney.

Bath,  Tuesday,  23d March,  1784,

You were a dear creature to write so soon and so-
sweetly ;  but we shall never meet.  I see that clearly^
and have seen it long.  My going to London would be
a dreadful expense,  and bring on a thousand inquiries
and inconveniences  —  visits to Johnson and from
Cator  :  and where must I live for the time,  too  ?  Oh,
I have desired nothing else since you wrote ;  but all is
impossibility.  Why would you ever flatter me that
you might,  maybe,  come to Bath?  I saw the un-
likelihood even then,  and my retired life will not
induce your friends to permit your coming hither now,
I fancy even my own young ladies will leave me,  and
I sincerely think they will be perfectly right so to da,
as the world they wish to shine in is quite excluded by
my style of living.

Bath flash they properly enough despise,  and Lon-
don flash I cannot attend them in.  More chapters of
the Bible,  or more volumes of the Roman and English,
histories,  would fatigue their ears  —  for their lungs have--
not yet suffered.  I have,  however,  read to them the*
Bible from beginning to end,  the Roman and English
histories,  Milton,  Shakspere,  Pope and Young's works
from head to heel;  Warton and Johnson's criticisn?^

308 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

on tlic Poets ;  besides a complete system of dramatic
writing  ;  and classical  —  I mean English classics  —
they are most perfectly acquainted with.  Such works
of Voltaire,  too,  as were not dangerous,  we have
worked at;  "  Rollin des Belles Lettres,"  and a hundred
more.

But my best powers are past,  and I think I must
look them a lady to supply my deficiency,  to attend
them if they should like a jaunt next summer or so;
for I will not quit Bath.  The waters and physicians
of this place are all my comfort,  and I often think I
never shall again leave the spot.

Ah,  Burney !  you little know the suffering,  and,  I
will add,  the patient suffering of your

H.  L.  T.*

Journal Resumed.

Saturday,  April 17th.  —  The sight of your paw
any way,  my dearest Susy,  my heart's ever dearest
friend,  would be well worth all the pence I have in the
world,  could I see it on no other condition.     Indeed I

*  The above letter is indorsed as follows in the handwriting of
Madame d' Arblay :  —

"  Many letters of a subsequent date to this letter,  of 14th
March,  1784,  I have utterly,  for cogent reasons  (cogent and con-
scientious), destroyed.  Followdng,  with this so long dearest friend,
the simple,  but unrivalled,  golden rule,  I would only preserve
such as evince her conflicts,  her misery,  and her sutferings,  mental
and corporeal,  to exonerate her from the banal reproach of yield-
ing unresisting to her passions.  Her fault and grievous mis-
fortune was,  not combating them in their origin ;  not flying even
from their menace.  How have I loved her !  with what affection,
"what gratitude,  what admiration,  and what affliction!

'' I2th Fehruarf/,  1825:'  m

1784]       OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        309

have not been really in spirits,  nor had one natural
laugh,  since I lost you  ;  there seems such an insi-
pidity, such a vacuity in all that passes.  I know not,
in truth,  whether I most miss you when happy or
when sad.  That I wish for you most v/hen happy is
certain;  but that nothing upon earth can do me so
much good,  when sad,  as your society,  is certain too.
Constantly to hear from you,  and to write to you,  is
the next best thing ;  so now,  with as little murmuring
as I am able,  I return to our paper conversations.

Your note by the postilion was truly welcome ;  and
I thank you most warmly for writing it.  I am grieved
you had so bad a journey,  which I fear you could
never bear so well as you imposingly pretend.  As to
me,  I have had,  I confess,  a slight headach ever since
you went ;  but I believe it to be owing to stagnation
of blood from stupidity,  nothing of an enlivening
nature having passed to give me 2i fillip for the Philip
I have lost.  There !  could Charlotte do more  ?  How-
ever, I solemnly assure you I am only heavyish,  not
ill ;  and I intend to shake that off by the first
opportunity.

Your letter to my father,  and account of the sweet
little girl,  delighted us all.  He will very soon answer
it himself.  I am rejoiced on your account as much as
hers that she can now walk so well.  So now to my
proceedings.

Monday,  April 19th.  —  I went in the evening to
see dear Dr.  Johnson.  He received me with open
arms,  scolded me with the most flattering expressions
for my absence,  but would not let me come away
without making me promise to dine with him next
day,  on a salmon from Mrs.  Thrale.  This I did not
dare refuse,  as he was urgent,  and I had played truant

-310 DIARY ANT)  LKTTKIIS  [Part VIII.

so long ;  but,  to be sure,  I liad rather have dined first,
on account of poor Blacky.  Me is amazingly re-
covered, and perfectly good-humoured and comfortable,
and smilingly alive to idle chat.

At Dr.  Johnson's we had Mr.  and Mrs.  Hoole and
their son,  and Mrs.  Hall,  a very good Methodist,  and
sister of John Wesley.  The day was tolerable ;  but
Dr.  Johnson is never his best when there is nobody to
draw him out;  but he was much pleased with my
coming,  and very kind indeed.

April 22d.  —  Sweet and delectable to me was my
dearest Susy's letter.  I am so glad of seeing your
sentiments,  when I cannot hear them,  that your letters
are only less valuable to me than yourself:  and,  in-
deed, no letters were ever so very near conversation as
ours ;  they have but this fault,  —  the longest never
says half there is to say.

I will not answer one word to what you say of our
dear,  lost Chesington ;  if I do,  I shall start no other
subject.  But I am truly delighted by all you say of
the sweet little girl,  and most thankful to Heaven for
the comfort she affords you.  I am well,  my dear
Susy,  I assure you,  though not  "  all alive and jolly ;"
yet by no means melancholic neither ;  a little still in
the stagnating order;  but it will wear away,  I hope,
-and I spare not for continual employment,  by way of
forwarding its departure.

I did not receive your letter,  my dear Susy,  till
Tuesday.  I have lately spent a great deal of time at
home,  for I have now a little broke my father into
permitting my sending excuses  ;  and,  indeed,  I was
most heartily tired of visiting,  though the people vi-
sited have been among the first for talents in the
'kingdom.     I can go nowhere with pleasure or spirit,

1784]  OF thp:  author of evelina.  311

if I meet not somebody who interests my heart as well
as my head,  and I miss Mrs.  Thrale most woefully in
both particulars.

Friday,  April 23d.  —  The sweet and most be-
w^itching Mrs.  Lock called upon me in the evening,
with her son George.  I let her in,  and did so rejoice
I had not gone to Mrs.  Vesey's.  But I rejoiced for
only a short time  ;  she came but to take leave,  for she
was going to Norbury the very next morning.  I was
quite heavy all the evening.  She does truly interest
both head and heart.  I love her already.  And she
was so kind,  so caressing,  so soft ;  pressed me so much
to fix a time for going to Norbury ;  said such sweet
things of Mrs.  Phillips ;  and kissed me so affectionately
in quitting me,  that I was quite melted by her.

What a charm has London lost for me by her de-
parture !  sweet creature that she is ;  born and bred to
dispense pleasure and delight to all who see or know
her!  She,  Mrs.  Thrale,  and Mrs.  Delany,  in their se-
veral ways all excellent,  possess the joint powers of
winning the affections,  w^hile they delight the intel-
lects, to the highest summit I can even conceive of
human attraction.  The heart -fascination of Mrs.
Thrale,  indeed,  few know;  but those few must confess
and must feel her sweetness,  to them,  is as captivating
as her wit is brilliant to all.

Saturday,  April 24th.  —  My father and I went
very late to the Borough :  early enough,  however,  for
me,  as I was not in cue for a mixed party of praters.
I respect and esteem them  ;  but they require an ex-
ertion to which I am not always inclined.  The com-
pany was Mrs.  Montagu,  Mrs.  Garrick,  Miss More,
Mr.  and Mrs.  Pepys,  Mrs.  Chapone,  and two or three
less eminent.

312 DIARY AND LETlEllS  [Part VIII.

I had many flattering reproaches for my late tru-
ancy from these parties ;  but all that I received any
pleasure in was about a quarter of an hour's separate
talk with Mrs.  Garrick,  who was so unaffected,  cheer-
ful, and rational,  that I was very glad of the chat.

Monday,  April 26th.  —  I spent with my dear Mrs.
Delany,  and more pleasantly than I have spent any
day since my Susy left town.  She gave me her letters
to rummage,  from Swift and Young ;  and she told me
all the anecdotes that occurred to her of her acquaint-
ance with them.  How I grieve that her sight visibly
continues to decay !  all her other senses and faculties
are perfect,  though she says not.

"  My friends/'  said she once when w^e were alone,
"  will last,  I believe,  as long as I last,  because they
are very good ;  but the pleasure of our friendship is
now all to be received by me,  for I have lost all power
of returning any."

If she often spoke such untruths,  I should not revere
her as I do.  She has been in great affliction lately for
Lady Mansfield,  a very old friend,  just dead.

*'  The Duchess of Portland and I,"  said she,  *'  have
shut ourselves up together,  and seen nobody  ;  and
some people said we did mischief to ourselves by it,
for the Duchess lamented Lady Mansfield still more
than I did.  However,  our sympathy has only done
good to both.  But to-day I wanted a cordial,  and that
made me wish for you."

How kind and how sweet !    We were quite alone till

evening,  except for lovely Miss P ,  whom I like

very much;  and I entreated Mrs.  Delany always to
let me dine with her alone ;  and I believe she will
comply,  for we grow more and more sociable and
unreserved.

OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  313

"  I was told,"  said she once,  ^'  that when I grew
older,  I should feel less  ;  but I do not find it so ;  I am
sooner,  I think,  hurt than ever.  I suppose it is with
very old age as with extreme youth,  the eflPect of
weakness  ;  neither of those stages of life have firmness
for bearing misfortunes."

In the evening we had Lady Andover and Mrs.
Walsingham.

May 6th.  —  I breakfasted at Mrs.  Ord's,  to meet
Mr.  and Mrs.  Smelt,  Mrs.  Garrick,  and Miss More,
and we had a very pleasant morning,  of rational and
elegant conversation.  Mr.  Smelt has the same taste
in the fine arts and in literature that Mr.  Lock has.
He is a most polished and high-bred man ;  but I
could make no acquaintance with him,  though Mrs.
Ord and himself were both earnest that I should  ;  for
never once did he open his mouth but to make me
some compliment allusive to  "Cecilia;"  and though
always with delicacy,  even to refinement,  it always was
compliment,  and kept me in that sort of acknow-
ledging restraint,  that put it out of my power to say
any thing in reply.  He asked me where I should
spend the summer?  I told him at Chesington ;  and,
for some part of it,  at Mr.  Lock's.

"Ah!"  cried he,  "you are acquainted,  then,  with
that divii^e family?"

No wonder he,  who has so much in common wdth
Mr.  Lock,  should passionately admire both him and
his.

May 7th.  —  My father and I dined at the Bishop of
Winchester's ;  this being my first sight of Mrs.  North
this year.  She reproached me,  however,  very gently,
pressing me to come to Chelsea,  and assuring me she
would never forofive it if I did not visit her at Farn-

314 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT VIII.

ham in the summer.  The Bishop is charming,  and
the children are very interesting.

In the evening we went to Sir Joshua Reynolds'.
Here we met Mr.  Burke ;  not well,  however,  nor ia
high spirits,  but very good-humoured and pleasant ;
and so kind as to seat himself next me all the evening.
His son was there too,  and,  as he came a full half-
hour before his father,  had kept that seat himself,  as
usual,  till his arrival.  I am quite amazed at him and
young Montagu,  for their noble perseverance in
working so resolutely at so much dryness and coldness
as I treat them with.  They are both very pleasing
and well-bred young men ;  and I can hardly tell
myself why I am not more sociable with them;  but it
is so that I am not ;  and I feel obliged to them in vain.

Young B.'s uncle,  Mr.  R.  Burke,  was there also,
and,  as he ever does,  instantly distinguished me in a
public manner ;  but though I am much entertained
sometimes with his strong humour,  there is a boldness
in his manners that always excites in mine a chilliness
that distances him.     How unlike his brother !

Mrs.  Thrale to Miss F.  Burney.

Mortimer Street,  Cavendish Square,
Tuesday Night,  May 1784.

I am come,  dearest Burney.  It is neither dream
nor fiction ;  though I love you dearly,  or I would
not have come.  Absence and distance do nothing
towards wearing out real affection  ;  so you shall always
iind it in your true and tender

H.  L.  T.

I am somewhat shaken bodily,  but  'tis the mentkl
shocks that have made me unable to bear the corpo-

1784]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  315

real ones.  'Tis past ten o'clock,  however,  and I must
lay myself down with the sweet expectation of seeing
my charming friend in the morning to breakfast.  I
love Dr.  Burney too well to fear him,  and he loves me
too well to say a word which should make me love
him less.

Journal Resumed.

May 17. —  Let me now,  my Susy,  acquaint you a
little more connectedly than I have done of late how I
have gone on.  The rest of that week I devoted almost
wholly to sweet Mrs.  Thrale,  whose society w^as truly
the most delightful of cordials to me,  however,  at
times,  mixed with bitters the least palatable.

One day I dined with Mrs.  Garrick to meet Dr.
Johnson,  Mrs.  Carter,  Miss Hamilton,  and Dr.  and
Miss Cadogan;  and one evening I went to Mrs.  Vesey,
to meet almost every body, — the Bishop of St.  Asaph,
and all the Shipleys,  Bishop Chester and Mrs.  Por-
tens,  Mrs.  and Miss Ord,  Sir Joshua Reynolds and
Miss Palmer,  Mrs.  Buller,  all the Burrows,  Mr.  Wal-
pole,  Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.  Garrick,  and Miss More,
and some others.  But all the rest of my time I gave
wholly to dear Mrs.  Thrale,  who lodged in Mortimer
Street,  and who saw nobody else.  Were I not sensible
of her goodness,  and full of incurable affection for her,
should I not be a monster  ?

#  #  #  *  #

I parted most reluctantly with ray dear Mrs.  Thrale,
whom,  when or how,  I shall see again,  Heaven only
knows  !  but in sorrow we parted  —  on my side in real
affliction.

The next morning,  while ruminating in much sad-

316 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

ness upon my late interviews with Mrs.  Tlirale,  how
great was the relief of my mind,  —  the delight,  in-
deed, to he summoned to my dear Mr.  Cambridge.
I flew to him  —  I gave him my hand,  for I could
not help it,  from the great satisfaction I felt in again
seeing him.  "  But why,  sir,"  I cried,  "  have you
been such a stranger  ?  —  I hope nothing is worse at
Twickenham  ?"

The grave and fixed countenance that now met my
eyes,  though the first look had been kindly smiling,
told me instantly how all our fair,  lately raised hopes
were blasted.  He was silent a moment,  and then
slowly answered, —  "  Yes  ;  we must not talk of that."

Shocked and disappointed at this relapse,  I could
not forbear expressing my concern.  He then more
explicitly told me how ill every thing went ;  and that
now all hope was finally over.  Sir John Elliot had
been with them the morning before,  and told them to
expect the worst !  ^'  You must now,  therefore,"  said
he,  "  only pray to have her released."

Something then,  but in a hurrying manner,  as if
willing to get rid of the subject,  he said of disappoint-
ment about my going to Twickenham,  or seeing his
beloved Kitty any more  ;  and concluded it wdth, —
*'  I can now only hope to see you a consolation to
Charlotte."

O that I might be so  !  but who on earth can console
that noble-minded creature  ?  He told me how greatly
she behaved,  and said that but the day before she had
declared she could not,  for the sake of one quarter of
an hour's smiles from her darling sister,  any longer
wish her to endure twenty-four hours'  misery !

The old complaints still continue,  and new ones
appear  :  he had stayed with them only to watch by

1784]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  317

the poor sufferer,  who bore her accumulated torments
like an angel.  He came up now in order to dine with
Dr.  Heberden and Sir John Elliot ;  but gave me to
understand this was the last visit he purposed making
to town till all suspense was over.

^  ^  T5*  ^  ^

[At this period the health of Mrs.  Phillips failed so
much that,  after some deliberation,  she and Captain
Phillips decided on removing to Boulogne for change
of air.  The following letter was written by Miss
Burney to her sister,  when this plan was first in
agitation.]

June 13. — My dearest,  dearest Susy,  I have read
your final letter with much more composure than I did
your leading one.  I saw what was coming,  and was
therefore prepared for it ;  but do not grieve,  so my
darling Susy, — my own ever,  ever most dear of friends
and sisters  !  Grieve not for me,  in taking measures to
preserve the life and health most valuable to my own.
Such being the motive of your removal,  I can bear it
without a murmur,  and I will do all in my power to
assist it,  by taking upon me the whole management of
it with my father whenever you please.

But must it be to the Continent?  —  the division by
sea  —  how could I cross it were you ill?  Who would
take me  ?  and could I bear that Phillips should leave
you to fetch me in such a case  ?  The remotest part of
England were better to me.  But if he or you think
your aho'ie there will be pleasanter,  oh,  dearest Susy!
that,  indeed,  will be a pull upon my heart-strings! —
but of this when we meet.  You certainly have been
well m various parts of England  :  Ipswich,  Twicken-
haiii Norbury,  —  all shew the nation is not against
you,  only the clay soil.      However,  when  ^Ye meet is

318 DIAKY AND LETTERS  [Part VIIL

time enough ;  I  ^vill tlo nothing to plague you out of a
scheme,  if it is formed.

You will,  probably,  have heard how they are re-
lieved at Twickenham,  and how angelically the whole
family bear what has befallen them.  O my Susy ! —
let me but preserve you,  and all other evils now seem
trifling.  I would not oppose Capt.  P.  in his plan for
the world.  I adore him for it  —  if it be for your
health.

[Towards the end of July in this year,  Mrs.  Thrale's
second marriage took place with Mr.  Piozzi,  and INIiss
Burney went about the same time to Norbury Park,
where she passed some weeks with Mr.  and Mrs.  Lock.
The following  '^  Sketch"  of a letter,  and memorandum
of what had recently passed between Mrs.  Piozzi and
herself,  is taken from the journal of that period.]

3Iiss F.  Burney to Mrs.  Piozzi,

Xorbury Park,  Aug.  10,  1784.

When my wondering eyes first looked over the
letter I received last night,  my mind instantly dictated
a high-spirited vindication of the consistency,  integrity,
and faithfulness of the friendship thus abruptly re-
proached and cast away.  But a sleepless night gave
me leisure to recollect that you were ever as generous
as precipitate,  and that your own heart would do
justice to mine,  in the cooler judgment of future re-
flection. Committing myself,  therefore,  to that period,
I determined simply to assure you,  that if my last letter
hurt either you or Mr.  Piozzi,  I am no less sorry than
surprised  ;  and that if it oftended you,  I sincerely beg
your pardon.

1784]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  319

Not to that time,  however,  can I wait to acknow-
ledge the pain an accusation so unexpected has caused
me,  nor the heartfelt satisfaction with which I shall
receive,  when you are able to write it,  a softer renewal
of regard .

May Heaven direct and bless you  !

F.  B.

N.B.  This is the sketch of the answer which F.  B.
most painfully wrote to the unmerited reproach of not
sending cordial congratulations upon a marriage which
she had uniformly,  openly,  and with deep and avowed
affliction,  thought wrong.

Mrs.  Piozzi to Miss Burney.

Wellbeck Street,  No.  33 Cavendish Square.
Friday,  Aug.  13,  1784.

Give yourself no serious concern,  sweetest Burney.
All is well,  and I am too happy myself to make a
friend otherwise ;  quiet your kind heart immediately,
and love my husband if you love his and your

H.  L.  Piozzi.

N.B.  To this kind note,  F.  B.  wrote the warmest
and most affectionate and heartfelt reply ;  but never
received another word !  And here and thus stopped
a correspondence of six years of almost unequalled
partiality,  and fondness on her side ;  and affection,
gratitude,  admiration,  and sincerity on that of F.  B.,
who could only conjecture the cessation to be caused
by the resentment of Piozzi,  when informed of her
constant opposition to the union.

320 DIARY AXD LETTERS  [ParT VIII.

Diary resumed.
Addressed to Mrs.  Phillips.

Friday,  Oct.  8th. — I set off with my dear father
for Chesington,  where we passed five days very com-
fortably :  my father was all good humour,  all himself, —
such as you and I mean by that word.  The next day
we had the blessing of your Dover letter,  and on Thurs-
day, Oct.  14.  I arrived at dear Norbury Park,vat about
seven o'clock,  after a pleasant ride in the dark.  Mr.  Lock
most kindly and cordially welcomed me ;  he came out
upon the steps to receive me,  and his beloved Fredy waited
for me in the vestibule.  Oh,  with what tenderness did
she take me to her bosom !  I felt melted with her kind-
ness, but I could not express a joy like hers,  for my
heart was very full — full of my dearest Susan,  whose
image seemed before me upon the spot where we had so
lately been together.  They told me that Madame de la
Fite,  her daughter,  and Mr.  Hinde,  were in the house;
but as I am now,  I hope,  come for a long time,  I did not
vex at hearing this.  Their first inquiries were if I had
not heard from Bouloane.

Saturday. — I fully expected a letter,  but none came ;
but Sunday I depended upon one.  The post,  however,
did not arrive before we went to church.  Madame de
la Fite,  seeing my sorrowful looks,  good naturedly
asked Mrs.  Lock what could be set about to divert
a little la pauvre Mademoiselle Beuniey  ?  and pro-
posed reading a drama of Madame de Genlis.  I
approved it much,  preferring it greatly to conversation;
and,  accordingly,  she and her daughter,  each taking
characters to themselves,  read  ''  La Rositre de Salency.^'
It is a very interesting and touchingly smiple little drama.

1784]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  321

I was so much pleased that they afterwards regularly
read one every evening while they stayed.

Next morning I went up stairs as usual,  to treat
myself with a solo of impatience for the post,  and at
about twelve o'clock I heard Mrs.  Locke stepping along
the passage.  I v^'as sure of good news,  for I knew,
if there was bad,  poor Mr.  Locke would have brought
it.  She came in,  with three letters in her hand,
and three thousand dimples in her cheeks and chin  !
Oh,  my dear Susy,  what a sight to me was your hand  !
I hardly cared for the letter :  I hardly desired to open it  ;
the direction alone almost satisfied me sufficiently.  How-
did Mrs.  Locke embrace me  !  I half kissed her to death.
Then came dear Mr.  Locke,  his eyes brighter than ever —
'^  Well,  how does she do?"

This question forced me to open my letter;  all was
just as I could wish,  except that I regretted the having
written the day before such a lamentation.  I was so
cono-ratulated  !  I shook hands with Mr.  Locke  :  the two
dear little girls came jumping to wish me joy;  and Mrs.
Locke ordered a fiddler,  that they might have a dance in
the evening,  which had been promised them from the
time of Mademoiselle de la Fite's arrival,  but postponed
from day to day,  by general desire,  on account of my
uneasiness.

^  W  "TS*  vP  ^  ^

Monday,  Oct.  25th. — Mr.  Hinde and Madame and
Mademoiselle de la Fits all left us.  They were all so
good humoured and so happy,  there was no being glad  ;
though how to be sorry at remaining alone with this
family,  1 really know not.  Both the de la Fites went
away in tears.    I love them for it.

Wednesday,  Nov.  3rd. — This day has brought me

VOL.   II.  Y

322 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIIL

another sweet letter from my Susy.  What a set of broken-
fortuned,  broken-charactered people of fashion are about
you at Boulogne  !*  The accounts are at once curious
■and melancholy to me.

Nothing can be more truly pleasant than our present
lives.  I bury all disquietudes in immediate enjoyment;
an enjoyment more fitted to my secret mind than any I
bad ever hoped to attain.  We are so perfectly tranquil,
that not a particle of our whole frames seems ruffled or
discomposed.  Mr.  Locke is gayer and more sportive than
I ever have seen him  ;  his Fredy seems made up of happi-
ness ;  and the two dear little girls are in spirits almost
ecstatic ;  and all from that internal contentment which
Norbury Park seems to have gathered from all corners
of the world into its own sphere.

Our mornings,  if fine,  are to ourselves,  as Mr.  Locke
rides out;  if bad,  we assemble in the picture room.  We
have two books in public reading,  Madame de Sevigne's
Letters,  and Cook's last Voyage.  Mrs.  Locke reads the
French,  myself the English.

Our conversations,  too,  are such as I could almost
wish to last for ever.  Mr.  Locke has been all himself, —
all instruction,  information,  and intelligence, — since we
have been left alone;  and the invariable sweetness,  as
well as judgment,  of all he says,  leaves,  indeed,  nothing
to wish.

They will not let me go while I can stay,  and I am
now most willing to stay till I must go.  The serenity of
a life like this,  smoothes the whole internal surface of the
mind.    IMy own,  I assure you,  begins to feel quite glossy.

*  [Mrs.  Phillips returned in less than a twelvemonth from Bou-
logne, much recovered in health,  and settled with her husband and
family in a house at Mickleham,  at the foot of Norbury Park.]

1784]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        323

To see Mrs.  Locke so entirely restored to total health,  and
to see her adoring husband lose all his torturing solici-
tude, while he retains his unparalleled tenderness — these
are sights to anticipate a taste of paradise,  if paradise
has any felicity consonant to our now ideas.

I am most amazingly well and hearty.  Since your letter
arrived,  I have not had an unpleasant thought that I
have not driven away pellmell,  as if it was a wasp near
an open window.

Tuesday,  Nov.  9th. — This is Mr.  William Locke's
birth-day  ;  he is how seventeen  :  he came home,  with his
brothers,  to keep it,  three days ago.  May they all
be as long-lived and as happy as they are now sweet and
amiable  !  This sweet place is beautiful even yet,  though
no longer of a beauty young and blooming,  such as you
left it ;  but the character of the prospect is so grand,  that
winter cannot annihilate its charms,  though it greatly
diminishes them.  The variety of the grounds,  and the
striking form of the hills,  always afford something new
to observe,  and retain somethincr lastino-  to admire.  Were
I,  however,  in a desert,  people such as these would make
it gay and cheery.

I am quite enchanted with Madame de Sevigne;  I
think her almost all that can be wished to form female
perfection.  Her softness,  her fond affection,  her wit,
spirit,  and drollery,  the right turn of her understanding,
the gay entertainment of her abilities,  but,  more than all,
the exquisite refinement of her quick sensibility,  attach
me to her as if she were alive,  and even now in my room,
and permitting me to run into her arms.

We go on but slowly with Captain Cook,  for this
syren seduces me from all other reading;   but nothino-

y2

324 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIIL

can be so delightful as any reading in such society,  and
such reading as Madame de Sevigne has written would
be deliohtful in any.

From Miss F.  Buryieij to Mrs.  Locke*

St.  Martin's Street,  Nov.  14th.

^'  On gracious errand bent,"  indeed  !  Dear Mr.
Locke  !  what a day for his benevolent excursion  !  But
he never thinks of himself,  where others may be benefited
by self-forgetfulness.  May his success but make him
recall those melancholy words I had once the pain to hear
him utter  —  'That,  though he had tried to do good, —
from twenty shillings to some thousands, — he had never
answered his own expectations.'  "

I was happy at the time,  to hear you recollect for him
some instances in which he had prospered, — and another
instance,  I hope,  will pay his exertion of to-day.

And now let me give my beloved Mrs.  Locke a little
history of my  (no)  adventures.

I found at home my dear father,  my mother,  Charlotte^
and Sarah,  with two Mr.  la Trobes,  sons of a Moravian
bishop,  two tall,  thin,  black,  very good sort of young
men,  whom I had never seen before,  but who stayed all
the afternoon and evening,  —  probably to take off the
strangeness of a new acquaintance.

On Sunday Mr.  Seward called;  and he stayed till
dinner — not for the same reason that kept the Mora-
vians, but because he was dying with impatience to talk
over a transaction which I grieve even to think of;  and I had
the satisfaction of hearing;  all the merits and demerits of
the cause fully discussed.  I sate very uneasily,  and spoke
as little as I could  :  but how did I congratulate myself

1784]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        325

in being spared this cruel subject at the time I should
have felt it the most,  by my fortunate residence in the
sweetly forbearing family at Norbury  !  Had I then been
in town,  while my whole heart was filled with sorrow and
disturbance,  I hardly know how I could have endured
the perpetual canvassing in which I must have been made
a party.  To hear just blame cast upon those who are
dear to us, — and to be checked both by truth and opinion
from defending them, — is,  at least,  one of the most irk-
some situations in the world ;  especially where,  as here,
the person censured possessed a thousand good qualities
which her censurers never could boast.  Those,  however,
were known to few  ;  her defects were seen by all.  Could
I tell how to direct,  I think I should write to her again  ;
for her heart must be strangely changed if this breach of
all intercourse gives her no concern.  I begin to fancy
my last letter to her miscarried.

I had a very unpleasant morning after I left you.  When
the coach and I had waited upon my father,  I made the
visit I mentioned to you.  O what a visit I — all that I pre-
supposed of attack,  inquiry,  and acrimony,  was nothing to
what passed.  Rage more intemperate I have not often
seen  ;  and the shrill voice of feeble old age,  screaming
with unavailing passion,  is horrible.  She had long looked
upon Mrs.  T.  as a kind of protegee,  whom she had
fondled when a child,  and whose fame,  as she grew into
notice,  she was always proud to hear of,  and help to exalt.
She is a woman  (I can well attest !)  of most furious pas-
sions herself,  however at liberty she thinks she may be
to shew no sort of mercy to those of another.

Once,  had I been less disturbed,  I could have laughed;
for she declared with great vehemence,  that if she had
suspected  "the wretch of any intention to marry the man,

326 DIARY AND LETTERS  [Part VIII.

she would have ordered her own postchaise,  and followed
her to prevent it !"

Alas,  poor Lady F. !

She then called upon me,  to hear my story  ;  which,
most painfully to myself,  I related.  She expressed her-
self very sorry for me,  till I came to an avowal of my
letter after the marriage  ;  she then flew out into new
choler.  ^*  I am amazed you would write to her,  Miss
Burney  !  I wonder you could think of it any more !"

I told her,  I had thought myself so much indebted to
her patience with my opposition to all her views and
wishes,  for the whole time of her long conflict,  that,  al-
though I was the first to acknowledge her last action
indefensible,  I should be the last to forget ail that had
made me love her before it was committed.

This by no means satisfied her,  and she poured forth
again a torrent of unrelenting abuse.  Some company,  at
last,  came in,  and I hastily took my leave.  She called
after me to fix some day for a longer visit ;  but I pre-
tended not to hear,  and ran down stairs,  heartily resolv-
ing that necessity alone should ever force me into her
presence again.

One lady had come in before;  but as it was in the
heiofht of our conference,  her stately violence sfave her
courage to beg she would walk into another room with
Miss B — e,  as she was particularly engaged  ;  and the
poor lady looked as little gratified at being sent away as
I did at being detained.

When I came home — before I could get up stairs, —
I was summoned to Miss Streatfield,  whom 1 met
with as little pleasure as Lady F.,  since I had never
seen her,  nor indeed anybody,  from the time this cruel
transaction has leen published.    Not that I dreaded her

1784]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  32V

violence,  for she is gentle as a lamb ;  but,  there were
causes enough for dread of another nature.  However^,
fortunately and unexpectedly,  she never named the sub-
ject, but prattled away upon nothing but her own affairs;
and so,  methinks,  have I done too,  and just as if I knew
you wished to hear them.  Do you  ? — I ask only for
decency's sake.

Diary Resumed.

NoRBURY Park,  Sunday,  Nov.  28th. — How will
my Susan smile at sight of this date!  Let me tell
her how it has all happened.  Last Thursday,  Nov.
25th,  my father set me down at Bolt-court,  while he
went on upon business.  I was anxious to again see
poor Dr.  Johnson,  who has had terrible health since his
return from Lichfield.  He let me in,  though very ill.
He was alone,  which I much rejoiced at;  for I had a
longer and more satisfactory conversation with him than
I have had for many months.  He was in rather better
spirits,  too,  than I have lately seen him  ;  but he told me
he was going to try what sleeping out of town might do
for him.

*' I remember,"  said he,  *'  that my wife,  when she was
near her end,  poor woman,  was also advised to sleep out
of town;  and when she was carried to the lodgings that
had been prepared for her,  she complained that the stair-
case was in very bad condition — for the plaster was beaten
off the walls in many places.  '  Oh,"  said the man of the
house,  '  that's nothing but by the knocks against it
of the coffins of the poor souls that have died in the
lodgings!'"

He laughed,  though not without apparent secret an-
guish, in telUng me this.     I felt extremely shocked,  but^

328 DIAllV AND LETTERS  [ParT VIII.

willing to confine my words at least to the literal story,  I
only exclaimed against the unfeeling absurdity of such a
confession.

*'  Such a confession,"  cried he,  "  to a person then com-
ins:  to try his lodging for her health,  contains,  indeed,
more absurdity than we can well lay our account for."

I had seen Miss T.  the day before.

''So,"  said he,  "did I."

I then said,  — "  Do you ever,  sir,  hear from her
mother  ?"

'*  No,"  cried he,  *'  nor write to her.  I drive her quite
from my mind.  If I meet with one of her letters,  I burn
it instantly.  I have burnt all I can find.  I never speak
of her,  and I desire never to hear of her more.  I drive
her,  as I said,  wholly from my mind."

Yet,  wholly to change this discourse,  I gave him a
history of the Bristol milk-woman,  and told him the
tales I had heard of her writing so v;onderfully,  though
she had read nothing but Young and Milton  ;  "  though
those,"  I continued,  ''could never possibly,  I should
think,  be the first authors with anybody.  Would children
understand them  ?  and grown people who have not read
are children in literature."

"  Doubtless,"  said he;  "but there is nothing so little
comprehended among mankind as what is genius.  They
give to it all,  when it can be but a part.  Genius is
nothing more than knowing the use of tools ;  but there
must be tools for it to use  :  a man who has spent all his
life in this room will give a very poor account of what is
contained in the next."

"  Certainly,  sir ;  yet there is such a thing as invention  ?
Shakspeare could never have seen a Caliban."

"  No ;  but he had seen a man,  and knew,  therefore,
how to vary him to a monster.     A man who would draw

1784]  OF THE AUTPIOR OF EVELINA.  329

a monstrous cow,  must first know what a cow commonly
is ;  or how can he tell that to give her an ass's head or an
elephant's tusk will make her monstrous  ?  Suppose you
shew me a man who is a very expert carpenter ;  another
will say he was born to be a carpenter — but what if he
had never seen any wood  ?  Let two men,  one with
genius,  the other with none,  look at an overturned
waggon  : — he who has no genius,  will think of the waggon
only as he sees it,  overturned,  and walk on;  he who has
genius,  will paint it to himself before it was overturned,
— standing still,  and moving on,  and heavy loaded,  and
empty  ;  but both must see the waggon,  to think of it
at all."

How just and true all this,  my dear Susy!  He then
animated,  and talked on,  upon this milk-woman,  upon a
once as famous shoemaker,  and upon our immortal
Shakspeare,  with as much fire,  spirit,  wit,  and truth of
criticism and judgment,  as ever yet I have heard him.
How dehghtfuily bright are his faculties,  though the
poor and infirm machine that contains them seems alarm-
ingly giving way.

Yet,  all brilliant as he was,  I saw him growing worse,
and offered to go,  which,  for the first time I ever remem-
berj he did not oppose ;  but,  most kindly pressing both
my hands, —

"  Be not,"  he said,  in a voice of even tenderness,  '^  be
not longer in coming again for my letting you go now."

I assured him 1 would be the sooner,  and was running
off,  but he called me back,  in a solemn voice,  and,  in
a manner the most energetic,  said, —

'*  Remember me in your prayers  !''

I longed to ask him to remember me,  but did not dare.
I gave him my promise,  and,  very heavily indeed,  I left
him.     Great,  good,  and excellent that he is,  how short a

3:30 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VII I

time will he be our boast !  Ah,  my dear Susy,  I see he
is going  !  This winter will never conduct him to a more
genial season here  !  Elsewhere,  who shall hope a fairer  ?
I wish I had bid him pray for me ;  but it seemed to me
presumptuous,  though this repetition of so kind a conde-
scension might,  I think,  have encouraged me.  Mrs.
Lock,  however,  I know does it daily  ;  my Susan's best
prayers I know are always mine;  and where can I find
two more innocent pleaders I So God bless you both  !

Miss Barneij to Dr.  Burfiey.

Norbury Park,  Nov.  -29111,  1784.
My dearest Sir,

I don't write because I have got anything to say,  nor,
indeed,  because I have got nothing to say  ;  for that were
a most woful reason for you,  who are to read that
nothing  ;  but I write because — because — because — be-
cause— because — because — and if that should not be
reason adequate,  I confess I have none more forcible!

Oh,  yes,  I have !  Mrs.  Locke is your most devoted.
She will adhere,  she says,  most religiously to her pro-
posed conditions;  you shall have the best-selected,  the
sweetest-smelhng,  the most picturesque-formed nose-
gays she can procure you,  made up by her own fair hand,
and elected by her own discriminating nose :  you shall
have as long,  and as broad,  and as short,  and as narrow a
ribbon to tie them up as you shall decide yourself,  and
she will love you not only dearly by promise,  but tout de
boil,  and without chicanery.

The housewife has not been mentioned again ;  but I
know you may command the whole fair.  This sweet
place is just as I best like it,  occupied only by its proper
inhabitants.      Winter here does not sweep away all

1784]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        331

beauty,  though it deducts much from its character of
smiliiig gaiety;  but the bold and majestic form of the
surrounding hills,  and the thick mass of the noble,
though leafless wood,  still,  and throughout the whole
varying year,  afford objects sufficiently diversified to
engage,  though not fully delight attention.  A flat
country is utterly desolate when all its trees are stripped,
and its uninteresting extent is laid open to the disap-
pointed eye,  which wants some occasional check to stimu-
late curiosity,  and give some play to fancy ;  and this,  in
summer,  is done by every luxuriant branch.  Here the
irregularity of the ground supplies a constant variety,
however variety may elsewhere regard change as its very
essence ;  but every new gleam of light from every fresh
breaking or passing cloud,  so changes the point of view,,
and so metamorphoses the principal object,  from the hill
to the vale,  and the wood to the plain,  that much as
summer is everywhere to be regretted,  winter,  here,  has
a thousand claims to being admired.

I shall come home faithfully to my time,  Saturday.
Mrs.  Locke says she is ambitious you should know she
may be trusted.

Mr.  Locke has been himself to Mickleham,  to give
orders for the planting some trees before our captain's
cottage,  to shelter it from the dust,  and from the staring
of the road.

I wish Charlotte would have the kindness to give me
a letter.  I always want intolerably to hear something
from home,  by the time I have left it two days.  I am
preparing a noble folio sheet for our Susan.  The
weather is,  I suppose,  too bad for any mtercourse with
dear Etty.

Adieu,  dearest sir,  Mr.  Locke desires me to give his
compliments to you ;  for Mrs.  Locke I think I have said

332 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

enough.  I beg my duty to my mother,  and love to
Charlotte,  Dick,  and Sarah,  and am,  dearest sir,  yours
most dutifully and affectionately.

F.  B.
I suppose to-night is the first muster of the Blue
forces.     I want to know how they perform their exer-
cises, who are their new recruits,  and if there is ever a
deserter to keep me in countenance.

Miss F.  Burney to Mrs.  Locke.

St.  Martin's Street,  Dec.  7,  1784.

Why,  poor Norbury and I are now in greater disgrace
than ever.  To have known nothing of the Emperor and
the Dutch,  was indeed rather rustic  ;  to have heard no-
thing of Lord George Gordon and his cockades,  was,  I
acknowledge,  somewhat defective  : — but anew ignorance
was discovered just now,  more ignominious than all that
preceded it ;  I was informed that the Duchess of De-
vonshire had cut the string of Mr.  Blanchard's balloon  !
I had vegetated upon a spot,  unconscious that Mrs.
Crewe had sent up a glove in it !  Oh,  unaspiring Nor-
bury !  ignorant of wars,  bloodshed,  and rumours of war!
Oh,  clownish Norbury !  stranger to the vagaries of the
ton  !

Thursday morning.  —  I was called away in the
midst of my rhodomontade,  and have lost all zest for
pursuing it.  I have been a second time to see poor
Dr.  Johnson,  and both times he was too ill to admit me.
I know how very much worse he must be,  for when I saw
him last,  which was the morning before I went to Nor-
bury, he repeatedly and even earnestly begged me to
come to him again,  and to see him both as soon and as
often as I could.     I am told by Mr.  Hoole,  that he in-

1784]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  333

quired of Dr.  Brocklesby if he thought it likely he
might live six weeks  ?  and the Doctor's hesitation say-
ing— No — he has been more deeply depressed than ever.
Fearing death as he does,  no one can wonder.  Why he
should fear it,  all may wonder.

He sent me down yesterday,  by a clergyman who was
with him,  the kindest of messages,  and I hardly know
whether I ought to go to him again or not ;  though I
know still less why I say so,  for go again I both must
and shall.  One thing,  his extreme dejection of mind
considered,  has both surprised and pleased me ;  he has
now constantly an amanuensis with him,  and dictates to
him such compositions,  particularly Latin and Greek,
as he has formerly made,  but repeated to his friends
without ever committing to paper.  This,  I hope,  will not
only gratify his survivors,  but serve to divert him.

The good Mr.  Hoole and equally good Mr.  Sastres
attend him,  rather as nurses than friends,  for they sit
whole hours by him,  without even speaking to him.  He
will not,  it seems,  be talked to — at least very rarely.  At
times,  indeed,  he re-animates:  but it is soon over,  and
he says of himself,  '^  I am now like Macbeth, — question
enra2:es me."

My father saw him once while I was away,  and car-
ried Mr.  Burke with him,  who was desirous of paying
his respects to him once more in person.  He raUied a
little while they were there ;  and Mr.  Burke,  when they
left him,  said to my father — "  His work is almost done ;
and well has he done it!"

How cheering,  in the midst of these sad scenes and
accounts of poor Dr.  Johnson,  are your words about
your dear self and many selves  !

One of the Moravians was here again the other even-
ing, and was really entertaining enough,  by the singular

334 DJARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

simplicity of his conversation.  He was brought up in
Germany,  and spent the greater part of his early youth
in roving about from place to place,  and country to
■country ;  for though he had his education in Germany,
he is a native of Ireland,  and his father and mother re-
side chiefly in England.

**  Not being used,"  said he,  "to a family when I was
a boy,  I always hated it ;  they seemed to me only so
many wasps ;  for one told me I was too silent,  and
another wished I would not speak so much,  and all of
them found some fault or other.  But now that I am
come home toUve,  and am constrained to be with them,
I enjoy it very much."

What must be the sect,  and where the traveilinir?  that
fehall un-Irish an Irishman I

Another of his confessions v,as this : —

"  Luckily for me,"  said he,  "I have no occasion to
speak till about two o'clock,  when we dine,  for that
keeps me fresh.  If I were to begin earlier,  I should
only be like skimmed milk the rest of the day."

As he came in betv.-een five and six o'clock,  we were
still at dinner.  My father asked him if he would join,
and do what we were doing?  "  No,  sir,"  answered he,
very composedly,  "  I have done my tea this hour."

F.  E.

Diary Resumed.

St.  Martin's-street,  Wednesday,  Dec.  10th. —
I went in the evening to poor Dr.  Johnson.  Frank toid
me he was very ill,  but let me in.  He would have taken
,me up stairs,  but I would not see him without his direct

1784]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,        335

permission,  I desired Frank to tell him I called to pay
my respects to him,  but not to disturb him if he was not
well enough to see me.  Mr.  Strahan,  a clergyman,
he said,  was with him alone.

In a few minutes,  this Mr,  Strahan came to me him-
self. He told me Dr.  Johnson was very ill,  very much
obliged to me for coming,  but so weak and bad he hoped
I would excuse his not seeing me.

I had promised to call for Charlotte at Mr.  Hoole's  ;
and there I went in to tea,  sure of a good reception,
though too much out of spirits to be worth one.  They
were all at home,  and their good humour and happi-
ness were pleasant to behold,  after such an unexpected
blow.

Dear,  dear,  and much-reverenced Dr.  Johnson !  how
ill or how low must he be,  to decline seeing a creature he
has so constantly,  so fondly,  called about him!  If I do
not see him again I shall be truly afflicted.  And I fear,
I almost know,  I cannot!

At night my father brought us the most dismal tidings
of dear Dr.  Johnson.  Dr.  Warren had seen him,  and
told him to take what opium he pleased!  He had
thanked and taken leave of all his physicians.  Alas  ! — I
shall lose him, and he will take no leave of me !  My father
was deeply depressed  ;  he has himself tried in vain for ad-
mission this week.  Yet some people see him — the Hooles,
Mr.  Sastres,  Mr.  Langton ; — but then they must be in
the house,  watching for one moment,  whole hours.  I
hear from every one he is now perfectly resigned to his
approaching fate,  and no longer in terror of death,  I
am thankfully happy in hearing that he speaks himself
now of the change his mind has undergone,  from its
dark horror,    and says — "  He feels the irradiation of

336 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

hope!"    Good,  and pious,  and excellent Christian — who
shall feel it if not he?

Dec.  11th. — We had a party to dinner,  by long ap-
pointment, for which,  indeed,  none of us were well dis-
posed, the apprehension of hearing news only of death
being hard upon us all.  The party was,  Dr.  Rose,  Dr.
Gillies,  Dr.  Garthshore,  and Charles.

The day could not be well — but mark the night.

My father,  in the morning,  saw this first of men  !  I
had not his account till bed-time  ;  he feared over-exciting
me.  He would not,  he said,  but have seen him for
worlds!  He happened to be better,  and admitted him.
He was up,  and very composed.  He took his hand very
kindly,  asked after all his family,  and then,  in particular,
how Fanny did  ?

"  I hope,"  he said,  ''Fanny did not take it amiss that
I did not see her?     I was very bad !"

Amiss  ! — what a w^ord  !  Oh that I had been present
to have answered it !  My father stayed,  I suppose,  half
an hour,  and then was coming away.  He again took
his hand,  and encouraged him to come again to him ;
and when he was taking leave,  said — *'  Tell Fanny to
pray for me!"

Ah  !  dear Dr.  Johnson !  might I but have i/ou?'
prayers  !  After which,  still grasping his hand,  he made
a prayer for himself, — the most fervent,  pious,  humble,
eloquent,  and touching,  my father says,  that ever was
composed.  Oh,  would I had heard it !  He ended it
with Amen  !  in which my father joined,  and was echoed
by all present.  And again,  when my father was leaving
him,  he brightened up,  something of his arch look re-
turned, and he said — "  I think I shall throw the ball at
Fanny yet !"

Little more passed ere my father came away,  decided,

1784]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        337

most tenderly,  not to tell me this till our party was
gone.

This most earnestly increased my desire to see him ;
this kind and frequent mention of me melted me into
double sorrow and regret,  I would give the world 1
had but gone to him that day !  It was,  however
impossible,  and the day was over before I knew he
had said what I look upon as a call to me.  This
morning,  after church time,  I went.  Frank said he
was very ill,  and saw nobody;  I told him I had under-
stood by my father the day before that he meant to see
me.  He then let me in.  I went into his room up
stairs ;  he was in his bedroom.  I saw it crowded,  and
ran hastily down.  Frank told me his master had
refused seeing even Mr.  Langton.  I told him merely
to say I had called,  but by no means to press my
admission.  His own feelings were all that should be
consulted ;  his tenderness,  I knew,  would be equal,
whether he was able to see me or not.

I went into the parlour,  preferring being alone in the
cold,  to any company with a fire.  Here I waited long,
here and upon the stairs,  which I ascended and de-
scended to meet again with Frank,  and make inquiries ;
but I met him not.  At last,  upon Dr.  Johnson's ringing
his bell,  I saw Frank enter his room,  and Mr.  Langton
follow.  ''Who's that?"  I heard him say;  they an-
swered, "  Mr.  Langton,"  and I found he did not return.
Soon after,  all the rest went away but a Mrs.  Davis,  a
good sort of woman,  whom this truly charitable soul had
sent for to take a dinner at his house.  I then went and
waited with her by the fire :  it was,  however,  between
three and four o'clock before I got any answer.  Mr.
Langton then came himself.  He could not look at
me,  and I turned away from him.  Mrs.  Davis asked
VOL.  n.  z

338 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT VIII.

how the Doctor was  ?  ^'  Going on to death very fast !"
was his mournful answer.  '•'•  Has he taken,"  said she,
"  anything  ?"  "  Nothing at all !  We carried him some
bread and milk — he refused it,  and said — *  The less the
hettery'^  She asked more questions,  by which I found
his faculties were perfect,  his mind composed,  and his
dissolution was quick drawing on.

I could not immediately go on,  and it is now long
since I have written at all ;  but 1 will go back to
this afflicting theme,  which I can now better bear.

Mr.  Langton was,  I believe,  a quarter of an hour in
the room before I suspected he meant to speak to me,
never looking near me.    At last he said —

"  This poor man,  I understand,  ma'am,  desired yes-
terday to see you."

^*  My understanding that,  sir,  brought me to-day."

"  Poor man !  it is pity he did not know himself
better,  and that you should have had this trouble."

*'  Trouble !"  cried I ;  "I would come a hundred
times to see him the hundredth and first !"

"  He hopes,  now,  you will excuse him  ;  he is very sorry
not to see you ;  but he desired me to come and speak to
you myself,  and tell you he hopes you will excuse him,
for he feels himself too weak for such an interview."

I hastily got up,  left him my most affectionate respects,
and every good wish I could half utter,  and ran back to
the coach.  Ah,  my Susy  !  I have never been to Bolt-
court since!  I then drove to poor Miss Strange,  to
make inquiries of the maid  ;  but Andrew ran out to
the coach door,  and told me all hope was at an end.
In short,  the next day was fatal to both! — the same
day  !

1784]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  339

Dec.  20th. — This day was the ever-honoured,  ever-
lamented Dr.  Johnson committed to the earth.  Oh,  how-
sad a day to me  !  My father attended,  and so did
Charles.  I could not keep my eyes dry all day;  nor can
I now,  in the recollecting it ;  but let me pass over what
to mourn is now so vain !

I had the good fortune at night of a sweet letter from
my dearest Susy;  that,  and another from my Fredy,
were alone able to draw me from this mournful day's
business.

******

Thursday,  Dec.  30th. — As I was engaged for this
evening at Mrs.  Chapone's,  I found it necessary to call
upon two or three people in the morning,  lest my going
thither,  after so long a secession,  should give offence.  I
went first to Lady Mary Duncan,  who is but lately come
from Bath.  She was very gracious,  and,  as usual,  very
diverting.  I then w^ent to Lady F.  B.,  and had another
painful conference.  Then I went to Mrs.  Vesey,  wnth
whom I spent an hour very sociably,  and she gave me great
pleasure by shewing me a letter from Mrs.  Allison,  late
Miss Gregory,  who is married very happily,  though not
richly,  and with the world's approbation,  though against
Mrs.  Montagu's.  She would have kept me to dinner,
very kindly ;  but I could not stay.  I tlien left a card for
Sophy Streatfield,  and came home.

In the evening,  I went to Mrs.  Chapone.  I was late,
on account of the coach,  and all her party was assem-
bled. Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.  Levison,  her daughter,
Mrs.  Burrows,  Mrs.  Amy Burrows,  Mr.  and Mrs.
Pepys,  Lady Rothes,  Sir Lucas Pepys,  young Burrows,
Mr.  Sandford,  a young sea-officer,  Mrs.  Ord,  and Miss
Ord,  her cousin.

This was the first time I had seen any of them,  except
z2

340 DIARY AND LETTERS,  ETC.       [PaRT VIII.

Mrs.  Old,  since last spring.  I was received with the
utmost kindness by them all,  but chiefly by Mrs.
Chapone herself,  who has really,  I believe,  a sincere re-
gard for me.  I had talk with all of them,  except Mrs.
Levison,  with whom I have merely a courtesying ac-
quaintance. But I was very sad within  ;  the loss of
dear Dr.  Johnson — the flight of Mrs.  Thrale — the death
of poor Miss Kitty Cambridge,  and of poor,  good Miss
Strange, — all these home and bosom strokes,  which had
all struck me since my last meeting this society,  were re-
volving in my mind the whole time I stayed.

Sir Lucas Pepys talked to me a great deal of Mrs.
Thrale,  and read me a letter from her,  which seems to
shew her gay and happy.  I hope it shews not false
colours.  Xo one else named her;  but poor Dr.  Johnson
was discussed repeatedly.  How melancholy will all
these circumstances render these once so pleasant meet-
in crs.

Dec.  3 1st. — I called early upon my dear Mrs.
Delany,  who was just come to town,  as Mrs.  Boscawen
told me the night before;  but she was not up,  and I
could not see her.  And where did I spend the rest of
the day?  With the sweet Locks,  in Upper Brook-street.
I went to wait their arrival,  with their dear httle girls,
and I stayed with them till bed-time.  Dear,  charming
people I how did they soothe my troubled mind.  I had
felt nothing so like peace since I left them;  and this real
pleasure,  with an exerted suppression of sadness,  gave us
all,  I believe,  an equally pleasant day.  You may think
how I must be guarded there — there,  where I can shew
no sorrow that will not instantly spread to themselves.

PART IX.

1785.

CONTENTS.

Correspondence — Mrs.  Delany — Dr.  Johnson — Acquaintance of Miss
Burney with Madame de Genlis — Letter from Madame de Genlis
to Miss Burney — Mrs.  Delany  —  Noble Conduct of George the
Third and Queen Charlotte towards her — Miss Burney to Mrs.
Phillips — Mrs.  Delany — Miss Burney to Mrs.  Lock — Anecdotes of
Mrs.  Delany and the Duchess of Portland — Anecdote of the King
and Queen — Horace Walpole — Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney —
Warren Hastings — Mr.  W.  Locke's Paintings — Miss Burney to Mrs.
Gast — Character of Mr.  Crisp — Diary Resumed — Windsor — The
Queen — The Princesses — Lady Louisa Clayton and Lady Charlotte
Finch — A Conjuring Doctor — Visit of the King to Mrs.  Delany —
Anecdote of the Queen — Visit of the King and Queen to Mrs.
Delany — Royal Chit-chat — Writing for the Stage — Princess Eliza-
beth— ^The Cave of Elephanta — Virtuosi — Visit to Thames Ditton
— Return to Windsor — The Comedy of Errors — Visit of the King to
Mrs.  Delany — His Conversation with Miss Burney — Hunting in a
Hoop — Arrival of the Queen — The Duke of Marlborough — Con-
versation between Queen Charlotte and Miss Burney — The Queen's
Description of the Drawing-room — Anecdote of the Duke of Dorset
— Webb,  the Musician — Anecdote of the Princess Sophia — Anecdote
of W' ebb — Etiquette at Leave-taking of Royalty — Personal Character
of Queen Charlotte and George IIL — Their Behaviour to each other
— St.  George's Chapel — A Court Preacher — Collection of Chinese
Curiosities — Another Visit from the King — His Fondness for his
Children — Attendance on Royalty — Bon Mot of the King about
Richard Cumberland — Lord Sackville — Madame de Genlis — The
King's Opinion of Voltaire and Rousseau — Anecdotes of Rousseau —
The King and the Players — Mrs.  Clive,  Henderson,  and Mrs.  Sid-
dons — The King's Opinion of Shakspeare — His Vindication of the
English Stage — Tete-a-tete with the Queen — Her Opinion of Bos-
well and Madame de Genlis — The Sorrows of W'erter — The Queen
at a Bookstall — Her Opinion of Klopstock — Her Anecdote of
Catholic Superstition — Her Account of Protestant Nunneries in
Germany — Letter from Mrs.  Montagu — Letter from Miss Burney
— How to Behave in the presence of Royalty.

342 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

P A E T IX.

1785.

Miss Burney to Miss

*****

St.  Martin's Street,  Jan.  3rd,  1785.

******

Your and my beloved Mrs.  Delany I have not yet
been able to see,  though we are now both inhabitants of
this  '^  dark and busy city."  I heard on Thursday of her
arrival,  from Mr.  Sandford,  the seaman,  whom I met at
Mrs.  Chapone's,  and the next morning early I hastened
to St.  James's Place.  I was anxious to catch her alone,
that I might enjoy what is so precious to me — her own
conversation,  unmixed,  uninterruped,  I had almost said
unadulterated,  by casual visitors and miscellaneous talk;
but I fancy,  by my ill success,  my plan was too selfish.
She had been tired the day before,  and was not stirring.
Mrs.  x\5tley,  however,  assured me she was pretty well,
and I have heard,  from Mrs.  Boscawen,  that she is in
excellent spirits ;  and her spirits,  we know,  enliven all
around her,  though their vivacity is so gentle that they
could not oppress even a mourner in the deepest afflic-
tion— if,  indeed,  such a one could be present and her
spirits not sink into similar sadness.

1 am sure my dear M  *  *  *  *  will give me a little
share of concern for the loss of my great,  good,  and
highly reverenced friend.  Dr.  Johnson.    My loss,  indeed.

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  343

where a whole nation has cause to mourn,  it seems almost
impertinent to mention ;  yet,  immaterial as it is in so
wide and general a regret,  I do not feel it the less for
knowing it to be universal.  You can now only know
him in his works ;  and,  perhaps,  from his character of
harshness and severity,  you may think you could there
alone know him to any advantage.  But had you been
presented to him,  you would not have found that the
case.  He was always indulgent to the young,  he never
attacked the unassuming,  nor meant to terrify the diffi-
dent. I pretend not,  however,  to vindicate his temper,
nor to justify his manners;  but his many and essential
virtues and excellences made all who were much con-
nected with him rather grieve at his defects than resent
them, — grieve,  indeed,  to see how much remains to be
pardoned,  even where there is most to be applauded and
admired !

Considerations such as these,  though they sadly lessen
our expectations of human perfection,  may yet be ex-
tremely useful in increasing our lenity for its frailty in
others,  and our vigilance for guarding against it in our-
selves.

Our all-amiable Mrs.  Delany seems to me to have
these two reflections ever uppermost,  and to owe to them
chiefly the benevolence that makes her so pleasing to
others,  and the purity that makes her so valuable in her-
self. Need I say to my dear M  *  *  *  *  *  how edifying an
example  ?  Oh,  no  !  no one is more watchfully awake to
all her virtues.  You have constantly before you what-
ever is most worthy to be imitated.  Sweet and happy
plant !  long may you thrive,  and long may those who
rear rejoice in your fragrance !

To one of your cultivators,  I beg to present my best
respects ;  to the other,  I hope personally to pay them

344 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaKT IX.

very speedily.  A very happy new year to you and your
fireside.  1 am,  my dear M  *****  's sincerely affec-
tionate friend,  F.  B.

[Few journals or letters written in the beginning of
this year have been preserved.  During the spring of
]785,  Dr.  Burney and his daughter became acquainted
with the celebrated Madame de Genlis,  who was then,  for
the first time,  in England,  and who  '*  warmly,  and with
predetermined partiality,  sought the friendship of Miss
Burney."  The following brief mention of her is in
a letter to Mrs.  PhiUips,  dated July llth,  1785.]

St.  Martin's Street.
"  I have been this whole morning with Madame de
Genlis,  the sweetest as well as most accomplished
Frenchwoman I ever met with.  Were my time and
mind more disengaged,  I would send you an account of
her,  highly interesting both for you and Mr.  and Mrs.
Locke ;  but I have neither leisure nor spirits for jour-
nalizing."

[A note from Madame de Genlis was long preserved
as a memorial of so attractive a person.]

Madame de Genlis to Miss Burner/.

Ce Vendredi,  15 Juillet,  1785.
Combien j'ai ete fachee,  ma chere amie,  de n'avoir pu
jouir du plaisir de vous recevoir ;  mais je dinois avec des
personnes qu'il m'etoit impossible de quitter.  Recevez
tous mes remercimens du precieux present que vous
m'avez fait,  et chargez vous d'exprimer a monsieur votre
pere toute la reconnoissance que je lui dois.  Je sais
combien son ouvrage est estimable;  il sera pour moi
doublement interessant,  et je me flatte que vous en

1785 J OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  345

devinerez facilement la raison.  Je pars dans I'lnstant
pour Oxford  ;  adieu ma chere amie ;  n'oubliez pas que
vous avez pris Tengagement de m' aimer.  Pour moi,  je
vous aime depuis Finstant ou j'ai lu Evelina et Cecilia,
et le bonheur de vous entendre et de vous connoitre per-
sonnellement,  a rendu ce sentiment aussi tendre qu'il est
bien fonde.

[The acquaintance,  however,  was not kept up.  They
were not at this time thrown in each other's way,  and
afterwards,  such tales,  whether true or false,  were forced
into the unwilling ears of Miss Burney,  that,  to use her
own words,  "  notwithstanding the most ardent admiration
of Madame de Genlis'  talents,  and a zest yet greater for
her engaging society and elegantly lively and winning
manners,  she yet dared no longer come within the
precincts of her fascinating allurements." — ^'  In France,
equally,  she felt compelled to keep aloof,  though most'
reluctantly."]

Miss F,  Burney to Dr.  Burney.

St.  James's Place,  August 24th,  1785.

I have been very much alarmed,  dearest Sir,  these
last four days,  by a feverish attack which dear Mrs.  De-
lany has suffered.  Unfortunately none of her physical
assistants were in town;  however,  she is now,  thank
Heaven  !  recovering,  and if there is no relapse,  will soon,
I hope,  be well.

I must tell you,  dearest Sir,  a tale concerning her,
which I am sure you will hear with true pleasure.
Among the many inferior losses which have been included

346 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

in her great and irreparable calamity,*  has been that of
a country house for the summer,  which she had in Bul-
strode,  and which for the half of every year was her
constant home.  The Duke of Portland behaved with
the utmost propriety and feeling upon this occasion,  and
was most earnest to accommodate her to the best of his
power,  with every comfort to which she had been accus-
tomed ;  but this noblest of women declared she loved
the memory of her friend beyond all other things,  and
would not suffer it to be tainted in the misjudging
world by an action that would be construed into a
reflection upon her will,  as if deficient in consideration
to her.  "  And I will not,"  said she to me,  ^'  suffer the
children of my dearest friend to suppose that their mother
left undone anvthins^  she ou2:ht to have done.  She did
not ;  I knew her best,  and I know she did what she was
sure I should most approve."  She steadily,  therefore,
refused all offers,  though made to her v»'ith even painful
earnestness,  and though solicited till her refusal became
a distress to herself.

This transaction was related,  I believe,  to their
Majesties ;  and Lady Weymouth,  the Duchess's eldest
daughter,  was commissioned to wait upon Mrs.  Delany
with this message : — That the Queen was extremely
anxious about her health,  and very apprehensive lest
continuing in London during the summer should be pre-
judicial to it :  she entreated her,  therefore,  to accept a
house belonging to the King at Windsor,  which she
should order to be fitted up for her immediately ;  and
she desired Lady Weymouth to give her time to consider
this proposal,  and by no means to hurry her ;  as well as
to assure her,  that happy as it would make her to have

*  The death of the Duchess Dowager of Portland.

1785 J OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  347

one she so sincerely esteemed for a neighbour,  she should
remember her situation,  and promise not to be trouble-
some to her.  The King,  at the same time,  desired to be
allowed to stand to the additional expenses incurred by
the maintenance of two houses,  and that Mrs.  Delany
would accept from him  £300 a year.

It would be needless to tell you how Mrs.  Delany was
touched by this benevolence  ;  for no creature has heard
it without emotion,  and I am sure my dear father will
not be the first.  Yet she dreaded accepting what she
feared would involve her in a new course of life,  and
force her into notice and connexions she wished to drop
or avoid.  She took the time the Queen so considerately
gave her for deUberation,  and she consulted with some of
her old friends.  They all agreed there must be no re-
fusal, and,  after many circumstances too long for writing,
though otherwise well worth knowing,  Lady Weymouth
was made the messenger of her Majesty's offer being
accepted.

The house,  therefore,  is now fitting up,  and the King
sees after the workmen himself.

A few days ago,  Miss Planta was sent from the
Queen,  with very kind inquiries after Mrs.  Delany's
health,  and information that she would receive a sum-
mons very soon.  She told her,  also,  that as the house
might still require a longer time in preparation than
would suit Mrs.  Delany to wait in London,  the Queen
had ordered some apartments in the Castle,  which lately
belonged to Prince Edward,  to be got ready with all
speed,  that she might reside in them till her own house
was finished.

This is the state of her affairs.  I am now with her
entirely.     At first I slept at home;  but going after

348 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaKT IX.

supper,  and coming before breakfast,  was inconvenient,
and she has therefore contrived me a bed-room.

When she sets oft'  for Windsor,  Mr.  Locke will be so
kind as to send his carriage for me to return to Norbury.
But now,  if the coach should continue at that time in
town,  and unemployed,  would there be any harm in my
using it to make a visit to Twickenham  ?  Charlotte
will much oblige me by a yes or no to this question.

I hope everybody is quite well at Chesington,  and I
beg my duty,  love,  and compliments,  with proper pro-
priety, may he delivered.  "To be sure,"  you will say,
"  I have nothing else to do."

The milk-woman's ungrateful tale I have heard con-
firmed, and that is all  (and a very bad all)  the news I
have heard since I came.  Adieu,  dearest Sir ;  I have
good accounts from Norbury,  and Mrs.  Delany charges
me with her kind compliments to you.  I hope James
brought back Baron Tott.

Most affectionately and dutifully yours,

F.  B.

Miss F.  Burney to Mrs,  Phillips.

St.  James's Place,  August 25th,  1785.

My most dear Susan's letter is this moment arrived,
just as I was preparing to write to her without so kind
an inducement.  You are right in concluding me en-
tirely under this roof.  My plans are lying in wait for
Mrs.  Delany's,  which depend upon her summons from
the Queen,  and her ability to obey it.  She is far from
well,  and unfit at present to remove.  But Miss Cam-
bridge earnestly claims my long-given promise,  and I
have sent her the situation of things.      She is very good,

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  349

and very affectionate,  and very sincere,  and I will cer-
tainly go to her for one night and day.

I am by no means at ease about my revered Mrs.
Delany.  Dr.  Turton has been with her.  He says she
has a thrush,  and says,  too,  by the state he finds her
in,  that what she must have suffered is very great indeed.
Sweet soul !  I have all along dreaded some such effect,
from the constraint she has imposed upon all her feel-
ings. I would not but be here for the world.  I draw
her from so hard and dangerous a self-set task,  with all
the vigilance in my power  ;  and to me,  whenever we are
quite alone,  she now unburthens her loaded heart,  and
allows her tears some vent.  And to see them upon her
venerable cheeks calls forth mine,  as if the friend she
laments had been equally dear to myself.  It is,  indeed,
the most touching spectacle that can be beheld.

As I told my dear Susan some melancholy circum-
stances relative to the examination we are making of her
papers,  let me not forget to mention that she is taken
by surprise with respect to those,  but employs me by
desion to search for all she thinks I can receive enter-
tainment from;  and I have met with a thousand both
amusing and instructive things in the course of the
general survey.

The Queen sent a message the other day to tell
Mrs.  Delany,  that as her own house would still require
a week or two,  she had ordered apartments to be pre-
pared for her in the Castle.

If she does but recover her strength,  honours and
favours such as these,  to her grateful and most loyal
heart,  will prove,  I am sure,  very pleasant.

She preserves,  indeed,  in the midst of affliction,  a
disposition to happiness,  that makes her thankfully ac-
cept whatever is put m her way,  to lead her back to it.

350 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART IX.

She repulses no attempt even at gaiety,  and delights in
nothing so much as in seeing her sweet niece in high
spirits.  I talk to her often of Norbury,  and she always
hears me with pleasure.

Miss F.  Barney to Mrs.  Locke*

St.  James's Place,  August 29,  1785.

How is my beloved Fredy?  and can she forgive her
most defective,  most deficient,  but most grateful corre-
spondent ? — for grateful,  indeed,  more than ever,  I have
felt,  when your dear letters have come to hand  ; — and,  to
confess the truth,  most blank and disappointed looked
the breakfast-table this morning,  when not a word from
sweet Norbury gave a zest to its fare.  Don't think me
too confident,  my Fredy ;  'tis your indulgence has
spoiled me,  if spoiled I am ;  and certain it is I build,
whether I will or not,  upon hearing from you very
often,  however little I call for your letters by my own.
And yet,  when they come,  a strong sense how ill I have
earned them,  makes me fancy I scarcely expected them.
But the moment they cease their kind frequency,  I find,
by my chagrin,  that my wishes had in fact been my
law.

My dear Mrs.  Delany has gone on mending gra-
dually ever since I wrote last.  She is employing me,
when able,  to look over her papers :  'tis to me a sacred
task,  for she cannot read v.hat she is trusting me with.
Sometimes,  with a magnifying glass,  she examines,  first,
if what she is giving me is some manuscript of secrecy,
with respect to the affairs or character of her friends ;
and as a word suffices to inform her,  she destroys,  un-
read, whatever is of that sort.     But this,  though a busi-

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  351

ness she wishes to have done,  produces letters and
memorandums too affecting for her spirits.  Yet she
never,  but by persuasion,  leaves off;  she seems bent
upon subduing all emotions but those that might give
pain to others by their suppression.  I frequently court
her to sadness,  for her exertions make me tremble more
than her tears ;  yet those,  when they do fall,  I can
hardly,  indeed,  with all her example before my eyes,
bear to look at.

Just now we have both of us been quite overset.  In
examining some papers in a pocket-book,  she opened one
with two leaves dried in it ;  she held them a little while
in silence,  but very calmly,  in her hand,  yet as some-
thing I saw she highly prized :  she then bade me read
what was written on the envelope ; — it was,  I think,
these words — "  Two leaves picked at Balsover,  by the
Duchess of Portland and myself,  in September,  1756,
the 20th year of our most intimate and dear friendship."
I could hardly read to her the last words,  and,  upon
hearing them,  for a little while she sunk.  But I has-
tened, the moment I could,  to other less interesting
papers,  and she forced her attention to them with a
strength of resolution that makes me honour as much as
I love her.

To me alone,  she kindly says,  she gives way to any
indulgence of sorrow ;  she fears being misunderstood
and thought repining by most others  ;  and,  indeed,  the
rest of her friends spending with her but a short time,
she thinks it her duty to study their comfort,  by appearing
composed to them.  Mine,  she justly and sweetly sees,
can only be studied by what is most relief to herself.
The nobleness of her mind can never have had such op-
portunity of displaying itself as during this last month  ;
and in the numberless instances in which it now ap-

352 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

pears,  she seems already raised to that height I am still
selfishly tryincr to keep her from yet reaching.

All our movements are at present uncertain;  her
Windsor house is still unfinished,  but I suppose it will
be fit for her reception by the beginnmg of next week,
and I have the happiest reasons for hoping she will then
be fit for it herself.  Her maid has been to see what for-
wardness it is in,  and this was her report: — She was
ordered to wait upon Miss Goldsworthy,  by the King's
direction,  who heard of her being sent to inspect the
house  ;  and there she received commands,  in the name
of both King and Queen,  to see that Mrs.  Delany
brought with her nothing but herself and clothes,  as they
insisted upon fitting up her habitation with everything
themselves,  including not only plate,  china,  glass,  and
linen,  but even all sort of stores — wine,  sweetmeats,
pickles,  Sec,  &c.  Their earnestness to save her every
care,  and give her every gratification in their power,  is
truly benevolent and amiable.  They seem to know and
feel her worth as if they had never worn crowns,  or,
wearing,  annexed no value to them.

I have just written to Mrs.  Walsinghara,  to apologize
for my long forbearance of that satisfaction,  and to talk
of Thames Ditton.  I was informed,  the other day,  by
Mr.  Walpole,  that she is going,  or gone,  to see the lakes
in the North,  with Mrs.  Garrick and Miss More. — Mrs.
Delany had sent for Mr.  Walpole,  to return him a pic-
ture of her uncle Lansdowne,  which he had lent her to
get copied ;  and I never knew him so entertaining,  for
he exerted himself to the utmost to amuse my dear
friend,  who accepted his attempts with a grace and
sweetness that encouraged them,  and gave double poig-
nancy to all his anecdotes.

I will not say,  forgive me that I talk of her so much :

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        353

who can I talk of so fitted to my dear Freddy's ear  ?  I
only wish I had time to acquaint you with everything
that belongs to her,  and everything that passes.

F.  B.

Miss F.  Burney to Dr.  Buruey."

Norbury Park,  Sept.  24th,  1785.

I HOPE,  dearest sir,  you are quite well,  but I long a
little to know how you all go on.

Mr.  Locke fetched me himself from Twickenham on
Wednesday.  I had the pleasure of passing one day
while there with Mr.  Hastings,  who came to dine with
Mr.  Cambridge.  I was extremely pleased,  indeed,  with
the extraordinary plainness and simplicity of his man-
ners, and the obliging openness and intelligence of his
communication.  He talked of India,  when the subject
was led to,  with the most unreserved readiness,  yet was
never the hero of his own tale,  but simply the narrator of
such anecdotes or descriptions as were called for,  or as
fell in naturally with other topics.

Mr.  Wm.  Locke goes on with painting,  in a manner
equally rapid in success with his drawing.  He has just
finished a female head,  from an idea rather than a repre-
sentation of his sister Ameha,  which is,  I think,  nearly
the most beautiful portrait I ever saw.  He is now about
a drawing,  from a Venetian story,  of a son,  who has been
unjustly condemned to banishment and imprisonment by
the senate,  in the action of taking his last leave of his
unhappy father and mother.  I have not yet seen what
he has done in it,  but am told his first sketch is won-
derfully striking.

I long to know what you think of our dear Dr.  John-
son's meditations,   and if you do not,  in the midst of

VOL.    II.  A A

354 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

what you will wish unpublished,  see stronger than ever
the purity of his principles and character,  and only la-
ment that effusions should be given to the world that are
too artless to be suited to it.

Miss F.  Biirnei/  to Mrs.  Gast.

Norbury Park,  Nov.  14th,  1785.
Can you,  dear madam,  after a silence so long,  bear to
receive a letter from me,  that has no other motive for
being written than a wish to inquire after your health,
and an anxiety to solicit your pardon for not sooner
thanking you for the kind letter with which you last
favoured me  ?

I am happy to find we thought so exactly alike with
respect to my most beloved friend,  your honoured and
truly incomparable brother.  As to his  *'  Virginia,"*  I be-
lieve, indeed,  it was his wish and intention that every-
thing belonging to it should rest in silence and quiet,  till
tiiey finally sunk into oblivion.  With me nothing can,
that ever belonged to him  ;  but I shall keep all the papers
with which you have so kindly entrusted me,  wholly to
myself^

I have great pleasure in telling you,  dear madam,  that
our good Kitty Cooke is evidently restored to some share
of her natural,  though long lost cheerfulness.  Her spirits,
however,  have received a shock which they can never
wholly recover  ;  nor can I wonder,  when 1 consider how
every way irreparable is the loss she has sustained,  and
when I feel that,  with the innumerable blessings with

*  A tragedy,  by Mr.  Crisp,  which had been produced at Drury-
laae theatre by Garrick,  with moderate success. _ It was printed
in 1754.

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        355

which I am myself encompassed,  scarce a day passes in
which I do not lament him,  and not an incident happens
to me that I do not long to communicate to him.  My
confidence in him was one of the greatest sources of my
happiness;  his wisdom aiid his kindness made my un-
bounded trust at once my pleasure and my profit.  He
thought no occasion too trifling to be consulted upon ;
and I thought none too important to be governed in
wholly by his advice.  I hardly ever could tell whether
I most loved or admired him,  for my reverence for his
abilities always kept pace with my affection for his vir-
tues. Unconscious of his own superiority,  he used fre-
quently to apprehend that when I went more into the
world,  my regard for him would weaken.  But,  even if
my nature had been of so ungrateful a texture,  (which I
must hope is not the case)  he would still have had no-
thing to fear ;  for where could I go to meet friendship
more sincere  ?  and whom could I see to inspire a more
deserved return  ?

You will forgive me,  I hope — I know,  indeed,  you will
forgive me — for entering so largely upon this subject ;  for
though you have looked too far and too clearly to suffer
your afl[liction to overpower you,  I am sure your best be-
loved on earth will ever be uppermost in your thoughts,
and the grateful justice done his honoured memory by
her whom you so truly call his favourite adopted child,
cannot be offensive to you.

Captain Frodsham and his amiable lady and their
family are,  I hope,  better than when you were so good as
to write last.  I beg my best compliments when you see
them.

I am now at the house of a friend,  Mr.  Locke,  who lives
only six m.iles from Chesington,  and whose many similar
excellences,  both of head and heart,  make me frequently

A A 2

356 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

reiiret that he knew not what a treasure was in his neigh-
bourhood. Mr.  Crisp could not,  with ad his perse-
vering love of retirement,  have rejected the acquaintance
of a man so nobly worthy his attention and regard,  and
whose own good and great qualities would have taught
him the value of our beloved hermit's.  His lady,  too,  the
fair partner of his worth as well as affection,  being no fine
lady,  but,  on the contrary,  the pattern of all that is ami-
able and lovely in woman,  would have conquered una-
voidably my dear daddy's secluding spirit.  But it would
have made me,  perhaps,  too happy here,  to have been
allowed the friendship I now experience from this admir-
able family,  while my first and best friend,  out of my
own house,  was still spared me,

I remain,  dear madam,  your obliged and

afi^'ectionately obedient servant,

F.    BuRNEY.

Journal resumed.
Addressed to her Father and Sister.
Windsor,  November,  1785. — -As you don't quite
hate one another,  you will not,  I hope,  hate me,  for
coupling you in my journal.  It will be impossible for
me to write separate accounts of any length or satis-
faction, so I crave your joint permissions to address
you together.  And now,  this settled,  I have only to
beg of Fortune some events worth recording,  and only
to remind my dear father it is my misfortune,  not
fault,  if they will not happen ;  his misfortune,  too,  1
grant,  should he have but common nothings to read.
As to Susanna,  I heed her not,  for she has been in that
practice all her life,  when we have been separated.
Well,  then,—-

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  357

Saturday,  Nov.  25th. — I got to Hounsiovv almost
at the same moment with Mrs.  Astley,  my dear Mrs.  De-
lany's maid,  who was sent to meet me.  As soon as she
had satisfied my inquiries concerning her lady,  she was
eager to inform me that the Queen had drunk tea with
Mrs.  D.  the day before,  and had asked when I should
come,  and heard the time ;  and that Mrs.  Delany believed
she would be with her again that evening,  and desire to
see me.

This was rather fidgetting intelligence.  I rather,  in
my own mind,  thought the Queen would prefer giving
me the first evening alone with my dear old friend.

I found that sweet lady not so well as I had hoped,
and strongly affected by afflicting recollections at sight
of me.  With all her gentleness and resignation,  bursts
of sorrow break from her still,  whenever we are alone
together;  and with all her gratitude and all her real
fondness for the Queen,  her suffering heart moans inter-
nally its irreparable loss ;  for the Duchess of Portland
was a bosom friend — a very Susan to her.

The Queen herself is most sensible of this,  and while
she tries,  by all the means in her power,  to supply the
place of the lamented Duchess of Portland,  she is the
first to observe and to forgive the impossibility of a full
success;  indeed,  the circumstances I am continually
hearing of her sweetness and benevolence make me more
than ever rejoice she has taken my dear Mrs.  Delany
under her mimediate protection.

Miss P ,  who is a truly lovely girl,  received me

with her usual warmth of joy,  and was most impatient
to whisper me that  "  all the Princesses intended to come
and see me."  She is just at the age to doat upon an
ado,  and nothing so much dehghts her as the thought
of my presentations.

358 DIARY AND LETTERS  [ParT IX,

My dear Mrs.  Delaiiy,  meanwhile,  fearful of occasion-
ing the smallest embarrassment,  gave me no hint of any
desisjn to notice me,  but onlv told me thin^s of the
Queen,  that could not but make it my own wish to see
her in her private conduct,  life,  and demeanour.

I did well,  it seems,  to be the champion of Madame

de Genlis ;  for Miss P tells me Madame de G.  spoke

of me to the Queen in terms the most extraordinary,  and
which the Queen has repeated to Mrs.  Delany,  and
which,  when we meet,  perhaps I may tell, — but on payer ^
this hint,  methinks,  is pretty well.

Mrs.  Delany acquainted me that the Queen,  in their
first interview,  upon her coming to this house,  said to
her,  ''  Why did not you bring your friend Miss Burney
with you  ?"

My dear Mrs.  Delany was very much gratified by
such an attention to whatever could be thought interest-
ing to her,  but,  with her usual propriety,  answered that,
in coming to a house of her Majesty's,  she could not
presume to ask anybody without immediate and express
permission.  "  The King,  however,"  she added,  ''  made
the very same inquiry when I saw him next."

Sunday,  Nov.  26th. — So now the royal encounters,
for a while at least,  are out of all question.  Nobody
came last night,  though Mrs.  Delany I saw,  and Miss
P I heard,  in continual expectation  ;  but this morn-
ing, Mr.  Battiscombe,  apothecary to the household,
called,  and said that an express arrived from Germany
yesterday afternoon,  with an account of the death of the
Queen's youngest brother.

The Queen,  whose domestic virtues rise upon me every
hour,  is strongly attached to all her family,  and in much
affliction at this news  ;  for though this brother was quite
a boy when she left Germany,  he has twice been to visit

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  359

her in England.  None of the Royal Family will appear
till the mourning takes place ;  the Queen,  perhaps,  may
shut herself up still longer.

Afterwards came Lady Louisa Clayton,  who had dined
at the Queen's Lodge,  where she often attends in the
place of her sister,  Lady Charlotte Finch,  whose ill
health makes her frequently require assistance in her
office of governess.  The Queen,  she said,  had been ex-
pecting this ill news some time,  though she heard it with
great grief.

Lady Louisa is very earnest to oblige Mrs.  Delany,
and most civilly offered her an apartment for me in her
house,  if the single spare bed in this should be at all
wanted by any of her nephews ;  desiring that no circum-
stance of that sort might hasten my leaving Windsor a
moment sooner than I was obliged to go.

Some time after,  while I was writing to my dear father
about my mourning,  Miss P jumped into my room.

*'  Oh,  Miss Burney  !  you must come this moment!
Here's a gentleman here wants to see you,  and he says
he has danced with you."

I could not conceive who this might be,  but she would
not let me rest till I went into the dining-room,  and
there who should I find but Dr.  Lind,  who might,  per-
haps, have been my partner at Mr.  Bremner's Twelfth
Night ball.  He asked very much after my father,  and
invited me to see his curiosities ;  which invitation I shall
be glad to accept,  as will Miss P He is married and

settled here,  and follows,  as much as he can get practice,
his profession;  but his taste for tricks,  conundrums,  and
queer things,  makes people fearful of his trying experi-
ments upon their constitutions,  and think him a better
conjurer than physician;  though I don't know why the
same man should not be both.

360 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

At night,  quite incog.,  quite alone,  and quite privately,
the King came,  and was shut up with Mrs.  Delany for
an hour.  It is out of rule for any of the family to be
seen till in mourning,  but he knew she was anxious for
an account of the Queen.  I had a very narrow escape of
being surprised by him,  which would have vexed me,  as
he only meant to see Mrs.  Delany by herself,  though
she says he told her he was very glad to hear 1 was
come.

Tuesday,  Nov.  29th. — My dear Mrs.  Delany was
ill yesterday,  and to-day she has been much worse.  The
Queen sent to ask her to the Lodge,  but she was obliged
to be blooded,  and seemed so full of inflammation,  that
I was extremely alarmed for her.  The Queen sent Miss
Planta to see her at night;  she says the Queen is in
much grief for her brother.

Wednesday,  Xov.  30th. — This morning I had the
happiness of seeing my dear Mrs.  Delany much cooler
and more easy,  but a little incident happened that a good
deal affected her.  It shews the tenderness of the Queen
for her in so strong and amiable a manner,  that I must
tell it my dear father and Susan,  who,  I am sure,  hke
me,  will grow more and more loyal in hearing it.

When the Duchess of Portland died,  the Duke,  before
Mrs.  Delany took her last leave of Bulstrode,  begged
her to choose and to take whatever she pleased that had
belonged to his mother.  Mrs.  Delany refused everything
that was proposed to her of any value,  but said she would
name one thing herself,  which was all she could accept :
this was a favourite bird of her friend's, — a weaver,  an
African bird,— which the Duchess had been very fond
of,  and always kept in her room.  She brought it to town
with her,  and thence to Windsor,  and it has grown so
dear to her,  that she could scarce ever look at it with

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  361

dry eyes.  Imagine,  then,  if I was concerned,  when this
morning,  upon coming into the room where we breakfast,
not seeing the bird perching,  I took down the cage,  and
perceived it at the bottom,  lying dead.

Mrs.  Delany was still in her own room,  weak and
unwell,  though better.  It was a particularly unlucky
time to tell her of this loss,  which we knew she would
regard as the conclusion of all that had remained to her

of Bulstrode.  While Miss P and I were considering

what we could do.  Miss Planta came in,  to inquire,  from
the Queen,  how Mrs.  Delany had passed the night.
The bird was in my hand,  and I told her the circum-
stances belonging to it.  She was sorry,  went to speak
with Mrs.  Delany in her bed-room,  and returned to the
Queen.  In less than a quarter of an hour she came
back again,  bringing with her a bird in a very fine cage.
It was the weaver bird,  she said,  and sent by the Queen,
to know if we thought it could not be put in the same
cage that had belonged to the Duchess,  and prevent
Mrs.  Delany from hearing that hers was dead.

This tender desire to spare her any pain,  though with-
out the reward of having such kindness known to its
object,  touched me extremely,  and the more,  for being
told the Queen herself had never possessed but two of
those birds.  I saw,  however,  the kind deception could
not succeed,  for the resemblance was very imperfect,  and
much as my dear old friend has lost of the acuteness of
her eye-sight,  enough,  thank Heaven!  yet remains to
have discerned the change.  I told Miss Planta this,
but at the same time added,  that,  if she could leave the
bird,  an attention so sweet and so delicate in the Queen
would soften the tale we had to tell,  and be her best
solace for the loss.  Miss Planta answered,  she would
certainly leave it ;  for the Queen had desired that if we

362 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

thought it could not pass for the same bird,  it might be
left in its own cage,  and given immediately from herself.
This,  accordingly,  we did ;  she heard it more quietly
than we expected,  yet not without emotion ;  but when
we brought her the Queen's bird,  the tears came into
her eyes,  and she looked at it with great tenderness,  and
exclaimed,  "  Don't you,  too,  die in my hands!"

I have been makmg a very melancholy visit to Ma-
dame de la Fite.  She sent her little son to invite me.  She
cried the whole time I was with her,  and told me she
was quite overcome by my visiting Windsor,  now she
had lost her poor Eliza,  who had always looked forward
to shewing it me herself.  I felt the strongest compas-
sion for her,  and could not come away till she grew
somewhat more composed,  for she seemed relieved by
indulging her grief.  She said she would talk of Norbury
Park and of Madame de Genlis when we met next;
but now she could only talk of her dear Elise.  She
compared herself with poor 3Irs.  Hill,  who had lost her
Billy J and could speak of nothing without recurring to
him.  She had just been reading  "  Cecilia,"  she told
me,  to the Princess Elizabeth :  but when she came to
that part,  she could not go on for her tears.  Dreadful,
indeed,  and most irreparable is her loss  !

I afterwards made a short call upon my old friend,
Madame de Luc.  You may remember Miss Cooper,  my
dear father,  at Streatham.  I had the pleasure to see her
very comfortably settled in a pretty and neat house,
with a view of the Castle.  She carried me up stairs into
Mr.  de Luc's study,  which is full of instruments,  tools,
and learned litter.  His daughter lives with them,  and is
a good-humoured,  sensible,  prating girl;  she talked
excessively,  and seemed mighty happy to be so em-
ployed.

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        363

I then went and aired in the Old Park with dear
Mrs.  Delany,  up and down the fine old avenue,  which,
with the Castle in view,  has so grand a formality,  that
to alter,  and even improve it,  would make me think of
Mason's expression in the English Garden,  "  that taste
here were sacrilege."

Dr.  Lind has called regularly every day,  to invite us
to see his Indian curiosities,  and to offer being my esquire
in going about Windsor ;  but Mrs.  Delany is so far from
well,  that I could have no pleasure in leaving her.  He
is excessively curious about my seeing the King and
Queen,  and earnest to know what will pass :  he is one
of their most loyal admirers,  and very eager that I should
be another ;  and he said to Mrs.  Delany,  when I was out
of the room,  "  I hope,  ma'am,  you will apprise Miss
Burney of the King's quick manner of speaking,  for fear
it should disconcert her  ?"  Mrs.  Delany is much diverted
with his solicitude and good humour.

Thursday,  Dec.  1st. — To-day the Queen sent Miss
Planta to tell Mrs.  Delany that if she would not yet
venture to the Lodge,  she would come to her in the
evening.  Mrs.  Delany accepted the gracious offer,  and,
at tea-time,  she came,  as well as the King,  and spent two
hours here.

Mrs.  Delany told me afterwards,  that the Queen was
very low-spirited,  and seemed to wish for nothing but the
solace of sitting perfectly quiet.  She is a sweet woman,
and has all the domestic affections warm and strong in
her heart.

Nevertheless they talked of me,  she says,  a good
deal;  and the king asked many questions about me.
There is a new play,  he told Mrs.  Delany,  coming out ;
*'  and it is said to be Miss Burney's !"  Mrs.  Delany
immediately answered that she knew the report must be

364 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

untrue.  *'  But I hope she is not idle?"'  cried the king.
'*  T hope she is writing something  ?"

What an opportunity,  ray dear father,  for the speech
Mr.  Cambridge told you he longed to make — that
'*  Miss B.  had no time to write,  for she was always work-
ing at her clothes .'"

What Mrs.  Delany said,  I know not ;  but he after-
wards inquired what she thought of my writing a play  ?

''  What,''  said he,  '*  do you wish about it,  Mrs.
Delany?"

Mrs.  Delany hesitated,  and the Queen then said,

*'  T wish what I know Mrs.  Delany does — that she
may not;  for though her reputation is so high,  her cha-
racter, by all I hear,  is too delicate to suit with writing
for the stage."

Sweet Queen  !  I could have kissed the hem of her
garment for that speech,  and I could not resist writing it.

Mrs.  Delany then said,

"  Why my opinion is what I believe to be Miss
Burney's own ;  that it is too public and hazardous a
style of writing for her quiet and fearful turn of mind."

I have really the grace to be a little ashamed of
scribbling this,  but I know I can scribble nothing my
dear father will be more curious to hear.

Upon Mrs.  Delany's coming to Windsor,  the Queen
had Cecilia read to her again  ;  and by M.  de Luc,  who
can hardly speak four words of English  !  but she told
Mrs.  Delany she had no good English reader.

Saturday,  Dec.  3rd.  —  To-night,  the King and
Queen again spent two hours with Mrs.  Delany.  They
were both of them in the greatest alarm for the Princess
Elizabeth,  who has a complaint on the chest,  and whose
sufferings aflflict them very deeply.  They go to her two or
three times a day,  but are forbid speaking to her.     How

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        365

happy for sweet Mrs.  Delany that,  after the obligatioQS
innumerable showered down upon her by the King and
Queen,  she now sees herself the resource to which they
fly for comfort and relief in their own distresses!  The
Queen sees nobody else.

In the midst of all,  the Queen took the good-hu-
moured pleasure of telling Mrs.  Delany the kind things
said of her guest,  by Madame de la Fite  : — "  You two,"
she said,  "  speak of her just alike."

Madame de la Fite sent me a note,  to say she heard the
Queen was to pass the evening with Mrs.  Delany,  and
to ask me to pass it with her.  I was very busy,  how-
ever, at work,  and excused myself till to-morrow,  when
Mrs.  Delany,  if well enough,  will go to the Lodge ;  and
she is veiy much better.

Miss P and I went to Dr.  Lind's,  and saw his

fat,  handsome wife,  who is as tall as himself,  and
about six times as big.  We had not time to stay and
look at his collection,  but he shewed me one very curious
representation of the  '^  Elephanta,"  in the East Indies,
which has been admirably executed,  from a drawing of
his own,  taken on the spot,  by Paul Sandby.  He told
me that when he went to see it,  with a large party of
English,  they carried masons,  carpenters,  and workmen
with them,  no less in number than sixty — in short,
I suppose all who could dig,  saw,  or carry — from the ship
he belonsred to,  for he was surgeon to an East Indiaman,
But after all their toiling,  in this wonderful excavation,
they found the rock so impenetrable,  and the pillars and
idols so stupendous,  that they could only bring away an
odd head or two,  and a few limbs.  I assured him he
now fully explained to me why,  in  *'  Gulliver's Travels,"
Swift has ranked in one class,  assassins,  murderers^
robbers,  and virtuosi.

366 DIAJIV AND LErrERS  [PART IX.

This mornine:  we had better news of the Princess;
and Mrs.  Delany went again to the Lodge in the
evening,  to the Queen.  When Mrs.  Delany returned,
she confirmed the good accounts of the Princess Eliza-
beth's amendment.  She had told the Queen I was
going to-morrow to Thames Ditton,  for a week  ;  and was
asked many questions about my coming back,  which the
Queen said she was sure I should be glad to do from
Mrs.VV to Mrs.  Delany.   O most penetrating Queen  !

She gratified Mrs.  Delany,  by many kind speeches,  of
being sorry I was going,  and glad I was returning,  and
so forth.  Mrs.  Delany then told her I had been reading
"  The Clandestine Marriage"  to her,  which the Queen
had recommended,  and she thanked her Majesty for the
very great pleasure she had received from it.

'^  O then,''  cried the Queen,  ''  if Miss Burney reads
to you,  what a pleasure you must have to make her read
her own works !"

Mrs.  Delany laughed,  and exclaimed,

"  O ma'am  !  read her own works  ! — your Majesty has
no notion of Miss Burney !  I believe she would as soon
die  !'"

This,  of course,  led to a great deal of discussion,  in the
midst of which the Queen said,

"  Do you know Dr.  Burney,  Mrs.  Delany?"

"  Yes,  ma'am,  extremely well,''  answered Mrs.
Delany.

"  I think him,"  said the Queen,  ^^  a very agreeable
and entertaining man."

There,  my dear father I said I not well just now,  O
most penetrating Queen  ?

So here ends my Windsor journal,  part the first.
To-morrow morning I go for my week to Thames
Ditton.

1785]  OF THE AUTHOK OF EVELINA.  367

Windsor,  Wednesday,  Dec.  14th,  1785. —
Yesterday I returned to my dear Mrs.  Delany,  from
Thames Ditton,  and had the great concern of finding her
very unwell.  Mr.  Barnard Dewes,  one of her nephews,
and his little girl,  a sweet child of seven years old,  were

with her,  and,  of course.  Miss P .     She had been

hurried,  though only with pleasure,  and her emotion,
first in receiving,  and next in entertaining them,  had
brought on a little fever.  Her health,  now,  is fearfully
precarious,  and her days,  to me,  are most tremblingly
precious.  Everything shatters her dear feeble frame;
she can bear neither joy nor sorrow ;  and how few are
those placid days that are touched by neither I Her
mind,  however,  has still its original strength,  and all her
faculties are in their fullest vigour  ;  'tis only the  ^'  tene-
ment of clay''  that has suffered by time.

She revived in the afternoon,  and I had the pleasure
of reading to her a play of Shakespeare's,  that she had
not heard for forty years,  and which I had never read
since I was a child, — '^  The Comedy of Errors  ;" — and
we found in it all the entertainment belonging to an ex-
cellent farce,  and all the objections belonging to an
indifferent play;  but the spirit with which she enters
into every part of everything she hears,  gives a sort of
theatric effect to whatever is read to her ;  and my spirits
rise in her presence,  with the joy of exciting hers.

But I am now obliged,  by what follows,  to confess a
little discussion I have had with my dear Mrs.  Delany,
almost all the time I spent with her at first,  and now
again upon my return,  relative to the royal interview,  so
long in expectation.

Immediately upon my arrival,  she had imagined,  by
what had preceded it,  that a visit would instantly
ensue here,  and I should have a summons to appear,-

868 DIARV AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

but the death of the Queen's brother,  which was known
the verv niiiht I came,  confined her Majesty and all
the family for some days to the Lodge;  and the dan-
gerous illness of the Princess Elizabeth next took place,
in occupying all their thoughts,  greatly to their credit.
My dear old friend,  however,  earnest I should have an
honour which her grateful reverence for their INIajesties
makes her regard very highly,  had often wished me to
stay in the room when they came to see her,  assuring
me that though they were so circumstanced as not to
send for a stranger,  she knew they would be much
pleased to meet with me.  This,  however,  was more
than I could assent to,  without infinite pain,  and that
she was too kind to make a point of my enduring.

Yesterday,  upon my return,  she began again the same
reasoning  ;  the Princess Elizabeth had relapsed,  and she
knew,  during her being worse,  there was no chance the
Queen would take any active step towards a meeting.
**  But she inquires,"  continued Mrs.  Delany, "  so much
about you,  and is so earnest that you should be with me,
that I am sure she wants to see and converse with you.
You will see her,  too,  with more ease to yourself by
being already in the room,  than from being summoned.
I would not for the world put this request to you,  if I
were not sure she wishes it."

There was notwithstanding the word  "  request"  from
Mrs.  Delany,  and little as I liked the business,  I could not
but comply.  What next was to be done,  was to beg
directions for the rencounter.

Ts'ovv though you,  my dear father,  have had an
audience,  and you,  my dear Susan,  are likely enough
to avoid one,  yet I think the etiquettes on these occasions
will be equally new to you both ;  for one never inquired
into them,  and the other has never thou2;ht of them.

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        369

Here,  at Windsor,  where more than half the people we
see are belonging to the Court,  and where all the rest
are trying to be in the same predicament,  the inteUigence
I have obtained must be looked upon as accurate ;  and I
shall therefore give it,  in full confidence you will both
regard it as a valuable addition to your present stock of
Court knowledge,  and read it with that decent awe the
dignity of the topic requires !

Directions for a private encounter loitfi the
Royal Famihj.

But no,  they will take me so long,  that I had better
put them on a separate sheet,  and go on with my
journal while all is fresh in my memory.  I am sorry to
have wasted so solemn a preamble,  but hope you will
have the generosity to remember it when 1 produce my
directions,  as I cannot possibly undertake writing
another.

To come,  then,  now,  to those particular instructions I
received myself,  and which must not be regarded as
having anything to do with general rules.

^''  I do beg of you,"  said dear Mrs.  Deiany,  ^'  when the
Queen or the King speak to you,  not to answer with
mere monosyllables.  The Queen often complains to me
of the difficulty with which she can get any conversation,
as she not only always has to start the subjects,  but,
commonly,  entirely to support them  :  and she says there
is nothing she so much loves as conversation,  and nothing-
she finds so hard to get.  She is always best pleased to
have the answers that are made her lead on to further
discourse.  IS'ow,  as I know she wishes to be acquainted
with you,  and converse with you,  I do really entreat you
not to draw back from her,  nor to stop conversation vvitl)
onlv answerino;  Yes,  or No."

VOL.   II.  B B

370 DIARV AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

This was a most tremendous injunction;  however,  I
could not but promise her I would do the best I could.

To this,  nevertheless,  she readily agreed,  that if upon
entering the room,  they should take no notice of me,  I
might quietly retire.  And that,  believe me,  will not be
very slowly  !  They cannot find me in this house with-
out knowing who I am,  and therefore they can be at no
Joss whether to speak to me or not,  from incertitude.

In the midst of all this,  the Queen came  !

I heard the thunder at the door,  and,  panic struck,
away flew all my resolutions and agreements,  and away
after them flew I !

Don't be angry,  my dear father — I would have stayed
if I could,  and I meant to stay;  but,  when the moment
came,  neither my preparations nor intentions availed,  and
I arrived at my own room,  ere I well knew I had left the
drawing-room,  and quite breathless between the race I
ran with Miss Port and the joy of escaping.

Mrs.  Delany,  though a little vexed at the time,  was
not afterwards,  when she found the Queen very much
dispirited,  by a relapse of the poor Princess Elizabeth.
She inquired if I was returned,  and hoped I now came
to make a longer stay.

Friday,  Dec.  16th. — Yesterday morning we had a
much better account of the Princess Elizabeth  ;  and
Mrs.  Delany said to me,

'*  Now you will escape no longer,  for if their uneasi-
ness ceases,  I am sure they will send for you,  when they
come next."

To be sent for,  I confessed to her,  would really be more
formidable than to be surprised ;  but to pretend to be
surprised would answer no purpose in making the meet-
ing easy to me,  and therefore I preferred letting the
matter take its chance.

1V85]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  371

After dinner,  while Mrs.  Deiany was left alone,  as
usual,  to take a little rest, — for sleep it but seldom
proves, — Mr.  B.  Devves,  bis little daughter,  Miss Port,
and myself,  went into the drawing-room.  And here,
while,  to pass the time,  I was amusing the little girl with
teaching her some Christmas games,  in which her father
and coasin joined,  Mrs.  Deiany came in.  We were all
in the middle of the room,  and in some confusion  ; — but
she had but just come up to us to inquire what was
going forwards,  and I was disentangling myself from
Miss Dewes,  to be ready to fly off if any one knocked
at the street-door,  when the door of the drawing-room
was again opened,  and a large man,  in deep mourning,
appeared at it,  entering and shutting it himself without
speaking.

A ghost could not more have scared me,  when I dis-
covered, by its glitter on the black,  a star  !  The general
disorder had prevented his being seen,  except by myself,

who was always on the watch,  till Miss P ,  turning

round,  exclaimed,  '^The King! — Aunt,  the King!"

•  O mercy  !  thought I,  that I were but out of the room I
which way shall I escape?  and how pass him unnoticed?
There is but the single door at which he entered,  in the
room !     Every one scampered out of the way :    Miss

P ,  to stand next the door ;  Mr.  Bernard Dewes to

a corner opposite it;  his little girl clung to me;  and Mrs.
Deiany advanced to meet his Majesty,  who,  after quietly
looking on till she saw him,  approached,  and inquired
how she did.

He then spoke to Mr.  Bernard,  whom he had already-
met two or three times here.

I had now retreated to the wail,  and purposed gliding
softly,  though speedily,  out of the room  ;  but before I had
taken a single step,  the King,  in a loud vi'hisper to Mrs.
B b2

372 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

Delany,  said,  "  Is that Miss Biirney  ?" — and on her
answering,  ''Yes,  sir,''  he bowed,  and with a counte-
nance of the most perfect good humour,  came close up
to me.

A most profound reverence on my part arrested the
progress of my intended retreat.

"  How long have you been come back,  Miss Burney  ?"

"  Two days,  sir."

Unluckily he did not hear me,  and repeated his ques-
tion ;  and whether the second time he heard me or not,
I don't know,  but he made a little civil inclination of
his head,  and went back to Mrs.  Delany.

He insisted she should sit down,  though he stood him-
self, and began to give her an account of the Prmcess
Elizabeth,  who once again was recovering,  and trying,
at present,  James's Powders.  She had been blooded,
he said,  twelve times in this last fortnight,  and had
lost seventy-five ounces of blood,  besides undergoing
blistering and other discipline.  He spoke of her illness
with the strongest emotion,  and seemed quite filled with
concern for her danger and sufferings.

Mrs.  Delany next inquired for the younger children.
They had all,  he said,  the whooping-cough,  and were
soon to be removed to Kew.

"  Not,"  added he,  "  for any other reason than change
of air for themselves ;  though I am pretty certain I have
never had the distemper myself,  and the Queen thinks
she has not had it either : — we shall take our chance.
When the two eldest had it,  I sent them away,  and
would not see them till it was over;  but now there
are so many of them that there would be no end to se-
parations, so I let it take its course."

Mrs.  Delany expressed a good deal of concern at his
running this risk,  but he laughed at it,  and said,  he was

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  373

much more afraid of catching the rheumatism,  which has
been threatening one of his shoulders lately.  However,
he added,  he should hunt the next morning,  in defiance
of it.

A good deal of talk then followed about his own
health,  and the extreme temperance by which he pre-
served it.  The fault of his constitution,  he said,  was a
tendency to excessive fat,  which he kept,  however,  in
order,  by the most vigorous exercise,  and the strictest
attention to a simple diet.

When Mrs.  Delany was beginning to praise his for-
bearance, he stopped her.

"No,  no,"  he cried,  "'tis no virtue;  I only prefer
eating plain and little,  to growing diseased and infirm."

During this discourse,  I stood quietly in the place
where he had first spoken to me.  His quitting me so
soon,  and conversing freely and easily with Mrs.  Delany,
proved so delightful a relief to me,  that I no longer
wished myself away ;  and the moment my first panic
from the surprise was over,  I diverted myself with a
thousand ridiculous notions,  of my own situation.

The Christmas games we had been shewing Miss
Dewes,  it seemed as if we were still performing,  as none
of us thought it proper to move,  though our manner of
standing reminded one of Puss in the corner.   Close to the

door was posted Miss P ;  opposite her,  close to the

wainscot,  stood Mr.  Dewes;  at just an equal distance
from him,  close to a window,  stood myself;  Mrs.  Delany,

though seated,  was at the opposite side to Miss P ;

and his Majesty kept pretty much in the middle of the
room.  The little girl,  who kept close to me,  did not
break the order,  and I could hardly help expecting to be
beckoned,  with a puss !  puss !  puss  !  to change places
with one of my neighbours.

374 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

This idea,  afterwards,  gave way to another more pomp-
ous. It seemed to me we were acting a play.  Tliere is
soQiething so little like common and real life,  in every-
body's standing,  while talking,  m a room full of chairs,
and standing,  too,  so aloof from each other,  that I almost
thought myself upon a stage,  assisting in the representa-
tion of a tragedy,  —  in which the King played his own
part,  of the king ;  Mrs.  Delany that of a venerable confi-
dante ;  Mr.  Dewes,  his respectful attendant;  Miss P — ,  a
suppliant virgin,  waiting encouragement to bring forward
some petition  ;  Miss Dewes,  a young orphan,  intended
to move the royal compassion  ;  and myself, — a very
solemn,  sober,  and decent mute.

These fancies,  however,  only regaled me while I con-
tinued a quiet spectator,  and without expectation of being
called into play.  But the King,  I have reason to think,
meant only to give me time to recover from my first em-
barrassment ;  and I feel myself infinitely obliged to his
good breeding and consideration,  which perfectly an-
swered, for before he returned to me I was entirely
recruited.

To go back to my narration.

When the discourse upon health and strength was
over,  the King went up to the table,  and looked at a book
of prints,  from Claude Lorraine,  which had been brought
down for Miss Dewesj but Mrs.  Delany,  by mistake,
told him they were for me.  He turned over a leaf or two,
and then said  —

'*  Pray,  does Miss Burney draw,  too  ?"

The too was pronounced very civilly.

*^  I believe not,  sir,"  answered Mrs.  Delany  ;  "  at least,
she does not tell?"

"Oh!"  cried he,  laughing,  '^that's nothing!  she is
not apt to tell;  she never does tell,  you know  ! — Her fa-

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        375

ther told me that himself.  He told me the whole history
of her Evelina.  And I shall never forget his face when
he spoke of his feelings at first taking up the book  ! — he
looked quite frightened,  just as if he was doing it that
moment !  I never can forget his face while I live !"

Then coming up close to me,  he said —

"  But what 1 — what  ? — how was it  ?"

*•  Sir" — cried I,  not well understanding him.

*'  How came you — how happened it — what  ? — what?"

*'  I — I only wrote,  sir,  for my own amusement,  — only
in some odd,  idle hours."

'•But your publishing  —  your printing,  —  how was
that?"

'*  That was only,  sir, — only because — "

I hesitated most abominably,  not knowing how to tell
him a long story,  and growing terribly confused at these
questions; — besides, — to say the truth,  his own  '*  what
what  ?"  so reminded me of those vile Probationary Odes,
that,  in the midst of all my flutter,  I was really hardly
able to keep my countenance.

The What I was then repeated,  with so earnest a look,
that,  forced to say something,  I stammeringly answered —

"  I thought — sir — it would look very well in print !"

I do really flatter myself this is the silliest speech I ever
made  !  I am quite provoked with myself for it ;  but a fear
of laughing made me eager to utter anything,  and by no
means conscious,  till I had spoken,  of what I was saying.

He laughed very heartily himself, — well he might —
and walked away to enjoy it,  crying out,

"  Very fair indeed I that's being very fair and honest !"

Then,  returning to me again,  he said,

'^  But your father — how came you not to shew him
what you wrote?"

'*  I v/astoo much ashamed of it,  sir,  seriously."

376 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

Literal truth that,  I am sure.

"  And how did he find it out?"

"  I don't know myself,  sir.     He never would tell me."

Literal truth again,  my dear father,  as you can testify.

*'  But how did you get it printed T'

''  I sent it,  sir,  to a bookseller my father never employed,
and that I never had seen myself,  Mr.  Lowndes,  in full
hope by that means he never would hear of it."

"  But how could you manage that  ?"

'^  By means of a brother,  sir."

'^  O  ! — you confided in a brother,  then  ?"

"  Yes,  sir — that is,  for the publication."

''  What entertainment you must have had from hear-
ing people's conjectures,  before you were known  !  Do
you remember any of them  ?''

^'  Yes,  sir,  many."

"  And what?"

"  I heard that Mr.  Baretti laid a wager it was written
by a man  ;  for no woman,  he said,  could have kept her
own counsel."

This diverted him extremely.

''  But how was it,"  he continued,  ''  you thought most
likely for your father to discover you  ?"

'*  Sometimes,  sir,  I have supposed I must have dropt
some of the manuscript;  sometimes,  that one of my
sisters betrayed me."

"  O  !  your sister  ? — what,  not your brother  ?"

''  jN'o,  sir;  he could not,  for — "

I was going on,  but he laughed so much I could not
be heard,  exclaiming,

'^  Vastly well !  I see you are of Mr.  Baretti's mind,
and think your brother could keep your secret,  and not
your sister  ?"

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        377

"  Well,  but,"  cried he presently,  ^^  how was it first
known to you,  you were betrayed  ?"

"  By a letter,  sir,  from another sister.  I was very ill,
and in the country ;  and she wrote me word that my
father had taken up a review,  in which the book was men-
tioned, and had put his finger upon its name,  and said —
'  Contrive to get that book for me.'  "

"  And when he got it,"  cried the King,  "  he told me he
was afraid of looking at it !  and never can I forget his
face when he mentioned his first opening it.  But you
have not kept your pen unemployed all this time  ?"

•^'  Indeed I have,  sir.*'

"  But why  ?"

'^  I — I believe I have exhausted myself,  sir."

He laughed aloud at this,  and went and told it to Mrs.
Delany,  civilly treating a plain fact as a mere hon moU

Then,  returning to me again,  he said,  more seriously,
''  But you have not determined against writing any
more  ?"

'•  N-— 0,  sir — "

^'You have made no vow — no real resolution of that
sort  ?"

'"  No,  sir.'^

"  You only wait for inclination  ?"

How admirably Mr.  Cambridge's speech might have
come in here !

''  No,  sir."

A very civil little bow spoke him pleased with this
answer,  and he went again to the middle of the room,
where he chiefly stood,  and,  addressing us in general,
talked upon the different motives of writing,  concluding
with,

*'  I believe there is no constraint to be put upon real
genius  ;  nothing but inclination can set it to work.  Miss

378 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

Burney,  however,  knows best."  And then,  hastily re-
tuininjj:  to me,  he cried,  ''  What?  what?"

'*  No,  sir,  1 — I — believe not,  certainly,"  quoth I,  very
awkwardly,  for 1 seemed taking a violent compliment
onlv as mv due  ;  but I knew not how to put him off as I
would another person.

He then made some inquiries concerning the pictures
with which the room is hung,  and which are all Mrs.
Delany's own painting;  and a little discourse followed,
upon some of the masters whose pictures she has copied.

This was all with her;  for nobody ever answers him
without being immediately addressed by him.

He then came to me again,  and said,

"  Is your father about anythmg at present  ?"

"Yes,  sir,  he goes on,  when he has time,  with his
history."

"  Does he write quick  ?"

'•Yes,  sir,  vt'hen he writes from himself;  but in his
history,  he has so many books to consult,  that sometimes
he spends three days in finding authorities for a single
passage."

**  Very true  ;  that must be unavoidable."

He pursued these inquiries some time,  and then went
again to his general station before the fire,  and Mrs.
Delany inquired if he meant to hunt the next day.
*'  Yes,"  he answered ;  and,  a httle pointedly,  Mrs.
Delany said,

"  I would the hunted could but feel as much pleasure
as the hunter."

The King understood her,  and with some quickness,
called out,  ''  Pray what did you hunt?"

Then,  looking round at us all, —

"  Did you know,"  he said,  '-that Mrs.  Delany once
hunted herself? — and in a long gown,  and a great hoop  ?"

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        379

It seems she had told his Majesty an adventure of that
sort which had befallen her in her youth,  from some
accident in which her will had no share.

While this was talking over,  a violent thunder was
made at the door.  I was almost certain it was the
Queen.  Once more I would have given anything to
escape ;  but in vain.  I had been informed that nobody
ever quitted the royal presence,  after having been con-
versed with,  till motioned to withdraw.

Miss P ,   according to established etiquette on

these occasions,  opened the door which she stood next,
by putting her hand behind her,  and slid out,  back-
wards, into the hall,  to light the Queen in.  The door
soon opened again,  and her Majesty entered.

Immediately seeing the King,  she made him a low
courtsey,  and cried, —

"Oh,  your Majesty is here  !"

"Yes,"  he cried,  ^*I ran here,  without speaking to
anybody."

The Queen had been at the lower Lodge,  to see the
Princess Elizabeth,  as the King had before told us.

She then hastened up to Mrs.  Delany,  with both her
hands held out,  saying,

"  My dear Mrs.  Delany,  how are you  ?"

"  Instantly after,  I felt her eye on my face.  I be-
lieve, too,  she curtsied to me ;  but though I saw the
bend,  I was too near-sighted to be sure it was intended
for me.  I was hardly ever in a situation more embarrass-
ing ;  I dared not return what I vi^as not certain I had
received,  yet considered myself as appearing quite a
monster,  to stand stiff-necked,  if really meant.

Almost at the same moment,  she spoke to Mr.
Bernard Dewes,  and then nodded to my little clinging
girl.

380 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

I was now really ready to sink,  with horrid uncertainty
of what I was doing,  or what I should do, — when his
Majesty,  who I fancy saw my distress,  most good-
humouredly said to the Queen something,  but I was too
much flurried to remember what,  except these words, —
*'  I have been telling Miss Burney — "

Relieved from so painful a dilemma,  I immediately
dropped a curtsey.  She made one to me in the same
moment,  and,  with a very smiling countenance,  came up
to me  ;  but she could not speak,  for the King went on
talking,  eagerly,  and very gaily,  repeating to her every
word I had said during our conversation upon Evelina,
its publication,  &c.  &c.

Then he told her of Baretti's wager,  saying, — ^'  But
she heard of a great many conjectures about the author,
before it was known,  and of Baretti,  an admirable
thing I — he laid a bet it must be a man,  as no woman,
he said,  could have kept her own counsel  !"

The Queen,  laughing a little,  exclaimed —

**  Oh,  that is quite too bad an affront to us! — Don't
you think so  ?"  addressing herself to me,  with great
gentleness of voice and manner.

I assented  ;  and the King continued his relation,  which
she listened to with a look of some interest ;  but when
he told her some particulars of my secrecy,  she again
spoke to me.

"  But your sister was your confidant,  was she not?"

"  Yes,  ma'am."

My sisters,  I might have said,  but I was always glad
to have done.

"  Oh,  yes  !"  cried the King,  laughing ;  '^  but I assure
you she is of Baretti's opinion herself;  for I asked her
if she thought it was her sister or her brother that be-

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        381

trayed her to her father  ? — and she says her sister,  she
thinks."

Poor Esther ! — but I shall make her amends by what
follows;  for the Queen,  again addressing me,  said —

'•  But to betray to a father is no crime — don't you
think so?"

I agreed  ;  and plainly saw she thought Esther,  if
Esther it was,  had only done right.

The King then went on,  and when he had finished his
narration the Queen took her seat.

She made Mrs.  Delany sit next her,  and Miss P

brought her some tea.

The King,  meanwhile,  came to me again,  and said, — ^
"  Are you musical  ?"

"  Not a performer,  sir."

Then,  going from me to the Queen,  he cried, — "  She
does not play."

I did not hear what the Queen answered  ;  she spoke
in a low voice,  and seemed much out of spirits.

They now talked together a little while,  about the
Princess Elizabeth,  and the Kino;  mentioned bavins:
had a very promising account from her physician,  Sir
George Baker ;  and the Queen soon brightened up.

The King then returned to me,  and said, —

"  Are you sure you never play  ? — never touch the
keys at all  ?"

*'  Never to acknowledge it,  sir."

*^  Oh  !  that's it  !"  cried he ;  and flying to the Queen,
cried,  ^^  She does play — but not to acknowledge it !"

I was now in a most horrible panic once more ;  pushed
so very home,  I could answer no other than I did,  for
these categorical questions almost constrain categorical
answers;  and here,  at Windsor,  it seems an absolute
point that whatever they ask must be told,  and whatever

382 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

they desire must be done.  Think but,  then,  of my con-
sternation,  in expecting their commands to perform  !  My
dear father,  pity me I

The eager air with which he returned to mc fully
explained what was to follow.  I hastily,  therefore,
spoke first,  in order to stop him,  crying — *'  I never,  sir,
played to anybody but myself! — never!"

'^  No  ?■'  cried he,  looking incredulous  ;  "  what,  not
to "

"  Not even to me,  sir !"'  cried ray kind Mrs.  Delany,
who saw what was threatening me.

"  No  ? — are you sure  ?"  cried he,  disappointed  ;  ''  but
—but you'll ''

'*  1 have never,  sir,"  cried I,  very earnestly,  ^'  played
in my life,  but when I could hear nobody else — quite
alone,  and from a mere love of any musical sounds."

He repeated all this to the Queen,  whose answers I
never heard  ;  but when he once more came back,  with a
face that looked unwilling to give it up,  in my fright I
had recourse to dumb show,  and raised my hands in a
supplicating fold,  with a most begging countenance to
be excused.  This,  luckily,  succeeded  ;  he understood
me very readily,  and laughed a little,  but made a sort
of desisting,  or rather complying,  little bow,  and said
no more about it.

I felt very much obliged to him,  for I saw his curiosity
was all alive.     I wished I could have kissed his hand.

He still,  however,  kept me in talk,  and still upon
music.

"  To me,"  said he,  "  it appears quite as strange to meet
with people who have no ear for music,  and cannot dis-
tinguish one air from another,  as to meet with people
who are dumb.  Lady Bell Finch once told me that she
had heard there was some difference between a psalm,  a

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  383

minuet,  and a countiy dance,  but she declared they all
sounded alike to her !  There are people who have no
eye for difference of colour.  The Duke of Marlborough
actually cannot tell scarlet from green  !"

He then told me an anecdote of his mistaking one of
those colours for another,  which was very laughable,  but
I do not remember it clearly enough to write it.  How
unfortunate for true virtuosi that such an eye should
possess objects worthy the most discerning — the trea-
sures of Blenheim  !

^' I do not find,  though,"  added his Majesty,  "that
this defect runs in his family,  for Lady Di Beauclerk
draws very finely."

He then went to Mr.  Bernard Dewes.

Almost instantly upon his leaving me,  a very gentle
voice called out — "  Miss Burney!"

It was the Queen's.  I walked a little nearer her,
and a gracious inclination of her head made me go
quite up to her.

"  You have been,"  she said,  "  at Mrs.  Walsingham's V

*'  Yes,  ma'am."

*^  She has a pretty place,  I beheve  ?"

*'  Yes,  ma'am."

'^  Were you ever there before  ?"

"  Yes,  ma'am."

Oh,  shocking  !  shocking  !  thought I ;  what will Mrs.
Delany say to ail these monosyllables  ?

'*  Has not she lately made some improvements  ?"

**  Yes,  ma'am ;  she has built a conservatory."

Then followed some questions about its situation,
during which the King came up to us ;  and she then,
ceasing to address me in particular,  began a general sort
of conversation,  with a spirit and animation that I had
not at all expected,  and which seemed the result of the

384 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

great and benevolent pleasure she took m giving enter-
tainment to Mrs.  Delany.

The subject was the last drawing-room,  which she
had been in town to keep on Thursday,  during the
dense fog.

*'  I assure you,  ma'am,"  cried she to Mrs.  Delany,
"  it was so dark,  there was no seeing anything,  and no
knowing anybody.  And Lady Harcourt could be of no
help to tell me who people were,  for when it was light,
she can't see;  and now it was dark,  I could not see
myself.  So it was in vain for me to go on in that man-
ner, without knowing which I had spoken to,  and which
was waiting for me;  so I said to Lady Harcourt,  ^*  We
had better stop,  and stand quite still,  for I don't know
anybody,  no more than you do.  But if we stand still,
they will all come up in the end,  and we must ask them
who they are,  and if I have spoken to them yet,  or not  :
for it is very odd to do it,  but what else can we manage  ?"

Her accent is a little foreign,  and very prettily so  ;  and
her emphasis has that sort of changeability,  which gives
an interest to everything she utters.  But her lang-uage
is rather peculiar than foreign.

*'  Besides,''  added she,  with a very significant look,
*'  if we go on here in the dark,  maybe I shall push
against somebody,  or somebody will push against me —
which is the more hkely to happen !"

She then gave an account of some circumstances
which attended the darkness,  in a manner not only ex-
tremely lively,  but mixed,  at times,  with an archness and
humour that made it very entertaining.  She chiefly
addressed herself to Mrs.  Delany;  and to me,  certainly,
she would not,  separately,  have been so communicative ;
but she contrived,  with great delicacy,  to include me ia
the little party,  by frequently looking at me,  and always

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  385

•with an expression that invited my participation in the
conversation.  And,  indeed,  though I did not join in
words,  I shared very openly in the pleasure of her recital.

'*  Well,"  she continued,  "  so there was standing by
me a man that I could not see in the face  ;  but I saw the
twisting of his bow ;  and I said to Lady Harcourt,  '  I
am sure that must be nobody but the Duke of Dorset.'
— 'Dear,'  she says,  'how can you tell that?' — '  OrJy
ask,'  said I ;  and so it proved he."

'•Yes,"  cried the King,  "  he is pretty well again  ;  he
can smile again,  now !"

It seems his features had appeared to be fixed,  or
stiffened.  It is said,  he has been obliged to hold his
hand to his mouth,  to hide it,  ever since his stroke, —
which he refuses to acknowledge was paralytic.

The Queen looked as if some comic notion had struck
her,  and,  after smiling a little while to herself,  said,
with a sort of innocent archness,  very pleasing,

"  To be sure,  it is very wrong to laugh at such things,
— I know that  ;  but yet,  I could not help thinking,
when his mouth was in that way,  that it was very lucky
people's happiness did not depend upon his smiles  !"

Afterwards,  she named other persons,  whose be-
haviour and manners pointed them out to her,  in defiance
of obscurity.

*'  A lady,"  said she,  "  came up to me,  that I could
not see,  so I was forced to ask who she was;  and imme-
diately she burst into a laugh.  '  O,'  says I,  '  that can
be only Mrs.  De Rolles  !' — and so it proved."

Methinks,  by this trait,  she should be a near rela-
tion to my Miss Larolles  !

When these,  and some more anecdotes which I do not
so clearly remember,  were told,  the King left us,  and
went to Mr.  Bernard Dewes.     A pause ensuing,  I,  too,

VOL.  II.  c c

886 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

drew back,  meaning to return to my original station,
which,  being opposite the fire,  was never a bad one.  But
the moment I began retreating,  the Queen,  bending for-
ward, and speaking in a very low voice,  said,  "Miss
Burney  !" — and,  upon my coming up to her,  almost in a
whisper,  cried,  '^  But shall we have no more — nothing

more

7"

I could not but understand her,  and only shook my
head.

The Queen then,  as if she thought she had said too
much,  with great sweetness and condescension,  drew
back herself,  and,  very delicately,  said,

*'  To be sure it is,  I own,  a very home question,  for
one who has not the pleasure to know you."

I was quite ashamed of this apology,  but did not
know what to say to it.  But how amiable a simphcity
in her speaking of herself in such a style, — ''for one who
has not the pleasure to know you."

'^  But,  indeed,"'  continued she,  presently,  "  I would
not say it,  only that I think from what has been
done,  there is a power to do so much good — and good
to young people — which is so very good a thing — that I
cannot help wishing it could be."

I felt very grateful for this speech,  and for the very-
soft manner in which she said it ;  and I very much
wished to thank her,  and was trying to mutter something,
though not very intelligibly,  when the King suddenly-
coming up to us,  inquired what was going forward.

The Queen readily repeated her kind speech.

The King eagerly undertook to make my answer for
me,  crying,

"  O,  but she will write I — she only waits for inclina-
tion— she told me so."  Then,  speaking to me,  he said,
*'  What — is it not so  ?"

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        387

I only laughed a little;  and he again said to the
Queen,

"She will write!  She told me,  just now,  she had
made no vow against it."

'^  No,  no,"  cried the Queen,  ''  I hope not,  indeed  !"

''  A vow  !"  cried dear Mrs.  Deiany,  *'  no,  indeed,  I
hojoe she would not be so wicked — she who can so do
what she does !"

^^  But she has not,''  said the King-,  earnestly;  "she
has owned that to me already."

What excessive condescension,  my dear Padre  !

*'  I only wish,*'  cried Mrs.  Deiany,  "  it could be as
easily done,  as it is earnestly and universally desired."

"  I doubt it not to be so desired,"  said the Queen.

I was quite ashamed of all this,  and quite sorry to
make no acknowledgment of their great condescension
in pressing such a subject,  and pressing it so much in
earnest.  But I really could get out nothing,  so that's
the truth ;  and I wish I could give a better account of
my eloquence,  my dear Padre and Susan.

I cannot,  however,  in justice any more than in incli-
nation, go on,  till I stop to admire the sweetness of the
Queen,  and the consideration of the King,  in each
making me a party in their general conversation,  before
they made any particular address to me.

They afterwards spoke of Mr.  Webb,  a Windsor mu-
sician, who is master to the young Princesses,  and who
has a nose,  from some strange calamity,  of so enormous a
size that it covers all the middle of his face.  I never saw
so frightful a deformity.  Mrs.  Deiany told the Queen I
had met with him,  accidentally,  when he came to give a
lesson to Miss P ,  and had been quite startled by him.

''  I dare say so ;"  said her Majesty.     '^  I must tell
Miss Burney a little trait of Sophia,  about Mr.  Webb."
c c 2

388 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

A small table was before the Queen,  who always has it
brought when she is seated,  to put her tea or work upon,
or,  when she has neither,  to look comfortable,  I believe  ;
for certainly it takes off much formality in a standing
circle.  And close to this,  by the gracious motion of her
head,  she kept me.

"  When first,"  continued she,  "  ^Ir.  Webb was to
come to Sophia,  I told her he had had some accident to
disfio'ure his whole face,  by making him an enormous nose;
but I desired her to remember this was a misfortune,  for
which he ought to be pitied,  and that she must be sure
not to laugh at it,  nor stare at it.  And she minded this
very well,  and behaved always very properly.  But,
while Lady Cremorne was at the Lodge,  she was with
Sophia when Mr.  Webb came to give her a lesson.  As
soon as he was named,  she coloured very red,  and ran
up to Lady Cremorne,  and said to her in a whisper,
'  Lady Cremorne,  Mr.  Webb has got a very great nose,
but that is only to be pitied — so mind you don't laugh  !'  "

This little Princess is just nine years old  !

The King joined us while the Queen was telling this,
and added,  "  Poor Mr.  Webb was very much discoun-
tenanced when he first saw me,  and tried to hide his
nose,  by a great nosegay,  or I believe only a bran-ch,
which he held before it  :  but really that had so odd a
look,  that it was worse,  and more ridiculous,  than his
nose.  However,  I hope he does not mind me,  now,  for
I have seen him four or five times."

After this,  Mrs.  Delany mentioned Madame de la
Fite,  and her son.

The Queen said  *^  He is a pretty little boy ;  and when
he goes to school,  it will do him good."

''  Where will she send him  ?"  said the King.

The Queen,  looking at me,  with a smile answered,

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA,  389

"  To the school where Mr.  Lock puts his sons.  I
know that !"

^' And where is that?"

"  Indeed I don't know ;  where is it,  Miss Burney  ?"

"  At Cheam,  ma'am."

«'  Oh,  at young Gilpin's?"  cried the King.  "I^  it
near Mr.  Locke's  ?"

^^  Yes,  sir ;  within about six miles,  I believe."

The Queen,  then,  with a little arch smile,  that seemed
to premise she should make me stare,  said,

"  It was there,  at Mr.  Locke's,  your sister laid in  ?"

«'  O yes,  ma'am I"  cried I,  out of breath with surprise.

The King repeated my O yes  !  and said,  "  I fancy —
by that O  —  you were frightened a little for her  ?

What r

I could not but assent to that ;  and the King,  who
seemed a good deal diverted at the accident — for he loves
little babies too well to look upon it,  as most people
would,  to be a shocking business — questioned me about
it.

''  How was it  ?"  said he, — "  how happened it  ?  Could
not she get home  ?''

''  It was so sudden,  sir,  and so unexpected,  there was
no time."

'^  I dare say,"  said the sweet Queen,  *'  Mrs.  Locke was
only very happy to have it at her house."

'^  Indeed,  ma'am,"  cried I,  '*  her kindness,  and Mr.
Locke's would make anybody think so  !  but they are all
kindness and goodness."

*'  I have heard indeed,"  said the Queen,  "that they
are all sensible,  and amiable,  and ingenuous,  in that
family."

*«  They are indeed,"  cried I,  '^  and as exemplary as they
are accomplished."

390 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

''  I have never seen Mrs.  Locke,"  said the King,  "  since
she was that high  ;" — pointing to Uttie IVIiss Dewes.

*^  And I,"  said the Queen — "  I have never seen her in
my hfe ;  but for all that,  from what I hear of her,  I can-
not help feeling interested whenever I only hear her
name."

This,  with a good deal of animation,  she said directly
to me.

'^  Mr.  William Locke,  ma'am,"  said Mrs.  Delany,  "  I
understand from Miss Burney,  is now making the same
wonderful progress in painting that he had done before
in drawing."

*'  I have seen some of his drawings,"  said the Queen,
''  w^hich were charming."

''  How old is he  !"  cried the King.

'^  Eighteen,  sir."

'*  Eighteen  !"  repeated the King — ^'  how time flies!"

**  Oh  !  for me,"  cried the Queen,  ^'  I am always quar-
relling with time !  It is so short to do somethino;  and
so long to do nothing^."

She has now and then something foreign to our idiom,
that has a very pretty effect.

"  Time,"  said the King,  "  always seems long when we
tare young,  and short when we begin to grow old."

"  But nothing makes me so angry,"  said the Queen,
'^  as to hear people not know what to do !  For me,  I
never have half time enough for things.  But what makes
me most angry still,  is to see people go up to a window
and say,  *  what a bad day ! — dear,  what shall we do
such a day as this V  '  What V I say  ;  '  why employ
yourselves ;  and then what signifies the bad day  ?'  "

Afterwards,  there w^as some talk upon sermons,  and
the Queen wished the Bishop of Chester would publish
another volume.

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        391

'^  No,  no,"  said the King,  *'  you must not expect a
man,  while he continues preaching,  to go on publishing.
Every sermon printed,  diminishes his stock for the
pulpit."

"  Very true,"  said the Queen ;  *^  but I believe the
Bishop of Chester has enough to spare."

The King then praised Carrs sermons,  and said he
liked none but what were plain and unadorned.

*'  Nor I neither,"  said the Queen ;  "  but for me,  it is,
I suppose,  because the others I don't understand."

The King then,  looking at his watch,  said,  *^  It is
eight o'clock,  and if we don't go now,  the children will
be sent to the other house."

'*  Yes,  your Majesty,"  cried the Queen,  instantly
rising.

Mrs.  Delany put on her Majesty's cloak,  and she took
a very kind leave of her.  She then curtsied separately
to us all,  and the King handed her to the carriage.

It is the custom for everybody they speak to to attend
them out,  but they would not suffer Mrs.  Delany to

move.    Miss P ,  Mr.  Dewes,  and his little daughter,

and myself,  all accompanied them,  and saw them in their
coach,  and received their last gracious nods.

When they were gone,  Mrs.  Delany confessed she
had heard the King's knock at the door before she came
into the drawing-room,  but would not avow it,  that I
might not run away.  Well !  being over was so good a
thing,  that I could not but be content.

The Queen,  indeed,  is a most charming woman.  She
appears to me full of sense and graciousness,  mingled
with delicacy of mind and liveliness of temper.  She
speaks English almost perfectly well,  with great choice
and copiousness of language,  though now and then with
foreign idiom,  and frequently with a foreign accent.    Her

392 DIARY A^D LEITERS  [PaRT IX.

manners have an easy dignity,  with a most engaging
simplicity,  and she has all that fine high breeding which
the mind,  not the station,  gives,  of carefully avoiding
to distress those who converse with her,  or studiously
removing the embarrassment she cannot prevent.

The King,  however he may have power,  in the cabinet,
to command himself,  has,  in private,  the appearance of a
character the most open and sincere.  He speaks his
opinions without reserve,  and seems to trust them intui-
tively to his hearers,  from a belief they will make no ill
use of them.  His countenance is full of inquiry,  to gain
information without asking it,  probably from believing
that to be the nearest road to truth.  All I saw of both
was the most perfect good humour,  good spirits,  ease,  and
pleasantness.

Their behaviour to each other speaks the most cordial
confidence and happiness.  The King seems to admire
as much as he enjoys her conversation,  and to covet her
participation in every thing he either sees or hears.  The
Queen appears to feci the most grateful regard for him,
and to make it her chief study to raise his consequence
with others,  by always marking that she considers her-
self, though Queen to the nation,  only,  to him,  the first
and most obedient of subjects.  Indeed,  in their different
ways,  and allowing for the difference of their characters,
they left me equally charmed both with their behaviour
to each other and to myself.

Friday. — Mrs.  Delany went to the Lodge to-night,
and,  when she came home,  brought very kind words of
the Queen's with respect to our meeting,  which she now
acknowledged she had much been wishing for.

Sunday,  Dec.  18. — This morning I went with Miss

P to hear the cathedral service at St.  George's

Chapel.     That antique and venerable structure gave me

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  393

much pleasure,  and the particular prayer offered up for
the Knights of the Garter brought me back to the days of
its founder,  as I imagine it must have been used in this
chapel from the time of Edward the Third.

One of the gates of the old Castle I have a view of
from a window in my bed-chamber,  and I have a suf-
ficient smattering of antiquarian affection to look at it
with great satisfaction.

Our preacher was Dr.  L ,  and though he told us

nothing either new or striking,  he at least took care to
give no disappointment after his first opening — by preach-
ing in a manner that never drew our attention.

Monday,  Dec.  19th. — Miss P ,   Mr.   Bernard

Dewes,  his daughter,  and myself,  have been to Dr.
Lind's,  by repeated invitation,  to see his Eastern cu-
riosities. 1 was extremely well entertained there.  His
collection is chiefly Chinese.  He has a book of the
whole process of preparing silk,  described in prints.
It is not,  however,  so done as to give a very clear
idea of the operation.  He has also a curious book
representing every part of a Chinese monastery, — build-
ing, utensils,  gods,  priests,  and idols ;  it is very neatly
and most elaborately executed,  and the colours are un-
commonly vivid.  A dictionary of the Chinese language,
in which many folio pages contain but the various uses
of a single word,  filled me with wonder at the prepos-
terous pedantry that could contrive to make the whole
life of man too short for learning to read and write.
There is a class even for every letter,  and more ways of
varying it,  by different accents,  than there are in French
or English of varying every word that begins with the
same letter.  A book,  too,  of Chinese plants,  very finely
executed and brightly coloured,  shewed how^  little their

394 DIARV AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

artists want'  patience,  though everything shews how
little is the pleasure to be given by any pains without
taste.

Upon the whole,  and for me,  don't you think,  my
dear father and Susan,  I comported myself mighty
well in my grand interview  ?  Indeed,  except quite at the
first,  I was infinitely more easy than I usually am with
strangers ;  and the great reason of that was,  that I had
no fear of being frightened,  nor shame of being ashamed  ;
for they,  I was sure,  were more accustomed to see people
frightened and confused,  than to find them composed
and undisturbed.  But that is not the case with others,
who cannot,  therefore,  make the same allowance.

In the evening,  while  ]Mrs.  Delany,  Miss P — ' — ,  and
I were sitting and working together in the drawing-
room,  the door was opened,  and the King entered.

We all started up  ;  Miss P flew to her modest post

by the door,  and I to my more comfortable one opposite
the fire,  which caused me but a slight and gentle retreat,
and Mrs.  Delany he immediately commanded to take
her own place again.

He was full of joy for the Princess Ehzabeth.  He
had been to the lower Lodge,  and found her in a sweet
sleep,  and she was now,  he said,  in a course of James's
powders,  from which he hoped her perfect restoration.  I
fear,  however,  it is still but precarious.

Mrs.  Delany congratulated him,  and then inquired
after the whooping-cough.  The children,  he said,  were
better,  and were going to Kew for some days,  to change
the air.  He and the Queen had been themselves,  in the
morning,  to Kew,  to see that their rooms were fit for their
reception.     He could not,  he said,  be easy to take any

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  395

account but from his own eyes,  when they were sick.  He
seems,  indeed,  one of the most tender fathers in the
world.

I cannot pretend to w rite this meeting with the method
and minuteness of the first ;  for that took me so long,  that
I have not time to spare for such another detail.  Besides,
the novelty is now^  over,  and I have not the same induce-
ment to be so very circumstantial.  But the principal parts
of the conversation I will write,  as I recollect.

Our party being so small,  he made all that passed
general ;  for though he principally addressed himself to
Mrs.  Delany,  he always looked round to see that we
heard him,  and frequently referred to us.

I should mention,  though,  the etiquette always ob-
served upon his entrance,  which,  first of all,  is to fly off to

distant quarters ;  and next,  Miss P goes out,  walking

backwards,  for more candles,  which she brings in,  two at
a time,  and places upon the tables and piano-forte.  Next
she goes out for tea,  which she then carries to his Ma-
jesty, upon a large salver,  containing sugar,  cream,  and
bread and butter,  and cake,  while she hangs a napkin
over her arm for his fingers.

When he has taken his tea,  she returns to her station,
where she waits till he has done,  and then takes away his-
cup,  and fetches more.

This,  it seems,  is a ceremony performed,  in other
places,  always by the mistress of the house ;  but here,
neither of their Majesties will permit Mrs.  Delany to at-
tempt it.

Well ;  but to return.  The King said he had just been
looking over a new pamphlet,  of Mr.  Cumberland's,  upon
the character of Lord Sackville.

"I have been asking Sir George Baker,"  said he,  *Mf
he had read it,  and he told me yes  ;  but that he could not

396 DIARY AND LETT KRS  [PaUT IX.

find out wliy Cumberland had written it.  However,
that,  I think,  I found out in the second page.  For there
he takes an opportunity to give a high character of him-
self."

He then enlarged more upon the subject,  very frankly
declaring in what points he differed from Mr.  Cumber-
land about Lord Sackville  ;  but as I neither knew him,
nor had read the pamphlet,  I could not at all enter into
the subject.

Mrs.  Delany then mentioned something of Madame
de Genlis,  upon which the King eagerly said to me,

"  Oh,  you saw her while she was here :"

'*  Yes,  sir."

"  And — did she speak English  ?"

*'  Yes,  sir."

''  And how  ?"

*'  Extremely well,  sir ;  with very great facility."

"Indeed?  That always surprises me in a foreigner
that has not lived here."'

Her accent is foreign,  however;  but her language is
remarkably ready.

He then spoke of Voltaire,  and talked a little of his
works,  concluding with this strong condemnation of their
tendency : —

"I,"  cried he,  "think him a monster,  I own it
fairly."

Nobody answered.  Mrs.  Delany did not quite hear
him,  and I knew too little of his works to have courage
to say anything about them.

He next named Rousseau,  whom he seemed to think
of with more favour,  though by no means with approba-
tion. Here,  too,  I had read too little to talk at all,
though his Majesty frequently applied to me.  Mrs.
Delany told several anecdotes which had come to her

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        397

immediate knowledge of him while he was in England,
at which time he had spent some days with her brother,
Mr.  Granville,  at Calwich.  The King,  too,  told others,
which had come to his own ears,  ail charging him with
savage pride and insolent ingratitude.

Here,  however,  I ventured to interfere;  for,  as I knew
he had had a pension from the King,  I could not but wish
his Majesty should be informed he was grateful to him.
And as you,  my dear father,  were my authority,  I
thought it but common justice to the memory of poor
E-ousseau to acquaint the King of his personal respect for
him.

'*  Some gratitude,  sir,"  said I,  *'he was not without^
When my father was in Paris,  which was after Rousseau
had been in England,  he visited him,  in his garret,  and
the first thing he shewed him was your Majesty's portrait
over his chimney."

The King paused a little while upon this ;  but nothing
more was said of Rousseau.

The sermon of the day before was then talked over.
Mrs.  Delany had not heard it,  and the King said it was no
great loss.  He asked me what I had thought of it,  and
we agreed perfectly,  to the no great exaltation of poor
Dr.  L ."

Some time afterwards,  the King said he found by the
newspapers,  that Mrs.  Clive was dead.

Do you read the newspapers  ?  thought I.  O,  King  !
you must then have the most unvexing temper in the
world,  not to run wild.

This led on to more players.  He was sorry,  he said,
for Henderson,  and the more as Mrs.  Siddons had wished
10 have him play at the same house with herself.  Then
Mrs.  Siddons took her turn,  and with the warmest praise.

"I am an enthusiast for her,"  cried the King,  "quite

398 DIARV Ax\D LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

an enthusiast.     I think there was never any player in
my time so excellent — not Garrick himself;  I own it!"

Then,  coming close to me,  who was silent,  he said, —

''What?  what?" — meaning,  what say you?  But I
still said nothing  ;  I could not concur where I thought
so differently,  and to enter into an argument was quite
impossible;  for every little thing I said,  the King
listened to with an eagerness that made me always
ashamed ol its insignificancy.  And,  indeed,  but for that
I should have talked to him with much greater fluency,
as well as ease.

From players he went to plays,  and complained of the
great want of good modern comedies,  and of the extreme
immorality of most of the old ones.

*'  And they pretend,"  cried he,  "  to mend them  ;  but
it is not possible.     Do you think it is  ? — what  ?"

"  No,  sir,  not often,  I believe; — the fault,  commonly,
lies in the very foundation."

*^  Yes,  or they might mend the mere speeches  ; — but
the characters are all bad from the beginning to the end."

Then he specified several ;  but I had read none of
them,  and consequently could say nothing about the
matter: — till,  at last,  he came to Shakespeare.

"  Was there ever,"  cried he,  "  such stuff as great
part of Shakespeare?  only one must not say so  !  But
what think you? — What? — Is there not sad stuffs?
What  ?— what  ?"

''Yes,  indeed,  I think so,  sir,  though mixed with
such excellences,  that — "

"  O  !"  cried he,  laughing good-humouredly,  "  I know
it is not to be said  !  but it's true.  Only it's Shakes-
peare, and nobody dare abuse him.''

Then he enumerated many of the characters and parts
of plays that he objected to;  and when he had run

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  399

them over,  finished with again laughing,  and exclaiming,

'*  But one should be stoned for saying so  !"

^*  Madame de Genlis,  sir,"  said I,  '*  had taken such
an impression of the English theatre,  that she told me
she thought no woman ought to go to any of our come-
dies."

This,  which,  indeed,  is a very overstrained censure of
our dramas,  made him draw back,  and vindicate the
stage from a sentence so severe ;  which,  however,  she
had pronounced to me,  as if she looked upon it to be an
opinion in which I should join as a thing past dispute.

The King approved such a denunciation no more
than his little subject ;  and he vindicated the stage from
so hard an aspersion,  with a warmth not wholly free from
indignation.

This led on to a good deal more dramatic criticism ;
but what was said was too little followed up to be re-
membered for writing.  His Majesty stayed near two
hours,  and then wished Mrs.  Delany good night,  and
having given me a bow,  shut the door himself,  to prevent
Mrs.  Delany,  or even me,  from attending him out,  and,

with only Miss P to wait upon him,  put on his own

great coat in the passage,  and walked away to the
lower lodge,  to see the Princess Elizabeth,  without car-
riage or attendant.  He is a pattern of modest,  but
manly superiority to rank.

I should say more of this evening,  and of the King,
with whose unaffected conversation and unassuming port
and manner I was charmed,  but that I have another
meeting to write, — a long,  and,  to me,  very delightful
private conference with the Queen.  It happened the
very next morning.

Tuesday,  Dec.  20th. — 1st,  summons ;  2ndly,  entree.

400 DIARV AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

"  Miss Burney,  have you heard that Boswell is going
to pubhsh a hfe of your friend Dr.  Johnson?"

*'  No,  ma'am."

*'  I tell you as I heard.  I don't know for the truth of
it,  and I can't tell what he will do.  He is so extraor-
dinary a man,  that perhaps he will devise something ex-
traordiiiar}-.  What do you think of Madame de Genlis'
last work  ?"

'^I have not read it,  ma'am."

"Not read it?"

(I believe she knew my copy,  which lay on the table.)

I said I had taken it to Norbury,  and meant to read it
with Mrs.  Locke,  but things then prevented.

««  Oh  !  (looking pleased)  have you read the last edi-
tion of her  '  Adeie?"'

*^  No,  ma'am."

"  Well,  it is much improved ;  for the passage,  you
know,  Mrs.  Delany,  of the untruth,  is all altered ;  fif-
teen pages are quite new;  and she has altered it very
prettily.  She has sent it to me.  She always sends me
her works;  she did it a long while ago,  when I did not
know there was such a lady as Madame de Genlis.
You have not seen  '  Adele/  then  ?"

"  No,  ma'am."

''  You would like to see it.  But I have it not here.
Indeed,  I think sometimes I have no books at all,  for
they are at Kew,  or they are in town,  and they are here  ;
and I don't know which is which.  Is Madame de
Genlis about any new work  ?"

"Yes,  ma'am;  one which she intends  '  pour k peu-

*'  Ah,  that will be a ijood work.  Have vou heard of — "
(mentioning some German book,  of which I forget the
name.)

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.       401

"  No,  ma'am."

^'  O,  it will be soon translated ;  very fine language, —
very bad book.  They translate all our worst !  And
they are so improved in language ;  they write so finely
now,  even for the most silly books,  that it makes one
read on,  and one cannot help it.  O,  I am very angry
sometimes at that !  Do you like the  ^  Sorrows of
Werter?'"

"  I — I have not read it,  ma'am,  only in part.''

"  No  ?  Well,  I don't know how it is translated,  but it
is very finely writ in German,  and I can't bear it."

"  I am very happy to hear that,  for what I did look
over made me determine never to read it.  It seemed
only writ as a deliberate defence of suicide."

*'  Yes  ;  and what is worse,  it is done by a bad man
for revenofe."

She then mentioned,  with praise,  another book,  saying,

"  I wish I knew the translator."

"  I wish the translator knew that !"

«•'  O — it is not — I should not like to give my name,
for fear I have judged ill :  I picked it up on a stall.  O,
it is amazing what good books there are on stalls."

"  It is amazing to me,"  said Mrs.  Delany,  ^'  to hear
that."

'-  Why,  I don't pick them up myself;  but I have a
servant very clever;  and if they are not to be had at the
booksellers',  they are not for me any more than for
another."

She then spoke of Klopstock's  "  Messiah,"  saying it
contained four lines most perfect on religion.

'«  How I should like to see it.  Is it translated  ?"
asked Mrs.  Delany,  turning to me.

"  111 :"  said her Majesty :  "  there is a story of Lazarus
and the Centurion's daughter ;    and another young

VOL.    II.  D D

402 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

lady,  Asyddel,  he calls her;  and Lazarus is in love; —
a very pretty scene — no stopping ; — but it is out of
place ; — I was quite angry to read it.  And a Ions;  con-
versation between Christ and Lazarus — very strange  !"

"  Yet Milton does that."

"Yes."

And then she went on discussing Milton :  this led to
Wicklifie,  and Cranmer  ;  and she spoke of the Roman-
catholic superstitions.

*'  0,  so odd  !  Can it signify to God Almighty if I
eat a piece of fish or a piece of meat?  And,  one of the
Queen of France's sisters wears the heel of her shoe
before,  for a penance ;  as if God Almighty could care
for that !"

*'  It is supposing in Him the caprice of a fine lady."

"  Yes,  just so.  Yet it is amusing,  and pretty too,
how sincere the lower people are,  of the Catholics.     I

was with my mother at ,  a Catholic town,  and there

was a lady we knew,  had a very bad tooth-ache  ;  she
suffered night and day,  and we w^ere very sorry.  But,
over the river there was a Virgin Mary of great fame for
miracles,  and,  one morning,  when I wanted to get up,
our maid did not come,  and nobody knew where she
was,  and she could not be found.  At last she came
back with a large bouquet,  which she had carried over
the river in the night and got it blessed,  and gave it to
the lady to cure her tooth-ache.  But we have Protestant
nunneries in Germany.  I belonged to one which was
under the Imperial protection ;  there is one for royal
families — one for noblesse ;  the candidates'  coats of arms
are put up several weeks to be examined,  and if any flaw
is found,  they are not elected.  These nunneries are in-
tended for young ladies of little fortunes and high birth.
There is great licence in them.     They have balls,  not at

1785]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  403

home,  but next door;  and there is no restriction but to
go to prayers at eight,  at nine,  and at night, — that is
very httle,  you know, — and wear black or white.  The
dress consists of three caps,  one over the forehead,  one
for the back,  one up high,  and one lower,  for the veil;
very pretty ;  and the gown is a vest,  and the skirt has I
don't know how many hundred plaits.  I had the Cross
and Order,  but I believe I gave it away when I came to
England  ;  for you may transfer ;  so I gave it to the
Countess of ,  a friend of mine.''

I could not help saying,  how glad we ail were that she
was no nun  !

"  Once,"  she continued,  ^*  I wanted to go to a chapel
in that Catholic town,  and my mother said I should go
if I would be sure not to laugh at anything  ;  and I pro-
mised I would not ;  so,  I took care to keep my eyes half
«hut,  half open,  thus,  for fear I should see something to
make me laugh,  for my mother told me I should not
come out all day if I laughed.  But there was nothing
ridiculous."

[The memorandum of the above conversation breaks
off abruptly.]

Mrs.  Montagu to Miss Burney*

Portman Square,  Dec.  16th,  1785.
Dear Madam,

It is dangerous to indulge an opinion that any temp-
tation could be absolutely irresistible,  and it would be
absurd to urge it to Miss Burney,  whose sentiments
would contradict it,  and whose writings teach better doc-

*  This letter is preserved merely as a specimen of the epistolary-
style of so celebrated a person as the writer.  /

D D 2

404 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

trines  ;  so I cannot assert it was impossible not to seize
the pretence I had to write to you,  but I thought you
would pardon my availing myself of it ;  for indeed,  my
dear madam,  if all people could,  few would be able to
withstand the temptation of corresponding with you.

This mornmg I took the liberty to send by the Wind-
sor coach,  directed to Mrs.  Delany,  a basket of game,
containing a brace of partridges,  a moorgame,  and a phea-
sant, and beg,  if they are not delivered,  that you would
order one of her servants to call at the inn where the
stage sets up,  and make inquiry after it.  I could not
address myself to Mrs.  Delany on this occasion,  for it
w ould be impossible for me to write to her without touch-
ing on a subject too affecting to us both.  I have known
by sad experience the agonies excited,  the wounds of the
breast torn open afresh,  by letters of condolence.  How-
ever, there is some degree of comfort in affliction,  de-
rived from the assurance of another's sympathy;  but
in this case,  where my own misfortune and loss was
so great,  it was quite unnecessary to express the share
I took in the sad event :  nor was there anv ar^u-
ment of consolation which was not to be found in
the characters of the deceased and surviving friend  ;
so that Mrs.  Delany would best read them in her
own,  and the excellent virtues of the friend she had
lost.  Ts'or indeed can anything administer comfort,
but the well-grounded confidence,  that after a short sepa-
ration, there will be a re-union in an eternal state.  Most
truly and emphatically is it said,  "  the sting of death is
sin,"  whether the dart assail us in our own person,  or
that of the friend one loves.

Their Majesties'  goodness must have been to Mrs.
Delany the best support in affliction which this world
could give  ;  their acts were princely,  but the sentiments

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        405

they have shewn in their manner are angelical.  May
the hearts where such virtues dwell never feel afflictioii
more I This will ever be my earnest wish,  and was my
earnest prayer while Princess Elizabeth was ill.  I
hope her Royal Highness is now out of all danger.

I had the pleasure of meeting Dr.  Burney at dinner at
Mrs.  Vesey's last week.  The society was very agreeable,
which may easily be imagined,  as the doctor made a part
of it ;  but my poor friend is so deaf,  she lost much of the
pleasant table-talk.  She is still much afflicted  ;  the
agrtmens which she found in the society of Mr.  Vesey she
regrets the loss of,  and he had not those virtues from
whence consolation can be drawn.  A frippery character,
like a gaudy flower,  may please while it is in bloom  ;  but
it is the virtuous only that,  like the aromatics,  preserve
their sweet and reviving odour when withered.

I beg you would take some opportunity to present my
most affectionate and sincere respects to Mrs.  Delany.

I have solicited Dr.  Burney to meet some of his friends
at dinner here on Wednesday  :  I need not say how happy
I should have been to have had a hope of your being of
the party  ;  but I am afraid we shall not get you to Lon-
don till the Christmas holidays are over.

I ask pardon for having intruded this long letter on
your time and patience.    With great esteem,  I am,
Dear madam,  yours,  &c.

E.  Montagu.

Miss F.  Burney to Mrs.  Burney.

Windsor,  Dec.  17th,  1785.
My dearest Hetty,
I am sorry I could not more immediately write ;  but
I really have not had a moment since your last.

40G DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT IX.

Now I know what you next want is,  to hear accounts
of kings,  queens,  and such royal persona^^es.  O ho!
do you so?     Well.

Shall I tell you a few matters of fact  ? — or,  had you
rather a few matters of etiquette  ?     Oh,  matters of eti-
quette, you cry  !  for matters of fact are short and stupid,
and anybody can tell,  and everybody is tired with them.
Very well,  take your own choice.
To begin,  then,  with the beginning.
You know I told you,  in my last,  my various difficul-
ties, what sort of preferment to turn mv thoughts to,  and
concluded with just starting a young budding notion of
decision,   by sugo^esting that a handsome pension for
nothino;  at all would be as well as workins:  nio-ht and
day for a salary.

This blossom of an idea,  the miore I dwelt upon,  the
more I liked.  Thinking served it for a hot-house,  and
it came out into full blow as I ruminated upon my
pillow.  Delighted that thus all my contradictory and
wayward fancies were overcome,  and my mind was
peaceably settled what to wish and to demand,  I gave
over all further meditation upon choice of elevation,
and had nothing more to do but to make my election
known.

My next business,  therefore,  was to be presented.
This could be no difficulty ;  my coming hither had
been their own desire,  and they had earnestly pressed its
execution.  I had only to prepare myself for the ren-
counter.

You would never believe — you,  who,  distant from
courts and courtiers,  know nothing of their ways, — the
many things to be studied,  for appearing with a proper
propriety before crowned heads.  Heads without crowns
are qui*e other sort of rotundas.

1785]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.       407

Now,  then,  to the etiquette.  I inquired into every
particular,  that no error might be committed.  And as
there is no saying what may happen in this mortal life,
I shall give you those instructions I have received my-
self, that,  should you find yourself in the royal presence,
you may know how to comport yourself.

Directions for coughing,  sneezing,  or moving^  before
the King and Queen,

In the first place,  you must not cough.  If you find a
cough tickling in your throat,  you must arrest it from
making any sound ;  if you find yourself choking witL
the forbearance,  you must choke — but not cough.

In the second place,  you must not sneeze.  If you
have a vehement cold,  you must take no notice of it;  if
your nose-membranes feel a great irritation,  you must
hold your breath ;  if a sneeze still insists upon making
its way,  you must oppose it,  by keeping your teeth
grinding together  ;  if the violence of the repulse breaks
some blood-vessel,  you must break the blood-vessel —
but not sneeze.

In the third place,  you must not,  upon any account^
stir either hand or foot.  If,  by chance,  a black pin runs
into your head,  you must not take it out.  If the pain is
very s^reat,  vou must be sure to bear it without vvinci>n2:;
if it brings the tears into your eyes,  you must not wipe
them off;  if they give you a tingling by running down
your cheeks,  you must look as if nothing was the matter.
If the blood should gush from your head by means of
the black pin,  you must let it gush  ;  if you are uneasy
to think of making such a blurred appearance,  you must
be uneasy,  but you must say nothing about it.  If,  how-
ever, the agony is very great,  you may,  privately,  bite
the inside of your cheek,  or of your lips,  for a little relief;

408 DIARY AND LETTERS,  ETC.        [PaRT IX.

taking care,  meanwhile,  to do it so cautiously as to make
no apparent dent outwardly.  And,  with that precaution,
if you even gnaw a piece out,  it will not be minded,  only
be sure either to swallow it,  or commit it to a corner of the
inside of your mouth till they are gone — for you must
not spit.

I have many other directions,  but no more paper ;  I
will endeavour,  however,  to have them ready for you in
tirne.  Perhaps,  meanwhile,  you will be glad to know if
I have myself had opportunity to put in practice these
receipts  ?

How can I answer in this little space  ?  My love to
Mr.  B.  and the little ones,  and remember me kindly to
cousin Edward,  and believe me,  my dearest Esther,

Most affectionately yours,

F.  B.

PART X.

1786.

CONTENTS.

Expectation — An Invitation to Windsor — Journey thither — Message
from the Queen — The Terrace at Windsor Castle — Interview with
the King and Queen — Disappointment — Warren Hastings — His
Amiable Manner and Private Character — Mrs.  Hastings  —  A
Dilemma — Proposal of the Queen for Miss Burney to accept a
Situation about her Person — Her Doubts and Fears on the Occasion
— Consultation — Extreme Delicacy of the Queen's Conduct to Miss
Burney — Nature and Duties of the Office — Mrs.  Schwellenberg —
Mrs.  Haggerdorn — A Message from the Queen — Letter from Miss
Burney to Dr.  Burney — Anecdote of the Queen's Conduct to her —
Her reasons for choosing Miss Burney for the Office — the Ap-
pointment takes place — Preparations and Preliminaries — Astonish-
ment of the Court — Letter from Miss Burney to her Sister Charlotte
— Change in her Condition and Prospects — Fitting Out — Con-
jectures and Mistakes — Letter from Miss Burney to Dr.  Burney —
Duties and Difficulties of her New Office — Congratulations from
the Ladies of the Court — The Embarrassments of Etiquette.

410 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

PAET X.

1786.

Diary resumed.

[Tlie records of the early part of this year are few,
and the topics of them are chiefly of a private nature,
until the correspondence reaches a subject which formed
an era in Miss Burney's life — her connexion with the
court and household of Queen Charlotte.]

Sunday,  May 21. — 1 have now quite a new business
to write upon.  Late on Saturday night,  news reached my
father of the death of the worthy Mr.  Stanley,  who has
been long in a declining state of health.  His place of
Master of the King's band my dear father had been
promised formerly.  Now he was once more to apply
for it;  and early on Sunday morning he went to Mr.
Smelt,  to beg his advice what way to proceed.

Just as I was at the door,  and going to church,  my
father returned,  and desired me to come back,  as he had
something to communicate to me.  Mr.  Smelt,  he then told
me,  had counselled him to go instantly to Windsor,  not
to address the King,  but to be seen by him.  '•  Take
your daughter,"  he said,  "  in your hand,  and walk upon
the terrace.  The King's seeing you at this time he will
understand,  and he is more likely to be touched by a
hint of that delicate sort than by any direct application,'*

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        411

My father determined implicitly to follow this advice.
But let me not omit a singular little circumstance,  which
much enUvened and encouraged our expedition.  While
I was changing my dress for the journey,  I received a

letter from Miss P ,  which was sent by a private

hand,  and ought to have arrived sooner,  and which
pressed my visit to my dear Mrs.  Delany very warmly,
and told me it was by the Queen's express wish.  This
gave me great spirits for my dear father's enterprise,  and
I was able to help his on the road,  from so favourable
a symptom.

When we got to Windsor,  my father saw me safe to
Mrs.  Delany's,  and then went himself to Dr.  Lind's.
With what joy did I fly into the dear,  open arms of this
most venerable of women !  Her reception had all the
warm liveliness of pleasant surprise,  added to its un-
failing kindness.  I spent about two hours with her,
most sweetly indeed ;  she unbosomed all her cares and
sorrows,  with that trusting openness that twines her
round my heart,  and makes it take a part,  such as it
feels for its own,  in all her sadnesses and solicitudes.
Grievous it is indeed,  grievous and most melancholy,
that,  at her very great age,  good,  pure,  and excellent
as she is,  sadness and solicitude should fall to her lot.
But all her primitive sensibility remains unimpaired,
and some there are who put it to most cruel proof.

Miss P ,  with her usual partiality,  was in high glee

from the surprise.  I dined and drank tea with them.
Mrs.  Delany wished me to continue with her,  and make
mv visit,  so long delayed,  from that time;  but I had
two positive engagements for Monday and Tuesday,  that
could not well be broken.  But I promised to go after
that day whenever she pleased.  She related to me
the most flattering speech made to her by the Queen,

412 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

about my coming to her as  **  the friend best suited to
solace her in her disturbances,"  and assured me she
had quite interested herself in pressmg Mrs.  Delany to
hasten me.

'Tis very extraordinary what a gracious disposition
towards me this sweet Queen always manifests,  and
what peculiar elegance there is in the expressions she
makes use of in my favour.  They were now particularly
well-timed,  and gave me most pleasant hopes for my
dear father.  He came to tea at Mrs.  Delany's,  and,  at
the proper hour,  went to the terrace,  with the good-
natured Dr.  Lind,  who is always ready to oblige.  I
waited to go with a female party,  which was arranged
for me by Mrs.  Delany,  and soon followed: — it was
Lady Louisa Clayton,  3Iiss Clayton,  her daughter-in-
law,  and Miss Emily,  her own daughter,  with Miss
P .

All the royal family were already on the terrace before
we arrived.  The King and Queen,  and the Prince of
Mechlenberg,  and her Majesty's mother,  walked together.
Next them the Princesses and their ladies,  and the young
Princes,  making a very gay and pleasing procession,  of
one of the finest families in the world.  Eveiy way they
moved,  the crowd retired to stand up against the wall as
they passed,  and then closed in to follow.  When they
approached towards us,  and we were retreating,  Lady
Louisa Clayton placed me next herself,  making her
daughters stand below — a politeness and attention with-
out which I had certainly not been seen;  for the moment
their Majesties advanced,  I involuntarily looked down,
and drew my hat over my face.  I could not endure to
stare at them,  and,  full of our real errand,  I felt ashamed
even of being seen by them.  The very idea of a design,
however far from illaudable,  is always distressing and

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  41^

uncomfortable.  Consequently,  I should have stood in
the herd,  and unregarded ;  but Lady Louisa's kindness
and good breeding put me in a place too conspicuous to
pass unnoticed.  The moment the Queen had spoken to
her,  which she stopped to do as soon as she came up to
her,  she inquired,  in a whisper,  who was with her ;  as I
know,  by hearing ray own name given for the answer.
The Queen then instantly stepped nearer m.e,  and asked
me how I did  ;  and then the King came forward,  and^
as soon as he had repeated the same question,  said,  ^'  Are-
you come to stay  ?"

"  No,  sir,  not now."

^'  No;  but how long shall you stay  ?"

*'  I go to-night,  sir."

'^  I was sure,"  cried the Queen,  '^  she was not come to
stay,  by seeing her father."

I was glad by this to know my father had been ob-
served.

•'  And when did vou come  ?"  cried the Kino;.

"  About two hours ago,  sir."

''  And when do you return again to Windsor?"

"  Very soon,  I hope,  sir."

"  And — and — and — "  cried he,  half laughing,  and
hesitating significantly,  '^  pray,  how goes on the
Muse  ?"

At first I only laughed,  too ;  but he repeated the in-
quiry, and then I answered,  "  Not at all,  sir."

''  No  ?     But why  ?— why not  ?"

''  I — I — I am afraid,  sir,"  stammered I,  and true
enough,  I am sure.

^'  And why  ?"  repeated he — ^'  of what  ?"

I spoke something, — I hardly know what myself, — so
indistinctly,  that he could not hear me,  though he had
put his head quite under my hat,  from the beginning of

414 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

the little conference  ;  and,  after another such question
or two,  and no greater satisfaction in the answer,  he
smiled very good-humouredly,  and walked on,  his
charming Queen by his side.  His condescension con-
fuses, though it delights me.

We stayed some time longer on the terrace,  and my
poor father occasionally joined me  ;  but he looked so con-
scious and depressed,  that it pained me to see him.
There is nothing that I know so very dejecting as soli-
citation. I am sure I could never,  I believe,  go through
a task of that sort.  My dear father was not spoken to,
though he had a bow every time the King passed him,
and a curtsey from the Queen.  But it hurt him,  and
be thought it a very bad prognostic ;  and all there was
at all to build upon  \vas the graciousness shewn to me,
which,  indeed,  in the manner I was accosted,  was very
flattering,  and,  except to high rank,  I am told,  very rare.

We stayed but a very short time with my sweet  ]\Irs.
Delany,  whose best wishes you are sure were ours.  I
told her our plan,  and our full conviction that she could
not assist in it,  as the obligations she herself owes are so
great and so weighty,  that any request from her would
be encroaching and improper.

We did not get home till past eleven o'clock.  We
were then informed that Lord Brudenel had called to say
Mr.  Parsons had a promise of the place from the Lcrd
Chamberlain.     This v.-as not very exhilarating.

I had been invited by Mr.  Cambridge to pass a day
at Twickenham with Mr.  and Mrs.  Hastings,  who had
proposed to carry me thither with them  :  accordingly,

Wednesday,  May 24th. — Mrs.  Hastings sent her
carriage here before ten o'clock.  I made her and Mr.
Hastings a visit of about half an hour previously to our
journey.     I am quite charmed with Mr.  Hastings;  and.

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        415

indeed,  from all I can gather,  and all I can observe, —
both which are but little, — he appears to me to be one
of the greatest men now living,  as a public character ;
while,  as a private one,  his gentleness,  candour,  soft
manners,  and openness of disposition,  make him one of
the most pleasing.

The little journey was extremely agreeable.  He spoke
with the utmost frankness of his situation and affairs,
and with a noble confidence in his certainty of victory
over his enemies,  from his consciousness of integrity and
honour,  that filled me with admiration and esteem for
him.

Mrs.  Hastings is lively,  obliging,  and entertaining,
and so adored by her husband,  that,  in her sight and
conversation he seems to find a recompense,  adequate to
all his wishes,  for the whole of his toils,  and long dis-
turbances and labours.  How rare,  but how sweet and
pleasant,  the sight of such unions !

[A vacancy at this time occurred in the royal house-
hold, from the resignation of Madame Haggerdorn,  one
of the Queen's German attendants who,  together with
Madame Schweilenberg,  held the office of Keeper of the
Robes.  The place was much sought after,  but her Majesty
had been so v»'ell pleased with what she saw of Miss Bur-
ney,  that she graciously empowered Mr.  Smelt to offer
her this situation,  allowing her time to consider and weigh
its advantages.

Miss Burney,  though deeply grateful for such a distinc-
tion, foresav/ with alarm the separation fromherfamily and
the total confinement it would occasion  ;  and,  in her per-

416 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

plexity how to decide,  she wrote the following letter to
her judicious and faithful friend,  the late Miss Cam-
bridge.]

To Miss Cambridge.

Monday,  June,  — 86.

«•'  I will share,"  says my dearest Miss Cambridge,  in a
letter,  not long ago,  '•  in all your cares — all your joys."
Is it fair in me,  beginning,  per force,  by the worst,  to take
you at your generous word?  Yes,  I hope it is — for
would you have invited such a participation,  and not
have wished it  ?  No,  I know your noble sincerity too
well,  and I call upon you to speak to rae in those words
you would speak to yourself,  when I have told you the
subject of my present difficulty.

It is only by minds such as yours — as my Susan's,  Mrs.
Delany's,  and INIrs.  Locke's — my four invaluable friends,
that I can hope to be even understood,  when I speak of
difficulty and distress from a proposal apparently only
advantageous.  But Susan's wishes are so certainly and
invariably my own,  that I wish to spare her from hearino-
of this matter till the decision is made;  Mrs.  Delany,
with all her indulgent partiality,  is here too deeply inte-
rested on the other side to be consulted without paining
her;  and Mrs.  Locke has an enthusiasm in her kindness
that makes every plan seem cruel to her that puts or keeps
us asunder.  In this particular case,  therefore,  I shall
apply for no opinion but yours, — yours,  which I may here
peculiarly trust,  from knowing that it unites the two pre-
cise qualities that suit it for judging my situation, — a
strong sense of duty,  with a disinterested love of inde-
pendence. And you are liberal enough,  too,  I am sure,
to permit me openly to tell you that I do not beg your

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  417

advice with a premeditated resolution to follow it ;  but
simply with a view to weigh and compare your ideas
with my own,  in the same manner I should do could I
talk the matter over with you instead of writing it.

I now come straight to the point.

Yesterday evening,  while I was with Mrs.  Delany,
Mr.  Smelt arrived from Windsor,  and desired a private
conference with her ;  and,  when it was over,  a separate
one with me :  surprising me not a little,  by entreating
me to suffer some very home questions from him,  relative
to my situation,  my views,  and even my wishes,  with re-
spect to my future life.  At first,  I only laughed  :  but
my merriment a little failed me,  when he gave me to
understand he was commissioned to make these inquiries
by a great personage,  who had conceived so favourable
an opinion of me as to be desirous of undoubted informa-
tion, whether or not there was a probability she might
permanendy attach me to herself and her family.

You cannot easily,  my dear Miss Cambridge,  picture
to yourself the consternation with which I received this
intimation.  It was such that the good and kind Mr.  Smelt,
perceiving it,  had the indulgence instantly to offer me
his services,  first,  in forbearing to mention even to my
father his commission,  and next in fabricating and
carrying back for me a respectful excuse.  And I must
always consider myself the more obliged to him,  as I saw
in his own face the utmost astonishment and disappoint-
ment at this reception of his embassy.

I could not,  however,  reconcile to myself concealing
from my dear father a matter that ought to be settled by
himself;  yet I frankly owned to Mr.  Smelt that no
situation of that sort was suited to my own taste,  or pro-
mising to my own happiness.

He seemed equally sorry and surprised  ;  he expatiated
VOL.  II.  E E

418 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

warmly upon the sweetness of character of all the royal
family,  and then begged me to consider the very pecu-
liai^  distinction shewn me,  that,  unsolicited,  unsought,  I
had been marked out with such personal favour by the
Queen herself,  as a person with whom she had been so
singularly pleased,  as to wish to settle me with one of
the princesses,  in preference to the thousands of offered
candidates,  of high birth and rank,  but small fortunes,
who were waiting and supplicating for places in the
new- forming establishment.  Her Majesty proposed
giving me apartments in the palace ;  making me be-
long to the table of Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  with whom
all her own visitors — bishops,  lords,  or commons — always
dine;  keeping me a footman,  and settling on me  £*200 a
year.  '^  And in such a situation,"  he added,  "  so re-
spectably offered,  not solicited,  you may have oppor-
tunities of serving your particular friends, — -especially
your father, — such as scarce any other could afford
you."

My dear Miss Cambridge will easily feel that this was
a plea not to be answered.  Yet the attendance upon this
Princess was to be incessant, — the confinement to the
court continual ; — I was scarce ever to be spared for a
single visit from the palaces,  nor to receive anybody
but with permission, — and,  my dear Miss Cambridge,
what a life for me,  who have friends so dear to me,  and
to whom friendship is the balm,  the comfort,  the very
support of existence  !

Don't think me ungrateful,  meanwhile,  to the sweet
Queen,  for thus singling out and distinguishing an ob-
scure and most unambitious individual.  No indeed,  I am
quite penetrated with her partial and most unexpected
condescension :  but yet,  let me go through,  for her sake,
my tasks with what cheerfulness I may,  the deprivations I

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        419

must suffer would inevitably keep me from all possibility
of happiness.

Though I said but little,  my dear Mrs.  Delany was
disturbed and good Mr.  Smelt much mortified,  that a
proposition which had appeared to them the most flat-
tering and honourable,  should be heard only with de-
jection. I cast,  however,  the whole into my father's dis-
posal and pleasure.

But I have time for no more detail,  than merely to
say,  that till the offer comes in form,  no positive answer
need be given,  and therefore that I am yet at liberty.
Write to me,  then,  my dearest Miss Cambridge,  with all
your fullest honesty,  and let me know which you wish to
strengthen — my courage in making my real sentiments
openly known,  or my fortitude in concealing what it may
be right I should endure.

The moment this affair is decided,  as I shail then
strive to make the best of it,  whatever be my decision,  I
shall entreat you to return me this letter,  or commit it to
the flames.  The measles will keep off any meetings at
Windsor for some time.  I hope,  therefore,  to receive
your answer before I am obliged to speak finally.

Can you forgive me this trouble  ?  If matters take the
turn I so much dread,  I shall not give you much more  !

If it should be in my power,  I still intend to defer my
fioinir to Windsor till all this is arranged.

Adieu !  my dearest Miss Cambridge ;  I am sorry to
send you a letter written in such confusion of mind.

Monday Night. — I have now to add,  that the zealous
Mr.  Smelt is just returned from Windsor,  whither he
went again this morning,  purposely to talk the matter
over with her Majesty.  What passed I know not, — but the
result is,  that she has desired an interview with me herself;
it is to take place next Monday,  at Windsor.  I now see the

E E 2

420 DIARY AND LETTERS  [FaRT X.

end — I see it next to inevitable.  I can sugijest nothing
upon earth that I dare say for myself,  in an audience so
generously meant.  I cannot even to my father utter my
reluctance, — I see him so much delighted at the prospect
of an establishment he looks upon as so honourable.  But
for the Queen's own word j)crmanejity  —  but for her de-
clared desire to to attach me entirely to herself and
family, — I should share in his pleasure ;  but what can
make me amends for all I shall forfeit  ?  But I must do
the best I can.  Write me a'comfortins:  and strenojtheninff
letter,  my dearest Miss Cambridge.  I have no heart to
write to Mickleham,  or Norbury.  I know how they will
grieve : — they have expected me to spend the whole sum-
mer with them.  My greatest terror is,  lest the Queen,
from what Mr.  Smelt hinted,  should make me promise
myself to her for a length of years.  What can I do to
avoid that?  Anything that has a period is endurable;
but what can I object that will not sound ungrateful,  to
the honour she is doinsr me and meaning?  me  ?  She has
given the most highly flattering reasons for making this
application,  in preference to listening to that of others;
she has put it upon terms of commendation the most
soothing ;  she is,  indeed,  one of the sweetest characters
in the world.  Will you,  too,  condemn me,  then,  that I
feel thus oppressed by her proposal?  I hope not, — I
think not; — but be very honest if you really do.  I wish
I could see you  !  It is not from nervousness  ; — I have
always and uniformly had a horror of a life of attend-
ance and dependence.

Don't be uneasy about me,  however ;  for,  this one week
of conflict over,  I shall set all my faculties at work to do
the best,  and think the least I can.  And till that time
comes,  I must not venture to write to my poor Susan.
She and Mrs.  Locke have long feared this.     I thought

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  421

their fears so vain,  so partial,  so almost absurd,  that I never
heeded them.  Yet I now hear the Queen has been form
ing this plan ever since I had first the honour of knowing
her ;  and she has been making the minutest inquiries
from that time into my conduct and disposition,  and all
that belongs to me.     How little did I suspect it !

Could I but save myself from a lasting bond, — from a
promised devotion !  That is the great point of all,  my
dearest Miss Cambridge,  in which,  if you can help me
to suggest something that will not sound disrespectful or
improper,  you will serve me indeed.

[The answ^er to this letter does not appear ;  but Miss
Burney's grateful sense of her Majesty's goodness,  and
the desire avowed by Dr.  Burney and Mrs.  Delany
that so honourable and advantageous an oifer should not
be declined,  all concurred to make her accept it ;  and the
following letter to her father shews the final result of hei
deliberations,  and her affectionate care to prevent him
from perceiving her uneasiness.]

F.  B.

Miss F.  Burney to Dr.  Burney.

Monday,  June 19th,  1786.

How great must have been your impatience,  dearest
sir  !  but my interview has only this morning taken
place.  Every thing is settled,  and to-morrow morning
I go to the Queen's Lodge,  to see the apartments,  and to
receive my instructions.

I must confess myself extremely frightened and full of
alarms,  at a change of situation so great,  so unexpected,
so unthought of.  Whether I shall suit it or not,  Hea-
ven only knows,  but I have a thousand doubts.  Yet
nothing could be sweeter than the Queen,— more en-

42-2 DIARV AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

couiaging,  more gentle,  or more delicate.  She did not
ask me one question concerning my qualifications for the
charge ;  she only said,  with the most condescending
softness,  *•  I am sure,  Miss Burney,  we shall suit one
another very well."  And,  another time,  "  I am sure
we shall do very well together."

And what is it,  dear Sir,  you suppose to be my busi-
ness ?  Not to attend any of the Princesses — but the
Queen herself !  This,  indeed,  was a delightful hearing,
reverencing and admiring her as I have so sincerely done
ever since I first saw her.  And in this,  my amazemen
is proportioned to my satisfaction  ;  for the place designed
me is that of Mrs.  Haggerdoi-n,  who came with her from
Germany,  and it will put me more immediately and more
constantly in her presence than any other place,  but
that of Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  in the Court.

The prepossession the Queen has taken in my favour
is truly extraordinary,  for it seems as if her real view was,
as Mr.  Smelt hinted,  to attach me to her person.  She
has been long,  she told Mrs.  Delany,  looking out for
one to supply the place of Mrs.  H.,  whose ill health
forces her back to Germany  :  "  and I was led to think of
Miss Burney,  first by her books ;  then by seeing her ;
then by always hearing how she was loved by her friends ;
but chiefly by your friendship for her."

I fancy my appointment will take place very soon.

♦  *  *  *  *

F.  B.

Miss F.  Burney to Dr.  Burney.

Windsor,  June 20th,  1786.
Most dear Sir,
I am sure you will be glad to hear I have got one for-
mality over,  that was very disagreeable to my expecta-

1786]  OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.  423

tions.  I have been introduced to Mrs.  Haggerdorn
whom I am to succeed,  and to Mrs.  Schwellenberg,  whom
I am to accompany.  This passed at the Queen's Lodge,
in their own apartments,  this morning.  I cannot easily
describe the sensation with which I entered that dwel-
ling,— the thoughts of its so soon becoming my habita-
tion,— and the great hazard of how all will go on in it
— and the sudden change !

Everything was perfectly civil and easy ;  the Queen
had herself prepared them to receive me,  and requested
me to go.

They made no use of the meeting in the way of busi-
ness ;  it was merely a visit of previous ceremony.

I hope to get to town on Thursday ;  I shall have very
little time,  indeed,  for a multiplicity of things to do,  and
to order,  and to settle.

Nobody has been told of this affair here as yet,  but
Mrs.  S.  and Mrs.  H.,  and Lady Weymouth,  who is now
in waiting,  to attend the Queen to the Races.

I am to go again to the Queen's Lodge,  in order to
receive some instructions from Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  in pre-
sence of her Majesty :  and I hope that will take place
to-morrow,  as I cannot leave Windsor till it is done.

The utmost astonishment will take place throughout
the Court when they hear of my appointment.  Every-
body has settled some successor to Mrs.  Haggerdorn ;  and
I have never,  I am very sure,  been suggested by a single
person.  I saw,  this morning,  by all that passed with Mrs.
S.,  how unexpected a step her Majesty has taken.  The
place,  she told me,  had been solicited,  distantly,  by thou-
sands and thousands of women of fashion and rank.

As my coming away cannot be fixed,  on account of my
going again to the Lodge,  and as I shall want to decamp
the very instant I have it in my power,  we think it will

424 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PaRT X.

be best for you,  dearest sir,  to bring me back,  instead of
fetchinfr me.  Indeed I shall want all the encouragement
and all the support you can give me,  flattering as the
whole of this business is,  to enter upon such anew scene,
and prepare for such painful separations,  with any spirit
or cheerfulness.

Adieu again,  dearest,  dearest sir.

Most dutifully and affectionately,  yours,

F.  B.

Miss Burncy to Mrs.  Francis^  Aylesham,  Norjolk.

St.  Martin's Street,  June 27th,  1766.

My sweet Charlotte's kind indulgence to my long
silence has been very,  very dearly accepted.  It is hke
your ever affectionate mind to believe and feel for my
hurries.  New ones that you dream not of have occupied,
and now occupy me.  1 must tell you them briefly,  for
I have scarce a moment ;  but it would be very vexatious
to me that any pen but my own should communicate
any event material to me,  to my dear Charlotte.

Her Majesty has sent me a message,  express,  near a
fortnight ago,  with an offer of a place at Court,  to suc-
ceed Mrs.  Haggerdorn,  one of the Germanswho accom-
panied her to England,  and who is now retiring into
her own country.  'Tis a place of being constantly about
her own person,  and assisting in her toilette, — a place of
much confidence,  and many comforts;  apartments in
the palace ;  a footman kept for me  ;  a coach in common
with Mrs.  Schwellenberg ;  200/.  a-year,  &c.  &c.

I have been in a state of extreme disturbance ever
since,  from the reluctance I feel to the separation it will
cause me from all my friends.     Those,  indeed,  whom I

1786]      OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.        425

most love,  I shall be able to invite to me in the palace  ;
but I see little or no possibility of being able to make,
what I most value,  excursions into the country.

When you come,  however,  my dearest Charlotte,  I
shall certainly take measures for seeing you,  either in
Town,  or at Windsor,  or both.

So new a scene,  so great a change,  so uncertain a
success,  frightens and depresses me  ;  though the extreme
sweetness of the Queen,  in so unsolicited an honour,  so
unthought of a distinction,  binds me to her with a devo-
tion that will make an attendance upon her light and
pleasant.  I repine only at losing my loved visits to the
country,  Mickleham,  Norbury,  Chesington,  Twicken-
ham, and Aylesham,  as I had hoped ;  all these I must
now forego.

Every body so violently congratulates me,  that it
seems as i^  all was gain.  However,  I am glad they are
all so pleased.  My dear father is in raptures  ;  that is my
first comfort.  Write to wish him joy,  my Charlotte,
without a hint to him,  or any one but Susan,  of my
confessions of my internal reluctance and fears.

You may believe how much I am busied.  I have been
presented at the Queen's Lodge in W^indsor,  and seen
Mrs.  Haggerdorn in office,  and find I have a place of
really nothing to do,  but to attend  ;  and on Thursday I am
appointed by her Majesty to go to St.  James's,  to see
all that belongs to me there.  And I am now fitting out
just as you were,  and all the maids and workers suppose
I am going to be married,  and snigger every time they
bring in any of my new attire.  I do not care to pub-
lish the affair,  till it is made known by authority ;  so I
leave them to their conjectures,  and I fancy their
greatest wonder is,  ivho and ivhere is the sposo ;  for they
must think it odd he should never appear  !

F.  B.

426 DIARY AND LETTERS  [PART X.

Miss Burneij to Doctor Burnejj.

Queen's Lodge,  Windsor,  July 20th,  178a

Never were tears so sweet as those I have this moment
been sheddinor over mv beloved father's most kind letter.
Praise such as this,  coming from the very hand in the
whole world that can make it most valuable to me,  quite
melts me.  The confidence you feel in my well-doing
is most grateful to my heart,  and most encouraging to
my spirits.

What my difficulties are to be,  I know not,  nor what
my dangers  ;  but everybody speaks of this as a situation
abounding in both,  and requiring the most indefatigable
prudence and foresight.  At present,  however,  I see
none  ••  I am happy,  indeed,  to tell my dearest father
that my road has grown smoother and smoother,  and
that whatever precipices and brambles I may have to
encounter,  they have not appeared to terrify,  me on the
onset,  and that I therefore hope they will not occur till
I am so well prepared to see them,  that I shall know
how to slip aside,  without tumbling from one,  or being
torn by the other.

What a delightful writing-box !  with what pleasure
shall I always think of who sent it,  and the sweet,  sweet
letter thac accompanied it,  whenever I use it ;  and that
will be continually,  for I have none other.  I am now
making my first experiment of all its contents.  May I
but send you letters as pleasant fi'om it as the first letter
I have found in it !

Sweet Mrs.  Delany comes to me this afternoon ;  she
has already made me two visits.  I shall read her what
you say of her,  if we are alone,  for I know it will much
gratify her.

Tuesday,  after I lost you,  and yesterday,  I was re

17861 OF THE AUTHOR OF EVELINA.         427

ceiving congratulatory visits from the ladies of the
Household,  during all my leisure time.  Lady Charlotte
Finch came in the morning,  and was extremely civil
indeed.  I returned her visit,  and that of her sister,  Lady
Louisa Clayton,  this morning,  for I was desred to walk
out,  for health and exercise,  in the most gracious
manner.  Mrs.  Fielding has been with me also,  renew-
ing our town acquaintance.  Madame La Fite calls
every day.  Miss Goldsworthy has made an opening ;
Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave brought her sister.  Lady
Caroline,  to sit with me for half an hour before they
went upon the Terrace  ;  and Miss Pianta came the first
morning.

To-day,  Lady Efl&ngham,  Lady Frances Howard,  and
Sir George,  who came to wait upon the Queen,  all
entered my room,  and introduced themselves to me,  with
a very flattering speech,  of desiring to cultivate,  &c. ;  but
most unluckily,  I was just going to dress,  and was obliged
to tell them so,  though I could hardly get such words
out ;  and to make them leave me at once.  The shock,
however,  was all mine ;  for they are too much used to a
court to receive any from submitting to its train of sub-
ordinate etiquettes.

F.  B.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

TO THB

SECOND VOLUME.

Barclay,  David,  was one of seven sons of the celebrated Apologist of
the Quakers, — all of whom were living fifty years after the death
of their father.  David was the last of them.  He was a wealthy
mercer in Cheapside,  and entertained successively the three kings
(George I.,  II.,  and III.)  on their respective visits to the city on
Lord Mayor's day.  He was subsequently the purchaser of Mr.
Thrale's brewery,  and founder of the most famous brewing firm of
the present day,  Barclay,  Perkins,  and Co.

Berquin,  Arnauld de,  was bom at Bourdeaux in 1749,  and died at
Paris in 1791.

Bewley,  William.  He was for some time the writer of the articles
on science and natural philosophy in the Monthly Review.  He
died at the house of Dr.  Burney in 1783.

BoscAWEXjTHE HoN. FRANCES, daughter ofW. E.Glanville, Esq., and
wife to Admiral Boscawen.  This lady was also mother to the Duchess
of Beaufort and Mrs.  Leveson Gower.  All these three ladies are
celebrated in Miss Hannah More's poem entitled  ''  Sensibility."

Browne,  Hawkins,  son of Isaac Hawkins Browne,  author of an
elegant Latin poem entitled  "  De Animi Immortalitate,"  which was
translated by Soame Jenyns.

BuNBURY,  Harry,  was one of the most celebrated caricaturists of liis
day in England.  He was especially celebrated on subjects con-
nected with horsemanship.  His best and best kno^ii work is a series
of caricatures,  with humorous descriptive letter-press,  on  *'  The Art
of Horsemanship."

Cambridge,  Richard Owen.  This gentleman,  of an opulent and
ancient Gloucestershire family,  was distinguished for his wit in con-
versation, no less than for his taste and talents in literature.  He
wrote a burlesque poem called  "  The Scribleriad,"  and was a prin-
cipal contributor to the periodical paper called  "  The World."  He
died,  aged 85,  at his seat near Twickenham,  on the banks of the
Thames,  in the year 1802,  leaving a widow,  two sons,  and one
daughter.  His works were collected and re-published by his younger
son,  who prefixed to them a memoir of Mr.  Cambridge,  which has
been justly admired for its elegance and perspicuity.

Cambridge,  the Rev.  George Owen — second son of R.  O.  Cam-
bridge, Esq.,  Prebendary of Ely and Archdeacon of Middlesex.
This gentleman is chiefly known in the literary world by the valuable
and interesting memoir of his father,  for which it is indebted to him  ;
but the sphere in which he eminently shone,  was that of public and
private benevolence.  He was ever fore.most in assisting and promot-
ing the best charitable institutions,  and employed his long and exem-
plary life in doing good to all that came within the reach of his un-
wearied benevolence.  He died at Twickenham Meadows,  early
in the year 1841.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.  429

Cator,  Mr.,  was chosen member of parliament for Ipswich in 1784.
This gentleman was joint executor and trustee,  with Dr.  Johnson,
Mr.  H.  Smith,  and Mr.  Crutchley,  to Mr.  Thrale's will.  He is
described by Dr.  Johnson as having  "  much good in his character,
and much usefulness in his knowledge."  Johnson used to visit
Mr.  Cator,  at his splendid seat at Beckenham,  in Kent.

CoswAY,  Richard.  The most celebrated miniature painter of his
day.  He also displayed great and varied talent in other depart-
ments of the art.  He was of extremely eccentric character and
habits,  and professed certam religious and other opinions which sub-
jected him to the charge of extravagance ;  but he was a man of sound
sense and strong judgment,  in matters appertaining to the business
of life.

Cowley,  Hannah,  authoress of  "  The Belle's Stratagem,"  and other
less successful dramatic works ;  and also of some long poetical
pieces,  "  The Maid of Anjou,"  Sec.  She was the daughter of Mr.
Parkhouse,  of Tiverton,  Devonshire,  where she was born in 1743.
She died at the same place in 1809.

CoxE,  THE Rev.  William.  This gentleman,  though at present better
known by his travels in various parts of Europe than by his other
works,  contributed very largely and usefully to the general literature
of his day,  chiefly in its biographical and historical departments.
He was born in 1747,  and was the eldest son of Dr.  William Coxe,
physician to the king's household.  He was brought up to the
church,  and in 1771 was appointed to the curacy of Denham,  near
Uxbridge.  He was for two years tutor to the late Duke of Marl-
borough. Afterwards  (in 1775)  he accompanied the late Earl of
Pembroke  (then Lord Herbert)  in the grand tour.  He was after-
wards travelling tutor,  in succession,  to the late Samuel Whithread,
the present Lord Portraan,  and the son of the Marquis of Com-
wallis.  He was blind during the last ten years of his life  ;  which
circumstance,  however,  did not prevent him from preparing for the
press the  "  Private Correspondence of the Duke of Shrewsbury,"^
which appeared in 1821,  and  "  Memoirs of the Administration of
the Right Hon.  Henry Pelham,"  which were just completed at the
period of his death in 1328.

Crutchley,  Mr.,  was chosen M.P.  for Horsham,  in 1784.

Delany,  Mrs.  This lady,  who was born in 1700,  was daughter of
John Granville,  Esq.,  and niece of Pope's Lansdowne — "  of every
muse the friend."  She became,  in 1743,  the second wife of Dr.
Patrick Delany,  the intimate friend of Dean Swift,  and of whom,  after
his death,  he wrote a work,  entitled,  *'  Observations on Swift."  Her
husband was himself promoted to an Irish deanery  (that of Down)
the year after their marriage,  in 1744.  Mrs.  Delany was left a widow
in 1768,  and was 83 years of age when she is first mentioned in the
Diary.  Lord Orford speaks of her skill in painting,  and in imi-
tating flowers in cut and coloured paper.  For further references to
this venerable and interesting lady,  see Sir Walter Scott's  "  Life of
Swift."

Eliot,  Mr.,  of Port Eliot,  afterwards the first Lord Eliot,  He was
father of the present Earl of St.  Germains.

Garthshore,  Dr.     An eminent physician,  son of the minister of

430 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

Kirkcudbright,  in Scotland,  where he was born.  He came to
London in 1763,  and practised there the various branches of his
profession,  till his death,  in 1812.  He was the writer of many valu-
able TTiedical and physiological papers in the Transactions of the
Royal Society,  &c.

Gillies,  Dr.  The learned author of the  "  History of Ancient Greece
till the Division of the Macedonian Empire,"  and several other
historical works.  He was appointed by George III.  Historiographer-
Royal for Scotland.  Dr.  Gillies was born in Forfarshire  (Scotland)
in 1750,  and died in 1824.

Gkeville,  Mks.  Author of the celebrated  *'  Ode to Indifference."
She was wife of Fulk Greville,  who was Minister Plenipotentiary
at the court of Bavaria.

Hamilton,  Sir William,  K.B.  Was Ambassador at Naples for
thirty-six years.  His mother was nurse to George III.,  who,  on
coming to the throne,  made young Hamilton his equerry.  He was a
person of excellent taste,  which he chiefly directed to antiquarian
researches connected with the classical vicinity in which he so long
resided.  His collection of antique vases  (which after his death was
purchased by government for the British Museum)  was,  and still
remains,  unrivalled.     He died in 1803.

Han WAY,  Jonas.  Celebrated first as a traveller,  and afterwards as a
philanthropist;  the establishment of the Marine Society and the
Magdalen Hospital was chiefly due to his exertions.  He was a
man of eccentric habits,  and greatly injured his fortune by his active
benevolence.  The government of the day,  (under Lord Bute,)  in
consequence of solicitations on his behalf from the principal mer-
chants of London,  appointed him a Commissioner of the Navy,
(which post he enjoyed for twenty years,  and the salary of it to the
end of his life.)     He was born in 1712,  and died in 1786.

Hatsel,  Me.,  was for many years Clerk of the House of Commons.

Holroyd,  Major.     Afterwards Lord Sheffield.

HooLE,  John.  The translator of Tasso,  Ariosto,  &:c.  He died in 1803.

HooLE,  THE Rev.  Samuel.  Son of the above,  author of a poem
called  "  Aurelia."

Jackson,  William.  Chiefly known as a musical composer;  but
he possessed considerable and varied attainments,  both as a writer
and an artist.     He was born at Exeter,  in 1730,  and died in 1804.

Jenyns,  Soame,  was the son of Sir Ptoger Jenyns,  of Bottisham Hall,
Cambridgeshire,  which county Mr.  Soame Jenyns,  after the death of
his father,  represented in parliament.  He was a successful writer in
various departments of literature,  but is chiefly known by his work,
on the  "  Evidences of the Christian Religion."     He died in 1787.

Kemble,  Jiliss.  The lady so named in the Diary,  and described as
the sister of Mrs.  Siddons,  afterwards became Mrs.  Twiss,  and was
the mother of the present Horace Tvviss,  Esq.

Levee,  Sir Ashton.  Known as the collector of what was long ex-
hibited to the public as the Leverian Museum,  consisting of natural
and artificial curiosities.  He was the son of a Lancashire baronet,
and so impaired his fortune by his passion for  •'  collecting,"  that
he was induced to dispose of his museum by lottery,  in 1785.  He
died in 1788.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.  431

Leveson,  Mrs.,  alluded to in the Poem.     She was daughter of Mrs.
Boscawen,  and wife of the Hon.  Leveson Gower.     This lady is
celebrated in Miss Hannah More's poem,  entitled  "  Sensibility."
LiGHTFooT,  THE Kev.  John.     A distinguished botanist of his day.
He published a botanical work called  "  Flora Scotica,"  and left at
his death  (in 1786)  an excellent Herbariumy which was purchased
of his executors by George III.,  for one hundred guineas.
LucAN,  Lady.     She was wife of the first Lord Lucan.
Merlin,  Monsieur.     A celebrated French mechanician.     Fie in-
vented many ingenious objects,  some of which were of real utility,
but most were mere playthings or objects of curiosity.     He was at
one period of his career quite  "  the rage  "  in London,  where every-
thing was a la Merlin — Merlin chairs — Merlin pianos — Merlin
swings,  kc.     He opened a very curious exhibition of automata,  and
used to ride about in a strange lantastical carriage,  of his own inven-
tion and construction.
Metcalf,  Mr.,  was chosen M.P.  for Horsham in 1784.
MiLLico.     An Italian soprano singer,  one of the most celebrated of

his time.
MoNCKTON,  the Hon.  Miss,  daughter of Viscount Galway,  and
afterwards,  (in 1786,)  married to the Earl of Cork and Orrery.  The
literary parties of this lady,  who died only a few months ago,  con-
tinued to be as singular and as celebrated during the present day,
as they are described as having been at the date when she is first
referred to in the Diary — sixty years ago.
Montagu,  Mr.     Afterwards Lord Rokeby.

Paoli,  General.  A Corsican officer,  who greatly distinguished
himself by his exertions to preserve the independence of his native
country.  He organized a force v»^hich successfully opposed all the
efforts of the Genoese oppressors of Corsica,  for nearly ten years,
and led at length to the cession of the island to the French by the
Genoese.  Paoli refused to concur in this arrangement,  and fled to
England,  where he enjoyed a pension of  £l200 a-year from the
.  English government.  Twenty years afterwards,  (at the Revolution
of 1789,)  he agreed to Corsica being declared a province of France;
but subsequently,  by his influence,  the island became a dependence
of England.  He afterwards returned to London,  where he died
in 1807,
Perkins,  Mr.  At the period first referred to in the Diary,  Mr.
Perkins was superintendendent of Mr.  Thrale's brewery  ;  he after-
wards became partner with Mr.  Barclay,  the wealthy Quaker.
Rauzzini.      An Italian singer and composer of some eminence,

who conducted the concerts at Bath for many years.
Sacchini,  Antonio Mario Gasparo.  A distinguished Italian
composer.  He was born at Naples,  in 1735.  He was for some
time at the head of the Conservatorio of L'Ospedaletto,  at Venice.
He afterwards  (in 1772)  came to England,  and remained here several
years,  but was driven away by one of those petty cabals to which
the musical world has ever shewn itself to be disgracefully liable.
A report was universally circulated,  and extensively believed,  that
many of his best tisings were composed by Rauzzini — a man infi-
nitely inferior to Sacchini in everything but the mere mechanism of

432 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.

music.  Sacchini finally established himselfat Paris,  where his great
talents were duly appreciated,  and rewarded by a pension from the
Queen,  Marie Antoinette.  He died at Paris in 178(5.  One of his
best dramatic pieces  (of which he composed more than eighty,)  is
on the subject of  "  Evelina."

Sastres,  Mr.  This gentleman is spoken of by Boswell as  "Mr.
Sastres.  the Italian Master."  He was on terms of great intimacy with
Dr.  Johnson,  Some of whose most pleasant letters were addressed
to him,  (see the General Appendix to  "  Murray's Boswell,"  vol.  10.)

Strange,  Mr.  Afterwards Sir Robert Strange,  the most celebrated
English engraver of his day.  He was born in 1725,  in one of the
Orkney Islands.  In early life ha entered the army of the Pretender.
Subsequently he pursued his professional studies at Paris and in
Italy.     He died at London in 1795.

Turner.     Sir Gregory Page,  Bart.,  father of the present Baronet.

Twining,  the Rev.  Thomas.  An accomplished Greek scholar,  and
translator of Aristotle's  "  Poetics."

Vancouver,  George.  A Captain in the Royal Navy.  He served as
midshipman under Captain Cook,  and was afterwards  (in 1790)
appointed to the command of an expedition of discovery to the
North Pacific Ocean.     He died in 1793.

Walker,  Adam.  Long known throughout England as a lecturer on
astronomy,  and as the inventor of the Eidouranion.  In early life he
shewed an extraordinary capacity for mechanics,  but was of very
eccentric' habits,  having when quite a youth built himself a hut in
a thicket near his father's house,  that he might pursue his studies
uninterruptedly.  He first commenced,  lecturing on astronomy in
London,  in 1778,  and continued to do so every year,  and also at
most of the foundation schools,  up to the period of his death,
in 1821.

Williams,  Sir Charles Hanbury.  Was M.P,  for Monmouth in
several parliaments.  He was afterwards Minister at the Courts of
Berlin and St.  Petersburg.  He died in 1759.  He is alluded to
in the Diary only as father of the witty and accom.plished Mrs.
Walsingham.

Wraxall,  Nathaniel William.  This gentleman  (who was
created a Baronet in 1813)  was a voluminous writer of travels,
historical wojks,  memoirs,  &c.  He was the son of a Bristol
merchant,  and passed the early part of his life in India,  in the
civil service of the company.  He was afterwards appointed Judge
Advocate and Paymaster of the Forces of the Presidency of Bombay.
His latest work,  and that which excited most attention,  was entitled
*'  Historical Memoirs of ray own Times,"  &c.  It was published
in 1815.  Sir Nathaniel Wraxall died at Dover,  in 1831,  on his
way to Naples.

END OF VOL.  II.

Moyes and Barclay,  Printers,  Castle Street,  Leicester Square.
