NUNC COGNOSCO EX PARTE

TRENT UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY

p.

FANNY BURNEY S EARLY DIARY,  INCLUDING A SELECTION FROM HER
CORRESPONDENCE,  AND FROM THE
JOURNALS OF HER SISTERS SUSAN
AND CHARLOTTE BURNEY,  WAS FIRST
PUBLISHED IN 1 889,  AND ADDED TO
BOHN’S STANDARD LIBRARY IN I907.

IT NOW APPEARS IN BOHN’S
POPULAR LIBRARY

.

\S»\3v?

THE EARLY DIARY OF
FRANCES BURNEY

1775

[In one respect this,  of all these diaries,  is the most perfect.
Only one name on Mme.  D’Arblay’s list is missing in the manuscript,  the name of Jenny Barsanti.  After the letter on Ornai,
Fanny must have felt secure of her power to please Mr.  Crisp.
Beyond him,  at distant Burford,  his sisters sued to share his enjoyment of her letters.  Their wish was slowly granted.

As Dr.  Burney was partly disabled by rheumatism during this,
the year before the publication of the first volume of his  “  History
of Music,”  she must have plied a busy pen.  Besides copying for
him,  writing her own  “  private fancies and vagaries,”  and keeping her journal,  (which,  even in its mutilated condition,  contains
more than a hundred large quarto pages),  she established herself as Mr.  Crisp’s  “  anecdote-monger,”  by writing him a series
of letters of from six to twelve large quarto pages,  ten of which
letters have been preserved.  In these she described scenes while
they were still vivid before her eyes,  or reported conversations
which were almost sounding in her ears.  The corresponding
accounts in her journal are often retrospective ,  being written as
she could snatch time,  at some distance from the events.  They
are perhaps a little more orderly in arrangement of speeches,
and incidents than the letters;  otherwise'they differ very little.
Now and then,  the letters have details which are omitted in the
journal,  and vice versa-,  but the difference is not considerable.
Here and there,  we give such extracts from the letters as are
complementary to the narratives of the journal.  In the case of
the first appearance of Gabrielli,  and the Concert for Prince
Orloff at Dr.  Burney’s house in November,  it seemed worth
while to give a great part of the narrative in the letter,  as well
as that in the journal.]

[  T AM now going to give myself the delight of recounting
-L an evening with the celebrated Signora Agujari ;  detta la
Bastardini ,  from some misfortune that preceded her birth,

32938

2

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

but of which none so innocent as herself.  The visit had
been some time arranged,  and we expected her with extreme
impatience.]  Dr.  Matty1 who is a little,  formal,  affected
man,  but held in the highest class for learning,  handed and
presented Signora Agujari.  She was accompanied by Signor
Colla,  an Italian musician,  and  [the Revd.]  Mr.  Penneck.
She is of the middle stature,  and has the misfortune to be
lame;  owing perhaps if there is any truth in the story to her
being mauled when an infant by a pig,  in consequence of
which she is reported to have a silver side.  Her face is
handsome,  and expressive of all her words.  She has the
character of being immensely proud.  She was,  however,  all
civility here,  though her excessive vanity wTas perpetually
[self]  betrayed.  Signor Colla,  to whom she is reported to
be married,  is a lively, — I might almost say,  fiery Italian.
She sings no songs but of his composition,  and he is her
constant attendant.  We were not much delighted with Mr.
Penneck,  who is generally believed to be half a mad-man;
though by no means from flightiness ,  which sometimes occasions a mighty agreeable craziness ,  for he is perfectly sombre.
He is not,  however,  insensible ,  for he took so violent a passion for a Miss Miller,  an actress,  that upon suspecting Mr.
Colman was his rival,  this pious clegyman,  who is twice the
heightt at least of Mr.  Colman,  one night,  in the streets,
knocked him down,  when he was quite unprepared for any
attack.  How ill does a nature so malignant suit with the
character and dignity which ought to distinguish a clergyman  !  I have often thought it very unfortunate that this first
of professions should be  [open at pleasure]  to the worst of
men,  instead of being devoted to the most respectable.

The conversation was chiefly in French.  As soon as public places were mentioned,  Signora Agujari asked us if we

1 Paul Henry Maty was the only son of Matthew Maty,  M.D.,  a
Dutchman of learning,  who came to England in 1740.  Matthew died
Principal Librarian of the British Museum,  and Secretary of the Royal
Society.  Paul was of Trin.  Coll.  Cambridge,  an assistant librarian of
the British Museum,  and,  in his turn,  Secretary of the Royal Society.
After his father’s death in 1776,  he joined the Unitarian Congregation
of Theophilus Lindsey.  In the  “Garrick Correspondence,”  there is a
letter endorsed by Garrick as from  “The Rev.  Mr.  Maty,  about the
new French actress,  Mile.  Raucourt,  May 20th,  1773.”  It is from
Paris,  and chiefly on actors and dramatic authors.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

3

had been to the Pantheon?  and lifted up her hands and
eyes,  when she heard we had not,  doubtless concluding us
to the highest degree barbarous and Gothic,  not to have
flown on the wings of — half Guineas — to see and hear this
Wonder of the World.  We all were,  however,  languishing to
hear her,  though as it was not perfectly convenient to us to
offer her fifty guineas for a song,  we were somewhat in fear
of requesting one.  My father hinted it to Dr.  Maty,  Dr.
Maty hinted it to Signor Colla;  Signor Colla did not take
the hint of hinting it to the Bastardini.  He said that she
certainly would sing to the Doctor Burney ;  but that she
had a slight sore throat,  and would wish to sing to him to
the greatest advantage.  He then launched into most profuse
panygyric of my father,  of his fame abroad,  and of the great
happiness he had in being introduced to a so celebre homme.

We were all disappointed;  but Signora Agujari promised
to make us another visit very soon,  when she would bring
two of her most favourite airs with her.  As soon as she
heard the conversation turn upon her singing,  she asked my
father if he had not heard la Gabriella  ?

“No;”  he said,  “she was in Sicily,  when he visited
Italy.”

“Ah,  Diable!”  cried she,  “  c’est dommage!  ”

“  Diable  ”  is a favourite exclamation with her,  though in
other respects she is not at all masculine.

“  Mais vous,  Mile.,”  said my father,  “  l’avez-vous enten-
due?  ”

“O,  no!”  returned she,  and added that they two could
never be in the same place together;  and Signor Colla said,
that two first singers could never meet.  “Two suns,”  said
Dr.  Maty,  in Italian,  “are never seen at once.”

Thus I find she allows Gabriella to be worthy the title of
rival-,  all others are inferiors.  We asked her how she liked
the new opera?  She said she had never been to the Opera-
House;  she feared taking cold.

Had she heard Rauzini?

“Never;”  “mais on me dit,”  added she,  “qu’il chante
joliment.”  1

1 A line has here been partly effaced which seems to show that
Fanny thought Agujari’s expression  “joliment,”  absurd as applied to

4

THE EARLY-  DIARY OF

[i775

My father then asked her how she liked Galluci,  the
second to herself at the Pantheon.  She answered that she
had never heard her;  for that she always left the room,
when she had finished her  [own]  song.  How conceitedly
incurious !  But she chuses to make it known,  that no singing can please her but her own.  Signor Colla is of the
same opinion for himself;  he speaks of her with rapture;
he said to my Father,  “Ah Monsieur!  c’est une prodige!”

Sukey had understood Dr.  Maty that Agujari was married
to Signor Colla,  and having told Hetty and me so,  we concluded that she only kept her maiden name as being the
most known;  which is the practice with most of the Italian
singers.  However this mistake occasioned a very ridiculous
question from Hetty,  which was brought in by her pleading
want of practice,  when she was asked to play the harpsichord;  the Bastardini expostulated with her upon the subject,  and she answered that she had had other things to
mind of late,  than her music.  “  Et qu’est ce que c’est?  ”
demanded Agujari.  “  Des Enfans,”  answered Hetty.

“Ah,  Diable!”  exclaimed she,  “Des Enfans!  et vous etes
si jeune encore,  et combien avez-vous?”

“  J’en ai trois.”

“Ah,  Diable!  est il possible?  Mais c’est bien extraordinaire.”

“  Et vous,  Madame,  avez-vous une enfant?”

She stared,  and answered,  “Moi!  Mile.,  je ne suis pas
marie,  moi !  ”

My sister was quite confounded.  She begged her pardon,
and said,  “  Mais vraiment,  Mile.,  j’ai toujours cru que ce
Monsieur etoit votre epoux.”

“  Ah,  Diable,  non  !  c’est mon maitre.  II est maitre de 1

the first opera-singer  !  ”  A fragment misplaced at the beginning of this
diary,  may come in here as its right place cannot be found:  “Montezuma is a delightful opera,  Rauzini is only second to Millico.  We met
that youth at Mrs.  Brooke’s last week,  and were much pleased with his
vivacity and drollery.  He afterwards went,  as well as ourselves,  to the
rehearsal of a new comic opera,  in which the excellent I.ovattini,  and
Signora Sestini sing.  The Sestini is excessively pretty,  and is a charming singer.  ”

1 It should be maitre de musique,  ( i.e .  band-master),  at the Court of
Parma.

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 5

la Cour a Parme;  nous voyagons ensemble,  mais je n’ai
pas voulu me marier — pour ma voix.”

My sister repeated her apologies,  which she accepted very
good-naturedly,  and seemed to think the mistake too natural
to take offence at it.1

My sister was asked by the company in general to play;
she begged to be excused,  being quite out of practice.  The
Bastardella,  turning to me,  said,  “  Est-ce que Madame ne
veut pas jouer?  ”

“  Elle a peur devant vous,  Madame,”  said I.

She attempted not to make any disqualifying speeches;
but rolling her fine languishing eyes,  only said,  “Ah,  Diable!
c’est dommage!  ”  However,  the rest of the company would
not accept of my sister’s excuses;  and therefore she played a
lesson of Bach of Berlin.  1

The Bastardini seemed really pleased with it,  and was
civil in her commendations.  Mr.  Burney then sat down,
and,  as usual,  raised a general astonishment,  though I thought
that the Bastardini seemed more pleased with Hetty’s playing,  which is infinitely expressive and full of taste .

When they went away,  she again repeated,  “/e veindrai
absolument and Dr.  Maty esquired her to their carriage,
adding she would only wait to be quite in voice.

This singer is really a slave to her voice;  she fears the
least breath of air.  She is equally apprehensive of any heat.
She seems to have a perpetual anxiety lest she should take
cold;  and I do believe that she neither eats,  drinks,  sleeps,
nor talks,  without considering in what manner she may perform those vulgar duties of life,  so as to be most beneficial
to her voice.  However,  there are so few who are gifted with
eminent talents,  that it is better to cultivate them,  even
laboriously,  than to let them suffer injury from carelessness
or neglect.2

1 Dr.  Burney calls Colla her husband in a volume of his  “  History of
Music,”  which was published after her death.  In the unpublished diary
of Susan Burney,  we find a jest of Pacchierotti’s upon the literal meaning of Colla’s name — “my father mentioned Agujari.  Pac.  called her
Madame Colla,  and then translating her name very comically,  ‘  Mrs.
Glue,'  he ask’d me which I preferr’d,  Madame le Brun,  or Mrs.
Glue?”

2  “  Lucrezia Agujari was a truly wonderful performer.  The lower

6

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[^775

And now I have said so much of this great Italian singer,
I will condescend to mention our great English singer,  Miss
Davies.

We had a visit from her,  her mother,  and sister last week;
and we had here to meet her Mr.  Twining a Clergyman,  who
is come to town for a few weeks from his parsonage near
Colchester.  He is a man of learning,  very fond of music,
and a good performer both on the harpsichord and violin.
He commenced a correspondence with my father upon the
pub'ication of his German Tour,  which they have kept up
with great spirit ever since;  for Mr.  Twining,  besides being
very deep in musical knowledge,  is a man of great humour
and drollery.* 1

Cecelia)  [ditta l’lnglesina,  was very engaging and pleasing  ;]  but,  would not be prevailed upon to sing,  to the
great disappointment of Mr.  Twining;  but she said that she
dared not;  for,  that a law-suit was not yet decided,  and her
articles with the Opera-managers tied her down to never
singing to any company.11 She invited our family,  however,
to visit her ,  and said that at home she supposed she might
be allowed to practice ;  and therefore if it would be any

part of her voice was full,  round,  of an excellent quality,  and its compass,  after she quitted its natural register,  which it was to be wished
she had never done,  beyond any one we had then heard  ....  Though
the pathetic and tender were not what her manner or figure promised,
yet she had expressions sometimes that were truly touching,  and she
would have been as capable of exciting universal pleasure as admiration,  if she had been a little less violent in the delivery of her passages,
and her looks had been more tempered by female softness and timidity.
1 his great singer died at Parma in 1783.” — Dr.  Burney’s History of
Music.

1 I he Rev.  Thomas Twining,  scholar and fellow of Sidney Sussex
College,  Cambridge,  held the living of Fordham for thirty years before
he was presented to the rectory of St.  Mary’s,  Colchester,  by his old
Cambridge acquaintance,  Bishop Porteous.

In a letter to Mr.  Crisp endorsed June 10th,  we find  :  “  By-the-way,
Miss Davis has gained her case,  and the managers will lose near
1 2000.  In the Harris Letters,  also,  we have Mrs.  Harris writing to
her son  (afterwards first Earl of Malmesbury):  “June 2,  1775.  You
see by the papers that Miss Davis has been triumphant over Yates,  and
S°t TG00!  with costs.  I should have been sorry if Miss Davis had
lost it,  and now I cannot help being sorry for Yates.  He is a civil
good-humoured man.  All the Italians and fine opera men attended the
trial.  r

FRANCES BURNEY

>775]

7

amusement to us,  she should be very happy to do whatever
was in her power.

Modesty and unassuming carriage in people of talent and
fame,  are irresistible.  How much do I prefer for acquaintance the well-bred and obliging Miss Davies to the self-
sufficient and imperious Bastardini,  though I doubt not the
superiority of her powers as a singer.1

******

My brother James has left us some time.  He has an
appointment for the Cerberus,  and is ordered to America,
which I am not at all pleased at,  though I thank Heaven
there is no prospect of any naval engagement,  their business
being only to convoy the General Officers.  I am sure I shall
earnestly pray for peaceable measures.  Jem and I correspond,  and I am glad to find he is not himself displeased at
his designation.

Mr.  Bruce,  that Great Lyon,2 has lately become very intimate with my father,  and has favoured him with two delightful original drawings,  done by himself,  of instruments

1  “Miss Davies has the honour of being not only the first Englishwoman who has performed the principal female parts in several great
theatres in Italy,  but who has ever been thought worthy of singing
there at all.”  .  .  .  She went very young into France with her sister,
and after travelling with her to Vienna,  they there became acquainted
with the celebrated composer Hasse,  and Faustina,  who had become the
wife of Hasse.  [There]  Miss Davies  “seems to have acquired much of
that steady and prudent carriage of her voice,  as well as recitative and
action,  for which she has been so justly admired.” — Dr.  Burney,
History of Music.

“Northcote.  ‘  My neighbour,  Mr.  Rowe,  the bookseller,  informed
me the other day,  that Signora Cecilia Davies frequently came to his
shop,  and always inquired after me.  Did you ever hear of her?”  Haz-
litt.  ‘No,  never!’  Northcote  (in 1830).  ‘She must be very old
now.  Fifty years ago,  in the time of Garrick,  ...  all England rang
with her name.  .  .  .  Afterwards she retired to Florence,  and was the
Prima Donna there.’  ” — Northcote’s Conversations with Hazlitt.

This poor woman was kindly helped by Mdrne.  D’Arblay in her old
age and want.

2 Our forefathers seem to have hunted  “Lyons”  with great ardour
for the sport,  as witness  “  Orniah  ”  and Bruce.  In 1781 Hannah More
wrote regretfully to her sister,  “Mrs.  Garrick and I were invited to a
fine assembly at Mrs.  Thrale’s.  There was to be a fine concert,  and all
the fine people were to be there;  but the chief attraction was to meet

8

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

which he found at the Egyptian Thebes,  in his long and
difficult and enterprising travels,  and also with a long letter
concerning them,  which is to be printed in the History.
These will be great ornaments to the book ;  and I am happy
to think that Mr.  Bruce,  in having so highly obliged my
father,  will find by the estimation he is in as a writer,  that
his own name and assistance will not be disgraced,  though
it is the first time he has signed it for any publication,  with
which he has hitherto favoured the world.

#  #  #  #  #  *

[Some Extracts from a letter addressed by Fanny to Mr.  Crisp,
(endorsed by him  “  2nd of March  ”),  are given as they add details
to the account in the journal. —

I am quite over stocked with materials: — So I think to prevent
waste of time in considering I will take people alphabetically.

A.

******

Signora Agujari,  detta Bastardini,  sent very particular compliments to my father by Dr.  Matty,  of the Museum,  regretting
that she had not seen him when she was abroad,  and very much
desiring to be introduced to his acquaintance.  It is somewhat
remarkable that this is the second capital female singer who has
sent to solicit my father’s acquaintance,  and both of them by men
of learning;  for Miss Davies commissioned Dr.  Johnson to
deliver her message of compliments.

******

She is of middle stature and a little lame.  She has a very
good complection,  and was well not absurdly ,  painted.  She has
fine expressive languishing eyes,  and altogether is a handsome
woman,  and appears about four or five and twenty.  She was accompanied by Signor Colla,  who is maitre de musique k la Cour
at Parma,  and who attends her in her travels,  and is,  like her,
pensioned by the Duke.  He is a tall,  thin,  spirited Italian,  full
of fire and not wanting in grimace.

Dr.  Maty also introduced two more gentlemen,  both clergymen,  to be of the party.  The name of one of them I have forgot;

the Bramin,  and the two Parsees  ”  .  .  .  “but just as my hair was
dressed,  came a servant to forbid our coming,  for that Mr.  Thrale was
dead.”  One of Sheridan’s characters asks,  “Shall you be at Lady
’s to-night?  I’m told the Bramin is to be there,  and the new

French philosopher - ” — “  No — it will be pleasanter at Lady - ’s

conversazione — The corn with two heads is to be there.  ”

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 9

he was a yea and nay man not worth remembering;  the  .other
was the famous Mr.  Penneck,  that worthy,  and gentle,  and pious
parson,  who knocked down Mr.  Colman upon suspecting his
having a penchant for a Miss Miller,  an actress.  This man is
half a madman ;  he looks dark and designing and altogether ill-
favoured.  1

This was our party,  and if I could write and spell French and
Italian I would give you a sketch of the conversation,  which was
lively and entertaining ;  but as that is out of my power I can
only mention two or three circumstances.

We were all of us excessively eager to hear her sing,  but as it
was not convenient to offer her her Pantheon price of 50 guineas
a song,  we were rather fearful of asking that favour;  however,
my father ventured to hint at it to Signor Colla;  who told us
that she certainly would sing — but that she had a bad cold,  and
slight sore throat!

******

Some account of Hetty’s mistake as to Agujari’s being married
is then given,  afterwards Fanny writes that. —

Dr.  Maty has assured us that she bears an unexceptional
character,  and that she is therefore visited by his wife and

1 The Rev.  Mr.  Penneck,  B.D.,  F.R.S.,  Keeper of the Reading-
Room at the British Museum,  appears to have had two characters.  In
one of them he was combative,  and,  perhaps,  pugnacious.  This was
when he was in a theatre,  or concerned with matters theatrical.  Horace
Walpole,  likewise,  wrote that  “Colman has been half-murdered by a
divine out of jealousy.”  In 1830,  Northcote told Hazlitt a droll story of
Penneck’s having a quarrel in a theatre,  with some one of the name of
Adair  (perhaps George Canning’s  “Bob Adair,  a dull fool”).  Adair
presented his card to Penneck,  saying with great pomposity,  “My
name is Adair ,  Sir.”  Penneck answered,  “I hear it,  Sir,  and am
not terrified.” — Cumberland,  Penneck’s early friend,  writes of him
with great regard,  in his own Memoirs,  as being  “a very amiable and
worthy man  .  .  .  filling a situation in the British Museum with great
respectability and much lamented by his friends,  after his death.”
He corresponded with Goldsmith,  and also with that clever,  and amusing tool of George Selwyn,  Dr.  Warner.  Fanny may have been set
against him partly,  by his looks,  which she describes to Mr.  Crisp.
He kept up his acquaintance with the  “  higher powers  ”  at Dr.  Burney’s;
tor years later,  Susan writes to Fanny of Giardini’s Benefit-Concert,
“as soon as I could prevail on my mother to leave the amiable Mr.
Penneck and Mr.  Molleau,  we returned to the Music-Room.”  We
also find him described as  “  purring after Charlotte,  like a huge,  black
tom-cat;”  but these girls were ungrateful,  as in 1778,  Mr.  Penneck
was  “  breaking his heart  ”  because P'anny did not make her fortune by
“  Evelina.”

IO THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

daughters.1 She has been strongly recommended to him from
abroad.  Her behaviour was very proper ,  and she displayed
none of her airs,  though it was not difficult to see that she could
behave otherwise,  for she displayed,  perhaps,  involuntarily,  a
consciousness of her greatness by a thousand little speeches
and looks.

******

After tea we went into the library,  and Hetty was prevailed
upon to play a Lesson of Bach of Berlin’s,  upon our Merlin
harpsichard.  It was very sweet,  and Agujari appeared to be
really much pleased with it,  and spoke highly of the taste and
feeling with which Hetty played.  Mr.  Burney sat down next.
They all stared  [with admiration],  as usual,  at his performance.

******

And so ended this visit.  Signor Colla has been here since,
and had a long discourse with my father concerning poetry and
music,  he is a most mighty reasoner.  But what was most provoking was that he came again yesterday,  and the Bastardini
with him,  and we were all,  unfortunately,  at the Stranges’.  However,  I hope we shall see her by appointment soon,  as my father
has promised Mr.  Twining to let him know when she comes,
that he may be of the party.]

Feby 28th.

Yesterday morning my mother,  Susan,  and self,  accompanied by Mr.  Twining,  went to the Opera House  .  .  .  but
.  .  .  no opera returned  .  .  .  a visit to Sir Joshua Reynolds’
to see his pictures.  Here we were very much delighted.  The
ease and elegance of this painter,  as Mr.  Twining observed,
seem unrivalled among English artists.  Among other portraits we saw Signor Sacchini,  which is taken for the Duke
of Dorset.  It is finely done and makes a most charming
picture.  Sir Joshua himself speaking of it to my father said
that Sacchini was the highest type of manly beauty.  But
what most delighted me was,  the beautiful Mrs.  Sheridan,
"ho is taken seated at a harp,-  a whole figure in character
of Saint Cecelia;  a denomination she greatly merits.  My

'  /A;. Maty ha,f married a niece of James Burney’s Captain Clerke,  of
the Discovery,  who succeeded Captain Cook in the  “  Resolution  ”  in
1 779-

2  “  Harpsichord  ”  was first written.

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY n

father is to supply Sir Joshua with some Greek Music,  to
place before her.1 When we had made a long visit,  my
mother not being very well went home,  and we two paraded
with Mr.  Twining to Miss Merlin’s  (?)  .  .  .  harpsichord

We then went to Miss Reid,  to see her paintings,  which
in crayons seem really to nearly reach perfection;  their not
standing appears to me the only inferiority they have to oil-
colours;  while they are new,  nothing can be so soft,  so delicate,  so blooming.  We went afterwards into the room,  where
Miss Reid and her lively niece were sitting.  As she is very
deaf,  I believe she did not hear me speak Mr.  Twining’s
name,  and she was so intent upon what she was about,  that
I am sure she never saw him.  She is a very clever woman,
and in her profession has certainly very great merit ;  but her
turn of mind is naturally melancholy.  She is absent,  full of
care,  and has a countenance the most haggard and wretched
I ever saw;  added to which she dresses in a style the mosl
strange and queer that can be conceived,  and which is worst
of all,  is always very dirty.  The unhappiness of her mind
I have heard attributed to so great and extraordinary an
unsteadiness not only of conduct,  but of principle,  that,  in
regard to her worldly affairs,  she is governed by all who will
direct her,  and therefore acts with inconsistency and the
most uncomfortable want of method;  and in her religious
opinions she is guided and led alternately by Free-thinkers
and by Enthusiasts.  Her mind is thus in a state of perpetual
agitation and uneasiness.  If she was a woman of weak intellect,  I should not wonder at her being so unfixed and
wavering;  but that is by no means the case;  she has a very
good understanding,  and when the foul fiend is not tormenting her,  she is even droll and entertaining.

We found her trying on a coat 2 she was altering in a fit

1 We find in Moore’s  “Life of Sheridan,”  that  “Even the precious
portrait of his first wife,”  [as Saint Cecilia],  “by Reynolds,  though not
actually sold during his life,  vanished away from his eyes into other
hands.”  Moore adds in a note — “The portrait of Mrs.  Sheridan at
Knowle,  though less ideal than that of Sir Joshua,  is  .  .  .  perhaps as
bearing a closer resemblance to the original,  still more beautiful.”

2 It marks a change of fashion in speech,  that Madame D’Arblay  (as
Fanny Burney,)  first wrote  “coat”  and many years later added  “ petti ”
above the line,  to explain a word out of use for women's dress.

12

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

of housewifery,  upon-  Nelly Beatson,  who seemed to think
the favour was all of her granting in permitting her aunt to
meddle with her.  It was curious to see the ill-managed contrivance of poor Miss Reid,  who was so ignorant how to
make the alteration she found necessary,  that she was piecing
a blue and white tissue with a large patch of black silk!  I
believe there are few men in the world,  who would not
figure more creditably as mantua-makers.  She had on a large
dirty wing cap,  made of muslin and a half handkerchief tied
over it as a hood;  a German dress,  made of old lute-string
excessively faded and colourless,  and a shawl that had been
a very fine spotted one,  but which was more soiled than if
she had been embraced by a chimney-sweeper,  flung over
her shoulders.  She did not stop her employment,  or even
lift up her head,  though she very civilly enquired after our
healths,  was very glad to see us  &c. ;  for her inattention is
the effect of absence,  not of wilful ill-breeding.

I asked Nelly to show us some of her  [own]  drawings.
“  There they are yonder,”  said she,  in her usual easy manner.
“  Well!  but wo’nt you come yourself,  and shew them to this
Gentleman?”  cried I.  “No;  I can’t,”  said she gravely,
“pray how does Charlotte do?”  “You little cross patch,”
cried I,  “you must come with us,— I won’t have you so

idle  - - ”  “No,  I can’t;”  answered she very composedly,

“  but come another time,  and I will.”

Her aunt bid her stand a little way off,  that she might see
how her coat set.  She immediately marched to the door;
“  Nay,  now,  Nelly,”  cried Miss Reid,  “  I can’t see at all.”
“Lord!  what signifies?”  returned she,  “I shan’t try it any
more;”  and jumped out of it,  leaving it on the ground.

As we were going,  Miss Reid called me to her,  and said
she wanted to speak to me,  “  I have a favour to ask of you,”
said she,  “  which is that you will sit to me in an attitude.”  I
burst out in laughter,  and told her I was then in haste;  but
would call soon and talk about it.  I cannot imagine what
she means;  however,  if it is to finish any burlesque picture,
I am much at her service.

Mr.  1 wining confessed that he was not more,  though
differe7itly entertained by Miss Reid’s paintings than by Miss
Reid herself;  for her knowledge of her profession is not
more remarkable than her ignorance of the world.  How-

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 13

ever,  it is a great pity,  that a girl of the parts and understanding of Nelly Beatson should be so miserably educated.
Mr.  Twining was excessively agreeable;  he assumed no
manner of superiority;  nor yet, — as is as often the case with
people of learning as with persons of distinction,  affected a
certain put-on equality; — a condescendsion which mortifies
a thousand times more than insolence itself.1

Not being much in town,  the new vis-a-vis were not
familiar to him.  “  That is to me a most disagreeable-looking carriage,”  said he,  “from want of custom perhaps;  for it
is true that a chariot or chaises will only hold two people,
any more than a vis-a-vis-,  but the thing is,  that one only
thinks of two people at sight of a chariot ;  but there is something in a vis-a-vis ,  which looks as if it meant to exclude a
third person:  it seems as if it were spiteful.”  .  .  .2

March 4th.

I had yesterday the honour of drinking tea in company
with His Abyssinian Majesty Mr.  Bruce;  for so Mrs.  Strange

1 The Rev.  Thomas Twining,  (translator of the  “Poetics”  of Aristotle,)  an accomplished and excellent man,  was of a family  “by
hereditary succession,  of high worth,  which produced scholars and men
of elegant tastes;  a distinction which does not seem likely to fail.”  So
wrote Miss Hawkins,  a little after 1820.  Our own time has seen the
publication of two volumes of their delightful family-papers,  which are
honourable to all concerned in them.  Mr.  Richard Twining wrote,  in
1817,  of Dr.  Burney,  and of his own brother  :  “They were far from
young when they met,  and they could ill afford to lose time.  They
soon became intimate;  they soon became friends.”  Mr.  Thomas
Twining,  who was  “  both in theory and practice a good musician,”  had
himself intended to write a  “  History of Music,”  but when he knew Dr.
Burney and his plan,  he gave up his own,  and put his materials and
help at Dr.  Burney’s disposal.  “  I like the man,  and I like the subject
upon which he is engaged,”  said he to his brother;  who adds,  “that
Thomas Twining had as much pleasure in giving,  as Dr.  Burney could
possibly have in receiving,  assistance.”  He was requited by the
affection of the Burneys,  in whose papers he is never named without
words of tenderness.

2 The Editor has to thank Mr.  Gibbs for the following extracts from
the  “Treatise on Carriages,”  of William Felton,  [coachmaker,]
London,  1794.  2 vols.  8vo.  “  Vis-a-vis,”  a small body,  of a coach
form,  meant only to contain two persons,  fronting each other.”  “The
advantage only,  independent of fashion,  is the being so confined as to
prevent the passengers being tossed about by the jolting of the

i4 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

calls Mr.  Bruce.  My mother and I went to Mr.  Strange’s
by appointment,  to meet Mr.  and Mrs.  Turner of Lynn,  who
are lately become acquainted in that family,  and who are in
town for the winter:  and this Majestic Personage chanced
to be there.  He has been acquainted intimately with Mrs.
Strange all his life,  and is very much attached to her and
her family.* 1 *  He seldom passes a day without visiting her;
but Miss Strange who has told me of many of his singularities,  says that he is generally put into a pet when they
have any company,  as his excessive haughtiness prevents his
being sociable with them,  and makes him think them imper-
tinant,  if they take the liberty to speak to him.  Indeed,  she
told me he has been really very ill-used from the curiosity,
which previous to his provocation,  he did satisfy,  for many
people gathered anecdotes and observations from him,  and
then printed them.  This  ...  as he intends  ...  to publish his travels himself,  was most abominably provoking.”  It
is not enough to say,  that this put him upon his guard,  it
has really made him shy of being asked how he does?  or,
what’s o’clock?  Haughty by nature,  his extraordinary travels,
and perhaps his long residence among savages have contributed to render him one of the most imperious of men;
he is indeed by far the most so,  that I ever saw.3 He is

carriage,  and by ils being so narrow,  they sit warmer than in other
carriages.”

1 In a letter to Mr.  Crisp,  Fanny says  “  Mr.  Bruce spends almost
every evening when in town at her house.”

-  “  However,  there is some excuse for his reserve and shyness,
because he has been very ill used by those to whom he has laid it aside ;
as all his accounts have transpired,  and been printed,  either in the news
papers,  or magazines.  Nay,  there is now published in Germany a
History of his Travels in 2 vols.  octavo!” — From Fanny’s letter to
Mr.  Crisp,  “  No.  5,”  of this year.

3 James Bruce of Kinnaird,  near Falkirk,  was a kinsman of Robert
Strange,  and of Andrew Lumisden.  He met the two in Italy in 1762-3.
Strange engraved plates for a book by Bruce on Ptestum.  The book
was never printed,  and the plates are lost.  Strange found Bruce an
Italian draughtsman for his African journey.  Bruce was mortified by
the general doubt of his exactness in telling his own adventures,  but his
“swaggering”  manners were much against him,  as can here be seen
plainly.  Dr.  Johnson said,  after meeting him,  that Bruce  “was not a
distinct relater,”  and that he  “did not perceive in him any superiority
of understanding.”  Bruce was so much hurt by being doubted and
ridiculed,  and,  perhaps,  so dilatory,  that he did not publish his travels

FRANCES BURNEY

'77 5]

15

more than six foot high,  is extremely well proportioned in
shape,  and has a handsome and expressive face.  If his
vanity is half as great as his pride,  he would certainly become
more courteous,  if he knew how much smiles become him,
for when he is pleased to soften the severity of his countenance,  and to suffer his features to relax into smiling,  he
is quite another creature.  .  .  .  Mr.  Bruce,  as my father did
not accompany us,  I doubt not wished himself alone with
the Stranges;  for he looked so important,  that he awed
almost into total silence Mr.  and Mrs.  Turner;  who secretly
wished the same  [for themselves],  Mr.  Turner,  who is a
very jocular man,  could not bear to be deprived of his laugh,
and yet had not courage sufficient to venture at joking
before so terrible a man,  who looks as if born to command
the world!  Besides,  he had heard so much of his character
before they met,  that he was prepared to fear him;  and Mrs.
Turner is too little used to the company of strangers,  to be
at her ease when in it.

As to my  [little]  self,  I sat next to Miss Strange,  and was
comfortable enough in conversing with her,  till my mother
finding herself little noticed  [by the Great Man],  quitted her
seat,  and went and placed herself next to Mrs.  Turner,
saying,  “  I shall come and sit by you,  and leave Mr.  Bruce
to the young lassies.”  I do heartily hate these sort of
speeches,  which oblige one to be  [remarked];  nothing can
be more provoking.  Mr.  Bruce,  accordingly turning towards
me,  said,  “  Well,  Miss Burney,  I think you can do no less
than take the seat your mamma has left.”  I did not half
like it;  but thought he would suppose me afraid. of him,  if I
refused;  [so,  I]  .  .  .  changed chairs,  but made signs to
Miss Strange to move next to me,  and immediately renewed

until 1790,  when Fanny at last read them.  “  He was a large man  ”  (says
Mr.  Cradock,  who knew him intimately),  “and,  in an evening,  rather
splendidly dressed.  He had a most extraordinary complaint which
could not well be accounted for;  when he attempted to speak,  his whole
stomach suddenly seemed to heave like an organ-bellows.  He did not
wish to make any secret about it,  but spoke of it as having originated in
Abyssinia,  but that it since remained  (under various advice)  much the
same in every climate.  However,  one evening,  when he appeared rather
agitated,  it lasted much longer than usual,  and was so violent that it
alarmed the company.”

1 6 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

our conversation,  lest he should think himself obliged to
take further notice of me.

A very strange Advertisement had been put in the papers
the evening before,  which said that Mr.  Bruce was dying or
dead.  My father who knew he was well,  wafered the paragraph upon a sheet of paper,  and sent it to his lodgings.
My mother asked him if he had seen it?  “  I thought,”
answered he,  “  it had come from Brucey  ”  [for Miss Strange,
who was christened Bruce,  he always calls Brucey].1  “Yes;
I saw it and read my death with great composure.”  Then
turning himself to me,  he added,  “  was you not sorry,  Miss
Burney,  to read of my death?”

These immense-sized men speak to little women,  as if
they were children.  I answered,  that,  as my father had seen
him the day before,  I was not much alarmed.  Mr.  Turner,
then gathering courage,  said,  “  Well,  Sir,  I think,  as times
go,  it is very well that when they killed you,  they said no ill
of you.”

“  I know of no reason they had to do otherwise,”  answered
Mr.  Bruce so haughtily,  that Mr.  Turner,  failing in his first
attempt,  never afterwards spoke to him,  or indeed hardly
opened his mouth.

1 Mary Bruce Strange was named after her grandmother,  Mary Bruce
of Rennet,  through whom she was akin to James Bruce of Kinnaird,
who called her so affectionately  “Brucey  !  ”  This was the daughter of
whom Mrs.  Strange wrote from Edinburgh in 1750,  to her brother in
Rome,  that she had  “taken great care of her education; — whenever she
hears the word Whig mentioned,  she girns  ”  [grins]  ‘  ‘  and makes faces
that would frighten a beau,  but when I name the Prince,  she kisses me
and looks at her picture;” — perhaps Mr.  Strange’s engraving of Charles
Edward.  In the same letter,  undaunted Bella Strange says,  “  I have
taken a very pretty house at the Cross,”  [of Edinburgh,]  “  ’tis the third
story;  I design to make more than the rent  [out]  of my five large
windows,  at the Restoration,  tho’  ’tis fourteen pounds and a crown.”
At the Coronation,  when the five large windows were to be thronged
by hirers eager to see King James the Third,  little Mary was to wear
“a pretty gum-flower”  which her uncle had sent her from Rome.
Mary Strange died of rapid decline.  “Poor,  good Miss Strange,”
(writes Fanny),  “  and Dr.  Johnson died on the same day.”  Her family
still preserve traditions  “  of her high gifts,  and fine disposition;  of her
numerous admirers,  of,  whom one undoubtedly was her kinsman Bruce,
the great traveller.”  There is  “a charming portrait of her by Ram-
*ay>  a graceful,  sweet head,  with a knot of pink riband fastening the

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

1 7

Soon after,  a servant came in with General Melville’s
compliments,  and a desire to know if it was true,  that Mr.
Bruce was dangerously ill?  Mr.  Bruce answered drily,  “  Yes;
tell him I am dead.”

“  Ah!  poor soul!  ”  cried Mrs.  Strange,  “  I dare say he has
been vexed enough!  Honest man!  I don’t think that man
ever wronged or deceived a human being !  ”

“  Don’t you,  faith!  ”  cried Mr.  Bruce;  “  that’s saying more
than I would !  Can you really suppose that he has risen to
the rank of General with so little trouble?”

“O,  you know its only the women that are ever deceived;
and,  for my part,  I never allowed that the best among you
could deceive me;  for,  whenever you say pretty things to
me,  I make it a rule to believe them  [to be]  true !  ” 1

Bell Strange then carried him his tea.  [She is about twelve
years old],  a very good-looking girl.  .  .  .  Mr.  Bruce,  turning
to me,  said,  “  Do you know,  Miss Burney,  that I intend to
run away with Bell?  We are to go to Scotland together.  She
won’t let me rest till I take her.”

“How can you say so,  Sir?”  cried Bell;  “pray,  ma’am,
don’t believe it,”  [colouring,  and much fidgetted].

“Why,  how now,  Bell,”  returned he,  “what!  won’t you
go?”

“No,  Sir.”2

1  “‘O,  as to that,’  cried Mrs.  Strange,  ‘  you know,  men never
deceive men , — you have too much honour for that !  ’  ‘  And how as to
■women ?’  ‘Ah!  the best among you cannot deceive#^/  for whenever
you say pretty things,  I always make it a rule to believe them ;  so the
prettier the better !  ’  ”  [From a letter to Mr.  Crisp,  written later in
March.  ]

2 Isabella Katharine Strange was then nearer fifteen than twelve,
having been born in 1759.  By the kindness of her nieces,  Mrs.  Philip
Mure,  and Mrs.  Edmund Ffoulkes,  we are permitted to quote some
lines from a volume  (charming in all respects),  named  “Recollections
of Bygone Days,”  which was privately printed in 1883.  “Aunt Bell”
never married.  She lived to ninety,  a pattern of the virtues of all time,
and of the ceremonious usages of the last century.  She was past five-
and-forty when her mother died,  but had never sat down in her presence
unless bidden to do so.  She was never seen to handle the engravings of
her deceased father without rising reverently,  and standing while she
touched them.  Holding that all her mother’s household ways had been
well-nigh perfect,  she changed her customs as little as might be.  She
was never heard to utter the vulgar  “  Missis,”  but always said  “'Mistress,”  or  “Madam.”  She lived beloved and honoured of many in the

i8

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

“  This is the first lady,”  said Mr.  Bruce,  rising,  “  who ever
refused me !  ”  Then addressing Mrs.  Strange,  he asked her if
she had heard of Lord Rosemary lately?  They then joined
in drawing a most odious character of him,  especially for
avarice;  after which Mr.  Bruce walking up to me,  said,  “And
yet this man is my rival!  ”

“Really!”  cried I,  “I am sure I wonder that he should
[venture]  ”  [I meant on account of his prodigious figure].

“  O !  ”  answered he,  [thinking I meant a compliment,]
“it’s really true,  Mrs.  Strange,  is it not,  that he is my
rival  ?  ”

“  O,  yes!  they say so,”  said she.

“  I am surprised that he dares"  said my mother,  “  be
rival to Mr.  Bruce,  for I wonder he does not apprehend that
his long residence in Egypt made him so well acquainted
with magic,  that - ”

[As what was written to Mr.  Crisp has more details than the
corresponding passage in the journal,  it is quoted here in preference to that.

“‘O!’  cried he,  ‘I shall not poison him,  but I shall bribe his
servant to tie a cord across his staircase some night,  and as I
dare say he never is at the expense of allowing himself a candle
to walk up and down,  he must necessarily break his neck,  and
that will be as effectual. ’  As he went out of the room soon after,
I asked Miss Strange what all this meant?  She told me that it
was reported that he was going to marry Lady Anne Lindsey,
sister of the beautiful Lady Margaret Fordyce,  the banker’s wife,
and that whether this was true or not,  Lord R.  certainly paid his
addresses to her ladyship.”

Both James Bruce,  and Neil,  third Earl of Rosebery,  were
widowers in 1775,  but the beautiful,  witty,  and able Lady Anne
Lindsay did not marry either of them.  Nor did she marry

midst of her treasures of past time,  among which were many Jacobite
relics;  from portraits,  engravings,  and medallions,  to  “the clandestine
correspondence of 1 745s — letters written on narrow strips of vellum,
rolled up inside a quill,  and carried about in ladies’  powdered curls,  in
favour of the Prince.”  “  She never  ”  (it is added),  “  leant back in her
chair,  and we used to say my mother killed her by inducing her to lie
down on the sofa for the first time of her life.  She certainly died next
day.

,£  Those who read the humorous and easy conversation in Mrs.  Strange’s
“parlour”  will observe how lightly the fetters of form hung on those
who had been reared in them.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

19

Richard Atkinson,  M.P.,  of the great firm of Muir and Atkinson,
a rising politician,  who died in 1785,  bequeathing her a  “considerable part of his property.”  She waited until she was turned
forty,  when she married,  in 1793,  Andrew,  son of Dr.  Thomas
Barnard,  Bishop of Elphin,  with whom she went to the Cape of
Good Hope,  he being Colonial Secretary under Lord Macartney.
All know her pathetic poem,  “  Auld Robin Gray;”  and her accomplished kinsman,  the late Earl of Crawford,  has printed
many charming pages of hers in his  “  Lives of the Lindsays.”
It was on her younger sister,  Lady Margaret,  that Sheridan
wrote  (in 1771)  the lines —

“  Marked you her eye of heavenly blue?

Marked you her cheek of rosy hue?

That eye,  in liquid circles moving;

That cheek,  abashed at man’s approving;

The one,  Love’s arrows darting round,

The other,  blushing at the sound.”  1

Bruce was the reverse of  “  Lord Rosemary”  (as P'anny calls
him)  in his habits,  for she tells Mr.  Crisp that Mr.  Bruce  “is
now in lodgings in Leicester Fields,  at four guineas and a half a
week.  He keeps his carriage,  but hardly ever goes out.”  In
May,  1776,  Bruce took a lady of the Dundas family for his
second wife,  and in June,  1775,  “his rival ”  married,  secondly,
Mary,  only daughter of Sir Francis Vincent,  Bart.  Yet anyone
who was superstitious might well have cried out  “  Absit !”  or  (as
the Germans say)  “  Unberufen /”  to avert ill from a speaker
foretelling,  as it were,  his own doom,  for in this way  ( minus the
rival,  the cord,  and the bribe)  died James Bruce in 1794,  falling
headlong down the stairs of his own house,  and never speaking
more.]

[He then asked]  Miss Strange,  how she could let her
harpsichord be so much out of order?  “  I went dotvn,”  said
he,  “  to try it,  but,  upon my word !  it is too bad to be
touched.  However,  while I was at it,  in comes Bell,  and
seats herself quietly behind me;  but no sooner did I rise,
than away she flew down a flight of stairs quite to the cellar,
I suppose;  expecting,  no doubt,  that I should follow.  But,”
added he,  drily,  “I did not.  Well,  Bell,  what do you glow’r
at?  [I don’t know if I spell the word right.]  Do you understand Scotch,  Miss Burney?  ”

Some read  “  wound,”  but that rhyme is not so good.

1

20

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

“  I believe I can go so far as that word,  Sir.”

“But,  Brucey ,  why are you so negligent of your Music?
You play,  Miss Burney?”

“  Very little,  Sir.”

“O,  I hope I shall hear you;  I am to come to your
house some day with Mrs.  Strange,  and then - ”

“  When we have the honour of seeing you,  Sir,”  cried I,
“  I hope you will hear a much better player than me.”

“  O,  as to that,”  answered he,  “  I would not give a fig to
hear a man play,  comparatively.”

“Well,”  said Mrs.  Strange,  “I knew a young lady who
was at a concert for the first time,  and she sat and sighed
and groaned,  [and groaned and sighed,]  and at last she said,
‘Well,  I can’t help it!  ’  and burst into tears.”

“There’s a woman,”  cried Mr.  Bruce,  with some emotion,
“  who could never make a man unhappy !  Her soul must be
all harmony !  ”

We then joined in recommending to Miss Strange to
practice ;  and Mr.  Bruce took it into his head to affect to
speak to me in a whisper,  bending his head,  not without
difficulty,  to a level with mine.  What he said I have forgot,
though I know it was something of no manner of consequence;  but really I saw every body’s eyes,  struck with
his attitude,  were fixed upon us in total silence,  so that I
hardly heard him from the embarassment I was in.

Except what I have written,  almost every word that he
said was  [either]  addressed en badinage to plague Bell,  or in
diverting himself with Miss Strange’s parrot.  He seemed
determined not to enter into conversation with the company
in general,  nor to speak upon any but trifling topics.  It is
pity,  that a man who seems to have some generous feelings,
that break out by starts,  and who certainly is a man of
learning and of humour,  should be thus run away with by
pride  [and self-conceit],

March 10th.

. We had a large party here last Sunday,  the first of the
kind we have had in this house.

Mr.  Bruce,  who is very fond of music,  had appointed that
day to accompany Mrs.  Strange hither,  [in order]  to hear
Mr.  Burney play upon our Merlin harpsichord.  Mr.  Twining

FRANCES BURNEY

21

1775]

also brought his wife and another lady with the same view.
These,  with Miss Strange,  my sister,  and ourselves,  formed
the party.  Mr.  Bruce,  however,  did not appear till very late.
Mr.  Twining and his ladies came before six.  He apologised
for his unfashionable hour.  “But,”  added he,  honestly,  “I
not only wished for a long evening here,  but also to avoid
having to enter the room,  after your company were assembled  [under the Abyssinian Giant].”

Mrs.  and Miss Strange came soon after.  We enquired
after His Abyssinian Majesty ;  they said he dined at General
Melville’s,  and was to join them here.  We waited tea about
an hour during which time the conversation was too general
and mixed to be remembered;  the tea equipage was then
ordered,  and we had all done,  and Mr.  Burney,  followed by
Mr.  Twining,  had gone into the Library where our music
was to be,  and which joins the dining room,  where we all
were when a Thundering Rap called up our attention,  and
Mr.  Bruce was announced,  and entered the room like a
monarch,  [so grand and so pompous].

We soon found that he was disconcerted;  he complained
to Mrs.  Strange,  who enquired after the General,  that he had
invited a set of stupid people to meet him,  and he seemed
to have left the party in disgust.  He took one dish of tea,
and then desired to speak to my father,  concerning his Letter
that is to be printed in the  [Musical]  History.  My father
asked him into his study,  which is a very comfortable snug
room within the library,  whence at the same moment Mr.
Twining was returning to the dining-room.  My father introduced him to Mr.  Bruce ;  they exchanged bows,  and  [Mr.
Bruce]  went on.  Mr.  Twining lifted up his hands and eyes
in a droll kind of astonishment,  when Mr.  Bruce was out of
sight,  and coming up to us,  said  [in a low voice],  “  This is
the most awful man I ever saw!  ”  and added,  “  I never felt
myself so little before.”

“  Troth,  never mind,”  cried Mrs.  Strange,  “  if you was six
foot high,  he would look over you,  and he can do no more
now.”

Mr.  Twining then sate down;  but said he felt in fear of
his life;  “for,  if he should come in hastily,”  cried he,  “and
overlook me,  taking this chair to be empty,  it will be all
over with me!  I shall be crushed!”

22 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

After some time,  finding they did not return,  Mr.  Twining,
impatient to hear Mr.  Burney,  begged him to go to the harpsichord.  Accordingly,  we all went into the library,  and Mr.
Burney fired away in a voluntary.* 1

Mr.  Twining,  at once astonished and delighted at his performance,  exclaimed,  “  Is not this better than being tall?  ”
When Mr.  Bruce and my father joined the party,  Mrs.  Strange
introduced Mr.  Burney and my sister.  .  .  .  Mr.  Twining
was  [really]  enraptured;  Mrs.  Strange listened with silent
wonder and pleasure;  and Mr.  Bruce was composed into
perfect good humour.  He forgot the General,  discarded his
sternness,  and wore upon his face smiles,  attention,  and
satisfaction.

As to Mrs.  Twining,  she seems a very stupid woman.  I
marvel that Mr.  Twining could choose her!  She may,  however,  have virtues unknown to me; — perhaps,  too,  she was
rich!1

The whole party was asked to a family supper,  when,  to
a general surprise,  Mr.  Bruce  [himself]  consented to stay!
an honour we by no means expected;  however,  he was implicitly followed by the rest of the set.  Mr.  Bruce sat
between Mrs.  T wining and me.  That lady and he did not
fatigue themselves with exchanging one  [single]  word the
whole evening.  However,  Mr.  Bruce was exceeding courteous and in great good humour.  He made me seem so very
short,  as I sat next to him,  that had not Mr.  Burney,  who is
still less than myself,  been on my other side,  I should have
felt quite  .  .  .  pitiful.  But what very much diverted me was,
that whenever I turned to Mr.  Burney,  I found his head
leaning behind my chair,  to peer at Mr.  Bruce,  [as he would

1 These additional details are from a letter in March to Mr.  Crisp :
“  Mr.  Bruce and my father soon returned,  ancl we had music for above
two hours.  Mr.  Burney played delightfully ;  and Hetty accompanied
him in a very fine duet for the harpsichord and piano forte.”

1 This too rapid judgement makes no allowance for the feelings of
Mrs.  Twining among a party all of whom were strangers to her.  Her
husband had known Dr'.  Burney from,  at least,  the spring of 1774.  She
had been her husband’s fellow-pupil in Latin and Greek,  under his tutor
(who was.  her father),  the Rev.  Mr.  Smythies,  of an old Colchester
family which befriended Defoe.  Mr.  Richard Twining wrote  (in 1817)
that  “her good sense and cheerfulness rendered her an excellent companion for my brother.”

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

23

have done at any outlandish animal].  Indeed,  no eye was
off him;  though I believe he did not perceive it,  as he hardly
ever himself looks at any body.  [He seems quite satisfied
with thinking of his own consequence.]

The conversation during supper turned upon madness,  a
subject which the Strange’s are very full of,  as a lady of
their  [intimate]  acquaintance left their house but on Friday
in that terrible disorder.  We asked how she happened to be
then?  They said that she had seemed recovered.  Mr.  Bruce
who had seen her,  was very inquisitive about her.  Mrs.
Strange said that the beginning of her wandering that evening was,  by going up to her,  and asking her if she could
make faces  . ?

“I wish,”  said Mr.  Bruce,  “she had asked me!  I believe
I could have satisfied her that way !  ”

“  O,”  said Miss Strange,  “  she had a great desire to
speak to you,  Sir;  she said that she had much to say to
you.”

“If,”  said Mr.  Bruce,  “without any preface,  she had
entered the room,  and come up to me,  making faces;  I confess I should have been rather surprised !  ”

“  I am sure,”  cried I,  “I should have made a face without
much difficulty!  I am amazed at Miss Strange’s courage in
staying with her !  ”

“I have been a great deal with her,”  answered Miss
Strange,  “and she particularly minds whatever I say.”

“  But how are you to answer for your life a moment,”
cried Mr.  Bruce,  “in company with a mad woman?  When
she seems most quiet,  may she not snatch up a pair of
scissors or whatever is near,  and destroy you?  or at least
run them into your eyes,  and blind or maim you for life?”

“Nay;  while I tried to hold her from going into the
street,”  said Mrs.  Strange,  “  she scratched my arm,  as you
see —  ”

'  “  Did she fetch blood,”  cried Mr.  Bruce,  “  if she did you
will surely go mad too:  [you may depend upon that!]  Nay,
I would advise you to go directly to the sea;  and be dipt!
I assure you I would not be in your situation !

He said this so drily,  that I stared at him,  and could not
forbear beginning to expostulate,  when turning round to me,
1 saw he was laughing.

24 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

“  If you are bit by a mad cat”  continued he,  “  will you
not go mad?  and how much more by a mad womanl  ”

“  But I was not bit,”  answered Mrs.  Strange,  “  I only
felt her nail,  and where there enters no slaver,  there is no
danger.”

“  I hope,”  said my mother,  “  that her friends will not
place her in a private mad-house;  there is so much iniquity
practised at those places that,  in order to keep them,  they
will not let their friends know when they are really recovered.”

“Aye,  indeed!”  cried Mr.  Bruce,  “why this is very bad
encouragement to go mad !  ”

And now I must have done with this evening,  unless I
were to write horrid tales of madness;  for that horrid subject being started,  every body had something terrible to say
upon it.

Mr.  Twining has since left town.

March 13th.

Enclosed in a letter to myself,  I received on Tuesday one
for Miss Strange,  from my brother,  to thank her for a letter
she had favoured him with to a relation at Boston.  I went
in the afternoon with it to Mrs.  Strange,  and found her and
her two daughters at tea,  with Mr.  Bruce.  I told Miss
Strange,  that I had just received dispatches from Portsmouth,  but as her letter was from a gentleman I delivered
it before her mother,  for fear of consequences !

“From Portsmouth?”  said Mr.  Bruce,  “what,  from Collins,  Bruceyt ”

“  It is from a very honest Tar,”  answered I.

“  Then pray,  Brucey ,  let me look at the seal,  to see
whether he has sent you two pigeons billing?  or a bleeding
heart?  or a dove cooing?”

When he found my brother was the person in question,
and that he was going to America,  he said he was sorry for
it,  as there was going to be another South-Sea Expedition,
which would have been much more desirable for him.
“  And,”  said I,  “  much more agreeable to him;  for he wishes
it of all things.  He says he should now make a much better
figure at Otaheite,  than when there before,  as he learnt the
language of Omai in his passage home.”

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

25

“Ah,  weel,  honest lad,”  said Mrs.  Strange,  “  I suppose he
would get a wife or something pretty there.”

“  Perhaps,  Oberea,”  added Mr.  Bruce.1

“  Poor Oberea,”  said I,  “  he says is dethroned.”

“But,”  said he archly,  “if Mr.  Banks goes,  he will reinstate her!  But this poor fellow,  Omai,  has lost all his
time;  they have taught him nothing;  he will only pass for
a consummate liar when he returns;  for how can he make
them believe half the things he will tell them?  He can give
them no idea of our houses,  carriages,  or any thing that will
appear probable.”

“Troth,  then,”  cried Mrs.  Strange,  “they should give
him a set of dolls’  things and a baby’s house,  to show them ;
he should have every thing in miniature,  by way of model;
dressed babies,  cradles,  lying-in-women,  and a’  sort of pratty
things.”

There is a humorous ingenuity in this,  that I really believe would be well worth being tried.

Masquerades being mentioned,  the comely Mrs.  Tolfray,
whom I have sometimes met at their house,  was spoken
of.  .  .  .  She exhibited herself  [always,  they said,]  as a
Queen.  .  .  .  She was once Queen of the Amazons;  after
that,  [Mary]  Queen of Scots ;  and last of all,  Andromache.

“  I should think she must have appeared in character/
cried I,  “as Queen of the Amazons.”

“  I own I should like to have seen her,”  said Mr.  Bruce;
“  but how was she dressed?  ”

“O,”  answered Miss Strange,  “in buskins ,  and her hair
about her shoulders.”

1 Otaheite was first discovered by Captain Wallis in 1767.  Oberea,
or Oberee-roah,  was then treated by the natives as their queen.  She
was most generous in her gifts,  for she would not barter,  and wept
bitterly when Wallis  (with whom she was smitten)  sailed away,  in spite
of her entreaties that he would remain.  When Cook reached the island
her authority had waned.  He gave her a doll,  and she gave a hog in
return.  Many were the jests upon Banks and Oberea.  Even an epistle,
after the manner of Ovid,  was published,  in which she was made to bewail her love and his inconstancy.  In 1788 Captain Bligh of the
“Bounty,”  who had been with Cook,  found her grown old,  and so corpulent that it was hard to help her into his ship.  She clasped his knees
and told him,  with much weeping,  of her troubles since the death of
Cook.  She brought with her a favourite cat,  bred from one given her
by Captain Cook in 1777.

26

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

“But there was a peculiar custom,”  said Mr.  Bruce,
“among the Amazons,  which ought to have been attended
to;  which was that they cut off the left breast.  Now Mrs.
Tolfray has both right and left breast so very entire that
there is scarce any part of them suffered to be lost,  or
lessened even,  to public view.  What dress had she for
Andromache?  ”

“  Black velvet and a hoop,”  answered Miss Strange.

“And who the devil was to know that for Andromache?  ”
cried he.  “  Does nobody else wear black?  ”

“  She had better have been in a gown of her own spinning,”
quoth I.

Mrs.  Strange enquired of Mr.  Bruce,  if he was acquainted
with Mr.  and Mrs.  Bodville?  the former of whom she save
great encomiums to,  saying he was the most ingenious man,
and never idle night or day;  or scarce spending a moment
oi his life but in his peculiar branch of studies.

“  Then what  [the devil]  did he marry for?  ”  demanded
Mr.  Bruce.  “  I think his wife is but little obliged to him.
Now a man is certainly right to give his day to his studies;
but the evening should be devoted to society;  he should
give it to his wife,  or his friends,  to conversation,  or  [to]
making love.”

“Now,  do you know,  I adore you for that!”  exclaimed
Mrs.  Strange,  [“it’s just my way of thinking;  so be sure it’s
perfect.”]  1

Those who wish for more of the racy sayings of Mrs.  Strange
should read Mr.  Dennistoun’s memoirs of her husband and her brother.
Robert Strange  (who had been a law-student,  and a sailor,  but whose
true bent was towards art)  in the year 1744 fell in love with Isabella
Lumisden,  granddaughter of a pious and persecuted Scotch Bishop,
daughter of Wilham Lumisden,  who had refused the oaths,  and been
“out in 1 7 1 5»  an<3 sister of his friend,  Andrew Lumisden,  a young
lawyer.  In 1745,  Isabella promised to marry Strange if he would join
the army of I lince Charles,  to whom her brother became treasurer.  He
did so,  and plied both his graver,  and his sword,  in the Prince’s service.
His earliest known engraving is a likeness of Prince Charles,  for sale at
a low price among the people.  Pie procured English bank-notes as
patterns,  and copied them ;  designing a paper-currency for very small
sums,  to be used among the soldiers.  Just as his plates were ready to
be struck off,  there was the surprise and the rout at Culloden.  All was
over in twenty minutes.  Lumisden fled,  saving the great seal of King

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

27

We have been to return the visit of Signora Agujari.  She
was all civility  .  .  .  and has renewed her promise of
another and a musical evening.  She speaks of it with an
undisguised consciousness of the great pleasure she is to
give us.  If Mr.  Bruce is the proudest man I ever saw,  so is
the Bastardella the vainest woman.  She says she lives quite
alone,  and that it is charity to visit her.  She proposed cultivating very much with our family;  for she said that she
hardly ever saw any body,  as she was always refused to
gentlemen.  She certainly has great merit in this conduct,

James III.  Strange was in the Life-Guards.  In the flight one of his
incomplete plates for notes is supposed to have dropped where it was
found about thirty years ago by Loch Laggan.  Strange was hid in the
Highlands :  then in Edinburgh.  There some soldiers got a glimpse of
him,  and chased him into the Lumisden house,  where his lady sate
singing as she sewed.  She raised her wide hoop,  Strange slipped under
it,  and she sang and sewed on steadily while the soldiers searched the
house in vain.  In 1747 she married him against her father’s wishes,  and
secretly.  In 1748,  Strange carried the great seal  (which,  also,  had been
in hiding,)  to Andrew Lumisden at Rouen.  Lumisden was attainted,
but Strange was accidentally left out of the proclamation.  Still,  he was
grievously hampered,  until late in life,  by his known Jacobitism.  On
this account he worked mainly abroad,  while she reared her children in
London,  and sold his engravings without any middle-man.  ‘  ‘  Marrie for
love and live constantly asunder !  ”  she cries.  Out of seventeen years of
married life,  about half only had been passed together.

“No time,”  (she said,)  “can alter my opinions of right and wrong.”
In her book of Common Prayer,  it may be seen that she has effaced
“King George”  in the state-prayers,  and inserted  “King James.”  In
1766,  when her brother wrote to inform her of the death of the Chevalier de St.  George  (her King James)  at Rome,  she replied,  “If my
twenty-years’-old acquaintance”  (Charles Edward)  “is now at your
house,  on your knees present my humble duty,  nor blush to think a lady
bid you do so.  O had^  I been of a more useful sex  !  Had my pen been
a sword,  I had not now been sitting tamely by mv fire -side,  desiring you
to do me a simple office like this !  ”

This antique loyalty endured the strain,  when in the very next year,
under circumstances dishonouring himself alone,  Charles Edward suddenly dismissed her brother,  who had for sixteen years served his father
and himself as secretary.  Mrs.  Strange prayed Mr.  Lumisden to bear
insults and injuries in silence,  and even after King George III.  had
knighted her husband,  she went on paying her duty to the Countess of
Albany as to her rightful Queen.  Some may care to know that Fanny
thought there was much resemblance between Mrs.  Strange and Mrs.
Byron  (Sophia Trevannion,  the poet’s Cornish grandmother,)  in person,
manner,  wit,  and warmth of feeling.

28 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

as besides her talents,  she is a fine woman and must be
everywhere courted.

March 23rd.

Yesterday morning,  as Susette and I were returning  [from
and with]  Mr.  Burney,  we met the celebrated actress
Mrs.  Abington walking across  (?)  Tavistock Street  .  .  .
when we came to the end of the street,  at the corner of
Charles Street,  who should we see but Mr.  Garrick.  .  .  .
Mrs.  Abington  .  .  .  crossed over to him,  while we walked
gravely on,  taking no sort of notice of his bow.  .  .  .  They
went down Charles Street together,  and when we were
out of their sight we again turned  ....  When we came
to the bottom of Southampton Street,  he offered us each
a hand to cross the Strand,  but we declined,  and told him
we were not going that way.  “Are not you?”  cried he.
“  Well,  then,  I'll go your way.”  So saying,  he put himself
between us with a humorous and sportive kind of gallantry
which from him was infinitely agreeable.  He again proposed
calling a coach and making away with us.  .  .  .

******

March 26th.

Two days after the above-mentioned rencontre ,  early in
the morning,  this most entertaining of mortals came.  He
marched up stairs immediately into the study,  where my
father was having his hair dressed,  surrounded by books
and papers innumerable.  Charlotte was reading the newspaper,  and I was making breakfast.  The rest of the family
had not quitted their downy pillows.

My father was beginning a laughing sort of apology for
his litters,  and so forth,  but Mr.  Garrick interrupted him
with — “Aye,  now;  do be in a little confusion;  it will make
things comfortable !  ”  He then began to look very gravely
at the hair -dresser.  He was himself in a most odious scratch
wig,  which nobody but himself could dare be seen in.  He
put on a look in the Abel Drugger style of envy and sadness,
as he examined the hair-dresser’s progress;  and,  when he

FRANCES BURNEY

1 77 53

29

had done,  he turned to him with a dejected face,  and said,
“Pray,  Sir,  could you touch up this a little?”  taking hold
of his own frightful scratch.

The man only grinned,  and left the room.

He shook hands with me,  and told my father he had
almost run away with me a day or two before.  He then
enquired after some books which he had lent my father,
and how many he had?

“  I have ten of the Memoirs of the French Academy,”
said my father.

“And what others?  ”  cried Mr.  Garrick.

“I don’t know;  do you,  Fanny?”

“  O,  what,”  cried Mr.  Garrick,  archly,  “I suppose you
don’t chuse to know of any others;  O,  very well!  pray,  Sir,
make free with me !  pray,  keep them,  if you chuse it.”

“  Charles will know,  Sir,”  said I.

“What,  Cherry Nose?”  cried he  (for so he has named
poor Charles on account of his skin being rather of the
brightest).  .  .  .  “Why,  will he?  I am very good friends
with Cherry Nose.  I enquire sometimes if he would like to
go to the play,  and Cherry Nose smiles and simpers.  But
pray,  Doctor,  when shall we have the History out?  Do let
me know in time,  that I may prepare to blow the trumpet
of Fame.”  He then put his stick to his mouth,  and in
Raree-show-man’s voice,  cried,  “  Here is the only true History,  Gentlemen;  please to buy,  please to buy.  Gad,  Sir;  I
shall blow it in the very ear of yon scurvy magistrate,”
[meaning Sir John Hawkins,  who is writing the same
History].1

1 This Garrick might easily have done,  as he was a neighbour of Sir
John,  when in the country.  Another of Sir John’s Twickenham neighbours,  Horace Walpole,  is said to have put it into Sir John’s head,  to
write a history of Music,  at about the same time that Father Martini in
Italy,  M.  de la Borde in France,  Mr.  Twining and Dr.  Burney in England,  were,  more or less,  working with the same design.  Sir John
Hawkins had been an attorney,  an active magistrate in the Wilkes and
other riots,  for some time chairman of  “the Middlesex Justices,”  and
knighted on presenting an address to George III.  He had been a friend
of the learned Pepusch,  (Doctor of Music)  and a main supporter of the
Academy of Antient music,  but he was an amateur,  and Dr.  Burney a
musician skilled in theory and practice;  he was little liked in society,
while Dr.  Burney was highly popular.  There was a general preference

30

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[>775

He then ran on with great humour upon twenty subjects;
but so much of his drollery belongs to his voice,  looks and
manner,  that writing loses it almost all.

My father asked him to breakfast:  but he said he was
engaged at home with Mr.  Boswell and Mr.  Twiss.  He then
took the latter off,  as he did also Dr.  Arne,1 very comically;
and afterwards,  Dr.  Johnson,  in a little conversation concerning the borrowing a book of him.  “David,  will you
lend me Petraca?”  (sic).  “Yes,  Sir.”  “David,  you sigh.”
“  Sir,  you shall have it.”  “  Accordingly,  the book,  finely
bound,  was sent;  but scarce had he received it,  when uttering a Latin ejaculation  (which Mr.  Garrick repeated)  in a
fit of enthusiasm, — over his head goes poor Petraca, — -
Russia leather and all !  ”

for Dr.  Burney’s book,  which was playfully expressed by Dr.  Callcott
in a  “Glee for three Voices  ”  which took the prize of the Catch-Club,
in 1789,  the year in which Dr.  Burney’s last two volumes were published.  It runs thus : —

“  Have you Sir John Hawkins’  hist’ry?
Some folks think it quite a myst’ry.
Music fill’d his wondrous brain;

How d’ye like him?  Is it plain?

Both I’ve read,  and must agree,

That Burney’s Hist’ry pleases me.

Sir John Hawkins— Sir John Hawkins,
How d’ye like him?  how d’ye like him?
Burney’s hist’ry — Burney’s hist’ry,
Burney’s hist’ry pleases me.”

The pun in this catch reminds the editor of a like play upon Dr.  Burney’s name,  which she read long ago,  she knows not in what book.
Some concert-giver,  public or private,  offended a gentleman by not inviting him,  or not resenting a ticket for him.  He said to a friend,  in an
angry manner,  “I will go to Burney’s house!”  “What?  Burn his
houseV cried his friend in amazement.  These verses have been said to
have ruined the sale of Sir John’s History,  but they merely announce a
general opinion thirteen years after that History had been published.
They may have been handed about in manuscript,  but were,  probably,
not printed before the death of Sir Tohn Hawkins,  in 17S9,  the year in
which the glee took the prize.

1 Dr.  Arne was Dr.  Burney’s old master  (in music)  to whom he had
been articled.  Garrick and Arne had had the usual quarrels between a
manager and his authors and composers.  Arne once wrote to complain
that Garrick had  “an irresistible”  (he meant antipathy ,  but he wrote )
“ apathy ”  to him:  Garrick replied that apathy was no part of his
character.

FRANCES BURNEY

r77 5]

31

He soon after started up,  a*hd said,  he must run.  “Not
yet,”  cried I.  He turned to me,  and in mock heroics cried,
“Ah!  I will mak  &  your heart ache!  you shall sigh.”

He then went out of the study,  followed by my father,
and he took a survey of the books in the library.  Charlotte
and I soon joined them.  He called Charlotte his little
Dumpling Queen.  “See how she follows me with her
blushes !  and here comes another with her smiles — (to me)
ay,  I see how it is!  all the house in love with me!  Here is
one  (to Charlotte)  whose love is in the bud ;  and here  (to
me)  here it is in blow ;  and now  (to my father)  I go to one,
whose is full-blown ;  full-blown ,  egad!”

He would not be prevailed with to lengthen his visit.
We all followed him  [instinctively]  down stairs ;  though he
assured us he would not pilfer anything !  “  Here is a certain
maid here,”  said he,  “whom I love to speak' to,  because
she is cross:  Egad!  Sir,  she does not know the Great
Roscius ;  but I frightened her this morning a little.  Child,
said I,  you don’t know who you have the happiness to
speak to !  Do you know I am one of the first Geniuses of
the Age?  Why,  child,  you would faint away ,  if you knew
who I am !  ”

In this sportive manner he continued,  till the door was
shut.  He is sensible that we all doat on him;  but I believe
it is the same thing wherever he goes,  except where he has
had a personal quarrel,  which,  I am sorry to hear,  is frequently the case with those who have been his best friends.
He promised he would often call in the same sort of way,
to plague us;  we assured him we would freely forgive him
if he did.  In truth,  I desire no better entertainment than
his company affords.

April 3rd.

A few days since Mrs.  Strange called with a very civil
message from the King of Abyssinia,  importing that he had
had so much pleasure from the harpsichord duet he had
heard here,  that he could not forbear speaking of it in high
terms to a friend of his,  Mr.  Nesbit,  a very musical man,
whose curiosity he had so much raised to hear it,  that Mr.
Bruce promised him to endeavour to fix a day with my
father for his coming hither.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

32

[i775

Accordingly,  last Sunday we had another Music Meeting.
Our party consisted of Mr.  Bruce,  Mrs.  and Miss Strange,
Mr.  Nesbit,  who is a young man infinitely fade,  Mr.  and
Miss Bagnall,  Dr.  Russel,  a physician who is but lately returned from Aleppo,  where he met with Mr.  Bruce,  and
Mr.  Solly,  another great traveller who was acquainted with
Mr.  Bruce at Grand Cairo and Alexandria;  he had likewise
met with my father at almost every great town in Italy.  He
is a lively man,  full of chat,  and foreign shrugs and actions.

Dr.  Russel is,  I believe,  very clever;  but he is so nearsighted,  that he peers in every body’s face a minute or two
before he knows them,  and indeed after too;  for he never
casts his eyes upon the fire,  ground,  or any thing inanimate.
He is so fond of the human face divine,  that he looks at
nothing else.  Sukey and I could hardly keep our countenances from observing his perpetual stare from face to face.1

Mr.  Bruce was quite the thing;  he addressed himself with
great gallantry to us all alternately,  first going up to my
mother,  who was talking to Mrs.  Strange. — “  Madam,  I was
looking for you,  to pay my respects to you.”  Soon after he
came to my sister — “  Mrs.  Burney,  I hope your finger is
better?  Miss Strange told me you had hurt it.”

“  Mrs.  Burney's fingers,”  cried Dr.  Russel,  “  ought to be
exempt from pain.”

“Oh!”  returned Mr.  Bruce,  “I  [have]  prayed to Apollo
for her.”

“I don’t doubt,  Sir,”  said Hetty,  “your influence with
Apollo !  ”

“Madam,”  answered he,  “I ought to have some;  for I

1 Dr.  Patrick Russel,  physician to the English factory at Aleppo,  had
been medical instructor to Bruce,  who had studied surgery when Consul-General at Algiers,  under the surgeon to the Consulate.  He had
also attended him in a severe attack of ague.  Fanny met him at a
.dinner at Mrs.  Ord’s in 1791,  and wrote  “Dr.  Russel,  whose odd comic
humour my dear Susan is acquainted with,  contributed by its vein and
freedom to the general good humour and conviviality of the table.”
Dr.  Patrick was brother to Dr.  Alexander Russel,  who preceded him as
physician to the factory at Aleppo.  Dr.  A.  Russel wrote an  “Account
of Aleppo,”  which was re-published  (with large additions)  by Dr.
Patrick in 1794;  Dr.  Patrick also brought out a  “Treatise on the
Plague,”  and  “An account of Indian serpents collected on the coast of
Coromandel,”  1796.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

33

have made myself a slave to him all my life.”  Then,  turning to me,  “  Miss Burney,  I hope you intend to begin the
Concert to-night?  Yes,  you must indeed;  for perhaps you
may not like so well to play after these folks”  pointing to
Mr.  Burney and my sister.1

When he found he could make nothing of me,  he addressed himself to Sukey,  and told her that she must not
refuse to play;  for that he had dreamt some very great misfortune would happen to him,  if she did.  After this,  he and
Mr.  Nesbit got together,  and sat whispering for some time;
and I have since heard from Miss Strange,  that the delicate
Mr.  Nesbit was acquainting Mr.  Bruce with an appointment,  which a certain Lady of Quality had made with him
for the evening,  at the Opera the night before!  What a
thorough coxcomb!  even his friend Mr.  Bruce held his
communication in so ridiculous a light,  that he  [afterwards]
told Mrs.  Strange of it laughingly.

Mr.  Bagnall was far the most elegant man in the room.
Indeed,  he must be so almost every where.  His daughter
is rather improved,  and somewhat less reserved and shy
than formerly.

Mr.  Bruce told us that Dr.  Russel was a performer on
the violin:  “A very fine one too,”  added he;  “though we
used rather to disgrace his talents at Aleppo by making him
play English Country-Dances.”  The Doctor then mentioned
a Concert,  at which he had been,  in Aleppo I think,  which
lasted three days,  and which was frequent upon occasion of
marriages.  “Three days!”  exclaimed Mr.  Bruce,  “why
matrimony is more formidable there than here!”

The Duet — Mr.  Burney’s and my sister’s playing,  were
much admired,  and the evening passed very agreeably.

April.

Once again I have seen my old friend Mrs.  Pringle.  We
met her by accident.  I felt so much ashamed from having
so long dropt her acquaintance,  as if I had done her an

1 In a letter to Mr.  Crisp,  Fanny adds a detail;  Mr.  Bruce  “always
speaks to me with an encouraging smile,  as if I were about eleven years
old.”

34 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [.775

injury.  I put my handkerchief up to my mouth and walked
quietly on.  She saw me — looked earnestly,  and presently
recollected me — “Miss  [Fanny]  Burney? — God bless me!
I hardly knew you !  What an age since I have seen you !  ”
I asked after her health,  and her family.  She said,  in her
hearty manner,  shaking hands with me,  “Well,  I am vastly
glad to see you,  and how does your sister do?  has she any
family?  Well,  she was as fine a girl as ever I saw,  and I
was like a fond parent,  for I thought she could not do well
enough in the world.  And how is little Charlotte?  ”  “  O,
she is great Charlotte now,”  cried I.  She talked on,  and —
“  well,  do pray come and see me,  and bring Charlotte,  I
shall be vastly glad to see you,  I assure you . ”

#*#*##

[From Dr.  and Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp.]

[As this is the only letter that has been found from Dr.  Burney
to Mr.  Crisp,  it is thought well to give it,  with some portions of
Fanny’s letter,  omitting what is a mere repetition of her Journal.
Some fragments of this letter are also used as notes to the
Journal.]

[By Dr.  Burney.]

March.

Here Fanny desires me to write the Prologue to I know
not what she is going to give you— and with my paw too ! — -
not one straight finger have I on my right hand ! 1 However,
I want just to give you some signs of life after so long an
absence and silence.  I have a million of things to say to
you about myself and others,  but such a hurried shattered
worn-out post-horse as I am at present crawls not on the
earth.  Yet even leisure to attend to bodily health cannot
exempt poor mortals from pain !  for you,  poor soul,  I hear
are laid up.  I would it were  [summer]  and I’d come and
con ailments with you.  I know not what effect it would
have on your gout,  but it would certainly comfort my bowels
to chat and philosophize with you.  It seems a long life
since I saw you,  and I have to tell you of my poor book —

1 Dr.  Burney’s writing shows the rheumatic state of his fingers.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

35

at a dead stop now,  page 352.  But what think you of the
King of Abyssinia,  who has at length indulged me with two
charming drawings of instruments!  My dear Daddy, — an
Abyssinian lyre now in common use and the Theban Harp,
most beautiful indeed,  though drawn from a painting in
Diospolis at least 3000 years old.  A letter of description,
too,  which I have leave to print.  God bless you ! 1

[The letter is continued by Fanny.]

I was a little shocked to find,  soon after I sent you my
last letter,  that Hetty had written to you upon the same
subject,  the Bastardini,  just before.  I am afraid between us
you must be quite tired of this poor Silver side.  You have
doubtless heard the story of the pig’s eating half her side,
and of its being repaired by a silver kind of machine.  You
may be sure that she has not escaped the witticisms of our
wags upon this score:  it is too fair a subject for ridicule to
have been suffered to pass untouched.  Mr.  Bromfield has
given her the nickname of Argentini :  Mr.  Foote has advised her  (or threatened to advise her)  to go to the Stamp
Office to have her side entered ,  lest she should be prosecuted
for secreting silver contrary to law  ;  and my Lord Sandwich
has made a catch,  in Italian,  and in dialogue between her
and the Pig,  beginning Caro Mio Porco— the Pig answers
by a grunt,  and it ends by his exclaiming Ah che bel man-
giare!  Lord S.  has shewn it to my father,  but he says he
will not have it set till she has gone to Italy .

Let me tell you that my father’s excellent correspondent,
Mr.  Twining,  has been in town for a month.  He is just
gone,  which we are all sorry for.  He has not only as much

1 This letter extends to above ten pages of Dr.  Burney’s book.  The
lyre and harp are engraved as illustrations.  Walpole sneered that Bruce
was himself  “  the Abyssinian Liar.”  Others denied that he had ever
been in the sepulchres of Thebes,  and said that he had drawn the harp
in England,  from imagination,  or at any rate,  not drawn it on the spot,
but from memory.  In 1823,  however,  Captains Irby and Mangles say
that  “  In the small chamber where Bruce copied the harp he gave to
Mr.  Burney for his  “History of Music,”  [they]  “ saw that travellers
name scratched over the very harp.  .  .  .  He is erroneous in the number
of strings which he has given to it.  The instrument itself is not unlike
the original.”

36 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

humour as learning,  but also as much good nature as either.
We saw him almost every day,  and as he could not be much
with my father,  whose engagements are now at their height,
why he even took the house as he found it,  and came to the
Little when he could not get the Great.  You are sure he
was not less our favourite for that:  indeed it reminded us of
him who is  (out of this house)  our greatest favourite,  and
who took the same kind of pot-luck company in those days
when he was not so shy of London as at present .

[The letter is finished by Dr.  Burney.]

Thanks for Theocritus,  I must throw it in the cauldron
till an opportunity offers of seeing the passage.  My dissertation has been long closed,  otherwise it would have done
nicely in the section upon ancient Harmony.  But a time
will come perhaps when I may resume the subject of dispute
concerning the question whether the Greeks and Rome knew
Counterpoint,  or Music in Parts.  I am got now to the
Olympic and Pythian Games,  whose music  [will]  perhaps
furnish some biographical amusement,  at least,  to my readers,
whom I must endeavour to divert when I have not the least
chance of instructing them.  My first vol.  will necessarily
consist more of the History of Poets and Musicians than of
Music;  for till frequent specimens can be given how is it
possible to reason upon the kind of music that was in use
and admired at any distant period of time?  “What can we
reason but from what we know?” — “answer me that and
unyoke.”  My paw akes already,  so,  once more,  God bless
you!  Best remembrance to Mad™  Ham,  and the Cap.1 .

[This postscript is by Fanny.]

Now if you don’t thank me some how or other,  for getting
you this,  I’ll say you are a very bad man;  as haughty as
Mr.  Bruce,  as vain as the Bastardini,  and as much an actor
as Garrick!

Here about eight lines of Dr.  Burney’s postscript have been erased

1

FRANCES BURNEY

37

1775]

[Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney.]

Ches.  Mar.  27.

Dear Fanny

With a right hand half lame,  and a left wholly in flame,
two painful useless knees,  and a neck that I can’t move
about,  I take a pen to thank you for your account of the
Sovereign of Abyssinnia,  and the other Dramatis Personae
of your letter.  My only way of showing my approbation in
my present condition is to cry out, — more,  more! — I am
delighted with Foote’s scheme of entering the Bastardini’s
ribs at the stamp office — I think it an excellent hit.  The
name of Argentini has not much merit or fancy in it,  but
the catch is a happy thought,  in duet,  and if well carried
thro’,  must be clever ;  and in true character for such a jolly,

clever d — g as Lord S - .  His name puts me in mind of

poor Jem; — whom I long to hear of — is he not aboard the
Cerberus,  and is not the Cerberus ordered to America?
Have there not been some removals and advancements
lately among the officers of that ship?  What a cruel thing
it is,  that that r[ogue]  your father should be reduc’d to a
level with crook- finger’d Jack!  I wish he had the same
facility of picking people’s pockets;  and if he did not
exercise his talents among the great  (who are to the full as
great pick-pockets as either of them)  let him be hang’d for
a fool.  I long as much,  or more than he can do for us to
spend some time together;  as I am more hungry by far than
he can be,  who has a thousand various dainties to feed upon,
continually in his way.  I don’t at all love your King Bruce,
but give him some credit for distinguishing the aforesaid
Rogue from the herd;  I wish he would minutely publish
his travels,  and then I should not care if I never saw his
Man-Mountain-ship— is there any talk that he intends it?
I am prepared to love very much your Mr.  Twining — by
the description of him he should be one after my own
heart.  More,  More!  the horse-leach hath two daughters,
saying Give,  Give!  these are the very words of King Solomon;  and  /  am their eldest son.  .  .  .

My love to your Mammy.  .  .  .  My sister 1 has again

1 Mrs.  Gast.

38 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

wrote about the Journal,1 and does not care to be refus’d;

so do,  prythee send it her .

Adieu,  I am in pain all over.

Your affectionate Daddy

S.  C.

[Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp,  endorsed by him  “April 14.”]

You enquire so much after Jem that I am tempted to
send you one of his letters to me,  in which he gives a good
and satisfactory account of his captain and fellow lieutenant.
He corresponds with me with tolerable regularity.  Where
he at present is I am not certain,  but I fancy still at Portsmouth.  It is true that there have been many removals
among the officers of his ship,  in so much that only the
First Lieutenant remains the same as when Jem went on
board.  The Cerberus is ordered to carry the three General
officers,  viz.,  General Burgoigne,2 General Cleveland,  and
another to America,  but we have no certain information at
present when they will sail.  Jem in his last letter tells me
that he is quite in the dark about it himself.  There is much
talk of an intended South Sea expedition :  now you must
[know]  that there is nothing that Jem so earnestly desires
as to be of the party ;  and my father has made great interest
at the Admiralty to procure him that pleasure;  and as it is
not to be undertaken till Capt.  Cooke’s return,  it is just
possible that Jem may be returned  [himself]  in time from
America.  This intended expedition is to be the last:  they
are to carry Omai back,  and to give him a month for liking ,
at the end of which,  if he does not again relish his old
home,  or finds himself not well treated,  he is to have it in
his power to return hither again.

We made a visit yesterday morning to Miss Davies.  She
told us her law-suit was not yet decided,  for the managers
did every thing in their power to delay and procrastinate.
Her mother;  Miss Dumpty her sister  (for so Lady Edg-
cumbe calls her,  because she is short,  crooked,  and squat).

1 Fanny’s Teignmouth Journal.

2 Sir John Burgoyne,  who was more successful as a dramatist than in
war.

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 39

and herself drank tea with us while Mr.  Twining was in
town,  and we invited him to meet them.  As he had never
heard her sing we were in hopes of being able to procure
him that gratification,  which he very much wished for.  My
father made an attack by saying he wished she would try
the power of music upon his rheumatism,  which had withstood every thing hitherto:  but the medicinal power of a
song from her he dared believe would prove very efficacious.
Miss Davies looked down,  and was silent for a minute,  upon
which my father repeated his request.  She then,  in a
hesitating voice said — “  I should be very ready to — but
you know,  Sir,  how I am situated.”  Nobody spoke;  every
body looked disappointed;  and she proceeded to explain
herself by saying that her articles were so strict that she
dared not infringe them,  but if my father and us females
would give her our companies at her house,  she would try to
tire us ;  for she supposed that she might at least be allowed
to practice a little at home.  Poor Mr.  Twining looked very
blank.  I was sorry she did not include him in the invitation . Mr.  Twining was however,  much pleased with

her,  and agreed that she was a sensible,  well bred,  and engaging girl.  She has a very good house in Pall Mall,  opposite
to Charlton House,  where she lives  [with her mother and
sister]  with great reputation and honour .

I believe I told you in my last of another party we were
to have with the King of Abyssinia.  I heartily wished you
had been here,  for the evening proved very agreeable.  I
will give you our party.  The first who came was Mr.  Solly.
He is a brother of a merchant in the city,  and a great
traveller He met mv fatner at four several places in Italy,
all accidentally,  namely,  at Bologna,  Florence,  Rome,  and
Naples Since that time he has been wandering to many
more remote places.  But what occasioned his being invited
for this evening is that he had met with Mr.  Bruce at Alexandria and Grand Cairo.  He is a very chatty man — good
tempered and lively.  He has a little of the affectation of a
travelled gentleman,  and is very full of prate.  He and my
father  "fought all their battles o'er again  ”  in a very sprightly
conversation which lasted till the arrival of Mr.  and Miss
Bagnall.

Mr.  Bagnall is a man of large fortune.  His manners are

4o THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

infinitely elegant;  he is all attention and politeness.  He is
an elderly man,  but still very handsome,  and his face is a
very bad index if he is not an amiable,  sensible,  and benevolent man.  .  .  .  His daughter is about twenty.  She is tall
and well made,  with a fair complexion;  but otherwise is
rather plain,  having very bad features.  She is sensible and
reserved,  yet by no means seems worthy of such a father as
she has to boast of,  for her manners are unformed and ratlin:
uncouthe.

Mr.  Burney and Hetty arrived next;  and after them Mr.
and Miss Strange.  And then came Mr.  Bruce and his friend
Mr.  Nesbitt.

Mr.  Bruce was in the most perfect good humour — all
civility and pleasantry,  and his smiles diffused a general
cheerfulness which every one partook of.  As to Mr.  Nesbitt
he is a young Scotchman of distinction:  he is conceited,
self-sufficient,  and puppyish.  He spoke very little,  except to
Mr.  Bruce,  and to him always in a whisper.  He is heir to a
monstrous fortune,  which is lucky for him,  as it will be the
only thing which will recommend him.  .  .  .  Mr.  Bruce himself holds him very cheap,  and I cannot imagine why he
introduced him here.  That you may not think me severe I
will tell you a little circumstance that will,  with you ,  I am
sure,  justify my opinion.  I was talking to Miss Strange
t’other day about this coxcomb,  and observing how politely
he amused himself with whispering to Mr.  Bruce.  “  Shall I
tell you,”  said she,  “what he whispered about?  He was
telling Mr.  Bruce of a certain lady of quality he had seen
at the Opera the night before,  who was so well pleased with
him that she appointed him to wait on her the next evening
at 9 o’clock,  and therefore,  he said,  he must shorten his
visit at your house.”  What think you of this?  She added
that Mr.  Bruce gave so little weight to his intelligence,  that
he scrupled not to doubt of every particular,  which he told
to Mrs.  Strange with no little laughter.

But I have not yet mentioned all our party.  The rear was
brought up by Dr.  Russel,  a learned and travelled physician,
who was acquainted with Mr.  Bruce at Aleppo,  where he
resided some years.  He appears to be a droll,  clever,  and
rather original character.  He is so fond of the human face
divine that he looks at no other object,  for his eyes are

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 41

never for a moment fixed upon the ground or upon anything inanimate,  but always upon the phiz of some one of
the company .

[From Mr.  Crisp to Miss F.  Burney.]

Chesington,  April 18th.

Dear Fannikin

Tho’  fingers are crippley and left arm lame,  I shall not
spare them to tell you,  you are at last  (after a hard fight
with you)  a tolerable  (not very tolerable ,  observe)  good Girl.
You make such a rout about my sisters seeing what you are
pleased to call 11 your trifling stuff,”  &c.  &c.  &c.,  that I could
beat you.  I thought you had more taste,  but no;  ’tis not
want of taste;  ’tis a way young girls have got by habit,  and,
as it were,  mechanically,  of making mille fa<;o?is,  without a
shadow of reason.  You cannot but know that trifling,  that
negligence,  that even incorrectness,  now and then in familiar
epistolary writing,  is the very soul of genius and ease;  and
that if your letters were to be fine-labour’d compositions
that smelt of the lamp ,  I had as lieve they  [travelled elsewhere.]  So no more of that,  Fanny,  and thou lov’st me.
Dash away,  whatever comes uppermost;  and believe me
you’ll succeed better,  than by leaning on your elbow,  and
studying what to say.

One thing more,  and I have done:  Rest assured,  that the
unconnected rattle you tax yourself with,  is exactly the same
sort of thing,  as that  “  nonsense  ”  which we are told is  “  Eloquence in Love.”

Now for Jem’s letter,  which I am much pleas’d with.
What I am so much pleas’d with,  above the rest,  is to observe that caution and guardedness in his descriptions and
accounts,  that indicate a maturity of judgement,  that is more
frequently to be wish’d than found in a warm,  bold buck of
his time of life and profession.  This uncommon and valuable quality at so early a period,  promises and seems almost
to insure future success.

I am so far from being tir’d with your long letters,  as you
call them,  that I only wish them a quire apiece,  and all that
stuff about reading them at my leisure,  and the impossibility
of getting through them at once,  &c.  &c.  &c.,  is of a piece

THE EARLY DIARY OF

42

['775

with  “the ringing of the Bellman;”  “being come to the
bottom of your page,”  and the rest of those usual sprightly
conclusions,  which if you’ll take my opinion,  are rather too
much hackneyed for my Fanny’s use.1

You young devil,  you!  you know in your conscience,  I
devour greedily your journalizing letters,  and you once promised they should be weekly journals,  tho’  now you fight
off,  both in your declarations and your practice. — I desire
you would reform both.  Take my word for’t,  Miss Davis
will lose her law-suit.  I am glad to find the Abysinian King
mends upon your hands.  Pray are not the Strange’s going
to live abroad?  ....  Write me more about your Daddy.
Will he come here at Whitsuntide?

*#####

[Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp,  Monday,  April,  1775,
endorsed by Mr.  Crisp  “April 24.”]

I thought you would like Jem’s letter,  but pray,  Sir,  does
it follow that you must keep it?  If you return it in your
next,  I will reward you with a short,  but characteristic letter
I had from Mr.  Hutton lately.  That worthy,  good,  half-
mad man calls here pretty often.  There is something in his
flightiness which speaks so much goodness of heart,  and so
much ignorance,-— or contempt  (I know not which)  of the
world,  that his conversation is quite singular.

Jem left England last Tuesday.  Added to the ship’s
company were three Generals,  three*  Aid de Camps,  two
gentlemen passengers,  and six or seven servants.  The Government allows Capt.  Chad  ^400 to maintain them.  Their
stay is quite uncertain.  Jem prays for his return in time to
go to the South Seas.  He says that if they have fine weather
they shall have a jovial voyage — but if bad — God help them,
and all these useless hands!  I expect they will fling the
[poor]  land officers overboard if there should be a storm.

As to his Majesty of Abyssinia,  I have only had the
honour of seeing him for two or three minutes since my last

“  But I hear the ringing of the postman’s bell,”  was then a very
common way of bringing a letter to an end.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

43

letter,  which was on occasion of carrying Miss Bell Strange
thence after she had been with my mother and me to the
School Ball in Queen Square.  He was extremely out of sorts,
because there was some company in the room  (Dr.  Smith
and a lady)  who did not please him.  How Dr.  Smith
offended him I know not,1 but as to the lady Miss Strange
told me that she had too much tongue ,  and had fatigued his
Majesty.

Last night Andrew Strange drank tea here.  He is the
second son,  and now at Oxford.  He is a very pretty young
man.  He told us that he had been in the morning with a
party who had the honour of seeing Mr.  Bruce’s collection
of curiosities.  He spoke of them very highly,  particularly of
the drawings,  which he declares are delightful.  He said it
was to be the last morning of exhibiting them,  as he only
wishes them to be sufficiently seen to make their fame induce the Government to be at the expense of publication.
He sends them all to-day privately to Dr.  Hunter’s Museum;  “But,”  said Andrew,  “he intends the world to think
they are gone to Scotland,  that he may not be solicited to
shew them any more.”  He added that the morning had
proved very agreeable,  not only because the collection was
extremely curious,  but also,  he said,  “  Because his Majesty
was less relentless than usual.”2

1 This was,  most likely,  Dr.  Carmichael Smith,  the physician and
intimate friend of the Strange family,

-  This was the second of  “  the three fine boys,”  of whom their mother
wrote to their uncle,  Mr.  Lumisden  (after the death of the Chevalier de
St.  George in 1766) — “They’ll be recruits when I am gone;  I hope
they’ll all have Roman spirits in them — I’ll instruct them that their
lives are not their own when Rome demands them.  Although I wish to
see you,  yet I do not wish it at the expense of any breach of duty.  Remember you are Cato’s son.  ...  I would rather meet you at 1‘hilipy,
than that you should take any step which might create a future pain.1'
All  “three fine boys,”  in divers vocations,  served well their country
and King George — notably,  Sir Thomas Andrew Strange,  successively
Chief-Justice of Nova Scotia,  and of Madras,  author of a work on the
“  Elements of Hindu Law,”  which has passed through four editions.  It
is remarkable that his portrait was painted by three successive Presidents of the Royal Academy by the wish and at the cost of those who
admired and esteemed him.  By West for the Court-House at Halifax,
N.S. ;  by Lawrence,  for the Banqueting-Hall at Madras;  by Shee,  for
the great hall of Christ Church,  Oxford,  of which he was a mem-

THE EARLY DIARY OF

44

[i775

I am sorry to tell you that the advertisement you have seen
about the Stranges is true;  the whole family are going abroad

— they say for two years,  but I fear for life . I shall

extremely regret all of them,  though most particularly Mrs.
Strange,  who has more goodness and wit that I ever before
saw united in one woman.  .  .  .  All the family merit regard

and esteem . The reason of Mr.  Strange’s quitting

England is a disgust he has taken at being excluded from
being a member of the Royal Academy.  You know his
principles,  and therefore will not wonder either at the exclusion or the disgust.* 1

My father’s History goes on very slowly indeed at present.
The town is very full.  He teaches from nine to nine almost
every day,  and has scarce time to write a page a week.
Nobody besides himself could write a word so circumstanced.

ber.  He died at St.  Leonard’s in 1841,  aged eighty-five.  Four of his
children survive,  who connect the present year  [1889]  with' 1719,  and
1721,  in which years,  their grandmother Isabella Lumisden,  and their
grandfather,  Sir Robert Strange,  were born.

1 It does not appear that,  after 1745,  Mr.  Strange ever manifested
his principles in such a way as to justify the  “boycotting”  which he
suffered.  In 1765,  he had the diploma of five foreign Academies of Art,
while he was purposely shut out of the brand-new English Academy by
a special rule against the admission of engravers.  In this there was a
special meanness,  as they admitted the engraver,  Bartolozzi,  pretending
that they took him as a painter.  Strange might have said,  “  anck’  io
son'  pittore as his exquisite coloured drawings of the pictures which he
meant to engrave,  testify.  He had been thwarted,  even in Italy,  by
Bartolozzi and Dalton,,  who were travelling for George III.  It was of
political importance that King George should be more humoured than
King James.  Strange had gained permission from the Papal authorities
to copy certain fine pictures before Bartolozzi and Dalton even arrived,
but King George’s agents were given the precedence in copying those
very pictures;  and finding his engravings forestalled,  Strange copied not
what he would,  but what he could.  In the end,  it was King George
who had to yield.  Strange was sued to engrave Ramsay’s portrait of the
king.  This he refused to do on account of the paltry sum offered him
as payment.  Long afterwards,  he engraved what is called  “The
Apotheosis of Prince Alfred and Octavius  ”  (the two youngest sons of
George III)  who died in infancy.  He was knighted by George III in
1 7S7.  To many a household of the eighteenth century,  Sir Robert
Strange,  by his engravings,  first brought the love of good pictures.
“Sir Robert”  (wrote J.  T.  Smith,  keeper of the Prints and Drawings
in the British Museum)  .  .  .  may be considered by far the first Historical engraver this or any country ever produced.”

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

45

His health and hand are,  I hope,  rather better,  however,  very
little,  for never surely was an attack more obstinate.

I have been just interrupted by a visit from Dr.  King,
which as it proved short,  and very ridiculous,  I cannot forbear
relating.  I think you know him — if you do — you must
remember how prosing,  affected,  and very fine he is.  But
this morning he took it into his head to be quite flighty.
Mama was out — Sue and I at home.  After the first common
speeches,  he enquired of me for his snuff.  (You must know
he,  a long time since,  gave me some snuff in charge for him,
as he likes a pinch now and then,  though he does not regularly take it.  This snuff I have always unfortunately mislaid,  or lost,  and been frequently upbraided,  I had therefore
promised to put it in a box for him — but after he went I had
thought no more of it.)  Shamming a little confusion,  I confessed I knew not where it was.  He reproached me with
great gravity,  said he had depended upon me ,  but found he
had mistaken his man — but desired me to take no more
trouble about it.  “  You come so seldom,”  cried I,  “  that it is
too much for me to remember from time to time.”  “  What?  ”
cried he,  “you forget me then?”  God forbid I should not!
thought I,  but only said  “  I forget your snuff,  Sir.”  “  Very
well,”  answered he,  solemnly.  “I find I was mistaken!  I
had pitched upon you!  There is my good friend Mrs.  Burney
would most cheerfully have undertaken the charge — there is
Sukey wished to have had it — and Bessy almost quarrelled
with me about it — but I picked you out of the herd,  as the

one whom I expected most from - ”  “  O  !  I have just

recollected,”  exclaimed I,  “  the reason why I did not buy a
box — you must know I put it off in order to chuse it at the
Fiera 1 in Mascherata,  to-night — I was determined it should
be elegant — and I thought you would like it the better for
the place it came from.”  “  No,  no,”  said he,  “  don’t take any
more trouble about it.”  Then starting up he said he could
stay no longer,  but that he would not take any further notice
of me!  He then went up to Susette,  and,  casting a look of
reproach at me,  said — “  Come,  I’ll shake hands with Sukey.”

1 This was probably something like the sales of things  ‘  ‘  useful and
ornamental,”  by stall-holders in  “  fancied dresses, ”  which have lately
been in fashion.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

46

[i775

I bore this great stroke with all imaginable patience,  though
I believe he expected I should have wept at least— and I
suffered him very quietly to go to the door — which he had
no sooner reached,  than — unable,  I suppose,  to act with so
much cruelty — he turned hastily back,  and hurrying back to
me,  took my hand,  patted my cheek,  and genteely called me
a little hussey. — 1 again wished him good-morning.  He then
renewed his reproaches — and said,  if any other person had
used him so ill,  he should not have minded it — but — cried
he,  in a raised voice,  and suddenly flinging himself into a
theatrical attitude — “But there — where I had treasured up
my heart! — There — where — O fye!  fye!  fye!” — He then
opened the door — and half shutting it again,  repeated in an
emphatic manner — “Excellent wretch! — perdition catch my

soul - He did not wait to finish his rhapsody,  but left

the house,  suddenly,  on seeing John,  the man,  coming into

the parlour .

I think I never told you that Mr.  Hutton — curious after
every thing and body — had a most anxious desire to be introduced to Mr.  Bruce — whose enterprise he regards with a
kind of veneration,  and reveres the man who has made travels
so extraordinary and dangerous.  Accordingly he begged my
father to speak of him to Mr.  Bruce.  .  .  .  My father,  who
loves the character of this original man,  complied with his
request,  and spoke of him in terms so advantageous to the
Abyssinian King that he graciously condescended to admit
him.  He was very civil also to him,  which I think is somewhat to his honour,  considering that Mr.  Hutton’s appearance is by no means in his favour,  as he wears an old wig
and shabby clothes.  But he is a good being:  and I think

you would,  all together,  oddities and all,  like him .

Adieu,  my dearest Sir.  I will write again next Monday,
according to your desire — provided I hear of or from you
between this and then.  I do assure you I could not wade
through so much writing were it not for the reward of seeing

your hand in return .

My love and compts.,  and so forth,

I am ever,  my dear Daddy,

Your obliged and affectionate

F.  Burney.

Monday,  April

1775]

FRANCES BURNEY

47

May 8th.

This month is called a tender one.  It has proved so to me
— but not in me.  I have not breathed one sigh, — felt one
sensation, — or uttered one folly the more for the softness of
the season.  However I have met with a youth whose heart,
if he is to be credited,  has been less guarded — indeed it has
yielded itself so suddenly,  that had it been in any other
month — I should not have known how to have accounted
for so easy a conquest.

The first day of this month I drank tea and spent the
evening at Mr.  Burney’s,  at the request of my sister,  to meet
a very stupid family,  which she told me it would be charity
to herself to give my time to.  This family consisted of Mrs.
O’Connor and her daughter,  by a first marriage,  Miss Dickenson,  who,  poor creature,  has the misfortune to be deaf and
dumb.  They are very old acquaintances of my grandmother
Burney,  to oblige whom my sister invited them.  My grandmother and two aunts therefore were of the party: — as was
also Mr.  Barlow,  a young man who has lived and boarded
with Mrs.  O’Connor for about two years.

Mr.  Barlow is rather short,  but handsome.  He is a very
well bred,  ....  good-tempered and sensible young man.

.  .  .  *  He bears an excellent character both for disposition
and morals.  He has read more than he has conversed,  and
seems to know but little of the world;  his language  [therefore]  is stiff and uncommon,  [and seems laboured,  if not
affected] — he has a great desire to please,  but no elegance
of manners;  neither,  though he may be very worthy,  is he
at all agreeable.

Unfortunately,  however,  he happened to be prodigiously
civil to me,  and though I have met with much more gallantry
occasionally,  yet I could not but observe a seriousness of
attention much more expressive than complimenting.

As my sister knew not well how to ivile away the time ,  I
proposed,  after supper,  a-  round of cross questions.  This was
agreed to.  Mr.  Barlow,  who sat next to me,  took near half
an hour to settle upon what he should ask me,  and at last
his question was — What I thought most necessary in Love?
I answered — Constancy.  I hope for his own sake he will not

48 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

remember this answer long,  though he readily subscribed to
it at the time.

The coach came for me about eleven.  I rose to go.  He
earnestly entreated me to stay one or two minutes.  I did
not,  however,  think such compliance at all requisite,  and
therefore only offered to set my grandmother down in my
way.  The party then broke up.  Mrs.  O’Connor began an
urgent invitation to all present to return the visit the next
week.  Mr.  Barlow,  who followed me,  repeated it very
pressingly,  to me ,  hoping I would make one.  I promised
that I would.

When we had all taken leave of our host and hostess,  my
grandmother,  according to custom,  gave me a kiss and her
blessing.  I would fain have eluded my aunts,  as nothing can
be so disagreeable as kissing before young men;  however,
they chose it should go round;  and after them Mrs.  O’Connor
also saluted me,  as did her daughter,  desiring to be better
acquainted with me.  This disagreeable ceremony over,  Mr.
Barlow came up to me,  and making an apology,  which,  not
suspecting his intention,  I did not understand, —  he gave me
a most ardent salute!  I have seldom been more surprised.
I had no idea of his taking such a freedom.  However,  I
have told my good friends that for the future I will not chuse
to lead,  or have led,  so contagious an example.  [I wonder
so modest a man could dare be so bold.]

He came down stairs with us and waited at the door,  I
believe,  till the coach was out of sight.

Four days after this meeting,  my mother and Mrs.  Young
happened to be in the parlour when I received a letter which,
from the strong resemblance of the handwriting  [in the direction]  to that of Mr.  Crisp,  I immediately opened and thought
came from Chesington;  but what was my surprise to see
4<  Madam,”  at the beginning,  and at the conclusion, — “  Your
sincere admirer and very humble serc Thos.  Barlow.”

I read it three or four times before I could credit my eyes.
An acquaintance so short,  and a procedure so hasty astonished
me.  It is a most tender epistle,  and contains a passionate
declaration of attachment,  hinting at hopes of a return ,  and
so forth.

1775]

FRANCES BURNEY

49

[From Mr.  Barlow to Miss Burney.]  1

Mad"1, — Uninterrupted happiness we are told is of a short
duration,  and is quickly succeeded by Anxiety,  which moral
Axiom I really experienc’d on the Conclusion of May day at
Mr.  Charles Burney’s,  as the singular Pleasure of your Company was so soon Eclips’d by the rapidity of ever-flying Time;
but the felicity,  tho’  short,  was too great to keep within the
limits of one Breast,  I must therefore intreat your Pardon for
the Liberty I take,  in attempting to reiterate the satisfaction
I then felt,  and paying a Tythe- of Justice to the amiable
Lady from whom it proceeded,  permit me then Mad"',  with
the greatest sincerity,  to assure you,  that the feelings of that
Evening were the most refined I ever enjoy’d,  and discovered
such a latent Spring of Happiness from the Company of the
Fair,  which I had positively before then been a Stranger to;
I had  ’til then thought,  all Ladys might be flatter’d,  but I
now experience the contrary,  and am assur’d,  Language cannot possibly depict the soft Emotions of a mind captivated
by so much Merit;  and have now a Contest between my
ardorous Pen,  stimulated by so pleasing and so just a subject,
on the one side,  and a dread of being accused of Adulation
on the other;  however,  endeavouring at Justice,  and taking
Truth  (in her plainest Attire)  for my Guide,  I will venture to
declare,  that the Affability,  Sweetness,  and Sensibility,  which
shone in your every Action,  lead me irresistably to Love and
Admire the Mistress of them,  and I should account it the
road to the highest Felicity,  if my sincerity might in any
degree meet your Approbation;  as I am persuaded that is
the first Principle ,  which can be offer’d as a foundation for
the least hope of a Lady’s regard;  and I must beg leave to
observe,  I greatly admire that Quality which yourself so
justly declar’d,  was most necessary in Love,  I mean Constancy,  from which I woud presume to infer,  that we are
naturally led from Admiration,  to Imitation and Practice;
All which in being permitted to declare to you — would constitute my particular happiness,  as far as Expression could
be prevail’d on to figure the Ideas of the Mind;  meanwhile

1 This letter,  which Fanny did not copy because it was  “so high-
flown/’  was found among her papers.

50 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

I woud particularly Request,  you would condescend to favour
me with a Line,  in which I hope to hear you are well,  and
that you will honour us with your Company with good Mrs.
Burney and Family some day next week,  which that Lady is
to fix;  in which request I trust we shall not be deny’d,  as
’twill not be possible to admit separating so particularly
desirable a part of the Company,  and as I am persuaded we
are honoured with your Assent to the Engagement:

I am Dr Miss Fanny’s

Most sincere Admirer and very hble Serb

Thos.  Barlow.

I took not a moment to deliberate. — I felt that my heart
was totally insensible — and I felt that I could never consent
to unite myself to a man who I did not very highly value.

However,  as I do not consider myself as an independant
member of society,  and as I knew I could depend upon my
father’s kindness,  I thought it incumbent upon me to act
with his concurrence,  I therefore,  at night,  before I sent an
answer shewed him the letter.  He asked me a great many
questions.  I assured him that forming a connection without
attachment — (and that I was totally indifferent to the youth
in question)  was what I could never think of.  My father was
all indulgence and goodness.  He at first proposed that I
should write him word that our acquaintance had been too
short to authorise so high an opinion as he expressed for me;
but I objected to that as seeming to infer that a longer acquaintance might be acceptable:  he therefore concluded
upon the whole that I should send no answer at all.

I was not very easy at this determination,  as it seemed to
treat Mr.  Barlow with a degree of contempt which his partiality to me by no means merited from myself;  and I apprehended it to be possible for him to put,  perhaps,  another
and more favourable interpretation upon my silence.  I shewed
Hetty the letter next day.  She most vehemently took the
young man’s part;  urged me to think differently,  and above
all advised me to certainly write an answer,  and to be of their
party,  according to my promise,  when they went to Mrs.
O’Connor’s.

I told her I would speak to my father again in regard to
writing an answer,  which I wished much to do,  but could not

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

5i

now without his consent;  but as to the party I could not
make one,  as it would be a kind of tacit approbation and
assent of his further attentions.

I went afterwards to call on my grandmother;  my sister
followed me,  and directly told her and my aunts of the affair.
They all of them became most zealous advocates for Mr.
Barlow.  They spoke most highly of the character they had
heard of him,  and my aunt Anne humourously bid me beware of her and Beckey’s fate !

I assured them I was not intimidated,  and that I had
rather a thousand times die an old maid than be married,
except from affection.

When I came home I wrote the following answer which I
proposed sending,  with my father’s leave.

Miss Burney presents her compliments to Mr.  Barlow.
She is much obliged for,  though greatly surprised at the
good opinion with which on so short an acquaintance he is
pleased to honour her.  She wishes Mr.  Barlow all happiness,
but must beg leave to recommend to him to transfer to
some person better known to him a partiality which she so
little merits.

My father,  however,  did not approve of my writing,  I could
not imagine why;  but have since heard from my sister that
he was unwilling I should give a No without some further
knowledge of the young man.

Further knowledge will little avail in connections of this
sort;  the heart ought to be heard,  and mine will never speak
a word I am sure,  for any one I do not truly enough honour
to cheerfully,  in all things serious,  obey.  How hard must be
the duty of a wife practised without high esteem !  And I
am too spoilt by such men as my father and Mr.  Crisp to
content myself with a character merely inoffensive.  I should
expire of fatigue with him.

My sister was not contented with giving her own advice;
she wrote about the affair to Mr.  Crisp,  representing in the
strongest light the utility of my listening to Mr.  Barlow.  He
has written me such a letter!  God knows how I shall answer

it.  Every body is against me but my beloved father .

They all of them are kindly interested in my welfare ;  but

52 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

they know not so well as myself what may make me happy
or miserable.  To unite myself for life to a man who is not
infinitely dear to me is what I can never,  never consent to,
unless,  indeed,  I was strongly urged by my father.  I thank
God most gratefully he has not interfered.

They tell me they do not desire me to mart-)’,  but not to
give up th q poiver of it without seeing more of the proposer;
but this reasoning I cannot give in to, — it is foreign to all
my notions.  .How can I see more of Mr.  Barlow without
encouraging him to believe I am willing to think of him?  I
detest all trifling.  If ever I marry,  my consent shall be prompt
and unaffected.

[From Mr.  Crisp to Miss Fanny Burney.]

[May 8.]

So much of the future good or ill of your life seems
now depending,  Fanny,  that I cannot dispense with myself
from giving you  (without being called upon)  my w'hole sentiments on a subject,  which I dare say you already guess at.
Hetty  (as she told you she would) ‘has disclosed the affair
to me.  The character she gives of the young man is in these
words :  “  A young man,  whose circumstances 1 have heard,
are easy;  but am not throughly inform’d of them;  but he
bears an extraordinary character for a young man now a-
days, — I have it from some who have known him long,  that
he is remarkably even-temper’d,  sedate,  and sensible;  he is
twenty-four years of age;  is greatly esteem’d for qualities
rarely found at his age — temperance and industry ;  well
educated,  understands books and words,  better than the
world,  which gives him something of a stiffness and formality,
which discovers him unus’d to company,  but wffiich might
wear off.”

Is all this true,  Fanny? — If it is,  is such a man so very
determinately to be rejected,  because from the overflowings
of an innocent honest mind  (I won’t call it ignorant,  but)
untainted with the world  (instead of a thousand pitiful airs
and disguises,  mixt perhaps with treachery and design)  he
with trembling and diffidence ventures to write,  what he is
unable to declare in person;  and,  forsooth,  to raise your

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 53

indignation to the highest pitch,  is so indelicate,  as to hint

that his intentions aim at Matrimony l . If you don’t

put me in mind of Moliere’s Precieuses Ridicules.  Read it,
....  you young devil,  and blush !  ’tis scene the fourth,  and
instead of Gorgibus and Madelon,  read Crispin and Fanchon;
and the dialogue will run thus:

Fanchon.

La belle galanterie que la siennel quoi,  debuier d'abord par
la mariage!

Crispin.

Et par oil veux-tu done qiiil debit tel par la concubinage  ?
n’est-ce pas un procede ,  dont vous avez sujet de vous toiler ,
aussi bien que moil est-il rien de plus obligeant que celal
et ce lien severe,  oil il aspire ,  liest-il pas un temoignage dt
P honnetete de ses intentions 1

Fanchon.

Ah mon pere!  ce que vous dites la est du dernier bourgeois.
Cela me fait honte de vous oiiir parler de la sorte,  et vous
devriez un peu vous faire apprendre le bel air des choses.

How does this happen?  Were there Fanchons in Moliere’s
days,  or are there Madelons now?  But,  seriously,  Fanny,  all
the ill-founded objections you make,  to me appear strong
and invincible marks of a violent and sincere passion.  What
you take it into your head to be displeas’d with,  as too great
a liberty,  I mean,  his presuming to write to you,  and in so
tender and respectful and submissive a strain,  if you knew
the world,  and that villanous Yahoo called Man,  as well as
I do,  you would see in a very different light, — in its true
light,—  fearfullness,  a high opinion of you,  a consciousness
(an unjust one I will call it)  of his own inferiority;  and at
last,,  as he thinks the happiness of his life is at stake,  summoning up a trembling resolution of disclosing in writing
the situation of his mind,  which he has not the courage to
do to your face:  and do you call or think this, — can you
judge so ill,  as to look on this,  as an undue or impertinent
liberty? — Ah!  Fanny,  such a disposition promises a thousandfold more happiness,  more solid,  lasting,  home-felt happiness,
than all the seducing exterior airs,  graces,  accomplishments,

54 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

and addresses of an artful  [worldly man.]1 Such a man,  as
this young Barlow if ever you are so lucky and so well-
advis’d,  as to be united to him,  will improve upon you every
hour.  You will discover in him graces and charms which
kindness will bring to light,  that at present you have no idea
of ; — I mean,  if his character is truly given by Hetty.  That
is the grand object of enquiry,  as likewise his circumstances;
this last,  as the great sheet-anchor,  upon which we are to
depend in our voyage through life,  ought most minutely to
be scrutiniz’d.  Is he of any profession,  or only of an independent fortune?  if either,  or both,  sufficient to promise a
.  .  .  comfortable  [income.]  You may live to the age of your
grandmother,  and not meet with so valuable an offer.  Shake-
spear says:

There is a tide in the affairs of men,  ^

Which taken at the heighth leads on to Fortune;

But being neglected,  &c.

I forget how it goes on,  but the sense is  (what you may
guess),  that the opportunity is never to be recover’d;  the
tide is lost,  and you are left in shallows,  fast a-ground,  and
struggling in vain for the remainder of your life to get on, —
doom’d to pass it in obscurity and regret.  Look round you,
Fan;  look at your aunts!  Fanny Burnev won’t always be
what she is now!  Mrs.  Hamilton once had an offer of  ^3000
a-year,  or near it;  a parcel of young giggling girls laugh’d
her out of it.  The man,  forsooth,  was not quite smart
enough,  though otherwise estimable.  Oh,  Fan,  this is not a
marrying age,  without a handsome Fortune!  ....  Suppose
you to lose your father, — take in all chances.  Consider the
situation of an unprotected,  unprovided woman !  Excuse my
being so earnest with you.  Assure yourself it proceeds from
my regard,  and from  (let me say it though it savors of vanity)
a deep knowledge of the world.  Observe how far I go;  I
don’t urge you,  hand over head,  to have this man at all
events;  but,  for God’s sake and your own sake,  give him
and yourself fair play.  Don’t decide so positively against it.

These words have been substituted in the manuscript for some
stronger expression used by Mr.  Crisp;  perhaps  “rake.”  “Income,”
also,  is not Mr.  Crisp’s word.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

55

If you do,  you are ridiculous to a high degree.  If you don’t
answer his letter,  don’t avoid seeing him.  At all events,  I
charge you on my blessing to attend Hetty in her visit to
the O’Connors,  according to your promise,  and which you
can’t get off without positive rudeness.  This binds you to
nothing;  it leaves an opening for future consideration and
enquiry,  and is barely decent.  I have wrote so much on this
subject,  (which is now next my heart)  that I cannot frame
myself to any thing else for this bout.  So,  adieu !  you have
the best wishes of your affectionate Daddy,  S.  C.

Chesington,  May 8.

Sunday,  May 15th.

The visit to Mrs.  O’Connor was made yesterday.  I commissioned my aunts — though they would hardly hear me—
to say that I was prevented from waiting on her by a bad
cold.  How the message was taken,  and what passed I know
not;  but this morning,  while we were all at breakfast,  except
my father who was in the study,  John came into the parlour
and said that a gentleman enquired for me.

I guessed who it was — and was inexpressibly confused.
Mama stared but desired he might walk in.  The door opened,
and Mr.  Barlow appeared.  He had dressed himself elegantly,  but could hardly speak.  He bowed two or three
times — I coloured like scarlet,  and I believe he was the only
person in the room who did not see it.

“  Mrs.  O’Connor— he called — my cold — he understood —
he was very sorry  ” —

He could not get on.  My voice too failed me terribly —
for his silence at his first entrance made me fear he was
going to reproach me for not answering his letter.  I told him
my cold had been too bad to allow me to go out — but I was
so terribly frightened lest my mother should say— “  What
told? '  I did not know you had one!” — that I had great difficulty to get out the words;  and he himself took notice that
my voice spoke how bad my cold was,  though in fact I have
no cold at all,  [but grew husky from embarrassment.]  My
mother then asked him to sit down,  and Sukey,  very good
naturedly entered into conversation with him to our mutual
relief — particularly to his,  as he seemed so confounded he

56 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

scarce knew where he was.  I sat upon thorns from the fear
that he would desire to speak to me alone.  I looked another
way,  and hardly opened my mouth.  In about half an hour

he rose to go . Whether he was induced to make

this visit from expecting he might speak to me,  or whether
in order to see if I had any cold or not,  I cannot tell;  but
it proved cruelly distressing to him,  and confusing to me.

Had I sent an answer,  this would not have happened ;  but
it is now too late.  I am very sorry to find this young man
seems so serious; — howmver,  an attachment so precipitately
formed,  so totally discouraged,  and so placed — cannot be
difficult to cure.

May.

We have had a charming Concert;  I am very glad that,
after their long cessation,  these entertainments are revived
amongst us.

Our party consisted of the Baron Deiden,  the Danish
Ambassador and the Baronness his lady,  who is a sweet
woman,  young,  pretty,  accomplished,  and graceful.  She is
reckoned one of the best lady harpsichord players in Europe.
Miss Phipps,  a charming girl whom I have mentioned
before.  Sir James Lake,1 who,  as heretofore,  was sensible,
cold,  and reserved.  Lady Lake,2 who as heretofore was all
politeness and sweetness.  Miss Lake,  sister of Sir James,
who is a very obliging and sweet-tempered,  old/lsA maid 3 and
Sir Thomas Clarges,  a young baronet,  who was formerly so

1 Sir James Winter Lake  (son of Sir Sitwell Lake,  Governor of the
Hudson’s Bay Company),  and himself a director of  “  The Million Bank,”
had  “  one of the most extensive and choice collections of English portraits in the kingdom.”

2 Henrietta Maria,  daughter of the first Baron Mulgrave,  afterwards
married to Charles,  eleventh Viscount Dillon,  was the  “amiable and
zealous  ”  friend who,  gathering from her brother,  Captain Phipps,  that
Dr.  Burney had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society without a
single black-ball,  made it known to him by directing a letter to  “  Dr.
Burney,  F.R.  S.,  Queen’s Square,”  before the President,  or the friend
who had nominated him,  had time to forward the news.

3 In her letter to Mr.  Crisp upon this concert,  Fanny says playfully
of Miss Lake,  that she is a  “very agreeable old maid,  I respect and
admire, — and wish to imitate her.”

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

57

desperately enamoured of Miss Linley,  now Mrs.  Sheridan,
that his friends made a point of his going abroad to recover
himself:  he is now just returned from Italy,  and I hope
cured.  He still retains all the school-boy English mauvaise
honte;  scarce speaks but to make an answer,  and is as shy
as if his last residence had been at Eaton instead of Paris.1
Mr.  Harris,  author of the three Treatises on Music,  Poetry,
and Happiness,  of Philosophical Arrangements,  Hermes,
and several other tracts.  He is at the same time learned and
polite,  intelligent and humble.2 Mrs.  Harris,  his wife,  is in
nothing extraordinary.3 Miss Louisa Harris,  his second
daughter,  is a modest,  reserved,  and sensible girl.  She is a
singing-scholar of Sacchini’s,  and has obtained some fame as

1 Sir Thomas Clarges afterwards married a lady who was beloved by
Dr.  Burney as resembling his Susan  (who was her dear friend)  in
person,  voice,  and musical taste and skill;  Lady Clarges afterwards,
unfortunately,  resembled Susan in her delicacy of health and premature
death.

2 In the letter Mr.  Harris is said to be  “  a charming old man — well-
bred even to humility,  gentle in his manners,  communicative and
agreeable in his conversation.”

3 Here we raise the pen of protest.  This was indeed a hasty judgement,  made from the surface.  It is heightened in the letter to Mr.  Crisp,
describing this same evening — “  Mrs.  Harris — a so,  so,  sort of woman.'"
What !  was our witty Mrs.  Harris to be made out to be like that gown
in which she went to the birthday in 1774 — “a decent,  plain silk, — no
colour— 'l Read her,  reader.  Mortimer Collins made us read her.  We
quote from his article on  “Mrs.  Harris”:  “Mrs.  Harris was a person
who made her mark in the world.  .  .  .  She was a constant correspondent of her son,”  [the first Lord Malmesbury]  “whether he was studying
at Oxford or the Hague,  or doing diplomacy at Madrid,  or Berlin,  or
St.  Petersburg;  and her letters are charming for their vivacity,  and for
the graphic style in which they narrate the events of the day.  ...  I
wonder if any rising politician of the present day has a mother who can
send him such delightful epistles— I greatly doubt it.  ”  Mortimer ends
by saying that now  “  nobody can chronicle the gossip of the day with
so playful a pen as Mrs.  Harris.”  She was Elizabeth,  daughter,  and in
the end heiress,  of John Clarke,  M.P.,  of Sandford,  in Somersetshire,—
a woman of fashion and esprit,  but not wholly like the family whom she
thus wittily describes :  “They have a good house in Park Place,  and
are people of this world.”  Her letters to her son begin on his going to
Oxford in June,  1763,  and end in October,  1780,  when he represented
Great Britain at St.  Petersburg.  They are not to be found in the Diplomatic Correspondence of the first Lord Malmesbury,  but in another
collection,  that of the Letters of his Family and Friends.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

58

C*77S

a lady-singer.1 Mrs.  Ord,2 a very musical lady and agreeable
woman.  Miss Ord,  a fine girl,  but very insipid.  Mr.  Earl,  a
very musical gentleman.  Mrs.  Anguish,  a keen ,  sharp ,  clever
woman.  Miss Harrison,  daughter of the unfortunate Commodore,3 4 a haughty and uninteresting sort of girl.  Mr.
Merlin,  the very ingenious mechanic.  He is a great favourite
at our house.  [He is very diverting also in conversation.]
There is a singular simplicity in his manners.  .  .  .  He speaks
his opinion upon all subjects and about all persons with the
most undisguised freedom.  He does not,  though a foreigner,
want words;  but he arranges and pronounces them very
comically.  He is humbly grateful for all civilities that are
shown him ;  but is warmly and honestly resentful for the
least slight.3  .  .  .

Mr.  Jones,  a Welsh harper,  a silly young man,  [was also
present.]  We had a great deal of conversation in parties,
before the Concert began.  I had the satisfaction to sit next
to Mr.  Harris,  who is very chearful and communicative,  and
his conversation was instructive and agreeable.5 Mr.  Jones,
the harper,  began the Concert.  He has a fine instrument of

1 Fanny says in the letter,  “Miss Louisa Harris has a bad figure,
and is not handsome.”

2 Mrs.  Ord,  Fanny’s firm friend in after years,  was daughter of an
eminent surgeon surnamed Dillingham,  or Dellingham ;  and was,  then,
a wealthy widow.

3 Called  “the unfortunate”  because,  after distinguished service in
the East and West Indies,  he was stricken with palsy from over-work
of mind and body,  and lived in a helpless state for twenty years.

4 Merlin was a clever but absurd man,  a mechanician,  always trying
new inventions.  In her letter Fanny says,  “he pronounces English
very comically,  for though he is never at a loss for a word,  he almost
always puts the emphasis on the wrong syllable.”

3 James Harris,  of Salisbury,  was nephew to that Earl of Shaftesbury
who wrote the  “  Characteristics.”  He was First Lord of the Admiralty
in 1762;  a Lord of the Treasury afterwards.  Dr.  Johnson said that he
was  “a sound,  solid scholar,”  but  “a prig,  and a bad prig,”  and  “a
coxcomb,”  who  “  did not understand his own system  ”  in his own book,
called  “  Hermes,  an inquiry concerning universal grammar.”  We here
see him in his pleasant,  social aspect.  Dr.  Burney ranks him as a writer
on music,  in virtue of his three  “  Treatises on Art,  Music,  and History,”  1774-  When Mr.  Harris took his seat in the House of Commons,
Charles Townsend said to his next neighbour, — “Who is this man?” —
“  Who?  why Harris that wrote one book about Grammar,  and another
about Virtue.” — “What does he come here for?  He will find neither
Grammar nor Virtue here.”

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

59

Merlin’s construction ;  he plays with great neatness and
delicacy;  but as expression must have meaning ,  he does not
abound in that commodity.  After him,  at the request of the
Baronness Deiden,  Mr.  Burney went to the harpsichord.  He
played with his usual successful velocity and his usual applause.  When he had received the compliments of the
nobility and gentry,  my father begged the Baronness to take
his place;  but she would not at first hear of it.  She said in
French,  which she almost always speaks,  that it was quite
out of the question;  and that it would be like a figurante’s
dancing after Heinel.1 However,  MissPhipps joined so warmly
in my father’s request,  that she was at length prevailed with.
The character she has acquired of being the first of lady
harpsichord players,  as far as I have heard or can judge,  is
well merited.  She has a great deal of execution and fire,
and plays with much meaning.  She is,  besides,  extremely
modest and unconscious.  She declared she had never been
so much frightened before  -in her life.2 When she had played
a Lesson of Schobert’s,  my father asked her for another
German composition,  which he had heard her play at Lord
Mulgrave’s.  She was going very obligingly to comply,  when
the Baron Deiden,  looking at my sister,  said,  “  Mais apres,
ma chere.”  “Eh bien!”  cried Miss Phipps,  “apres Mrs.
Burney.”

The Baroness then rose,  and gracefully gave her place to
my sister,  who,  to avoid emulation,  with great propriety
chose to play a slow movement of Echard’s,  because the
Baroness had been playing music of execution.  She could

1 Horace Walpole to Lord Strafford,  August 25,  1771 “There is a
finer dancer”  [than Mile.  Guimard]  “  whom Mr.  Hobart is to transport
to London;  a Mile.  Heinel or Ingle,  a Fleming.  She is tall,  perfectly
made,  very handsome,  and has a set of attitudes copied from the
classics;  she moves as gracefully slow as Pygmalion’s statue when it
was coming to life.”  She filled a before-deserted Opera House.  The
manager,  Mr.  Hobart,  paid her six hundred pounds for the season,
and the MacCaroni Club  “  complimented her with a regale of six
hundred more.”

2 According to Horace Walpole,  the Baron and Baroness Deiden
were not persona grata at the Court of St.  James;  being sent to England after the imprisonment of George Ill’s sister,  Caroline Matilda,
Queen of Denmark.  They were moved to the Papal Court,  where Miss
Berry met them a little later.

6o

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

not,  however,  have chosen any thing,  by which she could
have given more pleasure;  for it is a lesson which is almost
unequalled for taste,  elegance,  and delicacy,  and she played
it with so much feeling and expression,  that the wrhole company listened with delighted attention.  She afterwards played
a very difficult lesson of my father’s;  but she was so much
flurried,  that she neither did that nor herself justice.

After this,  we had a song from Miss Louisa Harris.  She
has little or no voice;  but sings with great taste and in a
high style.  She was accompanied by her father,1 and sang
some recitative and an air of Sacchini’s,  which were never
printed;  but we remembered having heard him sing them:
the music is beautiful.  She said she had rather have sung at
a theatre than before such an audience!  She afterwards sung
a most charming Rondeau of Rauzzini’s,  from Piramo and
Thisbe:  Fuggiam dove seen rad

Then followed the great Feast of the night,  which was
Miithel’s Duet for two harpsichords by Mr.  Burney and my
sister.  They played delightfully.  It is impossible for admiration to exceed what the company in general expressed.
The Lakes in particular declared they had never heard
Music before.  The charming Baroness spoke her approbation in the highest terms.  Mr.  Harris,  and,  indeed,  every
body,  appeared enchanted.

The Concert finished by another song from- Miss Louisa
Harris,  for they all agreed that no instrumental music could
be attended to,  after such a duet;  and therefore the Baroness
would not consent to play again.

They all went away soon after .

June 6th.

I must go back a fortnight or more.

Soon after their visit to Mrs.  O’Connor’s,  my grandmother,  aunts,  Mr.  Burney and my sister dined here.  As

J Mr.  Harris is  (in a diary of Susan Burney)  said,  by Pacchierotti,  to
have  “accompanied”  him,  to his  “great surprise,  on the violin da
maestro.  ”

In Mr,  Lysons’s  “History of the Meeting of the Three Choirs”
(1812),  it is said that the  “  Piramo e Tisbe”  of Venanzio Rauzzini was
the only entire opera ever introduced at these meetings.  This  -was at
Hereford in 1 777>  when Rauzzini was the principal singer.

FRANCES BURNEY

61

i77S]

my aunt Beckey is remarkably good tempered,  I fixed upon
her to make a few enquiries of what passed at Hoxton,
where Mrs.  O’Connor lives;  for I was desirous to know
whether my cold was believed,  and whether they had forbore,  as I had earnestly entreated that they would,  to betray
their knowledge of Mr.  Barlow’s secret;  for it is certainly
incumbent upon every female who refuses a man to keep
from the world his unsuccessful choice,  [which she must
always regard as a grateful compliment to her,  whether she
likes or detests him — unless she is very rich.]  ....

She told me that they seemed to believe my tale;  but
that,  to use her own words — “[When]  poor Mr.  Barlow
came to hand us out of the coach — he said nothing — but
when he saw you was not there,  he looked ready to drop I”
She assured me that they had all very carefully guarded my
secret,  and that he had not said anything of his intended
call here.

She asked me to diner with her the next day — -  I told her
that perhaps I might call in the afternoon  .  .  .  accordingly
I went to tea,  and ran up stairs,  as usual,  without ceremony,
— but when I opened the door,  the first object that met my
eyes was Mr.  Barlow seated with my grandmother,  aunts,
and Mrs.  Powel,  a niece of Mrs.  O’Connor.  [I was quite
disconcerted,]  for I could not help fearing that my aunt
Beckey,  who has a much better temper than understanding,
had acquainted him of my intended visit;  the more so as,
though he seemed much pleased,  he did not appear at all
surprised at my entrance.

He made a thousand anxious enquiries about my health.
My answers were short and cold,  and I turned as much from
him as I could with decency;  for I dreaded his attributing
my silence to his letter to a wrong cause,  and therefore
thought myself obliged to manifest my disapprobation of
his assiduity by my behaviour.  [Not,  however,  to be affected,
or.  impertinent,]  ....  my reserve by degrees wore off,  and
I endeavoured to behave as if I had never received his
letter.  I had the conversation,  it is true,  pretty much to
myself,  for though I soon grew easy and unconcerned,  he
by no means followed my example.  He took an opportunity
of making an invite to my grandmother to make Mrs.
O’Connor another visit soon.  He pressed it earnestly,  and

62

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

said that as the last visit had by no means answered  [all]
Mrs.  O' Connor's hopes she could not rest till favoured with
another.  [He then ejitreated ]  and conjured me not to have
a cold then.  I made very little answer,  and was not sorry
that he thought my cold in my own power .

A week passed after this,  without my hearing or seeing
any more of Mr.  B.,  and I hoped that he had resigned his
pretensions.  But on Saturday morning,  while we were at
breakfast,  I had a letter brought me in a hand which I
immediately knew to be his.  As it by no means is so high
flown as his first I will copy it.

Mad"' — I have somewhere seen that powerful Deity,
Cupid,  and the invincible Mars,  habited in a similar manner;
and each have in their train several of the same disposition^
Attendants:  the propriety of which Thought I own pleas’d
me,  for when drawn from the allegory,  it is acknowledg’d,
both Love and War are comparative in several particulars;
they each require Constancy,  and the hope of Success
stimulate each to Perseverance;  and as the one is warm’d
and encourag’d by the desire of Glory;  so the other is much
more powerfully fir’d and transported by the Charms of the
Fair Sex:  I have been told that Artifice and Deception are
connected to both,  but those Qualitys I shou’d determine
to discard,  and substitute in their Place an open Frankness,
and undisguised Truth and Honour;  and for Diligence,
Assiduity,  Care,  and Attention,  which are essential to both,
and which some place in the Catalogue of the Labours of
Love,  I should have them happily converted to Pleasures,
in the honour of devoting them to Miss Fanny Burney;  if
the Destinys auspiciously avert a disagreeable sequel,  for as
the bravest General may miscarry;  so the most sincere Lover
may lose the wish’d-for Prize;  to prevent which I shou’d
continue to invoke my guardian Genius,  that she may ever
inspire me with such Principles and Actions as may enable
me to reach the summit of my Ambition,  in approving myself not unworthy the Esteem of your amiable self,  and not

unworthy - but stop,  oh ardurous Pen ,  and presume not

(’til in the front you can place Permission to hope)  ascending such sublime heights.

It has given me great Uneasiness that the excessive hurry

*775]  FRANCES BURNEY 63

of Business has so long prevented me the honour of waiting
on you,  and enquiring after your Welfare,  which I earnestly
wish to hear,  but I determine,  with your leave,  e’er long to
do myself that Pleasure,  as methinks Time moves very
slowly in granting me an Opportunity to declare,  in some
small degree  (for I could not reach what I shoud call
otherwise)  how much I am,  with the greatest Respect
immaginable,

Dr Miss'  Fanny1

Yr most devoted  &  most obed1 Serv\

Thos.  Barlow.

Hoxton.

Notwithstanding I was at once sorry and provoked  [at]
perceiving how sanguine this youth chose to be I was not
absolutely concerned at receiving this  [2ntl]  letter,  because I
regarded it as a fortunate opportunity of putting an unalterable conclusion to the whole affair.  However,  ....  I
thought it my duty to speak to my father before I sent an
answer,  never doubting his immediate concurrence.

My mother,  Sukey,  and I went to the Opera that evening;
it was therefore too late when I returned to send a letter to
Hoxton — but I went up stairs into the study,  and told my
father I had received another epistle from Mr.  Barlow,  which
I could only attribute to my not answering,  as I had wished,
his first.  I added that I proposed,  with his leave,  to write
to Mr.  Barlow the next morning.

My father looked grave,  asked me for the letter,  put it in
his pocket unread,  and wished me good night.

I was seized with a kind of pannic.  I trembled at the
idea of his espousing,  however mildly,  the cause of this
young man.  I passed a restless night,  and in the morning
dared not write without his permission,  which I was now
half afraid to ask.

About 2 o’clock,  while I was dawdling in the study,  and
waiting for an opportunity to speak,  we heard a rap at the
door and soon after John came in and said — “A gentlemen

1 So in the letter itself.  In copying the letter in the diary Fanny
substituted  “  Madam.”

II.

C

THE EARLY DIARY OF

64

[i775

is below,  who asks for Miss Burney:  Mr.  Barlow.”  I think
I was never more distressed in my life — to have taken pains
to avoid a private conversation so highly disagreeable to
me,  and at last to be forced into it at so unfavourable a
juncture,  for I had now two letters from him,  both unanswered,  and consequently open to his conjectures.  I
exclaimed — “Lord!  how provoking!  what shall I do?”

My father looked uneasy and perplexed:  he said something about not being hasty,  which I did not desire him to
explain.  [Terrified lest he should hint at the advantage of
an early establishment — like Mr.  Crisp — quick from the
study — but slow enough afterwards — I]  went down stairs.
I saw my mother pass  [from the front]  into the back parlour;  which did not add to the graciousness of my reception
of poor Mr.  Barlow,  who I found alone in the  [front]
parlour.  I was not sorry that none of the family were there,
as I now began to seriously dread any protraction of this
affair.

He came up to me with an air of tenderness and satisfaction,  began some anxious enquiries about my health;
but I interrupted him with saying — “  I fancy,  Sir,  you have
not received a letter I — I ”

[I stopt,  for I could not say which I had sent/]

“A letter? — No,  Ma’am!”

“You will have it,  then,  to-morrow,  Sir.”

We were both silent for a minute or two,  when he said —
“  In consequence I presume,  Ma’am,  of the one I — —  ”

“  Yes,  Sir,”  cried I.

“And pray — Ma’am — Miss Burney!— may I — beg to ask
the contents? — that is — the — the — .”  H<;  could not go on.

“  Sir— I — it was only — it was merely — in short,  you will
see it to-morrow.”

“  But if you would favour me with the contents now,  I
could perhaps answer it at once?  ”

“Sir,  it requires no answer!”

A second silence ensued.  I was really distressed myself
to see  /us distress,  which was very apparent.  After some
time he stammered out something of hoping ,  and beseeching
— which,  gathering more firmness,  I answered — “  I am much
obliged to you,  Sir,  for the  [too]  good opinion you are
pleased to have of me — but I should be very sorry you

FRANCES BURNEY

I775J

65

should lose any more time upon my account — as I have no
thoughts of changing my situation  [and abode.]  ”

He seemed to be quite overset:  having,  therefore,  so
freely explained myself,  I then asked him to sit down,  and
began to talk of the weather.  When he had a little recovered himself,  he drew a chair close to me and began
making most ardent professions of respect and regard,  and
so forth.  I interrupted him as soon as I could,  and begged
him to rest satisfied with my answer.

“  Satisfied 1  ”  repeated he,  “  my dear Ma’am — is that
possible?  ”

“Perhaps,  Sir,”  said I,  “I ought to make some apologies
for not answering your first letter — but really I was so much
surprised — upon so short an acquaintance.”

He then began making excuses for having written ;  but
as to short acquaintance,  he owned it was a reason for me —
but for him— fifty years could not have more convinced him
of my,  &c.  &c.

“You have taken a sudden,  and far too partial idea of
my character,”  answered I.  “If you look round among
your older acquaintance,  I doubt not but you will very soon
be able to make a better choice.”

He shook his head:  “I have seen Madam,  a great many
ladies,  it is true — but never - ”

“  You do me much honour,”  cried I,  “  but I must desire
you would take no further trouble about me — for I have
not at present the slightest thoughts of ever leaving this
house.”

“  At present ?  ”  repeated he,  eagerly.  “No,  I would
not expect it — I would not wish to precipitate — but in
future - ”

“  Neither now or ever,  Sir,”  returned I,  “have I any view
of changing my condition.”

“But surely,  surely this can never be!  so severe a resolution — you cannot mean it — it would be wronging all the
world !  ”

“  I am extremely sorry,  Sir,  that you did not receive my
letter,  because it might have saved you this trouble.”

He looked very much mortified,  and said in a dejected
voice — “  If there is anything in me — in my connexions — or
in my situation in life,  which^you wholly think unworthy of

66

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

you — and beneath you — or if my character,  or disposition
meet with your disapprobation — I will immediately forgo

all — I will not — I would not - ”

“  No,  indeed,  Sir,”  cried I,  “  I have neither seen or heard
of anything of you that was to your disadvantage — and I
have no doubts of your worthiness —  ”

He thanked me,  and seemed reassured;  but renewed his
solicitations in the most urgent manner.  He repeatedly
begged my permission to acquaint my family of the state of
his affairs,  and to abide by their decision ;  but I would not
let him say two words following upon that subject.  I told
him that my answer was a final one,  and begged him to
take it as such.

He remonstrated very earnestly.  “  This is the severest
decision !  .  .  .  .  Surely you must allow that the social stale
is what we were all meant lor? — that we were created for
one another? — that to form such a resolution is contrary to
the design of our being?  ” —

“  All this may be true,”  said I,  “  I have nothing to say in
contradiction to it — but you know there are many odd
characters in the world — and I am one of them.”

“O,  no,  no,  no, — that can never be!  but is it possible
that you can have so bad an opinion of the Married State?
It seems to me the only state for happiness!  ”

“Well,  Sir, you are attracted to the married life — I am to
the single — therefore every man in his humour — do you follow your opinion — and let me follow mine.”

“  But,  surely — is not this singular?  ”

“  I give you leave,  Sir,”  cried I,  laughing,  “  to think me
singular — odd — queer — nay,  even whimsical,  if you please.”

“  But,  my dear Miss Burney,  only - ”

“  I entreat you,  Sir,  to take my answer — you really pain
me by being so urgent.”

“That would not I do for the world! — I only beg you to

suffer me — perhaps in future - ”

“No,  indeed,  I shall never change — I do assure you you
will find me very obstinate !  ”

He began to lament his own destiny.  I grew extremely
tired of so often saying the same thing;  but I could not
absolutely turn him out of the house;  and,  indeed,  he seemed
so dejected and unhappy,  that I made it my study to soften

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 67

my refusal as much as I could without leaving room for future
expectations.

About this time my mother came in.  We both rose.  I
was horridly provoked at my situation.

“Iam only come in for a letter,”  cried she,  “  pray don’t
let me disturb you.”  And away she went .

[This could not but be encouraging to him,  for]  she was no
sooner gone than he began again the same story,  and seemed
determined not to give up his cause.  He hoped,  at least,
that I would allow him to enquire after my health?

“  I must beg you,  Sir,  to send me no more letters.”

He seemed much hurt,  and looked down in silence.

“You had better,  Sir,  think of me no more,  if you study
your own happiness - ”

“  I do study my own happiness — more than I have ever
[had]  any probability of doing before !  ”

“You have made an unfortunate choice,  Sir,  but youwill find
it easier to forget it than you imagine.  You have only to suppose that I was not at Mr.  Burney’s on May Day — and it was
a mere chance my being there — and then you will be - ”

“  But,  if I could , — could I also forget seeing you at old Mrs.
Burney’s? — and if I did — can I forget that I see you now?”

“O yes!  In three months’  time you may forget you ever
saw me.  You will not find it so difficult as you suppose.”

“You have heard,  Ma’am,  of an old man being ground
young?  Perhaps you believe that l But you will not deny
me leave to sometimes see you?”

“My father,  Sir,  is seldom,  hardly ever,  indeed,  at home.”

“  I have never seen the Doctor — but I hope he would not
refuse me the permission to enquire after your health?  I have
no wish without his consent.”

“  Though I acknowledge myself to be singular I would
not have you think me either affected or trifling—  and therefore I must assure you I am fixed in the answer I have given
you — --unalterably fixed.”

His entreaties grew  [now]  extremely  ....  distressing to
me.  He besought me to take more time,  and said it should
be the study of his life to make me happy.  “  Allow me,  my
dear Miss Burney,  only to hope that my future conduct - ”

“  I shall always think myself obliged,  nay,  honoured by
your good opinion — and you are entitled to my best wishes

THE EARLY DIARY OF

68

[i775

for your health and happiness — but,  indeed,  the less we meet
the better.”

“What — what can I do?”  cried he very sorrowfully.

“  Why — go and ponder upon this alfair for about half an
hour.-  Then say— what an odd,  queer,  strange creature she
is — and then — think of something else.”

“O no,  no! — you cannot suppose all that?  I shall think
of nothing else; — your refusal is more pleasing than any other
lady’s acceptance — ”

He said this very simply,  but too seriously for me to laugh
at.  J ust then,  Susette came in — but did not stay two minutes.
It would have been shocking to be thus left purposely as if
with a declared lover,  and  [then]  I was not sorry to have an
opportunity of preventing future doubts and expectations.

I rose and walked to the window thinking it high time to
end a conversation already much too long;  and then he again
began to entreat me not to be so very severe.  I told him that
I was sure I should never alter the answer I made at first;
that I was very happy at home;  and not at all inclined to try
my fate elsewhere.  I then desired my compliments to Mrs.
O’Connor and Miss Dickenson,  and made a reverence by way
of leave taking.

“  I am extremely sorry to detain you so long,  Ma’am,”  said
he,  in a melancholy voice.  I made no answer.  He then
walked about the room;  and then again besought my leave to
ask me how I did some other time.  I absolutely,  though
civilly refused it,  and told him frankly that,  fixed as I was it
was better that we should not meet.

He then took his leave: — returned back; — took leave; —
end returned again.  [I now made a more formal reverence ot
the head,  at the same time]  expressing my good wishes for
his welfare,  in a sort of way that implied I expected never to
see him again.  He would fain have taken a more tender leave
of me, — but I repulsed him with great surprise and displeasure.
I did not,  however,  as he was so terribly sorrowful refuse him
my hand,  which he had made sundry attempts to take in the
course of conversation.  AVhen I withdrew it,  as I did presently,  I rang the bell to prevent his again returning from
the door.

Though I was really sorry for the unfortunate and misplaced attachment which this young man professes for me,

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 69

yet I could almost have jumped for joy when he was gone,  to
think that the affair was thus finally over.

Indeed I think it hardly possible for a woman to be in a
more irksome situation than when rejecting a worthy man,
who is all humility,  respect,  and submission,  and who throws
himself and his fortune at her feet.

I had no opportunity of speaking to my father all that day.
In the evening Mr.  Burney and Hetty came.  Hetty told me
that the day before Mrs.  O’Connor had called on her,  and
[acquainted her that Mr.  Barlow had owned]  his attachment
to me,  and requested  ...  to know,  first,  whether I had any
pre-engagement,  and,  secondly,  whether I had ever expressed
any antipathy to him.  She answered both these in the negative;  and then Mrs.  O’Connor,  in Mr.  B’s name,  entreated
her to be his advocate;  which she readily promised.

After his conversation with me,  he called on her himself.
She says he was all dejection and sadness.  He expressed the
greatest respect for me;  feared I thought him wanting in it;
apologised for his early declaration,  which,  he said,  resulted
from his sincerity and his having no experience either in the
arts or the ways of men.

My father s^nt for Hetty up stairs and made a thousand
enquiries concerning Mr.  Barlow.

The next day,  a day,  the remembrance of which will be
never erased from my memory, — my father first spoke to me
in favour of Mr.  Barlow,  and desired me not to be peremptory
in the answer I was going to write,  [though it was to appear
written previously.]

I scarce made any answer;  I was terrified to death.  I
felt the utter impossibility of resisting not merely my father’s
persuasioji ,  but even his advice.  I felt too,  that I had no
argumentative objections to make to Mr.  Barlow,  his character — disposition — situation — I know nothing against ;  but,
O !  I felt he was no companion for my heart !  I wept like an
infant,  when alone;  eat nothing;  seemed as if already married,
and passed the whole day in more misery than,  merely on
my own account,  I ever did before in my life,  except  [when
a child,]  upon the loss of my own beloved mother,  and ever
revered and most dear grandmother !

After supper I went into the study,  while my dear father
was alone,  to wish him good night;  which I did as chearfully

THE EARLY DIARY OF

7 o

[i775

as I could,  though pretty evidently in dreadful uneasiness.
When I had got to the door,  he called me back,  and asked
[some questions]  concerning a new  [Court]  mourning gown
.  .  .  .  [kindly saying he would]  assist Susey and me  [in our
fitting-out,]  which he accordingly did,  and affectionately embraced me,  saying,  “  I wish I could do more for thee,  Fanny!”
“Oh,  Sir;”  cried I,  “/wish for nothing!  only let me live
with you.”  “My life!”  cried he,  kissing me kindly,  “Thou
shalt live with me for ever,  if thee wilt!  Thou canst not think
I meant to get rid of thee?  ”

“I could not Sir;  I could not!”  cried I;  [“I could not
outlive such a thought!”  and,  as I kissed him — O!  how
gratefully and thankfully !  with what a relief to my heart !]

I saw his eyes full of tears !  a mark of his tenderness which
I shall never forget !  “  God knows,”  continued he,  “  I wish
not to part with my girls !  only,  don’t be too hasty !  ”

Thus relieved,  restored to future hopes,  I went to bed,
light,  happy,  and thankful,  as if escaped from destruction.

I had,  however,  written my letter before my father spoke,
and as I had expressly told Mr.  Barlow it contained a Refusal,
I thought it would be even ridiculous to alter it.  I rather
determined,  if my father had persisted in desiring it,  to unsay
a rejection than not to write it after having declared I already
had.  This is the copy : —

Sir,

I am much concerned to find that my silence to the first
letter with which you honoured me has not had the effect it
was meant to produce,  of preventing your giving yourself any
further trouble upon my account.

The good opinion you are pleased to express of me,  however extraordinary upon so short an acquaintance,  certainly
claims my acknowledgments;  but as 1 have no intention of
changing my present situation,  I can only assure you of my
good wishes for your health and happiness,  and request and
desire that you will bestow no further thoughts,  time,  or
trouble upon,

Sir,

Your most humble servant,

F.  Burney.

St.  Martin’s Street,

Leicester Fields.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

7 1

From that day to this my father,  I thank Heaven,  has never
again mentioned Mr.  Barlow.

June 9th.

I called at my sister’s lately,  and was very sorry to hear
that Mr.  Barlow,  who has been again to visit her,  expressed
himself to be as strongly as ever attached to me,  and requested
of her to suffer him to meet me some day at her house,  by
letting him know when I was with her.  She told him I should
be very angry with her.  He promised to appear much surprised,  that I should never know the meeting was not accidental,  and she was at length prevailed upon to promise him
her assistance.  However,  reflecting upon it afterwards,  she
repented,  and therefore told me of what had passed.  I assured
her I was extremely glad she had saved me so disagreeable
a task as a second refusal would have been — for as his motives
are obvious so my resolution is unalterable — but by my father,
who,  I am sure is too indulgent to require me to give my
hand without my heart.

I commissioned her,  when she saw him to tell him that she
found by my conversation I was so determined that she thought
it was only exposing both of us to uneasiness to promote a
meeting.

I wish this young man well.  I believe him to be worthy,
but am sorry he will not be answered .

Friday,  June  [10th].

******

On Wednesday morning,  while my mother  [and I were in
the study with Miss Lidderdale,  of Lynn,  the servant came
to tell me that a gentleman was in]  the parlour waiting for
me.  “Did not he send up his name?”  cried mama.  “No
ma’am,”  answered he.  “Do you know who he is?”  “No,
Ma’am.”

I supposed it was Mr.  Barlow,  and heartily wished I had
been out.  I went down stairs  [perforce,]  .  .  .  and found him
alone.  He bowed.  I curtsied.  He seemed at a loss what
to say, — and as I determined not to ask him to sit down,  or
to say anything that might encourage him either to stay or

72 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

to repeat his visit,  I was silent also.  At length he stammered
out — “  I hope,  ma’am,  you are well?  ”

“Very well,  I thank you,”  was my laconic reply.

Another silence;  and then— “Your cold? — I hope ma’am
— 1 hope you have quite -

“  O,  it is quite gone,”  cried I;  “  I am perfectly well.”

“  I am very happy to hear it — I could not,  Ma’am,  I could
not deny myself the satisfaction of enquiring after your
health. —

“I am sorry,  Sir,”  answered I very gravely,  “that you
should have taken the trouble to call.”

“  Does it give you — I hope,  Ma’am,  it does not give you
— any uneasiness  ?  ”

I made no answer,  but went towards the window.  There
I saw Dick and Miss Fydell,  a lady who was coming to see
Miss Lidderdale,  [advancing to the door.]  I was rejoiced at
so speedy an opportunity of ending the tete-a-tete ,  and flew
myself to the door to let them in.  I then began to talk to
Miss Fydell,  all the time standing myself,  that I might not
be obliged to ask Mr.  Barlow to sit.

He seemed a good deal agitated.  I was truly quite sorry
to be so rude to him — but what can be  [done]  when a man
will not take an answer?  I would,  with all my heart,  have
been civil and sociable with him in a friendly manner,  from
gratitude for the real regard he seems to have for me— but I
have heard,  [from Mr.  Crisp,]  too much of mankind to believe
he would not draw inferences,  and entertain expectations from
such friendliness that might greatly distress and embarrass
me.  Besides,  ever since my father spoke for him,  I have
quite dreaded the continuation of his addresses.

His situation was too uneasy to be long supported,  and
after enquiring about the family,  he took his leave,  with a
look so mortified and unhappy that I felt shocked at myself
for what,  in fact,  I could not help.  [However,  when he had
mournfully shut the parlour door,  and I heard the street door
open,  I re-opened the parlour door]  and called out that I
wished him a good walk.  He started back,  and seemed going
to return,  but I immediately came into the parlour,  yet not
before I could see by his change of countenance that he was
pleased with this little mark of civility.

I hope,  however,  that this visit will be his last.  I think he

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 73

will never have the courage to make another.  I have not
mentioned it to my father.  Indeed I dare not renew a
subject which has caused me so much uneasiness and
fright.  Sorry as I am for Mr.  B.,  who is a worthy young
man,  I cannot involve myself in a life of discomfort for his
satisfaction.

I have had the great pleasure of a letter from my dear
Mr.  Crisp,  in answer to my pleas against marrying heart-
whole,  in which he most kindly gives up the cause,  and allows
of my reasoning and opinion.

What my mother thinks of the affair I know not,  but the
other day,  when Hetty and Mr.  Burney were here,  she suddenly,  in a laughing way,  turned to me and said — “  O,  but —
Fanny — was you,  cruel,  or kind,  the other morning?  Upon
my word,  it is time to enquire!— a gentleman whose visits
are admitted l  ” -

I only laughed,  not caring to be serious so publicly;  but,
really,  it was a very provoking turn to give to Mr.  B.’s calls,
and will make me doubly desirous that they should not be
renewed.

I forgot to mention that one evening,  about a fortnight
since,  as we were all walking in the Park,  we met Mrs.
Pringle again.  I introduced to her her young old friend,
Charlotte,  and they were naturally glad to see each other.
She was extremely cordial in her invitations to all of us,  and
I much wish it was in my power to accept them.

We also saw poor Miss L.,  whose face immediately shewed
that she recollected my eldest sister and me;  however we
walked on wishing to avoid speaking to her:  but when we
were at Spring Garden gate,  she just touched my shoulder
as she came suddenly behind us,  and said — “  Miss Burney !
— how do you do?  ”  I answered her rather coldly,  and Hetty
turned from her abruptly.  I was afterwards very sorry that
I did not speak with more kindness to her,  for Susey says
that she looked greatly disappointed.  It is,  however,  impossible,  and improper to keep up acquaintance with a female
who has lost her character,  however sincerely she may be an
object of pity.  What way this unfortunate girl is in at present
I know not,  but Miss Strange believes her to be as culpable
as ever.  She was with a very decent looking party,  and was
very genteely dressed without shew or frippery,  and looked

74 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

very handsome.  Much is to be said in excuse of a poor
credulous young creature whose person is attractive while
her mind is unformed.  Should she quit her way of life
before she grows more abandoned,  I shall have great pleasure
in shewing her any civility in my circumscribed power,  for
the remembrance of her innocence when I first knew her.
Miss Strange has heard the story of her marriage all contradicted.

[Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp.]

[May 16th.]

And so it is all over with me! - and I am to be given

up — to forfeit your blessing — to lose your good opinion — to
be doomed to regret and the horrors — because — I have not a
mind to be married. — Forgive me,  dearest Mr.  Crisp — forgive me — but indeed I cannot act from worldly motives  —
You know and have long known and laughed at my notions
and character:  continue still to laugh at me — but pray don’t
make me cry — for your last letter really made me unhappy.1
I am grieved that you can so earnestly espouse the cause of
a person you never saw.  I heartily wish him well— he is,  I
believe,  a worthy young man,  but I have long accustomed
myself to the idea of being an old maid,  and the title has
lost all its terrors in my ears.  I feel no repugnance to the
expectation of being ranked among the number.

As to the visit to Hoxton,  my dear Daddy,  how could I
make it without leaving Mr.  Barlow to infer the Lord knows
what?  By what he says in his letter,  it is evident he would
have taken it to himself :  he is hasty,  and I dreaded being
somehow or other entangled.  I have no dislike to him.  The
whole party were strongly his friends,  and upon the whole I
thought it necessary to keep away.  I would not for the world
be thought to trifle with any man.  I could not have made
that visit without giving him reason to draw conclusions
very disagreeable to me.  Don’t imagine by what I say that
I have made a vow for a single life — No:  but on the other

1 This letter is missing.

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 75

hand I have no objection to it,  and have all my life determined never to marry without having the very highest value
and esteem for the man who should be my lord.  Were I
ever so well disposed to follow your advice and see more of
this youth,  I am convinced he would not let me;  he is so
extremely precipitate.  I must either determine for,  or against
him,  or,  at least,  enter into such conditions as I should feel
myself bound to abide by.  Besides, — I am quite fixed.

If you ask my objections,  I must frankly own they are such
as perhaps will only satisfy myself,  for I have none to make
to his character,  disposition,  or person; — they are all good;
— -but he is not used to company,  or the world ;  his language
is stiff,  studied,  and even affected.  In short,  he does not hit
my fancy.

“  I do not like you,  Dr.  Fell,

The reason why I cannot tell.

But I don’t like you,  Dr.  Fell.”

Hetty and the party went on Saturday to Hoxton.  I desired them to say I was not well.  How the day passed,  I
know not.  They have all quarrelled with me about this
affair,  and I don’t care to go to  [one or other of them till
they forget it.]  But while we were at breakfast,  yesterday
morning,  John came in and said a gentleman desired to
speak to me.  Mr.  Barlow came in — to enquire after my
health !—  You would have laughed had you been present — I
was so much frightened,  lest my mother should blab my
[not having been ill?]  and lest he should desire to speak to
me, — that I quite lost my voice,  in so much that he himself
afterwards took notice how bad my cold was,  though in fact
I have none at all !  while on the other hand,  he was so
terribly confused that he made three several bows before he
could get out a word.  My mother,  Bessy,  and Charlotte all
stared with amazement,  wondering who he was,  and what
his visit meant,  as to Sukey,  she could not keep her
countenance at first,  though soon after she very good
naturedly entered into conversation with Mr.  Barlow to our
mutual relief.  I am very uneasy at not having answered his
letter.  I should be equally grieved to have him take my
silence either for contempt ,  or for compliance ;  but my father,
to whom I shewed it,  desired me not to answer it — why I

76 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

cannot imagine.  If he sided against me,  I could not resist
the stream,  for Sukey is firmly Mr.  Barlow’s friend,  but,  I
thank heaven he does not interfere.  He is all indulgence,  and
to quit his roof requires inducements which I am sure I shall
never have.  I never,  never can love any human being as I
love him.  Once more,  I entreat your forgiveness,  and that
you will write me word you forgive me.

Don’t be uneasy about my welfare,  my dear Daddy,  I dare
say I shall do very well,  I cannot persuade myself to snap
at a settlement,  and I do assure you this young man would
not suffer me to deliberate long.  Had marriage from prudence
and convenience been my desire,  I believe I have had it
quite as much in my power  [two or three times]  as now.
[Particularly]  there was a certain youth,  not quite so hasty
to be sure,  as Mr.  Barlow,  but not far otherwise,  who took
much pains for cultivating our acquaintance.  I happened to
dance with him at a private masquerade  .  .  .  and he called
two or three times afterwards,  and wrote two notes with
most pressing  [requests,  through a third person,  that he
might be introduced to my father,  and to know whether]  he
might exist again  [or not].  However,  after the answer he
received,  [written by myself]  to the second note,  I heard of
him no more.  In short,  I long since settled to either
attach myself with my whole heart,  or to have the courage
to lead apes.  I have now,  and I shall ever have,  the most
grateful sense of your kindness,  and of the interest you take
in my concerns.  I heartily wish I could act by your advice,
and that I could return an attachment,  which strange as it
appears to me,  I so little deserve.  After all,  so long as I live
to be of some comfort,  (as I flatter myself I am,)  to my
father,  I can have no motive to wish to sign myself other
than his and your,

Ever obliged,  and ever affectionate,

and devoted,

Frances Burney,  to

the end of the chapter,
Amen.

As to his circumstances,  I have made no enquiries,  for I
honestly confess they would have but little influence with
me,  one way or other.

FRANCES BURNEY

I77b]

17

[It is difficult to fix the date of the letter to Mr.  Crisp describing Dr.  Burney’s first concert of this year.  In fact,  it has puzzled
Mme.  D’Arblay herself,  who has  (in her old age)  successively
inserted three or four tentative dates;  all of which are wrong.
It seems to have been written after the account of the  “  Deiden”
concert in her journal.  Mr.  Crisp has endorsed it  “May”  only.
It begins thus:  “  I was extremely happy at the receipt of your
last letter,1 2 because you assure me you are not angry with me,
though believe me,  I cannot with unconcern read your cautions
and prognostics:  I am not triumphant ,  but I am not desponding;
and I must again repeat what I have so often had the hardiesse
to say,  that I have no idea why the single life may not be happy.
Liberty is not without its value— with women as well as with
men,  though it may not have equal recommendations for both,
and I hope never  (without a prospect brighter to myself),  to lose
mine;  and have no such prospect in view.  Had I ever hesitated
about Mr.  Barlow,  your advice,  my dear Sir,  would have turned
the balance on his side;  but I never did or could.  So now to
other matters.”  More than four pages are then given to the
musir of Mr.  and Mrs.  Burney,  the Baroness Deiden,  and the
rest.  These pages  (with some amplifications),  are printed in the
“Memoirs of Dr.  Burney.”  Fanny then ends with a request for
advice.  She has refused one invitation to the house of Mrs.
O’Connor;  shall she accept another?  Shall she go to Hoxton
with the set purpose of discouraging Mr.  Barlow?  Shall she
“force myself to say  (as Lord Ogleby expresses it)  shocking
things to him?  ....  or avoid him totally,  and hope the affair
will drop as it is?  I don’t care to say any more to my father about
itr.  I certainly ought not to keep Mr.  Barlow in suspense ,  if it is
possible he can think himself so.  Pray instruct me,  only remembering that I am fixed. — Adieu,  my dear Sir,  I am now and ever,
most faithfully and truly yours,  Frances Burney.”]'

[Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp.]

[Probably written on the 1st of June.]  3

My dear Sir,

My father cannot see you before Sunday,  when he
proposes to be with you as soon as he can.  Whether alone ,
or with anyone else,  or whether your anecdote-monger will

1 This letter is not extant.

2 Fanny has thrice underlined her name.

3 This letter has a post-mark of June 2,  and is endorsed by Mr.  Crisp
as having been received on that day.

78 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

accompany him,  as yet none but the great gods can tell!  If I
do not see you,  I must take this opportunity of entreating
and conjuring you not to use your influence with my father
for Mr.  Barlow,  in case he should mention that personage
to you.  I have not time to tell you all about it ,  but a great
deal has passed since I wrote last,  and I have suffered the
most cruel and terrifying uneasiness.  I am now again at
peace,  and hope to continue so.  Should my father happen
to speak to you of what I have said,  (as it is well known that
I write very openly to you)  I entreat you to assure him that

I have expressed the greatest aversion to forming a connection with Mr.  B.  I have not dared to speak so much to the
purpose myself,— for I have been,  and I am,  determined at
all events not to oppose his will and advice;  but I know he
wishes only for my happiness,  and I am sensible that I
should be wretched for ever if induced to marry where I
have no manner of affection,  or regard.  .  .  O Mr.  Crisp,  it
is dreadful to me to think of my uniting my destiny, —
spending my time, — devoting my life, — to one whose face I
never desire to see again !  Had I with equal bluntness expressed myself to my father,  I am certain he would not ever
think of Mr.  Barlow more, — but his interference was so unexpected — it silenced,  confounded,  and frightened me.  I
see you did not care to send me your advice,  which however,
would be too late,  as Mr.  Barlow is no dreaming lover.  I
hope all is over  [for I have written a point blank refusal—
without shewing it to anybody,  that I might put an end to
the worry.]  I don’t think my mother will be able to be with
you,  as Miss Lidderdale of Lynn is expected here, — but this
is unsettled.

Adieu,  my dear Daddy,

I am ever most truly yours,

F.  Burney.

[Fanny signs the letters about Mr.  Barlow with her name

II writ large,”  and twice or thrice underlined,  to show that it would,
at least,  never be changed to  “Barlow.”  In knowing her own mind
at once upon marriage,  no woman surpassed Fanny;  and if Mr.
Crisp had read Mr.  Barlow’s letter,  he must have said,  with Mr.
Bennet to his daughter Elizabeth  (had  “Pride and Prejudice”
then been written),  “I know your disposition.  .  .  .  Your lively
talents would place you”  (if not in  “the greatest danger,”  in

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

79

“misery,”)  “  in an unequal marriage.  My child,  let me not have
the grief of seeing you unable to respect your partner in life.”
Mi.  Crisp and Dr.  Burney were,  according to the opinion of
their time,  over-indulgent to a young lady’s mere fancy — or even
whim.  Lady Bertram  (in  “  Mansfield Park  ”)  lays down the
proper view,  when she says to her niece  (on Mr.  Crawford’s proposing marriage),  “You must be aware,  Fanny,  that it is every
young woman’s duty to accept such a very eligible offer as this.”
In fact,  the name of no one of note in the eighteenth century who
thought that daughters should have a free choice in marriage
occurs to the editor,  except that of Dr.  Johnson.  Mr.  Crisp had,
it is seen,  thought it not expedient to answer Fanny’s foregoing
letter,  and Dr.  Burney did not go to Chesington until Mr.  Barlow
had wholly ceased to trouble.]

[Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp.]

[This extract from a letter which Mr.  Crisp has endorsed
“June 10,”  gives Fanny’s first impressions on hearing Agujari.]

At length, — we have heard Agujari!  We wished for you!
— I cannot tell you how much we wished for you! — The
great singers of former years,  whom I have heard you so
emphatically describe seem to have all their talents revived
in this wonderful singer ! — I could compare her to nothing  /
ever heard, — but only to what you have heard,  your Cares-
tino,1 — Farinelli— Senesino — alone are worthy to be ranked
with the Bastardini. — Such a powerful voice! — so astonishing a compass, — reaching from C.  in the middle of the harpsichord to two notes above the harpsichord ! — Every tone so
clear,  so full,  so charming! — Then her shake — so plump — so
true,  so open!  It is as strong and distinct as Mr.  Burney’s
upon the harpsichord.  Besides its great poiver,  her voice is
all sweetness,  and when she pleases,  all softness and delicacy.
She sings in the highest style of taste and with an expression
so pathetic,  that it is impossible to hear it unmoved.  She
does the greatest difficulties that are possible to be given to
her,  with all the ease and facility that I could say  “  my dear
Daddy!”

She came before 7,  and stayed till 12,  and was singing
almost all the time !  She permitted us to encore almost every

1 Carestini.

8o

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

song.  She sung in twenty different styles.  The greatest was
son regina and son amante ,  from Didone.  Good God !  what
a song !  and how sung !  Then she gave us two or three
Cantabiles,  sung divinely,  then she chaunted some church-
music,  in a style so nobly simple,  and unadorned,  that it
stole into one’s very soul !  Then she gave us a bravura,  with
difficulties which seemed only possible for an instrument in
the hands of a great master;  then she spoke some recitative,
so nobly!  In short,  whether she most astonished,  or most
delighted us,  1 cannot say,  but she is really a sublime singer !
We had not a soul beyond our own family,  which was her
particular desire.  She gave us some hope of coming once
more before she quits England.  If she does,  and if we know
of it in time,  could you resist coming to town for one night?
Papa could introduce you to her as one who desired to be
admitted,  because your health would not permit you to hear
her at the Pantheon.  Indeed,  it would greatly answer to you.
Besides her musical talents,  she has really a great deal of
] 1 and would entertain you by her conversation.  She
has great ideas of action,  and grew so animated in singing
an arria parla7ite from Didone that she acted it throughout
with great spirit and feeling.  I could not help regretting to
her that she should sing at the Pantheon,  wThen she was so
much formed for the Theatre.  She made faces,  and shrugs,
in the Italian way,  and said — “  Out- — comme une statue ! —
comme ime petite ecoliere  ” — and then she took up a book to
take herself off when singing at the Pantheon.  We all hoped
that,  after the Gabriella was gone,  she would return to England,  and to the Opera House.  She said that if ever she did,
it should be through the means of Dr.  Burney , — into whose
hands she would put her engagements,  and to no one else!
She professes great contempt for the managers. — By the way,
Miss Davis has gained her cause,  and the managers will lose
near  ^2,000.  Among other things Agujari sang a Rondeau
.  .  .  she says she detests ces  .  .  .  for her talents are so
very superior that she cannot chuse but hold all other
performers cheap.  The Gabriella,  her only rival she has

1 Here some short word,  such as  “mirth”  or  “sport”  has been
effaced,  and  “originality”  tried instead of it,  then changed to  “singularity,”  but this was perhaps done by another hand.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

81

never heard,  and consequently she has never met with any
singer equal to herself.  She is a wonderful creature!  .  .  .  .
Adieu my dear Daddy.  My father cannot yet fix his day for
dear Chesington — I wish I could fix mine!  My love to Kitty,
and respects to Mrs.  H.  .  .  .

June nth.

And now for the singer of singers  [Agujari !]  She came,
with Signor Maestro Colla,  to tea.  She frightened us a little
at first,  by complaining of a cold.  Mr.  Burney,  as usual,
played first;  and after that,  Signora Agujari rose to sing!
We all rose too,— we seemed all Ear.  Had a pin fallen,  J
suppose we should have taken it at least for a thwider-clap.
All was husht and rapt attention.  Signor Colla accompanied
her.  She began by singing what she called a little Minuet of
his composition.  Her cold was not affected — for her voice
was really not quite clear.  However,  she acquitted herself
charmingly,  and little ,  as she called this Minuet,  it contained
difficulties,  which I firmly believe no other singer in the world
could have executed.  She was so obliging as to sing it
twice,  and the second time was much better than the first.
But her great talents and our great astonishment were reserved
for her second song,  which was taken from Metastasio’s opera
of Didone,  set by Colla:  Non hai ragione,  ingrato!

As this is what she called an Arria parlatite ,l she was
desirous that we should all understand the words,  before
we heard the music;  and in a voice softly melodious,  she
repeated the song through,  before she sang it,  and then translated its sense into French.  It is nobly set.  She began with

1 These technical expressions refer to the rigid old rules of the opera
when it was first brought into England.  Not only were  “  the unities of
time and place  ”  strictly observed,  but the singers were not to exceed
the number of three men and three women,  whose voices were defined,
and whose songs were arranged by unalterable law.  There were  (says
Mr.  Rockstro),  “five unvarying classes,  each distinguished by some
well-defined peculiarity of style,  though not of general design.  .  .  .
First,  the aria cantabile,  a quiet and pathetic slow movement.  .  .  .
4th,  the aria parlante,  of a freer,  fuller and more declamatory character
than the aria di portamento  (2nd),  or the aria di mezzo carattere ,  (3rd).
5th,  the aria di bravura ,  a dashing allegro,  .  .  .  adapted to exhibit
the executive powers of the performer.”

82

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

a fullness and power of voice,  that astonished us beyond all
our possible expectations.  She then lowered it to the most
expressive softness;  in short,  she was sublime:  I can use no
other word,  without degrading her.

This and another great song from the same opera,  Son
Regina ,  e son amante,  she sung in a style,  to which my ears
have been hitherto strangers.1 She unites to her astonishing
and incomparable powers of execution and luxuriant facility
and compass of voice,  an expression still more delicate , — and
I had almost said,  equally feeling ,  with that of my darling
Millico.  But,  though her merit is superior to any singer’s I
ever before heard,  I do confess I can never have pleasure
superiour,  if equal,  from hearing anymusic in this nether world,
to what I have,  to the most exquisite degree,  felt from hearing Millico.  His se?isibility in singing seemed more unaffectedly genuine and touchant than any other human being’s I
ever heard.

Agujari,  however,  has  [vocal]  talents that almost surpass
belief to those who have not heard her.  Her voice reaches
from the middle of the harpsichord to two notes above it,
yet it is never husky when low,  or shrill when high.  She
grew so animated,  while she was singing that she acted
throughout the two songs of Didone,  and with great spirit
and meaning.  She began Son Regina ,  with a dignity I scarce
had an idea of,  and then proceeded to e so?i amante ,  in a
tone of voice so sweetly pathetic,  so softly clear,  that it almost melted us to tears to hear it;  then when she grew more
animated, — never was expression more impassioned.

I could not forbear regretting to her,  that she should perform in a place where her talents were half obscured,  as she
seemed so much formed to grace a Theatre,  from her excellent ideas of action.  She made faces at the name of The
Pantheon,  and took herself off when standing there— “  Comme
une statue! — comme une petite JEcoliere!  ”

To display her various powers to my father,  she sung in
all styles,  the Bravura,  the Arria parlante,  the Cantabile,
Church Music,  Recitative,  and Rondeau,  though she laughed

1  “Son Regina,  e sono Amante,”  see sc.  5,  act vi.  of Didone Abban-
donata,  Metastasio’s first  “  dramnia  ”  set to music by Sarra,  and first
represented at Naples during the Carnival of 1724.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

at herself in the latter,  saying,
i/s me font guignon  !  ”  1

83

“Ah!  ie hais ces miser es la;

I called lately upon my grandmother and found her at
cards with my aunts and Mrs.  O’Connor,  who I saw looked
rather gravely upon me.  I enquired after Miss Dickenson,
and sat and chatted about a quarter of an hour,  and then I
said I must be gone,  for Miss Cooke,  from Chesington,  and
Mr.  and Miss Simmons were to drink tea with us.  Just as
I rose,  and was taking leave,  Mrs.  O’Connor called out —
“No!  Stop a moment! — I stood,  suspended, — and in a
solemn kind of manner she addressed herself to my grandmother,  and said, — “Would you think this lady to be one
of the greatest cheats that ever was born?”

They all stared,  and she went on.  “  Who,  to look in her
face,  and see so much good nature would believe her to have
nonet— to be actually crneli Here has she sat this half hour
— and never once had the common civility to ask how my
poor Mr.  Barlow does,  whose heart she has been breaking !
Fie!— fie!”

I was much surprised at this attack,— and made no immediate answer,  hardly knowing whether she meant it
seriously . My aunts looked rather displeased,  and my

1 Mrs.  Harris to her son at Beilin :  “Piccadilly,  March 21,  1775. —
Yesterday  ....  in the evening,  Gertrude,  Miss Kitty Knatchbull,
and I  .  .  .  .  went to the Pantheon with Miss Wyndham.  Nothing
worth going there for but the Agujari.  She is a most surprising singer,,
and in my opinion a pleasing one;  she goes two notes higher in her
voice than the notes of the harpsichord.  The ton is to say  ‘  she is more
surprising than pleasing,’  but I do not subscribe to that,  for she has a
very good method.”  The pig-story is then given,  with this addition,
that  “  she screamed so violently  ....  that it is imagined she broke
something in her throat,  which has caused her voice to be so very high

and clear . This woman always fills the Pantheon with a great

mixture of company.  The best company goes off soon after the concert
is over.  We stayed an hour longer,  and then it is beyond all things
deplorable.”  In her  “Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,”  Mme.  d’Arblay adds,
that Agujari  “left England with great contempt for the land of
rondeaux',  and never desired to visit it again  ....  she died before
her high and unexampled talents had expanded their truly wonderful
supremacy.”  In his  “  History of Music,”  Dr.  Burney speculates as to>
whether Sappho had not a voice of the same pitch as that of Agujari.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

84

[t775

grandmother said — “  I’ll assure you,  I began to wonder what
you meant by calling my grand daughter a cheat.”

“  O yes!  ”  cried Mrs.  O’Connor,  “  I expected to make you
all angry! — I thought as much! — but I could not contain.
Poor Mr.  Barlow !  how will he wish he had happened to have
been here,  when I tell him.  But you need not,  I shall say,
for she never once asked how you did !  ”

“  If Mr.  Barlow would have been the better for any enquiry,”  said I,  “  I should certainly - ”

“  O — if you meant nothing else”  cried she,  “  it may be as
well as it is!  but you will- — you will say yes yet? — ”

“  Let us hope,”  said my aunt Anne,  very judiciously,
“  that they may both do better.”

“Ay — well — I don’t know — I can’t say — all I know is
that poor Mr.  Barlow is almost dying with grief — you — you
• — naughty thing!  you have broke his heart!  ”

“  O,”  cried I,  endeavouring to laugh it off,  “  I dare say he
will survive .”

“O!— very well,  Ma’am, — very well— pray exult — it is always the way with you young ladies - ”

I determined to make no more answer,  as I was quite
affronted at this speech.  Exult!  I would not for the world!
But how affected would it sound in me to pity a man for my
own cruelty ,  as she calls it!

“  He is a good and most worthy young man,”  continued
she,  “and I have the greatest regard for him — however —
perhaps — before twice seven years’  time — you may repe?it.”

How excessively impertinent !  I was quite silent,  and so
were my grandmother and aunt Anne;  but my poor aunt
Beckey simply added to Mrs.  O’Connor’s prediction by saying — “Ay — when you are like us!”

Perhaps Mrs.  O’Connor thought she had gone too far,  for
she afterwards seemed to endeavour to soften her attack by
saying a great deal of the good nature of my looks; — and wishing— though with an air of doubt — that I might be happier.

As to my enquiring after Mr.  Barlow,  I felt too conscious
to mention his name,  and had I looked so,  and spoke of him
at the same time,  I am certain she would have put a wrong
construction upon it.  Besides,  Mr.  Barlow,  I believe,  would
catch at a shadow ,  and if he heard I merely asked after his
health,  he would be anxious I doubt not,  to answer me him-

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

85

self,  and I should be extremely uneasy to have,  or to give,
any further trouble about this affair.  [Ah !  will anyone I can
love — ever thus love met — Singleness,  therefore,  be mine —
with peace of mind and liberty.  My father and Mr.  Crisp
spoil me for every other male creature.]

-H-  Jl.  Jt.  JJ.

'TV  'TV  -w  'TV'  '7V'  ■jf

[Between the last paragraph on Mr.  Barlow and this letter
from Fanny to Mr.  Crisp,  at least twenty pages have been cut
out of this diary and are missing.  We say that they are missing
because over thirty pages of the Barlow narration have also been
cut out,  but lie loose within the cover of the diary.  It is believed
that much of what is missing related to the last illness of Dr.
Burney’s mother.  The following letter has lost the last of its
four quarto leaves,  and with that,  Mr.  Crisp’s customary endorsement of the day on which it reached him.  Mme.  D’Arblay,  feeling after a date,  has headed it in later days  “30 Octr.  ’75.”]

[Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp.]

My dear Daddy,

It is so long since I wrote to you that I suppose you
conclude we are all gone a fortune-hunting in some other
planet,  however,  though I cannot totally exculpate myself
from the charge of negligence,  yet a great part of the time
during which I have been silent has been employed in a
manner that would have given you no pleasure to have heard
of,— for my poor grandmother Burney,  after a long,  painful,
lingering illness,  in the course of which we all contributed
our mites towards assisting as nurses,  has breathed her last.
I shall not dwell upon this melancholy subject,  as I know
your peculiar aversion to the Horrors — but shall proceed to
write upon those topics which you have yourself made
choice of.

Now first as to that R[ogue]  my F[ather].  He was at
Buxton near three weeks,  and bathed 15 times.  He went
afterwards to sea bathing at Clay in Norfolk.  He has been
returned home about a fortnight,  and I thank God is in good
health at present,  though his hand is still obstinately bent.
The History has been this very day,  for the first time since
its long cessation,  put into the press.  It is now rough written

86

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

to the end of the first volume,  Preface and Dedication inclusive.  When it is actually published we intend to keep the
carnival.

As to the Gabrielle,  she has taken a house in Golden-
square,  and has had a brass plate put on the door,  with Mrs.
Gabrielle on it.  She and Rauzzini seem admirably suited for
each other,  for let her live ever so much en princesse,  he will
always keep her in countenance by living eu prince.  He has
had his drawing room painted after the manner of the card
rooms at the Pantheon,  with pink and green and finely ornamented.  The first opera is to be next Saturday,  when,  if you
do not come to town I shall think and conclude that you are
lost to all the St.  Cecelian powers of attraction.  Indeed
if neither Agujari or Gabrielli have charms to allure you to
the Opera or Pantheon,  one may imagine that you are become as indifferent to music as to dancing or horse-racing.
The opera is to be Metastasio’s JDidojie,  which is the very
opera that Agujari sung to us twelve songs from,  composed
by her Maestro Sigr.  Colla.  It is to be a half pasticcio,  but
all the recitatives by Sacchini,  as well as a cantabile for
Rauzzini,  and all the part of la Gabrielli.  This I very much
rejoice at,  as I had rather hear her first in music of his composition,  than of any other Maestro whose works I am
unacquainted with.  I am extremely glad,  also,  that the
squalling Galli is dismissed,  and Savoi once more taken as
Second man.  A sister of Gabrielli is to be Second woman,
and I hear she is very pretty,  but no further has yet transpired.  The rehearsals are begun and the managers are very
busy.  My father,  at the earnest invitation of Mr.  and Mrs.
Yates and Mrs.  Brooke,  dined at their house last week,  with
the following delicious party — Rauzzini,  Sacchini,  the sister,
and the Gabrielli herself!  He tells us that she is still very
pretty,  and /  extremely elegant;  and very well bred,  and has
the air and manner of a woman of rank.  She did not sing,
neither did any presume to ask her;  but she has invited my
father to her house,  and desired to cultivate his acquaintance.
There’s for you!  He intends,  notwithstanding the value of
his time,  to shortly avail himself of this graciousness.  Nothing
could ever exceed the expectations of people of all ranks and
all ways of thinking concerning this so celebrated singer.
P'or my part,  should anything unfortunately prevent my hear-

i77S]  FRANCES BURNEY 87

ing her first performance,  I shall regard it ever after as a very
great misfortune .

Now for family.  All well.  Bessie is to go to Paris as soon
as Mrs.  Strange returns from Scotland.  Dick is at school at
Harrow.  Little Sally is come home,  and is one of the most
innocent,  artless,  queer little things you ever saw,  and altogether she is a very sweet,  and very engaging child.1 Jem
we hear nothing of yet;  but when he comes it will be no
fault of mine if I do not obey your kind commands,  and
accompany him to Chesington.  Neither will it be any fault
of his,  for I know he will both go himself and make me,  if
it is in his power.

I have had the honour lately of a sort of correspondence
with Mrs.  Brooke,  opera manager,  and authoress of  ‘  Lady
Julia Mandeville,’  &c.,  &c.,  and she has been not a little
civil upon the occasion,  though she only wrote queries concerning my father’s absence,  return,  and so forth,  when he
was at Buxton.  Pray,  if you are at any time,  when not well,
or not busy,  disposed for some light summer reading,  send
for The Correspondents,  which you will find to be a queer
series of letters between a young widow and an old half
philosopher:  Mrs.  Brooke  (who is very honourably mentioned by both of them)  assures us that they are genuine letters of the late Lord and present young Lady Lyttelton,  his
son’s wife.  How they got to the press seems so unaccountable,  that it makes one doubt their authenticity whether one
will or no.2

1 Dr.  Burney’s only daughter by his second marriage,  Sarah Harriet,
who,  in her turn,  published several novels,  which had some success.
H.  Crabb Robinson met her in Rome in 1829,  and gives some account
of her in his  “Diary and Reminiscences.”  She was a favourite with
him and his friends in Rome.

2 George,  first Lord Lyttelton  (1709-1773,)  so well known in the last
century as a politician,  and an author of prose and verse,  had an only
son Thomas,  who married a young and very rich widow,  “  Apphia,  relict of Joseph Peach,  Governor of Calcutta.”  Mr.  Gibbs kindly informs
the Editor that  “there are two or three editions of  ‘  The Correspondents’  in the British Museum;  the first being dated 1775” 5 but that the
book is  “catalogued as an anonymous work,  whose authorship remains
unknown.”  In December,  1775,  Mrs.  Boscawen wrote  “  that _ ever
‘  The Correspondents  ’  was hinted to be Lord Lyttelton’s,  is a wicked
bookseller’s trick to make it sell.”  Some years afterwards Fanny met

88

THE EARLY DIARY OF  [177s

My good friend and correspondent,  Mr:  Hutton,  called
here last week in good health and spirits,  and was as droll,
and affectionate,  and odd,  as ever.  My father read to him
his Dedication to the Queen,  which mightily pleased him,
for he almost adores her Majesty.

In regard to Mr.  Barlow,  I have not seen him for many
months;  but I hear of him very often,  from a certain Mrs.
O’Connor,  who was an old friend and favourite of my poor
grandmother,  and continues to be so of my aunts.  It was by
her means that he became acquainted with our family.  This
gentlewoman and I never meet without her most officiously
telling me tales of his goodness,  worth,  and so forth,  and expatiating on my cruelty ,  and my own loss,  and his broken
heart ,  and such sort of stuff.  I have,  however,  sent her a
message by my aunt Anne,  desiring her to forbear these attacks,  and letting her know in as civil words as possible,  that
I was too much determined for them to answer any possible
purpose.  She has thought fit to make an apology,  and I
hope she will desist in future.  My father,  thank heaven,  has
not once mentioned his name since the tragical tragedy which
I gave you a hint of.* 1

As to any other person — my dear Mr.  Crisp your wishes
for me are very kind,  but I am a queer sort of character,
and,  without particular inducements ,  cannot bear the thought
of uniting myself for life with one who must have full power
to make me miserable,  and perhaps none to make me happy,
— for it is such a chance ! — and,  as the constable says,  there

“the lady of the late young Lord Lyttelton,”  (the wicked,  or mad
lord),  at the house of Mr.  Pepys,  among  “  many beaux esprits ,”  and was
gratified to meet her,  but adds that the book which had made her  “  very
celebrated,  ....  proves to be a very impertinent forgery.”

1 Mr.  Barlow returns no more to St.  Martin’s Street.  One cannot
help thinking what elaborate letters his  “ardurous pen”  might have
contributed to  “Evelina.”  There is something didactic in the name.
“  Sandford and Merton”  had a wise and instructive Mr.  Barlow for
their tutor.  Did he,  three years later,  read  “Evelina”?  If so,  was his
pain renewed?  But man is apt to console himself for rejection by choosing another lady with better taste and judgement,  and since we began
our notes on this journal,  we have seen in a London paper the death of
a Thomas Barlow of Hoxton ,  who may  (it pleases us to fancy)  have been
a descendant of this Thomas of 1775.

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 89

are gifts which God gives and do not fall to the lot of every
one.1

But though I am difficult and saucy,  as you call me,  in
regard to giving another the sole power of settling my fate,
yet I am by no means difficult to be pleased and happy as I
am ,  on the contrary I neither want spirits nor pliability of
temper to enjoy all the good that I can meet with :  and as to
the bad ,  though I am sometimes tempted to think I can never
in one point have more,  yet up07i the whole perhaps I shall
never have less;  and the more sensible I am of the comforts
I actually possess the more careful it makes me of foregoing
them.

[Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp.]

St.  Martin’s Street,

Monday  [endorsed by Mr.  Crisp,  “Novr 1775.”]

The best apology I can make for the indolence you accuse
me of,  is by shewing more alacrity in future.  Don’t you
allow of that reparation?  As to my correspondence with the
Huttons,  the Brooks,  or so forth,  it was only occasional,  and
neither did,  or could,  or can interfere with one which gives
me a thousand times more real satisfaction and pleasure.
Besides,  compared to what I write to you,  all my other letters
are mere notes.  So you are angry with Gabrielli for making
Signor Onofrio ill?  What would you have been had you gone
last Tuesday to the Opera House after seeing Didone advertised in all the papers and then been told there was no opera?
Every one of our family but my mother went.  The crowd
was prodigious.  They gave us hand-bills on which were
written — “  There can be no opera this evening on account of the
indisposition of the two Capital Serious Singers.”  People were
in horrid passions.  Some said it was scandalous;  others that
it was a shame;  others called for the managers;  one gentleman blustered furiously,  vowing he had come twenty miles

1 This is rather a reference to,  than a quotation from,  the inimitable
Dogberry — “To be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune;  but to
write and read comes by nature.”  Again,  in disparaging his neighbour
Verges,  Dogberry says,  “  All men are not alike;  alas!  good neighbour  !
Lem.  Indeed,  neighbour,  he comes too short of you.  Dogberry.  Gifts,
that God gives !  ”

THE EARLY DIARY OF

90

[i775

since dinner on purpose to hear Signora Gabriella.  Poor
Yates,  the manager,  was obliged to stand at the door from
5 till past 7 o’clock to appease the rage of the disappointed
public;  though every person he sent away caused him a pang,
as he could not but say — There goes three shillings !— there
five! — there half-a-guinea!  ”  Yet if he had not been there
the house would have been probably pulled down.

We all came home horribly out of humour,  and as to Hetty
she determined from that moment not to like her,  and prayed
most devoutly that she might be hissed whenever she should
honour England with the sound of her voice.  After this we
heard that she refused to let herself be heard even by the
subscribers to the opera,  and would not sing at any rehearsals,
except at her own house.  The next news was that all the
band complained,  that when they assembled to accompany
her,  she would only give them recitative.

My father called on the managers to know the reason why
the opera was deferred on such short notice.  They doubted
much whether Gabrielli was really ill,  but told him that she
had declared she could not sing.  When they represented the
fury of an English audience upon such sort of disappointments,  she told them,  very easily,  that if that was the case
she would dress herself and make her appearance, —  that the
opera might be performed, — but that,  for herself,  she would
make a curtsie,  and point to her throat to excuse her singing.
You may be sure they knew too well the genius of our nation
to trust the safety of their theatre to such a trial of the forbearance of an audience,  so big with expectation.  Therefore
the opera was put off to Saturday.  The managers added that
she addressed them in the mildest terms and with the most
obliging softness,  prefacing her refusal with — “  Mais,  Madame,
ecoutez ! — je donnerai tres volontiers deux operas la semaine
prochaine — but the deuce a bit has she kept her word.1
Mr.  Bromfield,  the surgeon,  called here last week,  and said
he had heard her in a trio,  and that though she did not
exert herself,  he never heard such singing before !  He was so
proud of it that he could talk of nothing else,  and he owned
that he had not thought of anything but her ever since he
heard her.  He had had a note from her and he shewed me

1 The managers were Mrs.  Brooke and Mrs.  Yates.

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 91

her hand-writing,  which was indeed a miserable scrawl,  and
her own name signed by her own hand.  As to my father,  he
met with no opportunity of hearing her till Saturday night at
the theatre.  She requires more attendance and courting than
he has time to give.

Now for Saturday.  My mother partly from fear of the
crowd and,  partly from indifference to music,  would not go.
My father went in the pit.  Mr.  Burney,  Hetty,  Sukey,
Charles,  Charlotte,  Bessy Allen and me,  all sat in the front
row of the 2nd gallery  ....  There was a prodigious house,
such a one as November can scarce ever have seen before,
unless indeed it was formerly more the fashion to come to
town before Christmas than it is at present.

Well,  Sir,  expectations being raised so very high — can you
wonder they were not answered?  In the first scene,  Rauzzini
and Sistini entered with the sister ,  Franscesca Gabrielli;  they
prepared us for the approach of the blazing Star,  who appeared in the second.  Nothing could be more noble than
her entrance.  She took a sweep from the full length of the
stage,  amidst peals of applause,  which seemed as if they would
shake the foundation of the theatre.  She walked with great
majesty.  Her person is rather short but charmingly proportioned.  Her face is rather plump,  but very pretty,  and her
air is all dignity.  Though the applause was so violent she
never deigned to make the slightest acknowledgement till she
had finished her career,  and marched from the farthest extremity of the stage,  which was open to the end,  quite up to
the orchestra,  when,  finding the applause drowned the music,
not a note of which could be heard she made an Italian
curtsie ,  alias a bozvl They continued to clap,  however,  and
made her make two more bows,  whether she would or not,
before they were silent enough to listen to her voice.  Expectation was kept on the rack long after her appearance,  because
she did not sing till after every other performer had had an
air and then came Son Regina,  and Sono Amante.

And now I know not what to write.  Opinions vary so
much that I would to heaven you would come and hear and
judge for yourself.  In the case of Agujari,  I spoke boldly of

1 The  “  Italian Curtsie”  (much abridged of its graceful slowness of
bend)  has supplanted the old English curtsey,  except at Court.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

92

[1775

her talents because there was but one mind among us;  at
present I think I must speak separately of every one’s sentiments,  and leave you to suppose what you can.

This first song was the only one of any consequence that
she sang,  all the rest being mere bits.  The trio and the duets
were really charming.  The difficulties in the Son Regina
were all in the Davis style,  in so much that one would think
Miss Davis had been Gabrielli’s pupil.

To tell you I was not disappointed is impossible.  You
must already have perceived that your Tribunal has pronounced well,  for Agujari is still alone and unrivalled!

Air.  Burney said that he was prodigiously let down;  that
she was not within ten degrees of Agujari.  Hetty ,  because
she was not an Agujari,  would allow her nothing;  declared
that she would not quit her room to hear her;  that she did
not care whether she went to another opera the whole season.
[But Hetty’s warm admiration has been so won by Agujari
that she looks upon Gabrielli as a sort of usurper,  in coming
upon a throne that ought to be sacred to its first Queen.
You know her honest vivacity,  and love her for it.  Indeed,
who does not?]  Susy was rather more pleased with her.  For
my part I was overborne by the torrent ;  but though I by no
means could compare her with Agujari,  I thought the tone
of her voice was extremely sweet,  that she sung in a masterly
manner,  acted judiciously and gracefully,  and was only second
to Agujari.  My father,  who has at once more indulgence and
more judgement than any of us,  came home in much better
humour with her than his saucy children.  He pronounces
her,  upon the whole,  taking perfections and vnperfections together ,  a very capital singer.

Disappointed as we were,  there is no possibility,  as yet,  of
knowing whether she would not,  or could not do more,  for
she was most impertinently easy,  visibly took no pains,  and
never in the least exerted herself.  All that can excuse her,  is
that she had really a bad cold,  coughed often,  and was even
hoarse at times.

She has very little voice though sweetly toned and.  polished.
She never gave us one shake,  nor an idea of one,  though I
have heard that she has a very fine one.  What could possibly
put her out of humour,  if in reality she did not want the
power but the will to do greater things?  Nothing could be

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

93

more flattering than her reception,  and she had the most
striking applause the whole night.

She is the universal subject of conversation,  and no two
people think alike of her.  In the gallery every one seemed
to think that she gave herself airs,  and would not sing.  In
the pit,  near my father,  every lady was delighted with her.
So you see you must come and hear her yourself.  Others
aver that she was in a terrible fright,  and lost her steadiness
and powers from fear.  Indeed,  she actually told Mr.  Brom-
field that she was sure she should be errified to death.  Upon
the whole there is no knowing what to say.  So I will say
no more,  but change the subject,  and come to yesterday,
to give you an account of a little concert we had,  at which
assisted a most superb party of company.  It was occasioned
by the desire of Dr.  King to have Prince Orloff,  of Russia,
hear Mr.  Burney and my sister in a duet before he left
England.

Prince Orloff is the identical man who was the reigning
favourite with the Empress of Russia at the time the Czar
was murdered.  He is said to have seized the Emperor,  but
he is known to have immediately succeeded to the good will
of the Czarina.  This Prince was sent to negotiate peace at
Constantinople some little time since;  but,  in his absence,
he was unfortunately supplanted in the favour of the Empress,
by some other Adonis,  and though loaded with honours,
preferment,  and all sorts of orders,  he chose to travel a little
while,  when,  upon his return to Russia,  he found that the
Empress had received another friend into her good graces.
He is now therefore in England,  where he lives in great
splendour,  is perpetually at Court,  and has had entertainments made for him by all the Ministers of State,  &c.  Dr.
King had him,  when in Russia,  for his patron,  and now proposed his coming here yesterday.1 We had no performers

1 Alexis Orloff was as bad a man as he was a good  “  Lyon.”  _ There
is no reason why he should not have been  “  a favourite”  of Catherine II.,
but in this respect London Society seems to have confused him with his
brother Gregory,  Catherine’s minister,  who also had permission to wear
her picture at his button-hole.  Alexis was the reputed murderer of
Peter III.,  of whom Merimee remarks that to strangle him was the only
thino-  that could be done with him.  Alexis rose in the army and navy
after’ the murder.  He was admiral of the Russian fleet which destroyed

94

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

but Mr.  Burney and Hetty,  but a good deal of company.  I
will introduce them to you as they entered,  and hope to
make my peace with you in relation to indolence by being
as minute as I can.

Rat,  tat,  tat!  Enter the Dean of Winchester.  The Dean
is a man of drollery,  good humour,  and sociality ;  but he is
very severe at times in his characters of men,  though perfectly
free from any narrowness or contraction.  He disdains submitting to the great or Lording it over the little,  and was
equally at his ease with Prince Orloff — or

Dr.  Burney.  Was you at the Opera last night Mr.  Dean?

Dean of W.  No,  Sir.  I made an attempt,  but I hate a
crowd — as much as the ladies love it.  I beg pardon !  (Bowing to us).

Mama then entered into a defensive argument,  which lasted
till another — Tat,  Tat,  at the door.  Enter Dr.  King.

He was as fade and as imposing,  and as consequential,  and
as insipid as usual.  He told us that the Prince was to dine
with Lord Buckingham and a multitude of others,  and begged
the concert might not wait for him,  as he was obliged to go
in for a few minutes to Lady Harrington’s before he came,  it
being her Rout Day.

Tat,  tat,  tat,  tat,  tat,  two! — Enter Lady Edgecumbe.  We
were all introduced to her,  and were honoured with a most

the Turkish fleet at Tscheme in July,  1770,  he was thence called
“Tschesmenskoi”  in honour of the victory,  but Carlyle  (in his
‘‘Frederick the Great”)  says that that feat was performed by three
Britons in the Russian service,  Captains Elphinstone and Greig,  and
Lieutenant Dugdale,  who with  “their single fire-ship surprised the
Turkish fleet,  and so blew some twenty-four ships and eight hundred
men to gasses and black cinders.”  Carlyle calls Alexis  “  scarred Orloff
the brother of Lover Orloff;”  “a visionary admiral,  and an extremely
bad seaman and man.”  Soon after this victory  (or surprise),  Orloff committed the atrocious crime of kidnapping a girl who was thought to
have ^  some claim to the Russian throne.  He went through a form of
marriage with her,  got her on board his ship,  and took her as a prisoner
to perish in Russia.  He is  (after such distinguished services)  said to have
attempted to rival his brother with the Empress.  Gregory sent him on
his travels,  and we see here how he comported himself.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

95

gracious reception.  She began a very animated conversation
with my father,  and was all condescension,  repartee  {and yet)
good humour.

Dr.  Burney.  Your Ladyship was doubtless at the Opera
last night?

Lady Edge.  O Yes!  But I have not heard the Gabrielli!
- — that is all I can say,  I have not heard her !  I wont allow
that I have!

Dr.  B.  Your Ladyship expected a greater and more powerful voice?

Lady Edge.  Why no;  not much.  But the shadow tells me
what the substance must be.  However,  I have not yet heard
her.  She had really a terrible cold.

Dr.  B.  It is most fair not to judge of her yet.

Lady Edge.  She cannot have acquired the fame of the first
singer in the world for nothing.  But for me — I have heard
Monticelli — I have heard Mingotti — and I have heard Man-
zoli ! — and I shall never hear them again !

Dr.  King  {pushing himself forward).  But I humbly submit
to your Ladyship,  whether Gabrielli has yet done herself
justice?  (N.B. — He knows nor cares a fig for music.)

Lady Edge.  Certainly not.  But Dr.  Burney,  I have also
heard Agujari — and I shall never hear her again !

Hetty ,  Fanny ,  Susey.  O,  Agujari!

Dr.  B.  Your Ladyship wins all their hearts by naming
Agujari.  But I hope you will hear her again.

Lady Edge.  Do pray,  Dr.  Burney,  speak about her to Mrs.
Yates.  Let her know that Agujari wishes to sing at the
theatre.

Dr.  B.  Their present engagements with the Gabrielli must
be first over;  and then I hope we shall bring Agujari back
again.

Lady Edge.  O !  then I shall be quite crazy !

Dea7i of W.  But,  Lady Edgecumbe,  may not Gabrielli
have great powers,  and yet not voice sufficient to fill a
theatre?

Lady Edge.  O,  Mr.  Dean,  our theatre is nothing to what
she has been used to abroad.  Agujari would greatly fill the
Theatre — indeed she could fill the Pantheon.  By Gabrielli ,
Rauzzini seemed to have a great voice;  by Agujari he appeared a child,
n.

D

9 6 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

Tat,  tat,  tat.— Enter Mr.  Charles Boone.  Salutations
over —

Dr.  B.  You were at the Opera last night?

Mr.  Boone.  No,  my cold was too bad.  But I am told by
Mr.  Cooper,  an excellent judge,  that he heard enough to pronounce her the greatest singer in the world.

Tat,  tat,  tat,  tat. — Enter Mr.  and Mrs.  Brudenal.1 Mr.
Brudenal is second brother to the Duke of Montague.  His
lady was the Hon.  Miss Legge,  a great lady singer,  and
scholar of Mingotti.  She is a soft,  obliging,  pretty sort of
woman.

The introduction over,  the Question of the Night was repeated — How do you like Gabrielli?

Mrs.  Brudenal.  O,  Lady Edgecumbe and I are exactly of
one mind;  we both agree that she has not sung yet.

Tat,  tat,  tat. — Enter Mr.  Chamier.  Mr.  Chamier who is
the most gallant of men,  immediately seated himself by Susey
and me,  and began a most lively and agreeable conversation ;
and from this time the company being large divided into
parties.  But I am resolved you shall hear every body's
opinion of Gabrielli.

Mr.  Chamier.  Well,  ladies,  I hope you were entertained
at the Opera?  I had the happiness of sitting next Dr.  Burney.

Susy.  I believe I saw you.

Mr.  Chamier.  I was very sorry I could not see you.  I
looked for you.

Fanny.  O,  we were at an humble distance! — in the
gallery.

Susy.  I rather think we were at an exalted distance.

Mr.  Chamier.  I heard where you were,  for though I had
not the pleasure of seeing you,  I enquired of the Doctor
where you were.  Was not the Gabrielli charming?

Susy.  O,  y — e — s.

Fanny.  I never expected so much in my life — I was really
in an agitation — I could not listen to the overture — I could
hardly breathe till I had heard her.

Mr.  Chamier.  Well,  I am sure she did not disappoint
you ! —

'  This name has all through been spelt Brudenal,  though the a is often
altered to e.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

97

Fanny.  I must confess my expectations were too high
raised to be answered.

Mr.  Chamier.  0,  she was not in voice;  you must regard
this as a mere echantillon.

F[etty.  A very feeble and bad one!  (N.B. — Between her
teeth.)

Mr.  Chamier.  I was kept at the theatre a full hour after
the last dance before I could get to a chair,  for the crowd.
However we got into a party in the Coffee Room,  and settled
the affairs of the opera.

Fanny.  Then I am sure there could be no dearth of conversation,  for the opinions of every one concerning Gabrielli
are so various.

Mr.  Chamier.  O,  I beg your pardon !  I find it is the ton
to be dissatisfied — “  Cest pen de chose f was echoed and reechoed partout!

Tat,  tat,  tat.— Enter M.  le Baron de Demidoff.  He is a
Russian nobleman who travels with the Prince.  He is very
musical,  and subscribed to my father’s History of Music
before he left Russia.  He brought news that the Prince was
detained at Lady Harrington’s rout,  but would be with us as
soon as possible.

Lady Edgecumbe was engaged at the same place,  but said
she would defer her visit to the last moment.  My father,
followed by her Ladyship,  then went into the library,  and
Mr.  Burney seated himself at the harpsichord.  We all followed.  He was very much admired;  but I can tell you
nothing new upon that subject.

Tat,  tat,  tat. — Enter Mr.  Harris of Salisbury.  He is a
most charming old man,  and I like him amazingly.  Lady
Edgecumbe arose and went to meet him,  saying he was an
old and particular friend of hers and she rejoiced to meet
him.  When he  [had paid her his compliments,]  he very
civilly renewed acquaintance with us.  I told him we were
all afraid he would be tired of so much of one thing ,  for that
there was nothing for him again but the Duet.  “  That is the
very reason I come,”  answered he,  “because I was never so
much entertained as when I heard it before,  and wish to renew-  the same pleasure.”

Mr.  Burney and Hetty then played a duet on the harpsichord and piano forte of Mr.  Burney’s composition,  for they

98 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

kept Miithel till his Highness arrived.  Lady Edgecumbe
expressed herself in terms of the most lively pleasure,  and
was so animated and interested during the performance,  that,
added to her adoring Agujari,  I quite adored her.  Indeed
she was the life of the company,  for she was so chatty ,
spirited,  and easy,  that she dispelled all sort of ceremony,  distance,  or fussation.

Tat,  tat,  tat. — Enter Lord Bruce.  He is younger brother
to Mr.  Brudenal,  but an uncle who took very much to him,
settled his estate and barony upon him.  He looks a tall
raw-boned Scotchman,  but he is a most polite and agreeable
man.  He said he had been very unfortunate in losing a full
hour,  from a mistake of his servants,  who drove him to St.
Martin’s Lane,  where he had been danced up and down from
top to bottom,  and at last was in such a passion at their
stupidity in not finding the house that he jumped out of his
carriage,  swore an oath or two,  and began enquiring himself
till he was directed right.

Mrs.  Brudenal was now so obliging as to sing.  She gave
us a little pastoral cantabile,  of very elegant,  sweet music,
from Rauzzini’s Piramo and Thisbe,  with which you were
much pleased at Chesington.  She has a fine voice,  and sings,
my father says,  in the style of the good old school.  She has a
very pretty shake,  and sings very chastly,  not with vile
graces and trills.  But she was dreadfully frightened,  which
caused her to sing out of tune at times,  though happily not
always.

When she had done,  I turned about and said to Mr.
Chamier — “  What pretty music!”  He made no answer,  but
gave me such a look,  expressive of satire and drollery,  that
unable to keep my countenance I was forced precipitately to
retreat into the dining room.  He soon after came there
himself.  I expostulated with him upon his cruelty in driving
me out of the room.  He was pleased to say he was sure I
thought what he looked.  I told him,  which is truth,  that he
was,  very difficult and severe.  “  A singer who sings out of
tune,”  cried he,  “ is not to be borne!”  “  She was extremely
frightened,”  answered I,  “  and that ought to be allowed for.”
“  But,”  cried he,  “  those who wont open their mouths  (N.B.
Mrs.  Brudenal sings with hers almost shut)  ought to be
dumb;  and those who cannot sing in tune ,  I could excuse

FRANCES BURNEY

U75]

99

from singing at all"  “O!”  cried I,  “how many voices
would you silence at this rate!  and how few lady singers
would you leave!”  “No matter,”  returned he,  “a candle
that does not give a good light ought to have an extinguisher
put on it.”

More music now called us back into the library.  Mr.
Chamier was very curious to know if that was not the
room which Sir Isaac used to study in  ?  and which my
father used for that purpose?”  “No,  no,”  said I,  “ this is
quite superb to the study ;  you never saw such a scene of
confusion as that is  !”  “It’s quite a dungeon is it?  well that’s
all as it should be.  But you have Sir Isaac’s Observatory ,
have not you?”  ....  I remember that he once before
asked me,  very seriously,  if I did not think my father’s real
motive for coming into this house was that it had been Sir
Isaac's.  Mrs.  Brudenal now began another song.  I told
Mr.  Chamier that I should take care not to look at him
when it was over.  He promised he would not say a word;
but I mixed in with the crowd ,  and would not trust myself
near him.

I forgot to tell you that Mr.  Harris is among those who
admire the Gabrielli above all singers.  .  .  .

I have filled my three sheets before my time,  but if you
wish for the remnant of this evening you have but to say
so.  .  .  .

Write soon if you desire to have the Prince  [Orloff]  introduced to you.  I can’t possibly,  without you send his Highness a card first;  or,  as I am your Sir Clement Cotterel,1
why if you send one to me,  I will endeavour to manage an
interview.  Pray tell me your health is better.

Yours  [ever and]  ever and ever
F.  B.

The Gabriella so fills up this letter that I must beg you to
.  excuse any answer to your letter till I write again when I will
tell you about the  [Tours?],  &c.

1 The Cotterels are said to have been Masters of the Ceremonies
from the reign of Charles II.  While Fanny was writing this,  Sir Charles
Cotterel Dormer,  Knt.,  with a salary of  £300 a year was assisted by
Stephen Cotterel,  Esq.,  with 6s.  8d.  a day,  and had,  for his marshal,  a
Stephen,  who was probably the same,  with  £100 a year.

IOO

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i 775

Novr.  1 6th.

The celebrated singer,  La Gabrielli,  made her first appearance upon the Opera stage last Saturday.  She had frequently
disappointed the public by deferring the opera,  after it was
promised;  but she had only heightened expectation by this
coquetry;  and the crowd to see and hear her,  was prodigious.
Tho’,  I have been tiring myself with writing so long an
account of her to Mr.  Crisp,  that my journal must be contented with a very short one.

The Opera was  [the]  Didone of Metastasio ;  the very same
that la Bastardella sung so many songs from,  though new-
set.  The entrance of the Gabrielli was noble.  The stage
was open to the bottom,  and she appeared at the most distant part,  and marched forward quite close to the orchestra,
amidst the most violent acclamation of applause.  She has a
pretty figure,  rather short,  but charmingly proportioned;  her
face is also very pretty.  She still looks very young,  is rather
plump and is perfectly graceful.  She walks extremely well,
and has great dignity in her air.  Her voice is feeble,  but
sweetly toned.  She has great powers of execution;  but— she
is no Agujari!1

Our party were all disappointed :  myself the least,  and yet
very much.  Mr.  Burney and Hetty even dislike her.  Susette
is rather more moderate;  and my father whose candour and
indulgence equal his judgement,  was much better satisfied
with her than any of his saucy children.2

1 Dr.  Burney informs us that the most memorable musical event of
1775 was the arrival of the celebrated Caterina Gabrielli,  called early in
life La Cuochetina,  being the daughter of a cardinal’s cook at Rome.
He describes her as being of low stature,  but of such grace and dignity
of gestures and deportment as to occupy the whole attention of the
spectators when she  “  filled the stage.”  He adds that she was the most
intelligent and best-bred  “  virtuosa”  with whom he ever conversed,
speaking like a well-educated woman,  who had seeh the world,  not only
on music,  but on other subjects.  “In youth,  her beauty and caprice
had occasioned an universal delirium among her young countrymen,
and there were still remains of both sufficiently powerful,  while she was
in England,  to render credible their former influence.”  She was living
at Bologna when Dr.  Burney thus wrote of her in 1789.  Mr.  Sharp tells
us that she had  ^900 for singing at Naples in the season of 1764 and
the same in 1765.

2  “Candour”  is here used in its earlier English sense of mildness,

i77S]  FRANCES BURNEY ioi

As an actress,  her motions are elegant and judicious ;  but
she seems to want spirit and animation.  The whole town
seems divided in opinion about her;  some think her the
finest singer we have ever had;  others prefer not only the
Agujari,  but Miss Davis and  .  .  .  Some say that her cold
disabled her from exerting her powers,  others,  that her sister
(a vilainous singer),  being hissed,  put her so much out of
humour,  that she would not sing;  while others say that she
is passee,  and has lost entirely those powers,  by which she has
hitherto fascinated all who have heard her.  What is the real
truth,  nothing but a future hearing can show.  For my part,
I was so sanguine,  that nothing less than an Agujari could
have contented me.

The day after,  Sunday,  we had a very great party of company,  concerning which,  as they were very agreeable,  I shall
be very loquacious,  for I think that term may be not ill
applied to writing ,  at times ,  as well as speech.

[Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney.]

Ches.  Novr.  19.

Dear Fanny,

That I wish for the remnant of your evening concert,  is
saying nothing.  You have learn’d from that R[ogue]  your
father  (by so long serving as amanuensis,  I suppose)  to
make your descriptions alive, — send the remainder,  therefore,  without a moment’s delay; — while breathing,  and warm.
I am now convinc’d I had entertain’d a true and clear idea
of Mrs.  Gabriel;  and form’d a just estimate of the comparative merits of her and Bastardini ;  for which I claim nothing
to myself,  but readily give it all to your faithful portraits of
both.  The pen,  as well as the pencil,  sometimes exhibit!
pictures with such strong marks of nature,  that one instantly
pronounces them like,  without having seen the originals.  I
can,  not only excuse,  but applaud Hetty,  for her outrageous
preference of Agujari,  and I love Charles for being prodigiously let down.

or gentleness in judging and expressing your judgement;  but see on
page 102 what Mr.  Crisp says of Dr.  Burney’s  “candour”  on this
occasion.

102 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

As for that Rogue your father,  I could lick him for his
affected coolness and moderation  [some strong words are
here erased]  if it were not for one consideration,  which it must
be own’d,  has,  and ought to have,  .some weight with him — I
mean,  the rank he holds in the musical world;  which,  not
unreasonably,  may check him from giving the sanction of his
opinion in disfavour of so trumpeted a character;  now
present in England;  and in contradiction to great and
powerful Numbers,  Numbers! — to whom without grain of
talents or feeling,  some demon has whisper’d Numbers have
a taste ! 1

But ....  to tell one gravely that Gabriel has a very weak
voice , — or a weak voice , — but very S7veet and polish’d,  &c.  &c. !
— and then compare her,  or prefer to the Bastard,  who,  besides sweetness and taste,  has all the powers of thunder and
lightning in her,  who can mark at pleasure every passage
with what degree of strength and softness,  light and shade,
she pleases;  who can strike you speechless with majesty,  or
melt you with tenderness in the change of a moment! — I
would recommend to such worthy judges,  the sing-song and
prettiness of Waller and Cowley,  in preference to the sublimity of Milton and Homer.  I shall set my mark upon your
Harris’s,  Bromfeilds,  &c.  &c.  with regard to music,  however.  Adieu,  I am far from well.  Write directly.  All here
whom you love,  return it sincerely.  Mine to the aforesaid
rogue,  and all the creatures.  Adieu,  your loving daddy,

S.  C.

Nov.  21.

My father had a little Concert in honour of Prince OrlofT,
of Russia,  at the request of Dr.  King,  to whom he was
patron during his chaplainship in Petersburg.

This Prince is,  by some,  supposed to be the very man,
who seized the late Czar;  but however that may have been,
he was certainly the man,  who was honoured with the
Czarina’s most unbounded favour,  loaded with marks of distinction,  and known as the chief influencer of her conduct,
and favourite of her heart.  He went lately on an Embassy
to Constantinople,  about the Peace with the Turks  :  and on

1  “  Some demon whispered,  ‘  Visto,  have a taste.”’ — Pope.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

103

his return found that the Empress had suffered some other
to supplant him in her good graces;  and this has induced
him to travel,  and occasioned his visit to England.  Many
Russians of distinction are in his suite,  and they were all invited here.  .  .  .  But I shall introduce all who came in the
same order of time and precedence that they introduced
themselves.  And first,  therefore, —

Enter the Dean of Winchester.  He is very clever and
agreeable;  but I fancy somewhat too much inclined to
severity in his judgements,  and that from a tendency to satire ,
not from bigotry or contraction ,  for he is perfectly liberal-
minded,  unaffected,  and free from parade or littleness.1

Dr.  Burney.  Was you at the Opera last  [night],  Mr.
Dean?

Dean of Winchester.  No,  Sir;  I made an attempt,  but
soon retreated;  for I hate a crowd, — as much as the ladies
love it, — I beg pardon !  (bowing to we fair sex).

Dr.  Burtiey.  The Gabrielli is a very fine singer;  but she
has not voice enough for the people of this country;  she will
never please fohn.

Hetty  (pulling his sleeve).  Nay,  Sir — now don’t call me
John  !

Enter Dr.  King.  The Doctor was quite the thing to-night,
and figured amazingly ;  but he was,  as usual fade ,  imposing,
and insipid.

Enter Lady Edgecumbe.  We all had the honour to be in-

1 Dr.  Newton Ogle,  Archdeacon of Surrey,  1761,  Prebendary of
Durham,  1768,  Dean of Winchester,  1769,  was son of Nathaniel Ogle,
M.D.,  of Kirkley,  Northumberland,  who had been physician to Marlborough’s army.  The Editor has well known those who well knew the
genial,  humorous Dean of Winchester;  very musical was he,  and if not
a' poet,  poetical.  Some graceful and touching Latin verses,  addressed by
him to the little river of his boyhood,  the Blyth,  in Northumberland,
were much handed about in manuscript at the end of the last century.
They were  “  written in 1763,  after a long absence from Kirkley,  his
patrimonial seat,  and estate.”  They were translated by the poet Bowles,
and by Hodgson the historian of Northumberland,  who also printed the
original verses in his history of Northumberland  (vol.  ii.  pt.  ii. ).  They
were reprinted by the late Dr.  Raine,  in his life of Hodgson.  They give
a pathetic utterance to the difference between youth and age by the
same stream.  In conversation he sometimes affected a tone of republicanism,  and he wished for the abolition of pluralities in the church,
“  but not in my time ,”  said he;  “  not in my time .”

104 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

troduced to her,  and to meet a most gracious reception.
She seems to me a very clever,  lively,  quick,  discerning
woman,  and was totally free from airs and superiority.

Dr.  Burney.  Your Ladyship was doubtless at the Opera
last night  ?

Lady Edgecumbe.  Oh,  yes!  but I have not heard the
Gabrielli!  no;  I will not allow that I have heard her yet.

Dr.  Burney.  Your Ladyship expected a more powerful
voice  ?

Lady Edgecumbe.  Why no;  not that;  the shadow tells
me what the substance must be.  She cannot have acquired
this great name throughout Europe for nothing  ;  but I repeat,
I have not yet heard her ;  so I will not judge.  She had
certainly a bad cold.

Dean of Winchester.  But,  Lady Edgecumbe,  may not
Gabrielli have great powers,  and yet too weak a voice for a
great Theatre?

Lady Edgecumbe.  Our Theatre,  Mr.  Dean,  is of no size
compared to those she has been accustomed to abroad.
Agujari would have greatly filled the Theatre.  Indeed,  she
could fill the Pantheon.

Hetty ,  B'anny,  Sukey.  Oh,  Agujari!

Dr.  Burney.  Your La' ship wins all their hearts by speaking of Agujari.  She is adored here.

Lady Edgecumbe.  O !  she is divine !  only mark the difference,  Dr.  Burney;  by the Gabrielli,  Rauzzini seems to
have a most powerful voice ;  by the Agujari,  he seems a
child.

Dr.  King  {pushing himself forward).  But,  with submission,  I humbly beg leave to ask your Ladyship,  if Gabrielli
has yet done herself justice?

Lady Edgecumbe.  Certainly not.  But,  Dr.  Burney,  /  have
heard Monticelli ;  I have heard Manzoli ;  and  /  have heard
Mingotti ;  and I shall never hear them again  ! — And,- — I
have heard the Agujari ;  and I shall never hear her again  !

Dr.  Bu?-ney.  O,  but I hope you will hear her again;  I hope
we shall,  some time or other,  see her on the Opera-stage.

Lady Edgecumbe.  I know that she herself wished it.  Do
pray,  Dr.  Burney,  speak to Mrs.  Yates about her.  Let her
know that it is her own desire to be heard at the Theatre.

Dr.  Burney.  The engagements with Gabrielli must first

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 105

be over ;  and after that I have no doubt but Agujari will
succeed her.

Lady Edgecumbe.  O,  then I shall be quite crazy !

Hetty ,  Fanny ,  Susette.  O,  I hope she will !

Dean of Winchester.  But why may we not have Agujari
here now ,  and so hear them together?

Dr.  Burney.  O,  that would be impossible;  the rivalry
would be too strong ;  they would be Cesar and Pompey d

Lady Edgecumbe.  Pompey the Little ,  then,  I am sure,
would Gabrielli be !

Enter The Honble.  Mr.  &  Mrs.  Brudenel.

Mr.  Brudenel is second brother to The Duke of Montague.
His Lady was Miss Legge,  sister of Lord Dartmouth.  Mr.
Brudenel has a tall and imposante figure ;  he is a good deal
in the present ton ,  which is not Macaronyism ;  but consists
of a certain freedom of manners,  and a dry,  short,  abrupt
method of speech,  by no means to me agreeable.1 2 Mrs.  Brudenel is a very obliging and pretty sort of woman,  and a
female dilettante of great fame and reputation in the Beau
Monde as a singer.  The Question of the night was immediately asked,  of,  How did you like Gabrielli l

Mrs.  Brudenel.  O,  Lady Edgecumbe and I are exactly
of the same opinion ;  we agree that we have not heard her
yet.

Lady Edgecumbe.  The ceremony of her quitting the house,
after the Opera is over,  is extremely curious:  First,  goes a
man in a livery,  to clear the way;  then follows the sister;
then,  the Gabrielli herself;  then a page to hold her train;

1  “Pompey the Little”  is the name of a popular story by Mr.
Coventry,  to be found with the  “  Vicar of Wakefield  ”  in Mrs.  Bar-
bauld’s  “  British Novelists,”  vol.  xxiii,  1810.

2 See note 2,  p.  ic8,  post.  Mr.  Brudenell’s love of music is the subject
of some jests in the once famous  “  Political Eclogues” —

“  Brudenell dies enamoured of a voice;  ” —

perhaps that of this  “pretty sort of woman,”  Anne,  daughter of the

first Lord Dartmouth . He sang himself ;  for it is written in these

Eclogues —

“To us shall Brudenell sing his choicest airs.”

The title of  “  His Honour  ”  is  (we think)  some jest which stuck to him.

106 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [177s

and lastly,  another man,  who carries her muff,  in which is her
little lap-dog.

Mr.  Brudenel.  But where is Lord March all this time?

Lady Edgecumbe.  O — he,  you know,  is Lord of the Bed-
Chamber  !

Enter Mr.  Boone.1  (I omit all compliments ,  and so forth,
as things of course.)

Mr.  Boone.  I broke my sword in coming up stairs.  Indeed,  I wonder I did not break my neck.

Dr.  Burney.  I am afraid that speaks ill for my stairs !  Y et
I assure you they were constructed by Sir Lsaac Newton ,  not
by me.

Mr.  Boone.  Indeed?  why,  was this Sir Isaac’s house?

Dr.  Burney.  Yes;  really.

Mr.  Boone.  But I hope he did not leave you this fine
ceiling?  (N.B.  The ceiling is prodigiously painted and ornamented.)

Dr.  Burney.  Nay,  Sir;  I hope you don’t suspect me of
being such a coxcomb;  for I swear  /  did not do it!

Enter Mr.  Chamier.  This Mr.  Chamier is an extremely
agreeable man,  and the very pink of gallantry.  He immediately seated himself by Susy and me,  and indeed,  was the
whole evening constantly engaged with one or other of us.
He is a married man,  and an intimate friend of my father’s,
therefore we were by no means shy of him.2

1 Charles Boone,  of Barkinhall,  Suffolk,  M.P.,  was a man of fashion
whom Dr.  Burney had met early in life at Mr.  Greville’s.  He and his
wife are sometimes named in the Correspondence of George Selwyn.
Garrick has some lines in which his name occurs —

“  E’en Boon,  who ne’er inclines to satire.

With modest sense,  and much good-nature
Could not but say there was some blame,

And sweet Eliza”  (Mrs.  Boone)  “  blush’d the same.”

The  “  blame  ”  was that Garrick was  (or said he was)  about to write an
answer in prose to some lines from Anstey,  and some of his friends,  with
more or less warmth,  urged that it was not seemly to return prose for
verse.

2 Anthony Chamier was descended from a Huguenot family,  which
took refuge in England towards the end of the 17th century.  There was
more than one divine among these Chamiers.  Anthony,  who had been
a stock-broker,  left business early in life.  He was a well-educated man ;
and a good Spanish scholar,  which was then uncommon.  He is to be

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 107

Mr.  Chamier.  I hope,  ladies,  you were entertained at the
Opera last night?  Gabrielli is qharming;  I had the happiness
of sitting next Dr.  Burney.

Susette.  I believe I saw you,  Sir,  in the pit.

Mr.  Chamier.  I was very sorry I could not see you;  I
looked for you.

Fanny.  O,  we were at an humble distance — in the gallery.

Susette.  I think we were,  rather,  at an exalted distance.

Mr.  Chamier.  I heard where you were;  for though I had
not the pleasure of seeing you,  I did not fail to enquire where
you were.  But you liked Gabrielli?

Fatmy.  I never expected so much in my life!  I was really
quite agitated — I could not listen to a note of the overture —

Mr.  Chamier.  Well!  I am sure she answered to you?

Fanny.  Why,  I own my expectations were too high raised.

Mr.  Chamier.  But she had a cold;  you must consider this
as a mere echantillon.

Fdetty.  A very weak and feeble one — (between her teeth).

Mr.  Chamier.  The crowd was so great,  that 1 was detained
a full hour,  after the last dance,  in the Coffee-Roorrq where
we settled the affairs of the Opera.

Fanny.  Then I am sure there could be no dearth of conversation;  for there are so many different opinions concerning Gabrielli, -

Mr.  Chamier.  Oh,  no;  there is scarce a division;  it is not
at all the ton to like her:  dest peu de chose!  (with a Macarony
shrug).

Enter Mr.  Harris.  This charming old man made us all
happy by his company.  Lady Edgecumbe rose to meet him,
with a respect due to his age and character,  declaring herself very glad at seeing an old friend.  We soon found that
he was a Gabrielli man:  indeed no two persons seem to
think exactly the same of that singer.  When he came to
speak to us,  I told him that we were afraid he would be tired
of hearing the same thing again,  as my father had failed in
his wishes and endeavours of varying the entertainment by
some singers,  because every performer he applied to,  happened

found with Dr.  Johnson in Boswell’s pages,  and was member for Tam-
worth,  Deputy-Secretary,  at War,  and Under-Secretary of State to
Lord Weymouth,  and to Lord Hillsborough.

io8 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [[775

to be either ill or engaged.  “That is the very reason,”  said
he,  “  that I wished to come again,  because I was so much
pleased with the duet,  when I first heard it,  that I desire
nothing so much as a repetition of the same pleasure.”

Enter M.  Le Baron de Demidoff.  This Russian nobleman
brought excuses from Prince Orloff for his late appearance,
which was owing to his being obliged to show himself at Lady
Harrington’s rout;  but His Highness desired the music
might not be deferred on his account.  My father,  therefore,
led the way into the library,  followed by Lady Edgecumbe
&c. ;  and Mr.  Burney sat down to the harpsichord.  After
his solo,  my sister took the piano forte ;  and they played a
new Duet,  of Mr.  Burney’s composition;  for Miithel was kept
till the arrival of the Prince.  The music was very deservedly
much admired,  and the effect of the two instruments together
met with the greatest admiration and applause.  As to Lady
Edgecumbe,  she was quite in raptures.  Being herself a
performer of reputation in the lady world ,  she was able to
feel and to judge the merit of the performers and performance at once.1 2

Enter Lord Bruce He is younger brother of the Duke of
Montague and Mr.  Brudenel.  How the titles came to be
managed so awkwardly in this family,  is no affair of mine;
therefore,  I shall not trouble myself with explanations lades sus?

Lord Bruce is a very polite and agreeable man ;  though of
no preve?iant face;  he is tall,  thin,  and plain.  He repined
much at having lost a full hour by mistake of his servants,
who drove him to Saint Martin’s Latie ,  which he was danced
up and down till,  in a great passion,  he jumped out of the

1 Emma,  daughter of Dr.  John Gilbert,  Archbishop of York,  and
wife of the first Earl of Mount Edgecumbe,  was  (Dr.  Burney says)  his

“  oldest and most partial musical friend,  and . at the head of

lady-musicians.”  She was  (like himself)  “always of the Italian school,”
[of music,]  “and spoke both Italian and French well and fluently.  She
played with great force and precision all the best modern compositions
of the times;  and in so high and spirited a style that no other lady,  or
hardly professor,  in England,  durst attempt them.”

2 Mr.  Brudenell was next brother of the fourth Earl of Cardigan,  who
received the title of Duke of Montagu on his wife’s account ;  and the
fourth brother,  Thomas,  succeeded an uncle,  first as Baron Bruce,  afterwards as Earl of Ailesbury.

FRANCES BURNEY

i77S]

109

carriage,  gave them an oath or two ,  and looked and enquired
for the house himself,  till he was directed right.

When the Duet was over,  Mrs.  Brudenel was prevailed
upon to sing.  She was a scholar of La Signora Mingotti,  and,
my father told her,  reminded him of the good old.  school of
singing.  She has a fine voice,  and has great merit,  for a lady
singer ;  but she was extremely frightened,  was not by any
means steadily in tune,  and sung with her mouth shut,  which
has never a good effect.  When she had done,  I turned about
to Mr.  Chamier,  and said,  “  What pretty music !  ”  for she
had chosen a very sweet song of Rauzzini’s.  He made me
no answer;  but gave me such a look expressive of an archdisapprobation,  that,  unable to keep my countenance,  and
dreading losing it,  I walked suddenly into the next room.  He
soon after followed,  and I then expostulated with him upon
his cruelty in driving me out of the room.  He told me he
was sure I thought what he looked.  “  Those,”  he added,  “who
will not sing with an open mouth,  had better keep it quite
shut;  and those who do not sing in tune,  had better not sing
at all.”

“  O,”  cried I,  “  how many lady singers would such laws
silence !  ”

“No matter,”  cried he,  “when a candle does not give a
good light,  I would always put an extinguisher upon it.”

A second song trom Mrs.  Brudenel called us back into the
library.  I told Mr.  Chamier I was determined I would not
look at him when it was over.  He promised he would not
say a word;  but I did not chuse to trust him,  and so mixed
in with another set.

Enter His Highness Prince Orloff.  This prince is of a
prodigious stature,  something resembling Mr.  Bruce.  He is
handsome,  tall,  fat,  upright,  and magnifique.  His dress was
superb;  besides a Blue Ribbon,  he had a Star of Diamonds
of the most dazzling lustre;  a shoulder-knot of the same
brilliancy,  .  .  .  and a picture of the Empress was hung upon
his neck,  which was set round with three rows of diamonds
of the first magnitude and beauty.  His air and address were
gracious and condescending;  and he seemed to have a very
agreeable share of drollery in his composition.  He was attended by a Russian nobleman,  whose name I have forgot,
and by General Baur,  a Hessian . His introduction to

I IO

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

my father,  in which Dr.  King figured,  passed in the diningroom;  after which he came into the library.  Lord Bruce
immediately rose and made way for him.  The Prince
who knew him,  called out,  “Ah!  Milord me fuye!”  Mr.
Brudenel who had also the honour of being known to him,
made a profound reverence,  and was removing from his seat,
to offer it to Son Altesse,  but the Prince would by no means
be induced to accept it.  He retreated; — insisted on Mr.
Brudenel’s keeping his place;  or declared he would himself
retire,  and to strengthen his determination,  he added with a
laugh, — “Non,  non,  Monsieur;  je ne veux pas;  je suis
opiniati-e ,  moi,  comme Messieurs les Anglois,  ainsi je ne
veux pas!”  Mr.  Brudenel therefore re-seated himself,  and
Prince Orloff placed himself on the corner of a form which
was vacant.

I said in a low voice to Mr.  -Chamier,  that I hated such
monstrous tall men.  Mr.  Chamier,  with a very arch look,
said,  “  He has not been so unhappy,  as to meet with such
objections every where!”  I knew he meant the Empress;
but not choosing to understand him,  I only added,  according,
indeed,  to all my meaning,  that they made me ,  and such as
me,  look so very insignificantly pigmy.1

Mr.  Chamier’s gallantry could by no means neglect such
an opportunity for civil speeches;  indeed his own size is so
little superior to mine,  that probably he might think what
he said upon that subject.  He asked me if I remembered
the French proverb?  He then repeated one,  which I don’t
exactly recollect,  but which was very galant pour les petites
femmes.

Mr.  C.  was extremely curious to know which was the room
that Sir Isaac used to study in,  and asked me whether it was
not our library?  I assured him,  with great truth,  that our

1 On the 14th of November,  1775,  Horace Walpole wrote to Mann:
“  Orloff the great,  or rather the Big is here ;  and as proud of his infamous
diamonds as the Duchess of Kingston herself.  He dances gigantic
dances,  and makes gigantic love;  but not conquests.  Orloff talks an
infinite deal of nonsense;  but parts are not necessary to a royal
favourite,  or to an assassin.”  In December of the same year,  Mrs.  Bos-
cawen met Orloff at the house of the Portuguese Envoy,  and described
his height as  “  Patagonian,  his diamonds Mogulian,  their quantity immense indeed.”

FRANCES BURNEY

1 1 1

1775]

library was quite magnificent to Sir Isaac's studying-room,
which was,  as we are informed,  the same my father makes
use of,  and which is within the library,  and a mere lumber-
room.  There was no possibility of shewing it to him then,
otherwise I am sure he would have been highly diverted at
sight of so much learned confusion.

While we were engaged in this light chit-chat ,  my mother
came up to me and said — “  So Fanny,  I see you have got
Mr.  Chamier into a corner!”  for he happened to be in a
snug recess behind a book-case.  “No,  Madam,”  cried Mr.
Chamier,  “  it is I who have sought out a corner near where
[Miss Burney]  inhabited.”  However,  I don’t at all admire
these sort of jokes,  and therefore I moved off.

Miithel’s Duet was then played.  It was,  as usual,  heard
with great applause.  Every body had some remark to make
upon the couple who played it.  Lord Bruce,  pointing to
them,  said to Prince Orloff,  “  Monseigneur,  c’est mari et
femme !  ”

“  Ma foi !  ”  cried His Highness,  “  s’ils sont aussi d' accord 1
en toutes autres choses qu’en la Musique,  il faut qu’ils soient
bien heureux !  ”  He then went up to my sister,  and made
her many compliments,  expressing at the same time his surprise,  that two people of talents so similar,  should happen to
be united .

The Russian nobleman who came with the Prince,  and
who had a most trisie,  foreign countenance,  clapping his
snuff-box with great vehemence,  [after the Duet,]  exclaimed,
“  Id is is so pretty as ever I heard in my life!

Mr.  Boone said to me,  who was his neighbour,  “  See what
can be done by a man and his wife,  who live in harmony
together !  ”

Mr.  Harris also observed what harmony reigned between
them.

Lady Edgecumbe,  in her animated way,  declared she was
set a-madding;  vowed she would  [willingly]  practise night
and day to be able to perform in such a manner,  and said
she had rather hear such a Duet than twenty Operas.

“  Your father,”  said the Dean of Winchester,  to me,  “has

1 OrlofPs word seems to have been  “  heureux which was long afte. -
wards changed to  “  I accord."

1 12

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i 775

been so obliging as to make my two girls attempt something
of this sort;  but,  if they succeed in a few years,  they will be
never the better for it,  because they will be separated;  at
least they hope so !  whereas husband and wife cannot give too
much time and trouble to shew off each other to advantage.”

Enter General Bawr.  He was the last who came;  indeed
many were gone,  before he appeared.  He is a Hessian by
birth,  but commanded as second in power,  during the war
with the Turks by the Russians,  being Lieutenant-General
aii service de sa S.  M.  P Lmperatrice de Russie.  He has displayed so much courage,  firmness,  and intrepidity in the
several engagements where he commanded,  that Mr.  Harris
who told us of many anecdotes in his favour,  said,  “  I assure
you he is a man to be looked at.”  He has a stern aspect and an
air of bravery;  but is polite,  and seems very fond of music.
He regretted much having missed the Duets;  and,  if the
evening had not been too far advanced,  Mr.  Burney would
have repeated them.

Lady Edgecumbe who was now introduced to Prince
Orloff,  whom she had not met with before,  entered into an
absolute flirtation with him.  She invited his Highness,  in
terms of the most extreme civility,  to honour her with a visit,
saying she had but a little house,  but  &  great ambition.  To
be sure it was very presuming in her to suppose that any one
she met at Dr.  Burney's ,  should condescend to visit Lord
Edgecumbe I

The Gabrielli was again mentioned.  The Russians all
declared that she had not yet sung near so well as when in
their country.  General Bawr protested that,  had he shut
his eyes,  he should not,  by her singing,  have known La
Gabrielli.

Mrs.  Brudenel,  even after her cloak was on,  and she was
retiring,  was so obliging,  at my earnest request,  as to return
and sing another song,  which served to vary the entertainment for the Prince.  She sung much better than at first,
and I was very glad that her good-nature proved its own
reward.

Prince Orloff enquired of Dr.  King very particularly who
we all were.  The Doctor  (who told us afterwards)  to save
trouble,  told His Highness,  that all who were in black,  were
Dr.  Burney’s daughters.  At which the Prince exclaimed,  he

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

1 13

should have thought it impossible,  for that my father did not
look above thirty years of age.

Mr.  Harris in a whisper said to me that he wished some
of the ladies would express a desire of seeing the Empress’s
picture;  “for,”  continued he,  “I,  you know,  as a man ,  cannot,  though I much wish it,  for my old eyes cannot see it at
this distance.”1

I immediately applied to Dr.  King,  who whispered to M.
de Demidoff,  who hinted to the General,  who boldly made
the request to the Prince,  in the name of the ladies.

The Prince instantly,  and with the utmost good-humour,
asked the General to untie the picture from his neck,  and
had it handed about.  He was very facetious upon the occasion,  and declared that,  if they wished the ladies might
strip him entirely !  Mr.  Pogenpohl’s gallantry was far more
polished.  I was amazed,  at this near view,  at the size of
the diamonds,  which are set round the picture;  one of
them,  I really believe,  was as big as a nutmeg.

They stayed and chatted some time after the music was
over,  and were extremely lively and agreeable.

The Dean of Winchester and Dr.  King supped with us.
My father told them that if there was any crime in having
music on a Sunday he hoped for absolution from them.  The
Dean said he thought music was a very excellent thing any
and every day;  and Dr.  King said — “Have we not music at
church?  ”

“  Ay,”  answered my father,  “  and much worse music than,
I hope,  you have heard here !  ”

******

[Here two leaves have been tom from the diary.  The gap may
be stopped by comparing the journal with the letter to Mr.  Crisp,
of the 6th of December.  A small part of what is missing is also

1 Mr.  Harris,  Sen.,  M.P.,  to Mr.  James Harris,  November 14,
1775  ; — “  Sunday.  I was at a small but agreeable concert at your friend
Dr.  Burney’s.  Lord Bruce,  Lady Edgcumb,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Brudenell,
and many fine people were there,  amongst others General Baur and
Count Orlow,  this last the most decorated with diamonds I ever beheld.
He had the Empress’s picture in diamonds,  but I think yours of the
King of Spain far more magnificent.  ”  Thus Mr.  Harris had a reason
for asking to see the picture.  He wished to compare Orloff’s diamonds
with those of his son,  the future Lord Malmesbury.

1 14 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

supplied in the  “  Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,”  pages 64-5,  vol.  ii.,
where M.  de Guignes is said  “to have left an amusing laugh
behind him from the pomposity of his exit;  for not finding,  upon
quitting the music-room,  with an abrupt French leave ,  half-a-
dozen of our lackeys waiting to receive his orders;  half:a-dozen
of those gentlemen not being positively at hand;  he indignantly
and impatiently called out aloud:  ‘  Mes gens/  oil sont mes gens?
Qui sont-ils done devenu?  {sic)  Mes gens!  Je dis.  Mes gens ! 3  ”
To this incident Fanny refers also in a letter to her father of the
25th of April,  1802,  when,  narrating a visit to the Opera Buffa
in Paris,  with a party formed on her account,  by the Princesse
d’Henin,  of some few of the old French nobles,  she adds that,

“  M.  Malhouet failing  [to come],  M.  de Guignes,  formerly ambassador in England,  took his place,  you remember him,  my
dear padre,  at one of your concerts,  and ses gens.  Do you think
I could help recollecting his haste?”  The name of this gay and
gallant ambassador had been  (wrongly,  perhaps)  connected by
scandal with that of the handsome Lady Craven,  who is better
known as the Margravine of Anspach.  She wrote two of the
vainest volumes  (in every sense of.  the word),  in an attempt to
prove that she was the most attractive,  clever,  accomplished,
amiable,  and innocent woman ever born,  and afflicted with as
unkind a set of relations as ever were.  The Margravine describes
De Guignes as being  “  the best flute-player sho ever heard,”  and
adds that his  “taste in music was exquisite.”  He had been sent
to Berlin as ambassador to another flute-player,  Frederick II,  to
whom he is credited with giving a hint that his playing of the
flute was bad enough to drive him out of the room.  This was in
well-merited repartee to an impertinent speech of Frederick’s.
That King said to him,  “What does the King of France do
when he wishes to get rid of de Guignes?”  The Count replied,
“The King,  my master,  unfortunately,  does not play upon the
flute.”  De Guignes was atypical French noble of the time before
the taking of the Bastille.  Though he had not a sous,  he would
notbeemployedbyanygovernment afterthe Revolution.  Madame
de Boufflers,  and others among his old friends,  lodged and maintained him.

After the break,  we find Rauzzini speaking.]

- “Ah!  je suis au desespoir que je ne puis pas.”  “  Je

le suis,  moi!”  cried I,  “de ne vous pas entendre.”  Sukey
joined us,  and we went on with a sort of half petition.  He
assured us that he himself suffered most;  that nothing made
him so unhappy as to be where there was a harpsichord,  and
musical people,  and not to be employed.  But he promised
that he would come again some other time.  When l we

FRANCES BURNEY

U75]

ii5

asked.  “  O !  ”  cried he,  “  quand M.  Bortii voudra ,  et lors,
je chanterai toute la soiree.”

He said he had dined at Gabrielli’s.  “  Comment se porte-
elle?”  cried Lady Edgecumbe.

“Fort bien,  Madame.”

“Fort bien?  Je suis bien fachee,  done!”

“Comment,  done?”  cried Rauzzini,  surprised.

She explained herself by saying she was sorry she could
[be well,]  and not sing better.

Lord Edgecumbe,  who is by no means at his ease in
French,  but who seems to love any thing ridiculous,  took
great pains to tell Rauzzini of the train that attended
Gabrielli as she left the Opera House.  After relating the
ceremony, — when he came to speak of the servants carrying the train ,  and un autre pour le petit chien, — Rauzzini
cried,  “  et un autre pour le peroquet,  et un autre pour le
singe.”

“  But,”  returned Lord Edgecumbe,  addressing himself to
Lord Ashburnham,  “only think,  My Lord!  her lap-dog was
carried in a muff,  by a servant,  instead of being carried in a
Gentleman's hat l Now,  was not that enough to put any
woman out of humour?”

Lord Barrington made up to Rauzzini,  and hinted his
desire of hearing him in a little air.  He explained to him
that he dared not sing,  as he had suffered so much from
straining his voice the preceding evening at the Opera
House;  he always exerted himself to the utmost of his
power,  “  moi,  je respecte le publique,  milord.”  When he
was going he turned to me and said he would not disturb
my father who was then engaged,  but would leave with me
his best compliments to him.  We pressed him to stay,  but
he said he should go immediately to bed,  to nurse his cold.

When all the company was gone,  but the Lords Sandwich and Barrington,  and the Baron and Baronness Deiden,
Lord Sandwich expressed a very great desire to hear the
Baronness perform.  My sister seconded the request.  “  O
yes,”  cried she smiling,  “  it will be very pretty indeed,  after
all this fine music,  for me to sit down and play a little
minuet !  ”

“  I could wish,  Dr.  Burney,”  said Lord Sandwich,  “  that
it were possible to prevail,  by any means,  with Madame

ii 6 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

Deiden,  who I have heard is the finest lady-player in
Europe.”

“I beg,  I beg,  my Lord!”  cried the Baronness,  waving
her hand.  Lord Barrington,  who is intimate with her,  went
up to her,  and offering to take  [the waving]  hand,  beg’d to
lead her to the harpsichord,  and was very urgent.

“Oh fie,  my Lord,”  cried she,  “so ill-natured!  I should
not think was you!  Besides,  you have so often heard me.”

“Madame Deiden,”  answered he,  “I wish you to play
[precisely]  because my Lord Sandwich has not heard you —
and because I have.  ”

The Baron then came forward,  and said to her,  she had
better play something,  than give so much trouble.  She rose
immediately,  but said with a half-smile,  “JVow this looks  ■’ust
as if I w as like to be so much pressed!  ”

She played an Overture of Abel’s and a minuet of Scho-
bert.  They were both slow and full of taste;  she played
them delightfully with so much expression and soul,  that she
did herself great credit,  and gave us great pleasure.  Indeed,
she is a very charming player.

Thanks and compliments over,  the two Lords soon departed;  but.  the Baron and Baronness stayed above half an
hour longer,  and made Mr.  Burney play a long lesson of
Schobert’s.

When they took leave,  the Baronness returned my father
thanks in the prettiest manner in the world,  for having remembered her ,  and for giving her so agreeable an evenmg.

[Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp.]

Tuesday Evening  [Dec.  6th].

Dear Dada,  I have this moment received your letter,  and
being most conveniently alone,  the family being at the
Sympsons,  I obey your commands of writing immediately.
You speak of Agujari just as she deserves to be spoke of,
with enthusiasm;  nay,  you express yourself with such a
justness and feeling at once,  that,  as I read,  for an instant,
you cheated my ears into an imaginary attention to her,  and
my mind's ear at least,  was once more pleased,  charmed,
soothed,  astonished and enraptured as when I actually heard

FRANCES BURNEY

'77 5l

117

her.  Why,  why did not you grant yourself the delight of
really feeling her incomparable excellence?  I can’t imagine
how you,  who never heard her,  can contrive to describe
her more to the life than any one who has!  But I impute
it to the remembrance of those great singers of former times
whose great talents must have borne so near an affinity to
hers.  Indeed from the moment that I heard her,  I was
struck with ideas exactly similar to those which your accounts of Carestine,  Farinelli,  &c.,  had given me.  However,  I frankly own,  I have no notion of being unjust to all
other peoples merit,  because Agujari united in her single
self every thing.  I regarded her as a prodigy  (which M.
Colla called her),  and therefore by no means shut my ears
or my heart from receiving pleasure from those who are not
super-natural.  Nevertheless,  though not against her,  I can
never dispute that I was most abominably disappointed in
Gabrielli,  who is,  notwithstanding,  a singer of very great
merit.

I have received your last letter my dear Daddy.  You
have really half-shocked — and at the same time half flattered
me.  I had begun to write the moment I received your first
letter,  but was interrupted,  and have had no opportunity
since;  for at this cold season,  when there is no writing in a
fireless room,  it is by no means easy to find times for letter
writing,  where three or four sheets are to be filled.  I will not
now,  however,  rest till I have answered all my promise and
your desire.

So now back to our first concert.  I must trace back the
circumstances in my memory to the best of my power.  I
left off before the arrival of the Prince:- — so now — Enter his
Highness,  attended by a Russian nobleman and followed by
General Bawr.

.The Prince is another Mr.  Bruce,  being immensely tall
and stout in proportion.  He is a handsome and magnificent
figure.  His dress was very superb.  Besides a blue Garter
he had a star of diamonds of prodigious brilliancy;  he had
likewise a shoulder knot of the same precious jewels ,  and a
picture of the Empress hung from his neck,  which was set
round with diamonds of such magnitude and lustre that,
when near the candle,  they were too dazzling for the eye.

1 1 8

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i775

His jewels,  Dr.  King says,  are valued at above  ,£100,000.
He was extremely gracious and polite,  and appeared to be
addicted to pleasantry.  He speaks very little English but
knows French perfectly.  He was received by my father in
the dining room.  The library,  where the music was,  was so
crowded,  he only shewed himself at the door,  where he
bowed to Mr.  Chamier,  who had met with him elswhere.

I felt myself so dwarfish by his high Highness,  that I
could not forbear whispering Mr.  Chamier— “  Lord,  how I
hate those enormous tall men!”  “He has been less unfortunate,”  answered he,  archly,  “elswhere!  that objection has
not been made to him by all ladies.”  I knew he meant the
Empress,  but by no means desired a conversation on the
subject,  and told him that I only hated them because they
made me,  and such as me,  look so very insignificant.  You
may be sure his gallantry would by no means subscribe to
this speech,  which was followed by the usual style of small
talk.

Lord Bruce rose and bowed very respectfully to the Prince,
and quitting his seat to make way for him went to the further
end of the room.  “Ah!”  cried Prince Orloff  “milord me
fuit !  ”  Mr.  Brudenal then offered his seat to his Highness,
but he would not accept it,  and declared that if he disturbed
any body he would immediately retire: — he desired him
therefore to immediately re-seat himself,  and when Mr.
Brudenal demurred ,  he said,  with a laugh,  (in answer to
Mr.  B.’s pressing him to take his seat)  “  Non,  non,  Monsieur,  je ne le veux pas,  absolumeni,  je suis opiniatre,  moi!
je ne le veux pas!  Je suis un peu comme Messieurs les
Anglois !  ”  He gained his point,  and the Prince at last
squatted himself on the corner of a form,  just by Susey,
who,  as he seemed to shut her in,  he called his petite
prisonni'ere.  Mr.  Chamier,  in a whisper,  said — “  I wish Dr.
Burney would have had Omiah here,  instead of Prince
Orloff!  ”

The grand duet of Miithel was then played.  Added to the
applause given to the music,  everybody had something to
say upon the singularity of the performers being man and
wife.  Mr.  Boone said to me — “  See what a man and his
wife can do together,  when they live in harmony l”  “O,
Dr.  Burney,”  cried Lady Edgecumbe,  “  you have set me

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

1 19

a madding.  I shall never bear any other music!”  Lord
Bruce,  turning to Prince Orloff,  told him the performers
were mari et femme.  The Prince seemed surprised,  and
walking up to Hetty made her many compliments,  and expressed his wonder that two such performers should chance
to be united;  and added — “Mat's,  qiia produit tant d' Harmonic  ?  ”  “  Rien,  Monseigneur ,”  answered Hetty,  laughing,
“  que trois enfans She vows she was irresistabiy led to
make this queer answer at the moment,  but was sorry afterwards,  for the Prince laughed immoderately;  and went immediately to Lord Bruce,  and repeated ce que Madame avoit
dit,  with many droll comments and observations,  such as
that such an harmonious secret should be communicated to
the foreign academies;  that it was of consequence to natural
philosophy,  &c.,  &c.  Mr.  Harris said he rejoiced,  in these
degenerate days,  to see such Harmony in married people.
“  Your father,”  said the Dean of Winchester,  to me  “has
been so obliging as to make my girls undertake something
of this sort;  but it will never do for sisters.  A man and his
wife cannot take too much pains to shine together ;  but as
to my girls,  even if they succeed,  they will,  in a few years,
be parted — at least they hope so!”  Mr.  Chamier joined
warmly in the chorus of praise.  He got himself into a little
snug recess behind a book-case,  and as he and I were engaged
in a very witty confabulation,  my mother came up to us,  and
said — “  So,  Fanny,  I see you have got Mr.  Chamier into a
corner!”  You must know,  I don’t. at all like these sort of
jokes,  which are by no means the ton,  so I walked away.
But Mr.  Chamier answered — “  No,  ma’am,  it is I that seek
out a corner near where the lady inhabits.”

General Bawr is a Hessian by birth,  though now Lieutenant
General a sa S.  M.  Hlmperatrice de Russia.  He wears two
stars;  he was in England formerly with the Hessian troops,
and at Winchester,  as the Dean informed us.  Mr.  Harris
told us that he was a man to be looked at!  for that he had
commanded during the Turkish war,  with so much courage
conduct and success,  that his valour and spirit could not be
too much admired.  He is tall and rather thin,  of a stern and
martial aspect;  but very well bred,  and very fond of music.
He speaks pretty good English,  but came in so late that he
missed both duets,  which he much regretted.

120 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [177s

The Baron de Demidoff was likewise extremely delighted
with the music.  He is very thin and long-nosed,  and has a
most triste and meager countenance.  When the duet was
over he clapped his hand on his snuff-box with great vehemence,  and called out with energy,  [in broken English]  —
“  Dis is so pretty as ever I heard in my life!  ”

Lady Edgecumbe was introduced to Prince Orloff,  whom
she had never met with before.  She entered into a flirtation
with him,  and was so courteous,  and made so many reverences,  that the Dean of Winchester  (who is very satirical)
observed afterwards that his diamonds and his Highness
together had quite penetrated her ladyship.  She invited
him with great earnestness and great humility,  to honour
her with a visit,  saying that though she had but a small
house,  she had a great ambition.  Indeed it must be owned
that it was great presumption in Lady Edgecumbe to invite
any person she met with at Dr.  Burney’s!  [Ha,  ha!]

The conversation turned again upon Gabrielli.  The Prince
said she had by no means sung so well as in Russia.  General
Bawr declared that if he had shut his eyes,  he should not
have known the Gabrielli !

I forget whether I told you of Gabrielli’s train as she quits
the Opera House of a Saturday night?  Take it now,  however,  as Lady Edgecumbe told it.  “  First goes a running
footman;  then the sister;  then the Gabrielli;  then a page
to hold up her train;  then a footman;  and then a man out
of livery with her lap dog in her muff!  ”

“But,”  cried Mr.  Brudenal,  very drily,  “where is Lord
March all this time?”

“  O,”  answered Lady Edgecumbe,  “  he ,  you know,  is Lord
of the Bedchamber.”

Lady Edgecumbe being obliged to shew herself at Lady
Harrington’s retired soon after the last duet.  Mrs.  Brudenal
was going with her,  but as she looked very soft and good
natured,  I ventured to ask her to favour us with another
song,  and though her cloak was on she was so obliging as to
return.  She sung much better than at first,  and,  for all Mr.
Chamier,  is a very good lady singer,  and such a one as is
not very frequently heard.

When the room was a good deal thinned Mr.  Harris told
me he wished some of the ladies would express a desire of

FRANCES BURNEY

121

1775]

seeing the Empress's picture nearer.  “  I,  you know,”  said he,
“as a man cannot,  but my old eyes can’t see it at a distance.”  I went up to Dr.  King and made the request to
him.  He hesitated some time,  but afterwards hinted the
demand to General Bawr,  who boldly made it to the Prince.
His Highness laughed,  and with great good humour,  desired
the General to untie the picture from his neck,  and present
it to us;  and he was very facetious upon the occasion,  desiring to know if we wanted any thing else?  and saying that if
they pleased,  the ladies might strip him entirely !  Not very
elegant,  methinks,  his pleasantry!  When we got it there was
hardly any looking at the Empress for the glare of the diamonds.  Their size is almost incredible.  One of them,  I am
sure,  was as big as a nutmeg at least.  When we were all satisfied it was returned,  and the Prince,  who most graciously
made a bow to,  and received a curtsie from,  every one who
looked at it.

Well— and now,  my dear Daddy,  I think I have told you
enough of this evening,  which was indeed a most agreeable
one,  and replete with matter.  Now as to the last concert,
which you desire an account of,  I have not so much to say;
but take it as it was.

It was given in honour of his Excellency the Count de
Guignes,1 at the request of Lady Edgecumbe,  who talked so
much to him of the Duet ,  that he expressed a great desire
to hear it.  I think I will introduce the company,  which was
very select,  in the same way as before,  viz.,  as they introduced themselves to us.1

And,  first,  Enter the Earl of Ashburnham.  He is just
made Groom of the Stole and First Lord of the Bedchamber,
and has a gold key hanging from his pocket.  He is a thin,
genteel man,  perfectly well-bred,  attentive,  and elegant in his
manners.

Next,  Enter Lord and Lady Edgecumbe.  Lord Edgecumbe is short and squabby,  he is droll and facetious,  and
never easy but when joking.  Lady Edgecumbe expressed
tierself in the most civil terms of thanks for my father’s
making this party at her desire. — “  I am particularly obliged
:o you,  Dr.  Burney,  for giving your time to my friends,”  &c.

1 This name is found also as de Guisnes and de Guines.

122

THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

Enter his Honour ,  Mr.  Brudenal.  Enough of him before.

Enter Signor Rauzzini.  Every eye brightened at his entrance.  He looked like an angel.  Nothing can be more
beautiful than this youth.  He has the compaction of our
Dick. — the very finest white and red I ever saw:  his eyes
are the sweetest in the world,  at once soft and spirited :  all
his features are animated and charming.  I am extremely
pleased to find that he gains ground with the public daily.
His friends encrease every opera night;  the more they hear
the more they like him,  especially as at his first appearance
he had the disadvantage of a terrible cold.  Mr.  Burney and
Hetty are grown of late quite enraptured with him.

“Avez vous une Assemblee chez vous tous les Di-
manches?”  cried he,  to my father.  “  Je viendrai une autre
fois quand je pourrai chanter.”  Only think how we were
let doivn!  “  Une autre fois!”  cried Hetty;  “Line autre
fois !  ”  echoed Susey ;  “  Une autre fois !  ”  still more pathetically echoed your humble servant.1

Mr.  Brudenal soon after took Rauzzini aside to concert
measures relative to his benefit.  After which Lord Edge-
cumbe hurried in a droll manner up to Rauzzini to tell him
of Gabriella’s ceremony on leaving the Opera House — though
to be sure he must know most of that matter himself.  Lord
Edgecumbe speaks but indifferent French and referred every
now and then to Lord Ashburnham in English.  When he
had told the whole parade,  and came to  “  apres cela,  un
valet,  et puis,  un autre avec le petit chien,”  Rauzzini called
out — “  Et puis,  un autre pour un singe,  et un autre pour un
perroquet!  ”  “  But,”  added Lord Edgecumbe,  to Lord Ashburnham,  “  last night,  the dog was carried — only think how
horrid ! — by a woman in a handkerchief,  instead of a gentleman in his hat!  Now,  my Lord,  was not that enough to put
any singer out of humour?”  Rauzzini said he had dined
with Gabrielli.  “Comment se porte-t-elle? ”  cried Lady
Edgecumbe.  “Fort bien,  Madame,”  answered he.  “Fort
bien? — je suis bien fachee!”  “Comment done?”  cried
he with some surprise.  She answered that she was sorry
Gabrielli should be well and not sing better.

1 This fashionable singer had been heard by Dr.  Burney at Munich,
in August,  177°-  “  The first singer in the serious opera here,  is Signor

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 123

Enter His Excellency,  Count de Guignes.  The Count,
when he first came from France,  was esteemed to be a remarkably handsome man;  but he is now grown so monstrous fat,  and looks so sleek,  that he is by no means an
Adonis to  .  .  .  He looks very soft ,  in the most extensive
meaning of the word,  c’est a dire in temper,  person,  and
head.  Remember,  I speak only of his looks.  However,  he
was very civil,  though silent and reserved.

Enter the Baron and Baronness de Deiden,  the Danish
ambassador and his lady.  The Baronness is one of the
sweetest creatures in this lower world,  if she is not one of
the most deceitful  ....  we liked her extremely at a
former concert which she honoured with her presence,  but
we liked her now a thousand times more.  Her face is
beautifully expressive of sense and sensibility.  Her manners
are truly elegant.  She is mild,  obliging,  accomplished and
modest.  Her figure is equal to her face,  being tall and
well made.

Rauzzini,  a young Roman performer,  of singular merit,  who has been
six years in the service of this Court ;  he is  ...  a charming singer,  a
pleasing figure,  and a good actor.”  At Brighton,  in 1779,  Fanny met a

very comic person,  who appears in her published diaries as Mr.  B - y.

This Mr.  Blakeney made light of Garrick,  and  “such poor beings,”  as
“actors and musicians,”  whom he classed with  “  barbers and dentists.”
On hearing Mrs.  Thrale and Fanny,  'fair females,  as he always calls
us  ...  .  speaking of Agujari ;  .  .  .  .  constrained himself from flying
out as long as he was able;  but upon our mentioning her having fifty
pounds a song,  he suddenly,  in a great rage,  called out — ‘Catgut and
rosin! — Ma’am,  ’tis scandalous!’  ....  ‘Oh,  fie !  fie !  I have not
patience to hear of such folly;  common sense,  common sense is against
it.  Why now,  there was one of these fellows at Bath last season,  a Mr.
Rozzini, — I vow I longed to cane him every day!  Such a work made
with him  !  All the fair females sighing for him  !  enough to make a man
sick!’”  We feel with Mr.  Blakeney when w'e learn that the musical
Miss Louisa Harris corresponded with Rauzzini,  slighted a proper lover
for him in a manner blamed at the time,  and if she changed from
Rauzzini,  it was only to  “  make a work  ”  about Pacchierotti.  In Lysons’s
book on the  “  Meeting of the Three Choirs,”  Rauzzini is described as
being  “a beautiful,  animated,  young man,  with a sweet,  clear,  and
flexible voice,  more than tw'O octaves in compass.”  About the time when
the  "fair females  ”  made themselves still more absurd about Pacchierotti,
Rauzzini withdrew from the opera,  and settled at Bath,  where he taught
music,  and with La Motte,  a famous violin-player,  revived,  with greater
brilliance,  concerts such as had been given by Linley and his family.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

124

[i775

The Baron is sensible and polite;  and,  what most pleased
me,  he seems extremely well satisfied of the merit and charms
of his sweet wife.  They both speak English.

The Baron made his compliments to my father with great
civility,  and the Baroness said — “  How good it was in you,
Sir,  to remember us!  We are very much oblige to you indeed!  ”  Then going up to my sister she said— “  I have heard
no music since I was here last!”  “For me,  Mrs.  Burney,”
added Lady Edgecumbe,  “  I think I have shewn how much
I was pleased by my eagerness to hear you again so soon.”

Mr.  Burney then went into the library and seated himself
at the harpsichord.  Every body followed.

Enter Lord Viscount Barrington.  To look at this nobleman,  you would swear he was a tradesman,  and by no means
superior to stand behind a counter.  He has by no means the
air noble ,  nor would you dream that he almost lives at Court,
and has a private conference with the king every other day.
But I suppose he has  “that within that passeth shew  ”!  .  .  .

This evening’s party was closed by the entrance of the
Earl of Sandwich,  of famous name and character.

I thought of Jemmy Twitcher immediately.  He is a tall,
stout man,  and looks as weather-proof as any sailor in the
navy.  He has great good-humour and joviality marked in
his countenance.  He went up to mama,  and said to her,
“  I have heard of your son,  Madam;  and expect him home
daily.”  1

1 Lord Sandwich is said to have been an active and zealous First Lord
of the Admiralty,  but he had played a vile trick on his boon companion,
Jack Wilkes,  who  “had written a parody on Pope’s  ‘  Essay on Man,’
entitled the  ‘  Essay on Woman,’  and had appended to it notes,  in
ridicule of Warburton’s famous Commentary.  This composition was
extremely profligate,  .  .  .  but  ...  to do Wilkes justice,  he had not
given  ...  his ribaldry to the world.  He had merely printed at a
private press a very small number of copies,  which he meant to present
to some of his boon companions,  whose morals were in no more danger
of being corrupted by a loose book than a negro of being tanned by a
warm sun.  A tool of the government,  by giving a bribe to the printer,
procured a copy of this trash,  and placed it in the hands of the ministers.

.  .  .  On the first day of the session of Parliament,  the book,  thus disgracefully obtained,  was laid on the table of the Lords by the Earl of
Sandwich,  whom the Duke of Bedford’s interest had made Secretary of
State.  The unfortunate author had not the slightest suspicion that his
licentious poem had ever been seen,  except by his printer,  and by a few

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

125

The Duets went off with their usual eclat,  Lady Edge-
cumbe vowing she would rather hear them than twenty
operas.  The Baron and Baroness were unaffectedly delighted.  The Ambassadour was gently pleased.  Lord Edge-
cumbe,  who had a bad cold,  almost choaked himself with
stifling a cough,  nevertheless his wife scolded him about it,
and said — “  What do you come here for,  my Lord,  coughing?  ”

Rauzzini was attacked by my father to vary the entertainment by a Rondeau de sa facon.  He supplicated ,  with uplifted hands,  to be excused,  declaring most solemnly that he
had,  having a dreadful cold,  been obliged,  the preceding
evening,  to exert himself so as to force his voice,  in consequence of which his throat was actually quite raw and
sore.  He protested that he should have the greatest pleasure

of his dissipated companions,  till it was produced in full Parliament.  .  .  .
The conduct of Sandwich  .  .  .  excited universal disgust.  His own
vices were notorious ;  and,  only a fortnight before he laid the  ‘  Essay on
Woman  ’  before the House of Lords,  he had been drinking and singing
loose catches with Wilkes at one of the most dissolute clubs in London.
Shortly after the meeting of Parliament,  the  *  Beggar’s Opera  ’  was acted
at Covent Garden Theatre.  When Macheath uttered the words  ‘  that
Jemmy Tivitcher should peach,  I own surprised me,’— pit,  boxes,  and
galleries burst into a roar which seemed likely to bring the roof down.”
— Macaulay.  Lord Sandwich fell into the hands of the poets Gray,
who abhorred his bad morals,  and Mason,  who detested his politics.
They caught up the nickname,  and preserved it in verse.  Gray’s lines —

“  When sly Jemmy T witcher had smugged up his face

With a lick of court white-wash,  and pious grimace  ” —

allude to the homage of hypocrisy which Lord Sandwich paid to virtue.
“  I never knew so cautious a man,”  said a Bishop.  Mr.  Cradock,  who
in his Memoirs makes the best of him that he can,  tells us that  “  no
man was more careful not to offend public decorum.”  This,  his love of
fun and of music,  his hospitable bent,  and his tincture of learning,  account for such men as Dr.  Burney,  Mr.  Cradock,  Owen Cambridge,
and Dr.  Solander frequenting his dinners at the Admiralty,  where they
met  “admirals,  sea-captains,  naturalists,  and philosophers.”  He gave
concerts,  plays,  and oratorios.  The dreadful tragedy of Miss Ray in
1779 put an end to even  “public decorum”  in his case,  and he afterwards lived in retirement.  Fate still pursues Lord Sandwich,  for,  on
looking out his name in  “  Woodward and Cates,”  we find him following
his great-grandfather Edward,  the Lord High Admiral  (Mr.  Pepys’  Earl
of Sandwich),  as  “Sandwich,  John Montagu,  4th Earl of  [Jemmy
Twitcher).  ”

126

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i77S

in singing to a select party of musical people,  if he was able,
and added that he came merely to shew his willingness,
though he ought to have been in bed.  In short he did not
absolutely refuse ,  but with so much earnestness and seeming
regret begged my father not to press him that he neither
could teize him,  or yet,  though very sorry,  be at all offended
at his declining to sing.  Lord Barrington made up to him
after this,  and hinted his wish to hear him thus in private.
He made the same apology,  and complained of the managers
for obliging him to sing whether well or ill,  which occasioned
his being obliged either to disgrace himself,  or force his
voice,  to his great detriment,  “  car,  pour moi,  milord,  je
respecte le publique et l’on ne m’a pas accorde le terns de
me remettre,  ainsi de jour en jour au lieu de me guerir
j'empire Lady Edgecumbe was then applied to to play,
but she absolutely refused,  and declared the Baroness to be
la premiere Dame pour la Musique.  The Baroness was therefore solicited;  but in vain.  Her invincible modesty made
her regard herself as a meer Miss player by Mr.  Burney and
my sister.

I longed irresistably to speak with Rauzzini,  and so when
I saw him stealing from the library back to the dining room,
I gathered courage to say — “  Eh,  vous ne chanterez pas,
Monsieur?  ”  He turned to me with the prettiest air imaginable,  and cried — “Ah!  je suis audesespoir!  mais je nepuis
pas ! —  ”

Sukey joined us and we had a very agreeable trio of about
a quarter of an hour,  in which he told us that nothing made
him so miserable as refusing;  that to be where there was a
harpsichord,  and musical people,  and to be idle,  made him
quite unhappy.  He protested that he would come some
other time with the greatest pleasure.  “  Mais quandl  ”
cried Sukey.  “  Quand M.  Borni voudra,”  answered he,  “  et
alors,  je chanterai toute la soiree.”  He said that he must
retire,  and immediately go to bed;  that he would not disturb my father,  but left his best compliments for him with
me.  And so he went,  leaving every body monstrously disappointed,  and nobody displeased .

My father is in want of the Phil.  Tran.,  and of Mr.  Twiss.
By the way,  that gentleman called here last week,  but saw
nobody.  He is iust returned from Ireland,  where,  he told

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 127

my father,  he went to be dipt in the Shannon,  to take from
him his too great mauvaise hontel

Have I made my peace with you or not?

After all,  you write such scraps in return for my volumes,
that I own it sometimes discourages and mortifies me,  to
think that so many pages of writing cannot afford any matter
for comment or observation.

My love to Kitty,  and believe me most affectionately and
faithfully yours

F.  Burney.

[Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney.]

Ches.  Dec.  14,  1775.

Dear Fanny,

Don’t imagine,  that,  because my letters are  (from necessity,  and poverty of matter)  shorter than yours,  I am
therefore insensible,  that the advantage is all on my side;
and that intrinsically a dozen of one sort would not weigh
against one of the other, — and in real value too,  as well as
size.  But pray remember,  that when my Lord condescends
to visit the humble curate in his tatter’d cottage,  he does not
expect a dinner like his own ;  but contents himself with the
parson’s ale,  and mutton and turnips,  and this too,  rather at
short allowance,  and all 1 with a real or feigned smile upon
his countenance.  Do you imitate my Lord,  for your two last
letters are such rich ones,  and have made such a weighty
ballance against me,  that you must either accept eighteen
pence in the pound,  or take out a statute of bankruptcy
against me.  You have produc’d such an illustrious assembly
of Princes,  and generals,  and lords,  and ladies,  and wits,  and
pictures,  and diamonds,  and shoulder-knots,  that I feel myself shrink into nothing at the idea of them, — nay,  you yourself that made one among them,  seem to be a little dazzled
at their glare. — You appear likewise to be somewhat touch’d
with the charms of the beautiful Rauzzini,  and perhaps  ’tis
well for you,  he did not add the magic of his voice to  ...  .

1 Here there seems to have been some equivalent to swalloiued ,  or
gulped,  which has been crossed out.

II.

E

128 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

It was impossible for me to be present,  at this scene of glory.
Your representation of it comes the nearest to the reality,
and puts one in mind of one of those delicious dreams,  that
give one in sleep what is not to be attained waking.  One
particular in your letter gave me a particular pleasure ,  I
mean Lord Sandwich’s intelligence that Jem is shortly expected;  you remember,  I hope,  that you and he are to come
to Ches.  before he sets off for his sweethearts on t’other side
of the globe. — ’Tis true Chesington is not in its glory at this
time o’  year,  but if a good fire,  hearty welcome,  sound wine,
and backgammon,  can in some measure attone for dirty and
vile roads,  come along.  There are two horses in the stable;
and when the sun deigns to peep out,  Jem and I can take
an airing.  Pray lay all this to heart,  and make something off
it.  .  .  .

Yours ever,

S.  C.

December 12th.

Bessy Allen is gone to Paris for the purpose of completing
her education and refining her manners.

She is gone under the care of Mrs.  Strange,  who will I am
sure be a mother to her,  and who has more good qualities
joined to great talents,  than almost any woman I know.  Mr.
Lumisden,1 her worthy brother,  is gone with them,  as is Miss
Strange,  with whom I parted with regret;  for,  though far
from a shining character,  she is a very estimable one,  and
had improved much on acquaintance.2 Mr.  Strange and

1 Andrew Lumisden  “  carried the sinews of war”  for Charles Edward’s
army in 1745;  afterwards,  he served the Stuart princes as secretary
for eighteen years.  In 1770,  he,  with two other Scotch gentlemen,  was
suddenly dismissed by Charles Edward,  under circumstances more
creditable to them than to their prince.  In 1773,  Lumisden ascertained
that he would not be brought to trial if he abstained from Jacobite intrigues on his return to Britain.  He had turned his mind to the antiquities of Rome,  on which he published a book.  He ended his days in
peace in his own country,  and saw,  without displeasure,  his brother-in-
law,  Strange,  receive knighthood from King George.

2 Of Mary Bruce Strange Mr.  Dennistoun writes :  “  She,  alone of her
father’s family,  inherited somewhat of his gifts.”  Mr.  Strange gave her
good drawing-masters in London.  In 1764,  at fifteen,  she tried at least
to win the drawing-prize of the Society of Arts,  At seventeen her father

I775J FRANCES BURNEY 129

Bell,  the second daughter,  went to Paris some months before.
The whole party dined with us the day before their departure,  and set off in excellent spirits.  We have had the
satisfaction of hearing they all arrived safe at Paris.

We miss Bessy very much;  but still rejoice that she is
gone;  for we hope much from the improvement of two years’
residence in Paris,  and she was unformed and backward to
an uncommon degree.

Before they went,  the whole Strange family recommended
very strongly to our acquaintance the two Miss Paynes,
daughters of Mr.  Payne,  the bookseller at the Meuse Gate,
saying they were pretty and motherless ,  and it would be benevolent to attend to them . The eldest is very pretty,

and about eighteen years of age;  she is modest,  gentle,  and
obliging.  The younger has I believe a deeper understanding;  but is neither so handsome nor so pleasing as her
sister.* 1  ....

took her to Paris for further instruction.  “Not until after her death,  in

1784,  did her family knowthat she had written much in prose and verse.”
Many years later,  her sister Bell,  who lived to a great age,  wrote,  “  To
know her was to love and admire her,  and many admirers and offers she
had.”

1 This was an important introduction,  as it led to the marriage of
“Jas.  Burney,  Esq.,  Capt.  R.N.,  and son of Dr.  Burney,  to Miss Sally
Payne,  d.  of Mr.  Thomas Payne,  bookseller,”  on the 6th of September,

1785.  (We may fairly guess that  “Sally  ”  was the prettier Miss Payne.)
Then Sarah,  daughter of Captain Burney,  married back among the
Paynes,  espousing John Payne,  of that firm which her father’s friend,
Charles Lamb,  would call  “ Pain and Fuss”  [Payne and Foss].  Mr.
Payne’s shop,  “at the gate of the lower Mews,  opening into Castle
Street,  Leicester Fields,”  was the great resort,  about one o’clock every
day,  of men of letters.  It was so small,  being  “an elbow-shed,  rather
than a shop,  lighted by a sky-light,”  that Mr.  Payne found the literary
folk very much in his way.  Among them were Tyrwhitt,  editor of
Chaucer;  Dr.  Percy,  of the  “Reliques”;  Bennet Langton,  Dr.  Heber-
den,  Mr.  Cracherode,  Sir John Hawkins,  George Steevens,  and many
more.  He had a good house hard by,  with  “  windows barricaded with
books.”  Another Payne,  Henry,  a brother of Dr.  Johnson’s publisher,
opened a very handsome shop,  almost opposite Marlborough House,  in
the hope of drawing off some of these loungers,  but found to his grief
that the force of habit still took them daily to  “the dark and encumbered shop.”  Mr.  Payne’s son,  and his partner,  Mr.  Foss,  left  “the
Meuse Gate  ”  for Pall Mall.  A brother of Mr.  Foss  (Edward,  a solicitor)
was the author of the  “  Lives of the Judges,”  in nine volumes,  and of
other works.  He was educated by Dr.  Charles Burney,  the younger,

1 3o THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

[Two letters from Miss Strange,  when living in Paris,  to Fanny
in London,  have been preserved.  One speaks of Mr.  Hutton,
who was in France,  and of his foolish attempt to negotiate
peace with Dr.  Franklin,  praising Hutton’s good intentions,  but
doubting that Franklin’s head was better than his heart.  Another asks Fanny to look for a parcel,  containing  “  a purchase  ”
of  “  uncustomed goods,”  which may have been left at Dr.  Burney’s
house.  If Fanny cannot send it by a gentleman to whom Miss
Strange has enclosed a note,  then will she ask any other gentleman going to Paris,  “  to put it in his pocket.”  People thought
little of evading the customs’  duties.  Lady Hales,  the widow of
a member for Dover,  (Jane Austen’s Lady Hales,  and Fanny’s
great admirer,)  thought it a pleasing and suitable way of showing
her delight in  “  Evelina,”  to send Fanny a smuggled chintz
gown-piece,  which she had bought at Deal among other contraband goods.]

December 14th.

To our great surprise,  who should enter late in the evening,  but Omiah.  How he found out the house,  I cannot tell,
as it is a twelve month since he was here before.  But he now
walks everywhere quite alone,  and has lodgings in Warwick.
Street,  where he lives by himself.  The King allows him a
pension.  He has learnt a great deal of English since his last
visit,  and can with the assistance of signs and action,  make
himself tolerably well understood.  He pronounces English
quite different from other foreigners,  and sometimes unintelligibly.  However,  he has really made a great proficiency,
considering the disadvantages he labours under,  which render his studying the language so much more difficult to him
than to other strangers,  for he knows nothing of letters ,  and
there are so very few persons who are acquainted with his
language that it must have been extremely difficult to have
instructed him at all.

He is lively and intelligent,  and seems so open and frank-
hearted,  that he looks every one in the face as his friend and
well-wisher.  Indeed,  to me he seems to have shewn no small
share of real greatness of mind,  in having thus thrown him-

who was,  by marriage,  bis uncle;  Dr.  Charles Burney and Edward Foss,
the elder,  solicitor,  having married sisters,  who were daughters of Dr.
Rose of Chiswick,  an eminent schoolmaster,  and editor of  “  The Monthly
Review.”  We have seen both Mr.  Payne and one of his sons,  called
“  honest Tom Payne,”  for distinction from the notorious Tom Paine.

FRANCES BURNEY

1775]

131

self into the power of a nation of strangers,  and placing such
entire confidence in their honour and benevolence.  As we
are totally unacquainted with his country,  connections,  and
affairs,  our conversation was necessarily very much confined;
indeed,  it wholly consisted in questions of what he had seen
here,  which he answered,  when he understood,  ve 'ey entertainingly.  Making w'ords,  now and then,  in familiar writing,  is
unavoidable,  and saves the trouble of thinking ,  which,  as
Mr.  Addison observes,  we females are not much addicted to.

He began immediately to talk of my brother.

“  Lord Sandwich write one,  two,  three  ”  (counting on his
fingers)  “  monts ago, — Mr.  Burney — come home.”

“He will be very happy,”  cried I,  “to see you.”

He bowed and said,  “  Mr.  Burney very dood man !  ”

We asked if he had seen the King lately?

“  Yes;  King George bid me, — ‘Omy,  you go home.’  Oh,
very dood man,  King George!”

He then,  with our assisting him,  made us understand that
he was extremely rejoiced at the thoughts of seeing again his
native land ;  but at the same time that he should much regret
leaving his friends in England.

“  Lord Sandwich,”  he added,  “  bid me,  ‘  Mr.  Omy,  you two
ships, — you go home.’ — I say  (making a fine bow)  ‘  Very
much oblige ,  my Lord.’  ”

We asked if he had been to the Opera?

He immediately began’ a squeak,  by way of imitation,
which was very ridiculous;  however,  he told us he thought
the music was very fine,  which,  when he first heard it,  he
thought detestable.

We then enquired how he liked the Theatres ;  but could
not make him understand us;  though,  with a most astonishing politeness,  he always endeavoured,  by his bows and
smiles,  to save us the trouble of knowing that he was not
able to comprehend whatever we said.

When we spoke of riding on horseback,  an idea entered
his head,  which much diverted him,  and which he endeavoured to explain,  of riding double,  which I suppose he has
seen upon the roads.

“First goes man,  so!”  (making a motion of whipping a
horse)  “then here ”  (pointing behind him)  “ here goes woman !
Ha!  ha!  ha!”

THE EARLY DIARY OF

132

[1775

Miss Lidderdale,  of Lynn,  who was with us,  and in a
riding-habit,  told him that she was prepared to go on horseback.  He made her a very civil bow,  and said,  “  Oh you,
you dood woman,  you no man;  dirty woman,  beggar woman
ride so; — not you.”1

We mentioned Dick to him,  who is now at Harrow School,
as we told him.  He recollected him,  and enquired after him.
When we said he was gone to school,  he cried,  “  O !  to learn
his book?  so!”  putting his two hands up to his eyes,  in
imitation of holding a book.  He then attempted to describe
to us a school,  to which he had been taken to see the
humours.

“  Boys here, — boys there, — boys all over!  One boy come
up, — do so!  ”  (again imitating reading)  “  not well; — 7nan not
like;  man do so!”  Then he showed us how the master had
hit the boy a violent blow with the book on his shoulder.

Miss Lidderdale asked him,  if he had seen Lady Towns-
hend lately?

“ Very pretty woman,  Lady Townshend!”  cried he;  “I
drink tea with Lady Townshend in one,  two,  tree days:  Lord
Townshend my friend,  Lady Townshend my friend.  Very
pretty woman,  Lady Townshend!  Very pretty woman,  Mrs.
Crewe!  Very pretty woman,  Mrs.  Bouverie!  Very pretty
woman,  Lady Craven !  ”

We all approved his taste;  and he told us that,  when any
of his acquaintances wished to see him,  “  they write,  and bid
me,  Mr.  Omy,  you come, — dinner,  tea,  or supper,  then I go.”

My father,  who fortunately came in during his visit,  asked
him very much to favour us with a song of his own country,
which he had heard him sing at Hinchinbrooke.  He seemed,
to be quite ashamed;  but we all joined and made the request
so earnestly,  that he could not refuse us.  But he was either
so modest,  that he blushed for his own performance,  or his
residence here had made him so conscious of the barbarity
of the South Sea Islands’  music,  that he could hardly prevail

1 Miss Lidderdale of Lynn,  who is now and then named in these
papers,  was,  perhaps,  a daughter,  certainly some relation of Dr.  .Lidderdale,  a Scotch physician,  who settled at Lynn in the earlier half of the
last century,  married a daughter of a still earlier Scotch physician)  Dr.
Hepburn)  who had migrated to Lynn,  and became Sir Robert Walpole’s
favourite doctor when Sir Robert was ill at Houghton.

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 133

with himself to comply with our request;  and when he did,
he began two or three times,  before he could acquire voice
or firmness to go on.

Nothing can be more curious or less pleasing than his
singing voice;  he seems to have none;  and tune or air
hardly seem to be aimed at;  so queer,  wild,  strange a
rumbling of sounds never did I before hear;  and very contentedly can I go to the grave,  if I never do again.  His
song is the only thing that is savage belonging to him.

The story that the words told,  was laughable enough,  for
he took great pains to explain to us the English of the song.
It appeared to be a sort of trio between an old woman,  a
young woman,  and a young man.  The two latter are entertaining each other with praises of their merits and protestations of their passions,  when the old woman enters,  and endeavours to faire Vaimable to the youth ;  but,  as she cannot
boast of her charms ,  she is very earnest in displaying her
dress,  and making him observe and admire her taste and
fancy.  Omiah,  who stood up to act the scene,  was extremely
droll and diverting by the grimaces,  minauderies,  and affectation he assumed for this character,  examining and regarding
himself and his dress with the most conceited self-complacency.  The youth then avows his passion for the nymph;
the old woman sends her away,  and,  to use Omiah’s own
words,  coming forward to offer herself says,  “Come!  marry
mel  ”  The young man starts as if he had seen a viper,  then
makes her a bow,  begs to be excused,  and runs off.

Though the singing of Omy is so barbarous,  hie actions,
the expression he gives to each character,  are so original and
so diverting,  that they did not fail to afford us very great entertainment of the risible kind.

#*####

December 30th.

My brother James,  to our great joy and satisfaction,  is
returned home safe from America,  which he has left in most
terrible disorder.  He is extremely well in health and spirits;
and has undergone great hardships,  which he has,  however,
gained both credit and friends by.  He has a brave soul,
and disdains all self-applause and egotism;  nevertheless he

134 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1775

has so honourably increased his friends and gained reputation,  that it is not in the power of his forbearance or modesty
to conceal it.  He is now in very good time for his favourite
voyage to the South Seas,  which we believe will take place
in February.

His friend,  Omiah,  whom he is to convoy home,  called
here again last week,  in company with Dr.  Andrews,  a
gentleman who speaks his language very well ;  which we had
reason to regret,  as it rendered Omiah far less entertaining
than on his former visit,  when he was obliged,  despite of
difficulties,  to explain himself as well as he could,  having no
assistant;  but now,  this Dr.  Andrews being ready as an interpreter,  he gave himself very little trouble to speak English.  Now,  that James is returned,  I doubt not his visits
will be repeated.1  ....

[A mutilated letter from Mr.  Crisp to Fanny belongs to the last
days of the year 1775.]

[Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney.]

“  There's no more faith in thee than in a stewed prune ;  no
more truth in thee than in a drawn fox  ;  a?id for womanhood ,

1 This poor fellow’s head was quite turned b'y notice from great people.
He sailed with Cook,  loaded with presents of all sorts,  down to a box of
toys,  plates,  mugs,  pots and kettles.  The toys pleased the savages ;  the
kitchen-ware was soon changed for hatchets and iron tools,  as being the
more useful.  He found his level;  having no rank in the island,  he was
of no account except with the lowest of the natives,  who drew from hitn
valuable gifts.  He gave Cook some trouble by his folly.  It seems that
he had expected while in England that this hunting him as a lion w'ould
lead to Cook’s replacing him in some property in the island of Ulietea,  of
which he had been dispossessed by conquest.  Cook left him in Hua-
heine,  where he was the only rich man in the island,  advising him to
propitiate the chiefs by presents,  and threatening them that he would
return if Omai was wronged.  Cook and Clerke,  to whom Omai had
given two or three dinners,  sailed on the 2nd of November,  1777,  sending Omai off in a boat,  weeping all the way to the shore.  About a fortnight afterwards they had a message from him to say that he was unmolested so far;  then he disappears,  dying about thirty months after the
departure of Cook.  Vancouver,  who sailed round the world  (1 790-5),
inquired into the death of Omai,  and reported his belief that it was
natural,  from a disease peculiar to those islands,  adding that he turned
out very vain and silly when he got back among his fellow-savages.

1775]  FRANCES BURNEY 135

Maid Marian may be the deputy's wife of the ward to thee.”  1
Besides you never could be better spared by that R[ogue]
your father than now;  as all his first vol.  is gone to the
press,  and what remains to be done lies between him and
the printers,  for surely my little friend Suzette can at any
time ,  much more at such a pinch,  make out a list of subscribers as well as yourself.  My love to her,  and beg her to
undertake it. —  Look ye,  Fanny,  at this time of year all our
comforts must lye within doors;  for you know how surrounded we are with clay and mud without — therefore at all
events you must come  (and no excuse to be admitted)  to
keep us alive,  and in spirits. — What can Jem do with a parcel of old Fograms,  without some other help to keep up the
ball? — -If any objection is made to this my proposal by the
superiors of the house,  on pretence that you cannot be spared,
produce this letter,  and tell that R[ogue]  yr father,  and that
honest woman,  your mother,  my friend,  Goody Bramble,
that I make it my request;  and make a point of it besides in
*  *  as for Jem,  give my love to him,  and tell

him I want to secure him before-hand;  that when he comes
to be an Admiral,  (which I am as sure he will be — and I am a
devil of a prophet — as that I now have a pen in my hand,)
and struts about,  and gives himself lordly airs,  I may tell
him,  times are much alter’d since I gave him such a thorough
licking-bout at back gammon.

Adieu,  yr affectionate Daddy,  S.  C.

Dame Ham and Kate long to see you both.

[These fragments put together,  form the lower half of the last
leaf of a letter.  Ten lines are made illegible by pen-strokes,  not,
we think,  those of Fanny — as a note of hers remains below the
effacement,  “  This prophecy was fulfilled,  very happily,  though
very late.”

In the  “  Navy List”  for 1814,  James Burney is described as a
retired captain,  with the rank of rear-admiral.]

1 First Part of King Henry IV,  act iii,  sc.  3.

136

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[1776

.  1776.

[LETTERS,  ETC.]

[An entry in Madame D’Arblay’s own  “  Notes of Persons and
Things in each volume,  1768-1779,”  gives the reason why no
journal for this year is extant.  “  1776,  9th.”  [diary.]  “The whole
of what was written of this year was upon family matters or
anecdotes,  and I have destroyed it in totality.”  On the sheet of
paper which encloses the few letters of this year she has also
written  “a letter or two preserved from and to Mr.  Crisp in
1776.”  [1 .]  “Mr.  Bruce and Masquerades.”  [2.]  “Mrs.  Ord,
with Dr.  Russel,  Mr.  (since Sir W.  W.)  Pefiys,  Mrs.  Smith,  Mr.
Burroughs,  Duchess of Devonshire in the Park,  and Omai.”
[3.]  “Agujari and Colla,  Mr.,  Miss,  and Keene Fitzgerald,  Mr.

Devaynes,  the Ords,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Nollekens,  Miss B - .  The

Correspondence of this year was chiefly on family subjects,  and
I have destroyed it.  F.  d’A.”  Of this list,  the first letter is missing,  nor has any letter from Mr.  Crisp been found except a halfsheet,  marked as No.  4 of his letters of this year,  more than half
of which is scored with ink so as to be illegible;  but one is in the
wrapper which is not on the list,  namely,  the first sheet of a letter
of her own  (July,  1776)  to Mr.  Crisp,  of which we give some extracts.  In this year Fanny’s letters are often sealed with an impression of a well-engraved female head.  It has a classical look,
but is called by Mrs.  Rishton  “your Madonna seal.”  We may
suppose that Fanny’s obduracy to Mr.  Barlow had been discussed
all through the family,  as we find Mrs.  Rishton writing that
“Jem  ”  (who was staying at Stanhoe)  and she herself had laughed
at the sight of a letter from Fanny with that seal,  “te-hee’d
heartily,  and made some apt and witty remarks,  but as I immediately scribbled them down in my common-place-book,  to be
published with my miscellaneous and fugitives after my departure,
1 hope you’ll excuse my giving them here.”]

[Some Extracts from a letter from Miss Burney to Mr.
Crisp,  endorsed by him  “Ap.  5,  1776.”]

My dear Daddy,

I long to hear if you have got,  and how you like the
books.  I would have sent Montaigne,  but was afraid the

FRANCES BURNEY

1776]

137

parcel would have been too heavy to be safe only packed in
paper,  so they must wait till the next opportunity.

Our visit to Mrs.  Ord proved very agreeable.  The party
was small,  but select ;  consisting of Dr.  Russel,  who I have
mentioned at one of our Concerts; 1 Mr.  Pepys,  a man who,
to the most fashionable air,  dress,  and address,  adds great
shrewdness,  and drollery;2 Mr.  Burrows,  a clergyman who is
a wit ,  in a peculiar style,  chusing to aim all his fire at the
Ton ,  in which he sometimes succeeds very well; 3 Mr.  Wright,
a stupid man,  but one who was so obliging as to be generally
silent;  his wife,  who did not make him blush by her superiority;
Miss Wright,  who is rather pretty,  and very sensible and
agreeable;  Mr.  Ord,  the eldest hope of the family,  who is an
exceeding handsome youth,  and seems good natured and all
that;  Dr.  Mrs.  and F.  and S.  Burney.

O but,  I should have first mentioned Mrs.  Smith,  who you
may perhaps formerly have known,  as she was an intimate
friend of Mrs.  Greville’s.  She is very little,  ugly,  and terribly
deformed ;  but she is quick,  clever,  and entertaining.

Mrs.  Ord herself is almost the best mistress of a family I
ever saw;  she is so easy,  so chearfully polite,  that it is not
possible for a guest in her house to feel the least restraint.
She banishes all ceremony and formality,  and made us all
draw our chairs about a table,  which she kept in the middle

1 Dr.  Patrick Russel,  from Aleppo,  whom we met with Bruce in 1775*
He wrote an account of Aleppo.

2 Afterwards Sir William Weller Pepys,  brother of Sir Lucas Pepys,
M.D.  Sir William was called by Dr.  Burney,  Mrs.  Thrale’s  “Master
in Chancery,”  to distinguish him from  “  My Master ,”  the name given by
Mrs.  Thrale to her husband,  which had been caught up by Dr.  Johnson,
and all the intimate friends of  “  My Master  ”  and  “  My Mistress.”  Sir
William  (said Horace Walpole,  in pleasantry or malice)  had  “a nose
longer than himself.”  He gave,  as well as frequented,  Blue-Stocking
parties.

3 The Rev.  Dr.  Burrows,  rector of St.  Clement Danes in the Strand,
and of Hadley,  or Hadleigh,  “  on the other side of Enfield Chace,”  had,
according to Hannah More,  “a peculiar vein of wit,  a truly original
way of thinking,  a singular talent in education,  and an uncommon
felicity as an earnest and awakening preacher.”  Bozzy,  with Dr.  Johnson,  heard his sermon on Good Friday,  1 779j and gives some account
of it.  He was friendly with Mrs.  Boscawen,  Mrs.  Delany,  Mrs.  Chapone,
and others of the fashionable,  but serious,  “  Blues.”

1 38 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1776

of the room,  and called the best friend to sociable conversation.1

We stayed till near eleven o’clock,  and had neither cards,
music or dancing.  It was a true Conversatione.  Every body
went away well satisfied,  and returning thanks to Mrs.  Ord
for having been admitted to the party.  My attention was
given too generally and indiscriminately to all sides,  to enable
me to write you any of the conversation,  which I would
otherwise do.

Mr.  Bruce had a bad cold,  and was not there.  When we
took leave,  my father told Mrs.  Ord that it gave him great
pleasure to say,  that he knew two or three houses even in
these times,  where company could be entertained and got
together merely by conversation,  unassisted by cards,  etc.

“Such parties as Mrs.  Ord collects,”  said Mrs.  Smith,
“  cannot fail in regard to entertainment.”  “  And yet  ”
answered Mr.  Pepys,  “  I have known meetings where equal
pleasure has been proposed anch'expected,  and where the
ingredients have been equally good,  and yet the pudding has
proved very bad.”

“True,”  returned my father,  “for if the ingredients are
not well mixed ,  their separate goodness does not signify ;  for
if one is a little too sour,  and another a little too sweet,  or
too bitter,  they counteract each other:  But Mrs.  Ord is an
excellent cook,  and takes care not to put clashing materials
into one mess.”  ....

[Mr.  Burney,]  Hetty and I took a walk in the Park on
Sunday morning,  where among others,  we saw the young and
handsome Duchess of Devonshire,  walking in such an undressed and slaternly manner,  as,  in former times,  Mrs.
Rishton might have done in Chesington garden.  Two of
her curls came quite unpinned,  and fell lank on one of her
shoulders;  one shoe was down at heel,  the trimming of her
jacket and coat was in some places unsown;  her cap was

1 Mrs.  Ord was a woman of social distinction,  who did not quite
belong to the  “  Bas bleus,”  but visited,  and received them,  and had the
art of mixing them skilfully with those of other sets,  without incurring
the ready sneer of Horace Walpole at  “  Mrs.  Montagu and her Moen-
ades,”  “  Mrs.  Vesey and her Babels or Chaos,”  and the scientific
“  Saturnalia  ’’  of Sir Joseph Banks panny has written on this letter
“  F.  B.’s first visit to Mrs.  Ord.”

1776]  FRANCES BURNEY 139

awry;  and her cloak which was rusty and powdered,  was
flung half on and half off.  Had she not had a servant in a
superb livery behind her,  she would certainly have been
affronted.  Every creature turned back to stare at her.  Indeed I think her very handsome,  and she has a look of
innocence and artlessness that made me quite sorry she
should be so foolishly negligent of her person.  She had hold
of the Duke’s arm,  who is the very reverse of herself,  for he
is ugly,  tidy,  and grave.  He looks like a very mean shopkeeper’s journeyman.1

Omai,  who was in the Park,  called here this morning,  and
says that he went to her Grace,  and asked her why she let
her hair go in that manner? — Ha,  Ha,  Ha! — Don’t you
laugh at her having a lesson of attention from an Ota-
heitan?  ....

My dearest Sir,

Your ever affecte F.  B.

[Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp.]

July  —  76.

Now really,  my dear Daddy,  this is prodigiously curious!
— Was it me ox you who should first sh signs of life?  Does
the traveller ,  or the fixed resident expect reasonably the first

1 Perhaps Gainsborough and Reynolds made Georgiana,  Duchess of
Devonshire,  a beauty.  Wraxall says that  “her hair was not without a
tinge of red;  and her face,  though pleasing,  yet had it not been illuminated by her mind,  might have been considered as an ordinary
countenance.  Descended in the fourth degree lineally from Sarah
Jennings,  the wife of John Churchill,  Duke of Marlborough,  she resembled the portraits of that celebrated woman.”  Of William,  Duke of
Devonshire,  whom she married willingly,  at seventeen,  her own distant
relation,  Mrs.  Delany,  says:  “  She was so peculiarly happy as to think
his Grace very agreeable.  The Duke’s intimate friends say that he has
sense,  and does not want merit, — to be sure the jewel has not been
well-polished:  had he fallen under the tuition of the late Lord Chesterfield,  he might have possessed les Graces,  but,  at present,  only that of
his Dukedom belongs to him.”  Wraxall confirms his having sense,  and
even learning,  although  “constitutional apathy formed his distinguishing characteristic.”  For Fanny’s opinion of this Duchess when she met
her in 1791,  see the fifth volume of her later diary.

i4o THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1776

letter?  Besides,  till you issue your orders,  and give me a few
hints,  I don’t know what to write about,  further than a bill
of health — which take as follows: —

My father is charmingly.  My mother still very weak,  but
acknowledges herself to be better.  She is now at Lynn.  As
to the destination of the family for the rest of the summer,  I
am even yet in the dark,  and cannot give you any intelligence.

But the great Man of Men is your friend James,  who is
now,  in fact and in power ,  Captain of his ship,  though,  alas !
not in honour or profit.  The case is,  Captain Clarke has
obtained permission to stay some time longer in town,  to
settle his affairs,  and in the hope of profiting by some Act —
that I don’t very well understand — concerning debtors.  He
has surrendered himself,  and is now actually in the King’s
Bench.1 An order has been sent from the Admiralty to our

1 Captain Cook embarked on the 12th of July,  1776.  After Cook
was slain by the natives of Owhyhee on the 14th of December,  1778,
James Burney was transferred to Cook’s ship,  the  “  Discovery,”  as first
lieutenant.  On his return,  in 1780,  we find Fanny writing:  “Mr.
Thrale,  I believe,  is gone this day to the  ‘  Discovery,’  to see Jim on
board.  Dr.  Johnson also intends visiting him in his ship.  And he has
an invitation to Streatham,  whither he means to accompany me when I
go next.”  We also find Dr.  Johnson wondering at  “  the gentle and
humane manners  ”  of James Burney,  after he had  “  lived so long among
sailors and savages.”  In 1803,  Captain Burney began to publish his
“Chronological History of Discoveries in the South Sea,”  in fivevolumes,
4to,  1803-1817.  On the iSth of November,  1803,  Southe"y wrote to his
friend Rickman,  “  I am manufacturing a piece of Paternoster Row goods,
value three guineas,  out of Captain Burney’s book;  and not very easy
work,  it being always more difficult to dilate praise than censure.”
Southey and Captain Burney had a common friend in Mr.  Rickman,  the
Secretary to the Speaker of the House of Commons.  In June,  1804,
Southey tells Coleridge of a dinner at Mr.  Sotheby’s where he met some
“lions,”  among whom was Dr.  Charles Burney,  the younger,  who,
“after a long silence,  broke out into a discourse upon the properties of
the conjunction Qrta/n.  Except his quamical knowledge,  which is as
profound as you will imagine,  he knows nothing but bibliography,  or the
science of title-pages,  impresses,  and dates.  It was a relief to leave
him,  and find his brother,  the Captain,  at Rickman’s,  smoking after
supper,  and letting out puffs at one corner of his mouth,  and puns at the
other.”  In 1808,  Southey writes that  “  the new Review  ”  (“  The Quarterly  ”)  “  is to appear in April.  Among the persons who are calculated
upon to write in it there are Frere,  G.  Ellis,  Heber,  Copleston the
Oxford Poetry Professor,  Miss Baillie,  Sharon Turner,  and Captain

1776]  FRANCES BURNEY 141

Lieutenant to carry the ship himself to Plymouth.  And
further of his affairs I know not myself,  nor whether he is
yet sailed nor any thing about him.  We have never seen his
sweet face since the last day that I saw yours;  and that
glorious confusion to which you was a witness,  was,  I presume,  meant by way of a tender farewell of the house.  He
was stopt in the Portland Road,  by contrary winds,  and took
that opportunity of writing to my father.  In his letter,  though
he clumps compliments,  &c.,  to all ,  the only person he
mentions by name is yourself.

Saturday,  July 27.

O dear, — O dear, — O dear!  I was unfortunately interrupted after writing the above,  which I began the moment I
received your letter; — and after that,  I had an inflammation
in my eyes,  which has almost incapacitated me from using
them,  and indeed they are still so weak,  that any exertion of
them gives me a good deal of pain.  But indeed,  I am now
„quite ashamed to write at all; — and had I any reasonable
hope of seeing you,  I would defer my apologies and my
pleadings till that time, — but things seem so ordered,  that I
believe I shall not be allowed that happiness for a long time,
and therefore,  after some very serious confabs between me
and my conscience,  have taken courage,  and resolved to try
to make my peace with my dear,  and I fear much displeased
Daddy.  O that I could devise any means or ways or methods
by which to atone for my dilitariness !  Will you accept from
me two letters every week  ’till I have made up for the lost
time?  I know I must not expect any answer as yet — and
therefore I will promise myself your compliance with this
condition,  which to me is not a very pleasant one,  as I must
own letter-writing gives me no manner of diversion,  save
merely as the means of procuring returns.

My mother came from Lynn and Stanhoe last Saturday,
so well,  aparently,  that no co7nmon eye could discern she had
been ill.  However,  she did not give up her Bristol scheme,
and this very afternoon,  she and my father set off for that

Burney.”  Poor Captain Clerke died on this voyage;  this led to Lieutenant Burney’s promotion to be first lieutenant of the chief ship,  the
“  Resolution.”

THE EARLY DIARY OF

142

[1776

place — and with them went Charlotte,  who is to accompany
my mother to Wales,  where she proposes spending near two
months.  That dear little girl went so much a contre coeur,
that I was quite sorry and concerned for her.  I believe she
would willingly and literally have parted with a little finger
to have been left behind with me,  and no wonder ! — for
she is never spoke to,  never noticed at all,  except as an
errand runner:  in which capacity,  I am apt to suspect,  she
now travels,  as she is by no means a favourite;  however
while my father is of the party,  who leaves them at Bristol,

I hope she may be happy.  I should myself have gone,  but
for the difficulty of placing Charlotte and Sally anywhere
properly.  And so I am now quite alone, — at large and at
liberty !— Hetty and Susy remain at Worcester till September.
I have nobody but little Sally for a companion.  But I have
no dread of ennui,  nor fear of idleness or listlessness.  I am
going  (as soon as I have finished this letter)  to study Italian ,
which I can do alone at least as easily as I did French.
However,  I believe I shall be rather more engaged,  than less;-
for since my intended situation has been known,  I have received more invitations,  &c.,  than I ever did before,  and in
particular,  my good old friend,  Mr.  Hutton,  no sooner heard
of my summer destination,  than he made me a most earnest
invite to visit his wife; — which he never before did to any of
the family.  The Miss Paynes,  who are really sweet girls,  and
very great favourites with me, — will almost live with me,  for
they are so willing to come here,  that they want nothing but
asking to be with me for ever,  and they serve admirably to
keep up my spirits,  and excite all sorts of nonsensical sport
and jollity.  Indeed,  but for them,  I believe I should be apt
to confine 1

*  ^  *  *  *  *  *

[A portion of a letter from Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney.]  2

My dear Fanny,

Septr.  1776.]

....  What?  Do you believe I have drop V your correspondence?  and ask,  what you have done  ? — in answer to this

1 The rest of the letter is missing.

2 The greater parr of inis ieuer defaced by pen-strokes.

1776]

FRANCES BURNEY

143

strange quaery this is my reply,  and that in the sincerity of
my heart — there are not above two or three people in the
world that I love so well as Fanny Burney — better none —
whose correspondence I would prefer,  not one — My sister
Gast,  is pretty much of the same way of thinking;  for she
has known her a long while,  tho’  seen her so lately. — .  .  .  .
I have liv’d long enough in the world,  to see the futility of
professions;  and the instability of characters,  humours,  and
what are called friendships: — in a course of years the commerce of that world commonly renverses all these things
topsy turvy;  if that change should happen in Fanny Burney,
it is not likely at my time of life,  I should live to see it,  so I
am glad to catch the present moment,  and enjoy it,  while

it lasts . Adieu,  my dear Fanny.  Your affectionate

Daddy,

S.  C.

Gast and Ham and Kate send their love.

[These fragments of a letter from Mr.  Crisp to Fanny were
apparently written in November,  1776.]

....  really concerned when you tell  .  .  .  colds and
cuppings,  and still continuing unwell ;  and yet he 1 must go
out,  instead of nursing at home — this money hunting is a
cursed thing. — I know too well how it must be with him,  by
myself — for if I was starving I could not turn out for bread,
nor,  in my present state of health,  shift my quarters,  and lye
out  [of]  my bed,  ’tho the house were in danger of falling.
’Tis true he is not a quarter so bad as I am;  buCstill he
must feel what  ’tis to be forced out of doors to attend and
humour people he does not  ....

Thank you,  my dear Fanny,  for your conversation piece at
Sir James Lake’s.2 If specimens of this kind had been preserved of the different Tons that have succeeded one another
for twenty centuries last past,  how interesting would they
have been !  infinitely more so,  than antique statues,  bas-
reliefs,  and intaglio’s.  To compare the vanities and puppyisms
of the Greek and Roman,  and Gothic,  and Moorish,  and
Ecclesiastic reigning fine gentlemen of the day with one an-

1  [Dr.  Burney.]

2 This has not been found.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

144

[1776

other,  and the present age must be a high entertainment,  to
a mind that has a turn for a mixture of contemplation and
satire;  and to do you justice,  Fanny,  you paint well;  therefore send me more,  and more.

######

[A portion of a letter from Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp,
endorsed by him 2 Decr.  1776.]  1 2

■AS.  Jfr Jfc  -Sfc Jfc Jfc

7P  •7V'  ‘7V  *7T  '7V  '7V

The party consisted of Signora Agujari, — invited without
the least thought of her singing,  and merely as an auditor
herself.  She looked charmingly,  though horribly ill dressed,
in old court mourning,  by way of being quite in the fashion.

Signor Colla,  and his triste sister,  stupid as a post,  and
tired to death,  for she neither speaks French or English,  and
was condemned merely to look and be looked at all the
evening.

Mrs.  Ord,  a very charming woman,  of whom I have spoken
more than once."  Her daughter,  of whom ditto.  Mr.  Ord,  a
near relation,  a most agreeable,  well bred,  lively young man,
who is just returned from his travels,  and talked French and
Italian delightfully.  He is an enthusiast in music,  and seemed
to enjoy Agujari with a rapture little short of what we felt
ourselves.

Mr.  Fitzgerald,  a hard featured,  tall,  hard voiced and hard
mannered Irishman :  fond of music,  but fonder of discussing
than of listening, — as are many other people who shall be
nameless.  Miss Fitzgerald,  his daughter,  as droll a sort of
piece of goods  (to use your expression)  as one might wish to
know.  She is good natured and sprightly,  but so unlike
other Misses of the present time that she is really diverting,
for she speaks her mind as freely and readily before a room

1 The first page of this letter has been made illegible.

2 Few were kinder to Fanny than was Mrs.  Ord,  who became her
“  chaperon,”  when one was needed,  after  “Evelina”  had caused her to
be invited to balls and parties for her very own sake ;  who conducted
her to Windsor,  to begin her court-service;  and,  when she was worn
out by illness,  took her on a pleasant journey of three months through
the south-west of England to restore her health.

1)76]  FRANCES BURNEY 145

full of company,  as if with only a single friend.  She laughs
louder than a man,  pokes her head vehemently,  dresses
shockingly,  and has a carriage the most ungain that ever was
seen.  Keene Fitzgerald is half a coxcomb and half a man
of sense;  now humble and diffident;  now satisfied and conceited;  and so much for him.  Mr.  Nollekens,  who is a jolly,
fat,  lisping,  laughing,  underbred,  good humoured man as
lives:  his merit seems pretty much confined to his profession,
and his language is as vulgar as his works are elegant.1 Mrs.
Nollekens,  his wife,  a civil,  obliging,  gentle sort of woman ;
rather too complaisant.2

1 In due time,  Nollekens  “  chopped out heads  ”  (as Dr.  Johnson said)
of Dr.  Burney,  Dr.  Charles Burney,  and Captain James Burney.  We
give,  as an illustration of this sculptor’s character,  a story told by
Lieut. -Colonel Phillips  (Dr.  Burney’s son-in-law)  to J.  T.  Smith,  keeper
of the p'rints and drawings in the British Museum.  Nollekens  “dropped
in  ”  at Dr.  Burney’s while Piozzi and Signora Corn were singing a
“  duettino  ”  accompanied by Domenica  (the lady’s husband)  on the
violin.  There was applause;  while it was lessening,  “Nolly”  called
out,  “  Dr.  Burney 1 I don’t like that kind of music.  I heard a good deal
of it in Italy,  but I like the Scotch and English music better.”  Dr.  Burney,
stepping forward,  said,  “  Suppose a person to say,  ‘  Well,  I have been
to Rome,  saw the Apollo,  and many fine works,  but for all that,  give me
a good barber’s block !  ’”  “  Ay,  that would be talking like a fool l  ”  rejoined the sculptor.  “Mrs.  Nollekens was a daughter of Saunders
Welch,”  who was beloved by Henry Fielding,  and by Dr.  Johnson.
Fielding,  whom he succeeded as police-magistrate,  called him  “my
friend,  Mr.  Welch,  whom I never think or speak of but with love and
esteem,”  and Dr.  Johnson wrote of him as  “  one of my best and dearest
friends.”  Mrs.  Nollekens,  now and then,  checked her  “  little Nolly  ”
(as she called him)  by reference to Dr.  Burney.  She  “  wished from her
heart that Dr.  Burney would come in just now!”  when  “  Nolly  ”  (as he
yearly did on May-day)  “kept time with his feet to the strumming to
which the milk-maids danced with their garlands before his parlour-
window.”  See for both of them J.  T.  Smith’s very entertaining  “Life
of Nollekens.”

2 Mrs.  Nollekens was a very lovely woman,  but her share of brains
seems to have been bestowed upon her able,  but rather odd,  sister
(Dr.  Johnson’s  “Miss Nancy”),  who knew seven languages,  and
travelled upon the Continent in man’s clothes,  with her hair in a bag,
and a sword by her side,  for her greater convenience and independence.
Mary Welch  (Mrs.  Nollekens)  was painted by Angelica Kauffman as
Innocence,  with a dove.  Smith makes out that Dr.  Johnson had had
“serious thoughts”  of marrying Mary Welch,  but this rests on the
authority of Mr.  Nollekens,  who said the doctor,  when  “  joked about  ”
Mrs.  Nollekens,  observed,  “Yes,  I think Mary would have been mine,

1 46 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1776

Governor Devaynes,* 1 and Mr.  Dudley Long:2 with these
two,  as I had no conversation,  I can say nothing.

Miss B. —  something ,  a sister-in-law of Mr.  Hayes of the
Pantheon :  a young lady quite a la mode , — every part of her
dress,  the very pink and extreme of the fashion ; — her head
erect and stiff as any statue; — her voice low,  and delicate,
and mincing; — her hair3 higher than twelve wigs stuck one
on the other; — her waist taper and pinched,  evidently; — her
eyes cast languishingly from one object to another,  and her
conversation very much the thing.  What was most pleasant,
this fashionable lady came in with Miss Fitzgerald,  who is so
exactly her opposite that they could never be looked at without having the difference remarked.  Mr.  Merlin,  Mr.  Burney,
and my sister.

O how we all wished for our Daddy when the Divine

if little Joe had not stepped in.”  This sounds like one of those jocosities
of Dr.  Johnson,  which were too often taken in earnest.

1 Bateson gives William Devaynes,  Esq.,  as M.P.  for Liverpool,
1775-80,  and adds that he was  “a Director of the East India Company.”  This was perhaps the  “Governor”  of the text,  who may also
be identical with Mr.  Devaynes,  the chairman of the East India Directors
(“a man who knows his own interest as well as most men,  and looks as
well after it”),  mentioned in 1793 in a letter from Richard Twining to
his brother Thomas.  There was also a Mr.  John Devaynes,  apothecary
to the King’s household,  whom Dr.  Burney met among Dr.  Johnson’s
friends.

2 This was the son of Charles Long,  of Longville,  Jamaica,  and
Hurts Hall,  Saxmundham,  and of Mary,  heiress of Dudley North,  Esq.,
of Glenham Hall,  Suffolk,  nephew of Francis,  First Lord Keeper Guildford.  Dudley Long was M.P.  in several parliaments.  He assumed the
name of North in lieu of Long in 1789.  As it brings Sir W.  W.  Pepys
in with Mr.  Long,  we quote one of Dr.  Johnson’s rebukes to Mrs.
Thrale,  as recorded by Boswell.  “Mrs.  Thrale gave high praise to
Mr.  Dudley Long  (now North).  Johnson:  ‘Nay,  my dear lady,  don’t
talk so.  Mr.  Long’s character is very short.  It is nothing.  He fills a
chair.  He is a man of genteel appearance,  and that is all.  I know nobody who blasts by praise as you do :  for whenever there is exaggerated
praise,  everybody is set against a character.  They are provoked to
attack it.  Now there is Pepys;  you praised that man with such disproportion,  that I was incited to lessen him,  perhaps more than he
deserves.  His blood is upon your head.  By the same principle,  your
malice defeats itself;  for your censure is too violent.’”

3 The word  “  head ”  was first written,  but changed to  “  hair  ”  in after
days,  when ladies had ceased to have powdered  “  teles, ”  reared high
upon wire and cushions.

FRANCES BURNEY

1776]

147

Agujari said she would sing !  She was all good humour and
sweetness.  She sang— O,  Sir! — what words can I use? —
Could I write what she deserves,  you would come to hear
her,  let what would be the consequence.  O,  Mr.  Crisp,  she
would heal all your complaints, — her voice would restore
you to health and spirits,— I think it is almost greater than
ever, — and then,  when softened,  so sweet,  so mellow,  so
affecting!  She has every thing! — every requisite to accomplish a singer,  in every style and manner! — the sublime and
the beautiful equally at command!  I tremble not lest she
should not answer to you,  for she cannot,  cannot fail!  She
astonishes and she affects at pleasure — O that you could
come and hear her !  Is it impossible?  I die to have you enjoy
the greatest luxury the world can offer; — such to me — such,
I am sure,  to you,  would be the singing of Agujari !  Adieu,
dear Sir,  my love to Mrs.  Hamilton and Kitty.

*  Ever most truly yours,  F.  B.

148

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i777

1 777

[On the wrapper of this year’s letters,  are the words —

“  Parts of Letters to and from Mr.  Crisp and F.  B.  in 1777.”

“First sight of Dr.  Johnson,  Mrs.  and Miss Thrale,  and Mr.
Seward.  N.B. — This is the only letter of my own I have
preserved of this year  ....  for reasons given in the preceding.”

The letters destroyed in 1776 were  “on family subjects.”  On
another wrapper,  which has once been used for these letters of
1777,  a letter is mentioned,  concerning  “Dr.  Johnson and Sir
Philip Jennings Clerke.”  No such- letter has been found.  We
believe that,  by mistake,  some account of a warm political dispute at Streatham,  in 1779,  between Dr.  Johnson and Sir P.  J.
Clerke,  was once misplaced in this cover,  that the error was
detected,  and the paper put into its proper place.  It is to be
found in the diaries already printed.  It will be observed on
reference to them that Sir Philip is described as if Fanny saw
him for the first time in 1779.  Pages are probably missing at
either end of the visits to Gloucester,  and to Westwood Park.
After that,  the names of Sir John Pechell,  Mr.  Pechell,  Miss
Pechell,  Miss Chambers and Miss Betty  [Chambers],  Miss
Jones,  and Dr.  Johnson of Worcester occur in Madame D’Ar-
blay’s notes,  but all concerning them is lost.

1777 was the year when the copying of the rough draft of
“Evelina”  had made such progress,  that the book is,  for the
first time,  obscurely hinted at in the letter to Susan of the 15th
of March,  and distinctly written of in the pages called the prelude to the Worcester Journal.  These detached introductory
pages are  (with exceptions enclosed in brackets)  in the handwriting of Fanny after her apprenticeship as copyist to her
father;  that is,  in clear,  easy,  and rather large characters,  distinct from the small running scrawl of her earliest diaries,  and
the less distinct and blacker writing of her old age.  “The
prelude  ”  may have been written as an introduction to the Bar-
borne Journal,  when that was given back to her,  after being
handed about by Susan and Mr.  Crisp to those who were to
be trusted,  as the Teignmouth Journal had been before it;  or,
it may have been added when her letters to Susan were returned to her.

The words and passages in brackets are much later.]

1777]

FRANCES BURNEY

149

[From Miss Burney to Miss S.  Burney.]  1

[Chesington.]

Your letter,  my dear Susy,  was a most acceptable regale
to me;  but I wish you would remember my so often repeated
request and entreaty,  to give me two for one,  which I could
plainly prove would be but justice and equity,  according to
the situations we are in;  but that I will not affront your
judgement by supposing you require my assistance for discovering what is so obvious.  I think you can’t much wonder
that Miss C.  is not fond of her morning’s amusement at our
house.  Upon my word,  I am ashamed to think of it.  I don’t
know which was worst the raspberry or the coffee;  but nothing of the refreshment kind seems palateable in Saint
Martin’s.  Pray,  when you see her next,  make my best compliments to her.  I die to hear the Vauxhall Mad Song;  I
have an idea of it,  that makes me almost mad,  that I missed
it.  However,  to recover my senses,  I must think of that
pretty couplet,  which you know,  of old,  is always a consolation to me,  namely,

“What is wishing?— wishing will not do;

We cannot have a cake, — and eat it too!”

A wise maxim,  Miss Susan,  and altogether as new and instructive as it is wise;  and moreover and above,  expressed
with no small poignancy of wit.  The turn at the end is truly
epigrammatic,  and makes my mouth water.  I can easily
believe Rauzzini has behaved in the same way he looks,  i.e.
like an Angel,  since you say so;  but I long to know the
particulars of a conduct sufficiently seraphic to have made
you usher him to his place among the Cherubim and Seraphim.
You say you have much more to say,  had you paper ; — surely
never before had any one the meanness to avow so stingy an
excuse!  However,  if you can’t afford to buy ,  why,  beg!  or,  if
you are too modest for that,  why,  steal;  for stealing can never
impeach your modesty ;  and that,  you know,  is a female’s
first recommendation,  since the very action itself,  far from

1 This letter has a London post-mark of March 15.

150 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

discovering any boldness,  manifests an internal diffidence of
being welcome to what is taken.

Now,  as I hope I have cleared up this point to your
satisfaction and to the utter extinction of all vulgar prejudices,  I entreat that I may never again hear so shabby an
apology.

We pass our time here very serenely,  and distant as you
may think us from the great world,  I sometimes find myself
in the midst of it,  though nobody suspects the brilliancy of
the company I occasionally keep.1 We walk,  talk,  write,
read,  eat,  drink,  thrum,  and sleep.  These are our recreations,
which for your better conception I will somewhat enlarge
upon.

Imprimis; — We walk:  The brightness of the sun invites
us abroad;  the tranquillity of the scene promises all the
pleasures of philosophic contemplation,  which,  “  ever studious
of rural amusement ,”  I eagerly pursue.  Mais,  helas !  scarce
have I wandered over half a meadow,  ere the bleak winds
whistle round my head ;  off flies my faithless hat;  my perfidious cloak endeavours to follow,— even though it clings
with well-acted fondness to my neck;  my apron,  my gown,
all my habiliments,  with rebellious emotion,  wage a civil war
with the Mother country !  though there is not an individual
among them,  but has been indebted to me for the very existence,  by which they so treacherously betray me  !  My shoes
too,  though they cannot,  like the rest,  brave me to my teeth,
are equally false and worthless;  for,  far from aiding me by
springing forward,  with the generous 2eal they owe me for
having rescued them from the dark and dusty warehouse in
which they were pent, — they fail me in the very moment I
require their assistance,  sink me in bogs,  pop me into the
mud,  and attaching themselves rather to the mire than to the
feet which guide them,  threaten me perpetually with desertion  ;  and I shall not be much surprised,  if some day when
I least think of it,  they should give me the slip,  and settle
themselves by the way.

Secondly; — We talk.  That you can do yourself ;  so I shall
not enter into a minute discussion of this point.

1 That of my Lords Orville and Merton,  Sir Clement Willoughby,
Lady Louisa Larpent,  Lady Howard,  etc.

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

151

Thirdly; —  We write;  that is thus:  Mr.  Crisp writes to
Miss Simmons;  Mrs.  Hamilton to the butcher;  and Miss
Cooke,  a list of clothes for the washerwoman;  and as to me,
— do you know I write to you every evening,  while the family
play at cards?  The folks here often marvel at your ingratitude
in sending me so few returns in kind.

Fourthly; — We read:  Mr.  Crisp pores over Crit.  Reviews
and Sir John Hawkens  (sic) ; 1 Mrs.  Hamilton,  the tradesmen’s bills;  Miss Cook,  her own Pocket-book or Ladies'
Memorandum ;  and I am studying against I return to town,
Le Diable Boiteux ,  which contains no few moral sentences,
proper for those who dwell in a great Metropolis.

Fifthly;  We eat:  There is something in this part of our
daily occupation,  too singular and uncommon to be passed
over,  without some particular notice and observation.  Our
method is as follows:  we have certain substances of various
sorts,  consisting chiefly of beasts,  birds and vegetables,  which
being first roasted,  boiled,  or baked  (N.B.  We shall not eat
raw flesh till Mr.  Bruce publishes his Travels),  are put upon
dishes either of pewter,  earthen-ware,  or china;  and then
being cut into small divisions,  every plate receives a part.
After this,  with the aid of a knife and fork,  the divisions are
made still smaller;  they are then  (care being taken not to
maim the mouth by the above offensive weapons)  put between
the lips,  where by the aid of the teeth the divisions are made
yet more delicate,  till,  diminishing almost insensibly,  they
form a general mash,  or wrad,  and are then swallowed.

I must continue my account of our Lives in my next.

Jt Ji.  JL Ji.  Ji.

-ft-  W TV TV TV*  *IS"

1 The  “General History of the Science and Practice of Music,”  in
five volumes,  quarto,  by Sir John Hawkins,  was published in the same
year  (1776)  as Dr.  Burney’s first volume of the  “General History of
Music.”  We find in Boswell’s  “Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides,”
August 20,  1773:  “Both Sir John Hawkins’s and Dr.  Burney’s  ‘History of Music’  had then been advertised.  I asked if this was not unlucky:  would they not hurt one another?  Johnson:  “No,  sir.  They
do good to one another.  Some will buy the one,  some the other,  and
compare them;  and so a talk is made about a thing,  and the books are
sold.’”

152

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i777

[From Miss Burney to Mr.  Crisp.]

[27th and]  28th March.

My dear Daddy,

######

My dear father seemed well pleased at my returning to my
time;  and that is no small consolation and pleasure to me.
So now,  to our Thursday morning party.1

Mrs.  and Miss Thrale,  Miss Owen,  and Mr.  Seward came
long before Lexiphanes .2 Mrs.  Thrale is a very pretty woman
still;  she is extremely lively and chatty;  has no supercilious
or pedantic airs,  and is really gay and agreeable.  Her
daughter is about twelve years old,  [stiff and proud,]  I
believe,  [or else shy and reserved :  I don’t yet know which].3
Miss Owen,  who is a relation,  is good-humoured and sensible
enough;  she is a sort of butt,  and,  as such,  a general favourite;
for those sort of characters are prodigiously useful in drawing
out the wit and pleasantry of others.  Mr.  Seward is a very
polite,  agreeable young man.4

1  “Thursday morning”  appears to have been the 20th of March,  as
Dr.  Johnson wrote thus to Mrs.  Thrale on the 19th:  “  Did you stay
all night at Sir Joshua’s?  and keep Miss  [Thrale]  up again?  Miss Owen
had a sight — all the Burke’s — the Harris’s — Miss Reynolds — what has
she to see more?  and Mrs.  Horneck,  and Miss.  You are all young,  and
gay,  and easy ;  but I have miserable nights,  and know not how to make
them better ;  but I shift pretty well a-days,  and so have at you all at
Dr.  Burney’s to-morrow.”

2  “  Lexiphanes”  was a name given to Dr.  Johnson by more people
than  “  an obscure fellow,  called Campbell,  a Scotch purser of a man-of-
war;  who,  as well for the malignancy of his heart,  as his terrific
countenance,  was called  ‘horrible Campbell.’  This fellow had abilities
for writing,  and in a small volume,  called  ‘Lexiphanes’  (1767),  endeavoured to turn many passages in  ‘  The Rambler  ’  and interpretations
in the dictionary,  into ridicule.  He also censured Akenside,  hoping one
or both would answer him,  but neither did.”  Fanny,  however,  most
likely alluded to what Boswell calls  “a sportive sally of ridicule on
Johnson,”  by her very old friend George Colman  (the elder),  who in
his  “Prose on Several Occasions,”  has a letter from Lexiphanes,  containing proposals for a glossary or vocabulary of the vulgar tongue,  intended as a supplement to a larger dictionary.

3 The words in brackets are late additions,  in place of other words,
which have been expunged.

4 William Seward  (1747-1799)  was the only son of the rich Mr.
Seward,  of the firm of Calvert and Seward,  the brewers of more beer

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

153

My sister Burney was invited to meet and play to them.
The conversation was supported with a good deal of vivacity
(N.B.  my father being at home)  for about half an hour,  and
then Hetty and Sukey,x for the first time in public,  played a
duet;  and in the midst of this performance Dr.  Johnson was
announced.  He is,  indeed,  very ill-favoured;  is tall and
stout;  but stoops terribly;  he is almost bent double.  His
mouth is almost  [constantly opening and shutting],* 1 2 as if he
was chewing.  He has a strange method of frequently twirling his fingers,  and twisting his hands.  His body is in continual agitation,  see-sawing up and  .down;  his feet are never
a moment quiet;  and,  in short,  his whole person is in perpetual motion.  His dress,  too,  considering the times,  and
that he had meant to put on his best becomes ,  being engaged
to dine in a large company,  was as much out of the common
road as Jiis figure ;  he had a large wig,  snuff-colour coat,  and
gold buttons,  but no ruffles to his shirt,  [doughty fists,  and
black worsted stockings.]3 He is shockingly near-sighted,

than any firm in London,  according to a list of 1759-60.  They head this
list with 74,734 barrels of beer,  brewed in the year.  After them come
Whitbread,  Trueman,  and then  “  Thrail,”  brewing then only 32,740
barrels.  According to Mrs.  Thrale,  this  “polite and agreeable young
man,”  who was of the  “  Charter-House,  and Oxford,”  “  displeased and
grieved his father by his preference of literature to riches ;  ”  but  (she
adds)  “his head was not quite right.”  Mr.  Thrale was,  perhaps,  not
much  “  grieved and disappointed  ”  when the heir of a rival turned out a
literary trifler,  and became  (as Dr.  Johnson wrote)  “a great favourite
at Streatham.”  Mr.  Seward wrote papers in magazines,  and kept a
common-place book,  which he published under the names of  “Anecdotes,”  &c.,  5 vols.,  1 795-7 ;  “  Biographiana,”  2 vols.,  1799.  He is
often met in Fanny’s Diaries,  1778-84,  and,  now and then,  in Boswell’s
“Johnson.”

1 It was Susan’s first time of playing in public with Hetty,  who
almost always played at Dr.  Burney’s concerts.

2 Added in lieu of other words.

3 It is not easy to make sense of this passage,  as two lines have been
effaced,  and  “doughty fists,  and black worsted stockings”  are of later
writing.  We have a strong suspicion that  “  doughty fists  ”  was originally
“dirty fists.”  See Charlotte’s fragment,  No.  2.  As all relating to
Dr.  Johnson is of interest,  even to the  “rusty black stockings,”  the
historical suit of brown,  and  “the brown tradesman’s wig,”  in which
Dr.  Routh  (who almost lived a century)  remembered,  in 1849,  seeing
Johnson on his last visit to Oxford in 1784,  we subjoin the opinions of
Fuseli who knew him,  and Reynolds,  who knew him far better  (indeed
for thirty years),  upon his  (so-called)  convulsive movements.  Painters,

THE EARLY DIARY OF

154

[i777

and did not,  till she held out her hand to him,  even know
Mrs.  Thrale.  He poked his nose over the keys of the harpsichord,  till the duet was finished,  and then my father introduced Hetty to him as an old acquaintance,  and he  [cordially]
kissed her!  When she was a little girl,  he had made her a
present of  “ The Idler P

His attention,  however,  was not to be diverted five minutes

used to scan faces and figures,  may be considered to be  “experts.”
“Johnson,”  said Fuseli,  “  had to a physiognomist a good face,  but he
was singular in all his movements ;  he was not so uncouth in appearance
and manners as has been represented by some ;  he sat at table in a large
bushy wig and brown coat,  and behaved decently enough.”  Sir Joshua
Reynolds told Boswell,  after the publication of Boswell’s  “Journal of a
Tour to the Hebrides,”  in which he described Johnson’s convulsive
movements,  that  “Dr.  Johnson’s extraordinary gestures were only
habits,  in which he indulged himself at certain times.  When in company where he was not free,  or when engaged earnestly in conversation,
he never gave way to such habits,  which proves that they were not involuntary.”  Again,  Sir Joshua wrote:  “Every person who knew him
must have observed that,  when he was left out of the conversation,
whether from his deafness,  or from any other cause,  but a few minutes
without speaking or listening,  he fell ints a reverie accompanied with
strange antic gestures ;  but this he never did when his mind was engaged
by the conversation.”  [These were]  “unfortunately called by”  [Sir
John Hawkins?]  “as well as by others,  convulsions,  which imply involuntary contortions;  whereas,  when a word was addressed to him,  his
attention was recovered.”  Dr.  Johnson himself may also be cited,  as he
told a very young girl,  a niece of Christopher Smart,  who asked him
why he made such strange gestures?  “From bad habit.  Do you,  my
dear,  take care to guard against bad habits.”  As it is interesting to add
to this first description of Dr.  Johnson what Fanny wrote on meeting
him under the roof of Mr.  Thrale in 1778,  we copy a passage,  omitted
in  “  The Diary of Mme.  D’Arblay,”  which would be in its right place
on page 63 of the first volume.  Speaking of Dr.  Johnson’s infirmities
and convulsive movements,  Fanny writes:  “The sight of them can
never excite ridicule,  or,  indeed,  any other than melancholy reflections
upon the imperfections of Human Nature;  for this man,  who is the
acknowledged Head of Literature in this kingdom,  and who has the
most extensive knowledge,  the clearest understanding,  and the greatest
abilities of any living author,  has a face the most ugly,  a person the
most awkward,  and manners the most singular that ever were,  or ever
can be seen.  But all that is unfortunate in his exterior,  is so greatly
compensated for in his interior,  that I can only,  like Desdemona to
Othello,  ‘  See his visage in his mind.''  His conversation is so replete
with instruction and entertainment,  his wit is so ready,  and his language
at once so original and comprehensive,  that I hardly know any satisfaction I can receive equal to listening to him.”

1777]  FRANCES BURNEY 155

from the books,  as we were in the library;  he pored over
them,  [shelf by shelf,]  almost touching the backs of them
with his eye-lashes,  as he read their titles.  At last,  having
fixed upon one,  he began,  without further ceremony,  to read
[to himself,]  all the time standing at a distance from the
company.  We were  [all]  very much provoked,  as we perfectly
languished to hear him talk;  but it seems he is the most
silent creature,  when not particularly drawn out,  in the
world.1

My sister then played another duet with my father;  but
Dr.  Johnson was so deep in the Encyclopedic that,  as he is
very deaf,  I question if he even knew what was going forward.
When this was over,  Mrs.  Thrale,  in a laughing manner,  said,
“  Pray,  Dr.  Burney,  can you tell me what that song was and
whose,  which Savoi sung last night at Bach’s Concert,  and
which you did not hear?  ”  My father confessed himself by
no means so good a diviner,  not having had time to consult
the stars,  though in the house of Sir Isaac Newton.  However,  wishing to draw Dr.  Johnson into some conversation,
he told him the question.  The Doctor,  seeing his drift,  good-
naturedly put away his book,  and said very drolly,  “And
pray,  Sir,  who is Bachl is he a piper?”  Many exclamations
of surprise you will believe followed this question.  “Why
you have read his name often in the papers,”  said Mrs.
Thrale;  and then  [she]  gave him some account of his
Concert,  and the number of fine performances she had
heard at it.

“  Pray,”  said he,  [gravely,]  “  Madam,  what is the expence?  ”

“  O !  ”  answered she,  “  much trouble and solicitation to
get a Subscriber’s Ticket; — or else,  half a Guinea.”

“Trouble and solicitation,”  said he,  “I will have nothing
to do with ;  but I would be willing to give eighteen pence.”

[Ha!  ha!]2

1  “Johnson once observed to me,  ‘Tom Tyers described me the
best:  “Sir  (said he),  you are like a ghost:  you never speak until you
are spoken to.”  ’  ’’—Boswell.

2 The Bach here mentioned was J.  C.  Bach,  called English Bach,
one of the sons of J.  S.  Bach;  b.  Leipzig,  1735;  came to London,
1762;  d.  there,  1782.  He was K.  F.  Abel’s partner in the famous concerts given in London,  1764-82.

156 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

Chocolate being then brought,  we adjourned to the dining-room.1 And here,  Dr.  Johnson being taken from the
books,  entered freely and most cleverly into conversation;
though it is remarkable he never speaks at all,  but when
spoken to;  nor does he ever start,  though he so admirably
supports ,  any subject.

The whole party was engaged to dine at Mrs.  Montague’s.
Dr.  Johnson said he had received the most flattering note he
had ever read,  or  [that]  any body else had ever read,  by way
of invitation.  “Well!  so have I too,”  cried Mrs.  Thrale;
“so if a note from Mrs.  Montague is to be boasted of,  I
beg mine may not be forgot.”

“  Your note,”  cried Dr.  Johnson,  “  can bear no comparison
with mine ;  I am at the head of the Philosophers ,  she says.”

“And I,”  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  “ have all the Muses in my .
train  !  ”

“  A fair battle,”  said my father.  “  Come,  compliment for
compliment,  and see who will hold out longest.”

“O!  I am afraid for Mrs.  Thrale,”  cried Mr.  Seward;

“  for I know Mrs.  Montague exerts all her forces,  when she
attacks Dr.  Johnson.”

“  O,  yes !  ”  said Mrs.  Thrale,  “  she has often,  I know,
flattered him ,  till he has been ready to faint.”

“  Well,  ladies,”  said my father,  “  you must get him between
you to-day,  and see which can lay on the paint thickest,
Mrs.  Thrale or Mrs.  Montague.”

“  I had rather,”  cried the Doctor,  [drily,]  “  go to Bach’s
Concert !  ”

After this,  they talked of Mr.  Garrick and his late exhibition before the King,  to whom and  [to]  the Queen and
Royal Family he read Lethe in character ,  c'est a dire,  in
different voices,  and theatrically.2 Mr.  Seward gave us an

1 This word has been changed in the MS.  into  “  drawing-room.”
Fanny does not seem to have said  “  drawing-room  ”  until she went
to Court,  as she writes in her Windsor diary,  “the  * drawing-room ,’
as they call it here.”  Mrs.  Delany,  in 1755,  speaks of her  “  diningroom. ,  vulgarly so called The old words were  “ parlour ”  for any
sitting-room;  “ ea/ing-”  or  “ dining-parlour ,”  and chamber or bedchamber,  for rooms distinct from those of reception.

2 A farce of Garrick’s own writing,  in which he had been used to act
more than one part.

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

157

account of a Fable,  which Mr.  Garrick had written,  by way
of prologue or Introduction,  upon the occasion.  In this he
says,  that a blackbird,  grown old and feeble,  droops his
wings  &c.  &c.,  and gives up singing;  but being called upon
by the eagle,  his voice recovers its powers,  his spirits revive,
he sets age at defiance,  and sings better than ever.  The application is obvious.

“There is not,”  said Dr.  Johnson,  “much of the spirit of
fabulosity in this Fable;  for the call of an eagle never yet
had much tendency to restore the voice of a black-bird!  ’Tis
true that the fabulists frequently make the wolves converse
with the lambs;  but,  when the conversation is over,  the lambs
are sure to be eaten!  And so the eagle may entertain the
black-bird;  but the entertainment always ends in a feast for
the eagle .”

“They say,”  cried Mrs.  Thrale,  “that Garrick was extremely hurt at the coolness of the King’s applause,  and did
not find his reception such as he expected.”

“  He has been so long accustomed,”  said Mr.  Seward,  “  to
the thundering approbation of the Theatre,  that a mere  ‘  Very
well must necessarily and naturally disappoint him.”'

“Sir,”  said Dr.  Johnson,  “he should not,  in a Royal
apartment,  expect the hallowing and clamour of the One
Shilling Gallery.  The King,  I ddubt not,  gave him as much
applause,  as was rationally his due;  and,  indeed,  great and
uncommon as is the merit of Mr.  Garrick,  no man will be
bold enough to assert he has not had his just proportion
both of fame and profit.  He has long reigned the unequalled
favourite of the public;  and therefore nobody will mourn his
hard fate,  if the King and the Royal Family were not transported into rapture,  upon hearing him read Lethe.  Yet Mr.
Garrick will complain to his friends,  and his friends will
lament the King’s want of feeling and taste;— and then Mr.
Garrick will  [kindly]  excuse the King.  He will say that  [Flis
Majesty]  might be thinking of something else;  that the
affairs of America might occur to him ;  or some subject of
more importance than Lethe ;  but,  though he will say this
himself,  he will not forgive his friends,  if they do not contradict him!”

But,  now that I have written this satire,  it is but just both
to Mr.'  Garrick and to Dr.  Johnson,  to tell you what he said

158 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

of him afterwards,  when he discriminated his character with
equal candour 1 and humour.

“Garrick,”  said he,  “is accused of vanity;  but few men
would have borne such unremitting prosperity with greater,
if with equal moderation.  He is accused,  too,  of avarice;
but,  were he not,  he would be accused of just the contrary;
for he now lives rather as a prince than an actor;  but the
frugality he practised,  when he first appeared in the world,
and which,  even then was perhaps beyond his necessity,  has
marked his character ever since;  and now,  though his table,
his equipage,  and manner of living,  are all the most expensive,
and equal to those of a nobleman,  yet the original stain still
blots his name !  Though,  had he not fixed upon himself the
charge of avarice,  he would long since have been reproached
with luxury and with living beyond his station in magnificence
and splendour.”

Another time he said of him,  “  Garrick never enters a room,
but he regards himself as the object of general attention,
from whom the entertainment of the company is expected;
and true it is,  that he seldom disappoints them ;  for he has
infinite humour,  a very just proportion of wit,  and more convivial pleasantry,  than almost any other man.  But then off,
as well as on the Stage,  he is always an Actor;  for he thinks
it so incumbent upon him to be sportive,  that his gaiety
becomes mechanical  [from being]  habitual,  and he can exert
his spirits at all times alike,  without consulting his real disposition to hilarity.”

Friday.

I am very sorry that I cannot possibly finish this account,
for I am bothered to death— my uncle is just come,  cousins
James and Becky are with-  hint*  and all are bent on my returning with them.  .  .

1 In his Dictionary,  Dr.  Johnson himself explains  “Candour”  as
“sweetness of temper,  kindness.”  In  “The Rambler,”  No.  93  (1751),
he writes,  “  Criticism has so often given occasion to the envious and
ill-natured of gratifying their malignity,  that some have thought it
necessaiy to recommend the virtue of candour without restriction,  and
to preclude all future liberty of censure.”  In 1770,  Burke called candour
“  a sickly habit,  to which virtues were not to be sacrificed,”  which was
in Dr.  Johnson’s own manner of thinking.

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

159

A thousand thanks for yours which I have just received.  .  .  .

Your kindness is more grateful to me than I can express,
— I am monstrous glad you missed me.  .  .

Adieu,  my dearest Sir, — a thousand loves and compliments
to Mrs.  H.  and Kitty,  and believe me with all affection and
gratitude

Yours ever

Frances Burney.

I am now writing with a Steel Pen,  which Mr.  Cutler,  [an
old friend of my father’s]  a very agreeable man,  has just sent
me,  with a note,  and these lines —

“  A ma chere plume

Va,  petite plume, — va servir Ma’m’selle Burney, — •
Puisse tu surpasser la Volante de Gurney!”1

######

[Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney.]

Ches.  March 27,  1777.

My dear Fanny,

You can’t imagine how we miss’d you as soon as you
were gone — There was a Void,  which still continues,  and will
not easily be fill’d up. -

Well,  you are gone,  so that matter is ended. — So now write
a long account,  a journal of yourself,  and all your proceedings,  what you are all doing at St.  Martin’s,  all about your
lordly uncle,  and your Worcester  ....  journey — A most
minute,  and particular account of your Sunday night’s concert,  &c..&c. — &c. — In short,  Fanny,  in this eternal scene
of inaction,  call’d Chesington,  in return for your lively,  entertaining intelligence;  your anecdotes,  descriptions,  accounts
of people and things,  you must expect nothing else,  but a
demand for more.  You know this place,  and its inhabitants;
consequently the solid truth of what I say;  so that I own,
you can have no real motive f@r such a commerce of letters
where the ballance of trade is all on my side,  except this

1  “  Gurney’s Flying Pen,”  one of the advertised pens of the day.

II.  '  F

160 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

one consideration— I mean,  a firm persuasion,  that I most
sincerely,  nay ardently,  interest myself in whatever concerns
a Fannikin— What then,  it may be said?  This goodwill,  and
these good wishes,  are barren. — I can’t help it- — The soil is
poor,  and you can have no more.

I have now began to get on horseback,  and shall try what
air and exercise in this fine weather will do for me,  in regard
to sleep and digestion.  I have likewise began a new course
of medicines,  from which,  indeed,  I do not expect much,  as
I know of none that are a cure for age,  and the infirmities
attending it — If I can obtain a palliation of uneasiness,  some
intervals of relief,  my expectations and pretensions go no
farther.  Love to your folks.  Kate and Ham,  I am convinc’d,
have a fine regard for a Fannikin,  and now,  and at all times,
desire she may be assur’d of it —

God bless you,  my creature,

Yours affectionately

S.  C.

[Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney.]

Ches.  Ap.  2,  1777.

[Some of Mr.  Crisp’s old-world words have been effaced at the
beginning of this letter.]

D’ye think to come off so?  .  .  .  ’tis true your letter was
an excellent one;  full of excellent portraits,  as like,  and as
strongly painted as Sir J.  Reynolds’s — What then? — the
Concert,  the Concert,  you young  [Torment] !  Monday night’s
concert,  Piozzi,  Rauzzini,  your Gentilities,  and your Tran-
quallities,  as Shakespear says !  This I expect ;  and as circumstantially described,  and as highly finished,  as the Johnson’s,
Thrale’s,  Garrick’s,  Montagues,  &c.  By the way,  how wonderfully well,  in half a dozen masterly touches,  has Johnson
made a striking likeness of Garrick!  It half reconciles me
to his heavy Dictionary.  I am now convinced  (putting
together your account of him and what I had heard before)
that his real forte is Conversation.  His quickness,  his originality,  his oddities,  his singularities,  (which so well become
him and perhaps would nobody else)  must make him a model
of an entertaining companion.  Well,  Fanny,  since I can’t
come to London,  and personally partake of the turtle feast;

FRANCES BURNEY

161

1777]

you saved,  and collected me a part of it,  so well selected,  so
well clos’d up,  and packed with such care,  that it has all the
full relish,  and the high flavour of the Callipash,  and the
Callipee.  This being the case,  d’ye think my modesty will
restrain me from crying more,  more?  No,  Fanny,  I know
too well,  when I am got into good quarters — Besides Sunday
night,  send me word all about your Worcester journey and
your Worcester people — how d’ye like Becky?— has your
Lordly uncle yet given his consent that his son Edward shall
be allow’d to make a figure in the world,  and do honour to
himself,  family,  and country?  .  .  .  Send me a journal of
every thing relating to you and yours — did you deliver my
message to Fletty and Charles?  how do they do?  go on?
&c.,  &c.,  &c. — I would write you more if I had any thing to
say.  .  :  .  Adieu.

Ever your affectionate Daddy.  S.  C.

My love to all your folks.

[The Author’s  “  Prelude to the Worcester Journal.”]
O Yes!

Be it known to all whom it may concern,  c’est a dire,  in
the first place, — Nobody; — in the second place,  the same
person; — and in the third place,  Ditto , — That Frances
Burney,  Spinster,  of the Parish of Saint Martin’s in the Fields,
....  did keep no Journal this unhappy year,  till she wrote
from Worcester to her Sister Susan of the same parish,  and
likewise a spinster.  There are who may live to mourn this.
For my part,  I shall not here enumerate all the particular
misfortunes which this gap in literature may occasion,  though
I feel that they will be of a nature most serious and melancholy;  but I shall merely scrawl down such matters of
moment as will be requisite to mention,  in order to make
the Worcester Journal,  which is a delicious morsel of learning and profound reasoning,  intelligible to the three persons
mentioned above.

When with infinite toil and labour,  [during the last year,]

I had transcribed  [in a feigned hand]  the second Volume
[of my new Essay],1 I sent it by my brother  [Charles]  to

1  “Evelina;  or the History of a Young Lady’s Entrance into the
World.”

162

THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

Mr.  Lowndes.  The fear of discovery,  or of suspicion in the
house,  made the copying extremely laborious to me ;  for in
the day time,  I could only take odd moments,  so that I was
obliged to sit up the greatest part of many nights,  in order
to get it ready.  And,  after all this fagging,  Mr,  Lowndes
sent me word,  that he approved of the book;  but could not
think of printing it,  till it was finished ;  that it would be a
great disadvantage to it,  and that he would wait my time,
and hoped to see it again,  as soon as it was completed.

Now,  this man,  knowing nothing of my situation,  supposed,
in all probability,  that I could seat myself quietly at my
bureau,  and write on with all expedition and ease,  till the
work was finished.  But so different was the case,  that I had
hardly time to write half a page in a day  ;  and neither my
health nor inclination wrould allow me to continue my
nocturnal scribbling for so long a time,  as to write first,  and
then copy,  a whole volume.  I was therefore obliged to give
the attempt and affair entirely over for the present.

In March I made a long and happy visit to my ever-dear
and ever-kind Mr.  Crisp.  There is no place where I more
really e?ijoy myself than at Chesington.  All the household
are kind,  hospitable,  and partial to me;  there is no sort of
restraint;  every body is disengaged,  and at liberty to pursue
their own inclinations;  and my Daddy  [Crisp],  who is the
soul of the place,  is at once so flatteringly affectionate to me,
and so infinitely,  so beyond comparison clever in himself,
that were I to be otherwise than happy in his company,  I
must either be wholly without feeling or utterly destitute of
understanding.

From this loved spot I was suddenly hurried by intelligence,
that my uncle was coming to town.1 And the fear that he

1 Richard,  elder brother of Dr.  Burney;  “your lordly uncle,”  as
Mr.  Crisp calls him in the letter of the 27th of March,  in a slight tone
of pique at his carrying Fanny from Chesington,  “from this eternal
scene of dull inaction,  called Chesington ;  ”  leaving  “a void,  which still
continues,  and will not be easily fill’d up.”  The fact was that Mr.  Crisp
was just recovering from a fit of the gout,  and grudged his  “  Fannikin  ”
to her uncle with the less scruple,  as he knew that she stood in rather
needless awe of Richard Burney,  the elder,  and was not at all inclined
to go to Worcester with him.  “God bless you my creature!”  cries
Mr.  Crisp,  in ending.  It was a serious matter to refuse a visit to Uncle

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

163

would be displeased at finding that I made a visit to
Chesington nearly at the time I was invited to Barborne,
made me not dare out-stay the intelligence of his intended
journey.  He brought with him his son James and his
daughter Beckey.

James is a very manly,  good-natured,  unaffected,  good-
hearted young man.  He has by no means the power of entertainment that his brother Richard possesses;  but he is so
well-disposed and so sweet-tempered that it is hardly fair and
possible to find fault with him.

Beckey is rather pretty in her face,  and perfectly elegant
in her person.  She is extremely lively,  gay as the morning
of May,  and wild as the wind of March.  Her temper is very
sweet;  her heart affectionate,  and her head mighty well laden
with natural stores of good understanding and sense.  Like
Betsy,  she laughs rather more than reason;  but she is so
young and so good-humoured that,  though she may sometimes appear foolishly giddy,  it is not possible to entertain
an idea of  [censuring her.]  She is,  upon the whole,  a most
sweet girl,  and one that I loved much at first sight,  and yet
more afterwards.* 1

My uncle’s professed intention in his journey,  was to carry
me back to Barborne;  and he would not be denied;  nor let
my father rest,  till he obtained his leave.  And so,  escorted
by my uncle and cousin James,  I set off for Worcester the
beginning of April.

[“  Evelina”  before publication.]  2

"H*

But,  before I made this journey,  [while I was taking leave,
I was so much penetrated by my dear father’s kind parting
embrace,]  that in the fullness of my heart  [I could not forbear telling him,  that I had sent a manuscript to Mr.
Lowndes;  earnestly,  however,  beseeching him never to

Richard;  but Richard,  even in 1 777,  seems to have valued Fanny more
than she thought.

1 Miss Rebecca Burney,  of Worcester,  married a Mr.  Sandford.

2 This is the author’s own heading,  as is  “Way to Keep Him.”
[though both are written in at a later date].

1 64 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

divulge it,  nor to demand a sight of such trash as I could
scribble;  assuring him that Charles had managed to save me
from being at all suspected].  He could not help laughing;
but I believe was much surprised at the communication.
He desired me to acquaint him from time to time,  how my
work went on,  called himself the Pere confident ,  and kindly
promised to guard my secret as cautiously as I could wish.

So much to prelude the Worcester Journal.

But,  when I told my dear father,  I never  [wished or]  intended,  [that even]  he  [himself]  should see my essay,  he
forbore to ask me its name,  or make any enquiries.  I believe he is not sorry to be saved the giving me the pain of
his criticism.  He made no sort of objection to my having
my own way in total secrecy and silence to all the world.
Yet I am easier in not taking the step,  without his having
this little knowledge of it,  as he is contented with my telling
him I shall never have the courage to let him know its name.

[“  Way to Keep Him.”]

Monday,  April 7.

My Susy,

******

Now for Barborne Lodge.1 The morning was ushered in
— by a general disturbance.  We were all inconceivably busy;
we contrived,  however,  for little Nancy’s sake,  to rehearseTom
Thumb,  and then we bribed her to lie down,  and most fortunately she slept for more than three hours,  which made
her very wakeful all the rest of the day and night.2

1 Barborne lies beyond the chief street of Worcester,  the Foregate.
There is Barborne Park,  etc.

2 Anna Maria Burney,  who is sometimes called Marianne,  was the
eldest child of  “Mr.  Burney”  (Charles of Worcester)  and of Hetty.
She was,  at the utmost,  not seven years old when she played  “Tom
Thumb.”  Marianne grew up  “  lovely in mind and person.”  She followed her Aunt Fanny’s example in marrying a Frenchman.  Her
husband,  M.  Bourdois,  was of the same town as M.  D’Arblay  (Joigny,
in Burgundy),  and his early friend.  M.  Bourdois is said to have been
a very pleasant,  as well as a very brave man.  He was aide-de-camp to
General Dumourier,  and distinguished himself at the battle of Jemappes.
Madame Bourdois lived latterly in Bath.

1777]  FRANCES BURNEY 165

At dinner we did not sit down above three at a time;  one
was with the hair-dresser,  another finishing some dress,  another,  some scenery;  and so on.  I was quite amazed to see
how my uncle submitted to all this confusion;  but he was
the first to promote our following our own affairs.

And indeed,  I cannot speak too highly of the good-nature
of  [my cousin]  Nancy upon this occasion;  for she has given
up all her time to general assistance.1

Before five o’Clock,  while we were all in the midst of our
disorder,  Mrs.  Bund and her daughter arrived.  They did
not know what they came for,  and my uncle and Miss
Humphries,  who received them,  said we were preparing for
a droll sort of Concert,  which we intended to give them.

Next came Dr.  R.  Johnston2 and Mr.  Russell,  and soon
after the three Lawson’s,  and then,  Miss Bridget Harris and
Miss Ivnowell.

You can have no idea what  [a shatter]  every new comer
gave me.  I could hardly dress myself, — hardly knew where
I was, — hardly could stand.  Betsy,  too,  was very much
flurried,  and so afraid of being worse,  that she forced wine
and water and punch down her throat,  till she was almost
tipsey.  Richard and James gave all their thoughts to their
own adornment;  Tom capered about the house in great joy;
little Nancy jumped and laughed;  Edward was tolerably
composed;  but Beckey was in extacy of pleasure.  She felt
no fright or palpitation;  but laughed,  danced,  and sung all
day long  [delightfully.]

*#*#**

We were now quite ready,  when the tliree Miss Brookes’
came,  and to my great relief,  no Dr.  Wall or Capt.  Couss-
maker.

The Band was now got into order for the Overture,  and
the company going to be summoned up stairs,— when another
chaise arrived,  and it proved from Gloucester,  with the
Doctor and the Captain.  I assure you this frightened me so
much,  that I most heartily wished myself twenty miles off.

1  “Cousin Nancy,”  in 1779,  married Mr.  Hawkins,  rector of Halstead,  in Essex.

2 This name is  “Johnson”  in Mme.  D’Arblay’s notes.

1 66 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

I was quite sick,  and if I had dared,  should have given up
the part.

When I came to be painted,  my cheeks were already of so
high a colour,  that I could hardly bear to have any added;
but,  before I went on,  I seemed seized with an ague-fit,  and
was so extremely cold,  that my uncle,  upon taking my hand,
said he thought he had touched ice or marble.

At length,  they all came up stairs:  a green curtain was
drawn before them,  and the Overture was played.  Miss
Humphries did all the honours;  for Nancy was engaged as
prompter,  and my uncle,  one of the band.  The Theatre
looked extremely well,  and was fitted up in a very dramatic
manner,  With side scenes,  and two figures of Tragedy and
Comedy at each hand,  and a Head of Shakespear in the
middle.  We had four change of scenes.  [The play we acted
-was,  “  The IVay to Keep Him .”]  1

Now,  for a Play-Bill — which I think you will own was
stupid enough ;  but we dared not be jocular after my uncle’s
interference.2

As soon as the Overture was played,  which you must
know was performed in the passage  ;  for we had no room for
an Orchestra in the Theatre, — Edward and Tom were seated
at cards,  and the curtain drawn.  Tom’s part was very soon
over,  and then Betsy entered.  She was much flurried,  and
yet in very great spirits,  and acquitted herself greatly beyond
my expectations.  Edward was,  I believe,  very little frightened,  yet not quite so easy or so excellent as I had imagined
he would have been.  Indeed his part is extremely unworthy
of him,  and I fancy he was determined to let it take its
chance,  without troubling himself with much exertion.3

Take notice that,  from the beginning to the end,  no
applause was given to the play.  The company judged that

1 A comedy in three acts,  by Arthur Murphy,  brought out in
January,  1760.

The play-bill,  however,  is not given in the MS.,  though there is
more than half a page left blank for it.  The principal characters in
“  The Way to Keep Him  ”  are — Lovemore Sir Bashful Constant;  Sir
Brilliant Fashion;  Sideboard,  servant to Sir Bashful;  Pompey,  a black
servant ;  Mrs.  Lovemore ;  the Widow Bellmour ;  Lady Constant ;  and
Muslin,  maid to Mrs.  Lovemore.

3 He played Sir Bashful’s servant,  “Sideboard.”

1777]  FRANCES BURNEY 167

it would be inelegant,  and therefore,  as they all said,  fore-
bore;  but indeed  [a little clapping]  would have been very
encouraging,  and I heartily wish they had not practised such
self-denial !

Next came my scene:  I was discovered drinking tea.  To
tell you how infinitely ,  how beyond measure I was terrified
at my situation,  I really cannot;  but my fright was nearly
such as I should have suffered,  had I made my appearance
upon a public Theatre,  since Miss Humphries and Captain
Coussmaker were the only two of the audience I had ever
before seen.

The few word:  1 had to speak,  before Muslin came tome,
I know not whether I spoke or not,  neither does any body
else;  so you need not enquire of others;  for the matter is to
this moment unknown.  Fortunately for me,  all the next
scene gave me hardly three words in a speech;  for Muslin
has it almost to herself.  So I had little else to do than to
lean on the table,  and twirl my thumbs,  and sometimes bite
my fingers;  which,  indeed,  I once or twice did very severely,
without knowing why,  or yet being able to help it.  I am
sure,  without flattery ,  I looked like a most egregious fool;
for I made no use of the tea-things.  I never tasted a drop,
- — once indeed,  I made an attempt,  by way of passing the
time better,  to drink a little;  but my hand shook so violently,
I was fain to put down the cup instantly in order to save my
gown.

By the way I have forgot to mention dresses.  Edward
had a coat trim’d to have the effect of a rich lace livery.
He had a capital bag,  long ruffles,  and so forth.  Tops much
the same.  Betsy,  as Muslin,  had a very showy striped pink
and white Manchester,  pink shoes,  red ribbons in abundance,
and a short apron.  The paint upon her very pale cheeks set
her off to the greatest advantage,  and I never saw her look
near so well.  Mrs.  Lovemore wore her green and grey,  which
I have trimed with gause,  white ribbons,  gause apron,  cuffs,
robins,  &C.1

The next who made his appearance was cousin James.

1  “Robings”  were,  generally speaking,  trimmings upon the borders
of a lady’s negligee,  or sacque,  or open gown of any fashion,  over a.
more or less rich skirt,  or

1 68 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [i 777

He was most superbly dressed;  but,  as you saw his cloaths
at the Music-meeting,  I will not describe them.  His hair,
however,  I must not pass unnoticed ;  for you never saw the
most foppish stage-character better dressed in the Macaroni
style.  Indeed,  all our hairs were done to the astonishment
of all the company.

James,  or Sir Brilliant Fashion,  entered with an air so
immensely conceited and affected,  and at the same time so
uncommonly bold,  that I could scarce stand his abord,  and
throughout the scene that followed,  he acted with such a
satisfied,  nay,  insolent assurance of success,  that I declare,
had I been entirely myself and free from fear,  he would have
wholly disconcerted me :  as it was,  my flurry hardly admitted
of encrease,  yet I felt mys elf glow most violently.  I must
assure you,  notwithstanding my embarassment,  I found he
did the part admirably ;  not merely very much beyond my
expectations,  but,  I think,  as well as it could be done.  He
looked very fashionable,  very assured,  very affected,  very
every way the thing.  Not one part in the piece was better
or more properly done;  nor did any give more entertainment.

We were next joined by Richard,  whose non-chalance ,  indifference,  half vacancy and half absence excellently marked
the careless,  unfeeling husband which he represented.  Between his extreme unconcern and Sir Brilliant’s extreme
assurance,  I had not much trouble in appearing the only
languid and discontented person in company.

Richard was in a very genteel morning dress.

A short scene next followed between Betsy and me,  which
I made as little of as any body might desire,  indeed I would
ehalenge all my acquaintance around to go through an act
more thoroughly to their own dissatisfaction.  So,  that is
saying more than every body can,  however.

The act finished by a solo of Betsy,  which I did not hear;
for I ran into a corner,  to recover breath against the next
act.  My uncle was very good natured,  and spoke very comfortable things to me, — which I did by no means expect,  as,
at first,  he seemed not delighted,  that Betsy had given me
her part.  He said I wanted nothing but exertion,  and charged
me to speak louder,  and take courage.

“O!”  cried Edward,  “that this had but been Lady Betty

1777]  FRANCES BURNEY  '  169

Modish!”  However,  since I was so terribly cowardly,  I
now rejoice that I had a part so serious and solemn,  sad,
and sorrowful.  Cousin James was prodigiously  [gallant]  in
comforting me  ....  supporting his tendresse yet more
strongly off than on the stage.  The truth is,  he is so very
good natured,  that the least idea of pity really softens him
into downright tenderness.  Richard was entirely occupied
in changing his dress for Lord Etheridge.

In the next act the Widow Belmour made her appearance.
Beckey’s elegant figure and red face were charmingly set off ;
for her dress was fashionable and becoming.  She had on a
lilac negligee,  gause cuffs,1 trimmed richly with flowers and
spangles,  spankled shoes,  bows of gause and flowers,  and a
cap ! — quite the thing ,  I assure you ! — full of flowers,  frivolete,
spangles,  gauze,  and long feathers,  immensely high,  and her
hair delightfully well dressed.  She was in great spirits,  and
not at all frightened.  Her entrance,  I am sure,  must be
striking,  and I was surprised the folks could forbear giving
her applause.  She was  [throughout lively,  easy and elegant;
and her whole appearance was so charming,  there was no
looking at any thing else.] 2

Betsy changed her dress entirely for Mignonet,  and did
the character very well,  though the worse for having another
in the same play,  as she saved herself very much for Muslin,
which she did admirably.

During my reprieve from business,  I thought I had entirely banished my fears,  and could assume sufficient courage
to go through the rest of my part to the best of my capacity;
but far.  otherwise I found it;  for,  the moment I entered,  I
was again gone!  Knew not where I stood,  nor what I said;
a mist was before my eyes,  so strong that it almost blinded
me,  and my voice faltered so cruelly,  that had they not all

1  “Cuffs”  do not,  as now,  always mean the trimming round the
wrists of long sleeves,  which were rarely worn in 1777,  but often the
trimming round gown-sleeves which came to the elbow.  Below the
elbow-cuffs fell the ruffles,  which had been long,  triple,  and pointed ;
such were then old-fashioned enough for Madame D’Arblay to mention
Ladies Wallingford and Mary Duncan — who wore them when she was
young — as adhering to the fashion of their youth.

-  Here about twelve lines have been scored out.  The words in
brackets have been written later among the defaced lines.

170 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

been particularly silent whenever I aimed at speaking,  not a
word the better would they have been for my presence!

And all this for pleasure !  but indeed it was too much,—
and I have not yet recovered from the painful sensations I
experienced that night, — sensations which will always make
my recollection of  “  The Way to Keep him  ,”  disagreeable to

me . Fortunately for me,  my part and my spirits,  in

this act,  had great sympathy;  for Mrs.  Lovemore is almost
unhappy enough for a tragedy heroine;  and I assure you.
she lost none of her pathos by any giddiness of mine!  I
gave her melancholy feelings very fair play,  and looked her
misfortunes with as much sadness,  as if I really experienced
them.  In this act,  therefore,  circumstances were so happily
miserable for me,  that I believe some of my auditors thought
,ne a much better and more artificial actress than I dreamt
of being myself ;  and I had the satisfaction to hear some few
buzzes of approbation,  which did me no harm.

But I would never have engaged in this scheme,  had I not
have been persuaded that my fright would have ended with
the first scene.  I had not any idea of being so completely
overcome by it.  The grand scene between the widow and
Lord Etheridge,  Richard and Beckey acquitted themselves
extremely well in.  If Richard had a fault,  it was being too
easy, — he would have had more spirit,  had he been rather
less at home.  His dress for this part was all elegance.  This
act concluded with the scene,  that I prevailed with Edward
and Betsy to add;  they did it vastly well,  and are both,  I
believe,  well pleased,  that they listened to me.

Again,  my uncle spoke the most flattering things to encourage me;  “Only speak out,  Miss Fanny,”  said he,  “and
you leave nothing to wish;  it is impossible to do the part
with greater propriety,  or to speak with greater feeling,  or
more sensibly;  every,  the most insignificant thing you say,
comes home to me.”  You can’t imagine how much this kindness from him cheared me.

In the third act I recovered myself very decently,  compared
to the two first;  but indeed,  I was very,  very far from being
easy,  or from doing the part according to my own ideas;  so
that,  in short,  I am totally,  wholly,  and entirely dissatisfied
with myself in the whole performance.  Not once could I
command my voice to any steadiness,  or look about me

FRANCES BURNEY

171

1777]

otherwise than as a poltroon,  either smelling something unsavor)',  or expecting to be bastinadoed.

In the most capital scene of Mrs.  Lovemore with her husband,  in the third act,  when she is all air ,  alertness ,  pleasurey
and enjoyment ,  I endeavoured,  what I could,  to soften off the
affectation of her sudden change of disposition,  and I gagged
the gentleman with as much ease as my very little ease would
allow me to assume.  Richard was really charming in this
scene;  so thoroughly negligent,  inattentive,  and sleepy,  that
he kept a continual titter among the young ladies.  But when
he was roused from his indifference by Mrs.  Lovemore’s pretended alteration of temper and conduct, — he sung small
indeed!  When her flightiness begun,  you can hardly suppose how little he looked!  how mortified!  astonished!  and
simple!  it was admirably in character,  and yet he seemed as
if he really could not help it;  and as if her unexpected gaiety
quite confounded him.  Betsy,  Beckey,  and James were all
of them very lively,  and very clever in all they had to do in
this act.  I am very sorry that Edward could not have more
justice done to those talents,  which I know only want to be
called forth .

At the end of all there was a faint something in imitation
of a clap,  but very faint indeed.  Yet,  though applause would
much have encouraged us,  we have no reason to be mortified
at its omission;  since they all repeatedly declared they wnged
to clap ;  but thought it would not be approved ;  and since,
we have heard from all quarters nothing but praise and compliment.  Richard spoke the last speech in a very spirited
manner;  and he was very delicate and very comfortable to
me,  in our reconciliation,  when Mrs.  Belmour says,  “  Come,
kiss and be friends;”  and he adds,  “it is in your power.
Madam,  to make a reclaimed libertine of me indeed;  ”  for he
excused all the embracing part,  and without making any fuss,
took my hand,  which bowing over  (like Sir Charles Grandison)
he most respectfully pressed to his lips.

We now all hastened to dress for  “  Tom Thumb,”  and the
company went into the dining room for some refreshments.1
Little Nancy was led away by Miss Humphries,  who made

1 Fielding’s  "Tom Thumb”  was first played at the Haymarket
Theatre in 1730.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

172

[i777

her take a formal leave of the company,  as if going to bed,
that they might not expect what followed.  The sweet little
thing was quite in mad spirits ,  which we kept up by all sorts
of good things,  both drinking and eating,  and flattery;  for
our only fear was,  lest she should grow shame-faced,  and
refuse to make her entrance.

She flew up to me,  “  Ay,  cousin Fanny,  I saw your drinking your tea by yourself,  before all the company!  did you
think they would not see you?”

You must know she always calls me cousin Fanny,  because
she says every body else does;  so she’s sure I can’t really
be an aunt.

During the whole performance she had not the least idea
what we all meant,  and wanted several times to join us;
especially while I was weeping;  “Pray,  what does cousin
Fanny cry for,  aunt Hannah;  does she cry really,  I say?”

But I must now for your better information tell you
exactly how the parts in  “Tom Thumb”  were cast:

Lord Grizzle .

Noodle .

Bailiff .

Doodle .

King .

Bailiff’s follower  .  .  .  .

A fighting man .

And Tom Thumb  .  .  .  .

Huncamunca .

Cleora  .

Glumdalca,  Queen,  Giantess
And,  Queen .

J-  Mr.  Edward Burney,
i Mr.  Thomas Burney.

Mr.  Richard Burney.

Miss Anna Maria Burney.
Miss Fanny Burney.

Miss Rebecca Burney.

Mr.  James Burney.

Miss Elizabeth Burney.1

Noodle and Doodle,  who opened the farce,  were both
dressed very fantastically,  in the old English style,  and were
several minutes practising antics before they spoke.  Edward
disguised his voice in this part,  and made the burlesque

1 We give some of Fielding’s own descriptions of his  “ dramatis
persona'"  in notes.  We do not find in the Burneys’  play-bill  “  Mus-
tacha  ”  (the second maid of honour),  “in love with Doodle”;  nor the
ghost of  “  Gaffer Thumb,”  father of the hero;  nor  “  Courtiers,  Guards,
Rebels,  Drums,  Trumpets,  Thunder and Lightning.”

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

173

doubly ludicrous by giving a foppish twang to every period ;
Tom did Doodle vastly well.1

Then entered the King,  which was performed by Richard
most admirably,  and with a dignified drollery that was highly
diverting and exceeding clever.  Betsy accompanied him.
She was  [extremely]  well in the Queen,  [both in strutting
and pomposity].  Their dresses,  though made of mere tinsel
and all sort of gaudiness,  had a charming and most theatrical
effect.  Their crowns,  jewels,  trains,  &c.,.were superb.

Next entered — Tom Thumb!

When the King says  :

“But see!  our Warrior comes!  The great Tom Thumb!
the little Hero,  Giant-killing Boy!” —

Then there was an immense hub a dub ,  with drums and
trumpets and a clarionet,  to proclaim his approach.

The sweet little girl looked as beautiful as an angel !  She
had an exceeding pretty and most becoming dress,  made of
pink persian,2 trimmed with silver and spangles;  the form of
it the same as that of the others,  i.e.  Old English;  her mantle
was white;  she had a small truncheon in her hand,  and a
Vandyke hat;  her own sweet hair was left to itself.

When  [Nancy]  was to appear,  I took her hand to put her

1 T-  T.  Smith wrote in 1828:  “There are persons now living who
recollect seeing the father of the late Mr.  Prime,  of Witton,  wearing a
flowing wig,  or what is better known in the Burletta of  ‘Tclrn Thumb’
as a Noodle and a Doodle.  At the sale of Mr.  Rawle,  one of the King’s
accoutrement-makers,  one of the lots was a large black wig,  with long
flowing curls,  w'hich was stated to have been worn by Charles II.  This
was bought by Suett,  the actor,  who wore it for many years in  ‘Tom
Thumb,’"  and other pieces,  until it was burnt,  when the Birmingham
Theatre was destroyed by fire.” — Life of Nollekens.

“  Noodle]  courtiers Jn place,  and consequently zealous for that party
Doodle j that is uppermost.”

2  “Persian”  is a name now in use for a common silk,  used for
linings.  It would seem to have been of better quality in the eighteenth
century,  as it was worn by Fanny at the Masquerade.  In 1796,  Jane
Austen writes to her sister,  that she is spending all her money  “on
white gloves,  and pink Persian.”  Another name,  that of lustring,  ^
for a glazed or glace silk,  was explained by milliners into^  lute-stiing,
until their absurdity became received by others.  Mr.  Gibbs kindly reminds the editor that Goldsmith’s Chinese buys lutestring silk for his
own dress in London.  See  “  Citizen of the World.

174 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

on;  but she shrunk back and seemed half afraid:  however,
a few promises of grand things,  caresses,  and flattery gave
her courage again,  and she then strutted on in a manner
that astonished us all.  The company,  none of them expecting her,  were delighted and amazed beyond measure.  A
general laugh and exclamations of surprise went round.  Her
first speech —

“  When I’m not thank’d at all,  I’m thank’d enough;

I’ve done my duty,  and I’ve done no more  ” —

she spoke so loud and so articulately and with such courage,
that people could scarce credit their senses when they looked
at her baby face.  I declare, — I could hardly help crying;  I
was so much charmed,  and at the same time frightened for
her.  O!  how we all wished for Hetty!  It was with difficulty I restrained myself from running on with her;  and my
uncle was so agitated,  that he began,  involuntarily,  a most
vehement clap;  a sound to which we had hitherto been
strangers;  but the hint was instantly taken,  and it was echoed
and re-echoed by the audience.

This applause would have entirely disconcerted her,  had
it been unexpected;  but,  as we all imagined,  she could not
fail meeting with it,  we had accustomed her to it,  at all rehearsals;  so that she seemed very sensible of the reason of
the noise ,  as she calls it,  and highly gratified by it.  The
meaning and energy with which this sweet child spoke was
really wonderful;  we had all done our best in giving her instructions,  and she had profited with a facility and good
sense,  that at her age I do indeed believe to be unequalled.
When the ice was once broken in regard to applause,  it was
not suffered to be again cemented;  but,  while behind the
scenes,  I could not forbear myself leading a clap to every
one of Nance’s speeches.  I wish I could give you any idea
how sweetly she spoke:

“  Whisper,  ye winds,  that Huncamunca’s mine;

Echoes,  repeat that Huncamunca’s mine!

The dreadful business of the war is o’er,

And beauty,  heavenly beauty crowns my toils !  ”

But it is impossible;  nor do I expect anybody not present
to do her the justice she deserves.

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

175

At the end of the speech,  the drums and trumpets again
made a racket;  and the King,  Queen,  and Tom Thumb
marched off in triumph.  I caught the dear little hero in my
arms,  and almost devoured her.1

“  I wasn’t afraid of the people now,  cousin Fanny,”  cried
she,  “was I?  No,  I wasn’t;  nor I wasn’t ashamed,  neither;
was I  ?  ”

We gave her all sorts of good things,  to keep up her spirits,
and she was so well pleased,  that she wanted to go on again
immediately; — and such was her innocence that without
having any notion of connection in the piece she begged me
to accompany her directly.  “  Do now,  cousin Fanny;  let us,
you and I,  do our scene now;  why won’t you,  /  say?  ”  ....

After this,  Lord Grizzle made his appearance.  And here
Edward did shine indeed!  He was dressed very richly,
though ridiculously,  and was in high spirits.  Indeed,  I
must own I think he excelled them all;  clever as Richard,
his only possible rival,  was.  He spoke with such solemnity,
such tragic pomposity and energy,  and gave us such fine and
striking attitudes,  while his face preserved the most inviolable gravity,  that to enter into the true spirit of burlesque with
greater humour or propriety,  would be impossible.  Among
his numerous talents he has,  undoubtedly,  real abilities for
the stage.2

But I have neglected to mention the entrance of Glum-
dalca,  from my eagerness to speak of little Nancy.  Yet can
nothing in the piece be more worthy of mention ;  for nothing
excited greater merriment.

'  James was dressed in a strait body with long sleeves,  made
of striped lutestring,  lapelled with fur,  and ornamented with
small bows of green,  blue,  garnet,  and yellow.3 The back
was shaped with red.  His coat 4 was pompadour,  trimmed
with white Persian;  his shoes were ornamented with tinsefl;
he had a fan in his hand,  a large hoop on,  and a cap made

1  “Tom Thumb the Great,  a little hero,  with a great soul.’’

2  “  Lord Grizzle,  extremely zealous for the liberty of the subject,  very
cholerick in his temper,  and in love with Huncamunca.”

3  “  Glumdalca,  Queen of the Giants,  a captive Queen,  beloved by
King Arthur,  but in love with Tom Thumb.”

4  “  Coat”  means his petticoat ,  below the straight-bodied open gown.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

176

[D77

of every thing that could be devised,  that was gaudy and
extravagant,  feathers of an immense height,  cut in paper,1
streamers of ribbons of all colours,  and old ear-rings and
stone buckles,  put in his hair,  for jewels.  We were obliged
to keep the hair-dresser upon his account;  for Sir Brilliant’s
Tete would by no means do for The Giantess,  no;  he had
the full covering of a modern barber’s block,  toupee,  chignon,
and curls,  all put on at once.2 The height of his head,  cap,
and feathers,  was prodigious;  and,  to make him still more
violent,  he had very high-heeled shoes on.  His face was
very delicately rouged ;  and his eye-brows very finely arched;
so that his face was not to be known.  You cannot imagine
how impossible it was to look at him,  thus transformed,  without laughing, — unless you recollect our infinite grinning,
when we saw aunt Nanny in Dr.  Prattle.  Indeed,  there was
nothing but laughter,  whenever he was on the stage.

The second act I had myself the honour of opening,  attended by Beckey.  My dress was a good sort enough of
burlesque of tragedy dresses,  but so made up as to be quite
indescribable,  though of no bad effect.  Cleora’s was of
muslin and pink gause,  and really very pretty — rather too

1  “  Heads ”  absurdly high had come into fashion,  and were enhanced
by the long feathers,  brought into vogue by the Duchess'  of Devonshire.
In the spring of 1775 Mrs.  Harris wrote to her son:  “  The Duchess of
Devonshire had two plumes sixteen inches long,  besides three small
ones ;  this has so far outdone all other plumes,  that Mrs.  Damer,  Lady
Harriet Stanhope,  etc.,  looked nothing.”  Wraxall tells us that some
one wishing to have ostrich feathers as long as those of the Duchess,

'searched London in vain,  until an undertaker was induced to sell
feathers from a hearse.  Eleven at a time were worn at Court in otie
head,  and by degrees the hair was raised,  on cushions,  from ten inches
to a yard above the forehead.

2 The toupet and pinned-on curls  (or pinned-M/,  if they were of
natural growth)  were nearly alike for men and women,  except that the
men’s stiffened toupets could not rival those the ladies piled up with
padding.  The chignon of the ladies was at that time modified by
gentlemen into the queue,  in its raiment of a bag.  The Duchess of
Devonshire walks in the park with the Duke,  and is rebuked by Omai
because two of her curls are unpinned.  A little later we shall find a
young lady’s curl coming off,  and a mischievous boy tying it to a bell.
Our favourite coxcomb Dick has a severe illness;  Susan tells Fanny of
his convalescence,  but that he has  “  lost both his curls ! — Monstrous
provoking !  ”  A few years later,  fashion exacted two curls on each
side.

1777]  FRANCES BURNEY 177

pretty for the purpose.  The curtain was drawn up,  and the
lovesick Huncamunca was discovered reclining upon an easy
chair,  and weeping,  Cleora standing humbly by her side.1

“Give me some music;  see that it be sad” — was followed
by the very sad air of  “Two Black-birds sat upon a spray,”
in which Beckey was accompanied by the Passage Band,  and
which gave high diversion to the audience and great benefit
to The Princess,  who had time to become quite easy,  before
she spoke any more.2

Indeed,  happily for me,  my spirits were now entirely restored;  the seeing the first act,  and being so much interested
about Nance,  made me quite forget myself,  and to my great
satisfaction I,  found myself quite forsaken by the horrors.
The extreme absurdity and queerness of my part contributed
greatly to reviving me,  and I was really in high and happy
spirits;  though I must own I had been fain to drink  .  .  .
before I began.

The scene that followed,  went off far beyond my expectations.  During Beckey’s song I put myself into all sorts of
affected attitudes of rapturous attention,  and had the pleasure
to find each of them produced a laugh.  She then left me,
and I had the honour of a scene with the King,  in which I
exerted myself,  to the utmost of my power,  in tragic pomp
and greatness;  and I believe the folks hardly knew me
again ;  for I could hear sundry expressions of surprise from
different parts.  Indeed,  had my extreme terror lasted
longer,  I should have hated heartily the very thoughts of
acting ever after.

The King had not been gone a moment,  ere I was visited
by Lord Grizzle,  who kneeling began,

1  “The Princess Huncamunca,  daughter of their Majesties King
Arthur and Queen Dollalolla,  of a sweet,  gentle,  and amorous disposition,  equally in love w'ith Lord Grizzle and Tom Thumb,  and desirous
to be married to them both.”  “Cleora,  a maid of honour,  in love with
Noodle.”

2 Cleora’s song runs thus :

“Cupid,  ease a love-sick maid,

Bring thy quiver to her aid ;

With equal ardor wound the swain,

Beauty should never sigh in vain.”

i/8

THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777/

Oh!  Huncamunca!  Huncamunca!  Oh!”1
to which came the most haughty of all my speeches:

“  Ha!  doest thou know me!  Princess that I am  !

That thus of me you dare to make your game?  ” —

and I do assure you it wanted no energy or imperiousness
that I could give it;  so that my transition to kindness afterwards in proposing to be married in the Fleet,  was  [the more]

laughable and ridiculous . When we had arranged our

plan,  and he quitted me to buy a licence,  my other lover,
Tom Thumb,  entered.  O,  that you all could have heard her
say, —

“Where is my Princess?  where my Huncamunca?” —

she spoke it with a pathos that was astonishing.  The tender
Princess easily yields to the eloquence of her little hero,  and
they are just coming to terms,  when the appearance of
Glumdalca interrupts them.  And this scene occasioned more
excess of laughter than any throughout the piece.  Glum-
dalca’s first speech,

“I need not ask if you are Huncamunca;

Your brandy nose proclaims— - ”

caused almost a roar,  and the scornful airs of the two ladies,
while deriding the charms of each other,  kept it up as long
as we continued together.  But had you seen little Nancy
standing between James and me,  and each of us taking a
hand,  and courting her favour, — you would have laughed
yourself sick at her amazed looks at each.

I came off,  however,  victorious,  and we left Glumdalca to
mourn her slighted love.  Little Nancy who stood listening
for some time,  heard some of them say,  that  “  this is Tom
Thumb’s wedding-day “Am I married?”  cried she,  “cousin
Fanny.”  “  O yes.”  “  Who am I married to,  then? “Why to

“Oh!  Sophonisba!  Sophonisba !  Oh!”

is a line in a tragedy by the poet of  “The Seasons,”  which was thus
mocked.

“  Oh  !  Jemmy Thomson  !  Jemmy Thomson  !  Oh  !  ”
is another well-known parody of the same line.

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

179

me,  my love.”  “Ol’m glad it isn’t to uncle James then,
’cause he’s such an ugly woman  [with that nose on].”

The 3rd act had many alterations,  in order to lengthen
the part of Cleora.  Beckey also  .  .  .

The battle-scene went off extremely well;  but Edward,
while fighting with the Giantess,  had his forehead,  and the
side of his eye most terribly wounded.

The whole concluded with great spirit,  all the performers
dying,  and all the audience laughing.  The curtain was then
drawn,  and we all ran into our Green Room;  and here we
remained till the company went down stairs.

They had refreshments in the diningroom.  James changed
his dress and went to pay his compliments to his acquaintance.  Betsy and Beckey,  after some hesitation,  followed
him,  but I begged to be excused as I knew none of the
party,  and had been pertly stared at enough.  I would have
persuaded Richard to make one among them,  but he said
he looked so ugly  (by means of whiskers,  and so forth) 1 that

he could not bear to be seen . While we were waiting

at the stair’s head for the company’s retiring,  a voice to
which I was an utter stranger,  and speaking in masquerade
manner,  called out — -“Where’s Miss Fanny?  Why won’t
Miss Fanny shew herself?  ”  I could not imagine  [wrho that
was,  but supposed Dr.  Wall.]

******

[Visit to Gloucester.]

[Between April and July,  1777. ]
******

We arrived at Gloucester about 5 o’clock.  Dr.  Waif
handed us out of the coach with one shoe all over mud and.
the other clean,  but without any buckle.  He welcomed us
very cordially,  “  but how happened it,”  cried he,  “  that you

1 Not very long ago,  a Berkshire farmer’s wife said to the editor that
she thought the clergyman of her parish  “  much better- looking before he
grew those whiskers" \  by which she meant moustaches,  and a flowing
beard ;  for of whiskers ,  in the modern meaning,  he had none at al!
This is an instance that the Elizabethan meaning of  “  whiskers  ”  still
survives in out of the way places,  among old people.  [1889.]

180 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

did not come by water?  I have been almost to Tewksbury
to meet you,  and walked along the shore till I was covered
with mud; — and here I would not wait to dress before I
came to you;  but there are two or three barges gone up the
river to meet you. 1 Captain Coussmaker returned from Bath
yesterday,  and he should have gone to escourt you,  if you
would have fixed your time for coming.”

He then went up to his wife and returned with her compliments,  and that she was extremely unhappy she could not
wait upon us,  but had all her hair combed out,  and was
waiting for the man to dress it,  who had disappointed her
ever since two o’clock.

I think I never saw a more queerly droll character than
Dr.  Wall’s.  He lives just according to the whim of the
moment,  he rs passionately fond of sports of all sorts and
kinds,  and would purchase them at any trouble or expence;
he says every thing that occurs to him,  whether of praise or
censure,  compliment or ridicule;  he means to offend nobody,
and never dreams of taking offence himself:  and,  wit hall,  he
has a most absurdly odd face,  and wears the most ridiculous
wig I ever saw.2

1 Fanny and her friends were probably expected to reach Gloucester
by the  “Worcester Wherry,”  or by one of the barges which landed
their passengers three or four times a week at  “  the Ship,  on the quay,”
at Gloucester.  Instead of so doing,  they most likely travelled to Gloucester in the Birmingham and Worcester coach,  unless they posted.
The barges which went up the river to meet Dr.  Wall’s friends must
have been hired for this occasion.  Public wherries,  trows,  and barges,
as well as the Birmingham coach,  have sunk under the  “stress and
storm  ’  of the railway between Worcester and Gloucester.

2 Dr.  John Wall  (the elder),  who was,  probably,  the father of Fanny’s
friend,  Dr.  Wall,  of Worcester,  was,  in his day,  a physician in good
practice and repute.  He wrote a treatise on the Malvern waters.  '  We
have seen the treatment of putting patients into sheets soaked in the
spring attributed to him.  It was certainly practised at Malvern in the
eighteenth century.  This treatise,  and other works,  were re-published
some years after his death in 1776,  with his life,  by his youngest son,
Dr.  Martin Wall,  M.D.,  who was born in 1746.  He settled in Oxford,
and in 1784  (on Dr Johnson’s last visit to Oxford)  is described by
Boswell as being  “a learned,  ingenious,  and pleasing gentleman,”  who
drank tea with Johnson’s early friend and host,  Dr.  Adams  (Master of
Pembroke College,  and Canon of Gloucester),  to meet the Doctor,
Bozzy and others.

Dr.  John Wall  (the elder)  was a steward of the Worcester Music

FRANCES BURNEY

181

1777]

He began immediately to talk of the play ,  and said he
could think of nothing else.  “  I hope,  Miss Fanny,”  said he,
you are now quite recovered from the fright of your first
appearance in public;  though,  upon my word,  I should never
have found it out if they had not told me of it;  it appeared
so well in character,  that I took it for granted tnat it belonged to the part.”

“  It was very fortunate for me,”  said I,  “  that I had so
serious and melancholy a part;  for I should totally have
ruined any other.”1

“  The character,  Ma’am,”  returned he,  “seemed wrote on
purpose for you!  Captain Coussmaker says he went to see
‘  The Way to Keep Him  ’  at Bath,  but it was so ill done,  that
after all of you,  he could not sit it,  so he came out before it
was half over.”

We had then to explain the reasons of our not coming by

Meeting in 1746.  He is found attending the beautiful Countess of'
Coventry  (Miss Gunning)  in her last illness;  but h.s name rests now
on being,  in 1751,  the chief founder of the still existing china manufactory at Worcester.  We find in the book of Mr.  Chaffers on  “  Pottery
and Porcelain,”  that he was  “a practical cnemist,  who,  with others,
formed the Worcester Porcelain Company ,  for the manufacture of soft
paste.”  It was promoted by the Cathedral clergy,  and  “tor many years
the principal director,  sub rosa,  was Dr Davies,  an apothecary.  After
the sale of the works in 1772,  Jno Wall,  the elder.  M.D.,  was the head
of the new company.”  Early Worcester china sometimes bears the
mark of W.  for Wall;  sometimes a crescent,  that being the crest of the
Warmstrey family,  whose house in Worcester he bought for his china
works;  and we have heard ot  “  W.  W.,”  which may mean  “Wall”
and  “Worcester.”

Dr.  Wall married a daughter of Mr.  Sandys,  a lawyer,  town clerk of
the city of Worcester.  Fanny’s Dr.  Wall was most likely his eldest
son,  “Jno.  Wall,  the younger,  M.D.”  Susan met him in Worcester,
as Fanny also did.  He had a grotesque bent towards music.  He was
living in a house in Gloucester Cathedral Close,  which nas since had
medical tenants.  That is all we have learned of him.  He does not
seem to have been living in Gloucester when Fanny again went there in
1788;  perhaps he soon returned to Worcester,  after the death of his
father in 1776.  The family was of Worcester,  connected with the
Lechmeres,  with whom they were associated in a bank.  There was a
clergyman of the name,  and a Capel Wall,  Esq.,  of Tavistock Street,
London,  who voted  (as a Whig)  in that Gloucestershire election,  which,
raised high the heat of party,  as is shown in the following pages.

1 The character was one for a first-rate actress.  It was played by
Mrs.  Siddons.

182

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i777

water.  James,  in a whisper,  asked me where I thought
Richard was?  I could not possibly guess.  “Why,”  said he,
“  he is in the back lane leading to the house,  standing in
the rain without his great coat,  and talking to Mrs.  Wall,  who
is leaning out of the window to answer him,  with all her hair
about her ears  !  ”  Thus,  you see,  there was no exaggeration
— ver prett:  n’est-ce pas 1 — of Richard’s favour with this fair
lady.

Captain Coussmaker came soon after.  Lord Berkeley had
promised to spend the evening at Dr.  Wall’s,  but afterwards
sent an excuse,  that he was so busy mustering and examining
men,  that he could not possibly keep his engagement.

Lord Berkeley,  you must know,  is Colonel of the Militia
of Gloucestershire,  and makes it his business to keep it upon
a footing remarkably respectable.  He is so active and vigilant
in the direction of the affairs of the corps,  that the lowest
soldier in the Militia cannot have done more actual business.
He is a very handsome man,  and looks remarkably sensible,
penetrating,  and serious.2

Mrs.  Wall did not make her appearance till tea was half
over;  for the Doctor insisted that Nancy should make tea,
and not wait for Mrs.  Brilly ,  which,  or My Ladyship ,  he
always calls her.  I think you know that Mrs.  Wall’s name
is Briliana  ! 3

1  “Ver prett,”  is a quotation from Omai.  If we are not mistaken.
Dr.  Wall’s house is in much the same state in 1SS9,  as it was in 1777.
It is at the south-west corner of the Gloucester College-Green.  The
window where Mrs.  Wall talked to Dick with her hair about her ears,
giving cause for comment,  may be seen in what is now euphoniously
called  “St.  Mary’s Street,”  but which was then  “Three Cocks’  Lane.”
The house where Lord Berkeley was then living is on the west aide of
the Green,  and has been used as a mess-room quite lately.

2 Frederick Augustus,  fifth Earl of Berkeley,  who was unfortunate
enough to alter the succession of his ancient family.  The Berkeley
Peerage case was tried by the House of Lords in 1811.

3 The name of Mrs.  Wall does not  (though it looks as if it did)  come
from a poem or a play,  like Gloriana,  Indiana, -Oriana,  and so forth;
but was coined for a daughter of Edward,  Viscount Conway,  and his
wife,  a Tracy,  of Toddington,  in Gloucestershire,  who was born at
what our forefathers called  “The Brill.”  “The Brill,”  “  Briel,”  or
“  Brielle,  is a fortified town on the island of Voorne,  fourteen miles
south of Rotterdam,  which was taken by the Dutch from the Spaniards
in 1572.  It was the starting-point of the Dutch Republic.  Lord Con-

1777]  FRANCES BURNEY 183

As she is in mourning,  her dress did not shew to so much
advantage as to pay us for waiting so long to see it.  And
now,  if you would have my opinion of Mrs.  Wall,  from what
I saw of her in a visit of three days,  take it.  I think her very
plain,  though very smart in dress and appearance;  she is.
clever,  but very satirical;  she makes it a rule never to look
at a woman when she can see a man;  she takes it in turn to
be very natural and very affected;  she spends infinitely more
than half her time at her toilette,  to which she is an absolute
slave  ;  she is exceedingly fond of laughing and making merry,
but rather tiresome in pointing out that penchant,  not leaving
others to discover;  and,  in short,  she has three ruling passions,  each of them so strong it would be difficult to say
which predominates,  and these are Dress,  Admiration,  and
Fun — -simple,  honest,  unrefined Fun.  I can believe any thing
as to the present  [to Richard]  from her behaviour and looks:
she is forever seeking Richard’s eyes,  and when they meet,
they smile so significantly,  and look with such intelligence
at each other  !  But,  indeed,  Mrs.  Wall does not confine her
smiles to him,  any more than he does his gallantry to her.
Were I Dr.  Wall,  I should be infinitely miserable to have a
wife so apparently addicted to flirting,  and seeking objects
with whom to coquet from morning to night.

Dr.  Wall,  though a very indifferent performer,  is really
very fond of music,  and he has so strange and mixed a
collection of musical instruments as I never before saw.  He
brought them all out of a closet in the parlour,  which he appropriates to keeping them,  one by one ;  and he drew out
some tone,  such as it was!  from each before he changed.
First came a French horn, — then a trumpet, — then a violin,
—a bass,— a bassoon,— a Macaroni fiddle,— and,  in short,  I
believe he produced twenty of different kinds.  An overture

way was its governor when he named his little daughter Brilhana.
She married Sir Robert Harley,  K.B.,  then head of the historical house
of Harley,  and became almost as famous during the Civil War as Charlotte de la Tremoille,  Countess of Derby.  In her husband’s absence,
she defended his Castle of Brampton in Herefordshire against the
Roundheads,  compelling them to raise the siege after a seven weeks’
struggle.  Her name was kept up in kindred families in the West of
England,  from one of w'hich probably sprung this second Mrs.  S.
who affected such a flirtation with Cousin Dick.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

184

[i777

was then attempted, — every body that possibly could,  bore a
part, — and I really would not wish to hear a much worse performance:  and yet this music lasted to supper!

Mr.  Coussmaker stayed supper.  He is a very pretty sort
of young man,  but rather too shy and silent,  which,  though
infinitely preferable to forwardness and loquacity,  nevertheless may be carried too far,  either for the comfort of the
owner or pleasure or satisfaction of those with whom he converses.1 We were,  however,  very jocose;  though,  unfortunately for me,  I had a very sad head-ach,  and could not
contribute my mite towards the general cause.

After supper Dr.  Wall gave about sentimental toasts.  We
were all mighty stupid at them,  and he was obliged to help
every body.  When my turn came I told him,  that not being
able to think of a sentiment I would give a good wish,  and
then I drank A Fair Day to the Review To-morrow.  Dr.
Wall pretended to misunderstand me,  and gave it out—
“  Miss Fanny Burney’s Good Wishes,  and a Fair Review, —
that is to say,  added he,  All Miss Fanny Burney’s Wishes, —
for I dare say they are all good.”

When he called upon Mr.  Coussmaker,  he,  too,  said he
really could not recollect one.  “  No?”  cried Dr.  Wall,  “  what
don’t you recollect any thing about Full pay? — O  ’tis a most

1 Mary,  daughter and heiress of Gervas Hayward,  Esq.,  of Sandwich,  in Kent,  married,  first,  George Coussmaker,  Esq.,  of Staple,
Kent.  Her son,  this Captain George Coussmaker,  was afterwards
“colonel of the foot-guards,”  and married,  in 1790,  Catharine,  sister
of Edward,  18th Baron de Clifford.  His daughter,  Sophia Coussmaker,
and her heirs,  afterwards succeeded to the ancient barony of De Clifford.
We find Captain Coussmaker in Miss Berry’s diary for 1783,  as meeting
her party at several places in Italy,  and joining it to visit Pompeii and
Vesuvius.  His sister,  Catherine Coussmaker,  was an intimate friend of
Susan Burney,  as was his mother of the Doctor.  Mrs.  Coussmaker
married,  secondly,  in 1764,  Sir Thomas Pym Hales,  Baronet,  M.P.  at
one time for Dover,  who died in 1773-  She,  with Miss Coussmaker and
her five  (Hales)  daughters,  lived at Howletts,  in Kent,  and,  at times,
in London.  It was to her that Dr.  Burney read  “Evelina,”  without
telling who wrote it.  Through her,  Fanny almost touches Jane Austen,
who must often have heard of her,  and of other Burneys,  through the
Hales family.  In 1796 Jane writes from Kent to her sister,  “Lady
Hales,  with her two youngest daughters,  have been to see us.”  In the
same letter she playfully compares herself with  “Camilla,”  in Madame
D’Arblay’s latest novel.

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

185

excellent sentimental toast!”  Nancy,  Betsey,  and Beckey
were all equally at a loss, — I know not what bewitched all
our memories,  but not a soul could recollect one when called
upon.  “Well,”  cried Dr.  Wall,  “don’t suppose,. gentlemen,
that the ladies have no sentiments,— the only thing is,  they
are ashamed to own them, — that’s all.”

Provoking enough, — but he says any thing:  for example,
looking hard at Betsy,  “Pray,”  said he,  “did ever any body
take notice of your eyes?” — “My eyes,  Sir? — Why?” —
“  Because they a’n’t fellows, — one is brown,  and one grey,”
— and,  indeed,  it is very true.  And when he was helping
Edward to some duck,  he bid him cut it very small,  for he
was afraid his mouth would hardly hold it.  When he called
upon Edward for his toast,  “  Come,  Sir,”  cried he,  “  what
do you gentlemen of the Royal Academy give for sentiments? — a model of Venus? — or what? — You that study from
Nature must certainly be very sentimental.”  1

The next morning,  before we were dressed,  Dr.  Wall serenaded us with sundry instruments,  one after another,  [upon
the stair-case.]  When we came down to breakfast,  Mrs.  Wall
having slightly enquired how we did,  said,  “  Pray do you
know why Dickey does not come?”  for so she jocosely calls
our cousin Richard.  All the gentlemen,  you must know slept
at some inn,  as Dr.  Wall could only accommodate the
females with beds.

Soon after we were seated a party entered who were
invited to spend the day,  consisting of Miss Holcomb,  a most
frightful and disagreeable woman,  Miss Hayward,  an old

1 Edward was among the earliest students of the Royal Academy.
Miss Lucy Aikin,  who was born in 1781,  wrote a dialogue on  “Old
Times  ”  from her own recollections of the last century.  In it  “  Mrs.
Harford”  describes to her grand-daughter,  “Sophia,’'  the sufferings
of young ladies who were called upon by custom to drink to the good
health of each one at the dinner-table in beer;  but she adds,  “it was
even worse when we came to the wine after dinner,  or supper.  It
was then not sufficient to drink healths.  A young lady would often
be obliged,  in spite of blushes and entreaties,  to give as a toast,  either
the name of a single gentleman,  or a sentiment ;  perhaps such a flat
affair as this,  ‘  May the single be married,  and the married happy !  ’  ”
It is clear,  however,  from the rest of the dialogue,  that  “  Mrs.  Harford  ”
speaks of the manners of a class whom Fanny would have thought in
great need of her book on  “  Politeness.”

i86

THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

maid,  she is deaf,  and should have been Mrs.  Hayward
many years ago,  her brother,  a fat-headed man,  and Miss
Wall,  sister of the Doctor,  who is ugly,  but agreeable.  Our
three youths and Mr.  Gale strolled in soon after.  Richard
seated himself,  with his usual ease,  at Mrs.  Wall’s elbow,
while she made breakfast;  and her company was not the
more attended to for his vicinity.

We had but just done when the Militia began to be drawn
forth upon the College Green,  where Dr.  Wall lives,  and
Lord Berkeley,  who resides next door but one to the Doctor,
appeared before the window.  We all flew to put on our hats,
and then went in a body to the door,  to see the ceremony of
preparing the men for marching to the field.  Here we were
joined by Captain Coussmaker,  Captain Snell,  Captain
Miers,  and heaven knows who — for Dr.  Wall is acquainted
with all the corps, — who are all men of fortune and family.
We were also joined by a Mr.  Davis,  a young man,  a neigh
bour of the Doctor,  celebrated for flightiness,  freedom,  gallantry and rioting.  He is handsome and agreeable,  though I
should like him much better were he less forward;  for not
content with renewing an intimate acquaintance with Betsy
and Beckey,  he began one with me,  upon the same free terms
at once!  [Imagine how that’s a mode to my royal favour.]
We went to the review in two coaches;  in one the same
party that travelled to Gloucester,  and in the other Miss
Holcomb,  &c.  But Mrs.  Wall — stayed at home,  lest she
should miss a hair-dresser she wanted to have to herself
against the Ball !  Richard,  Harry Davis and Mr.  Gale walked,

for the field of action is but just out of the city .

Our coach was so placed as to give us the best view we
could have,  from one spot,  of the show.  James and Edward
immediately got out,  as did all the men who came in
carriages.  When the salute was to be given to Lord Berkeley,
most of the ladies also alighted:  so did all our party,  myself
excepted,  and as I was by no means well,  and had silk shoes,
and the day was cold,  and the ground damp,  ....  I determined to content myself with what I could see from the
coach: 1 and away went all the rest except Edward .

1 This must have been upon the low-lying,  marshy ground beyond
the West Gate of Gloucester,  called  “the Town Ham.”

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

187

Harry Davis also insisted on keeping me company;  and he
entertained me with an account of the state of affairs in
Gloucester;  and told me,  that though he loved dancing
better than any thing under heaven,  and would give the
world  [to be of our set,]  yet he would not go to the Ball
to night for fifty guineas,  because it was a Berkeley Ball,—
and he and his family were Chesters!  1

Soon after Dr.  Wall paid me a visit,  and,  assuring me that
nobody took cold at a review,  advised me,  or,  rather,  rioted
me,  to get out and go and see the Salute;  and so,  though I
was cold and uncomfortable,  rather than appear finical and
fine-ladyish,  I got out and was escorted across the field to
the rest of the party,  who stood very near Lord Berkeley,  the
better to see the ceremony.

Harry Davis,  looking at my shoes,  said I should certainly
catch my death if I did not take care  (for it had rained all
the morning),  and then put down his handkerchief for me to
stand upon.  I was quite ashamed of being made such a fuss
with,  but he compelled me to comply;  and every time we
moved forwards or backwards,  he picked it up,  and every
time we stood still he put it on the ground,  and insisted on
my making use of it .

The men were reckoned by all the judges to go through
their different manoeuvres with great neatness,  dexterity,  and
spirit.  But for the firing,  which always shakes my whole

1 This is equal to Whig and Tory.  There are those living who remember the fame,  if not the person,  of a staunch old Tory,  of the most
hospitable bent,  known as Tom Davis.  He was a solicitor in Gloucester,
and almost certainly akin to the gallant Harry.  An election petition
was pending while Fanny was in Gloucester.  William Chester,  Esq.,
had been returned,  with Sir William Guise,  as a member for the county.
Beatson informs us that  “the Honble.  George Berkeley  (only brother
of the Earl),  and a number of the freeholders,  accused the High Sheriff
of the county of partiality towards Mr.  Chester,  and petitioned against
his election as being invalid.”  “The Committee,  [of the House of
Commons,]  after sitting three months,  declared Mr.  Chester duly elected,
and that they saw no cause to impeach the conduct of the High Sheriff.”
Hence all this warmth of feeling against Captain Berkeley,  R.N.,  who
was afterwards seven times returned for the county of Gloucester.  It
was said that as much as  .£100,000 was spent upon this contest.  Mrs.
Delany’s correspondence has details of her being asked to canvass an
upper servant of the Duke of Portland  (who was a Gloucestershire
freeholder)  for his vote for Chester.

1 88 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

frame,  I should think a review a sight as agreeable as it is
undoubtedly grand and striking .

When we returned home we found that Mrs.  Wall was
still at her toilette!  ....

Mrs.  Wall is as cavalier and easy in her actions as her
husband is in words;  for though she had a house full of
company,  several of them people of consequence,  such as the
Haywards and  ....  yet,  without the least hurry or discomposure,  she gave the whole day to the adornment of her
person for the night.

As we found we had our time pretty much at our own disposal from the review till dinner,  it was proposed to shew
me the town;  and so we all went in a body,  attended by
Harry Davis,  up and down the principal streets.  The city is
very little worth seeing,— indeed,  the Cathedral seems the
only building worthy notice;  there are very few good houses,
and no good streets.1 We then strolled upon the Parade at
the College Green,  where Richard would not be contented
without handing me,  as if I had been going into a carriage.
And here we met Dr.  Wall,  Mr.  Coussmaker,  and Mr.  Hayward,  who were going to dine with Lord Berkeley and the
Corps,  and invited our gentlemen to accompany them.  Only
James accepted the offer.  When we returned home,  poor
Harry Davis looked an desespoir ;  for though very intimate
at Dr.  Wall’s,  he was obliged not to enter the house because
the Berkeley party,  to which the Dr.  belongs,  were always
popping in and out.  When he left us,  he said he was afraid
he should hang himself before night.  But he advised me repeatedly to see the College the next morning,  to which he
proposed attending us.

1 Mrs.  Delany wrote in 1736 of Gloucester,  that  “it was a foggy
hole,  full of impertinent company.”  She used to visit her mother and
sister in St.  Mary’s Square,  close by  “  the College,”  as true Gloucester
folk call their cathedral.  Yet Gloucester must have been much more
lively when there was a Dr.  Wall,  a Mrs.  Brilly,  and a Harry Davis,
with country families clustering about  “the College”  in the winter
nionths,  than since all that has gone by;  and Fanny saw many picturesque objects which have since been removed,  defaced,  or destroyed.
Probably the  “  Adelphi,”  Portland Place,  and the new squares at the
West End of London,  were the models of what she desired in streetbuilding.  ,

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

189

Mrs.  Wall was still invisible;  and when,  at last,  she appeared,  she had only her hair dressed,  and very extravagantly,
nay,  preposterously,  and no cap on,  or any other appearance
of readiness.  After slightly begging our pardons,  “Tell
them,”  said she,  to the man,  “  to bring in dinner directly, —
for it has been waiting for me this hour.”  Then,  turning to
Richard,  with a smile of ineffable satisfaction,  “  How came
you not to dine at the booth”  [hall]  “with my Lord?”1

“  Ma’am,  I, — I rather thought, — that,  as the other gentlemen went - ”  affectedly stammered Richard.2

“  Upon my word,  Sir,  we are much obliged to you, — but I
am afraid you rather thought you was not dressed,  hay,  Mr.
Dickey? — was not that the case? — ”

Dinner was then brought in,  and Richard did the honours
for Dr.  Wall,  drinking with the ladies,  helping them,  and so
forth.

Mrs.  Wall complained bitterly that she was very backward
in her dress,  and feared she should not have time to be ready:
the hair dresser was appointed to be with her again by 4

1 The Booth-Hall,  or  “  Boothall  ”  (as we find it in a Gloucester
Guide of 1792,  by  “A Citizen,  and Member of the University of
Oxford''''),  was,  in early days,  a Guildhall,  used also as an Exchange of
wares by merchants.  It was rebuilt in 1606,  and made,  for a while,  a
prison for offending burgesses ;  an assize court for the county and city,
afterwards ;  an assembly and conceit-room,  besides,  being specially
fitted up for such purposes in 1757.  During the meeting of the Three
Choirs in that year,  “The Messiah”  was performed in it for the first
time in Gloucester.  In 1763 the whole performances of the Music-
Meeting were given in the Booth- Hall.  It is described,  about the time
when Fanny saw it,  as being  “a very lofty,  lath-and-plaster building,
full of windows.”  Inside,  it was  “barn-like,  and uncomfortable.”  It
was on the south side of Westgate Street,  hard by where now stamds
the  “Shire Hall,”  which answers many of the ends of the destroyed
Booth-Hall.  Close to it was an inn,  named after it,  “the Booth-Hall.”
Perhaps Lord Berkeley and his officers dined in the Hall.  Fanny
danced there,  unless the ball was at the assembly-room of the Bell Inn,
made famous by P'ielding.  We are told that some remains of the
hostelry may be seen near the present  “  Shire Hall”  of Gloucester.

2 In Mr.  Daniel Lysons’s  “  History of the Meeting of the Three
Choirs  ”  (1812),  Richard Burney is said to have been  “  a performer of
much taste,  both on the violin and violoncello.”  He is recorded,  with
his brother Charles Rousseau  (our  “Mr.  Burney”),  to have played at
the Worcester Music-Meeting ip 1770— and probably performed at
other meetings of the land.

THE EARLY DIARY OF

190

[i777

o’clock.  As soon as we could with decency,  we all separated
to beautify.

When the man came,  he was seized by so many,  one after
another,  that we almost feared we should have been obliged
,  to give up the ball,  it was so very late ere he came near us.
The affair became so serious,  and the waiting so alarming,
lest the minuets should be over,  that the party was fain tc
separate and go off in chairs as soon as they were ready.  .  .

Betsy and I were the last in the house;  and she went off
about two minutes before me.  When I went down,  in the
hall I was met by Harry Davis — who handed me into the
chair,  charging me not to over-fatigue myself at the ball,  because he built upon accompanying me to the College next
morning,  [to shew me Gloucester city,  &c.]

[The minuets were nearly over.]  The last minuet was by
Lord Berkeley and Mrs.  Yate.  James immediately engaged
me for country dances.  Dr.  Wall was so differently zvigged,
that I really did not know him, — and when he came and said
to me,  “  So,  Ma’am,  I’m glad to see you here, — -why you like
coming late to these places?” — I at first took him for a
stranger:  and he plagued me about it all the rest of the time
I remained at Gloucester, — for Mr.  Coussmaker informed
against me:  “so you didn’t know me?” — made every third
sentence.

[Adieu,  my dear girl, — I must finish this expedition another
time.] 1

I think I left off with the Ball at Gloucester? — You make
no answer,  so I presume silence gives consent.

Eh bien.  It was two o’clock in the morning ere we sat
down to supper.  Mr.  Berkeley and Captain Coussmaker were
of our party.  We were all in prodigious spirits,  and kept it
up till near 5 in the morning.

Mr.  Berkeley is a handsome man,  and very well,  but I
think him affected,  and therefore like him not.2 Richard,

1 It must be understood that there are here,  and elsewhere,  many
erasures.  These words seem to have been written later,  to connect two
letters,  and to fill the place of two effaced lines in one of them.

2 Afterwards,  Rear-Admiral Sir George Cranfield Berkeley,  G.C.B.,
some time Lord High Admiral of Portugal.  He was the only surviving
brother of the fifth Earl of Berkeley.  He greatly distinguished himself

FRANCES BURNEY

1777'J

191

who came in last  (because he waited for a chair),  found no
room at the table;  and so he got behind me,  and said he
would wait.  “Not behind my chair,  however,”  cried I,  “for
I can’t bear it.”  “  No,  no,  Dick,”  cried Dr.  Wall,  “  don’t
stand behind her chair, — go to some agreeable lady.”  Richard,
upon myrepeating the desire,  [after fine speechyfying,]  walked
off,  and got a seat behind Mrs.  Wall’s,  and by degrees,  and
her assistance,  wedged himself in between her and Nancy at
the top of the table,  where he laughed and figured away
very jocosely.  i;

Dr.  Wall,  who sat next me,  was mighty facetious:  and he
stuffed me all supper time,  saying he had  “ given orders I
should not he stinted. ,”  and conjecturing,  when I refused anything,  that I wanted something I could neither eat nor drink.'
Indeed,  he scarce ever spoke to me,  but with a quotation
from  “Tom Thumb,”  or an allusion to Huncamunca.

After supper,  Richard,  James,  Betsy,  and Mrs.  Wall sang
some catches,  indifferently enough upon the whole,  though I
like the voice of Richard very much on these occasions.  Mr.
Berkeley sometimes joined the treble part,  and Dr.  Wall the

as captain of the  “  Marlborough”  man-of-war,  of seventy-four guns,  in
Lord Howe’s victory over the French revolutionary fleet off Brest,  on
“the glorious 1st of June,”  1794.  After the  “Imperieux”  and the
“  Mutius Scaevola”  had struck their colours to him,  a French ship of
120 guns came under the stern of the  “  Marlborough,”  and raked her
with a broadside,  which totally dismasted her,  killed many of her crew,
and wounded,  among others,  Captain Berkeley in the head and leg,  so
that he was compelled to leave the quarter-deck.  Ten years afterwards a
writer in a London newspaper accused Sir George Berkeley of  “  skulking
in the cock-pit during the action.”  A jury gave Berkeley  .£1,000 of
damages for this libel.

1  “King Arthur:  Daughter,  I have observ’d of late some grief
Unusual in your countenance —

....  What is the cause?

Say,  have you not enough of meat and drink?

We’ve giv’n strict orders not to have you stinted.

Huncamunca:  Alas!  my lord,  I value not myself,

That once I eat two fowls,  and half a pig ;

Small is that praise !  but oh  !  a maid may want
What she can neither eat nor drink —

King Arthur:  What’s that?

Huncamunca:  O spare my blushes,  but I mean a husband —
King Arthur:  If that be all,  I have provided one.”

Fielding’s Tom Thumb,  Act ii,  Scene v.

G

II.

I92 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

bass,  but so ludicrously as to make me laugh immoderately.
Richard gave himself a thousand droll airs,  in the Italian
way,  squaring his elbows,  making faces,  heightening his eyebrows,  and acting profusely .

When we were all re-arranged,  and Richard again took his
seat next to Mrs.  Wall,  the Doctor said to me,  “Come,  now
for a little of  ‘Tom Thumb;’ — come,  Miss Fanny,  what
part will you speak? — the goose pie and half a pig? — come,
you must give us something.”  Upon my remonstrating,  or
rather,  absolutely refusing,  “  But you must,”  cried he, —
“come,  do, — else I’ll set Dick Burney upon you!”  “No,
no,”  cried I, — “O spare my blushes /” — and after a little
further fussation,  and much jocularity,  he gave it up,  to my
great satisfaction,  for,  had he persisted,  and made his request
public,  I could never have consented,  [however pained by
perpetual negativing].

When,  at length,  we thought it time to retire,  Mrs.  Wall
rang for candles, — but upon opening the parlour door,  for all
us females to decamp,  we all burst into a general chorus of
laughter at the call for candles,  for we found ourselves in
broad  ^ay-light!— We therefore wished all the gentlemen
good morning,  and left them to their wine.

We were so little disposed for sleep,  that we considered
for some time whether it would be worth while or not to go
at all to bed:  and we all went into Mrs.  Wall’s room,  where
we chatted and laughed,  and weighed this important point;
which was at length determined by our all agreeing that to
change our dresses being absolutely necessary,  we might as
well condescend to take a nap into the bargain.  Upon which
consideration we bid good night to the morning,  and sought
to conceal ourselves from the bright glare of the obtruding
sun by softly reposing our languid heads and wearied limbs
on downy pillows and enervating feather-beds.  We ought,
perhaps,  to blush at acknowledging such depravity and weakness of spirit, — yet had you seen what ghosts we looked, —
you must,  at least have owned,  that,  from whatever cause,
the effect of a blush could never be more becoming.

The gentlemen parted very soon.

Dr.  Wall gave us our usual serenade before we were dressed,

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

193

and blew to us all the Country Dances we nad figured in the
preceding evening.  We were down long before Mrs.  Wall,
whose toilette is an affair of moment, — though only in one
sense, — for as to time,  ’tis an affair of much longer duration.

As soon as we entered the room,  the Doctor,  seizing
me,  forced me to sit  [close to his chair.]  He was looking
over Thicknesse’s Tour,' — and we both went on with it,  and
made comments which,  had the author heard,  might have
endangered our safety for the rest of his life.

“  Pray,  Miss Fanny,”  cried he,  “  how does the Yellow >  lady
do?”  “  Yellow lady?”  “  Yes, — didn’t you know your sister
turned yellow while she was in Worcester?”1 2

There was never such a man,  I believe,  before ,  for making
strange speeches.  He says any and every thing;  but he
seems so good naturedly disposed to take as well as give ,
that one has never any idea of being affronted by him.

Scarcely had Mrs.  Wall entered the room ere she said —
“But where’s Dickey? — why doesn’t he come to breakfast?”
Then,  ringing the bell,  “  Tom,  go to the Inn,  and tell the
gentlemen we wait for them.”

An answer was brought that they were already at breakfast at the Inn,  but would attend us soon.

We then talked over the ball and review,  and both the
Doctor and his lady pressed us to stay some time longer,  in
a very earnest manner, — but our going was absolutely indispensable,  as my uncle had charged us by no means to stay
longer than the Thursday.

“  Lord! — what shall we do,  when you are all gone?”  cried
Dr.  Wall — “  why,  you may as well stay, — Mrs.  Humphries
can amuse Mr.  Burney,  you know.”

1 Philip Thicknesse,  Governor of Landguard Fort,  an early patronizer
of Gainsborough;  of whom he wrote an unfriendly Memoir,  after the
great painter had asserted his independence,  won fame,  and died.
“  April 3rd,  1778.  Tohnson  :  I have been reading Thicknesse’s Travels,
which I think are entertaining.  Boswell:  What,  Sir,  a good book?
Johnson:  Yes,  Sir,  to read once;  I do not say that you are to make a
study of it,  and digest it.  ”

2 This was either Hetty,  or Susan ;  each of whom had been staying
at Worcester before Fanny.  Was it a medical pleasantry?  or did it
turn upon the Gloucester Whig colour being yellow? — so that a Burney,
who was  “  blue  ”  (i.e.  Tory)  by birth,  had turned yellow for a while?

194

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i777

“How dull we shall be!”  cried the affectionate wife;  “I
shall be ready to drown myself; — yesterday the review and
the ball,  and to-night nothing,  only the Doctor and 1 ! — do,
Dr.  Wall,  let me go with the ladies just to Gorse Lawn,  for
a frolic ! — ”

The Doctor would not hear of this.  “  No,  Mrs.  Brilly, —
no,  my Ladyship , — you’ll fatigue yourself to death.  Besides,
how will you get back?”

“  O ! — I’ll manage that!”  However,  the subject was
waived for the present.  As soon as breakfast was over a
horse was brought to the door for the Doctor to try.  He
mounted it immediately,  and capered all round the College
Green in a very laughable manner,  for he made his horse
dance in and out by every other tree,  Hay fashion}

We sauntered about the hall and parlour till near one
o’clock,  expecting in vain our beaus;  and Mrs.  Wall perpetually exclaiming, — “Lord,  what can be become of Dickey?
— I’m afraid the pretty creature has lost himself!”

Nancy having a visit to make to a Mrs.  Barnes,  proposed
our then going;  and Mrs.  Wall said she would take the
opportunity to call upon a lady who was just going to quit
Gloucester  :  “  And I hope,”  cried she,  “  that when we return
the sweet dears will have found their way to the house.  I
must tell you what a nice trick I served Dickey last Saturday, — ha,  ha,  ha! — it makes me laugh to think of it!  You
must know,  when he was going to Cheltenham,  as usual,  on

1 To  “dance the Hay”  is,  in the dictionary of Dyche and Pardon
(1744),  to dance in a ring.  See also Nicholas Bailey,  who marks
“Play”  as an old word.  Yet new  “figures”  (as dancing-masters used
to call them)  may have been brought in for the Hay,  or Hey,  in the
eighteenth century.  Certainly,  Dr.  Wall dancing Fanny out and in
among the chairs,  or making  “his horse dance in and out by every
other tree”  in the College Green,  was not  “living up”  to the dictionaries,  which commonly make the Hay out to be a  “  round dance”  only,
from  “  Haie  ”  (French),  (1)  “a hedge,”  (2)  “a fenced enclosure.”
Even the dancing of the Hays,  in  “  The Rehearsal,”  of the sun,  moon,
and stars,  must have been much more  “  effective  ”  if the planets bobbed
“  in and out  ”  at the bidding of the great Mr.  Bayes,  than if they joined
solely in a ring,  or round.  “  Dancing ,  in merry mood ,  the winding
hayes ,”  is a verse which seems to imply a devious,  not a set dance,  in
a round.  We have seen  “  the hays ”  described as being not unlike
reels.

1777]  FRANCES BURNEY  >195

Saturday morning,  I took it into my head to try a new horse
the Doctor had bought me,  and so make a visit to Cheltenham at the same time.  Well,  Mr.  Dickey was to be njiy
’squire, — so off we set,  and  [lively]  enough we were,  you
may be sure.  Well,  we both dined at Mr.  Delebere’s,1 and I
saw that Mr.  Dickey kept on his boots, — but I did not know
that he intended to return with me to Gloucester that evening,  for I thought it was all choice,  or his custom,  and he
never said a word to me of having any such design.  So
after dinner he went to one of his schools;  and in the evening I saw nothing of the gentleman,  so I set off without him.
— Ha,  ha! — was it not a nice trick? — poor Dickey was so
mad !  for he had intended all along to see me home, — but
how should I know that? — I can’t think why he could not
as well tell me so at once.”  “  Probably,”  said I,  “  he concluded you would take it for granted.”  “Why,  I did call at
the Swan,  where he puts up, — but he was not there, - — so I
came away without him.  I have laughed at him about  .it
ever sfnce: — yet he might as well have let me know his design, — indeed,  I can’t think why he did not.”  A very nice
trick,  indeed! — and not at all by force I — What folly to talk,
nay boast ,  of a trick ,  when she took such pains as to call,  at
an inn in order to have Mr.  Dickey’s company !

We all proceeded,  Nancy,  Betsy,  Beckey,  and myself to
Mrs.  Barnes’;  and there we were scarce seated  [when]  we
were followed by Harry Davis,  who lives almost next door
to her.  “  Mrs.  Barnes,”  cried he,  “I hope you will admit
me,  for I must come to pay my compliments to the Miss
Burneys.”

The ball and review,  you may be sure,  furnished matter
sufficient for conversation.  Harry Davis asked me  [how I]
liked the assembly? — “  I can tell you,”  cried he,  “  who you
danced with.”  “  I’m glad of it,”  answered I,  “  because it
will be fare news to me.”  “  But I am sorry you were so
late,”  returned he, — “  why you lost all the minuets.”  So this
forlorn beau,  instead of hanging himself,  had been enquiring
into all the particulars of the ball.

In a short time we were joined by Richard,  James,  and

1 Mr.  Delabere's name occurs again during Fanny’s royal visit to
Cheltenham in 1788.

196 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

Edward.  Harry Davis then asked me if I would not go to
see the College?  I wTas very ready to comply, — so we all
took leave of Mrs.  Barnes, — a person whose name to have
mentioned has occasioned my writing two words too much.

We first took a stroll in the College Green,  and then
Harry Davis ran to procure the keys,  and get the doors open
for us.  .  .  .

This  [Cathedral,  or]  College,  [as they call it,]  is extremely
well worth seeing,  for its antiquity.  There are many curious
old monuments in it,  though it by no means abounds with
any of modern elegance:  Cuthbert,  King of the Saxons,  is,  I
believe,  the most ancient  :  it is a figure cut in stone,  and
very entire.* 1 There is another figure carved in oak and
painted,  of the Conqueror’s eldest son.  Edward the Second
has also a monument in this Cathedral.  There is a good
deal of painted glass remaining here,  and,  in particular,  one
whole and very large window,  which is reckoned extremely
curious.  We went up,  by terrible old steps and a crooked

stair-case,  to the top of the Tower . The Tower is of

very curious Gothic workmanship,  and so high,  that from
the ground it has the appearance of fine net-work;  though,
when we were close to it,  we should have thought such netting rather coarse,  even had it come from.  Otaheite.  We had
a grand coup d’ceil from the top,  taking in the greatest part
of the County,  with some of Worcestershire.  But I have
seen many more beautiful views,  as I think Gloucestershire
a county by no means of the first class;  at least,  the parts
round the city are not of beauty incomparable.  We had a
good deal of diversion,  all together,  while in the College, —
but I have waited too long to recollect particulars.

There is a Whispering place here; — Harry Davis stayed at
one end,  and Richard went to the other.  The latter began
with — “  How cursed mad Harry Davis was last night that
he could not go to the ball!”  and the other returned — “I
am afraid Mrs.  Wall is a turn-coat,  and that George Berkeley has danced her to his party.”

I his is a mistake.  The cenotaph of Osric,  Viceroy of the Hwiccas,
who,  in 681,  was authorized by Ethelred,  King of the Mercians,  to
build the.  monastery,  is probably meant,  but iC is of the time of the

1 udor Kings.  Robert,  Duke of Normandy,  has also a monument, —
carved nearly a hundred years after his death.

t

FRANCES BURNEY

1 777]

197

We then took another stroll about the town, — and I  .'•aw
enough of it to die contented if I never should see it again ;
- — and then we paraded upon the College Green till we were
obliged to return to dinner,  when Harry Davis was fain to
go to his own home.  Mrs.  Wall was not returned,  but we
found the Doctor playing upon the bassoon,  and,  as usual,
surrounded with the Lord knows how many other instruments.  He presently flung them all away — and what do you
think for? — why to romp with me.  I’m sure you would
never have guessed that;  but the less he found me inclined
to this sort of sport the more determined he seemed to
pursue it,  and we danced round the room,  Hayed in and out
with the chairs,  and all that ,  till it grew so late that he
ordered dinner,  saying,  “Come,  good folks,  let’s take care of
ourselves, — Mrs.  Brilly is certainly run away,— we will have
our dinner without further ceremony.”

We made some remonstrances,  but they had no effect.
In truth,  I think he really did right,  for she certainly ought
to have been at home sooner.  We had just done dinner
before she made her appearance.  She was extremely surprised to find how late it was,  and we were all rather
ashamed of our employment,  and were forced to tell hex
that the Doctor had insisted upon our not waiting any
longer.  “  Why,  Mrs.  Brilly,”  cried he,  “  we thought you
had forgot us, — and so,  my Ladyship ,  we sat down to
dinner:  but they have settled to fling all the fault upon
me.”  “  O,  to be sure,”  cried I,  “  you had nothing in the
world to do with it in reality! — however,  it may pass that
we have but just begun , — only we’ve eat fast.”  “Very well
thought of,”  said he, — “  but,  my Ladyship,  what shall I help
you to? ”

“Why — I don’t know,”  (looking about her),  “but I think
here seems nothing very nice.”  What an air!  I rejoiced in
the Doctor’s answer.

■  “Why,  then,  Mrs.  Brilly,  why did not you provide us
something better?”

“Shall/,  Ma’am,”  cried Richard,  “have the honour of
helping you?  ”

This was assented to;  and she then began,  in a low voice,
a conversation with him which lasted till he left us to go to
business.  I did not hear what passed,  as my neighbour,

THE EARLY DIARY OF

198

[i777

Dr.  Wall,  employed my attention.  But Nancy told me that
she acquainted him she had met with George Berkeley,  and
could not get away from him , — and ran on with much stuff
to that purpose,  as if to pique Richard !  but he is much too
easy for her to succeed in any such attempt, — however
praiseworthy the endeavour.

When Richard was gone,  she grew extremely sociable
with the rest of the party,  particularly with James;  and she
was quite urgent to dissuade us from leaving Gloucester,
and when she found us inexorable,  she grew mad to accompany us as far as Gorse Lawn.1 When she pressed her
husband to consent,  “  Mrs.  Brilly,”  said he,  “  it cannot be,
— you will never be ready in time, — you can’t possibly get
dressed.”  To this in our own minds I believe we all agreed,
for a greater slave to her toilette never existed.  She would
not however give it up,  but in a low voice desired James to
speak for her.  James complied,  but in a very slight manner,
for he is extremely cavalier with the world in general,  and
reserves his politesses pretty much for his favourites.  The
Doctor still refused his consent,  and Mrs.  Wall again exclaimed — “  Lord,  how monstrous dull we shall be !  only us
two! — Lord,  how stupid!”  Poor woman!  who could deny
her pity? — a wife,  and the mother of three children,  to be
lefc at home and with her family! — Unhappy creature;—
what an object of compassion would she think our Hetty?

However,  I must do her the justice to say that her children
never occasioned the least trouble or disturbance,  for not
once did they appear,  nor did we ever hear them mentioned;  so that,  but for previous information,  I should not
have had the slightest suspicion that Mrs.  Wall was a mother.

1 Corse is about six miles N.W.  of Gloucester.  Corse Common,  or
Lawn ,  was a baiting or halting-place on the road to Worcester.  The
common  (of about 1,400 acres)  was enclosed in 1790,  but there is plenty
of it still,  and an inn,  where refreshments can be procured by tourists,
which is probably the same that we have found in some old memoranda
of halting-places upon journeys from Gloucester to Birmingham,  &c. ,
although Upton-on-Severn is the next stage in bills for post-chaises.  A
spot upon Corse Lawn,  called  “  Snig’s End,”  was the scene of Feargus
O’Connor’s experiment of founding a Chartist community.  He brought
artisans from London,  to labour at their trades,  each tilling his own
ground.  It soon came to naught;  but the formal cottages may still be
seen.

*777]  FRANCES BURNEY,  199

I am sure it would tje superfluous to tell you how infinitely
a conduct so tender,  so maternal,  raised her in my esteem
and regard.

Dr.  Wall was so drolly troublesome to me during the rest
of the time we stayed,  that I hardly knew whether to be
[amused]  or angry, — and so I was something betweeii both ;
—a very agreeable mixture,  you will allow.  But he romped
most furiously  [and forcibly],  and made so many attempts
to be rather too facetious,  that I was fain to struggle most
furiously to free myself from him;  yet there was such a.
comic queerness in his manner all the time,  that,  as I succeeded in keeping off caresses,  I could not but be mightily
diverted with him.  The girls,  Betsy and Beckey were upon
the high gig all the time,  for they enjoyed seeing me thus
whisked about of all things.  When,  at last,  we took leave,
he said he  “should often think of Miss Fanny, — there was
something so comical in her!  [he should never forget,  her
while he lived.]  ”

We went in a coach and four,  in the same manner as
before.  Harry Davis came to the door as we left the house.
I believe he was watching for our coming out.  He kept us
talking as long as he could,  and then — off we went,  extremely well pleased and satisfied with our expedition-.

#  *  #  #  *  #

July-

My visit to Westwood,  which was to have taken place last
week,  was postponed,  for reasons and by.  accidents which I
shall not trouble you with relating;  for all the little,  in and
out circumstances of these sort of affairs have so little interest
or importance to recommend them,  that it is not one time
in a thousand they are wprth mentioning.  But on Tuesday
evening I had a note from Nancy,  who was there,  to tell
me that Sir Herbert Packington would call upon me in his
chaise the next morning,  if it would be agreeable to me to
accompany him to Westwood,  to stay a few days.  I graciously
assented,  and accordingly,  at about one o’clock the Baronet
arrived.

As you have the satisfaction of knowing him,  I must deny
myself the pleasure of describing his person,  which otherwise I should think well worth description for its excellent

200 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

ugliness.  He is,  however,  very good-natured,  extremely civil,
and uncommonly hospitable.1

Our journey proved very yea and nayish.  Beckey longed
vastly to accompany us;  and I,  for my part,  extremely
longed that she should;  but what argiified that?  We might
as well not have longed at all for the good it did us;  but
Beckey is a sweet open-hearted girl,  and totally free from
pride.  She owns all her wishes with the utmost sincerity,
which,  by the way,  very few people condescend to do;  they
always choose to be thought to despise whatever they cannot
attain.

Well!  to return to Sir Herbert and my fair self, — why,
perhaps you will be glad to hear our conversation ;  for we
had a tete a tete of full two hours long;  and in that time
much might be said.  I have known many a good thing hit
upon in a quarter of the time.  I can’t pretend to give you
all the particulars ;  but for the heads of the discourse,  they
were as follow,  viz.; — the Weather, — the Hay,— and Dr.
Dodd.

Now,  you will allow that,  to make these three subjects last
two hours,  must require no small art of expatiating;  and I
hope you will honour us accordingly.

Now,  the reasons why I do not give you further particulars
are,  as follow :  viz. ;

Imprimis—  as to the Weather,  I have now forgot clean and
clear ,  whether it was good or bad.

Secundo, — as to the Hay;  it has been so often spoilt,  that
the subject is melancholy,  and I am afraid it should give you
the vapours.

thirdly, — as to Dr.  Dodd;  the poor man is dead,  and I
would have his name rest with his ashes.2

Sir Herbert Perrott Packington,  the seventh baronet of the name,
by the death of whose son,  Sir John,  the baronetcy became extinct in
1830.  It was revived in 1846 in favour of Mr.  Russell  (son of Sir Herbert s elder daughter),  who became the Sir John Packington remembered
a;  a Conservative minister,  and created Lord Hampton.

2 William Dodd,  LL.D.,  Prebendary of Brecon,  Chaplain in Ordinary
to George III.,  and  “  author of a variety of works.”  “  Poor Dodd was
put to death yesterday,”  [June 27,  1777]  “in opposition to the recommendation of the jury, — the petition of the city of London, — and a subsequent petition signed by three-and-twenty thousand hands.  Surely

1777]  FRANCES BURNEY 201

All these circumstances considered,  the journey drops; — -
and you behold me safely arrived at Westwood.  Here again
my descriptive talents are rendered useless;  for you have
forestalled a most excellent account.  What is to be done
in this affair of urgency?  Must that venerable Castle,  its
antique towers,  its formidable turrets,  its noble wood,  its —

“  windows,  that exclude the light,

And passages that lead to nothing,” —

must they all,  all pass unnoticed?  Why,  Sukey,  I protest to
you I have not had so good a subject since I left you; —
and now I might as well have none!  Indeed,  for the future,
I must beg leave to visit places,  with which you are wholly
unacquainted;  for here my genius is perpetually curbed,  my
fancy nipped in the bud;  and the whole train of my descriptive powers cast away,  like a ship upon a desert island!
Very like a ship,  indeed, — a marvellous good simile!  and,  as
to the desert island,  why,  to be sure,  Worcester is somewhat
inhabited.  But what of that? — ’tis a marvellous good simile,
because the less like,  the more marvellous.

So,  you see,  I have made it out as clear as the sun at
noon-day.  But,  now I think of it,  a string of similes will
rather better suit the taste of Mrs.  Esther than yours;  therefore,  I shall set about a flowery epistle to her by the first
convenient opportunity this side of Christmas,  and,  in the
meantime,  I must descend to plain,  vulgar matter of fact,
from which I have,  I know not how, — nor will you easily find
why,  that long digressed.

I was very much pleased with the house and situation at
Westwood;  with the house,  for its antiquity and singularity
of style,  and with the situation,  for its retirement and prospects.  Lady Packington received me most graciously,  and
she shewed me the utmost civility and attention during my
stay.  I think her a rather fine woman of her age,  and sensible
and notable;  but she is parading and tolerably uncultivated
as to books,  and letters,  and such little branches of learning.* 1

the voice of the publick,  when it calls so loudly,  and only for mercy,
ought to be heard.”— Dr.  Johnson to Boswell,  June 28,  1777.

1 Elizabeth,  daughter of Ctesar Hawkins,  Esq.,  married,  first,  Herbert
Wylde,  Esq.,  of Ludlow;  secondly  (in 1759),  Sir Herbert Packington.

202 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [1777

She is also so immoderately fond of her Mansion,  that she will
scarce suffer any body to pass a fly,  if it is upon one of the
windows or tables,  without remarking how well it stands,  or
how beautiful it looks.  But I find she did not become mistress
of this great house early in life,  which accounts for that pride
of possession,  that time and early use might have diminished;
but which her late arrival at makes her  [still]  feel in all its
juvenile force and vivacity.

Miss Packington and Miss Dolly are both good sort of
girls;  but have nothing extraordinary,  and,  consequently,  I
can by no means presume to press your further acquaintance
with them.

But the most agreeable circumstance of my visit remains

to be told,  namely,  that Miss W - was at Westwood the

two first days of my residence there.  Now,  as you know
nothing of her but from Richard’s imitations,  I shall take the
liberty to enlarge upon her person,  character and behaviour.

She is short,  thick-set,  fat,  clumsy,  clunch,1 and heavy.
But her face is very handsome;  she has pretty blue eyes,  and
a most brilliant complexion,  with a colour the finest that can
be  [seen.]  She is very good-natured,  and is not quite a
natural,  that is,  not an absolute idiot;  but she is the verriest
booby I ever knew.  She cannot speak,  without making some
blunder.  She is so bothered in every speech,  that she is
eternally contradicting herself;  she seldom speaks,  without
exciting mirth,  yet seldom discovering the cause,  she always
joins in the effect,  and laughs as simply as she makes others do
artfully ;  and at the same time that her ignorance invites pity,
her happiness renders it  [unnecessary].  She was,  indeed,  the
very quintessence of sport during the visit;  every body
laughs at her with little or no ceremony;  but nobody affronts
her;  she takes all in good part;  and,  if you do but tell her

1  “Clunch”  is a word which Fanny,  most likely,  acquired in Norfolk,  where it is used as a synonym for a  '’‘clodhopper.''1 There is
also  “  churchy,”  thick or clumsy.  The word is not to be found in the
•dictionaries of Johnson,  or of Richardson;  “Davis’s Glossary”  gives
“Clunch;  clumsy,  thickset” — quoting two passages from  “Madame
D’Arblay’s Diary,”  vol.  iii.  397,  iv.  272,  and no other authority;  but
Anstey,  the author of the  “  New Bath Guide,”  who was born in Suffolk,
makes his wouid-be fine lady,  in  “An Election Ball,”  say,  “In Pudding
-there’s something so clumsy and clunch.”

1777]  FRANCES BURNEY 203

she is not the subject of your mirth,  she is thoroughly satisfied,  and laughs on herself,  without further enquiry.  At
dinner time she was the general butt.  Sir Herbert piques
himself upon shewing her off,  and makes ridiculous comments
upon everything she says;  Lady Packington sneers,  and exposes her to the strongest ridicule;  the young ladies titter
unmercifully;  even Nancy’s smiles border upon the full grin;
—and,  for my part,  I laughed most heartily;  yet was nobody
more merry than herself.  I would fain give you a specimen
of the conversation that you might laugh too;  but,  unless I
could paint her,  and shew you,  at the same time,  the extreme
vacancy of her countenance,  and give you some idea of the
drone of her voice and of her unmeaning manner, — I could
hope for no success at all equal to my wishes,  or to the subject.

When dinner was over,  Lady Packington took me a long
walk,  to shew me the park,  plantations,  and various improvements which Sir Herbert has lately made;  and they were
extremely well worth seeing;  at which I rejoiced the more,
because I found it extremely necessary to say so,  and that
warmly and repeatedly.  No praise was too high,  nor could
scarce any be sufficient,  to gratify her ladyship’s extreme
greediness upon this subject.  She then shewed me the spot,
upon which there was formerly a chapel belonging to a nunnery;  some fragments of ruins are still left,  and ancient coins
are frequently found when the workmen are digging.  The
Westwood House,  she told me,  was originally a monastary.

My curiosity was a good deal excited to know further
more satisfactory particulars of this place,  and I asked abundance of questions;  for I found her very ready to figure in the
information way.  To my first enquiry,  if she knew when the
house was built,  she said it was begun in the time of the
Romans ,  and Saxons:  no difference to be sure,  which!  But,
when I came to more close quarters,  she told me they had
accounts of it so far back as Henry the First.  This was a sad
falling-off,  after naming the Romans;  but afterwards she
added :  “  and indeed,  I believe we have so late as Richard
the First.”  Very ingenious!  was it not?  to come forward in
her dates four reigns,  and all the time believe she was going
back !  From this intelligence,  so accurate and satisfactory,  I
could not but regret that she did not communicate her
materials to some able historian.  After tea,  the rest of the

204 THE EARLY DIARY OF  [17 77

evening was given to music:  the performance of the Miss
Packingtons exactly tallied with the expectations your account
of them had given me.

At supper,  Miss W.  was requested to sing:  she declined
it for some time,  saying,  “  I don’t sing at all well;  you’ll only
think I’m a squalling;  for I don’t know any thing of the
music;  so sometimes I’m in tne tune,  and sometimes I’m
out of it;  but I never know which.  And so its the same with
my brother;  for he sings just as I do;  we both squall after a
sort;  but it isn’t very well.”  We all,  however,  pressed her
very much,  and Sir Herbert in particular;  “Come,  Lillies
and.  Roses,”  (that is the name he gives her)  “  come,  give us
Guardian Angels :  come,  tune your pipe;  now!  quick!”

“Ay;  come,  Miss W.,”  cried Lady Packington,  “give us
a fine Italian air;  I suppose,  Miss Fanny,  you are very fond
of Italian Music?  ”

“Lord!  My Lady,”  cried Miss W.,  “I really don’t know
the music at all;  I’m sure I shall only frighten you.”

“  O we know you don’t,”  returned she;  “  but never mind;
only let us heat your voice.”

“Come,  Lillies and Roses,”  said Sir Herbert;  “don’t be
too long;  begin at once,”  chucking her under the chin.

“Ay,  do!  Miss W.,”  said Miss Packington,  “or else you’ll
make us expect too much.”

“  Do you know no pretty new song?  ”  said her Ladyship.

“No,  My Lady,  I know hardly any songs; — that is to be
sure, — I dare say I know above a hundred;  but I don’t know
the music of  ’em.”

“Well!  any thing, — just what you please,”  cried Lady
Packington;  “only don’t make us wait;  for that is not very
well worth while.”

“  Why,  then,  if you please,  My Lady,”  said she,  “  I’ll sing,
*  Before the urchin well could go’; 1 — only I can’t sing it very
well;  so I tell you that before hand.”

'  We find this in an old song book,  under the name of
“  The Fair Thief.

“Before the urchin well could go,

She stole the whiteness of the snow;

And more that whiteness to adorn,

She stole the blushes of the morn,”  &c.

FRANCES BURNEY

205

1777]

“  Is that,  by way of something new,  Miss W?”

Regardless of this question,  the poor girl began  ;  and never
'before did I hear any thing half so ludicrous.  She has not
even a natural good voice to excuse her miserable performance;  on the contrary,  it is a croak ,  a squeak ,  and Nature has
been as little her friend as Art has been her assistant.

For some time I sat in an agony,  almost killing myself by
restraining my laughter;  but finding that nobody else took
the same trouble,  by degrees I began to excuse it myself,
and very soon after took the general liberty which example
gave me,  and laughed without controul or disguise.  She could
not get on three words at a time,  on account of the confusion;
for she caught the laugh,  and stopped to join in it;  and then
like a noodle,  the moment sne recovered her own countenance,  with the utmost solemnity she again began the song.

Nothing affected herm the manner any other person would
have been affected;  for the merriment she excited,  only
served,  occasionally to interrupt her;  but she never thought
of stopping it by ceasing to sing, — the only way in her power.
Nay;  Sir Herbert,  though the most desirous to hear her,  took
such methods to render her ridiculous,  as must have most
cruelly affronted any other character in the world.  He burst
out laughing in her face,  patted her cheeks,  slapped her
shoulders,  chucked her under the chin,  and exclaimed,
“  Brava ,  Lillies and Roses !  ”  perpetually.  But it was all one
to her;  for,  whenever she could conquer her own foolish
tittering,  she made up a face of stupid composure,  and with
the utmost indifference began her song again.  Sir Herbert
determined to spare no pains to expose her,  finding how well
she took all he had hitherto offered,  at length took up a large
spoon,  and fairly entered it down her bosom,  where the opening of her handkerchief left a most inviting vacancy.  I expected that this stroke would have raised some spirit ;  but
she continued her song with the same gravity,  only,  and with
the utmost deliberation taking the spoon out,  and putting it
into its place  [upon the table] !  The interruptions,  however,
in spite of her own tranquillity,  were so frequent,  that,  as she
always began again upon any stop of her own,  she could get
no further than the two first lines,  and the case now appearing desperate with regard to this song,  Sir Herbert desired
her to begin another.

206

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i777

“Come,  Lillies and Roses,  now try  ‘Guardian Angels.’”1

“Ay,  do,  Miss W - ,”  said Lady Packington,  “and

never mind the girls, — don’t stop for their laughing.”

“  No more I would,  my Lady,”  said she,  “  only that I can’t
help it, — for they make me laugh too.”

‘Guardian Angels’  was then begun, — but so long was it
in performing that we all retired the moment it was sung :
and really 1 was glad of a little relaxation from laughter;

though I did not obtain it immediately,  for as Miss W -

slept in the next room to ours,  she undressed herself in
company with us,  and she was so entertaining '  he whole time
she stayed,  without having the least design or knowledge of
being so,  that when I went to bed I was quite weak and exhausted.

Thursday morning she came to sit with me,  till Lady
Packington was ready for breakfast.  .  .  .  She then gave me
a very circumstantial account of her life and employments,
and told me all her affairs with as much openness and unreserve,  as if she had known me many years.  I will recollect
what I can of her relations;  and,  when you read wThat she
says,  you must suppose it spoke in a very slow and slovenly
voice.  .  .  .

As Richard teaches singing 2 at the school which her father

1 Mr.  Gibbs kindly informs the editor that

“  Guardian Angels,  now protect me,

Send to me the youth I love,”  &c.,  or,

“  Send,  ah!  send the swain I love,”

is a song from the  “  Golden Pippin,”  a musical burletta first played at
Covent Garden Theatre in 1773,  the air of which,  the late Mr.  Chappell
says,  is that now adapted to Bishop Heber’s Advent-hymn,

“Lo!  He comes,  in clouds descending,”  &c.,

an air which Heber probably did not1 know to be taken from a burlesque
operetta.  If the newspaper report be correct,  Archdeacon Farrar,  when
preaching on Hymns at the service on the  “Re-opening”  (as they
called it)  of the organ in Gloucester Cathedral,  made the statement that
“  ‘  Lo !  He comes,  in clouds descending,’  expressed the thoughts of
Cennick during the horrors of European war.”  Cennick was a dissenting preacher and hymn writer,  who died eight years before Kane
O’Hara’s  “Golden Pippin”  was played at all,  and many more before
Reginald Heber wrote the Advent-hymn.

2  [As part of this sentence is crossed through in the MS.  it is doubtful

FRANCES BURNEY

1777]

zoy

keeps at Hartlebury,  the conversation began by my enquiring,
if they did not make very merry when Richard was among
them?

“Why,  yes;  he’s merry enough sometimes;  only he
mustn’t be so with our young gentlemen:  but he makes fun
enough with my brother;  sometimes they two’ll laugh like
any thing, — but it ’s mostly at my expence,  but the thing is,
I don’t much mind  ’em,  for it’s all one to me;  for if I were
to mind it,  they do it as bad again.”

“Well!  but I hop q you laugh,  too?”

“Yes;  I laugh enough,  too,  sometimes;  but then,  when I
do,  my brother says I’m just like a jackass in fits;  besides,  I
mustn’t laugh much when my papa’s at home,  because,  if I
do,  he says,  ‘  Come,  let’s have no more noise;  it ’s all levity ;  ’
— But I talk enough for all that;  for Mr.  Smith and Mr.
Giles say they can hear me at their house;  I talk so loud, —
and that’s as far off as half a mile, — almost,  I believe.  But
I’ve enough to do sometimes,  betause of our young gentlemen;  for I’ve no time to myself;  I’m always doing some odd
job or another;  yet you’d think I do nothing, — and no more
I do;  only papa says I’ve a mind to make a fuss about it;
but I never get up till past nine o’clock.  Lady Packington
would be finely angry,  if she knew it ;  for she’d say it was all

a whim;  but I never tell
any thing before night.’

her about it;  but I’m as tired as

[The continuation of this conversation  (with a break,  however)
was found pasted down in the MS.  It runs: — ]

“ .  .  .  him as I helped first is ready to begin again,  and so
then I get none at all;  for if I was to put myself a bit by,
they’d think I took the best;  so I only eat a bit of bread and
cheese.”

“  Well,  that ’s very hard upon you :  I wonder you don’t
make them wait a little?  ”

■  “  Why,  there ’s nothing I love so well as bread and cheese

whetherthis word is  “singing”  or  “dancing.”  It seems probable from
what follows that the latter is the word;  if so we have disclosed the
hitherto well-kept secret that Richard’s profession was that of dancing-
master.  Possibly his father was of the same profession,  as some of the
earlier Burneys certainly were. — J.  W.  M.  G.]

208

THE EARLY DIARY OF

['777

— I prefer it to meat a great deal.  Sometimes I’m as dirty
as can be, — and I hardly know how,  for I do nothing:  but
one day a gentleman came to our house,  he’s one of my
cousins,  so he said to me,  very gravely,  says he,  do pray get
me a wash hands bason and a towel.” .

[Some hint that Miss W.  should herself make use of the basin
and towel appears to have been given.]

I enquired of her whether she ever danced when Richard
was at her father’s at Hartlebury?

“  Why,”  said she,  “  I used sometimes,  when a new young
gentleman came,  and when Richard Burney had no partner

to dance with him . I like dancing of all things — only

I don’t dance at all myself — not well,  I don’t;  for I’m
always a falling down,  and Lady Packington makes such
game of me for it you can’t think.  But I’ve left off dancing
now,  for one of our young gentlemen affronted me.”

“Affronted you — how was that?”

“Why,  his foot kicked me,  here,  upon the shin, — and you
can’t think how he hurt me, — so I said then I would never
dance with the young gentlemen any more.”

I then asked her to sing to me.  She immediately complied,  and I squeezed in my laughter with great decency.

When we came down,  Lady Packington took her to task
for not being dressed herself,  and the poor girl looked so
foolish that nobody could refrain smiling,  at least.  When
she was going,  as her journey was for the present only to
Droitwich,  which is but two miles from Westwood,  Lady
Packington said she would take that opportunity to shew me
more of the Park,  and to give me'  a drive round the Pool :
accordingly I attended her Ladyship in seeing Miss W.  to
Mrs.  Aubery,  her aunt.  I was very sorry to leave her,  for I
had by no means the entertainment after she was gon-e;  indeed I told her that I was sure we should not be so merry
when she was gone, — and she seemed extremely pleased at
the compliment.

Notwithstanding I laughed so intolerably at Miss W.,  I
continued so well to satisfy her that she was not the object
of my mirth,  that we were exceeding good friends,  and she
invited me very cordially to make her a visit at Hartlebury.
“You know,”  says she,  “your cousin Richard comes  .  .  .  .

1777]  FRANCES BURNEY 209

and you should persuade ijim to bring you with him;  and
then”  she added  “we’ll go together to Stourport;  but you
must let me know when you come,  or else,  I sha’nt be
dressed;  for I always go any how at home;  you can’t think
what a figure I am.  Now,  if you come,  without telling me
first,  I’ll tell you how you’ll find me:  I shall have on a dirty
cotton gown,  and a dirty muslin handkerchief about my
neck,  and a cloth apron,  may be,  and quite a close cap;  for
I never do my hair up,  when I’m alone,  for I don’t much
mind our young gentlemen;  and I shall have on a red stuff
coat;  and now I’ll lay you any thing you will,  that’s the way
you’ll find me.”

I ventured not to lay against her,  because I thought her
rather too much in the secret.

While I dressed for dinner,  she again gave me her company and conversation;  and indeed,  there was no person in
the house I so much desired to have with me;  for she was
always as good as a comedy to me.

She marvelled very much at the quantity of my hair,  and
bidding me look at her’s,  said,  “  See what a little I have,  and
my hair’s as low as any thing;  and for all that,  it’s all a
falsity !  only see !  One day one of the curls came off,  and
Master Packington tied it to the bell.  I am often angry
enough with Master Packington,  for he was always doing
something or other to me.”

The next day,  as it rained all the morning,  we could not
walk out.  Therefore,  Lady Packington produced some coins
she had had very lately dug out by the Nuns’  Chapel;  and
then got Rapin’s Plistory of England,  and we went to
work in viewing the coins of the different reigns,  in order
to discover the age of those she had found.  Sheds fond of
figuring upon these subjects;  but yet she shewed so much
ignorance of History as to render her researches truly ridiculous,  for so little did she know of the matter that she
always took it for granted that every King of the same name
followed in regular succession;  and so,  when we had examined the coins of Henry the Second,  “  Now,”  said she,
“we’ll come to Henry the Third;”  but happening,  instead,
to meet with Richard the First.  With the same correctness
she looked for Richard the Second and was not at all abashed
at her blunder.  .  .  .  We then descended :  and after break-

210

THE EARLY DIARY OF

[i777

fast Lady Packington was so civil as to go entirely over the
house with me;  and it is so large that she was quite fatigued
by the time we returned to the parlour.

The weather was unfortunately very indifferent during my
stay at Westwood  ;  which prevented my enjoying any benefit
from the beautiful Pool which is in the Park,  though Sir
Herbert was so obliging as to plan a water-excursion every
day;  for he was very desirous to shew me his barge,  and to
display all the beauty of his largest pool,  which is reckoned
the finest in England,  being more than two miles long,  and
proportionally wide.  However,  the weather never allowed
of any such schemes being put in execution .

[Here a couple of leaves of manuscript,  snipped by scissors
into six shreds,  which have been tacked with thread upon a
blank leaf of paper,  end all we have-of Fanny’s journal for 1 777.
Between the words  “  the beautiful pool,”  and  “  is in the park,”
two lines in Susan’s writing occur.  They have headed a leaf
which Fanny has reversed when she wrote upon it.  “  I expect,”
writes Susan,  “to have this paper returned me with a little ink,
which I shall regard with interest , — very shortly— I know you
can’t get this sort at Barebones .”  1

After these lively visits in the West of England were finished,
Fanny returned to St.  Martin’s Street,  where we may think of
her as copying the third volume of  “  Evelina”  for the printing-
press,  since Mr.  Lowndes had refused to publish her novel by
instalments.  To our after-seeing eyes,  these early letters and
journals visibly lead on to the publication of  “  Evelina.”  The
book is latent in the diaries.  The  “  prentice-hand  ”  sketches
Mr.  Seaton and Dick Burney,  Mrs.  S.  and Mrs.  Wall;  the
“  watering-place,”  and the country boarding-house of the last
century,  with their variety of visitors;  the makers of music,  and
the men and women of fashion who delighted in it;  “the lyons”
of the time,  the haughty and touchy King of Abyssinia,  the
savage Omai,  and the criminal Orloff;  the coxcombs of literature,  Mr.  1 wiss and Mr.  Keate,  and its ruffian,  Dr.  Shebbeare.
fhe past mistress  “draws large”  Sir Clement and the Captain,  Madame Duval,  and the Branghtons,  with their inimitable
lodger — “the Holborn Beau” — Mr.  Smith.

After the abrupt ending of the visit to Westwood,  no word of
Fanny’s writing has come before our eyes until her diary for
1778 suddenly begins with a paragraph which has been omitted
by the editor of her later diaries,  as have others,  which we print

1 A family pun on the name of their uncle’s house at Barborne.

FRANCES BURNEY

21 I

1777]

in full,  as they give a happy ending  (befitting a novelist above
others)  to all that has gone before in these volumes.  They,  and
the letters of the most loving of all sisters,  Susan Burney,  are,
as it were,  the third volume of a fresh and lively story which
widens and deepens towards its joyous close.  A lover made
happy,  it is true,  is not to be found therein,  but the pride and
happiness of a father,  and the rapture of the most amiable and
affectionate of clever families,  make the wedding little missed J

[SOME PAGES FROM THE DIARY OF
FRANCES BURNEY FOR THE YEAR 1778.]

March is almost over — and not a word have I bestowed
upon my Journal! — -n’importe, — I shall now whisk on to the
present time,  mentioning whatever occurs to me promiscuously.

[This 1 year was ushered in by a grand and most important event, — for at the latter end of January the literary world
was favoured with the first publication of the ingenious,
learned,  and most profound Fanny Burney! — I doubt not
but this memorable affair will,  in future times,  mark the
period whence chronologers will date the zenith of the polite
arts in this island!  This admirable authoress has named her
most elaborate performance  “  Evelina,  or a Young Lady’s
Entrance into the World.”  Perhaps this may seem a
rather bold attempt and title for a female whose knowledge
of the world is very confined,  and whose inclinations,  as well
as situation,  incline her to a private and domestic life.  All I
can urge is,  that I have only presumed to trace the accidents
and adventures to which a  “  young woman  ”  is liable.  I have
not pretended to shew the world what it actually is,  but what
it appears to a girl of seventeen : — and so far as that,  surely
any girl who is past seventeen may safely do?

The motto of my excuse shall be taken from Pope’s
“Temple of Fame,” —

‘  In every Work,  regard the Writer’s end,

None e’er can compass more than they intend.”

1 The passages enclosed by brackets have already been printed in the
“  Diary of Madame D’Arblay.”  The brackets within brackets indicate
her later additions to her diary in these passages ;  as do also the brackets
in hose paragraphs which are now printed for the first time.

1778]  DIARY OF FRANCES BURNEY 213

About the middle of January,  my cousin Edward brought
me a private message from my aunts,  that a parcel was come
for me,  under the name of Grafton.

I had,  some little time before,  acquainted both my aunts,
of my frolic:  they will,  I am sure,  be discreet, — indeed,  I
exacted a vow from them of strict secresy; — and they love
me with such partial kindness,  that I have a pleasure in reposing much confidence in them.]  And the more so,  as their
connections in life are so very confined,  that almost all their
concerns centre in our,  and my uncle’s family.

[I immediately conjectured what the parcel was,  and found
the following letter: — ■

To Mr.  Grafton:

To be left at the Orange Coffee House.

Mr.  Grafton,

Sir,

L take the liberty to send you a novel,  which a gentleman your acquaintance,  said you would hand to him.  I beg
with expedition,  as  ’tis time it should be published,  and  ’tis
requisite he should first revise it,  or the reviewers may find
a flaw.

I am,  Sir,

Your obed1 serv',

Thos.  Lowndes.

Fleet Street,  Jan.  7,  1778.

My aunts,  now,  would take no denial to my reading to
them ,  in order to make errata;  and — to cut the matter short,
I was compelled to communicate the affair to my cousin
Edward, — and then to obey their commands.

Of course,  they were all prodigiously charmed with it.  My
■cousin,  now,  became my agent,  [as deputy toCharles,]  with Mr,
Lowndes,  and,  when I had made the errata,  carried it to him.

The book,  however,  was not published till the latter end
of the month.  A thousand little  [odd]  incidents happened
about this time,  but I am not in a humour to recollect them-;
however,  they were none of them productive of a discovery
either to my father or mother.]

214 SOME PAGES FROM THE  [1778

My cousins Richard and James past thro’  town this
■Christmas,  in their way to Dover,  and they spent six weeks
in France:  on their return,  poor Richard was taken extremely ill,  and obliged to continue in  [town]  ....  and be
attended by Dr.  Jebb.  James is gone to Worcester,  and
Miss Humphries is come hither by way of nurse:  he  [Richard]
is now very much recovered,  thank God,  and gone to
Brumpton for a little change of air,  and there he is to continue till he is able to return to Worcester.

March 26th.

I have now to trace some curious anecdotes for about a
fortnight past.

My cousin Richard has continued gaining strength and
health with a daily rapidity of recovery,  that has almost as
much astonished as it has delighted us,  and that is saying
very much,  for his truly amiable behaviour during his residence here,  has so much encreased the regard I always had
for him,  that I have never in my life been more heartily rejoiced than upon his restoration to his friends.

On Friday se’night,  my mother accompanied my father to
Stre'atham,  on a visit to Mrs.  Thrale for four or live days.
We invited Edward to drink tea with us,  and,  upon the plan
of a frolic ,  we determined upon going to Bell’s circulating
Library,  at which my father subscribes for new books,  in
order to ask some questions about Evelina,  however,  when
we got to the shop,  I was ashamed to speak about it,  and
only enquired for some magazines,  at the backs of which I
saw it advertised.  But Edward,  the moment I walked off,
asked the shop-man if he had  .  .  [my little book,  I am told,
is now at all the circulating libraries.

I have an exceeding odd sensation,  when I consider that
it is now in the power of any and every body to read what I
so carefully hoarded even from my best friends,  till this last
month or two, — and that a work which was so lately lodged,
in all privacy in my bureau,  may now be seen by every
butcher and baker,  cobler and tinker,  throughout the three
kingdoms,  for the small tribute of three pence.

My aunt Anne and Miss Humphries being settled at this
time at Brompton,  I was going thither,  with Susan to tea

1778]  DIARY OF FRANCES BURNEY 215

when Charlotte acquainted me that they were then employed
in reading Evelina — [to the invalid my cousin Richard.}  My
sister had recommended it to Miss Humphries, — and my
aunts and Edward agreed that they would read it,  but without mentioning anything of the author!]

Edward,  therefore,  bought,  and took it with him to
Brompton —

[This intelligence gave me the utmost uneasiness, — I foresaw a thousand dangers of a discovery; — I dreaded the indiscreet warmth of all my confidents,]  and I would almost as
soon have told the Mornhig Post Editor as Miss Humphries.

[In truth I was quite sick with apprehension . and

was too uncomfortable to go to Brompton,  and my Susan
carried my excuses. —

Upon her return I was somewhat tranquillised,  for she
assured me that there was not the smallest suspicion of the
author,  and that they had concluded it to be the work of a
man ,  and Miss Humphries,  who read it aloud to Richard,
said several things in its commendation,  and concluded them
by exclaiming — “  It’s a thousand pities the author should lie
concealed!  ”

Finding myself more safe than I had apprehended,  I
ventured to go to Brompton next day.

In my way upstairs I heard Miss Humphries reading,  she
was in the midst of Mr.  Villars’  Letter of consolation upon
Sir John Belmont’s rejection of his daughter,  and,  just as I
entered the room,  she cried out — “How pretty that is!” —

How much in luck would she have thought herself,  had
she known who heard her !

In a private confabulation which I had with my aunt Anne,
she told me a thousand things that had been said in its
praise,  and assured me they had not for a moment doubted
that the work was a man's.

Comforted and made easy by these assurances,  I longed
for the diversion of hearing their observations,  and therefore
(though rather mal a propos)  after I had been near two hours
in the room,  I told Miss Humphries that I was afraid I had
interrupted her,  and begged she would go on with what she
was reading.

“Why,”  cried she,  taking up the book — “We have been
prodigiously entertained  ” — and,  very readily,  she continued.

2 1 6

SOME PAGES FROM THE

[1778

I must own I suffered great difficulty in refraining from
laughing upon several occasions, — and several times,  when
they praised what they read,  I was upon the point of saying
— “  You are very good! — ”  and so forth,  and I could scarce
keep myself from making acknowledgements,  and bowing
my head involuntarily.

However,  I got off  [_ perfectly ]  safely.

Monday,  Susan and I went to tea at Brompton.  We met
Miss Humphries coming to town.  She told us she had just
finished — “  Evelina  ’’—and gave us to understand that she
could not get away till she had done it.  We heard afterwards,  from my aunt,  the most flattering praises, — and
Richard could talk of nothing else !  His encomiums gave
me double pleasure,  from being wholly unexpected:  for I
had prepared myself to hear that he held it extremely cheap.
And I was yet more satisfied,  because I was sure they were
sincere,  as he convinced me that he had not the most distant
idea of suspicion,  by finding great fault with Evelina herself
for her bashfulness with such a man as Lord Orville.] — “  A
man,”  continued he — vyhose politeness is so extraordinary,
— who is so elegant,  so refined, — so — so —unaccountably
polite, — for I can think of no  [other]  word. — I never read,
never heard such language in my life! — and then,  just as he
is speaking to her,  she is so confused, — that she  [always]  runs
out of the room  !  ”

[I could have answered him,  that he ought to consider the
original character of Evelina,— that she had been brought
up in the strictest retirement,  that she knew nothing of the
world,  and only acted from the impulses of Nature;  and that
her timidity always prevented her from daring to hope that
Lord Orville was seriously attached to her.  In short,  I could
have bid him read the Preface again,  where she is called —
“the offspring of Nature,  and of Nature in her simplest
attire” — but I feared appearing too well acquainted with the
book,  and I rejoiced that an unprejudiced reader should make
no weightier objection.]

Edward walked home with us;  I railed at him violently
for having bought the book,  and charged him to consult
with me before he again put it into any body’s hands :  but
he told me he hoped that,  as it had gone off so well,  I should
not regret it.  Indeed he seems quite delighted at the appro-

1778]  DIARY OF FRANCES BURNEY 217

bation it has met with.  He was extremely desirous that his
brother should be made acquainted with the author,  telling
me that he wished to plead for him,  but did not know how.

The next day,  my father and mother returned to town.
On Thursday morning,  we went to a delightful Concert
at Mr.  Harris’s.  The sweet Rauzini was there,  and sung
four Duets with Miss Louisa Harris.  He has now left the
Opera,  where he is succeeded by Roncaglia.  I was extremely
delighted at meeting with him again,  and again hearing him
sing.  La Motte,  Cervetto,  ....  played several Quartettos
divinely,  and the morning afforded me the greatest entertainment.

There was nobody we knew but Lady Hales a.nd Miss
Coussmaker,  who were as usual very civil.

F riday.

Miss Humphries,  Charlotte,  Edward and I went to the
Oratorio of Judas Maccabeus.  Oratorios I don’t love,  so I
shall say nothing of the performance.  We were,  also,  a few
nights since,  at Giardini’s Benefit,  and heard a most charming Concert .

Edward talked only of Evelina,  and frequently .

[It seems, — to my utter amazement,  Miss Humphries has
guessed the author to be Anstey,  who wrote the Bath Guide!
—  How improbable — and how extraordinary a supposition.
But they have both of them done it so much honour that,
but for Richard’s anger at Evelina’s bashfulness,  I never
could believe they did not suspect me.]

#*'#*#  *=

[As there are few better characters in comedy than that of
clever Dick Burney,  we tell what we have learned of him in a
summary of some more of these hitherto unprinted pages from
Fanny’s diary for 1778.  His coxcombry was conscious,  nay,  intentional;  he laughed at himself;  he mimicked his own  “airs
and graces.”  Then he had such 'an easy way of permitting ,
rather than leading,  ladies like the two whom we have met in
these diaries,  to show off their  “airs and graces”  in a game of
coquetry,  played with scarce an approach to meaning,  on their
part;  with none at all on his.  In her dreary court-life Fahny
was,  at times,  tormented by M.  Guiffardiere,  “  a half-witted
French Protestant Minister,  who talked oddly about conjugal

218

NOTE ON PAGES

[1778

fidelity,''’1 and affected stormy gallantry towards herself.  Once
she writes that,  “  although I believe his rhodomontading to be
quite as innocent as that of our cousin Richard,  there is something in it,  at times,  too violent for my nerves.”

Fanny continued to find Dick  “  speaking of all the characters”
[of her novel]  “as if they were acquaintance;  and praising
•different parts perpetually:  both he and Miss Humphries seem
to have it by heart,  for it is always apropos to whatever is the
subject of discourse.”  The third volume is never out of Richard’s
hands.  He is on the eve of going home,  so Aunt Anne presses
Fanny to tell him of her authorship before he leaves London.
Fanny refuses  ;  but on hearing her aunt say,  in a low voice to
Susan,  that if Fanny won’t,  she will!  begins to think that she
had better be the first to tell her own secret,  making her own
conditions.  “  I seated myself at a table to finish a letter to
Betsy  [Burney],  Susanna took up 4 Evelina,’ — which is always
at hand.”  Richard said to her,  “  4 I like that book better and
better;  I have read nothing like it since Fielding’s novels.’
Susan laughed, — so did I,  but I wrote on.  He asked,  with some
surprise,  what was the joke?  but as he obtained no answer,  he
continued his favourite topic — 4 1 think I can’t read it too often,
--for you are to know that I think it very edifying.  The two
principal characters,  Lord Orville and Mr.  Villars,  are so excellent! — and there is something in the character and manners
of Lord Orville so refined,  and so polite,  that I never saw the
like in any book before :  and all his compliments are so new —
as well as so elegant.’”  Fanny hints that she knows who wrote
the book.  Richard declares that he is  '‘'’quite lost: — such amazing knowledge of characters, — such an acquaintance with high
and low life, — such universal and extensive knowledge of the
world, — I declare,  I know not a man breathing who is likely to
be the author, — unless it is my uncle”  [Dr.  Burney].  “No man
is capable.”  Such praise makes it harder for Fanny to tell him,
but Richard leaves her no rest.  He follows her about the room
until she fears Miss Humphries will hear what is the subject of
his importunity.  At last,  he brings a pen and paper,  and begs
her to write the name,  promising not to read it until she has
left him.  “I only wrote on this paper,  ‘No Man,’ — and then
folded it up.”  He is  “extremely eager”  to see it,  but Fanny
demands that he shall,  first,  give a solemn pledge of secrecy.
He puts his hand on his heart,  and promises,  by his honour,  to
be faithful.  This is not enough,  he must kneel down,  and make
a vow that he  “ 4 will never tell any body in the world.’  4 What,
not a sister J”  4 No,  not a human being.’  4 What,  not Betsy?  O,

1 Macaulay.

FROM THE DIARY

1778]

219

pray let me tell her T  ‘No,  no, — not a soul.’”  Dick’s curiosity
must be satisfied.  “‘I must vow then.’  ‘Kneel,  then!’  cried I.
He laughed,  ....  Miss Humphries looked round;”  so that
mock-heroic detail could not be exacted.  He took his vow,
Fanny gave him the paper,  and ran from him to the window.
“  He read it with the utmost eagerness, — but still did not seem
to comprehend how the affair stood,  till he came to the window,
— and then,  I believe,  my countenance cleared up his doubts.
His surprise was too great for speech;  Susan says he coloured
violently, — but I could hardly look at him.  Indeed,  I believe it
utterly impossible for astonishment to be greater than his was
at that moment.  When he recovered somewhat from it,  he came
again to me,  and taking my hand,  said,  ‘  I believe I must now
kneel indeed!’ — and drawing me to the fire,  he actually knelt to
me, — but I made him rise almost instantly.”  Dick,  in his amazement and admiration,  kneeling to his cousin,  in whose journals
lay hidden at the very time sketches of his coxcombries,  and of
the coquetries of Mrs.  S.  of Bewdley and Mrs.  Wall of Gloucester,
might have suggested a subject for the pencil of his brother
Edward.  His  “  partiality  ”  was known to Fanny to be  “  so great,
that had he ever suspected me,  I am sure that he would have
offered me nothing short of adulatioii .”  “As if he had forgot all
the flattering speeches he had made about the book,  or as if he
thought them all hiadequate to what he should have said,  he
implored my forgiveness for what he called his criticisms ,  and
seemed ready to kill himself for having made them.”  Yet,  they
were but censures of  “Evelina’s”  bashfulness towards  “his
favourite Lord,  whose character he studies every day of his
life;  with whom he seemed so struck,  that we all fancied that
he meant to make him his model ,  as far as his situation would
allow.  Indeed,  not only during his illness he penetrated us by
his patient and most amiable behaviour,  but since his recovery,
he has more than kept his ground,  by having wholly discarded
all the foibles that formerly tinged his manners,  though they
never ,  I believe,  affected his heart.”

We part with Dick as with the hero of some sparkling little
comedy,  whose lively  “ foibles  ”  scarce merit any greater chastisement than the loss in illness of his  “two curls ”  (then indispensable to a gentleman’s toupet)\  and who is reclaimed from
following Maccaronis,  and members of the  “  Savoir-vivre”
Club,  by a new type of virtuous elegance,  created by his cousin
in the character of  “  Lord Orville.”]

LETTERS AND FRAGMENTS OF LETTERS
FROM SUSAN TO FRANCES BURNEY.

[These letters begin when Fanny was sent to Chesington in
the beginning of May,  1778,  to regain strength after a severe
attack of illness,  which left her unable to walk more than two
or three yards at a time.  She has written on their wrapper,
“Some fragments,  chiefly on Evelina,  of the letters of Susanna
Elizabeth Burney,  to F.  B.,  before the fatal marriage of the first,
or the happy marriage of the second.  The Correspondence at
large has been committed to the flames,  from family reasons,
resulting from its unbounded openness of Confidence.”

On letter No.  1 there is a later heading,  “Early narratives
relating to the first appearance of Evelina,  recorded to F.  B.  by
her beloved sister Phillips.”  In the left corner at the head of
the fragment Mme.  D’Arblay has written,  “  On Eliz.  B’s.  suspicion of the author of Evelina.”  “Cousin Bessy”  of Worcester
will be remembered as acting with Fanny in  “The Way to Keep
Him,”  and in  “Tom Thumb.”]

[Post-mark,  May 9,  1778.]

*  *  #  #  #  #

I will transcribe for you Bessy’s last letter on one head.1
[Copied from Eliz.  Burney by my Susanna.]

“I have just finished reading Evelina — and I believe I
should thank you,  or some of your family for the great
pleasure I have received from it.  It is by far the most bewitching novel I ever read. — I could not leave it till I came
to the conclusion of it; — and now I can’t help regretting
that I made such short work of it — I wish it was as long

1 This is but the last leaf of a letter addressed to  “  Miss Burney,  at
Mrs.  Hambleton’s,  Chessington,  near Kingston,  Surrey.”]

220

1778]  LETTERS FROM SUSAN BURNEY 221

again — however J shall not content myself with once reading; — for  ’twill bear a second and third,  and still delight one
I am sure.  Indeed,  I am quite charm’d with it —  tis so interesting!  The characters are so well drawn, — so contrasted,
— so striking,  that I can’t help fancying myself perfectly well
acquainted with them all. — There is so much elegance in it
too!  I know not how to say enough of it. — But now,  as you
are a friend,  an honest friend too,  and I hope will not go to
deceive me,  I’ll tell you a conjecture of mine,  when I had
read about three of the letters,  and which has gained through
every letter since. — I think I know a person not one hundred
miles from Leicester Square very capable of writing such a
novel — Indeed  ’tis so clever and so much in her style,  that I
cannot persuade myself to think she is not the authoress.
Any one else would be proud of putting their name to it—  I
have but one doubt about it,  which is that I never knew her
allow any but her most particular and intimate friends to be
the better for her uncommon abilities in this way — She is so
divident  (sic)  of her owtt performances.  However you must
tell me,  and tell me truly ,  whether I am or am not mistaken
— and if I am not mistaken you must pay me the compliment
of owning that I have some penetration — But don’t tell
Fanny that I smoke her if you think she will be displeased,
for I know her to be extremely delicate in these matters —
and probably she may not like that any of our family should
suspect her tho’  she cannot or at least has no reason to be in
the smallest degree afraid of any of us.  I have been very
snug and quiet ever since I had this notion about Fanny,
and shall not mention it,  till I have heard from you,  and not
even then,  unless you give me leave.”

She then speaks of other subjects — says Richard continues
very well,  “  but has lost both his curls! — Monstrous provoking  ! — ”

But my dear love — what shall I say to this long-headed girl
'■ — It is evident that Richard has dealt very honourably by
you,  yet such suspicions as hers will not easily be laid asleep
— especially as she ventures to declare them,  and make so
open an attack about them.  Let me know when you can
without hurry or fatigue what I shall say — the poor girl is
distracted to know how you do,  which makes me want much

222 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1778

to write soon — Shall I take no notice of this passage in her
letter? — She assures me that I may write her anything in the
world by post if I send my letters off on Mondays — -

If you write,  I shall expect as yet only two or three lines
from you my sweet Fanny at a time — So don’t worry yourself by writing more — not this fortnight — I hope in God you
mind where you are,  and have had no fit of faintness.  Remember me properly and particularly to Mr.  Crisp and
Kitty — and take great care of yourself —

Adieu I am more than ever yours

S.  E.  Burney.

[Susan to Frances Burney,  at Chesington.]

[Original account of my dear Father’s first Reading
Evelina.  F.  B.]

[Post-mark June 4,  1778.]

But,  my dear Fanny,  my father has at last got Evelina ! — -
.  .  .  Charlotte . has written you all the account — I

have been monstrously vexed that I was not at home when
he first got it— I am sure I should have cried I think had I
been present upon his opening the Ode  [to himself] — for the
idea of it never occurs to me without bringing tears into my
eyes — However he has never mentioned it to me,  tho’  it
affected him so much at the time — but Yesterday morning
when I was alone with him a few minutes while he
dress’d—

“Why Susan”  said he to me — “I have got Fan’s
book.” —

“Lord sir!  have you?”

“Yes — but I suppose you must not tell her — Poor Fan’s
such a prude.”

“Oh!  I don’t know sir,  she knows you know of it— ’tis
only others

“  Oh”,  said he,  quick — “  I shall keep it locked up in my
Sanctum Sanctorum,”  pointing to his bureau — “  I would not
betray the poor girl for the world — -but upon my soul I like

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1778]

223

it vastly— Do you know I began to read it with Lady Hales
and Miss Coussmaker yesterday  ”

“Lord!”  cried I,  a little alarm’d,  “you did not tell
them . ”

“  ‘Tell them,’  no certainly — I said  'twas a book had been
recommended to me — they’ll never know,  and they like it
vastly ,  but upon my soul there’s something in the preface
and dedication vastly strong and well written — better than I
could have expected- — and yet I did not think  ’twould be
trash when I began it, — and there are twro or three letters of
Mr. — the old — ”

“Mr.  Villars?  ”

“  Aye,  Mr.  Villars,  which are indeed extremely well —
really — -pathetic.  ”

“And how far have you got?  ’

“Oh ! — beyond where Madame French appears — but shan’t
we have a little too much of her?  ”

“  Nay,  that’s according to your taste — besides you read
with fine ladies and  .  .  .  .”

“  Oh !  they like it of all things — tho’  ’tis pure vulgar to be
sure — but the girl’s account of public places is very animated
and natural,  and not common — it really appears to me that
Lowndes has had a devilish good bargain of it — for the book
will sell — it has real merit,  and the Review alone would
sell it.”

“  What the Monthly?  ”

“Yes — and it’s in Kenrick’s too.”

Here we were interrupted by Mr.  Davis,  and I have not
since heard any more remarks.  As I do,  you may depend
upon having them,  and just in the words they are made to
me,  as you will believe by what I have already written —
Adieu my sweetest girl,  I have no room for comments —

Yours ever.  S.  B.

[Susan to Frances Burney,  at Chesington.]

#  #  #  *  *  *  ■

[June 1778.]

Yesterday I spent in Brook Street — ’twas a visit e de conge ,
as they leave town Saturday. — At dinner Lady H[ales]  and

n.

H

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

224

[1778

Miss Coussmaker were set terribly on the titter.  Mad1'  de
Ferre’s saying  “  Vel,  I protest I never saw noting so prittyas
Miss Burney’s choice of cloaths  ” — presently she said something to Mr.  Coussmaker 1 of when he should be married,  and
he laughing about it as a ridiculous thing.  Miss C.  said to
him— “  I hope you are not of Mr.  Smith’s opinion however  ” —

“  What opinion is that,”  said I,  “  bonnenwitl  ”

“  Oh ! — that it is very well to say fine,  gallant things to
the Ladies but that marriage is quite out of the question —
and he says this to that sweet,  elegant,  beautiful girl Evelina,
— who is so sick of him,  and detests him so much she can
scarce bear to be in his company — ”

“  What,  it’s in the novel is it?”

'  Lord,  yes — you haven’t read that yet  ?  ”

“  Why  "'tis but two or three days since you mention’d it
to me — and I shall get my father to lend it me when you have
done with it—”

“That you won’t,  indeed,  my dear”  said Lady Hales
“  for I’ve bought the book of him — tho’  indeed he may perhaps get another.”

“Oh!  I am sure,”  said Miss Coussmaker,  “he’ll never
live without it.— He is so fond of it. — Do you know,  mama,
Lady Radnor says,  she’ll have it too?”

“  Well it will entertain her I dare say,  but Lizzy, — or Jane
I believe it was you,2 put me almost out of countenance  .  .
when Mrs.  Hales was here this morning,  a formal old maid,
you know her  ”  (to me)  “  who would think it destruction for
a girl to read a novel.  But Jane suddenly turned to me,  while
she was here — ‘Lord,  Mama,’  said she,  ‘YtmYyou pity poor
Mr.  Macartney  ?  ’  ”

“  Mr.  Macartney — who’s that?  ”  cries Mrs.  Hales.

“  ‘  Oh !  only a poor man  ’  said I — ‘  I have been hearing a
sad story about’ — and so luckily she asked me no more
questions.”

“Oh”  said Miss Coussmaker,  “  Jane is distracted about
Mr.  Macartney — Poor man — Oh Lord!  ’tis so shocking —

1 The Captain Coussmaker of Fanny’s visits to Worcester and Gloucester.  Miss Coussmaker was his sister.

2 One of her five daughters,  the Misses Hales.

i77?]  TO FRANCES BURNEY 225

those butchers,  the Branghtons!  Well,  I must not tell you
the story tho’.”

When Made de Ferre left the room after dinner Mr.  Couss-
maker ask’d Lady Hales who she laugh’d at so at the table
with Kitty.1

“  Gracious me!  ”  cried Lady Hales,  “  Kitty,  that book will
certainly get us into a scrape! — for I never can hear poor
Madc'  de Ferre open her mouth now without its putting me
so in mind of that Mad*  Duval,  so that I am ready to die
with laughing.”

“  No,”  said Mr.  Coussmaker,  “  I don’t think so — Mad*  de
Ferre is very different — Mad*  Duval is described to be very
much painted and dressed out — and besides you know she
is supposed to be a very fine woman.”

“Why that’s very true — but her never noting ,  and her
blunders in conversation,  are so ridiculously like,  that they
always remind me of each other.”2

“  But indeed,  Susan,  you  ?nust read it— for  ’tis very well
worth your reading.”

“  Nay,  you may think it must be something above the
common things,”  said Miss Coussmaker,  “for Dr.  Burney to
recommend a novel.”

Lady Hales.  I declare,  the Preface and Address,  there,
what is it — Dedication— Vo the Reviewers are as fine pieces
of writing as ever I heard in my life — and Dr.  Burney thinks
so too;  doesn’t he Kitty?

Miss Coussmaker.  Yes,  indeed— I assure you this writer
is a great acquisition.

Lady Hales.  Oh !  it’s a writer of great abilities,  whoever
he be.

Miss Coussmaker.  He says it will never be known — but if
the book circulates,  which I think,  considering its merit,  it
certainly must,  I hope he will be tempted to discover himself
— or she indeed for you’re to know L think it’s a woman.

Susan.  Do you indeed?  Why pray?

Miss Coussmaker.  Why I don’t know — I believe I dreamt
it first,  for I thought it was said so in the preface or dedica-

1 Miss Coussmaker.

2 Mme.  de Ferre appears to have been governess to the daughters of
Lady Hales.

226

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

[1778

tion — but I have read  ’em since and find it is not — but there
is such a remarkable delicacy in all the descriptions and
conversations,  that I can’t think it can be anybody’s writing
but a woman’s — tho’  there are very gross vulgar characters
introduced.

Lady ILales.  Lord,  aye — that nasty person,  Captain —

Miss Coussmaker.  Yet there never is an indelicate word,
nor an oath throughout the book— indeed Evelina says after
giving an account of a violent quarrel that has pass’d between
the Captain and Made Duval — •“  this conversation had the
addition of an oath at every two or three words,  but I have
not repeated them because I am sure they would be as
disagreable to you to read as to me to write  ” — which is so
delicately avoiding it,  you know,  without anything unnatural.

Lady Hales.  It certainly must be some person very much
us’d to high life — the language is quite elegant too,  of all
Mr.  Villars’  letters particularly — and of Evelina’s which he
writes from herself.

Miss Coussmaker.  A great deal of it is conversation — such
a variety of Characters  ’tis amazing I declare.

Lady Hales.  And so wonderfully well sustained they are
— so mark’d — indeed there is great genius in it.

Lady Hales had a millener to call upon — and walk’d to
the shop with Miss Coussmaker and me.  One cap which was
remarkably showy and full of pink ribbon they said should
be sent to poor Made Duval,  to make her amends for the loss
of her most becomingest cap.

“No,  a set of curls would be better to lend her”  said
Miss Coussmaker.  And tho’  they were eternally saying they
would not forestall anything of the pleasure I should have in
reading the book,  I saw they long’d to give me the whole
account of poor Mad0 Duval’s misfortune,  and laugh’d themselves sick at the recollection of it,  tho’  they declared  ’twas
very inhuman of the Captain,  and tho’  they detested her they
could not help pitying her.

“But as to the Captain”  said Miss Coussmaker  “as
poor Mad®  Duval says,  he has no compassion nor nothing
at all.”

Lady Hales declared they should get Made Duval’s expressions so pat she was afraid they would grow into use with
them even when they did not intend it —

1778]  TO FRANCES BURNEY 227

As we came from the millener’s they took notice how
dismal London began to look.

“Aye,”  cried Lady Hales,  “Poor Evelina! — No — Lord
Orvilles now !  ”

After tea we went in the Coach to Jones’s shop on Holborn
Hill — in the way Marianne found out a queer coarse looking
man to be Captain Mirvan — Miss Coussmaker a much worse
to be Mr.  Branghton — As we went thro’  Holborn —

“  Only think  ”  cried Miss Coussmaker  “  of that elegant
girl Evelina to lodge in such a place as this— and to be good
neighbours to such wretches as the Branghtons !  ”

Then she looked out for Mr.  Branghton’s silversmith’s
shop —

“  But you know it’s on Snow Hill ,”  cried Lady Hales.

“Well then,  that’s it”  said Miss Coussmaker as we stopt
at Jones’s — “and there on the first floor lives Mr.  Smith,
that odious vulgar creature,  who means to be fine and quite
the thing — and upstairs is that sweet Evelina,  with Miss
Polly and Miss Biddy Branghton — and higher is poor Mr.
Macartney.”

She then told me of Mr.  Smith’s complaint of the young
ladies greasing his room — and of young Branghton’s vulgarity
— and of poor Evelina’s letter to Miss Mirvan in which she
exclaims that she should ever have danc’d with Lord Orville !
This I imagine was one of the last letters they had read —
but as I was to be ignorant of the book I could not ask
where they left off — but I fancy the pistol scene with Mr.
Macartney and the evening at Vauxhall and Marybone are
yet to come. — I’m afraid I shall hear no more particulars —
and that they never can get thro’  it with my father as they
are so soon to leave town — but he has made them promise
not to open the book but in his presence,  which tormenting
as it is Miss Coussmaker says she regrets the less because
Dr.  Burney does read it so well!

They brought me home with them,  and I expect they will
call here to morrow.

Adieu my sweet love — [S.  B.J

228

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

[1778

[Susan to Frances Burney.]  1

[Continuation of reading  “  Evelina,”  while unknown,  with Lady
Hales.]

####**

They were got on in reading it as far as where the two
old women were to run for a wager,  which is,  you know in
the 3rd vol.

“Oh!”  said Miss Coussmaker,  “ I am more char?ned with
it than ever l It is the sweetest thing I do declare that ever I
read in my life — there’s a Mrs.  Selwyn,  a monstrous clever
woman,  that does trim and cut up some impertinent fools of
lords — oh !  I do assure you,  ’tis the highest thing I ever read
in my life.  And Lord Orville is such an amiable,  humane,
sweet character !  ”

She then gave me the whole account of the conversation
concerning the bett between Lord Merton and Mr.  Coverley
■ — the different things proposed by every one present,  and
the distress occasioned by Mrs.  Selwyn’s proposal,  and that
at last the two genius’s fix upon two poor old women to
run for a wager— but that they could not make them
practice.

“Dear”  said I  “the book must be full of ridiculous
things,  I think — •  ”

“Oh,  but I beg your pardon,”  said she,  “for I think the
serious part is even preferable to the comic.”

“  Why is there any serious part?  ”

“  Oh yes,  I assure you,  Mr.  Villars’  letters,  and poor
Evelina’s distress of mind on leaving town.  She thinks
Lord Orville has offended her: — and there is a scene between her and Mr.  Villars that is,  I do assure you — quite
affecting.”

“Aye indeed?”

“And the poor girl does get into such eternal scrapes
from her innocence of mind and entire inexperience! — that

1 This is only the first leaf of a latter,  and half of it has been made
illegible.

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1778]

229

really I have been ready to laugh and to cry for her at the
same time — and she goes to Vauxhall,  and with those vile
creatures the Branghtons , — and so after supper what does
Miss Biddy propose to her but to leave their company,  and
walk by themselves.  So Evelina can’t bear the thought of
this,  but Miss Biddy tells her she supposes she can’t bear to
leave the Gentlemen,  and this provokes her too much;  for
there’s that odious creature Mr.  Smith with them,  that away
she goes with them— and she does not know anything at
all of the place or the dark walks,  or anything,  and those
frightful girls carry her with them,  for a little fun ,  into one
of the dark alleys — and there they meet with a party of
gentlemen,  and are so frightened!  Poor Evelina runs away
but falls into a worse danger,  for she meets with that creature
Sir Clement Willoughby.”

“Sir Clement Willoughby? — Who’s he?”

“  Oh !  the worst man in the world ! — -instead of rescuing
her,  he carries her into another dark walk ; — but she behaves
with great spirit — charmingly,  indeed — and makes him afraid
of pursuing his scheme,  and so he takes her back,  and at
last she meets her party again.  But,  dear sweet creature!
She is so mortified that he should see her with such wretches
as Madc Duval and the Branghtons !  He that is drawn quite
a man of ton and fashion,  and that has always seen her in
such high life !— But he is such an artful creature,  I can’t bear
him.”

She beg’d me to write her word my opinion of it — and
said we would read it together when I should go to
Howlett’s.

“But,”  said I,  “’twill be too recent in yr memory.”

“  Oh,  I should like to read it all over again,  for the sake
of the language immediately— but indeed I believe there is
not a circumstance from the beginning to the end of the
book that I do not perfectly remember — for we have read
.it in a most delightful manner — not hurried it over —
but stopt to laugh and talk it over between almost every
letter.”

“  Dear,  I should have liked to have been with you.”

“  Oh,  and Dr.  Burney does read the conversations,  and
mark the characters so well,  ’tis quite delightful.  But I daresay he’ll have no objection,  when he comes to Howletts,  to

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

230

[1778

read it again,  and then you will have it in perfection,  I assure
you.”

They took leave very affectionately of me,  and,  by the bye,
always enquire and send a thousand loves,  compts and good
wishes to you . ,  •

[Susan to Frances Burney,  Chesington.]

[Doctor Burney’s first reading  “  Evelina”  with Lady Hales and
her daughters.]

My dearest Fanny —

*  *  *

Tuesday,  June 16th.

#  #  *

My mother was gone to  .  .  .  My dear dad came in in
very good spirits and invited me into his study — told me he
had  ......  [My father]  recollected that he had a letter

to give me from Miss Coussmaker — written when he took
leave of her,  Sunday.

“  I daresay,”  said he,  “  she talks to you in it of the book
— We’ve finished Evelina.”

“Indeed! — And  .  .  .  what are your real sentiments of
it?”

“  Why — upon my soul I think it the best novel I know,
excepting Fielding’s — and in some respects it is better than
his — I have been excessively pleased with it — there are perhaps a few things might have been otherwise — Mirvan’s
trick upon Lovel is I think carried too far — I don’t hate
that young man enough,  ridiculous as he is,  to be pleased
or diverted at his having his ear torn by a monkey — there’s
a something disgusting in it.”

“  But the Captain is reckoned a brute by everybody

“  Why that’s true,  but in this case  ’tis a brutality which
does not make one laugh — Now Made Duval[’s]  loss of her
curls and all that is very diverting — However,  except this
instance I declare I think the book would scarce bear an
improvement I — I wish I may die if I do not believe it to
be the best novel in the language Fielding’s excepted— for

Smollett’s are so d - d gross that they are not fit reading

for women with all their wit.  Mr.  Villars’  character is ad-

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1778]

231

mirably supported— and rises upon one in every letter — the
language throughout his letters are as good as any body need
write — (N.B.  Spoken with emphasis and spirit)— I declare
as good as I would wish to read!  and every letter of his
seems to me better and better — Lord Orville’s character
is just what it ought to be — perfectly benevolent and upright.”

“And without being fade,  I think — ”

“  Oh,  entirely— there’s a boldness in it that struck me
mightily — He is a man not ashamed of being better than
the rest of mankind — indeed I am excessively pleased with
him — Evelina is in a new style too— so perfectly natural and
innocent — and the scene between her and her father,  Sir
John Belmont — I protest I think  ’tis a scene for a Tragedy
—I blubber'd.”

“  No — did you Sir? — How the ladies must cry — ”

“  Oh !  I don’t think they’ve recovered it yet- — It made
them quite ill — ’tis indeed wrought up in a most extraordinary manner — I laid the book down — and could not
for some time get on with it.”

“  Oh,  Miss Coussmaker was distracted about it before —
what she will be now I can’t tell — but she’ll be wanting me
to tell her my opinion of it — and I shall scarce know what
to say.”

“  Oh,  speak out about it as you would of another book —
I have — and if it was to be discovered I should tell them
that I was as much at liberty to admire or criticise as them,
for I’m sure I knew as little about it. — However keep snug
for poor Fanny’s sake — tho’  I protest that sometime hence
I should think there would be no kind of impropriety in its
being known — on the contrary it would do her a great deal
of credit — For a young woman’s work I look upon it to be
really wonderful!”

(His own very words,  as I hope to live!)

Well — I had interrupted with frequent jumps,  but now
could not forbear saying —

“Lord,  sir,  I’m so glad to hear you say so — for I’m sure
we think so !  ”

“  What you,  and Hetty?  ”

“  Oh — she's been distracted at your not having read it
sooner.”

232 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1778

“  Why how could I when she would not tell me the name?
— But hasn’t she got something more on the stocks?  ”

“  Oh,  no sir — Her head — her poor head will scarce admit
of her writing ev’n a letter now.”

“  What still !  poor thing ! — But how sly she has been about
this work!  ”

“  Oh lord — so sly,  and so cautious that tho’  I long tc
mention it to a few people I dare not — I declare I wanted
to recommend it to Miss Fitzgerald the other night,  she is
i  ] 1 it would delight her — but  ’twould be as much as my
life is worth —  ”

“  Oh,  but  /  want to make Mrs.  Thrale read it — Lady
Hales has bought my Book,  and Lady Radnor has got
another already,  but I must get another set — for I won’t be
without it — I’m sure  ’twill please Mrs.  Thrale — and the language is such as nobody need be ashamed of.” —

He then sent me up to dress — and thus ended a conversation which has made me inclined to grin and jump about
like a fool all day — My sweet Fanny! — you must have a
little vanity in spite of your talk — for I do protest solemnly
to you,  that tho’  I’m convinced I have in my hurry forgot
many of the flattering things my father said,  I have not
written one word that he did not speak,  and what he said
received still additional force by the spirit with which he
utter’d it. — I design to make you a present of Miss Couss’s
letter when we meet for your nosegay,  if you think her praise
worth having — ’tis all about your work.

Mais Adieu — il fait si tard que je ne puis plus voir.
Make my best respects to Mr.  Crisp,  and my love to Miss
Cooke.

I wTish I could see thee again my sweetest girl,  but don’t
wish you any where but where you are^-and en attendant '
am

for Ever and Aye

Your Susanna Ei.iz.  B - .

[No.  6 of this series is entered on Mine.  D’Arblay’s own list
as  “  Sam.  Mislaid. — It has not been found.]

1 Here the seal comes in the way of some words.

1778]

TO FRANCES BURNEY

233

[There is no date or address to this letter,  which is but a leaf,
numbered 19 on the first page.]

[Susan to Frances Burney,  at Chesington.]

[Dr.  Johnson — “Evelina.”]

##=*###

“  I have such a thing to tell you  ”  said he  [my father]
“  about poor Fan  ” —

“Dear sir,  what?”  and I immediately suppos’d he had
spoke to Mrs.  Thrale.

“Why to night,  we were sitting at tea — only Johnson,
Mrs.  Thrale and me — ‘Madam’  cried Johnson see saw-ing
on his chair — ‘  Mrs.  Chol’mley was talking to me last night
of a new novel,  which she says has a very uncommon share
of merit — Evelina — She says she has not been so much
entertained this great while as in reading it — and that she
shall go all over London in order to discover the author  ’ —

“  ‘  Good G — d  ’ 1 cried Mrs.  Thrale — why somebody else

1 It can have escaped no reader familiar with the ways of the eighteenth century,  that the careless old ejaculations descending from the
Middle Ages,  and still in common use upon the Continent,  are omitted in
these diaries,  as in those which have already been published,  although
they are retained in modern editions of  “Evelina” and  “Cecilia.”  They
have,  in almost every case,  been modified,  or effaced in the manuscript
of the diaries,  old and new ;  in many cases by Mme.  D’Arblay herself,
in more by her niece,  who was the editor of her later diaries.  These
"almost unmeaning expletives seem to have passed unrebuked by Dr.
Johnson in the case of Mrs.  Thrale,  although he would not suffer
Boswell to write  “  by my soul.”  His ear had become used to them,  or she
was incorrigible.  It is only fair to Fanny and her sisters to say that they
used them much less than most young ladies of their time.  The editor
was told by a lady who lived to nearly a hundred,  who was a religious
woman,  the daughter of pious parents,  that travelling in a stage-coach
in the West of England,  when a girl,  about the year 1794,  she was asked
by a gentleman of benignant aspect,  who saw that she knew the neighbourhood,  whose was the house that they were then passing.  She carer
lessly answered,  “  The Lord knows who  !  ”  He laid his hand upon her
arm,  saying,  “Friend,  thou should’st not take the name of Godin vain.”
She was deeply impressed,  and at once gave up an idle way of speaking,

234 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1778

mentioned that book to me — Lady W estcote it was I believe
—The modest writer of Evelina,  she talk’d to me of.’

“  ‘  Mrs.  Chol’mley says she never met so much modesty
with so much merit before in any literary performance,’  said
Johnson.* 1

“  ‘  Why,’  said I,  quite cooly and innocently — ‘  Somebody
recommended it to me too — I read a little of it,  which indeed seem’d to be above the common class works of this
kind.’

“  ‘  Well,’  said Mrs.  Thrale — 1 Ill get it certainly.’  ‘  It will
do  ’  said I,  1 for your time of confinement I think.’

‘“You must have it Madam,’  cried Johnson, — ‘for Mrs.
Chol’mley says she shall keep it on her table the whole
summer,  that every body that knows. her may see it — for
she says everybody ought to read it !  ’

A tolerably agreable conversation this,  methinks — It took
away my breath,  and made me skip about like a mad creature
— What effect it may have on you I know not — But I think
it will occasion you no less consternation than you received
from the Monthly Review —

“And how you feel sir?”  cried I to my father.

“Feel?  Why I liked it,  of all things! — and I wanted
somebody else to introduce the book there too— ’T was just
what I wish’d— I am sure Mrs.  Thrale will be pleased with
it.”

“  Why in one respect  ’twill stand a fairer chance with her

about which she had never thought before.  Her monitor was that eminent
“  Friend,”  Richard Rathbone,  of Liverpool.

These letters have been less carefully corrected by elder hands than
most of the others,  and a few expressions occur in them which are left,
as they stand,  because they show how people spoke in their haste in
1778,  while wholly devoid of evil intention.

1 Mrs.  Cholmondeley was Polly Woffington,  younger sister of the
better-known  “  Peg,”  who,  it is said,  had her educated in a French convent.  She married the honourable Robert Cholmondeley,  an Earl’s
younger son.  He left the army,  and took orders.  Boswell,  writing of
a dinner at Sir Joshua Reynolds’s,  on the 25th of April,  1778,  tells of
her high spirits and  “  lively sallies  ”  to Dr.  Johnson,  “  with whom she
had been long acquainted,  and was very easy.”  In a letter from Fanny
to Mrs.  Thrale,  in 1780,  she is described as being  “gay,  flighty,  entertaining, and frisky,” — yet there is a tone of deprecation in this,  as well as
in the last words of the paragraph,  “  After all,  there is something in her
very attractive.”

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1778]

235

than with Mrs.  Chol’mley,  I think: — She liked,  I daresay,  all
the fun and the comic parts of it,  but Mrs.  Thrale  ” —

“Aye,”  said he interrupting me,  “Mrs.  Thrale will like
the delicacy which is preserved throughout it.”

“  Why,  indeed,  Fanny  [would not come to any]  discredit
if she was known as the Authoress,  shy as she is about
it.”  «

11 Discredit!  ”  repeated my father,  “no indeed, — [just the
reverse] — ’ twou'd be a credit to her ,  and to me,  and to yoic —
there is great goodness of heart and great purity of manners
in all that relates to her heroine — and even with the Captain
she has in a very nice manner avoided intermingling either
oaths or any other thing that a female might not safely read
or write  ” —

[Susan to Frances Burney,  at Chesington.]  1

[“Evelina”  first read by Mrs.  Thrale.  Mrs.  Thrale’s original
opinion while the book was anonymous.]

[Post-mark 7  (?)  July.]

#####*

When Charlotte and I return’d home the coach was
standing at the door,  and my father and mother had alighted
from it — they expected a great deal of company to day at
Mrs.  Thrale’s,  so they put off their design of spending a few
days there till next week.  They brought in several books
they had carried with them,  but added to these,  three in a
new and not z/wfamiliar binding to me — “Evelina  [senza
dub bio j\  ”  thought I.  However no notice was taken on any
side,  and I accompanied my father and mother into the
study— When the latter left the room,

“Your mother has 'got Evelina home to read,”  said my
father,  laughing.

“  So I see,”  said I.

1 The first page of this letter is defaced by pen-strokes.

236 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1778

“Mrs.  Thrale” — -shall I go on? — exert your fortitude my
dear Fanny on this trying occasion,  and call up all your
philosophical ideas— however your diffidence has prepared
you for a little mortification,  which thank heav’n you are
likely,  not to get over — but to escape — “Mrs.  Thrale”  said
my dear father,  his eyes beaming with the pleasure he felt
and that he knew I should feel — “  likes it vastly — is
extremely pleased with it.”

I was not overpower’d with surprise ,  tho’  not greatly displeased at this account.

“And Miss Thrale,”  said he,  “  said as much of it as ever
she says of anything — that it was very entertaining and well
written — She read it to her mother.”

“And pray,  sir,  how did the conversation begin about
it?  ”

“  Why,  when we had sat a little while,  Mr.  Thrale and
Johnson were in town,  and only Queeny,  your mother and
me with Mrs.  Thrale;  I ask’d her if she had got her books
safe? —

“  ‘  Oh!  yes,’  said she — and thank’d me for getting  ’em her
— ‘  But,’  said she — we found the novel very short,  for we
quite finish’d it in two days — but  ’tis very clever I assure you
—I was a little afraid  (from the name I suppose)  it had been
a mere sentimental business but there’s a vast deal of
humour and entertainment in it — the second volume is
charming — there is such a family,  silversmiths on Snow Hill,
that diverted Queany and me beyond measure ! — and there’s
a brute of a Captain that plays tricks on a poor creature,
Made Duval,  that is half French and half English,  and the
vulgarest of human beings,  and their characters are exceedingly well supported,  and the scenes between them very
comical I assure you — I wish’d it had been longer,’  said she
— and then recommended it to your mother to read— and
told her that Mrs.  Chol’mley carried it everywhere she went ,
with her.’

“  I think Eve almost got over yopr mother’s suspicions
about it — I’ve been reading part of it to her as we came home
— not the verses — I miss’d them as if I had not observed
them — but read the preface and dedication to her,  and the
two or three first letters —

‘“It begins very well,’  said she,  ‘ and if there is humour

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1778]

237

in it,  it is a very good’novel  ’ — but she told me that by something that had pass’d at Chesington,  she thought Fanny and
Sukey had written it together .’  ”

1 wish she had divined right !

******

Mrs.  Thrale,  he says,  has not the most remote suspicion
ev’n that he has read the book — is particularly pleased with
the  .  ones in the 2nd Volume — and all that relates to

the Branghtons  ” — Miss Thrale and her mother seemed to
have it by heart,  and quoted in the course of the day several
of the Snow Hill phrases.

“Your mother,”  said my father,  “was telling Mrs.  Thrale
she was sure she would be greatly entertain’d by reading
Madame Riccoboni’s novels — there was so much of human
nature in them — 1 *

“  ‘  Well  ’  said Mrs.  Thrale—4 1 don’t know how much of
human nature there may be in Made Riccoboni,  but I am
sure there’s a great deal of human life in this book,  and of
the manners of the present time.  It’s writ by somebody that
knows the top and the bottom ,  the highest and lowest of mankind — It’s very good language,  and there’s an infinite deal of
fun in it  ’  ” —

Mais adieu — rejouis toi,  ma chere,  et desormais ne per-
mets —

*#####

[Here seven lines are crossed out.]

[Susan to Frances Burney.]

[Dr.  Burney’s first reading  “Evelina”  with Mrs.  Burney,  who
knew not the Author.]

Sunday Morn.  July 5th.

******

This Morning between seven and eight I was woke by a
noise in the next room — upon listening a minute or two I
found it was my father and mother laughing in a most extra-

1 A lady who wrote pleasant stories,  and translated Fielding’s

“Amelia”  into French.

238 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1778

ordinary manner — presently I heard by the voice of the
former that he was reading  ....  I had a little suspicion
of what it might be,  and started up and went to the door to
satisfy myself.  I presently not only discover’d the book he
was reading — but even the page — with the assistance of your
new Eveli?ia /  which I made free with on this occasion — they
were in the midst of the Ridotto scene— P.  64 — and the
eclats of Laughter that accompanied it — did my heart good
— from my father — .

Every speach of Sir Clement’s in this scene diverted my
father no less than me,  and at the question — “  My dear
creature — why where could you be educated!  ”  he laid the*book
down to laugh till he cried — and when it was done,  said it
was an admirable conversation,  the poor girl’s mistakes extremely natural,  and the man of fashion’s character touch’ d
with delicacy and written with great humour and spirit.

In the next letter Charlotte join’d me,  and we stood till
we were cramp’d to death,  not daring to move,  and almost
stifled ourselves with laughing — the next scene was productive of no less mirth than the Ridotto . My father

stopt to laugh after every speach of the Captain’s — “  that’s
excellent” — “isn’t that good?  there’s wit in spite of all

his grossness in every word he says  ” — etc.,  etc. — the next
letter from Mr.  Villars he read with a tenderness which drew
tears from me.  Not a period of it did he pass over unnotic’d
— the matter and the language he declared were equally
good,  and both excellent . P.  88.  M.  Dubois’  profound bow at the Captain’s gross speach did not escape
observation,  and the conversation of Madc Duval and Mirvan
at Ranelagh almost convuls’d my father with laughing.  I
wish’d with all my heart you had been with Charlotte and
me — for  ’tis impossible by letter to convey an idea to you of
how thoroughly he enjoy’d every line of it — this was the last

1 Fanny up to July had no copy of her own book  (which had been
published at the end of January),  except one which Mr.  Lowndes sent
her that she might make a list of errata ;  as this was  “  incomplete,  and
unbound,”  she asked Mr.  Lowndes for a better copy,  but received no
answer until she repeated her request,  on which he sent,  during her
absence at Chesington,  “a set very elegantly bound.”  In the end,  she
obtained ten handsomely-bound copies of her book,  which was sold for
nine shillings when bound in the ordinary calf-binding.

1778]  TO FRANCES BURNEY 239

letter he read — but I believe  ’twas near twelve before we
breakfasted.

Monday July 6th . .

This morning my father and mother were again reading
in bed before I woke and so I lost all the Opera and
Branghtons,  and just got to the listening place time enough
to hear the latter part of the Pantheon adventure,  and Lord
Orville’s application to the young ladies — p.  189,  to hear the
opinion of the public places they had seen,  the Captain’s
‘  What signifies asking them girls!  ”  etc.,  was very well
relished,  and Lord Merton was not thrown away.  P.  195,
when Evelina says  “Sir Clement seem’d in misery” — My
father exclaim’d he was glad of that — “  ’tis such a dog,  that
Sir Clement, — and this Lord seems to be his match.” — Poor
Moll’s pug nose occasion’d a new burst of laughter — the
admirable  (excuse me my dear)  observation upon the variety
of characters and manners in all ranks of life — 198,  my father
stopt at some minutes.

Mr.  Villars’  letter 10 1 he read with the utmost feeling —
the dispute on leaving town between the Captain and Mad^
French,  and the English fashion the former makes bold tO'
shew M.  Dubois,  he enjoy’d in the highest degree — He
finish’d the Vol.  before he could get up — Mr.  Villars’  Letter
P.  220 had its full weight given it — he said it was as pathetic
as anything he had ever read— that it had all the appearance
of being writ by a man that had had a College education,  with
a goodness of heart scarce ever to be met with.  222 — after
the period that ends with  “  and feared lest it should be accepted ” — -“how delicate,”  cried he,  and presently after he
protested that — 11 Johnson could not have expressed himself
better ” — but I must stop my pen — for I’ve just had your
letter,  and I would not willingly again take away your breath
—I am delighted at Lowndes’  intelligence — Another Edition
this year! — Well— I’ll never say that merit does not make
its own way  ?io more.  As to your secret,  I am afraid it must
go — and my mother has said prodigious fine things of the
book to-day.  This morning my father call’d me into his,
room when he was alone to desire me to write and ask you,
as a favour to him ,  leave to let Mrs.  Thrale know you for
the authoress.

240

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

[1778

“  And in that case,”  said he,  “  I must likewise tell your
mother — and I assure you she is greatly pleased with it.”

I told him I was sure the idea would make you start.

“  Why you may be sure,”  said he — if I did not think it
would do her credit,  I should not think of making the request
— but if she will give her permission,  I will still entreat Mrs.
Thrale not to acquaint a soul of it,  and I’m certain  ’twill do
her honour.”

He wishes for an answer if possible by return of post as
he goes to Streatham the latter end of the week.  He has
received your sweet letter,  and sends you his best love and
thanks — yet desired me to write you the above mention’d
request .

[Susan to Frances Burney,  at Chesington.]

[Dr.  Burney’s first reading  “Evelina”  with Mrs.  Burney.]

To my great disappointment my  [mother]  was weary,  and
they stopt before the Vauxhall scene,  on shutting up the book
— “Well,”  said my father,  “we shall begin again at 5!”  and
so I believe they did,  for tho’  my father rose before me,  he
must have read a great deal,  as my mother said something
at dinner relating to Made Duval’s borrowing Lord Orville’s
coach — “  She hoped,  on going out,  that she should not be
caught in the rain,”  she said,  “  for fear she should see  ?io
Lord's coach that she knew,  to call to.”  I have heard no more
read since,  for my father had the head ache last night,  and
this morning rose early. — But he is tolerably to-day. — When
my mother was saying something in favour of the book the
other morning,

“  Oh,”  said he — “  One might be sure there must be something in it by Mrs.  Cholmondeley’s recommending it so
strongly — for such women as she and Mrs.  Thrale are afraid
of praising a tort et a travers,  and if there is not something
more than common,  as they know they are liable to have,
their opinions quoted they are d — lish shy of speaking favourably.”

To me,  I believe I have already told you,  he said you
could not have had a greater compliment than the making

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1778]

241

these two ladies your friends,  as they were d — d severe and
d — d knowing — you must excuse the energy of the expression.
[Here Mme.  D’Arblay has written between the lines, — “  It

came from my dear father’s energy of delight.”] . .

I don’t wonder at your being in a twitter at the questions
ask’d me per la dama 1  [the morning after we were at Mrs.
Ord’s,]  ...  for Charlotte says I turn’d as pale as ashes,  and
I felt my voice so unsteady I was frighten’d at speaking —
luckily she did not look at me — and I soon assumed a fij-mer
tone.  You ask me to tell you honestly if I am not astonished
at the sale of the book — and I will not scruple to tell you I
am.  I never doubted its success,  provided it was read — but
its being generally read I confess I scarce hoped — as you
would permit nobody to mention it,  and would have suffered
the poor babe to die in oblivion had it not been miraculously
preserved. — The Monthly Review I think must have been
its recommendation to Mrs.  Cholmondeley — and since it has
fallen into her hands,  its subsequent good fortune has
nothing in it that seems to me wonderful .

[Susan to Frances Burney at Chesington.]

Thursday,  July 16th.

#  #  #  #  #  *

At night my father read as usual.  I found he was at p.  41,
at the conversation concerning the bett,  Vol.  3rd.  Lord Orville’s proposal he admired as being characteristic — his delicate
manner of returning the compliments made him by Miss
Anville yet more.  In the next letter he remark’d the knowledge of the world the author had in the inhumanity and impertinence with which Lovel speaks of Evelina.  The race
between the old women excited a roar of laughter — After
the scene in which Mr.  Macartney is again introduced and
Lord Orville’s accusation of Evelina’s making an appointment
with him he left off— intending to begin again next morning
at 5 — but he was up before me — so I heard nothing of it. —
Mr.  Strange dined with us Fryday— and Mr.  Magellan came

1 The second Mrs.  Burney.

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

242

[1778

in the evening,  but did not stay — Merlin sup’d here and was
very diverting.  (I think you must introduce him in your
next work.)  At night my father open'd at P.  125,  so I found
he must have read two or three hours in the morning.  Yet
he was up early — Poor Evelina was much pitied for the
effects of her altered conduct on Lord Orville.  Mr.  Villars’
Letter gout'e as usual by my father — “  that man is always
right ” — said he,  meaning in his advice and judgement of
things — the conclusion of his Letter,  P.  130,  lost nothing of
its pathos by the manner in which it was read.  The subsequent epistle of Lady Belmont’s affected him very much —
and me,  by the nervous,  energetic manner in which he read
it,  much more than when I read it myself.  Indeed I have
found this to be the case frequently in listening to my father,
tho’  it has been impossible for me to hear him always distinctly.  He stopt several times in the course of this letter
— nor was his handkerchief useless — When it was done —

“  This is monstrously strong,  surely,”  said he,  shutting up
the book!

“Very characteristic said my mother.

“  Upon my soul,”  said he— “  there seems to me a force in
it,  that I have scarce ever met with.” —

At Mrs.  Selwyn’s expression in the next letter that a trio
of females would be  '‘'■nervous to the last degree ”  my father
laugh’d violently.  Indeed I can readily believe what he once
said to me,  that the book rose on him on the 2nd reading —
for it is utterly impossible that anybody should ever enjoy it
more than he has done in my hearing —

“  Excellent,”  said he,  “  how well kept up is that woman’s
character !  ”

“  And indeed all of them,”  said my mother.

“  Wonderfully"— cried he.

My father,  who is much in love with Lord Orville as to be
almost angry that even Mr.  Villars should lead Evelina into
neglecting him,  at the observation she makes P.  137 concerning the suddenness of the alteration in her behaviour
being ill-judged,  cried out —

“  W ell,  I am glad she finds that out however! — tho’  as she
thought herself obliged to change her conduct it is much
more natural that she should overdo it than otherwise.”

I was delighted at the opportunity of hearing the scene

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1778]

243

that followed — which is I think the most interesting among
the many interesting scenes in the book.

Sir Clement’s satire upon the three ladies was not thrown
away — the Character he gives of each,  but especially that of
Mrs.  Selwyn,  diverted my father excessively —

“  How he trims them! — and all in a language of his own
— entirely himself — a true,  fashionable,  unprincipled Man of
the World!  ”

“Admirably kept up!”  cried he at the last speech he
makes P.  141 — “  there ’s a Galant homme for you!  ” — at the
appearance of Lord Orville —

“  Another Coup de Theatre ,”  cried my father!

What the preceding ones that he had mark’d had been I
know not.  The pistol scene with Mr.  Macartney was,  I suppose,  one — and he frequently had before remark’d how
dramatic a novel it was.  He admired Lord Orville as he
deserved in this conversation with Sir Clement.

“  She is not ,  indeed,  like most modern young ladies ,  to be
known in half an hour A

“That’s very good!  that’s excellent!”  said my father.
P.  1 49,  when he says — ■“  we will discuss this point no further,  ”
etc — “  Aye,”  cried he — “  there the lover breaks out — The
friend and the man of honour are conspicuous in the former
part of the conversation— but the lover speaks here.”

He remark’d that it was at once an artful and a natural
method the author had taken to dispel the suspicions of Lord
Orville by Evelina’s calling out to him to free her from Sir
Clement.

“  The plan is admirably laid,”  said he,  “  and circumstances
the least expected succeed each other in the most natural
and probable manner.”- — -

In the following scene between Evelina and Lord Orville,
when Mrs.  Beaumont enters —

“Oh,”  cried my father,  in a tone of vexation— “  What a
■  critical moment has she chose to make her appearance ! — P.
155,  when E.  says Lord Orville sat next to her — He would
sit next me A  “That’s excellent — charmingly mark’d,”  said
he,— “  and as he almost exhausted himself in fruitless efforts
to entertain me  ” — “  Everything here turns to account,”  said
he — “nothing is forgotten.”

The sweet scene that follows he read with as much

244 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1778

appearance of interest as if it had been perfectly new to him
—  the interruption of — “I can’t imagine what Mrs.  Selwyn
has done with these books!”  diverted him beyond measure.

“This scene,”  said he,  “is delicately wrought — and broke
off just as it should be — there’s nothing fade in it — it is more
natural that Evelina should avoid greater minuteness in her
own confession than that she should practice it,  and at the
same time it prevents the scene from bearing a resemblance
to any other of the kind.”

Mrs.  Selwyn’s entrance was announced by my Father with
a violent eclat de rire — and  “ Another Coup de Theatre!”

P.  160,  at  “you must not a second time reproach me with
making an appointment ” — “That’s very well— archly put in
of Miss Evelina,”  said my father,  laughing,  “  deprive her not
of the pleasure of her conjectures” — produced another laugh.
Lord Orville’s two speaches,  161,  were follow’d by the exclamations of — “delicate!” — and  “noble!”— her weeping
with joy declared to be very natural,  and in short almost
every time produced an observation and a panergyric — Ld
O’s manner of entreating permission to accompany E.  to
town was deservedly admired,  and,  164,  when the forged
letter of Sir Clement came sur le tapis ,

“  Aye,”  said my father,  “  I am glad to have that cleared
up — I was sure it could not be Lord Orville’s — Tis the only
thing I guess’d in the book — but I was afraid  ’twould have
been forgot” — At p.  166 they stopt,  and I lost several interesting scenes — tho’  I was early woke by laughing in the next
room,  and upon whisking to the listening place I found it
was at Mrs.  Selwyn’s — “ poor Polly Green  ”  P.  210 — Ld Oreille’s proposal to wait on Mrs.  Villars himself my father
much admired — and likewise noticed how well laid the plan
was in making his declaration to Evelina previous to his
knowledge of her rank,  etc — At Lady Louisa and Mrs.
Beaumont’s sudden politeness to her,  P.  213,  he cried out —

“ Admirable!— the world,  the world!”

Lord Orville’s introduction of her by her real name he
said was  “quite right — but this Character,”  said he,  “seems
to me a model for a young man — as Villars is for an old
one” — his insisting on accompanying her instead of Mrs
Selwyn to her father he remark’d was very well judg’d,  as
well as natural in him as her lover — the shortness of the ride

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1778]

245

diverted him not a little likewise — But the Scene between
her and her father,  218! — you would have cried had you
heard him read it,  and stop as he did to cry himself — I
declare I could scarce prevent myself from making a noise
— his being unable to open Lady Belmont’s letter and
agonies at reading it — his sudden transitions from tenderness to fury and despair- — his returns again to Evelina,  he
mark’d so well that no one could I am sure have heard him
without tears — and his own flow’d plentifully — When he had
done he shut up the book for a while and said— “  ’twas an
amazing scene  —

“  I declare,”  said he  (N.B.  it passed for the first reading)
“  I never remember crying so at a Tragedy — had I not taken
pains to check myself — I should have blubber'd — I never read
anything higher wrought than it is — I do protest I wish it
could be brought on the stage— just as it is,  without adding
or taking away one word — indeed there is not a word that
could be changed without injury— I am not in general very
easy to please with regard to language — but I wish I may die
if I think this letter could be mended in any respect — I
really think it would be almost too much for the stage — yet ip
it had not been printed,  and I knew the author ,  I think I
would advise its being part of a Drama — ’Tis pity it has been
printed !  ”

After these,  and some more similar observations,  he went
on reading — and was charm’d with the new instance of Lord
Orville’s noble mind,  P.  226 —

“  He is so cojisistently generous and noble!  ”  said he.  Sir
Clement’s letter — he declared was as good as any one in
the book — because so proud and so characteristic from
such a man in such a situation — “his Character is kept
up to the last  ” — her observations upon it he much admired — and her answer,  and rejoiced that she was prevented
from signing her name to it — “  ’twas a lucky circumstance,”
he said — ■

He laugh’d at her saying the preparations went on — -

“  Amazing !  ”  said he— at the end of this letter he left off,
but prognosticated that there would be some fun again— and
that they should have some more laughs after all their blubbering.  I hope my mother thought him second sighted —
Since this I heard nothing further — for at two they set off

246 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1778

for Streatham — with the 3rd Vol.  loose in the chaise with
them .

My father and mother returned from Streatham Tuesday
— -When I was alone with the latter  (sic)  he told me he had
put confidence in the cat — told my mother on the road — but
had no opportunity of speaking alone to Mrs.  Thrale till
Monday.

He then brought her the books— he said —

“But do you know,  Ma’am,”  said he,  “that I have been
reading it myself,  upon your recommendation?  ”

“Well?  and is it not a very pretty book — and a very clever
book — and a very comical book  ?  ”

“  Why — it’s toell enough — but I have something to tell you
about it.”

“Well,  what?”

“Has Mrs.  Cholmley found out the author?”

“No — not that I know of — ”

“  Because I believe I have — tho’  but very lately—  ”

“  Well,  pray — let’s hear,”  said she eagerly — “  I want to
know him of all things .”

“  And so then,”  continued my father — but I could get no
vnoxe particulars — “  I told her  ’twas our Fanny’s —  ”

“  And did she know who our Fanny was?  ”

“  Oh,  yes,  immediately —  ”

“And wasn’t she monstrously surprised?—”

“  Why,  she expressed less surprise than I expected — perhaps she thought  ’twould not have been so civil — nor is she
aware of the few opportunities Fanny has had of seeing the
world and different scenes of life — But she is mortal fond of
the book,  and has got it by heart — and yesterday she read a
great deal of it to Johnson and Thrale,  and whoever came
near her.”

“  And what did Johnson say?”

“  Oh,  he laughed as much as I did.”

“  What part did she read?  ”

“  Oh,  some of her favorites,  the Branghtons’  dialogues —
and the Captain and Made Duval’s — she is vastly pleased at
their being pitted against one another — and she has taken
vastly to the verses at the beginning — she told me that when
she read  ’em first,  by the tenderness with which they were
dictated,  she had taken it in her head they were writ to a

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1778]

247

mother — she said a hundred handsome things — said Fanny
had looked round her 7 vith a penetrating eye,  and paid me
the comp1 to say she must not wonder at the language,  as
she had been brought up in so good a school'1'1 — Adieu.

[Under the seal.]

If you don’t write to me soon I shall

[Susan to Frances Burney,  at Chesington.]

[“  Evelina.”]

Thursday Night,  July 16th.
******

Tuesday my father and mother came home.  I had no
opportunity till evening of speaking to the former alone —
and before that was attacked by the latter— (we were  “  tit a
tit  ”)—

“And so,  Evelina /”  said she,  and made a full stop. — I
said nothing and she continued — “Well I confess,”  said
she — “  I did not think it the production of otie —  ”

“  I am sure,  ma’am,  you did me an honour I did not
deserve if you thought I had a share in it —  ”

She said civil things to justify her suspicions,  and added
that the variety of character and situations in it had indeed
surprised her —

“As to the style and language,  that did not at all surprise
me —  ”

By the emphasis she laid on the me,  I conjectured,  and I
doubt not reasonably — that Mrs.  Thrale had express’d some
admiration on this head. — She said no more,  nor has she
since mention’d it — but I hear she has,  or designs to write to
you about it.  My father introduced the subject when we
were alone by saying — ■“  I suppose Fanny’ll give me leave
to tell her secret to Lady Hales —  ”

I tried to dissuade him — but don’t know whether I succeeded — because I should like to be on the spot when it

1 This letter appears to have been begun on a Thursday,  and finished
on the Tuesday or Wednesday following.

248 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1778

comes out.  I then asked him about Mrs.  Thrale and he told
me what I wrote you in my last letter — but says she has
promised inviolable secrecy .

Sunday July 19th

######

You will be’  sorry to hear that Rousseau has follow’d
Voltaire to the tomb and that a period of a few weeks has
terminated the existence of two such great and eminent
writers.  Mr.  Cutler brought us the intelligence — but I was
not in the way,  and did not hear it from him.

Saturday Morning we spent extremely well at Mr.  L — Sir
Ashton Lever’s,  Museum I mean. — Mr.  Anson call’d here
with Miss Clayton and carried my mother,  Charlotte,  and
myself there.  I wish I was a good Natural Historian that I
might give you some idea of our entertainment in seeing
birds,  beasts,  shells,  fossils,  etc — but I can scarce remember
a dozen names of the thousand I heard that were new to me.
— The birds of paradise,  and the humming birds,  were I
think among the most beautiful — There are several pelicans
— flamingos — peacocks  (one quite white) — a penguin.  Among
the beasts a hippopotamus  (sea-horse)  of an immense size,
an elephant,  a tyger from the Tower — a Greenland bear and
its cub — a wolf— two or three leopards — an Otaheite dog,  a
very coarse ugly looking creature — a camelion — a young
crocodile— a room full of monkeys — one of which presents
the company with an Italian Song—  another is reading a
book — another,  the most horrid of all,  is put in the attitude
of Venus de Medicis,  and is scarce fit to be look’d at.  Lizards,
bats,  toads,  frogs,  scorpions and other filthy creatures in
abundance.  There were a great many things from Otaheite
— the compleat dress of a Chinese Mandarine,  made of blue
and brown sattin — of an African Prince — A suit of armour
that they say belonged to Oliver Cromwel — the Dress worn
in Charles ist’s time — etc — etc — etc— In one of the back
rooms we found ourselves within hearing of a delightful
Concert — but I dared not stop to listen to it — the ciceroni
(Sir Ashton was not in town)  told us it was at Giardini’s
house — which overlooks the gardens of Leicester House —

He and others were playing quartettos charmingly .

S.  E.  Burney.

1778]

TO FRANCES BURNEY

249

[Susan to Frances Burney,  at Chesington.]

[This is headed by Mme.  D’Arblay,  “Dr.  Johnson upon Evelina,  No.  1 3- 1 ,  1778.  Mrs.  Thrale to Dr.  Burney.”

This is the letter which set Fanny dancing with delight round
the mulberry tree in the garden at Chesington,  as she lived to
tell Sir Walter Scott nearly fifty years afterwards.  She writes,
in her diary for 1778,  “Dr.  Johnson’s approbation! — it almost
crazed me with agreeable surprise — it gave me such a flight of
spirits,  that I danced a jigg to Mr.  Crisp,  without any preparation,  music,  or explanation, —  to his no small amazement,  and
diversion.”]

At dinner yesterday my father had a letter from that sweet
woman,  Mrs.  Thrale,  whom I love better than ever.  He said
it was a charming one,  but mention’d no particulars.  A
novel of Madme Riccoboni’s was returned at the same time
to my mother.  This morning,  after having made enquiries
about Chesington,  which I thought you would all want to
hear by the baker to-morrow,  I ventured to hint at the above
mentioned letter — “  I shall have all your heads turned,  girls,”
said he,  and at first refused to shew it me,  but after a little
coquettry between us,  he gave me Mrs.  Thrale’s letter and
leave to communicate its contents to you  “  to comfort poor
Fan’s Bowels.”  I will copy it verbatim.

Mrs.  Thrale to Dr.  Burney.

Wednesday,  22  [July,  1778-]
Str.eatham.

Dear Sir,

I forgot to give you the novels home in your carriage
which  ...  4 by Mr.  Abingdon’s.

Evelina certainly excels them far enough both in probability of story,  elegance of sentiment,  and general power
over the mind,  whether exerted in humour or pathos.  Add
to this that Riccoboni is a veteran author,  and all she ever

Some words have here been torn out with the seal.

1

250 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1778

can be,  but I cannot tell what might not be expected from
Evelina was she to try her genius at Comedy.  So far had I
written of my letter when Mr.  Johnson  '  returned home full
of praises of the book I had lent him,  and protesting there
were passages in it which might do honour to Richardson.
We talk of it for ever,  and he feels ardent after the denouement ;  he could not get rid of the rogue,  he said!  I lent him
the second volume,  and he is now busy with the other.  You
must be more a philosopher,  and less a father than I wish
you,  not to be pleased with this letter  ;  and the giving such
pleasure yields to nothing but receiving it.  Long,  my Dear
Sir,  may you live to enjoy the just praises of your children !
and long may they live to deserve and delight such a parent!
These are things you would say in verse,  but Poetry implies
Fiction,  and all this is naked truth.

My Compliments to Mrs.  Burney,  and the kindest wishes
to all your flock.  When is your visit to Chesington?  Remember that,  in Mannucci’s 2 phrase,  I hope to be Prior.
My Master sends love to Dr.  Burney,  and I am ever with
the truest esteem,  dear Sir,  your faithful and obedient
servant,

H.  L.  Thrale.

I could make no comments when I had read this letter
but by jumping,  and laughing,  and almost crying.  But indeed
I had thought before that you had reached the summit of
grandeur in Mrs.  Thrale’s,  Mrs.  Cholmondeley’s and my
father’s warm approbation; — but Johnson's raises you so
many degrees higher,  that you may now certainly rest secure
on your literary throne,  for no one can ever shake it.  I will
not pray that  “  the height of Fame to which you are rising
may not render you giddy ,  but that the purity of your mind

Throughout these manuscripts,  the great Doctor is always addressed
and spoken of as  “  Mr.  Johnson  ”  by the Thrale family.  This confirms
what Boswell says,  “  It is remarkable that he never,  so far as I know,
assumed his title of Doctor,  but called himself  ‘  Mr.  Johnson as
appears from many of his cards and notes to myself,  and I have seen
many from him to other persons,  in which he uniformly takes that
designation.”

2 Count Manucci of Florence.

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1778]

251

may form the brightest splendour of your prosperity ,”  '  because
such prayer would imply a doubt,  which I have not,  nor
knowing you as I do,  ever can have —

God bless you,  my dearest girl!  Do send me some of the
comments of the Congress employed in reading your book.
I long for Kitty’s as much as anybody’s.  My love to my
sister,  Mr.  B,  &c  &c Yours ever  &  aye.  S.  E.  B.

[Susan to Frances Burney,  at Chesington.]

[Dr.  Johnson on Evelina.]

*KS  ^  ^  ^  ^

But indeed my dear girl if that and my father’s wishes and
expectations from you had no effect  [as to producing something else]1 2 I should be very much vexed and disappointed
and should even think you made an ill use of the gifts
of Dame Nature,  to neglect using them as soon as their
worth was pointed out to you— for I will do you the justice
to say that hitherto nobody has been so insensible to your
merit  (of which,  in Mr.  Mattocks phrase,  I wish you joy)  as
yourself — shy as you have ever been of shewing it — Before
I went to bed my Father called me into the study to read
your letter which diverted him not a few,  but ,  as I thought
you might wish to have no expectations raised concerning
futurity I omitted the passages I have cited above and the
same to Charlotte — I know your muse to be so bashful that
I am terribly afraid of allarming her.  My father was much
pleased wEen I came to the end,  to find the secret had been
kept and seems to enjoy the idea of being himself the discoverer of it to Mr.  Crisp — yet perhaps it may be too late
and Hetty may have been the Informer.

######

1 Here Susan quotes  “  Evelina  ”  to its author,  changing  “  bliss  ”  into
“fame,”  and  “thou,”  “thee,”  and  “thy,”  into  “you”  and  “your.”
Fanny replies,  “Dear,  dear Dr.  Johnson,  what a charming man you
are !  Why cousin Charles could not be more worthy,  and affable  !  ”

a The words between brackets have been added by Mme.  D’Arblay.

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

252

[1778

But my dear Fanny I have something to tell you which I
am afraid you wont like,  yet,  “as the wig is wet,”  it must be
submitted to.1

My father has not the strictest notion of your being  [un]-
known as authoress of a work so much and so universally
admired as Evelina — The other day speaking of the Howlett
folks 2 — I urged that if he would wait only till he and I were
there it would be a great deal more funny — “Yes,”  said he,
“and then they will have heard of it by some other means
and there will be no civility in telling them.”  I was confounded at the term other means as I thought the secret
pretty much in our family,  however I am afraid there may be
a little danger now.

My father went to Streatham Saturday morning.  .  .  .  Dr.
Johnson was just gone to town.  Mrs.  Thrale told him that
the first word he said to her when he returned to Streatham
after having read the 1st Vol.  of Evelina was,  “why,  Madam,
why what a charming book you lent me,”  and that he eagerly
asked for the rest of it,  and said other things  [in its praises,
some of]  which she mentioned in her letter— he was particularly pleased with the Snow Hill scenes — but most with

1 This is a family pleasantry,  meaning  “it can’t be helped,”  “the

thing is done.”  It refers to an incident in Fanny’s childhood,  which
was thus recorded by her father in the year 1808.  “  There lived next

door to me  ...  in Poland Street,  and in a private house,  a capital hair-
merchant,  who furnished peruques to the judges,  and gentlemen of the
law.  The merchant’s female children and mine used to play together in
the little garden behind the house;  and,  unfortunately,  one day,  the
door of the wig magazine being left open,  they each of them put on one
of those dignified ornaments of the head,  and danced and jumped about
in a thousand antics,  laughing  ’till they screamed at their own ridiculous
figures.  Unfortunately,  in their vagaries,  one of the flaxen wigs,  said by
the proprietor to be worth upwards of ten guineas, — in those days a price
enormous, — fell into a tub of water,  placed for the shrubs in the little
garden,  and lost all its gorgon buckle,  and was said by the owner to be
totally spoilt.  He was extremely angry,  and chid veiy severely his own
children;  when my little daughter,  '‘the old lady,'1  [Fanny,]  then ten
years of age,  advancing towards him,  as I was informed,  with great
gravity and composure,  sedately says :  ‘  What signifies talking so much
about an accident?  The wig is wet,  to be sure;  and the wig was a good
wig,  to be sure;  but its of no use to speak of it any more;  because
what’s done can’t be undone.’” — Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,  pp.  170- 1,
vol.  ii.

2 Lady Hales and her family.

1778]  TO FRANCES BURNEY 253

those in which Sir Clement is joined to the Branghton party.
Mr.  Smith delighted him — the vulgar gentility,  he said,  was
admirably pourtrayed,  but when Sir Clement appeared he
remarked that there was a shade of character which was prodigiously well marked — Smith ,  low as he was,  so superiour
to the Branghtons,  and yet so lost even in his own eyes on
the appearance of Sir Clement.  He went to town quite full
of the book,  but my father did not hear from Mrs.  Thrale
that she had acquainted him with the writer’s name,  mais
patience !  What’s done cannot be undone.

A note,  sealed up,  was delivered my father as soon as he
came in from Streatham,  which had been sent from Dr.  Johnson's ,  tho’  it was not in his hand,  at 5 in the afternoon.  I
will copy it for you.

“Mrs.  Williams sends compliments to Dr.  Burney,  and
begs he will intercede with Miss Burney to do her the
favour to lend her the reading of Evelina — July 25.”

We were confounded by this billet,  which proved Dr.
Johnson’s knowledge of the writer,  and his having communicated it to Mrs.  Williams,  yet to have the book recommended by Dr.  Johnson must make you some amends for his
indiscretion —  1

I would not produce your beauties,  and it appeared that
there was not a set in the house; — and so my Father desired
William to get a set at Lowndes,  (which he intends keeping
for himself,)  and sent them on with his compliments to Mrs.
Williams — William when he came back told us he was obliged
to pay 9 s.  6 d.  for it,  but added  “  them that I have got now
are the handsomest of them there books they have given me
yet .”  I then found that besides the set my father had,  and
disposed of to Lady Hales,  my mother,  before she was told
who was the writer,  bought a set to send over to Mrs.  Strange
by Mr.  Strange,  so your work is on the Continent ! 2 — William

1 All readers of Boswell know Mrs.  Williams,  the blind widow lady,
whom Dr.  Johnson befriended.

2 Mr.  Dennistoun says that  “of Mrs.  Strange’s own clever epistles
from foreign parts,  abounding,  as they must have done,  with quaint
remarks,  we unfortunately possess none.  ”  The state of affairs between
England and France forbade remarks,  but here is a note saved from the

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

254

[1778

said they had none of the common 95.  ones bound — I hope
you will be ready with your emendations for the second edition.
God bless — and a merry Christmas to you.  If you wish any
hint to be sent Mrs.  Williams to silence her and Dr.  Johnson,
write to my father about it.  Mrs.  Thrale has wrote to Miss
Stretfield ,  who is now at Tunbridge,  to desire her to read it
immediately and if the booksellers there have it not,  that she
will make them send to London for it.  Addio,  my dear girl,
give my duty to Mr.  Crisp,  and best love to  ...  and to
Kitty.  Yrs ever  &  ever.  S.  E.  B.

[Here end Susan’s letters on  “Evelina.”  One of Fanny’s,  in
answer to that which tells of the approbation of Mrs.  Chol-
mondeley,  as reported by Dr.  Johnson,  is headed by herself,  in
old age,  “  Rapturous and most innocent happiness during anony-

wreck of the rest of Mrs.  Strange’s letters between 1775 and 1780.  It
was probably given by Mrs.  Burney to her step-daughter,  Fanny.  The
French ambassador left London on the 20th of March,  and the French
government declared war with England on the 10th of July,  1778.

[Mrs.  Strange to Mrs.  Burney.]

My dearest Madam,

Much do I miss the benefite of the Courier to bring me Letters of
comfort which hearing that my Friends are all well ever was.— When
any body leaves this place which have not been a few I write but have
no returns.  God send peace or at least me nearer my friends — If our
letters from India comes from Mr.  Drummond to your House I hope
you will put them into the post house but Mr.  Drummond will most
likly do so Himself.  However if you are passing that way will you be
so kind as bid them do so as when they come to you you may be in the
Country— I have been greatly pleas’d amus’d and entertain’d in Reading
what you was so kind as send me I’m reading Evelina for a second time it
will please often going over it the first time I do no more than find out
the story so keen am 1 now I find the Beautys and natural Stroaks— I
have much more pleasure in reading now than ever I had as I go to no
public places which I never found so comfortable as on reflection I found
the very reading of a play — I will be happy at all times to hear that you
ere well— Well may you be for be assur’d that as I ever was so will I
ever be

My Dearest Madam

Y our affect friend
and very humb serh

Paris Isabella Strange.

August 10
1778.

Every body here calls to me to present their compliments to you —
Adieu.

1779]  TO FRANCES BURNEY 255

mous success.”  So might well be named those that tell of the
happiness of Susan and Charlotte,  of Doctor and Mrs.  Burney.
Out of many letters from Susan to Fanny,  we have chosen two
which bring us near to Mr.  Crisp,  with the purpose of showing
him just as he was.  To explain Susan’s letters we give the
greater part of one of Mr.  Crisp’s own.  It was written five days
after the King of Spain had declared war against England,  as
the King of France had done about a year before;  both taking
base advantage of the war going on in America.

French and Spanish ships were parading in the Channel,
doing some damage here and there,  besides depressing Mr.
Crisp,  and making Lady Mount Edgecumbe  (who was not forgetful of the Armada and the Spanish Admiral’s design to seize
for himself the pleasant and convenient island and mansion of
Mount Edgecumbe)  “  fall ill with fright,”  so Pacchierotti’s promised visit to Mount Edgecumbe was put off until she recovered.]

[Susan Burney to  “  Miss Burney,

St.  Martin’s Street,

Leicester Fields.”]

[Chesington,  Sunday,  Aug.  i,  1779.]

We arrived at Streatham at a very little past eleven.  As
a place ,  it surpassed all my expectations.  The avenue to the
house,  plantations,  &c.  are beautiful ;  worthy of the charming inhabitants.  It is a little Paradise,  I think.  Cattle,
poultry,  dogs,  all running freely about,  without annoying
each other.  Sam 1 opened the chaise-door,  and told my
father breakfast was not quite over,  and I had no sooner got
out than Mr.  Tbrale appeared at a window close to the door,
— and,  indeed,  my dear Fanny,  you did not tell me anything
about him which I did not find entirely just.  With regard to
his reception of me,  it was particularly polite.2 I followed
my father into the library,  which was much such a room as

1  “  Sam  ”  was Samuel Greaves,  an old servant of Mr.  Thrale,  after
whose death Dr.  Johnson instituted  “Sam’s Club,  a little evening
meeting thrice a week,”  at the Essex Head,  in Essex Street,  for the
benefit of Sam,  who kept the tavern,  and to make up a little to himself
for the loss of Streatham.

2 Fanny wrote on first seeing Mr.  Thrale,  in August 1 779,  “He is a
very tall,  well-looking man,  and very well-bred,  but shy and reserved.”

II.  I

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

256

[i779

I expected; — a most charming one.  There sat Mrs.  Thraie
and Dr.  Johnson,  the latter finishing his breakfast upon
peaches.  Mrs.  Thraie immediately rose to meet me very
sweetly,  and to welcome me to Streatham.  Dr.  Johnson,  too,
rose.  “  How do ,  dear lady  ?"  My father told him it was not
his Miss, — but another of his own bantlings.  Dr.  Johnson,
however,  looked at me with great kindness,  and not at all in

a discouraging manner . Dr.  Johnson interrupted Mrs.

Thraie by telling my father Mrs.  Thraie had desired Mr.
Potter to translate some verses for him,  which he,  (Dr.  J.)
had before undertaken to do.  “How so?”  said my father.
“  Why Mr.  Potter ?”  “Nay,  Sir,  I don’t know.  It was
Mrs.  Thrale’s fancy.”  Mrs.  Thraie said she would go and
fetch them.  As soon as she was gone,  Dr.  Johnson invited
me to take her seat,  which was next to him.  “  Come,  come
here,  my little dear,”  said he,  with great kindness,  and took
my hand as I sat down,  I took then courage to deliver your
respects.  “  Aye. — Why don’t she come among us?  ”  said he.

I said you were confined by a sick sister,  but that you were
very sorry to be away.  “  A rogue !  ”  said he,  laughing.  “She
don’t mind me!  ”  And then I up and spoke vast fine about
you,  for Dr.  Johnson looked so kind,  and so good-hum our’d
I was not afraid of the sound of my voice.  Mr.  Thraie then
came in, — and,  by the way,  during my whole visit look’d at
me with so much curiosity ,  tho’  he behaved with the utmost
politeness,  that I could not help thinking all the time of his
having said he had not had fair play about that Miss Susan.
I am sorry he had heard me puff’d;  however,  kinder and
more flattering attention could not be paid me from all
quarters than I received.  Dr.  Johnson insisted upon my
eating one of his peaches,  and,  when I had eat it,  took a
great deal of pains to persuade me to take another.  “No,”
said Mr.  Thraie,  “  they’re good for nothing.  Miss Burney
must have some better than them.”  However,  I was humble.
They did for me.  Miss Thraie came in :  coldly civil as usual,
— but was very chatty with me,  for her ,  before I went away.

1 hen came back Mrs.  Thraie,  with the verses ,  which she
had been copying out.  I rose,  and took a seat next Miss
1 hrale.  However,  she made me return to that next Dr.
Johnson,  that he might hear what I had to say.  “But,  if
I have nothing to say,  Ma’am?”  said I — “Oh,  never fear,”

1779]  TO FRANCES BURNEY 257

said she,  laughing,  “  I’ll warrant you’ll find something to
talk about.”  The verses were then given to my father.  After
he had read the first stanza,  “Why,  these are none of
Potter’s!”  said he,  “these are worse than Potter.1 They
beat him at his own weapons.”  Dr.  Johnson and Mrs.
Thrale laugh’d very much,  and the verses proved to be the
formers,  and were composed,  in a comical humour,  the
evening before,  in derision of Potter.  They are admirable,
you will see them at Streatham,  and perhaps procure a
ropy,  which my father could not do.  Dr.  Johnson is afraid
of having them spread about as some other verses were he
wrote in the same way to redicule poor Dr.  Percy;  but
Mrs.  Thrale advised my father to make you attack Dr.
Johnson about them,  “for she can do what she pleases
with him.”  After a little while my father and Miss Thrale
went off after their business,  and Mrs.  Thrale said she must
shew me the Lions of Streatham.  I followed her after due
apologies,  and she took me into your room,  shewed me your
desk;  then her own dressing-room,  and Miss Streatfield,2
Miss Thrale,  and Miss Burney over the chimney-piece.
“They are three pretty Misses,  that they are,”  said she.
I then went into her bedroom,  and into the other which

1 The Rev.  Robert Potter,  prebendary of Norwich,  translator of
Aischylus,  Euripides,  and Sophocles.  Boswell writes in April,  1778:
“  After wandering about in a kind of pleasing distraction for some time,
I got into a corner with Johnson,  Garrick,  and Harris.  Garrick  (to
Harris):  ‘Pray,  sir,  have you read Potter’s TEschylus?’  Harris:
‘Yes;  and think it pretty.’  Garrick  (to Johnson):  ‘  And what think
you,  sir,  of it?’  Johnson:  ‘  I thought what I read of it verbiage:  but
upon Mr.  Harris’s recommendation,  I will read a play.  ’  (1 o Mr.  Harris)
‘  Don’t prescribe two’  ”  Dr.  Johnson’s verses on Potter,  have,  so far as
we know,  never been printed.  His verses in ridicule of Dr.  Percy are
probably those given by Boswell : —

“  Hermit hoar,  in solemn cell,

Wearing out life’s evening gray,

Smite thy bosom,  sage,  and tell,

What is bliss?  and which the way?

Thus I spoke,  and speaking sigh’d.

Scarce repress’d the starting tear ;

When the smiling sage reply’d,

‘  Come,  my lad,  and drink some beer.’  ”

2 Miss Streatfield was a very beautiful girl,  who often appears in
Fanny’s later diaries,  as a friend of the Thrales.

258 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1779

is next yours.  “You see we live together,”  said she,  “and
Streatham is not like Streatham without her.  We do miss
her sadly;  that’s the truth on’t.”  When we return’d down
stairs,  [into]  a room where my father was tuning ,  “  Now,”
says she,  “  this is the dining-parlour, — and that’s the harpsichord, — but they won’t let us stay here,  I suppose,  so we’ll
go and walk.”  She lent me a calash,1 and we stroll’d about
the sweet plantations,  and saw the summer-house,  and
Dick’s island,  &c.  A servant brought her your letter while
we were walking.  “  Aye,  here it comes at last.”  She shew’d
me what you said.  “Nobody need be stifled now.”  “A
naughty girl!  and she won’t let one shut a window but by
force.”

Upon returning into the music-room,  Miss Thrale sung
“In te spero.”  I was better pleased than I expected to be
with hearing her.  Her voice is very sweet,  and will improve
with practice.  She has much to do,  but nothing to undo ;
however,  “ Manca Fanima ,  e Vanima sempre maticara .”  Then
I was made to tune up,  and sung  “ poveri affetti because I
thought the words would please Mrs.  Thrale,  and it is an
expressive song.  Miss Thrale said I sung like Lady Clarges.
Nothing like it,  I think.  My father said Mr.  Skrine thought
our faces alike,  but that was a bad compliment to me,  Mrs.
and Miss Thrale found out!  Mrs.  Thrale compared her
daughter’s hair and mine together,  and said ive were alike,
— a less compliment in my eyes than that of bearing a resemblance to Lady Clarges.  However,  from the quarter
whence it came,  I know it was meant for a much greater.2
My father then played over some songs from the Olimpiade

1 Has any lacty who reads this ever worn a calash?  The editor has,
at least,  seen one worn in the precincts of a cathedral to protect a lady’s
dressed hair,  while she stepped on pavement from one prebendal house,
to a dinner-party,  to another.  Inquiry in old country houses will probably cause a calash to be brought irom some closet,  where it is kept as
a curiosity.  A calash  (it should be caliche)  is like a model in miniature
of the  “hood”  of an old-fashioned carriage,  in fact,  of a  “ caliche .”  It
was made of black silk,  “drawn”  (as the bonnet-makers used to say)
upon whale-bone,  or wire,  folding back,  so as to lie almost flat ;  and
when pulled out of its folds,  it made a  “ poke  ”  over a lady’s face,  without flattening her head-gear.  It was originally designed to protect the
“  very high heads  ”  of 1778,  and some years onwards.

2 Even Dr.  Wolcot  (“Peter Pindar”),  who is rarely found giving

TO FRANCES BURNEY

*77 9]

259

during which Dr.  Johnson came in.  He had a book in his
hand,  and wanted to shew some passage to my father,  but
seeing him engaged,  stopt close to me,  who was standing
near the piano-forte.  He put his arm round me,  and smiling
very good-humouredly,  said  “Now you don’t expect that I
shall ever love you so well as I do your sister?  ” — “  Oh,  no,
Sir,”  said I — “  I have no such hopes — I am not so presump-
tious.” — “I am glad you are so modest ,”  said he,  laughing,
— and so encouraged by his good-humour,  (and he kept
see-sawing me backwards and forwards in his arms,  as if he
had taken me for you)  that I told him I must make an
interest with him through you.  He again said he was glad I
was so modest ,  and added — “  but I believe you’re a good
little creature — I think one should love you,  too,  if one did
but  ''mow you!”  There’s for you! — I assure you I shall set
this little conversation down among my first honours.  It
put me in good humour and spirits for the rest of the day.
After this Mr.  Thrale came in,  and some very good conversation went about concerning Count Manned’  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Pepys,  and I dont know who besides,  in which Miss
Thrale and I had some very lively discourse.  She was to
meet Mr.  Baretti that day,  with Mr.  and Mrs.  Thrale at
Mr.  Cateds,  I think,  and did not seem much delighted by
the idea.

When we were to go,  Dr.  Johnson comically repeated his
“  Dont expect me to love you so well as your sister ,”  but
added,  as I left the room,  a very good-natured farewell —
“  Goodbye ,  my little love.” — Mr.,  Mrs.  and Miss Thrale came
out with us,  and Mrs.  Thrale said she was determined to

praise,  writes of a New-Year’s-Day Drawing-room at St.  James’s
Palace —

“  The lovely Lady Clarges too was there,

To all the Graces,  as to Music,  born;

Whose notes,  so sweetly melting,  soothe the ear !

Soft as the robin’s to the blush of morn  !  ”

1 Count Manucci was a Florentine nobleman,  who is named by Dr.
Tohnson in his notes of his visit to Paris with the Thrales in 1775-  1 he
next year Boswell made the Count’s acquaintance in London,  and aftt r-
wards showed him  “what civilities he could”  in Edinburgh,  on Dr.
Johnson’s account,  and on that of Mr.  and Mrs.  Thrale.  Manucci came
to Scotland from Ireland.  “He seems to be a very amiable man,”
adds Boswell.

Li 779

260 LETTERS FROM SUSAN

become a favourite with that Mr.  Crisp ,  and had sent him a
pine-apple and some fruit — No disagreeable compliment. —
She said if their chaise was but in order she and you might
come and pay him a visit while we should be at Chesington
— for she did long to see him.  “  And why can’t you go in
the coach?  ”  said Mr.  Thrale,  “  You must have four horses.”
“  Why that indeed might be done,”  said she.  My father
seem’d to snap at the proposal,  but beg’d she would let us
know beforehand,  that he might not be out of the way.  She
promised she would,  and that,  when you came to her again,
she would see if it could not be done. — We then mounted
our vehicle and left this sweet place,  and sweet company;
on my side in much better spirits than when we had arrived
there; — indeed I shall never recollect this morning without

pleasure . We arrived at dear Chesington exactly at

three o’clock.”  ....  [There they found Mr.  Crisp,  Mrs.
Cast,  Mrs.  Hamilton,  and Kitty Cooke assembled in the
parlour.]  ....  “  Mr.  Crisp looks well,  makes few complaints,  and is in admirable spirits.  My father presented
him the fruit-basket ,  which put him in such good humour
with Mrs.  Thrale that he did not shrink back at hearing her
design of visiting Chesington;  on the contrary,  as you are
to be of the party he seemed to like the thoughts of it marvellous much.  I kept back your letter,  because I thought
two treats too much at one time,  and wrote you a hasty
scrawl,  which I hope the postillion took care to deliver to
you.  Since this,  however,  I have given him your epistle,

which he took up to his own room to browse upon .

Sunday.  My father had your letter from the parson — I was
in such a hurry for it that I persuaded Kitty to walk with
me to meet him. — He asked us if we were going to fetch a
walk l Surely Fielding never drew a more poor creature
than this man among his country parsons ! — Mr.  Crisp went
to Church with us in the evening,  where we were join’d by
Mr.  Toriano and his youngest sister.  They came here afterwards to tea.  He is a simplicity youth;  does not deserve
the name of Macartney ;  1 she is as heavy as lead.  .  .  .  Mr.

1 See  “  The Merry Wives of Windsor,”  Act iv.,  Scene 1.  Sir Hugh
Evans to Mrs.  Quickly,  “You are a simplicity  ’oman.”  Macartney is
the name of a character in  “  Evelina.”

26i

1779]  TO FRANCES BURNEY

Crisp made her  [play]  which she did in such a manner as
not much to alarm me,  who came next,  tho’  I dont enjoy
mes aises much in playing to Mr.  Crisp.  He is very fond of
Tornaie ,  [Sirene]  and has made me chaunt it three times to
him,  and as I don’t hate the song myself  (tho’  ’tis the most
difficult I ever attempted,  by the way)  I am not very sorry
he takes to it.  He is fond of my father’s third Duet of the
second set,  too, — which we play like anything!  ....

[Mr.  Crisp to Miss Burney.]

[A portion of a letter dated  “  Ches — Wednesday,  June 21,  1779,”
is given to show Mr.  Crisp’s feelings for his country which
was then threatened by Finance and Spain.]

Churrlotte,  and your Favorite,  Edward,  are now here;  the
latter goes back to-morrow,  and will probably be the bearer
of this letter to Town;  Master Doctor,  I understand,  will in
two or three days bring down Suzette in his hand;  and I
shall be made as happy with them both as crazy health,  old
age,  and a dismal prospect of Affairs will admit of — to tell
you the truth,  this last Object is ever uppermost in my
Mind — it infects the very little sleep I do get;  and even
when my thoughts are otherwise engag’d,  the melancholy
impression it first occasion’d,  remains,  without my immediately remembring why I am sad — Oh Fanny,  I fear I have
liv’d a few years too long! — for I declare I had much rather
be under Ground,  than stay behind,  to see the insolent
Bourbon trampling under foot this once happy Island —

. Faction has undone this Country — for my own

part,  I have often lean’d to an opinion,  and am now fix’d
in it,  that an arbitrary Government mildly administred  (as
France is and has been of late years,  since Science,  Philosophy,  and the arts have taken such Root and softned
Manners)  is upon the whole the most permanent and
Eligible of all Forms — at present,  the prevailing Fashion
in Europe seems to be for the great Powers to join together
to swallow up the Lesser,  and then divide the Spoil — witness
Russia,  Prussia,  and the Empire sharing Poland among
themselves — France and Spain threatning Portugal and

262 LETTERS FROM SUSAN  [1779

Holland unless they will join them to destroy England-
even the Empire abetting them — France and Spain,  first by
their uniting in their infernal Family Compact,  and next by
succeeding in their plan of separating us from America,
now fully feel their own strength,  and see their way plainly

before them . to weaken England,  and annex it to

France,  &c . Perhaps England may be comfortable

as a Province,  when the pitiless storm is over — but  [here
Mr.  C.  breaks into blank verse of the same quality as that
of his  “  Virginia  ”]

“Oh Patriots,  Patriots! — Oh,  Richmond,  Shelburne,
Rockingham,  Fox,  Barre,  Burke,  Townshend,

Hartley,  Sawbridge,  Wilkes,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. ! —

Ha!  Dogs! — ”

[A Part of a Letter from Susan to Frances Burney.]
[Chesington]  Wednesday,  August 25th  [1779]-

Heartily glad was I to see him — [her father] — for during
his absence we have heard so many dismal pieces of false
intelligence,  and so many terrible prognostications of horrid
events,  even when these have been discovered not to be
true,  I have been on tenter-hooks to see him here again—
I hope never to be absent from him again when horrid
reports prevail of actual invasions,  &c. — You are,  thank
Heav’n,  happily placed, — I mean comparison-speaking,  and
things of that sort.  .  .  A

Hetty has recover’d extremely,  and had it not been for
vile Public news we should have spent this last week charmingly, — but two days after she  [Hetty]  came,  a report reach’d
us from Kingston that the French and Spaniards were
lajided — Mr.  Crisp,  who spends his life in perpetual apprehension of terrible national calamities,  went to Kingston the
next morning,  and came back with a countenance calculated
to terrify and crush temerity itself.  He could eat no dinner

1 Susan here copies the way of talking of Mr.  Rose Fuller,  a frequenter
of Streatham.

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1779]

263

— and seem’d struck by such a consternation that the most
impenetrable creature must have felt something at seeing
him.  Troops of French and Spaniards were landed at Falmouth,  whilst the combined Fleets were throwing Bombs into
Plymouth.  He supposed they would march to London and
pass thro ’  Kingston — Destruction and Desolation would attend their steps — in short everything that could be apprehended he was prepared to expect. — I dreaded the effect of
all this upon our dear Hetty.  .  .  .  However she does behave charmingly.

******

This day and the next we spent really very miserably. —
Poor Mr.  Crisp could neither eat,  sleep,  nor talk — Sunday,
we received intelligence from my father,  who was at Mr.
Chamier’s,  which produced a Revolution in our minds — for
we found that the French had not yet attempted to land,  or
attack any part of the Kingdom,  and that tho’  much was to
be dreaded,  there yet remained something to hope.  After
tea we took a comfortable walk,  which made up for our late
dismalities. — In this we met a kind of an adventure , — which
for want of something better I will recount to you.  Our
Party consisted of Mr.  Crisp,  young Toriano,  my sister
Pletty,  Kitty  [Cooke],  Charlotte,  and your Slave.  We had
walk’d several fields from the house when we saw at a little
distance two or three gypsies — My sister said we should
have our fortunes told.  “  Lend me your ring then,”  said I,
“and we will exchange characters.”  “Pho,  Pho,”  said Mr.
Crisp,  “  don’t let us lose our time — it will soon be too late
to walk.”  At this moment however a gypsey girl with a pipe
in her mouth started up from behind a hedge. — She was
very young,  and very pretty — Mr.  Crisp’s objections vanish’d
in a pig’s wink.- — “Can you tell fortunes?  ”  said he.  “That
I can,”  answer’d our gypsy very quick— and approached us.
She told Hetty she would tell her her fortune — for a twelve-
pemiy piece,  however she took sixpence— and accordingly
took her aside and told her a great deal of comical nonsense
— another female,  who was her mother we found,  came up
to us at the same time,  and insisted upon telling us our
fortunes though we all discouraged her as much as possible,
and as she was ugly Mr.  Crisp said the girl should tell us

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

264

[1779

what we wish'd to know. — But the old lady was not to be so
put off,  and she began with himself — “Aye,”  said she,
“  yonder old gentleman will be a long liver — ”  “  Why that’s
the best thing you can tell me I think,”  said he,  laughing. —
“  He will be prosperous in his fortunes,  tho’  two mankmd
wish him ill — and if he’ll come here and pay me a twelve-
penny piece I’ll tell him their names and their places of
abode.”  Such intelligence tempted not Mr.  Crisp,  who only
laugh’d at her — but she went on — “  He never did harm to
mankind,  but he has been wronged himself — and was once
cruelly cheated.”— “  There you’re out,  my dear,”  said Mr.
Crisp,  so drily,  we were all ready to die with laughing — and
the old gypsey then attack’d Mr.  Toriano,  and told him of
ladies that were in love with him ,  and I know not what
besides,  to induce him to have his fortune regularly told for
a 12 penny piece — but the poor youth’s lips quiver’d and
turn’d pale — and when she said  “  He was a Gay Man
among the Ladies ,”  he look’d just as Charlotte and I might
have been expected to do had she accused us of having had
an intrigue with some man — so shock’d,  confounded,
abashed,  and foolishly resentful. — “  If you can tell fortunes
no better than that  ”...  said he,  indignantly  .  .  .  but did
not pursue his threat.  The woman then told poor Kitty
“  she would never have any more husbands than she had now.”
“  I hope you don’t expect to be paid for telling me that,"
said she,  colouring,  but laughing at the same time.  “  You’ve
had many suitors,”  said the woman,  “but one gentleman
wishes you well yet — You too  ( to me)  have had many suitors,
and will have many proffers — but you’ve fixed your heart on
one alone  ” — My sister had now done with the girl in the
corner,  and Mr.  Crisp then admired her at his leisure — ’tho
her complexion look’d Egyptian her eyes and features were
so remarkably beautiful that one could scarce look at her
without surprise. — All her features were elegantly formed,
and her eyes and whole countenance were animated with an
expression that was in the highest degree attractive and captivating — her shape and height too seem’d very good — and
there was nothing to remind one of coarseness or vulgarity
about her — her face was oval — her nose Grecian and beautiful — her mouth small,  and her teeth white,  regular,  lovely—
Her eyes hazle,  brilliant and charming.  Indeed I scarce

TO FRANCES BURNEY

1781]

265

ever saw so handsome a creature. — “  Upon my word,”  said
Mr.  Crisp,  staring at her and laughing,  “  she’s a good pretty
girl,  and would be very handsome if she was not so tan’d.”
“You bin the first that ever told me so,”  said she,  but with
an archness that did not support the truth of her words.
“  See what white teeth she has,”  said he.  “  Aye,  Sir,  de
Blackmoor have white teeth.”  “  I dare say her skin is naturally fair too — let’s see your arms.”  “  White as a Blackmoor”  said she laughing and throwing aside her Cloak which
hid them — then turning quick to him,  “  Sir,”  said she,  “  my
mother lonfd for charcoal ” — In this comical manner she
answer’d all his compliments — but he was so captivated that
I thought he never would have quitted the spot where they
were.  She told Charlotte her fortune and would fain have
persuaded me to have heard mine,  but I was then grown
quite tired of standing,  and so were all the rest I believe,
unless it was Mr.  Crisp,  and so I came away without —

[Susan to Frances Burney.]

[Mrs.  Thrale’s Owyhee Court-Dress.]

Friday,  January 19,  1781.

Yesterday was the Queen’s birthday,  and soon after breakfast a note came here,  directed to Mrs.  Burney ,  or Miss
Susan.  .  .  . — ’twas from Mrs.  Thrale to say that the Owyhee
savage was to he seen at Mrs.  Davenant’s,  Red Lyon Square,
before two,  and no longer,  adding that if Miss Susan,  or the
Captain,  had any curiosity to view this wondrous sight,  Mrs.
Thrale would be very happy to see them or any of the rest

of the family . I accompanied my mother to Red

Lion Square,  and Mrs.  Davenant came for us in Mrs.
Thrale’s carriage.1 We found Mrs.  Thrale at her toilette,  in

1 The Davenants were  (as Fanny says)  “very lively and agreeable
cousins of Mrs.  Thrale.”  Mrs.  Davenant,  then living in  “Red Lyon
Square,”  was  “  one of the saucy women of the ton.”  She was by birth
a Cotton,  as was Mrs.  Thrale’s mother.

266

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

[1781

high beauty and spirits.  She received me with even more
than her usual sweetness — but seem’d to long to be wicked.

.  .  .  .  I wish she may know that secrecy with regard to
P[hillips] 1 is at present and is likely to be for some time
very necessary for him,  and every way desirable to me — for
setting all other motives aside,  it would be a hateful thing
to me to be talked of as engaged for an age before I may
change my name,  and to be subject to a thousand disagreeable conjectures.  After we had been a little while above,  we
went into the drawing-room while Mrs.  Thrale put on her
gown — but had not been absent five minutes before your
friend Sam 2 came to tell me Mrs.  Thrale beg’d me to come
upstairs.  Well,  I ran up in some trepidation — Mrs.  Thrale
had two maids in the room,  and I believe particularised me
in this manner more from a desire of shewing me great
kindness than from any intention of saying anything to me.
However,  as she was regretting your not seeing her in this
her glory,  she said,  “Aye,  but your seeing me is almost the
same thing.  I think I shall step in your place by and bye,  I
can tell you,  for I believe  ’tis you chiefly that stand between
Fanny and me.”  I felt foolish,  and admired her dress,  and
then asked if the other ladies might not come up — they were
accordingly summon’d,  and Mrs.  Thrale,  immediately on
seeing Miss Streatfield,  said,  “  Well,  now Susan Burney and
I have settled our secrets you may come up,  for  ’tis a very
particular thing I must tell you,  that Miss Susan Burney
and I scarce know one another,  and yet are prodigiously
intimate  ” — and after this said something more to make me
look silly,  and Miss Streatfield said she was in the dark.
Miss Streatfield looks sadly — and indeed has a terrible cold.
Mrs.  Thrale’s dress is magnificent and not heavy — part of
the trimming is composed of greb feathers made up in bells
tor tassels,  which are remarkably elegant . 3

Susan had recently engaged herself to marry Molesworth Phillips,
a comrade of her brother James in Cook’s last voyage.

2 Samuel Greaves.

_ 3 This court-dress was copied in a Spitalfields’  loom from one of
Captain Burney’s specimens of goods from Owyhee,  and  “trimmed”
(as Mrs.  1 hrale wrote to Fanny)  “  with grebeskins and gold to the tune
oi  £6$ — the trimming only.”

1779]  TO FRANCES BURNEY 267

[The following sheet of a letter is of earlier date than four of
Susan’s  “journal letters”  which have gone before it,  but,  in its
tender humility,  its  “  incomparable,  partial sweetness,”  it appears
to be in its fittest place as the end to what is here given from
the pen of its charming writer,  “the peculiar darling of the
whole house of Dr.  Burney,  as well as of his heart.”1]

[Susan to Frances Burney,  at Chesington.]

[January,  1779.]

I cannot thank you sufficiently,  my dearest Fanny,  for
your charming paquet,  but it is cruel in you to say you expect a genteel return for it, — unless I am to understand the
epithet in the same light as when it is used in speaking of a
lady’s shape — for I really believe the less my letter contained
the more worthy it would be of being called genteel.  I have
not even the description of my disappointment at a ball to
give you,  or,  which would be yet more afflictive,  those occasioned by a hair-dresser. . I have been writing

away like a mad creature — or like a creature without sense,
which is nearly the same thing,  to Miss E.  Kirwan,  but I
find nothing worthy writing to you — rien ne me vient — the
thing is,  I believe,  that she gives me credit for a great deal
more than I deserve,  et 071 a toujours le plus dlesprit avec
ceux qui  ?ious en croye7it:  for esprit substitute folie or any
other word which signifies but its shadow,  and you will
mend the phrase. — Indeed,  my dear Fanny,  your letters are
so excellent that nothing but the extreme longing they excite
in me for more could make me attempt answering them;
especially from this place,  where there are no subjects for
the dear narratory style which helps one out admirably when
one is distressed for ideas.  But don’t now imagine I’m proud
— no,  my sweet Fanny I am too proud,  at least,  of having
such a sister to suffer at acknowledging her superiority,  and
I have too high a sense of her merit and her talents to be
humbled at it.  But the reason that somewhat represses the
glee I should otherwise feel in writing to you is that I

1 The first of these quotations is from Madame D’Arblay’s heading to
this letter,  the second,  from her  “Memoirs of Dr.  Burney.”

268

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

[i779

grudge the time I take you up in reading such vile trash as
I am obliged to send you if I write at all. — I know you love
me,  ....  and will be very glad to see me,  as I hope you
will do next week, — but to read long,  tiresome,  uninteresting
letters — and not to wish them over  ; — not to yawn  ; — not to
silently wish the time and paper had been spared which
have been expended on them; — do you love me enough for
that?  ....

I dont know even how far my friendship to you would
lead me on such an occasion,  because you don’t know how
to write stupid letters;  and such as you send me it requires
no sisterly affection,  no effort of friendship,  no exercise
of good-humour to render delightfully entertaining and
charming.

####*#

Your letter is all I could wish.  Your account of your visit
at Sir Joshua’s so compleat that the entertainment it has
afforded me has been almost equal to that I should have received in being present at it.  I hope to be at home when
Mrs.  Cholmondeley makes her first appearance at our nouse.
She is a comical woman,  and I long to hear her spout Made
Duval.1 But,  dear girl,  let me have more,  more,  more.
You leave off,  as if you did it on purpose,  in the style of the
last page of the first volume of a novel, — at the most interesting place possible.  Oh,  Dr.  Johnson!  Howl do love,
honour — reverence you !  But you are a dear,  good girl and
mean to let me have the end of your Streatham visit,  as you
say you have another paquet began.  Do,  sweet girl,  fill it
speedily,  let me hear of all your abundant adventures and
that as soon as possible; — for ere long I trust we shall meet
— next Thursday se’nnight is the day at present designed for
our journey — but if you will send me a paquet and let me
have another frank before that time I will write again par -
tic'lars,

I was of your opinion before I heard it was yours with
regard to the dear little Burney in Warley — indeed it was
impossible not to think immediately of Dr.  Johnson.  But

1 See under Jan.  1779 in the  “Diary of Madame D’Arblay,”  for
an account of Fanny’s first meeting Mrs.  Cholmondeley at the house of
Sir Joshua Reynolds.

1779]  TO FRANCES BURNEY 269

how I long to know if Mr.  Huddisford is known to him,  or
if he knew the epithets bestowed on you by this great man
from second,  or perhaps third-rate,  intelligence?  Pray let
me hear.1 I have no sort of adventures to write;— or indeed
anything else.  I only wish I had got a pen which would
write larger,  that my letter might look more consequential,
without becoming tedious.

[The rest of the letter is wanting.]

[After reading Susan’s letters,  it may be that many will agree
with Dr.  Johnson,  “  I think one should love you ,  too,  if one did
but know you"

We,  who have learned to know this  “peculiar darling of the
whole house of Dr.  Burney,  as well as of his heart,”  confess to
placing this slight notice of her after,  not before,  her letters,  lest
we should take from their brightness by telling of her decline
and death.  Two of her severe illnesses have already been described;  one,  when on her way to school in Paris,  in 1764;
another in 1769,  when Dr.  Armstrong was called to attend her.
They were presages of the last.

She was well and happy when,  in the beginning of 1781,  she
married Molesworth,  son of John Phillips,  Esquire,  of Dublin,
lieutenant of the party of marines sent with Captain Cook on
his last voyage.  Phillips saw Cook and four of the marines
slaughtered.  With the rest who were there,  Phillips  “  swum for
his life,  helped by a smart fire on the savages from the ships’
boats,  which were only twenty yards from the shore.”  He had
got into a boat,  when he saw one of his men,  who was a good
swimmer,  in danger of being taken by the savages.  Although
Phillips had been stabbed between the shoulders with a long
iron spike,  (called a pahooa,)  he leapt into the sea.  He was
struck by a stone on his head,  but brought off the marine by

1 This refers to Fanny’s distress on finding her name brought into a
pamphlet by a Mr.  Huddisford,  called  “  Warley:  a Satire,”  which was
addressed to Sir Joshua Reynolds,  as  “the first artist in Europe.”
Fanny’s niece,  Mrs.  Barrett,  writes:  “Speaking of some aim of Sir
Joshua Reynolds,  the writer asks,  “  Will it gain approbation from dear
little Burney?”  The phrase,  “dear little Burney,”  was Dr.  Johnson’s
favourite mode of speaking of Miss Burney.  Hence Fanny and Susan
surmised that Dr.  Johnson’s familiar way of speaking had been spread
too far abroad.  However,  Fanny’s real vexation was caused by the
phrase seeming to imply that Sir Joshua was carrying out what he had
said after reading  “  Evelina,”  that he was sure he should make love to
the author,  if ever he met with her.

LETTERS FROM SUSAN

270

[1779

his hair.  Courage like this,  and comradeship with Jem Burney,
with love of music,  and some skill in it,  won Susan to consent
to an engagement until the means of living were inherited from
an unqle of Phillips.  He was promoted in due time to a lieutenant-colonelcy.  After the break of a residence in Boulogne
for Susan’s failing health,  the married couple lived chiefly at
Mickleham,  in great intimacy with the accomplished family of
Lock,  of Norbury Park.  In Mrs.  Lock,  Fanny,  through Susan,
gained a more stable friend than Mrs.  Thrale;  through Susan,
also,  she learnt to know the Chevalier D’Arblay,  who became
her husband.

During the Irish Rebellion,  while a French force was on
Irish soil,  Susan’s husband felt bound to live on his property for
three years.  Susan’s family were keenly distressed at this necessity.  As if it were with a presentiment that her absence
would be final,  Dr.  Burney wrote some lines which sound like
an epitaph.

“ON THE DEPARTURE OF MY DAUGHTER SUSAN
TO IRELAND.

“  My gentle Susan!  who,  in early state,

Each pain or care could soothe or mitigate;

And who in adolescence could impart
Delight to every eye and feeling heart;

Whose mind,  expanding with increase of years,
Precluded all anxiety and fears
Which parents feel for inexperienced youth
Unguided in the ways of moral truth.
*****

On her kind Nature,  genially her friend,

A heart bestowed instruction could not mend;

Intuitive,  each virtue she possessed,

And learned their foes to shun and to detest.

“  Nor did her intellectual powers require
The usual aid of labour to inspire
Her soul with prudence,  wisdom,  and a taste,

Unerring in refinement;  sound and chaste.

“Yet of her merits this the smallest part —

Far more endeared by virtues of the heart,

Which constantly excite her to embrace
Each duty of her state with active grace.”

*****

Susan was weak when she went to Ireland,  where her health
further declined.  Before her second year there was over her
doctors could do no more than recommend a trial of her native

1779]  TO FRANCES BURNEY 271

English air.  Her own feeling,  as expressed in her own words,
was that  “  to behold her father again,  to meet his commiserating
eyes,  and to be under his roof and in his arms,  would make him
give her a second life.”

With such feelings,  Bishop Atterbury’s daughter crossed the
channel to die in his arms;  but less happy than Mrs.  Morrice,
Susan was too much exhausted ever to reach her father.  She
lay ill in Dublin,  after a slow journey from Belcotton;  after-
wards,  she lay ill for a week at the old sailing and landing place
for Irish ships,  Parkgate,  near Chester,  where she was met by
her brother Charles.  There she passed gently away on the 6tlx
of January,  1800,  a day which,  with the 12th of January,  (the
anniversary of her funeral,)  Fanny kept as one of religious
seclusion for thirteen years;  she gave up this custom at last,  in
obedience to the wish of her father,  who held with Dr.  Johnson,
that  “  sorrow was the mere rust of the soul.”  It is noteworthy
that Fanny was taken to Susan on the 6th of January,  1840.

Susan left two sons,  Norbury,  (so called because he was unexpectedly born while his mother was on a visit at Norbury
Park,)  and William.  Her only daughter,  Fanny,  for some time
kept the house of her grandfather,  Dr.  Burney,  who wrote of her
to Madame D’Arblay,  with affectionate praise.  She married
Mr.  C.  C.  Rapei'.  Mrs.  Raper was very pretty,  but we are
told that her daughter,  Mrs.  Minet Kingston,  was more like
Susan.

A descendant of Charlotte says of this grand-daughter,  Mrs.
Kingston,  that she had more life,  and fun,  and esprit ,  than airy
of them,  though she was not so clever and well-read as the
grand-daughter 6f Charlotte,  nor so brilliant in society as  “  Sally
Payne,”  the daughter of Admiral Burney.

There exist in the keeping of her kin,  “a very pretty miniature of  ‘  sweet Susan,’  ”  and a portrait of her by Edward Burney,
a companion picture to his likeness of Fanny.  We know nothing
of Susan’s sons.  Colonel Phillips married again,  and had other
children.  We find him in J.  T.  Smith’s  “  Life of Nollekens,”  and
in Charles Lamb’s Letters.  Charles Lamb reminds Southey of
Phillips,  as being among  “the little knot of whist-players,  that
used to assemble weekly for so many years at the Queen’s Gate,
and called Admiral Burney friend.”  Lamb calls Phillips  “  the
high-minded associate of Cook;  the veteran Colonel,  with his
lusty heart still sending cartels of defiance to old Time.”  When
Smith wrote,  in 1828,  Phillips was one of the two survivors of
Cook’s last expedition.  “  His venerable age  ”  (says Smith,  somewhat quaintly)  “  is not beyond his politeness.”  Some of Smith’s
anecdotes he owed to Phillips,  who,  he says,  often relates
anecdotes of his youth,  and the distinguished characteis he has
known.”

272 CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY  [1779

We pass from Susan to her youngest sister Charlotte,  who
could barely walk when her mother died in 1761.

On her father’s second marriage,  six years afterwards,  she
was sent to a school in Norfolk.  She appears to have been little
in London during the years of these early diaries.  We find,
from one of Mrs.  Rishton’s letters,  that Charlotte was much
more with Maria’s sister,  Bessy  (who was nearly of Charlotte’s
age),  under Mrs.  Burney’s roof at Lynn  (during those frequent
absences to which Mrs.  Burney was bound by duty to her
mother,  Mrs.  Allen,  and by other family ties),  than with Hetty,
Fanny,  or Susy,  her own sisters.  One may see this by a turn of
fancy,  quite her own,  as well as by her way of writing,  which is,
in part,  an exaggeration of the family habit of quoting the odd
things said in their hearing,  especially by foreigners;  in part,  a
slang of her own,  which she wrote to herself,  for herself,  never
thinking it would be read a hundred years later.

By a grotesque chance,  a few of Charlotte’s letters to Fanny
and Susan,  and the mutilated fragments spared by some hand
from her diary,  are now in a wrapper on which Madame
D’Arblay has written  “  Some brief letters from the truly pious
W.  Wilberforce to F.  D’Arblay — one  ...  of 1817,  1818,  1820,
1822,  1823.”  Charlotte’s anecdotes — “  Nanny go at sf as she
called them — now replace those weightier words!

In a letter from Fanny to Susan,  there are a few words of
affectionate regret at the impression which Charlotte’s manner
might make upon strangers.  We think that her gaiety,  love of
fun,  innocent self-complacency when praised or even noticed,
her manifest and hearty enjoyment of a little flirtation,  will win
our readers to condone some flippancy and  “slang,”  which was
mainly written to herself alone.  She had been  (it is said)  a little
neglected,  and not a little repressed.  Some checking she apparently needed;  subdued her spirits could not be for long,  as
they were of her father’s kind.  Comparing her accounts of
people with Fanny’s,  we find hers correct,  nay exact,  in spite of
her random style of writing.  She sees people in her own way,
not in that of Fanny,  who was a born and skilled observer of
character.  Sometimes she sees more,  or otherwise,  than Fanny
did;  “the futile fellow”  story,  with Gai'rick’s mimicry of Dr.
Johnson,  is better told by Charlotte than by Boswell.  Indeed,
nothing in any book has given us so strong an impression of
Garrick’s great powers of pleasing and winning,  as these flights
of the pen of a girl who was about sixteen when he was sixty.
Mrs.  Paradise’s ball,  and the evenings at Mr.  Hoole’s and at the
Dean of Winchester’s,  are also capital examples of Charlotte’s
power of bringing a scene before our eyes.  Her flirtations we
may fancy,  from the passages concerning Mr.  Vincent Mathias.
Of her marriage we copy a family account:  “Clement Francis

1779]  CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 273

had been secretary to Warren Hastings in India,'  and while
there he read,  and was so charmed with  ‘Evelina,1 2 that he was
seized with a desire to make the authoress his wife,  and,  with
that intent,  came home from India,  and obtained an introduction to Dr.  Burney and his family;  but the result was that he
married the younger sister — Charlotte.”  Not long after the
publication of  “  Evelina,”  Mr.  Beresford,  a gentleman who
visited the Thrale family,  expressed his intention to see more
of Fanny with a view of marrying her.  She heard of this,  and
shunned him.  We know not what was the case with Mr.  Francis,
but the  “Gentleman’s Magazine”  chronicles among the marriages of 1786:  “  Feb.  11.  Clement Francis,  Esq.,  to Miss Charlotte Burney,  daughter of Dr.  Burney,  and younger sister to the
celebrated author of  ‘Cecilia.’”  Mr.  Francis is found on the
official list of medical officers of the East India Company,  in
the Bombay Presidency,  as  “Surgeon,  September 6,  1778,  resigned January 17,  1785.”  He probably returned to England
with Hastings,  in 1785.  After his marriage he practised as a
surgeon at Aylsham in Norfolk,  where he died suddenly,  towards
the end of 1792,  while Fanny  (after her release from Windsor)
was staying in his house.

Charlotte was left with two daughters and a son.  Early in
1798,  she married Captain Ralph Broome,  of the Bengal Army,
author of some political verses named  “  Letters of Simpkin the
Second,  Poetic Recorder of all the Proceedings upon the Trial
of Warren Hastings,  Esq.,  in Westminster Hall.”3 There was
a son of this marriage,  who died young.

Charlotte’s daughters,  Marianne and Charlotte Francis,  were
(from their own bent)  what Charlotte might have called  “  bluestockings.”  In a letter written by Dr.  Burney to Fanny,  in 1808.
he describes the manifold attainments of his grand-daughter,
Marianne,  but ends with his private expression of feeling that
she is  “a monster” — of knowledge only,  of course.  Charlotte
Francis  (Mrs.  Barrett),  the editor of the later diaries of her
aunt,  Madame D’Arblay,  is still affectionately and respectfully
remembered.  “A very little old lady  (writes one of her granddaughters),  with bright blue eyes,  and soft brown hair,  and the
neatest,  trimmest,  little figure imaginable.  She never grew old.
though she lived so long.  On Sunday evenings,  she always spelt
out her Hebrew psalm,  and Dr.  Greenhill  (of Hastings)  remarked that she was the only woman he knew who could  ‘read
Hebrew,  and make jelly.’  Her devoted care of her invalid

1 As he is not on the Civil List,  he was probably a private secretary.

2 These rhyming letters,  which are in imitation of Anstey’s  “  New

Bath Guide,”  were" published in the  “  World”  as the trial went on,  and
republished by Stockdale in 1789-

274 CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY  [1779

daughter was most beautiful.  All her later life seemed to be
spent in nursing first one and then another of her dear ones.
She married when she was about sixteen.  It was said that she
had not the least intention,  or wish,  to do so,  but Mr.  Barrett
would take no refusal.  He was much her senior.  She was so
simple and humble-minded with all her learning that no one
could accuse her of pedantry.  Her most laborious work was the
catalogue of the Fitzwilliam Museum,  but I think she took
nearly as much pride in  ‘  Charades,  Enigmas,  and Riddles,  by
a Cantab,’  which she collected,  and published,  with a characteristic preface.”

The children of Mrs.  Barrett were worthy of their descent.
Her eldest son,  the Reverend Richard Arthur Francis Barrett,
Fellow of King’s College,  Cambridge,  and Rector of Stower
Provost,  Dorsetshire,  was the author of  “A Synopsis of Criticisms on Passages in the Old Testament,”  &c.  When at college
his eyes failed him from overwork.  His sister,  Julia Charlotte,
learned enough of Hebrew to help him to carry on his studies.
Her daughter writes  :  “  I have seen sheets of her transcribing
of Hebrew on blue paper which he could see to read when
printed books drove him wild.  I think this was a creditable act
for a young girl universally admired,  extremely pretty,  witty,
and lively.  Later in life,  she materially helped her  [second]  husband with his books.”  Julia Charlotte Barrett married first,
James Thomas,  E.I.C.S.;  secondly,  Dr-  Charles Maitland,
author of  “The Church in the Catacombs,”  and  “The Apostles’
School of Prophetic Interpretation.”  She herself w'rote  “  Letters
from Madras,  by A Lady,”  a book which was highly praised at
the time of its publication in 1843.  It was reprinted by Mr.
Murray in his Home and Colonial Library ,  in 1846,  with renewed success.

The editor has seen a pocket-book which belonged to Charlotte Ann Burney;  it has evidently been a  “fairing,”  from the
famous fair of St.  Edmund’s-Bury.  It is bound with soft red
leather stamped with a silver pattern.  It has never been used
but for memoranda such as a young woman might make who
had left a brilliant society for a tiny town near the Norfolk
coast.  There is a list of the  “singers and players on musical
instruments  ”  whom she had  (once upon a time)  heard ;  also,  of
the authors and celebrities whom she had met ;  then of the
“deaths of friends”;  among whom  (without a date),  there is
“ Cousin Richard.”  One entry is joyous:  “St.  Andrews’s Day,
1786,  my dear Dad was chosen of the Council of the Royal
Society,  together with Rt.  Hon.  Ch.  Greville,  W.  Herschall,
L.D.  (sic),  astronomer,  Nevil Maskelyne,  D.D.”  Lastly comes
a short list of  “  Norfolk Provincialisms.”  The title-page explains
the reason why it belonged to Charlotte ; — the frontispiece was

*7791

CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY

275

designed by her cousin Edward,  from a scene in the  “  Cecilia  ”
of her sister Fanny.  Edward has also succeeded in making six.
ladies,  in as many frightful head-dresses,  look lovely,  notwithstanding fashion.

The title runs thus  : —

“The/  Norfolk Ladies/  Memorandum Book/  or/  Fashion-
able Pocket Repository/  for the year 1787 1 Embellished with
a/  Beautiful descriptive Plate/  representing an/  interesting'
scene from Cecilia/  likewise/  Six of the most Fashionable
Ladies/  Head Dresses/  Designed by Burney and masterly engraved by Walker/. - - - .....  Bury St.  Edmund’s:/  Printed

and sold by John Rackham/  and may be had of/  All the Booksellers  &  Stationers in the County of Norfolk/  To be continued
annually/  (price one Shilling).”]

■

'

SOME LETTERS AND FRAGMENTS OF THE
JOURNAL OF CHARLOTTE ANN
BURNEY.  1777—1787.

Fragment I.  [1777].

[Garrick after his withdrawal from the Stage.]

....  had been settled a quarter of an hour,  he was looking and prying about with his opera glass,  to the right and
to the left,  before and behind him,  and everywhere but over
his right shoulder — at last however in the middle of one of
Henderson’s most interesting speeches,  one of the box-
keepers luckily made a most comfortably horrid noise with
the door — Garrick turnd round,  and in turning his head
back to its usual position ,  “help me or else I die,  on us he
cast an eye,”  most earnestly; — “Ha!  what is it you!”  and
so saying he shook hands with us.  L — d,  how consequen-
cial I felt just then!  “Well,  but you an’t alone?”  “Oh,
no,  Sir,  we have a lady with us.”  How friendly,  and fatherly,
sweet soul!  “Well but how have you done this long while;
I’m so glad to see you.”  “And we’re so proud to be acknowledged,”  answered Susey.  She said right,  for splitt me'

1 Perhaps Charlotte borrowed her audacious  “  splitt me ”  from Sheridan’s  “  Trip to Scarborough,”  which was acted at Drury Lane theatre
in the February of the year in which this fragment was written.  We
owe this suggestion to Mr.  Gibbs,  who adds that  “The Trip”  is an
almost literal reproduction of Vanbrugh’s  “  Relapse,” — some grossness
excepted ;  yet even in the present reprints of it,  Lord Foppington
indulges in such  “  choice oaths  ”  as these;  “strike me dumb  !”  “  strike
me ugly!”  and  “split my windpipe!”  There seems to have been a
revival of  “strange oaths”  about 1775,  the year of Sheridan’s  “  Rivals,”
in which we find Bob Acres stating that  “  plain damns have had their

277

278 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [177 7

if I’d not a hundred times rather be spoken to by Garrick
in public than His majesty,  G — d bless him !  There was a
Lilliputian dance by about a dozen children,  none more than
twelve I’m sure,  and he asked me very much to go and join
them.  “  Come shall you and I make one among  ’em?  Come,
if you will I will,  I only wait for you,  we should look as
handsome as any of them.”  “  I fancy,”  rejoind I,  “  we should
look like Patagonians among them.”  “  Oh,”  says he,  “  I
should be the  /a//agonion.”  How amazingly ready he is !
Perhaps his partner would be better off than she’d be dancing in public with anybody else,  as he is always so much observed,  that peoples eyes allways seemd rivitted to him like
so many basilisks,  whenever he was on,  and on that account
his partner would sheer off without a look.  But I don’t know,
neither,  whether people could avoid looking at his partner
sometimes,  and then it should be a perfect dancer indeed
to bear looking at in the same hour with Garrick.  However,
be that as it may,  I doubt not but he would have been
tolerably Wellcome to have given them a surprise.

At the end of the second act there was a gentleman took
the trouble of climbing over two boxes to ask Garrick —
■“What he thought of the imitation?”  “Imitation,  Sir?”
says Garrick.  “Ay,  Sir,  this imitation of Shylock?  “  O,
Sir,  I’m no judge.”  How quick,  how sensible,  how comical,
how Garrick -worthy a way of evading giving a direct answer,
when there certainly cannot be a man in the world a more
competent judge than he is !  But the question,  in a public
theatre,  to be sure was rather the reverse of well judged,  and

<lay  ” :  old profanities had indeed almost lost their meaning by over
use.  It was felt that swearing must be modified if it could not be done
without;— that is,  either softened to suit the aspirations of the time for
“  elegance,”  or given a turn quaint,  fantastic,  or startling.

In 1779 we find Susan telling Fanny that  “  We had a visit from
Captain Williamson,  (one of Cook’s former officers,)  he is a good-looking man,  and was showily dress’d,  in all other respects I think detestable.  He swears furiously,  a vile custom which heaven be prais’d is
now almost wholly abolish’d — in female company at least.”  In 1780
Susan writes also of  “  the now exploded words Whig and Tory,”  yet
both the evil custom of swearing and the use of the party-nicknames of
Whig and Tory are,  to some extent,  unabolished,  and unexploded,
in 1889.

1777]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 279

on that account I didn’t pity the man for having such a cute
answer made him.

He was saying that my father had promised to lend him
some journals,  and I said Charles was at home and would
be vastly happy to wait upon him with the journals.  “  What,
the Cherry Derry of the age,  is he in town?1 — But I don’t
know whether I can explain the matter more clearly if I
come myself.”  L — d,  I thought I must have been fain to
take one of Mr.  Astley’s flying leaps into the pit for joy I
But I  'calmd my transport a little by recollecting that two-
months ago my father met him,  and he told him that he had
n’t tormented him a great while,  and would come certainly
some morning that week.  I intirely depended upon it,  and
for four mornings was up at 7 o’clock,  and at the trouble
and fatigue of washing face and hands quite clean,  putting
on clean linnen,  a tidy gown,  and smug cap;  and after all
we were choused ,  for he nickd us entirely and never came at
all.  But,  nevertheless,  I could not refrain asking sister
Susey,  in a whisper that he could not help hearing,  this,
simple question, — “  whether Mr.  Garrick had settled to come
next morning?”  Upon which he turned to me with one of
the gruffest of his lion looks 2 — “I will.”  “To-morrow,
Sir?”  “I’ll come to-morrow,”  answerd he in the same
tone of voice.

The farce was  “Piety in Pattens,”  most wrechedly writ
ten and acted,  all that I saw of it,  for Susey had n’t patience

1 When Charles Burney  (afterwards Dr.  Charles No.  2  )was a schoolboy,  Garrick spoke of him as  “  Cherry-Nose ”  ;  “  so,”  (Fanny explains)
“Garrick has named poor Charles,  on account of his skin being rather
of the brightest.”  Charles was a stripling when Garrick called him
“  Cherry Derry,”  keeping up the jest by changing the words in  “  Hurry
Durry. ”  A  “  Hurry Durry  ”  person,  or  “this Hurry Durry age,”  are
expressions to be found in letters of that century,  which many think
did by no means quicken its pace until 1789.

2 Miss Hawkins says that,  as a child,  she was more afraid of Garrick
than of Johnson — “Garrick had a frown,  and spoke impetuously —
lohnson was slow and kind in his way to children.”  There is said to
have been a resemblance between Garrick and Napoleon Buonapaite.
A son of George Garrick,  who resembled his Uncle David,  was arrested
in Wales,  during the war with France,  owing to his likeness to prints
of the Corsican,  who was supposed to have landed as a spy  !  Young Garrick was detained some time,  but released with a  “  safe-conduct or
pass from the Mayor of Tenby.

28o

LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1777

to stay,  though she might have paid herself by half an
hour longer of his company  !  He laughed as much as he
could have done at the most excellent piece in the world.
Indeed,  to borrow one of Fanny’s expressions,  it was
“  bad enough to be good d’1

1 Susan,  then in her twenty-second,  and Charlotte in her seventeenth year,  perhaps loved best  “  the songs that made them grieve  ” —
the tearful comedies which were mocked in Foote’s  “  Handsome
Housemaid,  or Piety in Pattens.”  Yet they ought to have laughed
with Garrick.  It was far from being his first laugh at this diverting
satire,  which was first played in 1773.  “Cock-a-doodle-doo”  (as Foote
called Garrick)  was himself to have been mimicked in it,  but  (according
to Plorace Walpole)  “  Garrick,  by the negotiation of a Secretary of
State,  has made his peace with Foote,  and is to be left out of the
puppet-show.”  Mr.  Cradock and Mr.  Cumberland were brought into it
by name on the first night,  when there was a great riot,  and benches
were torn up  ;  some  (like these girls)  thinking  “the thing stupid”  :
others  (with the injured dramatists,  Cradock and Cumberland)  holding
it to be malicious.  It was in this year,  1777,  that Dr.  Johnson said,
with truth,  “  Foote,  Sir,  quatenus Foote,  has powers superior to them
all.”  It is diverting even to read about this piece.  The story is of a
handsome servant  ( acted,  at Mrs.  Yates),  whose master makes her proposals like those of  “  Mr.  B.”  to Pamela,  in Richardson’s novel.
Thomas,  the butler,  who honestly loves her,  warns her solemnly,  that
“  if she once losses her virtue,  she will have no pretensions to chastity.”
Her master finding her of firm principles,  then offers to marry her.  She
begs that Thomas may be called to hear her answer to so noble an offer.
When Thomas appears,  she says that she will marry him,  because he
has given her good advice.  The squire,  not to be surpassed in sentiment,  gives his consent to their marriage.  “  Piety in Pattens  ”  thereupon,  “out of gratitude for her master’s great condescension,  resolves to
marry neither of them,  but to live single,  although she owns to them
that she loves them both."  The piece was played by well-made and well-
dressed puppets,  with  “  the usual contrivance for the speeches,”  and
was considerably softened after it had raised a disturbance.  Tom Davies
writes that  “  Piety in Pattens  ”  was a charm as powerful in demolishing
that species of comedy which the French term larmoyante ,  as  ‘  The Rehearsal  ’  in banishing the rants and bombast of Dryden and his followers.”  Goldsmith’s  “  She Stoops to Conquer,”  which was produced
in the same year,  1773,  was another attack upon the  “Sentimental”
Comedy.  Mr.  Gibbs,  in his edition of Goldsmith’s Works,  has several
references to  “Piety in Pattens,”  and the  “sentimental comedy”  it
was designed to satirize.  He kindly writes to inform us that  “  this visit
•  ...  to the play was to the Haymarket.  It was upon June 11,  1777,
upon the occasion of Miss Barsanti’s first appearance at that house,
which,  no doubt,  accounts for the Burneys’  visit.  ‘  The Merchant of
Venice’  was the play.  Henderson was Shylock,  and Jenny Barsanti
Portia.  Miss Barsanti did not play in the after-piece,  ‘  Piety in Pattens.’”

1777]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 281

Mr.  George Garrick was there,  and Garrick introduced us
to him1 with — -“Here’s two of my children,  two of the
Burneys.”  How kind he is to us all!  He was very intent,
either upon the petit piece or his own cogitations,  so we were
obliged to sail off without saying anything,  to my no small
greggitation.

Next morning while I was making my father’s tea,  I heard
three knocks at the door  (which were the sweetest music I
had had my ears tickled with for many a day)  upon
which,  after knocking down the tea cannister,  dropping the
tea pot lead into the water,  and scalding my fingers,  I tumbled up stairs and met him.  “  Well,  why,  what did you steal
away for?  I intended to have seen you safe,  but what did
you mean by it?”  Before I could have given an answer of
any sort,  Betty,  who stood by with the broom in her hand,
and whose cockles were tickled by his droll attitudes and way
of expressing himself,  burst out a laughing!— upon which he
fairly caned her up a whole flight of stairs,  desiring at the
same time to know what she laughed for?  As soon as he was
safely moord in the chaos 2 he attacked me again.  “Well,
but,  Piety in pattens,  how came you to run away,  hay?  I
remember the time when she was not quite so cruel,  when I
used to tuck her under my arm and run away with her,  but
now she runs from me!  But Piety in pattens blushd at shaking hands with me in public!  didn’t you?  didn’t you?  then
the folks all stared,  and we  (I admire his saying we)  looked
so handsome !  Ay,  says they,  he’s got a young egg by him

The next entry in Charlotte’s journal is dated the 25th of August,  1777,
but if her diary was kept with as little regularity as that of her sister
Fanny,  the visit to the theatre may well have been upon the nth of

June.

1 Garrick’s favourite brother,  whom he made his heir,  through
George’s children.

2 To be  “safely moor’d in Chaos,”  is a drolly mixed metaphor.
“  The capacious table of  [Dr.  Burney’s]  small but capacious study,  exhibited,  in what he called his Chaos,  the countless,  increasing stores of
his materials.  Multitudinous,  or rather,  innumerous,  blank books,  were
severally adapted to concentrating some portion of his work,”  [“The
History of Music,”]  writes Madame D’Arblay,  in 1832— so that,  like the
great Bishop Thirlwall,  Dr.  Burney had his  ‘  Chaos,’  although not so
vast a Chaos,  for that of the Bishop spread beyond the limits of tables
or shelves.

232 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [177Z

that he wants to swallow up ! — But then my little Piety to
leave me in the lurch,  wasn’t well done of you,  besides,”
repeated he,  “I intended to have had the pleasure of seeing
you safe out. — But  ’twas that old gentlewoman’s doing I
suppose — she thought I was too sweet upon you,  didn’t
she?  ”

He took off Dr.  Johnson most admirably.  Indeed I en-
joyd it doubly from having been in his company;  his see-
sazv,  his pawing. ,  his very look ,  and his voice!  My cot l what
.an astonishing thing it is he  [Garrick]  has not a good ear
for music!  He took him off in a speech  (that has stuck in
his gizzard ever since some friendly person was so obliging
as to repeat it to him).  Indeed,  I should much wonder if it
did not,  for it would have been a severe speech if it had
been said upon who it would,  much more upon Garrick,  indeed I think it must have been exaggerated,  or if not,  that
it was a very severe,  ill-natured,  unjust thing.  “Yes,  yes,
Davy has some convivial pleasantries in him  ;  but  ’tis a.  futile
Fellow.”  A little while after he took him off in one1 of his
own convivial pleasantries l'  “No Sir;  I’m for the musick
of the ancients,  it has been corrupted so.”  2 *

1  “  [Garrick]  was always jealous that Johnson spoke lightly of him.  I
Tecollect his exhibiting him to me one day,  as if saying,  4 Davy has
some convivial pleasantry about him,  but  ’tis a futile fellow ;  ’  which he
uttered perfectly with the air and tone of Johnson.” — Boswell.

*  This does not seem to refer to the  “Academy of Ancient Music”
(instituted in 1 710),  with which Sir John Hawkins had much to do;  or
to  “the Ancient Concerts”  (established in 1776),  which interested
Dr.  Burney ;  but to the controversy as to the relative value of ancient
and modern poetry,  music,  &c.,  &c.,  which raged from the end of the
seventeenth into the first quarter of the eighteenth century.  It left behind it two English books,  which are still famous:  Bentley’s  “Dissertation on the Epistles of Phalaris  ”  (1695),  and Swift’s  “  Battle of the
Books  ”  (1705).  In 1705,  the Abbe de Chateauneuf heard a discussion
on the  “  Music of the Ancients”  at the house of Ninon de l’Enclos,
which he reproduced in 1725,  in the form of a dialogue between

Thcagene and Callimaque .”  “  Leontium  ”  (Ninon)  asks a German

(Hebenstreil)  who is called  “  Pant a1 eon  ”  in the dialogue to play upon
a musical instrument of his own invention,  which he calls a  “  tym-
panonP  “  Callimaque  ”  extols the Music of the Moderns,  while
“  Thcagene  ”  invokes the shade of Lycurgus,  and cites the punishment
inflicted at Sparta upon a certain  “  Timothee who had been guilty of
adding a new chord to the lyre,  thereby humouring the bent of the
Greeks to suffer themselves to be enervated by the charms of music.

1777]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 283

He askd my father hew he stood his ground at Straight-
hem,* 1  “Oh,”  says my father,  “vastly well;  and I can assure
you Johnson fights your battles for you.”  Upon which Garrick insisted upon knowing who with ?  But my father declared off for that:  “  Well,  but Burney,  I’ll never forgive you,
if you wont tell me.”  “Oh,  I’m bound in honour not to do
that,”  and so he went on,  all the way down stairs,  and was
so very earnest to know,  that it required all my father’s
rhetoric to avoid letting him.  know.  “  Well,  Burney,  mind I
put you out of my books.”  “  Why,  what good will it do
you?  ”  “  Why,  it will be letting me know my friends from my
enemies.”  And when he got out of the door — “  Well,
Burney,  here ends our friendship!”  Becket the bookseller
came with him,  and he walkd on a little before Garrick,  and
he was impudent enough to take him off,  to his face ,  I was
going to say,  but to do him justice he did it like a gentleman,
behind his back.2 He enquired after Jemm and  “the news
earlanders,”  [New Zealanders]  3 and my father said that
what we knew of that affair was chiefly from his Journal ,  for
that it was a subject upon which he was very shy ,  and always
spoke of it in a whisper,  as if it was treason.  “  Why,  what,
they didn’t eat  ’em?”  says Garrick.  “Yes,  but they did.”
“We are not sure of that,”  answerd Garrick,  “perhaps they
potted  ’em !  ”  And thus ended his visit,  sweet soul !  He had
on his favourite scratch ,  his mob wig ,  as Mr.  Twining calls
it; — but in spight of it he looked as abominably handsome
as I think I ever saw him.

Ninon closes the dispute by saying that the Spartans would not have
found tortures enough for her musician who had added more than a
hundred chords to the tympanon.

1 This is one of Charlotte’s puns.  Dr.  Burney’s acquaintance with
Mr.  and Mrs.  Thrale,  and visits to Streatham,  began in 1776,  when he
was invited to give lessons in music to  “  Queeny  ”  [Esther]  Thrale.

2 Charlotte,  perhaps,  did not know that she was quoting from

Wycherley’s  “  Plain Dealer”  (1677).  ‘  Plausible  ’  says to  ‘  Manly,’ —

“  If I did say or do an ill thing to any body,  it should be behind their
backs,  out of pure good manners.”

3 Was this poor pun Garrick’s,  or Charlotte’s  ?  In a letter to Fanny,
then in France,  with her husband,  dated November 12th,  1808,  giving
a brief sketch of the then condition of all his family,  Dr.  Burney tells
her that her  “  sister Charlotte still loves a pun.”

284

LETTERS AND JOURNAL

['777

Monday August 25th,  1777.  St Martin’s Street.

My mother is gone to Paris — my father to Mr.  Thrale’s at
Stratham, — Fanny to Chessington — Susey to Howletts —
Dick to Hindon — and Jemm to Otahieta — so they are
pretty well dispersed methinks ,  and I am left at home to
keep house,  unless somebody should run away with me,  as
Mr.  Crisp says.

This morning,  while Fanchon and I were at breakfast,  a
post chaise stopd at the door,  and out of it came Mr.  Crisp
and Mrs.  Cast,  his sister, — quite unexpected — but not unwelcome.  He looks rather thin,  every where but his legs,
which have been fattend up by the gout,  but,  nevertheless,
has not the sallow,  unhealthy look that he had a year ago,
and upon the whole,  tout ensemble looks better than I expected from the acounts I have heard of him lately.  Mrs
Cast I never saw before ,  but should be sorry if I was certain
I should never see her again,  as she is,  as far as I can judge
by so short an acquaintance,  a very sensible,  agreable,
amiable woman.

Fragment II.

[Praise of Mrs.  Thrale. — Her first meeting with Piozzi.]

[If Boswell be followed,  the date of this fragment is 1778,  as
in that year he places Dr.  Johnson’s visit to Winchester in Dr.
Burney’s company.  If we rely upon Madame D’Arblay,  it is
1 777,  as she tells us that this evening party happened  “some
few months after”  that described on pages 152-158 of this
volume.

This fragment of Charlotte’s diary is written upon a leaf of
paper,  the upper half of which has been cut off and preserved ;
the rest is wanting.  The paper has been cut with little care.  We
supply the words in brackets by conjecture.  The first part shows
the growing friendliness between Dr.  Burney and the Thrales,
which led to Mrs.  Burney,  and her boy Dick,  visiting Streat-
ham,  Dick was then  “  a beautiful boy.”  Like poor Miss W.,  he
was  “all lilies and roses.”  Mrs.  Thrale petted him.  Dr.  Johnson
wrote to Dr.  Joseph Warton in his favour,  and offered to go with
Dr.  Burney to place him in Winchester School.  The going and

1777 or 8]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 285

coming back together in a post-chaise,  shook Drs.  Johnson and
Burney into still greater regard for each other.* 1 * *

The second part describes a visit to St.  Martin’s Street of the
chiefs of the Streatham set.  This was arranged by Dr.  Burney
at the request of Mr.  and Mrs.  Grevillc,  and their daughter,
Mrs.  Crewe,  that they might meet Dr.  Johnson and Mrs.  Thrale.
It was to have been a brilliant encounter of wits ; — it was a disastrous failure.  Charlotte’s view of what happened  (little of it as
is left)  is worth having,  that it may be compared with Fanny’s
narrative,  which is to be found in.  the second volume of her
“Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,”  pages ici to 114.  The evening was
noteworthy as being that on which Mrs.  Thrale first saw Piozzi,
whose gestures she mimicked while standing behind him as he
played and sang,  in such a manner as to draw upon herself a
well-deserved rebuke from Dr.  Burney.  She took it with good
humour,  being indeed,  as said Lord Lansdowne — who,  when
Lord Henry Petty,  had  “put up for a day,”  at her house,  “Brin-
bella,”  in Wales — “  good-humoured and lively,  but affected.”
“  Piozzi,”  he added,  “  was a civil man,  with his head full of
nothing but music,”  while Mrs.  Thrale,  as Fanny wrote,  knew
“not a flat from a sharp,  nor a crochet from a quaver.”  Mr.
Abraham Hayward,  as editor of the  “  Autobiography of Mrs.
Piozzi,”  places  “this scene at Dr.  Burney’s”  after the 13th of
August,  1781.  This is incorrect,  as Mme.  D’Arblay clearly states
that the second visit of Dr.  Johnson and Mrs.  Thrale to St.
Martin’s Street was  “a few months”  after the first;  that is,  after
the 20th of March,  1777.  Mrs.  Thrale tells us herself in one page
of Mr.  Hay ward’s volumes,  that  “the beginning oi her acquaintance with Piozzi was at Brighton,  after the  ’80 riots,  August,  or
so.”  On another page dated  “Brighton,  July 1780,”  there is a
more precise statement.  She writes :  “  I have picked up Piozzi
here,  the great Italian singer.  He is amazingly like my father.
He shall teach Hester.”  She found him at the time by no means
desirous of giving lessons.  He told her that he was at Brighton
for his health only.  Her comments were that  “  nothing ails him
but pride,”  and that the newspapers say he is earning  ,£1,200 a
year.  Mr.  Thrale died in April,  1781.  On the 13th of August,

1 Dick is the subject of one of Mrs.  Piozzi’s  “Anecdotes of Dr.
Johnson.”  “We parted at his door one evening when I had teized him
many weeks to write a recommendatory letter of a little boy to his
schoolmaster;  and after he had faithfully promised to do this prodigious feat before we met again—4 Do not forget dear Dick,  Sir,’  said

I,  as he went out of the coach  :  he turned back,  stood still two minutes

on the carriage step — ‘  When I have written my letter for Dick,  I may

hang myself,  mayn’t I?’— and turned away in a very ill humour indeed.” — P.  194,  edit.  1786.

286

LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1777 or 8

1781,  his widow wrote in her  “  Thraliana” :  “Piozzi is become
a prodigious favourite with me,  he is so intelligent a creature,
so discerning one can’t help wishing for his good opinion,  his
singing surpasses everybody’s for taste,  tenderness,  and true
elegance ;  his hand on the forte piano too is so soft,  so sweet,
so delicate,  every tone goes to the heart,  I think,  and fills the
mind with emotions one would not be without,  though inconvenient enough sometimes.”  On the 25th of November,  1781,
she writes :  “  I have got my Piozzi again.”  Mr.  Hayward says,
in a note on these words,  that this  “  did not the7i imply what it
would now.'”  He wrote as an advocate,  doing the best he could
for his client,  but he would have found it hard to prove that the
words had any other meaning than they bear to-day,  nor can there
be any doubt that such a marriage would provoke the same
comments now as then.]

[It would be]  strange indeed if they did n’t idolize her, —
[Mrs.  Thrale]  for besides her particular unremitting,  delicate
almost unparrellel’d attention to my father,  upon every occasion she has interisted herself so much in regard to getting
little Dick to Winchester School  (where he went on Tuesday
last)  that she has seemed to think of nothing else,  and has
not only made him a present of a piece of fine holland to
set him up in shirts with but has likewise furnished him with
an intire set of school books,  and she is so far from being
conceited and pedantic in respect to her learning,  that everybody that is free from envy,  hatred and malice allows that
her learning is the last thing that appears — nor,  indeed,  to
do her justice,  does it shew itself unless to her very intimate
friends — I fancy she is about thirty tho’  she hardly looks
twenty-eight,  for she is blooming and pretty enough to prove
that nature has not been a little partial to her in any respect.1
Dr.  Johnson was pleased —

******

of the weather the gentlemen were so kind and considerate
as to divert themselves by making a fire skreen to the whole

1 Mrs.  Thrale habitually  “  rouged” ;  nature,  however,  had been
more than  “a little partial”  to her,  for  (according to Mr.  Abraham
Hayward)  the Mr.  Salusbury,  who put her papers into Mr.  Hayward’s
hands,  possessed a china-bowl,  with a slip of paper pasted into it,
bearing these words:  “  In this bason was baptized Hester Lynch Salusbury,  16 Jan.,  1740-1,  O.S.,  at Bodville,  Carmarthenshire.”  This Mr.

1777 or 8]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 287

room — Dr.  Johnson,  made them all make off,  for when nobody would have imagind he had known the gentlemen were
in the room,  he said that  “  if he was not ashamed he would
keep the fire from the ladies too,” — this reproof  (fora reproof
it certainly was,  altho’  given in a very comical dry way)  was
productive of a scene as good as a comedy ,  for Mr.  Suard 1
tumbled on to the sopha directly,  Mr.  Thrale on to a chair,
Mr.  Davenant sneaked off the previises seemingly in as great
a fright and as much confounded as if he had done any bad
action,  and Mr.  Gruel?  being left solus was obliged to stalk
off in spight of his teeth,  and it was pretty evidently against
the grain.  During one of the duets,  Piozzi,  fatigued I suppose with being encircled with strangers and having nobody
to converse with,  regaled himself with a short nap.

Dr.  Johnson was immensely smart ,  for him , — for he had
not only a very decent tidy suit of cloathes on,  but his hands,
face,  and linnen were clean,  and he treated us with his
worsted wig which Mr.  Thrale made him a present of,  because it scarce ever gets out of curl,  and he generally
diverts himself with laying down just after he has got
a fresh wig on.3  .  1'  .

Salusbury’s father copied from the original bit of paper,  (probably)  of
her own writing,  which was worn out by time.  In those days,  and even
much later,  it was common to baptize infants privately,  without much
regard for there being  “  great cause or necessity for it,”  as the rubric
ordains.  The best china bowl in the house  (which served as the punchbowl at supper-time)  was used on these occasions.

1 Seward.

2 Mr.  “  Gruel  ”  is the lofty Greville,  this being one of Charlotte’s
puns.  It is to be observed that Mme.  D’Arblay omits the names of
Mr.  Seward and of Mr.  Davenant from her account of this party.  She
also says that no one of the party  “  ever asked or wished for its repetition.”  This is a mistake,  as in the unpublished journal of her sister
Susan there is some mention of another meeting between Dr.  Johnson
and Mr.  Greville in the house of Dr.  Burney,  at which Dr.  Russel and
Mr.  Harris of Salisbury were present.

,3 This  “  worsted wig”  is  (we think)  some slight addition to the wig-
history of Dr.  Johnson.  As for his  “  linnen  ”  being clean,  when speaking to Dr.  Burney of the infirmities  (of brain)  of poor Kit Smart,  whom
he  “did not think ought to be shut up,”  he added,  “another charge
was,  that Smart did not love clean linen;  and 1 have no passion for

it r

u.

K

288

LETTERS AND JOURNAL

[1-780

Fragment III.

[Charlotte at Chesington.]

[This was probably written in 1778,  after the publication of
“Evelina,”  and after Fanny’s severe illness,  but before she first
went to stay with the Thrales.]

Sunday,  July the 4th.

Yesterday fortnight my father,  the Lady,  and self set off
in a post sha for Chessington,  about five o’clock,  and arrived
there time enough to get a very comfortable dish of tea.  We
were met at the gate by dear Fanny,  who is so surprisingly
recovered in her looks that I was doubly rejoiced to see her!
We found in the parlour,  Mrs.  Ham,  Moonshine,  and thafs
trifles.  I was quite an unexpected guest,  and Mrs.  H.  made
me a low curtesey,  and cried,  “  How d’ye do,  Miss Sukey?  ”
and Kitty Cooke did n’t know me.  Presently Mr.  Crisp
came into the garden.  He soon espied me,  and I him,  and
notwithstanding his passiotiate message that he had sent me
respecting the Lady,  he gave me a most cordial reception,
quite huged me.  “  How does Mrs.  Barritti do? — very ugly,
I perceive that !  ”  My father and him next went to looking
over the prints in Captain Cookes last voyage,1 which my
father carried down to him,  and he pointed to the ugliest
squaw in the book,  which he said  “  was very like her ,”
pointing to me.

******

Letter I.

[Charlotte Burney to Miss Burney,  then at Bath.]

Monday Morn.,  April 10th  [1780].

I hope my dearest Ftrnny that you are not in dudgeon at
my not writing sooner,  for I wd have sent you a few pleasing
words e’er nowr,  but that for this fortnight past,  I have really

1 This was the account of Cook’s second voyage,  which was edited
by himself.  It was published in 1777,  in two volumes,  quarto.

1780]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 289

been so hard fag’d with stitchery in new rigging papa’s old
shifets  [as Mrs.  Market calls em]  that I really have n’t had
time.  We trot on much as usual here.

I paid Davies the money you left for him — and apropos
to Hair dressing,  as our Finances is extremely low in general,
I think against next Season we had better apply to Mrs.
Pitt’s Hair dresser,  for Dick says when she was drest for the
Pantheon that night,  she paid him ninepence and yet thought
it threepence all too dear!

The Masquerade at the Pantheon was rather thinnish ,
owing,  as they suppose,  to so many people seeing Masks —
but there was one person there that I fancy you’ll be a little
surprised to hear of — a person that I am afraid,  (for his
sake)  has rather a tendresse for a Lady of Quality at the
other end of the Town;  no other than Mr.  Edward Burney
— Papa gave him his Proprietor’s Ticket,  and the Dress cost
him nothing,  but a day’s work,  for he went as a Native of
Otaehitie,  so he cooked up a dress out of Jemm’s Otaehietie
Merchandize.  I contrived to go to York St.  that Night to tea,
and saw his Dress,  which was a very good one,  he went
privately to Sir Joshua’s and took a sketch of Omiah’s dress,
— which he copied in his own pretty exactly.  My Mother’s
Otaehitie Cloth Domino was perdigously chinkd ,  but it
served to wear under the other parts o’  the dress — he had
an Otahietie Stick in one hand,  and a pillow in the other,
and with a Cosmetic of his own invention and preparation,
he wash’d his Mask and his hands so as to make them the
colour of Omiah’s,  and he tattoo’d his fingers with blue
paint,  and flatten’d the Nose of the Mask,  so that altogether
he was so thoroughly disguised that I believe My Uncle
himself wou’d not have known him — he says his dress was
very much admired,  particularly his mask;  which he had
painted so well,  that one Character came up to feel of it,  to
be certain it was not his naytural face— he spoke broken
English,  except now and then that he touch’d  ’em up with
a speech in the Otaehitie language,  that he had got by heart
— he staid  ’till five next morning,  and it answered to him
excessively well,  as indeed you may easily suppose,  being the
first Masquerade that he ever was at — Merlin was there as a
Sick Man in his Chair as he calls it.  Pie was a very

good mask Edward says,  but the newsmongers are not so

290 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1780

good natured to him,  for they say that there was a sick man
in his Chair who made everybody sick of him  !

But I have something to tell you about Edward that I
think you will not be displeased at.  He has just finished
three stained Drawings in Miniature,  Designs for Evilina —
and most sweet things they are.  The Design for the first
vol.  is the scene at Ranelaugh after the Disaster of Madame
Duval and Monsieur Du Bois.  He has just caught the
moment when Madame French is going to dash the candle
out of the Captain’s hand ;  he says he was very much
puzzled how to give Madame Duval the beau-reste d but we
think he has succeeded delightfully.  But Monsieur Slippery
is my favourite figure.  I do think it is a most incomparable
one indeed!  so miserably triste!  he has taken him shivering
by the fire.  Evilina is introduced in all three,  and a most
lovely creature he has made of her — but its whimsical
enough that there must certainly be a likeness between
Edward’s Evilina and Miss Streatfield,  as seperately and
apart  (as Sir Anthony Branville says) 1 2 Susan and I were
both struck with the resemblance.  The subject for the 2nd
vol.  is the part where Evilina is sitting in that dejected way,
leaning her arm on the table,  and Mr.  Villars is watching
her at the door before she perceives him. — The design for
the 3rd vol:  is as affecting as that for the 2nd,  it is the
-  scene between Evilina and her father,  when she is kneeling,
and he in an agony is turning from her. — I think there
can’t be a greater proof of Edward’s having read and felt
every passage in the book than these drawings.  My father
is so pleased with them that he has shewn them to Sir
Joshua Reynolds,  and ask’d him whether there would be
any impropriety in putting them into the Exhibition?  Sir
Joshua highly approved of the proposal,  and sure enough
ihto the Exhibition they are to go,  and Mr.  Barry,  who is
mightily struck with them,  has promised of his own accord,
to endeavour to procure a good place for them — Sir Joshua

1 The appearance of some remains of the beauty which she had
possessed when young.

2 Sir Anthony Branville is a pedantic character in  “  The Discovery,”
a comedy by Mrs.  Frances Sheridan,  the mother of Richard Brinsley
Sheridan.

i/8o]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 291

was amased that he could do any thing original so well,  as
he had seen nothing but copies before of his doing — he said
some very handsome things of them,  and was much pleased
with a picture  (that Edward has introduced into Mr.  Villars’s
parlour,)  cf Dr.  Johnson,  as he says he thinks it very natural
for so good a man as Mr.  Villars,  to have a value for Dr.
Johnson.  But pray my dear Fonny write me word what you
think of all this?  It is a very popular subject,  and they are
to be inserted in the catalogue  “  Designs for Evilina.”  1 I
am vastly glad to tell you,  that Signor Pachierote is so well
recoverd,  that he performed his part in Quinto Fabio on
Saturday.  How do you and the great Mrs.  Montague hit it
off?  vastly well I dare say,  tho’  I warrant she thinks our friend
a very powerful character.  We were honoured with a visit
the other day from the charming Mrs.  Sleepe.  She brought
a letter from Mr.  Sleepe to Charles,  and as Captain Couss-
maker was not here,  I did not grudge her the great chair.
Poor Mr.  Sleepe is vastly well in every respect but Memory ,
but that begins to fail him.  So no more at present from yours
my dear Fanny,  with great truth and affection

Churrlott.

Pray have you had an interview with Lord Peterborough? 2

Susans  (sic)  has this instant received your letter and says
she will answer it very soon.

[As this letter contains the longest passage concerning Edward
Burney that has been found among these papers,  we append to
it some slight notice of a most amiable man,  who withdrew early
from what may be called the public life of a painter ; — the competition which is implied when pictures are exhibited.  There is
no notice of Edward Francis Burney in the early editions of

1 Fanny writes on Wednesday,  April 12,  1780:  “I received Charlotte’s most agreeable account of Edward’s stained drawings from
‘  Evelina,’  and I am much delighted that he means them for the Exhibition,  and that we shall thus show off together.  His notion of putting
a portrait of Dr.  Johnson into Mr.  Villars’s parlour was charming.  I
shall tell the Doctor of it in my next letter,  for he makes me write to
him.”

2 Charlotte means Dr.  Hinchcliffe,  Bishop of Peterborough,  who was
at Bath that season.

292 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1780

“  Bryan’s Dictionary of Painters”;  none in the  “National
Biography,”  none even in the obituary of  “  The Gentleman's
Magazine.”  Mr.  Redgrave says that he was born at Worcester,
in September,  1760,  that he went to London to study in 1776,
that his drawings from  “Evelina”  were the first which he
exhibited in the rooms of the Royal Academy,  to which also he
sent portraits and domestic subjects to the number of nineteen
between 1780 and 1793;  his last being illustrations of  “Tele-
machus.”  “  Devoting himself to book-illustration,  he then became popular.  His designs were clever and imaginative,  made
with the pen,  and slightly tinted.”

Edward’s father seems to have demurred about allowing him
to follow his bent.  When Fanny,  on her way to Bath with the
Thrales,  in 1780,  stayed at the Bear Inn,  at Devizes,  she was
struck with the son of her hostess,  Mrs.  Lawrence,  “  a most
lovely boy of ten years of age,  who seems to be not merely the
wonder of  [his]  family,  but of the times,  for his astonishing skill
in drawing.  The future Sir Thomas Lawrence,  P.R.A.,  had
never had any instruction  [in drawing],  but on his being taken
to town  ...  all the painters had been very kind to him,  and
Sir Joshua Reynolds had pronounced him,  (the mother said,)
the most promising genius he had ever met with.  ...  [He has
just such sweet,  expressive,  soft,  intelligent eyes as his brother
wonder ,  our Edward,  and all his other features are infinitely
handsome.  Methinks I am half sorry.  How I wish our Edward
had had as early an introduction to those who have power to
encourage and assist him  !  ”] x This was written on the 7th of
April;  on the 10th Charlotte wrote the foregoing letter.  Edward
was a pupil of the Royal Academy,  with whose age his own ran
almost parallel.  Dr.  Burney had taken him to Sir Joshua Reynolds,  who highly commended his drawings as  ‘being  “ finely
drawn,”  adding that he  “  did not believe any one in the Academy
could do better /”  Reynolds also lent him his own portraits of
Dr.  Johnson and Burke to copy,  and said that Edward ought
“  by no means to leave London,”  whereupon Dr.  Burney wrote
“  a very long and charming letter  ”  to his brother,  “  which if
anything ”  (writes Susan)  “can,  I think must have weight with
him.”  It was to entreat him to suffer Edward to remain in
London.  The kind cousins waited for his answer  “  in trembling
hope”  but it was all in vain,  as  -Richard recalled his son to
Worcester,  fixing a day on which he must leave London.  Later
on,  however,  we find Edward again in London,  following his
“  propensity to painting,”  which was  “  so strong,  that I believe  ”
(said Sir Joshua to Dr.  Burney)  “  we must call it genius.'1

1 The passage between brackets was omitted in the diary of Mme.
D’Arblay which was published in the lifetime of her cousin Edward.

!78o]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 293

J.  T.  Smith ranks Edward Burney after Blake,  Flaxman,
Lawrence,  and Stothard;  but before Ryley,  Howard,  Hilton,
Etty,  Briggs,  and Morton,  “  all  ”  being  (he writes)  “faithful and
constant delineators of form and muscular action.”  He painted
the portrait of Fanny which was engraved when her later diaries
were published in 1843,  and another,  which is said to be
“plainer”;  three portraits of Mr.  Crisp,  and one of his sister,
Mrs.  Gast,  and made the drawings for four full-page engravings
in his uncle Dr.  Burney’s quarto volume on the Handel Commemoration in Westminster Abbey,  1784.1 His designs for frontispieces and vignettes are very numerous.  We have often seen
old pocket-books preserved for the sake of his illustrations ; —
notably,  some very pretty little books published for years under
the title of  “  Le Souvenir,  or Pocket Tablet.”  Some of his
designs for  “The Lady’s Pocket Magazine  ”  were reproduced in
a volume published in 1799,  entitled  “  The Cabinet of the Arts.  A
series of Engravings by English Artists,  from Stothard,  Burney,
Harding,  Corbould,  Van Assen,  Potter,  Cosway,  Paul Sandby,
Mather Brown,  Catton,  &c.”  Among the  &c.  are Turner and
Isaac Cruikshank.  Family tradition ascribes to Edward an
affectionate admiration for the ladies of his own family,  which
descended for three generations.  He is said to have drawn
Fanny’s likeness as seen with his heart’s eye,  rather than as it
“stood confess’d.”  Next,  one of her nieces was the lady of his
admiration.  She was succeeded in time,  in his regard,  by her
daughter.  No greater compliment could be paid to his own
family than by finding in it,  not out of it,  all that he thought lovely
and loveworthy in woman.  Fanny never names him without
speaking of his merit and his diffident distrust of it.  In 1778,
she says,  “  the kind Mrs.  Thrale would give courage even to
Edward,  if she studied so to do.”  In a letter to Hetty,  written
in 1820,  she says,  “how unfortunate that he never married,  who
is so made for domestic life.”  Elsewhere she writes of this
gentle,  and diffident painter,  as being  “  amiable,  deserving,  and
almost faultless.”  He lived to the great age of Dr.  Burney and
Fanny,  dying at eighty-eight,  in Wimpole Street,  on the 16th of
December,  1848.]

111 One of the page-plates to the series of articles on Music in Rees’s
Cyclopaedia is by Edward Burney.  This delineates,  in something of the
Rowlandson caricature vein,  the  ‘  Pandean Minstrels in performance at
Vauxhall.’  It is dated 1806.”  The plates in Dr.  Burney’s volume are
also remarkable for the character given to numerous figures on a very
minute scale.

294

LETTERS AND JOURNAL

[1781

Letter II.

[Charlotte Ann Burney to Miss Burney,  at Mrs.

Hamilton’s,  Chessington;  Kingston,  Surrey.]

Monday  [1781].

Dearest Fonni,

Thanks for your comique letter — I would have written
per baker,  but had not time.

I call’d on Mrs.  Reynolds last week,  and had a curious
conversation with her.  Upon her enquiring very particularly
where you were — I said with a friend in Surry.  “Oh,  then,
[said she,  with a significant nod]  she has shut herself up to
write.”  In order to cure her of this suspision I said you were
upon a visit to a favourite friend of us all,  who you would
wish to be a good deal with,  and therefore would not find
time for writing.  “Why,  who is it she is gone to see?  What
is the name?  ”  “  Mr.  Crisp,  a very old friend  ” — “  Well,  but
he’s married I suppose?”  “No” — “Bless me!  what,  then
she is gone to a house with only a gentleman in it,  and that
gentleman a bachelor too!”  “Yes,  but there are two ladies
in the house that he lives with” — answered I — “Oh;  two
ladies,  well — but I suppose one of them is his wife?  ”  “  No;
but he has known them a great many years — it is an old
lady and her niece,  that he lives with,  and none of their
acquaintance think there is any scandal in it I assure you”
— “Well but,”  cried she,  with a wink,  “how did they come
to live together at first,  these ladies and him?  I never heard
of such a thing!  I wunder at it!  pray are you sure he is
really not married privately to one of them?”  “  O,  yes;  he
is not married to either of them,”  answered I.  But I had a
great mind to have told her that he was to quiet her scruples.
“  Bless me,”  cried this oddity,  “it seems very odd to me!
I dont understand it.” — -Dear Fanny did you ever hear of
anything so rediculous!  I said a great deal to her to un-
scandalize her,  but I don’t know whether I did at last.1

'  Mrs.  Reynolds,  who was a most worthy woman,  but singular in her
ways,  was not to be foiled by Charlotte;  she questioned Fanny herself
when next she met her.  This was on the 28th of December,  1 782,  at a

1781]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 295

Mazzanti has been setting a song to music;  an English song;
and written by an Englishman;  but nobody would guess it" I
believe— as I know you have a taste for elegant writing I’ll
give it you —

“Song by the Nymphs.

As the sun’s refulgent ray
Brightens in the natal day,

So will we our voices raise
To celebrate the Stranger’s praise.

“  Song by the Ladies.

Accept fair Thames our grateful lay
For this our happy festive day
To you sweet nymphs no less is due
How happy we to join with you.

“  Nymphs and Ladies.

Sweet chorus come your melody combine
And with the sisters and the cousins join
Trumpets sound,  let all be gay
And celebrate Sir Edward’s day.”

Pray what is your opinion of these lines?  Heregoes insists

dinner in the house of Sir Joshua.  Fanny writes to Susan,  that afier
dinner she had a whispering conversation with Mrs.  Reynolds,  “  which
made me laugh,  from her excessive oddness and absurdity.  It began
about Chesington.  She expressed her wonder how I could have passed so
much time there.  I assured her that with my own will I should pass
much more time there,  as I know no place where I had had more,  if so
much happiness.  ‘Well,  bless me!’  cried she,  holding up her hands,

‘  and all this variety comes from only one man  !  That’s strange indeed,
for,  by what I can make out,  there’s nothing but that one Mr.  Quip
there!’  ‘Mr.  Crisp,'  said I,  ‘is indeed,  the only man;  but there are
also two ladies,  very dear friends of mine,  who live there constantly.’
‘  What !  and they neither of them married Mr. — that same gentleman?’
‘No,  they never married anybody;  they are single,  and so is he.’
‘  Well,  but if he is so mighty agreeable,’  said she,  holding up her finger
to her nose most significantly,1 can you tell me how it comes to pass
he should never have got a wife all this time?’  There was no answering
this but by grinning;  but I thought how my dear Kitty  [Cooke]
would have called her the old sifter"  (Diary of Mme.  D'Arblay,  vol.  ii. ,
p.  219).

296 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1782?

upon it that there is nothing ridiculous in them,  and moralized for half an hour because I laugh’d at them.

Yours in furious haste,

Charlotte Ann Burney.

Jem goes to Sheerness to-night.1

Fragment IV.

[Charlotte with the Hooles  ;  at Dr.  Percy’s;  at the Dean of
Winchester’s.]

[1781,  or 1782.]

heads now,  and have the Grecian Stoop.  On Sunday last I
spent the day inti rely with my friends the Hoole’s,  and a
very happy,  comfortable,  social day I had.  I went to church
with them and heard Dr.  Franklin preach.  They say he is a
preacher that has had a great run,  but I was not delighted
with him.  He has a hectoring manner — wants some new
teeth,  and has a bad voice.2 3 Mrs.  Hoole and I walked in
the Temple Gardens before dinner,  which were var?y dule.
There we met Miss Owen,  an acquaintance and crony of
Mrs.  Williams’s,  and there we met Miss Hall,  a conceited
tall young woman.

In the afternoon Mr.  Poor called in,  on his way to a state
visit.  He thought proper to address his conversation to me;
and so I got into an argument with him,  about Blue ladies.
He set off,  (and indeed concluded)  with such insolent speeches
about women,  that I could not resist answering him,  some-

1 To join his ship,  the  “  Bristol,”  to which he was appointed in June,

1781,  as captain.

3 Dr.  Thomas Francklin,  some time Greek Professor at Cambridge
and translator of Sophocles and Lucian,  had a chapel in Great Queen
Street,  in which,  in 1 749>  l>e married his friend Garrick to the Violetta.
It was probably in that chapel Charlotte heard him preach.  We find
Fanny describing him,  in 1 779?  as  “a square old gentleman,  well-
wigged,  formal,  grave,  and important,”  who asked her,  “  Is not your
name Evelina,  Ma’am?”

1782?]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 297

how he always begins upon that topic to me.  He began with
saying that,  “  He could not bear Mrs.  Montague,  on account
of her disputing ;  ”  and in other words said,  “that a woman
ought to read nothing but novels and plays!  and talk of
nothing but caps.”  “  Well,  I never heard so insolent a
speech!”  exclaimed I.  “I sat by a lady at the opera last
night,”  said he,  “a very elegant woman that talked to me
for above an hour,  without ceasing,  and I could n’t listen to
her enough to know a word she said;  but I was very much
pleased with her;  her voice sounded so pretty and soft.”
“How excessively cheap you do hold ladies,  Mr.  Poor!”
said I.  “  No,  I don’t hold ladies cheap;  there is no man has
a greater predilection for ladies than I have !  When I say I
don’t like prescieuse ?  I mean it  /or a compliment — I do indeed; — you are not learned, — are you? — I’m sure you are
not learned,—  are you?  ”  What an insolent wretch!  He told
a story of a lady,  a great talker.  She had had a visit from a
most agreable man,  who was so full of Bons Mots that she
was quite delighted with him; — and the man was dumb !

Thursday,  June 24th,  Quarter day.

The Percys have been in town and I and my father and
Fanny have been and spent an evening with them,  where we
met Dr.  Lort,  whose nose I am sure has never grown since
he was six years old, — nipped in the bud ; — but he’s a droll
quiz,  and I rather like him.1 2 3 There we met Sir Joshua Reynolds,  who did me the favour to speak to me; — and Mrs.
Rena?  and Miss Johnson who looked handsomer than I ever
saw her.  Dr.  Percy,  I like,  I thought he had been but a dry
scholar,  but I find he is an entertaining companion.  Mrs.
Percy is a vulgar,  fussocking,  proud woman;  but very civil
to us.  Miss Percy is among the very well. 4 My father and

1 Charlotte means  “  Precieuses ,  ”  like those of Moliere.

2 Michael Tort,  D.D.,  an eminent collector of books.

3 Mrs.  Frances Reynolds,  sister of Sir Joshua.  The jest is on the
name of an opera performer of the time,  La Rena.

4 This was written when Dr.  Percy was Dean of Carlisle.  Compare
it with Fanny’s account of the Percys in 1791,  when Dr.  Percy was
Bishop of Dromore.  “The Bishop is perfectly easy and unassuming,
very communicative,  and though not very entertaining,  because. toa

298 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1782?

Mother and Jemm and I went one evening last week to the
Dean of AVinchester’s,  where we met Mrs.  Chapone,  who
looked less forbidding than usual;  but she is deadly ugly to
be sure; — such  [an]  African nose and lips,  and such a
clunch figure!  '■'■Poor Chappy ,  she’s so ugly you know!”
Mr.  Seward says.  There was Mr.  Hartley there — He was
Member of Parliament in Tickell’s  “Anticipation”1 time.
He seems a very agreable,  sensible man ;  and some othet
folk.

When we were coming away,  the Dean said,  “  Stop a few
minutes,  and you shall hear my girls sing a whimsical
song.”  Upon which both the girls exclaimed with the greatest
vociferation,  the eldest cried,  “  Papa,  I can’t,  indeed,  I cannot sing such stuff,  I can’t,  and I won’t!”  “Pooh,  pooh,”
answered the Dean,  “  sing it.  Such as it is,  I desire you to
sing it.”  “Papa,  I ivonder at you!”  cried the youngest;  as
if she had been talking to a younger brother!  Much more of
this sort of stuff passed,  ’till at last the poor Dean was quite
orovoked,  and stamping his foot,  he cried,  “  I protest then,
if you will not sing it you shall never have another master
come into the house,  and now I’ve said it!”

It was but reasonable in him to be sure when he pays
Piozzi half a guinea a lesson,  twice a week,  for each of
them !

This threat staggered them a little.  “But such stuff!”
cried the eldest daughter.  “Never mind;  let it be what it
will ,  let’s sing it,”  answered the other.  As if it had been the
greatest hardship in the world!  It was really curious.  They
then condescended to begin,  and a very pretty little old
song it was,

“  Drink to me only with thine eyes,”

and vastly well,  and with a good deal of taste,  the youngest
has the sweetest voice; — but they stop’d in the middle of

prolix,  he is otherwise intelligent and of good commerce.  .  .  .  Mrs.
Percy is very uncultivated in manners and conversation,  but a good
creature,  and much delighted to talk over the Royal Family,  to one of
whom she was formerly a nurse.  Miss Percy is a natural and very
pleasing character.”

1 A lively political piece of verse by Mr.  Tickell,  Sheridan’s brother-
in-law.

J7B2?]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 299

ihe song. — “  Why don’t you go on?  ”  cried Dr.  Ogle.  “  Why
the rest is,  nothing but about stinks,'1 2 answered Miss Ogle. —
“Never mind;  if it was the Black Joke and I desired you
to sing it,  you ought,”  answered the Dean.  Upon which they
finished the Lay }  The Dean came and sat down and talked
to i,  upon which i,  grew I! — He is to my taste a charming
creature,  if he was a single man I could find it in my heart
to fall in love with him,  so comical,  so sensible,  and sweet-
temper’d,  eke handsome ! — Susan thinks he looks at me as
thof he liked me.  I wish she may be right. — What pity it is
he has suffered his daughters to get a head so,  respecting
the head of having their ane way!  They neither mind him nor
Mrs.  Ogle any more than a rush — or a Rush light;  if they
should light of sharp husbands it will fall heavy on them!*
They are both very droll,  and sensible,  and entertaining,  but
full saucy,  as Kitty Cooke would say,  to every body— not
proud,  but saucy,  and so extravagant!  They spent at one

1  “  All attempts to discover the author of this simple and beautiful
air have hitherto failed  ....  among those who essayed was Dr.  Burney.”— Chappell.

That our readers may judge between the Dean and his daughters,  we
givfe in full the words of Ben Jonson’s song: — ■

“  To Celia.

“  Drink to me only with thine eyes,

And I will pledge with mine;

Or leave a kiss but in the cup,

And I’ll not ask for wine.

The thirst that from the soul doth rise.

Doth ask a drink divine :

But might I of Jove’s nectar sup,

I would not change for thine.

I sent thee late a rosy wreath,

Not so much honouring thee,

As giving it a hope,  that there
It could not withered be.

But thou thereon didst only breathe,

And sent’st it back to me :

Since then it grows and smells,  I swear.

Not of itself,  but thee.”

2 One of these mutinous girls,  Esther Anne,  did,  indeed,  have it
“  fan heavy on  ”  her  !  She became the second wife of Richard Brinsley
Sheridan.  Her mother,  Mrs.  Ogle,  was a daughter of Dr.  Thomas,
Bishop of Winchester.

3oo LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1782?

shopping  £20 in Gauzes two or three years ago!  I think
they are very elegant figures both,  and both rather pretty;  in
spight of Mr.  Poor,  who had the impudence to tell Susan
that  “  He thought no one who was not handsomer than the
Miss Ogles ought to come into company !  ”

I hope we shall get better acquainted with them next
winter,  for I like them both.  It is possible that they are too
unaffected.  Merlin has taken to visiting us again,  to my
delight.  If ever I am at all my own mistress,  I’ll certainly
always have my doors open to Merlin.  He said that Sir
Crostopher Wichcurfs daughter had affro7it him.'  But
that he knows a Turk who is very civil,  and not at all
Barbarative.

Mem:  I have this season seen the Vestris’s dance.  They
are French,  father and son,  and dance at the Opera.  The
father calls himself Le Dieu de la da>ise — and  ....

1  “That absurd creature Merlin”  (the mechanician)  occurs in
Fanny’s diary for 1781.  She writes to Susan,  “  When Merlin came in”
(at Streatham)  “  I gave Mr.  Crutchley a hint of your story about Sir
Christopher Whitchcott,  whom Mr.  Crutchley knows,  and says he is
‘  one of his hunting idiots,’  and therefore he endeavoured to draw  [Merlin]  into telling the tale,  by talking of drinking.  Merlin was quiet
a long time,  but when at last Mr.  Crutchley said,— ‘  In England no man
is ever obliged to drink more than he pleases  !’  he suddenly called out,
and with a most rueful face, — ‘  Oh,  certainly I beg your pardon !  there
is a person,  Sir Christopher Whitchcott,  which certainly does do it!’
i Do what,  Mr.  Merlin?’  ‘WThy,  certainly,  Sir,  he does give,  that is,  a
very great reprimand,  to any person that does not drink as much as
himself.’  ”  If Merlin was absurd,  he was full of ability in his own way,
or rather ways.  Merlin was a Frenchman,  who came to England about
1760,  at the age of five and twenty.  He was a maker of mathematical
instruments,  of watches,  of  “rose-engines”  [i.e.  turning-lathes);  of
wheeled-chairs,  with his own improvements:  Dr.  Burney tells us,  in
his article,  “  Harpsichord,”  in Rees’s Cyclopaedia:  “  A double harpsichord used to have two sets of keys and three strings,  two unisons and
an octave to each note.  Merlin,  we believe,  was the first who changed
the octave stop into a third unison,  about the year 1770,  which
rendered the instrument equally powerful,  and less subject to go out of
tune.”  ....  “  Large piano-fortes afterwards received great improvement in the mechanism by Merlin.”  John Joseph Merlin died at
Paddington in 1803.

1782]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY

301

Fragment V.

[A party at  “  good Mr.  Hoole’s.” — The great drollery of Mr.
Vincent Mathias. — A party at  (the widowed)  Mrs.  Thrale’s.
— What was paid for the copyright of  “  Cecilia.”]

[These pages,  although written in January,  1783,  contain
incidents of 1782 only.]

******

he said,  “  It must n’t be said that I like Mrs.  F[itzgerald]
better than any woman in the world,  for it might be thought
that  /  said it,  and that would sound impertinent;  besides
there are five or six women in the world that I like as well.”
Let them believe it that may,  thought I.  I was just going
to tell him that he was like Mr.  Pepys,  but stopt short,  when
upon asking him if he knew Mr.  Pepy’s,  he answered,  “  What
old Master Pepy’s?  yes;  he’s very fond of the women.”
“No,”  cried I,  “that must n’t be said,  for he is a married
man.”  “Ay,”  answered he,  “and that is one proof.”

Jan'T 14,  1783.

I have long arrears to make up in journalizing,  but must
begin with the conclusion,

******

fun.

I by myself I went to the Hooles on Sunday last.  There
was a set party there.  Dr.  Warton of Winchester School,  a
very pleasing man.  His brother,  Mr.  Tom Warton,  the
greatest clod I ever saw,  and so vulgar a figure with his
clunch wig that I took him for a shoemaker at first.  His real
name is Colin McClod.1 Mr.  Blunt,  senior,  rather a favourite
of mine;  a sensible,  shrewd,  handsome,  gentleman-like man.

1 Dr.  Joseph Warton,  head master of Winchester School,  and Prebendary of Winchester,  editor of Pope’s Works,  &c.  Dr.  Thomas War-
ton,  Professor of Poetry,  Camden Professor of History,  poet-laureate
(1788),  author of  “  Poems,”  a  “  History of English Poetry,”  &c.

302 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1782

His son,  Mr.  Meadows.’  Dr.  Franklin,  Miss Williams,  author
of Edwin and Eldrada,  a legendary tale,  a pretty girl rather,
but so superfinely affected that,  tho’  I had the honour of
being introduced to her,  I could n’t think of conversing with
her."  Mr.  Sastres,  whom I am always glad to see,1 2 3 General
Paoli, — Miss Polly Todd,  and a set of vulgar drest up men
and women whose names I have n’t patience to mention,
that I fancy went by half after 5 o’clock,  for I went at 7,  and
found the room full.  After I had been there about half an
hour,  Mr.  Blunt was announced,  and Mrs.  Hoole insisted
on his sitting by me,  and after he had sat,  or sot ,  a few 2ds,
casting my eyes towards the bottom of the room,  I there
espied to my great satisfaction,  young Mathias,  who sat there
and never said nothing to nobody.  I asked Mr.  Hoole if it
was he.  He answered in the affirmative,  and went and
brought him to the top of the room,  where I sat in state,  to
me.  Old Blunt,  in a blunt way,  got up,  and made him take
his seat by me on the sopha; — where he stuck by me till
near the time of my going,  and kept me in one continued
roar of laughter from his down-sitting to his up-rising.  He
was so excessive comical that before I had recovered fron
one laugh,  I was shaking with another.  Of all the droll
people I have yet met with,  he is the drollest of the droll.
His puns came so quick one upon another that I can’t re-

1 This means that Mr.  Blunt the younger was a languid man of the
ton,  like Mr.  Meadows in Fanny’s  “  Cecilia.”

2  “Edwin and Eltruda,  a legendary tale,  by a young Lady,”  was
published in 1782.  Helen Maria Williams wrote much in prose and
verse.  She was among those whom Dr.  Johnson met,  but Boswell
pauses to blame her for over  [sympathy with F rench Revolutionists.
She went to live in Paris,  where her sister married a M.  Coquerel.
Thus Helen became the aunt of the well-known Protestant preacher,
Athanase Coquerel,  the elder — an unorthodox Athanasius.  There is
curious testimony to Charlotte’s correctness of observation in a passage
of one of Mary Wollstonecraft’s letters from Paris in December,  1794 —
“Miss Williams has behaved very civilly to me,  and I shall visit her
frequently,  because I rather like her,  and I meet French company at
her house.  Her manners are affected,  yet the simple goodness of her
heart continually breaks through the varnish,  so that one would be
more inclined,  at least,  I should,  to love,  than admire her.”

“The good Mr.  Hoole,  and the equally good Mr.  Sastres.” —
b anny Burney.  Mr.  Sastres was an Italian master.  See Boswell’s
“  Johnson.”

1782]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 303

member a quarter of it; — but the most comical nonsense I
have yet heard I think.  He is a young Twining!  et c'est
beaucoup dire ! 1 He quoted a thing from  “Anticipation”
that I had forgot,  of two of the speakers that piqued themselves on being always of the same opinion,  insomuch that
when they walk’d out together they boasted that they had
but one idea between them !  He asked me if I knew the
meaning of the word Disembogue  ?  and said he had heard an
explanation of it by a man who being ask’d the same question answer’d — “  Disembogue ?■ — oh — why,  Disembogue is,  if
you was to Disembogue me,  and I was to Disembogue you,
that is Disembogue “Oh,”  cried the enquirer,  “is that it 1
—very well;  ”  quite satisfied.1 2 3 He told me of a gentleman
that had a large party at his house, 'and they were strangers
to each other,  and when they were all assembled,  sat perfectly silent,  so he very deliberately walked up to one of the
gentlemen in the company,  and said.  “Please Sir to begin
the conversation !  ”  He was excessively comical in his remarks
on the footboy that waited with refreshment,  and sweetned
me a dish of tea and presented it to me with  “  Miss Burney,
nature must be recruited.”  He would fain have had me take
off my gloves to drink my tea,  quite made a point of it,  said
I should spoil  ’em,  and quite took me to task about it;—
“Miss Burney,  for shame;  you’ll ruin your gloves.” — He
took me in hand,  I had a good mind to say like Madam
Duval,  “  I desire,  Sir,  you won’t come a-ordering me in this
manner.”

One great bore was that the whole room rose upon the
entrance of every fresh person,  and he and I agreed how
tiresome it was,  and one time he absolutely held me down
that I might n’t stand up!  He said that his hair-dresser is
very fond of dressing his brother’s hair because he has such
a great quantity,  and he assured him that  “  his brother had,
without exception,  the thickest head he ever saw !  ” — He was
quite on the watch for fun,  for he would n’t even suffer me to

1 It was the best of compliments for a Burney to liken Mr.  Mathias

to the beloved Mr.  Twining of Colchester,  her father’s friend,  and her
own.

3 Charlotte originally wrote  “ Disgorge ”  in the six places where
“  Disembogue ”  now stands.  Her own hand,  or that of another,  has
changed it into  “  Disembogue ,”  to the improvement of the jest

304 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1782

blow my nose quietly,  crying, — “  Miss Burney,  for shame,  in
this hot room,  I am surprised at you !  ” — He says he laughs
sosometimes,  that he loses his strength,  and feels as if he
was seperated in the middle,  quite a wasp’s shape!

I’m sure he made me laugh  ’till I cried out for mercy.  On
my saying he would kill me — “No,”  said he,  “I’ll only
gently wound you.”  I was much pleased by a speako or two
he made,  for he said he came there with the hope of meeting
me — and,  upon my saying there was one thing I envied prodigiously,  he cried with great quickness,  “  ay,  what can that
be?  I can’t at all imagine,  I’m sure.” — I meant the having a
great command of countenance when any thing rediculous
pass’d.  Mr.  Hoole came poking up from the bottom of the
room to tell him that there was a disputation on the Italian
poets,  going forward there; 1 — but to my great surprise,  this
had no effect tho’  he is a learned clerk in Italian,  but he
kept his seat and went on with his fun with me !

One thing rather confounded me,  for he offered to call
here,  and how he will be received by the lady is rather
dubons.  He said he should come by himself,  but I charged
him to bring his sister in his hand.  About half an hour before
I came away,  Mr.  Blunt senior came and took him off to
introduce him to Miss Williams,  and then I had scarce any

1 Those who know their Boswell as they ought to do,  will remember
as one of Dr.  Johnson's best friends,  Mr.  Hoole,  a translator of Tasso
and Ariosto,  and author of  “  Cleonice,  a Tragedy.”  Southey tells us
that the first book he  “  ever possessed beyond the size of Newberry’s
gilt regiment,  more than twenty in number,  of sixpenny books,  which
were given him by Francis Newberry,  was Hoole’s translation of the
‘  Gerusalemme Liberata.’  ”  Afterwards he read Hoole’s translation of
the  “  Orlando Furioso.”  “  I do not think  (Southey wrote in 1823)  that
any accession of fortune could now give me so much delight as I then
derived from that vile version of Hoole’s.”  This was before he attained
to reading Spenser’s  “  Faery Queen”;  a little later,  he  “  felt the magic
of its verse;  the contrast between the flat couplets of a rhymester,  like
Hoole,  and.  the finest of all stanzas,  written by one who was a perfect
mastei of his art.  There was something so kindly and honest about
Mi.  Hoole,  that he may be forgiven lines for which Pope might have
given him a couplet in the Dunciad.  When he told Dr.  Johnson that
he had been born in Moorfields,  and received part of his early education
in Grub Street,  “  Sir,  said Johnson smiling,  “you have had a regular
education.”  Boswell adds,  “In reference to himself and Mr.  Hoole as
brother authours,  he often said,  ‘  Let you and I,  Sir,  go together to
Grub Street,  and eat a beef-steak together.’”

\  1782]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 305

more fun with him.  I told him he ought to write a Farce ,
and he said,  if he did,  he should dedicate it to me.  I came
away about ten o’clock,  and altogether it was an evening
such as I have had but few of in my life.

Janrr 15 th.

Proceed my Muse.  I have been very great with Mrs.
Fitz Gerald lately, — she took me down to their seat at Cook-
ham in Berkshire for a few days,  and has taken me frequently
with her to the opera,  where she has a sweet box in the third
row that holds three in front;  and I have been twice to the
play with her;  and dined with her repeatedly.  It is an
acquaintance after my own heart,  Mr.  Fitz,  her husband,  I
like vastly:  a sensible sweet tempered man,  with a good taste
for fun.  She is delightful.  She smoaks the Lady charmingly,  for she says  “  she is so fond of talking that she is certain she was one of the principal speakers at the Belle
Assemblee — She says she is sure she heard her one night.1
Mr.  Poor and the Fit’s have cut;  which I regret,  but poor
man nobody likes him that ever I met but Andrew Strange,
Bessy Kirwan,  and her father,  and i !  I have a quarrel with
him too,  tho’  he don’t know it,  and that is for his impertinence in always calling me Charlotte.  1 am afraid of telling
him of it,  because it would look prodigiously proud;- — but I
gave him a hint one night at the Opera,  when he said Charlotte.  “  Mr.  Poor is a Quaker,”  cried I,  but my courage
fail’d me at the time,  and I said it in so low a voice that I
don’t believe he heard me.  I have begun this winter happier
than ever I did another — I have had an invitation to Mrs.
Thrale’s,  and my dear father and Fanny and I went.  She is
now in town in Argyle Street.2 There was a large party there

,  1  “  La Belle Assemblee  ”  appears to have been a meeting of ladies
whom you might hear debate by paying for admission.  Susan says in
a letter to Fanny,  “  Dr.  Gillies  ....  beg’d to escort us to La Belle
Assemblee to-night.  However  /  shall beg to be excus’d going,  as I am
not very rich.— But indeed if I was,  the Opera House w'd benefit by my
being so,  not la belle Assemblee,  tho’  I am not totally divested of curiosity
concerning the latter absurd,  and disgraceful in my mind,  exibition
(sic)  neither.”

2  “Dec.  2nd  (1782).  This evening Mrs.  Thrale had a large party,
and invited Charlotte to it,  w'hich I was very glad of,  as she was much

306 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1782

— Dr.  Pepys,  and his wife,  Lady Rothes,1 old Master Pepys
and his wife — Mr.  Seward,  Sastres,  Mrs.  Ord,  the Duke de
Sanglos,  an Italian,  an elegant,  pretty,  young man.  Mr.
Selwyn,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Davenant with a long  &c.,  and Mrs.
Byron.2 I believe I had no particular enemies there for all
that knew me look’d glad to see me there.  Mrs.  Thrale
received me sweetly;  and Mr.  Seward came up to me immediately as he commonly does when I meet him to do
the honours to me in his odd way; — lugging a chair into the
middle of the room for me,  and upon my saying I could not
sit there by myself,  “oh,”  cried he,  “I’ll stand by you,  and
amuse you.”  Miss Thrale wras,  to my no small astonishment,
civil to me,  and sat by me the whole evening.  She has taken
it into her head to be civil to people this winter,  I hear.  I
had not a very entertaining evening,  but I would not but
have been there,  for the flash of the thing.

Miss Mathias’s father Mr.  Vincent Mathias,  and her uncle
James Mathias,  and Mrs.  Fitz Gerald’s father all died last
autumn.3

delighted.  My father took us both,  for I could not go to dinner,  and
we were very late.  Dear Mrs.  Thrale received me as usual,  as if I was
the first person of her company.  There was not a creature there with
whom I was not acquainted,  except the Duca di Sangro,  a Neapolitan
nobleman,  very much in fashion at present among the young ladies
comme il faut ,  with two or three of whom he has trifled not very
honourably.  He is very young and very handsome,  and very insinuating
in his address and manners.” — 7'he Diary of Mine.  D’Arblay,  vol.  ii,
p.  185.

1 Jane Elizabeth Leslie,  in her own right Countess of Rothes,  married
first,  George Raymond Evelyn,  Esq.,  secondly,  in 1772,  Lucas Pepys,
M.D.,  physician to King George III.,  and physician-general to the
army.  He was created a baronet in 1 784.

-  Mr.  Selwyn was a wealthy,  and somewhat too old,  admirer of
Fanny;  he was rudely discouraged by Mrs.  Thrale,  who had among
other fantastic projects,  one of marrying her to Mr.  Thrale’s nephew,
the spendthrift Sir John Lade,  or Ladd.  Mrs.  Byron was the wife of
the admiral  (“  Foul-weather Jack  ”)  and the poet’s grandmother.

3 Mr.  Mathias was  “the King’s Resident,”  at the then free city of
Hamburg,  when Dr.  Burney made his German tour.  We think this
must have been James Mathias,  who had a city-house of what Lmtitia
Hawkins calls  “  the most liberal substantiality.”  She and her mother
were once taken into it by accident when they drove to the door to fake
her father home.  It is diverting to read her surprise at the supper-room,
with  “  a very tolerable army of decanters,  and a set of silver candlesticks
of the best taste I ever saw  ; — and true wax.  ”

1783?]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN TURNEY 307

I army s Cecilis,  csime out last summer,  and is as rnuchs
liked and read I believe as any book ever was.  She had
^250 for it from Payne and Cadell.  Most people say she
ought to have had a thousand.  It is now going into the third
edition,  tho’  Payne owns that they printed 2000 at the first
edition,  and Lowndes told me five hundred was the common
number for a novel.1 2

Finis 1782.

Fragment VI.

\Dick Burney staying with his Bishop.— The Pantheon. —
More of Mr.  Vincent Mathias.]

[February,  1783?!

The Monday before last,  we had an agreable dinner of it
enough.  Cozen Dick was there on a visit.  Mrs.  North says,
the Bishop has a tendre for me.  He is a sweet man, — and
she a sensible,  agreable,  handsome woman.'  From thence
I went with my Father to the Pantheon,  or Panthin,  for it was
rather thinnish.  There we met Mrs.  Montague’s nephew and
heir,  a very elegant man, — who condescended to talk a great

1  “What Miss Burney received for the copyright  [of  “Cecilia”]  is.
not mentioned in the diary;  but we have observed several expressions
from which we infer that the sum was considerable.  That the safe
would be great nobody could doubt;  and Frances now had shrewd and
experienced advisers,  who would not suffer her to wrong herself.  We
have been told that the publishers gave her two thousand pounds,  and
we have no doubt that they might have given a still larger sum without
being losers.” — Macaulay.  We had long believed that rumour had
greatly magnified the sum given for the copyright of  “  Cecilia.”  Here
is proof positive that the two thousand copies printed,  were turned into
two thousand pounds paid.

2 Brownlow North,  second son of the third Baron Guildford,  was
successively Bishop of Lichfield,  Worcester,  and Winchester.  He was
half-brother to the minister,  Lord North.  It was most likely at Worcester
that he learnt to know our lively  “  Cousin Dick,”  whom we find staying;
at his London house.  Mrs.  North was Henrietta Maria,  daughter and
co-heiress of John Bannister,  Esq.

3o8 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1783?

deal to me;1 — and there we saw Dr.  Warren’s2 two sons,
who were playing at cards in the gallery; — and we stopt and
spoke to them,  and staid till Mr.  Charles Warren call’d out
Dr.  Burney,  you’ve made me lose deal.”  My father says
he told him,  since,  that he was sorry he had'nt time to come
and speak to me any more before we came away;  which I am
surprised at,  considering I was such a bad partner for him
at Mrs.  Paradise’s ball.  From the Pantheon,  we went to a
rout at Mrs.  'Thrale’s,  where I saw Mrs.  Montague to my
great satisfaction,  as I wish to see all celebrated people.

######

Wednesday,  Feb?  5th.

I drank tea at Hetty’s on Monday,  and met Miss Mathias,
and her brother,  and a very sweet evening I had ; — only too
musical.  I like some music vastly,  but Hetty and Mr.  Burney never can have enough.  Mr.  Burney was out,  and from
the time tea was over  (i.e.  from half after seven  ’till half after
ten)  she never ceased playing at top of the harpsichord,  ex-
cept'tolet Miss Mathias sit down to the instrument.  Too
much of one thing is good for no thing,  and then Hetty is
■quite mad with young Mathias and me for talking — Captain
Phillips came in to tea.  We were talking of near-sighted
people at tea,  and Mr.  Mathias said he was uncommonly
near-sighted — There was a plate of muffin on the hearth ;
‘‘  Now,”  said he,  “  do you know I could not swear that was
a muffin at this distance.”  He said that a lady that read
Livy,  ask’d him to give  [her]  a succinct account of the new
opera.  We were speaking of the blue stocking Club,  and he
ask’d me  “  where the blue stocking manufactory was !  ”  Hqw
brimfull of fun he is!  He shew’d us a pair of new gloves
that he said he had bought of the everlasting glove-maker,
who promised him they should last him twenty years;  and if
he did not like  ’em at the end of sixteen years,  he would
take  ’em again.3

1 Mathew Montagu,  M.P. ,  who edited the letters of his aunt by
-marriage,  Elizabeth Montagu.

2 A well-known physician,  who was one of the four who attended
_Dr.  Johnson in his last illness.

3 Charlotte’s friend,  Mr.  Vincent Mathias,  wras sub-treasurer to

i?83?]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 309

The near-sighted people always draw their chairs very close
to other peoples ;  he did it so palpably that I was forced two
or three times to retreat with mine.  One time he jerked
himself against my hoop,  and then,  in a voice of alarm,  cried
out,  “for G — ’s sake,  Miss Charlotte,  what is this! ”  I told
him it was a hoop,  but he would insist upon feeling it,  to
know,  he said,  whether it was not made of wicker!  and then
ask’d me,  with great gravity,  what was the original design of
the deception of a hoop?

Sally Payne desired me when I saw him next to ask him
for a story he tells of the President of his College;  so I did,
and told him I heard it was a famous story,  but I could n’t
make him tell it me,  he only laugh’d,  and said,  “  What!  when
I come into a room,  I suppose the company cry,  ‘  this is the
gentleman that tells the famous story.’”

There are two odd figures introduced in the comical opera
of 11 Convito,  that nobody can understand.  They come in
without paint,  and are dressed in white coats,  and with white
hats.  Mr.  Mathias says one of them is meant for the ghost of
an injured baker.

I have a very large muff made of the skin of a sea-otter
that Jemm brought me from King George’s Sound,  and Mr.
Mathias insisted upon it that it was a young New Zealand
bear made into a muff!  called it Miss Charlotte’s Cub, — and
when I laid  ....

Fragment VII.

[A dinner with Mr.  Vincent Mathias and his sister.]

Sunday Feb’T the twenty third by owl’s light.

[1783?]

Miss Mathias call’d on me on Thursday last and invited me
to dinner the next day,  which invitation I accepted with rapture.  The party was the family,  the agreeable Mr.  Wharton,

Queen Charlotte.  In 1782,  his uncle,  acting as his deputy,  made out
the warrant for Fanny’s appointment as keeper of the robes.  He was
Vincent,  son of Vincent Mathias,  also of Queen Charlotte’s Treasury.
His brother,  Thomas James,  was the author of  “The Pursuits of
Literature.”

310 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1783?

Sir George Farmer  (?)  son to Captain Farmer,  (?)  that lost his
life so gloriously in an engagement at sea,  and two other
men.  I had as delightful a visit as I ever had in my life ! —
young Mathias and his friend Mr.  Wharton were so excessively funny.  The former says he knows a bookbinder at
Cambridge,  that is exactly the character of Hobson.1 He
gave us some of his speeches,  and one was,  “  I’ll not be disturbed at my dinner.  When I’m about my book I’ll not be
about my beef,  and when I’m about my beef I’ll not be
about my book.  I’ll not spoil my vittals for no man.”  This
Hobsonian speech he sputter’d out just as if his mouth had
been full of beef and pudding at the time.  There was such
a succession of fun passd between him and Mr.  Wharton
that one joke drove another out of one’s head,  and I can
now hardly recollect any thing that was said,  which is very
provoking as there were more good things passd than ever I
remember at a sitting before.2 He,  Mr.  Mat:  gave an account
of a man whose first speech always is,  “I hope you’re very
well,  I thank you,  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.”  This he said was genuine.
Mr.  Mat:  had sent me word by his sister that he intended
doing himself the pleasure of calling and he had at it again on
Friday,  so I put it upon his coming to see the Observatory,
and said to him  “  But shall you come and see the Observatory?  ” 3  “I shall come and see you,”  cried he,  “  hang the
Observatory.  I shall enquire for Miss Charlotte Ann,  (shall
I say Ann,  or Anna?)  Burney,  and if they say she is not at
home,  I shall not go in.”  Mr.  Mat:  and his friend Wharton
repeated some lines from one of the old English poets,  alternately,  a line a piece;  which had the most delightfully
rediculous effect — They are well match’d.  At the fag end
of the evening,  when they were all gone,  Miss Mathias and
her brother both fell upon me to tell them what I had written.
Something they were certain.  This they said bonnement ,  but
I chose to take it ironically,  and said writing was my fort.

1 Hobson is a tradesman in Fanny’s  “  Cecilia.”

2 We suspect Mr.  Wharton to have been Richard,  son of the poet
Gray’s friend,  Dr.  Wharton,  M.D.,  of Old Park,  in the county of
Durham.  If so,  he was a barrister,  several times Tory member for the
city of Durham,  and sometime Chairman of Ways and Means,  and Joint
Secretary of the Treasury.

3 Sir Isaac Newton’s observatory,  in,  or upon,  Dr.  Burney’s house.

1783?]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 311

“  Ay,”  cried Mr.  Mathias,  with a significant look,  “  There’s;
many a true word spoke in jest.  I mean what I say — What
have you written  ?  ”

“An epigram or two on Miss poll tod  ”  (sic).1  “That’s
very possible,”  cried he,  “  but I want to know what besides.”

We playd with the conversation cards,  and to be sure I
did n’t laugh  ?  I never yet heard .

Fragment VIII.

[Mr.  Vincent Mathias  “in an abyss of literature.”]

[I783?J

******

perfectly a gentleman,  and says she thinks he has a very
pleasing voice;  which he has.  Heaskd me what I had done
with his books that he gave me?  I told him that I kept
them in my bureau,  and he was pleased to say that I did them
a great deal of honour,  and added that he wishd he could
have the ransacking of my bureau.  He is always suspecting
me of being an authoress.  He said that when he was at our
house that night he felt himself in  “an abyss of literature.”
#####%

delight except in the dear Garrick’s.  The Lady in her usual
spightful style pretends to forget the names of all my friends,
as being unworthy a place in her memory,  and calls Miss
Mathias nothing but Miss Thingum ,  and him the little black
man.  He said he should call again ,  but I dare say he won’t.
He has a great aversion to gloves,  and is always railing at
me for wearing them.  He said he supposed I was fond of a
line in the Bath Guide.2

1 See page 302.

2  “  Come,  but don’t forget the Gloves,
Which,  with all the smiling Loves,
Venus caught young Cupid picking
From the tender breast of Chicken  ;
Little Chicken worthier far

Than the Birds of Juno’s car.

Soft as Cytherea’s Dove,

Let thy skin my skin improve :

312

LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1783?

******

rather in a glow,  as they always are with laughing;  this Mr.
Mathias observd,  and said,  “I look’d like Thais.” — '‘Why?'’
said I,  “  I hope I shall not set any thing on fire.”  “  I won’t
answer for that,”  said he —

We had’nt their footman to go with us,  and he said  “  his
man was let,  or hindered from coming.”  We had no company but them two  ....

then,  that’s one comfort;  he was taking hold of my gloves,
and they were crumpled and creesd,  as gloves commonly arc
when on,  and I said it was the wrinclcs in my flesh,  upon
which he stroakd my glove down and cried,  “  Its not proud
flesh tho :  ” — but he did provoke me more than I almost
ever was provoked.  My gloves,  like my neighbours’,  are
commonly a little soild with moisture in the fingers,  and I
left my gloves on my chair when I got up to go nearer the
harpsichord,  and he seized them,  and began examining the
fingers’  ends — How mad I was ! — I was obliged to pursue
him all round the room for them,  and had quite a battle with
him in endeavouring to snatch them back again,  but he was
[deaf]  to my entreaties,  and all I could do,  he would insist —*  1

*****  *

Thou by Night shah grace my arm,

And by Day shalt teach to charm.”

The New Bath Guide.  Letter III. :  “The Birth of Fashion.”

1 We find Fanny confirming the judgement of Charlotte,  upon Mr.
Vincent Mathias.  She writes at the end of 1786,  “I think I have
omitted to mention,  in its place,  Mr.  Mathias.  My first official visit from
Mr.  Gabriel  (uncle to our,  or rather Charlotte’s,  Mr.  Mathias)  I remember telling ;  but my second quarterly meeting was with the nephew.
Greatly to my advantage was the change.  He really deserved our
Charlotte’s good opinion in its fullest possible extent.  He stayed with
me more than an hour,  though he came only for a minute ;  but so much
he found to say,  and all so lively and well worth hearing,  that I was
pleased with his stay,  and encouraged him to lengthen it.  His first
recommendation with me was a secret pleasure in receiving a favourite

of our dear Charlotte . If you will not laugh at me too much,  I

will also acknowledge that I liked Mr.  Mathias all the more for observing him as awkward and embarrassed how to present me my
salary as I felt myself in receiving it.”— -Diary of Mine.  D'Arblay,
vol.  iii.  p.  257.

1784]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 313

Letter III.

From Charlotte Burney to Mrs.  Phillips  (Susan Burney),
at Mrs.  Hamilton’s,  Chesington,  near Kingston,  Surry.

[Endorsed Janr 16th,  1 784. 3

....  I suppose Bessy K[irvvan]  either has,  or will,  write
you a succinct account of Mrs.  P’s ball on Twelfth Night,  so
I shall only give a few nanny goats of it — It was a very pleasant evening — There were eight couple,  and more gentlemen
than ladies,  which I think was very proper,  as it made the
ladies of more consequence.  There were but two good dancers
among the gentlemen,  Mr.  Smith,  and Mr.  Frieri,  a Portuguese,  whom you have seen at the K[irwans].  He is a
scholar of Le Picq’s.  They mixed the fans together,  and
drew for partners with them,  the first dance or two,  and then
changed partners every dance or two.  I say they,  for I was
destined,  some how or other,  to dance with Mr.  Smith the
whole evening,  for he askd me to dance with him as soon as
I went in,  and took it in his head to contrive for me to dance
with him every dance.  I don’t know how he managed it,  but
he and Mrs.  P.  caballed together about it,  and so it was. —  I
didn’t much care,  for unless I had danced with Mr.  Frieri,  I
had as lieve have danced with him as any of the others.
Mr.  Planta 1 of the Museum was one of the dancers,  and Dick,
and some more whom I did’nt take the trouble to enquire
the names of.  Miss Kirwans and Miss Planta,  Mrs.  Northy,
painted like Agujari,  in a balloon hat,  and Mrs.  P.  and her
two daughters,  were all the fair females 2 that danced.  But
the behaviour of the lady,  who had one of her tea cups broke
by the all knowing Pflanta?]  was really too rediculous  ! — She
took a great fancy to dance with Mr.  Frieri,  who is acquainted

1 The Royal Kalenda?  puts Mr.  Joseph Planta,  F.R.S.,  at the head
of the Under Librarians of the British Museum.  He had also  “the
care of the MSS.  and Medals.”

2 This is a quotation from Mr.  Blakeney,  whom Fanny met when
with the Thrales.  He spoke of ladies as  “  the fair females.”

3i4 LETTERS AND JOURNAL 1.1784

with our friends in Newman St.1 and after the two first
dances,  engaged the eldest of them for his partner.  As soon
as he had gone down one dance with her,  he engaged her
for the next,  and immediately after,  up came Mrs.  Teacup
and asked him to dance the next dance with her!  He looked
rather confused,  and said he was engaged to Miss Kirwan.

Oh,  never mind,”  replied she,  “  you can go down this one
dance with me!'  He excused himself as politely as he could,
but  [she]  told him she had got another partner for Miss Kirwan,  and that he must go down that dance with her;  so he
submitted, — but as soon as it was over,  he went and secured
Miss Kirwan for the next ,  which he had no sooner done,
than Mrs.  Teacup flew up to him a second time,  with a request that he would go down that next dance with her eldest
daughter! — He again pleaded a pre-engagement,  but all in
vain,  for she stuck to her request,  altho’  he repeatedly told
her he was engaged! — being a foreign r,  she thought to impose upon him I suppose,  for she said he must go down that
dance with Miss P.  for it was customary!  so he again submitted to be led a dance against his will! — He then secured
Miss Kirwan for the next,  and as soon as that was over,  for
the next,  but he might have spared himself the trouble,  for
before he began the second,  Mrs.  P.  came up to him again
with  “Mr.  Frieri,  who do you dance this dance with? ” —
“  With Miss Kirwan,  Ma’am.” — “No,  but you must dance this
pretty dance with me.” — “  Why,  really,  Ma’am,”  replied he
in great confusion,  “I am engaged to Miss Kirwan;  she has
promised to dance this dance with me.”  “  Oh,  never mind
that,”  answered shewith the most noble perseverance,  “I have
got another partner for Miss Kirwan,  and I insist upon your
dancing this one dance with me.— I say I insist upon it — I’ll
never forgive you if you don’t!  ” — So she again carried her
point.  The partner she gave Miss Kirwan as a substitute for
Mr.  Frieri who was the best dancer in the room,  was a German
doctor,  a thick,  squob,  square man of fifty,  with a club 2 as
thick as my two hands,  and two squinney curls,  and a broad
grin on his face,  that set every one a grinning that lookd at

'  The Misses Kirwan,  of whom we know nothing except that Fanny
says they were  “  sweet girls.”

2 A club of hair.

1784]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 315

him,  and so bad a dancer that he only ran about among
them all,  and took his chance whether he was right or
wrong!  Poor Miss Kirwan was monstrously provoked,  as
well she might! — About one o’clock Mr.  Friarey was missing.  “Now”  says Mrs.  P.  “I’ll be crucified if Mr.  Frieri
hasn’t made his escape!  Miss P.  go down and see if he is in
the parlour with Mr.  P.,  and bring him up again.”  Miss P.
would fain have avoided the task,  but Mrs.  P.  said she insisted upon it,  so away the poor girl went,  and presently
returned,  followed by Mr.  Frieri,  who had got on his great
coat to go,  but that was a trifle,  Mrs.  P.  insisted on his
taking another dance,  which she did him the favour to make
him go down with Mrs.  Den,  an old harridan — so that the
poor man was absolutely persecuted! 1 The lookers on were
General Paoli,2 to whom I was introduced for the second
time,  Dr.  Blagden,  who was too elegant to undergo the

1 This ill-mannered hostess is called  “Mrs.  P.”  throughout this
letter.  We believe her to have been Mrs.  Paradise,  an American,  whose
husband was an Anglo-Greek.  J.  T.  Smith tells,  among other amusing
anecdotes of Mary Moser,  the Royal Academician  (afterwards Mrs.
Lloyd),  that  “she now and then gave the retort-courteous to Mrs.
Paradice,  a woman she detested,  and who once allowed her passion
to overpower her good sense,  of which in general she had a pretty good
share;  which overflowing of her gall took place at Mrs.  Nollekens’s
table when Dr.  Johnson was present.  Mrs.  Paradice’s figure was so neat
and small,  that Mrs.  Lloyd called her a sylph.  ‘  Better to be so,’  rejoined Mrs.  P.,  ‘than to be as dull-looking and blind as a mole.’
‘  Mole as I am,’  said Mrs.  Lloyd,  ‘  I never added to the weight of
Paul Jodrell’s phaeton.’  ‘Fie!  fie!  my dears,’  exclaimed the Doctor,
‘no sparring;  off with your mufflers,  and fight it fairly out !  ’  At this
time Miss Welch  (who communicated this anecdote to me)  frowned at
Mrs.  Nollekens for suffering her house to be made the seat of discord  ;
and that lady particularly requested Mrs.  Paradice,  for whom she entertained no high respect,  to suspend the altercation,  adding that  ‘such
remarks were not altogether lady-like.’  ”

Miss Moser,  R.A.,  had the best wit and temper of the two combatants.  She wrote in 1805 to Mrs.  West,  the wife of the American-
born President of the Royal Academy:  “I am glad that our old
acquaintance,  Mrs.  Paradice,  got safe to America,  although she and I
used to say uncivil things sometimes to each other,  I should have been
sorry any harm had happened to her,  as she has many worthy qualities  ;
in consideration of which,  when she is out of my sight,  I like her very
well,  and can think of her with commiseration.”

*  Pasquale de Paoli  (“  Corsorum olim supremus Dux et Moderator”),
born in Corsica,  1726,  died near London in 1807.  He was Captain-
General of the Corsicans in their revolt,  and godfather of Napoleon

3i 6 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1784

fatigue of dancing,  the Venetian Resident,  and two or three
more;  to my great joy Mr.  Seward was not one,  tho’  he was
invited.  We drew Twelfth Cake,  but the names were very
dull — we got home about two in the morning.  I have made
a new acquaintance within this fortnight,  with a young Counsellor and his wife,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Shadwell, — agreable people
— He is one of the most amiable looking men I ever saw,
and she is a very pleasing cultivated woman.1 A little  [here
a word has been torn away with the seal.]  I met them at
the Hoole’s,  and dined,  drank tea,  and supped there last
week,  and met the delightful Greek Talamas,  he and I are
great friends.2 I met him again on Monday last,  at the
Hoole’s,  and sat by him dinner and supper,  and vastly entertaining he was!  There was an immense party between
dinner and supper,  thirty five people,  among them were
Romney the painter,  to whom I had the pleasure of being
introduced,  and a very pleasing man he seems to be!3 Dr.
Kippis,4 Miss Williams the poetess,  Captain Romney,  Mr.

Buonaparte.  In September,  1889,  the remains of Paoli were removed
from St.  Pancras Churchyard to the private chapel of the house in which
he was born in Corsica.

1 The editor has been favoured with the following note : —

“  Lancelot Shadwell,  born in 1750,  of Lincoln’s Inn,  barrister-at-law;
an eminent conveyancer and real property lawyer.  Married in 1776
Elizabeth Sophia Whitmore,  sister of William Whitmore,  of Apley,
Salop.  Father of Sir Lancelot Shadwell,  late Vice-Chancellor of England.  Died 1815.  A portrait of Mr.  Shadwell,  painted about 1780,  by
Romney,  and a miniature,  of somewhat earlier date,  are in the possession of his great grandson and present representative,  C.  L.  Shadwell,
of Oriel College,  Oxford.”

2 We are told by Miss Hawkins,  that  “There was to be met in the
literary society of London,  about the year 1779,  at Sir Joseph Banks’s,
Mr.  Hastings’,  and Mr.  Hoole’s,  and houses of such elegant reception,  a
native of Jerusalem,  of the name of Telamas,  whose father had been a
dragoman at Constantinople.  He himself was an Asiatic of the finest
race ;  and had been sent hither with overland dispatches from Lord
Pigot at Madras.  ...  In his dress he adopted a style combining the
Turkish costume with that of this country.  He was a man of thought
and reflection ;  and he had made reading the eight volumes of Buffon’s
Natural History the amusement of a voyage to India.

3 George Romney,  1734-1802.

4 Dr.  Kippis was a presbyterian minister,  who,  as Malone writes in a
note on Boswell’s  “Johnson,”  “having given to the publick the first
five volumes of a new edition of the Biographia Britannica,  between the
years 1778 and 1793,  died in 1795.”

1784]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY  *  317

Romney’s brother,  the Kirwans,  and Captain Phillips, —
“  ring the bell for some coals  ”  ’—my father,  Dr.  Rose,1 2
Charles,  Dick,  Mr.  G.  Blunt,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Shadwell,  Count
Alfieri,3 Miss Howarth’s  .....  and Mr.  Paradice.4 I had
a good flashey evening,  for Talamas stood behind my chair
talking part of the time,  and as soon as he  .crossd over to
speak to Mrs.  Shadwell,  Captain Romney took his place.
Mr.  Hoole’s brother asked Talamas  “What the husbands
did in his country when their wives behaved ill.”  “Why”
replied he,  “  some ladies arc very deceitful,  and behave so
charming to their sweethearts before the marriage,  and do
them sweet eyes ,  but after the marriage they forget to behave
well,  but in my country when that is the case the husband
send her away,  and take another,  for if I marry,  I want a
sweet companion,  I marry a wife,  I do not marry a devil !  ”
He was speaking of savages and barbarians,  and he said
that in Constantinople there were a great many barbars
indeed !

1 This seems to be a family pleasantry,  but could it be Susan’s
Captain,  or  “King Philip”  as Charlotte called him?

2 Dr.  Rose,  the reviewer and master of the Chiswick School,  had
become father-in-law to his assistant,  Charles Burney the younger,  in
June,  1783.

3 An Italian poet might well be met at the house of the translator of
Tasso and Ariosto ;  but if this was Vittorio Alfieri,  Macaulay’s  “  haughty,
ardent,  and voluptuous nobleman,  who fought with Lord Ligonier in
Hyde Park,  and robbed the Pretender of his Queen,”  it is strange that
Charlotte merely gives his name.  Still,  she was but ten years old in
1771,  the year of the scandal and duel.  It is known that Alfieri visited
England afterwards.

4 In a note by Boswell to his  “  Life of Dr.  Johnson,”  he states that
John Paradise,  Esq.,  is  “son of the late Peter Paradise,  Esq.,  his
Britannick Majesty’s Consul at Salonica,  in Macedonia,  by his lady,  a
native of that country.  He studied at Oxford,  and has been honoured
by that University with the degree of LL.D.  Lie is distinguished not
only by his learning and talents,  but by an amiable disposition,  gentleness of manners,  and a very general acquaintance with well-informed
and accomplished persons of almost all nations.  ”

Boswell’s note is appended to a letter which Dr.  Johnson,  within two
months of his death,  wrote to Mr.  Paradise,  in which Johnson says,  “I
hope you think better of me than to imagine it possible for me to forget
you,  whose kindness to me has been too great and too constant not to
have made its impression upon a harder breast than mine.

Johnson hopes that  “Mr.  Paradise’s lady,  and the young charmers
are well.”

3 1 8 LETTERS AND JOURNAL  [1786?

Thursday night.  Fanny,  to my utter amazement,  has just
told me that she has not had time to write a word to-day to
you about Jemm or anything else.  So in case you should
not have seen the newspapers,  which is all the intelligence
we have,  I just tell you,  my dear girl,  that there has been an
engagement in Madras Roads,  between the French and
English fleets just before the news of the peace arrived,  and
Jemm’s ship1 was in it,  but not one man killed in his ship.
Love to Captain P.  The bellman is waiting.

Yours most affectionately,

C.  B.

Letter IV.

[Mrs.  Francis to Miss Burney.]

[Charlotte in her wedded state.]

[After 1785.]

The play,  and farce were both decently perform’d,  enough
to give us a good deal of pleasure.2

Monday,  July 14th.

We all went to the play again last Thursday.  The New
Peerage,  and a Harliquin piece.  The latter was as well as
could be expected.  The overture was composed,  or rather
patch’d,  borrow’d,  stolen and flagrantly crib'd by Mr.  Rivet,
one of the band.— It consisted of a set of old tunes,  and ti
turn ti of his own between each tune.  The most execrable
composition I ever had the honour of hearing.  At the end

1  ^  U81 James Burney was appointed Captain of the Bristol  (fifty
guns).  He joined Admiral Sir Edward Hughes in the East Indies,  and
t^e w*th Suffren.  The last action of the war was
o Cuddalore,  on the 20th June,  1783.  Jem is said in the  “National
lography to have returned in ill-health,  made no application for a
sup,  and never served again;  but he did make a vigorous application
or a  ‘uSate  °f thirty-two guns to Lord Chatham,  in 1790,  when there
was a prospect of a war with Spain,  and led Fanny to approach the
CJueen in his favour.  But all was in vain,  and  “  Burney of the Bristol  ”
never got another ship.

This is a portion only of a letter.

r 786  ?]  OF CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY 319

A one of the tunes,  Benjamin la Trobe gave the signal,  tho'
it was in the middle of the overture,  and set up a violent clap
and encore! — The extreme absurd and ludicrous effect that
this had,  nothing but your having been of the party could
testify.  The performers went blundering on without seeming

to heed it.  “Keep never heeding.” — There was a very . 1

company of a washing week when I can avoid it,  for the
maid's sake.  Mr.  and Mrs.  Browne came yesterday,  and
stay  ’till Saturday.  He is a minor-canon of Norwich Cathedral,  and one of my prime favourites, — a very superior
man indeed, — an excellent companion,  and a fine singer.2
Sir William Jerningham call’d here last week and chatted
■  with La T[robe]  and me.  Francis was gone to see a sick
man.  He is a very elegant tonish man.3 Sunday last Mr.
and Mrs.  Garret dined here from London.  He is a friend
of Bros,  a tea dealer,  getting rich,  and says  “  He shall
never let his sons learn dancing,  as it would spoil them
for tradesmen.”  Saturday La T[robe]  and the rest gave us
a ball with twenty couple, — a very merry one.  I have seen
Mr.  Wyndham but once,  and then by accident.  He was
very civil in his bow.

My New coloured linnen gown has been prodigiously admired.  You have seen it my love.  It has a green ground,
and medallions.

Sunday,  Aug1 10th.  I yesterday received a very clever and
kind letter from the eldest La Trobe with my beloved Fanny’s

1 These plays must,  we think,  have been acted at Norwich,  Aylsham
being then a tiny town about midway on the coach road between Norwich and Cromer  ;  a characteristic little Norfolk town,  with no side
pavement,  but the flints of the road pavement carried up to the house-
walls on either side.  This is a recollection of some years after 1850,
when a wheel came off the Cromer coach close by Aylsham,  and a
party were detained at a little inn in Aylsham,  late in the evening,  until
another coach came from Norwich.  So primitive was the inn,  that it
provided no sugar-tongs for its guests.

2 Mr.  Browne we suspect to have been the father of a person who
w'rote,  under her real Christian names of  “Charlotte Elizabeth,”  very
furious ultra-Protestant pamphlets and volumes.  See her autobiography.

3 This  “  very elegant tonish man  ”  was the eldest brother of a  “  very
elegant tonish”  poet,  Edward Jerningham,  who appears in fanny s
Bath diary of 1780.  See Appendix IV.

II.

L

320 CHARLOTTE ANN BURNEY  [17S6?

direction.1 I shall therefore lose no time in forwarding this.
Believe me my dearest girl,  your,  with the warmest affection,

Tatlanthe.

P.S.— I shall not send you any more stchoff  ’till I hear
from you of the receipt of this.2

1 Boswell speaks of  “the learned and venerable Mr.  Latrobe,”  a
Moravian minister.  He  “helped Dr.  Burney in German.”  These two
professional musicians were his sons — one was a clarionet player.

a Charlotte here quotes her father's little pleasantries on his German
friends’  pronunciation of the word  “stop.”  For instance,  on the 20th
of July,  1778,  Fanny,  while at Chesington,  had a letter on  “  Evelina”
from Dr.  Burney; — (“the kindest,  sweetest letter in the world,”)  in
which he said,  “  Thy schtoff reads better the second time,  than the first,
and thou hast made thy old father laugh and cry at thy pleasure.”

APPENDIX

I.

[This letter is given to show the taste of the time.  It is as
good in its way as that curiosity among old guide-books,  the
catalogue  (as it may be called)  of the temples,  and other decorative objects at Stowe.  Horace Walpole wrote,  in 1779,  to Lady
Ossory,  “  If our trade decays,  we have new handycrafts at
Turnham Green;  'I read on a large board, — Mamcfacture of
Temples He himself was an amateur manufacturer of Gothic
cloisters and oratories.]

[Mrs.  Rishton to Miss Burney.]

[Sir Richard Colt Hoare’s Grounds at Stourhead.]

Froome,  April the 13th  [1773].

My dear Fanny,

I know not whether I owe you a letter or not but as I
think I shoud be guilty of a great piece of rudeness in sending a frank directed to you,  and no letter — so without anything to say or one grain of sense in my noddle I intend
filling three sheets  (read sides)  of paper — so to begin and
give a little account of my self — I have been near three
weeks at Froome with my Bold Face 1 — and have spent my
time very agreably — we have bought a new Whiskey and
horse and sold my Julia,  and Martin has very often the complaisance to let me drive him,  a thing I am remarkably fond
of — We went yesterday to see Mr.  Hoare’s 2 house and

1 This is most likely a quotation of what some one had said of her
demeanour after her concealed marriage was made known.

2 Mr.  Hoare,  afterwards Sir Richard Colt IToare,  Bart. :  wrote the
“Ancient History of Wiltshire,”  and other works.  His  “Modern
History of Wiltshire  ”  was published after his death.

APPENDIX I

322

Garden at Storehead  [Stourhead],  a place I think the best
worth seeing of any seat I ever beheld — it has every advantage Art or Nature Can bestow— Imagine to yourself the
Most beautiful romantic Country there is in the West of
England Commanding the most delightful prospects and
where three Hundred Thousand pounds on the most moderate Calculation has been spent in the Improvements — The
River Store  [Stour]  rises in one part of the gardens and is so
beautifully Contrived as to come gushing out of an Urn on
which Neptune is reclining in his grotto — Which is Composed of the most beautiful Spas and Fossils.  There are
several Apartments in this grotto,  and Such a Cold Bath
— with an Invocation to the Nymph of the place.  There is
a palladion  [Palladian]  Bridge over a most beautiful piece of
Water — a temple of the Sun situated on a very great imminence and so Contrived that the top which is a Window
looks like the rays of phoebus and seems to enlighten the
Temple — there is a pantheon filled with very Costly Statues
of all the heathen gods and goddesses— on pedestals of Siena
Marble — many of them Cost  £112 — there is a temple of
Flora — a beautiful Turkish Tent such as Sultans take out
when they go to war — a Prodigious fine root-house with
Several Cells intended as a hermitage a lamp Always Burning,  hour glass,  human bones,  and several inscriptions,  there
are hundred others disposed about the gardens which are of
such amazing Extent that they are not at all Crowded —
there are mighty pretty inscriptions etc — the House is very
well worth seeing many very Beautiful things and fine pictures — after dinner we had the most delightful ride on a
terrace that surrounds all his Estates — to Alfred’s Tower —
which is about 3 Miles and  &c from the house- — this tower
is 152 feet high and is seen more than 50 miles off — there
is this Inscription on it — on this Spot — King Alfred the
Great Erected his Standard against Danish Invaders he
formd — laws and raisd a Militia he is Justly Calld the Father
of his Country as he laid the first basis for English Monarchy
and Liberty  (It was words to this Effect tho’  better Ex-
pressd)  we mounted this beautiful building which forms
three Angles — and three Towers up one of which runs a
winding Staircase — and brings you up to a Stupendious
height it is all built of New Brick and portland Stone and

APPENDIX II

323

has hot Cost so little as 20,000.  After that we drove thro’
the most divine Winding Walks to the Convent — which is
built exactly in the Monastic Stile — and pictures of Nuns of
all the different Orders of France- — I never saw anything
prettier in my Life but to shew you how little the Owner of
these things Enjoys them — the Gardiner told us Mr.  Hoare
had never been tcxlhe Top of Alfred’s Tower — or had been
to the Convent.  I spent a Most happy day.

[To complete this sketch,  let us give some extracts from a
letter written by Mrs.  Boscawen to Mrs.  Delany,  ten years later,
from an inn at Warminster.  Mrs.  Boscawen describes herself
as  “  having been leading a wayfaring life.”  She has gone from
her daughter the Duchess of Beaufort’s seat at Badminton to
see Lady Weymouth at Longleat  (the very finest place she ever
saw in her life) ;  then to call on Dr.  Ross,  the Bishop of Exeter,
at Frome.  She spent all yesterday 1 at Mr.  Hoare’s,  and was
lucky in a fine day to sit,  and tarry,  at the different stations.  It
has many pretty opera-scenes in it,  but is not in the style of
Longleat.  There is an immense high tower built at the extremity
of his plantation,  called Alfred’s Tower,  on a very high ground
which overlooks the whole country;  256 steps to the top of it.
There is a convent in Mr.  Hoare's woods which Mrs.  Delany
would like very well.  It has fine painted glass in the windows,
and a picture which belonged to one of the Abbots of Glastonbury
Abbey,  which shuts up with doors,  but perhaps,  after all,  it is
only an imitation.  To-day she has been,  with her daughter,
Mrs.  Lewson,  to see Mr.  Beckford’s Fonthill,  where Mrs.  Delany
“  woud have been provoked to see fine prints of Titian’s pell mell
with drawings of Capali  .  .  .  The mixture of good and bad
pictures was hideous .”]

II.

Lady Hales and Miss Coussmaker.

A few letters from Lady Hales,  and her daughter,  Miss Coussmaker,  to Susan and Fanny Burney,  have been preserved,  of
which it may divert some people to read an abstract.  In the
first,  which was written to Susan before the authorship of
“  Evelina  ”  was known,  Miss Coussmaker adjures her dearest
Susy to read that novel,  but hopes that it will not have such an

1  “  Ye 25th Septembr,  1783-”

APPENDIX II

324

effect on her,  as it has on herself — “The last volume has almost
distracted me.  I have never been well since.  Some part of the
discovery is so tragical,  that I declare it worked me as much as
the death of Desdemona,  or Belvidera.  .  .  .  And how mortifying it is to think that so few,  nay,  I hardly know any,  Lord
Orvilles,  or Evelinas are to be found,  and so many Sir Clement
Willoughbys.”  She prefers Evelina and Lord Orville to St.  Preux
and Julie,  though the latter seem more natural.  She would delight in bringing up her dear little sister,  Caroline Hales,  in
“  that same simplicity as Evelina.”

In the next,  Lady Hales tells Susan  “  what a sly little thing
you was to set me a-reading unaware,”  but adds she was not
surprised when she learnt the  ?iame of the author ,  as  “  there was
something in the stile and manner that made me think of your
family.”  She had thought that  “Evelina might be a child of the
head of your house!”  to whom she encloses a  “  paquet on a
family matter,  having a high opinion of his judgment,  she means
to profit by it,”  but her daughter  “  Kitty is not to be told of this,
as she is young.”  Susan favours Lady Hales with her  “  amusing
company”  at Howletts,  her seat in Kent.  They drive to Deal,
“  a sad smuggling town,”  where Lady Hales1 buys  “  run goods,”
and writes to ask F anny to  ‘  ‘  accept a very small part of her
purchase,”  namely,  a piece of chintz.  Fanny’s draught of her
“  elegant”  answer to Lady Hales is preserved.  She has tried
her pen with the first line of the song,  “  When first I saw thy
face.”  She has also to answer a letter of compliment from Kitty
Coussmaker,  and a draught is made,  in which Fanny writes
thus of  “  Evelina” :  “  I thought her only admirers would be
school-girls,  and destined her to no nobler inhabitation than a
circulating library.”  Lady Hales had said to Susan,  towards
the end of the letter which we have quoted,  that her sister Fanny
could  “bear fame with her usual gentleness and meekness.”
With meekness and discretion Fanny answers the heartfelt
praise of Lady Hales and her daughter ;  it is only to Susan,  and
herself,  that she indulges in the most natural joy at her own
success.

Letters from Lady Hales and Miss Coussmaker on  “  Cecilia”
have also been kept.  They are addressed to Susan  (then Mrs.
Phillips)  from Howletts,  on the 24th of July,  1782.  As they give
glimpses of life in Kent,  a few details are copied from them.
Lady Hales writes that the Archbishop’s visiting his diocese
adds to her  “  round of engagements,  as Mrs.  Cornwallis always
accompanies his Grace.  To-morrow,  Sir Horace Mann2 begins

1 The letter is dated Septr 7th,  1778.

2 The nephew,  and heir of Horace Walpole’s friend,  Sir Horace
Mann.

APPENDIX III

325

his fetes by a great cricket-match between his Grace of Dorset
and himself,  to which all this part of the world will be assembled.
.  .  .  Many out of compliment to Sir Horace,  who is never so
happy as when he has all the world about him,  and,  as he gives
a very magnificent ball and supper on Friday,  it would not be so
polite to attend that,  without paying a compliment to his
favourite amusement.  .  .  .  Last night,  I had a nice quiet little
concertino in my dressing-room — Lady Bridges,  Mrs.  and Miss
Milles were,  with others,  of the party.  .  .  .  ‘  Cecilia  ’  sends us
into people’s houses with our eyes swelled out of our heads with
weeping.  We take the book into the carriage,  and read and
weep.  .  .  .  During Cecilia’s delirium,  anyone coming into the
room would have been surprised.  .  .  .  The children wept and
sobbed alcud ;  my heart was bursting with agony !  and we all
seemed in despair.”  Miss Coussmaker encloses a letter in her
mother’s franked cover.  She tells Susan that they all kept their
resolution of not reading  “Cecilia”  apart, — or dipping; — indeed
they locked it up !  They are longing to dispatch dinner,  to
finish it that fight.  They had not felt so much since their wise
scheme of reading  “  Venice Preserved”  [aloud].  Does not Susan
recollect that?  Lady Hales has said that she has  “  such a Mrs.
Harrell m herneighbourhood,”and Miss Coussmaker thinks Lord
Brudenell a little like Mr.  Delville,  and asks Susan if she  “  did
not immediately find out the strongest likeness for the excellent
Dr.  Lyster?  Sir Richard Jebb would have said word for word
the same.  I would give something to erase  ‘upon my honour!’
and put in  ‘faith,’  (which is Sir Richard’s characteristic expression,)  in a speech which Dr.  Lyster makes,  in the copy Sir
Richard will have,  to make him know himself but she will tell
him what she thinks,  the next time she sees him.

III.

[Mr.  Crisp’s Tragedy,  “Virginia.”]

[A portion of a Letter from Mrs.  Gast to Miss Burney.]

My dear and amiable Fannikin,

Your much valued friend,  and my beloved brother,  in
his last illness,  said something,  which on reflection appears
to me as a hint,  that he wish’d the scatter’d fragments of his
Virginia might ultimately fall into your hands.  The only
compleat and perfect copy of his play,  as himself approved,
was got into some hands,  from whom he never could recover

APPENDIX III

326

it.  The then manager  (it was thought from  - -1)  would

not suffer the too much approved,  and greatly admired performance,  to be acted as in its pristine state,  but insisted on
many alterations,  greatly against the author’s judgement,  and
inclination,  which however he was necessitated to comply
with,  if he would ever have it brought on the stage.  I have
neither time nor capacity to select all the beautiful passages
that deserve to be kept from the blotted papers that had
better be destroy’d.  But as I would not omit even in the
most trifling instance,  doing whatever I thought he wish’d,  I
send you the whole;  which you will please to dispose of as
you think proper,  selecting what you think worth preserving,
and destroying the rest.

April 27,  1784.

Your ever affectionate

Sophia Gast.

This was the packet which reached us apparently in the same
state as when it was seen by Fanny in 1784.  The copy of
“Virginia”  was  (as Mrs.  Gast wrote)  incomplete.  Those scenes
in which no changes had been made were wanting.  It was a
bundle of mere draughts of scenes,  some of which had been thrice
or four times copied,  as corrections came into the mind of Mr.
Crisp,  or were suggested to him by others.  There were memoranda in the manuscript of letters to and from Lord Deerhurst
(afterwards sixth Earl of Coventry)  upon the tragedy,2 and of
Garrick’s suggestions as to alterations in it.  Garrick’s hints as
to verbal changes were few,  and chiefly technical.  They referred,
not to the quality of the blank verse,  but to the means of bringing
it into the best condition for the actor to utter with good effect.
But there were also traces of a more than verbal alteration.
There seemed to have been a change of structure in the first act,
if not elsewhere  ;  at any rate,  there was a tentative change.  Mr.
Crisp had shrunk from no labour;  nay,  with his own pen,  had
declared that this alteration of structure could easily be made.

1 Fanny has concealed this word by scores of her pen.  It appears
to have been  “jealousy.”

2 Lord Deerhurst wrote to Mr.  Crisp,  concerning  “Virginia,”  in 1748
and 1749.  He did not succeed his father in the earldom of Coventry
until 1750.  This shows that the play was five or six years,  more or less,
in hand before it was acted in 1754.

APPENDIX III 327

There is no sign of anything but gratitude to Garrick in the
manuscript,  or in the  “advertisement”  to the printed play.1 If
Mr.  Crisp had any sore feelings with regard to Garrick’s treatment of his tragedy,  they seem to have been after-feelings;
perhaps only after-thoughts.  With his own pen he has,  unconsciously,  cleared himself from the reproach of falling out with
Garrick because of  “  Virginia.”  This is in a letter to Fanny of
the year 1779.  She had been urged into writing a comedy,  which,
in the joint judgement of her father and of Mr.  Crisp,  was a failure.  To what she has called the  “  severe criticism  ”  of Mr.  Crisp,
she replied with a good-humoured meekness of submission which
drew from him an affectionate answer,  deprecating his own frankness of utterance.

“This sincerity I have smarted for,  and severely too,  ere now;
and yet,  happen what will,  (where those I love are concern’d)  I
am determin’d never to part with it.  All the world  (if you will
believe them)  profess to expect it,  to demand it,  to take it kindly,
thankfully,  &c.,  &c. ;  and yet how few are generous enough to
take it as it is meant!  It is imputed to envy,  ill-will,  a desire of
lowering,  and certainly to a total want of taste.  Is not this,  by
vehement importunity,  to draw your very entrails from you,  and
then to give them a stab? — On this topic,  I find I have,  ere I
was aware,  grown warm;  but I have been a sufferer.  My plain
dealing  (after the most earnest solicitations,  professions,  and protestations)  irrecoverably lost me Garrick.  But his soul was little !
— Greville,  for a while,  became my enemy,  though,  afterwards,
through his constitutional inconstancy,  he became more attach’d
than before ;  and since that time,  thro’  absence,  whim,  and various
accidents,  all is  (I thank Fortune)  dwindled to nothing.”

Can this be read otherwise than in reference to some disagreement of Mr.  Crisp’s opinion with that of Garrick,  to whom
the question was probably personal,  since it was pressed upon
Mr.  Crisp with so much urgency,  and its adverse answer resented
by an actor whose native susceptibility had been heightened by
just applause?  The openness,  natural to Mr.  Crisp’s character,
led him,  when asked an opinion,  to say what Garrick could not
bear.  Others beside Mr.  Crisp  (even Dr.  Burney himself in some
degree)  had experience of Garrick’s mutability,  even when they
had given no occasion of offence,  or of mortification.

1 Mr.  Gibbs kindly tells us that,  “  In the British Museum,  there is
a sixpenny pamphlet, — The Story on which the new Tragedy called
“  Virginia,”  now in rehearsal at the T.  R.  Drury Lane,  is founded,’
published by W.  Reeve,  Fleet Street,  1754,  pp.  26.”  This has no name
or initials,  “but it must refer to Crisp’s play,  and so likely enough was
written by him.”  It was so;  there was a fragment of it in the packet
of MSS.

APPENDIX III

328

“  He cast off his friends as a huntsman his pack,

For he knew,  when he pleased,  he could whistle them back.”

This extract seems to show that Garrick’s friendship towards
Mr.  Crisp underwent a change after some conversation unconnected with  “Virginia”;  years,  it may be,  after it was acted,  and
possibly when Mr.  Crisp was Garrick’s neighbour at Hampton-,
upon-Thames.  It must be borne in mind that Mr.  Crisp and
Garrick were intimate friends long before the representation of
“Virginia”  at Drury Lane Theatre;  that the play was put into
the hands of Garrick when finished;  that,  “  season after season,”  it
was kept back by Garrick,  who  (justly)  thought that it fell short of
what was expected from its author ;  that it was in abeyance while
Mr.  Crisp lived on the Continent,  that is,  for some years between
1749-50,  and 1754  ;  that Garrick gave way at last to the production of the tragedy in deference only to pressure from such potent
friends of Mr.  Crisp as Lord and Lady Coventry,  supported by
the judgement of the great Commoner,  Mr.  Pitt.

What a life Garrick had among the play-wrights,  may be seen
in his  “  Correspondence.”  There were three  “  Virginias  ”  at
nearly the same time,  two of which were acted  ; — Mr.  Crisp’s,  at
Drury Lane,  in 1754;  another,  by John Moncreif,  at Covent
Garden,  in 1755  (under the name of  “  Appius  ”),  old Mr.  Sheridan
playing Virginius,  and Mrs.  Bellamy,  Virginia;  Mrs.  Brooke,
the novelist,  offered Garrick a third,  which he would not even
read until the  “  Virginia  ”  of Mr.  Crisp had been not only played,
but printed.  The  “  Virginia”  of Mrs.  Brooke was written before
the other two were acted.  In 1756 she published her tragedy,
seeing that there was no chance of its being played.  If Garrick
were partial ,  it was to Mr.  Crisp,  and his lords and ladies of
rank and ton.  He even advised the restoration in the printed
tragedy of the  “  beautiful passages  ”  which he had cancelled,  for
actor’s reasons,  in the manuscript play.  He himself acted Virginius.  He wrote and spoke the prologue ;  he also wrote the
epilogue.  Could he have done more?  To the charge of jealousy
he was so used,  that he plays with it as a jest,  in one of his prologues or epilogues.  It would have had more force if Mr.  Crisp
had written a good comedy.

It is obvious that in 1754 there was no cause of coolness,  as
Garrick did his very best for the tragedy,  and the notes in the
manuscript and the tentative changes of plan indicate submission to his judgement even to the extent of laborious effort,
deemed to be light by the author.

The next of Mrs.  Gast’s letters to Fanny is dated from Bur-
ford,  “June 22nd,  1784,”  and begins thus:

“  The sight of that dear hand,  which has so often given exquisite pleasure to my best beloved on earth,  could not fail of

APPENDIX III

329

awakening keen sensations in a heart so much his,  and yours. —
I don’t apprehend he wish’d the relics I sent you should live in
any memory but your own.  Your approbation I believe was his
aim,  and might cause his regret at not recovering the compleat
copy.  Very long absences,  even from our childhood,  makes it
more than probable I knew less of his mind than his favourite
adopted child ;  with whom he so frequently,  with great delight
conversed.  I cannot suppose that he thought of any future renown.”  This letter Fanny did not answer until the 14th of November,  1785,  when she wrote,  “  I am happy to find we thought
so exactly alike with respect to my most beloved friend,  your
honoured and truly incomparable brother.  As to his  ‘Virginia,’
I believe,  indeed,  it was his wish and intention that everything
belonging to it should rest in silence and quiet,  till they finally
sank into oblivion.  With me nothing can,  that ever belonged to
him ;  but I shall keep all the papers with which you have so
kindly entrusted me entirely to myself.”

About forty years afterwards,  Fanny wrote the pages from
which Macaulay drew his details concerning Mr.  Crisp.
“Oblivion”  seems now further off than ever,  as paraphrases of
Macaulay are what we encounter whensoever we light upon the
name of Samuel Crisp.

As concerns the error,  of which Macaulay writes,  that on
looking for Samuel Crisp  “in a copious Dictionaiy of Dramatic
Authors published while he was still alive,  he found only that
Mr.  Henry Crisp,  of the Custom House,  had written a play called
‘Virginia,’  acted in 1754,”  blunders are apt to be made in, errors
to creep into,  such books  ;  as those who consult them much know
well.  It was a double mistake,  for Henry Crisp,  of the Custom
House,  died in 1747,  as his will testifies.  The man meant was a
reverend Henry Crispe,  who,  as Samuel Crisp did not put his
name to his play,  seems to have been taken for its author.  Perhaps being called  “  the reverend author”  by Boaden and Arthur
Murphy,  would have not a little annoyed our Mr.  Crisp,  who
was born when it was the mode to sneer at  “  parsons.”  The
play,  of which there are two copies in the British Museum,
is said in the catalogue to be by Henry Crisp.  There are also
two copies in the Bodleian Library,  which the editor found in
the catalogue as being by Henry Crisp.  Probably both catalogues followed the book which Macaulay consulted,  namely,
the  “Biographia Dramatica”  of Baker,  Reed,  and Jones.  If we
examined the catalogue of the Cambridge University Library,
we should probably find in it also,  “Virginia,  a Tragedy,  &c.  [by
Henry Crisp].”  “  The Gentleman’s Magazine”  of 1754,  says that
the author of the play  “  is not known.”  Bell,  and Harrison besides,  reprinted the play as by  “Mr.  Crisp”;  Nichols has  “Henry
Crispe,  of the Custom House,”  as author of  “Virginia”;  but the

APPENDIX III

330

mistake of Arthur Murphy is the most remarkable,  and may,
perhaps,  be put down to that confusion of memory which led
him to believe,  thirty years after the time,  that he was present
when Boswell first met Johnson,  in Tom Davies’s back-parlour,
— for Murphy must often have heard of Mr.  Crisp,  in Fanny’s
days at Streatham.

We give the accounts of Murphy,  and of Boaden,  of the production of the play.  Arthur Murphy writes of  “  Virginia,”  that
“  The fable,  ’tho it cannot boast of situations to alarm and agitate
the heart,  is conducted in regular order,  and a well-connected
train of events.  The Rev.  Mr.  Crisp,  who wrote the play,  seems

to have been a scholar,  and a man of taste . Lady Coventry,

as Garrick often related,  drove to his house,  and sent in word
that she had a moment’s business.  He went to the side of her
carriage — ‘There,  Mr.  Garrick,’  said Lady Coventry,  ‘  I put into
your hands a play which the best judges tell me will do honour
to you and the author.’  It was not necessary for her to say
more  .  .  .  Garrick obeyed as if she had been the tenth Muse ,
and prepared the play with the utmost despatch.1 He,  in the
character of Virginius,  Mossop in that of Appius,  and Mrs.  Cibber
in that of Virginia,  deserved the compliments paid them by the
author in his preface.  The representation was attended by
another advantage.  Mrs.  Yates,  at that time Mrs.  Graham,
made her first appearance on the English stage,  in the character
of Marcia,  and by her extraordinary beauty,  and an early promise
of great talent,  helped to give attraction to the piece.  But the
great stroke which crowned it with success,  was Garrick’s manner of uttering two words, — which were,  after all,  ‘  thou traitor  ,’
to the tool of Appius,  who claimed Virginia as his slave, — but it
was his previous demeanour  .  .  .  and the working of his countenance,  which electrified the whole audience,  who gave him a
thunder of applause.”  2 Murphy adds that  “  the subject required
a Shakespeare,  an Otway,  or perhaps such a genius as Rowe.”

Next comes the account of Mr.  Boaden,  in his Memoir prefixed to the Garrick Correspondence.

“  The season of 1753-4 saw Mrs.  Cibber again at Drury Lane,3
with her old friend,  Mr.  Garrick;  and her substitute in the Juliet
business,  Miss Bellamy,  returned to Covent Garden;  Bellamy,

1 This,  we have seen,  was not the first time that the play had been
put into the hands of Garrick.

2 Garrick wrote and spoke the prologue ;  he also wrote the epilogue,
which was spoken by Mrs.  Cibber.  Of Mrs.  Graham he said—

“  Should you indulge our novice yet unseen,

And crown her with your hands a tragic queen.”

3 The theatre season was from September to June.

APPENDIX III 331

in fact,  had failed miserably in the Brothers ;  and,  as a general
heroine,  was faint and inefficient.  Tragedies now were like the
regal spectres in Macbeth,  whose great representative uttered
to them unwillingly —

‘  Come like shadows  !  so depart.’

Thus it was with the Boadicea of Glover,  and the Virginia of
Crisp,  and the Creusa of Whitehead.

“The writer of this epitome remembers that Murphy,  with
whom he passed an evening at his old haunt,  Slaughter’s Coffee
House,  gave the party,  after supper,  a notion of Garrick in the
character of Virginius,  in Crisp’s tragedy.  Appius being seated
on his tribunal,  Claudius,  the villainous tool of the Decemvir,
claims Virginia as a slave born in his house.  During this
declaration Garrick stood on the opposite side of the stage,  with
his arms folded,  his eyes fixed on the ground,  mute and motionless as a statue.  By slow degrees,  he at length raised his head
— after a slight pause,  during which the spectators could read
the struggle within him,  in a face that kept no secrets — he
turned round slowly,  till his.  eyes rested upon Claudius ;  then,
in the low,  smothered voice of anguish,  tears gushing as he
spoke the words,  his broken heart sobbed out,  ‘  Thou traitor !  ’
The audience was,  for once,  electrified without noise;  and the
applause became abundant and universal.  Such things atone for
much wearisome length of blank song.  However,  Garrick’s reception of Virginia was secured by the irresistible sweetness of
the beautiful Lady Coventry,  who patronized the reverend
author of the play.”

We are told by Madame D’Arblay thdt Lord Coventry advised
“  sundry changes”  in,  and a  “new trial”  of,  the play upon the
stage ;  that Mr.  Crisp proceeded to re-cast his tragedy,  but that,
when it was complete,  Garrick was polite in form,  but fixed
in mind not to revive it;  that Lady Coventry was unable
through decline of health to use once more the influence of her
beauty and fashion,  and it is implied that  “Virginia”  was  (to
the disgust of the author)  never again represented.  It is possible
that the sketches of a change of structure in the play which we
have mentioned were made at such a time,  for such a purpose,
although there was nothing in the manuscript to indicate that
they were not written in 1748-9;  but it is hard to suppose that
the ill-health and death of Lady Coventry,  who lived up to the
year 1760,  had anything to do with the revival or non-revival of
the play.  As a matter of fact,  it appears that  “  Virginia.  ”  was
revived at Drury Lane,  and played at Covent Garden,  if it were
but for one night only in either case,  in the life-time of
Mr.  Crisp.

Evidence to this effect has been found by Mr.  Gibbs,  from

332 APPENDIX III

whose obliging letters we sum the following details,  which
appear to us conclusive that there were reproductions of  “Virginia”  of which Fanny had perhaps never heard.

Mr.  Gibbs writes :  “  The cast of the play in the first printed
edition,  (Mr.  Crisp’s own,  in 1754)  shows Garrick as  ‘  L.  Vir-
ginius,’  Mrs.  Cibber as  ‘  Virginia,’  and Mrs.  Graham as  '•  Marcia,’
but Bell’s British Theatre  (1778)  has a portrait of Mrs.  Yates
(formerly Mrs.  Graham)  as  ‘Virginia’;  this must,  I think,  indicate a reproduction of the play.  There is additional evidence in
the facts that in the title of the reprint of  ‘  Virginia  ’  in Harrison’s
series of plays  (1781)  we have the words,  ‘as performed at the
Theatres Royal,  Drury Lane and Covent Garden,’  and as a
frontispiece to the same reprint,  there is a portrait of Mr.  Clarke
as  ‘  L.  Virginius.’  Clarke made his first appearance at Covent
Garden in 1755  (October 30),  and played to about 1786.  Mrs.
Yates made her first appearance,  under the name of Graham,  in
1754,  in Crisp’s play.  In 1767,  she went over to Covent Garden,
where she played  ’till 1774,  then returned to Drury Lane.  Again
she went over to the rival house in 1780,  where she remained
till 1785.  From these dates and facts I am inclined to draw the
conclusion that the supplemental performance,  or performances,
of Crisp’s play at Covent Garden occurred between 1767 and
1774.  They may however have been benefit performances ,  for one
night only.  Mrs.  Yates may have chosen the part of Virginia for
a benefit performance because she made her entry upon the
stage as Marcia in that play,  and also to show herself in
Mrs.  Cibber’s original part of Virginia.  The play,  too,  might
have been chosen for a benefit performance by Clarke,  for the
sufficient reason that he would in it play Virginius,  first played
by Garrick.”

Mr.  Gibbs adds that Genest  (in his  “History of the Stage”)
makes no mention of Clarke’s having played  “  Virginius,”  but
states that  “  Genest’s list is confessedly a selection only of
Clarke’s characters,”  The same is the case with Mrs.  Yates and
“Virginia”;  “but Genest’s record,  although the fullest we
have,  is by no means without omissions,  as I have often found
before.”

IV.

“The Deserter.”

The literary puzzle which occurs in Fanny’s diary for 1770
(see page 97,  Vol.  I)  seems to be settled by the discovery in
the British Museum of a poem entitled  “The Deserter,”  published in 1 77°-  It is a quarto pamphlet of eighteen pages,  with

APPENDIX V

333

the title-page of  “The Deserter,  a Poem.  London.  Printed for
J.  Robson at the Feathers in New Bond Street,  1770.  Price
One Shilling.”  The author was Edward Jemingham,  a cadet
of the Norfolk Jerninghams,  who may have been a friend,  or
even a connexion of Alexander Seton.  About four and twenty
years later he published a play called  “  The Siege of Berwick,”
having for its subject the heroism of Sir Alexander Seaton,
Governor of Berwick,  and his two sons,  Alexander and Thomas
Seaton.  This drama,  which was played at Covent Garden
theatre in 1793,  has been reprinted by Mr.  H.  E.  H.  Jerning-
ham,  sometime M.P.  for Berwick,  with a dedication to the
Mayor of that town.

Fanny was mistaken in supposing Mr.  Jerningham’s unfortunate hero to be,  like Mr.  Seton,  a deserter from love.  He is
a soldier who deserts for love,  and suffers the penalty of death.

V.

Mrs.  Papendiek’s Reminiscences.

In 1887,  two volumes were published bearing the title of
“Court and Private Life in the Time of Queen Charlotte:  being
the Journals of Mrs.  Papendiek,  Assistant Keeper of the Wardrobe and Reader to Her Majesty,”  &c.

Mrs.  Papendiek was a daughter of Frederick Albert,  who
passed from the service of the Duke of Mecklenberg Strelitz to
that of the Duke’s sister Charlotte when,  in 1761,  she became
Queen of England.  At first Albert’s service was unclassed,  but,
later on,  we find him third page of the backstairs to the Queen,
and hair-dresser to George III.  He rose in the end to be
“Principal Barber.”  His second child,  Mrs.  Papendiek,  was
born in England,  in January 1765,  sent to school at Streatham
in 1773,  finally taken from school in 1780,  and married in 1783
to Mr.  Christopher Papendiek,  page to the Princess Royal.1

1 When the Princess Royal married,  the Queen made Mr.  Papendiek
one of her own pages.  He was also in her chamber-band,  and was,  (as
the Scotch say),  “no Plate, ”  having really  (according to his wife)  had
the coolness to  “  look forward  ”  to the prize of the English musical
profession,  the Mastership of the Royal Band of Music but the
King told him that these public appointments must be held by Englishmen.”  This was the appointment of which Dr.  Burney was twice disappointed.  In the first instance,  the Lord Chamberlain is said to have
broken his promise to give it to hint;  in the second,  another Loid
Chamberlain preferred Dr.  Parsons,  who the King told Fanny was  “a
poor little musician,  who was not fit for it;  but Lord Salisbury used

APPENDIX V

334

These volumes of reminiscences are misnamed journals,  as
they were in no wise written at,  or near,  the times of which
Mrs.  Papendiek tells us,  but were beg in over forty years,  and
end abruptly about forty-six years,  after the last events chronicled
in their pages.1 Nor was distance of time her only drawback :
Mrs.  Papendiek wrote to beguile her slow recovery from illness,
and lost two of her children while her narrative was in progress.
It is,  therefore,  no marvel that a general inexactitude is apparent,  to all but the most general readers,  throughout the whole
of the book.  As we have heard such readers take all they found
in these volumes to be as trustworthy as Mrs.  Papendiek’s
recollections of the colour and fashion of her clothes,  and of those
of her children ;  of her  “  nice meals,”  and choice bills of fare ;
as we have read,  and cut out in amazement,  a review assuming
her errors concerning Fanny Burney to be facts,  we take the
trouble of correction.  It is not worth doing unless as an exercise
in the practice of Dr.  Johnson’s precept of  “strict attention to
truth,  even in the most minute particulars.”  2

Mrs.  Papendiek’s mother kept to her German ways and German friends,  with a stiffness blamed even by her own daughter,

your father very ill in that business,  and so he did me!  ”  Of this appointment,  Mrs.  Boscawen wrote in 1786,  “  they have given Dr.  Burney
the name of  ‘  The Hare with many Friends.’  .  .  .  Lord Salisbury had
a favourite amongst the musical people,  so as not to prefer the most
■worthy .”

1 Among these events is misplaced the coming of Haydn to England.  Mrs.  Papendiek puts it in 1792.  A scrap of Dr.  Burney’s pocket-
book  (which is given in note 1,  p.  xiii,  of the preface)  corrects her. —
“Sunday,  [fan.]  2  [1791].— Haydn arrives in England.”  THs,  however,  is far from being such a slip as that of representing Miss Linley
as singing in public in 1783,  the year of Mrs.  Papendiek’s own marriage.
Miss Linley never sang in public after 1773,  when Mrs.  Papendiek was
eight years old.  See pages 175 and 188 of Mrs.  Papendiek’s first
volume,  and pages 209 and 216,  Vol.  I,  of these Early Diaries.

2  “‘Accustom your children’  (said Dr.  Johnson to Boswell)  ‘constantly to this;  ’  (strict attention to truth)  ‘if a thing happened at one
window,  and they,  when relating it,  say that it happened at another,
do not let it pass,  but instantly check them ;  you do not know where
deviation from truth will end.’  Our lively hostess  [Mrs.  Thrale]  whose
fancy was impatient of the rein,  fidgeted at this,  and ventured to say :
‘Nay,  this is too much.  If Mr.  Johnson should forbid me to drink tea,
I should,  comply,  as I should feel the restraint only twice a day;  but
little variations in narrative must happen a hundred times a day,  if one
is not perpetually watching.’  Johnson  :  ‘  Well,  madam,  and you ought
to be perpetually watching.  It is more from carelessness about truth
than from intentional lying,  that there is so much falsehood in the
world.

APPENDIX V

335

who was herself a thorough German Hausfrau.  Industrious,
managing,  a tender mother,  a kind-hearted woman,  musical,
fond of as much gaiety and sight-seeing as could be procured
without waste of money,  or neglect of her household,  simple,
gossiping,  and credulous of gossip,  without inquiry into whether
or not it were true,  Mrs.  Papendiek does not err out of any malice,
but by carelessly writing down hearsays,  imperfectly remembered
as to facts,  and all-incoherent with dates.  Her reminiscences
are of small use as to English ways in her time,  as much allowance must be made for the customs and modes of living of a
cluster of German royal servants and their children,  who mixed
but imperfectly with the English domestics,  and for the most
part married among themselves.  The book,  however,  presents
a lively picture of the friendships and squabbles of this little
clan  ;  of their jealousies,  of their struggles to rise in place,  and
of the kind of back-stairs gossip about royal doings which went
on among them.  It gives echoes from staircases and antechambers  ;  conjectures formed behind royal backs at the dinner
table,  or in the  “  powdering closet,”  and expanded by fancy into
statements of fact.  To read the book tires the intellect of no
one,  though it would exhaust the patience of many.

Nothing out of the common course of things happened to
Mrs.  Papendiek except her appointment to a place in the Royal
Wardrobe.

On this we must quote the concluding chapter of the second
volume,  which is from the pen of her editor.1  “  Not much in the
way of family records remains to tell of the further life of Mrs.
Papendiek,  but from the few sources of information open to me
I gather that she obtained the appointment at the Court of
Queen Charlotte,  which she held for some years,  shortly after
the occurrences narrated by her in the closing pages of her
Memoirs.”2  .  .  .  “  It was probably in the year 1797 or 1798,  I
cannot ascertain the exact date,  that she was appointed Assistant Keeper of the Wardrobe,  the same post as that previously
held by Miss Burney,  though Mrs.  Papendiek did not immediately succeed her.  Later on she became Reader to the Queen
also.”  ...  .

We are not concerned with a readership to the Queen,  which
was never held by Miss Burney,  nor indeed by any one except
Mr.  De Luc as a place classed in the Court Kalendar.  Miss
Burney sometimes read to the Queen ;  the Queen,  as she liked
to read aloud,  sometimes read to Miss Burney;  that was all.
By the help of Court Kalendars,  it is easy to ascertain the

1  “  Court and Private Life,”  etc.,  vol.  ii,  p.  300.

2 Her Memoirs stop,  rather than come to an end,  at the year 1792.

336 APPENDIX V

relative position of those in the department of the Mistress of
the Robes.  After the Bedchamber-Women,  who were for show
and state only,1 there came,  in 1791,  the year when Fanny left
Windsor,  the

“  Keepers of the Robes  :

Mrs.  Schwellenbergen.

Mrs.  Frances Burney.

Assistants :

Mrs.  Thielcke.2

Mrs.  Sandys.”

The  “ Assistants  ”  appear to have been rather assistants to
the Keepers of the Robes,  than Assistant-Keepers of the Robes.
At Court they wei'e spoken of as  “  Wardrobe- Women,”  as may
be seen in Fanny’s later diaries.3

Mrs.  Fapendiek was one of them,  but her name is not to be
found at all in the Court Kalendar before ,  or after ,  1800.  In that
year we find her as assistant under Mrs.  Thielcke.

“  Keepers of the Robes  :

Mrs.  Margaret Bremeyer.

Mrs.  J.  C.  Bacmeister.

Assistants :

Mrs.  Thielcke.

Mrs.  Papendiek.”

Thus it was Mrs.  Bac[h]meister,  not Mrs.  Papendiek,  who
held the office of Miss Burney.  As Mrs.  Papendiek was in
place one year only,  it looks as if she merely helped the others
until some competent person was found.  In 1801 we find that
Mrs.  Margaret Robinson has succeeded her,  and remains on the
pages of the Kalendar,  until 1814,  as  “second assistant,”  or
rather second Wardrobe-woman.

The name of Miss Burney is often found on Mrs.  Papendiek’s
pages.  It occurs for the first time when Mrs.  Papendiek was a
school-girl of thirteen at Streatham.  She says that  “  in this
half-year  (1778)  I was introduced to the neighbouring families;
amongst others to the Thrales,  on Streatham Common,  where
Dr.  Johnson and Miss Burney usually resided.”  She was taken
from school at Christmas,  1778,  but,  at her own request,  allowed

1 On court-days,  it was the rale that one of the bedchamber-women
must tie on the Queen’s necklace,  and hand her fan and gloves.

-  Mrs.  Thielcke  (Miss Pascal)  who had been in the service of the
Princess Dowager of Wales,  is called by Fanny  “  the real acting person,
though I am the apparent one.”

3 T^ey were as often called  “  dressers,”  as by any other name.

APPENDIX V

337

to return for half a year,  at Midsummer,  1780.  She represents
“the Thrales and dear old Dr.  Johnson”  as  “pleased to have
[her]  back among them.”

Here occurs the following passage :

“  About this time Miss Burney’s first publication made its
appearance,  under the title of  ‘  Evelina,’  and Dr.  Johnson introduced it to us,  saying that a novel of a new character had been put
into his hand,  in which each of the persons introduced spoke in
his or her own line,  and that the moral was unobjectionable.  He
would,  therefore,  have it read,  and Miss Burney,  as usual,  was
deputed to do so.  As she proceeded,  Mrs.  Thrale kept saying
that the turn of the sentences and the general tone were familiar
to her ear,  and that she must find out the author.  Many surmises were started,  and at last Miss Burney,  finding that the
book met with approbation among her friends,  acknowledged
herself to be the authoress.  Dr.  Johnson obtained for her
increased payment,  and she then produced her  ‘  Cecilia,’  which
I believe to be considered equally good.”

“About this time”  means,  according to Mrs.  Papendiek’s
chronology,1 between Midsummer and Christmas,  1780.  ‘  Evelina  ’  was published in January,  1778,  and,  by the Midsummer
of that year,  was making its way by bounds.

In July,  1778,  Dr.  Burney,  finding that Mrs.  Thrale admired
that novel,  told her that his Fanny,  whom she barely knew,  was
its author.2 As such she was invited to visit Streatham,  where
she had never before been.  She never read  “  Evelina  ”  aloud to
any one out of her own family,  except to Mr.  Crisp,  to whom she
tried to read it,  but turned timid,  and gave up at the end of the
second volume.3 Even Susan,  her  “  sole confidante,”  had never
heard her novel read;  that however was for want of time and
of privacy before its publication.  She never read  “Evelina”
or any other book aloud at Streatham.  Of this there is proof
in abundance.  In September,  1778,  Mr.  Thrale asked Fanny

1  “Court and Private Life,”  &c.,  vol.  i,  pp.  95,  112,  113,  114.

2 There is no reason to think that,  before July,  1778,  Fanny had
spoken to Mrs.  Thrale more than twice,  and then only as.  Susan and
Charlotte spoke to her,  or to any visitor at Dr.  Burney’s house.  Mrs.
Burney was friendly with Mrs.  Thrale,  and made visits to Streatham
before Fanny went there as the known author of  “  Evelina.”

3  “I have,  since,  heartily repented that I read any of the book to
him,  for I found it a much more awkward thing than I had expected:
my voice quite faltered when I began it,  which,  however,  I passed off
for the effect of remaining weakness of the lungs ;  and,  in short,  from
an invincible embarrassment,  which I could not for a page together
repress,  the book,  by my reading,  lost all manner of spirit.  Diavy oj
Mme.  D'Arblay,  vol.  i,  p.  4°-

338 APPENDIX V

repeatedly to read a tragedy to him.  “  \  told him I would as soon
act to Garrick,  or try attitudes to Sir J oshua Reynolds'  as read
to anybody at Streatham.”  I n February,  1 782,  she wishes that she
could read her  “  Cecilia”  with Susan before it was published,  but
“  could not admit Captain Phillips  (Susan’s husband),  dearly as
I love him  ;  I could not,  for my life,  read myself to Mr.  Burney
(her cousin and brother-in-law),  but was obliged to make Etty.
It is too awkward a thing to do to any human being ,  but my
sisters,  or poor Auntys,  or Kitty Cooke.”  In 1785,  Mrs.  Delany
told Queen Charlotte that Miss Burney had been reading Col-
man’s  “  Clandestine Marriage  ”  to her.  “  O then,”  cried the
Queen,  ‘‘  if Miss Burney reads to you,  what a pleasure you must
have to make her read her own works 1”  Mrs.  Delany laughed
and exclaimed,  “O Ma’am!  read her own works!  Your Majesty
has no notion of Miss Burney !  she would as soon die!”  Lastly,
Dr.  Johnson did not procure Fanny any increase of payment for
“  Evelina,”  nor did she ever receive any such increase.  The whole
narration probably arose from Mrs.  Papendiek’s having so many
times heard people say,  “  How delightful it would have been,  or
must have been,  to hear Miss Burney read her own book,”  that
she acquired a persuasion that she had had so great a pleasure.
Mrs.  Papendiek says that Mrs.  Thrale noticed her as a schoolgirl,  but she is singularly ill-informed about the affairs of the
Thrale family.  In the following narrative,  which is a tissue of
errors,  she places the death of Mr.  Thrale among the occurrences
of the year 1789.  He died in April,  1781,  within four months of
her leaving the Streatham School.

“About this time Mr.  Thrale,  the great porter brewer,  and
member for Southwark,  died,  leaving to his widow the brewery
and  ,£50,000,  and to each of five daughters the same sum.  An
Italian artist of mediocre talent taught the young ladies to sing,
and for the purpose of improvement Mrs.  Thrale took her three
eldest daughters to Italy,  leaving the two younger with Mrs.
Kay and Mrs.  Fry,  with whom they remained until their education was completed.  By agreement this man,  whose name was
Piozzi,  met them in Italy,  when a marriage took place between
him and Mrs.  Thrale.

“  On the return of the party to England these three daughters
demanded their fortunes,  and Mrs.  Piozzi’s finances were shaken
a little by having to sell out of the funds at a great loss,  and
selling the brewery at a still greater.  Previously to her second
marriage Mrs.  Piozzi had been known in the literary world.  She.
still continued to write and to publish her writings,  but they no
longer carried with them the same interest.  Her friends and
the public ceased to respect her,  and she soon fell into oblivion.
Where she lived,  and whether now alive or dead,  I cannot tell.
Her mother was a renowned classic scholar,  and the daughter,

APPENDIX V

339

'when still Mrs.  Thrale,  the same.  The latter possessed very
superior abilities and great judgment ;  she managed her family
and household with industry and economy,  took the trouble of
the business off Mr.  Thrale’s hands,  and educated her children
at home.  She was a religious,  charitable,  and good woman,  and
how she became infatuated with a person not even eminent in
his profession,  after maintaining a rectitude of conduct for so
many years,  is not to be defined.”

The rumours of Streatham may have magnified Mr.  Thrale’s
fortune,1 but could they have given him five,  instead of four surviving daughters?  He died in April,  1781.  On the 24th of July,
1783,  Mrs.  Thrale married Piozzi in London,  having previously
consigned her four daughters,  all of whom were under age,  to
the care of Miss Nicholson,  a governess-chaperon.2 Mrs.  Thrale
never went to Italy before her marriage with Piozzi.  The brewery
was sold immediately after Mr.  Thrale’s death to Mr.  Barclay,
at a price on which the widow was congratulated.  Mrs.  Thrale
had written little  “  fugitive pieces,”  but had not published any
book before her marriage with Piozzi.  Interest in her writings
began in 1786,  when,  three years after her second marriage,  she
published her  “Anecdotes of Dr.  Johnson.”  She withdrew from
those of her friends who were intimate enough to show disapprobation of her second marriage,  but,  though Mrs.  Papendiek
does not exaggerate her decline in the opinion of many,  Mrs.
Piozzi was never without others to defend her,  and to admire
her quickness,  liveliness,  and showy accomplishments.

This,  the last passage concerning Fanny which we shall quote,
refers to her leaving the Queen’s household,  and is wholly incorrect  :

“What gave rise to the change was Miss Burney telling the
Queen that she had written a third novel ;  that it would gratify
her much if her Majesty would permit her to read it;  that if approved her Majesty would title it,  and grant Miss Burney the
honour and indulgence of dedicating it to her.

“The Queen immediately replied that she could do neither,
as it would not be consistent with her feelings to encourage or
even sanction novel writing,  particularly under her own roof.

1 We have before us a letter from Mr.  Crisp to Fanny,  commenting

upon the property left by Mr.  Thrale,  and the dispositions of his will,
as told him by Fanny.  It is needless to copy the details.  “Why,  ’tis
a princely fortune!  ”  cries Mr.  Crisp;  but it was not what Mrs.  Papendiek reports.  .

2 It is said this arrangement did not last long;  Miss Thrale dismissed
the lady of her mother’s choice.  In 179 7>  we find Sir Walter Scott
meeting his future wife  (a ward of the Marquis of Downshire),  “under
the care of Miss Nicholson,  a daughter of the late Dean of Exeter.”

34o APPENDIX V

She added that she perceived a want of cheerfulness and pleasurable attendance in Miss Burney,  and always felt certain that
whenever she rang her bell,  the pen was laid down with regret;
and that she thought Miss Burney would feel happier to resume
her writing for the public than to continue in a situation that did
not appear to suit her,  and of which the duties were irksome and
uncongenial to her.  Poor thing,  she bowed out;  and not being
in good circumstances as to pecuniary matters in her home with
her father,  Dr.  Burney,  it was a severe blow.”

As Fanny told  *he King,  “the skeleton”  of her third novel,
“Camilla,”  “was formed”  at Windsor,  “but nothing was completed.”  She began  “  to work it up  ”  three years after she had
left the Queen.  “  Camilla  ”  was dedicated to the Queen by special
permission,  and presented to her by Fanny in person at Windsor.
The dedication was rewarded by the  “  compliment  ”  of a hundred
guineas by the King and Queen,  who showed the most kindly
interest in the book.

It is well known that Fanny’s health failed while she was at
Court.  She had been long ill,  and seemed to her friends to be
on her way to death,  when she wrote the resignation of her office.
She knew the Queen to be so loath to lose her that it was two
months before she had courage to give to Mrs.  Schwellenberg
the paper for the Queen on which she had written what she dared
not speak.  The Queen put every obstacle in the way of Fanny’s
leaving,  and there can be no doubt that had her associate,  Mrs.
Schwellenberg,  been a sensible and agreeable woman,  Fanny
would have accepted the Queen’s offer to give her a holiday for
rest and change of air,  and withdrawn her resignation.  As it
was,  the Queen seems to have delayed to set her free in the hope
that she would retract.  Her resignation was given in at the end
of 1790;  it was not until the 7th of July,  1791,  that she was
allowed to leave.  Her tact,  and the good feeling which prompted
it,  bore her through a six months’  time of trial.  She succeeded
in soothing the irritation of the Queen,  who was,  in many ways,
mortified by her resignation,  and who  (as was afterwards shown
in the case of Cornelia Knight)  was by no means above bearing
malice,  and giving strong proofs of ill-will towards those who
wounded her royal and individual self-love by leaving her service.1
In 1791,  Fanny writes,  “  In a long discourse upon my altered
health with Mrs.  De Luc,  [the Queen]  condescended to speak
most graciously of  [me],  saying in particular these strong words
in answer to something kind uttered by that good friend in my
favour:  ‘O, as to character,  she is what we call in German  “true
as gold”;  and,  in point of heart,  there is not,  all the world over,

1 See the  “Autobiography of Cornelia Knight.”

APPENDIX V

34i

one better.’”1 On Fanny’s  “last day of office,”  she was offered
(through Mrs.  Schwellenberg),  the head place,  then held by that
functionary,  on its vacation  “  either by her retiring,  or death.”
What Mrs.  Papendiek,  who pities her,  calls her  “  dismissal,”  was
her joyous departure.

That Mrs.  Papendiek was far better fitted than was Fanny for
the place which Fanny held,  and she did not,  no one can deny
who reads the touching story of Mrs.  Papendiek’s first satin gown
It was made — we were about to say born  (being justified therein
by a pathetic statement that,  ten years afterwards,  it was  “  at its
last gasp”) — in January,  1782.  “It was of a puce colour,  trimmed
with white satin,  and a petticoat of the same colour to match the
trimming.”  In 1783,  the  “puce satin was new trimmed with
white”  as part of its wearer’s wedding outfit.  In 1785,  it was
“trimmed with a row of flat steel down each front,  the white
being taken off,  cap and petticoat being trimmed to match,  and
steel buckles on black satin shoes.”  In 1788,  it was worn at a
dance,  “with the trimmed sleeves and gauze handkerchief as
before,  the ends of it being fastened in front by three white satin
broad straps,  buckled with steel buckles.”  In 1789,  the puce
satin was once more given white satin trimmings,  with gauze.
We may have overlooked other of its vicissitudes;  if so,  we are
sorry.  Wordsworth once described himself as possessing  “thirteen coats of various degrees of merit?  but we question whether
any one of them was so meritorious as this puce satin,  which we
lament to say was  “at its last gasp”  in 1792,  when the Memoirs
of Mrs.  Papendiek suddenly close.  We feel sure,  however,  that
the puce satin revived,  and continued its useful existence in some
beneficial form or other for many more years ;  even if it were
but as a lining to some newer,  but less tried and trusty garment.
Had its wearer lived longer,  the biography of the puce gown
would have been continued,  and into the accuracy of that narrative there would have been no need to inquire :  so vivid is the
memory of the heart.

The many other errors of the book are appropriately accompanied by numerous blunders in proper names,  which may be
due to a bad transcript of the original manuscript,  to which is
added a careless correction of the press.  The name of the family
of Sir Abraham Pitches,  a Lord Mayor of London,  is invariably
printed Pitcher;  Mr.  Bromfield,  surgeon to the Royal household,
appears as Blomfield ;  Rauzzini and Pacchieroti,  as Ranzmi and
Perchierotti.  So well-known a family to Mrs.  Papendiek as that
of Ramus  (there were five or six of them in the Court Kalendar)
is everywhere transmuted into Kamus.  It is lucky for Nash

1 See the  “  Diary of Mme.  D’Arblay,”  pp.  188,  223,  vol.  v.

APPENDIX V

342

the architect,  that he is scarcely named,  as he figures in the
text and index as Sir Thomas Mash.

Mrs.  Papendiek appears to have been much aggrieved by
those reforms of expenses in the King’s household which,  by
what she herself tells us of the pay and perquisites of her own
family,  and by what is shown as to sinecures in the Court Kalen-
dar,  were most urgently required.  Looking into the Kalendar
for 1777,  we find nine wet-nurses of Princes and Princesses each
enjoying a pension of two hundred a year for life.  There were
five more royal children before the list of these payments was
closed.  Two hundred a year was their pension,  and the pay of
Fanny also;  but she withdrew upon a pension of one hundred a
year only.  Mrs.  Papendiek is of opinion that it is not improbable
that Edmund Burke’s reform in the Civil List brought on a
“wonderful change in our Royal household;  and that this led
through many trifling channels to the destruction of the F rench
King,  for in his country also the cry for economy was raised ,  and.
soon spread far and wide"  With this bit of reasoning by induction we part in amusement from  “  Court and Private Life in the
Time of Queen Charlotte. "

INDEX

Abel and Bach's concerts,  ii,  155 n.
Abingdon,  Mr.,  ii.  249.

Abington,  Mrs.,  i.  305 n.,  ii.  28.

“  Abyssinian Majesty,  His.”  See
Bruce,  James.

Academy of Ancient Music.  See
Ancient,  &c.

Academy,  The Royal,  and Sir R.
Strange,  ii.  44.

Academy,  Soho Square,  amateur
theatricals there,  i.  32.

Adair  (?),  ii.  9 n.

Adam,  the brothers,  architects,  i.
92,  175 n.,  200.

Adam,  or Adams,  Miss Peggy,  i.  91,
92 n.

Adelphi Buildings,  and the brothers Adam,  i.  92 n.,  175,  200.
Addison,  Joseph,  on women,  ii.

131-

“  Adventurer,  The,”  Dr.  Hawkes-
worth’s,  i.  47.

Adventures,  the age for,  past,  i.  224.
Agujari,  Italian singer,  ii.  1,  35,
144,  147;  and the pig,  ii.  35,
83 n. ;  compared with Gabrielli,
ii.  91,  100;  her  “Pantheon price,”
i.  9.  See also ii.  5 n.,  8,  27,
36,  79,  81,  86,  95,  104,  1 17,
123 n.

Aikin,  Anna Lsetitia,  her poems,  i.

299.  See also Barbauld,  Mrs.
Aikin,  Lucy,  her  “Old Times,’
quoted,  ii.  185.

Akenside’s poems,  i.  lxxvi.

Albert,  Frederick,  “  Principal Barber”  to Geo.  III.,  ii.  333 n.
Albert,  Miss,  afterwards Mrs.
Papendiek,  which see.

Alfieri,  Count,  ii.  317.

Alfred,  King,  at Stourhead,  ii.
322.

“Alfred,  Masque of,”  Thomson and
Mallet’s,  i.  263.

Alcock,  H.,  violinist,  i.  xix.

Alison,  Rev.  Archibald,  i.  liv.

Allen,  Bessy,  afterwards Mrs.
Meeke,  i.  xcii,  42,  61,  158,  221,
316;  ii.  87,  129,  272.  See also
Allens,  the.

Allen,  Maria  (afterwards Mrs.  Rish-
ton),  i.  lxvii,  lxxxv,  xcii;  and
Mr.  Crisp,  i.  181;  her Journal,  i.
8,  136,  140,  228,  269 n.;  her
letters,  i.  82 n.,  106 n.,  107,  131,
136,  140,  164,  181,  188,  200,
273,  ii.  321 ;  her marriage,  i.
181 ;  at Paris and Geneva,  i.  140;
in private theatricals,  i.  127;  and
Martin F.  Rishton,  their love-
story and run-away match,  i.
105 n.,  1 13 n.,  164.  Also i.  8,
42,  61,  64,  99,  101,  104 m,  113,
125,  132 n.,  134,  174,  179,  186.
See also under Rishton,  Mrs. ,  the
Allens,  &c.

Allen,  Miss Elizabeth.  See Allen,
Bessy.

Allen,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  afterwards
the second wife of Dr.  Burney,  i.
2.  See also Burney,  Mrs.

Allen,  Mrs.,  sen.,  Mrs.  Burney’s
mother,  i.  xcii,  136,  266,  291,
295.  297-

Allen,  Patty,  i.  xcii.  See Young,
Mrs.  Arthur.

Allen,  Mrs.  Stephen,  i.  6 n.  See
also Burney,  Mrs.  Elizabeth.

INDEX

344

Allen,  Rev.  Stephen,  i.  xcii,  148.
Allens,  the,  of Lynn,  i.  xl,  2,  3,
6 n.,  10,  201,  ii.  272 n.

Amazons,  ii.  25.

Amelia,  Princess,  i.  21 n.

Ancient Concerts,  The,  ii.  282 n.
AncientMusic,  Academy of,  ii.  2911.  ,
282 n.

Ancient music controversy on,  ii.
282 n.

Andrews,  Dr.,  ii.  134.

Animals,  cruelty to,  i.  100.

Anson,  Mr.,  ii.  248.

Anspach,  Margravine of,  ii.  114 m  ;

her Memoirs,  ii.  H4n.

Anstey,  Christopher,  “Evelina”
attributed to him,  ii.  217;  and
Garrick,  ii.  106 n.  ;  his  “New
Bath Guide”  quoted,  ii.  31 1.
Antiquity,  the ruins of,  i.  64.

“  Appius,”  play by Moncreif,  ii.
328.

Applause,  Dr.  Johnson on Garrick’s
love of it,  &c.,  ii.  158.

Aprile’s duets,  i.  lxxxvi.

Aram,  Eugene,  and James Burney,
origin of Hood’s  “  Dream of
Eugene Aram,”  i.  62 n.
Arbuthnot and Pope,  i.  146.
Argentini,  name for Agujari,  ii.
35-

Arland  (or Arlond),  Miss,  i.  149,

211.

Armstrong,  Dr.,  his age,  i.  163,  318;
and Dr.  Burney,  i.  xxxix,  43 n. ;
and Fuseli,  i.  138 n. ;  and Lady
Strange,  i.  138 n.;  his share in
Thomson’s  ‘ 1 Castleof Indolence,  ”
i.  43 n.  Also i.  41,  43,  531!.,
1 16,  137,  205,  286.

Armstrong,  Mr.,  i.  42.

Arne,  Dr.,  and Dr.  Burney,  i.  xxi,
xxv,  xxvi,  220 n. ;  his post at Drury
Lane Theatre,  i.  xxi;  and Garrick,  ii.  30  ;  and the poet Mason,

i.  19m.

Arne,  Mrs.,  i.  149.

Arniston,  Dundas of,  &c.,  i.  92 n.
Artists,  Society of,  i.  239 n.

“  Arts,  the Cabinet of the,”  1799

ii.  293 n.

Arts and Literature,  English and I
foreign,  i.  154.

Arts,  Society of,  picture exhibitions  ;
there,  i.  239 n.

Ashburnham,  Earl of,  ii.  122.
Ashburnham,  Devon,  i.  260.

Ass race at Teignmouth,  i.  244.
Assembly,  the,  at Lynn,  i.  23.

Astley,  Mr.,  equestrian,  ii.  279.
Aston,  Sir W. ,  i.  6 n.

Atterbury and Pope,  i.  146.

Augusta,  Princess Dowager of
Wales,  i.  1580.

Austen,  Miss Jane,  i.  282 n. ,  284 n.,
326 n.,  ii.  7G n;  and Lady
Hales,  ii,  184 n.  ;  and Miss
Leigh,  i.  xxv;  her  “Emma,”  i.
13211.

Author,  an elegant  (Iveate),  i.

A 5-

Avison,  Charles,  composer,  i.  156
and n.

Aylsham,  Norfolk,  Charlotte Burney’s married life at,  ii.  273 n.,
3*9 n.

B - ,  Miss,  ii.  146,

Bach,  J.  C.,  or  “English Bach,”
ii-  155-

Bach,  K.  P.  E.,  of Berlin,  i.  154.
Bachs,  the,  i.  154m,  ii.  155 m
Bach’s concerts,  ii.  155.
Bac[h]meister,  Mrs.  J.  C.,  ii.  336 n.
Bagenall  (or Bagnall),  Mr.,  Mrs.,
and Miss,  i.  178,  ii.  32,  39.

Bagg,  or Bagge,  family of Lynn,  i.
xl,  17.

Baker,  organist,  of Chester,  i.  xix.
Ball,  at Gloucester,  ii.  187,  190-
192;  at Mrs.  Paradise’s,  ii.  313;
at the Rev.  Mr.  Pugh’s,  kept up
till five in the morning,  i.  78,  81.
Ball etiquette,  i.  81,  ii.  313.

Banks,  Mr.,  afterwards,  Sir Joseph,

i.  138,  ii.  25,  316 n. ;  and Omai
the Otaheitan,  i.  332,  334 n. ;  his
“  Saturnalia,”  ii.  138 n.

Bannister,  John,  and his daughter,

ii.  307 n.

Barbauld,  Mrs.,  her  “ British Novel-

INDEX

345

ists,”i.  28811. ;  her lineson  “Life,”
299 n.  See also Aikin,  A.  L.
Barber,  John,  Alderman and printer,
in Queen Square,  i.  lxxi,  104 n.
Barborne Lodge,  Worcester,  residence of Richard Burney,  i.  101,
ii.  164,  210 n.

Baretti,  Signor,  i.  lxxxvii,  Ixxxviii,
ii.  288 ;  and Boswell,  i.  207 n. ;
his affair in the Haymarket,  ib. ;
and the use of the knife in Italy,

i.  25 n.,  and Mrs.  Piozzi,  i.
206 n. ;  and Samuel Sharp,  i.  25.
See also i.  lxxiv,  175,  221,  296,  ii.
259-

Barlow,  Mr.  Thomas,  his  ‘  ‘  offer  ”
to Frances Burney,  ii.  47,  55,  61,
64-79,  83,  88,  136;  his letters,

ii.  49,  62,  63.

Barnard,  Lady Anne.  See Lady
Anne Lindsay.-

Barnes,  Mrs.,  of Gloucester,  ii.  195,
196.

Barrett,  Mrs.  Charlotte,  Editor of
the  “Diary of Mme.  D’Arblay,”
ii.  273 n.

Barrett,  Julia Charlotte,  ii.  274 n.
Barrett,  Rev.  R.  A.  F. ,  ii.  274 n.
Barrington,  Daines,  i.  158.
Barrington,  Lord,  ii.  115,  124.
Barry,  James,  R.  A.,  i.  Ixxxviii,  ii.
290.

Barsanti,  Jenny,  actress,  i.  55,  59,
126,  130,  144,  191,  21 in.,  216,
219,  265,  ii.  1,  280 n.

Barsanti,  Mrs.,  i.  no n.

Barsanti petticoats,  i.  191 n.
Barthelemon,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  i.  148.
Bartolozzi,  engraver,  ii.  44 n.
Bas-bleus ,  i.  lxv,  lxxxiv.  See also
Blue-stocking.

Bastardini,  La,  =  Agujari,  which see.
Bateman,  Dicky,  i.  85 n.

Bateman,  Lord,  i.  85 n.

Bath,  Madame Bourdois at,  ii.  164
n.  ;  Frances Burney at,  i.  262 ;
Fischer’s concerts there,  i.  201 ;
the Linley family at,  i.  208  ;
Rauzzini and La Motte’s concerts
at,  ii.  123 n. ;  Mrs.  Rishton at,  i.
201.

Bath,  Earl of.  See Pulteney.

Bathing at Teignmouth,  i.  254.

Batt,  Mr.,  i.  lxxxiv,  216.

Baur,  or Bawr,  General,  ii.  109,
1 12,  1 17,  1 19.

Beard and whiskers,  ii.  179.

Beardmore,  Under-Sheriff,  his defence of Shebbeare,  i.  285 n.

Beatson,  Miss Nelly  (Helena),  i.
283,  ii.  12.

Beauchamp,  Lord,  i.  xlviii.

“Beaux,  old,”  Fanny Burney’s,  i.
256 n.

Beaux,  dandies,  &c.,  names for,  at
different times,  i.  68,  157 n.

Becket,  Mr.,  bookseller,  Garrick
and,  i.  140 n.,  ii.  283.

Beckford,  Mr.,  at Fonthill,  ii.
323 n.

Beckford,  Wm.,  of Somerly,  i.
155 n.,  177,  221.

Bed of exquisite workmanship at
Ugborough,  i.  251.

“  Before the urchin well could go,”
song,  ii.  204.

‘  ‘  Beggars’  Opera,  ”  the,  and  “Jemmy
Twitcher,”  otherwise Lord Sandwich,  ii.  125 n.

Bellamy,  Miss  (or Mrs.),  actress,  ii.
328,  331.

“  Belle Assemblee ,  La ,”  a ladies’
club  (?),  ii.  305.

Bellman,  the,  ii.  318.

Bell’s Circulating Library,  ii.  214.

Benham’s biography of James
Plutton  (Moravian brother),  i.
3 07 n.

Bentley,  Richard,  his  “Dissertation on the Epistles of Phalaris,”
ii.  282 n.

Beraman  (?),  i.  155.

Beresford,  Mr.,  ii.  273 n.

Berkeley,  Hon.  George,  afterwards
Rear-Admiral Sir George,  ii.  187
n. ;  in Lord Howe’s action on
“the glorious 1st of June,”  ii.
190 n.;  his libel suit,  ii.  191 n.

Berkeley,  Lord,  ii.  182,  186.

Berkeley Peerage,  the,  ii.  182 n.Q

Berkeleys,  the  (Whig)  party in
Gloucester,  ii.  187.

INDEX

34^

Berry,  Miss,  on Frances Burney,  i.
lxxxi.

Bertoni,  Signor,  i.  Ixxxvii.
Bethlehem Hospital,  i.  270 n.

Bets,  Lord Chesterfield on,  i.  205 ;

some of  “  old Q’s,”  i.  220.

“  Betsy Thoughtless,”  Mrs.  Haywood’s,  and  “  Evelina,”  i.  lxxxiv.
Bettenson  (or Betenson),  Sir
Richard and Lady,  i.  105 n.,  115
n.,  131,  190.

Bettensons,  the,  and the Folkeses,

i.  190.

Bever,  Dr.  Thomas,  i.  116,  119.
Bewley,  Mr.  William,  Dr.  Johnson’s  “broom gentleman,”  i.  li,
18,  19,  176,  317 and n.;  his
death,  318 n.

Bicheli,  Signora,  i.  1 10 n.
Bickerstaffe,  Isaac,  his and Foote’s
“Dr.  Last in his Chariot,”  i.  60.
Billet-doux,  Italian,  i.  303.
Birthday,  Pope on a,  i.  146.

“  Black Joke,  The,”  song,  ii.  299.
Blagden,  Dr.,  ii.  315.

Blake,  the sisters,  i.  315.

Blakeney,  Mr.,  ii.  123 n.,  313.
Bloods  =  dandies,  &c.  See Macca-
roni.

Bloomfield,  Captain,  i.  81,  82 n.,
83 n.

Blount,  Martha,  and Pope,  i.
147 n.

Blow,  Dr.,  i.  xviii.

Blue-stocking parties and  “Blues,”

ii.  137 n. ,  138 n.,  296.  See also
Bas-bleus,  &c.

Blunt,  Mr.  G.,  ii.  302,  317.

Blunt,  Mr.,  sen.,  ii.  301,  304.
Boaden,  James,  his account of Mr.

Crisp’s play,  ii.  330.

Bohmen,  Mynhere,  i.  14S.
Bolingbroke,  Lord,  i.  lxxi,  lxxxvi;

and  “  Rule Britannia,”  i.  263.

“  Book fight  ”  between S.  Sharp and
Signor Baretti,  i.  24.

Booksellers’  Bill,  the  (extending
copyright),  and its defeat,  i.  288,
and n.

Boone,  Mr.  Charles,  i.  lxxxvi,  ii.
96,  106,  1 18.

Boscawen,  Mrs.,  ii.  137 n.,  323 n.,
334 n.

Boswell,  his Life of Johnson,  its
dates,  ii.  284 n.  ;  Boswell and(
Baretti,  i.  207 n.

Boufflers,  Mme.  de,  ii.  114 n.

Bourdois,  M. ,  'early friend of Genj
D’Arbiay,  i.  xcii,  ii.  164 n.

Bourdois,  Mrs.  ==  Anna Maria Burney,  which see.

Bowdler,  Dr.,  and his  “  Bowdlerized”  Shakespeare,  i.  262 n.

Bowdler,  Miss Frances,  i.  231,  243,
252,  254,  256,  261,  262.

Bowdler,  Mrs.  Harriet,  i.  262.

Bowdler,  Miss Jane,  i.  262.

Bowdler,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  i.  xxvii,i
xxviii.

Bradfield,  A.  Young at,  i.  6 n.

Bradshaw,  Lucretia,  actress,  afterwards wife of Martin Folkes,,
P.R.S.,  i.  1 14 n.

Bremner,  Mr.  v i.  148.

Brewers,  London,  ii.  153 n. ;  oi
Lynn,  i.  xl.

Breydone,  Mr.,  ?  Brydone,  which

see.

Bridges,  Lady,  i.  6 n. ,  ii.  325.

Brilliana,  the name,  ii.  182 11.

Brissot de Warville,  J.  P.,  i.  Ixxxv.

British Museum,  the Burney collections there,  i.  lxxii;  Hamilton
collection there,  i.  177 n.

Brixham,  a little squall on the coast
at,  i.  235.

Bromfield,.  Mr.,  surgeon,  i.  198,  ii.
90,  93-

Brooke,  Mrs.,  i.  157 n.,  229,  283,
329,  ii.  86,  87,  90;  her play,
“Virginia,”  i.  284 n. ,  ii.  32S.

Brookes,  Dr.  and Mrs.,  i.  121.

Brookes,  the Misses,  of Worcester,
ii.  165.

Broome,  Capt.  Ralph,  i.  xcii,  ii.
273 n.

Browne,  the Rev.  Mr.  (?),  minor
canon,  Norwich,  ii.  319.

Browne,  Sir Richard,  English minister at Paris,  i.  xxxi.

Browne,  Sir William,  M.D.,i.  11411.,
184,  1 85 n. ;  and the actor F oote,  i.

INDEX

57 n. ;  at Lynn,  i.  185 n. ;  his muff,
&c.,  i.  185 n. ;  in Queen Square,  i.
184  ;  his will,  i.  185 n.

Browning,  Robert,  on Charles Avi-
son,  i.  156 n. ;  on Christopher
Smart’s  “Song to David,”  i.  29.

Bruce,  James,  his travels,  &c.,  ii.
14,  151;  his collections,  ii.  43;
his conflicts with the journals,  &c.,
ii.  14;  his contributions to  “Burney’s Hist.  Music,”  ii.  8,  21,  35;
his death,  ii.  19 n.  See also ii.
7,  I3>  3L 33)  36,  39,  42,  46,
136.

Bruce,  Lord,  ii.  98,  108,  118.

Brudenell,  Lord,  ii.  325.

Brudenell,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  ii.  96,
105,  108 n.,  109,  1 18,  122.

Brunton,  Mrs.,  i.  284 n.

Brydone,  P. ,  and his  “Tour in
Sicily,”  &c. ,  i.  149,  215.

Bucks.  See Maccaronis.

Buggey,  carriage,  i.  273 n.

“  Bull,  Fanny,”  Frances Burney so
called by her father,  i.  1 52.

Bull-fights in Spain,  i.  293.

Bund,  Mrs.,  ii.  165.

Burgoyne,  Sir John,  ii.  38.

Burke,  Edmund,  favours the booksellers’  claim to copyright,  i.  288 n.

Burlington,  Earl of,  and the Garricks,  i.  1 18 n.

Burney,  Miss Ann,  or Anne,  Frances
Burney’s aunt,  i.  lxxx,  lxxxvii,
xci,  41,  49,  124,  148,  ii.  84,  88,
176;  and the publication of  “Evelina,”  ii.  214,  218 n.

Burney,  Mrs.  Ann,  Dr.  Burney’s
mother,  i.  lxxx,  xci,  xcii,  18,
non.,  148.

Burney,  Ann,  or Nancy,  afterwards
Mrs.  Hawkins,  Frances Burney’s
cousin,  i.  xcii,  ii.  165,  166.

Burney,  Anna Maria  (or Marianne),

i.  xcii,  149,  ii.  164m;  appears as
a child in a private performance
of  “Tom Thumb,”  ii.  164,  171-
179;  her husband M.  Bourdois,

ii.  164 n.

Burney,  Bessy.  See Burney,  Elizabeth,  of Worcester.

347

Burney,  Captain.  See Burney,  Rear-
Admiral James.

Burney,  Dr.  Charles,  Frances Burney’s father,  i.  viii,  xci,  9;  his
apprenticeship to Mr.,  afterwards
Dr.,  Arne,  i.  xxi;  his autobiography destroyed,  i.  xiii;  his birth
and family,  i.  x,  xci;  his business
as a teacher of music,  i.  xlv,  lxi,
2)  3>. 44>  I74>  h.  44;  at Chesing-
ton,  i.  lxxxvi;  at Chester,  i.  xviii;
his concerts,  or music parties,  i.
lxxi,  176,  ii.  32,  40,  56,  93,  102,
113,  152;  at Condover,  i.  xvii;
his meeting with Mr.  Crisp,  i.
xxxv,  xxxviii ;  his  “  Cunning
Man,”  i.  1,  Ixxii;  he translates
Dante,  i.  xlvi;  his essay on comets,  i.  xliv;  his early life,  i.  x,
xvii,  56 n. ;  his first reading of
“Evelina,”  ii.  222,  225,  230;  his
opinion of  “Evelina,”  ii.  230,
252,  320 n.;  his account of Mrs.
Thrale’s reception of  “  Evelina,”
ii.  236,  239;  as F. R.S.,  and
member of the French Institute,
i.  xci,  ii.  56 n.,  274 n.;  his tour
through F ranee and Italy,  i.  1 ion. ,
115,  120,  135;  his friends,  i.  xiv;
his German,  ii.  320m;  his German
tour,  i.  138 n.,  179,  185,  186,
199,  204,  214,  303;  his  “History of Music,”  i.  ix,  x,  lxviii,
214,  224,  226,  290,  ii.  I,  8,  21,
29,  34,  35,  44,  85,  88, 151,  281 n.;
his illness,  i.  43 n. ;  a candidate
for the mastership of the King’s
band,  i.  313 and n.,  ii.  333 m;
his late hours,  i.  263,  269;  his
letters and correspondence,  i.
xlvii,  56,  220 n.,  ii.  34  ( see also
“  Memoirs,”  &c.) ;  his library and
coins,  i.  lxxvii,  67 n.,  125 n. ;  his
“  chaos,”  and his  “  abyss of literature,”  i.  lxxxix,  ii.  281,  31 1;  at
Lynn,  i.  xxxviii,  xl,  3,  9,  47 n. ;
his first marriage,  i.  xxvi,  xci ;  his
second marriage,  i.  lxiv,  xcii,  2;
his  “Memoirs,”  i.  ix,  xi,  186 n.,
330 m,  ii.  114m,  285 n. ;  taking
his Oxford degrees as Mus.  Doc. ,

INDEX

348

Burney,  Dr.  Charles — continued.
i-  5Sj>  59;  as organist,  xxxviii,
xxxix,  xl;  his musical compositions,  i.  lxxxvi,  59;  his rebuke to
Nollekens,  ii.  145 n.;  in Paris,
i.  xlvii;  his personal appearance,

i.  58;  his portrait,  i.  lxx ;  at
Naples,  i.  1 77 n. ,  294 ;  at St.  Dionis
Backchurch,  i.  xxxviii,  2 n. ;  his
plan for a  “  School of Music,”  i.
lxx ;  on a private stage,  i.  85 n. ;
at Shrewsbury,  i.  xvii,  xviii,  xx,
xxii,  xxiii;  his  !  ‘  Tours,”  i.  115 m,

ii.  3  {see also German tour,  &c. );
in Venice,  i.  102 n. ;  verse by,  addressed to his daughter Susan,  ii.
27°  n-_;  his first wife,  i.  xxvi,
xxxviii,  xlv;  his works,  i.  viii,
lv,  lxx,  222,  225  {see also  “History of Music,”  “Tours,”  &c.);
Dr.  Burney and the masque of
“Alfred,”  i.  263 n.;  and Maria
Allen,  i.  142,  278;  and the Ancient Concerts,  ii.  282 n. ;  and
Dr.  Arne,  i.  xxv,  220,  ii.  30 n. ;
and Mr.  Barlow’s suit for Fanny,
ii.  50,  63,  69;  and Mrs.  Cibber,
1.  xxiii;  and Capt.  Cook,  i.  i6on. ;
and Mr.  Crisp,  i.  xxvi,  xliv,  li,  Iv,
Du,  non.,  126 n.,  269;  and his
daughters,  i.  li,  227 ;  and Diderot,
i-  144;  and  “Evelina”  before its
publication and after,  ii.  163,  164,
252>  320 n. ;  and Mr.,  afterwards
oir,  William Hamilton,  i.  177,
178;  and Dr.  Johnson,  i.  xli,  2 n.’
222,  11.  285 n. ;  and Garrick,  i.
xxiv,  1,  144;  and Goldsmith,  i.
226;  and Mr.  Greville,  i.  xxv
2!9, 220;  andFIandel,  i.  xix,  xxiv;
and the King,  i.  xxii;  and  “Rule
Britannia,”  i.  263 m;  and Lord
Sandwich,  1.  138,322;  and Rousseau,  1.  299;  and Christopher
Smart,  1.  133  •  and the Society of
Musicians,  i.  151;  and Thomson,

1.  xxiv ;  and theThrales,  ii.  283 n.

.  5n->  337 n.;  on French music'
1-.  227;  on_ likenesses,  i.  51;  0n
giving parties,  ii.  138;  Mr.  Crisp
on,  ii.  143.  See also i.  xlv,  18,

42,  46,  67,  89,  107 n.,  132,  18&
194,  220,  222,  279,  286,  306,  i i
§5,  92,  317-

Burney,  Dr.  Charles,  jun. ,  Dr.  Bun
ney’s son,  i.  xli,  lxxii,  lxxv,  xci
26,  51,  non.,  148,  ii.  137 n.,  3177
called  “Cherry Nose”  ana
“Cherry Derry”  by Garrick,  in:
29,  279;  compared with hiai
brother James,  ii.  140 n.;  as li
brarian to his father,  ii.  279;  h i
negotiates the publication c3
“  Evelina,”  ii.  161,  213;  Southev
on his  “  quamical”  knowledge:
ii.  140 n.

Burney,  Charles,  an infant son oc
Dr.  Burney,  i.  xxxviii,  xci.

Burney,  Charles Rousseau,  cousin
of Frances Burney and husbancu
of her sister Hetty,  i.  lxxi,  xcii
27 n. ,  32,  47 ;  engaged as harp 3
sichord player at Drury Lanai
d heatre,  i.  lxxii ;  his engagement
with Hetty,  i.  99,  101;  his mar-r
nage,  i.  102;  as a musician,  id
17S,  219,  ii.  5,  20,  22,  33,  59,  794
93,  97,  108,  126,  189 n.  See also',
l-  59,  105,  124,  ii.  92,  in,  anat
under Burney,  Hetty.

Bumey,  Charlotte Ann,  Frances:
Burney’s sister,  i.  lxxv,  xci,  2,  40,1,
42,  61,  64,  102,  131,  132 n.,  162,;!
206,  225,  264,  ii.  31, 142,  217,  222,;,
235,  238,  241,  271 n. ;  her character,  ii.  272 n. ;  at Chesington, ,
ii.  288;  likened to  “  Comedy” inn
Reynolds’s picture of Garrick between Tragedy and Comedy,  i.  .
221;  her husbands,  ii.  273 n.;:
Fragments from her Letters and 1
Journal,  ii.  272 n.,  277,  et sq. ;  ;
her marriage and family,  ii.  273 5
n. ;  her pocket book,  ii.  274 n.  ;  .
her puns,  ii.  283 ;  and Vincent
Mathias,  ii.  272 n.

Burney,  Edward Francis,  painter,  .
cousin of Frances Burney,  i.  xlv,  ,
lxxii,  Ixxx,  xcii,  ii.  161;  at Chesing-
i-_ lviii ;  his illustrations to  >
Evelina”  and  “Cecilia,”  ii.  275
n. ,  289,  290,  291 n. ;  his portraits of

INDEX

Fanny and Susan Burney,  i.  lxxxv,
ii.  271 n. ;  in private theatricals,
ii.  166,  170,  17 1,  172,  185;  and
the publication of  “  Evelina,”  ii.
213-217;  and Sir Joshua Reynolds,  ii.  290,  292 n. ;  and the
Royal Academy,  ii.  290,  292 n. ;
account of,  and his works,  ii.
291 n.

Burney,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  Dr.  Burney’s second wife,  i.  xliv,  lxiv,
lxxxviii,  xcii,  7,  10,  61,  ii.  284;
her cookery,  &c.,  ii.  149;  and her
daughter Maria Allen’s secret
marriage, i.  H5n.,i86, 193 n.  ;and
Charlotte Burney,  ii.  142,  305,

31 1 ;  and the publication of  “  Evelina,”  ii.  237,  239,  240,  247;  letter of,  i.  lxvi;  loses her property
through Dr.  King,  i.  H9n.;  her
marriage with Dr.  Burney,  i.  lxiv,
xcii,  2 ;  buys the house in Queen
Square,  i.  102 n.  See also i.  113,
132,  174,  199,  221.

Burney,  Elizabeth,  of Worcester,  i.
xcii,  148,  ii.  163,  165-172,  179,
185,  199,  218 n.  ;  guesses the
authorship of  “  Evelina.”  ii.
221.

Burney,  Esther.  See Burney,  Hetty.

Burney,  Mrs.  Esther,  Dr.  Burney’s
first wife,  and Frances Burney’s
mother,  i.  xxvi,  xliv,  xlv,  21 n.

Burney,  Frances,  the dates of her
birth and baptism,  i.  xxxix,  xci,

2,  23,  222;  at Bath,  i.  262 n.,  ii.
288,  292 n, ;  as a bridesmaid,  i.
49;  her third novel  “Camilla,”
ii.  340 n. ;  burns her early novel,
“Caroline Evelyn,”  i.  lxvi,  io6n.;
at Chesington,  i.  lxiv,  322,  ii.  284,
288,  294  ( see also Chesington);
her comedy,  ii.  327 ;  is called,  at
different times,  “  Fanny Bull,”  i.
152,  “feeling Fanny,”  i.  8,  “the
Goddess of Wisdom,”  i.  71,  “the
old lady,”  i.  lxxix,  and  “silent
observant Miss Fanny,”  i.  39 n. ;
her child-life,  i.  lxxviii,  ii.  252
(see also at Lynn) ;  her correspondence with Mr.  Crisp,  i.  Ii,  lii,  liii,  I

349

lxxx,  175,  185,  ii.  1  (see also
Crisp,  Samuel);  her dates,  &c.,
sometimes doubtful,  i.  1,  ii.
28411.,  287 n.;  her Diaries,  i.  vii,
lxxvii,  lxxx  (see also under Journal);  her dress,  &c. ,  i.  lxxxiii;
her early life,  i.  xliv,  lxxviii,  lxxix,
39 n. ;  is an early riser,  i.  135;  her
early writings,  some burnt,  i.  lxv,
lxvi,  Ixviii,  lxxix,  3,  16,  20,  82m,
106 n.,  188,  279,  314,  ii.  I;  her
eyes,  i.  256 n.;  her French,  i.
103,  222;  her  “little bay nag
Grub,”  i.  82 n.,  279 n. ;  her visit
to Gloucester,  ii.  179;  her handwriting,  ii.  148 n. ;  helps her
father with his  “History of Music,”  i.  Ixviii,  39 n.,  224,  ii.  1,
135,  I48n.;  studies Italian,  i.  134,
222,  252,  ii.  142;  her first sight of
Dr.  Johnson,  ii.  153;  and Johnson’s praise of  “Evelina,”  ii.  246,
249,  250,  251,  253;  her judgment of character,  i.  lxxvii,  ii.
272 n.  ;  her letters,  i.  lxxix;  as
“  Librarian,”  &c.,  to her father,  i.
lxxvii,  39 n.,  222;  her acquaintance with literature,  i.  lxxvii;
her lovers,  i.  Ii,  lxxxii,  82 n.,  ii.
47,  76,  273 n. ,  306 n.  (see also
under Barlow,  Bloomfield,  Tom-
kyn,  &c.);  her  “Madonna seal,”
ii.  136;  at Lynn,  see Lynn;  her
views on marriage,  ii.  88;  at a
masquerade,  i.  70;  the novels she
read,  i.  lxxvii;  her  “old beaus,”
i.  256 n. ,  268;  Mrs.  Papendiek’s
erroneous account of her life at
Court,  &c. ,  ii.  334 n. ;  in Paris,  i.
lxxxii,  ii.  1 14 n. ;  her pension from
the Court,  ii.  342 n. ;  her personal
appearance,  portraits,  &c. ,  i.
lxxxi,  lxxxii,  lxxxv,  21 1,  257,  ii.
271 n.,  293 n.;  in Poland-Street,
i.  lxxxv;  her burlesque  “Treatise on Politeness,”  i.  324;  in the
Queen’s household,  as one of the
Keepers of the Robes,  i.  Ixxxiv,
71 n.,  14m.,  292 n.,  325 n.,  ii.
335m,  336 n.,  340n. ;  sheis invited
to Teignmouth,  i.  222;  in private

INDEX

350

Burney,  Frances — continued.

theatricals,  i.  128,  ii.  165-192;
her style and its decadence,  i.
Ixix;  her verses,  i.  lxxx,  57,  60;
her visit to Westwood,  ii.  199;  at
work in Sir Isaac Newton’s Observatory,  in the St.  Martin’s
Street house,  i.  314;  and Maria
Allen,  i.  lxxix;  and Mrs.  Burney,  i.  lxv lxvi,  Ixxviii;  and Mr.
Crisp,  i.  Ii,  lix,  lx,  ii.  325 ;  and
her father,  i.  xlvi,  li,  9 ;  and Mrs.
Garrick,  i.  lxxix;  and her sister
Hetty,  i.  50;  and Laetitia Hawkins,  i.  Ixix;  and Dr.  Johnson,  i.
xiv,  ii.  153,291;  and her mother,

i.  xlv;  and Mrs.  Schwellenberg,

ii.  340 n. ;  and Dr.  Shepherd,  i.

292 n. ;  and the Thrales,  i.  liii,
Ivii,  lxxx,  132 n.,  ii.  257,  292 n.,

293 n->  3°S  »•>  337 n.;  Macaulay
on Frances Burney,  i.  Ixxvi,  ii.
307 n.  See also D’Arblay,  Mme.

Burney,  Hetty  (Esther),  afterwards
Mrs.  Charles Rousseau Burney,

i.  xxxviii,  xliv,  xlviii,  xlix,  lviii,
Ixxi,  lxxv,  xci,  xcii,  2,  3,  6n.,  8,
32>  39>  41 ,  45>  47)  49 5 her daughter,  Anna Maria,  ii.  164;  her illness,  i.  50 n.;  and Dr.  Johnson,

ii.  154;  love passages with Mr.
Seaton, i.  33,  53, 86, 94,  96,  97,200
(see also Seaton);  at a masquerade,  i.  70;  engagement and marriage with her cousin Charles
Burney, i.  97,99,  101,  102,  105m,
106 n.,  200;  as a musician,  i.  Ixxi,
6,196,  ii.  5,  22,  33,  60,  93,  97,
108,  127,  155,  308;  her residence,
i.  136;  verse addressed to her,  i.
103;  “  the wifish,”  i.  1 15 n.,  201.
See also i.  50,  63,  70,  101,  124,126,
194,  290 n.,  ii.  50,  90,  92,  hi,
142,  193 m,  201.

Burney,  or Macburney,  James,
Dr.  Burney’s father,  i.  xvi,  xci,
18 n.

Burney,  James,  half-brother of Dr.
Burney,  and organist,  of Shrewsbury,  i.  xviii,  xx.

Burney,  Rear-Admiral James,  eldest

son of Dr.  Burney,  i.  xxxvii::
Ixxii,  lxxv,  xci,  ii.  296;  in ac
tion under Admiral Sir Edwari
Hughes,  ii.  318;  his birth dat
corrected,  i.  62 n.  ;  his character
i.  67,  68 n.;  at Chesington,  i
lviii ;  compared with his brother
Charles,  ii.  140 n. ;  his voyages
and account of Capt.  Cook
death,  i.  319 and n.,  ii.  140,  283
his share in the compilation c
Cook’s Voyages,  i.  139 n. ;  his ac
quaintance with Eugene Aram,  i
62 n. ;  his house at Buckinghan
Gate,  i.  125 m;  his journal,  i
lxxiii,  ii.  283;  his marriage,  ii
129 n. ;  and Omai the Otaheitan

i.  322,  332,  ii.  131,  133,  134;  hi
promotion in the navy,  i.  lviii
214,  ii.  135;  and Lord Sandwich

ii.  124;  and whist,  i.  68 n. ;  hi
wife and family,  i.  277,  ii.  129 m
277 n. ;  his writings,  ii.  14cm
See also i.  61,  63,  65,  84,  non.
120,  180,  318,  322m,  ii.  7,  24
37,  38,  41,  87,  266 n.

Burney,  James,  of Worceste]
Frances Burney’s cousin,  i.  xci:
ii.  158,  163,  165,  168,  172,  17;
195,  198.

Burney,  Marianne.  See Burnej
Anna Maria.

Burney,  Martin,  only son of Ac
miral Burney,  i.  lxxiii,  277;  h
friendship with Charles Laml
&c.,  i.  lxxiii.

Burney,  Mr.,  —  Charles Roussea
Burney,  which see.

Burney,  Rebecca,  Frances Burney
aunt,  i.  lxxx,  xcii,  77,  78,  12^
148,  ii.  61,  84.

Burney,  Rebecca,  of Worceste
Frances Burney’s cousin,  i.  xci
ii.  158,  163,  165,  172,  176,  191
200.

Burney,  Richard,  son of Dr.  Bu
ney,  i.  lxvi,  Ixvii,  lxxiii,  lxx
xcii,  3,  64,  152,  221,  316,  ii.  8'
132,  285 n.

Burney,  Richard,  of Worceste
Dr.  Burney’s brother,  i.  xxi,  lx

INDEX

Ixxx,  xci,  xcii,  ioi,  168,  ii.  161,
162,  165,  168,  170,  292 n.

Burney,  Richard,  jun,,  Frances
Burney’s cousin,  i.  xlv,  Ixxii,
xcii,  6 n.,  2711.,  59,  166,  168,  170;
ii.  i63,  165,  202,  20S,  221,  274 n.,
307,  317;  his character,  ii.  217 n. ;
his first reading of  “Evelina,”  ii.
215,  216,  218 n. ;  at Hartlebury,  ii.
208;  as a musician,  ii.  191 n. ;  in
private theatricals,  ii.  168-173;
his profession,  ii.  195,  206;  and
Mrs.  S.  of Bewdley,  i.  170,  ii.
219 n. ;  and Mrs.  Wall,  ii.  183,
l85>  193,  J96.

Burney,  Sarah Harriet,  i.  lxxv,
xcii,  ii.  87,  142;  her novels,  ii.
87 n.

Burney,  Sarah,  daughter of the
Admiral,  i.  Ixxii.  See also under
Mrs.  Payne.

Burney,  Susanna Elizabeth,  Frances Burney’s sister,  i.  xli,  xliv,
xlvii,  lxii,  Ixxiv,  xci,  xcii,  3,  6 n.,
8 ;  is suspected as being part author
of  “  Evelina,”  i.  Ixxiv,  ii.  237,
247 ;  the D’Arblay Diary originally letters to her,  i.  Ixxx;  in
France,  i.  30 n. ;  her Journal,  i.  1,
Ixxxvii,  210 n.,  269 n. ;  her letters,  i.  Ixxiv,  Ixxxvii,  44,  228,
ii.  220,  235 n.,  267 n.,  269 n.  ;
letters to her,  ii.  323;  her marriage with Molesworth Phillips,
ii.  266,  269 n. ;  at Mickleham,  ii.
270m ;  as a musician,  ii.  153;
her portrait,  ii.  271 n. ;  her sons
and daughter,  ii.  271 n. ;  with the
Thrales at Streatham,  ii.  255;
Dr.  Burney’s verses addressed to
her,  ii.  270 n.  See also i.  46,  61,
64,  100,  102,  106 n.,  109,  non.,
432,  1 5 1,  181,  186,  197,  208,
210 n.,  222,  227,  ii.  92,  142,
193 n.,  210,  216,  269 m,  277.

Burney,  Thomas,  Frances Burney’s
cousin,  i.  xcii,  ii.  165,  166,  167,
172.

Burney,  or Holt,  Mr.  Thomas,  i.
xcii,  79.

Burney family,  the,  i.  Ixxxiii,  45 n.,
II.

62 n. ;  and the Allens,  see Allen  ;
and the Hawkins family,  i.  55 n. ;
and the Thrales,  see Thrales.

Burneys of Worcester,  the,  i.  lxx.
See also Burney,  Richard,  &c.

Burney collections in the British
Museum,  i.  Ixxii.

“  Burney,  Memoirs of Dr.”  See
“  Memoirs of Dr.  Burney.”

Burrows  (or Burroughs),  Rev.  Dr.,
ii.  137.

Bute,  Lord,  i.  158 n.

Butler,  Lady Eleanor,  i.  132 m

Byron,  Admiral and Mrs.,  ii.  27 n.,
306.

Byron,  Augusta,  i.  lxxvii.

“  Cabin,”  the,  at Lynn,  i.  10,  12.

“  Cadets,”  tea-,  i.  142 n.

Calash,  the,  ii.  258.

Calcutta,  “  Black Hole of,”  i.  65 n.

Callcott,  Dr.,  his glee on Burney's
and Hawkins’s Hists.  of Music,
ii.  30 n.

Calvert and Seward,  brewers,  ii.
152 n.

Cambridge,  Owen,  i.  xxxvii,  Ixxiv.

Camilla,  “a character,”  for Mrs.
Greville,  i.  122 and n.

“Camilla,”  Frances Burney’s third
novel,  i.  105 n. ,  ii.  184 n.,
340 n.

Campbell,  Archibald,  and his  “  Lexi-
phanes,”  ii.  152 n.

Canadian scenery,  i.  283 n.

Candour,  word,  i.  241,  ii.  100,
158.

Card games,  1.  90.

Cardigan Head Tavern,  Charing
Cross,  i.  151 n.

“Careless Husband,  The,”  amateur,
performance of,  at Chesington,  i.
127.

Carestini,  ii.  79,  117.

Carlisle House,  Soho Square,  i.
98 n.

Carlyle,  Thomas,  on the Orloffs,  ii.
94 n.

“Caroline Evelyn,”  novel by
Frances Burney,  burnt,  i.  lxvi,
106 n.

M

INDEX

352

Carriages,  ii.  13;  the buggey,  the
whiskey,  the phaeton,  i.  273 n.

Carte,  the historian,  i.  lxxxvi.

Carter,  Mrs.  Eliz.,  i.  220 n.

Case,  Alderman and Miss,  of Lynn,

i.  17.

Catch Club,  the,  ii.  30 n.

Catches and glees,  ii.  30 n.,  191.

Cater  (or Cator),  Mr.,  ii.  259.

Catherine,  Empress of Russia,  and
Gregory and Alexis Orloff,  ii.  93,
121.

Cavan,  Richard,  4th Earl of,  i.  27 n.

“  Cecilia,”  Frances Burney's,  i.
lxxv,  305 n.,  ii.  275 n. ;  early
opinions on,  ii.  325  ;  sale and publication of,  ii.  307,  337 n.

Celestini,  Signor,  i.  176,  177,  194.

Cennick,  the preacher,  and the
Advent-Hymn,  ii.  206 n.

Cervettos,  the two,  musicians,  i.  32,

ii.  217.

Chambers,  Ephraim,  his Cyclo-
ptedia,  i.  x.  See also Rees.

Chambers,  the Miss,  ii.  148 n.

Chamier,  Mr.  Anthony,  ii.  96,  106,

1 18,  263.

Chandos,  Duke of,  i.  6 n.

“  Chaos,”  Dr.  Burney’s,  and Bishop
Thirl wall’s,  ii.  281 n.

Chapone,  Mrs.,  ii.  137 n.,  298.

“  Characters,  Maxims,  and Reflections,”  Greville’s,  i.  26.

Charles Edward Stuart,  Prince,
ii.  27 n. ;  and the Stranges,  ii.
16 11. ;  and Andrew Lumisden,
ii.  128 n.  See also St.  George,
Chevalier,  &c.

Charles Street  (?  Covent Garden),
Hetty’s house in,  i.  136.

“  Charlotte Elizabeth  ”  (Miss
Browne),  ii.  319 n.

Charlotte,  Queen,  and Frances Burney,  i.  lxxxii ;  and Cornelia
Knight,  ii.  340 n. ;  Mrs.  Papen-
diek’s erroneous account of
Frances Burney at her Court,  ii.
334 n. ;  Mrs.  Piozzi on,  i.  n8n. ;
her wardrobe department and its
officials,  ii.  336 n.

Chateauneuf,  Abbe de,  ii.  282 n.

Cheesecakes at Cornhill,  i.  107.

Chelsea,  Lindsey House,  i.  306.

Chelsea Assembly,  i.  82.

Chesington Hall,  i.  lvi,  lvii,  Ixiv.
See also Chesington.

Chesington,  Surrey,  i.  xxxiii,  lvii,
lxxxvi,  44,  101 ;  Frances Burney
there,  i.  125,  322,  328,  ii.  220,
250;  the church,  i.  126m;  Chesington Hall,  described,  i.  125,  and n. ;
Susan Burney’s visit to,  ii.  260,
262,  313.  See also ii.  128,  149,
162,  163,  288,  and Crisp,  Samuel,
&c.

Chester,  W.,  M.P.  for Gloucester,
ii.  187 n.

Chesters,  the  (Tory)  party in
Gloucester,  ii.  187.

Chesterfield,  the Earl of,  on gaming,  i.  205  ;  on horse racing,  ib. ;
and his heir Mr.  Stanhope,  ib. ;
his  “Letters,”  i.  314;  his purchases of pictures,  i.  205 n.  ;  his
death and will,  i.  205,  206 n.

Chevalier de St.  George,  the,  and !
the Strange family,  i.  86 n.,  ii.
16 n. ,  26 n. ,  29 n.  See also Stuarts, ,
&c.

Chignons,  &c.,  ii.  176 n.

China,  Worcester.  See Porcelain.

Cholmondeley,  the Earls of,  i. .
330 n-

Cholmondeley,  Gen.  James,  i. .
33°-

Cholmondeley,  Mrs.,  ii.  268;  hert
praise of  “Evelina”  before the;
authorship was known,  ii.  233, .
234,  236,  240,  241 ;  and Dr. .
Johnson,  ii.  234.

Cholmondeley,  Hon.  Robert,  ii,
234-

Christenings,  ii.  286 n.

Church,  singing at Teignmouth,  i.
25S-  .

Churchill,  Charles,  i.  Ixxvi.

Chute,  Molly,  and Mr.  Crisp,  i.
xxxvii.

Cibber,  Colley,  his alterations of
“  King Lear,”  i.  200;  and Garrick!
in Bayes,  i.  164 n.

Cibber,  Mrs.,  and Dr.  Burney,  i.

INDEX

353

xxiii,  xxiv,  xlvii;  in Crisp’s play,
ii.  330.

Cicero,  Middleton’s edition of,  i.
I35-

“Cid,  II,”  Sacchini’s opera,  i.  195,
216.

“  Clandestine Marriage,”  Garrick
and Colman’s,  i.  68 n.,  hi n.,
280 n.

Clarges,  Lady,  ii.  57 n.,  258.
Clarges,  Sir Thomas,  i.  116,  n7n.,
ii.  56.

Clarges Street,  Piccadilly,  i.  117 n.
“  Clarissa,”  Richardson’s,  i.  36 n.
Clarke,  actor,  at Covent Garden
Theatre,  ii.  332.

Clarke,  Captain.  See Clerke.
Clarke,  Elizabeth.  See Harris,
Mrs.

Clarke,  John,  M.  P.,  of Sandford,
Somerset,  ii.  57 n.

Claude Lorraine,  picture by,  bought
by Lord Chesterfield,  i.  206 n.
Clayton,  Miss,  ii.  248.

Clerke,  Capt. ,  successor of Capt.

Cook,  i.  321,  ii.  10 n. ,  140.
Clerke,  Sir Philip Jennings,  and
Dr.  Johnson,  ii.  148 n.

Clifford,  Lady de,  i.  xlviii,  xlix.
Clifford,  Lord,  hisseatatUgborough,

i,  231.

“  Club,  The,”  i.  68 n.

Clunch,  the word,  ii.  202,  301.
Coach accident,  a,  i.  197,  198.
Coach,  stage,  company,  i.  225.
Coaches.  See carriage.

Coat and petticoat,  in women’s
dress,  i.  248,  ii.  11,  175.

Coke,  Mrs.,  of Holkham,  i.  278.
Cokethorpe,  Oxfordshire,  i.  274.
Colbourns,  the,  i.  234,  238,  239,  246.
Coleridge,  S.  T.,  i.  68 n. ;  Southey
'  to,  ii.  140 n.

Colla,  Signor,  singing master,  ii.  2,
81,  144.

Collins,  his poems,  i.  lxxvii.

Collins,  Mortimer,  on Mrs.  Harris,

ii.  57 n.

Colrnan,  George,  the Elder,  i.  xlviii,
148;  and Dr.  Burney,  i.  116;
and Covent Garden Theatre,  i.

1 1 1 n. ;  his wife’s death,  i.  1 1 1 ;  his
father,  i.  111 n.;  his and Garrick’s
“Clandestine Marriage, ”i.  68 n. ;
his letter signed  “  Lexiphanes,”
ii.  152 n. ;  and Mason,  i.  192 n. ;
his  “  Prelude,”  i.  191 ;  isknocked
down by the Rev.  Mr.  Penneck,
ii.  2,  9;  and his patron,  Pulteney,
Earl of Bath,  i.  ill n.  ;  and his
wife,  i.  31,  hi.

Colman,  George,  the Younger,  i.
1 12;  death of his mother,  ill,  112;
his  “Recollections,”  113m
Colman,  Mrs.,  wife of George Colman the Elder,  her death,  i.
hi;  her daughter Miss Ford,  i.
1 12.

Combe,  Mrs.,  i.  136.

Comedie Italienne,  Paris,  i.  xlvii.
Comedy,  “sentimental ’’and  “laughing,”  the contest between,  ii.
280 n.

Comedy and Tragedy,  Garrick between,  Reynolds’s picture,  i.
206 n.,  221.

“Comedy,  Little,”  Goldsmith’s,  i.
206 n.,  221 n.

Composers,  English and foreign,  i.

I5S.  156-

Conceit and rudeness,  i.  135.
Concerts at Dr.  Burney’s house,  i.
176,  217.  See also Burney,  Dr.
Charles,  concerts.

Condover,  Dr.  Burney at,  i,  xvii,
xxiii.

Coney,  Mr.,  of Lynn,  i.  317.

Const,  Mrs.  and Miss,  i.  no n.
Constancy,  and Mr.  Barlow,  ii.  47,
49-

Conversation,  i.  38;  the best friend
to,  ii.  138;  Frances Burney’s
power in recording,  i.  39 n. ;  and
music,  i.  96,  ii.  308.

Conversation cards,  ii.  31 1.

“  Conversatione,  a true,”  ii.  138.
“Convito,  II,”  comic opera,  ii.  309.
Conway,  Edward,  Viscount,  ii.
182 n.

Cook,  Capt.,  Jas.  Burney’s and
Capt.  Furneaux’s accounts of his
death,  i.  319 and n. ;  and Dr.

INDEX

354

Burney,  i.  i6on. ;  and Omai and
Otaheite,  i.  334 n.,  ii.  25 n.,  134;
his voyages,  i.  138,  ii.  38,  140 n.,
their publication,  i.  139 n.,  140 n.,
ii.  288.

Cooke,  Miss Kitty,  i.  lxi,  lxii,  lxxxii,
9.  31.  126,  322-327,  ii.  288,  295 n.
Cookery,  i.  107,  136,  137;  Mrs.
Glasse’s book on,  i.  245 n. ;  a
hash,  or hachis,  &c. ,  i.  245 n.
Cooper,  Ann,  afterwards Mrs.  Ann
Burney,  Dr.  Burney’s mother,

i.  xvii.  See also Burney,  Mrs.
Ann.

Cooper,  Mr.,  ii.  96.

Copyright.  See Booksellers’  Bill.
Coquerel,  Athanase,  ii.  302 n.
Coquetry,  i.  282.

Corbett,  Kynaston,  M.  P.,  i.  xviii.
Cornelys,  Mrs.,  and her Rooms,
Soho Square,  i.  89,  98,  298,
329 n.

“Correspondents,  The,”  attributed
to George,  Lord Lyttelton and
others,  ii.  87.

Corri,  Signor,  i.  no n.,  314.

Corri,  Signora,  ii.  145 n.

Cosin,  John,  Bishop of Durham,  i.
133 n.

Cotterel,  Sir Clement,  ii.  99.
Cottons,  the,  ii.  265 n.

Coughing,  sneezing,  &c. ,  directions
for,  i.  325 and n.

Counterpoint and the ancients,  ii.

36.

Country,  life in the,  i.  276 ;  parsons,

ii.  260;  and town,  i.  15.

Court- dress for the Queen’s birthday,  Mrs.  Thrale’s Owyhee,  ii.
265.

Courvoisyois,  Mile.,  i.  323-327.
Coussmaker,  Capt.,  ii.  167,  180,
181,  182,  184 n.,  186,  188,  190,
225.

Coussmaker,  Catherine,  ii.  184 n.,
218,  223-232,  323.

Coussmaker,  Mrs.  See Hales,
Lady.

Covent Garden Theatre,  George
Colman and,  i.  hi n. ;  Crisp’s
“Virginia”  reproduced there,  ii.

332;  “a new instrument called
Piano Forte”  there,  i.  lv.

Coventry,  6th Earl of,  i.  xxxvii,  ii.

326,  331.

Coventry,  Countess of,  i.  xxxvii,  ii.
iSin.,  328,  330,  331.

Coxcombries and coquetries of the
time,  ii.  217 n.,  219m

Cracherode,  Mr.,  ii.  129 n.

Cradock,  Mr.,  his  “Zobeide,”  i.
xlii,  330 n. ;  and Foote,  ii.  280 n.

“  Cranbo  ”  verse  (?  Crambo),  by
Fanny Burney,  i.  56.

Craven,  Lady,  ii.  133.  See also
Anspach,  Margravine of.

Crawford,  Miss,  i.  54.

Crawford,  Mr.,  i.  42,  84.

Crewe,  Lady,  i.  xxiii,  xxxix,  51,  ii.
132,  285 n.

Crewe,  Miss,  i.  xxiii.

Cricket,  i.  224;  in Kent,  ii.  325;
at Teignmouth,  i.  244,  249.

Crisp,  Mrs.  Anne of Burford,  Oxfordshire,  i.  lxii.

Crisp,  Sir Charles,  i.  lxiii.

Crisp,  Frederick Arthur,  his  “Collections relative to the family of
Crispe,”  1881,  i.  xxv.

Crisp,  Henry  =  Crisp,  Samuel,  of
Chesington,  which see.

Crisp,  Sir Nicholas,  i.  xxix,  lvi.

Crisp,  Sam.,  “the Greenwich Traveller,”  i.  xxvii,  xxviii.

Crisp,  Samuel,  of Chesington,  i.  viii,
lxxii,  lxxiii,  2,  9;  his alarm as to
invasion,  1779,  ii.  255 n.,  261,
262,  263;  he meets Burney,  i.
xxxv ;  at cards,  i.  lviii ;  his correspondence with Frances Burney,
i.  Ii,  lii,  lxxx,  175,  185,  202,  228,
267,  279,  312,  ii.  1,  37,  38,  41,  52,
73,  101,  1 16,  127,  134,  136,  139,
142,  i43>  J44.,  152,  i59»  160,  261;
his early life,  i.  xxxv ;  errors of his
biographers,  ii.  329;  his executrix,
i.  229;  his expletives,  i.  1 Si ;  his
family,  i.  xxvii;  at Hampton,  i.
liv;  his house at Chesington,  i.
125 and n.  (see also Chesington);
was owner of the first piano-forte
brought to England,  i.  lv;  his

INDEX

poetry,  ii.  262;  his politics,  i.  Ivi,
ii.  26111.;  in Rome,  i.  liv;  his
play  “  Virginia,”  i.  xxxvii,  xli,  ii.
262, 326-332;  his sisters,  i.  xxxviii,
228,  ii.  1 ;  on Mr.  Barlow’s addresses to Frances Burney,  ii.  52,
73.  77;  on Dr.  Burney,  ii.  143;
on Dr.  Johnson,  ii.  160;  on man,
ii.  53;  on moneymaking,  ii.  143;
on the vanities and puppyisms of
society,  ii.  143;  and Maria Allen,

i.  1 15,  181;  and Dr.  Burney,  i.
xxvi,  xliv,  li,  lvii,  1 1 5 ;  and Frances Burney,  i.  xxvi,  li,  (see also
his correspondence,  &c. );  and the
publication of  “  Evelina,”  ii.  251,
337 n. ;  and Garrick,  i.  xxxvi,  xliii,

ii.  327;  and Greville,  i.  xxxv.  lv,
ii.  327;  and Moliere,  i.  lix;  and
the gypsies,  ii.  264;  and Mrs.
Pringle,  i.  144;  and Mrs.  Thrale,
ii.  260.  See also i.  25,  26 n.,  31,
32,  43,  45,  47,  49,  75.  IOI>  102 n->
126,  127,  129,  130,  133,  163 n.,
165,  179,  256 m,  323-328,  331,
ii.  51,  85,  148,  151,  162,  284,
288,  293 n.,  294,

Crisp,  Sir Thomas,  i.  lxiii.

Crisp,  Dr.  Tobias,  i.  xxix,  xxxii,  lv,
lvi.

Crispe,  Ellis,  i.  xxxiii.

Crispe,  Henry,  ii.  329.

Crisps,  the,  of Chipping Norton,  i.
lxiii.

Crispen,  Mr.  (?  of Bath),  i.  230-247,
252-257,  261 ;  his gallantry,  i.  238,
242.

Crist ofori,  of Florence,  and the invention of the pianoforte,  i.  lv.

“Critical Review,  The,”  i.  66 and
n.,  ii.  151.

Croker,  J.  W.,  his attacks on Mme.
D’Arblay’s Diary,  and the  “  Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,”  i.  xiii,  142m

Cromartie,  Earl of,  the unfortunate,
i.  32.

“Cross Purposes,”  Obrien’s,  i.  192.

Crutchley,  Mr.,  ii.  300.

Cuffs,  ruffles,  &c. ,  ii.  169 and n.

Cumberland,  his  “  West-Indian,”  i.
265 n. ;  and Foote,  ii,  280 n.

355

“  Cunning Man,  The,”  Dr.  Burney’s
play,  i.  1.

Curtsey,  Italian and English,  ii.  91.

Cute,  the word,  ii.  279.

Cutler,  Mr.,  ii.  159,  248.

Daddy  =  Mr.  Crisp,  i.  45 n.

Dahl,  Michael,  painter,  i.  xvi.

Dalrymple,  his attack on Hawkes-
worth’s edition of Cook’s Voyages,  i.  272.

Dalrymple,  Miss,  i.  91.

Dalston,  Sir W.  and Lady,  i.  174.

Daly,  Mrs.  =Miss Barsanti,  i.  191 n.

Dancing,  i.  298.  See also Fandango,
Hay,  the,  &c.

Dante,  Dr.  Burney translates,  i.
xlvi.

D’Arblay,  Rev.  Alexander,  Mme.
D’Arblay’s son,  i.  279.

D’Arblay,  Lieut. -General,  Comte,
Mme.  D’Arblay’s husband,  i.  xci,
ii.  164 n.,  270 n.;  his death,  i.
262 n.

D’Arblay,  Mme.  (Frances Burney),
her MSS.  of this Diary,  i.  1,
1 10,  1 13 n.  (see also under Diary) ;
her husband,  i.  26211.;  her son,  i.
279;  her letter to D’lsraeli the
younger,  i.  lxxvii;  her residence
in France,  i.  Ixxxii,  ii.  11411.;
and Mrs.  Barbauld,  i.  299.  See
also under Burney,  Frances.

Davenant,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  ii.  265,
287,  306.

Davies,  Thomas,  bookseller,  i.  300.

Davies,  Dr.,  of Worcester,  ii.  181 n.

Davies,  Miss Cecilia,  singer,  ii.  6,
7,  8,  38,  42,  92,  101 ;  in Italy,  ii.
7 n. ;  her law suit won,  ii.  80.

Davis,  Harry,  of Gloucester,  ii.  186,
et seq.

Davis,  Tom,  of Gloucester,  ii.  18711.

Davy,  Lady,  i.  261.

Davy,  Miss,  i.  258,  261.

Davy,  Sir John,  and daughters,  i.
230-

Deal,  ii.  324.

“  Dean of Coleraine,  The,”  novel,  i.
45 n.

INDEX

Death,  punishment of,  Goldsmith
on,  i.  13.

Debbieg,  or Debieg,  Capt.,  afterwards General,  and Mrs.,  i.  53>
54,  71 n.,  85,  90,  94 m,  163,  200.
De Clifford,  the Baron,  ii.  184 n.
Deerhurst,  Lord,  ii.  326.  See also
Coventry,  6th Earl of.

Deiden,  Baron and Baroness,  ii.  36,
59>  77,  US,  1 1 6,  123.

Delabere,  Mr.,  ii.  195.

Delany,  Mrs.,  i.  xxxvii,  lxii,  ii.  137
n.,  187 n.,  188 n.,  323 m
Demidoff,  Baron de,  ii.  97,  108,
120.

Den,  Mrs.,  ii.  315.

“Deserter,  The,”  i.  97 and n.,  ii.
332 n.

Devaynes,  John,  ii.  147 n.

Devaynes,  Governor,  ii.  147.

“  Devil on Two Sticks,”  farce by
Foote,  i.  57 n.,  161 n.,  265 n.
Devonshire,  i.  260.  See also Teign-
mouth,  &c.

Devonshire,  Georgiana,  Duchess of,
ii.  176 n. ;  in the Park,  ii.  138.
Devonshire,  Win.,  Duke of,  ii.  139
and n.

Diamonds,  Alexis Orloff’s,  ii.  109,

1 17,  120;  the Duchess of Kingston’s,  ii.  non.;  Lord Malmesbury’s,  ii.  113 m

Diaries,  Burney,  the first of the
series begun by Susan Burney,  i.  1.
Diary,  Mme.  D’Arblay’s  (the later
Diary),  i.  Ixxx,  ii.  123 n.,  2ion. ;
unpublished pieces of,  i.  lxxviii,
26m.,  ii.  15411.,  2l2n.,  217 n.,
233 n.,  292 n.

Diary,  The Juvenile,  Frances Burney’s  (otherwise the Early Diary)
i.  vii,  lxxvii.  See also Journal,
and MSS.

Dickenson,  Miss,  ii.  47.

Diderot,  M.,  and Dr.  Burney,  i.
123,  144;  his daughter,  i.  144;
his treatise on music,  id.
“Didone,”  Metastasio’s,  ii.  82,  86;

Gabrielli in,  ii.  89,  loo.

Digby and Pope,  i.  146.

Dillingham,  Miss.  See Ord,  Mrs.

“  Disciple House  ”  (Moravian),  Zin-
zendorf’s,  at Chelsea,  i.  306 n,
D’lsraeli,  Benjamin,  Mme.  D’Arblay’s praise of his  “  Contarini
Fleming,”  i.  lxxvii.

Dissipation,  the word,  i.  7,  3^-
“  Doctor Last,  To,”  verse by Fanny
Burney,  i.  57,  60.

“Dr.  Last in His Chariot,”  farce
by Bickerstaffe and Foote,  i.  60.
Doctors’  Club.  See Physicians.
Doctors put on the stage by Foote,
i.  57 n.

Dodd,  Dr.,  his execution,  ii.  200.
Dogs,  Mr.  Rishton’s,  i.  233,  239,
249-

Dolls,  wax,  i.  142.

Domenica,  Signor,  ii.  145 n.

Dorset,  Duke of,  i.  148.

Dorset,  Lord,  and Sir Horace Mann,
their match at cricket,  ii.  325.
Drapery,  French and English,  i.

141.  See also Dress.
Drawing-room,  and dining-room,
parlour,  &c. ,  ii.  1 56 n.

Dress,  i.  Ixxxiii,  lxxxvi,  106 n. ,  ii.
146,  169,  175,  176,  258 m,  266,
319,  341 n. ;  Barsanti petticoats,
i.  I91 n.;  in the country,  i.  277;
furbelows,  or falbalas,  i.  132 n. ;
hair-clubs  (queues),  i.  297 ;  glowworms and shining flies worn in
the hair,  i.  291;  mignonette,  lace,

i.  201;  in Paris,  1764,  i.  xlix;
riding-habits and riding-skirts,  i.
131 and n. ;  ruffles and jabots,  i.
202 n. ;  women’s  “coat”  and
“  petticoat,”  i.  248.

Dressing-rooms,  i.  lxxxv.
Dressmakers,  &c.,  i.  183.

“  Drink to me only,”  Ben Jonson’s,

ii.  299.

Drinking habits,  ii.  300 n.

Drinking healths,  &c.,ii.  184,  185 n.

See also Wine,  &c.

Droitwich,  ii.  208.

Drummond,  Mr. ,  ii.  254 n.

Drury Lane Theatre,  Arne and
Burney’s posts there,  i.  xxi ;
C.  R.  Burney plays the harpsichord there,  i.  Ixxii;  Crisp’s play

INDEX

there,  ii.  328.  See also Crisp’s
play,  Garrick,  &c.

Dryden,  and  “The Rehearsal,”  i.
164 n.,  ii.  280 n.

Dryden’s  ‘  ‘  Life of Plutarch,”  i.
22.

Dubois,  maiden name of Mrs.
Sleepe,  F.  Burney’s grandmother,
i.  Ixvi.

Dundas,  of Arniston,  and others,
i.  92 n.

Dundas,  “  Harry,”  afterwards Lord
Melville,  i.  92 n.

Dundas,  James,  i.  91,  92,  97.

Dundas,  John,  i.  92.

Dundas,  Major,  i.  91,  92.

Durham,  the Smarts and Bishop
Cosin there,  i.  133 n.

Dutchman,  the,  at the Masquerade,
i.  74,  82,  87.

Duval,  Mme.,  and Mr.  Smith  (in
“  Evelina  ”),  i.  lviii.

Earl  (or Earle),  Mr.,  ii.  58.

Edgecumbe,  Emma,  Lady,  ii.  94,
103,  108,  1 12,  120,  121,  255 n.

Edgecumbe,  Lord,  ii.  115,  121.

Edgeworth,  Maria,  i.  21,  i8on.,
284 n.

Education of girls,  temp.  1752,  i.
lxxv,  lxxvi.

Edwards,  (?)  Dr.,  i.  215.

Edwards,  Mr.,  i.  148.

“  Elfrida,”  Mason’s,  i.  191-

Ellerker,  Mr.,  Mrs.,  and the Misses,
i.  217,  218.

Ellis,  Rebecca,  actress,  first wife of
James Macburney,  Dr.  Burney’s
father,  i.  xvi.

Epping Forest,  i.  64.

Esparto-grass,  and paper,  i.  302 n.

Etiquette,  &c.,  ii.  17 n.;  at a ball,

■  i.  81;  Scottish and English,  i.  96.
See also under Curtsey,  &c.

Europe,  state of,  1779,  ii.  261.

Evance  (or Evans),  Rev.  Mr.,  of
Shropshire,  i.  xvi.

“Evelina,”  Frances Burney’s,  1.
xxxvi,  lxxv,  66 n.,  323 n.,  ii.  9nG
and  “Betsy Thoughtless,”  i.
lxxxiv;  Dr.  Burney’s first read357

ing,  ii.  222;  character of the
heroine,  ii.  216;  at the circulating
libraries,  ii.  214;  early criticism
of,  i.  lxv,  ii.  220,  254,  320,  324;
disclosed to Dr.  Burney before
publication,  ii.  163;  first draft of,
ii.  148 n.;  the illustrations to it
by Edward Burney,  ii.  290,  291 n. ;
Dr.  Johnson on,  ii.  246,  249,  250,
251;  offered to Lowndes the publisher,  ii.  162,  163;  an opera
founded on,  i.  194 n. ;  origin of,  i.

1 13 n.;  Mrs.  Papendiek on,  ii.
337 n.;  publication of,  ii.  210 n.,
212,  220,  238,  241,  253,  273 n.;
and Sir J oshua Reynolds,  ii.  269 n. ;
the second edition of,  ii.  254;
some scenes of,  i.  183;  Mr.  Smith
and Mme.  Duval in,  i.  lviii;
Susan Burney suspected as part
author,  ii.  237,  247;  Mrs.  Thrale
learns the authorship of,  ii.  246,
337 n. ;  the writing of,  i.  lxviii,
224 n.

Evelyn,  John,  the Diarist,  at Sayes
Court,  i.  xxxi.

Evelyn,  George Raymond,  ii.  306 n.

“  Evelyn  ”  and  “  Evelina  ”  in fiction
before Frances Burney’s  “Evelina,”  i.  Ixvi.

“Evening Post,  The General,”  i.
320.

Exeter,  Dean of.  See Milles,  Dean.

Eyebrows and eyelashes,  dropped
off through fright,  i.  3 1 5 n.

“Fair Thief,  The,”  song,  ii.  204.

Falconer’s  “Shipwreck,”  i.  lxxvi.

Fandango,  the,  i.  295,  302 n.

Farinelli,  singer,  ii.  79,  1 1 7 5 and
Dr.  Burney,  i.  123 n.

Farmer,  Capt.,  ii.  310.

Farmer,  Sir George,  ii.  310.

Farquhar,  Sir Walter,  physician,  i.
92,  93 m

Fashions.  See Dress,  Hair-dressing,  &c.  ....  !

Feathers,  wearing,  ii.  17b-

Featherstone,  Mr.,  i.  126.

Featherstonehaugh,  the name,  i.
126 n.

INDEX

353

Felton,  Rev.  William,  Dr.  Hayes,
and Dr.  Burney,  i.  xx,  56 n.
Fermignacs,  the,  Garrick connected
with them,  i.  1 1 7 n.

Ferrars,  Lord de,  i.  218 n.

Ferre,  Mme.  de,  ii.  224,  225.
Ffoulkes,  Mrs.  Edmund,  i.  lxxiii,
ii.  17 n. ;  her portraits,  &c.,  of
the Stranges,  i.  283 n.

Fielding,  Henry,  Frances Burney’s
acquaintance with his works,  i.
Ixxvii;  his novels,  Dr.  Burney
on,  ii.  230;  his  “Tom Thumb
the Great  ”  played privately at
Worcester,  ii.  172.

Fiera in Mascherata,  the,  ii.  45.
Fischer,  J.  C.,  his concerts,  i.  202,
208.

Fisher-folk at Teignmouth,  i.  212,
244 n.,  246,  248.

Fitzgerald,  Keene,  ii.  144,  145.
Fitzgerald Miss,  i.  149,  ii.  144,  146,
232.

Fitzgerald,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  of Cook-
ham,  i.  149,  178,  ii.  301,  305,
306.

Fitzwilliam,  Gen.,  i.  26 n.

“  Flash  ”• — “  the flash,  of the thing,’1
ii.  306.

Fleet marriages.  See Marriage Act.
Fleet Street,  wax-work in,  i.  142.
Flirtation,  i.  105.

Flora,  “a character”  for Mrs.

Garrick,  i.  122 and n.

Flowers,  artificial,  i.  157 n.
“Fograms,”  or  “fogrums,”  old,  i.

xxvi,  xxxvii,  ii.  135.

Folkes family,  i.  247,  260;  and the
Bettensons,  i.  190;  and Sir Wm.
Browne,  i.  185 n.

Folkes,  Martin,  P.R.S.,  &c.,  i.

113 n.,  148;  his actress wife,  i.

114 m ;  sale of his books,  &c.,  i.

115 m ;  and Stukeley,  i.  114 m
Folkes,  Martin,  the second,  i.

1 13 n-

Folkes,  William,  and Lynn,  i.
113 m

Fonthill,  pictures at,  ii.  323 n.
Foote,  Samuel,  his farce,  “The
Devil on Two Sticks,”  i.  57 n.,

161 n.,  265 n. ;  and Garrick,  ii.
280 n. ;  and Dr.  J ohnson,  ii.
280 n.;  his  “Piety in Pattens,”
ii.  279,  280 n.

Foppington,  Lord,  in  “  The Relapse,  &c.,  ii.  277 n.

Fops and their verses,  i.  103 n.  See
also under Maccaronies,  &c.

Forbes,  Mrs.,  and the Misses,  i.
148.

Ford,  Miss  (Mrs.  Wilkinson),
daughter of Mrs.  Colrnan,  i.
148,  212,  265.

Fordyce,  Dr.,  i.  189;  his  “Sermons to Young Women,”  i.  142.

Fordyce,  Lady Margaret,  i.  148.

Forster,  Dr. ,  i.  139 n.

Fortune,  i.  27.

Fortune-telling by gypsies,  ii.  263.

Foss,  Edward,  ii.  129 n.

Fothergill,  Dr.  John,  i.  265.

Foundling Hospital,  the,  and Dr.
Burney,  i.  Ixx.

Fox,  C.  J.,  i.  178m,  288 n.

France,  declaration of war by,  1777,
ii.  255 n.  ;  state of,  i.  lvi,  ii.  261;
war with,  1779,  ii.  262,  263.

France and Italy,  Arthur Young’s
Tours in,  i.  130 n.

Francis,  Charlotte,  afterwards Mrs,
Barrett,  ii.  273 n.

Francis,  Mrs.,  Charlotte Anne Burney,  which also see,  ii.  318.

Francis,  Clement,  i.  xcii,  ii.  273 n.

Francis,  Marianne,  ii.  27311.

Francklin,  Dr.  Thomas,  ii.  296 n.,
302.

Franked letters,  i.  liii,  97.

Franklin,  Dr.  Benjamin,  in Paris,
ii.  130.

Frasi,  Signora Giulia,  i.  xxiv,  xxv.

Frederick the Great and De Guignes,
ii.  1 14 m

French language,  Frances Burney’s
proficiency in the,  i.  102, 1 51, 152.

French Revolution,  ii.  302 n.

Friendship,  Pope on,  i.  146.

Frieri,  Mr.,  ii.  313.

Fright,  effects of,  i.  315 n.

Frivolete  (?),  ii.  169.

Frodsham,  Mrs.,  i.  229 m

INDEX

359

Frontiville,  M.  de,  i.  xxiii.

Fuller,  Richard,  i.  2.

Fuller,  Mr.  Rose,  ii,  26211.
Furbelows,  or falbalas,  i.  13211.
Furneaux,  Capt.,  his and James
Burney’s accounts of the death of
Capt.  Cook,  i.  319 and n.

Fuseli,  Henry,  painter,  and Dr.
Armstrong,  i.  138 n.;  on Dr.
Johnson’s convulsive movements,
ii.  15411.

Fydell,  Miss,  ii.  72.

Gabriei.li,  Caterina,  singer,  ii.  1,
3;  at the opera,  ii.  89,  95 et seq.,
100 et seq.;  compared with Agu-
jari,  ii.  92,  100,  101.  Also see
ii.  80,  86,  112,  115,  1 1 7,  120,
122.

Gabrielli,  Franscesca,  ii.  91,  101.

Gainsborough,  i.  2o8n,  ;  hisDuchess
of Devonshire,  ii.  139 n.j and
Philip Thicknesse,  ii.  193 n.

Gale,  Mr.,  ii.  186.

Gallantry,  Mr.  Crispen’s,  i.  238 ;  of
the time,  i.  242.

Galli,  Signora,  ii.  86.

Galluci,  Signora,  ii.  4.

Gaming,  Lord Chesterfield’  condemnation of,  i.  205.

Gardening,  decorative,  ii.  321.

Garret,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  ii.  319.

Garrick,  Arabella and Catherine,
Garrick’s nieces,  i.  117,  119.

Garrick,  David,  i.  134,  175;  ii.  311;
as Abel Drugger,  i.  264,  265 ;  after
his withdrawal from the stage,  ii.
277;  as Bayes,  i.  163;  before the
curtain,  ii.  278;  in company,  ii.
158;  in Crisp’s  “Virginia,”  ii.
328,  330;  as a critic,  ii.  278;  his
“piercing eyes,”  i.  120;  his
French name and ancestors,  i.
H7n.,  I29n. ;  the  “futile fellow,”
ii.  282;  at Goodman’s Fields
Theatre,  i.  l64n.,  186 n. ;  his
“Irish Widow,”  i.  99,  15711.;  at
Hampton,  i.  H7n. ,  ii.  328;  in
“Lethe,”  before the King,  ii.
156;  in  “King Lear,”  i.  199,  I

222;  letter of,  i.  226;  his likeness
to Napoleon,  i.  117 n.;  his marriage,  i.  1 18 n. ,  ii.  296 n.;  his
mutability,  ii.  327;  his  “Miss in
Her Teens,”  i.  85;  his nieces,  i.
117,119;  Reynolds’s picture showing him between Comedy and
Tragedy,  i.  206 n.,  221;  on

“Piety in Pattens,”  ii.  280;  his
quarrels,  ii.  30;  in  “Richard
III.,”  i.  186;  when about to retire,  i.  222;  his wife,  i.  117,  118
(see also Garrick,  Mrs.);  and An-
stey,  ii.  106 n.;  and Mrs.  Brooke,

i.  284 n. ;  and Dr.  Burney,  i.
xxiv;  and the Burneys,  i.  116,
!44,  15°,  221,  ii.  28,  29,  281;
and Cibber,  i.  164 m;  and Mr.
Crisp,  i.  xxxvi,  ii.  327;  and
Crisp’s play,  i.  xliii,  ii.  328,  330;
and Goldsmith,  i.  226;  and
Hawkesworth,  i.  140 n. ;  and
Macklin,  i.  164 n.;  and Mason,  i.
19211.;  and Dr.  Johnson,  i.

1 17 n.,  ii.  30,  27211.,  27911.,
282;  and the playwrights,  ii.  328;
and Christopher Smart,  i.  13311.;
Mr.  Crisp on,  ii.  160;  Miss Hawkins’  description of him at Hampton,  i.  117 m;  Dr.  Johnson on,

ii.  157,  158,  160;  Pope on his
acting at Goodman’s Fields,  i.
18611.  See also i.  263,  ii.  28,  36.

Garrick,  George,  i.  149,  ii.  281.

Garrick,  Mrs.,  i.  117,  118,  175 ;
and Frances Burney,  i.  lxxix;
Greville’s character of her as
“Flora,”  i.  122;  and the Earl
and Countess of Burlington,  i.
Ii8n. ;  Mrs.  Piozzi on,  i.  n8n.

Gast,  Mrs.,  Mr.  Crisp’s sister,  i.
lviii,  lix,  lxii,  lxxx,  228,  ii.  143,
260,  284,  293 11.,  325,  328.

Gay,  John,  and the Duchess of
Queensberry,  i.  192 n. ;  and Pope,
i.  146.

Geneva,  Miss Maria Allen at,  i.
140.

“  Gentleman’s Magazine,”  error in,
i.  xxvii;  Dr.  Hawkesworth’s
work on,  i.  47 n.

INDEX

360

George III.,  his Band of Music and
Dr.  Burney,  ii.  333 n. ;  his Civil
List,  ii.  342 n. ;  Garrick’s performance before,  ii.  156;  his
German servants,  ii.  335 n. ;  and
James Hutton the Moravian,  i.
309;  and Omai the Otaheitan,  i.
333,  ii.  13 1;  and his sub- preceptor,  i.  52 n.;  on Chesterfield’s
Letters,  i.  314.

German Tour,  Dr.  Burney’s,  i.  185,
186,  199,  204,  214.

Germany,  temp,  the Seven Years’
War,  i.  304.

Germs,  theory of,  in a farce by
Foote,  i.  57 n.

Giardini,  Felice,  violin player,  i.
1 16,  223,  292,  302 n.,  ii.  9 n.,
217,  248.

Gibbs,  Mr.,  afterwards Sir Vicary,

i.  250 n.

Gibbs,  Mr.  J.  W.  M.,  his edition
of Goldsmith’s Works,  i.  226 n.,

ii.  173 n.,  280 n.

Giffard,  of Goodman’s Fields Theatre,  and Garrick,  i.  xvi,  164 n.
Giffardiere.  See Guiffardiere.
Gillies,  Dr.,  ii.  305.

Gilpin,  Bernard,  i.  133 n.

Glasse,  Mrs.,  her  “Art of Cookery,”
i.  245 n.

Glasses,  writing names on,  a game,

i.  85.

Gloucester,  a ball at,  ii.  187;  the
Booth- Hall,  ii.  189;  Frances
Burney’s visit to,  ii.  179 et seq . ;
the Cathedral,  or College,  ii.  iSS,
196;  Corse Common,  or Gorse
Lawn,  ii.  198;  Mrs.  Delany at,

ii.  188 n.  ;  elections at,  ii.  187 n.  ;
political parties there,  ii.  187;
a review on the Town Ham,
ii.  186 n. ;  St.  Mary’s Street,
ii.  182 n. ;  the Three Choirs
meetings,  ii.  189 n.

Gloucestershire militia,  ii.  182,
186.

Glover’s  “Boadicea,”  ii.  331.
Gloves,  ii.  303,  308,  312.
Glow-worms worn in the hair in
Spain,  i.  291,  297.

“Golden Pippin,”  burlesque,  ii.
206 n.

Goldsmith,  Oliver,  Frances Burney
and,  i.  lxxvi,  97  ;  his attacks upon
“sentimental comedy,”  ii.  280 n. ;
his  “Deserted Village,”  confused
with  “The Deserter,”  i.  97,  ii.
332;  his projected Dictionary of
Arts and Sciences,  i.  226;  a letter
of,  i.  226;  his  “Little Comedy,”

i.  206 n. ;  production of his  “She
Stoops to Conquer,”  i.  215,  ii.
280 n. ;  Fanny Burney’s criticism
ofhis  “Vicar of Wakefield,”  i.  13,
14 n. ;  and Garrick,  i.  226;  and
Ralph Griffiths,  i.  12 n. ;  and the
Rev.  Mr.  Penneck,  ii.  9 n, ;  and
Dr.  Whiston,  i.  13 n. ;  on the Marriage Act,  1753,  i.  289 n.  ;  on the
punishment of death,  i.  13;  Mr.
Gibbs’s edition of his works,  i.
226 n.,  ii.  173 n.,  280 n.

Goodman’s Fields Theatre,  Garrick
there,  i.  xvi,  164m,  186 n.

Gossip of a country town,  i.  15.

Gough,  Mrs.  (?),  =  Gast,  Mrs.,  i.
Ixiii.

“Governor,  the,”  =  Mama  (the second Mrs.  Burney),  i.  132.

Grafton,  Mr.,  assumed name of
Fanny Burney while negotiating
the publication of  “Evelina,’*

ii.  213.

Graham,  Mrs.,  actress,  afterwards
Mrs.  Yates,  ii.  330.  See alsc
Yates,  Mrs.

Grand-Daddy  =  Mr.  Crisp,  i.  45.

Granville,  Mary.  See Delany,  Mrs.,

Gray,  Sir James,  i.  121.

Gray,  the poet,  and Lord Sandwich 1
ii.  12511.;  his death,  i.  134.

Greaves,  Sam.  See Sam Greaves.

Greeks and Romans,  i.  37,  38.

Green,  Mr.,  painter,  i.  231,  234.

Green,  Amos,  and Benjamin
painters,  and other painter
named Green,  i.  239 and n.

Green room,  Drury Lane Theatre*
hung with red,  i.  2x1.

Greenwich and London,  coach bei
tween,  i.  xxviii.

INDEX

“Greenwich Traveller,  ”  Sam Crisp,
the.  See Crisp,  Sam.

Gregg,  Mrs.,  Dr.  Burney’s sister,
i.  lxxix,  lxxx,  xcii,  i8n.

Gregory,  Miss,  afterwards Mrs.

Archibald Alison,  i.  liv.

Greville,  Chas.,  the Diarist,  i.  25 n.
Greville,  Fulke,  i.  xxxvii,  lxxi,  25,
26,  30m,  47,  65,  271,  ii.  285 n.,
287;  his  “Characters,  Maxims,”
&c.,  i.  26,  121,  122;  and Dr.
Burney,  i.  xxv,  220;  and Mr.
Crisp,  i.  lv,  ii 327.

Greville,  Mrs.  Frances,  Frances
Burney’s godmother,  i.  xxxix,  26,
30 n.,  52,  85 n.,  220 n.,  ii.  137,
285 n. ;  her daughter,  see Crewe,
Lady;  “Camilla”  (Greville’s),  a
character of her,  i.  122 and n.;
her  “Ode to Indifference,”  i.  26;
her novel,  i.  xxxix.

Griffardiere,  Mme.,  i.  136,  137,  143.

See also Guiffardiere.

Griffith,  Richard and Mrs.,  their
“Henry and Frances,”  i.  9,  11.
Griffiths,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  of the
“Monthly Review,”  i.  1211.
Grimston,  third Viscount,  i.  218.
“Grub,  Miss Burney’s pretty nag,”
i.  82 n.,  279 n.

“Guardian Angels,”  song,  ii.  206.
Guiffardiere,  Rev.  Chas.  de,  i.
142 n. ,  ii.  217 n.

Guignes,  or Guisnes,  Count de,  ii.
114m,  121,  123.

Guimard,  Mile.,  dancer,  ii.  59 n-
Gunning,  Maria.  See Coventry,
Countess of.

Gunning,  .Sir R.,  i.  155 n.

Gunnings,  the,  i.  2x3 n.

Gunpowder Plot day,  performances
of  “Tamerlane”  on,  i.  31 n.
Gurney,  his  “Flying Pen,”  ii.  159-
Gypsies and fortune telling,  ii.
263.

Habits,  bad,  Dr.  Johnson on,  ii.

r_54 n.  .  ..

Hair-clubs  (queues),  i.  298,  ii.  314-
Hair ornaments,  glowworms as,  i.
291.

361

Hair-dressing,  i.  Ixxxvi,  ii.  146 and
n.,  209,  219,  221,  258,  289.
Hales,  Lady,  ii.  184 n.,  217,  325;
and  “Evelina,”  ii.  130,  223-227,
247.

Hales,  the Misses,  ii.  224.

Hales,  Sir Thomas Pym,  ii.  184 m
Halhed,  Sheridan’s friend,  i.  209 n.
Hall,  Miss,  ii.  296.

Hambleton,  Mrs.  See Hamilton,
Mrs.  (Miss).

Hamilton,  Christopher,  i.  lvi.
Hamilton,  Duke of,  i.  155 n.
Hamilton,  Lady,  nee Barlow,  i.
1 77-

Hamilton,  Lady,  nee Emma Hart,

i.  177 n.

Hamilton,  Mary,  niece of Sir
William,  i.  131 n.

Hamilton,  Mr.,  afterwards Sir
William,  i.  177,  179.

Hamilton,  Mrs.  (Miss),  of Chesing-
ton,  i.  lvii,  Ixi,  Ixii,  31,  125,  322,

ii.  294.

Hamilton  (Sir William)  collection
in the British Museum,  i.  177 n.
Hampstead,  i.  104;  the Long Room
at,  i.  lix.

Hampton,  Mr.  Crisp at,  i.  125 n. ;

Garrick at,  i.  1 17 n.

Hampton,  Lord,  (Packington),  ii.
200 n.

Hanbury,  Mr.,  i.  148.

Handel,  i.  156;  his  “bearishness,”
i.  xx,  xxv;  and Dr.  Burney,  i.
xix,  xxiv;  at Chester,  i,  xix;  at
Mrs.  Cibber’s,  i.  xxiv;  and Signora Cuzzoni,  i.  xx;  his  “Messiah,”  i.  xix;  his performances at
the Haymarket Opera House,  ?..
329 n.  ;  and  “singing at sight,”
i.  xix.

Handel Commemoration,  1784,  i.
15m.

“Handsome Housemaid,  The.”  See
“Piety in Pattens.”

Hanwood,  Great,  Shropshire,  and
the Burney family,  i.  xvi.
Happiness,  no real,  i.  16.

Harley,  Thomas,  Lord Mayor,  i.
288 n. ;  and his wig,  i.  58 and n.

INDEX

362

Harleys,  the,  ii.  1830.

“Harmony”  of married people,  ii.
H9-.

Harpsichord,  the,  ii.  30011.,  308,
312,  ( see also Burney,  Charles
Rousseau,  and Burney,  Hetty,  as
players);  the improvements of,
which led to the pianoforte,  i.  lv.

Harrington,  Lady,  ii.  108,  1 20.

Harris,  Miss Bridget,  of Worcester,
ii.  165.

Harris,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  ii.  57;  §3 5
and her son,  the first Lord Malmesbury,  ii.  57 n. ;  her letters,  ii.
57

Harris,  James,  of Salisbury,  i.  216;
ii.  57,  60,  97,  99,  107,  1 13,  120,
15?  n.,  217,  287.  _

Harris,  Miss Louisa,  ii.  57,  6c,
123 n.,  217.

Harrison,  Commodore,  and Miss,  ii.

58*

Harrop,  Miss  (singer),  compared
with Mrs.  Sheridan  (Miss Linley),
i.  210 n.

Hart,  Emma,  Lady Hamilton,  i.

1 77 n-

Hartlebury,  a school at,  ii.  208.

Hartley,  Mr.,  M.P. ,  ii.  298.

Hash,  or hachis,  a,  in cookery,  i.
244 and n.

Hasse,  composer,  ii.  7 n.

Hastings,  Warren,  and Clement
Francis,  ii.  273 n. ;  the Hastings
trial,  ii.  274 n.

Hats,  ladies’,  i.  162.

Hatton,  Betty,  i.  48,  50 n.

Hatton,  John,  footman,  his marriage,  i.  48.

Hawaii.  See Otaheite,  also Owyhee.

Hawkesworth,  Dr. ,  i.  47,  66 n.  ,116,
132,  175,  207,  215;  his account of
himself,  i.  273;  his  “Adventurer,”
i.  47  ;  at Bromley,  Kent,  i.  48 n.
his edition of Cook’s Voyages,  and
the attacks on it,  i.  66 n.,  139,
1400.,  264,  272;  and Sir John
Hawkins,  i.  48 n. ,  ;  and J ames
Hutton,  i.  304 n. ;  and his wife,
i.  198,  264,  272 n.;  his death,
i.  273.

Hawkins,  Csesar,  his daughter Lady
Packington,  ii.  201.

Hawkins,  Sir John,  i.  Ixviii,  191 n.,
21 in. ;  his  “History of Music”
and Burney’s,  rivalry between,  i.
Ixviii,  ii.  29 n.,  15 m.;  catch on the
same,  ib. ;  and the Academy of
Ancient Music,  ii.  282 n. ;  and
the Burneys,  i.  55 n. ;  and Dr.
Hawkesworth,  i.  48 n. ;  and Dr.
Johnson,  i.  48 n. ,  200 n. ;  and
“King Lear,”  i.  199 n. ;  and his
wife,  i.  191 n.

Hawkins,  Miss Loetitia M.,i.  Ixviii,
Ixix,  lxxvii,  191 n. ,  199 n. ,  211 n. ;
ii.  306 n.,  316 n. ;  and Frances
Burney,  i.  Ixviii ;  on the Garricks,
i.  117 m,  Ii8n.,  ii.  279 n.;  on
Dr.  Johnson,  i.  11711.,  ii.  2790.;
the Hawkins family and the Burneys,  i.  55 n. ;  her  “Reminiscences  ”  and novels,  i.  Ixix.

Hawkins,  Mrs.,  =  Ann Burney,
which see.

“Hay,”  “  Haye,”  “Hayes,”  or
“  Heys,”  dancing the,  ii.  194 and
n.,  197.

Haydn,  his arrival in England,  i.
xv,  ii.  334 E-

Hayes,  Mr.,  of the Pantheon,  ii.
146.

Hayes,  Mr. ,  a reputed son of Sir R.
Walpole,  i.  67;  his coins,  ib. ;  left
his library to Dr.  Burney,  and his
house to  (Admiral)  James Burney,
i.  125 n.  See also i.  124,  149,
333-

Hayes,  Dr.  William,  i.  xx,  56,  60,

I56n-

Haymarket,  Signor Baretti kills a
man there,  i.  25 n.,  206 n.

Haymarket,  King’s Theatre there.
See King’s Theatre,  also Opera.

Haymarket Theatre,  Foote’s Puppet Show there,  ii.  28011. ;  Henderson in the  “  Merchant of Venice  ”  there,  ii.  277,  280 n.

Hayward,  Mr.  Abraham,  on Mrs.
Piozzi,  ii.  285 n.

Hayward,  Mary,  afterwards Lady
Hales,  which see.

INDEX

563

Hayward,  Miss,  ii.  185.

Haywood,  Mrs.,  i.  lxxxiv;  her
“  Betsy Thoughtless,”  i.  lxxxiv.
Hazlitt,  William,  on Mme.  D’Ar-
blay,  i.  lxxiii;  he and James Burney quarrel over Miss Burney’s
novels,  i.  68 n.

Hazlitt,  Mr.  W.  C.,  his edition of
Lamb’s Letters,  i.  125 n.
Heacham,  i.  165.

Head  (a lady’s)  =  her hair,  ii.  176.

See also Dress,  and Hair-dressing.
Heber,  Bishop,  his Advent Hymn,
ii.  206 n.

Heckford,  Mr.,  apothecary,  i.  41.
Ilecla,  Mount,  discovered,  i.  139 m
Heidegger,  John James,  of the
Opera house,  Haymarket,  i.  329.
Heinel,  Mile.,  dancer,  ii.  59.
Hell-fire Club,  the,  i.  182 n.
Henderson as Shylock,  ii.  277,
280 n.

Henniver,  Mrs.,  “the facetious,”  i.

xxix.

“  Henry and Frances,  Letters of,”
by Mr.  and Mrs.  Griffith,  i.  9,  11,
I3>  14-

Hepburn,  Dr.,  of Lynn,  ii.  132 n.

“  Hermit hoar,”  Dr.  Johnson’s
parody on Dr.  Percy,  ii.  257.
Heriot,  George,  and James I.,  i.

xxx.

Hertford,  Lord,  i.  xlviii,  313.
Hervey,  Felton,  i.  85 n.

Hervey,  Lord,  i.  85 n.

Hessian soldiers employed by
George III.,  i.  i6on.

Heyne,  Christian Gottlob,  i.  Ixxi.
Highgate,  i.  104.

Hinchcliffe,  Dr.,  Bishop of Peterborough,  ii.  291.

Hinchinbroke,  Dr.  Burney there,  i.
138.

Hoare,  Sir Richard Colt,  and his
grounds at Stourhead,  ii.  32 1  •
Hobson,  Mr.,  in  “Cecilia,”  ii.  310,
Hockrel  (or Hockerel),  i.  64.
Holcomb,  Miss,  ii.  185,  186.
Holdernesse,  Lord,  i.  n6n.

Holt,  Thomas Burney,  i.  xcii,  79-
H dwell,  Governor,  i.  120 n. ;  and

the  “  Black Hole of Calcutta,”  i.
65 n.

Home,  Hon.  and Rev.  Mr.,  i.  43 n.
Homer,  i.  29,  30,  31.

Hood,  Thomas,  his  “Dream of
Eugene Aram”  and Admiral
James Burney,  i.  62 n.

Hoole,  John,  ii.  273 n.,  296,  301,
302,  304 m,  316.

Hoops,  ladies’,  i.  lxxxiv,  ii.  309.
Hoppner,  his portrait of Frances
Burney,  i.  lxxxv.

Hornecks,  the,  ii.  152 n.

Hornsby,  Rev.  Mr.,  i.  60.
Horse-racing,  Lord Chesterfield on,
i.  205.

House-keeping,  i.  107.

“  How do do?”  in English,  i.  223.
Plowarth,  the Misses,  ii.  317.
Howletts,  Kent,  ii.  184 n.,  284,
324-

Huaheine.  See Otaheite,  and
Owyhee.

Huddisford,  Mr.,  his  “Warley:  a
Satire,”  ii.  268,  269.

Hudson,  Mr.,  i.  149,  158.

Hume,  David,  and Dr.  Burney,  i.
xlviii;  his  “  History of England,”

i.  30.

Humphries,  Miss,  of Worcester,  ii.
165,  166,  214;  first reading of
“  Evelina,”  ii.  215,  216,  218 n. ;
she attributes it to Anstey,  ii.  217.
Humphry,  Ozias,  i.  208 n.

Hunter,  Dr.,  i.  148,  215;  his mu-
!  seum,  ii.  43.
i Hunter,  John,  surgeon,  i.  215.
Hurrels  (or Hurrell),  the,  at Teign-
mouth,  i.  230,  234,  235,  257,  258.
“  Hurry Durry,”  &c.,  ii.  279 n.
Hutton,  James,  bookseller,  and
Moravian Brother,  i.  304,  305 n. ,

ii.  42,  46,  88,  89;  his correspondence with Fanny Burney,  i.  229,
306,  309;  and King George III.,
i.  309,  314;  and his wife,  i.  308.
See also ii.  130,  142.

“Incognitos”  to Fanny Burney,
i.  10.

Indifferent,  the word,  i.  151.

INDEX

364

Inns,  London,  i.  107 n.

Invasion panic,  1779,  ii.  262,  263.

“Irish Widow,”  Garrick’s,  i.  99.

Irish women,  Mr.  Twiss on,  i.  302 n.

Italian friends of Dr.  Burney,  i.

r3S-

Italian language,  the,  i.  134.

Italy,  use of the knife in,  i.  25 n.

James’s Powders,  i.  275.

James Street,  Buckingham Gate,
James Burney’s house there,  i.
125 n.

Janson,  printer and chorus singer,
and Handel,  i.  xix.

“Jealous Wife,”  Colman and Garrick’s,  i.  219 n.

Jebb,  Dr.  Richard,  ii.  215,  325.

Jenner,  Rev.  Charles,  author of
“The Placid Man,”  i.  321 n.

Jerningham,  Edward,  ii.  31911.;
his poem,  “The Deserter,”  ii.
333*

Jerningham,  H.  E.  II.,  M.P.,  ii.

333  «•

Jerningham,  Sir William,  ii.  319.

Johnson,  or Johnston,  Dr.,  of Worcester,  ii.  148 n.,  165.

Johnson,  Dr.  Samuel,  i.  xxxvi,  229;
P'rances Burney’s first sight of,  ii.
153;  in company,  ii.  155;  in
conversation,  ii.  155,  160;  his
“convulsions,”  ii.  153,  154 n.,
282;  his Dictionary,  ii.  160;  his
dress,  ii.  153,  287;  his first
opinions of  “Evelina,”  ii.  233,
246,  250,  252,  253,  337 n.  ;  Fuseli
on,  ii.  15411.;  his handwriting,  i.
296;  a tuft of his hearthbroom
procured for Mr.  Bewley by Dr.
Burney,  i.  176:  his  “Irene”  on
the stage,  i.  xliii;  he lectures Mrs.
Thrale on truthfulness,  ii.  334 11. ;
letter of,  i.  176 n.,  ii.  15211.,
253;  as  “Lexiphanes,”  ii.  152;
at Oxford in 1784,  ii.  153;  parodies by,  ii.  257;  Mrs.  Piozzi’s
Anecdotes of,  ii.  285 n. ;  his portrait by Reynolds,  i.  1 i6n. ;  his
“Rasselas,”  i.  16;  Reynolds 011,
ii.  15411.;  he rebukes Mrs.

Thrale,  ii.  146;  Tom Tyers’  description of,  ii.  1 55 n. ;  his visits
to Dr.  Burney,  i.  Ixxxviii,  ii.
285 n;  his visit with Dr.  Burney
to Winchester,  ii.  284 n.,  286;
his wig,  ii.  153,  287;  on Bach’s
concerts,  ii.  155,  287;  on bad
habits,  ii.  154 m ;  on blasting
with praise and praising with censure,  ii.  146 n. ;  on Dr.  Burney,
and his Tours,  i.  viii,  222;  on
Canadian and Scotch scenery,  i.
284 n. ;  on the execution of Dr.
Dodd,  ii.  200 n. ;  on Foote and
Garrick,  ii.  2S0 n. ;  on Garrick,
ii.  157,  158,  160,  282;  and Grub
Street,  ii.  304 n.  ;  on the rival
Histories of Music  (by Hawkins
and Burney),  ii.  151m  ;  and the
ladies,  ii.  286;  on music,  ii.  155,
282 ;  on Shebbeare and ihe pillory,

i.  285 n. ;  and the Burneys,  i.  2,
n6n. ,  ii.  284 n. ;  and Fanny
Burney,  ii.  256,  259,  268,  269
(see also under Burney,  Frances);
and Susan -Burney,  ii.  256,  259;
had  “no passion for clean linen,”

ii.  287 n. ;  and Sir P.  J.  Clerke,

ii.  148 n. ;  and Garrick,  i.  117 m,
ii.  30,  272 n.,  279 n. ;  and Goldsmith,  i.  226;  and Sir John
Hawkins,  i.  48 n. ;  and Mrs.
Montague,  ii.  156;  and Mrs.
Papendiek,  ii.  337 n. ;  and Mr.
and Mrs.  Paradise,  ii.  317 n.;
and G.  L.  Scott,  i.  162 n.  ;  and
the  “sparring”  ladies,  ii.  315 m  ;
and Christopher Smart,  i.  13311.,
ii.  287 n. ;  and the Thrales,  ii.
250,  256,  285 n. ;  and Mary

Welch(Mrs.  Nollekens),  ii.  14511. ;
and the blind widow Mrs.  Williams,  ii.  253.  See also i.  286,
ii.  8,  79 n.

Jones,  Miss,  ii.  149 n.

Jones,  Mr.,  Welsh harper,  ii.  58.

Jonson,  Ben,  his  “Alchemist,”
Garrick as Abel Drugger in,  i.
264,  265;  his  “Drink to me
only,  ”  ii.  298.

Journal,  P'rances Burney’s,  i.  1,  5,

INDEX 365

14, 18,  19,  21,  46,  50,  120,  146,
188,  268,  320,338,  ii.  1.  See also
Diary.

Keate,  George,  i.  314,  315;  his
‘  ‘  F erney — an Epistle to Voltaire,  ”
i.  57;  and the Shakespeare Jubilee,  i.  31511.

Kelway,  Mr.,  organist,  i.  xxiv.
Kemble,  Miss,  who married the
Rev.  F.  Twiss,  i.  302 n.

Kenrick,  Dr.,  his Review and
“Evelina,”  ii.  223.

Kerry,  Earl of,  and Lady,  k 27,  28.
King,  Dr.  John Glen,  i.  119,  149,
151-158,  1 78,  ii.  45,  93,  103;  his
“spouting”  of Shakespeare,  &c. ,

i.  134.

“King Lear,”  Garrick in,  i.  199;

Sir John Hawkins and,  i.  199 n.
King’s Arms,  Cornhill,  concerts
there,  i.  xxxviii.

King’s Theatre,  the, .  i.  284 n.  See
also Opera.

Kingston,  Duchess of,  ii.  non.
Kingston,  Mrs.  Minet,  ii.  271 n.
Kinnaird,  Lord,  i.  264.

Kinnaird,  Miss,  afterwards Mrs.

Wiggins,  i.  21 1,  264,  314.

Kippis,  Dr.,  ii.  316.

Kirk,  Miss,  i.  79.

Kirwan,  Miss E.,  ii.  267,  313.
Kirwans,  the,  ii.  305,  314,  317.
Kissing in company,  Frances Burney’s mishap with Mr.  Barlow,

ii.  48.

Knife,  use of the,  in Italy,  i.  25 n.

•  Knight,  Cornelia,  and Queen Charlotte,  ii.  340 n.

Knowell,  Miss,  ii.  165.

L - ,  Miss,  ii.  73.

Lactarium,  the,  St.  George s Fields,
i.  xxviii.

Lade,  or Ladd,  Sir John,  ii.  306 n.
Ladies,  English,  their manners,
education,  &c.,  i.  35  >  dissipation
of,  i.  36.

“Lady Julia Mandeville,”  Mrs.
Brooke’s novel,  i.  i57n->  2^3>
284 n.

Lake,  Sir James,  and Lady,  ii.  56,
143-

Lalande,  M.,  i.  292 n.

Lalause,  Miss,  i.  72,  87.

Lalause,  Mr.,  dancing-master,  i.
86,  87;  his rooms,  Leicester
Square,  i.  70,  72.

“Lamb,  the,”  a name for Mrs.
Rishton,  i.  234.

Lamb,  Charles,  and his friends and
Capt.  Burney,  i.  68 n.,  125 n.  and
Martin Burney,  i.  lxxiii.

Lambe,  Mr.,  i.  71.

Lambert,  Lady Gertrude,  i.  27 n.

La Motte,  musician,  ii.  12311.,  218.
Langley,  Betty,  “our old cook,”
married to John Hatton,  i.  48,
Son-

Languages,  European,  i.  296.
Lansdowne,  Lord.  See Petty,  Lord
Henry.

Late hours,  ii.  192;  Dr.  Burney’s,

i.  263.

Lates,  musician,  i.  59.

Lattice,  Rev.  John.  See Lettice.
Latrobe,  the brothers,  musicians,

ii.  319.

Latrobe,  Mr.,  Moravian minister,
ii.  320 n.

Laughing,  &c. ,  regulations for,  i.
325-

Laure,  an old French dance,  1.  87.
Lavater,  J.  C.  (?),  i.  310.

Lawrence,  Sir T.,  early life,  ii.
292 n.

Le Chantre,  Mme.  and Mile.,  i.  149.
Lechmeres,  the,  of Worcester,  ii.
181 n.

Lee Boo,  Prince,  i.  315 11.

Legge,  Hon.  Miss.  See Brudenell,
Mrs.

Leicester House,  ii.  248.

Leicester Square,  Mr.  Lalause’s
dancing rooms there,  i.  72.

Leigh,  Miss,  and the Crisps,  i.  xxvii;

and Jane Austen,  i.  xxvii.
Leighton,  Sir Baldwin,  i.  xxii.

Le  "Noir,  Mrs.,  a daughter of Christopher Smart,  i.  134 m
Lenthall,  Molly,  i.  lxii,  lxxxi,  229.
Lentil all,  Speaker,  his house at

INDEX

366

Burford,  i.  Ixii;  his pictures,  i.
lxiii.

Leoni,  i.  non.

Lesley  (or Lister),  Mrs.,  =  Barsanti,
Miss,  i.  21 1 n.

Leslie,  Jane Elizabeth,  Countess of
Rothes,  ii.  306.

Lester,  or Lister,  Mrs.,  =  Miss Bar-
santi,  i.  191 n.

Letter-boxes at newspaper offices,  i.
xxix.

Letters,  postage of.  See Postal service,  Postmarks,  & c.

Lettice,  Rev.  John,  i.  151,  155 n.

Lever,  Sir Ashton,  his museum,  ii.
248.

Lewis,  Dr.,  i.  lii.

Lewis,  George,  =  Geo.  Lewis Scott,
i.  52 n.

“  Lexiphanes,”  —  Dr.  Johnson,  ii.
152;  Archibald Campbell’s book
so called,  ib.

Libraries,  circulating,  ii.  2 14.

Lidderdale,  Mrs.  and Miss,  of Lynn,
i.  148,  ii.  71,  132.

Life,  lines on,  by Mrs.  Barbauld,  i.
299 n.

Likenesses,  Dr.  Burney on,  i.  51.

Lilliputian Dance ,  at the Haymarket
Theatre,  ii.  278.

Lindsay,  Lady Anne,  i.  148,  ii.  18.

Lindsay,  Lady Margaret,  ii.  19 n.

Lindsey House,  Chelsea,  i.  306.

Linley,  Dr.,  i.  208.

Linley,  Eliza,  singer,  afterwards
Mrs.  Sheridan,  i.  60 n.,  i2on.,
208,  ii.  10,  57 ;  her family,
&c. ,  i.  208,  210 n.  ;  her runaway
marriage,  i.  209,  216;  her married life,  i.  209 n.  ;  her retirement,  ii.  334 n. ;  and Miss Harrop,
i.  2ion. ;  in Susan Burney’s unpublished journal,  i.  210 n.

Linley,  Mary,  =  Mrs.  Tickell,  i.
210 n.

“Lions”  (in  “society”),  ii.  7m,
93 n.

Lister,  Mr.  (?),  Jenny Barsanti’s
first husband,  i.  21 1 n.

Literature,  eighteenth century,  close
of the Queen Anne period,  i.  lxxi ;

passion for the  “elegant”  in,  i.
lxix;  Frances Burney’s acquaintance with literature,  i.  lxxvi,
Ixxvii.  See also Novels,  Style,  & c.
“Literature,  an abyss of,”  ii.  311.

“  Llangollen,  the ladies of,”i.  132m
Lloyd,  Mrs.  (Mary Moser),  ii.  315 n.
Lluellyn,  Rev.  George,  i.  xvii.

“  Lo !  He comes,”  hymn,  its tune
taken from an opera  (?),  ii.  206 n.
Lock family,  of Norbury Park,  ii.
270 m

Locke,  John,  i.  155.

Lockwood,  Miss,  i.  231.

London,  in 1767,  i.  104m  ;  inns of,

i.  107 n. ;  Lord Mayor and Aider-
men of,  their wigs,  i.  58 and n. ;
mile-stones round,  i.  xxix;  “the
smoak of,”  i.  65.  See also names
of Streets,  Src.

Long,  Dudley,  M.P. ,  ii.  146.
Longitude,  discussions on the,  i.
114 m

Longleat,  ii.  323 n.

“Look Out,”  or Cabin,  the,  at
Lynn,  i.  10,  12.

Lort,  Dr.  Michael,  ii.  297.

Louis XIV.  and William III. ,  i.  31 n.
Love,  i.  10;  “love affairs”  in
Naples,  i.  294,  303 ;  love and
flirtation,  i.  105;  love letters,  Mr.
Barlow’s,  addressed to Fanny
Burney  ( see also under Barlow,
&c.),  ii.  49.

“  Love,  The Dictionary of,”  i.  300.
Lowndes,  Thomas,  publisher,  and
the publication of  “Evelina,”  ii.
163,  213,  223,  238 in.,  239.
Lumisden,  Andrew,  i.  86 n.,  138 n.,

ii.  14 n.,  26 n.;  and the Stuart
Princes,  ii.  128 m

Lumisdens,  the,  ii.  26 n.

Lustring,  or lute-string,  ii.  1 73 n.
Lycurgus,  i.  22.

“  Lydia,  or Filial Piety,”  Dr.  Sheb-
beare’s novel,  i.  288.

Lynn,  Norfolk,  i.  101,  15 1,  276,
317;  the Allens at,  i.  xliv,  2,  3,
17,  42,  136;  the Assembly at,  i.
23,  108;  Sir Wm.  Browne at,  i.
185 n. ;  Dr.  Burney at,  i.  3,  9,

INDEX 367

4711. ;  Frances Burney at,  i.  xxxix,
9,21,61,88,  100;  the Burneys at,
i.  xliv,  3,  10,  21 n.,42,  44,  47 n.,
64,  221 ;  in the fields near,  i.  22;
Mr.  Robinson of,  i.  6 n.  ;  St.  Margaret’s Church,  and Dr.  Burney
organist there,  i.  9,  16;  a wedding
at,  i.  16;  the Turners of,  i.  47;
Arthur Young at,  i.  6 n.  ;  worthies
and people of,  i.  xl,  19 n.,  106 n.,
11911.,  ii.  14,  71,  132 n.

Lyons and Paris cioaths,  i.  141.

Lyttelton,  George,  first Lord,  ii.  87.

Lyttelton,  Thomas,  second Lord
(the so-called  “wicked Lord”),
and his Lady,  ii.  88.

Macartney,  James,  i.  25 n.

Macartney,  Lord,  i.  220 n.

Macartney,  Miss,  i.  25 n.  See also
Greville,  Mrs.

Macaulay,  on Frances Burney,  i.
Ixxvi;  his error as to the price
paid for  “  Cecilia,”  ii.  307 n. ;  on
Mr.  Crisp,  i.  xlii,  lix,  ii.  329.

Macburney,  James,  father of Dr.
Burney,  i.  xvi.  See also Burney,
James.

Macburney,  James,  of Great Ilan-
wood,  Dr.  Burney’s grandfather,
i.  xvi.

Maccaronies,  Macaroons ,  Beaux,
Fops,  & c.,  i.  68 n.,  157 and n.,
177,  225,  ii.  105,  168,  219m

Macdonald,  Sir James,  i.  xlviii.

Mackenzie,  Mr.,  i.  32.

Mackintosh,  Mr.,  i.  84.

Macklin,  Charles,  actor,  his quarrel
with Garrick,  i.  164 n.

“  Mad Song,  the,”  at Vauxhall,  ii.
149.

Madness,  ii.  23.

Madras,  death of Lord Pigot,  the
Governor of,  i.  89 n.

“Madras,  Letters from,”  and the
author,  ii.  274 n.

Magellan,  Mr.,  ii.  241.

“  Maggy Lauder,”  i.  95.

Maids,  old,  i.  28;  six,  i.  315.

Mailing,  Mr.  and Mrs.  See Maling.

Mainstone,  Miss,  i.  1 10 n.

Maintenon,  Madame de,  Letters of*
i.  312.

Maitland,  Dr.  Charles,  ii.  274 n.
Malchair,  musician,  i.  59.

Maling,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  i.  116.
Mallet,  David,  his  “  Masque of
Alfred,”  and  “Rule Britannia,”-

i.  263 n.

Malmesbury,  the first Lord,  i.  2l6n.,

ii.  113 m ;  Family Letters of,  ii.
57 n.  See also Harris,  Mrs.  Elizabeth.

Man,  “the villanous Yahoo called,”
Mr.  Crisp on,  ii.  53.

Man and wife,  i.  122.

Mancer,  Mrs.,  i.  xcii,  71.
Manchester fabric dresses,  ii.  167.
Mankind,  i.  37.

Mann,  Sir Horace,  the Younger,  in
Kent,  ii.  324.

Manners,  of the time,  ii.  205.  See
also under various special headings, ,  such as Etiquette,  “  Romping,”  Visiting,  &c.

Mansfield,  Lord,  and the Adelphi
Buildings,  i.  175 n.

Manucci,  Count,  ii.  250,  259.
Manuscripts,  Frances Burney’s,  &c.

See MSS.

Manzoli,  ii.  95-

March,  Lord,  i.  220,  313,  ii.  106,.
120.

“Marianne,”  Marivaux’s,  i.  36.
Marivaux and Richardson,  i.  36.
Marriage ceremony,  on the,  i.  49.
Marriage,  “harmony”  and,  ii.  119^
views on,  ii.  73,  75,  7§  and n.  -
young women and,  ii.  79 n.
Marriage Act,  1753,  Goldsmith,  &c.,.
on,  i.  289 n. ;  Shebbeare’s novel,
on,  i.  288.

Marsili,  Dr.,  i.  206.

Martinelli,  Signor,  i.  135,  314.
Martini,  Padre,  i.  124;  his History
of Music,  i.  124 n. ;  his library,  id.  -T
and Dr.  Burney,  ib.

Marybone Gardens,  i.  222.
Maskelyne,  Dr.  JN’evil,  ii.  274 m
Mason,  the poet,  i.  116,  121;  and
Arne,  i.  191 n. ;  and Colman,  i.
191 n. ;  his  “Elfrida,”i.  191 ;  and

INDEX

368

Garrick,  i.  191 n.  ;  and Lord
Sandwich,  ii.  125 n.  ;  and Walpole,  i.  191 n.

Masquerade,  at a,  i.  70.

Masquerade at the Pantheon,  17S0,
ii.  289.

Masquerades,  i.  295,  ii.  25.
“Massingham,  the Philosopher of,”
=  W.  Bewley,  i.  19 n.

Mathews,  singer,  i.  59.

Mathias,  Gabriel,  ii.  309 n.,  312 n.
Mathias,  James,  ii.  306.

Mathias,  Miss,  ii.  306,  308,  309,
310,  31 1.

Mathias,  T.  J.,  author of  “The
Pursuits of Literature,”  ii.  309 n.
Mathias,  Vincent,  sen.,  i.  149,  ii.
30911.

Mathias,  Vincent,  jun.,  ii.  27211.,
302,  306,  308,  309,  310,  31 1,
3I2n-

Matrimony,  and getting married,  i.
18.

“Matrimony!  O rare,”  i.  99.
Matteis,  “little”  [Nicola],  musician,
i.  xx.

Matthews,  Capt.,  and Miss Linley,

i.  209 n.

Mattocks,  Mr.,  ii.  251.

Maty,  Dr.  Matthew,  ii.  2 n.

Maty,  Dr.  Paul,  ii.  2,  10.

May-day,  dance of milk-maids on,

ii.  145 m

Mazzanti,  song by,  ii.  295.

Mead,  Dr.,  i.  183 n.

Meeke,  Mrs.,  i.  148.  See also Allen,
Bessy.

“Melidorus”  addresses verse to
Fanny Burney,  i.  23.

Melville,  Gen.,  ii.  17,  21.

Melville,  Lord,  i.  92 n.

“Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,”  Mme.

D’Arblay’s,  i.  xi,  lxx,  ii.  285 n.
Men and women,  i.  279,  280,  282.
Men,  superior,  i.  66.

Merlin,  John Joseph,  harpsichord
maker,  &c. ,  ii.  10,  20,  58,  146,
242 289,  300.

Mersh,  at,  i.  59.

Merton,  Surrey,  the Crisps there,  i.
xxx iii.

Metastasio,  his  “Didone,”  ii.  82.
86,  89,  100.

Methodists,  Dr.  Priestley and the,
i.  305 n.

Mickleham,  Susan Bumey  (Mrs.

Philips),  at,  ii.  270 n.

Middleton’s Cicero,  i.  135.

Miers,  Capt.,  ii.  186.

Mignonette lace edgings,  &c.,i.  201.
|  Milands,  the,  i.  199.

Mile-stones near London,  i.  xxix.
Militia,  Gloucestershire,  ii.  182.
186.

Miller,  singer,  i.  59.

Miller,  Miss,  actress,  and the Rev.

Mr.  Penneck,  ii.  2.

Milles,  Jeremiah,  Dean of Exeter,  i.
244,  253,  254.

Milles,  Jeremiah,  jun.,  i.  253 n.
Milles,  Mrs.  and Miss,  ii.  325.
Milles,  Richard,  i.  253 n.

Milles,  Thomas,  i.  244,  250,  252,
253 n.,  255,  258,  260.

Millico,  Signor,  singer,  i.  194- 197,
212,  215,  218,  ii.  82.

Mills,  Miss,  i.  265.

Milne,  Miss,  i.  72.

Milton,  harpsichord tuner,  i.  172.
Mingotti,  Signora,  ii.  95,  96,  109.
Minitie,  the Misses,  their novels,  i.
213-

Minuet a la cour,  a,  on the stage,  i.

87-

“Miss in Her Teens,”  amateur per
formance of,  i.  85.

Moliere and Mr.  Crisp,  i.  lix,  lxxvi,
280 n. ;  ii.  53;  Foote’s adaptatior
of the  “Malade Imaginaire,”  i.
64 n.

Molleau,  ii.  9 n.

Moncreif,  John,  his  “Appius,”  ii.
328.

Money-hunting,  i.e.  making money.

Mr.  Crisp on,  ii.  143.

Monk,  General,  i.  H7n.

Monro,  Dr.,  i.  270.

Montagu,  Admiral,  James Burnej
and,  i.  62 n.

Montagu,  Duke of,  his family,  ii
108.

Montagu,  Mathew,  M.P.,  ii.  308.

INDEX

Montagu,  Mrs. ,  i.  xxxvi,  liv,  lxxxiv,
53 n.,  ii.  138 nM 297,  308;  and
Frances Burney,  ii.  291 ;  and Dr.
Johnson,  ii.  157 ;  and Mrs.  Thrale,
ii.  157.

Montague House,  duels behind,  i.
96.

“Monthly Review,  The,”  Dr.  Burney’s contributions to,  i.  viii ;
W.  Be w ley’s contributions to,
I9n.,  318 n.;  and  “Evelina,”  ii.
223,  234,  241.

Monticelli,  Signora,  ii.  95.

Moore,  Frances,  =  Mrs.  Brooke,
•which see.

Moore,  Mrs.,  i.  323.

Moore,  Thomas,  his Life of Sheridan,  i.  209 n.

Moravians  (the sect),  i.  305 n.,
307 n. ,  308 n.  See also under
Hutton,  James,  &c.

More,  Hannah,  i.  303 n.,  305 n.  ;
and Garrick,  i.  284 n.

Morellet,  Abbe,  i.  180 n.

Morris,  Lord,  i.  1 53-

Moser,  Mary,  R.A. ,  ii.  315 n.

“Motezuma,”  opera,  ii.  4.

Mother and daughter,  etiquette,  &c. ,
ii.  17 n.

Mount Edgecumbe,  ii.  255 n.  See
also Edgecumbe.

Mozley,  Rev.  T.,  his  “Reminiscences,”  i.  132 n.

MSS.  of these diaries,  &c.,  i.  lii,
lxxxv;  some burnt,  i.  1 13m,  228m ;
some lost,  ii.  232.  See also Diary.

Muffs worn by men,  i.  57 n. ,  185 n.

Mulgrave,  Baron and Earl,  i.  88
and n.,  337.  See also Phipps,
Henry.

Mure,  Mrs.  Philip,  ii.  17 n.

Murphy,  Arthur,  on Dr.  Burney,  i.

ix;  and Crisp’s play,  ii.  330,  331 ;
'  his  “Orphan of China,”  i.  xli,
330 n.  ;  his  “Way to Keep Him”
played privately,  ii.  166.

Music,  ancient,  see Ancient music;
English and foreign,  i.  155;  in
France and Italy,  Dr.  Burney
on,  i.  1 1 5,  227  ( see also Burney’s
Tour in France,  &c.);  Dr.  John369

son on,  ii,  282 ;  Oxford degree of,
taken by Dr.  Burney,  1769,  i.
55)  59,  60;  School of,  Dr.  Burney’s plan for a,  i.  lxx;  on Sundays,  ii.  1 13;  too much,  ii.  308;
and conversation,  i.  96.  See also
under Concerts,  &c.

“Music,  History of,”  Dr.  Burney’s,
and the rival history by Sir John
Hawkins,  ii.  29 n.  ;  a catch on
the rival histories,  ii.  30 n.  See
also under Burney,  Dr.  Charles,
&c.

Musical clubs at Worcester,  i.  168.
Musical instruments in Burney’s
“Hist.  Music,”  ii.  7,  35.
“Musical Lady,”  Garrick’s,  i.  219.
Musicians,  Society of,  establishment
of,  i.  1 5 1 n.

Mylne,  Sir Robert,  architect,  i.  72.
My Sow’s Pig’d,  card game,  i.  90.

Names on glasses,  writing,  a game,

i.  85.

Naples,  “love affairs”  in,  i.  294,
303-

Napoleon,  his likeness to Garrick,

i.  1 17 n.

Narbonne,  Count Louis de,  i.  lxxiv.
Nature,  and Art,  i.  337;  and Providence,  i.  280.

Needlework,  by the Duchess of
Norfolk,  i.  251.

Nesbit,  Mr.,  ii.  31,  32,  40.
Newbery,  John,  and Christopher
Smart,  i.  133 n.

Newcome,  Col.,  Thackeray’s,  original of the character,  i.  16 1 n.
Newton,  Sir Isaac,  i.  155;  his
house in St.  Martin’s Street
taken by Dr.  Burney,  i.  313,  ii.
99,  106,  no;  his observatory,  i.
lxxi,  328,  lxxxvi,  lxxxvii,  ii.  310.
Nicholson,  Miss,  ii.  33911.

Ninon de l’Enclos and the  “Music
of the Ancients,”  ii.  282 n.
“Nobody,  Miss,”  Frances Burney
addresses her Journal to,  i.  1,  5,
29,  50,  64,  338,  ii.  161.
Nollekens,  Joseph,  sculptor,  1.  149,

ii.  145-

INDEX

370

Nollekens,  Mrs.,  ii.  145,  3 x 5 n.
Norfolk,  Duchess of,  needlework
by,  1.251.

Norfolk Pocket-Book,  a,  1787,  11.
275 n.

Norris,  singer,  i.  59.

Norris,  young,  singer,  i.  216 n.
North,  Brownlow,  Bishop,  and his
wife,  ii.  307.

North,  Dudley.  See Long,  Dudley.
Norwich  (?),  plays at,  about 1785,
ii.  319.

Novels,  i.  36;  those read by Frances
Burney,  i.  Ixxvi,  lxxvii;  old,  i.
lxvi,  288 n.

Nourse,  John  (?),  bookseller,  i.  225.
Nun,  the,  at the Masquerade,  i.  72.

Oaki.ey,  Sir Chas.,  Bart.,  and his
wife,  i.  284 and n.

Oaths,  &c.,  of the eighteenth century,  i.  182 n.,  ii.  98,  109,  230,
233.  240,  277.

Oberea,  Queen of Otaheite,  ii.  25.
Obrien,  his  “Cross Purposes,”  i.
192.

O’Connor,  Mrs.,  ii.  47,  55,  61,  69,

83,  88.

Ogle,  Dr.  Newton,  Dean of Winchester,  ii.  94,  103,  1 13,  120,

298.

Ogle,  Mrs.  and the Misses,  ii.  298,

299.

Ogleby,  Lord,  in the  “Clandestine
Marriage,”  i.  68.

“Old Woman’s Magazine,”  C.

Smart’s,  i.  28,  133 n.

Omai,  the Otaheitan,  i.  321,  330,
331 et seq.,  ii.  24,  38,  130;  and
Capt.  Cook,  ii.  13411.;  compared
with the Hon.  Mr.  Stanhope,  i.
336 ;  and the Duchess of Devonshire,  ii.  139;  and the King,  ii.
1 31 ;  returned to his own country,
ii.  134 m

Omiah or Omy.  See Omai.

Onofrio,  Signor,  singer,  ii.  89.
Onslow,  Rev.  Arthur,  i,  257,  258,
259-

Onslow,  Earl,  i.  217 n.

Onslow,  Mrs.,  i.  257,  260.

Opera in England,  ii.  8 1 n. ;  early
technicalities of,  ib.

Opera House,  Haymarket,  i.  329 ;
Handel there,  i.  3290.;  Gabrielli
there,  ii.  80.  See also Gabrielli,
&c.

Orange Coffee House,  ii.  213.

Orange Street Chapel,  i.  329 n.

Oratorios,  i.  298;  in Lent,  i.  201,
209.

Ord,  Mr.,  Mrs.,  Miss,  ii.  58,  138,
144,  306.

Orford,  Lord,  Horace Walpole’s
“mad nephew,”  i.  139,  322.

Orloff,  Prince Alexis,  his visit to
Burney’s concerts,  ii.  1,  93,  99,
102,  108,  109,  1 1 7 ;  his relations
with the Empress Catherine,  ii.
93.  102,  109;  his diamonds,  ii.
109,  no n.,  1 1 3,  1 1 7,  121;  is
said to have murdered the Emperor Peter III.,  ii.  93;  and the
Turkish fleet atTscheme,  ii.  93 n.

Orloff,  Gregory,  and Empress
Catherine,  ii.  93 n.

Osric,  Viceroy of the Hwiccas,
cenotaph in Gloucester Cathedral,
ii.  196.

Otaheite,  i.  334 n.,  ii.  25,  134 n.
See also Omai.

Owen,  Miss,  ii.  152,  296.

Ow'yhee  (Hawaii,  or Huahei).  See
Otaheite.

Owyhee court dress,  Mrs.  Thrale’s,
ii.  265.

Oxford,  Dr.  Burney at,  taking his
degree of music,  1769,  i.  55,  59,
60  ;  Martin Rishton at,  i.  274.

“Oxford Journal,”  the,  i.  59.

Oxford Road,  now Oxford Street,
i.  273.

P.,  Mrs.  See Paradise,  Mrs.

Pacchieroti,  Gasparo,  singer,  i.  1,
lxxiv,  lxxv,  lxxxvii,  ii.  123 n. ,
255 n.,  291;  and Sheridan,  i.
lxxxvii,  210 n.

Packington,  Sir Herbert Perrot,
Bart.,  and his house at West-
wood,  ii.  199,  200 n.

Packington,  Sir John,  ii.  200 n.

INDEX

37i

Packington,  Lady,  ii.  201-209.
Packington,  the Misses,  ii.  202.
Pages,  Court,  and the clergy,  i.
xvii.

Pandean Minstrels,  the,  ii.  293 n.
Pantheon,  the,  Oxford Street,  ii.
104,  146,  307 ;  Agujari there,  ii.
3,  80,  82 ;  Gabrielli there,  ii.  86 ;
a masquerade there,  1780,  ii.
289.

Pantomimes,  Rich’s,  i.  72 n.

Paoli,  General,  of Corsica,  ii.  302,
315-

Papendiek,  Christopher,  ii.  333.
P&pendiek,  Mrs.,  ii.  333 n. ;  her
“  Court and Private Life in the
Time of Queen Charlotte,”  and
its errors,  ib.

Paper mills,  R.  Twiss’s,  i.  302 n.
Papier-mache,  i.  157 n.

Paradise,  John,  ii.  317 n.

Paradise,  Mrs.,  i.  lxxxviii,  ii.  272 n. ,
3!3>  3r4>  315;  and Baretti,  i.
207 n. ;  and Mary Moser,  R.A.,
ii.  315 n.

Paris,  Miss Allen at,  i.  140;  the
Burneys in,  i.  xlvii.

Paris and Lyons drapery,  i.  141.
Park,  musician,  i.  59.

Parsons,  Dr.,  King’s Bandmaster,
ii-  333 n.

Parsons,  Mr.  (?  Dr. ),  i.  149.
Partners,  choosing,  at a ball,  i.
78.

Partridge,  Mr.,  i.  47.

Party giving,  ii.  138.

Pascal,  Mr.,  i.  71.

Pascals,  the,  i.  71,  89,  148.  See also
Mrs.  Thielcke.

Pasquali,  musician,  i.  59.

Paydes,  Mr.,  i.  148.

Payne,  John,  of Payne and Foss,  i.
lxxiii,  ii.  129 n.

Payne,  the Misses,  ii.  129,  142.
Payne,  Mrs.  Sally  (Admiral Burney’s daughter),  i.  lxxiii,  ii.
129 n.,  271 n.,  309.

Payne,  Thomas,  bookseller,  ii.  129,
307-

Payne,  T.  and Son,  and Cadell T. ,
publishers of  “Cecilia,”  ii.  307.

“  Paysan Parvenu,  Le,”  Marivaux’,

i.  36.

“Pea,  The,”  =  Miss Sarah Robinson,  i.  53 n.

Pechell,  Sir John,  Mr.  and Miss,

ii.  148 n.

Pellew Islands,  H.  Wilson’s account of,  i.  315 n.

Penneck,  Rev.  Mr.,  i.  lxxxviii,  ii.  2,
9 and n.

Pens,  steel,  early,  ii.  159.

Pepusch,  Dr.,  ii.  29 n.

Pepys,  Sir Lucas,  M.D.,  and his
wife,  ii.  137 n.,  306.

Pepys,  Mr.,  afterwards Sir William
Weller Pepys,  Master in Chancery,  ii.  137,  146,  259,  301,
306.

Pepys,  Samuel,  i.  xxxiii ;  his Mr.
LIuellyn  (?),  i.  xviii ;  and Sir
Nicholas Crisp,  i.  xxxi.

Pepys,  Thomas,  and Merton  (Martin),  Surrey,  i.  xxxiii.

Percy,  Dr.,  ii.  297;  Dr.  Johnson’s
parody of his  “  Hermit,”  ii.
257.

Pere  (or  ?  Perez,  David),  composer,

i.  311.

Persian lustring,  or lute-string,  &c.,

ii.  173 m,  175.

Peter III.,  Emperor of Russia,
murder of,  ii.  93.

Petrarch,  Mr.  Crisp on,  i.  269.
Petticoat and coat,  i.  248,  ii.  175-
Petty,  Lord Henry,  on Mrs.  Thrale,
ii.  285 n.

Phaeton,  carriage,  i.  274.

Philidor,  F.  A.,  the chess-player,  i.
123.

Phillips,  Captain,  afterwards Colonel
Molesworth,  and his family,  i.
xci,  ii.  266,  269,  271 n.,  308,  317.
See also under Burney,  Susan
(Mrs.  Phillips).

Phillips,  Mrs.,  Susan Burney,  ii.

313.  See also Burney,  Susan.
Philosophy,  English,  i.  154-
Phipps,  Chas. ,  i.  88 n.

Phipps,  Constantine,  Esq.,  1.  257 n.
Phipps,  Capt.  Constantine,  1.  88n.,
ii.  56.

INDEX

372

Phipps,  Henry  (Harry),  i.  76,  77 n.,
87,  88,  97,  11 7 n.

Phipps,  Miss,  ii.  56.

Phipps,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  at Teign-
mouth,  i.  230,  232,  235,  237,  246,
257,  260,  262.

Physicians,  See.,  Club of,  in St.

Paul’s Church Yard,  i.  161 n.
Physiognomy,  Lavater’s  (?),  i.  310.
Piano fortes,  i.  25,  32,  142,  ii.
300 n. ;  Mr.  Crisp’s the first in
England,  i.  lv;  invention of,  i.  lv.
Picture exhibitions,  early London,

i.  239.

Pictures,  high prices of,  i.  204,
205 n.

Pictures at Fonthill,  ii.  323 n.

“  Piety in Pattens,”  Foote’s,  i.

330 n.,  ii.  279,  28011.

Pig,  child mauled by a,  ii.  2.

Pig race at Teignmouth,  i.  244.
Pigot,  Lord,  i.  51,  84,  89;  his
tragic death,  i.  89 n.

Pilkington,  Sir Lionel,  i.  88.
Pillory,  the,  Dr.  Shebbeare in,  i.
285.

Piozzi,  Mr,,  i.  lxxxvii,  ii.  14611.,
287,  298 ;  his first meeting with
Mrs.  Thrale,  ii.  285.

Piozzi,  Mrs.,  i.  118 n. ;  her  “  Anec
dotes of Dr.  Johnson,”  ii.  285 n.  ;
and Frances Burney,  i.  lxxxi,
lxxxiii;  her characters of Mrs.
Garrick and Queen Charlotte,  i.
11811.;  and Baretti,  i.  2070.;
Hayward’s  “Autobiography of,”

ii.  285 n. ;  and Shrewsbury,  i.  xxii.
See also Thrale,  Mrs.

Pitt,  Mr.,  ii.  329.

Pitt,  Mrs.,  and her hair-dresser,  ii.
289.

“  Placid Man,  The,”  i.  321.

Planta,  Joseph,  of the British Museum,  ii.  313.

Pleydell,  Mrs.,  i.  50,  51,  61,  65,
120.

Plutarch’s Lives,  i.  22,  23,  24,  26.
Poachers,  i.  258.

Pogenpohl,  M.,  i.  82 n.,  151-160,  ii.

IJ3-

Poland Street,  Dr.  Burney s house

there,  i.  xlv,  lxxi,  Ixxxv,  3,  5,  Zu
44,  65,  102,  143,  ii.  252 n.

“Politeness,  Treatise on,”  F.  Bun
ney’s burlesque,  i.  324.

Politics,  of the Burneys,  ii.  193 an
n. ;  in Gloucester,  ii.  187 n.

“Pompey the Little,”  ii.  105.

Ponsonby,  Miss,  i.  1 32 n.

Poor,  Mr.,  ii.  296,  300,  305.

Pope,  Alexander,  i.  lxxx*vi,  144;  hi
friends,  i.  146;  his Letters,  :
145;  and Martha Blount,  i.  147
and his mother,  i.  146;  on Gai
rick’s Richard III.,  i.  186 n.
Thackeray on his Letters,  i.  I46n

Popery,  No,  riots,  1780,  i.  50 n.

Porcelain,  manufacture of Worces
ter,  ii.  181 n.

Porte,  Madame,  i.  141.

Porter,  beer,  i.  136,  335.

Porter,  Rev.  Mr.,  of Woolwich,  am
his lady,  i.  81.

Porteous,  Bishop,  ii.  6 n. ;  on style
i.  lxix.

Portland,  Duchess of,  the  “  vii
tuosa,”  i.  xxxvii.

Portland Vase,  &c. ,  at the Britisi
Museum,  i.  177 n.

Portuguese ladies,  their  “hail
clubs  ”  (queues),  i.  297.

Post-marks,  &c.,  of letters,  i.  137
143-

Postal service,  Sec.,  of the time,  i
lxi,  97,  ii.  41,  318.

Potter,  Rev.  Robert,  Dr.  Johnson’
verses on,  ii.  257 n.

Poussin,  Nicholas,  landscape by
sold for  ^650,  i.  204,  205 n.

Powel,  Mrs. ,  ii.  61.

“  Prelude,  The,”  Colman’s,  i.  190.

Prescott,  Prebendary,  i.  xix.

Prevost,  Abbe,  his  “  Doyen de Kil
lerine,”  i.  45.

Price,  a singer,  i.  59.

Price,  Mr.,  i.  117,  177.

Priest,  a poet’s,  i.  235.

Priestley,  Dr.,  i.  1911.,  318 n.  ;  am
the Methodists,  i.  305 n.

Pringle,  Andrew,  i.  33,  53,  71,  85.

Pringle,  Captain,  i.  32,  71,  84,  90
93>  97,  103,  163.

INDEX

373

Pringle,  Mrs.,  and her parties,  i.

lxxxv,  31,  32,  33,  39,  42,  52,  84,
:  90,  95>  96,  102,  143,  162,  ii.  33,
73-

Pringles,  the,  and the Stranges,  i.
92 n.

Prior,  Matthew,  and the Duchess
of Queensberry,  i.  192.

Propriety,  word,  i.  272.

Providence and Nature,  i.  280.
Pugh,  Rev.  Mr.,  i.  2,  77-82,  148.
Pulteney,  Earl of Bath,  and Geo.

Colman,  i.  hi n.

Puns,  ii.  283,  303.

Puppet-Show,  Foote’s,  at the Hay-
market,  ii.  280 n.

Purcell,  Henry,  i.  xviii.

Pyle,  Rev.  Thomas,  of Lynn,  i.
xxxix.

“  Q.,  Old,”  =T)uke of Queensberry,
i.  220.

“  Quarterly Review,  The,”  starting
of,  ii.  140 n.  ;  its attacks on
Madame D’Arblay’s Diary,  &c.,

i.  142 n.

Queen Square,  Bloomsbury,  Sir
Wrn.  Browne there,  i.  184;  Dr.
Burney’s house there,  i.  xlv,  Ixxi,
lxxxvi,  102,  104,  103,  no,  n6n.,
132,  137,  190,  ii.  43.

Queen Street,  Lincoln’s Inn Fields,
George Colman in,  i.  112;  the
chapel in Great Queen Street,

ii.  296.

Queensberry,  “  Kilty,”  Duchess of,
i.  192;  and Gay,  i.  192 n. ;  and
Prior,  i.  192;  and Swift,  i.  192 n.
Queensberry,  Duke,  “old Q.,”  i.
220.

Quin,  actor,  i.  xxxvi ;  on Handel,
i.  xxiv.

Quiz,  the word,  i.  166 n.

■Iabutin,  Bussy de,  the Letters of,
i.  311.

laces at Teignmouth,  i.  230,  242,
244.

ladnor,  Lady,  ii.  224,  232.
laillery,  freedom of,  i.  134.
lanelagh Gardens,  i.  47,  113,  124.

Raper,  Mrs.  C.  C.,  ii.  271 n.
Raphael’s School of Athens,  i.  312.
“Rasselas,  ”  Dr.  Johnson’s,  1.  16,
48 n.

Raucourt,  Mile.,  ii.  211.

Rauzzini,  Venanzio,  singer,  i.  329,
ii.  3,  60,  86,  91,  95,  98,  104,  114,
122,  125,  126,  149,  217.

Ray,  Miss,  the murder of,  and Lord
Sandwich,  ii.  1250.

Red Lion Square,  ii.  265.

Rees’  Cyclopaedia,  Dr.  Burney's
contributions to,  i.  x,  xi,  lv.

“  Rehearsal,  The,”  and Cibber,  i.
163,  16411.;  and Dryden,  ii.

28011.,  and Garrick,  i.  163.

Reid,  Miss,  “  paintress, ”  i.  283,  286,
ii.  11.

Religion,  practical,  i.  125.
Reynolds,  Miss Frances,  Sir
Joshua’s sister and housekeeper,
‘ii.  153 n.,  294,  297.

Reynolds,  Sir Joshua,  i.  lxxxv,  ii.

10,  297;  and Edward Burney,  ii.
290,  292 n. ;  his picture of Garrick
between Tragedy and Comedy,  i.
206 n.,  221 n.  ;  his portrait of Dr.
Johnson,  i.  Ii6n. ;  and Sir T.
Lawrence,  ii.  29211.;  his  “Tragic
Muse”  and Romney’s,  i.  330 n.;
on Devonshire,  i.  261 n. ;  on Dr.
Johnson’s convulsive movements,

11.  154 n. ;  Johnson on a party at
his house,  ii.  15211.;  and Fanny
Burney,  ii.  268,  269.

Riccoboni,  Mine.,  her novels,  ii.
237,  249-

Rich,  manager,  and his pantomimes,
i.  72 m

Richardson,  Samuel,  i.  viii,  xxxvi ;
Fanny Burney’s admiration for
his novels,  i.  lxxvii;  and Marivaux,  i.  36;  and Fanny Burney’s
novels,  Dr.  Johnson on,  ii.  250 ;
his  “Pamela”  burlesqued,  ii.
280 n.

Riches,  without liberality,  i.  193;

and wickedness,  i.  38.

Rickman,  Mr.,  and Southey,  Capt.

Burney,  &c.,  ii.  140 n.

Riddle,  Miss,  i.  non.

INDEX

374

Riding-habits and riding-skirts,  i.
131 n.

Riots,  No Popery,  1780,  i.  50 n.
Rishmau  (?),  name in Poland Street,

i.  143.

Rishton,  Martin Folkes,  and his
family,  i.  1 13 n. ;  and his dogs,  i.
239,  249;  and Maria Allen,  their
love story,  i.  115 m,  136  ( see also
under Allen,  Maria);  at Teign-
moulh,  i.  229 et seq. ;  and the
wrestlers,  i.  245.  See also i.  1051:.,
108,  13 1 ,  i8in.,  224,  227,  259.
Rishton,  Mrs.  Maria,  i.  12,  ii.  321 ;
her cookery,  i.  244 n. ;  her letters,
i.  212,  222,  224,  279;  her love
story and marriage,  i.  113m,  136,
193 n,;  at Teignmouth,  i.  222,
224,  229 et seq. ;  her later life and
death,  i.  278.  See also ,  i.  250,  ii.
136,  138,  and under Allen,  Maria.
Rishtons,  the,  i.  190,  262,  273.

“  Rivals,  The,”  production of,  i.
191 n.

Rivet,  Mr.,  ii.  318.

Roads,  bad,  at Chesington,  i.  lxi,
126 n.  See also Postal Service.
Robings  =  trimmings,  ii.  167 and n.
Robinson,  Mr.,  of Lynn,  i.  6 n.
Robinson,  Mr. ,  i.  93,  95.

Robinson,  Mrs.  Margaret,  ii.
336 n.

Robinson,  the sisters,  afterwards
Mrs.  Montagu and Mrs.  Scott,  i.
53 n.

Roebuck,  J.  A  ,  M.P. ,  i.  2 ion.
Rogers,  Samuel,  on Mrs.  Barbauld,
i.  299 n,

Rolfe,  Edmund,  of Heacham,  i.
131,  165.

Romans and Greeks,  and their
civilization,  i.  37.

Romney,  Capt.,  ii.  316.

Romney,  G.,  painter,  ii.  317;  his
“Tragic Muse”  and Reynolds’s,
i.  33011.

“Romping,”  ii.  197,  199.
Roncaglia,  Signor,  ii.  217.

Rosalba,  i.  283 n.

Rosamond’s Pond,  St.  James’s
Park,  i.  20,  158 n.

Rosat,  Ule.,  i.  125,  323

Rose,  Dr.,  of Chiswick,  ii.  130 n.

3J7-

Rosebery,  Lord,  ii.  18,  19.

Rosemary,  Lord,  =  Rosebery,  Lord
j ii.  18,  19.

Rothes,  Countess of,  ii.  306.

Rousseau,  J.  J.,  i.  299,  ii.  258;  anc
Dr.  Burney,  i.  124;  his  “  Devir
du Village”  translated by Dr
Burney,  i.  1.

Routh,  Dr.,  his account of Dr.
Johnson at Oxford in 1784,  ii.
153 n-

Rowe,  Mrs.,  her  “Letters from the
Dead,”  i.  9.

Rowing match of women at Teignmouth,  i.  246.

“Rowley Poems,”  Milles and Wal
pole and the,  i.  254 n.

Royal Academy.  See Academy,
Royal.

Rudeness and conceit,  i.  135.

Ruffles,  &c.,  i.  202 n.  See alst
Cuffs.

“Rule Britannia,”  the authorshij
of,  i.  263 n.

“  Run goods,”  i. e. ,  smuggled goods
ii.  324.

Russel,  Dr.  Alexander,  ii.  32 n.

Russel,  Dr.  Patrick,  ii.  32,  40,  137
287 n.

Russell,  John,  afterwards Sir Join
Packington,  and finally Lon
Hampton,  ii.  200 n.

Russell,  Mr.,  ii.  165.

S.,  Mr.,  of Bewdley,  i.  170.

S.,  Mrs.,  of Bewdley,  i.  170,  ii
219 n.

Sacchini,  Antonio,  i.  Ixxxvi,  194
217,  218,  223,  ii.  86;  Reynolds’
portrait of,  ii.  10.

St.  Dionis Backchurch,  Fenchurc
Street,  Dr.  Burney organist there
i.  xxxviii,  2 n. ;  the Burneys in th
Register there,  i.  xxxviii,  62 n.

St.  George,  Chevalier de,  and th
Stranges,  &c. ,  ii.  27 11.  See ah
under Stuarts,  &c.

INDEX

3t.  George’s Fields,  Mrs.  Henniver
and th e.  Lactarium there,  i.  xxviii.

?t.  James’s Park,  Rosamond’s Pond
and the Decoy there,  i.  20,
158 n.

it.  Mart,  Mme.,  of Paris,  i.  1,
lxiv.

it.  Martin’s Street,  Leicester
Square,  Dr.  Burney’s house
there,  i.  Ixxi,  lxxxvi,  313,  328.
See also Newton,  Sir Isaac,  his
house.

it.  Paul’s Church Yard,  club of
doctors there,  i.  161 n.

Saigas,  De,  M.,  i.  309.

Salisbury,  Lord,  and Dr.  Burney,  ii.
^  333 n.

Saltern,  Capt.,  i.  249.

Salzar,  J.  G.,  i.  31 1 and n.

Sam  (?),  ii.  232.

Sam  =  Samuel Greaves,  servant of
Mr.  Thrale,  and afterwards tavern
keeper,  ii.  255.

Sam’s Club,  ii.  255 n.

Sandford,  Mrs.,  =  Rebecca Burney
of Worcester,  ivhich see.

Sandwich,  John,  fourth Earl,  and
Dr.  Burney,  i.  138:  catch by,  ii.
35  ;  and Hawkesworth’s edition of
Cook’s Voyages,  i.  272m  ;  is called
“Jemmy T witcher, ”  ii.  124;  and
Omai,  i.  334 n. ;  and the Miss
Ray tragedy,  ii.  125 n. ;  and
Wilkes,  ii.  124 n.  See also i.  214,
313,  322,  ii.  37,  115.

Sandwich Islands.  See Otaheite.

Sandys,  Mr.,  of Worcester,  ii.  181 n.

Sandys,  Mrs.,  ii.  336 n.

Sanglos,  Duca di,  ii.  306.

Sansom,  Mr.  Francis,  i.  non.

Sansom,  Mr.  James,  i.  non.

Sansom,  Mrs.,  i.  non.

Sastres,  Mr.,  Italian master,  ii.  302,
306.

“Saturnalia,”  the,  of Sir Joseph
Banks,  ii.  13811.

Savoi,  singer,  ii.  86,  155-

Savoir-vivre Club,  i.  I78n.,ii.  2l9n.

Scandal,  i.  15.

Schmidt,  Mr.,  i.  xxv.  See also
Smith,  J.  C.

375

Schwellenberg,  Mrs.,  i.  292 n.,  ii,
336 n. ;  and Frances Burney,  ii.
340 n.

Scotch,  the,  Dr.  Shebbeare’s attacks on,  i.  286.

Scotland Yard,  Mrs.  Cibber’s house
there,  i.  xxiv.

Scott,  Geo.  Lewis,  i.  52>  92 n->
162.

Scott,  Rev.  Mr.,  chaplain to Lord
Sandwich,  i.  53 n.

Scott,  Mrs.,  i.  53 n.

Scott,  Sir Walter,  censured by Miss
Hawkins and Mrs.  Thrale,  i.
Ixxvii;  his wife,  ii.  339 n.

Scottish and English etiquette,  &c.,

i-  34-  ,  .

Seaton,  or Seton,  Alexander,  1.  31;
his attentions to Hetty Burney,
i.  31,  33,  84,  94,  97;  and Hetty’s
marriage,  i.  200;  and Edward
Jerningham’s  “Deserter,”  ii.  333;
a tete-a-tete with,  i.  33.  See also i.
33,  39,  52,  S3,  84,  90,  9L 93*
102,  105,  163.

Seaton,  Sir Henry,  Bart.,  i.  31 n.,
92.

Seaton,  Major,  1.  91.

Seatons,  the,  at the siege of Berwick,  ii.  333 n.

Seine,  drawing the,  by the fisher-
folk of Teignmouth,  i.  248.
Selwyn,  Mr.,  banker,  i.  lxxx'i,  ii.
306.

Senesino,  ii.  79-

Sentiments and toasts,  ii.  184,
185 n.

Seton,  Alexander.  See Seaton.
Seven Years’  War,  the,  in Germany,
i-  3°4-

Sevigne,  Madame de,  Letters of,  i.
311.

Seward,  William,  ii.  1 5 2j 2^7 ;  29&’
306,  316.

Shadwell,  Lancelot,^  father of the
Vice-Chancellor,  ii.  316,  317.
Shakespeare Jubilee,  the 1769,  G.

Keate and,  i.  315 n.
Shakespeare’s mulberry tree,  i.  57-
Shaldon,  near Teignmouth,  i.  246,

249-

INDEX

376

Shannon,  river,  a dip in,  a cure for
bashfulness,  ii.  127.

Sharp,  Samuel,  and Signor Baretti,
i.  25.

Shebbeare,  Dr.,  i.  283,  284,  313;
his novels,  i.  288;  in the pillory,

i.  284 285 n. ;  on woman and the
Scotch,  i.  285;  in Smollett’s  “  Sir
Lancelot Graves,”  i.  285 n. ;  on
booksellers,  i.  288.

Sheeles,  Mrs.  See Shields.
Sheffield,  Miss,  i.  28.

Shelburne,  Lord,  afterwards the
first Marquis of Lansdowne,  i.
180 n.,  263,  313.

Shepherd,  Dr.  A.,  i.  116,  215,292;
and Frances Burney,  i.  292 n.;
and Shepherd’s Islands,  i.  292 n.
Sheridan,  Mrs.  Frances,  her comedy
“The Discovery,”  ii.  290.
Sheridan,  Richard Brinsley,  ii.
19 n.;  his runaway marriage with
Miss Linley,  i.  209,  216;  Moore’s
Life of,  i.  209 ;  and Pac-
chieroti,  i.  lxxxvii,  210 n.;  production of his  “  Rivals,”  i.  191 n. ;
his  “  Trip to Scarborough,”

ii.  277 n.;  his second wife,  ii.
299.

Sheridan,  Mrs.  R.  B.  (Linley),  her
portraits,  ii.  10.  See also Linley,
Miss.

Sheridan,  Thomas,  father of R.  B.

Sheridan,  ii.  32S.

Shields,  Mrs.,  i.  xlv,  116.

Shooting parties of the Rishtons,  i.
258,  260.

Shrewsbury,  the early life of Dr.

Burney there,  i.  x,  xx,  xxii.
Siddons,  Mrs.,  and Mrs.  Yates,  i.
330 n.

“Siege of Berwick,”  play by E.

Jerningham,”  ii.  333 m
Silver-side,  a name for Agujari,  ii.
.35-

Simmons,  Capt.  John,  i.  322 n.
Simmons,  Mrs.  and Miss,  i.  lx,  323,
33i-

Simnel cake,  i.  xxii.

“Simpkin the Second,  The Letters
of,”  ii.  273 m

Singers,  Italian and English,  ii.  6.

Singing at church,  Teignmouth,  i

255-

“  Sir Charles Grandison,”  Richard
son’s,  i.  36.

Sisters,  elder and younger,  i.  51.

Sistini,  ii.  91.

Skinner,  Mrs.,  i.  61.

Skrine,  Mr.,  ii.  258.

Slang,  i.  132 n.,  166 n.,  ii.  272 n.

Slaughter’s Coffee House,  ii.  331.

Sleepe,  Esther,  afterwards Mrs
Burney,  and mother of France
Burney,  i.  xxvi.  See also Burney
Mrs.  Esther.

Sleepe,  Mr.,  i.  xcii,  no n.,  ii.  291

Sleepe,  Mrs.,  ii.  291.

Sleepe,  Mrs.,  Frances Burney
grandmother,  i.  xlix,  lxvi.

Sloane,  Sir Iians,  i.  306 n.

Sloper,  Mr.,  i.  148.

Smart,  Christopher,  i.  Ii;  and D
Burney,  i.  133 n. ;  and cleai
linen,  ii.  287 n. ;  and the  “  Crit
cal Reviewers,”  i.  66;  his daughtol
Mrs.  Le Noir,  i.  134 n.;  :
Durham,  i.  1330.;  his family
death,  character,  and rnisfo:
tunes,  i.  133 and n.;  Johnson ar
Garrick and,  i.  133 n. ;  mamas
to a step-daughter of Newbery,
133 n.;  his  “Old Woman’s Mag;
zine,”  i.  28,  133 n. ;  his poemi
i.  28;  Mr.  Browning on h!
“  Song to David,”  i.  2911.

Smart,  Peter,  ancestor of Chris;
opher,  i.  133 n.;  at Durhar
ib.  ;  his attacks upon Bisho
Cosin,  ib.

Smith,  Dr.  C.,  ii.  42.  See ah
Smyth.

Smith,  Isaac,  composer,  i.  156.

Smith,  or Schmidt,  J.  C. ,  con
poser,  i.  156.

Smith,  J.  S.,  composer,  i.  156.

Smith,  J.  T.,  his  “Anecdotes
“Life of Nollekens,”  &c. ,
145 n.,  173 n.,  271 n.,  293 ri
315-

Smith,  Martin,  composer,  i.  156.

Smith,  Mr.,  ii.  313.

INDEX

Smith,  Mr.,  and Madame Duval,
in  “  Evelina,”  i.  lviii.

Smith,  Mrs.,  ii.  137,  138.

“Smoked,”  the word,  i.  77>  166,
17 1,  293.  n.  221,  305.

Smollett,  Tobias,  his  “History of
England,”  i.  100;  his novels,  Dr.
Burney on,  ii.  230;  his  “Sir
Lancelot Greaves,”  i.  285 n. ;  on
Dr.  Shebbeare,  i.  285 n.

Smuggling by ladies,  ii.  130,  324.

Smyth,  Dr.  James Carmichael,  i.
161.

Smyth,  Major Henry William
Carmichael,  the original of
Thackeray’s Col.  Newcome,  i.
161 n.

Smythies,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  22.

Snell,  Capt.,  ii.  186.

Snetzler,  M.,  i.  xl.

Snig’s End,  scene of one of Feargus
O’Connor’s settlements of Chartists,  ii.  198 n.

Society Islands.  See Otaheite.

Soho Square,  i.  98;  amateur theatricals there,  i.  32.

Solander,  Dr.,  i.  138,  139,  333.

Solgas,  De.  See Saigas.

Solly,  Mr.,  ii.  32,  39.

South Sea Islands,  a native song of
the,  ii.  132.

Southey,  Robert,  ii.  140m,  304 n. ;
his mother,  i.  lxxv.

Spain,  glowworms worn in the
hair there,  i.  291;  things of,  Mr.
Twiss on,  i.  290,  293;  the war
with,  1779,  ii.  255,  262,  263;
women in,  i.  291,  293.

Spandau,  Mynhere,  i.  148.

Spenser,  reading,  i.  252.

Stage,  the,  1770,  i.  86 n.

Stancliffe,  Molly,  i.  non.,  i43>
213.

Stanhoe,  Norfolk,  the Rishtons at,
i.  181,  188,  201,  233,  275.

Stanhope,  Mr.,  Lord Chesterfield’s
heir,,  i.  205;  his manners compared with Omai the Otaheitan’s,
i.  336.

Stanley,  John,  composer,  i.  149,
156,  210,  21 1 n.,  279.

377

Stanley,  Lord,  his fete -champHre at
the Oaks near Epsom,  i.  276.
Stanley,  Mrs.  John,  i.  149,  210,
211,  279.

Stanyan,  Temple,  his histories,  i.  44.
Star-Cross,  Devon,  i.  259.
Staverton,  Devon,  i.  260.

Sterne’s  “Sentimental Journey,”
i.  49.

Stourhead,  Sir R.  C.  Hoare’s
grounds at,  ii.  321.

Stowe,  Temples,  &c. ,  at,  ii.  321.
Strange,  Andrew,  ii.  305.

Strange,  Miss Bella,  ii.  129.  See
also Strange,  Mrs.

Strange,  little Jamie  (J.  C.  S.),  i.
86 n.

Strange,  Lady  (Isabella Lumisden),
i.  2 n. ;  and Dr.  Armstrong,  i.
138 n. ;  her portrait,  i.  283 n.  ;  and
the Stuart Princes,  Tames Francis
and Charles Edward,  ii.  26 n.  See
also under Strange,  Mrs.,  Strange,
Sir R.,  and Lumisden.

Strange,  Mary Bruce,  ii.  16,  128.

See also Strange,  Mrs.

Strange,  Mrs.  Isabella Katharine,
and the Misses Strange,  i.  3011.,
72,  86,  148,  160,  287,  ii.  I4>
16 n.,  1 7,  24,  31,  87,  128,  253m
See also Strange,  Lady.

Strange,  Mr.,  afterwards Sir Robert,
engraver,  i.  xlviii,  lxxiii;  early
life and services to the Stuart
Princes,  ii.  26 n. ;  his engravings,

i.  204 n.,  ii.  44 n. ;  and Geo.  III.,

ii.  44m ;  his knighthood,  ii.  128m;
his Memoirs by Dennistoun,  i.
3011.,  ii.  26 n.  ;  his quarrel with
the Royal Academy,  ii.  44;  his
sales of pictures,  i.  204,  205 ;  and
his wife,  i.  287 n.  {see also undei
Strange,  Lady,  &c.).  Also see i.
30 n.,  72,  86,  1 16,  161 n.,  285.
286,  287 n.,  333,  ii.  14,  i6n.,  44,
129,  241.

Strange,  Sir Thomas Andrew,  11.
43-

Stranges,  the,  in Pans,  11.  254;  and
Mr.  Bruce the traveller,  ii.  14;
and the Pringles,  i.  92 n.

INDEX

373

Streatfield,  Miss,  ii.  254,  257,  266,
290.

Streatham,  the Thrales at,  ii.  255.
See also under Thrale.

Stretfield,  Miss,  =  Streatfield,  which
see.

Stuart,  Miss,  i.  91.

Stuarts,  the,  claiming the English
throne.  See Charles Edward,
Strange,  Sic.

Stukeley,  the antiquary,  i.  11411.

Suett,  Dicky,  actor,  his Charles II.
wig,  ii.  17311.

Suffolk Street,  Haymarket,  coach
accident in,  i.  197,  198.

Sunday,  parties and music on,  i.  32,
47,  1 16,  128,  138 n„  158,  ii.  1 13,
301.

Swift,  Dean,  and Alderman Barber,
i.  lxxi,  Ixxxvi,  104m;  his  “  Battle
of the Books,”  ii.  282 n. ;  and the
Duchess of Queensberry,  i.  192 n. ;
his  “  Polite Conversation  ”  and
“Directions to Servants,”  i.  325
and n.;  and Pope,  i.  146.

Sympsons,  the,  ii.  116.

Tacet,  flute-player,  i.  176.

“Tamerlane,”  Rowe’s,  played on
the 5th of November,  i.  31 n.  ;
private performance of,  i.  31,  32.

“Tamerlano,”  opera,  i.  Ixxxvi,  216,
217.

Tatlanthe,  a signature of Charlotte
Burney,  ii.  320.

Tea  “  cadets,”  i.  142.

Teeth,  picking the,  and politeness,
i.  326.

Teignmouth,  Devon,  Frances Burney’s visit to,  i.  222,  228 et seq. ;
the fisher-folk there,  i.  212;  the
Globe Inn there,  i.  244;  the Rish-
tons at,  i.  212,  213,  276.

Teignmouth Journal,  the,  (Frances
Burney’s),  i.  lxxx,  228,  ii.  38.

Telamas,  or Talamas,  ii.  316,  317.

Telemachus,  i.  30.

Temple Gardens,  ii.  296.

Tesse,  Mine,  de,  on Frances Burney,
i.  lxxxii.

Thackeray,  his Col.  Newcome,  i
161 n. ;  on Pope’s Letters,  i.  146

Theatricals,  amateur,  for the benefi
of Mr.  Lalauze,  i.  86 ;  at Soh
Square,  i.  32.

Theatricals,  private,  at Chesingtor
i.  127;  of  “  Miss in Her Teens,

i.  85;  at Queen Square,  i.  104
at Worcester,  ii.  164.

Thetford,  at,  i.  64.

Thicknesse,  Philip,  and his  “  Tour,

ii.  193;  and Gainsborough,  i:
193 n.

Thielcke,  or Thielky,  Mr.  and Mrs.

i.  71 n.,  ii.  336 n.  See also Pascal:
the.

Thomas,  James,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  i
274 m

Thomson,  Jas.,  and Dr.  Burney,
xxiv,  53n.,ii.  I78n. ;  his  “  Cast!
of Indolence,”  Armstrong’s shai
in it,  i.  43 n. ;  his  “Masque  <
Alfred,”  and the  “  Rule Britar
nia  ”  stanzas,  i.  263 and n.

Thrale,  Mr.,  ii.  255,  285,  287;  h
brewery,  ii.  153m,  338 n.

Thrale,  Miss.  SeeunderlAxs,.  Thval

Thrale,  Mrs.,  ii.  284,  286;  in Argy
Street,  ii.  305 ;  and Dr.  Burne

ii.  286;  and Frances Burney,
lxxxii,  ii.  293 n. ;  her story
Baretti and his knife,  i.  25 n
censured by Dr.  John son,  ii.  1460
334 n. ;  and Mr.  Crisp,  ii.  261
and her daughters,  ii.  152,  231
258,  306,  338 n. ;  on  “Evelina
ii.  232-7,  239,  240,  246,  247,  24'
and Mrs.  Montague,  ii.  156;  h
Owyhee Court dress,  ii.  265  ;  Mi
Papendiek’s account of,  ii.  337 r
her first meeting with Piozzi,
285 n. ;  she is rebuked by E
Burney,  ii.  285 n. ;  her dislike

,  Sir Walter Scott,  i.  lxxvii ;  h
writings,  ii.  339 n.  See also Pioz;
Mrs.,  and Thrales,  the.

Thrales,  the,  and the Burneys,  i.  Ii
lvii,  lxi,  132,  139 n.,  ii.  214,  23
283,  285 ji.,  305,  308,  338 n  ;  E
Johnson and,  ii.  250;  at Stre;
ham,  ii.  253.

INDEX

Three Choirs meeting,  at Gloucester,  ii.  189 n. ;  at Worcester,  ii.
189 n.

Thurlow,  Attorney-Gen.,  i.  288 n.

Tickell,  Richard,  his  “  Anticipation,”  ii.  298,  303.

Tickell,  Mrs.  Richard,  =  Miss Mary
Linley,  i.  210 n.

Tilson,  Janies,  of Pallice,  i.  27 n.,  28.

Tilson,  Miss,  i.  27,  28.

Tingmouth  =  Teignmouth,  which
see.

Toasts and Sentiments,  i.  169,  ii.
184,  185 n.

Todd,  Miss Polly,  ii.  302,  31 1.

Tolfray,  Mrs.,  ii.  25.

“  Tom Thumb the Great,”  Fielding’s burlesque,  played privately
by the Burneys at Worcester,  ii.
172.

Tomkin,  Mr.,  i.  82 n.  See also
Dutchman,  the.

Toplady,  Rev.  Mr.,  i.  329 n.

Toriano,  Mr.,  ii.  260,  263.

Tottenham  [Court]  Road,  i.  273.

Toupets,  queues,  &c.,  ii.  176 n.

Town and country,  i.  15.

Townshend,  Lady,  ii.  132.

Townshend,  second Marquis,  i.
217 n.

Toyshops,  i.  224.

“  Tragic Muse,”  Romney’s  (Mrs.
Yates),  and Reynolds’s  (Mrs.  Sid-
dons),  i.  330 n.

Travellers,  “  the lies of,”  i.  291.

Tucker,  Abraham,  i.  lxix.

Tunbridge Wells,  at,  i.  132 n.

“Turbulent,  Mr.,”  i.  142 n.

Turner,  Sir John,  Bt.,  M.P.,  of
Lynn,i.  xl,  47 n.,  106 n.,  108,  149.

Turners,  the,  of Lynn,  i.  47,  ii.  14.

Twelfth night ball,  a,  ii.  313.

Twining,  Mrs.,  ii.  22.

Twining,  Richard,  i.  lxxi,  lxxxviii,
ii.  13 n.

Twining,  Rev.  Thos.,  i.  1,  lxxxviii,
220 n.,  ii.  6,  10,  13 andn.,  20,  35,
37,  39,  3°3-

Twiss,  Rev.  Francis,  i.  302 n. ;  his
Shakespeare index,  ib.

Twiss,  FLorace,  i.  302 n.

379

Twiss,  Richard,  and his travels,  i.

289-303,  3X3,  127.

Twiss,  Sir Travers,  i.  303 n.

Ugbrooke,  Devonshire,  i,  251.
“Ugly,  Count,”  Fielding’s,  i.  329 n.
Unitarians,  ii.  2n.

Vaillant,  Mr.,  bookseller,  i.  xlviii.
Valentine’s Day,  i.  44.

Vanbrugh’s  “Relapse,”  ii.  277 n.
Vauxhall Gardens,  the  “  Mad Song  ”
at,  ii.  149;  the Pandean Minstrels there,  ii.  2930.

Veigel,  or Weigel,  Eva Maria,  Mrs.

Garrick,  which see.

Vesey,  Mrs.,  her  “Babels,”  &c.,  ii.
13811.

Vestris,  father and son,  dancers,  ii.

3°°.

Vesuvius,  Mount,  Sir Wm.  Hamil-
ton and,  i.  179.

‘  ‘  Vicar of Wakefield,  ”  Goldsmith’s,
i.  13.

Viennet,  M.  P.  G.,  French poet,  i.

2 73 n-

Vincent,  Mr.,  haut-bois player,  i.
1,  47 n.

Vincents,  the two,  i.  47.

Violetta,  La,  stage name of Mrs.

Garrick,  i.  Ii8n. ,  11911.
“Virginia,”  Mr.  Crisp’s tragedy,  i.
xxxvii,  ii.  325.  See also Crisp,
Samuel.

Vis-a-vis,  carriage,  ii.  13.

Visiting,  i.  15;  in the country and
in London,  i.  62;  waste of time
in,  i.  54.

Volfe  (?),  i.  155-

Voltaire,  i.  223,  ii.  248;  and Frances
Burney,  i.  lxxvi;  Keate’s Epistle

to,  i.  57.

W - ,  Miss,  a visitor at Sir Herbert Packington’s,  ii.  202,  204.
Wale,  Thomas,  his account of
Lynn,  i.  xl.

Walker  (engraver),  and Edward
Burney,  ii.  275 n.

Wall,  Capel,  ii.  181 n.

Wall,  Dr.  John,  sen.,  and the china

INDEX

380

manufacture of Worcester,  ii.
i8on.,  181 n.

Wall,  Dr.  John,  jun.,  of Gloucester,  ii.  165,  179,  180,  181 n.,
182 n.,  192,  197.

Wall,  Dr.  Martin,  ii.  180 n.

Wall,  Miss,  ii.  186.

Wall,  Mrs.,  ii.  180,182,183,186, 188,
192,  197,  198;  and Richard Burney,  jun.,  ii.  183,  191,  194,  219m
Walpole,  Horace,  ii.  321 n. ;  on Sir
J.  Banks,  i.  139 n.  ;  and Mason,

i.  191 n.,  and the  “Rowley”
Poems,  i.  254 n.

Walpole,  Sir R.,  at Houghton,  ii.
132 m  ;  a reputed son of his,  i.
67 n.

Want,  i.  193.

Warham,  letter so endorsed,  i.
137-

“  Warley:  a Satire,”  (by Mr.  Hud-
disford)  and Fanny Burney,  ii.
268,  269.

Warmstrey family,  of Worcester,

ii.  181 n.

Warner,  Dr.,  ii.  9 n.

Warren,  Dr.  Charles,  and his sons,
ii.  308.

Warton,  Dr.  Joseph,  ii.  2840.,  301.
Warton,  Dr.  Thomas,  ii.  301.
Watchman,  the night,  i.  27.
Wax-work in Fleet Street,  i.  142.
“Way to Keep Plim,”  Murphy’s,
played privately by the Burneys
at Worcester,  ii.  166,  181.
Webster,  John,  his  “  Appius and
Virginia,”  i.  xlii.

Wedding,  a public,  at Lynn,  i.  16.
Weigel,  Eva Maria,  Mrs.  p-arrick,
which see.

Wells Street,  Oxford Street,  the
Guiffardieres in,  i.  137,  142 n.
Welch,  Miss Mary  (Mrs.  Nolle-
kens),  and Miss Nancy,  ii.  145 n.,
315 n-

Welch,  Saunders,  ii.  145 n, ;  his
“  nine storey  ”  wig,  i.  58 n.
Welsh rabbit,  i.  136.

Wesley,  John,  i.  305 n.

Westcote,  Lady,  on  “  Evelina,”  ii.
234.

Western,  Mr.  and Mrs.,  i.  247,  252.
274-

Westwood,  Frances Burney’s visit
to,  ii.  199;  the Pool at,  ii.  208.
210.

Westwood House,  ii.  201,  203.

Weymouth,  Lady,  at Longleat,  ii.
323 n.

Wharton,  Dr.,  the poet Gray’e
friend,  ii.  310 n.

Wharton,  Richard,  M.P.  (or?  Ro
bert Wharton,  of Pembroke
College,  Cambridge),  ii.  310.

Whiskers and beard,  ii.  179.

Whiskey,  carriage,  i.  273.

Whist,  Capt.  (Admiral)  James Bur
ney and,  i.  68 n.

Whiston,  Dr.,  i.  13m

Whitchcott,  Sir C. ,  ii.  300.

Whitehead,  William,  poet-laureate
i.  189;  his  “  Creusa,”  ii.  331.

Wife,  a happy,  i.  90;  wife and hus
band,  i.  122.

Wiggins,  Mrs.,  nee Kinnaird,  i.  21 1

Wigs,  i.  58,  ii.  173 n. ;  “as the wij
is wet,”  ii.  252.

Wilberforce,  W.,  ii.  272 n.

Wilkes,  John,  his  “Essay on Wo
man,”  and Lord Sandwich,  ii
124 n.

Wilkinson,  Mr.,  i.  ii2n.

Wilkinson,  Mrs.,  nee Miss Ford,  i
148.  See also Ford.

Wilks,  Mr.  (?  John Wilkes),  i
xlviii.

William III.  and Louis XIV.,
3In-

Williams,  Helen Maria,  ii.  296,  302
3°4,  3l6-

Williams,  Mrs.,  Dr.  Johnson’s blin
friend,  i.  lxxxviii,  ii.  253.

“  Williams,  Memoirs of Mrs.,”  :
165.

Williamson,  Capt. ,  ii.  278 n.

Winchester,  Dean of,  ii.  272 n
298.  See also Ogle,  Dr.

Windham,  Mr.,  of Norfolk,  an
Garrick,  i.  164 m

Witch,  the old,  at the Masqueradi
i.  72.

Wives,  Eastern,  ii.  317.  .

INDEX

381

Woffington,  Polly,  Mrs.  Chol-
mondeley,  which see.

Woide,  Dr.,  i.  215.

Wolcot,  Dr.,  ii.  2580.

Women,  education of,  temp.  [752,
i.  lxxv;  opinions on,  i.  121,  285  ;
women and men,  i.  279,  280,
282.

Women,  fisher,  of Teignmouth,  i.
246;  their  “drawing the seine,”
i.  248;  their rowing match,  i.
246.

Wonder,  said to be the attribute of
fools,  i.  no.

Wood,  Father,  maker of the first
pianoforte brought to England,
i.  lv.

Woodhay,  Berkshire,  i.  xlvi.

Woodstock,  i.  59.

Worcester,  its china manufacture
and Dr.  Wall,  ii.  18 1  ;  its clubs,
i.  168;  its music meetings,  ii.
181 n.,  189 n.

Worcester,  Barborne Lodge there,
residence of Richard Burney,  Dr.
Burney’s brother,  ii.  164.

Worcester Journal,  Frances Burney’s,  ii.  161.

Wordsworth,  William,  i.  68 n. ;  on
Mrs.  Barbauld,  i.  299 n.

Worgan,  John,  composer,  i.  156.

World,  on the,  i.  189.

Wrestling at Teignmouth,  i.  245.

Wright,  Mr.,  Mrs.,  and Miss,  ii.

1 37-

Wycherley,  i.  xci;  and Pope,  1.
146.

Wyndham,  Mr.,  ii.  319.

Wynn,  Sir Watkin,  i.  204.

Yate,  Mrs.,  ii.  190.

Yates,  Richard,  actor,  i.  330,  ii.  86,
90;  and Miss Davies,  lawsuit between,  ii.  6.

Yates,  Mrs.,  actress,  i.  329,  ii.  86;
and Mrs.  Brooke,  i.  284 n. ;  her
characters burlesqued,  ii.  280 n.  ;
in Mr.  Crisp’s play,  ii.  330,  332;
and Garrick,  i.  330 n. ;  and Murphy,  i.  330 n.  ;  and Mrs.  Siddons,
i.  330 n.

York Street,  Covent Garden,  Mrs.
Gregg’s house there,  i.  lxxix,
lxxxvii,  18 n. ;  old Mrs.  Burney
dies there,  i.  lxxx.

Young,  Arthur, i.  2,6,8,  10211.,  164,
215, 222 ;  his books on agriculture,
i.  145,  150 n. ;  his coxcombical
airs,  i.  98;  his experiments in
farming,  i.  145;  his difficulties,!.
145,  149;  and his wife,  i.  xcii,
98,  121,  271,  291;  Lord Lonsdale on,  i.  150 n. ;  at Lynn,  i.
6 n. ;  his  “Tour in Ireland,”  i.
150 m  ;  his travels,  ib. ;  on women and married life,  i.  121,  122.

Young,  Miss Dolly,  i.  xliv,  lviii,  2,
19,  21,  41,  220 n.,  267.

Young,  Mrs.,  i.  98,  121,  145,  208,
215,  222,  291,  294,  297,  298,  316.

Zinzendorf,  Count,  and the Moravian Brethren,  i.  305 n.,  306 n.,
308 n.

BILLING AND SONS,  LTD.,  PRINTERS,  GUILDFORD.

-

Date Due

hh\  f

JAN 3 1 19

36

0

'  MAY

15 1988

lAAf  ‘/  +  'Q

f/H fV  '  (7

PRINTED IN

U.  S.  A.

[ttf cat-

NO.  23233
