THE
EARLY DIARY OF FRANCES BURNEY.

1768—1778.

FRANCES BURNEY

1768—1778.

WITH A SELECTION FROM HER CORRESPONDENCE,    AND

FROM THE JOURNALS OF HER SISTERS SUSAN

AND CHARLOTTE BURNEY.

EDITED BY

ANNIE RAINE ELLIS,

AUTHOR OF  "  STLVESTRA J  "    EDITOR OF  "  EVKLINA,"  AND OF  "  CECILIA,
BT FRANCES BURNEY.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL.    I.

LONDON :

GEORGE BELL AND SONS,   YORK STREET,
COVENT GARDEN.

1889.

CHISV ICE PRESS  : — C.  WHITTINGHAM AND CO.,  TOOKS COURT,
CHANCERT LANE.

A PREFACE

BY THE EDITOR.

QTlris is believed to be the only published,  perhaps the only
existing,  record of the life of an English girl,  written by her
self,  in a century before that which is now in its wane.  Such
a portrayal of a young Englishwoman,  and her times,  would
be interesting even if the girl had not been  (as was this one)
a born author,  who lived among men and women more or less
distinguished,  herself became famous,  and was admired by the
admired,  as well as praised by the common voice ;  whose bril
liant reputation as a novelist was revived,  some fifty years
ag°>  by her fresh and still greater renown as a chronicler of
English social and court-life,  during many and marked years
of the long reign of George the Third.^

The novelist and the chronicler are shown in these still
earlier diaries which are now for the first time published,  as
developing from year to year.  Sketches revealing the future
"  character-monger " l alternate here with innocent,  tender,
and generous thoughts,  and feelings of affection to kinsfolk
and friends,  more than commonly lasting,  as well as warm ;
with traits of a disposition very mobile,  but singularly steady ;
very lively,  but very sweet ;  discreet,  and considerate almost
to moral precocity.  The character of Frances Burney shows
itself on every leaf of these journals,  even as the story of
her first youth tells itself as we turn them.  They were the
offspring of that real pleasure in writing,  even in the mechani-

1 Dr.  Johnson.

VI

Preface.

cal part of it,  which Richardson attributes to his heroine,
"  Clarissa,"  which he had felt himself;  for it is not to be
divined,  but known.  These journals gave Frances in old age,
the delight which she had looked forward to receiving from
them in her youth.  No stronger proof of a clear conscience
and a healthy mind could well be shown.  In them there are
erasures,  there are long passages removed,  and destroyed,  but
the context shows that the feelings of others,  not her own,
were to be considered and spared.

Two there were whose names prevail in these pages — her
father,  and her adopted father,  Mr.  Crisp,  concerning whom
she has left all standing which she wrote,  early or late ;  nay,
has added little ejaculations in their praise and honour.

It is following her,  when we write first of them,  who were
first with her ;  of whom when she began to write she could
not dream that one would live wholly,  and the other mainly,
through her writings.

"  I love Burney  :  my heart goes out to meet him

Dr.  Burney is a man for all the world to love.  ...  It is
but natural to love him.  ...  I much question if there is,
in the world,  such another man as Dr.  Burney."  When
Dr.  Burney is named,  such words as these of Dr.  Johnson
recur to us rather than the music which he composed,  or
the books that he wrote.  We recall,  too,  the names of
Admiral Burney,  of the second Dr.  Charles,  and,  above all,  of
Frances.  If his reputation once gave lustre to theirs,  his
celebrity now ascends from that of his children.  No list of his
musical compositions is known to exist.  His daughter admits
that they were out of date even in her own day.  No list of his
many articles in the  "Monthly Review,"  and the Cyclopaedia
of Abraham Rees,  has ever been compiled ;  his  «  Tours"  are less
read than they might well be,  and his  "  History of Music  "  has,
in the very course and progress of Music,  been superseded.  The
repute of his reputation survives.  The concurrence of his'  con-

Preface.  vii

temporaries is on record that he was,  "  indeed,  a most extra
ordinary man,  ...  at home upon all subjects,  and upon all so
ao-reeable  !—  a wonderful man  !  "  l His place in social life was

O

unique,  being due to what Dr.  Johnson implied to be an almost
unique blending of a happy temper of mind,  an affectionate
disposition,  gentle and attractive manners  (having dignity in
reserve should it be needed),  with a very active and versatile
intellect,   and considerable acquirements.       The charm of
character and of manners,  the    "vivacity and readiness of
wit,"  which made him the man of the eighteenth century
who gained and kept the greatest number of friends,  can now
be brought before us only by the warmth of the praise of
those friends ;  and of the love  (rising to enthusiasm)  of his
children,  to which the diaries that follow bear continuous testi
mony.     It is possible that his Memoirs of his own life and
times would have interested many who would not even open
one of the four quarto volumes of his  "  History of Music,"  or
who would shun the technical  (which is much the greater)
part of his Tours of inquiry into the state of Music in the
France,  Italy,  and Germany of 1770 and 1772.

It was his full purpose to leave such an account of his own
long and varied life as might give a picture of nearly a century.
He justly thought himself well fitted to write a book which
might  (as he said)  "  be read with avidity at the distance of
some centuries,  by antiquaries and lovers of anecdotes,"
although it would then have lost the poignancy of personality,
which might  "  mortify and offend a few persons  "  of his own
time.  He justly wrote that  "  perhaps few have been better
enabled to describe,  from an actual survey,  the manners and
customs of the age in which they lived than myself ;  ascending
from those of the most humble cottagers and lowest mechanics,
to the first nobility and most elevated personages,  with whom

1 Arthur Murphy.

viii  '  Preface.

circumstances,  situation,  and accident,  at different periods of
my life,  have rendered me familiar.  Oppressed and laborious
husbandmen;  insolent and illiberal yeomanry;  overgrown
farmers  ;  generous and hospitable merchants  ;  men of busi
ness and men of pleasure;  men of letters;  men of science;
artists  ;  sportsmen and country  'squires  ;  dissipated and ex
travagant voluptuaries;  gamesters;  ambassadors,  statesmen,
and even sovereign princes,  I have had opportunities of
examining in almost every point of view  :  all these it is my
intention to display in their respective situations  ;  and to de
lineate their virtues,  vices,  and apparent degrees of happiness
and misery."

This was indeed a great promise made to future time,  as Dr.
Burney was born while George the First was not firm upon
his throne,  and lived until Buonaparte was a prisoner on board
the  "Bellerophon."1 What might he not have told us had he
been able to fulfil his plan,  unchecked by engagements with
pupils,  and societies,  musical,  literary,  and benevolent  ;  by in
numerable friends,  and multitudinous invitations  ;  by an old
pledge to complete his  "History of Music,"2 and by an
agreement made when he was seventy-five years old to furnish
musical articles for a new edition of the Cyclopedia

Chambers-"  the shortest calculation for the termination

of this work being  "  (as he wrote in 1801)  -  still ten years."  3

this contract,  he gave up writing for the  -Monthly

!70«HnuaS  *Tn iU KaVen Street'  Shre^sbury,  on the 12th of April

.h't of  ^        d'ed at,,CHlsea  °n the 12th of AP^  1814,  N.S.,  on the

Napoleon       *  **«***<*  after the first downfall of the first

'  The prospectus of the  '« History of Music"  was issued in 1770  •
nrst volnm«  wan nnki;ni — j  •     T inn      ,,
in l//o  ;  the

Enrich r^D^^*'"  °WU W0rd8 When  ™  sP<*k of the first
.sh Cyclopa^a as the work of Chambers.     .  Ephraim Chambers!

Preface.  ix

Review,"  and laid aside his autobiography.  The fragment
which we have quoted,  was written in 1782,  and stood,  without
a page to follow it,  until 1807,  when Dr.  Burney began to
write his own life in earnest,  at the age of eighty-one.

At little less than the same age,  his daughter Frances pub
lished that compilation from his twelve volumes of manuscript
memoirs,  his  "  countless,  fathomless  "  mass of papers,  and her
own journals and letters,1 which is known as the  "  Memoirs of
Dr.  Burney."  In it she has indicated her reasons for suppres
sing his own narrative.  They are more fully given in  "  quite
a pamphlet"  of a letter to her sister Esther,  which was written
in November,  1820.

It would fatigue the reader's fancy to follow her details of
toil and disappointment.  Of the twelve volumes,  some were
mere repetitions of others.  "  The dear,  indefatigable author
wrote frequently the whole of every cahier three times over
himself,"  in small writing,  with many abbreviations ;  and
Frances  (nervous in her turn)  read some of the manuscript
volumes in even four different copies lest her collation should

miscellaneous writer,  b.  at Kendal,  probably about 1680;  F.R.S.,  6 Nov.
1729;  d.  at Islington,  15 May,  1740;  Cyclopaedia,  1728." — WOODWARD
AND GATES'  Encyclopaedia of Chronology.  According to the same
authorities,  Abraham Rees,  a well-known Presbyterian pastor,  succes
sively tutor at Hoxton and Hackney,  "  edits Chambers'  Cyclopaedia,
1786,"  but in the edition to which Dr.  Burney began to contribute in
1801,  the name of Chambers was omitted.  The Cyclopaedia,  which was
published in parts,  was not completed until 1820,  five years before the
death of Rees,  who was born in 1743.

1 The  "  Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,  arranged from his own Manuscripts,
from Family Papers,  and from Personal Recollections,  by his daughter,
Madame D'Arblay,"  were published in 1832,  by Edward Moxon,  in three
8vo.  volumes.  In 1820 it had been her intention to publish three 8vo.
volumes of his Correspondence,  after the Memoirs had appeared in
print;  but by 1832,  this plan shrunk into that of adding a fourth
volume of Letters to the three of Memoirs,  and even this was never
carried out.

x Preface.

be imperfect.  She found the Memoirs to be the work,  not of
the father who wrote the  "  Tours/'  or the  "  History of Music/'
not even of the father whose spirits afterwards rallied so that
he wrote  "  occasional essays "  of better texture than the
Memoirs,  and very entertaining letters,  some of which she
has printed in his  "  Memoirs/'  but of a man dejected by the
loss of his wife,  of his  "gentle Susan/'  and of many of his
oldest friends ;  by the experience of one paralytic stroke,  and
the apprehension of another.  Beginning with the thought that
she  "had nothing to do but to revise,  and somewhat abridge,"
his narrative,  her ultimate decision was to suppress all that he
had written which would not maintain his literary  "  credit and
fair fame."

She shrank  "  from a storm of disapprobation,  if not invec
tive,  upon the editor l who,  for a fortnight's quick profit from
his former celebrity,  had exhibited her faded father's faded
talents."  In the full conviction that he would have been his
own expurgator had he not written in ill-health and seclusion,
she at once destroyed all his manuscripts and papers which
"  could not have been spread,  even in a general family review,
without causing pain or mischief."  2 From the remainder,
she chose such portions as resembled his manner of writing
"  when his memory was full and gay ;  .  .  .  when he lived in the
world."  These amount to very few pages in the  "  Memoirs
of Dr.  Burney."  After this long winnowing of his  "  volumi
nous piles of papers  "  and pocket-books,  the rest of the book

"  His designed,  wished,  and bespoken editor." — Mme.  D'ArUay to
her sitter Esther,  Nov.,  1820.  Other quotations in the text are from the
same unpublished letter.

2 When a widower with six children,  Dr.  Burney married a widow
with three,  and two children were born of his second marriage  ;  thus,
it would have been marvellous had there not occurred some  (however
slight or gentle)  friction,  or conflict,  of ways of thinking,  feeling,  and
acting.

Preface.  xi

appears to have been chiefly constructed from her own diaries,
letters,  and memory.  She felt herself to be the guardian of
her father's fame,  and no more tender guardian could have
been found,  or fancied.

According to the bent of our readers,  her decision to sup
press,  if not destroy,  her father's autobiography,  will be re
ceived with satisfied submission,  or questioned,  disapproved,
nay,  deplored.1  "Invective"  she did not escape at the time.
Croker was lying in wait,  and among his points of attack was
that she had not suffered her father to tell his own tale,  but had
published her autobiography under the title of his Memoirs.

Her labour to prepare the book,  none but herself could
know.  At the end of 1 820 she had not even finished reading
the correspondence of Dr.  Burney,  nor does she appear to
have begun that looking through all her own diaries and letters
which took place within the next ten years.  In November,
1820,  her anticipation was that  "about three years'  hard reading
for myself will finally produce about three quarters of an hour's
reading for my Lecturers." :  Justification of the suppression
of the mass of her father's papers she has left in abundance
in that letter to her sister of sixteen quarto pages;  at less
length,  but with even more strength,  in her  "  Memoirs of
Dr.  Burney,"  3 she has pleaded justification.  "All the juvenile
voluminous MSS.  (she writes to Esther)  are filled with
literal nurses'  tales, — such as narrated by himself were truly

'  Her words are,  "  All that I thought utterly irrelevant,  or any way
mischievous,  I have committed to the flames ;  whatever admits of any
doubt,  or demands any enquiry,  I have set apart ; "  but as she
states that what she thought of value for biographical purposes was of
"  so little volume,  compared with what  "  was  "  hopeless,"  there seems
reason to think that not much was preserved.

2 Here she thought first of the French word  "  lecteurs"  then turned
it into lecturers,  instead of readers.

3 See pages 382-3-4,  420-21,  vol.  Hi.,  of the  "  Memoirs of Dr.  Burney."

xii Preface.

amusing,  but on paper,  and read,  not recited,  they are trivial
to poverty,  and dull to sleepiness."  When he described his
early life in London,  she found him  "giving his whole paper  .  .  .

to enormous long paragraphs,  and endless folio pages,  upon
the city electioneering for organs,  and concerts,  and Stanley's
rivalry,  and Frasi,  and local interests of the day."  In  "  the
various cahiers upon Norfolk and Lynn"  there was  "some
more agreeable style of writing,  but still upon people not
generally known."  "At last comes London;  and then the'
great names begin to occur."  .  .  .  [Those of his correspon
dents,  (most of whom where his friends),  "  Garrick,  Diderot,
llousseau,  Dr.  Warton,  Dr.  JOHNSON/  Mr.  Mason,  Horace
Walpole,  Lord Mornington,  Mr.  Crisp,  Mr.  Greville,  Lady
Crewe,  Mr.  Bewley,  Mr.  Griffith,  Mr.  Cutler,  Mrs.  Le Noir,
Lord Macartney,  Lord Lonsdale,  Duke of Portland,  Mr.
Canning,  Mr.  Windham,  Mr.  Wesley,  Mr.  La Trobe,  Mr.
Walker,  Mr.  Burke,  Mr.  Malone,  Sir J.  Eeynolds,  Mr.  Seward,
Kit Smart,  Mrs.  Piozzi."] — "  Here I had the full expectation
of detail,  anecdote,  description,  and conversation,  such as to
manifest these characters in the brilliant light of their own
fame,  and to show our dear father the caressed,  sought,
honoured and admired friend of such a constellation ;  for such
he was,  and as much loved and esteemed as if he had been the
universal patron of them all."  Again she felt sore disappoint
ment.  For many years Dr.  Burney had been too busy to do
more than register in his pocket-books the first day of meeting
each particular star of this constellation.  He had trusted the
rest  (all besides the where,  and the when)  to a future time of
leisure,  which came only when his memory was impaired.
For his kind intentions towards them,  antiquaries,  at least,

1 It was Madame D'Arblay's custom to write Dr.  Johnson's name in
large letters.  "  The brilliant light of their own fame  "  no longer
manifests  "  the whole of this constellation."  Some of the stars now
need notes to explain their manner and degree of brightness.

Preface.  xiii

will give Dr.  Burney their gratitude.  We believe that,  in the
end,  Madame D'Arblay put it out of the power of any one to
affirm,  contest,  or revise her judgement.  Without blaming her,
we incline to regret it.  Even with the piteous picture before
us of an aged Frances bending over boxes after boxes,  and
bags after bags,  of papers,  "  wading,  painfully,  laboriously
wading,"  through every note of appointment,  or invitation,
which her father had ever received,  every pocket-book in
which he had made entries,1 and the twelve folio volumes of
his autobiography,  our provoked fancy teases us,  by repeating
that the aspect of the second fifty years of this century towards
such records as lay before her is far from being that of the
first fifty.  Those  "  nursery-tales  "  might now be called Folk
lore  ;  those accounts of obscure people in Lynn and Norfolk,
materials for a narrative of the manners and customs of a town
and county which,  not long ago,  had strongly marked ways of
their own;  and the trivial,  or tedious,  details of Dr.  Burney' s
early days in the City of London,  facts precious to those for
whom he meant them, — that is,  to lovers of anecdote,  anti
quaries,  and even historians.  The Memoirs of Dr.  Burney
are now rather consulted than read ;  but as the book is in the
London Library,  as well as in all permanent subscription-
libraries and in many private libraries of its time,  we need
not draw much from it.  Rather we would add to it a little

1 The first leaf of what appears to have been Dr.  Barney's pocket-
book for 1791,  has been preserved,  owing to his daughter's having
written some of her own Memoranda upon it.

Under  "  MEMORANDUMS,  OBSERVATIONS,  and appointments,  in January,
1791,"  January 1,  Saturday,  Dr.  Burney has entered —

"  Miss Dillon Decr 14th 1790.  dine at

Lady Banks 14 Kobsou's.

Acct begun June 5 of last year."

Under  "  Sunday 2—

Seward  &  famly party,
Haydn arrives in England."

xiv Preface.

by quoting a few anecdotes from his own writings which his
daughter overlooked,  or did not copy because it could never
have occurred to her how little his works would be read now,
as compared with her own.

The Burney family waits for a genealogist and biblio
grapher.  One ought to appear within it.  Meantime,  a family
tradition brings it,  with James I.,  from Scotland,  in 1600.
This might easily be the case with Dr.  Burney's great-great
grandfather,  as his grandfather,  James Macburney,  was born
about 1653.  He had an estate at Great Hanwood in Shrop
shire,  and a house in Whitehall.  He married a daughter of
his Shropshire rector,  Mr.  Evance  [Evans].  His eldest son,
James  (born at Hanwood in 1678),  was a pupil of Dr.  Busby
at Westminster School,  and of Dahl in painting.1 When
nineteen he married Rebecca Ellis,  a girl of sixteen,  who is
said to have acted at Goodman's Fields Theatre.2 Thereupon
his father disinherited him,  and himself married his own
cook,  whose son,  Joseph,  ran through the property.

James is said by Mme.  D'Arblay to have possessed   "  neg-

1  "  Dahl,  Michael,  painter,  b.  at Stockholm,  1656.  Visits England,
1678  ;  Paris,  1679 ;  Italy,  1680-3.  Settles in England,  1688.  D.  in Lon
don,  1743."— -WOODWARD AND GATES'  Encyclopaedia of Chronology,  1872.
Dahl was a painter of portraits only.  His own sovereigns,  Christina,
and Charles XI.,  of Sweden,  sat to him,  as did Queen Anne,  Prince
George of Denmark,  and numbers of Englishmen and women of rank.
Many of his portraits have been engraved.  As he was of high repute,
it would appear that James Burney  (who afterwards became a portrait-
painter)  studied teriontly with Dahl.  That he was Dahl's pupil the
Editor learned from some notes on the Burney family communicated
to her by the owner of these manuscript diaries.

'  This cannot be literally correct,  as Goodman's Fields Theatre was
not opened until 1728,  long after the death of the first Mrs.  Burney  ;
but it may be explained if we suppose that the boy Burney married an
actress in the company of Giflard,  who,  long afterwards  (in 1729),  suc
ceeded Odell as manager of Goodman's Fields.  Giffard was then an ex
perienced manager,  and became famous by bringing out Garrick.

Preface.  xv

ligent facility and dissipated ease."  Her words bore a softer
meaning in the last century than in this.  James Macburney
might now be called  "  clever all round/'  that is,  he was agree
able,  witty,  an admirable dancer,  and as good a player on the
yiolin as a painter,  but with much of that want of perseverance,
and concentration of mind,  that being  "  everything by turns,
and nothing long,"  about him,  which was the older meaning of
the word  "  dissipation."  We know not when his wife died,  leav
ing several children.  Next he married Ann Cooper,  a Shrop
shire young lady,  not without money.  Having nine children
living out of fifteen  (of the two marriages) ,  he was at last forced
to stick to some one way of earning money,  and chose portrait-
painting.  He settled at Chester,  leaving his last-born child,
Charles  (who was twin with a girl,  Susannah),  at nurse in the
village of Condover,  four miles from Shrewsbury.  There,  the
boy was left for twelve or thirteen years.  This was by no
means an injury to him,  his foster-mother,  Dame Ball,  being
a simple,  kind creature,  who loved him,  and whom he quitted
"  in an agony of grief."  It was,  perhaps,  to his  (apparent)
abandonment in a village that he owed the vigourous health
which enabled him afterwards to give lessons in music from
eight in the morning until eleven at night,  then write until
four in the morning,  and rise at seven,1 — yet live to be
eighty-eight.  Such a brain as his could scarcely have been
idle anywhere,  or at any age,  and such a rector as that of
Condover,  during the whole time of Burney's stay in it,  was
the very man to quicken its activity.

The Reverend George Lluellyn,  who had in his youth been
a page to Charles II.,3 was  "  a lively Welshman,  active in all

1 This is taking his lessons at their greatest number,  i.e.,  during the
London season,  which ended after the King's birthday  (the 4th of
June)  ;  but it came to the same thing all the year round,  as Dr.  Burney
was at work in his study when not teaching.

a This transition from the ante-room,  or even the back-stairs,  to the

XVI

Preface.

his pursuits,  a man of wit,  and taste in the fine arts,  fond of
music,  who had fitted his house with great taste,  and had
many good pictures,  but spent more time in gardening than
he did in anything else."  Mr.  Lluellyn liked  "  the Dutch
manner of laying out gardens,"  with yew-trees cut into shapes  ;
he liked not William of Orange,  but was hand-in-glove with
the Shropshire Jacobite leader  (Kynaston Corbett,  M. P.),  arid
in 1715 sheltered rebels in his rectory.  "The Whigs called him
a Jacobitical,  musical,  mad Welsh parson/'

He had known Henry Purcell well enough to be able to
supply Dr.  Blow with more than thirty of Purcell's settings
of music to words,  when Blow brought out the  "  Orpheus Bri-
tannicus,"2 so that between him and the eldest half-brother of
little Charles  (James Burney,  organist then,  and for many a
year afterwards,  of St.  Margaret's,  Shrewsbury),  the child
was little likely to lack music.  We assume that some one
must have minded his learning,  as he got on very quickly at
Chester Grammar School,  and cannot have been there more
than from three to four years,3 which,  of course,  was not

church seems to have been not uncommon.  In the Wentworth Papers,
a lady in Queen Anne's reign is  "  most concerned at those things called
paget  .  .  .  they are what she has never been used to.  ...  When they
have done with them,  she'll make them all parsons."  Mr.  Luellyn was
perhaps a relation of  "  Luellin,"  a Clerk of the Council in 1659-60,  and
a comrade of Samuel Pepys,  whom we find dining with Pepys at a
cook-shop,  and also at  "  Heaven,  a place of entertainment in Old Palace
Yard."

1 The quotations are from Dr.  Burney.

The first volume of Purcell's  "  vocal compositions  "  appeared in
1698  ;  a new edition of it and a second volume were published in 1702,
which Mr.  Luellyn aided with his help;  and a third volume in 1705.

3 Writing to Fanny in August,  1797,  Dr.  Burney says,  "  I ran about
Chester,  the rows,  walls,  cathedral,  and castle,  as familiarly as I could
have done fifty years ago ;  visited the Free School,  where I hie,  hcec,
hoc'd it three or four years  ;  and the Cathedral,  where I saw and heard
the first organ I ever touched."

Preface.  xvii

long enough for scholarship,  but was long enough to give
him some clue to it.  At Chester School,  he was only once
punished  :  it was for prompting a friend.  When about four
teen,  the Cathedral organist,  who was a pupil of Dr.  Blow,
had a fit of the gout.  In a few days,  he taught the musical
school-boy,  Burney,  to play chants enough  "  to keep the organ
going/'

The following extract shows young Burney on his first
approach to Handel :  "  When Handel went through Chester,
on his way to Ireland,  this year,  1741,1 I was at the Public-
School in that city,  and very well remember seeing him smoke
a pipe,  over a dish of coffee,  at the Exchange Coffee-house,  for
being extremely curious to see so extraordinary a man,  I
watched him narrowly so long as he remained in Chester;
which on account of the wind being unfavourable for his
embarking at Parkgate,  was several days.  During this time,
he applied to Mr.  Baker,  the organist,  my first music-master,
to know whether there were any choirmen in the cathedral
who could sing at sight,  as he wished to prove some books
that had been hastily transcribed,  by trying the choruses
which he intended to perform in Ireland.  Mr.  Baker men
tioned some of the most likely singers then in Chester,  and
among the rest,  a printer of the name of Janson,  who had a
good base voice,  and was one of the best musicians in the
choir.  At this time,  Harry Alcock,  a good player,  was the
first violin at Chester,  which was then a very musical place ;
for besides public performances,  Mr.  Prebendary Prescott had
a weekly concert,  at which he was able to muster eighteen or
twenty performers,  gentlemen and professors.  A time was
fixed for this private rehearsal at the Golden Falcon,  where

1 This was after the bad reception of  "  The Messiah,"  upon its first
performance,  owing to a cabal against him among  "  many great per
sonages whom he had offended "  in London.  "  Dulness,"  says tfce
Dunciad,  "  drove him to the Hibernian shore."

xviii Preface.

Handel was quartered ;  but,  alas  !  on trial of the chorus in the
Messiah,  '  And with his stripes we are healed,' — poor Janson,
after repeated attempts,  failed so egregiously,  that Handel let
loose his great bear upon him;1 and after swearing in four or
five languages,  cried out in broken English:  'You shcauntrel !
tit not you dell me dat you could sing at soite  ? '  '  Yes,  sir/
says the printer, '  and so I can;  but not at first sight."'

Soon afterwards Charles Burney is found at Shrewsbury as
a pupil in music of his half-brother,  the organist ;  learning
French,  and to play upon the violin,  from.  "  little Matteis,"
who  (in Barney's mature opinion)  played Corelli's solos better
than any one whom he ever heard afterwards.  At sixteen,
Charles was the future Doctor in little ;  learning every thing
that any one would teach him,  and  "  helping himself "  to
what he was not taught.  He wrote,  taught,  tuned instru
ments,  and copied  "&  prodigious quantity of music  "  for his
brother.  He says that he tried to  "  keep up the little Latin
he had learned,"  to improve his hand- writing,  and to compose.
He does not tell us what he composed,  but it seems to have
been prose,  verse,  and music.  He read much ;  and though
angling with fervour,  it was with a book in his pocket.

He heard Mr.  Felton and Dr.  William Hayes play on his
brother's organ.  He admired them,  and they encouraged
him.2  "Thenceforward,  he went to work with an ambition
and fury that would hardly allow him to eat or sleep."

1 His  "  great bear  "  of a temper.

"Handel,  as famed for manners as a pig,
Enraged,  upon a time,  pull'd off his  \vig,
And flung it plump in poor Cuzzoni's face,
Because the little Syren missed a grace."

PETER PINDAR,  Ode iipon Ode.

See p.  xxiii,  for another instance of Handel's letting  "  loose his great
bear."

"  The Rev.  William Felton  ....  was a performer of considerable
merit on the organ,  and published a set of concertos for that instrument.

Preface.  xix

In the autumn of 1744,  Arne,  who is still a well-known
English composer of music,  was,  after a stay of two years in
Ireland,  on his way to London to take his post at Drury Lane,
as conductor of the orchestra and composer of music for that
Royal theatre.  He met young Burney,  who was again at
Chester,  was pleased with him,  and took him to London as his
apprentice in music.1

If Charles Burney had suffered from what Madame D'Arblay
calls  "  the parsimonious authority and exactions "  of his
half-brother,  James,  he was left far too much to himself by
Arne,  who cared not what was his conduct,  and taught him
very little  :  exacting only that he should copy a great quantity
of music and make himself useful.  His elder own brother,
Richard,  was then living in London.  His seems to have
been the only guidance given to Charles.  It is described
by Madame D'Arblay as  "  lordly tyranny."  She wrote with
the warmth of a daughter,  whose imagination kindled at
inattention,  rigour,  or show of superiority to such a father
as hers,  who,  although the youngest born,  was the ornament of
his family and its chief;  but Dr.  Burney seems to have taken
some neglect,  some harshness,  and much hard work in his
early days very little to heart ;  and wrote gaily of what moved
his daughter to pity,  akin to indignation,  long after all had
passed into  "  honour,  obedience,  love,  and troops of friends/'

The Burneys of the generation before her own had been
able enough,  but with the exception of her father and his sister
Rebecca,  Mme.  D'Arblay describes them as having been much

Dr.  "William Hayes  .  .  .  a good solo Ringer and organist ;  distinguished
himself by his compositions of Church Music and several much ad
mired catches,  glees,  and canons ;  was chosen professor of music at
Oxford,  and was for many years called upon to preside as a conductor
of orchestras in different parts of the kingdom." — LYSONS'S History of
the Meeting of the Three Choirs.

1 As the 1744-5 season 1at the theatre began on the loth of Sep
tember,  this meeting was probably in August,  1744.

xx Preface.

less amiable and united by affection than his children and
their cousins.  But then there were so many of them,  that life
was a struggle to live.  There could not have been much amiss
in his early life,  as the enthusiasm of Dr.  Burney for  "  old
Shrewsbury  "  was a subject of pleasantry among those who
knew him,  and to dwell on Condover,  and sing the songs of
his dear old nurse,  with an imitation of her tones,  and the
expression of her face,  his delight even to his old age.

In 1819,  Mrs.  Piozzi writes to Sir James Fellowes,  that Sir
Baldwin Leighton is  "a true Salopian,  who,  though well
acquainted with both hemispheres,  delights in talking only of
Shrewsbury.  He will now end his life where he began,  a mile
from his favourite spot ; — a pretty spot enough,  but its power
over a soldier of fortune like General Leighton,  or a full-minded
man like my friend,  the first Dr.  Burney,  is really to its credit.1
When the last-named friend had occasion to kiss his majesty's
hand two or three times within two or three years,  I remember
the wags saying,  '  Why,  Burney takes the King's hand,  sure,
for Shrewsbury-brawn ;  he puts it so often to his lips/  '"  The
jest sounds like one of Mrs.  Thrale's own,  but Dr.  Burney
does really seem to have translated an Italian word,  "  mostac-
ciolo,"  as  "  simnel,"  in order to have the pleasure of bringing
Shrewsbury into a note in his  "Life of Metastasio."  This
note explains that  "  mostacciolo is a cake made at Naples,  of
flour,  sugar,  eggs,  and sweet wine, ....  which is very different
from a Shrewsbury simnel,  which is a rich plum-cake,  in
closed in an impenetrable case,  or crust,  made of flour and
water,  and coloured with saffron,  which preserves it from
injury and decay in the longest voyages to the most remote
parts of the globe."

He did not see Shrewsbury again for fifty- three years.
In 1797,  Mrs.  Crewe,  to raise his spirits after the death

1 In the life of Charles Darwin we may observe Shrewsbury as re
taining the same power of attraction.

Preface.  xxi

of Burke,  insisted upon his accompanying her to Crowe Hall,
in Cheshire,  and went forty miles out of her way to show him
Shrewsbury.  Then he wrote to Fanny,  "  I ran away from
Mrs.  Crewe,  who was too tired to walk about,  and played the
Cicerone myself to Miss Crewe,  ....  and M.  de Fronti-
ville,  to whom I undertook to show off old Shrewsbury,  of
which I knew all the streets,  lanes,  and parishes,  as well as
I did sixty years ago."  .  .  .  .  "  The next morning  ....  I
walked in that most beautiful of all public walks,  as I still
believe,  in the world,  called the Quarry ;  formed in verdant,
and flower-enamelled fields,  by the Severn side,  with the
boldest and most lovely opposite shore imaginable."  ....
"  In a most violent rain,  nearly a storm,  we left my dear old
Shrewsbury ;  and without being able,  in such weather,  to get
to my dearer old Condover."  ]

"The walk by the Severn-side"  is the scene of lovers'
meetings in Farquhar's  "  Recruiting Officer."  The  "  noble
Serjeant Kite,"  speaking in  "  the street,  Shrewsbury,"  bids all
who desire to enlist,  "  repair  "  to him  "  at the sign of the
Raven"  (doubtless in Raven Street,  where Dr.  Burney was
born) ;  and Captain Plume censures  "  the March beer at the
Raven."

Burney was in the orchestra at Drury Lane,  under Arne.
If he was a drudge,  his work seems to have been relieved by
plays and operas,  as well as by concerts,  in which latter he most
likely took some part.  The kindness of Arne's sister,  Mrs.
Cibber,  <f the most enchanting actress of her day,"  more than
made up for her brother's negligence.  Her house in Scotland

1 At Condover,  there is now a little railway-station on the line
between Hereford and Shrewsbury.  Condover is four miles,  or ten
minutes,  by railway from Shrewsbury.  On  "the boldest and most
lovely opposite shore imaginable,"  the new schools now rise.  The
ancient Raven Inn is near the old schools  ;  some part of them are now
used as a Free Library.

xxii Preface.

Yard,  was the resort of  "wits,  poets,  and men of letters."  She
made Burney welcome to it,  and known to them.  The rest was
done by his modest and pleasing manners,  great liveliness,  and
quick intelligence.  At her house he gained the friendliness
of Thomson and Garrick.  There he again met Handel.  Burney
pauses in his volume on the Handel Commemoration of 1784,
to tell us,  that  "after my first arrival in London,  1744,  he"
[Handel]  "was seldom absent from the benefit for Decayed
Musicians and their Families;  and I have sometimes seen
him at the Playhouses,  the Opera,  and at St.  Martin's church,

when Mr.  Kelway played the organ Besides seeing

Handel,  myself,  at his own house,  in Brook- Street,  and at
Carlton-House,  where he had rehearsals of his Oratorios  ;  by
meeting him at Mrs.  Gibber's,  and at Frasi's,  who was then
my scholar,1 I acquired considerable knowledge of his private
character,  and turn for humour.  He was very fond of Mrs.
Gibber,  whose voice and manner had softened his severity for
her want of musical knowledge.  At her house,  of a Sunday
evening,  he used to meet Quin,  who,  in spite of native rough
ness,  was very fond of music.  Yet the first time Mrs.  Gibber
prevailed on Handel to sit down while he was present  (on
which occasion I remember the great musician played the
overture in Siroe,  and delighted us all with the marvellous
neatness with which he played the jig,  at the end of it),
Quin,  after Handel was gone,  being asked by Mrs.  Gibber,
whether he did not think Mr.  Handel ha,d a charming hand  ?
replied,  '  A hand,  Madam  !  you mistake,  its a foot.'  '  Poh  !

poh  ! '  says she,  '  has he not a fine finger  ?  '    '  Toes,  by G ,

Madam ! '  Indeed,  his hand was then so fat,  that the
knuckles,  which usually appear convex,  were like those of a

1 Signora Giulia Frasi appeared in London in 1743.  She chiefly
sang Handel's compositions.  Yet,  though Dr.  Burney writes as if
Frasi was his scholar in 1744,  when he was himself in pupilage,  it is
more likely that it was later on,  when he was his own master.

Preface.  xxiii

child,  dinted or dimpled in,  so as to be rendered concave ;
however,  his touch was so smooth,  and the tone of the instru
ment so much cherished,  that his fingers seemed to grow to
the keys.  They were so curved and compact,  when he played,
that no motion,  and scarcely the fingers themselves,  could be
discerned."

Once,  at a later time,  Handel's temper broke loose on
Burney.  "  At Frasi's,  I remember,  in the year 1748,  he
brought in his pocket the duet of Judas Macchabceus,  'From
these dread Scenes,'  in which she had not sung when that
Oratorio was first performed in 1746.  At the time he sat
down to the harpsichord,  to give her and me the time of it,
while he sung her part,  I hummed,  at sight,  the second,  over
his shoulder ;  in which he encouraged me,  by desiring that
I would sing out — but,  unfortunately,  something went wrong,
and Handel,  with his usual impetuosity,  grew violent :  a
circumstance very terrific to a young musician.  At length,
however,  recovering from my fright,  I ventured to say,  that
I fancied there was a mistake in the writing ;  which,  upon
examining,  Handel discovered to be the case :  and then,  in
stantly,  with the greatest good humour and humility,  said,
'  I pec your barton — I am a very odd tog — Maishter Schmitt
is to blame/  "

Burney was parted from Arne by Fulk Greville,  a young
man of rank,  fashion,  and fortune,  who coveted all kinds of
distinction,  from eminence in metaphysics  (in which he fancied
himself strong)  to pre-eminence on the race-course and in
the hunting-field,  in  "  all the fashionable exercises  "  of riding,
fencing,  shooting at a mark,  dancing,  and tennis,  down,  or
up,  to music and drawing,  writing verses,  and laying out
gardens and plantations.  Mr.  Greville wished for the con
tinual company of a good musician,  who would give him
lessons,  and who was also fit for  "  the society of a gentleman/'
He doubted if there were such an one,  but after hearing young

xxiv Preface.

Burney  (who was ignorant of his object)  talk,  as well as
play upon the harpsichord,  he was so much taken with him
as to pay Arne three hundred pounds to cancel Barney's
articles.  Burney was even too much his companion,  as
Greville took him to the race-course and the gambling clubs
— to Newmarket,  to White's,  and to Boodle's.  He might do
anything he chose,  so long as Mr.  Greville did not think it
"fogrum."  Burney gave away the bride with whom Greville
pretended to elope,  because it was  "fogrum  "  to be married
like other people.  Burney stood as proxy for a duke when
Greville's baby was baptised.1 He was to have gone to Italy
with that  "  pair of our beauties,"  Mr.  and Mrs.  Greville  (who
are commemorated in the letters of Horace Walpole,  and of
Lady Mary Wortley Montagu) ,  but just at that time he himself
fell in love,  and Mr.  Greville graciously cancelled the un
written articles which bound Burney to him by the words,
"  Why don't you marry her  ?"  "May I  ?  "  cried Burney,  and
the deed was done.  "She"  (Esther Sleepe)  "  was a very lovely
and intelligent girl,  who made him as happy as a man could
be made.  But,  before speaking of his married life,  we must
tell of a friendship which began three or four years before he
met his wife,  lasted two-and-twenty years after her death,  and
was shared with him by all his children.  This was with Samuel
Crisp,  a man whose praise runs through all the Burney papers  ;
whom Frances,  from her earliest journal to her latest annota
tions on her letters and papers,  never names but with ex
pressions of love,  honour,  and reverence.

As he has hitherto been commemorated only by sundry
misdescriptions in divers books,  by a few lines in  «  The Gen
tleman's Magazine,"  an epitaph in Chesington Church,  and
some over-coloured paragraphs in Macaulay's review of Mme.
D'Arblay's Diaries,  let such amends as can,  be made by

1 Afterwards the well-known Whig beauty,  Lady Crewe.

Preface.  xxv

telling what may be learned of him from the Burney papers,
and of his family from the volumes  (in their thoroughness in
all ways a pleasure to eye and mind)  which the courteous
kindness of Mr.  Crisp,  of Denmark Hill,  has put at the
service of the Editor.

For some time it was far from easy to affiliate Mr.  Crisp  ;
so many were the Samuels in his ancient and wide-spread
family.  To add to the puzzle,  Mr.  Crisp had a double in
another Samuel Crisp,  who was born three years before him,
and died about eight months after him  ;  l was,  like himself,  a
bachelor,  had some of his characteristics,  and did things which
"Daddy"  might have done if his bent had been towards
philanthropy instead of towards what is called  "  culture."  This
pseudo Samuel Crisp has slipped into the same line of the
index to  "  The Gentleman's Magazine  "  with our Samuel,  so
that a reference to an article upon  "  his character  "  was,  for
a moment,  thought to concern our dear and  "  honoured
Daddy."

The Crisps had much originality,  fervour,  and force.  Many
of them were men of mark.  Mr.  Crisp's double was so well
known in London,  that it is surprising that Fanny should never
have heard of him until she went to Bath in 1780.  There
she met a Miss Leigh,  a cousin of her  "  Daddy,"  and very
likely a cousin of Jane Austen also.  While telling Miss
Leigh how happy she was to see a relation of Mr.  Crisp,
Fanny was heard by Mrs.  Bowdler,  the mother of the Tun-
bridge Wells doctor who unintentionally enriched the English

1  "  Suddenly,  at Macclesfield Street,  Soho,  aged 79,  Samuel Crisp,
Esq. :  a relation of the celebrated Sir Nicholas Crisp."  This is the
notice of the death of the double in  "  The Gentleman's Magazine  "  for
January,  1784.  It would seem that it was his library which was sold
in 1784,  as our Samuel Crisp,  who died in April,  1783,  had sold his
"  books,  prints,  pictures,  and musical instruments,"  and other works of
art,  before retiring to Chesiugton.

XXVI

Preface.

language with a new verb.  Mrs.  Bowdler,  who  (according
to Fanny)  was  "a very clever woman/''  but  "not a very
delicate one,"  "cried out  'What Mr.  Crisp is it?  Is it
Sam  ?  '  '  Yes,  rna'am/  said I,  staring at her familiarity.
'  What/  cried she again,  '  do you know little Sam Crisp  ?  '
1 I don't know for little'  returned I,  much surprised;  ( but
he is the most intimate friend I have in the world,  and the
dearest.  Do you know him then  ?  '  '  Do I  ?  yes,  very well ;
I have known little Sam Crisp this long while/  '  I can't
imagine/  cried I,  half affronted at her manner of naming
him,  ( why you should so little him ;  I know not any one
thing in the world in which he is little, — neither in head nor
heart, — neither in understanding,  person,  talents,  nor mind.'
'  I fancy,  ma'am/  said Miss Leigh,  '  you hardly mean the
Mr.  Crisp Miss Burney does.'  '  I mean Sam Crisp/  said
she,  '  The Greenwich Traveller.'  This appeased me,  and we
cleared up the mistake."  But not wholly was Fanny appeased,
as on the next day,  when she first saw Mr.  Bowdler,  the
"very worthy"  husband of this inelegant person,  she de
scribes Mr.  Bowdler as being lt an extremely little man,
much less than Sam Crisp,  I assure you,  Mrs.  Bowdler." !

"  Little Sam Crisp,"  who had withdrawn from business
for the last fourteen years of his life,  paid the owners of the
Greenwich stage-coach  £27 yearly,  for what  "The Gentleman's1
Magazine  "  calls his  "  daily amusement of riding in the coach
from London to Greenwich,  and returning in it immediately."  ]
He acted on  "his favourite motto,  pro bono publico,  and with
the least ostentation performed many generous and charitable
actions,  which would have dignified a more ample fortune.

1 He may have had some early association with Greenwich,  as
Edward Crisp,  who died in 1690,  had  "lands,  messuages,  and tene-:
ments,  scituate in East-Greenwich,"  was the Master of the Trinity
House at Greenwich,  and in the commission of the peace for Middlesex,
Surrey,  and Kent.

Preface.

XXVll

Ho was tho institutor of the Ladarium in St.  George's
Fields,  and selected the Latin mottoes for the facetious
Mrs.  Henniver,  who got a little fortune there.  He pro
jected the mile and half stones near London,  and teased the

printers of news-papers into the plan of letter-boxes

He was a good-humoured,  obliging,  and facetious com
panion,  always paying a particular attention and a profusion
of compliments to the ladies,  especially to those who were
agreeable."  *

If he was a relation of the celebrated Sir Nicholas Crisp,  it
must have been collaterally,  as was the case with our Mr.  Crisp,
who was a great-grand-nephew of Sir Nicholas,  the direct line
of whose heirs ended in 1740,  in Sir Charles Crisp,  of Dornford,
in Oxfordshire.  Sir Nicholas was a maker of history.  What
he did ia to be seen in the State Papers and the Commons'
Journals,  in Clarendon and Rushworth,  in Pepys and Evelyn.
His younger brother Tobias,  the great-grandfather of our
Mr.  Crisp,  made still more noise than Sir Nicholas in his time,
and even after it,  but it was among polemical Puritans.  He
has shrunk into a small space in dictionaries of biography
and in histories of controversy.2

These brothers sprang from a Leicestershire family,  which
in the sixteenth century had a Gloucestershire offshoot,  if it
were not rather the main stock transplanted.  Towards the
end of that century two cadets of the Crisps of Marshfield,
near Bristol,  became citizens of London.  Ellis,  the younger
of the two,  had a large house in Bread Street,  a seat at Ham-

1 These extracts are from  "  The Gentleman's Magazine."
a Granger counts four engraved portraits of Tobias to one of Sir
Nicholas.  Clarendon describes Sir Nicholas as being  "a citizen of
good wealth,  great trade  ;  an active-spirited man  ;  a very popular man
in the City,  where he had been a commander of the train'd bands,  till
the Ordinance of the Militia removed him  ;  which rather improv'd than
lessen'd his credit."

xxviii Preface.

mersmith,  house-property in London and in Bristol,  with land  \
both in southern counties and in Yorkshire.  He made the
old kindly will of a prosperous,  godly man,  remembering all
his kinsfolk,  all his wife's kinsfolk,  his city company,  and the
"poore people of the towne of Marshefielde,"  in which he
was born,  and where,  with his brother,  he had founded
almshouses.  He died in 1625,  the year of his shrievalty,  that
year in which Charles I.  dissolved his first Parliament.

Would that we had ample room to tell of his eldest son,
"  Capitaine Nicholas Crisp,  Esquier,"  Charles I/s  "  faithful
farmer"  of the Customs,  and raiser of money;  that adven
turous merchant who  "  opened and settled the Guinea-trade,
and built there the Castle of Coromandine  " ;  that gallant
Cavalier  ;  that daring  "  Admiral of Sea-Pirats,"  who raised a
squadron of ships as well as a regiment for his King ; l who
pawned for the King his collar of rubies, 2 trafficked for him,
plotted and was in exile for him ;  whose spirit and whose
fortune no fines or plundering by Parliament could sensibly
daunt or diminish.  In words3 which his son,  Sir Thomas,

1 This is from the title of a party-pamphlet against Sir Nicholas,  in
the Bodleian Library.  "  Carolus I.  Kex Angliae,  a copie of the King's
Commission to Sir Nicholas Crispe,  making him Admiral of the Sea-
Pirats,  May 6."  4to,  London,  1645.  Crisp had a commission to equip
not less than fifteen ships of war,  to which the King gave power to
make prizes.  This squadron kept the King's communications with the
Continent open,  and exchanged the King's tin and wool for arms and
ammunition.

The very  "  carcanet of large balas rubies,  with a great diamond,"
which King James took from his dusty old grey hat,  which it  "  en
circled,"  in order to  "  opignorate,  pledge,  or lay in wad,"  for two hun
dred pounds,  to George Heriot,  saying,  "Here — here — ye have had these
in pledge for a larger sum,  ye auld Levite that ye are.  Keep them in
gage,  till I gie ye back the siller out of the next subsidy."  The very
"cimelia"  which are restored to the King by Kichie Moniplies,  iu>
the third volume of  "  The Fortunes of Nigel."

3 In his own epitaph in the church of St.  Mildred,  Bread Street,  of

Preface.  xxix

wrote with pride,  Sir Nicholas was an  "  ould ffaithfull servant
to King Charles the ffirst,  and King Charles the second,  for
whom he suffered very much,  and lost one hundred thousand
pounds in their services,  but was repaired in a great measure
by King Charles the second his justice,  and bounty,  and is
here mentioned by his executor as a gratefull acknowledge
ment."  This repayment will appear not the least notable fact
in the life of Sir Nicholas.  After the Restoration he was made
a baronet,  his ceaseless energy was then turned to improving
brick-making,  paper-mills,  powder-mills,  water-mills,  etc.  His
desires  "pro bono publico  "  were on a grander scale than those
of Samuel Crisp,  "  the Greenwich traveller."  He troubled
the mind of Sir Richard Browne,  sometime English Minister
in Paris,  by planning a wet-dock at Deptford,  to hold  "  two
hundred sail of ships/'  He treated with Browne's son-in-law,
Mr.  Evelyn,  at Sayes Court,  and brought him up to London
"  about a vast design of a mole to be made for ships in part
of his grounds at Sayes Court."  l To complete the multiform

which the Crisp family held the advowson.     Sir Thomas was a first
cousin of our Mr.  Crisp's grandfather.

1  "  The vast design  "  of Sir Nicholas was baffled.  The Admiralty
was  "  talked over."  The Duke of York visited Mr.  Evelyn's  "  poor
habitation,  and viewed such things as  "  [he]  "  had to entertain his
curiosity  " ;  caused Mr.  Evelyn to dine with him,  at the Treasurer of
the Navy's house,  with the Duke of Ormond,  and several lords ;  then
they viewed some of Mr.  Evelyn's grounds,  and  "  laid aside the project
of a receptacle for ships as a fancy of Sir Nicholas Crisp's."  Crisp's
design was to use some crown lands which it was found afterwards had
been granted to Sir Kichard Browne,  (whose only child was Evelyn's
wife,  and brought the Deptford property to that family,)  for his  "  mole  "
and  "  wet dock,"  or  "  sasse,"  which were parts of the same plan.
We are told that the Evelyn family still hold the ground concerning
which Sir Nicholas had  "  a fancy"  as Mr.  Evelyn wrote;  or as Claren
don would have written,  one of  "  hit oicn sprightly inclinations and
resolutions"  The loyalty of Sir Richard Browne was but that of a
convert ;  the loyalty of Mr.  Evelyn had been inactive in time of need ;
BO that they may well have been perturbed.

XXX

Preface.

Sir Nicholas,  he was met,  with the other Farmers of the
Customs,  by Mr.  Pepys at Woolwich in 1662 :  when Pepys
found them to be  "very grave,  fine gentlemen"; — "  very
good company  " ; — whom he was  "  very glad to know."

Samuel Crisp,  next brother to Sir Nicholas,  was probably
concerned with him in what the King and Sir Nicholas called
"  a Commission of Array";  the.  Parliament named it a plot to
seize the City of London.  Samuel's estate was sequestered.
Tobias,  the third surviving son of Ellis,  was,  like his brothers,
born in Milton's Bread Street,  in 1602,  a few years before
Milton.  He was of Eton,  of Cambridge,  and of Oxford,  and
rector of Brinkworth,  in Hampshire,  when the Civil War
began.  He had married Mary,  daughter,  and,  in the end,
heiress,  of Eowland Wilson,  citizen of London,  and vintner,
who seems to have been in Sir Nicholas Crisp's Guinea Com
pany,  but was the reverse of him in politics,  being a member
of the Long Parliament,  and  (in the fatal year 1648-9)  one
of the Council of State.  This connexion may have sometimes
saved the person of Sir Nicholas at the cost of his purse.  In
the same month of the same year l that the King raised his
standard at Nottingham,  Tobias  (who was  "  Puritannically
affected"),  "to avoid the insolencies of the soldiers,  especially
of the Cavaliers,  for whom he had but little affection,  retired
to London."2

Tobias had little  "luck"  alive,  or dead.  Shunning frays in
Hampshire,  he preached himself into worse in London,  where
he was  "  baited by fifty-two opponents in a grand dispute con
cerning freeness of grace."  "  By which encounter,  which was
eagerly managed on his part,  he contracted a disease which
brought him to his grave."  That is to say,  in the heat and
the crowd,  he was infected by the small-pox,  of which he died
on the 27th of February,  1642.  The controversy raged long

1 August,  1642.  2 Anthony k Wood.

Preface.

XXXI

after his demise.  On the publication of a volume of his
sermons after his death,  the Westminster Assembly of Divines
proposed that they should be publicly burned as heretical.  His
son Samuel,  who was about ten when Tobias died,  grew up a
biblical student and a lay theologian.  In 1689 he republished
his father's works,  and brought upon himself a seven years'
strife.  He provoked it by prefixing to the book the names of
twelve Presbyterian and twelve Anabaptist ministers as ap
proving the sermons.  Samuel was denounced for reprinting
sermons which should never have been preached,  or published,
at all.  He defended himself in two volumes.  The whole con
troversy rests undisturbed on the shelves of College-libraries,
but John Gill,  a Baptist minister,  reprinted Toby in 1791. l
In the latest book that gives a sketch of him,  we find him as
"Tobias Crisp,  Antinomian";  but what one of his foemen
called him,  i.e.  "  Crispinian,"  seems nearer the fact.  A con
temporary describes him as being  "  innocent,  and harmless,  of
all evil;  .  .  .  zealous and fervent of all good."

His children were left to the care of their mother,  and her
father — Rowland Wilson.  Tobias was rich,  and their grand
father increased the wealth of the children.  He left among
them,  the church lands of Merton Abbey,  in the parish of
Maiden,  in Surrey.3 Among other property,  he bequeathed

1 We saw several volumes of it in Merton College Library.  Some
•will remember that Walter de Merton first founded his college iu the
parish of Maiden,  (in which lies Chesington,)  in 1264,  but transferred
it to Oxford ten years later.

a Ellis Crispe,  sometime High Sheriff of Surrey,  the eldest surviving
son of Dr.  Tobias,  did not long retain his share of the Mertou property,
on which stood the remains of the priory.  In 1668,  he conveyed it to
Thomas Pepys,  Esquire,  of Hatcham Barnes,  Master of the Jewel Office
to Charles II.  and James II.  It was an estate of importance,  as may
be seen by the following entry in the diary of Samuel Pepys:  "May 21st,
1668.  To the office,  where meets me Sir Kichard Ford ;  who among
other things congratulates me,  as one or two did yesterday,  on my great

xxxii Preface.

to his grandchildren his bad debts,  namely,  what  "  the Crowne
of Portugal!"  and King Charles II.  owed him.  When his
grandson,  Samuel Crisp,  died,  in 1703,  they were still unpaid.
The first Samuel  (1)  describes himself in his will,  made in
1701,  as being then in his  "  sixty-nynth yeare,"  and  "the last
survyving son of Dr.  Tobias Crisp."  He had lived at Clapham
in a pious and wealthy way,  much as they who were called
"  the Clapham Sect"  (or Set)  did after him.  His second son,
Samuel  (2) ,  seems to have received more than the rest.  His
eldest,  Pheasaunt,  a merchant,  who died at Bombay,  had pro
vision made for him,  but was reminded that he  "  married Mr.
Dolins'  daughter"  without his father's consent,  or even his
knowledge;  that his father had lent him money  "in his
straits/'  which he had promised to repay to his younger
brothers when he was worth four thousand pounds ;  and that
he had borrowed a picture of  "  the Madona,"  which his father
bequeathed to him,  seemingly because Pheasaunt showed no
signs of returning it.  His father also leaves him his own
"  pocket-bible of forty-four yeares vse,  hopeinge that he will
make a good vse of it."  Samuel,  the second son,  has the
bible of Dr.  Tobias.  "My flatter's bible,  printed,  1631,  in
the margent of which from 1675,  to 1680,  I made annotations
from 1st Corinthians to the end."  Four younger sons and a
daughter are left more less curious bibles,  some of them anno
tated.  To one of them,  Stephen,  "  to furnish him somewhat

purchase ;  and he advises me rather to forbear,  if it be not done,  as a thing
that the world will envy me in  :  and what is it but my cosen Tom Pepys'
[of Deptford]  buying of Martin Abbey,  in Surry  ! "  Ellis was the only
child of Tobias,  who received a legacy from his uncle,  Sir Nicholas : '
this silence concerning the rest,  with other circumstances,  persuades
us that the other children of Tobias were dissenters.  Samuel Crisp's
share of the Merton estate was,  in the end,  sold by his grandson,  our
"Daddy."  It may be noted,  that although the land came to the
Crisps from Kowland Wilson,  there had been Crisps settled in the
neighbourhood from the time of Henry VIII.

Preface.  xxxiii

in the blessed worke of the ministery,"  the testator says,  "  I
give all my manuscripts of Hebrew and Greek in my three
times writing out the Bible in Hebrew and Greek letters,  and
rendring the whole into proper English.  My booke of the
list of 7000 and od sermons from 1648 to 1701,  and all the
sermon-books about 300,  I give to my said sonne Stephen."

Samuel  (2)  survived his father Samuel fourteen years,  dying
in 1717.  He had married into a family living not far from
the old home of the Crisps at Marshfield.  He left five
daughters and an only son,  our Mr.  Crisp,  the third and last
Samuel of this line of the Crisps.  His mother,  Mrs.  Florence
Crisp,  did not live two years after her husband,  so that
"  Daddy "  was brought up by his sisters,  three of whom
appear to have been older than himself.  When just in his
"  teens/'  he became owner of his father's share in the Merton
property,  and of his mother's shares in land at Tockington in
Gloucestershire,  and at Camerton in Somersetshire.  That he
was well-taught we are assured;  but there is a gap in his
history between his father's death in 1717,  and his meeting
young Burney at the house of Fulk Greville,  near Andover,
which can only be filled by fancy.1 All we know is that Mr.
Crisp was a man of fashion,  as well as of  "  taste";  that he
was tall,  handsome,  of fine bearing,  agreeable,  and intelligent,
excelling both as a musician and a painter when young,  and
that he did not let his accomplishments slip from him in

1 Madame D'Arblay tells us that her father was  "but seventeen
years of age,  when first he had this incalculable advantage."  But
Barney was some months past eighteen when he went to London in
1744,  and time must be allowed for his stay as the pupil of Arne,
before he met Mr.  Greville.  He probably met Mr.  Crisp between,  at
earliett,  1745 and 1747,  when he may have married,  or 1748,  when he
must,  at any rate,  have married,  as he had three children born to him
by the middle of 1751 — that is,  by a couple of months after he was five-
and-twenty.

XXXIV

Preface.

middle-age.  There are traces after he was seventy,  of his
accompanying Susan Burney on the harpsichord,  and of his
needing paint-brushes.1 Even when his fingers were swollen
by gout,  his handwriting is remarkable for its delicacy.  The
Puritanism of Tobias,  and the Nonconformity of his son
Samuel,  had become feeble in the second Samuel ;  there was
no sign of it in  "  Daddy."  He heard Farinelli,  Senesino,
and Cuzzoni with rapture,  and dwelt on their praise in the
time of Agujari,  Gabrielli,  and Pacchieroti.  He loved
Shakespeare and Moliere,  admired Fielding and Smollett,
thought little of Richardson,  considered Dr.  Johnson a better
talker than writer,  and set Mrs.  Montagu at naught.2 As be-

1 Half-a-dozen lines begging Susan to go to a colour shop in New
port Street,  and buy  "  two ermine points,  the shortest and stiffest"  she
can get,  lie before us.     They end thus :

"  I'll pay Fannikin in money,  and you in love

"  Your honoured daddy,

"  S.  CRISP.

"  Chesington,  July 6,  1778."

Below this,  Fanny runs on to Susy,  "'Honoured,  quotha?'  says I.
'  Why,  an't I  ? '  says he.  '  Suppose you are,'  says I,  '  it don't become
you to say it.'  '  Oh yes,  it does, — and to think it too  ! '  "

2 Mr.  Crisp writes thus to Fanny in 1778  :  "  I have read Evelina
over again,  and if there is not more true sterling Genius in 3 pages
of that work than in all Bichardson's nineteen volumes put together
I do hereby in form acknowledge myself to be the most taste
less of courteous or uncourteous Eeaders.       However such an
authority as Dr.  Johnson's is not to be slighted ;  for which reason,
I don't care if I do throw away a little in tumbling him over now
and then,  and try if I can find any thing to alter my opinion of so
many years standing.     I think there were 4 vol.  of Pamela — the two
first,  and then 2 more of Pamela in high life — such high life  ! — 8 of
Clarissa,  and 7 of Sir C.  Grandison."  Elsewhere,  he speaks of  "  Pamela  "
as  "  poor stuff, — as it is,  to my mind,  at least."     Of Mrs.  Montagu,  he
writes to Fanny,  in 1780,  "  I believe I have told you of several letters
the Duchess of Portland showed me of hers formerly,  (for I had no
acquaintance with herself,)  so full of affectation,  refinement,  attempts

Preface.

came a man of wit,  he supped with Quin,  and had been intimate
with Garrick.  As a man of fashion,  he knew the  "  virtuoso, "
Duchess of Portland,  and Mrs.  Delany,  her friend,  and the
friend of his eldest sister.  He was intimate with the beautiful
Maria Gunning and her husband,  Lord Coventry.  Among
other men of letters he was friendly with Owen Cambridge,
"  a man of good estate,  not unknown to the Muses,"  l as well
as with Fulk Greville and his set,  who probably called some
of the others,  "fogrum."  Mr.  Crisp,  in the words of the last
century,  was a  "dilettante,"  and a  "  virtuoso."  Greville,  and
Greville's friends,  teased,  ridiculed,  or chid him for lingering
by young Burney's harpsichord when they would fain have
had him go a-hunting.  He guided the clever and interesting
boy Burney by the experience of a kind-hearted man twenty
years his elder.

His play  "Virginia/'  which has been represented as the
main thing in his life,  was not acted until he was forty-eight,
although begun some years earlier.  Whether any less shadowy
affection than his love for it warmed those years of which we
know nothing,  must be left to conjecture.  He tells Fanny in
1778,  that  "  Molly Chute  (an intimate and most infinitely
agreable old friend of mine,  long since dead),  when I us'd
to desire her to love me a great deal,  would say,  '  Look ye
Sam,  I have this much stock of love by me/  putting out her
little finger,  'and I can afford you so much,'  measuring off
perhaps half the length of her nail,  '  and I think that's pretty
fair.'  I thought so too,  and was well content, — but what
shall I do with you who have so many to content  ?  .  .  .  .

to philosophize,  talking metaphysics — in all which particulars she so
bewildered and puzzled herself and her readers,  and showed herself so
superficial,  nay,  really ignorant in the subjects she paraded on — that
in my own private mind's pocket-book,  I set her down for a vain,
empty,  conceited pretender,  and little else."

1 So writes George Colman,  the younger,  of Owen Cambridge.

xxxvi Preface.

Well,  I must do as I may,  and that is the very nuthook humour
of it." l

Now,  to be  "  well content "  with the little love Molly could
spare him,  shows that it was her friendship that he desired.  In
one of Susan Burney' s amusing letters we find Mr.  Crisp,  when
above seventy,  delaying his party on their walk in order to
admire the beauty of a Gypsy girl,  on whom he gazed as upon
a picture.2

Only one of his five sisters married  (Anne,  the eldest,  being
of set purpose a spinster) ,  and Mr.  Crisp may have had no
love-story at all to tell,  even as he had none to tell of being*
"  wronged or cruelly cheated/' 3

As we are expressly told that Mr.  Crisp never saw the
lovely Esther Sleepe,  whom Charles Burney married about
1748,  it is most likely that he did not meet her husband for
about thirteen years,  nine or ten of which Burney spent at
Lynn,  while Mr.  Crisp passed some of them in Borne.4 In
1749 Burney was appointed organist of St.  Dionis Backchurch,
Fenchurch Street.  He had pupils;  he composed music,  to
which,  except in one instance,  he did not put his name ;  and
he  "  took the organ part at the new concert established at
the King's Arms,"  on the west side of Cornhill.

1 Mr.  Crisp's quotations are more ready than exact.  What Corporal
Nym does say is —

"  Be advis'd,  sir,  and pass good humours  :  I will say  '  Marry strap  *
with you if you run the nuthooks on me  :  that is the very note of it.'*
— Merry Wives of Windsor,  Act I.  Scene 1.

a See p.  265,  Vol.  II.

3 See p.  265,  Vol.  II.

4 It is possible that Burney may have met Mr.  Crisp on some visit
from Lynn to London,  but we are told expressly that their friendship
was in abeyance,  through absence only,  "  for many years,"  and was
renewed by a purely accidental meeting,  some time after the death
of Mrs.  Bnrney in 1761.

Preface.  xxxvii

We have not seen the register of the birth of his eldest
child,  Esther  (Hetty) ,  but James,  and a Charles  (who probably
died an infant),  were baptised at St.  Dionis.1 Burney soon
became seriously ill from work,  study,  and city air,  and happen
ing to be offered the post of organist at Lynn Regis,  accepted
it at the end of 1750,  or beginning of 1751,  being advised to
live in the country by Dr.  Armstrong,  the poet,  who was
his physician.  Mrs.  Burney was left in London for nursery
reasons,  and did not join him until some months before the
birth of her daughter Frances,  on the 13th of June,  1752.

Frances received the Christian name of her godmother,
Mrs.  Greville,2 from the Reverend Thomas Pyle,  perpetual
curate of St.  Nicholas,  in Ann Street,  Lynn,  a chapel of ease
to St.  Margaret's Church,  of which church in the end he
became the something short of orthodox  "  minister."  Be
tween 1706 and 1718 he had preached six pamphlets in sup
port of the succession of the House of Hanover,  which he
published under the name of sermons.  He had  "  engaged  "
in the Bangorian controversy in aid of his friend Hoadley,
who made him a residentiary prebendary of Salisbury.  Owing
to his merits and efforts,  his three sons had an almost fabulous

1 In the baptismal register of St.  Dionis Backchnrch,  Mr.  Gibbs
found  :  "  July 5,  1750,  James,  s.  of Chas.  and Esther Burney  (organist
of this parish),  born June 13."      "  June 16, 1751,  Charles Burney,  s.
of Chas.  and Esther Burney  (organist of this parish),  born June 3."
This infant is not named in any Burney paper that we have seen.     It
•will be remarked that James and Frances were born on the same day
of the same month.     The coincidence is apparent but not real,  as one
was born under the Old Style,  the other under the New.     The same is
the case with Dr.  Burney 's dying on his birthday.    The change of style
must be reckoned.

2 Sheridan's  "  Critic  "  was dedicated to Mrs.  Greville.     She left a
fragment of a novel,  which her daughter,  Lady Crewe,  wished Fanny
to complete.     Fanny says,  "It has much spirit,  knowledge of human
nature,  and gaiety in most of its parts."

XXXV111

Preface.

amount of church preferment.  Thus that Fanny was to
spend her life among people of more or less note,  was fore
shown even at her baptism.

The port of Bishop's Lynn  (the name was changed to
King's Lynn when Henry VIII.  wrested it from the see of
Norwich)  has lost consequence since the growth of Grimsby
and Kingston-upon-Hull.  It was a town of merchants who
imported wine,  and of brewers who exported beer,  chiefly to
the Baltic ;  a town where the venturous settled,  to rise if they
could into the powerful corporation ;  a town of high living
rather than high thinking.1 Although made much of,  Charles
Burney was ill at ease when playing upon an  "  execrably bad
organ  "  to  "  foggy aldermen  "  totally ignorant of music,  with
a patron and local  "  oracle of Apollo "  (Sir John Turner,
M.P.)  who was  "  extremely shallow  " ;  but he tells us in a

1 Details of Lynn life may be found in  "  My Grandfather's Pocket-
book,"  which was published by the Kev.  Henry John Wale in 1883.

Thomas Wale  (the  "  Grandfather")  was born in 1701,  and was  "  pub
out apprentice"  at Lynn to one of the second Mrs.  Burney's family
(Mr.  W.  Allen,  Kussian merchant)  between 1718 and 1724.  He lived
some time iu Eussia,  where he traded.  In 1777 he was at Norwich,
where he visited Mr.  Peter Finch,  whose  "  Lady  "  (he writes)  "is own
sister to  ...  J.  Bagge,  gran-son of my old friend J.  Bagge,  who married
Sally Allen of Lynn.  .  .  .  Visited this day also a Parson Pyle,  youngest
brother of Parson Pyle,  diseased."  At another time Mr.  Wale went
to Lynn and  "  walked to the Keys and almost all over ye town."  At a
brewer's he was shown  "  a prodigious quantity of beer and ale,  and one
large warehouse of brandy.  Mr.  Everard  .  .  .  concluded  ...  to send
fifty or more casks of his pale ale  (like Burton ale),  which seemed nicely
good,  and twenty-five casks of porter by a ship they are about to send
to Riga,  being very well pleased with the sale of what last year he
sent to our house."  Among rich brewers and wine merchants,  importers
of timber from America,  exporters of beer and of  "  ventures  "  of divers
goods,  one or two Scotch physicians,  some attorneys and clergymen
and their wives,  Fanny must have passed months for some years
running,  after her father's second marriage to a Lynn lady,  without
reckoning that the first eight years of her life were spent at Lynn.

Preface.  xxxix

note to the second volume of his  "  History of Music  "  (1782),
that before he left Lynn the corporation granted him a new
organ,  made by his advice by Snetzler,  "  in place of one
with worm-eaten wooden pipes";  and he halts in his first
foreign tour to record Snetzler's sarcasms upon his first organ1
at Lynn.  In like manner,  in his German tour,  he pauses on
the way between Berlin and Potsdam to say that  "  the road
...  is through a deep running sand,  like the worst parts of
Norfolk and Suffolk,  where there are no turnpikes/'  On such
roads his mare Peggy picked her way,  while her master studied
Italian poetry on her back,  with a dictionary of his own com
piling in one pocket of his great coat,  and his commonplace-
book in another.  If  "  looking around him in Lynn,  he seemed
to see a void,"  visits to Houghton,  Holkham,  Rainham,  and
Felbrig,  with occasional letters from Mr.  and Mrs.  Greville
and Mr.  Crisp,  new friendships with Mr.  Hayes and Mr.
Bewley,  and an approach by letters to Dr.  Johnson,  much
reading and many pupils,  a happy home and returning health,
made up for the loss of London.  His children,  Susan and
Charles,  were born in Lynn,  which he did not leave before 1760.

Meanwhile,  Mr.  Crisp's tragedy of  "  Virginia  "  had been
played at Drury Lane Theatre on the 25th of February,  1754.

It was with tenderness towards that play which had been
so dear to Mr.  Crisp,  that the Editor untied his manuscript of
"  Virginia  " ;  with regret that she found all that she could
admire was the conspicuous beauty of the penmanship, — the
delicacy of the text written in the Italian hand,  the exquisite
neatness of the writing of the foot-notes from Livy  (printed

1  "  I remember M.  Snetzler,  being asked by some churchwardens
what he thought an old organ which they wanted to have repaired was
worth,  and what would be the expense of mending it,  honestly telling
them,  that after he had appraised the instrument at one hundred
pounds,  that if they would lay out another hundred upon it,  perhaps
then it would be worth fifty."

xl Preface.

with the pen)  with which Mr.  Crisp had fortified the text.  It
put her in mind of Rousseau's care for the beauty of the
manuscript of his  "  Nouvelle Helo'ise/'  and of how he tied it
with blue ribands.  Lying on the dainty writing was a single
small quarto leaf of another tragedy upon  "  Virginia/'  which
had been printed exactly one hundred years before that of
Mr.  Crisp.  Had he kept it before him as a warning,  or as an
example  ?  If it had been the key which had given him the
note,  no voice of his century could sustain it.  In three lines
on that black old leaf was more force than in Mr.  Crisp's five
acts,  for it was from the  "  Appius and Virginia  "  of the great
poet of  "  Vittoria Corombona"  and  "The Duchess of Malfy." l
From a single scene of Mr.  Crisp's  "  Virginia "  as given
in  "  The Gentleman's Magazine,"  Macaulay had divined that
"the whole piece was one blemish."  Not even Macaulay could
exaggerate the flatness of the plot,  the feeble conception of
character,  the weakness of diction.  We feel almost as if
criticising our own father ;  but truth is mighty and must pre
vail  ;  yet we were bent upon admiring our  "  Daddy's  "  "Vir
ginia,"  if it were possible.  The pathos of the play,  "  the
pity of it/'  lay in Mr.  Crisp's having felt so warmly and
strongly without having naturally,  or by acquisition,  a power
to make others feel,  adequate in any wise to his aim and end.
His heart had burned within him when he read and wrote
of the piteous story of Virginia,  as it burned within him in
his oldest days,  when the combined fleets of France and
Spain made a show of menace in the Channel,  and he wished
he were  "under ground  .  .  .  rather than see the insolent
Bourbon trampling under foot this once happy island/'  To

1  "  Appius and Virginia,"  by John Webster,  was printed in 1654.
"Virginia,"  by Samuel Crisp,  acted and printed in 1754.  Mr.  Dyce
was of opinion that Webster's tragedy had been played long before
1654 ;  indeed that Webster was not alive in that year.

Preface.  xli

him his tragedy may have seemed as pathetic as that of
Webster,  without the overflow of force or archaic jocosities of
the previous century ;  not as what it resembles,  the dry frame
work of  "  a theme,"  filled by a schoolboy.

It was not below many eighteenth century tragedies;  not
duller,  for instance,  than the  "  Zobeide "  of Mr.  Cradock
"  of Leicestershire,"  or the  "  Orphan of China "  of Arthur
Murphy.  Nor is it correct to say with Madame D'Arblay,
that it had a  "  catastrophe of a yea and nay character/'  that
it neither succeeded nor failed ;  or with Macaulay,  that there
was  "a feeling that the attempt had failed."  Nine nights
then brought three authors'  benefits,  and not many plays ran
much longer.  In his Epilogue,  Garrick asked for little more —

"  Our author hopes,  this fickle goddess,  Ifode,
With us,  will make,  at least,  nine days abode  ;
To present pleasure he contracts his view,
And leaves his future fame to time and you."  l

Nine were as many as were secured for Johnson's  "  Irene."  Mr.
Crisp's play  "ran"  at least eleven nights at Drury Lane  ;  was
reproduced at Covent Garden,  as well as at Drury Lane,  in his
lifetime;  was reprinted  (in 1778 and in 1784), in collections of
standard English plays,  from his own edition of  "  Virginia  "
in 1754.  This,  for that time,  was success.  If Mr.  Crisp
complained,  what he must have missed was that admiration
from the admired,  which would have been sweeter than the
applause of the pit of Garrick's bearing as  "  Yirginius,"  of
the working of his countenance while silent,  and of his manner
of saying  "  Thou traitor !  "  Yet in all his letters which we
have seen,  there is only a single sentence  (that seized by
Macaulay)  which touches  "Virginia,"  and even that is in
direct.  It merely supports a counsel to Fanny by his own
experience.  We could never have inferred from his letters,

1 Garrick himself wrote and spoke the Prologue to  "  Virginia"  ;  he
also wrote the Epilogue,  which was spoken by Mrs.  Gibber.

xlii Preface.

or the letters of others about him,  that he had,  or had had,
any great trouble but the gout  (which we believe to have
been his main misery),  if it were not for Fanny's narrative,
upon which Macaulay founded his.  To her,  who had heard
Mr.  Crisp speak of  "  Virginia,"  we must defer,  but with a
conviction that she herself would have  "  toned down  "  her pic
ture had she known how much Macaulay would strengthen
her outline and heighten her colouring.  His inferences from
her words are not unfair ;  but a close examination  (which
the  "  Memoirs of Dr.  Burney  "  require as to dates and the
order of events)  would have shown,  that in her sketch of Mr.
Crisp facts are so run together,  that his withdrawal to Chesing-
ton appears as a result of the cold reception of a play acted in
1754,  whereas it was due to considerations of income and
health ten years or more later.1 One single fragment of a
letter from Mr.  Crisp to her father is all of their correspon
dence that Fanny has published.  It was written shortly
before Mr.  Crisp left England,  to press Burney to return to
London.  This he was not able to do for some years afterwards.
Mrs.  Burney being the grand-daughter of a Huguenot,
French was almost as much her language as English.  She
shared with her husband the pleasure and profit to be gained

1 Mr.  Crisp to Mr.  Burney.  [Probably written in 1756,  or 7.]  ....
"  I have no more to say.  my dear Burney,  about harpsichords,  and
if you remain amongst your foggy aldermen,  I shall be the more in
different whether I have one or not.  But really,  among friends,  is not
settling at Lynn planting your youth,  genius,  hopes,  fortune,  &c.,
against a north wall  ?  Can you ever expect ripe,  high-flavoured fruit,
from such an aspect  ?  .  .  .  .  Take then,  your spare person,  your
pretty mate,  and your brats,  to that propitious mart,"  [London]  "  and

'  Seize the glorious,  golden opportunity,'

while you have youth,  spirits,  and vigour to give fair play to your
abilities,  for placing them and yourself in a proper point of view.
And so I give you my blessing.

"  SAMUEL CKISP."

Preface.  xliii

from books.  She made a translation from Maupertuis,  which
her husband published,  after her death,  with his own fi Essay
towards a History of Comets."

Among the three ladies in Lynn who read,  she was the chief.
The other two were Dolly Young,  whom Esther Burney wished
Dr.  Burney to marry after her own death,1 and Mrs.  Stephen
Allen,  whom he did marry in the end.

While Mrs.  Burney was  "reading the best authors"  with
Hetty,  Fanny was learning by ear.  She was so slow in learn
ing to read,  that her sister Susan,  who was between two and
three years the younger,  could read before Fanny knew her
letters ;  but in her own words to Hetty  (1821),  "Well I recol
lect your reading with our dear mother all Pope's works and
Pitt's  './Eneid.'  I recollect you also spouting passages from
Pope,  that I learned from hearing you recite them before —
many years before,  I knew them myself."  Her dulness seems
to have been as superficial as the quickness of many children.
Her mother,  who was never deceived by it,  said she had no
fear of Fanny,  when friends called the child  "  the little dunce."
Nor does it appear that,  after the dreary days of the alphabet
and the copybook,  anyone near to her thought Fanny dull.
She was looked upon as considerate,  reflective,  and wise above
nature  ;  as a Mentor rather than a dunce.  Her diffidence had
much share in her apparent dulness.  Diffidence ran in the
family.  Dr.  Burney's polished manners concealed it ;  Fanny
suffered from it through life ;  it has made her cousin Edward
less known as a painter than he well deserved to be  ;  and the
two apparent exceptions,  Fanny's sister Charlotte and her
cousin Richard,  may have been, — one somewhat flippant,  the
other a coxcomb by design, — out of a well-known turn taken
by excessive diffidence.

1 She had a local reputation.     Richards mentions her as  "  the in
telligent Miss Young"  in his  "  History of Lynn."

xliv Preface.

In 1760 the Burney family left Lynn for London,  where
the head of it soon became the music-master most in request;
but his wife sickened in Poland Street,  apparently after the
birth of her fourth daughter,  Charlotte.  As was the custom
in cases of consumption,  she was sent to  "  Bristol Hot Wells,"
(now called Clifton,)  where she rallied.  This change for the
better did not last long.  She died,  after a short,  severe
illness,  on the 28th of September,  1761.  We are told that
during their mother's last days,  Fanny and Susan were sent
to Mrs.  Shields,  a friend of their family,  who lived in Queen
Square,  to be out of the way  ;  and it is added that,  when told
of the loss of her mother,  "  the agony of Frances's grief was
so great,  though she was not more than nine years old,  that
Mrs.  Shields declared that she had never met with a child of
such intense and acute feelings.

Dr.  Burney's loss was great ;  so was his grief.  Nothing
is known of his next few years.  His friends did their utmost
to cheer him;  the Garricks being conspicuously kind,  Dr.
Burney struggled with his grief.  He sought some task
difficult enough to compel his attention,  and made,  at this
time,  a prose translation of Dante's greatest poem,  choosing
it because it was not among the Italian poems which he had
read with his Esther.

Among Fanny's papers,  the following,  from Dr.  Burney,  is
the first : —

[  Woodhay,  Berkshire,  N°  1,  1763.]  1

"  FOE FANNY.

"  My Fanny shall find
That I have in mind
Her humble request and petition,

Woodhay,  near Newbury,  a  "  most sweet place,"  was the summer.

Preface.  xlv

Which said,  if I'd write her
A line  'twould delight her
And quite happy make her condition.

"  I'm not such a churl

To deny my dear girl
So small and so trifling a favour  ;

For I always shall try

With her wish to comply,
Though of nonsense it happen to savour.

"  'Tho'  little I say,

I beg and I pray
That careful you'll put these lines rare by  ;

For well they'll succeed,

If my love they should plead —
So now you've a letter to swear by.

"  C.  B."

"  La rime n'est pas riche,"  but it gave the pleasure it was
meant to give.  Fanny has numbered it,  headed it,  and en
dorsed it in childish round hand ;  then added,  in old age,
"  from my dear father,  when I was ten years old."  Fanny's
next two numbered papers are letters from her father when
in Paris,  for the first time,  on the occasion of taking her
sisters Esther and Susan to school.  One begins thus  :  "  I
write to my dear Fanny to tell her grandmamas,  to tell her
aunts,  to tell her uncles,  to tell her cousins,  to tell all friends,
that we are now at Paris.  'Tis now Wednesday night the
loth of June.1 I am just come from the Comick Opera,

dwelling of Dr.  Barney's kind friend,  Susannah Maria Arne,  (Mrs.
Gibber,)  who lived but three years after 1763.     On her death,  Garrick
said,  "  Barry and I still remain,  but Tragedy is dead on one tide"
1 1764,  Fanny's twelfth birthday.

xlvi Preface.

which is here called the Comedie Italienne,  where I have
been extremely well entertained,  but am so tired with standing
the whole time,  which every one in the pit does,  that I can
hardly put a foot to the ground,  or a hand to the pen."  His
journey had been slow on account of one of those severe
feverish colds to which Susan was subject.  She was,  to all
seeming,  quite well when they left Calais about ten o'clock at
noon on the previous Thursday,  but so tired when they reached
Boulogne at five,  that they  "  did not get into the chaise till
near twelve o'clock,  and lay at Abbeville,  fifty-four miles from
Boulogne."  Poor Susan was again indulged by rest in bed
until near eleven,  before posting to Amiens,  thirty miles
farther,  to dine.  They slept at Breteuil;  next day,  they
dined at Clermont,  and slept at that  "very delightful place,
Chantilly."  On Monday night they reached the Hotel
de Hollande,  in Paris.1 When Dr.  Burney wrote,  Susan was
a little better,  but he had been  "  excessively wretched about
her,"  as she had had paroxysms of coughing,  and of bleeding
of the nose.  Indeed one reason for taking her to school in
France was the hope that the air might strengthen her.  Dr.
Burney next says,  that Lady de Clifford,  who lived below him
in the hotel,  "  hearing we were English,  very kindly sent to
desire to see us."  To-morrow,  or next day,  he will  "have
some cloathes to appear among French people in."  He has
fouDd out his friend,  Mr.  Strange,  [the great engraver,]  and
has been with Sir James Macdonald,  ' '  not minding dress with
my countrymen."

In the second letter,  (which was written on the 17th and 18th
of June,)  Dr.  Burney informs Fanny that her sister Susan is a
great deal better,  but that he has made no progress towards
finding a proper school for her and Hetty.  "  It turns out far
more difficult to find out a proper house for them than I had

He desires to be addressed  "  Rue du Colomlier"

Preface.  xlvii

expected."  The next day he has  "  hopes of placing them much
to his satisfaction  "  ;  "  it will cost a good deal more money  "
than he expected,  but he is  "  now too far advanced to retreat."
Then comes a glimpse of Paris under Louis XV.  The morrow
is  "  a great festival,  when all the Streets and Churches will be
hung with Tapestry,  and the finest Pictures in the King's
Collections will be exposed.  There will be likewise Proces
sions of the Clergy in all parts of the City.  Hetty and Susey
have been out but very little yet,  not having had proper
Cloathes :  and indeed if they had been ever so much dressed
Sukey was unable to stir at Home or Abroad.  I was on
Sunday at the English Ambassador's Chapel,  (Lord Hertford,)
and saw there a great many English People,  among whom was
Mr Coleman,  author of  '  the Deuce is in him/ l etc.,  Mr
Vaillant the Bookseller, — Mr Wilks,  etc, — Ld Beauchamp son
to the Ambassador has been very civil and has showed me
the House wch his Father Lord Hertford lives in,  and for wch
his Lordship gives  £800 a year.  It is called 1'Hotel de
Brancas,  the name of a French Duke now living,  and is the
finest and best furnished and fitted up I ever saw.  Mr Hume,
Secretary to the Embassy,  is likewise very civil and Friendly
to me,2 as is Lady Clifford who lives in the same House and is
own sister to the Duchess of Norfolk,  indeed she is uncom
monly kind to your sisters,  who wd not know what to do about
dress but for her Ladyship."

******
"  Oh if you were to see what a Beau they have made of me
here  ! — but   [I]    shd in my present dress,  figure at a Birth
Day in England,  yet here I am not near so fine as a Trades
man,  who have all fine figured or  [  | 3 silk Coats,  and Laced

1 George Colman,  the elder.

2 David Hume.     He kept up this friendship towards Dr.  Barney.

3 The word has been torn away.

xlviii Preface.

Ruffles, — while mine are only plain.  Adieu,  adieu,  I shall
present Hetty with this bit of paper to write down her dream
upon,  for she is now fast asleep at my Elbow."

"  Dear Fanny,

"  You must not expect anything very clever now,  as
you have sometimes,  from me,  because I am hardly awake yet.
Papa talks of his being a Beau,  I am sure if you were to
see me you'd say I was an old woman,  but shorter,  for papa
beg'd the favour of Lady Clifford to Buy for me and Susey a
silk thing a-piece,  and her Ladyship has Bought the silk for a
Negligee for me,  and a slip for Sukey.  Mine was finish'd to
night,  and I have had it on.  The Girls at nine and ten years
old weare sacks and Coats here,  and have seen severall about
my size in Hoops,  and if little Charley was here he might
wear a Bag and Sword,  for he wou'd be thought big enough.1

"  I shall write often to you dear Fanny when we are plac'd,
and am,  in the most affecle manner,  your Loving sister and
Friend,

"  E.  BUKNEY."

Paris dispersed much of Dr.  Burney's melancholy.  He
began to read and write without an effort.  With the en
couragement of Garrick he translated the words and adapted
the music of Rousseau's little piece,  "  Le Devin du Village,'*

1 The future Greek scholar was then,  according to the received
accounts,  seven years old at the utmost ;  Susan was between nine and
ten,  Hetty about fifteen.  We are told that Fanny was left at home,
because Dr.  Burney feared that she had some predisposition to
Romanism,  her grandmother Sleepe,  whom she much loved and
revered,  being  (although the daughter of a Huguenot refugee,  and the
mother of an English Protestant daughter)  herself a Koman Catholic.
This shows a state of things in which Boman Catholic members of
Protestant families migrated from France rather than be parted from
their nearest relations.

Preface.  xlix

for the English stage,  under the infelicitous title of  "  The
Cunning Man."  Hetty and Susan he left with Mme.  St.
Mart,  who had some English pupils of rank.  Little Susan,
in her tenth year,  began what so far as we know was the first
of the many Burney diaries.  None of it has been found,  but
a leaf exists which Susan,  in a quaint,  business-like manner,
styles an  "Appendix to follow April 19,  1767,  in my journal
written in this year of our Lord,  1770."  As in it Susan men
tions Hetty's marriage and her father's journey to France and
Italy,  this must have been written in the latter half of 1770.
It is so delicately written that we could exclaim with Pac-
chieroti in later years — Come scrive bene quella creatura !
As to the composition,  even in the year before,  1769,  Fanny
very truly wrote,  "  that Susan's letters would not disgrace a
woman of forty."  It contains a summary of what had befallen
her schoolfellows and the friends,  French and English,  whom
she left in Paris,  not without a note that two of her English
schoolfellows did not return Hetty's call and her own when
they came back,  not merely to England,  but to Poland Street,
where they as well as the Burney s lived.  The leaf ends thus,
"I went to Chesington,  Monday,  April 20  (1767),  and was
conducted to the coach by my two elder sisters,  and Cousin
Dick.  The company contained in the leather conveniency
were an old lady,  and a young man who entertained me very
much by his ridiculous account of a passion which he had con
ceived for my sister Fanny,  whom he saw at the inn.  I found
him to be a lieutenant — his name Williams — a whimsical,
clever young man.  I have never seen him since."

1 Since this was written,  there has come into our hands M.  Percy's
"  Histoire d'une Grande Dame au XVIII".  Siccle."  The great lady
was the Princess Helcne Mas sal ska,  who afterwards married Prince
Charles de Ligne.  At nine years of age she was sent to the Convent
of the Abbaye-aux-Bois,  in Paris,  to receive from nuns of noble birth,
among girls with many quarterings,  the training necessary for great

d

I Preface.

Some time after the death of Mrs.  Barney,  Mr.  Crisp and
Charles Burney met by accident at the house of their common
friend Mr.  Vincent.  The next day Mr.  Crisp went to Poland
Street,  and at once made all the children his firm friends.
Such was their fervour,  that  (as they did in after days to their
dear Mr.  Twining)  Fanny and Susan used to follow Mr.
Crisp  "jointly"  to the door,  going  "like supporters on each
side,  and never losing a quarter of an instant that we could
spend with him — our most beloved Mr.  Crisp  !— who arrived
in our hearts the first,  and took the place of all  !  "

Fanny's love for Dr.  Burney was no ordinary filial love ;
it was a passion.  Her loyalty,  enthusiasm,  and devotion ex
tended from him to his friends,  even to those least likely to
please a girl.  See how she writes,  for instance,  of two able
but very ungainly men, — Christopher Smart and William
Bewley ;  the latter of whom was even repulsive in appearance.
Mr.  Crisp,  a handsome,  agreeable,  highly-bred bachelor of fifty-
five,  was at once taken into the heart of the shy and silent little
girl of nine.  But for the great difference of years,  one can
have no doubt that it would have been love on her part.  Dr.

ladies who were to adorn the Court of France.  This Polish child found
her schoolfellows  (some of whom were approaching the arrangement
of their marriages)  amusing themselves by writing the memoirs of
their own lives before they entered the convent,  and during their abode
therein.  She followed what she calls the fashion,  and has left a series
of cahiers like those of Fanny,  showing her life in and out of the con
vent,  up to her marriage at fourteen.  Helcne yields to no girl in
putting before us what happened.  Her sketches of the Abbaye,  that
nursery and training-school of ladies of rank before the Revolution in
France,  are of great value.  She entered it in 1773.  In 1764,  Susan
Burney,  who was between nine and ten years old,  was placed in Madame
St.  Mart's school in Paris.  Perhaps she also found the fashion of
writing some account of their lives prevailing among her school-fellows.
At any rate she is the first of the known journal-writers of the Buruey
family,  and hers is the earliest fragment which has been found.
1 Diary of Mme.  D'Arblay,  vol.  iv.,  p.  55.

Preface.  li

Burney hinted as much when,  in the very beginning of these
journals,  he calls Mr.  Crisp  "  Fanny's flame"  To visit Mr.
Crisp,  to please him,  to be approved by him,  to write to him,
to receive his letters,  was Fanny's chief aim,  until on her list
of his letters she notes the fatal year which deprived her of
him,  1783.1 As she read and revised her papers of fifty years
ago,  in handwriting cramped or tremulous through age she
added to her old tender phrases fresh words of praise of Mr.
Crisp.  By her love she won his.  For some years there is no
sign that he distinguished her more than Hetty,  who also
wrote to him,  but in the end she was  "  Fannikin,  the dearest
thing to me on earth."  Though out of date here,  the following
touching letters written when Mr.  Crisp was very ill,  while
Fanny was staying with the Thrales,  are not out of place.  No
words of another can tell of the love between Mr.  Crisp and
Fanny like their own.

[MR.  CRISP TO Miss BURNEY.]

"  My dear Fannikin,

"  My weak state of health can never destroy my sense
of your kindness ;  or prevent,  while I am able,  my acknow
ledging it.  Your sending over a Messenger on purpose to
enquire after an old,  sick,  obscure Daddy,  surrounded as you
are,  with every thing that is splendid,  gay,  bright,  happy,
shews a heart not of the common sort; — not to be chang'd by a
change of Situation,  and Circumstances ;  the favour  &  smiles of
the World: — tho'  I always esteem'd it,  I did not perfectly know
its full value till Now. — You are to be envied for the posses
sion of such a warm Muscle  ;2 for though it may occasion you

1  "  Letters from and to my honoured friend,  and earliest counsellor,
Mr.  Crisp."  The number which she had preserved in each year is
noted opposite the year from 1773  ;  against 1783 are ejaculations of
grief.

a If this expression should seem odd,  what say we to Prosper Mcrimce's

Hi Preface.

some palpitations which other people escape,  yet upon the
fvhole,  it is amply its own reward,  and so I wish you joy of
it." He then gives some account of the weakness and infir
mities of his  "crazy constitution."  He expects a visit
from Dr.  Lewis,  "an excellent Physician,"  and adds that
"  Either Kate,  or I,  (if I am able,)  shall,  (since you seem
really to be anxious for your old Daddy,)  let you know how I
go on— and if you will,  in return,  let me hear some of your
proceedings when your time will permit it will be most accept
able to me ;  for weak as I am,  both in Body  &  Mind,  I still
interest Myself in whatever regards a Fannikin,  and shall so
continue to do to my last hour.  Such in those moments,  as
in all the past,  your most affectionate Daddy,

"S.  C.
"  Chesington,  Friday,  May 15,  1779."

Miss BURNEY    "  to SAMUEL CRISP,  Esqr.,  at Chesington,  near
Kingston,  Surrey.

"  Streatham,  May 20/79,  credo.1

"  My dear Daddy  !  Your last sweet Letter was the most
acceptable I almost ever received in my life, — your extreme
kindness to me nearly equalled the joy I had from hearing
you were getting better.  I do long to see you most eagerly,
and will,  with my first power,  contrive it — indeed,  I hav&
made everybody here long to see you too,  but I would not for
any bribery be as little likely to have my longing gratified as
their's is.  Your exculpation of me was like yourself,  liberal
and unsuspicious ; — and indeed,  my dear Daddy,  my heart

telling his inconnue — "Entre nous,  je ne crois pas que vous ayez encore
la jouissance de ce viscere nomme coaur."

1 The dates and the  "  credo"  were added by Mme.  D'Arblay many
years afterwards.  The letter was written in 1779.  It is franked thus
by Mr.  Thrale,  "  H free Thrale."

Preface.  liii

was as unalterably and gratefully attached to you as it coul<l
be,  and so it must ever remain, — for,  for many,  many years,
you have been more dear to rne than any other person out of
my immediate family in the whole world ; — and this,  though
I believe I never was so gross before as to say it to you,  is a
notorious fact to all others; — and Mrs.  Thrale is contented to
come next you,  and to know she cannot get above you.1 — I am
half ashamed of this wndelicacy, — but your Illness  &  kind
ness joined put me off my guard.  However,  I hope you will
make no bad use of my confession,  ....  believe me,  ever
and ever yours,  "  F.  B."

A later letter runs in the same strain, —

[MR.  CRISP TO Miss BURNEY.]

"  June 26,  1781.

"  How could you have the face to say to Miss Gregory2 what
you did,  about me  ? — it is well for Us both,  that I live out of
the way,  and out of the knowledge of the World  ;  otherwise,
how could I hope to escape the disgrace of being tceiyh'd in
the balance fy found wanting,  &  you the imputation of a most
partial and egregious Puffer of an old,  worn-out,  insignificant
Daddy,  that never was a quarter of what yon pretend,  &  now
less so than ever  ? — I am not only well content,  but delighted,

1 Although he was delighted at Fanny's success in society,  Mr.
Crisp had not been without pain on losing much of her company when
Mrs.  Thrale tried to engross it to herself,  to the prejudice of both her
friend at Chesington,  and her family in St.  Martin's Street.  "  It is
in vain to repine,"  he writes ;  "  I must say to myself Caro me,  ci vuol
flemma ! "

a Miss Gregory,  who at that time lived with Mrs.  Montagu,  was a
daughter of the Scotch physician who wrote  "  A Father's Legacy to
his Daughters."  She married the Kev.  Archibald Alison,  author of
"Essays on the Nature and Principles of Taste,"  &c.,  and was the
mother of a more voluminous writer,  Sir Archibald Alison.

Hv Preface.

that your Judgment should be warp'd in my favor by your
kindness j but if the Eeport of an Evelina should bring on a
scrutiny into the merits of the Cause,  what must I do then?-

-VVell ! love me on ! — Continue in your blindness,  &  I will

take my Chance for the rest,  &  depend upon my Obscurity for
my security  "

To go back ;  on Mr.  Crisp's return from Rome,  where he
had lived some years,  in order  "  to indulge his passion for
music,  painting,  and sculpture/'  after living some time in
London,  he fitted up a house at Hampton with the objects
of art which he had collected in Italy.  As we write,  we learn
that among these there was probably the first pianoforte ever
brought to England.1 He had inherited the hospitable bent-

1 Dr.  Barney's article  "  Harpsichord,"  in.  the Cyclopaedia of Kees,.
seems to authorize this statement.      "  The first harpsichord with
hammers brought to England was made by an English monk at Borne,
Father Wood,  for an English friend  (the late Samuel Crisp,  Esq.,  of
Chesington,  author of Virginia,  a tragedy),  and a man of learning and
exquisite taste in all the fine arts."     Mr.  J.  W.  M.  Gibbs,  to whom we
owe this,  and much more information acquired in those  "  intelligent and
persistent researches in the British Museum,"  and elsewhere,  for which
he has been thanked by Mr.  Napier in his edition of Boswell's Johnson,,
proceeds to say :   "  The article adds that Fulke Greville purchased this
harpsichord of Mr.  Crisp for 100 guineas.     Now,  as I understand the
matter,  the main distinction between the harpsichord and the piano
forte was,  originally,  that the latter was made to do with  '  hammers '  what
the former did with quills,  &c.  Therefore this harpsichord with hammers
was virtually a pianoforte.     In Dr.  Burney's article on Harpsichords
cited above,  it is said that  'In the beginning of the last century,  hammer-
harpsichords were invented at Florence,  of which there is a description
in the  "  Giornale d'ltalia,"   1711,'   and it is well known  (continues
Mr.  Gibbs)  that Cristofori of Florence,  about 1709,  was one of the
earliest,   if not the earliest,  of the makers of the hammer-furnished
instrument as we,  in the main,  now have it.     The appearance of the
pianoforte,  as distinguished from the harpsichord,  in England,  is most
generally dated back to about 1767,  in which year there was an announce
ment in a Covent Garden play -bill that  "a new instrument called

Preface.  Iv

of his great-grandfather,  Dr.  Tobias,  who entertained at his
Wiltshire rectory all who came,  "  many more than a hundred
persons at a time,  and ample provision made for man and
horse."  [This was a solid basis to his great popularity as a
preacher.]  Our Mr.  Crisp made his house so pleasant,  that
the number of his guests began to tell upon his income,  which
Fanny says was not more than  "  easy,"  nay,  "  small,  but
unencumbered."  He lived with people who had the habits of
high station,  with means of living much greater than his own,
and through such friends he next sought  "  an honourable
place with a good salary,"  but he had not taken part enough

'Piano-Forte'"  would be played;  but the above introduction from
Rome by Mr.  Crisp would bear an earlier date."  It is probable that
it would,  as so far as any dates can be made clear from the narrative
in the Memoirs of Dr.  Burney,  Mr.  Crisp's residence in Eome was
between 1750,  the year in which Dr.  Burney went to Lynn,  and 1754,
the year in which his tragedy  "  Virginia  "  was acted.  It may be,  that
Mr.  Crisp brought the instrument into England before it had yet
been given the fanciful name of piano-forte,  or forte-piano.

In Fanny's first diary,  we find Mr.  Greville  (who had not long
returned from his Bavarian Embassy)  supping in Poland Street in
August or September 1768.  He asks Dr.  Burney  "if he play'd much
on piano-fortes  ?  "  The words seem to carry his thoughts back to
3Ir.  Crisp  :  "  '  If I was to be in town this winter,'  said he,  '  I should
cultivate my old acquaintance with old Crisp.'  '  Ah,'  said papa,  '  he's
truly worth it.'  '  Ay,  indeed is he,'  answered Mr.  Greville,  '  he's a
most superiour man.'"  This acquaintance was never renewed,  Mr.
Crisp having particularly desired Dr.  Burney not to disclose his
dwelling-place to Mr.  Greville.  This appears to throw back the trans
fer of Mr.  Crisp's harpsichord with hammers to Mr.  Greville to a time,
it may be,  ten or twelve years earlier than 1767.

Although the Editor has in several of her notes acknowledged the
aid of Mr.  Gibbs,  she wishes,  in this appropriate place,  more especially
to thank him for the zeal and patience with which he has assisted
her endeavours to clear not only chronological and other questions
directly concerning the Burney family,  but also many minute points
of literary interest collateral to the subjects of these diaries.

Ivi Preface.

in politics to have claims upon any faction.  He abhorred
the furious factions of his day,  and had brought back from
the continent of Europe opinions less in agreement with
those of Dr.  Tobias Crisp than with those of Sir Nicholas,
as,  for instance,  that  "  an arbitrary government mildly ad
ministered  (as France is,  and has been of late years  .  .  .),  is,
upon the whole,  the most permanent and eligible of all forms/' ]
Mr.  Crisp got no place  (not even one in the Custom House  !),
but was seized by a fit of the gout,  after looking at his bills ;
and in great fear of debt,  sold his collections,  gave up house
keeping,  and joined an old friend whose purse and health were
in a worse plight than his own,  in what Madame D'Arblay
calls  "some pic-nic plan of sharing expenses."  This friend,
Mr.  Christopher Hamilton,  was the owner of Chesington Hall,
in Surrey,  a house much too spacious for his income.  It was
by no means Mr.  Crisp's first stay at Chesington,  so it may
be that he withdrew to the old house,  and shunned his old
associates,  not merely as a means of keeping within his in
come,  but of improving his health,  since Dr.  Burney  (who
knew him well for nearly forty years)  wrote in his epitaph on
Samuel Crisp how great a part he might have played —

"  Had he through life been blest by Nature kind,
With health robust of body,  as of mind."

After the death of Mr.  Hamilton  (who was the last male of
his branch of the Hamilton family),  Mr.  Crisp still clung to
the old Hall,  partly perhaps out of kindness,  and even charity,
to Mr.  Hamilton's spinster-sister,  and her niece Miss Cooke.
By becoming her first boarder,  he helped Mrs.  Hamilton to
maintain herself.  He read,  he rode on horseback,  he kept
up his accomplishments by practice;  he went to London for
some time every spring,  but when past sixty,  by degrees it

1 See pages 262-3,  Vol.  II.,  for the greater part of this letter,  which
bears the date of 1779.

Preface-  Ivii

became his habit to go less and less to London,  and  (as
Fanny put it to him) ,  "  to shun new,  and shirk most of his old,
acquaintances."  This is what Macaulay describes as  "  losing
his temper and his spirits ;  becoming a cynic and a hater of
mankind/'  and  "  hiding himself like a wild beast in his den."
Chesington was no den,  but a kind of sanatorium,  without
doctors ;  a country boarding-house for the convalescent,  a
"  Liberty Hall "  for the young and healthy.  It stood  (it now
stands only in a drawing by Edward Burney)  in pure air,  on
high ground rising gradually from a wide common.  It had
many and spacious rooms,  large gardens,  wide  "  prospects  "
over a charming country,  ample supplies of milk and chickens,
eggs and fruit.1  "  Dear,  ever dear Chesington,"  cries Fanny,
"  whereat passed the scenes of the greatest ease,  gaiety,  and
native mirth that have fallen to my lot." :

It was to many more than Fanny  "  a place of peace,  ease,
freedom,  and cheerfulness."  Thither went Dr.  Burney to
arrange the notes of his French and Italian tour,  under the
eye of Mr.  Crisp,  to whom he played upon the harpsichord,  or
with whom he played at whist,  or backgammon.3 There the
future Admiral threw down his cards,  and sang and laughed

1 Nor must we omit Mr.  Crisp's cucumbers.  When Fanny went
with Mr.  and Mrs.  Thrale to Chesington,  towards the end of September,
1781,  their interest was great in seeing that antique hall of the Hattons.
Fanny wrote afterwards to Mr.  Crisp :  "  Pray tell Kitty  "  [Cookel
"  that Mr.  Thrale,  when he talked of his prowling all over the Chesiug-
ton house,  said, — '  Pray what does Mr.  Crisp do with all those cucum
bers in his room  ?  ' " — What Dr.  Johnson did with the orange-peel that
he dried,  may be found in his letters to Miss Boothby,  although he
refused to tell it to Boswell ;  but Mr.  Crisp may have stuffed his
cucumbers with pearls  (like those in the  "  Arabian Nights  ")  for any
thing we know.

a This was written in 1786.  See p.  124,  Vol.  I.  Fanny adds,  "  All
its inhabitants are good-humoured and obliging,  and my dear Mr.
Crisp alone would make it,  to us,  a Paradise."

3 A sketch of Mr.  Crisp at cards is preserved in Fanny's diary for

Iviii Preface.

for joy,  whirling Kitty Cooke about the room in a frenzied
dance,  when an express brought the news of his appointment
to the  ' '  Latona "  frigate of eight and thirty guns ; 1 there
Hetty took her babies and herself for change of air,  and,
with her husband,  made music to Mr.  Crisp;  there Edward
Burney took Fanny in a post-chaise  "  loaded with painting
materials/'2 There Fanny and Maria Allen,  with Jenny Bar-
santi,  played Gibber's  "Careless Husband,"  amid  "outrageous
mirth";  there Mr.  Crisp and Hetty danced a minuet,  as
Madame Duval and Mr.  Smith in Fanny's novel.  This we
must extract from Susan's diary ;  to show  "  the gloom "  in
which Mr.  Crisp ended his life,  "  the same gloom in which,
during more than a quarter of a century,  it had been passed"  : 3
"  Monday night after supper we were all made very merry
by Mr.  Crisp's suffering his wig to be turn'd the hind part
before,  and my cap put over it — Hetty's cloak — and Mrs.
Cast's apron and ruffles — in this ridiculous trim he danced a
minuet with Hetty,  personifying Madame Duval,  while she
acted Mr.  Smith at the Long Eoom,  Hampstead  !  4 — The maids

1778.  She blames a lady  "  famed for tonishness  "  for dressing in such
a manner as  "  to obtain notice,  and excite remark,"  and adds,  "  I always
long to treat "  [such people]  "  as Daddy Crisp does bad players  (when
his own partners,  at whist),  and call to them with a nod of contempt
*  Bless you  !  Bless you  ! '"

This was but a temporary appointment.

"  August 12,  1782. — We came in a chaise,  which was well loaded
with canvasses,  pencils,  and painting materials,  for Mr.  Crisp was to
be three times painted,  and Mrs.  Gast once.  My sweet father came
down Gascoign Lane to meet us,  in very good spirits,  and very good
health.  Next came dear Daddy Crisp,  looking vastly well,  and,  as
usual,  high in glee and kindness at the meeting.  Then the affectionate
Kitty,  the good Mrs.  Hamilton,  the gentle Miss Young,  the enthusiastic
Mrs.  Gast."— Diary of Madame D'Avllay.

3 See Macaulay's review of the  "Diary and Letters of Madame
D'Arblay."

4 See  "  Evelina,"  Letter L.

Preface.  lix

were call'd in to see this curious exhibition,  and we all thought
poor Mutty would have sniggered away all her strength."

As a matter of fact,  we commonly find Mr.  Crisp laughing
in these letters,  and with a laugh quite his own.  A gentle
man whom Fanny met at Brighton in 1770,  reminded her
(she says)  of Mr.  Crisp.  "  He has not so good a face,  but it
is that sort of face,  and his laugh is the very same  :  for it first
puts every feature in comical motion,  and then fairly shakes
his whole frame,  so that there are tokens of thorough enjoy
ment from head to foot."  Fun-making,  with Fanny,  was
a frequent form of his melancholy.  However,  as he was well
read in Moliere,  we do catch echoes of the  "  Misanthrope "
in his letters and conversation,  but rather of Philinte,  than of
Alceste himself.  Look at that letter to Fanny on young
ladies being,  as it were,  "ferae naturoe"  and men  "animals
of prey,"  and then read Philinte's answer to the Misanthrope,
Alceste :

"  Oui,  je vois ces dcfauts dout votre ame murmure,

Comme vices unis a Phumaine nature,

Et mon esprit enfiu n'est pas pins offense,

De voir un homme fourbe,  injuste,  interesse,

Que de voir des vautours affames de carnage,

Des singes mal faisauts,  et des loups plein de rage."

As Philinte spoke to Alceste,  so Mr.  Crisp wrote to Fanny.
He saw,  and divined,  that her youthful enthusiasm was far
beyond even the enthusiasm natural to generous youth.  The
century of Moliere had had good reason to distrust and dread
enthusiasm.  With the century of Mr.  Crisp,  it had,  wrong
fully,  yet naturally,  become a synonym with fanaticism.  Mr.
Crisp desired only that Fanny should learn to restrain her
warmth of feeling before the movement of her life drew her
among circumstances in which its exaltation might have en-

•  Diary of Madame D'Arblay,"  vol.  i.,  p.  425.

lx Preface.

dangered her happiness.  She was so young,  and oven with
him so timid,  that he could not duly calculate the general just
ness of her perceptions,  and clearness of her judgement.

Allowance must be made beside for Mr.  Crisp's own vein of
humourous exaggeration,  of which there are many instances in
these volumes.  His affection it will be found,  often showed
itself in railing at his friends,  old or young,  and giving them
hard names of playful abuse.  He made out the world to be
worse than it was in order to lead Fanny into making the best
of it by practising discreet control of her feelings as a duty,
not as a hateful self-suppression forced upon her by suffering
from the results of too great openness of heart.  To Mr.  Crisp,
Chesington was a contracted,  and too often monotonous little
world,  but we see no token that he was ever gloomy unless he
had the gout,  or despondent except about the safety of Eng
land in the troubled years of the American War.

Mr.  Crisp far too well knew himself beloved by a few ever to
be morbid as he has been pictured.  He smiles at the warmth
of his young admirers towards a man of seventy.  He tells the
Burney girls that they are his  "  virtuous seraglio."  Once,
when he is writing on Susan's engagement,  or approaching
engagement,  which was,  perhaps,  not yet made known to the
elders,  he says to Fanny,  "  when I do put her  [Susan]  to the
cost of a Penny,  ...  it will be directed  ...  to Hetty's house, '
because of becauses — besides it looks so like an intrigue,  and
consequently I must be an Homme a bonne fortune with a
young girl."

Chesington was not dull except in winter.  Often very
droll people were to be met among Mrs.  Hamilton's boarders ;
such as the odd group of foreigners,  and Mrs.  Simmons,  and
her sister,  in 1774,  who,  with Kitty Cooke,  were treasures of
quaintness of speech.  The  "  den"  had strange animals in it,

1 This is dated 15 Nov.  1780.

Preface.  l.\i

of the very kind Fanny loved,  as she said,  "  for sport."  That
Chesington could not be reached by any carriage-road;  that
there was only one tolerable track across the common for
Dr.  Burney' s occasional post-chaises ;  that Hook Lane and
Gascoign Lane lay deep in mud all winter ;  that Mr.  Thrale
must use four horses when he drove to Chesington,  from
which his own Streatham could be seen with a telescope,  as
Chesington could be from Epsom when Fanny used her glass ;
that there was no regular delivery of letters except by the
baker,  that  "  The Parson  " l brought them,  or anyone else who
came from Kingston,  were grievances not peculiar to Chesing
ton  :  Streatham,  with its wits and its men of wealth,  had what
Mr.  Crisp calls an  "  odious post."  A letter which he wrote
to Fanny on the 28th of March did not reach Streatham until
the 2nd of April.  Yet they came to Mr.  Crisp somehow,  those
letters and journals of the girls  :  he knew more of their joys
and their troubles than did Dr.  Burney,  who was either  "pass
ing from scholar to scholar,"  and dining in his coach on the
road or writing in his study, — a  "  chaos  "  which his daughters
felt to be peculiarly inaccessible to suitors for their hands.
Their inclination or disinclination to this or that wooer seems
to have been made known to Mr.  Crisp,  before it was
timidly hinted to the busy Dr.  Burney.  "We find Hetty desi
rous that Mr.  Crisp should persuade Fanny to accept a very
good offer of marriage;  we find Fanny praying him not to
press her to marry a man whom she could not love.  Susan's
engagement with her brother's comrade,  Captain Phillips,  is a
subject of other letters,  in which the lover is given a fictitious
name.  They were but anticipating their father,  for on all
points,  as to books,  or music,  the education of his sons and
the establishment of his daughters,  Dr.  Burney likewise con-

1  "My patience"  (writes Mr.  Crisp to Fanny in 1778)  "was almost
exhausted,  when lo !  in comes your letter,  brought by the parson."

Ixii Preface.

suited Mr.  Crisp.  The adopted father of eight Burneys
could lack no interest in his life.  It ended in severe suffering,
but in no other gloom.  He was almost worshipped by his
kind nurses,  Mrs.  Hamilton and Kitty Cooke.  Fanny,  and
Susan watched his bed,  and it was with difficulty that Hetty
and Charlotte were prevailed upon to keep away.1 His sister,
too,  was there,  a woman of the old Crisp fervour of character,
who was devoted to her only brother,  from whom circum
stances had parted her early and long.

From the order of names in a will,  she seems to have been
Mr.  Crisp's fourth sister.  In 1725 she was still unmarried.
She married a Mr.  Gast,  whose name has a French look.
When a widow she joined her sister,  Mrs.  Anne Crisp,2 in
living at Burford in Oxfordshire,  a place to which Mrs.  Anne
had probably been drawn by its being within reach of two
other branches of the Crisp family,  those of  "  Mr.  Crisp,  the

1 Five years after his death,  Fanny writes thus of Mr.  Crisp to
Susan :  "  Our most beloved Mr.  Crisp ! — who arrived in our hearts
the first,  and took the place of all !    Ah,  my dearest Susan,  what a
blank is to me the reflection that he is no more  !    Even to this moment
I can scarce forbear,  at times,  considering how I shall relate to him
my affairs,  and what will be his opinion when he hears them  !    Yet the
remembrance grows less bitter;  for now,  as you find,  I can bear to
name it.     Till very,  very lately,  .1 was always forced to fly from the
subject wholly ;  so poignant,  so overwhelming I found it."

2 The acquaintance between Anne Crisp and Mary Granville  (Mrs.
Delany)  may have begun in those early days when the Granvilles lived
in retired poverty at Buckland,  near Campden,    in Gloucestershire.
The great friend of Mrs.  Gast,  at Burford,  who shared her delight in
Fanny's letters to Mr.  Crisp,  was  "  Molly Lenthall,"  a descendant of
Speaker Lenthall,  whose house Horace Walpole went to see in 1753,
and Mrs.  Boscawen in 1783.    Walpole writes to Mr.  Bentley :  "  At Bur-
ford,  I saw the house of Mr.  Lenthal,  the descendant of the Speaker
....  except a portrait of Sir T.  More's family,  by Holbein,  the por
traits are rubbish,  though celebrated.     I am told that the Speaker
who really had a fine collection,  made his peace  "  (after the Eestora-

Preface.  Ixiii

eminent lawyer of Chipping Norton,"  l and Sir Charles,  the
great-grandson of Sir Nicholas,  and last baronet of his name,
who lived at Dornford,  in the parish of Woottop,  in Oxford
shire.

Unless Mr.  Crisp had another sister a widow,  whose name
was Gough,  (of which we find no sign,)  the following extract
from a letter of Mrs.  Delany's to her sister,  Mrs.  Dewes,
gives us a glimpse of Mrs.  Gast : —

"  I must tell you a story of our old friend Nanny Crisp,
though it cost me half a sheet more of paper.  She has a
sister Gough,  younger by several years than herself,  who has
been abroad,  and is a widow in very bad circumstances.2 Mrs.
Bernard,  who told me the story,  says she is very ordinary in
her appearance,  but an excellent creature,  and far superior to
our old acquaintance in understanding.  A sister of Mrs.
Bernard's was asked by a gentleman of a very good estate,
who has one only daughter  (a child),  if she could recommend a
wife to him who was qualified to make him a good companion,

tion,)  "  by presenting them to Corubury,  where they were well known,
until the Duke of Marlborough bought that seat."  "  Lightly come,
lightly go,"  if Lenthall paid Lord Chancellor Clarendon for his peace,
as it is said,  with what he himself had plundered from the houses of
Royalists,  or bought from those who stole.  Many of his pictures are
reported to be at  "  The Grove,"  in Hertfordshire.  Mrs.  Boscawen,  who
describes the mansion of the Lenthalls as  "  forlorn,"  says of the
pictures,  "  how they have been neglected and spoilt !  "

1 His daughter was the first wife of Bishop Butler's patron,  Bishop
Talbot.      Sir Charles Crisp married his father's first cousin,  Anne
Crisp,  heiress of Sir Thomas Crisp,  Knight,  of Doruford,  the youngest
son of  "  old Sir Nicholas."

2 Compare this with Mrs.  Cast's statement to Fanny,  that her  "  very
long absences,  even from her childhood,"  made it more than probable
that she knew less of her brother's mind than was known by Fanny,
adopted child.     See Appendix,  p.  329,  Vol.  II.     The  "  Nanny Crisp  "
of this letter was certainly Mr.  Crisp's sister,  and Gough is probably a
misreading or misprint for Gast.

Ixiv Preface.

and to educate his daughter;  she immediately thought of
Mrs.  Gough;  as he neither insisted on youth,  beauty,  nor
fortune.  She told him she could recommend just such a
person who would make him a happy man.  (They were at
this time at Oxford,  Nanny Crisp and her sister at Burford) :
it was agreed that Mrs.  Price should carry him there to
breakfast,  she did accordingly,  and what do you think hap
pened  ?  He falls in love with Crisp,  and will not hear of
Mrs.  Gough !  but Crisp has vowed to live and die a virgin,
and will not admit of any addresses." ]

Mrs.  Gast took her brother's  "  Fannikin  "  upon trust from
his descriptions,  and her own journals,  until she met her at
Chesington in 1776.  In 1777 we find her calling with her
brother at  "  Newton House,"  in St.  Martin's Street.

The first visit of Fanny to Chesington that is mentioned,
was in the first half of the year 1766.2 Soon afterwards Fanny,
with little Charlotte under her care,  was to have had her turn
of two years'  schooling,  under Madame St.  Mart,  in Paris.
This plan was delayed,  and,  in the end,  dropped ;  owing to
Mrs.  Stephen Allen's coming,  when a widow,  to London,
that her daughter Maria might have better teaching than
she could obtain at Lynn.  Mrs.  Allen had lamented the
death of Dr.  Burney's first wife with him.  He soon found the
society of so handsome,  well-read,  intelligent a woman,  con
solatory.  She,  who had been married by her family to her
cousin,  (whom she merely esteemed,)  found in Dr.  Burney the
husband of her choice.  Some opposition from her family
appears to have been avoided by a private marriage,  in October,
1767.  Mr.  Crisp was in the secret,  and himself hired rooms
for the wedded couple in a farm-house near Chesington.  It

1  "  Life and Correspondence of Mrs Delany,"  vol.  iii.,  p.  52,  First
Series.

2 This may possibly indicate the time when the Hall became a     'j
boarding-house.

Preface.  Ixv

was a stolen honeymoon.  In accordance with the rules of
the novel writer,  the secret was made known through the mis
delivery of a letter.  The young Barneys and Maria Allen
looked upon that marriage as a happy event which joined them
all in one merry party in the same house.

Dr.  Burney describes his second wife as being of a  "  culti
vated mind,  intellects above the general level of her sex,  and
with a curiosity after knowledge,  insatiable to the last."  Her
"  extensive reading,  and the assistance of a tenacious and
happy memory/'  enabled  "  her to converse with persons of
learning and talents on all subjects to which female studies are
commonly allowed to extend;  and,  through a coincidence of
taste and principles in all matters of which the discus
sion is apt to ruffle the temper,  and alienate affection,
our conversation and intercourse was sincere,  cordial,  and
cheering."  There are hints in these papers,  that some of her
step-daughters thought she loved what they called  "  argumen
tation,  better than any other thing in the world,"  and that
those visiters who shared her love of discussion and contro
versy,  were her favourites.  As Mrs.  Stephen Allen,  she had
held a sort of bas-bleu meeting once a week  ;  as Mrs.  Burney,
she received men of letters,  or art,  almost daily,  in an informal
way.  She was of a critical bent,  and,  eleven years later,
Mrs.  Burney was  "  the quarter from which  "  [Fanny]  "  most
dreaded satire,"  should she discover the authorship of
"Evelina."  Under the influence of some hints from this
new step-mother,  who saw,  and heard of,  some scribbling,
that girls who wrote lost their time,  and risked their good
repute,  and some doubts of her own to the same effect,  Fanny
made that  "  great renunciation,"  that piteous bonfire of her
works in prose and verse,  in the paved court in Poland
Street,  while Susan looked on in tears.1 Mrs.  Burney not

1 Among Fanny's tragedies and epic poems,  she burned a novel

e

Preface.

merely meant well,  but set a great and judicious value upon
Fanny's head and heart.  A singular proof of this remains in
a letter which Fanny endorsed many years afterwards,
"  The Recommendation of Richard to F.  B.,  when the latter
was sixteen,  from her mother-in-law."  This letter was written
after Fanny's return to London in the autumn of 1768,  while
Mrs.  Burney was left at Lynn,  awaiting the birth of her son
Richard,  to whom Fanny had written,  in advance,  a letter of
welcome into the world j sending with it a baby's cap of her
own embroidery.

"  Thursday,  ye 13th Octor
"  My dear Fanny,

"  I've but a bad excuse to make for not acknowledging
your two letters — as well as generous present to the Unborn —
I've not been Well,  and what was worse woefully out o'  spirits
— so much that I wanted resolution to take pen in hand,  to
any one but you know who — and I ought not even there — but
I am better both as to health and chearfulmess — so will try
to thank you for all you say to me and mine indeed I comfort

called  "The History of Caroline Evelyn."  This name may have rung
in her ears,  echoed from a one volume tale by Colley Gibber's youngest
daughter,  Mrs.  Charlotte Charke,  "  The History of Henry Dumont,
Esquire,  and Miss Charlotte Evelyn,"  which was in its third edition in  •
1756.  Mr.  Gibbs kindly tells us that he has also observed in various
book lists  "  The Morning Eamble,  or the History of Miss Evelyn,"
2vols,  12mo,  1775;  and  "Evelina,  a poem,"  1773.  There was also
Mason's heroine,  "  Evelina."  Thus  "  Evelyn  "  and  "  Evelina  "  were
names in stock for novels and verse in Fanny's young time.  There
was also a novel of that period called  "  The History of Miss Charlotte
Villars."  Villars is the name of the good clergyman in  "  Evelina,"  a
novel which shows little research in names,  as that of Dubois was the
maiden-name of Fanny's grandmother,  Mrs.  Sleepe,  and Macartney
the maiden-name of her godmother,  Mrs.  Greville.  She would not
have taken names BO near to her,  had she ever expected to be known
as an author.

Preface.  Ixvii

myself often,  when I think how doubtful!  the continuance of my
Life is,  by considering and reflecting on the goodness of your
heart and disposition that they will expand in Acts of Kindness
and Affection towards even the half of sweet Charlotte's rela
tionship to you.  Allow me my dear Fanny to take this
moment  (if there proves occasion)  to recommend a helpless
infant to your pity and protection,  you will ev'ry day become
more and more capable of the task — and you will,  I do trust
you will,  for your same dear Father's sake,  cherish and support
His innocent child,  tho'  but half allied to you. — My weak
heart speaks in tears to you my love,  Let it be the Voice of
nature,  which is always heard,  where the heart is not hardened
to its dictates.  I'm sure yours is not.  There — somehow I
am easier now,  I think you've heard and will listen to me — so
I'll dry my eyes and seek a more chearfull subject.  As for
your letter,  I shall lay it by,  and it shall be yc first letter ever
read by those it is addressed to, — as your cap shall be its first
covering."  *

This surely is a letter which does credit to her who wrote,
and to her who received it.  Fanny was never called upon to
be more than a kind sister to the child,  but she many times
nursed his mother in illness with great attention.  Allowing

1 Kichard Barney was born on the 20th of November,  1768.  On his
birth,  Fanny's step-sister  (Maria Allen)  wrote a comical note in his
name to Fanny,  thanking her for the kind letter she had written,
which was delivered to him the minute he was born,  and for  "  de joli
"bonnet"  of her working,  "de first he did port on his tcte."  She puts
into his baby-mouth a jargon which was much used by these girls,
made up of the oddest of the phrases of broken English which they
heard from the foreign musicians and singers who frequented Dr.
Burney's house.  The babe begins his note as  "  Master Newcome,"
and ends it by  "  hoping she will excuse de long lettre from him,  her
affectionate

"  Broter,

"  BEBXAI."

Ixviii Preface.

for what Maria Allen called  "  the little rubs "  of life,  Mrs.
Barney's affection for,  and confidence in Fanny,  was never
lessened,  and hers was a hearty letter of congratulation to
Fanny when she learnt the authorship of  "  Evelina."

We may suppose this great burning of manuscripts to have
happened just before these early diaries begin,  as it is obvious
that such an instinct for writing as Fanny's could not have been
resisted for any length of time.

There was living while these journals were being written a
young lady some part of whose early life ran singularly parallel
with part of the early life of Fanny Burney.  This was
Lsetitia Hawkins,  only daughter of Sir John.  The father of
each girl wrote a  "  History of Music."  The whole book of
Sir John Hawkins,  and part of that of Dr.  Burney,  were pub
lished in the same year,  1776.  Each father employed his
daughter as his amanuensis.  Each daughter was secretly
occupied in writing a novel,  which the youngest brother of
each aided her in getting published without her name.  In
Fanny's case,  Dr.  Burney's consent was asked,  but so far
as we see,  Sir John Hawkins died in ignorance that his
"  girl "  had published several novels anonymously.  "  I was,"
(wrote Miss Hawkins,)  "  I will not say educated,  but broke,  to
the drudgery of my father's pursuits.  I had no time but
what I could purloin from my incessant task of copying,  or  .
writing from dictation — "  writing six hours in the day for my
father,  and reading nearly as long to my mother."  Fanny
nowhere mentions how much time she spent daily in copying
for her father,  until at last she feared that her hand-writing
had become so well known among compositors that she was
fain to disguise it when transcribing her own  "  Evelina  "  for
the press.  She never complains;  once only she speaks of
"  stealing time to write " ;  but the letters of Mr.  Crisp and
Mrs.  Rishton show how seldom she was spared to visit her
friends.

Preface.  Ixix

These two clever girls knew more or less of the same people
of note ; — from Johnson,  Hawkesworth,  Garrick,  and Horace
Walpole,  down to Nollekens and Jenny Barsanti ;  but there is
no sign that they ever were acquainted with each other.  A
decorous reserve prevails in Fanny's early diaries towards the
works and deeds of the rival historian of Music,  Peter Pindar's
*'  fiddling knight/'  Sir John Hawkins.  His book is merely
named,  without praise or blame.1 Each of these girls followed
her father in his opinions ;  but what a difference there was
between the fathers  !  To borrow Mr.  Crisp's phrase,  Laetitia
had been  "planted against a north wall/'  Fanny against a
southern.  Sir John was a pragmatical person :  "  stiff in
opinions/'  often  "  in the wrong "  ;  a Puritan by birth and in
grain,  notwithstanding his love of music :  Lady Hawkins,  a
severe disciplinarian towards her children and servants.  All
about Laetitia was what Peter Pindar calls  "  magistratial;" —
all was intended to  "awe the vicious,  and encourage the
deserving."  Laetitia's  "  Reminiscences "  and her novels
bristle with moral opinions,  magisterially given forth.2 They

1 There is a sentence not unlike a hit at Dr.  Barney in the amusing,
inexact,  and censorious volumes of  "  Reminiscences "  of Laetitia
Hawkins.  It is this,  "Those who,  in giving out that they write a
history of what is deep in its own essence,  make it their principal aim
to amuse  " — that is,  to be clear and pleasant to readers.  Once only she
names a Burney ;  then it is Dr.  Charles,  the Greek scholar.

a There is now and then a droll likeness between the phraseology
of Latitia and that of Fanny.  It is when they shun  "  poor language,"
which was in much discredit in their pseudo-classic days.  "Be
elegant "  was a first precept for authors,  years beyond 1800.  Bishop
Porteous even writes,  as in commendation,  of  "the elegant brevity of" —
St.  John the Divine.  Miss Hawkins tells us that her father,  when young,
was  "  the victim of variegated tyranny  "  ;  Mme.  D'Arblay writes of
hen as being under  "  the parsimonious authority"  of an elder brother.
With one,  Twickenham is  "  our lovely situated and elegantly inhabited
village"  ;  with the other St.  Martin's is  "  our vulgarly-peopled street."
Such queerly formed phrases were not peculiar to these two young

Ixx Preface.

leave on the mind how much better it was to have been born a
Burney than a daughter of Sir John Hawkins.  Those nearest
to Fanny's  "  observant eye and attentive ear  "  were all gifted
with good hearts,  good brains,  good tempers,  and good spirits.
The same may be said of her cousins,  the children of Dr.
Burney' s elder brother,  Richard of Worcester,  who was himself
a man of some distinction.  Dr.  Burney was a man not worldly,
but endowed with great natural and acquired tact as his safe
guard against an impulsive disposition,  and a very open and
tender heart.  His character was simple,  his intellect many-
sided.  When naming his chief works,  we passed for the
moment over his by-play  (which might have been the life's
labour of many an author)  ;  by-play,  such as his quarto
volume upon the commemoration of Handel in 1784;  his three
octavo volumes of the Memoirs of Metastasio,  meant as a sup
plement to his  "History of Music";  his poem  (which he,
perhaps wisely,  burned)  on Astronomy,  in twelve books or
cantos,  each of from four to eight hundred lines ;  his projects
for  "  balloon-voyages  " ;  his Essay on Comets ;  and his collec
tions for a Dictionary of Music  ;  his many occasional pieces in
prose,  verse,  or music;  his benevolent plans and efforts;
among which was one for founding a School of Music,  a
"  Conservatorio"  (like those he had seen at Naples and Vienna) ,
"  in the bosom of the Foundling Hospital,"  by choosing from
the boys and girls those who had good ears for music and
promising voices.

The many things which he did,   or tried to do,  were,
perhaps,  less extraordinary than the sweetness of temper

ladies.  You can find the like if you turn over books of the eighteenth
century.  One such phrase occurs to us as we write,  "novel-studied."
It is used by Abraham Tucker for an habitual reader of novels.  Fanny,
however,  grew worse as she grew older,  and increased her elegant
periphrases,  until her style became what it is in the memoirs of her
father.

Preface.  Ixxi

•which he maintained in working and in suffering.  There was
nothing of  "  the enraged musician "  about him,  although
Reynolds has depicted him with a more restless countenance
than our fancy could have foreseen.1

He was born at the close of a classic period.  His young
enthusiasm had been roused by the brilliant writings of the band
of Queen Anne's men.  When with Mr.  Greville,  at Bath,  he had
watched and waited for hours to gain glimpses of Bolingbroke.
It pleased him to think that Swift might have entered his house
in Queen Square as the guest of Lord Mayor Barber,  and it was
suspected that he removed to a house in St.  Martin's Street
chiefly because it had been the dwelling of Sir Isaac Newton.
This fine enthusiasm,  with his natural gifts and graces,  and
acquired knowledge and accomplishments,  carried him,  with
little effort of his own,  into social and friendly relations with
many of the foreign,  as well as with most of the English,  men
of note throughout his long life.  His friendships and acquaint
anceships were an inheritance and an education for his chil
dren.  They inherited also from him,  and gave to,  and took
from,  each other,  pleasing manners and kindly ways.  Family
tradition ascribes to his eldest child,  Esther  ("  Hetty  ") ,  great
loveliness,  great sweetness of temper,  much good sense,  and a
strong  "  love of fun."  The  "  Gentleman's Magazine  "  records
that when eight years old she  "  gained great notice among
musical people by her astonishing performances on the harpsi
chord at her father's parties."2 Fanny describes her,  at

1 We judge only from the engraving in the 7th volume of Madame
D'Arblay's Diary.     In 1778,  Mr.  Kichard Twining writes from Gcittin-
gen to his brother Thomas   (Dr.  Barney's friend),  that  "  Heyne's
manner is extremely animated.     He seems to be all esprit.     He fre
quently folded his arms,  and nodded his head in a way which put me
much in mind of Dr.  Burney."

2 If the Poland Street parties are meant,  Hetty must have been
about eleven years old when they were given ;  but she may have begun
to play at her father's parties at Lynn.

Preface.

sixty-eight,  as being  "  all spirit and vivacity/'—"  the spring
and spirit of her family ;— happily,  foreseeing neither sickness
nor ennui"  Yet Hetty,  and her cousin and husband,  Charles
Burney of Worcester,  must have shared the weight of many
burdens of sickness and toil,  as well as played many a duet
together to the delight of all their hearers.  Charles had been
a pupil of Dr.  Burney,  whom he sometimes assisted.  He had
pupils of his own  ;  he gave concerts,  was player on the harp
sichord at Drury Lane Theatre,  and composed music.  After
"  long toils,"  he withdrew to Bath,  where he passed  "  serene
days,  in the tranquil enjoyment of peace,  rest,  books,  music,
and drawing." 1 As Charles drew,  so his brother Edward
was in some measure a musician ;  a certain readiness,  facility,
and aptitude for many things being shared among the Burney
family.  Edward was a portrait-painter,  but he is better
known as a designer of illustrations for books.  Good judges
who have seen his drawings speak of their delicacy of outline
with admiration.  His diffidence,  which his cousin Fanny
thought was almost without parallel,  withheld him from taking
the place which was thought to be his due by contemporary
critics.  Readers will find another son of Richard of Worces
ter,  the humorous and fantastic  "  Cousin Dick,  the genius of
of the family,"  giving gaiety to many pages of these diaries.
Of Dr.  Burney's own sons,  the Admiral appears to have

1 The words between commas are those of Madame D'Arblay.  The
following dates of events were copied by Dr.  Burney,  or Dr.  Charles
the younger,  from  "  The Public Advertiser"  into that wonderful col
lection of theirs in several hundred volumes,  of play-bills,  cuttings
from newspapers,  &c.  &c.,  which is now in the British Museum  :  "  In
December,  1765,  Charles Rousseau Burney was engaged at Drury-
Lane Theatre.  He played,  for the second time,  on the 3rd of that
mouth,  which was the benefit-night of Dr.  Burney as arranger of Rous
seau's  '  Devin du Village '  for an English stage.  On the 4th,  C.  R.
Burney played a concerto before the King and Queen,  who went to see
Garrick as  '  Bayes.' "

Preface.  Ixxiii

been the most original in his ability.  His wit and humour
made hitn welcome among wits and men of letters who have
preserved his name.  He was so great a favourite with Mr.
Crisp that Fanny often writes of him at a time when his better-
known brother,  the learned Dr.  Charles that was to be,  is only
named as being  "  the sweetest-tempered boy in the Charter
house School,"  and Richard,  Dr.  Burney's youngest son,
praised only for his boyish beauty.1 Mr.  Crisp's interest in
James Burney was an earnest of his merit.

Susan told Mr.  Crisp,  "  You know you do not love to throw
away praise."  And how well worth having was his regard and
approbation may be seen throughout these volumes.  In a
letter with no date but  "  October,"  to which Fanny added
many a year later,  "  1779,  credo/'  she wrote to Mr.  Crisp,
"  Our Jem is at last come, — and I have quitted Streatham
to visit him, — so now all our long anxieties and fears are over,

1 Martin,  the only son of Admiral Burney,  was a barrister,  who is
chiefly remembered as having been from his childhood one of Charles
Lamb's  "  dearest objects,"  and returning warmly his affection,  and that
of Mary Lamb ;  "  refusing to be comforted  "  when,  on the 20th of May,
1847,  he saw her laid beside her brother.  His sister,  Sarah,  who married
her cousin,  John Payne,  was a brilliant personage,  of whom Hazlitt
speaks as  "a young lady very much like her aunt"  (Madame D'Arblay),
"and as the latter I conceived might have been at her time of life."  She
is described to the Editor as having been  "full of fun and spirits,"  given
to  "  madcap doings."  After she had  (as her aunt said)  "  sowed her wild
oats,"  she  "lived much on the Continent,  but chiefly at Rome with her
husband.1'  Her wit and ability were shown in conversation,  and in very
interesting and amusing letters to her kindred describing the best Roman
society.  It seems fitting that a grand-daughter of Sir Robert Strange
should have met this grand-daughter of Dr.  Burney in Rome.  "  I wish,"
writes Mrs.  Edmund Ffoulkes,  "  that my old friend Mrs.  Payne's
letters could be published.  She and her husband had most interesting
society at their house in Rome ; — foreigners who were met nowhere
else among the English.  Cardinal Antonelli received the Paynes
specially."

Ixxiv Preface.

and we are all,  thank Heaven,  happy,  and at peace.  He has
brought us home an admirable journal,  of which I have only
read one year,  but I have found it full of entertainment and
matters of curiosity,  and really very well-written,  concise,  per
tinent,  and rational.  You will be quite delighted with it,  and
he means to lend it to you of his own accord."

Susan,  the next in order of birth,  although two years and a
half younger than Fanny,  was so early mature in mind as to
influence,  as well as feel with,  her elder sister.  In these
papers,  no character discloses itself more delightfully than
that of Susan.  It is with regret that we give but few extracts
from what has been preserved of her excellent  "  journal  -
letters  "  to Fanny,  the bulk of them belonging to a time later
than 1778.  Susan rated her own ability far too low.  She
was amazed when her stepmother,  Mrs.  Burney,  paid the com
pliment of supposing her to be the joint author of  "  Evelina/'
In a letter,  which Fanny has most justly described as being
"  of incomparable sweetness," 1 Susan apologizes for occupying
the precious time of such a person as Fanny with her own
poor letters.  All owned Susan to be a  "  gracious creature."
Count Louis de Narbonne said that she was  "all that is  'douce'
with all that is  ' spirituelle'" ;  Owen Cambridge exclaimed to
Fanny,  "  What a charm is that of your sister  !  What a pe
culiar felicity she has in her manner  !  She cannot even move,
— she cannot get up,  or sit down,  but there is something in
her manner that is sure to give pleasure  ! "

The  "  dolcissima voce"  of Susan was praised by Baretti ;  her
critical knowledge of music was such that Pacchieroti de
clared her to be  "  capable de juger en professeur."  The same
celebrated singer said to her,  "  You are attached to Miss
Fanny,  and she to you,  more than  [to]  the rest.  There seem
but one soul — but one mind between you; — you are two in one."

See p.  268,  Vol.  II.

Preface.  Ixxv

To write Fanny charming letters,  full of finely-touched
sketches of things and people,  and of happy turns of expres
sion  ;  to bring London before Fanny's eyes when she was at
Chesington or with the Thrales,  satisfied Susan.  Perhaps she
was not,  like Fanny,  compelled to write.  We know not if she
could have found — we were about to write  "  invented"  but
"  Evelina  "  was more of a  ' '  trouvaille  "  than of an invention
— such a book as  "  Evelina/'  or constructed such a book as
"  Cecilia/'  Perhaps she had not the intense pleasure in per
ceiving,  the delight in giving to paper,  words and traits from
which characters may be inferred,  which is manifest through
out the following diaries ;  or the power of imagining circum
stances from which tragic or comic consequences must ensue,
which was shown by her sister in her early novels.  We know
only that she could put before Fanny all that she knew Fanny
wished to know,  in a manner which was her own,  not that of
Fanny.  Hetty,  James,  and Susan were,  writing strictly,  all
of her family who were of ages to influence Fanny.  Others
are brought in simply to show how considerable was the
amount of ability in those of her own blood.  Her own
younger brother,  the second Dr.  Charles,  was  (as we have
said)  a school-boy when these diaries begin ;  her own youngest
sister,  Charlotte,  a lively and affectionate girl,  was in 1777
just beginning to show her pretty face at parties,  and to write
of them with a glee and a sense of what was absurd,  which
can amuse readers of whom she never thought.  She had been
in certain ways left much to herself,  and there are some who
think that because of that "  her state was the more gracious/'1
Fanny's half-brother,  Richard,  had not been long at school
when these early journals end.  Sarah Harriett,  her half-

1 Southey,  writing of his mother,  (who was born in Fanny's year,
1752,)  says,  "  My mother,  I believe,  never went to any but a dancing-
school,  and her state was the more gracious."

Ixxvi Preface.

sister,  who grew up to write several successful novels,  was a
droll and clever child,  but scarcely out of the nursery.1 As
Pacchieroti said,  "  All !  all !  very clever girls  !  Sense and
witta  (sic)  inhabit here.  Sensibility has taken up its abode in

this house All I meet with at Dr.  Burney's house

are superior to other people.  I am myself the only Bestia,
that enters the house.  I am indeed,  a truly Beast !  "

If to be of such a family,  in such a household,  among such
friends and acquaintances as those of her father,  was not edu
cation,  we hardly know to what to give that name.  There
were many more educated ladies in the last century than it is
customary to think there were,  but it would be difficult to
overstate the poorness of teaching in the schools for girls.
Fanny might have left no book behind her had she been sent
to a boarding-school.  That she never had any regular teacher
was no dire misfortune,  if it were some loss.3 By bringing

1 Dr.  Barney describes this daughter as having  "  native spirits of the
highest order,  and distinguished ability."

2 The poor man meant only that he felt himself to be a stupid person
among so many who were clever.     The French word bete expresses his
meaning.

3 When we remember that Macaulay had nothing but the Memoirs
of Dr.  Burney,  and that short   "  Introductory Memoir  "    of Mme.
D'Arblay,  which is prefixed to her Diary,  to guide him as to the circum
stances and events of the first four and twenty years of Fanny's life,
it is more remarkable that he has divined or comprehended so much,
than that here and there some details should be inexact,  or incomplete.
In the main,  the following paragraph from his review is correct,  but
it requires some qualification.

"  It was not,  however,  by reading that her intellect was formed.
Indeed,  when her best novels were produced her knowledge of books
was very small.  When at the height of her fame,  she was unacquainted
with the most celebrated works of Voltaire and Moliere ;  and what seems
still more extraordinary,  had never heard or seen a line of Churchill,
who,  when she was a girl,  was the most popular of living poets."

It will be found that,  at any rate,  she had read Voltaire's  "Henriade."

Preface.  Ixxvii

her father the books he needed while writing for the press,
she earned the name of his  "  Librarian/'  and learned to find
on his shelves others which suited her fancy,  or fitted into her
schemes for self-improvement.  She was throughout her life
a masterly listener to others,  and had her reward.  Not a
word or gesture escaped the observation of the shy,  silent,
demure little girl.  Her early progress in the study of
character is very perceptible in these diaries.  Putting aside

Moliere seems to be brought in because Fanny says that she had not
read his  "  Femmes Savantes."  This is the stranger thing,  because
she must often have heard Moliere quoted by Mr.  Crisp,  while it is not
probable that Dr.  Burney favoured the works of Churchill.  Macaulay
overlooks her not having read Akenside's  "  Pleasures of the Imagina
tion,"  and Falconer's  "  Shipwreck,"  until 1788;  and  (strangest of all)
Goldsmith's  "Poems,"  until 1790.  In an unpublished passage in her
diary for 1778,  Mr.  Seward puts into her hands the poems of Collins,
of whom she does not seem to have heard before she visited Streatham.

Macaulay continues :  "  It is particularly deserving of observation
that she appears to have been by no means a novel reader.  Her father's
library was large,  .  .  .  but in the whole collection there was only a single
novel,  Fielding's  '  Amelia.'"  Mrs.  Burney,  however,  was a great and
general reader  ;  strong in religious controversy,  critical of new books.
Novels were brought into the house if they did not abide in it.  That
Fanny was not a reader of novels o»Zy,  is all that can be granted.  It
is obvious from letters,  that Fanny could catch Maria Allen's allusions
to some rather poor novels.

Through Fielding's novels she did but  "  pick her way,"  but she
reminds Susan of their early love of Richardson's novels.  Augusta
Byron  (aunt of the poet)  has  (she writes)  just such an enthusiasm
for her,  as Susan and herself used to have for Richardson.  On the
whole,  if we cannot say with Mrs.  Thrale,  that Fanny was  "  a good
English classic,"  we find her with a fair amount of reading for one
so constantly employed in one or other kind of writing.  Her love of
reading abode with her.  She was not set in her eighteenth century
classicism,  like Mrs.  Thrale,  who was averse from Scott,  or Laetitia
Hawkins,  who cavilled at his novels.  Among the later letters written
by Mme.  D'Arblay,  was one,  long and warm,  congratulating the young
D'Israeli upon his  "  Contarini Fleming,"  nor was her praise disdained.

Ixxviii Preface.

some hasty opinions at first sight,  her judgements of the
people whom she met are often correct,  and could not have
been bettered when her mind was mature.  In fact,  there is
nothing more remarkable in Fanny than the continuity of
her way of thinking from sixteen to eighty-eight.  In 1768,
when these early diaries begin,  she was at an age most sus
ceptible of impressions,  but was endowed with a steadiness of
character,  marred by no taint of obstinacy,  which gave unity
to all she said and did throughout a long life.  This is the
more remarkable as she shared,  in no mean degree,  the power
of her family for acting,  which,  in many cases,  implies more
mobility than that of countenance,  gesture,  bearing,  and
utterance.

The superficial form of acting,  mimicry  ("  imitations  "  was
the name she gave it),  was also a gift of hers,  but she never
displayed it.  It was spontaneous when she was with those
she loved and thoroughly at ease.1

A singular proof of unity of character is given in her finding
at seventy the pleasure which she had anticipated in reading
her old diaries when she began to write in them at sixteen,
the very age of dreams.  No greater proof of purity of heart
could be shown.  She had many for whom to mourn ; — nothing
on her own part to lament,  her days having been  "  bound,  each
to each,  by natural piety."  Herself endowed with a very warm
heart,  she was much beloved by her warm-hearted family,

1 An officer of whom she had seen much when with the Thrales at
Brighton,  pressed her  "  to make amends  "  for his showing her his powers
of  "  imitation"  by a display of her own,  at the expense of a lady known
to both.  "  I was.  on the point of trying fifty times,  for he was so earnest
that I was ashamed of refusing  ;  but I have really no command of my

voice when lam not quite easy,  and though I had run on in Mrs. 's

way to Mrs.  Thrale for half an hour together,  it had been accidentally,
and when some of her cackle just occurred to me,  not deliberately,  and
by way of exhibition."  (From an unpublished passage in the Diary for
1770.)

Preface.  Ixxix

who were very far from being unconscious of her gifts of
mind.  Even in her backward childhood,  there is no sign that
Fanny was ever thought a dunce by any one who knew her
well.1.  Her early writings had an audience,  if it were but of one
sister.  In 1767,  Susan bewailed the burning of Fanny's papers.
Next year,  in the very first letter addressed to Fanny by Maria
Allen  (her correspondent for fifty years afterwards) ,  Fanny is
taxed with pedantry,  rather than with backwardness  ;  with a
love of hard words and fine phrases,  not with  "  poor language/'
or  "inelegance"  of diction.  "I have no doubt,"  says Maria,
"  of your letters being so very much above our comprehension,
that we shall adore you for a Divinity,  for you know people

1 We are told that her mother's friends called her  "  the little dunce,"
but that Mrs.  Burney said she  "was not uneasy about Fanny."  Dr.
Burney,  in a memorandum written in 1808,  puts her true case so
clearly,  that it is well to quote a part of what he says  :  "  She was
wholly unnoticed in the nursery for any talents,  or quickness of study  :
indeed,  at eight years old she did not know her letters ;  and her brother,
the tar,  who in his boyhood had a natural genius for hoaxing,  used
to pretend to teach her to read ;  and gave her a book topsy-turvy,
which he said she never found out !  She had,  however,  a great deal
of invention and humour in her childish sports ;  and used,  after having
seen a play in Mrs.  Garrick's box,  to take the actors off,  and compose
speeches for their characters ;  for she could not read them.  But in
company or before strangers,  she was silent,  backward,  and timid,
«ven to sheepishness :  and,  from her shyness,  had such profound
gravity and composure of features,  that those of my friends who came
often to my house,  and entered into the different humours of the
children,  never called Fanny by any other name,  from the time she
had reached her eleventh year,  than The Old Lady."  In this account
of Fanny,  her backwardness in learning to read,  and her precocity in
composing speeches for characters,  are in strong contrast.  The vivacity
of her perceptions of life was probably a cause of her slowness in other
ways  ;  even of her bashfulness,  and want of presence of mind.  She
«aw and felt so much so early,  that she was receiving and arranging
her impressions when other children were  "  writing their copies,"  or
41 doing their sums."

Ixxx Preface.

almost always have a much greater opinion of a thing they
don't understand,  than what is as plain and simple as the
nose in their faces.  Now Hetty's letters and your Papa's —
why they are common entertaining lively witty letters,  such
as Dr.  Swift might write or People who prefer the beautiful
to the sublime,  but you now why I dare say will talk of
Corporeal Machines,  Negation fluid,  matter and motion and
all those pretty things — Well well,  Fanny's letters for my
money."  ]

In 1769,  Dr.  Burney was proud enough of his daughter's
playful verses on his doctor's degree at Oxford,  to show them
to at least one of his friends.  Not long afterwards she drew
Mr.  Crisp into that correspondence by letters which became
the chief pleasure of his later years.  In 1773,  her Teignmouth
journal was passed by Susan to Mr.  Crisp,  who not only
delayed to return it that he might  (as the girls said)  "  browse
on its contents,"  but pressed Fanny to allow him to lend it
to his sister in Oxfordshire.  After the close of 1774,  there
seems to have been a continuous passing by Mr.  Crisp to-
Mrs.  Gast of Fanny's less private letters.  In,  and after
1778,  Mr.  Crisp copied Fanny's letters to Susan  (which are
now called  "The Diary of Mme.  D'Arblay"),  with his own
hand,  that he might enjoy them often at his leisure,  and Fanny

1 The only letter of Fanny written before 1770,  of which we know,
is addressed from Lynn,  in August 1768,  to one of her aunts  : —

"  To Mrs.  Gregg,

at her House,

York Street,

Covent Garden,

London."

It is in doggrel verse,  and too slight in substance to be printed,  but
there is a dramatic effort to represent what will be said of it by her
cousin Charles,  her Aunts Gregg,  Ann,  and Eebecca,  and her grand
mother Burney,  who is made to cry out —

Preface.  Ixxxi

found that Mrs.  Gast was rather too willing to share the
pleasure she took in them with her Oxfordshire friends.1 The
good Aunts Rebecca and Ann craved also for their dear girl's
journals.  Thus Fanny may he said to have had,  from a very
early age,  a little public audience of few but fond admirers,
which extended,  in and after 1778,  to the great public of three
kingdoms,  and,  through translations,  to France,  Italy,  and
Germany.

"  Why Fanny  !— child  !

My dear  !  you're frantic — mad — quite wild  !
I'm lost in wonder and amaze  ;
Ah  !  Things were different in my days  !
When I was young,  to hem and sow  (tic)
Was almost all I wish'd to know  :
But as to writing vene and rhimea —
0 dear !  Oh  (tic)  dear  !  How changed the times  ! "

This is the only mention found of Mrs.  Gregg,  but Mrs.  Burney the
elder lived in York Street up to her death in 1775.  She and Aunts
Ann and Becky made their house a home for her son Richard of Wor
cester and his children when they came to London.  His sons Charles
and Edward appear even to have lived with their grandmother when
youths.  The publishers of these volumes occupy two houses in the
short street to which this letter was addressed,  so that in 1768,  and in
1888,  it has been delivered,  in the same street,  if not at the same house.

1 When Fanny became an inmate of Streatham,  she demurred to
Mr.  Crisp's copying her journal of the sayings and doings of the
Streatham set.  He replied,  "  In very many of the former letters of our
ancient correspondence,  there were a hundred particulars that would
never bear the light,  any more than Streathami&n."  ....  He signed
this letter,  "  Your loving untrusted

"  DADDY."

After that letter Fanny once more permitted Mr.  Crisp,  not merely
to copy her journals,  but to send them to his sister,  "as the strongest
mark in my power to give her of my affectionate esteem ; "  adding,  "  I
entreat you will enjoin her to read them quite alone,  or,  not to be cruel,
to poor sick Mrs.  Leuthuall  («ic),  under an oath of secresy and silence."

Ixxxii Preface.

It is according to rule that a heroine should be described
before she begins to narrate her own adventures,  as Fanny is
about to do.  Was Fanny beautiful, — lovely, — or,  at least,
pretty  ?  Neither pretty nor plain,  we incline to think,  but
capable of looking charming from variety and force of ex
pression rather than from beauty of complexion and regu
larity of features.  There are proofs in these diaries that,
when a girl,  Fanny was attractive,  and she looked like a girl
long after she was a woman.  Mrs.  Piozzi,  when an unfriendly
witness,  tells us that she was much admired at Bath when eight-
and-twenty ;  and Miss Berry  (who does not seem to have met
her until she was Madame D'Arblay,  and not far from fifty years
of age)  says,  that at sixty,  after her absence in France,  she had
"  wonderfully improved in good looks in ten years,  which have
usually a very different effect at an age when people begin to
fall off.  Her face has acquired expression,  and a charm which
it never had before.  She has gained an embonpoint very
advantageous to her face/'  It was the restoration,  rather than
the acquisition of a charm,  as we have ample proof that Fanny's
earlier,  as well as later,  power of pleasing lay in her variability
of expression.  Her countenance reflected her feelings,  or
(as her father said),  "poor Fanny's face tells us what she
thinks,  whether she will or no."1 Mr.  Thrale repeatedly
pressed her to read a tragedy to him,  because she had what
he termed  "such a marking face."  She herself wrote,
"  Nobody,  I believe,  has so very little command of countenance
as myself — I could feel my whole face on fire."2 When,  in

1 Elsewhere he calls it  "  her honest face."  It was faithful to her rapid
perceptions,  and pure feelings.  Those who knew Fanny best,  trusted
her most.  The dull,  uncouth,  absurd Kitty Cooke is an instance.
Mr.  Crisp writes in 1778:  "Honest Kate,  my only Housemate at
present,  says, '  I love Fanny,  because she is sincere.'  "  "  Good as gold,"
said Queen Charlotte,  with whom Fanny had felt to the fall in the
dreadful time of the King's disorder of reason.

This,  however,  was on an occasion when  "  the whole face  "  of any

Preface.

1802,  she went to live in Paris among what was left un-
guillotined of the best French Society,  it was said by Mme.
de Tesse that  "  Mme.  D'Arblay's looks filled up what her
words left short,"  in her efforts to speak French.1 Fanny
was short in stature,  and slightly made.  Once Mr.  Crisp
cries out,  "  Why,  what a small cargo for the Chesington
coach  !  "  At another time,  "  What a slight piece of machinery
is the terrestrial part of thee,  our Fannikin  ! — a mere nothing;
a blast,  a vapour disorders the spring of thy watch ;  and the
mechanism is so fine that it requires no common hand to set it
a going again."  He often warns her against a habit which was
due to her shortness of sight,  "that murtherous stooping,

other young lady might have well been  "  on fire."  Mr.  Selwyn,  who
had been English banker in Paris,  showed Fanny signs of a  "dis
tinguishing preference  "  (the language is that of the time) ;  Mrs.  Thrale
thought him too elderly for a match,  and more than hinted so to him
in Fanny's presence,  in dwelling on the evil and absurdity of marriage
between the old and the young  ;  in spite of Mr.  Thrale's endeavours
"  to look her silent."

1 Adrienne de Noailles,  Marquise de Tesse,  is described by Fanny
as being  "  one of the most spirituelle,  instruite,  and charming of
women."  She was aunt of Mme.  Lafayette,  whose famous husband
was a great friend of M.  D' Arblay.  It is a pity that it was dangerous
to write journals between 1802 and 1815,  the term of Fanny's re
sidence in France.  We lose her skilled observation of the best French
society,  tempered by literature,  in the salons of the Princesse d'  Heuiu,
Mme.  de Tesse,  and Dr.  Burney's friends,  the Abbe Morellet,  and M.
Suard,  perpetual secretary of the French Academy.  This society is
sketched by M.  Guizot,  who was twenty when received in it in 1807.
Through it,  he found his future wife,  Pauline de Meulan,  (an ari«toci-ate
by birth,  who gained her living by her pen),  with whose brother,  General
de Meulan,  Fanny was acquainted.  To the pages of  "  M.  GUIZOT DANS SA
FAMILLE,"  we refer our readers for a brief notice of  "  les restes de la Societe
des Constituants,  telle qu'elle se reunissait chez Mme.  de Tesse et chez
la Princesse d'Henin,  avec ses traditions de leur temps,  ses habitudes
elegantes,  son estime de lettres,  et ses principes politiques."  [Guizox.]

Ixxxiv Preface,

which will one day be your bane."  Her mother had been
consumptive,  and Fanny,  like her sister Susan,  was liable to
very severe colds and coughs j some of which may be attri
buted to their practice of stealing away from warm parlours
to write their long letters in fireless chambers.  But like her
father,  Fanny was wiry j her  "  slight piece of machinery "
withstood rude shocks.  What blistering,  bleeding,  and
lowering of diet it resisted  !

In 1781,  she says,  "  Sir Richard Jebb ordered me to be
blooded again — a thing I mortally dislike, — asses'  milk,  also,
he forbids,  as holding it too nourishing !  and even potatoes
are too solid food for me  !  He has ordered me to live wholly
on turnips,  with a very little dry bread,  and what fruit I like  :
but nothing else of any sort — I drink barley-water and rennet-
whey."  Mrs.  Piozzi wrote to her in 1821:  "A slight frame
escapes many evils that beset a robust one  ;  water-gruel and
spinach were all you ever wanted."  It may be said for the
doctors,  that while two of her brothers died long before her of
apoplexy,  Fanny,  surviving all her sisters except the youngest,
who was nearly twenty years her junior,  lived,  like her father,
to eighty-eight years of age.  What she called her  "  easy
temperature as to food  "  (meaning her indifference as to what
she ate,  and how it was cooked) ,  is not uncommon with those
born to live longer than their brethren.  Her  "  temperature  "
as to dress was no less  "  easy,"  or indifferent.1 Twice only
in these volumes does she tell us what she wore.  It is only
when she plays apartih&i she thinks it worth while to mention
her gowns.  One is the  "pink Persian"  worn at the masque-

This  "  easy temperature "  as to how she fared,  was dressed,  or
lodged,  appears to have been part of the Burney inheritance.  Writing
in 1781 of the means of marrying possessed by Susan and Captain
Phillips,  Fanny says,  "  I know there is not any part of our family that
cannot live upon very little,  very gaily ;  as cheerfully as most folks
upon very much."

Preface.  Ixxxv

rade in 1770  ;  the other,  her  "  green and grey"  dress as Mrs.
Lovemore in  "The Way to Keep Him."  "  Quela habits,"
cries Mme.  de Sevigne from Brittany to her beautiful daughter
in Provence,  "  quels habits aviez-vous a Lyon,  a Aries,  a
Aix  ?  Je ne VOHS vois que cet habit bleu  ! "  In another place,
she completes the sense of these words by saying  "  Qui n'a
qu'un habit,  n'en a pas du tout."  The cares and toils of dress
were not the least part of Fanny's sufferings at court.  It was
with joy that she laid by her sacque,  court-hoop,  and long
ruffles.  She records,  as if she shared it,  Mr.  Batt's pleasure in
seeing her  "  no more dressed than other people."  We have
somewhere seen her described in later life as  "  changing her
lodgings oftener than her gown."  That is quite beyond the
mark,  but it is certain that she was much more indifferent to
her apparel than were many of the bas bleus with whom she
shrank from being classed.  Their Queen,  Mrs.  Montagu,
crowned her toupet,  and circled her neck with diamonds,  when
she received an assembly of foreigners,  literati,  and niaccaronis,
in her dressing-room,  the walls of which were newly painted
with  "  bowers of roses and jessamines,  entirely inhabited by
little Cupids."

"I long"  (wrote Mr.  Crisp to Fanny in 1778)  "to see
your Abord with Mrs.  Montagu,  and Sir Joshua Reynolds.
I hope he will take your picture ; — who knows,  but the time
may come when your image may appear,

'  Fair as before your works you stand confest,'

not
'  In Mowers and Pearls,  by bounteous Kirkall drest,'  !

"  Fair as before her works she stands confess'd,

In flowers and pearls by bounteous Kirkall dress'd."

TJie Dunriad,  lines 159-60,  book ii.

This was written sarcastically of Mrs.   Haywood,   "  the libellous
novelist,  whom he stileth Eliza." — MARTIXUS SCRIBLERUS.

Mrs.  Haywood,  who was no credit to novelists,  has been said,  far

Ixxxvi Preface.

like Garrick with the Comic and Tragic Muse,  contending
for you  ?  "  Fanny never sat to Sir Joshua,  who had had two
strokes of paralysis before she knew him.  Hoppner painted
a portrait of her,  and her cousin Edward two.  In an engraving
of one of them she  "  stands confessed  "  before  "  The Diary of
Mme.  D'Arblay."  It is said that Edward saw her by the
light of love,  and in this picture somewhat flattered her.  In
his first raptures over  "  Evelina/'  Dr.  Burney wrote to her  :
"  I never yet heard of a novel-writer's statue ; — yet who
knows  ?  "  Who knew indeed  ?  The man whose name was
given to the Brissotin party,  Brissot de Warville,  urged Dr.
Burney to permit a portrait,  or bust,  or statue of his celebrated
daughter to be set up in that desecrated church in Paris,
which is still called the Pantheon,  but was as firmly refused
by Dr.  Burney,  at the entreaty of Fanny,  as common sense and
propriety dictated that he should be.

The toil needed to bring these early diaries into order of
time cannot be guessed even by the few who have seen the
original manuscripts with their mutilations and defacements,
but the wearisome labour has been lightened by living in such
pleasant company for so long.  By degrees we have grown
not only familiar with the Burney family,  but with the ways
of the house,  and the way about their different houses  ;  first,
with that in Poland Street,  and the wig-maker's next door,  and
Mrs.  Pringle's close by,  where Hetty and Fanny were made
so welcome and happy for a while.  We know Maria Allen's
room,  in which the girls  "  browsed  "  by the fire upon dainties
brought out of  "Allen's"  cupboard ;  and Fanny's  "pretty little
neat cabinet,  that is in the bed-chamber, — where I keep all
my affairs, — whenever yet was there a heroine without one  ?"

from correctly,  to have given Fanny the hint for  "  Evelina "  in her
novel of  "  Betsy Thoughtless."

1 The Chesington  "  little Gallery Cabinet,"  or,  as Mr.  Crisp called it,

Preface.  Ixxxvii

We know  "  the children's play-room/'  a closet up two flights
of stairs,  in which the younger children kept their toys,
and Fanny wrote plays and novels,  and the paved court
below,  in which she burned them all at fifteen.  We see Lord
Mayor Barber's house in Queen Square,  which Pope,  Swift,
and Bolingbroke may have frequented,  and in which
Carte,  the Jacobite,  was put into a damp bed,  to the sore
damage of his health and the great hindrance of the publica
tion of his  "  Life of the Duke of Ormonde."  We see the
pompous painted ceilings of Newton's house in St.  Martin's
Street,  which,  Dr.  Burney explained,  that he himself was not
"  such a coxcomb  "  as to have commissioned any painter to
execute ;  nor,  perhaps,  was Sir Isaac such a coxcomb, — he who
sneered at my Lord Arundel's famous  <f Marbles,"  as so many
"  stone dolls."

We know the three parlours,  and the cabinets and com
modes in the dining-parlour,  with Mrs.  Burney's bureau,  and
that of the Doctor,  into which he thrust his private papers
and his fees,  until both bureaux were broken open by a former
footman of theirs,  who knowing far too well the ways of the
house,  was able to rob his old master and mistress of three
hundred pounds.  We know what music was lying upon the
harpsichord one day in August,  1779,  when Susan sent
from Chesington for  "  a set of Motezuma,  a set of Aprile's
duets in M.S.  given me by Lady Clarges,  the set of Didone
which contains  '  Son'  regina,'  the second number of Sacchini's

"  the Doctor's Conjuring Closet,"  in which Dr.  Burney wrote when
staying with Mr.  Crisp,  and which was given to the use of Fanny,
when she was an acknowledged author,  is another instance.  "  Dress
ing-rooms  "  were then in England,  as in France,  rooms of reception,
in which ladies of fashion received their friends  (after they had been
dressed in another room),  while the /mew gave the last touches to the
curls,  toupet,  and chignon.  A lady's dretting-room was a  «/iotc-roomr
with silver  "  dressing-plate  "  and elaborate furniture.

Ixxxviii Preface.

'  Tamerlano/  and of his duets." l All these were to be played
to,  or with Mr.  Crisp.

Mr.  Boone breaks his sword in going up the steep stairs,
and wonders that he did not break his neck.  "  I am afraid,"
replies Dr.  Burney,  not without complacency,  "  that speaks ill
for my stairs  ! — but they were constructed by Sir Isaac New
ton,  not by me."  Looking over London,  Fanny writes a novel
in the Observatory of a man who we may be pretty sure never
read a romance.2 When Fanny,  as Baretti said with a sneer,
was  "  exalted to the Thralic Majesty,"  Susan sent to her at
Streatham,  or Brighton,  or Bath,  delightful  (as yet unpub
lished)  chronicles of all that went on at home.3 We see Aunt
Ann come in from York Street to tea, "  in hopes that she should
meet with no foreigner,  as I had told her that we had seen
Merlin,  Piozzi,  and Baretti,  all so lately.  However,  our tea-
things were not removed,  when we were alarmed by a rap at
our door,  and who should enter but I'imperatore del canto"
(Pacchieroti)  "  and his treasurer  "  (Bertoni) .  "  I leave you to
guess who was charmed,  and who looked blank.  They stayed
with us full three hours."  Susan corrects Pacchieroti's
English exercises,  and stops his sending that letter to  "  the
object of his particular despise,"  Sheridan,  in which he had

1 At another time,  Susan writes that  "  Mr.  Crisp is fond of my father's
third duet of the second set,  which we play like anything."     She also
asks that  [Dean]  "Tucker's pamphelet,  and the first set of  [Dr.  Burney's]
duets,"  may be sent to Chesington.

2  "We are told that some time ago this Observatory was bought by an
American,  who removed it to his own country,  forgetful that it lost its
interest when not in its right place.      What he acquired was,  however,
almost entirely a re-construction of this Observatory by Dr.  Burney.
In  "  the fearful hurricane of 1778  .  .  .  its glass sides were utterly de
molished  ;  and its leaden roof  .  .  .  was swept wholly away." — Memoirs
of Dr.  Burney,  vol.  i.  p.  291.

The details in these last pages are chiefly gathered from these
unpublished letters from Susan to Fanny.

Preface.  Ixxxix

drawn that slippery manager as swinging on a gallows lor
not paying the money due to Pacchieroti as his first singer at
the opera.

Or we see Piozzi arrive,  "  in excellent spirits and humour,"
from a country-house where he has been spending two months.
He plays  "  two or three of his new lessons,"  which Susan does
not like,  but he sings  "  some songs divinely."  At another
time Susan is very glad that Piozzi just misses Pacchieroti,
of whom he is so jealous that  "  he walked off from me at a
concert on seeing him approaching, — which,  indeed,  I was not
sorry for."  Piozzi,  that almost historical character,  appears
on Susan's pages as touchy,  and jealous of his betters in song.
To be told that any one was not at home when he knocked at
the door,  he took as an insult.  "  Not a torn  !  "  he cried to the
Burneys,  complaining that at the door of some great house he
had again had  "  la cattiva sorte del not a torn!"  But if Dr.
Burney were in his study, or  "abroad,"  (as they said then,)  Mrs.
Burney and the three girls made English and foreign friends
welcome in St.  Martin's Street.  Mrs.  Burney,  who was not
unconscious of her reading and power of speech,  had favourites
who shared her love of a thorough discussion of subjects.
These were not always acceptable to her step-daughters.
Mrs.  Burney loved to see Baretti,  or Mr.  Penneck of the
British Museum,  or James Barry,  R.A.,  enter the parlour.
Fanny and Susan had favourites of another kind,  from
"  Aristotle Twining"  to Pacchieroti.1 It must be owned that
their raptures concerning Pacchieroti's manners and voice
were only surpassed by the downright ravings of some girls,

1 As we have here and there quoted Pacchieroti's opinions,  it is well
to copy what Mr.  Richard Twining wrote of him to his admirable
brother,  "  Aristotle Twining,"  in the year 1781 :  "  There were some
musical people at Spa,  and,  in the first place,  Signer Pacchieroti.  He
is not only an admirable singer,  but also a sensible,  modest,  and
agreeable man."

xc

Preface.

as recorded by Susan.  Her journals abound in traits of the
time and its noted people.  Dr.  Johnson brings blind Mrs.
Williams to tea in St.  Martin's Street.  In his vast presence,
that lively American,  Mrs.  Paradise,  makes Barry dance a
minuet with herself — Barry,  whose politeness was as  "  rare as a
bit of Peg Woffington's writing  "  !  Barry provokes Susan by
insisting on bringing her home from a tea-party,  although
her father's man-servant has been sent for her,  and by staying
in St.  Martin's Street  (she  "  verily believes ")  till midnight.
Uninvited guests leave the house about eleven;  after which
there is supper,  "  an excuse with us,  as you know,"  (says
Fanny,)  "for chatting over baked apples."  Hetty,  her hus
band,  and his brother Edward,  now and then  "  drop in "  to
supper ;  Dr.  Burney appears,  perchance with sword and bag,  on
his way from the King's brother's music party to his own
"  Chaos."  He says a few kind and pleasant words ;  then bids
all good night,  and  "  outwatches the Bear/'  pondering over
the little which has been spared to tell us of the manner of
the music made by the  "  godlike Greek."

PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.

A LIST OF THOSE MEMBERS OP THE BURNEY FAMILY WHO APPEAK
IN THESE PAGES.

MRS.  ANN BURNEY  (born Cooper),  widow of James Burney  (or Mac
Burney),  Esq. ;  a Shropshire lady,  of advanced age,  as she is
said to have refused Wycherley,  the dramatist,  who died in 1715.

[She was the second wife of James Burney;  his first having
been Rebecca Ellis.  James had fifteen children,  of whom nine
lived;  but in some cases it is not clear of which marriage they
came].

1.  EICHARD,  of Barborne Lodge,  Worcester,  elder son of James and

Ann Burney  ;  of whom more hereafter.

2.  ANN,  a daughter of James and Ann Burney.

3.  CHARLES  (known as Dr.  Burney),  their second son and youngest

child.     He was born in 1726,  and married first,  Esther Sleepe,
who died September 28,  1761.     Doctor of Music  (Oxford,  1769)  ;
F.E.S.,  1773 ;   Member of the French Institute,  Classe des Beaux
Arts,  1811.
The children of Charles and Esther Burney were  : —

1.  ESTHER,  married her Cousin,  Charles Rousseau Burney.

2.  JAMES  (the Admiral),  born June 5, 1750,  married Sarah,  daughter

of Thomas Payne.

3.  FRANCES,  born at Lynn Regis,  on the 13th of June,  1752,  married

Lieutenant-General Comte D'Arblay,  an officer of the  (Noble)
"  Corps de Gardes du Roi,"  and sometime commandant of
Longwy;  a Knight of the Orders of St.  Louis,  the Legion of
Honour,  and the  "  Lys."

4.  SUSANNA ELIZABETH,  married Molesworth Phillips,  Lieut.  Colonel

of Marines.

5.  CHARLES,  married a daughter of Dr.  Rose,  of the  "Monthly

Review."  l

6.  CHARLOTTE ANN,   married,   first,   Clement Francis,   Esq.,   of

Aylsham,  Norfolk,  secondly,  Ralph Broome,  Esq.,  of the Bengal
Army.

1 Another Charles,  a son of Charles and Esther Burney,  is found in
the register of St.  Dionis Backchurch,  of which church Dr.  Burney
was chosen organist in 1749.  He was born aud baptized in June,
1751.  He probably died young.  Dr.  Charles,  the Greek scholar,  is
commonly said to have been born at Lynn,  in 1757,  or 1758.

xcii Persons of the Drama.

DR.  BURNEY married secondly  (in October,  1767),  Elizabeth,  widow of
Stephen Allen of Lynn-Begis,  who appears to have been her cousin,
as she was born an Allen.

The children of Charles and Elizabeth Burney were : —

1.  RICHARD THOMAS,  in the Indian Civil Service.

2.  SARAH HARRIET,  a novelist.

REBECCA BURNEY,    who was living with Mrs.   Burney the elder,
was,  most likely,  a half-sister of Dr.  Burney.     There was also a
sister,  or half-sister,  Mrs.  Gregg,  and a half-sister,  Mrs.  Mancer.
EICHARD BURNEY,  of Worcester,  had five sons,  and three daughters,
but as we do not know their precise order of birth,  we put first  (as
he is always called  "  Mr.  Burney  ")  : —
CHARLES ROUSSEAU,  who,  in 1770,  married his cousin Esther.

[Their eldest child,  the only one named in these journals,  was
Anna Maria,  who married M.  Bourdois,  an early friend of
General D' Arblay.  He was aide-de-camp to General Dumourier,
and distinguished himself in the battle of Jemappes.

2.  RICHARD.

3.  EDWARD FRANCIS,  the painter.

4.  THOMAS.

5.  JAMES.

6.  ELIZABETH.

7.  REBECCA  (Mrs.  Sandford).

8.  ANNE  (or Hannah),  called  "  Nancy  "  (Mrs.  Hawkins.)

The step-children of Dr.  Burney were the Rev.  Stephen Allen and
his sisters,  Maria  (Mrs.  Rishton)  and  "  Bessy  "  (Mrs.  Meeke).  The
other connexions mentioned are Mr.  Sleepe of Watford  (some kins
man of Dr.  Burney's first wife) ;  Mr.  Thomas Burney,  who had taken
the name of Holt,  "  a cousin of ours  "  ;  Mrs.  Allen,  mother of the
second Mrs.  Burney  ;  Mrs.  Arthur Young  (Patty Allen),  Mrs.  Burney's
sister  ;  and her husband,  the well-known writer on agriculture.

We have no baptismal registers to quote for the ages of Hetty,
Susan,  or Maria Allen,  but it is near the truth if we assume that when
these diaries begin,  Hetty was in her nineteenth year,  Susan in her
fourteenth,  and Maria Allen about seventeen.

EARLY DIARY OF FRANCES BURNEY.

1768.

EDITOR'S NOTE FOR THE YEAR.

The first of these journals is wrapped hi soft,  old fashioned,  blue
paper,  to which it has once been stitched.  Madame D'Arblay has
written on the cover,  "  Juvenile Journal,  No.  1. — Curtailed and erased
of what might be mischievous from friendly or Family Considera
tions."  Within the cover,  some figures,  which seem to be hers,  are
hard to make out.  There are also these words — "  Original old
Juvenile Private Journal,  No.  1. —  Begun at 15 — total 66."  If
"  total 66 "  refers to the number of leaves,  or of pages,  no such
number is left,  nor can any part of it have been written at the age
of fifteen,  unless it be the fanciful address to Nobody,  which is
upon a loose leaf,  of a yellower and more worn look than the yellow
and worn leaves which follow,  it is also in slightly different hand
writing.  Upon this prefatory leaf we find again,  "  This strange
Medley of Thoughts and Facts was written at the age of fifteen,  for
my genuine and most private Amusement."  Below this,  in a
girlish round hand,  is written  "  Fanny Burney."

More than fifty years,  it is probable,  lie between the writing of the
Diary,  and the writing of the notes on,  and within,  the cover  ;  and in
those years many of the  "  changes and chances of this mortal life  "  had
befallen their writer ;  enough to blur a memory even so excellent
as hers.  Fame,  and much life in public ;  a court life ;  a married
life,  involving a residence in a foreign country for ten years at a
stretch ;  a stolen visit to England,  a return to Paris,  a flight to
Brussels before Waterloo,  England again,  the death of a father,  of
a husband,  changes of dwelling from London to Bath,  from Bath to
London ;  the burden of examining Dr.  Burney's piles of manu
script,  a toil which we have proof was not ended in 1820.  What
marvel,  if looking over her own papers,  from which she had been
parted while living abroad,  and which she seems not to have read
and revised until she needed them to recall incidents essential to a
memoir of her father,  what marvel that she erred in her dates?
The mistake of a year  (be it for more or for less),  in the life of any
one,  man or woman,  is so common,  in youth or in age,  that it need
not be mentioned unless other facts depend upon it.  Miss Edgeworth
I.  B

2 The Early Diary of  [1768

(one of the least likely of women to be suspected of making herself
out to be younger than she was),  wrote,  and published,  in the
memoirs of her father,  that she was twelve years old when she first
went to Ireland,  whereas it is indubitable that she was fifteen  ;  but she
believed it,  and that her first impressions of Ireland were taken at twelve
years old,  and not at the far more sensitive age of fifteen.  So Miss
Burney believed herself to have been fifteen in 1768;  but that is
disproved by the register of the Chapelry of St.  Nicholas,  in the
parish of St.  Margaret's,  King's Lynn,  which gives her baptism upon
the 7th of July,  1752,  by the Eev.  Thomas Pyle— about three weeks
after her birth on the 13th of June.

As the date of Dr.  Burney's second marriage was uncertain,  the
register of St.  James's,  Westminster,  has been examined for the sake
of complete accuracy.  Under the marriages was found in  "  1767,
No.  7,  294.  Charles Burney,  of this parish,  to Elizabeth Allen,  of
Lynn Eegis,  Norfolk,  by Licence of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
2nd October,  M.  Pugh,  Curate."  The witnesses were Isabella Strange,
and Eichard Fuller.1

This completely tallies with the entry on  "  Monday night,  May 30th,"
in this Diary,  that  "  last night,  Hetty,  Susey,  Charlotte,  and I were at
tea,  mama and Miss Allen not being returned from Harrow,"  when
the  "charming"  Arthur Young  "entered the room."  This second
marriage was a secret from all the friends of Dr.  Burney,  except
Mr.  Crisp and Miss Dolly Young,  for reasons which concei-ned the
lady.  Her mother,  who seems to have had much control over
her,  and the brothers of her first husband  (who was an Allen also
and most likely her cousin),  would apparently have opposed the match.
The Allen family was rich,  her husband's brothers were the guardians
of her three children,  and she had lately lost all the money which she
could herself control by trusting its investment to an imprudent
speculator.

Dr.  Burney's income was a good one,  but it depended upon his
health,  which had once before failed,  and driven him for years from
London to Lynn.  Then he had six children,  the eldest old enough to
give trouble to a stepmother,  had she not been so sweet-tempered as
was Hetty ;  the youngest,  Charlotte,  about seven years old.  "  Since
1724,"  (according to an historian of Lynn),  "  when Stephen Allen was
made a freeman of Lynn,  on the payment of twenty nobles,"  the Aliens
had  "  figured among the first families in the town."  The loss of Mrs.

1 We shall meet Isabella,  afterwards Lady Strange,  in the year 1770.
Eichard Fuller,  Esq.,  was one among five subscribers to Johnson's
Dictionary,  whose names were sent to Johnson from Lynn,  in 1757,
by the future Dr.  Burney.  Mr.  Fuller was probably of a banker's
family,  as the Fullers and Hankeys are mentioned by Mme.  D'Arblay
as among the great city houses,  that helped Dr.  Burney to secure the
organist's place at St.  Dionis Backchurch,  Fenchurch Street.

1768]  Frances Burney.  3

Allen's own fortune proved to her that Dr.  Barney took little interest
in her money  ;  and it was agreed between them that a secret marriage
was the best way to avoid opposition to an open engagement.  After a
honeymoon spent near Chesington,  the lady came to live for a while in
Poland Street,  but still as Mrs.  Allen,  and in a house of her own.  In
the end all came out through the wrong delivery of some letter.  Things
had been smoothed by the 30th of May,  1768.  The two families were
then living together,  in Poland Street.  Most likely before this journal
begins,  Fanny had made that famous bonfire of her writings in the
paved court of her father's house  (which his children used as a play
ground),  while he was at Chesington,  and her step-mother at Lynn.

To Lynn Mrs.  Burney was drawn every year by her mother;
perhaps,  too,  by the uncles of her children,  and others of their Allen
kinsfolk.  Besides,  she had a house settled upon her,  and some one
must live in it.  Later on,  we find Hetty or Fanny going to take
her place at Lynn when she went to London.  To that house
the delicate Susan was sent for change of air,  and Charlotte  (during
her holidays,  and after she was taken from school),  spent most of her
time at Lynn,  with little Bessy Allen.  In the November of this year,
Richard,  Dr.  Burney's son by the second marriage,  was born at Lynn.
With a stepmother so much in Norfolk,  and with Dr.  Burney giving
lessons from eight,  and in one case from seven,  in the morning  ;  often
dining in his coach,  and coming home mainly to sit up the night
through,  writing in his study,  Hetty,  Fanny,  and Susan were often
almost entirely thrown upon their own guidance when in London.  It
will be seen that they ran some risks,  but their innocent steadiness
of character preserved their hearts from harm.  Sweeter and purer
girls it would be hard to find in any century  ;  nor did Susan lack
aught but the health which was never granted her for long,  to give
her distinction as an author — scarcely second to that of her sister
Fanny.

The Early Diary of  [1768

FRANCES BURNEY.
JUVENILE JOURNAL

ADDKESSED TO A CEETAIN Miss NOBODY.

Poland Street,  London,  March 27.

\~To have some account of my thoughts,  manners,  ac
quaintance and actions,  when the hour arrives in which time
is more nimble than memory,  is the reason which induces me
to keep a Journal.  A Journal in which I must confess my
every thought,  must open my whole heart  !  But a thing of
this kind ought to be addressed to somebody — I must
imagion  (sic)  myself to be talking — talking to the most in
timate of friends — to one in whom I should take delight in
confiding,  and remorse in concealment : — but who must this
friend be?  to make choice of one in whom I can but half
rely,  would be to frustrate entirely the intention of my plan.
The only one I could wholly,  totally confide in,  lives in the
same house with me,  and not only never has,  but never will,
leave me one secret to tell her.  To whom,  then,  must I dedi
cate my wonderful,  surprising and interesting Adventures?
— to whom dare I reveal my private opinion of my nearest
relations  ?  my secret thoughts of my dearest friends  ?  my

own hopes,  fears,  reflections,  and dislikes  ? Nobody  !

To Nobody,  then,  will I write my Journal !  since to
Nobody can I be wholly unreserved — to Nobody can I reveal
every thought,  every wish of my heart,  with the most un
limited confidence,  the most unremitting sincerity to the end
of my life !  J For what chance,  what accident can end my
connections with Nobody  ?  No secret can I conceal from

1768]  Frances Burney.  5

Nobody,  and to Nobody can I be ever unreserved.  Disagree
ment cannot stop our affection,  Time itself has no power to
end our friendship.  The love,  the esteem I entertain for
Nobody,  Nobody's self has not power to destroy.  From
Nobody I have nothing to fear,  the secrets sacred to friendship
Nobody will not reveal when the affair is doubtful,  Nobody
will not look towards the side least favourable.

I will suppose you,  then,  to be my best friend,  (tho*  Heaven
forbid you ever should !)  my dearest companion — and a
romantick girl,  for mere oddity may perhaps be more sincere
— more tender — than if you were a friend in propria persona — •
in as much as imagionation  (sic)  often exceeds reality.  In your
breast my errors may create pity without exciting contempt ;
may raise your compassion,  without eradicating your love.
From this moment,  then,  my dear girl — but why,  permit me
to ask,  must a,  female be made Nobody  ?  Ah  !  my dear,  what
were this world good for,  were Nobody a female  ?  And now
I have done with preambulation.1

Monday Night,  May 30.

0 my dear — such a charming day !  and then last night —
well,  you shall have it all in order — as well as I can recollect.

Last night,  while Hetty,  Susey, — Charlotte and myself were
at tea,  mama and Miss Allen not being returned from Harrow,
and Papa in his study busy as usual,  that lively,  charming,
spirited Mr.  Young2 entered the room.  O how glad we were

1 When,  in 1760,  Dr.  Barney left Lynn for a house in Poland Street,
he had there  (in succession)  as neighbours,  The Duke of Chandos,
Lady Augusta Bridges,  Sir Willoughby Aston  (with whose daughters
Hetty and Susan Burney were at school in Paris)  and other great
people.

2 Arthur Young was son of the Rev.  Arthur Young,  of Bradfield
Hall in Suffolk,  who had been chaplain to Speaker Onslow,  and was
made a Prebendary of Canterbury in 1749.     Arthur,  his son,  was
apprenticed to Mr.  Robinson,  one of the wine merchants of Lynn Regis.
When about four and twenty,   he married Martha Allen,   sister of
Mrs.  Stephen Allen,  who afterwards became the second wife of Dr.
Burney.     When he married he was in charge of his mother's farm at
Bradfield.      He was six or seven and twenty when Fanny first speaks
of him,  but had already published his  "  Farmer's Letters to the people
of England,"  which went through a second edition in 1768.

6 The Early Diary of  [1768

to see him.  He was in extreme good spirits.  Hetty sat down
to the harpsichord and sung to him — mama soon returned,
and then they left it.  Well,  and so — upon the entrance of fathers
and mothers — we departed this life of anguish and misery,  and
rested our weary souls in the Elysian fields — my Papa's study
— there freed from the noise and bustle of the world,  enjoy'd
the  *  *  harmony of chattering,  and the melody of musick  ! —
there,  burying each gloomy thought,  each sad reflection,  in the
hearse  [?]  of dissipation,  lost the remembrance of our woes,  our
cruel misfortunes,  our agonizing sorrows — and graciously per
mitted them to glide along the stream of reviving comfort,
blown by the gentle gale of new-born hope,  till they reposed
in the bosom of oblivion — then — No  'tis impossible  !  this style
is too great,  too noble to be supported with proper dignity —
the sublime and beautiful how charmingly blended  !  yes !  I
mil desist — I will lay down my pen while I can with  ....
It would be miraculous had I power to maintain the same
glowing enthusiasm — the same — on my word I can not go on,
my imagination is raised too high,  it soars above this little dirty
sphere,  it transports me beyond mortality — it conveys me to
the Elysian fields — but my ideas grow confused — I fear you
cannot comprehend my meaning — all I shall add,  is to beg you
would please to attribute your not understanding the sublimity
of my sentiments to your own stupidity and dullness of appre
hension,  and not to my want of meaning — which is only too fine
to be clear.

After this beautiful flow of expression,  refinement of senti
ment and exaltation of ideas,  can I meanly descend to common
life  ?  can I basely stoop to relate the particulars of common
life  ?  can I condescendingly deign to recapitulate vulgar con
versation  ?  I can !

0 what a falling off is here  ! — what a chatter there was  ! —
however I was not engaged in it  ....  and therefore,  on a
little consideration,  a due sense of my own superlative merit
convinces me that to mention anything more of the matter
would be nonsense.  Adieu,  then,  most amiable — who  ?
Nobody !

Not so fast,  good girl !  not so fast — 'tis true,  I have done
with last night — but I have all to-day — a charming one it is,

1768]  Frances Burney.  7

too — to relate.  Last night,  to my great satisfaction,  Mama
prevailed on Mr.  Y—  -  to promise to be of our party to-day
to Greenwich.  Well,  he slept here.  For my part,  I could
not sleep all night,  I was up before five o'clock — Hetty and
Susette were before six, — and Miss Allen soon after — while we
were all adorning our sweet persons, — each at a looking-glass —
admiring the enchanting object it presented to our view,  who
should rap at the chamber door but —  (my cheeks are crimsoned
with the blush of indignation while I write it)  — Mr.  Young  !  I
ran into a closet,  and lock'd myself up — however he did not
pollute my chamber with his unhallowed feet,  but poor Miss Allen
was in a miserable condition — her Journal,  which he wanted
to see,  in full sight — on her open bureau.  He said he
had a right to it as her uncle.  She called Hetty into her
room and they were a long time ere they could turn him
out of it.

Well but,  now for the Greenwich party.  We set out at
about ten or eleven — the company was,  mama,  Mr.  Young,
Miss Allen,  Stephen,  and your most obsequious slave. — The
Conversation as we went was such as I would wish to re
member — I will try if I can,  for I think it even worthy the
perusal of Nobody  ! — what an honour  !

Well,  I have racked my brains half-an-hour — in vain — and
if you imagine I shall trouble myself with racking the dear
creatures any longer you are under a mistake.  One thing,
however,  which related to myself,  I shall mention,  as that
struck me too forcibly to be now,  or perhaps ever,  forgot :
besides,  it has been the occasion of my receiving so much
raillery,  &c.,  that it is requisite for you to hear it,  in order to
observe the decorum due to the Drama.  Talking of happiness
and misery,  sensibility and a total want of feeling,  my
mama said,  turning to me.  "  Here's a girl will never be
happy  !  Never while she lives  ! — for she possesses perhaps as
feeling a heart as over girl had  !  "  Some time after,  when
we were near the end of our journey,  "and so,"  said Mr.
Young — "  my friend Fanny possesses a very feeling heart  ?  "
He harp'd on this some little time till at last he said he would
call vie feeling Fanny, it was characteristick,  he said,  and a great
deal more such nonsense,  that put me out of all patience,  which

8 The Early Diary of  [1768

same virtue I have not yet sufficiently recovered to recount
any more of our conversation,  charming as part of it was,
which part you may be sure I had my share in,  how else could
it be charming  ?  .  .  .  .

[All at once,  Poland Street is left,  and Frances writes from her step-
mother's dowry-house,  in the churchyard of St.  Margaret,  Lynn Eegis  ;
that fme church of which Dr.  Burney had been organist for about ten
years.]

From Lynn Eegis.

I am reading the  "  Letters of Henry and Frances "  and
like them prodigiously.  I have just finished Mrs.  Rowe's
Letters from the Dead to the Living — and moral and enter
taining/ — I had heard a great deal of them before I saw them,
and am sorry to tell you I was much disappointed with them  :
they are so very enthusiastick,  that the religion she preaches
rather disgusts and cloys than charms and elevates — and so
romantick,  that every word betrays improbability,  instead of
disguising fiction,  and displays the Author,  instead of human
nature.  For my own part,  I cannot be much pleased with
out an appearance of truth ;  at least of possibility — I wish
the story to be natural tho'  the sentiments are refined ;
and the characters to be probable tho'  their behaviour is ex
celling.  Well,  I am going to bed — Sweet dreams attend me
— and may you sympathize with me.  Heigh ho  !  I wonder
when I shall return to London  ! — Not that we are very dull
here — no,  really — tolerably happy — I wish Kitty Cooke2 would
write to me — I long to hear how my dear,  dear,  beloved Mr.
Crisp does.  My papa always mentions him by the name of
my Flame.  Indeed he is not mistaken — himself is the only
man on earth I prefer to him.  Well — I must write a word

1 Elizabeth Eowe.     1674-1737.     The book is  "  Friendship in Death,
in twenty letters from the Dead to the Living,"  etc.     She was a
Calvinist,  whose life was written by Toplady.      Southey seems to
concur with Fanny when he says,  although with praise of Mrs.  Eowe's
poems,  that  "they are at times a little more enthusiastic than is
allowable even for poetry."

2 Kitty Cooke,  who was about double Fanny's age,  was the niece of
Mrs.  Hamilton,  with whom Mr.  Crisp lodged.

1768]  Frances Burney.  9

more — only to end my paper — so  ! — that's done — and now
good night to you

[Here are erasures,  and also misplacements of the original diary,
which it is impossible now to remedy.  Among these have been found
a broken passage or two,  worth preserving  :

"  Saturday.

"  Oh my dear I have received the finest letter ! while we

were at dinner a packet came from London.  Papa opened it,  and
among other epistles was the following to me '

Four lines of verse follow the address,  "  To Miss FRANCES BURNEY."
These words only are quite legible —

"  When first I saw thee   .  .   .  . "

"  Incoguitus."

Fanny then appears to tax whosoever wrote the epistle with taking
the hint of his verses  "  from an old song I have often  [heard]  which
runs thus,"

"  When first I saw that

Ah me  "

Only a few detached words of what follows can be read.  This frag
ment is merely given to show that Fanny was not without her
share of the current compliments in verse which it was almost the
duty of a gentleman to pay,  and even a slight for a young lady not to
receive.  Another mutilated passage shows Hetty and A.  (Maria Allen)
as,  for some time,  amusing themselves with railing against Lynn,  every
thing,  every body in it,  and praising to adulation — London.  "  I offered
some few wordt in favour of my poor old abused town — the laud of my
nativity — of the world's happiness  !  We disputed a little time,  and
Hetty suddenly cried,  '  Hush,  hush — Mama's in the next room — If
she hears us — we two shall be whipt,  and Fanny will have a sugar-
plumb.'  '  Ay,'  cried A.,  '  'tis her defending Lynn which makes mama
and my grandmama so fond of her.'  '  Fond of me ! '  cried I,  '  what
makes you imagine Mrs.  Allen fond of me  ? '  '  What she said of

you — ' 'I am now writing in the pleasantest place belonging

to this house.     It is called sometimes  '  the Look Out ' — as ships are

observed from hence,  and at other times,  the Cabin It is  [at

the]  end of a long garden that runs along the house." ]

I am going to tell you something concerning myself,  which,
(if I have not chanced to mention it before)  will,  I believe,  a
little surprise you — it is,  that I scarce wish for anything so
truly,  really,  and greatly,  as to be in love — upon my word I
am serious — and very gravely and sedately,  assure you it is a

10 The Early Diary of  [1768

real and true wish.  I cannot help thinking it is a great hap
piness to have a strong and particular attachment to some
one person,  independent of duty,  interest,  relationship or
pleasure;  but I carry not my wish so far as for a mutual
tendresse.  No,  I should be contented to love Sola — and let Dueto
be reserved for those who have a proper sense of their supe
riority.  For my own part,  I vow and declare that the mere
pleasure of having a great affection for some one person to
which I was neither guided by fear,  hope of profit,  gratitude,
respect,  or any motive but mere fancy,  would sufficiently
satisfy me,  and I should not at all wish a return.  Bless me—
how I run on !  foolish and ill-judged !  how despicable a pic
ture have I drawn of an object of Love  !  mere giddiness,  not
inclination,  I am sure,  penned it — Love without respect or
gratitude  ! — that could only be felt for a person wholly unde
serving — but indeed I write so much at random,  that it is
much more a chance if I know what I am saying than if I
do not.

I have just finished  "  Henry and Frances" — They have left
me in a very serious,  very grave mood — almost melancholy — a
bell is now tolling,  most dreadfully loud and solemn,  for the
death of some person of this town,  which contributes not a
little to add to my seriousness — indeed I never heard anything
so dismal — this bell is sufficient to lower the highest spirits
— and more than sufficient to quite subdue those which are
already low.

The greatest part of the last volume of  "  Henry and
Frances,"  is wrote by Henry — and on the gravest of grave
subjects,  and that which is most dreadful to our thoughts —
Eternal Misery.  Religion in general is the subject to all the
latter part of these Letters,  and this is particularly treated on.
I don't know that I ever read finer sentiments on piety and
Christianity,  than the second vol.  abounds with — indeed,  most
of the Letters might be calFd with very little alteration —
Essays on Religion.  I own I differ from him in many of his
thoughts,  but in far many more I am delighted with him.  His
sentiments shew him to be a man possessed of all the humanity
which dignifies his sex  ;  his observations,  of all the penetra
tion and judgment which improves it,  and his expressions,  of

1 7 68]  Frances Burney.  11

all the ability,  capacity and power which adorn it.1 I cannot
express how infinitely more I am charmed with him at the
conclusion than beginning.  Some of his opinions — I might
say many of them — on divine subjects,  I think,  would be
worthy a sermon — and an excellent one too.

It is a sweet,  mild evening,  I will take a turn in the garden,
and re-peruse in my thoughts these genuine,  interesting
Letters.  This garden is very small,  but very,  very prettily
laid out — the greatest part is quite a grove,  and three people
might be wholly concealed from each other with ease in it.
I scarce ever walk in it,  without becoming grave,  for it has
the most private,  lonely,  shady,  melancholy look in the world.

[Let us look into  "  the Cabin,"  with the eyes of Maria Allen,  after
wards Mrs.  Rishton.  In 1778,  writing from Lynn,  she gives Fanny
an account of her own new house in that town,  and thus contrasts
her Belvedere or  "Look Out,"  (as they said in Lynn),  with the
"  Cabin."

"  Lynn,  3rd Sept.  —  You are very well acquainted with the
house we now Inhabit which is Charles Turner's — and which is
quite a palace in point of conveniences to the one we left.  The
rooms are large and handsome — and it is quite big enough for us —
and Rishton has excellent stables and dog kennel down the yard
— but what is most comfortable to us,  the yard and premises are
quite private,  it leads to no granaries etc. — Consequently We are
troubled with neither corn-waggons or porters — but we have every
thing within ourselves — and a very large Look-out,  as they are
called here,  which overlooks the river that I pass many hours in and
which often brings back past scenes to my view when I think of the
hours we used to spend in that little cabbin of my mother's — but this
overlooks a much pleasauter part of the river,  as we never have any

1 This book is said to have been mainly written by Elizabeth,  wife of
Richard Griffith,  of Millicent,  in the County of Kildare.  Mr.  Griffith
had some share in it,  and in two more of her novels.  She wrote,  besides,
other novels,  poems,  and comedies.  He had written a novel before his
marriage,  which is said to have done anything but  "  dignify his sex."
"  Henry and Frances  "  was brought out anonymously,  in six volumes,
between 1766 and 1780.  One of this couple's novels bore the good title
of  "  The Gordian Knot,"  which has been used again,  in our own time,
by Shirley Brooks.  This Mr.  and Mrs.  Griffith are by no means to be
confounded with Ralph Griffiths,  who brought out the  "  Monthly
Review,"  with,  as the legend goes,  Mrs.  Griffiths to correct  "  the copy  "  of
the poor hack whom her husband boarded and lodged,  Oliver Goldsmith.

12 The Early Diary of  [1768

ships laying against our Watergate,  at least very seldom,  to what we
had there,  by which means we escape the oaths and ribaldry of the
sailors and porters which used often to drive us from thence ."]

Tuesday,  Cabin.

I have this very moment finished reading a novel call'd
the Vicar of Wakefield.  It was wrote by Dr.  Goldsmith,  His
style is rational and sensible and I knew it again immediately.
This book is of a very singular kind — I own I began it with
distaste and disrelish,  having just read the elegant Letters of
Henry, — the beginning of it,  even disgusted me — he mentions
his wife with such indifference — such contempt — the contrast
of Henry's treatment of Frances struck me — the more so,  as
it is real — while this tale is fictitious — and then the style of
the latter is so elegantly natural,  so tenderly manly,  so un
assumingly rational, — I own I was tempted to thro'  (sic)  the
book aside — but there was something in the situation of his
family,  which if it did not interest me,  at least drew me on —
and as I proceeded,  I was better pleased. — The description of
his rural felicity,  his simple,  unaffected contentment — and
family domestic happiness,  gave me much pleasure — but still,
I was not satisfied,  a something was wanting to make the book
satisfy me — to make me feel for the Vicar in every line he
writes,  nevertheless,  before I was half thro'  the first volume,
I was,  as I may truly express myself,  surprised into tears — and
in the second volume,  I really sobb'd.  It appears to me,  to be
impossible any person could read this book thro'  with a dry
eye at the same time the best part of it is that which turns
one's grief out of doors,  to open them to laughter.  He
advances many very bold and singular opinions — for example,
he avers that murder is the sole crime for which death ought
to be the punishment,1 he goes even farther,  and ventures to
affirm that our laws in regard to penalties and punishments

1 The pith of the passage upon which Fanny comments is in chap,
xxvii.  Dr.  Primrose,  "  the great Monogamist,"  here speaks some of
the language of his Master,  William Whiston,  who held it absolutely
unscriptural to take human life except for murder  :  but  "  social combina
tions,"  "  compacts  "  and  "  natural laws  "  never entered into Whiston's
brain — See his very diverting autobiography.

1768]  Frances Burney.  13

are all too severe.  This doctrine might be contradicted from
the very essence of our religion — Scripture for  [erasure]  in
the Bible — in Exodus particularly,  death is commanded by
God himself,  for many crimes besides murder.  But this
author shews in all his works a love of peculiarity and of
making  [sic,  but probably marking^  originality of character
in others;  and therefore I am not surprised he possesses it
himself.  This Vicar is a very venerable old man — his dis
tresses must move you.  There is but very little story,  the
plot is thin,  the incidents very rare,  the sentiments uncommon,
the vicar is contented,  humble,  pious,  virtuous,  quite a darling
character.1 How far more was I pleased with the genuine
productions of Mr.  Griffith's pen — for that is the real name of
Henry, — I hear that more volumes are lately published.  I
wish I could get them,  I have read but two — the elegance and
delicacy of the manner — expressions — style of that book are
so superiour  ! — How much I should like to be acquainted
with the writers of it ! — Those Letters are doubly pleasing,
charming to me,  for being genuine — they have encreased my
relish for minute,  heartfelt writing,  and encouraged me in my
attempt to give an opinion of the books I read.

Cabin,  Wednesday Afternoon.

I always spend the evening,  sometimes all the afternoon,
in this sweet Cabin — except sometimes,  when unusually
thoughtful,  I prefer the garden.  ...•_!  cannot express the
pleasure I have in writing down my thoughts,  at the very
moment — my opinion of people when I first see them,  and
how I alter,  or how confirm myself in it — and I am much
deceived in my fore sight,ifl shall not have very great delight
in reading this living proof of my manner of passing my time,
my sentiments,  my thoughts of people I know,  and a thousand
other things in future — there is something to me very unsatis
factory in passing year after year,  without even a memorandum
of what you did,  &c.  And then,  all the happy hours I spend
with particular friends and favourites would fade from my
recollection.  .  .  .  H

1 The  "  Vicar of Wakefield  "  had been published two years previously.

14 The Early Diary of  [1768

July 17.

tSuch a set of tittle tattle,  prittle prattle visitants  !  Oh dear !
I am so sick of the ceremony and fuss of these fall lall people  !
So much dressing — chit chat — complimentary nonsense— In
short,  a Country Town is my detestation — all the conversation
is scandal,  all the attention,  dress,  and almost all the heart,
folly,  envy,  and censoriousness.  A City or a village are the
only places  -which I think,  can be comfortable,  for a Country
Town,  I think has all the bad qualities,  without one of the
good ones,  of both.  '

We live here,  generally speaking,  in a very regular way —
we breakfast always at 10,  and rise as much before as we
please — we dine precisely at 2,  drink tea about 6 — and sup
exactly at 9.  I make a kind of rule,  never to indulge myself
in my two most favourite pursuits,  reading and writing,  in the
morning — no,  like a very good girl I give that up wholly,
accidental occasions and preventions excepted,  to needle work,
by which means my reading and writing in the afternoon is a
pleasure I cannot be blamed for by my mother,  as it does
not take up the time I ought to spend otherwise.  I never
pretend to be so superior a being as to be above having and
indulging a Hobby Horse,  and while I keep mine within due
bounds and limits,  nobody,  I natter myself,  would wish to
deprive me of the poor animal:  to be sure,  he is not
formed for labour,  and is rather lame and weak,  but then the
dear creature is faithful,  constant,  and loving,  and tho'  he
sometimes prances,  would not kick anyone into the mire,  or
hurt a single soul for the world — and I would not part with
him for one who could win the greatest prize that ever was
won at any Races.

Alas,  alas !  my poor Journal !  how dull unentertaining,
uninteresting thou art! — oh what would I give for some
Adventure worthy reciting — for something which would
surprise — astonish you !  I have lately read the Prince of
Abyssinia — I am almost equally charmed and shocked at
it — the style,  the sentiments are inimitable — but the subject
is dreadful — and handled as it is by Dr.  Johnson,  might make
any young,  perhaps old,  person tremble.  0,  how dreadful,

1768]  Frances Burney.  15

how terrible is it to be told by a man cf his genius and know
ledge,  in so affectingly probable a manner,  that true,  real,
happiness is ever unattainable in this world  ! — Thro'  all the
scenes,  publick or private,  domestick or solitary,  that Nekaya
or Rasselas pass,  real felicity eludes their pursuit and mocks
their solicitude.  In high life,  superiority,  envy and haughti
ness baffle the power of preferment,  favour and greatness —
and,  with or without them,  all is animosity,  suspicion,
apprehension,  and misery ! — in private families,  disagreement
jealousy and partiality,  destroy all domestick felicities and all
social cheerfulness,  and all is peevishness,  contradiction,  ill-
will,  and wretchedness  !  And in solitude,  imagination paints
the world in a new light,  every bliss which was wanting when
in it,  appears easily attained when away from it,  but the loneli
ness of retirement seems unsocial,  dreary,  savouring of mis
anthropy and melancholy — and all is anxiety,  doubt,  fear and
anguish  !  In this manner does Mr.  Johnson proceed in his
melancholy conviction of the impossibility of all human en
joyments and the impossibility of all earthly happiness.  "\

Wednesday,  July,  10 in the morning.

We have just had a wedding — a publick wedding — and
very fine it was I assure you.  The bride is Miss Case;
daughter of an alderman of Lynn,  with a great fortune — the
bridegroom,  Mr.  Bagg, — the affair has long been in agitation
on account of Mr.  Bagg's inferiority of fortune.1 Our house
is in the Church yard,  and exactly opposite the great church

1 In 1710 the names of Bagg,  or Bagge,  and of Case,  occur in the list
of the Corporation of Lynn.  In 1763 Philip Case was Mayor for the
second time.  In 1832 a property which had been held by the Case
family had passed to William Bagge,  who was perhaps this bridegroom
in his old age,  or his heir.  There was a double marriage between the
Aliens and the Bagges,  Maxey Allen  =  Miss Bagge,  J.  Bagge  =  Sally
Allen.  In  "  My Grandfather's Pocket- Book,"  (edited by the Rev.  Mr.
Wale),  are several notices of the Aliens and Bagges.  In 1792 Mr.
Wale records that  "  one Mr.  Case,  an attorney of Lynn-Regis, — dyed
there worth a deall,  I think they say of money,  £100,000."  This was
probably the bride's father.

16 The Early Diary of  [1768

door so that we had a very good view of the procession.

The walk that leads up to the church was crowded
almost incredibly a prodigious mob indeed  ! — I'm sure I
trembled for the bride.  0 what a gauntlet for any woman of
delicacy to run ! — Mr.  Bagg handed the bride and her com
pany out of their coach,  and then Mr.  Case took her hand
and led her to the church door,  and the bridegroom followed
handing Mrs.  Case.  0 how short a time does it take to put
an eternal end to a woman's liberty  !  I don't think they
were a quarter of an hour in the Church altogether. — Bless
me  !  it would not be time enough,  I should think,  for a poor
creature to see where she was — I verily believe I should
insist on sitting an hour or two to recover my spirits — I
declare my heart ach'd to think how terrible the poor Bride's
feelings must be to walk by such crowds of people,  the
occasion in itself so awful !  How little does it need the
addition of that frightful mob  !  In my conscience I fear that
if it had been me,  I should never have had courage to get out
of the coach — Indeed,  I feel I should behave very foolishly.
When they had been in the Church about a quarter of an
hour,  the bells began to ring,  so merrily — so loud — and the
doors open'd — we saw them walk down the Isle — the bride
and bridegroom first,  hand in hand  ....  the bridegroom
look'd so gay,  so happy  !  Surely it must be grateful to her
heart to see his joy  !  it would to mine I know.  She looked
grave,  but not sad — and,  in short,  all was happy and charming.
Well of all things in the world,  I don't suppose any thing can
be so dreadful as a publick wedding — my stars  !  I should
never be able to support it !  ....

Mr.  Bewly,  a great and particular friend of my papa's, —

and a very ingenious,  clever man,  is now here At

breakfast time,  we had,  as you may imagine,  a long conversa
tion on Matrimony. — Every body spoke against a publick
wedding,1 as the most shocking thing in the world — papa said

1 Compare this with a passage,  or more,  in Letter LXXII.  of Gold
smith's  "  Citizen of the World "  as,  for instance,  "  I could submit
to court my mistress herself upon reasonable terms  ;  but to court her  .
father,  her mother,  and a long tribe of cousins,  aunts,  and relations,  and  *
then stand the butt of a whole country church "

1 768]  Frances Burney.  17

he would not have gone thro'  those people in such a manner
for 5000 a year — and Mr.  Bewly said that when he was
married,  his lady and self stole in to the Church,  privately as
possible,  and ashamed of every step they took

Cabin,  Saturday,  July.

And so I suppose you are staring at the torn paper and
unconnected sentence — I don't much wonder — I'll tell you
what happen'd.  Last Monday I was in the little parlour,
which room my papa generally dresses in — and writing a
letter to my grandmama.1 You must know I always have
the last sheet of my Journal in my pocket,  and when I have
wrote it half full I join it to the rest,  and take another sheet —
and so on.  Now I happen'd unluckily to take the last sheet
out of my pocket with my letter — and laid it on the piano

forte,  and there,  negligent fool ! — I left it Well,  as ill

fortune would have it,  papa went into the room — took my
poor Journal — read,  and pocketted it.  Mama came up to me
and told me of it.  0 Dear !  I was in a sad distress — I
could not for the life of me ask for it — and so dawdled and
fretted the time away till Tuesday evening.  Then,  gathering
courage  "  Pray papa/'  I said,  "have you got — any papers of
mine  ?  "

"  Papers of yours?"  said he — "  how should Jcome by papers
of yours  ?  "

"  I'm sure — I dont know — but " —

"  Why do you leave your papers about the house  ?  "  asked
he,  gravely.

I could not say another word — he went on playing on
the piano forte.       Well,  to be sure,  thought I,  these same

1 Ann,  widow of James Macburney,  or Burney.  In August,  1768
Fanny wrote a rhyming letter to her aunt,  Mrs.  Gregg,  from  "  St.
Margt's Church-yard,  Lynn Eegis." — We quote what concerns Mrs.
Burney,  her grandmother —

"  And when my scrawl you read to Granny,
'  Pure free and easy,  Madam Fanny  !
'  And so you re'ly condescend
'  To name your Or army at the end  ? '"
I.  C

18 The Early Diary of  [1768

dear Journals are most shocking plaguing things— I've  &  good
mind to resolve never to write a word more.J However,  I
stayed still in the room,  walking,  and looking wistfully at
him for about an hour and half.  At last,  he rose to dress-
Again I look'd wistfully at him— He laughed — "  What,
Fanny ,"  said he,  kindly,  "  are you in sad distress  ?  "  I half
laugh'd.  "  Well, — I'll give it you,  now I see you are in such
distress — but take care,  my dear,  of leaving your writings
about the house again — suppose any body else had found it
— I declare I was going to read it loud — Here,  take it — but
if ever I find any more of your Journals,  I vow I'll stick them
up in the market place/'  And then he kiss'd me so kindly —
never was parent so properly,  so weZZ-judgedly affectionate  !
I was so frightened that I have not had the heart to write
since,  till now,  I should not but that — in short,  but that I
cannot help it!  As to the paper,  I destroy'd it the moment I
got it

We have had several little parties of pleasure since I wrote
last,  but they are not worth mentioning.  My papa went on
Thursday to Massingham,  to Mr.  Bewly's.1  ....

I have been having a long conversation with Miss Young
on journals.  She has very seriously and earnestly advised me
to give mine up — heigho-ho  !  Do you think I can bring
myself to oblige her  ?  What she says has great weight with
me ;  but,  indeed,  I should be very loath to quite give my
poor friend up.  She says that it is the most dangerous em
ployment young persons can have — that it makes them often
record things which ought not to be recorded,  but instantly
forgot.  I told her,  that as my Journal was solely for my own
perusal,  nobody could in justice,  or even in sense,  be angry or
displeased at my writing any thing.

1 William Bewly,  a country-surgeon at Massiugham,  a very little
town in Norfolk,  was called by his neighbours the  "  Philosopher of
Massingham,"  from his attainments in electricity and chemistry,  which
brought him into communication with Dr.  Priestley and other well-
known men.  Some years later he wrote the scientific articles in
Griffiths'  "  Monthly Eeview."  He was from the North of England,
but has a notice among Norfolk worthies in the  "  History of Lynn,"  by
W.  Kichards,  1812.

1768]  Frances Burney.  19

"  But how can you answer/'  said she,  "  that it is only for
your own perusal  ?  That very circumstance of your papa's
finding it,  shows you are not so very careful as is necessary
for such a work.  And if you drop it,  and any improper
person finds it,  you know not the uneasiness it may cost you."

"  Well but,  dear ma'am,  this is an  '  if that may not happen
once in a century."

"I beg your pardon;  I know not how often it may happen;
and even once might prove enough to give you more pain than
you are aware of."

"  Why,  dear ma'am,  papa never prohibited my writing,  and
he knows that I do write,  and what I do write."

"  I question that.  However,  'tis impossible for you to
answer for the curiosity of others.  And suppose any body
finds a part in which they are extremely censured."

"  Why then,  they must take it for their pains.  It was not
wrote for them,  but me,  and I cannot see any harm in writing
to myself."

"  It was very well whilst there were only your sisters with
you to do any thing of this kind ;  but,  depend upon it,  when
your connections are enlarged,  your family increased,  your
acquaintance multiplied,  young and old so apt to be curious —
depend upon it,  Fanny,  'tis the most dangerous employment
you can have.  Suppose now,  for example,  your favourite wish
were granted,  and you were to fall in love,  and then the
object of your passion were to get sight of some part which
related to himself  ?  "

"  Why then,  Miss Young,  I must take a little trip to
Rosamond's Pond."

"  Why,  ay,  I doubt it would be all you would have left."

1 George Colman,  the younger  (writing in 1830),  tells us of Rosa
mond's Pond,  in St.  James's Park.  "  This Pond is now fill'd up  ;
it had some little islands upon it,  forming part of the Decoy,  upon
one of which there was a summer-house,  where the old Princess
Amelia used to drink tea."  From the days of Charles II.  to those of
George II.  this pond had been rather the trysting-place of happy lovers
or the rendezvous of the gay and giddy,  than what Warburton said of
it afterwards,  "  Consecrated to disastrous love,  and elegiac poetry."  It
was filled up in 1770,  perhaps to stop the suicides to which Fanny
alludes in the test.

20 The Early Diary of  [1768

"  Dear Miss Young  !— But Tin sure,  by your earnestness,
that you think worse of my poor Journal than it deserves."

"  I know very well the nature of these things.  I know
that in journals,  thoughts,  actions,  looks,  conversations — all
go down  ;  do they not  ?  "

The conclusion of our debate was,  that if I would show her
some part of what I had wrote she should be a better judge,
and would then give me her best advice whether to proceed or
not.  I believe I shall accept her condition ;  though I own I
shall show it with shame and fear,  for such nonsense is so
unworthy her perusal.

I'm sure,  besides,  I know not what part to choose.  Shall
I take at random  ?  l

Wednesday,  August lOtb.

....  Well,  my  [Nobody]  I have read part of my Journal to
Miss Young and what's more,  let her choose the day herself,
which was our Journey,  the day in which I have mentioned our
arrival,  &c.2 I assure you I quite triumph  !  prejudiced as she
was,  she is pleas'd to give it her sanction, — if it is equally
harmless everywhere — nay,  says she even approves of it.3  .  .  .

For some time past,  I have taken a walk in the fields near
Lynn of about an hour every morning before breakfast — I have
never yet got out before six,  and never after seven.  The fields

1 This conversation no longer exists in the original manuscript,  but
has been preserved in a transcript of selections from these diaries,
made about forty years ago.

2 This account of the journey to and arrival at Lynn which Miss
Young thought so  "  harmless,"  is not to be found in this diary.

3 This was the good and intelligent    "Dolly Young,"  the dearest
friend,  at Lynn,  of Esther,  first wife of Dr.  Burney.    In 1832,  Madame
D'Arblay wrote that Miss Young  "  took charge of Mrs.  Burney's little
family upon every occasion of its increase during the nine or ten years
of the Lynn residence,"  and  "Miss Young's were the kind arms that
first welcomed to this nether sphere the writer of these Memoirs  "  (of
Dr.  Burney).     The first Mrs.  Burney,  on her death-bed,  recommended
her husband to marry Miss Young,  as  "  the lady most capable to suit
him as a companion,"  and the  "most tenderly disposed  "  towards her six
children,  but Dr.  Burney could not overlook her total want of grace
and beauty.

1768]  Frances Burney.  21

are,  in my eyes,  particularly charming at that time in the
morning — the sun is warm and not sultry — and there is scarce
a soul to be seen.  Near the capital I should not dare indulge
myself in this delightful manner,  for fear of robbers — but
here,  every body is known,  and one has nothing to
apprehend.

I am reading Plutarch's Lives— his own,  wrote by Dryden
has charm' d me beyond expression.  I have just finished
Lycurgus — and am as much pleased with all his publick Laws,
as displeased with his private ones.  There is scarce one of
the former which is not noble and praiseworthy, — and as I
think very few of the latter which are not the contrary — the
custom of only preserving healthy children,  and destroying
weak ones how barbarous  !— besides all his domestick family
duties appear strange to me  ! — but you must consider how
very,  very,  very bad a judge I am,  as I read with nobody,
and consequently have nobody to correct or guide my opinion :
nevertheless,  I cannot  (forbear,  sometimes)  writing what it
is  ...  .1 read Plutarch's Lives with more pleasure than
I can express.  I am charmed with them,  and rejoice exceed
ingly that I did not read them ere now ;  as I every day,
certainly,  am more able to enjoy them

[Here occur erasures and passages in disarray,  from among which
we rescue four lines of halting verse  : —

"  What beauties have met me  !
"  How often have I,  sighing said
"  Poor Hetty's charms are now quite dead

"  Nor dare they vie with Fanny.

"  MELIDORUS."

Fanny adds  :  "  Your servant,  Mr.  Melidorus,  I am much obliged to
you.  Who would not be proud to have such verses made on them  ?"]

Wednesday — August.

We had a large party to the Assembly on Monday,  which
was so-so-so— I danced but one country dance— the room was
so hot,  t'was really fatiguing.  Don't you laugh to hear a girl
of fifteen complain of the fatigue of dancing  ?  Can't be helped !
if you will laugh,  you must.— My partner was a pretty youth

22 The Early Diary of  [1768

enough — and quite a. youth — younger than myself— poor dear
creature,  I really pitied him,  for he seem'd to long for another
caper — in vain — I was inexorable — not that he quite  "knelt for
my hand — if he had I might have been moved — for I have an
uncommonly soft heart — I am interrupted,  or else I am in an
excellent humour to scribble nonsense

Poland Street.

Mr.  Greville supped here,  and talked of the book figlit
between Mr.  Sharpe and Signor Baretti — concerning Italy,
of which country the former has wrote an account;  which the
latter has absolutely confuted.1  "  I wish,"  said Mr.  Greville,
"  men would not pretend to write of what they cannot be
masters of,  another country — It is impossible they can be
judges  ;  and they ought not to aim at it — for they have diffe
rent sensations,  are used to different laws,  manners and things,
and consequently are habituated to different thoughts and ideas ;
'tis the same as if a cow was to write of a horse — or a horse
of a cow — why they would proceed on quite different principles,
and therefore certainly could be no judge of one another."
He asked papa if he played much on piano fortes. — "  If I was
to be in town this winter/'  said he,  "  I should cultivate my
old acquaintance with old Crisp."  "  Ah,"  said papa,  "  he's
truly worth it."  "  Ay,  indeed is he,"  answered Mr.  Greville,

Samuel Sharp,  surgeon to Guy's Hospital,  an eminent writer on
surgery,  and a great friend and adviser of Garriek on theatrical matters,
travelled for his health in 1765-6,  and published his  "  Letters from
Italy  "  in 1766.  Baretti not only attacked him anonymously in a paper
he was carrying on at Venice,  but wrote two volumes in very good
English to confute him in his own country.  Both writers were able
men.  Both were praised by Johnson,  who wrote in 1776,  "I read
Sharp's letters from Italy over again when I was at Bath.  There is a
great deal of matter in them."  By the strange irony of circumstances
Baretti,  who had denied that any but low Italians,  and those mainly low
Romans,  used their knives in sudden quarrels,  as was averred by Sharp,
himself stabbed a man in the Haymarket the very next year,  and  (if
we are to believe Mrs.  Thrale)  long afterwards called attention to his
pocket-knife,  while using it at dessert,  in her house,  as being the knife
with which he killed him.

1768]  Frances Burney.  23

"  he's a most auperiour man."  This one speech has gain'd him
my heart for ever.  This man is exceeding fond of my father.
Before he went to Germany1 he used to sup with him per
petually,  in the most familiar and comfortable style,  and now
again he resumes this freedom.  His wife and daughter were
and are the two greatest beautys in England,  and Mrs.  Greville
is my godmother.  Her Ode to Indifference is so excessively
pretty that it almost puts me out of conceit with my desire to
be favoured with a touch of the power of Cupid,  when I happen
to recollect it.  How she would scorn me if she knew it — but
I suppose she did not begin with a passion for Indifference
herself — I should not like to be Mr.  Greville if he converted
her to that side.2

Sunday Night,  Sept.  11.

My sweet brother Charles is come home for the holidays,
full of spirits,  mirth,  and good -humour.    My aunt Nanny who

1 Fulke Greville,  only son of Algernon,  second son of the fifth Lord
Brooke,  made believe to elope with Frances,  third daughter and co
heiress of James Macartney,  a gentleman of large fortune,  and ancient
Irish family.    She was not of age,  and the future Dr.  Buruey,  who gave
her away,  in the presence of her two sisters,  was the youngest of the
party,  being then about seventeen.    When they played at asking pardon,
Mr.  Macartney drily said that  "Mr.  Greville had taken a wife out of the
window,    whom he might just as well have taken out of the door."
Mr.   Greville was grandfather of the Diarists Charles and Henry
Greville.      In Charles much of Fulke's superciliousness and fickleness
may be traced.     Dr.  Burney suffered,  as will be seen,  from Greville's
exacting and changeable temper.    Mr.  Crisp would not be  "  cultivated"
any more.     He forbade Dr.  Burney to let Greville know where he
lived.      In a letter to Fanny,  in 1779,  Mr.   Crisp writes of  "  the
constitutional inconstancy of Greville  ....  who became my enemy
for a time,  though afterwards he became more attached than before."
Later on Mr.   Crisp adds,   "  through absence,   whim,   and various
accidents,  all Greville's friendship dwindled to nothing."

2 Mr.  Greville gave but too much cause for this ode,  which was
handed about by admiring copyists.      Among others,   General Fitz-
william,   in 1767,  tells a lady that,   from her copy of the poem he
himself had taken and given forty copies.

24 The Early Diary of  [1768

went lately to see him at the Charter House,  was assured
there that he was the sweetest tempered boy in the school.1

Papa is gone to supper with Mr.  Greville.  You must know
this gentleman is the author of a book called Characters,  Maxims,
and Reflections — Serious,  Moral,  and Entertaining.  I never
read it thro',  but what I have pleased me extremely.

Sept.  12.

Mr.  Smart the poet was here yesterday.  He is the author
of the  "  Old Woman's Magazine  "  and of several poetical pro
ductions;  some of which are sweetly elegant and pretty — for
example  :  "  Harriet's Birthday,"  "  Care and Generosity," — and
many more.  This ingenious writer is one of the most un
fortunate of men — he has been twice confined in a mad-house —
and but last year sent a most affecting epistle to papa,  to
entreat him to lend him half-a-guinea ! — How great a pity so
clever,  so ingenious a man should be reduced to such shocking
circumstances.  He is extremely grave,  and has still great
wildness in his manner,  looks,  and voice ;  but  'tis impossible
to see him and to think of his works,  without feeling the utmost
pity and concern2 for him  ....  I am prodigiously surprised,

1 Charles,  second sou of Dr.  Burney,  was placed by Lord Holdemesse
in the Charter-House School in 1768.

2 Any dictionary of biography will tell us that Christopher Smart
gained the Seatonian prize five times,  all but in succession  ;    that his
chief poem was  "  The Hop-Garden  ; "  and that he scratched his  "  Song
to David  "  on the wall of his cell with a key,  during a fit of lunacy.
The laurels of Smart were  "  sere and withered,"  until lately,  when a
great poet lit upon the  "  Song to David,"  and sung of it,  "  parleying  "
with Smart,  as  :

"  Yourself who sang

A Song where flute-breath silvers trumpet-clang,
And stations you for once on either hand

With Milton and with Keats "

— "  Only out of throngs between

Milton and Keats that donned the singing-dress —

Smart,  solely of such songmen pierced the screen

'Twixt thing and word,  lit language straight from soul "

Mr.  Browning addresses those who may be startled

" Or blame,  or praise my judgement,  thus it fronts you full."

"  Parleying!  with Certain People of Importance."

1768]  Frances Bumey.  25

immensely astonish'd — indeed absolutely petrified with amaze
ment — and what do you imagine the cause  ?  You can never
guess ;  I shall pity your ignorance and incapacity,  and,  generous,
noble minded as I am,  keep you no longer in suspense.  Know
then — Ha !  this frightful old watchman how he has startled
me — past eleven o'clock  !  bless you,  friend,  don't bawl so loud,
— my nerves can't possibly bear it — no — I shall expire — this
robust,  gross creature will be the death of me — yes  !  I feel
myself going — my spirits fail — my blood chills — I am gone  !
To my eternal astonishment,  I am recovered ! — I really am
alive — I have actually and truly survived this bawling.  Well,
and now that I have in some measure recollected my scattered
spirits,  I will endeavour sufficiently to compose myself to relate
the cause of wonder the first.  Would you believe it — but,
now I think of it,  you can't well tell till you hear — well,  have
patience — all in good time — don't imagine I intend to cheat
you — no — no — now attend.  Miss Tilson,  a young lady of
fashion,  fortune,  education,  birth,  accomplishments,  and beauty
has fallen in love with my cousin Charles Burney.  She is
about seventeen,  and she wrote her declaration to him on her
glove,  which she dropt for him to pick up.  She is daughter
to some Lady Kerry and has a portion in her own hands of
several thousands,  but this worthy Charles,  not liking her,  is
above the temptation.  Well,  I'm so sleepy,  I must  ....
you may hear more anon.

10 o'clock.

I left off with a little account of Miss Tilson — I shall only
tell you that I heard of her passion and the amiable object by
Hetty,  who was told it by Miss Sheffield,  and had it afterwards
confirmed by the fair one's own mouth.  An Amorosa so forward
in Cupid's cause makes me almost revolt from my wishes for his
darts,  and really I think upon the whole,  the most dignified
thing for an exalted female must be to die an old maid.  Her
mother married Mr.  Tilson on the death of the Earl of Kerry.
She is very short but Hetty says very pretty.1

1 This is the first mention of Charles Rousseau,  eldest son of Dr.
Burney's elder  (own)  brother Richard Burney of Worcester.      After

26 The Early Diary of  [1768

Wednesday Sept.  21.

I have not wrote you a line this age,  my sweet Journal.
Indeed I have no wonderful matters to scrawl,  now — Is it
not very perverse in Dame Fortune to deny me the least share
in any of her so much talk'd of tricks  ?  especially as I should,
by means of my inimitable pen immortalize every favour she
honoured me with:  but so it is,  and so it seems likely to be ;
that I am to pass my days in the dullest of dull things,  insipid,
calm,  uninterrupted quiet.  This life is by many desired — so
be it — But it surely was designed to give happiness after  (and
not one ounce before)  twenty full years are past,  but till then
— no matter what happens — the spirits — the health — the never
dying hope are too strong to be much affected by whatever
comes to pass — Supper bell,  as I live  ! —

Fve finish'd the Iliad this age — I never was so charm'd
with a poem in my life — Fve read the Odyssey since —
and Dr.  Hawkesworth's Translation of Telemachus.  I am
going now to read Mr.  Hume's History of England,  which
I shall begin to-morrow — well now adieu at once.

Hetty and I are going out to tea this afternoon to Mrs.
Pringle's,  a widow lady who lives in this street.  She is a most
sensible,  entertaining,  clever  ....

Sunday,  Noon.

We passed a very agreable evening at Mrs.  Pringle's
yesterday — Mr.  Seaton,  a very sensible and clever man,  and a
prodigious admirer of Hetty's  .  .  .  .*

his uncle became a doctor of music,  he is commonly called  "Mr.  Burney  "
in these Diaries.  As he is often named,  and always with praise,  this is
preserved.  On the 15th of July,  1750,  Mrs.  Delany writes  : — "  The
present talk of Dublin is of Mr.  Tilson's marriage with Lady Kerry last
Thursday — nobody suspected it ;  he is a very lively,  gay man,  and she
rather of the insiped strain."  "  Lady Kerry,"  was Lady Gertrude
Lambert,  daughter of Eichard,  4th Earl of Cavan,  who married William,
2nd Earl of Kerry,  in 1738,  and afterwards Mr.  James Tilson,  of Pallice.
Charles Buruey appears to have given lessons for his uncle Charles in
his occasional absence,  and was thus perhaps thrown with Miss Tilson.
Mr.  Seaton appears to have been a younger son of Sir Henry Seton,
or Seaton,  Bart.,  who died in 1751.

1768]  Frances Burney.  27

Tuesday,  Oct.  4th.

Dinner bell,  I declare ! — 0 dear,  O dear,  the kindest
letter from Mr.  Crisp.  If my papa has not the most obdurate,
barbarous and inhuman heart in the world,  he must be moved
by it to permit some of us to accept his invitation.  We are
all in agonies of fear and suspense — waiting with such im
patience for papa's return.  Jjf he should refuse us  ! — I verily
believe I shall play truant ! — I wish he'd come home I shall
be so happy to see that dearest of men again  !  and then Miss
Cooke — the good Mrs.  Hamilton,  too — in short,  Chesington
is all in all.  I am going to console myself with reading the
Iliad till his return.

Achilles has just relented,  and hastes to the assistance and
succour of the Grecians — is it not a fortunate part  ? — if my
dear papa would just so relent too,  I could almost aver that
he would give us equal joy,  to that felt by the Greeks at the
yielding of Achilles

Friday.

Mr.  Crisp is come to town

[Mrs.  Colman] 1 wife of the celebrated author who is also chief
manager of that house,  is extremely kind and friendly to us
all — we are to dine at her house on Tuesday.  Well,  adieu
for the present,  if I pass an agreeable evening,  I shall write
again at night — or early to morrow — if not — your most
obedient,  very humble servant to command.

1 Just here there is a group of mutilated passages of no interest.
Out of them we save this,  as it undoubtedly refers to Mrs.  Colman,
wife of George Colman the elder,  who was a very old friend of Dr.
Burney.  In a fragment written by Susan Burney,  in 1770,  giving
some account of her  "  acquaintance,  in France in particular,"  that
is,  of those whom she had seen or known when at school in Paris,  she
says : — "  Mr.  and Mrs.  Greville are mentioned in my journals from
67,  as are Mr.  and Mrs.  Strange,  and Mr.  and Mrs.  Colman,  the latter
never see me without reminding me of the embarras I was in to explain
myself in English to them when 1 was at Paris."  Here is an instance
of Mrs.  Strange's being with her husband in Paris,  unknown to her
chronicler,  Mr.  Dennistoun,  who makes no mention of her joining him
there until 1775.

28 The Early Diary of  [1768

Tuesday,  Nov.  15th.

Monday morning,  Mrs Pringle called here — to invite me to
tea in the afternoon,  to meet the Emperor Tamerlane,1 however,
I excused myself on the score of our having a little concert
to night—"  Well then/'  said she,  "  Shall he come here  ?  "
There was no saying No — so she agreed that he should be
introduced by her son in the evening to papa — for mama is
at Lynn.  Cerveto,2 who plays the base very finely,  and his
son,  came in and,  to grace the whole set,  Mr.  Crisp.  We
had a charming concert — Hetty play'd the piano forte,  and
Charles the violin,  the two Cervetos the base,  and papa
the organ :  and afterwards we had two solos on the violincello
by young Cerveto,  who plays delightfully — and Charles shone
in a Lesson of papa's on the harpsichord.  Mr.  Pringle and
Mr.  Mackenzie  (you must know he is grandson to the unfortu
nate Earl of Cromartie,  who lost his estates,  etc.,  in the
Rebellion)3 came in during the performance,  drank a dish
of tea — and away again.  Well,  now we come to Tuesday,
that is — yesterday.  At about five o'clock ;  Hetty and I went
to Mrs.  Pringle' s,  where we found to our great joy,  Mr.  Seaton
was to be of the party — he is a charming man.  We all went

1  "  Tamerlane,"  a play  (1702-3)  by Nicholas Bowe,  which it was the
custom to act in public on the 5th of November,  as there was some
shadowing of William III.  in the Emperor Tamerlance  (who was,  for
the nonce,  represented as mild and merciful),  and of Louis XIV.  in
the vanquished Bajazet.

2 In his  "  History of Music,"  Dr.  Burney tells us that the elder
Cervetto,  a player on the violoncello,  came to England about 1739,
and remained here until his death,    at above a hundred years of
age.     His tone was  "raw,  crude,  and uninteresting."     "The younger
Cervetto,  when a child,  and hardly acquainted with the gammut had
a better tone,  and played what he was able to execute,  in a manner
much more chantant than his father."     It was the younger Cerveto
whom Dr.  Burney afterwards styled  "  the incomparable."

The Earl of Cromartie was pardoned after being sentenced to
death with Lords Lovat and Balmerino,  but his title and estates were
forfeited.

1768]  Frances Burney.  29

in our coach,  Mrs.  Pringle,  her son,  Mr.  Seaton,  and our
Ladyships to see the play of Tamerlane acted by young
gentlemen at an Academy in Soho Square.  The play was
much better performed than I expected,  and the dresses were
superb — made new for the purpose,  by the members of the
society,  and proper for the characters and country — that is
after the Turkish manner.  The farce,  too,  was very well done.
We were much entertained — Mr.  Seaton was so very clever,
droll,  and entertaining,  you can't imagine.  When the per
formance was over,  Tamerlane came to me,  to open the Ball  !
But I was frightened to death,  and beg'd and besought him
not to begin — he said one of the members always did — how
ever I prevailed,  after much fuss,  to put Hetty and Andrew
Pringle first,  and we were second.  I assure you I danced

like any thing — and called the second dance after

which,  I hopp'd about with the utmost ease and cheerfulness.

They were very perfect in the play,  except in one

speech  ;  the young gentleman who performed Selima,  suddenly
stopp'd short,  and forgot himself — it was in a love scene, —
between her — him I mean — and Axalla,  who was very tender.
She — he — soon recovered fho'  Andrew whispered us that
when it was over — "He'd lick her  !  "  —  Stratocles,  amused him
self with no other action all the time but beating,  with one
hand,  his breast,  with the other he held his hat.  I'm sure,  I
was ready to die with laughter at some of them.  Arpasia and
Moneses we all thought were the best perform'd.  Tamerlane
was midling ;  he seems to be about twenty — neither hand
some,  ugly,  agreeable or disagreeable,  and on the whole,  very
tolerable.

Thursday,  Nov.  16th.
I have had to-day the first real conversation I ever had in

my life,  except with Mr.   Crisp It was with Mr.

Seaton.  Hetty has seen him again and she is quite charm'd
with him.  He called with a message from Mrs.  Pringle this
morning and I had the pleasure of a delightful Tete a Tete with
him — for Hetty,  unluckily,  was out,  and Susette kept up stairs.
I am really half in love with him,  he is so sensible,  clever,

30 The Early Diary of  [1768

entertaining — His person is very far from recommending him
to favour — he is very little,  and far from handsome,  but he
has a sensible countenance,  and appears quite an Adonis after
half an hour's conversation.  Do you know,  he actually stay'd
above three hours with me  ?  I own to you that I am not a
little flattered that a man of his superior sense and cleverness,
should think me worth so much of his time,  which is much more
than ever I had reason to expect.  He ask'd me,  if my sister
and self were engaged to Mrs.  Pringle's this afternoon  ?
«  No — not that I know of,  at least."  "  No  ?  why Mrs.  Pringle
promised me I should meet Miss Burney and you there this
evening.  But she's a strange woman ; — she has an excellent
heart,  and understanding,  but she is not well versed in real
delicacy and good breeding.  But,  however,  I wish I could
know if you ladies were to be there — because if I go at a ven
ture,  I may be disappointed,  and then so much time is thrown
away.  I hope Miss Burney caught no cold last night,  for
she came away,  just after a dance."

F.  No Sir,  I believe not.  But you fared worse,  I fear,  it
rain'd very hard,  and Hetty says you could not get a chair or
coach.

Mr.  S.  Why,  I could have managed that better !  There
were but two chairs to be had.  Miss Crawford,  a young lady,
who was with Mrs.  Pringle,  offered to go in the same chair as
herself — and then Miss Burney could have taken me into her's.
But she would not consent to it at all — and I see you laugh
too  ! — I am afraid I made an improper proposal —

F.   Improper  !  why surely you only laugh' d yourself.

Mr.  8.  No indeed.  It is very common in Scotland,  and
in truth I know nothing of the English punctilios perhaps it
was wrong.  I feared so at the time,  when Miss Burney
refused me,  and you can't imagine how much it chagrined me.
But I see few young ladies,  and often fear I make myself
either particular or ridiculous.

F.  Indeed,  when my sister told me of it,  I very naturally
concluded you could only have made such a proposal in jest.

He caught up the words — when my sister told me of it — "  0,"
said he,  "  how much I would give to hear some of your private
conversations !  I dare say they are very curious ;  and the

1768]  Frances Burney.  31

remarks you each make,   I am sure must be very clever.      I
dont doubt but you sometimes take me to task !  "

F.  I see you are now fishing,  to draw out our sentiments :
but I shall be on my guard  !

Mr.  S.  0,  When Mrs.  Pringle trusted me with the mes
sage,  I hesitated some time,  to know whether I should call or
not.  For it is customary in my country to do so many things
which appear singular here,  that I am continually at a loss,
and should esteem it a most particular favour,  if you would
have the goodness to tell me honestly,  at once,  when you see
me making any of these gross mistakes.

F.  Fm sure it would be highly vain and conceited in us
to pretend to advise you.

Mr.  S.  Quite the contrary.  And if I had the pleasure of
hearing some of your private chats,  I doubt not I should make
myself quite another creature :  for then,  what you blamed,  I
would amend,  and what you were pleased to be contented with,
I would confirm myself in.

F.  But correction should come from a superior — in cha
racter I mean — for merely to hear that we either approved or
condemned does not make you either better or wose,  as it may
most likely,  proceed from caprice,  fancy,  or want of judgment.

Mr.  S.  I beg your pardon — I doubt not your capacity to
amend me at all.  And as I am really a stranger to the
manners of the English,  it would be great goodness.  I am so
little in company with young ladies  (I scarce know five)  that
I have not observed their little peculiarities,  etc.  The truth
is,  the young women here,  are so mortally silly and insipid,
that I cannot bear them. — Upon my word,  except you and
your sister,  I have scarce met with one worthy being spoke
to.  Their chat is all on caps — balls — cards — dress — nonsense.

F.  Upon my word,  you are unmercifully severe.

Mr.  S.  Nay,  it's truth.  You have sensible women here,
but then,  they are very devils ; — censorious,  uncharitable,
sarcastick. — The women in Scotland have twice — thrice their
freedom,  with all their virtue — and are very conversable and
agreeable — their educations are more finish'd.  In England,  I
was quite struck to see how forward the girls are made — A
child of ten years old will chat and keep you company,  while

32 The Early Diary of  [1768

her parents are busy,  or out,  etc.,  with the ease of a woman of
twenty-six — But then,  how does this education go on  ?  Not
at all  :  it absolutely stops short.  Perhaps,  I have been very
unfortunate in my acquaintance,  but so it is,  that you and your
sister are almost the only girls I have met,  who could keep
up any conversation — and I vow,  if I had gone into almost any
other house,  and talk'd at this rate to a young lady, — she
would have been sound asleep by this time.  Or at least,  she
would have amused me with gaping and yawning all the time,
and certainly,  she would not have understood a word I had
uttered.

F.  And so,  this is your opinion of our sex  ?

Mr.  8.  Ay  ;  and of mine,  too.

F.  Why you are absolutely a man hater,  a misanthrope.

Mr.  8.  Quite the contrary.  Nobody enjoys better spirits
— or more happiness.

F.  Then assuredly you have advanced most of these severe
judgments,  merely for argument,  and not as your real
thoughts.  You know,  we continually say things to support
an opinion which we have given,  that in reality we don't
above half mean.

Mr.  8.  I grant you I may have exaggerated — but nothing
more.  Look at your ladies of quality — Are they not for
ever parting with their husbands — forfeiting their reputations
— and is their life aught but dissipation  ?  In common genteel
life,  indeed,  you may now and then meet with very fine girls
— who have politeness,  sense,  and conversation — but these are
few.  And then,  look at your tradesmen's daughters — what
are they  ? — poor creatures indeed  !  all pertness,  imitation and
folly.

I said a great deal in defence of our poor sex,  and all I
could say,  but it sounds so poor compared to my opponent,
that I dare not write it.

"  And what are you studying here  ?  "  said he,  "  0 ho,
'  Marianne' !  And did you ever read  (Le Paysan Parvenu'  ?  *

1  "  Marianne "  and  "  Le Paysan Parvenu "  have still a charm of
their own.  Mr.  Seaton's comparison of these novels with Sir Charles
Graudison is not very unfair ;  with  "  Clarissa,"  it is that of works of

7768]  Frances Burney.  33

They are the two best novels that ever were wrote,  for they
are pictures of nature,  and therefore excell your Clarissas
and Grandisons far away.  Now,  Sir Charles Grandison is all
perfection,  and consequently,  the last character wo find in
real life.  In truth there's no such thing. "

F.  Indeed !  do you really think a Sir Charles Grandison
never existed  ?

Mr.  S.    Certainly not.     He's too perfect for human nature.

F.  It quite hurts me to hear anybody declare a really and
thoroughly good man never lived.  It is so much to the dis
grace of mankind.

Mr.  S.  Ay — you are too young to conceive its truth.  I
own to you,  you are therefore more happy.  I would give all
I am worth to have the same innocence and credulity of
heart I had some years since ;  and to be able to go through
life with it.

.P.  But if,  as you assert,  nobody around you would be the
same,  would not that innocence rather expose you to danger,
than increase your happiness  ?

Mr.  S.  Faith,  I dont know,  since you must be exposed
to it at all events.  Besides,  when once — which every body
must be — you are convinced of the wickedness and deceit of
men,  it is impossible to preserve untainted your own innocence
of heart.  Experience will prove the depravity of mankind,
and the conviction of it only serves to create distrust,  sus
picion,  caution,  and sometimes causelessly.

F.  But surely this experience has its advantages as well
as its inconveniences,  since without it you are liable to be
ensnared in every trap,  which,  according to your account of
mankind,  they put in your way.

Mr.  8.  Assuredly — But,  depend upon it,  no one need
fear missing this experience  !

F.  You seem to have a most shocking opinion of the
world in general.

Mr.  S.    Because the world in general merits it.      The

fancy with one of imagination,  but there i»  a parallel between the lives
of Pierre de Marivaux and Samuel Richardson.     One was born in 1688,
the other in 1689.     Both wrote well-approved novels when of mature
age;  one died in 1763,  the other in 1761.
I.  D

34 The Early Diary of  [1768

most innocent time must be the rise of any state,  when they
are unacquainted with vice.     Now Rome,  in it's infancy

F.  0,  that was not the most flourishing time of Rome,  for
in its infancy it was inhabited merely by villains and ruffians.

Mr.  S.  O but they soon forgot that,  in forming their
State :  and established excellent Laws,  and became models of
morality,  liberty,  virtue.

F.  Yes ;  and the first proof they gave of their virtue,  was
to murder their founder,  to whom they were indebted for
every thing — and farther to rob the neighbouring states of
their wives and daughters,  whom they forcibly detained.  I
can't say you have hit on the best country to shew the inno
cence of it's first state.

Mr.  8.  0 you are too hard upon me !  Well then the
rise of the Grecian cities.  They certainly were virtuous in
their infancy.  And so are all nations — in proportion to their
poverty,  for money is the source of the greatest vice,  and that
nation which is most rich,  is most wicked.

F.  But,  Sir,  this is saying,  in reality,  nothing for virtue  ;
since if these people you mention were only virtuous thro'
necessity,  and as wicked as they could be,  they are in fact full
as vicious as any country whatever.

Mr.  S.  That's very true.  In short I believe there was
always the same degree of real  (tho'  there could not be of
practical)  vice in mankind,  in all countrys,  and all ages,  as at
present.

F.  You must give me leave again to repeat that I fancy
you inveigh thus violently against the world,  partly at least
in order to support your own side of the question ;  for surely
any person who really and truly thought so like a misanthrope
as you talk,  must abhor mankind,  and shut themselves up in
a cave,  away from them all.  You absolutely appear to be the
greatest satirist,  and most severe judge of the world

Mr.  8.  0,  no.    I assure you,  nobody lives happier in it

or can have greater or more equal spirits,  but I can see the
faults of people nevertheless.

F.   Permit me to say one thing,   Sir:   You tell me that

you are a stranger,  that you know not the manners of the

ladies here ;  that you don't know this — are ignorant of that

—(a lady's going home after a ball,  for example!).      Well,

1768]  Frances Burney.  35

Sir,  give me leave to ask what you have observed  ?  Why
even all our faults !  You have not been very blind to them,
or taken much time to find them out !  You seem to have
taken the worst side of the question all the way.

Mr.  S.  O,  Ma'am,  your moat obedient But,

(looking at his watch)  what a time have I detained you
from your employments by my tongue  !  But it is so seldom
I can find ladies who,  like you and your sister,  can keep up
a conversation,  that I am loath to lose them when I do,  and
I do protest,  that to talk with a young lady who will answer
me with the sense and reason that you do now,  gives me far
more pleasure than all the plays,  operas or diversions in the
world:  for none of them can be compared to a sensible,
spirited conversation !

I should be ashamed to write down these  [much]  un
deserved,  outre compliments,  but that they are made,  as you
see,  only when they are unavoidable,  and consequently become
no compliment at all.  I am quite surprised to find how much
of his conversation I have remembered,  but as there was only
him and myself,  it was not very difficult.

[Below this eight lines are erased,  which seem to begin with
"  Writing for papa."  This is the only allusion throughout these Diaries
to what was Fanny's constant work when with her father.]

Saturday,  Nov.  18th.

[Eight scored out lines of a new paragraph end the last page left of
this year's Journal.  A few sentences may be made out]: —

We passed the most curious evening yesterday  ....  Never
sure did any conversation seem more like a scene in a comedy
....  I must tell you something of what pass'd.

[The names of Hetty and of Mrs.  Pringle may be read.  Fifty-three
years afterwards,  Fanny wrote to Hetty — "  October 21,  1821.  Though
BO sluggish to learn,  I was always observant :  do you remember Mr.
Seatou's denominating me at fifteen,  the tilent,  observant MI*s Fanny  ?"
Perhaps she broke her nearly total silence among strangers for the
first time in this very long talk with Mr.  Seaton.  This passage is
particularly interesting as giving the first example of her extra
ordinary power of retaining protracted conversations unmarked by
any special brilliancy,  or novelty' of thought.  She does not even
appear to have seen that the wily Mr.  Seaton was trying to please her
as well as her lovely sister.  Her innocent enjoyment was in the
argument,  and in repeating it in writing.]

36 The Early Diary of

1769.

Saturday,  Jany.  7th.

[Mnch has been cut from the Diary of this year,  and it has many
erasures.  It appears to have been in two or three cahiers,  which all
lie now within one quarto sheet of paper,  so much are they shrunk
in size.]

0 dear  !  O dear  !  how melancholy has been to us this last
week,  the first of this year  !  Never during my life have I
suffered more severely in my mind,  I do verily believe  ! — But
God be praised  !  I hope it is now over  !  The poor Susette,
who I told you was disappointed of her Lynn journey by
a violent cold,  was just put to Bed somewhat better when I
wrote to you this day se'night — I soon after went to her,
and found her considerably worse.  She talked to me in a
most affecting style,  her voice and manner were peculiarly
touching.

"  My dear Fanny,"  cried she,  "  I love you dearly — my dear
sister  ! — have I any more sisters  ?  " — 0 how I was terrified —
shocked — surprised  !  —  "  O yes  !  "  continued she,  "  I have
sister Hetty — but I don't wish her to come to me now,
because she'll want me to drink my barley water,  and I
can't — but I will if you want me — and where's papa  ?  "  For
my life I could not speak a word,  and almost choak'd myself
to prevent my sobbing.  "  0 dear  !  I shall die  !  "  "  My
dear girl."  l  "  O but I must though  ! — But I can't help it —
it is not my fault you know  !  " — Tho'  I almost suffocated my
self with smothering my grief,  I believe she perceived it,  for
she kiss'd me,  and again said  "  How I love you !  my dear
Fanny  ! — I love you dearly  !  "  "  My sweet Girl !  "  cried I—
"  you — you can't love me so much as I do you  !  "  "  If I was.
Charly I should love you — indeed I should2 Oh  ! — I shall

1 Here two or three words are torn away.

2 This seems to be,  not Charles,  but little Charlotte,  the youngest
of the first family of Dr.  Burney.

1769]  Frances Burney.  37

die !  " — "But not yet,  my dear love — not yet  !  "    "  Oh yes — I
shall ! — I should like to see papa first thoV

In short,  she talk'd in a manner inconceivably affecting —
and how greatly I was shocked,  no words can express.  My
dear papa out of town too  ! — We sent immediately for Mr.
Heckford,  an excellent apothecary,  who has attended our
family many years.  He bled her immediately,  and said it
would not be safe to omit it — She continued much the same
some hours.  Between 1 and 2 I went to bed,  as she was
sleeping,  and Hetty and the maid sat up all night,  for Hetty
was very urgent that I should.  She had a shocking night.
At 7 o'clock Mr.  Heckford was again call'd.  She had a
blister put on her back ;  he beg'd that a physician might be
directly applied to,  as she was in a very dangerous way  !  —
O my good God !  what did poor Hetty and myself
suffer  ! —

Dr.  Armstrong was sent for — and my good Aunt Nanny
who is the best nurse in England,  tender,  careful,  and affec
tionate,  and but too well experienced in illness.  We were
much inclined to send an express after my dear papa to
Lynn,  but resolved to wait while we possibly could.  Unfor
tunately Mr.,  Mrs.  and Miss Molly Young all came very early to
spend the day here — I never went to them,  or from Susy,
till dinner,  and then I could eat none,  nor speak a word.
Never,  I believe,  shall I forget the shock I received that night.
The fever increased — she could not swallow her medicines,
and was quite delirious — Mr.  Heckford said indeed she had
a very poor chance of recovery  !  He endeavour' d himself to
give her her physick,  which he said was absolutely necessary,
but in vain — she rambled — breathed short,  and was terribly
suffering — her disorder he pronounced an inflammation of the
breast.1 — "  I am sorry to say it,"  said he,  "  but indeed at best
she stands a very poor chance  !  "  I felt my blood freeze — I
ran out of the room in an anguish beyond thought — and all I
could do was to almost rave — and pray,  in such an agony  !
O what a night she had  !  We all sat up — She slept per
petually,  without being at all refreshed,  and was so light-

1 In modern phrase,  of the Itmgs.

38 The Early Diary of  [1769

headed !  I kept behind her pillow,  and fed her with barley
water in a tea-spoon the whole night,  without her knowing of
it at all — indeed she was dreadfully bad  !  On Monday how
ever,  the Dr.  and apothecary thought her somewhat better,
tho'  in great danger.  We all sat up again.  We wrote to
papa,  not daring to conceal the news,  while her life was thus
uncertain — On Tuesday,  they ventured to pronounce her out
of danger — We made Hetty go to bed,  and my aunt and I
sat up again — and on Wednesday,  we two went to bed,  the
dear girl continuing to mend,  which she has,  tho'  very slowly,
ever since.  My beloved papa and mama have both wrote to

us quite,  kindly

Jan7.,  Tuesday.

My sweet Susette is almost well.  I think of nothing else
but to thank God Almighty enough,  which I am obliged to run
out of the room to do twenty times a day,  for else I cannot
breathe — I feel as if I had an asthma except when I am doing
that.

Wednesday.

Papa's come back,  and we are all happier than ever we were
in our lives.

Thursday,  Jan.  19th.

Well,  my dear creature,  we have great hopes and expecta
tions of happiness to-morrow.  Susette is quite recovered.
We are going to a great party at Mrs.  Pringle's — When
Susette is well enough,  she is still to go to Lynn where mama
and Charttie and Bessy and Miss Allen will pass the
winter.  Adieu — pour le present.

Saturday,  Jany.  21st.

There was a very great party at Mrs.  Pringle's  ......     We

danced till 2 o'clock this morning.  Mr.  Crawford with Hetty,
and a Mr.  Armstrong with me — a young man with a fine
person,  and a handsome face,  but who made me laugh to so
immoderate a degree that I was quite ashamed ;  for he aim'd at
being a wit,  and yet kept so settled a solemn countenance,

1769]  Frances Burney.  39

with such languishing eyes,    that he made himself quite
ridiculous.

N.B. — Pages 4 and 5 burnt.   [This is in Mdme.  D'Arblay's writing.]

Dr.  Armstrong I see now,  at last,  with real pleasure,  for
I have seen him lately with a very contrary feeling.  He
asked Susette many questions concerning her health — "  I can
tell you/'  said he,  "  you have had a very narrow escape  !  you
was just gone  !  the Gates of Heaven were in view —  "  O,"
cried I,  "  they shut them on her — I fancy she was not good
enough to enter  !  "  "  O yes/'  answered he,  "  they were very
ready to receive her there — but I would not let her depart, —
I thought she might as well stay here a little while longer." 1

Monday,  Feby.  13th.

The ever charming,  engaging,  beloved Mr.  Crisp spent the
whole day with us yesterday.  I love him more than ever —
every time I see him I cannot help saying so — never can
there have been a more truly amiable man — he appears to
take a parental interest in our affairs,  and I do believe  [loves]
us all with a really fatherly affection.  The frankness — the sin-

1 Dr.  Armstrong left strong impressions on the memory of Fanny.
When she was eighty,  she wrote that  "  the very sight of him was
medicinal,"  and that  "his prescriptions were unsparing,  but well-
poised."  Dr.  Buruey and Dr.  Armstrong were friendly before Dr.
Armstrong was sent to Burney,  when he had a fever,  by another
Scotchman  (the Houble.  and Revd.  Mr.  Home).  Dr.  Armstrong put
blister after blister on Buruey until he was  (as his daughter says)
almost covered with blisters,  and almost flayed alive.  He theu
ordered Burney to live out of London.  Thus Armstrong was the
indirect cause of Fanny's being born at Lynn.  Dr.  Armstrong was one
of those who have been called  "the unpoetical poets"  of the last
century.  The  "  Art of Preserving Health"  was published in 1744 —
the year in which Dr.  Buruey went to London.  It is commonly to be
found in the duodecimo poets of the last century,  side by side of,  or
bound with,  "  The Union,"  and the poems of Allan Ramsay and Blair.
It has been lifted bodily into several selections of poetry,  such as
"  The Elegant Extracts,"  and Dr.  Aikin's  "  British Poets."  Dr.  Arm
strong is said to have written four stanzas  (74-5-6-7)  in the first canto
of his friend Thomson's  "Castle of Indolence."  They aro medical
stanzas,  showing the ill effects of indolence and  "  false luxury."

40 The Early Diary of  [1769

cerity with which he corrects and reproves us,  is more grate
ful to me,  than the most flattering professions could be,
because it is far,  far more seriously and really kind and
friendly.  His very smile is all benevolence as well as play
fulness.  He protests he will take no denial from papa for
Hetty and me to go to Chesington this summer,  and told
papa to remember he had bespoke us  :  I fancy he is weary of
asking almost,  and I am sure my dear papa is tired of refusing
— for what in the world can be more disagreeable,  more pain
ful to a mind generous and good as his  ? — I declare 1 am
almost ashamed to hear Chesington mentioned before him,  and
cannot for my life join in in treaties to go,  tho'  my heart
prompts me most furiously.

[The proceedings on  "  Valentine's  "  Day — Feb.  14 — have been
erased,  but the date remains legible.]

[Poland Street],  Feby.  16.

How delightful,  how enviable a tranquility and content do
I at present enjoy  !  I have scarce a wish,  and am happy and
easy as my heart can desire.  All are at Lynn but us three,
Papa,  Hetty,  and I,  so that I am very much alone,  but to that
I have no objection.  I pass my time in working,  reading,

and thrumming the harpsichord I am now reading

Stanyan's Grecian History.  Tho'  the words are not obsolete,
the style and expressions are not at all familiar,  and many of
the latter what at present,  I believe,  would not be reckoned
extremely elegant.  But it is,  nevertheless,  a very clever
book,  which I need not say,  since it is generally approved ;
but that's no matter.1 Susy and I correspond constantly.  Her
letters would not disgrace a woman of 40 years of age.  My
dear papa is in charming health and good humour,  tho'
hurried to death — You will perhaps admire the consistency
of my expressions,  and allow most cordially that I have a
right to criticize others — Prithee,  my good friend,  don't

Temple Stanyan,  the author of this Grecian History,  was,  for
some time,  British Minister at Constantinople.  He had previously
written  "  An Account of Switzerland."  "  The Swiss,"  said Dr.  John
son,  in 1778,  "  admit that there is but one error in Stanyan."

1769]  Frances Burney.  41

trouble me with any impertinent remarks, — past twelve o'clock !
and I must rise at seven to-morrow  !  I must to bed imme
diately — I write now from a pretty neat little closet of mine
that is in the bed chamber,  where I keep all my affairs — Tell
me,  my dear,  what Heroine ever yet existed without her own
closet  ?

Sunday Xight.

My Grand-Daddy is here to night,  to the very great satisfac
tion of us all.  He gave us a great deal of excellent general
advice,  and told us very gravely this — "  Experience is never
good till  'tis bought."  Hetty,  in a very gay and flighty
manner assented,  and added that every body should have ex
perience of their own,  [and]  not follow advice from other
people's  "  — "  Ay/'  returned he,  "  let them have it ! — and it

must be paid for too  !    yes,  well paid for  !  "  1 O,  I

must tell you that I have at last fallen in Love,  and with a
gentleman whom I have lately become acquainted with  :  he is
about sixty or seventy — has the misfortune to be hump-backed,
crooked legged,  and rather deform'd in his face — But,  in sober
sadness,  I am delighted with the Dean of Coleraine,  (whose
picture this is,)  and which I have very lately read.  The
piety,  the zeal,  the humanity,  goodness and humility of this
charming old man have won my heart — Ah !  who will not
envy him the invaluable treasure  ?  2

Saturday.

If my dear Susette was here I should want nothing.  We
are still only us three together.  I seldom quit home con-

1 A passage in the  "  Memoirs of Dr.   Burney  "  (p.  135 vol.  iii)  con
firms the conjecture that  "  My Grand-Daddy  "  was Mr.  Crisp.      Dr.
JBuruey,  who was nearly twenty years younger than he was,  used to
call him  "  Daddy."     Hence  "  Grand-Daddy."     A little later on he is
brought closer still to Hetty and Fanny by being called  "  Daddy."
All Fanny's grand- parents,  except Dr.  Buruey's mother,  seem to have
been dead when she wrote this.

2  "The Dean of Coleraiue"  (1752)  is a novel in three volumes,  from
the French of the Abbe Prevost,    best known as the author of
"  Manou L'Escaut."     The French title is  "  Le Doyen de Killeriue,
histoire morale,"  etc.

42 The Early Diary of  [1769

sidering my youth and opportunities.  But why should I when
I am so happy in it  ?  following my own vagaries,  which my
papa never controls,  I never can  [want]  employment,  nor
sigh for amusement.  We have a library which is an everlast
ing resource when attacked by the spleen — I have always a
sufficiency of work to spend,  if I pleased,  my whole time at it
— musick is a feast which can never grow insipid — and,  in
short,  I have all the reason that  .ever mortal had to be con
tented with my lot — and I am contented with,  I am grateful
for it !  If few people are more happy,  few are more sensible
of their happiness.  But what of that  ? — is there any merit in
paying the small tribute of gratitude,  where blessings such as
I have received compel it from me  ?  How strongly,  how for
cibly do I feel to whom I owe all the earthly happiness I en
joy  ! — it is to my father !  to this dearest,  most amiable,  this
best beloved — most worthy of men  ! — it is his goodness to
me which makes all appear so gay,  it is his affection which
makes my sun shine.

But if to this parent I owe all my comfort — it is to my
God I owe him  !  and that God who hath given to me this
treasure which no earthly one can equal,  alone knows the
value I set on it. — Yet what value can compare with  [its]
worth? — the worth of such a treasure  ?  a parent who makes
the happiness of his children  !  I am in a moralising humour.
— How truly does this Journal contain my real and undis
guised thoughts ! — I always write in it according to the
humour I am in,  and if any stranger was accidentally reading
it,  how capricious — inconsistent and whimsical I must appear  !
One moment flighty and half mad, — the next sad and melan
choly.  No matter !  it's truth and simplicity are it's sole re
commendation,  and I doubt not but I shall hereafter receive
great pleasure from reviewing and almost renewing my youth,
and my former sentiments,  unless,  indeed,  the latter part of
my life is doomed to be as miserable as the beginning is the
reverse,  and then indeed,  every line here will rend my heart !
—I sigh from the bottom of it at this dreadful idea,  I think I

am in a humour to write a funeral sermon — Hetty

is gone to Ranelagh,  and I fancy does not sympathize with
me  !  that is,  not just now.

1769]  Frances Burney.  43

[Here,  in whose writing is uncertain,  are the words  :  "15 burnt
to 21."]

*       *       #       *       *

Our party last evening was large and brilliant.  Mr.
Greville,  the celebrated Dr.  Hawkesworth,  Mr.  Crisp and my
cousin dined with us.  In the evening,  Mrs.  and Miss
Turner of Lynn,1 two gentlemen named Vincent,  and Mr.
Partridge made a very agreeable addition to our company.

Dr.  Hawkesworth does not shine in conversation so much
superior to others as from his writings might be expected.
Papa calls his talking book language — for I never heard a man
speak in a style which so much resembles writing.  He has an
amazing flow of choice words and expressions.  'Twould be non
sense to say he is extremely clever and sensible ;  while the
Adventurers exist,  that must be universally acknowledged, — but
his talents seem to consist rather in the solid than in the
brilliant.  All he says is just,  proper,  and better expressed than
most written language ;  but he does not appear to me to be at
all what is called a wit,  neither is his conversation sprightly
or brilliant.  He is remarkably well bred and attentive,  consider
ing how great an author he is ;  for without that consideration,
he would be reckoned so.2 He has a small tincture of affectation,
I believe; — but I have quite forgot the wise resolution I so
often make of never judging of people by first sight !  Pity  !
that we have all the power of malting resolutions so readily,
and so properly,  and that few or none are capable of keeping

1 The Turners were of the family of Sir John Turner,  who had,
years before,  procured the organist's place for Dr.  Burney at Lynn
Regis.     A Mr.  Partridge was,  in 1755,  Recorder of Lynn.    A Mr.  Vin
cent was a friend of both Mr.    Crisp and Dr.  Buruey.     At his house
they accidentally met,  after a separation of many years,  during which
Mr.  Crisp had travelled,  and Dr.  Buruey married and lost a wife whom
Mr.  Crisp had never seen,  but whose children he was to treat as his
own.    Mr.  Vincent may have been the same Vincent who was for thirty
years the chief player on the haut-bois at Covent Garden Theatre and
in the Queen's baud.

2 If by no means  "a great author,"  Dr.  John Hawkesworth was a
pleasant and fluent writer,  who could turn his pen to anything,  and
was agreeable to readers,  and popular with publishers.     He condensed
the Parliamentary Debates for  "  Sylvanus Urban."     For two years he

44 The Early Diary of  [1769

them!  But here again am I judging of others'  want of
fortitude by my own weakness  !  O dear,  I am always to be
wrong  !  However,  I think I may prevail on myself not to be
my own judge rashly.  Why should I think I am always to
be wrong?  I know not I am sure;  certain it is I have
hitherto never been otherwise  ;  but that ought not to dis
courage me,  since so inconsistent is human nature allowed to
be,  that for that very reason  'tis impossible I should be the
same creature at the conclusion as at the beginning of my
life.  So who knows but I may turn out to be a wiseacre  ?

0  !   I am to go to a wedding to-morrow  —  the partys  —  one
Mr.  John Hatton,  glass polisher,1 and Mrs.  Betty Langley,
spinster,  our old cook.      Perhaps I may give you,    Miss

brought out  "  The Adventurer,"  writing half the papers himself.  Like
Dr.  Johnson,  too,  he wrote an Eastern tale.  He edited  "  Swift,"  he
translated  "  Telemachus,"  he even found words for the music of a
fairy piece,  nay,  of an oratorio,  or more.  Like Dr.  Johnson,  too,  he
had the ill-will of Sir John Hawkins,  who wrote of him mainly to run
him down.  Hawkesworth and Hawkins had begun life in the same
manner,  that is,  as Presbyterians and lawyer's clerks,  and seen much
of each other as neighbours,  if not friends.  Kind Sir John tells us
that Hawkesworth had but  "a small stock of learning,"  that he was
"ostensibly the.  governor of a school for the Education of young
females,"  and became so unduly elevated by receiving a Lambeth
degree of D.C.L.,  that he neglected his early friends,  etc.  Sir John's
"  derangement of Epitaphs  "  was such that he meant to praise
"  Easselas,"  when he said that  "  '  Easselas'  is a specimen of our language
scarcely to be paralleled  ;  it is written in a style refined to a degree of
immaculate purity,  and displays the whole force of turgid eloquence!"
The best excuse which can be made for Hawkins,  who has written so
harshly of Dr.  Johnson,  and many other men of letters,  is to be found
in a letter from H.  Walpole to Mason,  in 1782.  —  "  Why do you fall so
foul of my friend,  Sir John Hawkins,  who is a most inoffensive,  good
being?  Do not wound harmless simpletons,  you who can gibbet
convicts of magnitude."  Therefore  "ostensibly"  may not mean aught
of ill if  "  turgid  "  be laudatory.  The rest of the meaning is that
Mrs.  Hawkesworth kept a girls'  boarding-school at Bromley,  Kent.
As for neglect of early friends,  here we find Hawkesworth with Burney,
whose acquaintance he had made at the house of Fulk Greville in 1745,
before he was  "  elated  "  —  duly or unduly.

1 This seems to be meant as a pleasantry upon Hatton's being a
footman.

1769]  Frances Burney.  45

Nobody,  an account of this affair to-morrow.  I never had
the honour of being at a wedding in my life — but tho'  this
will be the first,  I fancy it will not be the last too.

I am vastly sorry Mr.  Crisp is gone — I shall think of him
every Sunday at least,  all my life I believe. — I am now going
to charm myself for the third time with poor Sterne's
"  Sentimental Journey/'  *****

Monday Eve,  May 15th.

Well,  the wedding is over,  the good folks are joined for
better for worse. — A shocking clause that ! — 'tis preparing
one to lead a long journey,  and to know the path is not
altogether strew'd with roses. — This same marriage ceremony
is so short,  I really should have doubted its validity had I been
the bride ;  though perhaps she may not find the road it leads
her to very short ;  be that as it may,  she must now trudge on,
she can only return with her wishes,  be she ever so wearied.
We have spent an exceedingly agreeable day,  I speak for
myself and a few more at least,  I will not answer for the bride
and the groom's feelings,  at least not for the latter — tho'  they
neither of them appeared miserable ;  but had J been that latter,
I fear I could not have said so much for myself. — As to the bride,
she is blythe as the month ;  if one can compare in any degree
a weed of December,  with the fragrance of May ;  for a weed
in truth it is,  and a weed not in its first prime.  But I must

give some account of the wedding To begin with the

Company,  first,  The Bride.     A maiden of about fifty

She was dressed in a white linnen gown,  and with all the
elegance which marks her character and station,  having the
honour to be cook to Mr.  Burney.  The Bridegroom.  A
young man who had the appearance of being her son.  A
good,  modest,  sober,  and decent youth.  He was in blue
trim'd with red.  .  .  .  The Father  (of the day)  Mr.  Charles
Burney,  Junr.  .  .  .  Not merely her husband,  but her father
too was young enough to own her for a mother.  .  .  .  The
Bride's maids,  three.  1st,  Miss Anne Burney,  who may count
years with the bride herself.  .  .  .  2nd,  Miss Esther
Burney.  .  .  .  And 3rd,  Miss Frances Burney

46 The Early Diary of  [1769

We went in papa's coach,  as many as it would hold, — the
gentlemen were obliged to walk — which condescension is not
inconsiderable,  for Mr.  Somebody,  and the bridegroom too,  have
the honour of being footmen to very topping people  !  The
bride supported her spirits amazingly.1  ....

[On or just after]  Monday,  May 22.

A droll mistake happened to me to day — We live commonly
in a parlour which is forwards,  and I saw a gentleman walking
at the other side of the street who stopt before our house,
and looked at the window some time — and then crossed the
way and knocked at the door.  Papa happened to be at home.
— "  Who is it  ?  "  said he. — I told him I did not know,  but
I believed some man who had a tolerable assurance by his
staring. — The gentleman came immediately into the parlour,
and after asking papa how he did,  came up to me,  and said
— "  I have called in ma'am,  on purpose to pay my respects to

you — and ."  I stared,  and could not recollect I had ever

seen him before,  nor imagine who it was,  and,  was quite at a
loss what to do,  but my papa relieved me by saying —

"  O  !   this is not your acquaintance — this is her sister — "

"  No  !  "  cried he — "  well,  I never saw any thing so like  !
I really thought it was Miss Burney  !  "

Helas  !  what flattery !  But still I was puzzled to think
who it was,  till by papa's conversation I discovered at last he
was Lord Pigot,  .  .  .  who I had heard was of the party
yesterday at Mrs.  PleydelFs.  But how fortunate it was for
me that papa chanced to be at home — I should have been
horridly confused at his mistake else,  for nothing on earth is
so disagreeable as to be obliged to tell any body you don't
know them  ; — it is mortifying on both sides.  His Lordship
did papa the honour to invite him and us,  he said to a con
cert,  and to spend the evening at his house but as,  I knew it
could not be really meant for me,  I begged not to go ;  and

Eleven years afterwards,  Susan,  when writing to tell Fanny of
their Sister Hetty's serious illness,  caused by fright during the riots
of 1780,  says,  "I am sure you will rejoice to hear that good creature
Betty Hatton is with her."

1769]  Frances Bwmey.  47

papa thought the same,  so they've gone without me  ....
Younger sisters are almost different beings from elder one's,
but,  thank God,  it is quite and unaffectedly without repining
or envy that I see my elder sister so continually gad about
and visit,  etc,  when I rest at home.  I fancy Lord Pigot is
a very agreeable man — he is undoubtedly polite and lively.
Charles and I sup alone.  We are reading that satirical,
entertaining poem the  "  New Bath Guide " — but I have
read very little lately,  tho'  I doat on nothing equally ;

but I have had sufficient employment in working

In speaking of Lord Pigot's taking me for Hetty,  my
papa accounted for the mistake by saying — "  You may have
observed,  my Lord,  that people who live together,  naturally
catch the looks and air of one another,  and,  without having
one feature alike,  they contract a something in the whole of the
countenance which strikes one as a resemblance.  There are
two ladies who your Lordship very likely has seen,  Mrs.
Greville and Mrs.  Crewe,  mother and daughter.  In examining
their faces,  they are as different as one face can be from another ;
yet by living together,  they have accustomed themselves so
much to the same habits and manners,  that I never see one,
without thinking of the other."

Thursday,  June.

What an age since I last wrote  !  I have been wavering in
my mind whether I should ever again touch this Journal,
unless it were to commit it to the flames — for this same mind
of mine would fain persuade me that this same Journal of
mine is a very ridiculous — trifling,  and useless affair;  and
as such,  would wisely advise me to part with it for ever — but
I felt at the same time a regret,  a loss of some thing in for
bearing to here unburthen myself the pleasure which  (in
imagination at least)  awaits me in the perusal of these sheets
hereafter,  pleaded strongly in favour of continuing to encrease
them — and now that I have once more taken courage to begin,
I think and already feel twice the content I did while this
dear little book was neglected.

48 The Early Diary of  [1769

I have much to write,  and as I am to day entirely alone,
why I have both time and opportunity,  but as I am not at pre
sent much inclined to be particular — I shall only mention a
few occurrences that are past. —

In the first place,  my sister and self lately spent the evening
at Mrs.  Pringle's. — Her party was — Mr.  Scot,  who had been
preceptor to the King when he was Prince of Wales  * — Mr.
Seton,  and Mrs.  and Mr.  Debbieg,  his sister,  and brother in
law,  who are a very polite,  sensible couple.  The company
divided into little partys immediately — Mr.  Debbieg — his
lady,  Mrs.  Pringle and Andrew went to cards — a diversion
I always avoid — Mr.  Seton and Hetty amused themselves
very comfortably together  ....  in an uninterrupted tete-a-
tete.  If Mr.  Scot had not been there,  I should have made
some excuse for coming home;  but as he was,  I was ex
tremely well contented to stay,  for he disliked cards as much
as myself,  and very good naturedly devoted the whole evening

1 George Lewis Scott  (named after George I.,  at whose Court of
Hanover his father held an appointment)  was,  nevertheless,  reputed to
be a Jacobite.  From the company in which he is found in these
journals,  it seems very likely that such was the case.  He was recom
mended by Bolingbroke,  through Lord Bathurst,  as sub-preceptor to
the Prince of Wales,  in 1752.  Then there was a turmoil — as it was
thought he might give his pupil notions of the divine right of kings —
nay,  even persuade him of the justice of yielding his claims to those of
the Stewarts.  About the same time Scott married Sarah Robinson,
younger sister of the better -known Mrs.  Montague.  Sarah was called
"  The Pea"  because the sisters were  "  as like as two peas."  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Scott soon separated.  Her friends said that he was a bad man,
but did not say why.  A rumour was spread that he had tried to poison
her.  His pupil,  George III.,  who always remembered him with affec
tion,  said,  long afterwards,  that it was  "  a gross and wicked calumny,"
invented by an intriguing upper preceptor,  Dr.  Hayter,  Bishop of
Norwich,  "  against a man of the purest mind,  and most innocent con
duct."  Scott was made a Commissioner of Excise as a reward for his
services,  and is found well spoken of,  even by Walpole and Mason.
He was a friend of Gibbon.  In 1777,  when Johnson was preparing his
prefaces to  "  Lives of the Poets,"  Boswell wrote to him — "  I believe
George Lewis Scott and Dr.  Armstrong are Thomson's only surviving
companions while he lived in,  or about London."  He was talked of
as  "  George Lewis"  to mark him out from a less amiable and reputable
Scott,  who was,  like him,  a very tall man,  and a writer — Mr.  Scott,
chaplain to Lord Sandwich.

1769]  Frances Burney.  49

—  (till supper separated parties)  to me.  That he is very
clever,  his office of Preceptor ought to make undoubted — and
he is very sociable and facetious too,  and entertained me
extremely with droll anecdotes and storys among the Great
and about the Court  ....  All the party was surprised to
see that he would,  and that I could be so sociable and inti
mate,  but he was so good-natured and unassuming that I
was quite at my ease with him.

Not long after,  Mrs.  Debbieg and Mr.  Seton called here
...  to invite Hetty and me to drink tea and spend the
evening with the former. — Hetty joyfully accepted the invi
tation — it was not convenient for me to go,  and so she made
my excuses.  She spent an exceeding agreeable evening —
they all made very civil enquirys about me,  and  .  .  .  Mr.
Seton offered to fetch me,  so did Andrew — and Major Debbieg
himself — but Hetty,  who knew I should not be delighted to
see them all here,  made excuses for me.

Miss Crawford called here lately — she is very earnest for
us to visit her — but we are not very earnest about the
matter : — however,  the laws of custom make our spending
one evening with her necessary.  O  !  how I hate this vile
custom which obliges us to make slaves of ourselves  ! — to
sell the most precious property we boast,  our time ; — and to
sacrifice it to every prattling impertinent who chooses to de
mand it ! — Yet those who shall pretend to defy this irksome
confinement of our happiness,  must stand accused of incivility,
— breach of manners — love of originality, — and  .  .  .  what
npt.  But,  nevertheless,  .  .  .  they who will nobly dare to be
above submitting to chains their reason disapproves,  them
shall I always honour — if that will be of any service to them  !
For why should we not be permitted to be masters of our
time  ? — Why may we not venture to love,  and to dislike —
and why,  if we do,  may we not give to those we love the
richest jewel we own,  our time  ? — What is it can stimulate us
to bestow that on all alike  ? — 'tis not affection — 'tis not a
desire of pleasing — or if it is,  'tis a very weak one ; — no  !  'tis
indolence — 'tis custom — custom — which is so woven around

I.  £

50 The Early Diary of  [1769

us— which so universally commands us— which we all blame
—and all obey,  without knowing why or wherefore— which
keeps our better reason,  that sometimes dares to show it's
folly,  in subjection— and which,  in short,  is a very ridiculous
affair,  more particularly as it hath kept me writing on it til]
have forgot what introduced it— I feel myself in no excellent
mood— I will walk out and give my spirits another turn,  and

then resume my pen.

Sunday afternoon.     June.

Now don't imagine that because I have not wrote sooner
since the walk I proposed taking in order to amend my
spirits and temper,  I have so ill succeeded as not to have
gain'd the desired point till now— no,  no,  I have been in most
exceeding good humour I assure you,  tho'  not at all inclined to
write :  nor indeed am I at present,  but as I believe I shall not
have time to employ myself in this pretty manner again soon,
and as I have a most remarkable and very interesting affair to
relate,  I have resolved,  neck or nothing,  to take the pen once  '
again in hand.  This same affair is that —

My papa went last Monday to Oxford,  in order to take a
Doctor's Degree in Musick :    Is not that a grand affair  ?-
He composed an Anthem by way of exercise to be perform'd
on the occasion,  in which his pupil Miss Barsanti was to be
the principal singer,  and make her first appearance in publick.
....     His Anthem was performed last Thursday,  and gave
much satisfaction — indeed the musick of it is delightful — Poor  (
Barsanti was terrified to death,  and her mother,  who was among
the audience,  was so much affected,  that she fainted away;
but by immediate assistance soon revived.1 However,  not
withstanding her fears and apprehensions,  Barsanti came off
with flying colours and met with great applause    ....
My dear,  kind papa wrote us a short note to let us know all

1 Miss Barsanti  (we are told by Lsetitia Hawkins),  was the daughter
of  "a little old Lucchese,"  a humble musician,  and of a Scotch
woman  ;  who,  in later days,  when her daughter Jenny acted in Dublin,
was known by the Irish as  "  the big woman."  Jenny suited herself
to both the Hawkinses and the Burneys — that is,  to the two His
torians of Music,  and their families,  and was helped by both to make
way as a singer,  and afterwards as an actress.

Frances Burney.  51

was well over the moment the performance was finished The

very great kindness of his thinking of us at so busy a time,
I shall remember with the most grateful pleasure all my

llfe As Hetty keeps the letter,  I will copy it here,

for I shall always love to read it :   ....

"  Oxford,  Thursday June 22nd,

"  past 2 o'clock.
'  My dear Girls,

'  I know it will please you much to hear that the per
formance of my Anthem is just very well over,  not one mis
take of consequence — Barsanti did extremely well,  and all
was much applauded  —  I shall to-morrow have both my
Degrees  (for I must first take that of Batchelor of Musick)
with great unanimity and reputation — Dr.  Hayes is very

civil ;  and lends me his robe with a very good grace l Adieu

— I know not when I shall get home/'

This made us extremely happy.  We have pass'd this week
quite alone,  but very comfortably and cheerfully.  And now
for something concerning myself,  at which I am a little un
easy.

As I found Friday was to be the Day of Days that my
father took his degrees,  as soon as we had read this letter,  I
ran upstairs and wrote one to him in verse — which I am hor
ridly afraid he will think impertinent — I read it to Hetty
before I sent it,  and she persuaded me it would merely have

the effect I intended,  namely to make him laugh I wish it

may,  but I shan't be happy till he comes home I

will copy from memory the foolish thing I sent,  'tis an attempt
at Cranbo — and a poor one enough.

1 Dr.  William Hayes was Heather Professor of Music in the Univer-
nty of Oxford,  from 1741 to 1777;  University Organist at St.  Mary's,
etc.,  etc.  Dr.  Burney has written,  in a memorandum which refers to
a time before he was eighteen,  "The celebrated Felton,  and after him,
the Erst Dr.  Hayes,  came from Oxford to Shrewsbury on a tour,  while
-  was studying hard,  without instruction or example;  and they
amazed and stimulated me so forcibly by their performance on the
organ,  as well as by their encouragement,  that I thenceforward went to
work with an ambition and fury that would hardly allow me to eat or
sleep."

52 The Early Diary of  [1769

TO DOCTOR LAST.1

1.

0 aid me,  ye Muses of ev'ry degree,
O give me the standish2 of Mulberry Tree

Which was cut for the Author of  "  Ferney  ;  "
0 give me a quill to the stump worn by Gray,
And paper which cut was on Milton's birth -day,
To write to the great Doctor Burney.

2.

0 Doctor,  of Doctors,  the Last and the Best,
By Fortune most honoured,  distinguished and blest,

1 A pun,  alluding to the character in the  "  Devil on Two Sticks."-
(AutJior's Note.)

"  The Devil upon Two Sticks,"  a most diverting satire in three acts
(called by Foote a comedy),  brought him above three thousand
pounds during the acting season of 1768.  It was directed mainly
against doctors of all degrees,  up to the President of the College of
Physicians,  Sir William Browne, — a very odd,  clever man,  who was
then at war with the Licentiates of Medicine.  In this piece,  an Irish
man and a Scot,  a Jew,  and a Quaker,  all doctors,  are against Dr.
Hellebore  (Browne).  He is preparing to repulse their attack upon
his College in Warwick Lane,  when Last,  a shoemaker,  enters,
seeking his way to the College,  to obtain a doctor's license,  because,
though  "  bred-up  "  a shoemaker,  he was  "  born a doctor,  being the
seventh son of a seventh son."  The Devil upon Two Sticks directs
him to the College,  and assumes the form of Doctor Hellebore,  with his
"  large wig and superior importance."  Foote,  who acted this part,
closely copied the dress of Sir William Browne,  who had wit and good-
humour enough,  although then past eighty,  to send him his own muff,
to make what  (as he said)  was so good a personation as to his coat,
sword,  wig,  and eyeglass,  complete.  Last is licensed,  after a very droll
.  examination,  by the supposed Hellebore ;  who then proceeds to lec
ture upon  "  some notable discoveries of his own  "  (which amount to a
theory of germs),  of which much mirth is made by Foote.  We meet
Sir William for a few minutes hereafter.  "  Dr.  Last's Examination  "
was,  shortly afterwards,  extracted from the comedy,  and played occa
sionally as an interlude of one act,  although the whole piece still held
the stage.

2 An ink standish cut out of a mulberry tree,  planted by Shake
speare,  for Mr.  Keate,  author of  "  Ferney — An Epistle to Voltaire."
(Author's Note.)

Of  "  Ferney — an Epistle,  etc.,"  H.  Walpole writes,  with a sneer,
that it  "  gives M.  de Voltaire an account of his own tragedies."

1769]  Frances Burney.  53

And may you for ever be her nigh  !
O smile  (if a Doctor's permitted to smile),
Your new acquired l gravity lessen awhile

To read this,  O dread Doctor Burney.

3.

For the letter most kind we to day did receive
With grateful affection our bosoms do heave ;

And to see you,  0 grave Sir !  how yearn I  !
'Tis true the time's short since you last was in town,
Yet both fatter and taller you doubtless are grown,

Or you'll make but a poor Doctor Burney.

4.

For I never can think of a Doctor,  not big
As a Falstaff,  and not with a full bottomed wig,

And the sly air Fame gives an atterney ;
Not more at the bag did the citizen's stare
Of Harley,  when Harley was made a Lord Mayor,

Than I at the thin Doctor Burney.2

5.

O !  may Wisdom,  which still to Good Humour gives birth,
May fatness with dignity,  goodness with mirth,

Still attend you,  and speed your town journey  !
And O  !   till the hour that Death us shall part
May Fanny a corner possess of the heart

Of the owner of her's,  Doctor Burney  !

1  "  Natural  "  was first written.

2 In 1761 Foote makes Smirk,  who is suddenly called upon by Prig
("the greatest man in the world in his way that ever was,  or ever will be,")
to take his place as an auctioneer,  consult his wife as to what manner of
wig he is to wear at the sale.    She tells him that "  a bag is too boyish,  de
ficient in dignity for the solemn occasion."     In 1778,  Bos well writes —
"  There is a general levity in the age.     We leave physicians now with
bag-wigs."     Full-bottomed wigs were worn by physicians and others
who would not appear light-minded.     The Aldermen of London wore
such wigs when waiting upon the King and Queen in 1761,  with an
a'ddress after their marriage.     So,  probably,  they did in Barley's pro
cession as Lord Mayor,  in 1768.     Perhaps he ought to have worn a
"  large flowing wig of many tiers," — "  a nine-storey wig,  highly-

54 The Early Diary of  [1769

Mersh,  June 29th.
Thursday Night.

We are arrived thus far on our journey to Lynn

Papa came home from Oxford on Sunday night,  as we ex
pected — "We ran to meet him with as much joy as if instead
of a week's,  we had groan'd at a year's absence — I had
frightened myself not a little before he came,  lest he should be
angry at my pert verses — but the moment he arrived,  I for
got everything but the pleasure of seeing him.  He was more
kind — more affectionate than ever  ;  if possible — tho'  he two
or three times called me  "  Saucy Girl !  "  of which however,  I
wisely chose to take no notice,  rather preferring to drop the
subject.  Notwithstanding his extreme hurry and business,  he
had thought of us when at Woodstock,  and most kindly
brought us both presents from that place — but the best thing
he showed us was the Oxford Journal,  in which his affair was
mentioned.  Who wrote it we know not,  but I will copy the
paragraph. —

[From the]  Oxford Journal,  June 23rd.

"  On Thursday last was performed in the Musick School an
Anthem composed by Mr.  Charles Burney,  of Poland Street,
London,  as an Exercise for the Degree of Doctor of Mnsick :
which was received with universal applause,  and allowed by
the judges of musical merit to be the most elegant and in
genious performance that was ever exhibited here on the like
occasion.  The vocal parts were performed by Miss Barsanti
(being the first time of her appearance in publick)  Messrs.
Norris,  Mathews,  Price,  Millar,  etc. ;  the instrumental by Mr.
Burney,  the composer — Messrs.  Malchair,  Charles Burney
Junr.,  Richard Burney,  Park,  Pasquali,  Lates etc.,  And
yesterday Mr.  Burney was admitted to his Degree,  to which
he was introduced ex officio by the Eev.  Mr.  Hornsby,  Savilian

powdered,  with long curls,  such as was worn by Saunders Welsh,  the
friend of Dr.  Johnson,  when he rode as High Constable of Westminster.
Thomas Harley  (who thus broke through custom)  was,  although a
wine-merchant in the City who had married a daughter of his father's
steward,  a son of the third Earl of Oxford,  and grand-nephew of Queen
Anne's Earl Eobert.

1769]  Frances Burney.  55

Professor of Astronomy.  The whole of the Musical Per
formance was conducted by our Professor,  Dr.  Hayes.1
Miss Barsanti's voice and manner of singing were greatly
admired,  both in the above performance,  and in the Musick
room on Thursday and Friday nights :  and the young lady,
who is a scholar of Dr.  Burney,  will,  if we mistake not,  in
time amply repay the publick any indulgence with which they
may be disposed to encourage the becoming diffidence of
modest merit/'

There's for you  ! — "  think of that Master Brooke."  Well,
when papa had been returned a short time,  unfortunately a
play called  "  Dr.  Last in his Chariot "  was mentioned by
Charles.2  ....

Papa looked at me — I looked any other way — "  Oh  !  you
saucy girl,"  cried he.  Charles appeared curious,  I was
horridly ashamed.  "  What do you think,"  continued papa,
"  do you know this abominable girl calls me Dr.  Last  ?  " —
Charles and Hetty both laughed,  and papa took up the letter,
and holding it out to me said — "  Come,  do me the favour of
reading this  !  "  —I would fain have torn it,  but papa drew it
back,  and was going to read it — I beg'd him not — but in
vain,  and so I ran out of the room.  But,  to own the truth,
my curiosity prevailed so far that I could not forbear running
downstairs again with more speed than I ran up,  and into the
next room,  where I found  ....  by papa's voice and man
ner that he did not appear displeased — though he half

1 By the Statutes of Oxford,  a candidate for the degree of Doctor of
Music  "  shall compose a song in six,  or eight parts,  and shall publicly
perform the same,  '  tarn Vocibus,  quam Instruments etiam Musicis,'
in presence of Dr.  Heather's Professor of Music.     This being done,  he
shall supplicate for his grace in the Convocation House,  which being
granted by both the Savilian Professors,  he shall be presented to his
degree."     Dr.  Buruey's exercise was performed three years running at
Choral Meetings in Oxford.     In 1770 the lovely Linley  (Mrs.  Sheridan)
sang instead of Jenny Barsanti,  and turned the heads of more than
undergraduates.

2 In 1769 Isaac Bickerstaffe,  with some help from Foote,  continued
the character of Dr.  Last  (who was the shoemaker-doctor in the  "  Devil
upon Two Sticks  "),  in a piece adapted from Moliere's  *'  Malade Iinagi-
naire,"  Foote playing Ailwou'd,  the fanciful patient,  but the play had
little success.

56 The Early Diary of  [1769

affected to be so — he read it loud — .  ...  "I assure you "
said papa,  "His very good stuff !  I read it to Mrs.  Playdel,
and she was much pleased — particularly with the last stanza

and to one or two of my new Oxford friends at breakfast,

and we had a very hearty laugh—

This was enough — I ran once more upstairs,  and lighter
than a feather felt my heart !

******

0 — but one thing has very much vexed me — my papa has
read my nonsense to Mrs.  Skinner,  an intimate acquaintance
and a very clever woman,  and she insisted on having a copy
which papa desired me to write — I was horrid mad,  and
beg'd most earnestly to be excused,  for such trash,  however it
may serve to read at the moment,  must be shocking a second
time ;  but papa would take no denial — "  It's very sufficient,"
said he,  "for the occasion,  and for your age/'  However,
I am as much mortified at doing this,  as if my first fear had
been verified,  for I cannot at all relish being thus exposed to
a deliberate examination

Lynn Regis,
St.  Margts Church Yard,  July.

Once more I take up a pen to write to my Journal,  which
I thought I never again should do

We find every body here well.  My mama is in better
health than ever  ....  Miss Allen is the same generous,  un
affected,  lively girl as ever — Susette much improved in every
particular — Charlotte mighty pretty and  ....  also improved,
indeed she is a sweet good girl ;  .  .  .  .  Bessy is more grace
ful and more handsome than ever.  *  *  *  *

But I am extremely uneasy at present on the account of my
elder brother — so are we all.  He told us in his last letter,
which we had above half a year ago,  that he expected to be
home this last Spring — we have long been impatient for his
arrival — and we find by the newspaper that the Aquillon,  his
ship,  was paid off last week :  what can be the meaning of his
not writing to us then  ? — We know not how to enquire for
him,  nor where to direct to him — dear,  dear fellow  !  how much

1769]  Frances Burney.  57

do I wish to see him — My papa I perceive is very anxious  :  he
has written to town with directions for his journey hither in
case of his going there.  I think of him from morning to night
from fear of some accident.1

We have nothing but visiting here,  and this perpetual round
of constrained civilities,  to persons quite indifferent to us,  is
the most provoking and tiresome thing in the world ;  but it is
unavoidable in a country town,  where everybody is known,  as
here.  Its a most unworthy way of spending our precious and
irrecoverable time,  to devote it to those who know not it's
value — why are we not permitted to decline as well as accept
visits and acquaintance  ?  It is not that we are ignorant of
means to better employ ourselves,  but that we daro not pursue
them.  However,  restraint of this kind is much,  much less
practised or necessary in London than else where — Excuses
there are no sooner made than admitted — acquaintance as
easily dropped as courted — company chosen or rejected at
pleasure — undoubtedly the same plan might be pursued here,
but how  ?  with breaking the customs of the place,  disobliging
the inhabitants,  and incurring the censure of the town in
general,  as unsociable,  proud,  or impertinent innovators.
Seeing therefore what must be submitted to,  'tis best to assume
a good grace,  only its horrid hard

Saturday Morn.  Aug.

$          $          $          $          9fC

It is with great satisfaction I observe Hetty  (who some
time before we left town grew melancholy and sad)  has the

1 This was her sailor brother,  James Burney,  who was a midshipman
with Admiral Montagu at ten years of age.  His short education had
been partly given him by Eugene Aram,  who was hanged at York
in 1759,  for a murder committed fourteen years before.  Hood's poem,
"  The Dream of Eugene Aram,"  was founded upon Captain Burney 's
recollections of how the gentle usher paced the playground at Lynn,
arm-in-arm with one of the elder boys,  talking of strange murders,
and how he himself had shuddered on seeing Aram taken to prison,
with handcuffs on his wrists — or,  as Hood wrote,  "  gyves."  The date
of his birth,  and the place,  as commonly given in books,  are 1749,  and
Lynn Regis ;  but the Register of St.  Diouis Backchurch contains
this entry,  under baptisms — "July 5,  1750,  James,  s.  of Chas.  and
Esther Burney  (organist of this Parish),  born June 13."

58 The Early Diary of  [1769

same constant flow of spirits and gaiety she inherited from
nature.  Few things,  I think,  are more dispiriting than per
ceiving a disposition alter from liveliness to dejection, —
nothing so much saddens me.

Would to God we could hear good news of my brother
even now  ....  I never see a stormy night without shudder
ing,  nor a letter without trembling.

Poland Street,  London.

Sunday,  Sept*.  8th.

Papa,  Hetty and I have been at this ever dear house,  in
charming London above a week, — I am now in my little
closet,  and intend writing the memoirs of the past ten days
for the perusal of my dear friend,  whose gratitude I doubt not
will be as great as the obligation requires.

Mama,  Miss Allen,  Susette,  Charlotte,  Bessy and beautiful
little Dick J remain at Lynn till we return there,  I believe —
and sorry we are all round at the separation.  Mama,  Allen,
and Susette accompanied us as far as Thetford,  where we saw
the remains,  which we visited carefully,  of monasteries and
abbeys,  very curious and antique.  Called to supper. —

12 o'clock.

There is something in the sight of the ruins of antiquity,
which always inspires me with melancholy,  and yet gives me a
pleasure which compensates for the pain — "Pis dreadful to see
the ravage of time and the fury of war,  which are the joint
causes of the destruction of cities,  etc — and yet  "'tis pleasing
to discover the taste of former ages by the remains of their
works,  and to endeavour to trace the rise and progress we
have made in improving or altering the fabricks,  laws,  and
customs of our forefathers ;  and we can form no opinion,  with
equal certainty of truth,  by any other means than by the
relicks we have preserved —

"Dick,"  afterwards called in letters  "Bengal Dick"  was the only
son of Dr.  Burney by his second marriage.  He went to India,  where
he died in 1811.

1769]  Frances Burney.  59

Tuesday,  Sept.

At Thetford we slept,  and the next morning separated.
Miss Allen and sweet Susette looked weeping after us till the
road turned.  Our first stage was very gloomy  —  we spent it
in regretting the absence of those who had so much contributed
to enliven our first day's journey,  which was really delightful  —
but we recovered our spirits afterwards,  and were very com
fortable  —  we slept at Hockrel that night and on Friday even
ing got to town  —  rather slow travelling,  but the same horses
with our heavy large coach could not go faster.  We dined
that day on Epping Forest  —  what a delightful spot  !  we almost
always go different roads to Lynn,  which makes a variety of
prospect and novelty of view highly preferable to the high road
sameness.  Hetty was charmed even with the smoak of
London.  God bless it  .....

Poland Street,  Tuesday.

Here we are again,  and with as much happiness both in
present possession,  and in prospect for the future as can pos
sibly fall to a mortal's lot  :  —  if my dear James would write  !  —

******

That sweet Mrs.  Pleydell would win a heart of stone  .....
There is a something,  je ne sais quoi in the really amiable or
agreeable which does not need intimacy or time to create
esteem and admiration for them  :  for my own part,  I love
many people with sincere affection whom I have not seen
above half an Hour  —  of this number is Mrs.  Pleydell,  who has
something in her manners which engages the heart as effec
tually,  immediately,  as many thousand people would be ajale to
do in years.1 I hear she is now at Tunbridge.  Besides her
being so very beautiful  .....

1 Mrs.  Pleydell was daughter of Mr.  Holwell,  the first in rank
among the hundred and forty-six British prisoners who were thrust
into the  "  Black Hole of Calcutta  "  on the 21st of June,  1756.  He was
one of the three and twenty who survived that dreadful night.

60 The Early Diary of  [1769

Saturday.

....  it was my turn to sit up  ...  for papa made a late
visit to Mr.  Greville.  When the door opened I heard him
and some other talking very earnestly and loud and into the
room together they both bolted — and then I knew the voice of
Dr.  Hawkesworth.  He was engaged so deeply in conversa
tion,  with papa,  that neither seemed to know what they were
about.  However,  on coming into the parlour the Doctor made
his compliments to me,  and out of it they then stalked again,
and ran up into the study where they stayed some time,  and
then flying down the Dr.  wished me good night,  and got into
the coach again,  and papa followed and talked with him at the
door of it some time.  There is an earnestness,  a spirit in the
conversation of very superior men which makes them absolutely
forget every body and every thing about them,  and which,
when one knows not the subject which engages them,  appears
ridiculous to spectators  ;  to hearers the appearance is different
— I was only a spectator,  and could not possibly help laughing
heartily to see them capering about all the time they talked as
if they were bewildered.  I believe it was only to look for
books,  and authors,  and authorities for what they said.
******

Friday.

I pass unnoticed — for so the world did by me.

Poor Mr.  Smart presented me this morning with a rose,
blooming and sweet as if we were in the month of June.

"  It was given me,"  said he  "  by a fair lady — though not so

fairasyow/"  I always admired poetical licence ! —

This,  however,  is nothing to what he afterwards amused him
self with saying.  The Critical Reviewers,  ever eager to catch at
every opportunity of lessening and degrading the merit of this
unfortunate man  (who has been twice confined in a mad house) ,
would think all the most rancourous observations on his declin
ing powers fully justified,  and perhaps even pronounce him to
be in a state of mind that rendered him a proper object to return

1769]  Frances Burney.  61

a third time to Bedlam,  if they heard that he had descended
to flatter and praise me!  even me,  jF.  B.,  or Q in a corner.1

******

13th Nov.

Poor Mr.  Hayes,  an old,  and intimate friend of papa's is
below ;  he has lost his wife while we were in Lynn,  and I
dread meeting him.2

I live in perpetual alarm — every rap at the door I think
will bring me news — my rest is very much disturbed — I dream
confused things of my brother for ever.  But all that relates to
me is nothing.  My papa observes my low spirits,  and asks the
cause  ;  'tis impossible for me to answer.  He is more kind,
more affectionate to me than ever.  Dearest,  best of fathers !
******

Decr.  20.

My dear brother has now been home these three weeks !
....  and my beloved father daily appears more and
more kind and affectionate to this dear brother,  and we
are now all happily settled.  This affair never gave us
more uneasiness,  than,  thank God,  it does at last happiness.
James's character appears the same as ever — honest,
generous,  sensible,  unpolished ;  always unwilling to take

1 Perhaps Fanny avenged the wrongs of Smart,  and of Hawkes worth,
so far as in her lay,  by writing her sarcastic dedication of  "  Evelina"
to the  "  Monthly and Critical Reviewers."     Those Reviewers were then
as terrible as ever were Jeffrey and Gifford;  more so,   perhaps,  for
about 1770,  there were only two reviews — "The Monthly,"  and the
"  Critical."     Smollett had been editor of the  "  Critical Review,"  and
Goldsmith had written in it up to 1760,  or thereabouts.     Fanny was
hereafter to be connected with Monthly Reviewers by the marriage
of her brother Charles with the daughter of Dr.  Rose of Chiswick.
Nay,  Dr.  Burney himself,  in his old age,  wrote for the  "Monthly
Review "  many articles of which no list has been found.

2 Mr.  Hayes was reputed to be a natural son of Sir Robert Walpole,
whom he much resembled in face,  and in the better parts of Sir Robert's
character.     In April,  1745,  we find Stukeley,  the antiquary,  writing,
"  Mr.  Hayes,  governor of Landguard-Fort in Norfolk,  visited me.     He
showed me a great number of Roman coins,  found there,  it having been
a Roman castram."     He left his fine collection of coins to Dr.  Burney.

62 The Early Diary of  [1769

offence,  yet always eager to resent it;  very careless,  and
possessed of an uncommon share of good nature;  full of
humour,  mirth and jollity  ;  ever delighted at mirth in others,
and happy in a peculiar talent of propagating it himself.  His
heart is full of love and affection for us — I sincerely believe
he would perform the most difficult task which could possibly
be imposed on him,  to do us service.  In short,  he is a
most worthy,  deserving creature,  and we are extremely happy
in his company — tho'  he complains that we use him very ill,
in making engagements in which he cannot join from ignorance
of the partys ;  but  "  'twas unavoidable,  Fate and Necessity/'

as Lord Ogleby says.1

Sunday.

We are going to lose our dear brother again ;  as he is
going on a new voyage,  and he is now on board his ship,
and quite happy,  and quite good and amiable.  He has
applied himself very much to the study of mathematicks lately,
and will take a very good collection of books with him.
God prosper him  ! 2

1 We believe that no single play is so often quoted throughout the
early,  and later Diaries,  and letters,  of Fanny Burney,  as that highly
successful comedy of Garrick and George Colman  (the elder),  "  The
Clandestine Marriage."     Doubtless,  Fanny saw it many times,  from
the box of Mr.  Garrick,  or of Mr.   Colman.     "  Lord Ogleby "    is a
decrepit beau,  of a type which was dying out in 1766,  and was quite
distinct from that of the Maccaronies,  who were coming on.     He is,
although a superannuated coxcomb,  a gentleman,  with a dash of French
sentiment.

2 This,  and all praise of James Burney in this year's journal,  or in
others,  is true,  and not the mere statement of a partial sister.    Captain
Burney endured many hardships with but tardy recompense ;    yet,
when on land,  he led a delightful life — in youth,  with Johnson and
"  The Club ;  "  in age,  with Charles Lamb,  Hood,  Hazlitt,  Gary,  Southey,
and even with  "Wordsworth and Coleridge.     It was to Wordsworth
that Lamb wrote in 1822: — "Every departure destroys a class of
sympathies.     There's Captain Burney gone!     What fun has whist
now  ?     What matters it what you lead if you can no longer fancy
him looking over you  ? "     Admiral Burney wrote a book on Whist,
which went through several editions.      "  He was a fine old man,"
(writes H.  C.  Eobinson),   *'a humourous old man — a character,   a
fine,  noble creature,  with a rough exterior,  as became the associate of
Captain Cook."     It fits into Fanny's sketch of him that he dropped
Hazlitt out of his whist-parties,  because   "  Hazlitt affronted him by
severe criticisms on the works  "  of his sister Fanny.

1769]  Frances Burney.  03

Dec.  26th.

I have spent this day alone,  nevertheless,  very comfortably.
I have at present so many pursuits,  that my whole time can
be very well employed at home,  and could if every hour
doubled in length.  I am now aiming at some knowledge of
the Grecian History ;  I began Stanyan some time since,  but
never finished it,  I am just beginning to read Smith's transla
tion of Thucydides'  history of the Peloponnesian War — I
mention the translator,  lest I should be suspected of reading
the original Greek.  .  .  .  J think the precaution necessary  !

*****

64 The Early Diary of  [1770

1770.

Jan.  10th,  1770.

How very differently do I begin this year to what I did
the last !  O,  how unhappy I then was — My poor Susan on
the brink of the grave  ! — But I will not waste time in recol
lecting past misfortunes,  when present happiness opens so
fair a prospect to make me forget them.  In truth,  I have a
most delightful subject to commence the present year with —
such a one,  as I fear I may never chance to meet with again.
— Yet why should I look into futurity with a gloomy eye  ? —
But let me waive all this nonsense,  and tell you,  my dear,
faithful,  ever attentive Nobody — that I was last Monday at a
masquerade  !

Has Nobody any curiosity to read an account of this
frolic  ?  I am sure Nobody has,  and Nobody will I satisfy
by writing one.  I am so good natured as to prevent
Nobody's wishes.

This Masquerade — how does that word grace my Journal  !
was,  however,  a very private one,  and at the house of Mr.
Laluze,  a French dancing master

Hetty had for three months thought of nothing but the mas
querade—no more had I.  She had long fixed upon her dress ;
my stupid head only set about one on Friday evening.  I
could think of no character I liked much,  and could obtain ;
as to Nuns,  Quakers,  &c.  (which I was much advised to)  I
cannot help thinking there is a gravity and extreme reserve
required to support them well,  which would have made me
necessarily so dull and stupid,  that I could not have met with
much entertainment,  and being unable to fix on a character,  I
resolved at length to go in a meer fancy dress

One day — and who could do it less in  ?
The masqueraders spent in dressing.

1 770]  Frances Burney.  65

It is really true that all Monday we passed in preparationing
for the evening

Oh,  I must tell you,  that speaking of my distress in regard
to a dress one day to Mrs.  Mancer,  a very notable,  talkative,
good sort of old gentlewoman,  and who is a half aunt to us —
she said — "  Why I'll tell you how Miss Fanny should go —
as Flora,  the Goddess of Wisdom  /  "

We had a concourse of people to see us and Hetty,  who was
dressed early,  went down to receive them.  They sent me up

repeated messages to hasten ; and when I ivas ready,

they had made so much fuss,  that I was really ashamed to go
down,  and but for my mask,  which I put on,  I could scarce

have had courage to appear Hetty went as a

Savoyard,  with a hurdy gurdy fastened round her waist.
Nothing could look more simple,  innocent,  or pretty.  My

dress was,  a close pink Persian vest, covered with

gauze,  in loose pleats,  and with flowers  &c.  &c a

little garland or wreath of flowers on the left side of my
head When I came down,  I found assembled Cap
tain Pringle,1 Mr.  Andrew,  the three Miss Pascalls,2 Mr.

Lambe,    their father-in-law, my aunt,    James,

Charles,  and Hetty so that our parlour was tolerably

filled.  Both our dresses met with approbation.  Not one of
the company could forbear repeatedly wishing themselves of our
party.  Nothing appears so gay,  flattering and charming as a
masquerade ;  and the sight of two who were going,  and in
very high spirits,  was absolutely tantalising.

The Captain had a fine opportunity for gallantry — to say
the truth,  those whimsical dresses are not unbecoming.  He
made a story for me — "  That I had been incarcerated by the
Grand Seignor as a part of the Seraglio,  and made prisoner

1 Captain Pringle was an Engineer-Officer.     The last time we hear
of him is as going to Newfoundland in 1772,  under the command of
Captain  (afterwards General)  Debbieg.

2 It is a mere conjecture that Fanny had much to do in after years
with one of the Miss Pascalls.  A Mr.  Pascal was a page to the Dowager-
Princess of Wales,  and,  on her death,  was taken into the household of
her son,  George III.     A sister of his married Mr.  Thielky,  or Thielcke,
and was wardrobe-woman to Queen Charlotte under Mrs.  Schwellen-
burg and Miss Burney.

I.  P

66 The Early Diary of  [1770

by the Russians in the present war ;  and that the generosity
of the commanding officer had prevailed with him to grant
me my liberty,  and that I had consequently thrown myself
into the protection of the bravest and noblest people of
Europe,  and sought shelter from oppression in this Land of
Freedom/'  We stayed with this company about half an hour,

and then the Captain handed us into the coach,  and

away we drove.  We called for Mrs.  and Miss Strange/  and
then went to Mr.  Lalause,  who lives in Leicester Square.2
Miss Strange had a white satin Domino trimmed with blue
Mr.  and Mrs.  Lalause were neither of them in masquerade

dresses

The Room was large,  and very well lighted,  but,  when we
first went in,  not half filled,  so that every eye was turned on
each new comer.  I felt extremely awkward and abashed,

notwithstanding my mask Hetty went in playing

on her hurdy gurdy,  and the company flocked about her with
much pleasure.  I was soon found out by Miss Lalause,  who

is a fine girl,  about sixteen she had on a fancy

dress much in the style of mine.     The first Mask

who accosted me was an old Witch,  tall,  shrivelled,  leaning on
a broomstick,  and,  in short,  a fear inspiring figure,  apparently,

by his walk,  a man "  Thou thinkest,  then,  that that

little bit of black silk is a mask  ?"  cried he.  I was abso
lutely confounded,  for I thought directly that he meant to
laugh at my mask,  but on recollection I believe he was going
on with some compliment,  but I was so unable to rally,  that
with a silly half laugh,  I turned on my heel,  and walked

away as far off as I could I observed a Nun,  dressed

in black,  who was speaking with great earnestness,  and who I
soon discovered by her voice to be a Miss Milne,3 a pretty

1 The wife and elder daughter of the famous engraver,  Eobert
Strange.  Mrs.  Strange  (Isabella Lumisden)  had been one of the
witnesses of Dr.  Burney's second marriage.

z M.  Lalauze performed with Rich in a pantomime at the great enter
tainment given in 1740 by Frederick,  Prince of Wales,  in the gardens
of Cliefden,  when the masque of  "  Alfred  "  was first produced.

3 Probably Miss Milne,  or rather Mylne,  was related to Robert
Mylne,  surveyor of St.  Paul's Cathedral,  and builder of old Black-
friars Bridge.  He was a friend of Sir Robert Strange.

1 770]  Frances Burney.  67

Scotch nymph I have met at Mrs.  Strange's.  I atopt to listen
to her.  She turn'd about and took my hand,  and led me into
a corner of the room — "  Beautiful creature  "  cried she,  in a
plaintive voice,  "  with what pain do I see you here,  beset by
this crowd of folly and deceit !  O could I prevail on you to
quit this wicked world,  and all it's vices,  and to follow my
footsteps !  "

"  But how am I to account,"  said I,  "  for the reason that one
who so much despises the World,  should choose to mix with
the gayest part of it  ?  What do you do here  ?  "

"  I come but,"  said she,  "  to see and to save such innocent,
beautiful,  young creatures as you from the snares of the
wicked.  Listen to me  !  I was once such as you are,  I
mixed with the world ;  I was caressed by it,  I loved it — I
was deceived  !  Surrounded by an artful set of flattering,
designing men,  I fell but too easily into the net they spread
for me.  I am now convinced of the vanity of life,  and in this
peaceful,  tranquil state shall I pass the remainder of my days."

"  It is so impossible,"  said I,  "  to listen to you without being
benefitted by your conversation,  that I shall to the utmost of
my power imitate you,  and always choose to despise the world,
and hold it in contempt — at a Masquerade  !  " —

"  Alas,"  said she,  "  I am here merely to contemplate the
strange follies and vices of mankind — this scene affords me
only a subject of joy to think I have quitted it."

We were here interrupted,  and parted.  After that I had
several short conversations with different Masks.  I will tell
you the principal dresses as well as I can recollect them.
They were a Punch who was indeed very completely dressed,
and who very well supported his character  ;  the Witch whom
I mentioned before was a very capital figure,  and told many
fortunes with great humour ;  a Shepherd,  of all characters
the last,  were I a man,  I should have wished to have assumed ;
a Harliquin,  who hopped and skipped about very lightly and
gayly  ;  a Huntsman,  who indeed seemed suited for nothing but
the company of dogs ;  a Gardener ;  a Persian  ;  two or three
Turks,  and two Friars ;  an admirable Merlin,  who spoke of
spells,  magick and charms with all the mock heroick and bom
bast manner which his character could require.  There were

68 The Early Diary of  [1770

also two most jolly looking Sailors,  and many Dominos,  besides
some dresses which I have forgot.  Among the females,  two
sweet little Nuns in white pleased me most,  there was a very
complete Shepherdess,  with the gayest crook,  the smartest
little hat,  and most trifling conversation one might desire ;
nevertheless full as clever as her choice of so hackneyed and
insipid a dress led one to expect.  You may imagine that she
was immediately and unavoidably paired with the amiable
Shepherd I mentioned before.  There were two or three young
pastoral nymphs to keep her in countenance  :  and I can
recollect no other dresses,  save an Indian Queen ;  and
Dominos.

I seized the first opportunity that offered of again joining
mv saare monitor the fair Nun — who did not seem averse to

v O

honouring me with her conversation.  She renewed her
former subject,  expatiated on the wickedness and degeneracy
of the world,  dwelt with great energy and warmth on the
deceit and craft of man,  and pressed me to join her holy order

with the zeal of an enthusiast in religion A pink

Domino advanced,  and charged her not to instill her pre
posterous sentiments into my mind ;  she answered him with
so much contempt that he immediately quitted us. — We were
then accosted by the Shepherd,  who would fain have appeared
of some consequence,  and aimed at being gallant and agree
able — poor man  !  wofully was he the contrary.  The Nun did
not spare him.  "  Hence,"  cried she,  "  thou gaudy animal,
with thy trifling and ridiculous trappings,  away let not this
fair creature be corrupted by thy company  !  O fly the per
nicious impertinence of these shadows which surround
thee!"-

"  The — the lady" — stammered the poor swain — "the
lady will be — will be more likely — to be hurt — by — by you
than — than "

"  Yes — yes,"  cried she — "  she would be safe enough were
she followed only by such as thee  !  "

Hetty just then bid me observe a very droll old Dutchman,
who soon after joined us.  He accosted us in high Dutch —
not that I would quarrel with any one who told me it was loiv
Dutch !  ....  it might be Arabick for aught I could tell !  He

1770]  Frances Burney.  69

was very completely dressed,  and had on an exceeding droll
old man's mask,  and was smoaking a pipe.  He presented
me with a quid of tobaco,  I accepted it very cordially.  The
Nun was not disposed to be pleased.  She attacked poor Myn
heer with much haughtiness — ' f Thou savage !  hence to thy
native land of brutes and barbarians ;  smoak thy pipe there,
but pollute not us with thy dull and coarse attempts at wit
and pleasantry !"....  The Dutchman,  however,  heeded
her not,  he amused himself with talking Dutch and making
signs of devotion to me,  while the Nun railed and I laughed.
At last she took my hand,  and led me to another part of the
room,  where we renewed our former conversation.

"  You see,"  she cried,  "  what a herd of danglers flutter
around you ;  thus it was once with me ;  your form is elegant ;
your face,  I doubt not,  is beautiful ;  your sentiments are
superior to both :  regard these vipers then with a proper dis
dain  ;  they will follow you,  will admire,  court,  caress and
flatter you — they will engage your affections — and then they
will desert you  !  It is not that you are less amiable,  or that
they cease to esteem you  ;  but they are weary of you  ;  novelty
must atone in another for every loss they may regret in you :
—it is not merit they seek,  but variety.  I speak from ex
perience  !  "  I could almost have taken my Nun for Mr.  Crisp
in disguise.

"  'Tis rather surprising,"  said I,  "  that one who speaks
with such rigour of the world,  and professes having quitted it
from knowing its degeneracy,  and who talks of experience in
the style of age,  should have a voice which is a perpetual re
minder of her own youth,  and should in all visible respects,  be
so formed to grace and adorn the world she holds in such
contempt."

' '  Hold  !  "  cried she,  "  remember my sacred order  ;  and re
member that we nuns can never admit to our conferences that
baleful enemy of innocence,  flattery  !  Alas,  you learn this
from men  !  Would you but renounce them  !  what happiness
would such a convert give me  \  "  .  .  .  .

The Dutchman and the Shepherd soon joined us again.  The
former was very liberal of his tobaco,  and supported his charac
ter with much drollery,  speaking no English,  and but a few

70 The Early Diary of  [1770

Dutch words,  and making signs.    The Shepherd seemed formed
for all the stupidity of a Dutchman more than the man who
assumed that dress j but he aimed at something superiour.—
The Nun,  looking on her veil and habit as a sanction to

the utmost liberty of speech spoke to them both without

the least ceremony All she said to me did honour to

the name she assumed — it was sensible and delicate,  it was
probably very true ;  it was certainly very well adapted to her
apparent character  :  but when we were joined by men,  her
exhortations degenerated into railing;  which though she
might intend the better to support her part,  by displaying her
indignation against the sex,  nevertheless seemed rather suited
to the virulency and bitterness of a revengeful woman of the
world,  than the gentleness and dignity which were expected
from the piety,  patience,  and forbearance of a cloister.

"  And what,"  said she to the Dutchman,  "  what can have
induced such a savage to venture himself here  ?  Go,  seek
thy fellow- brutes  !  the vulgar bestial society thou art used to,
is such alone as thou ought to mix with."  He jabbered some
thing in his defence,  and seemed inclined to make his court
to me.

"  Perhaps,"  said she,  "  it may be in the power of this fair
creature to reform thee ;  she may civilize thy gross and bar
barous manners."

The Dutchman bowed,  said  "  yaw  "  and put his hand on his
heart in token of approbation.  "  Ay,"  said the poor Shep
herd,  whose eyes had the most marked expression of stupidity
(if stupidity can be said to have any expression)  that I ever
saw,  and his words and manner so exactly coincided with his
appearance,  that he was merely an object for laughter — He
served only for such to me at least ;  for indeed my spirits
were not very low,  and I knew there was nobody present but
friends of the house. — Refreshments were then brought and
everybody was engaged with a partner  ;  Merlin,1 a delightful
Mask,  secured Hetty,  and the Dutchman my ladyship.
Every body was then unmasked,  and when I presently turned
hastily round,  I saw a young man so very like Mr.  Young that

"  Merlin  "  was Henry Phipps, — the first Earl of Mulgrave.

1 77°]  Frances Burney.  71

at the first glance I thought it was him,  but what was my sur
prise at seeing the Dutchman  !  I had no idea that he was
under fifty,  when behold he scarce looked three and twenty.
I believe my surprise was very manifest,  for Mynheer could
not forbear laughing.  On his part he paid me many com
pliments,  repeatedly and with much civility congratulating
himself on his choice.  "  I have been smoaking them all
round,"  cried he,  for he had always a tobaco pipe in his hand
— "till at last a happy whiff blew away your mask,  and
fixed me so fortunately."  ....

Nothing could be more droll than the first dance we had
after unmasking ;  the pleasure which appeared in some coun
tenances,  and the disappointment pictured in others made the
most singular contrast imaginable,  and to see the old turned
young,  and the young old — in short,  every face appeared dif
ferent from what we expected.  The old Witch in particular
we found was a young officer.  The Punch who had made
himself as broad as long,  was a very young and handsome
man ;  but what most surprised me,  was the Shepherd whose
own face was so stupid that we could scarcely tell whether he
had taken off his mask or not}  ....

[Tuesday.]

We have been engaged some time to a private dance at the
Reverend Mr.  Pugh's,2 who I have mentioned in my Chronicles.
Aunt Becky is to be our chaperon.  But I was so ill with a
cold this morning that I rose with a resolution of sending an
excuse ;  but was prevented by Mr.  Pugh/s calling.  He ear
nestly beg'd me not to disappoint him,  and promised me I
should rest as often as I pleased. — He protested he would not
upon any account have me fail coming,  as he has settled all
the partners,  and I should break his schemes. — "  I should be

1 This was a masquerade never to be forgotten by Hetty and Fanny.
In 1779 Fanny tells how  "  a younger brother of the Harry Phipps
that Hetty danced with at Mr.  Lalauze's, "  was brought by Lady Ladd
to visit Mrs.  Thrale at Streatham.

a The Reverend Mr.  Pugh,  Curate of St.  James's,  was the old friend
who married Dr.  Burney to Mrs.  Allen.

72 Tlie Early Diary of  [177°

more particularly sorry at your absence,  Ma'am,"  said he —
as I have engaged you to the most elegant and agreeable
man of my whole company — who would be extremely disap
pointed  ;  and who,  I flatter myself,  would make the evening
very happy to you."  I am never fond of being engaged un
seen,  as in those cases,  two people are frequently disap
pointed.  Mr.  Pugh was too urgent to be refused

How I have got this violent cold I cannot tell — it affects
me in a cough,  sore throat,  and most dreadful headache,  at
tended with a slight fever.  I shall really be an amiable
object,  for I am pale as possible,  and my eyes heavy as
lead.  How would a philosopher or moralist hold me in con
tempt  !  to have so many complaints — yet go to a ball !  it
appears ridiculous to me myself.  ....

Feb.  7th.

Near a fortnight has elapsed since our Dance at Mr.

Pugb/s I was infinitely better that evening than I

had been,  and when we set off for South Street,  I was in
much higher spirits than any of the party,  though Hetty was
very cheerfull,  and also Aunt Rebecca.1  ....  Mr.  Pugh
welcomed us very joyfully — and introduced us to the company
who were seated formally at tea.  Hetty told me she was sure

she had fixed her eye on my partner (<  There he is,"

said she,  "  and I can read in his face everything that is
clever and agreeable.  I hope I shall dance a minuet
with him."  ....  Tea being over,  we marched into a larger
room,  and minuets were begun.

"  Come,  gentlemen,"  said Mr.  Pugh — "  choose hats — I
won't let you choose partners  !  "  .  .  .  .  After all I cannot
approve this plan of settling partners unseen — the usual
privilege the men have of pleasing themselves I think far pre
ferable,  as only one can be dissatisfied then Mr.  Pugh

presented the ladies to the gentlemen —

"  This lady,"   when he came to me,  "  is your partner,

Aunt Rebecca,  "  an ancient and very amiable sister of Dr.  Bnrney,"
died a spinster between 1802 and 1812,  while Fanny was in France.

1 77°]  Frances Burney.  73

Captain Bloomfield."  ....  Indeed he was very unfortu
nate — for he did not himself tire the whole evening,  and
poor little I was fatigued to death after the second dance.
....  I very much admired the lady who danced with Mr.

Pugh,  who was very pleasing I had said many

things in her praise occasionally to Captain Bloomfield,  and I
then asked if he knew her  ?

"  I have the honour,  Ma'am,"  said he,  "  to be her
brother ! — Don't you think/'  added he,  laughing, — "  we are
very much like  ?  "

There was another young lady there who addressed herself
so frequently to the Captain,  and smiled so tenderly at him,
that I could not forbear observing to Hetty that Mr.  Pugh
was cruel to have given her any other partner; — but when
the night was half over,  I found this was another sister.

At two o'clock we returned to the parlour to sup.  And
here Mr.  Pugh and Captain Bloomfield seemed to vie with
each other which should have least ease and rest himself,  or
give most to others.  I was now scarce able to move,  I did
however force my feet to go down two or three dances,  but
with great pain,  ....  for indeed I was very indifferent ;
....  yet the spirit which every body supported,  as well
as the extreme alacrity of Captain Bloomfield,  made me

ashamed to sit still As to Captain Bloomfield,  he

could assuredly be no sufferer by an exchange,  for Miss Kirk
was very pretty and agreeable  ....  And after going down
one more dance,  which completely finished me,  Captain Bloom-
field,  seeing me fatigued,  considerately led me to a seat — just
by me sat poor Miss Kirk.  "  How perverse this is,"  said
I,  to him,  "  here is a lady who is not at all tired,  and there
is a gentleman who is; — and here am  /  knocked up  : — and
you not at all  !  "

"Well?"  said he,  with quickness,  "and what do you
imply by that !  "

I then proposed an exchange.

"  Do you want to get rid of me  ?  "  cried he.

I did not know what to say to this Nevertheless,

I was convinced that only his delicacy prevented his being in
raptures at the proposal ; — therefore,  after a short pause I

74 The Early Diary of  [1770

pressed him much to ask Miss Kirk to dance,  declaring
myself very sorry to deprive him of that pleasure, —

"  But I would rather  "  said he,  "  sit with you,  than dance
with any other lady/'

I cannot say I believed him : — but on my further urging
him,  he told me he was too sensible of his happiness to fling
it away. — As to Miss Kirk,  I had made my proposal to her
first,  never imagining that Captain Bloomfield would object ;
....  and she frankly and honestly agreed to it.  But
nothing I could say would induce him  : — he certainly thought
I should regard it as a reproach on my inactivity ;  and he
chose rather to suffer himself,  than make another ashamed.

"  And how do you know,"  said he,  "  that the gentleman
would agree to quit his partner  ?  "

"  0 — if that is any objection  "  cried I,  "  I will undertake
to speak to him — you see he is tired to death already — "

"  O,  that will pass off,"  replied he — "  he might be as
unwilling to relinquish his partner,  as I am mine,  for why
should not he be contented and happy  ? — She is very pretty
and agreeable ;  and,  as you observed,  looks all good
humour. —

"  0 leave him to me,"  said I, "  I will readily manage him. —

"  Nothing  "  returned he,  "  shall prevail on me to dance
without you,  but your really desiring it,  and unless it would
do you a favour —

I regarded this as a delicate assent — therefore I answered
— "  It will do me a favour; — a great one  ! — "

"  But how  ?  "  said he  :  "  because you think it will oblige
me  ?  or because you wish to get rid of me  ?  "

There was no answering this — and so I made no further
attempt :  And then we only conversed,  and very agreeably,
for the rest of the evening.  At 5 o'clock,  or rather more,
every one gave up.  Late as it was we could not go home,
as the carriage was not to be found.  We therefore returned
again to the parlour,  where we were entertained with catches
and glees by part of the company,  namely Mr.  Pugh,  Captain
Bloomfield,  Mr.  Porter,  Mr.  Burney,  and my sister.  Mr.
Porter is a clergyman of Woolwich,  whose lady I must men
tion I committed a fault from inattention,  (chiefly

1 770]  Frances Burney.  75

owing to my extreme fatigue)  which was,  seating myself,
after having gone down a dance,  without walking it up
again : — and Captain Bloomfield either forgot this punctilio
also,  or did not choose to remind me of it:  however this lady
took great offence at it — for while we were seated,  she came
and addressed herself to Captain Bloomfield,  keeping her
back towards me,  and affecting not to see me ;  and,  not in
the gentlest manner,  she cried —

"And so you are sit down! — you,  who are such a young
man give out first : — and that after going down a dance,  tho'
you could not walk it up again  !  "  This reproof I was con
scious was meant for me; — the Captain,  I believe was rather
distressed  :  the gentle lady's volubility satisfied herself,  how
ever,  for she did not wait for any answer.  cc Had you been
really fatigued,"  continued she — "you might have shown it
by sitting before you had gone down the dance — I must say
it was very ill bred  ! — and I did not expect it from you,
Captain Bloomfield  !  you,  who are so polite a man  !  "

I was sensible the reproof was,  to me,  just ;  but neverthe
less it was exceeding gross and illnatured to address this
discourse to either of us. — Captain Bloomfield did not once
look towards me ;  he did not even plead my indisposition,
but taking the whole affair to himself,  with the utmost good
humour he said — "  But I am sure you are too compassionate
not to pity me,  when you hear my disaster,  for I was unable
to dance longer,  as I sprained my ancle, — and what then
could a poor man do  ?  "  I believe she was somewhat calmed
by his tranquility ; — for she softened her voice,  but said,  as
she left us — "  Well,  to be sure it might not be your fault —
but it was very rude,  and I am very sorry you had any share
in it !  "  I was quite shocked and disconcerted at this un
expected lecture. — The Captain very delicately still looked

another way,  and did not turn towards me However I

spoke to Kim — "  You were in the right/'  said I,  "  not to be
angry,  for not one word of this was meant for you  !  "

"And you,"  cried he,  "have too much sweet  [ness],  I am
sure,  to think of it any more."  Soon after we came home.

Mr.  Pugh has since proposed bringing Captain Bloomfield
to a music party at our house,  and also has earnestly invited

76 The Early Diary of  [177°

us to another dance at Woolwich with aunt Rebecca,  where
Captain Bloomfield,  he said,  would be very happy to dance
again with Miss Fanny.  But we did not go.

******

About this time we received the following note from the
Masquerade Dutchman.

"  The Dutchman presents his compliments to the Miss
Burneys,  and takes the liberty to enclose three tickets for the
Chelsea Assembly hoping the Miss Burneys will have the
goodness to find a chaperon.  The Dutchman will do himself
the honour to wait upon the Miss Burneys this evening,  with
the Doctor's permission,  to know whether he may exist
again or not/'

[This was a rather more serious case of love at first sight than
would be inferred from what is left in the manuscript.  The letter,
answered with so much decision,  was the second sent by  "  Mynheer
Dutchman,"  as he is called in the notes of Mme.  D'Arblay.  Perhaps
(as she loved euphony)  she did not care to write that his name was
Tomkin.  So we gather from Maria Allen,  who,  writing to Fanny four
years later,  jests thus upon her presumed admirers of 1770 and 1772  :
"  And so Miss Fanny Burney has mounted her little bay nag Grub,
and is riding away tantivi — upon my word ma'am,  very pretty usage —
pray let me know the meaning of all this at your peril or you may
depend I shall dispatch a note to the TomJcin,  the Bloomfield s nay,  I
don't know whether I shall  'not touch up the poganpole  (M.  Pogen-
pohl,  in the Diary 4,  1772),  and tell them what pretty freaks you have
taken into your pretty noddle."  Fanny had been long in writing to
Maria,  who at once suspects that she was writing a novel,  as was the
case about that time  (1774).  In a letter to Mr.  Crisp  (of the 10th of
May,  1775),  with reference to an offer of marriage which Dr.  Burney
and Mr.  Crisp advised her to accept  (the suitor being pressing,  and
having a good income),  she writes:  "  Had marriage from prudence
and convenience been my desire — I believe I have had it quite as much
in my power two or three times as now — particularly there was a
certain youth not quite so hasty to be sure,  as Mr.  Barlow,  but not far
otherwise,  who took much pains for cultivating our acquaintance.  I
happened to dance with him at a private masquerade at Mr.  Lalauze's,
and he called two or three times afterwards,  and wrote two notes,
with most pressing requests,  through a third person,  that he might be
introduced to my father,  and know whether he might exist again,  or
not.  However,  after the answer received,  written by myself to the
second note,  I heard of him no more."]

I never coloured so in my life,  for papa was in the room,

1 770]  Frances Burney.  77

and Hetty read the note out aloud,  and then,  laughing,  flung
it to me to answer,  saying she knew she had nothing to do
with it ;  and wishing me joy of my first serious conquest.  I
was so very much surprised I could not speak.  Papa said it
was coming to the point very quick indeed,  and he must
either be a very bold man,  or a young man who knew nothing
of the world.  But he said I must return the tickets,  but
might let him come to tea,  as he deserved civility,  by naming
him  (papa),  and then we might see more how to judge him.
I was quite frightened at this — but very glad papa and Hetty
both left me to answer the note for myself,  for as they
thought him serious I determined to be so too.1  ....

I wrote the following answer,  and sent it off without
shewing it to papa,  to put an end to the whole at once.

"  Miss Burneys present their compliments to the Dutch
man,  and as they cannot go to the Chelsea Assembly,  they
beg leave to return the three tickets with many thanks.

"  They are very sorry it will not be in their power to have
the pleasure of seeing him this evening,  having been some
time pre-engaged.  February 19th.  Wed  :  Morn8."

This note will,  I doubt not,  be  [the last]  I shall have to
answer from this gentleman — indeed it is the first also that I
have answered  :  nevertheless,  I  [fa]ncy he will condescend to
exist still

My dear James has been gone  [some]  time — he went on
board the Green [wich]  East India man,  he was in very  [good]
spirits,  and we have all great hopes that he will have a happy
and prosperous voyage.

The same evening that I sent the Dutchman's note,  we
spent at  [Mrs.]  Pringle's.  Mr.  Seaton,  Mr.  Crawford,  Mrs.
Mackintosh and her two sons made her party.  Mr.  Seaton
was all assiduity and attention to my sister. — Mr.  Crawford
willingly would have been the same,  but  ....  Mr.  Seaton
was so much more agreeable,  that no one else could engage

1 Some comparison with Captain Bloomfield is here crossed out.  It
looks as if Fanny had written that the Captain would not have been
"  BO abrupt."

78 The Early Diary of  [1770

her for three minutes.  As to the Captain,  it would  [be]
difficult to decide to whom he  [add]ressed his conversation
most — [we were]  rival Queens with him,  but which  [was the]
Statira1 is doubtful.

Mr.  Mackintosh is a very stupid  [youn]g man,  who is,  un
happily,  possessed  [of a]  very great fortune,  which could
[hardly]  be worse bestowed.  He has per[sua]ded himself
that he has a great regard for me,  and,  moreover,  that he has
a genius for poetry,  and has made  [an]  Acrostick on my name
which is very well worth preserving.  'Tis the]  most laugh
able stuff I ever saw.

Fancy ne'er painted a more beauteous Mind,
And a more pleasing Face you'll seldom find  ;
None with her in Wit can vie,
No,  not even Pallas,  may I die  !
You'll all know this to be Fanny  !

Beautiful,  witty and young,
Unskilled in all deceits of Tongue,
Reflecting glory on her Sex,
None can her in Compliments perplex
Easy in her manners as in her Dress —
You'll that this is Fanny all must guess.

To complete the elegance and brilliancy of this Acrostick,
the paper on which it is wrote is cut out in the shape of a
Fan

After supper,  Captain Pringle amused himself with writing
ladies names on  [the]  glasses,  beginning with our's,  and
[th]en wrote gentlemen's under them.  Andrew wrote his
under mine,  Hetty  [ch]ose Lord Pigot for one,  and I
Mr.  Crisp for another.  They had given up the dance  [which]
Mr.  Seton hinted of to us,  but  [prop]osed having a farce,  in
which we  [wer]e all to perform,  and after some time  [we]

It may be needful to remind some readers of Dryden's play of
"  The Rival Queens  "  (Roxalana and Statira).

1 770]  Frances Burney.  79

fixed on — "  Miss in Her Teens."  —Mr.  Crawford undertook
Rodolpho,  Andrew,  Fribble  (which parts had been much
better reversed),  the Captain,  Capt.  Flash,  Mr.  Seaton,  the
Man,  Mrs.  Pringle the Aunt,  Hetty,  Miss Biddy,  and for me,
Tag.  They were all very eager about it,  and fixed a day for
a rehearsal ; — but when I came home and read the farce,  I
found the part of Tag was quite shocking — indeed I would
not have done it for the universe,  and I we[nt]  and told
Mrs.  Pringle so directly.  She could not accuse me of affecta
tion for the moment she read it attentively she said to her
sons she was sure  [I]  should not do it ;  which was very kind

of  [her]

Not long after this visit we received a note of invitation

from Mrs.  Debbieg The Captain went with us in papa's

coach.  Poor Andrew was gone to the East Indies.  I wish
....  he may meet with my dear James.  Mr.  and Mrs.
Debieg are a charming  [coupjle ;  2 and never was there more
conjugal  [hajppiness visible than in them.  They have
three children,  whom they doat on.  Mrs.  Debieg is gentle,
polite,  sensible,  engaging — Mr.  Debieg is every thing that
can render him deserving of such an amiable wife.  Mr.  Seton
lives chiefly with them,  and there appears the most affectionate
and true harmony among them all.  Mr.  Se[ton]  again

1 A farce by Garrick,  first acted iu 1747,  at Covent Garden.  The
chief characters were Captain Flash,  a swaggering,  but far from
courageous,  officer,  and Fribble,  a contemptible,  effeminate dandy.
Woodward acted Flash,  and Garrick Fribble.  Mrs.  Pritchard played
the part which was to have been given to Fanny — that of a serving-
woman deserted by her husband,  a soldier.  In earlier days Dr.  Burney
had played Fribble  (on a private stage)  to Mrs.  Greville's Miss Biddy
Bellair,  the heroine,  and Greville's Captain Flash.  In 1747,  Mrs.
Delany tells her sister,  "  Nothing can be loicer,  but the part Garrick
acts himself,  ...  he makes so very ridiculous that it is really enter-
taining.  It is said he mimics eleven men of fashion — Lord Bateman,
Lord Hervey,  Felton Hervey,  and our friend Dicky Batemau, — I must
own the latter is a striking likeness."

3 Hugh Debbieg,  an officer of high character,  took rank as a major
of engineers from July 23,  1772,  when he was sent to Newfoundland.
Later on,  when one of the six colonel commandants of the corps of
engineers,  he is brought into the Rolliad as disagreeing with the Duke

80 The Early Diary of  [1770

appeared to me in a more favourable light ;  his ch  [arm]  ing
sister must reflect honour on all  [her]  relations.  If the sin
cerity of this ma[n]  equal'd his sense,  wit,  polite and in-
s[in]uating address,  I would not wish Hetty a happier lot

than to be his

We went to Mr.  Lalause'  Benefit though without

the l[east]  expectation of receiving pleasure,  a[s the]  play was
an old revived one,  and perfor[med]  by a set of Ladies and
Gentlemen who never appeared on any Stage before.  We went
[with]  Mr.  Mrs.  and Miss Stra[nge]  and some more com
pany of their party,  into the same box.1

of Eichmond,  Master- General of the Ordnance,  and being  "  oppressed  "

by him : —

"  Learn,  thoughtless Debbeige,  now no more a youth,
The woes unnumbered that encompass truth ;
Nor of experience,  nor of knowledge vain,
Mock the chimaeras of a sea-sick brain.
Oh,  learn on happier terms with him to live,
Who ne'er knew twice,  the weakness to forgive  !
******

Thy skill,  thy science,  judgment to resign  !

With patient ear,  the high-wrapt tale attend,

Nor snarl at fancies which no skill can mend.

So shall thy comforts with thy days increase,

And all thy last,  unlike thy first,  be peace.

No rude courts-martial shall thy fame decry."  *

1 In 1763 this Mr.  Lalauze was the subject of a rather warm set
of letters to and from Mrs.  Strange.  Lalauze was  "a very clever
Frenchman,  who had a connexion with one of the London theatres."
He taught dancing to the children of Eobert Strange,  who was then
at Bologna.  Little Jamie Strange was his very best pupil,  so Lalauze
asked Mrs.  Strange to permit her boy to dance upon the stage at his
benefit,  with his daughter Miss Lalauze.  Now Jamie,  or rather James
Charles Stewart Strange,  was godson of the old Chevalier;  an honour
which his mother had begged for him even before his birth,  through
her brother,  Andrew Lumisden,  who was secretary to that prince,  and
attainted for his share in the Rebellion of 1745.  Robert Strange
himself had served under Prince Charles,  having been drawn into it
by his Bella,  who refused him her hand unless he fought for her king  ;
so that he was under a cloud,  and lived chiefly abroad.  In her
mother's pride,  Mrs.  Strange wrote to her  "  Robie  "  that  "Jamie"
was about to dance upon the stage.  Strange wrote to Lumisden,  in
Rome,  to beg him to use an influence which he knew to be greater

1 770]  Frances Burney.  81

It was most wretchedly performed.  It is called Themistocles
and Aristides — never were heroes more barbarously mur
dered.  Miss La Lause and her father danced a minuet a la
cour between an act,  after which she came into our box.

....  When the play was over Mr.  Henry Phipps,
Hetty's Masquerade partner came to speak to her.  He
is so very agreeable and well bred,  that,  young as he is,  it is a
pleasure to hear him converse.

The next morning Mr.  Phipps called.  He is more pro
perly Mr.  Henry Phipps,1 being the second son of Lord Mul-

than his own,  to prevent the boy from figuring on the boards of a
theatre.  Andrew took it heartily up,  and sent his sister an over
solemn warning against a theatrical style of dancing ;  backed by
dreadful examples of young Englishmen who were laughed at in Italy for
showing off as if they were stage- dancers.  Bella replied with vigour,
that  "  Jamie knows no more of a theatrical carriage than you do.  He
moves and dances like a gentleman.  His master is as much unlike a
dancing-master as your Holy Father."  This was not the Pope of Rome,
but a certain Reverend Mr.  Wagstaffe,  who was chaplain to Lumisden
and the faithful few of the English Church in the Pretender's household.
Then Bella gave Andrew an ominous hint that  "  I shall vindicate
myself on the deafest tide of your head,"  adding that  "  I will not quit
my knowledge of mankind to the best of you"  [men-folk].  I have
seen throw  (sic)  things you yourself have been blind to,  as the foibles of
men,  or wemon"  (sic);  of which foibles,  she will do herself the justice
to say,  she has  "  as few as any she that ever wore petticoats."  She
adds,  that her husband and brother,  both being in Italy,  had much
better  "  submite the care of the children  "  to her,  as she hereby desires
them to do.  Indeed,  she had half-a-dozen to mind while Strange lived
abroad.  As for Robie,  all she has to say to him is,  "  My love to him
when you write to him, — or,  you may send him this."  Of course,
"Robie"  had  "to submite"  in 1763,  and to go on  "  submiting ; "  as
here,  in 1772,  we find Bella taking her own daughter,  with Fanny and
Hetty,  both to the masquerade of Mr.  Lalauze and to his benefit.  As
Jamie was only ten years old in 1763,  Andrew and Robie might have
spared themselves their trouble.  Sir Lawrence Dundas,  in due time,
got Jamie a writership in India,  and of poor Miss Lalauze we hear
again in a later Diary.

1 This is a mistake ;  Henry Phipps was the third son of the first
Baron Mulgrave.  In 1792 he succeeded his eldest brother,  "  The Polar
Captain  "  in the Barony of Mulgrave,  and in 1812 was created the first
Earl of Mulgrave.  He was the father of the first Marquis of Nor-
mauby,  who wrote some novels,  which were fashionable in his time.
Constantino  (sometimes called the  "Polar Bear,"  or  "Ursa Major,"

I.  G

82 The Early Diary of  [1770

grave.  He is really one of the most amiable,  sensible,  and
well-bred youths I ever saw.  It is impossible not to forget
while he is talking that he is so young,  for he is so very clever
and sensible,  that not a word escapes him which would not do
credit to double his years.  It is a question whether he is
most polite or most entertaining.  The Dutchman also joined
us — a bold man he certainly is not,  for he looked very,  very
dejected — but his note,  and papa's and Hetty's opinion of
his being so serious,  made me think it right to answer nothing
that he said beyond yes or no. — However he contrived to
hand me to the coach. —

Lynn Regis,  April 20th.

Is Nobody surprised at the date of this  ? — Ah,  my good and
excellent friend,  when I last addressed myself to you from fair
London town,  I very little imagined that my next address
would be from Lynn  !  I have now been here nearly a fort
night,  but have not had time or inclination to write to my
Journal,  nor should I now but from the pleasure that I take
in recollecting and relating what passed during the space of

time between my last writing and my journey hither

Sir Lionel Pilkington spent an evening with us.  He is an
old and intimate acquaintance of papa's,  a man famous for wit
and dry humour.  He is also,  which is rare with men of that
sort,  very well bred,  for in general they affect a bluntness and

from his rough manners),  sat in the House of Commons  (being an i
Irish peer)  at the same time as his brothers Charles,  who also was in
the Navy,  and Harry,  who was in the Army.  In the once famous,  and
still most amusing,  "Probationary Odes,"  they are all brought into an.
Amcebsean dialogue between Dr.  Prettyman and Mr.  Banks  : —

"  PRETTYMAN.     Sooner the ass in fields of air shall graze,
Or WARTON'S Odes with justice claim the bays  ;
Sooner shall mack'rel on the plains disport,
Or Mulgrave's hearers think his speech too short ;
Sooner shall sense escape the prattling lips
Of Captain CHAELES,  or Col'nel HENRY Phipps  ;
Sooner shall Campbell mend his phrase uncouth,
Than Doctor Prettyman shall speak the truth  ! "

1 770]  Frances Burney.  83

conciseness which quite excludes the attention and respect

necessary for a polite man.1

On Wednesday evening,  ...  we went to Mrs.  Cornelys'
with papa and Miss Nancy Pascall.  The magnificence of the
rooms,  splendour of the illuminations and embellishments,  and
the brilliant appearance of company exceeded any thing I
ever before saw.  The apartments were so crowded we had
scarce room to move,  which was quite disagreeable,  neverthe
less,  the flight of apartments both upstairs and on the ground
floor seemed endless.  .  .  .  The first person that we saw and
knew was Lord Pigot.2  .  .  .  He spoke to papa with his accus
tomed ease and pleasantness,  and called Hetty his little friend  :
neither did he forget little me.  He appeared to be of no par
ticular party,  and frequently joined us.  He asked papa — "  Dr.
Burney,  but when will you come to one of my Concerts,  and
dine with me,  with the young ladies  ?  "  Papa did not fix any
time,  and to my great concern I have quitted town before he
did,  for I had great pleasure in the thought of being of the
party.  The Rooms were so full and so hot that nobody
attempted to dance I must own this evening's enter
tainment more disappointed my expectations than any I ever
spent ;  for I had imagined it would have been the most
charming in the world — but papa was but half recovered,  and

went merely that we should not be disappointed of

seeing the apartments.      What other father  .  .  .  would have

been so very indulgent and though he could not

enjoy at all the evening's entertainment,  yet was he all kindness

1 A Yorkshire baronet,  who was member of Parliament for Horsham
from 1754 to 1768.

2 This pleasant and musical Lord Pigot came to a sad end.     In 1775
he was made Governor of Madras.      In 1776 a majority of his own
council  "suspended"  and imprisoned him,  proclaiming their leader
Governor in his place.    He died on the first of May,  1777,  in the Garden
Port,  just after the East India Company had voted his restoration.
Mason wrote to H.  Wai pole,  "  I shrewdly suspect some dark practice
in this death of Lord Pigot ;   pray tell me what you think of it."
Walpole answered,  "I know no more than you see in the newspapers,
and thence you may collect that there was more than meets the ear."
The rebellious officials were tried,  but not,  it was considered,  adequately
punished.

84 The Early Diary of  [1770

and affection to us — he is one of the few who can be dejected
without losing his sweetness of temper.  Nevertheless our
knowledge of his indisposition prevented our being comfort
able  ....

The next evening,  rather late,  Mrs Pringle sent an invita
tion to my sister and self,  to drink tea,  sending word she was
quite alone.  Hetty was out,  but I went,  and found Mrs.  P.
and Mr.  Seton sitting together,  with little Clement Debieg,
the latter's nephew  ....  Soon after Captain and Mrs.  Debieg
came,  full dressed and in high spirits,  from some great dinner,
I was obliged to make excuses for my appearance,  which their
cheerfulness and good humour soon made me forget.  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Debieg and Mrs.  Pringle went to cards — Mr.  Seton and
myself declined playing — I never do but at Pope Joan,  Com
merce,  or My Sow's Pig'd  ! ' — We therefore entered into a
very comfortable conversation:  he enquired much after my
sister — and regretted her absence.  So did every body.
Captain Pringle did not come home till supper.  I spent a
very agreeable evening ;  the party though small were select,
and each in high good humour and spirits.  Mr.  Debieg
appears at every meeting to more and more advantage  ;  he is
really a charming man,  sensible,  well bred,  unaffected,  and
very droll.  Mrs.  Debeig is happy,  very happy I am sure in
the possession of the heart of such a man ;  and his affectionate,
.  .  .  and obliging behaviour to her,  evidently declare her
to have retained,  though a wife,  all the influence and power of
a mistress.  And this might perhaps be more universally the
case,  were women more universally such as Mrs.  Debieg.
She is indeed truly worthy her happy lot — with great dis
advantage of person,  for she is actually ugly;  her many
amiable qualities,  the goodness and excellence of her mind,
are so marked in her countenance,  that she claims a place in
the very heart immediately.  I quite forget whether I men
tioned that at the visit we made to this charming pair,  there

1 Mr.  Gibbs kindly informs the Editor that  "My Sow's Pig'd  "  is
not in Hoyle ;  and that the only mention of it he has found is in  "  Notes
and Queries"  (5th Series,  vol.  v.  p.  129),  where it is named as one of
several old card games in a list given in a MS.  Diary,  dated 1629.

1 770]  Frances Barney.  85

were of their company two gentlemen of the name of Dundas  ?
— Major Dundas,  the younger was much smitten with Hetty  ;
Mr.  Dundas the eldest was at that time  ....  engaged in

contesting an election to be member of Parliament for  .

Mr.  Debieg told me that he had gained his cause;  and I
found that,  by way of rejoicing,  they intended having a dance
at their house ;  which they fixed to be the next Tuesday,  be
cause that was the aniversary of their marriage day,  and they
invited Mrs.  and Captain Pringle,  and my sister and self to it.
I answered for one — I knew I might for the other,  tho'  I did

not choose it A formal note followed next day to Miss

Burney and Miss Fanny Burn ey with the invitation for Tuesday.
Mrs.  Pringle chaperoned us,  and we were almost the first in the
room ;  but I will mention the whole party by name,  for indeed
they well deserve it.  To begin,  as I ought,  with the women.
Mrs.  Seaton,  a very engaging woman,  about twenty-three,
widow of Major Seaton,  an elder brother of our acquaintance —
she is rather handsome,  extremely elegant in her manners,  and
mild and sensible in her conversation.  Mrs.  Pringle,  who was as
gay,  chatty and clever as usual.  Mrs.  Debieg herself,  who is
always charming.  Miss Peggy Adams,  an old flame of Mr.
Seaton's she is called  :  she is about twenty-six or seven,  ugly
in person,  and too reserved in manners to permit me to judge
of her,  but I will imagine she has some remarkable qualities
to have engaged Mr.  Seaton's attention,  though I cannot
wonder he has transfered it to another object,  when I see
how striking is the difference between them  :  nevertheless,
I am concerned to find this additional proof of the fickleness
of his disposition.  Miss Stuart,  she is about nineteen or
twenty,  has a fine face in spight of the small pocks,  is
modest,  well-bred,  and very silent.  Miss Dalrymple,  who
we have frequently seen at Mrs.  Pringle's.  She too,  is
reported to be an old flame of Mr.  Seaton's — she is about
twenty-eight or nine,  rather handsome,  lisps affectedly,  simpers
designedly,  and looks conceitedly.  She is famed for never
speaking ill to any one's face,  or well behind their backs.  An
amiable character.  Miss Burney and Miss Fanny Burney —
sweet charming young creatures  ! — I need not describe.  Now
to the men.  I must begin with Mr.  Debieg,  for whom I have

86 The Early Diary of  [1770

conceived a great regard  :  he was all spirits and sweetness,
and made,  with his other half s assistance,  all his company
happy.  Sir Harry Seaton,  the eldest brother of Mr.  Seaton
and Mrs.  Debieg:  he is very unlike either;  grave,  reserved,
silent,  yet perfectly well-bred,  and very attentive ;  and there
is something in his manners prevenant.  Mr.  Dundas,  to whose
successful election we owe this meeting,  almost the same
words I have used for Sir Harry Seaton would suit him,  save
only he was less reserved,  rather.1 Major Dundas,  his younger
brother,  very unlike him ; — conceited,  talkative,  coxcombical.
Mr.  John Dundas,  a Cousin to these gentlemen,  a well-behaved
man,  nothing extraordinary.  Mr.  Adams,  very sensible,  very
polite,  and very agreeable, — the most so,  Mr.  Debieg excepted,

of the whole party.      Mr. Adams,  his younger brother,

a well-behaved good sort of young man.2 Mr.  Farquar,  he is
....  very droll and a favourite rather of Hetty's for his

1 It was for the gain of an election upon petition that Mrs.  Pringle's
party was given.       James Dundas,    Esquire,    contested Linlithgow-
shire at the general election of 1768,  with John Hope,    Esquire,  a
nephew of the Earl of Hopetoun.     Dundas was beaten,  but petitioned
Parliament against the return of Hope in its first session,   and re
newed his petition in its second.      On the 27th of March,  1770,  he
was reported to have been duly elected,    and Mr.    Hope was,
accordingly unseated.      He was of the Dundas family,   of Castle
Dundas,  Linlithgowshire,  but related to the Arniston family,  and the
famous  "  Harry,"  Pitt's friend  (Lord Melville).     Mrs.   Strange was
related to Sir Lawrence Duudas through his marriage with one of
the Braces of Ken net,  and the Pringles of Whytbank were akin to her.
Perhaps Fanny's Pringles were of that family.    We never meet Mrs.
Strange and Mrs.  Pringle together in these Diaries,  but Mr.  Scott,  the
Jacobite ex-tutor of the King,  is found at the houses of both.

2 There were four brothers,   John,    Bobert,   James,    and William
Adam,   who about this time began building  "  that noble pile,  the
Adelphi,"  upon a site which they had bought,  as a heap of ruins,  of what
had been the town-house of the Bishops of Durham,  on the Strand.    We
learn from a passage in Fanny's Diary for 1773,  that Kobert and James
Adam were the brothers named in the text.     Miss Peggy,  one of Mr.
Seatou's many  "  flames,"  was probably of the same family.     They were,
soon afterwards,  in great repute as architects.     Kobert,  who was born
at Kircaldy,  in 1728,  was royal architect from 1763-4 to 1768,  in which
year he was chosen M.P.  for Kinross.    He was the chief of the brothers
whose names are given to streets in the Adelphi Buildings quarter.

1 770]  Frances Burney.  87

pleasantry.1 Mr.  Robinson,  a very handsome young man,  and
also  ....  agreeable, — tolerably,  at least.  Captain Pringle,
who has lately rather risen in my opinion,  as he has forbore
giving himself the airs he formerly did  :  he seems less con
ceited,  and speaks less in a rhodomantide manner,  and is also
less liberal of flattery and compliments.  Mr.  Alexander
Seaton,  I need not give his character — indeed I could not — I
once thought I knew it — I now am sure I am ignorant of it.
I believe I have mentioned the whole party ;  and though my
account may be very faulty,  it is such as I think.

We  ....  began dancing about 9 o'clock : — then,  when the
company stood up,  Mr.  Seaton took my hand  ....  He was
as entertaining and agreeable as ever  :  seemed in high spirits,
and danced extremely well ;  though he was scarse a moment
silent.  I told him of my frolick for Friday ;  of going to
Lynn — he seemed sorry.  He very gravely,  with an  "  upon
my honour"  assured me that nobody throughout the town
would more sincerely regret my absence than himself.  I
thanked him kindly for his opinion of my friends'  affection  !
He is perpetually accusing me of mauvaise honte,  tho'  in
civiller terms,  he exaggerates compliments such as never were
put together before.  He often protested that he knows not
any living creature who possesses so much modesty with MY
parts and talents  !!  which,  for my years,  exceed all his acquain
tance's  !!  he says that till that morning that he had that long
conversation with me at our house  ...  he had no conception
of my character,  and that but for that circumstance,  he might
never have known my abilities !  II he very frequently and
earnestly advises and presses me,  as a friend,  to join more
generally in conversation,  etc,  etc,  etc.  Ha  !  Ha  !  Ha  !

Mr.  Seton is artful :  I have seen that :  he courts my good
opinion,  and I know why  ;  he flatters me in a peculiar style,
always affecting a serious air,  and assuring me he speaks his
real sentiments  : — I some times think he does not know how to
do that ; — though there is an insinuating air of sincerity in his
manner whenever he is serious,  which often staggers me,  in

1 Afterwards Sir Walter Farquhar,  a physician of note,  who is called
in 1808,   by his patient,  Dr.  Barney,  "  our wise and good  ^Esculapius."

88 The Early Diary of  [177°

spight of the prejudice I have conceived against him for his
unworthy trifling with so sweet,  so amiable a girl as Hetty  : —
in short,  I have no fixed opinion of him.  I know he is agree
able to a superior degree;  and I believe he is as artful as

"  But for how long are you going  ?  "  said he  :  I told him
for the whole summer. —

"  Just now/'  said he,  "  that I have begun to be acquainted
with you !  I never knew your powers,  I believe,  quite com
pletely till the last time I saw you at Mrs.  Pringle's,  when
you ventured to open your mouth,  while the rest were at
cards,  and was really so entertaining — "

I would not hear him on this subject,  conscious as I am of
my deficiency that way: — He admired the philosophy with
which I bore this stroke of leaving town — I affected to
need none for it.

"  What would your sister say in a similar situation  ?"

"  0 there's very little to be said, — she would go as I do."

"  I believe she would have hanged herself first ! "  He
said this laughingly,  but sarcastically.

Presently we sat down and joined her,  when he said to her
— "What do you think Miss Fanny says? — She tells me
that if it had been your lot to be carried into the country,
thus in the Spring you would have just taken your garters
and hanged yourself!"

1 It is in keeping with the character of Mr.  Seton,  or Seaton,  that he
should be as hard to find as he was to hold.  We fancy that we can
trace him to have been one of the four sons of Sir Henry Seatou,  who
also had a daughter  ;  probably Mrs.  Debieg.  This Sir Henry died in
1751,  and was succeeded by another Sir Henry.  A Sir Henry Seaton
served in the war of the conquest of Canada,  and settled in New York.
Perhaps he was the father of Alexander,  who may have come from
America,  and returned to some part of it,  as the last time he is named
it is as being likely to obtain some appointment,  although he had not
gone with his brother-in-law,  Debieg,  to Newfoundland.  Once again
he is named,  in Fanny's diary of the year 1780.  She returns a letter
which has been  "  sent me to peruse,  from Mr.  Bruce to Mr.  H.  Seton,
not Alexander.1' — Her editor has omitted this return of memory to the
fickle Seton of 1770.

1 77°]  Frances Burney.  89

I railed at him to no purpose,  he absolutely insisted 7 had
told him so  ! — Hetty did not know which to believe.  He ran
on with more stuff to the same purpose  ;  Hetty looked at me ;
— I cleared myself,  and insisted on his clearing me:  —

"  Well "  said he,  laughing,  "  I believe I added the
garters ! "

"  Why,  did I say any thing at all about hanging  ?  n cried I —

"  Nay  "  returned he,  "  when I had given the garters,  I was
obliged to give a use for them  !  "

At the end of two dances,  ....  Mrs.  Debieg told us we
were to change partners every two dances.  Mr.  Seaton then
took out Hetty  ....  and Mr.  John Dundas made his bow

to me These two dances over,  Captain Pringle

marched to me ; — Mr.  Farquar to Hetty.  The Captain pro
fessed much concern at my approaching journey — though he
so seldom saw me,  he said,  it was a pleasure to him to know
he lived in the same neighbourhood — He rejoiced,  however,
that we did not both go — then he should have put his whole
house in mourning, — now only half of it — etc — etc —

After that I went down two dances with Mr.  Robinson.
....  We then left off for supper.  During the time of
rest,  I was happier than in dancing,  for I was  ....  more
pleased with the conversations I then had with Mr.  Dundas,
Mr.  Adams and others,  than with my partners,  and they all
in turn came to chat with me,  with as much good humour as
if I had been as good a talker as I am a listener.  Mr.  Dundas
the elder and Mr.  Adams are quite high conversers.  I was
never more pleased

When supper was over,  all who had voices worth hearing
were made to sing — none shone more than Mr.  Adams;
though in truth he has little or no voice,  ....  yet he sung
with so much taste and feeling,  that few very fine voices could
give equal pleasure  :  I cannot but much regret the probability
there is of my never seeing him again.  I may see many fools
ere I see such a sensible man again.  Mr.  Robinson also sung
and showed to advantage his fine teeth and face. — Miss
Dalrymple also showed to  ^-advantage her conceit and self
approbation  ; — Hetty with one song only gave more pleasure
than any other.

90 The Early Diary of  [1770

Poor Mrs.  Pringle,  who hates musick,  unless it be Maggy
Lauder,  was on the rack of impatience and vexation all the
time.  She is seldom silent three minutes,  yet seldom speaks
without applause  ;  therefore this musical entertainment was
absolute torture to her.  For the life of me I could not
forbear laughing.  She gave as many hints against singing as
she possibly could,  but nobody would take them — between
every song she cried ; — "  Pray gentlemen and ladies take
breath  !  Upon my word you ought not to suffer for your
complaisance — "  Still they were not tired ; — more eagerly
than before,  she cried out — "  Why,  bless me  !  you'll kill your
selves  !  pray,  Mr.  Debieg,  speak! — Mr.  Adams and Miss Dal-
rymple are so very polite,  that they won't consider themselves;
— but we ought!"  Finding this also fail,  quite out of patience
she exclaimed — "  Why  !  good folks,  this is all very fine,  but
you should not give us too much of it !  let us have a little
conversation — Mr.  Debieg,  why won't you talk  ? — Come,  Sir
Harry,  I am sure,  is of my side ;  bless us,  what's to become
of our tongues  ? "  Mr.  Seaton did not let his be idle ;  his
whole attention was confined to Hetty,  and his conversation
m ore flattering than ever; — equally so at least.  Well might he
be proud of engaging her as he did,  for she met with the most
flattering and apparent approbation of every one present

We took our leaves at about three in the morning,  I mine
with much concern,  assured as I was of not seeing them again
so long,  if ever  :  for mama's not being acquainted with this
family,  may probably put an end to our intimacy when we are
all in town again.  Mr.  Seaton handed Hetty to the carriage.
— Mr.  John Dundas very civilly beg'd the favour of my hand,
which,  just as I had held towards him,  Major Dundas,  imper
tinent coxcomb !  pushed himself between us,  and very cava
lierly took it.  I can't say it made any difference to me,  but
I cannot bear the airs of that Major.  Mr.  John laughed it
off very well,  threatning to send him a challenge next day ;
bidding him remember Montague House  ;*  and not imagine
he would pocket such an affront.

1 Duels were fought in the fields behind old Montague House,  which
stood on part of the site of the British Museum.

1 77°]  Frances Burney.  91

Captain and Mrs.  Pringle came home with us:  the former
intimated his intention of calling to pay me a farewell visit
ere I went ; — fearing the consequences of his despair,  I would
not prohibit him.  Poor Hetty passed an uneasy night,  racked
with uncertainty about this Seton,  this eternal destroyer of
her peace  !  —  Were he sincere,  she owned she could be happier
in a union with him than with any man breathing  : — indeed,
he deserves her not ; — but the next morning,  when she had
considered well of every thing,  she declared were he to make
her the most solemn offer of his hand,  she would refuse him, —
and half added — accept of Charles  !

Wednesday.

At breakfast entered Captain Pringle ; — pitied Hetty,  pitied
himself,  for my intended absence — nor did he exclude me from
his pity — in truth it was I most merited it.  He hoped,  how
ever,  that I did not carry my heart down with me  !  assured
me I should find it very troublesome in the country,  and
vastly more entertaining to go without that,  though not with
out a successor to it — he told me I was now at the most
susceptible age,  and hoped I made not a bad use of my time  :
— said the country was intolerably insipid without la belle
passion.  Having stayed about two hours,  he made his
compliments,  and departed.  Soon after Mr.  Seaton called,  on
pretence of bringing Hetty a Poem,  which she had expressed
a wish to read,  Goldsmith's Deserter.1 I wonder he chose
to bring it !  How blind to our own failings are we  !  .  .  .  .

1 This passage offers a pleasant puzzle to those who care for minute
literary details.  Bishop Percy says that  "  The Deserted Village  "  was
published in 1769.  But Sir James Prior,  another of Goldsmith's editors,
quotes from the  "  Public Advertiser"  of the 26th of May,  1770  :  "  This
day,  at 12,  will be published,  price 2s.,  '  The Deserted Village,'  a poem
by Dr.  Goldsmith,  printed for W.  Griffin,"  etc.  Mr.  Gibbs,  who has
recently edited Goldsmith's works for the Bohu's Standard Library of
Messrs.  Bell,  has kindly furnished me with the facts of this note.  He
informs me that he has examined the early editions of this poem,  and
that  "  the dates,  according to their titles,  are,  of editions one to five,
1770;  of edition seven,  1772,"  thus confirming Prior's statement.  Yet
here,  in Fanny Burney's Journal,  at a date prior to April 20,  in fact,
at about April 8th,  we have Mr.  Seaton apparently making a present

92 The Early Diary of  [1770

I now come to Thursday,  my last day  ...  in town.
In the morning Harry Phipps called — and stayed some
time.  Hetty and I wished to form a friendship with him,  nor
has he shewn any aversion to such a scheme ; — there is some
thing very engaging in him.  Soon after,  tat tat tat too  .  .
.  .  .  Tat,  tat,  at the door — and enter Mr.  Seton.  I was
quite amazed — he marched up to me,  and presented me with
a little parcel,  which on opening I found to contain a dozen
franks directed to Hetty.  Free,  Dundas !  He had men
tioned this to her before,  tho',  as she rather declined it,  from
our little acquaintance with Mr.  Dundas,  we did not expect
them.  Mr.  Seaton said that my sister should have a dozen
directed to me,  if I would tell him my direction.  Imagine
my blushes etc.  He stayed near two hours.  I don't admire
being obliged to him. — He says that Mrs.  Debieg mentioned
it to Mr.  Dundas — but it's much the same.  Really Mr.
Dundas must wonder we should permit such a request after
only seeing him twice  !  I should not like he should think ill
of us,  for we think very well of him.  Mr.  Seaton told me
that he has a wife and daughter in Scotland,  the latter married.

Just after he was gone Mr.  Young whom we had

not seen for an age called to-day.  He was most absurdly
dressed for a common visit,  being in light blue,  embroidered
with silver,  a bag and sword,  and walking in the rain  !  He

of a copy of Goldsmith's poem.  Mr.  Gibbs conjectures that a solution
of this problem must lie in the direction of one or other of the following
possibilities : — (1)  Mr.  Seaton may have got hold of  "  an advance
copy"  to gratify a fair lady's wish,  and Fanny Barney,  may have
mistaken the title for  "  The Deserter ;"  (2)  there may have been a
"Deserter"  by somebody else,  and Mme.  D'Arblay,  years after,  forgot
this,  and wrongly attributed the work to Goldsmith,  being at the same
time oblivious of the real title of Goldsmith's poem ;  or  (3)  Goldsmith
may have written a poem,  "  The Deserter,"  which is now lost,  perhaps
buried in some periodical work of the time.  It will be observed that
the words originally written were  "  called the Deserter."  These,  some
fifty years after  (for it is in her later handwriting)  Mme.  D'Arblay
altered by crossing out  "  called the,"  and adding  "  Goldsmith's."  She
did not alter  "  Deserter"  on which word her blame of Seaton hinges.
"  Strange  "  (as she says)  "  to tell,"  Fanny had not read Goldsmith's
Poems up to 1790,  when a copy was given to her by Mrs.  De Luc.

1 770]  Frances Burney.  93

looked extremely well,  and looked tolerably conscious of it—
Upon my word he is quite altered from what I thought him on
our first acquaintance — he  [is grown]  all airs and affectation ;
— assumed a coxcombical assurance and indolence joined — yet
I believe this was put on — for what purpose I cannot tell,
unless it were to let us see what a power of transformation he
possessed.  He bowed to the ground at entering,  then swinging
his hat the full extent of his arm, — "  This is the most un
fortunate shower/'  cried he, "  or,  rather,  I am most unfortunate
in being caught in it.  Pray how does Dr.  Burney do  ?
Where is he  ?  "  We,  in return,  enquired after Mrs.  Young.
"  She's very well,  in the environs of Soho,  I believe."  "  At
Mrs.  Cornelys',  I presume,"  said Hetty.  "  Ay sure/'  returned
he — "just going to open a ball with Lord Carlisle.1 But
where is Dr.  Burney  ? "  Once again we answered,  out,  on
business;  and retorted a second enquiry after Mrs.  Young.
"  We just now parted in a pet/1 said he,  "  but,  I think,  we
were to meet here — "

Soon after she came in a chair.  After common salutations
— "  Pray how came you to leave me so,  Mr.  Young  ?  "  cried
she — "  Only think,"  turning to us — "  the fellow of a coach
man drove the horses'  heads towards a court in Soho Square,
and pretended he could not move them;  and Mr.  Young was
fool enough to get out,  and let the man have his way, — when
he deserved to be horse- whipped."  "  Instead of which/'
returned he,  "  I gave him a shilling  !  where's the difference  ?  "
"  Who but you  "  cried she  "  would not have made the man
come on with us  ?  or else not have paid him  ? — and so I was
forced to run into a toyshop,  where he politely left me to my
fate — and where I chanced to meet with a chair."  0 rare
Matrimony  !  *  thought I.

1 This seems to have been meant for a pleasantry.     Mrs.  Cornelys
gave her subscription balls in Carlisle House  (on the east side of Soho
Square,  at the corner of Sutton Street),  a nobleman's mansion,  which
she altered and enlarged.

2 This is a quotation from Garrick's farce of  "The Irish Widow":
"  Bates.  The aflair of marriage is,  in this country,  put upon the easiest
footing;.  .  .  .  they are united at first for their mutual convenience,  and
separated ever after for their particular pleasure — O rare Matrimony !  "

94

The Early Diary of

[1770

Mr.  Young turned to Hetty — '•'  Where is Dr.  Burney  ? "
"  Why,  dear/'  cried she,  "  I told you twenty times,  out,  on
business/'  "  O  !  ay,  I believe you did — "  "  When will Miss
Allen leave Bath,"  said Mrs.  Young.  "  Why,  is Miss Allen
at Bath  ?  "  cried he.  ' '  Mr.  Young,"  exclaimed she, — "  how
can you be so affected  !  why you knew she was there a month
ago — "  "  Not I,  faith  !  never heard a syllable of the matter
— not a single syllable ! "  "I have no patience with such
affectation — you knew it as well as I did"  cried she.  "  Miss
Burney"  cried Mr.  Young fixing his eyes earnestly on her face,
"  how does Mr. — what's his name  ? — Charles,  I believe — ay,
how does Mr.  Charles Burney do  ?  "  "  Very well,  I believe"
said she,  half smiling in spight of a studied composure.
"  When does my sister come to town  ?  "  asked Mr.  Young.
"  Next Tuesday  "  said I — "  and I go to Lynn to-morrow."
"  To-morrow  !  is this magick  ?  and why do you go  ?  "  said
Mr.  Young.  "  To take mama's place,  and be very notable."
"  And for that do you go  ? — No reason besides  ? — "  "  Not
one  !  "  "  I'll go too  !— when is it  ?  "  "  Next Tuesday."
"  I'll go too,  I protest !  "  cried Mr.  Young.  "  Pray do ;  "
said I,  " it will be very worth while 1  "  "I will,  upon my
honour ! "

He then insisted on Hetty's singing — which she did,  and
most sweetly.  They went away about nine.  My dear papa
soon after came home.  I told him of my franks,  though in
some fear that he should think me wrong in consenting
to have them,  though I don't know how I could have refused
them.  .  .

Lynn Regis.

My Susette and I are very comfortable here We

work,  read,  walk,  and play on the harpsichord — these are our
employments,  and we find them sufficient to fill up all our
time without ever being tired.

I am reading again,  the History of England,  that of Smollet.

I have read to the reign of George the Second,  and,

in spight of the dislike I have to Smollet's language and style
of writing,  I am much entertained,  for scarce a name is now

1 770]  Frances Burney.  95

mentioned that is not familiar to my ear,  and I delight in thus
tracing the rise and progress of the great characters of the

age

We meet with great civility and kindness in this town,
and

[To Miss BURNEY,  Chesiugton.]

My dearest sister,

With a very short time to write,  and a very great deal
to say,  I take up my pen to thank you most heartily for your
comfortable letter.  I had thought it very long on the road.
We are now in daily expectation of the important letter from
papa — and let me say one thing — it seems to me not unlikely
that immediately that papa receives the last pacquet,  he will
write to my uncle.  I hope therefore that you have ere now
acquainted him with your affairs,  or else that you directly will,
as it would be shocking for him to hear of it first from abroad,
and as he would then perhaps always believe that you in
tended to secret it from him.

How can it have got about,  God knows,  but every body
here speaks of your marriage as a certain and speedy affair.
So you will have it in town.  I fear mama cannot go  ; — as for
me,  I am ready to break my heart when I think of being
absent from you.  O that it were in my power to quit this
place directly  !  But I hope all for the best ;  indeed I cannot
bear to suppose that I shall be away from you.  Miss Allen
goes to Snettisham to-morrow — is too busy to write,  but will
from thence.  Susette's best love attends you.  I have had
a sensible and affectionate letter from my cousin,  which I beg
you to thank him for in my name.

Sweet Chesington  ! — abominable Lynn  !

My dear Hetty,  I shall write myself into the vapours and
then give them to you — so I will have done.  But I must say
how much I admire your plan of life.  Certainly it would seem
very strange for you to have gone to the Coffee House,  for all
his and your own acquaintance will be visiting you on the
occasion.  I will write to you the very instant we hear from
Venice.  My kindest and best love to my ever dear Mr.  Crisp

96 The Early Diary of  [177°

and to dear Kitty.  Let us know about the Barbornes1 when
you can.  Adieu,  my dearest,  dear sister.  I am in much haste.
My first wish is to be with you.  God forbid I should not !
Believe me ever with the utmost affection

Your

FKANCES BuENEY.2

Poland Street.

I have not written for an age — the reason is,  my thoughts
have been all drawn away from myself and given up to my
dear Hetty — and to her I have been writing without end  ; —
so that all my time besides was due to my dearest Suzette
with whom I have been reading French  :  having taught
myself that charming language for the sake of its bewitching
authors — for I shall never want to speak it.

With this dear Suzette and my sweet little Charlotte,  it is
well I can be so happy :  for Hetty,  my dear Hetty,  has given
herself away from us.  She has married at last her faithful
Charles.  God send her happy  !  He is one of the worthiest
young men living. — I am come up to town to spend a little
time with them.  They are now in our house till they can find
a dwelling to their taste.

Papa has bought a house in Queen Square.      It is settled

1 The family of Eichard Burney,  of Barb orne- Lodge,  Worcester,  the
"  uncle  "  named in this letter.

2 Arthur Young hinted,  on a previous page,  that there was some tie
between Charles Eousseau Burney and his cousin Hetty,  so that no
wonder  "  it got about "  in Lynn.     On the back of this letter there
is a date in pencil of  "  July,  1770,"  which may be in Fanny's writing.
We do not know the exact date of the marriage.     The reference to the
"  pacquet from Venice  "  shows that Dr.  Burney was then on his first
tour,  and was not present at it,  as he writes,  in his  "  Present State of
Music in France and Italy,"  "  I left London in the beginning of June,
1770."     He did not return until January,  1771,  when he was welcomed
by his family and Mr.  Crisp to his new house in Queen Square,  which
was bought by Mrs.  Burney in his absence,  so that the communication
which Fanny advises her sister to make was to her uncle,  Eichard
Burney,  father of the bridegroom,  who was not to be shocked by hearing
of it first from Dr.  Burney on the Continent.

1 770]  Frances Burney.  97

by Mr.  Crisp to my very great grief that we are quite to drop
Mrs.  Pringle,  that we may see no more of Mr.  Seton.

For this reason I shall be glad to quit Poland Street,—
that I may no more see Mrs.  Pringle since I dare not visit or
even speak to her,  when it is not unavoidable,  as it was a few
days since,  when Miss Allen and I were standing at the
parlour window,  and Mrs.  Pringle passed,  but seeing me
turned back and made a motion for me to open the window,
which I did,  though I was terribly confused what to say to
her,  for it waa not in my power to explain the reasons of my
absence from her ;  yet,  after so much kindness and civility as
we have met with from her,  I am sure excuses were very
necessary.  She asked me how I did,  and immediately added
— "  Pray what have I done that you never come near me  ? "
I was much at a loss what to say,  but stammered something
about the hurry of moving,  want of time,  etc. — She shook
her head — "  Want of time! — what only next door?  .  .  .  .
I'll assure you I think it very ungrateful in you."  Her
bluntness confounded me,  which I believe she saw,  for she
said in a softer manner — "  Well,  my dear,  I am glad to see
you so well — I wish you good morning  "  — and walked away.
I am truly sorry to say I believe this is the last time I shall
speak to Mrs.  Pringle.  I have a very strong sense of the
favours we have received from her,  and were it in my power,
would convince her that I have — but it is not.  Just before her
eldest son,  the Captain,  went abroad last spring,  he gave to my
sister a Copy of Verses on her,  and me,  which I will write out.

[Four stanzas follow,  professing to be French.  Captain Pringle
most likely copied them in part from a book,  grafting upon them some
conceits of "  his own pure brain."  "Belle Venus,"1 and  "Madame
Minerve,"  took human forms one day,  and made such mischief among
hearts on earth,  that the cry of men rose to Olympus.  In his wrath,
Jupiter banished the goddesses for ever, — (of all places in the world,)
to Poland Street,  Soho  («•  la rue de Pologne  ")  bidding them be women
for the rett of their lives  !

"  Soit femmes pour le reste de la vie  !  "  (sic. )

1  "  1.  Miss Hester.

2.  Miss Fanny Burney."

[Captain Pringle's own explanation of whom he meant]
I.  H

98 The Early Diary of  [1770

This line is a fair sample of the sense and grammar of these verses,
which,  after copying in her youth,  Madame D'Arblay has noted in her
age,  as being  "  out of all metre,  and not French."  They are also  "  out
of all "  spelling,  and right accents,  but as we printed the not much
wiser effusions of  "  Incognitus,"  "  Melidorus,"  and Mr.  Mackenzie,
Captain Pringle's merit mention.  As Lord Mulgrave wrote of a
generation before theirs,  "  Without his song no fop is to be found."]

Can any thing be more galant  ?  My sister and myself pro
pose in future signing no other names than those of Venus
and Minerva.

Wednesday Oct.  [1  ?]

....  our play,  which I shall presently copy a bill of.
There was just a week's interval from the proposing and the
performing.  But I will begin with a play bill,  which I had
the honour to draw up.

...  the 29th

Will be presented,

By a Company of Comedians in Queen Square.1

Queen Square,  Nov.  16.

I have now changed my abode,  and quitted dear Poland
Street for ever.  How well satisfied shall I be if after having
lived as long in Queen Square,  I can look back to equally
happy days !

We have a charming house here.  It is situated at the
upper end of the square,  and has a delightful prospect of
Hamstead and Hygate,  we have more than room for our
family,  large as it is,  and all the rooms are well fitted up,  con
venient,  and handsome.2  ....

1 This has been crossed out,  but so much as is given above may be read ;
and it may be discerned that the parts were played by the Burneys,
their cousins,  and Maria Allen.     It shows the family turn for acting.

2 Dr.  Burney liked this house because it had been that of John
Barber,  the  "  Johannes Tousor  "  of the charming correspondence of
Swift and his friends.      Lord Mayor Barber,  printer to Queen Anne
and to the City of London,  lived and died a hearty Jacobite,  bequeath-

1770]  Frances Burney.  99

I left Mr.  Burney and my sister with regret;  I passed five
happy weeks with them.

«
[The following fragment is iu a proper place here,  as winding up the

record of the waverings of Mr.  Seton.]

....  Though he never knew his own mind while she
was single,  ....  and that his friends,  and his party,  knowing
[his]  disappointment,  and not knowing how his behaviour
incurred it,  all look upon her marriage as if it was jilting him.
I know,  [that]  they all thought much higher for her  [than]
Mr.  Burney,  who has nothing to offer but the fruits of his
profession ;  and she is  [so]  pretty,  and so accomplished,  so
agreeable and so active,  that both in and out of her family  [it]
was imagined she would connect herself to far more worldly
advantage.  The extreme worth,  however,  [and]  excellent
though unpretending understanding  [of]  Mr.  Burney and his
goodness of heart,  and regard from childhood will,  I trust
and hope,  make her happy,  and make  ....

[Here ends a record of  "  such love as belongs to admiration,  and
leads to flirtation,  and ends in nothing at all." l But the strong mea
sure of moving to Queen Square to be out of the close neighbourhood
of so easy a chaperon as the good-natured,  social,  hospitable Mrs.
Pringle,  did no more than change the scene and the actors upon the
stage.  We shall soon see that it was also the proverbial change,
4i from the frying-pan into the fire "  ;  for iu Queen Square lived Sir
Richard Bettenson,  Mr.  Rishtou's uncle by marriage,  and Sir William
Browne,  M.D.,  whose daughter was married to his great-uncle.  Hence
the square was a little Lynn Regis when the Burueys also entered it;
and there were two young people who could easily renew the love-
affair begun at Lynn.  Madame Minerve  (herself all fancy-free)  was
soon to watch and chronicle another inroad of the great god Cupid.
Herself younger than Hetty and Maria,  she observed their growing

ing  £300,  £200,  and  £100,  respectively,  to his friends Bolingbroke,
Swift,  and Pope.  In a plan of London by J.  Gibson,  1767,  Queen
Square has only two parallel blocks of houses,  and is unfinished on
the other sides.  Upon the north it lies open to St.  George's Fields
and Lamb's Conduit ;  in fact,  Fanny must have seen Highgate and
Hampstead as villages on the heights,  with clear fields between them
and Bloomsbury.

1 So wrote Fanny  (many years afterwards),  in  "  Camilla"  ;  perhaps,
not without memory of 1770.

100 The Early Diary of  [1770

attachments with tender and anxious care,  with a sister's feelings,  but
also  (how can nature be expelled  ?)  with the eye of an unconscious
artist.  Hetty,  the sweet and sensible,  had scarcely settled into a
very happy married life with her modest and constant Charles,  than
the stormier love-tale of Maria Allen and Martin Folkes Rishton began
to occupy the mind of Fanny.  She was not to lack a heroine,  or  (as
in 1768)  to complain of  "insipid calm and uninterrupted quiet."  Dis
creet she was  ;  but the warnings of Dolly Young as to the danger of
"  all going down  "  in journals was not always heeded.  Twelve pages
at the end of this Diary have been cut out,  perhaps by her own hand,
perhaps by the hand of some one still more discreet.  We learn from
Fanny's own memoranda that they contained the names of Miss Allen
and Mr.  Rishton.  Much of the Diary of 1771 has,  in like manner,
been sacrificed to prudence  ;  but Fanny preserved,  as long as she lived,
a bundle of Maria's letters,  which  (though they have undergone some
censorship)  half show,  half hide,  a romance which stirred her fancy,
and,  it may be,  turned back her thoughts to the story  (which she
had burnt)  of  "  Caroline Evelyn."  These letters have been elsewhere
described by Fanny as being  "  flighty,  ridiculous,  uncommon,  lively,
comical,  entertaining,  frank,  and undisguised."  They are also not a
little indiscreet ;  and,  in one of them,  Maria most justly describes
herself as not being  "near so squeamish as you  [Fanny]  are."  In
fact,  nothing lying before the Editor gives a higher opinion of the
natural refinement of Hetty,  Fanny,  and Susy,  than the contrast
between what they did and wrote,  and the occasional doings and
writing of this impulsive girl.  The contrast in education is equally
striking.  Maria could spell tolerably,  and her writing was neat,  and
even good when she chose to take pains  ;  but she was commonly care
less,  and often left her readers to correct her grammar and spelling,
and supply little words of connexion.  Dateless for the most part are
her letters  ;  and,  although they have been numbered in most cases by
Mme.  D' Arblay,  the order of numbering cannot always be trusted.

Nothing could surpass the confidence felt in Fanny by Maria,  and i
the affection between them was never altered.  In a letter of 1780,  or
later,  Maria writes  :  "  My heart at this instant glows with the same
love and friendship it ever felt towards you,  and I love your father as
I ever did,  and never will be the ungrateful wretch I must feel my
self ever to forget his paternal kindness to me when I lived under
his roof."

As we have no cooking at all in these early Diaries,  and our
heroine does but twice describe her own apparel,  we wish to show
that the Burneys did more than drink tea,  and can only find Maria
(who was rather  "notable"}  to fill the void.  Here is part of a letter
from Warham,  then the abode of Sir John Turner.1 It seems to have

1 Mr.  John Turner,  who was said to have been a waiter at a Cam
bridge-inn,  was,  in 1675,  chosen a common councillor of Lynn Regis,
and within two years'  time became alderman,  mayor,  and member of

1770]  Frances Bumey.  101

beeii written after Hetty's marriage,  but whether in 1770 or 1771 it is
hard to tell.  She writes as if about to take the place of her mother as
mistress in Dr.  Burney's house.  We introduce Maria by this frag-
meut.  and she begins to open her love-affairs in the lively letter which
follows it.]

[From MABIA ALLEN to FANNY BUKNEY.]

....  Oh as I coine Along some House keeping thoughts
enterd my noddle as follows — tell Jenny I have Alterd the
dinner on Monday — and intend having at top fry'd smelts —
at Bottom the Ham — on one side 2 boild Chickens — on the
other a small pigion Pie with 3 pigions in it and let the
Crust be made very Rich and eggs in it — in the Middle a
Orleon plumb Pudding — and a Roast Loin of Mutton — after
the fish.  There must be french beans round the Chickens —
and let her get some green gages and filberts — and a few
good Orleans for after dinner—  —Oh and pray remember that
the Window blind belonging to the Common parlour be put
up and the door shut when the Ladies come in that there
may not seem a fuss — and let the Carpet be Laid down in the
Musick Room for I shall carry them up there till dinner is
ready — and let the hair cloth on the Stairs be taken away —
for you Susey,  and the Children can go up by the Study
all the time they are with us to prevent dirt.  Excuse All
these ORDERS but they accur'd to me as necessary things while
on my journey.

[To Miss FANNY BURNEY.]
My dear Fan,

Prepare a good Stomach and good pair of Shoes for
an agreable walk to Cornhill1 — to eat your fill of Delicious

parliament for the borough.  "  From him sprang the family that after
wards bore great sway in this town for a whole century  "  (see  "  A
History of Lynn,"  by W.  Richards,  1812).  This descendant,  Sir John
Turner,  had the Walpole interest,  and  (with a Walpole)  fought and
won a violent election battle against William Folkes in 1747.  Sir
John contested Lyun for the last time in 1768.

1 The advice to prepare a good appetite for cheesecakes at Coruhill,
possibly means that Fanny was to go to an inii to receive some
parcel from Norfolk,  by  "  machine,"  or waggon,  and to pay the inn the
tribute of eating cheesecakes,  those dainties being in readiness at most

102 The Early Diary of  [1770

Cheesecakes —  (does not your mouth water at the bare Idea)
I was at the Assembly forced to go entirely against my own
Inclination.  But I always have sacrificed my own Inclina
tions to the will of other people —  could not resist the pressing
Importunity of — Bet Dickens — to go- — tho'  it proved Hor
ridly stupid.  I drank tea at the — told old T[urner] — I was
determined not to dance — he would not believe me — a wager
ensued — half a Crown provided I followed my own Inclina
tions — agreed — Mr.  Audley asked me.  I refused — sat still
— yet followed my own Inclinations.  But four couple began
— Martin was there — yet stupid — nimporte — quite Indifferent
— on both sides —  —Who had I — to converse with the whole
Evening — not a female friend — none there — not an acquaint
ance — All Dancing who then — I've forgot — nimporte —

I broke my Earring — how — heaven knows — foolishly enough
— one can't always keep on the Mask of Wisdom— well n'irn-
porte I danced a Minuet a quatre the latter end of the Eve —
with a stupid Wretch — need I name him — They danced
Cotillions almost the whole Night — two sets — yet I did not
join them — Miss Jenny Hawkins danced — with who — can't

you guess — well — n'importe

Some folks broke their promise of not Dancing.  Well who
could resist — the object was tempting — only half a Dance
• — the rest of time stupidly.  Not a soul I know there of my
own sex who are not too much engaged to speak to me —
well nimporte — I drank tea with no one in no party — I was
an Alien — quite save that poor bewitched solitary thing — not
quite — got into the Chariot to come home.  Young Mrs.
Hogg's Coachman forgot to set me down at our own door —
drove me in Chequer Street.  I did not go in with her tho
much askd — came home — was I alone — guess — well all is
vanity and vexation of spirit — did I pass a happy eve —
guess — did My going answer the expence of the cheesecakes
— yes — Was I better pleasd on Wednesday or Thursday
morning — The Latter —  .  .  .  You remember saying to me

inns.  In 1667,  Mr.  Pepys says that at the Red Lion,  at Barnet Wells,
he  "  did eat some of the best cheese-cakes that ever I did eat in my
life."  There may,  however,  be some playful double meaning in the
word  "  cheesecakes."

1770]  Frances Burney.  103

the night before you went these words — "  Write me

a full account of the Assembly you need not mind explana
tions — I shall not need them as I know how affairs stand — I
will explain them to Hetty—  I have obeyed your orders,
though have been rather to explicit I think — Adieu con
tinue to love me — and remember me to dear Hetty and her
Charles —

I am yours sincerely

MARIA LUCIA ALLEN

[Lucius appears to have been one of the Christian names of Mr.
Rishton.  Maria has playfully written  "  Lucia,"  then blurred it with
her finger.  Susan adds this postscript : — ]

"  Susanna sends her love to all 3 — has nothing to say,  as
is not able to write so much yet say so little as Miss A — "

104 The Early Diary of  [1771

1771.

[We cannot tell how much has been cut away from the diary of this
year before the first date which remains in it,  that of the llth of April.
Thereby we have lost all account of Dr.  Burney's joyous return to his
family in January,  and of his speedy retreat to Chesington to arrange
his notes,  and the journals of his tour in France and Italy,  for
publication.

In her elder days,  Mme.  D'Arblay drew up a list of  "persons and
things as ocurring  "  in her diaries from 1768 to 1779.

It seems probable that what she entered upon this list she meant to
stand when her manuscripts were published.  As the name of Miss
Ford is the first upon her notes for this year  (1771)  she herself most
likely cut out what went before it.  We assume  (we can do no more
than assume)  that when the names of people exist in her notes,  and
nothing about them is to be found in her journals,  the pages are in
many cases missing by accident,  in many others through the varying
measure of discretion,  and sense of fitness,  in those who handled them
about 1847.  Her own efiacements,  which are numerous,  can almost
always be known to be hers,  by their extreme thoroughness  ;  the lines
being so closely scored through and through that scarcely one word can
be made out.  Those of later hands,  have sometimes been read,  and
printed.  Between the paragraph upon Christopher Smart at p.  127,
and that on Signer Martiuelli,  p.  129,  passages concerning her brothers,
Charles and James,  her sister Susan,  Leoni,  Signer Corri,  and Signora
Bicheli,  were once in this journal ;  after Martinelli,  and before Dr.
Armstrong,  p.  131,  we have lost all that was written of Mr.  Sleepe,
Mr.  James Sansom,  and Mr.  Francis Sarisom ;  after Dr.  Armstrong,
p.  132,  of Mrs.  Barsanti,  Miss Eiddle,  Mrs.  Sansom,  Mrs.  Burney,  senr.,
Miss Mainstone,  Miss Const,  Molly Stauclifie,  and Mrs.  Const.]

Queen's Square,  Bloomsbury  —
April 11.

I have of late been led into many reflections from the
strange and unexpected behaviour I have seen on several
occasions:  one happened this morning.  Mrs.  Colman,

We have here omitted three pages of these moral reflections which

177 1]  Frances Burney.  105

wife of the famous author Mr.  Cohnan,1 a sweet amiable
woman,  was taken ill and died suddenly rather more
than a fortnight since.  We were intimately acquainted
with,  and very sincerely regretted her.  In point of under
standing she was infinitely inferior to Mr.  Colman ;  but
she possessed an uncommon sweetness of temper,  much
sensibility,  and a generous and restless desire of obliging,
and of making her friends happy.  So amiable a character
must,  I am sure,  endear her infinitely to Mr.  Colman,
whom she,  with the greatest reason,  was beyond expres
sion attached to.  He is one of the best tempered  (though
I believe very passionate)  of men,  lively',  agreeable,  open-
hearted,  and clever.  Her daughter,  Miss Ford,  is about
sixteen,  very genteel in person,  well bred,  and very well
educated.  Her son,  George Colman,  is still younger.  Poor
Mrs.  Colman was doatingly fond of both her children.  I have
heartily pitied them for the loss of such a mother,  ever since
I heard of it.

This morning it happened that only I was at home,  when
I heard a violent rap at the door,  and John came in with Miss
Ford's name.  I felt myself almost shudder with the idea of

were not cmly acceptable,  but obligatory,  iu a ceutury so much less
impatient than our own.  Iu fact,  they were part of the moral and
mental costume of the period  ;  but we have retained enough of them in
the Diary of 1768 to preserve the historical colouring which would have
been blurred had they been wholly left out.

1 George Colman  (the elder),  boru at Florence in 1732,  was the only
sou of Francis Colmau,  British Resident in Tuscany,  and of a sister
of the wife of Pulteuey,  Earl of Bath.  As a minister's child he had,
by precedent,  a claim that George II.  should be his godfather,  as
Queen Caroline had beeu godmother to his sister.  On his father's
death in 1733 Pulteuey became his guardian,  educated him at
Westminster School,  and Christ-church,  Oxford,  and entered him at
Lincoln's Inn.  George would have been left even more of Pulteney's
money than was the case,  had he not alarmed his uncle by liking
things theatrical.  In 1767 he became one of the proprietors of Covent
Garden Theatre.  He manacred the Haymarket after Foote gave it up
in 1776.  He wrote,  or rather adapted,  many pieces for the stage.
He had a share in the most successful comedy of the time,  "  The Clan
destine Marriage."  His  "  Jealous Wife,"  and  "  The Heir-at-Law  "  of
his son George,  have kept the stage in our own time.

100 The Early Diary of  [1771

what she must suffer from entering a house in which her
mother had been so intimate,  and while her death was so
recent ;  and,  when she came in,  I knew not what to do
with my eyes,  to prevent their meeting her's.  I was equally
distressed for words,  not knowing how to address her on this
melancholy occasion.  But I soon found my apprehensions were
needless ;  for she received my salute,  and seated herself with
great composure,  and without manifesting any concern.  I
talked,  as well as I was able,  of indifferent matters,  and she
followed as I led,  with the utmost ease and serenity  ;  offered
to call upon me any morning that would be agreeable to me,  to
go an airing,  spoke just as usual of Mr.  Colman and her
bi'other,  whom I enquired much after  ;  and with the ready
politeness of an old mistress of a family hoped soon to have
the pleasure of seeing me in Queen Street !  Then,  said she
was going to St.  James'  and so many places,  that she could
not possibly stay longer.

1 held up my hands and eyes with astonishment,  when she
left me.  Alas  !  thought I,  is all the tenderness of the fondest
of mothers so soon forgot  ?  or,  is it that,  becoming the
mistress of the house,  for such Mr.  Colman has made her,
having his servants and equipage at her command, — is it in
such things to compensate for the best of parents?1

April 20.
I went last night with mama and Miss Allen to Eanelagh.

1 This girl,  who shocked Fanny so greatly,  is said to have been upon
the stage at six years of age.  She afterwards married a Mr.  Wilkinson.
Her half-brother  (George Column the younger)  was but nine years old
when his poor mother died.  He tells a piteous little story in his
"  Random Kecollections."  On the night of Maundy Thursday,  1771,
he was to be taken home from Marylebone School to enter Westminster
after the holidays.  He had been told that a servant should be sent for
him.  None came.  He sobbed for some time,  but was piqued at last.
He went to ted in his stockings,  making a vow that he would never pull
them off again until he had seen his mother.  Never again did he see
her.  That night she was dying,  having taken a wrong medicine.  On.
Good Friday  (March 29,  1771),  the little lad was taken home to a house
with closed shutters,  to begin his acquaintance with loss and grief.

1771]  Fro. n ces Bu met/ .  1  ( ) 7

...  I saw few people that I knew,  and none that I cared
for.

[Here occurs a gap,  which we find from Mme.  D'Arblay's notes was
once filled with the affairs of  "  Mrs.  Doctor Burney,"  Miss Allen,  and
Mr.  Bishtoii.  As the second marriage of Dr.  Burney,  and the reaching
the grave age of fifteen,  moved Fanny to burn her elegies and odes  ;
nay,  her tragedies and epic poems,  and to indulge onjy in writing
journals,  with some scruples even about that ;  so it would appear that
the experience she had of other people's love-affairs stirred her mind to
begin  "Evelina"  early iu 1774.  To tell a tale aright which,  to our
belief,  had an influence over Fanny's imagination,  we must begin with
a pedigree.

Martin Folkes,  an eminent barrister,  was father of Martin Folkes,  a
bencher of Gray's Inn,  who married Dorothy,  one of the three co
heiresses of Sir William Hovell,  of Hillington Hall,  in Norfolk,  not far
from Lynn.  Martin  (II.)  had three sous,  of whom only the eldest
(Martin)  and the second  (William)  need be named.  Martin  (III.)  is the
Martin Folkes whose name abounds in the memoirs,  autobiographies,
and journals of the men of letters or science of his period  [1690-1754].
He was of Westminster School,  and a pupil of the famous Dr.  Laughton
at Clare Hall,  Cambridge,  and had also studied at Saumur.  He was
named Vice-Presideut of the Royal Society by Newton in 1722-3,  and
contested the Presidentship with Sir Hans Sloane,  upon the death of
Newton,  in 1727.  Failing to win,  he travelled in Germany and Italy for
two years.  In the end he succeeded Sloane as P.R.S.,  Dr.  Hartley as a
foreign member of the Academic des Sciences,  and the Duke of Somerset
as President of the Society of Antiquaries.  Oxford gave him his D.C.L.
before his own University offered her own degree of doctor.  He wrote
many papers upon a great variety of subjects,  for his fancy was kindled
by all things interesting in art,  science,  or learning,  though he is
charged by a contemporary with  "refusing constantly"  (as P.R.S.)
"  all papers that treat of the Longitude."  No wonder.  The longitude
was the  "  great Boar  "  (as they spelled it)  of that time.  The more
serious charge of making  "infidelity fashionable"  in the Royal Society,
by being himself  "  an errant infidel and loud scoffer,"  is made by
several writers,  as well as by his brother in the Royal Society and
Society of Antiquaries,  Stukeley,  who also wrote himself M.D.  and
S.T.P.  Stukeley was  (as the poet Gray said)  "  a gossip in coffee
houses,"  as well as iu his Common-place Book.  Yet,  as he had seen
much of Martin Folkes from at least 1720,  called him his  "  good friend,"
and given him a fibula,  we may  (after allowing for a few palpable
errors)  give some credence to the sad story he tells,  which bears
upon the fortunes of Martin's grandson,  Martin Folkes Rishton.  It
tallies,  besides,  with the more generous account given by Nichols.
"  Before he was at age "  Martin Folkes married from Drury Lane
Theatre a beautiful,  discreet,  and even exemplary woman,  who acted
under the name of Lucretia Bradshaw.  His mother,  ou hearing of his

108 The Early Diary of  [1771

marriage,  threw herself out of a window.  She only broke her arm
(which was less thau she meant to do),  but the fracture may not have
been in vain as a useful warning to her youngest son William,  who,  in
due time,  married twice,  and went where money was.1 His second
wife was the only child and rich heiress of that odd Norfolk man,
Sir William Browne,  President of the College of Physicians.  To
President Folkes a Martin  (IV.)  was born,  of Westminster School,
Glare Hall,  and Saumur — a brilliant youth,  who shared his father's
likings,  especially for coins and medals.  He was in Eome with his
father when poor Lucretia  (once Bradshaw)  went mad upon religion.
She was brought home to a house for lunatics at Chelsea,  where she
remained,  surviving her husband.  Her son was killed by a fall from
his horse,  while ending his studies in France.  Martin Folkes resigned
the Presidentship of the Royal Society in 1751,  after an attack of
paralysis,  but lingered in life until the middle of 1754.  He was
renowned for collecting curious and beautiful things,  and giving
generously to students.  To his Society he left his portrait of Lord
Verulam,  and a ring for future Presidents,  which he had himself worn
as P.R.S.  To his brother William he bequeathed their mother's estate
of Hillington  ;  to his two daughters,  Dorothy and Lucretia,2 twelve
thousand pounds apiece.  Dorothy  (says Stukeley)  had run away with
"an indigent person,"  "a bookkeeper,"  of the name of Rishtou,  who
"used her very ill."  Certainly Dorothy was only left a couple of
family portraits,  while her younger sister was made her father's
executrix,  and heiress of what he loved best,  his  "  great and well-
chosen library,"  his fine collection of English coins,  and vast gather
ings of objects of virtu or curiosity.  Two years after his death,  Lucretia,
his daughter  (who was then four-and-thirty),  married Richard Bettenson,
who also is said by Stukeley to have been at that time an  "indigent
person."  At any rate,  the fine library and rich museum of Martin
Folkes were sold the year Lucretia married ;  the sale lasting fifty-six
days,  of which the books consumed forty-one,  and the prints and
engravings eight.  Lucretia died two years after her marriage.  In
1773 we find Betteusou,  who had succeeded to a baronetcy,  living in
Queen Square,  with a large income,  but in an over-frugal way.  He
was childless,  and the baronetcy expired with him ;  so that he treated
his wife's nephew and his own ward,  Martin Folkes Rishton,  as his
heir,  and sent him to travel for two years in the beginning of this year,
1771 — partly,  perhaps,  to keep him out of harm's way in the form of
Maria Allen,  who may have been as beautiful as her mother had been

1 William,  from whom the present family descends,  was a barrister,
and agent for the Lancashire estates of the Duke of Montagu.

*  Lucretia was also left his silver plate.  Stukeley makes both
Dorothy arid Lucretia marry two years after their father's death ;  but,
in the absence of other evidence,  the will makes it likely that Dorothy
had married in his lifetime.

I771]  Frances Burney.

and her sister then was.  We have not found any reasons why Mrs.
Burney was so very warm against Mr.  Rishton,  except that he had
been extravagant at Oxford,  and that she had heard some story that he
had done something unworthy of a gentleman.  Mr.  Crisp,  Hetty,
Fanny,  and Susan,  were under the same belief that he was an unfit
and unsafe lover for Maria,  but Fanny and Susan  (the confidantes)
were much more pitiful than the  "wifish Hetty,"  although they pleaded
on the side of Discretion  ;  with the usual result,  as may be seen
hereafter.]

May 8.

My father's book,  '  The present state of Music' l made
its appearance in the world the 3rd of this month,  and we
flatter ourselves it will be favourably received. — Last Sunday
was the first day for some time past,  that my father has
favoured us with his company in a sociable style,  having been
so exceedingly occupied by writing in those few hours he spends
at home,  that he really seemed lost to his family ;  and the
comfort of his society and conversation is almost as new as
grateful to us.  He prints this book for himself.  He has
sent a multitude of them to his particular friends as presents  ;
among others,  to the famous Dr.  Hawkesworth,  to that charm
ing poet Mr.  Mason,2 to Mr.  Garrick,  and Mr.  Crisp,  who,  all
four,  were consulted about it when a manuscript,  and in
terested themselves much with it.  Dr.  Shepherd, 3 Mr.
Colman,  Dr.  Armstrong,  Mr.  Strange,  Dr.  Bever,4 Giardini,'

1 The title of this book is  :  "  The Present State of Music In France
and Italy  :  or The Journal of a Tour Through Those Countries,  Under
taken To Collect Materials For A General History of Music,  By Charles
Burney,  Mus.  D."  There was a second edition in 1773.  We give Dr.
Burney's own account of his undertaking  :  "  When I left England,  I
had two objects in view:  the one was to get what information I could
relative to the music of the ancients  ;  and the other was to judge with
my own eyes of the present state of modern music in the places through
which I should pass,  from the performance and conversation of the first
musicians in Italy."

3 Dr.  Burney had made the acquaintance of Mason at the house of
Lord Holdernesse,  to whom the poet was chaplain.

3 Dr.  Shepherd was Plumian Professor of Astronomy and Experi
mental Philosophy in the University of Cambridge from 1760 to 1796.

*  Thomas Bever,  LL.D.,  Oxon.,  1752,  was a jurist.  In 1781 he pub
lished a  "  History of the Legal Polity of the Roman State."

5 Felice Giardini was the first violin player in Europe.      "The

110 The Early Diary of  [1771

and many others had likewise books,  before the publica
tion

We had a great deal of company last Sunday.  Mrs.
Sheeles and Mr.  and Mrs.  Mailing,  her son and daughter,
dined and spent the evening with us.  Mrs.  Mailing is a
sweet woman,  with whom we were intimate before her mar
riage,  and who now,  to our great regret,  lives in the North of
England.1 After dinner Sir Thomas Clarges,  a modest
young baronet,2 and Mr.  Price,  a young man of fashion,  called
and sat about two hours.  The latter is lately returned from his
travels and was eager to compare notes with my father.  He
is a very intelligent sensible and clever young man.  He is a
kinsman to Mr.  Greville.3  ....

Yesterday,  after tea,  we were cheered indeed ;  for rap-tap-
tap,  and entered Mr.  and Mrs.  Garrick with their two nieces.
Mr.  Garrick who has lately been very ill,  is delightfully
recovered,  looks as handsome as ever I saw him,  is in charm
ing spirits,  and was all animation and good humour.4

arrival of GIAE.DINI in London,  in the spring of 1750,  forms a memo
rable aera in the instrumental music of this kingdom."  "  Of his
academy,  scholars,  manner of leading at the opera and oratorio,  per
formance in private concerts,  compositions vocal and instrumental,
I shall say nothing here,  lest my praise should be too much for others,
and too little for himself." — DR.  BURNEY.

1 These names should be Shields and Maling.     "  Mrs.  Sheeles  "  was
the kind friend of the Burneys,  who took Fanny,  Susan,  and Charles
to her house in Queen Square,  some days before the death of their
mother.     Of Mrs.  Maling,  Mme.  D'Arblay tells that she had often
said  "  Why did not Sir Joshua Reynolds paint Dr.  Johnson when he
was speaking to your father,  or to you  ?  "     Mrs.  Maling had observed
that the sight of Dr.  Burney or of Fanny seemed to light up Johnson's
countenance.       Mrs.   Maling was the wife of Christopher Maling,
Esquire,   of West Herrington,  in the County of Durham.     Sophia,
their daughter,  afterwards married the Harry Phipps named in 1770.

2 This Sir Thomas Clarges,  whose name is preserved in that of
Clarges Street,  where his grandfather had his house,  was a descendant
of John Clarges,    the farrier in the Savoy,   whose daughter Anne
married General Monk.

8 For Mr.  Price,  see a note to the diary for 1772.

4  "  I see him now,"  wrote Letitia Hawkins,  over forty years after
his death,  "  I see him now in a dark blue coat,  the button-holes bound
with gold,  a small cocked hat laced with gold,  his waistcoat very open  ;

1771]  Frances Burney.  Ill

Mrs.  Garrick is the most attentively polite and perfectly
well-bred woman in the world  ;  her speech is all softness;  her
manners,  all elegance ;  her smiles,  all sweetness.  There is
something so peculiarly graceful in her motion,  and pleasing
in her address,  that the most trifling words have weight and
power,  when spoken by her,  to oblige and even delight.1

his countenance never at rest,  and indeed seldom his person  ;  for in.
the relaxation of the country  [at Hampton]  he gave way to all his
natural volatility,  and with my father was perfectly at ease,  .  .  .  some
times sitting on a table,  and then,  if he saw my brothers at a distance
on the lawn,  shooting off like an arrow out of a bow,  in a spirited
chase of them round the garden."  Miss Hawkins adds that she was
much more afraid of Garrick than of Johnson,  "  whom I knew not
to be,  nor could ever suppose lie ever would be thought to be an extra
ordinary num.  Garrick had a frown,  and spoke impetuously  ;  Johnson
was slow and kind in his way with children."  The lithe and lively
Gascon,  who was connected with the Fermiguacs,  and claimed by
French Garricks as a kinsman,  was low of stature,  but well shaped
(bien prig),  with brilliant,  full,  black eyes,  and a dark complexion,
alert and  "  alive in every muscle and every feature."  It has been said
that there was a resemblance between Garrick and the 6rst Napoleon.
A nephew of Garrick,  who was exactly like his uncle,  was arrested
(under the belief that he was Buonaparte)  in 1803,  while travelling
in Wales,  but allowed to return to England by way of Teuby,  under a
pass from the Mayor of Haverfordwest.

1 Eva Maria Veigel,  or Weigel,  a charming dancer,  was born in
Vienna.  Her name which in Austrian-German,  means violet,  was
changed into  '•  Violette,"  or  "  La Violetta,"  by her patroness,  the
Empress Maria Theresa.  She came to England in 1744,  where she
lived with the Countess of Burlington,  (wife of the Earl who designed
his own palace),  while performing on the stage.  Garrick married her
in June,  or July,  1749,  after a courtship and a settlement care
fully superintended by the Earl and Countess,  who gave her a dower
of  £6,000 — to which Garrick added  £4,000,  in her settlement.  All
agree as to the attractions and great good sense of Mrs.  Garrick.
Mrs.  Piozzi wrote on the 17th of January,  1789:  ''That woman has
lived a very icise life,  regular and steady in her conduct,  attentive
to every word she speaks and every step she treads,  decorous in her
manners and graceful in her person.  My fancy forms the Queen
[Charlotte]  just like Mrs.  Garrick  ;  they are countrywomen,  and have,
as the phrase is,  had a hard card to play ;  yet  ....  they will rise
from the table unhurt either by others or themselves  ....  having
played a saving game."  What Mrs.  Piozzi meant was that Mrs.
Garrick maintained her ordinary manner towards herself on her second
marriage,  with a singer,— (a calling akin to that of Garrick and of

112 The Early Diary of  [1771

The Miss Garricks resemble,  the eldest her aunt,  the
youngest her uncle,  in a striking manner.  Softness,  modesty,
reserve and silence characterise Miss Garrick,  while Kitty is
all animation,  spirit and openness.  They are both very fine
girls,  but the youngest is most handsome,  her face is the
most expressive I almost ever saw of liveliness and sweetness.1

Dr.  King,  who has just taken the doctor's degree,  came in
and figured away to his own satisfaction before Mr.  Garrick,
whom he so engrossed,  that I thought it quite effrontery in
him.  I wonder he had the courage to open his mouth ;  but
men of half -understandings have generally  (I believe)  too
little feeling to be overpowered with diffidence.2 Besides

La Violetta),  when other people shunned  "  Thrale's gay widow."  Dr.
Burney,  to whom Mr.  and Mrs.  Garrick had shown the greatest kindness
when he lost his first wife,  writes emphatically that  "  Mrs.  Garrick
had every faculty of social judgment,  good taste and steadiness of
character,  which he wanted.  She was an excellent appreciate!1 of the
fine arts ;  and attended all the last rehearsals of new,  or of revived
plays,  to give her opinion of effects,  dresses,  and machinery.  She
seemed to be his real other half."  ....  Mrs.  Garrick survived her
husband more than forty years,  dying in 1822,  at a great age.

1 These young ladies were so much admired,  that Miss Hawkins
(who lived near them when in the country),  says that she was  "  duly
jealous of their re-echoed praises."    They were Arabella and Catherino,
daughters of George,  the only brother of David who left children to
keep up the name of Garrick.     Miss Garrick married in his life-time,
"  Kitty,"  after his death.     He gave each  £6,000,  the same sum that he
had received with  "  La Violetta."     By the way,  the name originally
was  "  Game."     The word Garigue is found in French dictionaries as
meaning a piece of waste ground,  a  "  lande"  but in the south of
France it takes the form of Garric,  and is applied to stretches of ground
in the  "  landes  "  which are overgrown by stunted oaks,  and brushwood
of oak — the primary meaning of the word being an oak.     The word
under the form of  "  Garriga"  is found in Spain.

2 Poor Dr.  King,  who actually had the impertinence to open his
mouth before Garrick,  was author of  "  The Rites and Ceremonies of the
Greek Church,"  1772,  4to,  and of a pamphlet on the climate of Russia,
where he had lived as chaplain to the English Factory at St.  Peters-
burgh.  His judgment may have been the less esteemed,  as  (being a Lyni
man)  he seems to have advised the second Mrs.  Burney;    and,  beinj
an  "unfortunate but honourable speculator,"  lost her all the money she
possessed absolutely.     He was John Glen King,  D.D.,  F.R.S. ;  born,
1731 ;  chaplain in Russia,  1764  ;    rector of Wormley,  in Hertfordshire,
1786.     He had a London chapel in 1786.     He also wrote a paper in the

i??1]  Frances Burney.  113

the man is wont to preach,  and that has taught him to prose,
which he does unmercifully.

Dr.  Bever,  a very civil,  heavy-headed man of the Law,  who
had listened with attentive admiration,  but quite dumb,  to
every word Mr.  Garrick spoke;  but,  upon something being
advanced relative to the Chancery,  he ventured to offer some
reply.  I really pitied the poor man ;  for,  when Mr.  Garrick
turned round to him,  and every body was silent to hear him ;
his voice failed him  ;  he hesitated,  confounded his own mean
ing,  and was in so much confusion,  that he could not make
himself understood.

I sat by the youngest Miss Garrick,  and had some comfort
able  [conversation]  with her.  Mrs.  Garrick with much kind
ness took my hand when she spoke to me,  and Mr.  Garrick
enquired most particularly after every one of the family.

I never saw in my life such brilliant,  piercing eyes as Mr.
Garrick' s are.  In looking at him,  when I have chanced to
meet them,  I have really not been able to bear their lustre.
I remember three lines which I once heard Mrs.  Pleydell
repeat,  (they were her own)  upon Mr.  Garrick,  speaking of
his face  :

"  That mouth that might Envy with passion inspire ;
Those eyes !    fraught with genius,   with sweetness,    with

fire,
And every thing else that the heart can desire — "

This sweet poetess,  on the very Sunday that I am writing
of,  set out for the East Indies.1

"  Archoeologia  "  on the Barberiui Vase,  and began a history of Roman
consular and imperial coins.  Ninety-two folio engravings for this work
were published after his death in 1787.

1 In 1832 Mme.  D'Arblay describes Mrs.  Pleydell as having been
rivalled only by Miss Linley for youthful beauty.  "  This lady,  in
taking leave of Dr.  Burney,"  for whom she had a great regard.  "  pre
sented to him a Chinese  (?)  painting on ivory,  which she had inherited
from her father,"  Governor Holwell,  who  "  estimated it as a sort of
treasure."  It was a procession of the Great Mogul.  Sir Joshua
Reynolds and Sir Robert Strange said that the female heads in it were
BO highly finished that they might be set in rings.

I.  I

114 The Early Diary of  [1771

June 3rd.

Alas  !  my poor forsaken Journal !  how long have I neglected
thee,  faithful friend that thou hast been to me,  I blush at my
inconstancy ;  but I know not how it is,  I have lost my gout
for writing.  I have known the time when I could enjoy
nothing without relating it.  Now,  how many subjects of
joy,  how very many of sorrow have I met with of late,  with
out the least wish of applying to my old friend for participa
tion,  or rather relief?  Perhaps I am myself the only one
who would not rather be amazed that a humour so particular
should have lasted so long.  Nevertheless,  I shall not dis
courage the small remains of it which this night prompt me
to resume my pen.  My dear brother James has returned
home in very good health and spirits,  to mine and all his
family's sincere satisfaction.  As to merchandise,  the few
ventures he took out with him,  he has brought back un
changed  !  Poor soul,  he was never designed for trade —

My dear father has gained more honour by his book,  than I
dared flatter myself would have attended it.  We hear daily
of new readers and approvers.  Mr.  Mason has written him a
very polite letter upon it,  desiring to introduce him to Sir
James Gray,1 one of the most accomplished men of the age,
who was so much pleased with my father's book,  as to beg of
Mr.  Mason to make them acquainted.

Dr.  Brookes,  husband to the Mrs.  Brookes who wrote
"  Lady Julia Mandeville "  and many other books,  has also
written to praise it.

Mrs.  Young has been on a visit to us for some days.  She
and her Caro Sposo are a very strange couple-
she is grown so immoderately fat,  that I believe she would at
least weigh  [  ]  times more than her husband.  I wonder
he could ever marry her  !  They have however given over
those violent disputes and quarrels with which they used to
entertain their friends,  not that Mrs.  Young has any reason to
congratulate herself upon it,  quite the contrary,  for the
extreme violence of her overbearing temper has at length so

1 Sir James Gray had been British Besideut at Venice,  was after-
wards at Naples,  and finally,  Ambassador to the Court of Spain.

1771]  Frances Burney.  115

entirely wearied Mr.  Young that he disdains any controversy
with her,  scarce ever contradicting her,  and lives a life of
calm,  easy contempt.

I had the favour of a short tete-a-tete with him t'other
day,  mama,  etc,  being out or engaged.  He had taken up Mr.
Greville' s  "Characters,  Maxims,  and Reflections/'  and asked
if it was written by our Mr.  Greville.  He opened it,  and read
aloud.1  "  There  !"  cried he,  laughing,  "  that's his opinion of
the sex  !  what do you think of that,  Miss Fanny  ?  " — "  Oh  !
he gave the reins to his wit there ;  I am sure he has,  never
theless,  a very high opinion of women."  "Well !  but what is
there against a woman,  that she yields to temptation  ?  why,
a woman who could resist all possible temptation,  must be an
animal out of nature  !  such a one never could exist/'  ....
He then shook his head at me and asked me what made me
say Mr.  Greville had so high an opinion of women  ?  "  His
conversation and his connexions.  It would be very extra
ordinary if he had not/'

"  Why so,  why so  ?  "

"  His wife is so very superior and amiable a woman,
that "

"  That's nothing !  that does not matter a straw.  A sex
ought not to be judged of by an individual."  "But we are
very apt to judge of others from those we are nearest con
nected with."  "  But man and wife can never judge fairly of
each other ;  from the moment they are married,  they are too
prejudiced to know each other.  The last character a man is
acquainted with,  is his wife's,  because he is in extremes ;  he
either loves,  or hates her/' — "  Oh !  I don't think that !  I
believe there are many more who neither love nor hate,  than
there are who do either." — "  It's no such thin^  !  "  cried the
impetuous creature,  "  you will find no such thing in life,  as a
medium  ;  all is love or hatred  ! "  I could have said,  it is
much oftener indifference than either ;  but I thought it would
be too pointed,  and dropped the argument.  1 recommended
to him to read the characters of Mrs.  Greville and Mrs.  Garrick,

1 Here Fanny left the space for a few lines bhi  >  in her diary,
meaning to copy what Mr.  Young had read,  but,  a-  n i fuw other
cases,  she never filled the blank.

116 The Early Diary of  [1771

which are written under the names of Camilla and Flora.
He read the former in silence ;  when he came to the latter,  he
gave the involuntary preference of immediately reading aloud.
Camilla he said was too celestial.  He was perfectly enrap
tured with the description of Flora *

The famous Philidor,2 so much celebrated for his surprising

CAMILLA,  [Mrs.  Garrick.]

1 From   "  Maxims,   Characters,  and Eeflections,"    2nd ed.,   1757  :
"  Camilla is really what writers have so often imagined ;  or rather
she possesses a combination of delicacies,  which they have seldom had
minuteness of virtue and taste enough to conceive :    to say she is
beautiful,  she is accomplished,  she is generous,  she is tender,  is talking
in general,  and it is the particular I would describe.     In her person
she is almost tall,  and almost thin ;  graceful,  commanding,  and in
spiring a kind of tender respect ;  the tone of her voice is melodious,
and she can neither look nor move without expressing something to her
advantage.     Possessed of almost every excellence she is unconscious
of any,  and thus heightens them all :  she is modest and diffident of
her own opinion,  yet always perfectly comprehends the subject on
which she gives it,  and sees the question in its true light :  she has
neither pride,  prejudice,  nor precipitancy to misguide her ;   she is true,
and therefore judges truly."

FLORA,  [Mrs.  Greville.]

"  You see a character that you admire,  and you think it perfect ;  do
you therefore conclude that every different character is imperfect  ?
What,  will you allow a variety of beauty almost equally striking in the
art of a Corregio,  a Guido,  a Raphael,  and refuse it to the infinity of
nature !  How different from lovely Camilla is the beloved Flora !  In
Camilla,  nature has displayed the beauty of exact regularity,  and the
elegant softness of female propriety :  in Flora,  she charms with a
certain artless poignancy,  a graceful negligence,  and an uncontrolled
yet blameless freedom.  Flora has something original and peculiar
about her a charm which is not easily defined ;  to know her and ta
love her is the same thing  ;  but you cannot know her by description.
Her person is rather touching than majestic,  her features more expres
sive than regular,  and her manner pleases rather because it is restrained
by no rule,  than because it is conformable to any that custom has
established.  Camilla puts you in mind of the most perfect music that
can be composed  ;  Flora of the wild sweetness which is sometimes
produced by the irregular play of the breeze upon the  ^Eolian harp."

2 Francois Andre Philidor,  who is still remembered as a writer on
chess,  as well as a great chess player,  was,  in the words of Dr.  Burney,.
in 1771,   a composer of music,  who    "  drinks hard at the Italian
fountain."      "The French    (Burney adds),    are much indebted to-

1 77*]  Frances Burney.  117

skill at the game of Chess,  is just come to England  ;  he
brought my father a letter of recommendation from the cele
brated M.  Diderot.1 He is going to have a new edition,
with considerable amendments and additions,  of a book upon
Chess,  which he wrote formerly in England.  A plan of his
work M.  Diderot has drawn up for him  ;  but he had got it
so vilely translated,  that my father had the patience,  from the
good-natured benevolence of his heart,  to translate it for him
himself.  M.  Philidor is a well-bred,  obliging,  and very
sociable man ;  he in also a very good musician.

My father has been honoured with letters from the great
Rousseau,2 M.  Diderot,  and Padre Martini,3 three as eminent
men,  as the age has produced,  I believe,  upon his book.

M.  Philidor for being among the first to betray them into a toleration
of Italian music,  by adopting French words to it,  and afterwards by
imitating the Italian style in several comic operas,  which have had
great success."

1 Diderot had,  the year before,  shown great courtesy to Dr.  Buriiey.
44 He entered  "   (writes Buruey)  "  so zealously into my views concern-
iu<;  the history of his favourite art,"  [of music]  "  that he presented me
with a number of his own MSS.,  sufficient for a volume in folio,  on the
subject.     These,  from such a writer,  I regard as invaluable.     '  Here,
take them,'  says he,  '  I know not what they contain  :  if any materials
for your purpose,  use them in the course of your work,  as your own
property  ;  if not,  throw them into the fire.'"

2 In 1770,  Dr.  Buruey says of Rousseau,  whom he met in Paris :  "  I
was so happy as to converse for a considerable time with him upon
music,  a subject which has received such embellishments from his pen,
that the dryest parts are rendered interesting by his manner of treat-
ing them,  both in the Encyclopedic,  and in his Musical Dictionary.
He read over my plan very attentively,  and gave me his opinion of it,
article by article."   Elsewhere,  Dr.  Buruey highly commends Rousseau's
"  Lettre sur la musique Framboise,"  for which Rousseau was burnt in
effigy at the door of the Opera-House in Paris.

J Padre Martini was a Franciscan friar at Bologna,  and  "Maestro
di Capella  "  in the church of his order He was a composer of music,
and author of a treatise upon it,  which is often quoted by Dr.  Burney
with deference.  He began a history of music upon a plan so vast
that he did not live to finish it.  Dr.  Burney went to Bologna mainly
to see him,  and Fariuelli ;  Martini  "  being regarded by all Europe as
the deepest theorist "  upon music.  Martini had a fine library of books
and MSS.,  in which Dr.  Buruey spent a great part of his time at
Bologna.  "Upon so short an acquaintance"  (Burney writes of

118 The Early Diary of  [1771

I have lately spent several evenings in paying visits with
mama and Miss Allen,  and have been tolerably  [tired of]  it.
I was at Kanelagh with them last week,  but I had not the
good fortune to see any body I wished.  I went there again
last Friday with my sister,  my aunts,  and Mr.  Burney,  and
fortune was equally kind.  However,  we were very well
pleased,  the sense of my aunt Anne,  the good nature of her
sister Rebecca,  the obliging disposition of Mr.  Burney,  and
the lively,  engaging sweetness of my beloved Hetty formed a
party I could not but be happy with.

July 3rd.

We have had a visit from a bridegroom this afternoon.  It
would not be very easy to guess him — Mr.  Hayes  !  That
poor old man has suffered the severest grief from the great
loss he sustained by the death of his first wife ;  he has never
ceased to regret her,  and nor ever will he.  Contracted is
that mind,  which,  from his second marriage immediately,
doubts his sincerity.  How could a man at his time of life,
having no children or near relations,  support himself alone,
with the most sociable disposition in the universe  ?  His
beloved wife never could be restored to him,  and he has
therefore sought a companion,  whose esteem and society may
tranquilize the remainder of his days.  For my own part,  I
applaud and honour every body who,  having that lively and
agonizing sensibility which is tremblingly alive to each emotion
of sorrow,  can so far subdue the too exquisite refinement of
their feelings as to permit themselves to be consoled in afflic
tion.  Why should despair find entrance into the short life of
man  ?  It is praiseworthy to fly from it, — it is true philosophy
as well as practical religion,  says,  often,  my dear father,  to
accomodate ourselves,  without murmuring,  to our fortune.1

Martini)  "  I never liked any man more ;  and I felt as little reserve
with him after a few hours conversation,  as with an old friend,  or a
beloved brother ;  it was impossible for confidence to be more cordial,
especially between two persons whose pursuits were the same."

1 Although Dr.  Burney's  "good and gay-hearted old friend,"  Mr.

1771]  Frances Burney.  119

I am just returned from Chesington,  to which dear place
Miss Allen took me.  I had not been for almost five years.
The country is extremely pleasant at Chesington.  The house
is situated on very high ground,  and has only cottages about
it for some miles.  A sketch of our party  :  Mrs.  Hamilton is
the mistress of the house,  which was her brother's,  who,  having
lived too much at his ease,  left her in such circumstances as
obliged her to take boarders for her maintenance.  She is a
very good little old woman,  hospitable and even-tempered.1

Hayes,  lived more than twenty years after Fanny made this entry,  we
are told so little more of him that this seems the place to r»cord that
he left Dr.  Burney his library,  and made James Burney his general
heir,  thereby giving him the house No.  26,  James Street,  Buckingham
Gate,  wherein he entertained Charles Lamb and his compeers. — See
Mr.  W.  C.  Hazlitt's recent edition of the  "  Letters of Charles Lamb."

1 Mrs.  Sarah Hamilton,  ah ancient maiden-lady,  on the death of her
spendthrift brother Christopher succeeded to some property at Chesing
ton,  a chapelry in the parish of Maiden,  in Surrey,  about eighteen miles
from London,  lying between Epsom and Kingston.  After giving up
his house at Hampton,  Mr.  Crisp had lived with her brother in the
picturesque old house,  which was built by the Hattons,  and of the
same date as Hampton Court.  So fallen were Mr.  Hamilton's fortunes,
that it had lost even the name of The Hall.  Mr.  Crisp's kind advice
helped the poor woman in her confused affairs.  Half of the house,  and
what was left of its grounds,  were let to a farmer.  Mr.  Crisp became
Mrs.  Hamilton's first boarder in the other half.  He chose a suite of
rooms,  with a light and pleasant cabinet at the end of a corridor,
which he gave up to Dr.  Burney as his writing-room when he visited
Chesington.  This was called by Mr.  Crisp  "the Doctor's Conjuring
Closet."  Chesingtou  (to abridge Mme.  D'Arblay's account of it)  was
a house with nooks and corners — "  quarters of staircases  "  leading to
unused rooms  ;  garrets,  or rather cells,  in great number,  and in all
shapes,  to fit the capricious forms of the leaded roof;  windows in angles
nigh the ceiling;  carven cupboards and carven chimney-pieces,  above
blue and white tiles;  "a tall canopied bed,  tied up to the ceiling;"
japan cabinets,  with two or three hundred drawers ;  old pictures and
tapestry presenting knights and damosels;  before the windows,
"straight old garden-paths,"  and across the leaden ridges of the roof a
view of the country for sixteen miles round.  Altogether an enchanting
house,  fit to form the fancy of the young.  It is all gone  ;  but,  perhaps,
in the little church there still remains the epitaph written by Dr.
Burney on his beloved friend,  Samuel Crisp.  This church,  which is
of the thirteenth century,  was restored in 1854.  The living is in the
gift of Merton College,  Oxford.  The name is more commonly written

120 The Early Diary of  [1771

Mademoiselle Rosat, — who boards with her;  she is about
forty,  tall and elegant in person and dress,  very sensible,
extremely well-bred,  and when in spirits,  droll and humorous.
But she has been very unhappy,  and her misfortunes have left
indelible traces on her mind;  which subjects her to extreme
low spirits.  Yet I think her a great acquisition to Chesington.
Miss Cooke, — who I believe is forty,  too;  but has so much
good-nature and love of mirth in her,  that she still appears a
girl.  My sister Burney, — than whom I know few prettier,
more lively,  or more agreeable.  Miss Barsanti,  who is a great
favourite of my sister's,  and was by her and Miss Allen
invited to Chesington.  She is extremely clever and entertain
ing,  possesses amazing power of mimickry,  and an uncommon
share of humour.  Miss Allen,  and myself,  and the females.
Mr.  Crisp,  whose health is happily restored,- — I think I need
not give his character.  Mr.  Featherstone, — brother of Sir
Matthew,  a middle-aged gentleman,  who,  having broken his
leg,  walks upon crutches.1 He is equally ugly and cross.
Mr.  Charles Burney brings up the rear.1 I would my father
did  !  ....

Miss Barsanti has great theatrical talents ;  her voice is en
tirely lost,  but from distressed circumstances her mother de
signs her for the stage,  as she cannot be a concert or opera-
singer  ;  and very kindly my father,  who,  as she was his pupil,
wishes to serve her,  begged Mr.  Crisp would hear her spout,
while she was at Chesington.  To make her acting less for
midable to her,  Miss Allen and myself proposed to perform
with her,  and accordingly we got by heart some scenes from
'  The Careless Husband/2 in which she chose to be Edging,

Chessington.  Once we read of Susan's going towards Chesiugtou by
coach ;  but there was only one  "  safe route across the wild common,"
and Dr.  Burney's chaises were guided by  "  a clue  "  given to him,  but
concealed from others,  by Mr.  Crisp.  Maria Allen,  writing in 1773 of
her journey from Tetsworth to Oxford,  tells Fanny that the roads
were more dreadful than can be conceived — literally worse and more
dangerous than Hook Lane,  or the Common leading to Chesington,  in
the winter.

1 The Northumbrian name of Featherstonehaugh is commonly so
shortened by its owners,  and by others,  in speech,  but not in writing.

2 A Comedy,  by Colley Gibber,  actor,  dramatist,  and Poet Laureate.

I771]  Frances Burncy.  121

myself Lady Easy,  and Miss Allen Sir Charles.  That droll
girl has so very great a love of sport and mirth,  that there
is nothing she will not do to contribute to it.  We had no
sooner fixed upon this scheme,  than we were perplexed about
the dressing Sir Charles.  We all agreed that it would be
ridiculous for that gallant man to appear in petticoats,  and
Maria had no idea of spoiling sport;  she only determined
not to exhibit before Mr.  Featherstone ;  as to Mr.  Crisp,
as he was half author of the project,  we knew it would be in
vain to attempt excluding him,  and Mr.  Burney could not
be avoided  ;  besides,  his cloathes she intended to borrow ;
but unluckily,  we found upon enquiry,  he had no wardrobe
with him,  the cloaths he wore were all his stock  :  this quite
disconcerted us.  Mr.  Crisp was so tall and large,  it was im
possible Allen could wear any thing of his.  We were long in
great perplexity upon this account ;  but being unwilling to
give up the frolic,  she at length,  though very mad at it,  re
solved upon the only expedient left, —  to borrow cloathes of
Mr.  Featherstone.  I never met a character so little damped
by difficulties as her's  ;  indeed,  she seldom sees any,  and,  when
she cannot help it,  always surmounts them.

To ask this of him,  made his being one of the audience in
evitable;  but it was the last resource.  Accordingly,  Allen
and Barsanti watched one morning for his coming into the
gallery upstairs,  from which all the bed-chambers lead,  and
addressed themselves to him very gravely,  to ask the favour of
him to lend them a suite of cloathes.  The man laughed mon
strously,  and assumed no small consequence,  on their begging
him to keep the affair secret,  as they intended to surprise the
company ;  for they were obliged to explain the motives of
the request.  This seemed something like confidence,  and
flattered him into better temper than we ever saw him in
before.  He led them to his ward-robe,  and begged Allen to
choose to her fancy.  She fixed upon a suite of dark blue,
uncut velvet.  I was in a closet at the end of the gallery,  not
able to compose my countenance sufficiently to join them,  till
a loud laugh raised my curiosity.  1 found she had just been
begging the favour of a wig ;  and he produced a most beau
tiful tie,  which he told her his man should dress for her.  She

122 The  .Early Diary of  [1771

then asked for stock,  shoes,  buckles,  ruffles,  and stockings,
and all with great gravity,  assisted by Barsanti,  who reminded
her of so many things,  I thought she would never have been
satisfied.  Mr.  Featherstone enjoyed it prodigiously,  snig
gering and joking,  and resting upon his crutches to laugh.
For my own part,  the torrent of their ridiculous requests
made rne every minute,  march out of the room to laugh more
freely We settled Saturday evening for our per
formance.  Meanwhile,  Mr.  Featherstone was observed,  as
he hobbled up and down the garden,  to continually burst into
horse-laughs,  from the diversion of his own thoughts.

On Saturday morning,  rehearsing our parts,  we found them
so short that we wished to add another scene ;  and,  as there
is a good deal of drollery in the quarelling scene between Sir
Charles Easy and Lady Graveairs,  we fixed upon that,  Miss
Allen to continue as Sir Charles,  and Barsanti to change her

cap or so,  and appear as Lady Graveairs While

they studdied their parts,  Kitty Cooke and myself,  as we fre
quently did,  walked out,  visiting all the cottages within a
mile of Chesington.  Upon our return to dinner,  Barsanti
told us she found the neiv scene too long to get in time.

Miss Allen and I,  being both sorry,  after some deliberation,
agreed to perform it ourselves,  and accordingly we,  after
dinner,  hurried up-stairs,  and made all possible expedition in
getting our parts,  resolving not to act till after supper.  While
we were studdying ourselves with great diligence,  Miss Bar
santi ran upstairs,  and told us that Mr.  Crisp had informed
all the company of our intention,  and that they were very
eager for our performance,  and declared they would never
forgive us,  if we disappointed them.  This flurried me violently,
insomuch that my memory failed me,  and I forgot my old
part,  without seeming to learn my new one.  I can,  in
general,  get by heart with the utmost facility  ;  but-  I was
really so much fidgetted,  that my head seemed to turn round,
and I scarse knew what I was about.  They,  too,  were flurried ;
but my excessive worry seemed to lessen their's.  I must own
it was quite ridiculous ;  but I could not command myself,  and
would fain have been off  .  .  .  .;  but my repentance came
too late.

i77']  Frances Burney.  123

We three retired after supper,  and I could not forbear
being highly diverted at seeing Allen dress herself in Mr.
Featherstone's clothes.  They fitted her horribly ;  the back
preposterously broad  ;  the sleeves too wide ;  the cuffs hiding
all her hand  ;  yet the coat hardly long enough  ;  neither was
the wig large enough to hide her hair ;  and,  in short,  she
appeared the most dapper,  ill-shaped,  ridiculous figure I ever
saw  ;  yet her face looked remarkably well

My repentance every moment increased ;  but in vain ;
they insisted upon no further delay  ;  and accordingly we

descended As we came down,  the servants were all

in the hall  ;  and the first object that struck us,  was Mr.
Featherstone's man,  staring in speechless astonishment at the
young figure in his old master's clothes.

Unfortunately for me,  I was to appear first,  and alone.  I
was pushed on  ;  they clapped violently.  I was fool enough
to run off quite overset,  and unable to speak.  I was really in
an agony of fear and shame  !  and,  when at last Allen and
Barsanti persuaded me to go on again,  the former in the lively
warmth of her temper called to the audience not to clap again;
for it was very impertinent.  I had lost all power of speaking
steadily,  and almost of being understood  ;  and as to action,  I
had not the presence of mind to attempt it.  Surely only Mr.
Crisp could excite such extreme terror  !  My soliloquy at
length over,  Edging entered with great spirit,  and spoke very
well.  I was almost breathless the whole scene ;  and oh  !
how glad when it was over  !  Sir Charles's appearance raised
outrageous mirth.  She required all her resolution to stand it.
Hetty was almost in convulsions.  Mr.  Crisp hollowed.
Mr.  Featherstone absolutely wept with excessive laughing ;
and even Mamselle Rosat leaned her elbows on her lap,  and
could not support herself upright.  What rendered her ap
pearance more ridiculous was that,  being wholly unused to
acting,  she forgot her audience,  and acted as often with her
back to them as her face ;  and her back was really quite too
absurd,  the full breadth of her height !

I had soon after to make my appearance as Lady Graveairs.
To be sure,  I was in proper spirits for the part ;  however,  a
few exceptionable speeches I had insisted on omitting,  and I

124 The Early Diary of  [1771

was greatly recovered,  compared to my former appearance.
Barsanti,  at a sudden thought,  went on and made an apology,
"  that the gentlewoman who was to have performed Lady
Graveairs,  being taken ill,  her place was to be supplied by the
performer of Lady Easy.  To be sure it was rather in the
barn style.

I acquitted myself with rather a better grace now,  and we
were much applauded.  Not having performers sufficient for
a regular plan,  we finished with such a short,  unsatisfactory
scene,  that they all called out for more.  Allen,  intending to
carry the affair off with a joke,  took Barsanti and me each by
the hand,  and led us on  ;  but whether from shame or what I
know not,  when she had bowed and we had curtsied,  she was
wholly at a loss,  and could not think of a word to say.  So,
after keeping the company in a few minutes'  suspense,  ' '  In
short/'  cried she,  "  you know the rest/'  and ran off.

It is easy to suppose laughs were not spared for this ridicu
lous attempt.

We all left Chesington with regret ;  it is a place of peace,
ease,  freedom,  and cheerfulness,  and all its inhabitants are
good humoured and obliging,  and my dear Mr.  Crisp alone
would make it,  to us,  a Paradise.

[There is no date or post-mark to a letter which is numbered 8,  and
addressed by Maria Allen,  from Lynn,  "  to Miss Fan and Suk — ."
Sir Richard Bettenson had,  as has been said,  sent his ward to travel,
about the end of January in this year,  making him promise to remain
abroad for two years.  Maria writes  :  "  Well girls — such a piece of
news — if it does but astonish you equal to what it did me in hearing it
you won't have recovered your surprise by the time I see you again —
Eishtou — my — yes the very identical Martin — Folkes — Lucious  (sic)
— etc. — Rishton is come over — and now in England — I can't write
any more I must leave you to get over your exclamations and then pro
ceed. 1 must skip over all trumpery Lynn occurrences when such

a subject as this demands my pen. — Well my journey into Norfolk has
more than answer'd all my expence and trouble in hearing this in
telligence."  But after all,  Maria knows no more than  "  Rishton is in
England!  "  "  Old Squire Rolfe,"1 had  "  on Friday  (the day we came

1 A Norfolk gentleman,  who had married a first cousin of Mr.
Rishton's mother.

i??1]  Frances Burney.  125

home from Chessiugtou)  been at dinner at his son's in Welbeck Street
— when the door open'd and in came  [Mr.  Rishton]."  The Kolfes
were  "  really terrify'd at seeing him as all the company concluded he
was then at Thoulouse — he had never mentioned his returning,  or
even hinted at it — and they all sat in silent astonishment,"  for he had
mentioned in his last letter liking the place extremely.  Martin was
looking very well — When asked what could have brought him over in
such a hurry  ?  "  he smiled,  but said nothing to the question."  He had
gone to Croome to see Mrs.  Jessey  "  on Sunday,  the day Dr.  Hawkes-
worth dined with us."  This is all that Maria can  "  pick up,"  but
it is thought that he is in London.  His letters are directed to the
St.  James's Coflee-house.  He has come back at the end of five mouths ;
it cannot be with his uncle's consent.  "  I neither eat drink nor sleep
for thinking of it — Whether I am glad or sorry,  I shall leave for
another opportunity, — or your own clever heads to find out."  Maria
wishes Susy,  who  (she knows)  is rich,  would pay her milliner's bill for
her  ;  and  "  you,  Fanny,  woud enquire what is the newest Parisian cut
for the sleeve of a riding-habit." l Little Charlotte is with her at

1 This does not ahvays,  or even often,  mean a habit for riding on
horseback.  TJiat was more commonly called a riding-skirt.  The dis
tinction between the two is shown in a diary kept by Mary Hamilton,
(a niece of the well-known Sir William),  in 1783,  while paying a very
quiet visit to the Dowager-Duchess of Portland at Bulstrode.  "  Dec.
3rd. — Got up a little after 8,  had my hair dress'd for ye day,  though
I put on as usual for ye morning a riding-habit."  After breakfast,  she
rode on horseback.  On coming in,  she writes,  •'  I changed my riding-
skirt,  and put on my habit again."  She appears to have dined in her
habit.  In 1782,  Fanny went with the Thrales to the last ball of the
season at Tunbridge- Wells.  She says that some of the ladies were in
riding-habits,  and they made admirable men.  "  'Tis tonnish to be so
much undressed at the last ball."  Lady Eleanor Butler and Miss
Pousonby,  ("  the ladies of Llangollen,")  appear in their portraits as
walking,  and sitting at dessert,  in their riding-habits.  The cut of their
habits to the waist is that of men's clothes, — and altogether they look
like respectable,  well-beneficed clergymen.  In Miss Austin's  "  Emma,"
which was published in 1816,  Mr.  Dixon saves the life of Jane Fairfax
at a Weymouth water-party,  when,  "  by the sudden whirling round of
something or other amongst the sails,  she would have been dashed into
the sea at once,  and was all but gone,  if he had not,  with the greatest
presence of mind,  caught hold of her habit."  [Miss Bates loqwtwr.]
In his second set of  "Reminiscences,"  Mr.  T.  Mozley says,  "'till,  I
should say,  1835,  it was a very ordinary thing to meet with ladies who,
to save the trouble and cost of following the fashion,  never wore any
thing but a closely-fitting habit.  It required a good figure and bear
ing."  Mr.  Mozley adds that it was  "  the usual travelling-dress for
ladies,"  that is,  even for ladies who did not wear it daily.  We think

126 The Early Diary of  [1771

Lynn,  but  "  the Governor  "  l is  (happily for Maria)  in London.  In a
postscript — "  I don't desire my love to Hetty— 'tho you may give it to
her husband."]

*  *****

Queen Square,  August.

Dr.  Hawkesworth has this moment left us  ;  he called on
my father,  who with mama is,  at present,  at Mrs.  Allen's
in Lynn j but he did us the favour to sit here some minutes
nevertheless,  only Susan and myself at home The ad
miration I have of his works,  has created great esteem for
their author ;  though he is too precise to be really agree
able,  that is,  to be natural,  like Mr.  Crisp and my dear
father

But now I speak of authors,  let me pay the small tribute of
regret and concern due to the memory of poor Mr.  Smart,
who died lately in the King's Bench Prison ;  a man by nature
endowed with talents,  wit,  and vivacity,  in an eminent degree;
and whose unhappy loss of his senses was a public as well as
private misfortune.  I never knew him in his glory,  but ever
respected him in his decline,  from the fine proofs he had left
of his better day,  and from the account I have heard of his
youth from my father,  who was then his intimate companion ;
as,  of late years,  he has been his most active and generous
friend,  having raised a kind of fund for his relief,  though
he was ever in distress.  His intellects,  so cruelly impaired,  I

that Mr.  Mozley brings the custom down rather too late,  and that it can
only have continued in very out-of-the-way places as a daily dress.  It
is so obsolete that we have known ladies speak of their mothers,  or
grandmothers,  being married in their riding-habits,  as if it had been
some exceptional,  and distinguished thing to have done,  of a rather
"  fast "  nature,  instead of a token of privacy,  and of desire to spare
expense.  It was,  in fact,  being married in the gown in which you
meant to travel,  made of some solid material,  with no furbelows,
(Jalbalas.)

1 Slang is of all centuries.  Maria calls her mother  "  the Governor  " ;
and Charlotte  (with whom her stepmother was not in favour)  has
divers ways of writing of her,  generally implying that Mrs.  Burney
the second was masterful.  She was an Allen who had married an
Allen,  so that if the family temper was wilful and warm,  Maria had a
double share of it by inheritance.

1 7 7 1]  Frances Burney.  \  -2 7

doubt not,  affected his whole conduct.  In a letter he sent
my father not long before his death,  to ask his assistance for
a fellow sufferer and good offices for him in that charity over
which he presides,  he made use of an expression which pleased
me much,  "  that he had himself assisted him,  according to his
willing poverty."  1

Mr.  Gray,  too,  the justly and greatly celebrated Gray is
dead  !  How many centuries had he been spared,  if Death
had been as kind to him,  as Fame will be to his works  !  2

1 In another letter to Dr.  Burney poor Smart wrote,  "  I bless God
for your good-nature,  which please take as a receipt."

Christopher Smart had,  by collateral descent,  the blood of Bernard
Gilpin,  "the Apostle of the North;"  and,  by direct descent,  that of
Peter Smart,  a  "  peevish,  froward and furious  "  puritan divine,  and a
writer of Latin and English libels in prose and verse.  Peter was
head-master of Durham Grammar School in 1598,  and afterwards,  a
prebendary of the Cathedral of Durham,  in which he preached an
outrageous sermon in 1628,  levelled against his brethren in that
Cathedral,  and above all against the learned and loyal John Cosin,
afterwards one of the most munificent of Bishops.  Smart also wrote
and published 1,490 Latin verses mainly against Cosin.  He was very
severely punished for his sermon,  but cropped up again during the
rebellion,  and appeared against Laud on his trial.  His violence of
language leads to a strong opinion that he was far from sane.  Poor
Christopher was born in Kent,  but taught at Durham Grammar School,
and sent to Cambridge by a Durham nobleman.  He gained a fellow-
ship at Pembroke College,  which he resigned upon marrying the step
daughter of Newbery,  the publisher and bookseller,  with whom he
wrote  "  The Old Woman's Magazine."  Dr.  Burney,  who had known
Smart from the early days of his own apprenticeship to Dr.  Arne,  intro
duced Smart to Newbery,  and Smart made the  "  Rambler  "  known to
Burney while he was organist in unlettered Lynn.  If Smart inherited
his forefather Peter's heat of brain,  his piety was much more amiable,
and all were kind to poor Christopher.  Johnson wrote to help him  ;
in 1759,  Garrick not only gave a play for his benefit,  but finished his
little piece,  "  The Guardian,"  in the utmost haste that it might be acted
on that night.  The  "  benefit  "  brought Smart a good sum of money.
One of Smart's two daughters,  Mrs.  Le Noir,  wrote a book called
"  Village Manners,"  which she dedicated to Dr.  Burney.

3 Gray died July 30, 1771.

128 The Early Diary of  [1771

August.
I am now devoting all ray leisure to the study of Italian.

0  !  what a language of sweetness and harmony  !

Dr.  King has been with me all this afternoon,  amusing
himself with spouting Shakespeare,  Pope,  and others.
Though I say amusing himself I must,  however,  own that it
was the only way he had any chance of amusing me  ;  but his
visit was unconscionably long,  and as I happened to be alone,

1 had the whole weight of it.      For the first time,  however,  I
did not regret Miss Allen's absence,  for she sees the ridi
culous part of this man's character in so strong a light,  that
she cannot forbear showing that she despises him every
moment.      The strongest trait of her own character is sin
cerity,  one of the most noble of virtues,  and perhaps,  without
any exception,  the most uncommon.      But,  if it is possible,
she is too sincere  :    she pays too little regard to the world  ;
and indulges herself with too much freedom of raillery and
pride of disdain towards those whose vices and follies offend her.
Were this a general rule of conduct what real benefit might
it bring to society ;    but being particular it only hurts and
provokes individuals.      But yet I am unjust to my own
opinion in censuring the first who shall venture,  in a good
cause,  to break through the confinement of custom,  and at
least show the way to a new and open path.      I mean but to
blame severity to harmless folly,  which claims pity and not
scorn,  though I cannot but acknowledge it to be infinitely
tiresome,  and for any length of time even almost disgustful.

Dr.  King fancies himself a genius for the Theatre ;  he had
the weakness to pretend to show me how Garrick performed a
scene of Macbeth  !  "  I generally,"  said he,  "  say to myself
how I should perform such and such a part,  before I see it ;
and when Garrick is on the stage,  how I should speak such or
such a speech ;  and I am generally so happy to find we agree ;
but the scene where he fancies he sees the dagger in  '  Mac
beth/  he surprised me in ;  he has a stroke in that quite new ;
I had never thought of it ;  if you will stand here,  I will show
you/'  Stand I did,  as well as I could for laughter.  Could
anything be more absurd  ?  He with his clumsy arms and
vacant eyes imitate Mr.  Garrick  !

i77J]  Frances Burney.

We live very peaceably and quietly ;  I rise very early, — 5,  6,
or 7,  my latest hour.  I have just finished Middleton's
History of Cicero,1 which I read immediately after Hooke's
Roman History.  It is a delightful book ;  the style is manly
and elegant j and,  though he may be too partial to Cicero,  the
fine writings he occasionally translates of that great man,
authorize and excuse his partiality.

Many of my father's Italian friends,  and of the English
ones he made in Italy,  have been here lately ;  and among
them  ....  Signer Martinelli.  That original genius has
been intimate in our family,  from my infancy.  He is the
author of the Lettere familiare e criticlie,  and is now writing
a history of our country in Italian.  He has a most uncommon
flow of wit,  and with it the utmost bitterness of satire and
raillery of ill nature.  His vanity and self-conceit exceed
every persons I ever saw ;  and,  far from endeavouring to con
ceal this weakness,  he glories in it,  and thinks he but does
himself justice in esteeming himself the head of whatever
company he is in,  and openly manifesting that he does so.
He is not satisfied with priding himself that he speaks to the
Great with sincerity,  he piques himself upon treating them
with rudeness.  He was boasting to this effect in his broken
English,  and said — "I hear the nobleman talk — I give him
great attention — I make him low bow — and I say,  My Lord  !
yon are a very great man, — but for all that, — a blockhead  !  "
....  He is an admirable story-teller,  if he could forbear
making himself the hero of all his tales;  but the every pur
port of his speaking is,  to acquaint the company with his
consequence.2

1 The title of this book is  "  History of the Life of M.  Tullius
Cicero,"  1741.

*  ••  On Thursday,  April 15,  1773,  I "  [Boswell]  "  dined with him  "
[Johnson]  "  and Dr.  Goldsmith at General Paoli's.  We found here
Signer Martinelli,  of Florence,  author of a History of England in
Italian,  printed at London.''

I.  K

130 The Early Diary of  [1771

[MARIA ALLEN to FANNY and SUSAN BUKNEY.]

Dear Toads,

I have kept an exact Journal ever since I have been
out — which is all addressed to the Two Divinities of Queen
Square — but I have had no opportunity  •  of remitting it to
you,  since I left home but propose myself the pleasure of
reading it with a proper emphasis and delivery when we
meet to browse over a pot of Castalian Porter and a Welsh
Eabbit either in Charles Street1 or Queen Square so I shall,
keep you in perfect suspence till that time — which will Be
next Saturday sen'night — pray let the morning be usher'd in
with every public manifestation of Joy —  ...  I am at
present as happy as I can be deprived of Two of the greatest
Blessings in life your company and the heart of  [Rishton],  tho'
I am not quite certain of the latter —

To rouse your Curiosity,  I have seen him — and danced
Next Couple to him a whole Evening.  I was at Lynn two
or three times during which time my Mother received a letter
from Madame Griffodiere who informed her that she had re
ceived a letter from her Mother at Geneva who had not room
for any more in her family nor coud not procure me Lodgings
near her so that my boarding with her was renderd imprac
ticable — which really distressed me very much as I am de
termined at all events to spend the winter Abroad.2

[Maria then fears she shall  "miss of travelling with Mrs.  Combe,"  but
has  "  another string to her Bow,"  which Fanny will find explained in
her Journal.]

My Grandmother will not hear of my Mother's going

1 Hetty's house.

2 This letter is too long to be given in full ;  it is also quite dis
jointed.     In another place in it Maria speaks of what would be her
"terrible disappointment"    should she not go to Geneva,  "after I
have been plagued so much already,  .  .  .  and now have leave to go
by myself too,  and have spoke of it publickly to every one that I met,"
but that  "  even setting out at an uncertainty,  although very disagree
able  "   [would]    "  be better than what my future prospects are in
England."

1771]  Frances Burney.  131

abroad,  and I believe has absolutely forbid her — and I fancy
she  [my mother]  will stay at Lynn some months this winter.

[After a commission to Hetty,  "  Allen  "  runs on thus  : — ]

You,  Mrs.  Fanny,  I desire to dress neatly and properly—
without a hole in either Apron or Ruffles — and go to Madame
Griffodieres in Wells Street — and ask if she has received any

letter I desire you all to be at home on Saturday

morning to receive me — tho'  as you are very Poor,  I believe
I shall dine with Hetty — so desire that I may have a boil'd
Orlean plomb pudding for my dinner — that is for my own
private eating — and some delicate toasted cheese for my
supper — and let my bed be well aired.  Mind what I say
and dont be rude and neglect your visitor — or else I shall go
to Chesington on Sunday—

My love to Jem — I am sorry to hear that he has been 111
— I hope my presence will revive him — pray get the skittle
ground marked out — and every thing in order —

I am yours

Allen.

[This letter is addressed to —

"  Miss Burney,

"  Queen's Square,

"  Frank John  (s/c)  "  Bloomsbury,

"  Turner.  "  London."

It has a Thetford stamp,  without any date,  and a London post-mark of
^ — v^       It is endorsed  (perhaps by Mme.  D'Arblay)    "  Warham,
/     i      \     1771,"   and numbered No.   10,  erroneously,  as the letter
S.E.   J numbered 9 was dated by Maria herself  "  Xovembre le 21,
1771."]

September 13th.

I had the pleasure to meet Dr.  Armstrong yesterday ;  he
is an amazing old man  ;  I believe he is seventy,  and he yet
retains spirits and wit to a great degree  ;  his memory is rather
impaired,  but his health seems perfect,  and he says by starts
most excellent things.  The general of people at his time of
life are confined by infirmities ;  but he walks out perpetually
and always unattended ;  his conversation is,  indeed,  very un-

132 The Early Diary of  [1771

equal ;  but he has sallies of humour that are delightful.  He
has lately made a short tour of Italy ;  but was past the age of
enjoying foreign countries or manners.1

tt

My father spent a few days lately at Hinchinbroke at Lord
Sandwich's,  to meet,  Mr.  Banks,  Captain Cooke,2 and Dr.
Solander,  who have just made the voyage round the world,
and are going speedily to make another.3 My father,.

1 Dr.  Armstrong published in this year  (1771)  "  A Short Kamble
through France and Italy."     He travelled with Fuseli in Italy.     As is
almost usual with travellers,  they quarrelled,  and parted at Genoa.
The quarrel was about the right way to pronounce some English
word,  of which Fuseli said he,  a Swiss,  was quite as good a judge as
a,  Scotchman could be.     Their disagreement was made up when Dr.
Armstrong was dying.     Fuseli,  by the advice of a friend,  called upon
him.     The Doctor could not resist a sarcasm :  "  So you have come
back?"     FUSELI  :  " Yes,  I have come home."     ARMSTRONG:  "Home?
You mean to London? — 'the needy villain's gen'ral home.'     However,,
I thank you for your visit.     I am glad to see you again."     If not a
Jacobite,  he,  at any rate,  "lived near the  [White]  Bose."     He was a
cousin of Lady Strange,  and made a visit to her brother and his cousin
Andrew Lumsden  (who had been secretary to the Stewart Princes),
in Paris,  on his return from Italy.     In 1773 he published  "Medical
Essays."     He lived until 1779.

2 Cook's first voyage round the world  (July,  1768,  to July,  1771)
was mainly undertaken by the Government at the instance of the
Eoyal Society,  that the transit of Venus over the disc of the sun
might be competently observed.     Another object was to make dis
coveries in the South Pacific Ocean,  and explore New Zealand.     Mr.
Banks gained permission to sail with Cook,  and took with him Daniel
Charles Solander,  M.D.,   LL.D.,  a Swede,  who had been a pupil of
Linnaeus,  and brought letters of introduction from him to England.
He got an appointment as Under Librarian at the British Museum,
which was then in its early days.     John Montagu,  fourth Earl of
Sandwich,  thrice First Lord of the Admiralty,  was one of Dr.  Burney'a
musical patrons,  and,  in 1772,  as the Doctor tells with gratitude,  "  was
pleased to honour me with recommendatory letters,  in his own hand,
to every English nobleman and gentleman who resided in a public
character in the several cities through which I passed"    [on the
German tour],

3 Mr.  (afterwards Sir Joseph)  Banks,  P.R.S.,  was a Lincolnshire
landowner.     On leaving Oxford in 1763 he visited the coasts of New
foundland and Labrador.     "  That wild man,  Banks,  who is poaching

I771]  Frances Burney.  133

through his Lordship's means,  made interest for James to go
with them,  and we have reason to hope he will have a pros
perous and agreeable voyage.

My father has had a happy opportunity of extremely
obliging Dr.  Hawkesworth.  During his stay in Norfolk,  he
waited upon Lord Orford,1 who has always been particularly
friendly to him.  He there,  among others,  met with Lord
Sandwich.  His Lordship was speaking of the late voyage
round the world and mentioned his having the papers of it

in every ocean for the fry of little islands that escaped the drag-net of
•Spain,"  so sneers Horace Wai pole at the rich amateur of science.
Banks and Solander had had enough of the hardships of the first
Toyage.  The Admiralty hired Dr.  Fcirster and his son,  a couple of
Germans,  in their place at ten days'  notice.  Banks had paid his ex
penses and those of his friend.  Banks and Solauder,  instead of going
again to the South Seas,  went upon what Mrs.  Delauy calls a  "  sum
mer's tour,"  namely,  a cruise,  in which she assures her niece they
*'  made the discovery of an island on the Western coast of Scotland
called Staffa,"  .  .  .  with  "  a cave of a very particular form."  .  .  .
"  From thence they went to Iceland,  which is 65 degrees north lati
tude,  not far from Greenland :  there they met with a mountain called
Hecla,  which had been a volcano — and  '  boyled  '  a partridge in seven
minutes  '  in a fountain called Geyser.' "  We read of Banks in Mme.
D'Arblay's later journals and memoirs as entertaining her father and
brother James at his London parties — or,  as Horace Walpole called
them,  his  "  Saturnalia."  As Cook put his papers,  so Banks gave his
journals of the first voyage in the  "  Endeavour  "  into Hawkesworth's
hands,  and,  at the request of Banks,  James Buruey helped in com
piling the narrative of the last,  when the pen had dropped from
Hawkesworth and from Cook.

As for Dr.  Solauder,  he was given the charge of the Natural History
department in the British Museum,  but Fanny never met him until
about 1780,  when she found him  "  very sociable,  full of talk,  in
formation,  and entertainment.  My father has very exactly named
him,  in calling him a philosophical gossip."  This was at Mr.  Thrale's
house in the Borough,  just as the news of the death of Cook had
reached England.

1 This was Horace Wai pole's  "  mad nephew,"  of whom a kinder
account is given in the  "Memoirs"  of Dr.  Burney,  than in the letters
of his uncle.

134 The Early Diary of  [1771

in his possession;  for he is First Lord of the Admiralty;  and
said that they were not arranged,  but mere rough draughts,
and that he should be much obliged to any one who could
recommend a proper person to write the Voyage.  My father
directly named Dr.  Hawkesworth,  and his Lordship did him
the honour to accept his recommendation.  The Doctor waited
upon Lord Sandwich,  and they both returned my father par
ticular thanks for  -their meeting.1 Yet I cannot but be-
amazed,  that a man of Lord Sandwich's power,  &c.,  should be
so ignorant of men of learning and merit,  as to apply to an
almost stranger for a recommendation.  Pity  !  pity  !  that
those should be most sensible of talents,  who cannot reward
worth  !

My father is at present most diligently studying German.
He has an unquenchable thirst for knowledge  ;  and would,  if
he had time,  I believe,  be the first linguist in England.

1 This will be found to have been a fatal kindness to poor Hawkes
worth.  The six or seven thousand pounds paid him for his labour,  and
the notice taken of him at the Admiralty,  stirred up all the envious
scribblers to run him down.  Even Garrick quarrelled with him,
because he did not give Becket,  the bookseller,  the option of publishing
his book.  Eumour had made so much of it that Mrs.  Delany tells her
niece it was to be in at least fourteen volumes folio  !  When Hawkes-
worth touched mathematics or astronomy Cambridge men pointed out
his blunders  ;  others blamed his morality ;  and,  to crown all,  Cook did
not support the accuracy of the narrative.  Cook excused his own part
in the account of his second voyage as being  "  the production of a man
who has not had the advantage of much school-education,  but who
has been constantly at sea from his youth  ;  and though,  with the
assistance of a few good friends,  he has passed through all the stations
belonging to a seaman,  from an apprentice-boy in the coal trade to a
post-captain in the Royal Navy,  he has had no opportunity of culti
vating letters.  After this account of myself,  the public must not
expect from me the elegance of a fine writer,  or the plausibility of a
professed look-maker,  but will,  I hope,  consider me as a plain man,
zealously exerting himself in the service of his country,  and deter
mined to give the best account he is able of his proceedings."

:  7 7  *  ]  Frances Burney.  1 35

We have had a charming paquet from Miss Allen,  from
Paris,  containing an ample Journal of her affairs,  ever since
she left us,  and we have since heard that she is arrived at
Geneva.

[On the 21st of November,  1771,  Maria was inditing a piteous and
dismal letter to Fanny from Geneva,  which we curtail,  but give,  as
nearly as we can,  in her own words.  She conjures Fanny,  by their
long friendship and the love Fanny bore her,  to write by the first
courier,  and say why she had not a line from England,  although she
had wrote to her mother from every town where she had stopped.  She
had.  sailed,  from Brighthelmstone,  whence she wrote,  as also from
Dieppe,  Rouenne  («ac),  Paris,  and Lyons.  She was now at Geneva,
fretting away her time in forming the most cruel conjectures,  and,
besides her uncertainty as to whether her friends were in health,  very
certain that she had not a penny of money,  and was in debt ;  though
she denied herself every necessary.  Only her beloved Esther had
written to her,  but as the letter was written only four days after she
left England they might all be dead since then,  and she near 700 miles
away ;  indeed,  it was too unkind,  and she could not help thinking so.
She had sent off a large pacquet of her journal from Paris,  which
Fanny and Susan must have received before now,  but did not think
worth answering.

She had been obliged to borrow five guineas from the best of friends,
Mme.  Porte,  "  a most sweet woman,"  because she had spent all the
money she had for her journey — owing to the advice of  ';  everybody  "
to provide herself with cloaths at Paris and Lyons as they were so
much cheaper and better there.  After taking so much good advice,
Maria found herself without a single penny on arriving at Geneva.
Mme.  Porte had offered to lend her money,  but shamo withheld
her for some days from borrowing,  until necessity compelled her
to write a little note.  [N.B. — Mme.  Porte seems to have known her
in England,  or elsewhere,  previously.]  Then Maria fires,  and desires to
know from Fanny if her lack of money be owing to any impertinance
(sic)  on the part of her uncles Allen  (of Lynn)?  She had written to
inform them that she was leaving England — had mama sent her letters?
Were they so enraged at her quitting England that they refused sending
her any supplies  ?  If so,  she would take measures accordingly,  and
either take up money,  which she could have very easily,  as she should
soon be of age,  or sell her diamonds,  which she was very glad she had
with her.  After this spirited burst,  which ia not unworthy of a young
heir,  Maria proceeds to new plans for spending money.  She writes of
music lessons which she may take when her  "  tiney forte  "  comes and

136 The Early Diary of  [1771

desires Fanny to go to Griflardiere's,1 and wear them both out to look
for some conveyance for her instrument and music — and Fanny is to
send her  "fordyce's  "  sermons with it.  Then the penniless one proposes
that Hetty shall buy her any trifles which she wants from England,
keeping an account of their cost,  and she repay Hetty by sending any
thing which Hetty may fancy from Geneva,  at once,  or else bringing it
on her return.  "  My first commission is a very elegant tea cadet,
very like that I bought my mother,  and at the same shop,  which is in
Piccadilly — on the same side as the haymarket — 7 or eight doors
farther you will see all sorts of things of inlaid work stand out at the
window,  buy me a little black ebony inkstand with silver plaited tops
to the bottles — and a handle like one to a basket of the same metal —
They were new last winter,  and then cost 18s.  and the cadet not more
than  ]2s.  These two things and a very pretty naked wax doll with
blue eyes,  the half crown sort — I fancy at the wax-work in fleet street
will be the place — Susey knows the size — Bessy and Charlotte had two
ugly ones bought at the mart — and do it up that it will not be broke
with cotton all over it and 100 papers.  I fancy they will all come in
the piano forte case."  If Hetty does not want things from Geneva,
Maria will send her  "  a bill on somebody in London,"  as soon as she
receives any money — If Fanny and Susey do not answer this letter
immediately upon receiving it  (she has exactly calculated the time when

1 Maria Allen never spelt this name correctly.  She always puts an
r into the name,  and often an o  ;  it is also to be found elsewhere as
Gueyffardiere and Gaiffardiere.  Fanny merely copied her errors.  In
her Court days Fanny was to see much more than she liked either
of this man,  or of some very close kinsman of his,  whom she wrote of
as  "  Mr.  Turbulent."  He had become French  "  teacher to the elder
princesses,  and occasionally,  to the Queen herself,"  and was at first
sight  (in 1786)  described by her as  "  well-bred and sensible."  Fanny
does not seem to have recognized him until he told her that he and his
wife had been acquainted with Maria Allen at Geneva  ;  and  (adds Fanny
to Susan)  "  I have some idea that both you and I once saw him.  Do
you remember our hearing a younger sister of his wife sing a fine
French air,  with all true French cadenzas  ?"  When Croker,  in 1842,
abused the Diaries of Mme.  D'Arblay,  just as he had done the Memoirs
of her father about ten years before,  he blamed their editor for publishing
Fanny's scenes with  "  Mr.  Turbulent,"  but himself first printed his true
name,  in the  "  Quarterly Review."  Macaulay describes him as  "  a
half-witted French Protestant minister,  who talked oddly about
conjugal infidelity."  Croker says that he was the Eev.  Charles de
Guiffardiere  (called Giflardiere),  prebendary of Salisbury,  vicar of
Newington,  and rector of Berkhampstead.  If so,  he got on remark
ably well,  if he be the same whom we find here,  in Wells Street as a
kind of agent for his wife's mother's boarding-house at Geneva ;  who
is,  with his wife,  to be -teased into hurrying off Maria Allen's piano,
wax dolls,  and tea  "  cadets  "  to Geneva.

1771]  Frances Burney.  137

they will do so)  they shall have ueither journal nor letter more during
her stay at Geneva,  were it to last three years.  As it did not last
quite six calendar mouths from the date of this letter,  one wonders
whether the pianoforte went wandering to Geneva,  laden with presents
for the natives.  Maria sends a chill duty to mama,  and  "  let her know
all my inquietudes  "  ;  but to Dr.  Buruey Fanny is  "  not to forget my
duty and gratitude,  and everything your own heart would dictate to
your dear father."  Molly Stanclifle,  (her maid and sub-confidante)  stands
by Maria as she writes,  "  with her hair dress'd "  [turned up over a
cushion,  like a lady's]  "  and powder'd,  in a very elegant dishabille k la
Genevoise"  ;  natheless she disdains not to ask to be  •'  remembered  "  to
Dr.  Burney's Betty.  This letter is addressed by Maria,  in her best
writing,  to  "  Miss Fanny Burney,  at Dr.  Burney's,  Queen Square,
Bloomsbury,  London,  Angleterre,"  and bears the stamp of  "  Geneve,"

Oe

with  *'pp"  (for par Paris),  an English post-mark of  (          •    )  and a

London  "five o'clock"  mark.]

Nov.  4.

Returning this morning from Madame Griffardieres,  I went
through Poland Street,  a place I cannot but love,  from re-
membring  (sic)  the happiness I have known there.  I passed
with great regret by Mrs.  Pringle's windows,  but looking at
the door saw the name of  [Rishman  ?]  on it.  I have too much
regard for Mrs.  Pringle to be indifferent to what is become of
her.  A woman was at the door.  I asked her if she knew
where Mrs.  Pringle was gone  ?  She did not,  but my curiosity
was excited,  and I waited till a servant came to open the door.
I made the same question.  Without answering,  the servant
went and rapt at the parlour door,  I was in some confusion,
lest Mrs Pringle might be there,  and pondered upon what
possible excuse I could make for my long absence,  and even
felt a sort of guilt in having

Nov.  6.

I have just heard by chance that Mrs.  Pringle is gone to
the East Indies.  O that I had known her intention  !  Nothing
should have prevented my seeing her if I had had the least

138 The Early Diary of  [1771

idea of her quitting England.   I imagine she is gone to her son

Andrew I would often have given the world to have

met her by chance,  though I had not dared to seek her

And thus I suppose will close for ever all acquaintance with
this agreeable woman and our family.  On my side how
unwillingly!  for I cannot join in the bad opinion mama and
Mr.  Crisp have so strangely,  so causelessly conceived of her.
Her kindness and friendship to us she could have no interest
in,  it would be ingratitude not to regard her for  [it].  Inde
pendent of these more serious reasons for regret at her de
parture,  I must also own that since we have droped her
acquaintance,  we have never made any half so lively and
agreeable.  But what principally concerns me,  is that she
has left the kingdom with an idea of our ingratitude.  Dear,
wise,  and good Mr.  Crisp has surely been too severe in his
judgment.  What a misfortune I should deem it to think so
ill of mankind as he,  the wisest of his race,  tries to make me
think  !

My dear Susette has been very ill,  but,  thank God,  is re
covered.  She is the most engaging creature living,  and has
a fund of sense and feeling almost incomparable.

November.

Susette and myself are extremely engaged at present in
studying a book lately published under M.  Diderot's direction,
which he sent to papa,  upon Music.  It promises to teach us
Harmony and the Theory of Music.  M.  Diderot' s daughtei
was taught by the method made use of in it.1  .  .  .  .  I at
reading — I blush to say for the first time, — Pope's Works.
He is a darling pet of our family.  It is with exquisite delight
I make myself acquainted with him ;  and,  in serious truth,
am glad he is new to me.

I have before mentioned that Miss Barsanti had intention!
to go on the stage.  According to them,  she applied to mj
father to speak to Mr.  Colman concerning her.  My father

In his first musical tour Dr.  Burney makes high mention of the
well-known daughter of Diderot as being a good musician.

I771]  Frances Burney.  139

to oblige her,  consented,  though unwittingly,  having a
superiour regard for Mr.  Garrick,  but Drury Lane Theatre
has actresses already in Barsahti's style.  Mr.  Colman pro
fessed great regard for my father's recommendation,  but de
ferred till another time settling when to see her.

December 8th.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Young have been in town a few days.  They
are in a situation that quite afflicts me,  how brought on I
know not,  but I fear by extravagance.  Be that as it may,
they are at present reduced to a most distressful state.  They
seem to have almost ruined themselves,  and to be quite igno
rant in what manner to retrieve their affairs.  Mr.  Young,
whose study and dependence is agriculture,  has half undone
himself by experiments.  His writings upon this subject have
been amazingly well received by the public,  and in his tours
through England he has been caressed and assisted almost
universally.  Indeed his conversation and appearance must
ever secure him welcome and admiration.  But,  of late,  some
of his facts have been disputed,  and though I believe it to be
only by envious and malignant people,  yet reports of that
kind are fatal to an author,  whose sole credit must subsist on
his veracity.  In short,  by slow but sure degrees,  his fame has
been sported with,  and his fortune destroyed.  I grieve for
him inexpressibly  ;  he truly merits a better fate.  Too suc
cessful in his early life,  he expected a constancy in fortune,
that has cruelly disappointed him.  His children happily have
their mother's jointure settled upon them.  He has some
thoughts of going abroad  ;  but his wife is averse to it.  He is
an enterprising genius,  and I sincerely hope will be able to-
struggle effectually with his bad fortune;  but how I know not.

They went with us one night to Mr.  Colman's box ;  but
poor Mr.  Young has only forced spirits.  Those he does in
deed exert in an uncommon manner.  She,  too,  supports her
self with more resolution and better temper than I thought
her equal to.

But now that I am in a scribbling vein,  I cannot forbear

140 The Early Diary of  [1771

mentioning that the reading of Pope's Letters has made me
quite melancholy.  He laments with such generous sorrow
the misfortunes of his friends that every line I read raises his
character higher in my estimation.  But it is not possible to
find with unconcern that all his best and dearest friends die
before him.  0 great misery of length of days,  to preserve
life only to know its little value  !  Pope had but one great
•end in view to render this world supportable to him.  That
was Friendship,  the peculiar gift of heaven.  This did he nobly
deserve and obtain ;  but for how short a time  !  Jealousy de
prived him of the affection he assiduously sought from Mr.
Wycherly,  and many others  ;  but Death cruel Death was far
more cruel.  The dearest ties of his heart all yielded to his
stroke.  The modest Digby,  the gentle virtuous Gay,  the
worthy Arbuthnot,  the exiled Atterbury — but why should I
enumerate these excellent men,  when their very names deject
me  ?  But in nothing does Pope equally charm me as in his
conduct to his mother :  it is truly noble.  He gives up all his
time,  thought,  and attention to her ease and comfort.  I dare
not begin to mention his  [long]  friendship with the admirable
Swift,  because I shall not know where  [to]  stop,  for the attach
ment of such eminent men to one another has  [some] thing in it
that almost awes me,  and  [at]  the same time inexpressibly
•delights  [me].  I must tear myself from this.1  ....

Yes my dear journal !   yes  !   with the more pleasure shall I

1 This generous outburst brings to mind a noble passage on the
"Letters of Pope and of his Friends,"  in Thackeray's  "English
Humourists."  "  I do not know in the range of our literature,
volumes more delightful.  You live in them in the finest company
in the world — in the expression of their thoughts,  their various
views and natures,  there is something generous,  and cheering,  and
^nobling.  You are in the society of men who have filled the greatest
parts in the world's story.  You are with St.  John,  the statesman ;
Peterborough,  the conqueror ;  Swift,  the greatest wit of all times ;
Gay,  the kindliest laugher, — it is a privilege to sit in that com
pany He who reads these noble records of a past age,  salutes

And reverences the great spirits who adorn it I know nothing

in any story more gallant and cheering than the love and friend
ship which this company of famous men bore towards one another
— there never has been a society of men more friendly,  as there never
was one more brilliant."

i77J]  Frances Burney.  141

regard thee thou faithful preserver and repository of my
thoughts and actions.  Yet I cannot forbear thinking of some
lines of my dear Pope's upon a birthday applicable to my poor
dear journal, —

"  With added years if life bring nothing  [new,]
But,  like a sieve,  let every pleasure  *  [thro',  ]

******

And all we gain,  one2 sad reflection more;
Is this a birthday  ?  'tis,  alas  !  too clear,
'Tis but the fun'ral of a 3 former year."

'• a>  3 In the edition'  of Elwin and Courthope,  Pope's words are
"blessing,"  "some,"  and  "the,"  but we are informed that Fanny's
words are correct according to an early text of Pope.  The verses
quoted are from a poem to Mrs.  Martha Blount on her birthday.

142

The Early Diary of

[1772

1772.

[So much of this year's journal has been cut away,  that the following
table of its original contents is given.  The names absent from Fanny's
pages for 1772,  of course,  indicate what we have lost.

Dr.  Burney.

Miss BarsantL

Mr.  Colman — the elder.

Arthur Young.

Dr.  King.

Eichard Burney.

Mr.  Garrick.

Mrs.,  apres Lady Strange.

Miss Strange.

Mr.  apres Sir Eobt.  Strange.

Miss Pascals.

Mr.  Pogenpohl.

Miss Susan Burney.

Miss Charlotte Burney.

Miss Eliza Allen,  Mrs.,  Meeke.

Mr.  Lattice, — the Eevd.

Honable.  Daines Barriugton.

Mr.  Hudson.

James Burney,  apres Admiral.

Mrs.  Dr.  Burney.

Martin Folks,  apres Sir.

Miss Eliz.  Burney.

Mr.  Sloper.

Capt.  Cooke.

Mrs.  Burney,  senr.

Mr.  Eishton.

Dr.  Hunter.

Charles,  after Dr.  Chas.  Burney.

Mynhere Bohmen.

Lady Ann Lindsay.

Lady Margaret Fordyce.

Mr.  Scot.

Dr.  Armstrong.

Mr.  Charles Burney.

Mr.  Burney,  senr.,  Worcester.

Eichard Burney of Worcester.

Miss Anne Burney,  Mrs.  Hawkins.

Miss Ann Burney.

Mrs.  Charles Burney.

Signer Celestini.

Miss Eebecca Burney.

Mr.  Beckford.

Eevd.  Mr.  Pugh.

Duke of Dorset.

Mr.  Hanbury.

Miss Allen.

Lady Dalston.

Mrs.  Garrick.

Mrs.  Forbes.

Miss Forbes.

Miss  —  Forbes.

Mr.  Crisp.

Dr.  Hawkesworth.

Mr.  Barretti.

Sir William Hamilton.

Mr.  Tacet.

The Abbe Morellet.

Sir William Brown.

Mrs.  Lidderdale.

Miss Lidderdale.

Miss Ford,  after Mrs.  Wilkinson.

Mr.  Edwards.

Eev.  Stephen Allen.

Miss Sukey Sharpen.

Mrs.  Young.

Mr.  Barthelemon.

Mynhere Spandau.

Mr.  Pawles.

Mr.  Bremner.

Mrs.  Barthelemon.

Mr.  Parsons.

Mr.  Daines Barrington.

1772]  Frances Burney.                            143

Mr.  Mathias.  Sir John Turner.

Mr.  Hudson.  Mrs.  Stanley.

Mr.  Breydone.  Miss Arlaud.

Mr.  George Garrick.  Mr.  Fitzgerald.

Mrs.  Arne.  Miss Fitzgerald.

Mr.  Hayes.  Mr.  Nollikens.
Anna Maria Buruey  (Bourdois).         Made.  Le Chantre.

Mr.  Stanley.  Mdlle.  Le Chantre.]

[3rd January.]

Mr.  Young called here lately ;  I saw him with sorrow.  He
is not well,  and appears almost overcome with the horrors of
his situation.  In fact he is almost destitute.  I fancy he is
himself undetermined yet what plan to persue.  This is a
dreadful trial for him ;  yet I am persuaded he will still find
some means of extricating himself from his distresses  :  at least,
if genius,  spirit,  and enterprize can avail.  In defiance of the
gloom his misfortunes have cast over him,  some starts of his
former,  his native vivacity break out.  Dr.  King has lately
published a book,  entitled,  "  The Rites,  &c.  of the Greek
Church."  Mr.  Young took it up,  and opening at the Preface —
"  So,  so  ;  what's here  ?  "  cried he,  and read aloud that he had
undertaken this work to relieve his mind from  '  a most severe
affliction occasioned by the loss of a virtuous and affectionate
But it would be impertinent to obtrude my private mis
fortunes on the public/ ''

"  He means his wife,"  said I.

"  It would serve as well for his mistress,"  answered he.

"For my own part,"  added I  (very good-naturedly)  "it
appears ridiculous ostentation to me,  as I am almost certain
he had very little regard for her,  and he was never in his life
more gay than since her death ;  for I have heard well- authenti
cated particulars of her marriage ;  and therefore it seems
mere "

"  Well ! "  cried he,  "  I honour a man who dares to be
singular ;  I like to see a man's oddities in his works."

"But,  I think,"  said I,  you are no friend to affecta
tion  ;  which to us who know him,  this appears. — Are you
affected?"

144 The Early Diary of  [1772

"Affected  !  "  exclaimed he with all his wonted impetuosity,
"  I had rather be a murderer  !  "

January 26th.

Mr.  Garrick is this moment gone.  Unfortunately my
father was out,  and mama not come downstairs ;  yet to my
great satisfaction he came in.  Dick ran to him,  as the door was
opened, — we were all seated at breakfast.  "  What,  my bright-
eyed beauty  !  "  cried he  ;  and then flinging himself back in a,
theatrical posture,  "  and here ye all are — one — two — three —
four — beauties all."  He then with a great deal of humour
played with Dick.  How many pities that he has no children ;
for he is extremely,  nay passionately fond of them.  "  Well,
but,  Madam,  so your father is out.  Why I can never see him.
He calls upon me — I call upon him,  but we never meet.
Can he come to dine with me to-day  ?  can he  ?  "  I could not
possibly tell.  "  Well don't let him send or make any fuss-
if he can come he shall find beef and pudding :  but I must
have him on Tuesday.  Some of his friends are to be with
me :  and I must have him then."  I could not venture to
promise  .  .  .  .  "I have not had a moment to myself tilL
this morning,  I can't tell when."

1 Arthur Young rallied,  and was seldom deserted by what Miss-
Burney,  in 1792,  calls his  "  old spirit and impetuosity."  Between 1767
and 1815 he wrote,  or edited,  150 volumes.  He was for long
"  Secretary to the Board of Agriculture,"  and was accused,  by the
"  New Whigs,"  of making his reports bear against the revolutionary
changes in France,  which,  like other able men,  he had at first favoured.
"  His agricultural tours in France and Italy I consider the only works
that give an intelligible account of those countries.  His tour in Ireland
has given me the idea that his views of Ireland were nearer the truth
than any other work.  .  .  .  Mr.  Parker tells me that his accuracy and
correctness as to all statements of prices and of all things of his day
are respected and considered as matters of fact by all the leading
agriculturists.  .  .  .  His  '  Farmer's Calendar,'  which is for the manage
ment  [of a farm],  advising what to do each month by month,  is the-
standard book of all farmers at present,  and has gone through many
editions.  .  .  .  He was spoilt by the success of his early works,  and
became a book-maker.  ...  He obtained an immediate gain,  but hi&
general reputation ceased."— Lord Lonsdale to John Wilson Croker.
Sept.  4, 1849.

1772]  Frances Burney.  145

February 3rd.

It is amazing to me how such a man as Dr.  King can have
ingratiated himself into the good graces and acquaintance of
the first men of the nation,  which he really has done.  It
would be curious to discover by what methods he has so raised
himself above his possible expectations ;  at least,  above what
his friends could conceive he formed  !  When he left Lynn,
about nine years since,  he knew — nobody,  I was going to say;
and now he is acquainted with all the men of letters in
England  !  He is chaplain to the British factory at St.
Petersburg,  and perhaps he owes his happy connections to
having being abroad,  though at least in my opinion he has not
much the appearance of a travelled gentleman.

He appointed to bring a Russian gentleman and an English
clergyman,  both fond of music,  to my father yesterday,  for
a conversazione;  but unfortunately my father was obliged by
a sudden summons to attend a committee for the purpose of
settling a benefit for decayed musicians.1 Mamma was too
indifferent 2 to quit her room ;  and they found only Susanna,
Charlotte,  Bessy,  Dick,  and myself to receive them.  Dr.
King with an attempted politeness introduced them,  "  Mr.
Pogenpohl,  justement arrive de Eussia,"3 and Mr.  Lattice,  who
I found was just returned from Denmark.  Never was an
introduction less requisite than to the first.  With the well-
bred address of an elegant man of the world he made his own

1 In the words of Dr.  Burney,  "  a subscription was set on foot  "
iu April,  1738,  for establishing a fund for the support of decayed
Musicians,  or their families  ;  the subscribers forming themselves into
a Society,  called  "  the Society of Musicians."  They began with an
annual payment of  "at least half-a-crowu a quarter,"  and in 1766,
raised it to twenty shillings.  The Governors met the first Sunday in
every month at the Cardigan-Head Tavern,  near Charing Cross.
Handel left the charity one thousand pounds.  Six thousand were
given to it from the profits of the Handel Commemoration in 1784,  and
Dr.  Burney himself munificently presented the fund with the profits of
his handsome quarto volume containing an account of that Commemo
ration with a sketch of the Life of Handel.

3 This,  in our present language,  is equivalent to being indisposed.

3 In all cases where foreign words are found in the text the editor
leaves them exactly as found.

146 The Early Diary of  [1772

compliments in French.  I did not dare return mine,  in the
same language;  but I found he extremely well understood
English,  and spoke it,  for a foreigner,  amazingly ;  though as
he found I perfectly understood him in French,  he rather
chose the whole evening to speak it,  while poor Fanny Bull,
as my father calls me,  always answered in English.

I never saw a Russian before.  Contrary to all my former
ideas,  I shall ever,  in future,  annex politeness and good breed-
ino-  to the thought of one.  This gentleman appears about
twenty-two,  genteel in his person,  and agreeable in his face.
His manners are polished,  his conversation is lively,  entertain
ing,  and sensible.  I made my father's apologies as well as I
could,  and acquainted them that I expected him home soon.
Mr.  Lattice looked a good sort of half-stupid man enough.
The Russian seated himself next to me,  and immediately
entered into conversation.  It is amazing with what ease and
facility foreigners in general converse with strangers.  Poor
Mr.  Lattice was in the room near half an hour,  before he ven
tured to utter a word.

Dr.  King,  by way of joke,  said he was very sorry to hear
mama was so shabby.  "  So shabby  !  "  said the Russian with
a smile,  .  .  .  "  I had always understood that word in a very
mean sense ! "  "  Why,"  cried the Dr.,  "I don't know whether
Mrs.  Burney taught me that word,  or I her."  Presently
after,  some other such word being used,  the Russian drolly
said, "  cela vaut autant que shabby  !  "  They extremely admired
the beautiful Dick,  whom I called Malcheek — I suppose I spell
the word terribly, — it is Russ for boy,  as Dr.  King had told me.
M.  Pogenpohl laughed heartily at my speaking it.  I told him
I was too proud of knowing a Russ word,  not to publish it.
"  But did Dr.  King/'  cried he,  "  teach you only that word  ?—
O fie  ! — that can give you no idea of the softness of our
language."  "  M.  Pogenpohl,"  said the Dr.,  "  will teach you
much better than I can, — but did not I tell you some other
word  ?  "  "  No indeed."  The Russian then ran on most
fluently,  repeating Russ expressions and words of soft sounds,
— and,  if I may trust his manner,  soft meaning !  I observed
Dr.  King laughed,  so I did not dare repeat them after him,
though he stop'ed for that purpose,  and said sallimani or some

1772]  Frances Burney.  147

such word,  several times over,  and appealed seriously to mo to
judge if it was not a more pleasing word than Malcheek  ?
"  0,"  cried I,  "  I shall never remember so much at once.  I
have not a head for so much/'  "  Mais si mademoiselle veut
bien me donner Vhonneur de repeter mes lemons." — Dr.  King,
by way of wit,  I suppose,  then amused himself with saying
some Russ too ; — what it meant,  I know not ;  but M.  Pogen-
pohl exclaimed  "0 fie ! " — which at the same time raised my
good opinion of 7am,  and lessened it of the Doctor,  who was
inexcusable if he said any thing reprehensible,  even in an
unknown language.  The Russian  [was too well bred]1
though I must confess,  there was so much archness in his look
that I did not chuse to ask the meaning of what he said.  He
told me he had been five months in England.  "  But when I
first came,"  said he,  "  I learnt nothing  :  I spoke only French
with my sisters; — afterwards,  Lord Morris,  (I believe you
would call him) "

[Here four lines have been cut out.     Fanny is next found speaking.]

""  though/'  said I,  "  they may talk so much as to save you the
trouble of speaking,  if you only desire to learn the language,
indeed,  the ladies may be very proper."

When tea was over,  I began to be uneasy at my father's not
returning.  Dr King I saw looked displeased  ;  but the polite
ness and liveliness of the Russian,  who was too civil to appear
•dissatisfied,  soon dissipated my anxiety.  He never once
.seemed to have any thing wanting or any end unanswered in
his visit :  while Dr.  King looked at his watch,  listened atten
tively to every rap of the knocker,  started whenever the
parlour-door opened,  and was in visible concern the whole
•evening.  Music was now proposed,  Mr.  Pogenpohl had often
heard Bach,  of Berlin,2 and by his conversation showed so fine

1 Here the author has effaced some words,  and added the four in
brackets,  which confuse the sentence.

2 Karl Philipp Emanuel Bach,  a composer of music,  and musician,
was in the service of Frederick the Great between 1740 aud 1767.      He
•was called  "  Bach of Berlin"  to distinguish him from Wilhclm Bach of
Halle,  Johanu Christian Bach of London,  and the best known of them
all,  Johanu Sebastian Bach.

148 The Early Diary of  [1772-

a taste and so good a judgment of the art,  that neither Susan
nor I could be induced to touch a note.  Indeed we never do,,
though Mr.  PogenpohTs great love of music made me more-
than ever regret my deficiency.  We,  however,  persuaded Mr.
Lattice to play,  which he did,  in a horrible old-fashioned style  ;
insomuch that I did not dare to meet the Russian's eyes,  I
was so sure it must be ridiculous to him

Dr.  King and Mr.  Lattice entered into a dispute with him
concerning the beaux esprits of his and our nation,  and of the-
arts and literature of both countries.  He seems to love his own.
country with a patriot warmth,  yet with the best grace in the-
world,  he gave up to us Philosophy and Poetry,  the former
with a smile that drolly implied our too great tendency that
way.  Civil Law,  &c.  he strenuously supported his right to,.
and indeed his antagonists had not much to urge against him.
Dr.  King,  who is really ill-bred in argument,  and Mr.  Lattice,
who is a plain,  common sort of man,  both like true John Bulls,
fought with better will than justice for Old England,  giving it
every virtue and every science under the sun.  Dr.  King was
absolutely ridiculous.  My father has often observed of this man,
that he has a knack of talking for three hours upon any given
subject,  without saying anything  !  For my own part,  I very
frequently after a long argument have endeavoured to recol
lect what he aimed at,  or even what he said, — in vain  !  for he-
has no meaning,  but continually dives in the dark for one.
To regard it in no other light — would any man of common
civility amuse a foreigner with exaggerated praises of England,,
given at the expense of his own and of all other nations  ?

"  Our universities,  Sir/'  said he,  "  are the only schools in
Europe for learning ;  they bring forth geniuses superior to all
the world."

"  Are they,  then,"  said the Russian archly,  "  all geniuses,
Sir  ?  "

"  They are the noblest schools in the world,"  said the Doctor.

"  You think them superior to all others,  Sir  ?  "  cried Mr..
Pogenpohl,  naming some one which I have forgot.

"  Undoubtedly,  Sir.  What nation has brought forth such.
men as our's  ?  Have we not Locke  ?  "

"  Oh,  oui !  and you have Newton !   but then have we not

I

1772]  Frances Burney.  149

Yolfe  (sic)  and Beraman  (sic), — was not he the father of
Civil Law  ?  Whom have you,  Sirs,  in that class  ?  "

"  Why,  as to that "  said the Doctor.

"  As to that,"  repeated Mr.  Lattice, — "  I can't say."

"  But,  Sir/'  continued the Doctor with a vehemence,  which,
rude as it was,  was only put on,  to give himself imaginary
consequence,  "  but,  Sir,  are we not superior to all the world
in Astronomy  ?  in Natural History  ?  in Poetry  ?  in Philosophy?
in Music  ?  "

"  La Musique  !  "  repeated Mr.  Pogenpohl,  "  la Musique  !  "
and flung back,  as if he felt the utter impossibility of arguing
with a man so imposing and so very ignorant :  for neither
Susan nor I could help laughing.  Give England Music  !  .  .  .

Mr.  Lattice then took up the argument.  He is,  however,
really modest,  and gave his opinion with diffidence.  But his
taste is terribly fogruin and old-fashioned.1 He began an
•eloge on our English Music and performers.  Dr.  King,  with
out knowing what he said,  joined with him  ;  for I am sure he
does not know at all the music of one master,  or even of one
nation,  from another.

"  And pray,  Sir,"  said the Russian,  drily,  "  who are they,
jour English composers  ?  "

"  Who,  Sir  ?  "  cried the Doctor — "  why,  why,  we have
.Smith  !  There's a great man  !  "  2

1 John Lettice,  (1737 or 8-1832).    Fellow of Sydney-Sussex College,
Cambridge,   Prebendary of Chichester,  &c.f D.D.,  was author of the
Seatouiau Prize Poem in 1764,  and of books on sundry subjects.     He
was tutor to the brilliant William Beckford,  with whom he travelled  ;
•chaplain and secretary to Sir Robert Gunning,  when ambassador to
Copenhagen in 1768, — and chaplain to the Duke of Hamilton.

2 There are three Smiths from whom to choose as composers,  but one
only of them wrote upon music,  John Stafford Smith,  who was born in
1750.     He was son of Martin Smith,  organist of Gloucester Cathedral,
was  (according to Grove,)  "  a student,  chorister,  organist,  and an efficient
tenor-singer up to 1773,  after which he composed sacred and secular
music,  and much assisted Sir John Hawkins in his History of Music."
He was organist of the Chapel-Koyal in 1802,  and  "  Master of the
Children of the Chapel-Royal"  from 1805 to 1817.     "  He published,  at
various times,  five collections of glees,  containing compositions which
place him in the foremost rank of English glee composers,"  but we find
no music and no bock of his named as being published so early as 1772.

150 The Early Diary of  [1772-

"  But he,  Sir,"  answered Mr.  Pogenpohl,  "  wrote on Music ;
I only speak of music for the ear.  Only tell me who are-
your composers."

Mr.  Lattice paused.  Dr.  King,  too bright to consider,,
named Handel— Ha  !  Ha!  Ha!1

"  Oh,  pardonnez-moi,  Monsieur ;  Handel was not an?
English composer  !  But you all tell me of your excellent
English Music,  and yet nobody will name any composer to
me."

"  Why,  Sir,"  after some hesitation said Mr.  Lattice,  "  we-
have Avison,  and Worgan,  and Stanley."  .  .  ."

After this,  both Mr.  Lattice and the Russian most furiously

attacked me to play ;  but of course in vain He then

made a similar attack upon Susette,  who,  after a long defence,.

As Dr.  King was not very clear-headed,  he may have claimed John
Christopher Smith,  (or Schmidt,  a German pupil of Handel,  who played
the organ at his oratorios,  and at the Foundling Hospital,  composed
several operas,  and an oratorio,  and wrote for Handel when he was
blind,)  as being like Handel,  an English composer,  but we do not find,
that he wrote upon music.  The third is Isaac Smith,  a composer,  who-
was born about the middle of the eighteenth century.

1 When Fanny ends her sentences with Ha !  Ha  !  Ha  !   she appears-
to be thinking of the directions for stage-laughter,  common in printed
plays of that time.

2 Charles Avison,  musician,  composer of,  and writer upon music.

"  Not too conspicuous on the list
Of worthies who by help of pipe or wire
Expressed in sound rough rage or soft desire,
Thou whileom of Newcastle organist !  "

Thus Mr.  Browning  "parleys"  with Avison,  in his day  "  a person of
importance"  enough to have had a little controversy with Dr.  William
Hayes,  Music Professor at Oxford.  Avison's Work on  "  Musical
Expression  "  was published in 1753 — Hayes'  "  Eemarks  "  upon it,  and
Avison's  "  Reply  "  followed in the same year.  The date of Avison's
birth seems uncertain,  but he died at Newcastle-on-Tyne in 1770.  A
march of his suddenly remembered by Mr.  Browning inspired one of the
finest poems in his latest volume.

John Worgan,  born 1724,  organist and composer at Vauxhall,  1751-
1774,  Mus.  Doc.  Cambridge,  1775,  was a well-known church-organist
likewise,  and the composer of several oratorios,  many anthems,  &c.

Stanley was the blind musician and composer of music,  of whom we
shall read more by and by.

1772]  Frances Burney.  151

sat down.  .  .  .  Susette had just finished her first movement
•when Dr.  King hastily and eagerly made his bow.  He had sat
upon thorns some time  ;  and when I made all the speeches I
could for my father's absence he told me he was a macaroni ; l
invited company to his house and then went out !  And,  indeed,
but for the Russian's peculiar address and politeness I should
have been in an exceeding disagreeable situation,  for they
came between six and seven and it was half-past nine before
they ofl'ered to go,  and yet no Dr.  Burney appeared  !  .  .  .  .

My dear father returned home soon after they went.  He
had been detained greatly against his will at the committee.
He was extremely vexed,  and much the more on hearing from

1 As the word  "Maccaroni"  occurs every now and then in these
pages,  it may be well to state generally that the term represents a
period of affectation between that of the  "  "beaux  "  of the first half of
the eighteenth century,  and the  "  dandies,"  "  bucks,"  or  "  bloods  "  of
the time of the Prince of Wales  (George IV.).  It lasted long enough
to pass through changes in its own fashions,  but the word is always
applied to something superfine,  and rather unmanly.  In Mrs.  Brooke's
novel of  "Julia Mandeville"  there is a maccaroni,  "Lord Viscount
Fondville,"  who arrives  ("  fresh from Paris  ")  at a country-seat in a
"papier-mache"  carriage  "highly gilded,"  painted with  "loves and
doves,"  and drawn by  "four long-tailed grey Arabians."  From this he
"descends"  (humming an opera-tune),  "dressed in a suit of light-
coloured silk,  embroidered with silver;"  under his arm,  he carries a
hat with a black feather ;  in his button-hole is a large bouquet of
artificial floicert,  and  "all Arabia breathes from his scented hand
kerchief."  He receives some sort of  "  poetical justice  "  at the end of
the story,  by being married to  "  a detestable cit";  however,  she has a
large fortune to make up for her forward vulgarity — and to maintain
his equipage.  We next quote Garrick's  "  Irish Widow."  Mrs.  Brady
(in man's clothes,  under the name of Lieutenant O'Neale),  says:  "Your
Macaroons — whipper-snappers who look so much more like girls than
those I see in petticoats,  that fait and trot it is a pity to hurt  'em.
The fair sex in London here seem the most masculine of the two."
There were  "  bucks,"  also ;  that is,  slovenly men of fashion,  contem
poraneous with the  "  Maccaroniet"  but not so many of them as later
on.  As a matter of fact,  the affectation of young Englishmen  (in the
last century)  oscillated between noisy,  rough,  and even violent ways of
trying to distinguish themselves,  with slovenly disregard of dress,  and
much neglect of soap and water;  and strained  "elegance,"  studied
frivolity,  and the newest modeg from Paris,  with that dash,  or  "  soupqon"
of Italy,  which converted the  "  beau"  of George II.  into the  "  Maca
roni  "  of George III.

152 The Early Diary of  [1772

us what he had lost in missing the Russian,  whose taste in
music alone was enough to excite in my father a good opinion
of him,  and we spoke so much in his praise,  that he declared
he must see him.  He called on Dr.  King the next day,  and
made his apologies and peace,  and settled to have the same
party,  if the Doctor's friends were disengaged,  the following
day.  Mr.  Barney and my sister came to meet them  ;  also
Mr.  Daines Barrington1 and Mr.  Hudson and some others.

******
Speaking of the death of the Princess Dowager of Wales,
which happened two days before, — "  This is a very dull week
for strangers/'  said the Russian ;  "  no diversions !  no any
thing  !  all shut up  !  very dull !  is it not so,  Mile.  ?  "  to little
Charlotte,  who,  blushing,  retreated.  "  Qu'en pensez-vous,
Mile.  ?  "  to Bessy,  who,  smiling,  advanced.  "  I don't know,
Sir."  "  She is not,  I think,  very much regretted by the nation  ?
but I — I — regret her very much!  she is great loss to me."2
He then began a comic mock flirtation with little Bessy.  I
could gather by what he said,  though all en badinage,  with
what ridicule,  perhaps contempt,  he had remarked the prejudi
cial opinions our nation in general entertain of the Russians ;
the drolly absurd account he gave her of his country,  could
have no other meaning.  "  Will you not go to Russia with

1 Daines,  one of the sons of the first Viscount Barrington,  was a
"  Welsh judge,  and second justice of Chester."     He was also a well-
known  "  virtuoso"  who would write and print a paper upon anything —
from the Polar passage,  to  "  the sudden decay of certain trees in St.
James's Park,  within a year of the filling up of  '  Eosamond's Pond' "  ;
on a newly-found bat,  or a fossil ;  on  "  Mozart,  a Eemarkable Young
Musician";  and on  "the Grey Wethers,"  which he supposed to have
been blown into Berkshire,  out of some volcano,  somewhere.

2 Augusta,  Princess-Dowager of Wales  (mother of George III.),  died
on the 8th of February,  1772,  after a widowhood of twenty years.     She
was the most unpopular woman in England on account of her supposed
favour for Lord Bute.     She died of a most painful malady,  borne with
the greatest firmness,  at the very time when her daughter,  the Queen
of Denmark,  was in prison,  and in danger of her life.     There seems no
reason to believe the gross suppositions of the rabble,  who drove her
by their insults from going to a London theatre,  "  sang songs about
her in every alley,"  and  "  scrawled the grossest ribaldry against her on
every wall."

1772]  Frances Burney.  153

me  ?  "  said he.  "  Oh  !  you will admire it beyond expression  !  "
"No,"  cried Bessy,  " I should not,  I am sure,  I should not
like your country."  "No? — Why?  Oh,  yes;  you would
like it vastly  !  you should always be with a tiger or a lion or
a wolf or some such fine beast."  "  No,  no ;  I won't go."
"  Oh  !  yes ;  very agreeable !  and you should live on high
mountains covered with snow,  and sit upon ice,  and you should
eat trees,  and sometimes hay,  and you should have grass
and briers for sauce."  "  0  !  no  ;  I should not like it at all."
"  Oh  !  yes  ;  very good  !  very excellent !  and you should have
the sea always before you,  and the waves should dash against
you,  and you should dress in tigers'  skins."  "  0,  no  ;  indeed,
Sir,  I won't go."  "  0,  very agreeable  !  you will much like
my country."  l

March 6th.

Mama is gone to Lynn ;  and Susanna and I keep house
for my father.    We are so happy  !  for he is so kind  !   .  .  .   .

1 There has been much more about M.   Pogeupohl.     That he had
"  an elegant address,"  and was  "  a fine gentleman without any foppery,
or pretension,"  may still be read.     It seems to have been indeed a
pleasure to Fanny to meet a Russian,  and find him the reverse of what
the foreign singers who came to Dr.  Barney's house called  "  a barbar."
Though a Russian,  it looks as if he was in the service of George III.  at
the time,  probably as an officer of those Hessian soldiers who were
employed by George III.,  as well as by his grandfather.    M.  Pogeupohl
came to Dr.  Burney's tea and music in his uniform.     He had  "  gold
shoulder-knots,"  instead of silver,  such as were worn,  (he told little
Bessy Allen,)  by English officers,  he had a scarf round his arm as a
sign of mourning for the Princess of Hesse  (aunt of George III.),  and
he explained to the child that  "  every officer wear it,  and it will soon
be for the Princess of Wales."     The editor is told that M.  Pogenpohl
was not strictly exact in saying that English officers wore  "  silver
shoulder-knots  "  only.     Some regiments wore gold,  others,  silver.

2 Perhaps some of the matter cut out here included an account of
Captain Cook's visit to Dr.  Burney in February of this year.     Cook's
name figures in Mme.  D'Arblay's contents table,  and in her  "Memoirs"
of her father,  vol.  i.,  p.  270,  she gives the latter's account of the visit.

154 The Early Diary of  [1772

April 1st.

A new month,  to my great regret is begun.  How fast,  how
imperceptibly does time fly,  where the mind is at ease  !

I drank tea last Saturday with Mrs.  Strange.  I am very
glad to find her journey to Paris deferred till June.1 An old
gentleman was sitting next to he[r]  when I went in,  whom I
thought I had  [met]  before,  but remembered very imperfectly,
and  [as]  he did not speak to me I imagined myself mistaken.
But at tea-time Dr.  Smyth2 came in.  He addressed me by my

1 If this journey took place in June,  Mrs.  Strange had been earlier
in Paris than is known to her husband's biographer,  Mr.  Dennistoun.

2 James Carmichael Smyth  (born 1742,  died 1821),  M.D.,  F.E.S.,  was
physician-extraordinary to George III.     He twice received the thanks
of the House of Commons for his public services.     His eldest son com
manded the Royal Engineers at the battle of Waterloo,  and was created
a baronet.     His second,  a gallant soldier,  became the second husband
of Thackeray's mother.     We read in the  "  Church Times  "  of the 17th
of February,  1888,  that a brass has been placed in the new church of
the Holy Trinity,  Ayr,  (of which a portion was opened on Quinqua-
gesima Sunday,  1888),  by Mrs.  Eitchie  (Miss Thackeray),  with the
following epitaph to the memory of her father's stepfather,  the original
of Colonel Newcome  : —

"  Sacred to the memory of Major Henry William Carmichael Smyth,
of the Bengal Engineers,  who departed this life at Ayr,  9th September,
1861,  aged eighty-one years.

"ADSUM

"  And lo,  he whose heart was as that of a little child,  had answered
to his name,  and stood in the Presence of The Master." — "  Newcomes."  j
Vol.  iii.,  Ch.  26.

"  On the rebuilding of the church,  his grave was brought within the
walls.  He was laid to rest immediately beneath this place by his step
son,  William Makepeace Thackeray.  This memorial was put up in
1887 by some members of the family."

Dr.  Smyth was a friend of the Stranges,  as well as their physician.
He attended Sir Eobert Strange in his last illness.  A note,  without a
date,  exists,  showing that he was called to Dr.  Burney in some illness,
through Mrs.  Strange.  She writes to Miss Burney — perhaps Fanny-
after Hetty's marriage  :  "  I was sorry I miss'd my Sweet Girl.  ...  Be
assur'd that the Gentleman who I recommended is a most regular bred
physician as ever came out of any Collage of physicians in Europ."  She ia
ready to send for him without delay,  "  as the Dr.  will not be so easily got
at after 8 for he goes to the Club of Drs.  in St.  Paul's Church Yard,  than
[then  ?]  Mr.  Strange goes with Him.  The sooner Dr.  Burney Has help
the better.  His name is Dr.  James Carmichel Smyth.  For Shortnes8

1772]  Frances Burney.  155

name,  and asked after my father.  "  God bless me  !  "  cried this
gentleman,  "  why,  is this a daughter of Dr.  Burney  ? "
"  Yes,"  cried Mrs.  Strange.  "  My dear Miss Burney,"  cried
he,  rising and embracing me with great cordiality,  "  How
glad I am to see you! — but why do ycu wear this great
thing over your face  ?  (turning up my hat)  why it pre
vented my knowing you."  Quite unable to recollect who-
he was,  I told him 1 fancied he was mistaken,  and meant my
sister.  "  Oh,  no/'  cried he — "  I know your sister too,  I know
your  [mar]ried sister,  and your sister Charlotte."  I still
could not help doubting,  though he assured me I was his old
acquaintance.  "I knew you,"  said he,  "in Poland Street,
but I wonder you should forget me,  I thought I was too big
to be forgotten  !  "  Seeing me still perplexed he asked my
Christian name.  When I told him,  "  0,  aye,"  cried he,  "  Miss
Fanny  !  why I knew Miss Fanny very well.  I used to meet
you at Mrs.  Pringle's,  and with very particular pleasure."
Then in a moment I recollected Mr.  Scot !  2 I was both

Dr.  Smith,  Newport Street.  He is oue of the Collage Here."  By the
•way,  Foote  (in  "  The Devil upon Two Sticks  ")  does not overlook the
Doctor's Club : —

Devil :  "  Do you know the public-house where they meet  ?  "

Johnny Macpherson  :  "  Yes,  yes  ;  unco weel,  Sir ;  it is at the south
side of Paul's Kirk."

1 This fashion was continued for a long time.  In 1774 Horace
Walpole writes that Lady Mary Somerset wore a hat over her nose,  so
that I only fell in love with her chin."  In 1777,  Mrs.  Delany hints to
her niece that propriety  "  will never sufler you to wear your hat with
one edge to touch your nose,  and the other edge perpendicularly in the
air"  ;  and after 1780,  Susan Buruey was  "  not sorry she had a hat on,"
when some oue alluded to her approaching marriage.

9  "When Dr.  Johnson read his own satire,  in which the life of a
scholar is painted,  with the various obstructions thrown in his way to
fortune and fame,  he burst into a passion of tears one day.  The
[Thrale]  family and Mr.  Scott only were present,  who,  in a jocose way,
clapped him on the back,  and said,  '  What's all this,  my dear Sir  ?
Why you,  and I,  and Hercula,  you know,  were all troubled with
melancholy.'  As there are many gentlemen of the same name,  I should
say,  perhaps,  that it was a Mr.  Scott who married Miss Robinson,  and
that I think I have heard Mr.  Thrale call him George Lewis,  or George
Augustus,  I have forgot which.  He was a very large man,  however,
and made out the triumvirate with Johnson and Hercules comically

156 The Early Diary of  [1772

ashamed and surprised at having forgot him.  But he is
much altered.  I was extremely glad of the opportunity of
enquiring after my old friends.  He told me that Mrs.  Pringle
was not gone to the East Indies,  but to the Isle of Wight
to try whether sea bathing would be of service to her youngest
boy,  who,  poor thing,  is an absolute ideot.  And that Captain
Pringle was gone to Newfoundland as engineer under Captain
Debieg,  who was gone as commanding officer.  ...  I then
asked after Mr.  Seton.  He told me that he had been ex
tremely ill,  that he was not gone with his brother-in-law,  but
that something,  he understood,  was in agitation for him.  This
Mr.  Scot was sub-preceptor to the King.

We are still without mama.  We live in the most serene
comfort possible.  We have hardly a wish.  My dear Susette
is a companion so much to the taste of my heart,  she will
spoil me for any other.

April 2nd.

Dr.  Armstrong called here on Sunday morning.  My father
was engaged.  He was in very good spirits,  and very droll.
He is a most amazing old man, —  [the oldest I know.]  *  I told
him I had the honour,  at the Haberdashers'  Hall,  of seeing
the Lord Mayor,  for the first time I had seen one.  "And
how did you like him?"  "Oh!  very well."  "Why,  I
think,"  said he,  very gravely,  "  he is somewhat of the human
species  ;  there is some resemblance to mankind in him."  ....

But the day after we were happy indeed,  for we saw Gar-

enough.    The Doctor was so delighted at his odd sally,  that he suddenly  •
embraced him,  and the subject was immediately changed.     I never
saw Mr.  Scott but that once in my life." — Mrs.  Piozzi's Anecdotes of
Dr.  Johnson,  1786.

1 The words in brackets have been added by the author,  at a later
time.  If she be correct,  the date of Dr.  Armstrong's birth commonly
given in books must be wrong.  For instance,  you find in the  "  EnT
cyclopedia of Chronology "  (Woodward and Gates)  "  Armstrong,
John,  poet,  physician,  born at Castleton,  Koxburghshire,  about 1709."
Now Daddy Crisp,  who is never treated as an old man in these pages,
was born in 1706,  or 1707.  Perhaps Armstrong looked older than he
•was from having been physician to the army in the West Indies before
1746,  and to the army in Germany in 1760.

1772]  Frances Burney.  157

rick,  the inimitable Garrick,  in Bayes  !  O,  he was great
beyond measure  !  Betsy and James,  Sue,  my aunt and I
made up  [the party].  I was almost in convulsions  [with
excess]  of laughter,  which he kept me in from the moment he
entered to the end of the play — never in my life did I see
any thing so entertaining,  so ridiculous, — so humourous, — so
absurd !  and I have talked of nothing else — and we have
laughed almost as much at the recollection as at the re
presentation.1 Mr.  Young dined with Sue and me to-day.
Fortune,  I hope,  smiles on him again,  for he again smiles on
the world.

[Here may be given a fragment of a letter to Fanny Burney from
Maria Allen,  who was still abroad.  It is numbered 13 — Nos.  11 and 12
are wanting.  They,  and parts of Maria's journal about that time,  must
have contained perilous stuff indeed,  as we find her here in secret cor
respondence with Mr.  Kishton,  and imploring Fanny to burn,  as soon
as she has read it,  a copy of a letter from him,  as  "  I don't think I act
perfectly right to Rishton in going so far — As for Hetty's seeing it I
own it would give me pain as she then must be acquainted with so
great a weakness in favour of a Man whom she is prejudiced against.
And As I have hitherto Concealed it from her — I should be loth now
[to]  incur her Contempt or her Raillery — I know I deliver him into the

1 The character of Bayes,  in the admirable play of the il Rehearsal,"
was peculiarly associated with Garrick's history.  When Garrick acted
in  "  Goodman's Fields,"  he gained the permission of his manager,
Giffard,  to imitate,  not merely the chief actors of the greater theatres,
but Giffard himself.  He did it too well.  Giffard challenged him,  and
Garrick was wounded.  Again,  in 1743,  after his quarrel with Macklin,
Garrick,  as Bayes,  was pelted with eggs and apples,  and not allowed
a hearing,  by the upholders of Macklin,  until  "Mr.  Windham,  of
Norfolk"  (Dr.  Johnson's Windham, — Windham the politician),  four
days later,  chose thirty prize-fighters to keep the middle of the pit.
They soon drove out the Macklin gang.  The story of Giffard's
challenge was told by Garrick to Dr.  Burney,  and written down by
Dr.  Charles Burney.  Yet Horace Wai pole says Gibber gave the
character of Bayes better than Garrick.  "  Old Cibber preserved the
solemn coxcomb;  and was the caricature of a great poet"  [Dryden],
"as the part was meant to be" — not what Garrick made Bayes — "a
garretteer-bard."  In 1746 Gilbert Walmsley wrote from Bath to
Garrick to tell him that Lord Chesterfield particularly objected to his
way of  "  playing Bayes,  which he says is a gerious,  tolemn character,  <fec.,
and that yon mistake it."

158 The Early Diary of  [1772

hands of his Enemies in Sending you his letter.  I hope Susey will
remember a little of her former good opinion — but my dear dear Girls
Spare me when you write — think that you speak of him on whom all
my happiness in this Life depends and in whom I wish to see no faults,
you will call me infatuated I know — I  *  [am not]  happy at the figure I
make in your Eyes — but don't  [0 !]  don't mistake me.  I don't wish
you to disguise a sin[gle]  sentiment of your hearts on the Contents of
the letter.°you would ill-merit the faith I put in you if you was Capable
of flattering me at the expense of your sincerity — I only wish you
would not be guided by prejudice— put yourselves a few minutes in my

place you know my heart has never once Ceased to Beat in his favor

even when I thought him most unworthy — that the fear of seeing him
had a great Share in my leaving England — you will not wonder that
left to myself — my whole soul pleading for him that I perhaps too
easily forgave him— but indeed I was so happy at his return — that had
I followed the dictates of my own heart I should have wrote him a very
different Answer from what I did.  I Wrote 3 letters before I coud pen
one severe and indifferent enough but at last Compleated a Master peace
if you was to see the 2nd letter he wrote me you woud see it did not
make him vain — but you must excuse my transcribing any more of Our
letters — when I return you shall see them — I write to Susey the same
Post therefore you will suppress this letter,  as hers will be a suite to the
present Time.  If ever I am his Wife I will inform Hetty of what has
past — but wish at present she may be kept in Ignorance.  I am quite
of your opinion about Crisp — don't let a hint transpire you may let
him see all the Journal I send except the last Cahier where I mention
our Affairs — I will finish this with transcribing A paragraph in his
second letter — in answer to what I mentioned About the letter I wrote
him — '  you tell me the remembrance of the first letter you sent me
to Heacham2 has embitter'd many hours of your Life  &  Cost you many
tears. — I grant you — such a step might have disagreeable Reflections
— But pray !  what reason had you for such Uneasiness  ?  did my Char
acter ever give you room to Imagine I shoud expose you because you
Loved me  ?  Tis thoroughly unnatural — I defy the world to bring an
Instance of my behaving unworthy the Character of a Gentleman —
(unless you Accuse me)  your letter was immediately destroyed — &
had I vainly boasted of such honours who would have believed me.
Men of that stamp never gain Credit,  but on the Contrary universal
contempt — you cou'd not have Chosen a Man more unlikely to do you
a Wilfull Injury than myself — on every Account,  nor was you ignorant
of my Character and Disposition when you wrote — or if I know you you
had saved yourself the pain.'  I think those the sentiments of a Man
of honour and such I hope to find him.  Don't be surprised at the

1 Some words have been cut away with the seal.

2 Heacham was the residence of Edmund Eolfe,   Esq.,   who
married Dorothy Folkes,  a first cousin of Mr.  Eishtou's mother.

i772]  Frances Barney.  159

beginning  &  call out before Mama do you remember the Memoirs of
Mr».  William s."'       This fragment of a letter bears a London post

mark of

Monday.

We — Susan and I — had a long visit to-day from the Genius,

as he is called,  of the elder branch of the Burney race,

Richard Burney of Worcester,  Junior,  a young man of very
uncommon talents and parts,  and of the utmost sweetness of
disposition.  But,  unluckily for his fortitude of mind or modesty
of character,  he is so handsome,  and so lively and amusing,
from never-failing spirits,  that he is quite spoiled,  and seems
at times to be made up of self-admiration ;  yet,  at others,  he
laughs at his own foppery as cordially as his most sarcastic
censurers  ;  and then he will take himself off in his high airs as
drolly and gaily,  as he takes off,  with incomparable mimicry,
the airs of his neighbours.  He gave us a very entertaining
account of his life in the country,  and suffered us to laugh at
his affectation with the utmost good-nature,  and flung out
occasions for it as frequently as possible,  even joining in our
mirth,  and seeming happy to be smoaked."  What a strange
character !  But I will recollect some of his conversation  :

[Here there is a gap,  and when Richard is found speaking,  it is of
some person to whose name we have no clue.]

"  Such ease  ! — his bow was so extremely genteel  ! and

1 This may be an allusion to an incident in some novel.  We are
kindly informed that Watt  (Bibliotheca Britannica),  has the title of
a novel called  "  Memoirs of Miss Williams,  a History founded on facts  "
2 vols.,  12mo.,  5«M but that the British Museum has no copy of it.  The
Museum possesses,  however,  "  Authentic Memoirs of Mrs.  Williams,  a
Domestic and Pathetic Tale,"  London,  1823,  24mo.  This,  very likely
is the book,  as it seems to be a reprint of an earlier edition

z It shows the changes of fashion in  "  slang  "  that Fanny has,  (fifty
years or more afterwards,)  translated this  (then obsolete)  word
"*moaA:<?d,"  as  "quizzed,"  for nineteenth century readers,  not that the
word  "  quiz"  did not exist in the eighteenth century,  but it was chiefly
used as a substantive,  and applied to the object or victim,  of"  quizzing,"
—the  "  fluiz,"  or  "  quoz"  They  "  tmoaked  "  a  "  quiz  "  and then they
41 roasted"  or teased,  or tormented,  him.

160 The Early Diary of  [1772

then — nothing disturbs him  ; — if the whole is in confusion,
he is as calm and careless as ever/'  "  0  !  he's a fine fellow  ! ""
(Then he rose and took him off with inimitable humour,  still
pretending to admire him — though,  in fact,  he must be a mere
copy of himself.)  "  Then his tooth-picks,"  continued he,
"  are in the most exact order : — he has three different sizes,
for different times — and he amuses himself with picking

his teeth half the day "      "  I should be afraid it would be

catching."       (By the way,   he does it almost continually.)
"  Then his tradesmen  ! — such wretches  !     0,  insupportable  !
— here's a shoe  ! — and then what a coat !  why that man has
not three ideas in a week.     Then we do so loll in a chaise  !
— for when I go my rounds,  I always take a chaise and four
— and we are so much at our ease ! — I go from Barborne
on my own horse — and so the good folks there think I
ride her all the way — Ha — Ha — Ha  ! — but the first inn I
come to — I leave the poor jade behind me,  order a chaise and
four — and as I return stop at the same inn — and go back to-
Barborne on my horse  !  "      "  This,  I own,  I much admire — it
is so considerate for the poor horse — to let her rest ; — that
is really humane!"      "0 — meerly for the horse! — and I
always feed it with corn — the creature grows so fat and plump !
In truth I believe riding saves my life — otherwise,  my late
hours — Do you know,  it stands me in a hundred a year for
chaises  ; — the time I spend at inns — which is very little — and
there I can only get Port and Madeira — for people,  hang  '
wont sell anything better."   .  .  .  .   "  But I would advise yon
to set up a few inns of your own — that may accommodate you
better."    "  Then again,  I subscribe to every thing — the]
always bring me all subscription papers — '  Come— you know,
you'll give us your name — I know you are a young man that
encourage these sort of things/  "     "  0,  I dare say,  any art
and sciences."      "  And then — Ha !    ha  ! — God so — I oftei
sign them without reading  ! — and when I've wrote my name
—I look over what its to  !  "     Here he burst out a laughing,
as at his own absurdity — and we cordially accompanied him.
"Then they keep monstrous tables in the country — not
that I care for the victuals — not in the least — only the
shew — nay I dislike their dishes — though I always eat thei

i772]  Frances Burneij.  161

— but then the beef is always put on the side table  ! — so I
swallow the  [ragout]  that is before me — though,  faith,  I love
the  [beef best]  of all things  ! — but it would be impossible to
call for it,  you know."  "  0,  utterly — that would be having
such a vulgar appetite  !  }>  "  Ha — Ha — Ha  ! — a vulgar
-appetite  ! — Then again,  [I am]  Master of the Ceremonies at
all the Balls — and Conductor at all the Concerts."  ....

He wished us of his party at the opera — made his bow —
said it would go off with  [twice]  the spirit if wo were there

— and decamped His foppery,  airs,  and affectation

are dreadful,  but he has at times,  strong humour,  great quick
ness,  and in spight of his follies,  is sensible,  clever,  and
agreeable.  And it is very obvious,  that he takes much more
trouble to be a coxcomb than he need to be a man of

sense

******

About three o'clock,  the rest of our company came.  And
from that time,  was my comfort over,  for my uncle is so  .  .  .
yet,  I should not have regarded him,  if mama had been at
home,  but,  upon my word,  appearing as Mistress of the house
[for the first time]  distressed me beyond imagination  ....
so criticizing an eye,  and one that makes no allowances  !  l I
would not go through such another day for the world.
*  *  *  *  *

Tuesday,  April.
******

About two my uncle came,  Mr.  Richard with him.  The
former went with my father into the study,  and we had a

sequel to the Saturday's conversation Speaking of the

clubs in and about Worcester]  he spoke with infinite plea
sure of being  [President — I found they were chiefly musical
ones,  and I asked him how he came to bo always first man,
which he said ho was —  ....

"  O — ma'am,  why I have it all my own  [way]  I have all
power — I direct and fix every thing — nothing can be done

1 Mme.  D'Arblay,  iu 1832,  describes her uncle Richard as a man of
4<  true worth,"  with    "  a vigourous understanding,"    humorous,   pas
sionately fond of all the arts,  and a collector of historical portraits.
I.  M

162 The Early Diary of  [1772

without my consent.  I have a casting vote — I make all the
motions — in short,  my power is unlimited."  "  And I don't
doubt but you make a good use of it — and keep them all in
order.  And what else do you do  ?  "  "  Why I put about the

wine take care they all give their toasts — First we go

round with sentiments,  and then ladies — "  "  And you take
care they take but half glasses,  I am sure? — or at least
that they drink half water  ?  "  "  O Lord no,  ma'am — that
is always an affront — no,  a full bumper !  always."  "  And
do you give toasts  ?  "  "0 yes,  ma'am,  every body."  "  And
how many have you  ?  three or  [four  ?  "]  "  Three or four  ?
Lord bless me !  three or four and twenty !  "  "  And does,
every body drink three or four and twenty toasts  ?"....
"  0,  we never go beyond the  [  ]  but I give per

mission,  sometimes,  to some of them to mix a little water —
we don't like it — but I connive at a few."  "  0,  fie  !  that's-
terrible want of spirit !....!  can't imagine how you find
time for all  [thi]s."  "  0,  with great difficulty,  but there
would be no living in the country without.  All day I am
fagging at business — then in the evening I begin to live.
We never break-up till morning.  Sometimes I go to bed at.
3 or 4 — and am up again at 6,  and begin my rides — which
keep me in health.  But I am convinced that people may
live upon a third part of the sleep they give themselves,,
if it is sound — It is all custom — [For]  my part I can't bear
bed — it is such a total loss of time  !  and then,  I am commonly
....  master of the Ceremonies,  which obliges me to call
all the minuets — lead out the ladies — fix on the gentlemen —

0  !    I have such a fuss to settle disputes  ! — every thing is
refe[rred]  to me — '  Sir,  was not this my dance?'      'No,  sir,

1 am sure it was my turn ' — '  Now p  .  .  .  .

Monday.

Richard has spent all the morning with Susette and I.  I
had heard his brother Charles often mention a Mrs.  S.,  a
woman of fortune and figure,  who lives near Bewdley,  and
had taken a most violent liking to Richard,  insomuch as to
invite him to town with her.  I enquired whether he had
visited Mrs.  S.  since he came to town  ?  "  No  ;  he had not

1772]  Frances Burney.  1G3

had time to call."  "  I hear you go there very often,  and are
much in favour."  "  I am such a favourite,  she does nothing
but flatter me,  and says such things to me,  though I doubt not
but she abuses me behind my back  ;  0 !  I know she does,  by
what she says of others ;  but I seem to be everything there.
The moment I go in,  she runs up to me,  'My dear Burney ; '

and leaves whoever is there to themselves though

perhaps there may be somebody of high  [  ]  in the

room,  but she flings herself on her settee,  and calls me to her,
and there we sit and laugh at the old codgers, — who stare so
at ua  !  ha  !  ha  !  ha  !  Then she'll begin to tell me the London
news of the winter,  and private anecdotes of Lady Sarah this,
and my Lord Duke,  and the Marquis, — and does so run on,
and abuses everybody !  And I know the moment I am gone,
'tis the same with me."  "  What a strange character/'  said I ;
"  but how every body must wonder at her."  "  Oh  !  yes ;
why they'll come in,  and hardly get a word from her;  but
she lolls at one side,  and I at the other ;  and we have all our
own talk;  and we so enjoy their wonder!  and,  if any body
comes in,  she'll just turn her head and say, '  How do do  ?  How
do do  ?  Well ;  and so,  Burney  ; ' — and then run on again to
me,  and take no more notice of them."  "  Why,  I think she
can't be much visited."  "01 she won't,  by the country
ladies;  she won't let them come near her,  and sometimes
she'll be denied to people,  when she's at the window !  But
she always lets me in,  and says such things to me  !  before her
husband  !  "  "  Her husband  !  "  we both exclaimed,  "  what,  is
he alive  ?  Is there a husband in the case  ?  "  "  0  !  yes."
"And what sort of a man is he?"  "A very good-natured
man  (archly)  upon my word  !  very good-natured  !  "  "  But
how does he like this strange conduct  ?  "  "  Why,  I don't
know  ;  she does not mind him  ;  he's a spruce little counsellor ;

but we seldom speak with him.     The two Miss S s,  the

mother,  and I get into a party,  and we leave him as much to
himself,  as if he was not in the room."  (t How old is
Miss S.  ?  "  "About fifteen or sixteen, — a very fine girl."
"  What a strange family it must seem in the country !  "  "  0  !
dear,  yes  ;  she sees  /  smoak her,  and that has kept me in
favour but you'd be surprised to hear the things she

164 The Early Diary of  [1772

says to me,  such flattery,  and insists on it all being true,  and
I lauo-h  !  0 I never laugh so much anywhere else  !  But,
she praises people in such a manner to their faces  !  and so
many of them believe her,  and then, — they are done for!
She  "11 never see  'em again.  No  ;  it won't do  !  she gets rid
of them as fast as possible  ;  and so she would of me,  if I had
been taken in.  The people of Bewdley are all so surprised  ;
they siy,  '  why,  how does Burney manage to keep well in
that house so long  ?' "  "01 if she saw you believed her,  she
would soon discard you  !  Pray,  what age is she  ?  "  "  About
thirty,  or rather more.  She has very much the look of an
Italian — black eyes and hair and a sallow complexion.  When
she was young,  what a coquet she was  !  She entertains mo
with histories of her amours l before her marriage,  and tells
me who she really liked,  and who not,  and all before her
husband."  "  0  !  I think the better of her for that."  "  Why
yes,  perhaps,  but its very — its odd  !  "  "  It is,  indeed,  that
she should talk so at all/'  "  But what does the poor man do
all the while?"  "Why, — he walks about the room, — as I
have seen other men,  at a quick rate,  up and down,  as if for
exercise  ;  thus — (mocking him,)  and this he will do for hours.
Then,  he whistles, — and sometimes he'll stop,  and take up my
hat — and put it on, — ( My dear,  have you seen Burney's new
hat  ?  '  Then he'll walk to the glass,  and turn it about, — '  Ah  !
these young fellows.'  Then Mrs.  S.  calls out,  'I wish you
would let the hat alone ;  you know nothing at all of the
matter ;  so,  pray put it down.' — '  Well,  my dear, — I only—
and then he walks again  !  Sometimes he examines my cane,
or anything that is new :  '  Pray,  my dear,  have you seen
Burney's cane  ?  ' — and then she scolds,  '  Mr.  S.,  will you leave
Mr.  Burney's things alone  ?  '  "  "  But I can't help pitying the
daughters."

[Here about eight lines are scored out,  which seem to have con
tained Fanny's blame of Mrs.  S.  A line of Richard's defence may be
read — "  Why,  really I do believe she is,  in fact,  a woman of as good
principles as lives."]

"  and when she is serious,  extremely humane."     "  She is the

Fanny adds this note,  "  I am sure by what I heard of her after
wards that he did not mean what iu general is meant by amours."

1772]  Fnuices Burney.  105

oddest character I ever heard  [of]  IIow was you first intro
duced to her  ?  "  "  Why,  Milton  "  (n.b.  Milton is a relation
of his,  and formerly assistant to his father,)  went there to tune
the harpsichord.  O my stars  !  how they do laugh at Milton  !
— well one day when I was at Bewdley,  near five years  [ag]o,
after my leaving London,  it was settled that I should ride
over there with him.  We were shewn into a parlour —
Mrs.  S.  was with company in another — so I seated myself
at the harpsichord,  and began playing — soon after she
came in — with such an air! — and flung  [her]  self on a chair by
the harpsichord,  lent on both her elbows,  and stared me full
in the face  !...."  Did you blush  ?  "  "  0,  always  !  I
always blush  !  But the fact is I was a little upon the reserve
at first.  [Bu]t I found it would not do — no — I was  [objliged
to fling it off — And the Bewdley  [peo]ple think me so
different ! — for one is ob[lig]ed to adapt one's self a little to
the company one is with — so there I appear so serious and
sedate  ! — and then when they see me at Mrs.  S/s — I am all
airs and graces and affectat[ion]  and so fine ! — so much the
thing!"  ....  "  I am quite sorry for the Miss S.'s  ! — it is
terrible to have them brought up in such a manner."  "  0,
they enjoy it of all things."  .  .  .  .  "  Mrs.  S.  knows nothing
at all of her family — she leans both her arms on the  [tab]le,
when we go to dinner,  and looks about her,  as if to see what
there is — but she makes her husband carve — then she'll
peer ab[out]  'pray what's that — in that corner? — what have
you got behind that dish  ? — it looks nasty Burney,  you sha'nt
eat that/ — Then she takes great pleasure in pumping me,  and
is for ever telling me of reports she says she hears — m[ere]ly
to pump me — so I always assent — I never contradict her —
'  do you really?' — 'ay,  I hear that such a one' — 'do you,
indeed  ? ' — Then she'll run on about the people she wa[nts]
me to see — '  0,  Burney,  you must see Lady Betty  !  [you]  will
be quite in love with her — the sweetest creature — you must
see Lady Betty! — Then she used to form such schemes for
my comi[ng]  to town  ! — and she charged me,  if I did not,  that
I would write to her.  Ha  !  Ha  !  Ha!"  "  Upon my word  ! — "
"  0,  you can conceive nothing like it — If I am not exact
to my time — when I get to Be[wdley]  I am sure to find a note

166 The Early Diary of  [1772

waiting for  [me and]  such enquiries sent all about Bewdley—
and often  [I f]ind two or three notes — read this first,  wrote
upon  [     ] — Then such a reception  !  l

******

'  My dear Burney !  '  .  .  .  .  '  My dear Madam  !  '  (Here he
mimicked his own foppery to admiration).  Then the moment
I am gone,  I dare say,  she calls me puppy,  coxcomb,  prig,  and
a [11]  the names she can invent — not that I ever heard she did
— but she serves every b[ody]  so.  Then she takes great plea
sure in tel[ling]  us of her old favourites — '  That was such a
sweet fellow  ! — 0 Bet  ! — if you had seen Vincent ! — what a
sweet fellow  ! — 0  !  h[ow]  I loved him  ! — and her husband in
the room all the while  !— Ha  !  Ha  !  Ha  !  "  "  But what can the
poor man say?"  "Say! — Why he talks about the roads —
whistles — '  Pray,  Burney,  have you got that place mended in
the road yet  ?' — Then she'll pull me by the sleeve — 'Never
mind him — '"  .  .  .  "so,  what did he say next?" — '"I say,
Burney,  that is a very bad road that leads to your house —

when will it be mended  ? '  '  Why,  sir '     '  Lord,  don't mind

Mm — well,  who came—  '  '  Pray,  Buruey,  have you heard who
was at the  [tur]npike meeting on Monday  ?' — Then she always
pulls my sleeve,  and won't let me answer him! — I just turn
round to him — '  Sir,  I think —  0,  ma'am, — there was
such sport — Sir,  it's next — so Mr.  such-a-one — its next
Tuesday,  Sir, — and afterwards,  Mrs.  "

He turned from side to side with such drollness that I could
almost fancy I  [sa]w them,  and we laughed till we were tired.
"  Then she'll call the youngest — girl to  [her]  and take off her
cap,  to shew me her  [ha]ir,  which is the finest in the world,
and she even makes me feel it — 'tis so soft !  "  "  How old is
she?"  "  About thirteen,  and quite beautiful — and she says
[eve]ry thing she can in her praise,  and makes me say the
same — and then she te[lls]  me,  that she is very like me  ! —
and when I come in — '  Burney,  I've thought of nothing but
you since you were here — and indeed I never can look at
that girl without thinking of you' — though,  in truth,  the girl

1 Nearly a page has been crossed through and through by the pen
of Mme.  D'Arblay after these words.

1772]  Frances Bumey.  107

is no more like me than the moo[n] — nay,  she even — you
would be surprised "

He stop'd,  but we begM him to go on.

"  Why,  she took great pains to pump me,  to know how my
affections stood — and,  in short — asked how I should like her
B[et]  for a wife  ? — Ha  !  Ha  !  Ha  ! — but I took  [it]  to be in
jest — and I told her — that — I  [was]  engaged.  But a little
after,  I heard of it at Bewdley — that she had said — '  Why
Burney must have very high views,  for he refused my Bet !
Who can he be p[ossi]bly engaged to? — he is very young
indeed for any engagement of that sort  ?  "  "  How provoking
for Miss S.  ! — how dreadful to have such a mother !  to offer
her — what a dangerous life for young people  !  "  f(  Why yes
— if any body was to take advantage of their situation — "
•"  But yet,  I think it's ungrateful in you not to have visited
them yet —  "  Why,  I have had no time."

April 30.

Now for a little domestic business,  after so much foreign.

Mama came home on SaturJay evening,  in health,  spirits,
and embonpoint.  We have not heard lately from Geneva,  but
expect Miss Allen home next June.

My father continues in good health,  excellent spirits,  and
ever in good humour.  His book flourishes with praise,  and
we hear almost daily of new readers and admirers,  and if ho
had time and inclination for it he might daily increase his
acquaintance among the learned and the great.  But his time
is terribly occupied,  and his inclinations lead to retirement
and quiet.  If his business did not draw him into the world
by necessity,  I believe he would live almost wholly with his
family and books.

We went yesterday to make a round of visits,  and drank
tea at Lady Dalston's,1 who is a very good sort of woman,
and a very old acquaintance of both my father and mother.
I shall take notice of only two of the houses we stopt at.

1 The wife of Sir William Dalston,  Bart.

168 The Early Diary of  [1772

And secondly we were so happy as to be let in at Mr.
Garrick's,  and saw his new house in the Adelphi Buildings,  a
sweet situation.1 The house is large and most elegantly fitted
up.  Mrs.  Garrick received us with a politeness and sweet
ness of manners inseparable from her.  I explained to Mr.
Garrick why no reply had been sent to his card of invitation,
for I told him my father said it required no answer as he had
given it one himself,  by saying at the bottom that no excuse
would be taken.

"  Why,  ay  " — said he — "  I could not take an excuse — but

if he had neither come or sent me a card  !  !  "-—he looked

drolly defying to combat —

"  0,  he certainly would have done one or the other —
"  If he had not — why then we two must have fought  !      I
think you have pretty convenient fields near your house  ?"

May.

My design upon the correspondence of Mr.  Crisp has
succeeded to my wish.  He has sent me the kindest and most
flattering answer,  which encourages me to write again.  He
says more in three lines than I shall in a hundred,  while I
live.

[May 4th.]

Dr.  Hawkes worth called here lately.  He has been,  and
still is,  extremely engaged in writing this Voyage round the
World,  which I doubt not will be a very charming book.  He

1 The Adam brothers appear to have teen under the patronage of
Lord  (Chief Justice)  Mansfield,  who was somewhat given to specula
tion.  There was a kind of lottery to dispose of the Adelphi Buildings.
Mr.  Cradock tells us in his Memoirs that  "  the houses on the terrace,
from the beauty of their prospects,  were selected for particular friends.
The centre was allotted to Mr.  Garrick,  but none of them were quite-
suited to him,  as his health was then declining,  and the bleak situation
was ill contrasted with his own warm and sheltered situation in
Southampton Street,  but he was tempted at last to make the experi
ment,  and acceded to the proposal.  Thus Garrick returned to the same-
spot where he had begun life as a wine merchant in Durham Yard.

1772]

Frances Burney.

169

is very pressing in inviting my father and family to Bromley
where he lives.      I should extremely like such a jaunt.

I have had the honour,  also,  of seeing Mr.  Baretti,  author
of tfce Journey to Spain,  and many other books.  He is a very
good-looking man ;  which is all I can say,  as I have not ex
changed more than half a dozen words with him.  But I have
a most prodigious enthusiasm for authors,  and wish to see all
of all sorts ;  and I believe they find it out ;  for they all look
at me with benevolence  ;  though perhaps it is the nature of
literary pursuits and meditations to soften the manners and
the countenance.  What would I not go through to see Dr.
Johnson  !  Mr.  Bewley accepted as a present or relic,  a tuft
of his hearth-broom,  which my father secretly cut off,  and
sent to him in a frank.  He thinks it more precious than
pearls.1

May 5th.

If my father was disposed to cultivate with the world,
what a delightful acquaintance he might have  !  We had
yesterday another ioble concert,  at which we had again

1 Iii 1760 Dr.  Burney n^dc his first visit to Dr.  Johnson.  He was
left a short while alone,  anaiooking about,  to fulfil his promise to Mr.
Bewley to secure him something  -which had belonged to Dr.  Johnson,
as he could see not so much  ^  the cover of a letter,  a wafer,  or a split
pen,  he cut some bristles fron.  an o]d hearth-broom in the chimney-
corner,  slipped them into his  ^cket-book,  wrapped them in silver-
paper,  and enclosed them in ajetter to Horace Wai pole's nephew,
Lord Orford,  in Norfolk,  who gAe these treasures to Mr.  Bewley.
He kept them all his life.  Dr.  «ohnson was told this.  When he
published  "The Lives of the Poetsj he sent a copy of the volumes
which came out first to Mr.  Bewlry,  ^rough the Barneys,  addressed,
with his compliments,  "  For the BroOo Gentleman."  He afterwards
wrote Fanny this note,  which has not EW printed,  at the same time
sending the later volumes of the  "  Lives  *V_
"  To Miss Buruo,

"  Dear Madam, — Pray let these books be e>^  aftcr the former to tho
gentleman whose name I do not know. — I an\

"  Madam,
"  Your most humble s\yant,

"July 9,  1781.  "\M:  JOHNSON

170 The Early Diary of  [1772

Celestini,  who led the band,  and charmed us all with a solo.1
We had Tacet also,  who gave us a solo on the flute.2

Sir William Hamilton,  whom my father knew at Naples,
where he was Ambassador,  honoured us with his assistance.
He is mentioned with gratitude,  in my father's book,  for his
very great attention to him when abroad  ;  as is his Lady for
lier fine playing.  They were then Mr.  and Mrs.  Hamilton  ;
but he has since been created Knight of the Bath.  Ha played
•out of Celestini's book,  and I believe very well.3

Mr.  Beckford brought his flute with him,  aad played
under Tacet.  He has won all our hearts by tie extreme
openness,  good-humour,  and friendly fervency of Hs manners.4

1  "  Rome,  September 21  [1770]. — The day after m/  arrival,  at his
Grace the Duke of Dorset's,  I heard Signor Celestni,  the principal
violin here.  .  .  .   [He]  played,  among other things one of his own
solos,  which was very pleasing,  though extremely cifiicult,  with great
brilliancy,  taste,  and precision." — Dr.  Burners Fiist Tour.

2 Tacet was an excellent player on the flute.

3 We find in Dr.  Burney's first Musical Tear; — "October,   1770.
— The Honourable Mr.  Hamilton  ....  whose taste and zeal for the
Arts,  and whose patronage of artists are veil known throughout
Europe,  being out of town when I came to N'ples,  did me the honour
as soon as he heard of my arrival to invite me to his country-house,
called Villa Angelica,  at the foot of Mount Vesuvius I was re
ceived by him and his lady,  not only witb politeness,  but even kind
ness."     Music,  also,  was not wanting,  asHamiltou had two pages,  one
of whom was an excellent player upa*  the violin,  the other upon
the violoncello.     When Hamilton we-t back to Naples,  he gave a
great concert,  at which Dr.  Burney hard all the chief performers of
Naples,  all of whom were surpassed upon the harpsichord by Lady
Hamilton.     She was a Welsh lady.of the name of Barlow,  "  a good
fortune in laud."     She must not oe confounded with the notorious
Emma Hart,  or Lyou,  or Cadog'11.  whom Sir William unfortunately
made his second wife in 1791.     forace Walpole,  who saw Hamilton in
1776,   wrote that  "Vesuvius  ;ad burnt him to a cinder."      He was
minister at Naples from 1764^°  1800.      He published a splendid book
upon Greek,  Etruscan,  and-Roman antiquities.     In 1772 he sold his
collection of vases to the British Museum for  £8,400.     The so-called
Portland Vase was also H-     This he parted with to Fanny's admirer,
the Duchess of Portland ln 1784.     His fine Correggio,  of  "  Cupid de
prived of his Bow,"  i?"ow in the National Gallery.     He was one of
the most versatile of ieu-    In his youth he had been in battles,  and,  at
seventy,  hunted an-'snot Wlth the King of Naples.

4  "  Saturday,  PP-  22, 1770. — This evening Mr.  Beckford,  to whose

1772]  Frances Burney.  171

Mr.  Price,  whom I have mentioned formerly,  and who is
one of the macaronis of the age,  came with Sir William.1

Mr.  Fitzgerald,  a very sensible old acquaintance of the
family's was another hearer,"  as was Mr.  Bagnall,  a yet more
sensible new acquaintance.  He is indeed a sweet man ;  his
manners are all gentleness ;  his countenance,  the picture of
benevolence.  1 hear from my father,  that he is learned,
fond of the polite arts,  and himself well versed in them.  His
son and daughter came with him;  the son has just purchased

zeal for the business in which I am embarked I have infinite obliga
tions,  made a concert for me,  consisting of twelve or fourteen of the
best performers in Rome  ;  these were led by Signer Celestini."-
Dr.  Burney.  William Beckford,  of Somerly,  in Suffolk,  was,  like his
better-known namesakes,  the Lord Mayor,  and the Lord Mayor's son
(the author of  "Vathek"),  descended from Colonel Peter Beckford,
Lientenaut-Goveruor and Commissioner-in-Chief of Jamaica.

1 We fancy that we have found Mr.  Pricu in a copy of verses of the
year 1771,  called  "A Party to Richmond."    He is placed among people
who  (as Garrick says in one of his farces)  were all  "  Macaroons,  or
Savoury Vivers"  (i.e.,  of the Savoir-vivre Club).

"  To Richmond the folks of the very first mode

In coaches and chaises and cabriolets rode;

There was Bouverie and Meynell,  and Greville and Crowe,

With Molyueux,  Melbourn,  and husbands a few  ;

And Fitzpatrick,  and Charles —

"  Charles  "  was Charleb James Fox.  There were,  besides,  Sir Ralph
Payne,  Mr.  Conway,  Mr.  Boothby,  Mr.  Price,  and Horace Wai pole's
M.  do Guignes,  or Guisnes,  the French ambassador.  It is but poor
etuff.  Mr.  Price opes his mouth once only,  to utter this sorry couplet :  —

"  I shall into the kitchen and see whafs to eat,

For methinks with discourse we should mingle some meat."

Sir Ralph concurs in this —

'•  The banquet convivial,  dear Price,  be your care,
Whilst I the choice fruits and cool bev'rage prepare."

All ends by Mr.  Crewe saying —

"  What a terrible loar it has been all this day  ! "

He may also be the same of whom Gilly Williams wrote to George
Selwyn,  from White's,  one Saturday evening  :  "  Your friend,  Charles
Price,  had such a tumble last night that the whole Macaroni"  [Club  ?]
rings with it."  Probably this was a great loss at the gaming-table.

2 This appears to have been Mr.  Fitzgerald of Cookham,  in Berkshire.

172 The Early Diary of  [1772

a commission in the Guards ;  he is too insignificant to de
serve further mention.  Miss Bagnall,  too,  though modest
and obliging,  does not appear to deserve a father of such
shining and winning merit,  as Mr.  Bagnall.  Dr.  King com
pletes my list.

Mr.  Burney was again the King of the evening.  Hia
performance will never,  I believe,  cease to be wonderful,  even
to such frequent hearers.  When the concert was over,  my
father talked over with Sir William Hamilton his Italian ex
pedition.  Sir William is a very curious1 man,  a very great
naturalist,  and antiquary.  He took a house,  or for aught I
know built it,  within a short distance of Mount Vesuvius,  on
purpose to observe its eruptions,  and ran daily the utmost
risque of his life,  to satisfy his curiosity.  He spoke with
great pleasure of the fine eruptions he had seen,  and told us
that Mount  ^Etna was now playing the devil.2 He has written
several accounts of both these mountains to the Royal Society,
which he said he was now correcting and collecting to print
in one volume.  He is to return in June to Naples,  unless
there is an Installation,  which will detain him,  as he has yefc
received no Star,  only the Garter.3 He said he should pass
through Germany.  "  Shall you  ?  "  cried my father,  "  why,  I
believe I shall go to Germany this summer."  "  Well,"  cried
Sir William,  "  if you'll go with me,  I'll give you a cook and a
bed."  I verily believe,  though this was said en passant,  that

1  "Curious"  is here used iu its old sense of praise.  Sir William
was to be admired as a persevering seeker of objects worth possessing,
and as an inquirer into things worth knowing.

'  Thirteen years later,  Horace Walpole speaks of Hamilton as
"probing Vesuvius."

3 This is a mistake.     The Order of the Bath has a badge,  or cog
nisance,  pendant from a red riband,  and a star  "  embroidered on the
left side of the upper garment."     Debrett says that  "no knight elect
can wear either the collar or the star before his installation."     Pro
bably Sir William's collar,  which Fanny calls a garter,  was sent to him
at Naples,  but he waited to be installed before wearing it,  or,  at any
rate,  to receive a dispensation from the sovereign,  which was in late
days,  if not then,  always granted to knights on foreign service.    Thei
was a grand installation of fifteen new Knights of the Bath on the 15t
of June,   1772,   after which those new knights gave a costly eul
tainment.

1772]  Frances Burney.  173

my father will reflect upon it,  for he has an insatiable rage of
adding to the materials for his History,  and could not go in
better company.  Sir William has,  in a striking degree,  a
look that is sensible,  penetrating,  and even piercing;  his
singularly curious and enterprising turn seems marked strongly
in his countenance.

To this select party had Mr.  Crisp and Miss Allen been
added,  we should scarce have wished another.

Sunday,  May 10th.

Monsieur L'Abbe Morellet 1 spent this  .evening with my
father.  He is a French writer of fame  ;  his subject,  Com
merce and Agriculture.  He is a man of science and learning,
and has lately written a book on Music,  which has been very
much approved.  He is come to England for a few months,
and we hope to have the favour of seeing him often.2

1 In 1759  "  the Abbe Morellet published a small pamphlet on  'Musical
Expression and Imitation,'  which is full of ingenious ideas,  and written
with elegance." — Dr.  Surney.     This was only an episode in the writings
and doings of Morellet,  who was not only an Academician and a
member of the Institute,  but even  (in 1807)  of the French Legislature,
•when,   (in the words of Dr.  Barney,)   "  with a collar encircled with
wreaths of laurel,  he girded on his sword for the first time in his life,
at seventy-nine,  ....  and suffered it to get between his legs,  and
trip up his heels  !  "    Morellet was uncle of the wife of Marmontel.     He
appears in Miss Edgeworth's  "  Ormoud."      She had met him in Paris,
where,  about 1802,   Mme.  D'Arblay renewed her early acquaintance
with him.     In 1810 she wrote to Dr.  Barney :   "  You are always re
membered here,  and named with pleasure by M.  Suard and M.  L'Abbe
Morellet,  both of whom we meet chez Madame de Tesse."     He had
sung her a Bong of his own making upon completing his eightieth
year.     In 1811 she speaks of Morellet as  "  now 85 or 86,"  but walking
about Paris like a young man,  preserving  "  his spirits,  memory,  and
pleasure in existence,"  and having  "  a lookery in such elegant order
th&t people beg to go to see it."     These were affectionate hints that
Dr.  Buruey,  who was of about the same age,  was to do likewise,  live on,
and perhaps,  also,  to put his  "  Chaos"  into better order.

2 Morellet spent some time in the house of Lord Shclburue,  after
wards the first Marquis of Lansdowne.

174 The Early Diary of

Thursday,  May 21st.

Miss Allen, — for the last time I shall so call her, — came
home on Monday last.  Her novel is not yet over ;  neverthe
less,  she — was married last Saturday  !

Good Heaven  !  what a romantic life has this beloved friend
lived  !  I dare not commit particulars to paper

[After writing came meeting.  These young folks,  Maria Allen and
Mr.  Rishton,  met somewhere abroad,  and were married at Ipres,1 on
the 16th of May,  1772,  Mrs.  Maria reaching England,  if not her
"  Governor,"  on the 18th.  Fanny and Susan were told the secret of
the marriage,  but all three were afraid to disclose it to the proper
people,  Maria's own mother and kindred.  It was most likely Fanny's
suggestion that it should be broken to,  and by,  Mr.  Crisp.  Mrs.  Maria
went,  as Miss Allen,  to see Garrick in Richard III.  upon the 30th of
May,  and,  in fact,  masqueraded as a single woman until the 7th of
June.  She then took Susan to Chesingtou,  where a scene of confes
sion to Mr.  Crisp was arranged,  which is thus described in a joint
letter from the two young ladies to Fanny ;  who had probably de
signed it as an artist.  Maria begins :  "  My dear Fan — all's over — Crisp
knows I am Maria Rishton  ....  To begin in a concise pleasing
manner — He took me aside the first night after I had by hints hums
and ha's told him Rishy and I were to be one — and shewd him the
dogs picture — well the old devil grew so scurrilous — he almost made
me mad — if he had been a Mahoon 2 he could not have merited what
Crisp said. — So I sent him a message by Kate  "  [Cooke] — "  who,  with
her thick skull guessed the whole affair from the beginning — that Mrs.
Rishton sent compts.  and hoped to see him at Stanhoe 3 this
summer."  Here Susan thus begins  :  "  Sue — he came into the room to
us.  Maria fell on her knees instantly and hid her face on the bed — Why
what is all this?  sd he.  Kate claw'd hold of her left hand,  and shew'd
him the Ring."  Whereupon Mr.  Crisp used some expressions which,
among cultivated gentlemen like himself,  were rather obsolete even in
1772,  but were not oaths.4 They signified that Maria had worked too

1 Maria's pen at first slips,  and she writes  "  St.  Ypres  "  ;    the
second time she drops the St.

2 Perhaps a corruption of  "  Mahoun  "  or  "  Mahound  " — i.e.,  a Turk,
according to mediaeval views of Turks as fierce,  nay,  ferocious followers
of Mahomet.     The word is a survival of the time when the Turks be
sieged Vienna,  but it was late in the day for it to be used in 1772.

3 Stanhoe is a village in Norfolk,  near the little town of Docking,
where Mr.  Rishton afterwards lived.     It was not far from Lynn.

The language of Mr.  Crisp,  as reported in the Diaries of Fanny
and Susan,  and as sometimes crossed out or altered for softer synonyms
in his letters to Fanny by her tender hand,  was of the strength of

1772]  Frances Bumey.  17<>

much upon his feelings,  when  "all the while she knew he cou'd do
her no good — "  "  He then came to me " — "  Susettikin,"  sd he,
"  You know all this affair — is it so  ?  " — "  I had had my cue before —
"  yes Sir — Indeed " — "  She is really married,"  sd he,  arching his
eyebrows with such a stare of astonishment- — "  She is upon my
honour" — [MARIA:]  "No — No — No — Indeed — Nothing — Nothing at
all — its all the lyes of that impudent little toad  " — [meaning we.]  "
"  However poor Maria still kept hiding her face in agonies — which
confirmed what I had before said — We shewed him the 2 letters which
she has received "  [from Mr.  Kishtou]  "  since she has been in
England."  Soon Mr.  Crisp was convinced,  and laughed.  After this,
in his capacity of Daddy to them all,  "  he enquired particularly
where she was married — by whom — who were the witnesses,  &c.,  &c."
Susan writes again  :  "  Maria,  as you will perhaps gness,  told a hun
dred lyes in a moment,"  but Mr.  Crisp made out from Susan,  as well as
from herself,  enough to show him that it was  "  a well-witnessed "
and valid marriage,  although they could not give him any very satis
factory answers to several of his questions.  "  He took  "  (Maria away
from Susan and Kitty Cooke)  •'  into his own room."  Next  "  M.
Rishton"  seizes the pen,  and tells how  (after making her give a
minute account)  Mr.  Crisp at once  (like the man of the world,  which
he once had been)  "changed his tone about my  */)o«o,"  and even
"said,  in the room before Sue,"  etc.,  "You may see he is a man of
sence and a gentleman — and he had before call'd him all the de
signing worthless dogs he coud think of — he wont hear of our being
married again as he says that woud be putting odd thoughts into
people's heads — and nothing was wanting if he had the certificate and
my relations might write to Ypres if they  (sic)  but he insisted on the
affair being immediately known and declared in a publick-way —
and grew almost angry on my remonstrating — all the objections I
coud make were like dirt in his eyes — what did we want with a
house — while we had money in our pockets we might find a place any
where — besides he woud have us go directly into Norfolk together
|  and settle our affairs on the spot,  he has,  wrote to Mama to tell her
the whole affair and insists upon my going back to Queen Square
Mrt.  Eishton and writing immediately to Martin to come over.

Queen Anne's days,  which saw his birth  ;  quite distinct from the
|milder expletives or metaphors which these girls were used to hear
fonder George III.  For instance,  when Mr.  Crisp learnt that Fanny

•J had made him hear  "  Evelina,"  read,  without telling him that she had
written it,  he called her  "  a young Devil,"  "  a young Hell-fire,"  for
drawing him in to read and praise it unawares.  The  "  Hell-fire  "  was
an allusion to a terrific club of that name,  believed to have existed in
bis youth,  on purpose to talk and act  "  horrid impieties."  Mrs.  Delauy

,. 'said that  "  the club consisted of about a dozen persons of fashion of
x>th sexes,  some of them females unmarried,'1 and one,  a maid of
lOnour to Queen Caroline.

17G Tke Early Diary of  [1772

Maria is to write to my Uncles about this affair — and in short I am
no longer to conceal my name.  I told him what Eishton had said
that people woud attribute to indifference his being absent from me

now '  not in the least — things are exactly as they shoud be ' — that I

must go to my Lord and Master the instant he arrived in London if
Mama would not give him house room for a day or two till we went
into Norfolk — in short I fear there will be a terrible bustle — Write
me word how Mama takes it — and in what manner.  I hope she will
send me an answer on Tuesday as I am losing my time at Chesington
which is now quite precious to me.  if you are asked about it tell all you
know — and speak a good word for us — tell Hetty the same — and bid
Molly "  [Stancliffe]  "  not fright herself but answer clearly all the
questions asked her and let her go to Mrs.  Searle's  "  [a milliner,  or dress
maker]  "  to get some of my things ready to be tried on on Thurs
day morning —  and to get on with the handkerchiefs — .  ...  I shan't
come until I hear something from my Mother,  if she is civil to
you do press her to write directly that I may come up immediately on
the receipt of her letter.  Speak to that poor toad Molly directly — and
write the return of the post yourself — Adieu my own Fan."  This
letter is numbered 14,  is addressed to Fanny in Queen's Square,  and

/      8     \
has a London post-mark of  (   — —     )  and an illegible country-mark.

What a kind  "  Daddy Crisp"  he was to be a father to all these girls  !
He let Maria off very lightly — telling her only,  "  What a pretty piece
of work she might have made of it !  "  and uttering a few  'reflections
upon  "  the thousand difficulties in which young people involved them
selves before they were aware,  by concealing things from their re
lations  "  ;  but even at more than a hundred years distance,  we cannot
help pitying Fanny,  who was involved in the secret of one who had no
drop of her blood,  and was obliged to front the culprit's mother,  who
was also her own stepmother.  Nor was Fanny the bearer of a word of
penitence or of apology.  She was only told to look to the progress of
Maria's  "  things  " — that is,  of her trousseau.  "  What scenes we shall
have  ! "  writes Fanny,  then draws her pen through the words.  We
also have had scenes out of it,  for the situation of  "  Evelina,"  dis
owned by her father,  who had been  "  a very profligate young man,"
and had married that  "  ill-advised  "  young lady,  her mother,  privately
in Paris,  then  "infamously burnt the certificate of their marriage,  and
denied that they had ever been united,"  might well have been suggested
by some of the words and warnings which fell from Mr.  Crisp on that
night in June,  1772.  Mainly for this have we dwelt upon Mr.  Rishtoi
and Maria Allen.  How did Mrs.  Burney take it  ?  Very warmly,
well she might !  We know not what she said to Fanny,  but thence
forth she put obstacles in the way of her visiting Maria.  She did
receive the couple,  sooner or later ;  but spoke her mind with vigour ;
upon one occasion giving Mr.  Rishton  (as poor Maria complains)

1772]  Frances Burney.  177

account of"  every vice,  fault,  or foible I had ever been guilty of since
my birth."  The wrath of Mrs.  Burney was,  most likely,  not so  "  im
placable"  as Maria describes it to have been  ;  but although Maria nobly
announces that she forgets all her mother has ever made her suffer
when Miss Allen now that they are parted ;  as Mrs.  Rishton,  she re
sented Mrs.  Bumey's resentment at her marriage,  for long-and-long.
No mention of a second marriage has,  so far,  been found.  The Rishtons
pass from our view until the beginning of 1773.  The wild  "  Allen"  is
being tamed during these next mouths.  She has married  "a Bashaw"
(as she was told by his sister,  Mrs.  Edgell) — a very affectionate Bashaw,
but still a Bashaw  ;  although not  "  a Mahoou,"  as Mr.  Crisp had almost
made him out to be,  but just an only son,  inclined to show and extrava
gance,  sensitive as to what appearance was made by the careless Maria,
touchy towards his kindred and hers,  with many dislikes of people,  which
she fell into,  but a loving husband when he was humoured,  as he always
seems to have been during the years of their married life of which we
have cognizance through the letters of his wife to Fanny.]

[May.]

I have just left the famous Sir William Browne in the par
lour,  a most extraordinary old man,  who lives in the Square,1
and is here on a visit.  He has been a very renowned physi
cian  ;  whether for saving or killing,  I cannot say.  He is near
eighty,  and enjoys prodigious health and spirits,  and is gallant
to the ladies to a most ridiculous degree.  He never comes
without repeating some of his verses.  I can now recollect a
stanza he has just told me,  occasioned by some little flirtation
with a lady's fan  :  —

No wonder that this Fan should prove

A vehicle to carry love ;

But to return it I desire,

Lest it too much should fan the fire.

I think the lines worth preserving  ;  so flew out of the room
to write them.3

1 Queen Square.

2 Sir William Browne,  M.D.  (1692-1774),  was an M.A.  of Cambridge,
and wrote the well-known epigram,  "  The King to Oxford sent a troop
of horse,"  etc.     He has kept his name alive by founding prizes of three
gold medals to be given yearly at Cambridge for the best Greek ode,
the best Latiu ode.  and the three best Latin and Greek epigrams.     He
also founded a scholarship at Cambridge.     He settled at Lynn about

N

178 Tke Early Diary of  [1772

I have had a very clever letter from my dear Daddy Crisp ;
I am charmed at entering into a correspondence with him.

My dear father intends going to Germany this summer,  to
see if he can gather any materials for his History of Music.
If the most indefatigable pains and industry will render his
work worthy of approbation,  it will meet with the greatest.

May 30th.

Maria,  Susan,  and myself had the happiness to see Garrick,
last night,  in Richard the Third.  We had always longed to
see him in all his great characters,  though least in this which is
so shocking,  though not the least,  of the praise of his acting.
(sic.}  ....  Garrick was sublimely horrible  !  Good Heavens
— how he made me shudder whenever he appeared !  It is
inconceivable how terribly great he is in this character !  I
will never see him so disfigured again ;  he seemed so truly
the monster he performed,  that I felt myself glow with indig-

1716.  There he was,  like Dr.  Burney,  under the patronage of the
reigning family of Turner.  In 1740 he went to London,  and became,
in the end,  President of the College of Physicians.  Bishop Warburton
describes him as a little,  round,  well-fed gentleman,  with a large muff
in one hand,  and a small Horace,  open,  in the other  (1769).  See a
previous note,  p.  52.  He had been in frequent conflict with the aldermen
of Lynn,  as he was with the licentiates of medicine in London,  but
seems to have been as shrewd as he was singular.  Nichols has printed
his elaborate will,  in which he desires that on his coffin,  "  when in the
grave,  may be deposited in its leather case or coffin,  my pocket Elzevir
Horace,  '  comes vise vitaeque dulcis et utilis,'  '  worn out with,  and
by me.'"  He also appointed himself,  not only a monument
with that of his late  "Lady"  in Hillington Church  (Norfolk),
but a marble monument in Westminster Abbey,  to be placed  "  as
near that of my Master,  Dr.  Mead  (Medicorum facile Principis)
as any vacant arch may admit,  or otherwise,  in the Poets'  Corner,
over against that of Mr.  Prior."  He ordained by this will that his
descendants,  through his only child,  Mary  (who married William,
brother of Martin Folkes,  President of the Royal Society),  should
forfeit his property to the University of Cambridge if ever they
dropped the name of Browne before that of Folkes.  The forfeiture has
so far been avoided by the baronets who have represented him.  Martin.
Folkes Eishton was first cousin of Martin Browne Folkes,  Sir W.
Browne's grandson and future heir.

\Tj2\  Frances Burney.  179

nation every time I saw him.  The applause he met with,
exceeds all belief of the absent.  I thought at the end they
would have torn the house down  :  our seats shook under us.1

[It may be remarked that what remains of this year's Diary is prior to
Dr.  Barney's departure on his German Tour,  in July,  1772.  Fanny fills
the gap in her Memoir of her father,  and gives an account of his severe
illness on his return,  in the very stormy weather of December,  1772 ;
and of the droll,  but dismal,  incident,  that he was so much exhausted
by sea-sickness,  that when he was told that the sailing-vessel had
reached Dover,  he begged  «to be left to rest before landing,  fell asleep,
was forgotten,  and woke,  in mid-channel,  to find himself on his way
back to Calais,  with another stormy passage to Dover before him.
He had a most severe illness on reaching Queen's Square,  was sent to
Chesington on recovery,  and forbidden writing books for some time.
The affectionate outburst in praise of Dr.  Burney,  written in the
beginning of the Diary for January,  1773,  may have been a tribute
from Fanny to his patience and cheerfulness in illness.]

1 Mr.  Cradock writes that : — "  When Garrick was about to leave the
stage,  he said to a party of us,  '  I gained my fame by Richard,  and I
mean to end with it.'  "  When Garrick said this he was mindful of a
great time when he had played Richard at an illicit theatre in Good
man's Fields,  and when the whole line of streets from Temple Bar to
Whitechapel was thronged by carriages of noble and gentlemen going
to hear him.  One night,  as he began to speak,  he saw a gentleman
dressed in black sitting in a side box.  This he knew to be the famous
Mr.  Pope,  whose eyes,  he said,  shot like lightning through him,  so that
for joy and fear he could hardly go on,  but he soon saw Mr.  Pope clap
his hands,  and was told afterwards that Pope had said to Lord Ossory,
who was sitting with him,  "  That young man never had his equal as an
actor,  and he will never have a rival."

180 Tke Early Diary of  [1773

1773.

[To give an account of the condition of this year's journal would be
to repeat much of what has been said of others.  One point of difference
is to be noted,  this is much more bulky  ;  partly because Fanny's
pleasure in writing grew with her age,  partly because it consists of
two journals  ;  one of them private,  to which another has been attached,
which is addressed to her sister Susan.  This latter describes a delight
ful visit to Devonshire.  The following extract from a letter of Maria
Eishton's to Fanny,  is a piece of playful rhodomoutade about what
was,  perhaps,  one of those bursts of authorship which Fanny no
longer tried to restrain.  It is convenient to place it here,  although it
was written after the Teignmouth visit.

"And so by way of return to the very Curious Manuscript I received
I have named the first Cow I ever was Mistress of Fanny.  How can
I thank you enough my friend for the Invaluable Treasure you have
sent me.  My workmen are now employed in turning an Arched Vault
where it is to be deposited in An Iron Chest to preserve it from the
Eavages of Times  (sic)  and hand down this Valuable piece of Antiquity
to future Ages yet unborn — I intend leaving it as An Inheritance to
one of my Sons who shall be instructed Early in All the Hidden
misteries of Science that he may understand this great production —
but as I am Afraid I am not Worthy of being Mother to such A Son I
must select some favorite of the Muses to intrust this Treasure with —
How came you in possession of this precious pearl  ? — and how is it
possible your Friend ship coud Transport you so far to let you part
with it — Happy Britain  !  to live to see tho days when thy Children are
Capable of Such Astonishing Actions — but my gratitude transports
me so far I am unable to pursue the Theme,  and heartily  (sic)  I coud
with propriety begin your Tambour Apron At this Time — and so you
wish  (sic)  all how and About us — upon  (sic)  my head is so filled with
household affairs And my life at Stanhoe is so different from the
Serenity of Tingmouth I can  (sic)  bring my ideas into order enough
to Attempt anything in the Narritive Style  " ]

January 16th,  Queen's Square.

I shall begin this year without any preamble,  having nothing
new to say.  I am in the situation of the Poet-Laureat/  and
with him may exclaim  :

Whitehead.

1773]  Frances Eurney.  181

"  For on a subject so to tatters tore  ;
What can be said,  that ha'nt been said before  ?  "

This is my fifth or sixth Journal-book ;  yet will not,  I am
persuaded,  be my last,  but it would require very superior
talents to write an annual Exordium.  I must therefore content
myself with plainly and concisely proceeding with my life and
opinions — addressed to Myself.

And,  first,  it is my opinion,  that the world is very ill used
in being called a bad one.  If people did but know how to
enjoy the blessings they meet,  they would learn that our share
of misfortunes very often serves but to enhance their value.

Exceptions,  Fordyce says,  do only confirm a general rule.
For my own part,  how well should I think of myself,  if my
deserts equalled my happiness !  My father has ever been
more deserving than fortunate.  This saying could not be
reversed in him.  The longer I live,  and the more I see of the
world,  the more am I both astonished and delighted at the
goodness,  the merit,  and the sweetness of that best of men.
All that is amiable,  added to all that is agreeable;  every thing
that is striking joined to every thing that is pleasing  ;  learning,
taste,  judgment,  wit,  and humour, — candour,  temperance,
patience,  benevolence,  every virtue under the sun is his  !

But now to events,  which will otherwise crowd so fast upon
me,  that I shall not be able to recollect them  :  what a loss
would that be  !  to rny dear — Nobody  !

Tuesday.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Rishton are in town.      Yesterday they made
me spend the day with them,  to accompany them to Covent

Garden Theatre Mrs Bettenson and Sir Richard

Bettenson,1 uncle and aunt of Mr.  Rishton,  are to make our
party at the play.     The Baronet has a fortune of  £5000 per

1 Sir Richard Betenson,  or Bettenson,  was the widower of Mr.
Rishton's aunt,  [Lucretia Folkes ;]  Mrs.  Bettenson was probably his
spinster sister.

182 The Early Diary of  [1773

annum,  and Mr.  Rishton is his presumtive heir.  Though
not a declared one,  yet he is the nearest relation.  They live
in our Square,  and we went to take them up early,  as the
Prelude was to be done.1  ....  The servant begged us to
alight,  as his mistress was not ready.  The moment the coach
stopped Mr.  Rishton said to me,  "  Now,  take no notice,  but
you will see presently one of the oddest women you ever yet
have seen — off the stage ! "  Mrs.  Rishton,  who was extremely
eager not to miss Barsanti,  having never yet seen her on the
stage,  was very much vexed at this delay.  Her husband,  more
impetuous,  exclaimed against such ill-breeding. — "How truly
vulgar  !  to make people wait  !  "  But he would not get out.
"Let's sit still,"  cried he,  "it will save both time and com
pliments."  In about five minutes Mrs.  Bettenson appeared
in the passage.  She is a fat,  squab,  ugly,  vulgar woman,  yet,
I am told,  extremely fond of her family.  However,  she was
this evening all condescension.

"Won't you come in,  Mrs.  Rishton? — why,  Lord,  I have
been ready this good while ; — we only wait for my brother.
But he says he can't go five in a coach."

This was a delicate speech for me  !  I began to say I was
sorry,  &c.,  but Mrs.  Rishton whispered me  "  Remember they
are the intruders,  we made our party first."  Mr.  Rishton
was now obliged to get out,  and after a decent quantity of
speeches and compliments,  the Baronet and his amiable sister
at last came in.

We had an upper box.  Barsanti acted extremely well,  and
was much admired.2  "And how do you like this Prelude,

1  "An occasional Prelude"    was written by George Colman,   the
elder,  for Miss Barsanti's first appearance as an actress on the 21st of
September,  1772.     It was contrived so that she might mimic the
Italian and English singers of the day.

2 Miss Barsanti first appeared at Covent Garden Theatre on the 21 st of
September,  1772.    She gave the happy occasion for Miss L.  M.  Hawkins's
going,  to what she looked upon as her first real play.     It is true that
she had before seen  "  The Alchemist,"  but she did not like that,  and
"  Cato,"  but it was only acted by schoolboys at an academy,  just as
Fanny saw young gentlemen play  "Tamerlane"  in 1768.     The rigid
Sir John,  and the strict Lady Hawkins,  upheld Jenny Barsanti,  who
was  "religious,  discreet,  and made all that she wore,"  even to her

1773]  Frances Burney.  183

madam  ?  "  asked Sir Richard,  little thinking that I have seen
it near a dozen times.  I am glad to find it so long lived.
The play was again  "Elfrida,"1 with a new entertainment
called  "  Cross Purposes/'2 in which is introduced a macaroni's
footman who had on exactly the undress livery of Mr:  Rishton's
servants.  Mrs.  Rishton could not forbear laughing as well
as myself.  She looked up to Mr.  Rishton  :  I did not venture.

stage-dresses.  Miss Hawkiiis tells us that Jenny first appeared in
"  The Funeral,"  by Sir Richard Steele.  It was a sore struggle for her
to act at all that uight,  as her father had had a paralytic stroke that
very day while at dinner.  George Colman,  the younger,  says she
"  was by far the most distinguished of the actresses of her time  "  in
talent.  She was the first Lydia Languish,  playing that part on the
nights of January the 17th and 18th,  1775,  when  "  The Rivals  "  is said
by some to have failed through Lee's bad acting as Sir Lucius
O'Trigger,  by others,  owing to its tedious length before revision.  Miss
Barsanti afterwards played Lydia both in London and the country
during its great success.  She married a Mr.  Lester,  or Lister,  in 1777
— and Mr.  Daly,  manager of the Dublin Theatre,  afterwards.  She seems
to have had tact,  as she pleased both the Hawkinses and the Burueys.
When acting in Dublin,  she wore nothing but very rich Irish manu
factures.  Ladies were then wearing very full petticoats in Dublin,
but Jenny made hers scantier,  and turned the tide of fashion in favour
of what were called  "  Barsanti petticoats."

1 Mason's  "Elfrida"  was published in 1752,  but never acted until
the 21st of November,  1772.      On the 26th,  Walpole wrote to con
gratulate Mason on its  "  pleasing exceedingly."     This Walpole learnt
from  "  the papers,  his only company at present,"  as he was slowly
recovering from a severe fit of the gout.     Mason replied,  "  in the
spleen,"  (real or affected) : —  "  do you not think it somewhat cavalier
in Mr.  Colman,"  (the manager of the theatre,)  "  to do what he has
done without any previous intimation to me  ?     I should have knowu
nothing about the matter if my bookseller had not heard of it,  and
demanded the property of the chorus books then printing off.     One of
these he has sent me in which the odes are PO lopped and mangled,
that they are worse than the productions of Handel's poet,  Dr.  Morell."
Dr.  Arue,  who composed the music for  "  Elfrida,"  is also a subject of
complaint,  and the only thing  "that pleases me"  (Mason)  "in the
whole business,  is that Garrick is in a fidget,"  that  "little Colmau,"
not he himself,  brought  "Elfrida"  upon the stage — which he would
have done,  had he thought it would have been agreeable to Mr.  Mason.
"  This would almost lead me to forgive Colman,  was such a man worth
one's forgiveness."

2  "  Cross Purposes,"  a comedy in two acts,  by Obrien,  an actor,  was
first played on the 8th of December.  1772.

184 The Early Diary of  [1773

After all,  his foible is certainly dress,  and love of being
distinguished from the vulgar crew.  I had the pleasure to see
Prior's celebrated fair  "Kitty,  beautiful and young,"  now
called Kitty,  beautiful and old,  in the stage box,  i.e.,  the
Duchess of Queensberry.1

In going back to the coach,  Sir Richard and his sister gave
a polite invitation to supper.  I desired to be set down at
home,  but they all joined in asking me,  and I was too happy
to be anywhere with the Rishtons to refuse.

Mr.  Rishton was in high spirits,  and prodigiously agreeable.
Mrs.  Bettenson,  among her other amiable qualities,  has to an
uncommon degree that of thriftiness,  of which her brother,
though not so apparently,  participates.  I had been told
before,  by Mr.  Rishton,  that whenever she had company she
was always so unlucky as to have just parted with her cook, —
so that I had the utmost difficulty to keep my countenance,
when,  upon my apologizing for my visit,  she said — "  0 dear,
ma'am,  you do me a great deal of honour, — I am only sorry

1 Catherine Hyde,  second daughter of Henry Hyde,  Earl of Clarendon
and Eochester,  a kinsman of Queen Anne,  married the third Duke of
Queensberry in 1720.  Prior made her famous by his poem called  "  The
Female Phaeton."  In it,  she wrings from her mother permission to go
ont in the chariot,  and  "  sets the world on fire."  Prior's first line is
often quoted, —

"  Thus Kitty,  beautiful and young,"

but not so the second,  which was quite as true, —
"  And wild as colt untamed.''

She must have been very beautiful to judge from even a poor portrait
of her,  but she was rather flighty than witty. — When the French Lady
Bolingbroke spoke of her as  "  Sa Singularite,"  Mrs.  Montagu tells us
that the Duchess was silly enough to be  "  in raptures with the"  (sar
castic)  "  appellation."  She courted the Tory wits.  Gay almost lived
with the Duke,  and she tried hard to bring Swift from Ireland to join
him.  She lived to 1777.  Horace Walpole wrote on the 26th of June,
1773 — "  I saw the Duchess of Queensberry last night ;  she was in a new
pink lute-string,  and looked more blooming than the Maccaronesses.
One should sooner take her for a young beauty of an old-fashioned
century than for an antiquated goddess of this age.  I mean by
twilight."  When Fanny saw her it was fifty-two years after the death
of her poet,  Prior.

1773]  Frances Burney.  185

you will not have better fare — but,  indeed,  my cook — and an
excellent one she was, — went away yesterday."

In considering the partial dispensation of riches,   I think
the poor should ever have in remembrance this query  :

"  which is worse,

Want — with a full — or with an empty purse  ?  "

The table was covered with half,  or less than half,  filled
dishes.  I should not,  however,  have mentioned this,  but to
speak of Mr.  Rishton,  whose behaviour was unmerciful.
It is a general custom with him to eat little or no supper —
but he affected a voracious appetite,  and eat as if he had fasted
three days.  I own I had malice enough to enjoy this,  as I
have no pity for grand penury.  Riches and Pride without
Liberality — how odious  !  I touched nothing but an orange  ;
which was not remarked.

Mr.  Rishton raised my admiration by his behaviour to this
pair,  from whom he has reason to expect so much.  Far from
flattering,  he even trims them for their foibles ;  and whenever
they seem to exact any deference,  he treats them most
cavalierly.  He declares to his wife,  that he would not
descend to cringe and court them for the surety of all his
uncle's estate.  If he humbled himself to them,  he is con
vinced they would trample on him.  Such is the insolence of
Wealth.

At twelve o'clock Mr.  Rishton ordered his carriage — and
turning to me,  with a very wicked smile,  said — "  The play
will be over late to-night,  Miss Burney  !  "  However,  I know
that my offence was given in going  ;  my staying did not much
signify.1

1 This seems to refer to the difficulty Fanny had in obtaining the
permission of Mrs.  Buruey to go to the theatre with those offenders
against propriety,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Rishton.  A page,  at the least,  has been
erased before the passage beginning,  "Mr.  and Mrs.  Rishton are in
town."  At the top of it may just be read,  '•  Leave,  however,  I
obtained,  though a dry one."

186 The Early Diary of  [1773

January 25th.

We had yesterday the most heavenly evening  !  Millico,1
the divine Millico was here,  and with him Sigr.  Sacchini,2 and
Sigr.  Celestini,  that sweet violinist,  whom I have often
mentioned.  We had no further party,  which I greatly
rejoiced at,  as we were at full liberty to devote every instant
to these.  Sigr.  Sacchini is a very elegant man and extremely
handsome.  Millico is of a large or rather an immense figure,
and not handsome at all,  at all;  but his countenance is
strongly expressive of sweetness of disposition,  and his con
versation is exceedingly sensible.  He was very much sur
prised at the size of our family.  My father has so young a
look,  that all strangers are astonished to find him such a
Patriarch.  Millico's conversation was partly Italian and partly
French,  and Sacchini' s almost all Italian ;  but they neither of
them speak three words of English.

Hetty being called upon to open the concert,  began a
rondeau in the overture to Sacchini's new opera,  which has
been performed but twice;  but she had been to three re
hearsals,  and has gotten almost half the opera by ear.
Sacchini almost started;  he looked at first in the utmost
perplexity,  as if doubting his own ears,  as the music of 11 Cid
has never been published.3 Millico clapped his hands,  and

1 Millico came to England in the spring of 1772.     Dr.  Burney writes
that he was a  "  judicious performer,  and worthy man,  who was not an
Adonis in person,  and whose voice had received its greatest beauties
from art."     Horace Walpole tells us that Millico sang for the first time
in England on the 21st of April,  1772.

2 Antonio Sacchini,  of Naples,  arrived in England in 1772,  after
having composed for all the great theatres in Italy and Germany,  with
increasing success.    "  In the year 1770,  when I saw Sacchini at Venice,
he told me that he had composed near forty serious and ten comic
operas  ;  and in 1778,  enquiring of him to what number his dramatic
works then amounted,   he said to seventy-eight,  of which he had
forgotten even the names of two.''  ....  "This graceful,  elegant,  and
judicious composer died at Paris in September,  1786,  where he was
honoured with a public funeral." — DR.  BUKNEY.     It may be added that
Sacchini composed the music of  "  a dramatic piece,"  adapted from.
Fanny's novel,  "  Evelina."

"II Cid"  was the first opera by Sacchini ever brought upon the
English stage.     Millico was the chief singer in it.

1773]  Frances Burney.  187

laughed — "Ah!  brava!  brava  !  "  Sacchini then bowed,  and
my father explained the manner of her having got this,
rondeau  ;  at which he seemed much pleased.  When she had
finished her lesson,  my father applied to Millico,  who readily
complied,  and with the utmost good-nature sang his most
favourite air in the new opera,  only accompanied by Sacchini
on the harpsichord.  I have no words to express the delight
which his singing gave me,  more far away than I have ever
received,  even at the Opera;  for his voice is so sweet,  that it
wants no instruments to cover it.  Ho was not,  however,
satisfied with himself;  he complained of his cold  ;  but seeing
us all charmed, — with a sweetness that enchanted me in so
great a performer,  he said,  "  Eh bien,  encore une fois ;  la
voix commence a venir";  and sang it again.  Oh!  how
divinely  !  I am sure he must then satisfy himself,  and he will
never find any other person equally difficult.  For my own
part,  the mere recollection fills me with rapture  ;  my terms are-
strong,  and yet they but weakly express my feelings.

After this,  he made Sacchini himself sing  (though not with
out difficulty),  saying,  "il a une petite voix;  mais il chante
tres bien."  Sacchini with the utmost merit has the truest
modesty;  when he found he could not excuse himself,  he
complied with the most graceful diffidence imaginable.  He
has very little voice,  but great taste.  Millico led the applause
that was given him.  This composer and singer appear to be
most affectionate friends.  They do indeed seem born to make
each other's merit conspicuous.  Millico has read in my
father's countenance,  I suppose,  the excellence of his heart,
for though their acquaintance is of short date,  he reposes great
confidence in him,  insomuch as that he has given him some
manuscript music of his own composition,  which he intends
for his Benefit.  This MS.  is for an Ode which ho has had
written,  expressing his gratitude for his reception in England.
The verses are pretty,  and he has set them with great pro
priety.  He sat down himself to the harpsichord,  and played
and sung his part through, — as the words are English,  he
desired that we would all try,  whether we could understand
them,  which,  to say the truth,  was not very easy.  He made
my father correct the pronunciation.

188 The Early Diary of  [1773

When they moved from the harpsichord,  to draw them back,
Hetty began another air of Millico's in  "  II Cid  " ;  this had
the desired effect.  Millico,  all good-nature,  was prevailed
upon to sing it ;  which he did —

"  in notes so sweet and clear,
The sound still vibrates on my ravished ear."

Admiration can be no new tribute to the merit of this
divine singer ;  yet he two or three times observed our delight
to my father,  and repeated that we had  "  1  'alma harmonica  "
(fie);  and,  on Sacchini's singing an air which was quite
new to us,  but which we were highly pleased with,  he said,
"Elles connaissent la bonne musique  ;  cela les touche a 1'
instant."

I again repeat,  the evening was heavenly !  If any thing on
earth can be so,  'tis surely perfection of vocal music.  Nothing
is more charming than to see great talents without affectation.
My father says,  that there are hardly in all Italy three such
modest men as Millico,  Sacchini,  and Celestini.  They did
whatever was asked of them with the most unaffected good-
humour.  They are wholly free from vanity,  yet seemed as
much to enjoy giving pleasure,  as we did receiving it.

In taking leave,  Millico turned to Hetty,  Susan,  and me,
and bowing,  said,  "  Je viendrai une autre fois,  et nous
passerons la soiree comme ilfaut."

February 13th.

On the above assurance have I lived ever since.  The
voice of Millico seems continually sounding in my ear,  and
harmonizing my soul.  Never have I known pleasure so
exquisite,  so heartfelt,  so divinely penetrating,  as this sweet
singer has given me.  He is ever present in my imagination ;
his singing and his songs are the constant companions of my
recollection.

My father dined last week with this Orfeo ;  he has invited
himself to favour us again soon,  and promised to bring his
harp,  on which he sometimes accompanies himself.  But 01
affection to Millico has occasioned our meeting with

1773]  Frances Barney.  189

very disagreeable accident.  Last Saturday evening mama
suddenly proposed going to the Opera,  II Ci<l,  the fame of
which had excited our curiosity.  Susy and myself joyfully
skipt at the proposal,  and the coach was instantly ordered.
The opera is the sweetest I ever heard,  and Millico sang like
an angel.  We stayed very late to avoid the ci-owd.  When
we went down,  we got with difficulty to oar coach  ;  but,  after
the usual perils and dangers,  we were driven out of the
Haymarket and into Suffolk Street.  Here we concluded we
were safe ;  but,  as we afterwards found,  there had been
left a load of gravel in the street,  which the shade  (being
moonlight)  hid from the coachman.  We found ourselves
suddenly mounted on one side.  Mama,  who is soon
alarmed,  cried out,  "  We are going,  we are going  !  "  I sat
quite quiet,  thinking it a false alarm;  but presently the
coach was entirely overturned,  and we came sideways to the
ground.  Stupefied between surprise and fright,  I fell without
moving a finger,  and lay quite silent.  The glass at my side
was fortunately down,  and the blind up,  which saved my
temples from the pavement ;  but the glass above me broke,
and the pieces fell on my face.  Mama and Susan both
imagined me to be most in danger,  from being undermost,
and my tender Susan called out to me repeatedly,  "  Fanny,
are you hurt  ?  are you very much hurt,  Fanny  ?  my dear
Fanny  ?  "

It was some time,  from an unaccountable effect of fear>
before I could answer ;  but the falling of the glass roused me.
Some people immediately gathered about the carriage,  and
opened the door,  which was now at the top of the coach.
Mama called out,  "  Here's nobody hurt !  "  but desired them
to assist me.  With some difficulty I made a shift to stand
up,  and a gentleman lifted me out of the carriage.  He had
no hat on,  being come out of a neighbouring house.  He
begged me to go with him to his sisters,  who were close by,
that I might get out of the mob,  and promised to take care of
me ;  but I was now terrified for mama and Susan,  and could
not leave the place,  as we were all separated by different
assistants,  I heard the former call out that her arm was
broken !  I quite wrung my hands with horror.  Thia

190 The Early Diary of  [1773

gentleman took hold of me,  and almost used violence to make
me come away.  I remember I called out to him,  as he forced
me on,  that he would drive me distracted  !  He assured me
that the other ladies would be safe ;  but,  as if he had not had
trouble enough with me,  I answered all his civilities with,
•"  But,  go  !  why can't you go and help them  ?  "  However,
he would not leave me,  for which I believe I am very much
obliged to him,  as I was surrounded by a mob,  and as there
were assistants enough about the coach.  When mama and
Susan were taken out,  we accepted this gentleman's offer,
and went into his house,  where we were very hospitably
received by some ladies.  My poor mother had her arm
dreadfully hurt ;  Susan had only sprained two fingers,  to save
herself from falling on us ;  my face was very bloody from two
small cuts I had received on my nose.  We stayed here near
•a quarter of an hour,  and met with the utmost kindness and
•civility.

Mamma declared she would walk home ;  my deliverer
insisted on accompanying us ;  but John assured us that the
•coach was not further injured than by the glasses being
broken,  and that we might very safely go home in it j which
^we accordingly did,  though in much terror.  Mamma has
been confined ever since.  Mr.  Bromfield has examined her
arm  ;  but it is so much swelled,  that it can only be poulticed
at present,  and he has not said whether it has received any
further injury than a most violent sprain.1 I fear it will be a
very tedious affair.  Susan,  thank God  !  is very well ;  and
so am I.

Sunday,  February.

Dr.  Hawkesworth and his lady by appointment dined and
spent the evening here.  I like the Doctor more and more
every time I have the pleasure of seeing him ;  that stiffness
and something resembling pedantry,  which formerly struck
me in him,  upon further acquaintance and more intimacy

1 About that time there were sevei'al surgeons of the name of
Bromfield.  This may have been William Bromfield,  Esq. ;  who,  in
1776,  appears as surgeon to the royal household,  "  with  £150,"  and
senior surgeon to St.  George's Hospital.

1773]  Frances Barney.  191

either wear off or disappear.  He was extremely natural and
agreeable.  His wife is a very well-bred,  obliging,  and sweet-
tempered woman.

We were all of opinion that it was necessary immediately
to wait on the family in Suffolk Street,  to return them thanks
for their assistance;  but mama was obliged to keep her room,
— Susan was engaged,  and therefore on Monday I went,  John
knowing the way to the house.  They appear to be an agree
able family,  consisting of a brother and three sisters.  I felt
very awkward,  when I got into the street,  lest I should be
forgot.  However,  I determined to venture rather than omit
paying thanks so well deserved  ;  but they all immediately
recollected me,  and seemed very glad to hear of our safety.
Their names are Miland.

February 19bh.

My father's German Tour is now in the press,  and he is
hurried and fatigued beyond expression,  for this is a time of
jear when his business is at its height.

We had yesterday, — I know not whether to say pain or
pleasure, — of seeing Mr.  Garrick in the part of Lear.1 He
was exquisitely great;  every idea which I had formed of his
talents,  although I have ever idolized him,  was exceeded.  I
am sorry that this play is acted with Gibber's alterations,  as
every line of his,  is immediately to be distinguished from
Shakespeare ;  who,  with all his imperfections,  is too superior
•to any other dramatic writer,  for them to bear so near a
•comparison;  and to my ears every line of Gibber's is feeble
and paltry.

1 Loetitia Hawkins says that her very unpleasant father,  Sir John,
threatened to punish her,  and her brothers,  when they took her part,
in what he pompously called,  a  "  Triple Alliance ;  "  by taking them all
to see  "King Lear."  Was it as a warning against filial disobedience? —
or to give them  "a good fright "  ?  Miss Hawkins says that Lear made
her ill,  from nerve-distress.  Another threat Sir John once used when
-she had been naughty,  was, — "  Miss — I intend to take you to Dr.
Johnson's this evening."

192 The Ea rly Diary of  [1773

Thursday,  February 25th.

Mr.  Adam and his brother,  two gentlemen whom my sister
and self formerly met with at Captain Debieg's,  had this day
exposed to public sale a large and valuable collection of busts,
statues,  bas-reliefs,  pictures,  &c.,  which they purchased many
years since in Italy.  These gentlemen,  with another of their
brothers,  have,  since our acquaintance with Mrs.  Debieg has
dropt,  built the Adelphi, — so called from the three brothers
being engaged in it.  The undertaking was,  I believe,  too
great for them,  and they have suffered much in their fortunes.
I cannot but wonder,  that so noble and elegant a plan should
fail of encouragement.  I went yesterday morning with my
sister to the view of these things.  I could not but greatly
pity the collector,  who is I fear obliged to part with them.
As I have neither knowledge or judgment in these matters,  I
venture at no further opinion than that to me the sight was a
great regale.1 We saw many of our old friends of the Scotch
party,  but were not known to any,  probably not seen,  as wo
sate very backward,  Hetty wishing to avoid them.  I often
suspect that Mr.  Seton was thunderstruck by Hetty's marriage.

[There is a great gap in Mrs.  Eishton's letters between June,  1772,
and the 22nd of February,  1773,  on which day she writes to Fanny,
regretting her mother's injury,  and the alarm of all who were in the
coach accident.  She writes from  "Alfred's Buildings,"  Bath,  where
she seems to have spent the autumn and winter for the sake of drink
ing the waters.  She had been ill,  indeed she was not so robust as her
high spirits might make us suppose.  As a girl,  she had bad health.
She says that she is much alone,  although Mr.  Eishton was so kind
that  "  there is not a sun that rises that does not make  [her]  more
thankful for being his wife."

The Bishtons were looking forward to living at Stanhoe House,
which belonged to  "Mrs.  'Mun2 Allen"  (the wife of one of Maria's
family),  and Fanny is desired to  "  put no spokes in the wheel of her
own Norfolk journey,"  as Maria hopes to see her at Stanhoe.  "  I hope
not to see Bath of many years.  I am surprised what a change
Matrimony has made in me — and you may remember how we used to-
wonder at Hetty's being so wifish. — I woud not be condemned to

1 Kobert and James Adam had lived eight years in Italy,  France,
and Holland,    [1754-1762].     They had a three days'   sale of their
pictures in February,  1773,  but bought in the greater part of the 218.

2 An East-country shortening of Edmund.

1773]  Frances Burney.  193

settle here if any one coud give me a house ready furnished."  In the
next letter she has suffered from servants,  having been obliged to send
away a butler whom they had hired in London,  as he  "  proved so dirty,
stupid,  and unqualified in every respect."  Maria has even a passing fit
of jealousy ;  thinks her husband cooled towards her,  and prays Fanny's
pity for what she must suffer,  assuring her that she may depend
upon her letters being burned directly.  "  So be free.  I have beeu
vastly disappointed iu not going to Fischer's concert to-night.  I
suppose all Bath will be there,  for it is the last time the eldest Liuley
sings at Bath,  she is engaged for the oratorios' — but Rishton who is
rather more exact about dress than I am,  can't think of my appearing.
B  .  .  .  .  wanted me to buy a suit of miguiouet linnen fringed for
second mourning2 — but my economy prevaild over that,  and as he
was unwilling I should appear else,  I gave up the dear Fischer — see
what a cruel thing to have a sposo who is rather a p — p — y in those sort
of things.  Now don't you think this little anecdote put into proper
hands might make a dismal tale,  such as  'Ah,  poor girl,  she has reason
enough to repent — denied going into company,  left all alone,  husband
flirting with every Miss in his way,'  &c.  tho'  I am afraid I am not
enough in favor to be an object of pity — well all for the best.  Rishton
is gone  "  [to the concert]  "  fischer's hautboy has the same merit with
him the Bagpipes or Jews'  trump might."3]

1 The Oratorios at Covent Garden Theatre in Lent.

2 The delicate little garden-plant   (a woad,)  which in England is
called  "  mignonette,"  is,  in France,  named  "  reseda"  but our name
must have come to us through France,  as a synonym for daintiness in
miniature.     In 1721,  Lady Mary Wortley Montagu asks her sister to
buy  "  some narrow minunet"   (a guinea's worth,)  for the use of the
future Lady Bute,  "  who grows a little woman."     This appears to have
been what ladies used to call  "  edging,"  a fine,  narrow lace for trimming
children's caps and tuckers.     The word  "  mignon,"  and  (its diminutive
of comparison,)   "  mignonnetfe,"  serve as many purposes in France,  as
the much-abused word  "  nice"  in England.     A book is  "  mignon  "  if it
has  "finesse d'esprit,"  a child,  if it is good.     A fine kind of net,  and of
lace was  "  mignonnette"     So was a kind of stuff made of wool and silk,
and a tiny sort of pear;    even a kind of pepper finely ground.     In
French typography there are both  "  rnignonne "  and  "mignonnette"
founts of type.     The suit of linen,  which was too expensive for Maria,
was certainly very fine,  as well as fringed.     The fringe showed that it
was  "  mourning."     "  Fringed,  or plain linen,"  has but lately been left
out of orders in the Gazette for court-mourning.     The fringe was a
substitute for lace-ruffles and  "jabots"  on gentlemen's shirts.

3 For John Christian Fischer,    the hautbois player,   see note 1,
p.  109.

194 The Early Diary of  [1773

[From MR.  CRISP to FRANCES BuRNEY.1]

Dear Fanny,

Though the weak knotty joints of my knuckles are
somewhat tired with writing to your Mamma by this post,  I
cannot forbear forcing them to pay you this short tribute of
acknowledgment for your kind and entertaining letter.  You
are an exceeding good child,  and I shall cherish you accord
ingly.  You have good and grateful sentiments about you ;
in short,  you have good things in you,  and I wish it was in my
power to bring about, — but stop,  my pen  !  you are going
beyond your line  ;  but there are many valuable people in this
wide world of ours,  that for want of rightly understanding one
another,  do not do what Nature seems to have intended they
should do ;  I mean draw close together by mutual attraction.
'Tis pity ;  for the really valuable do not over-abound.  The
esteem you express for sincerity,  shows the world has not
infected you with its contagion ;  but beware of too liberal a
use of it,  my dear Fanny ;  His a dangerous weapon to carry
about one  ;  it is a sword that is very apt to eat into the scabbard
and wound its owner.  At my hour of life  'tis not worth while
to change one's old habits ;  but,  if I were to begin the world
again,  I should certainly carry it very much muffled up.  You
have drawn a very good picture of two brothers,  and strikingly
like I believe  ;  I am sure one is so  ;  and as sure all I have
seen of the other is so.  You with reason set a just value on
your lot

As for sincerity,  Fanny,  such a young untainted,  un
hackneyed mind as your own may naturally enough be struck
with the bright side of it ;  but take the word of an old
sufferer;  it ten times hurts the owner for once it does any

1 The date of this letter is uncertain,  but as it gives in a little space
a very clear notion of Mr.  Crisp's estimate of Fanny,  and of his way of
thinking,  it is not much out of the place where we found it arranged
among these papers,  "  as it gives the note"  to his other letters.  Mr.
Crisp uses the term  "  sincerity  "  (as many others have done,  and do),
without precision,  as if it were the reverse of discretion in speech.  It
is against too great openness that he is warning Fanny,  as the last
sentence proves.

1773]  Frances Burney.  195

good to the hearer  ;  whom you are to thank and be highly
obliged to,  if he does not from that moment become your
enemy.  Whenever,  therefore,  you have heated your imagi
nation with these glowing,  generous,  great sentiments,  let me
recommend to you by way of a cooler,  to reflect on the follow
ing lines in the mouth of a more wary character —

"  What !   shall I wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at  ?  "

March.

My father's German Tour will be published next week;
Heaven grant it as favourable a reception as the Italian one ;
he is extremely anxious and diffident beyond any author that
ever,  I believe,  existed.  He has shut himself up entirely
from all  -who know him,  but his own family.  Dr.  Armstrong,
among others,  has called fifty times unsuccessfully,  though he
has always the gallantry to say,  that he wants nobody,  when
he sees us.  I had the pleasure of a long tete a tete with him
last Monday.  He asked me what I conjectured to be the
prime cost of the most capital picture in Mr.  Strangers last
sale  ?  It is a landscape by Nicholas Poussin,  and was pur
chased by Sir Watkin Wynn,  at the sum of six hundred and
fifty pounds.  I told him that I could not possibly guess  ;  but
I supposed it to be much less than was then given for it.
"But I can tell you exactly/'  said he,  " for I have it from a
gentleman,  who was well acquainted with the transaction  :  the
prime cost was seven pounds,  odd shillings  !  and for that sum
Poussin sold it !  What Mr.  Strange might purchase it for at
Paris,  I cannot say."  How very hard that the man by whose
labour and talents this fine landscape was produced should
have worked so much for the advantage of others,  and so little
for his own  ! l

"  'Tis not long after

But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at." — Othello,  L,  sc.  1.

a Horace  "Walpole sneers at this picture as having been dearly bought,
but hear Mr.  Denuistouu  : — "  Sir Robert Strange has long enjoyed an

196 The Early Diary of  [1773

Dr.  Armstrong told me of some particulars in the will of
the famous Lord Chesterfield,  who is just dead.  "  He has
given,"  said he,  "  some very excellent advice to Mr.  Stanhope,
his heir,  admonishing him never to indulge himself in the
pernicious practice of gaming,  and he has taken some pretty
effectual measures towards securing his advice from being
forgot,  as he has added a clause to it that,  if ever he loses
£100 by gaming,  he is to forfeit  £5,000.  In another article
he has represented the ill consequences of horse-racing,
earnestly begging him not to give in to that diversion ;  and
to this salutary counsel he has annexed a small clause that,  if k
ever Mr.  Stanhope is seen upon Newmarket Heath,  he is
immediately to forfeit 5,000 pounds  !  and these forfeited sums
are all to be given in charity by the Dean and Chapter of
Canterbury."  I fancy it would be of great service if this
will should prove a model for future ones.1 It was but last
week that this nobleman purchased two of the capital pictures
of Mr.  Strangers collection,  though he was then so much con
fined,  that he was obliged to have them carried to his own

European reputation  ;  yet the excellence of his works is no adequate
index of his merit.  .  .  .  From his native Orkney to the Land's End,
his engravings brought within reach of all men the best works of great
painters.  .  .  .  These engravings,  offered at the same price as the trash
which preceded them in the market,  gradually obtained a large circula
tion,  and became the first important step towards a general amelioration
of the English'  taste in the fine Arts.  ...  He boldly ventured the
moderate capital at his disposal in importing a superior class of pictures
for the home-market ;  and,  by descriptive catalogues of these and his
own works,  he did much to instruct the public."

1 This is inexact.  As given by Lord Mahon,  the will runs thus  : —
"  In case my godson,  Philip Stanhope,  shall at any time hereinafter
keep,  or be concerned in the keeping,  of any race-horses or pack of
hounds,  or reside one night at Newmarket,  that infamous seminary of
iniquity and ill-manners,  during the course of the races there ;  or shall
resort to the said races,  or shall lose in any one day,  at any game or
bet whatsoever,  the sum of  £500 ;  then,  in any of the cases aforesaid,
it is my express wish that he,  my said godson,  shall forfeit and pay out
of my estate the sum of  £5,000,  to and for the use of the Dean and
Chapter of Westminster."  The sting is at the end.  Lord Chesterfield
thought that the Chapter of Westminster had made him pay very highly
for the site of Chesterfield House,  so he said that he would make the
fine payable to a body which would be sure to exact it.

1773]  Frances Burney.  197

room,  to examine  :  an evident proof that he retained not only
his senses,  but his love of the arts,  to his last moments.1

I have likewise had the honour of two  (short)  conversations
with Mr.  Baretti ;  he called with a letter from Dr.  Marsili,  a
physician of Padua,  who desired him to send my father's
Italian Tour to him,  which he was very impatient to see,
as he was my father's Ciceroni at Padua.2 Mr.  Baretti
appears to be very facetious  ;  he amused himself very much
with Charlotte,  whom he calls Churlotte,  and kisses whether
she will or no,  always calmly saying,  "  Kiss a me,  Churlotte."
He asked if she had read  "  Robinson Crusoe "  ?  Charlotte
coloured and said,  "Yes,  sir/'  "And pray,  how many years
vas he on de uninhabited island  ?  "  "  Oh,  sir ;  I can't tell
that !  "  "  Vat  /  don't you remember vat you read  ?  den,  my
pretty Churlotte,  you might spare your eye-sight.  But can
you remember vat was de name of Robinson Crusoe's island  ?  "
"  Oh  !  sir,  no,  that I can't,  indeed  !  "  "  And could you read
all dat book,  and not find out,  dat it has no name at all  ?  "
He enquired of me very particularly how my sister  "  [Hetty]  "
did,  whom he had seen as a child.3

1 Horace Walpole writes to the Countess of Ossory on March the
llth,  1773  : — "  My Lord Chesterfield bought a  '  Claude  '  the other day
for fonr hundred guineas,  and a  '  Madame de la Valliere  '  four."  And
again to Sir Horace Mann on the 12th of March,  1773 : — "  You tell me
how dear you pay at your theatres.  I will tell you how cheap we buy
pictures.  Sir Watkin Williams Wynn gave six hundred and fifty
pounds last week for a landscape of Nicolo Poussin  ;  and Lord Chester
field four hundred guineas for another,  which somebody was so good as
to paint a few months ago for Claude Lorraine.  Books,  prints,  coins,
do not lose their rank in proportion.  I am every day tempted to make
an auction."  Lord Chesterfield died on the 24th of March,  1773.

8  "  Dr.  Marsili,  the worthy professor of botany in the University of
Fadua.  to whose friendly offices,  during my stay at Padua,  I have in
numerable obligations." — Dr.  Burney '«  First Tour.  Dr.  Marsili had been
in England in 1757,  when Dr.  Johnson gave him letters to Dr.  Huddes-
ford and to Thomas Warton,  Professor of Poetry at Oxford,  describing
him as  "  a learned gentleman,  and good Latin poet,"  whom he should
be glad to have shown anything in Oxford.  Marsili was also a friend
of Gar rick.

3 This  "  kiss-a-me "  was remembered.  Charlotte is found in the
Burney Papers as  "  ChiirJot,"  and as  "  Mrs.  Barett-i."  She was,  also,
Garrick's own  "  Reynold? t Comedy,"  (compare Goldsmith's  "  Little

198 The Early Diary of  [1773

Dr.  Hawkesworth supped with us very lately,  and was
extremely sociable and agreeable  ;  yet he always seems rather
to be reading than speaking;  his language is so remarkably
elegant and flowing.  I.  could not but imagine,  that he was
reciting one of his own  "  Adventurers/'  in an account he gave
of a school-boy's holiday.  I will endeavour to recollect it :
"  His sleep/'  said he,  "  the night before is broken and dis
turbed  ;  his anticipation of pleasure is too lively to let him
rest ;  yet he wakes,  delighted that the happy day is come.  If
it is in his power,  he lies in bed,  till he is ashamed of leaving

Comedy's Face"}  and his own  "  Piety in Pattens."  Her  "  cherubinical
face"  and her liveliness lasted long.  When she was sixty,  Fanny
describes her as  "  looking quite young and pretty."  An amusing
letter is also extant in which Hetty rallies Charlotte upon being the
reigning toast of Brighton at a time when Charlotte had been twice a
widow,  and was a grandmother.  This we are kindly told by one of
Charlotte's descendants.  Guiseppe Baretti,  a native of Turin,  had
been brought to England by Lord Charlemont,  in 1753.  He wrote
vigorous English,  and was an able man,  with a bad temper.  He kept
the best company in London,  that of Johnson,  Burke,  Eeynolds,  and
Goldsmith.  He boasted that he had friends,  both in town arid country,
with whom he could,  at any time,  spend a month.  Off and on,  he lived
some years with the Thrales.  Yet he quarrelled with almost all his
friends,  even with Dr.  Johnson,  who had known him from 1754.  He
sparred with Mrs.  Thrale,  while giving lessons in her house,  and was
thus excused by Johnson, — "  Poor Baretti,  do not quarrel with him,
...  he means only to be frank,  manly,  and independent.  ...  To be
frank,  he thinks is to be cynical,  and to be independent,  is to be rude.
Forgive him,  dearest lady,  the rather,  because of his misbehaviour,  I
am afraid,  he learned part from me."  When Mrs.  Thrale married
Piozzi,  Baretti reviled her in the  "  European Magazine."  Her marriage
seems to have provoked him the more as he had ridiculed the notice
taken of Italian singers in England in his answer to Mr.  Sharp.
Boswell and he so detested each other that when Baretti met Boswell
at the Thrales,  Boswell did not rise on seeing Baretti ;  and when
Baretti descried Boswell,  he  "grinned a perturbed glance."  The Irish
Dr.  Campbell makes him  "  grin this glance,"  and was told by Mrs.
Thrale,  and by Arthur Murphy,  that Boswell had wished Baretti
might be hanged for that stab in the Hay -Market.  Baretti one
BO provoked a beautifnl and lively American,  Mrs.  Paradise,  that she
turned the boiling-water of her tea-urn upon him.  He returned
Italy,  but found that he could not enjoy it after the nearly thirty years
of absence,  and came back to London to be among the friends he
made, — some of whom he kept until death.

1773]  Frances Eurney.  1(J9

it,  and at last rises ashamed of being ashamed.  The remain
ing part of the morning he passes in considering what to do ;
but every plan that occurs,  appears unworthy employing so
precious a day.  At length,  evening comes,  and his recollec
tion then tells him a thousand things which he might have
done ;  he spends the rest of the night in regretting that he
wasted the day ;  and at last goes to bed disgusted,  wearied,
and disappointed."  This description,  however,  belongs rather
to young men than to boys,  whose childish or boisterous
amusements present themselves with the light.

******

[April.]
We went,  Susan and I,  to a very fine concert lately for

Mr.  Fischar's  (the celebrated Hautbois)  benefit.1 But can I

speak of music,  and not mention Miss Linley  ?     The town has

rung of no other name this month.

Miss Linley is daughter to a musician of Bath,  a very sour,

ill-bred,  severe,  and selfish man.2 She is believed to be very

1 John Christian Fischer was born at Friburg.    He came to London,
and married a daughter of our great painter,  Gainsborough.    He was a
celebrated player on the haut-bois.     In his  "  History of Music,"  Dr.
Barney writes of the  "admirable"  Fischer,  that  "he composed for
himsslf,  and in a style so new and fanciful,  that in point of invention,
as well as tone,  taste,  expression,  and neatness of execution,  his piece
was always regarded as one of the highest treats of the night."     He
was much in favour with George III.,  to whom he bequeathed his
music.     He died in 1800,  being seized with a fit while playing before
Queen Charlotte.

2 Dr.  Burney says of Linley,  his brother doctor of music,  that  "  he
was a studious man,  equally versed in theory and practice.     Having a
large family,  he pointed his studies to singing,  and became the first
master of his day.     He was a masterly player on the harpsichord,  and
a good composer."     His children were  "  a nest of nightingales."     He
had to feed so many,  as well as to train their voices,  that he made them
all sing in public,  "  even to the seven year olds."     Linley had refused
the offers of both Garrick and Colman to engage his daughter Eliza as
a singer.     "  I think"  (he wrote)  "  as she has acquired a reputation,  I
ought to have the advantage of her first performing in London myself.

...  I do not relish giving the prime of my daughter's performances

to support the schemes of others Still,  I would take two

hundred guineas and a clear benefit,  with choice of oratorios I

shall never lay myself at the mercy of my children,  especially when
their power of being of service to me depends so entirely upon chance."

200 The Early Diary of  .    [i?73

romantic ;  she has long been very celebrated for her singing,
though never,  till within this month,  has she been in London.
She has met with a great variety of adventures,  and has had
more lovers and admirers than any nymph of these times.
She has been addressed by men of all ranks.  I dare not
pretend to say,  honourably,  which is doubtful;  but what is
certain is,  that whatever were their designs,  she has rejected
them all.  She has long been attached to a Mr.  Sheridan,  a
young man of great talents,  and very well spoken of,  whom it
is expected she will speedily marry.1 She has performed this

When she was only fourteen,  Linley was blamed for making Eliza
sing too much and too often.  He bound her to himself as an appren
tice,  and insisted upon her working out her time.  He knew no better,
and was heart-broken when he found himself outlive five of his grown
up-children.

Miss Linley's charms must have been very great.  J.  T.  Smith
tells us of the miniature painter,  Ozias Humphry  (born 1742),  that
"  having a wish to try his fortune at Bath,  he went thither in 1762,  and
took lodgings with Linley,  the musician,  whose lovely daughter,  Eliza
Anne,  ....  was then in her ninth year.  She knew all the songs
in  '  Thomas and Sally,'  '  The Beggar's Opera,'  '  The Chaplet,'  and
'  Love in a Village ' ;  and these she would sing so sweetly,  that many
a day,  at the young painter's solicitation,  she chanted them,  seated at
the foot of his easel,  looking up to him,  unconscious of her heavenly
features  :  with such features and such looks,  as prevailed on the motley
visitors of Bath,  when she so gracefully held up her little basket,  with
her father's benefit-tickets,  at the door,  as they passed in and out of the
Pump-Boom."

1 This beautiful girl had,  it is said,  been married to  "a Mr.  Sheridan"
about a year before Fanny saw her  ;  but without the knowledge of his
father,  or her own.  At the end of March,  1772,  Sheridan escorted
her to France,  to withdraw her from the disgraceful attentions of a
married man,  with whom Sheridan,  in the end,  fought two duels,  and
very nearly three.  She had persuaded herself that she was going to
take shelter in a nunnery from admirers,  many of whom were more
honourable than Captain Matthews,  and none less so.  Sheridan
induced her to marry him by the way,  somewhere near Calais,  quite
in Maria Allen's style.  Her father pursued her to Lille,  and took her
home to fulfil the musical engagements which he had made for her.
In fact,  she was a runaway apprentice.  Though he found Sheridan
at Lille,  he does not seem to have suspected the marriage of a youth-
just of age,  and a girl under it by two years at least,  if not three.  He
took Sheridan back in the same chaise with his daughter,  but forbade
them afterwards to meet.  Still Sheridan contrived to see her by some
times disguising himself as a hackney-coachman,  and driving her

1773]  Frances Barney.  20 L

Lent at the Oratorio of Drury Lane,  under Mr.  Stanley's
direction.  The applause and admiration she has met with,
can only be compared to what is given Mr.  Garrick.  The
whole town seems distracted about her.  Every other diversion
is forsaken.  Miss Linley alone engrosses all eyes,  ears,

home from the theatre.  This is T.  Moore's account,  given him by
Sheridan's family.  It is very improbable,  and there is great doubt
whether there was anything more than a flight from Bath until the
13th of April,  1773,  (according to Sylvanus Urban,)  "  Mr.  Sheridan
of the Middle Temple,"  (which he had only entered three weeks before
as a law-student,)  was married publicly to  "  the celebrated Miss Linley,"
after which she never again sang for pay,  and sometimes not even to
give pleasure.  There is a story that Sheridan refused to let her sing
to the Prince of Wales.  Sheridan's  "  triumph,"  says Moore,  "  was the
first that even rivals knew of his love."  Even his own brother,  even his
best friend,  Halhed,  who had loved Miss Linley before Sheridan seems
to have seen her,  and who confided in him,  were kept in the dark.
Halhed,  who had been his school -friend at Harrow,  sailed to India on
hearing of his success.  She was more than musical and lovely.  She
was his right hand,  and perhaps worked harder for him than she had
done for her father.  As manager of a theatre she helped him by keep
ing the account of the weekly receipts,  by reading the plays sent to
him,  suggesting changes in them,  and in fact acting as a copying
clerk.  She was his secretary when he was a member of the House of
Commons.  She set his verses to music,  and sang them to her harp.
She herself wrote good,  unaffected letters,  and very fair verses.  Yet
he wore out all this love.  Susan Burney has left an amusing account
in her unpublished journal,  which belongs to a later period than these
diaries,  of how Sheridan provoked the delightful singer Pacchierotti by
his facile excuses,  and broken appointments,  and above all by not paying
his salary,  to write him a grotesque letter to tell him that  "  Pacchierotti
was very displeas'd to be obliged to call him rascal."  The letter ended
with a sketch of Sheridan dangling from a gallows.  Susan stopped its
being sent.  As Susan Burney was,  in the words of Pacchierrotti,  "  capable
de juger en professeur,"  we give,  from her diary,  a few lines of comparison
between the singing of Miss Harrop and of Mrs.  Sheridan,  written some
years later than this diary  : — "Miss Harrop's manner some times  [was]
very good — much more Italian than Mrs.  Sheridan's ever was when I
heard her.  But every now and then things eecaped her that were really
vulgar,  in her recitative particularly,  and a howl and bad manner of taking
her notes,  which Mrs.  S.  was always free from.  She was never vulgar,
tho'  without the soul or refinements of a great Italian singer."

Miss Linley' s sister Mary,  whom Fanny saw with her,  married Richard
Tickell,  a wit,  who was a grandson of Addison's friend,  Tickell.  The
late J.  A.  Roebuck,  M.P.,  was grandson of Richard and Mary Tickell.

202 The Early Diary of  [1773

hearts.  At Mrs.  Stanley's invitation,  mama,  Susan,  and
myself sat in her box at Alexander Balus,  to see and hear this
Syren.1 Her voice is soft,  sweet,  clear,  and affecting.  She
sings with good expression,  and has great fancy and even
taste in her cadences,  though perhaps a finished singer would
give less way to the former,  and prefer few and select notes.
She has an exceeding good shake,  and the best and most
critical judges,  all pronounce her to be infinitely superior to all
other English singers.  The Town in general give her the
preference to any other.  To me her singing was extremely
pleasing.  Perhaps,  except the divine Millico,  I would rather
hear her  (if I also saw her  !)  than any other.

As Mrs.  Stanley's box is very high,  and I am very near
sighted,  I could only perceive that Miss Linley's figure was
extremely genteel,  and the form of her face very elegant.  I
had heard from Miss Kinnaird,  who is acquainted with Mrs.
Stanley,  that she always went into the green-room after the
oratorio,  and I determined to make interest for the same
favour,  as it had been granted to Miss Kinnaird.2 I had
immediate success.  As soon as the performance was over,
we all went into that famous apartment,  which I was surprised
to see,  was lined with red  !  There was not a creature there ;
but at my request Miss Arland,  Mrs.  Stanley's sister,3 went

1 Alexander Balus,  an oratorio by Handel,  1748.

2 Fanny writes to Susan,  in June,  1779 :— "  I find by the papers
that Miss Kinnaird is married to a Mr.  Wiggan."     [Miss Kinnaird
was a daughter of the sixth Baron Kinnaird.     Her husband's name is
given in peerages as Wiggins,  or Wiggens.]     "  I hope,  therefore,  she
is settled in England,  and that I may see her again.     I quite long to
know if she has met with a man at all deserving of her.     I never had
so much affection for a short acquaintance in my life as for this sweet
girl.     Ah,  how does the word affection joined to sweet girl,  remind me
of our dear Barsanti !     I hope you sent my letter,  and if you wished it,
added some lines of your own.     I am not sorry now that I never saw
Mr.  Lister,  since I could see him no more,  but pray,  my dear love,  if
any answer comes from poor Jenny,  let it be instantly sent me."    This
passage,  (hitherto unpublished,)  shows that Fanny,  then in full fame,
had a heart very retentive of old friends.     Jenny Barsanti had just lost
her first husband,  whom George Colman the younger calls Lesley.

3 John Stanley,  who was born in 1713,  and lost his sight at two
years of age,  was at eleven,  organist of All Hallows,  Bread Street ;  at

1773]  Frances Burney.

into another room,  and asked Miss Linley and her sister to
favour us with her company.  The rest of the family,  viz.  :
father,  mother,  and brother were already in the red green room.
Had I been for my sins born of the male race,  I should
certainly have added one more to Miss Linley's train.  She is
really beautiful ;  her complexion a clear, lovely, animated brown,
with a blooming colour on her cheeks;  her nose,  that most
elegant of shapes,  Grecian ;  fine luxurious,  easy-sitting hair,  a
charming forehead,  pretty mouth,  and most bewitching eyes.
With all this her carriage is modest and unassuming,  and
her countenance indicates diffidence,  and a strong desire of
pleasing, — a desire in which she can never be disappointed.
I most sincerely and earnestly wish her well,  safely,  and
happily settled.  I think that so young a woman,  gifted with
such enchanting talents,  and surrounded by so many admirers,
who can preserve herself unconscious of her charms and diffi
dent of her powers,  has merit that entitles her to the strongest
approbation,  and I hope,  to the greatest happiness  : — a union
from affection with a man who deserves her  !

[In No.  38,  which is dated  "  Tingmonth,  April ye 25th,"  Maria tells
Fauny that she never made so pleasant a journey in her life as in the

thirteen,  chosen out of nearly twenty candidates to be organist of
St.  Andrew's,  Holboru.  This,  with an appointment as one of the
organists of the Inner Temple,  he kept until his death — in 1786.  He
played the first violin,  was a composer of music,  an excellent whist-
player,  and a most pleasant companion.  In 1779,  he succeeded Dr.
Boyce as master of the King's Band.  He married a Miss Arland,  or
Arlond.  Her sister,  who is here named by Fauny,  had refused to
marry Sir John Hawkins.  The Stanleys are  (among many others),  ill-
spoken of by Miss Hawkins,  who,  although she complains a little of
her father,  was dutiful enough to continue,  as well as to chronicle most
of his resentments.  Dr.  Burney says that  "  about 1730,  whenever
there was a charity sermon,  or a new organ to be opened,  the young
blind Stanley seems to have been preferred"  (as organist)  "to all
others."  The divine,  who is known to readers of Mr.  Napier's Boswell's
Johnson,  as  "the Irish Dr.  Campbell,"  met Stanley in 1775,  and says
that he was comely for a blind man.  He sat down to cards after tea,
and played with as much ease and quickness as any man I ever saw."
The cards were pricked for him with a pin,  by his wife's sister  ;  but so
well were they done,  that Dr.  Campbell  "could not make out the key
whereby he marked them."  If Miss Arlaud onca played an oratorio
through to him,  he was aMe to conduct it in public.

204 Tlie Early Diary of  [1773

three days spent in going from Froome to Exeter,  driving with her
husband in the  "  whiskey,"  her maid and the baggage being in the
chaise.  "  Tiugmouth  "  (a spelling of the name which Fanny copied
from Maria and always retained)  "  surpasses everything her imagina
tion had formed of the most beautiful  ;"  she goes on to say that : —

"  You see nothing here but women in the summer — their husbands
all go out to the Newfoundland fishery for 8 or 9 months in the  [year]
so the women do all the laborious business such as rowing and towing
the boats and go out a fishing yet I never saw cleaner Cottages nor
healthier finer Children — the Women are in general Handsome none
plain tho'  tall and Strapping owing their robust work — Their husbands
come home about november or december — consequently the winter is
their time for Mirth and Jollity.  They are very poor,  yet no signs of
poverty appear,  nor have I seen a beggar since I came — I will now
litterally describe our dwelling — the owner is a captain of a ship,  such
as Molly  '  StancliSVs father,  not at all in a higher style — they have
one of the very neatest Thatchd Cottages you ever saw — we have it
almost all that is a little parlour not much bigger than the 3rd Room
in Queen's Square — the furniture a very elegant set Beavfet painted
blue — and Open — filled with Curious odd bits of China glass flowers
etc.  that the Captain has pick'd up during his Voyages — a very fine
picture of our Saviour on the Cross — supposed to be a Raphael — and
a Magdalen by Corregio — with a vast many curious prints cut out of
Common Prayer-book and I am afraid the old Family Bible is a Loser
— the window with very pretty flower in pots — and a Most delightful
Mirtle hedge as thick as any common one in a very little Spot of
Garden before the house — we have behind our parlour a Scullery con
verted into a Kitchen over this is two very neat Bedchambers with
nice Clean Linen Beds — in short this Cottage woud make a very great
figure in Miss Minifies1 2 hands and very much resembles the retreat of
some heroine — the front of our house looks on a fine green not a
quarter of a Mile from the Ocean we have a fine view of a Cliff that
resembles that Shakespear describes at dover — We don't know half the
beauties of the place yet we have rode out once — thro'  such Lanes that
open every now and then to the Sea.  There is delightful fishing here
for Whiting Mackerel young Salmon etc. — we shall often go out and
take our dinners with us — the people are so Simple and happy — I am
quite Charmed with them,  here is one of the finest beaches for Bathing
you ever saw.  We have a brace of beautiful Spaniels and a remarkable
fine pomeranian dog R gave a great deal of money for at Bath to please
me — we have great diversion with them they all take the water and
are our Constant Companions — we intend getting a very large New
foundland dog before we leave this place."

1 Molly was Mrs.  Rishton's maid.

2 The Misses Minifie,  of Fairwater,  Somersetshire,  were novel writers
of that day.     One of them married General Gunning,  brother of the
beauties,  Lady Coventry and the Duchess of Hamilton.

1773]  Frances Barney.  205

What is given of this letter is literally transcribed,  with Maria's
characteristic omission of little words,  and her little dashes to make up
for the absence of stops.  After her signature Maria writes her address  :
"  at Capt.  Whitbourue's,  Tingmouth,  near Exou,  Devon."]

Sunday,  May 3rd.

I have a thousand things to write,  too many to observe
method,  and therefore I shall commit them as they occur.

Premlerement, — We have had from the Cape of Good Hope
the welcome news of my brother's promotion,  Lieutenant
Shanks,  a young man who was on board the Adventure,  one
of the three sloops under Captain Cooke,  was so ill,  that
he was obliged to leave the ship,  and return to England,
"in whose place,"  says the Captain's letter to Lord Sandwich,
"  I have appointed Mr.  Burney,  whom I have found very
deserving."  This is most comfortable intelligence and
rejoices us unspeakably ;  he will be a lieutenant of three
years'  standing by his return.  He has written to us in very
good spirits,  and assures us that the Cape of Good Hope is a
very agreeable place  !

Mr.  and Mrs.  Rishton are turned absolute hermits for this
summer,  they have left Bath,  and are gone to Tingmouth in
Devonshire where they have taken a cottage rather than a
house.  The country she says is beautiful.  They are however
only to remain there till Stanhoe House which they have
taken for 7 years is ready for them — I hear very often from
Mrs.  Rishton,  whose friendship,  affection,  and confidence,
will,  I believe,  end only with our lives.

My father's German tour has been published this week ;  in
it are inserted proposals for publishing by subscription hia
History of Music.  If he has not 500 subscribers by next Christ
mas,  he declares he will not publish it at all.1 I will at least

1 A gentleman,  who did not wish his name to be made known to
Dr.  Burney,  proposed to him,  through two eminent city merchants,
that he should not drop his work in case the 500 copies were not sub
scribed for by Christmas,  but go on under his guarantee to take every
copy that was left on hand.  Dr.  Burney thanked him heartily,  but
preferred letting things take their natural course.  He proved right,  as
the subscription-list was quickly and freely filled ;  but the generous
offer of a man whose name he never knew,  kept alive in him his warm

206 The Early Diary of  [17 73

hope,  that the German tour will not disgrace its brother of
Italy.  Mr.  Garrick writes that  "nothing can be more pleasing
to his friends or more agreeable to the public ;  and that it is
•clear,  interesting,  instructive,  and delightful."  My father
has made a prodigious quantity of presents of this book,  viz. ;
to Messrs.  Garrick,  Colman,  Woide,1 Baretti,  Strange,  Hayes,
Crisp,  Edwards/2 Young;  to Doctors Shepherd,3 Hunter,4
Armstrong,  Hawkesworth ;  to Mr.  Fischar,5 to Lord Sand
wich,  and to Mr.  Burney.

Captain Brydone,  whom Mr.  Beckford brought to one of
our concerts,  has just published,  "  A Tour to the Islands of
Sicily and Malta,  in letters to William Beckford,  Esq.,  from
P.  Brydone,  F.R.  S."  I have received very great entertain
ment from this book ;  it is written in an easy,  natural,  and
lively style,  and is full of anecdotes,  observations,  and descrip
tions,  and in many places is very philosophical.  It discovers
throughout a liveliness of imagination,  an insatiate curiosity
after knowledge,  and the most vehement desire of instruction.
I very much wish,  that the author may continue his acquain
tance with my father;  for I am sure he must be very
agreeable.6

love for the City of London,  in which,  from boyhood,  he had been
•shown great kindness.

1 The learned Dr.  Woide,  of the British Museum,  reader and chaplain
at the Dutch Chapel in the Savoy.

2 This may have been Dr.  Johnson's friend,  Dr.  Edwards,  of Jesus
College,  Oxford,  "  my convivial friend,"  whose loss Johnson laments
in 1784.     Although Dr.  Johnson does not appear to have given Dr.
Burney a letter asking the help of Dr.  Edwards for the Welsh part of
the History of Music until 1778,  Dr.  Burney may have met Dr.  Edwards
at Oxford when he took his musical degree in 1769.

3 Dr.  Anthony Shepherd,  Fellow and tutor of Christ's College,  and
Plumian Professor in the University of Cambridge.

*  There were several doctors of the name of Hunter living in London
at that time.  One of them had attended Dr.  Burney's first wife in her
sudden and fatal illness.  As the famous anatomist,  John Hunter,  is
commonly called Dr.  Hunter in books of that time,  it may have been
himself ;  if not,  it was probably Dr.  William Hunter,  a man of some
distinction.

5 John Christian Fischer,  who is before named.

Patrick Brydone,  a Berwickshire gentleman,  published this very
lively book in 1773.

1773]  Frances Burney.  207

Dr.  Goldsmith has just brought on the stage a new comedy,
called,  "  She stoops to Conquer."  We went to it with Mr.
and Mrs.  Young  ;  it is very laughable and comic ;  but I know
not how it is,  almost all diversions are insipid at present to
me,  except the opera

Miss Linley is married to Mr.  Sheridan.  She has entirely
given up singing in public,  and I am very glad to find that
the Queen has taken her under her protection,  as private
singer to Her Majesty,  and allows to her a salary of  £600 per
ann.1 I hope this double settlement will ensure her peace for
life,  though heaven knows how many hearts it may break  !

My father came home between four and five,  all kindness
and indulgence,  he asked if we should like to go to the Opera  ?
Mama declined it ;  but Susan and I were quite in rapture.  To
the pleasure of hearing such sweet music, — it was Tamerlano,
— was added the interest we took in its success on account of
the composer.  We called upon my sister,  who was delighted
at joining us.

Mr.  Harris of Salisbury,  famous for his Treatises on Music,
Happiness,  &c.,  sat just before us at the Opera,  and was
introduced by Mr.  Batt,  a gentleman with him,  to my father.
I found he was an enthusiast for Sacchini,  whose music my
father and himself seemed endeavouring which should praise
most.  "  Such ingenious accompaniments,  so much taste,
such an inexhaustible variety,  &c/'  Mr.  Harris also men
tioned that he was acquainted and consequently charmed with

the man as well as the musician I have not heard

any Opera that has given me equal pleasure,  except II Cid.2

1 This seems to have been what Dr.  Johnson called  "  a wandering
lie ; "  or,  speaking more politely,  a mere idle rumour.

*  James Harris,  of Salisbury,  nephew of that Earl of Shaftesbury
who wrote  "  the Characteristics,"  and father of the first Lord Malmes-
bury,  is ranked as a writer upon music in a list given by Dr.  Burney in
his  "  History of Music."  He published the book referred to  "  On Art,
Music,  and Happiness,"  1744.  Mr.  Harris was,  also,  a composer of
music.  At Gloucester-music-meeting in 1776,  "  the pastoral of
Daphnis and Amaryllis,  written by the learned James Harris,  Esquire,
and first produced at Drury Lane in 1762,  for the purpose of bringing
his protege,  young Norris,  on the stage,"  was performed.  "  The airs
were admirably adapted by its author,  who was a great proficient in

208 The Early Diary of  [1773

Now for our Concert, — Sacchini and Millico came early.
Sncchini was in apparent high spirits,  and had an animation
in his countenance,  that I had thought was foreign to it,  as
he has hitherto appeared too mild and gentle to be even
lively,  which however could merely have been owing to his
bad health,  or else his inquietude about his operas ;  for this
evening he was all spirit.  He was seated next to mama, —
who,  when he found it in vain to address in French or Italian,
he said in a very droll voice,  "  Eh bien ! — I most speak
Engelise ; "  then bowing to her,  "  How do you do,  Madam  ?
very well  ?  "  This little attempt included,  I believe,  almost
all his English learning.

My father then told Sacchini how much he had been
charmed with Tamerlano*  which he had heard the night before.
Signer Sacchini receives compliments with the graceful
modesty of a man by nature diffident,  yet by custom inured
to them.  Millico pursued the conversation concerning the
opera,  and very drolly going to the harpsichord,  played a
passage in one of the choruses,  and mimicked a most terrible
man,  who in spite of all the instruction he has had,  always
ruins it.  This chorus is exceeding spirited,  and though very
indifferently performed,  has a very fine effect,  and is very
much admired.  "  It shows the composer,"  said my father,  in
Italian  ;  "  notwithstanding his mildness and sweetness,  he
breaks out,  now and then,  with all the Neapolitan fire  :  he is
a Vesuvius at times  ! "

Mrs.  and the Miss Ellerkers now entered;2 the mother is a

that science,  to the music of Pergolesi,  Handel,  Jomelli,  &c."  "  Master
Norris"  had been a chorister of Salisbury Cathedral.  He sang in
Doctor Burney's exercise for his musical degrees at Oxford in 1769.
Mr.  Batt was a  "  Commissioner of Bankrupts."

1 Tamerlano,  an opera by Sacchini,  was brought out in May,  1773,
with Millico as chief singer.

2 Eaton Maiuwaring Ellerker,  Esq.,  of Eisby Park,  in Yorkshire,
left three co-heiresses.     These young ladies were,  the eldest,  Arabella,
who married the second Earl Onslow,    and the second daughter,
Charlotte,  who married George Ferrars Townshend  (in right of his
deceased mother,  Baron de Ferrars of Chartley and Baron Compton) ;
he was afterwards the second Marquis Townshend.      On the 4th of
November,  1782,  Fanny,  "  with all our house,"  (that is,  with the Thrales
and Dr.  Johnson)   "met Lady de Ferrars,  whom you"    (her sister

1773]  Frances Burney.  209

slow,  dawdling,  sleepy kind of dame ;  the daughters are ac
complished,  and anxious for distinction,  and good and well-
principled  ;  but very stiff and affected.  I like them,  never
theless,  for their real enthusiasm for Millico and Sacchini.
There is always soul with enthusiasm,  though not always

sense Miss Ellerker now led the way to the study.

Millico,  like another Orpheus,  was embracing his harp.  We
all flocked about him,  but he would not sing a note till we
were all seated.  Oh!  how he did sing then!  His voice
with the harp,  how infinitely sweet !  the delicacy of his piano
so affectingly soft !  smooth,  melting I may say, — the forte
clear,  well-toned,  exactly and nicely in tune.  The harp alone
is proper to accompany such a voice.  He sang to airs,  all of
his own composition and expressly made for the harp ;  they
are very pretty,  but serve as mere outlines for him to fill up.
He has lately published them.  He told my father,  that it was
not to get,  but simply to save money,  that he printed them ;  for
that,  wherever he played them,  he found so many ladies re
quested them of him,  that he should have been ruined in

paying copyists

In the midst of this performance,  two beaux entered  ;  Mr.
Grimston,  eldest son of Lord Grimston,  and his brother.1 He

is just returned from making the grand tour When

we had breathed,  which we scarcely allowed ourselves to do
while Millico sung,  Mr.  Burney was requested to play  :  he
was animated,  and never performed better.  It is impossible
to express the delight which his performance gave to Millico.
His amazing execution really excited in Millico the most
hearty laughs.  The Italians cultivate harpsichord-playing
so little,  giving all their time to the voice,  that execution
such as Mr.  Burney's appeared miraculous,  and when Millico
saw him make a fine and long:  shake with his fourth and

Susan)  "may remember as Charlotte Ellerker,  and her lord and
•isters,"  at Brighton,  "by mutual appointment" — "Lord de Ferrars is
very ugly,  but extremely well-bred His lady is much im
proved since we knew her in former days,  and seems good-humoured,
lively,  and rather agreeable.  Miss Ellerker is nothing altered."

1 James Bucknall Grimston,  afterwards third Viscount Grimston,
in the peerage of Ireland,  and first Baron Verulam in that of England.

I.  P

210 The Early Diary of  [1773

little fingers,  and then change from finger to finger,  while his
left hand kept on the subject,  he was really almost convulsed.
And when it was over,  rising from his seat,  he clapped his
hands and cried with emphasis and in a very droll accent,
"  It is terrible,  I really tink."

******

Miss Barsanti's Benefit was the 10th.  She however did
the Prelude,  and acted Sophy in the  "  Musical Lady."  ]  I
think she acquitted herself extremely well ;  .  .  .  .  with spirit

and propriety.  She had a very great house I am

much pleased that this evening has proved at once so credi
table and so profitable to her.

I do not know whether I have ever mentioned the breach
that happened some years since between my father and Mr.
Greville,  occasioned by some dispute,  in which the latter con
ducted himself with so much arrogance that,  notwithstanding
the very long friendship and intercourse between them,  they
broke off all acquaintance;  and have not met since.  But
this last week my father received the following curious note  :

Query  ? N.  B. — I have quite forgot what the query was  ;

but this followed  : —

"  Lord March2 and Mr.  Greville have a small bet upon this,
and have both agreed to refer the matter to Dr.  Burney's
decision.  They will,  therefore,  be much obliged to him,  if he
will send his answer to Almack's."  My father accordingly did  ;
but we have heard no more of it,  save only a note of thanks
from Mr.  Greville.  I am always concerned at the breaking
of old friends.  I am sure that Mr.  Greville loves my father,
and I doubt not wishes much to renew his intimacy  ;  but he is

1 In Mr.  Genest's  "  History of the Stage,"  Miss Barsanti's benefit is
Btated to have been on the 10th of May,  1773.     "  The Musical Lady,"
which was then played by her for the   "first time,"  was a part of
Colman's play of."  The Jealous Wife,"  which Garrick had cut out when
he produced that comedy in 1761.     In December,  1762,  "  The Musical
Lady  "  was acted separately,  as a farce.

2 The disgraceful  "old Q."  In 1773,  the betting and bad Lord Marc!
succeeded to the Dukedom of Queeusberry.     In 1771,  a bet of his as t(
which of two men would die first,  was actually brought before Lor
•Chief Justice Mansfield,  and settled by the verdict of a jury.

1773]  Frances Burney.  211

a haughty man,  and must be too sensible that he has acted ill,
to be able to make a graceful reparation.1

My father's friend,  Mr.  Beckford,  is just married  ;  we
have not seen him since,  though he has called.  I should like
to be acquainted with his bride,  who I think must be amiable.

[May].

Mama is gone to Lynn already for the summer ;  Bessy
and the sweet Dick are gone with her ;  and I am once more
here en maitresse;  but,  thank Heaven!  my dear father is
en mattre ;  I am never half so happy as with him.

1 This was only one of a series of reconciliations,  the last of which
(upon record)  was in 1778.  Mrae.  D'Arblay admits that Garrick showed
her father some slight degree of his well-known fickleness.  It may be
that in Garrick this was little worse than mobility,  without which he
would not have been the Garrick that he was,  but Mr.  Greville's friend
ship had acute intermissions.  He was of an arrogant temper.  He
had paid Dr.  Arue to cancel Burney's articles of apprenticeship,  that
he might take him into his own household.  All his life,  he acted as
if he had a lien upon Dr.  Buruey.  Greville's demands upon Burney's
time were inconsistent with the doctor's maintaining half-a-dozen
children by his profession  ;  even setting aside the composition of music,
and of books.  In a letter written to Hetty,  in November,  1820,  Mme.
D'Arblay relates how in the year 1812 she went with her father
44 through the letters of Mr.  Greville,  from the commencement of that
early intercourse  "  (in 1744 or 5),  "all of which were clever,  but many"
(so)  "  disputative,  quarrelsome,  and highly disagreeable,"  that Dr.
Burney  "  did not preserve above three or four."  These Mme.  D'Arblay
meant to have printed,  with those of Garrick,  and others to her father,
in three volumes of  "Correspondence,"  which never appeared.

To show the intermittent character of the friendship,  Mme.  D'Arblay,
in 1781,  says that she had not seen her godmother,  Mrs.  Greville,  for
many years.  When Mr.  Greville died,  Fanny says it was  "  rather a
shock than a loss."  She adds that he had  "  highly irritable nerves;  "
yet,  whatever may have disturbed,  nothing seems to have shortened
his existence,  since,  though nearly alienated from his family,  estranged
from his connexions,  and  "  at war with the world,  he lived until over
ninety,"  dying about the same time that Dr.  Buruey lost a group of
more reasonable friends,  Lord Macartney,  the accomplished and excel-
'  lent Mr.  Twining,  the learned Mrs.  Elizabeth Carter,  and Dolly Young,
vrho is mentioned in the History of Lynn,  by Mr.  Richards,  among the
intellectual people of Lynn.

212 The Early Diary of  [1773

We were at the Fund-Play last year.      Garrick did King

Lear but too well !   He has alarmed us extremely by hinting

at a design of leaving the stage next year.  I hope he will
be prevailed upon to change his resolution.  He has been
here twice lately, — in most excellent spirits.  One morning
he called at eight o'clock,  and,  unfortunately,  Susette and I
were not come down stairs.  We hurried in vain  ;  for he
discovered our laziness and made us monstrously ashamed by
his raillery.  "  I shall tell Mrs.  Garrick,"  said he,  "  that I
found the Doctor reading Petrarch,  in flannel,  like a young
man — but where,  says I,  where were the young ladies  ?  where
do you think were my favourites  ?  why in bed  !  "

When he went away,  he caught Charlotte in his arms,  and
ran with her down the steps,  and to the corner of the square,
protesting he intended taking her off,  as his own Reynolds' 8
Comedy,  which she looks as if she had sat for,  he says-
Mr.  Baretti called here last Sunday.  He told my father
that Dr.  Johnson will be very glad to see him ;  that he has
read both his Tours with great pleasure,  and has pronounced
him to be one of the first writers of the age for travels  !  Such
praise from Dr.  Johnson,  whom my father reveres above all
authors living or dead,  has given him the highest delight.

[Here follow six lines,  which may be read as saying that F.  has had
a most earnest and pressing invitation from the Rishton's to pass the
summer with them at Teignmouth.  "  My father,  however,  does not
wish to part with his Librarian at present — but when he goes into
Norfolk I fancy and hope I shall make a trip into Devonshire."

In a letter written from Teignmouth on the 23rd of May,  which
was given to a man going to Exeter to be posted there,  but which was
quite forgotten by him until the 28th,  Maria urges Fanny not to go to
Lynn,  but to spend the summer with her at Teignmouth.  It is but
sixty miles farther  ;  if Dr.  Burney can spare Fanny to go to Lynn,  he
can spare her to go to Teignmouth.  She can come in a chaise in
twenty-six hours,  or if she does not  "  like the fatigue of that,"  there is

1 The allusion is to the picture by Sir Joshua Eeynolds,  of Garrick
between Tragedy and Comedy.  George Colman wrote to Garrick from
Paris,  in 1766,  "There hang out here in every street pirated prints from
Reynolds's picture of you,  which are underwritten  'Z'/iomme entre le
Vice et la VertiC  "  It is probable that the  "  little Comedy's face  "  of
Goldsmith was also a comparison of the younger Miss Horneck with
this picture.

1773]  Frances Burney.  213

a  "  regular machine comes in two days to Exeter,  where we woud meet
you at the Oxford Inn."  She is to stay till September,  when Maria
will take her up to town,  aud theuce to Lynn in her own chaise.

Fanny need not lay out a penny for Teignmouth,  as she must for the
visitiugs at Lynn.  Maria herself wears nothing at Teignmouth but  "a
common linnen gown,"  and has not had her hair once dressed since
she came there.  She writes at the suggestion of Mr.  Rishton,  who
would fain  "  go out oftner a fashing and shooting,"  had his wife any
companion.  Maria can ask none but Fanny,  as her rooms are  "  so
littered with dogs and poultry,"  and sho can only offer Fanny the room
in which her own trunks are kept.]

Sunday,  June 13th.

This day,  time was! — gave me birth;  but no bells have
rung,  no guns have fired  :  I am strangely neglected  !  .  .  .  .

Susan and I are extremely comfortable together ;  and my

father who is all kindness,  makes us truly happy We

are both studying Italian.  We are reading some of the best
French works together,  not regularly,  but only such parts as
are adapted either to our capacity or inclination.  We have
just finished the Henriade.  I am not absolutely in raptures
with it;  I think Voltaire has made much too free with religion
in giving words to the Almighty.  I doat on poetry;  but
cannot allow of even poetical licence giving language human
to the Divine Power.  For which reason I am more attached
to poetry concerning fabulous times  ;  for Jove,  Juno,  Minerva,
Venus, — may talk as much as they please.  I am never hurt
even at their quarrelling.  But a man pretending to believe
in revealed Religion,  to presume to dictate sentiments to his
maker, — I cannot think it right.  Nay more,  he actually makes
his God so very a human creature,  as to give up His intended
proceedings,  upon the prayers of Lewis  !  It is very well for
a Jove or any other fabulous God,  to be softened,  or enraged,
and mutable ;  but an all-seeing Eye — can it leave anything
for another to represent  ?  an all-wise,  all-good Power, — can
it have any design which is better to be laid aside?  But
M.  Voltaire,  I understand,  is not a man of very rigid principles,
at least not in religion

Sacchini told my father that,  when he first came to Eng
land,  he dined with a person of distinction,  along with
Seignior Giardini  (who loves mischief better than any man
alive)  ;  and Giardini gave him a lesson that,  when he wanted

214 The Early Diary of  [1773

wine and water to drink,  he must ask for it in English,
by saying,  "  How do do  ?  "  Accordingly,  when he was thirsty,
he turned to a servant,  and said very civilly,  "  How do do  ?  "
the man made a very low bow,  and seemed very much confused  ;
but brought him no wine and water  !  He was obliged to be
patient  ;  but took the first opportunity of saying to another of
the men,  "  How do do  ?  "  the man grinned,  and bowed  ;  but
still,  no wine and water  !  he found himself extremely dry,  and
very much surprised,  and perhaps thought he spoke ill  ;  but
yet again repeated his demand to a third servant.  Upon
which il Padrone della casa called out to him,  u Mr.  Sacchini,
you are very civil to my people  ;  how came you to know them
all  ?  "  "  Moi  !  "  cried he,  "  j'ai seulement demande a boire  ?  "
"  Et que dites-vous pour cela  ?  "  —  "  How do do"  Giardini's
lesson was then betrayed  ;  the laugh,  I doubt not,  was very
hearty.

[FROM MKS.  EISHTON TO Miss BUKNET.]

[la No.  42,  which is dated,  Juue ye 6th,  Mrs.  Eishton complains
that there has been no answer to the foregoing letter or to one to
Dr.  Barney enclosed in the same frank,  a fortnight previously.  She
repeats the substance of these letters.  She begs Fanny to buy Mr.
Rishton,  "  Two Cricket Batts,  made by Pett of 7 Oaks  —  you will get
them at any of the great Toy shops,  the makers name always stamp'd
upon them  —  ask for the very best sort,  which costs 4s.  or 4s.  6d.  each

—  let them weigh 4 oz.  and a qur or 4 oz.  and  '/2 each,  send them by
the Exeter post coach.     This is followed by a letter of the 13th of
June,  which claims  "the clause in the latter part"  of Dr.  Barney's
reply,  which Maria has just received,  "  as an absolute promise,  for it
is impossible you can be A person of Buch immense consequence that
you can be able to work during your Father's Absence at Lynn without
his guiding  —  unless you are to be the Authoress of the History of
Musick  —  only intend following the plan of Marmontel's Connoisseur

—  that is out of great generosity allow the Dr.  the merit of it  —  and let
it pass in his Name  —  I own that will be Noble.1  .....  their is one
of his scruples which I must endeavour to Answer  —  as you seem to
say it is the principal  —  that is his fear of your travelling alone  —  Now
really my dear Fanny  —  I must say with a deep sigh  —  we don't Live in

1 We give this as there is no reference in Fanny's Diaries to her in
cessant labour for her dear father,  although many are the allusions
made to it in Maria's letters.  Fanny took it as a joy,  although she

1773]  Frances Burney.  215

an Age for Adventures-— Xor have we the men spirit enough to be
knight errants — really to my sorrow I say it — I never met with an
Adventure in my life — I have travelled from 16  (a critical Ago
Fanny — )  till I married without meeting with a single occurrence in
my travels worth publishing.1 I have been from London to York and
from York to London — to Bath,  Lynn,  Brighthelmstone with a long
&c.,  and I am afraid was ever Unnoticed from the Vulgar Crew

'  Full many a flower is born to Blush unseen
4 And waste its sweetness in the desert air.'

Exactly my Case — Fanny — Grey certainly thought of me when he
composed those Lines — I own I am fond of them for that reason — but
Joking apart I really believe take it in general the Company in a Stage
Coach Consists chiefly — of perhaps reputable tradesmen their wives or
daughters — or perhaps a mantua Maker or Milliner — but really they
are generally good Harmless civil kind of people— who if you can bear
with their Nonsense will treat you very well. — It is not the Convey
ance for Bucks or Alackeronies I wonder the Dr.  has never

thought of your travelling to Exeter on a Cow — and feeding on her
Milk I have long'd to go a journey that way ever since I read his

journel That I hope your Absence for a Month or six Weeks

will not much retard his Book — as you coud not have workd much in
the dog-days."  Describing in this letter her enjoyment of the lovely
Devonshire scenery,  as viewed with Mr.  Rishton,  she adds,  "  though if
we had set out to visit a pig stye or Brandon Sands I shoud have been
happy and delighted in his Company or must have been the most un
grateful Creature breathing."  2  .  .  .  .

Fanny is given a commission. — "  Mr.  Rishton begs you wou'd open
a bill for him at Nounes3 — or to make use of his Elegant Expression
spring a Tick with him at that Booksellers — let him know the lad is no
sharper and send him down — Hawksworth's Journal — and at the
same time — Veneronis Grammar — which tho'  he likes Antoninis very
much yet he is told may be useful to him in some respects — but Noune
knows the youth is no Sharper — let them be sent as soon as possible —
by the Exeter Waggon,  if the Work is not Published Mr.  R.  would be
glad to be a Subscriber — Write a long letter with the Book?."]

often had not time to make her diary complete,  and carried  "Evelina"
about in her head,  long before she could write it down in patches,  on
scraps of paper,  which she at last copied by slow degrees.

1 What,  by the way,  about getting married at Ipres  ?

2 Brandon Sands are where Norfolk joins Suffolk,  about seven miles
from Thetford,  the  "little Ouse,"  or Brandon river,  runs between the
two counties.     The late Lord Lytton has given the name of Brandon to
the chief characters in his unequal,  but charming romance of  "  Paul
Clifford."

'  This name is probably meant for Ncurse,  John Nourse being at
that time bookseller to the king.

The Early Diary of  [1773

[June.]

I have now to mention a visit from Roscius ;  he came again
last Wednesday before eight o'Clock.  I had fortunately been
up above an hour.  When I went into the study,  he was
playing with Charlotte.  I had,  as it is pretty usual with me
on seeing him,  something of a grin upon my face.  "  Oh here
she comes  !  "  cried he,  "and resolved to look as handsome as
she can.  I shall run away with her next."  My father read to
him an article he had been drawing up for a new Dictionary of
Arts and Sciences,  a sort of English Encyclopedia.  Dr.  Gold
smith is the Editor,  and is to be assisted by many of the best
writers.  Among others,  Dr.  Johnson is to take ethics ;  Sir
Joshua Reynolds,  painting,  and Mr.  Garrick,  acting.  It was
Mr.  Garrick,  who mentioned it to my father some time since,
and told him he wished to have his name in the list for the
article,  music ;  he wrote to Dr.  Goldsmith concerning it,  whose
answer I will copy by memory :

"  To David Garrick,  Esq.
"  Dear Sir,

"  To be thought of by you,  obliges me  ;  to be served,
still more  ;  I am very happy that Dr.  Burney thinks my plan
of a Dictionary useful ;  still more,  that he will be so kind,  as to
adorn it with any thing of his own.  I beg you will also accept
my gratitude for procuring me so valuable an acquisition.  I
am,  Dear sir,

"  Your most affect6,  serv'.

Oliver Goldsmith/'

This very civil note Mr.  Garrick enclosed in a short one
from himself :

"  My dear Doctor,

"  I have just received the enclosed.  Dr.  Goldsmith
will be proud to have your name in the list of the chosen.  You
shall have the books very soon.

"  Yours ever,  D.  G."
"  My love to your fair ones."

1773]  Frances Burney.  217

My father cannot do much in this work,  without robbing
his History  ;  but he has written the article Musician,  which he
read to Mr.  Garrick,  who was pleased to admire it very much.1
He also read to him an Answer,  which he is preparing to some
complaints made by French writers,  concerning his censure of
their Music.  When Susette came down,  and he had spoken
to her,  he said to my father,  "  And so you have these young
creatures all about you in a morning  ?  "

"  Oh yes  !  "

"  And so they prattle, — and you rest your understanding  ?  "

This was monstrous  !

"  Quite the contrary/'  cried I,  "  my father exerts his under
standing to keep pace with us !  " — He understood me,  and
getting up in a violent hurry,  he came to the table where I
was making tea  ;  and with a thousand whimsical gestures,  he
cried,  "  Oh  !  you quite mistake me  ; — I meant to make you
the greatest compliment in the world  !  I could not make you
a greater  ! — what I meant was — to say that — that when you
were all about him,  he could then most delightfully  "

"  Repose  ?"  cried Susette.  "Aye,"  cried he,  "  repose,  and
— and — most delightfully — do this,  and that,  and the other."

" Excellent,  Mr.  Bayes  !  "  cried my father;  and indeed he
made it as clear as Mr.  Bayes could possibly have done, —
and with the most affected earnestness,  he declaring repeatedly
that he meant to pay us an amazing compliment.

*****  *2

[Mr.  Rishton is said by Fanny to have had  "  a husky voice."  There
is also something husky in his pen-strokes ;  his being the final note
that ends this letter-writing.

"  Mr.  and Mrs.  Rishton hope Miss Burney will excuse not having

1 The reader will find in the most complete edition of Goldsmith's
Works  (that of Mr.  Gibbs,  in Bonn's Library,)  that this Dictionary
never went beyond a happily-written prospectus,  which was found
among poor Goldsmith's papers,  after his untimely death.  The pro
spectus has disappeared,  and it is not known whether or not any one of
"  the Club  "  wrote his promised paper.  If Dr.  Burney did so,  he pro
bably restored his facts and opinions to their proper place in his  "  His
tory of Music."

3 Of the erasures here only a date,  June 30th,  as heading,  can be
made out.

218 The Early Diary of  [1773

it in their power to fetch her,  as they did not receive her favour until
this moment,  have sent the whisky,  and will make proper apologies oil
her arrival at Tiugmouth.

"  Leave yr things to the care of Mrs.  Tucker at the Oxford Inn,  and
they will come by the carrier to-morrow."]

TINGMOUTH JOURNAL.
EDITOR'S PREFACE TO THE  "  TINGMOUTH JOURNAL."

The Teigumouth journal was,  originally,  no part of this year's
Diary.  It was,  what Mme.  D'Arblay herself called a  "  Journal Letter,'1''
addressed to that sister,  Susan,  who,  in return,  sent her records so full
and frank of all that passed in the house of Dr.  Burney,  that the
greater part of them were destroyed by Mme.  D'Arblay,  on account of
their  "  confidential openness."  This Teignmouth journal may be called
Fanny's first book,  privately circulated.  It was handed to Mr.  Crisp,
who loved to dwell long on the writing of these girls.  He even had
"Allen's  "  Geneva journal  (1771-2)  as well as this,  still in his keeping
in 1775.  We find Maria,  in October,  1774,  in distress,  and even alarm;
wishing that her journal had never been out of her own hands.  Yet
Fanny had kept back from Mr.  Crisp what there was in it of  "  perilous
stuff."  Mr.  Crisp was so charmed with Fanny's letter on Omai in
December,  1774,  that,  after reading it to those about him who were
able to value it,  he sent it to his two sisters,  a widow  (Mrs.  Cast),  and
a spinster,  who were living at Burford,  in Oxfordshire.  Mrs.  Cast was
a woman of education and refinement.  She was delighted with her
brother's  "delectable Fanny,"  and,  in an effusive letter,  thanked Mr.
Crisp for it,  telling him that she had,  like himself,  "entertained others
with it,  who had any taste for cleverility" — [a word which we hope
that we may never find anywhere again.]  Now it happened,  that in
the beginning of the Omai letter,  Fanny had implored Mr.  Crisp to
return her Teignmouth journal,  as  "  papers which can only furnish
entertainment,  if any,  from the first perusal ;  but to me,  who know all
the people,  and things mentioned,  they may possibly give some pleasure,
by rubbing up my memory,  when I am a very tabby,  before when I
shall not think of looking into them.  But the return was the condition,
so give me my bond."  She also begged that he would return Maria's
journal.  Mr.  Crisp audaciously replied,  that in sending his sisters the
letter,  "  in order to make them understand what those papers were
which you reclaim'd with such fury,"  he had been obliged to explain
that they were  "  your journal and the Allen's," — that his sister,  (whose
letter he copies in part),  has,  with much warmth,  entreated that she
may have a sight of his  "  charming Fanny's  "  journal, — and why should
she not? — and why not of Allen's,  too  ;  her name being concealed?
Thereupon,  follows Fanny's positive denial in the case of her frienc

1773]  Frances Burney.

and an expression of great reluctance in her own.  "  Ever since her
marriage,"  Maria,  "had a thousand,  nay a million of times,  both by
letters,  and by word of mouth,  conjured Fanny to get her papers from
Mr.  Crisp,  and destroy them at once."  Fanny adds that she had only
preserved that part of the journal which Mr.  Crisp had never seen,  in
order that she might give Mrs.  Rishtou the satisfaction of seeing it
burnt before her face, — together with that part which she begs him to-
send to her.  He answers that Mrs.  Rishtou's journal shall be given up
to Fanny,  when he can find some safe way of sending it.  This he has
not found in July,  1775,  although by March he has restored the Teign-
mouth journal to its writer ;  but merely in order that she may read it
before he sends it to his sisters.  She reviews it critically ;  and  "  feels
a thousand times more repugnance  "  than before,  to letting Mr.  Crisp's
sisters see  "  such folly,"  but yields,  rather than contest the point with
him  ;  yet stipulates that he shall write a line or two to tell them that
it was at his desire that they receive her journal ;  not through her own
vanity.  She asks him to return the letters which she has written to
him,  but this he not merely refuses to do,  but apparently sends all of
them which do not touch upon family affairs to Mrs.  Gast,  whom
Fanny has,  so far,  never met.  The love of Fanny's letters grows upon
Mr.  Crisp,  and his demands for them increase.  He even shows a little
jealousy of her spending time in writing to Mr.  Hutton,  and to Mrs.
Brooke,  the novelist,  when she might have been writing more letters
to Mm.  Later on,  Fanny meets Mrs.  Gast at Chesington,  loves her,
and is loved by her.  There is no more withholding of papers from her.
Mr.  Crisp even copies with his own feeble fingers,  Fanny's journal
which,  after 1776,  are mainly addressed to Susan,  then passed on to
him,  and he sends them,  (at least in part)  to Mrs.  Gast,  who is to read
them to no one but  "Molly Leuthal,"  her great friend.  Dr.  Johnson
is shown a letter from Mrs.  Gast to Fanny,  that he may admire,  as he
does admire,  her elegant handwriting.  On the death of Mr.  Crisp in
1783,  Mrs.  Gast,  as his executrix,  became possessor of Fanny's letters
to him.  Her cousin,  and executrix,  Mrs.  Frodsham,  restored them
afterwards to Madame D'Arblay ;  a fact which is gratefully recorded
in the Memoirs of Dr.  Burney.

Two leaves,  at least,  are missing,  so that this journal begins abruptly*
thus —

[July.]

some repair,  and I therefore,  was
very late before I came in sight of Tingmouth,  half a mile
from which Mr.  and Mrs.  Rishton walked to meet me.

I was received with the most cordial welcome by my dear
Maria,  who had been quite uneasy,  lest any accident had
happened to me.  I was very glad to find their company
all gone.

220 The Early Diary of  [1773

Tingmouth is situated the most beautifully of any town I
ever saw,  or perhaps in England,  ever can see.  Mr.  Rishton's
house is on the Den,  which is the Mall here.  It is a small,
neat,  thatched and white-washed cottage,  neither more nor
less.  We are not a hundred yards from the sea,  in which
Mrs.  Rishton bathes every morning.  There is no end to the
variety of delightful walks and rides which this sweet spot
affords.

The morning after I came they insisted on my accompany
ing them to the Races,  and I had a very civil invitation from
Mrs.  Phipps,  in whose chaise and company Mrs.  Rishton and
myself went.  Mr.  Rishton drove Mr.  Phipps in his whiskey.
The Phipps'  are newly married,  and in great favour with Mr.
Rishton and Maria.

We got a very good place in the stand,  where there was a
very great deal of company,  and the races,  being quite new to
me,  really afforded me a great deal of entertainment.  But I
must not omit mentioning that Mrs.  R.  announced to me that
the first person for agreeability,  cultivation,  pleasantry,  and
good breeding of their acquaintance was a half name-sake of
my dear Daddy Crisp, — i.e.  a Mr.  Crispen.

Mr.  Rishton is still more in love with retirement than his
wife,  if that is possible  ;  there are but two families he approves
keeping up acquaintance with  :  though I find there is at
present a great deal of company at Tingmouth,  as this is the
season for sea-bathing,  and as the rural beauties of the place
become every year more known,  in so much that the price of
all provisions,  &c.,  is actually doubled within these three years.
The two families honoured with Mr.  Rishton's preference art
those of the Phips and the Hurrels,  which latter consists of  |
Mr.  Hurrel,  a clergyman of  [£]  1500 per ann.  his wife and her
sister,  Miss Davy,  who are daughters of Sir John Davy.

In returning from Mrs.  Phips we were met by Mr.  Crispen.
It seems he has interested himself very much in my father's
musical plan.  He is on the wrong side of an elderly man,
but seems to have good health and spirits.  He has spent
many years abroad,  and is perfect master of French and
Italian.  He is at Tingmouth for the summer season,  but I
believe Bath is his usual place of residence.

1773]  Frances Burner/.  --1

I was also introduced the same morning to Miss Bowdler,
a young woman,  who according to Mr.  Rishton,  bears a rather
singular character.  She is very sensible and clever,  and
possesses a great share of wit and poignancy,  which spares,  he
says,  neither friend or foe.  She reckons herself superior,  he
also adds,  to the opinion of the world and to all common
forms and customs,  and therefore lives exactly as she pleases,
guarding herself from all real evil,  but wholly regardless and
indifferent of appearances.  She is about six and twenty ;  a
rather pretty little figure,  but not at all handsome,  though
her countenance is very spirited and expressive.  She has
father,  mother,  and sisters alive  ;  but yet is come to Tingmouth
alone ;  though for the moment indeed,  she is with a Mis*
Lockwood,  a rich old maid  ;  but she will very soon be entirely
at liberty.  She and her family are old acquaintances of Mrs.
Rishton,  and of mama ;  she is therefore frequently hero ;
but Mr.  Rishton,  who gave me most of this account of her,
cannot endure even the sight of her,  a woman,  he says,  who
despises the customs and manners of the country she lives in,
must,  consequently,  conduct herself with impropriety.  For
my part I own myself of the same sentiment,  but,  nevertheless,
we have not any one of us the most distant shadow of doubt
of Miss Bowdler's being equally innocent with those who have
more worldly prudence,  at the same time,  that her conduct
appears to me highly improper :  for she finds that the company
of gentlemen is more entertaining than that of ladies,  and
therefore,  without any scruples or punctilio,  indulges her
fancy.  She is perpetually at Mr.  Crispen's,  notwithstanding
a very young man,  Mr.  Green,  lives in the same house  ;  not
contented with a call,  she very frequently sups with them ;
and though she does this in the fair face of day,  and speaks of
it as openly and commonly as I should of visiting my sister,
yet I can by no means approve so great a contempt of public
opinion.  As to Mr.  Rishton he almost detests her ;  but his
wife is really attached to her,  which is an unfortunate circum
stance.  I heartily  [wish]  that sho was not here,  as she
always drives Mr.  Rishton away when she appears ;  for he is
delicate,  or rather scrupulous,  to an uncommon degree in his
choice of acquaintance for his wife.  Nevertheless,  when sho

222 The Early Diary of  [1773

offers to entirely give Miss Bowdler up,  he does not consent
to it,  because he knows it would be much against her will,  and
because if it was not,  he would not risque her character to the
lash of Miss Bowdler's tongue.

"  After the Races,"  said Miss Bowdler,  in taking leave,  "  I
shall do myself the honour to wait on Miss Burney/'

"  Ay,"  cried Mr.  Rishton,  when she was gone,  t(  they will
soon make this as errant a public place as Bristol Hotwells
or any other place."

Thursday we again went to the Races,  with Mrs.  Phips,  &c.

Friday morning Mr.  Crispen called,  and said that he should
sooner have paid his respects to me but that  [he]  understood I
had been engaged at the Races.

But before I talk any more of other people,  let me,  my
dear Susette,  more particularly mention my home.  And,
first,  our dear friend Maria,  is just the same I ever knew
her,  save that she is become more gentle in her manners in
.general,  and less indulges herself in that disposition for whim,
which Nature so lavishly gave her ;  but this restraint is more
in actions than words ;  for her conversation,  except in com
pany very formal and old,  is as flighty,  as ridiculous,  as un
common,  lively,  comical,  and truly entertaining as ever we
knew it ;  and her heart generous,  frank,  undisguised,  admits
•of no alteration.  We are most excessively comfortable to
gether,  and have nothing to repine at,  but the impossibility
•of wholly avoiding visits and visitings,  though she has almost
all her former carelessness of what she does in this particular,
to save herself the torment of seeing people she does not care
for.

Her adored Rishton improves daily in my opinion,  because
I think I daily observe in him an encrease of real affection
and tenderness for his wife.  They are,  indeed,  most un
affectedly happy in each other ;  even I who live in the house
with them,  should find it at present difficult to determine
which of them is more affectionately,  I might say,  passionately
attached to the other.  Mrs.  Rishton' s love has long admitted
of no addition,  though her happiness certainly has,  as time
makes her know how peculiarly fortunate her choice has been.
There is a remarkable similarity in their humours ;  for he is

1773]  Frances Burney.  223

as whimsical and odd as herself;  but he is so very difficult in
his opinion of proper companions and acquaintance for his
wife,  that he is really miserable whenever she speaks to any
but the select few of his option.  Though this exceeding
scrupulosity,  and some other things of this nature,  have
perhaps their rise from pride,  yet he evidently proves that all
his thoughts and attentions are directed towards her,  and
seeking to do her honour.  There is a kind of generous im
petuosity in his disposition,  which often hurries him beyond
the bounds which his own cooler judgment would approve ;
and here again he resembles his wife — that he cannot at all
disguise any thing that he feels.

I find myself very happy here.  I am treated with the
most unbounded confidence by Mr.  Rishtou himself as well as
by his wife,  and I am most comfortable in finding that every
thing in the family goes on just the same as if I was away,  and
that I am no restraint either in their affairs or conversation.

The rest of our family consists of four dogs who are pro
digious favourites.  Two of them are spaniels,  Vigo and
Trump ;  the third is a Newfoundland dog,  excellent for
diving,  who always goes with Mr.  Rishton to swim or bathe  :
he is named Tingmouth ;  the fourth is most particularly for
Mrs.  Rishton,  it is called Romeo and is a very faithful old
dog,  it is a brown Pomeranian.

Mr.  Rishtou having some business in London on Saturday,
Mrs.  R.  and myself accompanied him as far as Exeter in his
way.  But I should mention that before we went Mr.  Crispen
paid us another visit,  in the course of which he was pleased
to offer himself for the most devoted of my slaves  !  but,  he
said,  it was in all humility,  and only till I met here with a
younger :  and then he would resign his pretensions.

He asked Mr.  Rishton how long his stay here would be.
"  It is quite uncertain,"  answered he,  "  according to what
news I hear from Stanhoe.1 Perhaps I may be kept till
Christmas  : — if we could but keep Miss Burney."

1 Stanhoe House,  near Dockiug,  in Norfolk,  where Mr.  and Mrs.
Rishton lived shortly afterwards,  was near Hillington Hall,  the seat
of his mother's cousin,  Martin William Browne Folkes,  who was
created a baronet in 1774.

224 The Early Diary of  [1773

"0,"  cried Mr.  Crispen,  "if Miss Burney stays,  I do!
thouo-h I intended to go in five or six weeks.  She has ac
cepted me for an old lover,  though indeed I was in love
with her before I saw her by what I heard from the Lamb  (a
name he has given to Mrs.  R),  and now—  "  &c.,  &c.  We
agreed to go again to Exeter on Thursday,  which day Mr.  R.
had fixed upon for his return,  and on Sunday evening Mrs.  R.
and myself called in at Mr.  Crispen's to borrow the poem of
the Minstrel.

This Mr.  Crispeu seems attached to the fair sex in the
style of the old courtiers.  I am told that he has Dulcineas
without number,  though I am the reigning sovereign at
present.  Miss Bowdler,  who is on the list,  and who I take
for a very formidable rival,  was sitting with him.  He insisted
on Mrs.  Rishton's coming in,  but demanded instantly  "  have
you brought my little flame with you  ?  "  We stayed but a.
few minutes,  and in that time Mr.  Green entered.  Mr.  Crispen
introduced me to him,  and added  ' '  you must say every thing
that is civil — but nothing that is fond to this young lady —
for yesterday I poured forth the effusions of my heart to her."

"  I will with a great deal of pleasure,"  answered Mr.
Green,  "  both say and do every thing that is civil that is in
my power."

"  Miss Bowdler,  do you allow of all this?"  cried Mrs.
Rishton.  "  0,  I am obliged to it,"  replied she — for I am but
an old wife  !  "  She made no scruple of being left with the-
two gentlemen,  when we came away.

Mr.  Crispen and Mr.  Green were to set out the next morn
ing on a trip to Plymouth and Mount Edgecombe,  with a
family who are here for the season,  of the name of Colbourn,.
consisting of Mr.  Colbourn,  who was a Bath apothecary,  but.
has had an immense fortune left him,  and is now enjoying it,,
his wife and daughter.  They were to return on Thursday.

Monday and Tuesday Mrs.  R.  and myself spent in the-
most comfortable manner possible,— but for Wednesday I
must be more particular.

Mr.  Hurrel1 has an exceeding pretty boat of his own here,

1 This name is properly  "HttireZZ"  ;  some memory of it is obvious.

1773]  Frances Burney.  225

with which he makes frequent excursions on the river Ting,
and sometimes on the sea.  His wife called here on Tuesday
evening,  to invite us to be of their party on Wednesday,  when
they intended sailing to Torbay,  to see a Fleet under Admiral
Spry,  which was just come from Portsmouth.  We very
gladly accepted the offer,  and set off the next morning about
seven o'clock,  our company consisting of Mr.  and Mrs.
Hurrel,  Mr.  Phips,  a boatswain,  another sailor,  Mr.  Hurrel's
servant,  and ourselves.

Mr.  Hurrel is quite a poet's priest ;  he is fat as Falstaff,
unable to use exercise and eke unwilling ;  his love of ease is
surpassed by nothing,  but his love of good living,  which
equals whatever detraction has hitherto devised for a parson's
gluttony.  Mrs.  Hurrel is an obliging,  civil,  tiresome woman.

Our plan was to see the fleet,  and if possible,  a man o'
war's inside,  and then to land on one of the safest and plea-
santest rocks,  to dine,  as Mr.  Hurrel had taken especial care
of this particular.  But when he came near the ships,  the sea
grew rough,  and having no invitation,  we were obliged to
give up the thought of entering any of them.  There were
seven men of war in the bay,  and we sailed round them.
They are most noble vessels.  I had reason to think myself
very fortunate that I was not sea-sick,  though I never before
was on the ocean.  We put in at Brixham,  a most excellent
fishing-town,  but very dirty and disagreeable.  We made but
a short stay,  and set sail again.  Brixham is about ten miles
from Tingmouth by sea.1

The wind was against us,  and we were hardly out of the
harbour,  before we found the sea terribly rough.  I own I

in the  "  Barrels  "  of  "  Cecilia."  It is remarkable how names strike
the fancy of authors.  The editor saw  "  Donnithorne  "  (the  "  Donni-
thorne  "  of  "  Adam Bede ")  over a shop in Penzance long before she
knew that George Elliot had stayed in Penzance;  and the name of
"  Inglesant "  was seen some time ago over a paltry shop in a shabby
•treet,  yet no name could have been better,  quainter,  and more mys
terious than that for the book which brightened it.  But these things
(according to Balzac)  are pre-ordained,  and novelists do but  "  take the
good the gods provide"  them.

1 In 1779 the churchyard of the old church at Brighton reminded
Fanny of Brixham,  "  where the houses are built by the sides of hills."

T.  Q

226 The Early Diary of  [1773

was not very easy,  as our boat,  though a large one for the
Thames,  was very small for the sea ;  but still I considered
myself as the person of the least consequence,  whatever our
danger.  However,|it was no sport to me to be danced up
and down,  and to find the waves higher and rougher every
instant,  especially when I saw Mr.  Hurrel who had hitherto
guided us,  quit the helm to the Boatswain,  and exclaim,  "  We
shall run foul of these rocks  !  "

The waves foamed in little white mountains rising above
the green surface of the sea ;  they dashed against the rocks
off the coast of Brixham with monstrous fury ;  and really to
own the truth,  I felt no inclination to be boat-wrecked,  how
ever pathetic and moving a Tale our adventure might have
made.^  Mrs.  H.  grasped my hand,  and looked very much
frightened ;  her agreeable husband repeated several times his
most comfortable exclamation of,  "  We shall run foul of the
rocks  !  "  There followed a most terrible confusion.  I don't
remember or understand sea-phrases ;  but the hurrying,  loud,
violent manner in which they gave orders to one another,  was
really frightful.  "  Is there any danger,"  cried Mrs.  Hurrel ;
pray,  Boatswain,  tell me,  is there any danger  ?  "  "  No  ;  I
don't think there is Ma'am."

This was the most alarming sound I had heard yet — I
don't think there is  !  However,  I found we were all in equal
danger ;  for the two sailors assured us their swimming would
be totally useless,  as the fury of the waves would presently
swallow them up.  Mrs.  Hurrel grasped my hand harder thai
ever.  Her husband forgot his cloth,  and began to swear,
but always adding,  "  God forgive me  !  " — At length,  after
being tosst up and down in a most terrible manner for about
quarter of an hour,  the Boatswain said we should not reach Ting-
mouth before midnight ;  and just then the waves seemed to re
double their violence,  and the boat scooped one fairly over us.

I gave up the ghost ;     Mrs.  Hurrel burst into tears,  at
cried vehemently,  "  For mercy's sake  !     Mr.  Hurrel,  pray
us go back to Brixham, — pray do, — we shall be all drowned
Oh  !   pray don't let me be drowned  !     Set me down  !   set me
down!"   ....

"  But where are we to dine  ?  "  cried he.

1773]  Frances Burney.  227

"  Oh  !  any where,  Mr.  Hurrel,  any where,  so as wo do but
get a- shore  !  I don't mind,  I assure-ee  /  "

"  Oh  !  that's pretty talking,"  answered the priest,  "  but that
•won't serve for a meal."

However,  I believe he also had no objection to prolong his
days  ;  for when the boatswain said that it blew fresher higher
up,  he immediately ordered,  that we should tack about ;  and
so we returned to Brixham.

When we landed,  I was so very giddy,  that I could hardly
stand,  and was obliged to go into the first house for a glass of
water ;  but I am only amazed that I was not dreadfully sea
sick.  How to get home,  was the next consideration.  Mrs.
Rishton had promised to meet Mr.  R.  at Exeter the next day,
and was determined rather to walk than disappoint him ;  but
it is sixteen miles from Tingmouth by land ;  there was no
post-chaise to be had ;  nor could we hear even of any horses.
We went into the best inn of the place,  and Mr.  Hurrel
ordered dinner.  After a thousand enquiries,  pro's and con's
•&c.  we were settled thus :  Mrs.  R.  procured a horse,  Mr.
Phipps another,  on which he accompanied her back to Teign-
mouth ;  and Mr.  Hurrel,  his wife and myself,  to my great
regret,  were obliged to stay all night at Brixham.

But I forgot to mention that a sloop filled with Tingmothians,
was obliged to put in at Brixham as well as us,  they were a
•very gay party,  who had come out with the same view as
•ourselves,  among them were Miss Lockwood and Miss
Bowdler.  I was sorry to see the latter in such company,  for
.they behaved in a most ridiculous and improper manner
•dancing about the town and diverting themselves in a very
ommannerly easy and careless style,  and though Miss Bowdler
herself behaved with propriety yet her party reflected some
thing on her  [  ]  and has much added to Mr.  Rishton's

aversion to her.  But to be brief.  We passed a weary
evening,  and the next morning at three o'clock we got up and
-set sail for Tingmouth,  intending to breakfast in the boat.
But,  Oh grief of griefs  !  the awkward boatswain managed
to destroy all the matches;  and we were obliged to give our
.breakfast up,  to Mr.  Hun-el's very great anger and sorrow.
1 A word illegible — it may be  "  scuse."

The Early Diary of  [1773

I will mention nothing more of our perils,  though they were
not inconsiderable in my opinion.  But however we landed at
last,  safe and sound,  about nine o'clock.  The Hurrel's in
sisted on my going to breakfast with them  ;  after which I came
home,  and went to bed for a couple of hours,  not having
undressed myself at Brixham.  But I caught a very bad cold,
and know not when I shall part with it.

Mr.  and Mrs.  Eishton returned from Exeter to dinner,  and
in the evening Mr.  Crispen called,  just arrived from Plymouth.
He protested he could not rest till he came  ;  that this was his
first visit ;  and that where the thoughts were,  there the person
must wish itself! — &c. — all addressed to little me  !

"  But I think,"  added he,  "  that my love expressed no-
great joy at seeing me  ? — My heart went pit-a-pat all the
way I came."

He said he had rode the whole way from Plymouth on
horseback,  having given the Colbourns the slip :  he pro
nounced a very high character of the daughter both for
accomplishments and propriety of conduct.  He declared that
he found himself so little fatigued with his journey that he
was ready to shew his prowess by going on the beach and de
claring the Bright Burney,  the best of her sex  !

"  Except,"  said Mr.  Eishton/'  "  Miss Colbourn  !  "

"  Without any exception  !  I have a very great esteem for
Miss Colbourn ;  and admire her greatly ;  but here "

"  But then,  Miss Bowdler  ?  what do you do with her/'  re
turned Mr.  Eishton.

"  For the little Bowdler I have indeed a most particular
regard ;  but still — still Miss Burney  ! "

Mr.  Eishton mentioned some more fair Dulcineas,  to alll
which he answered,  "  O,  these are but my diversion ! — but
Burney is my Home  !  "  Then,  turning to me  "your little hand
.  .  1 love you  ! — I was prepared to love you before I saw you;
— but now I find in you a strong resemblance to a sister who
was very dear to me,  that I must love you more for her sake."

The next morning Miss Bowdler called.  She seemed in a
very angry humour with her old friend Mr.  Crispen.  I fancy
she wishes to be more unique with him than she finds it is
her power to be.

1773]  Frances Burney.  229

"  He is returned quite a young man,"  said Mrs.  Rishton,
•"  and not at all fatigued."

"  Yes/'  answered she,  "  but he droops this morning  !  he
must take another journey to Plymouth to recruit.  He tells
me that Miss Colbourne was all perfection.  I only laughed :
to me she appears the most affected,  conceited thing I ever
saw :  however,  I am glad Perfection is so easily attained  !  "

"  We shall hear Fanny's opinion of her to-night/'  said
Mrs.  Rishton,  "  for she drinks tea here."

"  Well,  much good may it do you  ! — they extol her paint
ing too — but I'd lay my life all the landscapes she has taken
this journey are from Green : l — however,  Crispen can afford to
lavish away a multitude of compliments without feeling their
loss  :  but novelty is all in all for him."

She said much more to the same purpose,  and made me
very angry with her,  as Mr.  Crispen deserves more considera
tion from her,  and seems her first-rate favourite.  In the
evening the Colbourns came.  The father is a worthy kind of
man,  but full of that parade and bluster which constitute that
sort of man whom we call purse-proud.  The mother is an
insipid,  good sort of woman.  The daughter is a very smart
girl,  somewhat affected and not too diffident of her accom
plishments;  but extremely civil and obliging,  and very well
behaved.

I don't know when I shall come to the present time ;  but
Patienza  !

Saturday morning Mrs.  Rishton and I walked out  [to]  avoid
a very disagreeable scene;  for the day before Mr.  Rishton
came home in great haste and perforation,  (sic)  and calling his

1 There were,  about that time,  four brothers Green,  two of whom
were engravers,  and two painters.  This might be Amos Green,  a
flower and landscape-painter;  or his brother Benjamin,  who was
teacher of drawing at Christ's Hospital.  Crispen is not a name in
the index to Mrs.  Delany's Correspondence,  but,  although our reference
is lost,  a memory remains that we saw in one of those six ponderous
volumes that a Mr.  Crispen was very polite in showing Mrs.  Delany
pictures at an exhibition of cither the  "  Society of Arts,"  which was
founded in 1755,  or of the  "  Society of Artists of Great Britain,"  which
was a few years its junior.

230 T/te Early Diary of  [1775

wife told her that he had broke Romeo's leg  !  This was occa
sioned by the poor dog's running after sheep,  for which he-
has often been,  in vain,  very severely beat ;  but now he and
one of the spaniels got a poor sheep quite down and began to-
tear her to pieces.  Mr.  R.  rode up to them,  and catching
Romeo at first by the leg,  to prevent his biting,  began to flog
him violently,  till he found that by the twist,  he had broke-
his leg short off !  He was beyond measure concerned,  and
gave a man a crown to carry him home gently in his arms;,
and the next morning had a surgeon to set the poor animal's
leg, — which not chusing to see we sauntered before the door
till it was done  :  in which time Mr.  Crispen went by on horse
back.  "Are these my ladies?"  cried he, — "and how does my
love  ?  I did not see her all yesterday — the day was heavy f
I felt something wanting  ! — and how fares it with the Lamb?"

"  I wish you would come and hear me read Italian/'  cried
she,  now do,  Mr.  Crispen,  I want help extremely."

"  And does my little Burney speak it  ?   or learn it  ?  "

"  O yes,"  answered Mrs.  R.

"  Then I'll come  ! — the sound of her voice — "

"  Well,"  returned she I never heard anything so genteel  ?
upon my word,  Mr.  Crispen,  there's no bearing all this — "

"Nay — you know I always loved the sound of yours,"  cried
he,  as he rode off.

In the evening,  however,  he came ;  but as Mr.  Rishton was-
at home,  we had no Italian :  for he is too far advanced in that
language to profit by such lessons as we want.  Mr.  Crispen
brought with him some drawings on cards of Mr.  Green's
performance.  Two of them were views of Tingmouth,  and
he made a great fuss about them,  asking me how I would
bribe him for a sight  ?  I told him that I had nothing at all
to offer. —

''  Why,  now "  said he,  "  methinks two drawings deserve-
two kisses — and — if — "

"  No,  no,  no/'  cried I,  "  not that !  "  much surprised at his
modest request.  But he only spoke in sport I am sure.

He brought one view for Mrs.  Rishton which Mr.  Green,
had sent her as a present ;  saying  "  I wish it was for my little
Burney  !  "

1773]  Frances Burney.  -31

The drawings were extremely pretty.     One of them I was
admiring very much — it was a night piece — for its coolness —
"0,"  cried Mr.  Crispen,  "  that is it  !   you would like a cool
lover,  then  ?      I am too passionate for you  ?  "

When we had examined these cards,  "  Come/'  said Mr.
Rishton,  "  won't you sit down,  Mr.  Crispeu — there's a chair
by Miss Burney  !  "

"  That is where I mean to sit,"  answered he.  Poor Romeo's
misfortune then came on the carpet,  and Mr.  Crispen gave Mr.
R.  some very good and very free advice,  on restraining his
passions,  and keeping them more under command  ; — and Mr.
R.  who is quite afflicted for the dog,  took it very candidly  *
and sensibly  ;  indeed,  they both did themselves honour.  But,
however,  nothing could engage the old gentleman long from
his gallantry to me.  He turned towards me with a mournful
air  :  "  I don't know how it is but my little Burney and I don't
hit it off well together  !  I take all possible pains, — but I can
not please her  ! — Well,  I can't help it  ! — I can only say,  you
would not have used me thus forty years ago  !  "

Thank God I could not,  thought I.  But,  really,  I scarce
knew what to say,  and indeed have seldom made any other
answer than laughing ;  but I took the first opportunity of his
being engaged in conversation with Mr.  Rishton to move off
and seat myself in the window.  He perceived it immediately,
and with a reproachful voice,  called out,  "  Now is this decent,
Miss Burney  ?  are you afraid of only sitting by me  ?  "  Then
rising and getting his hat,  "Well,  I shall go to my little
Colbourn — she will not use me thus  !  "

However,  he altered his mind,  and brought a chair and
placed himself before me  ;  and the subject was changed to
Miss Bowdler and the Brixham party.

Miss Bowdler might have blushed to have heard the bene
volence with which he spoke of her.  He lamented in very
affectionate terms that she had been unfortunately mixed with
so giddy and imprudent a party,  and recommended it very
strongly to Mrs.  Rishton to make it known as much as she

1  "Candidly"  is here used in its old sense,  and is equivalent to
mildly,  with gentleness,  without impatience or ill-temper.

232 The Early Diary of  [1773

could,  that Miss Bowdler was an exception to the general set,
when the company was named.  He regretted her being alone
here and hoped Mrs.  Rishton would extend her friendship
to protect her,  and be as much with her as possible,  after Miss
Lockwood's departure.  He spoke of her in very high terms
and said he owed her so much regard and respect that he
would himself be always with her,  but that he knew the people
here would only sneer about it.  It seems,  in a bad illness
which Mr.  Crispen had,  she was his constant nurse.

Mr.  Rishton very openly blamed her for mixing with the
Brixham party.  Mr.  Crispen could hardly justify her.  "  I
would not/'  said he,  ' {  have had a daughter of mine there — or
my little Burney,  for the whole world  !  "

Then again he renewed his discourse to me,  and begged me
to remember an old proverb — that

"  Love burns slowest in old veins —
But when once entered,  long remains."

"  Indeed/'  said I, "  I did not come to Tingmouth at all pre
pared for such fine speeches  ! "

"  Fine speeches  !"  exclaimed he — "  ah  !  that is always the
way you answer old bachelors  ! "

Now,  to tell you my private opinion,  my dear Susy,  I am
inclined to think that this gallantry is the effect of the man's
taking me for a fool ; — because I have been so much surprised
at it that I have hardly ever had a word of answer ready.
You,  who know how wise I am,  must allow the injustice of
such an inference  !  But I cannot write or recollect half the
fine things he says.  But don't let all this make you think him
a fool.  He is much of a gentlemen,  has an easy and polite
address,  is very sensible and agreeable in conversation,  and
remarkably mild,  candid,  and benevolent in his opinions and
judgments :  but he has lived so long abroad that I suppose he
thinks it necessary to talk nonsense to we fair sex.

Monday,  Aug.

We are just going to Tingmouth Races,  which,  indeed,  are
to be held in sight of our house.  "We hope for very good
sport, — a great deal of company are arrived on the Den.

1773]  Frances Burney.  233

Aug.  19th.

I have not had a moment for writing this age — I never
had less,  as Mrs.  R.  and myself are almost inseparable.  The
Races,  however,  must by no means pass unrecorded.

Miss Lockwood and Miss Bowdler invited themselves to ac
company us to the Race ground :  Mr.  Crispen also called in
and joined us.  Mr.  Rishton was not at all pleased,  and the
half hour which we spent before we set out,  he sat almost
totally silent.  Mr.  Crispen addressed himself to me with his
usual particularity,  which really put me quite out of coun
tenance,  as I dreaded Miss Bowdler's opinion,  and feared she
would rank me with Miss Colbourne.  I seated myself quietly
at a distance,  but Mr.  Crispen,  determined to torment me,
drew his chair quite close to mine,  and in so particular a
manner that I could not keep my place but got up and seated
myself next to Mrs.  R.  on the window.

I then wished that I had not,  for every body  (except Mr.  R.)
laughed :  I felt my face on fire.  "  Do you run away from
me,"  cried Mr.  Crispen,  "to take shelter under the Lamb  ?"
But it was in vain,  for he immediately moved after me,  and
continued,  in the same style,  to complain of me.  I en
deavoured to change the subject,  and made some enquiries
concerning the Races  ;  but nothing would do.  "  Ah I"  cried
he,  "  would that your heart was to be run for  !  What an effort
would I make  ! "  "  Yes,"  cried Miss Bowdler  (not very
delicately),  "you would break your wind on the occasion,  I
doubt not/'  "  What will they do,"  said I,  "  with the poor
pig after the Races  ?  "  (one was to be run for).

"  0 that my heart,"  cried Mr.  Crispen,  "  could be as easily
cured  ! "

"  Never fear,"  said Miss Bowdler,  "  it has stood a good
many shocks !"

"  Were it now to be opened,"  answered he,  "  you would
find Burney engraved on it in large characters."

"  0 yes,"  cried she,  "  and you would find a great many
pretty misses there besides  !  "

"Ay,"  said Mrs.  R.,  "  there would be Miss Colbourne."

"  But Burney,"  cried he emphatically,  "  is my sum total.
I own,  I avow it publicly,  I make no secret of it !  "

234 The Early Diary of  [1773

"Yes,  yes/'  returned Miss Bowdler,  "the Present is
always best ! "

I just then recollected a little dispute which we had had1
with Mr.  Rishton,  on the pronunciation of some Italian words,
and giving a grammar to Mr.  Crispen,  begM him to decide it.

"  Look another way,  my dear little Burney,"  cried he,
"look another way — I must take out my reading glass!  —
You have a natural antipathy to me,  but don't strengthen it
by looking at me now  ! "

I was very glad when this conversation was concluded,  by
our being all obliged to march.  We found a great deal
of company,  and a great deal of diversion.  The sport began
by an Ass Race.  There were sixteen of the long eared tribe  >
some of them really ran extremely well ;  others were indeed
truly ridiculous  ;  but all of them diverting.  Next followed a
Pig Race.  This was certainly cruel,  for the poor animal had
his tail cut to within the length of an inch,  and then that inch
was soaped.  It was then let loose and made run.  It was
to be the property of the man who could catch it by the tail ;
which after many ridiculous attempts was found to be impos
sible,  it was so very slippery.  Therefore the candidates con
cluded this day's sport by running for it themselves.  The
great Sweep Stakes of the asses were half-a-guinea;  the
second prize a crown,  and the third half-a-crown.  However,
the whole of it was truly laughable.

The next Race day was not till Friday,  which day was also
destined to a grand Cricket Match.  Mr.  Rishton is a very
good player;  and there is an excellent ground on the Den.
Two gentlemen who were to be of the match breakfasted
here in the morning.  They are sons of Dr.  Milles,  Dean of

Exeter The cricket players dined on the green,

where they had a boothe erected,  and a dinner from the Globe,
the best Inn here,1 to which Mrs.  Rishton added a liash,

It is the editor's impression that the roomy lodging-house in which
she first stayed at Teignmouth,  five-and-twenty years ago,  was,  in 1773,
"The Globe Inn."  On the first floor,  a large ball-roomhad been turned
into bed-rooms  (with never a chimney),  by wooden partitions,  so slight
that each movement,  or speech,  could be heard in the chambers adjoin
ing.  The Editor finally saw it pulled down  ;  and a modern high house,

1773]  Frances Burney.  235.

which Mr.  T.  Mills assured her was most excellent,  for Mr.
Hurrel himself eat three times of it !  and that,  he remarked,,
indisputably proved its goodness.1

The Cricket Match was hardly over before the Tingmouth
games began.  All that was  [to]  be done this second day was
"Wrestling,  a most barbarous diversion,  and which I could not
look on,  and would not have gone to if I had not feared being
thought affected.  A ring was formed for the combattants by
a rope railing,  from which we stood to see the sport !  !  The
wrestler was to conquer twice,  one opponent immediately
after another,  to entitle himself to the prize.  A strong
labouring man came off victorious in the first battles  ;  but
while his shins were yet bleeding,  he was obliged to attack
another.  The hat  (their gauntlet)  was thrown by a servant of
Mr.  Colbourn's.  He was reckoned by the judges an admirable

looking doc west to the red cliff  (which Maria Allen likened to Shake
speare's cliff at Dover),  was reared high,  iu place of the long,  low
building.

In August,  races  (less grotesque)  are still run on the Den,  or Dene,
at Teignmouth  (a sandy grass-grown stretch of some acres between the
sea and the irregular line of houses which front it),  and reviews of
militia,  or yeomanry,  are held on it ;  the Den being three fourths of'
a mile long.  There is still a good Newfoundland trade,  and excellent
home-fishing.  The beauty of the colouring of the sea,  and of the vivid
red sandstone cliffs,  capped with bright green to their edge,  no words
can describe.

1 It must not be supposed that Mrs.  Rishtou gave,  or Mr.  Hurrell
approved,  what a na'ive cook of the last century calls  "  a harsh ;  "  that
word is still too often a just description of cold meat,  sliced and warmed.
This was most likely a lordly dish,  such as Mrs.  Glasse tells us how to
make,  iu the sixteenth edition of her  "  Art of Cookery,"  1786,  pages 28-

> — '•  To hash a calf's head,"  or to hash it  "  white."    It was more than a.

'ragoo;"  strong gravy,  eggs and butter,  red wine,  or white,  truffles,
morels,  mushrooms pickled,  or not,  eschalots,  lemons,  and sweet herbs,
forced-meat balls,  fried oysters,  and toasted bacon,  cream,  artichoke-
bottoms,  and asparagus,  float before the astonished eye upon these pages.
The fried oysters,  (twenty in number),  were indispensable.  There is
nothing of a hash about it,  except that the calf's-head is scored with a
hashing-knife while whole,  and hot from the pan,  before it is browned..
It is a  "  hdchis,"  not a hash — and such an one we give Mrs.  Rishton
credit for offering to her friends.  In 1765,  we find Voltaire writing-
that he cannot eat a  "  hachis"  of turkey,  hare,  and rabbit,  whicU
his friends try to persuade him is composed of one viand only.

236 The Early Diary of  [1773

wrestler,  and he very fairly beat his adversary.  A sailor
•directly flung his hat :  he was sworn friend of the defeated
labourer.  He entered the lists in a passion,  and attacked the
servant,  as all the gentlemen said,  very unfairly,  and,  while a
short truce was declared for the man to have his shoe un
buckled,  he very dishonourably hit him a violent blow.  Upon
this they both prepared for a boxing match,  and were upon the
point of engaging  (though the whole Ring cried out  "  shame  "
upon the sailor),  when Mr.  Rishton inflamed with generous
rage at this foul play,  rushed precipitately into the Ring,  and
getting between the combattants,  collared the sailor,  declaring
he should be turned out of the lists.

I am really amazed that he escaped being ill- treated  ;  but,
at the very instant,  two of the young Mills ran into the Ring
•and catching hold of Mr.  Rishton insisted on his not venturing
himself against the brutality of the enraged sailor.  However,
he would not retire till the sailor was voted out of the lists as
u foul player.  Mr.  Rishton then returned to us between the
Mr.  Mills.  Every body seemed in admiration of the spirit
"which he exerted on this occasion.

The Tingmouth Games concluded the day after with a
Rowing Match between the women of Shaldon,  a fishing town
•on the other side of the Ting,  and the fair ones of this place.
For all the men are at Newfoundland every summer,  and all
laborious work is done by the women,  who have a strength
and hardiness which I have never seen before in our race.

The following morning,  while Mrs.   R.  and myself were
dressing,  we received a very civil message from Mrs.  and Miss
Colbourne to invite us to see the rowing in their carriage.
Mrs.  R.  sent word that we would come to them on the Den
but afterwards we recollected that we were engaged to tea
Mrs.  Phips.      This put us in a dilemma ;  but as Mrs.  Phips'
was the prior engagement,  we were obliged to march to Mi
Colbourne's coach on the Den to make our apologies.     The
first object I saw was Mr.  Crispen.     He expressed himself
prodigiously charmed at seeing us.     I said we were obliged
[to go.      He]  said he had heard of our not being well — (( I
<;ould ill bear/'  he added,  "  to hear of the Lamb's illness — but
when they told me that you was not well ! — I should not have

1773]  Frances Barney.  237

been so long without seeing you,  but from having had a
violent cold and fever myself — [and I]  thought in my confine
ment that one half hour's conversation with you would com
pletely recover me."

"  If I had known,"  said I,  "  ray miraculous power —

"  0,"  cried he,  taking my hand,  "  it is not yet too late  !  If
you are mercifully disposed." — I skipt off.

We made our apologies as well as we could,  and they insisted
on setting us down at Mr.  Phips',  Mrs.  Colbourn and Mr.
Crispen on one side and we three lasses on the other.  All the
way we went Mr.  Crispen amused himself with holding the
same kind of language to me,  notwithstanding the presence
of Miss Colbourne.

The women rowed with astonishing dexterity and quickness.
There were five boats of them.  The prizes which they won
were,  shifts with pink ribbands.  Games such as these,  Mr.
Crispen says,  ought to make future events be dated as univer
sally from Tingrnothiads as former ones were from Olympiads.

I must now miss a whole week,  having no time to recollect
any thing which passed.  Last Sunday Mr.1 and Mrs.  Western,
arrived here,  to make a week's visit.  Mrs.  Western 2 is.
cousin to Mr.  Bishton,  being sister to Mr.  Martin Folkes.
She is infinitely the most agreeable of her family,  good-
tempered,  lively,  well-bred,  and obliging.  Mr.  Western is a
very sensible man ;  but has an oddity in him,  which I know
not how to characterize.  He has a good deal of drollery ;  but
I fancy makes a very uncomfortable companion.  I think he
has the remains of a very agreeable man,  as strongly marked
in his looks and manners,  as I have ever seen the remains of a
celebrated beauty visible in a countenance.  He is still a
young man,  but has such very indifferent health,  that it
embitters every moment of his life.  Mrs.  Western was most
violently in love with him when they married,  though their
fortunes on each side were too considerable to make either of

1 Maximilian Western,  Esq.,  of Cokethorpe,  near Witney,  in Ox
fordshire.

a Elizabeth,  fourth daughter of William Folkes,  Esq.,  by his first
marriage,  was cousin to Mr.  Rishton's mother,  and half-sister to Martin
Browne Folkes.

238 The Early Diary of  [1773

them be styled romantic.  .But I think at present she seems to
have the most perfect,  the coldest indifference towards him that
ever wife had.  Mr.  Western is still reckoned a very gay man,
in no very constant sense of that word.  He may,  therefore,
have trifled away her affection,  while his own for her appears
still continued.  0,  what bad policy in men,  to accustom their
wives to their fickleness till even their love becomes a matter
of indifferency  !  Indeed I am sorry for them both,  as each of
them seem formed for  [a degree]  of happiness to which they
really seem to deny each other.  Mrs.  Western has,  in the
politest manner,  invited me to accompany Mr.  and Mrs.  R.  to
Oxfordshire when they return this visit.  As to Mr.  Western,
he and I are particularly good friends,  indeed Mrs.  R.  and my
self are as free from restraint or ceremony as before they came,
for,  fortunately,  they neither of them have the least grain of it
in their composition.

We all went on Monday evening to the sea-shore,  to see
the scene drawn;  this is a most curious work,  all done by
women.1 They have a very long net,  so considerable as to
cost them thirteen or sixteen pounds.  This they first draw
into a boat,  which they go off the shore in,  and row in a kind
of semicircle,  till they land at some distance.  All the way
they spread this net,  one side of which is kept above water by
•corks.  Then they land and divide forces  ;  half of them return
to the beginning of the net,  and half remain at the end  ;  and
then with amazing strength both divisions at the same time
pull the net in by the two ends.  Whatever fish they catch,
are always encircled in the middle of the net,  which comes
out of the water the last;  and,  as they draw towards each
other,  they all join in getting their prey.  When once they
perceive that there is fish in their nets,  they set up a loud
shout,  and make an almost unintelligible noise in expressing
their joy and in disputing at the same time upon their shares,
and on what fish escaped them.  They are all robust and
well-made,  and have remarkably beautiful teeth,  and some of

1 This drawing of the seine is no longer done by the Teignmouth
•women,  who are now very much like the fisherwomen at other sea-side
places,  and seem to have lost their beauty with their savagery.

1773]  Frances Barney.  239

them are really very fine women.  Their dress is barbarous;
they have stays half-laced,  and something by way of handker
chiefs about their necks  ;  they wear a single coloured flannel,
or stuff petticoat ;  no shoes or stockings,  notwithstanding the
hard pebbles and stones all along the beach  ;  and their coat is
pinned up in the shape of a pair of trousers,  leaving them
•wholly naked to the knee.1 Mr.  Western declares he could
not have imagined such a race of females existed in a civilized
-country ;  and had he come hither by sea,  he should have
almost fancied he had been cast on a newly discovered coast.
They caught this evening at one time nine large salmon,  a
John dory,  and a gurnet.  On Tuesday evening we went again,
and saw them catch four dozen of mackerel at a haul.

After this was over,  we crosst the Ting in a ferry-boat
to Shaldon,  and took a most delightful walk up a high hill,
from whence the prospects both by sea and land are incon
ceivably beautiful.  We had the three dogs with us :  poor
Romeo is still confined,  and,  as he is an old dog,  I fear will
never recover.2 We returned by the same boat.  The dogs
have always swum across,  and they jumped into the water as
usual ;  but the tide was very high,  and we were obliged to go
a quarter of a mile about before we could land.  Mr.  Rishton
hallowed to the dogs,  and whistled all the way to encourage
•them,  however,  the current was so strong at the point where
we landed that they could not stem it.  Mrs.  Western,  R.,
and myself walked home and left the gentlemen to watch the
dogs.  Tingmouth,  the Newfoundland dog,  after a hard
struggle,  by his excellent swimming,  at length got safe on
shore.  Trump,  who is a very cunning brute,  found out a
.shorter cut,  and arrived safe.  His fellow spaniel,  Vigo,  they
could see nothing of.  Mr.  Rishton went after him,  but he
did not appear all night — and the next morning we found
that he was drowned  !  This has been a great concern to us
•all.  The drowned spaniel cost Mr.  Rishton  [  ]  guineas.

1  "  Coat"  used to mean the upper skirt of a woman's clothing.    The
•editor has heard the word used in country villages after 1840.

2 Some may be glad to know that Romeo recovered and enjoyed his
•after life in Norfolk,  with  "  Tingmouth."

240 The Early Diary of  [1773

Yesterday was settled for a grand cricket match,  but it
proved so miserable a day that the gentlemen relinquished it.
We went out of curiosity to the beach;  the sea was extremely
rou^h,  and the waves uncommonly high  :  as we stood looking
at it,  a wave came suddenly,  with such amazing force,  that
though we all ran away full speed,  Mrs.  Western and Mrs.
Rishton were wetted all over.  I had happened to be not so
near.  We hurried home,  and they were obliged to new dress
themselves.

In the evening the Mr.  Mills called to settle on to day for
Cricket.  They brought with them two gentlemen  (who were
on a visit at the Dean's,  on purpose to be of the party)  Captain
Saltern and Mr.  Gibbs,  the latter of them is esteemed one of the
most learned young men alive,  having won the  [  L Prize at
Cambridge.  Our little parlour was quite filled.

Mr.  T.  Mills begged me to remark the beauties of our
chimney piece,  on each side of which are placed,  just opposite
to each other,  a dog and a cat.  "  I am sorry,"  said he,  "  to-
see these animals here,  for I fancy they are meant as an.
emblem of husband and wife.  Now no two creatures disagree
so much as dog and cat " — "  And husband and wife  ?  "  cried I.
"  0,  no,  I beg your pardon,  ma'am,"  cried he,  "  I am only
sorry these people have ill judged them so  \"

To day has been but very so-so — nevertheless the Cricket
match could be no longer defer'd.  Mrs.  Western,  M.  JR.,
and I went on the Green at noon.  Mr.  T.  Mills,  not being
then engaged in play,  met us,  and got three chairs out of
their booth,  for us to sit without danger of the ball.  But it
was too cold.  Capt.  Saltern and Mr.  Gibbs walked round
with us.  Mr.  Gibbs came on my side pretending to screen
me from the wind,  and entered into small talk with a facility

Fanny left a blank for the name of the prize,  but never filled it.
It was one of the Craven Scholarships that was taken,  in 1772,  by Mr.
Gibbs,  afterwards Sir Vicaiy Gibbs,  Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer-
and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.  He was born at Exeter.
Towards the end of 1818,  H.  Crabb Robinson writes  :  "  Kaye the
Solicitor told Gurney once that he had,  that day,  carried the Attorney-
General,"  [Gibbs]  "  100 general retainers These were on thft

Baltic captures,  and insurance cases."

1773]  Frances Burney.  241

that would not have led me to supposing how high his
character stood at the university.  Mrs.  Rishton was in one
of her provoking humours.  She came behind me every now
and then and whispered  "  Fie,  child  ! "  and then shaking her
head and walking off  "  Upon my word,  the girls of this age  !
there is no more respect for a married woman than if — well,
I'd rather be whip'd than be married,  I declare  !  Really,
Mrs.  Western,  we matrons are no more regarded by these
chits than so many pepper-corns."  Mr.  Gibbs stared,  but
continued his talk.  Then in a few minutes she returned to
me again,  "  Really,  Miss Fanny Burney,  I don't know what
you mean by this behaviour  !  0 girls  !  girls  !  girls  !  "

When the wind grew more violent we went into the booth
for shelter.  Soon after Captain Saltern called out — "Take
care ladies all  ! "  and then hurried me suddenly out,  for the
cricket ball came over the booth.  Mrs.  Rishton,  with one of
her droll looks of sternness,  came behind me and in a half
whisper cried,  "  Very well,  Miss Fanny Burney,  very well 1 I
shall write to Dr.  Burney to-morrow morning."

They have all diverted themselves with me,  not a little,
ever since,  except Mr.  Rishton,  who does not approve of these
sort of pleasantries.  However,  his wife sufficed for two,  at
least !  She and Mrs.  Western have talked of the Captain
ever since.  And Mr.  Western has been very dry about the
Mr.  Mills. — "  They are very agreeable young men,"  said he,
*'  but I think he that sat by Miss Burney  (Mr.  G.)  is much
the most agreeable.  What do you think Miss Burney  ? "
41 0 yes,"  answered I.  Then again at supper yesterday,  he
said — "  A very agreeable evening,  upon my word, — don't
you think so,  Miss Burney  ?  "  And to-day,  after dinner,  he
said he was going to the cricket ground,  to see how they went
on — "  I shall acquaint the gentlemen,"  said he,  "  how indus
trious you all are  (we were picking sea- weeds) ,  and that tea
will be made in the same corner it was yesterday — hey,  Miss
Burney?"  'Tis quite enough to be younj,  my dear Susey,  to
be an object for gallant raillery.

i.

242 The Early Diary of  [1773

Friday,  Augst.

We have been taking a most delightful walk on the top of
the rocks and cliffs by the sea shore.  Mrs.  Western is so
charmed with this country that she endeavours to prevail with
her husband to buy an estate and reside here :  indeed it is a
most tempting spot.

Sunday,  Aug.

Yesterday morning we went to Ugbrook the seat of Lord
Clifford/  about five miles from here,  the gentlemen on horse
back,  and we three in Mr.  Western's chaise.

What is most remarkable in the House is a bed of exquisite
workmanship,  done under the direction of the Duchess of
Norfolk.  It is on a beautiful pink ground,  and worked in
birds and natural flowers with such glowing colours,  and so
exact a resemblance to nature,  that it is reckoned the most
finished piece of work in the kingdom.  The House is situated
in a most delightful Park filled with deer.  We went five miles
round his lordship's grounds,  and took a view of the rocks at
Chudleigh,  which are the most romantic and beautiful imagin
able.

This morning Mr.  and Mrs.  Western left us,  which we are
all sorry for, — we passed a very gay week with them,  being
all of us perfectly intimate and easy.  Mr.  Western is really
a very agreeable man,  and his wife is a charming woman.
Mr.  Rishton is quite melancholy at their departure,  as they are
prodigious favourites with him.  Indeed this has been the
dullest day we have spent yet.  Mrs.  Western has very par
ticularly repeated her invitation to me,  which I fancy,  as
Mrs.  Rishton is extremely earnest with me for it,  I shall  «
accept — with il caro Padres permission.

We seem to have quite dropt Mr.  Crispen.  He cannot but
have perceived Mr.  Rishton's coldness,  as he never calls.  Mr.
Rishton has an uncommon aversion to every thing that leads
towards flirtation,  and Mr.  Crispen from being much regarded
by him,  as the first man here,  is become almost odious.  I

This is Ugborough in booVs  ;  but the peasants say something like

rbronlr  "

«'  Ugbrook."

1773]  Frances Burney.  243

fancy that his friendship for Miss Bowdler has much contri
buted to make Mr.  Rishton dislike him.  However,  whenever
I meet him he assures me of the constancy of his passion,
though I really endeavour to shun him,  to avoid Mr.  Rishton' s
disapprobation.

It is not possible for a man to make a better husband than
Mr.  Rishton does.  He spends almost every moment of his
time with his wife,  and is all attention and kindness to her.
He is reading Spencer's  (sic)  "  Fairy Queen  "  to us,  in which
he is extremely delicate,  omitting whatever,  to the poet's great
disgrace,  has crept in that is improper for a woman's ear.  I
receive very great pleasure from this poem,  in which there is
an endless fund of invention and fancy,  ingenuity and poetry.

Mrs.  R.  and I study Italian together,  though very slowly.
Indeed we go out so much,  either walking or in the whiskey,
that we have hardly any time.

There are not above three houses here that have not
thatched roofs.  One of the three is Sir John Davy's,  which
we have been to see.  It is delightfully situated on the river
Ting

Mr.  T.  Mills has told Mr.  Rishton that he was in the same
College with my father when he was at Oxford,  at the Instal
lation,  and that no man has been received with so much
honour there as Dr.  Burney since it was a University.  Hearing
Mr.  Rishton name him,  "  Pray,"  said the Dean,  "  are you
talking of the Dr.  Burney  ?  "

Wednesday,  Aug".

On Monday the three brothers dined here.  They are
really very agreeable and amiable young men.  I add the
latter clause presuming upon the harmony and affection which
seems to reign among them  ;  and they appear to regard their
father only as an elder brother,  to whom they owe more respect
but not less openness.1

After dinner Mrs.  R.  and I took a walk,  and the gentlemen

1 Dr.  Milles married Edith,  daughter of Archbishop Potter.  His
sons,  Jeremiah  (whom Faiiuy,  in her notes,  calls  "James,")  and Thomas,
both became barristers.  The youngest,  Richard,  was afterwards a
Prebendary of Exeter.

244 The Early Diary of  [1773

went on the Den to play at quoits.  We returned first,  and
were just seated,  when we heard a rap at the parlour door.
"  Come in,"  cried I,  "  whoever you are/'  The door opened
and Mr.  Crispen entered.  "  Whose sweet voice bid me come
in?"  cried he,  "  May I hope that my love welcomes me  ?  "
He came immediately and drew a chair before me,  as I sat on
the window,  and began to relate his sufferings from his long
absence.  I told him that I thought it rather an affront that
he was alive.  He complained very much of my usage of him,
which he said was extremely ungenerous,  as I took advantage
of his fondness to treat him with cruelty.  To say the truth
he has of late grown rather more gallantly courteous to me
than I wish,  having taken it into his head to pay me many
compliments of too ridiculous a nature to bear writing;  besides
he is somewhat troublesome in taking,  or rather making,
perpetual opportunities of taking my hand.  I was very glad
that his attention was just called off,  to look at a particular
kind of cane,  which he moved away from me to examine,  as
the gentlemen returned.  Mr.  Rishton made him a very cold
bow,  and the eldest Mr.  Mills came and seated himself in the
chair which he had left vacant,  and entered into conversation
with me.  Mr.  Crispen was obliged to seat himself at some
distance.  The first interval he could catch he said to me —
"  I observe that my sweet friend is not without ambition,  for
I have taken notice that she always seats herself as high as
possible."  "  It is only,"  answered I,  "  because I require
some assistance to my heighth."  Tea and coffee were now
brought in — Mr.  Crispen presented my cup,  and then hastily
made his exit.  I fancy that his reception was such as will
by no means speed another visit from him.  Miss Bowdler,
too,  was with us all the morning,  and if she is not determined
to be blind,  must perceive Mr.  Rishton's coldness to her.

Friday,  Aug8t.

To-day,  for the first time,  I bathed.  Ever since I went
to Torbay 1 have been tormented with a dreadful cold,  till
within this day or two,  and Mr.  Rishton very much advised

1773]  Frances Barney.  24')

me to sea bathing in order to harden me.  The women here
are so poor,  and this place till lately was so obscure and re
tired,  that they wheel the bathing machine into the sea them
selves,  and have never heard of  [  ].  I was terribly
frightened,  and really thought I should never have recovered
from the plunge.  I had not breath enough to speak for a
minute or two,  the shock was beyond expression great ;  but,
after I got back to the machine,  I presently felt myself in a
glow that was delightful — it is the finest feeling in the world,
and will induce me to bathe as often as will be safe.

Saturday,  Aug*.
******

Sunday,  Augast.

This morning all the world was at church,  as the Dean of
Exeter preached.  He gave us an excellent discourse,1 which
he delivered extremely well.  We met all the family as we
came out,  and Mr.  T.  Mills joined our party.  The morning
was lovely,  and we took a very pleasant walk.  Mr.  Kishton
proposes going to Ivy Bridge or Staverton in a short time,  for
a few days,  in order to fish.  Mr.  T.  Mills invited himself to
be of our party.  We had again the pleasure to hear the Dean
in the afternoon,  who gave us a most admirable sermon on
Moral Duties.  The singing here is the most extraordinary
I ever heard ;  there is no instrument,  but the people attempt
to sing in parts, — with such voices !  such expression !  and such
composition  !  They to-day,  in honour I presume of the
Dean,  performed an Anthem ;  it was really too much to be
borne decently ;  it was set by a weaver,  and so very unlike
anything that was ever before imagined,  so truly barbarous,

1 Dr.  Jeremiah Milles,  Dean of Exeter  (1762),  F.E.S.,  aud President
of the Society of Antiquaries,  seems to have been a very worthy man,
aud a very frequent contributor to the  "  Archasologia."  Ho took the
wrong side about  "  Rowley's Poems,"  against such experts as Warton
and Percy.  He is the object of many sneers in Walpole's letters,  not
merely because of Rowley,  but for daring to doubt Walpole's own
"  Historic Doubts,"  as to the character and person of Richard III.  and
to say so in print.

246 The Early Diary of  [1773

that with the addition of the singers trilling and squalling, —
no comedy could have afforded more diversion.  Mrs.  Rishton
and I laughed ourselves sick,  though we very much endea
voured to be grave.  Mr.  Rishton was quite offended,  and
told his wife,  that the eyes of the whole congregation were
on her ;  but nothing could restrain us,  till the Dean began
his prayer;  and there is a something commanding in his voice,
that immediately gained all our attention.

Monday,  Aug".  30.

This morning,  Mr.  Rishton being out,  his wife and I were
studying Italian,  when we received a visit from Mr.  Crispen.

He was scarce seated,  when,  turning to me — "Now,  did
not I behave very well t'other day  ?  "  said he,  "  when the
Mills's were here  ? — I told you that when a young lover
offered,  I would retire,  and,  really,  the eldest Mills took to
my little Burney just as — indeed he is a very pretty young
man — and I think — "  I interrupted him with very warm
expostulations — letting him know,  as well as I could,  that this
discourse was quite too ridiculous.  Mrs.  Rishton got the
Peruvienne Letters,1 and beg'd him to hear her read — which
when he had done,  he insisted on giving me a lesson.  I was
extremely shy of receiving one,  but he would take no denial.
"  Don't mind we,"  said he,  "  what am I  ?  if it was Mr.  Mills,
indeed — "

To silence him,  I then began.  He paid me prodigious
compliments,  and concluded with modestly saying — "  Yes,  I
will follow you to London,  and give you a lesson a day,  for
three kisses entrance,  and two kisses a lesson."

Really I believe the man is mad,  or thinks me a fool,  for he
has perpetually proposed this payment to himself for different
things.  I was very grave with him,  but he was only the more
provoking.2

1  "  Lettres Peruviennes,"   by Madame de Graffigny,  published in
1747.

2 Mr.  Crisp gives the best explanation of Mr.  Crispen,  in writing
later on  (of Dr.  Fothergill),  to Fanny  : — "  I find he has taken to you,
and I observe we old fellows are inclinable to be very fond of yon.  You'll
say,  what care I for old fellows  ?     Give me a young one  !    Well,  we

1773]  Frances Burney.  247

"  Why,  now,"  said he,  "  you think this is a high price for
me — but it would be nothing for Mr.  Mills  !—

In short,  I believe ho has determined to say any and every
thing to me that occurs to him.

When he was going he turned to me pathetically — "  This
was a most imprudent visit ! — I feel it here stronger than
ever — I must tear myself away  !  >J Seating himself,  however,
again,  the conversation,  I know not by what means,  between
Mrs.  R.  and him turned on ill-proportioned marriages,  on
which he talked very sensibly,  but concluded with saying —
"  Had I come into the world thirty-five years later,  here I
had been fixed,"  taking my hand,  and then he went on in a
strain of complimenting till he took his leave.

As soon as he was gone,  we went to pay a visit to Miss
Bowdler ;  and here again we found Mr.  Crispen.

We both remarked that she was most excessively cold in
her reception and behaviour.  Perhaps Mr.  Rishton has in
fected her ;  and perhaps Mr.  Crispen's unexpected persever
ance in his devoirs to me offends her,  for she would be his
Eloise — a character she,  beyond all others,  admires — at least
her behaviour has that appearance.

Mr.  Crispen said I looked like a picture he had seen of
lone.  I never saw it,  and could therefore make no speeches.
I told him I had never before been compared to any picture
but that of the Goddess of Dullness in the  "  Dunciad."  His
usual strain was renewed.1 Mrs.  Rishton observed that he

don't hinder you of young ones  ;  and wo judge more coolly and disin
terestedly than they do;  so,  don't turn up your noso oven at our
approbation."  In 1779,  Mrs.  Streatftold called Fanny  "  the dove,"
just as Mr.  Crispeu had done.  "  For what reason  "  (writes Fanny),
"I cannot guess,  except it be that the dove has a greenish grey eye,
something like mine ;  be that as it may,  she called mo nothing else
while I stayed at Tunbridge."

"  In clouded Majesty here Duluess shone,

Four guardian virtues,  round,  support her throne."

Well,  after all,  the four guardians might have supported Fanny,  in no
ironic souse,  such as was meant by Popo.  Fortitude,  Temperance,  Pru
dence,  and Justice,  were fitting upholders of  "  Madame Miuerve,"  or
"  the Old Lady,"  or  "Flora,  Goddess of Wisdom."  See  "The Duu-
ciad,"  book i..  lines 45 to 54.

248 The Early Diary of  [1773

must make love to me.  "  Ay,"  cried Miss Bowdler,  "  or to
any body !"

"  No,  no/'  cried he,  "  if I had but been born thirty-five
years later — I had certainly fixed here for life  !  "

"  Or else with Miss Colbourne,"  cried Mrs.  Eishton.

"  Never did Miss Colbourne hear such a declaration/'  said
he,  "  no,  never  !  "

"Ay,  but the little Bowdler  !  "  returned Mrs.  R.

"No,  nor the little Bowdler neither/'  answered he.

"  0,"  cried she,  "  I am quite out of the question now."

"  And always,"  said he,  "  in regard to love,  always out of
the question  ! — ''

"  Why,  yes,"  replied Miss Bowdler,  colouring, — "  to give
him his due,  he never talked that nonsense to me."

Tuesday,  Aug.  31st.

We dined at Mr.  Hurrel's,  and met there Mr.  and Mrs.
Onslow.  The latter is a sister of Mr.  Phips.  They are the
handsomest couple I ever saw.  Mrs.  Onslow has suffered
very much from illness,  but must have been quite beautiful.
They are well bred and sensible.1

I cannot imagine what whim has induced Mr.  Rishton,  so
lively,  so entertaining as he is himself,  to take a fancy to the
Hurrels,  who are,  Mrs.  R.  and I both think,  most truly stupid
and tiresome.  Miss Davy,  the sister,  is a well-bred and con-
versible old maid,  and I much prefer her.

Wednesday,  Sept.  1st.

I was never before at the house of a sportsman on this most
critical day,  and really it is not bad diversion.  Mr.  Onslow
and Mr.  T.  Mills agreed to be of Mr.  Rishton's company
this morning,  in shooting.  At four o'clock the commotion
in the house awoke me.  I heard a thousand different noises;
the horses prancing,  the dogs called,  the gentlemen hallooing.

1 Arthur,  third son of General Onslow,  Lieutenant-Governor of
Plymouth,  married Frances,  daughter of Constantino Phipps,  Esq.  He
became Archdeacon of Berkshire,  and Dean of Worcester.

1773]  Frances Burney.  249

Messrs.  Onslow and Mills were here before Mr.  Rishton was
up  :  the house was in an uproar,  and it was by no means light
though they were so eager for sport.

Friday,  Sept.  3rd.

Nothing is now talked or thought of but shooting and game.
Mr.  R.  is just now set off with Mr.  T.  Mills  ;  dressed such
figures  !  really sportsmen have no regard to even common
appearances.

They complain very much of poachers here;  for my part,
I have no great compassion for their injuries.  Mr.  H.  who
is too fat and too lazy to shoot,  is also too great a gourmand
to deny himself game,  and is therefore suspected to be a
very great encourager of poachers.  They live but next door
to us,  and came out this morning,  as well as Mrs.  R.  and me,
to see the sportsmen set off.  Mr.  T.  Mills very slyly began
to entertain them with discoursing on the injuries they received
from poachers,  and added,  "  it is not for the birds  ;  we sports
men do not much value them,  but for the pleasure of finding
them,  that we quarrel with poachers"-  —  and  (turning to me)
"  I am sorry to say,  for the pleasure of killing them."

"  I had some intention/'  said I,  "  of sending an  '  Ode,  on
the 31st of August,  with the Partridges'  Complaint/  to every
sportsman in the county."

"  I am sure I should have been very happy,"  cried he,
bowing with an air,  "  to have received it from you,  and to
have given it"-  Here he stopped,  checked,  I presume,

by conscience from giving any promissory professions.

Sunday,  September.

This morning we heard Mr.  Onslow preach.  He says ho
always travels with a brace of sermons,  that he may be ready
to give occasional assistance to his brother clergymen when
requested.  I did not at all admire him,  as he seems to be con-

250 The Early Diary of  [1773

•ceited  ;  and indeed the Dean has at present made mo
•difficult.  After service the two youngest Mills and Mr.
Onslow called in,  to settle their next shooting party with Mr.
Eishton.  It is amazing what a laborious business this is  :  they
go out before breakfast ;  after two or three hours'  shooting
they get what they can at any farm-house ;  then toil till three
or four o'clock,  when sometimes they return home  ;  but,  if
they have any prospect of more sport,  they take pot-luck at
any cottage,  and stay out till eight or nine o'clock.  The
weather makes no alteration in their pursuits ;  a sportsman
defies wind,  rain,  and all inclemencies of either heat or cold.
As to Mr.  Eishton,  he seems bent on being proof against
everything  ;  he seeks all kinds of manly exercises,  and grows
sun-burnt,  strong,  and hardy.

We went to dinner at Star- Cross,  a little town about eight
miles off ;  Mrs.  Eishton,  as usual,  driving me in the whiskey,
and Mr.  Eishton and the man on horseback.  We dined at
an Inn in a room which overlooked the river Ex.  We were
very unfortunate in the evening,  and were overtaken by rain,
wind and darkness  ;  and,  as these roads are very narrow,  very
steep,  and very craggy,  we should really have been in a very
•dangerous situation after it grew too dark for Mrs.  E.  to see
to drive,  had not her husband made the man lead his horse,
while in the midst of the wet and dirt,  he led the whiskey
himself by hand.  On these occasions he is very uncommonly
good-natured and attentive to female fears and cowardice.

Thursday,  September.

Mr.  Tom Mills breakfasted with us this morning at 6
o'clock,  and then set out with Mr.  Eishton on a shooting
party.  Mrs.  E.  and I went in the whiskey to Dawlish a
mighty pretty village on the sea coast.  We had the Hur-
rels with us in the evening.  That stupid couple,  to whom
Mr.  Eishton has taken a most unaccountable liking,  ennui both
his wife and me to death.  Her good nature is so tiresome
and officious that I would prefer even a bad temper,  with a
little portion of understanding.

1773]  Frances Barney.  251

We have seen Mrs.  Phips but seldom since her sister-in-
law Mrs.  Onslow has been here.  She is a sweet woman and
has pretty blue eyes,  like my dear Susan's.

Septr.

I must give you this last week all in a lump,  for I have no
time for daily dottings.

We have been to Staverton.  ...  It was a very agreeable
excursion.  We slept at Ashburnham,  and went in the whiskey
many miles round.  The county of Devonshire is inexhausti
ble in the variety of its rural beauties.  Hills,  vallies,  rivers,
plains,  woods,  lanes,  meadows  —  everything beyond all
description,  romantic and beautiful.  The river Dart,  which
is the boundary of the Staverton manor,  is the most rapid
clear and delightful one I ever saw.  There are walks along
the banks that are delicious.  The whole manor belongs to
the Miss Folkes and their married sisters.1 The richness of
the land is astonishing,  plenty and abundance reign partout —
but I have neither time or talents to describe this most
charming country.  There are places about Tingrnouth which
do altogether exceed every other,  as all the prospects have
some view of the sea,  which is so noble an object that it en
livens and beautifies all others.*

Thursday,  Sepf.  16th.
We leave Tingmouth to-morrow.

It will not be without regret that I shall quit this incom
parable county

Mr.  Crispen went yesterday.      We have seen very little of

1 These ladies appear to have been the cousins of Mr.  Rishton's
mother.  We have already met ou these pages Mrs.  Rolfe and Mr.
Western,  the second and the youngest daughters of William Folkes,
Esq.  Ursula,  his eldest,  and Mary,  his third daughter,  were probably
the ladies of Staverton.  Ursula afterwards married Admiral John
Macbride,  and Mary,  John Balcheu West,  Esq.

*  This most genuine and just feeling Fanny expressed to Sir Joshua
Reynolds,  and in spite of villa-building,  it is still true.  We copy an
unpublished paragraph in her Diary for 1778  : — "  We had a good deal
of talk about Devonshire,  Sir Joshua's native county  : — and we agreed
perfectly in praise of Tiugmouth and its environs,  indeed,  he said,  he
was sure I must admire it,  for no person of taste could do otherwise, —
so,  you see,  we had a little touch of gallantry as well as of virtu."

252 The Early Diary of  [1773

him lately ;  Mr.  Rishton's extreme coldness has been too
visible to be unnoticed.  We were not returned from Staver-
ton when he went,  and so took no leave of him  ;  by which
means I dare say I lost an abundance of fine speeches  :  though
I believe he thought himself laughed at by Mrs.  Rishton as
well as slighted by her husband, — for of late he has contented
himself with insisting on my never marrying,  without his con
sent,  and on my letting him give me away — this he has been
vehement about  ....  And he earnestly and very seriously
solicited me to write to him,  that he might prepare himself
for his office,  &c.  [Honestly,  my dear Susan,  I have never
been able to quite understand him  ;  but when he lets alone
his gallantry he is full of information and very agreeable.]

Miss Bowdler,  who goes to Bath to-day,  called this morn
ing.  We have all parted upon very civil terms,  though I am
sure her penetration is too great to have suffered Mr.  Rish-
ton's dislike to escape her

We spent yesterday between packing and leave-taking.  We
only found time to go down to the beach,  to take a last view
of the sea.  Mr.  Rishton was in monstrous spirits all day.  I
am afraid he was grown somewhat tired of Tingmouth,  where
he has been six months.  I wish it may happen,  that I may
ever see Mrs.  Phipps again,  [and the very clever Miss Bowd-
ler.]  *

1 The wish to see Mrs.  Phipps again,  originally ended this sentence,
and the Teignmouth Diary.  The words,  "  and the very clever Miss
Bowdler,"  were added much later,  and are of the nature of a
palinode.  In 1818,  Mme.  D'Arblay wrote of  "  My oldest friend,
to my knowledge,  Mrs.  Frances Bowdler,"  making a point of seeing
her about seven weeks after the death of General D'Arblay,  and
staying two hours,  when Mme.  D'Arblay scarcely saw any friends.
These two,  who were young ladies in 1773,  may have met again
at Bath,  where Miss Burney was,  either in 1776,  of which we
have no journal,  or in 1777,  of which there is but an imperfect
Diary — at any rate,  they did meet again at Bath in 1780.  Seven
years had made one Fanny famous,  and  "  Bowdlerized"  the manners
of the other,  so that Mr.  Crispen could be named  (as ho was)  without
exciting pique or petulance.  In 1780,  Fanny found Miss Frances
Bowdler  "  more agreeable than formerly  ....  very sensible,  and un
commonly cultivated,"  .  ..."  so that her conversation and company
were well worth seeking."  The Bowdler family were in high,  and more
than local,  esteem,  within the memory of the living.  Worthy people

1773]  Frances Barney.  253

Mrs.  R.  and I went to sit with the Hurrels and Miss Davy
in the evening.  Lady Davy,  who is a great fright in every
sense of that word,  was there.  They took a very affectionate
leave of us.  We then went to Mrs.  Phips.

[No account remains of the journey eastward.  The Rishtons took
Fanny to London,  and left her,  and Romeo,  (whom she was to nurse,)  in
Queen's Square.  The further movements,  and something of the after-life
of Maria and her husband will be told at the end of this year's diary.]

Queen Square,  October.

Mr.  Garrick,  to my great confusion,  has again surprised
the house,  before we were up;  but really my father keeps
such late hours at night,  that I have not resolution to rise
before eight in the morning.  My father himself was only on
the stairs,  when this early,  industrious,  active,  charming man
came.  I dressed myself immediately;  but found he was
going,  as I entered the study.  He stopped short,  and with
his accustomed drollery,  exclaimed,  "  Why now,  why are you
come down,  now,  to keep me  ?  But this will never do  !
(looking at his watch)  upon my word,  young ladies,  this will

revered them as a family of moral and religious authors.  Their
mother wrote theological works,  a brother was the cause of a new
English verb,  to  "  Bowdlerize."  He immortalized himself by such
vigorous excisions from Shakespeare's plays,  to make them fit for
41 family reading,"  that we have been told by a strict governess of the
old school that when she hpld the true Shakespeare,  and set her pupils
to read to her from the Bowdler,  she discovered that Dr.  Bowdler had
seen evil where none was,  and pruned without heed or need.  He
afterwards treated Gibbon's  "  Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire  "
in like manner.  He was a Tunbridge Wells physician,  and F.R.S.
The youngest daughter,  Mrs.  Harriet,  wrote poems,  essays,  a novel or
more,  and sermons  (without her name),  which were taken for those of
a divine,  and preached by real divines.  In 1730,  Miss Bowdler  (Jane)
had totally lost her voice for the three previous years after a severe
cold.  She wrote,  for her own consolation,  essays and verses,  which
were published by her family after her death,  and ran through sixteen
editions between 1787 and 1830.  The high opinion of her family,  and
the fact that the profits were to be given to the Bath hospital account
for this,  as,  taken away her sad condition and the pity of it,  there is
nothing in the volume.  Frances was the second daughter,  and seems
to have kept her pen quiet,  preferring the use of her tongue.  In a
family numbering seven authors this was no small distinction.

254 The Early Diary of  [1773

never do  !  "  He invited my father in Lord Shelbourne's name
to go with him to dine at his lordship's,  as he has a fine statue
lately come from Italy,  which has a musical instrument,  and
which he wishes to show my father.1

My father asked him for his box for us at night,  to see the
Mask of Alfred,  which is revived.2 But he insisted upon our
going to the front-boxes.  "  You shall have my box,"  said
he,  "  any other time that you please ;  but you will see nothing
of the new scenes up there.  Now,  you shall have my box to
see me,  or the old new play that is coming out,  with all my
heart."

"  0  !  dont say that,"  cried I ;  "  dont say to see you  ;  you
don't know what you promise."  He laughed ;  but I deter
mined not to let such an offer be made with impunity.

He took much notice,  as usual,  of Charlotte ;  he seems
indeed to love all that belong to my father,  of whom he is
really very fond.  Nay,  as he went out,  he said,  with a very
comical face to me,  "  I like you  !  I like you all  !  I like
your looks  !  I like your manner  !  "  And then,  opening his

1 William,  second Earl of Shelburne,  and first Marquis of Laiis-
downe,  the well-known minister of George III.    Dr.  Buruey was always
on the search for ancient,  or even savage,  musical instruments.     Banks
and Solander brought him from Iceland a  "  long spiel,"  played with a
bow,  so obsolete that only one Icelander could be  .found to play on it,~
and Bruce supplied him with a beautiful drawing of an Abyssinian
lyre.

2 James Thomson and David Mallet wrote the  "  Masque of Alfred,"
by command of Frederick,  Prince of Wales,   for the birthday of his
eldest daughter,  "  the Lady Augusta."     It was acted in the gardens of
Cliveden,  upon the 1st of August,  1740,  and repeated.     The decora
tions,  dresses,  and scenery were the finest that had then been seen,  nor
were there wanting  "triumphal arches,  dances of furies,  and incanta-
tatious."     It was revived in 1750,  with music partly composed by Dr.
Burney.     Thomson died in  ]  74#.     Mallet made changes in the Masque
that Garrick might have more of a part to play as Alfred.     Mallet was
much blamed for mangling the work of Thomson,  "  retaining  "  (says
Arthur Murphy)  "  only three or four of Thomson's speeches and part
of one song" — the famous  "  '  Kule Britannia,'  which he altered for the
worse  " — but this may have been a mere political criticism,  as Boliug-
broke,  Mallet's patron,  wrote some stanzas of  "  Kule Britannia,"  with
intentional reference to politics,  and to his favourite idea of a  "  Patriot
King."

1773]  Frances Burneij.  255.

arms with an air of heroics,  he cried,  "  I am tempted to run
away with you all,  one after another."  We all longed to say,
Pray,  do!

Dr.  Hawkesworth dined here the same day ;  his wife and
Miss Kinnaird were to have accompanied him  ;  but were dis
appointed.  I was very sorry at not seeing Miss Kinnaird,
who is a sweet girl.  I find that she is sister to Lord Kin
naird,  a young Scotch nobleman,  just come of age.  Dr.
Hawkesworth looks very ill ;  he has had very bad health
lately.  Indeed I believe that the abuse so illiberally cast on
him,  since he obtained  £6,000 by writing the Voyages round
the World,  has really affected his health,  by preying upon his,
mind.  It is a terrible alternative,  that an author must cither-
starve and be esteemed,  or be vilified and get money.

Seeing in the papers on Thursday  "  Abel Drugger by Mr.
Garrick,"  I prevailed with my dear father to write him a note,,
which he did very drolly,  claiming his promise,  but begging
for only two places.  He sent immediately this answer :

"  My dear Dr.,

"  I would rather have your family in my box,  than
all the Lords and Commons.

"  Tour's Ever,

"D.   G."

Never could I have imagined such a metamorphose as I
saw ;  the extreme meanness,  the vulgarity,  the low wit,  the
vacancy of countenance,  the appearance of unlicked nature in
all his motions.  In short,  never was character so well entered
into,  yet so opposite to his own.1

We have had a visit from Miss Ford and her companion

1 Abel Drugger is a character in Ben Jonson's play of  "  The Alche
mist,"  which was altered by Colmau,  and played at Drury Lane.
Drugger is an uncouth and dull tobacco-vendor,  who consults the
Alchemist as to success in his trade.  Garrick had the art of making
himself look so stupid and insignificant in this part,  that someone who
had been favoured with a letter of introduction to him,  after seeing
him as Abel Drugger,  said that  "  now he had seen what a mean-looking
creature Garrick was,  he should not present his letter."

256 The Early Diary of  [1773

Miss Mills.  She lent us her box yesterday to see Miss Bar-
santi in the part of Charlotte Rusport in the West Indian.
She did it with great ease,  sprightliness,  and propriety,  and
looked exceedingly well.1 I am very glad,  that she has suc
ceeded in so gentoel a part.  But how unfortunate the loss of
voice that drove her from a concert-singer to the stage  !

Kovr.  9th,  3 in the morning.

My poor mother is extremely ill of a bilious fever.  This
is the third night that I have sate up with her  ;  but I hope to
Heaven,  that she is now in a way to recover.  She has been
most exceeding kind to us,  since her return to town ;  which
makes me the more sensibly feel her illness.  She is now
sleeping,  so is her nurse,  and I write to avoid the contagion.

Dr.  Fothergill,  the celebrated Quaker,  is mama's physi
cian.2 I doubt not his being a man of great skill ;  but?  his
manners are stiff,  set,  and unpleasant.  His conversation con
sists of sentences spoken with the utmost solemnity,  concise
ness,  and importance.  He is an upright,  stern,  formal-looking
old man.  He enters the room,  and makes his address with
his hat always on,  and lest that mark of his sect should pass
unnoticed,  the hat which he wears,  is of the most enormous
size I ever beheld.  Nevertheless,  this old prig sometimes
affects something bordering upon gallantry.  The first time
he came,  after he had been with Mrs.  Allen 3 to the bed-side,
and spoken to mama, — and then written her prescription ;

1  "  The West Indian,"  Cumberland's best comedy,  was first acted,
at Drury Lane,  in 1771.

2 John Fothergill,  M.D.  (1712-1780),  left  £80,000.     He made  £7,000
a year when in full practice.     He founded the Quaker school at Ack-
worth,  in Yorkshire.     His medical writings were four times published,
by three different editors,  between 1781 and 1784.     There is a notice
of him and a very Quakerish portrait in Nichols's  "  Literary Anec*
dotes."     He was Dr.  Melchisedech Broadbrim in Foote's  "  Devil upon
Two Sticks."

3 The mother of the second Mrs.  Barney.

'773]  Frances Burney.  257

—he stalked up to me,  and endeavouring to arrange his rigid
features to something which resembled a smile  ;  "  And what,"
cried he,  "  must we do for this young lady's cough  ?  "  Then
he insisted on feeling my pulse,  and with a kind of dry plea
santry,  said,  "Well,  we will wait till to-morrow;  we wont
lose any blood to-night."

November 24th,  2 in the morning.

Though it is now a fortnight since I wrote last,  I take up
my pen exactly in the same situation and with the same view,
as I then did, — save that mama is exceedingly recovered,
and thank God  !  nearly well.  Since I wrote last,  I have my
self been ill with a sore throat,  which I believe was the effect
of over-rating my strength.  Dr.  Fothergill has been my very
good friend,  and that,  whether I would or not.  He imme
diately perceived when I was taken ill,  and after seeing
mama,  said to me,  "I am afraid thee art not well thyself?"
On examining my throat,  he advised me to be very careful ;
for that it was catching,  the sort which I had,  which was the
putrid,  though in a slight degree.  He told me what to take
Ac.,  and was most exceeding attentive to me the whole time ;
and really,  for him,  has been amazingly civil and polite to'
me.  But yesterday,  after complaining of his fatigue and great
business,  he turned suddenly to me,  and taking my hand,
cried,  "  My dear,  never marry a physician.  If he has but
little to do,  he may be distressed ;  if he has much,  it is a
very uncomfortable life for his companion."

He came here several times,  before he saw my father,  who,
when at home,  is always shut up in his study ;  but one even
ing,  when mama was very ill,  being anxious to hear the
Doctor's opinion,  he came up stairs.  He addressed himself,
like a man of the world,  to the Doctor,  who rose,  and with
great^ solemnity said,  "I suppose it is Dr.  Burney that I
see  ?  My father bowed,  and said he was happy in being
known to him.  "I never,"  answered he,  "had the satisfac
tion of seeing Dr.  Burney before!"  "No,  Sir;"  said my
father,  "  I have always been so unfortunate as to be out,  when
you have been here."  "  Most commonly,"  answered the old
Quaker,  with a dryness that seemed not to give implicit faith

258 The Early Diary of  [1773

to the assertion.  But since this,  they have had many conver
sations,  and are very good friends.  And really with all his
stiffness and solemnity he appears to be as humane as he is
skilful.

Mama has so good a night,  that I fancy this will be the
last of my nocturnal communications.  While she was ill,  she
desired me to write for Miss Young,  who is now here.  I had
not seen her some years ;  she is exactly the same she was, —
sensible,  intelligent,  bashful,  shy,  awkward,  affectionate,  feel
ing,  and truly worthy.  I love her much,  and hope we shall
keep her some time.  Mama is almost recovered.  Dr.
Fothergill makes his visits very seldom.  He says he always
knows when his patients are really recovering by these signs  :
if men,  he finds their beds covered with newspapers;  if
women,  he sees them,  with new top -knots,  or hears them ex
claim,  t(  Dear me  !  what a figure I am  !  "

I have now entered into a very particular correspondence
with Mr.  Crisp.  I write really a Journal to him,  and in an
swer he sends me most delightful long,  and incomparably
clever,  letters,  animadverting upon all the facts  &c.,  which I
acquaint him with,  and dealing with the utmost sincerity in
stating his opinion and giving his advice.  I am infinitely
charmed with this correspondance — ant I mean — which is not
more agreeable than it may prove instructive.

[From Mr.  Crisp.]

[1773.]
My Dear Fanny,

In consequence of our agreement,  I shall now begin
with an instance of the most pure and genuine sincerity,
when I declare to you that I was delighted with your letter
throughout, — a proof of which  (that perhaps you would have
excused)  is this immediate answer with a demand for more —
The horseleech hath two daughters,  saith the wise man,  saying,
"  Give  !  Give  !  " — I find myself nearly related to them on this
occasion.  I profess there is not a single word or expression
or thought in your whole letter,  that I do not relish, — not

1773]  Frances Bumey.  259

that in our Correspondence I shall set up for a Critic or
Schoolmaster or observer of composition — the deuce take
them all !  I hate them.  If once you set about framing
studied letters,  that are to be correct,  nicely grammatical,  and
run in smooth periods,  I shall mind them no otherwise than
as newspapers of intelligence.  I make this preface,  because
you have needlessly enjoined me to deal sincerely,  and to tell
you of your faults ;  and so let this declaration serve  [to tell
you]  once for all,  that there is no fault in an epistolary cor
respondence like stifihess and study.  Dash away whatever
comes uppermost;  the sudden sallies of imagination,  clap'd
down on paper,  just as they arise,  are worth folios,  and have
all the warmth and merit of that sort of nonsense that is
eloquent in love.  Never think of being correct when you
write to me.  So I conclude this topic,  and proceed to be
sorry and glad that you and your Mammy have been ill and
are better.  Your Dr.  Fothergill I am well acquainted with
by character,  and pronounce you a very able portrait painter.
I find he has taken to you,  and I observe we old fellows are
inclinable to be very fond of you.  You'll say,  "  What care
I for old fellows  ?  give me a young one ! "  Well ;  we don't
hinder you of young ones ;  and we judge more coolly and
disinterestedly than they do ;  so don't turn up your nose even
at our approbation.

Now,  Fanny,  I do by no means allow of your re-considera
tion and revocation of your Tingmouth Journal ;  on the con
trary,  I demand it,  and claim your promise,  and confirm my
own,  viz. ;  to return it safe to Charly Burney's,  well and care
fully sealed up,  and the contents lodged in my own snowy
bosom.1 Your pleas,  frivolous ones they are;  and I reject
them all

As to that rogue your father,  if I did not know him to be
incorrigible,  I should say something of that regular course of

1 These girls seem to have thought that  "  the Governor  "  considered
their papers lawfully subject to her control,  and inspection.  Maria
took very little pains to deprive  "  the higher powers,"  (as she writes)
of chance of reading her journal,  which was apt to be  "  lying some
where about the house  " — although she demanded great caution on the
part of Fanny and Susy.

260 The Early Diary of  [1773

irregularity he persists in — two,  three,  four,  five o'clock in
the morning,  sups at twelve  ! — is it impossible for him to get
the better of his constitution  ?  has he forgot the condition he
was in the winter after his first return to England  ?  perhaps
he is like a seasoned old drinker,  whose inside is so lined with
a coat of tartar,  that his brandy only goes in  [.  .  .]  like a
worm in a still,  without affecting the vessel it passes through.
Certain it is,  that he uses his thin carcass most abominably,
and if it takes it at his  [hands,]  it is the most passive,  sub
missive slave  [of a carcass]  in Europe.

I am greatly pleased with the growing reputation of his
Tours ;  of which I never had the least doubt ;  and no less so,
with those marks of favour and esteem for the Great and the
Eminent,  and only wish him to make that worldly use of
them,  which he ought;  in which particular he has hitherto
been so deficient ;  and I desire you will transmit to him the
enclosed quotation,  which I have lately read in a Letter from
his friend Petrarch to Mainard Accurse  : —

Now,  if Petrarch  (for whom all the Princes and Geniuses
of Europe were contending for fifty years together)  could find
out this severe and mortifying truth,  surely  'tis a lesson to all
future candidates for fame and favour,  to make that bien-
veillance  (which at bottom is all self and vanity)  turn to some
account,  and make hay while the sun shines.

******
I am quite comforted to hear he is so full  [of business,
which]  if it does not improve and increase,  'tis his own fault —
On my blessing I charge him,  not for any consideration,  to
neglect that,  and which at last,  and at the long run,  will prove
his surest,  firmest,  best,  perhaps his only Friend — mark that —
while he preserves that,  it will prove his best security for
holding fast other friends — I cannot too much inculcate,  beat,
drive,  hammer,  this saving Doctrine into him which makes
me dwell so long on this Article

[ME.  CEISP TO FANNY BUBNEY.]

[Although this fragment of a letter from Mr.  Crisp to Fanny is not
of the same date as that which precedes it,  we place it here,  as it dwells

1773]  Frances Burney.  261

on the same subject,  Dr.  Barney's beat towards working more than
was good for his health.  At its head are these words written by
Mme.  D'Arblay.  —  "  Written at the time when my dear indefatigable
father was working at night at his History."]

I'll tell you what,  Fanny.  —  I yesterday received a letter
from Hettina,  wherein she gives such an account of your papa
that,  when I come to town  (which I believe will not be very
distant)  I shall without ceremony send for Dr.  Monro,1 have a
strait waistcoat immediately put on him,  debar him the use of
pen.  ink,  and paper and books,  to which  (if he is mutinous)
shall be added a dark room  —  what does he mean?  if he has
no consideration for himself,  has he no regard for his rela
tives  ?  I am out of all patience with him,  —  I have lately had
just the same pain in my side he has;  but  'tis of no con
sequence  ;  it comes and goes,  and the booby has nothing to
do,  but to allow some repose to his thin carcase,  to get well
again.  —  I call him booby  ;  but that is not half bad enough
for him  ;  'tis downright idiotism  ;  how true is it,  that he that
increaseth knowledge,  increaseth sorrow  !  I had rather be a
frog,  an oyster,  an onion,  than a S9avant at such a rate  !
Adieu  !

I sadly want to know about Mr.  Greville and his motions  ;
....  have you seen him lately  ?  send me all about him and
your absurd Father particularly,  and that immediately.
Adieu  !

I am glad that my father has recovered an old friend,  with
whom he had a breach  ;  he is,  at length,  entirely and most
cordially reconciled to Mr.  Greville,  who has been here two
or three times,  in his old way,  without fuss or ceremony  .....

I have had,  lately,  a very long,  and a very strange con
versation with Mr.  Young.  We happened to be alone in the

1 John Monro,    M.D.,   was chief physician to Bridewell,    and to
Bethlehem Hospital,  vulgarly known as Bedlam. —

"  Close to those walls where Folly holds her throne,
And laughs to think Monroe would take her down.

One cell there is concealed from vulgar eye,
The cave of Poverty and Poetry." — The Dunciad.

The Early Diary of  [1773

parlour,  and either from confidence in my prudence or from
an entire and unaccountable carelessness of consequences,  he
told me  "  that he was the most miserable fellow breathing,"
and almost directly said that his connections made him so,  and
most vehemently added,  that if he was to begin the world
again,  no earthly thing should ever prevail with him to marry  !
that now he was never easy,  but when he was litterally in a
plow cart ;  but that happy he never could be  !  [I a]m sorry
for him — but cannot wonder  ....

I am truly concerned,  as we all are,  at the untimely death
of Dr.  Hawkesworth.1 He had not strength to support the
abuse he has most unjustly been loaded with.  I cannot help
attributing his death to the uneasiness of his mind,  which
brought on a slow fever,  that proved mortal.  When he was
last here,  he told us his plan of defence,  which he was then
preparing for the press,  as soon as a lawsuit,  then depending,
was decided.  I am doubly sorry that he left this plan un
accomplished and his fame and reputation at the mercy of his
enemies;  who have,  however,  been wholly silent since his
death.  The world has lost one of its best ornaments, — a man
of letters who was worthy and honest.  Poor Mrs.  Hawkes
worth is in great affliction.

*»P  *  TT TT  -JP  "Tr

REMNANT OP AN OLD LETTER TO MR.  CRISP.*     [1773].
#  *  #  #  *  #

The death of poor Dr.  Hawkesworth is most sincerely
lamented by us all,  the more so as we do really attribute it to
the abuse he has of late met with from the newspapers.  His
book was dearly purchased at the price of his character,  and
peace,  and those envious and malignant Witlings who per
secuted him,  from his gaining money,  are now satisfied and
silent.  You may perhaps doubt of this,  but indeed if you had
known him more,  you would not.  He dined with us about a
month before he died,  and we all agreed we never saw a man

Dr.  Hawkesworth died,  Nov.  17,  1773.

This heading is in the writing of Madame D'  Arblay.

T773]  Frances Burney.  263

more altered,  thin,  livid,  harassed  !  He conversed very freely
upon the affair of his book and abuse  :  my father told him
there was hardly a man in the kingdom who had ever had a
pen in his hand,  who did not think that he could have done it
with more propriety,1 and that his enemies were all occasioned
by his success,  for if he had failed,  every voice would have said
"  poor man  'tis an ingenious,  well written book,  he deserved more
encouragement."  Dr.  Hawkesworth said that he had not yet
made any answer to the torrent poured upon him,2 except to
Dalrymple who had attacked him by name.  He added he was
extremely sorry when any of his friends had vindicated him in
print,  for that a lawsuit was then depending upon Parkinson's
publication,  and that he would take no methods of influencing
justice,  but as soon as it was decided,  he should publish at
once a full and general answer to the invidious,  calumniating
and most unjust aspersions which had been so cruelly and
wantonly cast on him.  He has not lived to accomplish his
plan  !  He told my father that he had earned every thing he

1  '  Propriety '  is not used here in its present sense.  What is meant
is,  that every hack or scribbler,  who was envious of the high pay
received by Hawkesworth,  thought lie could have done the work better,
was,  in fact,  more fit,  or proper for it.

a  "  Mr.  Cradock of Leicestershire,"  whom Boswell describes as  "  a
very pleasing gentleman,"  says in his  "  Memoirs  " : — "  All Lord
Sandwich's other friends were severely assailed on account of a
passage relative to a particular providence in the preface to Hawkes
worth' s book,  and it was maliciously urged that, "  till Dr.  Hawkesworth
had been connected with the India House and the Admiralty,  he had
always written on the side of morality and religion."  Mr.  Cradock
adds,  "  I constantly met Dr.  Hawkesworth at Lord Sandwich's table at
the Admiralty about the time of his publishing  '  Cook's Voyages.'
He was a most agreeable companion ;  but he became careless and
luxurious  ;  hurt his constitution by high living ;  and was con
sequently very unhappy.  His excellent and intelligent wife was
always discreet ;  and had the management of his great work,  '  The
Voyages,'  been left entirely with her,  nothing either immoral or
offensive would ever have appeared before the public.  I never knew,
till lately,  how much merit,  in former publications,  was due to her.
She was an unassuming woman,  of very superior talent.  The Doctor
never  '  sinned but against himself.'  He was quite finical in his
dress,  by which he sometimes subjected himself to ridicule,  though a
favourite with all."  In 1799 Dr.  Burney writes of the Abbe Delille,
•'  His person is not very unlike little Hawkeswortb/B,  but piu brutto"

264 The Early Diary of  [1773

possessed by dint of labour and industry,  except the last
£6000 — that he had had no education or advantage but what
he had given himself:  but that he had preserved an un
blemished character and reputation till this last year  ;  since
when,  I believe he has had reason to detest the fortune which
only preceded detraction and defamation.  He died of a linger
ing fever which had begun to prey upon him when we last saw
him.  My father read to him a great deal of his history/  with
which he appeared much pleased,  and only objected to one
word all the way.  He candidly declared it was all new to
him,  and that though he had never studied or cared for music,
he found it easy to understand,  and very entertaining.  He
expressed much curiosity about the remainder,  and made my
father explain his design and intentions

[When their pleasant sojourn at Teignmouth was ended,  the
Kishtons,  after leaving Fanny in London,  went to visit Mr.  and Mrs.
Western at Cokethorpe,  in Oxfordshire.  Maria wrote from Tets-
worth,  the very next day after a parting so tender that she threatened
Fanny with a quarrel when next they met for  "  making the first
fifteen miles of her journey very uncomfortable."  Indeed her dis
tress confused Mr.  Kishton,  who lost his way,  and,  instead of taking
the Oxford Koad,  (now Oxford Street,)  drove up the Tottenham
[Court]  Eoad in order to go to  "the Crown and Cushion,"  at Ux-
bridge,  where they were to sleep.  They next ran over  "Tingmouth,"
"  who was travelling under the body of the whiskey,2 but though the

1  "  The History of Music,"  published 1776 to 1789.

2 In 1773,  Mr.  Eishton felt that he could not drive through London
in a  "buggey"  although he might in a whiskey.     In 1824,  Sir Walter
Scott describes the whiskey of Mrs.  Margaret Dods,  of the Cleikum
Inn,   St.   Eonan's,   as being  "a vehicle,   which,  had it appeared in
Piccadilly,  would have furnished  ....  laughter for a week. ....  It was
a two-wheeled vehicle,   sturdily and safely low upon its little old-
fashioned wheels."     About 1830,  the buggy had its revenge,  by be
coming the fashion in Paris.      "  Le boguey"  is among the sterile
pleasures,  the empty amusements,  in which M.  P.  G.  Viennet,  a French
poet,  in his Epistle to a  "  desoeuvre,"  (or unoccupied young fellow,)
upon the charms of Study,  entreats his  "  cher Eaymond  "  no longer to
consume his leisure,  and squander his youth.      Earnestly does he
ask him,

"  Mais les bals,  les concerts,  les festins ou tu cours
Ton boguey,  tes chevaux,  tes frivoles amours,
Les spectacles,  les jeux,  remplissent-ils ta Vie  ?  "
As for Martin Eishton's  "  phaeton and four bays,"  when an under.

1773]  Frances Burney.  265

wheel went clean over her body,  after giving herself two or 3 hearty
shakes and wriggles she began romping with Trump  .  .  .  and pursued her
journey on foot."  Maria  "  begs an account of the governour's health."
In her next,  of  "  Oct.  ye 2nd,  1773,  she hopes Fanny and herself will
soon meet and forget over a chearfull bottle all past sorrows."  She
dwells on the beauty of the road from High Wycombe to Tetsworth,
lying chiefly through Lord Le de Spencer's woods.  As she is  "  not
gifted with a descriptive talent,"  she will defer  "  these beauties  "  until
they meet ;  but she pauses to tell of his stables,  &c.,  which he has made
so  "  ornamental as they appear like temples."  They arrive at Oxford
on a showery morning,  and  "  R.  did not seem sorry,  as I believe he
much dreaded trailing about Oxford to shew me the colleges — it was
almost as bad as driving thro'  London in a buggey — vowt m'entendez
— how coud we bear to be seen in Oxford,  where we had once shone
forth the gay,  the extravagant Martin Rishton — whose only carriage
was a phaeton and four bays — metaphorsed  (tic),  into the attentive kind
husband,  who I believe prefers a dot-and-go-one with his wife to the
fiery coursers without,  as I saw how matters stood,  I put of seing
anything and begd it might be left to another opportunity,  on which I
was exceedingly press'd,  but I was obdurate."  She had her hair dressed
by the worst friseur she had seen for many years — "took a snap-
dinner,"  and then set off.  Next they ran over another of their dogs,
"  Judge,"  and hurt  "  Tiugmouth,"  as well as a dog called  "  Swinger  ;"
the dogs being  "crazy."  From Witney to Cokethorpe the road was
almost impassable.  The mud hindered them from more than walking
the horse at the slowest pace.  Cokethorpe they gained at half-past six.
"  The park and house very melancholly  ...  as we drove up there
seemed a deadlike silence.  .  .  .  The shutters were shut in the front.
.  .  .  We drove into the stable-yard ;  still no appearance of any living
creature  .  .  .  but Rishtou attributed all this to the order and method
of Mr.  Western.  Thomas dismounted and hallowd  (sic).  No one
auswerd.  .  .  .  Still R.  said,  '  Ah,  you see what order and regularity
reigns in this family — the servants are all employed.'  I own my
thoughts were full of the sleeping beauty in the wood,  which I dared
not communicate.  After straining our voices the old shepherd ap
peared,  who told us Maister and Madam was not at home,  but he woud
call Maister Thomas,  who coud tell us more about it."  This was a
servant,  who said that Mr.  and Mrs.  Western were gone into Bucking
hamshire,  and had written to prevent the Rishtons coming there until
Wednesday.  He pressed them to stay,  but they braved the bad road
and slept at Witney  ;  returning next day to meet their kinsfolk.
"  Whisker"  (the horse)  is knocked up,  Swinger is better,  Tingmouth has
had the distemper,  "  been blooded,"  and  "  takes regularly"  the powders

graduate,  that would indeed be a sight to amaze all Oxford in our time,
for in nothing is that University more changed than in the very small
proportion of undergraduates who keep a horse at all — to the great
number who did so fifty years ago.

266 The Early Diary of  [1773

"  of Dr.  James  "  (which are said to have been fatal to Oliver Goldsmith),
and  "  is walked out gently for exercise,"  led by  .Maria in a string ;  "  it
is thought that Tingmouth must ride all the way to town."

After a few days,  they again passed through London,  on their way
to an old house,  at Stanhoe,  infested by rats,  and much out of repair,
which belonged to the wife of one of Maria's Allen kinsmen.  A letter is
extant in which Maria first says that she will send Fanny a plan of the
house,  next adds,  that Fanny would not understand it if she did ;
then begins a description of it,  but breaks off with,  "but hang descrip
tions — I never understood one in my life till I had seen the premises,  so
will give you some account of our manner of life.  We have hardly seen
a soul since our arrival except Mrs.  Mun Allen who comes prying
about pretending to look after her workmen — she has given us a ten
years lease on the condition we go half the expence of new sashing the
house — which we agreed to do readily as we have at present nothing to
look forward to that need make us mind a hundred pounds,  for look and
convenience ;  it is a monstrous good bargain for her,  as the frames of the
windows are so rotten they woud not have hung together two years
longer and then she must have done them at her own expence — we are
making vast out door improvements.  We found every thing in the most
ruinous condition we are new planting the garden — cleaning and cutting
out new walks in the wood — indeed it is a sweet spot I every day find
new beauties in it and am determined to think it my own and not look
too much into futurity ten years will make a great break in our lives
and I hope we are comfortably settled for the best ten years of it.  I
own when I first came for a day or two I let the foul fiend get so much
the better of me as to think within myself what signifies making this
place agreeable to me or laying out money on Other people's estates,  tis
ours to day and theirs to morrow — but I hope I chased such narrow
minded ideas from my heart and that I shall be as happy to see the fruit
trees I plant flourish the last year of my lease as I shoud the first — you
may remember while at Tiugmouth I dreaded engaging in the cares of
so large a family but am now convinced there are pleasures for every
station and employment for I now woud not give up my bustling morn
ings for the loitering life I led in Devonshire — that might have tired
this cannot as I hope I am acting properly what shoud I do — As I have
no children,  to fill up my mornings with — sometimes Bishton is out
from breakfast till dinner — I then dedicate an hour or two to the

kitchen Mr.  R.  has spared me a very pretty yard and house for

my poultry and I have several friends who have promised to supply me
with some — we have got one cow and are to have others and have one
of the prettiest neatest dairys you can imagine.  I potter after Kishton
everywhere." — Then comes a list of the dogs,  old and new;  the last
being  "a Portugal pointer from the banks of the Dowrow — from whence
he takes his name."  For awhile,  Maria wrote of her house and manner
of living with a sense of enjoyment — so that she has little time to write
to Fanny,  whom she is always begging to visit her.  There is even a very
daring statement that she  "does not envy Fanny Lord Stanley's /ete-

1773]  Frances Burney.  267

champetrc.1 I think the entertainment of my chicken and poultry -yard
and dog-kennel,  far exceeds it."  But her spirits rose and fell.  At
another time,  it was a cry of  "  How 1 regret the calm life I led at
Tingmouth." — "  Ah,  Fanny,  Tingmouth,  Tingmouth  !  What a diffe
rence between a man and a maid,  and nine servants  ! " — "  I am not
formd to manage a set of caballing insolent servants." — "  The more
there are,  the more insolent,  and if R.  was of my mind,  I woud give
up one half of those we have."  Her Lynn connexions visit her and
pity her for living away from  "  that seat of the muses,  that meridian of
taste,  the second Athens for learning,  the favourite retreat of the gods
where the golden age flourishes again,  where simplicity,  virtue,  benevo
lence,  candour,  have taken their abode — Lynn I will en
deavour to prevail on my soaring gineus  («?c)  to drop his fluttering
pinions and descend to a vulgar style suited to your grovling ideas,"  &c.

Again,  "  Not even my kitchen is sacred from the Lynn Managers."
Her Lynn visitors follow her into it,  and she is  "  still so awkward and
bashfull,  (a favorite expression of Martin,)  that she can riot order a dinner
before them."  She breeds turkeys and poultry,  and toils with Martin
over ploughed fields to look at his barley.  She is often  "  in a Moil  "  (as
they still say in Norfolk),  but"  Eishton,  Who I believe is the Most Active
Creature Alive is never easy to see me Stupyfying myself with domestic
employments — if I sit down to the Tambour for half an hour — '  Come
Maria you must go with me and see how charmingly Damon  (the new
pointer,  the reigning Favorite)  hunts and what good command I have
him under — I know of a pheasants Nest about two Miles of you Shall
go and see it,'  then away we trail broiling over Corn-fields — and
When we come to the pit some Unlucky Boy has Stole the Eggs as
was the Case the other  [day,]  then I spend Whole Mornings seeing
him Shoot Rooks — grub up trees — and at night for we never come in
now till Nine o'Clock — When tea is over and I have settled my
Accounts or done some company business — bed-time Comes."

There is no certain sign that Fanny was ever again in Norfolk
until after she left the Queen,  but her brother James visited the
Rishtons when he chanced to be on dry land.  We find them in
terested in Dr.  Burney's  "  History of Music,"  and for Jem's sake,  in
Captain Cook.  Mr.  Rishton gives Jem two choice puppies,  which some
less favoured connexion covets,  so that Jem had better not speak of
the gift.  At a later time,  Captain Buruey names his only son,  (the
"  Martin Burney  "  of Charles and Mary Lamb,)  after the Norfolk squire
Martin Rishton.  We find Mr.  Rishtou in company with Mr.  Windham,
in the diary of the latter.

The doctor and Fanny were high in Mr.  Rishton's good graces,  but
he thought his mother-in-law  "  very tolerable,  and not to be endured."

1 If Fanny went to this fete,  she has left no description of it.  Lord
Stanley gave it at his villa,  the Oaks,  near Epsom,  on the 9th of June,
1774.  See the correspondence of Mrs.  Delany,  pp.  1-4,  Vol.  II.
Series II.

268 The Early Diary of  [J773

Indeed,  he was hard to please,  and,  it may be,  that,  for long,  Maria
humoured his fastidious fancies and proneness to cavil at his kinsfolk
and her own,  far beyond what loyalty demanded.  He raised bars
about her by being what the French call  '  difficile '  in character,  quick
to disapprove,  and prompt in expecting his wife to share his distastes.
He oscillated between setting up fine equipages,  and selling his
coach-horses to spare expense.  Things must be showy,  or non-existent.
Not long after her marriage,  Maria writes that  "  Eishtou has got a
phaeton building in London.  I dont think it quite Prudent so many
Expences but I am become a much better manager and cannot think of
throwing Cold Water as I have hitherto on an Amusement he has
wished for ever since we married.  I must endeavour to save in other
Matters,  you may believe me when I assure you If he wd permit me
that I woud rather go in a Linnen or Stuff gown all my Life than
debar him of the vast pleasure indeed it is no merit at all of mine as
you well know — Dress was never an Object with me — but one must Con
form a little to the manners of the World at least he wishes I shoud."

She was childless,  and often alone.  By degrees her letters lose their
wild gaiety — she is,  (she writes,)  "so entirely seperated from those I
love " — "  from a lovd society that I remember with the greatest
pleasure notwithstanding the maney rubs we used to meet with,  when
browsing over my little  [fire],  and eating good things out of the closet
by the fire side."  She is always  "  very inquisitive to know anything
about "  the Burneys,  "  from my Mo,  and my Do  "  [Dr.  and Mrs.  B,]
"  to the cat and Charlotte's Sparrow."  To the Burueys  ;  above all to
Fanny and to Dr.  Burney,1 she shows  (throughout a correspondence
with Fanny,  lasting until 1821)  a devotion and gratitude,  which find
even passionate expression,  increasing as the years go by,  although
the time had long passed when  (as she says)  "our connexions and
friendships were nearly the same  ; "  and all subjects were in common.

She has her Mrs.  Coke of Holkham,  while Fanny has,  for a while,  her
Mrs.  Thrale.  Mrs.  Coke entreats Fanny,  whom she knows only as the
author of  "  Evelina  "  and  "  Cecilia,"  to choose her a governess,  whom
she will take from her,  unseen.  We have dwelt upon this friendship,
mainly because it is another proof of the steady warmth of Fanny's
heart ;  and of that constancy,  which was  (as she truly said to a lover
of her own,  later on,)  her favourite virtue.  Fanny survived her
"  beloved friend  "  about twenty years.  Maria,  who was then a widow,
died in 1821.

1 Maria writes in 1786,  "  I must be the most ungrateful of human
beings coud I for a moment forget the paternal kindness I received
from him while I boasted his protection."  "  There is an even melan
choly regret — in the shape of a sincere wish that none of my family
had ever quitted his sheltering roof till placed under the protection of
a worthy husband."  This refers not only to her own case,  but to that
of her younger sister,  who was still more imprudent,  and more unhappy
in her marriage.

1774]  Frances Burney.  269

1774.

[The diary of this year originally contained passages concerning
Dr.  Burney,  Mr.  and Mrs.  Stanley,  and Mr.  and Mrs.  Arthur Young,
before the description of the visit to Miss Reid.

The Crisp letters of the year are enclosed in a quarto sheet of paper,
marked No.  II,  and headed  "  Parts of Letters of my honoured Mr.
Crisp,  of the year 1774."  Below,  is this note,  addressed by Mrae.
D'Arblay to her son ;  "  I have kept only one whole letter of my own
this year.  The rest were too trivial for a place in the Rectory — for
which I try to select some innocent prog." l

That Fanny was writing something,  beside letters,  early in this
year seems to be shown by the following passage,  which we find in a
letter dated Feb.  7  : —

[MARIA KISHTON TO FANNY BUENEY.]

And so Mr.  Cartwright has made Miss Burney a new riding habit —
and she is riding away on her pretty nag Grub — at least one wd
imagine so by my not having receivd a single line. — "  Are you sure,
James,  Miss Burney did not give me any letter or parcel  ?  "  "  No indeed,
ma'am."  "  Well then she is a false perfidious girl,  and so much for
her."]

[FROM ME.  CRISP.]

Chesington,  Jan.  the 1st.

A happy new year to the Fannikin  !  and I think I begin it
well ;  and as an instance of my sincerity,  I own to you,  I
answer your letter so soon,  just as your over grateful people
profess their acknowledgements for benefits received — in
hopes of more — your letter,  when it came,  was an excellent
one ;  but you are devilish long-winded,  pray mend that fault
*'s history is something singular,  and highly enter
taining — you sum up the whole with this question —
"  Is each man perjur'd,  and each Nymph betray'd  ?"

1 This alludes to those hopes of her son's preferment in the church,
which were never fulfilled so far as a rectory was concerned.

270 The Early Diary of  [1774

You don't state the matter right ;  but in the light you con
sider it,  the plain,  positive answer,  is, — Yes.

Now,  you are young,  artless,  open,  sincere,  unexperienced,
unhackney'd in the Ways of Men  ;  consequently you have high
notions of Generosity,  Fidelity,  disinterestedness,  Constancy
and all the sublime train of Sentimental Visions,  that get into
girls'  heads,  and are so apt to turn them inside out — No wonder
therefore,  that you rail at men,  and pull the poor devils to
pieces at such a rate — Now I must endeavour to set you right,
and persuade you to see things as they really are,  in Truth
and in Nature;  then you will be more favorable,  and no longer
think them monsters,  wretches,  etc. — be assured,  my Fanny,
they are just what they were design 'd to be — Animals of
Prey  * — all men are cats,  all young girls mice — morsels —
dainty bits — Now to suppose when the mouse comes from her
hole,  that the generous,  sentimental Grimalkin will not seize
her,  is contrary to all Nature and Experience,  and even to the
design and Order of Providence — for depend on it,  whatever
is,  is right ',  and however strange such a doctrine may seem,
the constant,  universal,  and invariable,  innate Disposition and
Practice of all mankind from the beginning of things,  and in
all ages,  must have been originally meant and intended ;  and
tho'  particulars,  and individuals,  are the sufferers,  I have
no doubt,  but that the general order and design of Providence
is carried on by these irregularities and misfortunes — Teeth and
claws were given to tygers  ;  and nimble heels,  and quick
ears to the roebuck,  by him who gave all to all — I don't mean
by this to justify particular instances of treachery,  ingratitude,
breach of hospitality,  etc.,  which are ever to be detested,  and
their authors should be banished from society ;  but barely to
inculcate and if possible immoveably to fix in your mind this
position,  that in the commerce between the two sexes,  a sense
of what is right and wrong is too feeble a restraint to have the
least dependence on ;  in many cases,  the incitement is so
violent,  and uncontroulable,  that even a long-try'd virtue

1 This reminds us of a speech of my Lord Ogleby's,  in Garrick and
Colman's  "Clandestine Marriage,"  (1766,)  "I look upon women as ferae,
nature,  lawful game,"  etc.  Some sentences in this letter are an en
largement of a few lines in the  "  Misanthrope  "  of Moliere.

1774]  Frances Burney.  271

snaps in two like a thread at the first attack — such is human
nature — the only Security is flight,  or Bars and Bolts and
Walls.1

[Miss BURNEY TO MR.  CRISP.]

7th Feb.

Did you draw me into a correspondence,  my dear Daddy,
with no other view than that of mortifying me by this entire
breach of it  ?  I take it for granted that you were heartily
tired,  and repented of your scheme.  Though I allow this to
be very natural,  I cannot forbear noticing that it seems of
necessity for men to be capricious and fickle,  even about trifles.
However,  I acknowledge that if I had had any head I must
have foreseen this blow,  but as I never had none it has almost
stunned me.  Yet I will frankly own,  that even while I
received your letters they appeared to me too flattering to last
long.  But,  if by any chance,  I have been so unfortunate as
to offend you, — though I can hardly suppose it — I intreat you
my dear Sir,  not to punish me with silent resentment.  I
would rather receive from you the severest lecture you could
pen,  because while I might flatter myself with even meriting
your notice I ahould indulge hopes of regaining your kind
ness  ; — and,  if you will so far favour me,  I will gladly kiss the rod.

But if,  after all,  I have only weaned you,  do not think me
so weak as to wish to teaze you into writing — I could not for
bear sending this remonstrance,  but will not trouble you again
unless you should again desire it— which I only fear you
should now do out of compliment,  or compassion.  However,
I will not further pester you,  but only subscribe myself,

My dear Daddy,
Your ever affectionate and obliged

FRANCES BURNEY.

If you should write,  I conjure you to let it be with frankness.

[Addressed — "  Samuel Crisp,  Esqe.,  at Mrs.  Hamilton's,  Chesington,
near Kingston-upon-Thames,  Surrey."  Numbered 2,  i.e.,  of this year.]

1 This letter is numbered as II.  (of 1774),  and headed by Mine.
D'Arblay,  "  severe portrait and strictures on mankind at large."

The Early Diary of  [1774

[Miss BUENEY TO ME.  CRISP.]

Queen Square,

9th Feb.

My dearest Sir,

The sight of your hand,  once again directed to me,  really
made me jump.  I am a thousand times more comfortable,
too,  in knowing that you wrote before my foolish scrawl could
reach you,  for which I now beg your pardon,  though I can
only now urge in my excuse that the readiness of your first
answers quite spoiled me.  I cannot imagine how you can
contrive to laugh with so much gravity,  as when you are
pleased to speak of my letters — however,  though my swallow
is not quite so deep as you apprehend,  yet while I can at any
rate procure answers,  I neither can or will forbear writing.

I dare not— perhaps indeed can not — pursue your  [*  *  *  *]
Coquetry,  I must acknowledge,  is almost universal,  and I
know fewer girls exempt from that passion than from any
other — it seems irresistible — I was going to add something of
vanity and love of pleasure,  but there is no sort of occasion to
make concessions to you,  who are so little inclined to over-rate
our merits.  I will therefore only say,  that though I readily
allow you a general superiority over us in most other par
ticulars,  yet in constancy,  gratitude,  and virtue,  I regard you
as unworthy all competition or comparison.1 The flights and
failings of women are oftener from some defect in the head
than the heart,  which is just reversed by you — so that where
we are weak you are wicked — now which is least justifiable  ?2

February 20th.

What will become of the world,  if my Annals are thus
irregular  ?  Almost two months have elapsed without my
recording one anecdote  !  I am really shocked for posterity !

1 Compare this with what Miss Austen puts into the mouth of Anne
Elliot,  in  "  Persuasion,"  Chapter XI.,  Vol.  2.

2 This is a fragment,  numbered 3,  i.e.,  of this year.

1774]  Frances Burney.  273

But for my pen,  all the adventures of this noble family might
sink to oblivion  !  I am amazed when I consider the great
ness of my importance,  the dignity of my task,  and the novelty
of my pursuits  !  I should be the Eighth Wonder of the
World,  if the world had not already,  and too prematurely,
nominated so many persons to that honour!

Thursday mama took us with her to Miss Reid,  the cele
brated paintress,1 to meet Mrs.  Brooke,  the celebrated au
thoress of  '  Lady Julia Mandeville.'  Miss Reid is shrewd and
clever,  where she has any opportunity given her to make it
known  ;  but she is so very deaf,  that it is a fatigue to attempt
conversation with her.  She is most exceeding ugly,  and of
a very melancholy,  or rather discontented,  humour.  Mrs.
Brooke is very short and fat,  and squints  ;  but has the art of
showing agreeable ugliness.  She is very well bred,  and ex
presses herself with much modesty upon all subjects  ;  which
in an authoress,  a woman of known understanding,  is extremely
pleasing.  *

1 Catherine Reid,  a Scotch portrait-painter,  was called  "  the English
Rosalba"  ;  Rosalba being a Venetian lady crayon-painter,  of high note
in Europe in the earlier half of the eighteenth century.  Miss Reid,
in 1745,  painted the beautiful Isabella Lumisden,  (afterwards Lady
Strange,)  as a maiden in a blue snood,  pressing a white rose to her heart.
The Editor saw this with singular pleasure among other interesting
family portraits and Jacobite relics in the kindly possession of a grand
daughter of Sir Robert and Lady Strange,  Mrs.  Edmund Ffoulkes,  the
wife of the Vicar of S.  Mary the Virgin,  in Oxford.  The face is oval  ;
there is a power in the chin and forehead whick gives expression to the
regular beauty of all the features.  She appears as if archly looking at
some one who has just spoken.  The utterance may have been  "whigguh,"
as she answers by the mockery of her eyes,  and the closer pressure of
the rose.  In the same collection there is a portrait of Mr.  Lumisden,
brother of Mrs.  Strange,  by Miss Reid.  He,  too,  is very handsome.
Family-tradition tells that he was also charming,  and that the paiutress
felt the charm even too much for her happiness.

1 Frances Moore,  daughter of a Norfolk clergyman,  married the Rev.
John Brooke,  rector of St.  Augustine's Church in Norwich,  and of
Coluey,  also in Norfolk.  Mr.  Brooke was,  at one time,  chaplain to the
garrison of Quebec,  which gave his wife the opportunity of describing
Canadian scenery in her novel,  "  Emily Montague,"  and of drawing

I.  T

274 The Early Diary of  [17 74

The rest of the party consisted of Miss Beatson,  a niece of
Miss Reid's,  Mr.  Strange,  and Dr.  Shebbeare.  Miss Beatson
is a very young and very fine girl,  not absolutely handsome,
yet infinitely attractive ;  she is sensible,  smart,  quick,  and
comical ;  and has not only an understanding which seems
already to be mature,  but a most astonishing genius for
drawing,  though never taught.  She groupes figures of chil
dren in the most ingenious,  playful,  and beautiful variety of
attitudes and employments,  in a manner surpassing all credi
bility,  but what the eye itself obtains :  in truth,  she is a very
wonderful girl.1

on herself,  by praises of  "  the fine prospect up the river St.  Lawrence,"
the remark from Dr.  Johnson,  "  Come,  Madam,  confess that nothing
ever equalled your pleasure in seeing that sight reversed,  and finding
yourself looking at the happy prospect down the St.  Lawrence."  [Just
like  "  the high road to England."  See Boswell.]  Mrs.  Brooke's
"  Lady Julia Mandeville"  was esteemed a  "  standai'd novel,"  and is to
be found as such in Mrs.  Barbauld's edition of  "The British Novelists."
The plot of the story is absurd,  and the manners are,  on the whole,
"  imaginary,"  that is,  when they are semi- Arcadian  ;  but it would
appear to have touched the fancy of better novelists who read it in
their  'teens.  There is in it a very coquettish widow  (by far the best-
handled character in the book),  whom you expect to turn out something
like the  "  Lady Olivia"  of Miss Edgeworth and the  "Lady Susan  "  of
Miss Austen,  but who stops far short of those dangerous charmers,
and,  after alarming you,  is left the only happy person at the end of the
novel,  with the exception of a very patient colonel,  whose constancy she
rewards,  so that the  "  modish  "  people turn out the most sensible.  We
suspect that a well-meaning but very tiresome novelist,  Mrs.  Brunton,
borrowed from  "Emily Montague"  for her novel of  "  Self- Control."
Mrs.  Brooke was also a writer of plays,  and had the usual quarrel of
playwrights with Garrick,  whom she put into one of her novels,  but
said afterwards that she regretted it.  Hannah Moore took up her pen
for Garrick against Mrs.  Brooke.  About the same time that Mr.  Crisp's
"  Virginia  "  was played,  Mrs.  Brooke sent Garrick a play of her own
upon the same subject.  Garrick refused to read it until Mr.  Crisp had
printed his tragedy.

Mrs.  Brooke appears to have been a pleasant and amiable woman.
In proof whereof,  although she joined Mrs.  Tates,  the actress,  whom
she had met by chance,  in the management of the King's Theatre in
the Hayraarket,  they lived in harmony until Mrs.  Yates died in 1787,
when  "  an accurate account of her life from the admired pen  "  of Mrs.
Brooke was printed in the  "  Gentleman's Magazine."

1  "Nelly"  Beatson,  niece of Miss Reid,  was Helena,  daughter of

1774]  Frances Burney.  275

\pr.  Shebbeare,  who was once put actually in the pillory for
a libel,  is well known for political and other writings.1 He
absolutely ruined our evening;  for he is the most morose,
rude,  gross,  and ill-mannered man I was ever in company
with.  He aims perpetually at wit,  though he constantly
stops short at rudeness.  He reminded me of Swift's lines :

"  Thinks raillery consists in railing,
Will tell aloud your greatest failing." ")

For he did,  to the utmost of his power,  cut up every body on
their most favourite subject ;  though what most incited his
spleen was Woman,  to whom he professes a fixed aversion ;
and next to her his greatest disgust is against the Scotch;
and these two subjects he wore thread-bare;  though indeed
they were pretty much fatigued,  before he attacked them ;

Robert Beatson,  of Killeric in Fifeshire.  In 1777 she married Charles
Oakley,  who held several important offices in the East India Company's
service.  He was made a baronet in 1790,  and Governor of Madras in
1794.

1 John Shebbeare,  M.D.,  was fined,  imprisoned,  and nominally pil
loried,  for some trash called  "Letters to the People of England"
(1756-7).  No.  7 of these letters was seized by the Government.
Beardmore,  Under-Sheriff of the City of London,  happened to be an
old brother-scribbler of Shebbeare's,  and took such care to treat him
gently,  that he was himself fined and imprisoned for neglect of his
duty — in fact,  for making the pillory too pleasant Afterwards Sheb
beare was pensioned by another government.  ''  I,"  says Boswell,
"observed"  [to Johnson]  "that the pillory does not always disgrace  ;
and I mentioned an instance of a gentleman who I thought was not
dishonoured by it."  "  Ay,  but he was,  Sir.  He could not mouth and
strut about as he used to do,  after having been there.  People are not
willing to ask a man to their tables who has stood in the pillory."
Here,  however,  he is found  "  mouthing "  as if he had never stood in
the pillory.  Some sentences which Fanny wrote down in amazement
have been crossed out  (seemingly by another hand)  as too  "  gross  "  to
be suffered to stand even in manuscript ;  yet,  as it is,  we have here a
good specimen of those stupid efforts at satire which sent him to the
pillory.  He was a Jacobite,  so Mr.  Strange and Miss Reid put up
with him,  and Smollett writes of him in his  "  History of England  "  as
"  this good man."  Yet he is said to have been  "  Ferret "  in Smollett's
novel of  "  Sir Lancelot Greaves."  His last appearance in the pillory
is in one of Macaulay's Essays.

276 The Early Diary of  [1774

and all the satire which he levelled at them,  consisted of trite
and hackneyed abuse.  The only novelty which they owed to
him was from the extraordinary coarseness of language he
made use of.  But I shall recollect as much of the conversa
tion as I can,  and make the parties speak for themselves.  ^1
will begin with Mr.  Strangers entrance,  which was soon after
ours.  After his compliments were paid to the/air sex he turned
to the Growler. — 0

"  Well,  Dr.  Shebbeare,  and how do you do  ?  "

Dr.  Shebbeare. — Do  ?  why,  as you see,  pestered by a
parcel of women.

Mrs.  'Brooke. —  Women and the Scotch always fare ill with
Dr.  Shebbeare.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — Because they are the two greatest evils
upon earth.  The best woman that ever I knew is not worth
the worst man.  And as to the Scotch — there is but one thing
in which they are clever and can excell the English,  and that
is they can use both hands at once to scratch themselves — the
English never think of using more than one.^^- v

Miss Reid. — Ay,  Dr.,  you only abuse us because you are
sorry that you are not one of our countrymen.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — What,  envy,  hey  ?  Why its true enough
that they get every thing into their own hands ;  and when
once they come they take care never to return,  no,  no  !

Miss Reid. — You was saying,  Mrs.  Brooke,  that you did
not not know till I told you that Dr.  Burney had a wife  >
what do you think then of seeing these grown up daughters  ?

Mrs.  Brooke. — Why,  I don't know how,  or why,  but I
own I was never more surprised than when I heard that Dr.
Burney was married.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — What,  I suppose you did not take him
for a fool  ? — All men who marry are so,  but above all God
help him who takes a widow  !

Mr.  Strange. — This is a strange man,  Mrs.  Burney,  but
nobody ever minds him.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — I don't wonder that Dr.  Burney went
abroad  ! — all my amazement is at his ever coming home  !  un
less,  indeed,  he left his understanding behind him,  which I
suppose was the case.

1774]  Frances Burney.  277

Mrs.  Brooke. — I am sure that does not appear from his
Tour.  I never received more pleasure than from reading his
account of what he saw and did abroad.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — I hate authors  !  but I suppose one wit
must hate another.

Mrs.  Brooke. — Those few authors that I know give me
great reason not to hate them ; — quite the contrary — Dr.
Johnson,  Dr.  Armstrong,  and I wont say what I think of Dr.
Burney;  but for Dr.  Armstrong I have a very particular
regard.  I have known him more than twenty years.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — What,  I suppose you like him for his
intrigues  ?

Mrs.  Brooke. — Indeed,  I never heard he had any.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — What,  I suppose you had too many yourself
to keep his in your memory  ?

Mrs.  Brooke. — 0,  women,  you know,  Dr.,  never have
intrigues.  I wish Dr.  Burney was here,  I am sure he would
be our champion.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — What,  do you suppose he'd speak against
himself  ?  I know but too well what it is to be married  !  I
think I have been yoked for one and forty years,  and I have
wished my wife under ground any time since.

Mama. — And if she were you'd marry in a week  !

Dr.  Shebbeare. — I wish I was tried.

Mr.  Strange. — Why this is a sad man,  Mrs.  Burney,  I
think we must toss him in a blanket.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — Ay,  with all my heart.  But speak for
yourself  (to Mrs.  Brooke),  do you suppose your husband was
not long since tired of you  ?

Mrs.  Brooke. — O,  as to that — that is not a fair question ;
—I don't ask you if you're tired of your wife.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — And if you did,  I'd tell you.

Miss Beatson. — Then I ask you,  Dr.  Shebbeare,  are you
tired of your wife  ?

Dr.  Shebbeare. — I did not say I'd tell you,  Bold Face.

Mama. — I wish that Mrs.  Strange was here;  she'd fight
our battles admirably.

Mr.  Strange. — Why do you never come to see her,  Doctor  ?

Dr.  Shebbeare.— Because she has so much tongue,  that I

278 The Early Diary of  [1774

expect she'll talk herself to death,  and I don't choose to be
accessary.1

•jf  -Jr  */v  •$•  ^"

Mr.  Strange. — What do you think of the Bookseller's Bill
and the state of literary property,  Doctor  ?  2

Dr.  Shebbeare. — Why,  I don't think at all about it.  I
have done with books  !  I have not written a line these twenty
yearg — though indeed I wasted a pint of ink last week.

Mama. — Then I am sure you must have spilt it,  Dr.

Dr.  Shebbeare. — I never knew a bookseller who was not
a scoundrel ;  I was cheated plaguly about  '  Lydia/3 and the

1 It does geem a pity that Mrs.  Strange was not there  ;  but we shall
hear a little  (too little)  of her by-and-by.     Nothing could be more
characteristic of Mr.  Eobert Strange,  than his  (next to no)  share in
this conversation.     A lady connected with his family,  wrote thus of
him,  a little later:  "I was  -very happy with Sir Eobert Strange.     I
never saw so pleasant an equal-tempered agreeable man in my life,  and
so modest.     His wife and he are the very oposite  ;  (sic)  for she is all
fancy,  fire,  and flash,  yet very steady to the main chance ;  but he admires
her,  and is so well amused with her fancys  (sic)  that,  when silent,  he
starts a subject to make her shine."

2 This was a bill in the interest of the booksellers,  designed to give
them the monopoly of reprinting their own lapsed copyright works,
of which the decision at law of Beckett and others v.  Donaldson,  1771,
had deprived them,  and to otherwise modify the copyright act of 8th
Anne,  c.  19.     Burke and Alderman Harley were on the side of the
booksellers,  and Attorney -General Thurlow and C.  J.  Fox were against
them.     The bill passed the Commons in May,  1744,  but was thrown
out at the first reading in the Lords on June 2nd.     See Parl.  Hist.,
1744,  Feb.-June.

3 Shebbeare's novel of  "  Lydia,  or Filial Piety,"  was published in
1755,  in four 12mo.  volumes.     The man wrote thirty-four novels.     His
name is fixed in the editor's memory,  as,  when a girl,  she was sharply
rebuked for reading one of them,  of which she can recall neither the
name,  or the plot ;  but this conversation brings back to her its dul-
ness.     This novel was in a collection of novels from Don Quixote to
Richardson and a few later writers,  with the Arabian Nights and
all manner of imitations of them — Tales Turkish,  Persian,  Tartarian,
and of the Genii.     She has seen but one copy of the set,  which was
in forty-eight volumes ;  a dear and delightful collection,   never to
be forgotten.     It was printed in double columns,  had full-page en
gravings of Eobinson Crusoe and Friday,  Noureddin and the Fair
Persian,  Sir Hargrave carrying off Harriet Byron from the masquerade,
Sir Charles Grandison bowing over her grandmother's hand in the

Frances Burney.  279

rascal who sold the  '  Marriage Act '  promised to share the
profits,  yet though I know that there have been six editions,
he always calls it the first. l

Miss Reid. — Pray Dr.  have you seen Nelly's last drawing?
She has made me dance a minuet !

Dr.  Shebbeare. — Well said,  Nelly  !  I'll make thee im
mortal for that !  I'll write thy life.

Mrs.  Brooke. — She'll make herself immortal by her works.

As to Susy and I,  we never presumed to open our lips for
fear of being affronted  !  but,  when we were coming away,  Dr.
Shebbeare called out to us,  "  Here  !  mind what I say ;  be
sure you never marry  !  "  You are right,  thought I,  there could
not be a greater antidote to that state,  than thinking of you.

Miss Reid was,  I suppose,  somewhat scandalized at this
man's conversation,  as it happened at her house,  and therefore,
before we took leave,  she said,  "  Now,  I must tell you that
Dr.  Shebbeare has only been jesting ;  he thinks,  as we do,  all
the time."

"  This it is,"  cried he,  "  to have a friend to lye for one  ! "

What a strange fancy it was,  for such a man as this to write
novels  !  However,  I am tired of writing ;  and so,  Adieu  !
sweet Doctor Shebbeare.  I must read  "  The Marriage- Act,"
and  "  Lydia,"  nevertheless.

March 17th.

The Spring is generally fertile in new acquaintances.  My
father received a note last week from Mr.  Twiss,  a gentleman

cedar- parlour,  &c.  It was bound iu the best style of the latter half of
the eighteenth century.  The backs shone with gold.  Mrs.  Barbauld's
"  British Novelists  "  was the successor to this collection.  Mrs.  Barbauld
left out some inferior novels,  and added those of Fanny Burney and
Mrs.  Inchbald.  Her own prefaces to the novels have great merit.

1 The title of this novel was  "  The Marriage Act,  a Political Novel ;
in which the ruin of female honour,  the contempt of the clergy,  the
destruction of private and public liberty,  with other fatal consequences,
are considered in a series of interesting adventures."  By John Sheb
beare,  M.D.  The subject was not the Royal Marriage Act of 1772,  but
Lord Hardwick's Marriage Act of 1753,  which put an end to Fleet
Marriages.  This act was very unpopular,  as it enforced greater
publicity of marriages.  Goldsmith wrote two papers against it in the
"Public Ledger,"  1760,  which are reprinted as No.  Ixxii.  and No.  cxiv.
in  "  The Citizen of the World."

280 The Early Diary of  [1774

just returned from a tour in Spain ;  and he writes,  ardently
desiring to know my dear father,  and converse with him on
Spanish music.  My father was much pleased with this note,
and soon after waited upon Mr.  Twiss,  who presented him
with many scarce Spanish national airs,  and made an appoint
ment to drink tea here on Sunday.  Being at present a candidate
to be a member of the Royal Society,  he requested my father
to sign his certificate;  to which he very readily agreed.

On Sunday he came at five o'clock,  and was shown into the
study,  where he was cabinetted with my father till seven,  when
they descended into the parlour to tea.  He is very tall and
thin ;  there is something very odd in him.  I pretend not to
even sketch his character,  not being able to form any precise
idea of it;  but it would be strange,  if there was not some
peculiarity about him,  when it is considered he has spent
more than a third of his life in rambling about foreign coun
tries,  and that he is still a young man,  and has not seen Eng
land since he was seventeen,  till within a few months.  He
has travelled entirely at his own pleasure,  and without even a
tutor ;  he has not only been all over Europe,  except the North,
but over great part of Africa.  He speaks Spanish,  Italian,
French,  German,  (and I suppose of course Greek and Latin)
with great ease and fluency.1

As my father has never visited Spain or Portugal,  and as
Mr.  Twiss has always been very curious concerning musical
matters,  he drew up a collection of Spanish queries relative to
this subject,  which I copied for this traveller.  While he was
drinking tea,  he turned suddenly to my father,  and asked him
in Italian,  which of us two  (Susy or me)  played the harpsichord
so well  ?  My father told him that the player was not here,
"e maritata?"  demanded Mr.  Twiss.  "Si,  e maritata,"
answered my father.2 As I know enough of Italian to under-

1 In 1776 Mr.  Twiss wrote  :  "  I have now visited the greatest part
of England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  Holland,  Flanders,  France,  Switzerland,
Germany,  Bohemia,  Italy,  Portugal and Spain,  and including sea-
voyages,  have journeyed about 27,000 miles,  which is 2,000 more than
the circumference of the earth."     He gives very fair reasons against
travelling with companions,  or tutors,  and seems to have been by no
means extravagant in his expenses.

2 This was Hetty  (Mrs.  Burney).

1774]  Frances Burney.  281

stand any common and easy conversation,  I could not help
rather simpering,  which I suppose he observed  ;  for he turned
again to my father,  "  Credo che questa signorina intende Tltali-
ano  ?  "  However,  as my father had not denied that we played
a little and for our own diversion,  Mr.  Twiss was very earnest
with him to speak to us for that purpose ;  but,  thank Heaven !
in vain.  Soon after,  he said something to iny father,  which
by the direction of his eyes,  concerned us,  in a whisper ;  to
which he answered,  "No;"  and then the other said aloud,
' '  And do both the young ladies sing likewise,  Sir  ?  "

"  No,  no,  no  !"  from all quarters.  He talked a great deal
about Spain,  which as being least known,  my father was most
anxious to hear of.  Among other things,  he said that the
married ladies were very easy of access  ;  but that the single
who,  indeed,  very seldom left a convent till the day of their
marriage,  were kept very rigidly retired,  and that it was death
to touch them even by the little finger  !  He said that no
ladies were to be seen walking,  but that they appeared openly
at the Theatres,  where they sat,  however,  generally in the
darkest part,  but without veils ;  and that they had glow-worms
strung into beautiful shapes,  for ornaments to their hair,
and for stomachers ;  which had a most striking effect.  This
tale made Mrs.  Allen immediately his enemy ;  and the
moment he was gone,  she railed most violently at the lies of
travellers.  Mama,  too,  did not believe a word of it,  arguing
upon the short life of glow-worms,  when once they were taken
in the hand.  For my part,  I stood up Mr.  Twiss' s advocate,
and urged the unfairness of judging of animals any more
than of men,  only by those of our own country and climate.
All that shocked me was,  the cruelty of stringing them.1

1 Mr.  Twiss tells us in his  "  Travels through Spain,"  (published in
1775)  that after the plays or operas at Cadiz were ended  (which was
usually about half-past eleven)  it was customary to walk in the
Alameda,  or Mall.  "  Here I saw,

'  Dontie e donzelle,
D'ogni eta,  cTogni sorte,  e brutte e belle.'

— Ariosto,  Cant,  xvii.,  v.  33.

Among the rest I observed several ladies who had fixed glow-worms

282 The Early Diary of  [1774

March 30th.

I have a most extraordinary evening to give account of.
Last night we had a second visit from the Spanish traveller,
Mr.  Twiss.  Mrs.  Young drank tea with us.  Her husband
is infinitely better ;  which I much rejoice at.  Dr.  Shepherd
also assisted at that warm collation.  Mr.  Twiss did not come
till late,  and was shown into the study

When they had finished their private conversation,  my
father brought Mr.  Twiss into the parlour,  and invited him to
stay supper,  which from him in his present hurry is no small
favour.  The discourse till supper was entirely in parties.
Mrs.  Young,  Mrs.  Allen,  and Mama talked upon fashions,
which is ever an agreeable subject to Mrs.  Young,  and
constantly introduced by her ;  Dr.  Shepherd,  Mr.  Twiss,  and
my father conversed upon foreign countries,  and Susy and I
sat very snug together,  amused either by ourselves or them,
as we chose.

Dr.  Shepherd is going abroad himself in a short time,  as
tutor to a young man of the name of Hatton.  He has never
yet been farther than the Netherlands,  though he has intended
to travel I believe for thirty years of the fifty he has lived ;
but a certain timidity seems to have restrained him.  Giardini
relates that,  when he was on the continent,  being obliged to
wear a sword,  which his cloth prevents his being burthened
with here,  he was so extremely awkward for want of practice,
that the first day he walked out,  the sword got between his
legs,  and fairly tript him up — over — or down — I don't know
which is best to say.  He is prodigiously tall and stout,  and
must have made a most ludicrous appearance.  He enquired
many particulars concerning Mr.  Twiss's travels,  with a kind
of painful eagerness ;  and,  whenever he related any disasters,

by threads to their hair,  which had a luminous and pleasing effect."
Thus he slightly modified the statement which had raised the wrath of
Mrs.  Allen the year before.  He goes on to say,  "I find that the
Peruvian ladies likewise ornament their heads,  necks,  and arms with
strings of shining flies,  the splendor of which gives them the appear
ance of coronets,  necklaces,  and bracelets of natural lights."

1774]  Frances Burney.  283

the poor Doctor seemed in an agony,  as if the same dangers
were immediately to become his own.1

Mr.  Twiss has certainly travelled upon a sensible plan,  as
he has carried with him twelve curious Questions to be asked
wherever he went;  and he made his stay at the towns he
visited always according to the entertainment he received.
He has written four quarto volumes of observations and descrip
tions during his peregrinations.  He intends to publish his
Tour through Spain and Portugal,  as being the countries of
which there is the least known.  He is going soon to Dane-
mark,  and Russia :  his curiosity seems insatiable ;  and I
think his fortune too ought to be inexhaustible.

When supper appeared,  Mr.  Twiss desired to sit by the
young ladies ;  and making me take a place next to Mrs.  Allen,

seated himself by me Dr.  Shepherd still kept the

conversation upon travelling.  Mr.  Twiss spoke very highly
of the Spanish ladies,  whom he fully intended hereafter to
visit again.  He said that the bull-fights,  which he much
admired,  were still in high vogue at Madrid.  "  It is curious
to observe,"  said he,  with a sly kind of seriousness,  "  that the
ladies are very fond of assisting upon these festivals;  and they
who scream at a frog or faint at a spider,  will with all imagin-

1 Captain Cook says that he named  "  a group of small islands,
'  Shepherd's Isles,'  in honour of my worthy friend,  Dr.  Shepherd,
Plumian Professor of Astronomy at Cambridge."  Dr.  Shepherd pub
lished,  in 1772,  "  Tables for correcting the apparent distance of the
moon and a star from the effects of refraction and parallax,"  which
were probably used in Cook's expeditions.  Dr.  Shepherd was a Canon
of Windsor when Fanny was at Court,  and tried to please by offering
to give her a concert,  and by bringing the great M.  Lalande to see
"  cette celebre demoiselle;"  but she never would be pleased by Dr.
Shepherd,  and seems always rather hard upon him.  Mrs.  Schwelleu-
berg suggested that he was a suitable match for her.  "  A large man,"
said Mrs.  S.,  had come into her room,  and then left it,  "  bob-short"  upon
seeing her only.  "  Veil,  when he comes so often he might like you.
For what won't you not marry him  ?"  Fanny said that she would not
have him if he were Archbishop of Canterbury.  Mrs.  Schwellenberg
approved her.  "  Veil,  you been right when you don't not like him,  I
don't like the men neither.  Not one from them!"  Still,  later on.
Mrs.  S.  returned to the charge,  adding that  "  she had been told Dr.
Shepherd would marry me !"

284 The Early Diary of  [1774

able courtesy fling nuts upon the ground to make the Cavaliers
stumble ;  and,  whenever they are in danger,  they clap their
hands,  and call out,  '  Bravo,  Torre  !  Bravo,  Torre  ! ' J
However,  he did confess that there were ladies in Spain,  who
were never seen at the bull-fights ;  which for the honour of
my sex 1 rejoiced to hear.  It seems amazing to me,  that
this barbarous diversion should not be exploded.

When Naples was mentioned,  he was pleased to make con
fession,  that he left it in disgrace,  that is,  that he was obliged
to run away  !  As these sort of avowals immediately imply a
love-affair,  and wear a strong air of vanity,  my father,  who
smoaked him,  putting on a look of mortification,  said,  "  Well,
I was told,  that when I arrived at Naples,  if I did but show

myself upon the Piazza della ~  I should be sure to receive

three or four billet-doux in a few moments.  Accordingly,  as
soon as I got there,  I dressed myself to the best advantage,
and immediately went to the Piazza ;  but to no purpose  !  and
though I walked there every morning I stayed,  the devil a
billet-doux did I ever meet with  ! "  Every body laughed,
and Mrs.  Young cried out,  looking full at Mr.  Twiss,  "  Well ;
Dr.  Burney,  when you go next,  you must put a mask on  ! "

I don't know whether Mr.  Twiss felt the reproof my father
meant to convey or not ;  but he fought off the billets-douxs,
and declared that he also had not had any.  "  But,  why should
you run away then,  Sir  ?  "  cried Dr.  Shepherd,  who is dullness
itself.  "  0,  Sir,"  answered Mr.  Twiss,  "  the ladies are con
cerned  !  but another time,  Dr.  Burney,  when we are alone "

"  The ladies  ?  "  cried Dr.  Shepherd,  "  but how could the ladies
drive you away  ?  I should have supposed they would have
kept you?"  "  Have a care,  Dr.  Shepherd,"  cried Mrs.  Young,

1 Fanny should have written  "  Toro."     Mr.  Twiss gives all this in
his book.     He lost nothing for want of taking pains to see it.     On
Sunday,  the 25th of July,  1773,  he crossed the bay between Cadiz and
Port Mary,  nine miles broad,  in a boat,  and  (for 3s.  4d.)  saw ten bulls
and nine horses slaughtered within two hours and a-half.     After that,
he went to as many more bull-fights as he could  :  but he  "  owns with
pleasure,"  that he knew many Spanish ladies who had never seen,  or
meant to see,  such savageries.

2 A blank which was never filled has been left for the name of the
Piazza.

1774]  Frances Burney.  285

who showed as much too much quickness,  as the Doctor did
too much dullness  ;  "  don't ask such questions  ! "  "  But,  Dr.
Burney,"  said Mr.  Twiss,  "  was you never accosted by una
bella ragazza  ?"  Then turning to me,  "  You know what a
ragazza is Ma'am  ?"  "  Sir  ?"  "A Signorina  ?"

I stammered out something like neither yes or no  ;  because
the question rather frightened me,  lest he should conclude
that in understanding that,  I knew much more  ;  but I believe
he had already drawn his conclusions,  from my foolish simper
ing before,  upon his first visit ;  for he began such an attack,
in Italian,  of preposterous compliments,  that my head was
almost turned.  Yet it so happened,  all he said being of the
easy style,  that I understood every word,  though it is wholly
out of my power to write in that language.  Finding me
silent to his astonishing panegerick,  he said in English,  "Why,
what objection can you have to speaking to me in Italian  ?"
"  A very obvious one,"  answered I,  "  because it is not in my
power."  "  Mais vous aurez la bonte de me parler Fra^ois,"
cried he ;  but I again assured him of my inability ;  for I was
quite ashamed of this address,  as every body was looking at us,
and all of them were listening.  He turned then to my father,
"  Questa Signorina e troppa modesta."  My father,  all kind
ness,  had seemed to pity my embarrassment;  "Poor Fanny  !  "
cried he,  "  she has not had such an attack before  ;  this is as
bad as a bull-fight to her  !"

"  I hope not,  Sir,"  cried Mr.  Twiss,  rather hurt,  and then
again turning to me,  "  Do you go to the Masquerade adver
tised for Monday the llth of April  ?"  "  No,  Sir."  "  Have
you ever been to one  ?"  continued he.  "  I was — at a private
one."  "And what character did you honour with support
ing?"  "Oh!  none;  I did not venture to try one."  He then
went on with some high-flown complimentary guesses at what
I personated.

"  Did I tell you,  Dr.  Burney,  how horribly I was served
about the fandango  ?  I went to Hammersmith purposely to
find a dancer and found an old woman  !  I was never so
mad."1  "Well;"  said my father,  "if I see a Spaniard at

1 This must be taken as angry,  and  »nug as quiet ;  not telling
people your own affairs.

286 The Early Diary of  [1774

the next Masquerade,  I shall know who it is  !  "  "  Why,  no ; "
answered he,  "  I am not determined  ;  sometimes I think of a
Highlander."  "  Oh !  I know you'll be snug,"  said my father,
laughing.  "  But if you see a fandango,  danced,"  cried I to

my father "  Oh  !  Ma'am/'  cried he,  eagerly,  will you

dance it with me  ?  and give me leave to give you lessons  ? "
"No,  Sir;  I should require too many."  "Oh no;  Ma'am;
I can easily teach you.  Upon my word,  the fandango,  like
the allemande,  requires sentiment,  to dance it well ;  without an
agreeable partner it would be impossible ;  for I find myself so
animated by it, — it gives me such feelings !  I do declare that
I could not for the universe dance the fandango with an old
woman !  "  "  No,  Sir,"  cried old Mrs.  Allen,  angrily,  "  and
I suppose that an old woman could not dance it with you  ?  "

When supper was removed,  Mr.  Twiss again attacked me
in Italian. — "  Credo che inamorata,  perche non mangiava."
"Oh!  no;"  answered I,  truly enough,  though laughing,  "I
am not,  indeed."  "  E il lingua d'amore,"  continued he,  and
added that it became  "  una bella bocca"  "And it had best
be confined to such,"  answered I.  After something further,
which I have forgotten,  he asked me in a tone of pathetic
reproach — "Ma perche,"  &c.,  "but why will you not answer
me in Italian  ?  "  "  Because I assure you I cannot."  "  Ma,
but you have understood all I have said  !  "  "  Some part,  by
accident only."  "  Well,  Ma'am,"  cried he in English,  I hope
that when I have the honour to be further known to you,  you
will speak to me in no other language  !  I think,  Dr.  Burney,
that the Spanish is the noblest language in the world  !  I
would,  if it was in my power,  always speak Spanish to men,
and Italian to women.  As to English,  that is quite out of
the question,  you know !  but for French,  I protest I am
ashamed of speaking it;  it is become so very vulgar and
common."  "  See  !  how it is,"  cried my father,  archly,  "  the
French language from being spoken at every Court in Europe,
and being reckoned the politest living language,  is now sunk
to worse than nothing, — to vulgarity  !  "

"  I think I never knew a foreigner,"    said Mr.    Twiss,

1 Mr.  Twiss probably said,  "  Credo ch'  e innamorata,"  etc.

1774]  Frances Bumey.  287

(<  who spoke English so well as Baretti does ;   but so very
slow,"   (in a drawling voice,  turning to me)   "that if he—
W6re — to — make  —  love — it  —  would  —  take  —  him  —  tree  —
hours — to utter a declaration.      However,  I am of opinion,
Dr.    Burney,  that the English bids fair to be the standard
language at the European Courts in another century. — Have
you ever seen,  Ma'am,  any of the great Dr.  Johnson's curious
hand-writing  ?  "

He then put into iny hand a letter from that awful Colossus
of literature,  as he is often called.  I told him that I had
seen his writing  (which is scarce legible)  in a letter to my
father.  However,  he showed me one word ;  (it was testimony)
that I could not possibly make out.

"But,  Ma'am,"  added he,  "you write so well yourself!  I
have the Spanish Queries you did me the honour to write  ;
and upon my word,  it is very seldom a lady writes so
correctly."  "  Oh !  cried I,  I am particularly proud of the
spelling of the Spanish words  !  I hope you admired that  ?  "
He had already pointed out a mistake I had made ;  he looked
quite shocked.

Mrs.  Young then began to speak of Ireland,  where her
husband had some thoughts of going.  She asked Mr.  Twiss,
if he had been there  ?  Not having well attended to what
was said,  he took it into his head that she was of that
country,  answered very civilly,  "  I reserved the best for the
last,  Ma'am.  Pray,  do you speak Erse,  Ma'am  ?  "

"Who?  I?  Sir;"  cried Mrs.  Young,  staring,  "speak
Erse  ?  "

"  I did not know,  Ma'am — I thought that being an Irish
lady,  perhaps you might.  Well,  I declare solemnly,  the
more I go out of my own country,  the more I admire it ;  as
to Ireland and Scotland,  I mean to include them ;  but I have
travelled from the age of seventeen,  and return with double
satisfaction to England.  And of all the countries I have
seen,  upon my honour I would not take a wife out of my own
for the universe ;  for,  though I may prefer a foreign lady to
dance or sing with,  and though they have a certain agrement
that is charming in the vivacity with which they make ac
quaintance with strangers ;  yet in the English women there

288 The Early Diary of  [1774

is a reserve,  a modesty,  and something so sensible ;  they are
too sensible indeed,  to be intimate with strangers;  yet I
admire them for it ;  though I own the Spanish ladies charmed
me much,  and the Portuguese — Oh  !  Ma'am  ;  (to me)  if you
are fond of hair-clubs,  you should see the Portuguese ladies'
hair I — they have them thus broad,1 and they wear no caps,
only a few jewels or flowers, — or — "

"What?"  interrupted Mrs.  Allen,  with a sneer,  "and I
suppose some of those pretty shining things — those glow
worms that you mentioned  ? "

"  Glow-worms are caught in great plenty in Spain,"  said
he to me,  taking no notice of Mrs.  Allen's palpable sneer,
"  and they have an exceeding pretty effect in the ladies'  hair ;
but then,  if you wear them,  you must shut your eyes,  or they
won't shine  !  "

"  There's for you,  my dear  !  "  cried Mrs.  Allen.

"  Nay,  Ma'am,"  said mama,  "  it was not said to you  !  "

The conversation soon after turned upon dancing.  Mr.  Twiss
spoke of it in very warm terms,  "  I love dancing most
exceedingly.  I prefer it to anything."  "  I blush for you,"
cried my father,  laughing, — "  is this you who pretend to love
Music  ?  "  "  Aye,"  said Dr.  Shepherd,  "  what becomes of
music  ?  "  "  Oh,  dancing beats all music  !  I should prefer a
country-dance,  with you,  Ma'am,  to all the music in the world !
But this is only for your ear,  Ma'am.  You must not hear
this,  Doctor.  Do'nt you love dancing,  Ma'am  ?  "  whispering
quite languishingly.  "Me,  Sir?"  said I,  "Oh,  I seldom dance
— I don't know."  "  What Assemblies do you frequent,
Ma'am?"  "Me,  Sir?  I hardly ever dance;  I go to none!"
"  To none  ?  bless me  !  but — pray,  Ma'am — will you do me
the honour to accept any tickets for Mrs.  Cornely's?"  "  Sir,
I am obliged to you  ;  but I never — "  "  No,  Sir  ;  "  said my
father,  gravely  ;  "  she does nothing of that sort."

He seemed extremely surprised,  but continued,  "  I danced
last Thursday till past two o'clock  ;  but I was so unlucky,  as to

1 Mr.  Twiss meant that they wore their hair like the men,  "  clubbed"
or in  "  queues  " ;  that is,  in one thick plait,  hanging at the back of
the neck.

1774]  Frances Burney.  289

fix upon a very stupid partner,  from whom I hardly could get
a word,  all the evening.  I chose her,  because she was a pretty
girl, — Miss Ladbroke."  "  How could a pretty girl be stupid  ?"
cried Dr.  Shepherd.  "Aye;"  said my father;  "her eyes
should have sufficed to make her eloquent ;  but English girls
are often shy/'  "  Shall you go to the Lock Hospital Oratorio,
ma'am?"  "No,  Sir;"  answered I.  "To that at the
Foundling  ?  Oil hope it !  "  "No,  Sir ;  I seldom go out."
This was followed by an Italian moaning,  at my retiring spirit.

"  Well !  my dear,"  cried Mrs.  Allen,  "  you have it all  !
poor Susy is nothing to-night."

She said these kind of speeches,  though in a sort of
whisper,  so often,  during his almost heroics of compliments,
that I was exceedingly frightened lest Mr.  Twiss should hear
her;  and Mrs.  Young fixed her eyes with such curious observa
tion  !  My father,  too,  began to grow very grave;  so that alto
gether I was in a very embarrassing situation,  which I believe
was pretty obvious;  for they all endeavoured to turn Mr.
Twiss away from me,  and my father made several attempts at
changing the conversation,  though the florid traveller was
too flighty to regard them.  However,  at length,  he attacked
Susy,  and talked a little French with her ;  but,  as I was more
conveniently situated for him,  he returned again soon to me.

"  Have you read Miss Aiken's Poems  ?  Dr.  Burney,  they
have been much admired.  There is one poem in them,  'Come
here,  fond youth,'  that describes the symptoms of love,  which
all the ladies I meet with have by heart.  Have not you,
Ma'am?"  "Me?  no,  Sir."1

1 Anna Laetitia Aikin was the daughter,  sister,  and aunt of authors,
of whom she was the best.  In this year,  1774,  she married Mr.  Barbauld.
We are told by H.  C.  Robinson that  "  It was after her death that
Lucy Aikin  "  (her niece)  "  published Mrs.  Barbauld's collected works,
of which I gave a copy to Miss Wordsworth.  Among the poems is a
stanza on Life,  written in extreme old age.  Long after,  Wordsworth
said ;  '  Repeat me that stanza by Mrs.  Barbauld.'  I did so.  He made
me repeat it again,  and so he learned it by heart.  He was at the time
walking in his sitting-room at Rydal,  with his hands behind him;  and
I heard him mutter to himself,  '  I am not in the habit of grudging
people their good things,  but I wish I had written those lines.' "
In 1845,  Robinson says,  "  Rogers spoke highly of Mrs.  Barbauld,  and

I.  U

290 The Early Diary of  [1774

"But,  Dr.  Burney,  of all the books upon this subject,  none
was ever equal to Rousseau's Eloise  !  what feeling  !  what lan
guage  !  what fire  !  have you read it,  Ma'am  ?  "  "  No,  Sir."
"  Oh,  it's a book that is alone  !  "  "  And ought to be alone,"
said my father,  still more gravely.

Mr.  Twiss perceived that he was now angry,  and with great
eagerness he cried,  "  Why,  I assure you I gave it to my
sister,  who is but seventeen,  and just going to be married."
"  Well,"  returned my father,  "  I hope she read the Preface,
and then flung it away."  "  No,  upon my honour ;  she read
the Preface first,  and then the book.  But pray,  Doctor,  did
you ever meet with a little book upon this subject called the
Dictionary of Love  ?  It is a most elegant work.  I am
surprised you have not seen it.  But it is difficult to procure,
being out of print.  It is but a duodecimo,  but I gave half-a-
guinea for it.  Indeed Davies1 had a commission from me to
get it for five guineas,  but it took him three years.  I have it
now binding in gold,  for a present to a lady.  But first I shall
do myself the honour to show it to you,  Ma'am,  though you
cannot want it — you have it all ready — it is only for such
bunglers as me."  I made no answer.  He spoke this rather
in a low voice,  and I hoped that nobody heard him,  for I was
quite ashamed of receiving such an offer,  and did not seem
even to hear him myself.

His next attempt was for music.      He began a most urgent

related that Madame D'Arblay said she repeated every night Mrs.  B.'s
famous stanza."  We give the lines which Fanny repeated nightly,  and
Wordsworth wished that he had written  : —

"  Life  !  we have been long together,

Through pleasant,  and through cloudy,  weather  :

"Pis hard to part when friends are dear  ;

Perhaps  'twill cost a sigh,  a tear :

Then steal away ;  give little warning  ;

Choose thine own time  ;

Say not good-night ;   but,  in some brighter clime,

Bid me good-morning."

1 Mr.  Twiss seems to have been solemnly in earnest about his little
book.  Two years later,  in a note to his  "  Tour in Ireland,"  we find
him urging the ladies to read this  "  small duodecimo,"  as it was well
fitted to give them sage counsel.

1774]  Frances Burney.  291

and violent entreaty to me to play — "  I will kneel to you, —
for a quarter of an hour  !  "  I answered very seriously,  that I
could not possibly comply  :  he would not be rebuffed.  "  To
whom must I apply for assistance,  Dr.  Burney  ?  pray,  speak
for me  !  "  "  Sir/'  said my father,  half jesting,  half earnest,
"the young women in this house,  like those in Spain,  do
nothing,  before they are married/'

He was silent a few moments ;  and then turning to mama,
with a supplicating tone said,  t(  Will you use your influence,
Ma'am  ?  I will kneel to YOU to obtain it."  "  Sir/'  said she
rather sharply,  "  I am not a Duenna  ! "  "  Duenm'a,  Ma'am/'
said he,  "  is the true pronunciation.  What shall I say  ?  One
air before I go, — only one air will make my sleep so delight
ful  !  "  "  If you would go to sleep first,  Sir,"  said I,  "  perhaps

"  "  Why,  aye,  Fanny  ! "  said my father,  "  do play him

to sleep ! "  "  No,  no,  Dr.  Burney,  not to sleep ;  but my
dream after it will be so fine  •"  "  Well  !  "  cried Mrs.
Young,  "  here's a lady who can play,  if she will,"  turning to
Susan.  He immediately arose,  and went and flung himself
on his knees to Susy.  She refused his request,  and changed
her place ;  he followed her,  and again prostrated himself.
"  Well,  however,"  cried Mrs.  Allen,  ' '  I am glad he is gone a
little to Susy at last."  This scene lasted but a short time ;
finding he sued in vain,  he was obliged to rise;  and Dr.
Shepherd,  who had been quite out of his element all the
evening,  rose to depart,  and proposed to take Mr.  Twiss with
him.  This was agreed to;  and Mr.  Twiss giving me three
times most obsequiously his lowest bow,  was forced to quit
the field.

I think this was the most extraordinary evening I ever
passed.  Mr.  Twiss is such a man as I never saw before,  or
scarcely any one whose character even resembled his.  He
piques himself upon having travelled many years,  and,  when
very young,  without a tutor  ;  but I am apt to attribute greatly
to this very circumstance,  the extravagant strangeness of his
manners.  Always his own master,  he has scampered from
place to place,  met with new customs and new men every
month,  without any sensible or experienced friend to point
out the good or evil that he saw.  He is really a creature of

292 The Early Diary of  [1774

his own forming ;  for he seems to have seen every thing and
copied nothing.  Nothing could be more improper,  more
injudicious than the conversation which he chose to enter into.
Indeed,  I often wondered where he would stop.  It is,  how
ever,  evident that he meant no offence or impertinence,  by his
prating at such a rate,  before my father and mother.  Yet
what a novice should we conclude any man,  who could imagine
that any father would approve of such sort of a conversation  !
and more especially,  that any man of letters would be enter
tained by so much frivolous gallantry and forwardness;  for I
have not written half his fine speeches,  no,  nor a quarter.  But
perhaps he is of that number of men,  who conclude that all
females take nonsense for politeness,  and that it is necessary

to banish sense and reason,  in order to be understood

He has really put our house into a commotion ;  his behaviour
was so extraordinary,  that he has been the sole topic of dis
course since his curious visit ;  and even my gentle and candid
father says that he has quite mistaken the thing,  and that he
shall never see a table-cloth in his house again,  or be invited
evermore to the tea- table.1

1 Mr.  Twiss crosses these pages once more,  but there is no sign
that he ever again saw Dr.  Burney's table-cloth.  In 1775 he pub
lished his travels in Portugal and Spain,  and Dr.  Johnson advised Mrs.
Thrale to read the book.  In it,  he was rather more discreet in speak
ing of the  "  donne e d.onzelle"  but,  here and there,  we find the same want
of delicate perception of fitness which perplexed Fanny,  and displeased
her father.  He was quite in earnest about the Fandango.  He em
ployed his master,  Giardini,  the first violin-player of the time,  to set him
a bass for  "  El Fandango."  A page of his goodly quarto is filled by an
engraving of the notes.  Mr.  Twiss speculates  (in handsome print),
as to whether the Spaniards did not learn the dance from their Indian
subjects,  and teach it to their old subjects in the Netherlands.  There
he had seen veils like those of Spanish ladies,  and also  "  phigge dansen  "
which were much like the Fandango.  He compares the modulation of
the Fandango,  with that of Corelli's air,  "  La Follia di Spagnia."  He
compares  "  the fury and ardour  "  with which Spaniards are possessed
on hearing the music of the Fandango,  with the impatience of the race
horses at a Eoman Carnival,  as restrained by a rope breast-high,  across
the street,  they wait its removal to run riderless.  Next came his
"Irish Tour,"  in which Twiss maddened a whole nation by writing that
Irish women were not slender about their ankles.  Great was the ink-
shedding thereupon ;  Irish newspaper- scribblers and versifiers reviled

1774]  Frances Burney.  293

April.

In one of Mr.  Twiss'  late letters to my father concerning
Spanish music he says. — "  Inclosed is the form of folding
Italian billet-doux which I promised to the young ladies/'

As to promised,  which is a strange word,  and which only
this strange man would use,  all that passed concerning the
billets was that he asked me if my father had ever shown me
the Italian method of folding them  ?  I answered no.  "  Then
pray ask the Doctor,"  said he, — "  I dare not !  "  I begged to
be excused,  and neither said or thought more upon the sub
ject.  And this he calls a promise  !

him in a truly Irish style.  Mr.  Douce has preserved an Irish news
paper article on Twiss,  in his own copy of the  "  Irish Tour,"  which is
now in the Bodleian Library.  He has also written,  on a fly-leaf,  a
short account of Twiss,  which is nearly as incorrect as the article,
though not so abusive.  Mr.  Douce makes him out to be the Twiss who
married  (as he says,  "  off the stage,")  the beautiful Miss Kemble,  sister
of Sarah Siddous.  One would not wonder if he had ;  but it was his
brother Francis,  a clergyman,  who was much reviled by Dissenters for
making a complete index to every edition of Shakespeare then in print.
Francis was the father of Horace Twiss.  Our Richard was very in
genious in many ways,  being a good player on the violin,  a skilful
chess-player,  and the author of a clever book on that game.  He
injured his fortune by setting up mills to make paper out of what
accounts of him call  "straw."  We suspect it to have been Esparto-
grass,  from Spain,  which is now much in use.  He unfortunately began
his mills before the supply of rags had lessened,  and was,  perhaps the
first inventor of methods now prospering in England.  It has not been
by any means a dull part of the Editor's work to read some of the
books of  "  Traveller Twiss."  He had seen much,  read much,  and
closely compared several countries and their customs,  with other
customs and other countries.  His comparisons are always ready,  and
often apt.  He was  "  a coxcomb,  but a satisfactory coxcomb"  We part
with Mr.  Twiss in the words used to his namesake,  Sir Travers Twiss,
in the Sheldouian Theatre,  where he had eulogized those presented for
honorary degrees with so many words ending in  "  issimus,"  that it
was thought that all the superlatives of praise in the Latin Dictionary
must be exhausted,  so one of his hearers added aloud,  "  et Travers-
Tvnssimus."  Our Mr.  Twiss was certainly Richard-Twi$*imus,  but such
as he was,  Dr.  Johnson gave him letters of introduction to Ireland.
He was to be found with Garrick,  and even with Hannah More,  to
whom he gave, — well,  not  "  the Dictionary of Love,"  or  "  La Nouvelle
Helo'ise,"  but a curious edition of Horace.

294 The Early Diary of  [1774

The billet is folded in form of a heart ;  and very prettily.
It is sealed with a very fine impression of the Emperor.
The direction was —

Alia piu bella.

Susette and I both refused to open it.  Perhaps the gentle
man fancied we should pull caps upon the occasion  !  How
ever,  my father himself saved us that trouble.  Within were
these words,  written in an elegant hand. —

Di questa parte,  i cicesbei Italiani scrivono loro lettere
gallanti ed amorosi alle loro dame essendo la figura di questa
carta forma.

I shall now go from an odd young to an odd old man,  both
new acquaintance to us.

Soon after the publication of the German Tour,  my father
received a letter from a stranger,  who called himself Mr.
Hutton of Lindsey-House,  Chelsea,  and a friend of Dr.
Hawkesworth.  It contained some criticisms on the German
anecdotes concerning the poverty and wretchedness of that
country.  He said that he had frequently travelled there,  but
had always met with white bread,  and vindicated several other
particulars which seemed to bear hard upon Germany,  con
cluding with supposing that my father's servant or other
people must have misinformed him ;  and signed himself his
real well-wisher and a great admirer of all other parts of his
charming book.

My father wrote an immediate and angry answer to this
letter,  acquainting Mr.  Hutton,  that his veracity,  which had
never before been disputed,  was what he should most carefully
and invariably defend and adhere to  ;  that the accounts he
had given of the miserable state of the German Empire,  were
from his observations made with his own eyes,  and not the
result of any information ;  that if Mr.  Hutton had found that
country more reasonable,  fertile,  and flourishing,  he was sure
he must have travelled before the last war,  when the most
terrible ravages were committed by the King of Prussia ; 1 and
that whatever reasons he might have for defending Germany,
they could not be more powerful than those which would ever

The Seven Tears'  War.

1774]  Frances Burney.  295

impel himself to defend his own honour.  Then,  after answer
ing particularly to his several remarks,  he added that,  if he
desired any further satisfaction or had any remaining doubts,
he would at any time receive him,  and endeavour to convince
him in Queen Square.

Soon after this,  poor Dr.  Hawkesworth brought a letter
from Mr.  Hutton,  filled with apologies and concessions,  and
allowing that he had travelled before the last war.  He pro
tested that his letter was extremely well-meant,  and expressed
the greatest concern and contrition that he had given offence.
With this letter,  Dr.  Hawkesworth gave a character of Mr.
Hutton,  the most amiable that could be drawn.  He said that
he was his old and intimate friend ;  that a more worthy being
did not exist ;  but that he was singular and wholly ignorant of
the world ;  that he was a man who was a true lover of man
kind,  and made quite miserable with the idea of hurting or
displeasing any living creature.  In short,  he made his por
trait so full of benevolence and simplicity,  that my father
whose heart is replete with all  "  the milk of human kindness  "
wrote to him immediately a letter of reconciliation,  apologizing
in his turn for his own hasty answer to his first epistle,  and
begging the continuance of his esteem and friendship.

The much-regretted death of Dr.  Hawkesworth,  which
happened soon after,  did not put an end to this strangely
begun correspondence.  Mr.  Hutton wrote letters that were
truly his own,  being unlike any,  either printed or manuscript,
which we ever before saw.  They contained a good deal of
humour,  very oddly worded,  and the strongest expressions of
kindness.1

1 Up to this point,  all said about Mr.  Hutton is retrospective,
and refers to the year 1773.  It may have happened just after
Fanny's return from Teignmouth,  as Dr.  Hawkesworth is named in
her Diary as calling on Dr.  Burney about a month before his death
on the 17th of November,  1773.  There was not much in James Hutton,
but his name is often found in books  ;  notably,  in that set of letters
which,  by some odd chance,  came into the hands of Dr.  Priestley,  who
published them to vex the Methodists.  From them Southey drew a
sketch of Hutton  (for his  "  Life of Wesley  ")  but omitted to state that
he was the son of a former Fellow of King's College,  Cambridge,  who
had given up the Berkshire living of Stanford in the vale of White

296 The Early Diary of  [1774

About three months ago he called here.  I heard him par
leying in the passage,  and delivering his name  ;  which induced
me  (having only Susy at home)  to ask him into the parlour.
He looks about sixty,  good-humoured,  clever,  and kind-
hearted.  He came up to me,  and said,  "  Is your father at
home  ?  for I am deaf."  He had not heard the man's answer.
He stayed a little while with us,  and desired his respects and
love to my father.  "  Tell him,  said he,  that I know him very
well,  though I never saw him."  Last Good Friday he called
again,  and then had the good fortune to meet with my father.
He was also introduced to mama and all the family.  He
came with open arms,  and my father was very soon extremely
intimate with him.  He enquired concerning us all,  and
whether one daughter was not married  ?  "  Yes,"  "  And
pray,"  said he,  "  are you a grandfather,  young Gentleman  ?  "
My father has indeed a remarkably young look.  He said

Horse,  rather than take the oaths to King George I.  James Hutton
was  (according to his mother,  who was second a cousin of Sir Isaac
Newton,)  "good-humoured,  very undesigning,  and sincerely honest,
but of weak judgement."  She had expected that  "  his weak brain
would have been quite turned  "  (after a fever)  by so many Moravians
coming about him.  John Wesley was his first Pope;  afterwards he
obeyed Count Zinzendorf.  He was a bookseller,  who left his shop to
others,  or preached in it ;  and roamed about in England and on the
Continent,  pushing himself,  whenever he could,  among persons and into
things beyond and above him.  Hence his letters to,  and calls on Dr.
Burney.  In many cases his good-nature and oddity bore him through  ;
but when he tried Voltaire,  on the ground that he was a relation of
Sir Isaac Newton,  Voltaire found himself ill in bed ;  and,  silly as he
was,  Hutton suspected Warburton,  for he writes,  "  the Bishop of
Gloucester was said to be out when I called upon him."  In 1778,
Hannah More writes from London,  that she has been to a party —
"  incongruous,  heterogeneous, — Lords and ladies,  with the whole corps
diplomatique,  some learned foreigners,  Marchesi,  the famous new opera-
man,  General Paoli,  Hutton the Moravian,  and Mrs.  Abington,  the
actress."

The very silliest thing he ever did was attempting to settle the
American war by interviews,  in 1775,  between himself and Dr.  Franklin,
with whom he had got acquainted over the printing of Whitefield's
Journals.  He told Franklin that he had access to King George,  etc.
It all ended like the famous visit of the three Quakers to the Czar
Nicholas.  Some of his philanthropic ramblings may have given hints
for the character of Abany in  "  Cecilia."

1774]  Frances Burney.  297

many other humorous things,   and left us all in high good
humour with him.

The next day I received a letter in a hand that I was un
acquainted with ;  and to my great surprise saw the name of
Hutton at the bottom.  The letter is so extraordinary,  con
sidering the manner of his being known to us,  that I will copy
it,  though I hate the  "  Dear Miss,"  at the beginning ;  the
rest of the letter is worth preserving.  There was in it one
enclosed to my father.

[ME.  JAMES HUTTON TO Miss BURNEY.]

Lindsey House,  Chelsea1
April 2,  Thursday in the evening.
Dear Miss,

I have wrote here a longish kind of Letter to your dear
Papa,  whom I saw with infinite pleasure you love so tenderly.

1 Lindsey House,  Chelsea,  a very large house,  with a terrace,  and
gardens to the river,  and a history,  had fallen from its high estate,
when,  in 1750,  Sir Hans Sloane gave Count Zinzendorf a lease of it
for 999 years to make it into a Congregation House for the  "  Unitas
Fratrum,"  commonly called the Moravians.  After that,  it had,  or was
meant to have,  a meeting-house and a burial-ground.  Hutton and his
wife were put into it as part of the household in 1752 or 1753.  He was
to act as Secretary to the Society:  The house was called the  "  Disciple
House,"  Count Zinzendorf being  "  The Disciple"  He was always
addressed as  "  Papa,"  in the sense of father,  but it might just as well
have been in that of Pope,  since from 1747  "all"  (Moravian)  "Bishops
and elders submitted to him  .  .  .  and as  '  The Disciple  '  he became,
as it were,  the visible representative of the Invisible Head."  These
are the words of Mr.  Benham,  the hagiographer of James Hutton,  whose
book the editor received in 1886 from the uncongenial shelves of the
Bodleian Library,  where it had stood uncut since 1856,  when it was
published.  Yet there are delightful passages in it,  as when Mr.  Ben-
ham describes Button's father  (who gave up his living because he
would not take an oath to King George)  on this wise — "although he
had conscientiously declined performing the official parts of his clerical
function,  he was a devout and pious man."  Mr.  Beuham also states
that he was  "of a genteel family."  Count Zinzeudorf died in 1760,
and in 1764 the government of the Moravians was entirely removed
from England,  and the archives transferred to Germany.  As for
Lindsey House and the lease of 999 years,  by 1824 we find it divided
into many small dwellings.

298 The Early Diary of  [1774

As you love him therefore so much,  I shall recommend to you
to give him this Letter,  when he is in some degree at leisure
for the babble of a friend of his,  perhaps after dinner on
Monday or some such time  :  or you may leave the disposal of
it to your mama,  if you should be going out.  He is just as
well off in one of you as in the other.  How well does he
deserve you both  ?  I mentioned to him the use of the steam
of coffee for his eyes so well employed for himself,  his family,
and for all who have taste in the world.  You and your
Mamma together will know how to surprise him into the use
of it,  as I express in the enclosed,  for,  if you consult much
with him,  he may perhaps,  as most other studious men do,
till it be too late,  desire to be excused,  but if he should be
averse to it after the first surprise,  do not teaze him for the
world  :  for you will teaze him I know in nothing else,  and I
should be sorry if I should be a means of his being teazed.

I will tell you something else,  Miss,  if my skill in physiog
nomy has not totally deceived me,  he is happy in his lady and
children,  and you in him.  This gives me a high pleasure,  as
domestic happiness is all harmony and melody,  capable of
being expressed with a thousand graces,  the irregular and
new,  as well as the old grave of forty years ago ;  the thousand
small attentions accompanying the solid fundamental Melody,
charm beyond expression.

May ye all,  all of you be blessed together !  Happy will
that man be,  that shall be blessed with your hand,  or I am
totally out.  How do I wish my young friend,  as I call your
Father,  may have nothing but blessings in his Children and
Grand- children.  Pray where does your brother-in-law live
that 1 may run and take a peep at him and your sister  ?  and
what is his name  ?  You will always be married sat citb,  si sat
bene.  But,  how shall we find a man who will deserve a
daughter,  who loves her parents as you do  ?  Your Father is
the proper person to explain that Latin phrase to you.  If I
live till next Good Friday,  I may perhaps meet with your
Father again at home,  or on some Sunday afternoon  -when his
book is finished  ;  though then I shall rob all of you of part of
the pleasure his leisure gives you,  which at present you can
have but little of.  An old man as I am,  is garrulous,  and deaf

1774]  Frances Burney.  299

people often are so  :  Now,  I am both old and deaf.  Discretion
bids me finish.  I hope you believe that I am,  with the greatest
esteem,

Your obedient humble Servant,

JAMES HUTTON.

[P.S.] — I was married 34 years ago,  by recommendation of
friends,  as our Princes used to be ;  and have had nothing to
make me repent.  If I had chosen for myself,  I fancy I might
not have been so well off; 1 for I have had domestic happiness
in the highest degree,  and have still as much esteem and
tender friendship and love, — and it is reciprocal, — as in the
first month.  Am not I happy  ?  I believe this little anecdote
may give pleasure in Queen Square,  and therefore I mention
it ;  else I know it is not fashionable for a man to talk of his
domestic happiness.

Perhaps Mr.  Hutton thought the intelligence of his mar
riage was necessary,  after so civil a letter,  to prevent any
mistakes on my part !  However,  he is an exceedingly good
man,  and I like him very much ;  nevertheless,  his letter was
so odd,  that I could not attempt to answer it.

Some time after,  my mother met this gentleman,  and
he sent me a reproach for not writing ;  which I therefore was
then obliged to do,  excusing myself as well as I could.  The
very day after,  he called here again.  He came up to me,  and
shook my hand — "  Thank you for your letter ;  you thought I

1 In 1740,  Count Zinzendorf desired Hutton to marry Louise Brandt
(a French-speaking Swiss,  who had joined the brethren the year
before),  on the ground that she would be useful among the Moravians
in London.  Zinzendorf himself married them.  The poor woman
was very uneasy at first.  She found,  she said,  that she had got a
husband  "  who could not sit still for a quarter of an hour,  and was
of a very warm and impatient temper."  She was also fearful of the
displeasure of Mr.  and Mrs.  Hutton.  They,  however,  treated her as
if they had been consulted in the matter,  and made her welcome as a
daughter.

300 The Early Diary of  [1774

wanted a performance;  but I only wanted the heart;  but
I have got that,  and a performance too  !  "

It seems he had been speaking very highly of my father to
the King,  who he was accidentally admitted to the speech of,
by being one morning in the apartments of M.  de Saigas,  who
is sub-preceptor of The Prince of Wales,  when the King
came in,  who entered into conversation with great com
placency and condescension.1 He had given an account of
this to my mother.  She told him now,  that my father was much
pleased to have had so good a friend speak of him before the
King.  "  Madam,"  cried he,  "  I will speak of him before God,
and that is doing much more  !  "

Since this,  I have received another letter from him,  much in
the style of the former,  very much desiring me to write to
him ;  which I yesterday did ;  though I think few young
persons have entered into a more singular correspondence.

[MR.  JAMES HUTTON TO Miss BURNEY.]

Lindsey House,  Chelsea,

April 24,  Thursday  [1774].

Dear Madm

My little visit at your house on Saturday can by no
means dispense with my thanking you in writing for your
kind and charming answer to my former letter.  I hope
by this time you have courage to write to one who is no critic,
but an admirer of all the Burneys,  and if I was a critic you
need not with a heart and expression like yours be afraid of
the nicest eye,  any more than any of the most exquisite
singers your father heard were of his ears.

I was again so pleased at Queen's Square that I have just
now mentioned in a Lr,  which perhaps the King and Queen
may see,  that I supposed the domestic happiness of your father
was one of the causes of the charming spirit one finds in his
writings,  the good humour this must put a heart in that is like

1 The King called De Saigas,  or Solgas,  "  Button's son."     Hutton
acted as father,  by going to de Saigas'  wedding in Holland,  in 1778.

1774]  Frances Burney.  301

his,  is a kind of inspiration  ;  but I do not forget that the good
humour originated where it should,  in the parents.

If my little short occasional visits can give pleasure in
Queen's Square how delightful will it be to me to give plea
sure in return for so much I am sure of receiving  ?  I would
add to your father's time if I could instead of taking it from him,
pray tell him then,  at some not greatly employed moment,  that I
am not so unreasonable as to wish him to write to me ;  and if
you will now and then snatch a moment to tell me half a word
from him I shall get more than I have any pretence to.

I loved your father long before I saw him,  and the sight of
him did not disappoint me,  and your fondness for him and his
ease and yours together was the finest of all exhibitions,  but
whoever could do that  ?  the arts are but imitations of nature.
Have you learnt to paint  ?  If you have I wish I could get a
small profile of your father,  to send to a learned man abroad
who is making a collection of Heads in order to establish his
system of Physiognomy.1 If you can do it there will be ex
pression in it,  which no painter who does not feel for the
object will ever be able to hit.  If you can not,  I should be
glad,  by-and-by,  if there be any good picture drawn of him,
that satisfies you or your mama tolerably well at least,  to get a
profile taken of it,  for that great work I mentioned above.  If
you can draw a likeness yourself you can do it from memory,
for he has no time to sit for any such work.

If J could paint I would paint his benevolent look at me
and you,  feeling for something in his pockets on the chair and
looking pleased at a stranger that you saw loved your father ;
but I should never be able to express my satisfaction and the
happiness of that moment.  At another time I would paint the
joy of your father last Saturday with four of his daughters
round him,  and the friendly looks of that kind groupe.  I am
glad too that I saw your married sister,  to whom now I wish,
with increase of good will,  every sort of happiness.

Can you find a minute to ask your father his Taste of

1 As Button had travelled in Switzerland,  (after marrying a Swiss
in Germany,)  it is probable that this was Lavater who published hie
famous book in 1776.

302 The Early Diary of  [1774

Pere's 1 his compositions  ?  Mr.  Sulgar,  who just drank coffee
with me,  desired me to enquire.  He is a Swiss who sub
scribes for the  "  History of Music "  ;  is vastly fond of the
"  Musical Tour,"  and believes all I say of the Burneys.2 Mrs.
Hutton loves you too,  was vastly pleased with that letter
of yours I was so proud of,  and takes my word for all I tell
her of you.  She does indeed bestow happiness on me,  and
will do as long as we live.  I only wish to keep pace with
her in that best employment,  where friendship and esteem and
love are all blended.  Will you present my love to your own
family  ?  They have it indeed,  and I am with truth and a warm
heart

Your obedient and very humble servant,
JAMES HUTTON.

You will perhaps recollect that the first page at least of this
is in answer to several parts of your letter,  which I have be
fore me,  though it was so impressed upon my mind as that I
could answer without looking at it again.  Whenever you
write from the heart be assured that every correspondent of
taste will have reason to be satisfied and pleased,  and never
let letter writing cause you any study.  Dip your pen there
and you must succeed.  Nothing ever disgusted me so much
as many laboured printed letters I have seen,  which were
rather Performances than Letters,  and therefore painful,  stiff,
far-fetched,  unnatural stuff.  Such are all Bussi Babutin's
almost.  Madame de Sevigne's are infinitely more to the
taste of the discerning,  while Rabutin's vex and teaze my heart
and disappoint it and are nauseous to my very soul,  considered
as letters :  after I had thus tasted them I found that many
others were of my taste with regard to those Letters.  Affec
tation spoils every thing in writing,  singing,  speaking,  looks,
gesture,  gait,  in short,  every thing and every where.  I have

1 Probably David Perez,    Spanish-Italian composer,   1711-1778,  of
whom Dr.  Burney gives an account in his History.

2 Johannn Georg Salzer,  a native of Zurich,  Professor of Mathe
matics at Berlin,  was author of a book on the  "  Universal Theory of
the Fine Arts,"   published 1771-4 — but his name does not appear
among Dr.  Burney's subscribers.

1774]  Frances Burney.  303

found much pleasure in Madame de Maintenon's Letters  (ex
cept in Theologicals and Spirituals) ,  they are often most cor
dial,  free,  easy,  unaffected and therefore vastly clever.  But
why should I not leave off  ?

[FEOM ME.  CRISP.]

[April,  1774.]

My dear Fanny,

I tell you what — you are a Jew, — an Ebrew Jew — of the
line of Shylock,  and I shall henceforth call you,  Jessica ;  be
cause you,  an over-grown rich Jew,  can give me an entertain
ment of a hundred dishes,  do you expect the like from such a
poor,  forked,  unbeleiving Christian,  as I am  ? — You riot in pro
visions of all sorts,  and have nothing to do,  but to choose,  or
reject;  and your Cookery is at your fingers'  ends,  and to do
you justice has the true relish,  and is highly seasoned ;  all this
I give you credit for  ;  I devour the feast you give me,  finish
the dessert,  lick up the jellies and ic'd creams to the last drop,
and am thankful — but all this wont do it seems.  The Mosaic
Law says — "  An eye for an eye,  and a tooth for a tooth  ;  "  and
if I have neither,  then I must have your pound of flesh,  says
Jessica.  The truth is,  Chesington produces nothing but
Bacon and Greens,  with a new laid egg,  or so,  and the week
round the meats are pretty near the same ;  so that I can give
you no better than I have Fanny.  You say,  because I don't
like your new young acquaintance,  Mr.  Twiss,  I am so short
— here you are mistaken — I like your picture of him,  just as
in Raphael's School of Athens at the Vatican,  I like his pic
ture of the Pope's frightful Dwarf,  which for fun and spite he
lugg'd by head and shoulders into that fine composition.1 I
wont pretend to say,  like that beast Shebbeare,  I will make
you immortal for your pictures  ;  but I shall make a choice
Cabinet Collection of them,  and review them often for my own
entertainment.

As to your young,  travelled,  dying lover,  Twiss,  I own it is
matter of surprize to me,  that one who has seen and known so

1 As Socrates,  lying on the steps,  between the illustrious groups
above and below.  If this is not in books,  Mr.  Crisp perhaps repeats a
tradition which he had heard in Italy.

304 The Early Diary of  [1774

much,  and who you say has drollery in him,  &c.,  &c.,  should
at the same time,  in other things be so thorough a puppy —
has your Daddy had any further intercourse with him,  or seen
any of his Collections  ? — Tell me all about the progress of the
History,  the new Subscribers,  new acquaintance,  Garrick,
Charles,  Hetty;  ....  likewise about Mr.  Beckford,  and
above all,  about your new acquaintance,  whom you threaten me
with, — Mr.  Hutton — I believe I should like him greatly.  What
did King George say about Daddy's book  ?  or had he read it  ?
I want somebody that has weight and power to push his
interest home.  As for that scrub Lord Hertford,  I devote him
to everlasting contempt ; 1 but I should think Lord Sandwich,
Lord March,  Lord Shelburne,  or some of these chaps might
and should exert themselves.  But when I recollect what the
world is my surprise at their neglect ceases.

Send a minute Journal of every thing,  and never mind their
being trifles, — trifles well-dressed,  are excellent food,  anS your
cookery is with me of established reputation.

[April or May.]

My father has bought a House in St.  Martin's Street,  Lei-
ceister Fields, — an odious street — but well situated,  and nearly
in the centre of the town  ;  and the house is a large and good
one.  It was built by Sir Isaac Newton  !  and,  when he con
structed it,  it stood in Leicester Fields, — not Square,  that he
might have his observatory unannoyed by neighbouring
houses,  and his observatory is my favorite sitting place,
where I can retire to read or write any of my private fancies
or vagaries.  I burnt all up to my fifteenth year — thinking I
grew too old for scribbling nonsence  (sic] ,  but as I am less
young,  I grow,  I fear,  less wise,  for I cannot any longer resist
what I find to be irresistible,  the pleasure of popping down
my thoughts from time to time upon paper.

1 Mme.  D'Arblay states that when her father was in Paris  (in 1764),
Lord Hertford promised him the Mastership of the King's Band when
it should become vacant,  but broke his word next year,  on being
solicited by the Duke of York  (the King's brother)  in favour of another
musician.  This appointment seems to have been a perquisite of the
Lord Chamberlain,  but there must be some error as to dates,  since
Lord Hertford did not become Lord Chamberlain until 1766.

1774]  Frances Burney.  305

My good old new friend,  Mr.Hutton,made me two visits while
my mother was at Chesington.  We had a good deal of con
versation upon Lord Chesterfield's Letters,  which I have just
read.  I had the satisfaction to find,  that our opinions exactly
coincided  ;  that they were extremely well written,  contained
some excellent hints for education ;  but were written with a
tendency to make his son a man wholly unprincipled ;  incul
cating immorality,  countenancing all gentleman-like vices,
advising deceit and exhorting to inconstancy.  "  It pleased me
much,"  said Mr.  Hutton,  "in speaking to the King about
these Letters,  to hear him say,  "  For my part,  I like more
straight-forward work."

I have had the honour,  not long since,  of being in company
with Mr.  Keate,  author of an account of Geneva,  Ferney,  and
some other things,  chiefly poetical.  He is an author,  comme
ilfaut;  for he is in affluent circumstances,  and writes at his
leisure and for his amusement.  It was at the house of six
old maids,  all sisters,  and all above sixty,  that I met Mr.
Keate.1 These votaries of Diana are exceedingly worthy

1 George Keate,  F.R.S.  and F.S.A.,  is described by George Column
the Younger,  as  "  a worthy gentleman of independent fortune,  of good
connexions,  and good family ; "  who was therefore fittingly said  (in
the  "Biographia Dramatica"),  to have  "obliged the icorld with several
poemg of distinguish"  d elegance and reputation,"  with his own por
trait attached to them.  He  "  obliged the world  "  with a poem in thin
4to.  yearly,  from 1760 to 1769,  and also with some in after years.  His
best book is in prose,  being a compilation from the Journals of Cap
tain Henry Wilson,  called  "  An Account of the Pellew Islands  (1778),
wherein our grandparents read the touching story of  "  Prince Lee Boo."
George Colman wonders how Keate came to sit for his portrait,  "  for
his countenance was more grotesquely ugly than the generality of
human faces."  Keate told the elder Colman a story which permits us
to think that he had humour,  and was not unaware of his own strange
looks.  He said that he had been in a side box of one of the London
theatres,  when there was a cry of  "  Fire."  He was so much alarmed,
that when he got safely home,  he found that his eyebrows and eye-
lathes had dropt off through fright — "  and they have never, — as you
may perceive,  Sir, — grown again !  "  Some verses on Shakespeare in
his poem of  "  Ferney  "  caused Keate to be made free of Stratford-on-
Avon,  at the same time with Garrick,  in the  "  Jubilee-year,"  1769.

I.  X

306 The Early Diary of  [1774

women of the name of Blake  ;  and I heartily wish that I,  who
mean to devote myself to the same goddess,  should I be as
ancient,  may be as good.

Mr.  Keate did not appear to me to be very brilliant ;  his
powers of conversation are not of a shining cast ;  and one dis
advantage to his speeches is,  his delivery of them;  for he
speaks in a slow and sluggish voice.  But what principally
banished him from my good graces was,  the conceited manner
in which he introduced a discourse upon his own writings.

"  Do you know,  Mrs.  Blake/'  (addressing himself to the
senior virgin)  "  I have at last ventured upon building,  in spite
of my resolution,  and in spite of my Ode  ?  "

Mrs.  Blake fell into his plot,  without being sensible that he
had laid one.  "  Oh  !  Mrs.  Burney  "  (cried she to mama),
that Ode was the prettiest thing  !  I wish you could see
it!"

"  Why I had determined,  and indeed promised,"  said he,
"  that when I went into my new house,  I would either give a
Ball or write an Ode ; — and so I found the Ode was the more
easy to me ;  but I protested in the poem,  that I would never
undertake to build."  All the sisters then poured forth the
incense of praise upon this Ode,  to which he listened with the
utmost nonchalance,  reclining his person upon the back of his
chair,  and kicking his foot now over,  and now under,  a gold-
headed cane.

When these effusions of civility were vented,  the good old
ladies began another subject ;  but,  upon the first cessation of
speech,  Mr.  Keate broke the silence he had kept,  and said to
mama,  "  But the worst thing to me was,  that I was obliged to
hang a carpenter in the course of my poem."

"  Oh dear,  aye  ;  "  cried Mrs.  Blake ;  "  that part was vastly
pretty  !  I wish I could remember it.  Dear Mrs.  Burney,  I
wish you could see it  !  Mr.  Keate,  it's a pity it should not
be seen — "

"  Why surely"  (cried he,  affectedly),  "you would not have
me publish it  ?  "

"  Oh  !  as to that, — I don't know,"  answered with the utmost
simplicity,  Mrs.  Blake,  "  you are the best judge of that.  But
I do wish you could see it,  Mrs.  Burney/'

1774]  Frances Burney.  307

"  No j faith  !  "  added he,  "  I think that,  if I was to collect
my other brats,  I should not,  I believe,  put this among them."

"  If we may judge/'  said mama,  "  of the family unseen by
those in the world,  we must certainly wish for the pleasure of
knowing them all."

Having now set the conversation upon this favourite topic
again,  he resumed his posture and his silence,  which he did
not again break,  till he had again the trouble of renewing
himself the theme,  to which his ear delighted to listen;  else
he only

"  Sat attentive to his own applause."

My father,  who,  thank Heaven  !  is an author of a different
stamp,  pursues his work at all the leisure moments he can
snatch from business or from sleep.

Sunday night,  June 26th.

Mama with Bessy and Dick are gone for a few days to
Bradfield,  on a visit to Mrs.  Young.  A message came this
evening,  while my father and I were tete a tete in the study,
from Mr.  Coney of Lynn,  with compliments,  and that he was
coming to pay a visit here with an intimate friend of my
father's.  Not conjecturing who this might be,  and knowing
that Mr.  Coney did not merit the sacrifice of an evening,  word
was sent that my father was not at home ;  but they had left
home before the messenger returned,  and were therefore told
the same tale at this door.  However,  they came in to see
me,  Mr.  Coney first,  and then Mr.  Bewley !  my father's very
learned and philosophical friend,  who is come to town only for
this one evening !  I protest I was quite confounded at the sight
of him.  I well knew that my father would as earnestly desire
to see Mr.  Bewley,  as he had not to see Mr.  Coney.  I was
upon the point of saying,  tout de bon,  at sight of him, — •"  Mr.
Bewley,  my father is at home  "  j but the recollection of the
third of a second told me what a gross affront that would be
to Mr.  Coney,  whose name had already been sent,  and without
success.  I therefore restrained myself,  and to my great con
cern,  after about a quarter of an hour spent in chatting,  I
was obliged to sufier Mr.  Bewley to march off in the same

308 The Early Diary of  [1774

ignorance with his companion.  My father has since sent half
the town over in search of Mr.  Bewley ;  but in vain ;  for I
could not procure from him any satisfactory account of his
place of abode ;  which indeed he did not seem to know him
self.  He was so extremely distrait during the visit,  that I
believe he was uncertain whether he was in Queen Square in
reality or in a vision.

Mr.  Coney,  who piques himself upon having the address of
a man of the world,  and who is very conceited,  gave himself
the air of being diverted at Mr.  Bewley for his absence,  and
ignorance of the town,  &c.  He protested he had done
nothing but laugh since they arrived.  Ah  !  thought I,  my
merry gentleman,  however you may presume upon your
external acquirements,  that quiet unassuming man,  who makes
your diversion,  may also from you receive his own  !  *

I have been interrupted by a visit from Dr.  Armstrong.  He
must be very old,  and looks very much broken ;  but he still
retains his wit and his gallantry.  When I regretted my father's
being out,  and thanked him for coming in to see me  ;  "  To
you,"  repeated he,  shaking my hands,  "  do you think there

1 Although William Bewley was a poor and hard- worked surgeon
in an almost unknown country-town,  he was in correspondence with
the chief anatomists and writers on chemistry and electricity of his
time,  and for twenty years wrote articles on science and foreign
literature for  "  The Monthly Review."  He had never done more than
pass through London on business until 1783,  when illness took him
thither to consult for himself John Hunter and Mr.  Potts,  Dr.  Warren,
and Dr.  Jebb,  to whom he had often written on the maladies of others.
He travelled from Norfolk to London by Birmingham,  where he paid
Priestley a visit which had long been promised.  Under Dr.  Burney's
roof he revived,  seeing London with the zest of a boy,  and having the
delight of being presented to Johnson as the proud owner of the tuft
of bristles from the doctor's old hearth-broom.  He next visited
Griffiths,  the Editor of  "  The Monthly Review,"  at Turnham Green.
There his illness became severe,  and he returned abruptly to the house
of Dr.  Burney,  who was summoned  (by express,)  from Chesington.
The sick man's wife was with him,  but nursing and doctors could avail
nothing.  He died of an incurable interaal tumour in September,  1783,
in the house of Dr.  Burney,  and was buried in the neighbouring church
of St.  Martin -in -the- Fields.

1774]  Frances Burney.  309

is any body I would sooner come in to see than you  ?  '
Speaking of physicians,  I said that it appeared to me to be
the most melancholy of all professions,  though the most useful
to the world.  He shook his head,  and said that indeed he had
never been happy till he was able to live independant of his
business;  for that the pain and anxiety attendant upon it,
were inconceivable.

But now let me come to a matter of more importance and,
at the same time,  pleasure  :  My brother is returned in health,
spirits,  and credit.  He has made what he calls a very fine
voyage ;  but it must have been very dangerous.  Indeed,  he
has had several personal dangers  ;  and in these voyages of
hazard and enterprize,  so,  I imagine,  must every individual of
the ship.  Captain Cooke was parted from in bad weather,
accidentally,  in the passage from the Society Isles to New
Zealand,  in the second and so fatal visit which they made to
that barbarous country,  where they lost ten men in the most
inhuman manner.  My brother,  unfortunately for himself,  was
the witness and informer of that horrid massacre.  Mr.  Rowe,
(the acting Lieutenant),  a midshipman ;  and eight men were
sent from the ship in a boat to shore,  to get some greens.
The whole ship's company had lived so long upon good terms
with the New Zealanders,  that there was no suspicion of trea
chery or ill usage.  They were ordered to return at three
o'clock ;  but upon their failure,  Captain Furneaux sent a
launch,  with Jem to command it,  in search of them.  They
landed at two places without seeing anything of them.  They
went among the people,  and bought fish ;  and Jem says he
imagined they were gone further up the country,  but never
supposed how very long a way they were gone.  At the third
place,  it is almost too terrible to mention,  they found 1

1 This requires some correction from Captain Furneaux's Narrative of
his proceedings in the  "Adventure,"  after he was separated from Cap
tain Cook by the storm.  Mr.  Rowe was a Midshipman,  who was s«nt
as acting Lieutenant in the large cutter,  with a crew of nine of the

310 The Early Diary of  [1774

[ME.  CEISP TO Miss BUENEY.]

Ches.  Aug.  22.

Dear Fanny,

You are a good sort of girl enough and I don't hate you
violently. — You kept me in hot water about Jem tho'  for a
minute ;  which small penance  (as you love mischief at your
heart,  and cannot help it)  I can forgive since you set matters
to rights in three or four lines afterwards.  But I see in the
papers that a Lieutenant Clarke is to go out next voyage with
the command of the  "  Eesolution  " — how will Jem like that,
instead of his favourite Captain Cooke  ?  (sic) l Or is it all
one to Jem who he goes with,  so as he does but once more
visit Otaheite and his dear Piece that he left behind there  ?
But I wish him good luck with all my heart,  for I have taken
a great fancy to him. — I suppose that R[ogue]  your father is
at Buxton before now. — Have you heard from or about him  ?
Let me know.  I wish I had anything from hence,  to keep
up the ball of correspondence;  but in short instead of
offering to pay your ballance I can only send you an order for

best men in the ship to  "  gather wild greens,"  with orders to return the
same evening.  The poor lad was in such a hurry to be off,  that he
went an hour before the time fixed.  He did not return even on the
following morning,  when the  "Adventure"  was to sail.  Captain Fur-
neaux put it down to his desire to explore  (on his own account)  a bay into
which none in the ship had ever entered;  but was sufficiently alarmed
to send second-Lieutenant Burney,  with a crew,  and ten mai'ines,  in
the launch,  in search of him.  Captain Furneaux writes,  "  Mr.  Burney
having returned about eleven o'clock,  the same night,  made his report
of a horrible scene indeed,  which cannot be better described than in his
own words."  Here  (in Cook's Voyages)  follows the report of Lieu
tenant Burney,  who did not  "  witness the massacre,"  but found the
remains of Kowe and the crew.  Fanny has left the greater part of
her page blank,  with the intention,  seemingly,  of giving details;  but
she may have found them too  "  terrible."  As they are both terrible and
horrible,  we do not give them.

This was an incorrect report,  but Captain Clerke,  or Clarke,
succeeded Cook in the  "  Eesolution,"  after he was killed by the savages,
and died while in command of that vessel.

1 774]  Frances Burney.  311

more goods.      To say that I,  and Ham,  and Kate have much
missed you,  and would much have you again,  is,  or at least

ought to be no news to you — it is true however

Adieu,

Yrs sincerely,

S.  CRISP.

******

The present Lyon of the times,  according to the author of  "the
Placid Man's  "  term,  is Omy,  the native of Otaheite;  and next
to'  him,  the present object is Mr.  Bruce,  a gentleman who has
been abroad twelve years,  and spent four of them in Abyssinia
and other places in Africa,  where no Englishman before has
gained admission.  His adventures are very marvellous.  He
is expected to publish them,  and I hope he will.  He is very
intimate with the Stranges,  and one evening called here with
Miss Strange.  His figure is almost gigantic !  he is the
tallest man I ever saw ; 1 but well made,  neither fat or
lean in proportion to his amazing height.  I cannot say I
was charmed with him;  for he seems rather arrogant,  and to
have so large a share of good opinion of himself,  as to have
nothing left for the rest of the world but contempt.  Yet his
self-approbation is not that of a fop  ;  on the contrary,  he is a
very manly character,  and looks so dauntless and intrepid,  so
that I believe he could never in his life know what fear meant.

September 1st.

My father received a note last week from Lord Sandwich,
to invite him to meet Lord Orford and the Otaheitan at Hin-
chinbrook,  and to pass a week with him there ;  and also to
bring with him his son,  the Lieutenant.  This has filled us
with hope for some future good to my sailor-brother,  who is
the capital friend and favourite of Omai,  or Omiah,  or Omy,

Bruce was six feet four.

312 The Early Diary of  [1774

or Jack,  for my brother says he is called by all those names
on board,  but chiefly by the last appellation,  Jack  !

*  #  *  #  #  *

Chesington,  Saturday,  Sept.

Willingly,  my dearest Susy,  do I comply with your request
of journalizing to you during my stay at this place.  This dear,
dear place where we have all been so happy !  Our dearest
father is already better ;  our delightful Daddy is in high spirits
at his arrival,  and of me his reception was so kind — kind — kind
— that it has beaten at my heart ever since.  Mrs.  Hamilton
and Kitty are joyous also.  Mrs.  Simmons1 as usual,  vulgar
and forward  ;  her daughter struggling to be polite,  and Mrs,
Moore contentedly at the head of stupidity.

I have no adventures to communicate.  Mile.  Rosat
is just what she was,  sensible,  reserved,  civil,  and silent.
Mile.  Courvoisyois,  who is newly arrived at Chesington on a
visit to Mile.  Eosat,  seems to be good-natured and agreeable
enough ;  but to have what may be called a merry heart and
shallow head!  She laughs eternally;  neither her own illness
nor other people's can make her grave even a moment.  She
speaks very good English for a French woman ;  for so she
is as to language,  though born in Switzerland.

One thing which diverts me a good deal,  and which is
equally at least a diversion to Mile.  Eosat,  is that not a soul in
the house can pronounce Mile.  Courvoisyois'  name,  except Mr.
Crisp,  and he never will,  as he always calls her petite mechante.
Mrs.  Hamilton calls her Miss Creussy,  Mrs.  Simmons Miss
what's your name;  Mrs.  Moore calls her Miss Creusevoye;  and

Under Captain John Simmons,  of the  "  Cerberus,"  James Buruey
served for a time in the following year,  on the North America Station.
On the 12th of April,  1782,  Simmons was Captain of the  "  Formidable,"
the flagship of Admiral Eodney,  who that day won his famous victory
over Comte de Grasse,  off Dominica.  Some who knew Captain Sim
mons thought him the original of Fanny's Captain Mirvan,  nor does she
quite disclaim it,  as she merely says that he was not in her mind at
the time when she wrote.

1774]  Frances Burney.  313

Kitty,  to cut the matter as short as possible,  and to save trouble,
only says Miss Crewe.

Mrs.  Simmons,  who because she can smoak the folly of her
sister Moore,  who is quite silly,  thinks herself a prodigy of
wisdom ;  and I dare say would think herself an immediate
descendant from Minerva,  if she had ever happened to hear
of such a person ;  for her conceit raises her to the utmost
height of her conceptions.  Well;  this wise lady held poor
Mile.  Courvoisyois more cheap than any other person in
the house ;  and I really believe she took a dislike to her,
from finding she could not pronounce her name.  When she
spoke of her,  it was generally in this manner,  "  That Miss
What's her name,  there,  Miss Fid-Fad,  as I call her.  There
she has been laughing,  till she made my head ache ready to
split.  Yet I gave her a good set-too just now.  I suppose she
won't like me, — who cares  ?  Not I,  I promise her  !  I think
she's the greatest fool that ever  /  see.  She should not be
a tutoress to my cat/'

I have almost,  though very undesignedly,  occasioned a
grand fracas in the house,  by a ridiculous conceit which I
sported for the amusement of Miss Simmons and Kitty.  We
had been laughing at some of poor Mrs.  Moore's queer
phrases,  and then I mentioned some of Kitty's own.  Her
Cousin joined in laughing violently ;  and as I proceeded from
one absurd thing to another,  I took Miss Simmons herself to
task upon some speeches she had made;  and in conclusion I
told them I intended to write a Treatise upon Politeness for
their edification.  All this was taken as it was said,  in sport,
and we had much laughing in consequence of my scheme,
which I accompanied by a thousand flighty speeches and
capricios,  for you know what my spirits are at Liberty Hall,
Chesington.  After this,  upon all indecorums,  real or fanciful,  I
referred Miss Simmons and Kitty to my book for instruction,
and it became a sort of standard joke among us,  to which we
made every thing that passed applicable,  and Miss Simmons
who enjoyed hearing me run on as she called it,  introduced
the subject perpetually.  Indeed,  the chief amusement I have
made myself when with the two cousins,  has been indulging
liberally in that kind of rhodomontade discourse,  that it will

314 The Early Diary of  [1774

be easy to you to recollect some instances of.  ...  All this did
very well among ourselves ;  but the day after the Simmons' s
left us,  while we were at dinner,  Kitty blundered out,  "  Good
people,  I tell you what ; — she's going to write something about
Politeness,  and that,  and it's to be for all of you,  here at
Ohiss,  to mend your manners/'

"  I'm sure,"  cried Mile.  Courvoisyois,  "  we shall be very
much oblige to the lady/'

"  I'll subscribe to the book with all my heart/'  cried Mile.
Rosat.  "I beg leave to bespeak the first copy.  I am sure it
will be a very useful work."  .

"  She's to tell you all what you're to do/'  resumed Kitty,
"  and how you're to do this — and all that."

"  Exceedingly well defined,  Kate/'  said Mr.  Crisp  ;  "  but
pray,  Fannikin,  what shall you particularly treat of  ?  "

"  Oh,  Sir,"  cried I,  "  all parts of life  !  it will be a very
comprehensive work  ;  and I hope you'll all have a book."

"  Pray,  what will it cost  \  "  demanded Mrs.  Moore,  seriously.

"  A guinea a volume/'  answered I,  "  and I hope to comprize
it in nine volumes."

"  Oh,  lud  !  "  exclaimed she,  "  I sha'nt give no such money
for it."

"  I will have two copies,"  said Mile.  Rosat,  "  let it cost what
it will.  I am sure it will be exceeding well executed."

"  I do'nt doubt in least"  cried Mile.  Courvoisyois,  "  of
politeness of Miss Burney ;  but I should like to see the book,
to see if I should sought the same."

"  Will it be like Swift's  '  Polite Conversation'  ?  "  said Mr.
Crisp.

"  I intend to dedicate it to Miss Notable/'  *  answered I ;  "it

1  "  Miss Notable  "  is the lively heroine of Swift's ironical little piece
"  Polite Conversation,"  which runs side by side with his  "  Directions
to Servants."  One has actually been taken as a minute account of the
manners,  "  amusements,  and occupations of persons of fashion in Lon
don,"  in Swift's own time  ;  the other,  as a bad little book,  teaching the
ignorant to do wrong.  In fact,  one is a summary of every blunder,
fault,  or vice,  which Swift had known silly,  mischievous,  or wicked
servants  (especially Irish servants)  capable of committing  ;  the other,
a collection of all the pert,  vulgar  "  smart answers,"  "  repartees,  or

1774]  Frances Burney.  315

will contain all the newest fashioned regulations.  In the first
place,  you are never again to cough/'

"  Not to cough  ?  "  exclaimed every one at once ;  "  but how
are you to help it  ?  "

"  As to that"  answered I,  "  I am not very clear about it
myself,  as I own I am guilty sometimes of doing it ;  but it is
as much a mark of ill breeding,  as it is to laugh ;  which is a
thing that Lord Chesterfield has stigmatized."

"  Lud  !  well,  for my part,"  said Mrs.  Moore,  "  I think
there's no fun without it."

"  Not for to laugh''  exclaimed Courvoisyois,  with hands up
lifted,  "  well,  I declare I did.  not sought of such a sing."

"  And pray,"  said Mr.  Crisp,  making a fine affected face,
"  may you simper? ''

"  You may smile Sir,"  answered I ;  "  but to laugh is quite
abominable ;  though not quite so bad as sneezing,  or blowing
the nose"

"  Why,  if you do'nt blow it/'  cried Kitty,  taking me lite
rally,  "  what are you to do with it?"

I pretended to be too much shocked to answer her.

"But pray,  is it permitted,"  said Mr.  Crisp,  very drily,
"  to breathe."

"That is not yet,  I believe,  quite exploded,"  answered I;
"  but I shall be more exact about it in my book of which I
shall send you six copies.  I shall only tell you in general,  that
whatever is natural,  plain,  or easy,  is entirely banished from
polite circles."

"  And all is sentiment and delicacy,  hey,  Fannikin  ?  "

"  No,  Sir ;  not so,"  replied I with due gravity ;  ' '  senti
ments and sensations were the last fashion  ;  they are now done
with  ;  they were laughed out of use,  just before laughing was

rejoinders,"  which he had been able to rake together,  with some details
of bad manners to match the phrases.  In a preface  (as ironical as the
rest),  Swift tells us that  "  the flowers of wit,  fancy,  wisdom,  humour,
and politeness scattered in this volume,  amount to 1,074."  Compare
Fanny's projected book on politeness with her sarcastic u Directions for
coughing,  sneezing,  or moving,  before the King and Queen,"  contained
in a letter to her sister Hetty,  written at Windsor,  on the 17th of Dec.,
1 785,  before she had any notion that she was for years to be subject to
what she ridicules.

316 The Early Diary of  [1774

abolished.  The present ton is refinement;  nothing is to be,
that has been;  all things are to be new polished and highly
finished.  I shall explain this fully in my book."

"Well;  for my part,"  cried Mrs.  Moore,  who took every
word I said seriously ;  "  I don't desire to read no such tiddling
books.  I'm.  very well as I am."

It's well you think so,  thought I.

"  Pray,  Ma'am,"  said Mile.  Rosat,  "is it within the rules of
politeness to pick the teeth f  '

"  Provided you have a little glass to look in before you,"
answered I,  and rose to go up stairrc to my father.1

"  Pray,  Ma'am,"  cried she again,  "  is it polite,  when a per
son talks,  if you don't understand them,  to look at another,
as if you said,  '  What nonsense she says.'  '•

"  I should imagine not,"  answered I,  moving off alarmed,
as I found these questions were pointed against poor Kitty.

"  Pray,  is it polite,  Ma'am,"  cried Mile Rosat again,  "  to
make signs and to whisper f  "

"  I suppose not,"  cried I,  opening the door.

"  Andpray,"  cried Kitty,  colouring,"  is it petite to be touchy?
and has people any business to suspect and to be suspicious?"

"  Oh  !  "  cried I,  "  these are things that don't come into
my cognisance  ;  " — and away I ran.

My father,  however,  sent me down again,  to ask Mr.  Crisp
up stairs to play at backgammon.  I found them all silent.
Mr.  Crisp went up immediately,  and presently every body
went out,  but Kitty,  Courvoisyois,  and me.  I told Kitty,
who I saw was swelling with anger,  that I began to be sorry
she had mentioned the Book.  "  Oh !  it does not signify,"
cried she,  bursting into a violent fit of tears.  "  I don't mind,
if people will be cross  ;  it's nothing to rne.  I'm sure I'm as
obliging as I can — and if people don't like me they must let it
alone."

This may be compared with the passage in  "  Sense and Sensibility,"
in which the Dashwoods first see the  "  puppy  "  Robert Ferrars,  in a
London jeweller's shop,  "  debating for a quarter of an hour over every
tooth-pick-case  ....  deciding on all the different horrors of the
different tooth-pick cases,"  etc.

1774]  Frances Burney.  317

We tried to pacify her;  Courvoisyois gave her a glass
of wine,  and insisted on her drinking it.  "  I did not sought,
said she,  "  that Miss Rosat did mean you.  I am sure she
always says you are very good."

"  You're very obliging,  Miss Crewe,"  cried Kitty,  sobbing;
"  but I can see as well as other people;  and I know what Miss
Rossiter meant " — [N.B.  she calls her Rossiter ;  no one knows
why,  not even herself.]  "  because the thing was,  that one day
my cousin and I were together,  and so Rossiter came in,  and
I'm sure I did nothing more than I do at this moment ;
my cousin can witness for me ;  but she went out of the room
in a huff;  nobody knows for what;  and then afterwards she
goes and tells my Aunt Hamilton,  that when she came into
the room,  I said  '  Humph  !  '  Now,  I purtest I never said no
such a thing  ;  and so my cousin would say,  if she was here  ;
for I should scorn it ;  and though I a'nt so p elite as Miss
Rossiter,  I'm sure I always try to be as obliging as I can,  and
if ever she wants any thing at any time,  I'm always ready to
go for her."

"  I'm sure I always hear her say so,  Miss Cooke,"  cried Mile.
Courvoisyois,  "  I sink you are certainly of a mistake."

I was very glad she spoke,  as I could not :  for the account
of the cause of the disagreement was told so very ridiculously,
that it required a painful effort to forbear laughing out ;  it
was all I could do to be decent.  However,  after some time
we consoled her,  and made her dry up her tears,  which she
did,  all the while protesting that  "  she would not say such a
thing as Humph for the world,"  and that  "  nobody was further
from it."

They are now upon very good terms again.  Poor Kitty
has as honest and worthy a heart as any human being,  and
cannot bear to be thought ill of.  Yet I can never cease to be
astonished,  that she can have lived so many years under the
same roof with such a man as Mr.  Crisp,  and yet be so very
unformed,  [really]  vulgar.  I often wish it was possible to set
down,  as they occur,  the strange speeches which she makes,
as I am sure they would highly divert your own quaint fancy,
though not so quaint as your humble servant's.

318

The Early Diary of

[i774

Thursday,  Goose-Day.

How I wish you were here,  my Susette  !  I have returned
to all my old original rattling spirits,  that used to divert you so
much at this dear old Liberty Hall,  Chesington, — our beloved
Mr.  Crisp,  chieftain —

ft

tt

*

Newton House St.  Martin's Street,
Leicester Fields.

Oct.  18th.

My father,  very much recovered,  and myself left Chesington
ten days ago.  We came immediately to this house,  which we
propose calling Newton House,  or The Observatory,  or some
thing that sounds grand,  as Sir Isaac's identical observatory
is still subsisting,  and we show it,  to all our visitors,  as our
principal Lyon.  I am very much pleased with the Mansion.1

The first opera  [of the season]  was performed last Tuesday.
The morning before Mrs.  Brooke called here,  and very civilly
invited my mother,  Susy,  and me to her box.  We were very
desirous to hear the new singer Rauzzini,  of whom my father
has said so much in his German Tour ;  and we agreed to wait
upon Mrs.  Brooke about seven.  Accordingly we went.  Her
house in Market Lane,  by means of divers turnings and wind
ings,  has a passage to the Opera House.  We intended to

1 When Dr.  Burney entered this house  (which is now marked by a
tablet,  set up by the Society of Arts),  Newton's Observatory  "  over
looked all London and its environs."  It was a glazed turret,  that is,
a mere framework of small panes  ;  with a small fire-place and chimney,
and a cupboard.  On the little landing was a cupboard for coals.  Dr.
Burney's first act was to repair it,  "  at a considerable expense."  Four
years later,  in a hurricane,  the leaden roof and glazed sides were
whirled away ;  and he all but reconstructed it,  in his ardour for
Newton's memory.  If his name has no place on the recent tablet,
the more is the pity.  J.  T.  Smith describes the house as being No.  36,
"  next door to Orange Street Chapel,  where I have frequently heard
Mr.  Toplady preach."

Frances Burney,
have sat in her box and have seen only her;  but when we
at,  we found she was up stairs with Mrs.   Yates  !  and she
immediately asked us to go up stairs with her This we

hi f  /    ?n*    Sh,6 W°Uld D0t be refused>    and we    ™re
obliged to follow her.      We were led up a noble stair-case,

that brought us to a most magnificent apartment,   which

the same that belonged to the famous Heideger  '   and

ace his time has always been the property of the head

manager of the Opera.      Here we saw Mrs.  Yates,  seated like

tage queen,  surrounded with gay courtiers and dressed with

e utmost elegance and brilliancy.     What most provoked me

was,  that though our visit was only to Mrs.  Brooke,  vet

as we entered the room,  our names were announced in an

>nfv  *  TCn AV Can C°mf0rt m^8elf  ^  i8'  that  *  ~
only at the Opera-House that we met,  and that of late years

rs.  Yates has had no harm said of her.
Mrs Yates,  to a very fine figure joins a very handsome face,
though not now m her premiere jeunesse;   but the expression
ier face is infinitely haughty and hard.    With an over done
ility as soon as our names were spoken,  she rose from her
seat hastily,  and rather rushed towards,  than meerly advanced
=0 meet us;  but I doubt not it was meant as the very pink of
Pohteness As to poor Mr.  Yates,  he presumed not to take
iberty in his own house to act any other part than that of
er,  m which capacity he arranged the chairs.      We were
not absolutely seated,  when the door was opened by an officer
rs.  Yates again started from her seat,  and flew to receive
m,  crying,   -General Cholmondeley,  I am happy to see

In  "  the Author's

Town'  '  mo FMH-113  £  P»^h™'  »>W  «  the Pleasures of tC
1729),  Fielding brmgs him in as  ••  Count Ugly,"  saying,

—  "  I disdain
O'er the poor ragged tribe of bards to reigu.

Le did my stars to happier fates prefer,
Sur-inteudaut des plaisirs d'Augleterre  ;
If Masqueratet you have,  let those be mine."

320 The Early Diary of  [17 74

you ! "  '  Then turning to her Jerry,  "  Mr.  Yates,  pray,  get
the General a chair."  Mr.  Yates obeyed,  and then we rose
to go to the Opera.  We were to sit in a box by ourselves.2

[An account of Omai,  which is given in a letter to Mr.  Crisp,  is so
much more full than that in the Diary,  that it has been thought advis
able to print the letter rather than that passage;  especially as it has
not been published in the  "  Memoirs of Dr.  Burney."  The notice of
Omai in that book  (p.  28,  vol.  i.)  is compiled from this letter,  and from
this Diary,  with some additional details from memory.  More than the
first page of this letter is given to complaints that Mr.  Crisp has not yet
returned the  "  Tingmouth Journal."  It was written in  "  St.  Martin's
Street on Thursday night,"  and received by Mr.  Crisp on December 1,
1774.]  3

1 The second Earl of Cholmondeley had been kind to Dr.  Burney's
father.    This was James,  his second son,  who is often named by Horace
Walpole,  whose own sister married the third Earl of the name,  brother

to James.

2 Mrs.  Tates  (who had before been Mrs.  Graham)  was the second
wife of  "  Dick Yates,"  a popular actor,  to whom Garrick brought her
as a pupil.     She had shown intelligence as an actress,  but Garrick
thought she had not experience enough to play the heroine in Arthur
Murphy's   "  Orphan of China  ; "  indeed,  he had at first refused that
drama.     Murphy gave the discouraged actress of his discouraged play
his own instructions how to act in it;    finally both the tragedy
and the actress gained a great success.     Mrs.  Yates was Eomney's
"  Tragic Muse  "  in a picture,  before Eeynolds painted his majestic
Siddons  ;  and,  it was said,  that as Eomuey was to Keynolds,  so was
the Tragic Muse Yates to the Tragic Muse Siddons.      Mrs.  Yates
was playing   "sentimental heroines"  when Foote very nearly pro
duced her on his stage as  "  The Handsome Housemaid,  or Piety in
Pattens,"  in mimicry of her manner of acting,  and of Cradock's dull
"  Zobe"ide,"  and Cumberland's  "  Fashionable Lover."      Her husband,,
whom Fanny calls  "Jerry  "(see Foote's  "Mayor of Garratt,")  sur
vived her until 1796,  and is said to have died at the age of 89,
"  from getting into a violent passion."     Yet,  after all,  if  (as our Mrs.
Harris says)  she played well the charming Bellario in the fine play
of  "  Philaster,"  she may have surpassed Sarah Siddons,  who was toa
stately for Violas or Eosalinds — tender ladies in male attire for the
nonce — to whom Beaumont and Fletcher's Bellario is a younger sister.

3 The narrative in the diary begins thus  :  "  What is my present in
ducement to resume my pen is to write an account of a visit we have
received from Omai,  the native of Uliteja,  brought from the South

Seas,  &c The visit of Omai was at the invitation of my brother,

who has not only been his shipmate and companion,  but who speaks
the language,  which is the same as that of Otaheite,  with great ease
and fluency."

1 774.1 Frances Burney.

321

[Miss BUKNEY TO MR.   CRISP.]

St.  Martin's Street,  Thursday night.
*  *  *  *  *  *

I have seen Omai,  and if I am,  as I intend to be,  very
mmute in my account,  will you shake hands and be friends  ?
'  Yes,  you little Devil you !   so to business,  and no more
Very well,  I obey.     You must know,  then,  in the
first place,  that glad as I was to see this great personage I
extremely regretted not having you of the party,  as you had
half promised you would be,— and as I am sure you would
have been extremely well pleased,  and that the Journey would
have more than answered to you  :  but the notice was so ex
tremely short it was impossible.     Now to facts.

My brother went last Monday to the play of Isabella at
Drury Lane— He sat in one of the Upper Boxes,  from whence
he spied Omai and Mr.  Banks— upon which he crossed  *  *  *  *
over to speak to his friend.     Omai received him with a hearty
shako of the hand,  and made room for him by his side.      Jem
asked Mr.  Banks when he could see him to dinner  ?     Mr.  B.
said that he believed he was engaged every day till the holy-
days,  which he was to spend at Hinchinbrooke.      *  *  *  *
However on Tuesday night,  very late,  there came a note
which I will write down.     It was directed to my brother.—
Omai presents his Compts.  to Mr.  Burney,  and if it is agreeable
and convenient to him,  he will do himself the honour of
dining with Mr.  Burney to-morrow,  but if it is not so,  Omai
will wait upon Mr.  Burney some other time that shall suit
him better.      Omai begs to have an answer,  and that if he is
to come,  begs Mr.  Burney will fetch him.

Early on Wednesday morning,  Jem called at Mr.  Banks,
with my father's compts to him,  and to Dr.  Solander,  and
begging their company also.  But they were engaged at the
Royal Society.1

1 At a dinner,  "where my father himself would have been,  but on
account of his ill state of health."— DIAKT.

I.  v

322 The Early Diary of  [17 74

Mr.  Strange and Mr.  Hayes,  at their own motion,  came to
dinner to meet our guest.1 We did not dine till four.  But
Omai came at two,  and Mr.  Banks and Dr.  Solander brought
him,  in order to make a short visit to my father.  They were
all just come from the House of Lords,  where they had taken
Omai to hear the King make his speech from the Throne.

For my part,  I had been confined up stairs for three days—
however,  I was much better,  and obtained leave to come down,
though very much wrapt up,  and quite a figure,  but I did
not chuse to appear till Mr.  Banks and Dr.   Solander were
gone.       I found Oraai seated on the great chair,  and my
brother next to him,  and talking Otaheite as fast as possible.
You cannot suppose how fluently and easily Jem speaks it.
Mama and Susy and Charlotte were opposite.     As soon as
there was a cessation of talk,  Jem introduced me,  and told him
I was another sister.      He rose,  and make a very fine bow,
and then seated himself again.      But when Jem went on,  and
told him that I was not well,  he again directly rose,  and mut
tering something of the fire,  in a very polite manner,  without
speech insisting upon my taking his seat, — and he would not
be refused.     He then drew his chair next to mine,  and look
ing at me with an expression of pity said  "  very well to
morrow-morrow  ?  " — I imagine he meant I hope you will be
very well in two or three morrows — and when I shook my head,
he said"  no  ?  0 very bad  !"      When Mr.  Strange and Mr.
Hayes were introduced to him,  he paid his compliments with
great politeness to them,  which he has found a method of
doing without words.

As he had been to Court,  he was very fine.  He had on a
suit of Manchester velvet,  lined with white satten,  a bag,  lace
ruffles,  and a very handsome sword which the King had given
to him.2 He is tall and very well made,  much darkey

1 In the Diary it runs :  "  This lyon of lyons,  for such he now is of
this town."

2 Mr.  Cradock tells us that Omai soon found out that his suit was
only of English velvet,  not of velvet from Genoa,  in which the gentle
men were dressed between whom he sat at the dinner given by Lord
Sandwich at the Admiralty.    He was very angry at the distinction of
velvets made between himself,    who never had a coat at all,  and

'774J Frances Burney.  ;^23

than  [  expected to sec him,  but has a pleasing counte
nance.1

Ho makes remarkable good bows — not for him,  but for any
body,  however long under a Dancing Master's care.  Indeed
he seems to shame Education,  for his manners are so extremely
graceful,  and he is so polite,  attentive,  and easy,  that you
would have thought he came from some foreign Court.2 You

others,  and said so to Mr.  Cradock and to Mr.  Bates.—"  None,"  (say
the French)  "are so dainty about their food as those who have
eaten their potatoes raw before they came into service."  The Diary
adds  "he has long left off his Otahiete garments,  which were,  I suppose,
in every respect improper for England."

"  He is tall,  swarthy,  and young,  extremely well made,  and a fine
figure,  and though by no means handsome,  he has a good and pleasincr
countenance." — DIARY.

Captain Cook gives this account of Omai.  "  Before we quitted
this island"  (Huaheine),  "  Captain Furneaux agreed to receive on board
his ship a young man named Omai,  a native of Ulietea,  where he had
had some property,  of which ho had been dispossessed by the people of
Bolabola.  I at first rather wondered that Captain Furneaux would
encumber himself with this man,  who,  in my opinion,  was not a proper
sample of the inhabitants of these happy islands,  not having any ad-
vantage of birth,  or acquired rank  ;  nor being eminent in shape,  figure,
or complexion  :  for their people of the first rank are much fairer%nd
usually better behaved,  and more intelligent,  than the middling class of
people,  among whom Omai is to bo ranked.  I have,  however,  since my
arrival in England been convinced of my error:  for excepting his
complexion  (which is undoubtedly of a deeper hue than that of the
Earees,  or gentry,  who,  as in other countries,  live a more luxurious
life,  and are less exposed to the sun),  I much doubt whether any
other of the natives would have given more general satisfaction by his
behaviour among us.  Omai has most certainly a good understanding,
quick parts,  and honest principles  ....  as he was very watchful into
the manners and conduct of the persons of rank who honoured him

with their protection,  he was sober and modest During his

stay among us  ....  his principal patrons were the Earl of Sand-
wich,  Mr.  Banks,  and Dr.  Solander."  It may be added that,  although
Banks and Solander had not gone with Cook on his second voyage,
they at once patronised this young Otaheitan on his landing.  George
Colman,  the younger,  gives an amusing account of meeting them with
Omai,  when his father took him as a lad on a visit to Captain Phipps
(Lord Mulgrave),  in Yorkshire.  Sir Joshua Reynolds painted a fine
portrait of  "  Omiah."  Ulietea is one of the six islands which Cook
named  "  the Society Islands,"  because they lay near each other.  Ac-
cording to the newspapers,  the French flag has recently been set upon
Omai's Huaheiue.

324 The Early Diary of  [1774

will think that I speak in a Ugh style ;  but I assure you there
was but one opinion about him.

At dinner I had the pleasure of sitting next to him,  as my
cold kept me near the fire.  The moment he was helped,  he
presented his plate to me,  which,  when I declined,  he had not
the over-shot politeness to offer all round,  as I have seen some
people do,  but took it quietly again.  He eat heartily and com
mitted not the slightest blunder at table,  neither did he do any
thing awkwardly or ungainly.  He found by the turn of the
conversation,  and some wry faces,  that a joint of beef was not
roasted enough,  and therefore when he was helped,  he took
great pains to assure mama that he liked it,  and said two or
three times — "  very dood, — very dood."  It is very odd,  but
true,  that he can pronounce the th,  as in thank you,  and
the w,  as in well,  and yet cannot say g,  which he uses a d for.
But I now recollect,  that in the beginning of a word,  as
George,  he can pronounce it.  He took a good deal of notice
of Dick,  yet was not quite so well pleased with him,  as I had
expected him to be.

During dinner,  he called for some drink.  The man,  not
understanding what he would have,  brought the porter.  We
saw that he was wrong,  however,  Omai was too well bred to
send it back,  he took it in his hand,  and the man then
brought him the small beer ; — he laughed,  and said — "  Two  \"
—however,  he sent off the small beer,  as the worse of the
two.  Another time he called for port-wine.  And when the
bread was handed,  he took two bits,  and laughed and said
«  one — two  "  He even observed my abstinence,  which I think
you would have laughed at,  for he turned to me with some sur
prize,  when dinner was almost over,  and said  "  no wine  ? '

Mr.  Hayes asked him,  through Jem,  how he liked the
King and his Speech.  He had the politeness to try to answer
in English and to Mr.  Hayes — and said  "  very well,  King
George ! "

After dinner,  mama gave the king for a toast.  He made
a bow,  and said  "  Thank you,  madam  "  and then tost off  "  King
George  !  "

He told Jem that he had an engagement at six o'clock,  to go
with Dr.  Solander to see no less than twelve ladies. — Jem trans-

X774]  Frances Burney.  325

latcd this to us— he understands enough of English to Hud out
when he is talked of,  in general,  and so ho did now,  and he
laughed heartily,  and began to count,  with his fingors in
order to be understood-  » 1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10— twelve
—woman  /  "  said he.

When Mr.  Banks and Dr.  Solander went away,  he said to
them Good-bye—good-bye.  He never looked at his dress
though it was on for the first time.  Indeed he appears to be
a perfectly rational and intelligent man,  with an understanding
far superior to the common race of us cultivated gentry.  He
could not else have borne so well the way of Life into which
he is thrown,  without some practice.

When the man brought him the two beers,  I forgot to
mention that in returning them,  one hit against the other
and occasioned a little sprinkling.  He was shocked extremely
—indeed I was afraid for his fine cloaths,  and would have
pm'd up the wet table cloth,  to prevent its hurting them—
but he would not permit me;  and,  by his manner seem'd to
intrcat me not to trouble myself !— however he had thought
enough to spread his handkerchief over his knee.

Before six,  the coach came.    Our man came in and said  "  Mr

Oman's servant."     He heard it at once,  and answered   "  very

He kept his seat about five minutes after,  and then rose

and got his hat and sword.    My father happening to be talking

to Mr.  Strange,  Omai stood still,  neither chusing to interrupt

him,  nor to make his compliments to any body else first.  When

he was disengaged,  Omai went up to him,  and made an

Exceeding fine bow— the same to mama— then seperately to

every one in the company,  and then went out with Jem to

his coach.

He must certainly possess an uncommon share of observa
tion and attention.  I assure you every body was delighted
with him.  I only wished I could have spoke his language.  Lord
Sandwich has actually studied it so as to make himself under
stood in it.  His hands are very much tattooed,  but his face
is not at all.  He is by no means handsome,  though I like his
countenance.

The conversation of our house has turned ever since upon
Mr.  Stanhope and Omni—  the first with all the advantage of

326 TJie Early Diary of  [1774

Lord Chesterfield's instructions,  brought up at a great school.
introduced at fifteen to a Court,  taught all possible accomplish
ments from an infant,  and having all the care,  expence,
labour,  and benefit of the best education that any man can re
ceive,  —  proved after it all a meer pedantic booby  ;  —  the second
with no tutor but Nature,  changes,  after he is grown up,  his
dress,  his way of life,  his diet,  his country and his friends  ;  —
and appears in a new world like a man  [who]  had all his life
studied the Graces,  and attended with  [unrejmitting applica
tion and diligence to form his manners,  and to render his
appearance and behaviour politely easy,  and thoroughly well
bred!  I think this shows how much more nature can do
without art,  than art with all her refinement unassisted by
nature.1

If I have been too prolix,  you must excuse me,  because it is
wholly owing to the great curiosity I have heard you express
for whatever concerns Omai.  My father desires his love to
you,  and says that if you will but come to town,  as soon as
Omai returns from Hinchinbrooke,  he will promise you that
you shall still have a meeting with him.

[This letter is endorsed by Mr.  Crisp,  "  December 1."  Fanny appears
to have sat down and written this letter of more than seven quarto
pages that very Thursday night.]

Not having opportunity of proceeding in my ingenious
narration,  it has laid by so long,  that I have now forgot all

1 Boswell tells us that Dr.  Johnson was in company with Omai,
after he had been some time in this country.  Johnson was struck
with the elegance of his behaviour,  and accounted for it thus  :  "  Sir,
he had passed his time,  while in England,  only in the best com
pany  ;  so that all that he had acquired of our manners was genteel.  As
a proof of this,  Sir,  Lord Mulgrave and he dined one day at Streatham ;
they sat with their backs to the light fronting me,  so that I could not
see distinctly ;  and there was so little of the savage in Omai,  that I
was afraid to speak to either,  lest I should mistake one for the other."

This compliment to Omai must,  however,  be qualified with what
Mrs.  Thrale says of Lord Mulgrave  ..."  Eough as a boatswain,  and
fond of coarse merriment,  approaching to ill manners,  one never knew
what he would say next."

774]

Frances Burney.

327

1 intended to have added,  and 1 cannot give myself the trouble
of recollection,  not being in a prosing humour.  1 shall there
fore take an abrupt and rather cavalier leave of this adventure
(sic)  ;  and as I am already much in arrears with  .some new ones,
I shall reserve all my forces for those by way of amende
honorable — to whom  ?  why to myself,  that is to Nobody  !
Heigh-ho  !  poor me  !  Are Nobody and I one and the same
person  ?

END OP VOL.    I.

CHISWIfK I'KESS  : — C.  WHITTlS<iHAM AXD CO.,  TOOKS COUBT,  CII ANfKKV LAKE.

SEP 8

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY
