The History of Julia Benson, in a Series of Letters
Founded on Well-Known Facts

Dublin: Printed by Charles Lodge, Church-Street, 1784

[Source: Google Books, id=6sgkAAAAMAAJ]
[OCR quality: Fair — long-s (ſ) preserved, occasional spacing artifacts from 18c typography]

---

NYPL RESEARCH LIBRARIES

3 3433 07491338 9

Histues

2

THE

HIS

TOR

Y

OF

JULIA BENSON,
IN

A SERIES OF LETTERS ;
FOUNDED ON WELL-KNOWN FACTS .
TENDING

To Guard the MIND from the

INDULGENCE of UNLAWFUL PLEASURES,
And the FATAL EFFECTS of

FEMALE

RESENTMENT

Felix quemfaciunt aliena pericula cautum !
VOL.

I.

DUBLIN:

Printed by CHARLES LODGE, Church-Street.
MDCCLXXXIV

RAR
B
I
L
NOX

LE

NEW
YOR

K

LE

T

1

HISTORY
F

JULIA BENSON.

"

0

LETTER I.

Mr. MELVILL, to Mr. FREDERICK !!
1

Dear Charles,

the bett I made withMeDOnillyouonremember
taking a walk of half an hour, in
ſearch of an honest man and a virtuous woman ?

The other day we made an excurſion, by way of
trial, half injoke, which turned out more fuccefs-

fully than we could have expected, and proved ſo
extremely intereſting, that I shall, without further
preface, give you the adventure.

AtCharing-Croſs, Menill wanted me to turn
downbyWhitehall, and takeatripto St. Stephen's ;

but I poſitively inſiſted on the folly of going to
that quarter in pursuit of virtue. So we kept
ſtrait on to Pall-Mall, and had not taken many

ſteps in that ſtreet, before we came over-againft

thehotel. In thepaſſage of that houſe I remarked
A2

ayoung

4

THE HISTORY OF

a young lady, whoſe figure had fomething ſtriking init, with a face, beautiful in ſpite of tears,
for ſhe was in viſible diſtreſs, and without any
perfon near her. " Menill (faid I) here is an

objectworth pursuing-by Heaven, that coun" tenancecannot lye !" And immediatelyturning
into the houſe," Madam, you are in diſtreſs, can
" I aſſiſt you ?
" I am in diſtreſs God knows ! but"

" For Heaven's fake ſpeak, Madam !-What
" is the matter? upon myhonour, I am grieved
" to fee you weep."
" I know not what to do-could you ſhew me

" the way to ſome houſe, at a diſtance from
" this?"

" This inſtant, madam."

It immediately ſtruck me, that ſhe might perhaps be just come to town, and afraid of fome
purſuit or accident. I therefore beckoned fome

chairmen, put her into a chair, and ordered them

to follow me directly to my house in JermynStreet. Menill I diſmiſſed
" This (faid I to
" him) may prove an odd adventure, and you
" might spoil the whole ; call on me in the even-

" ing." Hetook the hint, and left me.
As foon as the incognita was ſeated in my
dining room, ſhe burst into a flood of tears ; nor
could any thing I said to her for fome time ſtop
her weeping-fhe moved me with pity. I ſhould
not forget to tell you, that her face, even in tears,
had fuch a ſweetneſs in it, that I was almoſt captivated with it ; and yet thou well knoweſt that I
am by no means a compleat whimperer. Iaddreſſed her ſeveral times, to which she returned
no anſwer.

" Doubtless, madam, you are alarmedat find" ing yourself in the house of an utter ſtranger,
" and

JULIA BENSON.

and with one who cannot perfuade you to un-

ravel the particulars of your ſituation. Believe
me, I fincerely pity you-from my foul I dodeperd upon the moſt ſacred honour, and, if
neceſſary, the ſtricteſt ſecrecy."

" I-am the moſt miferable creature in the
world.
"

" What is it that has made you fo? "

こ

" My tale, fir, is a fad one, and I have not
time to tell it ; beſides, where am I ? Whither

am I to go ? Mercy on me, what a ſituation ! "

"andFor
God's fake, madam, calm your grief,
condescend to make me acquainted with
your condition, that I may know how to ſerve
you."

L

I can only tell you, fir, that I am this moment come to town that I have fled from my

father's house in the country that I was going
to the hotel, but ſtruck with I know not what

tremour at the entrance, from the impropriety

of my conduct, I was almoſt loſt in acruel re
verie when you faw me."
" May I ask you, madam, on what account
you left your father, and from whenceyou are
come?"

" This, fir, was to havebeen my weddingday

' with a man I have every reaſon in the worldto
deteſt. My father was inexorable, and I found
" that I should either be forced to marry the man

I hated, or elſe muſt quithis house."
" You certainly acted with becoming ſpirit and

prudence, to take time to reconcile yourſelf

" with your father, and at the fame time eſcape a

" match ſo extremely difagreeable toyou. May

" I craveyour name, madam?"

THE HISTORY OF

6

The fon of a neighbouring gentleman of for

" tune, with whom he is inthe cloſeſt intimacy,
66

particularly in all their rural ſports, is the per-

" fon he pitched uponfor myhusband. He forced

" me to receive his viſits, which from the firſt I
" abhorred, as his character made him contemp" tible. He is a fox-hunter, avaricious to an extreme, and of brutal manners; I did and faid
66

"

every thing to break off the deſign, but my
" efforts were without effect. Mr. Slingſby, for
" that is his name, would perſiſt in paying his

" addreſſes, though he found himself diſagreeable
" to me.

This continued for some time, during

" which my father thought he had indulged me
enough, and infſiſted poſitively on my marry-

"

" ing, and went ſo far as even to name the wed-

" ding day ; by which I found myself obliged ei-

" ther to comply, or take the raſh ſtep which I
" havenow done. Mr. Slingſby's motive for ad" dreſſing me, was neither affection for me, or
" friendſhip for my father, but covetouſneſs, in" creaſed by my father's declaration that he would

"add five thousand pounds to the five which I
" have at my own diſpoſal."
" Your conduct, madam, will not admit of
" blame ; you certainly acted wiſely ; nor isit
" to be doubted but your father, unleſs he is loſt
" to every fentiment of humanity, will be recon" ciled to you, and be convinced of his imprui

" dence."
66

Never, fir,-I know him too well, and
" ſhouldnot have taken ſuch a terrible reſolution,

" if any thing less than marriage with a man I
" deſpiſed, had not neceffitated me to it. My

" father is paſſionate to exceſs, and has fuch an
idea of the duty of children towards their pa-

" rents, that I am veryconfident Ihave loft him
"for

JULIA BENSON.

7

for ever. But, ſir, whatcanI dowith myſelf?
-Whither am I to go ? I cannot ſtay in London, unless I am quite a recluſe ; for I ſhall be

diſcovered by ſome of our neighbours in three
days time, and my father, who is furious inhis
paffion, will purfue me, and, Idoubt not, bring
on that vile match again."

" Pray, madam, make yourself perfectly eaſy
on that head ; command this houſe as your
own-and conſider it as your afylum."
" Excuse me, fir, you are extremely generous-but-it is impoſſible, fir."" I understand your ſcruples, madam, but can

= remove them in a moment; my fiſter keeps

' my houſe, ſhe is out at preſent, but willbe at
' home by dinner, and, I am fure, willdo every
thing in her power to make you as eaſy as pof-

، fible."

" You are infinitely obliging, fir, but I am

' quite ashamed to think of taking ſo much

liberty; could you not hire me lodgings,

" which would prevent your having further trouble with ſo unfortunate a perſon as I am ?

" Name not any ſuch thing, madam: I ſhould

" be a brute indeed, to think any thing atrouble

" that would ſerve ſuch a lady as you in ſo much

" diſtreſs ."

Asyou ! do you mind that, Frederick ? And

upon my credit, itwas well put in ; for my heart
was too much interefted to part with her ſo easily,
her tears being dried, and her head dreſs not fo
much muffled up but I could more easily examine
her shape, air, &c. She is not a beauty, butten
times more pleaſing: you look at her ſometime
beforeyou know whether the is handsome or not,
being neither pretty nor plain; but ſhe ſoon convinces you, by the moſt infinuating charms, that

S

THE HISTORY OF

The was made for love. Her perſon is under the

common fize, elegant as poſſible, her grace, air,
and manner touching, as the French fay ; her eyes

have every expreſſion that fancy could give, they
are thoſe of a languiſhing or a fprightly beauty,
with a ſomething in them that ſpeaks immediately
tothe heart. Her complexion as fine as poffible ;
the reſt of her features have nothingin them, but

as accompanyments ofher expreſſion ; forthere is
nota motion of her body, or a turn of her eye,
butwhatis fullof expreffion.

Now, Frederick, this is an honest deſcription;
do not imagine that I am guilty of the folly of
fallinginlove at firſt fight ; beſides, I am ſtrongly poffefſed of the notion thatthis fair one hastold
mebut halfthe truth ; for I think the would not

have marched off with quite so much refolution,
had there not been a man ſhe loved, as well as

onewhom shehated ; and yet it isaſtrange thing,
if that bethe cafe, that she did not put herself at
onceunder his protection :-In short, I know not
what tothink of it ; but I know ſhe ſhall never
become food for a fox-hunter.

Upon my fiſter's return I introduced her, mentioning to her the circumſtances of the lady's dif
treſs: Fanny, you know, is a mild, good-natured
girl, whom one can do as we pleaſe with, and
who never gives herself the trouble of saying,
why do you do fo ? ſhe received MissBenson ve-

ry cordially ; and I can perceive from the countenanceof thefair ſtranger how well ſhe is pleaſed
with meeting with a good-natured, humane pro
tector of her own fex. After dinner, a glass or
two of wine fomewhat raiſed her spirits, and ſhe
became rather more communicative ; I wanted tol

find if she had not taken this ſtep from an affecti

on for fome happy country'ſquire unknown to her
father,

9
JULIA BENSON.
father, but she kept me at arm's length in that

point, not taking any of my hints, and indulging
no curioſity of that fort; but ſhe entered a little
more particularly into her own history, and as she

may be in future a conſiderable perſonage in the
drama of my letters, I ſhall infert ſome circum-

ſtances that will give you a better idea of her ſituation.

Her father is a man of agood eſtate in Suſſex,
onwhich he lives the whole year, never thinking
of visiting London; but is, on the contrary, bu-

ſied in rural ſports, particularly hunting, ſhooting, andfarming, which he likewife makes one ;

hehas very littleidea of the world, but has much
of that ignorant integrity and ſtrange fort of honeſty, which diſgraces the virtues, though they
add to their number ; in a word, a man of no re-

finement. Her mother died when she was very
young; ſhe was educated chiefly by an uncle and

aunt, people of the world, who ſpent much of
their time at London ; this uncle at his death left
her the five thousand pounds, but muchmore than

balanced it by her having no other houſe to dwell.
inbut her father's, for her aunt within a year after her husband's death married again. Upon her
return to fettle in Suffex ſhe was rather melancho-

ly, and did not bear ſo well with the ruſticity of
every thing about her, as when it was only a ſhort

ſummer's jaunt, and the town, with all its gaieties,
was in view, after a few months. Her principal
amuſements were books and her harpsichord,
which neither her mother, her father, her bro-

ther, or any of the neighbours had much taſte
for : they recommended the compleat Housewife
toher, as a much better companion than either

Addiſon or Pope ; and in the midst of an air of
Piccini have ſalutedher ears with hallowing their
dogs.
1

10

THE HISTORY OF

dogs. One may easily conceive that her time
muſthang moſt miferably heavy upon her, and
wanted not the addition of miſery that reſulted
from the intrusion of an admirer whom she deteſt-

ed. Upon my foul, Frederick, Iheartily fympathiſe with the poor girl-What could she do but

feek for happiness by flight ?
Inthe afternoon my fiſter took her in the coach

to fome ſhops, where ſhe bought ſome trifles, and
has, after a multitude of apologies,'confented to
remain in my houſe untilthe can frame ſome plan

of conduct that willbe proper for her to follow.Andhere endsmy narrative. I begin already to
wiſh ſhe had never entered my doors, for it is a
fituation more aukward than can be imagined; I

am in imminent danger of falling deſperately, in
love, and if I was to chooſe, I know not which I

ſhould prefer, that ſtate or an halter to marry I
ſhould not. Her five thousand comes not to my

mark by fifteen-love and poverty agree moſt miferably--other thoughts than marriage honour forbids. I love game, but it must be lawful ; Iwill
ſteal that in the night which ought to be shot in

the openday. Thus you fee there is no ſafety
for me but in my remaining an abſolute infipidacquaintance, having two ſiſters instead of one
I will endeavour it.

Yours..
RICHARD MELVILL.

2

LETTER

II.

Mr. FREDERICK to Mr. MELVILL.

there is not aman in the King's
MELVIL,
dominions that knows himself ſo little as

thou. Why this adventure was framed by kind

chance for thee alone; of all men you will make
the

JULIA BENSON.
theworst uſe of it. You have picked up a fair
II

incognita, with fine eyes, an admirable complexion, with ſuch a grace and air !-Oh Lord ! and
what are ſuch fine play-things made for ? Take

my word for it, Dick, for love and pleaſure not
for pain. This is one of the pretty painted clouds
that fail acroſs your atmosphere to beautify your
days , but thou art ſuch a whining fellow that if
poffible youwill turn it to a thunder-ſtorm.-Marriage! Heavens! that men ſhould be the forgers
of their own chains !-the builders of their own
gibbets!--the artificers of their own racks !-Mar-

riage indeed ! and for twenty thousand pounds ! I
thought Ihad cured you of talking that nonſenſe to

me: youwoulddeterminetomarry this pretty creatureinaninſtantifshehad twentythousandpoundsdepend upon it therefore that you will marry her

without a shilling: if you wouldjump into mount
Ætna for anhundred guineas, you would certainlydothe fame for half as many ſhillings-the evil

is ſo difproportionate to the reward, that five or
twenty are preciſely the ſame. It is, however,

plainenoughthat I am to confider you in future
as amarried inamorato! Making honourable ad-

dreſſes!-ha! ha! that truly is very pleaſant!But honour forbids any other ! Truehonourwould

forbidyour making a valuable woman ſo miferable
as the bleſſed ſtate is fure ofdoing. Well-I have
done with thee-and now I have given you fome

very ſage advice, prithee attend and let me have
the afſiſtance of yours.
'he Earl of H--you know has long profeſſed
T
himſelf my friend, that is my patron ; a word,
by the way, which I would blot from my dictionary if I had a quarter of your fortune. The

other day I was in company with him, and he
tookme aſide for an opportunity tomention to me
his

THE HISTORY OF

12

his going to the South of France, and that he
ſhouldbe glad I would accompany him. Now I
am in doubt whether I ſhould refuſe him poſitively
until I have a full explanation of his future intentions ; or, which I think would be the wiſerplan ,
whether I ſhould in the old ſtyle, at once take him

at his word, and go. Iam not yet determined,
and want advice, therefore give it me without
delay
.

Yourstruly,
HENRY FREDERICK.

LETTER III.
Mr. MELVILL to Mr. FREDERICK.

yours, my friend, and am very forryto
IReceived
findby the end of your letter that you have
not given up all hopes of any recommendations
from Lord H- n now he is not in office ; and

therefore may not have an opportunity of ferving
you, but remember that when he was, the reſult
was exactly the fame. I hate alldependance, but
Iam not one of thoſe fools, who think that every
body ſhould neglect thoſe connections, which may
probably prove beneficial, I advise you therefore
to follow your own opinion : If you think his
lordſhip will ever do any thing for you, by all

means go, and oblige him in every reasonable request; if you have but very diſtant hopes, the
fooner you break entirely the connection the better.
Nowyou must permit me torecur to my own affair.

Idisagree with you totally in principles-you
ridicule all religion, and every tye but thoſe of
mere and naked morality ; in ſuch a ſyſtem marriage appears in a light too ridiculous to think of

-you are fo far confiftent; but when you laugh
at the protection due from me to Mifs Benfon, as
the

JULIA BENSON.

13

the maſter of that houſe to which ſhe fled for

preſervation ; I utterly diſagree with you; I hate
the idea, andwould rather fuffer death than injure

even in imagination that virtue, which calls on
me for its fupport. To be yet more ferious, this
unfortunate lady is ſo full of excellence-is ſuch

an image of perfection, that to see and know her
and not to love her, would argue a mind ſtrangely
perverſe to every feeling of humanity, and every

elegant impreffion that beauty can make on a fufceptible mind ; that I begin to think itwillbe impoſſible not to love her. But what am I to do,

Frederick ? She is as filent as the grave ; when I
pay the moſt diſtant compliment to her beauty or
herwit, ſhe regards me no more than the chair ſhe
fits on, further than friendſhip ; and that, the

friendſhip of a day, and in which perhaps gratitudehas fome ſhare : But be it what it may, my
die is caft, and I muft love her in ſpite of myself.

I have however the fatisfaction of fuppofing, that
her heart isnot engaged ; but even this is conjecture. This morning I requested her to favour
me with ſome airs on the Harpsichord, and ſhe
obliged me with a readiness, that added to the
pleaſure I received. Her execution is infinite,
but her taſte far exceeds it : Her finging abſolutely moves one to madness ; every note drops into

the foul ; ſhe has an expreſſion, a pathos-a tendernels which exceeds all imagination. Youmay
frequent the beſt Operas to hear the exertion of
fine voices, but if you would experience the
breathings of imagination ; if you would have
the pathetic overpower your foul in the moft ama-

zing touches of the lofteft melody, this is the fyren that muſt enchant you. Taſte is her charac-

teriftic; the diſplays it equally in her dreſs, her

air, her speech, her ſentiments, and in the exB

preſſion

選4

THE HISTORY OF
L

preffionof her voice. Never was muſic ſo afto-

niſhingly exerted to melt the human foul. Never
was ſuch a commentary on the idea of Salluſt :

" Is it poſſiblethat a woman ſhould be able to
"expreſs in ſuch an inimitable manner the moſt
" tender feelings, and yet be strictly virtuous ? "
Itcannot be : but then this want of ſtrict virtue

is the want of the age-not peculiar to Miſs Benfon; theſe expreſſions are what all women aim at,
and moſt defire to excel in, "how few foever are

able to attain to ſuch uncommon perfection. It is
an age in which women bred in the world cannot

be truly virtuous through principle : they love
vice, but vanity preferves many from its practice ;
and thus it will everbe found, that one paſſion is

the oppofer of another. Did you ever know a
paflion conquered by the love of virtue ? Can
therebe a ſtronger proof of the general ſpirit of

vice thanwomen exerting theinſelves in ſinging
with fuch aftoniſhing effect as this lady ? I might
venture to aver that it is impoſſible to hear, without loving her. But where is the principle of
exerting arts that tend ſo powerfully to enſnare the
human foul ? Can a woman be miſtreſs to all men ?

Can ſhe be wife to more than one ? Why then
attack thewhole ſex ? I cannot entirely pardon a

female that plays like Miss Benſon, if she plays fo
to every one ; for I have no great notion of that

fpecies of modefty that conceals perfe&ions leſt
they ſhould be dazzling ; this will not be found in

!

the preſent age at least.
After my lovely warbler had riſen from the
harpsichord, I addreſſed her, with eyes that would
have betrayed me to half her fex, tho I really
believe she did not read me.

1

" Pray, Mifs Benſon, do you aim in your Mu-

" fic moft at execution or expreffion? "
" I don't
:

JULIA BENSON.
15
" Idon't clearlycomprehend the difference, Sir."
" True, madam; but the expreſſion of exe" cution, and the general expreſſion of the muſic
" are two things."

" That muſic which pleaſes moſt people I
" ſhould eſteem the beſt expreffion and the beſt
" execution."

" Now I understand you ; and I see you have
a very juft idea of the art, to give pleaſure in
" the great deſignof it: but pleaſing is fometimes
" the moſt cruel exertion of the moſt elegant
"

" mind.
"

" How can that be, Sir ? ""

" Very easily, madam: Afterhearingyou fing,
" who ſo much exceed all the ſinging I ever heard
" before, what pain would it be to know that I
" could hear you no more ! "
" Lord ! Mr. Melvill, you have gone quite
"round-about for a compliment."
" I am glad to hear it, for the ſtrait way would
" be to speak plain truth ; whereas a compliment

" implies a falfhood. I make them not to you,
" Miſs Benfon."

" You do then to other people ? "
" It is neceſſary; women in general muſt be
" complimented, or the conversation grows dull."
" So in order to enliven it you tellthem a pack
" of complimentary lies-- and thenthey are very
" well pleaſed. You have an excellent opinion
" of our ſex ."
"

" If the sex wants the art of discovering when
aman ſpeaks truth, andwhen he utters nothing

" but falſhood, they furely must thank themselves :

" But this is not the cafe they will know when a
" man is twisting a ſtring of compliments ; and
"they had rather hear fuch lying than My good
B2

،، Mifs

16

THE HISTORY OF

" Miſs, you are ſo very ugly that I will converſe
66

no longer with you."

" Sure, Mr. Melvill, you havethe ſtrangeft idea
" in the world ! ſo there can be no converfation

" with a woman without an addreſs to herbeauty
“

or her uglineſs ? Why cannot you converſe
" with a ſenſible or a filly woman in the fame
" manner as with fuch people of your own ſex ?"
" Impoſſible ! We always enter into converſation
" with women for pleaſure, never for inſtruction
"

or information: and a woman will never be

" pleaſing to others, unleſs ſhe is pleaſed herself ;
" hence arifes the neceſſity of complimenting the
" ladies for whom we feel not the leaſt emo" tion."

:

" Which is a habit that grows upon you until
"

you are incapable of feeling emotions for any,
andconfequently compliment all alike."
1

" Never can that be the cafe with me, and
" the woman that does not know when I fpeak

" truth must read me poorly indeed !"
If my eyes did not at that moment betray my
moſt inward feelings, they are very unfaithful interpreters : Never did ſhe appear half ſo charm-

ing; a rifing blush half ſpread her lovely cheeks
-a fweet confufion in her manner ; but in an in-

ſtant feating herself at the harpsichord, ſhe ſtruck
a few broken notes, and my fiſter entering the
room relieved us: Truly, Frederick, I went too
far, fuch moments are as much a declaration of

ones paſſion, as if I wrote it in capitals-and it
would be ridiculous to the laſt degree in me, to
expect any thing but contempt or reproof, for

making love to her in ſo peculiar a ſituation as ſhe
is in at preſent. I was much to blame; and will
conduct myself better for the future. Yours,
MELVILL.
LET-

JULIA BENSON,

17

BETTER IV.

Mr. FITZGERALD to Mr. MASON.

N my laſt I told you the idol of my foul for

INwhom I would facrifice ten thousand lives,

Miſs Benſon, was just on the verge of a forced
marriage with that Bruin Slingſby. You mustbe
wellaſſured that the nicest rules of conduct in this
cafe allowed and even demanded, that I should at-

tempt to ſave ſo amiable awoman from thejaws
of fuch a plot against her happiness, as this match,
than which nothing could be more out of all decorum. Mr. Mafon, I have often told you, and

you too often laughed at the idea, that a general
decorum of manners and propriety of behaviour
are theonly guides we ſhould follow inlife. Every

man, in order to gain that propriety, ſhould lay
down a plan of conduct on his entrance into the
world, to make it the rule of his actions in the

affairs of it ; in love, in friendſhip, in buſineſs,
ineverything. Why do men appear frequently
ridiculous when, unexpected accidents happen ?

Merelybecauſe they are notprepared for their de-fence, they have laid down no plan, the parts of
which are ſo nicely adapted to each other, that i
every ſtep in life is not only the exertion of one
effort, but preparatory to another: A man may
thus be faid to walk ſecurely ; he is not perpetu
ally thrown off his guard like thoſe flippant beings.
who, one would think, were made only to move :
about and to ſhew their own folly..
Ihave beenled into theſe reflections by a ſtrange
accident, that has happened to me lately; after I
knew that old Bonſon had ſo little propriety in him
as to think of forcing his daughter to marry Slings-

by, I determined upon mature confideration, to
prevent it. Two motives coincided tobring me
B3

too

18

THE HISTORY OF

to this reſolution, the lady's welfare highly demanded it, for nothing could be ſo prepoſterous
as to marry an accomplished woman to a fellow
of no ideas; and ſecondly, justice to my own happineſs. The honourablepoſſeſſion of this moſt valuable creature being the great aim of my preſent
endeavours, and not having received the treatment
from her father in the regular way that I deſerved,
it was highly neceſſary, with the lady's allowance,
to provide against evil accidents by marrying our2

ſelves without, as it could not be with, the con-

fent of her father. All this was ſyſtematic, you
know the always listened to my addreſſes not in
that filly manner which inferior women practiſe,
but according to the moſt genuine rules of propriety. I made her this proposal in fuch a manner,
that I did not apprehend ſhe would reject it: Her
reply was becoming awoman of her excellent underſtanding-" That a matter of ſuch great con" ſequence was not to be undertaken raſhly

" that it was a plan the had not confidered-the

" would therefore give me an anſwerthe Tuesday
" following."

When that day came, I was punctual to hear
her decifion : Mr. Maſon, it nearly affected me :

Noman could be more paſſionately in love with
any womanthan I with her : I had fo long contemplated her admirable mind, and been delightedwith the view of the moſt angelic perſon that
nature ever framed, that I could notbut be won-

derfully impatient, when I waited for the agreement that was to make me fupremely happy. She
conſented to my bliſs, faid the had well confidered
the whole affair, and put ſuch confidence inmy

honour and the propriety of my conduct, that ſhe
would engage in the propoſal I had made her;
adding that the had laid the plan herself, and apprehended

19
JULIA BENSON.
prehended I ſhouldhave no objection to her conducting it.
Overjoyed with this condeſcenſion, I was all
fubmiffion to her ideas-and promised to conduct
myſelf totally by her direction. She then in-

formed me that she had a relation at Mancheſter,

towhomI ſhould conduct her in poſt-chaiſes with
the utmoſt expedition; that no time must be loft,
as the next day was to be her wedding one-that
Iſhouldbe in alane where ſhe mentioned at twelve

o'clock that night, with a poſt-chaife and four
horfes, and the would preſentlyjoin me. " But,
" added ſhe, I have one condition on which the

" execution of this depends; and that you must
" abſolutely agree to."
.
" That, madam, wouldbe an impropriety in" deed in me to think of refuſing."
" It hurts my delicacy much to be ſo long as

" we must betogether, to be alone with a gentle" man and quite in his power ; for this reason,

" though I put the utmoſt confidence in you, I
" muſt inſiſt that you never open your lips to me .
" between this place and Mancheſter, which is
" near threehundred miles---you must abſolutely
" ſaynothing to me, in the chaiſe nor at the inns,
" though two nights willbeſpent at them ; andII
"deſign either to go in amaſk, or elſe ſo muffled
" up that nobody can know me, leſt I ſhould be
" discovered."

" I commendyour prudence and foreſight ex" ceedingly, madam, and you may depend on the
" moſt profound obedience. But as I am ſo long
" to be deprived the pleaſure of seeing this beau-

" teous face, or converfingwith the object of
"

my love-fuffer me to taſte heaven in one fa" lute, as a ſpecimen of my future blifs. "

Mr. Mafon, I am not a filly,whining lovernor

THE HISTORY OF
nor an indelicate ore-this was an abſolute im-

20

pulſe that led me to an indecorum ; but the fair
one allowedme to taste the pleaſures of heaven
before my time. Would Scipio have been continent had Mifs Benſon been his captive ?-But
one kiſs was not a great matter ; and her good
nature, which is as great as her beauty, forgave
the indifcretion.

I was punctual to a moment with the chaiſe,
with four picked horſes and lads Icould dependon ;
and after waiting about ten minutes at the pace
appointed, my charmer appeared, ſo bemuffled

that her father might have met her at noon-day
without knowing her. We were no fooner fea-

ted in the chaiſe than I forgot my promise, and
fpoke to her ; but she brought me, by an unbroken filence on her ſide, to a due remembrance of

it; and I fubmitted to my fate. We changed.
horſes at every stage, but from ſeveral untoward>
accidents did not get the next day further than
Northampton ; I would have pushed on two or

three ſtages more, but I dreaded fatiguing Mifs
Benfon. I made one or two attacks upon her
ſpeech in the moſt tender terms, but ſhe anſwer-

edme by holding up a piece of paper, on which
ſhe had written, Remember your promife. She
retired to her apartment as soon as she got tothe
inn; and I faw no more of her till next morning..
That evening we arrived at Manchester, when I

wasinhopes the would have gone directly to her.
relations, and made mehappy with her fight and
..
ſpeech-but no-no fuch matter
-ſhe would not

ftir from the inn, but retired again from the par
lour, and left me in cruel impatience till,next
morning.

The breakfaſt things were ſet out, and Iwas
walking backward and forwards in the room, impatient

JULIA BENSON.

21

patient, butwith a thrill of joy through all my
veins, when I reflected that this day was to give
me poffeffion of the objectof my adoration, and
make me the husband of the moſt charming of
her sex.

The fun ſhone with uncommon luſtre

-a peal of cheering bells were enlivening the

town-thedaywas auspicious-every thing ſeemedmade for joy, and my rapid ideas were all on
fire. The door opened, and in came my bride.
" Nay, Miſs Benfon-no more of this muffling
" up now-prithee bleſs me with the fight of
" that lovely face from which I have fo long been
" baniſhed." She agreed, and throwing back
her hood, who the devil ſhould ſtand before me

but a blear-ey'd wench, who I recollected to be
MiſsBenfon's waiting maid. I was ſtruck on a
heap,
but recovering
myſelf,child ? In Suffex ?
" Where
isyour miſtreſs,
"Yes, fir-my miſtrefs did not come."
" Who then ? " .

"I, fir."

"What! muffled up and cloaked from my
"knowledge inthat manner ? "
"Yes, fir."

" By whoſe orders ? "

" My miſtreſs gave me the orders, fir."
"And did your/miſtreſs order you to perfonate
" herself in that manner ? ‫יי‬
"Yes, fir ."
" For what reason ? "
" I don't know. But ſhe ſaid that she had laid
-

" a particular plan, fir, of operations, and this

"unusual ſtep was abfolutely neceſſary."
" A particular plan of operations ! Ha ! did
"ſhe ſay that?
"Yes, fir."

"And that it was abſolutely neceſſary? "
"Yes,

Γ

22
.

THE HISTORY OF

"Yes, and that the cataſpholy would come in
" good time, though not now."

" Catastrophe you mean, child-did the ob" ſerve that ?",
"Yes, fir, ſhe did."

" And what are you to do to gethome again? "
" Home, fir ? I am come home to my father-

" andmother, fir ; they live in Mancheſter."
" But how are you to return to your miſtreſs ? "
"Not at all, fir, my miſtreſs diſcharged me,
:

" fir-ſhe wants me no more till ſhe writes me a
"letter."

" Wants you no more!"
"Yes, fir, that is what she told me."

Iwritethis toyou from Stone, whither I am returned from Manchester, after this abominable

diſappointment. I have no doubt, Maſon, but
youwilllaugh at me for this affair not a little; but

I am at the fametime clear that you will not fully
conſider the weight of the declaration, thatit was

✓aparticular plan of operations that made this neceſſary. You will not comprehend theſe plans of
operations can be productive of deciſive ſtrokes

of this fort. It appears to me that Miſs Benfon

had discovered ſome exigency of affairs which
would not permit her to venture with me ; and at

thefametimewas fearful that my prefence in Sufſex, in cafe fuch exigence happened, would be
productive of evil confequences. This very na-

turally explains it, according to the principles of
propriety ; and depend upon it, my friend, that
this principle of acting is nevertobe flightedwith
impunity. We may laugh at regularity in the
conduct of life, but those who experience moſt of
it, will find thatfettled principles will ever conduct
aman nearer to the aims he wishes, than the de-

fultory wild manner in which the generality of
mankind

JULIA BENSON.I

23

mankind carry on their affairs. Adieu, my friend,
I shall be glad to hear your opinion of theſe
matters.

THOMAS FITZGERALD .

LETTER V.

:

Mr. MASON, to Mr. FITZGERALD.
!

allthewitthat ever flowed from the beſt
NOTallthe
comic poets collected in one piece, could

make me laugh halfſo much as your letter did.
Doft thou not remember that when I faw Miſs

Benſon at Mr. Cremer's, I told you it was abſolute

impertinence in ſuch a multiplicationtable ofmethod as thou art, to pretend to, or think of her ?
She is all that your warm fancy would paint her,
andby juſt ſo much too good for you. How could
you conceive that the moral fitneſs of things, the
propriety of conduct, and the neceſſity of ſyſtematic plans of life could make an impreſſion on
theheart of a young creature, beauteous as the
morn, and formed of nothing but wit, fire, and
fancy ? Your perſon, and even your fortune

wouldhave given ſanction to the idea, but that
damn'd jargon of propriety-that quakerifm of
ideas would have destroyed the pretenfions of a
man more formidable to the ſex than ever you
couldbe.

You ſee plainly from this I am clearly of opinion that you are bamboozled, and made the compleateft fool that ever I remember to have heard
of. Her maid's father lived at Mancheſter.

In

good truth, it was a modest way of paſſing the
wench home to her pariſh !
Reflect for a moment on the life Miſs Benfon

led-ſhut up in a caſtle where no pleaſure was
found but the chaſe and the bottle, and where
conversation

24

THE HISTORY OF

converſation never aroſe beyond a dog or a horſe

-ufed to London and good company-elegantly
accomplished-full ofwit, andconfequently ready
for mischief.--Sure you muſt ſuppoſe that a gen-

tleman paying his addreſſes to her, of whatever
kind, muſt varythe ſcene : if ſprightly and agreeable, he would enliven the time; if dull and dro-

niſh and (you'll forvive me) much in the ſyſtematic ſtyle, he would ferve for her to laugh at.
She encouraged you, and coquetted with you
merely to paſs away her time ; and I dare ſwear

has laughed as heartily as myſelf at the idea of
your very gallant journey with her maid. My
good friend, when willyou be convinced that love
muſt never be made by rule and order--thatpropriety of conduct is death to it-- andthat the ſpirit of ſyſtematizing can only disgust, never conquer a miſtreſs ? Your ideas are thoſe of another

world, or at least of anothercountry ; they would
be hardly pardonable in an old batchelor of ſeventy, much less in a young one of five and thirty.
In fober ſadneſs you muit forget the lady, for be-

lieve me she will never remember you without
laughing.

Yourreturnto Suffex will have cooled, I hope,
the rageof propriety, and you will then ſeethings
as they really are : give me another letter, that I
may have the fatisfaction of hearing you are in
your right fenfes, and tell me what the father,

brother, and young Slingſby, of hunting memory, ſays to this.

Adieu,
W. MASON.
5.

JULIA BENSON.
LETTER. VI.

Miſs BENSON, to Miss EMILIA WATSON ..

OU miſtake much, my dear Emilia, inthink-

Y ing that I ſhall draw myself into ſcrapes as
you call them. The man that catches me in a
Icrape must be a much ſtranger animal than any I
have ſeen yet. And why ſhould you wonder at

my leaving my father's, when ſuch pains were
taken tomake the houſe odious to me ? I have an

independant income that will fupport me faſhionably if I prove an economist ; and fure there is
more happiness in being free to follow one's a-

muſements than be ſhut up with a tyrannicfather,
a brutal brother, and a more odious lover. I
made, however, no hesitation in the matter, but

Idid not manage the whole ſo well as I ought,
which was partly owing to your brother's not being in time at the hotel, which brought on the
meeting with Mr. Melvill,

You againteaſe me to give you more particulars of my treatment in Suſſex, and are pleaſed
to ſay that I have not yet fufficiently apologized

and explained my conduct to you ; you ſhall not
have any reaſon for that complaint in future, for
I will now give you a few anecdotes that I apprehend willjustify me fufficiently, at least in your
friendly eye; as to the rigid part of the world I
defpiſe it.

At nine years of age my uncle Mr. Melliſh,
took me to live with him and his wife, as they

had no children of their own ; my father readily
aſſented to it, for the education of a young girl
withhimwould havebeen to make that of agroom

or a cook, any thing higher would have given
him too much trouble. Never were any people
C

more

-

26

THE HISTORY OF

more tender and indulgent to me than Mr. and
Mrs. Melliſh, but their indulgence did not flow
from the weakness, but the perfe&ion of humanity. Their treatment of me was full of propriety, full of manly ſenſe, and conducted in every
reſpect with an equal eye to my pleaſure and inſtruction, and ſo managed, which is extremely
rare, that both were anſwered, and yet neither
injured. They determined that I shouldbe miftreſs of every accomplishment in the power of the

beſt maſters to beſtow ; at the ſame time that they
carried me conſtantly into a round of very genteel
company, to prevent, as myuncle uſed to expreſs
it, the pedantry of accomplishments, which in
fome women is as offenfive as the worst that ever

iffued from the walls of a college. He spent a
winter with his whole family at Paris, chiefly to
perfect me in the French language, and to amuſe
me with some of the gaieties of the court of
France. Two years afterwards he made a fimilar
tour to Italy, that I might learn at Florence the

Italian language, of which he was very fond, and
thought it equally requiſite with the French.
Upon this plan I was inſtructed, with equal
care and attention, in the French, Italian, Latin,

mufic, dancing, and drawing ; in allwhich I had,
through my uncle's kindness, whatever aſſiſtance
couldbe gained in England, France, and Italy .

and at the fame time, to prevent the ill conſequences which ſometimes arife from inſtructing
women too much, he took care to attend to the

common manners of life, and eſpecially to ſteer
clear of that rock conceit, which he well knew fo
many of the ſex had ſplit on; but I will venture
to affert that it was impoffible for him to attend

the education of a woman, and have her turn out
affected.

19

い

Mr. Melliſh,
31

JULIA BENSON.

27

Mr. Melliſh, in making me a miſtreſs of the

languages I mentioned, had views to my reading
at least as much as, ſpeaking them. It was no
flight amusement to me to read over the Latin
and Italian poets to him, with some other writers .

in those andthe French language. He used often
to tellme, that women ſhould readthe beſt authors in order to form their minds and cultivate

their natural taſte, which was the only way to
keep clear of that affectation which foiled ſo many
excellent characters. " You should know (faid
he) what the world has been, as well as what it
is; and mark the progreſs of ideas, of manners,
and the ſtations and conduct of the female ſex in

other countries and other ages ; you will there

find, my dear Julia, that mankind have always
been nearly the fame. When youmark diſtinctions, you willat the fame time obſerve the reasons;
you will every where ſee the triumph of virtue,

and the trueufe of poliſhing and adorning the hu-

man
mind; effects, when regular through various nations, and traced in authors, who wrote in
different languages, and lived indiftant ages, will

convince you ſo clearly of the real accompany-

Iments of refined ideas and elegant manners, that

improvement must be the confequence. Affectation and conceit, which usually flow from ignorance, and as often from imperfect accomplishments, can never tarniſh amind thus ſtored with

thatknowledge which is for ever applicable to the
events of human life."

Iwas twenty years of age when at Florence;
there I became acquainted with Lord William
W, a man formed to captivate a ſenſible

heart, but without one quality to preferve itamiable, though an aggregate of vice; but his

hypocrify couldtake the femblance of every virC2

tue

28

THE HISTORY OF

\

tue in order to proſtitute it at the ſhrine of vice.
Mr. Melliſh was as much deceived in him as myfelf. A manof quality heir to an immenfe for-

tune-ard one day to fill the highest rank in his
country-apparently virtuous with great parts
----ready wit
-and a perſon formed to pleaſure-

It is not ſurpriſing that ſuch a man, aiming by
every affiduity to render himself agreeable to me,
openly profeffing to Mr. Melliſh, and in every
company, that his deſigns were honourable and
thathe ſhould never be happy till he called me
his: under all theſe circumstances the moſt cautious of my fex have been entrapped as well as I.

As todiſhonourable deſigns, as commonly underftcod, he could not think of them-he did not

think of them-my character and my connections kept him in awe.

Three months did he

employ in making himself master of a virgin
heart, which had not felt any paffion. I confefs,

freely confeſs, that I loved him with ardour, but
finding that nothing but marriage could further
enſue, he proved the moſt detestable of all characters-a male coquet, that had made a mere

play-thing of me to amuſe himself during his refidence at Florence. My uncle, full of honour

and integrity, the moment he saw him addreſſing
me, wrote to the Duke his father to lay ever y

circumſtance before him : he received an anſwer,
with many acknowledgments for fuch an honourable conduct, and informed him that Lord William

was at liberty entirely to pleaſe himself, as he
truſted fully to his difcretion. After the receipt
of this letter my uncle gave no interruption to
his vifits ; but when the baſeneſs of his conduct

was fully proved, he ſent him a challenge, conceived in terms that would have ſtung a heart not

already hardened. His lordſhip, however, knew
better

4

29
JULIA BENSON.
better how to wage war with women, than to
fight his own fox: he let Forence without returning any aniwer. Mr. Melliſh pursued him
to Verona, Paua, Milan, and Turin, with defign to force him to a combat, if poffible, or elfe
toditgr ce him in the fevereſt manner, by caning

him in public. But the wretch's conduce proved

him tobe a thorough coward. He fled to Italy,
leaving behind him a character trulycontemptible;

and Mr. Melliſh finding it in vain to purſue him
further, returned ; proteſtingthat on his arrival in
England, he would publicly make him appear as
despicable as he had ever been in Italy.

In truth, my dear Emilia, Ifound peace had
i

fled from my breast for ever ; Ihad no lukewarm,

hackneyed, or divided affection to give. I loved
fincerely, and left no reſource in my heart to bear
up againſt ſuch a cruel ſtroke: Reason was un-

ableto combat the folly of ftill loving amanwho
deſerved my hate. In vain did my uncle urge
me, in conversations full of the moſt genuine
4

philofophy, to forget a wretch fo undeferving my
attention.

Icould not ceafe to love; but, for

my uncle's peace, I did every thing my mind
could fuggeft to conceal the wound fresh bleeding
in my heart-I partly fucceeded. I applied to
my ſtudies with freſh vigour. Mr. Melliſh formeda little Society, at a vaſt expence, to teach
me Greek by conversation ; this was at Venice,

and he fucceeded. He thought that the acquifition of knowledge would baniſh from my mindthe
remembrance of Lord William W. Mufic

foothed me- 1 practiſed it much among thegreat-

eſt maſters. Travelling was used, with the greateft expence, and in the greatest variety to amuſe
me: we paffed from Venice into Germany ; we
reſided ſome time at the courts of:Vienna, MuC3

nich

30

THE HISTORY OF

nich, and Dreſden ; we partook of every diverfion. The handsome manner, ſplendid I may ſay,
in which we traveled, introduced us to the beſt

company. Mr. Melliſh was proud of diſplaying
my knowledge and accomplishments in a country
where the women are ill educated-I paſſed for a
prodigy. I had feveral offers of marriage, my
uncle was entirely filent, but I refuſed them all;
Iftill felt that my heart could not accompany my
hand.

Never was delicacy greater than my uncle's in

theſe affairs ; he wiſhed to ſee me advantageoufly
fettled in life, and particularly as I had met with
ſuch an unhappy disappointment at my firſt entrance into it ; but nothing could induce him to
attempt in the flightest manner, to perfuade me
in favour of any one.

After ajourney of near a year through all the
courts of Germany, through Denmark and Hol
land, we finiſhed with that of Bruffels ; and returning from thence to London, fixed there for
the winter. It was paſſed in a manner particular-

lyplanned by Mr. Melliſh to make me utterly
forget Lord William W-- who, I should tell

you, was at this time at Paris. The amiable
man faw in me a melancholy at times, which

made him fear my cure was not fully compleated

-his endeavours were partly, fucceſsful; the
chearful regularity of life returned, and the converſation which our travels created was always
agreeable and inſtructive.
In the ſpring -oh ! my Emilia, what a cut-

ting lofs ! Mr. Me liſh died; I might truly fay he
left me fatherleſs, for never man acted the part
of a father with truer friendſhip or a more unbi-

affed judgment. You well remember how per-

fealy miferable this infinite loſs made me. Five
and
doz

JULIA BENSON.

35

and twenty thousand pounds, which he left me as
alegacy made no amends for fo irreparable a loſs.
--Every day brought me more and more ac
quainted with the miferable fruation. I was in,
which appeared worſe when I reflected on the halcon days I had feen. Within three months after

Iwent down into Suſſex, quite a ſtranger in my
father's house.

What a change was it for mewho

had been used to every elegance of life, and to
thebeſt company Europe could afford, to meet
there with nothing but rufticity and vulgarness !

My father without any ideas, but those of dogs
and horses ; my brother bred in his ſchool with a
circle of country gentlemen, most of them foxhunters, and all of them ignorant and unpoliſhed
-their wives anddaughters framed for no higher
entertainment than a country affembly, or that
hoſpitable monster, a vifiting dinner. Theſe
were to be my companions. Nor was this all;
Ihad not even the affection of my father; he

ridiculed, or rather attempted to ridicule, the ſyſtem on which my uncle had educated me ; declared openly against every accomplishment that
ſhould tend to give women ideas fuperior to the
domeſtic offices; this was cutting to me, and
fome replies I gave him, which having more of
wit than duty, made him treat me as a being
quite a ſtranger to his family : My brother declared open war againſt me : My learning hurt him
greatly; he had not been three years from the
univerſity, yet bore (not feldom) the ſhame of
1

being corrected by his ſiſter.
Matters were int istrain when two inamorato's

ſtarted up ; one a country fquire, a fox-hunter,

as capital a calf as you can wellconceive; Slingfby the other, a man of small fortune : a well

meaning fool, who thought to gain importance by
an

32

THE HISTORY OF

an affected originality of character. You cannot
well imagine the contempt I felt within myself,

for thefe miferablebeings, who openly profeffed
to pay their addreſſes to me, who hadrefused offers that should have made them blush to follow ;

but my contempt was mixed with a reſentment
which I bore the ſex in general, ever fince the
infamous treatment I had received from a man on

whom I had once fixed my affection.
My dear Emilia, this is a partof my character
inwhich I feel a change, that Mr. Mulliſh, were
he living, would have much endeavoured to prevent! dece ved fo falfly and bafely by a man in
whom I thought all the virtues united. The
fex have fuffered much in my eſteem for hisde-

ceit; for when I am addreſſed in the languageof
love, I reflect on my old deceiver : Why should

I ever give credit to any? An honeft man may
certainly be found : But what a deſperate game

hall I play, who have been once fo miferably
fool'd, to truft the lying ſex again! I shall be no
more able to penetrate the meaning of a diſſem
bling villain now than formerly. Refined art fo
abfolutely conceals art, that it takes the ſemblance
of nature.

Isit not therefore the advice of found

ſenſe to ſuſpect them all ?

My averfion to the ſex increaſes every day. I
feel a kind of malignant pleaſure in the idea of
avenging on them the mifery I have felt. This
is by no means an emo ion that a liberal mind
that generosity allows-It is an idea that Mr.

Melliſh would have ſtrongly combated: I feel arguments he would have used-I feel their force;
but this black affair has given fuch a wound to
the peace of my foul, that it has thrown my
mind from its right bias; nor can I ever fee a

young fellow come flirting up to me, but I eye
him

JULIA BENSON.
33
him much in the fame manner as I do a reptile.
that I have an inclination to cruſh unfeeingly beneath my feet,
Since I met the flight at Florence, I have

viewed the whole ſex with no favourable eye,
whichhas made me very clear-fighted to the defects andfollies of every man of my acquaintance ;
my contempt of them is raised from the emptiness of their pretenſions. I find among them few

that poſleſs any realknowledge-fofew that are not
foppish, conceited, or brutal, that I must be wants

ing to common fenſe to have a grain of refpect
for beings that are incomparably beneath the attention ofwomen of common underſtanding Vice
debafes the foul, and reduces those who have received gifts from nature, and accomplishments..
from education, to apar with the meanest crea-

tures. Whydo I not find men who claim a diftinguiſhed attention for their learning, their knowledge of mankind, or theirwit ? Imect with none. I
Ifyou feek for learning itis to be found in a college,
where the poffeffors of it know nothing of life
:
and manners. If you would look for knowledge
ofmankind, you mustgo tothe aſſembly of knaves
and ſharpers. If you turn your eye to the polite
accomplishments , what do you see but coxcombs

and fashionable puppies ? Theſe are the beings!
who call themselves the Lords of the creation,
and who regard women as made only for their.

amusement., While I have a capacity to diſcover
the emptiness of their pretenfions, can I fail of
deſpiſing them ? While I see the general worthleff-

neſs of their principles, can I avoid adding hatred
Yes, my Emilia, I hate and deſpiſe the sex,
andI am never fo well pleaſed, as when I can revenge the injured caufe of women, by expofing

tocontempt?

their

34

THE HISTORY OF

their ignorance-ridiculing their foppery, andrendering their vicesthe engines of their punishment.

Ifever I allow the momentary addreſſes of any,
it will beto rival them in their own arts, to laugh
at them in their exultation, and to ſpurn them in
their fall. My heart is fecure againſt all their
plots, and I expect to profit by the experience F
have bought. But to return.
The history of my two Suffex lovers is a piece

of comedy. Slingſby is a mere brute, that had
an eye to nothing but my fortune, and to cement-

inghis friendſhipmore ſtrongly with my father and
brother. Hisapplicationwas firſt to them. My

father liked the thought extremely ; and my brother was overjoyed at an opportunity of making
agrand breach amongſt us all, for he conjectured
that I should give a poſitive refusal. Slingſby,
having delivered his credentials, became in form
my lover with a list of acres of found clay in
his hand, he came to make love. While Iwas
immured in Suflex I wanted amusement ; and

this fellow became a ſubject to laugh at. I re-

ceived him in high good humour, until I had
drawn out as plentiful a crop of folly as I could
expect, and then ridiculed him ſo ſeverely, that
he had ſenſe enough to look extremely filly, and

took hisdischarge, by leaving the room with as
muchprecipitation, as if he was afraid of being
V7

thrown out of the window.

This preſently brought my fatherto me ; I always treated him with refpect; but as to my brother, the keen contempt withwhich I treatedhim,
filencedhis tongue ; buthe employed himself in
inftigating my father to compel me to receive the
wretch inmarriage. Then itwas that Mr. Fitz-

gerald made his addreſſes, but unknown to my
family: this man was a coxcomb of a peculiar
fort,

JULIA BENSON.

35

fort, with whom I had no little ſport. I gave
him all the encouragement he could wish, for the
better opportunity of examining his nonfenfical
character ; but when I found him upon the whole
a very harmleſs ſuly being, Idetermined not to

keep him in fufpence any longer.

My father told me plainly that he was fixed in
his determination that I ſhould marry Mr. Slingſby.
Igave him the hearing, but foon determined to
disobey.

He then proceeded to name the day on

which the wedding ſhould be performed, ſwearing
that he would force me to it that if I had five

-and twenty millions inſtead of as many thousand
pounds, I ſhould find that he was maſter here ;

and intimated a deſign of locking me up. As I
was in the hands of a pack of brutes, I did not

like the ſituation, and directly determined to quit
thehouse.

Fitzgerald camefortunately in a critical time:
his vifits would have been ſuſpected had he not
uſed the precaution of always accompanying a

friend ofhis and my father's in dinner parties;
he very gravely informed me that I was foon to
be married, and proposed my eſcaping, by running away and marrying him. This piece of impertinencedeſerved punishment ; I determined to
give him a compleat diſappointment. I discharg-

| ed my maid, as I did not chuſe to take with me
to town any witneſſes of the ridiculous treatment
Imetwith in Suffex.

Her friends live at Man-

cheſter ; the was at a loſs how to get home. I
fixed a late hour at night for Fitzgerald to be
ready with a chaiſe. Iinſiſted uponhis travelling
to Mancheſter with me in a maſk, without offer-

ingto exchange aſyllable with me tillhe got there.
I then gave Betty her inftructions, with a ſtrict
charge to be cautious in the performance. W26
He

36

THE HISTORY OF

was punctual to the time, and my Abigail went
off to make him happy in a match with me. This

piece of mifchief he well deferved. I had provided a chaife for myself, at a neighbouring farm,
whether I had conveyed a trunk, with a few

cloaths, my jewels, and fome other things ; and
then bidding adieu to Suſſex, took the road to
London.

My plan was to go to Mr. Cazan's, at Charing
Croſs, who knew me, and with whom I had laid
out confiderable fums of money, that his wife

might provide me lodgings till a house and furniture could be got ; for till I could appear in a
proper manner among my friends I did not chuſe
to appear at all ; and leſt any accident ſhould
defeat this intention, I had written to Mrs. Pa-

trick, who you know is an obfequious relation, to
meet me at Cazan's, and in cafe I did not come

there, to wait for me at the hotel in Pall Mall,

with a coach ready to carry me away immediately. As miſchief would have it, Cazan was moved: but I left my trunk inthe care of the miftreſs of the house, and went to Pall Mall to meet
Mr. Patrick; ſhe was not there--the waiter

was called away the moment he had given me the
anfwer, and ſhut the inner door in my face.
Provoked, vexed, diſappointed, and fatigued, I
burst into tears; which , however, I fuppreffed,
left I ſhould be obſerved. At that inſtant up
cametwo gentlemenwhohad ſeen me ; theſpokef-

man, with much politeness, offered his service
in terms which I did not refuse.

I desired he

would convey me ſomewhere from this houſe-

Ihad an hundred fears
Mrs. Patrick Ithought
might have betrayed me, and I mightbe pursued:
my fatigue made me careleſs, and I catched at the
firft twig that offered. The gentlemen called a
chair,

JULIA BENSON.

37

chair, and conducted it to his own house in Ger-

main Street, where I was in ſtrange confufion,
and I believe fell into tears again, but I almoſt
forget. He was a modest civil man, and I thought
might aſſiſt me in my preſent affairs. Nothing
could end better ; his ſiſter keeps his houſe, a

mighty harmleſs good-natur'd girl ; and their civility made me accept their offer of uſing it in-

ſtead of alodging. I told them much of my tale,
only ſinking twenty thousand pounds of my fortune, for ſeveral reaſons : it was neceſſary, however, to let them know that they had no reaſon

to fear my being a burthen upon their hofpitality.
Here I am at preſent, my Emilia ; I have been
out twice to fee houſes, but can meet with none

that I like. My plan is to hire one in Pall-Mall,
if I can ; if not, fomewhere about Grosvenor

Square. I shall furnish it handſomely, fix a
ſmall eſtabliſhment of fervants, and live as gen-

teely as my fortune will allow. I have written to
Mrs. Henry, informing her of my intention, and
inviting her to ſpend ſometime with me. You
know her income is very small, ſo that I purpoſe ;
her living with me in a ſtile of relationship, to
ſave appearances with the world, as a woman of
my age cannotwith anypropriety live alone; ſhe

will, at the fame time, very readily take care of
the house-keeping, and eaſe me from the mintiæ
ofdomeſtic buſineſs. My income will allow me

a chariot, notwithstanding my being moreexpen-

five in books, painting, and fome other, amufement, than perhaps I ought to be. By the way,
I am extremely lucky that my connections are all
now in George-ftreet; had I been a fortnight later, they would have been gone for, Suffex.
Whenfettled inthe manner I propoſe, I ſhall be
able tolivecomfortably and independant, andſhall
D

follow

THE HISTORY OF

38

folow myuſual amusements as nearly as I poſſibly
can, upon the ſame plan as I ſhould have done,
if heaven had not deprived me of the best-the

only friend I had in the world. Good God!
what a loss to me was that of Mr. Melliſh ! Never

ſhall I ceaſe regretting him while I live, or of ho-

nouring hismemory as that of a being fuperior to
the world he lived in. If upon the plan I have
here ſketched I shall be able to paſs my time in an
easy manner ; to make ſtudy, or rather Mr. Melliſh's ſyſtem, my buſineſs, and the common amuſements of the town, a recreation from my at-

tention to better objects, I may perhaps be able
to live agreeably ; happily I fearI never can. So
long and painfully as I have ſtrove to baniſh an

unworthy idea from my breaſt, ſtill I find the taſk
is but working against nature: I dwell with pleafure on the moſt painful idea that ever entered
my mind. This muſt appear veryſtrange to you,

but it is no leſs true ; have I any reaſon to think
that the paffion that lurks in my breast will foon
beextirpated?

Adieu, my dear Emilia, I remain faithfully
yours.

JULIA BENSON.

LETTER . VII.

Mr. MELVILL to Mr. FREDERICK .

TAM
gone !-gone, my dear Harry, paft recovery. This angelic fair one has robbed me
of every idea but her own. I live but in her
prefence. I think of pought but her. I dream
of her both waking and fleeping. My paſſion is

wrought up to that cruel pitch, that I must declare it or my heart will burst. Declare it do I
fay ?

JULIA BENSON.

39

fay? To whom ? To Miſs Benſon ? It wouldbe
madness! I have no hope-no idea of relief-

nothing in view but despair.

:

Poffeft of the utmoſt po'iteness, and a boundlefs humanity, this amiable woman treats me with
a complaisance and an eaſe that is death to my
love. I adore her to that pitch of affection, that

nothing less than a return of paffion can fatisfy a
heart fo big with love.
Miss Benfon is, by many, many degrees, the
moſt accomplished, as well as the moſt beautiful
of her fex. For this week past, we have had feveral parties whoſe converſation gave her an occa-

fion, which forced herto impart ſome flight opinions on ſeveral literary ſubjects . Menill, who

you know is a man of uncommon claffical learning, aſſures me that ſhe is as good a claſſical ſcholaras ever he met with ; and he ſuſpects that the
underſtands both Latin and Greek. In French,

Italian, and German, ſhe is as fluent as in En--

gliſh. Her acquaintance with the beſt andpoliteft
authors in all languages, is unbounded. This
will appear rhodomontade to you ; but believe me
it is fact, and Menilt will give you the fame account. I before-mentioned to you her muſic and
ſinging, which exceeds the utmoſt heights to
which imagination can attain. Every motion of

her body ſhews without aregular figure, that her
dancing mustbe grace and elegance itself : Where

could the get all theſe accomplishments ? The
daughter of a private gentleman in Sufflex, tò
- eclipse the moſt dazzling fair ones that ſhine at

St. James's! to eclipse them in all the elegant
accomplishments as much as ſhe ſurpaſſes them in

beauty! and at the fame time to be a prodigy of
learningwithout a grain of affectación : all this is
paſſing ſtrange! Let me further add, that when
D 2

40

THE HISTORY OF

ſhe is dreſſed, there is an airof majeſticgrandeur:
a noble ſimplicity of ideas:-a fomething that

cannot be expreſſed, but which ſpeaks a princeſs
indignity: while the expreſſion of her countenance is that of all imaginable ſoftneſs: nothing

but the mild graces wantoning in every feature.
Certainlyſhe is the moſt extraordinary woman I
ever met with; Tell me honestly if you do not
think ſuch an one worthy of my love!

Thursday Morning.
Every day brings to light new and odd circumſtances concerning Miss Benson; ſhe has been often out, upon the ſearch after a houſe, and has
at laſt fixed upon one in Pall-Mall; forwhich, as

foon as it is put into good repair, the is to pay
one hundred and eighty pounds a year. Is not
this a ſtrange thing for a lady in her ſituation, that

has only five thousand pounds ? her income cannot
be more than two hundredand fifty pounds a year;
how therefore can the afford ſo much in houſe-

rent ? it is an enigma which I cannot decypher.
Thehouſe is to be ready for her in two months;
ſhe has been out twice or thrice among cabinet-

makers and upholsterers, and has beſpoke great
quantities of furniture, and ſcarcely any butwhat
is elegant and expenſive, I cannot comprehend
theſe thingsat all, I am happy as an angel in
theſe opportunities of beinguseful toher; for the
employs and confults me in allher buſineſs, but
in a manner that makes her ſervice perfect free-

dom. She is often making apologies for the trouble ſhe gives us, and was infinitely folicitous to
have her houſe ready as soon as poſſible, that ſhe

might not be a burthen to our politeneſs, as ſhe
termed

JULIA BENSON.

41

- termed it, the ſhorter time. When the found

howlong atime would be neceſſary, ſhe expreſſed
much uneaſineſs ; and foon after faid, that she'

must take ajourney intoHuntingdonſhine, to vifit
a young lady there for whom the had a particular
friendſhip ; for the could not think of troubling
us in fuch a manner. This ſpeech was death to

me: I said every thing my fancy could ſuggeſt,
to perfuade her to uſe my house as her own, and
not think of a journey into the country at a time
that ſhe ſhould be in town to attend to her houſe
and furniture. What The will do I know not, but

Ishallcurſe the day the leaves us, be it when it
may.Adieu.

1

RICHARD MELVIEt .
3
4
11

LLETTER VIII.

Mr. FREDERICK to Mr. MELVILE .

no time togive you mylopinion of Mifs
IHave
Benfon at large ; but depend on ityou are deceived ; the is the caft mitreſs or the preſent one
of fome man of fortune, who is abſent.

You

will falomiferably in love perhaps with a woman,

whoſe character will make your blush to think of
Donot berdeluded by herexcellencies Granting
that your love does not make you blind , whati

atonement will hert finging, her dancing, her Ita
lian, her claſſics, and ſoon belto your injured.
ſtate and fortune, if you either marry an impoftor, or the caft off of another! At all events.

make yourself a better master of her hiftory than
you ane at préfent, and check the violence ofyour

pallion till you know, at least, that it willnot
D3
1

hurry
...

47
.

THE HISTORY OF

hurry you to yourruin. A boy juſt eſcaped from
ſchool, or wild from the university, mightexpect
pardon from great indifcretions in love ; but
remember, you are not of an age to plead fuch

inexperience do not flight this advice, leſt you
ſhould miferably repentito
t.

Yours, &c. T

HENRY FREDERICK.
;

WLETTER XIX.
Mr. FITZGERALD to Mr. MASON.

17

your letter, inwhich I find that my
IReceived
Mancheſter journey made you merry, and
what is very strange, wholly at my expence.
But you are one of the common beings of the
1

world that follow each other in a beaten track,

andhave noidea of a ſyſtematic conduct. Time
may perhaps prove to you, howmuch you are
miſtaken in your views of life.

Imust confefs I wasmortally difappointedwhen
I found I had taken a trip of between two and
three hundred milesat no ſmall expence, in order
toentertain the Abigail inſtead of the miſtreſs ;
butthe confidence I had in the uncommon ſhare

of understanding poffeffed by the lovely Mifs
Benfon, made it clear to me, that this plan of
her's aroſe from a more attentive obſervation of

certain circumstances, of which I was ignorant

and that it was the means of perhaps enfuring
.
our marriage with more eaſe and more ſpeed
than could otherwise be poffible. Filled with

this happy idea, I returned to Suſſex not quite in
fuch hafte as I had left it. I found my friends

much furpriſed at myappearance, and in fullcon
clufion

JULIA BENSON.

43

cluſion that Miss Benſon had gone off with me,
for ſhe disappeared, it seems, at the same time.
Itwas in vain I afſſured them that I had nothet

eyes on that, lady. But the intelligence of her
being gone off, convinced me that my ideas were
true; fome accident certainly happened, which

made her prefer going alone as the fafest way;
and I think there is no doubt but I shall receive a

letter ſhortly, to inform me where ſhe is, and
that she is ready to perform the promise on which
myhappineſs depends.
Thofe brutes, her relations, I find, are ex-

tremely happy ſhe is gone. The father and brother publicly aſperſe her in the groffeft manner,
andfeem overjoyed in her abſence: but the lover,

Mr. Slingſby, is not quite ſo eaſys he is doubtleſs much urt at the lofs of her fortune : As foon
as he knew that I was returned, he came and de-

manded, in very unfeemly terms, what I had done
with the woman that was to have been his wife ?
but I gave him an anfwer, the ſhortness of which

preſently ſtopped his mouth, and I have heard no
more of him.

-As I expect a letter every day from Miſs Benfon,

I shall go on with this, till I can give you fome
further information .

1

:

८

London.

My friend Maſon, I am half convinced that
you were right in your conjectures, and much
fear that I ave been vilel duped. But you shall
have a detail of thoſe circumstances which have

unravelled this myſtery.

Waitingmany days, and receiving no tidings
of
L

=

!

44

THE HISTORY OF

ofMiss Benſon, Igrew impatient,anddeterminedto
try if I could not discover where she was fled to.

Iwent to every post townaround us, and I queftioned every poſt-by ; by a Intle drink money I
found ſhe had taken theoad to London.

I then

traced her every stage, and found that the lat
boys had fet her down at Charing-Crofs at a jeweller's. This made me doubly active in my purfuit. I examined all the houies around CharingCroſs, and found a jeweller's. The man's wife
only was at home. I enquired concerning the
lady, deſcribing her particularly, and the time

when she was probably there, adding that I came
on buſineſs of much confequence to her. After

fome recollection, ſhe told me that fuch a lady
had called at the ſhop, under the ſuppoſition of
another perſon living at it, whowas moved, that,
diſappointed at notmeetingwith thoſe ſhe wanted,
the left a trunk in charge with her, for a few days,
but it was afterwards fent away. I enquiredwhere
itwasfent : ſhe faid to Germain-ſtreet, but knowi

not the houſe; though the porter might probably
remember. I begged that the porter night be
:

called; he faid he remembered very well, and áccordingly went to thew itme.

4

Knocking at the door, I enquired if Miſs Benfon was there; and to my great joy was anſwered
in the affirmative. I defired to fee her, and was

ſhewn up into a dining-room, where she was fitting alone. Nothing could be more fortun te.

She stared at me with fome furprize-" So ! fir,
how came you here ? "

TAL

)

" On"hewings of love. My angelicfair one,
why have Inot heard from you ? "
" Heardfrom me ! But pray fir, let me have
none of your nonfenfe."

11

"Good heavens, madam, do you forget
"No

45
JULIA BENSON.
" No more, fir. I must hearno more of this."

Idropt on one knee at her feet, and with all
the pathetic words I was maſter of :
" Let me conjure you, Miſs Benſon, to "
At the inſtant the door opened, and in came a

welldreffedgentleman; furprized at this, he look-!
edwith astonishment, and I rifing" Miss Benſon, you doubtless will not let the

prefence of any perfon prevent your aſſuring me
thatyou ſpeedily intend to execute your promife !"
" What promiſe ? I never gave you any."
" Mercy on me! madam: Perhaps you did
not promise to marry me !-and at Mancheſter !
and fent me thither for that purpoſe !",
" Marryyou ! (faid the gentlemanwith acountenance I eaſily read)"

" I thought your Mancheſter journey might
havebeen ſufficient to have cooled your love,
fir?" (with a moſt ſatirical ſneer)
" And did you really mean to make ajoke of
me to laugh at and deſpiſe me in that manner ??""

4

" Moſt certainly : what aſſurance to expect
any thing else! "
" I am petrified! "
:

" Could you be ſo ſuperlative a coxcomb as
to imagine that I could do any thing but laugh at
yourplans, your ſyſtems, and your views of life ?"
." But here I ſuppoſe is the ſpark for whom you
have fo bafely betrayed me and Idoubt not but
you'll play him as good a trick as you have done
me. He is your paramour."
" Sir, this language is what Iam little diſpoſed
to bear. Though no paramour, I take an intereſt
in every thing that concerns that lady-and will
not ſee her inſulted in ſo illiberal a manner."

" Take an intereſt !-Truly ; yes I have no

doubt but you take an intereſt in her: but, the
fir,

THE HISTORY OF
46
the inſults are all her own--- never was man fo

vilely jilted ! "
" Jilted! This proof alone protects yououtof my houſe this moment!"
" I am gone, fir-but you ſhall hear fomething more from me."

Withthese words, into which I threw as much
expreffion as I was maſter of, I left the houſe, and

am fully determined to call this lover of her's to
account.

Inthe mean time, Maſon, what a pretty trick

it is that this abominable jilt has played me ! Her
art and her affurance have no bounds. I could-

not have conceived it poſſible that a woman-a
young woman too could have laid and executed
fuch a diabolical plot ; but I really believe I ſhalldiſcard all thoughts of martiage and the ſex, and
enter upon an entire new ſyſtem of life. Her

wit is methinks poorly applied in attempting to
ridicule my ideas of propriety of conduct. Such
notions, I grant, do not infure one an abfolute fe-

curity againft- the ills of life, but they keep off
many, and they teach us to bear the reft. I feel
at this moment the fuperiority which results from

this conduct; many flippant perſons would be
overwhelmed in grief at this disappointment in
their love, but I shall foon get the better of the
erroneous failing, by adopting anew ſyſtem. Experience teaches one when to change ; and nothing but folly could keep one either in an old

planof life, after it has proved unfucceſsful ; or

from pursuing anew one, becauſe the old turned
out contrary to expectation. I shall not easilybe
laughed out of this idea, while I feel it beneficial
in correcting the evil of fuch a mischievous affair,
as I have lately experienced.

Icannotyet fully understand the character of
this

JULIA BENSON.
47
this woman ; that ſhe is a coquet, cannot be
doubted, or ſhe would not have entrapped me in
ſuch a manner : but I have no idea of her being
abſolutely loft to ſhame: and yet, what can be
her connections with this new admirer Melvill ?

that is his name. It is plain, ſhe changes her lovers as eaſily and with as little concern as the does
her gloves-But I wrong her, it is plain, incall-

ingmyſelf a lover-ſince the never made me more
than the object of her ridicule. Adieu.
Yours, &c.

THOMAS FITZGERALD.

LETTER

X.

Mr. MELVILL to Mr. FREDERICK.

FFAIRS that have happened lately, de-

A mand a detail, and you shall have it.

A few days ago, on my return home from a
walk to Pall-Mall, I entered the dining-room :
Miſs Benfon was ſeated with a ſtrange looking
man, of about five and thirty, on his knees at
her feet, in a fupplicating attitude. On my entrance he ſtarted up, and ſeemed to reproach the

lady in ſtrong terms, on former rencounters, which
Idid not understand. He feil into a paffioncalled her jilt and abused me as her new paramour ; Miss Benſon retorted all his attacks with

amazing ſpirit and wit, and atlast drove him away
through the mere force of ridicule. But my gentleman did not march off without whispering a
challenge in my ear, and I had a formal one from
him within three days .

We met in the Green

Park, and it was my fortune, after receiving

awound in my left arm, to runhim through the
body

48

THE HISTORY OF

body yet more fortunately, I ſhould add not
dangerously; the furgeon that inmediately attendedhim, pronounced his wound not at all dangerous .

This affair is mysterious: Mr. Fitzgerald my
antagoniſt, poſitively aſſured me on the word of
amanof honour, and his conduct throughout the
affair, no ways impeached that title, that Miſs
Benfon had carried on a long love affair with him
in Suffex, which concluded in an abſolute promiſe
of marriage and even an appointment of the verywedding-day at Mancheſter whither the chofe
to retire, as her family were ſtrongly inclined to
marryher to another man. All thisheinſiſted ſhe

⚫⚫utterly difregarded, and fairly deſerved the title
hehad givenher of a merejilt. Theſe declarati-

ons came from a man in the very extremity of
life, for we were then going to engage. It is an

ugly affair ; I like it not. Nothing can be more
evident than their being old acquaintance. Why

ſhould their connection be just now diffolved?
Surely ſhe cannot be the mere girl of defperate
fortune that you pronounced her ? I wish I had

queſtioned Fitzgerald on that head, but it quite
eſcaped me.
Imuſt own, Frederick, that Iam full ofjealoufy
andfufpicion. Ihave never declared my paffion
to Miss Benſon, even in the moſt diſtant manner ;

but I neverthelessintereſt myself as much in every
thing that concerns her, as if I was fure of being
her husband next week. True it is, that gentle-

man might form improper and extravagant pretenſions, and imagine he had claims upon her,
which were merely ideal. The turn of their

converſation carried this appearance very much.
Ifso, why ſhould I in the least degree blame

Miſs Benfon for what was abfolutely the folly of
the

:

JULIA BENSON.

49

theman ?-But to give you the other anecdote.
Laſt Wednesday morning ayoung lady, decently dreſled, came to enquire for Miſs Benfon.
She was out with my ſiſter; but being ſhewn up
tome in the dining-room, the began the following converſation.

" I am very forry to find, fir, that your lady
is not at home. The infinite obligation which I
and my poor unhappy mother are under to her,

makes me eager to throw myself at the feet of
our benefatrefs."

I perceived from this introduction that ſhe was
under a total mistake, ſuppoſing Miſs Benſon to
be my wife ; however, that I might know the
tale, I replied,
" I heard her mention ſomething of this affair
-but be ſo kind, madam, as to give me a full
account of it.

I don't doubt but I shall have en-

tire reason to be fully satisfiedwith her conduct."
" I find, fir, that our benefactress has kepther
extraordinary merit fecret ; but it is toomuch for
the honour of human nature to remain fo."

" Pleaſe to proceed, madam, I am all attention."

" My mother, fir, is an officer's widow, left

without fupport, and with the burthen of maintaining me. My poor father, who had ferved
thirty years in the army, never roſe higher than

the rank of a lieutenant; and, though a good
ceconomiſt, did not leave my mother free from
debts.

She was arreſted ſoon after his death , and

languished fome time in priſon. I attended her
there to afſiſt her with my needle in earning ſome-

thing for our ſupport, and, in a miferable manner
paſſed ſome months a witneſs of my mother's virtues, herreſignation, andmisfortunes. Oneday
our jailor informed us that we were at libertyE

that

4

30

THE HISTORY OF

that herdebtwas diſcharged by a generous gentleman, and that he had left a purse of guineas to
alleviate our future neceſſities. Aftonished at this

unexpected news, we eagerly enquired for fo generous a benefactor. We were directed to the
houſe of a man of confiderable fortune in Grof-

venor-ſquare. While my mother fought for a
cheap lodging, I went to make our humble ac-

knowledgments to our benefactor. Upon being
conducted into the room, where he was fitting 2lone, I ſtarted with ſurpriſe to find it was Sir
George Milbourn. This Baronet, fir, having

accidentally ſeen me at a Milliner's, where I carried home fome work in my father's life time,
made, without any ceremony, the moſt diſhonourable proposals. I blushed at being thought
capable of fuch a vice ; and reje Eted his terms
with a ſpirit and a tartneſs that fuited not the lownefs of mycircumstances. He was piqued at the
refuſal, and the milliner threatened me with the
lofs of her work .

" The Baronet haunted me for some time, but

metwith nothing but ſuch reſolute rebuffs that
he at laſt ſeemed to give over the pursuit. My
poor father died, and left us, as I mentioned, at
the mercy of ſeveral creditors."

" Oh! Madam (ſaid he, ſeemingly furpriſed at
ſeeing me) what is your buſineſs ? "
" I am come, Sir George (replied I) to thank
you in my own and my mother's name for refcu-

ingus from a miferable imprisonment."
"I am very plain, Miſs, in alltheſe affairs-

you must allow me to declare I love you-that it
is foryour fake only Ihave donean actionwhich has
the appearance of generoſity. Surelyyou cannot
be ſo idle as to refuse to listen to the addreſſes of

onewho is able to raise you and your mother to
eafe

}

1

JULIA BENSON.

5
)

cafe and amende

As I came merely to return, with the trueft

fincerity, our acknowledgments foryour goodness,
fir, I did not expect this addreſs ; and beg I may
be excusedfrom answering it."

" My dearest ! (faid he) I cannot excufe you
-you must really confent tomake mehappy, and
Iwill make you both rich and independent."
Saying this he offered freedoms which I refented. Iwas fired with the baſeneſs of his de-

ſigns, and replied to him, with a warmth that
threw him into a paflion.
Oh oh I find you are yet in your tan
trums. Why do you not know that your and

your mother's fate depend on my will if I were
only to fpeak the word, I could hurry you both
‫ازر‬

to jail again P
Be it fold You shall not find abaſe com-

pliance had you twenty jails in your power. My
mother would abhor her preſervation, if purchafed at theexpence of my honour."
" Honour truly -The honour of fuch beg-

gars makes a very fine figure ! Be not ſo ridiculous, but comply-fave yourself from apriſen,
andhere is a purſe of guineas to beginhouſekeeping. "

" Rejecting his offers with ſcorn, he pushed
me out of the room, and the next day, calling at
the milliner's, to enquire for work, Mrs. Lhad the afſurance before two or three ladies, to

reprove me feverely for my neglecting the Baro-

net's offers ; adding, that I ſhould find myself
and my mother ſpeedily lodged in a jail again,
and bid me confider better of it.

I burſt from

the ſhop with indignation : but Sir George kept
his word we were both arreſted athis fuit, and

lodged in our old prifon.
My poor mother the
felt
E2
1

52

THE HISTORY

OF

the ſtroke in all its severity-her health declined
-ſhe viewed me with forrow-I was the tender-

eſt object of her love, and ſhe feared for nothing

fomuch as for my safety. The change of our
creditor, from a tradeſman to Sir George Milbourn, filled her with apprehenfions for me ;
which, however, I endeavoured by every means
to allay. Nothing could fill me with a more hor
rid idea than my mother's declining healthin the

wretchedneſs of a prison. I was ready to drop
under it, when the jailor, about a week after
our imprisonment, informed us once more we
were at liberty, and conducted us to a hackney

coach, the driver of which had received orders
where to carry us. My mother was alarmed,
anddreaded meeting with Sir George again ; but

we were carried to Ifſlington, and the coach ſtopping at a house in an airy part of the town, left
us there. The miſtreſs, an elderly woman, ſhewed us aſmall but neat apartment, which ſhe ſaid
was our's. At theſe words my mother aſked her
with what deſign Sir George had done this ? ‫י‬

" Oh ! I understand you (replied the woman)
Sir George has nothing to do with it, you are not
delivered out of prison by him, but agood lady
that has paid all your debts, and has agreed with
me for this lodging for you both "
" We were ſtruck dumb with ſuch an amazing

inſtance ofgenerosity in a perſon utterly unknown.
We ſtifled the old woman with queſtions concerning our benefactress, and found that she became
acquainted with the affair by means of the Milliner for whom I worked ; being one of thoſe ladies
before whom the had reproved me for rejecting
Sir George's offer that the enquired who was
creditor, and the ſum we were in prifon for ? Be

ing informed that we were indebted to Sir George
Milbourn

JULIA BENSON.

53

Milbourn fomething above ſeventy guineas, ſhe
ſent the money to him immediately, demanding
ourdifchargeanda receiptinfull; and this without letting him know who was our protector.
Hofitations, refuſals, and enquiries, on the part
of Sir George, waſted three or four days ; but

being threatenedperemptorily, he complied, with
abad grace, diſmally vexed at being dilappointed in what he thought certain game. That our
benefactress directly enquired for lodgings inthe
neighbourhood of London; and being recom--

mended here, had agreed with Mrs. Jenkins, our
landlady, forthe rooms, and alfo for fupplying us
with whatever neceffaries we wanted at her ex-

pence. We were eager to know who our bleffed

protectrefswas, that we might fly to expreſs our
gratitude; but the told us, the knew no more of
her than that her name was Benſon, and that the

came from Germain Street ; but he added that
thelady defigned foon to call upon us. Several
days having elapfed, I came in ſearch of this ge--

nerous lady, fir, unable longer to contain thoſfe
expreffions of gratitude which ſo noble an action

demands Do you expect, fir, that your lady
" Madam, this lady is not my wife, nor any
relation, but a friend of my fifter's. l'expect her

will return foon ? ...

every minute. The narrative you have given is

an affecting one ſhe has a noblemind, and demands admiration from every orre. That I might

know a freſh inſtance of her goodneſs, I deceivedyou at firſt by faying that Ihad heard fomething of this affair; but this is the firſtmoment
I knew any thing of the matter, though the has
been in my family ſome time. I need not tell
you that keeping fuch an action ſecret, ſhews the
thorough goodness of the heart, that could feel
for
E3

54

THE HISTORY OF

for thediſtreſs of another; and noble liberality,
thatcould ſo quickly relieve it."
Ihad hardly finiſhed these words, when the
door opened, and Miss Benfon appeared. " There

(faid I, to the officer's daughter,) is your benefactreſs. "-She eyed her with a kind of worship

for an inſtant, and dropping on one knee at her
feet, burst into a flood of tears, but could not

ſpeak a word. Recovering herself, however, the
made a faultering ſpeech of thanks, acknowledgments, gratitude, &c. which Miss Benſon, who

tillthen knew her not, ſtopped her mouth by earneſtly defiring her to name the affair no more ;
adding, " I have a little advice to offer your

mother, andwillcall upon you foon." Miss Sampher, for that I find is her name, took it as a

hintto
retire, and making her obeiſance, left the
room .
and

I ventured to rally Miss Benfon a little upon
making a fecret of this affair ; telling her that
Miſs Sampher hadgiven me the recital of it, ad-

ding, " I ſuppoſe, madam, you keep thebrighteſt ſide of your character a ſecret from the world,
left it ſhould be too dazzling to the eyes of thoſe

who could never conceive, and much less perform
ſuch actions. Those who can, deſpiſe the ſex
ſhould confider the luftre of you
.
" I think (replied ſhe, interrupting me) you
1

have more reaſon to blush for your own sex, than
to compliment mine" and with theſe words left
the room.

Now, Mafon, who can be a daily ſpectator ofthe
woman that has ſo generous a mind that it is at
the ſame time beauteous as themorn, and diſplays
in every ſentiment, word, and idea the moſt refined imaginations-who can be fuch a witneſs,
and not love her to diſtraction ? What an action
is

JULIA BENSON.

1

55

is this releif ofthe fufferers ! How full of generoſity !-how full of modesty ! The ſum is conſiderable, yet we find the does not limit herbounty to fetting them free-ſhe enters at once upon a
confiderable expence, to protect and fupport them
.
after their enlargement-It is impoſſible to exprefs
how much this action strikes me!

But I wanted it not to be convinced that the

mind of this woman is ſuperior toallpraife. From
ſeveral converſations of a ſerious caſt which I
have had with her, I find thather ideas are ama-

zingly enlarged, they are of that diftinguiſhed
kind of that uncommon luftre, that you liſten
with pleaſure and inſtruction to ſentiments, which
in a'l probability you never heard before. Her
diſtinctions are refined, and thew a perfpicuity of
thought that is very rare to be found. Of all the
minds I ever was acquainted with, I never met
with one that ſo we'l deſerved the name of cultiva-

ted. Her's is poliſhed by every elegance of life
and manners, and illuminated by every branch of

knowledge and learning. In a word, my friend,
I find her approaching ſo near to the ſtandard, of
ideal perfection-I find her in every moment of

her life fo greatly ſuperior, that I could as foon
think of feizing the thunder in the hand of Jove

asdeclaring my paſſion toher. I feel myſelf impreſſed with ſo much awe, when I think of doing
it, that I am tongue-tied-and must be filent for
ever. She has not lately mentioned any thing of

her journey to Huntingdonſhire, which makes
me hope the has changed her intention. Her
time at preſent is ſpent chiefly in reading and attending pretty much to forwarding the workmen
and tradeſmen, in fitting upand fornithingher
houfe

My youngest brother, Bob, is come to town

56

THE HISTORY OF

-I have not feen him before for fome time. He

is a raw youth, but if we canget him into the army he will be poliſhed. Lord C-gave me

hopes of a pair of colours for him, but I depend
very little on it.

The lad has no fortune, and I

ſhall find it, I fear, too pinching amatter to purchafe for him; but I shall send him to pay his
devoirs to Lord

This forwardnets I be-

lieve is neceſſary in theſe affairs.

bri

Let me hear from you as foon as you have
Heifure..

RICHARD MELVILL.

LETTER XI.
Sir PHILIP EGERTON to Lord WILLIAM
W
712

INDEED, my Lord, you are much toblamein
perfifting to refuſe your acquiefcence in your
father's proposal. Lady Harriet F--befides an

agreeable perfon and an unexceptionable temper,
willunite in your family two eftates, whoſe con-

tiguity makes them of fuch infinite value to each
other. Our long acquaintance allows me to af
fert, from the knowledge I have of you, that
there can be noreason for rejecting aplan ſo evi

dently beneficial, andwhich cannever offer again,
but by that lurking paffion for Signiora Zaffini,
orMiss Benfon. The whole history of your connections with those ladies, when in Italy I have
always told you was ſuch an ænigina to me, that

Icould never understand any of the motives of
your conduct. Believe me, my lord, you never
gave any fatisfactory account of it. I know not
whether you was, after all, in love with Signora

Zaffini. I know not why you neglected Miſs
Benfon,

JULIA BENSON.

57

Benſon, while paſſionately in love with her-I
know not how you came to incur the ſtigma of
being dishonourable to her, while I know there
exiſts not a man of more unfullied honour-I

knownot how it happened that, with a lion-like

bravery, you should behave as if you had been a
coward. In a word, my lord, after numerous ex

planatory letters, I muſt own myself quite inthe
dark. The Duke's conduct at preſent is ſenſible
andconſiſtent, believe me, your's is indefenſibly
inconfiftent. Either come into his proposals, or
give ſo ſtrong a reaſon against them that the moſt
dubious muſt remain ſatisfied.

The offer of a

ſettlement of five thousand pounds a year, with
fix more of Lady Harriet's !-Sure, my lord,
theſe are not to be trifled with !

Iremain, &c.
1

PHIL. EGERTON.
1

Γ.

LETTER

XII.

LordWILLIAM W- to Sir PHILIP EGERTON.

MY dear Sir Philip, the reproaches in
your last letterdare extremely juſt, and
your wonder no leſs ſo, I readily own, that my
conduct has proved very eccentric, and that I am
at preſent in a fituation of doubt which gives an

inconſiſtency to all my actions. But Iam not fo
bad as I feem-and ſeveral circumſtances, which

have hitherto appeared mysterious in my life,
have had that character from your knowing them
no better. You shall no longer reproach me with
this ignorance ; for I will now give you thoſe further explanations, that I hope will be ſufficient to
remove thecloud that hangs between us at preſent.
It

38

THE HISTORY OF

Itwas at Parma that I was firſt introduced to

the Marquisla Mina, and became acquaintedwith

his niece Signora Zaffini ; or rather, my friend,
the became acquainted with me. I think Ichave
more than once given you her character of a

moſt inſinuating carriage an agreeable freedom
of converſation- a ſprightly wit
-with beauty
enough to fet off and vary thefe manners . A

young manof three andtwenty, no enemy to the
fex, couldhardly refrain from returningadvances,
which he could not but understand. In a word,

I engaged in an intrigue with this lady,which
laſted ſome months withoutany fufpicion in thoſe,
who might have been concerned. Her confum-

mate art prevented discovery, for her fertile invention, in multiplying and extending reſources of
fecrecy and diffimulation, exceeded all bounds.

As to the ſtate of my heart at this period, it was
in avery filly ſituation. I had an affection formy
miſtreſs, much resembling love-but not love-

and atthe verytime that I entered and cheriſmed
it, I felt that itwould not laft ; but as tomy hav-

ing any remains of paſſion for her, you judge
ſtrangely to make it even a matter of doubt. I
parted with her without regret; and not long afterwards the wouldprobably have done the fame
byme.

C

But at Florence I found a fair one infinitely
more deſerving of my attention, Miſs Benfon;
Thewastravelling through Italy with her uncle, a
manof comfiderable fortune, and his family . I
became acquainted with him and his charming
niece at the fame time. He was a man of ftrict

honour, great probity, and of an admirable underſtanding ; the niecehad all theſe qualities and a

thousandmore much exceeding, in my opinion,
every thing I hadever read, heard, orfeenamong
the

JULIA BENSON.

59

the ſex; for ſhe was an aggregate of mental and
perſonal charms. Her converfation was fo full of
variety and inſtruction, that I could have liſtened
toher, with improvementfor ever. This woman
Ididlove ; nor will the affection ever cease, were
I to be introduced to ten thousand others ; for the
has rendered all the rest of the sex, fuch mere

figures and blanks in my eye, that I can think of
no one else.

This is the reaſon that I cannot come

into my father's propoſal. Iknow not, nor can
Ianywhere learn, whether Miſs Benfon is alive
or dead, ſingle or married. This uncertainty,
you may eaſily, ſuppoſe, is cruel enough; but
you shall have the particulars of the affair.
Mr. Melliſh , her uncle, foon after my viſits at
his houſe, became familiar, wrote to my father to
inform him of them, and oftheir object. Thiswas
acting the part of a gentleman ; what anſwer he
received I know not; but I had aletter foon after

from my father, with some general good advice,
given in his negligent ſtile ; from which I concluded, that he was quite indifferent about the affair.
This was always the cafe, till the death of Lord
H--threw that eſtate into the hands of an hei

reſs; from which time he has changed his note,
and never ceafed recommending to me to have
ſome thoughts of Lady Harriet.

It is impoffible todeſcribe perfectly to you, the
uninterrupted happiness I enjoyed during my ſtay
at Florence. I had the converſation of Miss

Benſon daily; nothing could exceed the paflion
which I felt for her; but what made it peculiarly

pleaſing, was my acting entirely a part, that even
my judgment.could not condemn. Attachmentsof

this fort are often made by men of rank, which
they are ashamed of; they feel, even in the moments of pleafure, that they are acting beneath
themselves.t

60

THE HISTORY OF

themselves; that the birth and manners of their
miſtreſs or her relations, are below them, or fit
only to bring them into contempt. Such ideas to

aſenſible mind, are ſtings even in the midst of
happiness ; but I felt them not. This lady was

born of a very antient and reſpectable family ;
her uncle the ſame ; all of them rich in inheritance, and no upſtarts of the day. Mr. Melliſh
was a man whoſe manners, conversation, and abilities, would do honour to any court in Europe.
MiſsBenfon, educated under his eye, is the moſt
accomplished woman of her age. What an advantage, with all this, to have ſeen and been intimate with the beſt company at home, in France,
and in Italy ! No, there were no aſſemblies more
polite in Florence than thoſe which were held at
Mr. Melliſh's.
But from the firſt moment I converſed with

Miſs Benfon, all idea of her inferiority to the

rank, I may one day poſſeſs in the world, vanished. Her ideas, her manners, her carriage, every
word and look convinced me, that this woman
was fit to rank with princes and kings ; for her
virtues and her charms would throw more luſtre on

thehighest rank, than the highest rank could ever
confer on them. Indeed, I felt the advantage of
my converſe in Mr. Melliſh's houſe too much not
to revere as well aslove it.

His houſe was indeed

the temple of politeness and good ſenſe. I found
more improvement, for I can give it no other
term, more enlargement of idea, and a more refined urbanity to be gained in the converſation of
this uncle and his niece, than in all the efforts of
education that have been used to form me, ſo
much inferior, even to a woman. In ſhort, Sir

Philip, it was a fituation in which I could notbut
love; and in which, love muſt reign without
bounds,

δι

JULIA BENSON..

bounds. I wasno fooner intimate with Miss Ben-

fon, than I openly declared to Mr. Melliſh, that
if I was fortunate enough to gain her affections, I
ſhould eſteem myself the happiest of mankind-

that I should pay my addreſſes to her under the
certainty of my father's approbation. I declared
my paſſion to her, and met with a return that
made me ſupremely bleſſed, but it was a return I

only gueſſed at, fo full of modest dignity I never
didmortal enjoygreater, or atthe sametime more
rational pleaſure than I-but, Sir Philip, the
dæmon of miſchief was at work to deftroy it all.

Ihad occafion to go to Rome for about ten days
upon ſome buſineſs of young Edmond's, who had
brought himself into a filly ſcrape there. I took
my leave of Mr. Melliſh and his excellent niece,
promiſing that I would not exceed my time. Some
unlucky accidents prolonged my ſtay a fortnight ;
but I wrote to Miss Benfon the reason of it.

On

my return, as I was entering the foreft of Ardi

very early in the morning, I was fet upon by

threebanditti. Ihad onlyJaques with me, andhe
was unarmed. As for the poſt-boys, upon the
firſt attack, theyjumped from their horfes and
fled. All three, without demanding any booty,

fired on me at once, but I received no other huit,
than a ball's grazing my left arm. I fired a piftol immediately at the perfon nearest me, and
ſhot him dead. At that inſtant I received another

fire, which wounded me flightly on the hip : but
upon my prèſenting another piſtol, the two rafcals
fled. Jaques was for riding after them, but I
ſtopped him. I examined the pocket of the dead
man, andfoundnothing about him worth remarkingbut this letter :
"Ardella,
F

" I now

62

THE HISTORY OF

" I now ſend ten piſtoles; fifty more will be
your reward if you are fure in your work-you

maydependon advancement.

I knew the hand to be Zaffini's, and it ftruck

me with ſurpriſe and dread; itoccurred at once to
me, that she had, out of revenge for my neglecting her, taken this method of having me difpatched.

Jaques mounted the horses, and conveyed me
fafe to Ardi ; there I had my wounds dreſſed,
and, when I was recovered, made all expedition
to Florence. Upon going to Mr. Mellifh's, I
found him gone to Venice. Iunderstood at the
next door, broken tidings of strange accidents

that had happened. I learned news even of myſelf; that Mr. Melliſh had purſued me to Turin,

to fight me for fome offence I had given to the
lady that accompanied him. All this, as you
may ſuppoſe, tortured me withdread and uncertainty. I was convinced, that the whole must be

owing to a vile plot of Zaffini's ; buthow to unravel it, furpaſſed my art. By Mr. Mellith and
Miſs Benson's leaving Florence ſo ſuddenly, itwas
evident that vile woman had, by some means,
miſrepreſented me to them in a manner ſufficient
to work allthe effects ſhe could defire or wiſh.

I

ordered a chaiſe immediately to go to Venice, that
Imight clear up ſo ſtrange an affair; but inattention to the wounds, which I had thought triffing,
great fatigue, and the anxiety of my mind,

brought me into ſuch a ſtate, that my furgeon
pronouncedſuch a journey death to me, and very

contraryto my inclination, instead of fetting off
for thejourney, I meditated, he put me into bed.
Idiſpatched

63
JULIA BENSON.
Idiſpatched Jaques to Venice with letters, and

ſtrict orders to gain fight of Mr. Melliſh and Miſs

Benfon, if poſſible; but he was driven from their

doorwiththe moſt contumelious language--my life
was threatened, if ever I was met with, by all
their domeſtics , and I was called, for what I know

not, a defpicable coward.
Beforehe returned to Florence, I had fallen into a mortal deſperate fever, which the heat ofthe

feaſon made ſo dangerous, that all myphyſical attendants deſpaired of my life for above a month.
Ifuffered three relapſes, each more alarming than
the other. In a word, I kept my chamber no leſs
than seventeen weeks ; and when I left it for air

and exercise, it was ſome time before I had any
ſtrength. Iwas preſcribed a refidence for fome time
inthemountains of lerni, where they hoped the air
and goats milk might have good effect. I tried
this remedy for near two months, and found it
ſuccessful, though I was by no means reſtored to

my former ſtrength and ſpirits. During my illneſs, Jaques made ſome discoveries which were
important; he informed me, that he heard I had
a great quarrel with Mr. Melliſh-that the latter
fent me achallenge which I refused, and ran away

-that Mr. Melliſh pursued me through all Italy
quite to Turin; that I was, for this baſe action,

looked upon generally as a coward-with much
information of the fame fort, that really aftoniſhed
me.

All this must be the effect of fome curſed

contrivances of Zattini ; how she could thus have
played her cards I cannot comprehend; but it is
true, that this devil incarnate has destroyed the
peace both of my foul and body.

After ſeveral months languiſhing for health, in
various parts of Italy and the south of France, I

gathered ſtrength enough to fet out in ſearch of
F2

the

4

THE HISTORY OF

the amiable woman that was the idol of my foul.
I went firſt to Venice, then to Munich, to Vienna, to Dreſden, to Berlin, &c. at all which

places' I heard of her, but she had left them long
before my arrival; and I found afterwards that
Mr. Melliſh had returned to England. I embarked at Calais, for the ſame country, was at London ſome time making enquiries. I then under-

ſtood that Mr. Melliſh was dead-a piece of in-

formation that grieved me exceedingly ; but as to
Miſs Benfon, 1 cou'd learn no tidings of her. I
laid the whole affair honestly and fairly before my
father, and I found that he received it as a confi-

derate and generous parent. He gave full credit
to my defcription of Miss Benfon andher unclefaid that he ſhould be the last of mankind to op-

poſe my wishes, in cafe I could gain ſo accompliſhed awoman for my wife, on whom I had
actually fixed my affections ; but obſerved, that
the muſt be certainly dead, or I must before now
haveheard ofher. Adding, however, that I ought
to make it my buſineſs to find out the truth; that
if she was alive, and ſingle, as I left her, he
would never be the man to oppoſe my happiness.
IleftEngland, and reſided fome months at Paris;
there I expected to hear some tidings of her: for

I have often obſerved that people, who have refided agreeably in that elegant center of politeneſs,
feldom fail of returning to it with pleaſure. But
I did not find her. I heard, however, that Mifs
Benfon was contracted in marriage to a Prince of
Furstenburgh, being at the court of Munich.
This intelligence ſurprized me ; for I had been at
Munich after ſhe hadleft it, andhadheard nothing
of it. But in a second company, hearing the
ſame intelligence, and that ſhe was actually mar-

ried there, I determined to ſet out immediately,
and,
:

1

65
JULIA BENSON.
and, accordingly went to Munich ; but, on my
arrival there, found that three parts in four of the

report were falfe. The Prince of Furstenburgh
actually made offers to her, but she refuſed him.
This intelligence pleafed me not a little, though I
could fcarcely hope to reap the leaſt benefit from
it.

In this ſituation, Sir Philip, I have remained.

ever ſince. Iam utterly ignorant of the fate of
thewoman Iadore. My father, under the preſumption, that fre is dead or married, preſſes me
to wed Lady Harriet; but never will I become
the husband of any other woman than Miss Benfon. Her excellencies ſo far outshine all other fe--

male merit, that I should be ſtrangely wanting to
myfelf to attempt to think of another after once
loving her. The greatest terror of my fout, and
what conſtitutes my highest mifery at preſent, is
the idea of her death. Iown, I fear, the arts of

the deteſted Zaffini. If ſhe ſhould have planned

and ſucceeded in any diabolical ſchemeof revenge
onher innocence, I am for ever the moſt miferable of mortals .

Here, my dear Sir Philip, you ſeethe real ſtate
of my affairs and heart-I think I have fully explainedallthoſe mysteries, whichyouhavethought
ſomany contradictions in my conduct-how Zaffini compaffed her aim I know not myſelf, and

therefore am utterly unable to explain it to you.
But obſerve, my friend, that I am bleeding of the
wounds my heart receivedinthe loss of Miss Benfon ; for if ever a perſon was at once ſnatched
from heaven, and plunged in the darkest hell, it
muſt ſurely be me. Every moment of abfence
only increaſes that indelible love which preysupon

my foul it is engraven in my heart. Never will
the image of that ſuperiorwoman be obliterated
F3

from

66

THE HISTORY OF

from my mind !-all life is but a blank !-alljoy
istaſteleſs !-all ſociety deteftable !-the ſun ſhines
no more to me !-I have lived on the road be-

tween Paris and London-I take many a tour to
Florence, to Munich, to Vienna-I gaze with
fond delight on the house, which was once the
feat of all my joys ; and am now in treaty to purchaſe it at an extravagant price, that every moment of my life may be devoted to the memory
of her I love. In this room I firſtſaw her; there
ſhe ſat, when she received my vows of fidelity ;
here I heard the converse of her noble uncle, and
hung with rapture on the accents of her amiable
tongue ! These are ideas that will drive me to

diſtraction ſpeedily-I do not endeavour to prevent it; for miſery is already my portion ; and its
continuance ſeems to threaten a period to my exiſtence. I long only for one thing before I die
it is revenge. I have my emiſſaries abroad, with

thepromise of boundless treasure, if they canfecure Zaffini alive, and bring her within my power.
WhenIthinkof the mortalmiſery ſhe has brought
on me, I lose all ſenſe of shame, allideas of man-

hood ; for I believe I could feaſt my eyes with
ſeeing her impaled alive. I become furious with
the idea.

Here let me cloſe this diſmal narrative.

Have I now fatisfiedyou of the abfurdity of my
father's urging marriage to me for the sake of an
eſtate ? Were twenty crowns at stake, would you
have fuch a wretch as me ſtretch out an arm to
feize them ? No, Sir Philip, I have matter deeper in my foul-I cannot write to the Duke in
theſe terms; but prithee take itupon thee to convince him of theimpropriety of injuring ayoung
innocent lady of a noble family and fortune fo

highly, as to think of making her wretched by
being the partner of fo miferable a being. It must
not

-

JULIA BENSON.

১

67

not be but withal let not his Grace know the

extremity of my misery; he loves me too much
to bear it without an emotion, that I fear would

be fatal to him; conceal the worst circumstances,
but let him know enough to lay aſide for ever all
ideas of my marriage with this or any other lady.

Ilook for this through your friendſhip ; do not
disappoint me.
Yours,
WILL. W
1

LETTER

XIII.

Mr. MELVILL to Mr. FREDERICK.

MY my
dearhouſe,
Frederick,
Benfon's
refidence
makesMiſs
it the
ſcene of
action
for a variety of characters to exhibit on ; we
have a new one brought on our ſtage by that amiab'elady's generofity to the Samphers. The other
day Sir George Milbourne was announced to Mifs
Benfon; at the mention of his name her colour

came with a tranſient gleam of indignation in her
countenance that pleaſed me. Upon being ſeated
he addreſſed himself to Miss Benſon and my fiſter,
who were fitting near each other.
" Ladies, I must request your pardon for this
intrusion, but one of you, I have not the honour

to knowwhich, has been ſo very generous of late,
that I was defirous of knowing the motive, as it
was exerted quite at my expence." After pauſing
a little, and finding that they either did not, or
would not, comprehend him. " I mean, ladies, the reſcuing those wretched culprits from
prifon-a woman, Sampher by name, and her
daughter."
This

68

THE HISTORY OF

" This is the lady (faid my ſiſter) who was the
author of that generous action."

:

" Madam (returned the baronet, addreſſing

himself to Miss Benfon) may I begthe pourquoi?"
" You must allow me, fir, to return your pour-

quoi, why did you affume to yourself a power
over them by buying in their debts ? "
"Uponmy credit, madam, you put yourqueries
with a vivacity, thatgives a luftre toyour countenance. I had just, very juſt-and ſolid reaſons. "
And then, with a very fignificant air of myſterious importance, brandiſhing a pinch of snuff
with a finger, on which was a very fine diamond
ring.-" You have been much deceived-you
have indeed, madam."

" Nothing more likely, Sir George-we womenhave not the nice distinctions that do ſo much

honour to many of your ſex."
" Such ladies as you, madam (eying her with

particular complacency) are poſſeſſed of every
diſtinction in life-Nature we must allow, after

all, is to be forgiven for producing fuch beings as
the Sampher's, while the makes amends for ſoma-

ny errors inyou
" That I think is what may be called a very
wellturned compliment ; pray, fir, was it addreſſed
tomy perfon or my understanding ? "
--

""Ponhonour, madam, I do not addreſs myfelf to the understanding of the fair ſex; they
have charms that fet the heart in a flame, but the

depth of their judgment, is a matter of leſs importance."

" So the moſt you allow a fine woman is to be
apretty fool ? "

:

" I ſhall make an exception withyou, madam
-you are a pretty wit."
" Sir George, I am not indebt you certainly
compliment

69

JULIA BENSON.

complimentme to-day, in order to put me in pri.
fon to-morrow."

" Pardon me, fair lady, thoſe eyes of your's
are more likely to impriſon the hearts of all my
1

fex."

i

" Miss Sampher's eyes too, Sir George, are
verykilling ! "

" Really, madam (looking filly and twirling his
watch chain) I have forgot what ſhe is, my bufineſs in that affair was with the old woman. "

" Fie, Sir George ! what ! a man of your gallantry plant the artillery of your elegant perſon
against theheart of an old woman, when a young
one was in the cafe ?"

" My elegant perfon ! ha ha ; egad, madam, you
have a talent at ridicule that would shine on the

ſtage; but, madam, you utterly mistake that affair.
"

" As your taſte carries you ſo ſtrongly to antient ladies, I fear I am ſtricken in years for you
have been complimenting me."
" As I before obſerved, madam, it is highly

neceſſary that theſe people whom you have protected, ſhould

."

" Return to prifon, I ſuppoſe, Sir George !
Canyou make love to the oldwoman nowhere but
in adungeon?‫י‬
" I affure you you have been guilty of--."
" Beingpretty-and you are ſo gallant aman,
that

.”

" Madam, I crave your patience, you must allow me to

”.

" Once more payyour polite addreſſes to Mrs.
Sampher

"

" I do not understand this, (angrily) they are

thieves in contracting debts which they cannot
pay, and I am come to defire explicitly your defigns

70

THE HISTORY OF

figns with them; for I confider them as depending
uponme."

" Depending upon you ?"
" Yes, on me

for here is a bank note for the

whole amount of the expences, madam, I do not
chuſe to have my debt paid inthe irregular manner you have done."

" So your meaning, Sir George, is to payme
the money now ? "
" It is, madam."

" Very good ; togive you an opportunity the
week following to claim it as a debt, and throw
me into gaol with the purest and moſt virtuous
deſigns in theworld."
" I expected you to be ſerious, madam."
" Perhaps you now deſire it ? "
" Indeed I do-I want to finiſh the buſineſs ? "
46

Then, Sir, you ſhallknow my mind in few
words. Your conduct to the Sampher's ſhews

you to be a baſe deſigning villain."
" How !"

" Who by means of wealth, proſtituted to the
loweſt purposes, aim at nothing but deſtroying
that virtue in others, to which yourself have no
pretenfions."
" Zounds, madam ! "

" Your buying in the debts of a diſtreſſed,
unfortunatewidow, and an orphan daughter, merelywith a vile deſign-your throwing them into
prifon becauſe ſhe would not proſtitute herself to

ſo deteſted a monster, proves, Sir, that your foul
is a compound of meanneſs and cruelty."
" This, methinks, is fine ranting, but your
nymph ſhallpay for it."
" You are much miſtaken. I am their pro-

tector ; my fortune, though not great, ſhall be
exerted

JULIA BENSON.

71

exertedin theirdefence; they ſhall fet your villainy at defiance."
The Baronet would hear no more, but looking

with great fire at MiſsBenſon, ſhe returned itwith
infinite contempt, and he made his retreat with a
precipitation, that proved him fairly beaten off
the field.

There, faid Miſs Benſon, goes one of our
modern fine gentlemen ? 'This ſpecies of animals

inLondon-what a credit he does to your fex,
Mr. Melvill ! " .

" Madam, I hope there are not many of Sir
George's character. There would be much fewer, if they metwithſuch reproof as you gavehim
thismorning."
" I gave it the readier, becauſe I recollected

his perfon, though he had forgotten mine. His
father was a friend of my uncle,who frequently
in my hearing foretold thatGeorge would turn out
anilliterate coxcomb, and more than once recommended a different education for a lad that would

one day inherit a good fortune. He was his mother's darling, who never ceafed inculcating ideas,
which ſhethought were adapted tohis future rank.

Had he been a Duke they would have spoiled him,
but being only a trumpery Baronet, they made

him truly ridiculous

While a ſtripling, the in-

dulged him in almoſt every vice, that could debaſehis character when a man; and now we find
him the mere ſquanderer of money for doing mifchief to other people."

Imade my offer to Miss Benfon to be useful to
her in any reſpect the approved, in patronizing
Mrs. Sampher and her daughter, but the, thanking
me, replied, that she could depend on their own
prudence, and the attention of the people where
they lodged.
My

THE HISTORY OF
72

My heart grows very heavy, Frederick. Mifs
Benson's houſe is almoſt ready for her. What I
am to do when she goes, I know not; but I be-

-lieve to make my exit then, would be the wiſeſt
plan; forit wouldbe the concluſion of adelicious
dream, which cannot be ended but with mifery.
We shall certainly be numbered among the neareſt of her friends, but that by no means fatisfies

me. It must, however, fatisfy me, for I cannot
ſpeak toher of what my heart feels. I plainly fee,
that ſhe is not the leaſt affected towards me ; I

mean further than mere friendſhip and politeneſs .
My eyes have, morethan once, ſpoken truth to
her; but she has not feemed to understand a ſyllable of their meaning, and I really believe the
thinks no more of me in the light of a lover than
the moon does. Indeed, I do not think ſhe will
quickly find amanthat is made for her ; for the
has rather an acrimonious way of thinking of the
fex, and drops general ſpeeches now and then,
conceived in ſuch ſtrong terms, that I think the
would allow of but very few exceptions. Notwithſtanding my paſſion for this uncommon wo-

man, I am not foblind but I can fee this failing in
her character, which ſome times eſcapes her in a
manner that ſhews too much rancour and con-

tempt, and yet much is to be faid in extenuation
of it. Her own abilities are ſuperior to every thing
ſhe finds in common among us-her learning, her
accomplishments are the fame; and while mankind look down on her, loſt in thegeneral infignificancy of the ſex, with that air of fuperiority
we are ſo apt to uſe, how can we wonder at her
retorting the ill founded contempt with ten-fold
vehemence ; and having been rather unfortunate

in the group of men that have been connected
with her by relationship, or accident, ſhe has a
caft

JULIA BENSON.

73

caſtof ridicule ready for all ; andhas a talent of
preſently finding out the weak part of every cha-

racter ſhe converſes with. She is perfectly forgiving and kind to the women, but, I muſt ſay,
the has no mercy on the men.
Menill cannot bear her; you know he has a

moſt filly way of laughing at the women in all
converſation, holding them as cheap as poſſible,
in any reſpéct beyond the walks of domestic life ;
he keeps his Kitty cloſely in thoſe bounds, though
agood fine girl, and by no means a fool ; and if
the was not contented would, I dare fay, preſent-

lychangeher for another ofthe ſiſterhood. When
I told him that Miss Benfon was far fuperior to all

other women, he only laughed at me, and concluded thatlove had blinded me to her defects ; and

he came one day to dinner, expecting nothing
but a fine woman with a common ſhare of under-

ſtanding- he trifled much in converſation, as if

perfectly off his guard, anddropping two or three
hints injurious to the ſex, Miſs Benſon did not
let them eſcape her, but entering further into the
chat, gave Menill aſkaunt ſeveral ſtrokes of keen
wit that made him riggle on his chair ; and on his
explaining himselfin a laughing negligent manner,
ſhe with more eaſe drew forth all his peculiarities

ofthinking, andridiculedthem with a ſeverity that
flead him alive, but never violated the bounds of

the utmoſt politeneſs. In a word, the bound him
down untilhe hadnot anidea at liberty ; and then
diverted us not a little at the ridiculousness of his

fituation ; the whole in ſuch a'ſtrain of irony on
the inferiority ofthe female fex, that I am much

miſtaken if my friend Menill will not be cured.
Adieu,

I remain truly yours,
G

RICH . MELVILL.
LET

74

THE HISTORY OF
LETTER

XIV ..

‫را‬

Mifs BENSON, to Mifs EMILIA WATSON .

MYdear
Emiliathan
deſervesmany
ledgments
are in my more
poweracknowto give
for the kindness of her invitation to Huntingdonſhire. Do not forget to preſent my ſincere thanks
to Mr. Watſon for uniting with you in this mark
of your tenderness. Iſhould readilyhave troubled
you, but I found my prefence neceſſary in London in order to get my house, &c. ready to receive me, and I was fortunate enough to find that
Miſs Melvill and her brother are people of fo
much good ſenſe and confideration, that they will,
7

notwithstanding their extreme politeneſs, allow me
to be perfectly at my eafe. When I found that I
could stay with them without being a troubleſome
gueſt, I readily conſented, and must find out fome

proper method, if I can, of returning their civilities.

Iam at laſt got into Pall-Mall, and have regulated my affairs and household in ſuch a manner
that I hope to live atleaſt at my eaſe. The houſe
is an agreeable one: Ihave two parlours on the
ground floor, and a large dining room, with a
pretty dreffing room, on the first floor. Thefe

four rooms I have furnished rather elegantly. The
pictures, &c. Mr. Melliſh left me, with the ca-

binets I collected with his aſſiſtance, are no flight
ornaments to them. Most of my sex would envy
my ſituation much , but not without reaſon, Mr.

Melvill got me a very grave, wellbehaved fellow
for my coachman; he likewife procured me a footman, and Miss Melvill has recommended a cock

and another maid ; for my own fervant Itook the
young woman from Suſſex, whoſe father, a cler-

gyman, died and left her deſtitute-Ibelievehave
you

:

JULIA BENSON.

75

haveheard me mention her more than once. Mrs.

Henry is in her poft, and fills it much better than

I expected; indeed this was the part of my eſtablishment which I had the moſt fears about.

I

had no doubt of her good humour and without
the leaft fear of her giving me any offence ; but I

ſuſpected that ſhe had been fo long in retirement,
that her carriage and manner would be rather too

awkward for going every wherewith me. In this
I am agreeably difappointed ; the has bought fome
handsome things, makes a very good old woman's

figure, without the attendant weaknessthat istoo
often found. One point I shall attend to as a very

neceffary one, which is economy ; not to lay up

money, for I want it not, but to take care in the
entrance of this new way of life, which is new
to me, to keep within my income, and have al-

ways a few hundred pounds at command for emergencies.
Imust have a country houſe, for I am fond of

the country, and ſhould by no means like to remain inanempty city ; but this I ſhall not trouble
myself about till next ſpring, as I ſhould diſlike

fixing in a place without ſeeing it at the ſeaſon to
which it is adapted. The neighbourhood of London I ſhall prefer, as being moſt agreeable, free
from the trouble of longjourneys, and, as I think,
the finest country in England. When I hear of a
little eftate within twenty miles of town, with a
decent houſe upon it, I shall purchaſe it. I have
no objection to hiring in London, but ſhould
much diflike it in the country.

I find my income will be, clear ofall my late
experces, near twelve hundred pounds a year ;
and I do not yet foreſee that my expences will be

more than nine hundred, and yet I allow liberally
for every thing; ſo, my dear Emilia, I am withG2

in

76.

THE HISTORY OF

in the bounds which I am defirous of not excee-

ding. A woman has net, nor cannot have the
fame weight or reſpect in the world as a man of
equal fortune; and ſhe is more liable to accidents
and exigencies, which nothing but a round ſum

of money, ready to be applied to any uſe that
happens, can fecure her against.

1

But I have that on my mind, Emilia, which
hurts its enjoyment, and gives me ſome unhappy
hours ; while thisis the cafe, and I blush to think

what little reaſon I have to fee any end of it, I
ſiculd, in prudence, take care, and not let other
matters, that are in my power, ever run counter
to my wishes. One mifery is enough, and there
is nothing of which I have so much deteftation as
the idea of that ſpecies of dependance on one's
inferiors, or that cramped ſituation which flows
from a want of attention to economy.

Ihave a room, Emilia, which I callyour's, and
believe me your occupying it will add not a little
to the happineſs which I can expect to reap from
futurity. I need not tell you that Mr. Watson's
company at the fame time would give me great
pleaſure.

Last Tuesday I was at court. The Sardinian

Ambaſſador remembered me, and, addreſſing me
with much politeneſs , enquired after his old
friend, Mr. Melliſh. It was with no flight for-

row I told him of his death, and the good old
man quite wept to hear it. The King, obferving his emotion, came up, and enquired the
cauſe ? The Marquis replied, " This young lady,
Sire, is a niece of an old friend of mine, whoſe

company, with her's, at Turin, I much eſteemed."
" You

JULIA BENSON.
77
" You have been in Italy, Madam," faid the
King.

"Yes, Sire (I replied) I reſided there two
years with the late Mr. Melliſh my uncle."
" Mellish !-Melliſh !-Sure I remember him !

-was he not a brigadier general ? "
" No, Sire, but in the earlier part of his life

he had the honour of being your Majesty's Envoy at Venice."
" Oh ! I remember him well-was he your
uncle?
"

Yes, Sire, andin his death I ſuſtained an irreparable loſs."
I am much concerned at it, madam."

" Your Majesty (faid the Ambaſſfador) had not
amore valuable ſubject than that gentleman, nor
can your dominions boast a more accomplished
woman than this lady."
The King made me fome compliments, and
paſſed oninthe circle, but the Marquis de Vigniola defired to know where I lived at prefent.

I

toldhim of my fettling lately in Pall-Mall; and
he ſaid he ſhould take the firſt opportunity of
waitingonme.

The Earl of C-- faw me, and immediately.
expreſſedhis forrow for the lofs of Mr. Melliſh.

He made enquiries after my prefent fituation, and
aſked me, ſmiling, after news from Suffex. You'
know his eftate is there, and that my father has

always oppofed his parliamentary intereſt in a
manner which well deferves the epithet abfurd.

Some other of my uncle's friends were there, who,
recollecting me, were much more polite than I
had any reaſon to expect. But I am not difpleaſed to find that they do not ſhun me after the
death of that uncommon man, who claimed and
G3

1

com:

78

THE HISTORY OF

commanded reſpect from every one that came
near him.

As to company, my Emilia, I am fomewhat
particular in my ideas of what is deſirable in that
point. People whoſe notions are ſuperior to thoſe

of the vulgar, are generally fond of aſſociating
with companions of parts, abilities or wit ; and
boaſt, even to affectation, of diſregarding rank;
but this is in oppoſition to inferior claſſes, who
viſit with a fatisfaction exactly proportioned to

the rank of the house they are going to. But I
muſt defire to ſteer in this reſpect the middle
courſe; the condu& of the latter is that of a fool,

and that of the former is generally mixed with
other marks of a meer humouriſt. I have found,

in a circle of no ſmall experience,that people of
rank, who have been used to ahigh ſphere oflife,
are, upon an average, more accomplished, and in

poffeflion of many more ideas thantheir inferiors.
The want of that polishing and politeneſs which
is common among the great, very often makes the

company of their inferiorsdiſguſting. Their fortunes have generally been attended with better
educations, and a much more extended ſphere of

motion, confequent'y their knowledge ſhould be
proportionably fuperior. Iam ſenſible however,
that the exceptions to this rule are numerous,
that plebeians often are finiſhed characters, while

the highest nobility offers inflances of contemptibleoness..

There is ſomething fingular in the life of the
Marquis de Vignicla. Mr. Melliſh was extremely intimate with him at Twin, where he fre-

quented cur houſe very much. I have had long
converfations with him, in which he morethan

oncegave me ſeveral particulars of his hiſtory,
that feemed to border more on romance than real
life;

79
JULIA BENSON.
life ; but, were nevertheleſs well known to the

whole court. The Duke of Savoy, paſſing
through a retired place among the mountains of

that province, his attendants loſt their way, and
the Duke, riding up to a houfe, wherein was nobody but a lad of about eight years old, the Duke
enquired his road ; the boy, with much vivacity,

told him ; but his highneſs fearing left he ſhould
misunderstand him ; asked him if he could not

go and conduct him right. Yes, replied the boy,
Iwill go and get my aſs immediately. He was
mounted in an inſtant androde off, the Duke fol-

lowing him, and leaving his attendants to make
the beſt of their way by themselves. The boy
entered into converſation, and entertained the

ſtranger much with the keenness of his remarks,
and the ſprightlineſs of his replies. When he
had conducted him to the high road, the Duke
faid, " I should like fuch a boy as you in my fervice." Should you, fir ? (replied the lad) I ſhould
bevery glad to serve you. " What can you do ? "
returned the Duke.

I will do whatever I am bid,

(faid the boy) and I will be very faithful." Pleaſed
with theſe replies, his Highness bid him follow,
aud upon coming to the little town of Suna, difpatched a meſſenger to the houſe from whence he
had taken the lad, to inform his father, that he

had entered into the ſervice of an unknown gentleman; but that he was ſafe, and would be taken

care of. Upon his joining his attendants, the
Duke gaveorders, that theboy fhould travelwith
them to Turin upon his own aſs, without any
change of garb. Young Samon, for fo he was
called, was aſtoniſhed to find, that hisnew maſter

was no less than the Duke of Savoy; but at the
ſametime no leſs pleaſed at having ſecuredthe favour of his fovereign.
The

:

80

THE HISTORY OF

The Duke hadhardly get two ſtages, before a
man in great agitation came riding up, and begged to speak with the gentleman, upon urgent
buſineſs. On being told, that the gentleman he
enquired for was the Duke, he seemed much

ſurpriſed ; but going immediately up to him .
" Noble Prince, (faid he) may the lowest of
your ſubjects prefume to requeſt the return of a
fon?" The Duke upon underſtanding his errand,
told him thathis ſon ſhould be taken great care of,

and promoted in his ſervice. The old man did
not feem pleafed-he was embarraffed ; and ſtill
repeated his requeſt: but the Duke, at laſt ſeeming to be diſpleaſed with the inconfiderateneſs of

the father, in, preventing the promotion of his
child, theold man faid with some emotion- " Не

is not what he ſeems, he is of a noble family."
Surpriſed at this eclairciſſement, the Duke, advancing from his attendants, and taking the old
manafide, gained the information he wantedconcerning the boy, and gave him the title of the
Marquis of Vigniola, a title, however, which
waswithout an citate, for the old Marquis had loſt
Lis eftate in the inſurrection, which had fome

years before happened in Savoy. There certain-

lywas fomething myſtericus inthe intelligence given by the oid man, but the Duke would never
divulge it..

The youngMarquis was taken to Court, raiſed
to a ſmall poft for his maintenance, entered in the

Ducalacademy, and was brought up in the practice of genteel exerciſes. At fixteen the Duke

gave him a commiſſion in his own regiment of
foot, and found from repeated converſations with

him, that he had gained a treasure in the youth,
who had made an uncommon progreſs in all his
exerciſes, and was become a good ſcholar. His
perfon
1

81

JULIA BENSON.

perſon was above the common ſize, and his air
and carriage diftinguiſhed him even in the midst of
a court. He was promoted gradually, till he had
a regiment given him. Awar breaking out, in
which the Duke of Savoy took part with the ene-

mies of France; the Marquis of Vigniola had
many opportunities of ſignalizing his courage ;
and being entrusted with several commands of im-

portance, he became an excellent foldier, and was
much depended on by his master.
In this war the Marquis was preſent at the taking of a townby ſtorm in Piedmont, and uſed his
utmoſt endeavours to reſtrain the barbarities fo

commonly practised on thoſe horrible occaſions. He
was calling the foldiers off from a purfuit, when
a tumult at a convent attracted his notice.

He

hurried to the gates, fearing left the men ſhould
break in. He found the Lady Abbess and her
nuns indreadfulconfternation, expecting the greateſt evils, from a party of foldiers which were
plundering their hall. He pacified them, drove
out the fellows, and restored their tranquility, but
loft his own-He fell in love with a nun ; and en-

gaged in an intrigue, which might have been of
dangerous conſequence. Ihave heard feveral particulars of this affair, which were not, upon the
whole, to his honour.

In the reign of Charles Emanuel II. King of
Sardinia, he was fent upon an important buſineſs
into that iſland, to meet the ſtates of it ; but was,

in the voyage, takenby a Turkish galley, and carried prifoner to Conſtantinople; there he reſided
but a little time, as he ſoon gained his liberty ;
but he was there long enough to be concerned in

ſeveral intrigues, which were near being fatal to
him.

7

After a life of uncommon activity, the King
made

82

THE HISTORY OF

made him his ambaffador extraordinary to Great
Britain, with a confiderable appointment. On

his preparing for his embaſſy we were at Turin,
and Mr. Melliſh having been before introduced to
him, the friendſhip commenced between them
was easily cemented from a ſimilarity in their characters ; for the Marquis de Vigniola is of an
open generous temper, which is not often found

with the highest poliſh that politeneſs can give ;
but they are united in him in a manner that could

not fail of pleaſing my uncle, who gave him excellent information concerning the ftate of England, which proved of much ufe tohim.

Tuefday.

The Marquis, my dear Emilia, paid me a
friendly viſit this morning, for which I think myfelf much indebted. He converſes with all the

fire and vivacity of youth ; and is as keen and
penetrating inhis remarks and obfervations, as if

he had lived in England halfhis life. I was defirous of knowing what he thought of the nation.
Why, madam, (he replied) the Engliſh are

aſenſiblegenerous people, from whom more valuable individuals may be felected than from any
people in theworld. But your mob is very extenſive. I think there are more inferior charac-

ters to befound in every company a man of rank
can frequent, than can be met with in moſt other
countries."
66

But yourexcellencydoes not fufficientlyconſider that the appearance of inferior characters,
which offend you, is not owing to their abounding more in this country, than in others, but to
the

JULIA BENSON.

83

the greater liberty enjoyed here ; which is in its
effects ſo intimately connected with all ranks of
people,their aſſemblies, their actions, their manners, and their amusements ; that you can produce no inſtance of national character which is

not materially affected byit. In countries where
the power of the fovereign is arbitrary, ranks are
much clearer distinguished. People that have accidentally become rich, do not mingle with thofe
of the noblest birth ; of course, you fee few or
none of thoſe characters, which are obſervable in
allEnglish affemblies .".

" But this reasoning, madam, which however

I admit to be juſt, only provesſeveral evils inſtead
ofone. This liberty, about which you are fo
intereſted, is productive of the evil of which I
complain, but the existence of the evil you do
not attempt to contradict. It, muft undoubtedly
much affect the national character ; for foreigners cannot difcriminate aniong the various members of a numerous aſſembly, or the perfons that

form the ſmalleſt parties. It would be ridiculous
to go to the lowest of the vulgar for a national character.

The liberal and fair method is to mingle

with the beſt company, and draw your conclufion

from what you fee atthe politeſt aſſemblies. If
liberty, empties the kennel into the drawing-room
of the Prince, or the affemblies of the great, the

maſs there found mut certaitly be taken as the fair
repreſentative of the nation ; and if vulgar characters abound, vulgarness will, in a certain meafure, be the ſtigma on the country atlarge. Nor
can it be replied, with any degree of propriety,
that a foreigner ſhould not form his ideas from
ſuch mixed affemblies ; but distinguiſh the polite
from the low.

If that was to be the criterion,

the enquiry would end in reducing all nations to a
level,

84

THE HISTORY OF

level, by finding that there were many excellent

individuals in every one; and therefore Italy and
Sweden, Spain and Poland, would all appear in
the fame light."

"But I think your excellency confines yourſelf
too much to the higher ranks of people. The

lower ones, even the mob (as they are called) demand attention ; they are a very material part of
the nation ; and the distinctions of national character are to be found among them much more
readily than among their betters. The fuperior
claſſes in all countries are like the excellent individuals you mentioned. They are every where
pretty much the fame ; travelling, reading, liberal intercourse with one another, tend to give a
ſameneſs to their characters ; but nature is left
to work her own effects in the lower claſſes.

Ac-

cordingly we fee a very strong distinction among
thoſe of every nation. And this difference is, I
think, that which alone deſerves the name of

distinctions, with respect to national character."
" I must own, I hate the licentiouſneſs of your
-lower claffesin England-your liberty, as you are
pleaſed to callit, degenerates into brutality, and
even the most terrible tyranny. In what other
country couldyou ever beholdthe ſpectacle which
I faw the other day ? I met a great mob, with a
well dreffed Italianjust arrived who was walking
from his ſhip which landedhim at London, to his

lodgings. The mob infifted of his acclamations
inpraise offome favourite oftheirs, but thegentheman understanding nothing they said, could not
comply. Asa punishment for which they rolled
him three times in a moſt filthy kennel, till he
was almoſt ſmothered. Isaw the poor wretchjuft
as he escaped from their hands, and figured to
myself the fentiments he must have of a nation
which

1

JULIA BENSON.

85
which calls itſelf civilized, but allows its mob to

givea foreigner, the moment he is landed ſo cor-

dial a reception. Allthings are to be judged of
by their effects, not their qualities ; the latter
looks only to what ought to be, butthe former is
the reſult of experience. How can ſuch liberty
be praiſed, while it ſubjects you to the moſt deteſtable tyrranny ? "
" I am very clear that liberty is the greatest
bleſſing any nation can enjoy, but it would be
prepoſterous toaſſert that it is unattended with
evils. Your Excellency ſpeaks not ofliberty, but
the abuſe of liberty ; for which reaſon you prefer
an arbitrary to a limited government. But, my
Lord, are there not evils much greater under the

tyranny of a monarch ? what wretched poverty
andmifery among all the lower claſſes ! what regular oppreſſion from the monarch downwards,
which, like the encreaſing velocity of a defcend-

ing weight, lights at laſt, ſo heavily on theheads
ofthepoor, as to grind them into wretchedneſs !
Befides, all countries have now and then their

mobs, and some ofthem, a mob much more to be
dreaded than our's. Every county has individuals
among the lower people that are a ſcandal to fociety. Government may prevent the commiffion
ofgreat vices, but it cannot make wicked men
good. Another point, fir, that is not to be forgotten, is acommon blunder made in all countries,
that of judging of the national character by the

inhabitants of the capital. Great cities every
where contain the worst people of awhole country; they attract all the ill humours of the ſtate,
as certainly as the magnet attracts the iron. You
must go to the provinces to fee the characters of

he lower claffes, you willnot there find mobs, or
H

fcarcely

86

THE HISTORY OF

ſcarcely any of that brutality, which ſo much
offends you here."
" Pardon me, madam ; I grant the country is
free from mobs ; but I have made ſeveral excur-

ſions from London to the feats of ſome of the

nobility ; and I have obſerved, in the country,
the fame inſolence and brutality, that I fee at
London , in proportion to their numbers. Ihave
beenwith an Engliſh Earl, who has been forced
to make way for a couple ofclowns. I have been
driven into a ditch by the impudence of awaggoner,
And in a ſhort reſidence I made in Surry, not
long fince, I found that the only method of keepingmyſelf free from the ſuperiorities of the lower
rabble, was to avoid all meetings, or intercourſe

with them; confidering them as ſo many tygers
let loose to devour every body better than themſelves. In a walk I took with Lady L. fhe had a
favourite Italian greyhound with her. We met
three ruſtics, the dog did not make way time
enoughforgentlemen ofſuch importance. One

of them kicked the poorbeaſt with infinite brutality. I was advancing to cane the raſcal, but
they all three ſet themselves in array, with their
tools intheir hands, and would have deftroyed me,
hadI attempted it ; atthe fame time making ufe
ofcurfing and abuse, which ſeems to be the only

language they are perfectly maſters of. Now,
Madam, is this liberty deſirable ? Is it neceſſary to

nurſe up theſe vipers by the foftering hand of
liberty, in order to ſting thoſe, who gave them

this precious privilege of licentiouſneſs ?"
The Marquis continued for ſome time vehe-

mently inveighing against Engliſh freedom. He
carries his ideas of it to exceſs, but I am not at all

furpriſed at it. All foreigners, who have been
here, agree in the fametale ; and think the tyranny

JULIA BENSON.

87

nyof a great monrch and his nobles infinitely preferable to that ofthe ſcum ofthe earth. But,
from theobſervations Imade in travellingthrough

countries,where deſpotifm reigned, I am convinced
that the evils of which they complained, are but

light andpaffing clouds in abeautiful hemisphere ;
whereas incountries differentlygoverned,the whole
ſky is one dark cloud of misery, and defpair. At
the fame time I must allow that the infolence of

our common people is beyond all example and all
bounds-and that the liberty oftheir ſuperiors, is
to the full as equivocal, while they are allowed

thisdangerous licentiouſneſs, as theirs wouldbe,
if trampledon like their brethren in France.
:

Adieu, my dear Emilia,
I remain truly yours,
L

JULIA BENSON.
T

LETTTER

XV.

Mr. MELVILL to Mr. FREDERICK.

dear friend, ſhe hasleft us, and with
MY
her is goneallmy happineſs. While I had
the pleaſure of being in her company, love was

a regular fource of delight to me, but now she is
gone I feel ſuch an inanity ofbeing, ſuch an inquietude ofheart, that I find the force of my pafſion ſtronger every day. This woman is certainly the moſt amiable ofher sex. I must give you

afresh inſtance of that generous ſpirit, which
diftinguiſhes all her actions ; Itold you in a former letter, that Lord C. had promifed to remem-

ber my brother in the next promotion of officers ;
and I fent the lad to wait on him by way of
H'2

reminding

88

THE HISTORY OF

reminding his Lordſhip. His reception was very
cool, and the promotion was made, but nothing
in it for Bob.

Soon after a commiſſion was ſent

me for him, of an enfigncy in the fifty-fixth ;
and in a fortnight after a vacancy among the
lieutenants happening, a purchase was made, and
the commiffion likewiſe ſent me . I was fur-

priſed at both theſe unexpected events. Being in
thecountry Icould not wait on Lord--to thank

him for this great mark ofhis favour ; but on

my return Iwent immediately to pay my acknowledgments. His Lordſhip was in ſome confufion,
but replied, that he knew nothing of thematter :
upon which I retired. It then ſtruck me that theſe
commiſſions were owing to the generofity of Miſs
Benfon. I droveimmediately to her houſe, and

uponmy beginning to thank her for this uncommonmark of her generosity, ſhe ſtopped me
haftilywith ſaying,

"Pray, Mr. Melvill, ſpeak no more of this
matter- I am much more indebted to you and

your good fifter for receiving meſo hofpitably,
than your brother can poſſibly be to me for this
trifle."

"Madam, ſuchunboundedgenerofityconfounds
me
-I--

" Iftheyouth doesnot turn out very brave,I

ſhall bevery unlucky in my recommendation."
Iwas endeavouring further to expreſs my acknowledgments,but the changed the converſation
in a peremptory manner. Oh ! Frederick, her

manner ofſaying and doing everything is enchan
ting ; it is the very reverſe of affectation.
Friday,

Yeflerday a gentleman defired to speak with
me,

89
JULIA BENSON.
me, and uponbeing ſhewn up, he enquired for

Miss Benfon ; I told him, she did not reſide at
myhouse.

"( Nay replied he ) itdoes not ſignifydenying
it. Ihavebuſineſs of great confequence to communicate to her, andI know very well the lives
with you."
66

Idefire, fir, to have no fuch freedoms-

Whatdoyoumean by denying it ? Do you give
me thelye ?"

" Itmatters not altercating. If, as I fuppofe,
you are a particular friend ofher's,itimports much
that you bring meto her."

"Let me know your buſineſs, and I willtake
careandconvey it to her."
"That will notdo-where is the ?"

" Inform me from whence you came, and on
what buſineſs ??

So now ! - Isit notplain from your intereſting
yourself fo muchin her buſineſsthat ſhelives with

you ?

She is now in the houſe, I ſuppoſe ?"

"No ſuch matter, and I would in an inſtant

inform you where she was, had
. I not reason,
from the ſtrangeness of your addreſs to ſuppoſe
you meantno good

Meant no good ! What do you mean, fir ?Iwill on'y letyouknow thatMissBenfonis in amoſt
perilous fituation, from which the can only ef
cape by drawing her purfe- ſtrings freely to me."
Looking upon him either as an impoftor or

the agentofa mifchief, Idiſmiſſed him in avery
abrupt manner ; but as I liked not his behaviour,

nor his errand, I went immediately to Pall-Mall,
to advise Miss Benfon of the adventure, and to

fee iftheapprovedofmy conduct.Uponmy relating
to her the affair, the laughed, and faid the knew
not what it could be, unless a trick of Sir George
Milbourn's
H3

90

THE HISTORY OF

Milbourn's in revenge for her diſappointing him
in the Sampher's .

"But ( added ſhe) I will go to Iſlington, and
ſee whether they have had any reaſon to be
alarmed." I offered my ſervice to attend her,

which the accepted. She rung for her coach, and
we drove off thither. All was quiet and happy
with that unfortunate mother and her daughter,
and ſo the matter ended.

I know not what to

think of it-the stranger had the appearance of
ſomething about him that would giveone the idea

ofhis havingreal buſineſs, though fuch as could
not be communicated. I ſhall, however, keep
openthis letter till I have freſh intelligence, that

ifany thing extraordinary ſhould happen I may
have an opportunity ofinferting it.
Wednesday Morning.

Frederick, I am half afraid that there is fome
miſchief brooding. Miss Benfon has received a
citation at law, on the behalf of her brother, in

Doctors Commons to prove and affign over the
amount of all the legacies the received from Mrг.
Melliſh . This is in conſequence of a will, faid to
be found, of a later date,than that under which
ſhe inherited. I conſulted her upon her opinion
reſpecting this affair ; and, from what ſhe ſays,
Ihave not adoubt but this pretended will is all
a forgery. I find the inherited more than thitty
thousand pounds from Mr. Melliſh, which, by

theway, I remember ſherepreſented as only five ;
for what reason I know not. She says her brother has always cordia'ly hated her that ſhe
has nodoubt ofthe fame want of esteem from her
father,
24

91
JULIA BENSON.
father, and that her old lover, Mr. Slingſby, the
ſuppoſes would come into any meaſure that could

poſſibly flatter his avarice. In wl at manner they
canhaveunitedtheir villainy ſo far as to combine

in fuch a plot as this, ſhe cannot comprehend ;
but it is certain that it must be as diabolical a piece
ofvillainy as ever was heard of.
The stranger that called at my houſe, and had

that remarkable converſation certainly had fome
knowledge of this affair. I now repent very much
that Idid not direct him to Miss Benson's ; butit

was impoſſible to judge etherwise at the time. I
adviſed her immediately to confult the beſt council in London, which thedetermined todo inime-

diately, and as ſecurity against the worst evils to
retainthe moſt famous pleaders inher cauſe. She

ſeems to hold the whole affair in great contempt,
but I must own, I like not the appearance of fuch
adventures.

Miſs Benfon is a little alarmed- from an accu-

rate examination into the allegations of her adverfary, he seems to have fortified his out-works with
fuch a wall of witneſſes, that if they are hardenedvillains, as ſheſuppoſesthem, matters may poffibly run in an unfavourable channel. The trial wil
come on in three weeks .

I tremble at the event

of ſuch an attack, even in idea; for it implies at
leaſt a hope of her antagoniſt that he may carry
his point ; and, from the ſeverity with which a
forgery is puniſhed by our laws, that hope, one
wouldthink, cannot be flight, or they would never proceed to the poſſibility of a detection. This
amiable woman, though frightened at her know

ledge of this unnatural brother's temper, yet cannot be perfuaded that it is a caſe from which real
danger

92

THE HISTORY OF

danger may flow. She seems too fecure in her
confciouſneſs of the undoubtedjustice of her cauſe,
and from the remembrance ofthe contempt which

Mr. Melliſh always had for all her family. She
knowsthat ſhe alone was the only perſon in it for
whom he ever teſtified the least eſteem.

In a

word, ſhe is clear that thewhole is a vile forgery,
and thinks that the truth can hardly fail of coming to light fooner or later.

You may eafily ſuppoſe that I intereſt myself
not a little in thiscaufe. I run perpetually to her
lawyers, and take every meaſure with them to
ſearch into and examine the pretences of her infernal brother.

Adieu--you ſhallhear again from me foon,
if poffible.

.1

RICHARD MELVILL.

LETTER

XVI.

Sir PHILIP EGERTON to Lord WILLIAM W-

lately had a rencounter, towhich I muſt
IHave
defire your Lordſhip to give attention ; and

that you may form an adequate idea of the affair,
I shall give you a full detailof it.
Tuesday night, in a lounging humour, I went
to a masquerade which our club gave at Almack's;
Iwas not in a difpofition for the impertinences

which usually disgust one at theſe meetings. I was
only in a domino, that I might have the better

opportunity of obferving the folly of others, and
be the lefs befpattered by it myself. After a few
turns I remarked a maſque prettily fancied, that
affumed the character of Beatrice, ſhe attracted

not my notice alone, for I obſerved a eroud of
Bene-

JULIA BENSON.

93

Benedicksin pursuit of her. There was a fome-

thing in herair, manner, and carriage, that were
remarkably ſtriking ; more grace and elegance
= could not be diſplayed under an aſſumed character.
Her appearance, at a ſmall diſtance, made me follicitous to know if the attracted her attendants.

merely by the fineness of her figure, or whether
herwit could keep up a character, which seemed
to have put Shakespear's to the ſtretch. I approached within hearing, and while ſhe was in full
play upon three or four of her followers. I do
not remember a ſcene, that ever pleaſed me more.
Nothingcould exceed the ſprightlineſs of her wit.
Amaſque in the character of Benedick, thought
it incumbent on him to attack every Beatrice in the
room ; and, being a likely little fellow, he had
made his part good with two or three of them ;
when, eſpying this ſtranger, he openedhis trench-

es, but they were levelled in a moment. The
figure of one was ridiculous; the dulness of another ; the mistakes of a third ; the ignorance of a
fourth ; and with ſo ſuperior a ſtrain of humour,
and ſuch flashes of wit, that none could be found
that would have ſtood the encounter for a moment,
had the ſhame been viſible in their countenance .

" Beatrice, (faid I) you over-act your part,
you forget that Benedick alone is not only to appear
-but Benedick the married man, and where's the

he that willbe Benedick of fuch atermagant! "

" Oh, your ſex is ſo full ofwit, thatBenedicks
will riſe up like mushrooms."
" True ; and exiſt as long ; you cutthem off

with ſuch keen wit, you toſs them up with ſuch
high flavoured ſauce that they --

" I find them moſt unpalatable morſels, but I
ſuppoſe you , Signior--"

"Aye to be fure!-you have a mind what
to fee

94
THE HISTORY OF
what a ragoo you can make of my brains; but
ſtop that merciless tongue;-the arbour ſcene is

paft ; you mar your character, if you turn not
!

out a moſt kind nymph."

" Andyou are the fighing fimpleton thatwants
to experience my kindness.-"
" Beatrice muſt at last give with one hand a
kind jeſt, and with the other a ſtill kinder heart."

" Benedicks that deſerve ajeſt are easily found,
but where's he that merits the heart of Beatrice ?"

" Keep it yourself, Beatrice, but remember it
3

is a perishable commodity."
" Should I lay it by in Lavender to be brought
out like a faded ribbon, and worn as a favour at

the marriage of the antiquated Benedick ! Truly
itwould then begood enough for him."

-" Iwillhave nothing to ſay to hearts, that are
manufactured like a face. But here is adance,

Beatrice, if youhave as much grace in your motion, as wit in your conversation, I proteft you
ſhallbemyBeatrice."
" I accept the challenge, but ſhall never claim
the reward."

She danced like an angel to that uncommon

degree of fuperiority, as drew the eyes of the
whole room ; retiring prefently to afofa;where Iwas
begining to complimenther onher dancing, when
an awkward old woman approaching in a domino,

and whispering fomething to her in a mumbling
voice, Ijuſt overheard

Indeed, Miss Benfon, it

is not ;" I ſtarted at this found, which ſtruck me

all-a-heap, " Zounds (thought I) if this thould

be Lord William's Miss Benfon ! " I was just going bluntly to queſtion her, but fearing to miſs
my aims if I was impetuous, I thought it would

be the ſafer way, under the idea of its being her,
to examine her as far as I could, and bring her off
from

JULIA BENSON.

95

from the flippancy of her aſſumed character.
** There goes a maſque, (faid Igravely) the very
figure of a friend of mine I left two years ago at
Florence."

She turning quickly to me, ſaid, " was you at
Florence at that time, Sir ? "
" Yes, Madam; one of the happiest periods of

my life was a pretty long reſidence I made in Italy; I ſtaid some time at Florence, where I contracted fome friendſhips I shall adhere to through
life."

" With ſome Italian Beatrice's I fuppofe ; and

you will remember them just as your ſex generally
do. The Italian ladies deſerve better."

" No madam; my friendſhips were not ſo general, nor werethey among the ladies only.-Butmadam, were you ever acquainted with many Italians ?"
" A few."

" Perhaps,you have been in Italy ? "
" I have. "
( Lord William's Mifs Benfon
by this light! exclaimed I to myſelf.)
" And at Florence ? "..

" Yes ; I was at Florence ſome months."

" I proteſt this is the moſt agreeable intelligence
in the world ; I have an hundred old friends to
talk of. Will you favour me with your name ! "
" Beatrice, fir, at your ſervice ; I am not
among your old friends ; or you must have been
very dull in recollecting them."

" Well madam, you will excuſe my freedom,
but I remember a Mr. and Mrs. Jenkinson at Flcrence, with whom I ſpent many happy hours ;
do you remember them ? "
" Not the leaft."

" There was alſo a Mr. Melliſh, one of the
moſt ſenſible and accomplished men the age has
produced.

96

THE HISTORY OF

produced. " (Thiswas touching a key which I

thought would make her betray herself; and fo

I thought it did, for the appeared agitated, ſhe
however aſked,)

" Did you know Mr. Melliſh ? "
"Yes , Madam ; I knew him well ; nor did I
ever meet witha man from whoſe converſation I

profited ſo much."
"heardmuch ofthat Mr. Melliſh ; but I think,
if I recollect right, he left Florence before Iwent
there."

"He had alfo a niece with him who was, with-

out exception, the most beautiful woman inItaly ;

if her eyes did not effect the conquest of the
beholder, he could have no chance to eſcape her
wit."

"A formidable lady truly!"
"Much more amiable than formidable ; the

was the moſt fingular woman I ever met with.
A moſt ſtrangeaccident drove her from Florence,
and whether Mr. Meliſh carried her I could never
learn."

" Methinks youwas not a very gallant admirer, tolet her eſcape ſo easily. But what ſtrange
accident could drive her from Florence in ſuch
haſte ?"

" Why, madam, the talewould have the appearanceof a romance ; I was no profeſſed admirer ; but intereſted myself in the affair , on

account of aparticular and moſt valuable friend ;
ayoung nobleman(here ſhe began to flutter ) then
on his trave's (yet more) who conceived ſo violent

apaſſion for her (thewas now quite agitated, but
I ſeeming to take no notice of it, went on) fo fervent and fincere a flame

"

" Sincere a flame (with much emphasis)."
Sincere a flame, Madam ! what do you apprehend

JULIA BENSON .

97

prehend there is no fincerity in love ? "
"Not much, fir, I believe in the love of which

you are ſpeaking ; I heard fomething obfcurely of
fuchan affair, but the lady Iunderstand was very
bafelytreated."
" She thought ſo, madam, Mr. Melliſh thought
fo, and half Florence thought ſo; but it was all

a delufion, (here ſhe began again to flutter) perhaps we speak ofdifferent gentlemen ; the man
Imean is Lord William W." (notwithstanding
all this preparation, the mentioning your name
took away her breath ; I could fee ſhe was affected, and held a ſmelling bottle to her nofe.)
" It is the ſameI have heard of, fir ; but Ibe-

lieve it grows late ;--" (getting up to retire.)

" No, madam ; you must allow me to intreat
you to let me explain this matter more fully : perhaps you may accidentally meet the lady, or hear
of her among your acquaintance ; it would be
acting a humane part to undeceive ſo valuable a
woman. Lord William W. fince that unhappy
affair, has not known peace or reſt. He is vio-

lently in love with her to this day ; refuses to
engage in a match of great advantage, which the
Duke his father has preſſed him to--leads a
miferable retired life, becauſe he can learn no

tidings of Mifs Benfon. "

" I must beg tobe excused taking all you fay
literally ; I heard enough of the affair to be convinced that Miss Benfon was cruelly ufed ; and
doubtless fuch a woman as you repreſent her, can
never forgive inſults of that nature."
"Madam , I fufpect from yourconverfation that
you are fome intimate friend ofthe lady in queftion. Will you be open and impartial enough to
give me ameeting at any proper place, and I

will lay before you a feries of letters, that have
I

paſſed

1

98

THE HISTORY OF

paffed between his Lordſhip and me, many of
them of fuch old dates and ſo regular and confiftent, that you shall not doubt his innocence."
" I confefs , fir, Iam intereſted in the welfare

ofthelady you mention, and I can tell you a very
easymethodoffeeing her, which is by calling any
morning at 12 o'clock at her own house in PallMall."

" I will undoubtedly be there to-morrow, in
the mean time I take my leave. "
The next day I was at Miſs Benfon's door
2

punctually at twelve. By the way, my Lord, is
it not extremely ſtrange, that ſhe ſhould have a
houſe in ſo public a ſtreet of London, and conſequently mustbe known by many of her uncle's
friends, and yet they never ſhould have heard
any tidings of her ? Upon enquiring ofthe fervant, ifMiss Benſon was at home ? and being

answered in the affirmative, I was ſhewn up ſtairs.
In the dining-room, which was the cabinet for
themuſes, I found (without any exception) the
moſt engaging beautiful woman I ever met with.
Had I not known my friend's paſſion I had loft
my own heart in an inſtant. She received me
withgreatpoliteneſs,mingled with a certain haughtineſs, like that of a Sovereign giving audienceto
the ambaflador of a conquered Potentate.
"You doubtless know, madam, the buſineſs
on which I am come to trouble you ; aLady
laft night at the --"

" To undeceive you, fir, and make your intelligence the clearer, I ſhall inform you that I am
that Lady you had the conversation with laſt
night."

" I am extremely glad to hear it, madam, for

you willbe thebetter able to examineme, relative
to the declarations I then made you. "
0

"In

JULIA BENSON.

99

" In the firſt place, fir, you will favour me with
yourname."

" Sir Philip Egerton."

" I must beg leave to inform you, Sir Philip,
that Ithink myfelf treated in the moſt ignominious manner by Lord William W. that unless

you clear up, to my full fatisfaction, the mysteriesyou mentioned last night, I thall confiderycur
preſent buſineſs not as a very honourable one."
" You must allow me, madam, to request the
particulars that gave the offence in the conduct of
Lord William W. for they are, to the fullasmyfterious to him, as his conduct can be toyou.
Andfrom whatyou mention I shall be the better
able to fatisfy you of the profs I have brought
ofthe fincerity of his profeffions."
"Before I do that, fir, or proceed any further
in thisaffair, I must be informed of his Lordſhip's

}

preſent ſituation, his ſentiments, & c."

" That I can give you in a few words , madam .
Totally a stranger to the reafon of your fudden

abſence from Florence, till he gathered fome
particulars which made him charge the miſchief
to the machinations of an old enemy, he has
never ceased tobe the most miferable of mankind.

He fell ill of a violent fever at Florence, before
he could follow you to Venice. That fever
which reduced him to the brink of the grave, for

twelve months, was totally owing to ſo cruel a
difappointment. Itprevented him ever finding out
where you had retired to. He continues to this

hour anunhappy man, and merely on account of
the lofs of you."
66

How could this be the cafe, Sir Philip,when
my uncle Mr. Melliſh not only fent him a chal;

lenge,but pursued him, through half Italy ?"
" So, madam, Lord William W. was informed.
12:

But.

100

THE HISTORY OF

But it was a moſt egregious mistake. He never
received a challenge, nor even an unkind word ;
and, at the very time in which Mr. Melliſh
thought he was pursuing him, his Lordſhip was
confined, between Rome andFlorence, ofwounds
he received from aſſaſſins hiredto destroy him by
the fame enemy."

"What bitter enemy could this be ? "
" Why, Madam, it was a female of Milan, not
ofthe beſt reputation, with whom Lord William
W. had an affair morethan a year before he ſaw
you.

He had visited her under the idea of her

being perfectly modeſt; it was never his character to connect himselfwith the vicious part of the

ſex. Afterwards, finding he had been deceived,
ſhe disappointed, it may be ſuppoſed in golden
hopes, perfecuted him with a moſt enterpriſing

ſpirit of violent revenge. She hired affaſſins to
killhim, atthe same time that she took effectual
meaſures to break the connection between his

Lordſhip and you. How ſhe effected that deſign
he was never able to diſcover ; but from what he
could pick up at different times, he found that
the had procured a man to perfonate him, who
fled from Mr. Melliſh after the pretended challenge.

Several letters his Lordſhip wrote to

Venice to you were, he ſuppoſed, delivered, but
is not certain of that

.”

" I never received. any."
" She doubtless had her emiſſaries about you

both, and took ſpecial care todeceiveyou equally.
" I never heard ſo villainous an affair ; but

ſtill, fir, it remains very myſterious. Ihave doubts
that hurt me not a little."

" Madam, this correſpondence, which hascontinued for fome years, will clear up all your
doubts. Ihave here arranged all his Lordſhip's
letters

IOI
JULIA BENSON.
letters to me for three years paſt, including a

period before he had the happiness ofbeing acquainted with you-here you will fee his youthful flights, his follies, the ſecrets of his heart, laid

open with the unreſerved freedom of private
friendſhip. Believe me, madam, I would not
truft theſe letters to the eye of any other in the
univerſe ; and least of all to yours, if Iwas not

clear in the ſtate of his Lordſhip's heart.-Did I
not know paſt all doubt, that you reign there with
uncontrouleddominion, I ſhouldnever venture to
take this ſtep. The letters are too numerous to

be read at preſent ; I will leave them with you

madam, and waiton you to-morrow for them."
" I must' confefs, fir, there is an ingenuouſneſs

in this conduct, that much pleaſes me; and I
ſhall peruſe the letters with fatisfaction."

" Iknow from my friend's conversation, Miſs
Benfon, thatyou are a lady of ideas much fuperior
to the punctilious conduct ſo common inthe ſex.

Will you permit me, on the behalf of his Lordſhip, to put a queſtion to you ? ‫י‬
" Frankly ; Iwill.

" Is your heart as much difengaged from other
connections, as when Lord William W. was in

your good opinion ? "

Upon my honour it is. Resentment at the
injurious treatment, Ithought Ihad receivedfrom

him, gave me an antipathy to the sex, which has
not for a moment been changed."
" I am fatisfied, Madam."
" There was however one circumſtance in this
affair, which I obſerved in your account of it, that

difpleaſed me greatly ; the Duke is very defirous
of his fon's marrying a Lady, whoſe great eſtate
1

is
:

you;
" That cannotbe the ſmalleſt objection towhile
13

while

102-

THE HISTORY OF

while his grace preſſed his Lordſhip, upon that
head, he had abſolutely deſpaired of meeting with
you, and had no connection with any other Lady.
The Duke knew not half the hiſtory of his acquaintance with you ; only that he had a connection with an Engliſh Lady at Florence, in which
he exprefly left him to his own direction ; nor did
he ever urge him to another match, tillhe under-ſtood the acquaintance with you was totally broke
off. The Duke, as a moſt indulgent father, has
more than once said to me, that he ſhouldbewell

contented, if Lord William W. would marry an
amiable woman, had the not a shilling ; but he

couldnot help being ſurpriſed at his refuſal of a
moſt advantageous match with an unexceptionable
woman, while he was unconnected with any
other."

" The conversationlaſtingfor somehours, Mifs

Benfon was informed that dinner would be ready

in a quarter of anhour, ſhe defired my company,
which I readily afſented to; and, retiring to dreſs,
left me with her books for entertainment.

Itis with the utmoſt ſatisfaction I congratulate
your Lordſhip upon my finding this moſt accom-

pliſhed woman ; truly ſhe is worthy of you. I
think the is extremelybeautiful ; butthe turnand
air of herperfonexceed; in my mind, the charms
of all the faces in the world ; but what is much

the moſt ſtriking in her is, her conversation ;
which, upon the who'e, much exceeds that of any
perfon I have met with, male or female. Without any affectation, ſhe ſhews more good ſenfe
than can well be conceived, with a variety, a
knowledge, anda penetration, that independently

of her wit, juftifies you, my Lord, fully in my
eyes, andwould in your father's, was he toknow
her.

2

In

JULIA BENSON.

103

Inthe afternoon Mifs Benfon communicated to

me ſeveral particulars relative to their leaving
Florence, which ſhewed, very plainly, that
Zaffini was the authoreſs of all the mischief that

has happened. I willmention theſe to you, when
I have more time, but atpreſent I am in haſte to
diſpatch this letter, as Iam confident, the receipt

of it will give more pleaſure, than any one you
ever received from

:

Your Lordſhip's

Truly affectionate Friend,
PHIL. EGERTON.

LETTER XVII .
To the Same.

Was in haſte, my Lord, to diſpatch my laſt,
therefore did not wait to give you an account

of a little plan I had formed to bring the Duke
your father acquainted with Miss Benfon. Iwas
certain itwould be a treat of the highest relish to

let him know on what a woman you had placed
your affections.
The day after I was with her I waited on him.
The old man, who had not feen me for fome
:

weeks, accoſted me thus,

" Sir Philip, this wayward fon of mine cannot fettle two hours in a plice: he wrote to me,
not three weeks ago, that he ſhould stay at Paris

three months, and last night I had another lefter
from him to let me know that he was juſt ſetting

out for Montpelier, and is uncertain if he ſhall

not go into Italy before the expiration of theyear,
Sir Philip, write to your friend, and tellhim that
the
{

104

THE HISTORY OF

the heir of a Dukedom and the representative of
an Engliſh county ſhould not spend allhis time in
France and Italy."

" Iwith as well as your grace that he would
come home and fettle for life; but that cannot
betill

"

:

" 'Till he is married-youths of his quality

ought to marry early-what in thename of wonder is of fo much conſequence to the whole fami-

ly as his having heirs to prevent thetitle being

extinct. There is Lady Harriet--"
" Your fon, my Lord, believeme, is onethat
will never marry at all if he does not chooſe for
himself."

" I had rather he would choose for himself than

force me to choose for him ; but while he does

not chooſe at all, furely he might hear plain reafon. The honour of our family induces me to
wiſh he would marry one of an inferior rank rather than not marry at all."

" Your grace cannot furely forget the affair he
was engaged in at Florence.-

Whilehis heartis fixed on the moſt accomplished
womanof her age, of a moſt antient family; and
inexpectation ofa confiderablefortune, what other
engagement can you expect him to enter into ?"

" That affair is no longer an objection. Such
a

match would have made me truly happу,

though, by the way, Sir Philip, he gave fuch an
hyperbolical deſcription of that ſame lady, that I
put nogreat faith in the likeness of the picture.
But she is loft, gone, or dead, and at preſent totally out of the queſtion."
" I am now come togive your grace ſome information relativeto that affair. His lordſhip continues a moſt miferable being to this day, on ac-

count of that lady, and it is now ſo lorg ſince
he

JULIA BENSON.

105

he heard of her that I believe he is in deſpair ;
butbe aſſured, ſhe has made ſuch an impreſſion
on his heart that he will never connect himself

with any other. But, my Lord, Miss Benson is.
now in London- I have found her out."

" Give me your hand, my dear Sir Philip,
you overjoy me with the news." .
Ithen entered into a minute detail of the maf-

querade, and the meeting at Mifs Benfon's ; affuring him, that she was all his fon had ever deſcri-

bed. (The old Duke was in a tranſport ofjoyhe interrupted me every moment, with a thoufand enquiries)-and when I had done, he said,

" Sir Philip, you ſhallcarryme this minute to the
Lady--I will immediately make propoſals to.
her.

:

" My Lord, I came with that deſign, thatyou
might be a witneſs of your ſon's taste. But there
wouldbe too much referve perhaps in the viſit
if she knew you. I wi'l call on her and introduce.
you as a friend of mine, who is defirous of her
conversation. As you are not a young fellow,
there is nothing odd in it. But you must dreſs
without the ſtar and garter, I will call on you my
Lord to-morrow morning."

" No by G-- Sir Philip ; this moment."
Saying this he changed his coat, and walked
away with me to Pall Mall. Miss Benfon was

luckily at home: Lintroduced my friend Mr. Bembridge, as one who was defirous of being acquainted with a lady, of whoſe uncommon ac-complishments he had heardso much. She was
leſs referved than I expected, and I thought I saw
her mind admirably tuned for the day, by the
peruſal of your Lordfhip's letters. She ſupported.
the conversation with fuch a ſolidity, but, with

an eaſe, as appeared perfectly engaging. She
feafoned

106

THE HISTORY OF

featoned it with a thousand good humoured fallies
of wit and fancy. The Duke diſputed with her
on the merits of the Italian poets. She defended

the cause of Tafſo against the ſuperiority ofDante
orArioſto. She entered into a complete criticifm.
on Taffo's imitation of Virgil. From literature
we paffedto thepreſent ſtateofthe countries through

which the had travelled. She made many pertinent and original remarks on the characters of the
different nations of Europe ; and ſeemed rather
inclined to compliment the French with underſtanding life the best. The Duke diſputed the
point, and produced a lively altercation, much, I
could fee, to his fatisfaction.

" But whatever ſuperiority (faid the Duke) is
allowed to the French in the art of paffing life
agreeably ; I think, upon thewhole, madam, the
preference is due to our own country.. Here only

we find real liberty, and thoſe bold and generous
ſentiments which are most worthy of mankind."
" I cannot compliment this country ſo much,
Sir. You have, it is true, more of that fierce

boldness, and capricious freedom in all the purfuits of life, than is found in any other nation.

Liberty cannot be enjoyed without producing
brave and generous ſentiments, but you will, in
no country in Europe, find more numerous inſtances of weakness and even meanneſs.

That liber-

tv which gives energy to every noble fpirit, gives
alfo the reins to every pitiful one: both follow
their inclinations, withoutcontroul ; and produce
that aftoniſhing medley, the British nation. In
which, I think, there is to the full, as much to
blame as to commend. And is it not a very un-

worthy idea of the diſpenſations of Providence,

to ſuppoſe, that every thing great and good is ſhut
up in this little ifle ? I think I have obſerved the
French,

JULIA BENSON.

107

French, Italians, Germans and Dutch with attention, and I think each of them have peculiar

advantages in which they are unrivalled by the
others."

The Duke liftened to all ſhe ſaid with the moſt

eager attention. He changed the converfation

with rapidity, that he might hear her ſentiments
on asmany fubjects as poſſible. Among others he
introduced the conduct of human life, and the

purſuit ofhappineſs. He could not have touched.
a key whichwouldhave founded more music from

Miſs Benfon. She ridiculed the pursuits oflife
with amoſtmanly and expreſſive urbanity : laughed at the idea of happiness flowing from a gratification of the paſſions; from the exertions of
wealth, or the purſuits of ambition ; but obferved that the nearest ſtate to it was, " a certain

mediocrity of life paſſed in eaſe andindulgence,
equallydiſtant from ambition and voluptuouſneſs.
Thegenuine epicurianphilofophywas,thethought,
best adapted to a tranquillife ;butthe more modern

doctrines which were grafted on that ſtock was
utterly inconfiftent with it. But, ſad ſhe, the
luxury and devouring profuſion ofthis age, ren-

der all pleaſures of life abortive, and undermine
every ſyſtem, that in idea promiſes happiness.
Extravagance is the vice of every refined nation ,
and draws with it a train ofconfequences, which
include the whole catalogue of vice and folly. I
know not if a decent and well regulated economy
isnot, at preſent, the fummum bonum of human
life."

I obſerved your fatherwas ſo agitated with his
approbation of Miss Benſon's ideas, which ſhe
offered in the moſt unaffected, modest manner,
that cannot be conceived ; that Iwas fearful he

would every inſtant diſcover himself. To avoid
which,

108

THE HISTORY OF

which, I begged the favour of her gratifying us
with her performance on the harpſicord. She
readily complied, and enchanted the old man,
who, you know, is extremely fond of music. She
ſung and played near an hour a variety ofyour
father's favourite airs, with so much taste and ex-

preffion, that he could fcarcely believe his own
ears. He was easily perfuadedto ſtay to dinner.
Miſs Benfon keeps a plain table, but it ſhews the
elegance ofhertaſte. Every thing excellent ofthe
fort ; nothing expensive. The conversation was
lively, but inſtructive. Mr. Bembridge expreſſed
his wonder at finding a young lady ofher beauty,

wit, accomplishments and fortune, living fingle,
when ſo excellently qualified for rendering a

worthy man happy. You certainly judge very
wrong, (replied the) I am eaſy and contented at

preſent; but how do Iknow what my husband
would be ? Besides, I have certainly contracted

filly habits from being my own miſtreſs, which
would but ill accord with the ruling ſway ofyour
ſex . If I preferve my preſent reſolution I never
ſhall marry."

" You must not keep it, by heaven, Madam ,

oryou will make my fon the moſt miferable of
mortals!".
" Your fon ! "

" It is impoſſible longer to conceal myself.
You see, madam, the father of the man, who is
the moſt unhappy in the world,-of Lord Wil-

liam W---, who has never taſted pleaſure
fince he loft you."
66

Upon my word, Sir, I fcarcely know what

answer to make yourGrace:-this keeping yourſelf concealed is-is-

" Lovely Miſs Benfon ! I concealed myselfin
order to be fully convinced of the truth of my
friend,

109
JULIA BENSON.
friend, Sir Philip Egerton's report, and of the
deſcriptions my fon had given me. Allow me,
madam, to affure you, that I am at this inſtant
the happiest of mankind :-I now ſee my son's
good ſenſe-his taſte andfeeling-Ithankheaven !

he has fixed his affections on a woman worthy of
the firſt nobleman in the land."

" I know not what-my Lord--Your
Grace muſt excuſe--(in ſome confufion.)
" But, Miſs Benſon, is my ſon happy ?-Allow an old man's impertinence to enquire. Have
you been fully undeceived with respect to that vile
miſtake which traduced him in your opinion ?

Has he regained any ſhare inyour heart ? Suffer
the inquietude of a father, anxious for the happineſs of aworthy child. Be ingenuous-tell me,
Miſs Benfon, what has my lord to expect ? You
are the arbitreſs of his fate

of the fate of our

family."
1

" Your Lordſhip overwhelms me with confuſion.

I know not what to anſwer ; but believe

me, my Lord, Ihave the highest eſteem for your
ſon, and am convinced that he was cruelly traduced."

" Thank heaven for this joyful hour ! I have
diſpatched an expreſs to him in the South of
France, and am certain he will fly to England on
thewings of youthful love. Never could he have
fought an alliance that would have been half fo
agreeable, You must allow me, Madam, to pay
my devoirs to you as often as you will admit an
old man's intrusion. Iconſider you as my daughter, as adaughter that will do me honour." .
I never faw your father in ſuch extacies. The
tears flowed plentifully down the cheeks of the
amiable Julia; it was inleed a moving ſeene :
would to heaven you could have been a witneſs of
K

it.

10
THE HISTORY OF
it. The Duke, unable to expreſs what he felt,

left the houſe abruptly, and, taking me with him,
returned home ; nor would he part with me, but

talked over
ſcenehiswith
fuch enjoyment,
as
thewed
how the
complete
fatisfaction
is. Heis in
raptures with Miss Benſon , ſays ſhe has more underſtanding than half the men he ever converſed
with. " Canyou, (faid he) have a ſtronger inſtance of her incomparable fenfe, than her pofſeſſing ſo much learning without the tincture of
affectation ? I shall not have any peace till Lord
William W- returns and makes me, as well
as himself, happy by marrying her.
I would not delay giving you theſe particulars,
which will meet you at Paris in your return ; and

I hopeyou will make allthe expedition that is poffible.
Adieu.
Your fincere Friend,
PHILIP EGERTON'

LETTER

XVIII.

Mr. MELVILL to Mr. FREDERICK.

OU may remember, Frederick, that I men-

Y tioned a strange rencounter I had with a
ſtrange fellow, who came after Miſs Benfon, and
that I predicted miſchief. I was but too true a

prophet, for mischief with a vengeance has hap- pened to the moſt amiable of her fex.
She has loft her trial, and with it much more
than all her fortune, for her brother has laid his

damages, by her poſſeſſion at eight thouſand
pounds, which they aſſerted ſhe had ſquandered

away. This with many other demands coming
on

JULIA BENSON.

IIF

onher atthe moment ſhe had lost her all, has left

her entirely in their power, and the uſe thebeaft
her brother made of it was to throw her immedi-

ately into prifon. It was by accident that I heard
of thefe particulars. I fully propoſed being prefent at the trial, but was fuddenly called out of
town.

When I called at Miss Benfſon's in Pall-

mall, thedoor was opened by an old womanwhom
I had never feen before. I enquired if Mifs Benſon was at home ? " 'This houſe, replied the od

hag, does not belong to her any longer, the is in
priton for more than the can pay."
Judge, my dear Frederick, of the agonies Ifelt
at this thunderbolt of intelligence : Her fituation
was ſo truly pathetic, had the been even a ſtran-

ger, that one must have felt it feverely, much
more when it befel the idol of my foul. To be
hurried from a ſtate of eaſe and affluence, from a

life of the utmoſt elegance, to a dungeon, ſtripped of every penny, and in the power of others,
by a debt of no less than eight thousand pounds,
was altogether ſo pitiable a caſe that it filledme
with horror.
I hastened to her folicitor to know the truth.
He told me that " her brother had carried his cauſe

with a perfect eclat ; by fuch a crowdof witnefles, that there could not be a shadow of doubt

concerning the validity of the will under which
the claimed, and, in a word, that Miſs Benfon

had no hope left." He had humanity enough to
execrate the wretch for not being contented with
what he got, without imprisoning an only fiſter
forwhat it was impoſſible ſhe ſhould ever pay. I
flew immediately to the hateful p'ace that immu-

red the brightest jewel in the creation. The jaifor would not introduce me to her; he had her

expreſs orders, andwasbribed (Iwill answer for
K2

it,

THE HISTORY OF

112

it, to obey them) not, on any pretence, to introduce a creature to her. I offered a guinea, then
three, and then five. But he was inexorable. I

then threatened him moſt bitterly. Thundered in
his ears the illegality of his refusal, and ſwore by
G-that I would immediately profecute him.
The fellow perſiſting in his refuſal brought me a
little to my recollection. I thought she must certainly havegiven theſe inſtructions to the jailor to
keep her from the eyes of inquifitive people,
whoſe prefence would only inſult, but could not
relieve her.

What should I see her for unleſs I

could adminiſter comfort ? Zounds, what did I
come here for without it ?

I left the priſon door, and returning to her folicitor, defired the address of her brother's law-

yer, determining to pay the eight thousand pounds,
themoment I could convert part of my Berkſhire

eftate into money ; or mortgage it for theamount

directly. Withthis reſolution I found him out,
and informing him that I would become immediate ſecurity for Miss Benson's debt, he replied,
butin a furly manner, as if he was not well pleaſed, " that it was paid." Astonished at this, I defired to know by whom ? he replied, " by a Sir
Philip Egerton."
This news gave me a freſh wound. Who is
this Sir Philip Egerton ? faid I to myself. How
long hashe known her ? He must certainly have
beenupon terms of great intimacy, or elfe much
inlove with her, orhe would never pay ſo conſiderable a ſum : he doubtless has seen her, and be-

fore now carried her in triumph from her prifon.
Whither will he carry her ? To his own houſe to
be fure. He will become herfriend, her protector, her

to this !

Oh ! the devil! that it ſhould come

I was distracted.
1

In

F

JULIA BENSON.
113
Inthis moſt cut ng disappointment I returned home to confider of what meaſures I ſhould

take, and ſpent a reſtleſs night without fixing on
ary plan that I approved of. Next day I returned again to the prifon ; thejailor informed me,
the went away last night, " With whom ; "
"With agent'emanin his chariot. "--

Curſethe gentleman, thought I.
" For my part (added the fellow) I never met
with ſuch a strange woman in my life.--She
was as eager to ſtay in a priſon as ever any other
perfon was to get out of one. He came twice,

but I refused him, by her order ; he thenbrought

awarrant for my ſhewing him to her. She would
not go, poſitively, not the ;-and then he went:
away, and brought another warrant, with which

he removed her body from my cuftody."
This was aſtrange account, which I could not
understand. I asked him if he knew whohe was

and whither he was gone ? " He replied,
No. I haftened again to Pall-Mal' , thinking it
might be poſſible to gain fome intelligence ofher
ather ownhouse.

When I came there, the door

was opened by her footman ; I enquired hastily
for his miſtreſs, and putting ſeveral queſtions to
him in a breath, found that she came home laſt

night, but was gee out this morning, andwas
expected at hom to dinner. Her being taken

out ofprisonby agentleman, andnow finding the

に

was at her own houſe again, appeared very
ſtrange and mysterious. I know not what to un-

derſtand by it, Frederick, and ſhall be on the
rack till I find out the real ſtate ofthis complicatedcafe.

Adieu; Iwill write again as foon as Igain any
further information.

Your's,
RICHARD MELVILL.
LET
K3

114

THE HISTORY OF
LETTER

XIX.

Miſs BENSON, to Miſs EMILIA WATSON.
Canefield, Herts .
Y dear Emilia, I have an hiſtory towrite
M you, which will move your pity in favour
ofyour friend : a moſt ſtrange revo'utionhas happened in my fortune, on which I cannot reflect
without the greatest astonishment.

The reafon I have not been ſo punctual lately

in anſwering your letters, was owing to my being
engaged in alaw-fuit with mybrother, for no leſs
than the whole of the fortune I received from

Mr. Melliſh , charged at more than eight thou-

ſand pounds above the real amount. This claim

of mybrother's is founded on a pretended will of
alater date, than that under which I inherited.

Now, my dear Emilia, there could not have been
produced anywriting, which I ſhould be ſo extremly clear was a forgery, as fuch a will. All who
knew my uncle, knew him to be aman incapable
of fobaſe an action, as that of bringing me up in

expectation of an handſome fortune, and then
leaving me abſolutely deſtitute. And in favour of

whom ? Why of a man he always deſpiſed and
treated with as much contempt, as ever proceeded from his amiable temper. I am confident this
willis alla vile forgery.

Mybrothermade good his claim, eſtabliſhed by
the teſtimony offeveralwitneſſes, the credibility
ofthewill he had produced, fo thatby the verdict

he gained, he ftripped me of every thing, and left
me his debtor for more than eight thousand
pounds. As I was unable to pay fuch, or indeed
any fum, he went further and threw me into
prifon.
I wasnot furprized at this ſtroke at all, as I was
clear

JULIA BENSON.
115
clear that his ſucceſs was founded on a most infa-

=

mous villainy. Iſhould have ſuppoſed, that he
would let no opportunity eſcape ofdriving me to
despair, which he doubtleſs hoped would put an
end tomydays-till then, Ido not apprehend he

looks for any full ſecurity in apoffeffion, which
he has acquiredby injustice.

You may easily imagine, my dear Emilia,
what were my feelings at finding myſelf moved
from my own houſe, inwhich I enjoyed myself
in no illiberal manner, to a prifon. Iwas full of
reflection-andin the moſt irreſolute, undetermi-

ned ſtateof mind, I ever thought it was poſſible I
could experience. My future prospect of life was at

once clouded with an impenetrable gloom. The
priſonwas at once ſtripped of its horrors, when I
reflected that Icould not leave it, but to lead a

dependent life, the ſport ofthoſe I hated, or a burthen to them I loved. The prison was a ſtate of
happiness, compared with that refinement ofmiſery felt by ſo many, who seem to be at liberty.

Imeditated as deeply on my fate, and with as
clear amind as my ſituation would allow, and
what was the event ofmy ideas I have forgotten.
But I indulged, with some little horror, the

thought ofputting a period at once to my mifery,
andmylife.
Suicide may be condemned by divines, but it
appears not to me to be at all inconfiftent with
the principles offound philoſophy. A perfon, it
is ſaid, has no power over their own life. This is

the language of fophiftry. Pray what power have
they over the lives ofcriminals ? or what is the
power of one army over another, they are going
to ſlaughter ? Force alone is power; but the legality of using that force, is much clearer in a

woman's putting aperiod to her own miferable
exiſtence,

116

THE HISTORY OF

exiſtence, than in mankind, who by the violent,
the refined ſyſtems of wars and laws, cut the
throats ofone another. It is idleto raiſe objections against an act, which are equally ſt ong
against a thousand others that are common and allowed of.

Iwas apprehenſive ofbeing enquired for at the
prifon. From my laſt letter, my dear Emilia,
you understood the uncoinmon viſit I had received
from the Duke of

, with the converſations

that had paffed with Sir Philip Egerton ;-from

the general turn of that conversation, it appeared
very evidently to me, that I might receive viſits,
which I ſhould deteft. I muſt own to you, my
friend, thatI am infinitely jealous of Lord William W.--, his connections- his friends.

When I was acquainted with him at Florence, I
knew them all ; but what adventures may have
happened ſince !-what changes !--Inolonger reflect with any pleaſure on a reconciliation with
him, even when Iwas poſſeſſed of my fortune,

and made the appearance ofa perſon above dependance ; but at preſent I renounce the connection, I am determined never more to allow its

being mentioned to me. Iam too proud, after
having lost all that in theeyes of the world rendered me reſpectable- deeply in debt-in prifon
-in fuch a fituation to bearthe humiliating pity
ofthoſe that know that affair-it is what I could
not bear.

Full of this idea, I determined to prevail on
the goaler to deny every body admittance tome.
Itold him, that itwas poffible, fome perſons of
faſhionable appearance might call on me but on

no account to allow any one admiſſion ; and as a
means of enſuring his obedience, I promised him

fiveguineas in a month, ifhe would be punctual.
One

JULIA BENSON.

117

One day, he came to inform me, that a gen-

tleman in a chariot was extremely importunate
toſee me ; and ſoon after another in a chariot on

theſameerrand ; that he was again returned with
the Lord Chief Juſtice's permiſſion to ſee meſaying theſe words,he introduced Sir Philip Egerton.

" Miss Benſon, ſurely it is very ſtrange, that
you ſhould take ſuch pains to remain concealed
and hidden from every one. Can you imagine,
madam, that any perſon,who had had the honour
of your acquaintace in Pall-Mall, would not be
proud ofithere ? "

" I know not that, Sir, but I aſſure you I am
too proudtogive it them here."
" I underſtand you, Madam; becauſe you have

met with cruel misfortunes, you inſiſtupon fup-

poſing other people as inſenſible asyou are unhappy."

" Upon what account, Sir, is it that you trouble me here ? I defire to know it at once, that

youmay retireand leavemeto myſelf."
" My buſineſs, Miſs Benfon, is only to inform
you, that the Duke of ---has paid your brother all his demand, has purchaſed your leaſe,

furniture, &c. and they only wait your ſhewing
yourſelf to take poſſeſſion."
" Then I am the moſt miferable woman brea-

thing
"Good God, madam ! what can you mean? "
" I mean, Sir, that I eſteem and venerate the
generoſity of a man, to whom I can make no return ; and for that reaſon, am determined never
to accept it."

" Lord William W---, madam, would-.”
" Name him not, Sir ; and believe the fixed

reſolution of one, whom no misfortune can ever
drive

118

THE HISTORY OF

drive from it ; Inever will see his Lordſhip-he

knew me in profperity he ſhall not defcend to
take me from a goal.""

"This, madam, is by nomeans a proper place

to altercate theſe affairs ; but if you will pleaſe
to attend me, I promise you,you shall findyourfelf as perfectly independent as ever. "
I poſitively refused to ſtir, to his no ſmall aſtonishment ; but finding by my manner, that Iwas
refolute, he left me, and returned again soon after
with awarrant from the Lord Chief Justice, to
remove me from prifon. He infinted on uſing
his power, heſaid, and I was forced, by thegoa-

ler's language, who wanted, I believe, to get rid
of me, to accompany him in his chariot-he
drove to Pall Mall; ſhewed me my late houfe,
the fervants there, and every circumſtance as I
left it.

It was a ſtroke that made me admire the

Duke's generofity; but my heart was too full of
grief and pride honeſt pride I must call it-to
allow me a moment's repoſe or fatisfaction.
Sir Philip preſently left me, finding that all
conversation was in vain.

This action of the Duke's gives me a very

great opinion of his fincerity and his generofity;
butit only makes me the more miferable tothink,
that it is no longer poſſible for me to dream of a
connection that would wound me in the tendereſt

manner. Besides, what do I know of Lord Wil-

liam W-- ? It is some years fince I faw him.
He has, doubtless, ſeen women more deſerving
thanI, or at leastmore agreeable. Apaffion that
is fo long without hope of fatisfaction, preſently
dies with the men. I know not his connections.

I have noauthority but a few letters. Fool that I
havebeen! But the Duke is inevery thing complete. I found in the toilet boxes five banknotes,
each

JULIA BENSON.

119

each of one hundred pounds ; I returned them to
their place, and determined not only to quit the

houſe the firſt opportunity, but alſo to retire from
the world to ſome unknown ſpot, where I might
at leiſure, reflect on my hard fate, and take a refolution, either to live in obſcurity, or not to live
at all.

Onbeing hurried away to priſon, I had the
precaution of dreſſing myſelfin theplaineftmorning dress I had, and of takingin my pocket ſeventy guineas, which I had then inthe houſe ; Ipropofed, in the fame manner, to take a voluntary

leave of my house, determining to go into the
country, to ſome diſtance from London.

In the night, instead of Deep, I had twenty
waking dreams concerning my future conduct,
but none that pleaſed me.I tell you this, my
dearEmilia, with the utmoſt freedom ; andI know
you will at once exclaim, " My dear Julia, why
would you not immediately come down to your
faithful friend Emilia! " Iknow this wi'l be your
fentiment; but the ftubbornneſs of my heart will
not allow me to be a dependant beggar any where.
Ihave not a proſpect of better times.-My father
has been ſo ſet against me by my brother, that I
do not expect a ſhilling from him, even at his
1

death ; how therefore can I make one of thoſe

impudent viſits of diſtreſs for a month, in pre-

tence of ſtaying ten years ! No, my Emilia, let
me prevent yourhumanity and friendſhip making
any offers, which I am predetermined to refufe.
Sometimes I thought of an obfcure lodging in
London, and to try to maintain myself by fine
work, but the fear of being discovered, and the inſults to which allwomen of that ſtile, who are

not either old or ugly, are expoſed, determined
me against it. Getting a place as a lady's maid,
would
1

120

THE HISTORY OF

would be a moſt eligible plan, if I couldprocure
a good ſervice ; but I should, at a diſtance from
London, be utterly ignorant how to get a good
one; for as to character, I can have none ; and

ſhall appear every where more of a run-away vagrant than any thing else. It once came into my
head todiſguife myself like a man, go down into
Suſſex, hire myself to ſome of our family, and
ſee if chance would not give me an opportunity
of discovering, in ſome inadvertent hour ofmy
maſter's, ſome traces of the villainy that deprived
me of myfortune. Thisſcheme pleaſed me moft;

but the difficulty of executing it was almoſt infuperable.

I fixed upon nothing, but determined to get an
obſcure lodging, at ſome diſtance from London,
for a week or two, for leiſure to reflect on what

was beſt tobedone. On ſecond thoughts, I conceived that I should be more privatewithin fifteen

or twenty-five miles of London, than at a greater
diſtance; becauſe ſtrangers of a particular caft
are ſtared at by a whole village, either from envy
at their finery, or fear of being burthened with
freſh paupers, from their poverty.
I aroſe rather earlier than common, eat my

breakfaſt, and made up a ſmallparcel of linen and
neceſſaries in a ſmall trunk, in which I alfo depoſited part of fixty guineas I had left; and the reſt

for fearof accident in my pocket. I fent the footman up to Portman-square; andone of the maids
another way, that I might get off quite unperceived; and taking my opportunity, I beckoned
to a chairman to come and take my trunk ; and
then marched off, ordering him to follow me. I

went up to Soho-Square , and there, to be fecure

of not being folowed, I made the clairman ſet
down the trunk by the iron rails, I fet myself on
it

JULIA BENSON.

121

it, andpaid him off, ſaying I ſhould wait there
till Iwas called for; when he was out of fight I
called a coach, and told the coachman to drive

towards Hampstead, till I ſtopped him. We had

ſcarcely got off the stones before I faw a ſtagecoach; I then ſtoppedthe hack, enquiring if they
had room, and being anſwered in the affirmative,

took a place, without ever enquiring where they
weregoing to.

"Ihad only one fellow-traveller ; who had the

I appearance of a plain honeſt farmer, I made many enquiries of him, about the country, about

lodging and boarding, prices, &c. and theold man
in return aſked me ſeveral queſtions, which I anſwered as itbeſt ſuited my purpoſe. After apauſe
he ſaid to me, " Mayhap you want to lodge and
board in the country."

" Yes, I replied, if I could find a very retired
houſe in the country, with a ſmall family, I ſhould
like it very well."

" But mayhap you want to be very near London."
--

" No, anſwered I, I had rather not be very
near London."

" Should you like a farmer's houſe to board
in ?"

" Yes ; returned I, very well. "
" Why, faid he, my dame would like to take
aboarder."

Where do you live ? "
" At Canefield, near Watford."

" Shall we go near your houſe ? "-" Not very near it; but my man is to meet
me to take two baſkets, and if you could walk
three miles you might go fee how you liked it. "
I embraced, with readiness, the offer.

The

farmer's man took my trunk, and he and his maL

fter

122

THE HISTORY OF

ſter the baſkets ; and ſo we trudged the three

miles through a very pleasant and retired country.
On our arrival at the farm-houſe, which I was

pleaſed to find in a lonely rural pleaſant ſituation;

he introduced me to his dame, telling her the
motive of his bringing the lady. The woman's

good-natured, open countenance, prejudiced me
in her favour. I deſired to see the room they
could furnish me with, and was ſhewn into the
beſt bed-chamber, a neat clean room, much bet-

ter furnished than I expected. I liked it very
well. Next we came to the terms of boarding,

waſhing, and lodging, by the week or month.
They confulted together, while I took a walk
in a pretty garden, under the windows of the

chamber I had feen, and preſently coming to me,
faid they could not afford it under two guineas and
ahalf a month; I acquiefced at once in the terms,

and took poffeffion of my lodging.
After fuch a rapid ſucceſſion of miſery, it was
fome comfort to be able to board in filence over

my ill fate, and meditate on future ills. I amextremely fortunate in this retreat. We are three
miles from Watford, which is the nearest town;
this houſe ſtands quite alone in the middle of a

woodland country, and in the center of a farm of
near four hundred acres. The country is very

retired; ſcarce an houſe to be ſeen; my room is
of a middling ſize, airy and pleasant, I look over
a part of the farm, to a large wood-under the
banks of which there is a trout ſtream a few.breaks

of which I see from my windows. It is, upon
the whole, rural and pretty. I am quite in the
back part of the houſe; out of the way of all
fervants, labourers or ploughmen-ſo that it is a

perfect retirement ; inaword, identically what I
ſhould have wiſhed for.
Ibreak-

JULIA BENSON.

123

Ibreakfaſt in my own room at nine ; at one I

dinewith the family; thatis, the farmer, hiswife,
two fons and a daughter ; all as decent people as
canbe;'very civil and attentive. At fix I drink
tea by myself, and at eight we fup. I go under

the name of Mrs. Pigot, a married woman, my
huſbandgone to the East-Indies. I have much
conversation with the farmer upon his husbandry,
the culture of his lands, his crops, manuring,
&c. and I talk with his wife concerning the matters of the dairy, and the management of cows.
If I was to be here a twelvemonth, Iſhould make

as good a farmer as moſt I believe in this pariſh
Ihave had ſeveral walks about the farm, which is

verypleasantly ſpread over two hills. The farmer
thinks me very intelligent, and isſurpriſed to find,
after a little chat, that I have made ſo much ad

vantage of his information as to be able to puzzle
him. I have been here but five days, and poffefs
the good-will of the whole family-they feemed

pleafed with me, and I am perfectly satisfied with
them. I had the precaution to bring with me a
fmall edition of Horace, Homer, and Taffo,

which are all the books I hawe got with me, and

alleviate my aching mind ſometimes. Alittle
reading, much walking, and fome work, are my

employments ; but the feverest taſk, my Emilia,
is the buſineſs of thinking. Reflection is death

to all repoſe. I can fix on no plan. I can find
comfort in no idea ; what I am to do I know not.
Could my preſentretirement laſt, Ibelieve Icould
ſubmit to itwith more than ease; evenwith chear-

fulness and pleaſure; but the idea of its ending,
and the beginning of poverty, is painful; and as
to ever becoming a burthen on others it is what I
have a fixed reſolution to periſh rather than fubmit to.

La

One

124

THE HISTORY OF

One favourable circumſtance, however, I ſhall
mention. While I was in profperity, I could ne-

ver root out the remainderof that ſtrong affection
I had for Lord William W--, even while I

thought him the moſt worthless of mankind, I

couldnot totally ſmother what I eſteemed an unworthy paffion; and when, my dear Emilia, I
was convinced of his innocence, it only re-kindled the paffion, and made me rejoice, too ſoon,
to find that I had been deceived; for I never had

anyproof of his preſent ſentiments towards me.
Upon reflection, therefore, I cannot but feverely

condemn myself, for liſtening to the conversations
of Sir Philip and the Duke. Now, however, I
know how to act with propriety ; I cannot bear
even the moſt diſtant idea of an alliance with a

nobleman, while I myself am adependant beggar ;
eſpecially with that man, with whom I was once
nearly on terms of equality.
Good God! Emilia, what a change is there
frem. my ſituation in Mr. Melliſh's life, to the
preſentmiferable ſtate Iam in! Travelling through
the courts of Europe, with a gay and brilliant
train; courted and careſſed by all; and refuſing

even the hand of a fovereignPrince; living in the
profuſion of all the elegancies of life; and folli-

citous alone for paſſing the time agreeably-but I
feel inmyſelf philoſophy enough to fupport the
change. In this humble retirement I do not re-

gret the living in the ſtile of fix thousand pounds
a year ; becauſe even then my heart was reſtleſs

but the idea of dependency hurts me. At preſent
I am actually happy in every thing that concerns
myſituation, andhave no evil to complainof while
itlaſts.

Adieu, my dear friend ! Direct to Mrs. Pigot,
at Mr. Clevely's, Canefield, near Watford.
LET-

2

JULIA BENSON.
LETTER

129

XX .

MISS WATSON to MISS BENSON.

OU muſt always have remembered, my
Ydear
Julia, that I eſteemed yourjudgment
not as an opinion, which ſhould be canvaſſed,
but as an oracle which ſhould be ſubmitted to.

Be aſſured, therefore, that any affair, inwhich I
differ totally from you, muſt have ſome ſtrange
peculiarities, not easily to be accounted for. I am
amazed at your ſentiments, or rather at your extravagance to which you carry them. I am no

enemyto your ideas ofindependency ; butthey
are general ideas, and not at all applicable to this

cafe. Your pride might prevent you, poffibly,
with justice from living inyour houſe, after it
must be by the favour of another ; but, when

,
you are in a retirement, that you should chooſe
to be unhappy, leſt you should be driven by poverty to fuicide , when you have contracted your

expences to thirty or forty pounds a year, is ridi
culous, to the highest degree. Acording to this
fine ſyſtem, you can live a year and an half, which,
my dear Julia, is time enough for confideration of
the future. But, now, pray tell me, if you think
the ſpirit of independency ſhould have preventedyour fixing in juſt ſuch a farm-houſe in my
neighbourhood ? You have always profefſſed a
value for my friendship. Now you have no creature to converſe with except a farmer and his
family, furely my company now and then would
have been agreeable ; and as to poverty at the
end ofan year and anhalf, reallyI thinkyou might
accept of forty guineas a year from your friend
Emilia, without any wound to that high ſpirit,
which actuates all your actions. My income_of
L 3.

two

126

THE HISTORY OF

two hundred pounds ayear, which my induſtry
increaſes an hundred ways, is abſolutely more
than I knowwhat to dowith. As a proof of which,
let me aſſure you, I have now in bank one hundred and fixty pounds, not one ſhilling of which

Iſhall ſpend before next quarter-day. Taking
money from me is taking itfrom one that knows
notwhat to do with it. Andyour having itwould
makeme far more happy, than any other way of
ſpending it whatever. But obſerve well what I
am going to ſay : You need not write to me to

diſſuade me, for I am abſolutely determined. Uponmy eſtate, the rents ofwhichmy father receives
and pays me the nett amount, which as I faid

before, is twohundred pounds ayear, there is now
apretty little farm vacant. It contains onlythirty
acres of land, and most of itgrass; the houſe is
ſmall,but very pretty, and moſt ſweetly ſituated
on thebanks ofa little river, that runs like your
trout ſtream. Under a wood, behind the houſe,

arethe incloſures, which ſpread on the ſide of a
gentle hill. It is a delicious retirement. Iwill
put the house in repair, get you ſome cows and

apig, and you ſhall be my tenant for the farm.
You may afford a maid out ofthe profits ofthe
dairy, pay your rent and be obliged to nobody.
Then I shall fee if you have learned any thing
from farmer Clevely. The ploughed landwill
make ſome variety in your management, and be
an amusement. You need not keep any men, as
the neighbouring farmers will be glad to plough
foryou for hire, which will be better. Here you

may be, Mrs. Pigot, as well as at Canefield, fee
nobody, but thoſe you like, admit me as feldom
as you pleaſe, and ifyou will make use of your
philoſophy,confider it as that retirement, which
your favourite Horace wiſhed for in vain. It
will

JULIA BENSON.
127
will be ſome time before it is ready for your reception, but I will give you a line when you
fhould fet out. But, once more, remember that

itwill be in vain to reply in your heroical ſtile,

and refuſethis markofmyfriendſhip,but notofmy

bounty. I shall get every thing ready, whither
you take or refuſe the offer. But, my dear Julia,
do you treat me in the ſame ſtile as Sir Philip,
the Duke, and I know not who ? Have you no

regard for my friendſhip ? Would you do nothing to make me happy ? I will no longer ſuppoſeyou can be ſo inconſiderate, and ſounfriendly.

As to the wretch your brother, Iam as fully

perfuaded the whole affair is aforgery as you can
be: from the whole tenour ofyour letters, while
Mr. Melliſh was living, I am confident he would
have left his fortune to Satan as foon as your bro-

ther ; but, my dearest, I am alſo confident that
this villainy will come out, and you be re-inſtated in your fortune again: the number of witneffes your brother had collected, appears to me
a favourable circumſtance ; depend upon itfome
ofthem will turn out villains to their truſt as well

as to you, andbetray the whole. At leaſt, I think,
it is highly probable ; nor ſhould you, on any
account, deſpair, for ſuch changes and turns are

by no means more ſurprizing, thanwhatyou have
experienced already. Your ſcheme of turning
man andgoing down to Suſſex to reconnoitreand

pick up intelligence, Ido not think a bad one,
provided you did it in the character of a gentleman, and not a footman, which would expoſe

you very frequently tobe diſcovered. But ifyou
got acquainted at your father's, you certainly
would have a chance ofmaking fome diſcoveries.

Incaſe you ſhould be ofthe ſame opinion, and
make

128

THE HISTORY OF

make the attempt, let mebeg ofyou to be unmind.
ful of expence ; Iwill lend you any fum that

may be requifite, and you ſhall pay me with legal intereſt, when you regain your fortune :-

but I am entirely against your attempting it in a
low character.

I must inform you, that my father, as foon as
he learnt your misfortune, was very urgent with

me to invite you to ſpendthis ſpring and ſummer
at our house. My mother longs to feeyou, and
-would do every thing to make you happy ; and
my brother thinks you will come to obligeme,
but the receipt of your letter made megive up

the idea, and I fixed upon that ofthe little farm
as a more e'igible plan.
Farewell, my dear Julia,
Iam truly your's,
EMILIA WATSON.

LETTER

XXI.

Lord WILLIAM W- to Sir PHILIP EGERTON,
Paris
.

Mydear Sir Philip,
Do not think the world ever knew a more mis

I ferable man from the hour I loft Miss Benfon
to the arrival of this expreſs : nor does the world
at this moment contain an happier one. The
great object of all my wishes to be found and accomplished atonce-fo unexpectedly! Good God,
what joy is it to be thus recalled to life ! Your
wholemanagement of this affair has been admirable: I am infinitely pleased with the trick you
playedher with the Duke, and that he faw and
conver

JULIA BENSON .

129

converſed with her in diſguiſe. I knew he would
be exceſſively pleased with her.

I am on my road to Calais, with all the expedition I am maſter of.

I have therefore no time

for longletters, but I am forry that I give you the
following anecdote. I have juſt received a letter from an old ſervant, whom Idiſcharged at Milan, and rewarded for his fidelity, wherein he in-

formed me, that Signora Zaffini had departed
ſome time ago, in a private manner, forEngland,
and, leſt I ſhould fall into any further miſchief
from her revenge, he gave me the intelligence.
Ido not like this at all, Sir Philip , that machina-

ting ſpirit willplay the devil, wherever ſhe goes;
and if Miss Benſon falls into her hands-Zounds !

I am in agonies at the idea. Be all alive and

watchful: You know notwhat an enemy ſhe is to
deal with.
Adieu.

I remain your's truly,
WILLIAM W,

(Carry the incloſed directly.)

LETTER

XXII.

Lord WILLIAM W--, to Miſs BENSON .

( Incloſed in the preceding. )
MADAM,

Philip Egerton has recalled me to life byinforming me that you are in being, and ſtill
SIR
Miss Benson. Thoſe cruel aſperſions which tore
you from me; which gave me the appearance of
the vileſt wretch, which threw me into deſpair,

and almoſt into thejaws ofdeath, have fallenheavieronmethan languagecan expreſs. But I forget

THE HISTORY OF

130

get allmy fufferings at the idea of once morebe-

ing
ſupremely bleſſed inthe companyof the moſt
amiable of her fex.
Yes, my dearest Julia, I return to you with a
heart that never ceaſed being your's-and your's

alone. Your image is engravenonit ; the only
joyof mymiferable life has been the remembrance

of the bleffed hours I spent with you. I fly to
youwith all the ardoursofunabatedlove, with all
the fervour of the trueſt paſſion that ever warmed
the human breaft.-Pray heaven I may find in
my Julia the fame tenderness that once made ine
thehappieſt of mortals. I fly to throw myselfat
herfeet.
(

WILLIAM W--

LETTER XXIII .

Mr. MELVIL to Mr. FREDERICK.

NOTHING fure
is fo mysteriously
strange
circumſtance
of
Benson's
hiſtory; ſhe ſeems formed tobe theſportof fortune,
andyour friend from his firſt acquaintance with
her, has been toffed about almoſt in the ſame

manner. It was impoſſible Iſhould miſs falling
violently in love with ſuch awoman conſtantly
under my eye; and, when in love, how was it
poſſible I ſhould eſcape mifery ! Had I not been
thegreatest idiot under heayen, Imight have feen

that I was perfectly indifferent to her. Though
ſhenever gave the leaſt ſign ofreturning my pafſion, ſtill, like a true inamorato, Iplungeddeeperanddeeper inthe delufion. Such was my fate !
and itis now concluded with her flipping fairly
outof my hands, and leaving me and every one
elfe in the lurch. However, I have made one.
diſcovery,

JULIA BENSON.

431

diſcovery, which I must make good account of,
and that is, that she has had atendreſſe with a

young nobleman abroad, who is in love with her,
but she has, for God knows what reaſon, abfo-

lutely rejected his ſuit-but I muſt acquaint you
how I gained theſe particulars.
Itold you in my laſt, that Ihad called at Miſs

Benfon's in Pall-Mall, after what happened at the
door of her prifon, andthat her man informedme

ſhe was gone, but expected at dinner ; upon this
I returned home, and waited again on her in the
afternoon .

Ithen found her houſe in much con-

fuſion ; ſhe was not returned ; they could not
conceive where the was gone-all this I thought
very ſtrange. I made enquiries. They told me

ſhe had fent Johnto Portman's-Square and Molly
to the Strand; that the cook was in her kitchen,

and the houſe-maid in the country on a vifit to her
relations ; that their miſtreſs had feemed to take

that opportunity to go out; that Sir Philip Egerton had beenthere, and had raiſed a ſtorm to difcover where ſhe was gone to. This intelligence

Idid not like. While I was thus queſtioning the
ſervants, who ſhould appear but Sir Philip ; he
ſeemed ſtruck at my being there ; aſked me, my
buſineſs in a tone rather deficient in politeneſs.

Idefired to knowhis right of enquiring my bufiness; that my buſineſs was with Miss Benfon.
"Then (faid he)you know where she is." "Not
I truly ; I come to enquire. But methinks you

intereſt yourself verywarmly inwhatconcerns this
lady."
" I have reaſon, Sir. And Imust be allowed

to expreſs my fufpicions that you alſo intereſt
yourselfmuch in her affairs ; otherwise the lady's
notbeingathome would sendyou from her door."

" Send me from her door !-Are you the
guardian

1

THE HISTORY OF
guardian of her door ? I prithee, Sir, no ſuch
132

language. I have ever intereſted myſelf in the
welfare of Miſs Benſon.

I have the honour of

being intimately acquainted with her."

" Do you repeat mywords ? Zounds, Sir, let
us retire and fee who has the beſt right to be impertinent."

He was fired at this-and both of us kicking
thegaping fools down ſtairs that ſtood looking at
us, and turning the key onthem, we drew imme-

diately. Sir Philip ſcratched my left arm, and I
gave him an uglywoundin his ſword-arm, which
finiſhed the fray.

Then addreſſing him ;

" Now, Sir, before we part, it is abſolutely
neceſſary we ſhould each of us explain his ſituation with respect to Miss Benfon."
" That, Sir, is done in a moment. I am a

mere friend ; the had an intimacy with a young
nobleman in Italy, who will one day fill the higheſt rank in this country. Accidents broke the affair off for fome time; butthat nobleman is now

on his return from Paris, to make propoſals of
marriage to MiſsBenfon ; and I flatter myſelf with
her entire acquiefcence."
" I am satisfied, Sir."

" Now, Sir, can you give me any intelligence
of her mations ? "

" None, believe me. I know nothing of the
matter."

I then took my leave, and returned home much

chagrined at finding ſo muchreaſon to believe that
Miſs Benton was engaged to another man. Frederick, believe me, it was a ſtroke that quite

funk me with disappointment-- Iwas choaked-I
could not fpeak.

In the afternoon the lodging-woman, at whoſe
houſe at Iſlington, Miſs Benfon had fixedMrs.
and

JULIA BENSON.
133
and Miſs Sampher, came to me with a doleful
face, to enquire after her. Itold her I knew not
where ſhe was that she was gone from her houſe

privately, unknown to any one.
" Alas ! aday, (faid ſhe) that fad man, Sir
George Milbourn, has played his pranks again

withmy poor lodgers."
" How fo ? I thought Miſs Benſon had paid
him all his deinand ? "

:

" She did, Sir ; but he has found out an old

debt never thought of before, has bought it, and
againthrown the mother into prifon, and carried
offthe daughter."
"Dhim for a raſcal."
"And when he came to the house he ſwore

terribly he would be revenged on Mifs Benfon,
that arrogant female, and the coxcomb that pretended to counteract him. By G , ſheherſelf ſhall be a laſs in my feraglio before ſhe is
much older," (faidhe)-"them were his words."
"When was this ???
"

).

Only last night, Sir. I have been at Miſs

Benson's, and find that ſhe isgone, and all the
houſe is in confufion.-What a fad man, Sir. !"

I was quite ſtupified with this intelligence.
Thought I, ſhall ſhe be the ſport of fuch a puppy
as this baronet !-She must have deſigned returning to dinner, as the ſervant informed me, but
was kidnapped by Sir George. It certainly muſt
be fo-every circumſtance confirms it. Iwas
filled with indignation at this ſurmiſe. Nothing

preſented itſelf to my imagination, but thatthe
woman I loved to deſperation ſhould be in the
power of a rafcal ſhe deteſted. I would have
flown like lightning to refcue her ; butthis ardour
was dampedby the idea, that I should fight for
others, not for myſelf.
-Let
the young nobleman,
M
or

134

THE HISTORY OF

or his friend Sir Philip, undertake the buſineſs.
But love prevailed! I could fix on no plan that
flattered me with a profpect ofbeing more bleffed
inher company.

Where Sir George lived I knew not ; and I
doſt ſome time in enquiries before Icould find it
out. At last, Menilltold me it was in Hill-ftreet,

Berkely- square. I put on my sword, and was ordering Tom to follow me, when who ſhould appearbut the young military hero Bob, whom Mifs
Benfon: had procured a commiffion for! I told
him the affair in a few words. The fire ofgra-

titude flushed inhis eyes ; he was all eagerneſshe would go with me-he would cut the throat of
the baronet-he would he would-and ſtepping
in for his fword, he marched off with me for his

firſt rencontre, and Tom was left behind. Ibe-

lieveBob would have fought awhole regiment to
ſerve her ; he has a better plea for his

Quixotism, than Ihave. But did you know the
woman, you would forgive all the extravagance
of your friend...

ALO

Whenwecameto Sir George's, I was told that
hewas not at home. "I have particular buſineſs

with your mafter, Sir, and Imuſtiſee him. ""He is not athomes his man affuredime. 1 Then
where is he," aſked ? " He could not tell, but

hebelieved he was inthe country." " Then you
may certainly know by the time when he went."
He has not been at home (faid the man) ſince

yesterday." " Very well (replied I) --where is
Sir George's villa, for I am fure he would take it
extremely illof me, if Idid notſee him immediately."
It isat Wimbledon, Sir
We then got, into apoſt-chaile,and drove to
Wimbledon ; welenquired for his house, and as
foon as Ihad fixed my eye upon it, Iwent to a
little

JULIA BENSON.

135

litdehedge ale-houſe in fight, and feeing an oftler, aſkedif Sir George was at home ,the faidthe
didnot know
what (replied I)did he noti
come homelast night? " "Afellowworkingonthe
road hearing this, faid to me, Sir George came >
homeinhis coach, Sir, in theevening. " "Very!
well, my friend, (replied I) but is he notgone out
again ? Lhave been here, Sir, from fix this morn

ing, and was here till eight last night, but have!
ſeennothingofhim." " Did hecomehome alone?
" No, Sir; therewas al ladywith him, the neigh
bours thought, muffledupin acloak." Aye, Siry
(faid another workman) but we don't know whe
thenitwasa lady, for five did not seem much fo
Why; my'lad ? ", " Lord, Sir, she gave Sir
George a ſtrokeupon the heads, as if thehad been
in a paffion ; but the faid nothing ; we thought
ita little odd, that a gentleman ſhould be used fo.
" Pray, my lads, did the go into thehouse ofther
own accord, or did Sir George carry her in
"SirGeorge andthe twoſervantshanded her in

Very good; this is plainly violence. Her

mouth, I fuppofe, was ſtopped with a handker
chief, and they pushed her into the houfe as faſt I
as they could. This, I doubted not, was Mifst
Sampher ; and humanity dictated an attemptto
rescue her , especially as the fame opportunity
would ſerve for discovering where Miss Benfon

was. We made immediately to the houſe, but
obſerving aback way,where a perſon, ſeemingly.
amaid ſervant, hadjust entered ; I walked to a

door, and without knocking, lifted up the latch;
luckily,it was not locked; it led into a paſſage.
which we followed , when we had gone out of

that, making as little noiſe as poſſible, we opened
another door, which carried us into a ſmall room
like abutler's pantry. All this while we neither
M2

heard

136

THE HISTORY OF

heard nor faw any body. From thence another
paſſage ledus into a back hall, where was a gentleman's hat, fome canes and awork-baſket ; a

door into a ſmall,but very retired garden, was
opened. Itthen came into my mind that the beſt
planofoperation would be to conceal ourſelves,

tofee what chance mightbring. With this idea
we opened adoor into aparlour, deſigning to

lookfor acloſet, or fome paſſage that appearedproper for the purpoſe. The room was empty, and
we could find noplace to hide ourselves in. We
went into a fecond apartment, the window ſhutters of which were not opened. This I thought
favourable to us; in we went, and ſhut the door

again. We had aview of every thing through
theſhuttersofthegarden; andI had the precautionto take the key out of the door, that I might
fecure a retreat into the room we had left.

Thus

planted in ambuſcade, we feated ourſelves very
patiently,waiting for any thing that chance might
throw in the way.
I believe we had fat about three quarters of an

hour, when hearing anoiſe in the other room,

I planted myselfat the key-hole to reconnoitre :Awoman of about fifty years of age, with as vile
accountenance as ever hanged athief, entered
withMiss Sampher in tears, ſhe pushed her before her into the room, and forcing her into a
chair ſhutthedoor behind her, and feating herfelfnear her, began the following converſation, as
near as I can recollect.

" Miss ! I am amazed that you ſhould know
your own intereſt no better than to treat Sir

George in fuch a manner. It is in vain for you
to perfift in refuſing him -you are abſolutely
in his power, and had therefore much better
こ

yield

JULIA BENSON.

137

yield with a good grace, or elſe he will have you
by force.
" I will die firſt ."
"

Aye-aye-tobe fure that is fine language,
butyou'll be fick of dying, take myword for it.
But I fay again you will be forced if you won't
conſent with a good grace."
" I never will content-I have friends that will

revenge this villainous uſage on all your crew."
" Yes-yes-you have friends to be fure.

There is Miss Benſon, whom Sir George has got
in limbo as well as you, the will be your friend,
certainly, and your mother in a goal, dependant
uponhim ; theſe are fine friends;-ſtarving, Miſs,,

will be your friend, if you don't be quiet."
" You may ſpareyourself all this trouble, for
Ioncemoretell you, I will hang, ſtarve, and die
first ;-I hate, abhor, and deteſt the villain" Well, I shall leave you, and inform Sir
George of this. I ſhall bring ſome help to un--

dreſs you, put you to bed directly, and hold you
faſt enough, I warrant you, when you are in it."
" I ſhall find my remedy before that."
TheEnd of the Firſt Volume..

M.3

V

λ
00

31 .

2

THE

HISTORY
OF

JULIA BENSON :
IN

A SERIES OF LETTERS;
FOUNDED ON WELL-KNOWN FACTS.
TENDING

To Guard the MIND from the

INDULGENCE of UNLAWFUL PLEASURES,
And the FATAL EFFECTS of

FEMALE

RESENTMENT.

Felix quemfaciunt aliena pericula cautum!
VOL.

II.

DUBLIN:

Printed by CHARLES LODGE, Church-Street.
MDCCLXXXIV.

ЦЕНУГЕ ИЕЗЕЙДЖЕИЛ

TE

VEKIES CE
CL FELLEVE

T

HE

HISTORY
OF

JULIA

BENSON.

Mr. MELVILL, to Mr. FREDERICK.
১

( In Continuation. )

HE old devil left her upon this;when the

T was gone I remarked the poor girl's countenance, and ſaw in it as lively a picture of terror
and deſpair as imagination could paint, She hadnot been long before the door opened again, when

in came Sir George with his bawd, and two
maids ; Sir George addreſſed her thus :

" Miſs Sampher, once more I make you offers
that are highly advantageous. I again repeat it
that I will fettle two hundred pounds a year on
you ;-here is a bank-note of an hundred for rea-

dy pocket-money ;-your mother ſhall be relea-

fed, and her debt forgiven: Will you comply ???
" No ; by heaven I will not. "
" Then to your buſineſs."

Upon this, they began to undreſs her by violence, one holding her hands behindher ; there
7

:

was

THE HISTORY OF

2

was a large couch in the room; they preſently
made bare her neck which Sir George began to

make free with ; Miſs Sampher ſtruggled, kicked and ſcreamed. It was high time I thought to
interpoſe, I winked at Bob to be ready, when, on
a ſudden, bursting open the door, we appeared,
to the no ſmall confufion of the whole gang.

Sir George looking at the door, Bob perceived
hismotion of fidling round, fixed himself directly before it. I broke the filence by ſpeaking thus
tothe Baronet.
66

Isthis manly, Sir George
ge! IU
You may well

be confused, Sir, but I am come not only to ref-

cue innocence, but to puniſh villainy. Where is
Miss Benfon ? "

" I don't at all underſtand this conduct, Sir,
--nor what buſineſs you have here
"
" This is no time for talking nonſenſe, or aſkingimpertinentquestions. Tell nie)at once where

Miſs Benfon is, or by heaventhis ſword ſhall penetrate your heartvsh

-(Dropping on his knees) " For heaven's fake
do not killme, and I will tellyou all
I know nothing of her. "

3

I

Lying villain, death is your portion; this
old harradan of iniquity faid, within half anhour,
you had her in limbo. This inſtanttellmewhere
meis, or I'll run you through
1. For God's fake, Mr. Melvill I know nod
thing of herbas Clive

wi

10

-804 Oh! Sir (faid the Bawd) SirGeorge fpeaks

truth, and, upon my word, Ifaid that to this
good lady only to frighten her. "
" To this good lady ! why thou infernal imp
ofhell, was not ſhe as good a lady five minutes
ago ? But Iwill take eſpecial care of you, believe
27

" Whether
1

JULIA BENSON.

3

" Whether you ſpeak truth or not I find I must
believe you ; but, Sir George, this willnot do,
your villainy must have a punishment, which you

have not experienced yet. There hangs your
fword-rife Bob ! let him come by you, and
turn the woman to the other end of the room.

There, Sir-now. take your ſword and come
on.-

" Mr. Melvill-this conduct of your's is what

I cannot comprehend:-I know nothing of Miss
Benfon, and there is Miſs Sampher, in God's
name takeher ; but I do not chuſe to fight two
at once. I will meet you upon ſome other occa
fion."

10

" That is as much as to ſay that you, Sir
George, are a plain, abſolute, and palpable coward; andwill, I doubt not, prove ſo on your other
occafion. As to Miſs Sampher, I ſhall take her

with me, and likewise this worthy old lady, come,
madam,

I then madea ſignto Bob to open the door, and
to take the old woman under his arm, which he

didvery manfully, and I, leading Mifs Sampher,
left the room, and departed the houſe; I took
the lady in the chaiſe, and directed Bob to take
another forthe old woman. As foon as we arrived

intown, we laid information against this princeſs
of bawds, and she was immediately committed to

goal; and a warrant is alſo iſfued against SirGeorge
and the two fervants.

What the event of the

profecution willbe, I know not. Poor-Miss Sam-

pher was fuller of gratitude than canbe expreſſed.
-I carried her home with me ; related the affair
to my ſiſter, and I have inſiſted on her making
myi houſe her own, till the gets fomel fettledde-

pendance onwhich ſhe can tely. I have alſo gain
ed themother's releaſe without any payment, by
laying

-

THE HISTORY OF
4

laying the whole affair before the Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench.
Thus the matter has ended; a good concluſion
undoubtedly . But I am not one jot nearer my

purpofe. My only aim was todiscover Miss Benfon, and in that I am quite disappointed: but I

muft, however, think that SirGeorge has nothing
to do with her abſence. He was in ſuch a pro-

foundfright, that had he trapanned twenty girls,
all, I will anſwer for it, would have been furrendered at once. I am very clear in this-I muſt,
therefore, take ſome other method to difcover
this uncommon woman's retreat.

What she can

aim at in remaining concealed, I cannot conjecture. If she has any intention ofmarrying her
nobleman, ſhe certainly would not fly from him,
juſt when he and his friends had taken ſuch careto
ferve her. I know not how to account for this,

ous .
allismysteri
is quite reſtleſs to find out
The young foldier

hisbenefactress, he talks ofnobody elſe,-lays an
hundred plans to discover what evil has befallen
her, but preſently finds them all impracticable.
Wehave talked over her affairs, and are clearly

ofopinion, that the will under which her brotherhas cheated her of her fortune , is a vile for-

gery, but how to discover it is a matter that
puzzles us extremely. What confirms me in
this, is the ſtrange abrupt viſit Ihad from a perfon I never saw before- of which I gave you an

account. That man certainly came to offer a
diſcovery of importance to her, if she wouldbribe
him to it ; how unlucky was itthat she was not
athome!

After all theſe adventures, my dear Frederick,
I must still own that I am by no means cured of

my folly,

yetlove awoman,who certainly does
not

5
JULIA BENSON.
not love me ; but, in all probability loves another. This is a terrible ſituation, and grating to
one's pride. Butthe mischief is, that a blind
affection fets all other paffions at defiance. IfI
was certain of my fate, if it was clear that ſhe
was engaged to another, I think I ſhould have
philosophy enough to act rationally ; but the
cruel uncertainty, in which I live, temps me to a
continuance of misery. Yet in the midst of all
my mifery, let me exculpate Miſs Benson. She
never gave me any encouragement,- never fed
mewith the moſt diſtant hope ;-nay, she knows
not that I loves her .

It is I alone that am the

foo! and deserve the ridicule, which ſuch folly
ought ever to meet with,
Your's,
RICHARD MELVILL.

LETTER

XXIV.

Sir PHILIP EGERTON to Lord WILLIAM W-

is a fatality hangsover all your affairs with Miss Benfon , that I know not
T HERE
howto account for , or to remedy. A little while
ago, I wrote to you, full of hope and confidence,
thatyour unhappiness was at an end. Since that
time an accident has happened, which throws us

al' into confufion, ard will be a bar toyour enjoyment-how lorg I cannot ſay.

Miſs Benfon has been for fome time engaged
in a law-fuit with her brother about the fortune

the received from Mr. Melliſh. I apprehended it
was foire litigious fellow that wanted more than

his thare, and that the matter was ofno great.
N

conſequence.

6

THE HISTORY OF

conſequence. But I was much mistaken. The
brother claimed no less than all ſhe has, and eight
thousand pounds more. He carried his fuit by
producing a will, (by the way ſtrongly ſuſpected
ofbeing a forgery) and had the infamy to throw
his ſiſter in priſon for what the could not pay ;
herhouſe andfurniture were leized, and the villain

exulted in his triumph, which proved the grave
ofhis humanity. You may ſuppoſe we did not
leave her in the prison-your father immediately paid the brother's demand, and bought all her
effects ofhim at his own price. I hurried to the

priſon to releaſe her and bring her back to her
house. It was with great difficulty ſhe was tobe
feen-ſhe would not leave the prison. And,

though I got her out of it, by pretending a warrant from the Lord Chief Justice for her removal,

yet I discovered a ſentiment in her, which gave
me no great hope. I saw that ſhe had an unconquerable pride-and that she could not endure
the thought of living dependant. She told me,
after I got her home, that ſhe was determined never to marry- nor enter into, or renew any connection for the future. Iexpoftulated with her
on this head-but I faw a ſtern reſolution in her

manner, that made me tremble. " While the
hada fortune, (ſhe ſaid) and with it of courſe the
refpect of the world, ſhe could converſe on terms
ofequality. Our ſex is contemptible the moment
they are dependant. Iam now a beggar, and
will never be inſulted with the compaffion ofpeo-

ple that I hate or defpife " I took my leave,
fearing that ſhe would take ſome courſe to dif-

appoint our wishes. Ireturned next morningfhe was gone out. I went again in the afternoon
-ſhewas not come home yet, though expected

todinner.-Ithen ſuſpected she had given us the
Mip,

JULIA BENSON.
y
flip, and ſo it proved. Her maid miſſed a ſmall
trunk and a few other things , which ſhe certainlytookwith her; and what encreaſed our fufpicions, was her ſending out all her fervants but one
in different ways ; and in their abfence ſhe certainly departed. Some bank notes, which the

Dukehaddefiredme to lay onthe toilette, remained there.

I immediatelyſet myselfto confider what courſe
ſhe had taken-upon what plan the had goneor with whatdeſign. She had no money with
her, or at least, not more than the remains of

what was usually in the house. As to her father's
in Suſſex, it was the laſt place in the world to
ſeek her at

and I had never heard her mention

acountry friend, to whoſe houſe it was probable
ſhewas gone.

Returning again to the houſe, I queſtioned and
croſs-examined all the ſervants, but it was plain
they knew nothing of the matter. At this I was
not ſurpriſed ; for no ſervant was ever her confident. She keeps them all at a great diſtance,
fcarcely ever ſpeaking to any of them ; though
an admirable miſtreſs, and one whom they all
love to exceſs. I thought it proper to examine

allthe chairmen, porters, and hackney-coachmen,
from St. James's to Charing-Croſs. By this
means Imade a diſcovery whichwas of fome confequence, as it led, though not to the finding
her yet to a knowledge of her deſigns. She
beckoned to a chairman out of her dining-room
window, about eleven in the morning ; when he
came to the door, he found her at it with a trunk ,

which ſhe ordered him totake up and follow her ;
ſhe walked to Soho-Square, made the man ſet the
trunk down by the rails ; ſhe then paid him ,
and fat Gown upon it, keeping a handkerchief at
N2

her

:
8

THE HISTORY OF

her face all the while. The chairman took his mo-

ney-left her ; and knows nothingfurther of her

motions. This ſhe certainly did to prevent difcovery, and in truth the plan was effectual.
I went to your father to inform him of what
had happened. He was much ſurprized, and yet
more vexed ; for he had tet his heart on the

match's being foon concluded-and this unlucky
event breaking all his meatures, diſconcerted him

infinitely. He ſaid it was certainly owing toher
high spirit-that ifdained teing indebted to any
one ;-he liked her the better for it and added,
that she was much mistaken, if the imagined Ier
moneyhad any weight either with him or his
fon-that her own excellencies were ſuperior to
all the money in the world ; " but, concluded he,
!

Sir Fhilip, we must find her, and attempt at leaſt

to bringherto reaſon ; for what will my fon fay,
ifwe have hurried him home for this !"

In this ſituation I found myself more deeply
engaged than I intended ; for although I was ready to exert every effort in my power to advance

the happiness of my friend, yet I never dreamt of
answering for its ſucceſs. But believe me, my
lord, I ſhall try every thing to difcover her retreat, by making all the enquiries that are poſſible.
When the left Suſſex and came to town, the was

onaviſit at a Mr. Melvill's in Germain-ſtreet,

while her houſe was repairing in Pall-Mall.
met him there, coming like me, to enquire after
1

her; his houſe iskept by his ſiſter, as the was
fome time with her, poſſibly ſhe may know some
of her country connections, and I intend making
the enquiry directly, though it is allquite aha
zard whether I shall be able to diſcover her .

Your's,&c.
PHILIP EGERTON
LET

JULIA BENSON.
LETTER

XXV.

Mifs BENSON, to Miss EMILIA WATSON .

Y dear Emilia, it iswith fome fatisfaction
MY
that Ican tell you, my fate is not so bad,
as it might be, fince I am mere reconciled to my
retirement than I was. As to your thorough

frendſhip, ſo evidentin your laſt letter, you may
believe me that I do not reject your offers through
any improper pride. The ſentiment which moves
me to keep fromdependance and fromburthening
my friends, my dear, ſhould not be eſteemed
pride; but a mere opposite to meanness. Your
was right in your anfwer to your worthy father.

In profperity I wished to make you a viſit ; but
adverſity changes the cafe. Your making methe
miſtreſs of a farm, I laughed at heartily, and I
like the idea ; if every thing fails, and I get ex
perience enough under my friend Clevel , I may
perhaps make the experiment :-but, pri.hee, my
dearest, do not be ſo wild as to keep any farm vacant, and repair any houſes for me.
I haveevery day more and more reaſon to like
this honeſt farmer and his family. They are in-

finitely attentive to me, full of real humanity,
and a great mixture of naturalfenfe. In fuch
characters there is as much merit as in the moſt.
brilliantones we meet in a court. The old man

delights to have me walk with him about hisfields,
andconverſe with him about his husbandry. Ido
fo continually, and hold myself tobe in a fairway
of gaining a great ſtore of rural knowledge. I

paſs my time very agreeably in walking, reading,
and working : Ihave alſo taken fome diverſion in
trout-fiſhing in farmer Clevel's fields. Now I

havementioned this, I must tellyou of alittleadN3

venture

THE HISTORY OF

TO

venture I hadthe other day, which did not at all
pleaſeme

As I was throwing myline, and very intent on
the fly, a gentleman appeared closeto me, whom
Ihad never seen before. He made me ſtart by
crying out, " What ſport, Madam ?" I ſtared
athimwith ſome furprize, and replied,-" None,
Sir." He was a kind of country 'ſquire, of a

middle age ; who was fiſhing, like myself, for
trout. He entered into common place topics.of the weather, the ſport, the fiſh, the river,
until, at last, he asked me,
" Pray, madam, may I crave the place you.
live at?"
:

" Very near this place, Sir."
" Dear me !-near this place!- I know all the
country round,-- and never had the happineſs
of feeing you before."
" Nor would it have been of any conſequence
if you had not had it now."
" Indeed it would, madam, for I ſhould beg
the honour of attending you now and then to the
river. It is much more agreeable to fiſh in company, than alone."

" I am quite of adifferentopinion-I likebetter to be alone-and foryour fervant, Sir.

”

Saying this I left him, andreturned honde. He
made me a'ow bow,-aſked many pardons, and
hopedno offence.
As an abfolute retirement is what I have fought
with the u'moſt affiguity, and thought myself fo
happy in fini git, this litte adventure did not
pleaf: me. Of all things Idefire nothing ſo much
as to remain abſolutely unknown,

and left fish-

ing ſhould bring me into more ſcrapes of the fame
kind, (for I can call them by no other name) I
ſhall take that diverſion no more.
-

Tuesday.

4

1.1
JULIA BENSON.
This afternoon as I was at work in my room,

one of Clevely's little girls came in, to defire in
her mother's name, that I would favour her with

my company at tea. I had three or four times

received ſuch invitations, and generally accepted
of them, as I thought they were pleaſed with it,
-therefore I told her I would wait on her mother.

Upon my going down ſtairs, and entering their
beſt parlour, I found, inthe roomwith then, the
gentleman, whom I had met at the river, an old
lady his mother, and his two ſiſters, young ladies
of good appearance. I was infinitely chagrined
at this rencontre ; but determined at once to

make the beſt of it by not opening my lips more
than was requifite, and ſtaying only for twodithes
atmost.

1

" This good lady (ſaid the farmer's wife) is
my landlad , ſhe has done me the fatisfaction of
accepting a cup of tea with us, Mrs. Pigott.--"
I madeno reply but a flight curtfie; but Mrs.
Simpton, for that was her name, addreſſing herfelf to me ;

!

" I find, madam, that you have made a choice
of this part of the country for a fummer retire-

men --I hope you are pl aſed with it --"
" Yes, madam, very well pleaſed with it
" Why it is a fine rich country, and very retired, though ſo near London."
" Yes, madam."

" I did not know, till my fon faw you at the

river, that we had any stranger in the parith.Ihave notſeen you at church, mada n."
" No, madam, Iſeldom go to chu ch. "
" No, indeed ! that is very strange. But perhaps you are of the Romiſh religion ? "
No, madan, I am not."

" Or of the Calviniſts perfuafion?
"No,

THE HISTORY OF
" No, madam."

12

" Poffibly the Lutheran?"
" No."

" Bred, perhaps, inthe kirk of Scotland?"
" Neither."

" I hope I am not impertinent."
"Not inthe leaſt."

" Among the friends, vulgarly called Quakers ?"

You feel am not by my drefs."
"

here are other religions, ſuch as Anabap-

tifts- and Methodists
" None of them."

" Poſſibly a Jewefs ?"
" By no means."
" I hope, madam, you do not think me im
pertinent -but--"
" Not at all, madam."

If I fhouldgive youno offence-pray, madam,
may I ask of what religion you are ?

" Of that of the Houlougroufchoukorſkins."
" Of what, madam !"

I profeſs the fame religion as the Houlougroufchoukonſkins."
" And what may that be?"

" I have no time at preſent to tellyou. The
1

creed is a very long one."
By this time I had swallowed two dishes, hear-

tily glad that the time was filled in ſo ridiculous
amanner, without queſtions which I ſhould have
difliked much more. But the lady feeing me
move began agair.-" Let me beg of you, madam, not to hurry
away upon our account. I fear I have made
too free with you."
" Not in the leaſt, madam."

1

" May Fexpectthe pleasure of your company
at

JULIA BENSON.
13
at Simpn Hall; it is only two miles off;
--an
agreeable walk in dry weather.
- Mr. Clevely will
ſhew you the way."

" I am extremely obliged to you, madam ; I
will take fome opportunity of waiting on you."
" I hope you wi , madam, ( and one of t'e
daughters.) We shall endeavour to render the
place agreeable to you."

" And whenever you want any fiſhing (faid the
gent eman) I am your man-and I beg you will

commandmy fervice."
To all this I made as civil a return as few words

would let me. The old lady preſſed me to cone
on the morrow . I faid I could not.

66

Then

next day (replied ſhe)"-and pushed me ſo brifk-

ly withher invitation, that I was forced to put
her off rather abruptly, by saying that I could not
name the day-- but would wait on her.

" Well, (replied the) if we do not ſee you
foon, Betſey ſhall call uponyou , and enquire after your health, and thew you the way." To this
I answered, that I was much obliged to her ; but
begged the young lady would not trouble herself
-and to the viſit ended.

I am leſs alarmed than if they were fine people.

Luckily, it is a thorough country family. The
old lady is a widow, with an estate of about eight

hundred pounds ayear, out of which ſhe ſupports
the fon, and his two ſiſters, as well as herſelf; af-

ter her death, Farmer Clevely tells me the young
*ſquire will be his landlord-that the oldgentleman
would not have him brought up to any trade or
profeffion; ſo he lives, booby like, with his mother. The daughters are modeſt, agreeable women, and Idareſay would appear ſenſible, if their
mother was not in company ; but her tonguefilen-

ces every body's elfe. I believe the fon is not a
fool,

14

THE HISTORY OF

fool, but he is a moſt uncultivated creature-he
puts me more in mind of Will Wimble than of

any thing elſe-a character, which is seldom defpicable in any point, becauseitpretends to nothing
further than what it is maſter off, which is the

caſewith very few others.
Iwas not in any haſte to pay my viſit. Some
days paffed, and the farmer and his wife urged me

to go-faying ſhe was a very good woman-and
meantme a compliment, by aſking me; but I generally put the converſation off, with faying I
ſhould goperhaps foon. However, Iſtaid ſo long,
that the Miſs Simpsons and their brother came to
enquire after me, and ſhew me the way to Simp-

fon Hall-upon this I was obliged to attend them.
As we were walking, the eldest of the ladies had
ſome converſation with me; the began with ſaying, that ſhe hoped I excuſed the ſtrange freedom

of hermamma, in afking fomany queſtions about
my religion ; but aſſured me, that she did not
mean to be offenſive-and ſaid, that ſhe intereſted

herſelf very much about me; that she did not
think I was what I appeared at Clevely's, but a
perfon of faſhion, that had retired for some reafon or other into the country.

To this obſervation, which did not please me,
I answered, that she was much mistaken- that I

was nothingmore than I appeared and no perſon
of fashion-or any thing like it.
"Mama ſays, Madam, that you muſt certainly
be ſomething above what you appear, by the

ſtrangenessof yourreligion, and
and by your always
being alone-and notdefiring to come into company at all. But I hope you will not find any
thing diſagreeable at our house."
"I am very confident I shall not do that,
madam."
"And

۱

JULIA BENSON.
15
"Andif mama ſhould happen to teaze you
with queſtions, which it must be owned, ſhe is
very apt to do to every body, will you be kind
enough only to look at me, and Iwill take you
outof the room ?""

:

"There will be no occafion, Mifs, for your
giving yourself that trouble, as I am not at all
offendedby any queſtions."
" We never go to Londen, andkeep not much
company from my mama's diſliking the London
neighbours. She says the country is ſpoiled by
being overrun by upſtarts, from the shops of
Fleet-ſtreet and the Strand.

This makes

er

eſteemed proud, though she is very far from being ſo, and keeps us almoſt from all fociety-fo
that we should be very happy, madam, ifyou
would favour us with your company now and
then."

1.

Upon arriving atthe manſion, we were met by
Mrs. Simpson,in company with a gentle man, who
they told me, was the parfon of the parish. The
old lady began immediately to reproach me for
not having been there before. I apologized.
" Madam, (replied ſhe) I have a notion that
you are a woman of fashion, who, for some reaſon or other, have retired for atime into the

country-I am therefore deſirous of paying you
any civilities in my power.".
" I am much obliged to you, madam, for your
kindneſs-butindeedyou muchmistake me Iam
no-

" Yes yes, you are of a different ſpecies from
the ſwarms of Londoners, that render this neigh-

bourhood diſagreeable. Mr. Munſter, indeed,

ſays theydo good in ſpending their moneyhere ;
but I appeal to you, madam, if it is not grating
to an antient family, which has lived five hundred

years on the ſame ſpot, to findit over-runwith
tinkers

16

THE HISTORY OF

tinkers and taylors : fruiterers and ſtay-makers."

" Certanny , madam, they do not improve a
neighbourhood.
" I cannot take awalk, but I run my nofe
againſt an oilman ; or aside, but I meet the

daughter of a fifhmonger on a netted horse, with
ahat and teather. My coach is joſtled in the
read, by that of a fcale-maker's; and I am prevented from getting to my pew at church, by a

nob of grocers and chandlers, milleners andmantua-makers.

"Keall , madam, this isan abſolute grievance
to you ; but, it is to be hoped theſe fine people
pay you the reſpect that is due to your family.

"Respect ! yes, they do reſpect one's family
indeed.

Their whole buſineſs is to thew their

wealth, and make themselves look great among
the countrymen, and this, they think, is done by
raying.elpect to no body-they take precedence
of you- givethemteives ali minner of airs-drive
over you ride a hunting through your garden-

and think every thing may be justified if they
keep a pair ofhorfes more than you-or a footman
-or drets richer-or eat better--- These are

our London neighbours !"

"Bad enough, ingood truth, madam."
" Yes, yes ; but Mrs. Sin plon carries every
thing to extren es. They are not fo bad, and
theſe ſame Londoners that offend you so much
fpend abundanceof money inthe country. They
a ready market for your tenants to fell their

crops and produ&s of all forts to, and you let your
fa.ms inproportion to that advantage
Aye, Mr. Munter is always taking their part
-and fo he would if they we e Mahometans.
Mis. Piggot, had I ſuppoſed you a mere Lon"

“

doner Iſhould not have ſpoken ſo freely against
then,

JULIA BENSON.

17

them, but, as I faid before, I think you were not
bredin that offenfive town-you had a better origin, madam."
" Beſides (continued the parſon) theſe are not
your only neighbours, you have foveral families
of real faſhion, that vifit you regularly."
" Yes, but thenumber is very few-What do

you call Sir William Reeves, Mr. Anſon, ana Sir
GeorgeMilbourn ? These are not neighbours."
At the mention of the name of Sir George, I
was ſtruck with fear, as he would, in cafe he met

me, certainly know me, from the rencounter we
had at Mr. Melvill's ."

" Neighbours! (continued the parſon) what

- do you caid neighbours ?-they vifit you very often."

" Do they ſo (faid I to myself) thenI willnot."
Soon after Mis. Simpſon ſhewed me her houſe,
and when I entered the room, upon being fummoned totea, who ſhouldbe there but Sir George ?
-The moment he saw me-

" Miſs Benfon!- Madam, your most obedi-

ent fervant, (making me a profound bow) What
brought you into this part of the world ? "
" Some buſineſs, fir"-and turning to one of
the Miss Simpson's, I began a conversation with
her, merely to change it from t at odious coxcomb. Mrs. Simpson, however, cried out,
" Miſs Benfon !- See there now !- Did I not

tell you, guls, that Mrs. Pigot was not what the
ſeemed?"

" Mrs. Pigot ! (exclaimed Sir George) I fear
I havemade miſchief.- Upon my word, madan,
if I had thought you ad meant to appear under a
borrowed name, I would have been more cautious."
" It is of no conſequence."

" Truly not of much indeed; for I apprehend
0

you

9

18

THE HISTORY OF

you no longer profeſs yourself a female Quixot
for rescuing damſels in diſtreſs."
From this ſpeech, and the manner in which it
was made, I ſaw plainly he was going to make
uſe of this opportunity to revenge himself on me
for the tranſaction at Mr. Melvill's, relating tothe
affair of the Sampher's-But I determined not to
ſpare him.

" Pray, why ſhould I not now be the female
Quixot as well as at any other time?"
" Delicacy, madam, prevents my being expli
cit
-not that you are to blame-to be ſure fortune
has been rather croſs of late."

" True, SirGeorge, butfortune maydomuch
worſe for me ; I may useher neglect as badly as
you have applied her bounty-when that is the
cafe, you will indeed have reason for your hums
andhaws, and for thoſe infinuating ſhrugs."
" Methinks, madam, you are very farcaſtical."

" I profeſs it, Sir George, whenever I have
the honour of converfing with you."

" I think it would better become a perſon in
your preſent circumſtances to have more humility."

" Poverty in me, Sir, is no reproach.-Befides, I have reaſon rather for exultation than bu-

mility, to find my poverty riſe ſo much fuperior
toyour wealth. Indeed, Sir, I look down upon
you with pity."
I made him this ſpeech in a tone and manner
that cut him to the heart-he reddened with an-

ger-and only faid, in reply to it, " that he believed this country would toon find out what refpect was due to a fugitive-a run away from a

gaol"-and upon that took his leave hastily of
1

Mrs. Simpson.

When he was gone, Iexplained toher in asfew
words

JULIA BENSON.

‫و‬

words as I could, the reasons for the circumſtan-

ces, which appeared ænigmatical to her-and
gaveher a full relation of Miss Sampher's affairs.
They all treated his character with very little refpect-loaded me with careſſes

and in a moſt

friendly manner begged of me to ſtay the evening
-and aſſured me they ſhould never be better entertained than with my company.
But, my dear Emilia, I have been too much
difciplined to viciffitude, to ſtay longer in this

country and I think my deſtiny is very cruel to
diſplace me from a ſituation, in which I could
have continued with entire ſatisfaction.

This vile

adventure will prove of infinite inconvenience to
me-I know not where to go, and may try forty
farm-houſes , before I find one ſo much to my
purpoſe as Clevely's. But my evil ſtars must be
obeyed-I must seek another habitation whether I
will or not. As this is a critical matter to me, I

muſt determine on conducting myſelf accordingly
without delay-I ſhall keep this letter open, that

I may give you a further account of my motions.
:

My dear Emilia! I am fated, I believe, to be

the ſport of fortune ; for every day brings me
into vile adventures, which terminate in the moſt

gratingmanner . You must give me your pati-

ence while I recite the particulars of a ſtrange
affair that has lately happened.
I before told you my refolution of leaving
Canefield, and ſearching for fome other retirement. Pursuant to this reſolution, I told farmer

Clevely of it, and paid his wife up to my taking
leave of them,
they were very much concern-

ed, and uſed many arguments
to perfuade me to
Ο 2

change

20

THE HISTORY OF

change my mind. I believe they would readily
have boarded me for nothing,wather than have

me go ſo ſuddenly. A poſt-ch ife was procured
to carry me to Uxbridge, whither I had fixed on
going, as I ſhould then be in the main road, and
take a ſtage coach to any place at adiſtance from
Londen. I had my trunk packed up immediately. The chaiſe was to have been ready at one
o'clock, as it could not come before. It was not

with me till three, and then I took my leave of
the worthy family.

The boy had not driven me four mi'es, before
he complained that one of his horses had lost a
ſhoe, and that he must have a new one put on ;
for which he ſtopped at a fmith's, and kept me
two hours-foon after the linch-pin flew outof one
of the wheels. This occafioned a freſh delay,
and I was forced to walk half a mile almoſt in the

dark to another ſmith's, where the loſs was repai

red. Then Igotin again, and, after ajumbling,
jolting ride of near two hours longer-all the way
in the dark-the chaiſe ſtopped at the door of
what, I thought, the inn at Uxbridge. I alighted, and defiring to be ſhewed a room, a waiter
conducted me up ſtairs, opened a dining-room
door, and uſhered me in, aſking what I would
pleaſe tohave for ſupper? I ordered a fowl, and
beingmuch fatigued, defired to fee the chambermaid, whom I directed to get me a bed directly.
Iafked two or three questions about Uxbridge
and its neighbourhood, which were anſwered very
readily. It was eleven o'clock before I got to
bed.

In about a quarter of an hour after, the door.

of my room opened, and who ſhould appear but
the wretch, Sir George Milbourne, dreſſed with
abag-wig and ſword, attended by two women,
whofe

JULIA BENSON,

21

whoſe countenances I by no means lized, each of
them carrying a candle. I ſtarted up in my bed,

and Sir George, without any ceremony, undrawing the curtain, ſaid tome,
6

"Now, Miss Benton, I think, is the proper
time for you to make meſome fatisfaction for the
pretty extraordinary treatment I have received
fron you more thanonce. Look you, madam,
you are in a house of mine fifteen miles from
Uxbri ge-all here are at my devotion-Iam determined to paſs the night with you, either by
fair means or foul. Submit at once with a good

grace-or with the aſſiſtance of theſe good women I shall

"

" Stop-sir George-give me a moment's
recollection, and I will answer you."
He stood filent, Imade uſe of theſe few mi-

nutes to collect my frightened ſenſes, and confider

what to do. I found that I was abſolutely in his
power, and that reſiſtance wouldbe in vain.. No-

thing could fave me but ſtratagem-I thought I
could deal with him better alone than with his

curſedattendants. I caſt my eyes upon his ſword,
could Ibut be nimble enough to ſecure it, thought

I, I shallbe ſafe-I formed my reſolution very
ſpeedily

and replied,

" WellSir-I must own-I must confels you
have nowgot the better of me-I ſubmit, Sirand ſince you have got the advantage ofme-I
hope you willbehave like a man of honour and "
" You charm me, my angel-By heavens I will
beas fecret as the grave-I will never-"

" Remember my reputation depends on your

prudence, Iwillſubmit with a goodgrace at once;
but ſpare my blushes, Sir George-fend away
your attendants for heaven's fake."

" Away !-leave me you may go to bed,
03

Kitty ,

22

THE HISTORY OF

Kitty; do not let me (in a low voice)be diſturbed
inthe morning-tellGeorge he maygo to bed-”
"They left the room, andthe baronet enraptured with fucceſs, which he began to thinkwas
partly owing to an affection for his dear perfon,

ofwhich he is immoderately vain, careffed me
much-made me an hundred compliments--and

began to undreſs. While he was thus employed,
I felt an hundred terrors, but not ſufficient to deprive me of my prefence of mind-leſt I ſhould

be disappointed in my attempt on his fword for
wantof an opportunity-I tied two handkerchiefs

together, and formed a flipping noofe at one end
without being ſeen by him with this I purpoſed
watchingan opportunity to ſtrangle him, or at least
to fecure him, or entangle himwhile I flew to the
fword. Upon his coming into bed, through modeſty and defign, I begged he would look another
way-complained ofthe candles not being out-

and on iis giving himselfa turn,pushedmyhandkerchief to his eyes in order to blind him- atthat
inſtant Iwatched my opportunity, and flipped the
noofe over his head. Itdropped a little below
his ſhoulders-I tightened it at once with a great

exertion of ſtrength, and ſpringingunto him, gave
it ſuch a pull, that he was pinioned in aninſtant.
His arms bent back, and cloſe to his fide. With a'l

the expedition imaginable, I tied a knot which
fecured him ; and,flying out of bed, feized his

fword, which I drew. He was beginning torecover fromhis aftonishment and ſtruggling ſo hard
as to alarm me, calling cut atthe fame time ; but

preſenting the ſword with a fierce air: " Villain,
this inſtant isyour last, if you ftir hand or foot, or

ſpeak a fylable." And pointing it at his heart:
now is the time (faid I) to revenge myfelf." But
he

JULIA BENSON.
he in a low voice

23

" for God's fake- for

heaven's fake ſpare my life ! "
Ididnot yetthink him fecure, anddreaded his
getting looſe. With one hand therefore I drew
away the upper ſheet, holding the ſword in the
other; andwhen I had got it all off-laying down
the weapon in a chair within my reach, I put one
endof the ſheet under him, and pulling it round,

began to bind him up in it over the arms and
head. He was as quiet as a mouse. I ſwaddled
himup in ſuch a manner, that I did not think it

was poſſible for him to get looſe, or even to
ſpeak; but left Ishould be mistaken, I did the
fame with the other ſheet,binding him so tight,
that he in ahalf-ſtified voice cried out, " I am

fuffocated ! -do not ſtrangle me !"
Having thus fecured him paſt a poſſibility of
getting loofe; Ibegan to think of making my
eſcape. At that moment ſeeing his clothes lie
on a chair, it came into my head to dreſs myfelf
in them, as the beſt means of getting off. The
idea no ſooner ſtruck me than the reſolution was

taken. I drew on his breeches, and they fitted
me exactly, but then I recollected that I had no

ſhirt
-my shift would make but a bad appearance; I ſhall be happy indeed, thought I, ifgood
luck ſhould lead me to one in theſe drawers ;

when opening a cheſt, that ſtood in the room, it
diſplayed at least a dozen, with other linen. I

putone on immediately ; delighted with my good
fortune. Then drawing on his ſtockings, and
putting on his ſhoes, &c. Ifound nothing that

woulddiscover me but my hair-this I put into
his bag, and ſtroaking up my toupee, made it fet
pretty decently, when I had gothis hat on. Next

I buckled on the sword, and then put on his coat
and waistcoat. All this was very aukward to me,
and

24

THE HISTORY OF

and was not thereforedone with ſuch expedition
as Iwaited for. Being thus accoutred, l'examined his pockets. I found a pocket-book ſtuffed
with pape s-an etwee and in his purse fifteen
guineas, both the latter I left behind me on the
choir. But the former I took , as Idid not doubt
but itwould afford me fome amusement.

I then

emptied my own pockets of what I wanted ; and
packedup two of Sir George's ſhirts in a handkerchief, a couple more ſtocks, two pair of ſtockings, and ſome handkerchiefs of my own, with
two or three ther trifles out of my trunk ; then

putting one of the candles out, and taking the
other in my hand-I fallied forth.
Ihad two chances ofdeceiving any body that
ill-luck ſh uld throwin my way among the females
of the house ; my being dreſſed in Sir George's
clothes, and my being nearly of this ſtature.
Theſewere lucky circumstances. Beſides his voice
has a peculiar,ſqueak init, that I had often taken
off ; and I thought the ſame practice might beof
admirable uſe. I went down stairs, without hear-

ing any one. I perceived a ſtair-cale, at the foot
of which were ſome mens ſhoes and buckles.

This, thought I, is the ſtairs to the men's rooms.
Imitating Sir George's voice, I hollowedGeorge!
at the bottom, who answered preſently " Sir !"
"Din you for a rafcal, how often am I to
call you get up this moment." Iwas now in a
great di emma, which was, whether it were poffible for me to appear before the fellow, when he
came down, and not be discovered.-I waited till

he came down, and then blowing my nosewhile

I ſpoke, tohide myface. You, fir, go-putto
your horses in the poſt-chaife his moment-I

mustgo offnow on particular buſineſs."
A

"Yes,

JULIA BENSON.

25

"Yes, fir, ſhould Itake the mare Kitty, fir,
or longlegs."
"Take long legs."
" Yes, fir."

And out he went withoutdreamingof a deception.

No body elſe ſtirred in the houſe, and in about
half anhour the chaife was at the door-I stepped
into it ſaying I would have none of the peop! go
with me, and ordered the man to drive to Uxbridge. All this w ile he did not ſeem in the leaſt

to ſuſpect the impoſition ; I imitated SirGeorge's
voice fo well, that the man could not well be un-

deceived. Upon my arrival at Uxbridge, I or
dered him to go to the George, which was an

inn I had heard of; andwithoutgetting out ofthe
chaiſe, directed him to order a poſt-chaiſe and
borſes immediately. I then told George to wait
till five o'clock the next evening for me, and then
ſtepping out of one chaiſe into the other, I drove
off in the London road. At Brentford, I turned

off, croſſed the Thames, and diſcharging the
chaiſe, took another for Epſom. Here thinking

myfelf pretty ſafe from a pursuit ; I ſtopped to
take ſome refreshment, and to plan my future
operations.
Iwas inclined to take a place in ſome ſtage
coach, to a greater diſtance from London, to get
a fresh farm- house to boardin-but I determined

to do it as a man, and not as a woman. I like my

metamorphofis-I feel an independance--and a

fatisfaction from beingin appearance a man-and
on an equality with that ſex, which, I muſt own
Ihate and deſpiſe. It is true, there are ſome individuals of it that are valuable, and would almoſt
make one eſteem the ſex for the sake of them .

But theſe few excepted, where are there any that
do

26

THE HSITORY OF

do not move one's indignation !

There are,

it is true, numbers of women who are as vile as

any men can be. But ifthe whole ſex is examined, I am clearly of opinion that the ballance of

villainy will be with the men. The activity of
their lives hurries them into more mischief, than
the quietness of ours will allow ; and their education is agreat advantage to them. They are,
for the moſt part, brought up inſeminaries ofvice,

folly, and licentieuſneſs. The moſt agreeable
man, therefore, my Emilia, must be the male appearance, with the feminine reality.

My fituation is ſo precarious, and whereever I
go, thedanger of diſcovery is ſo great, that I shall
certainly continue in my disguise, but it willbe
neceffary, as foon as poſſible, to get the other
clothes made.-Theſe of Sir George's may only

betrayme. Sometimes I thought of going down
to Suſſex thus disguised, and getting acquainted,
ifI could, with either my father, brother, or fome
of their friends.

Here, mydear Emilia, I am; uncertain ofmy
future fate, where I ſhall go I know not what is
beſt for me to do equally uncertain:-I think I
may be able to---but the waiter now enterswith
the dinner I have ordered therefore muſt, for
the preſent, lay down my pen.

The dinner being over, and the fellow gone, it
came into my headto examine Sir George's pocket-book; I took it out, and turning over ſome of
the papers, have made a diſcovery that aftoniſhes
me.--The only way, my dearest, of letting
you into the fecret without confuſion, will be to

tranſcribe ſome letters I found.

I would send
you

JULIA BENSON.

27

youtheoriginals, but they will bewanted forpurpoſes, I hope, of much importance to me.

You remember the history of Lord William
W-'s tranſactions with Signora Zaffini atMilan; and the many reaſons I have for confidering
J

her as thegreatest enemy that ever rofe to the disquiet of my life. The following is a letter from
her to Sir George.

To Sir GEORGE MILBOURN .
" SIR,

1

I not
Cannot
comprehend your meaning ; did you
tell me, that in cafe I fucceeded, you
would reward me withfourhundred guineas ? This
was ſimply the agreement. Whereas, now, you
talk of conditions, which Inever heard of before.

What can be the meaning of this ? Itis miſchievous to my love that any fuch connection ſhould
have been between us , for now I cannot but

conſtrue alltheſe neglects of your's merely as a
wantof that affection to which I firſt ſacrificed

myſelf. Relent, fir, and dojustice tothe injured
ZAFFINI."

" To Sir GEORGE MILBOURN.
" SIR GEORGE !

YOURanswer is by no means fatisfactory.
expence. It was never mentioned; far leſs agreed
to.

You cannot but remember that when I firſt

perfuadedyou to undertake thejourney to Suſſex,
inwhich I accompanied you-that your engage-

ment through revenge, as you faid, was to make
you

28

THE HISTORY OF

you ſharers inthe expence. Ithen told Mr. Benfon, that from the knowledge I had gainedof Mr.
Melliſh in Italy, and, in particular, by the exiſtencect a wil of a later date than that underwhich

Mits Benfon inherited, he might very easily gain
what might be made appear to be his undoubted
right. He was at fiſt backward in the affairbut you pushedit with vel emence, and after retiring with Mr. Fenton , for about an hour, returned to me, and erquired into the expence of

my witneſſes.-Then it was that I toldyou I muſt
have the fun of ſeven hundred pounds depoſited
immedi tely : Mr. Fenfon making many hefitations, you to encourage him, on ſeeing that he
would otherwife flinch, faid " I willbe half, Mr.

Benton. " " Will you, Sir George ?" faid he,
then I agree to the other half." Something I

krow paſſed tetween you about dividing the ſpeil,
butwhat agreement you came to, I kuow not.

" In confequence of that day's trantation, and
only thepayment of a part, Iprocured the witneſſes myself, principally, to a will which you
know was all a romance.In confequence ofthat

wil! you and Mr. Benton divide fifty thousand
pounds, and disputewith me about my small reward.

" Was I a common informer or of an infamous

char ter, you might well ſuppoſe I ight be

focled in his marner. I gave you not only my

affifance in this affair, but my heart alfo and
you owe me not only justice, but an affe&ion
which I expe&ed, but in which I am, I doubt,
nittably deceived.
" Acieu ! I expect a determinate anſwer im-

mediately, as I purpoſe ſetting out for Italy as
foon as this affait is over.

ZAFFINI.
To

JULIA BENSON.

29

✓ To Sir GEORGE MILBOURNE.

Receivedyour answer to my laſt,but believe
me, Sir George, this remittance of one hundredpounds, which is plainly fentbyway ofexpediting my voyage to Italy, inſtead oftatisfaction
to ajuſt demand, will not anf er your purpoſe.
You are much mistaken if you think I had com-

mon notives for engaging in the villainy of procuring you a pack of perjured raſcals of my own
country to eſta liſh the credibility of a will that

put ſomany thousands into thepockets ofyou and
Mr. Benſon. No Sir- REVENGE against the
womanwasmy motive-and I would have you to

know that means ſhall not be wanting to fatisfy
a ſimilar reſentment against you and that lump
of ſtupidity- Benfon. I reject your offers, and
will either be fatisfied or feize that, with ruin to

you all, which you refuſe to give me by fair
means."

ZAFFINI .

>

To Sir GEORGE MILBOURNE .
Received your notes- as to the papers you
mention I shall not return them . I cannot but

confider this acquiescence ſo very late and ungracious, as forcedby my threats rather than granted

I

thro' justice. Jaques, Lacreſe, and Villette are
gone.- Did you think me fuch a novice as to keep
them after their buſineſs was executed ?
Yours, &c.
ZAFFINI.

Here's intelligence, my dear Emilia !- Surely
this may bemade uſeof to recover my fortuneP

if

THE HISTORY OF

30

if not I am in a ſtrange dream. Now to explain
the uſe I am to make of this diſcovery.-In the

firſt place, Sir George, the inſtant, he miſſes his
pocket-book, will do all he can to pursue me,
which is nodifficutmatter. I must therefore away
immediately.
1

My plan is togo directly to London in the firſt
Portsmouth ſtage that paſſes , which will be here
in half an hour, but I ſhall take a walk out of

town that the people of this houſe may not know
mymotions.
The moment I get to London I
buy a ready made fuit of cloaths with all things

ſuitable. Then I will go directly to Sir Philip
Egerton's, and give him a packet containing theſe
letters, with one for myſelf, pretending that they
come from a lady who entrusted me with them.

This is my preſent ſcheme -Adien, my
dearEmilia, believe me ever to remain fincerely
3

_your's,

JULIA BENSON.

MISS BENSON to Sir PHILIP EGERTON.
SIR,

NCLOSED Ifend you fome letters which

I accident has thrown in my way. They lay
open, in theclearest manner, the amazing ſcene
ofvillainy, which has deprived me of my fortune. Every thingis eaſy to be accounted for ;
now it appears that that extraordinary woman,
Zaffini is at thebottom of it.

I ſhallnot yet make my appearance at preſent,
being determined toremain in entire obſcurity,
rather than live in a dependance which would
1

make

JULIA BENSON.

31

make me contemptible. I am confident Imay
depend onyour friendship to put theſe papers into

hands proper for a new trial, and alfo for punishing ina fuitablemanner the whole crew of knaves
that are discovered. After the trial is over, if it

re-inftates me in my just rights, I ſhall ſpeedily
return, otherwiſe ſhallnever be heard of.

My friends may think this reſolution extraordinary- but my introduction into life was too brilliantto make me ſtoop to fuch a bitter change of

fortune. Dependance is hateful tome, and Icannot think of an intercourse of friendship where

all is liberality on one ſide andonly gratitude for
me. As to Lord William W--, I fincerely
regret him he is a man Itruly valued, andwhoſe

friendſhip I ſhould prize moſt dearly if Iwas in
a ſtate to return him any thing but poverty. If
my fortune isdeſperate, ſeriouſly urge him no lon-

ger to think of an unhappy woman who never
more can be known to him. Your friendſhip
for him, Sir Philip, should make you warm in
my
executing this part of my commifion, foritis
:
fixeddetermination.

I remain, &c.
JULIABENSON. :
1

1
1
.

1

गे 1

LETTER XXVIIL
Mr. MELVILL to Mr. FREDERICK.
.
2

ONVINCED thatMiss Benſonwill remain in

Cher preſent retirement,wherever ſhe isgone,
to avoid all mankind ; or that, if she returns
from it, it will not be for me I have fet about in

good earnest to conquer a paffion that promifes
P2

to

32

THE HISTORY OF

to be ſo utterly fruitleſs, and hope ſometime of
other to give you a good account of my being
truly a recovered man. That she is a very extraordinary woman cannot be doubted, and it is
fromthe strength of character in her that I judge
The will always remain unknown. I never had

any clear intelligence of her affair withthe nobleman abroad-but nothing can be conjectured of
it but its being a love one that was unexpectedly
broken off, probably renewable again in England
-but whateverit is, it has damped my hopes not
a little.

If I had ever known that she was en-

gaged, I ſhouldhave been far enough from falling
in love with her for that is a paffion which can
never exiſt without hope. Certainly I ſhouldhave

explained my inclinations to her then she would
have had an opportunity of explaining her
ſituation, or of giving me apoſitive denial, which
would have saved me a world of pain. But all
theſe things have gone adverſe, and I must apply

thebeſt remedy which my philofophy can afford.
Miſs Sampher has gained fomeintelligencecon-

cerning her old enemy Sir George which gives
her much fatisfaction, for ſheis terribly afraid of
ever meeting with him again-This idea ſhe carriesſo far as never to ſtir out without alitle pocket
piſtolabout her. Iwould have laughed her out of
fears, but she made me with a ſerious intent,load
it for her, and teach her the whole use of it. Sir

George isgone to France with the utmoſt expedition-he haſtened from his houſe more like a

fugitive flying for life than a gentleman ſetting
out totravel. Ithink it not unlikely that he has

run awaytoeſcape fighting with fomebody-for
he is anarrant coward, andyet inceffantly getting
into fcrapesthatmuſtunavoidably bring him aduel
or a drubbing fome time or other.
Do

33
JULIA BENSON.
Do you know that Maſon is going to be marri-

ed?-One would think the man is mad, and was

bent on proving that there are no contradictions
too great to be looked for in the characters of

mankind. After ſpending twenty years at laughing at, ridiculing, andreviling theſex, andthinking marriage, under every advantage of rank,
fortune, education, &c. to be but another word

for the ruin of a man's peace-after having made
freewith every one of his acquaintance in this
manner is this ſtrange lump of volatility and

fournefs going to match himself for life with a
termagant miſtreſs the off-caſt of another. Cer-

tainly he deſerves what he willget ; nor ſhall I
ever pity him if ſhe beats him ten times a week .
-It is Sally Manning, as vile a temper as ever
formed a ſhrew-ugly-hagged-and not worth a
thilling-but probably many in debt. I have

laughed at him pretty feverely once or twice, but
hegrows choleric, and fays a man ſhould act as

he pleaſes if he chooſes to marry a cow. If you
meethim do not ſparehim he well deferves eve1
ry ridicule we can caft on him.
My brother is ordered to his regiment, much
t

concerned that he has not been able to do fome

ſervice for his benefactress.-He is a gratefullad
and the well deferves it.

RICHARD MELVILL
1.
2

-87

LETTER

Lord WILLIAM W

XXIX.

, to Mr. FRANKLIN.

NCE more I am landed on my native ſhore
-and what hurts me not a little in fearch

of adventures. Igave you an account, in mylaſt
P3

from

34

THE HISTORY OF

from Parma, that I had received preffing calls in-

toEngland, to see my long loft Julia-I haſtened
with all the speed of unabated love, and yet arrived too late.

There never was a man ſo marked

by fate to be the ſport of fortune. It is a strange
tale, but I willbe brief in relating it.. >
My worthy friend, Sir Philip Egerton, acci-

dentally met with Miss Benfon at a maſquerade,
and formed an immediate acquaintance with her.
-Hewaited onher the nextday, to make known
the ſtate of my heart to her and to interm her,
that her abſence had made me the moſt miferab'e

of mortals. He put into her hands aferies of letters to prove the falfity of the accusation I laid
under at Florence, from her, and her uncle, Mr.
Melliſh. In a word, he convinced her that I was

innocent and he had so much regard for my re-

poſe, as to queſtion her frankly concerning the
ſtate of her inclinations-left any new attachment
or connection ſhould have obliterated the memo-

ryof me. The account he gave me was very
favourable to my wishes; and made me the happieſt being in the world. He waited on the duke
my father, and laid the whole affair before himhe was introduced to Miſs Benfon, admired her

infinitely, and was the eagereſt creature breathing
to haften me home, that the nuptials might be

immediately
Julia livedcelebrated
in a house in Pall-mall, in an elegant and genteel manner. Her uncle left her
above thirty thouſard pounds, beſides many va-

luable colections. From my knowledge of her,
Iam clear, that no perfon in England would make
a bet er or more reſpectable figure. In the midst
however of her profperity, her brother commenced a law fuit against her for no less than the
whole fortune lefther by Mr. Mellifu. He made
this

JULIA BENSON.

35

this claim under the fan&ion of a will of a later

date, than that by which Julia inherited. By the

teſtimony of ſeveral witneſſes, though under the
cloud of fome very fufpicious circumstances, he
carried his point, and ſtripped this moſt amiable
woman of allherfortune, and left her indebted to

him eight thousand pounds. The wretch threw
her into prifon': my father immediately paid the

money ; and bought her houſe and every thing it
contained, of her brother, at one bargain-and
kept the fervants together, determining directly

to re-inftate Miſs Benfon till my arrival, when
the marriage would obliterate the memory of the
misfortune ; and as to the lots of the money, the
old duke valued it not

he was ſo charmed with

the woman, that the greatest fortune he thought
could add no luſtre to her.

Such was the plan ; and Sir Philip Egerton was
diſpatched to releaſe her from confinement-but
incredible to tell!-she would not be ſeen, and
uncommon means were taken, firſt to see, and
thento take her from confinement. At last, he

conducted her home to Pall-Mall, where ſhe found
every thing as she had left it-ſhe was very low
and penſive, and ſeemedmuch tobrood over her
ill fortune; his endeavours to affure her, that the

lofs or gain of her fortune was not an object of
any confequence, ſeemed not to make any im'he next morning he called on
preffion onher. T
her-ſhe was gone out !-Again he called-not
comehome! In a word, ſhe was gone off, and
nobody knew where .

: Sir Philip affures me, from the conversationhe
*
hashad with her, that the motive for this action

ismere pride. Shecould not bear to make a connection, while ſhe was an object rather of pity

than envy. I know her well; and though her
mind

1

36

THE HISTORY OF

mind is morepoliſhed than nine-tenths of woman.

kind, and ſtored with ſenſe, and an understanding
ſuperior to her fex-yet ſhe is open to the attack
of chimeras of her own imagination, and capable
of taking and fuſtaining the boldest reſolutions.
It is aftoniſhing to conceive what her plan can
be; ſhe was utterly deſtitute of money and in
all probability has not a friend, or relation, to
whom she can apply for aſſiſtance ; herown family are her moſt violent enemies. Beſides, I have
no idea that the would ever ſubmit topetition any
one. My father had given Sir Philip bank-notes
to the amount of fivehundred poundsto lay upon
her toilet for preſent use theſe ſhe left behind
her. Perhaps the may have fifty or an hundred
guineas by her butwhat isthat for awoman uſed
to affluence and every elegance of life. In a
word, she is retired to fome unknown place, and
cannot fail of being foon in great want, and expoſed to allthe miferies to which poverty leads.
This Mr. Franklin, is the ſituation of the wo-

man I love with an affection beyond the power of
expreſſion. I feel for her every wretchedneſs
that can befall human nature

and I tremble when

I think on what may befall her. Zaffini is yet in
England !-Miſs Benfon's misfortunes hitherto
cannot be owing to her , but in cafe ſhe was to
meet with her, while ſhe is thus defenceleſs and

exposed,what would be the conſequence ! Never

wasmanmore unhappy than I feel myfelf atpre
fent. It is a moſt miferable ſituation out of
which I must either ſoon be removed or rather

ceaſe to live. Before Iheard of her, after our

longſeparation, I was comparatively happy-but
tobe conducted almoſt to the poffeffion of fupreme happiness, and then at once ſnatched from

the profpect andhurried into miſery, is a trial too
fevere

JULIA BENSON.
37
ſevere for me to withſtand. I cannot think of the
1

fate which may befall that amiable woman, with-

outſhivering with horror.
I am laying plans every hour with Sir Philip
todifcover her retreat ; but we can fix on none

that have any proſpect of fucceſs. What courſe
to take, I know not. In caſe Icontinue much

1

longer in ignorance of the event that has befallen
the woman I adore, I ſhall leave this country for
ever, which will be perfe&ly hateful to me. My
father talks of a journey to the South of France
for his health. Iſhalfix in that charming country, where a clear azure ſky , andſerene air, with

apleaſing medium between heat and cold, will

probably keep my mind in better ſtate thanthis
foggy, changeable climate can, while I labour under miſery that drives me almoſt to deſpair.
Your's
*

ちょ

moſt truly,
WILLIAM W--,

1
1

LETTER

1

XXX.

Miſs BENSON, to Miſs EMILIA WATSON.

profecute the account I before fentyou,
IShall
mydearEmilia.
As I then mentioned, I took a ſtage to London ;

the company conſiſted of two naval officers, myfolf, and a young lady, that ſeened, from her appearance, to claim that title though I am not
clear but she might be a milliner's apprentice.
However, the was a paſſable ſtage-coach lady, and
rather pretty. I perceived that my fellow-travel-

lers, the fea-officers caſt a leering eye at her, and
would foon make love to her.

I reſolved not to
be

THE HISTORY OF

38

be outdone ingallantry, but made much more
brifk and lively advances than my rivals. I was
much better dreſſed than either of them, which

was no bad thing in my favour; ſo I preſently
found I should gain a clear fuperiority. I fung
love fongs-ogled-ſqueezed her hands-encircledherwaiſtwith my arm-whispered ſoft things
in her ear-called her an angelic creature-abuled the tar barrels and out-talked them fore and
aft. Oh ! Emilia ! what ſtuff are women made

of!

and how infignificant the means that are

usually made use of to enſnare theml-did they

but try the experiment themselves, they would
find that the victories of the men are void of all

honcur, on account of the eaſe with which they

are atchieved, A very little trouble wouldhave
ſecured me this fair one for my bedfellow : but
as I was not ambitious of that happineſs-I left
her foon to the attack of her friends ofthe waves ;
and took ahackney coach , which I ordered to
drive about till I saw a ſhop where ready inade

cloaths are fold. We prefently came toone, and
going in, I diſmiſſed the coach.

There I fixedupon aſuitofplain cloaths, &c.
and fully equipt myſelf much in the ſtile of a
well dreffed country farmer ; they took Sir

George's note in part of the payment. Afterwards getting into another coach, I ordered the
coachman to drive to Westminster-Abbey, that

Imight find lodgings in fome ſtreet beyond it, in
the moſt private part of the town. So farI proceededverywell. I hireda dining-room and bedchamber for fifteen ſhillings a week ; and I should

tellyou, that the people of the houſe, afterwards
feeing me rather diſtreſſed about eating, offered
to board me, which I accepted with the greatest
pleasure.
As

JULIA BENSON.

39

As foon as I was fixed in my new habitation, I

thought of going about my affairs to Sir Philip
Egerton's. I believe my dress and change of lex
would have ſcreenedme entirely from his diſcovery, in caſe he ſhould fee me ; but, to make aſſurance doubly fure, I bound a black ribbon acroſs
one eye. With this precaution Iſet out. When

I came to his door, I met him in the paſſage going out.

" Is this Sir Philip's ?" ſaid I to the ſervant
and having his reply ;

১১

" Sir (faid I) here is a packet, which I was
defired to give into your hands." Taking and
throwing his eye on the direction " Good God!
(faid he) Miſs Benfon's."

Pray, friend, wheredidyou get this letter ?"
" A lady, Sir, with whom I came to town in

a ſtage coach, hearing that Iwas comingthis way,
defired I would give it to you ."

!

" What ſtage-coach ? "
" The Portsmouth ſtage."
" Where did it fet her down ?"

" At an inn in Ludgate-ſtreet. I don't know
what.
"

" Which way did the go?"
" Really, Sir, Icannot ſay."
" Be ſo good as to ſtay one moment while I
read the letter."

Saying this he took me into the parlour, where
Ifat down while he read it-I marked his coun-

tenance, and if I may judge by the changes of it,
heis a true friend. Before he had finiſhed reading,
the door opened, and the man announced " Lord:
William W-."

Heavens! my dear Emilia, had a thunder-bolt
fallen near me, it would not have shocked me

more; but I believe, with the dieſs of the men,
Ihave

THE HISTORY OF

40

I have put on their refolution. I ſtarted up and
flew to the window, as if it were to look at fome-

body I knew, who waspaffing by : and ſo eſcaped
obſervation. I felta trembling ſhoot through me

like lightning: the meeting was ſo unexpected,
the rencontre ſo ſudder, that it ſeized me totally
unprepared.
" Here is nev's Lord William, that willmake

you leap for joy ;" (reading yet)
" Of Miss Benion ? "
"Yes."

" GoodGod!-let me read it immediatelywhere is she ?-how did you get it?-wherewhen-what- how- "

Atthat momentI lost my fright in the happineſs of hearing him, and finding by the evidence
of my own fenfes that Sir Philip had not deceived
me. I think he is improved in perſon ſince Ihad
that miferable parting from him at Florence. His
face is as animated as ever, but I think Ifee inhis
countenance a greater maturity of expreſſion,
more dignity and openneſsthanbefore. His manner and perſonal character are just the fame. At
this moment, Emilia, I found it was recorded in
the book of fate that I must love this man for ever.

" Here (laid Sir Philip) read theſe letters im-

mediately- they wil! anſwer all your queſtions."
Saying this, he gave them to his Lordſhip,

whoſe expreffive countenance exhibited everyfeeling of hisheart, and gave me the pureft fatisfaction. While he was reading them he cried out,
1

" Ah! Sir Philip, did I not warn you of the
machinations of that abominable woman ?-You
fee ſhe has been at the bottom of all this."

When he came to my letter to Sir Philip Egerton,

" Oh ! (faid he) here is Miss Benfon's."
He

JULIA BENSON.

41

He read it eagerly, and to the words, " As to
LordWilliam I fincerely regret him he is a man
I truly valued, and whole friendship I ſhould
prize moſt dearly, if I were in a ſtate to return
him any thing butpoverty."
" Gods! (cried he) what a glorious girl !"
The tears trickled from his eyes, and I saw his
heart was full. At that moment I had a ſtrong

impulſe to fly into his arms, andclaſp him to my
heart.-

1

" It is amazing(addedhe) that ſuch a woman
canthink there is the leaſt difference in her be-

tween poverty and millions. How did you
come by theſe letters, Sir Philip ? "
" I told you, my Lord, that this honeſt man
brought them."
" Pray, friend (faid Lord William to me)
can'ſt thou not give any gueſs where the ladyis to
be found that ſent theſe letters ? "

" No, mv Lord, I know nothing of her."
" Sir Philip, we must immediately have recourſe to the law in this affair.

Let us, without

delay, fly immediately to your lawyer, and confult him-we must proceed with the greateſt expedition, -for that must be the foul of this
buſineſs."..
66

My chariot is at the door, my Lord I will
attendyou immediately."

Imade my bow and left them, very well pleaſed
with the event of my experiment. Ohl my
Emilia, my heart is too full for utterance-I can-

not exprefs the rapidity of my feelings-I tremble
at my own happiness. Solong have I been used

tomiſery, that I can hardly believe my preſent joy
is not the effect of a delusion.-But why do I
indulge it ? Do I know that the event will turn
out well ? Is it not yet in the hands of lawyers,
of

42

THE HISTORY OF

of attornies and witneſſes ?-and if my fortune
ſhould not be recovered, I think I hope I truft

in myown reſolutionyet, that I ſhallhave ſtrength
of mind enough to reject all thoughts of the connection, pleaſing as it is, rather than be joined a
helpless beggar to a wealthy nobleman. But I will

not indulge this idea-I will entertain an hope for
the beſt, and think that I have at least a good

chance forbeing re-inſtated...
I returned to my lodging with a light heart,
and without regret fat down to the homely board
of an inferior ſhop-keeper, The man, after dinner, readthe news-paper, and among other art cles
was one of Sir George Milbourn's arrival at Paris.
This ſtruck me he certainly went thuher on account of the loss of his pocket-book ;-he expected to be ſeized for his ſhare in the transaction.
Ithink it is a goodfign, Emilia-for fuch a haſty

journey will have the appearance of a flight, and
induce thejury to give a verdict in my favour.
1

✓Saturday.
i

Iwalked yeſterday to Iſlington to make enquiries after the poor Samphers. The woman of
the houſe gave me a fad account of them-that
that brute, Sir George had again thrown the mother isjail, and had at, the fame time carried off
1

the daughter; but ſhe informed me that a gentlemanin Germain-Greet had rescued the young lady,
and ſhe ſince heard that he had taken the mother
outof prifon. This isM. Melvill; it is a worthy action, and he deserves praiſe for it. I am
eaſy, therefore, on this head, as I dare fay he will
not let them want.
My

JULIA BENSON.

43

My landlord is a ſhoe-maker, and as ſtrange a
character as ever I metwith he is politically mad.
Reading the news-papers is an employment with
him that rivals his ſhoe-making, and he gives

fuch attention to the ſtate of all the political affairs
in Europe, that I much queſtion if he will not
foon be a bankrupt. He makes it a rule to read
every article in every paper-to find out every
p'ace mentioned inthe map and to read the defcription of it in half a dozen Gazetteers. He
has taken another lodger and boarder, who is almoſt as great a politician as himself, and they
diſpute and wrangle about what they are both ex

tremely ignorant of, to my no ſmall diverfion.
This new lodger has something fingular in his
appearance. He has rather the look of the re-

mains of gentility ; he dreſſes ſhabbily-has a
meagre aſpect a thoughtful countenance-and
moſt eccentric manners.

He is one of the most

original creatures I ever met with his conversati
on is full of admirable good fenfe and confummate folly ſo equally blended, that it is almoſt impoſſible to pronounce whether he is a genius, a
fool, or a madman. I have an infinite curiofity
to know his hiſtory, and as I have liſtened with
fomeattention to much of his nonſenſe as well as

his ſenſe, I have fomehopes that I shallbe able to
:
gethim togive me the outlines of it.
Yesterday after dinner we had a converfation
that will give you fome idea of this ſtrange mortal,
whoſe name is Muſman, and he calls himself a
captain.
Our landlord, according to cuſtom, was at the
papers, which imported that the Empress of Ruf-

fia was deeply engaged in giving a new code of
laws to her people.

:

Q

Upor

44

THE HISTORY OF

Upon this Muſman obſerved, that she could
not have thought of a more ridiculous plan.
" Why ? (faid the politician)"
" Becauſe (answered the other) they are inca-

pable of legislation. Itis not the Empress, but
the Knout that governs Ruſſia. They are all
beaſts of burthen from the climate inwhich they
live."
r

" From the climate, captain ?‫יי‬

" Aye, Sir-all countries are inhabited by
animals fuitable to their climate .

You fee

lyons in one, and oxen in another-here you find
whales, and there turbots in one place parrots ,
and in anotherpartridges: It isjust the same with
men- in Africa they are black-in Europe white
-in England are rational-in Muscovy the contrary-in Italy cultivators of the fine arts-in
Sweden mere cultivators of the earth.

All this

depends merely upon the latitude- have travelled through all the countries of the world, and
have univerſally found that the diſtance from the

line guides every thing."
" Travelled through all the countries of the
world !-Dear me ! You know then the political intereſts of the kingdoms of Tonquin and
Siam. It is amoſt ſad thing that Brookes's Gazetteer does not give one an idea of Tonquin and

Siam. Pray, captain is the King of Siam a dependant on the Emperor of China ? "

"No-he is dependant onnothing but the high
priest of the kingdom."
" Something like the Pope, Perhaps ?
Not much.-The high priest is the greatest
maggot that breeds in the fatteſt elephant in the
king's ſtable, which is killed for that purpoſe in
thefull ofthe moon Chegra, and lies expoſed tillit
is truly rotten. The fine ladies ofthe court ſnuff up
the fumes of rottenneſs with infinite fatisfaction;
and

JULIA BENSON.

45

and theEmperor, the moment the maggot isdiſcovered, doeshomage to him by fiting with his bare
breech on a chair ſet with ten-penny nails."
"Come,come, captain-your tricks upon tra-

vellers have infected you this is all romance."
" Romance !-Yes every thing is romance
unleſs it is as common as eggs ten a penny. If
Iwas to tell a tenth part ofthe wonders which I

have seen you would ſtare and think it impoflible ; juft in the ſame manner as theKing ofSiam

laughed at the Dutch Ambaffadors when they
told himthat water was often fo condenſed in their

country that men cou'd travel on it. Perhaps,
Sir, you would think it ſtrange if I was to tell
you that inBorneothere is a nation who think the

virginity of their wives the greateſt diſgrace to
them-whowould look upon it as an intolerable
hardſhip if they were prevented from offering
their wives and daughters to all ſtrangers, in the
ſame manner as you would give better eatables to

a ſtranger than you commonly have in your fa-

mily. Or, of another nation whoſe moſt polite
falutation is to turn the body half round, lift up
one thigh, and let a roufing f-t ; which cuſtom
hasmade a voluntary expreſſion. Courtiers and
others, remarkable for their high-breeding, will:
let fly three ſucceſſively in exact cadence andtune.
Thisisreckoned great politeneſs, and afew have
carried this poliſh of refined manners to ſuch an

exquifite pitch of breeding as to play almoſt a

voluntary from their poſteriors. This certainly
ſeems very strange, fir, toyou ?"
"Aye by G-doesit."

" Andto you, fir," (turning to me) :
"Not in the leaſt, captain,becauſe I alſo have

beenagreattraveller, and I remembermeetingwith
anation in the inland parts of Africawho went
much farther in that art. Your Borneans made
Q3

it

46

THE HISTORY OF

itbut a point of politeness, whereas my Africans
applied it to utility. If they wanted to demoliſh
abuilding, they collected the moſt powerfullywindedperſons inthe country, whoplanting themſelves against thebuilding, would á poſteriori blow
it down in a trice- Nay, fir, I have feen a for-

treſs which would have ſtoodſeven days open
trenches againſt aſtout battery of cannon puffed
down inthis manner like a pack of cards-mere
amuſement, fir !"
Here cur honeſt landlord exclaimed,

" Mercy on me !-Why I have got either two
necromancers in my houſe, or two of the moſt
confounded lyars in chriſtendom !

"Chriſtendom, truly ! (exclaimed thecaptain)
Why, perhaps you don't know that Chriſtendom
isbut a nine thousand fix hundred and forty-fecond
part ofthe terraqueous globe. The Chriſtian religion is---

"Well, captain (faid our landlady) I defire we
mayhave no facrilege-none, none of your blaf
pheming-you have been a great traveller doubt-

leſs, but Chriſtendom must be agreat place-all
the world- I have heard John read out of the
Gazetteer as how
"
" The Gazetteer is a fool-I have written

twenty Gazetteers myſelf."
" Then (faid I) I prefume you are an author,
fır."

" Not at preſent-I followed the profeſſion of
an author ſixteen years in this city-I wrote confiderably more books on divinity, aſtrology, mathematics, philoſophy natural and moral, cookery,
farriery, phyſic, politics, trade and commerce,mechanics, criticium, &c. than would, on a mode-

Fate computation, fill Westminster-hall, though
packed like herrings in abarrel."
This

47
JULIA BENSON.
" This is very ſurpriſing indeed : and pray,
captain, what work are you upon now ?-I have

not feen theprinter's devils afteryouyet. Zooks!
Ihad an author lodged here once that had twenty
in a day. He was a good companion till he grew
too conceited of his own opinion, and I was forced to give him warning to leave his lodgings.
But I fuppofe, captain, you are inveſtigating the
manners of the Siamese, or tracing the preſent
ſtate of the ballance of power between the Tonquin and Thibet-Tartars."
" The devil a bit, Sir, I wrote for fixteen

years, and yet could ſcarcely earn bread. So I
left off the profeffion, and took up that of mathematician and traveller. But I have aplan now in

ideawhich I think may pay me prettydecently.
" Good captain, what is it?"

" Why, fir, I have discovered the perpetual
motion and the art of flying."
" Indeed ! "‫י‬

" Moſt truly, fir-by means of the one Ihave
found out the other."

" Amazing!"

" My perpetual motion preſerves a perpetual
ſuſpenſion-my calculation is the velocity of ſevenhundred miles a day."
" Good Lord !"

" Andpray, good fir, (ſaid I) to what region
do you propofe flying ? "
" To the moon."

" You are ferious ?

" Serious !-that queſtion indicates pure ignorance. Nothing thatis not done to be ſure cannot be done."

" Well-but ſuppoſe you are fafely landed at

yourjourney's end-after breathing the medium
of that portion of ſpace through which you fly
after

48

THE HISTORY OF

after eating and drinking ſufficiently by the way
-when you are landed what are you to perform ?
-Gold is not probably more plentiful there than
here-andif it is, I fancy the inhabitants know
what to do with it."

" Thejourney may turn out golden without
loading myſelf back with ſo denſe a metal. Look
you, fir, I was ſixteenyears an author, and yet
never wrote any thing the world ever read-I am
defirous of giving the lye to profeſſed critics. I
ſhall furprize the world with particulars concerningthemoonneveryet publiſhed-I ſhall be read,
fir."

" Doubtless. But, captain, you will takemy

advice I am verycertain-makethis fame voyage
in your elbow chair-write memoirs, hiſtories,
travels through the moon, but do not take your
flight from St. Paul's till all other means fail."

Who wou'd ſuppoſe that this ſtrange creature
canruninto relations of this fort merely through
atalent for rhodomontade ?

He never wrote a

book, and was never out of Middlesex-but his

extemporary faculty is very quick. He lyes in
the moſt original manner I ever met with ; and
makes himself appear, by turns, a fool and a man
He has great learnof profound knowledge.
ing, and (but for lying) knows the world admirably. He is poor, and that he ſhouldbe ſo, with
ſuch an accomplishment, astonishesme.
Adieu to my dear Emilia,
JULIABENSON.

LET

JULIA BENSON .

LETTER

49

XXXI.

Lord WILLIAM W--, to Mr. FRANKLIN.

IShall, mygoodfriend,
continue
in my last
letter. the narrative
I broke of

I was one morning at Sir Philip Egerton's,,
when a packet of letters was brought him by a
country man-who ſhould they be from ? but one

from Miſs Benſon, incloſing ſeveral from Zaffini
to Sir George Milbourn. Theſe letters diſcover-

ed that this Sir George is an accomplice in villainy, with Miſs Benson's brother, who robbed
her of her fortune-and that Zaffini had fetched

witneſſes herself from abroad, being one herself,

to eſtabliſh the credibility of a forged will. She
was to have a pecuniary reward, to what amount.
does not appear; but they ſquabbled about ſome.
remaining hundreds, which gave riſe to the correſpondence Miſs Benfon got poſſeſſion of. Upon
my word, ſhe has abſented herself to a good pur-poſe. The letter to Sir Philip was to requeſt him
to oblige her by putting Zaffini's notes into proper hands, that meaſures might directly be taken
to re-inſtate her in her fortune. But ſhe kept
herself concealed, ſaying further, that ſhe ſhould
remain fo, till her fortune was recovered.

You may easily imagine that I took fire at this
letter, and made uſe of the greateſt expedition to
get her redreſſed. Egerton recommended his ownlawyer ; we drove to him immediately, and,
laying before him the letters, aſked his opinion-

Hesaid theyconveyed no abſolute proof-that they
muſt be, themselves, authenticated, before they
could overturn other proofs-but that, in all proba-

blity, whenthe parties came to know thatwe had
gained

50

THE HISTORY

OF

gained ſuch a clue to their knavery, that their
flight, or confeſſion of the fret, would, at once,
induce a court to ſet aſide the laſt decree.

That

it would be proper, immediately, to act, as if
everyproof we could wish for, was in our hands,

inorder toterrify our antagoniſts. One point of
conſequence, he obſerved, was to prove the handwriting, andthe existence of ſucha perſon as this

Italian. That, I replied, I coulddo with eafe,
for I had feveral of her letters, and could alfo

give a full explanation of her motives, &c. He
determinedupon immediately profecuting all the
parties for, perjury- and bringing an action againft
Benfon and Sir George for the property. Termtime fell out ſo luckily, that ne faid the action
ſhould be commenced within three days-I ſhall,
therefore leave this letter unfiniſhed till I cangive
you fome account of the event..

Fortune has been as favourable as poſſible. Sir
George Melbourne and Benſon fled into France

upon the firſt proceedings. Zaffini is gone with
them, and her witneſſes with her. Two were

ſeized at London, and condemned to ſtand in the

pillory for perjury, the former decree is reverſed,
and Miss Benfon is re-inſtated inher right. This,
however, was not all; for the matter of right,
without the fortune, was not what we wanted.

Mr. Benson's effects, and alfo Sir George Mil-

bourn's, were all ſeized-The latter has a good
eftate, ſo that the whole willbe reimbursed in a-

hout a fortnight. Old Mr. Benſon, upon being
truly informed of all this transaction, wrote a let

ter to his daughter's lawyer, informing him that he
had in poffeffion many effects of his fon's, and
would

JULIA BENSON.
SI
wouldgive themup immediately- renouncinghim
forever, ashe faid-and being very defirous of an
interview with his daughter. The two ringleaders

of theplot will, I believe, eſcape upon payment
of all demands, ſo that their tear carried them
farther thanit need.

After all this fucceſs, which turns outjuſt aswe
could wish-ſtill Miss Benfon is not to be found-

ſhe is not fogood as her promite in the letter to
Sir Philip ; and I begin to trembleleſt ſome unlucky accident ſhould have prevented her. I ſhall
haveno peace till the appears.
My dear Franklin muſt now participate my joy.
Miss Benfon is returned- we have net-and I find

her every thing, that my imagination, long wound

upwith an idea of perfection, hadpainted the original.

Herhouſe inPall Mallhad, all along, been kept
ready for her, and her fervants retained as usual.
Icalled everyday to learn if any tidings had been
received.-- This I did, after the trial for four days

ſucceſſively ; on the laſt her mantold me that his
miſtreſs was at home-in her dining-room . Up I

wentwiththe moſt palpitating heart that ever beat
in ahuman breast. On opening the door and feeingtheangelic object of my love, in all the luftre
of improvingbeauty-" My Julia!"
I could not utter another word. But, catching

her in my arms, wept with joy for fome moments. The ſweet maid mingled her tears with
mine. A filence enfued, moreeloquent than Tully'stongue.

Yes, my good friend, I find this admirablewomanthefame as I loſt at Florence.-The fame that
cap-

52

THE HISTORY OF

captivated my heart with ſuch a blaze of beauty
and perfection, that noheart could be proof against
ſuch an affemblage of charms. But nothing more
endears her to me, than that generous open ſimplicity of mind that total exemption from all art,

and affectation, which ſo often disgrace the beſt of
characters. She is the peculiar inſtance of genuine
love unmixed with duplicity.-Modeſt as the blushing morn ; but open and ingenuous as meridian
day!
Never did I ſpend more bleſſed hours-I found
that she loved me

that the had never ceased to

love me.-What a reward is this for the conſtancy,

with which I have ever regarded her memory!
The idea of my happiness is too great--I must,
for the preſent, lay down my pen.
1

My Father has been to viſit Miss Benfon. He
is quite in extaſies at my good fortune. The fiſt
hour he had been in the room, he hinted to her

that he expected the happy day ſhould be very
foon-and that he ſhouldgive orders to have every

thing got ready at Park-Hill (the villa at Twickenham) where he defired the ceremony might be
performed. Julia ſaid fomething of its being proper to ſtay ſome time firſt. But he would not
hear of it. In short, the old man is extremely
defpotic in the whole affair, and will be obeyedat which I am not at all diſpleaſed. His liberality
onthis occafion is much greater than I expected;
he gives up eight thousand pounds a year, his
Wiltshire eſtate ; and will put that feat in perfect

repair for my refidence. Thus, my friend, every
thing I canwiſh is planned to make me completely
happy, but principally the poffefſion of the moſt
beautiful

53
JULIA BENSON.
beautiful woman of her age, whoſe perſonal

charms are her leaſt excellency.

The amiable girl, I find, in her retirement
lodged at a farm-house, at ſome diſtance from

London; where ſhe took manyleſſons ofhusbandry of the honest farmer-Sheſeems mightily pleafed with the idea of country buſineſs-and is to
have her farm. Idoubt not but she will give me a

reliſh for it-though I muſt own, I never yet entered into the enjoyment ofany thing further than

theideaof the beauty, and agreeableneſs of profpects-rural decorations, &c-but if this extraordinary womangives an attention to the loweſt
offices of cultivation, her touch will convert it
all to gold.

I have no doubt but every hour which I live

withher, will bring to light new virtues in her
mind, that deſerve the admiration of all who

know them. I have juſt diſcovered an inſtance

of her generofity, which pleaſes me infinitely.
Ayoung lady waited on her, whom I found ſhe
had ſaved from the attacks of the fame Sir George

Milbourn, that had ſo deep a hand in the villainy
of robbing her of her fortune. She rescued her
and her mother, a poor officer's widow, from a
jail, by paying their debts ; and ſupported them,

at her own expence, till her misfortunes ſtopped
her generous hand. Is not this noble, Franklin ?
She now makes them handſome preſents-and I

am to find a husband for Miſs Sampher ; which
wi'l not be difficult; as ſhe is an agreeable, modeft

girl, a Wiltſhire living will unite her preſently
with the church .

Let me alſo take pleaſure in informing you,
that my Julia is one of the beſt claffic fcholars,
in the ſtile of an elegant accomplishment I ever
met with-After I left her at Florence, her uncle,
R

Mr.

THE HISTORY OF

34

Mr. Metliſh, provided a fociety of thebeſt ſcholars at Venice, to teach her Greek by converte,
and at the ſame time to perfect her Latin. She
reads Homer and Euripides with that taste and fenſibility, which we men never feel, but the amaz-

ing circumftance is, her poffeffing this kind of
literature andknowledge, and yet having not a
fpice of the coxcomb in her nothing affectednothing impertinent. I have defired her to read
paſſages of the Greek and Latin poets to me, and
itiswith infinite pleaſure, I find that her criticilms are full of vivacity, truth, andcandour.
My father tells me, that the firſt week of next
month is, if poſſible, to make me a happier man
than I am at preſent. In the mean time believe
me to be truly
Your's,

に

1

WILLIAM W
1

LETTER

XXXII .

Mr. MELVILL to Mr. FREDERICK.
HINGS have taken a moſt ſtrange turn,Fre-

T derick ; and I am the moſt miferable fellow
breathing ; for now all my hope is crushed.
MiſsBenfon has regained her fortune ; and it
ſeems that that raſcal, SirGeorge Milbourn, has
been, at the bottom, the cauſe of all her misfor-

tunes, in conjunction with her infamous brother.
But the procured proof of the forgery of the
will, and has set it afide ; and her brother, with

Sir George, well knowing their guilt, fled the
kingdom.

But, my good friend, the worst part of the af-

fair is, that theis gone to be married to the young
nobleman, I have mentioned more than once in
my

55
JULIA BENSON.
my letters toyou-withom she had an acquain-

tance abroad. This nobleman is no less than Lord'
William W. fon and heir of the Duke of-.

As the affair between them is of long ſtandingashis rank and fortune is fogreat and as fhe-never gave me the leaft reaſon to hope-I can have
nothing to fay against it but curfemy cruel ſtars
for ever throwing her in my way.
It is very plain, that I must now renounce the
idea of her, as soon as poſſible; becauſe, while

I love her as I do at prefent, it is impoſſible I.
ſhould enjoy any thing like eaſe, or happiness.And yet how difficult it is to conquer, at once a

paffion thatis sodeeply rooted in my heart! But
4

I must do it and the firſt means of executing

the reſolution willbe to keep from the fight of
her. One glance of thoſe eyes, that were form
edbut to ſet the world on fire, would undo a mil-

lien of refolutions and fet them all at nought.

Let me havea line from you to keep up my
ſpirits inthis woeful fituation.
I am truly Your's,

RICHARD MELVILL.
t

7

JOLETTER

XXXII.

Lady JULIA W- to Miſs WATSON.
ELL, my dear Emilia- the affair- is over,
become the fober partner
Wandyourfriendis
of a married man. Long deſcriptions of

cere-

monies I hate--they only disgust me--allthatI
ſhall fay is, that I am happy.

But, my dearest, you defire to know how I
could manage to change again from a man to a
R2

woman ;

56

THE HISTORY OF

woman; I will, in a few words, give you an account of my conduct.

Upon finding that I had gained a clear and deciſive victory in law-I determined, dire&ly, to
return to my houſe, which, I had no doubt, was

kept ready for me by my good friend, his Grace
-and as the firſt ſtep to it, went to a mantuamaker's, in the neighbourhood of my lodgings,
and beſpoke a night-gown fuit of chintz, with all
other appurtenances of a woman's dreſs complete,

tobe made to fit myself exactly, pretending that
I was to be preſent at a private maſquerade, and,
that I should dreſs myself in them the pretence

was ſhallow; but any thing will go down with
people of this fort, when intereſt ſpeaks in the
ſame tone. My orders were exactly executed,
andthewhole broughthome to my lodgings.
When the woman came with them, I was in a

deepdiſpute with the Philoſopher, Mufman, on
the burning glaſſes of Archimedes-but interruptedwith

" Sir, I have brought home the chintz night.
gown, and--

" A chintz gown ! (ſaid Muſman) Why what
the Devil have you to do with a chintz gown ?"
The rencontre was a little unlucky, but I
thought it beſt to put it offwith a laugh.
Why, captain, I intend to accompany you in
66

your Lunatic voyage. Perhaps the moon is not
inhabited, and you and I will be the Adam and
Eve of it-ſhall I notmake a very pretty lafs ?"
" Adam and Eve!-It is strange that people
ſhouldgive ear to ſuch abſurdities.
-Ihave calcu-

lated exactly the
"
Here he was at once involved in a philoſophical
1

diſquifition into the truth of the Mofaical ac-

count of the creation, and I flipt away with the
mantua-

JULIA BENSON.

57

martua-maker in the mean time, telling her to
ſtay below while I went up to fit the cloaths. My

orders were punctually executed-I found every
particular of a woman's dreſs ready for me, and
preſently became my own ſex again.-Mrs. Trollop, the mantua-maker, proteſted that out of all
the masquerade dreſſes of pretended womennone
came up to me. I paid her, and ſhe left me,
then ſending for my landlord up-he ſtared at my
metamorphofis .

Egad, fir, (faid he) you make as compleat a
woman as a manwould with toſee."

But ftopping further conversation, I told him I
ſhouldwant his lodgings no longer-paid himfaid that I left abundle of old cloaths, which he

ſhould give his ſervants-took a coach, and drove
to Pall-Mall .

There I found every thing, as I had ſuſpected,

ready for my reception the fervants waiting

impatiently for me. I once more took poffeffion
- of my house, and felt aneaſe and ferenity I had
longbeen a ſtrangerto.
The next day, my dearest, who ſhould call
but my Lord! Our meeting was in the rapid,
But filent expreſſion of long-felt, though difap-

pointed love, now breaking from its ſhackles . It
was almoment, my Emilia, in which our lives do
not much abound

C

I had foon after a vifit from the Duke, his fa-

ther, who was overjoyed to ſee me. He prefently began to talk of nuptial knots and matrimonial
delights, and gave me to underſtand that hewould
have thewedding very ſpeedily, andthat allmuft
befubmitted to his directiont

The ceremony was performed at his Grace's
villa, Park-Hill, where we ſtaid a week, and then
came down hither, which is an eſtate of eight
thousand
R3

58

THE HISTORY OF

thousand pounds a year, which this generous father has given up to his fon. He has fettled a
jointure of two thousand five hundred pounds a

yearupon me, and we found this houſe in compleat order for our reception, which has not coft
him leſs than ſeven thousand pounds more, with
many preſents tothe amountoffeveral morethoufands.

But, my Emilia, I have hurried over theſe
matters, that I might give you the ſketch of our
plan of life. I am fond of the country, though
neveruſed to it exceptat Farmer Clevely's.. Indeed the principal part of my life has been in a
continual buſtle through a croud; in a round of
}

diverfion from one court to another. When Eng-

landgrew infipid France wasat hand ; when tired
of France, we had recourſe to Italy; and from

thence we viſited Germany, &c. But this round
of livingfo much ina little while, gives me that
reliſh for retirement, which others, I believe,
2

can never feel, who have always enjoyed it.
Lord William is not yet fond ofany thing rural,
further than admiring the beauties of a fine profpect; he has been likewiferever in a croud,
and custom makes him like it. He is fond of

parliamentary buſineſs, has spoke once or twice,
and with great applause; in a word, all I can
hopefor is to get him to reliſh country entertainments, by way of a relief to the hurry of the

world; and I have the fatisfaction to find, that,
in the few weeks we have been here, I

have made ſome progreſs inthe attempt. You
remember what a farmer Clevely made me.-I
ſhall practiſe now, thetheory I learnt there, and
mylord heartily laughs at me for pretending to
know any thing of the matter ; you likewiſe re-

memberthe little farm, my dear Emilia, which
you

59
JULIA BENSON.
you was to let me.-I ſhall certainly go and fee
こ

it; but you must firſt make me happy here,
where an apartment, as well as at London, will
always be ready for you.
We found a large tract of land under the ma-

nageinent of a bailiff. My lord afſigned all this
over to my province: and I am bufy in giving
orders to have the whole new modelled. My
plan is to make rides through every part of it, for

viewing not onlythepleaſing ſcenes we have of
the neighbouring country, but alſo for examining
all my crops, to fee that they are kept free from

weeds; and I shall make experiments on every
part. I propoſe to have one partof the farm laid
cut in the Italiantaſte ;-platsofcorn and vetches
bordered with vines, and intermixed with ſome-

thing togive an idea of the olive gardens ; in the
beautiful mannerthey appear betweenMantua and
Parma. Another part I propoſe for French hufbandry, wherein I ſhall have ſtripes of lucern,
buckwheat, &c. in ſhort, I ſhall have twenty

ſchemes, and certainly execute ſome of them.
And his Lordſhip, by ornamenting ſome grounds

inthe midst of my improvements, will, I expect,
contract a taſte for husbandry.

He is fond of having much company in the
houſe, towhichI have no obje&ion, as the rules
are calculated to leave us as well as our gueſts,

perfectly at liberty. And I have the fatisfaction
of finding that we bid very fair for uniting the
buſy life agreeably with retirement, that each
may be the contraſtof the other, and more pleaf-

ing from notbeing perpetual. Butourcapitalenjoyment is the converſation of a few ſelect friends
who haveſeen the world, and underſtand it,- who,

without neglecting will never court it, who are
chearfully the maſters of themselves, whether in
apalace
44

60

THE HISTORY OF

apalace or a farm. You, my Emilia, must add
to the number, and diffuſe amongus the bleſſings
of true good humour, at the same time that you
increafe the happiness of your
Ever affectionate friend,

1

JULIA.
it

LLETTER

XXXIV.

Signora ZAFFINI, to Sir GEORGE MILBOURN.
Received your letter,SirGeorge, andam very

I forry you thould have fo muchweakness in
your nature as to affert that allis gone, thatall is
loft,

that we are ruined,

and fuch womaniſh

exclamations. What your ideas are I know not,
but if I was a man, and had received fuch treatment, as you have had from that vile woman and

her paramour Melvill, I would fight every animal
belonging to her, rather than let her eſcape a juſt.
revenge: Never was triumph more complete
than that she now exults in.

She has overturned

and routed us all in the affair of the will, and
withſuch circumstances of Thame, that the merits
double and treble revenge.-She has broken

through a'l my deep laid fchemes, all my toils,
-and arrived at happiness in the arms of that
baſe, deceiving, perjured villain, Lord William

enjoying that happiness which ought to
have been mine by prior right. Thus are we
all in the moſt contemptible ſituation, and instead

of pitying even envy her. Had you half my fpirit, Sir George, you would have cut halfa dozen
throats long ago ; and eaſed us of all this pain
and trouble. Had you run Lord William and

Melville through the body, and trepanned their
minion, allwhich you might easily have done
-we

JULIA BENSON.

6

--we ſhould now have triumphed inſtead of
murmuring. You have aproper idea of theſe
things enough,butwant ſpiritinthe execution. Such
an eftate as your's, with a maſculine daring mind,

would kindle glorious miſchief thro' half a kingdom. As to your offers for me toreturn diſguiſed
to England, to lay and enter into freſh plots-it
is awork Icould enter into with a true reliſh ;but

the ſums of money you mentioned are too inconſiderable. I would not engage if every effort..
that induſtry could ſuggeſt was not practised to
enfure ſucceſs ; and, in order, to that, great expences would inevitably be neceffary.

Ithink alſo thatyou will manage your affairs
verybadly, if you do notbring that capital calf,
Benſon, again into your meaſures, if he has money, but if he has not,take ſpecial care to keep

clearof him, for he is not formed for ſtratagem.
Iknownot what your feelings are at the idea

of ſo much happineſs being the portion of people

youhate. But for my part, to whomrevenge is
more acceptable than life,
-I cannot endure it.I think with pleaſure on their enjoyments, when

thenext idea ispouring poiſon in their cup, and
planting daggers in their breasts. Nothing is fo

T

delicious as the gratifying revenge. It is a fentiment that ennoblesour nature. Nonebut the cow-

ardly and deſpicable beings, who were made to be
trampled on, like the rabble, can be unfeeling of
thisbeſt expreſſion of ourfouls--Nobly to dare,
all evils rather than be injured, and unrevenged.

'
This is my idea. I feel it ſtrong-few have efcaped my vengeance, when they fondly imagined

that Iwouldbe treated like the general fools of
my ſex.
Youmaygiveme an anſwer to theſeſentiments,
and believe me to be, &c.

7

MELLUSINA ZAFFINI .
LET-

62

THE HISTORY OF
7,

ETTER

XXXV

Lady Wit
,to Miss WATSON.-

Nomy laft letter I gave you, my dear Emilia,
IN
a flight ſketch of our plan oflife ; fuch asI
apprehended it would turn out. The more intimatelyIbecome acquainted with Lord William's
heart, the more pleaſure I take in finding thathis
fentiments of life are very fimilar to mine; he

loves the country andretirement; but he, froma
1

greater activity of nature, likes the bustle of the
world alſo. I have the fatisfaction of finding him
always with a true reliſh for retired amusements.

Our mornings, even when the house is full of
company, we ſpend often by ourſelvés, and frequentlylee none of our guests till a late dinner,
This condut gives us an opportunity of purfuingour inclinations in any buſineſs or amusement.
-We read-walk-ride-plant-garden-farm,
as we pleaſe,withno more attendants than agreeable ; and, atthe fame time, every one does!

what he pleafes. Some ſhoot, others fiſh or hunt,
other parties walk, ride, lounge, playat billiards,
make love, or amuse themselves in whatever man-

ner they chooſe. Lord William and I are revi-

ving, ifI mayuse the term, our Latin andGreek.
We are going through a course of the claffic
poets,with ſome proſe writers, which is a work

of time, as we ſtop at every paſſage, which our
memory tellsus has been imitatedby the English,
French, Italian, or Spanish Poets. We compare

them with the originals; andthis courſe reminds
us of every branch of reading, recalls our idea of

what ſhould never be forgotten, and, at the fame

time, is a fund of great entertainment .
Ihave ſucceededin bringing him to a relifh of
farming,

JULIA BENSON.

63

farming, by mixing that amusement with his favourite ones of planting and laying out grounds;

ſo that every field and grove is decorated with a
neatneſs that is pleaſing. The borders of the field
are either graſs or gravel, and kept clean and in
order; and every time a hedge is repaired flowering fhrubs are planted among the common wood,
which has a very agreeable effect. The French

have a term in their language, ferme ornee ; but
it is a term without an idea; their ornamented

farm is a newincloſure laid out in ſtrait lines ; the
hedges clipt into green walls; the gates painted

white; with a temple, poſſibly Chineſe, on a
colline, with an avenue of trees to it. Every
thing which they call ornee is laid out by line and
compaſs, without the leaſt ſpark of what we call
taste. Water always takes a mathematical figure,

either a ſquare pond or an oblong canal, and the
adjoining earth too often dancesthe hay in Euclid's
bread and butter work. Regular terraces are
common, and, if very long, with many rows of
high trees, and a regular cut canal ;--if theſe
unite, you will hear as many commendations of
them as of the Tuilleries.
The Italian, Spanish , and German gardens
are all, precisely, in the fame tafte. Is it not
amazing that a contempt, a defiance of nature

ſhould fo much prevail among the European nations, while the Chineſe have, for many ages,
carried the art of imitating nature in theſe works

to ashigh a degree of perfection as our greatest
poets ? Our Homer's, Virgil's, Taffo's, Arioſto's,
Shakespeare's, &c. have not copied nature more

exactly than the Chineſe gardeners-though in
the creative walk of poetry there would be much
more excufe for monsters and capricious ideas
than inthe exhibition of real objects, in which
we

64

THE HISTORYOF

we look for an exact copy of nature. Muchis itto
the honour of England that she has thrown off

fuch a flaviſh adherence to cuftoms, though as antient as Pliny, and that the alone ſhould have de-

parted from theſe puerilities in favour of tafte
and nature.

By intermixing husbandry with the art of gardening, Lord Willim has come to take a reliſh in

it. Our bailiff is very intelligent, he reads books
on the fubject ; drills many crops ; plants lucerne
and faintfoine &c. in rows, horfe-hoes, in the
French manner; and fome of the fields, thus

managed, make ſo neat and pleafing an appearance, that they add prodigiously to the pleaſure of
our walks.

Lord William is pretty much engaged, likewife, in bringing the eſtate into good order. The
duke had much neglected it. The tenants took

advantage of his negligence, andinjuredhim much
inhis buildings, fences, &c.-all is nowto be new
modelled.

The houſes and barns, &c. to be

brought into excellent repair; the fields thrown
contiguous to each, and the rents raiſed ſufficiently
to pay the expence. Theſe alterations will much
improve the faceof the country.
Such employments, my dear Emilia, with the

regular amusements of the table, and our library,
is certainly a rational planof ſpending our time in
the country. Indulge me, my deareſt, in another reflection, ſince I am in a reflecting mood.
Mankind in general ſpend their lives in the coun-

try; of the poor who are forced to appropriate
their time totheir maintenance Ishall fav rothing;
but it is amazing that the rich ſhould ſo little un-

derſtand the artof a country life. To make a
feat, Londonin miniature is the grand object of
moſt of the great and vain. But, ſurely, itbetrays

JULIA BENSON.
65
trays a ſtrangewant of taſte ! This is a plan to baniſh retirement from a retired life; and not ſoconſiſtent as that of the French, who neglect it entirely, and live in Paris the year round. On the

other hand, it is degenerating into too much rufticity, to drop every elegance of life the moment
weget among the trees, and commence mere farmers or fox-hunters. Theſe two vicious extremes,

with the idle parade of the head of a party carry
ing his Whig and Toryiſm into the country, include the general rural life; and you will, Idoubt
not, agree with me, that all are wide of the mark,
which rational people would wiſh to aim at.

Mixing real ruſticity with some degree of the

elegance and poliſh of thecapital, and at the fame
time, ſeaſoning it very ſparingly with the magnificent provincial ſtile, will give us a juſt idea
of a rational rural life. The mornings ſhould be
dedicated to the field ; but afternoons to the draw-

ing-room. This is thegreateſt diſtinction between
the country life of the laſt age and the preſent.
Formerly the negligence of the morning- the
boots, fpurs, dirt and undreſs filled the day;-of
courſe baniſhed the women, and brought on drink-

ing to exceſs. Now, the whole family dreffing
for dinner, and ſpending the rest of the day with
the women, in converſation, cards, billiards, in

the library, &c. the indulgence of the former
cuſtom is baniſhed, and a mixed life full of vari-

ety introduced in its room.
Among other company that has lately viſited
us, are, Mr. Melvill andhis ſiſter, and Miſs Sam-

pher :-I gave Lord William the hiftories of them,
and, as you may ſuppoſe, he much approved my
aſking the Melvills, as I had received ſuch un-

doubted marks of their friendſhip. Miſs Sampher
we shallkeep here the whole fummer. Her moS

ther,

66

THE HISTORY OF

ther, with a little aſſiſtance from me, has opened

aſhop at Iſlington, in which I believe ſhe will do
verywell.

My dear Emilia, before I ſealup this letter, I
must give you a few particulars which make me

very unealy. I have obſerved, my lord, for a
day or two, of late, cold and unpleasant in his
manner, which, as we have hitherto lived in

the moſt perfect confidence, gave me great pain.
I feemed to take no notice at firſt, thinking it

might be owing to ſome political diſappointment
of only a tranfitoryconſequence; but it continuing, made me ask him concerning it. Finding
that Ihad noticed his manner, he denied that any
thing had happened, and, for a little while, put
on a forced chearfulness:-this conduct was ſo

ſtrong a confirmation of my fufpicion, that it cut
me to the heart ; but I refolved to be quiet and
make no more enquiries.

The next day I took a walk through a part of
the farm with Mr. Melvill and Miss Sampher : She was at a little distance before Mr. Melvill and

me, who was leaning on his arm up a hill: Lord
William, as we were turning a hedge, met us,
he ſtoppedhishorſeſhort, looked oddly, and turning about, rode off.

What! in the name of goodness ! thought I to

myself, can be his meaning !--He certainly has
met with ſome ſecret misfortune, or has taken

ſome diſguſt unknown to me :--but it is in vainto
form an idea of what one can never diſcover .

I ſhall have no happineſs till I know the bottom
of his heart, which never yet was ſecret tome.
Adieu.

JULIA.
LET

JULIA BENSON.

67

LETTER XXXVI ..
Lord WILLIAM W- to Sir PHILIP EGERTON .

My dear Sir Philip,
Need not tell you, that in my laſt letter, I
1

I proved myself the moſt happy of man-

kind. In this I ſhall as certainly ſhew myselfthe
moſt miferable. Ihave atale to tell you , my

good friend, that will furprize you as much as it
haswounded me .

You must remember a man, Mr. Melvill, at

whoſe houſe Julia, by accident, took refuge,
whendriven from Suflex-That tale, by theway,

Ihave often thought, of late hung very badly
together it has given me muchuneafineſs. The
circumstances alſo which I have found in your
letters to me, while I was abroad, which I have

been looking into, have all the appearance of his
being in love with Julia. Let me, to all thefe,

add, that ſhe propoſed his viſiting us in Wiltshire.
Now, Sir Philip, you may say that ſuch a chain

ofcircumſtances might happen by accident-but, ..
moſt affuredly, it must be by a ſtrange ſyſtem of

accidents, that they ſhould all apparently carry
the fame face..

Iknow that by this time your friendſhip for me
is alarmed-" You will fay I am tinctured with
jealousy-that jealous people never fee clearlyand an hundred othercommonplace afſſertions, all
extremely true andjuft, but no proof that I am:
miſtaken."

Butwhat isworſe than all theſe circumstances,

Sir Philip, I received by the poft the following
anonymous letter, which though ever of fufpici-

ous import, yet comingon the neck of many fimilar

68

THE HISTORY OF

milar circumſtances, I muſt own, makes me very
uneaſy.
"My Lord,

"One who is truly your friend, takes the liberty of addreſſing you in this manner. Your wife
is one of the moſt accomplished of women-and

you are happy in the poſſeſſion of her. Render
that happineſs as lafting as poſſible, by keeping
her perfectly true to you in mind-as well as
body. There is a man, with whom the once had
connections ; which I was in hope had been totalydropt; but hearing that that man is now in

your houſe, and that till he came to it he was no
acquaintance of yours', I cannot forbear giving
you, at least, a hint to be upon your guard.
"Your Friend,
22

I can easily form to myself an idea of what

you may fay tothisletter-butgranting the whole
force of your argument, are not the facts true ?

Anddo they not give very great reaſon to fuppoſe the. deductions true alſo? Melvill had a
very mysterious acquaintance with her before
her marriage-I knew nothing of this Mel-

vill and yet he is the firſt perſon ſhe brings
down to my houfe.

The receipt of this lettter filled me with difquiet. I watched their conduct narrowly ; and,

Sir Philip, if ever ſuſpicion wasjuſt, mine is : he
isin love with my wife. I see it in everymotion
ofthe eye-in his whole manner-were you here
you wou'd pronounce the fame. I cannot ſay,
that ſhe returns the compliment-but women are
more artful in theſe affairs and can better dif-

guiſe their ideas :-depend upon it that I am

right, and not only am-but with reaſon too, the
moſt

69
JULIA BENSON.L
moſtmiferable of mankind-but as if proofupon
proofwas with accumulated evidence toconvince
meof their intimacy, ſhe aſked me foon after to

take a walk in thefarm-itdid not fuit me ; then

ſhe took the opportunity, I ſuppoſe, knowing of
my abfence, to aſk Melvill to walk with her ;

for, as Iwas riding, tofee the repairs oftho farm,
turning ſhort through a gate, who ſhould I meet
but her and him alone, walking arm in arm !
The fight shocked me, but, recovering my furprize, I turned hastily about and rode off. Sir
Philip,when aman has ahouſe full of company,
isitnot a little ſtrange, that his wife, knowing her
huſband could not be with her, ſhould fix on

one perfon alone to walk with her and that per-

fon tobe the fufpected one ? Youmay indeed fay
that chance might have itfo--and it is most true
-chance to be ſure might be fo kind-but a man

muſt be a dupe indeed, to attribute all that to
chance. And, I doubt not, I ſhall be witneſs to
many more kindneſſes of this ſame blind chancetillI find it time to ruſh in and cutthe thread of

the very existence ofchance.

I am more unhappy than I can expreſs-fullof
ten thousand fufpicions that haunt me night and
day. She is dreadfully artful; for ſhe carries herfelf inthe very ſemblance of the moſt perfect innocence-and puts ſuch a face upon her guilt,
that you would swear the purity of heaven could
be asfoon corrupted. But I am clear, ſhe muſt
have a degree of guilt in ſuffering theſe appear-

ances : appearances are themselves guilt-a womanshouldnever fuffer them.

Iwillwrite to you again foon.
WILLIAM W.
S3

LET

70

THE HISTORY OF
:

LETTER XXXVII.

- Sir PHILIP EGERTON to Lord WILLIAM W-

dear Lord, I have a ſincere friendſhip for
MYyou,
or I would not take the trouble of
replying to a letter, which seems, to me, to be
dictatedby fome enemy of your repoſe-rather
than by yourself. Is it poſſible, that you can be
ſo ſuddenly changed, as to listen to the horrid

fuggeſtions of a groundleſs jealousy !-a jealouſy
notof awoman, whoſe doubtful character of af-

fection would make one receive ſuch impreſſions
with the utmoſt caution; but of one whoſe ſpot-

leſs fame--and long and tried affection, ſhouldbe
very far from fuffering even the moſt diſtant idea,
ſo injurious to her love and honour.

As to thatvile letter, which, I apprehend, muſt
undoubtedly come from a bitter enemy, merely
to diſquiet you, and fill you with jealousy-Igive

no credit to it. It is utterly to be rejected, did it
unite with ten thousand proofs. No friend would
ever think of fuch a transaction-and what credit

ſhould, in prudence, be given to the ſuggeſtions
of an enemy ! Surely, my Lord, your own un-

derſtanding must convince you ſtrongly enough
of the propriety of this obſervation.
But how utterly improbable is the whole affair ?

On account of the friendſhip I bear you, I will
recapitulate the whole of this affair.-Miſs Benfon, when driven from Suſſex, takes refuge, by
accident, at the house of Mr. and Miſs Melvill.
This " talehangs together badly," you fay. Pray,

inwhat manner would you have it hangtogether?
Is it impoffible, or utterly improbable, that ſhe,
who had nofriends in London, ſhould accept the
offer

[JULIA BENSON..

71

offerof a ſtranger ? " But this ſtranger ſhe aſks
down " to Wiltshire!" I ſhould have had a very
bad opinion of her, if she had not. She ſpent
ſome months at his houſe.

It would have been

very extraordinary, indeed, if she had made that
flight return to their civility. But the heinous
offenceis, " walking with him arm in arm; "
which, by the way, I have no doubt, but ſhe

would have done with every gentleman there.
My friend, you must conſider, that her ladyſhip
has not been brought up in the true Engliſh,

ſtarched behaviour, which transfers all the guilt
of concealed intimacy to the idle freedom of commonlife among the higher ranks of people. One
would think you were the ſon of a cit, to take
offence at any liberties your wife uſes ofthat fort.
She has had a univerſal education-has seen the

world-and deſpiſes nine-tenths of it most cordi-

ally; but she has learnt an eaſy general freedom
of intercourse with all, and never dreams ofyour

being the leaſt offended at any nonſenſe of that
fort-as how should she ? She has no idea of

any thing but the pureſt innocence, with which
allſuch freedoms are then perfectly conſiſtent.
But, my Lord, the mind of your Julia, well
understood, is a better explanation of her conduct, than ten thousand ſuch obſervations. As

her foul knows not a thought to your dishonour,
or any guilt, ſo her natural chearfulness-her
noble, unſuſpecting nature-the generoſity ofher

mind-her refinedwayof thinking-in allthings
ſo ſuperior to the generality of the ſex. Theſe,
my Lord,willnot allow her to act with a circumſpection and referve, which renders women ſui-

table wivesto thejealous of our fex. I will anſwer for it, there is nothing ſhe hates more, than

that generalcircumſpection, which would inyour
preſent

72

THE HISTORY

OF

preſent diſpoſition ofmind, be neceſſary to convince you, that ſhe was innocent. How in the
name of common ſenſe, is a bold, free, generous
woman to act with that caution and duplicity

neceſſary for the purpoſe ? Believe me it is an
abſurdity tothink ofit.

This my Lord, is the firſt motion of thedeteſtable paſſion, jealousy, inyour heart. Deſtroy
themonster on his firſt appearance; or take my

word for it, he will deſtroy you. Make use of
your underſtanding, and of thoſe liberal ideas,
which a general converſe with the better part of

theworldcannot but have raiſed in you. And at
all events, remember that you and her ladyſhip
too, have moſt bitter enemies ; from whoſe inveteracy andplotting diſpoſitions, every thing isto
be apprehended. For the fake ofcommon fenfe,
do not forget the reasons Zaffini and Sir George

Milbourn have for ſtimulating them to revenge.
Forget not Zaffini's journey to England before,
for no other purpoſe but to gratify that paffion.
Inwhat can they ſo ſeverely punish you, as in
infuſing, Iago like, the ſtings of jealouſy ?
Once more, my Lord, let me perfuade you to

call up the native dignity of your difpofitionand uſe it to the extirpation of ſentiments, ſo
infinitely beneath you. I cannot but flatter myſelf
that you will no longer listen to the ſuggeſtions of

that vile dæmon, jealousy, which ought to find
anentranceonly in the baſeſt minds.
One circumſtance in your letter I shall not

overlook. You sayyou are certain Melvill is in
love with your wife. This is very poſſible, with-

out her knowing any thing of the matter. She
isa woman, you must allow, for whom any man

might conceive that fort of pure affection, which

never paſſes further than the heart or eyes. I
think

JULIA BENSON.

73

think it utterly impoſſible, that you ſhouldhave
read her right ; but Imuſt ſtrenuouslyurge, that if
you have been ever ſo acute, it brings not a ſha-

dow of guilt upon your wife.
Adieu; I ſhall take the firſt opportunity to be
with you, to ſee what reasons you have for this
outrage upon your own honour.
Your's

Moſt truly,
PHILIP EGERTON.

LETTER XXXVIII.
Mr. MELVILL to Mr. FREDERICK.

life, I think, is to paſs ina ſcene
MYofwhole
contradictions. I told you that as I
had lost all hopes of Miss Benſon, I should, and

did, determine to forget her as foon as poffible.This, truly, was my refolution, which I had
mustered up with all the philoſophy, of which
I was maſter. But, my good friend, vain are the

effects of philofophy, when paſſion comes in competition. My fiſter received a letter from Lady
Julia W. inviting her into Wiltſhire ; and incloſed
.
came a card to me from his Lordſhip, her hufband. This, at once, overthrewall my fine-ſpun
reſolutions, and I became without remorse, the

dupe of my love ; for I can call it by no other
name. We accepted the invitation, and your
friend has been baſe enough-faith it deserves
no other term, to enter into the houſe of the man

who has treated him with the utmoſt civility,
andwhoſe wife I yet feel, I am in love with. I

cannot either in juſtice or in honour, forgive
myſelf this voluntary ruſhing into miſery for the
ſake of preſent happiness. What could induce
me, who was determined to conquer an unhappy
flame,

74

THE HISTORY OF

flame, to come again into the conſtant company :
of awoman who cannot be viewed without affec-

tion-andbymewithout the strongest paffion-apaffion much the more violent for having been
fome time ſmothered!

While my preſent dream laſts I am the happieſt being imaginable-I ſee her-I converſe
with her
1

on, who that had once loved her once ! did I
fay ? that had never ceaſed to love her:--Who

could ſtand ſuch dangerous opportunities of fallingyet deeper into the fatal infatuation ?-How

am Itoextricate myself? On what twig muft
it be ſuſtained ?-I am loſt for ever !-abſolutely
loſt in perdition l-and have no hope of recovering from a delufion, which now overwhelms my
foul ! What am I to'do ? Tell me, my friend,
that I may, if poſſible alleviate the fate thatawaits me and not fink entirely.

The amiable Juliahasnot an idea of my paffion; if thegueſſed it-the purity of her virtue
would baniſh me, ina moment from her houſe,

andgive a ſtiffneſs to her conduct, which I should
fee in an inſtant.

She talks to me with the kind-

neſs of familiarity with an air offriendship, that'
cutsmetothefoul. I feel myſelf, uponthe whole
ſo embarraſſed, that I know not how either to go

orto ſtay. Our viſitwas to be for the principal
partof the ſummer ; but I feel plainly, that if I
was to venture to ſtay half that time, I ſhould

rush into fome moſt prepoſterous conduct, and
fall a facrifice to abſurdity.
:

1

I hear her talk-ſhe moves before me

in allthe grace of beauty's queen: I hear her
fing-I walk with her, and-in ſuch a ſituati-

The reſolution which I form in thoſe moments,

when I have any uſe of reaſon, is to leave the

houſe the inſtant I canbring myſelf to the bold
determi-

75
JULIA BENSON.
compadetermination of tearing myſelf from the
ny of the woman, for whom alone I defire to

live. Out of her company the fun ſhines not to
me: a dark cloud covers the world : all is night :
all is folitude: and if I leave her to-day, tomorrow I exift no more .

Write tome, for I have need ofcouncil, though
I have not courage to purſue it.
Your's,
RICHARD MELVILL.

LETTER

XXXIX.

Lord WILLIAM W- , to Sir PHILIP
EGERTON .

your friendly letter, for which I am
IReceived
much obliged to you, but all your reasoning
is proved to be erroneous. I ſhallgive you no arguments in anſwer to it, but unfold a plain narrative of facts, which will ſhewyou how little reafon you have to laugh at what you call myjealouſy; be not alarmed at the letter's not being written by myſelf-you will in the ſequel
know the reafon.

I told you in my laſt, that I watched Melvill

and my wife, with the moſt ſcrutinizing eye. 1
did it, my friend, to a dreadful purpoſe
The
eternal ruin of all mypeace.
I was riding through the park in a penfive
mood, meditating on the miferable fate of hav-

ing ſo much reaſen to fuſpect the woman I adored,
when I was ſuddenly accoſted by a gentleman
whom I had never seen before.

" Lord William ! (faidhe with an earnest air)I am the man that ſentyou the anonymous letter
con-

76

THE HISTORY OF

concerningyour wife. You know me not, though
I am moſt highly indebted to you
Iwill
"
Stop, fir!-(replied I) your damnable letter
66

has filled me with torment. And let me warn

you , before you proceed, that unlessI have abſolute proof of my wife's falſhood I will hear no
more. I will have no ſuggeſtions-give me proof,

or by heaven this hand demands your life.--"
" Pardon me, my lord, this affair in which I
am engaged for you honour, more than my own
ſafety, makes it neceſſary that I ſhould remain
unknown at preſent."
" Can you give meproof? "

" I come for that purpoſe:-to convince you
that my ſuggeſtions are not falſe."
" Name me this moment the circumſtance."

" Your wife dishonours you with Melvill.

" Villain ! I want proof and not aſſertion. By
heaven, if I had--"

" Would your paſſion hear me, you should
have it. You are this day going to Salisbury on
buſineſs ?"
" I am ."

" Your wife knows it ?"
" She does."

" Change your mind ſuddenly-return home

-go directly to bed andyou will find

"

" Find what ?"

" At midnight Melville will enter your bed
chamber."

" Is it poſſible ?"
" By this prove the truth of what I wrote
andwhat I have nowſaid."

" I will indeed prove it. "
" But all this is on one condition."
" Name it."
" That

77
JULIA BENSON.
" That you do not, inthe firſt violence ofpaffion, betray yourſelf. Seem as if afleep-you

will then be the better convinced."
" Iwill."

" Be contented withthe fight of him. When
he finds his mistake, he will of courſe retire-do

not then diſcover yourself to him-the day after
will betime enough."

This was fufficient for me. I galloped away
with a foulas full of anguiſh as ever mortal's that
felt the ſevereſt woe.

I returned home, told

Julia I ſhould be back again from Salisbury in a
day or two, and hid my perturbation of mind,
as wellas poſſible. According to the plan I return-..
ed at night -got home between eleven and
twelve, and enquired if their miſtreſs was in bed,

wasanſwered inthe affirmative. I filently flipped
up ſtairs and went to bed, taking the precaution
of having my ſword by the bedſide. The art of
this woman, Sir Philip , muſt exceedallboundsſhedid not ſtart at my return, nor ſeem the leaſt

furprized. No fleep cloſed my eyes ; I waited
with the ſame curſed anxiety that a malefactor
waits for execution, but with a torture far fuperior. Between one and two in the morning, I

heard a flight noiſe at the door it opened and
in came Melvilldreſſed, but with his night-cap
on-he advanced toward, the bed-" My deareſt Julia!" (ſaid he in a low voice) " I am come
according to my promise to enjoy heaven inyour
arms!-She awaked then but did not hear him,
I believe

" What's that ?"-ſhe cried.

But Icould reſtain myſelf no longer-I ſprung
out of bed, and ſeizing my ſword" Villain here receive your punishment--"
He was as quick as myſe'f, forhe drew a rapier
of ſuch an enormous length, that in the ſecond
pafs

78

THE HISTORY OF

paſsheranme through the body-I could make

nodefence with my small ſword. Upon this he
fled without anynoife.
The wretch was out of bed by this time. I
was leaning against the bed-poft, the ran to me.
- Your vil" Stand off-(faid I) andhear me.

lainy has prevailed-I am killed-though firſt
diſhonoured by you:-the coward is fled-he is
ready to enjoy heaven in your arms but take
this prevention, wile woman."
Saying this I plunged my fword in her boſom,
andthe fell the victim of juſt reſentment !
Thenoise awaked Sir Edward Fanshaw, who
laid in the next chamber-he ran in, and after

all the furprize, which you may ſuppoſe in ſuch
cafes;

he ordered me to be carried out of the

room, and put into his bed:-ar furgeon has juſt
dreſſed my wound, and pronounces it mortal.-I

immediately called for my fecretary to write this,
as the best way inwhich I can employ my few

remaining moments, is togive you a full relation
of the whole affai , to vindicate mymemory from
theafperfions of lying tongues. A man in my
fituation has nointereſt in ſpeaking any thing but
1

truth. I shallnot defcribe to you the ſtate of my
mind-though all Ihave done is right the crueltyof my fate overwhelms me. If I die not pre-

ſently of my wound, I ſpeedily ſhalli of the fire

thathas ſeized on mybrain.i

Adieu for ever.

With this comes a will, which

Ihavejuſt executed.
WILLIAM W

6

1

LET-

79

JULIA BENSON.
:

LETTER XL.

Signora ZAFFINI to Signora TIANE.

Ipromised you

my leaving Italyagain,
a relation of my expedition toEngland, as
UPON

foon as I had materials enough for a letter ; but,

my dear friend, events crouded on ſo quick, that
Phavehadno timeto perform my promile, but you
ſhall now have the journal I intended.
You well know what reafon a woman of my

fpirit had to be offended with the faithless Engliſh
lord, who has already felt much from my vengeance and with the woman who dared to rob

me of the only heart I fully prized. Disappointments inmy revenge only ſharpened the edge of it.
I never ceased burning with an eager defire to
completethe ruin of the man and woman who had
made me completely miferable. With this view
Iembarked in the plan, which carried me before

toEngland, andthe fad ſucceſs that attended the
expedition, after the moſt flattering appearances,
enraged me the more. I readily liftened to propoſals from Sir George Milbourne for a fecond
attempt, and after agreeing on the terms, went
with the greateſt ſpeed to London.
:

There I had a conference with that baronet.

I know not whether I ever gaveyou his character.

He is a strange mixture of violence and ſupineneſs
fometimes he affects to be brave, and, I really
believe is ſo; but thoſe moments bear no propor-

tion to the continuance of his pufillanimity: for
he is ingeneral avilecoward: as fond of revenge
as I am ; has muchinvention; foreſees every difficulty, and knows how to oppoſe it, provided it
is not inhis own perſon. And eſtateofthree thou
fand pounds a year enables him to be very active
inmiſchief.
T2.

Ifound

80

THE HISTORY OF

I found that Lord William W--was married

to Miſs Benſon, and that they were at a feat in

Wiltshire. We debated how we might beſt gratify our revenge. The greatest object was to
make them both feel our vengeance equally, and

atthe ſame time, if we could manage it, put Sir
George in poffeffion of the lady's perfon, at leaft
for a night or two. The attempt was dangerous.

As a preliminary to it, he had already fold that
part of his fortune which conſiſted in land, and
was then remitting the whole to Holland, to be

veſted in the bank of Amſterdam, as in caſe of ill
fucceſs, or dfagreeable conſequences, he purpoſed

retiringwith me into Italy. Hesaidthathe ſhould
take lady W--to fatisfy his revenge, and that
Imight do what I pleaſed with her husband to fatisfy mine.. But this Iobſervedwas reverfing the
orderof nature, because he ought to be better
abletodeal with the man, and I with the ladyIt ended inan agreement to act in concert. My
plan, in which he readily concurred, was totake

every method of rendering Lord William jealous
of his wife, as that would make him inſtrumental

ofhis own miſery, and play us every card we
wiſhed. We gained information that Mr. Melvil!, who had before played Sir George a difagreeable trick, by rescuing Miss Sampher, was on a
viſit at my lord's in Wiltshire, from the conneEtionwhichhad fubſiſted between him and MiſsBenſon, we determined he was the man whom we

ſhould endeavour to make lord William jealous of.
Our firſt ſtep was to write an anonymous letter
tohis lordſhip, as from a friend, to make him
watchful of his wife and Melvill.

And then we

determined that I ſhould dreſs myſelf like a foreign gentleman, and by fome means become his

viſitor, atthe fame time as SirGeorge alſo, in
dif-

81
JULIA BENSON.
diſguiſe, ſhouldget acquainted with the fervants,

and, if poſſible, an admittance in the houſe, to
1

be ready to unite withme in any enterprize that

wasneceffary.

Allthis we executed ſpeedily. I forged a letter
from the Count de Malvigglia at Placenca ; re-

commending myself under the title of Signor
Strozzi , to Lord William W-; having taken
meaſures for disguising myself in ſuch a manner
asnot to fear the eye evenof an old acquaintance.

Iwas received with great politeneſs both by my
lord and lady. Sir George ſucceeded better than

Iexpected, for he improved on the hint, and
got hired as a footman inthe family..

We both being thus on the very fcene of action, hadopportunities of marking the effect of the
letter. Itoperated juſt as we could with his
countenance was full of fufpicion, and he eyed
Melvill and his wife with fuch a penetrating,
anxious, inquifitive air, that we had no doubtbut
his whole foul was poisoned to our with.

Nothing could be more fortunate than fixing on
Melvill for our man, for I could fee, paft a doubt,
that he was in love with Lady W. His
eyestold me this as a truth, that I could not miftake, thence it was the easierto inſpireLord Wil
-

lim with the keenetjealousy.
Botſeveral days pafling without matters coming
to a crifis, as we expected , we planned a hotter
feene of action. After ſome debates, we deter-

mined to contrive, inthe night, to ſteal Mellvill's
Cloaths out of his room for Sir George to dreſs

in-in order to enter hislordthip's bedchamber at
midnight, andpafsupon himfor Melvill; but firſt,
Litwas neceffary to prepare him for it, in order to
convince him of his wife's'falfhood.

I wrotetoLondon for one of my peopletocome
T3

immedi

82

THE HISTORY OF

immediately down, toplant himself in the park,
in his lordſhip's way to acknowledge that he
wrote the letter-and as a proof of the truth of

it, that Melvill, taking advantage of a deſigned
abfence of his lordſhip, had made an aſſignation
with his lady, and would come into his bedchamber at midnight. My lord received this news in
a ſtorm of rage-and threatened his life if it did
not prove true-but at the ſame time promisedto.
make the experiment.
As Sir George was ſure to meet Lord William

fword in hand-the expedition was more dangercus, than he ſtomached ; he at firſt abſolutely
refuſed it-ſtarted a million of objections, and
fawfear in a thousand shapes ; but I asked him,
" how our plan was to be executed, without
frightening Lord William ? Whether I was to
fight him ?" In short, I fpurred him on, as all
cowards mustbe before I could get three ſparks
of reſolution in him. At last he determined to

undertake the affair, but not without my taking
upon me the equally dangerous part of ſtealing
Melvill's cloaths for him.

At night Sir George came to my room armed
with a rapier of an enormous length--and
ſuch as none but a coward would think of using.

I went immediately to Mr. Melvill's room and
brought off his dreſs complete, without discovery.
When I ſhewed it to Sir George, he exelaimed
much at my good fortune, and wiſhed for as good
himſelf ; addingthat he had fecured aretreat for
us both, for a chaiſe andhorſes were ready and in
waitingfor us nearthehouſe.

About one o'clock he fallied forth frommy
room, which was near Lord William's ; and I
waited at the door to be ready to ſecure Lady

W-with him-to ſtop her mouth in case ofneed
-and

JULIA BENSON.
83
-and force her immediately into the chaiſe.
Imuchwiſhed for a fecond of a bold and intre-

pid ſpirit, for Ihad no reliance in any thing that
was to be executed with his aſſiſtance.

1

He had scarce entered the room and made the

ſpeech, we had fettled, to his dearest Julia, before

Iheard the claſhing of their weapons. In a few
minutes, SirGeorge came running to me,-

:

" Ihave run him through,"-faid he.

"Then let us return immediately and carry off
his wife," replied I.
"He has killed her," (returned he) Immediately on my victory I retired to the door, there
I faw Julia ſtart out of bed, and running to her

lord he run her through in a paſſion, and the fell
upontheground."

This was doing the buſineſs more completely
than we expected.

May I not now ſay, my friend, that I am revenged ? I tortured the proud lord with the pangs

ofjealousy. Iprocured his death-I made him
the murderer of the woman whom he adored-

Can any revenge be greater than this ? Yes, now
Iam satisfied, and ſhallreturn to Italy with pleafure.

We fled without the lofs ofa moment. The
chaiſe was ready, and it carried us two ſtages
without change of horses, then discharging it,

andthe neceſſary precautions to prevent a diſcovery, we came with the createſt expedition to
this place, and are now waiting for a fair wind to
carry us over to France. When we arrive ſafe
on that hofpitable ſhore, I will give you fome
further particulars..

Inthe mean time, my friend, you must con-

gratulate me on the uncommon ſucceſs ofmy
expedition. We did not intend death indeed to
Lady

THE HISTORY OF

84

Lady Julia W ; but the circumstances of the
fondhusband's being the murderer of his wife,

which inhis right ſenſes would have beendearer
tohim than his own foul, isan action fo full of

horror tohisheart, and everyfeeling ofhumanity,
thatwe do not regret it. Itmakes our vengence
yetmorecompletethan we expected-andas fuch
I am fatisfied.

Adieu,
1

I am truly Your's,

Weymouth.
MELUSINA ZAFFINI .

LETTER

XLI.

Mr. FRAMPTON (Secretary to Lord William
W.)to Sir PHILIP EGERTON.
SIR,

Nobedience to my maſter's melancholy comIN
mand, Ihave now taken up the pen to give you
the recital of the unhappy events which have

distractedthis goodfamilyfincehis lordſhip wrote
to you last. By his orders Ishall be explicit in

the account, writing, as nearly as my memory
will allow, whatever was ſaid and done.

Upon my mafter's being put in bed, SirEdward
Fanshaw, who was firſt up, ran to his room to
fee the ftate of my lady, whom his lordſhip, in
a fit of ungoverned paſſion, had ran through the
body with his fword. She laid upon the f
'oor
with her Thift held faft to the wound ſenſible,

but fpoke with difficulty. She was moved into
bed, and the furgeon of the family no fooner
boundup my lord's wound, than he did the farme
office tothe good lady. She was in a very dangerous ſtate but he could not pronounce wheOther
itWas mortal or hot thoughhe seemed much
alarmed.

JULIA BENSON.
alarmed.

85

The poor unhappy lady could not

refrain from enquiring what had inſtigated her
husband to be her murderer ? Sir Edward gave
her a ſhort relation of the affair, with some cir-

cumſtances that my lord had related tohim. He
told her, " that it was ajealousy of Mr. Melvill,
whichhe had conceived for ſome time paſt. That
he had received information of an intention, in

thatgentleman, to viſit her ladyſhip in her bedchamber, by affignation at midnight. That, according to this information, Mr. Melvill had
actually come into the room, and notknowing of

his lordſhip's being in bed, had addreſſed her in
termsof love; that my lord then ſtarted out the
duel enſued, which turned outſo unhappily."
Upon Sir Edward's concluding this account,

the amiable lady lifting up her eyes, repliedGracious heaven I what deeplaid plot ofdeftruction must this be-or what unfortunate accident,

to bring about theſe cruel events ! My honour,
Sir Edward, was ever untainted-It is beneath me

to defend it. But let me conjure you to fly immediately, and ſecure Melvill, that the truth may
befully known. If he is fled, lethim bepurſued,
Sir Edward, with all imaginable expedition. To
die is not my hardest fate, but to die under ſuch
animputation, is cruel indeed !"

In the hurry and confuſion of dreffing the
woundedperfons, and having them properly taken care of, every one had forgotten to fecure

Mr. Melvil. Upon Sir Edward's receiving this
defire of her ladyſhip's, he took me with him,
both ofus armed, and went to Melvil's room ;
giving orders at the fame time for all the fervants

to be called, and armed meſſengers on horseback
to be ready for a pursuit. When we came into
Mr. Melvill's room,he was afleep, but we awak12

ed
:

THE HISTORY OF
edhim, and ſeeing us with our naked ſwords, at

86

the bed-fide, he quickly askedwhat was the matter?

:

" Is it poffible that you can ask that afterkillingLord William !"

Killing Lord William!"
"Pretend, Sir to no furprize. It will not ſave
you,believe me.
"You aftonith me, by Heavens, gentlemen,
Ihave not been awake, ſince I went to bed laſt

night!"

" Come, Sir, you must riſe immediately-we
muſt ſecure you. "

"And welcome, Sir-allow me my cloaths,
and I will dreſs directly."
Sir Edward was going to help him tohiscloaths
-But none were to be found.

This occafioned

freſh furprize-Sir Edward feemed ſuſpicious,
that Mr. Melvill had concealed them. But he
addreſſed himthus:

Sir Edward Fanshaw, Ibeg Imay know
more ofthe circumstances of this unaccountable
affair ? How was it Sir ?"

"You, or one like you, came into his lordſhip's bedchamber at one in the morning, and
addreſſedhis wife in terms of love and affignation: he ſtarted out of bed and fought you but
was by a cowardly long ſword run through the
body."

Treachery by heaven! his lordſhip, I know,
has fome inveterate enemies. Let the houſe, Sir

Edward, be immediately fearched examine if
hone are abſent, for by all that's facred, my
cloaths were ſto'en for this purpose. "
Sir Edward feemed truck with this he left

me in Mr. Melvill's room, and went out togive
orders that everyone's room should be examined,
and

JULIA BENSON.

87

and all the houſe ſearched. In about half an

hour he returned, I having given Mr. Melvill
ſome cloaths from his drawers, and he brought
word that my ſuſpicions ſeemedjuſt, for the Italian
count was no where to be found--nor even the

new footman. Meſſengers were immediately difpatched all round the country, with threats and
promiſes to influence the countrymen to be as
expeditious as poffible in the pursuitof them.
1
.

His lordſhip being informed of theſe circumftances-fent for Sir Edward and Mr. Melvill.

Upon their entering his chamber-he faid to the
3

latter.

Now,Mr. Melvill, let me conjure you to
inform.me, upon the honour of agentleman, what
is the truth of this affair ? "

" Upon my honour, my lord, I am perfectly
ignorant of it."
Youhad then no aſſignationwith mywife ?"
" GoodGod, Sir, how could you ſuſpect it?
“

I never exchanged a fyllable with her from the

firſtmoment I knew her, to this day, that would
nothavebeen ſaid before you, had you been prefent.

Is it poſſible?"
" By heaven! it is fact."

" GoodGod! the torment of my mind ! I
have murdered her though she is innocent."

Murdered her!"
Yes: I ran her through on your account."
" Then you must have been mad."
"That curſed count was Zaffini in diſgnife,

or ſome aſſaſſin hired by her.- Sir Edward, I muſt

be carried to mywife-let me aſk forgivenessthat
of
21

(

১
.

83

THE HISTORY OF

that angelic woman, whom I have thus vilely deſtroyed!"
Her ladyſhip had, with much eagerneſs, aſked

after Mr. Melvill, and hearing what had paſſed,
ſaid, like my lord, that Zaffiini muſt certainly be
at the bottom of this. Poor lady! ſhe was very
reſteſs till this diſcovery was made ; but when her

innocencehad been ſo ſolemnly declared by Mr.
Melvill, and she was told that her lord now faw

his error " Then (faid ſhe) I shall die at leaſt
in peace."-She felt herself fainting, and the fur-

geonthat attended thought her in great danger,
infomuch thatthey would notpromiſe for her life,
even for fix hours.

Hislordſhip was brought in upon acouch, and
being reſted near her bed, a ſcene enſued, Sir,

which made ſuch animpreſſion on my mind, that,
to my latest hour, I am sure it will never be obliterated.

" Julia!-(making a nauſe) you ſee your
MURDERER! and the calumniator of your fair
fame ! "-

" Are you convinced that I am innocent?"

" Yes;-fully-to my confufion and my torment."
1

" Say no more then-I

"

" Hell awaits meno punishment is too great
-but ne ſpirit of the damned can feel the pangs

thatnow torture my foul!-Oh ! Julia !-Julia! "
" For heaven's fake, my lord !
" Talk not of heaven-heaven is for thee-

but not for-I dare not ask your forgiveness-"
" I give it you with all my foul-fully-and
fincerely do I forgive you and fince heaven has
convinced you I was innocent, Idie in peace."
" Bleſſed ſpirit!-Oh ! thou amiable and most
deſerving of thy ſex-cut off in the bloom of life
by

JULIA BENSON.
89
by this vile hand !-thy virtue traduced by my
curſedjealoufy-The purity of angels traduced!
Gods! Whatdo I feel !-Oh ! my head will ſplitl"
My lady burst into a floodof tears-Oh ! Sir,
this was a dreadfulmoment-his lordfhip, raiſing
himself with difficulty, claſped her in his arms." Oh ! my dear Julia !"
" Alas ! my lord !-I-I die-the hand of ath
comesupon me-I am faint ! Farewell-Alas !Farewell-for ever !"

With theſe words the ſweet lady expired. The
emotion ſhe felt at herlord's exclamations haſten-

ed her fate ; andthere fledthe last breath of the
moſt amiable womanthe world ever knew.

" Heaven's ! ſaid my lord-what do I see ?-

dying !-dead !-gone !-Julia! -my wife !-my
fair one !-Oh -Oh ! my heart-Good God ! Is
it come to this ?-I die."

My lord fainted away at theſe words, and was
removed. He fell into a dreadful delirium-and

could ſcarcely be prevented from tearing out his
own heart. In this ſhocking condition he laid
near ten hours -when he seemed to doze a little

with fatigue. Out of this he was awaked, on
hearing the arrival of the count and the footman

that wasmifling, who were ſeized at Weymouth,
0

and forced back.

Befides this, another ſtrange affairhas happened.
This footman was caught in Mr. Melvill's cloaths.

They were both brought into the room to my
lord, by his orders ; their prefence ſeemed a little
to revive him, and his ſenſes returned. He asked
the footman, " Now own at once who you are

that have ſtolen Mr. Melvill's cloaths to perpetrate this infernal action." ,

" I ſhallnot tellyou-you arenot my game-

I aſſignyou over tohim." (pointing to the count.)
U

"Yes

THE HISTORY OF &c.

" Yes, my lord, (faid the count) I am revenged
at last. Know you not your enemy-Do not the in-

juries of Zaffini ſtrike you ;" (throwing off the hat
and wig and appearing with a different countenance.)
66

Juſt God ! a ſpirit broke looſe from hell could
nothave carried revenge ſo far."

" Thus ſhall it farewith all that injure me. Vile
wretch ! I hated, and deſpiſed you-I ſwore eternal
Alence, and I now gratify my eager eyes with feeing thee thus humbled thus dying by my ordersand the murderer of your innocent wife !"
1

Theſewords affected my poor maſter ſo much that
they threw him again into his delirium-He called
upon his Julia in the moſt piteous manner-

ſtarted, asif he ſaw her bleeding under his hand
" She falls ! (cried he) I've killed her. There ſhe lies
-a breathless corps." Nothing could be more horrible

thanhis exclamations; but his wound bleeding afreſh,
and his torture encreaſing, he was helddown in his
bed-and preſently expired, after a faint return of
ſenſe, in which he called upon his wife in the moſt
patheticſtrain.
Mr. Melvill and Sir Edward hurried this Zaffini,
whoever he is, out of the room. He ordered him

tobeguarded, together with the perfon, in the difguiſe of a footman. Sir Edward faid,
that the
ſtranger wouldbe hanged ofcourſe, butthat as to this
Zaffini, who seemed to be foremost in the miſchief-

that he should himself take charge ofhim, and puniſh
him according to his deſerts though not allowed by
law, what his intentions are, I know not."
Thus, Sir, I have endeavoured to give you as ex-

actan accountof this tragic affair, as I am able. It
isone of the moſt horrible ever heard of God for.

bid I ſhould again bewitness of ſuch an one ! The
family is diſperſing, and this houſe, which was fo
Jately the reſidence of pleaſure and every happiness,
is now thehabitation of misery. The old duke is
arrived-andſo dreadfully hurt at his fon's unhappy
end, that the phyſician thinks it will be fatal to him.
I remain Sir, moſt dutifully yours,
FINIS .