/ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016 


https://archive.org/details/b22039892_0002 


.#f> ' 


I 


OBSERVATIONS 


ON  THE 

NATURE,  KINDS,  CAUSES,  AND  PREVENTION, 


OP 


INSANITY. 


BY  THOMAS  ARNOLD,  M.D. 

fEttOW  Of  THE  ROYAL  COLLEGE  OF  PHYSICIANS,  ANB  OF  THE  ROYAl 
MEDICAL  SOCIETY,  OF  EDINBURGH. 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES.  f 

''®Fa5D!.,Rf„,v 


VOL.  II. 

CO  NTAINI  N C 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  CAUSES  AND  PREVENTION • - « •-"  v'  V'^'V 

INSANITY.  ' ». 


SECOND  EDITION, 

CORRECTED  AND  IMPROVED. 


T«fc«r<rH  Tar  avflf^’Traj,  a t«  ^XX»  t«  TTspl  T^y  «Pc*y- 

EPICTETI  ENCHIRID.  CAP.  X. 

Men  are  not  disturbed  by  things  themselves;  but  by  the  opinions  which 
they  form  concerning  them. 


And  moody  madness  laughing  wild 
Amid  severest  woe. 


CRAY, 


> 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  FOR  RICHARD  PHILLIPS, 

BRIDGE  STREET,  BE ACKFRIAR8. 


1806. 


<A.V 


Non  impnne  unquam  tenas  inflantur  Jaccho  t 
Non  venerl  crebro  licet  unquam  impune  btare; 

Non  duros  poterunt  ullos  tolerare  labores 
Constanter ; nec  longa  quidem  jejunia  ferre: 

Lucubratio  denique  obest  insigniter  usque. 

flemyng  neuropath,  lib.  I.  f.  281, 

Nam  neque  sors  homlnum  est  adeo  miseranda  gravbque, 
Haec  ut,  si  parent  Naturx  legibus  sequis, 

Irruat,  et  cumulo  sese  addat  sponte  malorum. 

Culpa  oput^  ut  morbi  moles  condatur  acerba. 

Quo  magis  hsec — 

Pe<Storibus  scribenda  imis,  signandaque  firme , 

lit  Morbi  KTumnas  vitare  queamus  amaras. 

iv.  UB.  V.  302,  «c. 


j histopical 
\ medical 


Printed  by  B.  M*MiIlan,  ? 
Bow  Street^  Gorent  Garden,  j 


PREFACE 


TO  THE 

fIRST  EDITION  OP  THE  SECOND  VOLUME, 


I NOW  present  to  the  world  my  Second  Volume  of 
Observations  on  Insanity  *,  the  publication  of  which  has,  by 
various  weighty,  and  invincible,  impediments,  been  much 
longer  delayed,  than  I expelled  at  the  time  wlxen  the 
First  Volume  issued  from  the  press.  What  have  been  the 
causes  of  delay,  concerns  chiefly  myself,  and  can  but  little 
interest  the  reader.  Such  as  it  is,  the  complete  work  is 
now  presented  to  the  public  ; and  whatever  may  be  tlic 
opinion  of  the  execution,  the  attempt,  1 am  persuaded, 
xvill  be  thought  to  merit  approbation. 

lam  happy  to  learn,  that  the  First  Volume  has  been 
fhought,  by  men  of  great  respectability  in  the  medical  pro- 
fession, to  deserve  attention.  Of  this  I am  certain,  that  the 
greatest  part  of  it  is  the  result  of  experience,  and  founded 
upon  actual  observation.  Some  few,  I understand,  have 
objected  to  it,  that  I have  extended  the  boundaries  of  in- 
sanity too  far ; and  have  either  not  at  all,  or  not  suffici- 
ently, distinguished  it  from  mere  vice,  and  folly  j from  the 
moral  insanity  of  the  Stoics.  If  I have  really  confounded 
them,  it  was  not  my  intention.  I thought  I had  abun- 
dantly guarded  against  the  possibility  of  such  a mistake. 
There  are  very  few  definitions  in  the  whole  book,  which 
were  not  drawn  up  from  examples  of  aChial  cases  of  insa- 
nity, which  had  fallen  under  my  own  inspection.  And, 
' indeed,  after  a careful  review  of  all  that  I have  said  upon 
the  subject,  I cannot  but  persuade  myself,  that  the  persons 
who  have  made  the  objection,  would  not  have  made  it, 

^ 2 had 


IV 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION. 

had  they  attended  sufficiently  to'  the  whole  tenor  of  the 
work. 

I should  have  been  more  flattered  by  the  approbation  of 
my  venerable,  and  respedled  preceptor,  the  very  inge- 
nious- Dr.  Cullen  ; had  he  not  qualified  it  by  a reflection, 
which,  though  of  little  force  in  reality,  cannot  fail  to  de- 
rive great  weight  from  the  influence  of  his  authority. 
Without  defending  myself  in  what  I think  needs  no  de- 
fence, I shall  only  observe,  that  the  objeftion  would  be 
of  equal  validity  against  Dr.  Cullen’s  own  elaborate  sys- 
tem of  nosology  *,  and  especially  with  the  aid  of  those  wea- 
pons with  which  we  are  occasionally  furnished  by  his  First 
Lines  of  thcPraaice  of  Physic  : but  that  such  a mode  of 
attack  would  be  unfair  against  either  of  us  ; and  tliat  it  is 
equally  unfair  to  objea,  either  to  descriptions  drawn  from 
nature,  or  to  the  discoveries  of  new  appearances,  which 
are  both  real  acquisitions  to  science ; witness  the  nume- 
rous descriptions  of  Linn.eus,  and  his  followers,  and  the 
wonderful  discoveries  of  Priestley,  and  Herschel  •,  that 
•we  do  not  at  present  know  how  to  apply  them  to  use  i 
since  truth  is  always  valuable,  and  the  acquisition  of  new 
truth  ever  to  be  desired,  and  will  rarely  fail,  at  some 
time  or  other,  to  lead  to  important  purposes,  though  we 
may  be  unable,  at  present,  to  form  the  most  distant  con- 
jecture of  what  those  purposes  may  be.  The  ardour  for 
discovery  would  be  almost  entirely  suppressed,  and  sci- 
ence would  make  but  very  slow  advances,  were  nothing 
to  meet  with  a favourable  reception  from  the  public,  of 
which  it  was  difficult,  immediately,  to  perceive  the  ap- 
plication. 

I flatter  myself,  however,  that  I have  found  much  va- 
luable practical  advantage  from  the  distinctions  I have 
adopted.  And  I hope  they  will  be  allowed  by  all  to  be 
useful,  as  furnishing  a nomenclature  on  the  subjeCt  of  in- 
sanity ; 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.  V 

sanity ; and  enabling  us  to  convey  our  ideas  relative  to 
this  disorder,  and  to  describe  its  appearances  in  particular 
cases,  with  much  more  conciseness,  and  precision,  than 
we  are  able  to  do  while  no  other  distin6l!ons  were  known 
or  attended  to,  than  those  of  mania,  and  melancholia. 

The  truth  of  these  observations  will,  I presume,  in 
part  receive  confirmation  from  the  present  volume ; on 
the  contents  of  which  I have  bestowed  much  pains  ; and, 

I hope,  not  altogether  without  success;  though  I must 
acknowledge  that  I stand  greatly  in  need  of  the  candour, 
and  forbearance,  of  the  philosophical  reader,  who,  if  he 
find  something  to  commend,  will,  I fear,  meet  with  more 
than  I could  wish,  which  may  not  receive  his  entire  assent, 
and  approbation.  But  the  novelty,  and  difficulty,  of  my 
subject.  Will,  I allow  myself  to  believe,  plead  powerfully 
in  my  favour  ; and  contribute  to  secure  to  me  the  de- 
sirable encouragement  of  the  good  opinion  of  the  public. 

hcicester,  May  8,  1786. 


CONTENTS 


w- 


-'•  ''iii&l  ■'■'*'»■ . 9~  - » - - > 

Ivi  t:i*3^rT  rtfO  t>  , * 


_ r rV'*^ 

nik'^  ^h»\  pi  ^ Vi^w;  *N  n*  fni* 

Mfi  *i  ft*e*a  M t *fT^ 

ttw  ffv  Vli"  ' -*<5^  iK"^  ^ 

^ t,t.:  ■ ' asc*/*?"*  ''•  •■•  % '♦ 


'■!,•*  :-..i,i(MiT  li.«',',.-  V*.,».  ' ‘ >W»»  ■*"'  ' '■‘:«-'^'J>*V^^ 

.vt.., 


v'**.  ' 


r 

if 


•*d  ^ |».t  ■:  ' ■»V4||.<r  « "“i*  'K- 

w»»f  ^ *'  '*'^  * 4 • 


^,1P  V'ii'  ^ ‘ ^ ..r-a/  ' < ■. f 

. -1  tt  i Jl.«i  -o. 


W 
• • 


«-n. 

#»r5|f  * 


.«fe  -.  * - •'* 

'/:  ■•‘•3  Ur*- -■■( 


% f« 


t4K>\tM>nvs,t 


.«v  * 


•it- 


4i- 


► 


*■•"=.  ^ ■ 


V- 


N, 


t 


If 


' t^'  % ». 

, V »» 

••  ‘ ■ 


-■»^4  ^ 


V' 


k ' 


V 


CONTENTS  or  VOL.  II. 


SECT.  V. 

PACE 

t)f  the  dauses  of  Insanity  . ^ 

Remote  Causes  ' • • • 

A Tabic  of  the  Remote  Causes  ^ 

General  Observations  relative  to  the  Nervous  System,  and 
the  Influence  of  the  Mind  and  Body  on  each  other  ....  12 

A.  Bodily  Causes  

I.  Internal  Causes  seated  in  the  Brain,  its  Ve.ssels;  and 

Membrances  

II.  External  Causes  which  operate  mechanically'  upon 

the  Brain  65 

III.  Cau.ses  affedllng  the  Body  in  general,  which  produce- 
Insanity,  either  by  a6ting  direftly  upon  the  Brain, 
or  by  introducihg  a gradual  Change  in  the  System 

which  disposes  to  Insanity  /O 

iV.  Causes  seated  in,  or  primarily  afFe6ling,  some  parti- 
cular Parts,  and  giving  rise  to  Insanity,  either  by 
a£ting  speedily  upon  the  Brain,  as  by  Sympathy, 
or  Translation  j or  by  operating  more  slowly,  and 
producing  such  a gradual  Change  in  the  Constitu- 
tion as  disposes  to  Insanity 167 

B.  Mental  Causes  16I 

V.  Intense  Application  of  Mind  161 

1.  To  Study  163 

2.  To  Business,  or  Schemes,  of  any  kihd^  that  re- 

quire great  and  unremitted  Attention,  or  much 

Exertion  of  Genius  183 

Any  sort  of  Employment  of  the  Mind  which 
may  keep  it  for  a long  time  in  an  adive  and 
wakeful  state  185 

VI.  Passions  of  various  kinds,  when  sudden,  violent,  or 

habitual  1 S7 

Curiosity,  Admiration,  Wonder,  Surprise,  and 
* ^ 

Astonishment  Ip4. 

Joy  igg 

Vanity  20^ 

Malevolence  209 

Desire 

( 


CONtENTS. 


••• 

viu 


Desire  

Hope  

Answer  

Hatred  

Love 

Anibllion 

Avarice  

Distress  

Envy  

Grief  

Despair  

Fear 

Gonstcrnation  

Terror  

Shanae  

Suspicion  and  Jealousy  

Anxiety  

Religious  Fear 

Vll.  Too  great  Aftivily  of  Imagrnatiou 

VIII.  Imbeclllity  of  Mind  

Proximate  Causes  

Four  Variations  of  them  

1.  Phrenitic  Insanity  

2.  Incoherent  

3.  Maniacal  

4.  Sensitive  

5.  Delusive  - — 

6.  Whimsical  

7.  Fanciful  — ^ 

8.  Impulsive  

g.  Scheming  

10.  Vain,  or  Self-Important  Insanity 

1 1 . Hypochondriacal  

12.  Pathetic  

13.  Appetitive  

SECT.  VI. 

Of  the  Prevention  of  Insanity  


. . 212 
..  214 
*.  21G 
..  21ff 
. . 220 
. . 225 

. . 226 
. . 229 
. . 229 

. . 233^ 
. . 240 
..  244 
. . 245 
. . 245 
. . 256 

. . 257 
. . 259 
. . 26a 
. . 263- 

. . 268 
..  273 


..  2t;<> 

..  291 
..  294 

..  29& 

..  297 

..  300 
..  302 
..  304 

..  307 
..  308 

309 

..  312 
..  315 


320 

©B-SERYAf- 


O B S li  R VAT  IONS 


ON 


IN 


Cl 


.1 


i , f . • / • 


OP  THE  CAUSES  OP  iNSANI'i 


SECT.  V. 

NiH  ^ Of  V ^ 

F treating  of  causes  we  tread  upon  slipper^*^ 
ground  ; and  are  liable  to  much  obstruction, 
and  perplexity,  from  the  intricacy  of  the  way, 
and  the  imperfeCt  and  doubtful  lights  on  which 
we  are  obliged  to  rely ; so  that  it  is  often  exceed- 
ingly difficult  to  fix  any  finn  and  secure  footing, 
and  still  more  so  to  make  any  considerable  ad- 
vances towards  truth  and  certainty.  It  will  there- 
fore be  advisable  to  step  with  caution,  if  we  wish 
to  proceed  with  safety  and  success,  and  would 
avoid  falling  into  error,  or  bewildering  ourselves  in 
doubt  and  obscurity. 

Pathological  writers  have  said  a great  deal  on 
the  causes  of  diseases,  and  have  distinguished 
them  by  a variety  of  appellations  according  to 
their  different  natures,  and  the  several  relations 
which  they  bear  to  the  disorders  in  whose  produc- 
tion they  are  concerned. 


TOL.  n. 


On 


2 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


On  this  subject,  as  on  many  others,  the  more 
early  modern  writers  have  been  as  uselessly, 
as  they  have  been  indefatigably,  minute  j and,  im- 
proving upon  the  subtilty  of  their  venerable  mas- 
ters, Aristotle  and  Galen,  hav^e  enumerated 
causes  with  the  most  insignificant  and  disgusting 
refinement,  and  have  multiplied  distin6tions  with- 
out end. 

Of  these  disfm^Hons  the  more  important  have 
been  retained  bv  the  later  moderns ; who  usu- 
ally  distribute  the  causes  of  diseases  under  the 
three  heads  of  predisposing,  occasional,  and  proxi- 
mate and  sometimes,  which  seems  to  be  still 
better,  only  under  two,  which  they  term  remote, 
and  proximate:  for  though  the  former  division 
seems  to  have  a real  foundation  in  nature,  and, 
as  explained  in  the  writings  of  pathologists,  ap- 
pears beautiful  in  theory,  and  is  not,  perhajis, 
altogether  void  of  pradlical  utility ; it  is  rather 
perplexing  than  easy  in  the  application,  and  what- 
ever may  be  its  conveniences,  when  we  have  any 
particular  case  in  contemplation,  is  seldom,  if  at 
all,  applicable  in  treating  of  a disease  in  general : 
and  is,  perhaps,  upon  the  whole,  much  less  ser- 
viceable in  facilitating  the  investigations  of  the 
a61ual  |)ra61itioner,  than  in  opening  and  enlarging 
the  views  of  the  student,  by  showing  him  the  very 
lax,  and  unphilosophical  sense,  in  which  - the 
term  cause  is,  and  necessarily  must  be  used,  on 
most  occasions,  in  the  writings  of  physicians. 

Avoiding, 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


3 


Avoiding,  therefore,  the  former  of  the'se  di- 
visions of  causes,  as  more  apt  to  bewilder  than 
to  enlighten  ; and  adhering  to  the  plain  and  di- 
re£l  paths  of  experience  and  observation ; I 
shall  arrange  such  causes  as  are  either  known,  or 
thought,  to  have  some  share  in  producing  insa- 
nity, in  the  clearest  and  simplest  manner,  accord- 
ing to  what  appears  to  me  to  be  the  best,  because 
the  most  distinct  and  pra6tical  division  of  them, 
into  remote  and  proximate : the  former  containing 
all  those  causes  which  have  commonly  been  mar- 
shalled under  the  distindl  heads  of  predisposing 
and  occasional ; and  which  are  either  obviously 
striking,  or  more  latent,  and  only  to  be  deduced 
from  reasoning  on  what  we  plainly  see  and  know  ; 
either  external  or  internal ; recent  or  inveterate  ; 
accidental,  or  constitutional:  — and  the  latter, 
which  is  wholly  internal,  being  of  the  nature  of  a 
real  physical  cause,  and  so  necessarily  conneded 
with  the  disease,  that  the  one  existincr,  continu- 
ing,  changing,  or  ceasing,  the  other  must  of 
course  exist,  continue,  change,  or  cease*. 


* “ Missis  aliis  minoris  momenti  causarum  differentiis,  ex 
hucusqne  proposltis  constare  potest,  earn  solaro,  quam  sano 
.sensu  dixi  proxiinam  aut  continentem,  verse  causae  physicae  in- 
geninm  prae  se  ferre,  quae  morbum  ita  efficiat,  ut  ilia  posita  hie 
ponatur,  durante  duret,  mutata  mutetur,  ablata  tollatur.”— . 
irAUBii  fnstitut.  Patholog.  Medicinal.  § 6l,  p.  18. 


B 2 


.REMOTE 


4 


CAUSES  OE  INSANITY# 


EEMOTE  CAUSES. 

Of  remote  causes  we  can  speak  with  some  de- 
gree of  precision  ; as  a considerable  knowledge 
of  them  may  be  acquired  by  experience  and 
observation  ; they  being,  for  the  most  part,  either 
the  immediate  objects  of  our  senses,  or  di- 
rectly, and  clearly,  deducible  from  known  facts 
which  are  so. 

We  are  by  no  means,  however,  free  from  the 
possibility  of  error  even  here : and  we  are  not  a 
little  liable  to  deficiency.  Some  of  our  supposed 
causes,  may  have  but  a small  share  in  producing 
the  disease  in  question  ; some  may  have  no  other 
relation  to  it  than  that  of  originating  from  the 
same  common  cause ; others  may  have  no  con- 
nexion with  it  at  all,  and  only  exist  accidentally 
at  the  same  time  ; and  others  which  may  have 
some  real,  and  immediate,  relation  to  it,  may 
not  have  that  of  a cause,  but  of  an  effeCt.  Of  one 
or  other  of  the  three  last-mentioned  sorts,  are,  I 
believe,  many  of  the  appearances  on  disseClion. 
It  may  be  better,  however,  to  admit  an  imagi- 
nary cause,  than  to  rejeCla  real  one:  since,  after 
all  our  c^ire  and  attention  in  collecting  them,  our 
catalogue  of  remote  causes  will  inevitably  have 
many  deficiencies,-  which  time  and  obsen^ation 
alone  can  supply  ; and  the  same  time  and  obser- 
vation, while  they  enlarge  our  acquaintance  with 

real, 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


5 


real,  may  enable  us  to  reject  with  certainty  such 
supposed  causes,  as  we  could  not  have  discarded 
at  an  earlier  period,  on  any  better  ground  than 
that  of  mere  suspicion.  For  these  reasons  I shall 
admit  many  of  the  appearances  observed  on  dissec.- 
tion,  and  other  circumstances  noticed  by  pra(^ical 
writers,  into  the  list  of  causes,  in  which  I am  not 
positive  that  they  really  merit  a place. 

The  remote  causes  of  insanity  naturally  divide 
themselves  into  two  kinds,  bodily  and  mental. 

(A)  The.  hodilij  causes  are  either  (I.)  such  inter- 
nal causes  as  are  Immediately  seated  in  the  brain, 
its  vessels,  and  membranes:  or  (II.)  such  external 
causes  as  operate  mechanically  upon  that  organ : 
or  (III.)  such  causes  as,  while  they  affe6t  the  sys- 
tem in  general,  at  the  same  time  produce  insanity, 
either  by  acting  directly,  and  immediately,  upon 
the  brain  ; or  by  effedling  such  a gradual  change 
in  the  body,  as  disposes  to  insanity  by  diminish- 
ing the  healthful  tones,  occasioning  debility,  indu- 
cing morbid  irritability  and  sensibility,  and  excit- 
ing uneasy  and  painful  sensations : or  (IV.)  such  as, 
being  seated  in,  or  primarily  afte6ling,  some  parti- 
cular parts,  give  rise  to  insanity,  either  by  speedily, 
and  sometimes  almost  instantaneously,  disordering 
the  brain,  as  by  sympathy,  or  translation  ; or  by 
operating  slowly,  and  introducing,  like  the  third 
sort  of  causes,  such  a gradual  change  in  the  con- 
stitution as  disposes  to,  and  readily  terminates 
in,  insanity, 

B 3 


(B)  The 


6 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


(B)  The  mental  causes  all  consist  either  in  the 
immediate  and  intense  adiion  of  the  mind  itself 
(V.  VI.  VII.)  ; or  in  such  a constitution  of  mind 
(VIII.)  either  natural,  or  acquired,  as  disposes 
it  to  be  easily  put  into  a state  of  intense  action. 
In  the  former  case,  it  is  earnestly  fixed  on  one, 
or  a few  (V.  VI.),  or  busily  ranging  through 
a variety  (VII.)  of  objects : in  the  latter  (VIII.) 
it  is  in  a state  of  imbecility,  which  renders  it 
incapable  of  withdrawing  its  attention  from  any 
train  of  thinking  in  which  it  has  engaged  (V.),  dis- 
poses it  to  be  readily  carried  away  by  the  im- 
pulse of  the  passions  (VI.),  or  deluded  by  the 
:hasty  and  superficial  combinations  of  imagination 
(VII.)  ; and  is  subversive  of  self-command,  ra- 
• tional  conduci,  and  sound  judgment. 

The  whole  of  the  remote  causes  may  be  ar- 
ranged in  a table  as  follows : 

A Table  of  the  remote  Causes  of  Insanitij. 

(A).  BODILY  CAUSES. 

I.  Internal  causes  seated  In  the  brain,  its  vessels,  and  mem- 
branes. 

1.  Unusuql  firmness,  hardness,  dryness,  and  friability 
of  the  brain. 

3.  Hard  substances,  and  other  preternatural  tumors 
and  excrescences  in  various  parts  of  the  brai;i, 
such  as 

A tumor  on  the  corpus  callosum. 

Hydatids  and 


Indurated 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


7 


Indurated  glands  in  the  plexus  choroides. 
Enlargement,  induration,  and  stony  hardness  of 
the^iineal  gland. 

Unusual  thickness,  and  firmness,  and  ossifica- 
tions, of  the  coats  of  the  carotid  arteries. 

3.  Purulent,  sanious,  or  mucous  matter, — or 
Extravasated,  often  black,  and  sometimes  concreted 

blood,  or 

Water, — in  the  ventricles,  in  the  substance  of  the 
brain,  between  the  brain  and  its  membranes,  and 
between  the  membranes: — and 
Polypous  concretions,  or 
Coagulated  blood, — in  the  sinuses. 

4.  Distention,  and 

Enlargement, — of  the  vessels  of  the  brain  and  its 
membranes. 

5.  Inflammation  of  the  brain,  and  its  membranes. 

6.  Induration, 

Incrassatlon,  and  partial 

Ossification, — of  one,  or  botli  membranes  of  the 
brain. 

Adhesion  of  the  dura  mater  to  the  skull,  or  of  the 
membranes  to  each  other. 

7.  Any  other  internal  cause  of  compression,  or  irritation, 

of  the  brain. 

II.  External  causes  which  operate  mechanically,  or  at  least . 
immediately,  upon  the  brain. 

1.  Exostoses  of  the  inner  table  of  the  skull. 

2.  Depression,  or  fradure  of  the  skull, 

3.  Concussion  of  the  brain. 

4.  The  immediate  a£tion  of  the  burning  rays  of  the  sun 

upon  the  head,  in  hot  climates ; termed  by 
modern  medical  writers  insolath,  or  coup  du  soleil, 

B 4 5.  Smallness 


8 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


5.  Smallness  of  the  head,  early  obliteration  of  the  su» 

tures,  or,  in  short  any  external  cause,  compress^ 
ing,  confining,  or  irritating  the  brain'’. 

6.  A swelling  in  the  neck, 

III.  Causes  affecting  the  body  in  general,  which  produce  in-- 

sanity,  either  by  a6ling  diredly  upon  the  brain,  or 
by  introducing  a gradual  change  in  the  system 
which  disposes  to  insanity. 

1.  Hirenitis, 

Other  delirious  fevers. 

Small-pox. 

2.  Great  heat  of  climate. 

3.  Immoderate  .exercise,  and  especially  in  a dry  and 

hot  air. 

4.  Profuse  evacuations. 

5.  Excessive  venery. 

6.  DefeS:  of  nourishment. 

7.  Fevers,  of  whatever  kind,  which  have  continued  long, 

have  frequently  recurred,  have  terminated  with 
an  imperfect  crisis,  or  Iiave  not  been  treated  with 
proper  dilution. 

8.  An  inadive,  and  sedentary  life. 

IV.  Causes  seated  in,  or  primarily  affeding,  some  particular 

parts,  and  giving  rise  to  insanity,  either  by  ad- 
ing  speedily  upon  the  brain,  as  by  sympathy,  or 
translation ; or  by  operating  more  slowly,  and 
producing  such  a gradual  change  in  the  constitu<» 
tion  as  disposes  to  insanity. 

1 . A diseased  state  of  the  abdominal  viscera,  and  neigh- 
bouring parts } as  of  the 
Stomach, 

Pylorus, 

Intestines, 


^ Vide  Sauvages,  tom.  iii.  Parti,  vol.  iv.  p.  376, 

Pancreas, 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


9 


Pancreas, 

Mesentery  and 
Mesenteric  glands. 

Liver, 

Spleen, 

Haemorrhoidal  vessels. 

Kidneys, 

Glandulae  atrabiliariae. 

Omentum, 

Peritoneum  and  parts  adjoining. 

2.  Whatever  tends  to  induce,  or  is  the  consequence  of^ 

an  infirm  state  of  the  stomach,  and  intestines  j as 
Hard  and  indigestible  aliment. 

The  immoderate  use  of  warm  diluting  liquors. 
Intemperance  in  diet  of  any  l^ind. 

Viscid  phlegm. 

Worms. 

3.  Aftive  substances  taken  into  the  stomach  which  im- 

mediately afFeft  the  nerves  and  brain,  by  sym. 

pathy,  and  have  a tendency  to  produce  delirium  j as" 
Wine, 

Opium,  and  other 
Narcotics,  and 
Poisons. 

4.  A disordered  state  of  the 

Womb, 

Ovarla, 

Spermetic  vessels. 

5.  The  retention,  or  suppression,  of  any  customary  eva* 

cuation,  whether  natural  or  preternatural  j as 
The  lochia. 

Milk, 

Menses, 

Piles, 

Old  ulcers,  setons,  issues,  habitual  sweats. 


6,  Meta- 


10 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


6.  Metastases,  or  translations,  to  the  brain,  as  in  the 

repelled 

Gout, 

Erysipelas, 

Herpes, 

Cutaneous  eruptions. 

7.  Wornas  in  the  nostrils,  or  frontal  sinuses. 

(B.)  MENTAL  CAUSES. 

V.  Intense  application  of  the  mind  to 

1.  Study; 

2.  Business,  or  schemes,  of  any  kind,  that  require 

great  and  unremitted  attention,  or  much  exertion 
of  genius  ; — or 

3.  Any  sort  of  employment  of  the  mind,  which  may 

keep  it  for  a long  time  in  an  active  and  wakeful 
state. 

VI.  Passions  of  various  kinds,  when  sudden,  violent,  or 

habitual ; as 

1.  Surprise,  or  astonisliment. 

2.  Joy. 

3.  Enthusiasm,  or  religious  joy. 

4.  Pride  and  vanity. 

5.  Desire. 

6.  Anger. 

7.  Hatred,  and  aversion. 

8.  Love. 

9.  Ambition. 

10.  Avarice. 

1 1 . Distress. 

12.  Grief. 

13.  Despair. 

14.  Fear. 

15.  Suspicion. 

••  16.  Jealousy, 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


l\ 


16.  Jealousy. 

17.  Anxiety. 

18.  Religious  fear. 

VII.  Too  great  activity  of  Imagination. 

VIII.  Imbecility  of  mind. 

How  tlie  bodily  causes  which  operate  imme- 
diately upon  the  brain  are  capable  of  produciitg 
insanity,  we  may  form  some  notion  from  the  ob- 
vious analogy  between  the  delirium  which  con- 
stitutes this  disorder,  and  that  of  a fever : but  how 
insanity  is  excited  by  those  bodily  causes  which  do 
not  adl  immediately  upon  the  brain,  is  not,  per- 
haps, at  first  sight,  so  evident.  This,  it  is  pro- 
bable, will  be  better  understood,  after  a general 
preliminary  view  of  the  mutual  influence  of  the 
mind  and  body  on  each  other  in  the  produClioii 
of  sensation  and  motion  ; in  the  generation  of 
the  appetites  ; and  in  the  excitement,  and  opera- 
tion, of  the  passions:  the  previous  consideration 
of  which,  will  not  only  throw  some  light  upon 
this  matter  ; but  prepare  the  way  for  a more  mi- 
nute and  accurate  explanation  of  the  mental 
causes — intense  thinking, — violence,  or  sensi- 
bility, of  passion, — and  imbecility  of  mind. 

And  though,  that  there  is  such  a mutual  svmpa- 
thy  between  the  body  and  mind,  and  that  the  o|ie- 
rations  of  the  one  are  greatly  influenced  by  the 
afte61ions  of  the  other,  is  very  generally  acknow- 
ledged in  the  writings  of  physicians,  and  phi- 
losophers ; and  is,  indeed,  so  evident,  as  scarcely 

to 


n 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


to  need  a proof;  it  seems  nevertheless  proper, 
in  this  place,  to  illustrate  this  important  trutli 
with  some  degree  of  minuteness  and  precision, 
since  very  few  have  treated  it  with  that  exa61ness 
which  its  extensive  application,  and  usefulness, 
in  explaining  the  theory  of  the  human  frame,  and 
faculties,  appear  to  demand ; and,  however  fre- 
quently it  be  implied  in  their  reasonings,  it  is 
rarely  sufficiently  attended  to,  either  by  medical, 
or  philosophical  writers,  in  its  various  forms  arid 
consequences. 

The  philosophers  of  antiquity  were  so  sensible 
how  much  the  body  was  concerned  in  the  ope- 
rations of  the  mind,  that  not  a few  ot  them  sup- 
posed these  operations  to  be  nothing  more  than 
the  result  of  a certain  appropriate  stru6lure,  dis- 
position, and  harmony,  of  its  parts ; and  that 
mind  was  merely  a modification  of  matter.  Ci- 
cero, in  his  Tusculan  Disputations', — after  enu- 
merating a variety  of  opinions  relative  to  the  na- 
ture and  seat,  of  the  soul ; as  that  it  was  the  heart, 
the  blood,  the  brain,  the  bi*eath,  fire  ; or  that, 
whatever  was  its  nature,  its  seat  was  in  the 


® Ut  rnuUi  ante  vrteres,  proxlme  autem  Aristoxenvs, 
musicus  idemque  pbilosopluis,  ipsius  corporis  intentionem 
qnamdam,  velut  in  cantii  et  fidibus,  qu®  harmonia  dicitur  j sic 
ex  corporis  totius  natnra  cl  figura  varies  raotus  cieri,  lanquain 
in  cantu  sonos.  Hie  ab  artiricio  suo  non  rccessit,  et  tameu 
dixit  aliquid,  quod  ipsum  quale  esset,  erat  multo  ante  et  cKftuin 
elexplanatum  a Platon e." — Lih.  i.  cap,  x. 


heart. 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


13 


heart,  or  in  the  brain  ; — adds,  among  others, 

> several  of  which  are  ot  a similar  tendency,  the 
following — “ As  many  of  the  ancients,  says  he, 
“ formerly,  and  very  lately  Aristoxenus,  a mu- 
sician and  philosopher,  considered  the  soul  as 
a kind  of  tone  of  body,  which,  like  that  of  the 
voice  in  singing,  or  of  the  strings  of  a musical 
instrument,  was  termed  harmony ; so  they  sup- 
posed that  various  motions,  like  musical  sounds, 
were  excited  in  the  body,  in  consequence  of  the 
peculiar  nature  and  strudfure  of  the  whole.  In 
adopting  this  theory  he  might  be  influenced  by 
its  analogy  with  the  art  he  professed : but,  how- 
ever this  might  be,  he  only  asserted  what  had  long 
before  laeen  mentioned,  and  explained,  by  Plato.” 
But  allowing,  as  seems  most  probable,  that 
the  soul  is  an  immaterial  substance,  and  as  Ci- 
cero expresses  it,  being  of  a divine  nature,  and 
original'^,  has  a principle  of  motion  within  it- 
self, which  essentially  distinguishes  it  from  every 
material  substance';  or  according  to  Aristotle, 
a fifth  principle,  which  he  tenns  endelecheia,  to- 
tally different  from  the  four  known  material  ele- 
ments, and  possessing  powers,  and  properties,  of 
which  they  are  found,  by  uniform  experience,  to 
be  destitute,  as  the  faculty  of  thought,  of  foresight, 
of  receiving  and  communicating  instruefion,  of 


Ib.  Ub.  i.  cap.  xxrii. 

' Somn.-Scipion.  cap.  x. 


invention- 


u 


CAUSES  OP  INSANItV. 


invention,  memory,  love,  hatred,  desire,  fear, 
distress,  joy,  and  the  like  ; — it  is  not  only  ob- 
vious that  in  sensation,  and  voluntary  motion, 
the  soul  and  body  mutually  a6l  upon,  or  influence, 
each  otlier ; that  wine,  opium,  and  several  sorts 
of  poison,  much  affe6^,  and  often  greatly  disorder 
the  mind,  by  the  mediation  of  the  body  ; and 
that  the  mind,  on  the  other  hand,  by  means  of 
the  passions,  is  capable  of  wonderfully  aftedfing, 
and  disordering  the  body,  and  even  of  exciting, 
on  some  occasions,  such  violent  commotions,  as 
suddenly  to  dissolve  their  natural  union^ ; — but 
some  have  gone  so  far,  and  perhaps  not  wholly 
without  reason,  as  to  assert  that  the  dispositions 
of  the  soul  appear  to  be  much  influenced  by,  if 
tiiey  are  not  in  a great  measure  dependent  upon, 
the  temperament,  and  constitution,  of  the  body. 
Of  this  opinion  were  Hippocrates,  Plato,  Aris- 
totle, Galen,  and  many  others  among  the 
ancients  ; the  latter  of  whom  has  left  us  an  ex- 
jiress  dissertation  upon  thesubjedl®:  and  among 
tlie  moderns,  to  omit  a long  list  of  less  emi- 
nent names,  both  of  physicians  and  philosophers. 


Hoffmanni  De  Animo  Sanitatis  et  Morborum  Fabro, 
Oper.  tom.  v.  p.  25(),  § 10,  p.  2(50,  § 15,  10'. 

All  who  have  written  upon  the  efFeds  of  the  passions,  and  of 
ihe  imagination,  upon  the  body,  abound  with  fafts  of  this  sort. 

« De  animi  morum  et  corporei  temperanienfi  mutua  conse- 
quutione,  liber  unus. — Lacunje  Epitom.  Operitm  Galeni, 

p.  68. 


where 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


15 


the  celebrated  Hoffman’’,  Arbuthnot’,  and 
Montesquieu’. 

. How  far  it  may  be  in  the  power  of  the  mind 
to  resist,  and  counteract,  the  influence  of  tempe- 
rament, climate,  or  any  other  bodily  state  which 
may  have  a tendency  to  deprave  its  moral  feeling, 
and  impel  it  to  a vicious  conduCt ; or  by  its  ex- 
ertions, and  habitudes,  to  induce  such  a change 
in  the  bodily  state  as  shall  co-operate  with  its  vir- 
tuous propensities  ; tins  is  not  a proper  place  to 
inquire.  It  will  be  sufficient,  at  present,  to  show 
that  there  is  a mutual  sympathy  between  the  bodv 
and  mind  ; and  that  certain  states  of  tlie  one  .in- 
fallibly produce,  or  are  accompanied  with,  cer- 
tain states  of  the  other. 

It  is  owing  to  this  mutual  sympathv  and  influ- 
ence, that  cheerfulness  of  mind  is  naturally  con- 
nected with,  and  not  only  strongly  tends  to,  but, 
no  other  more  powerful  cause  of  disease  counter- 


*•  Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom,  i.  lib,  i.  § 1,  cap.  i.  § 34,  Oper. 
tom.  i.  p,  29, — and  cap.  ix.  § 30,  &c.  Operum,  tom.  i.  p.  52. 
— De  temperamento  fund.amento  rnorura  et  morborum  in  gen- 
tibus.  Operum  tom.  v.  p.  103 — 111. — Excrcitatio  physico- 
medica  de  mentis  morbis  ex  morbosa  sanguini.s  circulatione 
ortis.  Supplem.  vol.  ii.  p.  329 — 339.  . . 

' Essay  concerning  the  EfFe6ts  of  Air  qii  Human  Bodies, 
p.  148,  &c.  &:c. 

5 Spirit  of  Laws,  book  xiv.  Of  Laws  as  relative  to  the  Xa- 
tare  of  the  Climate.  Also  book  xv,  &c.  vol.  i.  p.  277,  &:c. — 
See  Johnson’s  Lives  of  the  most  eminent.  English  Poets,  art. 
Milton,  vol.  i.  p.  I89— 193. 

acting: 

O 


10 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


ailing  It,  will  necessarily  produce  health  of  body : 
and  that  health  of  body,  where  no  particular 
causes  of  distress  intervene,  is  always  accompa- 
nied with  habitual  cheerfulness  of  mind ; and, 
where  such  causes  do  intervene,  protedts  the  mind 
from  the  influence  of  any  trifling,  or  less  urgent 
ones,  and  does  not  easily  suffer  it  to  be  violently 
ruffled,  or  permanently  dejedfed,  by  causes  which 
would  overwhelm  with  affliction  such  weak  minds 
as  infirmity,  and  disease,  had  rendered  effemi- 
nate, pusillanimous,  and  gloomy. 

For  the  same  reason  solicitude,  timidity,  grief, 
and  every  other  anxious  and  distressful  affeCfioii, 
weaken  the  body,  diminish  the  healthful  tones, 
and,  when  long  indulged,  introduce  a most  ha- 
rassing, and  dismal,  train  of  nervous  and  other 
disorders:  while,  on  the  other  hand,  bodily  dis- 
ease, and  especially  of  what  is  called  the  ner\*ous 
kinds,  is  naturally  productive,  more  or  less  ac- 
cording to  its  nature,  degree,  and  duration,  of 
languor,  discontent,  peevishness,  dejeCtion,  and 
of  all  the  painful,  melancholy,  and  self-torment- 
ing  passions  ; which  growing  by  habit,  and  the 
reciprocal  growth  of  their  causes,  not  uncommonly 
terminate  in  the  inexpressible  miseries  of  anxiety, 
and  distress,  or  the  more  dreadful  anguish  of 
horror  and  dCvSpair. 

It  is  from  the  same  source  that  all  the  passions, 
whether  gloomy  or  cheerful,  selfish  or  benevolent, 
when  excited  by  their  proper  external  causes,  pro- 
duce 


Causes  of  insanita". 


17 


duce  a determinate,  and  specific,  state  of  body, 
as  will  be  shown  at  large  in  its  proper  place  ; and 
that  certain  states  of  body,  if  they  do  not  adtually 
produce  certain  passions,  at  least  dispose  the 
mind  to  be  strongly  affedled  by  such  objedls  as 
have  a tendency  to  excite  them. — But  to  proceed 
to  particulars. 

There  are  certain  circumstances  in  the  state 
of  the  body  on  which  its  health,  and  vigour, 
greatly  depend ; and  w'hich  are  much  concerned  in 
the  production  of  those  agreeable,  or  disagreeable 
influences,  with  w^hich  the  mind  and  body  mutu- 
ally affeCt  each  other. 

As  the  various  degrees  of  tension  in  the  strings 
of  a musical  instrument,  fit  it  to  produce  acute 
or  grave,  harmonious  or  discordant,  pleasing  or 
unpleasing  sounds,  in  proportion  to  their  intense- 
ness, and  to  their  mutual  correspondency  or  dis- 
agreement : — so  the  various  changes  in  these  cir- 
cumstances in  the  state  ot  the  body  dispose  it 
to  move  harmoniously,  or  discordantly,  to  every 
movement  of  the  soul,  or  to  the  touch  of  w’hat- 
ever,  from  without,  is  by  nature  adapted  to  call 
forth  its  vibrations  ; and  to  atfeCt  the  soul  with 
pleasure,  or  pain,  accordingly  as  those  vibrations 
are  of  the  one  kind  or  of  the  other.  The  state  of  the 
body  on  which  these  vibrations,  and  on  the  changes 
of  which  these  changes  depend,  has,  for  this  reason, 
not  improperly  been  called  its  tone: — not  because 
any  of  its  fibres,  whether  nervous,  vascular,  or  mus- 

voL,  II.  . c cular, 


28 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITT. 


cular,  are  strung-  to  vibrate  like  a musical  chprc?", 
and  thus  to  communicate  sensation  to  the  mind, 
or  to  receive  motion  from  its  impulses  ; but  be- 
cause a certain  harmonious  adaptation  of  its  se- 
veral parts  fits  it  to  be  suitably  affedled  by  exter- 
nal objedls;  renders  it  exquisitely  responsive  to- 
every  impulse  of  the  divine  musician  within ; 
and  ilisposcs  it,  on  every  occasion,  to  aftccl  the 
mind,  with  pleasure,  or  pain,  in  a due  degree^ 
and  as  the  nature  of  the  exciting  cause  requires, 
in  proportion  to  the  perfe6lion,  or  deficiency,  of 
its  respedlive  tones  and  harmonies. 

This  tone  of  body  seems  naturally  divisible  into- 
three  kinds, — the  muscular, — vascular, — and  elas- 
tic:— the  last  of  which  entirely  depends  on  the 
general,  and  habitual,  state  of  the  constitution ; 
is  permanent  during  that  state  ; is  seldom  capable 
of  sudden  changes  ; and  is  the  basis  of  the  other 
two  ; which,  for  this  reason  depend,  in  like  man- 
ner, a good  deal  upon  the  general  state  of  the 
constitution ; they  are  liable,  however,  at  the 
same  time,  to  be  greatly  influenced  by  the  sudden 
adlion  of  a variety  of  occasional  causes,  as  of  the 
appetites,  passions,  pleasing  or  painful  sensations, 
or  the  like,  as  will  plainly  appear  after  a farther 
explanation  of  their  nature,  and  of  the  nature 
and  elfedfs  of  the  passions  on  the  muscular  and 
vascular  systems;  and  ;ire,  of  course,  capable  of 
very  considerable,  rapid,  and  transient  changes. 

By  elastic  tone  I mean  that  state  of  the  body 

which 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


which  results  from  the  texture,  and  cohesion,  of 
the  constituent,  and  elementary  particles,  of  its 
several  parts;  which  varies  as  their  texture,  and 
cohesion  vary  ; and  in  the  variations  of  which  con- 
sist their  various  degrees  of  mechanical  strength, 
or  weakness.  The  perfe6lion,  or  middle  point, 
of  this  kind  of  tone,  such  as  we  see  in  persons 
of  high  health,  and  of  vigorous  constitutions, 
may  be  called  Jirm and  the  extremes,  on  each 
side,  of  which  we  meet  with  examples  in  old,  and 
in  hard  labouring,  people  on  the  one  hand,  and 
in  children,  indelicate  people,  and  in  all  who  have 
long  laboured  under  enfeebling  chronic  disor- 
ders on  the  other,  may  be  denominated  rigid  and 
lax. 

In  order  to  explain  what  I understand  by  mus-^ 
cular  tone,  it  is  proper  to  observe  that  every 
muscle  in  an  animal  body  afFedts,  as  its  natural 
state,  a certain  degree  of  contra6Hon  when,  appa- 
rently, at  rest ; and  that,  w^hen  in  an  obviously 
active  state,  it  still  farther  shortens  itself: — that 
each  muscle,  excepting  the  sphindters,  those  of 
the  vascular  system,  of  the  oesophagus,  stomach, 
intestines,  tongue,  and  perhaps  a few  others, — 
of  which,  however,  all,  but  the  sphincters,  being 
placed  round  hollow  cylinders,  or  composed  of 
fibres  which,  running  in  contrary  directions, 
counteract  each  other,  are  nearly  in  the  same  si- 
tuation as  to  the  resistance  to  their  aCtion,— -has 
two  fixed  points,  which  oppose  its  contraction  in 

C 2 


some 


‘20 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


some  degree,  and  keep  it  in  a state  of  moderate 
tension: — that  this  tension  admits  of  considerable 
latitude,  and  is  liable  to  variation  between  the 
extremes,  according  to  the  various  states  of  the 
muscular  fibres  tiiemselves,  of  the  vessels  which 
nourish  them,  of  tlje  cellular  membrane  which 
surrounds  and  coiinedls  them,  and  of  the  nerves 
by  which  they  are  animated ; and  that  the  muscles 
a6l  with  more  or  less  ease,  steadiness,  regularity, 
and  force,  in  proportion  as  the  degree  of  tension 
is  greater  or  less : — that  when,  therefore,  by  means 
of  a firm  elastic  tone  of  fibres,  a proper  supply  of 
healthful  blood  to  their  vessels,  and  a sufficient 
deposition  of  the  necessary  fluid  in  the  cellular 
membrane  which  surrounds  every  fibre,  and  every 
bundle  of  fibres,  duly  filling  the  interstices,  the 
muscles  have  acquired  just  such  a degree  of  ten- 
sion as  enables  them  to  aCl  on  every  occasion  with 
case,  and  strength,  their  tone  may  be  said  to  l>e 
vigorous. — When  from  an  increase  of  these  causes, 
in  a very  full  and  healthy  habit,  and  from  much 
muscular  exercise,  they  are  able  to  contradl  with 
still  greater  force,  they  may  then  be  said  to  possess 
an  athletic  tone. — But  when,  from  an  enormous 
quantity  of  fat,  the  muscular  fibres  are  weakened, 
by  being  separated,  over-stretched,  distorted,  im- 
jieded,  and  overloaded  ; and  still  more,  when  from 
a subsequent  emaciation  they  are  greatly  relaxed  ; 
as  well  as,  when,  from  a dcfedl  of  their  natural 
and  healthful  quantity  of  blood  and  other  fluids, 

• • cither 


, CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


21 

either  from  Inanition,  or  troni  a fault  in  the  chy- 
lopoietic  viscera,  occasioning  a want  of  clue  nou- 
rishment, or  from  any  otlier  cause,  they  are  both 
relaxed,  and  perhaps  otherwise  weakened,  their 
tone  may  then  be  called  injirm ; and  as  well  from 
a deficiency  of  a requisite  degree  of  tension,  af? 
of  a firm  elastic  tone,  their  exertions  are  weaker 
than  they  ouglit  to  be,  and  they  are  more  or  less 
apt  to  be  thrown  into  spasms,  in  proportion  to 
the  degree  of  these  imjjerfcdtions  ; and  especially 
if  they  hapjjen,  at  any  time,  to  act  in  an  unnatu- 
ral, or  distorted  situation,  or  to  contradl  more 
strongly  than  is  necessary  to  overcome  the  resist- 
ance they  meet  with. 

Vascular  tone  is,  for  the  most  part,  very 
closely  connedled  with  the  elastic  and  muscular 
tones  of  the  system  in  general ; depends  in  a great 
measure,  if  not  wliolly,  on  the  clastic  and  n)us- 
cular  tones  of  the  coats  of  the  vessels  ; and  con- 
sists in  the  peculiar  states  of  irritability  of  their 
muscular  fibres,  resulting  from  those  tones. 

When  the  heart,  and  arteries,  j)ossess  that  de- 
gree of  elastic  and  muscular  tones,  and  of  irrita- 
bility, which  is  necessary  to  the  equal  eireulation, 
and  distribution  of  tiic  blood  over  every  j)art  of  the 
body  ; when  the  vessels  whose  pecidiar  office  it  is 
to  perform  the  several  secretions,  andexcrctions,  are 
in  like  manner  qualilicd  for  the  due  regular  ex- 
ecution of  the  buisness  allotted  to  them  ; and  the 
absorbent  and  exhalent  vessels  arc  also  in  a pro- 

c 3 pe.*- 


22 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


per  state  foi*  the  fulfilling  of  their  several  appoint- 
ments ; the  vascular  tone  may  then  be  said  to  be 
healthful. — ^W^hen  to  rigid  or  hrm  elastic,  and 
athletic  or  vigorous  muscular  tones,  is  added 
unusual  irritability  of  the  muscular  coats  of  the 
arteries,  their  tone  is  then  inflammatory.  But 
when  in  the  coats  of  these  vessels  there  is  a 
defeat  of  elastic  and  muscular  tones,  the  one 
being  lax,  and  the  other  infirm,  and  consequently, 
a defe6l  of  nervous  power,  the  vascular  tone 
may  be  called  nervous.  In  this  tone  of  body, 
while  the  action  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  and 
of  the  whole  vascular  system,  is  too  weak,  it 
may  be  either  too  irritable  and  acHve,  or  too  dull, 
and  languid. 

Thus  we  see  that  elastic  tone  may  be  either,— 
firm, — or  rigid, — or  lax : — 

That  muscular  tone  may  be  vigorous,— or  ath- 
letic,— or  infirm. 

That  vascular  tone  may  be  healthful, — inflam- 
matory,— or  nervous  ; — and  that  the  last  of  these 
may  be  either  too  irritable  and  active, — or  from 
a want  of  irritability,  too  dull  and  languid  : — 
That  firm  elastic, — vigorous  muscular, — and 
healthful  vascular  tones,  arc  naturally  connected ; 
— that  the  two  former, — as  well  as  the  rigid  elas- 
tic,— and  athletic  muscular, — have  some  degree 
of  connexion  with  inflammatory  vascular; — and 
that  there  is  a similar  relation  between  the  lax 
elastic, — infirm  muscular, — and  nervous  vascular. 

There 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


23 


There  is,  also, a mutual  relation  between  the  state 
of  the  tones,  and  that  of  the  brain  and  nerves : — 
and  as  the  state  of  the  former  depends,  immedi- 
ately, or  more  remotely,  upon  that  of  the  lat- 
ter ; so  the  state  of  the  latter  has  in  its  turn, 
either  dire6Uy,  or  indirectly,  a dependence  upon 
the  former. 

This  mutual  dependence  of  one  part  of  our 
frame,  and  constitution,  upon  another,  is  plainly 
observable  in  many  of  the  fun6Hons  of  the  ani- 
mal economy ; which  are  so  closely,  and  inti- 
mately, connedled,  that  it  is  not  an  easy  matter  to 
give  an  explanation  of  any  one  of  them,  without 
taking  several  things  for  granted,  as  already 
known,  of  some  others,  which  have  not  yet  been 
explained  ; that  it  is  scarcely  conceivable  that  one 
can  be  materially  injured,  without  the  others  suffer- 
ing at  the  same  time ; — and  absolutely  impossible  for 
one  entirely  to  cease  without  the  others,  sooner, 
or  later,  ceasing  likewise  ; — all  of  them  forming 
together  a kind  of  circular  chain,  of  which  there 
is  no  beginning,  and  no  termination ; and  of 
which  every  link  has  a necessary  connexion, 
and  dependence,  upon  all  the  rest.  Thus  the 
brain  and  nerves,  which  seem  to  be  the  very  foun- 
tain, and  origin,  of  life  and  motion,  depend  every 
moment,  for  the  supply  of  their  power,  upon  the 
organs  of  digestion,  and  chylification,  upon  the 
absorption  of  the  ladleals,  ’ the  passage  of  the 
chyle  through  the  thoracic  du6t,  the  circulation 

c 4 of 


24 


Cx\USES  OP’  INSANITY. 


of  the  blood,  and  otlicr  fundiions  necessary  to 
animal  life  ; and  each  of  these  fiin^hons  depends, 
in  like  manner,  immediately  upon  the  brain  and 
nerves,  and  more  or  less  remotely  upon  all  the 
others. 

As  the  nervous  power  and  animal  fundhons 
have  thus  a mutual  dependence  ; so  have  this 
power  and  the  bodilv  tones,  which  rise  or  fall, 
are  healthful  or  debilitated,  flourish  or  decay,  to- 
gether. Indeed  the  several  tones  of  the  body 
seem  to  be  nothing  more  than  such  states  of  its 
adlive  and  sentient  parts  as  render  it  more  or  less 
fit  to  influence,  or  be  influenced  by,  the  mind, 
by  means  of  the  povver  residing  in  tlie  brain  and 
nerves,  and  immediately  communicating  with 
those  parts  through  the  channel  of  the  latter ; 
and,  in  the  one  case,  to  be  excited  to  adhon  by  voli- 
^ tion,  and  the  passions,  and,  in  the  other,  to  ex- 
cite sensation,  according  to  certain  uniform,  and 
established  laws  of  the  animal  machine,  whence 
are  derived  all  the  possible  varieties  of  motions, 
perceptions,  and  ideas. 

Perfedlion,  therefore  of  tones,  perfedliori  of 
health,  perfedlion  of  sensation  and  voluntary  mo- 
tion, perfedlion  of  mental  powers,  and  perfedlion 
both  of  bodily  comfort,  and  intelledlual  serenity, 
where  no  natural  or  moral  evils  interfere  to  destroy 
the  happy  union,  seem  naturally  related : and,while, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  mind  seems  to  be  aftedled, 
for  the  most  part,  with  ease,  cheerfulness,  and 

good 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


25 


good  spirits,  by  the  vigorous  ; and  with  uneasiness, 
dejedhon,  and  languor,  by  the  weaker,  and  less 
perfc6l  tones ; on  the  other  hand,  the  opposite 
tempers  of  mind,  cheerfulness  and  melancholy, 
reciprocally  affe6l  the  body  with  the  tones  of  vi- 
gour and  health,  or  with  those  of  infirmity  and 
disease. 

It  may  farther  be  added,  that  the  firm,  vigo- 
rous, and  healthful  tones,  are  connected  with 
easy  and  accurate  sensation,  strong  mental  fricul- 
ties,  temperate  passions,  and  rational  fortitude  ; 
— the  rigid,  athletic,  and  inflammatory  tones, 
with  dullness  of  sensation,  slowness  of  under- 
standing, obstinacy  of  passion,  and  brutal  cou- 
rage; — and  the  lax,  infirm,  and  nervous  .tones, 
with  liveliness  of  sensation,  quickness  of  concep- 
tion, sensibility  of  passion,  and  great  timidity. 

The  different  temperaments  of  the  ancients, 
so  far  as  they  had  a real  existence  in  nature,  seem 
to  have  been  little  more  than  so  many  different 
combinations  of  these  bodily  tones. 

The  mind  cannot  a6f  directly,  and  can,  there- 
fore, occasion  no  immediate  change,  on  the  elas- 
tic tones,  which,  resulting  from  the  texture  and 
cohesion  of  parts,  can  only  admit  of  a gradual 
one: — but,  by  means  of  its  instruments,  the 
nerves,  or  rather,  by  means  of  the  power  residing 
in  them,  it  can  immediately,  and  instantaneously, 
a6t  upon  the  muscles ; as  in  the  produ6lion  of 
voluntary  motion ; and,  perhaps  of  certain  other 

motions, 


26 


CAUSES  OF  IN8ANITT. 


rnotionii,  and  afFc(5lions,  as  tremblings,  debi- 
lity, and  the  like,  which  are  the  attendants  of 
some  of  the  passions,  are  the  consequence  of 
the  violent  commotions  which  they  sometimes 
raise  in  the  nervous,  and  muscular,  systems,  and 
have  no  dependence  upon  volition : — and  it  can 
likewise,  by  means  of  the  passions,  — seldom, 
and  perhaps  never,  by  volition, — immediately, 
and  instantaneously  affe61:  the  vascular  system, 
and  especially  the  heart  and  arteries,  and  produce 
at  least  a temporary  change  on  their  tone  ; as  will 
particularly  appear  when  we  come  to  consider 
the  influence  of  the  passions,  w'hich,  besides  their 
ordinary  effe61s  on  the  bodv,  have  not  only  been 
known  to  occasion  the  most  sudden,  and  won- 
derful alterations,  in  its  state,  but  sometimes 
even  death  itself. 

These  changes  produced  by  the  mind  in  the  mus- 
cular, and  vascular,  tones,  when  considerable, 
when  of  long  duration,  and  when  frequently 
repeated,  may  in  time  give  rise  to  the  correspond- 
ing changes  in  the  elastic  tones ; and  thus  give  ha- 
bit, and  permanency,  to  wliat  was  at  first  but  acci- 
dental, and  temporary.  So  much  is  it  in  the  power 
of  the  mind  to  injure,  or  improve,  the  frame  and 
constitution  of  the  body. 

In  what  the  power  of  the  nerves  consists,  and 
how  it  operates  in  exciting  the  motions  of  the 
muscular,  and  vascular  systems,  or  in  conveying 
sensation  to  the  mind  ; is  exceedingly  difficult, 

if 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


27 


if  not  impossible,  exactly  to  determine: — nor,  in- 
deed, is  it  of  much  consequence,  in  our  reason- 
ings concerning  its  efFedts,  to  ascertain — whether 
the  nervous  power  resides  in  an  inconceiv'ably 
fine  fluid,  peculiar  to  the  animal  system,  secreted 
in  the  brain,  distributed,  by  means  of  the  nerves, 
to  every  part  of  it,  and  serving  as  an  instrument 
of  communication  between  the  mind  and  body, 
as  many  have  believed,  and  Boerhaave",  with 
much  plausibility,  has  endeavoured  to  prove ; 
whether  it  be  no  more  than  the  subtile  medium 
which  has  been  said  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton*‘  to 

pervade 


8 Institut.  Medic.  § 274,  2/5,  &c. 

’’  “ Adjicere  jam  liceret  nonnulla  de  spiritu  quodam  sabtilis- 
simo  corpora  crassa  pervadente  et  in  iisdem  latente ; cujus  vi 
et  adlionibus  particulje  corporum  ad  minimas  distantias  se  mu- 
tao  attrahunt,  et  contiguae  fa6tx  cohoerent  j et  corpora  ele6trica 
agunt  ad  distantias  majores,  tarn  repellendo  quam  attrahendo 
corpuscula  vicina ; et  lux  emittitur,  refleflitur,  refringitur,  in- 
fleftitur,  et  corpora  calefacit ; et  sensatio  omnis  excitatur,  et 
membra  animalium  ad  voluntatem  moventur,  vibrationibus 
scilicet  hujus  spiritus  per  solida  nervorum  capillamenta  ab  ex- 
ternis  sensuum  organis  ad  cerebrum,  et  a ceiebro  in  muscuHs 
propagatis.  Sed  haec  paucis  exponi  non  possunt,  neque  adest 
sufficiens  copia  experinientorum,  quibus  leges  adtionum  hujus 
spiritus  accurate  determinari  et  monstrari  debeirt.” — Sir  Isaac 
Newton’s  Principia,  as  quoted  ly  Dr.  Bryan  Robinson,  in 
his  Observations  on  the  Virtues  and  Operations  of  Medicines, 
p.  2. 

“ I might  here  add  something  concerning  a most  subtile  spi- 
rit which  pervades,  and  resides  in  gross  bodies  j by  the  power, 
and  adlion,  of  which,  the  particles  of  bodies  mutually  attradl 

ead> 


28 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


pervade  the  whole  system  of  the  material  creation, 
and  to  which  he  has  given  the  name  of  etlier^ 
under  a peculiar  modification  in  the  bodies  of 
animals  ; by  means  of  the  vibrations  of  which, 
as  that  great  philosopher  has  conjedlured,  along 
the  solid  capillaments  of.  the  nerves,  excited  by 
external  objedls,  and  propagated  to  the  brain ; 
or  excited  by  the  will,  and  propagated  from  the 
brain  to  the  muscles ; an  opinion  which  has  been 
adopted  by  Dr.  HautleyS  Dr.  Bryan  Robin- 
son, and  others  ; and  which  has  great  appearance 
of  probability ; — or  whether  it  be  owing  solely, 
as  some  have  advanced,  to  the  peculiar  struc- 
ture, as  a spirah,  or  other  form'",  of  the  smallest 
nervous  filaments  themselves*. 


» 


each  other  at  exceedingly  small  distances,  become  contiguous, 
and  cohere  5 and  eledric  bodies  ad  at  greater  distances,  both  in 
repelling  and  attrading  small  neighbouring  bodies  j and  light  is 
emitted,  refleded,  refraded,  infleded,  and  imparts  heat  to 
bodies  ■,  and  all  sensation  is  excited,  and  the  limbs  of  animals 
are  moved  by  the  power  of  the  will,  the  vibrations  of  this  spirit 
being  propagated  along  the  solid  capillaments  of  the  nerves 
from  the  external  organs  of  the  senses  to  the  brain,  and  from 
the  brain  into  the  muscles.  But  these  matters  cannot  be  ex- 
plained  in  a few  words,  nor  have  we  a sufficient  number  of  ex- 
periments for  the  exad  determination,  and  proof,  of  the  laws 
by  which  this  spirit  ads.” — See  the  same  opinion  proposed  in 
the  queries  at  the  end  of  his  Optics,  p.  328,  query  23,  and  24. 

* See  Hartley  on  Man,  vol.  i.  Prop.  5.  p.  13 — 34,  where 
much  pains  is  taken  to  prove,  and  illustrate,  this  theory. 

- j Vandermonde. 

^ De  Boudeu. 

* See  Halleri  Element.  Physiologiae,  lib.  x,  sed.  8,  § 3, 
tom.  iv.  p.  300. 

But, 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


2g 


But,  whatever  be  the  nature  of  the  nervous 
power,  if  we  allow  the  soul  to  be  an  immaterial 
substance,  as  philosophers  have  very  generally 
thought  they  had  the  best,  and  surest,  ground 
for  believing  it  to  be, — in  which,  according  to  Ci- 
cero”, there  is  nothing  that  can  give  it  any  ma- 
terial property  whatever, — it  seems'  highly  pro- 
bable, that  the  body  and  soul,  a ■ material  and 
immaterial  substance,  cannot  physically  atl  upon, 
each  other  ; and  that  their  mutual  effedts  are  pro- 
duced according  to  certain  fixed  and  arbitrary  laws 
of  reciprocal  influence,  by  which,  and  by  which 
only,  they  were  united  to  each' other  at  first  by 
the  great  Creator  of  the  universe : — that,  there- 
fore, it  cannot  with  such  stridl  propriety  be  said 
that  they  a6t  upon-  each  other  ; as  that  certain 
states,  and  movements,  of  the  body,  are  the 
exciting,  or  occasional  causes,  of  certain  deter- 
minate feelings,  and  volitions,  of  the  mind  ; and 
that  certain  feelings,  and  volitions,  of  the  mind,  are 
in  like  manner  the  exciting,  or  occasional  causes, 
of  certain  corresponding  states,  and  movements, 
of  the  body.  It  is  our  business  to  discover  what 
these  states  and  movements,  and  their  corres- 
ponding feelings  and  volitions,,  or,  in  other 


® " Nihil  admixtum,  nihil  concretum,  nihil  copulatum,  ni- 
hil coagmentatum,  nihil  duplex.*' — Tuscidan.  Dispulat.  lib.  i. 
c. 


words* 


30 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


words,  what  these  laws  of  union  are.  And  it 
is  with  this  view,  that  I have  here  attempted  to 
point  out,  though  it  must  be  confessed  but  cur- 
sorily, and  superficially,  those  mechanical,  mus- 
cular, and  vascular  states  of  the  a<itive,  and  sen- 
tient parts  of  the  body,  which  in  a great  measure 
correspond  with,  and  are  either  the  causes,  or 
effects,  of.  the  various  states  of  the  mind ; and 
what  in  general  the  corresponding  states  of  the 
mind  and  body  are. 

With  the  same  view  I shall  now  proceed  to  say 
something  more  expressly  concerning  the  nervous 
power,  and  its  laws  of  ailing ; since  this  power, 
whatever  it  is,  residing  in  the  brain,  spinal  mar- 
row, and  nerves,  is  the  immediate  instrument  of 
communication  between  the  material  and  imma- 
terial part,  and  the  very  source  and  beginning,  if 
any  thing  can  be  said  to  be  the  beginning 
where  all  the  parts  and  fundions  have  a mutual 
dependence  on  each  other,  of  animal  life,  sense, 
and  motion  ; and  is  the  diredt,  and  a6live  cause, 
by  which  every  function  of  an  animated  body 
is  kept  up,  from  the  moment  of  separation  from 
the  parent  animal,  till  the  final  disunion  of  the 
material  and  immaterial  principle,  at  the  period  of 
this  mortal  life.  I shall  close  this  subje6l  by  enu- 
merating a few  particular,  and  most  of  them  well 
known,  fa6ts,  which  may  serve  farther  to  illustrate 
the  mutual  influence  of  the  mind  and  body  on 
each  other. 


The 


t 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  31 

' 'The  essential,  and  distinguishing  properties 
common  to  all,  or  at  least  to  the  more  perfedt 
animals,  are  life,  spontaneous  motion,  and  seri^ 
salion. 

I say  nothing  at  present  of  the  higher  powers 
of  the  mind  ; as  the  consideration  of  them  is  not 
necessary  to  the  understanding  of  what  is  imme- 
diately to  follow ; and  as  it  is  a disputable  point 
whether  they  belong  at  all  to  some  animals  ; and 
whether  more  than  a very  small  portion  of  them 
be  possessed  by  any  other  animal  than  man. 

Life,  or  automatic  and  involuntary  motion,  de- 
pends upon  irrita6ility;^spontaneouis  motion  iipoii 
volition, — and  sensation  upon  the  perceptive  potver 
ot  the  mind, — volition  moving  the  body,  and  the 
perceptive  power  of  the  mind  receiving  sensation, 
through  the  mediation  of  irritability. 

Of  these  sources,  therefore,  of  life,  motion, 
and  sensation, — volition  and  perception  are  mental 
powers  ; and  irritability  alone  is  a bodily  one. 

I here  employ  the  term  life  in  a very  narrow, 
and  restridfed  sense ; and  not  only  confine  it  to 
the  energies  of  the  aniipal  kingdom,  but  to  those 
motions  ot  the  animal  machine  which  are  earned 
on  independently  of  the  mind.  This  may  seem, 
on  a slight  view,  to  have  a near  resemblance  to  what 
is  Commonly  called  vegetable  life ; I apprehend, 
however,  that  there  is  an  essential  difference ; and 
that,  though  there  may  be  no  impropriety,  pro- 
vided this  difference  be  kept  in  view,  in  deno- 
minating 


32 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


luinatino”  tlic  one  ciyiiuicil,  and  tlic  other  ve^et(ihl6 
life,  it  might,  perhaps,  be  still  better,  while  the 
former  is,  by  way  of  eminence,  styled  life,  to 
distinguish  the  latter  from  it  simply  by  the  name 
oi  vegetation ; from  which  animal  life  appears  to 
differ  in  a variety  of  respedls  ; particularly  in  its 
dependence  upon  the  peculiar  apparatus  of  the 
nervous,  of  the  muscular,  and  of  the  vascular, 
systems;  the  y^ri^  of  which  is  the  source  of  irri- 
tability, the  second,  by  the  property  of  coiitradlion 
which  it  possesses  in  an  extraordinary  degree,  is  the 
immediate  instrument  of  motion,  and  the  last  by 
its  appropriate  structure,  and  the  aid  of  the  same 
cpntradling  power,  is  the  means  ot  keeping  up 
an  incessant  circulation  of  the  animal  fluids,  the 
lieart  by  its  contradlions,  impelling  the  blood 
through  tlie  larger  arteries,  and  the  capillary  ves- 
sels, by  their  oscillatory  motions,  continuing  the 
circulation  begun  by  tlie  heart.  For  nothing  like 
nerves,  much  less  like  the  whole  nervous  system 
of  animals,  has  been  discovered  in  vegetables.  And, 
since  they  afford  no  appearance  of  muscles,  we 
have  no  right  to  conclude  that  the  very  few  in- 
stances of  their  motion,  which  seem  to  have  some 
resemblance  to  muscular  motion,  such  as  the 
shrinking  of  the  leaves  of  the  sensitive  plant",  on 
being  touched,  the  extraordinary  motions  of  the 


" The  mimosa  sensitlva  of  Linx.'eus,  also  the  mimosa  viva, 
and  some  others  of  the  same  rjenus. 


moving 


Causes  of  insanity.  S3 

moving  plant®,  the  closing,  or  other  change  of 
position,  of  the  leaves  of  some  plants,  and  the 
drooping  of  the  flowers  of  others  in  the  night* 
time,  termed  by  Linn.eus^  their  sleeping**  ; and 
the  opening  and  shutting  of  the  flowers  of  certain 
plants  at  stated  hours,  which  he  calls  their  watch* 
— are  really  the  motions  of  a muscular  sys* 
tern  ; especially  as  the  texture  of  vegetables  is 
usually  too  rigid  to  give  countenance  to  such  a sup- 
position ; and  as,  in  all  the  known  instances, 
their  motion  seems  to  be  effedled  by  the  exter- 
nal, or  internal  operation,  of  certain  material 
substances,  as  light,  heat,  and  the  fluids  moving 
in  their  vessels,  on  their  peculiar  strudlure.  Nor 
do  we  find  in  vegetables  any  thing  bearing  much 
resemblance  to  the  circulation  of  the  blood  in 
animals ; the  motion  of  their  fluids  appearing  to 
be  begun  by  means  of  an  attradlive  power,  and 
not  by  any  impelling  force ; to  be  carried  on 
through  their  whole  vascular  system,  if  it  may 
be  so  termed,  by  the  uniform  and  continued  ex- 
ertion of  the  same  power  in  every  part ; to  be 
without  any  apparent  vascular  contraction ; to 
proceed  in  a perpetual  progression  ; and  to  be 
chiefly  influenced  by  the  seasons,  and  by  the 


* Hedysarum  movens. 

See  Dissertation  Ixiv.  entitled  Somnus  Plantarum,  in  his 
Amoenitates  Academicae,  volum.  iv.  p.  333. 
s Somnns. 

‘ Vigiliae. 


VOL.  II. 


D 


tempo- 


34 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


temperature  of  theair.^ — It  must,  notwithstanding, 
be  confessed,  that  in  vegetation  there  is  a powef 
something  analogous  to  that  of  animal  life,  and 
irritability ; though  greatly  inferior  in  degree  ; 
and,  probably,  as  different  in  kind,  as  are  the 
several  attradfions  of  gravitation,  cohesion,  mag- 
netism, elediricity,  and  the  eledlive  attradlions 
of  the  chemists. 

• ^ Irritahility  has  its  seat  in  the  brain,  spinal 
marrow,  and  nerv'^es ; and  its  origin  in  the  brain. 
It  depends  a great  deal,  if  not  altogether,  upon 
their  proper  texture  ; is  the  immediate  cause  of 
muscular  motion,  both  voluntary  and  involun- 
tary ; and  the  means  of  conveying  sensation  to 
the  soul. — That  irritability  depends,  in  a great 
measure,  upon  the  texture  of  the  nerves,  and 
varies  as  that  varies,  appears  so  evident,  as 
scarcely  to  need  a proof:  since  it  is  notorious, 
that  wherever  a nerve  is  injured,  or  its  texture 
any.  way  altered,  either  by  compression  or  other- 
wise ; whether  at  its  origin  in  the  brain,  or  spinal 
marrow,  in  its  course,  or  in  the  part  to  which 
it  is  distributed  ; the  irritability  of  the  nerve  below 
the  injury,  or  alteration  of  its  texture,  and  of 
the  parts  \vhich  it  supplies,  is,  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  change,  either  increased,  dimi- 
nished, or  destroyed:  as  we  see,  to  mention 
a few  instances,  in  the  increase,  or  diminution, 
of  strength,  and  sensibility,  according  to  the 
state  of  the  brain,  in  insanity  ; in  their  diminu- 
tion. 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY; 


35 


tlotij  or  destru61ion,  in  palsies ; and  in  their  in- 
crease in  consequence  of  that  change  of  texture 
in  the  extremities  of  the  nerves  which  accom- 
panies inflammation.  Nor  does  it  make  any  ma- 
terial difference,  in  this  respedf,  whether  the  me- 
dullary substance  of  the  nerves  consist  of  solid 
capillaments,  along  which  vibrations  are  trans- 
mitted ; or  of  hollow  cylinders,  containing  an 
exquisitely  elastic  nervous  fluid,  capable  of  receiv- 
ing and  conveying  vibrations  ; or  be  of  any  other 
appropriate,  and  necessary  construdlion. 

Whatever  motions  are  excited  by  the  mind,  in. 
consequence  of  volition,  are  denominated  volun- 
tary, or  spontaneous  motions:  for  as  to  those 
muscular,  or  vascular,  adlions  which  are  excited 
by  the  appetites  and  passions,  without  any  express 
adl  of  the  will,  they  being  necessary,  do  not  come 
within  the  present  description. 

Volition,  tlierefore,  so  far  as  it  relates  to  the 
immediate  operation  of  the  soul  upon  the  body, 
is  the  exciting  cause  of  every  determinate  adlion 
of  certain  muscles  of  the  body,  which  being  obe- 
dient to  the  will,  are  therefore  said  to  be  capable 
of  voluntarv  motion.  • 

Sensation  is  the  mental  perception  of  the  im- 
pressions of  sensible  objedls,  whether  external, 
or  internal,  upon  the  body ; which,  being  made 
in  a variety  of  ways,  according  to  the  differences 
in  the  nature,  and  adlion,  of  the  objedls  them- 
selves, and  of  the  organs  of  sense  to  which  they 

D 2 


% 


are 


36 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


are  applied,  are  conveyed  to  the  mind  by  the 
power,  or  irritability,  of  the  nerves. 

Life  is  carried  on,  spontaneous  motion  is  pro- 
duced, and  sensation  is  communicated,  by  stimuli, 
or  exciting  causes,  of  various  kinds,  a6ling  upon 
the  irritability  of  the  nerves.  The  operation  of 
these  causes  may  not  improperly  be  called  exr 
citement,  because  whatever  be  their  nature,  or 
mode  of  action,  the  efFedls  which  they  give  rise 
to  are  never  merely  mechanical. 

These  stimuli  are  either  corporeal  or  mental. — 
The  corporeal  may  be  divided  into  two  kinds, 
accidental  and  natural ; and  of  these  the  acciden- 
tal may  be  subdivided  into  mechanical,  acrimoni- 
ous, and  specific.  The  mental  may  be  divided  into 
necessary,  and  voluntary. 

We  may  reckon,  therefore,  six  different  kinds 
of  stimuli,  or  exciting  causes ; the  mechanical, 
acrimonious,  and  specific, — the  natural, — and 
the  necessary,  and  voluntary.  ^ 

Mechanical  stimuli  are  those  which  a6l  by 
their  bulk,  figure,  hardness,  or  in  short,  by  any 
mechanical  property  whatever:  as  any  hard  sub- 
stance, whether  large  or  small,  acting  with  force, 
externally,  and  bruising,  or  lacerating,  the  body  ; 
a knife,  sword,  or  other  edged,  or  pointed  in- 
strument, wounding,  or  piercing  it ; any  extra- 
neous substance,  or  preternatural  tumor,  com- 
pressing, loading,  or  any  way  injuring  by  its 
bulk  the  neighbouring  parts ; or  any  hard,  and 

sharp 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


3T 

sharp  substance,  contained  within  the  body,  and 
injuring  it  internally,  as  a stone  in  the  bladder  cut- 
ting, and  abrading,  by  the  action  of  its  rough  and 
angular  suface,  its  internal  coats. 

jicrimonious  stimuli  act  upon  the  body,  not 
by  their  general  and  mechanical,  but  by  their  pe- 
culiar and  sensible  properties,  as  all  bitter,  astrin- 
gent, nauseous,  sweet,  sour,  salt,  pungent,  caus- 
tic, ignited,  and  many  other  substances,  whose 
a6lion  seems  to  depend  on  the  sensible  qua- 
lities which  manifest  themselves  to  the  taste,  or 
upon  chemical  attradlioii. 

Specific  stimuli,  such  as  are  most  of  the  ve- 
getable poisons,  often  occasion  the  most  violent 
effects  without  possessing  any  very  conspicuous 
sensible  qualities,  and  always  without  possessing 
such  as  appear  to  be  in  any  degree  adequate  to 
the  effedls  which  they  produce. 

Natural  stimuli  are  those  without  which  the 
essential  offices  of  animal  life-could  not  go  on : 
as  the  stimulus  of  the  bl6od  to  - the  heart  and 
arteries,  and  to  the  organs  of ' secretion  ; ^ the 
stimulus  of  the  motion  of  the  air  on  the  drum 
of  the  ear,  and  that  of  light  on  the  expansion 
of  the  optic  nerve,  in  order  to  excite  in  the  mind 
the  sensations  of  sounds,  and  images. 

Necessary  stimuli  are  certain  states  of  the  mind 
which  produce  certain  determinate  changes  in 
the  body,  without  any  volition ' of  the  mind, 
that  such  changes  should  take  place.  These 
states  are  chiefly  ..connedled  with  the  appetites 

D 3 and 


38 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


and  passions;  and  comprehend  every  idea,  or 
notion,  which  makes  either  an  agreeable,  or  a 
disagreeable,  impression  upon  the  mind. 

Voluntary  stimuli  are  such  acts  of  the  will  as 
have  the  power  of  exciting  those  correspond- 
ing motions  of  the  body,  which,  from  the  cause  of 
their  excitement,  are  called  voluntary  motions. 

As  the  mental  stimuli  a6t  upon  the  body,  and 
the  bodily  stimuli  upon  the  mind,  through  the 
mediation  of  the  power,  or  irritabilitv,  of  the 
nerves ; their  efTe61s  will  vary,  as  this  power 
of  the  nerves  varies  ; will  increase  as  it  increases, 
decline  as  it  declines,  and  cease  as  it  ceases  ; and 
as  the  variations  of  irritability  are  partial  or  uni- 
versal, so  will  those  of  bodily  influence  on  the 
mind,  or  of  mental  influence  on  the  body,  be 
partial,  or  universal. 

Irritability  may  be  diminished  throughout  the 
body,  by  a disordered  state  of  the  brain,  or  of  the 
tones ; or  ip  any  particular  part,  by  a disordered 
state  of  the  nerves  going  to  that  part,  or  of  the 
nerves  of  the  part  itself.  Any  tumor  of  the  coats 
of  a nerve,  or  of  the  surrounding  parts,  which 
shall  compress  its  medullary  substance,  may 
be  sufflcient  to  diminish,  or  destroy,  both  sensa- 
tion and  motion  in  every  part  to  which  the  in- 
jured nerve  -is  distributed.  A disease  of  the  me- 
dullary substance  of  a nerve  may  produce  the 
same  efFecfls.  Sir  Isaac  Newton’  supposes  that 

• Queries  at  the  end  of  his  Optics.  Query  24,  p.  328. 

the 


I 


^ CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  30 

the  nervous  capillaments  are  pellucid,  and  that 
obstru6\ions  injuring  their  pellucidity,  and  by’ 
that  means  interrupting  the  vibrating  motions 
of  the  ethereal  medium,  create  palsies.  It  seems,' 
also,  probable,  that  the  power  of  the  nerves  may* 
sometimes  be  increased  bv  a disordered  state  of 
the  brain  ; since  it  frequently  happens,  in  cases 
of  insanity,  that  weakness  and  dejeefion  are  sud- 
denly succeeded  by  vigour  and  cheerfulness,  in 
consequence  of  a sudden,  and  conspicuous  change, 
in  the  state  of  the  brain  ; as  is  seen  in  the  transi- 
tions from  hypochondriacal,  and  from  sev’^eral  of 
the  species  of  pathetic,  to  maniacal,  incoherent, 
or  phrenitic  insanity : and  in  the  same  transitions, 
from  languor,  and  distress,  to  the  opposite  ex-' 
tremes,  in  any  of  the  species  of  ideal  insanity.  • 
But  granting  that  the  brain  and  nerves  are  in  a 
sound,  and  healthful  condition ; their  power 
may,  nowithstanding,  be  improved  by  exercise,  or 
injured  by  disuse.  Motion,  and  sensation,  de- 
pend upon  irritability;  and  that  they  may,  in- 
some  degree,  repay  the  obligation  they  are  under, 
they  are  both  capable,  by  the  exercise  of  frequent 
and  habitual  excitement,  of  improving  the  power 
to  which  they  are  indebted  for  their  existence  ; and, 
in  so  doing,  they  still  farther  improve  themselves. 
In  this  improvement  of  motion,  sensation,  and  ir- 
ritability, by  exercise,  the  mind  is  a principal  in- 
strument: since  the  frequent  exercise  of  motion 
must  depend  upon  volition  ; and  of  sensation 

D ^ upon 


40' 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


Upon  attention  of  the  mind  to  the  movements, 
or  vibrations,  excited  by  the  adtion  of  external 
objedls  on  the  irritability  'of  the  nerves : and  thus 
volition  and  attention,  by  repeatedly  exciting 
motion,  and  perceiving  sensation,  of  the  same, 
or  of  similar  kinds,  acquire  a facility  of  managing, 
that  is  improve,  the  nervous  power  ; the  one  with 
ease  diredling  the  body,  and  the  other  with  equal 
ease  receiving  from  it  the  impressions  of  sensible 
objedls : in  other  words,  accuracy  and  quickness 
of  motion,  and  accuracy  and  quickness  of  sensa- 
tion, are  both  to  be  acquired  by  attention,  and 
exercise. 

Irritability,  sensation,  and  motion,  may,  on 
the  other  hand,  be  diminished  by  disuse ; whe- 
ther it  be  owing  to  any  accidental  impediment, 
as  inconvenience  of  situation  and  circumstances, 
or  bodily  disorder,  rendering  the  exercise  of  them 
difficult  or  impradlicable ; or  to  an  habitual  in- 
dolence of  body  and  mind  ; or  to  that  inactivity, 
and  want  of  attention  to  external  objeCts,  which 
cannot  easily  be  avoided,  when  the  mind  is  in- 
tensely engaged  in  the  contemplation  of  some  in- 
teresting subject. 

Irritability  may  likewise  be  improved  or  injured, 
either  generally,  or  partially,  by  the  necessary  in- 
fluence of  the  passions ; those  which  are  lively, 
or  vigorous,  increasing,  and  those  which  are  de- 
pressing, or  pusillanimous,  diminishing  its  sus- 
ceptibility, and  influence. 


And 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


41 


And  the  diminution,  or  the  increase,  of  irrita- 
bility, may  be  either  transient,  or  permanent, 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  cause  from  which 
these  changes  take  their  rise. 

This  nervous  power  or  property  of  irritability, 
capable  of  adling  without  influencing,  or  being  in- 
fluenced by,  the  mind  ; without  the  mediation 
either  of  sensation,  or  volition  ; is  sufficient  of 
itself  for  the  performance  of  those  vital,  and  na- 
tural adhons,  which  can  be  performed  without  the 
agency  of  any  of  the  voluntary  muscles  ; as  the 
circulation  of  the  blood,  and  secretions,  absorp- 
tion, perspiration,  and  the  like.  When  excited, 
therefore,  by  the  natural  stimuli,  only  to  a cer- 
tain degree,  no  sensation  is  produced  ; most  of 
the  vital  and  natural  adlions  being  capable  of  pro- 
ceeding without  it.  But  when  excited  by  these 
in  an  unusual,  or  by  any  of  the  other  corporeal 
stimuli  in  a greater  degree,  it  ads  upon  the  mind, 
and  sensation  is  excited  of  such  a kind  as  corre- 
sponds to  the  cause  of  its  excitement:  and  this 
sensation  gives  rise  to  volition  ; a re-adion  of  the 
mind  on  the  nervous  power  ; and  the  generation 
of  voluntary  motion  ; if  the  nature  of  the  cause 
be  such  as  requires  it.  Irritability,  however, 
alone,  without  sensation,  is  not  sufficient  for 
the  carrying  on  of  all  the  vital  and  natural  adions. 
Some  of  the  fundions,  as  those  of  breathing',  and 

of 

• Breathing  is  carried  on  during  sleep,  and  then  probably 

■with 


42 


CAUSES  OF  IKSANITV. 


of  voiding  urino  and  stool,  cannot  be  performed 
without  the.  aid  of  the  voluntary  motion  of  certain 
muscles,  and,  therefore,  not  without  sensation. 
In  these  cases,  it  is  so  contrived  by  the  wise  Author 
of  our  frame,  that  the  natural  stimulus  belonging 
to  the  part,  shall,  by  accumulation,  become  so 
considerable  as  to  produce  a degree  of  irritation 
capable  of  exciting  sensation,  and  that  conse- 
quent exertion  of  the  voluntary  action  of  the  re- 
quisite muscles,  without  which  there  could  be  no 
perlbrmancc  of  those  necessary  fundtions. 

That  the  nervous  power,  or  irritability,  in  this 
manner  eives  life  to  the  body,  and  is  the  means 
by  which  all  the  vital  and  involuntary  adtions 
are  carried  on,  independently  of  the  mind,  seenns 
to  be  sufficiently  proved  by  many  of  the  numerous 
experiments  made,  or  referred  to,  by  Kaau  Boer- 
haave",  Whytt",  and  Haller"';  which  not 
only  show  that  the  contradlions  of  the  heart,  of  the 
intestines,  and  of  the  muscles  in  general,  are  ca- 
pable of  exerting  themselves,  on  the  application  of 

with  liille  or  no  sensation.  This  perhaps  may  be  accounted  for 
by  the  force  of  habit}  which  renders  us  unconscious  of  any  sen- 
sation during  ordinary  respiration,  even  when  we  are  awake. 

“ Impet.  Facient.  § 2C)5,  2Q(i,  330,  331,  332. 

Of  the  vital  and  other  involuntary  motions  of  animals, 
seft.  14,  Works,  p.  183 — 207. — observations  on  the  sensi- 
bility and  irritability  of  the  parts  of  men  and  other  animals, 
sea.  2,  Works,  p.  283—292,  and  sea.  4,  § 4,  Works,  p.  302. 

Element.  Physiologiae,  lib,  x.  sea.  7,  § 31,  tom.  iv. 
p.  337,  et  lib.  xi.  sea.  2,  § 4— § lO,  tom.  iv.  p.  446,  &c. 

stiniuli. 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


43 


stimuli,  always  for  some  time,  and  frequently  for  a 
long  time,  after  their  connexion  with  the  brain 
has  been  cut  oft':  but  afford  some  striking  in- 
stances of  the  continuance  of  the  vital  and  invo- 
luntary actions  in  dift'erent  animals  and  under  dif- 
ferent circumstances,  for  days,  weeks,  and  even 
months,  after  their  heads  have  been  separated 
from  their  bodies,  or  the  brain  has  been  entirely 
destroyed. 

Notwithstanding  these  fa6ts,  tlie  late  learned 
and  very  ingenious  physiologist.  Dr.  Whytt, 
endeavoured  to  account  for  all  the  vital,  and  in- 
voluntary motions,  from  sensation,  produced  in 
llie  mind  by  the  irritation  of  stimuli,  and  ex- 
citing it  to  perform  these  motions.  In  conse- 
quence of  this  do6frine,  he  not  only  found  it 
exceedingly  difticult,  on  many  occasions,  to 
keep  clear  of  the  Stahlian  theory,  which  he  disap- 
proved, and  which  makes  the  mind  a rational 
agent  in  the  affair,  and  even  the  original  fabricator* 

of 


* “ Esse  autem  animam  ratlonalem  in  hoc  negotio  cansain 
efficientem,  vel  inde  liquet,  quod  generationis  opus  maximi 
momenti  res  sit,  quae  principium  sibi  postulat,  non  niateriale, 
sed  intelligens,  a primo  conceptionis  momento  fbrmationem  cl 
struauram  prosequendo,  materiam  extendendo,  partes  I'or- 
mando,  formatas  nutriendo,  ut  tam  singularium  partium,  quani 
corporis  totius  justa  conformatio  ac  strudura  inde  resultet,  des- 
tinatis  finibus  undiquaque  coramoda.”— Junckeri  Compea. 
Physiologies  et  Hygieines,  isfe.  ad  Dogmata  StnhUana  potissi- 
jnum  adornati,  tab.  vi.  p.  143, 

X It 


44 


CAUSES  OF  rNSAJTITY. 


of  the  body  which  it  inhabits,  and  rationally,  and 
providentially,  governs  ; but  was  reduced  to  the 
disagreeable  dilemma  of  either  making  sensa- 
tion itself  independent  of  the  soul,  or  of  asserting 
that  an  immaterial  substance,  such  as  he  be- 
lieved the  soul  to  be,  is  extended  and  divisible. 
Not  to  insist  upon  the  manifest  absurdity  of 
supposing  that  sensation  is  the  immediate  cause, 
the  sine  qua  non  of  all  the  involuntary,  as  well  as  of 
the  voluntary  a6Hons ; since,  the  mind  not  being 
conscious  that. any  sensation  is  concerned  in  the 
excitement  of  many  of  the  automatic  motions  of 
the  body,  it  follows  that,  if  it  really  does  take 
place,  sensation  may  not  only  be  obvious  and 
perceptible,  but  latent  and  unperceived. 

The  ingenious  theory  of  Dr.  Stuart,  that  the 
extremity  of  every  nerve  is  a distiiuft  and  perfect 
brain,  belonging  to  the  organ,  or  part  in  which 
it  terminates'"  ; and  that  the  soul  is  present,  and 
perceives,  and  adls,  in  every  part  of  the  body 


“ It  will  appear  obvious  that  the  rational  soul  must  be  the 
immediate  agent  in  the  aft'air  of  generation,  if  w'e  consider  that 
this  business  is  a matter  of  the  utmost  moment,  and  requires, 
not  a material,  but  an  intelligent  principle,  w’hicb,  from  the 
very  moment  of  conception,  may  be  employed  in  so  regulating 
the  formation  and  conslrinStion  of  the  animal,  so  modelling  its 
various  parts,  and  nourishing  them  when  modelled,  that  the 
result  of  its  operations  may  be  such  a finished  form  and  struc- 
ture, as  well  of  the  whole  body,  as  of  its  several  parts,  as  shall 
be  perfeAly  adapted  to  fulfil  their  respcftive  destinations.” 
y Dissertat.  de  Stru6tura  et  Motu  Musculari,  p.  24. 


at 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


45 


at  the  same  instant  of  time^ ; is  liable  to  similar 
objevSlions. 

These  difficulties,  and  inconsistencies,  are 
easily  avoided,  by  granting  that,  though  sensa- 
sation  is  in  many  cases  concerned,  as  a mental 
stimulus,  in  exciting  motions  in  the  body,  both 
voluntary  and  involuntary,  yet  it  a6ls  but  a se- 
condary part ; and  is  in  every  respect  dependent 
on  a primary  power,  without  which  it  could 
neither  a6l,  nor  exist : — that  the  nerves  are  pos- 
sessed of  this  primary  power ; giving  life  to  the 
body ; being  irritable,  and  capable  of  acling  without 
the  interference,  or  influence,  of  the  mind ; and 
being  the  instruments  of  communication  between 
the  mind  and  body: — that  material  objedls  may 
act  upon  this  power  of  the  nerves  in  such  a man- 
ner as  not  to  excite  sensation,  and  yet  excite 
involuntary,  or  automatic,  motion  ; and  that  by 
acting  more  forcibly,  or  what  amounts  to  the 
same  thing,  on  parts  better  adapted  for  the  con- 
veying of  it,  they  may  excite  sensation: — that 
the  mind  is  capable  of  increasing,  or  diminishing, 
the  activity  of  this  power  ; and  of  thus  quicken- 
ing, or  deadening,  its  own  sensations,  on  the 
one  hand ; or  of  improving,  or  injuring,  and 
even  almost  destroying,  the  activity  of  the  muscles, 
on  the  other ; by  exertion  and  exercise,  or  by 
inattention  and  disuse.  In  this  view  of  the  mat- 
ter, we  may  readily  perceive  how  the  mind  can 

* Dissertat.  de  Stru6lura  et  Motu  Musculari,  p.  30  and  35. 

give 


4(5 


CAUSES  OP  fNSASrT\^; 


J^ive  tone  to  the  body,  and  the  body  give  tone 
to  the  mind ; — how  the  mind  can  enliven  the 
irritability  of  the  body,  and  tlie  body  quicken  the 
sensibility  of  the  mind  ; — and  how  both  are  apt  to- 
be  invigorated  or  weakened,  elevated  or  depressed, 
together. 

As  we  cannot  allow  that  sensation  is  neces- 
sarily concerned  in  every  motion,  whether  volun- 
tary or  involuntary,  of  an  animal  body,  and  that 
the  irritability  of  the  nerves  cannot  be  put  into 
action,  in  the  smallest  degree,  without  exciting 
it: — so  neither  can  we  suppose,  with  Dr.  Hal- 
ler, that  irritability  is  a property  of  the  animal 
gluten*  ; — since  such  an  hypothesis  is  not  only 
inconsistent  with  the  above  theory ; but,  as  has 
been  clearly  proved  by  Dr.  Whytt’s  experi- 
ments, and  reasonings,  is  incapable  of  account- 
ing for  the  phaenomena  of  irritability,  which 
evidently  point  out  the  nerves  as  the  source  of 
its  existence. 

As  irritability  is  put  into  motion  by  the  action 
of  stimuli,  either  mental,  or  corporeal,  so  its 
specific  operations  on  the  mind  and  body  seem 
to  consist  in  certain  specific  vibrations  of  the  me- 
dullary substance,  or  of  some  appropriate  fluid, 
of  the  nerves,  of  the  nature,  and  infinitely  vari- 
ous modifications  of  which,  we  may  possibly,  for 
ever  remain  ignorant.  Nor,  indeed,  does  a mi- 


* Element.  Thysiolog.  lib.  xi.  sea.  2.  § 12,  tom.  iv.  p.  464, 


nute 


Causes  op  insanity. 


4 ^ 

'i/ 

nute  investigation  of  its  mode' of  action  appear 
to  be  of  much  real  importance  to  the  practical 
physician  ; to  whom  it  may  answer  every  use- 
ful purpose  to  have  a general  knowledge  of  some 
of  the  laws  relative  to  the  mutual  influence  ot 
the  mind  and  body  on  each  other,  and  an  in- 
timate acquaintance  with  the  particular  facts  on 
which  such  knowledge  depends.  I shall  now  pro- 
ceed to  enumerate  a few  of  these  particular  facts. 

Th^  mind  is  afleefled  in  consequence  of  bodily 
aftection,  by  whatever  agent,  whether  external  or 
internal,  acts  upon  the  body  with  a certain  de- 
gree of  force,  which  will  be  greater  or  less  in  pro- 
portion to  the  irritability,  and  oflice,  of  the  or- 
gan acted  upon,  and  causes  such  a change  in  the 
extremities  of  the  nerves  of  the  part  concerned, 
as  is  sufficient  to  excite  a sensation  of  feelintr.  It 
is  more  or  less  violently  affected  by  such  sensation, 
in  proportion  as  it  rises  or  falls  in  the  scale  of 
corporeal  perceptions,  if  they  may  be  so  termed, 
from  the  lowest  degree  of  simple  feeling,  to  the 
very  summit,  and  extreme,  of  exquisite  pleasure, 
or  agonizing  pain.  These  several  kinds  of  cor- 
poreal affection  are  the  only  means  by  which  the 
body  can  act  upon  the  mind ; and  may  any  of 
them  be  excited  in  any  of  the  organs  of  sense. 

Simple  feeling  has  but  little  immediate  influ- 
ence on  the  happiness  of  our  animal  life ; but  on 
the  sensations  of  pleasure  or  pain,  our  happiness 
or  misery  greatly  depends.  The  latter  is  excited 

either 


48 


CAUSES  OF  INSANIlY. 


either  by  a disordered  state  of  the  body,  or  by 
whatever  in  its  healthful  state,  a61s  violently 
upon  it ; and  the  former  by  such  impressions  of 
sensible  objedls,  as  produce  lively,  but  not  vio- 
lent sensations  ; and  both  of  them  are  a good  deal 
influenced  by  contrast. 

Pleasurable  sensations  may  be  excited  in  the 
sense  of  feeling,  by  gentle  fridlion  ; tepid  bath- 
ing ; grateful  warmth,  especially  after  being 
exposed  to  cold,  in  winter ; cooling  and  refresh- 
ing breezes,  in  the  shade,  tempering  the  heat  of 
summer ; and  not  to  mention  a great  variety  of 
other  causes,  by  the  moderate  and  wholesome 
gratification  of  any  of  the  appetites. 

. Sensations  of  the  painful  kind  may  arise  from 
a wound,  a burn,  a bruise,  a blister,  intense 
heat,  severe  cold,  hunger,  thirst,  spasm,  and 
a thousand  other  more  or  less  violent  causes. 

Pleasure,  or  pain,  may  in  like  manner  be  ex- 
cited by  the  objedls  of  the  other  senses,  as  seeing, 
hearing,  smelling,  or  tasting. 

Depraved,  or  peculiar  sensations,  maybe  commu- 
nicated to  the  mind,  by  means  of  a depraved  or 
oeculiar  state  of  bodv  ; as  a sense  of  heat,  or  cold, 

A ^ 

in  nervous  people,  from  an  increase,  or  dimi- 
nution, of  the  vibratory  motions  of  the  small 
vessels. 

Wine,  opium,  antispasmodic,  tonic,  stimulant, 
and  other  cordial  medicines,  and  nourishing  diet, 
by  relaxing  spasm,  easing  pain,  and  invigorating 

the 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


4Q 


the  tone  of  the  body,  produce  serenity,  and 
cheerfulness. 

But  whatever  weakens  the  body,  whether  by 
exhausting,  impoverishing,  and  otherwise  deprav* 
ing  the  circulating  fluids  ; or  by  defrauding  the 
blofjd  of  its  due  supply  of  fresh,  and  wholesome, 
chyle,  as  happens  in  some  disorders  of  the  first 
passages ; tends  to  produce  languor,  dejecflioii, 
and  melancholy. 

Instances  of  the  reciprocal  influence,  whether 
voluntary  or  involuntary,  of  the  mind  on  the  body, 
are  equally  numerous,  and  obvious. 

The  most  conspicuous  example  of  the  voluntary 
influence  of  the  mind  on  the  body,  is  that  general 
power  which  it  possesses  over  all  the  muscles  which 
are  subservient  to  voluntary  motion:  a power 
which  is  natural,  and  with  which  every  animal 
is  born ; but  which  is  very  imperfedf,  and  par- 
ticularly in  the  human  species,  till  improved  by 
exercise,  experience,  and  habit.  A child,  when 
it  first  comes  into  the  world,  can,  it  is  true,  move 
its  limbs,  but  their  motions  are  irregular,  and 
without  aim,  and  seem  more  like  the  effects  of 
irritation,  than  of  volition.  After  a while  it  at- 
tempts to  move  them  in  a particular  diredion, 
with  a view  to  the  obtaining  of  some  end  by  the 
performance  of  some  determinate  a6fion  ; as  when 
it  endeavours  to  seize  any  thing  by  grasping  at 
it ; but  the  difflculty  with  which,  after  nume- 
rous trials,  it  accomplishes  its  purpose,  shows 

VOL.  II.  E ho^v 


E 


50 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


Ilow  imperfea  at  first  Is  its  power  over  the  mus- 
cles  of  voluntary  inotioii : and  it  is  not  till  after 
a long  time,  and  much  ])ra61ice,  that  it  acquires 
a free  and  ready  use  of  them.  Even  men  have 
a more  or  less  perfect,  and  accurate,  use  of  the  vo- 
luntary muscles,  in  proportion  to  the  diligence 
which  they  have  exerted  in  exercising  them ; 
and  can  move  their  limbs  with  more  or  less  dex-^ 
terity  and  grace,  in  an  almost  endless  variety  ot 
gradations,  from  the  uncouth  and  clumsy  rustic, 
whose  motions  are  unwieldy  and  inelegant  in  the 
extreme,  to  the  most  accom]>lished  in  those  ele- 
gant arts  which  require  the  nicest,  and  truest 
movements  of  the  body,  such  as  we  admire  in  the 
first-rate  dancers  on  the  stage,  or  in  the  most 
wonderful  performers  on  the  violin,  harpsichord^ 
©r  any  other  difficult  musical  instrument. 

This  improved  power  over  the  muscles  may 
again  d^'line,  or  be  destroyed,  by  an  accidental 
bodily  disorder,  as  a paralytic  afiedion  ; or  by  the 
infirmity  of  old  age,  which  naturally  impairs  every 
part  of  the  nicely  constriuficd  animal  machine  ; 
or  by  disuse,  in  consequence  of  which  many  of 
the  delicate  and  complicated  motions,  requisite 
to  a skilful  performance  in  any  exquisite  art,  which, 
though  once  acquired,  has  been  long  negleiled, 
may  be  greatly  injured,  or  entirely  lost. 

We  have  even  instances  of  muscles  over  wdiich 
the  mind  seems  never  to  have  acquired  its  in- 
tended power ; as  the  muscles  of  the  car,  which 

the 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


61 


the  early,  and  constant  application,  of  strait  ban- 
dages to  the  heads  of  in  hints,  commonly  renders 
so  entirely  useless,  that  a man  who  can  mov'e 
his  ears  is  looked  upon  as  a kind  of  monster'’. 

The  mind  can,  by  a voluntary  exertion  of  its 
power,  restrain  the  motions  which  would  naturally 
arise  from  irritation,  wherever  any  of  the  volun- 
tary muscles  arc  necessarily,  and  principally,  con- 
cerned in  those  motions ; provided  that  the  irri- 
tation does  not  occasion  such  violent  sensations  as 
to  force  tliem  into  a61ion,  and  thus  to  render  them, 
which  is  sometimes  the  case,  no  longer  voluntary, 
but  necessary,  agents.  By  this  voluntary  exer- 
tion the  mind  can,  to  a certain  degree,  restrain 
coughing,  sneezing,  yawning,  the  hiccup,  and 
even  breathing ; it  can  prevent  shivering  from  a 
sense  of  cold  ; and  it  can  check  the  discharges  of 
urine  and  stool. 

The  mind  may  also,  by  long  use  and  habit, 
acquire  such  a facility  of  certain  voluntary  ac- 
tions, as  often  to  perform  them  without  being  con- 
scious of  so  doing. — Of  this  we  have  examples 
in  the  uniform  motions  of  the  muscles  of  the 
eye;  in  the  adaptation  of  the chrystalline  lens,  and 
pupil,  for  the  purpose  of  distinct  vision,  to  the 
different  distances  of  objects  in  the  exertion  of 
the  muscles,  in  supporting  the  body  in  an  ereeft 


^ Vide  Halleri  Element.  Physlolog.  lib,  xv.  seft.  1,  § 4, 
and  5,  tom.  v.  p.  i^o, 

E 2 


posture, 


CAUSES  OF  IXSANITY. 


52 

posture,  which  would  otherwise  drop  to  the 
ground,  as  it  sometimes  does  on  the  sudden  stroke 
of  a palsy,  and  is  in  danger  of  doing  from  drowsi- 
ness after  long  watching ; in  a like  exertion  in 
holding  up  the  head,  which,  without  it,  would 
drop  upon  the  breast,  as  it  does  when  we  sleep 
in  a sitting  posture,  without  a stipport  for  it ; in 
the  exactly  conspiring  motions  of  a great  number 
of  muscles,  so  as  to  attain  the  proper  end  which 
the  mind  has  in  view,  walking,  running,  jump- 
ing, swimming,  dancing,  fencing,  and  in  the  per- 
formance of  an  immense  variety  of  other  ac- 
quired movements  in  the  exercise  of  the  useful,  or 
elegant,  arts. 

But  besides  the  voluntary,  there  are  other  mo- 
tions dependent  on  the  mind,  which  are  involun- 
tary ; and  are  either  conne61ed  with  sensation, 
with  the  appetites,  or  with  the  passions. 

DireSl  sensation  is  an  effe6t  of  the  body  upon 
the  mind.  When  excited  in  any  one  part  of  the 
body,  in  such  a manner,  or  degree,  as  to  cause 
pleasure  or  pain,  it  generally  more  or  less  af- 
fects th.e  whole,  and  not  unfrequently  produces 
conspicuous  effects  in  some  distant  part.  This 
diffusion  of  the  effects  of  local  pleasure  or  pain, 
which  has  been  termed  sympathy^  has  been  attri- 
buted to  the  mediation  of  the  mind.  But  it  may 
be  doubted,  in  many  cases,  whether  the  mind  has 
any  agency  in  the  affair,  and  whether  these  effc(5ts 
vvonUl  not  equally  take  place  without  sensation, 

supposing 


i 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  53 

supposing  it  possible  that  the  same  degree  of  ex- 
citement of  the  irritability  of  the  nerves  could 
exist  without  producing  it.  Indeed  I must  own 
that  I am  strongly  inclined  to  suspe<5l,  that  sensa- 
tion is,  on  most  of  these  occasions,  only  a con- 
comitant effe6l  produced  on  the  mind,  together 
with  many  others  which  are  merely  corporeal ; 
which  arise  from  the  excitement  of  the  nervous 
power  of  irritability  in  a certain  manner,  and  to  a 
certain  degree ; and  are  no  way  dependent  on 
the  sensation  which  accompanies  them. 

A sense  of  pain  will  stop  many  motions  aris- 
ing from  irritation,  Or  a less  sense  of  pain. — 
Blisters  will  allay  spasms,  appease  the  irritation  of 
a cough,  and  abate  inflammation  and  delirium. 
— A stitch  in  the  side,  accidentally  occasioned  by  an 
expansion  of  the  chest  to  sneeze,  or  yawn,  will 
often  instantly  check,  and  prevent,  the  perform- 
ance of  those  operations. 

Whether  these  effe61s  have  really  any  depend- 
ence upon  the  mind  ; and,  if  they  have,  how 
far  they  are  necessary,  or  voluntary  ; I shall  not 
here  inquire. 

The  recolleiflion  of  sensations  formerly  ex- 
perienced, will  sometimes  excite  the  same,  or 
concomitant  sensations,  or  produce  other  dis- 
agreeable efle<fls  upon  the  body. — The  recol- 
ledlion  of  the  disagreeable  sensation  in  the  teeth, 
termed  setting  them  on  edge,  excited  by  eating 
unripe,  austere,  and  acid  fruits ; by  the  very 

E 3 acute, 


54 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


acute,  or  grating  sounds,  of  rubbing  or  cutting 
a cork,  or  filing  a saw;  or  by  paring  the  nails 
to  the  quick,  or  rubbing  the  ends  of  the  fingers, 
vvitli  the  nails  so  pared,  upon  velvet,  and  other 
substances ; and  the  recolledlion  of  the  sensation 
of  tickling ; will  in  certain  states  of  the  nerves, 
and  in  people  of  irritable  habits,  instantly  renew 
those  sensations. — The  recollection  of  the  pains 
arising  from  spasmodic  afFedtions,  in  very  delicate 
nervous  and  hypochondriacal  people,  is  apt  to 
revive  the  same  painful  spasms. — The  rccolledtioa 
of  a nauseous  sensation  in  the  stomach,  or  of 
vomiting,  will  readily  renevv  the  nausea,  or  vo- 
miting ; — and  the  sight,  or  the  mere  mental 
conception,  of  any  thing  filthy,  and  disgusting, 
will  often  produce  the  same  effedts. — The  idea, 
smell,  or  sight,  of  a vomit,  or  purge,  of  which 
a person  has  frequently  made  use,  has  been  known 
to  excite  vomiting,  or  purging'". — The  sight  of  a 
person  yawning,  or  the  mere  recolledlion  of 
yawning,  will  almost  infallibly  produce  an  irresis- 
tible inclination  to  yawn. — And  the  breast  of  a 
nurse  will  begin  to  give  milk  when  the  infant 
which  slie  has  been  accustomed  to  nourish  is 
brought  near  it. 

* Turner,  in  his  Treatise  of  Diseases  incident  to  the  Skin, 
gives  an  account  of  a young  gentleman,  his  patient,  who  in- 
stead of  taking  an  emetic  bolus  to  which  he  had  contraded  an 
abhorrence,  in  consefiuencc  of  the  violence  of  its  lormer  opera- 
tion, used  to  vomit  himself  merely  by  looking  at  it.  Page  165. 

Nor 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


55 


Nor  are  the  involuntary  of  the  mind 

«n  the  body,  which  are  connecled  with  ^ppetite, 
less  numerous,  or  less  considerable.  They  are 
common,  and  obvious,  and  do  not  need  to  be 
enumerated.  x\n  example  or  two  will  be  sufficient. 

The  liv'ely  idea  of  grateful  food,  or  drink, 
whether  we  a6fually  see  it,  or  only  talk,  or  think 
of  it,  will  excite  a flow  of  saliva  into  the  moutli ; 
and  that  sometimes  with  such  violence,  and  im- 
patience, as  to  spirt  it  out  to  a distance,  and  to 
cause  considerable  pain  in  the  salivary  du6ls, — 
especially  if,  through  attention  of  mind  to  study, 
or  reading,  a long  negledf  of  moving  the  jaws, 
or  any  other  means,  none  has  flowed  through 
them  for  a considerable  time. 

Ideas  of  the  same  kind  will  frequently  excite 
the  appetite  of  hunger,  or  of  thirst,  which  was 
not  perceived  before. 

And  here  it  may  be  proper  to  remark,  that  all 
the  appetites  are  eminent  examples  of  the  influ- 
ence of  the  body  on  the  mind,  as  well  as  of  the 
mind  on  the  body ; — for  certain  changes  being 
produced  on  the  body,  by  their  proper  causes, 
excite,  by  adting  on  the  irritability  of  the  nerves, 
certain  sensations  in  the  mind  of  animal  desire, 
which  becomes  a powerful  motive  to  impel  it  to 
procure,  by  means  of  the  proper  objedls,  their  pe- 
culiar, and  ^natural,  gratification ; — and  on  the 
' other  hand,  the  idea  of  those  objects  arising  ac-, 
cidentally  in  the  mind,  will,  as  has  just  been  ob- 

E 4 served. 


56 


CAUiES  OF  INSANITY. 


served,  excite  corresponding  bodily  changes, 
and  produce  the  real  animal  desire. 

It  may,  also,  be  worth  remarking,  that  the 
appetites  afford  a very  striking  illustration  of  the 
essential  difference  between  the  bodily  power  of 
irritability,  and  the  mental  one  of  sensation. — 
Ii  ritability  may  Viave  produced  all  those  changes 
in  the  body,  which  should  excite  the  appetite  of 
hunger  ; but  the  mind,  otherwise  engaged,  may 
not  be  at  leisure  to  attend  to  those  changes,  and 
therefore  may  not  feel  an  inclination  to  eat.  That 
^tate  of  the  body  may  a6f  ually  exist,  which  ought 
to  excite  the  appetite  of  thirst ; but  the  mind,  at- 
tentive to  whatever  deeply  engages  it,  may  not  be 
' sensible  of  a desire  to  drink.  That  state  of  the 
body  may  have  taken  place  which  should  natu- 
rally produce  the  appetite  of  love  ; but  the  mind, 
absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  very  different 
objecls,  may  be  no  way  affedfed  by  that  bodily 
state  ; and  may,  therefore,  never  feel  a desire 
which,  however  important  to  the  multiplication, 
and  continuance,  of  the  species,  is  not  necessary 
to  the  preservation,  or  well  being,  of  the  indivi- 
dual, and,  for  that  reason,  less  importunate  in  its 
solicitations  than  the  necessary  appetites  of  hunger 
and  thirst.  They  can  seldom  be  long  unattended 
to  ; but  there  are  circumstances  and  states  of 
mind,  in  which  love,  as  an  appetite,  may  never 
have  been  experienced,  or,  having  been  experi- 
enced, may  be  almost  forgotten. 


I have 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


37 


T have  already  observed  that  it  is  in  the  power 
of  the  mind  to  increase  or  diminish  irritability. 
Of  its  diminishing  irritability  the  efFedl,  above- 
mentioned,  of  its  close  attention  to  objedls  of  a 
different  nature,  on  the  natural  appetites,  is  partly 
an  instance  ; as  are  the  effe6ts  of  its  attention  to 
the-obje6ts  of  sense  and  appetite,  instances  of  its 
increasing  it.  For  though  irritability  be  so  dis- 
tindl  a thing  from  sensation,  and  be  very  far  from 
being  universally  and  necessarily  connected  with 
it ; and  though  it  may  of  itself,  and  indepen- 
dently of  sensation,  produce  such  states  of  body 
as  are  requisite  to  generate  the  appetites  by  ex- 
citing those  sensual  perceptions  which  belong  to 
them  ; yet  as  the  exercise  of  sensation  increases, 
and  the  disuse  of  it  diminishes,  the  force  and 
acSlivity  of  irritability,  so  irritability  generates, 
and  unfolds  the  appetites,  and  brings  them  into 
adfion,  more  slowly,  and  with  less  certainty,  fre- 
quency, and  urgency,  in  men  of  contemplation, 
and  virtue ; whose  thoughts  are  otherwise,  and 
better  engaged  ; than  in  the  unthinking,  and  sen- 
sual, whose  minds  are  more  exposed  to  the  solici- 
tations, if  not  solely,  and  perpetually,  employed 
about  the  pleasure,  and  gratification,  of  the  appe- 
tites ; and  is  in  the  one  case  rendered  torpid  by 
too  little,  and  in  the  other  it  becomes  morbidly 
adlive  by  too  much  excitement. 

But  of  the  power  of  the  mind  in  diminishing, 
or  increasing,  irritability,  we  have  in  no  instance, 

perhaps. 


58 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


perhaps,  a more  distindl^,  and  evident  proof,  than 
in  its  influence  on  theadlionof  the  coats  and  ves- 
sels of  the  intestines,  by  the  excitement,  or  re- 
pression, of  which,  it  can  excite,  or  repress,  the 
evacuation  by  stool.  For  as,  when  agitated  by 
certain  affedlions,  it  can,  in  many  persons,  by  a 
constitutional  sympathy,  increase  the  irritability 
of  the  coats,  and  vessels,  of  the  intestines,  and 
excite  spontaneous  purging ; so  when  its  atten- 
tion is  strongly  engaged  by  study  ; composition  ; 
the  forcible  intrusion  of  certain  notions  and 
images,  in  the  delirium  of  a fever,  or  of  mad- 
ness ; or  by  any  other  cause  ; the  irritability  of 
those  parts,  and  indeed,  of  the  body  in  general, 
may  be  so  diminished,  by  the  obstruction  of  such 
of  the  fundlions  of  the  brain,  as  are  necessary  to 
the  perfection  of  the  nerves,  and  to  the  genera- 
tion and  accumulation  of  that,  whatever  it  be,  on 
which  the  power  of  irritability  depends,  as  to  les- 
sen, and  even  destroy,  the  action  of  stimuli,  and 
consequently  to  check,  or  prevent,  the  operation 
of  a purge. 

It  must,  indeed,  be  confessed  that  the  dimi- 
nution of  irritability,  though  the  principal,  is  not 
the  sole  cause,  of  the  difficulty  with  which  purges 
operate  in  insane  persons,  and  others,  where  the 
brain  is  much  affected,  and  its  operations  are  dis- 
turbed ; since  it  is  often,  in  part,  owing  to  a de- 
feat of  sensation,  where  irritability  has  not  failed 
to  perform  its  office,  occasioned  by  the  intense 

and 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


59 

and  unremitting  attention  of  the  mind  to  the  de- 
lirious images  and  notions  which  engage  it : and 
in  part  to  a voluntary  resistance  to  .the  sensation 
which  a61ual!y  exists,  and  which,  but  for  such 
resistance,  would  inevitably  produce  the  requisite 
evacuation.  For  though  sometimes,  in  di.seases, 
the  stools  come  away  involuntarily,  and  without 
the  consciousness  of  the  patient ; yet  when  a 
purge  operates  against  the  will,  this  efFcdl  seems 
to  be  owing  in  a great  measure  to  the  painful  sen- 
sation which  it  excites  ; which  partly  overcomes 
the  reluclancy  of  the  will  ; and  partly  creates 
spasmodic  motions  in  the  reclum,  and  other  parts 
concerned,  which  the  mind  cannot  restrain. 

The  passions  have  also  a very  extensive  and 
powerful  influence,  upon  the  body,  of  the  same 
involuntary  kind. 

Emotions  of  the  mind,  arising  from  objedls  and 
ideas  adapted  to  excite  grief,  joy,  benevolence,  or 
gratitude,  will  often  occasion  a flow  of  tears  from 
the  lachrymal  vessels. 

A sense  of  shame,  or  a modest  acceptance  of 
applause,  will  excite  blushing,  or  an  unusual 
glow  of  colour,  and  warmth,  in  the  face,  neck, 
and  bosom  ; and  particularly  of  young  persons’, 
and  of  the  more  delicate  sex. 

Any  ideas,  whatever,  presented  to  the  mind, 
which  are  capable  of  exciting  passion,  may,  by 
such  excitement,  increase,  or  diminish,  the  ve- 
locity, and  momentum,  of  the  blood,  or  other- 


wise 


6o 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


wise  variously  affe6l  its  circulation,  according  to 
the  nature,  and  degree,  of  the  passion  to  which  it 
gives  occasion‘d. 

Jn  a word,  the  passions  are  the  principal  instru- 
ments of  the  mind’s  agency  on  the  body.  Their 


«*  This  will  evidently  appear  to  any  one  who  considers  the 
common,  and  specific  effeds  of  the  several  passions  on  the  body. 
When  violent,  they  often  produce  very  violent  and  extraordi- 
nary efTefts  } of  which  the  following  are  instances. 

“ These  Iviolent  passions'\  alone,  sometimes  produce  violent 
inflammations  and  gangrene.  New  recruits  often  fall  into  very 
obstinate  disorders,  if  they  be  not  dismissed  from  the  army. 
Some  are  seized  with  an  acute  fever,  which  proves  mortal ; 
whilst  others  are  either  affected  with  madness,  or  become  scor- 
butic. The  author  has  seen  wounded  soldiers,  who  in  their 
dreams  being  thrown  into  a violent  fit  of  passion,  their  wounds 
inflamed,  and  became  gangrenous. 

“ One  of  these  men,  who  was  of  a cowardly  disposition,  in 
order  that  he  mi^ht  be  sent  to  the  iiospital,  made,  with  a blister, 
a large  ufeer  in  his  leg,  which  he  contrived  to  keep  open  by 
various  means.  He  was  admitted  into  the  hospital,  and  the 
author  cured  him  in  a few  days.  On  being  informed  of  the 
necessity  there  was  for  his  joining  the  regiment,  he  discovered 
great  signs  of  fear,  and  remained  silent.  In  two  hours  he  was 
seized  with  cold  and  hot  fits  alternately,  accompanied  with  a 
pain  of  ti’.e  head ; the  leg  began  to  inflame  and  tumify,  and 
next  day,  notwithstanding  he  was  blooded,  there  appeared  a 
gangrene,  which  in  a few  days  spread  over  the  whole  calf  of  the 
leg  : but  by  bleeding,  and  the  use  of  the  cortex,  he  was  entirely 
cured.” — From  the  account  of  a Cliirurgical  Treatise  on  the 
Pklegmone,  and  its  Terminatio?is,  by  John  Alexander 
Brambilla,  First  Surgeon  to  the  Emperor — in  the  Foreign 
Medical  Revie IV,  part  ii.  p.  117- 


CAUSES  CP  INSANITY. 


6i 


etTei5l  are  various,  sudden,  and  on  many  occasions, 
violent  : and  will  be  found  to  throw  much  addi- 
tional light  on  this  subject,  when  we  come  to 
treat  of  them  somewhat  at  large  in  their  proper 
olace. 

A 


(A.)  BODILY  CAUSES. 


I.  Internal  Causes  seated  in  the  Brain^  its  Vessels, 
and  Membranes. 

I now  enter,  more  particularly,  upon  the  con- 
sideration of  the  remote  causes  of  insanity  : in 
treating  of  which,  I shall  not  pay  any  very  exadl 
attention  to  the  distin<flion  of  predisposing  and 
occasional  causes ; nor  be  solicitous  to  ascertain 
which  are  of  the  one  kind,  and  which  of  the 
other  ; or  how  far,  and  in  what  respects,  on  dif- 
ferent occasions,  the  same  cause  may  partake  of 
the  nature  of  either.  Dr.  Lorry,  who  divides 
insanity  into  two  kinds,  which  he  calls  nervous 
and  humoral,  reckons  a delicate  and  irritable' 

constitu- 


' "Nec  minus  probatum  confidinius  earn  [melancholiam 
nerveam]  duplicem  esse;  unam  in  qua  nervi  quasi  accensi, 
ultra  consiitutas  a natura  toni  metas,  transiliunt  et  abripiuntur- 
alteram  in  qua  extra  ordinem,  in  absurda  quaeque  abnormes 
pulsisque  repagulis,  feruntur.’*— Inquisitionis  ergo  aostrae  ar- 

gumentum 


02  CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 

constitution,  liable  to  violent  and  inordinate  ner- 
vous alfe61ions,  as  the  predisposing  cause  of  the 
former  ; and  of  the  latter  the  melancholy  tempe- 
rament of  the  ancients,  or  what  he  rather  chooses 


gnmentam  constitnunt  causae  evidentes,  qure  lilnc  nerveam 
acJitionein  iiitendere  possunt ; illinc  vero  earn  pessundare.  > 

Elficit  morbum  cum  causa  occasionall,  coiidmo  corporis  huic 
recipiendo  apta. — Hanc  inducunt  causic  ipsic  nielancholiae  a 
Tongo  tempore  ageutes,  et  quae  dum  corpori  insident,  ipsam 
quasi  aptaut  et  ligunt  ad  melancholiam.  Hie  prajcipue  jure 
receusentur,  tenella  conslitutio,  prava  edneatione  praesertlm 
pravarn  naturani  debilitante.” — De  Melancholia,  torn,  i, 
p,  81,  &c. 

“ Nor  is  it,  I am  persuaded,  less  evident,  that  nervous  me- 
lancholy is  of  two  kinds  5 in  one  of  which  the  nerves,  being 
strongly  excited,  overleap,  and  are  hurried  beyond  the  boun- 
daries of  tension  established  by  Nature:  in  the  other,  being 
disposed  to  a6t  in  a disorderly  manner,  they  deviate  from  their 
usual  course  into  every  kind  of  absurd,  and  irregular  exertion. 
— The  proper  subje6ts,  therefore,  of  our  inquiry,  are  those 
evident  causes  w'hich  are  capable  of  increasing  the  nervous 
aiSlion  on  the  one  hand,  or  of  perverting  it  on  the  other. — In  the 
production  of  the  disease,  it  is  not  only  requisite  that  there 
should  be  an  occasional  cause,  but  the  concurrence  of  a fit  dis- 
position of  body  for  its  reception. — This  disposition  may  be  in- 
duced by  a long  continued  action  of  the  very  causes  of  melan- 
choly, which,  having  once  taken  up  their  residence  in  the  body, 
may  gradually  mould,  and  fashion  it,  as  it  were,  for  the  recep- 
tion of  melancholy.  And  here  tl'e  pre-eminence  is  justly  due 
to  a delicate  constitution  ■,  and  especially  when  an  injudicious 
education  has  conspired  to  debilitate  what  Nature  had  origi- 
nally made  but  too  infirm.” 


to 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.  63 

to  call  an  intemperament  which  is,  at  the  same 
time,  melancholy,  cold,  and  dryh 

But,  not  to  mention  that  it  may  justly  be 
doubted  whether  there  be,  in  reality,  any  such 
humour  in  the  body,  as  that  which  the  ancients 
termed  atra  bilis,  and,  consequently,  whether 
there  be,  stri<?Uy  sjjeaking,  any  such  tempera- 
ment as  the  atrabilious,  or  melancholy  ; it  is  cer- 
tain from  experience,  and  will  appear  obvious, 
alter  having  gone  through  the  investigation  of 
the  remote  causes,  upon  which  we  are  now  enter- 
ing, how  inadequate  the  predisposing  causes 
mentioned  by  Dr.  Lorry,  are  to  the  .purposes 


^ “ Caeterum  quicquid  hue  usque  de  causis  melanchollara 
invehentibus  diximus,  ita  intelligendum  esti  ut  non  ex  rei  nc* 
cessitate  melancholiam  inferent  illae,  cum  per  se  natae  sint  et 
alia  et  pessima  mala  producere.  Verum  requlritur  prsedisposi- 
tio  quaedam  a natura  accepta,  aut  arte  conquisita,  et  a repe- 
titis  earumdem  causarum  i6libus  allius  intrusa,  quod  melan- 
cholicum  temperamentum  veteres  vocaverant ; nos  vero  redius 
intemperiem  melancholicam,  frigidam  porro  et  siccam.” — De- 
Melancholia,  tom.  i.  p,  293. 

" What  we  have  hitherto  said  of  the  causes  of  melancholy,  ij 
not  so  to  be  understood  as  if  they  were  necessarily  produdivc 
of  this  disorder  j they  being  of  their  own  nature  capable  of  pro- 
ducing other,  and  those  very  grievous  maladies.’  To  give  oc- 
casion to  melancholy  there  must  be  a certain  predisposition, 
either  received  from  Nature,  or  acquired  by  arf,  and  deeply 
rivetted  by  the  repeated  adion  of  the  same  causes,  wliich  was 
termed  by  the  ancients  the  melancholy  temperament ; but 
which  we  may  style,  with  more  propriety,  an  intemperament 
which  is  at  the  same  time  melancholy,  cold,  and  dry.'"’ 

assigned 


(Ji  CAUSES  OF  INSANITT. 

assigned  to  them  ; and  that  persons  of  all  consti- 
tutions, and  of  all  temperaments,  are  liable  to 
this  disorder,  when  affected  by  exciting  causes  of 
sufficient  force,  and  efficacy.  And  indeed  Dr. 
Lorry  himself  seems  tacitly  to  acknowledge  their 
insufficiency,  when  he  tells  us  that  this  predispo- 
sition “ may  be  induced  by  along  continued  adfion 
of  the  v'ery  causes  of  melancholy,  which,  having 
once  taken  up  their  residence  in  the  body,  may 
gradually  mould,  and  fashion  it,  as  it  were,  for 
its  reception.” 

Of  all  the  causes  mentioned  under  this  division 
in  the  table,  we  derive  our  knowledge  from  the 
disse^ion  of  the  heads  of  such  as  have  died  insane. 
The  authorities  on  which^  they  are  here  inserted 
may  be  found  in  the  preceding  Sedlion.  How 
far  each  of  the  appearances  here  set  down  as  a 
cause,  when  it  occurs  after  death,  has  adfually 
been  concerned  in  the  produdfion  of  the  insanity 
which  existed  during  life,  may  be  a difficult  mat- 
ter to  determine.  It  is  obvious  that  they  are  all 
more  or  less  capable  of  affe6fmg  the  brain,  its 
vessels,  or  membranes,  by  compression,  irritation, 
or  both.  It  has  already  been  observed  that  the 
same  appearances  which  are  found  after  death  to 
have  accompanied  insanity,  are  also  found  to  be 
attendants  upon  many  other  diseases.  Whence 
they  derived  that  specific  determination  which  led 
to  the  production  of  insanity,  and  from  what  pe- 
culiar modifications  of  compression  or  irritation, 

resulted 


65 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

resulted  the  several  species,  will  be  more  properly 
a subje6l  of  inquiry  in  treating  of  the  proximate 
causes. 

II.  Rxtetnal  Causes  which  operate  mechanically 
upon  the  Brain, 

1 . Eocostoses  of  the  inner  table  of  the  skull  have 
been  enumerated  among  the  occasional  causes  of 
this  disorder''.  In  proportion  to  their  magnitude 
they  must,  in  a greater  or  less  degree,  compress 
and  irritate  the  brain.  It  is  possible,  therefore, 
that  they  may  sometimes  be  the  exciting  cause  of 
insanity  ; and  especially  in  those  instances  in 
which  it  appears  to  have  owed  its  origin  to  invete- 
rate venereal  complaints. 

2.  3.  That  depression,  or  fraSlure  of  the  skull, 
and  concussion  of  the  brain,  should  be  the  causes 
of  compression,  and  irritation,  is  equally  appa- 
rent. There  have  been  many  instances  in  which 
these  accidents  have  given  occasion  to  insanity  ; 
and  there  are  even  some  in  which  they  have  cured 
it.  Hoffman'’  relates  two  cases  of  insanity,  one 
from  Sanctorious,  of  a youth  who  was  cured  by 
a wound  which  had  penetrated  his  skull,  and  de- 
stroyed a portion  of  the  substance  of  the  brain  ; 


* Dr.  Battie’s  Treatise  on  Madness,  p.  46. 

**  Hoffm.  Oper.  Supplem.  Secund.  Part.  Secund.  p.  333, 
\ X.  et  p.  336^  § XV. 

TOL.  II, 


F 


and 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


66 

and  who  from  being  implacable,  rash,  and  perfe(Slly 
irrational,  became  so  mild,  and  reasonable,  that 
few  could  equal  him  in  the  wisdom  of  his  conducSl, 
or  conversation  : and  the  other  from  Rondele- 
Tius,  of  a similar  cure,  in  consequence  of  a fradlure 
of  the  skull  which  had  let  out  a watry  fluid.  And 
in  ScHENCKius’s  collection  there  is  a history  of  a 
madman  who  happening  to  be  so  wounded  in 
the  head,  that  his  skull  was  fra6lured,  was  free 
from  his  insanity  while  the  wound  remained  open ; 
which,  however,'  returned  again  when  it  was 
healed:  and  of  two  women  who  were  cured  by 
falls*. 

4.  Nor  is  it  less  evident  to  the  medical  reader, 
how  the  immediate  aSiion  of  the  burning  rays^ 
of  the  sun  upon  the  head,  may  in  like  manner, 
affect  the  brain  by  irritation,  and  compression. 
It  rs  well  known  that  external  heat,  upon  all  occa- 
sions, excites  quicker  than  ordinary  vibrations' 
in  the  small  and  capillary  arteries  of  the  parts  on 
which  it  acts;  that  these  accelerated  vibrations 
are  readily  communicated  to  the  neighbouring 
small  arteries ; that  this  increased  a6lion  of  the 
surrounding  small  arteries,  forcing  a greater  quan- 
tity of  blood  than  usual  through  their  cavities,  in 
a given  time,  must  of  course  accelerate  the  mo- 
tion of  the  vital  fluid  through  the  vessels  by  which 

' ScHENCKii  Obs.  Med.  Rar.  lib.  i.  Obs.  8,  12S. 

they 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  ^7^ 

they  are  immediately  supplied,  and  soon  througli 
a still  larger  series  of  vessels,  in  proportion  to 
the  violence,  and  duration,  of  the  first  exciting 
cause ; so  that  the  more  intense  the  heat,  the 
greater  will  be  the  quantity  of  blood  which  will 
pass  through  the  small  vessels  of  the  part  imme- 
diately affected  by  it,  in  a given  time  ; and  the 
influence  of  this  increased  acSlion  of  the  smaller 
arteries  will  gradually  extend  along  the  larger 
ones  from  which  they  derive  their  origin,  and  ul- 
timately even  to  the  heart  itself,  that  the  blood 
may  be  plentifully  supplied  where  it  is  largely  de- 
manded. And  all  these  efFedls  will  be  increased 
in  a progressive  ratio,  by  means  of  the  irritation 
arising  from  the  accumulation  of  blood  in  the  cor- 
responding veins,  from  the  consequent  distention, 
and  pain,  of  the  neighbouring  parts,  and  from 
the  immediate  operation  of  heat  upon  the  irri- 
tability of  the  nervous  system,  the  longer  the 
heat  continues  to  a6l  upon  the  part  more  particu- 
larly exposed  to  it. 

When,  therefore,  by  any  imprudent  or  una- 
voidable exposure,  in  hot  climates,  the  burning 
rays  of  the  sun  a6t  long,  and  immediately  upon 
the  head,  it  is  obvious  that  there  must  be  an 
unusual  derivation  of  blood  to  the  part  thus  im- 
mediately, and  powerfully,  adled  upon  by  heat ; 
that,  sinc^  the  activity  of  the  veins,  being  much 
less  considerable  than  that  of  the  arteries,  will 
be  much  less  influenced  by  the  stimulating  power 

F 2 of 


6e 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITYi 


of  the  heat  than  the  arteries  are,  the  blood  must 
rapidly  accumulate  in  the  veins  and  sinuses  of 
the  brain  and  its  membranes ; and  that  the  brain 
must,  of  consequence  be  suddenly  compressed, 
^nd  irritated  in  a very  great  degree ^it  is  no  won- 
der, therefore,  that  highly  delirious  fevers,  and 
insanity,  should  be  frequent,  and  violent ; sud- 
den in  their  attack,  and  rapid  in  their  progress  ; 
in  very  hot  climates. 

Hoffman'  says  that  long  exposure  to  the  rays 
of  the  sun,  especially  in  the  dog-days,  may  either 
be  the  originally  exciting  cause  of  insanity ; or 
may  renew  its  paroxysms : and  the  late  Dr.  Bat- 
tie'^  tells  us  that  he  once  met  with  an  instance 
of  a sailor,  who  became  raving  mad  in  a mo- 
ment while  the  sun-beams  darted  perpendicularly 
upon  his  head.” 

• 

5.  When  the  head  is  remarkably  small,  in  com- 
parison with  the  size  of  the  body ; which  it 
must  of  necessity  be  if  the  sutures  of  the  skull, 
}>ecoming  obliterated  in  early  youth,  check  its 
growth  before  it  has  acquired  those  dimensions 
which  are  requisite  to  the  preservation  of  a just 
proportion  between  it  and  the  other  members, 
when  arrived  at  a state  of  maturity  ; not  only  the 
due  expansion,  and  unfolding,  of  those  parts 


‘ Oper.  Snpplem,  Secund.  Part.  Secund.  p.  344,  § xvi.  (12). 
Treatise  on  Madness,  p.  47. 


of 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


69 

of  the  brain  on  which  the  perfect,  and  unim- 
peded, operation  of  its  fun^^ions,  and  conse- 
quently a sound  understanding,  depends,  may 
be  prevented  ; but  the  quantity  of  blood  sent  to 
it,  may  be  rendered  disproportionate,  and  its  mo- 
mentum increased,  by  the  smallness  of  its  capa- 
city ; and  the  over-distended  vessels  of  that  de- 
licate organ,  may  so  compress  and  irritate  it,  as 
to  give  occasion  to  insanity  of  some  species,  or 
other. 

Willis,  in  his  Anatomy  of  the  Brain,  gives  a 
figure  of  it,  as  he  had  observed  it  in  a youth  who 
had  been  an  idiot  from  his  birth,  and  in  whom 
it  was  found  to  be  less  than  it  ought  to  have  been. 
As  might  be  expecled  in  such  a brain,  which,  in 
consequence  of  being  of  less  magnitude  than  usual 
in  bodies  of  the  same  size,  would  probably  possess 
solid  parts  in  too  small  a proportion  to  its  vascu- 
lar cavities,  because  these  cavities  would  be  too 
much  distended  by  the  undue  proportion  of  blood 
circulated  through  them,  and  would  by  their  dis- 
tension compress,  and  reduce  in  a smaller  com- 
pass, the  solid  parts,  it  was  not  only  less,  but 
more  flabby  than  it  naturally  is  in  its  sound,  and 
perfect  state'. 

6.  I have  introduced  a swelling  in  the  neck  into 

* Willis  Ccrt-bri  Anatom,  p.  14,  cap.  iii.  fig.  4.— Boer- 
HA.wii  Pritleft,  Acad,  dc  Morbis  Nervcr,  tom,  i.  p.  128. 

F 3 this 


70  CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 

this  division  of  the  table  of  the  causes,  upon 
the  authority  of  Beasavolus,  as  I find  him 
quoted  by  Schenckius™.  But  whether,  in  the 
case  he  has  related,  it  operated  mechanically, 
by  compressing  the  jugular  veins,  and  thus  occa- 
sioning a plethoric  state  of  the  brain,  or  in  some 
other  manner,  appears  somewhat  fioubtful.  I 
have,  therefore,  placed  it  here  rather  as  a cause 
which  might  possibly  give  rise  to  insanity  in  this 
way,  than  as  one  certainly  known  to  have  done  so. 

III.  Causes  ajffeBing  the  Body  in  general,  which 
produce  Insar^ity,  either  by  adiing  direSlly  upon 
the  Brain,  or  by  introducing  a gradual  change 
in  the  System  which  disposes  to  Insanity. 

1.  In  cases  of  phren7.y,  small-pox  accompanied 
with  delirium,  and  other  delirious  fevers,  the  in- 
telledlual  disorder  may  continue  after  the  fever 
has  ceased,  and  the  acute  delirium  of  the  fever 
be  converted  into  the  chronic  one  of  insanity  ; or 
the  fever  may  have  so  injured  the  brain,  as  to 
leave  in  it  a disposition  to*  returns  of  the  delirium, 
which  may  again  be  excited  by  any  suitable,  and 
even  slight,  occasional  cause,  without  a return 
of  the  fever ; or  some  trifling,  or  merely  symp- 
tomatic fever,  may  accompany  the  first  attack 
of  returning  delirium,  and  may  speedily  cease 

ScHENCKii  Obs.  Med.  Rar.  lib,  i.  Cansee,  Obs.  i,  p.  132. 

with 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


71 


with  little  or  no  abatement  of  the  insanity : — or 
delirious  fever  may  have  so  debilitated  the  body, 
diminished  the  healthful  tones,  induced  morbid 
irritability,  and  sensibility,  excited  uneasy  and 
painful  sensations,  and,  in  a word,  may  have 
so  weakened  the  brain  and  the  whole  nervous 
system,  as  to  have  given  rise  to  chronical  com- 
plaints which  may  dispose  to,  and  readily  termi- 
nate in,  insanity. 

Of  the  produdlion  of  insanity,  by  each  of 
these  causes,  there  are  such  frequent  instances^ 
that  it  would  be  needless  to  adduce  any 
particulars  in  proof  of  it ; and  the  mode  of 
produ61ion  is  so  obvious,  as  scarcely  to  require 
an  explanation.  Whatever  be  the  kind  of  deli- 
rious fever  from  which  it  originates,  the  exciting 
cause  will  be  nearly  the  same : there  will  be  ac- 
celerated vibrations  of  the  small  vessels  of  the 
brain,  and  an  increased  determination,  and  accu- 
mulation, of  blood  in  them,  variously  distending, 
compressing,  and  irritating,  the  several  parts 
of  that  delicate  organ.  That  such  an  increased 
velocity  of  circulation  as  takes  place  in  fevers,  is 
of  itself  sufficient  to  occasion  delirium,  and  es- 
pecially if  at  the  same  time  it  be  so  vigorous  as 
to  determine  the  blood  with  any  extraordinary 
force  to  the  head,  is  evident  from  the  many  in- 
stai'vces  which  occur  of  delirium  in  intermittent  fe- 
vers, in  which  it  only  shows  itself  in  the  height  of 
the  febrile  paroxysm,  and  disappears  as  the  fever 

F 4 declines. 


72 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


declines.  I have  known  several  examples  of  the 
generation  of  insanity,  or  of  its  reproduction  in 
persons  who  had  been  formerly  subjeCl  to  it, 
by  intermittent,  and  remittent,  as  w'ell  as  con-^ 
tinned,  and  inflammatory  fevers. 

Indeed  it  is  so  common  a case  for  the  deli-, 
rium  of  a fever  to  terminate  in  insanity,  that 
JBoerhaave",  Van  Swieten",  Hoffman^,  and 
most  practical  writers  who  have  had  occasion  to 
treat  of  this  disorder,  have  not  only  mentioned 
the  phrenzy,  but  ardent,  putrid,  bilious,  vario- 
lous, and  other  exanthematous,  and  intermittent 
fevers,  when  accompanied  with  delirium,  among 
its  frequent  occasional  causes. 

We  are  told  by  Dion  is  in  his  account  of  an  at- 
tempt made  at  Paris  to  introduce  into  medicine  a 
new  practice,  which  consisted  in  transfusing  the 
blood  of  a young,  and  healthful  animal,  into  the 
veins  of  an  old,  or  diseased  one  ; by  means  of 
which  it  was  proposed  to  cure  or  prevent  dis- 
eases, to  preserve  or  restore  youth,  and  to  pro- 
long life  ; that  all  those  oh  whom  the  experiment 
was  tried  became  suddenly  insane,  and  died  rav- 


" Aphorism,  § 1108.  2,  § 1J25. — De  Morb.  Nerv.  tom.  ii. 
p.  412. 

“ Comment,  in  Aphor.  § 1108.  2,  § 1125. 

V Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  iv.  Part  iv,  cap.  viii.  § is.  Ope- 
rum,  tom.  iii.  p.  254— and  p.  262.  Cautel,  et  Observat. 
FratSt.  § 1. 


mg. 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


73 


ijig’’..  This  unhappy  termination  of  a project, 
of  the  success  of  which  they  had  conceived  such 
flattering  expe6iations,  is  supposed  by  Swie- 
TEN  to  prove  how  much  we  have  to  apprehend 
from  the  introduction  of  any  foreign  substance, 
however  mild,  into  the  circulating  blood ; of 
which  he  esteems  drunkenness  to  be  another  ex- 
ample. But  as  the  latter  seems,  in  a great  mea- 
sure, to  be  the  effed  of  a sympathy  between  the 
stomach  and  the  brain : so  the  former  might 
probably  arise  from  too  plethoric  a state  of  the 
vascular  system,  occasioned  by  the  quantity  of 
blood  transfused,  together  with  an  increased  de- 
termination of  it  to  the  brain,  the  natural  conse- 
quence of  such  a state  ; rather  than  from  any  thing 


“ Ils  firent  plusieurs  de  ccs  operations  qiii  devolent,  selon 
eux,  avoir  nn  siicces  surprenant ; mais  la  fin  funesle  de  ces 
nialhcnreuses  vi€times  de  la  nouveaute,  detrulsit  en  un  jour  Ics 
bautes  idees  qu’ils  avoient  con^ucs,  ils  devinrent  foux,  furieux 
ct  moururent  ensuite.  Le  parlenienl  iuform6  de  ce  qui  s’etoit 
passe,  interposa  son  autorite,  et  donna  un  Arret  par  lequel  il 
etoit  defendu  sous  des  rigoureuscs  peines  de  faire  cette  opera- 
tion.”— Cours  d Operations  de  Chirurpie,  p.  4gS. 

" They  performed  several  of  these  operations,  from  which 
they  promised  themselves  the  most  wonderful  success.  But 
the  dreadful  end  of  the  unhappy  vidtims  of  this  new  practice, 
destroyed  in  one  day  their  visionary  expe6tations  ; they  ail  be- 
came insane,  and  died  raving.  The  parliament,  bring  informed 
of  what  had  passed,  interposed  its  authority,  and  issued  a pro- 
ciamation,  in  w'hich  the  operation  was  prohibited  under  very 
severe  penalties.” 


neces- 


74 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


necessarily  noxious  in  the  introduction  of  a foreign 
substance,  merely  as  such,  into  the  course  of  the 
circulation. 

2.  It  is  pretty  generally  allowed  that  insanity, 
and  especially  of  that  division  which  I have  termed 
ideali  is  a very  common  disorder  in  hot  climates. 
Nor  is  it  difficult  to  conceive  how  intense  heat  may 
readily  produce  it ; whether  we  consider  it  as  imme- 
diately affeCled,  which  it  seems  not  unfrequently  to 
be,  by  the  rarefaClion  of  the  blood,  and  the  con- 
sequent fullness  of  the  vascular  system  ; by  its 
accelerated  motion  ; by  the  unusual  irritability, 
and  inflammatory  tone,  of  the  blood-vessds ; 
and  by  the  increased  determination  of  the  cir- 
culating fluids  to  the  head ; without  the  interven- 
tion  of  any  great  degree  of  fever : or  as  the  con- 
sequence of  those  ardent,  and  delirious  fevers, 
which  are  so  common,  and  so  violent,  in  coun- 
tries much  exposed  to  the  burning  rays  of  the 
sun  ; or  as  the  offspring  of  that  exquisite  irritabi- 
lity and  sensibility,  of  that  susceptibility  and 
keenness  of  the  appetites,  of  that  quickness  and 
activity  of  the  imagination,  that  liveliness  and  ve- 
hemence of  passion,  so  conspicuous  in  the  coun- 
tenance and  habit  of  body,  in  the  manners  and  con- 
dud,  in  the  religious  sentiments,  and  in  the  literary 
compositions,  where  literature  has  any  existence, 
of  the  numerous  nations  who  inhabit  the  torrid, 
and  the  warmer  climates  of  the  temperate  zones. 

The 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


75 


The  learned  and  ingenious  Dr.  Lorry',  draws 
a striking  pidlure  of  the  efFe^s  of  the  too  ex- 
quisite irritability,  and  sensibility,  of  the  inha- 
bitants of  the  southern  parts  of  Asia. — Among 
them,”  he  observes,  the  arts  and  sciences 
received  their  first  rudiments  ; but  were  pre- 
vented, by  the  want  of  perseverance,  and  impa- 
tience of  labour,  from  rising  to  the  highest 
degrees  of  perfedlion.  Poetry  is  so  natural 
to  them,  that  their  common  language  is,  in 
our  estimation,  absurdly  metaphorical.  If  we 
take  a view  of  their  manners,  they  arc  no  less  ex- 
travagant. Their  courage  is  fury,  and  outrage ; 
and  their  fear  pusillanimity.  Crimes,  in  the 
pages  of  oriental  history,  are  every  where  bkek- 
ened  with  incredible  barbarity  ; and  the  examples 
of  virtue,  and  wisdom,  appear  to  be  scarcely  hu- 
man. There  we  see  piety,  contaminated  with 
fanaticism,  wisdom  obscured  by  fable,  and  sci- 
ence involved  in  mystery.  In  these  regions,  mad 
and  ungovernable  love  taught  the  art  of  locking 
up  in  seraglios,  and  enslaving  to  the  will  of  one 
man,  the  most  beautiful  of  the  human  species. 
Here  the  fire  of  love  glows  with  so  much  ardour, 
and  so  possesses,  and  inflames,  the  whole  man,  that 
neither  threats,  nor  the  fear  of  death,  can  extin- 
guish an  afFedion  which  has  once  been  lighted  up. 
Here  the  sensibility  of  the  passions  requires  to  be 


' De  Mdancholia,  tom.  i.  p.  64,  8rc. 


soothed 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


76 

soothed  by  opium.  Hence  in  no  other  part  of  the 
world  is  nervous  melancholy  found  in  a greater  de- 
gree, as  we  learn  from  Aret^us,  Galen,  Bontius, 
Prosper  Alpinus,  and  from  almost  all  the  Arabian 
writers,  but  especially  Avicenna,  who  has  dis- 
tindtly  described  no  less  than  three  species  of  purely 
nervous  melancholy. — Hence  this  kind  of  insa- 
nity is  not  only  frequent  among  these  people,  but 
in  an  excessive  degree.  Hence  it  is  common  for 
their  imaginations  to  be  so  strongly  affedted,  that 
they  will  grow  delirious  about  an  object  on  which 
they  have  placed  their  afFe61Ions,  and  wound  their 
own  bodies  to  obtain  it.  No  w'here  else  are  they 
more  influenced  by  religious  fear,  or  terrified  by 
the  denunciations  of  their  prophets.  These  pro- 
phets, who  are  called  Bonzes^  whirl  themselves 
round  till  their  imaginations  are  disordered,  and 
when  they  have  worked  themselves  up  to  a de- 
gree of  enthusiasm,  perform  the  most  absurd,  and 
even  horrid  adlions,  under  the  sacred  notion  of 
religion. — And  so  excessive  are  the  efFe6ls  of  mu- 
sic upon  these  susceptible  people,  that  from  this 
circumstance  the  notions  of  charms,  incantations, 
and  enchantments,  have  derived  their  origin.’* 

In  our  own,  and  in  other  temperate  climates, 
insanity  is  observed  to  be  more  frequent  in  sum- 
mer ; and  CvSpecially  during  the  heat  of  the  dog- 
days,  or  after  a long  continuance  of  very  hot, 
dry,  and  sultry  weather.  In  these  ardent  sea- 
sons, the  fiery  temperature  of  the  air  not  only 

rarifics 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


77 


rarifies  the  blood,  stimulates  the  heart  and  arteries 
to  quicker  and  stronger  contradlions,  determines  an 
unusual  quantity  of  blood  to  the  head,  and  by 
these  and  the  other  means  above-mentioned  pro- 
duces immediate  insanity  of  the  more  violent 
kinds ; but  by  dissipating  the  fluid  parts  of  the 
blood,  and  enfeebling  the  solids,  when  it  conti- 
nues for  any  great  length  of  time,  may  with  the 
assistance  of  other  concurring  causes,  gradually 
lay  the  foundation  of  this  disorder,  and  prepare 
the  way  for  subsequent  attacks  of  it  in  the  less 
violent,  but  not  less  distressing,  and  usually  more 
gloomy  forms,  of  anxiety,  depression,  and  me- 
lancholy. 

The  inhabitants  of  Apulia,  where,  as  we  are 
told  by  Bagltvi’,  there  is  scarcely  any  rain  in  the 


* " Regio  pr3edi£ta  [Apulia]  orientem  respicit,  ventisque 
orientalibus,  et  aquilonaribus  obnoxia  est : aestate  illic  imbres 
rarissirni:  qua  de  re,  imo  ctiam  ob  viciniam  orientis,  exuventls- 
simis  caloribis  soils  uritur  Apulia  j unde  populares  illi  coguntur 
respirare  aerem  quasi  ab  ardenti  clibano  efflantem. — Huic  cli- 
matis  temperiei  analoga  est  ilia  incolarum ; generaliter  enim 
populares  illi  sunt  adusti  temperamenti,  nigris  capillis,  sub- 
fusco,  quandoque  subpallido  cutis  colore  praediti,  macilenti, 
impatientes,  iracundi,  insoranes,  m igno  mentis  acumine  prae- 
diti, ad  discursLim  veloces,  ad  operationes  promptissimi.  Ob- 
noxii  potissimum  sunt  ardentissimis  febribus,  phr.“nitidi,  pleu- 
ritidi,  dementiae,  aliisque  morbis  inflammatoriis  ; tantaque  ca- 
lorisest  illis  in  regionibus  aaivitas,  utplurimos  viderim  in  sum» 
mam  impatientiam,  atque  in  dementiam  a&os."—Disser/aL  de 
Tarantula,  cap.  ii.  Operum,  p.  OOJ.-^ndc  efiam,  p.  6'35.‘; 


summer 


78  CAUSES  OP  mSANITY. 

summer  season,  and  where  they  breathe  an  air 
as  intensely  hot  as  if*  it  proceeded  immediately 
from  the  mouth  of  a furnace,  partake  of  the  na* 
ture  of  the  climate,  are  of  an  adust  temperament, 
have  black  hair,  a sallow  and  sometimes  pale 
complexion,  are  lean,  impatient,  passionate,  wake- 
ful, acute,  rapid  in  conversation,  and  prompt  in 
execution ; and  are  peculiarly  liable  to  the  most  ar- 
dent fevers,  phrenzy,  pleurisy,  madness,  and  other 
inflammatory  disorders.  Such,  indeed,  he  tells 
ns,  is  the  excessive  a6Hvity  of  the  heat  in  that 
climate,  that  he  has  often  seen  people  driven  into 
madness  by  the  agony  of  impatience  into  which 
they  were  hurried  by  its  intolerable  violence. 

Hoffman'  reckons  mterise  cold,  and  especially 
when  the  lower  extremities  have  been  impru- 
dently exposed  to  it,  among  the  remote  causes 
of  insanity ; and  accounts  for  its  agency  in  the 
produ(5Hon  of  this  disorder,  by  means  of  the 
spasm  which  it. excites  over  the  whole  surface 
of  the  body,  whether  it  be  universally,  or  only 
partially,  applied  to  it ; and  the  consequent  de- 
termination of  the  circulating  blood,  with  unu- 
sual force,  and  energy,  from  the  surflice,  to  the 
internal  parts ; whence,  of  course,  must  arise 
various  (disorders  in  the  larger  vessels,  and  those 
internal  parts  with  which  they  are  connecSled, 
and  partfcularly  in  the  lungs,  in  the  heart,  and 

* Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  iv.  Operum,  tom,  iii.  p.  254,  § 24 
— etSupp1em»  Secuud.  Part.  Secund,  p.  239,  § ^^3- 


in 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


79 


in  the  brain;  producing  In  the  breast,  oppres- 
sion, anxiety,  shortness  of  breath,  and  sighing ; 
in  the  heart,  trembling  and  palpitation ; and  in 
the  head,  giddiness,  weight,  ferocity  of  the  eyes, 
long  watching,  and  various  kinds  of  insane  de- 
lirium. Tills  he  not  only  illustrates  by  the  cold- 
ness of  the  extremities,  and  shivering,  which  fre- 
cjuently  precede  hypochondriacal  paroxysms ; but 
by  the  history  of  a remarkable,  and  obstinate  hypo- 
chondriacal disorder,  brought  on  by  long  exposure, 
on  a journey  made  in  the  depth  of  a severe  win- 
ter, to  intense  cold.  But  notwithstanding  the 
authority  of  so  great  a name,  as  this  is,  at  best, 
a very  remote  cause,  and  has  rarely,  if  ever,  been 
known  to  have  been  immediately  instrumen- 
tal in  the  production  of  insanity,  I have  not  ven- 
tured to  introduce  it  into  the  list  of  causes  upon 
a merely  hypothetical  foundation. 

3.  As  great  heat  of  climate,  so  immoderate 
exercise'",  and  especially  in  a hot  and  dry  air ; 
by  accelerating  the  motion  of  the  blood,'  heat- 

“ Boerhaavii  Aph.  § 1093  et  § 1 108. 

TiMiEU3  A Guldenklee— “ refert  niotum  corporis  concita- 
tiorem  aestivo  tempore  institutum  juvenem  mauiacum  redi- 
disse,”— Hoffman.  Exercitat  Physico- Medic,  de  Morhis  ex 
Morlosa  Sanguinis  Circulatione  ortis.  Oper.  Supplement.  Se- 
cund.  Part.  Secund.  p.  336,  § J6. 

“ Tim^us  a Guldenklee  relates  the  case  of  a young  man 

who  was  rendered  manhicai  by  th^  e.xercise  of  running  Tn  Iwt 
weather.” 


mg 


80 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.' 


ing  the  body,  cKhausting  it  by  profuse  perspiration 
of  its  more  fluid  parts,  increasing  the  velocity, 
and  force,  of  the  circulation  through  the  head, 
and  eausing  an  unusual  accumulation  of  blood  in 
the  brain  ; is  not  only  capable  of  producing  imme- 
diate insanity,  or  delirious  fevers  terminating  in 
insanity  ; but  may  likewise  give  occasion  to  this 
disorder  by  means  of  the  great  debility,  and  va- 
rious chronical  complaints,  which  may  owe  their 
origin  to  this  source. 

4.  Profuse  evacuations  of  every  kind,  even  in 
the  firmest  constitutions,  soon  produce  debility  ; 
which  cannot  long  exist  without  giving  rise  to 
the  permanently  lax,  infirm,  and  nervous  tones, 
and  their  natural  offspring,  languor,  depression, 
and  gloominess.  These,  if  of  any  considerable 
standing ; vvKether  owing  to  the  continuance  of 
their  cause,  or  to  its  having  induced  by  its  vio- 
lence, though  it  may  now  long  since  have  ceased, 
such  a degree  of  weakness  into  the  habit  as  nature 
cannot  easily  overcome  ; and  especially,  if  aided 
by  the  concurring  influence  of  such  external 
causes,  as  have  a tendency  to  excite  any  of  the 
painful,  and  dejedfing  passions,  are,  by  the  mere 
habits  of  uneasiness,  anxiety,  and  depression,  rea- 
dily convertible  into  at'dual,  and  too  often  into 
incurable  insanity'' ; which  is  at  first,  from  the 

very 

» Vide  Boekhaavii  Aph.  ^ IIOS.  2.  et  Van  Swieten 

Comment. 


81 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

^‘ery  nature  of  its  causes,  usually  pathetic  ; but 
^vhich  not  uncommonly  so  increases  in  violence, 
3S  it  proceeds,  as  to  arrive  at  length,  and  some- 
times very  rapidly,  to  tlie  most  outrageous  im- 
petuosity of  [)hrciiitic  insanity. 

Case-i  ot  this  sort  are  not  unfrequent ; and  if 
recent  are  as  easily  cured,  as  when  of  long  date, 
they  are  obstinate,  and  unyielding.  I recolle6t 
one  instance  of  insanity  from  this  cause,  which, 
at  the  same  time  that  it  illustrates  the  facility 
with  which  it  may  be  removed  before  time  and 
Iiabit  have  rendered  it  inveterate,  affords  a plain 
proof  of  the  powerful  influence  of  mere  exhaus- 
tion, and  debility,  in  generating  this  disorder. 
An  unhappy  mother,  in  a low  station  of  life,  who 
while  poverty  obliged  her  to  live  on  a scanty 
allowance  of  poor,  and  unnourishing  diet,  had 
too  long  given  suck  to  a hearty  child,  was  reduced 
almost  to  a state  of  desperation  by  the  debility 
which  so  ill-timed  an  evacuation  had  occasioned. 
From  this  miserable  condition  she  was  restored, 
in  a short  time,  to  health,  and  serenity,  by  wean- 
ing her  child,  and  using  a more  plentiful,  and 
nutritious  diet,  without  the  aid  of  any  medicine 
whatever. 


Comment.— item  Boerh.  Aph.  § 1 125,  et  Van  Swiet.  Comm. 
—Vide  etiam  Hoffmann.  Dissert.  Medic,  de  vera  Morbi  Hy^ 
pochondriaci  Sede,  Indole,  ac  Curatione.  Supplem.  Secund. 
Part.  Secund.  p.  230,  § 13, 

Q 


VOL,  II. 


5.  But. 


62 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


5.  But  of  all  the  causes  of  insanity  which  ope- 
rate chiefly  by  means  of  the  previous  produ^lion 
of  clchility,  none  are  more  cffedual,  or  more  ob- 
stinate, than  excessive  venery ; which,  at  the 
same  time  that  it  acquires  accumulated,  and 
almost  invincible  force  by  habit,  and  almost  incu- 
rably enervates  the  body,  and  debilitates  the 
mind,  is  usually  accom])anied  by  other  distressing 
circumstances  ; by  great  and  olten  irreparable  in- 
jury both  of  fame  and  fortune  ; by  a privation  of 
the  very  enjoyment  lor  the  sake  of  wliich  they 
were  sacrificed  ; bv  the  possession  in  its  stead  ot 
tlie  most  tormenting,  and  tantalizing  desires, 
which  are  for  ever  disappointed  with  pain  where 
they  sought  for  gratification  ; by  vain  regret  for 
the  loss  of  almost  every  pleasure,  and  every  com- 
fort, both  corporeal  and  mental,  and  the  aggra- 
vating reproaches  of  a guilty  conscience  ; and  to 
add  to  its  fatal  power  of  gradually  debilitating  by 
all  these  means  the  faculties  of  the  mind,  and 
subverting  their  sound,  and  rational  operation,  it 
has  a peculiar  tendency  by  nature,  while  it  ex- 
hausts the  vital  powers,  and  enfeebles  the  whole 
animal  system,  to  occasion  an  increased  adion 
of  the  vessels  of  the  brain,  and  an  unusual  deter- 
mination of  blood  to  that  organ,  and  thus,  on 
many  occasions,  to  give  immediate  rise  to  insa- 
nity, by  its  diredt  action  upon  it. 

Where  the  tendency  of  a cause  is  so  obvious, 
authority  can  scarcely  be  wanting  to  prove  the 

existence 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


83 


existence  of  its  effe6ls  ; if  it  were,  instances 
might  be  adduced  in  great  abundance.  Authors, 
indeed,  are  universally  agreed,  from  Galen  down 
to  those  of  the  present  day,  about  the  pernicious 
influence  of  this  enervating  indulgence,  and  its 
strong  propensity  to  generate  the  very  worst,  and 
• most  formidable  kinds  of  insanity.  Nor  is  the 
injurious  power  it  derives  from  its  immediate 
operation  upon  the  brain,  perhaps,  less  conside- 
rable ; and  it  is  certainly  more  direct,  and  sudden  ; 
than  that  which  it  owes  to  its  tendency  to  pro- 
duce debility,  regret,  disappointment,  anxiety, 
and  remorse.  It  has  frequently  been  known  to 
occasion  speedy,  and  even  instant  insanity. 
ScHENCKius"'  relates  a case  from  Jacchinus,  of 
phrenitic  insanity  which  was  speedily  brought  on 
by  this  cause  ; and  Hoffman* * * * §  relates,  from  Fo- 
PiESTus  and  Henricus  ab  Heer,  two  other  cases 
of  a similar  nature. 

6.  A deficiency  of  nourishment,  from  whatever 
cause,  at  the  same  time  that  it  has  the  common 
debilitating  agency  of  profuse  evacuations,  not  only 
deprives  the  body  of  a due  supply ; which,  as  it 
may  be  abundantly  furnished,  during  the  exist- 
ence of  such  evacuation,  may  in  some  degree  di- 

Obs.  Med.  Rar.  lib.  i.  Obs,  3,  p.  133, 

* Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  iv.  Part  iv.  cap.  viii.  § 15.  Operum 

tom.  iii.  p.  254  et  De  Mentis  Morbis,  ex  Morbosa  Sanguinis 

Circulatione  ortis.  Supplem.  Secnnd.  Part  Secund.  p.  334, 

§ 11,  et  p.  336,  § l6. 


C2 


minish 


84 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


iTiinlsh  their  bad  efFe61s ; but  weakens,  and  irr-^ 
jures,  in  a peculiar  manner,  the  stomach  and 
other  organs  of  digestion  and  chylifieation,  which 
are  the  immediate  sources,  and  whose  debility 
seems  to  be  the  principal  cause,  of  hypochondria- 
cal melancholy'’,  the  fruitful  parent  of  almost 
every  species  of  insanity  : nor  is  it  merely  of  it-, 
self  a powerful  agent  in  the  production  both  of 
notional  and  ideal  delusion,  by  inducing  debility 
in  its  highest,  and  worst,  degree,  and  all  its  tor- 
menting consequences,  languor,  spasm,  pain,  de- 
jedlion,  anxiety,  and  fearful  apprehension  ; but  it 
not  uncommonly  brings  others  in  its  train  : since, 
it  can  seldom  fail  to  be  accompanied  with  a variety 
of  those  distressing  passions  which  must  naturally 
originate  from  extreme  poverty,  accidental  mis- 
fortune, cruel  usage,  or  some  painful,  or  perhaps 
hopeless,  bodily  disease,  which  either  withhold 
the  means  of  good  and  wholesome  nourishment, 
or  if  they  do  not  withhold  them,  render  it  im- 
possible  to  use  them  in  a sufficient  quantity,  or, 
wfien  they  are  plentifully  taken,  so  impede  diges- 
tion, and  chyliheation,  as  to  defraud  the  body  of 
its  due  proportion  of  daily  refreshment,  and  re- 
pair. 


y Hoffmanni  Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  iii.  ^ I,  cap.  ix.  § 21, 
Oper.  tom.  i.  p.  344.  Hoffmanni  Dissert.  Medic,  de  prseci- 
pno  Studiosonim  Morbo,  ejusejue  genuinis  Causis.  Operum. 
Supplem.  Second.  Part.  Second,  p.  243,  § 4.  Zacut.  I.u- 
siT.  Qper.  tom.  i.  p.  82,  Hist.  43. 


7.  As 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


85 


7.  As  the  phrcnitis,  small-pox  accompanied 
Vvitli  delirium,  and  other  delirious  fevers,  give 
rise  to  insanity  by  their  immediate  influence  upon 
tlie  brain,  so  fevers  of  whatever  kind,  ivkich  have 
continued  long,  have  frequently  recurred,  have 
terminated  ivith  an  imperfedl  crisis,  or  have  not 
been  treated  with  proper  dilution,  are  often  found 
to  be  produ61ive  of  insanity  by  means  of  the  in- 
firm tones,  debility  and  obstrudlion  of  the  sto- 
mach and  bowels,  and  other  diseases  of  the  natu- 
ral, and  animal  fumHions,  wliich  they  leave  be- 
fiind  them,  or  give  occasion  to  ; and  perhaps  by 
injuring  the  brain  itself  in  some  degree,  both  by 
the  violence  of  the  fever,  and  by  the  subsequent 
debility,  so  as  to  render  its  vessels  unusually  sus- 
ceptible of  an  increase  of  a61ion,  and  apt  to  pro- 
duce a preternatural  accumulation  of  blood  within 
the  cranium. 

We  are  informed  by  Sydenham,  that  he  fre- 
quently met  with  mania  which  had  been  the  off- 
spring of  long  continued  intermittents,  as  well  of 
spring  tertians,  as,  which  more  commonly  hap- 
pened, of  autumnal  quartans ; and  that  the  lat- 
ter, in  particular,  was  so  far  from  requiring  eva- 
cuations, of  any  kind,  that  the  mere  administra- 
tion of  the  mildest  clyster,  consisting  of  nothing 
more  than  milk  and  sugar,  even  when  the  pa- 
tient was  in  a convalescent  state,  would  immedi- 
ately renew  the  disorder^ 


* Oper.  Univers.  p.  84,  101 — 103. 
G 3 


Though 


86 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


Though  insanity  of  this  sort  seems  to  be  much 
less  frequent  now  than  it  was  in  Sydenham’s 
time;  owing,  probably,  totiie  very  free  use  of  eva- 
cuants  in  those  days,  and  the  timid  exhibition, 
or  total  neglecSt,  of  the  Peruvian  bark  ; a prac- 
tice which  was  reprobated  by  that  sagacious  phv- 
sician,  and  has  now  happily  given  way  to  a bet- 
ter, and,  indeed,  almost  infallible  method  of  cure  ; 
yet  insanity  from  this  cause  still  occurs  now  and 
then ; and  though  it  is  not  at  present  so  intole- 
rant of  all  evacuations  as  it  seems  then  to  have 
been  ; and  will  not  only  bear,  but  requires,  their 
prudent  and  moderate  use  ; yet  is  it  principally 
to  be  treated,  when  its  violence  is  somewhat 
abated,  with  nourishing  diet,  and  a plentiful  use 
of  the  bark. 

Bonetus''  gives  the  history  of  a case  of  phre- 
nitic  insanity  which  had  succeeded  an  acute  fever 
unaccompanied  with  delirium. 

Hoffman  mentions  insanity  of  every  species 
as  frequently  occurring  after  most  sorts  of  acute 
fevers,  and  especially  if  they  have  been  protracted 
to  a great  length : and  accounts  for  this  circum- 
stance from  the  dissipation  of  the  animal  spirits 
by  the  violent,  and  long  continued,  febrile  heat, 
and  watching  ; from  a defeCt  in  their  secretion 
in  consequence  of  the  injury  done  to  the  fibrous 
texture  of  the  brain  ; and,  in  short,  from  a.di- 


• Scpulchret.  tom,  i.  p.  205,  Obs.  1. 


minution 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


87 


Tuirmtlon  of  the  tone  of  the  vessels  and  fibres  of 
the  brain,  and  of  the  whole  animal  system*’. 
He  also  relates  a case  of  insanity,  succeeding  a 
tertian  fever,  every  paroxysm  of  which  had  been 
accompanied  with  a slight  delirium':  and  consi- 
ders hypochondriacal  melancholy  as  no  uncom- 
mon consequence  of  intermittents  ; but,  unfortu- 
nately, attributes  this  circumstance  to  their  being 
cured  by  the  Peruvian  bark, — “ according  to  Sy- 
denham’s method  without  the  intervention  of 
any  purging  medicine  to  carry  off  the  remains  of 
the  remedy,  as^well  as  of  the  disease'*.” 

8.  And  of  the  lono;  and  enervatiinr  train  of 
evils  arising  from  indigestion,  obstru6iion,  and 
defeclive  tones  of  every  kind,  all,  or  most,  are, 
sooner  or  later,  and  in  a greater  or  less  degree 
in  proportion  to  the  original  firmness,  or  deli- 
cacy, of  the  natural  constitution,  and  the  degree 
of  the  injuring  cause,  the  necessary  and  ine- 
vitable consequences  of  an  hiaflive  and  sedentan/ 
life.  It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  insanity  of 
some  species,  or  other,  should  often  close  the 
painful,  and  gloomy  procession. 


Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  iv.  Part  iv.  cap.  viii.  § IS,  Oper. 
tom.  iii.  p.  254. 

' Consult,  et  Respons.  Med.  Caut.  I,  § 1,  Cas.  xxxvi. 
Oper.  tom.  iv.  p.  62. 

^ De  vera  Morbi  Hypochondriaci  Sede,  Indole,  ac  Curatione, 
§ 14,  Oper.  Supplem.  Secnnd.  Part.  Secund.  p.  231. 

G 4 


How 


88’ 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


How  all  these  affli6iing  evils  are  the  natural, 
and  most  of  them  the  necessary,  offspring,  of 
of  an  inaclive  and  sedentary  life,  will  but  too 
plainly  appear,  if  we  consider  the  known  effedls 
of  exercise,  in  its  various  degrees,  upon  the  hu- 
man body. 

As  some  degree  of  motion,  and  exercise,  seems 
almost  essential  to  the  very  being  of  the  body, 
as  an  ac'dive,  and  animated  machine ; go  a con- 
siderable degree  of  them,  greater  or  less  in  dif- 
ferent ages,  sexes,  and  constitutions,  is  abso- 
lutely requisite  to  its  well-being. 

In  early  youth,  while  the  texture  of  the  fibres 
is  yet  tender,  their  strength  infirm,  and  the  ner- 
vous system  delicately  irritable,  exercise  should 
be  a61ive,  and  lively,  but  never  violent ; and, 
though  not  incessant,  it  should  be  interrupted 
with  but  short  interval's,  and  those  rarely  of  per- 
fect inaction  ; excepting  during  the  necessary  re- 
freshment of  sleep,  when  it  may  be  ])rotraCled  to 
a greater  length  in  the  tender  ages  of  infancy,  and 
youth,  than  at  any  other  period  of  life,  excepting 
extreme  olcj  age. 

In  tlie  prime  of  life,  when  the  body  is  ar- 
rived at  its  perfedt  vigour,  and  maturity ; when 
the  texture  of  the  fibres  is  become  more  compact, 
and  their  strength  robust ; when  the  nervous  sys- 
tem, though  si.fficiently  animated,  and  suscep- 
tible, is  not  too  delicately  irritable ; exercise 
should  be  more  vigorous  ; and  though  it  will  ad- 
mit 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


sg 


init  of  longer  interruptions  of  a less  a(9"ipe  state, 
\ve  should  carefully  guard  against  very  long,  or 
very  frequent  intermissions  of  moderate,  and  con- 
tinued motion  ; and  against  all  intemperate  in- 
dulgence of  repose  in  bed,  whether  sleeping,  or 
waking. 

As  old  age  advances,  and  the  fibres  become  hard, 
inflexible,  and  inactive ; the  nervous  system  less 
irritable  ; and  the  pow'ers  of  life  are  approaching 
to  decay  ; exercise  should  be  less  vigorous,  less 
livclv,  and  less  persevering  ; and  should  be  inter- 
rupted with  very  frequent,  but  not  with  very  long 
intervals  of  rest ; and  sleep,  if  happily  a ready 
visitant,  should  not  be  treated  with  negledl,  but 
indulged  so  long  as  shall  be  found  conducive  to 
refreshment ; and  where  sleep  is  less  liberal  of 
its  favours,  the  repose  of  bed,  while  it  continues 
easy  and  refreshing,  should  not  be  too  hastily 
quitted. 

Females,  being  of  a more  lax,  infirm,  and  ir- 
ritable habit  than  the  other  sex,  require  more 
gentle,  and  less  fatiguing  exercise ; as  do  also 
men  of  delicate,  enervated,  and  irritable  con- 
stitutions, than  men  of  robust  fibres,  and  an 
unenfeebled  nervous  system.  On  the  other  hand, 
men  of  strong  and  vigorous  constitutions  receive 
less  injury  from  temporary  interruptions  of  exer- 
cise, than  the  delicate  and  infirm. 

The  general  effe6f  of  exercise  of  all  degrees, 
and  upon  all  constitutions,  is  immediately  to 

quicken, 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY, 


90 

quicken,  and  invigorate  the  circulation.  This 
it  does  by  means  of  the  acdion  of  the  muscles, 
which,  when  in  a state  of  contradlion,  not  only 
press  upon  the  larger  neighbouring  veins,  and 
variously  squeeze  and  agitate  them  by  the  mo- 
tions of  the  body  and  limbs,  but  force  out  the 
blood  diffused  through  tlieir  own  substance  into 
the  veins  going  from  them  ; which  is  again  sup- 
plied by  the  arteries  during  their  relaxation,  and 
again  forced  into  the  larger  veins  by  the  repetition 
of  their  contraction.  The  blood  being,  by  these 
means,  propelled  more  rapidly  through  the  ve- 
nous system,  is  returned  in  greater  quantity  than 
in  a state  of  rest,  in  a given  time,  to  the  heart ; 
whose  right  auricle,  and  ventricle,  being  liiled 
more  speedily,  and  more  distended,  contraCl 
Math  greater  vigour,  and  at  shorter  intervals ; 
produce  the  same  change  in  the  aCtion  of  the  left 
auricle  and  ventricle;  M'hence  the  blood  is  sent 
with  greater  frequency,  celerity,  and  force,  through 
the  large  arteries ; and  the  aClion  of  the  smal- 
ler ones,  by  vdiatever  power  the  circulation  is 
carried  through  them,  is  accelerated,  in  pro- 
portion as  a larger  than  ordinary  supply,  de- 
manding a quicker  passage,  stimulates  them 
more  urgently  to  aClion.  It  is  also  a ge- 
neral effeCl  of.  exercise,  to  promote,  by  this  in- 
crease of  the  circulation,  the  generation  of  ani- 
mal heat ; to  keep  the  whole  system  of  vessels 
aClive  and  permeable ; to  quicken  respiration  ; 

and 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  Q1 

and  to  Increase  the  excretion  of  perspirable  matter 
fi'om  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  and  of  the  skin. 

Exercise  may  be  considered  as  of  three  degrees, 
— violent, — moderate, — and  defedf ive. 

Violent  exercise  may  be  injurious  in  two  ways; 
either  by  an  excess  in  degree,  or  by  an  excess  in 
duration. 

Violent  exercise  of  every  kind  has  a tendenev 
to  injure  health.  It  occasions  too  much  labour  of 
the  mucles,  of  the  heart,  and  of  the  whole  vascit- 
lar  system  ; too  great  exertions,  and  waste  of 
power,  of  the  nervous  system  ; and  too  violent 
attrition,  and  abrasion,  and  too  great  rigidity  of 
the  solids ; it  induces  too  firm  a texture  of  the 
blood ; dissipates  its  fluid  parts  by  immoderate 
perspiration  ; tends  to  generate  the  rigid,  athle- 
tic, and  inflammatory  tones ; and,  when  exces- 
sive, disturbs  all  the  secretions,  and  excretions ; 
impedes  digestion,  and  nourishment ; excites 
burning  heat ; produces  fevers,  inflammations, 
quinsies,  deflu6bons,  pleurisies,  hemorrhages,  con- 
sumptions, incurable  debility  from  over- exertion, 
and  a variety  of  other  considerable,  and  dangerous 
disorders. 

Exercise  which  is  excessive  in  degree  can  con- 
sist only  in  momentary,  or  at  most  In  no  very 
long  continued  exertions  ; as  in  violent  efforts  of 
strength,  or  speed,  in  lifting,  carrying,  wrest- 
ling, cricket- playing,  jumping,  running,  or  the 
like ; which  tend  to  occasion  ruptures,  hemorr- 
hages. 


92 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


hages,  fevers,  inflammations,  and  other  imme- 
diate, and  violent  disorders  ; as  well  as  greatly 
to  disturb  all  the  natural  fun^ions,  and  give  rise 
to  such  changes,  as  sometimes  lay  the  foundation 
of  very  troublesome  chronic  diseases. 

The  excessive  in  duration  has  less  violent  effetSls 
in  proportion  as  it  recedes  from  the  excessive  in 
degree.  It  tends  to  produce  more  gradual  changes 
in  the  system,  and  rather  to  injure  by  exhausting, 
a«d  wearing  out,  the  body,  inducing  too  early  ri- 
gidity, and  the  other  symptoms  of  premature 
old  age,  than  by  causing  those  sudden,  and 
alarming  cffccls,  which  are  the  common  conse- 
quences of  sucii  exercise  as  is  pursued  with  an  ex- 
cess of  eagerness,  and  impetuosity,  and  greatly 
errs  in  degree. 

Moderate  exercise  is,  in  its  effecl  upon  the 
body,  more  benign  and  salutary,  and  tends  as 
powerfully  to  promote  health,  and  prolong  life, 
as  violent  exercise  tends  to  injure  the  one,  and  to 
shorten  tlie  other.  It  produces  a due  degree  of 
celerity,  and  vigour,  of  cireulatipn  ; keeps  the 
whole  vascular  system  alive  and  permeable,  with- 
out exciting  too  great  impetuosity  of  adlion,  or 
pushing  any  of  the  fluids  into  vessels  which  ought 
not  to  receive  them  ; generates  temperate  heat  ; 
promotes  the  whole  operation  of  digestion — the 
effusion  of  the  gastric  fluid  into  the  stomach — 
the  adfion  of  the  stomach  and  surrounding  parts 
Vpon  the  aliment — the  propulsion  of  the  aliment 

I into 


CAUSES  OF  I]!?SANITY. 


95 

into  the  intestines — the  plentiful  efflux  of  bile, 
and  of  the  pancreatic  and  intestinal  fluids — the 
ready  performance  of  the  peristaltic  motion — the 
absorption  of  chyle  by  the  Unseals — and  the  speedy 
expulsion,  by  stool,  of  the  feculent,  and  excre- 
mentitious  matter,  which,  by  delay,  might  con- 
taminate the  chyle  with  less  pure,  and  less  nou- 
rishing particles.  The  blood,  thus  impregnated 
with  recent,  and  wholesome  chyle,  is  carried  by 
moderate  exercise,  in  a gentle,  steady,  and  un- 
ceasing current,  as  well  through  the  whole  system 
of  capillary,  as  through  the  larger  arteries  ; and 
not  only  the  particles  adapted  to  the  purpose  of 
each  secretion  are  regularly,  and  uniformly  con- 
veyed to  the  organs,  and  vessels,  destined  for  the 
offices  of  secreting,  and  colle6tir,g  them  into  their 
proper  receptacles  ; but  such  as,  having  performed 
their  parts  in  the  animal  economy,  are  now  be- 
come useless,  or  injurious,  and  recrementitiouS, 
are  readily,  and  speedily,  carried  off,  in  the  form 
of  urine  by  the  kidneys,  and  in  that  of  sensible, 
and  insensible  perspiration,  and  sensible  phlogis- 
ton, by  the  lungs,  and  by  the  whole  surface  of 
the  body ; and  every  part  of  the  body  is  at  the 
same  time  plentifully  nourished;  the  incessant 
waste  of  that  on  which  the  nervous  power  depends 
is  perpetually  supplied  ; and  the  firm,  healthful, 
and  vigorous  tones,  are  generated. — In  a word, 
every  vital,  natural,  and  animal  a6Hon,  is  per- 
formed with  facility,  and  efredt ; and  the  man  en- 
joys, 


94 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


joys,  SO  far  as  bodily  licalth  can  secure  enjoy- 
joyment, — if  he  be  constitutionally  healthful,  and 
has  entered  upon  a course  of  exercise  before  his 
health  liiis  by  any  means  been  essentially  injured, 
and  it  to  moderate  exercise  be  joined  regularity, 
and  temperance, — together  with  good  and  perfedl 
health,  a proportional  degree  of  perfeeftion  of  sen- 
satjon,  and  voluntary  motion,  of  the  mental  pow- 
ers of  bodily  comfort,  and  of  intelle61ual  serenity. 

But  all  these  invaluable  blessings  are  thrown 
away  by  the  indolent,  and  inaclive,  whose  un- 
happy, and  often  inexcusable,  defedl  of  exercise, 
is  the  source  of  not  less  pernicious,  though,  for 
the  most  part,  less  sudden,  and  alarming  evils, 
than  its  violence,  and  excess. 

Defect:  of  exercise,  by  withholding  the  com- 
pressing, agitating,  and  propelling,  acBon  of  the 
muscles,  both  on  capillary,  and  on  the  large  ves- 
sels, returns  the  blood  less  copiously  to  the  heart, 
stimulates  that  organ  less  forcibly  to  contra6tion, 
renders  it  incapable  of  projedling  the  blood  with 
vigour,  and  in  plenty,  to  the  capillary  vessels, 
which,  while  the  heart  thus  a61s  with  too  little 
power  to  ensure  a passage  into  their  beginning 
ramifications,  and  to  urge  them  into  contraclions, 
oppose  to  its  enfeebled  efforts  the  blood  alreadv 

« V 

stagnating  in  them,  and  increasing  the  resistance 
to  its  influence,  for  want  of  the  propelling  aid 
of  muscular  a6tion.  The  force,  and  extent, 
of  the  circulation,  being  thus  diminished,  tlie 

fluids 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


95 


fluids  stagnate,  and  degenerate,  the  blood  be- 
comes thick,  black,  and  glutinous,  or,  in  great 
degrees  of  degeneracy,  thin,  pale,  and  watry,  and 
in  both  cases  less  fit  for  secretion.,  the  capillary 
vessels  become  less  permeable,  and  some  per- 
haps  are  obliterated ; digestion  languishes ; nou- 
rishment is  ill  prepared,  and  ill  applied  ; the  body 
is  emaciated,  or  is  bloated  with  unhealthy  cor- 
pulency, or  deluged,  and  swollen,  with  watry 
fluids ; the  secretions,  and  excretions,  languish, 
or  are  disturbed  ; heat  is  diminished ; the  tone.s 
become  lax,  infirm,  and  nervous  ; and  the  man 
is  sunk  in  sloth  and  indolence,  depressed  with 
feebleness,  and  languor,  teazed  w'ith  exquisite 
irritability,  or  tormented  with  a variety  of  gouty, 
rheumatic,  spasmodic,  and  other  pains.  They 
who  have  long  indulged  in  inadlion,  are  some- 
times so  weakened  by  it,  as  scarcely  to  be  capable 
of  making  use  of  a degree  of  exercise,  which, 
had  it  never  been  intermitted,  would  have  pre- 
served that  health,  to  the  regaining  of  which  it 
can  now,  perhaps,  either  never  be  applied,  or  to 
which,  if  fortunately  it  can  be  applied,  there 
is  little  room  to  hope  that  it  can  ever  restore 
its  original  firmness,  and  perfedlion.  How  com- 
monly do  we  see  pei*sons  who  have  long  been 
habituated  to  a sedentary  life,  greatly  disordered 
even  by  moderate  exercise.  The  heart,  weak- 
ened and  rendered  more  irritable,  with  the  rest 
of  the  body,  is  incapable  of  sustaining  the 

unusual 


9(5 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


unusual  afflux  of  blood  occasioned  by  a little 
traordinary  muscular  motion,  and  Is  pei'petually 
irritated  Into  convulsive,  but  too  feeble,-  and  in- 
effedlual  contra611ons ; the  lungs,  unaccustomed 
to  the  jxissage  of  so  copious  a stream  of  blood 
through  them,  expand  with  labour,  and  trans- 
mit it  with  difficulty.  Such  persons,  therefore, 
on  using  exercise,  and  especially  that  of  walking, 
breathe  short,  and  with  much  difficulty,  and 
sometimes  with  a sense  of  oppression  little  short 
of  suffocation;  their  hearts  palpitate;  and  tliey 
are  often  unable  to  proceed  without  immediate 
danger  of  fainting.  These  painful  0^6613  of  ex« 
ercise  are  so  much  the  greater,  if  to  the  debi- 
litating influence  of  inadlion,  has  been  united 
a naturally  delicate  constitution,  or  some  such  dis- 
order as  has  a dire6l  tendency  to  produce  debi- 
lity, or  to  obstruct;  the  regular  action  of  the 
heart,  or  to  prevent  the  free  passage  of  the  blood 
through  the  lungs. 

But  no  where  are  the  injurious  consequences 
of  a defed  of  exercise  more  considerable,  than 
in  that  part  of  the  animal  economy,  which,  being 
destined  to  the  office  of  preparing  the  daily  re- 
freshment, and  nourishment,  of  tlie  body,  is  the 
very  fountain  of  life,  health,  and  vigour;  and  can- 
not be  disordered  but  the  whole  machine  must 
suffer.  For  indigestion,  flatulency,  acidity,  and 
an  endless  variety  of  other  disorders  of  the  first 
passages,  and  of  the  parts  connedfed  with  them. 


are 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


07 

Hre  the  natural  offspring  of  inacfion  ; and  while 
they  add  to  the  luimcrous  progeny  of  ills  of  :vhich 
it  is  the  parent,  they  nourish,  and  strengthen, 
most  of  the  other  complaints  which  are  derived 
from  the  same  origin. 

The  means  by  which  a defe61  of  exercise  im- 
pedes the  process  of  digestion  are  as  various  as 
those  by  which  moderate  motion  jiromotcs  it ; 
and  are,  indeed,  exadfly  the  reverse.  It  renders 
the  adion  of  the  stomach,  and  intestines,  weak 
and  languid  ; — it  debases  the  qualities  of  the  gas- 
tric, pancreatic,  and  intestinal  fluids,  and  of  the 
bile  ; — and  it  obstrudls  the  affusion,  and  due  mix- 
ture with  our  aliment,  of  these  pov/crful,  and  ne- 
cessary agents,  in  its  digestion,  and  assimilation. 

Defe6l  of  exercise  weakens  the  stomach,  and 
intestines,  by  preventing  the  gentle  concussion, 
and  agitation,  which  they  would  receive — from 
the  moderate  motion  of  the  body  in  general ; 
from  the  increased  a61ion  in  particular  of  the 
muscles  of  the  belly,  and  ot  those  concerned  in 
respiration  ; and  from  the  stronger  pulsation  of 
the  arteiics  through  the  whole  vascular  system, 
which  while  it  would  invigorate  their  tone  by  invi- 
gorating the  whole  animal  machine,  would  acT, 
within  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen,  as  a stimulating 
cause  immediately  upon  the  bowels  themselves. 
It  also  weakens  the  stomach,  and  intestines,  by 
variously  injuring  the  proper  nourishment,  les- 
sening the  excitement,  lowering  the  nervous 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


98 

power,  and  impairing  the  tones,  of  tlie  wliolcr 
body.  In  a word,  a defecl  of  exercise  weakens 
the  a61ion  of  all  the  instruments  of  digestion,  by 
diminishing  the  agitation,  and  stimiiliis,  of  ex- 
trinsic causes,  and  at  the  same  time  enfeebling 
their  healthful  tones,  and  lessening  their  inherent 


powei's. 

By  the  same  means  an  indolent,  and  sedentaiy 
life,  obstriuds  the  affusion,  and  debases  the  quali- 
ties, of  the  gastric  and  jiancreatic  juices,  of  the 
bile,  and  of  the  fluid  of  the  intestines.  Inac- 
tion diminishes  all  the  secretions,  and  of  course 


prevents  a sufficient  supply  of  these  invaluable 
fluids,  so  indispensably  requisite  to  good  diges- 


tion ; and  while  it  hinders  this  important  process 
by  defrauding  it  of  such  powerful  agents,  and  by 
diminishing  the  tones  of  the  stomach,  and  intes- 
tines, and  thus  injures  the  chyle  in  its  first  pre- 
paration ; the  enfeebled  tone  of  the  vascular  sys- 
tem renders  it  incapable  of  correi51ing  the  errors 
of  the  first  concoc'dion,  of  elaborating  a crude  chyle 
into  good  and  healthful  blood,  or  of  separating 
from  it,  by  secretion,  fluids  perfeel  in  their  kind. 

The  natural  and  unavoidable  consequences  of 
these  primary  deviations  »:i  th.e  animal  economy 


arisino;  from  a scdcntaiA  hfe, — of  the  weakened 
toncof  the  iustrumentsofdigcstionon  theone  hand; 
and  of  the  scanty  supply,  and  degenerate  condition, 
of  the  fluids  concerned  in  this  important  process, 
on  the  other; — arc,  that  the  aliment,  remaining 

long 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


99 


long  in  the  stomach,  passing  slowly  through  the 
cavity  of  the  intestines,  and  being  deprived,  in  a 
great  measure,  of  the  necessary  aid  of  such  pow- 
erful solvents,  and  corre6lors,  will  undergo,  in 
])roportion  to  the  deficiency,  such  spontaneous 
changes  as  it  would,  in  the  same  degree  of  warmth, 
moisture,  and  confinement,  out  of  the  body ; and, 
becoming  acid,  rancid,  or  putrid,  but  particularly 
acid,  in  a greater  or  less  degree  according  to  the  na- 
ture of  the  aliment  and  the  degree  of  debility,  will, 
while  it  supplies  the  system  w'ith  a less  perfe6f, 
and  less  wholesome  chyle,  produce  by  its  flatu- 
lency, and  acrimony,  frequent  erudlations,  of  va- 
rious kinds,  loss  of  appetite,  nausea,  unnatural 
cravings,  sharp  pains,  and  sometimes  enormous 
distentions  of  the  stomach  and  intestines,  w’hicli 
wall  occasionally  find  a little  relief  by  the  evacua- 
tion of  wind,  or  the  termination  of  a great  degree 
of  costiveness,  at  uncertain  intervals,  in  sponta- 
neous purging  ; or  be  prolonged,  and  aggravated, 
by  a costiveness  so  obstinate,  and  so  total  an  in- 
capacity of  these  organs  to  evacuate  the  offensive 
matter,  as  rarely  to  admit  even  of  that  temporary 
relief,  fn  this  situation  the  evil  increases ; the 
confined  matter  will  become  more  acrimonious, 
will  generate  unceasing  supplies  of  flatus  which  can 
neither  be-  expelled,  nor  subdued,  and  together 
with  all  the  other  enfeebling  and  painful  effeds 
of  a sedentary  life,  the  distressing  symptoms  of 

it  indi- 


100 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


indigestion  will  receive,  daily,  accumulated,  and 
reciprocal  increase,  as  long  at  least  as  the  in- 
action to  which  tliey  owe  their  origin  continues: 
this  disordered  state  of  the  bowels  increasing  the 
weakness  of  digestion,  the  increased  weakness 
of  digestion  rendering  the  chyle  still  more 
crude,  the  greater  crudity  of  the  chyle  producing 
less  nutritious  blood,  less  nutritious  blood  adding 
to  the  weakness  of  the  tones,  and  the  growing 
weakness  of  the  tones  yet  farther  debasing  the 
fluids  secreted,  and  both  diredlly,  and  indiredlly, 
rendering  the  digestion  less  jjerfecl,  and  still  multi- 
plying, and  aggravating,  all  its  painful,  contami- 
nating, and  debilitating  consequences. 

Nor  does  the  mischief  end  here.  These, 
though  sufficiently  grievous,  are  not  the  only 
evils  which  these  and  the  neighbouring  parts  ex- 
perience, from  the  want  of  an  uninterrupted  se- 
ries of  gentle  exercise,  and  agitation.  Such  is 
the  nature,  and  condition,  of  that  part  of  the 
vascular  system  which  is  distributed  through  the 
several  organs  concerned  in  the  great  business  of 
digestion,  and  returns  the  blood  from  the  intes- 
tines, spleen,  pancreas,  and  omentum,  to  the  li- 
ver, that  being  little  assisted  by  any  immediate 
muscular  aelion  in  these  soft  parts  themselves,  of 
which  the  intestines  alone  seem  to  possess  any, 
the  passage  of  the  blood  through  them,  its  con- 
veyance to  the  vena  portarum,  and  distribution 

to 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


iOi 


to  every  conceivable  point  of  so  large  a substance, 
for  the  secretion  of  the  bile,  by  veins  only,  which, 
whatever  power  of  action  they  may  possess  them- 
selves, can  receive  no  aid  from  the  aedion  of  the 
heart,  are  at  best  but  slow,  and  depend,  in  a great 
measure,  even  for  that  slow  progression,  on  the 
a6lion  of  respiration,  the  various  succussions,  and 
agitations,  of  the  contents  ot  the  belly,  and 
the  perpetual  employment  ot  the  abdominal  mus- 
cles, during  motion,  and  exercise.  This  natu- 
rally slow  and  languid  progression  must,  there- 
fore, in  a long  course  of  inaclion,  almost  cease  ; 
and  the  blood  which  will  continue  to  be  sent  in 
as  large,  or  nearly  as  large  a quantity,  as  usual, 
to  these  parts,  by  the  heart,  stagnating,  and  ac- 
cumulating, will  not  only  increase  the  mischiefs 
already  mentioned,  but  conspire  with  them  to 
produce  every  kind  of  obstruedion,  and  every  dis- 
order arising  from  this  cause,  of  which  they  are 
susceptible ; as  indiiiations,  and  enlargements, 
of  the  mesenteric  glands,  a scirrhous  state  of  the 
pancreas,  spleen,  omentum,  and  liver,  stones 
in  the  gall-bladder  and  kidneys,  irritation,  heat, 
pain,  inflammation,  gangrenes,  and  abscesses, 
in  the  stomach,  intestines,  liver,  and  other  sur- 
rounding parts  liable  to  be  ai'iedlcd  by  this  accu- 
mulation of  blood  in  the  veins  connedled  with 
the  vena  portarum : and  will  at  the  same  time 
occasion  other  disorders  which  are  the  more  im- 
mediate, and  peculiar,  eflec^ts  of  such  accumu- 

II 3 lation, 


102 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


Jalion,  as  the  piles,  morbus  niger'  of  Hippo- 
crates, and  all  the  troublesome,  dangerous, 
and  sometimes  fatal  complaints,  which  may  arise 
from  the  distention,  or  rupture,  of  the  veins  within 
the  cavity  of  the  belly. 

Flatulency,  indigestion,  and  acidity,  the  first 
signs  of  injury  in  the  stomach  and  intestines,  are 
essential  symptoms  of  the  hypochondriacal  dis- 
ease ; which,  when  it  rises  to  any  very  high  de- 
gree, is  so  commonly  accompanied  with  symp- 
toms of  insanity,  that  one  of  its  species  has  ge- 
nerally been  known  by  the  denomination  of  hy- 
pochondriacal melancholy . 

If  the  damp,  impure,  and  stagnating  air,  of 
woods  and  marshes,  or  of  any  place  in  a low  and 
moist  situation,  as  is  asserted  by  Boeriiaave^, 
and  his  commentator' ; if  noxious,  and  bitumi- 
nous 


® See  a description  of  this  disorder,  by  Hippocrates,  or 
whoever  was  the  author,  in  the  treatise  De  Morbis,  inserted 
among  his  works  ; book  the  second. — Hippocr.  Oper.  p.  486. 
50. — See  also  above,  p.  l6,  note  (ip).— Also,  " A Letter  from 
Dr,  Tissot  to  Dr.  Zimmerman,  on  the  Morbus  Niger/’ 
which  contains  some  cases  of  this  disorder. 

^ “ Aer  stagnans,  palustris,  umbrosus. — Jph.  ^ 1109. 

* “ Prxtcrca  plurima  signa  § 10p4  recensita,  quae  atrabilia- 
riam  sanguinis  cncochymiam  denotant,  observantur  in  illis  ho- 

A ^ 

niinibus,  qui  paludosa  et  depressa  loca  incolunt.  Color  enina 
pallidus,  flavescens,  maculae  in  cute,  torpor  ad  rnotus,  moesti- 
tia,  &c,  satis  comnutnia  sunt  talibus,  uti  in  integris  militmn 
cohortibus  observatur,  qui  antea  sanissimi  coguntur  in  simili- 

bus 


CAUSES  OF  IXSANITY. 


103 


rious  vapours  of  this  sort,  and  mineral  exhalations 
from  neighbouring  mines,  which  Lorry''  ima- 
gines may  be  one  cause  why  nervous  melancholy 
is  so  peculiarly  familiar  in  Britain  ; or  it  air  im- 
pregnated with  any  other  kind  ot  effluvia,  as  that 
of  populous  cities,  contaminated,  and  rendered 
less  fit  for  the  purposes  of  respiration,  and  tlie 
well-being  of  animal  life,  by  the  breath,  and 
other  unwholesome  effluvia  ot  men,  and  brutes, 
by  putrefadlion,  tire,  and  an  immense  variety 
of  other  noxious  va[)ours,  and  vitiating  causes  ; 
-—if  these,  and  such  like,  conditions  of  the  air, 
have  a tendency  to  j)roduce  insanity,  they  must 
operate,  like  many  of  the  other  causes  enume- 
rated under  this  general  division,  by  injuring  the 

bus  locis  statlonem  figevc,” — Van  Switten  Comment,  in 
§ llOS,  tom.  iii.  p,  505. 

“ Moreover  many  of  the  appecirnncrs  emimernted  at  § lOp-l, 
which  point  out  an  atrabilious  ilegeneracy  of  the  blood,  are  ob- 
servable in  such  persons  as  live  in  low  marshy  situations ; in 
whom  a pale  sallow  comjdexion,  blotclics  in  the  skin,  indispo- 
sition to  motion,  dejection,  and  the  like,  are  no  uncommon 
symptoms  j as  has  been  obsi wed  in  whole  regiments  of  soldiers 
who  were  in  perfeft  healtli  when  first  stationed  in  such  places.” 
“ Miuevarum  vicinia,  halitns  e paludibus  noxiis  bitiimino- 
sis,  dum  aerem  inticiunt,  melanchor’se  favent,  quod  forsan  una 
est  e causis  cur  sua  Briraniiis  compelat  melancholia  nervea." — 
De  Melancholia,  tom.  i.  p.  80’. 

“ The  neighbourhood  of  mines,  and  the  noxious  bituminous 
vapours  of  marshes,  contaminate  the  air,  and  favour  the  pro- 
du6liou  of  melancholy  ; which,  perhaps,  is  one  cause  why 
nervous  melancholy  is  so  peculiar  to  the  inhabitants  ot  Britain.” 

II 4 vital 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


1C4 

vital  func9;ions,  gradually  debilitating  the  whole 
svstciTi,  inducing  the  lax,  infirrn,  and  nervous 
tones,  and  rendering  us  liable  to  all  their  nu- 
merous ill  consequences  ; among  which  the  hy- 
pochondriac melancholy  of  the  ancients,  and  va- 
rious other  kinds  of  insanity,  hold  no  inconside- 
rable rank. 

Perhaps  intense  cold,  if  it  ever  contributes 
to  the  production  of  insanity,  does  it,  for  the 
most  part,  in  the  same  remote  way,  by  first  in- 
ducing debility  ; and  rarely,  if  ever,  by  any  sud- 
den, and  immediate  influence  of  the  spasm  excited 
in  the  vessels  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  and 
the  consequent  increased  determination  of  the 
blood  to  the  brain. 

Cold  produces  various  efteCts  upon  the  cutane- 
ous, and  other  superficial  vessels,  according  to  the 
degree  of  its  intensity,  and  the  state  of  the  body 
on  which  it  aCls.  Even  when  it  is  not  very  in- 
tense, it  will  excite  a general  spasm  in  the  capillary 
arteries  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  in  people  of 
lax,  infirm,  and  nervous  tones,  and  unless  coun- 
teracted by  exercise,  even  in  those  of  firm,  vigorous 
and  healthful  tones  ; but  if  the  bodily  warmth 
be  kept  up  by  exercise,  persons  in  health,  and 
vigour,  have  the  circulation  in  the  small  arteries 
ixithcr  stimulated  into  accelerated  nClion,  while 
that  of  tlie  veins,  is  perhaps,  diminished,  as 
seems  jirobable  from  the  swelling  of  the  face  and 
extremities,  and  their  florid,  and  sometimes  even 

livid 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


105 


livid  appearance,  by  a moderately  cold,  if  at  the 
same  time  it  bo  a dry  air.  In  like  manner  intense 
cold,  at  first  increases  the  action  of  the  capillary 
arteries  in  persons  of  firm,  healthful,  and  vigo- 
rous tones ; but  when  exceedingly  intense,  and 
long  endured,  diminishes  their  irritability,  pro- 
duces torpidity,  stagnation,  spasm,  insensibility, 
determination  to  the  internal  parts,  and  among 
others  to  the  head;  and  both  by  its  immediate 
diminution  of  irritability,  and  by  the  accumulation 
of  blood  in  the  brain,  brings  on  drowsiness,  a 
total  abolition  of  nervous  power,  and  of  animal 
life.  It  appears,  therefore,  exceedingly  probable 
that  cold,  under  certain  circumstances,  debilitates, 
by  diminishing  the  nervous  power  on  the  surface 
of  the  body, — that  is,  within  the  sphere  of  its 
immediate  influence, — and  abating  irritability ; 
and  by  exciting  a spasm  in  the  capillary  arteries, 
which,  while  it  tends  to  debilitate  the  vessels 
themselves  thus  spasmodically  affedled, — spasm 
naturally  producing  debility,  and  debility  spasm, 
— induces  general  debility,  by  determining  the 
blood  too  copiously  to  the  brain,  and  disturbing 
the  fundlions  of  the  very  organ  from  whose  re- 
gular procedure  the  whole  body  derives  its  re- 
gular supplies  of  nervous  povvei-. 

Debility  thus  produced,  if  the  cause  be  acci- 
dental, and  either  not  excessively  intense,  or  its 
action  of  no  long  continuance,  may  be  only  tran- 
sient, and  leave  no  lasting  traces  j but  if  it  owe 

its 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


106 

its  existence  to  cold  which  is  permanent,  or 
which  frecjuently  recurs,  and  is  of  an  intense 
degree,  it  may  give  rise  to  the  other  causes  of 
debility,  or  aggravate  the  effects  of  such  as  al- 
ready exist,  and  perhaps  lay  a lasting  foundation 
for  depression  of  spirits,  anxiety,  distress,  and 
insanity  ; as  seems  to  have  been  the  case  of  the 
person,  the  history  of  whose  curious  and  obsti- 
nate disorder,  originating  from  the  violent  action 
of  intense  cold,  has  already  been  quoted  from 
HoFFMANh  His  nervous  system  had  long  been 
injured  by  a variety  of  causes:  he  had  lived  freely 
in  his  youth;  had  sometimes  indulged  in  drinking 
to  excess  ; and  for  several  years  before  he  suffered 
so  severely  from  exposure  to  cold,  had  applied 
so  closely  to  a multiplicity  of  important  business, 
which  had  obliged  him  to  spend  almost  his  whole 
time  in  sitting,  and  thinking,  that  his  health  had 
begun  to  decline,  though  not  so  much  as  to  alarm 
him  with  any  serious  complaints.  In  this  state  of 
incipient  debility,  he  was  exposed  to  intense 
cold ; of  how  long  continuance  is  not  said, 
but  its  first  efiedis  were  violent,  and  alarm- 
ing, and  gave  a shock  to  his  constitution,  which 
he  never  recovered.  Insanity,  indeed,  was  not 
the  immediate  consequence:  but  hypochondri- 

acal symptoms  soon  made  their  appearance  ; and. 


’ Dissertat.  jNIedic.  sistens  AfFeftum  Spasmoclico-Hypochon- 
drtacum  inveteratum.  Oper.  Supplem.  Secund.  Part.  Secund. 
p.  235. 


by 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


107 


by  a continuation  of  his  bodily  inactivity,  and 
mental  application,  aided  by  an  injudicious,  and 
debilitating  medical  treatment,  they  were  so 
much  increased,  in  the  course  of  about  three 
years  after  his  severe  suffering  from  cold,  that, 
in  the  night,  his  sleep  became  extremely  unquiet, 
and  was  disturbed  with  anxious  and  terrifying 
dreams  ; which  were  succeeded  in  the  day-time, 
by  a degree  of  grief,  and  melancholy,  which  he 
was  unable  to  overcome,  or  to  resist.  * 

In  short,  if  there  are  any  other  agents,  not 
here  enumerated,  which  have  a considerable  pro- 
pensity to  weaken  the  tones,  and  induce  languor, 
torpor,  and  debility,  all  such  instruments  of  gra- 
dual change  in  the  body  may  very  properly  be 
reckoned  among  the  remote  causes  of  insanity. 

IV.  Causes  sealed  in,  or  primarily  affeSiing,  some 
particular  parts,  and  giving  rise  to  Insanity, 
either  by  aSing  speedily  upon  the  Brain,  as  by 
Sympathy,  or  Translation ; or  by  operating 
more  sloivly,  and  producing  such  a gradual 
change  in  the  constitution  as  disposes  to  In- 
sanity. 

I . There  appears  not  only  to  be  a general  sym- 
pathy between  every  irritable,  and  sensible  part 
of  the  body,  by  means  of  sensation:  but  also 
certain  less  general  ; though  not  less  important, 
or  less  conspicuous,  sympathies,  which  have 


some 


108 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


vsorne  only  a partial,  and  limited,  and  some  a 
very  extensive,  and  almost  unbounded  influence 
over  the  whole  animal  system  ; often,  and  per- 
haps most  commonly,  by  the  mediation  of  irri- 
tability alone,  but  not  unfrequently  by  the  united, 
operation  of  both  irritability,  and  sensation. 

Sympathies  of  the  former  kind  are  conspicuous 
in  all  cases  of  lively  sensation,  or  violent  pain : 
the  very  extensive,  and  almost  universal  diffusion 
of  ^hose  influence  over  every  sensible  part  of  the 
body,  and  perhaps,  every  fibre  capable  of  mus- 
cular contraction,  is  either  immediate,  and  invo- 
luntary ; as  in  the  general  spasm  of  the  capillary 
arteries,  and  of  the  muscular  fibres,  on  the  ap- 
plication of  cold  to  a particular  part,  or  the  con- 
trary, and  antispasmodic  effeCls,  of  the  partial 
application  of  warmth,  or,  in  the  universal  spasm, 
paleness,  and  excessive  coldness  in  some  cases, 
and  the  great  heat,  flushing,  and  profuse  perspi- 
ration in  others,  of  violent  pain  ; — or,  though 
scarcely  resistible,  is  indirect,  and  by  the  volun- 
tary, or  rather  semivoluntary,  mediation,  of  the 
mind  ; as  in  groaning,  holding  of  the  breath, 
violently  contracting  all  the  voluntary  muscles, 
biting  the  lips,  and  the  like  general  effeCts  of 
pain;  or  it  is  the  natural  result  of  these  efteCls, 
and  of  the  structure  and  functions  of  the  parts, 
such  as  the  bursting  of  blood-vessels,  hernial 
ruptures,  weariness,  debility,  and  sometimes  al- 
most paralytic  state  of  the  muscles,  involuntary 


evacu 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


log 


evacuation  of  urine,  and  stool,  and  in  some  mea- 
sure, perhaps,  increase  of  heat,  and  profuse  sen- 
sible perspiration. 

Of  the  latter  kind  is  the  sympathy  which 
seems  to  subsist  between  every  internal  organ  ot 
the  human  body,  and  almost  every  other  part 
of  that  curious,  and  wonderful,  animated  ma- 
chine. This  may,  possibly,  in  some  instances, 
be,  in  part,  accounted  for,  from  the  vicinity, 
connexion,  and  mechanical  structure,  of  the  parts 
concerned ; as  in  the  mutual  sympathy  between 
the  bladder  and  the  redlum ; between  the  blad- 
der and  the  glans  penis,  when  a stone,  or  ulcer, 
in  the  former,  excites  a sense  of  pain  in  the  latter  ; 
between  the  gall  bladder  and  other  parts  con- 
tained within  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  and  the  sto- 
mach ; between  the  neighbouring  parts  of  the 
same  membrane, — inflammation  spreading  more 
readily  along  the  same  continued  and  uniform 
expansion,  than  to  parts  more  distant,  less  con- 
nected, or  of  a dissimilar  stru6ture  ; between 
the  eyes  and  the  nose, — a strong  light  suddenly 
falling  upon  the  former  often  giving  occasion 
to  sneezing  by  exciting  a sympathetic  sensation 
in  the  latter  ; between  the  Schneiderian  mem- 
brane of  the  nose,  and  its  continuation  in  the 
throat,  windpipe,  and  lungs, — a cold  which  be- 
gins with  a running  in  the  head,  not  uncom- 
• monly  terminating  in  a cough,  and  a defluxion 
upon  the  breast ; between  the  two  eyes, — an 

inflam- 


110 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


inflammation,  or  other  disease  of  one,  bein^ 
often  succeeded  by  a like  disease  of  the  other ; 
between  the  same  parts  of  both  eyes, — produc- 
ing: an  uniform  motion  of  their  muscles,  and 
pupils ; and  between  different  parts  of  the  same 
eye,  as  between  the  pupil  and  retina, — the  former 
contra6ling,  or  dilating,  as  the  latter  is  variously 
affected  by  a stronger,  or  a weaker  light.  But 
even  in  these  instances,  since  other  parts  of  a si- 
milar stru6ture,  equal  vicinity,  and  as  intimate 
connexion,  are  not  in  like  manner  affected,  the 
sympathy  seems  chiefly,  and  is,  probably,  in 
many,  if  not  in  most  instances,  solely,  to  be  re- 
ferred to  certain  laws  of  the  animal  economy, 
which  a6l  merely  by  the  nervous  power,  and  of 
which  we  can  better  prove  the  existence,  than 
determine  the  specific  nature,  or  demonstrate  the 
mode  of  operation. 

This  sympathy  is  no  w'here  more  remarkable, 
or  extensive,  than  between  the  parts  contained 
within  the  cavity  of  the  belly,  and  the  other  parts 
of  the  human  body  ; and  of  these  the  stomach, 
the  whole  alimentary  canal,  and  the  w'omb, 
have,  ill  the  frequency,  variety,  and  magnitude, 
of  their  sympathetic  influence,  the  natural  conse- 
quence of  their  high,  and  important  offices,  greatly 
the  pre-eminence;  the  tw'o  former,  as  being  prin- 
cipally, and  essentially,  concerned  in  the  daily 
preservation  of  life,  and  the  distribution  of  health 
and  vigour  to  the  body  of  every  individual ; and  the 

latter. 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


1 n 

latter,  as  being  no  less  necessary  to  the  multipli- 
cation of  the  species,  and  having  no  inconsi- 
derable concern  in  the  well-being,  and  even  in 
the  life,  of  the  mother,  and  her  infant  offspring, 
by  its  great  and  wonderful  influence  over  several 
parts  of  the  female  economy,  by  the  deviations  of 
which  from  the  regular  performance  of  their  pro- 
per offices,  fruitfulness  may  be  prevented  ; or  the 
infant,  j)uny  from  its  birth,  or  blasted  by  an  un- 
wholesome nourishment,  may  wither  and  decay  ; 
or  the  mother’s  health  maybe  materially  injured, 
or  totally  destroyed. 

While  the  stomach  receives  the  food,  in  order 
to  dissolve,  and  conco6l  it,  to  transmit  it  thus 
prepared  to  the  intestines,  where  it  is  to  be  far- 
ther changed,  and  fitted  for  reception  into  the 
ladeals,  from  thence  to  be  conveyed  into  the 
blood,  assimilated  into  its  nature,  distributed  by 
the  circulation  to  every  part  of  the  body,  and  con- 
verted, by  nutrition,  into  its  very  subtance ; it 
communicates,  by  a wise,  and  wonderful  con- 
trivance of  the  benevolent  Author  of  Nature 
instantly  and  by  sympathy,  that  refreshment,  and 
vigour,  which  might  often  arrive  too  late  for  the 
repair,  and  preservation,  of  the  exhausted  ma- 
chine, were  it  delayed  till  the  aliment  had  gone 
through  the  tedious  operations  of  these  long  as- 
similating processes.  And  it  is,  indeed,  probable, 
that  in  the  whole  course  of  the  intestinal  tube, 
when  it  is  in  a sound  and  healthful  state,  and 

digestion 


112 


CAUSES  OP  INSAKITY. 


digestion  and  chylification  proceed  easily,  anc: 
\vell,  such  muscular  and  vascular  tones  are  ex--| 
cited,  as  tend  to  produce  ease  and  vigour  by  ex-j 
citing  similar  tones  through  the  whole  mus-t 
cular  and  vascular  systems  of  the  animal.  For 
ease,  and  vigour,  and  a due  performance  of  thel 
natural  functions,  seem  to  be  reciprocal.  When,,* 
therefore,  the  tone  of  these  organs  is  much  di-n 
minished,  or  when  they  are  in  any  other  re- 
spe6t  greatly  disordered,  as  in  hypochondriacal 
languor,  and  indigestion,  in  fevers,  in  inflamma— i 
tions  of  the  bowels,  or  the  like,  the  body 
neither  experiences  immediate  nor  considerable 
refreshment,  on  the  reception  of  aliment  into 
the  stomach,  which  on  many  occasions  it  even 
instantly  rejecfls  ; nor  is  afterwards  properly  nou- 
rished, and  invigorated,  by  a well  digested, 
wholesome,  and  nutritious  chyle:  but  remains 
languid,  and  relaxed,  and,  instead  of  ease  and 
vigour,  is  harassed  w’ith  pain,  and  depressed 
w ith  weariness  and  debility  ; and  these  disagree- 
able feelings  are  greatly  aggravated,  if  the  organs 
of  digestion  are  irritated  by  acrimonious,  over- 
loaded and  oppressed  by  too  heavy  and  indigesti- 
ble, or  too  copious,  or  distended  by  too  flatulent 
aliment : not  to  add  that  whatever  irritates,  over- 
loads, or  distends  the  stomach  and  intestines, 
and  impedes  digestion,  increases  the  weakness  of 
these  organs,  and  of  course  aggravates  the  de^ 
bility,  and  uneasiness  of  the  whole  fiame,  to 

which 


C2LUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


113 


which  their  weakness  was  but  too  much  disposed 
to  give  rise  without  the  aid  ot  any  such  additional 
cause.  But  how  the  lax,  infirm,  and  nervous 
tones,  painful  sensations,  and  bodily  disease, 
especially  of  what  is  called  the  nervous  kind,  ere 
naturally  conncdfed  with  peevishness,  melancholy, 
horror,  and  despair,  has  already,  in  some  de- 
gree, been  explained,  and  will  receive  still  far- 
ther illustration  from  what  is  to  follow. 

It  is  from  this  sympathy  between  the  stomacli 
and  intestines,  in  particular — to  say  nothing  at 
present  of  the  other  contents  of  the  abdomen — 
and  the  rest  of  the  bod}^,  that  the  hypochondri- 
acal disorder,  so  troublesome  to  studious,  and 
sedentary  persons,  derives  many  of  its  worst,, 
and  most  alarming  symptoms.  From  this  source 
proceeds  that  sort  of  insanity,  which,  from  the. 
apparent  seat  of  the  complaint,  and  the  conco- 
mitant symptoms,  has  usually  been  denominated 
hypochondriacal  melancholy.  And  though  the 
hysterical  disease  has,  perhaps,  a different  ori- 
gin, and  its  essential  symptoms  are  very  different, 
it  is  often  accompanied  with  the  like  disorder 
of  the  first  passages  ; and  besides  its  tendency  to 
occasion  delirium  during  the  paroxysms,  is  like- 
wise disposed  to  give  rise  to  it  in  the  intervals ; 
as  well  by  the  secondary  adfion  of  this  local  re- 
laxation,— in  injuring  the  tones  by  injuring  dit 
gestion  and  nourishment ; — as  by  its  direcf  sym- 
pathetic operation  upon  the  muscular,  vascular, 

and 


VOL.  II. 


1 


114 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


and  nervous  systems,  and  the  immediate  effects 
thence  resulting  upon  the  tones,  and  feelings,  of 
the  body. 

As  the  pylorus,  pancreas,  mesentery  and  mesen- 
teric glands,  liver,  spleen,  hemorrhoidal  vessels, 
kidneys,  omentum,  peritoneum,  and  other  parts 
adjoining,  have  all  a nearer  or  more  remote  con- 
nexion with  the  immediate  organs  of  digestion, 
and  chylification,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose,  of 
some  of  them  at  least,  that,  besides  a tendency 
to  promote  the  produdlion  of  insanity,  when  dis- 
eased, by  the  immediate  sympathy  which  subsists 
between  them  and  the  rest  of  the  system,  they 
may,  in  proportion  to  the  closeness,  and  intimacy, 
of  their  connexion  with  those  organs,  have  that 
tendency  increased, — in  consequence  of  the  ob- 
strudlion,  which  by  the  imperfe6l  performance  of 
their  proper  functions,  they  may  be  capable  of 
giving  to  those  of  the  stomach,  and  intestines  ; 
and  of  the  power  they  may  thus  possess  of  as  much 
weakening  their  tone,  and  im|>eding  digestion, 
in  their  diseased  state,  as  they  are  qualified  to 
promote  the  one,  and  invigorate  the  other,  when 
themselves  are  sound,  and  vigorous. 

It  has  been  seen,  in  the  enumeration  of  the  ap- 
pearances on  disse6fion,  that  all  these  parts  liavc 
been  found  diseased  in  one  case  or  another ; and 
many  instances,  of  a similar  kind,  might  easily 
be  adduced  from  pradical  writers,  in  which  some, 

other  of  them,  have  appeared  to  ad  as  excit- 

ing 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


115 


ing  causes  of  insanity  ; and  which,  at  least,  ren- 
der it  certain  that  a disordered  state  of  all,  or 
most  of  these  parts,  has  occasionally  accompanied 
insanity,  whatever  share  it  may  have  had  in  its 
production.  Nor  will  it  seem  wonderful  that 
such  great,  and  apparently  remote  effects,  should 
be  attributed  to  the  irritability  of  these  very  sensi- 
ble parts,  and  their  sympathy  with  the  rest  of  the 
body,  when  it  is  considered  that  not  only  deli- 
rium, but  even  death  itself  has  frequently  been  the 
speedy,  and  sometimes  almost  the  immediate  con- 
sequence of  excessive  pain  from  a violent  blow 
on  the  stomach,  belly,  and  some  other  parts  of 
exquisite  feeling ; or  from  any  other  external  vio- 
lence, or  from  internal  disease,  in  these  parts  ; 
v/hen,  upon  disseCfion  after  death,  it  has  some- 
times happened,  that  not  the  smallest,  and  often 
thaf  no  apparently  very  material,  or  adequate  in- 
jury, has  been  found.  Of  facls  of  this  sort  I do 
not  recollect  to  have  seen  many  very  striking,  or 
uncommon  examples  myself ; but  have  been  told 
of  such  by  very  capable,  and  credible,  eye-wit- 
nesses; and  have  not  unfrequently  met  with  them 
in  medical  books.  Boehiiaave  mentions  several 
instances  of  pain,  delirium,  and  death,  speedily 
succeeding  accidents  ; of  violent  delirium  and  sud- 
den death,  occasioned  by  painful  disorders ; and 
of  other  surprising  and  instantaneous  consequences 
of  exquisite  pain,  in  these  parts ; in  which  these 
great,  and  violent  effeds,  can  only  be  attributed 

I 2 to 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


ii5 

to  the  wonderful,  but  obscure,'  and  inexplicable, 
influence  of  s)Ynpathy : for  they  can  scarcely  be 
said  to  be  accounted  for  by  supposing,  since  we 
can  only  suppose,  that  the  vibrations  excited  in 
the  nerves,  and  brain,  on  these  occasions,  are  so 
excessive,  and  predominating,  as  to  overcome, 
and  suppress,  all  other  nervous  vibrations  ; and  of 
course  those  vibrations  on  whose  continuance 
the  vital  functions  depend  ; and  only  to  expire 
themselves  with  these  vibrations,  which,  hav- 
ing destroyed,  they  could  no  longer  exist. — A 
wound  in  the  belly  with  a knife,  which  has  nei- 
ther injured  the  intestines,  nor  blootl-vessels, 
has  been’  known  to  occasion  speedy  death, 
merely  by  dividing  certain  nerves  of  the  mesen- 
tery ; as  we  are  assured  by  Boerhaave',  on  the 
authority  of  the  celebrated  Ruysch,  who  had  seen 
frequent  disasters  of  this  kind  among  the  Dutch 
seamen.  The  wound  was  alvvays  succeeded  by  in- 
tolerable pain,  which  was  soon  followed  by  a liic- 
€up,  vomiting,  delirium,  and  death. — A country- 
manwho  followed  the  employment  of  a labourer, 
fatigued  by  the  exertions  of  the  day,  after  eating 
fiiid  drinking  at  supper  as  usual,  went  to  bed 
weary,  but  apparently  in  perfect  health.  In  the 
middle  of  the  night  he  was  waked  by  a violent 
^lin  in  his  ‘bowels,  which  soon  becoming  ex- 


. * De  Morbis  Nervoruro,  ‘tom.  u.  p.  424. 
' ^ Td.  ib.  p.  426.-  " ' ‘ * ■ 


cessive, 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


117 


cesslve,  he  died  quite  delirious  in  less  than  four 
hours.  Boerhaave'  himself  was  once  waked  in 
the  middle  of  the  night,  by  a similar  pain,  in  the. 
same  part,  which  was  so  exquisite,  and  intole-, 
rable,  that  he  was  persuaded  it  would  have  put 
an  end  to  his  life  in  a few  minutes,  had  he  not 
been  instantly  freed  from  it,  by  a medicine,"; 
which  happened  fortunately  to  be  at  hand.  And. 

I have  known  several  cases  of  the  same  nature 
in  some  of  which  a sudden  pain  of  the  stomach, 
intestines,  or  biliary  du61s,  has  by  its  excessiv'e 
violence  threatened  speedy  death,  which  has  hap- 
pily been  prevented  by  the  timely  aid  of  inedi  t 
cine ; and  in  others,  a sudden  cramp  in  the  sto- 
mach, or  something  like  it,  has  come  on  during 
sleep,  and  has  terminated  in  death  before  proper 
assistance  could  arrive. — An  incarcerated  hernia  « 
has,  in  like  manner,  been  known  to  occasion 
excruciating  pain,  delirium,  and  death,  in  a short 
time  ; and,  on  dissecSlion,  the  intestine  has  been 
found  strangulated,  indeed,  but  not  otherwise 
injured"*.  And  there  are  numberless  instances  of 
convulsions,  delirium,  and  dcatii,  in  painful  disor- 
ders, in  which  the  pain  seems  to  have  been,  if  not 
the. sole,  yet  a principal  ai5ior,  in  the  fatal  event 
which  ensued.  ' 

/ 2.  As  the  parts  contained  within  the  belly  have 

, ’ pe  Morbis  Nervorum,  tom.ii,  p,  426, 

Boerhaave  De' Morbis  Nervorum,  tom.  ii.  p.  426.  ’ 

1 3 


a con- 


118 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


a considerable  sympathetic  connexion  with  each 
other,  and  every  one  in  particular  with  the  sto- 
mach and  intestines ; which  seem  to  constitute 
a kind  of  centre  of  sympathy,  as  the  heart  does 
of  circulation  ; so  they  have  all  a general  sympa- 
thetic connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  body;  which 
being  carried  oh  by  means  of  the  nerves,  and 
brain,  whose  well-being,  with  that  of  the  whole 
machinery,  depends  in  a great  degree  upon  the 
well-being  of  the  stomach,  and  intestines,  by 
which  they  are  supplied  with  daily  nourishment, 
it  is  no  wonder  that  the  former  should  suffer 
when  the  latter  are  out  of  order,  and  that  insa- 
nity, among  a vast  variety  of  nervous,  and  other, 
complaints,  should  sometimes  be  the  offspring  of 
a disordered  state  of  the  alimentary  canal. 

The  stomach  and  intestines  seem  to  possess  this 
sympathy  with  the  other  parts  of  the  body,  as  for 
obvious  reasons  might  be  expedfed,  and  as  has  al- 
ready been  accounted  for,  in  the  most  eminent 
decree ; and  when  much  disordered,  and  debili- 
tated,  are  no  inconsiderable  sources  of  insanit}’. 
Whatever  therefore  tends  to  diminish  the  tones 
of  these  important  organs;  or,  taking  its  rise  from 
their  diseased  state,  tends  to  increase  the  debility 
which  gave  occasion  to  it ; may  with  great  pro- 
priety be  enumerated  among  the  causes  of  insa- 
nity, an  effedl  which  so  often  flows  from  such  a 
state.  ^ 

Of  this  sort,  to  mention  no  others,  are — hard 

and 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


119 


and  indigestible  aliment^ — the  immoderate  use  of 
warm  diluting  liquors, — intemperance  in  diet  of 
any  kind, — viscid  phlegm, — and  luorms. 

All  these  causes  seem  to  a6l,  in  the  produ6lion 
of  insanity,  partly  by  generating  an  unwholesome 
chyle,  and  bringing  on  a diseased  state  of  the 
blood; — for  such  a state  of  that  important,  and 
necessary  fluid,  may  doubtless  produce  some  ef- 
fedl  of  this  kind,  by  diminishing  the  general  health 
of  the  body,  bringing  on,  or  aggravating,  ner- 
vous symptoms,  and  exciting  a variety  of  uneasy 
sensations  ; — and  partly,  and  perhaps  principally, 
by  debilitating  the  stomach  and  intestines,  and 
weakening  their  tones.  Hence  it  is  that  acidity, 
and  flatulency,  in  the  first  passages,  are  so  uni- 
versally reckoned  by  the  ancients  among  the  prin- 
cipal, and  most  conspicuous  symptoms,  of  hypo- 
chondriacal melancholy ; the  former,  indeed,  ap- 
pears to  have  been  no  other  than  the  atrabilis  of 
Galen,  which,  he  says, — “wlien  thrown  up  from 
the  stomach  by  vomiting,  has  an  acid  taste,  and 
smell".” 

Hard  and  indigestible  aliment  lies  long  in  a 
weak  stomach,  and  is  not  easily  overcome,  or 
evacuated,  by  the  strongest ; if,  therefore,  it 
be  frequently  taken  into  the  stomach  already  ei- 
ther habitually  infirm,  or  rendered  so  by  some 

" “ Vomentibus  ipsam,  et  olfacientibus,  videtur  acida.”— 
De  Locis  Affeclis.  lib.  iii,  cap.  iii.  Lacun.e  Ep'ihm.  p 741 

I.  20. 

I 4 


reccni 


120 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY* 


recent  disease ; ot  if  it  be  customarily  taken  in 
too  large  a quantitv  into  a sound  and  healthful 
one  ; it  loads  the  first  passages  ; creates  flatulency, 
and  acidity  ; weakens  the  tone  of  the  stomach  and 
intestines  when  it  found  it  strong,  and  still  fartlier 
debilitates  it  when  it  found  it  weak, — by  distention ; 
.by  frustrating  their  perpetual  efforts  to  subdue, 
and  convert  into  wholesome  chyle,  the  insoluble 
mass  that  oppresses  them  ; and  by  defrauding  the 
whole  body,  and  of  consequence  the  alimen- 
tary canal  itself,  of  its  due  portion  of  good,' 
and  proper,  nourishment.  These  effedfs  are 
daily  aggravated,  and,  as  the  debility,  so  the  op- 
pressive load,  is  increased,  in  a growing  propor- 
tion, so  long  as  the  same  kinds  of  diet  is  con- 
tinued : and  especially,  if  to  a diet  of  diflicult 
digestion,  be  added  a want  of  sufficient  bodily 
exercise,  intemperance  in  the  use  of  vinous  and 
spirituous  liquors,  grief,  anxiety,  close  application 
of  mind  to  study  or  business,  or  other  debili- 
tating causes  which  have  an  immediate  tendency 
to  injure  the  tone,  and  obstrudl  the  operations, 
of  the  organs  concerned  in  the  business  of  di- 
gestion. 

Amoncr  aliments  that  are  hard,  and  of  difficult 
digestion,  may  be  enumerated  all  salted,  dried, 
and  rancid  meats  -,  the  flesh  of  all  animals  which 
is  become  tough  with  age,  or  labour ; all  the 
membranous,  tendinous,  and  cartilaginous  parts 
of  animals  ; fat,  oil,  and  butter,  of  all  sorts,  and 


in 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


121 


in  every  form ; cheese  of  ever)'  denomination, 
and  quality,  but  in  particular,  such  as  is  poor  and 
horny,  or,  if  rich,  is  new,  heavy,  and  glutinous  5 
pease,  beans,  and  every  kind  of  pulse ; all  un- 
fermented  farinaceous  substances  ; pastry  of  all 
sorts,  and  even  bread  while  quite  new;  almonds, 
chesnuts,  walnuts,  hazel-nuts,  filberts,  and  all 
other  nuts  and  kernels ; unripe,  acid,  and  austere 
fruits,  and  especially  such  as  are  of  a firm  texture, 
and  abound  in  insoluble  matter,  as  many  kinds  of 
plumbs,  and  pears ; cucumbers;  acids;  pickles  of 
all  varieties ; and  every  substance  which,  at  the 
same  time  that  it  is  hard,  and  of  difficult  solu» 
tion,  affords  but  a small  portion  of  matter  capa- 
ble of  being  converted,  by  the  strongest  stomachy 
into  good  nourishment. 

The  immoderate  use  of  warm  diluting  liquors  is 
found  by  experience  greatly  to  relax  the  tone  of 
the  stomach,  and  intestines ; to  render  food^ 
even  of  moderately  easy  solution,  too  heavy  for 
their  enfeebled  efforts,  and  not  to  be  digested  but 
with  uneasiness  and  difficulty ; and  hard,  and 
unyielding  aliment,  almost  perfectly  insoluble''. 
It  must,  therefore,,  have  a powerful  tendency  to 
debilitate  the  whole  muscular,  and  vascular  sys^ 
terns  ; and  to  bring  on  all  those  bodily  indispasia 
tions  which  arise  from  the  infirm  tones,  are  calciiv 
lated  toaffe<^f  the  mind  with  timidity,  anxiety,  and 
dejeaion,  and  have  a peculiar  propensity- to  be^ 
come  remote,  causes  of  insanity.  . - 

- But 


122 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


' But  of  all  the  remote  causes  of  this  disorder  ar- 
ranged under  the  division  in  tlje  table  now  un- 
der consideration,  there  is  not  a more  powerful 
one  than  intemperance ; which  if  indulged  in  the 
use  of  food  in  its  own  nature  productive  of  such 
injury,  both  in  the  first  passages,  and  in  the  ge- 
neral habit  of  body,  as  has  a tendency  to  give  oc- 
casion to  insanity,  will  much  increase  that  ten- 
dency: since  great  excess  in  diet  of  any  kind, 
even  the  most  wholesome  and  nourishing,  and 
of  the  most  easy  digestion,  may,  it  is  obvious, 
produce  the  same  effects,  if  long  and  habitually 
persisted  in,  as  food  of  difficult  digestion,  or  the 
immoderate  use  of  warm  diluting  liquors ; how- 
ever carefully  these  less  friendly  articles  of  diet 
may  be  avoided ; by  overloading,  distending,  and 
debilitating  the  alimentary  canal,  and  giving  oc- 
casion, by  delay,  to  those  spontaneous  changes 
of  the  food,  which  it  would  undergo  in  similar 
circumstances  out  of  the  body,  and  to  the  gene- 
ration of  wind,  acidity,  and  all  the  other  symp- 
toms and  consequences,  whether  local  or  general, 
of  indigestion  ; to  which  will  be  added  the  oppres- 
sive, and  otherwise  dangerous  influence  of  re- 
pletion. And  thus  the  plainest  and  simplest  food, 
may  by  an  excess  in  quantity  do  that  injury, 
which  it  was  incapable  of  doing  by  its  quality. 

As  indigestible  food,  immoderate  dilution,  and 
intemperance,  are . causes,  so  viscid  phlegm  is 
a consequence  of, debility  in  the  first  passages, 

and 


123 


* CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

and  of  its  offspring  indigestion;  and  tends  to 
increase  the  evils  to  which  it  owes  its  birth.  Lik.e 
the  other  effeds  of  indigestion,  it  is  a common 
symptom,  and  has  probably  some  share  in  thepro- 
du6\ion,  of  hypochondriacal  melancholy. 

Congestions  of  viscid  matter  in  the  stomac^i, 
and  intestines,  of  persons  of  weak  bowels,  of  lax 
and  sluggish  habits,  of  a sedentary  and  inactive 
life,  and  of  great  reading  and  close  thinking,  are 
not  uncommon ; and  arc  sometimes  so  excessive, 
as  to  be  equally  astonishing,  and  alarming.  They 
are  frequent  among  weakly  children,  delicate  wo- 
men, mechanics  whose  employment  requires  lit- 
tle exertion  of  strength,  and  constant  sitting; 
but  above  all,  among  such  literary  persons  as  are 
inordinately  devoted  to  study.  Of  such  a colledlion 
in  the  intestines,  owing  to  great  bodily  ina61i- 
vity,  joined  with  intense,  and  unremitted,  appli- 
cation of  mind,  we  have  an  extraordinary  example 
in  the  case  of  the  very  learned,  and  deservedly 
celebrated,  Justus  Lipsius®  ; who  was  long  tor- 
mented with  the  most  troublesome  complaints, 
from  which  he  could  obtain  no  relief,  till  he  had 
evacuated,  by  stool,  a viscid  pituitons  substance, 
of  the  form,  and  colour,  of  the  intestines,  in  the 
cavity  of  which  it  had  been  gradually  accumulated, 
during  a long  course  of  literary  indolence,  till  it 
had  covered  the  internal  surface  of  the  tube  with 
a preternatural  lining. 

® VUlc  Tissot  de  Valetudine  Literarorutn,  p.  33. 

The 


124  CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 

The  same  may  be  said  of  ivorms  in  tlie  alimen- 
tary canal,  as  of  viscid  phlegm.  Their  eggs  be- 
ing taken  in  with  the  food,  finding  a proper  nest 
in  the  stomach,  and  intestines,  already  infirm, 
and  abounding  with  viscid  matter,  and  there  as- 
suming their  vermicular  state ; they  add  to  the 
load,  as  they  grow  and  multiply,  with  which  these 
parts  were  but  too  much  oppressed  before ; in- 
crease their  debility  ; promote  the  accumulation 
of  phlegm  ; and  thus  nourish  the  disorders  which 
favoured  their  birth,  afforded  them  habitation  and 
support,  and  contributed  to  their  multiplication.  ‘ 

Since  worms  are  thus  the  effect  and  the  cause, 
of  debility,  of  the  first  passages  ; and  are  capable 
of  aggravating  all  its  consequences  ; it  is  easy  to 
perceive  how  they  may  contribute  to  the  produc- 
tion of 'insanity.  And  we  shall  be  more  con- 
vinced of  their  power  in  this  respedf,  when  wt 
consider  how  likely  they  are  to  irritate,  as  well 
as  to  weaken,  the  veiy  delicate,  and  sensible, 
parts,  in  which  they  are  lodged ; and  of  course 
to' produce  the  most  violent  efie^is  of  immediate 
sympathy,  as  well  as  those  arising  from  slow^,  and 
gradual,  changes  in  the  constitution.  Indeed  the 
most  alarming,  and  extraordinary,  symptoms  of 
disorder  in  other,  and  remote,  parts,  have  fre- 
quently, with  justice,  been  ascribed,  in  a great 
measure,  to  the  irritation  of  worms,  viscid  phlegm, 
and  other  indigestible,  or  acrimonious  matter,  dit 
th§  first  passages.  And  that  delirium,  and  insa- 

. ■ ‘ nity, 


cAxrsES  OP  rNSAjyrxY. 


125 


nity,  have  OTVTed  their  excitement  to  such  a cause, 
we  have  not  only  the  testimony  of  general  opi- 
nion, but  the  axSual  relations  of  particular  cases  : 
and  we  daily  see,  in  the  worm -fevers  of  children, 
how  apt  the  irritation  of  worms,  and  viscid  mat- 
ter, in  the  bowels,  is  to  affedt  the  brain,  by  the 
delirium,  and  coma,  which  are  their  frequent 
<Rymptoms^.  • • - 

• K 

3.  As  the  causes  mentioned  in  the  preced-r 
ing  article  have  all  a tendency  to  disorder’ the 
brain,  and  to  induce  insanity,  chiefly  by  ^low, 
and  progressive  depredations  on  the  health  of 
the  body,  and  by  imperceptibly  undermining  its 
vigour,  and  diminishing  all  its  toncfs ; effedls.  in 
the  produdlion  of  which  their  principal  agency 
is  gradually  exerted  on  the  alimentary  canal : so, 
on  the  other  hand,  such  adfive  substances -as  2^;£;ze, 
opium,  and  other  narcotics,  and  poisons,  not  only 
possess  a like  property  of  effedlrag,  when  habi- 
tually indulged  in  to  excess,  a progressive  cliaiige 
in  the  general  system  favourable  to  insanity,  by 
operating  slowly  upon  the  constitution,  gradually 


P Daeraonomania  a vermibus.  Sauvages.  Nosol.  Method, 
Class  viii,  Gen.  xix.  4.  tom.  iii.  Part.  i.  p.  397, — Vide  ctiatii 
JuNCKBRi  Conspe6t.  Medicin.  Theoret.  Pra6t.  Tab.  exxii; 
p.  926,  V.  Causas. — Harris  de  Morbis  Acutis  Infantum; 
p.  52.— Andrt  de  la  Generation  .des  vers  dans  le  Corps  de 
I’Homme,  chap.  iv.  art.  ii.  p.  yg,  &c.— et  Au6loccs  Medicos 
passim,  " ‘ ' 

debili- 


12(3  - CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

debilitating  the  stomach  and  intestines,  injuring 
all  the  viscera,  and  diminishing  the  tones  of  the 
whole  body ; — but  have  likewise,  by  a peculiar 
sympathy  between  the  stomach  and  brain,  a pow- 
erful, and  peculiar  propensity,  to  affedt  the  latter, 
- — and  either  gradually  to  weaken  its  vessels  and 
membranes,  increase  their  irritability,  induce  a fa- 
cility of  determination  of  blood  to  the  head,  and 
thus  to  generate  a local  predisposition  to  delirium, 
and  insanity  ; — or,  by  stimulating  the  vessels  of 
the  brain  into  sudden  and  violent  exertions,  to  ex- 
cite almost  instant  delirium,  and  very  speedy  in- 
sanity. 

The  efFe6ls  of  ivine  are  notorious  ; and,  like 
those  of  our  daily  food,  would  appear  more  won- 
derful, were  they  less  common.  This  exhilarating 
beverage  rouses  the  languid  energy  of  the  nerves, 
and  like  actual  nourishment,  refreshes  the  whole 
animal  machine,  the  moment  it  enters  the  stomach 
of  the  weary  and  exhausted.  If  too  plentifully 
taken,  it  increases  both  the  force,  and  quickness, 
of  the  circulation  ; creates  heat,  and  thirst ; ac- 
celerates the  a6Hon  of  the  small  vessels  of  the 
whole  system,  and  particularly  of  the  head,  and 
brain;  excites  cheerfulness,  and  self-importance  ; 
makes  a man  feel  happy  in  circumstances  of  dis- 
tress ; and  great  and  independent,  in  the  midst  of 
insignificancy,  control,  and  oppression  ; and  ren- 
ders him  sociable,  or  reserved,  merry -or  dispu- 
tatious, friendly  or  quarrelsome,  generous  and  hu- 
mane, 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


127 


mane,  or  malevolent  and  revengeful,  as  its  effects 
on  the  body,  and  spirits,  happen  to  operate  upon 
his  natural  disposition,  or  are  determined  by  ac- 
cidental circumstances.  His  ideas  are  at  first 
rapid,  then  deranged,  then  perfedlly  confused 
and  incoherent,  then  fixed  in  stupid  stagnation, 
and  at  last  almost  entirely  obliterated  in  the  pro- 
found insensibility  of  a nearly  apoplectic  sleep. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  intoxication  may 
emulate  almost  every  species  of  madness,  and 
idiotism.  And  as  this  similarity  between  intoxi- 
cation, and  insanity,  arises  from  a similarity,  in 
both  cases,  of  the  preternatural  states  of  the  brain  ; 
were  the  temporary  state  arising  from  intoxication 
to  remain,  after  the  immediate  operation  of  the 
liquor  had  ceased,  it  would  no  longer  be  intoxi- 
cation, but  insanity.  And  this  sometimes  actu- 
ally happens.  More  frequently,  however,  insanity 
is  the  dreadful  consequence  of  a habit  of  intoxi- ' 
cation ; of  which,  unhappily,  the  instances  are 
too  numerous  to  escape  the  notice,  of  the  most  in- 
attentive observer. 

But  in  no  case  is  inebriation  with  wine,  or  other 
fermented,  or  spirituous  liquors,  so  apt  to  ter- 
minate in  insanity,  as  when  it  prevents  sleep: 
and  thus  not  only  approaches  nearer  to  a state  of 
insanity,  the  beginnings  of  which  are  commonly 
attended  with  excessive  watchfulness ; but  increases 
the  danger  of  such  a termination,  by  continuing 
both  the  power,  and  the  inclination,  of  inces- 
santly 


129 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


Stintly  renewing  the  cause,  and  adding  fuel  to  the 
flame,  of  intoxication ; when  the  seasonable  in- 
terposition of  sleep  would  at  least  give  a tempo- 
rary suspension  to  the  former,  and  by  favouring 
the  return  of  sobriety,  and  reason,  might  fortu- 
nately put  an  end  to  the  latter.  Persons  thus  af- 
fected by  wine  will  frequently  persevere  in  drinking 
without  interruption,  and  with  little  or  no  sleep, 
for  days,  and  weeks  together  ; and  when  at  length 
obliged,  by  the  forcible  inter[X)sition  of  their 
friends,  to  desist,  not  uncommonly  continue  in- 
sane for  weeks,  and  months,  after  the  first  ex- 
citing cau“e  has  been  thus  withdrawn  ; sometimes 
iever  recover;  and  often  remain  liable  to  oc- 
casional returns  of  insanity  ; which  usually  in  the 
end  becomes  perpetual,  and  incurable. 

• The  effects  of  o/imm,  are  nearly  similar  to  those 
©f  wine.  But  while  the  more  direCt  tendency 
of  the  latter  is  to  intoxicate,  that  of  the  former 
is  to  induce  sleep.  Like  wine,  however,  it  is  more 
likely  to  give  rise  to  speedy  insanity,  when,  instead 
of  sleep,  it  causes  intoxication,  and  watching.' 

Opium,  as  well  as  wine,  occasions  a predispo^ 
sition  to  insanity, — when  the  free  use  of  it  isjia- 
bitually  indulged, — not  only  by  such  frequent 
f€?petitions  of  increased  aClion  in  the  vessels  of 
the' brain,  and  of  temporary  states  of  that  organ 
trhich  differ  from  insanity  merely  in  duration, 
da  to  give  to  such  states  a facility  of  exciterAent, 
and  an  aptitude  to  continue:  but  by  Uijuring  -di- 
. . - • gestion. 


CAUSES  OF  INSANIxt. 


1^9 

gestion,  chylification,  sanguification,  secretion, 
excretion,  and  nutrition  ; by  diminishing  ulti- 
mately all  the  tones ; by  creating  languor  ; by 
increasing  morbid  irritability  and  sensibility  ; by 
exciting  spasms,  and  painful  sensations  ; and  by 
inducing  dejedtion,  and  pusillanimity:  some  of 
the  most  obstinate  causes  of  insanity^  in  all  its 
forms. 

So  dreadful  are  the  languor,  and  the  distressful 
feelings  both  of  body  and  mind, — known  to  hard 
drinkers  by  the  appellation  of  the  horrors, — arising 
from  excessive  indulgence  either  in  wine,  or 
opium,  as,  even  when  they  have  not  given  occa- 
sion to  actual  insanity,  to  render  life  a burden  ; and 
to  tempt  some,  while  under  the  depression  of 
inexpressible  languor,  and  in  the  desperation  of 
hopeless  suffering,  to  free  themselves  by  suicide 
from  an  agonizing  state  of  present  misery,  than 
which  they  can  conceive  nothing  future  to  be 
more  in  tolerable'’ . 

Other 


I know  not  where  I can  with  more  propriety,  than  in  thii 
place,  take  notice  of  a remark  of  the  late  Dr.  Wall  of  Wor- 
cester, incidentally  made  in  a letter  to  Sir  George  Baker, 
relative  to  the  impregnation  of  the  cider  of  the  counties  of 
Hereford,  Glocester,  and  Worcester,  with  the  poison  of' lead, 
.and  to  the  endemic  diseases  of  those  counties ; which  was  first 
published  by  Sir  George  Baker,  in  the  Medical  Transac- 
tions*; and  afterwards  republished  by  Dr.  Martin  Wall, 
in  a colleftion  of  his  father’s  Medical  Traftsf. 


Vgl.  i.  p.  202. 


yoL.  u. 


K 


^ Page  *09. 


I haro 


130 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


Other  narcotics,  and  indeed  all  poisons  which 

have 


" I have  heard  it  observed,”  says  he,  “ by  a pliysician, 
late  of  this  city,  who  was  much  employed  in  the  cure  of  lunatics, 
that  more  of  those  unhappy  persons  came  to  him  from  Here- 
fordshire, than  from  any  other  place.  The  faft,  it  true,  may 
possibly  arise  from  the  quantity  drunk,  rather  than  the  quality. 

To  this  remark  of  his  father,  the  son  has  subjoined  the  fol- 
lowing note. 

“ In  a paper  Inserted  in  the  Glocester  Journal,  March  3, 
I777>  recommend  the  scheme  for  instituting  a hospital  for 
lunatics  at  Hereford,  is  the  following  sentence,  which  seems- 
to  shew  that  the  opinion  of  the  frequency  of  lunatics  in  that 
county  is  not  uncommon  ; at  least  that  it  was  not  peculiar  to  the 
physician  mentioned  above.  3 he  writer  after  enumeraiing  se- 
veral considerations  which  he  thought  necessary  to  demonstrate 
the  utility  of  such  a hospital,  says,  ^ These  considerations 
plead  strongly  in  favour  of  the  proposed  scheme ; and  the  more 
so  from  a circumstance,  perhaps,  not  generally  known  ; that 
the  cider-counties  unfortunately  abound  with  the  greatest 
numbers  of  these  objeas  of  compassion.’  Future  accurate  ob- 
servation will  determine,  whether  this  opinion  has  any  founda- 
tion, and  to  what  cause  it  is  to  be  ascribed. 

My  distant  situation  from  the  cider-counties  having  deprived 
me  of  the  opportunity  of  personal  experience  in  this  matter, 
I can  say  nothing,  fre^m  my  own  knowledge,  .about  it ; and 
have!  only  to  add,  to  the  authorities  above  quoted,  the  follow- 
iTig  observation  of  Dr.  Thomson,  a very  able  and  experienced' 
physician  of  Worcester,  which  I received  some  time  ago, 
in  answer  to  a letter  which  1 had  written  to  him  on  this  head  j 
and  which  seems  to  confirm  Dr.  Wall’s  remark:  and  the 
opinion  of  Dr.  Hakov, — the  ingenious  author  of  a valuable 
treatise  on  the  colic  ol‘  Poitou  and  Devon, — which  seems  to  mili- 
tate against  it. 

" My  own  experience,”  says  Dr.  Thomson,  entitles  me 

to 


131 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

have  the  power  of  intoxicating’’,  as  most  of  the 

vegetable 


say  very  Httle  on  the  subject.  In  the  course  of  business,  I have 
been  often  called  into  those  parts  of  Herefordshire  that  lie  con- 
tiguous to  this  county ; but  I do  not  recolleft  that  I there  met 
with,  or  heard  of,  more  people  labouring  under  insanity,  than 
In  this  or  any  other  of  the  neighbouring  counties,  where  my 
business  may  occasionally  call  me.  But  I met  with  an  ob* 
servatiod,  some  time  ago,  that  may  throw  some  light  on  this 
matter.  It  was  made  by  a very  sensible  and  observing  man 
who,  for  many  years,  kept  a house  for  the  reception  of  luna- 
tics, within  a few  miles  of  this  place.  He  said,  that  in  plen- 
tiful years  of  cider,  when  the  lower  class  of  people  had 
opportunity  to  drink  large  quantities  of  it,  he  usually  had 
many  patients  from  Herefordshire ; but  that  a few  weeks 
confinement  to  water-drinking,  and  some  medicines  of  the 
cooling  and  purging  kind,  generally  sent  them  home— ^sober, 
and  in  their  senses. 

" This  observation,  you  see,  corresponds  with  what  the 
late  Dr.  Wall  says  with  regard  to  the  quantity  instead  of  the 
quality  of  cyder,  considered  as  a cause  of  insanity.  I know 
not  whether  the  lunatic  hospital  has  taken  placfe  at  Hereford. 
Whenever  it  does,  we  may,  if  this  observation  be  well  founded, 
conclude,  that,  on  such  occasions,  it  will  be  very  full  of  pa- 
tients j and  the  praftice  particularly  successful.” 

Dr.  Hardy  observes,  that  in  the  north  part  ofDevofi,  where 
he  resided  for  several  years,  and  where  large  quantities  of  ci- 
der are  generally  drunk,  so  as  to  render  the  colic  frequent, 
and  endemic,  instances  of  lunacy  are  by  no  means  more  com- 
mon than  in  any  other  part  of  England,  in  which  he  has 
had  an  opportunity  of  making  observation: — that  he  is  certain 
that  the  medical  gentlemen  in  that  part  of  Devon  Would  agree 
in  this  opinion : — that  it  appears  to  him  highly  probable,  that 
had  instances  of  lunacy  often  occurred  among  the  drinkers  of 
aider  on  the  other,  or  southern  side  of  the  county,  he  must 

K 2 ’ have 


132 


CAUSES  OF  insanity. 


vegetable  poisons  have, — such  as  the  hyoscyaiTnis% 
strainonimn',  napellus'',  beliaclonna'',  oenaiithe'^, 
inerciirialis’',  cannabis-',  coriaria'",  certain  species 
of  fungi,  and  a few  more, — siiXMS  they  atic6f 
the  brain  nearly  in  the  same  way  as  wine  and 
opium,  arc  likely,  under  similar  circumstances, 
to  give  rise  to  similar  cfiecls,  and  to  be,  like 
them,  ]irodu6live  of  insanity.  Some  we  know 
have  ad  nail/  produced  it ; as  the  napellus,  in 
the  case,  already  related,  of  Van  Helmont* *  ; 
the  stramonium,  on  various  occasions,  and  among 
the  rest,  in  certain  instances  of  supposed  witch- 


have  heard  of  it  from  several  gentlemen  with  whom  he  had 
a correspondence; — so  tl.at  he  thinks,  that  the  observation  of 
Dr.  Wall  is  not  confirmed  among  the  cider- drinkers  of  De- 
vonshire. 

^ Vide  Sauvagesti  Nosol.  Method.  Class  Tui.  Gen.  xvii. 
Paraphrosyne.  tom.  iii.  Pait  i.  p.  3t)4,  &c.  &c.  et  Gen.  xix. 
Daemonorr>ania  Sagarum,  ib.  p.  393.  Daemonomania  Indica, 
ib.  p.  400. 

* Hyoscyamus  niger  of  LtnnjEUs — common  henbane. 

‘ Datura  stramonium  of  Linnaeus — thorn-apple. 

'*  Aconitum  napellus  of  LiNNiEus — monk’s-hood. 

Atropa  belladonna  of  Linn;eus — deadly  nightshade,  or 
dwale. 

tlMianthe  crocata  of  Linn.eu9 — hemlock  dropwort. 

Mercurialis  perennis  of  Linn.eus — dog's  mercury. 

y Cannabis  sativa  of  Linn^us — hemp. 

* Coriaria  myrtifolia  of  I.inn.eus — myrtle-leaved  sumach. 

Vide  supra,  vol.  i.  p.  163. 


craft 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


133 


craft  related  by  Sauvages’’  ; and  several  others. 
Indeed  examples  of  temporary  delirium  and  in- 
sanity excited  by  vegetable  poisons,  though  hap- 
pily not  familiar,  but  too  frequently  occur  in  the 
course  ot  medical  rending,  and  pradiice.  Nor 
are  there  wanting  melancholy  instances,  in  which 
poisons  of  this  sort  have  given  occasion  to  insa- 
nity, or  idiotism,  which  have  not  only  been  more 
permanent,  but  have  remained  during  life.  Ex- 
amples of  the  first  kind,  or  temporary  insanity, 
from  narcotic  vegetables,  may  readily  be  found  in 
the  common  histories  of  their  poisonous  effecls: 
— of  the  latter  a most  detestable  one  is  furnished 
by  the  pradlice  of  some  Indian  nations,  whose 
sovereigns,  as  we  are  told,  inebriate,  and  stupify, 
the  mental  faculties  of  their  voun2;er  brothers, 
and  of  others  whose  degree  of  consanguinity  is 
near  enough  to  excite  their  jealousy,  by  a prepa- 
ration of  a poisonous  vegetable  called  bangue"  ; 

and 


^ Sauvagesii  Nosol.  Method.  Class  viii.  Gen.  xvli.  Spec.  5. 
Paraphrosyne  m.agica,  tom.  iii.  Part.  i.  p.  3/0,  et  Gen.  xix. 
Djemonoroania  Sagarnm,  ib.  p.  303. 

Supposed  to  be  the  same  with  the  cannabis  sativa  ; from 
which  however  Sir  Hans  Sloane  says  it  essentially  differs. — 
Vide  Raii  Histor.  Plantamm,  tom.  i.  p.  I5p. — I do  not 
find  that  us  was  certain  about  it.  In  the  Amoenitates 

Academicje,  vol.  vi.  p.  184,  he  supposes,  on  the  authority 
of  Herman,  that  it  is  the  hibiscus  sabdariffa.  His  chara6ler 
of  the  cannabis  sativa  is,  that  it  is — narcolica  phantastica,  de- 
Oientans,  anodyna,  rrpellens,— “ narcotic,  produdtive  of  ideal 

K 3 delirium. 


134 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


and  thus  effectually  extinguish  the  aspirations  of 
ambition  in  the  imbecility  of  idiotism : — and  of 
both,  in  the  effcCls  of  philtresj  or  love-potions  j 
which  have  sometimes  been  charged,  with  appa- 
rently sufficient  ground,  as  the  causes  of  these  dis- 
orders ; and  in  the  preparation  of  which,  it  is  pro- 
bable that,  among  other  ingredients,  some  nar- 
cotic poison  was  usually  em[)loyed. 

That  the  safe,  or  at  least  the  agreeable,  inters 
nal  use  of  some  such  vegetable  production,  be- 
sides the  juice  of  the  poppy,  was  known  in  times 
of  very  high  antiquity,  seems  evident  from  what 
we  read  in  Homer  of  a medicament  which  Helen 
mixed  with  the  wine  which  she  gave  to  TELE7 
MACH  us,  and  his  companion. 


Mean  lime  with  genial  joy  to  warm  the  soql. 

Bright  Hblen  mix’d  a mirth-inspiring  bowl  : 
Temper’d  w'ith  drugs  of  sov’ reign  use,  t’assuage 
The  boiling  bosom  of  tumultuous  rage  j 
To  clear  the  cloudy  front  of  wrinkled  care, 

And  dry  the  tearful  sluices  of  despair: 

Charm’d  with  that  virtuous  draught,  th’  exalted  mind 
All  sense  of  woe  delivers  to  the  wind. 


delirium,  and  madness,  anodyne,  ^nd  repellent.” — Linn. 
Mater.  Medic,  p.  214. — Lorry  supposes  it  to  be  the  sola- 
imm  furiosum  ; that  is  the  atropa  belladonna  of  LinnjEus,  or 
deadly  nightshade. — De  Melancholia,  Part  i.  cap.  iv.  tom.  i. 
p.  88. — See  Baron  De  Tott’s  Account  of  the  Takers  of  Opium 
in  Turkey. — See  also  Campbell’s  Journey  over-land  to  India, 
-ito.  1796,  Part  iii.  p.  /. 


Ihough 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


135 


Tliougl)  on  the  blazing  pile  hi.s  parent  lay. 

Or  a lov’d  brother  groan’d  his  liie  away. 

Or  darling  son  oppress’d  by  ruffian  force 
Fell  breathless  at  his  feet,  a mangled  corse. 

From  morn  to  eve,  impassive  and  serene. 

The  man  entranc’d  would  view  the  deathful  scene'*. 

The  intoxicating  efFe6\s,  so  dissimilar  in  some 
respects  from  those  of  opium,  here  ascribed  to 
this  exhilarating  beverage  ; and  attributed  to  the 
addition  of  a mysterious  drug,  which,  from  the 
first  epithet  apjdied  to  it  by  the  immortal  bard, 
lias  obtained  the  appellation  of  nepenthes;  as 
well  as  the  total  ignorance  of  the  Greek  writers, 
to  whom  the  properties  of  opium  were  no  secret, 
concerning  tlie  nature  of  this  wonder-working 
substance  which  Helen  is  said  to  have  infused 
into  the  bowl ; seem  plainly  to  indicate,  that  it 
was  something  different  from  simple  opium,  of 
which,  however,  some  portion  might  possibly 
enter  into  the  composition. — According  to  the 
poet — 

These  drugs  so  friendly  to  the  joys  of  life, 

Bric^ht  Helen  learn’d  from  Tuone’s  imperial  wife; 

Who  sway’d  the  sceptre,  where  prolific  Nile 
With  various  simples  clothes  the  fatten’d  soil. 

With  wholesome  herbage  mix’d,  the  direful  bane 
Of  vegetable  venom  taints  the  plain'. 

It  seems,  indeed,  highly  credible,  that  the 

'*  Pope’s  Homer’s  Odyssey,  book  iv.  v.  301,  &c. 

' Ibid,  book  iv.  Vf315,  &c. 

K 4 


Egyp- 


136 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


Egyptians,  and  the  inhabitants  of  India,  had  a 
very  early  knowledge  of  inebriating  substances  of 
this  sort ; since,  besides  what  may  he  colIe6ied 
from  these  verses  of  IIomeh,  and  other  psssages 
of  ancient  writers,  it  is  an  undoubted  fadl  that  they 
are  in  possession  of  several  at  this  day,  of  which 
numberless  testimonies  might  be  adduced'  ; and 

f We  are  told  by  Pbosper  Alfinus,  that  (he  Egypfiant 
were,  in  his  time,  acquainted  with  a great  variety  of  these  ine- 
briating compositions  j which  they  had  in  such  familiar  use, 
that  it  was  no  uncommon  thing  to  see  persons  intoxicated  with 
them,  and  acting  like  madmen  j and  especially  in  the  strange 
motions  of  their  heads,  and  eyes:  and  that  it  was  usual  for 
them,  when  they  wished  to  avoid  any  disagreeable  engage- 
ment, to  pxense  themselves  by  alledging  that  it  would  interfere 
wdth  their  stated  time  of  taking  the  herb  j a term  signifying 
the  taking  of  any  of  these  inebriating  substances  ; the  principal 
of  which  are  known  by  the  names  of  affion,  assis,  bosa,  bernavi, 
and  bers  5 of  all  which  he  gives  some  account. — See  his  Trea- 
tise de  Medicbia  j^gyptiorum , lib.  iv.  cap.  i.  p.  118 — 122. 

Kempfer  mentions  a medicament  of  this  sort,  the  effects  of 
which  seem  nearly  to  have  resembled  those  of  the  nepenthes. 
He  says,  that  he,  and  others,  his  companions,  partook  of  an 
cleftuary,  which  was  offered  them  at  an  entertainment  in 
India;  tipit  they  soon  felt  themselves  so  exceedingly  happy, 
as  they  could  no  way  express  but  by  laughing,  roapng,  apd 
embracing  each  other;  that,  in  the  evening,  when  they  mounted 
their  horses  to  return  home,  they  seemed  to  be  flying  through 
the  clouds  upon  Pegasug,  surrounded  with  rainbows ; ih^t 
when  they  came  to  themselves,  they  eat  most  voraciously  of 
xyhatever  was  set  before  them  j and  that  they  were,  on  the  day 
followitig,  in  perfect  health  both  of  mind  and  body. — Sec  Sau* 
vAGEsn  NosoL  Method.  Class,  viii.  Gen.  xvii.  toi».  iii.  Fart.  i. 
p.  371. 


► 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  137 

it  is  well  known  that  the  opinions,  manners,  and 
customs  of  the  inhabitants  of  India,  and  of  other 
Asiatic  nations,  have  undergone  very  little  change 
since  the  earliest  times  in  which  we  have  anv  ac- 
count  of  them.  Some  of  these  the  Egyptians 
prepare  themselves  ; while  others,  with  whose 
preparation  they  are  unacquainted,  they  still  re- 
ceive, as  they  probably  always  received  them, 
from  the  luxurious  Asiatics,  to  whom  they  may 
have  been  originally  indebted  for  them  all  ; and 
with  whom  it  is  cei’tain  that  they  carried  on  a 
considerable  traffic,  as  we  learn  fiom  sacred  his- 
tory, long  before  the  days  of  Homer,  or  of 
Helen. 

But  whether  Helen  was  really  possessed  of 
any  composition  of  this  kind,  of  which  she  knew 
the  use,  if  not  the  preparation  ; and  which  she 
adlually  mixed  w'ith  the  wine  presented  to  her 
guests  on  this  occasion : or  whether  the  w hole 
be  no  more  than  a probable  fidlioii  of  the  poet, 
who  might  frequently,  during  his  travels  in 
Egypt,  have  seen  theeffedlsof  such  compositions, 
and  might  possibly  have  been  instrudled  in  the 
preparation  of  some  of  them : yet,  the  pleasures 
of  this  species  of  inebriation  having  never  received 
the  sandtion  of  custom,  or  been  naturalized,  in 
Greece;  the  knowledge  of  the  methods,  by 
which  it  might  be  excited,  might  either  die  with, 
or  not  long  survive,  the  first  introducers. 

EfFedls  of  a very  different  kind  from  those  pro- 
duced 


I 


138 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


cluced  by  vegetable  narcotics,  and  poisons,  and’ 
singularly  uncommon  in  their  nature,  and  ap- 
pearance, have  long  been  attributed  to  tlie  veno- 
mous bite  of  the  Apulian  tarantula"  ; which, 
if  real,  are,  perhaps,  to  be  considered  as  symp- 
toms of  a peculiar  variety  of  impulsive  insanity. 
Baglivi,  whose  judgment,  abilities,  and  inqui- 
sitive turn  of  mind,  were  not  very  compatible 
with  the  blindness  of  credulity  ; and  whose  situa- 
tion was  favourable  to  an  inquiry  into  the  real 
truth  of  this  matter ; enumerates  these  extra- 
ordinary eif'e^ts,  as  known,  and  indisputable ; 
relates  several  particular  histories  of  them  ; and 
minutely  describes  the  spider  from  whose  bite 
they  are  supposed  to  proceed  ; which,  he  tells  us, 
is  no  where  poisonous  but  in  Apulia,  and  there 
only  in  the  plains,  and  not  on  the  neighboui  ing 
mountains,  in  the  summer  season,  and  especially 
in  the  dog-days  ; and  adds,  that  the  reapers  in 
the  time  of  harvest  arc  so  liable  to  be  wounded 
by  these  pernicious  little  animals,  that  they  wear 
short  boots  with  an  express  view  to  defend  their 
legs  from  their  bite'’. 

But  notwithstanding  the  authority  of  such  a 
man  as  Baglivi,  who  was  an  eye-witness  of  many 
of  the  fa61s  which  he  relates  ; some  late  travellers, 
of  respe6lable  cbaradler,  who  h^vc  inquired  into 

< Arnnea  Tamntiila  of  LiiVn;eus. 

“ Baglivi  Dissertatio  de  Anaton^e,  Morsu,  et  Effedibiis 
Tarantulae.  Operum,  p.  sgg.  See. 

this 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


139 


dlls  matter  upon  the  spot,  have  treated  the  whole 
as  a table,  or  a cheat ; cr,  at  best,  as  a popular 
delusion'. 

4.  Insanity  may  likewise  take  its  rise  from  dis^ 
ordered  states  of  the  womb^  ovaries,  and  sper^ 
'malic  vessels,  and  of  the  parts  with  which 
they  are  conne^ded.  The  conditions  of  these 
parts  here  principally  intended,  are  such  as  are  by 
their  nature  adapted  to  becoine  the  immediately 
exciting  causes  of  the  two  varieties  of  appetitive 
insanity,  satyriasis,  and  nymphomania. 

These  disorders  may  owe  their  origin  to  an 
immoderate,  and  unseasonable,  indulgence  in  las- 
civious ideas,  in  persons  who  are  withheld  by  reli- 
gious, modest,  or  other  fear,  from  the  irregular 
gratification  of  an  appetite,  which,  in  their  situ- 
ation, cannot  be  gratified,  decently,  lawfully,  or 
conscientiously': — to  the  temporary,  and  acci- 
dental existence  of  an  undue  sensibility  of  these 
parts,  arising  from  merely  corporeal  causes ; as 


* See  Foster’s  Translation  of  Baron  Riedesel’s  Travels 
through  Sicily,  and  that  part  of  Italy  formerly  called  Magna 
Graecia,  i5cc.  p.  2J2,  &c. 

j Vide  Sauvagesii  Nosol.  Method,  tom.  iii.  Part.  i. 
jCl.iss.  viii.  Gen.  xiv.  1,  p,  343,  et  2,  p.345. — Sennerti  Oper. 
tom,  iv.  p.  6S8. — Zacuti  Lusitani  Prax.  Medic.  Admirand. 
lib.  ii.  Obs.  93,  tom.  ii.  ad  Calcem,  p.  64. — Schenckii, 
Obs.  Med.  Rar,  p.  134,  Obs.  4. 

the 


140 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


the  liixuriancy  of  vigorous  youth’' ; the  occasional 
irritation  of  intemperance  in  diet,  and  especially 
in  wine,  and  too  nourishing,  or  high-seasoned 
meats ; the  suppression  of  the  menstrual  dis- 
charge’ ; the  unseasonable  abstinence  of  virtuous 
persons  from  the  matrimonial  connexion’" ; or 
the  like" : — or  to  something  preternatural  in  their 
strudiire,  either  coeval  with  the  birth,  or  after- 
wards superinduced  by  disease®,  so  favourable  to 
the  produ61ion  of  these  disorders,  as  readily  to 
give  rise  to  them  ; and  especially  when  aided  by 
the  accidental  co-operation  of  any  suitable  excit- 
ing cause. 

^ Seminis  reteml  ardor,  Hoffmanni  Supplera.  Secund, 
Part.  Secund.  De  Mentis  Morbis  ex  Morbosa  Sanguinis  circn- 
latione  ortis,  § l6,  p,  336. — Bartholinc  Hist.  Anat.  Bar. 
Gent  2,  Hist  6q,  p,  258.  Vide  etiam  Sauvagesu  Nos. 
Meth.  See.  supra  citat,  s 

* Mensium  Suppressio,  Hoffm.  ib,— Schenckii  ib. 

I-ymphae  Seminalis  diuturna  nimis  retentio.  Hoffm.  ib. 
§ g,  p.  333  — SAUVAG.sib.  p.  3-44. 

" Vide  Senxerti  Oper.  tom.  iv,  p.  68S.  Where  we  are. 
told,  “ De  muliere  nupta,  quae  in  furorem  uterinum  per  inter- 
A'alla  incidit,  cum  noii  csstt  prnr.gnans  ; si,  scilicet,  post  par- 
turn  inter  annum  aut  duos  non  conciperet.  Postquam  vero  a 
viro  concepit,  semper  libera  fuit.” 

® Clitoris  mirae  m-agnitudinis.  Ovarium  maximae  magnitu- 
clinis,  &c.  &e.  Eonkti  Sepulch.  tom.  i.  p.  2l6.  Obs,  1. — 
Testiculus  sinister  pugni  magnitudinem  circiter  adaequans,  Sec. 
Id,  ib.  p.  220,  2. — Cadavera  ostendere  clitoridem  tumidam, 
ovaria  solito  inajora,  tubas  Failopii  clausas.  Sauvag.  ib. 
p.  346, — Clitoridem  obsidet  materies  hcrpetica  acris,  mordax. 
Id.  ib.  p.  346,  4. 


It 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


141 


It  has  been  remarked,  that  the  maniacal  are 
in  general  peculiarly  disposed  to  be  amorous. 
But  though  this  is  not  true,  it  is  a certain  fa£I, 
lliat  they  are  sometimes  so  in  a very  disgusting 
degree.  This  I have  frequently,  observed  in  per- 
sons who,  when  in  their  right  minds,  were  mo- 
dest, sober,  and  religious ; and  who  had  pro- 
bably but  little,  if  at  all,  indulged  in  wanton  ideas. 

In  such  cases,  this  symptom  has  not  made  it.s 
appearance  early  in  the  disorder  ; nor  discovered 
itself  till  the  insanity,  which  had  originally  no 
connexion  with  appetite,  has  acquired  a very  for- 
midable magnitude,  and  the  moral  sense  been 
much  impaired  by  the  almost  total  derangement 
of  reason. 

When  satyriasis,  or  nymphomania,  appear  thus 
late  in  the  disorder,  it  is  probable  that  they  arc 
the  consequence  of  some  very  erroneous,  and  ab- 
surd notions  or  delusive  images,  which  originate 
in  the  disordered  state  of  the  brain. 

But  when  they  are  the  first,  and  most  promi- 
nent symptoms,  and  precede  the  other  indications 
of  insanity  ; they  arise  out  of  some  of  the  causes 
above-mentioned ; which,  first  exciting  inordi- 
nate and  ungovernable  appetite,  lay  the  foun- 
dation of  insanity  as  its  natural  offspring. 

How  such  inordinate  appetites  should  generate 
insanity,  may  readily  be  conceived,  if  we  refledl, — 
that  it  is  of  their  nature  to  dwell  perpetually  upon 
their  obje6t,  to  the  exclusion  of  almost  every 

other; 


142 


Causes  op  insanity. 


other  ; — that  this  incessant  brooding  over  the  obr- 
jedl  of  desire,  soon  efFediually  banishes  sleep ; — 
that  the  unconquerable  desire  of  vitious,  and  un- 
lawful gratification,  is  not  only  attended  with  con- 
stant watching, . but  with  shame,  impatience, 
fear,  anxiety,  remorse,  and  all  those  uneasy,  and 
agonizing  feelings,  which  naturally  accompany 
the  agitation  of  contending  passions,  the  violent 
and  painfat  straggles  between  conscience  and  in- 
clination, virtue  and  appetite  ; — and  that  while 
of  itself  it  powerfully  impels  the  blood  into  the 
head;  and  heats,  and  excites  the  adlivity  of  the 
brain  ; these  immediate,  and  necessary  effeds  of 
amorous  propensity,  are  much  heightened  by 
the  co-operating  influence  of  the  above-mentioned 
unavoidable  concomitances,  and  consequences. 
Since  close  attention  toonesubjed,  uninterrupted 
watching,  and  the  painful  agitation  of  various 
and  opposing  passions,  all  determine  the  blood 
too  copiously  to  the  head,  and  are  powerful  agents 
in  the  produdion  of  insanity. 

To  all  this  may  be  added,  the  peculiar  sympa- 
thy which  subsists  between  these  organs  and  the 
whole  system  of  the  brain  and  nerves  ; and  their 
tendency,  when  in  too  irritable  a state,  to  propa- 
gate an  undue  degree  of  irritability  throughout 
tlie  body, — to  produce  hysterical  spasms,  and 
other  symptoms  of  nervous  afFedion, — and  to  ex- 
cite that  sympathetic,  and,  as  it  might  not  impro- 
perly be  termed,  hysterical  delirium,  the  con- 
nexion 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


M3 


tiexion  of  which  with  disorders  of  the  womb’’, 
ovaries,  and  spermatic  vessels,  we  are  better  able 
to  prove,  than  to  account  for. 

Happily  satyriasis,  and  nymp'homania,  are  not 
very  common.  The  latter,  fur  various,  and  ob- 
vious reasons,  is  more  frequent  than  the  former ; 
the  delicacy,  timidity,  restraint,  and  peculiar  na- 
tural economy,  of  the  fair  sex,  rendering  them 
more  liable  to  the  one  ; than  the  licentious  free- 
dom of  indulgence,  in  which  men  too  generally 
allow  themselves,  leaves  them  in  danger  of  the 
other. 

5.  The  peculiar  economy  of  the  womb,  in  the 
human  species  ; its  monthly  discharge  during  a 
certain  period  of  life,  and  the  customary  evacu- 
ation from  it,  termed  the  Lochia,  after  lying-in  ; 
the  influence  which  these  haemorrhages  have  upon 
the  state  of  the  vascular  svstem  ; their  connexion 
with  health  ; and  the  sympathy  wliich  subsists 
between  the  womb  and  the  rest  of  the  bodv  in 
general,  and  the  breasts  in  particular;  are  striking 
circumstances  in  the  female  system. 

If  we  consider  the  condition  of  the  womb  dur- 
ing pregnancy,  its  gradual  and  immense  disten- 
sion, and  the  extraordinary  increase  at  the  same 


P See  a very  curious,  and  interesting  case,  of  this  kind  of 
delirium,  in  Lorry's  Treatise,  Dc  Melancholia,  tom,  i.  part.  i. 
cap.  iii.  p.  79. 


time 


144 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


time  In  the  thickness  of  its  spongy  substance, 
owing  probably  to  the  unfolding  of  the  infinity  of 
blood-vessels  with  which  it  is  supplied,  and  which, 
with  the  blood  that  fills  them,  compose  the 
greatest  part  of  its  bulk  ; if  we  consider  the  un- 
usual quantity  of  blood  which  must  be  prepared 
to  supply  these  vessels,  and  to  furnish  nourish- 
ment, and  Increase,  to  the  growing  foetus  ; if  we 
consider  the  sudden  alteration  in  the  capacity  of 
this  organ,  after  the  birth  of  the  child,  and  that 
there  is  then  no  longer  a demand  for  any  extraor- 
dinary supply  of  blood,  either  to  distend  the  one, 
or  to  nourish  the  other  ; and  at  the  same  time  re- 
fle^l  on  the  violence,  and  injury,  which  the 
womb,  and  neighbouring  parts  may  have  under- 
gone during  delivery  ; and  how  liable  they  are  to 
suffer  from  a variety  of  causes,  at  first  of  infiam- 
mation,  and  afterwards  of  putridity ; and  if  to 
these  considerations  we  add  the  increased  irrita- 
bility both  of  the  womb,  and  of  the  rest  of  the 
body,  as  well  from  the  pains  of  labour,  and  those 
which  succeed  it,  from  the  dissipation  of  the  ner- 
vous power,  and  diminution  of  strength,  as  from 
the  other  causes  above-mentioned,  and  from  the 
extraordinary  changes  that  are  now  to  take  place 
in  the  system,  to  provide  for  the  nourishment  of 
the  infant,  by  new  ways  in  its  new  state  ; we  shall 
not  be  surprised  that  a variety  of  distressing,  and 
alarming  disorders,  and  among  the  rest  that  insa- 
nity itself,  should  be  the  common  consequences 

of 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


145 


of  too  small  a discharge  of  this  kind  ; and,  espe- 
cially, of  its  sudden  diminution,  or  suppression 
altogether". 

Insanity  rriay  be  produced  by  these  means  in 
several  ways.  For  either  the  blood  with  which 
the  habit  may  be  supposed  to  abound  in  an  extra- 
ordinary degree,  in  the  latter  months  of  preg- 
nancy, and  beyond  w’hat  is  consistent  with  health, 
if  retained  in  the  body  after  delivery,  may  in  con- 
sequence of  the  sudden  suppression,  or  great  di- 
minution, of  its  discharge,  be  diverted,  by  some 
accidental,  and  imperceptible  cause,  to  the  brain; 
or  an  inflammatory  state  of  the  womb  may,  by 
these  means,  be  brought  on,  and  the  brain  may 
suffer,  during  the  inflammatory  adlion  of  the 
heart  and  arteries^  by  the  violence  of  that  adhon, 
by  the  sympathy  between  the  two  organs,  or  by 
some  accidental  determination  to  the  brain,  or 
constitutional  irritability  in  its  vessels,  or  other 
peculiar  predisposition  ; or  it  may  suffer,  from 
similar  causes,  in  the  common  course  of  any 
other  kind  of  fever ; or  merely  from  the  genera- 
tion, or  increase,  of  preternatural  irritability,  and 
consequent  hysterical  symptoms,  by  such  devia- 
tions of  this  evacuation  from  its  natural  procedurCj 
without  the  concurrence  of  any  perceptible  fever : 
the  agency  of  all  which  in  the  production  of  in- 
sanity may  be  assisted  by  improper  medicines, 
diet,  or  regimen  ; by  violent  perturbations  of 

VOL.  II.  L mind  j 


i'46  CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 

mind  ; or  by  various  other  incidental,  and  con- 
spiring causes. 

If  to  the  consideration  of  all  these  circum- 
stances of  danger,  with  which  the  deficiency,  or 
the  sudden  diminution,  or  suppression,  of  the 
lochial  discharge,  are  accompanied,  we  add  that 
of  the  numerous  causes  from  which  these  irregu- 
larities may  originate  ; and  the  frequent  misma- 
nagement of  nurses,  friends,  and  attendants ; 
which  happily,  however,  are  now  much  less  com- 
mon than  formerly  ; we  cannot  but  admire  the 
kind  superintendence  of  Providence,  and  the  sur- 
prising efficacy  of  Nature,  in  the  preservation  of 
lying-in  women  ; and  ought  rather  to  w^onder 
that  they  so  often  escape,  than  that  they  some- 
times suffer,  violent  disorders  after  delivery,  and 
that  delirium,  and  insanity,  are  not  the  least  fre- 
quent of  these  disorders'’. 

It  is,  probably,  owdng  to  similar  causes,  that 
is  to  plenitude,  fever,  and  increased  irritability; 
and  not  to  a translation  of  the  milk  to  the  brain  ; 
or,  as  the  French  term  it,  depot  laiteux  sur  le 
cerveaii ; tlvat  tlie  non  appearance,  or  sudden 


’ Vide  IIoFFMANNi  Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  Iv.  part.  iv.  cap. 
vlli.  § 22,  et  § 27.  Oper.  tom.  ill.  p.  255,  et  256. — Boneti 
Med.  Septentr.  Collat.  lib.  i.  .seft.  19,  cap.  ix.  sub  Fin.  p.  188. — 
Van  Swjf.ten  Comment,  in  Boeru,  Aph6r.  § 1127,  tom.  iii. 
p.  531,  &'C. 


cessa- 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.  147 

Cessation,  of  this  salutary  secretion,  are  some- 
times succeeded  by  insanity  : and  especially  if 
accompanied,  or  preceded,  by  a suppression  of 
the  lochia ; a'nd  Nature  be  not  speedily  relieved 
by  a fortunate  flow  of  the  menstrual  discharge'. 

As  the  lochia  are  an  occasional,  so  the  menses ^ 
or  catemenia,  are  a periodical  evacuation,  of  su- 
perfluous blood,  by  the  vessels  of  the  womb;  and 
both  arc  the  consequences  of  a plethoric  state, 
either  general  or  partial.  Their  suppression  may, 
therefore,  so  far  as  the  circumstances  are  similar,’ 
bring  on  similar  eflC(fls,  by  similar  means.  As 
they  are  not  accompanied  with  the  pain,  and  vio- 
lence, of  child-birth  ; nor  with  so  extraordinary, 
and  sudden  a cliange  in  the  state  of  the  womb,  as 
is  experienced  after  delivery  ; so  their  suppression 
will  be  less  liable  to  be  attended  with  inflamma- 
tory, or  feverish  symptoms ; and  its  effedls  will 
usually  be  less  rapid,  and  less  alarming  ; and  will 
rather  be  the  produce  of  gentle,  gradual,  and  per- 
severing influence,  than  of  urgent,  and  impetu- 
ous force  : and  while  the  former  attacks  the  deli- 
cate female  fabric  with  violence,  and  by  storm  ; 
the  latter  will  insensibly  undermine  it  by  repeated, 
and  unremitting  efforts. 

Its' operations  are  diredled  to  produce  an  unna- 
turally plethoric  state ; to  distend,  and  overload. 


^ Vide  Sauvagesii  Nosol.  Method,  tom.  Hi.  part.  i.  CIa.ss. 
viii.  Gen.  xx.  2,  Mania  La6tea,  vol.  iv.  p.  405. 

h 2 


the 


14S 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


the  vessels,  in  particular,  which  are  distributed 
through  the  abdominal  viscera  ; to  obstrudt,  and 
counteract,  the  regular  proceedings,  and  energies 
of  Nature  ; to  excite  disorderly  determinations  of 
blood,  and  hemorrhages,  in  various  parts'  ; to 
create  a morbid  degree  of  irritability  in  the  womb, 
and  of  consequence  in  the  whole  system  ; to 
weaken  digestion  ; impede  chylification  ; deprave 
nourishment;  enfeeble  the  tones;  produce  lan- 
guor, indolence,  debility,  low  spirits,  and  dejec- 
tion ; in  all  these  ways,  aided  by  a suitable  con- 
currence of  conspiring  circumstances,  to  give  oc- 
casion to  determinations  of  the  circulating  fluid  to 
the  head  ; and  not  onlv  to  create  hvsterical,  and 
liypochondriacal  -symptoms,  and  melancholy ; 
but,  at  one  time  or  another,  almost  every  possible 
variety  of  insanity*. 

And 


* Vide  Hoffmanni  Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  iii.  sc(5t.  1,  cap.  lx. 
§ 3,  4,  5,  6,  7.  Oper.  tom.  i.  p.  340,  See. — et  Med.  Ral. 
Syst.  tom.  iv.  Part.  iv.  cap.  viii.  §22,  etc/.  Operum  tom. iii. 
p.  255. — Aldeuti,  IntrodutSt,  in  Universam  Mcdicinam, 
Parti,  p.  150. 

' Instances  of  insanity,  from  a suppression  of  the  menses, 
are  very  common.  I shall  only  refer  to  a few. — Hoffman 
relates  a case  of  a periodical  delirium,  with  epileptic  fits,  from 
a suppression  of  the  menses,  which  was  brought  on  by  anger. — 
Operum  vo\.  iv.  cas.  38,  p.  04. — Schenckius  relates  one  of 
nymphomania,  and  one  of  mania.,  from  the  same  cause. — Oh. 
Med.  liar  lib.  i.  p.  134,  Obs.  4,  et  p.  138.  Obs.  3. — Glaus 
Bokrichius  gives  one,  in  which  the  brain  was  so  much  af- 

feded 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


149 


xA.nd  not  only  the  suppression  ot  the  menses, 
after  they  have  been  accustomed  regularly  to  flow  ; 
but  their  long  and  obstinate  retention,  or  non- 
appearance  at  the  time  of  life  when  they  ought 
naturally  to  show  themselves  ; may  give  occasion 
to  insanity.  In  the  latter  case,  the  disordered 
state  of  the  brain  will  originate  from  ('lauses  in-  a 
great  measure  similar  to  those  which  give  rise  to 
it  in  the  former  ; but  especially  from  debility  of 
the  whole  vascular  system,  from  a languid  state 
of  the  chylopoietic  viscera,  from  general  weak- 
ness, and  a diminution  of  all  the  tones. 

The  suppression  of  habitual,  and  periodical, 
discharges  of  blood  from  the  hemorrhoidal  ves- 
sels, commonly  called  the  piles,  is  likewise  a 
source  of  insanity.  This  evacuation,  though  a 
preternatural  one,  and  always  the  indication  of  a 
disordered  state,  becomes  to  some  persons,  by 


fe6led  by  the  suppression  of  this  evacuation,  that  the  memory 
was  almost  obliterated  ; so  that  the  unhappy  sufferer  not  only 
became  timid;  and  distressed,  but  though  a very  religious  per- 
son, could  not  so  far  recolleft  herself,  as  to  repeat  the  Lord’s 
Prayer. — A6i.  Hafniens.  vol.  ii.  Obs,  78,  p.  ipd. — Zacutus 
Lusitanus  furnishes  an  instance  of  deep  melancholy  from  a 
suppression  of  the  menses — Operiim  tom.  i.  p.  71,  Obs.  31. — 
And  Bonetus  two  cases  of  insanity  from  the  same  cause  j 
which  were  both  cured  j one  by  the  restoration  of  that  evacu- 
ation, and  the  other  by  the  regular  course  of  the  lochia  after 
lying-in. — Med,  Septentr,  Collat.  lib,  viii.  sc6t,  jp,  Obs.  1 et  2, 
lorn  ii.  p.  421. 


habit^ 


l3 


150 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


habit,  as  essential  to  health,  as  the  above-men- 
tioned natural  discharges'",  and  in  such  cases,  its 
suppression  may  bring  on  insanity ; either  sud- 
denly, by  inducing  a plethoric  state  of  the  blood- 
vessels, and  exciting  an  extraordinary  determina- 
tion of  the  superabundant  blood  to  the  head  ; or 
slowly,  by  loading  the  vessels  of  the  alimentary 
canal,  obstru6ling  its  fundlions,  injuring  digesr 
tion,  and  nutrition,  producing  flatulency,  hypo- 
chondriacal and  spasmodic  symptoms,  general  de- 
bility, and  weakness  of  tones. — Cases  of  insanity'^, 
in  the  produdtion  of  which  the  suppression  of  the 
hemorrhoidal  flux  appears  to  have  been  instru- 
mental, frequently  occur  both  in  reading  and 
practice.  Nor  are  there  wanting  others,  in 
v/hich,  though  tlie  disorder  has  not  been  owing 
to  a suppression  of  a customary  bleeding  of  the 
piles ; it  has  been  thought  to  have  a very  similar 
origin  ; and  has  been  reasonably  attributed  to  the 
imprudent  neglc6l  of  usual  blood-letting ; or  to 


“ Vide  Hoffmanni  Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom  iii.  seS..  I,  cap.  ix. 
§ 10 — 25.  Operum  tom.  i.  p.  .342,  &c. — Alberti  Introd.  in 
Universam  Medicinam,  part  i,  p.l66,  &c.  * 

’ Vide  Hoffmanni  Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  iii.  se<St.  1,  cap.  ix. 
§ 14,  15,  16.  Operum  tom.  i.  p.  343 — Id.  ib.  tom.  iv.  parti, 
tap.  viii,  § 22.  Operum  tom.  iii.  p.  255. — Id.  ib.  p.  264. 
pbs.  2. — Zacuti  Lusitani  Oj^r.  tom.  i.  p.  7,  col.  1,  A. — 
p.  77,  Hist.  39. — p.  7S»  Hist.  40. — Van  Swieten  Comment. 
1127,  tom.  iii.  p.  253,  &TC. 


the 


CAUSES  GF  INSANITY. 


151 


the  ceasing  of  habitual  hemorrhages  from  the 
nose'\ 

Insanity  has  also  frequently  been  observed, 
sooner  or  later  to  succeed  the  suppression  of  old 
ulcers,  or  other  preternatural  discharges  of  serous 
fluids,  whether  induced  by  disease,  or  procured 
by  art ; and  has,  therefore,  with  great  probability, 
been  attributed  to  the  suppression  which  pre- 
ceded it ; though  there  may  seem  to  be  some  dif- 
ficulty in  attempting  to  account  satisfadforily  for 
such  an  efledt  from  such  a cause. 

If  the  discharge  has  been  copious,  and  has  sud- 
denly been  suppressed  by  art,  or  ceased  sponta- 
neously ; and  no  other  evacuation  has  been  sub- 
stituted in  its  stead,  which,  in  some  circumstances, 
ought  on  no  account  to  be  omitted  ; the  super- 
abundant fluid,  which  used  to  be  separated  from 
the  blood,  to  supply  the  customary  evacuation, 
being  no  longer  wanted,  will  be  retained  in  the 
vessels  ; and  fresh  blood  being  daily  furnished  by 
habit  in  the  usual  quantity,  or  nearly,  a state  of 
plenitude  will  be  produced  ; but  how  easily  the 
brain  may  be  affedled  by  a sudden  produdtion  of 
fulness  in  the  blood-vessels,  has  already  been  no- 
ticed. It  may,  therefore,  be  supposed  that  the 
superfluous  blood  which  formerly  supplied  the 
waste  of  the  ulcer,  or  other  similar  cause  of  eva- 


* Vide  Hoffmann  I Med,  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  iv.  part.  iv.  cap. 
§ ?2.  Oper.  tom.  ii.  p,  255, 

4 cuation. 


192 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


cuatlon,  being  retained  in  the  body,  may  by  an 
accidental  influence  be  determined  to  the  brain. 
And,  in  the  case  of  some  morhid  discharges,  we 
may  farther  suppose,  that  the  same  disease  in  the 
habit  which  gave  birth  to  the  idcer,  may  excite 
a disposition  in  the  vessels  of  distant  parts,  and 
among  others  in  those  of  tlie  brain,  to  renew  in 
themselves  the  disordered  aedion  which  has  ceased 
in  the  vessels  of  the  part  originally  affe61ed  : and 
may  in  this  way  either  generate  an  immediate  dis- 
ease in  the  brain,  produdlive  of  insanity  ; or,  by 
occasioning  glandular  obslrudtions,  or  otlier  dis- 
orders in  the  abdominal  viscera,  impeding  diges- 
tion and  nutrition,  weakening  the  tones,  increas- 
ing irritability,  and  exciting  uneasy  sensations, 
may  give  rise  to  a variety  of  hypochondriacal  and 
hysterical  symptoms,  and  to  such  other  gradual 
changes,  as  may  at  length  terminate  in  this  dis- 
order. 

Besides  the  suppression  of  habitual  ulcers  of  a 
morbid  nature,  of  old  issues  and  setons,  or  of  any 
co,pious  discharges  from  the  skin,  of  which  there 
is  great  variety  ; the  suppression  o*.  some  other 
habitual  drains  has  been  accused  of  giving  occa- 
sion to  insanity  : as  ot  the  7i:/iiles  in  females  ; 
and  of  tlic  preternatural  exudation  by  the  vessels 
of  the  head,  and  hair,  in  the  inhabitants  of  Po- 
land, and  of  certain  parts  of  Russia,  Prussia,  and 
fjerinanv,  by  cutting  off  the  diseased,  and  co- 
hering locks,  v hich  constitute  the  principal,  and 

most 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY, 


153 


most  conspicuous  symptom,  of  a very  nauseous 
and  sordid  disorder,  cjdled,  from  its  peculiar  fre- 
quency in  the  former  of  these  countries,  the 
plica  Polonica' . 

OhstruSied  perspiration  has  also  been  mentioned 
among  the  causes  of  insanity,  by  Hoffman’',  and 
Van  Swieten*  ; and  a particular  instance  of  it  is 
related  by  Bonetus^  : but  as  it  is  probable  that 
this  supposed  cause  of  the  disorder  is  usually  ac- 
companied with  fever,  from  which  the  insanity 
more  immediately  proceeds  ; it  is  most  properly 
considered  as  a more  remote  cause,  tendino-  to 
excite  the  less  remote  one  of  fever,  by  the  medi- 
ation of  which  it  acts,  and  therefore  to  be  referred 
to  that  head  in  the  table  of  causes.  If,  however, 
at  any  time,  it  appears  to  give  rise  to  insanity. 


* See  a full  account  of  this  strange  disease  in  Boneti  Med. 
Septentr.  Collat.  lib,  i,  sedt.  I,  cap.  iv.  tom.  i.  p.  2.— And  a case 
of  insanity  from  this  cause  in  Sauvagesu  Nosol.  Method.  Class 
viii.  Gen.  .xix.  8.  DaemonomaniaPolonica.  tom.  iii.  part.  i.  p.  400. 
— See  also  Hoffm.  Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  iii.  sedt.  1,  cap.  viii. 
De  damnis  ex  cohibita  cuticulari  e.xcretione.  § \y , Oper. 
tom.  i p.  33G,  et  Med.  Rat.  Syst.  tom.  iv.  part  iv.  cap.  viii. 
§11.  Oper.  tom,  iii.  p.  263 

y De  Mentis  Morbis,  ex  Morbosa  Sanguinis  Circulatione 
ortis,  § 12.  Operum,  Supplem.  Secund.  Part.  Secund.  p.  334. 
— “ Praepostera  sudoris  foetidi  resiccatio.” — Hoffm.  Med.  Rat. 
Syst.  tom.  iii,  sedt.  1.  cap.  ix.  De  vitiis  ex  turbatis  sanguineis 
aliisque  evacuationibus,  §21.  Operum  tom.  i.  p.  345. 

* Comment,  in  Boerhavii  Aph.  § 1090. 

» Med.  Scptertr.  Collat.  sed.  ig,  c,  ix.  tom.  i.  p.  188. 

without 


154 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


without  producing  fever  ; such  an  effect  may  pos- 
sibly be  accounted  for  in  some  of  the  ways  in 
which  I have  endeavoured  to  account  for  the  pro- 
duction of  insanity  by  the  suppression  of  old 
ulcers,  and  other  preternatural,  and  habitual  dis- 
charges. But  it  is,  I believe,  more  frequently  a 
symptom,  than  a diredt  cause  of  insanity  : a dry 
and  harsh  skin,  and  great  detedt  of  persjiiration, 
being  a common  attendant,  in  particular,  of 
what  has  been  usually  termed  hypochondriacal 
melancholy. 

6.  In  the  cases  of  gout^  erysipelas , herpes,  or 
cutaneous  eruptions  of  various  kinds,  whose  re- 
pulsion, and  translation  to  the  brain,  are  reckoned 
in  the  table,  among  the  causes  of  insanity,  it  is 
taken  for  granted,  that  there  is  no  discharge  sup- 
pressed ; or  none  of  sufficient  moment  to  produce 
a plethoric  state,  or  otherwise  to  excite  any  ma- 
terial disturbance  in  the  animal  economy.  Their 
repulsion  appears  capable,  however,  of  giving  oc- 
casion to  insanity,  cither  by  disordering  the  sys- 
tem in  general,  and  the  first  passages  in  particu- 
lar ; and  producing  indigestion,  preternatural  irri- 
tability, uneasy  sensations,  diminished  tones, 
languor,  and  dejcdlion  ; and  affedling  the  brain 
in  consequence  of  these  disorders  jfirst  excited  in 
the  alimentary  canal,  in  the  tones,  in  the  state 
of  irritability,  and  in  the  feelings  ; or  by  diredlly 
attacking  the  brain,  and  producing  sudden,  and 

violent 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


!55 


•yiolent  insanity,  by  suddenly  increasing  the  a61ioii 
.of  its  capillary  vessels,  and  thus  giving  rise  to  a- 
suddeii  accumulation  of  blood  in  the  head,  and  a 
violent  and  disorderly  excitement  of  the  nervous 
energy,  and  of  the  fundtions  on  .vvho.se  due  pro»- 
cedure  the  sound  and  orderly  state  of  reason,  ima- 
gination, and  the  affeclions  depend. 

Melancholy,  we  are  told  by  Sydenham,  is  the 
almost  inseparable  companion  of  the  gout’’  : and 
it  is  well  known  that  indigestion,  and  all  the  con- 
sequences of  a debilitated,  and  irritable  state  of 
the  first  passages,  are  its  very  common  attend- 
ants ; and  as  it  is  so  often  in  a wandering,  and 
unsettled  state,  and  may  fix  in  almost  any  part  of 
the  body,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  that  it  may  pro- 
duce insanity  in  both  these  ways. 

But  it  must  be  acknowledged  that,  with  regard 
to  some  of  the  supposed  translations,  whether  of 
the  gout,  erysipelas,  herpes,  or  other  cutaneous 
eruptions,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  the  insa- 
nity be  not  the  cause  of  the  repulsion,  or  disap- 
pearance of  the  disorder  ; rather  than  its  transla- 
tion to  the  brain  the  cause  of  the  insanity.  And 
the  same  may  be  saicf  of  many  supposed  instances 
of  disordered  mind  from  suppressed  evacuations. 
Dr.  Mead'  has  observed  that  insanity  not  only 


^ Tradat.  cle  Podagra,  Open.  Univers.  p,  467. 

' Medical  Precepts  and  Cautions,  chap.  iii.  Works,  vol.  iii. 
p.  42— -44. 


preserves 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


Jo6 

preserves  the  patient  from  other  diseases,  but 
when  it  seizes  him  a6lually  labouring  under  them, 
lays  such  strong  claim  to  the  whole  man,  that  it 
sometimes  dispossesses  the  body  of  them  : and 
relates  a case  of  a dropsy  cured,  and  of  a con- 
sumption stopped  for  a time,  by  the  coming  on 
of  insanity.  I have  frequently  seen  instances  of 
it  succeeding  most  of  the  causes  enumerated 
under  this  article  ; have  often  met  with  it  in  per- 
sons subjedf  to  regular  fits  of  the  gout,  who  have 
not  had  the  smallest  appearance  of  their  usual 
gouty  paroxysms  during  very  long  jieriods  of  this 
disorder : and  I have  known  a case  in  which  an 
habitual  asthma  entirely  disappeared  during  more 
than  one  fit  of  insanity,  and  returned,  as  usual 
when  the  insanity  ceased. 

7.  Worms  in  the  nostrils,  or  frontal  sinuses,  a.s 
we  learn  from  medical  history,  are  another  source 
of  insanity  ; which  they  have  been  known  to  ex- 
cite in  the  most  violent  degree.  Cases  of  this 
sort  are  related  by  Feknelius,  Schneider,  and 
Antonius  De  Pozzis  ; and  Sauvages  has  a spe- 
cies of  mania  founded  upon  these,  and  some 
other  cases,  of  disease,  and  irritation,  in  the  fron- 
tal sinuses,  which  he  terms  maijia  ah  heinicrania  ,* 
of  all  which  I have  already  given  a particular  ac- 
count in  the  history  o\'  Appearances  on  Dissedlion^. 
These  fadls  throw  a considerable  light  upon  the 

* Vide  supra,  vol.  i.  p.  257,  Note  (7)  and  (8). 

gene- 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


157 


generation  of  insanity  from  causes  seated  out  of 
the  brain  ; and  contribute,  with  various  other 
painful  diseases,  to  show  the  tendency  of  exces- 
siv^e  pain,  and  irritation,  to  disorder  the  brain, 
and  disturb  the  operation  of  the  intelle6lual  fa- 
culties. 

Before  I pass  from  the  consideration  of  bodily 
to  that  ot  mental  causes,  it  may  be  proper  to  say 
something  concerning  hereditary  predisposition. 
Of  this  I have  made  no  mention  in  the  table  of 
causes : since,  supposing  such  a predisposition 
really  to  exist,  it  is  probable  that  it  is  not  con- 
fined to  any  one  precise  state  of  body,  but  is 
of  a different  nature  in  different  cases.  Indeed 
the  term  ought  to  be  considered  as  merely  relative, 
and  as  rather  expressive  of  the  peculiar  origin,  and 
generation,  of  a cause,  than  of  its  specific  quality. 
It  points  out  a general  question  relative  to  causes  ; 
not  any  one  particular  cause. 

That  the  gout,  scrophula,  consumption  of  the 
lungs,  insanity,  and  some  other  disorders,  may 
be  derived  in  some  respedl  from  our  parents, 
seems  so  plainly  proved  by  the  frequent  occur- 
rence of  striking,  and  indubitable  fadls,  that,  in 
a proper  and  limited  sense,  it  cannot,  I think  be 
denied  by  any  man  of  much  experience  and  ob- 
servation : and  to  refuse  to  diseases  capable  of  be- 
ing so  communicated  the  title,  which  they  have 
long  possessed,  hereditary  diseases,  seems  but  ob- 
jedfing  to  a name,  while  we  allow  the  reality  of 

the 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


153 

I 

the  thing  which  it  is  intended  to  signify.  BuC 
that  diseases  of  any  sort  are  hereditary  is  to  be 
admitted  only  in  a very  limited  sense.  They 
do  not  pass  from  [parents  to  their  oTspring 
with  the  certainty  of  hereditary  estates.  A va- 
riety of  circumstances,  to  us  totally  unknown, 
may  probably  in  many  instances,  disturb  the  succes- 
sion ; or,  at  least,  may  prevent  the  aciual  appear- 
ance of  the  disease  in  some  fortunate  individual, 
notwithstanding  that  the  latent  disposition  to  it 
inav  be  some  way  transmitted  by  him  to  his  pos- 
terity. It  is  indeed  a common  remark,  which  ap- 
pears to  be  verified  by  fa6I,  that  the  disease  of 
the  parent  may  appear  in  some  of  the  offspringy 
and  not  in  others;  or  may  lie  dormant  in  the 
immediate  descendant,  and  break  out  again  in  the 
next  generation.  Nor  is  this  any  thing  r^^ore 
wonderful,  particularly  when  the  disorder  exists 
only  in  one  of  the  parents,  than  that  in  temper,- 
or  outward  form,  the  children  should  variously 
resemble,  some  the  father,  some  the  mother, 
and  some  neither  the  one  nor  the  other ; or  that 
some  who  have  no  likeness  to  either  of  the  pa- 
rents, should  strikingly  resemble  some  of  their  an- 
cestors ; and  especially  if  we  consider  that  heredi- 
tary disposition  to  disease,  like  similitude  of  mind  or 
person,  in  a great  measure  depends  on  the  origi- 
nal stru6ture,  and  tones,  of  the  solids,  either  in 
general,  or  in  some  particular  parts ; as  of  the 
brain,  the  lungs,  the  stomach  and  intestines,  the 

blood- 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.  I5g 

blood-vessels,  or  the  nerves;  wlilcli  may,  or  may 
not  be  communicated,  or  when  communicated, 
may  require  habitual  growth  and  nourishment, 
or  strong  occasional  excitement,  to  give  rise  to 
the  disease  of  the  parent,  or  family.  Hence 
it  is,  that  the  son  may  receive  from  his  father  a pre- 
disposition to  insanity,  by  receiving  something 
faulty  in  the  mechanical  strudlure  of  the  brain, 
tending  to  disturb  the  operation  ot  the  mental 
fundions  ; some  weakness  in  the  alimentary  canal 
favourable  to  the  generation  of  hypochondriacal 
melancholy;  some  unfortunate  construdlion  of 
the  nervous  system,  or  unhappy  contexture  of  the 
solids,  which  may  be  produ6^ive  of  excessive  ir- 
ritability, and  weakness  of  tones  ; a too  adlive 
and  ungovernable  imagination  ; great  timidity  of 
temper  ; or  some  other  bodily  or  mental  imperfec- 
tion ; which,  though  not  necessarily,  may  be' 
very  naturally,  and  probably,  the  causes  of  insa- 
nity ; and  may  seldom  fail  to  produce  it,  when 
assisted  by  the  concurrence  of  any  suitable  excit- 
ing  cause.  With  regard,  indeed,  to  insanity, 
it  is  so  often  to  be  traced  for  generations  back  ; 
is  so  often  observed  to  spread,  and  diffuse  itself, 
through  many,  and  sometimes  through  almost  all 
the  branches  of  a family  ; and  so  often  disco- 
vers itself  in  several  individuals  of  the  same  family 
at  the  same  time;  that,  whatev'er  may  be  thought 
of  the  stria  propriety  of  calling  any  disease  he- 
reditary, which  is  not  certainly  transmitted,  and 

inherited. 


100  CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

inherited,  I cannot  have  the  smallest  hesltatioh 
in  pronouncing  that  insanity  is  frequently  com- 
niunicated  by  parents  to  their  children  ; and  thatj 
as  there  are  family  likenesses,  and  family  tem- 
pers and  dispositions,  so  this  disorder,  as  well 
as  the  gout,  and  some  others,  affords  abundant 
proof  that  there  are  family  diseases.  But,  at  the 
same  time,  I think  it  right  to  remark,  for  the 
comfort  of  those  persons  who  are  so  unhappily  cir- 
cumstanced as  to  spring  from  insane  families^ 
or  to  be  born  of  insane  parents,  that,  as  has  been 
above  observed,  this  disorder  is  not  only  not  ne- 
cessarily transmitted  to  all  of  the  same  family,  or 
parents  ; but  that  the  danger  of  its  some  time  or 
other,  seizing  them,  may  be  much  diminished,  by 
proper  attention  to  avoid  the  influence  of  occa- 
sional causes,  or  of  whatever  may  tend  to 
strengthen  the  natural  predisposition ; and  that 
there  are  instances,  in  which  the  whole  of  the  im- 
mediate progeny  have  escaped  the  insanity  of  their 
parents. 


(b)  mental 


(b)  mental  causes. 


V.  Intense  yipplication  of  Mind. 

All  our  mental  operations,  all  our  thoughts,' 
passions,  sensations,  and  exertions,  are  accom- 
panied with  corresponding  motions,  or  vibrations',' 
of  which,  though  the  nature  is  obscure,  the  exist- 
ence cannot  be  doubted ; excited  by  some  or 
other  of  the  stimuli,  of  which  I have  already  giveni 
an  account,  in  the  elementary,  arid  inconceiv- 
ably minute,  medullary  fibres,  or  other  particles, 
of  the  exquisitely  delicate  structure  of  the  brain  ; 
on  the  good  order  of  whose  curious,  and  hitherto 
inscrutable  organization,  it  is  probable  that  their 
proper,  and  undisturbed  procedure,  their  regu- 
lar and  efficacious  exertions,  chiefly  depend. 
These  motions,  and  vibrations,  like  those  of  the 
air  in  the  propagation  of  sound,  are  more  percep- 
tible and  distindl,  in  proportion  as  they  are  less 
compounded,  and  multiplied,  and  of  course,  less 
interfere  with,  and  interrupt  each  other ; and  are 
more  or  less  vivid,  in  proportion  as  they  more 
frequently  recur,  or  are  longer  continued;  and 
bear  an  exad  relation  in  liveliness,  and  intensity, 

* See  Hartley  ©nMan,  Parti,  chap.  i.  vol.  i.  p.  1—114. 
yQL.  II,  M 


1()2 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


to  the  tlioiights,  passions,  sensations,  and  exer- 
tions, from  which  they  proceed,  or  to  which  they 
give  occasion. 

Slight,  and  transitory,  thoughts,  passions,  sensa- 
tions, and  exertions,  as  they  but  little  interest  the 
mind,  so  they  make  but  feeble  impressions,  and  ex- 
cite but  faint,  and  easy  vibrations,  in  themedullary 
substance  of  the  brain  ; produce  no  material,  or  per- 
manent, change  in  its  state  ; and  if  they  weary 
the  body,  and  waste  the  nervous  power,  they  do 
it  rather  by  tlieir  number,  repetition,  and  dura- 
tion, than  by  any  violence  of  effort,  or  intense- 
ness of  aeflion. 

But  close  and  severe  thinking,  strong  and  lively 
passions,  acute  and  painful  sensations,  and  vigo- 
rous or  vehement  exertions,  are  accompanied 
with  such  corresponding  motions,  or  vibrations, 
in  the  brain  and  nerves,  as  are  capable  of  excit- 
ing the  most  considerable,  and  violent  commo- 
tions, and  are  often  produdive  of  the  most  ex- 
traordinary, as  well  as  the  most  serious  and  per- 
manent consequences.  Some  of  these  have  been 
already  mentioned,  and  many  more  wall  be  enu- 
merated in  treating  of  the  effeds  of  inteoise  ap- 
plication of  mind, — of  inordinate  passions, — and. 
of  too  great  aclivity  of  imagination, — upon 
which  I am  now  entering.  In  considering  the 
former  of  these  I am  to  inquire  into  the  effeds 
of  too  great  application  of  the  mind — 


1.  To 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITT. 


163 


1.  To  study. — The  mind  cannot  long  continue 
in  a sound  state ; or  perform  its  fundlions  with 
regularity  and  precision  ; unless,  among  other  cir- 
cumstances, the  vibrations  excited  in  the  brain, 
by  the  adlion  of  external  objedls,  or  by  the  opera- 
tions and  emotions  of  the  mind,  be  in  general  mo- 
derate, various,  free  and  unobstrudled.  For  Strong 
and  immoderate  vibrations  tend  to  obliterate,  or 
to  prevent  the  excitement  of,  others, — as  tha 
spreading  circles  of  waves  on  the  surface  of  a lake, 
originating  from  the  immersion  of  a large  body 
in  its  water,  readily  swallow  up,  and  obliterate, 
the  smaller  ones  occasioned  by  diminutive  pebbles 
throwm  within  the  circumference  of  their  fluctua- 
tion ; — or  to  excite  such  others  only  as  happen 
accidentally  to  be  intimately,  or  recently  associ- 
ated with  them  ; and  even  magnify  such  associated 
vibrations  ; while  they  obstrudf,  or  diminish, 
others  with  which  they  have  no  such  connexion  ; 
and  of  course  prevent  the  regular  operations  of 
the  mind,  and  the  natural  progress,  or  excitement, 
of  associated  vibrations : — uniform  and  invariable 
vibrations,  imply  a limitation,  and  constraint, 
which  are  the  reverse  of  that  easy  variety  of  ex- 
citement, which  a sound  state  of  brain,  and  mind, 
admits  of,  and  requires : — and  confined  and  ob- 
strudled  vibrations  imply  such  imperfedlion  in  the 
struc^lure  of  the  brain,  or  such  habitually  im- 
peded, or  such  violent  excitement,  as  are  incom- 
patible with  the  redlitude  of  those  mental  opera- 

2 tione 


i64 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


tions  on  which  depend  just  reasoning,  and  a 
sound  understanding. 

. But  it  is  of  the  nature  of  close,  and  unreinitted 
thinking,  and  especially  if  long  continued,  and 
confined  to  one,  or  a few  obje6\s,  to  excite  in- 
tense, uniform,  and  limited  vibrations ; as  well 
as  in  various  other  ways  to  impede  the  sound  ope- 
rations of  the  brain  ; and  thus  to  tend  to  the  ge- 
neration of  insanity,  in  a variety  of  ways: — for 
“ when  a person  ap])lies  himself  to  any  particular 
study,  so  as  to  fix  his  attention  deeply  on  the  ideas 
and  terms  belonging  to  it,  and  to  be  very  little 
conversant  in  those  of  other  branches  of  know- 
ledge, it  is  commonly  observed  that  he  becomes 
narrow-minded,  strongly  persuaded  of  the  truth 
and  value  of  many  things  in  his  own  particular 
study,  which  others  think  doubtful  or  false,  or 
of  little  importance,  and  after  some  time  subje6\ 
to  low  spirits,  and  the  hypochondriacal  distem- 
per.”— For — “ the  perpetual  recurrency  of  par- 
ticular ideas  and  terms  makes-  the  vibrations  be- 
Ixmo-imr  thereto  become  more  than  ordinarily  vivid, 
converts  feeble  associations  into  strong  ones,  and 
enhances  the  secondary  kleasof  dignity  and  esteem 
which  adhere  to  them,  at  the  same  time  that  ah 
these  things  are  diininislied  in  respecSf  of  other 
ideas  and  terms,  that  are  kept  out  of  view  ; and 
which,  if  they  were  to  recur  in  due  proportion, 
would  oppose  and  correcSl  many  associations  in 
the  particular  stiuly,  which  are  made  not  accord- 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.  l05 

ing  to  the  reality  of  things,  and  keep  down  onr 
exorbitant  opinions  of  its  importance.  T.  he  same 
perpetual  recurrency  of  vibrations,  atFe61:ing  one 
and  the  same  part  of  the  brain,  in  nearly  one 
and  the  same  manner,  must  irritate  it  at  last,  so 
as  to  enter  the  limits  of  pain,  and  approach  to 
the  states  peculiar  to  fear,  anxiety,  despondency, 
peevishness,  jealousy,  and  the  rest  of  the  tribe  of 
hypochondriacal  passions'’.” 

All  these  efFetfts  are  aggravated,  and  the  danger 
of  insanity  is  much  more  considerable,  if,  instead 
of  one  particular  study,  the  attention  of  the  mind 
be  still  more  limited,  be  invariably  rivetted  to  one, 
or  to  a few  connected  notions,  and  be  for  ever 
pacing  in  the  same  train  of  thoughts. 

But  whether  the  application  of  the  mind  be  long 
and  incessantly  confined  to  one  study,  or  to  one 
particular  train  of  thinking,  or  not,  it  has  a ten- 
dency to  produce  similar  effecfts,  by  its  intensity  ; 
and  at  the  same  time  to  give  occasion  to  such 
other  changes  in  the  brain,  and  in  the  whole  body, 
as  well  in  other  ways,  as  by  its  Intensity,  as 
conspire  to  aggravate  the  effects  just  mentioned, 
and  variously,  and  powerfully  militate  towards 
the  total  overthrow  of  the  good  order,  and  rec- 
titude, of  the  mental  operations.  As  will  plainly 
appear  when  w'e  attentively  consider  the  several 


Hartley  on  Man,  vol.  i.  p.  3Q/. 

O 


effedlSj 


i66 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


effedlSj  and  concomitants,  of  close  and  nnremitted 
thinking.  For,  in  the  first  place — 

(a)  When  the  mind  has  continued  long  in  an 
intensely  adtive  state,  and  es})ccially  when  it  has 
been  thus  laboriously  employed  about  one  objedf, 
it  ^nds  a diJJicullij  in  restraining  its  own  activity^ 
and  in  removing  its  attention  from  the  ohjeft 
which  has  so  long  engaged  it;  as  Is  obvious  to 
the  experience  of  every  man  who  has  used  him- 
self to  exadf,  and  patient  thinking.  And  this  hap- 
pens from  the  tendency  which  vibrations  in  the 
medullary  substance  of  the  brain,  when  once  ex- 
cited, have  to  continue ; and  from  the  increase 
of  that  tendency  jn  proportion  to  their  intense- 
ness, and  duration:  just  in  the  same  manner  as, 
when  the  same  impression  has  been  made  for  a 
long  time  upon  the  eyes  or  ears,  or  upon  the 
common  sense  of  feeling,  the  idea  of  it  will  be 
for  a considerable  time  continued,  and  perpetually 
recurring,  after  the  objedl:  which  gave  occasion 
to  it  is  withdrawn,  or  ceases  to  act.  Thus  when  we 
have  long  been  exposed  to  a glaring  light,  we  can 
scarcely  see  at  all,  for  some  time  after  exchanging 
it  for  the  common  light  of  day ; when  we  have 
been  long  attending  to  a favourite  song,  or  hav'e 
been  employed  for  a whole  evening  in  dancing,  it 
frequently  happens  that  the  air  we  have  admired 
is  for  ever  vibrating  in  our  ears,  or  that  the  mu- 
sic and  dancing  are  continued,  in  imagination, 

during 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


\ 


]6; 


(luring  the  succeeding  hours  of  repose;  and,  when 
we  have  been  but  for  a few  days  at  sea,  the  im- 
pression made  on  the  brain,  and  nerves,  by  the 
motion  of  the  ship,  has  sometimes  been  found 
to  remain  after  we  have  been  several  days  at  land. 

But  the  mind  having  once  lost,  in  any  great 
degree,  the  power  of  commanding,  and  regulating 
its  own  attention,  of  turning  it  with  facility  from 
one  objedl  to  another,  and  of  resisting  the  forci- 
ble, and  continual  recurrence,  of  any  particular 
ideas,  or  notions,  is  apt  at  length  to  be  so  bewil- 
dered by  incessantlv  brooding  upon  the  same  ob- 
jedls,  as  to  become  entirely  passive,  and  to  be  car- 
ried along  with  the  stream  of  that  a61ivity  of  the 
brain,  and  those  violent  vibrations,  which  itself  had 
excited,  but  can  no  longer  control,  or  resist ; and, 
vibrations  arising  with  little  order,  and  succeed- 
ing one  another  by  the  slightest,  and  most  ac- 
cidental connexions,  and  possessing  the  whole 
attention  of  the  thus  fascinated,  and  uuopposing 
mind,  which  is  not  now  at  liberty  to  look  round, 
to  bring  into  review,  and  to  compare,  the  various 
stores  colle6fed  by  its  former  experience,  the  most 
slight,  and  accidental  connexions,  and  the  most 
unnatural,  and  fantastical  associations,  will  acquire 
the  force,  and  possess  the  authority,  of  the  most 
powerful  and  just;  vibrations  originally  derived 
from  the  impressions  of  external  objedls,  and  for- 
tuitously renewed  in  their  absence,  will  be  as  vivid, 
^nd  receive  the  same  credit,  as  when  they  were 

4 present ; 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

present ; and  the  mind  will  become  the  sport  of  ^ 
variety  of  absurd  ideas,  notions,  and  sensations, 
which  have  little  or  no  proper  relation  to  the 
real  existence  of  external  obje<51s,  or  adequate 
foundation  in  former  experience,  pr  association, 
but  are  the  natural  and  unavoidable  result  of  such 
ungovernable  adlivity,  and  inordinate  vibrations: 
in  a word,  reason  will  be  overpowered,  and  insa- 
nity will  assume  her  place. 

Indeed,  as  it  is  of  the  nature  of  insanity  to  dw^ell 
upon  the  same  ideas,  and  notions ; sometimes 
almost  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other ; and  to  as- 
sociate all  that  occur^  hovyever  dissimilar  and  un- 
ponnedled  w'ith  the  reigning  ideas  and  notions ; 
so  intense  application  of  mipd  to  the  same  ob- 
jedl,  or  objedls,  with  little  or  nq  attention  tq 

e 

others,  and,  as  it  too  frequently  b^PPWS,  with 
the  same  disposition  to  draw  the  most  dissimilar, 
and  discordant  objedts,  into  an  agreement  with 
its  favourite  ideas,  and  notions,  puts  the  mind 
into  a state  nearly  resembling  that  of  insanity  ; 
and  must,  also,  in  this  way,  be  favourable  to  its 
produdlion. 

The  danger  of  insanity  from  this  cause  w’ill 
likewise  be  farther  augmented  by  the  weariness, 
and  debility,  with  which  the  brain  vvill  be  afledtcd 
in  consequence  of  the  fatiguing  uniformity  of  long 
and  excessive  exertion : for  its  vigour  being  ex-^ 
hausted  by  this  incessant  labour,  its  operations 
will  be  rendered  languid,  unsteady,  and  indecisive : 

eficdls. 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.  16^ 

effe6ls,  which  when  once  produced,  will  not 
readily  be  overcome ; and  will  tend  to  facilitate 
the  approaches  of  insanity,  by  giving  occasion  to 
disorderly  vibrations,  and  disturbing  the  due  ope- 
ration of  the  natural,  and  habitual  associations. 

It  may  farther  be  remarked  that  habits  once 
acquired,  whether  bodily  or  mental,  are  not 
easily  overcome  ; that  the  deviations  from  menial 
perfe61ion,  arising  from  the  causes  just  mentioned, 
will  readily  become  habitual,  and  not  without 
difficulty  be  laid  aside ; and  will  thus  facilitate 
the  produdUon,  continuation,  and  recurrence  of 
insanity. 

Hence  we  may  perceive  how  nearly  ingenuity 
and  folly,  great  mental  power  and  imbecility 
of  mind,  genius  and  insanity,  are  allied  to  each 
other.  But  if  unreasonable  application  to  study 
may  overturn  the  strongest  mind ; what  are  weak 
ones  to  expe^l  from  an  imprudent  indulgence  in 
ths  same  excess  ? 

(b)  Intense  study  is  accompanied  with  an  ac~ 
celerated  aSHon  of  the  small  arteries  of  the  brain. 
For  the  employmeut  of  the  brain  in  thinking^ 
W'hatever  be  its  specific  nature,  appears  to  be  pro- 
du(51ive  of  an  increased  adhvity  of  these  vessels  ; 
as  is  obvious  from  the  heat,  pain,  sense  of  full- 
ness, and  giddiness  of  the  head,  and  singing  noise 
in  the  ears,  some  one  or  other  of  which  are  I 
Jielieve  universally,  and  all  frequently  perceived, 

after 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


iro 

after  the  mind  has  been  for  some  time  attentively 
engaged  in  the  accurate  investigation  of  any  diffi- 
cult, or  abstruse  subjedl:.  Now  it  may  be  con- 
sidered as  a general  law  of  the  animal  machine, 
not  onlv  that  whenever  there  is  an  accelerated 
velocity  of  the  circulation,  and  especially  when 
accompanied  with  a considerable  degree  of  force, 
in  the  whole  arterial  system,  as  in  fevers  of  various 
kinds,  a disproportionate  quantity  of  blood  will 
be  sent  to,  and  a consequent  accumulation  of  it 
take  place  in,  the  brain  ; whence  it  liappens, 
among  other  causes,  that  fevers  are  so  fre- 
quently attended  with  delirium  ; but  that  in 
whatever  part  of  the  machine  accelerated  oscilla- 
tions of  the  capillary  arteries  take  place,  a ple- 
thoric state  of  the  part  will  be  tiie  necessary  con- 
sequence, till  such  accelerated  oscillations  shall 
have  ceased,  and  the  veins,  whose  adfivity  does 
not  appear  to  be  increased  in  proportion  to  that 
of  the  arteries,  shall  have  had  time  to  restore  the 
equilibrium. 

This  circumstance  readily  accounts  for  the 
bleeding  at  the  nose,  epileptic  fits,  lethargies, 
apoplexies,  total  want  of  sleep,  delirious  fevers, 
insanity  and  many  other  grievous  complaints  of 
the  head,  which  have  been  known  to  accompany, 
or  to  succeed,  intense  study : and  why,  in  particu- 
lar, it  should  be  the  occasion  of  almost  every  species 
of  delirious  affection,  will  be  rendered  still  more 
evident,  if  we  consider  the  tendency  of  too  close 

thinking 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


171 

thinking  to  produce  delirium,  and  Insanity,  in 
the  way  already  explained  in  the  preceding 
article. 

The  quickness  of  hearing  in  many  insane  per* 
sons,  and  especially  in  cases  of  recent  insanity, 
and  when  it  is  bordering  on  the  phrenitic  state, 
seems  to  be  an  indication  of  a state  of  the  brain, 
and  its  membranes,  approaching  to  inflammation. 
And  want  of  sleep  is  often  a symptom,  and  the 
aggravating  cause,  of  this  state. 

(c)  It  is  of  the  nature  of  intense  application, 
and  adlivity,  of  mind,  to  prevent  sleep  ; the  want 
of  which  is  a natural  effedl  of  that  imbecility  of 
the  mind,  which  renders  it  incapable  of  withdraw* 
ing  its  thoughts,  without  great  difficulty,  from 
objedls  which  much  engage  its  attention  ; and  is 
a proof,  as  well  as  farther  cause,  of  turgescency, 
adfive  vibrations,  and  an  approach  towards  an  in- 
flammatory  state,  in  the  brain  : and,  if  long  con-  • 
tinned,  scarcely  any  thing  more  powerfully  tends 
to  disturb  the  imagination,  excite  inflammation 
in  the  brain,  and  produce  every  kind  and  degree 
of  delirium,  and  insanity.  How  this  happens 
will  appear  exceedingly  obvious,  if  we  examine 
into  the  nature,  causes,  and  efledls  of  sleep. 

In  sleep  the  instruments  of  sensation,  and  vo- 
luntary motion,  whose  influence  and  operation 
depend  upon  their  being  in  a state  to  a6l  upon, 
and  be  aduated  by  the  mind,  are  at  rest ; the 

mind 


]/2 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY^ 


mind  having,  during  the  repose  of  the  body, 
little  or  no  concern  with  the  nerves  : but  the 
adlion  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  respiration,  the 
peristaltic  motion  of  the  stomach  and  intestines, 
nutrition,  secretion,  excretion  so  far  as  voluntary 
motion  is  unconcerned,  and  the  a6\ion  of  the 
sphindler  muscles,  continue  their  exertions ; 
though  with  less  force,  and  vigour,  than  when 
the  body  is  awake.  It  is  plain,  therefo'C,  that 
in  the  time  of  sleep  irritability  is  diminished,  and 
that  the  connexion  between  the  mind,  and  the 
organs  of  sensation,  and  of  voluntary  motion, 
is. almost  entirely  suspended  : in  a word,  that  the 
vital  and  natural  funthons  are  carried  on,  at  tliis 
period,  for  the  most  part,  by  irritability  only. 

For  it  has  been  before  observed',  that  “ the 
nervous  power,  or  property,  of  irritability,  is  ca- 
pable of  acting  without  influencing,  or  being  in- 
fluenced by,  the  mind  ; without  the  mediation 
cither  of  sensation  or  volition  ; and  is  sufficient 
of  itself  for  the  performance  ot  those  vital,  and 
natural  adtions,  which  can  be  performed  without 
the  agency  of  any  of  the  voluntary  muscles ; as 
the  circulation  of  the  blood,  the  secretions,  ab- 
sorption, perspiration,  and  the  like.  That,  when 
excited,  therefore,  by  the  natural  stimuli,  only  to 
a certain  degree,  no  sensation  is  produced;  most 
pf  the  vital  and  natural  actions  being  capable  of 


proceed" 


See  eboye,  p.  41. 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


IP-  ^ 

1 / 

proceeding  without  it.  But  that  when  excited 
by  these  in  an  unusual,  or  by  any  of  the  other 
corporeal  stimuli,  in  a greater  degree,  it  a6ls 
upon  the  mind,  and  sensation  is  excited  of  such  a 
kind  as  corresponds  to  the  cause  of  its  excite- 
ment.” 

This  may  lead  us  to  account  for  the  suspension, 
in  a great  measure,  of  the  powers  of  voluntary 
motion,  and  sensation,  during  sleep  ; with  only 
the  diminution  of  those  of  the  adlionof  the  heart, 
and  arteries,  and  of  the  other  vital  and  natural 
operations. 

It  is  certain  that  the  increase  of  irritability,  the 
pressure  and  agitation  of  muscular  motion,  and 
the  influence  of  a great  variety  of  external  and 
internal  stimuli,  when  we  are  awake,  invigorate 
and  quicken  the  a6Hon  of  the  heart  and  arteries, 
and  augment  the  quantity  of  blood  sent  to  the 
brain.  An  accumulation,  therefore,  of  blood  in' 
the  veins  of  the  head  will  take  place  in  the  day 
time,  and  will  be  gradually  increasing  ; while  on 
the  other  hand,  the  nervous  power  will  be  in- 
sensibly wasting ; till  in  the  evening,  the  accu- 
mulation having  acquired  such  a magnitude  as  to 
compress  the  brain  to  a certain  degree,  and  the 
nervous  power  being  so  wasted  as  to  produce  great 
languor,  and  inability  of  exertion  without  power- 
ful stimulation,  irritability  will  be  diminished, 
both  from  sanguineous  accumulation  and  pressure, 
and  from*  nervous-  inanition  ; tlie  velocity  of  the 

circula- 


174  CAUSES  OF  INSANITY, 

circulation  will  begin  to  decline ; the  nerves  wil/ 
become  incapable  of  conveying  sensation  from  ex- 
ternal objects  to  the  mind,  or  voluntary  motion 
from  the  mind  to  the  muscles  ; and  this  state  wilt 
be  what  we  call  sleep ; in  which  the  commerce 
between  the  mind  and  body  is  much  diminished, 
and  sometimes  appears  to  be  almost  entirely  sus- 
pended. 

During  the  state  of  sleep  the  expence  of  ner- 
vous power  nearly  ceasing,  and  its  reparation 
going  on,  perhaps  even  more  perfe(511y  than  in 
our  waking  hours,  the  waste  of  it  incurred  in  the 
day  time  is  gradually  made  up,  and  the  blood  cir- 
culating much  more  slowly  during  sleep,  the 
veins  of  the  head  return  it  from  thence  faster  than 
it  is  supplied  by  the  now  languid  aclio.n  of  the  ar- 
teries, and  insensibly  re-es^blish  the  equilibrium 
which  their  more  rapid  motion  had  destroyerl  in 
the  course  of  the  day ; and  the  spirits  being  in 
this  way  recruited,  and  the  compression  of  the 
brain  taken  off,  sleep  quits  us  for  a season,  and 
ill  restoring  us  to  adlivity,  and  the  business  of 
life,  leaves  us  exposed  to  those  causes  which, 
after  a short  interval  of  waking,  and  active  ani*- 
mation,  will  return  us  back,  to  experience  again 
the  benefit  of  his  salutary  influence. 

The  requisites,  therefore,  to  sleep  being,  with 
great  probability,  supposed  to  be  a waste  of  ner- 
vous pow’cr, — a moderate  compression  of  the 
brain, — a consequently  slower  and  more  languid 

acSlioii 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


175 


a6Uon  of  the  arterial  system  than  when  we  arc 
awake,  and  a general  diminution  of  irritability  to 
a certain  degree  ; — it  is  easy  to  conceive  why  sen- 
sation, and  muscular  motion,  may  be  nearly  sus- 
pended while  we  sleep ; and  yet  those  vital,  and 
natural  processes,  which  depend  solely  upon  ir- 
ritability, proceed,  in  the  mean  time,  with  regula- 
rity, and  eftecl. 

These  circumstances  usually  take  place  in  the 
evening  of  the  day  ; the  coming  on  of  darkness, 
and  the  stillness  of  the  night,  by  withdrawing 
the  stimulation  of  light,  and  noise,  giving  aid  to 
the  operation  of  these  internal  causes  of  repose. 

And  as  their  influence  is  promoted  by  the  ab- 
sence of  common  stimuli ; so  it  may  be  prevented 
by  the  presence  of  uncommon  ones. 

For  strong  stimuli  will  excite  sensation,  and 
give  to  the  mind  the  power  of  exciting  motion, 
even  in  a torpid  state  of  irritability  ; and  vigorous 
excitement  will  readily  give  temporary,  and  some- 
times even  long-continued  strength  and  activity, 
when  the  waste  of  nervous  power,  and  unusual 
watching,  might  seem  to  proclaim  the  return  of 
debility  and  torpor,  and  to  demand  the  refresh- 
ment of  sleep  ; the  excess  of  the  stimulus  counter-, 
balancing  the  defe6l  of  irritability,  and  perhaps,  by 
its  influence  upon  the  brain,  furnishing  it  for  a' 
time  with  fresh  supplies.  f 

' Now  intense  mental  adlion  is  such  a stimulus,' 
and,  though  it  exceedingly  wastes  the  spirits,; 

and 


CAUSES  6P  insanity. 


176 

and  promotes  the  accumulation  of  blood  In  ihe 
brain,  is  yet  one  of  the  most  powerful  enemies  we 
know  to  sleep.  Paradoxical  as  this  may  seem,  it 
may,  I think  be  accounted  for  ; and  the  explana- 
tion of  it  will  prepare  the  way  to  account  for 
the  agency  of  walching  in  the  produdlion  of  in- 
sanity. 

The  increased  adiion  of  the  small  arteries  of 
the  brain,  which  always  accompanies  intense 
thinking,  is  a powerful  stimulus  to  that  organ : 
and  a general  fullness  of  the  vessels  of  the  brain, 
the  natural  consequence  of  their  increased  adiion, 
the  increased  adiion  of  the  small  arteries  from 
whence  it  took  its  rise  still  continuing,  when  ex- 
isting only  to  a certain  degree,  is  also  a powerful 
stimulus:  compression  of  the  brain,  within  cer- 
tain limits,  probably  adling  as  a stimulus  by  the 
uneasy  sensation  which  it  excites ; and  the  in- 
creased adlion  of  the  capillary  arteries,  and  sti- 
mulating fullness  of  the  vessels  of  the  brain,  pos^ 
sibly  promoting  in  some  degree  the  generation 
of  nervous  power.  Intense  thinking  may,  there- 
fore; drive'  away  sleep,  notwithstanding  that  if 
wasted-  the  nervous  power  in  certain  respedlsy 
and  gives  occasion  to  compression  of  the  brain. 

The'  increased  adlivity  of  the  small  arteries  of 
thebrain,  excited  by  intense  thinking,  having  car- 
ried the  c'oinpression  of  that  organ  beyond’ the? 
'boundaries  of  natural  sleep ; and  being  Icep^ 
and  even  aggravated,  by  the  irritation  ans- 

ing 


CAUSES  OP  IlS^SANITY. 


177 


ing  from  that  compression,  as  well  as  by  the  ex* 
citement  produced  in  the  brain  by  their  own  ac- 
celerated atdion,  and  by  the  continuation  of  that 
intense  thinking  from  which  it  at  first  originated, 
and  which  these  various  effe6ls  of  its  own  opera- 
tion have  now  rendered  the  mind  incapable  of  re- 
straining; an  approach  to  a state  of  inflammation  in 
the  brain  will  commence  ; and  even  an  adfual  in- 
flammation may  come  on  ; and  in  either  way  de- 
lirium may  be  produced ; and,  as  the  inflamma- 
tory aftedfion  of  the  brain  is  more  or  less  violent, 
death,  or  insanity,  may  be  the  unhappy  termina- 
tion : or  the  accumulation  of  the  blood  in  the 
vessels,  and  the  consequent  compression,  increas- 
ing, a lethargic,  and  almost  apopledlic  sleep,  may 
take  place ; which  may  either  terminate  fatally, 
or  may  leave  the  brain  so  impaired  as  never  per- 
fcdlly  to  recover  its  sound  and  healthful  state,  or 
be  a fit  instrument  for  the  rational  exercise  of 
the  mental  operations : but  should  the  brain  hap- 
pily resist  the  violence  done  to  it  by  intense  and 
unseasonable  exertion,  without  receiving  any  es- 
sential injury,  a deep,  and  long-continued  sleep, 
may  restore  it  to  its  former  tone,  and  repair  the 
waste  of  immoderate  activity  and  watching. 

A very  curious  instance  of  the  extraordinary 
and  pernicious  effedfs  of  intense  thinking,  in  pre- 
venting sleep,  is  related  by  Boerhaave  ; the 
circumstances  of  which  are  strikingly  analogous 

VOL.  ir.  N with 


];3  CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 

Y'lth  the  clo^Vine  here  advanced.  He  tells  us'^ 
‘‘  that  having  im])rndently  given  way  to  think- 
ing, on  a very  serious  matter,  from  the  morning 
early,  till  the  setting  of  the  sun,  of  a long  sum- 
mer’s day,  lie  did  not  once  close  his  eyes,  day  or 
night,  for  six  weeks  after  ; during  all  which  time 
lie  was  perfeaiy  indifferent  to  every  thing,  and 
nothing  whatever  atfeaed  him.  1 hat  this  state 
was  succeeded  by  pain  all  over  his  body  ; a sign, 
as  he  observes,  that  the  animal  sjiirits,  which 
were  now  recruited  were  returning  into  their 
wonted  channels,  and  again  diffusing  themselves 

over  every  part  of  the  body.’ 

From  this  account  of  the  effe61s  of  thinking  so 
as  to  put  off  sleep,  we  may  see  the  dangei  of 
study  protradled  into  the  night,  and  encroaching 
much  upon  the  hours  of  rest,  even  where  the  ap- 
plication of  the  mind  is  not  very  intense  ; since, 
at  least,  it  exhausts  the  body  by  fatigue,  and  robs 
it  of  the  seasonable,  and  necessary  repair  of  sleep  ; 
and  bv  resisting  the  natural  and  salutary  tendency 
to  the  lefreshment  ot  repose,  may,  by  thus  doing 
violence  to  nature,  besides  aggravating  the  evil 
tendency  of  too  much  exercise  of  the  brain,  give 
occasion  to  a variety  ot  other  bad  consequences, 
highlv'^  injurious  to  health,  and  comfoit;  and 


Praeleft.  Academic,  in  nroprias  Institutiones  Rei  Medicse, 
torn,  vii,  p.  1*1 1 • 

which 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.  ' 


3 79' 

wblcli  may  prepare  the  way  to  the  lntrodii6lioii 
ot  insanity  by  other  inlets,  which,  though  more 
remote  and  less  sudden,  may  not  be  free  from 
considerable  danger  ; the  preclusion  of  which 'may 
merit  our  most  serious  attention.  Of  these  more 
remote  ways  by  which  too  diligent  application  to 
study  may  introduce  insanity,  I come  nOw  to 
take  some  notice ; having  hitherto  cliiefly  at- 
tended to  the  direct,  and  immediate  operation,  of 
intense  study  upon  the  brain,  by  which  its  func- 
tions may  be  disturbed,  and  this  disorder  be  pro- 
duced. For-—- 

(d)  It  is  farther  to  be  observed,  that  too  much, 
and  intense  thinking,  besides  favouring  the  pro- 
du6licn  of  insanity  by  its  immediate  effe6ts  upon 
the  brain,  has  a remote  and  reflex  influence,  as 
has  been  just  hinted,  v/hich  powerfully  tends  to 
bring  about  the  same  unhappy  consequences  i 
since,  in  various  ways,  it  weakens  the  stomach, 
and  intestines,  and  the  whole  nervous  system, 
as  well  as  the  brain  itself ; the  debility  of  all  which 
are  powerful  causes  of  hysterical,  and  hypochon- 
driacal symptoms,  and,  in  the  end,  of  insanity. 
And  this  it  does  (l),  both  of  itself,  and  by  its  own 
dire6l  influence  upon  these  parts  ; and  (2)  by  the  , 
assistance,  and  conspiration,  of  various  concomi- 
tant circumstances. 

(1).  Intense  thinking  tends  remotely  to  the 

N 2 intro- 


180 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITV. 


introdiiclion  of  insanity,  by  its  immediate  influ- 
ence upon  the  nervous  system.  For  (n),  in  the 
first  place,  it  wastes  the  nervous  power,  fatigues 
excessively,  and,  if  long  persisted  in,  of  course 
permanently  debilitates  the  body  in  a great  degree, 
and  impairs  all  tlie  fimc^Hons  on  which  healthful- 
tones,  and  vigour  of  mind,  depend.  It  is  an  ob- 
servation of  Van  SwiE  i'RN  tliat  a pliilosopher, 
after  he  has  been  immersed  in  j)rofound  meditation 
for  severai  hours,  feels  himself  more  exhausted, 
than  he  would  do  if  l>e  had  been  using,  for  thc^ 
same  space  of  time,  the  most  violent  bodily  exer- 
cise : all  the  funclions  of  the  brain  dejx.*nding  upoir 
the  finest  fluid  in  the  body,  and  consuming  it  by 
their  operation'.”  For  study  while  it  fatigues, 
debilitates,  by  disturbing  the  other  fumflions  of 
the  bj-ain,  by  impairing  all  the  vital  and  natural 
aedions,  and  by  cliecking  the  supply,  as  well  as- 
by  wasting  the  fund,  of  the  nervous  power ; 
wliereas  exercise,  while  it  fatigues,  and  wastes 
the  nervous  power,  invigorates,  by  promot- 
ing the  vital  and  natural  a61ions,  and  thus 
overpaving,  if  not  immoderate,  tlie  waste  of 
power  which  tlie  exertion  of  the  muscles  had 
iiK'urred.  It  is,  therefore,  obvious  how  in- 
tense study  may,  in  this  way,  produce  debility, 
and  all  its  tormenting  nervmis  consequences;  how 
it  may  occasion  want  of  appetite,  nausea,  great 


' (^)mment.  in  BoERtfAAV.  Aph.  § 10g3>  tom.  Hi.  p.  466. 

weakness 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


181 


\veaV,ncss  of  the  stomach,  and  tremor,  so  familiar 
to  literary  men  ; how  it  may  give  rise  to  the  sing- 
ing noise  in  the  ears,  which  is  often  very  trou- 
blesome when  the  mind  has  been  long,  and  closely 
employed,  and  especially  on  a momentary  cessa- 
tion of  intense  thinking,  so  as  sometimes  almost 
to  excite  a vertigo  ; and  how  it  may  introduce  a 
variety  of  spasmodic,  and  hysterical  symptoms, 
and  the  whole  train  of  distressful  feelings  and  ap- 
prehensions accompanying  the  h)  pochondriacal 
disease.  But  this  is  not  all,  for  (b),  in  the  next 
place,  intense  thinking,  as  has  been  already  no- 
ticed^  diminishes  irritability,  and  produces  a torpid 
state  of  the  nervous  power  ; partly  perhaps,  by 
withdrawing  in  a great  measure  from  the  ner- 
vous system  in  general,  the  stimulus  of  the 
mind  ; and  partly  by  disturbing,  and  impeding, 
the  other  fundlions  of  the  brain.  For  it  makes 
the  body  almost  insensible  to  those  natural  and 
other  stimuli,  internal  and  external,  which  by 
their  irritation  give  life,  and  vigour,  to  the  ner- 
vous power;  suffers  it  to  languish  for  want  of  ex 
citement ; and  thus  gives  occasion  to  torpor, 
and  debility,  in  all  the  vital  and  natural  motions, 
crudity  in  the  first  passages,  and  the  other  obvi- 
ous consequences  both  in  the  body  and  mind. 
And  that  intense  thinking  should  disturb  the 
other  fundlions  of  the  brain  seems  highly  probable. 


^ See  above,  p.  40,  and  57. 

n3 


if 


IS‘2 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


if  it  be  considered  that,  while  the  mind  is  thus 
busil}’  occupied,  tlie  brain  is  in  a state  of  adlivity 
corresponding  to  the  intense  adlivity  of  the  mind, 
and  that  the  unusual  motions  and  vibrations, 
thus  excited  in  it,  will  be  likely  to  impede  those 
which  are  requisite  to  the  due  performance  of 
its  other  fimdions,  on  which  the  vigour  and 
well-being  of  the  vital  and  natural  operations, 
and  the  general  health  of  the  body,  depend. 
And  besides  (c)  the  constant  exertion  of  the  brain 
in  thinking  too  intensely  will  weaken  that  organ 
itself  by  excess  of  exercise, — by  disturbing  the 
performance  of  its  other  fundlions, — and  by 
weakening  the  body  in  general,  with  which  the 
brain  must  consequently  suffer ; and  the  brain 
being  debilitated,  the  faculties  of  the  mind  will 
lose  their  vigour  ; the  memory,  and  attention, 
will  fail,  reason  will  be  obscured,  imagination  will 
be  irregular,  its  suggestions  will  be  too  much 
credited,  a thousand  vain  fears  and  absurd  fan- 
cies will  rise  out  of  the  ruins  of  right  reason  and 
sound  judgment,  and  the  man  who,  as  Tissot® 
observes,  would,  a lew  months  before,  “ liave 
stood  unhurt  amidst  a falling  world,”  will  now 
become  the  sport  of  every  childish  whim,  and 
groundless  apprehension. 

(2)  Intense  thinking  tends  to  give  occasion  to 


8 St-rm.  Inang.  de  \’aletud.  Literator,  p.  15. 

insanity. 


183 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

insanity,  by  several  of  its  usual  concomitants  , as 
(a)  by  the  adivity  of  a sedentary  life  ; {b)  by  the 
common  custom-  of  literary  men  ot  studying 
immediately  after  meals,  and  especially  if  the 
meals  have  been  hearty  ; (c)  by  late  hours,  and 
want  of  sleep  ; {d)  by  the  solitude,  gloominess, 
and  moping,  which  often  attend  upon  a close 
application  to  study  ; and  (e)  by  the  anxiety,  vex- 
ation, disappointment,  dejedlion,  and  other  pas- 
sions which  attend  any  particular  study,  or  acci- 
dentally, from  some  external  cause,  intrude  upon 
the  student,  and  vex,  and  agitate  a mind  already  too 
much,  and  often  not  very  agreeably,  exercised. 
The  influence  of  all  which  in  laying  a foundation 
for  insanity  is  too  obvious  to  need  illustration. 

2,  To  business,  or  schemes,  of  any  kind,  that 
require  great  and  unremitted  attention,  or  much 
exertion  of  genius — Great  application  of  mind, 
and  intense  thinking,  whether  to  the  studies  of  phi  - 
losophy,  and  literature,  or  to  business,  or  schemes 
of  any  sort,  will  have  the  same  eftbas,  where 
the  attention  and  exertion  of  mind,  and  other 
circumstances,  are  the  same.  Where  business, 
therefore,  or  scheming,  are  accompanied  with 
a sedentary  life,  their  effbas  will  be  so  far  similar 
to  those  of  study.  But  where  they  are  conneacd 
with  bodily  exercise,  and  an  aaive  intercourse 
with  the  world,  as  not  unfrcquently  happens, 
their  tendency  to  give  occasion  to  insanity  will  so 


184 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


far  be  diminished.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
hopes,  fears,  vexations,  and  disappointments,  which 
are  the  too  common  companions  of  business,  and 
scheming,  and  especially  when  united  to  intense 
thinking,  are  such  powerful  causes  of  insanity, 
that  we  much  more  frequently  find  it  originating 
from  great  attention  to  these  pursuits,  than  from 
excessive  application  to  the  inquiries  of  the  learn- 
ed. In  the  seminaries  of  literature  it  may  proba- 
bly be  otherwise  ; and  the  greater  proportion  of 
men  of  business,  out  of  these  seminaries,  in  a 
mercantile  country  like  this,  may  be  alledged  as 
a reason  why  we  see  more  insane  tradesmen, 
and  merchants,  than  men  of  learning,  and  philo- 
sophers ; and  possibly,  with  truth.  But  what- 
ever be  the  cause,  the  fa6l  is,  I believe,  as  I 
have  represented  it.  Another  cause  why  we  more 
commonly  meet  with  instances  of  insanity  which 
have  originated  from  intense  application  to  busi- 
ness and  scheming,  than  to  learned  and  philoso- 
phical studies,  may  be,  that  watching  is,  per- 
haps, a more  frequent  attendant  upon  the  anxie- 
ties, and  vexations,  of  the  former,  than  upon 
the  mere  application  of  mind  to  study ; which 
is  rarely  accompanied  with  any  great  degree  of 
these  passions,  excepting  when  it  is  combined 
with  prospc61s  of  gain,  and  emolument,  and  de- 
generates into  business,  and  scheming.  How  in- 
tense application  of  mind  operates,  in  these 
cases,  will  be  obvious  from  what  has  already  been 

pretty 


CAUSES  OP  IN’S  AN  I TY. 


)85 


pretty  fully  explained  of  the  effects  of  its  applica- 
tion to  learning,  and  philosophy  ; and  the  ope- 
ration of  the  passions,  which  has  before  been  ex- 
plained in  part,  will  be  more  copiously  illustrated 
when  T come  to  treat  professedly  of  the  passions  as 
causes  ot  insanity.  I now  proceed  to  consider  the 
produdlion  ot  this  disorder  bv — 


3.  Any  sort  of  employment  of  the  mind  which 
may  keep  it  for  a long  time  in  an  adtive  and  ivahe- 
Jul  state.  A long  want  of  sleep,  from  whatever 
cause  it  may  originate,  is  favourable  to  the  pro- 
dii61;ion  of  delirium,  and  insanity  ; since  it  inust 
put  the  brain  into  a state  of  adivity,  and  pleni- 
tude, which  we  have  already  shown  to  dispose 
to  them,  when  considering  the  effects  of  intense 
thinking,  and  study.  Besides,  therefore,  those 
mental  operations  before  mentioned,  whatever 
exercise  of  the  mind  is  sufficient  to  counteract 
the  accustomed  propensity  of  the  body  to  sleep,  and 
to  keep  it  for  a long  time  in  a state  of  vigilance, 
will  not  only  injure  the  body,  but,  both  by  its 
immediate  action  upon  the  brain,  and  by  the  le- 
mote  consequences  of  such  adlion,  as  well  as  by 
other  unavoidable,  incidental  circumstances,  much 
endanger  the  health  of  the  mind.  Insanity, 
therefore,  may  be  the  consequence  of  long  watch- 
ing, arising  from  great  attention  of  mind,  not 
only  to  study,  business,  or  schemes,  of  any  kind, 
but  to  whatever  else  may  demand,  or  call  forth, 

its 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


186 

its  waking  exertions  ; whether  the  employment 
of  the  mind  w'hich  gives  rise  to  them  be  confined 
to  one,  or  divide  itself  among  a variety  ot  objecSts  ; 
wliethcr  it  be  free  from  passion  of  any  sort,  ex- 
cepting the  mere  desire  to  keep  awake,  or  be 
accompanied  with,  or  caused  by,  anxiety,  or  any 
other  passion  wliatevcr,  either  j)aintul,  or  pleas- 
ing ; all  of  which  tend,  more  or  less,  to  give  occa- 
sion to  insanity,  in  proportion  as  the  want  of  sleep 
is  continued  for  a longer  or  shorter  time ; as 
the  attention  of  mind  is  more  or  less  intense,  or 
more  or  less  confined  to  one  obje6l ; as  it  is  with, 
or  without,  the  agitation  of  passions  ; and  ac- 
cording to  the  nature,  and  violence  of  the  passions 
which  may  happen  to  accompany  it. 

Hence  insanity  may  derive  its  origin  from  long- 
continued  sitting  up,  and  .imrcinitted  attention, 
with  little  or  no  sleep,  in  nursing  the  sick ; of 
which  I have  known  an  instance:  from  severe 
watching  without  intermission  in  towns  that  arc 
besieged  : from  an  inability  to  sleep  owing  to  the 
agitation  of  some  unconquerable  passion  : or 

from  any  otlier  causes,  of  which  there  is  a great 
variety  that  require,  or  may  occasion,  long  and 

unremitted  wakefulness. 

Instances  of  the  production  of  insanity  by  every 
mode  of  too  intense  application  of  mind,  which  has 
been  mentioned  in  this  fifth  division  ot  the  causes, 
are  numerous  and  affeCting  ; and  ought  to  warn 
the  student  against  the  intemperate  pursuit  even 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


187 


of  knowledge  itself,  and  to  teach  him  that  exer- 
cise of  mind,  like  that  of  the  body,  when  violent 
and  excessive,  may  weaken  and  destroy  the 
health  which  it  was  intended  to  invigorate  and 
improve  ; to  guard  the  man  of  business,  and  the 
schemer,  against  the  too  eager  prosecution  of 
their  favourite  objects  ; and  to  convince  all  man- 
kind of  the  danger  of  persevering  in  any  sort  of 
employment  of  the  mind  which  may  keep  it  for 
a long  time  in  an  adfive,  and  wakeful,  state. 


VI.  Passions  of  various  hinds ; when  sudden,  vio^ 
lent,  or  habitual. 

The  passions  were  undoubtedly  implanted  in  our 
nature  for  wise,  and  beneficent,  purposes ; but 
the  folly  of  man  has  perverted  them  to  the  most 
absurd,  and  pernicious.  They  are  the  servants, 
not  the  masters  ; the  means,  under  the  guidance 
of  reason,  not  the  end,  of  human  happiness  : and 
to  fulfil  their  appointed  destination,  in  promoting 
the  well  being  of  mankind,  they  should  be  vari- 
ous, gentle,  calm,  and  manageable  ; and  onlv 
in  such  a degree  indulged,  as  is  proportioned  to 
the  attainment  of  some  reasonable  and  valuable 
purpose. 

According  to  the  dodlrine  of  the  stoics,  and 
other  philosophers,  the  passions  are  founded  upon 
our  notions,  or  opinions,  of  good  and  evil,  whe- 
ther present  or  absent.  If  we  form  a proper 

judg- 


188  CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 

juclsrmcnt,  and  estimation,  of  trie  things,  and 
occu.  r.mccs,  of  this  life,  we  shall  never  be  immo- 
derately depressed  by  the  evil,  nor  elated  by  the 
good,  either  jiresent  or  impending,  in  prospedl 
or  in  the  enjoyment.  But  it  we  suffer  ourselves 
to  judge  irrationally  of  things,  and  occurrences  , 
and  value  them,  not  according  to  their  real  nature, 
and  importance  to  human  happiness,  but  accord- 
iiio-  to  those  erroneous  notions,  and  opinions, 
which  wc  may  have  been  led  imprudently  to  form 
oftliem,  by  the  misguidance  of  appetites,  pre- 
judices, and  irrational  associations  ; we  shall  then 
be  liable  to  experience  all  those  excesses  of  pas- 
sion, which  will  inevitably  mar  the  liappiness 
which  we  seek  after  ; and  may,  possibly,  in  one 
vvay  or  other,  drive  us  into  madness. 

If,  yielding  thus  to  the  impulse  of  the  appetites, 
prejudices,  and  irrational  associations,  ot  what- 
ever kind,  we  permit  ourselves  to  be  elated  with 
the  possession  of  what  we  esteem  present,  or  to 
be  immoderately  impelled  to  the  future  acquisi- 
tion of  what  we  esteem  absent  good  ; we  exjieri- 
ence,  in  the  former  case,  the  passion  ot  turbu- 
lent ; and,  in  the  latter,  of  umiisy  desire : 
we  are  alarmed  with  the  threats  of  absent  evil, 
we  suffer  from  the  passion  of  fear  ; and,  if  we 
are  oppressed  with  the  weight  of  present  evil,  we 
sink  under  the  agonies  of  distress. 

Wise  men,  therefore,  allow  themselves  to  be 

but  little  affeaed  by  any  of  the  passions.  But  as 

we 


CAUSES  OP  insanity. 


iScf 

\VQ  are  all  impelled  by  Nature  to  avoid  whatever 
appears  to  us  to  be  evil,  and  to  choose  whatever 
appears  to  be  good  ; — so  a wise  man  is  pleased 
with  present  good,  and  may  will  to  obtain  the 
absent ; is  careful  to  avoid  probable  or  impending 
evil,  and  patiently  endures  the  pressure  of  the 
present  : but  his  hopes  and  fears,  his  pleasures 
and  his  pains,  are  always  sober,  and  moderate, 
and  directed  by  reason  to  those  good  ends  for 
\vhich  the  benevolent  Author  of  our  nature  de- 
signed them. 

But  the  bulk  of  mankind,  unhappily  for  them- 
selves, are  not  wise ; and  indulge,  to  their  own 
unspeakable  hurt,  every  kind  of  irrational  and 
ungovernable  passion.  They  suffer  themselves 
to  be  transported  with  joy,  and  dissolved  in  plea- 
sure, at  the  obtaining,  and  in  the  fruition  of  any 
present  good  ; and  to  be  hurried  on  and  tor- 
mented with  the  desire  of  possessing  some  absent 
one.  They  are  terrified  with  the  fear  of  approach- 
ing or  impending  evil ; and,  with  a pusillanimity 
unw'orthy  of  rational  beings,  sink  under  the 
weight  of  present  evil,  and  are  affli6led  beyond 
measure  with  that  which  a becoming  patience, 
and  fortitude,  and  more  rational  view's  of  good 
and  ill,  would  annihilate,  or  render  tolerable. 
For,  indeed,  we  may  truly  say  with  Horace,  of 
all  those  things  w'hich  are  usually  esteemed  the 
most  grievous  evils  in  this  life,  and  of  which  the 
wisest  of  us  cannot  but  have  some  feeling, — - 

"i'is 

'■l 


\go 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


Tis  hard : but  patience  must  endure. 

And  sooth  the  woes  it  cannot  cure**. 

Now  as  every  passion  is  accompanied  with  a 
correspondent  state  of  body,  as  lias  been  already 
observ'^ed,  produced  by  the  intervention  of  the 
brain  and  nerves  ; and  every  such  state  of  body, 
nerves,  and  brain,  is  accompanied  with,  or  at 
least  tends  to  promote,  a correspondent  pas- 
sion : — 

And  as  every  passion,  in  proportion  to  its  de- 
gree of  violence,  consists  in  an  adtive  state  of  the 
mind,  and  brain,  in  which  the  objcdls  ot  the  pre- 
sent passion  are  incessantly  recurring  to  the  ima- 
gination, become  peculiarly  interesting,  and  with 
difficulty  giv’^e  way  to  ideas  of  a ditlcicnt  na- 
ture : — 

And  as  vigorous,  and  intense  vibrations,  once 
excited  in  the  brain,  are  disposed  to  suppress,  or 
obscure,  all  others  that  are  not  immediately  con- 
neaed  with  them  ; to  continue  with  obstinate 
pertinacity  ; and  readily  to  be  renewed,  on  the 
slightest  occasion,  while  the  impression  of  them, 
remains  recent ; and,  in  short,  to  produce  such 
a change  in  the  state  of  the  brain,  and  nerv  es,  as 
to  give  a preternatural  facility  to  their  excite - 


^ Durum.  Sed  levius  fit  patlentia, 

Quicquid  corrigere  est  nefas. 

Carminum,  lib,  i.  Od.  xxir.  V. 

meat. 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


191 

mcnt,  and  a strong  propensity  to  their  becoming 
habitual ; and  as  an  a6Hve  state  of  the  brain, 
which  is  thus  intense,  uniform,  unceasing,  and 
habitual,  is  exceedingly  apt  to  disorder  the  rea- 
soning faculties ; as  has  been  shown  above  in 
treating  of  intense  thinking  : — 

And  as,  therefore,  theadlive  state  of  the  ideas, 
and  vibrations,  of  the  mind  and  brain,  accompa- 
nying the  passions,  will  of  course  increase  by  in- 
dulgence,— grow  by  degrees  into  a habit, — and 
at  length  take  the  sole  possession  of  them,  and 
exclude,  or  draw  into  their  vortex,  every  other 
idea  and  vibration  : — ■ 

. It  appears  evident,  from  these  considerations, 
that  the  passions  must  be  powerful  causes  of  insa- 
nity, which  is  itself  nothing  more  than  such  a 
state  of  mind,  as  I have  now  described,  become 
habitual,  and  permanent. 

When  insanity  originates  from  the  passions,  it 
is  usually,  at  first,  only  notional  : but  such  in- 
tense, and  uniform  a6fivity  of  mind,  generally, 
sooner  or  later,  in  proportion  to  its  nature  and 
violence,  produces  ideal  insanity,  and  often  the 
very  excess  of  phrensy. 

Imaginary  good  and  evil,  present  or  absent,  as 
I have  remarked  above,  arc  considered  by  the  an- 
tient  Stoics,  as  the  sources  of  all  the  passions. 
But  as  they  esteem  the  passions  to  be  enemies  to 
real  happiness,  and  think  it  unbecoming  a wise 
man  to  be,  in  any  degree,  influenced  by  them  ; 

they 


]g2 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


they  have  given  another  title  to  those  afFeclions 
wliicli  a wise  man  may  feel  towards  good  and  evil, 
and  have  denominated  them  constantio'y  or  con- 
stancies ; a term  which  has  not  been  adopted,  as 
I can  find,  into  our  language,  and  which  conveys 
an  idea  for  which  I know  of  no  appropriate  Eng- 
lish appellation.  They  consist  in  a certain  strengthy 
firmness,  and  perseverance  of  mind,  in  forming 
a true  estimation  of  the  value  of  things,  which' 
will  not  suffer  it  to  be  improperly  atfedfed  by  any 
of  the  objedfs  of  the  passions  ; and  they  receive 
different  names,  accordingly  as  they  are  most 
allied  to  one,  or  to  another  of  them.  From  pre- 
sent good  they  allow  a wise  man  to  feel  satisfac- 
tion, and  they  acknowledge  the  propriety  of  a vo- 
lition to  obtain  any  absent  good  ; nor  do  they 
blame  a prudent  attention  to  the  avoidance  of  any 
threatening  evil.  T.hus  the  passion  of  jo^  is,  in 
a wise  man,  nothing  more  than  the  constancy  of 
satisfaiTuon  ; — desire  is  mere  volition  ; fear  is 
only  caution  ; — and  distress  has  no  correspond- 
ing constancy.  They  might,  I thiilk,  very  justly 
have  made  one  of  patience  under  the  pressure  of 
present  evil : but  as  they  will  not  allow  that  a 
wise  man  can  experience  evil,  so  tlrey  will  not 
permit  him  to  be  any  way  affedled  by  the  presence 
of  such  things  as  even  the  wisest  of  men,  who 
have  not  adopted  this  chimerical  notion  of  the 
stoics,  must  confess  that  they  feel  to  be  evils, 
though  they  may  have  learned  to ‘bear  them, 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.  • 1Q3 

they  ought,  with  becoming  patience,  and  resig- 
nation. 

Other  writers,  therefore,  both  ancient,  and 
modern,  but  especially  the  moderns,  sensible  of 
this  absurdity  into  which  the  stoical  principles 
necessarily  led  them,  and  yielding  themselves  to 
be  guided  by  the  natural  feelings  of  the  human 
heart,  have  judiciously  granted  that  the  things, 
and  occurrences,  of  this  life,  may  be  good  or 
evil  to  the  wise  man,  a$  well  as  to  the  fool  : that 
the  former,  therefore,  may  very  consistently,  and 
philosophically,  acknowledge  those  feelings  which 
he  cannot  avoid  i and  that  the  only  difference, 
in  these  respedts,  between  him  and  the  latter  is, 
that  while  the  fool  feels  immoderately,  the  wise 
man  is  but  gently,  and  momentarily,  affedled  ; 
and  that  while  the  one  feels  only  real  good  and 
evil,  the  other  is  agitated,  and  distradled,  by  a 
thousand  things,  as  untutored  fancy  and  irrational 
j)rejudlces  diredl  him,  wdiich  in  their  own  nature 
are  neither  good  nor  evil. 

Some  moderns,  among  whom  are  the  cele- 
brated French  philosopher  Des-Cartes,  and  our 
very  ingenious  countryman  the  elegant  author  of 
the  Philosophical  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  our 
Ideas  of  the  Sublime  and  Beautiful,  have  added, 
and  I think  not  without  reason,  though  it  might 
possibly  be  resolved  into  one  of  those  already 
mentioned,  another  source  of  passion,  which  is 
novelty ; and  the  principal  passion  of  which  it  is 

VOL.  II.  o the 


1Q4 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


the  objecl  Is  curiosity,  according  to  Mr.  Bueke' ,*• 
and  according  to  Des-Cartes,  admiration  ; pas- 
sions, whicli,  when  properly  indulged,  are  the 
sources  of  a real,  innocent,  animated,  and  bene- 
licial  pleasure  ; bnt  when  indulged  without  mo- 
deration, or  restraint,  will  often  be  the  parents 
of  much  misconduct,  anxiety,  and  distress. 

Taking  these,  therefore,  into  the  number,  the 
principal  passions  are  six, — curiosity, — admiration, 
'—jny  or  pleasure, — desire, — distress, — and  jTeor. 

The  various  modifications  of  these  principi^l 
passions  are  almost  endless.  1 shall  here  enume- 
rate only  a few  of  the  most  considerable,  which 
I shall  do  in  the  order  of  the  principal  passions 
out  of  which  they  grow  ; and  shall  afterwards,  iti 
the  same  order,  describe  them  at  large,  and  shall 
espccialh'  dwell  upon  snch  ot  them  as  most  pow- 
erfully, or  characteristically,  affedt  both  the  mind 
and  body. 

The  most  considerable  of  the  passions,  princi- 
pal, or  derived,  seem  to  be — curiosity,  admira- 
tion, wonder,  surprise,  astonishment; — -joy,  en- 
thusiasm or  religions  joy,  vanity,  malevolence  ; 
— desire,  hope,  anger,  hatred,  love,  ambition, 
avarice  ; — distress,  envy,  ])ity,  grief,  dejedlion, 
ilespair ; — -fear,  consternation,  terror,  shame, 
suspicion,  jealousy,  anxiety,  and  religious  fear 
arising  from  superstition,  or  cnthusi?i;jin. 

The  passions  of  the  firs'c  class  have  for  their 
objcdl  novelty ; towards  which  as  they  variously 

relate,, 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


Jgj 

relate,  they  receive  the  several  names  of — curl- 
osiUj^  admiration,  wonder,  surprise,  and  asto- 
nishment. 

When  w’e  are  simply  impelled  by  the  desire  of 
experiencing  something  new,  the  j)assion  we  feel, 
it  so  gentle  an  emotion  deserves  the  name  of  a 
]>assion,  is  merely  curiosity: — if,  on  tlie  occur- 
rence ot  new  objec'ds  we,  at  once,  perceive  their 
relations  to  things  wdiicli  we  already  know,  and 
there  is  something  uncommon,  and  beautiful,  in 
those  relations,  and  which  shows  evident  marks 
ot  wisdom,  power,  or  bene\’olence ; or  if,  thougli 
when  they  first  presented  themselves  we  were  not 
sensible  of  these  relations,  yet  we  readily  [lerceive 
them  after  a more  cxa6t  attention,  or  after  they 
have  been  properly  explained  to  us  by  others  to 
whom  tliey  were  less  obscure  ; we  then  feel  the 
jjassion  ot  admiration : — but  if  such  objects,  be- 
.sides  being  new,  appear  to  have  relations  dissimi- 
lar from  any  which  we  have  hitherto  experienced, 
and  we  can  form  no  just  and  adequate  concep- 
tion, perhaps  not  even  a probable  conjecture,  of 
their  causes  ; and  especially  if  they  appear  to  be 
quite  inconsistent  with  what  we  usually  experi- 
ence : we  are  then  affeCled  with  wonder  : ^if 

such  objects  appear  suddenly  and  unaccountably, 
we  are  thrown  into  surprise : — and  if,  besides  all 
this,  there  be  any  thing  vast,  or  terrible,  or 
daring,  in  them,  we  are  struck  with  astonishment 
or  amazement. 

o 2 


The 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


196 

The  passions  which  spring  from  this  source, 
when  pure  and  iminixed,  produce  scarcely  any 
commotion  cither  in  the  mind  or  body  ; and  are, 
therefore,  when  in  that  state,  but  little  allied  to 
insanity  : but  as,  when  much  indulged,  they  sel- 
dom long  remain  so,  they  readily  become,  by 
combining  with,  and  aggravating,  the  other  pas- 
sions, a fruitful  cause  ot  that  disorder. 

P’or  though  those  affections  of  the  mind  which 
have  novelty  for  their  object,  seem  scarcely  to  de- 
serve the  name  of  passions  ; especially  curiosity, 
admiration,  and  wonder ; and  the  two  latter, 
surprise  and  astonishment,  may  be  suspe6ted  to 
have  something  of  an  idea  of  good  or  evil  mixed 
with  the  novelty  of  the  object,  whenever  they  ex- 
cite any  great  commotion  ; yet  this,  at  least,  i^ 
very  certain,  that  novelty,  in  the  various  forms 
above  described,  much  heightens  our  relish  of 
good,  and  our  abhorrence  of  evil  ; that  it  enli- 
vens, or  aggravates,  the  passions  originating 
from  these  causes,  with  which  it  happens  to  be 
connected ; and  that  long  familiarity  diminishes 
the  effects  both  of  the  one  and  the  other,  and 
softens  the  passions  to  which  they  are  fitted  to 
give  occasion  so  that  though  the  universality 
of  the  position  may  be  questioned,  yet  it  must 
be  acknowledged  that  there  is  much  truth  in  the 
observation  of  the  very  ingenious,  and  elegant' 
writer,  above-mentioned,  that  some  degree  of 
novelty  must  be  one  of  the  materials  in  every  in- 
strument 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY- 


197 


strnment  which  works  upon  the  mind  ; and  curi- 
osity blends  itself  more  or  less  with  cdl  our  pas- 
sionsk” 

Notwithstanding  that  tlie  stoics  considered  our 
notions  of  good  and  evil  as  the  sole  foundation  of 
the  passions,  yet  they  could  not  but  be  well  aware 
ot  the  power  of  novelty  in  forming,  and  iieighten-- 
ing,  those  notions,  and  consequently  the  passions 
which  arise  out  of  them  ; and  it  was,  probably, 
in  part,  with  a view  to  this  influence  of  novelty, 
in  mixing  with,  and  increasing,  all  the  other  pas- 
sions ; as  well  as  in  exciting  a restless  uneasiness 
and  dissatisfadlion  with  present  objedls,  and  a 
fruitless  search  after  absent  ones,  which,  losing 
their  novelty,  again  become  stale,  and  vile,  and 
tasteless  in  their  turn  ; and  thus  throwing  an 
imaginary  value  on  things  to  which  they  had  in 
their  own  nature  no  title ; that  they  so  much 
blame  a silly  admiration,  and  false  estimate,  of 
things,  as  the  very  bane  of  human  happiness  ; 
and  that  Horace  truly  says,  in  one  of  his 
Epistles — 

Not  to  admire,  is  of  all  means  the  best. 

The  only  means  to  make  and  keep  us  blesU. 

The 


’ A Philosophical  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  our  Ideas  of  the 
Sublime  and  Beautiful,  p.  2. 

j Nil  admirari  prope  res  est  una,  Numici, 

Solaque  quae  possit  facere  et  servare  beatum, 

Epist.  vi.  Jib.  i. 

° 3 There 


198 


CAUSES. OF  INSANITY. 


The  other,  or  second  class  of  passions,  consists 
of  those  which  have  ^ond  or  evil  for  their  object ; 
and  coinpreliends  all  the  remaining  passions  above 
enumerated  ; besides  many  more, — as  compla* 
cency,  satisfaction,  security,  confidence, — favour, 
benevolence,  . friendship,  devotion,  gratitude, 
aversion,  malice,  scorn,  derision,  emulation, 
glory,  courage,  audacity, — dissatisfaction,  disap- 
])robation,  remorse,  rcjjcntance, — doubt,  hesita- 
tion, irresolution,  and  pusillanimity  ; — which, 
being  modifications,  and  compositions,  of  the 


There  are  some  very  judicious  refleddions  in  the  Spectator  on 
the  influence  of  novelty,  and  admiration,  on  all  the  passions. — 
“ And  as  novelty  is  of  a very  powerful,  so  of  a most  extensive 
influence.  Moralists  have  long  since  observed  it  to  be  a source 
of  admiration,  which  lessens  in  proportion  to  our  familiarity 
with  objefts,  and,  upon  a thorough  acquaintance,  is  utterly 
extinguished.  But  I think  it  hath  not  been  so  commonly  re- 
marked, that  all  the  other  passions  depend  considerably  on  the 
same  circumstances.  What  is  it  but  novelty  that  awakens  de- 
sire, enhances  delight,  kindles  anger,  provokes  envy,  inspires 
horror  ? To  this  cause  we  must  ascribe  it,  that  love  languishes 
with  fruition,  and  friendship  is  recommended  by  intervals  of 
absence  : hence  monsters,  by  use,  are  beheld  without  loathing, 
and  the  most  enchanting  beauty  without  rapture.  7'hat  emotion 
of  the  spirits  in  which  passion  consists,  is  usually  the  effeft  of 
surprise,  and  as  long  as  it  continues,  heightens  the  agreeable  or 
disagreeable  qualities  of  its  objci^l ; but  as  this  emotion  ceases 
(audit  ceases  with  the  novelty)  things  appear  in  another  light, 
and  affedd  us  even  less  than  might  be  expc6led  from  their  proper 
energy,  for  having  moved  us  too  much  before.” — Vol.  viii. 
No.  626. 


other 


CAUSES  OF  insanity: 


tDtlier  passions  already  mentioned  ; or  exciting  but 
little  commotion,  bodily  or  mental ; do  not  merit 
any  particular  attention  liere  ; as  they  have  either 
little,  or  no  agency,  in  tile  produ61ion  ot  insanity, 
or  none  but  what  will  readily  be  understood  in 
consequence  of  what  will  be  said  of  the  principal, 
and  leading,  passions. 

Joy  is  that  emotion  with  which  the  mind  is 
affected  by  the  recent  acquisition,  and  present 
possession,  of  something  which  it  esteems  valu- 
able, and  worthy  of  being  received  and  enjoyed 
with  a degree  of  pleasing  emotion,  greater  or  less, 
in  proportion  to  its  estimation  of  the  magnitude 
of  the  good  acejuired,  and  to  the  greater  or  les^ 
desire,  or  expectation,  it  had  entertained  of  ac^ 
quiring  it. 

When  tlie  acquisition,  and  possession,  of  what 
is  esteemed  good,  only  excites  in  the  mind  an 
emotion  of  satlsfadion,  or  rational  pleasure,  it  is 
as  friendly  to  health  as  it  is  conducive  to  happi- 
ness ; and  an  habitual  disposition,  which  it  is  pos- 
sible to  cultivate,  in  almost  every  station  of  life, 
to  the  indulgence  of  such  a rational  satisfadlion  ; 
call  it  pleasure,  ease,  content,  or  what  you  will ; 
not  only  invigorates  the  ‘bodily  constitution,  but 
strengthens  the  faculties  of  the  mind,  and  tends 
to  produce  a healthful,  and  cheerful,  longevity. 
By  exciting  gentle,  pleasing,  and  animating,  vi- 
brations, it  tends  to  give  a due  degree  of  vascular 
and  muscular  tone,  and  insensibly  to  restore  the 

o 4 elastic 


200 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


elastic  tone,  which  may  have  been  injured,  and 
diminished,  by  disease  ; and  consequently  to  give 
due  force  and  activity  to  the  whole  vascular  sys- 
tem, to  strengthen  the  stomach  and  bowels,  to 
promote  appetite,  digestion,  insensible  perspira- 
tion, and  all  the  other  healthful  secretions,  and 
excretions ; and  to  invigorate  every  faculty  of 
body  and  mind'". 

But  tumultuous,  excessive,  and  irrational  joy, 
is  as  injurious  to  the  body  and  mind,  as  a just 
and  grateful  satisfaction  is  salutary  to  both.  It 


^ “ Anger  and  joy  increase,  and  fear  and  sadness  lessen, 
both  perspiration  and  urine.  The  soul,  which  has  great  power 
over  the  body  by  virtue  of  the  aether,  when  it  is  made  uneasy 
by  the  passion  of  anger,  raises  a strong  vibrating  motion  in  the 
aether  within  its  sensorium,  which  motion  is  propagated  through 
the  nerves  to  all  parts  of  the  body.  This  strong  motion  in  the 
membranes  of  the  heart  quickens  its  contradion  and  dilatation, 
and  thereby  quickens  the  contradion  and  dilatation  of  the  blood- 
vessels and  secerning  duds,  and  of  consequence  increases  the 
discharges  of  perspiration  and  urine,  and  that  more  or  less  in 
proportion  to  the  strength  and  continuance  of  the  passion, — Joy 
aifeds  these  discharges,  in  like  manner  as  anger.  In  the  passions 
of  fear  and  sorrow,  perspiration  and  urine  are  lessened,  by  a 
diminution  of  the  vibrating  motion  of  the  aether,  occasioned  by 
a depression  of  the  power  of  the  will  and  adivity  of  the  soul, 
under  these  passions.  Hence  joy  and  anger  increase,  and  feaj: 
and  sorrow  lessen,  perspiraUon  and  urine,  and  the  weight  of 
the  body.  And  other  passions,  as  they  partake  of  these,  will 
affed  the  discharges  and  weight  of  the  body  in  like  manner.”— 
Dr.  Bryan  Robinson,  07i  the  Food  and  Discharges  of  Human 
Bodies,  p.  //, 


produces 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


201 


produces  a sudden  increase  of  tone,  and  irritabi- 
lity, a quick  and  often  irregular  circulation,  and 
a <reneral  determination  to  the  surface  of  the 
body  ; an  increase  of  perspiration,  and  other  se- 
cretions, of  heat,  and  of  colour  ; a peculiarly  in- 
creased activity  of  the  vessels  of  the  head  and 
brain,  a highly  adlive  state  of  imagination,  great 
heat  of  the  head,  and  flushing  of  the  face.  From 
the  increased  irritability,  from  the  quick  succes- 
sion of  pleasing  ideas,  from  the  accelerated  mo- 
tion of  the  small  vessels  of  the  head  and  brain,  it 
is  usually  attended  with  benevolence  and  ge- 
nerosity, and  often  with  tenderness,  and  tears  ; 
and  if  sudden,  violent,  or  durable,  has  been 
known  to  produce  fainting,  fevers,  insanity,  and 
sudden  death. — In  producing  insanity  it  seems  to 
be  not  less  powerful  than  even  grief.  And  it 
is  remarkable  that,  as  we  are  told  by  Dr.  Mead*, 
on  the  authority  of  Dr.  Hale,  who  was  at  that 
time  physician  to  Bethlehem-hospital,  that  of  the 
great  number  of  persons  who  became  insane  in 
consequence  of  their  connexions  with  the  South - 
sea  Company,  in  the  year  17^0,  there  was  a 
much  larger  proportion  of  tliose  successful  adven- 
turers whom  fortune  had  favoured  with  the  sudden 
acquisition  of  immense  riches,  than  of  those  who 
were  completely  ruined  by  that  iniquitous  im- 
position. 

By  religious  joy  I do  not  mean  that  calm,  but 


* Medical  Precepts  and  Cautions,  chap.  iii.  vol.  iii.  p.  46. 

ineffable 


202 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


ineffable  satisfa6\ion,  which  is  felt  by  those  per- 
sons, whose  lives  ar^  a series  of  good  actions,  in- 
spired bv  genuine  virtue  and  true  piety ; and 
who  are  happy  in  the  consciousness  of  the  ge- 
neral goodness  of  their  conduct,  and  of  the  re6li- 
tude  of  their  intentions  ; and  are  persuaded  that, 
if  they  have  not  merited,  they  shall  nevertheless 
certainly  obtain,  the  favour  and  prote61ion  of  a 
benevolent  Deity,  both  in  this  life,  and  in  the 
next; — but  that  wild,  and  ill  grounded  joy,  which 
is  often  experienced  by  people  of  weak  minds,  and 
narrow  views  ; who  have  conceived  an  overween- 
ing opinion  of  their  own  sanctity,  or  faith  ; or 
would  gladly  arrive  at  heaven  by  any  merit  but 
their  own  ; and  who,  having  learned  the  irra- 
tional jargon  of  some  enthusiastic  se61,  fancy 
themselves  the  only  true  believers,  the  saints, 
the  ele61:,  the  favourites,  and  sometimes  even  the 
inspired  of  God™,  while  under  the  influence  of 

religious 


"*  “ We  see,”  says  Locke,  that  in  all  ages,  men,  in 
whom  melancholy  has  mixed  with  devotion,  oi  whose  conceit 
of  themselves  has  raised  them  into  an  opinion  of  a great  fami- 
liarity With  God,  and  a nearer  admittance  to  his  favour,  than  is 
afforded  to  others,  have  often  flattered  themselves  with  a persua- 
sion of  an  immediate  intercourse  with  the  Deity,  and  frequent 
communications  with  the  Divine  Spirit.  God  1 own  cannot 
be  denied  to  be  able  to  enlighten  the  understanding  by  a ray 
darted  into  the  mind  immediately  from  the  fountain  of  light. 
Ihis  they  understand  he  has  promised  to  do,  and  wdio  then  has 
so  good  a title  to  exped  it,  as  those  who  are  his  peculiar  people, 
chosen  by  him,  and  depending  upon  him? 

§ 6.  " Their 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


203 


religious  enthusiasm  and  intoxication  ; by  which, 
however,  they  are  not  unfrecjiieiitly  deserted  ; for 
a state  of  intoxication  will  sometimes  be  succeeded 
by  languor  and  depression  of  spirits;  and,  in  its 
stead,  are  harassed,  and  tormented,  with  reli- 
gious fear,  the  gloom  of  despondency,  and  the 
horrors  of  despair,  hereafter  to  be  described. 

This  religious  joy,  or  enthusiasm,  produces 
etfeiSts  on  the  body  similar  to  those  wliich  are 
occasioned  by  any  otlier  kind  of  joy ; but,  as 
it  is  seldom  calm,  and  never  rational,  and  too 
often  interrupted  by  religious  fear,  its  salutary 
operation  is  rarely  very  conspicuous  ; and,  on 
the  other  hand,  as  it  is  not  commonly  so  sudden, 
or  so  violent,  as  joy  from  some  other  sources. 


§ 6.  “ Their  minds  being  thus  prepared,  whatever  ground- 
less opinion  comes  to  settle  itself  strongly  in  their  fancies,  is 
an  illumination  from  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  presently  of  di- 
vine authority : and  whatsoever  odd  aftion  they  find  in  them- 
selves a strong  inclination  to  do,  that  impulse  is  concluded  to  be 
a call  or  diredion  from  heaven,  and  must  be  obeyed  ; it  is  a 
commission  from  above,  and  they  cannot  err  in  executing  it. 

§ 7.  “ This  I take  to  be  properly  enthusiasm,  which,  though 
founded  neither  on  reason  nor  divine  revelation,  but  risin<»^ 
from  the  conceits  of  a warmed  or  overu'eening  brain,  works 
yet,  where  it  once  gets  footing,  more  powerfully  on  the  per- 
suasions and  actions  of  men,  than  either  of  those  two,  or  both 
together:  men  being  most  forwardly  obedient  to  the  impulses 
they  receive  from  themselves ; and  the  whole  man  is  sure  to 
aft  more  vigorously,  where  the  whole  man  is  carried  by  na- 
tural motion. — Essay  concerning  Huma^n  Understanding  , b.  iv. 
chap,  xix.  § 5,  6,  7. 


SO 


204 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


SO  It  seldom,  or  perhaps  never,  produces  sudden 
death  ; but  as  it  excites  very  considerable,  and 
often  very  permanent,  adlivity  of  mind,  and  that 
adlivity  is  perpetually  employed  about  one  and 
the  same  subjedl ; as  it  is  not  unusually  conne61ed 
with  a too  irritable,  and  what  is  commonly  called 
a nervous  state  of  the  body ; and  always  with  weak- 
ness of  judgment,  strength  of  imagination,  and 
sensibility  of  passion  ; and  as  it  too  often,  as  has 
been  before  observed,  alternates  with  religious 
fear ; it  has  a tendency  to  terminate,  either  di- 
rectly in  insanity  of  the  enthusiastic  kind"  ; or 
indireclly,  by  the  interposition  of  religious  fear, 
in  despondency,  anddepair". 

J-^anity^ 


" Instances  of  this  are  numerous,  and  several  of  them  are  re- 
lated at  length  in  the  account  of  fanatical  insanity.  See  above, 
vol.  i.  p.  221,  &c.  The  case  of  John  Engelbrkcht  alfurds 
an  extraordinary  example  of  the  most  distressing  religious  de- 
spondency of  many  years  standing,  happily  terminating  in  very 
permanent  religious  joy,  with  syn)ptoms  of  a pleasing  maniacal 
insanity. 

® Of  this  examples  are  not  uncommon.  We  meet  with  a 
remarkable  one  in  Luther,  the  great  champion  of  the  Refor- 
mation ; on  whom,  or  whose  cause,  1 am  far  from  here  in- 
tending the  smallest  reflexion ; having  the  greatest  veneration 
for  both  j but  candour  must  ackowledge  that  he  was  fitted 
for  a reformer,  by  possessing  much  warmth  and  vehemence  of 
temper,  and  no  small  portion  of  enthusiasm  ; and  history,  and 
even  his  own  writings,  inform  us,  that  he  was  sometimes  af- 
flided  with  religious  melancholy. — It  is  no  wonder,  there- 
fore, that  men  so  much  his  inferiors,  both  in  learning,  and  abi- 
lities. 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


205 


Inanity,  or  pride,  is  an  overweening  opinion  of 
the  greatness,  and  value,  of  our  own  consequence, 

personal 


lilies,  as  Ludowick  Muggleton  ; a great  pretender  to  in- 
ward light,  which  was  to  answer  every  purpose  of  religion  ; 
and  his  friend  and  associate  George  Fox ; should,  as  we  are 
told  by  Leslie,  be  so  deeply  seized  with  despair,  that,  like  the 
possessed  man  in  the  gospel,  they  forsook  all  human  conver- 
sation, and  retired  into  deserts  and  solitary  places,  where  they 
spent  whole  days  and  nights  alone. — Leslie’s  Snake  in  the 
Grass,  edit.  16Q3,  p.  331.  See  also  Fox’s  Journal.  Gran- 
ger’s Biogr.  Hist.  Engl.  vol.  iv.  p.  210. 

Rashness,  vehemence,  and  obstinacy,  were  the  acknow- 
ledged failings  of  Luther.  Such  dispositions  imply  excess  of 
passion,  and  some  defe6t  of  judgment  j and  have  a tendency 
to  produce,  in  minds  religiously  disposed,  religious  enthusiasm, 
which  though  it  does  not  appear  that  he  ever  experienced  in 
any  such  degree,  as  to  disgrace  his  cause,  pervert  his  con- 
du6t,  or  produce  fanaticism ; yet  the  passage  in  his  last  will, 
quoted  by  the  elegant  Dr.  Robektso.n  ('Hist,  oj  Charles,  Vth, 
vol.  iii.  p,  339),  at  the  same  time  tliat  it  discovers  an  extraor- 
dinary elation  of  mind,  betrays  a near  approach  to  the  intoxi- 
cation of  enthusiasm. 

But  however  we  may  think  it  doubtful  whether  he  was 
ever  much  atfefted  with  religious  enthusiasm,  it  is  very  cer- 
tain that  he  was  not  always  free  from  religious  melancholy ; 
which  seems,  sometimes,  so  far  to  have  imposed  upon  his 
imagination  as  to  have  produced  even  ideal  insanity. — Of  these 
assertions  it  may  be  proper  to  bring  some  proofs. 

In  his  retreat,  in  the  castle  of  Wartenburg,  in  1521  and  2, 
he  was  troubled  with  excessive  costiveness ; and  with  temp- 
tations of  the  devil,  qui  etiam  strepitu  ei  molestus  fuit,  who 
even  made  a noise  to  torment  him and  was  cured  by  exer- 
cise, and  medicines  sent  him  by  Spalatinus. — Melchior. 

Adami 


206 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


personal  endowments,  abilities,  attainments,  or 
conclude  ; or  of  some  other  imaginary  excellency 

which 


Adami  Germanor.  Theologor.  in  vita  Lutiieki,  p.  122. 
— Hayne’s  Life  of  Dr.  Maktin  Luther,  p.  43. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1527 — “ he  endured  not  only 
a corporal  malady,  but  also  a spiritual  temptation,  which  he 
called  a buft'eting  of  Satan.  It  seemed  to  him,  that  swelling 
surges  of  the  sea  in  a tempest  did  sound  aloud  at  his  left  ear, 
and  against  the  left  side  of  his  head : yet  not  within  but  with- 
out his  head,  and  that  so  violently,  that  die  he  must  except 
they  presently  grew  calm,  &c.” — Hayne  s Life  of  Luther, 
p.  O’g. — Adami  Fit.  Luther,  p.  J34. 

With  these  buftetings,  and  temptations,  he  was  frequently 
visited;  he  called  them  confli6ts  between  him  and  Satan; 
the  terrors  he  experienced  he  called  the  devil’s  traps,  from 
which  God  would  deliver  him ; and  said  that  the  devil  and 
all  his  angels  vexed  him. — Hayne,  p. /O,  77>  125,  138. 

Melchior  Adam  (Hayke,  p.  1(32)  informs  us  that  he 
was  teazed  by  the  devil  with  many  spiritual  temptations, 
buftetings,  and  frightful  spedres : that,  when  he  lived  at  Co- 
burg, burning  torches  sometimes  appeared  to  him,  which  so 
terrified  him  as  almost  to  make  him  faint  away ; from  whicli 
he  was  relieved  by  medicines,  and  by  reading  the  epistle  to  the 
Galatians;  and  that  he  used,  on  these  occasions,  to  call  to 
those  about  him  to  sing  psalms  with  him  in  spite  of  the  devil ; 
and  that  the  devil  once  appeared  to  him  in  his  own  garden,  in 
the  form  of  a black  boar. 

And  that  these  buftetings,  spedres,  terrors,  and  temptations, 
as  he  called  them,  were  no  other  than  the  efieds  of  religious 
melancholy,  to  the  produdion  of  which  his  peculiar  tempera- 
ment of  mind,  the  ignorance  and  superstitious  credulity  ot  the 
times  in  which  he  lived,  his  incessant  application  to  his  studies, 
anti  sedentary  life,  all  probably  contributed,  is  pretty  evident 

from 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


207 


U'hich  we  fancy  we  possess  ; and  which  we  sup- 
pose that  others  hold,  or  ought  to  hold,  in  as 

high 


trom  the  attendant  circumstances : and  the  manner  in  which 
he  speaks  of  these  temptations  is  perfectly  analogous  with 
what  he  himself  says  ot  insanity. — “ I think,”  says  he,  “ that  all 
fools,  and  such  as  have  not  the  use  of  reason,  are  vexed  or 
led  aside  by  Satan:  not  that  they  are  therefore  condemned, 
but  because  Satan  doth  diversly  tempt  men,  some  grievously, 
some  easily  ; some  a longer,  some  a shorter  time.  And  whereas 
physicians  attribute  much  to  natural  means  sometimes:  this 
Cometh  to  pass,  because  they  know  not  how  great  the  power 
and  strength  of  the  devils  are.” — Hayne,  p.  129. — Adam, 
p.  164. 

All  this  seems  abundantly  to  prove  that  Luther  was  some- 
times afflifted  with  religious  melancholy  in  a very  high  degree ; 
and  is  farther  confirmed  by  his  own  account  of  his  disputa- 
tions, and  other  intercourses,  with  the  devil;  for  which,  as  I 
have  no  opportunity  of  consulting  the  originals  myself,  I am 
obliged  to  trust  to  the  fidelity  of  the  extracts  which  are  to  be 
met  with  in  Bayle’s  Historical  and  Critical  Diftionarj',  under 
the  article  Luther, 

Luther,  says  he,  owns,  in  several  places  of  his  works, 
that  he  knows  very  well  the  devil’s  way  of  disputing:  and  that 
it  had  cost  him  many  a bitter  night:  mi///as  noBes  mihi  sa- 
tis amarulaitas  et  acerbas  reddtre  ille  novit.  “The  devil,”  says 
he,  “ knows  how  to  invent,  and  to  urge  his  arguments  with 
great  force.  He  also  speaks  in  a deep  and  loud  tone  of  voice. 
Nor  are  these  disputes  carried  on  in  a long  course  of  various  ar- 
gumentation ; but  the  question  is  put,  and  the  answer  given, 
in  a moment.  I am  sensible,  and  have  sufficiently  experienced, 
how  it  sometimes  happens  that  persons  are  found  dead  in  their 
beds  in  a morning.  He  is  not  only  able  to  kill,  or  strangle,  the 
body  j but  knows  how  so  to  urge,  and  close  in,  the  soul  with 
' bis 


208 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


high  estiiTiation  as  hve  do  ourselves.  The  vain 
man,  therefore,  expe6ls  that  others  should  look, 
up  with  admiration  to  those  uncommon  qualities 
in  which  he  so  much  exceeds  the  rest  of  mankind  ; 
or,  at  least,  all  those  with  whom  while  he  com- 
pares himself  he  feels  the  emotions  of  this  child- 
ish, delusive,  and  ridiculous  affection. 

As  a pleasing,  and  not  violent  emotion,  it 
would  rather  promote  health  than  be  injurious  to 
it,  did  it  not  too  often  render  us  liable  to  chagrin, 
and  mortification,  from  the  disappointment  of 
our  expedlations  of  that  admiration,  and  applause, 


his  dl.spntations,  that  it  is  obliged  to  quit  the  body  in  an  instant; 
a state  into  which  he  had  nearly  reduced  me  more  than  once.— 
Indeed  I believe  that  Empskrus,  GEcolamp.\diu.s,  and  others 
who  have  died  in  the  same  manner,  met  with  their  sudden 
deaths  by  being  pierced  through  with  these  tiery  darts  and  spears 
of  Satan.  For  no  mortal  can  endure,  and  withstaiKl  them, 
■without  the  peculiar  assistance,  and  power,  of  Gon  : — and  his 
disputations  are  very  brief,  and  he  makes  no  long  delay,  if  he 
happens  to  meet  a man  at  home  by  himself.  —To  be  short,  he 
says,  (hat  “ the  sacramentarimis  do  not  understand  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  because  the  true  opponent,  the  devil,  is  no  oppo- 
nent of  theirs  ; and  that  we  are  no  better  ihiin  mere  speculative 
"Hieologians,  till  we  have  had  such  an  opposing  devil  clinging, 
to  our  necks.— That,  for  his  own  part,  he  thoroughly  knew  the 
devil,  and  had  eat  rtioie  than  one  bushel  of  salt  with  him  : — that 
the  devil  had  much  more  frequently,  and  closely  lain  in  bed, 
and  slept  with  him,  than  his  wife  Catherine  : — that  he  was 
•wout  to  walk  about  with  him  in  his  bed-chamber : — and  that  lie 
had  had  him  hanging  about  his  neck.” — For  the  originals,  and 
the  autliorities,  of  all  this,  I refer  the  reader  to  JBayle  himself. 

which 


CAUSES’  OP  IXSANITV. 


200 


which  we  fancy  we  merit;  but  which,  however  we 
rna)  deserve,  the  world  chooses  to  withhold  while 
we  so  arrogantly  demand  it;  and  were  it  not, 
when  most  successful,  and  most  gratified,  apt  to 
degenerate  into  insanity,  by  leading  the  mind 
J^o  incessantly  to  dwell  on  the  single  subject  of 
our  own  excellencies,  as  to  render  it,  by  means 
of  such  a perpetual  recurrence  of  the  same  errone^ 
ous,  or  ill  governed  imaginations,  at  first  notion- 
ally,  and  at  length,  by  inducing  an  uniform  and 
unremitting  a61ivity  of  the  brain,  ideally  delirious. 
Of  insanity  apparently  from  this  source,  I have 
sometimes  seen  examples.  That  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar king  of  Babylon  seems  to  have  origi- 
nated from  the  same  cause:  and  Alexander  the 
Great  was,  I am  persuaded,  intoxicated  to  a de- 
gree of  aclual  madness,  by  the  folly  of  excessive 
vanity,  as  well  as  by  that  of  excessive  drinking. 

Malevolence  is  defined  by  Cicero^  to  be  a 
pleasure  arising  from  the  sufferings  of  others,  when 
they  are  unaccompanied  with  any  advantage  to 
ourselves.” 

This  passion  may  have  for  its  obje<51:  cer- 
tain individuals  only ; and  may  derive  its  origin 
trorn  the  personal  resentment  of  some  real,  or 
supposed,  injury,  or  affront.  And  in  this  case 
it  nearly  resembles  from  which  it  chiefly 

differs  in  this,  that  revenge  is  more  violent ; and, 


^ nsculnn,  Oisput3tion,  lib,  iv.  esp,  x. 
VOL.  II. 


P 


arising 


210 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


arising  from  that  vehement  desire  of  punishing 
an  offender  which  is  called  anger,  deliberately  in- 
flidls  the  punishment,  which  the  momentary  pas- 
sion of  anger  would  impel  Us  to  inflidl  suddenly; 
and  whicli,  if  delayed  till  it  has  had  time  to  sub- 
side,  it  would  not  inflict  at  all ; i^  itself,  diredtly 
or  indiredlly,  the  •author  of  the  punishment ; 
and  is  in  short,  a fixed,  deliberate,  and  durable 
anger:  wluTeas  malevolence,  though  arising  from 
a {lerincUient  anger,  and  resembling  revenge,  is 
less  violent  than  either ; docs  not  imply  a desire 
of  inflidting  punishment ; much  less  does  it  actu- 
ally inflict  any  itself : but,  being  the  reverse  of 
benevoIencT,  which  rejoices  in  the  good,  it  un- 
kindly, and  maliciously,  rejoices  in  the  harm,  of 
others. 

Or  malevolence  may  extend  to  certain  bodies, 
or  societies,  of  men.  When  it  appears  in  this 
form,  it  may  have  arisen  from  early  prejudices, 
Jiave  been  indulged  from  selfish  and  interested 
views,  and  have  been  fomented  by  contentron  and 
animosity,  whether  of  the  tongue,  the  pen,  ch*  the 
sv/ord;  and  displays  itself  in  the  hatred  of  a party, 
of  a refi^dems  seCf,  or  of  a rival  nation  ; and  in 
all  these  ways  has  often  led  on  to  every  species  of 
injustice,  and  inhumanity.  Indeed  the  man  who 
can  once  bring  himself  to  feel  pleaure  in  the  pain 
of  another,  beyond  the  instantaneous  impulse  of 
n momentary  passion,  and  exceeding  the  degree 
viecessary  fur  the  correction  of  the  fault,  and  the 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


21  i 

proclu6lion  of  convi(Stion  and  amendmenf,  is  of 
too  savage  a temper  for  civilized  society,  and 
might  easily  be  driven  along  by  the  crnel  malig“ 
nity  of  ferocious  passions,  to  any  extreme  of  vio- 
lence and  barbarity. 

Nor  do  a party,  a se6f,  or  a nation^  set  bounds 
to  malevolence.  It  sometimes  spreads  unlimited^ 
and  comprehends  the  whole  human  race  ; and  is 
then  termed  misanthropy ; it  pining,  iind  gloomy 
passion,  or  habit  of  mind,  which  leads  us  tO  receive 
an  uncomfortable  sort  of  pleasure  from  thinking 
ill  of,  railing  at,  recounting  the  faults,  and  rejoic- 
ing over  the  miseries  of  mankind.  It  may  receive 
its  origin  from  private  injuries  done  to  us,  from 
great  disappointments,  or  heavy  misfortunes, 
brought,  or  supposed  to  be  brought  upoii  us, 
by  tlie  selfishness,  treachery,  or  malevolence  of 
others  ; and  will  be  fostered  by  pondering  much 
upon  the  injustice,  and  ingratitude,  we  have  ex- 
perienced from  our  fellow-creatures  ; and,  espe- 
cially, if  to  this  be  added  a firm  persuasion  that 
the  human  heart  is  entirely  selfish,  and  unge- 
nerous. 

This  unfriendly  passion,  though  placed  among 
those  arising  from  a feeling  of  pleasure ; from 
the  circumstance  of  the  gloomy  and  malicious  sa- 
tisfadtion,  which  constitutes  its  essential  charadier  ; 
is  yet  to  those  who  are  so  unfortunate,  and  so 
sunk  in  the  scale  of  moral  depravity,  as  to  be 
much  subje<^  to  its  influence,  a source  of  infi- 

p 2 nitely 


2\2 


CAUSES  OF  IKSAXITY. 


nitcly  more  pain  than  pleasure  ; not  only  as  bdn^ 
a selfish  passion,  but  as  it  is  usually  followed  by 
a long  train  of  other  passions,  no  less  selfish, 
malicious,  gloomy,  and  painful ; as  cm’y,  jea- 
lousy, suspicion,  disappointment,  hatred,  revenge, 
anxiety,'  shame,  grief,  fear,  terror,  remorse,  and 
the  like  malignant  and  tormenting  affedions.  It 
is  plain,  tlierefore,  that  habitual  malevolence  must 
be  a ready  inlet  to  the  various  distresses  of  the 
hyjiochondriacal  disorder,  and  insanity. 

Desire  is  an  earnest  volition  of  the  acquisitlo-u 
of  some  supposed  absent  good,  or  of  the  preserva- 
tion of  some  present  one : or,  which  amounts  to 
the  same  thing,  of  the  absence  of  some  present 
evil,  or  the  avoidance  of  some  possible  future 
one: — or,  in  other  words,  it  is  au  opinion  that 
the  possession  of  some  certain  attainable,  or  pos- 
sible, good,  would  contribute  to  our  happiness  ; 
accompanied  with  a wish  to  be  possessed  of  it, 
which  is  usiuilly,  more  or  less  painful,  in  propor- 
tion to  its  intenseuess,  and  to  the  prospect  of 
its  gratification. 

Of  this  affection  there  are  various  mcKlifica- 
tions,  which,  according  to  the  nature  of  its  vari- 
ous objedls,  relations,  and  combinations,  take  va- 
rious names  :■  besides  a coivsiderable  number  of  na- 
tural desires,  wliich,  not  having  acquired  distindV 
appellations,  pass  under  the  general  one:  and 
which  produce  no  very  conspicuous  commotion 
in  the  body,  hut  sq  hir  as  the^'  give  rise  to  tlie 

other 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


213 


•ether  passions  of  joy,  distpess,  anxiety,  and  fear  ; 
such  as -the  desire  of  life,  hcaltli,  ease,  pleasure, 
reputation,  or  the  good  opinion  ot  mankind, 
and  the  like,  with  the  avoidance  of  their  contra- 
ries, death,  disease,  pain,  disa|Dprobation,  and 
infamy. 

There  are,  likewise,  certain  desires,  or  wants, 
which  may  be  termetl  unnatwal,  and  which  I 
conceive  to  come  under  Cicero’s  description  of 
indigentia,  which  he  defines  libido  inexplehilis, 
“ insatiable  desire  and  to  comprehend  a great 
variety  of  artificial  wants; — as  the  desire  of 
monei/,  the  desire  of  glor?/  or  love  of  fame,  the 
desire  of  poiver,  a passion  for  dress^  gallanin/, 
gaming,  building,  gardening,  or  the  like  ; any  one 
of  which,  by  habit  and  indulgence,  may  take  such 
deep  root  in  the  mind  as  to  become  its  ruling  pas- 
sion, and  constitute  tlie  moral  disease  of  avarice, 
ambition,  ostentation,  a nice  sense  of  honour 
falsely  so  called,  offeElation  of  every  kind,  the 
love  of  pleasure  and  dissipation,  and  an  almost 
infinite  variety  of  nameless  deviations  from  the 
true  paths  of  virtue  and  happiness'’. 

I call  them  unnatural  desires,  because  they  ex- 
ist only  in  an  advanced,  and  artificial  state  of  so- 
ciety ; and  because  some  of  them  owe  their  birth 
to  the  peculiar  manners,  fashions,  and  luxuries, 
of  the  times,  and  countries,  in  which  they  pre- 
vail. 


« Vide  Horatii  Epist,  18,  lib.  i.  ver,  p(),  &c. 

P 3 


It 


214 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


It  is  too  obvious  to  need  discussion,  and  too  no- 
torious, to  need  proof,  how  frequently,  and  in 
what  way,  many  of  these  artificial  wants  terminate 
in  insanity. 

Hope,  which  is  a persuasion  of  the  mind  that 
,we  shall  obtain  the  good  we  wish  for,  is  an  affec- 
tion in  which  the  pain  of  desire  is  almost  annihi- 
lated by  the  pleasing  prospedl  of  approaching 
fruition  ; and  the  raptures  of  joy,  which  might 
ijccompany  adlual  fruition,  are  quieted,  and  kept 
under,  by  the  contrary  emotions  of  still  remaining 
desire,  and  of  a slight  though  sometimes  scarcely 
perceptible  sense,  of  the  possibility  of  disappoint- 
ment: and  is  usually  of  so  gentle  a nature,  SQ 
little  inimical  to  virtue,  and  so  friendly  to  health,, 
as  scarcely  to  retain  thy  qualities  and  charadler, 
or  to  deserve  the  name,  of  a passion  ; or  only  to 
merit  that  appellation  by  retaining  the  good 
ones;  for  which  reason,  I suppose  Cicero  has 
pmitted  it. 

What  is  here  said,  of  the  hope  of  obtaining  a 
desired  good,  is  equally  applicable  to  that  of  avoid- 
ing an  approaching,  or  escaping  from  a present 
evil.  The  absence  of  evil  being  to  be  considered, 
in  this  checquered  sU^e  of  good  and  ill,  as  the 
possession  of  real  good ; and  the  avoidance  of, 
or  liberation  from,  adlual  evil,  as  equivalent  to 
the  acquisition  of  up  inconsiderable  degree  of  po- 
sitive good. 

Human  happiness,  in  its  n^ost  perfect  state, 


seems 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY, 


215 


seems  to  be  made  up  ot  a calm  satlsfadHon  in  the 
enjoyment  of  present  good,  and  the  pleasing  hope 
that  it  will  continue,  or  will  be  succeeded  by  some 
other  good,  no  less  grateful  to  our  natures,  and 
agreeable  to  our  wishes. — Satisfa61ion,  therefore, 
and  hope,'  the  gentlest,  and  most  harmonious  af- 
fe<Slions  of  the  mind,  always  accompany,  and  are 
accompanied  by,  the  most  harmonious,  gentle, 
and  salutary  m.ovements  of  the  living,  and  adhve 
powers  of  the  body.  As  they  are  attended  with 
no  painful  emotions,  so  they  are  productive  ot 
no  in]urious  effeCts,  either  on  the  mind,  or  body  ; 
and  arc  as  unconneCled  with  vice,  as  they  are  the 
enemies  of  mental  suffering,  and  bodily  disease. 

I here  speak  of  a pure,  and  rational  hope,  un- 
tainted with  any  other  passion,  and  wortliy  of  our 
nature.  But  it  is  proper  to  add,  that  hope  may  be 
combined  with  other  passions,  and  may  have  for 
its  objeCl  real  evil,  under  the  specious  appearance* 
of  goo<l.  1 may  hope  to  obtain  the  gratification 
of  some  irregular  appetite,  or  disorderly  passion  ; 
or  to  acquire  some  fancied  good  which  is  in  rea- 
lity an  evil.  In  these  cases,  hope  is  but  an  under 
passion,  g mere  adjunCt,  accident,  or  modifica- 
tion ; bnt  partakes  not  of  the  evil  of  the  passion 
with  which  it  is  united.  Hope,  as  hope,  is  still 
pleasing,  still  salutary  ; and  even  here  displays  the 
beneficence  of  its  nature:  for,  though  it  cannot' 
overcome,  it  diminishes,  the  pernicious  effects 
’ p 4 of 


210 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


of  the  painful  and  turbulent  passions,  with  which 
it  is  combined. 

In  libe  manner,  hope  may  be  connected  with 
some  species  of  insanity,  as  a symptom,  but  never 
as  a cause.  It  may  exist  in  the  cheerful  kinds 
of  this  disorder,  without  producing  either  bad  ef- 
fedls,  or  good  ones  ; without  promoting  its  in- 
crease, or  contributing  to  its  amendment ; but 
it  is  of  so  opposite  a nature  to  those  kinds  of  in- 
sanity which  arc  chara61erizcd  by  gloominess, 
and  melancholy,  that  whenever  it  can  be  excited 
in  cases  of  this  sort,  it  afForcIs  an  excellent  sign 
of  amendment ; and  whatever  means  are  capable 
of  exciting  it,  will  have  a powerful  tendency  to  fa- 
cilitate their  cure. 

Anger  is  the  resentment  which  we  feel  of  an 
injury  done,  or  intended,  to  ourselv^es,  or  to 
others,  accompanied  with  a desire  to  punish  the 
trans2:ressor.  Its  immediate  elFecd  is  to  increase 
the  muscular,  and  vascular  tones  of  the  body  ; 
to  augment  strength  ; and  to  accelerate  the  cir- 
culation of  the  blood  through  the  wiiole  system 
of  vessels,  both  great  and  small ; to  increase  the 
quantity  of  blood  sent  to  the  head,  and  when  ve- 
hement, to  produce  in  the  arteries  a degree  of  in- 
flammatory tone  ; in  short,  to  excite  the  most 
vSiidden,  and  violent,  exertions  of  the  nervous 
power,  over  the  vessels,  and  muscles ; and  to 
leave,  when  it  subsides,  in  consequence  of  such 


imcom- 


“CAUSES  OP  INSANITY, 


217 


uncommon  and  tumultuous  efforts,  diminution 
ot  tones,  and  especially  of  the  muscular,  debility, 
languor,  trembling,  palpitation,  and  sometimes 
even  fainting. 

Hence  it  is  obvious  why  it  is  accompanied  with 
a general  increase  of  ^yarmth,  and  of  insensible 
perspiration  ; and  especially  with  uncommon 
flushing  of  the  face,  and  heat  and  throbbing  in. 
the  head  ; why  it  exhibits  vast  and  astonishing 
eftbrts  of  strength  ; why  the  hurry  of  great  and 
unusual  exertions  should  occasion  stammering ; 
and  why  the  violent  agitation  of  mind  with  which 
it  is  attended,  should  produce  restlessness,  and 
inquietude,  of  body.  From  the  sudden  change  in 
the  circulation  of  the  blood  in  the  large  vessels, 
it  is  easy  to  account  for  the  palpitations  which  are 
sometimes  felt  at  the  heart : and  from  the  accele- 
ration of  the  blood’s  motion  in  the  small  ones% 


*■  Ad  incitatum  autem  sanguinis  motum  pertinent  sangui- 
nis subtiliores  effusiones,  maculae  sanguineae  macula  subito 
fusca  in  pede  nata,  bine  f gangrgena  J maculse  et  vibices  letha- 
les,  et  nigredo  a pede  ad  genu  §.  Cum  isto  efFedu  comparo 
rubedinem  in  gallorum  calecuticorum  collo  ex  ira  natum,  ipsa 

denique  chamaeleontis  phaenomena.  Ea  enim,  &c.  &c.” 

Halleri  Element.  Physiolog.  lib.  xvii.  se6t.  ii.  § vi.  tom.  v, 
p.  587. 

* Prtzold.  Obs.  20 
f Albert.  Med.  Leg.  tom.  iij.  c.  134. 
i Idem.  ibid.  Quesnai  dc  la  Gangrene,  p.  3p0. 

5 Gal.  dnMinerv.  vi.  p.  1 32. 


WC 


118 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


we  can  easily  conceive  why  anger  should  give  rise 
to  hemorrhages,  inflammations,  fevers,  epilep- 
sies, apoplexies,  and  insanity  ; and  why  it  should 
occasionally  excite  vomiting,  purging,  and  in 
some  cases,  by  producing  a spasm  on  the  excre- 
tory du61s  of  the  bile,  even  a jaundice  ; and,  by 
a like  sudden  spasm  in  the  intestines,  the  iliac 
passion. — Hence  we  see  how  anger  may  give  mo- 
tion to  a paralytic  limb  ; cure  the  dumb  ; drive 
away  the  paroxysms  of  the  gout  and  rheumatism  ; 
relieve  some  sorts  of  fevers  ; and  protradf  the 
hour  of  death  itself,  keeping  up  for  a while  the 
vital  flame  by  its  strong  and  animated  excitement 
of  the  nervous  power. 

Since  anger  is  produdtive  of  such  extraordinary 
commotions  in  the  body,  and  is  itselt  so  much 
like  insanity,  as  to  be  very  commonly  styled,  alter 
Horaces  and  some  other  of  the  ancients,  “ a 
short  madness,”  we  cannot  wonder  that  it  should 
sometimes  terminate,  immediately,  in  actual  in- 
sanity. Nor  will  it  be  difficult  to  conceive  how 
a passion  which  occasions  so  sudden,  and  so  con- 

‘ furor  Irevis  est,  animum  rege,  qui  nisi  paret, 
Imperat : hunc  frenis,  hunc  tu  compesce  catena.” 

Epist.  ii.  lib.  i.  v,  62. 

Anger’s  a shorler  madness  of  the  mind  j 
Subdue  the  tyrant,  and  in  fetters  bind. 

Francis. 

Vide  efamCiCERONis  Tusculan.  Disputat.  lib.  iv.  cap.  3d. 

siderable 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


219 


siderable  a change  in  the  circulation  of  the  blood 
in  the  head  ; which  is  so  usually  succeeded  by  the 
contrary  emotions  of  sorrow,  and  rej)entance ; 
and  which  not  only  is  the  legitimate  offspring  of 
a degree  of  mental  imbecillitv,  but,  by  injuring 
the  brain,  tends  still  farther  to  weaken  the  facul- 
ties ot  the  mind,  and  by  rendering  both  mind  and 
body,  it  long  and  habitually  indulged,  too  irri-^ 
table,  impairs  the  judgment,  and  exposes  to  the 
frequent  attacks  of  the  most  hurtful  passions  ; 
should  in  the  course  of  time,  .other  causes  con- 
spiring, occasion  almost  every  species  of  insa- 
nity. 

Though  anger,  however,  be  a pernicious  one, 
it  is  often  the  passion  of  generous  minds  ; but 
hatred,  which  may  be  defined  an  inveterate  an- 
ger, and  is  a rooted  resentment  against  some  one 
obnoxious  person,  or  against  some  religious  se61, 
some  party,  some  society,  or  class  of  people, 
against  one  ,of  the  sexes,  or  against  mankind,  is 
always  a mark  of  a weak  mind  ; and,  where  it  is 
not  a symptom  of  actual  insanity,  as  it  frequently 
is,  is  the  certain  sign  of  a base,  and  corrupted' 
heart  : and  is  always  of  so  gloomy,  as  well  as  of. 

malevolent,  a nature,  as  when  by  indulgenco- 
it  has  insinuated  itself  into  the  very  temper  and' 
constitution  of  the  mind,  readily  to  extend  itself 
to  particular  bodies  of  people,  or  to  mankind  ; 
and  insensibly  to  degenerate  into  a morose  kind 
,of  melancholy,  whose  objecSl  may  indeed  be  va-» 

riouij. 


^20 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


rioii®,  but  whose  effe6is  must  ever  be  gloom}% 
painful,  and  tormenting. 

Love  is  a passion  of  a very  different  nature,  and 
of  an  opposite  tendency.  When  extended  to 
mankind  in  general,  it  is  called  bcnevmlence ; 
when  confined  to  an  individual,  with  a passionate 
warmth  of  attachment,  it  is  called  friendship  ; or 
if  that  individual  be  of  the  other  sex,  and  it  have 
a view  to  the  union  of  the  two,  it  becomes  a most 
tender  and  interesting  attachment,  which  has  uni- 
versally acquired  the  almost  exclusive  title  to  the 
' apjiellation  ofloveh 

Love  between  tlie  sexes,  when  it  is  reciprocal, 
and  uncontaminated  with  appetite,  consisting  in 
th.e  most  exalted  feelings  of  the  tenderest  friend- 
ship", without  having  yet  excited  a desire,  or  even 

a thought. 


* See  a beauiifu!  passage  from  Spenser,  containing  a com- 
parison between  natural  afFeftion,  loye,  and  friendship,  in  the 
Spectator,  No.  4£)0.  vol.  vii.  p.  SI, 

“ “ Stoici  vero  et  sapLentem  amaturumesse  dicunt ; et  amo- 
rem  ipsum,  conatum  amicitiae  faciendae  ex  piilcliritudiqis  spe- 
cie, definiunt,  Qiii  si  quis  est  in  rerum  natura  sine  sollicitu- 
dine,  sine  deslderio,  sine  cura,  sine  suspirio;  sit  sane : vacat 
enim  libidine  : — sin  autein  est  aliquis  amor,  ut  est  certe,  qui 
nihil  absit  aut  non  muUum  ab  insania,  &c.” — Cicero n.  Tus~ 
iulan.  Disputat.  lib.  iv.  cap.  .34. 

“ But  the  stoics  allow  that  a wise  man  may  be  in  love  : and 
define  love  itself  to  be  a desire  of  uniting  in  friendship,  excited 
by  personal  beauty.  And,  indeed,  if  there  be  such  a thing  in 
Nature  a.s  love  without  solicitude,  without  the  pain  of  absence, 

without 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


U2l 

ii  thought,  of  any  sensual  gratification,  is  the 
sweetest,  gentlest,  and  most  amiable  of  the  pas- 
sions ; and  produces  exactly  the  same  bodily 
effedls  as  temperate  joy  ; promoting  health  and 
cheerfulness,  invigorating  the  body,  improving 
the  temper,  softening  the  manners,  inspiring 
courage,  and  sharpening  and  animating  every  fa- 
culty of  the  mind  : — and  even  when  combined 
with  appetite,  an  union  to  which  the  purest  love 
between  the  sexes  has,  in  certain  circumstances, 
a necessary  tendency,  it  has,  when  indulged  with 
moderation,  the  same  salutary  effects,  perhaps  in 
a greater  degree  ; besides,  others,  no  less  benefi- 
cial, which  are  peculiar  to  itself; — and,  indeed, 
I know  of  no  one  ill  consequence  which  can 
proceed  from  mutual,  temperate,  and  lawful 
love. 

But  from  an  immoderate  indulgence  of  the  ap- 
petite conne^led  with  this  delightful  afFedlion, 
the  very  worst  consequences  too  often  ensue  5 
and,  though  the  unsuspedfed,  it  has  frequently, 
I believe,  been  the  real  source  of  insanity,  when 
it  has  been  erroneously  attributed  to  some  other 
cause,  or  when  po  probable  cause  could  be 
assigned. 


v7ithout  care,  without  sighing  j such  a love  may  be  allowed  ; 
as  being  free  from  all  desire  : — but  if  there  be  such  a sort  of 
Jove,  which  there  undoubtedly  is,  m differs  very  little,  if  at 
all,  from  insanity,  &c.” 


Intempe- 


CAUSES  OF  insanity. 


ii-2 

Intenipcj'ance  of  this  sort,  not  only  exhausts 
the  body,  but  depraves  and  enfeebles  tlie  mind  ; 
and  exchanges  health,  strength,  ease,  and  cheer- 
fulness, for  disease,  languor,  y)ain,  and  unsur- 
mountable  dejedtion,  which,  with  the  assistance 
of  some  accidental  occasional  cause,  and  some- 
times even  without  it,  too  readily  terminates  in 
insanity. 

But  this  disease  most  frequently  arises  from  the 
other  passions,  with  which  love  is  often,  unhap- 
pily, tormented ; as  solicitude,  fear,  suspicion, 
jealousy,  joy,  grief,  hope,  doubt,  disap})oiiit- 
ment,  despair'’ and  from  that  unremitting  at- 
tention 


’«  “ Sic  igitur  adfc6to  haec  atlbibenda  curatio  es(,  ut  et  Hliid 
quod  cuplat  ostendat  quam  leve,  quam  coiitemnendum,  quam 
uihUi  sit  omnino  5 quam  facile  vcl  aliunde  vel  alio  modo  perfici, 
■velomniuo  negligi  possit : abducendus  etiam  est  nonnunquam 
ad  alia  5 studia,  sollicitudiues,  curas,  negotia  : loci  .deuique 
il^utatione,  tomquam  xgroti  non  convalescenles,  saepe  curan- 
dus  est : etiam  novo  quidam  amove  veterem  amorem,  tamquam 
clavo  clavum,  ejiciendqm  putant : maxume  autem  admonen- 
dus,  quantus  sit  furor  amoris.  Omnibus  enim  ex  animi  per- 
turbationibus  est  profe6to  nulla  vehementior  : ut,  si  jam  ipsa 
ilia  accusarc  nolis,  stupra  dico  et  corruptelas  et  adulteria,  in- 
cesta  deifKjue,  quorum  omnium  arcusabilis  est  turpitudo  : sed 
tit  luEC  omittas,  perturbatio  ipsa  mentis  in  amore  tceda  per  se 
est ; nam  ut  ilia  prasteream,  quae  sunt  furoris  } haec  ipsa  per 
scse  (luam  babentlevitatem,  quee  videntur  esse  mediocria  ? 

— — Injunx, 

Suspicioues,  inimicitse,  induciae. 


Bellum, 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY* 


223 


tcntlon  of  mind  with  which  tlie  lover’s  thoughts 
are  forever  employed  about  the  beloved  object  of 
his  unalterable  affc6hon  ; which  will  scarcely  per- 
mit him  to  cat,  drink,  or  sleep,  and  sometimes 


Bellutrj,  pax  rursum  : incerta  haec  si  tu  postulcs 
Ratione  certa  facere ; iiihilo  plus  agas, 

Qnam  si  des  operam,  ut  cum  ratione  insanias.” 

Cic.  Tusc.  Disp.  ib,  cap.  35. 

« * 

, “ A |)crson  thus  afteded  should  be  cured  in  .this  way  j — he 
sliould  be  convinced  how  light,  how  despicable,  how  worthless 
a thing,  is  the  objeftt/fhis  desire:  how  ea.silyit  may  be  obtained 
from  some  other  quarter,  or  in  some  other  way,  or  may  be  dis- 
regarded altogether : he  should  sometimes  also  be  diverted  to 
other  things  ; to  study,  bustle,  care,  or  business  : and,  lastly, 
the  cure  should  frequently  be  attempted,  as  in  the  cases  of  sick 
persons  whose  recover)'^  seems  to  make  no  advances,  by  change 
of  place ; some  are  even  of  opinion  that  as  Cne  wedge  is 
driven  out  by  another,  so  should  an  inveterate  passion  be  ex- 
[)dled  by  a new  one  : but,  above  all,  he  should  be  made  sen- 
sible how  much  of  madness  there  is  in  love.  For  of  all  the 
passions  there  is  no  one  more  violent:  so  that,  to  say  nothing 
of  rapes,  seduftions,  adulteries,  or  even  of  incests,  all  of  which 
are  chargeable  with  most  criminal  turpitude  : but,  to  say  no- 
thing of  these,  the  mere  disorder  of  mind  which  accompanies 
love  is  of  itself  disgraceful : for,  to  pass  over  such  of  its  ex- 
cesses as  partake  of  insanity ; how  much  is  there  of  folly  even 
in  what  may  be  esteemed  ijs  moderate  irregularities  ? Its — 

Injuries, 

Suspicions,  enmities,  short  reconcilements. 

War  and  then  peace  again  : if  such  uncertainties 
By  reason  you  would  fix,  you  might  as  well 
Wish  tn  be  mad,  and  yet  retain  your  reason.” 


banishes 


224 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.' 


banishes  sleep  entirely  from  his  eyes  ; which  will 
induce  him,  when  in  the  agonies  t)f  anxiety,  fear, 
fmspicion,  or  of  any  of  the  other  baneful  passions 
attendant  upon  love,  to  negledl  business,  and 
all  the  duties  of  his  station,  and  of  social  life  ; to 
be  slovenly  in  his  dress,  and  even  inattentive  to 
cleanliness;  will  torment  him  with  doubt,  dis- 
solve him  with  grief,  make  him  frantic  with  jea- 
lousy, or  fi'ceze  him  with  the  horrors  of  despair  ; 
— or,  when  less  violent,  will  lead  him  to  some 
gloomy  retirement  to  meditate  in  silence, — to 
walk  with  folded  arms,  and  drooping  liead, — to 
be  restless  and  agitated,  in  motion,  gesture,  and 
countenance, — to  be  absent  to  every  thing  exter- 
nal,— and,  in  short,  day  and  night  to  think,  to 
dream,  of  nothing  else  but  the  dear,  interesting 
image,  graces,  and  condudf,  of  the  objedl  of  his 
unfortunate  passion"’. 

Love, 


Love,  and  its  effe£ts,  have  been  favourite  subjeas  with 
poets,  of  every  age,  and  nation.  Thomson,  in  his  Seasons, 
has  given  some  beautiful  sketches  of  it,  in  iti  various  forms. 
The  following  lines,  in  his  Spring,  afford  an  exaa  piaure  of 
Kome  of  the  pernicious  effeas  of  violent,  and  ill-regulated, 
love : — 

“ But  absent,  what  fantastic  woes,  arous'd. 

Rage  in  each  thought,  by  restless  musing  fed. 

Chill  the  warm  cheek,  and  blast  the  bloom  of  life  ? 
Negleaed  fortune  flies ; and  sliding  swift. 

Prone  into  ruin  fall  his  scorn’d  affairs. 

naught  but  gloom  around  ; the  darken’d  sun 


Loses 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.' 


225 


Love,  in  this  state,  is  by  Paulus  iEGiNETA"" 
very  properly  considered  as  a disordered  afFedlion 
of  the  brain  : and,  indeed,  it  not  only  too  often 
exhibits  every  symptom  of  notional  insanity  ; but 
frequently  terminates  in  the  most  deplorable  ex- 
tremes of  every  species  of  the  ideal. 

Ambition,  or  the  earnest  desire  of  power,  and 
pre-eminence,  may,  when  excessive,  dispose  the 
mind  to  insanity, — by  leading  it  to  dwell  too  in- 
tensely, and  incessantly,  on  the  sole  objedt  of  its 
pursuit,  and  aspiration  ; — by  the  injurious  ten- 
dency of  any  violent  and  predominant  passion 
which  may  accompany  it,  as  envy,  jealousy,  an- 
ger, resentment,  malice,  hatred,  revenge,  dis- 
appointment, indignation,  grief,  or  despair 
by  the  perpetual  agitation,  and  sudden  extremes, 
of  opposite  and  contending  passions ; of  hope 
and  fear,  elevation  and  depression,  cheerfulness 
and  anxiety,  fruition  and  deprivation,  joy  and 
distress,  expedtation  and  disappointment  ;~by 
fatigue  of  body,  and  mind,  from  perpetual,  in- 
tense, and  anxious  thinking  and  by  want  of 


Loses  his  light  j the  rosy-bosom'd  spring 
To  weeping  fancy  pines  j and  yon’  bright  arch, 
Contrafled,  bends  into  a dusky  vault. 

All  Nature  fades  extinft  3 and  she  alone 
Heard,  felt,  and  seen,  possesses  every  thought. 

Fills  every  sense,  and  pants  in  every  vein.  &c.  &c.  &c.” 

V ' 

Verse  1001,  See. 

■ De  Re  Medica,  lib,  iii.  cap,  17. 

* VOL.  ir.  « the 


22(3 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITV. 


the  clue  relaxation,  and  refreshment  of  sleep  j 
which  will  too  often  be  greatly  interrupted,  and 
sometimes  entireljr  banished,  by  much  and  deep 
thinking,  by  the  restless  activity  of  violent,  and 
by  the  ferment  and  agitation  of  contending,  pas- 
sions. 

A violent,  and  unreasonable  affection  for  mo- 
ney*, as  a thing  of  inlverent,  and  intrinsic  value, 
without  any  immediate  respe6l  to  its  use,  any 
proper,  and  proportionate  regard  to  the  advan- 
tages, and  comforts,  which  we  may  derive  from 
it  ourselves,  or  be  enabled  by  possessing  it  to 
confer  upon  others,  is  denominated  avarice:  a 
most  sordid,  selfisFt,  and  ungenerous  passion, 
which,  while  it  withholds,  and  stifles,  our  natu- 
ral sympathy,  and  pity,  for  our  fellow- creatures, 
never  fails  to  punish  with  the  pains  of  anxiety 
and  care,  and  with  a total  privation  of  the  finest 
pleasures  of  our  nature,  the  unhappy  wTetch  who 
is  so  unfortunate  as  to  siifter  himself  to  be  en- 
slaved by  an  attachment  so  little  alluring,  so’  per- 
fect ly  irrational,  so  subversive  of  our  best  moral 
feedings,  and  so  degrading  to  humanity. 

That  such  a passion  should  exist  seems  as  \von- 
derfiil,  as  it  is  con^imon.  Nor,  indeed,  could  it 
ever  take  possession  of  the  mind,  but  by  insensible 
approaches.  It  steals  upon  us  by  degrees,  under 
tlie  semblance  of  pro^>er  economy,  and  a prudent 
provision  for  future  enjoyment,  till  familiarity 
makes  us  insensible  of  its  deformity ; and,  by  an 

absurd 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY^ 

absurd  association,  we  begin  to  esteem  on  its  ovvnt 
account,  what  we  at  first  valued  merely  for  the 
sake  of  the  Conveniences  which  it  was  capable  of 
procuring  us ; and  to  transfer  that  affedtion  to 
the  means  only,  which  ought  to  have  been  placed 
entirely,  and  withailt  deviation,  upon  the  end. 

Wlwt  powerfully  assists  in  bringing  about  this 
revolution,  is  the  fear  of  poverty;  which  is  too 
ready  to  take  the  place  of  an  iiabitiial  care  to  save 
money,  and  of  an  anxious  solicitude  to  provide 
for  futurity  ; and  which  so  naturally  springs  up, 
and  strikes  such  deep  root,  in  the  mind  of  a co^ 
Vetous  man,  as  scarcely  ever  to  be  eradicated 
where  it  has  once  fixed  ; and  often,  as  I have  ex* 
perienced  in  a number  of  instances^  to  terminate 
in  that  variety  of  pathetic  insanity  which  I have 
denominated  avaricious,  and  of  which  the  princi^ 
pal,  and  characteristic  symptom,  is  the  ground- 
less dread  of  poverty  in  the  midst  of  affluence. 

Fear,  anxiety,  insatiable  desire,  and  unceas- 
ing care,  are  the  never  failing  tormentors  of  the 
man  of  avarice:  nor  are  they  his  only  tormentors: 
lie  sometimes  voluntarily  affliCls  himself  with  the 
needless  sufferings  of  poor,  and  scanty  diet ; of 
mean,  and  insufficient,  cloathing  ; of  the  want  of 
every  comfort  of  life ; with  the  certain  hardships 
of  a rigorous,  artificial,  poverty,  amidst  the  imagi- 
nary, and  improbable  apprehension  of  a real  one  : 
and  is  occasionally  agitated  with  suspicion,  anger, 
hatred,  distress,  grief,  despair,  or  whatever  other 

2 passion 


228 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


passion  may  possibly  accompany  the  solicitude 
of  colledling,  and  hoarding,  the  dread  of  losing, 
and  the  sorrow  for  the  adlual  loss,  of  the  pri- 
mary, and  almost  only  objedl,  of  all  his  cares,  and 
all  his  wishes. 

If  to  this  be  added  the  pain  of  the  selfish  pas- 
sions ; the  privation  of  the  cheering,  animating, 
and  salutary  influence,  of  the  social  ones  ; the 
horrors  of  a life  of  almost  perpetual  solitude, 
which  is  often  the  lot  of  the  covetous  man ; the 
moping  gloominess  of  spirit,  and  uncomfortable 
void  of  the  heart ; that  total  want  of  an  tinde- 
scribahle  something  essential  to  human  felicity, 
which  must  frequently  be  experienced  by  a being 
who  neither  loves,  nor  is  beloved,  who  is  interested 
in  no  one’s  happiness,  and  is  conscious  that  no  one 
can  be  interested  in  his  own  ; — a man  of  gene- 
rous sentiment,  and  keen  sensibility,  will  be  apt 
to  wonder  that  such  a charadler  as  a miser  can 
exist ; or,  existing,  can  long  retain  his  senses : 
and  even  men  of  less  delicate  feelings  will  not 
be  surprised  that  such  a passion,  or  moral  depra- 
vity, as  avarice,  should  often  terminate  in  insa- 
nity, which  in  its  best  condition,  it  so  much  re- 
sembles. 

How  such  passions,  and  such  habits  of  life,  as 
have  been  here  attributed  to  this  sordid  disposi- 
tion, may  be  produdtive  of  insanity  in  a va- 
riety of  ways,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  from  what 
has  already  been  said  of  the  nature  and  operation 

of 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  22Q 

trf  the  passions,  of  poor  diet,  and  of  constant  at- 
tention of  the  mind  to  one  ol)je6t ; and  will  pre- 
sently be  farther  illustrated,  in  treating  of  the 
passions  which  yet  remain  to  be  considered. 

Distress  is  the  affliaion  which  we  feel  from 
the  present  pressure  of  what  we  conceive  to  be  an 
evil ; arising  from  a persuasion  of  the  mind  that 
the  evil  which  has  befallen  us  is  a sufficient  cause 
for  such  affliaion.  The  passions  of  this  class 
have  a great  variety  of  names;  as  envy,  pity, 
commiseration,  uneasiness,  dejeaion,  anguish, 
sorrow,  mourning,  lamentation,  grief,  despair, 
and  many  others  ; of  which  several  are  nearly 
synonymous  ; some  indicate  passions  which  differ 
only  in  degi'ee ; and  none  produce  any  very  con- 
siderable bodily  effea  which  is  not  exemplified  in 
envy,  pity,  grief,  dejeaion,  and  despair.  ! 

Envy  is  that  affeaion  of  the  mind,  by  which  w^e 
are  distressed  at  the  good  fortune  of  another ; 
either  because  we  ourselves  are  in  w'ant  of  what 
he  enjoys ; or  because,  he  being  possessed  of  a 
desirable  objea  as  well  as  ourselves,  our  unge- 
nerous hearts  are  deprived  of  an  invidious,  and 
insulting  superiority ; — or  because  we  cannot  bear 
to  see  another  happy,  how  remote  soever  his  hap- 
piness may  be  from  interfering  with  our  own  ; or 
the  objea  of  it  from  being  an  objea  of  desire  to 

ourselves.  ' 

This  passion,  in  all  its  varieties,  is  of  a most 
painful,  some,  of  a most  malignant  nature  ; 

. Q 3 being 


230 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


being  tisually  accompanied,  with  anger,  and  ha- 
tred ;-r-either  in  consequence  of  an  unjust  associ^ 
ation,  as  i^  they  had  actually  injured  us,  who  pos- 
sess vv’hat  we  are  so  unhappy  as  to  be  unable  to 
obtain,  or  what  we  wish  to  possess  exclusively, 
and  without  a rival  ; — or  in  consequence  of  some 
former  injury  w'hich  we  j'et  resent,  and  which 
leads  us  to  view  with  a jualicious  indignation,  the 
prosperity  of  a foe  ; — or  because  tire  person  envied 
has  a6lually  been  either  the  intentional,  or  the 
innocent  cause,  of  our  owui  deprivation  ; — or 
from  a temper,  than  which  none  can  be  more 
painful,  or  detestable,  unfortunately  so  depraved 
by  habitual  envy,  as  to  feel  a malevolent  enmity 
to  whatever  we  sec  great,  or  good,  or  happy,  or 
■desireable,  in  the  chara6ier,  or  acquisitions,  or 
successes,  or  other  circumstances,  of  our  associ- 
ates, neighbours,  or  fellow'-citizens. 

The  efFecils  on  the  body  of  this  malicious,  and 
despicable  passion,  wdiich  excites  a desire  of 
humbling  those  whom  we  see  equally,  or  more 
prosperous,  and  whom  we  imagine  as  happy,  or 
happier,  than  ourselves,  are  similar  to  those  of 
grief,  or  dcjechon,  hereiiftor  to  be  described; 
but  often  animated,  and  at  the  same  time  ren- 
dered more  painful,  by  the  violence  of  angcT,  the 
malevolence  of  hatred,  or  the  fretful  impatience 
of  peevishness.  As  it  is  a most  selfish,  degene- 
rate, and  vicious  passion,  engrafted  upon  the 
gjEncrous,  natural,  and  virtuous  one  of  emulation; 


so 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


231 


60  it  is  most  gloomy,  and  uncomfortable ; and 
one  of  the  most  unprofitable,  pernicious,  and  in- 
curable, that  can  torment  and  corrode  the  human 
heart.  An  envious  temper  is  destrudfive  of  the 
peace  of  mind,  and  injurious  to  the  health,  of  its 
possessor ; and  a scourge  to  all  within  the  reach 
of  its  baneful  influence^. 

As 

Mfe  — ^■.^■11  — P— — ■ ——II  ■ Ml  ■■  ■ — — ^ 

y Its  hateful  etfefts  cannot  be  better  described,  allowing  for 
some  little  poetical  heightening,  and  embellishment ; if  that 
may  be  called  embellishment  which  is  intended  to  render  a pic- 
ture more  disgusting  j than  in  the  words  of  Ovid,  in  his  de- 
scription of  the  visit  of  Mixerva  to  the  cave  ofKuvy  ; where 
he  tells  us  that, — 

" Utque  deam  vldet  formaqne  armlsque  decoram  ; 
Ingemuit : vultumque  ima  ad  suspiria  duxit. 

Pallor  in  ore  sedet : macies  in  corporc  toto  : 

Nusquam  re6la  acies ; livent  rubigine  dentes  : 

Pe6tora  felle  virent : lingua  est  suffusa  veneno. 

Pxisus  abest ; nisi  quem  visi  movere  dolores. 

Nec  fruitur  somno,  vigilacibus  excita  enris : 

Sed  videt  ingratos,  intabescltque  vivendo, 

Succcssus  hominum  : carpitque  et  carpitur  un?  : 

Suppliciuraque  suimi  est. 

Et  tandem  Tritonida  coii.spicit  arcem, 

Ingeniis,  opibusque,  et  festa  pace  vireiitem  : 

Vixque  tenet  lacrymas  j quia  nil  lacrymablle  cernit.” 

Metamorphos.  lib.  ii.  v.  773., 

**  Soon  as  she  saw  the  goddess  gay  and  bright. 

She  fetch'd  a groan  at  such  a clieerful  sight. 

Livid  and  meagre  were  her  looks,  her  eye 
In  foul  distorted  glancps  turn’d  awry  j 

a 4 


Aboard 


232 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


•’  As  envy  pines  at  the  prosperity,  and  happiness, 
so  pity  sympathizes  with,  and  commiserates,  the 
misfortunes,  and  miseries,  of  others  : especially 
if  they  suffer  undeservedly,  and  without  any 
guilt,  or  even  fault,  of  their  own  ; or  if  their  suf- 
ferings be  much  greater  than  the  vices,  or  inad- 
vertencies, which  occasioned  them.  For  the  idea 
of  guilt  weakens  the  sympathy,  and  diminishes 
the  pity,  which  we  should  naturally  feel  for  an 
innocent  sufferer.  This  passion  habitually  in- 
dulged, and  meeting  w'ith  too  frequent  exercise, 
as  it  may  readily  do  when  the  obje6ls,  and  occa- 
sions of  it,  are  industriously  sought  for,  and  cul- 
tivated, softens  and  enfeebles  the  mind,  renders 
it  unfit  to  bear  with  fortitude  the  ordinary  occur- 
rences of  society,  occasions  a propensity  to  pic- 
ture human  life  in  the  darkest  colours,  to  indulge 


A board  of  gall  her  inward  parts  possess’d. 

And  spread  a greenness  o’er  her  canker’d  breast  j 
Her  teeth  were  brown  with  rust,  and  from  her  tongue. 
In  dangling  drops,  the  stringy  poison  hung. 

She  never  smiles  but  when  the  wretched  \veep. 

Nor  lulls  her  malice  with  a moment’s  sleep. 

Restless  in  spite  5 while  watcliful  to  destroy. 

She  pines  and  sickens  at  another’s  joy  ; 

Foe  to  herself,  distressing  and  distress’d. 

She  bears  her  own  tormentor  in  her  breast.———— 

When  Athens  she  beheld,  for  arts  renown’d. 

With  peace  made  happy,  and  with  plenty  crown’d. 
Scarce  cou)d  the  hideous  fiend  her  tears  forbear, 

■po  find  out  nothing  that  deserv’d  a tear.” 


impress 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


233 


mpressions  of  gloominess,  and  dejcdlion,  and  to 
prepare  the  way  for  the  easy  introdu6lion  ol  me-* 
Jancholy,  and  despondency ; which  would  be 
greatly  facilitated  by  the  relaxation  of  all  the 
tones,  naturally  resulting  from  a continued  course 
of  such  an  enervating  employment  of  the  mind  : 
but,  pity  being,  happily,  a passion  which  has  no- 
thing of  self  for  its  obje<9,  is  rarely  indulged  to 
such  an  excess,  as  to  do  any  material  injury,  or 
•lay  the  foundation  for  insanity.  In  truth,  it 
is  usually  indulged  too  little  ; and  perhaps  never 
to  any  unreasonable  degree,  but  where  it  meets 
with  encouragement  from  a disposition  of  mind 
too  much  softened  by  misfortunes,  or  too  tender 
by  temperament,  and  already  predisposed,  and 
approaching,  to  insanity. 

Grief  IS  a violent,  piercing,  and  overwhelming 
distress,  usually  accompanied  with  tears,  occa- 
sioned by  the  recent  privation  of  some  real,  or 
supposed,  good,  which  we  highly  esteemed ; or 
by  the  recent  inflidhon  of  some  positive,  or  ima- 
ginary, evil,  of  considerable  weight  and  magni- 
tude. 

Grief,  on  its  first  attack,  if  the  cause  be  great, 
produces  violent  agitation  both  internal  and  ex- 
ternal ; in  the  mind,  in  the  nervous  and  vascular 
systems,  and  in  the  bodily  gestures  ; with  a pro- 
fusion of  tears,  and  frequently  with  much  lamen- 
tation : — but  if  it  be  sudden,  as  well  as  great,  its 
clfedls  are  exceedingly  aggravated  by  surprise  ; 

and 


234 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


and  if  terrible,  with  horror ; under  both  which 
circumstances,  if  not  soon  relieved  by  tears,  it 
may  end  in  insanity*,  or  in  sudden  death  ; — and 

in 


* “ Mercator  quldam  opulentus,  quadragenarlus,  tempera- 
mento  melaticholicus,  ex  magnae  pecuniae  jaftura,  ante  ali- 
quot menses  fa6ta,  in  magnum  moerorem  et  perpetuam  solici- 
tudinem,  pene  omnem  soranum  ipsi  adimenlem,  incidit.  Mcn- 
eem  hoc  affe^u  tortus,  solitudinem  quaerere,  absurda  cogitare, 
et  praesentem  egestatem,  per  quam  sibi  et  familiae  suae  prae 
fame  sit  moriendum,  imaglnari  ccepit.  Hue  accessit,  quod, 
raalo  paulatim  ingras’escente,  aeternis  infemi  cruciatibus  a Deo 
®e  adjudicatum  jam  credat,  monstrosisque  spedris,  quae  diabo- 
4os  appellat,  se  freqitenter  infestari  vigilans  et  somnians  putet, 
quamvis  ipsi  mens  officio  suo  in  reliquis  satis  bene  fungatur, 
nulla  tamen  ratione,  haec  non  vera,  sed  imaginaria  esse,  per- 
suader! a quoquam  potest.  Atque  ideo,  perpetuo  angore  sc 
miserrime  excrucians,  vitara  cum  morte  commutare  exoptat. 
Ab  alimentis  et  medicamentis  est  alienior.” — Joh.  Broen. 
Animadversion.  Medic,  in  Henr.  Regii  Praxin.  Medicam. 
lib.  i.  cap.  14,  p.  137. 

“ An  opulent  merchant,  of  forty  years  of  age,  and  of  a me- 
lancholy temperament,  in  consequence  of  the  loss  of  a large 
sum  of  money  a few  months  ago,  was  affeCted  with  such  ex- 
cessive grief,  and  perpetual  anxiety,  as  almost  entirely  de- 
prived him  of  skep.  After  having  been  thus  tormented  for 
about  a month,  he  began  to  be  fond  of  solitude,  to  have  ab- 
surd thoughts,  and  to  imagine  that  he  was  reduced  to  absolute 
poverty,  and  that  he  and  his  family  should  perish  for  want.  To 
add  to  his  distress,  his  disorder  having  gradually  increased,  he 
fancies  that  he  is  condemned  by  God  to  eternal  torment ; and 
tliat  he  is  perpetually  haunted  by  monstrous  spedtres,  w'hich  he 
calls  devils,  both  sleeping  and  waking : and  though  the  facul- 
ties of  his  mind  perform  their  functions  in  every  otlier  respeft 

very 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


In  any  of  these  cases  it  may  produce  palpitation 
©t  the  heart,  swooning,  a difference  of  the  pulse 
in  the  different  arms,  polypous  concretions  in  the 
large  vessels,  and  sometimes  an  immoderate  flow 
of  the  menstrual  evacuation. 

In  proportion  to  its  violence,  and  duration,  it 
weakens,  and  wastes,  the  body.  It  immediatelj 
diminishes  the  muscular  and  vascular  tones,  and, 
an  the  end,  if  long  continued,  impairs  the  elastic  { 
and,  with  them,  lessens  the  irritability,  and  5en~ 
sibility,  of  the  whole  nervous  system.  Hence 
arise,  a great  and  universal  decay  of  muscular 
strength,  a general  languor,  and  debility,  of  aU 
the  vital  adlions,  and,  for  the  most  part,  a slug- 
gishness of  the  natural  ones.  Sometimes,  indeed, 
and  especially  in  the  fair  sex,  it  is  accompanied 
with  symptoms  of  diseased  irritability,  with  spas- 
modic affedlions,  and  with  an  increase  of  the  na- 
tural excretions  ; common  attendants  upon  dimi- 
nution of  tones,  obstru6lion  of  insensible  perspi- 
ration, and  weakness  of  digestion  ; but  upon  the 
whole,  that  kind  of  nervous  vascular  tone  is 
chiefly  produced,  in  which  the  adiion  of  the  heart 
and  arteries,  and  of  the  secretory  and  excretory 
vessels,  is  rather  too  dull,  than  too  irritable. 


very  well,  yet  can  be  by  no  reasoning  be  persuaded  that  these 
are  mere  fancies,  and  not  realities.  Perpetually,  therefore, 
Itormenting  himself  with  the  most  dreadful  apprehensions,  he 
wishes  for  death,  and  refuses  both  food  and  medicines.” 

ThiB 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


■^36 

This  universal  debility,  besides  its  constant, 
and  necessary  efTeifts,  may  give  occasion  to  various 
other  disorders,  both  general  and  local  ; accord- 
ingly as  the  body  may  happen  to  be  exposed  to  the 
influence  of  their  exciting  causes,  or  as  its  diffe- 
rent parts  may  be  previously  liable  to  be  more  or 

less  affected  by  such  debility . 

• From  this  general  view  of  the  effects  of  grief  on 
the  body,  it  will  appear  obvious  why  the  pulse  is . 
usually  weak,  small,  slow,  and  sometimes  inter- 
mitting ; why  perspiration  is  checked;  why  the- 
face  becomes  pale  ; the  skin  relaxed,  and  flabby  ; 
the  whole  body,  and  especially  the  extremities, 
cold  ; the  menses  suppressed  ; the  habit  edema- 
tous ; and,  after  the  first  agonies  of  grief  are  abated, . 
which  are  commonly  accompanied  with  watch-- 
fulness, — and  perpetual  watchfulness,  as  has  been  i| 
already  explained,  is  often  speedily  succeeded  by 
maniacal  and  phrenitic  insanity*, — why  the  sleep  • 
is  not  unfrecjuently  both  oppressive,  and  dis- 
turbed. 

If  to  the  consideration  of  the  diminished  irrita- 
bility, and  sensibility,  of  the  vascular  system,  w'e* 
add  that  of  the  constant  attention  of  the  mind  toi 
the  objea  of  its  sorrow,  it  will  likewise  be  obvi- 
ous wViy  frequent  sighing  becomes  necessary  to 
facilitate  the  passage  of  the  blood  through  the* 
lungs  y why  the  appetite,  and  digestion,  so  re-- 


» See  Ihe  preceding  Note. 

markably 


CAUSES  0^  INSANITY. 


237 


markably  suffer  ; and  why  the  operation  of-purges, 
vomits,  and  even  of  opiates,  may  sometimes  be 
prevented,  by  this  stupifying^  enfeebling,  and 
unremitting  passion. 

Nor  will  it  be  difficult  to  conceive  why  grief 
renders  the  body  liable  to  all  those  disorders 
which  are  accompanied  by  weakness  of  the  vital 
powers  ; and  why  it  aggravates  those  which  are 
apt  to  drive  violence,  and  danger,  from  such 
weakness  : why  it  disposes  the  body  to  imbibe,  or 
to  retain,  infe(?tion  ; as  the  pestilential,  variolous, 
putrid,  and  others  ; which  have  been  observed  to 
attack  more  readily  such  persons  as  are  much 
affe6led  with  fear,  or  grief ; and  why  it  increases 
the  danger  of  infedtious  diseases,  when  previ- 
ously existing  : why  it  does  the  same  with  regard 
to  the  scurvy,  and  especially  in  long,  anxious, 
and  distressful  v^oyages ; and  with  regard  to  the 
malignant  fevers,  which  are  so  prevalent,  and 
which  are  known  to  make  such  dreadful  havoc, 
in  towns  that  are  besieged  ; why  it  causes,  or  ag- 
gravates, the  hysteric  disease,  the  stone,  gout, 
scirrhous  tumors,  and  cancers ; makes  wounds 
mortify  ; occasions  gutta  serenas,  palsies  of  every 
kind,  and  sometimes  lethargies,  and  apoplexies  : 
why,  aided  by  that  obstinate,  and  statue-like  in- 
activity, which  ever  accompanies  it  when  exces- 
sive, it  produces  an  impeded  circulation,  and  con- 
gestion of  blood,  in  the  veins  which  terminate  in, 
tlie  vena  portarum  ; obstrudions,  local  imflam- 

mations. 


CAUSES  OP  INSANlTir. 


23S 

matlons,  and  abscesses,  in  all  the  abdominal  vis- 
cera ; flatulencies  and  acidities  in  the  first  pas- 
sages ; diarrhoeas,  dropsies,  and  the  like. 

All  these  things  considered,  it  will  not  appear 
wonderful,  that,  besides  sudden  death,  or  sudden 
insanity,  it  should  also,  in  a variety  of  ways,  be 
the  cause  of  a lingering  dissolution  ; and  that  the 
perpetual  gloom  which  accompanies  it,  and  the 
constant  att^^ntion  of  the  mind  to  tlae  same  me-^ 
lancholy  ideas,  should  ultimately  introduce  either 
notional,  or  ideal,  insanity  ; or,  in  their  natural 
order,  first  the  one,  and  then  the  other. 

When  time,  which  abates  the  violence  of  grief, 
is  unable  to  wear  away  the  pxainful  impressions 
which  it  has  imprinted  on  the  mind'* *;  or  to  banish 
the  regret,  which  it  still  acutely  feels,  of  the  in- 
fiiaion,  or  privation,  which  originally  gave  rise 
to  it,  and  which  yet  subsists  ; it  is  apt  gradiuilly 
to  subside  into  a fixed  sorrow,  or  deje^ion  o( 
mind ; which  may  be  defined  to  be  an  habitual 
distress,  with  which  we  are  aft'eaed  by  the  pre- 
seiup®  some  perm  ament  evil,  and  which  disposes 


k Boerhaave  remarks,  that  tlKJ  passions  sometimes  so' 
iecply  impress  the'  ideas  of  their  objeft  upon  the  mind,  as  to 
render  them,  for  a long  time,  incapable  of  being  obliterated  i 
tells  us,  tljat  be  himself  bad  experienced  that  it  was  i»v)ixi$- 

*iUe,  with  hLi  utmost  endeavours,  to  efface  tlvs  recolkaion  of. 
Ctitain  calamities  > tlie  ideas  of  which  seldom  left  him  even  In 
bis  sleep. — ProcLcBion.  Academic,  in  proprias  InHitutiones  Rei 
Mfdicce.  tom.  vii.  p.  H5. 


CAUSES  OP  INSAtffITY, 


239 


US  to  view  such  evil  as  incompatible  with  our 
happiness,  and,  by  giving  to  all  our  thoughts  a 
melancholy  cast,  inclines  us  to  consider  whatever 
concerns  ourselves  in  the  most  gloomy,  and  un- 
comfortable light.  It  differs  from  grief  only  with 
respect  to  vehemence,  and  duration  ; and,  while 
that  may  produce  sudden  and  violent  effe(5ls,  this 
works  more  slowly,  though  not  less  surely  ; gra- 
dually undermining,  and  destroying,  the  tone 
and  vigour  both  of  the  body  and  mind  ; and,  like 
grief,  not  only  bringing  on  all  the  bodily  diseases 
arising  from  debility  ; but  all  those  mental  ones, 
which  are  the  natural  offspring  of  a permanent, 
and  distressful  passion,  which  disposes  the  mind 
incessantly  to  brood  over  its  object;,  and  to  cherish 
the  gloom  by  which  it  is  undone. 

Long  continued  grief,  by  weakening  the  mind, 
and  brain,  and  rendering  those  vibrations  habitual 
which  are  conne(5led  with  distressful,  and  melan- 
choly feeling,  may  give  rise  to  an  habitual  depres- 
sion of  spirits ; which  may  be  kept  up,  and  perpe- 
tuated, by  a variety  of  disagreeable  occurrences, 
unconnedfed  with  the  original  cause  of  grief,  and 
without  the  excitement  of  those  particular  ideas  of 
distress  in  W'hich  it  originally  consisted  ; which 
occurrences,  though  not  perfectly  agreeable, 
would  not  of  themselves,  and  without  the  aid  of 
that  habitual  soreness  of  mind,  if  I may  so  term 
it^  have  been  sufficient  to  excite  any  more  than  a 

slight. 


240 


CAUSER  OF  INSANITY. 


slight,  and  momentary  uneasiness  ; or  perhaps 
would  have  excited  none  at  all. 

When  we  have  no  hope  of  regaining  a lost  good, 
or  of  being  freed  from  an  inflicted  evil,  we  may 
then  be  said  to  feel  the  emotion  of  despair  ; but, 
in  a more  strict  sense,  despair  may  be  defined  to 
be — the  extremity  of  distress,  with  agonizing  hor- 
ror, occasioned  by  the  sense  of  some  dreadful 
present  evil,  from  which  we  have  no  hope  of  ex- 
tricating ourselves  ; or  the  apprehension  of  some 
equally,  or  more,  dreadful,  future  evil,  which  ap- 
pears to  be  as  inevitable,  as  altogether  insupport- 
able, and  affe61s  us,  by  its  supposed  certainty,  as 
if  adlually  present. 

This  passion  is  always  terrible,  being  made  up 
of  the  very  excess  of  grief,  and  deje6lion  ; but  is 
peculiarly  dreadful  when,  as  is  too  often  the  case, 
it  has  religious  distress  for  its  object  : and  rends 
the  heart  with  those  inexpressible  horrors,  which 
are  experienced  by  such  miserable  mortals  as  ima- 
gine they  have  committed  crimes  which  can  never 
be  forgiven  by  an  offended  deity,  and  for  which 
they  are  inevitably  doomed  to  everlasting  tor- 
ment. 

This  religious  despair  may  be  thought  to  be  im- 
properly placed  here,  as  having  future  misery  for 
its  obje61,  and  seeming  to  be  a species  of  fear ; 
under  which  some  have  tho-ught  proper  to  class 
it ; and  the  reverse  of  hope,  from  the  absence  of 

which 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY* 


241 


which  it  derives  its  name  : — but,  not  to  mention 
that  Cicero,  and  the  stoics^  whom  in.  this  re- 
spedt  he  implicitly  fallows^  have  very  properly 
placed  despair  under  the  distresses  ; and  there 
seems  to  be  no  just  reason  why  religious  despair 
should  be  separated  from  the  other  species  of  this 
most  deplorable  mental  affedlion ; it  may  be  ob- 
served that,  as  the  future  evil,  being  supposed 
inevitable,  operates  on  the  mind  as  present ; 
and  as  the  crimes,  supposed,  or  real,  being  irre- 
vocable, and  irremediable,  are  everpresent  to  the 
despairing  mind,  as  adlually  existing  causes,  of 
certain,  and  unavoidable  effedls  ; and  as  theanxb 
ety  ot  fear  is  lost  in  the  more  dreadful  certainty 
of  despair  ; this  passion  may,  with  great  propriety, 
be  ranked  among  those  which  have  for  their  ob- 
jedt  present  evil,  and  go  under  the  general  deno- 
mination of  distresses. 

When  despair  arises  from  some  very  interest- 
ing, and  important,  objedl,  whether  it  be  love, 
or  religion,  or  whatever  it  be  ; but  especially  love, 
or  religion  ; it  too  often  prompts  its  unhappy  vic- 
tims to  suicide' . 

The  effedls  of  despair  on  the  bodyj  are  of  the 
Siime  nature  with  those  of  grief  and  dejedlion  ; 
to  which  are  sometimes  superadded  those  of  an- 


' Both  these  causes  are  judiciously  exemplified,  and  finely 
delineated,  by  Spenser,  in  the  Faery  Queen,  bock  i.  canto  9, 
stanza  xxviii — liii. 


VOL.  II, 


R 


242 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


ger,  against  the  persons,  whether  ourselves  of 
others,  from  wliom  we  suppose  our  misfortune 
to  have  proceeded  ; and,  whenever  the  objedl  is 
very  great,  and  im|X)rtant,  as  it  always  is  in  that 
degree  of  despair  whicli  is  the  proper  subjedt  of  my 
present  consideration,  tliose  of  horror  and  terror, 
often  from  its  suddenness,  and  always  from  its 
apprehended  magnitude,  and  inevitability. 

When  it  is  thus  derived  from  the  most  impor- 
tant objects,  as  from  the  adlual,  or  unavoidable 
loss  of  much  loved  friends,  of  fortune,  or  of  liberty, 
or  from  the  total  privation  of  the  liope  of  eter- 
nal salvation  ; — despair  then  adding,  to  the  ex- 
cess of  grief,  the  astonishment  of  horror,  the 
agonies  of  terror,  and  the  fury  of  hatred,  and  re- 
venue, towards  ourselves  or  others  ; — its  effedls 
are  violent,  and  even  diseordant  ; — violent,  from 
the  acuteness  of  the  distress,  and  of  the  other 
emotions,  which  accompany  it ; and  discordant, 
from  their  opposite,  and  discordant  influence  on 
the  nervous,  and  vascular,  systems  ; tending  to 
excite  immediately  both  a determination  of  the 
circulating  blood  to  the  surface  of  the  body,  with 
an  increased  adlion  of  the  oscillatory  motion  of 
the  capillary  arteries ; auvl  a spasmodic  affe(5hon 
of  the  same  vessels,  and  a conseq^uent  retropuU 
sion  of  the  blood  into  the  large  vessels ; and, 
sooner  or  later,  a diminution,  in  their  natural 
order,  of  all  the  tones  of  the  body  : and,  in  short, 
producing  every  kind  of  disorderly  motion,  which 

has" 


CAUSES  OF  insanity? 


443 


has  a tendency  to  injure,  or  destroy,  the  human 
frame.  For, — as  Hoffman'*  no  less  justly,  tliau 
ingeniously,  observes — “ as  the  motions,  in  the 
body,  hostile  to  nature,  and  produiSlive  of  disease, 
may  be  divided  into  three  general  classes  ;•  the 
violent  motion  of  a fever,  which  impels  the  blood 
forcibly  from  the  inner  to'  the  outer  parts'  of  the 
body ; spasm,  by  which  it  is  driven  from'  the 
external  parts  to  the  internal ; and  atonia,  which 
consists  in  the  too  great  resolution,  and  relax- 
ation, of  the  moving  fibres,-  and  the  remission  of 
their  tone ; ao,^  in  like  hianner,  there  are  three 
violent  passions  in  what  is  called  the  sensitive  soul, 
each  of  which  is  in  a peculiar  manner  adapted  to 
excite  and  keep  up,  its  corresponding  morbid  mo- 
tions in  the  body  ; anger  operating  by  the  eYcite- 
Itient  of  a febrile  motion,  terror  by  a spasmodic 


‘‘  “ Sicutl  tres  ma'xime  motuum  naturae  hostilluni  et  morbl- 

ficorum  datitur  classes,  uC  vehementior  febrilis,  qui  ab  intra 

foras  cum  impetu  pellit  sanguinera,  et  spasmus,  qui  ab  exteri- 

oribus  euin  urget  ad  interiora,  et  denique  atonia,  quae  in  jiiiuia 

resoiutione  et  relaxatioue  tibrarum  motriciura'et  rertiissione  tour 

consistit ; ita  etiam  tres  vehementes  in  anima  sic  difta  sensitiva 

exurgunt  passiones,  quse'singulas  has  motiones  morbosas  pecu- 

liari  modo  fovent  et  sustinent,  adeo,  utiramotu  febrili,  terror 

spasmo,  tristitia  atonia  operationes  suas  exserant.  Et  quern- 

admodum  ira  et  terror  celerrimq  agunt,  iti  tristitia  ta'rdiori  paulo 

■» 

gradu  nocet,  pau)atim  corporis  vires  depascerido,  et  tonum  ao 
robur  partium  solidarum  solvendo,” — Hoffman.  Med.  Bat. 
Systemat.  tern;  ii.  part.  ii.  cap.  i.  § ZO'.—Operum,  tom.  i. 

p.  m- 

B 3 


motion, 


244 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


motion,  and  sorrow  by  the  diminution  of  tone* 
And  as  anger  and  terror  adl  with  rapidity,  so  sor- 
row injures  more  gradually,-  by  insensibly  con- 
suming the  powers  of  the  body,  and  relaxing  the 
tone  and  vigour  of  the  solids.” 

Despair  of  every  kind,  from  whatever  cause 
it  may  have  originated  ; whether  from  -the  loss  of 
friends,  fortune,  or  liberty,  or  from  religious  dis- 
tress and  apprehension  ; very  readily  terminates 
in  insanity : and,  even  in  those  persons,  in  the 
production  of.vvhose  distress  religious  fear  was  no 
way,  originally,  concerned,  it  very  commonly 
happens  that,  by  exciting  a gloomy  turn  of  mind, 
which  disposes  it  to  view  the  worst,  and  most 
unpleasing,  side,  of  whatever  concerns  the. wel- 
fare of  the  unb.appy  sufferer,  it  degenerates,  soon- 
er or  later,  into  religious  desperation,  in  which — 

Hope  never  comes,  that  comes  to  all  j — 

a dreadful  state  of  mind,  which  constitutes  one  of' 
the  most  dismal,  and  shocking,  varieties,  of  pa- 
thetic insanity. 

Fear  is  the  emotion  which  we  feel,  w'hen  we 
apprehend  that  we  are  in  danger  of  being  de- 
prived of  some  present  good  which  we  enjoy  ; 
or  that  we  shall  be  prevented  from  obtaining  some 
absent  good  of  which  we  are  in  pursuit ; or  when 
we  conceive  ourselves  to  be  threatened  with  some 
impending  evil.— When  the  evil  apprehended  is 

such 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


245 


such  as  threatens  injurv  to  the  body,  or  destruc- 
tion to  life,  fear  impels  us  to  shrink  from,  and 
avoid,  the  danger  ; and  to  escape  by  flight  from 
the  coming  mischief. 

Consternation  is  sudden  and  excessive  fear, 
which  so  discomposes  the  mind,  and  diminishes  its 
influence  on  the  muscles  subservient  to  voluntary 
motion,  as  to  take  away,  always  in  a great  de- 
gree, and  sometimes  entirely,  the  power  of  resist- 
ance, or  of  flight. 

Ter  ror^  is  a sudden  and  excessive  fear,  in  which 
the  strong  desire  of  avoiding  the  impending  dan- 
ger, gives  a sudden,  and  extraordinary,  increase, 
during  its  continuance,  of  the  nervous  power  ; 
and  produces  the  most  wonderful,  and  almost 
incredible,  exertions  of  strength,  and  celerity,  as 
there  may  happen  to  be  occasion,  and  opportu- 
nity, for  flight,  or  necessity  for  resistance. 

The  efFedls  of  fear  are;  in  some  of  their  cir- 
cumstances, as  hath  already  been  observed,  in  a 
note,  from  Dr.  Bryan  Robinson',  the  same 
with  those  of  grief.  They  both  diminish  the 
tone  of  the  muscles,  and  blood  vessels,  and  lessen 
the  excretions  of  insensible  perspiration,  and  sweat ; 
but  in  other  respedls  they  differ  very  considerably. 
Grief  is  a permanent,  or,  if  I may  be  allowed  so 
to  term  it,  a chronic  passion  ; fear  a momentary. 


* See  above,  p.  200. 
R 3‘  ■ 


and 


CArgES  OF  INSANITY. 


245 

and  acute  one.  As  debility  of  fnind^  and  body, 
disposes  to,  and  aggravates,  both  ; so  they  both 
tend  to  increase  that  debility  : but  grief  produces 
this  effect  diredlly,  by  an  immediate  diminiitioii 
of  the  muscular,  and  vascular,  tones  ; fear  only 
iudirciflly ; by  exciting  a general  spasm  of  the 
j^uScles,  and  vdsscls  ; possibly,  in  some  degree, 
of  the  whole  vascular  system,  not  excepting  the 
large  vessels,  and  even  the  heart  itself,  but  espe- 
cially, and  consj)icuously,  of  the  capillary  arteries 
on  the  surface  of  the  body  ; and  exhibiting  a re- 
semblance of  the  several  stages  of  a regular  parox- 
ysm of  an  intermitting  fever, — the  cold  fif, — the 
hot  fit, — and  the  solution  ; — the  eftbefs  of  spasm, 
re-a(9;ion, — and  relaxation  ; — all  of  which,  in 
fiome  degree  or  other,  in  proportion  tp  the  \io- 
lenc.e  and  duration  of  the  passion  of  fear,  are  in- 
strumental in  the  produclion  of  debility,  and  a 
diminution  pf  tones.  These  stages  are  particularly 
observable,  when  a sudden  fright  is  soon  perceived 
to  have  arisen  from  a false  alarm.  The  Symptoms 
of  cold,  paleness,  and  trembling,  accompanying 
Spasm,  are,  in  such  cases,  speedily  relieved  by  a 
^low  of  \i\armth  over  the  whole  body,  and  a flush- 
ing of  the  face,  which  are  succetxled  by  a free 
perspiration,  terminating  in  a temporary  debility, 
which  soon  disappears.  But  when  the  fear  is 
great,  and  its  cause  continues  for  any  considerable 
length  of  time,  the  spasm  is  more  violent,  and 
durable,  and  the  symptoms  of  re-a61ion  propor- 

pQuably 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY, 


247 


tionably  less  conspicuous  in  tlieir  efle6l  of  relaxing 
it ; which  they  do  only  inornentarily,  and  at  in- 
tervals ; the  s])asrn  being  obstinately  kept  up, 
with  some  remissions,  by  the  excess  of  fear,  as 
long  as  tile  cause  continues  ; or,  even  when  it 
has  ceased,  as  long  as  a vivid  impression  of  it  re- 
mains upon  the  mind  ; and  abating  as  the  cause 
ceases,  or  the  impression  abates. 

In  consternation  the  mind  itself  is  so  discomposed 
as  to  be  incapable  of  perceiving,  and  determining 
what  means  to  pursue  to  avoid  danger  ; or  of  as- 
suming courage  to  resist  it  : and  tlie  body,  by 
the  violence  of  the  vascular,  and  muscular  spasms, 
is  rendered  unfit  to  be  a6led  upon  by  the  mind  ; 
and  all  sensation,  and  sometimes,  even  all  irrita- 
bility, seems  nearly  to  cease  for  a moment,  in 
consequence  of  the  sudden,  and  euormous  exer- 
tions, of  which  they  w ere  the  causes. 

In  terror,  the  mind  is,  likewise  discomposed  ; 
but  not  so  confounded  as  to  be  insensible  of  every 
means  of  safety.  It  has  neither  composure,  nor 
leisure,  to  deliberate,  or  to  search  for  the  best  ; 
but,  if  there  are  any,  however  unlikely,  and 
sometimes,  howevxr  desperate,  it  seizes  that 
which  most  readily  offers  itself,  - and  w'hieh  though 
desperate,  appears  perhaps  to  be  the  only  one  ; 
and  the  rea^Iion  of  the  heart,  and  larger  arteries, 
being  less  overbalanced  by  the  spasm  on  the  sur- 
face, and  the  muscles  being  not  so  much  affected 
as  to  become  unfit  instrumentsof  theniindsagency ; 

a 4 it 


248 


CAUSES  O'?  INSANITY. 


it  is  able  to  rouse  them  into  such  wonderful 
exertions  of  strength,  or  celerity,  as  they  could 
scarcely  put  forth  on  any  common  occasion,  and 
as  are  suited  to  the  vehemence  of  the  terror  with 
which  it  is  affedled,  and  the  greatness  of  the 
obstacles  opposed  to  an  escape  from  the  threat- 
ening danger, 

Thus  we  see  that  in  fear  the  spasm  is  less  vio- 
lent, and  the  readlion  moderate ; in  consterna- 
tion, and  terror,  the  spasm  is  great ; but  greater 
in  the  former,  than  in  the  latter ; while,  at  the 
same  time,  the  readlion  in  the  latter  is  great,  and, 
so  far  as  the  mind  is  concerned,  often  excessive  ; 
and  in  the  former  it  is  always  feeble,  at  least  so 
far  as'  the  mind  is  concerned,  and  sometimes 
none  at  all. 

The  symptoms  of  spasm  are  paleness,  coldness, 
trembling,  a contradhon  of  the  features  of  the 
face,  and  perhaps  of  the  bulk  of  the  whole  body  ; 
the  universal  spasm  of  the  capillary  arteries  driving 
the  blood  from  the  surface  of  the  body,  and  from 
all  the  parts  to  which  they  are  distributed,  to  the 
internal  parts,  and  into  the  larger  vessels  ; and 
that  of  the  muscles  altering  their  form,  shorten- 
ing their  length,  and  contradling  their  dimen- 
pions.  Daring  the  prevalence  of  spasm  the  pulse 
is  small,  weak,  and  irregular;  all  evacuations, 
or  at  least  all  exce[)ting  those  of  urine  and  stool, 
are  diminished  or  suppressed  ; the  distribution  of 
■ the  circulating  fluids  is  irregular^  accordingly  as  the 

^mall 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  24Q 

email  arteries  in  clifFerent  parts  are  by  nature,  or 
acquired  predisposition,  more  or  less  disposed  to 
be  spasmodically  afFedled  ; or  as  the  spasm  in 
different  parts  happens  to  be  more  or  less  intense, 
and  more  or  less  readily  overcome.  The  spasm 
sometimes  so  empties  the  smaller  veins,  partly, 
perhaps,  by  its  immediate  a6tion  upon  them,  and 
partly  by  cutting  off  the  supply  from  the  small 
arteries,  that,  if  a vein  be  opened,  scarcely  a 
drop  ot  blood  will  flow  from  the  orifice  : it  ren- 
ders wounds  mortal  which  without  such  a fatal 
auxiliary  might  have  terminated  happily ; it  causes 
gangrene  ; dries  up  old  ulcers,  issues,  and  setons ; 
and  has  been  known  to  produce,  in  consequence 
of  this  suppression  of  accustomed  evacuations,  dan- 
gerous asthmas,  spasmodic  colics,  and  other 
alarming  complaints  ; it  suppresses  hemorrhages, 
the  menses,  the  lochia,  and  the  milk  ; strikes  in 
eruptions,  as  in  the  small-pox,  measles,  and 
other  kinds  of  efflorescences  in  fevers;  and,  by  its 
influence  in  contracting  the  stomach,  intestines, 
and  biliary  ducts,  in  diminishing  the  tone  of  the 
whole  alimentary  canal,  and  impeding  digestion, 
as  well  as  suppresing  the  alvine  evacuation,  it 
produces  jaundice,  hysterical  and  hypochondriacal 
aftedions,  in  those  persons  in  particular  who  are 
subject  to  them,  distentions  and  pains  in  the  bow- 
els, and  all  the  variety  of  symptoms  attending  ou 
flatulency,  and  indigestion. 

The  blood  being  thus  driven  back  by  the  spasm 

of 


G50 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


of  the  small  vessels  towards  its  source,  and  accu- 
mulated in  the  large  vessels  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  heart,  and  pressing  from  the  veiOsS  to 
be  transmitted  by  that  organ  in  the  regular 
course  of  circulation,  fiister  than  its  accumulation 
in  the  larc-e  arteries  will  suffer  it  to  be  trans- 
initted,  a sense  of  uneasiness,  and  anxiety,  is 
produced,  the  large  veins  and  arteries,  are  botli 
at  first  distended,  and  afterwards  the  arteries  n»ore, 
and  tlicYeins  less  so,  it  is  stimulated  into  frequent, 
and  often  fruitless  aeiion,  tending  to  overcome 
the  spasm,  and  throw  off'  the  load  of  accumulated 
blood,  winch  oppress  it ; and  the  lungs  being  in 
like  manner  overloaded,  a quick,  and  difficult, 
respiration  ^accompanies,  and  increases  the  anxU 
cty. 

AVhen  the  cause  of  fear  is  not  very  great,  or 
quickly  ceases,  the  spasm,  being  slight,  or  soon 
spontaneously  giving  vvay  as  its  cause  disap|>ears, 
is  readily  conquered;  and  ease  spee^lily  obtained. 
But  where  the  cause  is  of  great  magnitude,  and 
subsists  long,  the  efforts  of  the  heart  are  of  but 
little  efficacy  in  overconjing  the  spasmodic  influ- 
ence of  fear  : for  while  the  affetSlion  of  the  miiKl 
still  continues  unabated,  the  symptoms  of  spasm 
will  still  subsist,  and  predominate.  During  this 
unequal  contest ; in  which  not  only  the  exertions 
of  the  heart  are  enfeebled,  and  disordered,  by  the 
impediment  opposed  to  them  by  the  quantity  of 
blood  pressing  upon  it  on  every  side>  but,  possi- 
bly, 


CAUSES  OF  iKSANltV.  251 

bly,  it  lO^iy  itself  be  spasmodically  afFecled,  as 
wefll  as  every  other  part  of  the  body  capable  of 
motion,  whether  voluntary’  or  involuntary;  the 
jjidse  varies,  as  the  vigour  of  the  heart  rises  or  falls ; 
as  it  is  roused  into  animated  resistance,  or  gives  way 
to  the  superior  force  of  its  antagonist ; aud  is, 
,a,ccordingly,  quick,  weak,  hard,  full,  throbbing, 
soft,  small,  undulating,  irregular,  or  even  inter- 
mitting,  and  sometimes  ceases  altogether  : whence 
palpitations,  swooning,  and  even  death  itself. 
And  as  in  this  struggle  it  may  happen,  from  somp 
predisposition  in  the  constitution,  or  from  some 
accidental  circumstance,  that  the  blood  may  be 
determined  more  plentifully  to  some  particular 
part,  than  to  others  ; or  such  part  may  be  inorfe 
liable  to  be  injured  ; if  it  be  t!  us  copiously  distrii- 
buted  to  the  head,  it  may  produce  apoplexies, 
epilepsies,  palsies,  or  spasmodic  symptoms ; if 
to  the  lungs,  it  may  occasion  difficulty  of  breath- 
ing, a sense  of  suffocation,  spitting  of  blood, 
inflammation,  a large  secretion  of  mucus,  or  of 
matter  : — if  determined  to  the  uterus,  in  the  time 
of  gestation,  it  may  procure  abortion  ; in  the 
time  of  menstruation,  or  in  persons  subject  to 
such  discharges,  at  other  times,  it  may  cause  pro- 
fuse menstrual  evacuations  : and  both  in  the 
time  of  gestation,  and  of  lying-in,  it  has  been 
known  to  raise  tubercles  in  the  breast,  probably 
in  consequence  of  a retention  and  coagulation  of 
the  milk,  which  haye  sometimes  ended  in  ill  con- 
ditioned 


232 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


clitioned,  and  cancerous  ulcers*.  And  as  ulcera- 
tions in  the  lips,  and  erysipelatous  inflammation 
in  various  parts  of  the  body,  have  been  observed 
to  succeed  the  perturbation  of  terror,  they  have 
not  unreasonably  been  attributed  to  the  disor- 
der excited  in  the  circulation  by  this  agitating 
passion. 

Since  the  efFecls  of  fear  upon  the  bo^ly,  and 
the  symptonas  of  a febrile  paroxysm,  so  exaclly 
resemble  each  other,  it  is  not  at  all  wonder!  ul 
that  fear  alone,  without  the  assistance  of  any  ex- 
ternal cause,  should  give  rise  to  a fever  ; and  in 
^ich  as  are  of  a bad  habit  of  body,  of  the  very” 
.worst  kind,  and  attended  with  the  most  alarming 
debility  : or  that  terror  immediately  preceding, 

or  exactly  coinciding  with,  the  accession  of  a fever, 
originating  from  some  other  cause,  should  pro- 
duce the  most  violent  symptoms  ; and  add  greatly 
.to  the  danger  previously  existing  ; or  create  dan- 
ger where  before  there  was  none ; or,  at  least, 
should  so  change  the  appearance  of  the  disease, 
as  to  deceive  the  most  skilful  physician,  who 
might  not  happen  to  be  acquainted  with  this 
circumstance,  into  an  apprehension  of  more  dan- 
ger than  a knowledge  of  the  real  nature  of  the 
fever  would  warrant. 

Nor  is  it  wonderful  that  fear  should  dispose  the 
body  to  the  admission,  and  aggravate  the  vio- 
lence, of  pestilential,  variolous,  and  putrid  infec- 
tions ; since,  not  only  the  died  of  fear,  and  the 

symptoms 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


253 


Syiuptoms  of  a fever,  are  exceedingly  similar, 
ljut  the  whole  body,  not  excepting  the  heart  itself, 
being  much  enfeebled  by  the  general  spasm  attend- 
ant upon  fear,  it  is  not  difficult  to  conceive  why 
«uch  infectious  miasmata  as  acl  upon  the  body  in 
a similar  manner,  and  whose  malignancy  depends, 
in  a great  measure,  on  the  diminutiqn  of  the 
force  and  vigour  of  the  heart, , should  be  most 
easily  received  into,  and  retained  by,  such  bodies 
as  are  already  debilitated,  and  prepared  for  them, 
by  the  influence  of  fear  and,  when  so  received, 
why  they  should  excite  the  most  alarming  symp- 
toms and  commit  the  most  dreadful  depredations.. 
It  is,  likewise,  easy  to  conceive,  why  fear  should 
be  of  a most  dangerous  tendency,  and  ought  most 
carefully  to  be  guarded  against,  in  such  diseases 
already  existing  : why  it  is  particularly  mischievous 
in  exanthematous  fevers,  by  preventing,  or  re- 
pelling, the  eruption  ; and  in  all  fevers  at  the  ap- 
proach of  a crisis,  by  disturbing  the  salutarv  one- 
ration  of  Nature,  and  suppressing  the  critical  eva- 
cuation by  which  she  was  meditating  to  free  the 
body  from  the  disease  : and  why,  as  fear  more 
readily  seizes  upon,  so  it  more  grievouslv  affiic.^*?. 
and  debilitates,  those  who  are  already  in  a state 
of  weakness,  and  debility  ; and  is,  in  a word,  of 
most  dangerous  operation  on  all  such  as  have  been 
exhausted  by  any  large  evacuation, . or  other 
means;  or  who  are  affeded  with  diseases  accom- 
panied 


234 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

panied  with  spasmodic  symptoms,  or  any  great 
diminution  of  tone;  or'  whose  vital  powers, 
though  considering  their  advanced  period  of  life, 
tliey  are  apparently  good,  have  yet  felt  the  refri- 
gerating and  depressing  infiuertce  of  age. 

While  the  cause  of  fear  remains  unabated,  the 
pe-a61ion  of  the  heart  may  produce  partial,  and 
temporary  relaxations ; or  rather,  perhaps,  the 
violence  of  the  spasms  themselves  ; according  to 
the  maxim  that  spasm  and  relaxation  mutually  ge- 
nerate each  other  ; and  from  one  or  both  these 
causes,  may  arise  those  cold  clammy  sweats  which 
so  commonly  afFe^l  persons  under  the  influence 
of  this  passion  : but  the  spasm  will  continue  to 
predominate,  till,  the  cause  ceasing,  or  abating, 
it  will  at  length  give  way  ; the  natural  warintlT 
will  gradually  return  ; a more  copious,  regular, 
and  durable  perspiration  will  succeed  ; the  sphinc- 
ters will  be  relaxed  ; if ritability  revived  ; the  os- 
eillatory  motions  of  the  small  arteries  renewed 
though  at  first  imperfedfly,  and  unequally  ; and 
the  balance  of  circulation  to  the  surface  will  begin 
to  resume  its  due  equilibrium  ; which,  however, 
not  being  at  once  regularly  and  perfedlly  restored, 
the  blood,  hitherto  restrained  within  the  narrow 
limits  of  a confined  circulation,  and  the  natural 
excretions  hitherto  suppressed,  will  be  urged  on 
by  the  violence  of  re-a6lion,  and  the  precipitancy 
®f  having  overcome  opposition^  with  unusual  ex- 
ertion 


Causes  of  insanity. 

crlion  and  a6Uvlty,  and  torce  open  a passage  wher- 
ever they  find  the  least  resistance ; whence  the  state 
of  solution  is  not  uncommonly  accompanied  with 
diarrhoea,  a flow  of  pale  urine,  of  the  menses, 
even  when  suppressed,  of  the  lochia,  and  some- 
times, as  we  are  told,  with  an  involuntary  emis- 
sion of  the  seminal  fluid ; accordingly  as  particulm* 
combinations  of  the  circumstances  jiist  mentioned 
happen  to  determine. 

But,  besides  the  disorders,  and  disturbances, 
at)ove  enumerated,  insanity  of  the  worst,  and 
sometimes  of  the  most  obstinate  kind,  is  a fre- 
quent consequence  of  great  and  excessive  terror; 
and,  when  it  arises  from  this  cause,  it  usually 
commeimes  immediately,  and  retains  the  charac- 
ter,  and  often  the  very  object,  of  the  passion 
which  gave  it  birth. 

Fear  and  terfor  are  adapted  to  produce  insanitv, 
by  the  liveliness  of  the  impression,  from  which 
the  mind  cannot  afterward  free  itself  • by  the  a6ti- 
vity  of  the  brain,  necessarily  accompanying  so 
violent  an  emotion  ; and  by  the  sudden  and  ex- 
traordinary determination  of  blood  to  that  organ  s 
the  agency  of  all  which  natural  efte61s  of  this  pas- 
sion, in  the  produaion  of  insanity,  \\ill  be  much 
promoted,  wherever  they  meet  with  a temper  of 
mind  peculiarly  favourable  to,  and  susceptible  of' 
the  agitation  of  excessive  terror  ; and  a constitu- 
tion of  brain  disposing  its  medullary  substance  to 

violent-. 


556 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


violent,  and  permanent  vibrations,  and  its  small 
arteries  to  rapid  oscillations^ 

Under  the  general  head  of  fear  may  very  pro- 
perly be  reckoned  shame,  which  is  a dread  of  cen- 
sure, or  disgrace,  or  indelicacy ; from  a consci- 
ousness of  having  adted  viciously,  or  indiscreetly, 
or  so  at  least  as  to  incur  the  disapprobation  of 


^ C-^Lius  Aurelianus  gives  the  following  instance  of  in- 
sanily  from  fear. 

“ Turbine  repentino  expavescentes  atque  percnssos  quosdara 
sic  ait  [Demetrius],  ut  etiam  olliuione  praegestorum  affician- 
tur.  Sic  denique  Artemidorum  grammaticum  Apollonius 
inemorat,  &c.” — Morh.  Diutumor.  lib.  i,  c.  v.  §151,  p.  328. 
— See  above,  vol.  i,  p.  128. 

Demetrius  informs  us  that  some  persons  have  been  so 
terrified,  and  alarmed  by  a sudden  whirlwind,  as  to  forget  their 
past  transadions  : and  [that  Artemidorus  the  grammarian, 
being  terrified  by  the  unexpe6ted  appearance  of  a crocodile, 
w'33  so  much  disordered  by  the  fright,  that  he  not  only  ima- 
gined that  the  animal  had  devoured  his  left  leg  and  hand,  but 
even  forgot  all  that  he  had  learned.” 

See  a- deplorable  history  of  insanity  from  terror,  terminating 
In  suicide,  in  Boerhavii  Praeledlion.  Academ.  de  Morbis 
Nervorum,  tom.  ii. 

That  frightful  dreams  have  produced  insanity,  is  asserted  by 
Boerhaave  (ib.  p.  242.) ; and  as  I from  experience,  can  affirm 
the  same. 

Hopfman  relates  a case  of  insanity  from  terror,  in  a womaa 
after  lying-in  5 and  I have  often  met  with  instances,  in  which 
the  most  violent,  and  alarming  symptoms  of  this  disorder  have 
succeeded  frights. — Vide  Hoffm.  Consult,  et  Respons.  Med. 
033.37.  Operum,  tom.  iv.  p.  64. 


those 


257 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

those  persons  of  whose  reprehension,  of  con- 
tempt, we  are  afraid  ; or  from  a constitutional 
diffidence  ; or  from  a nice  and  lively  sense  of  mo- 
desty ; and  w'hen  suddenly  excited,  on  any  par- 
ticular occasion,  is  accompanied  with  a flushing 
heat  over  the  body  in  general,  and  particularly  in 
the  head,  face,  neck,  and  bosom  ; and  often  dis- 
covers itself  by  a sliy  and  downcast  look,  and  by 
the  warm  suffiusion  of  blushing. 

The  sudden  emotion  of  shame  exciting  an  in- 
creased ablion  of  the  small  arteries  of  the  head  and 
brain  ; as  is  evident  from  the  heat  and  flushing 
ot  the  head  and  face,  and  from  the  dizziness, 
throbbing,  and  noise  in  the  head,  which  are 
vsometimes  all  experienced  in  a very  considerable 
degree,  while  under  the  influence  of  a very  lively 
•feeling  of  this  passion  ; is  capable  of  producing 
considerable  effedts ; and  may,  when  violent,  and 
attended  with  much  fear,  bring  on  sudden  deli- 
rium, and  insanity  ; but  more  is  to  be  dreaded 
from  its  becoming  permanent  and  habitual,  and 
adding  to  the  pain  of  perpetual  apprehension  froiYi 
the  eyes  of  every  beholder,  the  fixed  corrosion  of 
settled  grief,  anxiety,  dejedlion,  and  despair : 
and  how  these  affedfions  of  the  mind  may  favmur 
the  introdudlion  of  insanity  has  been  pretty  fully 
explained  already. 

Suspicion,  and  jealousy,  are  so  nearly  allied, 
that  the  former  may  be  considered  as  differing 
from  the  latter  chiefly  in  degree,  and,  perhaps, 

VOL.  II.  s in 


258 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


in  some  instances,  in  the  nature  of  its  object  : 
suspicion  being  the  apprehension  of  designs  formed 
against  us,  or  wrong  done  to  us,  by  certain  indi- 
viduals, on  whom  it  rests  without  proper  proof ; 
and  jealousy  being  a similar  apprehension,  lest, 
by  the  machinations  of  another,  we  should  be  de- 
prived c/f  some  good,  of  which  we  are  anxious  to 
retain  the  possession  ; and  which  we  so  highly 
value,  and  so  much  dretid  the  loss  of,  as  without 
just  cause  to  conceive  a fear  of  such  machinations, 
and  to  magnify  the  slightest  evidence,  in  favour 
of  our  apprehensions,  into  the  strangest  proofs. 

This  affection  is  more  ]>articuJarly  distinguished 
by  the  appellation  of  jealousy,  wl>en  the  source  of 
suspicion  is  the  love  between  the  sexes,  and  its 
principal  object  the  person  beloved. 

Suspicion  and  jealousy,  may,  in  the  most  can- 
did, and  generous  minds,  exist  in  a high  degree, 
when  countenanced  by  strong  appearances,  and 
great  probability  ; and  when  the  obje<ft,  if  not  the 
most  worthy,  has  at  least,  by  some  means,  ac- 
Cjuired  the  [)ower  of  interesting  the  heart.  In  such 
cases,  they  are  capable  of  giving  rise  to  insanity  ; 
and  esjxicially  where  the  brain  is  not  originally 
very  strong  ; as  well  by  their  own  violence,  and 
by  that  incessant  brooding  over  the  obje6l  which 
gave  birth  to  them,  inseparable  from  any  great 
degree  of  passion  ; as  by  the  various  distressing, 
and  agonizing  emotions,  which  the  fancied  im- 
portance of  tlie  object  of  these  malevolent,  and 

uncom- 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


259 


Uncomfortable  feelings,  and  the  firm  persuasion 
of  their  being  well  grounded,  falling  little  short 
of  complete  convidhon,  and  operating  on  the 
mind  with  the  force  of  certainty,  cannot  fail  to 
excite. 

But,  more  commonly,  these  painful,  and  tor- 
menting passions,  are  the  scourges  of  weak,  and 
gloomy  minds  ; and  though  they  may  sometimes 
be  supported  on  sufficient  ground,  both  of  impor- 
tance, and  probability  ; and  may  then  operate 
like  the  same  passions  in  the  minds  of  the  candid, 
and  generous  ; and  with  more  certainty,  as  being 
less  likely  to  subside,  or  to  yield  to  such  proofs  as 
would  in  the  candid  and  generous  perfe(5fly  eratli- 
cate  suspicion  : yet  are  they  more  commonly 

creeled  on  the  smallest  foundation  ; the  baseless 
fabrication  of  habitual  fear,  anxiety,  and  melan- 
choly ; and  often  the  mere  symptoms  of  incipient 
insanity.  Habits,  therefore,  of  suspicion  and  jea- 
lousy, since  they  arise  from  causes  approaching 
to,  and  produdtive  of,  insanity,  and  themselves 
})articipate  considerably  of  its  nature,  are  prone  to 
terminate  in  a disorder  which  they  so  nearly  re- 
semble, and  which  often  originates  from  the  same 
common  causes. 

As  suspicion,  and  jealousy,  arc  the  apprehen^ 
sion  of  some  particular  evil,  from  an  enemy  or  a 
rival ; so  anxiety  is  a general,  and  habitual  fear, 
of  disastrous  events  ; a restless  solicitude,  which 
will  never  admit  of  the  enjoyment  of  the  present 

s 2 moment, 


266 


Causes  op  iNSAjyiTt. 


Tuomentj  through  an  unreasonable  care  for  the 
future;  which,  while  it  creates,  and  magnifies 
■uncertain  evil  to  come,  diminishes,  or  annihilates 
certain  and  present  good.  It  is  commonly  the 
afIc6Iion  of  a weak,  and  broken  spirit,  and  like 
suspicion,  and  jealousy,  is  a symptom  of  a timid, 
gloomy,  and  unsound  mind  : and  readily  sinks 
into  the  deepest  distress  of  fixed  melancholy,  to 
winch  it  has  some  resemblance,  and  of  which  it 
seems  to  be  the  first  stage;  and  may  in  the  end 
assume  any  of  the  numerous  fonns  of  notional,  or 
ideal,  insanity. 

The  last,  and  not  the  least  important  afTeclion 
of  the  mind,  to  be  considered,  is  religious  fear, 
or  an  anxious  appprehension  of  eternal  punish- 
ment in  the  life  to  come.  It  may  derive  its  ori- 
gin dire611y  from  superstition,  and  indiredlly  from 
enthusiasm ; which  taking  root  only  in  minds 
weak  by  nature,  or  debased  by  habit,  may  not 
only  give  occasion  to  superstitious,  and  fanatical 
insanity  ; but,  as  obviously  appears  from  wb.at  has 
before  been  said  in  treating  of  these  disorders^, 
and  of  religious  joy'',  and  of  despair* *,  may  with 
facility  introduce  desponding  insanity. 

For  superstition,  which  views  the  Deity  as  ‘^an 


£ See  above,  vcl.  i,  p,  212 — 241. 

See  p,  201  of  (bis  volume. 

* See  p.  210  of  (his  volume. 


unreason- 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


261 

vmrcasonable,  fantastical,  and  capricious  being, 
whose  favour  is  to  be  obtained,  or  anger  averted, 
by  idle  ceremonies,  ridiculous  observances,  or 
painful  mortifications-' in  which,  in  short,  as 
Cicero  remarks,  “ there  is  a vain  fear  of  the 
Gods‘‘ — being  built  upon  notions  which  arc  not 
derived  from  reason,  and  the  nature  of  things, 
but  owe  their  existence  to  the  uncertain  sugges- 
tions of  fancy ; will  vary  as  fancy  varies  ; and, 
having  no  satisfadfory,  or  fixed  principles,  on 
which  the  mind  can  rest,  assured  of  the  good 
effedfs  of  its  good  and  honest  intentions,  may 
lead  it  to  fear  punishment  one  day,  from  a con- 
diuSl  by  which  on  a preceding,  it  had  hoped  to 
draw  down  a blessing  ; and  to  tremble  in  the  anx- 
ious uncertainty  whether  its  best  intended  addons, 
will  be  rewarded  with  good  or  ill,  by  a Deity  of 
whose  attributes  it  has  formed  such  crude  and  in- 
digested conceptions.  For  as  a fantastical,  and 
capricious  deity,  who  appears  to  us  to  be  governed 
by  the  most  irrational  motives,  may  be  fantasti- 
cal, and  capricious,  in  his  rewards  and  punish- 
ments, our  prospedfs  of  his  favour,  or  frown, 
will  present  no  certain,  and  determined  objedfs ; 
and  our  hopes  of  happiness,  or  fears  of  misery, 
will  vary  as  accident  shall  produce  a change  of 


j See  above,  vol.i.  p.  218. 

^ “ In  qua  [snperstitione]  inest  timor  inanis  Dcoriira.”— 
De  Natura  Deorum , lib.  i.  cap.  42,  Ed,  Davisii. 

s 3 


circiim- 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


2G2 

circumstances ; and  will  rise,  or  fall,  as  our 
bodily  tones  are  elevated,  or  depressed  ; our  sen- 
sations and  perceptions  pleasing,  or  un pleasing  ; 
and  our  spirits  high,  or  low.  But  as  the  mind 
cannot  be  well  at  ease  in  a state  of  doubt,  and  un- 
certainty ; and  as  the  observances  of  superstition 
are  often  severe,  slavish,  and  anxious;  bodily  in- 
disposition, mental  debility,  and  abje6l  terror,  to 
say  nothing  of  other  causes,  will  all  frequently 
contribute  to  ingraft  insanity  on  superstition,  and 
religious  fear. 

Enthusiasm*,  being  founded  in  like  manner 
upon  the  feeble,  and  unsteady,  basis  of  fancy, 
though  more  pleasing  in  its  immediate  influence, 
is  perhaps  not  more  certain  in  its  operation,  or 
more  happy  in  its  consequences,  than  supersti- 
tion. And  its  hopes  being  the  result  of  feeling, 
as  well  as  of  fancy  ; and  depending,  more  di really 
than  tliose  of  superstition,  upon  the  state  of  bodily 
tones,  perceptions  and  sensations,  and  animal 
spirits  ; and  tones  elevated,  perceptions  and  sen- 
sations rendered  pleasing,  and  spirits  animated, 
above  their  natural  pitch,  by  mental  activity,  and 
exertion,  being  always  succeeded,  without  the 
intervention  of  some  other  invigorating  cause,  by 
]jroportional  remission,  weariness,  and  depres- 
sion ; an  easy  passage  is  opened,  from  the  rap- 


’ See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  218, 


t tires 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


•263 


lures  of  enthusiasm,  to  the  apprehensions,  and 
horrors,  of  religious  fear,  and  desponaing  inSti- 
nity. 


VII.  Too  great  A6Uvity  of  Imagination. 

The  imagination  is  too  active  when  it  is  for 
ever  busily  employed  ; is  led  by  the  slightest  asso- 
ciations to  pass  with  facility  from  one  object  to 
another  ; is  disjiosed  to  arrange  and  connect,  by 
such  slight  associations,  the  most  dissimilar,  and 
incongruous  ; and  to  ramble  with  rapidity  through 
an  endless  variety  : or  dwells  incessantly  upon  the 
lively,  and  indelible  impression,  of  some  one  ob- 
ject of  passion,  and  w'ithout  abating  of  its  activity, 
confines  itself  to  the  subjec!:!  of  emotion,  over 
every  conceivable  relation  of  which,  and  it  is  fruit- 
ful in  the  discovery  of  them,  it  ranges  with  in- 
credible avidity. 

An  over  busy  imagination  implies  a too  active 
state  of  the  mind,  and  brain  ; and  an  imagination 
habitually  busy,  implies,  that  the  mind  and  brain 
are  habitually  and  constitutionally,  of  too  activ^e 
a disposition.  How  such  a state  of  the  mind, 
and  brain,  is  productive  of,  and  how  nearly  it 
actually  approaches  to,  a state  of  insanity,  has 
been  shown  at  large,  in  treating  of  too  intense 
application  of  mind  to  whatevi  r may  long,  and 
deeply  engage  its  attention  ; and  of  the  influence 
of  the  passions. 

s 4 


And 


254 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


And  though  the  activity  of  mind,  in  a too 
busy  imagination  ; which  is  little  disposed  to  rest 
long  upon  any  one  objedl,  hut  ranges  at  random 
from  one  to  another  with  a celerity  which  is  scarcely 
to  be  tenned  thinking  j is  much  less  intense 
than  when  the  mind  is  eagerly  fixed  on  the  con- 
sideration of  some  one  important,  or  apparently 
important  object,  either  of  study  or  passion,  which 
engages  its  whole  attention  ; yet  the  tendency  of* 
a too  active  imagination  to  pass,  by  the  slightest 
associations,  from  one  objedt  to  another  ; to  ar- 
range, and  conne6t,  b}'  such  slight  associations, 
the  most  dissimilar,  and  incongruous  ; as  they 
indicate  a nearer  approach  to,  and  resemblance 
of,  insanity,  than  mere  intenseness  of  thinking  ; 
and  as  that  vicinity,  and  similitude,  are  here  sup- 
posed to  be  constitutional  ; they  not  only  mark 
a weakness  of  mind,  incompatible  with  great  rea- 
soning powers,  and  tending  to  obstrudf,  and  im- 
pede our  progress,  in  all  the  most  rational  and 
valuable  pursuits  of  life  ; but  are  nmre  frequently 
instrumiental  in  the  produdion  of  insanity,  by 
giving  energy,  and  effect,  to  other  causes,  which, 
without  such  assistance,  might  more  commonly 
fail  to  produce  it,  than  mere  application  of 
mind,  however  intense,  to  one  objeCf ; or  per- 
haps than  any  other  cause  whatever. 

For  an  imagination  naturally  too  a61ive,  and 
fanciful,  not  only  tends  to  excite,  and  propagate, 
that  inordinate  aclivity  of  the  brain,  so  essential 

to 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


to  the  existence  of  insanity  ; but  is  capable  of 
giving  strength,  and  efficiency,  perhaps  to  every 
other  agent  which  may  concur  in  the  produdlion 
of  that  disorder  ; and  especially  of  aggravating, 
and  strengthening  the  ptissions,  by  exciting,  nou- 
rishing, and  confirming,  prejudice  and  error  ; by 
raising  up  an  army  of  ideas  congenial  to  their  na- 
ture, and  hostile  to  reason,  and  moderation ; 
■iind  thus  fomenting,  stimulating,  and  giving 
habit,  and  vigour,  to  their  folly,  and  madness. 

Indeed  strength  of  passion,  adlivity  of  imagina- 
tion, and  erroneous  judgment,  are  so  intimately 
connedted,  so  aid  and  support  each  other,  and 
are  so  opposite  to,  and  destruclive  of,  sound  rea- 
son, that  whenever  any  of  them  have  arisen  to  a 
great  height,  and  flourish  in  the  extreme,  they 
partake  of'the  nature  of  insanity,  from  which  they 
differ  not  so  much  in  kind,  as  in  degree. 

The  too  great  adlivity’^  of  imagination  here  in- 
tended, though  often  combined  with,  is  entirely 
distindl  from  genius  ; which,  in  proportion  as  it 
is  connedled  with  it,  it  tends  to  diminish.  It  im- 
plies an  incapacity  of  close  attention  ; an  inabi- 
lity to  retain  a number  of  related  objedls  in  the 
mind,  at  the  same  time,  and  deliberately  to 
compare,  and  appreciate,  their  relations ; in 
short,  it  implies  a defect  of  judgment : but  judg- 
ment is  essential  to  genius  ; which  cannot  exist 
without  a large  portion  of  it,  and  is  then  only 
perfect,  when,  to  a rich  vein  of  imagination,  are 

added 


266 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


added  the  most  comprehensive  views,  and  nice 
discriminations,  of  this  discerning,  and  govern- 
ing faculty.  For,  as  the  judicious  Dr.  Gerard 
very  ingeniously  remarks,  “ the  finest  imagina- 
tion, totally  destitute  of  assistance  from  judg- 
ment, would  in  some  measure  resemble  a blind 
man,  who  may  be  very  dexterous  in  groping  the 
right  road,  but  cannot  know  certainly,  whether 
he  continues  in  it,  and  has  no  means  of  recover- 
ing it,  if  once  he  strays”.” 

And  as  genius  cannot  exist  in  any  eminent  de- 
gree without  judgment ; and,  as  judgment  is  the 
power  of  regulating  the  activity  of  imagination, 
of  arresting  its  too  rapid  progress,  of  fixing  its 
attention,  and  of  diredling  its  operations,  and  ex- 
ertions, to  some  certain,  proper,  and  important 
end  ; so  the  too  adlive  state  of  imagination  which 
I here  consider  as  subversive  of  mental  perfedlion, 
and  produdtive  of  insanity,  is  such  an  adlivity  as 
the  mind  has  not  power  to  check,  as  the  judg- 
ment cannot  regulate,  or  control  ; which,  when 
not  in  some  degree  fixed  by  passion,  flits  at  ran- 
dom from  obje6l  to  obje61,  and  is  incompatible 
with  that  steady  attention,  and  that  just  discri- 
mination of  suitable  and  unsuitable,  of  similitude 
and  difference,  of  symmetry  and  disproportion, 
of  regularity  and  disorder,  of  beauty  and  deform- 
ity, of  truth  and  falsbood,  of  right  and  wrong, 

^ Essay  on  Genius,  p.  82. 

which 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


267 


wliich  are  not  to  be  acquired  without  pa- 
tient observation,  and  exa(9:  judgment,  so  essen- 
tial to  the  operations,  and  existence,  of  true 
genius. 

And  so  prone  is  imagination,  where  it  is  a(51ive, 
to  run  into  this  error  of  rambling  without  its  pro- 
per guide  ; and  to  be  impatient  of  the  slow  pro- 
ceedings of  minute  attention,  and  the  severe  con- 
straint of  scrupulous  judgment ; that  true  genius 
is  as  rare,  as  it  is  excellent ; and  activity  ot  ima- 
gination, which  is  no  uncommon  endowment,  and 
which,  as  w-ell  as  judgment,  is  essential  to  genius, 
is  more  frequently  the  parent  of  folly,  than  the 
companion,  and  assistant,  of  judgment,  in  the 
produ6lion,  and  support,  of  those  great,  and 
sublime  exertions,  to  which  their  united  operation 
is  capable  of  raising  the  human  mind. 

Since  adlivity  and  imagination  is  so  nearly  related 
to  folly  ; and  since,  wherever  it  exists  in  any  great 
degree,  whether  by  nature,  by  habit,  or  by  the 
occasional  influence  of  some  strong  emotion  ; and 
particularly  by  love,  a passion  in  which  imagina- 
tiomreigns  unrivalled  ; it  must  frequently  put  the 
brain  into  a state  nearly  resembling  that  which  is 
COnnetTted  with  a disordered  mind  ; it  is  calculated 
to  give  occasion  to  insanity,  as  well  by  the  very 
adfive  vibrations  which  it  excites  in  the  fibres  and 
vessels  of  the  brain,  as  by  its  natural  alliance  with 
folly.  It  is  with  much  propriety,  therefore,  that 

the 


26s 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


the  Poet  of  Nature"  has  conne6ted,  by  this  com- 
mon characlcr  of  imagination,  the  poet,  the  lover, 
and  the  inaclman. 

Of  the  influence  of  imagination,  in  the  produc- 
tion of  insanity,  I shall  have  occasion  to  make 
some  farther  observations,  in  treating  of  the 
next  source  of  this  disorder,  to  which  I now 
proceed. 

VII[.  IniheciUilij  of  Mi. ul. 

By  iml'ccillity  of  mind,  I understand  that  debi- 
litated slate  of  its  faculties,  which  renders  it  inca- 
pable of  withdrawing  its  attention  from  any  train 
of  thinking  in  which  it  is  engaged,  disposes  it  to 
be  carried  away  by  the  impulse  of  the  passions, 
or  deluded  by  the  hasty  and  superficial  combi- 
nations of  imagination  ; and  is  subversive  of  selt- 
coinmand,  rational  conduct,  and  sound  judg- 
ment. 

A weak  judgment,  therefore,  where  it  exists 
originally,  and  by  nature,  as  it  often  appears  to 
do,  may  be  no  inconsiderable  instrument  in  the 
production  of  insanity.  How  it  may  give  occa- 
sion to  this  disorder,  will  be  obvious,  from  a re- 


" The  lunatic,  the  lover,  and  the  poet. 

Are  of  imagination  all  compatSt : 

One  sees  more  devils,  &c.  &c. 
giH  akespeare’s  Midsumvier  Night's  dreamy  a6t.  v.  scene  i. 

colledlion 


CAUSES  OF  INS.ANiTy.  26q 

colledlion  of  what  has  been  said  on  the  eifedls  of 
an  inability  to  withdraw  the  attention  of  the 
mind  from  any  particular  train  of  thinking  ; and 
of  the  influence  of  the  passions  ; and  from  a con- 
sideration of  what  has  just  been  advanced,  rela- 
tive to  too  great  aeSlivity  of  imagination. 

But  though  imbecillity  of  mind,  and  weakness 
of  judgment,  may  often  be  original,  and  natural; 
they  are  more  frequently,  perhaps,  the  offspring 
of  the  passions,  imagination,  and  prejudices ; 
which,  by  a thousand  accidental,  and  impercep- 
tible, associations,  have  a wonderful  efficacy  in 
deceiving,  and  impairing  the  judgment,  distort- 
ing,  and  weakening,  the  operation  of  reasoning, 
and  exposing  the  mind  to  almost  every  species  of 
error,  and  delusion. 

Indeed  such  is  the  power  of  the  passions,  ima- 
gination, and  prejudices,  united,  as  almost  to- 
tally to  confound  truth  and  falshood,  right  and 
wrong  ; and  it  may,  I believe,  be  laid  down  as 
an  undoubted  maxim,  that  under  their  influence 
we  may  persuade  ourselves  to  believe  whatever  we 
please ; or  rather,  whatever  the  habitual  tendency 
of  our  minds  inclines  us  to  believe'’ : not  only  things 

the 


Plurii  rnulto  liornincsjudicnnt  odio,  aut  amorc,  autcu- 
piditate,  aut  iracundia,  aut  dolore,  aut  laetitia,  aut  spe,  aut 
timore,  aut  errore,  aut  aliqua  j>erniotione  mentis,  quam  veri- 
tate,  aut  praescripto,  aut  juris  norma  aliqua,  aut  judicii  for- 
mula. 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


270 

the  truth  of  which  has  not  been,  or  cannot  be  de- 
monstrated ; but  which  are  opposed  by  a very  high 
degree  of  probable  evidence,  or  of  which  it  were 
not  very  difficult  to  demonstrate  the  falshood. 

Thus  one  political  party,  or  one  religious  sea, 
or  an  individunl  any  way  under  the  influence 
of  strong  prejudice,  will  believe,  on  the  slightest 
grounds,  whatever  is  ill  of  another  party,  or  sea, 
or  individual.  Infidels  of  some  sorts,  will  not 
believe  the  strongest  evidence  in  favour  of  the 
Christian  revelation  ; but  will  give  credit  to  the 
weakest  reasonings,  or  the  idlest  stories,  against 
it,  or  where  it  is  no  way  concerned^.  These  are 

persons 


inula,  aut  legibus.” — Ciceron.  de  Oratore,  lib.  ii.  n.  I78. 
Oj&er,  a Grut.  et  Gron.  edit.  8vo.  p.  34*^. 

“ For  men  are  more  frequently  influenced  in  their  judgment 
by  hatred,  or  love,  or  desire,  or  anger,  or  grief,  or  joy,  or  hope, 
or  fear,  or  error,  or  some  other  pas.sion  of  the  nnnd,  than  by 
truth,  or  by  any  established  decree,  or  by  any  rule  of  right,  or 
by  any  regular  form  of  judgment,  or  by  the  laws.” 

P I mean  not  to  comprehend  in  this  censure  the  philosophical 
deists  ; such  as  really  deserve  that  appellation  j among  whom 
are,  1 am  persuaded,  men  of  undoubted  abilities,  and  exalied 
virtues,  whose  names  ought  ever  to  be  mentioned  with  rcspeft, 
and  afleftion.  In  this  class  must  be  reckoned  Hume,  though 
too  much  led  astr.ay  by  the  pride  of  originality,  and  the  afFefta- 
tion  of  novelty  j and  highly  blameable  for  bis  prejudices 
against  the  clergy  : and  Rousseau,  though  at  length  driven 
into  insanity,  by  the  liveliness  of  his  iihagination,  and  the  sen- 
sibility of  his  passions  : but  Voltaire,  I fear,  must  be  ex- 

cluded; the  brightness  of  w'hose  genius  w'ouUl  have  shed  a 

lustre 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  271 

persons  of  weak  minds,  and  small  understand- 
ings  ; who,  with  the  meanest  reasoning  powers, 
have  the  vanity  to  fancy  themselves  sagacious 
observers,  acute  reasoners,  and  superior  to  the 
superstitious  prejudices  of  the  vulgar.  Such  is 
the  power  of  the  passions  ; such  the  force  of  ha- 
bit ; such  the  delusion  of  wrong  associations, 
and  ot  an  incorredl,  and  unsubdued  imagination. 

The  cause  of  all  theseerrors  is  imbecillity  of  mind ; 
in  the  produdlion  of  which,  though  the  agency 
of  the  passions,  of  habit,  and  of  wrong  associa- 
tions, and  prejudice,  is  added  to  that  of  an  incor- 
re<5f,  and  unsubdued  imagination  ; yet  the  chief 
source  ot  this  imbecillity,  when  not  de- 
rived from  the  original  strudUire,  or  consequent 
injury,  of  the  brain,  seems  to  be  a too  adlive, 
and  ill  condudfed  imagination  ; without  the  un- 
due influence  of  which  our  very  passions,  which 
owe  much  of  their  violence  to  imagination,  would 
become  gentle  and  temperate,  our  prejudices 
would  never  be  formed,  or  soon  cease,  and  judg- 
ment, however  weak  by  nature,  would  lead  us 
into  no  material  error. 


lustre  on  his  name,  and  have  made  him  the  admiration  and 
delight  of  his  own,  and  of  future  ages  j had  it  not  been  ob- 
scured by  certain  dark,  and  unpleasing,  shades  in  his  charafter, 
which  lessen  our  esteem  for  him  as  a man  j and,  while  they 

confirm  to  him  the  title  of  a wit,  degrade  him  from  the  rank 
of  a philosopher. 


For  ■ 


572 


CAUSES  OF  insanity. 


For  it  is  the  province  of  fancy  to  colle61;  and 
bring-  together  ideas,  which,  when  unaided  by 
clue  deliberation,  and  sound  judgment,  it  is  dis- 
posed to  combine  by  any,  the  slightest,  most  ar- 
bitrarj’,  and  accidental  relations  ; and  when,  there- 
fore, in  a state  of  adiivity,  to  present  to  the  mind, 
at  one  view,  or  in  quick  succession,  and  to  con- 
nedf  and  associate,  when  thus  presented,  what- 
ever in  its  rapid  progress  it  perceives  to  possess  any 
Such  slender  relations. 

Whereas  the  province  of  reason,  and  judg- 
ment, is  to  consider  the  ideas  winch  are  presented 
to  them  with  deliberate  attention,  and  to  rejedt 
all  slight,  arbitrary,  and  accidental  relations  ; and 
only  to  arrange,  combine,  and  associate  our  ideaSy 
according  to  those  relations  which  ai*e  strong, 
permanent,  and  founded  on  tl>e  true  and  proper 
nature  of  things. 

In  other  words,  the  one  deals  in  imaginary 
relations ; the  other  in  real  ones ; the  one  in  tlie 
wildness  of  invention,  and  the  brilliancy  of  wit  j 
the  other  in  the  soberness  of  truth  and  demon- 
stration. 

When,  therefore,  the  mind  gives  that  credit  to 
the  slight,  r>ccidental,  and  arbitrary  combinations 
of  fancy,  which  is  only  due  to  the  intimate,  per- 
manent, and  natural  ones  of  reason,  it  is  tlien  in 
an  unsound,  and  sickly  state  ; and  the  person  so 
tlisordered  in  understanding,  and  so  irrationally 
judging,  is  to  be  considered  as  insane ; though 

the 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


273 


tl:i£  disorder  may  be  in  so  low  a degree  as  scarcely 

to  be  perceptible,  and  be  may  not  be  deemed  such 

by  the  bulk,  of  mankind. 

/ 

This  is  the  state  of  mind  which  I have  de- 
scribed as  constituting  notional  insanity.  It  has  no 
relation  to  ideal  insanity,  as  Such  : but  when 
combined  with  passion  of  any  considerable  dura- 
tion, or  violence  ; as  sooner,  or  later,  it  gene- 
rally is ; such  intense,  incessant,  and  uniform 
adlivity  of  mind,  is  at  length  produced,  as  renders 
it  exceedingly  liable  to  assume  the  symptoms  of 
ideal,  and  phrenitic  insanity. 


PROXIMATE  CAUSES. 


Scarcely  any  two  cases  of  what  is  nominally, 
the  same  disease,  are,  in  every  symptom,  exactly 
alike;  there  being  usually  more  or  less  difference, 
both  in  the  number,  and  nature,  of  the  symp.- 
toms,  and  in  their  degrees  of  violence ; and  yet 
they  are  not  without  propriety  called  by  the  same 
name  ; since  they  agree  in  those  leading  symp- 
toms which  nosologists  have  termed  pathogno- 
monic, and  consider  as  essential  to,  and  charac- 
teristu:  of,  the  disease  : but  as  the  concourse  of 
symptoms,  or,  in  other  words,  as  the  disease, 
varies,  while  the  name  remains  unchanged  ; so 
the  proximate,  or  physical,  cause, — that  cause 
VOL.  XI.  T which 


T 


274 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


which  existing,  continuing,  changing,  or  ceasing, 
the  disease  must  exist,  continue,  change,  or 
cease'’ , — will  of  course  vary  also  : for  though  the 
narhe'of  the  disease’ be  still  the  same,  yet  is  its 
whole,  and  real  nature,  different:  a circumstance 
which,  'in  coiisklering  the  proximate  causes  of 
diseases,  cannot  be  too  carefully  attended  to. 
•vAsit  is  almost,  f>crhaps  altogether,  impossible 
to  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  the  true,  and  proxi- 
mate, or  physical  cause,  ot  most  disorders,  we 
must,  for  the  greatest  part,  rest  satisfied  with  a 
few  imperfect  conjeclures  on  this  head  ; and  may 
think  ourselves  happy,  if,  by  accurate  observa- 
tion, and  just  deduction  from  plain  and  undoubt- 
ed fa6ts,  we  can  discover  some  very  general  cause, 
which  always  accompanies  the  disorder  ; or  cer- 
tain specific  causes,  which  are,  one  or  other  ot 
them,  inseparable  from  the  several  species;  and 
can  invariably  observe  that  such  cause,  or  causes, 
being  taken  away,  the  disease  either  immediately, 
(n*  speedily,  ceases. 

Xhe  proximate  causes  of  insanity,  from  what- 
ever remote  cau.se,  or  causes,  it  may  derive  its 
origin,  is,  without  doubt,  seated  in  tire  brain. 
For  since  its  action  is  immediately  on  the  mind 
itself,  who.se  operations  it  powerfully  influences, 
and  greatly  deranges  ; its  situation  must  be  in 

Gacbii  Instllut.  Pjtbolog.  Medicinal,  t dl,  p.  18. — See 
.ibovc,  p/3.’ 


that 


Causes  op  insanity. 


275 


that  organ  which  is  universally,  arid  justly,  ac- 
knowledged to  be  the  imrriediate  seat  of  union 
between  the  body  and  mind  i and  ori  whose 
sound,  and  perfedl  state,  the  perfedl  operations  of 
the  latter,  during  that  union,  seem  entirely  to 
depend. 

In  confirmation  of  this,  it  may  be  observed, 
that  in  all  violent  degrees  of  insanity ; as  in  the 
phrenitic,  highly  maniacal,  or  rapidly  incoherent , 
or  in  any  of  the  species  of  notional  insanity  when 
approacliing  to  a phrenitic  state  ; there  is  always 
an  increased  adlivity,  and  turgescency^  of  the 
vessels  of  the  brain,  as  aj>pears  obvious  from  the 
flushing  of  the  face,  redness  of  the  eyes,  iieat 
and  pain  of  the  head,  adlivity  of  imagination,  and 
perpetual  watching,  most,  or  all  of  which,  ma/ 
usually  be  observed  in  this  state  of  insanity. 

It  may  also  be  remarked,  that  some  of  the  re- 
mote causes  of  this  disorder  are  seated  in  the 
brain  ; as  water  in  its  ventricles,  in  its  substance, 
and  between  its  membrances ; and  the  various 
other  disordered  states  of  this  organ,  and  its  con- 
nexions, enumerated  among  the  Appearances  on 
DisseRion  : — that  it  is  often  combined  wdth  other 
diseases  whose  immediate  source  is  indisputably 
in  the  brain  ; as  dizziness,  deafness,  a sense  of 
weight,  stri6Iure,  and  numbness,  across  the  fore  - 
head, upon  the  crown,  or  at  the  back  part,  of 
the  head,  habitual  headach,  pain  over  the  eyes^ 
epilepsy,  palsy,  apoplexy,  or  the  like  :—and  that 

T 2 such 


CAUSES  OE  INSANITV". 


2 7 <3 

such  disorders  of  the  nerves,  arising  from  causes 
whose  situation  is  remote  from  the  brain,  as  either 
obstrn6f,  deprave,  or  excite,  false  sensation,  and 
frequently  terminate  in  insanity  ; as  well  as  its 
other  remote  causes  which  are  not  Immediately 
connedled  with  the  head  ; are  often  known  to 
exist,  in  a great  degree,  without  exciting  the 
slightest  symptom  of  that  disorder. 

As  the  proximate  cause  of  insanity  always  re- 
sides in  the  brain  ; so  it  is  obvious  that  it  must, 
some  way  or  other,  so  affedl  it,  and  excite  in  it 
such  motions,  or  vibrations,  as  shall  give  rise  to 
those  kinds  of  ideas,  or  notions,  which  enter  into 
the  definition  already  given  of  insanity.  If,  there- 
fore, the  seat  of  the  originally  exciting  cause  be 
in  any  other  part  of  the  body,  it  must  first  sym- 
pathetically produce  a determination  of  blood  to 
the  head,  and  a change  in  the  circulation,  or 
vibratory  motions,  of  the  brain  ; before  it  can 
excite  the  smallest  mental  disorder  ; and,  even 

N 

those  causes  which  immediately,  and* confessedly, 
ad  upon  the  brain  ; as  intense  application  of 
mind,  or  violent  passions;  will  be  insufficient  for 
the  produdion  of  insanity,  or  at  least  will  produce 
but  a temporary  one,  till  they  have  effeded  some 
great,  and  permanent  change,  of  this  kind. 

And  as  such  great,  and  permanent  change, 
necessary  to  the  existence  of  insanity,  is  most 
frequently  the  effed  of  an  inci*cased  adivity  of 
the  small  arteries,  and  a consequent  turgescency 

of 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


2// 


of  the  whole  vascular  system  of  the  brain  ; which 
seldom  fail  to  accompany  the  beginning,  and  are 
never  absent  from  the  violent  states,  of  this  dis- 
order ; we  are  led  by  a knowledge  of  this  cause, 
>to  very  useful,  and  important,  pra6lical  conclu- 
sions, and  diredled  to  a rational  method  of  cure  ; 
s>ince  it  points  out  to  us  the  great  advantage  which 
we  may  expe(£l  to  derive  from  evacuations  in 
almost  every  recent,  and  violent  case  of  insanity ; 
and  especially  from  topical  evacuations  from  the 
head ; and  from  such  other  means,  as  can,  in 
any  way,  divert  the  impetus  of  the  blood  from 
the  vessels  of  the  brain,  and  abate  their  preterna- 
tural a<Slivity.  And,  happily,  tlie  obvious  symp- 
toms which  usually  accompany  this  increased  ac- 
tivity, and  turgescency,  ol  the  vessels  of  the 
brain,  readily  indiaite  its  existence,  and  its 
degree  of  violence.  But  as  the  brain  may  be  in  a 
plethoric  state,  when  the  rest  of  the  body  is  not 
so  ; most  of  the  remote  causes  of  insanity  being 
capable  of  exciting  a turgescency  in  the  brain, 
independently  of  any  general  fulness  of  the  vascu- 
lar system  ; we  may  see  the  necessity  of  distin- 
guishing when  there  is  a general,  and  when  only 
a local,  plenitude ; and  of  regulating  accord- 
ingly, our  evacuations,  and  other  means  of  re- 
lieving the  head. 

It  will  appear  obvious,  too,  from  what  hasjust 
been  remarked  above,  why  insanity  may  often  re- 
main, when  the  original  exciting  cause  is  taken 

T 3 away, 


27S 


CAUSES  OF  INSATHTY. 


away.  This  frequently  happens,  when  the  cause 
has  continued  for  a long  time  iiiisuspe6ied,  or 
unsubdued;  and  has,  therefore,  been  gradually 
the  occasion  of  such  a change  in  the  economy  of 
the  brain,  as  cannot  easily  be  rectified  ; though 
the  original,  and  exciting,  cause,  on  which  it 
now  no  longer  depends  for  existence,  should  be 
taken  away.  Thus  when  insanity  has  taken  its 
rise  from  a fever,  or  a suppression  of  the  menses, 
the  disorder  often  remains  long  after  these  causes 
have  been  removed ; and  especially  if  the  fever 
has  been  obstinate,  and  violent ; or  it  has  been 
long  before  the  suppressed  evacuation  could  be 
restored.  This,  among  other  reasons,  shews  the 
importance  of  early,  and  vigorous  help,  in  these 
most  distressing,  and  formidable  disorders. 

Of  the  real  proximate,  or  physical,  cause,  I 
can  say  but  little.  The  attempt  to  discover,  or 
to  explain  it,  would,  I fear,  be  fruitless.  This, 
however,  I think  I may  safely  say,  that,  as  the 
nearest,  and  most  specific  causes,  which  we  can 
discover,  seem  to  be  either  a gradual  congestion 
of  fluids,  of  some  kind  or  other,  in  the  brain  ; or 
such  a sudden  determination  of  the  circulating 
fluids  to  that  organ,  as  produces  the  sameetfe^; 
or  any  other  cause  of  preternatural  compression 
of  the  brain  ; so  the  true,  and  adlual,  proximate 
cause  of  insanity,  of  whatever  species,  is  not  only 
seated  in  the  brain,  but  is  such  a degree  of  com- 
pression, or  condensation,  of  the  medullary  sub- 

' stance 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


279. 


stance  of  the  brain, — or  of  that  part  ofit,  by  means, 
of  which  the  intercourse  between  the  mind  and, 
body,,  is  carried  on,  and  on  whose  perfect  and 
healthful  tone,  or  texture,  or  consistency,  the, 
perfection  of  that  intercourse,  and  ot  all  the  men- 
tal operations,  depends, — as  gives  rise  to  images 
in  the  brain,  as  if  existing  externally,  which  have 
either  no  existence  in  nature,  or  do  not  exist  as 
they  are  at  that  time,  or  in  that  place,  supposed 
to  exist ; or  to  such  notions  as  arc  obviously  ab- 
surd in  their  kind,  or  degree,  and  could  only 
originate  from  an  unsound  state,  and  undue  ope- 
ration, of  the  brain.  But  what  are  the  specific 
degrees  of  compression,  or  condensation  ; wliat 
are  precisely  the  parts  compressed,  or  condensed; 
how  variations  in  these  rcspedls  produce  varia- 
tions of  insanity  ; and  what  are  those  variations  ; 
must,  I fear,  for  ever  remain  among  the  defi- 
ciencies of  our  knowledge  of  these  nice,  and  intri- 
cate, matters.  There  are,  however,  other  vari- 
ations, connedted  with  the  proximate  causes  of 
insanity,  which  are  more  obvious  ; and  evidently 
differ  in  kind  and  degree,  in  the  various  species, 
and  degrees  of  that  disorder.  These  variations 
may  be  reduced,  I think  to  four  heads.  For — 

I.  The  small  arteries  of  the  brain  may  be  in  too 
a6live  a state,  and  may  produce — by  such  undue 
activity, — turgescency,  compression,  and  an  ap- 
proadi  to  inflammation  ; during  which  state  if  an 

T 4 insane 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


^SO 

insane  person  die,  not  only  the  veins,  and  arteries, 
are  all  found  turgid  with  blood,  but  the  brain  so 
expands  itself  on  the  taking  off  of  the  upper  hemis- 
phere of  the  skull,  that  no  compression  can 
again  reduce  it  within  its  former  boundaries  : — 
Or— 


II.  The  brain  may  be  compressed  by  a gradual 
accumulation  in  its  veins,  and  sinuses,  without 
any  increased  activity  of  the  arteries  : — Or — 

III.  Water,  or  other  preternatural  substances, 
may  occupy  a place,  which  does  not  belong  to 
them,  in  the  brain  ; or  parts  enlarged  by  disease 
may  occupy  too  great  a space  ; and,  by  their  bulk, 
may  compress  its  medullary  substance  : — Or — 

IV.  There  may  be  a change  in  the  intimate, 
and  invisible  te;cture,  in  what  Hartley  calls  the 
infinitesimal  particles,  of  the  medullary  substance 
of  the  brain  ; gradually,  and  sensibly,  produced; 
either  without  the  presence,  or  intervention,  of 
any  of  the  above  obvious  causes  ; or  by  the  medi- 
ation of  one,  or  other,  of  them,  from  which  it 
primarily  derived  its  origin. — Indeed  all  these 
causes  may  not  only  be  combined  with,  but  may 
variously  originate  from,  one  another.  Thus — 

1.  The  first  cause,  ora  too  adlive  state  of  the 
small  arteries  in  the  brain,  may  [II]  produce  an 

accumu- 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  '281 

Accumulation  of  blood  in  the  veins,  and  sinii^ 
ses  of  the  brain  : — may  [III]  generate  water, 
or  other  preternatural,  dr  morbid  substances,  in 
that  organ — or  [IV]  may  occasion  an  alteration 
in  its  texture. 

2.  Compression  from  an  accumulation  of  blood 
in  the  veins  and  sinuses,  may  [I]  excite  a too  ac- 
tive state  of  the  small  arteries,  with  turgescency, 
and  compression  of  the  medullary  substance  from 
such  turgescency  ; — or  £III]  may  give  occasion 
to  the  generation  of  water,  or  other  preternatural 
substances,  in  the  brain  : — or  [IV]  to  an  altera- 
tion in  its  texture. 

3.  Water,  or  other  preternatural  substances, 
in  the  brain,  may  [I]  by  compression,  and  irri- 
tation, be  the  causes  of  too  great  activity  of  the 
arteries  : — or  [II]  may  by  the  same  means,  occa- 
sion an  accumulation  of  blood  in  the  veins,  and 
sinuses  ; on  the  one  hand,  by  stimulating  to  too 
great  activity  the  small  arteries,  and  on  the  other, 
by  impeding  the  circulation  of  the  blood  through 
the  veins,  and  sinuses,  and  obstrudling  its  re- 
turn from  the  head ; — or  [IV]  may  efFedl  a 
change  in  the  texture  of  the  medullary  substance 
of  the  brain. 

4.  Or  a preternatural  texture  of  the  brain  may 
be  the  origin  [I]  of  increased  adivity  of  the  small 

arteries, 


282 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


arteries,  by  obstruding  the  passage  of  the  blood 
through  them,  and  variously  stimulating  them  by 
previously  exciting  undue  attention  ot  mind,  inor- 
dinate passions,  or  watchfulness,  or  in  any  other 
way  giving  rise  to  too  intense,  and  iinv'aricd  think- 
ing, or  to  tooadlive  a state  of  imagination  : — [II] 
of  accumulation  ofblood  in  the  veins,  and  sinuses  ; 
by  the  same  means  which  gave  rise  to  the  too  ac- 
tive state  of  tlie  small  arteries  ; and,  especially, 
in  consequence  of  such  increased  a(5\ivity  ; and 
[III]  in  the  same  way,  of  water,  and  other  pre- 
ternatural substances,  in  the  brain. 

But  that  we  may  the  better  understand  how 
these  variations  ot  the  proximate  cause  of  insanity, 
are  instrumental  in  the  produdlion  of  its  vaiious 
species,  it  will  be  proper  to  take  a short  view  of 
the  natural  operations  of  the  mind,  and  brain, 
relative  to  ideas,  and  notions  ; and  then  to  consi- 
der the  manner,  in  which  these  several  preterna- 
tural states  of  the  brain  disturb  the  natural  curp 
rent,  and  confound  the  ordinary,  and  established 
connexions,  ot  our  notions,  and  ideas.  After 
which  I shall  endeavour  to  show  how  such  states 
are  related  to,  and  in  wliat  manner  they  are  pro^ 
du6tive  of,  the  several  species  ot  insanity. 

Sensations,  which  are  the  instruments,  and 
vehicles,  and  furnish  the  materials,  of  all  we 
know,  are  conveyed  to  the  mind,  as  has  been 
explained  already,  by  certain  vibrations  or  mo- 
tions, excited  by  their  objeds  on  the  medullary 

substance 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


283 


€ubstance  of  the  nerves,  or  of  some  subtile  mat- 
ter contained  in  them,  on  which  their  power,  or 
irritability,  depends,  and  propagated  along  the 
nerves  to  the  brain  ; where,  as  they  are  per- 
ceived by  the  mind,  they  are  termed  ideas. 

The  vibrations  thus  excited  in  the  brain  by  ex- 
ternal objects,  have  certain  specific  qualities,  cor- 
responding to  the  objects  which  excited  them  ; 
so  that  each  obJe6t,  in  nature,  lias  its  specific, 
and  determinate  vibrations,  in  the  brain  : and 
these  vibrations  excite  in  the  mind  distindl,  and 
specific,  ideas,  of  the  objedts  to  which  they  re- 
late. 

Such  ideas  may  be  excited  in  the  mind,  at  any 
time  during  the  absence  of  their  objects,  by  w’hat- 
ever  is  capable  of  renewing  the  specific  vibrations 
which  belong  to  them. 

The  absence  of  their  proper  object  is  readily 
supplied,  and  their  specific  vibrations  are  renewed, 
by  those  accidental,  natural,  or  arbitrary  associ- 
ations, according  to  the  order  of  which  the  ideas 
of  external  objects  are,  as  it  were  reposited  in  the 
mind,  and,  which  result  from  its  natural  propen- 
sity to  bring  into  one  view,  and  compare,  objeds, 
and  their  ideal  representations,  and  either  to  dis- 
join, or  to  unite  them  together.  For  when  ob- 
je61s  have  thus  passed  in  review  before  the  mind, 
or  have  any  way  been  presented  to  its  observa- 
tion, at  the  same  time,  those  vibrations  which 

have 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


Cl  84 

have  once  existed  together,  or  in  immediate  sue* 
cession,  are  apt,  on  future  occasions,  to  vibrate 
at  the  same  time,  or  to  succeed  each  other  in  the 
same  order,  and  connexion. 

The  perception  that  the  mind  has  of  the  rela-r 
tions,  and  qualities,  of  such  obje6ts  of  sense,  and 
whatever  apprehensions,  or  sentiments,  it  can  de* 
duce  from  its  perception,  and  experience,  ci  such 
relations,  and  qualities,  are  properly  called  no- 
iions ; and  are  accompanied  with  corresponding 
vibrations,  derived  from,  and  compounded  of, 
the  various  sensible  vibrations  to  which  they  re- 
late : and  are  apt  to  recur  to  the  mind  in  certain 
and  regular  trains,  according  to  the  order  of  the 
sensible,  and  notional  vibrations,  with  which  they 
are  associated  and  combined. 

When  these  ideal  and  notional  vibrations,  oc- 
cur to  the  mind  in  their  natural  order,  and  retain 
their  original,  natural,  and  rational  associations  ; 
and  the  mind  can  retard,  or  accelerate,  their  pro- 
gress, to  a certain  degree,  at  pleasure ; and  can 
deliberately  consider  them,  and  compare  the  past 
with  the  present ; when,  of  course,  memory 
holds  her  seat,  conneding  consciousness,  as 
Hartley  terms  it,  is  unimpaired,  and  the  associ- 
ations of  truth,  and  decency,  and  propriety,  and 
virtue,  remain  uninjured  ; in  short,  when  the 
mind  can  regulate  properly  all  its  operations  ; it 
is  then  in  a sound,  and  rational  state:  but  in  pro- 
portion 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


285 

portion  as  the  reverse  of  this  takes  place,  in  such 
])roportion  is  it  in  a state  of  unsoundness,  and 
insanity.  * 

Now  such  an  interruption  of  the  regular  course 
of  the  vibrations  of  the  brain,  and  of  the  right 
operations  ot  the  mind,  may  be  produced  by  each 
of  the  variations,  above  enumerated,  of  the  prox- 
imate cause  of  insanity. 

1 . Too  a<5live  a state  of  the  small  arteries  of 
the  brain,  and  the  consequent  turgescency,  com- 
pression, and  inflammatory  tendency,  give  rise- 
to  high  spirits ; a quick  and  disorderly  succession 
of  ideas,  and  notions  ; vivid  and  lively  concep- 
tions; intense  attention  of  mind  to  its  own- 
internal  operations,  without  much  regarding  what 
passes  without ; such  animated  revival  of  internal 
sensitive  vibrations,  in  the  absence  of  their  exter- 
nal objedls,  as  deceives  the  mind  into  a belief  of 
their  actual  presence  ; unnatural,  and  absurd, . 
combinations  of  sensitive,  and  of  notional  vibra- 
tions, with  themselves,  and  with  each  other  ; 
violent,  unreasonable,  ridiculous,  and  inconsist- 
ent emotions;  excessive  bodily  exertions,  .the 
result  of  such  emotions  ; indecent,  dangerous, 
and  absurd  condud  ; and  a total  want- of  a sense 
of  delicacy,  propriety,  and  virtue  : and  some- 
times the  compression  of  the  brain  becomes  so 
great,  as  almost  entirely  to  destroy  the  know- 
ledge, and  perception  of  external  obje6ls  ; grejilly 

to 


285 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


to  diminish  irritably,  and  vigour ; and  finally,  16 
extinguish  the  powers  of  life  altogether. 

2.  When  the  brain  is  compressed  by  a gradual 
accumulation  of  blood  in  the  veins,  and  sinusesy 
without  any  Increased  adhvity  of  the  small  arte- 
ries ; such  compression  at  first  only  excites  head- 
ach,  a painful  sensation  of  numbness,  and  weight, 
in  some  part  of  the  head,  as  across  the  forehead, 
on  the  crown,  or  on  the  back  part  of  the  head, 
dizziness,  paralytic  ti’embling  more  or  less,  great 
nervous  debility,  diminution  of  tone,  indolence, 
restlessness,  spasms,  and  uncomfortable  feelings, 
over  the  whole  body,  indigestion,  hypochondri- 
acal symptoms,  low  spirits,  dcje6tion,  and  me- 
lancholy ; and  the  mind,  unavoidably  contra6fing 
an  habitual  gloominess,  and  being  disposed  to 
dwell,  with  little  intermission,  upon  some  parti- 
cular ideas  of  distress  which  have  happened  to 
gain  possession  of  its  attention,  soon  loses  its  ca- 
pacity of  judging  truly  of  things  ; and  the  vessels 
of  the  brain  becoming,  at  length,  active,  by 
means  of  the  intense,  and  passionate,  attention 
of  the  mind  to  the  particular  objedls  of  its  dis- 
tress ; that  organ  begins  to  acquire  all  the  condi- 
tions of  the  preceding  c^use,  and  the  insanity  ah 
those  symptoms  to  wdiich  that  cause  is  disposed 
to  give  occasion. 

a.  Water  In  the  brain,  may  produce,  at  first, 

symptoms 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


287 


symptoms  of  debility,  indigestion,' -s[)asm,  gloom 
and  dejedlion,  dizziness,-  and  otlier  nervous,  and 
|xiralytic  sj  niptoms,  resembling  those  arising  from 
venous  accumulation,  and  compression  : but  as 
it  increases,  it-  may  often,  I think,  be  discrimi- 
natedj  'by  dimness  and  imperfedlion  of  sigJit,  en- 
largement of  the  pupils,  of  the  eyes,' and  stagger- 
ing,  and  tripping,  in  walking : occasionally,  by 
irritation,  it  may  excite  some  degree  of  the  first 
state  ; and  is  frequently,  when  verv'  considerable, 
'accompanied  with  delirious  rambling,  incohe- 
rency; stupidity,  and  idiotism,  and  terminates  in 
death.— —Other  preternatural  substances  may  give 
occasion  to  similar  effecfs ; with  more,  or  less, 
violence  of  delirium,  in  such  proportion  as  the 
compression,  and  irritation,  of  the  brain,  happens 
to  be  greater  or  less,  and  to  excite  more  or  less 
inflammatory  adliv'ity  in  its  vessels.  Cut  as  water 
in  the  brain  often  originates  from  the  first  state 
of  the  proximate  cause;  as  well  as  sometimes, 
perhaps,  from  the  second,  from  the  beginnings 
qf  which  its  symptoms  do  not  seem  to  afford  any 
certain  dlstiiuftion  ; the  symptoms  of  increased 
adlivity  of  the  arteries,  often,  for  this  reason, 
precede  those  arising  from  water  in  the  brain. 

4,  The  change  in  the  intimate  texture  of  the 
medullary  substance' of  the  brain,  may  give  rise 
to  permanent  disorders  in  its  natural  vibrations, 
without  so  much  deranging  its  operations,  as  to 

withdraw 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY.^ 

• 

withdraw  the  attention  of  the  mind  from  external 
objects ; or  greatly,  or  very  generally,  to  con- 
found its  associations  : whence  may  arise  dejec- 
tion, and  melancholy,  or  too  great  flow  of  spirits^ 
or  frequent  transitions  from  one  to  the  other,  or 
strange  fancies,  and  deceptions,  and  a great  va- 
riety of  other  notional,  or  maniacal,  symptoms, 
intermixed  with  a large  portion  of  apparently  good 
sense,  and  sound  reason  or  the  alteration  in 
its  texture  may  be  so  great,  that  the  procedure 
of  its  vibrations,  and  the  associations,  and  opera- 
tions, of  the  mind,  may  be  perfedlly  deranged, 
and  incoherentj’ ; and  sensible  vibrations  may 
sometimes  recur  in  the  absence  of  their  objedfs, 
so  as  to  produce  a persuasion  of  their  adtual  pre- 
sence ; without  any  such  injury  of  the  brain  as 
shall  give  occasion  to  much  irritation  in  it,  or 
produce  any  extraordinary  adivity  of  the  small 
arteries,  intense  ideal  delirium,  symptoms  of  great 
compression,  debility  of  body,  and  tones,  much 
torpor  of  the  natural,  or  the  smallest  perceptible 
injury  of  the  vital,  fundfions  ^or  the  alterec^ 
texture  of  the  brain,  or  the  insanity  arising  from 
it,  may,  at  intervals,  excite  the  a6hvity  of  its  ar- 
terious  system  ; and  may  produce  temporary  fits 
of  more  violent  insanity,  in  which  the  passions 
may  be  greatly  agitated,  the  delirium  may  be  per- 
petually, and  intensely,  ideal,  and  the  natural, 
and  vital  fun6hons,  may  be  much  disturbed. 

The  third  and  fourth  variations  of  the  proxi- 
mate 


CAUSaES  OP  I^^SAi^I^y. 


2BQ 


fixate  cause  of  insanity,  exist,  I 'belieye,-  much 
less  commonly  in  the  beginning  of  the  disorder, 
and  give  less  frequent  occasion  to  its  first  attacks, 
than  the  first  and  second  ; of  one  or  other  of 
which,  they  are  more  usually  the  consequences  ^ 
and  are,  for  the  most  part,  the  attendants  of  in*^ 
veterate,  and  incurable  insanity.  This  conside- 
ration will  account  for  their  being  so  frequently 
met  with  on  opening  the  heads  of  insane  persons, 
after  death.  And  as  increased  activity  of  the  small 
arteries  is  so  common,  and  compression  so  inse- 
parable, a companion  of  insanity  ; we  need  not 
wonder  that  Morgagni  should  in  so  many  in- 
stances meet  with  a preternatural  firmness,  and 
solidity,  of  the  medullary  substance  of  the  brain, 
as  to  be  tempted  to  imagine  that  such  hardness  of 
that  organ  was  the  proximate  cause  of  this  disor- 
der. And  though  I believe  that  water  in  the 
brain  is  rarely  the  original  cause  of  insanity,  and 
most  frequently  the  attendant  of  an  inveterate  dis- 
order ; yet  I must  confess  that  I have  met  with 
instances  in  which  it  has  appeared  to  have  been 
the  sole  cause  ; and  that  I have  seen  it  generated 
in  a very  short  time,  in  deliriums  originating  from 
a highly  inflammatory  state  of  the  brain. 

Having  premised  thus  much  in  general  con- 
cerning the  proximate,  or  rather  those  approach- 
ing nearest  to  the  proximate,  causes  of  insanity  ; 
I shall  now  endeavour  to  apply  what  has  been  ad- 
vanced, to  the  particular  species ; and  to  point 

VOL.  lu  V out 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


290 

out  the  agency  of  the  several  causes,  in  the  pro- 
dudlion  of  each. 

1.  Phrenitic  insanitif  may  ingraft  itself  upon 
every  other  species,  whether  ideal,  or  notional ; 
as  may  easily  be  colledled  from  what  has  been  said 
upon  each  of  them,  and  upon  the  various  remote 
causes  of  insanity  ; and  may,  therefore,  be  in 
some  way  connected  with  all  the  four  proximate 
causes  of  this  disorder  : but  its  own  proper,  and 
peculiar  cause,  is,  invariably,  an  increased,  and 
almost  inflammatory,  atlivity  of  the  small  arte- 
ries, with  the  consequent  turgescency,  and  com- 
pression, of  the  brain.  This  is  evident  from  the 
symptoms  ; and  is  demonstrated  by  dissection  ; 
since  all,  I believe,  who  die  in  this  state,  are 
found  with  its  arteries,  and  veins,  full  of  blood  ; 
and  with  the  brain  so  turgid  as  to  burst  from  its 
confinement,  as  soon  as  the  upper  part  of  the 
skull  is  taken  off ; and  though  water  is,  likewise, 
usually  met  with,  it  is  not  generally  found  in  any 
large  quantity,  and  apj)ears  to  be  merely  the  con- 
sequence of  the  inflammatory  state  of  the  brain. 
But  though  phrenitic  insanity  may  ingraft  itself 
upon  all  the  other  species,  it  has  no  necessary 
dependence,  either  upon  them,  or  their  causes, 
so^  far  as  they  differ  from  its  own  ; and  may  be- 
gin, and  terminate,  without  being  connedled 


' See  above,  rol.  i.  p.  94. 


with 


CAUSES  OF  insanity: 


291 

with  any  of  them  ; so  little  truth  is  there  in  the 
opinion  of  many  of  the  moderns,  and  most  of  the 
ancients,  that  it  is  the  offspring  of  melancholy  ; 
or  nothing  more  than  melancholy  elevated  to  a 
degree  of  fury\ 

2.  Incoherent  imanily\  consisting  of  four  va- 
rieties, acknowledges  various  causes. 

The  first  variety,  or  ardent  incoherent  insanity, 
is  a near  approach  to,  and  often  merely  an  incipient 
state  of,  phrenitic  insanity,  and  is  usuallv  accompa- 
nied with  incessant  talking,  or  raving,  either  on  the 
same  subjedf,  or  with  sudden  transitions  from 
one  subject  to  another,  as  images  and  fancies  oc- 
cur. It  has  for  its  cause  such  an  adlivity  of  the 
small  arteries  of  the  brain,  and  sucli  a consequent 
degree  of  turgescency,  and  compression,  as  pro- 
duce high  spirits,  delirious  images,  and  a rapid 
flow  of  ideas  that  are  very  slightly,  or  not  at  all, 
connedled.  W hen  it  is  original,  and  has  not 
arisen  out  of  any  other  variety  of  incoherent,  or 
out  of  any  other  species  of  ideal,  or  out  of  no- 
tional, insanity,  it  owns  no  other  cause ; but 
when  it  is  derived  from  any  of  the  other  sorts, 
this  adfivity  of  the  small  vessels  of  the  brain  will 
be  combined  with  the  other  causes  from  whence 
they  took  their  rise.  In  the  former  case  it  is 


• See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  45, 

* See  above,  vol.  i.  p,  104. 

U 2 


usually 


CAUSES  OF  iJfSANITY. 


•2Q2 

usually  curable,  and  often  with  case,  and  celerity; 
in  the  latter,  it  is  more  or  less  so,  according  to 
the  nature^  and  duration,  of  the  original  cause. 

The  second  variety  of  incoherent  insanity, 
whicli  I have  termed  consists  in  that  kind 

of  adhv'e  state  of  the  brain  which  occasion S flight!- 
tiess  of  imagination,  without  any  tendency  to  a 
phrenitic  state ; and  exhibits  sudden  transitions, 
and  ra[)id  flights  of  fancy.  It  depends  immedi- 
ately on  such  a61ivity  of  circulation  through  the 
small  arteries  of  the  brain,  as  excites  lively  vibra- 
tions, in  quick,  and  unconnecled,  or  very  slightly 
conne6led,  successions,  and  a great  flow  of  spi- 
rits ; but  is  without  that  intenseness,  and  not 
prodiudlive  of  that  great  turgescency,  which  oc- 
casions j)hrcnitic  insanity  ; and  is  unaccompanied 
with  that  earnestness,  and  solicitude  of  mind, 
which  tend  to  introduce  it.  It  may  arise  out  of 
maniacal,  or. out  of  whimsical,  flighty,  or  other 
.species  of  notional,  insanity  ; and  its  immediate 
cause  may  be  united  with  the  second,  third,  or 
fourth  proximate  cause  ; but  most  frequently  I 
think,  with  the  fourth  ; and  least  so  with  the 
tliird,  which  seems  to  be  more  disposed  to  stupify, 
than  toenlwen  the  Imaor'ination. 

O 

The  third  variety  of  incoherent  insanity,  which 
peculiarly  merits  the  name  of  unconneSIedf  arises 
out  of  such  a state  of  the  brain,  as  produces,  per- 
petually, trains  of  apparently  unconne6Ied,  or 
very  slightly  conneded,  ideas ; with  calm,  and, 

not 


CAUSES  OF  insanity. 


not  incessant,  but  frequent,  incoherent  talking, 
or  muttering ; without  tlie  smallest  tendency  to  a 
])hrenitic  state,  or  any  flightincss  of  imagination  ; 
and  is  nearly  related  to  the  third  species  of  idiot- 
ism“,  from  which  it  is  chiefly  distinguished  by 
occasional  indications  of  ideal  delirium.  This  va- 
riety always,  I imagine,  owes  its  existence  to  the 
fourth  proximate  cause  of  insanity  ; and  is  rarely, 
if  ever,  capable  of  receiving  a cure.  It  seems 
never  to  be  original,  but  always  to  succeed  some 
other  species  of  ideal,  or  notional  insanity. 

In  the  fourth  and  last  variety,  there  is  a great 
defe6l  of  memory,  occasioned  by  such  a state  of 
the  brain  as  produces  an  almost  total  privation  of 
thought,  or  a fixed  and  senseless  uniformity,  of 
the  mental  operations.  It  is,  therefore,  of  two 
sorts,  and  is  either  stupid  and  senseless,  or  absent 
and  musing  : the  first  being  more  especially  ac- 
companied with  great  defe6t  of  memory,  and  re- 
sembling a good  deal  the  delirium  of  old  age ; 
and  the  second  with  a sluggishness  of  the  mental 
faculties,  and  an  inability  to  attend  to  more  than 
one  obje6t  at  once,  and  equal  inability  to  remove 
the  attention  from  one  object  to  another.  This' 
variety  seems  to  originate  from  a great  compres- 
sion, or  great  compa61ness  and  solidity,  of  the 
brain,  and  sometimes  from  both.  In  a few  in- 
stances, I believe,  it  owes  these  conditions  to  the 


“ See  above,  vol,  i.  p.  65. 
V 3- 


second 


294 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


second  proximate  cause  ; in  wliich  case,  though 
obstinate,  and  of  long  duration,  it  is  sometimes 
cured  : but  more  Irecjuently  it  seems  to  be  in- 
curable, and  to  derive  its  origin  from  the  third, 
or  fourth,  proxiiuate  cause,  or  .from  both 
ULiitcd. 

f 

3.  Maniacal  insaniiy'',  growing  out  of  every 
other  species  of  insanity,  mayoiiginate  from  any 
of  the  numerous  causes  of  this  disorder  ; but 
being  an  approach  to  a phrenitic  state,  seems  ever 
to  be  accompanied  with  that  degree  of  turges- 
cency,  whicli  readily  excites  a too  great  activity  of 
the  brain,  and  too  intense  sensitive  vibrations,  in 
the  absence  of  the  ohjedis  to  which  they  relate  ; 
and  which,  in  proportion,  as  it  is  greater,  or  less, 
gives  occasion  to  maniacal  symptoms,  which  are 
more,  or  less,  perpetual,  and  intense,  and  ap- 
proach to,  or  recede  from,  those  of  phrenitic  in- 
sanity. • 

When  maniacal  insanity  arises  from  the  first 
cause  only,  without  the  participation  of  any  of  the 
others,  it  may  be  violent,  and  uninterrupted, 
and  may  nearly  apjjroach  to  phrenitic  insanity  ; 
but  thea61ivity  of  the  brain,  having  no  inveterate 
and  chronic  cause,  may  for  tlie  most  part  he  easily 
appeased,  and  the  insanity  readily  overcome,  by 
proper  medical  treatment. — When  from  the  se- 


" See  abuve,  vol.  i.  p.  no. 


cond 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


2gf* 


cond  cause,  it  may  be  less  violent,  and  be  inter- 
rupted by  longer  intervals  ; but,  arising  from  a 
more  fixed  and  obstinate  cause,  will  usually  give 
way  with  more  <lifficalty,  and  yield  only  to  re- 
peated attacks,  and  long  continued  efforts. — The 
third  and  fourth,  causes,  afford  but  little  hope 
of  a perfe^f  cure  ; since,  though  the  maniacal 
symptonivS,  in  the  former  case,  ntay  have  consi- 
derable intermissions,  and  seem,  on  such  occa- 
sions, entirely  to  cease,  the  symptoms  of  mental 
stupidity,  nervous  imbecillity,  and  ibodily  decay, 
will  seldom  terminate  but  in  perfedf  idiotism,  and 
premature  death  ; and  though,  in  the  latter  case, 
there  may  be  very  long  intervals,  and  good  bodily 
health,  the  operations  of  the  mind  will  rarely  be 
completely  restored,  returns  of  a high  degree  of 
delirium  will  be  always  to  be  apprehended,  and 
an  incurable,  but  often  healthy  idiotism,"  may 
commence,  and  remain  during  life,  which  may 
not  unfrequentlv,  under  the  attentive  guardian- 
ship of  careful  persons,  be  prolonged  for  a course 
of  years,  and  only  terminate  with  the  natural  pe- 
riod of  human  life. 

When  the  maniacal  delirium  has  lono;  inter- 
vals,  and  extends  only  to  one,  or  a few'  objecfs, 
the  insane  person  commonly  enjoys  a great  de- 
gree of  rationality,  and  is  frequently  even  uncom- 
monly acute,  relative  to  such  subjedls  as  hav'e  nO 
conned  ion  with  the  objed,  or  objeds,  of  deli- 
.rium,  as  was  singularly  exemplitied  in  the  elegant 

u 4 and 


2^6  CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 

and  sublime  Tasso""  and  in  the  learned  and  Inge- 
nious iHakrington%  In  these  cases,  the  brain 
being  1 in  an* *  irritable,  and  susceptible  state,  and 
liable  to  b6  strongly  afFecled  by  some  certain 
.ideas,  and  notions,  dwells  u|X)n  tliem,  whenever 
they  occur,  with  peculiar  ardour  and  intenseness, 
'which  rapidly  increases  the  oscillatory  motions  of 
the  small  arteries  of  the  brain,  and  the  adlivity  of 
its  vibrations  ; and  by  such  intense  attention,  and 
accelei*ated  addon,  the  sensitive  vibrations  of  ima- 
•gination  assiinne  a degree  of  vivacity  equal  to  those 
excited  by  the  real  presence  of  their  object,  and 
the  mind  is  deluded  into  a belief  of  the  adtual,  and 
external,  existence  of  its  own  internal  fancies,  and 
reveries, 

> 

4.  ’As  sensitive  insanity'^  much  resembles  the 
maniacal,  and' often  borders  very  nearly  upon  the 
phrenitic ; from  the  former  of  which  it  is  chiefly 
distinguished  by  the  relation  of  the  delirium  to  the 
form,  substance,  or  other  sensible  qualities,  or  cout 
tents,  of  the  body  of  the  insane  person ; and  from  the 
latter  by  the  violence  of  the  delirium ; and  the  de- 
gree of  inflammatory  adlivity  of  the  vessels  of  the’ 
brain ; its  causes  must  be  similar  to  those  of  mani- 
acal, and  phrenitic  insanity  ; and  approach  nearer 
to  the  one,  or  to  the  other,  accordingly  as  its 


See  above,  vol.  i,  p.  81,  and  Up. 

* See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  115, 
t See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  121. 


symptoms 


•CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


^97 

symptoms  may  happen  most  to*  resemble  those  of 
the  one,  or  the  other  ; and  ‘ may  vary,  in  otlier 
respedts,'  in  the  same  manner*  as  I have  above 
supposed  the  causes  of  those  species  of  insanity  to 
vary.  ■ ‘ -’I  i . ' ' ' . 'oi  - j i* 

' The  symptom  Of  sensitive  delusipd  may  partly 
originate  from  the  usual  causes  of  hypochondriacal 
feelings,  and  ndrvohs  (iebility,  existinglout  of  the 
brain  ; which  most  commonly  aVise  from  exhaust- 
ion, or  from  a disordered  state  of  thb  alimentary 
canal ; and  partly  froth  the  great,  and  inordinate, 
affedfion  of  the  brain  ‘ which  may  UKrrt  only  give 

r 

occasion  to  intense  delirium,  and  to  sensitive 
misapprehension',  from' the  mere. force  of  a deluded 
imagination ; but  may  so  disturb  the  ordinary, 
find  natural  fundlions  of  the  brain,  and  so  disorder 
the  nerves  in  consequense  of'  such  disturbance,  as 
to  give  rise  to  preternatural,  and  delusive  sensa- 
tions ; and  thus,  in  both  ways,  may  give  occasion 
to  insanity. 

5.  Delusive  insanity'' ^ the  first  species  of  notion- 
al, being  always  a near  approach  to  some  spe- 
cies of  ideal  insanity,  must,  in  all  cases,  be  ac- 
companied by  a considerable  degree  of  compres- 
sion, compadfness,  or  firmness,  of  the  brain,  and, 
in  many,  with  no  inconsiderable  adfivity  of  its  | 
small  arteries.  But  as  its  intenseness  is  exceed- 


ingly 


? See  above,  vol.  i,  p.  135, 


'208  CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

-ingly  various,  and  it  is  often,  at  intervals,  which 
are  sometimes  pretty  long,  so  diminished,  as 
scarcely  to  afford  any  remaining  traces  of  insanity, 
thcj  degree^  of  compression,  and  compactness, 
must  be  proportionably  various  in  the  same  indi- 
vidual, and  possess,  in  different  persons,  the  dif- 
Iferences.!’  of  /a.  very  extensive  scale:  and  the 
activity  of^ithe' small*  arteries  of<  the  brain,  both 
in  the  same,  and  in  dlfterent  individuals,  must 
sometimes  rise  very  high,  at  others  be  extremely 
low,  and  not  unfrequently  cease  altogether. 

As  it  may  arise  out  of  every  other  species  of 
.notional  insanity,  or  be  only  the  relics  of  some 
species  of  ideal  ; and  is  often  no  other  than  an 
incipient  state,  or  the  mere  termination  of  phre- 
nitic  insanity  : so  it  may  originate  from  any  of  the 
four  proximate  causes,  though  it  can  seldom  arise 
to  any  great  height  without  being  indebted  to 

some  degree  ot  the  first. 

When  it  derives  its  existence  from  the  first 
proximate  cause  only,  which  may  be  the  sole 
cause  of  either  variety,  it  not  only  nearly  borders 
upon  ideal,  but  is  often  upon  the  very  confines  of 
the  phrenitic  state.  But  if,  in  this  case,  it  be 
attacked  with  vigour  ; and  originate  from  no  very 
obstinate,  and  formidable,  remote  cause;  it  may, 
for  the  most  part,  be  speedily  subdued,  before 
the  brain  receives  any  material  injury  ; and  may 
afford  a fair  prospec^^  of  a permanent  cure. 

The  second  proximate  cause  is  more  obstinate, 

but 


CAUSES  OP  IJJSANITY. 


299 

but  will  commonly  yield  to  the  presevering  efforts 
of  medical  skill.  It  is  capable  of  giving  occasion 
to  either  the  first  or  the  second  variety  of  delusive 
insanity,  and  to  every  degree  of  them,  as  the  cir- 
cumstances of  com[)ression,  and  irritation  of  the 
arteroiis  activity,  an«l  the  concomitant  intenseness 
of  delirium,  and  the  nature  of  the  remote  cause, 
may  happen  to  vary  ; but  never  can  approach  to  a 
phrenitic  state,  till  the  compression  is  become 
very  considerable,  the  delirium  intense,  and  a 
great  degree  of  ablion  has  been  by  these  means 
excited  in  tlie  small  arteries  of  the  brain. 

The  third  proximate  cause  may,  by  similar  de- 
grees of  compression,  and  irritation,  and  other 
corresponding  circumstances,  produce  similar 
effedfs  : but  affords  a less  favourable  prospedf  of 
a happy  termination  : is  often  accompanied  with 
paralytic  symptoms  ; frequently  reduces  tl’C  hope- 
less sufferer  in  a sliort  time  to  a state  of  idiotism  ; 
aud  though  sometimes  slow,  is  more  frequently 
rapid,  in  its  progress;  and  rarely  admits  of  a 
long  state  of  suffering  ; or  makes  a la^ti^g  spec- 
tacle of  human  degradation,  and  infirmity,  by  a 
protradfeil  life  of  drivelling  imbecillity. 

The  fourth  cause,  though  less  violent  in  its 
fcffedfs,  less  hostile  to  life,  and  rarely  so  totally 
subversive  of  sense  and  intelligence,  as  the  third, 
is  obstinate,  and  formidable,  unless  while  recent, 
and  affords  but  an  indifferent  prospecd  of  a per- 
fedf  restoration  to  soundness  of  mind.  Some. 

times. 


300 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


times,  when  the  change  in’  the  texture  of  the 
brain  is  very  considerable,  or  the  remote  causes 
are  such  as  excite  much  activity  of  mind,  the  in- 
tenseness  of  the  delirium  may  so  excite  the  activity 
of  the  small  arteries,  as  to  induce  plirenitic  in- 
sanity ; which  subsiding,  often  leaves  the  brain 
in  a worse  state  of  injured  texture;  and  the  insa- 
nity, at  length,  frequently  terminates  in  perfect 
idiotism,  or  excessiv'e,  fixed,  and  incurable  de- 
lusion. 

What  circumstances,  and  conditions,  may  de- 
termine delusive  insanity  to  be  of  the  first,  or  se- 
cond, variety  ; or  may  favour  the  introdu61ion  of 
any  of  the  species  of  ideal  insanity  ; may  easily 
be  collected  from  what  has  just  been  observed 
concerning  the  proximate  causes  of  those  spe- 
cies. 

* 6.  JVhimsical  insanity’'  is  occasioned  by  such  a 
degree  of  compression,  and  firmness  of  the  brain, 

. as  is  adapted  to  render  it  too  irritable  ; to  excite, 
in  a considerable  degree,  uncomfortable  nervous 
feelings,  a general  gloom  of  mind,  timidity  and 
suspicion  ; to  give  frequent  recurrency,  and  vi- 
gour to  vibrations  of  some  particular  kinds  ; and 
thus  incessantly,  and  intensely,  to  engage  the 
attention  of  the  mind  to  some  particular  objedls  ; 
and  by  fixing  and  limiting  its  views,  to  give  oc- 


I 


* See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  154. 


casion 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY* 


301 


caslon  to  a variety  of  urinatuml,  but  strong,  asso- 
ciations ; and  so  to  confound  the  judgment,  as 
to  g'ive  to  the  most  false  and  absurd,  the  credit  of 
tlie  most  j ust,  and  true.  These  effedis  are  greatly 
proinoted  by  a long  series  of  habitual  low  spirits, 
by  constitutional,  or  acquired,  irritability  of  pas- 
sion, fancifulness  of  imagination,  and  unsound- 
ness  ol  judgment.  This  species  of  insanity  is 
often,  therefore,  the  disorder  of  ingenious,,  and 
always,  perhaps,  of  wciik,  timid,  and  little. 
Blinds. 

When  it  is  in  the  extreme,  it  often  borders 
upon,  or  is  conne<5led  with,  fanciful  insanity ; but 
is  more  commonly  related  to  the  gloomy  varieties 
of  pathetic  insanity,  out  of  which  it  frequently 
proceeds  ; and  it  is  sometimes  pure,  un mixed, 
and  original.  As  it  is,  not  unusually,  so  slight,  as 
scarcely  to  distinguish  the  insane  from  the  com- 
mon ranks  of  mankind  ; so,  on  the  other  hand, 
as  the  compression,  or  compa6liiess,  and  irrita- 
tion, increase,  as  passion  unites  itself  to.  the 
other  causes,  and  the  attention  becomes  fixed, 
and  intense,  it  occasionally  rises  through  all  the 
intermediate  degrees  of  notional,  to  the  highest 
pitch  of  ideal,  and  phrenitic,  insanity. 

As  the  mind,  under  the  influence  of  whimsi- 
cal, is  in  a state  of  less  adlivity,  and  excitement, 
than  in  fanciful  insanity,  so  this  species  is  less  de- 
pendant on  the  first  proximate  cause  ; from  a low 
degree  of  which,  howev’er,  it  seems  sometimes 

to 


302 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


to  originate  ; and  to  which  it  sometimes  gives 
occasion ; and  then,  especially,  approaches  to 
fanciful  insanity,  and  sometimes  passes  on  to 
maniacal,  and  even  to  phrenitic.  But  more 
frequently  it  seems  to  proceed  from  the  second  ; 
not  uncommonly  from  the  fourth  ; and  very  rarely 
from  the  third. 

7.  In  all  the  degrees  fanciful  insanity^  the 
tones,  and  vibrations,  of  the  brain,  are  lively, 
and  the  mind  is  in  too  wakeful,  and  a6live,  a 
state.  There  is  that  degree  of  irritability  in  the 
medullary  fibres  ot  the  brain,  and  of  the  nervous 
power  by  w'hich  they  are  incited,  and  agitated, 
which  renders  them  tremblingly  alive  to  adlion, 
and  eagerly  susceptible  of  quick,  and  animated, 
vibrations  ^ and  which  fits  them  foi  the  excite- 
ment of  vivid  trains  of  ideas  by  the  gentlest  im- 
pulse of  exciting  causes  ; and  disposes  the  vivid 
trains,  thus  excited,  to  follow,  in  rapid  succes- 
sion, by  the  slightest  connexions,  and  the  most 
remote  associations. 

Hence  it  is  that  the  fancifully  insane  are  talka- 
tive, quick,  lively,  acute,  ingenious,  witty,  brilli- 
liant,  and  sometimes  sublime. 

In  the  lowest  degree  of  this  species  of  insanity, 
there  is  a certain  a6livity  of  the  arterial  system  of 
the  brain,  which  does  not  exist  but  in  an  adlive 


See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  101. 


state 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  303 

State  of  the  mind  ; and  which  is  prone  to  become, 
by  the  continued  a6lion,  and  re-a6lion  of  the  mind, 
«nd  brain,  mutually  upon  each  other,  and  the 
reciprocal  excitement  of  each’  others  exertions, 
insensibly  more  and  more  rapid  ; till,  by  degrees, 
the  oscillations,  and  turgescency,  of  the  vessels 
of  the  head,  so  increase,  as  to  work  up  the  mind, 
and  brain,  to  a degree  of  a61ivity  and  excitement, 
often  little  short  of,  and  not  uncommonly  termi- 
nating in,  adual  ideal  delirium  : which  does  not 
usually  stop  here  ; but  proceeding  from  one  de- 
gree to  another,  passes,  from  the  first  advances 
beyond  the  line  of  fanciful,  through  every  inter- 
mediate stage,  to  the  utmost  extreme  of  phrenitic 
insanity.  And,  as  in  its  lower  degree  the  disorder 
has  rather  the  appearance  of  uncommon  sense, 
and  acuteness  of  parts,  than  of  insanity;  so  in 
the  highest,  the  excessive  quickness  of  imagina- 
tion, and  rapidity  of  transition  from  one  associa- 
tion to  another,  perfcdily  destroy  the  appearance 
of  coherency,  and  assume  the  form,  and  charadier, 
of  the  most  senseless,  and  idiotical  raving. 

It  is  obvious  that  this  species  of  insanity  is 
more  immediately  conneded  with  the  first  proxi- 
mate cause,  and  depends  on  such  an  adlive  state 
of  the  small  arteries  of  the  brain,  and  such  a de- 
gree of  turgescency  and  compression,  as  are 
adapted  to  give  liveliness,  and  vivacity,  to  the 
imagination,  and  to  excite,  in  a rapid  succession, 
incessant  trains  of  ideas,  which  often  succeed 

- each 


SO-1  jCAt^SES  OF  insa:^ity. 

e-j,ch  other  by  lire  slightest  connexions.— It  mny 
proceed,  however,  more  remotely,  from  any  of 
tiie  other  proximate  causes,  whenever  they  l^ppen 
to  give  occasion,  as  they  not  imiVequejitly  do,  to 
such  a degree  of  excitement  in  the  vibrations  oi 
tlie  brain,  and  tiie  oscillations  of  its  capillary  *arte- 
ties,  as  are  lucre  described  as  necessary  to  the 
produdiion  ot  this  species  of  insanity. 

8.  OUTripuhiue  insanitif  I have  distinguished 
fouj-  varieties,  all  of  which  are  accoinpanieil  with 
some  degree  of  increased  adlivity  of  the  small  ar- 
teries, and  of  the  nervous  filaments,  or  of  what- 
ever it  is  that  vibmtes,  excites  ideas,  and  conve}  s 
impulses,  in  the  medullary  substance, . of  the 
brain  : and  this  increased  adivity  is  greater  or 
less ; is  exerted  continually  or  at  intervals  ; and 
is  connedled  with  high  or  low  spirits  ; according 
to  the  nature,  and  intensene.ss,  of  the  insa- 

nity. 

The  first  variety  often  originates  from  dejec- 
tion of  spirits,  or  from  some  one  of  the  various 
kinds  of  pathetic  insanity  ; which,  suddenly  dis- 
appearing, are  succeeded  by  unexpcdled  cheerful-' 
ness,  and  an  imaginary  amendment ; a change, 
however,  which,  in  reality,  only  indicates  an  in- 
crease of  the  disorder  of  the  brain,  and  a com- 
mencement of  a more  than  ordinarily  adUve  state 


* See  above,  ?ol.  i.  p. 


of 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


305 


of  the  oscillations  of  its  small  arteries,  and  of  the 
vibrations  of  its  medullary  substance.  At  other 
times  it  comes  on  almost  immediately,  and  with, 
apparently,  little  or  no  antecedent  insanity  ; with 
scarcely  any  preceding  dejection,  or  the  obvious 
influence  of  any  considerable  passion  ; and  is  then 
usually  the  symptom  of  an  incipient  ideal  insanity. 
In  the  latter  case,  it  is  generally  owing  to  the  first 
proximate  cause  alone.  In  the  former,  com- 
monly to  the  second  ; sometimes,  perhaps,  to 
the  third  ; and  not  very^  rarely  to  the  fourth. 

In  the  second  variety  there  is  great  irritability 
of  mind,  and  brain  ; derived  from  an  habitual, 
and  chronic,  disorder  of  that  organ  ; which  owes 
its  birth  to  injudicious  education,  and  the  early 
indulgence  of  froward  inclinations,  and  perverse 
passions  ; to  hypochondriacal,  and  other  nervous 
complaints  ; to  some  sorts  of  pathetic  insanity  ; 
to  painful  disorders  of  the  head  ; and  to  whatever- 
can  occasion  a chronic  accumulation  of  fluids  in 
the  brain,  and  so  distemper  it,  as  to  give  rise  to 
great  nervous  irritability,  susceptibility  of  violent 
passion,  strong  and  permanent  resentment,  ob* 
stinacy  of  temper,  impatience  of  contradi61ion  or 
restraint,  and  an  irresistible  propensity  to  pursue 
the  impulses  of  the  present  moment.  It  is  always 
accompanied  with  the  first  proximate  cause,  when 
considerable  ; but  may  originate  from  any  of  the 
other  three  ; and  especially  from  the  second,  and 
fourth.  When  violent,  it  frequently  terminates 

VOL.  If.  X 


m 


306 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


in  some  species  of  ideal  insanity.  This,  and  tlie 
first  variety,  are  often  the  causes,  and  not  un- 
commonly the  consequences,  of  excessive  drink- 
ing : and,  in  either  case,  they  are  in  general 
easily  cured  ; but  exceedingly  apt  to  return  ; till 
by  repetition,  and  the  baneful  influence  of  intoxi- 
cation, it  is  commonly  rendered  incurable,  and 
usually  terminates  in  some  species  of  ideal  insa- 
nity, or  sinks  into  perfect  idiotism. 

The  third  variety  frequently  occurs  in'  the  fe- 
male sex  ; is  the  offspring  of  great  nervous  irrita- 
bility ; is  always  immediately  excited  by  the  first 
cause ; most  commonly,  I believe,  originates 
from  the  second,  and  sometimes  from  the  fourth. 
It  yields,  for  the  most  part,  readily  to  medicine  ; 
but  is  very  apt  to  return.  Though  usually  the 
disorder  of  the  fair  sex,  it  sometimes  exists  in  the 
other  ; and  is  even  an  occasional  symptom  of  ma- 
niacal, or  phrenitic,  insanity. 

The  fourth  variety  is  a very  near  approach  to 
phrenitic  insanity  ; may  succeed  any  of  the  other 
varieties,  anti  may  owe  its  existence  to  the  same 
causes  ; but  always  immediately  depends  upon 
the  first  proximate  cause ; and  sometimes,  per- 
haps, upon  that  only  : and  is  more  or  less  easily, 
curable,  according  to  its  permanency,  the  vio- 
lence of  its  symptoms,  its  connexion  with  any 
other  species  of  insanity,  the  nature  of  that  insa- 
nity, and  the  nature  of  the  causes  from  which  it 
may  have  sprung. 


y.  Scheming 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.'  30/ 

0-  Scheming  insanitif,  of  which  the  varieties, 
so  far  as  respeCls  its  obje6t,  are  inniHOerable, 
may  be  distinguished,  with  a view  to  its  origin, 
into  two  sorts. 

Sometimes  it  takes  its  rise  from  intense  appli- 
cation of  mind  to,  and  incessant  and  uniform 
brooding  over,  some  one  obje6l;  which  has  taken 
hold  of  the  imagination,  and  gained  the  affeciion^ 
as  especially,  if  not  solely,  worthy  of  attention,- 
and  pursuit ; or  for  the  attainment  of  which  the 
qualihcations,  and  abilities,  of  the  pursuer,  are 
peculiarly,  and  happily,  adapted. — Or  it  may 
grow  out  of  some  other  species  of  insanity,  and 
spring  from  the  same  causes  from  which  they  de- 
rived their  existence. 

In  the  former  case  it  receives  its  beginning  most 
commonly,  from  the  second  cause  of  insanity  ; 
but  sometimes,  perhaps,  from  the  fourth  ; and 
owes  its  increase,  animation,  and  impetuosity,  to 
the  first : and,  in  the  latter  case,  from  any  of  the 
causes  from  which  they  originated  : but,  especially 
from  the  second  ; to  which,  when  it  becomes  vio- 
lent, is  added  the  first. 

It  is  peculiarly  subjedl  to  intermissions ; either 
in  the  scheming  only  ; on  which  occasion  it  devi- 
ates into  self-important,  impulsive,  whimsical, 
fanciful,  delusive,  or  into  some  variety  of  pathe- 
tic insanity ; according  to  the  nature,  or  com- 


^ See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  170. 
X 2 


bination. 


308 


CAUSES  Of  insanity- 


binatioiij  of  its  causes  ; or  of  the  insanity  alto-' 
gather.  When  the  intermission  is  complete,  I 
attribute  it  to  the  second  only,  or  to  the  first,  and 
second,  causes  united.  Wlien  it  is  imperfetSt, 
and  some  degree  of  insanity,  however  different  in' 
its  kind,  for  ever  remains,  I suspect  such  obsti- 
nacy of  disorder  to  arise  from  the  lourth. 

It  is  a frequent  prelude  to  maniacal  and  phreni- 
tic  insanity ; to  which  it  sometimes  makes  the 
most  rapid  advances. 

10.  Vain,  or  self  important  insanilif,  usually 
proceeds  from  a considerable  degree,  and  inv'ete- 
ratc  state  of  the  fourth  cause,  and  is  incurable  : 
and  is  then  not  only  permanent,  but  pretty  uni- 
form ; and  has  few  deviations,  rarely  any  great 
amendment,  and  no  perfect  intermissions.  But 
there  are  cases  in  which  it  is  less  constant,  and 
unyielding,  and  has  longer  or  shorter,  intermis- 
sions ; though  it  is  still  liable  to  returns,  which 
are,  not  uncommonly,  pretty  frequent,  and  sel- 
dom leaves  the  mind,  in  the  intervals,  in  a pci- 
fcclly  sound,  and  rational,  state.  In  these  cases 
it  may  be  owing  in  part  to  the  fourthcause  : but 
is  probably  more  indebted  to  the  second  : which 
giving  way,  in  time,  to  proper  medical  exertions, 
leavTS  the  mind  in  a state  which  cannot  justly  be 
considered  as  sound ; and  yet  so  nearly  approaches 


* See  above,  vol,  i.  p.  1/1. 

to 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


309 


to  sanity,  that  it  ought,  rather,  perhaps,  to  be 
termed  unsteady,  than  'insane.  When  this  less 
obstinate,  but  commonly  more  violent,  sort  of 
self-important  insanity,  is  at  its  heigfit,  it  always 
associates,  with  the  second  and  fourth  cause, 
some  portion,  and  often  a very  large  one,  of  the 
first ; and  frequently  terminates  in  some  species 
of  ideal,  and  often  rises  into  a very  high  degree 
of phrenitic,  insanity. 

11.  fn  hypochondriacal  insanitif , — (a)  the  ali- 
mentary canal,  and  the  whole  apparatus  of  the  in- 
struments of  chylification,  are,  sometimes,  the 
parts  that  first  suffer ; and  the  head  is  only 
affc61ed  in  consequence  of  the  disorder  of  these 
important  organs.  How  complaints  so  remote 
from  the  head,  tend  to  affect  tlie  brain,  and  to 
bring  on  insanity,  has  already  been  explainech. — 
(b)  Often,  however,  the  head  seems  to  be  pri* 
marily  afiebled  : and  it  is  always,  I believe,  very” 
sensibly,  and  considerably,  disordered,  before  the 
imagination,  and  understanding,  are  very”  obser- 
vably injured.  In  these  cases,  the  nervous,  and 
other  symptoms,  afFe6hng  other,  and  distant, 
parts  of  the  body,  arc  only  the  consequences  of 
the  disordered  state  of  the  brain. — (c)  In  other 
cases,  the  head,  and  the  rcst  of  the  body,  seem 


^ See  above,  vol.  i,  p.  17*4. 

8 See  above,  p.  UJ6,  and  1 17  of  this  volume. 

X 3 


to 


310 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


to  suffer  at  the  same  time,  and  from  the  same 
common  cause : as  when  the  disorder  proceeds 
from  much  and  fatiguing  dissipation,  and  late 
hours’’,  from  a studious  and  sedentary  life’,  or 
from  habitual  excesses  in  eating',  drinking'',  or 
venery’.  In  all  cases,  however,  the  nerves  suffer 
much  ; and  uncomfortable,  and  distressing,  feel- 
ings, are  a predominant  symptom  ; and  some- 
times the  flesh  insensibly  wastes,  and  the  strength 
decays ; and  in  most  instances  the  skin  is  harsh 
and  clammy  ; or  harsh,  dry,  and  withered  ; and 
not  uncommonly  separates  in  scales,  or  falls  off  in 
a scurfy  powder. 

(a)  When  the  disease  begins  in  the  alimentary 
canal,  and  the  organs  of  chylification,  the  insa- 
nity which  follows  is  probably  the  immediate  effe(5f 
of  the  second  cause  ; which  will  naturally  be  ge- 
nerated by  the  diminution  of  tones,  and  deje61ion 
of  spirits,  unavoidably  resulting  from  the  disor- 
dered state  of  the  viscera  ; and  the  anxious,  de- 
sponding, and  unceasing  attention  of  the  mind, 
to  the  uncomfortable  feelings  thus  excited  in  the 
body ; and  the  consequent  increased  determina- 
tion of  blood  to  the  brain  ; while  its  recurrence 


•'  See  above,  p.  1S5  of  this  volume. 
^ lb.  p.  JO’3- 
j lb.  p.  122. 

^ lb.  p.  125. 

^ Ib.  p.  82,  and  222. 


through 


311 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 

through  the  veins,  if  not  diminished,  is  not  in- 
creased, with  the  increased  a6lion  of  the  capillary 
arteries. 

f 

(b)  When  the  head  is  primarily  afte6ied,  as  by 
intense  thinking,  habitual  passions,  or  some 
other  immediate  cause  of  disorder  in  the  brain  ; 
the  insanity  is  probably,  in  like  manner,  the  im- 
mediate effedl  of  the  second  proximate  cause,  or 
an  accumulation  of  blood  in  the  veins,  and  sinu- 
ses ; either  alone  ; or  united  with  the  third  ; or 
with  the  fourth ; or  with  both  at  the  same 
time. 

(c)  When  the  head  and  body  suffer  together, 
and  especially  by  excessive  drinking,  it  is  pro- 
bable that  all  the  four  causes  frequently  unite  their 
influence,  in  disordering  the  understanding.  And 
when  the  insanity  is  accompanied  by  tremor,  gid- 
diness, unsteady  walking,  enlargement  of  the  j)u- 
pils,  or  a vacant,  and  staring  appearance  of  the 
eyes,  as  it  sometimes  is,  I suspedl  some  degree  of 
the  third  to  be  the  principal  cause  concerned. 

The  disordered  state  of  the  nerves  which  they 
all  produce  ; and  the  languor,  depression  of  spi- 
rits, spasms,  and  various  painful  feelings,  which 
flow  from  that  source ; and  especially  when 
aided  by  some  accidental  circumstance,  -which 
may  be  fitted  to  impose  upon  an  infirm,  prepos- 

X 4 sessed, 


312 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


sessed,  and  dejected  mind ; easily  lead  to  the  pe- 
culiar fancies  of  the  hypochondriacally  insane. 

How  this  species  may  degenerate  into  pathetic 
insanity,  may  easily  be  understood  from  what  has 
before  been  said,  in  treating  of  the  passions“  as 
remote  causes  of  insanity. 

12.  Of  the  proximate  causes  of  pathetic  insa~ 
nitif  I shall  only  speak  in  general  ; without  at- 
tempting to  point  out  their  several  variations,  and 
combinations,  corresponding  to  the  several  diffe- 
rences of  its  numerous  varieties ; or  to  describe 
the  manner  in  which  the  remote  causes  give  occa- 
sion to  them  : which,  indeed,  has  been  already 
done,  in  some  measure,  in  treating  of  the  pas- 
sions concerned  in  the  produdlion  of  insanity". 

This  species  may  originate — (a)  from  peculi- 
arity of  temper,  and  disposition,  of  mind,  or 
from  the  habitual  indulgence  of ‘some  particular, 
and  especially  of  some  painful,  passion  ; as  male- 
volence, discontent,  anxiety,  fretfulness,  peevish- 
ness, avarice,  and  other  dispositions,  and  pas- 
sions, of  a like  nature  ; — (b)  from  the  accidental 
excitement  of  some  violent  passion,  as  fear,  ter- 
ror, grief,  or  the  like  : — (c)  from  some  bodily 


See  above,  p.  18/  of  this  volume. 
See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  185. 

% See  above,  p.  187  of  this  volume. 


disorder 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


313 


disorder  affeding  the  brain  ; as  the  suppression 
of  the  menses,  or  milk,  the  repulsion  of  the  gout, 
or  of  cutaneous  eruptions,  the  drying  up  of  old 
ulcers,  or  fevers  of  various  kinds  ; and  producing 
an  insanity  chara61crised  by  some  particular  pas-< 
sion: — or  (d)  from  some  other  species  of  insa- 
nity. 

(a)  As  the  varieties  of  pathetic  insanity  arc 
almost  all  accompanied  with  distress,  deje61ion, 
anxiety,  pain,  agitation,  or  restlessness  of  mind  ; 
and  are  apt  to  terminate  in  the  deepest  melan- 
choly ; and,  in  the  impetuosity  of  impatience,  or 
the  agony  of  desperation,  to  plunge  the  unhappy 
sufferer  into  the  horror,  and  guilt,  of  suicide  ; it 
is  obvious  that  the  temper  and  disposition  of  mind, 
or  the  passion  habitually  indulged,  from  which 
they  originate,  must  usually  be  of  the  anxious, 
peevish,  or  gloomy  kind.  How  such  a temper, 
and  such  passions,  may  introduce  insanity  has 
already  been  shown,  in  treating  of  the  passions. 
•And  as  they  all  a€t  in  part,  by  exciting  a deter- 
mination of  blood  to  the  head,  it  is  probable  that 
they  occasion  an  accumulation  of  it  in  the  veins, 
and  sinuses,  of  the  brain ; and  produce  insanity 
by  the  second  proximate  cause. 

(b)  Pathetic  insanity  arising  from  the  second 
remote  cause,  is,  like  the  former,  the  offspring 
gf  the  second  proximate  cause  ; but  as  it  is  usually 


more 


314 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


more  violent  in  its  symptoms,  and  more  rapid  in 
its  progress  ; and  often  makes  hasty  advances  to 
the  very  extreme  of  phrenitic  insanity ; it  is 
seldom  long  before  it  calls  in  the  aid  of  the 
first. 

(c)  In  like  manner  pathetic  insanity  from  the 
third  remote  cause,  while  it  is  indebted  to  the 
second  proximate  cause  for  iis  origin,  soon  re- 
ceives increase,  and  is  often  speedily  exalted  into 
phrenitic  insanity,  by  the  first : and  when  it  de- 
rives its  beginning  from  a fever,  it  is,  probably, 
frequently  aggravated  by  the  third,  or  fourth, 
proximate  causes  ; and  in  such  cases  is  very  often 
either  incurable,  or  leaves  behind  it  some  other 
incurable  disease.  When  owing  to  the  second 
only,  it  is  usually  curable. 

(d)  Pathetic  insanity  from  the  fourth  remote 
cause,  may  either  succeed  some  species  of  no- 
tional, or  of  ideal,  insanity.  In  the  former  case 
it  is  usually  on  the  increase,  and  continues  grow- 
ing in  violence  till  it  rises  to  phrenitic  insanity. 
In  the  latter  case  the  ideal  symptoms,  which  were 
at  first,  perhaps,  violent,  and  even  phrenitic, 
gradually  decline,  and  at  length  disappear ; and 
leave,  in  their  stead,  symptoms  of  pathetic  insa- 
nity only.  When  it  succeeds  some  other  species 
of  notional  insanity,  it  probably  acknowledges  most 
frequently  the  second  proximate  cause  ; to  which, 

when 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


313 


■when  it  is  violent,  and  on  the  increase,  is  added  some 
degree  of  the  first  : and  when  it  remains  after 
ideal  insanity,  it  is  sometimes,  perhaps,  alsocoii- 
ne6led  with  the  third,  or  fourth ; and  is  then, 
for  the  most  part,  either  incurable,  or  leaves  be- 
iiind  it  other  incurable  diseases. 

13.  In  treating  of^  appetitive  insaniiy^^  I shall 
pay  no  particular  regard  to  the  distin6Hon  into 
satyriasis,  and  nymphomania  ; the  differences  of 
which,  depending  upon  the  differences  of  sex, 
need  no  explanation  : but  shall  remark  two  very 
striking,  and  essential,  variations,  which  may  be 
observed  in  this  disorder,  and  are  to  be  met  with 
in  either  of  the  sexes.  For  appetitive  insanity,, 
whether  in  males  or  females,  appears  sometimes  to 
arise  from  the  state  of  the  parts  by  which  they  are 
distinguished  ; and  sometimes  to  grow  out  of 
some  other  species  of  insanity. — In  the  former 
case,  it  seems  to  spring  sometimes  from  the  dis- 
ordered, or  preternatural,  state  of  those  parts, 
without  the  previous  stimulation  of  mental  turpi- 
tude ; and  sometimes  from  the  depraved  indul- 
gence of  lascivious  ideas.  And,  under  both  cir- 
cumstances, the  insanity  is  induced  in  consequence 
of  the  perpetual  employment  of  the  mind  about 


P See  above,  vol.  i.  p.  241. — See  also  p 139 — 143  of  this 
volume. 


the 


3l5 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


the  objects  of  irregular  desire'^ ; is,  therefore,  to 
be  attributed  to  the  first  proximate  cause ; and 
usually  makes  hasty  advances  to  a phreiiitic  state. 
—In  the  latter,  the  lascivious  ideas,  and  disor-* 
tlerly  propensities,  seem  to  be  nierely,  or  chiefiy, 
the  result  of  the  delirious  state  of  the  brain  ; and 
of  course,  the  proximate  c-ause  will  vary  accord- 
ing to  the  nature  of  the  insanity  which  gave  occa- 
sion to  the  existence  of  such  ideas,  and  propen- 
sities. 

• Having  thus  taken  a review,  imperfedi  indeed, 
and  limited,  but  which  I hoj>e  will  be  found  to 
throw  some  practical  light  upon  the  suhjc'^  ol 
the  several  sjxicies  of  insanity  ; and  having  pointed 
out  the  apparent  relations  of  each  species  to  the 
four  variations  of  the  state  of  tlie  brain  which  seem 
to  approach  the  nearest  to  the  proximate  causes  ; 
I am  naturally  led  to  remark  certain  common, 
and  regular,  changes  which  occur  in  many  cases 
of  insanity,  and  which  seem  to  admit  of  a ready 
explanation  from  what  has  been  said  above  re- 
lative to  this  subjedl. 

I have  often  observed,  in  certain  cases  of  insa- 
nity in  which  the  patient  has  experienced  fre- 
quent returns  of  the  complaint ; and  also  in  some 
others  ; that  the  first  appearance  of  disorder  has 
been  no  nmre  than  a change  from  natural  cven- 

^ See  above,  p.  141  of  this  volume.  . 


ness. 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY. 


3i7 


J^ess,  of  spirits,  or  cheerfulness,  to  unusual  dul- 
ness,  silence,  musing,  and  fondness  of  retire- 
ment and  solitude  ; which  have  been  succeeded, 
ns  the  disorder  increased,  by  great  dejection,  dis- 
tress, and  melancholy ; when,  at  once,  the  un- 
bappy  sufferer  has  become  cheerful,  has  seemed 
uncommonly  sensible,  and  rational,  and  has  ap- 
peared to  be  suddenly,  and  unexpectedly,  getting 
well.  Soon,  however,  this  agreeable  prospedt  has 
vanished  ; he  has  grown  high  spirited,  fanciful, 
.scheming ; he  has  been  hurried  about  by  every 
impulse  of  a wayward  imagination,  or  of  t;nrea- 
sonable  passion  ; and  while,  being  freed  from  his 
distress  of  mind,  he  has  fancied  himself  well,  his 
anxious  friends  have  lamented  the  increase  of  his 
<lisorder,  and  have  been  alarmed  at  the  quick  pro- 
gress which,  they  have  now  become  sensible,  it 
was  making  to  maniacal,  and  phrenitic,  insanity. 
And,  when  at  length  this  violence  has  giv'cn  way, 
the  patient  has  appeared  first  more  calm,  and  ra- 
tional ; then  dejedled  ; and  this  state  of  dejec- 
tion has  frequently  continued  for  a long  time, 
gradually  retiring,  before  he  has  been  pertecllv 
restored  to  his  right  mind. — The  first,  and  melan- 
choly state,  seems  to  be  owino:  to  a beffinnino*  de- 
termination  of  blood  to  the  brain,  and  a gradual 
accumulation  in  its  veins,  and  sinuses.  When 
this  accumulation,  and  compression  have  by  their 
irritation,  begun  to  excite  accelerated  oscillations 
ill  the  small  arteries,  and  vivid  vibrations  in  the  * 

medullarv 


318 


CAUSES  OF  INSANITY. 


medullary  substance,  of  the  brain,  the  uneasy 
gloom  now  giving  way  to  more  lively  ideas,  the 
person  seems,  at  first,  to  be  getting  well  ; till  the 
increased  action  of  the  arteries,  and  undue  ex- 
citement of  the  brain,  induce  the  higher,  and 
more  violent,  degrees  of  delirium.  And  when, 
these  subsiding,  the  former  states  of  the  brain  suc- 
cessively, but  in  an  inverted  order,  recur ; the 
same  appearances  return,  till  the  disorder  of  the 
brain,  entirely  ceasing,  leaves  the  patient  again 
restored  to  his  right  mind. 

Similar  to  this  has  been  the  succession  of 
symptoms,  which  I have  frequently  observ^ed,  iit 
certain  cases  of  highly  maniacal,  and  phrenitic,- 
insanity,  which  were  subjedt  to  irregular  parox- 
\’^ms,  and  remissions  ; were  incurable  ; and  were, 
apparently,  attended  with  a combination  of  all 
the  four  conditions  of  the  proximate  cause. — In 
their  best  state  they  were  mildly  maniacal.  On 
the  approach  of  a paroxysm,  they  became  exceed- 
ingly dull,  and  stupid  : after  a time  they  began  to 
be  more  lively,  and  in  some  degree  calm,  and 
sensible  : this  apparent  amendment  was  soon  suc- 
ceeded by  violent  phrenitic  insanity ; which  sub- 
siding, tl>ey  became  again  more  calm,  and  sensi- 
ble ; then,  dull,  and  stupid  ; and  in  the  end  set- 
tled into  the  usual  course  of  their  ordinary,  and 
mild,  maniacal  delirium. — ^Thc  first  dull,  and 
stupid  state,  appeared  to  arise  from  a considera- 
bly increased  compression  of  the  brain  ; and  was 

attended 


CAUSES  OP  INSANITY.  31Q 

attended  with  a remarkably  slow  pulse  ; when  the 
cheerfulness  commenced,  the  velocity  of  the 
pulse  began  to  quicken  ; became  rapid  during  the 
phrenitic  delirium  ; subsided  as  the  delirium  sub- 
sided ; till,  on  the  return  of  the  stupidity,  it  be- 
came once  more  exceedingly  slow  ; and  when  the 
insanity  was  at  last  settled  in  its  common  mania- 
cal state,  rose  again  to  its  ordinary  standard. 

These  remarks  are  founded  upon  repeated  ex- 
perience, and  accurate  observation  ; and  appear 
to  me,  to  throw  great  light  upon  the  proximat« 
causes  of  insanity. 


SECTION 


320 


SECTION  VI. 

OF  THE  PREVENTION  OF  INSANITY, 

In  treating  of  the  prevention  of  insanity, 
notwithstanding  the  great  importance  of  tlie  sub- 
je6l,  I shall  endeavour,  as  much  as  possible,  to 
avoid  minuteness  ; partly,  that  the  size  of  the 
jitesent  volume  may  be  confined  within  reason- 
able limits  ; and  partly,  because  a due  attention 
to  what  has  before  been  said,  concerning  the  se- 
veral causes  of  insanity,  will  lead  to  a proper 
knowledge  of  the  principal  dangers  to  be  avoided, 
and  observances  to  be  pradiised,  in  order  to  its 
prevention. 

To  defend  ourselves,  as  much  as  may  be,  from 
the  attacks  of  an  enemy,  so  hostile  to  our  com- 
fort, and  so  subversive  of  the  dignity  of  the  hu- 
man charadler ; it  is  fit  that  every  man  should  be 
rationally,  and  diligently,  but  not  anxiously,  at- 
tentive, to  the  stridl  observance  of  whatever  may 
tend  to  preserve,  or  regain,  the  health,  and  to 
contribute  to  the  pertedlion  of  his  whole  nature, 
bodily  and  mental.  This  opens  to  our  prosper 
a large  field  of  speculation,  and  pra61ice.  I shall 
confine  myself  to  the  following  views. 


1.  Tempe 


PREVENTION  OP  INSANITY.  321 

1.  Temperance  in  food,  drink,  sleep,  and  the 
indulgence  of  the  venereal  appetite. 

2.  Exercise. 

3.  The  due  regulation  of  the  passions. 

4.  Attention  to  the  operations  of  the  imagina- 
tion ; and  care  to  check  its  propensity  to  too  great 
a(ftivity. 

5.  An  assiduous  diligence  in  the  improvement 
of  the  reasoning  faculties  of  the  mind ; and  a 
Watchful  avoidance  of  the  various  causes  of  its 
imbecillity. 

6.  The  careful  avoidance  of  too  long  continued, 
too  intense,  and  too  uniform,  thinking ; and  of 
excessive  watching. 

7.  The  avoidance  of  the  other  occasional  causes 
of  insanity  ; so  far  as  they  may,  by  our  care  and 
diligence,  be  avoided. 

8.  Rational  views  of  God  and  religion  ; free 
from  superstition,  enthusiasm,  or  despondency  j 
and  a Conscientious,  and  cheerful,  performance^ 
of  the  duties  which  religion  prescribes. 


VoL.  ir< 


T 


1*  The 


322  JREVENTIOX  OF  INSANITY. 

1.  The  best  rule  of  temperance  iti  food  is,  that 
it  be  taken  in  such  quantity,  as  to  leave  little 
or  no,  fulness,  after  eating ; as  that  the  body 
shall  feel  refreshed,  and  not  oppressed,  and  the 
mind  lively,  and  cheerful,  and  fit  for  the  perform- 
ance of  all  its  operations,  if  requisite,  with  ease 
and  alacrity  ; that  dinner  be  the  principal  meal ; 
and  that  supper  either  be  taken  very  early,  or  be 
very  light. 

With  regard  to  drink,  temperance  Is  necessary 
in  small  liquors,  as  w'cll  as  in  strong.  For  though  the 
former  cannot  injureby  inebriation  ; they  are  capa- 
ble, when  used  immoderately,  or  injudiciously,  to 
do  much  mischief  by  their  quantity,  and  by  their 
other  sensible  qualities.  Small  cold  liquors  should 
never  be  drunk,  but  with  the  greatest  caution, 
when  we  are  warm  with  exercise  ; and  not  at  all 
when  we  are  very  hot ; and  large  draughts  should 
always  be  avoided.  If  drunk  by  persons  who  are 
very  hot,  they  frequently  bring  on  inflammatory, 
and  other  violent  diseases ; which,  often,  either 
end  in  death,  or  leave  behind  them  complaints 
which  remain  for  life  : and  may  prepare  the  w'ay  for 
insanity,  as  w^ell  more  immediately  by  givingocca- 
sion  to  the  delirium  of  a fever,  or  by  otherwise 
violently  disordering  the  brain  ; as  more  remotely, 
by  such  permanent  injuries  of  the  brain,  of  other, 
kinds,  as  may  proceed  from  the  violence  of  these 
original  disorders. 


How 


PREVENTION  OF  INSANITY.  323 

How  warm  diluting  liquors'  may  lay  the  foun- 
dation of  Insanity  ; and  how  wine',  and^  other 
fermented,  or  spirituous,  liquors,  may  produce 
the  same  cfFedl  ; has  already  been  explained  in 
treating  of  the  remote  causes. 

Warm  diluting  liquors  should  never  be  drunk 
in  large  quantities  ; unless  with  some  particular 
views,  and  under  such  particular  circumstances 
as  may  render  copious  dilution  with  small  warm  ' 
fluids,  proper  in  the  cure  of  a disease : and 
should  never  be  drunk  warmer  than  new  milk, 
or  the  human  blood  while  yet  flowing  in  the 
course  of  circulation.  < 

Wine  should  either  be  avoided  altogether  ; or 
when  that  is  not  very  pra61icable,  or  not  very  pru- 
dent, should  always  be  taken  in  such  moderation, 
as  not  to  produce  intoxication  ; nor  flushing  in 
the  face  ; nor  drowsiness  ; nor  great  spirits  on 
the  one  hand  ; nor  dulness,  and  depression  on  the 
other.  Two  or  three  glasses,  twice  a day,  should 
rarely  be  exceeded,  even  by  such  as  have  not  the 
smallest  reason  to  be  apprehensive  of  insanity  ; 
and  one  glass  will  in  most  cases,  where  no  great 
exercise  is  made  use  of,  be  quite  sufficient.  But 
I would  advise  such  as  have  any  particular  reason 
for  guarding  against  insanity  ; unless  in  cases  of 
debility,  in  which  a small  quantity  of  wine  is 


^ See  above,  p.  121  of  this  volume, 
* See  above,  p.  125  of  this  volume, 
y '1 


2 


found 


I 


324  FBEVENTION  OF  llfSANlTT. 

found  useful  as  a medicine  ; to  abstain  from  vi- 
nous, and  spirituous  liquors,  entirely  : or  at  most 
to  drink  nothing  stronger  than  small  beer. 

Temperance  with  regard  to  sleep,  will  be  best 
regulated  by  the  age,  constitution,  and  experi- 
ence, of  individuals.  In  general,  I believe,  sleep 
is  too  much  indulged  ; and  that  there  is  little 
need  for  caution  against  unreasonable  abstinence 
from  so  neces'sary  a refreshment ; which,  were  it 
common,  would  demand  attention,  as  perhaps 
the  more  dangerous  extreme  of  the  two.  How  a 
defeat  of  sleep  may  be  favourable  to  insanity,  has 
been  explained  before'.  And  that  its  excess 
should  have  a tendency  to  promote  the  produc- 
tion of  it,  may  easily  be  deduced,  as  well  from  the 
efFedls,  as  from  what  has  above  been  said  of  the 
causes,  of  sleep":  an  excessive  indulgence-  in 
which,  while  it  tends  to  induce  an  habitual  disten- 
tion of  the  veins,  and  sinuses,  and  perpetual  com- 
pression, of  the  brain  ; at  the  same  time  encou- 
rages the  generation  of  blood,  promotes  a general 
plenitude,  and  grossness  of  habit,  and  debilitates 
all  the  tones;  and  is,  in  both  ways,  injurious 
to  health  ; and  may  lay  the  foundation  of  future 
insanity. 

Persons  m health,  should  rarely  indulge  in  sleep 
during  the  day  ; should  go  to  bed  early  in  the 


* See  above,  p.  171,  and  IS.'J  of  tliis  volume. 
“ Sec  above,  p.  I Jlof  Uiis  volume. 


evening^ 


PREVENTIO>f  OF  INSANITY.  325 

evening,  and  rise  early  in  the  morning  ; should 
allow  themselves  so  much  sleep,  during  the  night, 
as  they  shall  find,  by  experience,  to  be  most  con- 
ducive to  bodily  vigour,  and  mental  alacrity  ; but 
should  carefully  guard  against  such  indulgence, 
as  shall  give  occasion  to  habitual  languor,  listless- 
ness, weariness,  torpidity,  and  drowsiness ; and 
shall  thus,  obviously,  injure  the  health  of.  the 
body,  and  impair  the  faculties  of  the  mind. — Who- 
ever allows  himself  about  eight  hours  refreshment 
in  bed,  out  of  twenty-four,  will  he  in  no  great 
danger  of  insanity  from  an  injurious  abridgment 
of  the  hours  of  repose  ; and  will  usually  be 
found,  I am  persuaded,  equally  distant  from  the 
opposite  error,  of  giving  too  much  time  to  the  in- 
dulgence of  sleep. 

For  the  temperate  regulation  of  the  venereal 
appetite ; the  dangerous  tendency  of  an  undue 
indulgence  of  which  I have  more  than  once  had 
occasion  to  mention^;  I shall  lay  down  no  other 
rule,  than  that  it  be  restrained  within  the  bounds 
of  what  is  allowed,  by  the  sandion  both  of  God, 
and  man  ; and  that  it  be  used  with  so  much  mo- 
deration, as,  not  to  debilitate,  but  to  animate, 
and  strengthen,  both  the  body,  and  mind. 

, 2.  Of  the  effecSls  of  exercise,  in  its  various  degrees, 
upon  the  body  ; of  the  necessary  portions  of  it. 


See  above,  p.  82,  and  139  of  this  volume, 
y 3 


and 


326 


PKEVENTION  OF  INSANITY. 


and  the  latitude  which  may  be  allowed  in  its  use, 
in  different  ages,  sexes,  and  constitutions  ; and 
of  the  tendency  of  inadlivity  to  promote  the  pro- 
dudlion  of  insanity;  I have  treated  pretty  largely, 
under  the  head  of  remote  causes'’.  I need 
scarcely,  therefore,  observe  here,  that  when 
there  is  nothing  in  the  state  of  health  to  forbid  it, 
it  should  not  only  be  used  daily,  but  should  be  fre- 
quently repeated  every  day : that  seldom  many 
hours  should  pass  without  riding,  or  walking,  or 
making  use  of  some  sort  of  bodily  motion,  either 
Avithin  doors,  or  in  the  open  air,  accordingly  as 
the  health,  weather,  or  other  circumstances,  may 
permit,  or  require  : that  it  may  sometimes  be 
brisk,  vigorous,  and  continued  for  a considerable 
time  ; but  should  never  be  violent,  nor  persevered 
in  to  any  great  degree  of  fatigue  ; and  should 
generally  be  moderate  both  in  degree  and  dura- 
tion : that  however,  with  regard  to  its  kind,  de- 
gree, frequency,  and  protradlion,  every  prudent 
man’s  own  taste,  judgment,  and  experience,  will 
be  his  .best  guides. 

3.  The  regulation  of  the  passions  is  a very  impor- 
tant obje61  ; and  is  as  ditficult  as  it  is  important. 
What  has  been  said  above  of  • their  causes,  and 
of  their  agency  in  the  production  of  insanity*,  at 

t y ■■■■■  I-  ■ ■ ■■  - ---  '■  ■■ 

See  above,  p.  S7 — 102,  of  this  volume. 

? See  above,  p.  18/ — 263,  of  this  volume. 


the 


PUEVENTION  OP  INSANITY.  32/ 

the  same  time  that  it  points  out  their  nature,  and 
danger,  will  not  only  show  the  necessity,  but  will 
be  a guide  to  some  of  the  means,  of  dirc(5ling 
their  aim,  and  of  combating  their  violence. 

The  chief  means  of  combating  the  passions, 
and  of  keeping  them  within  just  bounds,  are,  so 
to  form  our  estimate  of  the  things  of  this  life  ; and 
ot  the  relation  of  our  state  here  to  a future  Slate 
of  existence  alter  death  ; and  of  the  influence 
which  our  condutfl;  here,  in  which  the  good  or 
bad  management  of  our  passions  will  have  a prin- 
cipal share,  will  have  upon  our  happiness,  both 
here,  and  hereafter ; as  to  be  under  the  smallest 
possible  temptation  to  be  much  agitated,  or  any 
way  unduly  influenced,  by  any  of  our  passions  : 
which,  when  suffered,  in  consequence  of  an 
erroneous,  and  irrational  estimate,  of  the.  value, 
and  relation,  of  the  things  of  this  life,  and  ano- 
ther, to  become  violent,  or  unjust,  are  capable 
of  inducing  insanity,  not  only  by  their  immediate 
effect  upon  the  brain,  but  by  the  self-condemna- 
tion, and  remorse,  with  which  they  are  not  un- 
frequently  followed.  Such  a right]  estimate  every 
rational  man  will  labour  to  attain.  He  will  endea- 
vour, by  corredting  error,  and  acquiring  such  ha- 
.bits  as  are  consistent  with  just  sentiments,  to 
withdraw  the  nourishment  from  the  very  root  of 
.passion,  rather  than  be  forever  fruitlessly  occupied 
in  merely. pruning  the  luxuriance  of  some  of  its 
branches.  But  as  there  are  many  to  be  guarded 

Y 4 against 


328  PEEVENTION  OP  INSANITY. 

against  the  inroads  of  insanity,  who  have  but  a 
small  portion  of  religion,  and  less  qf  philosophy  ; 
and  who  will  scarcely  be  at  much  pains  to  acquire 
a larger  of  either  ; it  may  be  proper  to  teach  such 
l)Ow  to  moderate  the  passions  w’hich  they  cannot 
subdue ; that,  while  they  are  in  some  degree 
figuratively,  and  rporally  insane,  they  may  not 
become  so  adlually,  and  medically. 

It  may  be  useful  for  such  persons  to  impress 
strongly  qpon  their  minds  the  persuasion,  that 
the  indulgence  of  apy  passion  to  excess,  and 
especially  of  the  selfish,  and  maleyolent,  is 
likely  to  be  injurious  to  health  ; will  certainly  be 
destru6live  of  serenity,  and  comfort  ; and,  of 
course,  by  diminishing  happiness,  will  frustrate 
its  own  aim,  and  intention  : and  may,  by  repe- 
tition, acquire  accumulated  force,  and  facility  of 
excitement ; and  become,  at  length,  unconquer- 
able, and  habitual,  and  according  to  its  nature, 
violence,  and  frequency,  will,  ip  a greater  or  less 
degree,  be  subversive  of  happiness,  and  leave  us, 
more  or  less,  open  to  the  attacks  of  insanity. 

Such  persons  will,  therefore,  see  it  highly  ex-r 
pedient  while  under  the  infiuence  pf  these  im- 
pressions, to  do  all  in  their  power  to  avoid  the 
occasions  of  passion  ; to  cop^pare  the  urgency, 
and  apparent  importance  of  them,  when  they  oc- 
cur, with  the  probable  diminution  of  the  comfort, 
and  health,  of  body,  and  mind,  which  the  pas- 
sion they  would  urge  ps  to  might  induce  ; and  to 


PREVENTION  OP  INSANITY.  32^ 

lay  it  clown  as  a rule,  never  to  indulge  any  pas- 
sion whatever,  till,  independently  of  moral  con- 
siderations, and  the  notions  of  duty,  and  obliga- 
tion, they  have  deliberately  refledled,  whether 
the  importance  of  the  cause,  will  be  a sufficient 
counterbalance  to  the  certain  pain,  of  the  passion, 
and  the  injury  which  may  be  thence  derived  to 
their  health  of  body,  and  ease,  and  soundness,  of 
mind,  A habit  of  such  deliberation,  once  ac- 
quired ; and  it  may  be  acquired,  by  diligence, 
and  resolution  ; will  entirely  put  an  end  to  exor- 
bitant passions ; since  by  checking  the  very  be- 
ginnings ot  emotion,  its  growth,  and  progress, 
will  be  altogether  prevented. 

And  as  every  one  has  some  weak  part,  on  which 
he  is  more  open  to  a successful  attack ; some  con- 
stitutional, or  habitual,  passion,  whose  approaches 
he  cannot  easily  withstand  ; all  persons  who  are 
convinced  of  the  expediency,  and  necessity,  of 
subduing  their  passions,  if  they  would  consult 
their  own  ease,  will  be  aware  of  the  importance 
of  keeping  a diligent  watch,  and  placing  a strong 
guard,  upon  the  passion  that  most  easily,  and 
successfully,  besets  them. 

And  whoever  would  secure  a reasonable  portion 
of  present  happiness,  will  be  sensible  of  the  ne- 
cessity of  learning  the  art  of  contentment ; which, 
difficult  as  it  may  seem  to  those  who  have  not 
used  themselves  to  check  the  wanderings  of  ima- 
gination, and  to  keep  their  desires  witliin  prudent 

bounds. 


330 


PREVENTIOX  OF  INSAuITY. 


bounds,  not  only  appears  indispensable,  but  easy, 
to  the  man  who  feels  a lively,  and  pra6hcal,  con- 
viiSlion,  of  its  wonderful  tendency  to  multiply  tlxi 
sum  of  a(5lual  enjoyment. 

With  the  same  view  of  promoting,  and  securing, 
their  own  present  felicity,  such  persons  will  see 
the  propriety  of  acquiring  habits  of  good  nature  ; 
and  of  cultivating  the  emotions  of  benevolence. 
x\nd,  as  virtue  seldom  fails  to  bring  vvith  her,  her 
.own  dowry,  contentedness,  and  benevolence, 
‘will  infallibly  introduce  habits  of  cheerfulness; 
which,  while  they  improve  our  happiness,  area 
powerful  preservative  against  disease,  and  the  de-; 
terinined  enemies  of  insanity. 

4.  That  the  wanderings  of  imagination  may 

prevented,  and  its  too  great  ardor,  and  a61i- 
vitv,  controlled,  the  most  exa6l  and  unwearied 
attention  should  be  paid  to  its  operations : and 
the  man  who  is  conscious  of  its  propensity  to 
ramble,  or  to  become  too  adlive,  should  e\^r  be 
upon  the  watch,  to  check  its  first  deviations, 
and  to  recall  its  a6\ivity,  to  sobriety,  and  steadi- 
ness ; to  fix  it  to  one,  and  to  a single,  and  un- 
varying, view  of  one,  subjedl ; to  habituate  it  to 
examine  relations  with  accurate  observation : and 
to  distinguish  between  distant  similitudes,  and 
cxa6l  resemblances.  It  should  rarely,  therefore, 
be  suffered  to  move  with  impatient,  or  unthink- 
ing levity,  from  one  obje6l  to  another;  but  should 


PREVENTION  OP  INSANITY.  331 

be  taught,  with  great  care,  and  pains,  to  fix  its 
attention  on  whatever  comes  in  review  before  it ; 
so  that  it  may  not  only  receive  a proper  impres- 
sion from  it  ; but  may  keep  it  long  enough  in 
view  for  the  due  consideration  of  its  various  pro- 
perties, and  the  accurate  investigation  of  its  seve- 
ral relations.  W riters  on  subjedls  of  imagination, 
or  who  misuse  imagination  on  subjedls  of  reason- 
ing, and  investigation,  should  be  carefully  avoided, 
as  too  favourable  to  the  growth  of  the  natural 
propensity  ; or  should  be  read  but  little,  and  with 
much  caution  ; and  their  dangerous  influence 
should  be  counteradied,  by  the  diligent  perusal  of 
a few  seledt  books  of  sound  and  philosophical  cri- 
ticism.— Emotions  of  passion,  as  prone  to  excite 
the  undue  adfivity,  and  to  encourage  the  errone- 
ous operations,  of  imagination,  should  rarely  be 
indulged,  and  never  to  excess  ; and  that  uniform 
a6fivity  of  imagination  should  be  instantly  sup- 
pressed, which  discovers  itself  in  the  frequent, 
forcible,  and  unbidden  intrusion,  and  recurrency, 
of  the  same  fancy  ; and  which,  like  its  similar 
adhvity  when  the  mind  is  under  the  influence  of 
any  strong  passion,  displays  an  inability  to  con- 
trol it,  or  a very  blamable  inattention  to  its  due 
government. 

In  short,  the  imagination  should  so  be  subdued, 
and  kept  under,  that  the  mind  may  be  able  to  at- 
tend to  reality,  and  the  nature  of  things,  and  not  ’ 
suffer  itself-to  be  seduced  by  fancy  j may  learn  to 

' " reason 


33^  PREVENTION  OP  INSANITY. 

reason  from  objedls  themselves,  and  not  from 
words,  whic^h  too  often  are  no  more  than  sounds 
without  a meaning  ; and  may  not  be  diredted  in 
its  opinions  by  mere  names,  and  authorities, 
without  due  and  satisfadiory,  examination.- — This 
leads  me  to  the  consideration  of  the  next  method 
of  avoiding  insanity  ; which  is — 

5.  An  assiduous  diligence  in  the  improvement 
of  the  reasoning  faculties  of  the  mind  ; and  a 
watchful  avoidance  of  the  various  causes  of  its 
imbecillity. 

He  who  has  learned  to  govern  his  passions,  to 
restrain  the  precipitancy  of  imagination,  and  to 
fix,  or  withdraw,  his  attention,  as  may  be  most 
expedient,  has  laid  a good  foundation  whereon  to 
eredt  that  firmness  of  mind,  and  soundness  of 
judgment,  which  are  the  very  reverse  of  imbecil- 
lity ; by  which,  as  I have  before  said,  I under- 
stand that  debilitated  state  of  the  reasoning  facul- 
ties, which  renders  the  mind  incapable  of  with- 
drawing its  attention  from  any  train  of  thinking 
in  which  it  is  engaged  ; disposes  it  to  be  carried 
away  by  the  impulse  of  passion,  or  to  be  deluded 
by  the  hasty  and  superficial  combinations  of  ima- 
gination ; and  is  subversive  of  self-command,  ra- 
tional condudl:,  and  sound  judgment. 

This  imbecillity  has  often  its  foundation  in  na- 
ture ; but  may  be  much  increased,  or  dimi- 
nished, by  education,  and  habit  5 which,  while 

they 


PREVENTION  OP  INSANITY. 


333 


they  are  capable  of  strengthening  a weak  mind, 
are  able  to  debase  the  strongest  original  faculties, 
and  the  best  natural  endowments. 

To  the  rules,  therefore,  just  laid  down,  rela- 
tive to  the  government  of  the  passions,  and  the 
condudl  of  the  imagination ; the  observance  of 
which  is  of  great  efficacy  in  invigorating  the  powers 
of  the  mind  ; I shall  here  add  a few  others  of  a 
similar  nature,  and  tendency,  and  no  way  inferior 
in  importance. 

I would  advise  all  persons  who  wish  to  improve 
their  reasoning  faculties,  and  to  avoid  the  causes 
of  imbecillity  of  mind  ; besides  observing  stridtly 
the  above-mentioned  rules  ; — to  use  themselves 
to  deliberate,  on  whatever  comes  under  their  con- 
sideration, with  great  care,  and  diligence  ; to  be 
at  much  pains  to  form  clear  conceptions  of  things ; 
to  bring  their  various  relations,  and  connexions, 
before  the  mind,  as  much  as  may  be  at  one  view, 
and  to  examine,  and  compare  them,  with  the’ 
greatest  exactness  ; to  be  more  careful  to  sepa- 
rate, and  distinguish,  than  solicitous  to  bring  to- 
gether, and  combine,  ideas,  and  notions ; ter 
combine  them  only  after  the  severest,  and  most 
discriminating  examination  ; anxiously  to  avoid 
all  slight,  and  superficial  thinking ; never  to  be 
contented  with  a mere  smattering ; to  draw  no- 
conclusion  which  they  are  not  persuaded,  after 
the  most  serious  refledUon,  and  the  most  scrupu- 
lous- 


334  PREVENTION  OF  INSANITY. 

lous  examination,  that  they  may  justly  draw  ; 
and  never  to  draw  fixed  conclusions,  relative  to 
any  subject  whatever,  till  it  has  passed  in  complete 
review  before  the  mind,  and  has  undergone  the 
severest  test  of  the  most  accurate  scrutiny  ; andy 
after  all,  though  rationally  firm,  and  steady,  to 
be  ever  prepared  for  farther  information,  and  ever 
open  to  conviction  ; and  though  careful  to  with- 
hold assent,  till  the  force  of  evidence  is  complete, 
yet  ready  to  yield  it  up  to  the  superior  strength  of 
reason,  and  truth  ; to  avoid  prejudices  of  all 
sorts  ; to  dislike  none  for  difference  of  condu6fy^ 
])arty,  or  opinion  ; to  guard  against  credulity,  and 
superstition ; in  a word,  to  cultivate  benevolence, 
(xindour,  a love  of  truth,  and  a love  of  virtue ; 
but  above  all,  to  pay  a particular  attention  to 
moral  truth  ; and  to  spare  no  pains  to  acquire 
the  most  enlarged,  and  exalted  notions,  of  the 
suitableness  to  our  nature,  of  the  importance, 
rectitude,  truth,  goodness,  beauty,  and  happi- 
ness, of  virtue,  and  religion.  That  these  valuable 
purposes  may  be  attained,  I would  recommend  it 
to  all  such  as  have  leisure,  and  ability,  that  they 
should  especially  endeavour  to  acquire  a habit  of 
close  thinking,  and  exa6t  reasoning,  by  cultivating 
a taste  for  mathematical  studies  ; by  confining 
their  reading  on  subjedfs  of  philosophy,  morals, 
or  divinity,  to  the  writings  of  such  authors  as  are 
eminent  for  stridl  investigation,  and  sound  rea- 
soning ; 


PREVENTION  OP  INSANITY* *  335 

Ronihg*;  and  by  making  themselves  perfeddy  mas- 
ters of  all  their  arguments  relative  to  the  subjects 
on  which  they  treat. 

Thus  the  passions  being  held  in  subje6lion,  the 
vagaries  of  imagination  restrained^  and  the  powers 
of  reason  cultivated,  and  improved,  a strong,  and 
invincible,  bulwark,  will  be  raised  against  the  in- 
roads of  insanity  from  mental  causes ; and  espe- 
cially— ^ , 

6.  If  we  be  careful  to  avoid  too  long  continued, 
too  intense,  and  too  uniform  thinking  ; which  I 
have  shown  to  be  exceedingly  unfriendly  to  the 
preservation  of  mental  sanity’';  and  the  avoidance 
of  which  seems  to  require  no  other  rule,  than 
what  every  man’s  prudence,  and  feelings,  will 
suggest,  relative  to  the  interruption,  moderation, 
and  variation  of  thinking  ; and  if  we  be  cautious 
not  to  indulge  too  much  in  late  hours,  and  long 
protra6ied  lucubrations  ; or,  in  any  respe6l,  give 
way  to  excessive  watching";  wdiich  are  apt  to  be 
accompanied  with  intense,  and  uniform  thinkino-: 
as  well  as  otherwise  to  disturb  the  fundions  of  the 
brain  ; to  disorder,  and  debilitate  the  faculties  of 
the  mind  ; and  to  facilitate  the  approaches  of  in- 
sanity. 


r See  above,  p.  l6i,  and  185  of  this  volume. 

* See  above,  p.  185  of  this  volume. 


7.  There 


33$  frevention  of  insanity. 

7.  There  are  other  causes  of  insanity,  all  of  th^ 
bodily  kind,  the  particulars  of  which  may  be  col- 
le^led  from  the  table,  against  some  of  which  no 
foresight  can  entirely  protedl  us ; though  the 
rules  relative  to  the  preservation  of  bodily  health, 
the  regulation  of  the  passions,  the  government  of 
the  imagination,  and  the  condudt  of  the  mind, 
above  laid  down,  will  both  render  us  less  liable  to 
their  attacks  ; and  free  us  from  much  of  their 
danger  : and  the  account  given  of  them  as  remote 
causes,  to  which  I refer  the  reader,  will  furnish 
many  useful  hints  for  the  avoidance  of  such  of 
them  as  are  more  immediately  in  our  power.  I 
shall,  therefore,  pass  over  the  particular  conside- 
ration of  them  here;  and  proceed  to  the  last,  and 
most  important,  method,  to  be  employed,  with 
a view  to  the  promotion  of  mental  serenity,  and 
comfort,  and  to  the  prevention  of  these  unhappy 
disorders,  so  far  as  they  may  originate  from  the 
mind  ; to  which  all  the  other  rules  relative  to  the 
condudt  of  the  passions,  the  imagination,  and  the 
understanding,  are  preparatory,  and  instrumen- 
tal ; and  that  is— 

8.  To  acquire  rational  views  of  Gou  and  reli- 
gion ; free  from  superstition,  enthusiasm,  or  de- 
spondency : and  to  observe  a conscientious,  and 
cheerful,  performance,  of  the  duties  which  religion 
prescribes ; equally  distant  from  the  moroseness 

of 


Prevention  of  insanity^  337 

of  glcK)iny  sevci'ity,  and  from  the  levity  of  un- 
warrantable relaxation. 

Men  would  be  more  generally  happy,  they 
would  have  more  true  enjoyment  ot  the  blessings^ 
and  would  be  less  sensibly  afFedted  with  the  mis- 
fortunes, of  this  life,  had  they  right  notions  of 
God  ; of  the  nature,  and  means,  of  real  happi- 
ness ; and  of  its  necessary  connexion  with  reli-, 
gion,  and  their  duty,  with  the  love  of  God,  the 
love  of  inan“,  and  a determined  abstinence  from 
all  intemperate  indulgences. 

He  who  has  right  apprehensions  of  the  benevo- 
lence of  the  Deity ; of  the  beauty,  of  the  suitable^ 
ness  to  our  nature,  and,  let  me  add,  of  the  easy 
pradlicability  to  a well-disposed  mind,  of  all  that 
religion  requires  of  us  imperfedt,  but  much  fa- 
voured mortals ; of  the  inward  peace^  and  com- 
fort, which  the  heart  of  man  cannot  fail  to  derive 
from  the  observance  of  its  precepts  ; must  ever  be 
impressed  with  the  most  perfed  .gratitude,  and 
affection,  towards  the  Creator,  the  Father,  and 


* As  J do  not  think  it  proper  here  to  ent^r  minutely  into 
very  interesting,  and  important,  sUbjedls;  I shall  satisfy  my-‘ 
self  with  recommending  to  such  of  my  readers  as  are  disposed 
to  enter  seriously  into  the  consideration  of  them,  four  excellent 
discourses  of  the  late  Bishop  Butler,  tWo  on  the  Love  of  Gon, 
and  two  on  tlie  Love  of  our  Neighbour,  published  in  the  c€»l- 
lefiioQ  of  bis  sea  mons  preached  at  the  Rolls  Chapel : — and  alsa 
twoequally  excellent  discourses  lately  published  by  Dr.  Priest- 
ley j the  first  Ou  Habitual  Devotion,  and  the  second  On  the 
Duty  of  not  living  to  Onrselves ; in  which  there  are  some  very 
just  refleftions  on  the  mental  causes  of  insanity. 

TOL.  ir*  z 


33S  PTvEVfiNTlON  OV  iNSANITr. 

the  Friend  of  man,  who  has  given  him  bein^, 
who  preserves,  and  prote6ls  him,  in  whom  her 
every  instant  lives,  and  moves,  and  exists,  who 
has  furnished  him  with  the  means  of  happiness, 
and  will  secure  to  him  the  enjoyment  ot  it ; and 
must  experience  so  heartfelt  a conviction  that  the 
knowledge,  the  ability,  and  the  aCtual  perfor- 
mance, of  right  conduct ; that  the  study,  and  the 
observance,  of  the  rules  ot  religion,  and  virtue  ; 
are  his  best  privileges,  and  his  greatest  happiness, 
and  tend  to  the  melioration,  and  perfection,  of 
his  nature  ; as  to  conceive  ot  God,  as  of  a being 
from  whom  he  has  every  thing  good  to  hope,  and 
nothing  evil  to  fear  ; for  perfeCt  love  casteth  out 
fear  ; and  to  consider  the  practice  of  religion  as  an 
easy,  and  delightful  service,  not  to  be  performed 
with  reluCtancy  as  a task,  but  with  cheerfulness, 
and  alacrity,  as  a source  of  the  most  exalted  plea- 
sure. 

This  seems  to  be  the  language  of  cultivated, 
and  enlightened,  reason,  relative  to  God,-  and 
our  duty  ; and  it  is,  surely,  the  language  of  the 
Holy  Scri(3tures  ; which  tell  us,  in  express  terms, 
that  God  is  our  creator,  our  father,  and  our 
friend, — that  we  are  the  children,  the  sons,  of 
God, — that  he  giveth  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy, 
—that  every  good  and  perfeCt  gift  is  from  above, 
and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  Light, — 
that  he  openeth  his  hand,  and  satisfieth  the  de- 
sire of  every  living  thing, — that  he  exerciseth 
loving  kindness, — that  he  is  good  to  all,  and  his 

tender 


PHEVENTiON  OP  INSANITY,  33Q 

tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works, — that  the 
earth  is  full  of  his  goodness, — that  he  is  the  God 
of  love,  and  peace,  the  father  of  all  mercies, 
comfort,  consolation,  and  goodness, — and  that 
his  peace  passeth  all  understanding ; — in  short, 
benevolence  is  so  eminent  a part  of  the  chara6ter 
of  the  great  Father,  and  Benefa61or,  of  mankind, 
that  the  Scriptures  tell  us  that  God  is  love. 

And  with  regard  to  the  practice  of  religion, 
and  its  suitableness  to  our  nature,  revelation  as- 
sures us  that  the  law  is  written  in  our  hearts, 
and  we  are  a law  unto  ourselves, — that  his  com- 
mandments, therefore,  are  not  grievous, — and 
that  his  yoke  is  easy , and  his  burden  is  light ; — 
that  is,  that  he  does  not  require  difficult  services, 
or  unmeaning  observances  ; such  as  arc  repug- 
nant to  our  nature,  have  no  rational  aim,  and  no 
tendency  to  promote  our  own  good,  or  that  of 
others  ; that  all  which  is  expecSled  from  us  is  only 
true,  and  sincere  repentance,  and  the  pure  ser- 
vices of  an  upright  heart,  and  honest  intentions  ; 

and  that,  the  duties  of  religion  being  so  con- 

o-enial  to  our  nature,  so  consonant  to  our  reason, 
so  suitable  to  our  feelings,  so  improving  to  the 
human  heart,  and  undei-standing,  and  so  every 
way  conducive  to  happiness,  as  well  in  the  imme- 
diate prabtice,  as  in  the  promised  reward,  having 
the  promise  of  this  life,  and  of  ffiat  which  is  to 
come, — her  ways  cannot  but  be  w’ays  of  pleasant- 
ness, and  all  her  paths  must  infallibly  lead  to  the 
habitations  of  peace. 

z 2 


And 


340 


PKEVENTION  OF  INSANITY. 


And  for  the  encouragement  of  such  as  have 
not  been  sufficiently  attentive  to  the  voice  of  na- 
ture, and  the  exhortations  of  revealed  religion ; and 
have  in  any  degree  transgressed  the  bounds  of 
duty  to  God,  to  themselves,  or  to  their  neigli- 
bours  ; we  are  told  that  our  benevolent  Father  is 
a God  ready  to  pardon,  nierciful  and  gracious, 
slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness, — who  par-r 
doneth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by  transgression, — 
who  retaineth  not  his  anger  forever, — because  he 
delighteth  in  mercy, — who  is  long-suffering  to 
us-ward,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but 
that  all  should  come  to  repentance, — who  will  not 
cast  off  forever,— and  w'ho  doth  not  afflict  wil- 
lingly, nor  grieve  the  children  of  men, — for  he 
knows  our  condition,  and  remembers  that  we  are 
but  dust. 

But  if  God  be  xSO  good  and  merciful,  and  so 
ready  to  forgive  ; if  he  be  a God  of  perfedi  bene- 
ficence ; if  he  made  us  for  happiness,  and  has 
provided  the  means  of  obtaining  it ; if,  when  we 
had  no  existence,  he  brought  us  into  being,  for 
the  sole  diffusion,  and  multiplication,  of  felicity, 

:: — and  indeed,  we  can  conceive  no  other  motive 
for  our  creation ; — surely  it  is  out  of  the  power  of 
man  to  frustrate,  by  his  folly,  the  benevolent  inten- 
tions of  the  Deity,  who  hath,  probably,  allowed 
Jiim  to  stray  from  the  paths  of  wisdom  and  happi- 
ness, but  to  convince  him  that  there  are  no  other; 
and  who  hath  suffered  him  to  w^ander,  that, 
taught  by  his  experience,  he.may  ultimately,  re- 
turn 


JREVENTION  OF  INSANITY.  341 

turn  into  the  right  way,  and  learn  to  wander  no 
more.  If  he  sent  his  Son  into  the  world,  as  tho 
Gospel  assures  us,  that  all  through  him  might  be 
saved, — surely  none  shall  be  finally  lost ! Or,  is 
his  hand  shortened,  that  he  cannot  Save  ? shall 
any  of  the  works  of  his  power,  and  goodness, 
perish?  shall  the  creatures,  which  he  made  to  be 
happy,  be  permitted  to  be  finally  wretched  ? be- 
suffered  to  make  themselves  irrecoverably  mise- 
rable? Shall  not  the  workmanship  of  God  be 
complete?  Though  made  liable  to  err,  shall  it 
not  contain,  within  itself,  that  which  shall,  in 
the  end,  corred:  its  errors?  In  a word,  can  the 
Almighty  want  power  ? can  the  allwise  want  wis- 
dom? can  the  maker  of  the  world  do  wrong? 
can  he  make  man  fallible,  and  leave  him  to  trans- 
gress, and  to  be  miserable  ? 

And  if  God  be  a wise,  and  benevolent,  being, 
if  his  service  be  an  easy,  and  a reasonable,  service, 
he  cannot  be  the  author  of  superstition  ; he  can- 
not approve  of  a ceremonious  devotion,  in  which 
the  heart  is  hut  little  concerned  ; he  cannot  im- 
pute merit  to  the  scrupulous,  and  laborious,  per- 
formance of  unprofitable,  and  superstitious  prac- 
tices. He  that  hath  said,  that  on  these  two  com- 
mandments,— to  love  God  with  the  whole  heart, 
and  to  love  our  neighbours  as  ourselves, — hang 
all  the  law  and  the  prophets  ; — and  that  the  love 
of  our  neighbour  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law ; — he 
cannot  give  a sandion  to  ceremonies  which  have 
no  relation  to  the  love  of  God,  or  the  love  of 

man  ; 


342  PriKVENTION  OP  INSANITY. 

mail;  he  cannot  mean  to  attribute  merit  even  to 
faith,  but  so  far  as  it  tends  to  enlarge,  and  ennoble, 
our  minds,  by  right  notions  of  the  power,  and  wis- 
dom, and  purity, and  an  unshaken  trust  in  the  bene- 
volence, of  his  nature;  to  inspire  us  with  the  love  of 
our  Creator,  and  of  our  fellow  creatures  ; and  a de- 
sire, with  the  blessing  of  God  to  attain,  by  the  per- 
formance of  his  will,  and  an  imitation  of  the  divine 
nature — humble  indeed,  and  at  an  awful  and  in- 
finite distance,  and  without  presumption,  and  so  far 
only  as  human  nature  may  be  permitted,  and  en- 
abled, to  imitate  the  divine, — to  attain,  as  much 
as  may  be,  to  the  perfedlion  of  our  own. 

But  whatever  may  be  our  attainments,  It  is 
our  duty,  and  our  interest ; for  duty  and  inte- 
rest always  go  hand  in  hand  ; still  to  be  humble, 
and  un presuming.  Shall  he  be  proud  who  has 
nothing  which  he  ought  to  call  his  owm  ? Even 
had  we  more  cause  to  take  to  ourselves  merit, 
than  any  of  us  can  pretend  to  ; pride  is  too  selfish 
an  emotion  to  be  indulged  with  conscious  appro- 
bation ; and  too  little  produ6live  of  rational  plea- 
sure, and  substantial  happiness,  to  be  purchased 
at  the  expence  of  the  best  feelings  of  the  human 
heart,  and  of  the  noblest  exercise  of  Christian  duty, 
the  feelings  and  exercise  of  a6live,  and  diffusive, 
benevolence.  Pride  is  a comparative  emotion  ; 
and  a malevolent  one ; it  is  raised  on  the  de- 
basement of  others  ; and  levies  self-applause — if 
it  can — at  the  expence  of  general  good-will,  and 
afTe<51ion.  It  is,  indeed,  unworthy  of  our  nature ; 
it  makes  us  stoop  from  our  real  dignity  ; and  is 

a proof 


rto'ENTION  OP  INSANITY#  3 l3 

5.  proof  of  our  deficiency  both  in  virtue  and  happi- 
ness, while  it  would  arrogate  a plenitude  of  both. 
Every  rational,  and  sincere  Christian,  will,  there-* 
fore,  see  it  to  be  his  duty,  and  his  interest,  as  he 
will  feel  it  to  be  his  inclination,  to  guard  against 
the  emotions  of  spiritual  pride  ; and  that  sort  of 
enthusiasm,  which  is  grounded  upon  the  notions 
of  extraordinary  excellency,  and  the  peculiar  ap- 
probation, and  friendship  of  God  ; as  proceeding 
from  irrational  views  of  God  and  religion,  as  un- 
suitable to  human  infirmity,  as  inconsistent  with 
human  duty,  as  tending  to  diminish  human  feli- 
city, as  partaking  of  the  nature  of  insanity,  as- 
calculated  to  promote  the  introduction  of  greater 
degrees  of  it,  and  as  paving  the  way  to  the  oppo- 
site disposition  of  mind,  and  leading  to  the  other 
extreme  of  religious  despondency.  Ev'ery  rational 
and  judicious  Christian,  will  see  it  to  be  his  inte- 
rest, to  do  his  duty,  without  vain  pride,  or  un- 
manly humility,  and  debasement : persuaded,  on 
the  one  hand,  that  as  pride  is  inconsistent  with  his 
duty,  and  interest,  so  likewise,  that  there  is  no  merife 
in  his  best  performances,  and  that  after  he  has 
done  all,  he  is,  with  regard  to  the  Deity,  an  un- 
profitable servant  : and  persuaded,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  he  ought  never  to  give  way  to  despera- 
tion ; that  his  imperfedf,  and  sincere  services, 
will  be  rewarded  with  happiness,  possibly  in  this 
world,  and  certainly  in  tire  next ; and,  however 
conscious  of  guilt,  also  persuaded  that  his  very, 
fears  w ill  be  accepted  of  as  repentance  ; that  our 

benevo- 


3 14  i^EVENTION  OP  INSANITY, 

benevolent  Creator  will  never  desert  the  work-^ 

i 

manship  of  his  hands,  or  give  up  to  perdition  ihe 
beings  whom  his  goodness  has  brought  into  exist-, 
ence ; that  our  Heavenly  Father  will  never  cast  o^ 
the  children  of  his  alfedlion  ; and  that  our  gracious 
friend  will  never  forsake  the  friends  whom  he  has 
chosen,  who  look  up  to  him  for  protedion.  and 
whom  none  can  doubt  that  he  is  able  to  save  to 
the  uttermost. 

With  such  notions,  and  such  prospedls,  the 
sincere  Christian  will  conscientiously,  and  cheer- 
fully, perform  the  duties  ol  his  station,  and  will 
go  on  his  way  rejoicing  ; he  will  exercise  temper- 
ance, and  do  every  thing  else  whicli  may  promote 
the  health  of  his  body  ; he  will  keep  his  passions 
in  subjection ; he  will  regulate  the  operations  of 
imagination,  check  its  aCtivity,  and  restrain  its 
wandering  ; he  will  diligently  cultivate  the  pow- 
ers of  the  mind,  and  guard  against  every  cause  of 
its  imbecillity  ; he  will  avoid  as  much,  as  may  be^ 
too  long  continued,  too  intense,  and  too  uni- 
form, thinking  ; and  unseasonable  watdiing  ; 
and,  to  all  this,  adding,  such  rational  views  of 
God  and  religion,  as  will  infallibly  inspire  the 
most  reverent  love  of  the  Deity,  and  the  most  ge- 
nerous and  disinterested  benevolence  toward  man  ; 
he  will  have  ereCted  as  strong  a fortification  against 
the  assaults  of  insanity,  both  from  bodily  and 
mental  causes,  as  it  is  in  the  power  of  human  pru- 
dence to  iTuse. 


Printedby  B.  M'Millan,  7 

Bow  Street,  Coveat  Garden.  S 


- • • «. 


.• 


< 


, TV  y? . ■'^ 


• :K 


h^'.K 


' : 


^ -i-; 


» . 


.^*1  t • I * . w«  • 


% " 


•i?. 


r i . 

0 


i •’ 


'Vt 


• r. 


<< 


ry 


I 

t 


’.'  H. , li 


X 


\ *w 


'r* 


<’■ ' 


S'  ■ 


r 


' ^ w * 


.■*  **  -'  ^ ' 

^ / 


• • % ' 


■•X  ■ 1 *.  . f 

» ^ ‘ ‘ .-tt 


•'V* 

jr.-K.. 


>-  I 

’ f f*  y* 


,5t 


»,  ' T^*'  .J  . f'- 


w>* 


" 4 ; 


i h 

^ \ 


■'if  • ' 


r 


>"• 


■'  y 

V.  t V 


VT  ,,. 


I 


r I 


9L. 

\ ■ . 


V 


* W . 


*^.0\ 


\ * 


V- 


If 


• » 


ft 

k'i. 


, 1 

I * 

I 


4 


4 


f 


f 


r 


\ 


