OBSERVATIONS 

O     N  T     H  E 

NATURE,    KINDS,  CAUSES, 
AND    PREVENTIO?^  OF 

INSANITY, 

.LUNACY, 

OR 

MADNESS. 


By  Thomas  Arnold, 


VO'L.     I.  ■[J^(l<S:^',' 

CONTAINING  I'' T  <'^>y/ 


OBSERVATIONS  ON    TH£    NATURE,     AND  V"7WMXWXS- 
KINDS  OF  INSANITY. 

7(X  nsfji  Tuv  7r^ayf/,UTCDV  'Soyf/.oira. 

EpicTETI  Enchirid.  Cap.  X. 

are   not   dijlurlcd    hy  things  thc7nfelves  ;    hv.t  hy  the 
opimons  ivhich  they  form  co?icerning  them. 

And  moody  Madnefs  laughing  wild 

Amid  feveieft  woe.  Gray. 

LEICESTER: 

fRINTED    BY    G.    IRELAND,    FOR  G.    ROBI.N'SON,    tN  PATER.* 
NOSTER-ROkV,    AND   T.    CADELL,    IN    THE  STRAND, 
lONDON,  M.PCC.LXXX:Iv 


Eumenidum  veluti  demens  videt  agmina  PEWTHEtrs, 

Et  folem  geminum,  &  duplices  fc  oftendere  Thebas  : 

Aut  Agamemnonius  fcenis  agitatus  Orestes, 

Armatam  facibus  matrem  &  fcrpcntlbus  atris 

Cum  fugit,  ultricefque  fedent  in  limine  Dirae. 

ViKGiLii  jEneidos,  Lib.  IV.  r.  469, 

Z/^^  Pentheus,  nxjhen,  diJlraElednxiithhisfear^ 

He  favj  two  funs^  and  double  Thebes  appear^ 

Or  mad  Orestes,  ivhcn  his  mother's ghoji 

Full  in  his  face  infernal  torches  toji  \ 

Andjhoek  her  fnaky  locks  :  he  Jhuns  the  Jight^ 

Flies  o'er  the  Jlage,  furprized  ivith  mortal fright ; 

The  furies  guard  the  door^  and  intercept  his  flight, 

Drydsn's  Virgil. 


PREFACE. 


IT  is  with  much  diffidence  that  I- 
offer  to  the  public  the  following 
obfervations.  They  were  written  at 
intervals,  in  the  midft  of  many  in- 
terruptions from  profeffional,  and  o- 
ther  neceffary  engagements  ;  and  con- 
tain but  a  lliort,  and  imperfe^:  inqui- 
ry, on  a  fubjeft,  whichis  of  too  much 
confequence  to  mankind  not  to  merit  a 
full,  and  accurate  invefligation.  But 
whatever  may  be  their  defe£ls,  they 
have  at  leaft  the  merit  of  beine  found- 
e^d  on  obfervation,  and  experience  :  and 
though  they  offer  but  merely  the  out- 
lines of  an  important  obje(El,  it  is  not 
the  chimerical  delineation  of  an  imagi- 
nary form  which  they  exhibit ;  it  is 

not 


PREFACE. 


not  a  fancy-piece  ;  but  a  real  copy,  how 
little  foever  it  may  difcover  the  hand 
of  a  mafter,  drawn  with  fome  care  and 
cxa£tnefs  immediately  from  nature. 

As  it  is  not  every  painter  who  can 
give  a  juft,  and  linking  reprefentation 
of  his  original ;  fo  I  am  fenfible  that  it 
is  not  every  one  who  pretends  to  be  an 
obferver  of  nature,  who  can  difcern  her 
genuine  and  chara£leriftic  features  ;  or 
make  a  true  copy  of  them  for  the  ufe, 
and  information  of  others.  How  far  I 
have  fucceeded,  in  this  refpeft,  muft 
be  left  to  the  decifion  of  the  few  who 
have  had  the  opportunity,  and  poiTefs 
the  abilities,  of  being  well  informed  in 
this  matter. 

The  definitions,  and  the  arrange- 
ment, 


PREFACE. 


ment,  of  the  feveral  fpecies,  and  vari- 
eties, of  Infanity,  have  at  leaft  a  claim 
to  novelty :  and  I  flatter  myfelf  that, 
while  they  convey  to  the  reader  clear, 
and  diftind,  ideas,  relative  to  a  difor- 
der  which  has  hitherto  been  very  im- 
perfe<£l:ly  underilood,  and  of  courfe  ve- 
ry inaccurately  defined,  they  will  be 
found  to  polTefs  a  kind  of  merit,  which 
ought  ever  to  hold  the  firll  place  in  all 
our  medical  refearches,  that  of  leading 
to  greater  certainty,  and  precifion,  in 
our  knowledge  of  the  diforder,  and  to 
greater  efficacy  in  our  methods  of  cure. 

This  part  of  the  work  I  have  en« 
deavoured  to  execute  according  to  the 
ideas  of  Sydenham  ;  to  whofe  recom- 
mendation "  that  every  difeafe  ihould 

"  be 


PREFACE. 


be  reduced  to  certain,  and  determi- 
nate  fpecies,  with  the  fame  care,  and 
accuracy,  with  which  we  fee  botanill 
*f  define,  and  arrange,  the  fpecies  of 
vegetables,  we  are  indebted  for 
the  valuable  performances,  in  this  way, 
of  S^^uvAOEs,  LiNNiEUs,  VoGEL,  and 
CuLLEN,  writers  of  the  firft  chara61er 
in  the  medical  world,  who  have  taken 
an  extenfive  ransre  throuah  the  whole 
field  of  difeafes ;  and  v/h  jfe  fuccefsful 
labours  in  this,  and  other  branches  of 
medicine,  in  chemillry,  and  in  natural 
Iiiilory,  will  carry  down  iheir  names 
with  honour  to  the  lateft  polkrity. — 
My  enquiries  of  this  kind  take  a  lefs 
ambitious  fcope,  and  are  content  to  be 
confined  within  the  narrow  boundaries 

of 


*  O^era  Univerfa,  Frafaiio,  p.  J  3. 


PREFACE 


V 


OT  one  difeafe:  and  I  (hall  efteem  my- 
feif  bappy,  if  a  mere  limited  attention, 
joined  to  careful  obfervation,  and  dili- 
gent ailiduity,  iliall  enable  me,  like 
the  inferior  ilatuary    of  Horace, | 
to   exprefs  with    accuracy  the  hairs, 
and   the   nails,    though    lefs  fitted 
to  defign  and  execute  a  greater  work  ; 
and  if  while  ihay  acquire  immortal  re» 
putation  by  defining,  and  reducing  to 
order,  the  whole  catalogue  of  difeafes, 
I  may  have  the    good  fortune  to  la- 
bour with  fucccfs,  and  approbation,  in 
my  lelTfc^r  department,  and  to  advance, 
if  but  a  few  tteps,  farther  than  my  il- 
lullrious  predecefTors,  in  the  knowledge 
of  a  diforder,  which  I  have  made  it  my 
peculiar  province  to  cultivate,  and  im- 
prove. I 

\  De  Arte  Poctica.  v,  32 


vi 


PREFACE. 


I  am  fenfible,  indeed,  that  my  e- 
numeration,  and   definitions,  of  the 
feveral  fpecies,  and  varieties^  of  Infa- 
nity,  are  ftill  very  incomplete ;  and 
that  in  fome  inftancesthey  may  poifi- 
bly  be  erroneous.   Farther  experience, 
and  obfervation,  may  enable  me  to 
correal  errors,  and  to  fupply  deficien- 
cies :  and  as  truth,  and  the  advance- 
pient  of  ufeful  knowledge,   are  the 
chief  objedts  of  my  inquiries,  I  fhall 
always  have  improvement  in  view  ; 
and  fliall  never  fcruple  to  add,  or  to 
retrench, — to  correct,  or  to  retra6l, — 
as  longer  experience,    and  more  exad; 
obfervation,  fhall  fuggeft. 

Though  this  kind  of  arrano;e- 
ment  of  difeafes,  recommended  by 
Sydenham,  and  attempted  by  the  a- 

bove- 


PREFACE,  vii 

bovementioned  eminent  writers,  is  an 
imitation  of  the  botanical  arrangement 
invented  by  modern  naturalifts,  and 
now  fo  greatly  improved  by  the  won- 
derful induftry,  and  comprehenfive 
genius,  of  the  late  illuftrious  Lin- 
naeus ;  yet  it  ought  to  be  remember- 
ed that  difeajes  are  incapable  of  that 
permanent  uniformity  of  charadler, 
and  of  that  exadnefs  of  difcriminati- 
on,  which  fo  much  facilitates  the  dif- 
tindlion,  and  arrangement,  of  plants 
and  animals  :  and  that  while  the 
two  latter  can  only  be  mixed,  and 
confounded,  to  a  certain  degree,  by 
the  production  of  hyhtid^  or  mule 
fpecies,  which  are  far  from  being 
common,  or  numerous,  and  are 
incapable  of  propagating  their  kind  ; 
difeafes  may  be  combined  in  an  infinite 

variety 


viii 


PREFACE. 


variety  of  degrees,  and  proportions^ 
and  varied  without  end. 

This  neceffary  inconvenience  no 
care,  or  attention,  can  obviate  :  but 
there  is  another,  and  accidental  one, 
into  which  Sauvages  has  frequently 
run,  which  might  readily  be  avoided  ; 
and  that  is,  the  not  adhering  ftridly 
to  the  Linnsean  method,  of  diftin- 
guidilngthe  fpecies  by  proper  fpecific 
definitions.  Inftead  of  thus  diftin- 
guifhing  them,  he  has  fometimes  ta- 
ken the  name,  and  the  diftindlion, 
folely  from  an  internal  caufe,  which 
could  feldom  be  difcov^ered  earlv  in 
the  diforder,  and  which  in  many  ca- 
fes could  not  be  certainly  known  till 
after  the  death  of  the  patient.  But 
as  fome  uniform,  and  permanent,  dif- 
ferences. 


PREFACE.  ix 

fcrences,  in  the  number,  pofition,  and 
form,  of  certain  parts,  conftitute  the 
only  proper  generic,  and  fpecific,  d;f~ 
tuidions,  of  plants;  fo  fome  obvious, 
and  eiTcntial  differences  in  fymptoms, 
are  the    only  ready,    and  infallible 
means,    of  diftino^uifhins  diforders  : 
the  diftindtion  from  caufes  being  ex- 
ceedingly vague,  and  uncertain  :  and 
though  the  knowledge  of  caufes  be  of 
the  greatefl:  importance  in  the  cure  of 
difeafes,  the  introduction  of  them  in- 
to the  fpecific  definitions ,  or  other- 
wife  employing  them  to  diftinguifh 
the  fpecies, — to  the  negled  of  definiti- 
ons drawn  from  the  obvious  and  ef- 
fential   fymptoms, — ferves   rather  to 
confufe  than  to  inform  ;   and  unnecef- 
farily  multiplies  fpecies  to  an  amazing 
degree.    Cafes  ought  to  be  enumera- 

^  ted 


X 


PREFACE. 


tedj  as  far  as  they  arc  known  ;  but  let 
thenfi  be  enumerated  in  their  proper 
places  ;  and  never  enter  into  the  de- 
finition either  of  genus,  or  fpecies,  un- 
lefs  where  they  are  perfecflly  obvious, 
and  no  obvious,  permanent,  and  ef- 
fential  fymptoms,  can  be  difcovered. 
An  arrangement  of  difeafes  formed 
upon  a  plan  of  exadl  adherence  to  fuch 
a  method,  might  be  attended  with 
much  difficulty,  and  trouble,  in  the 
execution  ;  but  would,  I  apprehend, 
abundantly  repay  the  labour  beftowed 
upon  it,  by  its  fimplicitj,  accuracy, 
and  practical  utility. 

W  I  T  H  a  view  to  illufirate  the  fpe- 
cies, I  have  fubjoined  a  confiderable 
number  of  particular  hiftories  of  In- 
fanity,  tranfcribed  from  pradlical  wri- 
ters. 


PREFACE. 


XI 


ters.  It  was  often  difficult,  and  fome- 
tinics  impoflible,  to  find  fuch  as  exact- 
ly correfponded  with  my  definitions  ; 
owing  to  the  frequent  combination  of 
fymptomsj  already  mentioned.  For 
this  reafon,  fonie  of  my  fpecies  will  be 
jound,  perhaps,  but  imperfed;ly  illuf- 
trated  by  the  hiflorics  adduced  ;  and 
otherrj  will  be  unaccompanied  with  any 
hiftory,  becaufe  I  could  meet  with  none 
that  would  in  any  tolerable  way  an- 
fwer  my  purpofe. 

For  the  convenience  of  fuch  of  my 
readers  as  may  be  not  at  all,  or 
but  imperfedly  acquainted,  with  any 
other  language  befides  their  own,  I  have 
given  tranfiations  of  the  pafTages  quoted 
from  Greek,  Latin,  or  French  writers. 
Why  I  have  left  a  few  untranflated,  will 
be  obvious  to  the  learned  reader. 


xii  PREFACE. 

A  s,  in  the  courfe  of  my  reading,  I 
have  frequently  experienced  much  in- 
convenience ;  often  a  great  wafie,  and 
fometimes  a  total  lofs,  both  or  time,  and 
labour  ;  by  a  loofe,  and  negligent  mode 
of  reference  from  one  author  to  another; 
an  imperfeftion  from  which  the  referen- 
ces even  in  the  ineiUmable  writings  of 
the  accurate  M  ORG  AG  N  I,  and  the  no 
lefs  accurate  Haller,  are  not  perfectly 
free  ;  I  have  not  only  been,  in  general, 
fo  full  in  my  references,  as  to  render 
them  as  extenfively  applicable  as  may 
be  to  the  various  editions  ;  but  have  al- 
io drawn  up,  for  the  emolument  of  the 
learned  reader,  a  catalogue  of  the  prin- 
cipal books  quoted,  or  referred  to,  with 
an  account  of  the  editions  made  ufe  of, 
in  thefe  obfervations. 


LEICESTER, 

Feb.  23.  178::. 


CONTENT 


SECTION  I. 
Introduction,  p.  i. 
SECTION  II. 

Whether  Insanity  prevails  more  in  Eng- 
land than  In  other  Countries^        p.  15 

SECTION  III. 

Of  the  Definition  and  Arrangement 
^Insanity.      -       -      p.  29 — 324. 

A  Table  of  the  Species  of  Insanity,  p,  124 

I.  IDEAL    INSANITY  -  125 

1.  Phrenitic  Insanity.    -   -  125 

2.  Incoherent  ■    -    -  136 

3.  Maniacal         «  '  ■      *  144 

4.  Sen. 


xiv  CONTENTS. 

4.  Sensitive  Insanity  -  158 
II.  NOTIONAL  INS  ANITY  172 

5.  Delusive  Insanity    -       -  172 

6.  Fanciful   ^95 

Whimsical—   -  199 

8.  Impulsive   -  207 

p.  Scheming  —   -     -  216 


10.  Vain,  or 
Self-Impor- 

TANT 

11.  Hypochon- 
driacal 


217 


220 


12.  Pathetic      —  .  235 

(1)  Amorous  Infanity      -    -  -  239 

(2)  Jealous  .— —  ,        -  243 

C3)  Avaricious                -  -  245 

(4)  Mifanthropic  ^"   /         -  247 

(5)  Arrogant 


CONTENTS.  XV 


(5)  Arrogant  Infanity       -  -  251 

(6)  Irafcible                  -  -  252 

(7)  Abhorrent                 -  -  25^ 

(8)  Sufpicious               T.     .-  -  255 

(9)                                 -  -  255 

(10)  Timid     "            -  -  25.7' 

(11)  Sorrowful               -  -  260 

(12)  Dijirefsful*            -  -  s6i 

(13)  Nofalgic   •       -  -  265 

(14)  (16)    SuperflitiouSy  fanatical, 
and  defponding  Infanity       -  -  273 

(14)  Superflitious — '   -  282 

(15)  Fanatical           •       -  -  285 

( 1 6)  'Defponding  ■»  -  -  306 
13.  Appetitive  Insanity*  ^ii 


On  a  revifal  of  the  enfuing  fheets,  feveral 
errors,  chiefly  literal,  have  been  obferved. 
The  following  are  the  moft  material. 


5  1.  19.  read  whence  ofteK  arofe 
8  1.  \  if.  for  pur  rf^^/ per 

^3  1  4.  this— —  ♦Hdfir 

a 6  1  21.  read  in  the  Icls,  &c. 
22,  for  in  read  on 

28  1  21  it  its 

37  1  14  fometim*;  fometimte 

39.1  ^'gy^^y^  —   .■  oi(ji^iY^ 

40  1  20  qe  be 

46  I    I  cognitationi         ■  cogitation^ 

4$  1  II  pdlages— — -pafles 

60  1    7  have  had 

^2  1    4 — : — faculties——^  operation* 

66  1    2  better.--  .little  better 

7S  ^  ^5 — ' — a(5live  ■      g  actual 
84  1  20  dele  an 

90  1    7  for  Qmnes  omnium 
1 10  1    5  dele  moft 

^31  1  2$  for    cig«.cr«-  cpfya-i 

155  1  10  SwePFTJSTJRGH  SWEDENBORC 

1 68  1    9  projiccrat  projiceret 

T^i  1    I  perfpecuity   PJ^C'tp.ic.MfQ^ 

236  1  23  dele  even 

338  1  16  for  noftolgic  noftalgic 

332  1  24  pallucid  pelluced 

In  fcveral  places  for  ideotifm  read  Idiot  fm  ;  and  for  ScHBNCHIUS 
read  Schbnckivs. 


SECTION  L 


INTRODUCTION. 

AMIDST  the  many  lifcful  difcovcrlcS 
and  improvements  which  the  fcverat 
branches  of  medical,  as  well  as  every  other 
fpccies  of  knowledge,  have  for  the  three  laft 
Centuries  been  continually  receiving,  as  the 
ilatural  confequcnce  of  that  facility  with 
which  fcience  has  been  diffufed  fnicc  the 
happy  invention  of  the  art  of  printing  :  — 
but  more  efpecially,  amidll:  the  rapid  and  al- 
moft  daily  accnmnlation  of  medical  fcience  ^ 
for  the  laft  hundred  and  ten  or  twenty 
years^  fincc  the  cftablifhraent  of  philofophi« 
eal  focictics,  *  and  the  publication  of  lite- 

A  tivy 

*  Thf  Ettglijh  Roydl  Society  may  date  its  commeHCcmerit  frorfi 
tlie  meetings  of  Ibme  learned  men  at  Dr.  Wilkins'i  lodg- 
ings in  Wadham  College  in  Oxford,  about  th*  year  1645  ;  wliicli 
they  continued  without  intermiffion  till  the  year  1658,  when  be- 
ing difperfed,  they  aftcrwirdi  renewed  their  meetings  in  Lon- 
don, and  from  that  time  ufually  aflembled  a;t  Grrfiam  College  ^ 
and  were  incorporated  under  the  title  of  the  Royal  Society  by 
Letters  Patent  from  King  Charles  the  Sfccond  in  the  year  ibboi 
Spratt's  Hijii  of  the  Royal  Society. — The  Society  began  to 

publifh  its  Tranfaffions  in  1665*  Haller. 

The  Reyal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris  was  firft  cftablifhcd  by 

Gtelcr  of  Lewis  XlVth;  in  1666  ;  but  not  incorporated  till  i69gj 


4  INTRODUCTION. 


rary  journals,  §  have  not  only  much  incrcafcd 
that  facility  of  difFufion,  but  have  greatly 
contributed  to  the  advancement  of  found 
jphilofophy,  by  promoting  a  free  and  liberal 
fpirit  of  inquiry  ;  in  conlcquencc  of  vi'hich, 
the  whimfical  invention?  of  a  childifli  and  un- 
diciplincd  fancy  have  been  taught  to  give 
M'-ay  to  the  fcvcrefb  inductions  of  correifl  and 
manly  reafoning  from  fa£ts  and  experi- 
ments :  amidfl  fuch  large  and  fplendid 

acquihtions  of  knowledge,  it  is  matter  of 
furprifc,  that  the  moft  important  branches 
•of  the  Healing  Art^ — the  Hijtory  of  Difsafes, — 
and  thc^  Method  of  curing  them, —  fhould  have 
hitherto  received  fo  little  proportional  im- 
provement, 

O  F 

See  "HiJIoire  du  Renowdlement  dtV Academle  Reyale  dts  Scienct  tn 
1699,  Ics  Eloges  HiJlgriquiSy  &c.  par  M.  dc  Fontinilli, 
Toln  I.  p.  27. 

The  Accadtmia  del?  Cmento  at  Florence  wai  inftitutcd  in 
1657  by  Leopold,  Grand  Duke  of  Tufcany  j  and  began  to  pub- 
lifh  in  1667. 

Th«  Ephemiridcs  .Natura  Curioforum  were  firft  prcfuntcd  to 
th«  world  in  1670. 

§  Tht  Journal  JeS  Sca^^aascQxnmtv^ctA.\m(3^C^,  and  has  witk 
little  interrQption,  continued  tor  above  a  hundred  yean. 

The  Ac}a  Erudltoni?ii  oi  Lcipfic,  firft  make  their  appearance 
In  1682,  and  are  now  continued  under  the  new  title  01  C»nf 
iHiHtarii  dt  rehus  infcitntU  naturaU  vS"  rt  mtdica  grjlis. 


INTRODUCTION.  3,, 


O  F  this  veiy  fmall  acccflion  to  praftical 
improvement,  we  have  no  where,  perhaps,  a, 
more  remarkable  inftance,  than  ui  that  clafj, 
of  dilbrders  which  is  the  objc(5t  of  my  pre- 
fcnt  confidcration.     Little,  very  little,  has 
been  communicated  to  the  world  on  this  im- 
portant fubjeit,  by  modern  writers.  They 
who  have  been  obliged  to  treat  of  it,  as  a 
matter  of  courfe,  in  delivering  a  regular  lyi- 
tcm  of  medic.1l  practice,  have  for  the  moflpart 
given  little  clfe  but  mere  compilation,  and 
havealmoft  wholly  borrowed,  either  dire^lly  or 
indiredlly,  from  the  truly  practical  writings 
of  the  anticnt  Greek  and  RoniAn  phyficians. 
And  if  at  any  time  a  man  of  Icicncc  and 
obfcrvation,   quitting  the  trite  and  illiberal 
praftice  of  tranfcribing,  and  retailing,  what 
is  alreidv  to  be  found  in  almoft  cvcrv  author 
who  has  gone  before  him,  and  of  \vriting  a. 
Hew  treat'ije  which  fliall  contain  not  a  finglc 
article      new  matter ^  has  ventured  to  t]iro\y 
out  fomc  original  fails,  or  to  hazard  fcime. 
new  and  ingenious  reflexions,  tending  to  open, 
our  views,  and  fpread  a  clearer  light  over 
jhc  nature  of  thcfc  obftinatc  and  obfcurc  dif- 
Qrdcrs  of  our  bell  and  noblcft  faculties,  they 

A  z,  have 


^  INTRODUCTION. 


hare  ufually  been  few  and  folitary,  and  a- 
midfl  the  more  plentiful  remains  of  antiqui?- 
Xy,  as  Virgil  fpcaks  on  another  occaiion, 

Apparent  rari  nantes  in  gurgite  vaflo.  '* 

And,  to  add  to  our  mortification,  we  havo 
not  been  fo  happy  a$  to  retain  all  that  the  an- 
ticnts  knew  on  this  important  fubjcft  ;  hav- 
ing loft  their  mofl;  general,  and,  if  we  may 
believe  them,  fcarcely  ever  failing  method  of 
pure,  f 

EXTRA- 

f  It  will  be  obvious  to  every  one  vvbo  1«  but  {lightly  acquainted 
with  medical  inatteis,  or  has  the  iinallclV  tamlliarity  with  the 
Greek  and  Latin  ClKiiics,  that  I  here  alKidc  ta  the  noted  method 
of  curii:g  thefe  difoiders  by  the  Ufe  o  f  Hellebore  ;  TlIoJI  Art,  to 
which  the  moderns,  v^rho  have  written  much  to  little  purpofc  a- 
bout  the  thing,  have  at  lead  the  merit  of  giving  n  name, — and 
which  is  now  pretty  generally  known  by  the  title  of  Hclkbsrifm. 
Ofthe  greet  deal  that  has  been  laid  upon  the  fubject,  I  ihali  content 
mvfelf  at  prefent  with  a  fe-xv  Extracls  ; — One  Irom  the  lcarn«d 
and  elegant  Dr.  Lorry's  cpiflle  to  his  friend  Dr.  Le  Monmer 
prefixed  to  his  treatife  De  Melancholia^ — a  book  which  contains 
much  excellent  matter  both  o/^^and  ne-j:,  but  which  it  obfcurcd, 
and  rendered  oflefs  value,  by  an  indulgence  in  too  minute  a 
theory,  and  too  fervilc  an  attachment  to  the  doftrines  and  hy- 
pothefes  o,f  the  antients  ; — my  other  extra^s  lliall  conhft  of  a 
few  paflages,  out  of  the  many  that  might  be  brought  together, 
alluding  to  this  pradice,  from  fcveral  of  the  Claflical  vvritcri  of 
antiquity. 

*'Meminifti  porro,  fays  Dr.  Lorry,  in  felicibus  illii  colloquiii, 
quibus  jam  frui  vix  dutur,  aCfum  fa^pius  inter  nos  fuilfc  de  me- 
lancholia ;  non  unam  efle  ejus  naiuram  facpius  diximu*>;  alteram 
fcilicct  legil3us  icgi  itque  adniiuiftrari  mcchaRici#  advcrtcbamus ; 

alteriui 


INTRODUCTION.  ^ 


Extraordinary  as  this  ftationary,  if 
not  indeed  retrograde  flate  of  medical  know- 
ledge 

altcrius  mirebamur  effcdus,  noii  folum  omncm  judicH  captuin 
fuperantes,  fed  &  vidgarem  ordincni  phylicarum  leguin  eluden- 
tes.  Uude  fa;pc  inccrta  medendi  methodus  &  tltubantis  artis 
tacitus  timor.  AiEtura  etiam  inter  noi  dc  veterum  Hellbborismo, 
mifcrrimaqut  hodiernorum  Lifanorum  forte,  quos  nimlura  ars  de- 
dignatur,  dum  mavult  impotens  dici,  quam  anxice  atquc  delicatae 
curatiouls  fuftidia  tolerare.  Ncc  minus  tamen  flupebauuis  «nti- 
quiores  medicos  paffim  de  eorum  fanaticne,  tanquam  de  arts 
yuLGATissiMA  loquentes."    Tom.  I.   p.  X. 

Tou  rimcmhcr  too^  that  in  thofc  delightful  converfations,  which 
ive  have  no-vj  hut  little  opportimi'y  of  enji>yi>ig,  ive  freejueatly  confider- 
td  the  fiihjedl  rf  Melancholy ;  -zve  agreed  that  it  ivas  of  more  than  one 
kind;  and  obferved  that  ivhile  one  ivas  gcverned  and  regulated 
hy  niccbat^ical  la-Ms;  another  appeared  ixjotiderful  in  its  effeSls,  and 
not  only  beyond  our  comprchenfions,  hut  out  of  the  reach  of  the  com~ 
man  order  of  phyfcal  la-ivs.  IVljence  arofe  a?i  uncertain  method  of 
ture,  and  a  fecret  diflrufi  of  an  art  fo  little  fccure  o  f  the  fuccefs  of 
its  proceedings.  J'Fe  confderedy  Uke^vife  the  Hellesokisu  of  the 
antients,  and  the  unhappy  lot  of  the  modern  Insane,  on  ivhom  art 
hejlo-ivs  too  little  of  its  regard,  ivhile  it  chufcs  rather  to  acquiefce 
in  the  charge  of  impo.tency,  than  to  undertake  the  difagreeahle  office 
t  f  attempting  a  cure  which  mujlhe  accompaniedivith  the  moji  anxious 
feelings,  and  require  the  minutefi  attention.  Nor  did  it  appear  lefs 
wonderful,  that  the  antient  phyficiatis  fhould  on  all  occafions  fpeakof 
thir  cure  as  of  an  art  universally  known. 

— —  Vide  etiam  Mehcubialis  -varior.  Legion,  lib.  2. 
cap,  35,  Opufc.  Aureor,  p. 

The  Latin  Poeti  frequently  allude  to  this  noted  method  o£ 
*^""og  Inlanity ;  and  of  fuch  fpecific  virtue  wai  Hellebore 
cfteemed  for  clearmg  and  invigorating  the  intelleaual  facultiei, 
that  It  was  not  unfrequently  ufcd  by  men  who  were  engaged  ia 
literary  and  philofopkical  purfuits,  as  will  prefcntly  be  feen  from 
fLiNY  and  AuLus  Gellius,  with  a  view  to  ftrengthcn  the 
Hnderltanduig,  and  to  prepare  it  for  the  nicer  part»  of  conipcntion, 

•  the 


6  INTRODUCTION. 


ledge  in  thcfc  diforders  may  feem  ;  it  will, 
perhaps,  appear  lefs  wonderful,  if  we  conii^ 
dcr,  that  their  peculiar  nature  has  neceflarily 

confined 

tine  more  difficult  rcfcarchcs  of  critical  inquiry,  or  the  more  ac- 
curate inveftigation  ol  moral  or  metapliyfical  truth. 

Horace  alludes  to  it,  on  feveral  occafions,  as  a  well  known 
PraiSlice.    Speaking  of  a  happy  madman,  he  fays,   

Hie  ubi  cognatorum  opibus  curifque  refeftus, 
Expulk  Eli<ebro  morbum  bilenique  meraco, 
Et  rcdit  ad  fefe  :  Pol  me  occldilUs,  amlci, 
Non  fervalti*,  alt  ;  - 

Epijl.  2.  Lib,  11.  Y.  136, 

He,  iKihen  hh  friends,  at  much  expence  and  pains. 
Had  amply  purged  •xvith  Msi,leeore  .6/.f  brains. 
Come  to  himfelf —  "  Ah  !  cruel  friends  !  he  cried y 
*'  Is  this  tofs've  me  ?  Better  far  have  died^ 
*'  Than  thus  he  rohVd  of  pleafiirc  fo  refndy 
^'  The  dear  delvjion  of  a  raptur'd  mind." 

Francis, 

In  another  place,  to  cxprefs  a  great  degree  of  madncfs,  he 
fays  •  

 trlbus  Anticyris  caput  Infanabile  — 

De  Arte  Poetic,  v.  300. 

—  A  Head  fo  diferdered  as  not  to  It  curable  fven  hy  thru 

Anticyras.  ■  

—  the  Iflandi  of  Anticyra,  of  which  there  were  only  t«o, 
being  famous  for  producing  great  plenty  of  Hellebore,  and  for 
the  cure  of  this  diforder  by  a  judicious  and  fafe  exhibition  ot  fa 
herculean  a  remedy. 

In  ouc  of  his  Satires,  in  which  he  co|)ioufly  illullr.itcs  the 
"»  §tolc»i 


INTRODUCTION.  f 


confined  the  treatment  of  them,  and  confc- 
quently  the  information  which  experience  a- 
lone  is  capable  of  affording,  to  a  few  indivi- 

duah  J 

Stolen!  doctrine,  "  that  all  are  mad  who  arc  not  wife  and  vir* 
luoKS,"  — are  the  following  pafTages  ;  — • 

"  Danda  eft  Elleeori  multo  pars  maxima  avnrii  : 
Nefcio  an  Anticyram  ratio  illis  dcftinet  omnem." 

Sat.  3.  Lib.  II.  V.  8% 

Mifirs  male  whoJs  Anticyr  A  their  oivn  t 
Its  Hellebore's  rcfcrv* d for  them  alone, 

FlANCIij 

*  Vcrum  ambltiofvis  &  audax. 

Nayiget  Anticyram. 

lb,  V,  165, 

if  your  ireaj?  vrith  hold  amhition  gloKVS^ 
Set  fnilivhere  Hellebore  abundant  grows, 

Francis. 

Ovid,  in  the  fourth  Book  of  his  *^  Etijioloe  ex  Ponto"  itx 
ttic  conclulion  of  the  third  Epiftic,  hai  the  tollowing  lines  j  — > 

*'  Littu*  ad  Euxlnum,     quls  mihi  diccret,  ibis, 

Et  metues  arcu  nc  feriare  Gctae  ; 
I,  blbc,  dixiflem,  purgantcs  pcftora  fuccos  : 

Quicquid  &  in  toto  nafcltur  Anticyra." 

To  Pontus  thou  JJmlt  gOy  n.i^hoc'er  had /aid. 

And  dread  the  ivound  from  Get  an  boiv  that  flies  % 

Go  purge y  I  had  replied,  and  clear  thy  head^ 
Go  drink  ivhate'er  Anticyra fupplies. 

Perseus  alludes  to  this  celebrated  medicine  for  purging  the 
brain,  and  curing  madnefs,  in  the  fixtecnth  verfe  of  his  fourth 
Satire,  where  the  tclU  Nero,  that,  inftcad  of  taking  upon  hlro- 

felf 


6  INTRODUCTION. 


duals ;  and  that  of  thofc  few,  hy  far  thd 
grcatcft  number,  have  unfortunately  been 
almoft  totalljr  ignorant  of  nacdical  matters^ 

For 

felf  the  gtcat  and  weighty  talk  of  govcrninent,  which  dtfmandi 
much  experience,  and  found  judgment,  he  ought  lathcr  to  take 
the  moft  powerful  medicines  to  clear  his  underllanding  — 

*  *'  Anticyras  meUor  forbere  meracas." 

TJyou  hajl  not  Jlrength  fuch  labours  tofujlain  : 
J[)n«,J  Helleeore^  my  hoy  ^  drink  deep  and  purge  thy  hralm 

Dryden. 

Pliny,  In  his  natural  hiftory,  gl\'e»  a  pretty  long  account 
of  both  kinds  of  Hell  EBORE  ;  from  which  a  fhort  extract  will 
fcrve  to  illuftrate  what  haS  been  already  quoted  above. — '•'•'Nigruni 
(Hellcbori  Genus)  purgat  pur  inferna.  Candidum  autem  vo- 
mitione,  ctufafque  morborum  extrahit,  quondam  terribile,  pof- 
tea  tam  promifcuumj  ut  pleriquc  ftudiorum  gratia  ad  pervidenda 
flcrius  qua*  commentabantur,  fa;piu»  fumptitaverint.  Carma- 
DEM  refponfurum  Z  eon  is  Libria  :  Drufum  quoc]ue  apud  nos  — - 
conftat  hoc  medicamento  liberatum  comitiali  morbo  in  Anti- 
CY  R  A  infula*  Ibi  enim  tutiffime  fumitur,  quoniam  (ut  dlximus) 
Befamoiiti  admlfcent." 

Lib.  25.  c.  5  p.  457. 

**  Black  Hellebore ^  ftool.  White  Helle- 
bore aHsbv  'Vomitings  and  expels  the  cctufcs  of  difeafes ;  it  ivas  for- 
itierly  dreaded ds  a  violent  medicine;  hut  its  ufe  in  time  hecame  fo  fa- 
miliar^ that  it  ivas  common  for  men  ofjludy  to  take  it  frequently,  i* 
order  ti  Jharpen  the  faculties,  and  tiiable  them  ?nore  clearly  to  compri* 
bend  the  ivhole  extent  of  their  fuhjeH.  CarneadbS  took  Hellebore 
•Lvhen preparing  to  anfiver  the  ivritings  of  Xi^o  and  are  af- 
fured  that  our  countryman  Drusus — -was  freed  from  the  ^filepjy^ 
hy  the  7ife  of  this  medicin*  in  the  ijland  of  An  t  I  c  y  R  a  ;  ivhere  it  is 
iakcn  ivith  moji  fafety,  in  confequence  of  their  mixing  viithity  as  I 
k4vt  formtrly  obfervtd^  the  herb  Sefamoides 


INTRODUCTidN. 


For  as  Iilfaiiity  of  every  fpecies^  befideS  th^ 
exhibition  of  proper  medicines,  and  an  exa6t 
attention  to  regiiilen,  generally  requires  a 
particular  management,  which  cannot  eafily 
be  accompliflied  uithout  an  appropriate  ap-- 
paratus,  a  houfe  adapted  to  the  purpofe^ 
and  fervants  whd  have  been  properly  in- 
,  ftruifled,  and  miich  convcrfant  with  luch. 
kinds  of  patients ;  it  has  always  been  founi 
convenient,  and  frequently  abfolutely  hecef-i 
farVj  to  put  unhappy  fufFeters  of  this  fort^ 
tinder  the  care  of  thofe  perfons,  who^  how- 
ever ill  qualified  as  to  the  knowledge  of  me- 
dicine, are  furnifhcd  with  the  rcquifite  con- 
venicncics  for  their  government  and  fafety, 

B  and 

I  fhall  conclude  this  jolig  note  with  the  folloiv'm^  jjalliige  oil 
the  fame  fiibjeA  from  AuL us  Gellius. — Carneades  aca^" 
Hemicus  Icripturus  aJvcrfuin  ftoici  Zenonis  librot  fuperiora  cor- 
poris HtLLtBORO  candIdo  purgavit,  ne  quid  ex  corruptis  in 
ftomacho  humoribus  ad  domicilia  ulque  animi  tedundaret,  at 
CoNSTANTiAM  ViGOREMQUE  mentis  labefaceret:  taiita  curjt 
tantoque  apjsaratu  vir  inaenio  piasflanti  ad  fefelleftddj  c^ua  fcrip- 
ferat  Zcno  aggreffus  eft. 

CARNfeAriES  the  academic.,  ivtwi  preparing  to  ixnfvjer  the  'ZlH-i', 
tings  of  the  Jloic  Zeno,  purged  himfclf  iip^vards  by  means  of 
White  Hellebore;  that  there  might  he  no  foul  humours  in  his 
Jlnmachto  overflo-zv  the  habitation,  and  injure  the  FIRMNESS  aJio 
YIGOXJR,  of  his  mindl  With  fo  much  care  and  preparation  did  a 
mn  of  excellent  farts  dter  u-^on  the  refutation  c/Zei^o's  writingH 


to  INTRODUCTION. 


and  have  made  it  their  particular  province 
to  undertake  the  confinement  of  the  In- 
sane, whatever  may  be  their  pretenfions, 
or  abihties,  to  cffcd  a  Cure. 

Medic  a  l  people,  therefore,  being  in 
Ji  great  meafure  excluded  from  this  branch  of 
pra6lice,  can  have  little  or  no  valuable  expe- 
rience in  thefe  diforders  ;  and  of  the  few 
'whofe  fituations  have  afforded  ample  room 
for  obfcrvation  in  this  way,  how  fraall  a 
number  have  fcen  it  proper  to  throw  what 
IB  lb  conducive  to  their  private  emolument 
-Into  the  pubHc  flock  i 

J  cannot  hope,  I  do  not  pretend,  in  the 
fmall  compafs  of  this  effay,  to  fupply  thefe 
defefts.  To  give  a  true  and  complete  hifto- 
ry  of  Insanity  in  all  its  variety  of  appear- 
ances,—  to  enter  minutely  and  fpecifically 
'into  the  invcftigation  of  its  caufes,  — to  lay 
down  clear,  exad,  and  fufficicnt  rules  of  pre- 
icention,  —  to  invent,  and  to  delineate  with 
accuracy  and  prccifion,  experienced  and  effi- 
cacious methods  of  cure  in  every  Ipecles  of 
this  difordcr,— would  require  more  than  the 

labour 


INTRODUCTION,  it 


labour  of  one  mau,  or  of  one  age;  and  when- 
ever it  ihall  be  accomplilhed,  muft  be  the 
obje(5l  of  a  much  larger  treatife  than  1  have 
any  thought  of  laymg  before  the  pubhc  at 
prefent.  Hereafter  I  may  encicavour  to  do 
Ibmething  towards  the  complcthig  of  fuch  a 
plan  ;  and  I  am  not  without  hope  that  the 
diligent  obfervation  even  of  one  ma:i,  con- 
duced with  a  fteady  attention  to  fo  great  and 
important  an  object,  may  do  more  than  could 
be  expeftcd  w'hcn  we  take  a  rctrofpe6live 
view  of  the  fmall  advances  that  have  hitherto 
been  made,  in  a  feries  of  ages,  by  the  num- 
bers who  have  had  no  fuch  plan  in  profpcdt  r 
at  lead:  it  is  my  intention,  at  fome  future  pe- 
riod, if  I  have  life  and  health,  to  offer  to  the 
world  as  full,  and  exa6l  a  defcriptioii  of  the? 
Nature,  Caiifes,  and  Cure  of  the  vnr'ious  kindp 
of  Infanity,  its  my  linall  abilities,  aided  by  no 
fmall  experience  in  thefe  deplorable  maladies^ 
will  enable  me  to  execute.— This  cffay  will,, 
in  the  mean  time,  fufficiently  attain  its  end, 
if,  by  acquainting  fuch  of  the  lefs  informed 
part  of  the  public,  whom  it  may  moft  con- 
cern, with  the  great  variety  of  thofe  diforders 
which  are  called  by  the  general  appellation  of 

S  ai  Madne.ss^ 


\z    I  N  T  il  O  D  U  C  T  I  Q  N 


Madness,  Insanity,  or  Lunacy  ;  iria- 
Xiy  of  which,  contrary  to  what  feems  com- 
xnonlj  to  be  imagined,  require  very  different, 
and  fomc  very  oppofitc  methods  of  cure  ;  it 
:(haU  in  any  degree  contribute  to  put  a  flop  to. 
the  ufujil  pradice  of  imprudently  trufting 
theix  unhappy  friends,  who  have  the  misfor- 
tune to  be  affli£lcd  with  fo  various,  terrible, 
and  obftinate  a  difeafe,  to  the  comn^oii  em- 
pirical pradtice  of  indifcriminate  evacuation, 
pot  to  mention  harfli  and  cruel  treatment^  in 

the  hands  of  any  illiterate  pretender  :  • 

and  if,   by  more   clearly  explaining  fome 
points  relative  to  the  nature  and  fymp.toms  of 
Madnefs,  by  enumerating  its,  feveral  caufcs, 
hy  cautioning  againft  fome  which  are  in  a^ 
great  meafuie  in  our  own  power,    and  by 
pointing  out  prob.able  methods  of  preventing 
fo  humiliating  a  degradation  of  our  reafoning 
faculties.,  it  fh,all  no.t  only  tend  to  eradicate 
fome  errors  and  prejudices  relative  to  thefe 
matters,  which  haye  been  deeply  rooted,  and 
almo.ft  uniyerfiUy  approved  and  propagated  ; 
and  confcquently  to  point  out  fome  improve" 
infants  both  in  our  knowledge,  and  pra6lice,r 
\'cliicive  to  this  diforder^  but  (hall  be  fuc- 

cefsfui 


INTRODUCTION.  t^. 


cefsfiil  in  perfuadlng  many  of  my  fellow^ 
creatures  to  that  temperance  and  moderation, 
iu  the  whole  of  their  thoughts  and  condud, 
which  vvill  in  every  rcfpe£l  be  conducive  to. 
their  cafe  and  happinefs,  and  will  almoft  in-- 
faJlibly  fecure  to  them  thofe  greatcft  of  earth- . 
ly  bleffin^s— a  healthful  body,  and  a Jound  mind^ 

It  not  being  the  objcd  of  my  plan  to.  take 
a  gpmplete  view  of  my  lubje£l,  but  only  to 
go  through  an  infpedtion  of  fomc  parts  of  itji. 
and  to  throw  out  a  few  hints  and  obfervations- 
which  1  imagine  may  not  be  altogether  void 
of  utility  ;  I  fhall  depend  much  on  the  can-^^ 
did  indulgence  of  the  intelligent  reader, — 
who  will  not  cxped  a  full  and  elaborate  trea- 
tife,  where  but  a  fhort  effay  was  intended  ; 
which  it  is  prefumed,  may  have  its  value, 
though  mucii  will  ncceffarily,  and  from  the 
very  nature  of  the  dcfign,  be  left  imperfe6l  ;  — 
as  a  rough  Iketch,  containing  only  the  out" 
lines,   and  thofe  but  rudely  marked,  and 
faintly  traced,  of  a  future  painting,  may  not 
be  deftitute  either  of  ufe  or  beauty^  though 
greatly  deficient  in  almofl  every  part,  and 
falling  infinitely  Ihort  of  a  finilhcd  piece. — 


14  INTRODUCTION, 


Such  readers,  therefore,  may  find  much  room 
for  cavilHng,  who  arc  not  difpofcd  to  judge 
with  camdor ;  and  to  whom  the  triumph  of 
literary  oflcntation,  or  the  gratification  of  H- 
terary  malevolence,  can  afford  more  fatisfadi- 
on  than  the  difcovery  of  truth,,  or  the  ad- 
vancement ©f  the  public  good. 

It  may  here  be  proper  to  obferve,  that 
throughout  this  effay,  unlefs  where  otherwife 
exprefled,  I  fhall  ufe  the  words  Madness, 
Insanity,  and  Lunacy,  as  Jynonymous. 
terms  ;  and  as  conveying  the  complex  idea  of 
all.  thofc  difojders,  excepting  fuch  as  fhall 
hereafter  be  mentioned,  in  which  the  facuU 
ties  of  the  mind  are  very  confiderably,  if  not, 
principally,  or  folely  affe£led  ; — in  which  its 
imagination  is  dijlurbed,  its  affeSlions  are  per- 
verted^ and  its  judgment  is  depraved » 


SECTION 


INSANITY  'why 


SECTION  II. 


Whether  Insanity  prtvatis  more  m 
England  ihm  in  other  Countries, 

INSANITY,  cfpecially  of  the  melan- 
choly khid,  has  been  commonly  fuppofed 
to  prevail  fo  much  moire  in  this  ifland  than  in 
any  "other  part  of  Europe,  that  it  has  acquired 
among  foreigners  the  denomination  of  the 
Englijlj  Difeafe.  J  Howjuftly,  might  be  dif- 
ficult 

J  This  opinion  o{  foreigners  that  the  Englifli  are  peculiarly  lia- 
Wt  to  what  he  terms  Ne^-vous  DiftempcrSy  Spleen^  Vapours^  and 
l.o'Mnefs  of  Spirits^  furnifhed  the  late  Dr.  Cheyne  with  the  ti- 
tle of  his  book,  called,  The  English  Malady  ;  the  publica- 
tion of  which  he  had  been  induced,  as  he  tells  u»,  to  haften,  by 

the  late  frequency  and  daily  increafe  of  wanton  and  uncommon 
felf-murderers,  produced  moftJy  by  this  dijlemper  ;  and  their 
blafphemous  and  frantic  apologies  grafted  on  the  principles  of  in- 
fidels ; — to  try  what  a  little  more  juft  and  folid  philofophy^ 
joined  to  a  method  of  cure,  and  proper  medicines  could  do,  to 
put  a  ftop  to  fo  univerfal  a  Lunacy  and  Madness."  ■ 
CniX'Szh  Etiglijb  Malady,  Preface  p.  3. 

Sauvages  among  the  fpecles  t>t  Melancholy,  lias  one  under 
.the  titlp  of  Melancholia  Anglica,  or  EngUJh  Melancholy  j 
by  which  he  means  that  difpofitton  to  fuiclde  fo  frequent  among 
the  Englifh  ;  *nd  though  he  allows  that  the  lame  difpofition  to 


common  In  ENGLAND. 


iicult  to  determine.  There  is^  I  believe; 
fomc  foundation  for  the  fuppofition  ;  though; 
perhaps,  much  Icfs  than  is  generally  imagined. 
This  is  certain,  that  it  is  not  uncommon  a- 
nlong  the  French,  as  their  medical  writings 
iabundantly  teftify.  I  am  Incliiied  however 
to  allow  that  they  have  lefs  ot  it,  fo  far  ai 
the  paffions  are  concerned,  thati  any  other 
nation  in  Europe ;   I  fhould  not^  per- 
haps, greatly  err  were  I  to  add,  than  any  o- 
thcr  civilized  nation  in  the  world: 

S  d  M 

fuicide  is  not  uricommdri  among  what  he  calls  Melancholy  Mani- 
'acs^  yet  Englijy  Melancholy^  he  tells  us,  differs  trom  all  others  id 
being  unaccompanied  With  fury,  or  any  very  grievous  affliction^ 
and  owing  its  exiftence  merely  to  L.ovj7iefs  of  Spirits  and  Wcari' 
mfs  of  Life.  This  horrid  aft  is  chiefly,  he  fays,  cornmitted  by 
fuch  as  have  thrown  afide  all  religion,  and  have  fo  little  fortitude 
iof  mind,  as  to  be  incapable  of  bearing  the  common  affliclions  ©f 
human  life. 

*'  Apud  Anglos — frfequen6  ieft  fuioidlui-n  oh  tedium  vitS,  quo 
fcapti  languid!,  moefti,  pmnium  remedioriim  j>ert£efi,  res  fuas  com- 
jjonunt,  teltamenta  fcribunt,  amicis  per  epiftolas  dein  tranfmit- 
tcndas  valedicunt,  &  deinde  laqueo,  veneno,  vel  alio  modo  vita; 
fuae  finem  imponunt;  quod  criminis  genus  admittunt  illi  qui  religi- 
bnem  omnem  exuerunt,  &  ita  debili  funt  animo,  ut  aerumnas  vitae 
humanse  fuftinerc  nequeant.— — Pluribus  maniacis  melanchoUcii 
tuicidium  familiare  eft  ;  aft  .Melancholia  Anglica  in  hoc 
difcrcpatab  aliis,  quod  fine  uUo  furore,  aut  gravi  a:rumna,  ex  fold 
Vits  taedio  tranquille  mori  deccruant,"  Nofolog,  Method,  Tfi^K 
3J  Fan  i,  vei,  4  390^ 


tommon  in  ENGLAND. 


2^' 


Some  of  the  moft  powerful  caufes  of  this 
kuid  of  Infanitj  -kxc— religion,— love,— tommerdf 
iaiid  the  various  paffiolis  which  attend  the 
defirc,  purfuit,  aild  acqiiilition  of  riches,— 
every  fpecics  of  luxury,— Tind  ail  violent  and 

permanent  attachments  ^vh^^tevei:..  Thefc 

caufes  Jefs  affed  the  French  than  moft  other 
Nations. — As  to  religion,  they  ire  much  \ti 
the  fame  fitujltion  with  all  other  true  catho- 
lics. Pardon  for  fins  of  all  forts  and  fizes, 
is  fo  eafily  obtained  in  every  popifh  country, 
that  very  few  true  believers,  as  all  good  ca- 
tholics undoubtedly  are^  in  the  comfortable 
do£lrinc  of  the  abfolving  power  of  the  prieft- 
hood,  can  be  fuppofed  to  be  much  troubled 
with  religious  melancholy.  Not  to  mention  that 
a  religion  whofe  chief  charad:erifl:ic  is  fuperfti* 
tion,  muft  be  much  lefs  apt  to  produce  Mc<- 
lancholyj  than  one  that  has  lefs  fuperftition, 
and  more  enthufiafm  in  its  Compofition**  In 

C  one 

*  See  an  excelleat  paper  of  Mr.  Addison**  dn  tKefc  two  o^- 
pofite  derintions  from  true  religion,  in  the  Spe£lator,  vol.  .3d. 
No.    201. — See  alfo  fome  good  obfervatioBs  on  the  fame  fuBjein: 

in  Hume's  Eflays,  p.  105.  The  Romati  Catholic  Church 

feems  inckeAy  fays  Mr.  Addison,  in  the  abovementioned  ^aper, 
irrecoverably  lo^  in  this  particular.  If  an  ahfurcL  drefs  or  heha- 
viour  be  introduced  into  the  "jjorld^  it  'will  Joon  ht  found  out  and 

dif carded  J 


t%  INSANITY  wfy 

one  the  heart  and  afFe£llons  are  but  little  con- 
cerned ; — in  the  other  thej  are  the  firfi:  and 
principal  agents^  The  one  is  ever  furnifhed 
with  fome  ready  ceremony — fomc  convenient 
penance — to  attolie  foT  every  tranfgreffion, — 
while  the  other,  though  it  often  elevates  its 
adherents  with  raptures  of  aflurance,  yet,  at 
:other  times,  it  depreffes  and  overwhelms 
them  with  the  deepcft  defpair and  in  both 

ways^ 

Hifcarclecl ;  on  'the  cbxtreiiy^  a  habit  or  ceremony,  though  n€".'cr  fo 
■ridic7{!ouSy  ivhich  has  taken  Ja?iftuary  in  the  church,  J^'chs  in  it  for 
ever.  j4  Gothic  biJl:op perhaps,  thought  it  proper  to  repeat  fuch  a 
'  form  171  fuch  particular  Jhoes  or  JJippers;  ajiot her  fancied  it  Hvouldbc 
I'ery  decent  if  fuch  apart  of  public  devotions  ivere  per  formed  ^vilh  a 
mitre  on  his  head,  and  a  crojier  l?i  his  hand  :  to  this  a  hrotlj^r  Van- 
dal,  as  ivlfe  cis  the  others,  adds  an  antic  drcfs,  •which  he  conceived 
y^oxild  allude  very  aptly  to  f  uch  and  fuch  myjlerics,  uiitil  by  degrees 
the 'whole  office  has  degenerated  Into  an  empty  JbciS}.'* 

That  tlr.s  fuperrtitious  charader  of  modern  chrijiian,  was 
derived  from  the  idolatrous  fuperftitioii  of  antient  heathen 
Rome,  has  been  difplayed  at  large,  with  his  ufual  fagacity  and 
elegance,  by  the  late  learned  Dr.  Middleton',  in  his  Letter 
fro?n  Ro7ne  ;  where  he  faw  ^''popery  exerci/cd  in  the  full potr.p  and 
■dlfplayoflts  pageantry  ;  andpradlljing  all  its  arts  and  powers  with' 
vut  caution  or  refcrvc^  See  his  IfUirks,  vol.  5. 

How  humouToufiy  the  abfurd  and  childifn  vows  to  their  faints., 
and  other  contemptible  fuperjlltlons  of  the  Roman  Catholics  are  ri- 
•■diculcd  by  Erasmus  in  his  Nanfraginm,  and  in  \m  Pci-fgrinatl» 
'rcligionls  ergo,  is  well  known  to  every  fchool-boy  ;  and  that  the 
•ridicule  is  as  juft,  as  it  is  humourous,  none  can  doubt  who  arc 
jsicguainted  with  the  charader  of  that  elegant  writcre 


comjjrm   hi  ENGLAND.. 

ways,  but  mofl  frequently  in  the  latter,  pro- 
duces religious  Madnefs. 

Even  invincible  lon:-e,  that  has  made, 
more  Madmen  in  every  age  and  nation  thaa 
any  other  paffion  befide,— perhaps  more  than 
all  of  them  together,— can  boaft,  I  believe,, 
few  fuch  triumphs  over  the  hearts  of  modem. 
Frenchm-en.  For,  however  rapturoufly  they 
may  affed  to  fpeak  of  the  betle  pajfion^  the 
imivcrfal  tafte  foE  gallantry  has  almoft  en-, 
tirely  baniflied  the  Under  pajfion  from  among 
them.  Love^  with  them,  is  almoft  wholly 
an  affair  of  art it  has  m^ore  of  fancy  than 
paifion  ;  and  is.  rather  an  amufement  of  the 
imagination,  than  a  ferious  bufincfs  of  the 

heart.  §  This  fource,  therefore,   of  In- 

C  2  fanity, 

§  That  thi&  is  their  true  charaflcr  ml^ht  be  proved  by  a 
thoulaiid  teftimonies  ;  and  even  from  the  internal  evidence  of  the 
very  lovc-fcenes  of  their  plays,  and  of  their  other  compoiitienc. 
which  relate  to  lore.    A  few  witueircs  on.  this  head  may  be  fuf» 
Ijcient  for  my  prefent  purpofe. 

Stek.ne  alludes  to  this  peculiarity  ©f  the  French  on  feveral 
occafions.    In  one  of  his  letters,  written  from  fomc  part  of 

France,  he  has  thefe  words  ;  "  I  make  mjfclf:belie-je  thai 

I  am  in  love — hut  I  carry  on  my  affairs  quite  in  the  French  ivay\, 

fintimeiitally  I'amour,  fay  thcy^  n'eO:  rien  funs  fentiment  • 

Ivnt  is  riotblf'^  "si'.hout  fcntimev.tK-  ■  ■  Novj  iiotK>yuhJlandiiig  they,. 


INSANITY  why 


fanity,  muft  of  courfc  much  lefs  affe^l:  the 
inhabitants  of  France,  than  of  this  ifland,  or 
of  anj  other  European  country  ;  all  of  whom 
fecm  lefs  difpofed  to  trifle  with  fo  fcrious  a 
paffion,  than  o\ir  agreeable,  volatile  neigh- 
bpurs, 

Nor  can  fo  many  fuffcr  among  them,  as 
with  us,  fr-orn  the  iiext  mentioned  caufe  of 

Infanity, 

fftfie  fuch  a  pother  aboHi  the  word,  thfy  have  na  prccife  Idea  an- 
nexed to  it." — Stern t's  Letters,  vol.  2d.  X^ettcr  56%  p.  120. 

One  of  their  own  countrymen,  Monfieur  dc  Pinto,  in  a  letter 
to  the  celebrated  Monfieur  Diderot,  gives  much  the  fame  ac- 
count of  the  almoft  total  annihilation  of  real  affeiStion  among  the 
Fi:ench  ;  r — t  which  he  humouroufly  attributes,  to  the  vvni-:. 

verfal  pafllon  for  card -pitying  :  "  The  men  in  thofe  days^ 

fays  he,  (i.  e<  before  oard-playing  was  fo  much  in  tafliior*)-  7iot- 
having  ly  means  of  the  talifman  of  the  cardsy  the  opportunitv  of 
Jatlating  their  eyes  -vjith  the  charms  of  'women  in  full  counter'viev} 
to  them^  over  the  green  carpet ,  friendfhip  and  love  "-Mere  paffions  ; 
iut^  at  prcfenty  thanks  to  thofe  fame  cards^  there  is  little  more  left 
than  gallantry  :  there  may  be  found  plenty  o  f  acquaintance ^  and 
not  a  fngle  friend ;  a  number  of  ntiftreffes,  and  not  on(  belo'vcd.-— 
Vide  Annual  Rfgif^r  fo?  1774,  x&S^ 

Thefe  may  be  confidered  as  fufficient  authorities,  without 
troubling  the  reader  with  long  extiatJis  from,  their  plays,  odes, 
fongs,  and  other  compofitions,  in  which  they  exhibit  what  they 
experience  when  under  the  influence  of  whnt  palfes  with  them 
for  love.  If  point,  conceit,  and  wit,  nnay  be  conlidered  as  the 
genuine  effufions  of  paffion,  it  muft  be  acknowledged  that  they 
poflefs  it  ia  in  eminent  degree  :  but  if  the  tendernefs  of  afFe(ftion^ 
'\!^  a  heart  of  fpnlibility,  fo  pofielTes  and  fills  it,  as  to  exclude  eve'< 


common   in  ENGLAND. 


21 


Tnfan'ity,  ihe  deftre,  and proJpeB,  of  acquir- 
ing riches,  or  the  a^iial  acquifiUon  of  them. 
Since  there  can  be  but  little  defire,  where 
there  is  but  little  hope  :  and  there  can  be 
but  little  hope  of  attaining  riches  in  a  land  of 
flaves,  where  the  bulk  and  ftrcngth  of  a  ,  na- 
tion is  depreflcd  and  impoverifhed,  and  com- 
merce and  agriculture,  the  two  great  fources 
both  of  national  and  private  wealth,  are  of 
cgurfe  greatly  checked^  and  much  obftrufted 
in  their  operation.    This  is  well  known  to  be 
the  cafe  iu  France  ;  as  it  muft  be,  more  or 
lefs,  in  every  country  whofc  inhabitants,  be- 
ing fubjed  to  the  will  of  an  abfolute  monarchy 
cajmot  feci  that  encouraging  confidence  of 

thQ 

rv  idea  that  is  not  immediately  and  clofcly  connevSted  with  its  ob- 
ject ;  and  is  not  at  leifviie  to  adorn  with  the  tinfel  of  imagination^ 
the  warm,  but  limple  language  of  the  heart  ;  then  can  they  have 
but  fmall  pretenlions  to  the  ferious  pailion  of  love.    In  the  Ap^ 
pendix  to  the  fixty-fccond  volume  ot  the  Monthly  Rcvieiv,  at 
p.  579,  is  a  very  jufl  obfervation  to  this  purpofe.    In  giving  an 
account  of  an  "  JEJJai  fur  la  Mujique  anficnne  ^  fiioderne"-  by 
M.  dc  Labordiy  it  is  remarked  by  the  Reviewers  that — Songs 
are  among  the  chara£lerijiica.l  marks^  from  which  an  obferver  ivill' 
ham  much  of  the  genius,  fpirit,  and  chara^cr  of  a  people,  and  it 
i9tll  appear  frotn  the  hijiorico-poetico-mujical  details,  i)ito  which 
ai'.r  author  here  enters,  that  the  French  excel  other  nations  in  their 
amorous,  fatirical,  and  bacchanalian  fongs.^*     They   adlJ,    in  X, 
note, — *'  By  the  iuor</ amorous,  Tvedo  riot  mean  love,   nor  any 
thing  out  of  the  fpherc  of  gallantry.    It  is  ahnofl  only  among  the- 
It^liar{  and  Btitif}  b(irds,  that  love  is fung  ivith  genuine  fctijibility^ 


32 


INSANITY  why 


the  fecurity  of  property,  or  that  animating 
boldnefs  of  a  confcious  freedom  of  project  and 
exertion,  which  are  experienced  in  a  very  high 
degree  in  this  happy  land  of  hherty  ;  — 
as  to  the  externals  of  opulence  and  freedom, 
had  they  but  enough  of  found  philofophy, 
and  genuine  chriftianity,  to  teach  them  the 
proper  ufe  and  Intrinfic  value  of  the  bleflings 
they  enjoy, 

T  T  was  an  obfervatlon  of  the  great  Lord 
Littleton,  in  the  year  1 735,  when  read- 
ing in  France,  that  "  the  mercamile  intereji 
had  at  no  time  been  much  conjidered  by  the  French 
court. I  It  is  now,  indeed,  more  attended 
to  ;  but  ftill  the  occupation  of  a  merchant  is 
too  much  held  in  contempt ;  and  commerce 
can  never  flourifh,  as  it  does  in  this  country, 
while  the  charadler  of  a  trader  and  a  gen- 
tleman are  fuppofed  to  be  incompatible,  and 
their  Noblejfe  would  rather  fee  their  fons  idle 
priefts,  or  needy  foldiers  of  fortune,  than  in.-, 
duftrious  and  opuknt  merchants,. 


J  See- his  J'F'orks.  410,  p.  66:! ». 


common  in  ENGLAND.  23 

And  though  it  is  true>  that  the  French 
nation  has  of  late  years,  more  than  formerly, 
attended  to  this  only  eligible  mcansjof  acquir- 
ing opulence,— agriculture,  and  commerce; 
and,  while  it  has  improved  the  former  in  ma- 
ny refpeds,  has  fo  far  pufhed  the  latter,  that 
it  is  now  become  very  confiderablc  and  cx- 
tenfive  ;  both  of  which  mull:  confequcntly 
have  fome  efFed  in  producing  this  difeafe^ 
by  giving  birth  to  the  defircs,  fears,  anxieties, 
difappointments,  and  other  afFc6lions  which 
accompany  the  purfuit,  or  pofleffion,  of  rich- 
es ;  yet  as  agriculture  is  ftill  in  a  very  impcr- 
fc6l  ftate,  and  flourifhes  but  little  among 
them  ;  and  as  their  commerce  is  confined  to 
a  much  lefs  number  of  individuals,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  great  extent  of  country,  than 
in  England  ;  and  as  they  who  are  concerned 
in  either  of  them,  muft  be  lefs  ardent  in  their 
defires,  lefs  faiiguine  in  their  hopes,  and  lefs 
liable  to  be  elevated  by  fuccefs,  or  deje£ted 
by  difappointment,  in  confequence  of  the 
enervating  effeas  of  the  nature  of  their  go- 
vernment,-which  by  its  perpetual  checks  and 
rcftraints,  produces  a  habit  of  tame  modera- 
tion, and  patient  acquiefcencc  not  to  men- 
tion 


24 


INSANITY  why 


tion  the  eafy  vcrfatile  temper  ib  peculiar  to 

Frenchmen  ;  much  fewer,  in  proportion ^ 

will  fuffer  from  this  Caufe  of  Infanit/  in 
France  than  among  us. 

1  think  I  may  fafely  add,  that  even  luxury^ 
which  IS  lb  fruitful  a  parent  of  Trifanity  id 
this  ifland,  has  much  lefs  influence,  bccaufe 
It  is  much  lefs  general,  in  France.  In  high 
Jife,  it  IS  true,  they  arc  not  lefs  infefted  with 
It  there,  than  We  are  in  England  ;  — but  it  is 
by  no  means  fo  unlverfally  diffufed  among  all 
ranks  of  people,  as  it  is  in  this  rich,  free, 
and  commercial  nation.  Their  lower  orders 
of  people  know,  I  believe,  but  little  of  it, — 
and  their  wretched  peafantry  nothing  at  all  ; 
thankful  if  they  earn  their  daily  homely  mor- 
jfel,  they  eat  it  with  chearfulnefs, — and  know 
no  other  luxury  than  good  humour,  and  a 
good  appetite. 

But,  above  all,  they  arc  fliielded  from 
the  attacks  of  this  diforder  by  that  national 
Itghinefs  of  hearty  that  vivacity  and  volatility  of 
temper^  which  will  fcldom  fuffer  them  to  fix 
their  attention  too  long,  or  their  afFedion$ 

too 


common  in  ENGLAND. 


too  violently,  and  ferioufly,  iipoii  any  par* 
ticular  objed.  In  fhort,  they  are  too  lax  in 
their  attachmelits,  and  have  too  much  gaiety 
and  verfatility,  ever  to  be  mnch  troubled 
with  religious^  amorous^  or  commercial  Ms" 
laJicholy.  * 

All  thefe  clrcumftances  being  taken  into 
the  account,  it  feems  not  improbable  that 
this  dlforder  is  not  only  much  more  prevalent 

D  ill 

*  Sterne  calls  them  a  laugtiter-loTing  nation. — Lord  Lit- 
tleton gives  a  very  lively  deleriptlon  ot  this  native  temper  of 
the  French  in  a  letter  to  his  father,  from  Paris,  dated  September 

the  28th.  1729.  '"'•Sunday,  by  foiir  o'clock^  fays  he,   ive  had 

the  good  nenvs  of  a  Dauphin^  and  Jince  that  tlmt  I  have  thought 
viyfelf  in  Bedlam.  The  natural  gaiety  of  the  nation  is  fo  improved 
on  this  occafon,  that  they  ate  all Jlark  mad  with  joy,  and  do  no- 
thing httt  dance  about  the  f  reels  by  hufidrcds  and  by  thoufands„  The 
txprcjfions  of  their  joy  are  admirable  :  one  fellozv  gives  notice  to  the 
public,  that  he  dejigns  to  dra-iv  teeth  for  a  %veek  together  tipon  the 
Pent  Netif  gratis." 

A  late  traveller  draws  the  following  character  of  them 
*'  During  this  and fcveral  former  expeditions  to  the  contineyit,  I 
have  Jludied  the  Manners  of  the  French  nation,  and  have  foun^ 
them  volatile,  even  to  a  degree  of  childdjhnefs.  -It  is  more  un  •> 

common  to  fee  the  loiver  fort  out  of fpirits  than  out  at  elbo^vs  ;  for 
in  this  country (  fir angc  to  relate  I )  the fmg  and  the  dance  are  the 
companions  tojlavery  and  poverty.  All  ra7iks  of  men,  almofl  nil 
^i^^^  fi^^  ^fi^t  pleafure,  or  rather  a7mfcmc.nt,  with  a  vjonderful 
avidity  ;  and  there  are  many  ivbo  debar  ihetnfelves  of  neceJfarieS  ifi 

order  to  lavij}}  their  fols  on  the  fpeflacle,  or  the  comedie  !"  • 

J-efters  from  an  Officer  in  the  Guards  to  his  frieads  in  Englan^i 


26 


INSANITY  why 


111  England  than  in  France,  but  more  peculi- 
~ar  to  this  than  to  any  other  country.  For 
even  waving  the  other  conliderations  juft  cnu  • 
merated,  an  e>:cefs  vf  wealth  and  luxury,  in 
which  perhaps  no  nation  upon  earth  can  vie 
with  this,  fecm  to  entitle  us  to  an  abundant 
ihare  of  the  curfe  which  appears  too  plainly 
to  be  entailed  upon  their  pofleffbrs.  What- 
ever may  be  the  caufe,  we  hear  of  few  or  no 
Inftances  of  Infanity  among  barbarous  nations, 
"whether  antient  or  modern  :  and  even  among 
the  poorer  and  lefs  civilized  inhabitants  of 
modern  Europe,  we  hear  but  little  of  this  dif- 
order  ;  and  the  little,  ^vhich  we  do  hear  of, 
arifes  chiefly  from  a  partial  attachment  to 
their  native  foil.  This  extraordinary  diforder, 
which  is  termed  by  the  French  the  maladie  du 
fays,  and  by  medical  writers  Nojlalgia,  exifts 
wc  are  told,  in  the  difmal  wilds  of  Lapland, 
tlie  lefs  frequented  parts  of  Germany,  and 
<jn  the  bleak  mountains  of  ,Switzcrlands, 

Even  in  this  ifland  we  fin^  Infanity  an 
uncommon  diforder  in  proportion,  as  wealth 
and  luxury  are  but  little  known.  In  Scotlandy 
^whcrc  the  inhabitants  in  general  are  neither 

opulent 


common   in  ENGLAND, 


opulent  nor  luxurious,  Infanity,  as  I  am  ia- 
formed,  is  very  rare  :  nor  is  it  more  frequent, 
in  the  poorer,  and  lefs  cultivated  parts  of 
Wales.  Indeed  there  can  fcarcely  be  a  doubt, 
that,  where  other  circumftances  are  funilar,, 
this  diforder  muft  be  more  or  lefs  common  a* 
mong  any  people,  as  wealth  and  luxury  more 
or  lefs  abound. — This,  at  leaft,  is  certain— 
that  inftances  of  Infanity  are,  at  this  day,  a- 
mazingly  numerous  in  this  kingdom  ; — pro- 
bably more  fo  than  they  ever  were  in  any  for- 
mer period  : — and  I  fee  no  other  way  of  ac- 
counting for  this  vaft  increafe  of  the  dilbrder, 
than  by  attributing  it  to  the  prefent  unlverfal 
diffufion  of  wealth  and  luxury  through  ahnoft. 
every  part  of  the  ifland^ 

This  confidcration  makes  the  obje£t  of 
our  prefent  inquiry  a  very  intercfting  one  tcr 
Englilhmen.  If  I  fhall  be  fo  happy  as  to  let 
in  more  light  upon  any  part  of  it  ; — and  ef- 
pecially  if  any  thing  which  I  fhali  advance 
fhall  point  to  a  real  improvement  in  the  me- 
thod of  cure  ;  towards  which  all  our  medical 
inveftigations  ought,  either  directly  or  indl* 
re£lly,  to  lead  us  I  fhall  not  think 
time  and  labour  beftowed  in  ysCm^ 


INSANITY  why 


With  this  view,  I  fhall  now  proceed 
to  make  feme  obfervations  on  the  nature^  kinds, 
catifes,  and  prevention  of  Madnefs  ;  which  I 
fhall  do  under  the  following  heads,  and  in 

the  following  order.  1  fliall  firft  confider 

the  DEFINITION  ;  then  propofe  a  new  me- 
thod of  Arrangement  ;  and  add  fuch  de^ 
fcriptions  and  remarks  as  may  appear  necef- 
fary  for  illuflrating  the  meaning,  and  con- 
firming the  propriety  of  both  : — After  that  I 
fliall  give  a  concife  view  of  the  Appearan- 
ces ON  Dissection,  as  they  are  exhibited 
^  BoNETus  and  Morgagni  : — I  fhall  then 
proceed  to  examine  into  the  Causes  of  Mad- 
nefsin  doing  which,  I  fhall  havcoccafion  to 
delineate  the  moft  conliderable  of  the  Pas-? 
sioNs,  and  to  demonftrate  their  very  great 
influence  in  producing  this  difordcr  ;--this 
will  naturally  lead  me  to  lay  down  fome 
Rules  for  its  prevention,  which  will  chiefly 
turn  on  the  due  regulation  of  the  pajfions. 


SECTION 


SECTION  III. 


Oft/je  Dii?iNiTioN  and  Arrangement 

ef  Infanlty. 

INSANITY,  or  Madness,  or  Lu-p-. 
NACY,   has  ufually  been  confidered  by- 
medical  writers,  with  feme  few  exceptions, 
from  the  earUeft  ages,  down  to  the  prelent 
time,  as  confifting  of  two  kinds  ;— to  one  of 
which,  they  have  ahxioil:  unanimo-ufly  givei^ 
the  name  of  Melancholy;  and  to  the  other, 
that  of  Mania,  Phrensy,  or  Fury.^  Of 
thefe  various  names  of  the  latter  kind,  the 
moft  common  is  that  of  Mania  ;  the  term 
Fhrenjy  being  more  frequently  appropriated 
to  the  delirium  of  a  violent  fever  ;  and  Fury 
being  ufed,  for  the  moft  part,  rather  as  de« 
fcriptivc  of  a  liriking  fymptom  of  the  difeafe, 
than  as  a  name,  or  generic  term.    This  kind 
anfwers  to  the  idea  which  is  vulgarly  affixed 
to  ourEnglifh  word  Madnejs\  and  is  fome- 
timej  popularly  diftinguifhed  by  the  cpithcta 


DEFINITION  and 


raving,  or  raging,  prefixed  to  the  common 
appellation  of  Madnefs, 

These  two  kinds  of  Infanity  have  ge- 
nerally been  defined  in  words  to  this  efFed 

**  Melancholy  is  a  permanent  delirium, 
without  fury,  or  fever,  in  which  the  mind 
is  dejeSied,  and  timorous,  and  ufually  em- 
"  ployed  about  oneobje^y 

"  Mania  is  a  permanent  delirium,  with 
^^fury  and  audacity,  but  without  fever. ""^ 

In  the  various  Definitions  of  Infani- 
ty which  are  to  be  found  in  medical  writings, 
fome  of  which  I  fhall  prefently  tranfcribe^ 
the  term  delirium,  or  fomething  fynonymous^ 
is  commonly  ufcd.  It  is,  however,  very 
differently  defined  by  different  writers^  ; — by 
many  it  is  not  defined  at  all ; — and  by  fome  it 
is  ufed,  in  defining  Madnefs,  in  a  fcnfc  not 
very  confiftent  either  with  the  ufual  definiti- 
on, or  with  that  which  themfelves  have 
given,  of  this  variable,  and  unfettled  term. 

But  notwithftanding  this  uncertainty  ir> 
the  ufc  of  the  term  delipuiH;  it;  were  eafy  to 

tranfcrlbc 


ARRANGEMENT. 


3^ 


tranfcribe  a  long  lift  of  Definitions  of 
Melancholy  and  Mania,  from  the  moft 
noted  pradical  writers,  both  of  antient  and 
modern  times,  in  which  it  would  be  feen 
that  they  univerfally  borrow  from  the  fame 
fource;  and  that  almoft  every  fucceflbr  of  Ga- 
len treads  with  little  variation  in  the  foot- 
fleps  of  his  mafter,  who  himfelf  did  not  ma- 
terially deviate  from  the  track  which  had 
already  been  marked  out  for  him  by  his 
predeccflbrs,  at  the  head  of  whom  was 
the  great  Father  of  Physic,  with  thofc 
other  antient  medical  authors  whofe  works 
arc  confounded  with  his. 

These  early  writers,  who  were  not  ac- 
cuftomed  to  deal  much  in  Definitions,  have, 
it  muft  be  acknowledged,  given  us  no  ex- 
prefs  ones  of  thefe  diforders  ;  but  that  their 
notions  concerning  them  have  ferved  as  a 
foundation  for  the  Definitions  of  their  fuc- 
celTors,  might  eafily  be  proved,  by  collci^ling 
and  comparing  fuch  detached  pallages,  rela-* 
tivc  to  the  feveral  kinds  of  Delirium  and  In- 
fanity,  as  are  to  be  found  in  that  invaluable 
Body  of  Pra^ical  Treatifes,  written  by  various 

avtlior% 


DEFINITION  and 


authors,  of  various  merit,  which  have  come 
down  to  us  as  the  IForks  of  Hippocrates  ; 
of  which  the  greateft  part  are  undoubtedly 
very  anticnt,  and  all  of  which,  whatever 
may  be  their  deficiencies  in  point  of  real  me- 
dical fcicncc,  ferve  at  leaft  to  make  us  ac-^ 
quainted  with  the  opinions  of  phyficians  who 
flourillied  long  before  the  time  of  Galen. 

A  very  minute  inquiry  of  this  kind,  with 
a  critical  examination  of  every  paflage  addu- 
ced, would  take  up  more  room  than  would 
be  confuTicnt  with  my  prefcnt  plan  ;  and,  af- 
ter all,  might  be  thought,  perhaps,  rather 
curious  than  ufeful.  1  fhall  only,  therefore, 
make  a  few  extra(9:s  from  the  works  of  Hip- 
pocrates in  confirmation  of  this  aflertioa  ;  and 
content  myfelf  with  merely  referring  to  fome 
others  which  tend  to  the  fame  purpofc. 

That  perma?ient  fear,  and  dlftrefs,  are 
there  coniidered  as  chara£leriftic  of  Melancho' 
fy,  is  obvious  from  the  twenty-third  Apho- 
rifm  of  feilion  the  fixth,  where  he  fays,  — 

(pcQog  Yi  ^uSu^tvj  T3'oXvv  x^ovov  hcijXs'^,  y,sXccf^oXix.ov 
to  roi^Tov.  X 

%  Oper,  Omn.  p.  12^7; 


ARRANGEMENT. 

"  If  fear  or  d'lftrefs  continue  for  a  long  tlmt-^ 
this  is  a  fymptom  of  Melancholy  ^'^ 

A  D  that  fuch  fear  and  diftrefs  *  arc  es- 
teemed fytnptoms  of  delirium^  may  juftly  be  in- 
ferred from  a  paffage  to  be  quoted  at  length  on 
another  occafion,  §  in  which  it  is  faid  that — > 
"  There  is  a  great  limilaritj,  as  to  the  difor- 
der  of  mind  ]jsyoc^ujoia^  \  in  thofe  who  are 
ill  of  a  Phrenjy,  and  thofe  who  are  affeded 
with  Melancholy.^'' 

N  ®  R  is  it  lefs  obvioufly  deducible  from 
the  fame  paffage,  if  compared  with  what 

E  precedes 

*  i  make  ufe  of  the  word  dijlrefs  in  a  general  and  comprehen- 
iive  fenfc,  as  implying  grief,  dejeSlion,  dcjfondcncy,  anxiety^  and 
in  flidrt  tvery  diprcfftng  affcSlion.  with  which  the  mind  may  bo 
fermanently  affiiHed  :  an  extent  of  meaning  which  feems  not  un- 
aptly to  corrcfpond  with  ovoS'VfJifr,y  whick  I  take  to  fignifjr 
a  ftafc  of  mind  in  which  its  **  healthful  tone  is  impaired^  and 

ivith  difficulty  exerts  a  due  degree  of  fortitude  and  cojijlancyj* 
And  it  may  be  obferved  that  Aret.«us,  who  is  a  clofe  imitator 
of  Hippocrates,  ufcs^  in  his  definition  of  Melancholy,  a  limi- 

?ar,  bat  Itronger  expreflion,  in  the  word  aSu^tij  which  feema  to 
imply  "  a  total  defeSl  of  tncntal  niigonr," 

§  Fotsii  HtppocR.  dc  Morbis  lib.  i,  Ofer,  Omn,  p.  460* 
50. 

f  Vide  Foes II  O(cono»i,  JJifpocr^ 


.54         r)EFINITlON  cimt 


precedes  it,  ||  and  with  other  paffagcs  belov^ 
referred  to,  in  fome  of  which  y^-u^r  is  expreffly 
.  mentioned  as  ejfeniial  to  Phrenk'is  ;  \  as  wcU 
from  many  others,  in  various  parts  of  his 
works  ;  that  he  fuppofes  the  dehrium  of  Mi- 
iancholy  to  be  without  fe'Oer, 

That  he  reckoned  Mania  a  kind  of  di* 
hrium  19  clearly  expreffed  in  the  above  paflage, 

to  mention  no  others :  and  that  in  the  idea 

^of  Maniacal  delirium,  he  comprehended  that 
of  'violence  is  evident  from  the  fame  paflagc, 
and  from  many  more  which  might  be  referred 
to, — whether  he  ufes  the  term  Mania,  or  its 
•derivatives,  as  he  not  unfrequently  does,  to 
denote  a  violent  degree  of  delirium  in  a  Pbren- 
Ms,  or  in  any  other  fever,  in  oppofition  to  the 
flighter  degrees  with  which  thefe  diforders  arc 
Sometimes  accompanied,  and  which  are  iim- 
termed  Ttrapoivoix,  Ts-a^x^ppoa-vvv]  ura^a.^p^ovyia'tct^ 

or  the  like ;  or  to  indicate  that  kind  of 

Madnefi 

]|  HipfGCR.  dcMoibis.  Lib.  i.  Opcr.  Omn.  p.  4601  30—' 
•44. 

X  HiPPOCR.  Morlo  Sacro^  O.per.Omn.  p*  309.  i. — 20« 
*r^he  Morhis.  Lib.  i.  Op.  p.  461.  30.  LiU  2.  p.  486,  30,— 1> 
£>t  AfeSlienibus,  Oper,  Omt.  p.  ^l^,  20, 


ARRANGEMENT. 


Madnefs  which  has  fincc  acq[uu'cd  the  exclu- 
five  title  to  that  appellation  ;.  which  it  is  plain 
he  underftands  to  be  zvithout  fever ^  and  to  be 
diftinguifhed  from  Melancholy  only  by  the  vio-- 
knee  oi- ferocity  the  delirium,  bj  v/hi-ch  it  is 
rendered  as  fpccificaUy  different  from  that 
kind  of  Infanity,  as  it  is  £iom  Bhrenitli 
the  abfencc  of  fever.  ^ 

G  A  L  K  K  affords  us  no.  definition,  fas* 
as  I  know,  which  comprehends  every  cha- 
ra6lcriflic  circumftance  of  Delirium^,  Melan^ 
choly^  or  Mania  ;  but  they  may  all.  be  colleifl- 
cd  from  the  following  cxtrarSts  from  Lacunae's 
^ptome  of  hit  JVorks  : — — 

"  H  ^  c  [imaginalrix  fufi^ioy—intcYd'um — * 
**  vitiatur,  ut  in  Delirio  : — fic  ratiocinaiio — 
"  nunc  laeditur  ac  depravatur,  9tPod  fympto- 
"  ma  vocTint  delirium.  Plerunque— in  utrifque 
^'  limul  confiflit  Delirium,  turn  parum.  probe 
"  imaginandoy  turn  parum  Tiptc  ratiocinando.  Eft 
"  quando  duntaxat  in  altero.  Interdum  qoippc 

ratio  vitiatur,,.  imaginatloue  iimul  atque  me- 

E.  2k,  '-'^  moria. 

^  Vide  Loc.  fupra  cltat  : — item  Htppoci.  Aphor.  §  Jj. 
Aph,  20,  22    Oper.  p.  1248.  5£  §  6.    Aph.  5.5.  135.8,. 


3^        DEFINITION  and 

moria  illaefa.     Quemadmodum  etlam  rati- 
"  one  Integra,  contigit  turn  imaglnationem, 
turn  memoriam  vitiari."  * 

"  I  N  T  E  R  D  u  M  vcro  ubi  prineipaks  adii- 
"  ones  funt  laefae,  febris  quoquc  accedit  :  ut 
in  phrenttide  &  lethargo,  Interdum fine  febre 
adefl  vitium  :  ut  in  Mania  &  Melancholia.'"  § 

'^Delirium  omnc,  depravatus  eft 
'*  principis  facultaiis  motus,  a  pravls  fuccis  aut 
"  cerebri  intemperie  ortum  habcns.  Caetc- 
"  rum  phrefiitis  dicitur,    fi  febris  adfit  ;  ut 

Mania  fi  abfque  febris  accidat.  Solae  au- 
"  tcm  Melancholic^  alienationes,  a  frigidiori 
"  fucco  produci  folent."  f 

^'  I  N  omnibus  autem  animi  alienationibus, 
"  fi  ///Tzoratquc  triftiliadiu  pcrfeverent,  atram 
bilem  in  caufa  efle  eft  indicium."  J 

"  U  B  ^ 

^  Dc  Symptomatum  Differcnuis.  p.  666,  i6. 
§  De  Locis  affc3.    Lib.  3.  cap.  3.  p.  739.  44, 
■\  De  Caujis  SymptomaU    Lib.  1%  p.  683.  13, 
X  lb,  p.  683,  z\.^ 


ARRANGEMENT. 


37 


**  U  B  I  vero  in  ipfo  cerebri  corporc  abuii- 
dat  laira  bills,  quae  vomentibus  ipfam  & 
'*  olfaclentibus  videtur  acida]  eiim  Infaniic 
**  fpeciem,  quern  Grajci  vocant  Mclancholiam, 
**  induclt.    Quemadmodum  alter  atrye  bills 
fuccus,   qui  praeaflata  flava  bile  nafcitur, 
**  [at  eft  veluti  fex  fanguliils  quie  admodam 
*'  fpiffa  exiftit,  faecibus  vini  baud  abfimilis,] 
fcrina  gignit  deliramenta,  modo  cum  febre, 
*'  modo  abjqe  illay   in  cerebri  corpore  abun- 
*'  dans."  II 

T  H  E  faculty  of  Imagination  7s  fo}j^c- 
*'  times'vitiatcd^  as  in  delirium.  Jl?id  the  rca- 
'*  foning  faculty  is  fometimes  injured  and  de- 

Praved^  a fymptoni  which  is  likewife  called  dc- 
"  Jirium.  For  the  moji part  delirium  confijls  in 
*'  the  union  o^both  thefe  fympto?ns,  the  imagina- 
**  tion prefentin^  erroneous  images,  and  reajon  at 

the  fame  time  judging  amifs.  But  fometimes  it 
* '  confijls  in  one  of  them  only.    For  there  are  ca- 

fes  in  which  reafon  is  injured,  while  the  ima- 
^J  gmation  and  memory  remain  unljitrt :  and  on 

II  Be  Locis  affeSl.    Lib.  3.  cap.  3.  p.  741.  ^6 — 26 
Vi4e  ctzam  Fotsi  Oaen'm,  Hi^pocr,  fub  [^micn  &  ^tKoS-^oXm* 


3S        DEFINITION  md 


"  the  other  hand,  in  which  the  imagination  and 
*'  memory  are  vitiated ^  and  yet  reafon  unimpair- 
edr 

m 

Sometimes  a  d^iiov^<^x.t^  36tion  of  the  princU 
^*  pal  faculties  is  accompanied  with  fcycr  ;  as 
"  in  phrcnfy  and  letbargjo    Sometimes  it  is 
without  fever,  as  in  Mania  Melancho-. 
"  Iv." 

"Every  delirium  is  a  depraved  aBion  of 
"  a  principal  faculty,  ariji?ig  from  vitiated  hu- 

moursy  and  a  difordered  temperament  of  the 
*'  brain.  It  is  called  ph.ren{y  if  it  be  accompani- 
"  ed  with  fever  ;  but  if  there  be  no  fever,  it  is 
*'  called  Mania.    But  alienations  of  a  melan-^ 

choly  kind  only,  are  produced  by  a  cold  hu^ 
"  mour,''' 

"  In  every  alienation  of  mind,  if  fear  and 
"  diftrcfs  continue  for  a  long  time,  it  is  a  fign  that 
the  dif order  is  caufed  by  black  bile. 

Whenever  that  kind  of  atrabilious  humour^ 
"  which  when  thrown  up  from  the  Jfomach  by 
vomiting  has  an  acid  tafte  and  fmell,  abounds 
^  is  the  fubjlance  of  the  brain,  it  brings  on  that 

^^Jpecics 


ARRx'^NGEMENT. 


39 


^\fpecies  of  Infamty  which  the  Greth  call  Me- 
"  lancholia.  As  when  that  other  atrahU'wus 
*'  humour  which  owes  its  origin  to  aduft  yellow 
**  bile,  is  a  kind  of  feculent  part  of  the  blood,  is 
"  very  thick,  and  not  unlike  the  lees  of  wine,  a- 
"  bounds  in  the  fubflance  of  the  brain  ;  it  produces 
"  furious  deliriums,  fometimes  with  and  fomc'* 
**         withoiJt  fever/* 

C^Lius     AuRELiANUS,  f  and 
Aret^us  Cappadox,  *  who  probably  both, 
lived  a  little  before  the  time  of  Galen, 
define  Melancholy  and  Mania  nearly  in  the 
fame  manner  ;  but  the  latter  adds  to  the  de- 
finition of  Melancholy — that  "  the  difirefs  is 
confined  to  one  objc6l," — 'i^i       a9V^]r,  IttI  jitn 
(puvjaa-lvi: — a  circumftance  in  which  the  exam- 
ple of  A  R  E  T  ^  u  s  has  been  followed  by 
J  o  N  s  T  o  N   and  the  illuflrious   B  o  E 
H  A  A  V  E, — and   which,  though  far  from 
univerfil,  mufl  be  acknowledged  to  be  nci-> 
ther  rare,  nor  unworthy  of  attention  ;  and^ 

therefore 

f  Mori^.  Chronic.  Lib.  I.  cap.  5.  p.  326.  &  cap.  6.  p.  340, 

*  De  Caujis  &  Sign.  M)rb»  Biuturn,  Lib,  l«  C.  5.  p.  29* 
£.  &  eap.  6,  p.  31,  Ao 


40         DEFINITION  and 


therefore,  G  A  l  E  N  ||  at  the  fame  time  that 
he  diftindly  pointed  it  out  as  frequently  ex- 
iting, very  judicioufly  excludes  it  from  a 
place  in  the  definition. 

Modern  writers  have,  for  the 
moft  part,  ftri^lly  adhered  to  their  mafiers  of 
antiquity.  Of  their  fcrupulous  exd£tnefs  in 
copying  from  thefe  antient  models  I  lhall 
txhihit  a  fev/  fpecimens,  and  refer  to  more 
which  the  reader  may  confult,  if  he  pleafes^ 
at  his  leifurci 

The  following  arc  modern  definitions  of 
Delirium. 

"In  genere  delirium  defihirl  poteft,  a£ti<» 
dcpravata  phantafia  &  ratloclnatlonlsy  a  fpi- 
ritu  impuro,  phantafmati  abfurdo  &  in- 
conveiiienti  occafionem  praebente.'*  •[ 

**Deli  r  iuM  may  In  general  he  defined 
to  ^e  d  depraved  action  of  the  faculties  of  imz- 
ginatidii  and  rcafoning,  arijing  from  an  im- 

'^^  purity 

ll  Df  Locis  affccl.  Lib;  3.  cap.  4.  p.  743.  6o, 
•jf  Sbnnerti  Oper,  Omn,  Tom.  3.  pi  84^ 


ARRANGEMENT, 


purity  of  the  animal  fpirlts,  which  gives  occa" 
Jlon  to  the-  internal  reprefentation  of  fame  ahfurd 
and-unreal  image  to  the  inind^ 

"  Delirium  phantajice  &  rationis  deprava<« 
tio,  a  phantafmatis  abfurdi  &  incoiivemeii- 
tls  oblatioue  exorta."  || 

"Delirium,  depravation  of  the  fa- 
culties o/'imagination  and  reafoning,  arifing 
from  the  internal  reprefentation  of  fome  abfurd 
and  unreal  image  to  the  mind^^ 

"Cum  imaginatioy  &  ^efimatio  depravatur, 
delirium  accidit,  quod  dicitur, — dcclinatio 
a  rc6la  rationis  fcmita,  unde  aegri  abfurda, 
&  incongrua  loquuntur,  aut  imaginaii- 
'  tur."  t 

"  When  the  imagination  judgment  are  de' 
'  praved^  then  exifls  what  is  called  delirium,-— 
'  or  a  deviatim  from  the  path  of  right  reafon,  in 

F  "  which 

\\  JoNSTONi  Idea  Unlverfce  Mediclnee  PraB.  Lib,  8,  p, 
88. 

f  Tozzi  Oper,  Omn,  Tom,  I.  p.  iii, 


4* 


DEFINITION  and 


"  which  the Jtck  talk  and  Imagine  abjurd  and  int'" 
probable  things*^ 

BoERHAAVE  and  De  Gorter  have 
Venturecl  to  ftrike  out  of  the  common  beaten 
track  ;  with  what  fiiccefs  I  fhall  not  here  ex- 
amine ;  but  am  inclined  to  fufped,  that  on 
a  ftri^l  inquiry,  they  would  be  found  to  dif- 
fer more  in  words,  than  in  reality,  from  their 
|)redeceirors. 

The  former  fays,  "  Delirium  eft  idearwn 
ortus  non  rcfpondens  externis  caufis,  fed  in- 
*•  tern  as  cerebri  difpofitioni,  una  cum  judicio 
*'  ex  his  fequente,  &  animi  affe^lu  motuque 
"  corporis  inde  fequente  :  atque  his  quidem 
*'  per  gradus  au5:is,  folitariis,  vel  combina- 
tis,  varia  deliriorum  genera  fiunt."  J 

**  D  E  L  I  R  I  u  M  is  the  exijlence  o/*  ideas  in 
correfpondence  with  fome  internal  difpojition  of 
"  the  brain,  and  not  with  external caufes toge- 
*'  ther  with  /^f  judgment  arijingfrom fuch  idtas, 
^  and  the  confequent  affedions  of  the  mindy  and 

actions 

I  BOERHAAYII  Aj^hor,  §  7OO,  "  'J*" 


ARRANGEMENT,  4,3^ 

*  a£llons  of  the  body  :  and  as  thefe  extji  in  v&ri^ 
'  ous  degrees,  and  are  foUtary,  or  combined,  they- 
'  give  rife  to  various  kinds  of  delirium.''* 

De  GoRTER  tells  us  that—**  Similla  Idd^ 
'  la  fomniantium  fi  vigilantes  occupant,  ut  faepe 
'  jsqiie  vivida  funt,  quam      fenfus  ofFerun- 

*  tur,  vcl  quae  cx  mentis  voluntate  concitan- 
tur,  faclunt  homincm  detirare:  fed  caufa 
dclirli  plus  valcre  videtur,  quia  in  fomna 
fine  dctrimento  fanitatis  faepe,  in  vigilanti- 
bus  autem  fcmper  a  morbofa  caufa,  alienac 
obrcpunt.'*  § 

When  images  arife  in  the  mind  while  we- 
ar e  awake,  in  a- manner fmilar  to  what  we  ex- 
perience when  dreaming  ;  and  it  often  happen^- 
that  they  do  fo,  and  are  equally  vivid  with  thofe 
which  are  excited  by  the  fcnfes,  or  by  the  will  ; 
we  are  then  in  a  f  ate  of  delirium.    But  the 
caufe  of  delirium  feems  to  be  more  powerful 
than  that  of  dreams :  for  in fieep  Juch  erroneous 
images  often  prefent  thcmf elves  in  a  fate  of' 
health,  but  when  we  are  waking,  they  always 
proceed fronifome  morbid  cauje^^ 

F  z  T  pr  ^[ 

§  De  GoRTER  Medicine  DogmaticiP,.  caj^.  I.  §  S-.  p»  5,«, 


44 


DEFINITION  md 


The  late  botanical  nosologists, 
if  I  may  fo  call  them,  have  all,  except  Sau- 
VAGES,  confined  the  term  to  the  febrile  deliri- 
um', and  affixed  different  generic  names  to  the 
other  fpecies.  They  are  almoft  the  only  wri- 
ters who  have  materially  deviated  from  the 
antients  ;  and  they  differ  from  each  other  no 
lefs  than  from  their  predeceflors.  They  have 
all,  however,  confiderable  merit  ;  but.  cfpe- 
cially  Dr.  Cull^^n,  who  has,  in  my  opini- 
on, greatly  improved  upon  the  reft,  by  an 
arrangement  which  is  remarkable  for  the 
chafte  fimplicity,  and  philofophical  precifion, 
fo  confpicuous  in  whatever  proceeds  from  the 
mouth  or  pen  of  that  great  modern  improver 
of  medical  fciencc. 

The  following  Definitions  of  Mel A'i^-* 
CHOLY  ond  Mania  may  ferve  as  a  fpeci- 
men  of  the  clofe  adherence  of  even  the  moft 
eminent  among  the  moderns  to  their  antient 
mafters. 

"Est  autem  Melancholia  mentis  allenaiio 

"  feu  defipicntia,  fine  febre^    cum  metu  ac 

mcefiitia  fine  caufa  manifefta  conjun6ta."  * 

Melan- 

*  PisoN.  dt  cogn.     curand,  Mori.  Lib.  i,  c.  23.  p.  1 6i.  Tom  1 


ARRANGEMENT.  45 

"Melancholy  is  an  alienation  of 
'  minci,  or  privation  of  its  faculties,  without  fe- 
'  ver,  accompanied  with  fear  and  dejed:ion  with- 
'  out  any  manifeji  caufe. 

**Definitur  melancholia  quod  fit 
'  delirium  feu  imaginationls  &  rationis  depra- 
*  vatio,  fine  fehre,  cum  timore  &  mafiitia^  % 

"Melancholy  is  dcfinedto  he  a  dc- 
'  lirlum,  or  depravation  of  imagination  and 
'  reafon,  without  fever,  and  with  fear  and  de- 
'  jedion." 

"  Melancholia  eft  delirium  fine  febre,  cum 
'  timore  &  moefiitiay  § 

"Melancholy  is  a  delirium  with- 
out fever,  with  fear  ^3;/^^  dejedion.'* 

"  Melancholia  eft  delirium,  a  phantafmate 
melancholico  cxortum,  qua  detcntus,  uni 

"  cognitationi, 


%  Sennerti  Oper,  Tom.  3.  p.  90, 

§  River  1 1  Trax,  M(d,  Lib.  i.  cap.  14.  p.  187* 


46 


DEFINITION  and 


"  cog\itationi,   abfque  furore  ^  febre,  cum 
trtfiitia  &  metu,  inhaerct."  || 

*'  M  E  L  A  N  c  H  o  L  Y  is  a  deliriura,  ari^ 
^'^  Jing  from  the  internal  reprefentation  of  forae  me- 
**  lane  holy  image,  in  which  the  attention  of  the 
jnind  is  rivet  ted  to  one  fubjedl,  without  fury  or 
fever,  and  with  dejedioH  fear." 

"  Melancholici  in  profundam  mcefitiam,  be 
ingentem  timoreni  delabnntur.     In  his  in-^ 
fuper  imaginatio  &  ratiocinatio  dcpravatiir 
*'  non  tamen  plcrumque  in  omnibus,  fed  in 
certis  folum  rerum  generibus.  Memoria 
an  tern  firma  manet,  &  febris  deef.    Per  id 
*'  vero  a  cietaris  infanis  melancholici  inter* 
"  nofcuntur,  quod  timeant,  &  moereant  fine 
"  caufa  inanifefla,  unde  Hippocrates,  6 
"  Aph.  23.     '  Si  timor  &  moeftitia  longo 
•  tempore  perfeverent,  judicatalem  elle  n;e- 
'  lancholicum.  * 

**  They  who  are  mchncholy  fall  into  deefdt' 
'  je(3;ion  and  great  fear.  Their  imagination 
'  and  reafon  is  alfo  depraved ;  but  in  general 

this 

II  Jons  TON  I  Idea  Uttl'verf.  MedklncE ^raH,  Lib.  S.  p.  390. 
^  Tozzi  (^'•'■'\  Tom.  I.  p.  II  g. 


ARRANGEMENT. 


47 


"  this  depravity  is  confined  to  fome  particular 
objects,  and  does  nottxtend  to  all.  The  me- 
mory  is  unhurt,  and  there  is  no  fever.  The 
melancholy  are  dijiinguijhed from  other  madmen 

•  '  by  the  exijience  of  fear  and  dejediion,  'without 

any  obvions  catfe  ;  whence  it  has  been  obferved 
'•'■by  Hippocrates— — *■  if  fear  and  de^ 
'  je£lion  continue  for  a  long  time,  this  is  a  Jymp' 

•  torn  of  melancholy* 

*'  Melancholia  vocatur  medicis  ille  morbus, 
'  in  quo  £eger   delirat  diu,    &  pertinaciter, 
fne  fibre,    eidem  fere  &  uni  cognitationi 
"  fcmper  affixus."  \ 

*'  That  diforder  is  by  fome  phyficians  called 
'  melancholy,  in  which  the  patient  is  long  and 

*  objlinately  delirious,  without  fever,  and  aU 

*  moji  always  intent  upon  one  and  the  fame 
thought." 

*'  Melancholia— firmior  cum  mente  alie^ 
nata  phantafia,  certis  objedlis  valde  inhae- 
"*  rens,  cum  diuturno  animi  angore,  inqui- 
;*  etudine,  metu  &  irijlitia  fine  ulla  caufa  ma- 

*'  nifcfta 


t  BOERHAAVH  A^hor,  §  loSg* 


4S         DEFINITION  and 

*'  nlfefta  jun£ta,  a  valde  difficlli  fanguinls  co- 
*'  piofius  in  cerebro  congefti  ac  ftagnantis  per 
*'  vafciejus  progreflb  oborta.  * 

*'  Melancholy  is  a  fixed  imagination^  with  ali- 
*'  enation  of  mind,  which  dwells  much  upon  cer- 
"  tain  objects,  with pennament  anguiJJj,  inquie- 

tude,  fear,  deje£lion,  without  any  obvious 
^'  caufe  ;  arifing  from  the  congefiion  and  Jlagna- 
*'  tion  in  the  brain  of  a  large  quantity  of  blood, 
*'  which  pajjttges  with  great  difficulty,  through 
"  the  vejels  of  that  organ^ 

"  lAoivioLv  Graeci,  infaniam,  vel  magis  pro- 
pric  furorem,  feu ,  rabicm  latini  vocant, 
*'  quod  CO  malo  detcnti  furibundi,  temerarii, 
"  &ferarum  inftar  efFrenes  font. — Eft  itaquc 
Mania  alientio  feu  delirium  vchemens  citra 
*'febremr  % 

"  JVhat  the  Greeks  term  Mania  the  Latins  call 
Infania,  or  more  properly  Furor,  or  Rabies, 
"  becaufe  they  who  are  ill  of  this  dif order  are  ra^ 

"  g'ng, 

*  HoFFMANNi  Med.  Rat.  SyJ!,  Tom.  4.  p.  4.  c.  8  §  7, 
Opcrum,  Tom.  3.  p.  252. 

^  PisoN.  dc  co^nos,  cHrand%  Morh,  Lib,  u  cap.  i4« 
p.  X73.  Tomt  I. 


ARRANGEMENT* 


*'  ging,  violent y  and  as  ungovernable  as  favag6 
*'  beajls^—'in  a  word.  Mania  is  a  violent  aliena^ 
**  tion  of  mind,  or  delirium,  without  fever/' 

**  Efl — Mania,  feu  furor,  delirium^  fcU 
imagination  is  &  rationis  depravatio,  fine 
*'  timore  fed  potius  cum  audacia,  temeritate,: 
"  ira,  jurgiis,  &  ferocia,  Jine  febre,  a  difpo* 
**  fitione  fpirituum  fervida  &  ignea  ortum  ha-- 
"  bens."  II 

"Mania,  or  fury,  is  a  delirium,  or  de-^ 
**  pravation  of  the  imagination  and  reafon,  ivitb- 
"  out  fear,  and  rather  with  audacity,  rajhnefs^ 
"  anger,  contention,  and  violence-,  without  fever, 
*'  owing  its  origin  to  a  hot  and  fery  difpojition 
*<  of  the  fpirits.'' 

"  Mania  eft  delirium  fine  febre  cum  furore 
"  &  audacia.'*  § 

"  M  A  N  I  A  is  a  delirium  without  fiver ^ 
*'  with  fury  and  auda\ity^^ 

G '  Mama 

II  Sennerti  0/fr.  Tom.  3.  p.  xoS. 

S  RiVEJlil  J^rax.Med,  Lib,  i,  c,  18,  Jj.  86, 


i-0       DEFINITION  W 

"  Mania  cil:  mentis  dluturna,  cum  audacid 
*'  &  ferocia  fine  fehre,  ab  igneo  fpiritiim  fer- 
vorc  exorta,  ernotio^^  * 

*'  M  A  N  I  A  ha  permanent  emotion  of  the 
'*  m'md^   with  audacity,    and  violence^  with- 

out  fever,  arlfrng  from  a  fery  fervor  of  the 
*'fpmts'* 

"  A  M  V  I  s  Cicero  hanc  afFc£llonem 
"  Latinos  furorem  appellalTe,  &  Grtecos  Me- 
"  lancholiam  fcripferit  ;  proprie  tamen  me- 

dici  ipfam  dlcunt  Infiniam,  feu  delirium  il- 

lud,  quo  segri  praeter  imaglnationis,  &  ra- 
"  tiocinationis  depravationem,  impetunt,  fu- 
**  runt,  ac  nihil  omnino  formidantes,  omnia 
"  temerc  audent,  &  indifcriminatim  aggredi- 
*'  untur  :  febre  tamen  carent,  &  memoria  va- 

lent."  X 

Though  Cicero  tells  us  that  the  Latins 
called  this  dif order  fury,  and  the  Greeks  Melan- 
choly  \  yet  phyficians,  -.oj  friSinefs  of  Jpeech, 
*'  give  it  the  appellation  of  infanity,  or  that  kind 

*  JoNSTONX  JJea  Univ.  Mcil.  PreH,  Lib,  8,  p.  394* 
X  Tozzi  0/fr.  Tom,  i,  p.  1x4, 


ARRANGEMENT. 


of  delirium,  in  which  the  patient  is  not  only  af^ 
fedled  with  a  depravity  of  imagination  andrca^ 
foning,  but  is  violent  and  outrageous,  andy  fear- 
ing  nothing,  rcfhly  dares,  and  indifcriminately>' 
attempts,  every  thing ;  yet  is  void  of  fevetj^ 
and  has  the  perfect  ufe  of  his  memory-'^ 

*'  S  I  Melancholia  eoufque  increfcit,  ut 
taiita  acG^dat  agitatio  liqmdi  ccrebrofi,  qua, 
in  fur  or  em.  agantur  f(ievum.  Mania  yoca-^- 
tur."  % 

"  If  Melancholy  her eafes  to  fuch  a.degree  as  to 
be  attended  with-great  agitation,  of  the  nervous.: 
■fluid  in  the  brain^  by  which  violent  fury  is  ex-^ 
cited,  the  diforderis  then  called  Mania.'* 

"  Mania— e{k  n^olenta  Infania  euro,  temerita- 
te  &  ingcnti  membporum  robore  conjundla^ 
a  vehementiori  fanguinis  crafli,  copiofi  & 
Meiancholici  per  cerebri  vafa  cum  magna, 
aeftu  fcranfpreffione  proveniens.  Phretiitis 
deniquc  eft  Infania  cum  febre^  3,  ftafi  fan-" 
G  2i  ''^uigia-- 

t 

^  BoSRHAAYII  JpK  §  IltS^ 


SZ        DEFINITION  and 


guinis  inflammatoria  in  vafis  cerebri  or- 
*'?a."f 

M  A  N  I  A  ha  violent  Infanity,  accom^ 
pafiied  with  temerity,  and  vajl  exertions  of 
**  mujcular  J}rength  ;  proceeding  from  a  forcible 
"  and  copious  tranfmiffion  of  thick,  and  Melancho" 
ly  blood,  with  great  heat,  through  the  vejfels 
of  the  brain.    Whereas  phrcn fy  is  Infanitj 
**  with  fever,  arifingfrom  an  inflammatory  o^^ 
Jlrudiion  in  the  vejjels  of  the  brain,'* 

I  fhall  not  trouble  the  reader  with  a  mi* 
nute  criticlfm  on  thefe  definitions.  In  what; 
refpedts  they  are  erroneous,  or  defective,  will, 
I  hope,  be  rendered  apparent  by  what  I  fhall 
hereafter  advance  in  the  courfe  pf  thefc  obfcr- 
yations,  A  fev/  curfory  remarks,  however, 
^nay  not  be  improper  in  th^s  place. 

I  N  ^11  the  definitions  of  Infanity  here  quo- 
ted, and  moft  medical  writers  agree  in  giving 
pretty  yearly  the  fame  definitions,  ||  it  may 
^      ■  be 

f  Hoffmann:  Mccl.  i?^,  -^9)^^,  Top.  4..  c.  8.  §  0^r» 
Tom.  3%  p.  253. 

1]  Such  as  choofc  to  fee  more  to  the  fkme,  or  nearly  to  the 

fa.ma 


ARRANGEMENT.  53 

he  obferved  that  the  term  delirium,  cfr  fome- 
thing   fynonymous,   is  univerlally  adopted. 
It  is,  however,  as  we  have  juft  feen,  very 
differently  defined  by  different  writers; — by 
many  it  is  not  defitaed  at  all  ;— and  by  none 
fo  perfeftly  as  might  be  wifhed.    For  moft 
writers,  while  they  adhere  to  the  commoii 
definitions  of  delirium,  and  Infanity,  defcribe 
fuch  forts  of  Infanity,  in  enumerating'  the 
particulars,  as  have  nothing  in  common  with 
the  delirium  of  a  fever  :    though  none  of 
them,  in  tlieir  definitions,  except  Aret^us, 
rnake  any.  other  difi^erence  between  the  dcliri- 
Vim  of  a  phrenf}'',  and  that  of  Infanity,  than 

what 

fame  purpofc,  may  confult,  among  othf:i"s,  the  following  wrn. 

ters  :  Celsi  de  Medic ina,   lib.  3.  cap.  18.  p.  148,  Sec.  — 

pAUi.  jEgin^t.  dc  Re  Mcdica^  lib.  3.  cap.  14.  p.  19,  39.  and 
p.  20,  22. — Prosper  I  Alpini  de  Medii,tna  Method,  lib.  10. 

10.  p.  608.  and  cap.  4.  p.  40 — Massari.e  Opcr.  lib.  \, 
cap.  21.  p.  65.  and  cap.  22.  p.  74. — Plateri  Opcr.  Medic. 
Tom.  I.  p.  84.87,85. — HoRSTii  (Georg.  Jlnior.)  Ope,\ 
^ledic.  Tom.  3.  p.  38. — DoL^I  Encyclopad,  Medic,  lib.  r, 
cap.  3.  p.  25.  and  cap.  22.  p.  74. — Willis  de  Anlma  Brutor. 
cap.  II.  p.  322.  cap.  12,  p,  344. — PiTCARN.  Element.  Me-r 
dicince.  lib.  2.  cap.  6.  Opcntm.  p,  IC3.  106. — Bueneti  Thc- 
faur.  Medic.  PraSl.  lib.  11.  §  6.  p.  602.  §  9.  p.  607. — Bo-, 
NETi  Polyath.  lib.  2.  cap.  17.  Tom.  i.  p.  671.  and  cap.  1.8.  p. 
696 — De  GoRTER  Medicln,  Dogmat.  c.  i.  §  5.  p,.  6. — Heis- 
ts Ri  Compcnd.  Medicin.  cap.  14.  §  23.  24.  zC,.  p.    108.  • 

Mead's  If^orh,  vol.  3.  p.  41, — ilouz  Princif,  McdicintXy^zxt: 
2,  ca|).  6,  ^.  225a 


54 


DEFINITION  and 


what  arifes  from  the  prefencc  or  abfence  of 
fever  ;  as  may  be  fecii  in  the  above  extrads 
from  Galen  and  his  followers.  Hoffman, 
in  endeavouring  to  derive  the  diftindions  from 
the  difference  of  the  proximate  caufes,  has 
liot  perhaps  done  much  better  :  and  two  other 
celebrated  moderns,  Boehhaave  and  De 
GoRTER,  in  attempting  to  furpafs,  have 
rather  fallen  fhort  of  the  antients  ;  fuice  their 
definitions,  or  at  leaft  that  of  De  Gorter, 
are  ftri6lly  sipplicable  only  to  thofe  fpecies  of 
delirium,  v/hich  I  fhall  hereafter  define  under 
the  title  of  ideal  delirium^  whereas  there  are 
feveral  fpecies  of  Infanity,  which  rank  under 
another  fort  of  delirmn,  in  which  there  is  no- 
thing fimilar  to  what  thefe  writers  have  defi- 
ned delirium  to  be. 

I  T  may  be  proper  farther  to  obferve,  that 

there  are  fpecies  of  Infanity,  and  thofe  not 
only  frequently  to  be  met  with,  but  of  vari- 
ous kinds,  in  which  there  is  neither  dej.e3ion 
nor  audacity  ;  and  which  confcquently  neither 
come  under  the  defpription,  of  Mania,  nor  of 
Melancholy. 


A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  NT. 


55 


The  learned  Dr.  Lorry  has,  indeed,  at- 
tempted fome  new,  and  ingenious,  definitions 
of  Infanity,  in  which  he  has  taken  no  notice  ei- 
ther of  delirium,  fever,  and  though  he  has 
retained  dejection,  or  what  he  calls  imbecility 
Df  mind,  by  which  he  means  to  exprefs  the 
«eupa  of  ARETiEUS,  as  a  fpecific  fymptom 
of  Melancholy,  he  has  rejected  audacity  as  not 
sHential  to  Mania.  But  while  he  has  in  fome 
refpe£ts,  laid  afide  the  language  of  the  anti- 
ents  ;  his  attachments  to  their  opinions  has  fo 
influenced  his  judgment,  that  his  definitions 
W'ill  be  found,  onaclofc  examination,  to  re- 
prcfent,  in  fa£t,  nothing  more  than  the  Me- 
lancholia and  Mania  of  the  Greek  phyficians, 
under  the  difguife  of  a  new,  and  more  fhowy 
drefs.  They  are  as  follows  : — 

*'Melancholi  a  a  nobis  defi- 

nietur,  ilia  mentis  imbcc'dlitas  [a5u/^/«]  a 
*^  corporis  vitiato  habitu  oriunda,  in  qua  for- 
*'  titer  concutimur  ab  obje£lis,  aut  externis, 
*'  aut  ab  imaginandi  vi  effc£lis,  ita  ut  jam  im- 
*'  poflibile  fit  ideis  inde  natis  obfiflere,  ab  iis 
avelli,  aut  contra  ratione  tendere."  f 

m 

f  De  Mdanchtlia^  Introdii^.  p.  3, 


5^ 


DEFINITION  and 


We  fi  all  define  Melancholy^   fays  he, 
be  an  imbecility  of  mind,  occafioned  by  a 
"  vitiated  habit  of  body,  in  which  we  are  fo 
firongly  affe5ied,  either  by  external  objeSls,  or 
"  fyfuchas  are  formedmerely  by  the  power  of  l- 
maglnatlon,  as  to  be  incapable  of  r  effing,  of 
"  withdrawing  the  attention  from,  or  of  over- 
*'  coming  by  reafon,  the  ideas  thence  arifing^'' 

"  Infania,  five  Mania,  efi  corporis  2egrd- 
*'  tantis  conditio  ilia,  in  qua  judicia  a  fenfibus 
"  orinnda  nullatenus  aut  fibi  inter  ie,  ailt  rei 
"  repraefentatas  refponfant.'*  | 

*'  I  N  s  A  N  t  T  Y,  or  Mania,  is  that  dif 
ordered fate  of  the  body,  in  which  the  judg- 
"  mcnts  arifngfrom  the  fenfes,  in  no  degree  cor" 
"  refpond  with  each  other,  or  with  the  objects  re* 
*'  prefeiited^'* 

But  though  Infinity  has  almoft  tiniver- 
fally  been  divided  into  thefe  two  kinds,  which 
have  ufually  been  conlidered  as  fo  perfe6lly 
diftintSV,  as  to  derive  their  origin  from  very 
different  and  dlftind  caufcs  J  one  of  which, 

according 

X  Me  Melancholia,  part  3,  cap,  6,  Articul.  frirn.  p,  36l< 


ARRx^NGEMENT. 


57 


according  to  Galen j  may  properly  be  called 
atra  bilis,  — "  atque  vomentibus  ipfam  &  ol- 
fiicientibus  videtur  acida,*'  §— "  and  when 
throw?!  up  from  the  Jlomach  has  an  acid  tajle  and 

fjuell   while  the  other—"  eft  veluti  faex 

fangiiinis,  quae  admodum  fpifla  exiftit,  faeci- 
bus  vidi  baud  abfimilis — neque  nlla  aeida  qua* 
Jitatc  participat ;  &  potius  melanchoUcus  aut 
fuccus  aut  fanguls^  quam  atra  bilis  dicenda 
eft  ^ — is  a  kind  of feculent  part  of  the  bloody 
"  very  thick,  and  not  unlike  the  lees  of  wine  ; 
*'  Js  without  a?7y  acid  quality, — and  ought  rather 
to  be  called  iuccvL%,  or  fanguis  melancholi* 
*' cus,  /y6^>7  atra  bills  :" — yet  they  are  by  no 
means  fo  abfolutely,  and  unlverfally,  diftm6: 
and  unconneded  difeafes,  as  fo  dlftindt  an 
origin,  and  fuch  different  fymptoms,  would 
lead  one  to  huagine  ;  and  indeed  it  has  been 
obferved  by  Aret^us  Cappadox,  ||  Alex- 

H  ANDER 
^  §  De  Loch  affeEl.   Lib.  3.   cap.  3.  Lacunje  Efitom.  p« 

^    I  *  I*  20* 

f  Ibid.  Lacunae  Epliom.  pi  741.  1.  17.  and  25. 
i  lAiXu^oXlTJ,      ^^«rb.  DliiUirn,  Lib.  i.  c.  5.  p.  29.  E. 


DEFINITION  and 

ANDER    TrALLIANUS,  §     BoERHAAVE,  -f- 

and  perhaps  one  or  two  more,  that  the  one 
is  frequently  generated  by  the  other. 

Mania,  however,  is  not  :nlways,  as 
BoERHAAVE,  after  Aket^us  and  Tral- 
LI  AN,  aflerts,  *'  Melancholias  proles** — the 
offspring  of  Melancholy, — lince  it  often  begins 
originally,  without  any  preceeding  Melan- 
choly ;  and  is  on  fuch  occafions,  fometimes 
the  parent,  inftead  of  being  the  offspring  of 
that  fpccies  of  delirium. 

Even  during  the  courfe  of  the  fame  ill- 
nefs,  it  not  unfrequently  happens  that  Mania 
and  Melancholy  alternate  repeatedly  with 
each  other  ;  fo  that  each  in  its  turn  gene- 
rates, and  is  generated  ;  is,  in  the  language  of 
BoERHAAVE,  both  parent  and  offspring. 

Both  alfb,  notwithffanding  that  the  de- 
finitions almofl  univerfally  contain  the  words 

§  Nihil  enira  aliud  eft  Infania,  quam  Melancholia:  ad  majo- 
rem  feritatcm  intenfio.  Dc  Arte  Mcdlca.  Lib.  i.  cap.  17. 
Halleri  Art.  Med.  Prlncip..  Tom.  6.  p.  86. 

f  Aph,  iiic). 


ARRANGEMENT. 


59^ 


fine fcbrCy'' — or  others  to  the  fame  pur*' 
pofe,  are  frequently  accompanied  with  fever^ 
and  have  nightly  exacerbations  ;  efpccially 
Mania.    It  is  a  fever,  however,  of  a  pecuUar 
'kind,  and  in  no  degree  proportioned  to  the. 
I  dehrium. 

And  yet  thefe  definitions,  as  they  have 
been  fo  generally  adhered  to,,  muft  have  been 
commonly  looked  upon  as  complete  ;  or,  at 
leaft,  as  very  fufficient  for  the  purpofes  of  the 
pra£llcal  phyfician.  And,  \\\  fa6l,  to  one  or 
other  of  thefe  two  genera,  every  fpecies  of 
madnefs  has  ufually  been  referred  ; — with 
what  propriety  the  reader  will  judge,  after  at- 
tentively conlidering  what  follows,  and  com- 
paring it  with,  the  above  defmltlons  and  ob- 
fervationSt 

I  T  muft  be  acknowledged,  indeed,  that 
there  are  fomc  fmall  deviations  from  thefe  ef- 
tablifhed  definitions,  befides  thofe  already 
mentioned,  to  be  met  with  in  the  writing? 
pf  praftical  phyficians  ;  efpecially  when  they 
come  to  enumerate  the  various  fymptoms  of 
Fnfanity.    They  have  controverted  the  pjo-%. 

H  2  pi'i^l^|t' 


6o        DEFINITION  and 


priety  of  fome  parts  of  the  definitions  ;  and 
have  hinted  at  a  fufpicion  of  a  greater  variety 
of  fpecies  :  but  at  the  fame  time  that  they 
have  perceived  fome  few  rays  of  truth,  they 
have  not  had  the  courage  to  follow  a  light,  of 
which  they  have  difcovered  lo  fmall  a  glim- 
mering. II 

I  T  appears  woiiderful  that  they  did  not 
examine  farther —that  they  did  not  entirely 
reject  definitions,  and  diftindions,  fo  little 
confident  with  appearances  ;  which  were  ori, 
ginally  huih  upon  a  theory,  of  which  the 
blindnefs  of  attachment  to  eftablifhed  do6lrines 
alone  could  prevent  even  the  earlier  writers 
from  perceiving  the  imperfedion  ;  and  which 
the  modern  difcoveries  relative  to  the  ftruc- 
ture,  fuuiSions,  and  oeconomy  of  t-he  human 
body,  might  have  taught  us,  have  but  a  ve- 
ry {lender  foundation  in  truth. 

H  A  V  I  K  G  thus  taken  a  general  view  of 
the  definitions,  and  devifions  of  delirium,  and 

Infanity, 

II  Eroent  Anbuadv,  Medic,  in  Regii  Prax.  Mrd.  lAh.  x, 
§  i^.  p.  137.  Note  a.  §  15.  p.  147,  Note  a.  p.  i<j8.  Note 
Bellini  De Morb,  ct^j>:t,  p.  ^oS, 


ARRANGEMENT. 


Infanity,  mod  commonly  adopted  ;  I  fhall 
now  proceed  to  enquire,  how  thefc  difordcrs 
may  be  better  defined,  and  the  feveral  fpecies 
of  Infanity  more  completely  enumerated,  and 
more  accurately  diftinguilhed. 

The  fources  of  human  Iznowledge  have 
been  reckoned  by  the  great  Mr.  Locke,  to 
be  two,  SENSATION,  and  reflection  ; 
and  coufequentl}'"  the  objects  about  which  the 
faculties  of  the  human  mind  may  be  employ- 
ed, to  be  alfo  of  two  kinds,  one  comprehend- 
ing, what  may  be  called  objects  of  sen-? 
SAT  ION,  and  the  other  objects  of  re- 
flection. J 

Objedis  offenfat'm  are  all  material  objects, 
and  their  fenfible  qualities  ;  and  their  reprc- 
fentations  in  the  mind  are  properly  called 
ideas  or  images. 

Objects  of  reflexion  are,  whatever  the  mind 
perceives  or  difcovers,  or  thinks  it  perceives 
or  difcovers,  by  the  exercife  of  its  faculties  in 

confidering 

X  See  Locke's  EJJlty  on  Hummi  XJndcrJlanding.    Book  2, 
chap.  1.  vol.  I,  p.  144. 


62 


DEFINITION  and 


confidering  the  powers,  properties,  and  rela-^ 
tions,  of  material  and  fenri,ble  objei^ls,  or  its 
own  iQCiiltiftC.  Such  perceptions  and  difca- 
vcries,  real  or  imaginary,  ma j  with  propriety 
be  called  notions, 

T  IT  I  s  diviiion,  though  apparently,  and 
nominally,  the  fame,  is,  in  reality  confidcra-. 
bly  different  from  that  of  Mr.  Logke  ;  and 
nearly  refembles  that  of  Dr.  Hartley^ 
zmd,  though  it  may  poflibly  be  thought  by 
fome,  to  be  lefs  philofophical,  it  is,  howe- 
ver, better  adapted  to  explain  my  own  par- 
ticular views,  in  the  prefent  enquiry.  The, 
former  derives  from  fenfation, — ideas  of  fcnfa" 
Jation  \  and  from  reflexion,  — of  rejleclion  : 
the  latter  calls  thofe  ideas  which  refemble  fen- 
fations,  ideas  of  fenfation  :  and  all  the  reft  in- 
telle5lual  ideas,  *  Whereas  I  confine  the  term 
idea  to  the  immediate  reprcfentation  in  the  mind 
af  ohjedis  of  fnfation  only  :  and  though  I  have 
adopted  Locke's  divifion  into  thefc  two 
fources  of  knowledge,  yet  I  am  inclined  to 
beheve,  with  Har^tley,  that  all  we  know  Is 

oriiriiiallv 

^  Ohfcrvations  on  Man^  vol.  I.  InfraduEljon^  p,  2« 


ARRANGEMENT. 


63 


coriginally  derived  from  fenfatioii  ;  which  iii- 
ideed  Mr.  Locke  himfelf  feems  in  fa6l,  to 
^^rant,  in  feveral  parts  of  his  eflay  ;  and  e- 
wen  of  his  fccond  fource,  he  obfervcs,  that 
'**  though  it  be  not  fcnfe,  as  having  nothing 
to  do  with  external  objects  ;  yet  it  is  very 
like  it,  and  might  properly  enough  be  cal- 
led  internal fenfey  § 

The  following  arc  Hartley's  obfcrva* 
tzions  upon  Locke's  two  fources  of  our  ideas. 

"First,  fays  he,  it  appears  to  me,  that 
all  the  moft  complex  ideas  arife  from  fenfa- 
tion  ;  and  that  reflection  is  not  a  diftin6t 
"fource,  as  Mr.  Locke  makes  it." 

"Secondly,  Mr.  Locke  afcribes 
"  ideas  to  many  words,  which,  as  I  havede- 
I"  fined  idea,  cannot  be  faid  to  have  any  im- 
I"  mediate  and  precife  ones  ;  but  only  to  ad- 
I"  mit  of  definitions.  However,  let  definition 
I"  be  fubftituted  inftead  of  idea,  in  thefc  ca- 
r*  fes,  and  then  all  Mr.  Locke's  excellent 
I  rules 

§  Lockers  Effay  on  Human  Underjianding^  Book  2,  chap.  r. 
Jbl.  I,  p.  147, 


64     '     DEFINITION  and 


rules  concerning  words  delivered  in  his 
•*  third  book,  will  fuit  the  theory  of  thefe 
*'  papers." 

"As  to  the  firft  difference,  which  I  think 

*'  may  be  called  an  error  in  Mr.  Locke,  it  is, 

"however,  of  little  confequence.     We  may 

*'  conceive,  that  he  called  fuch  ideas  as  he  could 
"  analyfe  up  to  fenfation,  ideas  of  feniation  ; 

the  reft  ideas  of  reflection,  ufing  reflexion  as 
*'atermof  art,  denoting  an  unknown  quantity. 
*'  Befides  which  it  may  be  remarked,  that  the 

words  which,  according  to  him,  ftand  for 

ideas  of  refledion,  are,  in  general,  words, 
*'  that,  according  to  the  theory  of  thefe  pa- 
*'  pers,  have  no  ideas,  but  definitions  only. 
*'  And  thus  the  firfl  difference,  is,  as  it  were, 
*'  taken  away  by  the  fecond  ;  for,  if  thefe 

words  have  no  immediate  ideas,  there  will 
"  be  no  occafion  to  have  recourfe  to  refleflion 
"  as  a  fource  of  ideas  ;  and,  upon  the  whole, 
"  there  is  no  material  repugnancy  between 
*'  the  confcquences  of  this  theor-y,  and  any 
"  thing  advanced  by  Mr.  Locke." 

T  H  E  ingenious  Bifhop  Berkeley  has 

juftly 


ARllANGEMENT* 


65 


'*f  juftly  obferved  agaiiifl  Mr.  LoCKE,  that 
there  can  be  no  fuch  thing  as  abftradt  ideas, 

'  in  the  proper  fenfe  of  the  word  idea.  How* 
ever^  this  does  not  feem  to  vitiate  any  con- 
fiderable  part  of  Mr.  Locke's  reafoning* 
Subftitute  definition  for  idea  in  the  proper 
places,  and  his  conclufions  will  hold  good 
"  in  general."  § 

W  E  fee,  by  this  extract!!:,  that  the  dif- 
:fercnce  between  Locke  and  Hartley  is 
mot  very  great.  While  the  former  makes  two 
ifources  of  our  ideas,  fenfation  and  refledlion,  he 
inot  only  allows  that  the  latter  is  a  kind  of  fen^ 
ifation  ;  but  even  makes  it  dependent  on  the 
.'  other  ;  fince  he  aflerts  that  we  can  have  no 
i ideas  till  we  begin  to  have  fenfations* 

But  though  it  be  granted,  that  fenfattoii 
iis  the  inftrument,  which  furnifhes  the  mind 
'with  means  and  materialsj  if  not  with  the 
tobje(£ls,  of  all  its  knowledge  ;  without  which 
lit  would  be  but  like  "  white  paper,  void  of 
:all  charaders,  without  any  ideas,"  in  a  word, 

I  little 


§  ChfcrvatioHS  on  Man^  vol.  i.  p.  360* 


DEFINITION  and 


better  than  a  nonentity  ;— yet  mere  fenf'ation 
is  lb  paffive  a  thing,  that  a  very  low  degree  of 
knowledge  only  could  be  derived  from  fo 
fcanty  a  fountain  ;  and  man  without  fome 
more  copious  fource,  -  without  fome  capacity 
of  turning  to  good  account  the  information 
which  he  receives  from  his  fenfes,— would 
feem  to  be  in  a  ftatc,  and  to  poflefs  powers^ 
not  at  all  fuperior  to  thofe  of  the  meancft  ani- 
mal. Now  man  appears  to  me  to  have  fuch  a 
capacity  in  what  more  peculiarly  deferves 
tile  name  of  reflection. 

F  o  R  it  may  be  obferved  of fenfation  and  re- 
Jlediion,  that  the  on  fcem*  to  be  merely  apajfive, 
and  the  othtr  partly  a  pajjive,  and  partly  a?t 
ii£live  Jiate  of  the  mind  :  that  when  the  latter 
is  paJJive,  it  might  with  more  propriety  be  cal- 
led internal  Jenfation,  or  perception  ;  and  that 
only  when  active  it  can  with  ftridnefs  be  de- 
nominated r-ejiedlion. 

And  though  it  mu'ft  be  acknowledged 
that  this  adi  'pve  Jlate  of  the  mind  is  much  in- 
ilnenced,  and  feems,  indeed,  in  a  great  mea- 
fuie,  it  not  altogether,  to  owe  its  exiftence 
to  the  paJjlve  :  yet  luch  i3  the  nature  and  con- 
flit  utioii 


ARRANGEMENT.  4^ 


flitutioa  of  the  mind,— of  thia.  "  divm(ie  partU 
cula  i/«r^"— that  while  it  is  capable  of  fenfa- 
tion  and  perception,  that  is,  while  it  can  be 
faid  to  exift,  it  can  fcarcely  for  a  moment  bq 
merely  pallive  ;  for  as  whatever  objects  pre-r. 
fent  themfelves  to  its  view,  whether  exter^ 
nally  or  internally,  are  all  perhaps  in  fomq 
degree,  dirc£lly,  or  by  aflbc.iation,  agreeable 
difagreeahle,  the  mind  muft  have  a  perpetual, 
motive,  of  fome  kind  or  other,  for  the  exer-^ 
tion  of  its  a6live  powers,  and  muft  ever  be  en- 
gaged in  the  purfuit  or  avoidance  of  what  ix 
likes  or  diflikes,  relative  to  knowledge,  virtue 
or  pleafure. 

I N  other  words,   the  acliVe  ftate  of  the 
mind,  and  the  a6live  powers,  in  the  immedi- 
ate exertion  of  which  fuch  adlive  ftatc  eonfifts, 
feem  originally,  and  perpetually,  to  depend 
on  the  paffive,  or  perceptive,  as  an  exciting 
caufe,  without  the  inccflfant  inftrumcntality  of 
iwhofe  Simulation  and  excitement,  they  would 
foon  ceafe  to  be  :  the  cxercifc  of  the  under^ 
'ftanding^  w///,  and  afeclions,  all  depending 
upon  fenfation,  external  or  internal,  truth 
:or  faljhood,  good  or  ///,  plcafure  or  pain  :  ia 


6Z        DEFINITION  (inJ 

iliort,  all  our  ideas  or  notions,  however  dif- 
tant  they  may  appear  to  be  from  any  fufpicion 
of  fuch  an  origin,  deriving  their  exlftence 

primarily  from  mere  fenfation.  "  If  it  be 

aiked,"  fays  that  fagacious  phllofopher  Mr. 
Locke,    "  zvhen  a  man  begins  to  have  any  i- 
deas  ?  I  think  the  true  anfwer  is,  when  he 
"  £rft  has  any  fenfation.    For  fince  there  ap- 
*'  pear  not  to  be  any  ideas  in  the  mind,  before 
*'^the  fenfes  have  conveyed  any  in,  I  conceive 
**  that  ideas  in  the  underftanding  are  coeval 
*'  with  fenfation  :  which  Is  fuch  an  impreflion 
or  motion,  made  in  fome  part  of  the  body, 
'     as  produces  fome  perception  of  the  under- 
*'  ftanding.      It  is  about  thefe  impreffions 
*'  made  on  our  fenfes  by  outward  objedls, 
that  the  mind  feems  firft  to  employ  itfelf  in 
fuch  operations  as  we  call  perception^  re- 
member ing,  conjiderifig,  reafoning,  &c."  || 

The  faculty  of  perceiving  material  ob- 
je£ls,  and  their  grofler  qualities,  by  means 
of  the  fenfes,  we  poffefs  in  common  with 
brutes  :  but  the  power  of  comparing  and  ar- 
ranging 

\\  EJTay  on  Hmnan  Uiiderjmdingy  Boplc  2,  chap.   i.   §  23, 
vol.  I,  p.  162. 


ARRANGEMENT, 


69 


ranging  their  feveral  relations  and  properties, 
and  of  reafoning  analogically  conccnp.ng 
them ;  the  power  of  abfrrattion  ;  and  thttt 
reflex  atlion  of  the  mind  by  which  it  is  et?x> 
bled  to  review  its  internal  trcalures,  and  to 
contemplate  its  own  fiiculties  and  operat'iojis  ; 
which  lead  to  the  difcovery  of  almofl  an  iiiti- 
nity  of  new  truths  and  probabilities  ;  and  are 
the  inexhauftiblc  fources  of  every  fpecks 
knowledge;  are,  in  a  great  meafure,  theex* 
cliifive  privilege  of  man. 

About  x\\q  former  it  is  obvious  that  ihot 
mind  can  err,  in  any  confiderable  degree,  022- 
iy  by  fome  defedl  in  the  bodily  organs,  "whe- 
ther natural  or  acquired,  permanent  or  traa- 
fient. 

About  the  latter  it  may  err  from  a  va- 
riety of  caufes ;  which  might  all,  perhaps, 
not  unaptly  be  arranged  under  the  following 

heads,  a  natural  incapacity,  or  habitual 

deficiency  of  attention, — vi^eaknefs  of  memory, — 
too  great  adivity,  and  indulgence  of  imaghm- 
//o;?,— depravity   of  w///,— excefs  of  pajjion, ' 
which  is  the  natural  confequence  of  them  all, 
—and  difeafe  of  body. 

T  H  E  S 


70 


DEFINITION  and 


These  errors  may  be  very  confiderable, 
and  unreafonablc,  without  conftltuting  Mad- 
nefs  :— to  deferve  that  appellation,  they  muft 
appear  of  a  certain  magnitude,  and  under 
certain  circumftances  and  limitations,  which 
I  fhall  now  proceed  to  point  out.  It  muft, 
however,  be  acknowledged,  that  it  is  fre- 
quently difficult,  efpeclally  with  regard  to  the 
latter  fort  of  mental  errors,  exa£lly  to  define 
where  folly  ends,  and  Infanity  begins. 

"The  mind  may  be  faid  to  be  delirious 
when  it  fuppofes  fenfible  objefts  to  cxlft  ex- 
tcrnally,  which  exift,  as  they  then  appear 

"  to  the  mind,  only  in  idea  :  or  has  fuch 

"  fiotions  about  objects  which  it  fees,  hears, 
*'  or  otherwife  perceives,  or  knows,  as  appear 
obvioufly  falfe,  or  abfurd,  to  the  common 
*'  fcnfc  and  experience  of  the  fober  and  ra- 

tional  part  of  mankind  Delirium,  there- 

fore,  may  naturally  be  divided  into  two 
"  kinds  : — the  one,  arifing  from  an  error  in 
om  ideas,  I  call  ideal  delirium  ;  and 
**  the  other,  arifing  from  an  error  in  our  noti" 

^  Ons^  I  call  NOTIONAL  DELIRIUM," 


The 


ARRANGEMENT.  .71 


The  former  kind  of  delirium  is  common 
both  to  fever  and  Madnefs the  latter^  I  am 
inclined  to  believe,  is  peculiar  to  Madnefs, — ■ 
and  fufpeft  that  whenever  any  degree  of  it  is 
to  be  obferved  in  the  delirium  of  a  fever,  it 
portends  that  it  will  probably  end  in  Mad- 
nefs. 

That  the  delirium  of  the  true  phrenfy, 
and  other  high  degrees  of  febrile  delirium, 
are  of  the  ideal  kind,  is  obvious  to  the  moft  fu- 
perficial  examiner  ;  but  that  the  flighter  de- 
grees, which  chiefly  affe£t  the  patient,  on 
firft  waking  out  of  deep,  with  abfencc,  mut- 
tering, wandering,  rage  or  terror ;  which 
greatly  abate,  or  ccafe  altogether,  as  the  re- 
maining efFeds  of  fleep  are  diflipated  ;  are  all 
likewifeof  the  ideal  kind,  is  not  at  firft  view 
fo  obvious  :  but  upon  a  ftri£ler  fcrutiny,  wc 
may  perceive  that  thefe  fymptoms  arife  chief- 
ly from  delirious  images  in  the  brain,  which 
being  but  {lightly  impreffed,  while  the  brain, 
is  but  flightly  affedled,  arc  only  vivid  during 
fleep,  which  fhuts  out  the  glare  of  external 
objedls ;  and  gradually  vanifli  as  fleep  gives 
place  to  waking  ;  jufl:  as  the  dreams  of  chil- 
dren 


DEFINITION  and 


dren often  continue  for  a  while  after  tbey  are 
apparently  awake,  their  fenfcs  being  with 
diiliculty  roufcd,  and  drawing  off  the  attenti- 
on hj  flow  degrees  from  the  tdeal p'l^iiirc  prc- 
f^nfed  during  flecp,  to  the  real  reprefentaiion 
of  ilixrounding  objcd:s. 

1  F  what  has  been  advanced  be  juft,  I  may 
BOW,  with  fome  degree  of  clearnelb  and  pi'e- 
cifioo,  proceed  to  defne  Insanity  ;  and  to 
enumerate,  and  deicribe,  fuch  of  its  Ipecies 
as  iiave  fallen  under  ray  own  obfervation,  or 
isnre  been  noticed  by  other  medical  writers. 

Insanity,  as  well  as  dcUnum,  may 
be  confidered  as  divifible  into  Hvo  kinds  ;  one 
of  which  may  be  called  ideal, — and  the  o- 
ther  NOTIONAL  Insanity. 

"Ideal   Insanity  is  that  ftate 
*'  of  mind  in  which  a  perfon  imagines  he  fees, 
hears,  or  otherwife  perceives,  or  converfes 
with,  perfonsor  things,  which  either  have 
no  external  exiflence  to  h'S  fenfes  at  that 
"  time  ;  -  or  have  no  fuch  external  exiftencc 
^*  as  they  are  then  conceived  to  have  :— or,  if 
he  perceives  external  objedls  as  they  really 

exiftp 


1^ 


ARRANGEMENT*  73 


"  exifl,  has  yet  erroneous  and  abfurd  ideas 
"  of  his  own  form,  and  other  fenfible  quali- 
"  ties  : — fuch  a  ftate  of  mind  continuing  for 
*'  a  confiderable  time  ;  and  being  unaccom- 
"  panied  with  anj  violent  or  adequate  degree 
"  of  fever.'* 

iNSANiTY  of*  this  fort  is  fomctimes  at- 
tended with  fear^  fornetimes  with  audacity, 
fometimes  with  neither  ;  and  maj  be  either 

conjlant,  — remittent,  —  or    intermittent,  The 

conjiant  has  no  very  obfervcablc,  nor  any  re- 
gular remiffions  : — the  remittent  ufually  grows 
milder  once  in  twenty  four  hours,  generally 
in  the  day  time,  and  has  exacerbations  in  the 
evening :  —  the  intermittent  has  confiderable 
lucid  intervals  ;  and  as  the  paroxyfms  of  this 
fort  of  Madncfs  have  been  commonly  fuppofed 
to  obey  the  full  and  change  of  the  moon,  ic 
has  therefore  been  peculiarly  diftinguifhcd  by 
the  name  of  Lunacy  a  name  which  has, 
however,  been  indifcriminately  extended  to 
every  fpecics  of  Infinity. 

"Notional  Insanity  is  that 
ftatc  of  mind  in  which  a  perfon  fees,  hears, 

K  "  or 


^4-        DEFINITION  and 


or  othcrwife  perceives  external  objects  as 
"  they  really  cxift,  as  obje61s  of  fcnfe  ;  yet 
*'  conceives  fuch  notioas  of  the  powers,  pro- 
*'  perties,   defigns,    ftate,    deftination,  im- 

portance,  manner  of  exiftencc,  or  the  like, 
"  of  things  and  perfons,  of  himfclf  and  o- 
*'  thcrs,  as  appear  obvioiifly,  and  often  grofs- 
*'  ly  erroneous,  or  nnrcafonable,  to  the 
*'  common  fenfe  of  the  fober  and  judicious 
"  part  of  mankind.    It  is  of  confiderable  du- 

ration  ;  is  never  accompanied  with  any 
*'  great  degree  of  fever,  and  very  often  with 

no  fever  at  all." 

Notional,  like  ideal  Insanity, 
may  be  either  with  or  without  fear,  or  auda- 
city :  it  is  ufually  conjfant ; — but  in  fome  ca- 
fes It  remits — and  even  intermits, — though  for 
the  moil:  part  with  great  uncertainty  and  ir- 
regularity. 

Insanity  is  eafily  diflinguilhed  from 
the  temporary  and  tranfient  delirium  of  intox^ 
ication^  whether  occafioned  by  wine,  opium, 
or  any  other  inebriating  fubftance, — from  the 
delirium  which  fometimes  accompanies  hyf- 

teric 


ARRANGEMENT.  75, 

itqric  fits,, — and  others  of  a  like  nature  ; — not 
I  by  a  knowledge  of  the  caufe,  but  by  the  du- 
ration of  the  delirium     for  even  the  delirium, 
iarifinp"  from  anv  of  thefe  caufes  becomes  In- 
:fanity,  if  it  continue  long  after  the  original 
I  exciting  caufe  hath  ceafed  to  adl.    Thus  in-- 
'  toxicating  fubftances  may  not  only  produce 
tranfient  delirium,  as  isufually  the  cafe  ;  but 
fometimes,  either  in  a  brain  predifpofed  to 
Infanity,  or  when  taken  to  great  excefs,  or 
when  the  intoxication  has  been  frequently 
and  habitually  repeated,  their  pernicious  ef- 
fects may  be  more  perrnanent  ;  and  indeed  ic 
too  oflen  happens,  that  adtJSli  Madnefs,  of 
various  kinds,  as  circumftances  may  chance 
to  determine,  is  the  dreadful  confecjuence  of 
this  kind  of  intemperance. 

Ideal  Insanity  may  be  either 
phrenltk^  or  not  phrenitic. 

I  N  phrenitic  Infanity  the  mind  may  either 
be  employed  about  one  fet  of  ideas  and  noti- 
ons, in  which  cafe  fomc  particular  aftedion 
is  generally  concerned,— as  love,  avarice,  feaj\ 
terror,  and  the  like  ;— or  it  may  be  agitated 

K  2,  with 


76 


DEFINITION  and 


f 

with  various  ideas,   notions,   and  afFe6lions 

indifcriminatrelj.  The  latter  flate  iifually 

accompanies  phrcnitic  Infanity  when  it  fiezes 
fuddenlj,  and  is  occafioncd  by  fome  bodily 
diforder. — The  former  mo9i  commonly  attends 
it  when  it  is  the  confequence  of  notional  In- 
fanity ;  or  of  any  long  continued  and  intenfe 
attention,  exertion,  or  paffion  of  the  mind. — 
But  both  flates  arc  in  fome  meafure  common 
to  all  thefe  fources  of  Infanity  ;  as  is  alfo  a 
very  high  degree  of  delirium,  in  which  the 
patient*s  imagination  has  fo  lively  an  ideal 
picture  for  ever  in  view,  as  overcomes,  and 
confounds,  the  imprcffions  made  by  external 
objects  ;  fo  that  he  fcarcely  perceives  any 
perfon  or  object  about  him  ;  or  is  apt  to  per- 
ceive them  erroneoufly,  and  to  miftake  one 
perfon  or  obje£t  for  another. 

W  HEN  ideal  Infanity  is  72ot  phrenitic,  it  is 
either  r/ianiaca/,  or  incoherent,  or  fc?iftiv^. 

I  N  maniacal  Infanity  the  mind  may,  in 
like  manner,  be  employed  either  about  one 
fet  of  ideas,  or  about  more  than  one  ; — but  in 
tjiis  refped:  it  efientially  differs  from  phrenitic 

hfanity^ 


ARRANGEMENT.  77 


Jnfanlty,  that  though  the  patient  raves,  and 
has  a  world  of  images  floating  in  the  brain, 
which,  as  in  a  dream,  or  in  a  reverie,  appear 
to  be  real  objcds  ;  yet  when  he  attends  to  the 
external  objeds  which  furround  him,  he 
readily  diftinguillies  every  thing,  and  every, 
perfon  about  him. 

T  N  incoherent  Injanity  the  trains  of  ideas  arc 
either  fluggifh  and  interrupted,  or  too  flight- 
)y  connefted,  or  pafs  in  too  rapid  a  fucceffi- 
on.  The  mind  is  feldom,  if  ever,  in  this 
fpecies  of  Tnfanity,  confined  to  any  one  par-r 
ticuhf  fet  of  ideas  ;  in  the  two  jirji  of  thefq 
flatcs  it  borders  upon  ideotifm,  or  has  acStually 
arrived  at  it  ;  and  in  the  laft,  in  fome  inftaii- 
ces,  it  approaches  to  phrcnitic  Infanity,  and 
in  others  is  but  an  aggravation  of  fome  of  the 
fpecies  of  notional  Infanity. 

When  ideal  Infanity  is  fenJitJve^  as  in  Ly- 
canthropia,  Cynanthropia,  and  in  fome  cafes 
of  what  is  commonly  called  hypochondriacal 
'Melancholy,  in  which  the  difeafed  imagines 
;himfclf  to  be  a  wolf,  or  a  dog,  or  a  tea-pot, 

or 


7S 


DEFINITION  and 


or  fancies  that  he  is  made  of  glafs,  or  of  wax, 
or  the  hke,  the  mind  is  chiefly  employed  a- 
bout  one  idea. 

I N  notional  Infanity  the  mind  may  either 
be  employed  about  one  particular  notion,  or 
paffion  ;  or  may  take  a  larger  fcope,  and  range 
through  a  variety  of  abfurd  notions  and  af- 
fections. And  in  both  cafes  may  be  cither 
chearful,  or  Melancholy,  according  to  the 
nature  of  its  object. 

I  N  the  former  kind,  or  when  the  mind  is 
employed  about  one  objedi,  the  delirium  may, 
in  fome inftances,  appear  glaringly  abfurd;  — 
as  when  a  man  fuppofes  himfelf,  though  a 
mortal,  to  have  the  command  and  regulation 
of  the  elements, — to  be  a  dead  corpfe, — to 
have  no  foul  like  other  men, — to  be  capable 
of  flying, — of  working  miracles, — or  the  like  ; 
in  all  which  cafes  it  ufually  borders  upon  i- 

deal  Infanity  :  or  it  may  appear  plaufble  ; 

fo  that  not  only  the  mind  may  impofe  upon 
itfelf, — but,  when  the  difordcr  is  not  very 
violent,  or  extravagant,  even  others  may  be 

impofed 


ARRANGEMENT. 


19 


impofed  upon,  by  the  apparent  reafonablenefs 
of  the  notion,  or  affection,  which  pofleffes  it, 
and  which  arifes  from  fome  feeminglj  real 
and  juft  caufe,  and  appears,  at  moft,  only 
to  err  in  beliig  quite  dilproportioned  to  it 
as  in  love,  jealoufy,  fufpicion,  timidity,  ir- 
reiblution,  fuperflition,  dcfpair,^  avarice,  mi^ 
fanthropy,  noftalgia,  and  all  inordinate  de- 

fircs  and  afFedions  :  or  it  may  obvioufly 

arile  from  a  difeafedjlate  of  the  natural  appe^ 
iites,  producing  an  ungovernable  inclination 
to  indulge  them,  and  inceflantly  exciting  in 
the  mind  a  lively  notion  of  the  felicity  of 
fuch  indulgence. 

The  latter,  or  that  kind  of  notional  In- 
fanity  which  is  not  confined  to  any  one  par- 
ticular notion,  or  paffion,  may  likcwife  l>e 
confider'd  as  €\.x\\zx plaujible ,  or  grofsly  abfurd%. 
and  comprehends  all  the  varieties  of  what  I 
fliiill  hereafter  defcribe  under  the  names  of 
fanciful,  whimfical,  impulfive,  fcheming, 
fclf-important,  and  hypochondriacal  Infan- 
ity  ;  which  manifeft  themfelves  in  ahuoft  e- 
vcry  kind  of  wild  and  extravagant  fancy,  or 

unaccountablG 


So         DEFINITION  ^nd 

unaccountable  whim  ■  in  an  invincible  incli- 
nation to  purfue  every  irap-ulfe  of  paflion,  or 
imagination  ;  in  lelf-impartance,  and  vani- 
ty ;  in  wit,  vivricityj  and  cunning  ;  in  laugh- 
ing, tinging,  talking,  waggery,  bragghig, 
and  lying  ;  in  fondnetb  for  fcheming  and  traf- 
fic of  the  moft  romantic,  extravagant,  child- 
ifh,  or  ablurd  kind  ;  in  attributing  great  ef- 
fe6ts  to  little  cauies,  and  great  caufes  to  little 
effed:s  j  in  Melancholy  without  any  fixed, 
and  determinate  obje61:,  or  what  is  called 
ii^dium  vita^  arlfing  from  a  general  imprei- 
fion  of  dcjcclion  on  the  mindj  which  renders 
it  totally  incapable  of  relifliing  any  of  thofe 
things  v/hence  mankind  ufually  derive  their 
happinefs. 

iNSANiTYj  or  delirium^  according  to 
the  above  account  of  them,  cannot  with 
propriety  be  faid  to  exift,  but  where  the 
JUDGMENT  is  dcceivcd,  the  affections 
are  mifguided,  or  the  conduct  is  perverted, 
by  fome  delulive  perception,  or  fome  noti- 
on palpably  erroneous,  or  abfurd  ;  but  the 
fcveral  faculties  of  the  mind  arc  liable  to  va- 
rious 


ARRANGEMENT.  8i 

rious  other  dlforders,  of  no  inconfiderable  mag- 
nitude  and  importance,  befides  thofe  which, 
iflriaiy  fpeaking,  dcfervc  thefe  appellations. 

The  memory  may  be  defedive,  and 
(€ven  fomctimcs  almoft  annihilated,  either 
if  rem  a  diminljloed,  or  from  an  increafed  aSiivity 
(of  certain  fibres  and  vejfels  of  the  brairiy  on 
wvhofe  prompt  and  regular  vibrations,  in  due 
ifubferviency  to  the  found  operation  of  all  the 
tfaculties  of  the  mind,  the  perfection  of  its 
isxertions  in  a  great  meafure  coniifts.  Their 
idiminljhed  a^lvity  may  either  confift  in  an  al- 
moft  total  privation  of  power  ;  or  in  a  languid 
uniformity  of  a£lion  :  and  their  increafed aSiivi^ 
\jy  in  fuch  quick  tranftions  as  give  rife  to  ideas 
rn  fuch  order  and  fucceffion  that  they  appear 
CO  have  little  or  no  proper  connexion  ;  or  in 
Vuch  vigorous  exertions  as  produce  rapid,  but 
iiaturally  and  obvioufly  connefted  trains  of 
Iddcas.  In  the  one  cafe  there  exifts  a  ftupid 
vacancy,  or  an  indolent  uniformity  ;  and  in 
[Ihe  other  a  bufy  incoherency,  or  an  animated 
Telocity  of  ideas.  Hence  arife  four  different 
btcs  of  the  mind,  all  of  which  are  apt,  more 

L  or 


82         DEFINITION  and 


or  lefs  to  afFcdl  the  memory,  and  feme  of 
which  univerfally,  and  infaUibly,  greatly  im- 
pair it.  Either  there  is  almoll:  a  total  inca- 
pacity of  receiving,  at  Icaft  of  retaining,  any  i- 
dea  at  all,  much  more  of  receiving,  and  re- 
taining, any  thing  that  defervcs  the  name  of 
-a  train  of  ideas : — or  the  mind  is  in  fuch  a  tor- 
pid ftate,  as  difpofes  it  indolently  to  dwell  on 
fome  one  ohjedl^  which  has  at  prefent  obtained 
its  attention,  or  fomething  like  its  attention, 
keeping  it  perpetually  in  the  fame  point  of 
view,  rarely  turning  it  into  any  new  pofition^ 
and  never  fo  far  exerting  itfelf  as  to  bring  its 
<lifFcrent'  views  and  portions  together  in  re- 
view, and  to  compare  them  with  each  other, 
—  a  ftateof  which  every  man  muft  have  had 
fome  little  experience,  either  in  the  abfence  of 
a  reverie,  on  the  approach  of  fleep,  or  in 
•thofe  difagrceably  uniform  dreams  which  of- 
ten attend  on  fevers,  or  other  difordered  ftates 
of  the  body  :— or  the  original  allbciations  of 
the  mind  may  be  fo  deranged,  and  its  ideas 
inceffantly  obtrude  themfelves  with  fo  little 
conneflion,  as  may  be  altogether  incompati- 
ble with  that  due  command  of  recoUedion  in 

which 


ARRANGEMENT.  83^ 


which  memory  properly  confifts  : — or  the 
mind  may  be  fo  fully  employed  by  its  own 
rapid  fucceffion  of  ideas,  as  fcarcely  to  attend 
to  any  thing  clfe  hut  the  fleeting  Images  of  the 
pafiing  inflant. 

The  memory  and  imagination  arc 
fo  nearly  alike  in  their  operations,  fo  inti- 
mately connetSted,  and  fo  perfectly  dependent 
on  each  other,  that  in  many  rclpeds  they 
are  fcarcely  to  be  diftinguifhed,  and  are,  con- 
fequently,  often  confounded :  it  is,  there- 
tore,  no  wonder,  that  faculties  fo  fimilar 
fhould  be  liable  to  fimllar  dlforders  ;  and 
that  in  all  the  cafes  juft  enumerated,  the- 
memory  and  imagination  flioukl  fuffer  toge- 
ther, and  both  faculties  be  in  like  manner  af- 

fe£lcd.  In  the  jirjl  cafe,  as  there  are  few 

ideas,  and  flill  fewer,  and  thofe  very  impcr- 
fe£l  trains  ;  fo  there  may  truly  be  faid  to  be 

no  imagination.  In  the  Jecond,  the  ina6tive 

ftate  of  the  brain,  as  it  is  unfavourable  to  the 
memory  and  recolleftion,  fo  it  ftupifies  and 

deadens  the  imagination,  In  the  third,  thera 

is  an  adlvity  of  the  imagination  of  a  peculiar 

L  2  kind 


84 


DEFINITION  and 


kind,  in  which  the  ideas  are  fo  {lightly  con- 
iieded,  and  feem  fo  little  indebted  for  their 
appearance  to  the  ufual  ties  of  aflbciation,  and 
fo  nlmoft  totally  free  from  the  controul  of  the 
other  powers  of  the  mind,  as  to  appear  for  the 

moft  part  perfe(5lly  incoherent.  In  the  fourth 

cafe^  as  there  are  often  appearances  of  fur- 
prifing  memory,  at  the  fame  time  that  there 
can  be  no  dependence  on  the  certainty  of 
the  operations  of  that  faculty,  while  they  are 
fo  little  under  the  influence  of  the  governing 
powers  of  the  mind  ;  fo,  for  the  fame  reafon, 
in  fimilar  ftates  of  mental  adllvity,  we  are  of- 
ten aftonifhed  with  the  wonderful  effulgence 
of  fudden  flafhes  of  a  rapid  imagination,  but 
rarely  delighted  with  the  fteady  light,  and 
permanent  fplendor,  which  are  difplayed  in  a 
regular  and  vigorous,  but  not  too  accelerated^ 
n»4rex,ertion  of  that  faculty. 

All  thefe  ftates  may  be  connected  with, 
but  do  not  conftitute  an  effential  part  of  Mad- 
nefs.  When  they  are  either  conf^antly,  or 
occallonally,  accompanied  with  abfurd  noti- 
ons, or  delufive  images,  they  are  then  to  be 

arranged 


ARRANGEMENT.  85 

arranged  under  fome  of  the  fpecies  of  that  dif- 
order,  as  the  fymptoms  may  happen  to  deter- 
mhie.    Otherwife,  the  three  frjt  Jlates  are  to 
be  coniidercd  as  fo  nnany  diftinft  kinds  of 
IDEOTISM      and  may  be  termed  the  Jfupid^ 
in  which  fcarcely  the  trace  of  a  thinking  foul 
remains      the  abfent,  in  which  the  mental 
powers  are  benumbed,  and  the  attention  is 
with   difficulty    removed    from    one  obje£t 
to  another  ;  —  and  the  incoherent,  in  which  the 
adbciated  trains  of  ideas  are  deranged  and  con* 
founded,  and  the  powers  and  operations  of 
the  mind  weakened,   and  obftru£ted.  by  the 
difordcrly  intrufion  of  ideas  which  are  very 
nightly,  or  improperly,  or  not  at  all  con- 

nefted.  The  fourth  Qi-iXt  is  an  approach  to 

Madnefs. 

The  three  firjl  Jlates  of  the  Imag'mation,  or 
t\\t  Jiupid,  abfent,  and  incoherent  ideotifm,  though 
effentially  different  from  Infanity,  yet  fo  far 
agree  with  it,  that  arifing  nearly  from  the 
fame  caufes  with  fome  of  its  fpecies,  hereaf- 
ter to  be  mentioned,  they  are  to  be  cured,  if 
curable,  by  the  fame  means. 

The 


S6 


DEFINITION  and 


The  fourth,  or  unujually  aEilve  Jfate  of  the  i~ 
■/uaghmtion,  fo  often  to  be  met  with  in  men  of 
genius,  and  of  lively  feeliiigs  ;— or  the  ri- 
diculous /^^«c^j  of  literary  and  ftudious  men, 
more  confpicuous  for  their  attachment  to  fci- 
cnce  and  literature,  than  for  real  abilities  to 
comprehend  and  improve  them,  v/hich  have 
fome  refcmblance  to  the  tbird  flate  ; — though 
bordering  upon  Madnefs,  or  Idcotifm,  in 
which  they  are  but  too  apt  to  terminate  ;  are 
yet  readily  diftinguifhable  from  Madnefs  by 
the  circumftances  already  mentioned  ;  and  the 
latter  from  Ideotifm  by  the  degree,  the  caufcs, 
and  the  remillions  of  the  malady  :  as  arc 
the  common  follies  and  abfurdities  of  man- 
kind from  notional  Infanity,  by  their  frequency, 
and  almoft  univerfality  ;. — unlefs  we  are  dif- 
pofed  to  think  that  in  reality  there  is  no  eflen- 
tiai  difference,  that  all  mankind  defcrve  to  be 
reckoned  in  the  fame  clafs  of  Infanity,  and 
that  it  was  not  more  feverely,  than  truly,  af- 
ferted  by  a  very  able  fatlrift—that^ 


Tous 


ARRANGEMENT. 


«7 


Tous  les  hommes  font  fous  :  &  malgre 
tons  leurs  folns, 
"  Ne  ditFercnt  eiitre  eux  que  du  plus  ou  du 
moinsy  % 

"  All  men  are  mad,  and,  fpite  of  all  fiiejj'e, 
*'  The  madnefs  differs  but  in  more  or  lefs." 

But,  however  this  may  be,  it  is  certain 
that  there  is  a  great  fimilarity  between  folly , 
and  notional  Infanity  ;  and  efpecially  that  fpe- 
cies  of  it  which  I  have  denominated  pathetic. 
For  as  ideal  Infanity  confifts  in  the  appearance 
of  unreal,  or  erroneous  images,  to  the  mind  ; 
lb  7Jotional  Infanity  is  owing  to  erroneous  aflbci- 
ntions,  in  which  confifts  the  very  eflence  of 
the  erroneous  notions  both  of  the  madman 
and  of  the  but,  perhaps,    with  this 

difference,  that  the  erroneous  notions  of  the 
fool  are  confined  to  the  eftimation  of  good  and 
evil,  only;  whereas  thofe  of  the  madman 
extend  to  the  eftimation  of  caufe  and  effed:, 
ind,  indeed,  to  that  of  every  other  relation 


^  BoiLEAU  Satire  4.  Tom.  i.  p.  27. 


8S 


DEFINITION  and 


of  things,  about  which  a  difordered  brain  is 
liable  to  form  erroneous  aflbciations. 

All  the  kinds  of  Infanity,  above  enume- 
rated, may  be  varioufly  combined,  and  fre- 
quently interchange  one  with  another.  If 
of  long  (landing,  they  are  generally  in- 
curable ;  and  in  a  courfe  of  time,  unlefs 
death  prevent  the  melancholy  fpc6lacle,  u- 
flially  degenerate  into  ideotifm  ;  a  moft  pitia- 
ble privation  of  the  human  faculties,  in 
which  the  memory  and  imagination,  as  we 
have  juft  feen,  are  often  fo  debilitated,  and 
irregular,  as  to  fink  the  man,  in  almoft  e- 
very  refpe<3:,  even  below  the  level  of  the 
brute  creation  ;  not  only  by  depriving  him 
of  reafon,  but  even,  in  a  great  mcafure,  of 
the  proper  ufe  of  his  fenfes,  and  of  inftind, 
which,  fo  far  as  the  well  being  of  mere  ani- 
mal life  is  concerned,  might  in  fome  degree 
fupply  its  place. 

Notional  delirium,  as  I 
have  already  obferved,  feems  to  be  peculiar 
to  Madnefs ; — and  I  am  forry  to  find  myfelf 

under 


ARRANGEMENT.  89 

under  the  neceffity  of  fo  far  agreeing  with 
the  fiuirifl:,  as  to  affert,  that  the  bulk  of 
mankind,  morally,  at  leafl:,  I  will  not  fay  Wf- 
d'lcally  fpeaking,  are  more  or  lefs  affedted  by 
it. — There  is,  indeed,  fome  difficulty  in  de- 
termining the  boundaries  between  what  may 
not  improperly  be  called  moral  and  medical  In- 
fanity.  Several  of  the  aiitient  philofophers, 
and  particularly  Socrates,  and  the  Stoics, 
confidered  every yoo/^,  or  vitious  perfon,  as 
in  fane,  or  morally  mad;  and  only  to  be  diftin- 
guifhed  from  the  adlually  and  medically  mad, 
by  the  degree  of  diforder,  J— the  fymptoms  of 
fury,  \  by  which  they  underftood  what  I 
have  called  ideal  Madnefs,  and  efpecially  thofe 
fpecics  termed  phrenitic,  incoherent,  and  ma* 

niacal,-^ 

i  "  Hanc  enim  Li/anlafn,  jun^a Jliiltitia  fatet  latius,  2 
"  furore  ditjungimiis. — Infaniam  enim  cenfuerunt  [duodecim  ta- 
*' bulae]  conftantia  id  eft  faiiitate  vacantem  :  pofle  tamen  tueri 
*'  mcdiocritatem  officiorum,  et  vitie  communem  cultum,  atque 
**  ufitatum." — See  the  parage  from  Cicero,  at  lengthy  immediate- 
lyfollovjing  in  the  text, 

•f     Fur  or  em  aUtem  efle  ntl  {nnt  mentis  ad  omnia  c^citatm. 
**  Quod  cum  magis  effe  videaturquam /^K/fl  ;  tamen  ejusmodi 
**  eft,  \xx.  furor  in  fapientem  caderc  poffit,  non  poffit  In/ania^\ 
-  Jhid , 


90 


DEFINITION  md 


macai,-^^nd  the  obvious  exiftence  of  lome  h~ 
4iily  caufe  :  ||— as  may  be  colle6leci,  to  mention 
no  other  authoritiep,  from  the  following  paf- 
fage  of  Cicero's  third  book  of  Tufculan  Dif- 
futatlons.  ^ 

*'  Om  n^^^  infipientium  animi  in  morbo 
'Vfant  :  omnes  infipientes  igitur  Infaniunt : 
fanitatem  enlm  animorum  pofttarh  in  tran- 
qiiilitatc  quadam  conftantlaque  cenfebant 
'*  [phiiofophi]  :  his  rebus  mentem  vacantem, 
*'  appelJarunt  infanam  :  propterea  quod  in 
*' perturbato  animo,  ficut  in  corpore,  fanitas 

*'  effe  non  poffit.  -Itaque  nihil  melius, 

*'  quam  quod  eft  in  confetudlne  fermonis  La- 
*'  tini  ;  cum  exiffe  ex  potejlate  dlcimus  eos, . 
"  qui  ecfrenati  feruntur  aut  libldlne  aut  ira- 
*'  cundia.- — -Q^i  igitur  exijj'e  ex  potejlate  di- 
cuntur  ;  idclrco  dlcuntur,  quia  non  funt 
"  in  poteftate  mentis  :  cui  regnum  totius  ani- 
mi  a  natura  tributum  eft.    Grasci  autem 
[.lavloiv  unde  appellant  non  facile  dixerim, 

*'  Eam 

]|  Which  they  termed  atrahilis.-^—*'  Quafi  vero  atra  bilt 
<♦  Iblum  mens,  ac  non  isepe  vcl  iiacundia  graviore,  vel  timore, 
**  vel  dolorc  moveaturl"—     See  the/avic  fcjjage  from  Cicero, 

%  Gap.  4.  &  5. 


(4 


ARRANGEMENT.  91 

*'  Earn  tamen  iplam  diftlngulmus  nos  melius^ 
"  quarn  1111 ;  liailq  eiiim  Infanlam,  quae  jwiSia 
Jhiltiti^e  patet  latius,  a  furore  dlsjungimus  :. 
Gr<£cl  volant  1111  quldem,  fed  parum  va- 
lent  verbo  :  quem  nos  furorem^  iu^sXa.yx°^^^^ 
*'  nil  vocant.  Quafi  vero  atra  bill  folum  mens, 
*'  ac  non  Ikpc  wq\  iracmidia  graviore,  vel 
**  more^  vel  dolore  moveatur  !  quo  gcnere  A- 
"  thamantem,  Alcmceonem,  Ajacem,  Oref- 
"  tern  furere  dlclmus.  Qiil  ita  lit  adfedus,. 
"  eum  domlnum  efl'e  rerum  fuarum  vetant: 
*'  DUODECIM  TARULiE.  Itaque  nou  eft  fcrip-. 
"  turn,  ii  iNSANUs,  fed  si  furiosus  es- 
"  SE  INCIPIT  :  tnfanldm  enim  cenfucrunt 
conftantla.  Id  eft  fanltate,  vacanteiTi  ^  pof* 
fe  tamen  tueri  medlocritatem  officiorum, 
"  &  D/V^  communem  cultum  at  que  ujiiatum  :  fu- 
*'  rorem  autem  rati  funt  jnentis  ad  omnia,  ececita- 
"  Urn.  Quod  cum  majus  efte  vldeatur  quani, 
infanla  :  tamen  ejufmodi  qft,  ut  furor  in 
"  faplentem  cadere  pofllt,  non  pofTu  tnfania^'^' 

* '  Alt  fools  are  dlfordered  in  mind ;  all  fools  ^ 
"  therefore y  are  infane:  for  it  is  the  opinion  of 
philofophers,  that  fanity,   or  health  of  mind 
Hz  ^'  confj, 


9i 


DEFINITION  and 


conjtfls,  in  a  certain  tranquility,  and  equa- 
*'  nimity,  or,  as  they  term  it,  conjlancy  ;  and  they 

conjider  the  mind,  when  void  of  thefe  qualities, 

as  infane  ;  Jtnce  fanity  can  no  more  exiji  in  a 
* '  di [ordered  mind,  than  in  a  dijordcred  body.  — 

Nothing,  therefore  can  be  better  than  the  com- 
"  mon  mode  of  fpeaki?ig  in  the  Latin  language, 
*'  when  we  fay,  that  they  who  are  carried  away 
*'  either  by  ungovernable  de fire,  or  by  immoderate 

anger,  are  out  of  their  own  power.  They, 

*'  therefore,  who  are  fiid  to  be  out  of  their  own 
"  power,  are  for  this  reafon  fa'id  to  be  fo,  he- 

caufe  they  are  not  under  the  control  of  reafon, 

to  which  nature  has  allotted  the  fupreme  go- 
"  vernment  of  the  mind.  How  the  Greeks  came 
"  to  give  to  this  the  appellation  of  Mani a,  might 
**  not  be  very  eafy  to  determine.  But  I  may  ven- 
**  iure  to  afjirm  that  we  difiinguifh  in  this  matter 
**  better  than  they  ;  for  we  feper  ate  from  fury, 
**  this  fort  of  Infanity,  which  being  of  the  na- 
**  ture  of  folly,  is  of  greater  extent  and  mag- 
**  nitude  ;  the  Greeks  wifh  to  do  the  fame,  but 

are  unhappy  in  the  choice  of  an  inadequate  term, 
**  What  ws  call  fury,  they  call  melancholy. 

''As 


ARRANGEMENT.  93 


Js  'if  the  mind  could  be  deranged  only  by 
"  atrabilis,  and  was  not  frequently  In  the  fame 
"  manner  affected  by  violent  anger,  or  tear,  or 
diftrefs  •  as  in  the  cafe  of  Athamas^  Aicma- 
"  on,  JJax,  and  Orefies,    to  all  of  whom  we 
give  the  appellation  of  furious.    fVhoever  is  fa 
afe^ed,  the  twelve  tables  forbid  that 
*'  he fjjoidd  have  the  management  of  his  own  af- 
"-^ fairs.     It  is  not  written^   if  he  begins 
*'>To  be  Insane,  but   if  he  begins  to. 
"  be  furious.    For  they  confidcred  I n fan  1  ty 
**  as  void  of  equanimity,  that  is  of  f unity  ;  hut 
"  thought,  notwithftanding,  that  the  infanewere 
*'  capable  of  fulfilling  tolerably  well  the  ordinary 
"  duties  of  life,  ^z.v^/ of  going  through  ^he  com- 
"  mon  and  familiar  forms  of  fecial  intercourfe. 
"  But  they  efeemed  fury  to  be  an  univcrfal 
*'  blindnefs  of  the  mind,  wltli  regard  to  all 
*'  forts  of  objects.    No%v  though  fury  appears 
to  be  of  greater  magnitude  than  Infvnty,  it  is 
yet  of  fuch  a  fiature,  that  a  wife  man  may  be' 
*'  come  furious,  but  cannot  be  iufane.'* 

This  pafluige,  I  muft  own,  is  not  to  be. 
met  with,  as  it  here  ftands,  in  any  one  editi- 

Ott 


DEFINITION  W 


on  of  the  Tufculan  Difputatlons  in  my  pofleiTion^ 
or  which  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  con- 
fulting  ;  but  the  disjedfa  membra  of  it  are  all 
to  be  found,  fome  in  one  copy,  and  fomc  in 
another.    The  reading  which  I  have  cho  fen 
.is  exactly  the  fame  with  that  which  is  given 
by  fome  of  the  bell:  editions,  excepting  in  one 
word;— for  where  I  read,    Infaniam,  cnim  cen- 
fuerunt  conflantia,  id  eft  fanitate  vacantem,*' 
they  adhere  to  the  common  reading,  and  re^ 
X^m  Jtulthlam  %  which  I  have  changed  {or  In- 
^faniam:  for  as  the  fenfe  abfolutely  requires 
Infaniam,  and  we  a£lually  meet  with  it  in 
.  fome  editions,  though  not,  as  I  can  difcover, 
on  the  authority  of  any  manufcript,  yet  on 
that  of  Nonius,  t  which  may,  I  think,  be 
efteemed  in  this  cafe  as  little,  if  at  all,  infe- 
rior ;  I  have  ventured  to  receive  it  as  the  true 
reading  ;  and  am  perfuaded  that  the  text,  as 
■it  is  here  fet  down,  may  be  fafely  confide  red 
as  reftored  to  its  primitive  purity. 

Th  R 

f  Vide  NoNiUM,  de  varla  ji^nijlcgtione  verleruMj  in  roce 


ARRANGEMENT. 


95 


The  learned  Mercurialis  *  wonders 
:hat  CicfeRO  (ho u Id  be  fo  much  a  ftranger  to 
yithe  real  fenfe  in  which  thefe  words,  Mania 
rand  Melancholia,  were  nl'ed  by  Greek  writers 
Wong  before  his  time,  as  in  this  paflage,  in  his 
(Opinion,  he  appears  to  be.    But  fuch  a  wri_ 
Items  Cicero  ought  not  lightly  to  be  cen- 
ifured.    He  feidom  difcovers  himfelf  to  be  ci- 
ither  ignorant,  or  inaccurate  :  and  it  is  cer- 
rtain  that  the  old  Greek  writers  did  not  un, 
: frequently  confound  thefe  terms  ;   as  even 
Mercurialis    himfelf  acknowledges  that 
HippoR  ATES  has  done  in  one  inflance  ;  to 
"Which  he  might  have  added,  had  he  been  ar 
I  the  trouble  of  examining  his  works  with  this 
.'intention,  feveral  others  :  his  woixJs  are, — 
"  quanquam  non  inficior  Icmel  Hippocratem, 
"5(XI  libri  fexti  Aphorifmu,  Maniam  pro  Me- 
lancholia ufurpaile."  II 

But  the  truth,  I  believe  is,  that  Mer- 
curialis 

*  Hieroa.  Mfrcuri alts  Vch-la::  Lcriion.  Lib.  6.  cgp. 
46.  Opnfcul,  Aur<or.  p.  4^^, 


Ji  Ibid. 


96 


DEFINITION  and 


CURIALIS  did  not  perfeclly  enter  into  the 
views  of  that  elegant  writer  in  this  palTagc, 
in  which,  it  muft  be  acknowledged,  he  has 
not  delivered  himfelf   altogether   with  his 

wonted  perfpiculty.  In  order  to  underftand 

him,  two  things  arc  to  be  attended  to  :  the 
one  is,  that  he  is  endeavouring  to  prove  the 
natural  conneclion  between  folly  and  mad- 
IJESS  ;  and  the  other,  that  he  wiflies  to  fliow 
the  fuperior  excellence  of  the  Latin  language, 
in  more  exaiSlly  difiinguiflilng  the  feveral 
kinds  of  Madnefs  ;  in  more  clearlj  pointing 
out  their  relation  to  folly  ;  and  in  making  ufe 
t)f  terms  wliofe philofophical  and  vulgar  fe?ifes 
perfcdily  coincide.  He  had  faid  a  little  be- 
fore,— "  omnes  infplenies  elTe  7ion  fanos'* — • 
'*  that  all  fooh  are  infane" — a  few  lines  after 
he  adds—'*  ita  fit  ut  fapkntla  fanitas  fit  animi : 
"  Injipkntm  autcm  quafi  hifanitas  quaedam^ 
quae  eft  Infania,  eademque  dcmetitia,  Mul- 
toque  melius  h^c  notata  funt  verbis  Lati- 
*'  nis,  quam  Graecis  ;  quod  aliis  quoquc  mul- 

tls  locls  reperletur   Hence  wifdom  is 

fanity  of  mind,  and  folly  is  Infanlty,  which 
is  Jikewife  calUd  dcrmiith,  and  is  that  faie 

in 


ARRANGEMENT. 


97 


^*  //;  which  a  man  may  be  fald  to  be  out  of  his 
"  mind.  Thefe  circumjlances  are  much  better 
* '  pointed  out  in  the  Latin  language,  than  in  the 
*'  Greek  \  an  obfervation  which  may  be  made  ort- 
*'  many  other  occajions,  as  well  as  on  this  '^ — He 
then  fubjoins  the  following  obfervation  in  fa- 
vour of  his  native  language, — "  totum  igitur 
**  id,  quod  quasrimiis,  quid  &  quale  Jit,  verbi 
*'  vis  ipfa declarat'^ — '''the  very  meaning,  there*' 
''''fore*,  of  the  word  Itfelf,  completely  illuftratcs 
"  the  obj'e5i  of  our  prefent  inquiry,  and  cUarly 

"  explains  the  true  nature  of  Infanity^*  After 

a  few  obfervations  on  the  ftri£t  propriety  of 
the  common  modes  of  cxpreffion  in  the  Latin 
language  on  this  fubje6t  of  moral  Infanlty^ 
moft  of  which  have  been  quoted  above,  he 
adds,  as  we  have  already  fecn, — "  how  the 
Greeks  came  to  give  to  this  the  appellation  of 
*'  Mania,  might  not  be  very  eafy  to  determine '^^ 
—and  that  with  very  good  reafon  ;  fince  none 
of  its  uncertain  etymologies  render  it  flrik- 
ingly  applicable  to  this  moral  Infanity  of  the 
philofophers  :  lince  it  is  commonly  ufed,  by 
Writers  of  every  clafs,  to  exprefs  impetuofity 
of  paffion  ;  and  by  medical  writers  to  denote 

K  violeiice 


DEFINITION  and 


violence  of  delirium,  whether  of  a  fever,  or 
cf  Madnefs  and  yet  it  is  certain  tliiit  fjLxvtu^ 
fjLcyAvofJc.01,1^  or  the  like,  are  the  very  words  made 
ufeof  by  the  old  Grecian  phllofophers,  when 
fpeaking  of  the  identity  of folly  and  Itifaniiy, 
Socrates,  in  Plato's  jikiblades  Stcundus,  § 

tells  us  that — a(p^oaruvi^  K^ot  x«t  fxavtoi  Xii/^uveilei 
ruvTcv  ^en'ui — *'  folly  and  madnefs  feem  to  be 
*^  the  fame  /^w^."— Diogenes  Laertius  |] 
informs  us  that  Zeno,  the  founder  of  the 
Stoic  philofophy,  taught,  that  "  a  wife 
man  could  never  he  mad^^ — 'm  l\  nil  inonvyiascBeni  ; 
-—^^  that  he  nught  experience  the  reprefentatlon  of 
delufive  images  in  his  mind^  either  through  me- 
lancholy or  delirium,  hx    iJ^iXayxoXiav  rj 

T^yj^Yicriv ; — "  not  in  confequence  of  any  error  in  his 
notions,  and  efiimaiion  of  things,  but  of  fome  na-^ 

tural  diforder  of  his  hody^  And  Cicero 

himfelfhas  placed  the  following  Greek  apho- 
rlfm — "on  iruq  K<pp'^v  jtxa''i'STa<— at  the  head  of 
his  fourth  paradox,  in  fupport  of  the  dodlrine 

■y^'' that 

-  §  Sea.  a. 

* 

j|j  Lib.  7.  //;  F7^«2£NONis.  p.  joji 


A  R  R  A  N  GE  M  E  N  T. 


9-9^" 


— "  that  ewry  fool  is  infaiie.*'— r— Had  Mer- 
curial is  attended  to  thefe  fa^s,,  he  would, 
not  have  charged  Cicero  with  being  igno* 
rant  of  the  meaning  of  the  Greek  word  ,u,ai/i«  j 
and  would  have  acknowledged  that  his  re-* 
flections  are  not  lefsjuft,  than  the  circuna- 
ftance  on  which  lie  grounds  them  is  true«  4 
Nor  is  Cicero  the  only  Latin  writer  who  , 
ufes  Infanta  in  the  fame  manner,  as  corref- 
ponding  to  the  fj.avia^  or  moral  Infanity,  of  tha 
Greeks.  Seneca,  in  his  fecond  book  De  Be'- 
neficiisy  *  has  the  following  paflage — "  Infanirc 
omnes  ftultos  diximus  :  nec  tamen  omnes 
curamus  Elleboro  ;  his  ipiis  quo&  vocamusi, 
"  infanos,  &  fufFragium  &  jurifdidionem 
"  commictimus.'* — We  fay  that  every  fool  is- 
*' in  fane:  uuedonot,  however,  attempt  to  cure 
"  them  all  with  Hellebore  ;  but  even  tritfi  thofe 
'*  very  men  whom  we  call  mfane,  to  vote  in  our 
>'  ajfemblies,  and  to  fill  the  maft  hnpartant  officer 
^' of  the  ft  ate  r 

N  2  After 

.*  Seneca  O^er.  Tom.  i.  p.  6cr.    Bt  BenefiQiis  Lib.  2* 


/ 


DEFINITION  and 


After  this  obfcrvation,  that  he  could 
not  fee  any  reafon,  in  the  etymology  of  the 
word,  why  the  Greeks  made  ufe  of  the  term 
Mania  to  fignify  what  the  Latins,  in  a  moral 
fenfe,  termed  Infanity  ; — he  adds— 'we 
"  dijlmgu'tjh  in  this  matter  [of  Infanity']  better 

than  they  :  for  that  kind  of  Infanity  which  be- 

ing  of  the  nature  of  folly  only  differs  from  it  in 
*'  magnitude'' — "  quae  jun6la  ftultitias  patet 
latius" — "  uoe  feperate  from  fury,  which  we  de" 
fine  to  be*^ — ^"  mentis  ad  omnia  caecitatem" — 

an  univerfal  blindnefs  of  the  mind  — forbid- 
ding the  latter'' — dominos  effe  rerum  fu- 
aruni" — *'  to  have  the  management  of  their  own 

affairs   while  we  allow  thr.t  the  former, 

though  infane  even  in  a  medical  fenfe,  are  a- 
bie — tueri  mediocritatem  officiorum,  &  vi- 
^'  t2e  communem  cultum  &  ufitatum,*' — *'  to 

fulfil  tolerably  well  the  ordinary  duties  of  life, 
*^  and  to  go  through  the  common  a?id  familiar 
'•''forms  of  foci al  intercoufeT  "  The  Greeks 

wi/h  to  do  the  fame,  but  are  unhappy  in  inaking 

choice  of  an  inadequate  term  for  their  me- 
Imcholia^  inftead  of  ipecifying  fomethijig  to- 
tally 


ARRANGEMENT, 


ICI 


tally  dlftind  from  their  Mania,  and  our  In- 
jania,  and  exactly  corrcfponding  to  our  furor^ 
correfponds  in  fome  cafes  to  Mania,  and  In/a- 
nia,  as  well  as  to  furor  ;— and  being  injudici-K 
oufly  taken  from  a  fuppofed  caufe,  which, 
however  real,  is  a  partial  one,  betrays  a  want 
of  precifion,  where  precifion  was  particularly 
aimed  at,  lincc  the  fame  fymptoms,  whether 
Cti'  Infania^  Ma7iia,  or  Furor^  may  equally  a- 
rife  from  other  caufes,  as  well  as  from  atrabl- 
li^,— fuch  as— Iracundia  gravior,  vel  timor, 
vcl  dolor," — "  violent  anger,  or  fear,  or  dif- 
trefsr 

The  Greeks,  in  fliort,  have  been  lefs 
fortunate  than  we  in  the  choice  of  their  terms 
in  thefe  refpeds,— that  their  Mania  is  not  fo 
ftrikingly  applicable,  from  its  obvious  mean- 
ing, to  that  kind  of  mental  diforder  which  ia 
ftriaiy  moral,  and  is  properly  denominated 
^flukitia,  Qx folly,  as  our  Infania  is  ;— that  they 
have  no  term  by  which  they  diftinguifh  that 
kind  of  Infanlty— «'  quae  jun£la  ftukiti^e  patet 
Jatius,"—"  which  being  of  the  nature  of  folly, 
is  of  greater  extent  and  magnitude,"'  and  an- 

fwers 


iQz        DEFINITION  anJ 

fwers  pretty  exa(Slly  to  what  I  call  notional 
Infanity  and  that  their  Melancholia,  at  the 
fame  time  that  it  correfponds  to  the  Furor  of 
the  Latins,  does  not  properly  comprehend 
thofe  kinds  of  Furor  which  arife  from  excefs  of 
fajpon,  and  not  from  atrabilis. 

Thus  Cicero,  we  find,,  reckons  three 
kinds  of  Infanity  ;— the  firjl,  fimple  Jiultitia, 
follyy  or  moral  Infanity  ;_the  fecond,  that  kind 
of  Infanity  which,  "  being  of  the  nature  of  folly, 
is  of  greater  extent  and  magnitude  and  corrcl- 
ponds  to  fuch  fpecies  of  notional  Infanity  as  a- 
rife  from  the  afFedlions  of  the  mind  ; — the 
ihlrd^  what  he  calls  Fury,  which  anfvvers  to 
thofe  fpecies  of  ideal  Infanity  which  can  be 
conceived  to  come  within  the  definition  of 
an  univerfal  blindnefs  of  mind,  ivith  regard  to 
«*  all  forts  ofobjeasr 

The  following  paflages  from  C^lius 
AuRELiANUS  may  ferve  ftill  farther  to  cor- 
roborate CiCERO*s  obfcrvations  relative  to 
the  Mania  and  Melancholia  of  the  Greeks, — to 
ihow  theinjuftice  of  Mercurialis's  charge 

of 


ARRANGEMENT- 


of  ignorance  in  thefe  matters,— and  to  Confirm 
tlie  truth  of  the  exphcation  which  I  have  a- 
bove  advanced —It  may  be  proper  to  obferve, 
that  he  cvrdry  where  ufes  the  Latin  word  Furor 
as  fynonymous  to  the  Greek  Maniay  of  which 

it  is  a  tranflation.  "  Stoici,  fays  he,  du- 

*' phcem  Farom;?  dixerunt,  ahum  injtplentta 
*'  genus,  quo  omnem  imprudentem  infanirc 
*'  probant  ;  alium  ex  alienatione  mentis  et  cor- 

poris  compajjione,  Empedoclem  fequcntes 
*'  alium  ^\cu\\t  ex  animi  purgamcnto  fieri,  ^* 
"  Hum  alienatione  mentis,  ex  corporis  caufa 

five  iniquitate,  de  quo  nunc  fcripturi  fumus  : 
*'  qucm  Graci,  fiquidem  magnam  faciat  anx- 

ietatem,  appellant  jtt«v/a  vel  quod  animum 
**  five  mentem  ultra  modum  laxet ;  ^xvov  c- 

nim  demiffam  five  mollem  appellant ;  vel 
**  quod  &c.*'  + 

The  Stoics  have  ajferted  that  there  are  two 
*^  forts  of  Fury  ;  one  of  which  ranks  under  fol- 
^'  ly,  and  this  they  prove  to  be  a  hind  of  Infanity 
**  inherent  in  every  man  who  is  not  wife ;  and 

ij-  Mori,  Chronic.  Lib,  i.  e.  5.  §  144,  p.  325, 


l64         DEFINITION  atd 


the  other  Is  owing  to  an  alienation  of  mindj 
*'  united  with  a  bodily  diforderi    They  who 
follo'vO  Elvri»EDOCLES py  that  the  firft  ar'ifes 
Jrdm  a  corruption  of  the  foul  ;  and  the  latter 
'^^  from  an  alienation  of  mind,  occajioned  by  a 

caufij  or  dlf order,  refidmg  In  the  body.  Of 
*'  thhlaftl'Ani  now  about  to  write  \  which,  as 
"  //  produces  great  anxiety,  the   Greeks  call 

Mania  ;  either  becaufe  It  Immoderately  relaxes 
*'  the  fold,  or  the  mind',  for  y.oc^jov  in  Greek  fg- 

nlfies  deprejfed,  orfoftened:  or  becaufe  S^'c." 


"Nam  furor  nunc  Iracundla,  nunc  hllarl- 
iate,  nunc  mceflltudlne,  five  vanltate  occu- 
pat  mentcm,  nunc  tlmore  comminantc  ina^ 
nlum  rerunij  &'c.'*  ^ 

"  For  fury  pojfejfes  the  mind  fometlmes  with 
anger,  fometlmes  with  mirth,  fometlmes  with 
dejedlion,  or  with  vanity,  fometlmes  with 
empty  fear  of  threatening  danger^  ^c»" 

Afterwards,  in  treating  of  melati" 
cholmy  he  has  the  following  remarkable  paf- 
fage 


^^  Mori.  Chronic.  Lib.  i.  C  5.  §  144.  p. 


ARRANGEMENT.  105 

*'  S  E  D  hanc  paffionem  furoris  fpeclm  alii 
plurimi,  atque  Themisonis  fe£latorcs 
vocaverunt.  DifFert  autem,  fiquidem  in 
ill:a  ^nnz\^2X\ttr  Jiojnachus  patitur,  in  furi- 
'**  ofis  vero  caput,''  | 

"  But  tJoe  followers  of  Tu'E.Miso'i^,  and^'aa" 
ny  others,  have  called  this  afeStion  a  fpecics 

"*  of  fury.  //  differs,  however,  from  fury 
in  this,  that  in  Melancholy  the  ftomach  is 

^'^principally  affedled  ;  and  in  fury  the  head.'* 

Let  me  add  one  more  authority  to  £how 
tthat  melancholia  fometimes  means  the  fame 
wvlth  the  furor  of  Cicero. 

"Mania  enim,  Infania,  {cm  furor,  fays 
Zacutus  Lusitanus,  quaedam  efl  Me- 
lancholiar  % 

For  Mania,  Infanity,  or  fury,  is  a  kind  of 
"'Melancholy/* 

O  It 

J  Morc^.  Chronic,  cap.  6.  §  183.  p.  340. 

%  Praxis  Hijgriar,  Lib,  i.  cap.  8.  p.  204.  col.  2.  C. 


DEFINITION  f,nd 


;I  T  has  been  commonly  aflerted,  that  per- 
fans  of  great  abilities,  and  genius,  are  more 
liable  to  Madnefs  than  men  of  inferior  under- 

ftandings.  -That,  whether  wife  men  are 

of  a  melancholy  temparament,  has  long  been  a 
bje6l  of  inquiry,  whicli  has  been  determined 
in  the  affirmative,  is  evident  from  the  follow- 
ing paffage  of  Zacutus  Lusitanus  :  

Verum  meIa?icholici Jintfap'ientes  f  hoc  loco 
a  nobis  enucleiindum.  Nam  Aristoteles 
lib.  30.  prob.  I.  omnes  qui  ingenio  claruerunty 
vel  in  ftudlis  phllofophiae,  vel  in  republica 
adminlftranda,  vel  in  carmine  pangendo, 
vel  in  artlbus  exercendis,  melanch'Glicos 
fuiffe  perhibet,  quales  Herculemf  jlju' 
cem,  Belleropljo?item^  LA'fjndrmn^  Efnpedocletn^ 
Socratem,  atque  Platonem  extltifle  affirmat. 
•Cur  autem  Melancholia  ad  prudentlam  confe- 
rjit,  explicatu  difficile  eft,  quod  Galen UM 
nbn  latult  :  hie  enlm  lib.  i.  de  naiura  human. 
com.  39.  fupponens  animi  mores  corporis 
temperamentum  fequi,  docet  quod  animi  a- 
cieSf  &  intelligeniia  ab  humore  billofo  emanet, 

quern- 


A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  107 


qiicmadmodum  conjlanlia,  &  firnvitas  z  melan^ 
choUco.    Si  crgo  praedidi  duo  humores  exacle, 
actemperantur,  hominem  £ipientem  reddunt,, 
cum  lapiens  ille  dicatur,  qui  facile  ac  cito. 
difcurrit,   ac  graviter  difcernitJ'* 

"Whether  wife  men  are  of  a  melan- 
choly temperament  ?  h  a  proper  Jubje£l  of  m-^ 
quiry  in  this  place.  For  Aristotle  ajerts, — 
that  all  who  have  been  famous  for  their  ge- 
nius, whejher  in  the  Jludy  of  philofophy ,  in  affair^ 
of  ftate,  in  poetical  compofition^  or  in  the  exercife:^ 
of  the  arts,  have  been  inclined  to  Melancholy  ; 
as  Hercules,  Ajax,  BcUerophon,  Lyfander, 
Empcdocles,  Socrates,  and  Plato.  But  why 
Melancholy  foould  cmitrihute  to  wifdo?n,  is  dif 
ficult  to  explain,  of  which  Galen  was  not  igno-' 
rant  ;  for  in  the  firfl  book  of  his  Trcatife  on 
Human  Nature,  in  which  he  fuppofes  that  the 
difpofition  of  mind  is  determined  by  the  tempera- 
ment of  the  body,  he  advances  that  quick nefs  andt 
penetration  of  mind  proceeds  froin  the  bilious 
humour,  as  equanimity  and  firmncfs  d^  from 

O  2  the 

*  Zacut.  Lusitan.  Frax.  Hijioriar,    Lib^  i.  cap.  84. 
0^er%  Tom.  2.  p.  206,  col,  2, 


DEFINITION  and 


the  tnclancholy.  If,  therefore,  thefe  two  hu- 
mours are  exadlly  attempered,  they  render  a  man 
wife  ;  fince  he  may  be  called  a  wife  man  who 
reafons  with  eafe  and  celerity,  and  determines 
with  judgment  ^"^ 

The  very  juft  obfcrvation  of  one  of  the 
beft  of  our  Englifh  poets,  in  the  following 
couplet,  is  frequently  quoted  in  favour  of  the 
natural  conne£lion  between  -wifdom  and  mad- 
nefs 

Great  wits  are  fure  to  Madnefs  near  al- 
lied, 

And  thin  partitions  do  their'  bounds  di- 
vide." § 

And,  indeed,  it  is  true,  that  perfons  of 
great  inventive  genius,  of  fine  imagination^ 
and  of  lively  feelings,  if  not  bleffed  with  great 
judgment,  as  well  as  with  the  beft  moral  dif- . 
pofitions,  are  fo  fituatcd  upon  the  very  verge 
of  Madnefs,  that  they  cafily  fall  into  it,  if 

pufhcd 

§  Dryden's  Aifahm  and  Achhophel. 


ARRANGEMENT.  109- 

piiflied  forward  by  any  confiderable  accidental 
caufc.  ^  What,  indeed,  can  be  a  nearer  ap- 
proach to  Madnefs,  than  that  of  a  man  of  ge- 
nius 

f[  of  this  wc  have  a  remarkable  inflance  iri  the  celebrated 
poet  Tasso  ;  on  whofc  fine  imagination  the  pafiions  of  hopdefs 
/oi'f,  and  ot grief  occafioned  by  ill  treatm.ent,  feem  to  have  ge- 
nerated ideal  Madnefs,  offuch  a  kind  as  might  be  expecfted  in  a 
fublime  poet,  who  had  indulged  his  fancy  fo  v/ildly,  and  fo  ex- 
quifitcly,  as  he  had  done,  in  the  vilionary  creation  of  witchcratt 
and  enchantment.  Of  this  Infinity  we  nieet  with  the  fol- 
lowing anecdotf^in  the  Life  o/'  1'asso  prefixed  to  Hod le's 
tranflatioa  of  his  Jervfalcm  delivered. 

"  I  N  this  place  \_at  Bifaccio  near  Knf:Ifs'\  Manso  had  an  op- 
portuaity  of  examining  the  fingular  effsiifs  ot  Tasso's  Mclsncho- 
ly  ;  and  often  difputed  with  him  concerning  u  iamiliar  fpirit, 
which  he  pretended  to  converfe  with.  Manso  endeavouied  ia 
vain  to  perfuade  his  triend  that  the  whole  was  the  illufion  of  a 
dillurbcd  imagination  :  but  the  latter  w:is  flrenuous  in  maintain- 
in|4  the  reality  of  what  he  afTcrtcd  j  and,  to  convince  Manso,  de- 
fired  him  to  be  prefcnt  at  one  of  thefe  mylterious  converfations. 
Manso  had  the  complaifancc  to  meet  him  next  dav,  and  while 
they  were  engaged  in  difcourfe,  on  a  fudden  he  oblerved  tlir,t 
Tasso  kept  his  eyes  fixed  upon  a  window,  and  remained  in  a 
manner  immoveable  :  he  called  hitn  by  his  name  feveral  times, 
bnt  received  noanfwer  :  at  lall  Tasso  cried  out,  *'  There  is  the 
"friendly  Ipirit  who  is  come  to  converfe  with  me:  look,  and 
*' you  will  be  convinced  of  the  truth  of  all  that  I  have  f;iid." 
Manso  heard  him -with  furprlfe  ;  he  looked,  but  faw  nothing 
except  the  km-beams  darting  through  tlie  window  :  he  call  his 
eyes  all  over  the  room,  but  could  perceive  nothing,  and  was  juft 
going  to  afk  where  the  pretended  fpirit  was,  when  be  ht^rd 
Tasso  fpeak  with  great  earneftnefs,  fometimes  patting  queftions 
to  the  fpirit,  andfometimes  giving  anfwers,  delivering  the  whole 
in  fuch  a  pleafing  manner,  and  with  fuch  elevated  expreffiona, 
that  he  liftened  with  admiration,  and  had  Hot  the  leaft  incHnation 

to 


no        DEFINITION  and 

nlus,  in  the  a£l  of  poetical  invention,  when,  as 
Shakespeare  moft  inimitably  exprefles  it,-^ 

"  The  poet's  eye,  in  a  fine  frenzy  rowling, 
"  Doth  glance  from  heav*n  to  earth,  from 
earth  to  heav'n  ; 
"  "  And,  as  imagination  bodies  forth 
*'  The  forms  of  things  unknown,  the  po- 
et's pen 

Turns  them  to  fhape,  and  gives  to  aiery 
nothing 

'  **  A  local  habitation  and  a  name."  * 

I  T  is  alfo  true,  that  the  ahleft  heads,  and 
foundeft  judgments,  may  be  deranged  by  too 
intenfc  an  application  of  mind  : — and  that 
Madnefs  from  bodily  caufes  has  little,  if  any 
relation,  to  the  greater  or  lefs  extent  of  the  o- 
riginal  powers  of  the  foul,  and  may  equally 
feize  on  the  tvlfe  man  and  on  the  fool. 

But 

to  interrupt  him.  At  laft  the  uiicomiiion  converfatlon  ended  with 
the  departure  of  th«  fpirit,  as  appeared  by  Tas^so's  words,  wha 
turning  to  Manso,  alked  him,  if  his  doubts  were  removed. 
Man  so  was  more  amazed  than  ever  J  he  fcarce  knew  what  toi. 
think  of  his  friend's  fituation,  and  waved  any  farther  converfaiK 
en  on  the  fIibjed."--iX//^<2/"TAsso,  p.  XLVIII, 

*  Midfummer  NighCs  Dreatstf  Aft  5.  fcenc  r» 


ARRANGEMENT-        1 1 1 


But,  letting  afide  thefe  circumflances,  I 

may  venture,  I  think,  from  much  experience 
in  thefe  cafes,  to  affirm— that  men  of  little ge- 

nius,  and  weak  judgme?tt^  .efpecially  if  to  a 
fmall  degree  of  capacity,  be  joined  a  lively 
and  a6live  imagination,  ftrong  paffions,  or 
abfurd  and  gloomy  notions  of  God  and  Religi- 
on, derived  from  vulgar  prejudices,  and  a  ve- 
ry defedtlve,  or  an  injudicious  education,  are, 
when  certain  circumftances  co-operate,  pecu- 
liarly liable^  every  fpecies  of  notional  Infani-^ 
iy. 

I  N  fhort,  as,  in  a  moral  fenfe,  every  fool 
is  with  propriety  fald  to  be  injane  ;  fo,  in  a 
natural  and  medical  fenfe,  It  may  truly  be  af- 
ferted,  that  fools  are  moft  liable  to  Madnefs  : 
fo  far  from^Deing  true  is  the  common  notion  ; 
which  has  been  adopted  by  a  very  ingenious 
poet,  and  thus  poetically  exprefled  in  the  fol- 
lowing lines  of  his  beautifully  defcriptlve 
ode  on  this  fubjeft  ;  


Hail,  awful  Madnefs,  hail  ! 
Thy  realm  extends,  thy  powers  prevail, 
"  Far  as  the  voyager  fprcads  his  Ventrous  fall. 

"  Nor 


112 


DEFINITION  and 


*'  Nor  bejl  nor  ivifefl  are  exempt  from  thee  ; 
"  Folly  folly  s  only  free,-}-" 

A  s  nofiofiai delirium  is  peculiar  to  Madnefs, 
fo,  on  the  other  hand,  ideal  delirium  is  com- 
mqn  both  to  fevers  and  Madnefs  ;  but  with 
this  difference,  that  in  fevers  it  is  generally 
pure,  and  unmixed whereas  in  Madnefs  it  fel- 
dom  occurs  without  fome  mixture  of  notional 
delirium. 

I  N  notional  Madnefs  Uie  patient  properly 
perceives,  and  diftinguiflies,  furrounding  ob- 
jecls,  knows  where  he  is,  and  who  are  about 
him  :  but  a  perfon  labouring  under  ideal 
Madnejs  knows  no  mort^  of  thefe  matters, 
under  equal  degrees  of  delirium,  than 
one  in  the  delirium  of  a  fever  ; — and  the 
caufc  is  obvious  :  for  both  in  the  delirium 
of  a  fever,  and  in  that  of  ideal  Madfiefs,  the 
mind  is  nearly  in  the  fame  flate  as  that  of  a 

perfon  in  a  dream,  has  a  world  of  images 

within  itfelfy  which  are  fo  forcibly  obtruded 

upon 

f  Penrose's  Flights  of  fancy,  p.  i6. 


ARRANGEMENT.  u^" 

upon  its  obfervation,  and  fo  vividly  perceived, 
as  in  a  great  msafure  to  prevent  the  percepti- 
on of  thofe  wliich  are  offered  by  the  miniftra- 
tion  of  the  fenfes,  as  immediately  aded  npoil 
by  the  then  prcfent  material  objeds  of  the  vi- 
fi'blc,  audible,  and  tangible  world  witJoout.^ 
In  all  thefe  cafes,  in  proportion  as  the  fenfes 
are  affeaed,  or,  in  other  words,  as  they  af- 
fed  the  mind,  by  the  perception  of  prcfent 
external  objg6:s,  the  deception  of  the  febrile 
znd  maniacal  delirium^  ^ud  oHhe  dream,  is  in-  - 
complete.  % 

So  that  the  diftincllon  of  Aretjeus, 
which  muft  be  acknowledged  to  be  plaufible  ; 

P  becaufe 

<^  Addison,  in  the  Spc^ato>;  has  a  very  juft  obfervation, 
amung  many  others,  on  the  fubjed  of  dreams,  which  is  equally 
applicable  to  the  delirium  of  fome  fpecies  of  ideal  Madnefs,  and 
of  fevers.  "  The  foul,  fays  he,  in  dreams  converfes  with  num- 
"  berlefs  beings  of  her  own  creation,  and  is  tranfported  into  ten 
*'  thoufand  fcenes  of  her  own  railing.    She  is  herfelf  the  theatre, 

the  ftvftors,  and  the  beholder.  This  puts  me  ia  mind  of  a  fay- 
"  in*  which  I  am  infinitely  pleafed  with,  and  which  Plutarch 
*' afcribes  to  Heraclitus,  That  all  men  vjhiljl  they  are  aviake 
' '  are  in  one  common  ivorld ;  but  that  each  of  them,  ^vhen  he  is 
*'  ajleep,  is  in  a  ivorld  of  his  o-zvn.  The  waking  man  is  conver- 
*'  fant  in  tke'world  of  nature  ;  when  Kefleeps,  he  retires  to  a  pri- 

vate  world  that  is  peculiar  to  himfelf,"— ^— Vol.  7,  No.  487. 
p.  69. 


M4        DEFINITION  and 

becaiife  founded  on  real,  though  partial,  ob- 
fervatioii  ;  is  yet  far  from  being  true.  After 
relatmg  a  very  curious  cafe  of  Madnefs,  he 
adds,"-  i^'Ho'i  ryjv  uirivjv  th  vco-r^.ulog^  KetpuXvj 
xui  VTTO^ov^piu,  uXXore  f^isv  u[^x  a,fx(pCAj  ci^^a,[MBV0i' 
ciXXors  uXX^Xokti  ^wti^'jo^uvtu*  to  KV^og.,  eu 
Toict  cT'n'AcK'y^voKrt  s^i  STn  ^otviri  koh  f/,B?\cx.y^oXi^, 
OKua'TTS^  iv  TT,  K£(poL\ri  Koci  roTart  ulo^rjaea-i  ra  Ts-oXXci 
roio-i  (p^tvi^TiitoTa-r  oi!^t  jxev  yxf)  lircx^oiicBccvovToci,  vcai 
Tct  jA,*^  "srapiovra.  o^eacri  CTjbsv  cog  •srapeovrocy  xon  to.  y^yj 

*'  /  C  \      t     f   r.  ,  /  ^\  y 

cpsfia-tv   fjiovug  ug  ^^-^  o^lw   «  yiyvcoa-K.aa'i  ce  Ttre^t 
avTecou^  ug  XP"^  yiyvucrnBtv.  ||— — —  "  'The  CP.ufe  of 
"  this  diforder  is  in  the  head  and  the  hypochondria^ 
**  which  fometimes  begin  to  he  affeSled  both  at 
'*  once^  and  at  other  times  one  diforder s  the  other. 
**  But  the  principal  feat  of  the  difeafe  in  Mania 
*'<and  Melancholy  is  in  the  vifcera  ;  as  that  of 
the  phrenitis  is,  for  the  mofl  part,  in  the  head 
'  and  the  fenfes.    For  in  the  latter,  or  phrenitis, 
they  have  errnneous  fenfations,  and  fee  things 
"  as prefent  which  are  notfo  ;   objedls  being  re- 
^^■^refented  to  their  fght  which  do  not  appear  to 

"  thofe 


4 


tl  l>e  Caujis&  Sign.  Morb.  DiUturn^  Lib.  x.  cap.  6.  p.  3a.  C 


ARRANGEMENT.  115 

thafe  about  them  '.^whereas  they  who  are  ma- 
*'  vuAcA  feif  only  as  they  ought  to  fee  ;  but  do.  not 
judge  of  what  they  fee  as  they  ought  to  judged"*/ 

Hippocrates,  or  whoever  is  the 
author  of  the  treatife  de  morbis,  which  is  to  he 
found  in  all  the  colleflions  of  his  works,  juft* 
ly  obferves,  that  the  delirium  of  a  phrenitis^ 

and  of  Madnefs,  are  ahke  :  "TtrpocreoiKxari 

^aKi^oi   Tcczi   VTTO    Trig    (ppeviridog    i-xp^zvoi,  ro~<rt 
j^aXizy^oAua-i  Kujoi  rviv  Tiroipoi-yOtotv.  one  yap  fJciXxy  ' 
^oXot)l&ig    QKorav   ipQoipvi  to  at^MCi   vtto  x^^"^^  ^cct 

't'l  ^\    f  t  /  \\C  t  f 

OVTCi)    OS  ■.'jO^OV  Vj  f/,(X.VlVj  T6  KO!,i  7}  "ST OC^Q'.Cp^O'^'^Tig  yil'ST 06tj 

oarcoTTep  Yi  %o?vi7  r»  (pXsyixczjog  afSev^cer-n  ecfv.  ^  ■. 

There  is  a  great  fmilarity,  fays  he,  as  to  ihs 
df order  of  mind,  in  thofe  who  are  ill  of  a 
phrenfy,  and  thoje  who  are  ajtiSled  with 
"  melancholy  :  for  they  of  a  melancholy  tem- 
perament become  difeafed,  and  are  delirious, 
and  fome  of  them  maniacal,  whenever  the  blood 
*'  becomes   corrupted  with    bile   and  phlegm;. 

P  3  "  And, 


%  Vide  i^^r/;  Hippo cR.  O/fr,  Omn,  p.  4,60.,  50, 


ii6        DEFINITION  and 

**  ^nd  it  is  the  fame  in  the  phrenfy.  jJnd  in 
^\hoth,  the  Mania  and  the  delirium,    are  lefs^ 

tn  proportion  as  the  bile  is  lefs  predominant 

than  the  phlegm. 

Galen  fays,  In  cfFe£t,  the  fame  thing  : 

•srvpsTn  ryjv  (p^iviriv  voajxev,  h^sv)  ^lutpspacrav  aXXco 
Trig  iA.ocvLug  •srK'^u  rca  TirvpeTO)'  (ppivoov  [^bv  ycip  a^(pM 
(^7\oiQoii,  TO   J'e  •aru^erS  tuv  ^aivofjisvuv  'l^tov, 

iao-Tve^  ro  crtw  wupsTU  (ppsvintccov.  For  by 

*'  the  conjlant  prefence  of  fever,  alone,  can  ive 
*■  diftinguijld  a  phrenfy  ;  which  differs  frmi 
Mania  in  nothing  but  this  circumjlance  :  for 
"  they  are  both  diforders  of  the  mmd ;  but  the  ab- 
fence  of  fever  is  character  if  ic  of  the  latter,  as  is 
^'  its  prefence  of  the  former.''* 

I  T  may  not  be  amifs  here  to  obferve,  that 
though  Galen  in  this,  and  other  pafTages, 
calls  Mania  a  delirium  without  fever  ;  yet  he 
acknowledges  that  the  term  is  ufed  by  Hip- 
pocrates, in  fcveral  places,  as  indeed  it  is 

in. 


»  Vide  Fxfti  Oeconom.  Hippocr  at.  Art,  Matv/a  ;  where 
more  may  be  fcca  to  the  f»me  purjf  ofe. 


ARRANGEMENT.  117 

in  that  j lift  qnotecl  above,  only  to  exprefs  a 
violent  degree  of  delirium,  whether  it  be 
with,  or  whether  it  be  without  fever.  In 
commenting  upon  a  pafiage  in  which  fzxvtxov  || 
is  u fed  by  Hippocb  ates  when  fpeaking  of 
delirium  in  a  fever,  he  obferves,  — • — r-  (aqcv.jcov. 
aey,  ag  si  zoii  'uraiccKOTfjiZov  K^/V^ug  ei^r,}csi  I — — . 
"  tbat  in  ujing  the  tertn  maniacal,  he  means  ths 

fame  thing  as  if  he  had  faid — highly  delui- 

ous." 

I  cannot  in  this  place  forbear  taking  notice 
of  the  latitude  which  the  antients  often  allow- 
ed themfelves  in  the  ufe  of  words  :  in  which, 

indeed 

II  "  In  febribus  autem  dentUnis  Uritleie,  qu'ibiis  a  puero  miJiimc 

«'  eft  confuemm,  y^oi'V^^cv  zai  ^raxT.u)hc.'" — u  Qrathij 
''•  the  teeth  in  a  fever,  when  the  patient  has  not  been  accuji ovied  ta. 
*'  dofo  fnce  his  thildbood,  foretcls  a  violent  degree  of  delirium,  arJ. 

e'ven  death  itfel/y  HiPPOcR.  Pr.cnotion.    Lib.  i.   p.  37. 

1.  52.  And  a  little  after,  ftill  fpeaking  of  fevers,  he  fays,- — r 

"  Qviod  (ietiam  pulfus  in  praecordiis  infit  Qo^v^ov   yj  TTa^a?:- 

"  ^aruvrjV  indicat.  Verum  etiam  eorum  oculos  Intueri  opportet. 

*'  Si  namqiie  oculi  crebro  moveantur  ^^<^'''7''«*  T^TCig  eXTfii, 

— "  If  there  be  a  pulfation  about  the  pr^cordia,  it  denotes  fimply 
an  approaching  perturbation  of  mind ^  or  delirium.  But  it  is 
alfo  proper  to  obfirve  the  eyes  ;  for  if  the  patient  moves  thimfre' 

*'  quently  ahout^  a  Tiolcnt  delirium,  Wisy  fcon  be  expe^ied.^*-^lhid. 

p.  38.  1.  37. 


ii8         DEFINITION  and 


Indeed,  too  many  of  the  moderns,  partly 
from  the  poverty  of  language,  partly  from  a 
defirc  to  avoid  the  charge  of  iui  affedation  of 
lingiilarity,  or  a  fondnefs  of  innovation  ;  but 
more,  I  fufpe6l,  from  inattention,  indolence, 
and  habit,  have  followed  their  example.  This 
latitude  of  language  is  often  the  occafion  of 
much  confufion,  and  apparent  inconfiflency, 
in  the  writings  of  the  antient  Greeks  and  Ro- 
mans ;  has  greatly  diminiflied  the  value  of  e- 
ven  their  beft  compofitions  relative  to  natur 
ral  faience,  by  rendering  them  frequently  ob- 
fcure,  and  fometimes  perfectly  unintclliglbie  ; 
and  has,  I  believe,  been  as  much  inftrumen- 
tal  to  the  decline  of  clajjical  learning  in  this 
phtlofophlcal age,  as  any  other  caufe  whatever. 
Had  they  been  as  accurate  as  they  are  ele- 
gant, they  would  have  been  more  valued,  and 
more  generally  read  ;  but  nothing  can  com- 
penfate,  in  the  eftimation  of  a  philofopher, 
for  want  of  precifion  ;  fince  there  can  be  no 
found  philofophy,  where  there  is  no  precifiou 
in  the  ufe  of  terms. 

This  want  of  precifion,  by  throwing  o- 

ver 


ARRANGEMENT-  119 


ver  a  compontion  the  dark  veil  of  obfcurity, 
is  as  unfavourable  to  the  reputation  of  an  au- 
thor, as  a  man  of  real  fciencc  and  genius,  as 
it  IS  injurious  to  the  advancement  of  know- 
ledge :  Since,  as  we  are  ufuaily  unwilling 

to  take  much  pains  to  underftand  a  writer  in 
whofe  works  we  frequently  meet  with  the  un- 
promifnig  appearance  of  obfcurity  and  incon- 
fiftency  ;  —  and,  as  we  cannot  be  fuppofed  to 
enter  much  into  the  fpirit  and  meaning  of 
what  we  read  without  pleafure,  and  without 
attention  ;  or  to  be  much  infl:ru(5led  by  what 
we  do  not  underftand  :— fo,  we  are  not  very 
ready  to  give  a  writer  credit  for  much  fcience, 
or  any  deep  views  into  the  fecret  operations 
of  nature,  who  has  not  fagacity,  or  attention, 
fufficient  to  enable  him  to  affix  determinate, 
and  appropriate  ideas,  to  the  terms  he  makes 
ufe  of  ; — and  are  apt  to  fulpe^l:  that  he  has  no 
very  clear  head,  or  bright  genius,  who  is  un- 
able to  communicate  his  own  notions,  what- 
ever they  may  be,  at  leaft  for  the  moft  part, 
with  perfpicuity  and  prccifion  :~for,  as  Ho- 
race very  juftly  obferves, — 

"  Scrlbendi 


120 


DEFINITION  and 


"  Scribendi  re6le  fc\pere  eft  piincipium  & 
fons. 

*'  Verbaque  provifam  rem  non  iiivita  fe- 
quciitur."  § 

"  Goodfenje  the  fount  am  of  the  mufes  art. 

■  "  And  ij  the  tnind  with  clear  conceptions  gloui), 
"  The  willing  words  injujl  exprejfions fiow^-^ 

There  is  not,  perhaps,  a  more  ftrlking 
inftance  of  this  latitude  in  the  ufe  of  words, 
than  in  the  variety  of  lignifications  in  which 
the  anticnt  phyficians  have  employed    the  > 
terms  Melancholia  and  Mania. 

MELANCHOLIA  is  fometimes  em- 
ployed to  fignify  a  certain  temperament,  or 
inorbid  difpolition  of  body  \  J — fometimes  to 

exprefs 

.§  3s  Arte  poetka,  r.  311* 
-{■  Francis. 

X  lilP?ocvi.  De  Aere,  Locis^^  Aquis.  p.  288.  6.— 
Hat  lone  in  Morh.  Acut.  p.  404.  39. — De  Affe^ion,  p»  325.  21,-—! 
'De  Morhis  Fulgarihus.  p.  109O*  G. 


1 


ARRANGEMENT- 


141 


cxprefs  Madnefs  in  general,  %  of  which  this 
temperament,  or  atrabilis,  was  almoft  univer- 
fally  fuppofed  to  be  the  caufcj— in  which 
view  HoKACEj  fpeaking  of  a  happy  Mad- 
man, fays — 

"  Expullt  elleboro  morbum  hllcmque  mcra- 
CO 

 moft  commonly  to  difcrlminate  that  kind 

which  is  attended  with,  dejecl  'ton  and  fcar^  \\  as 
has  already  been  abundantly  proved  ; — and 
fometimes,  as  Cicero  has  obferved,  to  de* 
note  even  fury  ;  and  that  either  in  proper  Mad- 
nefs,  *  or  in  the  delirium  of  a  fcven  J 

In 

^  HiPPOCR*  De  Morhisi  p.  460.  48* 

II  Ibid.  SrB.  6.  Jphdrlfm.  z^. — See  alfo  the  defiiiitioni  al* 
ready  tranfcribed  from  the  writings  of  the  antlent  phyficians. 

^  Ibid,  De  Morbis.  p.  460.  45.  This  may    be  farther 

confirmed  by  the  following  pallage  »f  the  Capteivei  of  Plau^^ 
Tus  :   ^ 

 "  Tynd.    Anient  octtli^  fune  opu'Jl  Hegio, 

Viden'  tu  illi  maculari  totum  corpus  maculis  luridis  ? 
Atra  eilis  agitat  hominem.*' 

"  Tynd.   His  eyes  flafli  fire  ;  'twere  fit  he  were  confinsd. 


122 


DEFINITION  and 


In  like  manner,  by  Mania  fometimes  is 
underftood  Madnefs  in  general ;  §— moft  fre- 
quently Madnefs  with  fury  and  audacity,  in 
which  fenfe,  as  has  been  fully  fliown  already, 
it  is  oppofed  to  melancholia  ;  f-loinetimes  no 
more  than  a  high  degree  of  delirium  in  a  fe- 
ver :       and  fometimes  even  to  denote  that 

kniQ 

See  younothbrjj  his  hocJyh  o'er fpread 

WHljli-vid  blotches  ?  'Tis  black  bile  dijiurh  him, 

-  And  a  little  after  Tyndarus  fays  

"  Jam  dcllrammta  loquitur  :  lavvx  ftlmulant  vlrum." 

Barkhon.^  he  raves  !  fame  ghofts  mfecn  torment  him." 
-"^  Aa  3.  fcene  4.  v.  63.-67. 

*  HiProcr..  Prorrhet.  Lib.  i.  No.  14,  ^S,   ^oac. 

Pranou  p.  i3°-  No.  88,  93,  94,  95- 

f  Htppocr    BeUorUSacro.  p.  308,  309.— PW-'f^  Lib. 

Democriti  Epijl-  P-  1285. 

4.  HiPPOCR.  Aphorlfm.  §  3.  AP^^'--  §  ^' 

^^^^De  ruHuf Ration.  Lib.  2.  p.  35^-  3°- 

*  Htppocr.        Judlcationihus.   p.   55-  ^^'"^v- ^"''^f 

*  HiPPOCR.  ^^^^^^^^  fpeakmgof  three  kinds  of 

me^tilSW   by  Hippocrates.  f»ys  the  fecond  . 

melancholica.  ^Vlde  Hoz-lerii  &  Jacotii  Com^ 

^.CrH-oc..x.  C..c.P..«.^  Lib.  a.  n.  50-  P-  -i. 


ARRANGEMENT. 


123 


kind  of  Madnefs  which  is  accompanied  with 
fear  :ind  deje^wn,  and  is  ufually  diftinguiflied 
trom  Mania  by  the  oppofite  term,  Melancho-^ 
iia. 

I  fhall  now  proceed  to  arrange  the  various 
SPECIES  of  Madnefs  according  to  the  above 
definitions  ,•  and  for  the  fake  of  pjacing  them 
in  a  clear  point  of  view,  fliall  throw  them  to- 
gether into  the  form  of  a  table  ;  which 
fhall  be  followed  by  fuch  defcriptions,  ill^if- 
trations,  and  authorities,  as  fhall  appear  to 
me  neceflary  to  explain,  and  confirm,  what- 
ever may  fland  in  need  of  explanation,  or 
confirmation. 

CL2  A  Table 

*  HiPPOCR.  Ba  FiSlns  Ration,  Lib.  2.  p.  351.  50 — Apho' 
ripi.  §  6.  Aphor.  21.  ;is  expl.iiued  by  Galen  ;  and  acknow- 
ledged by  Mercurialis.  Fariar,  Legion.  Lib.  6.  p.  475. 
The  fame  writer  lias,  in  another  work,  the  following  obfervati- 
on  ;  which  feems  fcarcely  to  be  confident  with  his  cenfurc  of 

Cicero,  abovementioned  :  *'  Per  Ma>iiam,  omnia  dellria. 

Nam  ut  Galenas  fcribit,  haec  vox  Mania  fignificat  aliquando 
Mclancholiam^  jam  Maniam,  jam  omnia  deliria."— By  Ma- 
nia, fays  he,  he  means  all  forts  of  delirium.  For  as  ive  leant 
from  GAhts,  this  vjord  Mania  fignifics  fomctimes  Melancholy^ 
fometimcs  Mania,  and fometi?nes  eveiy  kind  nf  delirium.'" — Vid© 
Hieron.^  Mercuriai-  feciind.  Lib,  Efulm,  HlPPOCRAT.. 
Frasleiflion.  Bonouiens.  p.  238, 


114-        DEFINITION  md 


A  Table  of  the  Species  of  Insan- 
ity. 

O//^  Genus,    Insanity. 

Two  Divifions,  — Ideal  Notional, 

I.    IDEAL  INSANITY. 

Insanity —  i.  Phrenitlc. 

2.  Incoherent. 

3.  Maniacal. 

4.  Senfitive. 

II.    NOTIONAL  INSANITY 

Insanity  —  5.  Delufive. 

6.  Fanciful. 

7.  Wlumfical. 

8.  Impuliive. 

9.  Scheming. 

10.  Vain,  or  Self-important. 

II-.  Hypochondriacal. 

i2r  Pathetic. 

13.  Appetitive, 


ARRANGEMENT. 


I.     IDEAL  INSANITY. 

I.  T"N  PHRENiTic  Insanity  the  patient 
X  KAVES  INCESSANTLY,  or  ivith  Jhort^ 
and  thofe  rarely  lucid  intervals,  either  about  one,^ 

or 

^  Curiofius  inquilivi,  Van  Helmont,  plures  amcntn, 
&  non  paiicos  fanavi,  tam  qui  a  magiiis  pertiiibationibus,  pa(Son- 
Ibus,  aliifque  inorbis,  quam  qui  ablumptis  demcntes  fafli  erant, 
narrarvmtque  mihl,  fe  incidiflc  fenfim  in  Maniam,  cum  prsvio 
fenfii  ex  hypochondrio  iilis  afccndeie  folitam,  veluti  oblcuiain 
phantajiam  &  nubilara  tentationem  amentise,  qu  i  priinum  vel 
inviti  premebantur,  donee  iJca  tandem,  plenum  iibi  dominiuni 
acquilivifiet.  In  fe  autem  .revcrn,  erant  a£loium  omnium  me- 
mores.  Fidenter  eiiim  conquefti  Hint  de  omnibus*  Quod  nimi- 
x\x\w  fpoliaraitur  primum  ornyii  dlfcurfus  confcctttione^  Jcque  majf 
Jjjje  in  puncluali  immcrjione  unlus  conceptns  ;  extra  qua.m  nihil  ali- 
ud  cogitarcnt,  cum  mccmore,  molellia,  &  importunitate.  Cogi- 
tarcnt  non  lecus  ac Ji  in  fpeculo  ilium  fcmpcr  conccptiim  f^uijfent  tn- 
tuiti.  Itnn  nrc  Jciehant  fc  turn  illud  cogitat  e^  'vcl  fiio  conccptu  lie 
afpiccre  :  quanquam  fic  immobiliter  cogitarent,  ut  tandem  tub 
ingrefTum  &  dominium  Manias,  fi  contingeret  illos  ^-wt^  fteuj]tnt 

per  dies  aliqtint,  abfcjue  laffitudlne,  7tec  fcirrnt  Jc  Jiarc."  VaN" 

YizhVioaT  Demens  Idea.  Operum.  p.  174. 

*'  I  ha've  minutely  examined  many  Madmen,  and  have  cured  not 
a  fciK!  ;  as  ivellfuch  as  have  been  rendered  infane  hy  great  uneajj- 
ttcfs^  violent  pajjions,  or  by  other  di/cafes^  as  by  fuhjlances  of  an  in- 
jurious nature  taken  into  the  Jlomach  ;  und  they  have  all  told  me  that 
they  became  gradualiy  maniacal,  having  a  previous  fenfation  of  4 
kind  of  ohkare  ideal  pifture,  a  fort  of  a  faint  approach  of  Infani- 
ty,  ivbichfecmed  to  afcend from  the  region  of  the  flomach  :  that 


12$      DEFINITION    and  [Meal 


cr  VARIOUS  II  objeSis  ;  and  laughs,  fings, 
vvhiftles,   weeps,    laments,   prays,  fhours, 

fwcars, 

this  troiiblefame  reprefsntatlon  nvas  at  firji  yielded  to  ivith  reluHancey 
hut  the  idea  'mfenjihly  gaining  Jlrength,  acq^uired  at  length  fcrfcH 
dominion  over  them.  JVJjcn  they  came,  hov^ever,  to  themfcl'ves^ 
they  re/nemiered  all  that  they  had  experienced  in  their  illnefs ;  and 
gave  an  exaSl  relation  of  all  their  dijlrejfes  ; — as  that  they  ivere  ai 
jirjl  deprived  of  all  the  connexions  of  affociation  and  reafoning,  fo 
that  the  mind  remained  fixed  on  the  individual  point  of  one  lingle 
objc6t,  beyond -xvhich  it  could  not  think,  and -which  it  d-zvelt  upon 

ixjith  grief,  uneajinefs,  andfoUcituda;  that  in  this  intcnfe  aH 

of  thinking  thcy  feemcd  for  ever  to  behold  one  object ;  as  it  were 
in  a  glafs  ; — and  that  they  were  not  even  confcioiis  that  they  were 
merely  thinking  of  fuch  objeft,  or  that  they  only  beheld  it  in  i- 
magination  ;  though  they  were  fo  iTmnovcahly  rivettcd  in  thought, 
that  if  they  happened  to  he  Jlanding,  at  the  firfi  attack,  or  at  leajf 
during  the  violence  of  a  maniacal  par  oxyf?n,  thcy  would  continue 
ftanding  for  fome  days,  without  %vearinefsy  and  yet  not  be  aware 
that  they  were  ftanding." 

**  Quidam  fenex  nobilis,  quandoque  a  fede  exiliens  fubito,  ab 
lioftibus  fe  impeti  credebat  :  quos  arreptos,  retro  fe  in  furninn 

confertim,  fua  quidem  opinione,  intrudebat."  Wieri  De 

Prafligiis  D^emonum,  Lib.  3.  De Lamiis  ap.  y,  §  2.  Operum, 
p.  180. 

*'  A  certain  elderly  nohleman  would fometimes,  on  a  fuddcn,  fan- 
cy  that  he  was  attacked  hy  an  enemy  ;  and  fpringing  from  his  fcaty 
would,  in  imagination,  thruji  together  fuch  as  he  could  fcize  upon^ 
into  an  oven  which  was  at  his  hack," 

II  "  Juvcnis  robuftus,  viginti  quatuor  annos  natus,  biliofos,  & 
poculis  largioribus  quotidie  indulgens,  nuper  magna  contumelia 
fult  afFe6tus,  qu£e  ipfam,  hinc  ira  valde  perturbatum,  diu  de  viu- 
ditSla  magnopere  habuit  folicitum.  Poll:  aliquot  dies  ccepit  feroci- 
or  vidcri,  &  cum  quovis  dc  rebus  Icviculis  rixuri)  nobles pcne  tolas 

infomnts 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  127 

fwears,  threatens,  attempts  to  commit  vio- 
lence either  to  himfeif  or  others,  or  docs 
whatever  elfe   the  nature  of  his  dehrinm 

prompts 

inf^nnnrs  dnccrc,  &  m'lris  imflginationihus  Jnfeflari.  Cumque  ma- 
iuin  deirnie  Ingravefceret,  diluculo  quodain  invigilans,  e  ledo  nu- 
dus  exiliit:  iadiifium  &  loiices  diftVegit,  clamoribus  turiofis  totam 
dumu:n  replcvit,  &  in  occurrentcs  domefticos  tantum  impetum  fe- 
cit, ut  uni,  reniteiitibus  aliis,  gulam  manibus  fortiilime  com- 
prelieniam,  pene  totam  confregit.  A  pluribus  itaquc  viris  ro- 
builif.  compvchcnfus,  &:  vinculis  in  Icfto  dententus  ;  ubi  jam  per 
biduam  damans,  ahftirda  loqucns,  cantillans,  ridens,  dcjerans^ 
torvum  vidcns,  perpetuo  vigilat.  Cibos  oblatos  fatis  avidc  inge- 
rit.  Potum  ore  haultum,  in  adfiantium  vultum,  fi  non  atten- 
dant, labris  in  fiftulae  modam  arftatis  impudenter  nonnunquam 
ejioulatur.  S;epiflime  nudo  jacet  C(3rpore,  nec  ullum  frigus  fen- 
tit,  nec  ab  uUo  lasditui.  Nullis  blandimentij,  nullisobjurgation- 
ibus,  nec  uUis  admonitionibui,  ejus  icrocia  franari  vel  leniri  hac- 

tenus  poteft."  Broen  Anlmad.   Med,  in  Regii  Prax, 

j]fed.  Lib.  I.  §  15. 

''^  Arohuji  young  ma7t,  ofiifycarsofage^  of  a  bilious  conjlitu- 
tiin,  and  ufed  to  a  daily  indulgence  in  hard  drinking,  received  late- 
ly a  violent  affront,  at  ivhich  he  -'Mas  fj  enraged,  that  he  thought  of 
nothing  but  ho-M  he  might  be  revenged.  After  fotnc  days  he  began 
to  be  morofe,  to  quarrel  ivith  any  body  about  the  merejl  trijles  ;  to 
pals  almoll:  whole  nights  without  deep,  and  to  he  troubled  ivith 
Itrange  fancies.  The  di [order  incrcafing,  one  morning  early,  as  he 
ivas  lying  a^vake,  he  fuddenh  Jlarted,  naked,  out  o  f  bed,  tore  his 
Jhirt,  and  his  bed  clothes,  filled  the  ivhole  honfe  -iinth  the  noife  of  his 
violent  raving,  and  attacked -vjitb  fuch  fury  the  fervants  ivho  ran 
to  him,  that  feizing  one  by  the  throat  he  ahjiofl  flrangled  hinif 
notivithfanding  the  ajfiftance  given  him  by  the  refi.  He  ivas y 
therefore,  fecitrcd  by  feveral  flout  men,  and  fafiened  doivn  in  his 
bed ;  ivhere  he  has  now  lain,  without  fleep,  for  i-zvo  days,  incef- 
fantly  fliouting,  talking  nonfenfe,  finging,  "laughing,  fweanng, 
and  expreffing  in  his  looks  the  ftemnefs  of  Vevenge.  He  eats  his 
food fomevjhat greedily.    Sometimes^  contra^ling  his  Hps  fo  as  t0 

ftrm 


128      DEFINITION    W  [Ideal 


prompts  him  to  do  \  -^or  h  as  incessantly 

EMPLOYED     ABOUT      SOME     ONE  THING 

•which  IS  either  abfurd,  or  uncommon  ;  §— and 
is  almoft  wholly  intent  on  the  foUtary  idea^  or 

on 

f$rm  a  kind  o  f  tube ^  he  ivill  ruMy  fpirt  out  of  his  mouth  a  part  of 
bis  drink ^  into  the  faces  o  f  his  attendants,  if  they  are  not  careful 
to  avoid  it.  He  often  lies  quite  naked,  and  neither  perceives,  nsr 
is  injured  by  cold.  Neither  perfuajion,  chiding^  nor  admonition, 
have  hitherto  had  the  fmallcji  effcH  in  rejl:-ai7iing,  or  foothing  his 
ferocity.^* 

*'  Vidi  Maniacum  omn'\x  corporis  integumenta  lacerafle,  &  nu- 
dum ftramini  incubuifle  in  loco  lapidibus  ftrato,  duin  afperrima 
laevicbat  hyems,  per  plures  fcptimanas  ;  quandoque  per  o£lo  dies 
amni  cibo  abjiintiijfc ,  deindc  oblata  qua  vis  ingurgitafl'e  avidilfime, 
imo  %c  fcedlffitno  fpeftaculo,  proprlas  feces  alvinas  devorafle,  licet 
pptimi  cibi  fuppeterent.  Per  plures  feptlmanas  nobles  isf  dies  per- 
I'igil,  Horrendis  clamoribus  totam  replebat  viciniam  ;  ic  tamen 
per  plurci  anaos  lupervixir,  fedatc  quidem  furore,  fed  fatuus,  & 

omnium  rcrum  immemor.''  Van  Swieten  Comment,  j4pk, 

1 1 20.  Tom,  3,  p.  521. 

I  have  fecn  a  Maniac  tear  all  his  cloathing  from  his  body  ;  lie 
nxiked  upon  fra%v,  on  a  fione  pavement,  for  many  weeks,  during 
the  feverity  of  a  cold  vointer  ;  fometimes  abftaiu  from  food  for 
eight  days  together  ;  then  greedily  JvjalUw  whatever  ivas  placed 
hcfore  him  ;  and,  vjhat  ivas  ^[hocking  to  behold,  devour  his  o-zvn 
(ixcrcmentSy  even  ivhen  he  had  the  bejl  o  f  food  at  hand.  I  have 
known  him  to  have  no  fleep  for  many  weeks  together ;  /*  fill  the 
Kvhole  neighbourhood  -xvith  his  dreadful  cries  ;  andyet  he  furvivcd  for 
feveral years,  the  fury  in  the  mean  time  abating,  and  being  fuc- 
ceeded  by  ideotifm,  and  a  total  inattention  to  every  thing,"— — - 
Vide  etiam,  Schfnchii  Obferv.  Medic,  rarior.  Lib.  i.  D< 
Mania,  Caufa,  Obf.  i.  2.  p.  132.  &c. 

§  JDiis  ac  noHes  curjitabat  IMauiacusJ^  fubfultu  tara  pcrnice, 

& 


Inflmity]  ARRANGEMENT.  129 


on  the  world  of  ideas  within  ;  and  fcarccl/ 

knows, 

&  agkatione  tarn  pcrtnni,  ut  prae  defatigatione  dcflueret  undequa- 
que  ludoribus  :  nequc  ttmen  propterea,  vel  tantulum  qiiiefceret, 
h»mo  volaticus,  &  irrequieta:  huic  revolutioni,  tarn  ftride  ad- 
diAus,  ut  nunquam  fe  dedtrlt  uUi  qulcti,  nifi  quam  invito  extor- 
qucrer,  Inevitabilis  dorinicndi  neceliitas.'' 

"A  qua  Iiifania,  baud  miiltum  certc  ablufit,  illa,7^r/>  imaginati- 
onis^  Ipecies  :  quam  a  mallei  limilitudiiac,  lubult  malleationem 
vocare.  Nam  velut  fabri  ferrarii,  iteiatis  i£tlbus,  incudem  fuam 
tundimt:  lie  vidimus  muliercm  Campcnfem,  Infania  hac  pcrcltam, 
p^rcuiriflc  indelinenter  genu  fuum  ;  modo  dc2:tro,  modo  rero 
brachio  linlftro  ;  fed  i£tu  tarn  vchementi,  ut  quilibet  ipfam  max- 
imopcrc  lEeliflet  :  nifi  verberantis  manus  impetum  fregiflcnt  do- 
meftici,  intcipolito  raolliori  pulvinari." 

"  Brachlum  quidem  clevabat,  ac  deprimebat  fatis  diftlniSte :  fed 
motum  ejus  inchoatum,  vel  incitarc,  vel  retardare,  non  videba- 
tur,  in  manu  ipfius  effe,  multo  minus  intcgre  cefTare,  ab  hoc  feri- 
eiidi  ftudio.  Q^nod  fane  lubens  intcrmifilTet  (jtm  cmmquinque menfes^ 
incudem  banc  tutuderat)  nifi  ipfam  potentcr  eo  peitraxiflct,  faU 
fa  imaginatio" — TuLPii  Obfer-v.  Medic*  Lib.  i.  cap.  1 6  & 
17.  p.  34. 

•*  A  certain  maniac  ran  backwards  aad  forwards  day  and  night, 

imthfuch  p(rfevering  agility,  andfuch  incejfant  hurry ,  thathcujas 
ujually  in  a  pro/u/e  fiveai  from  fat/grte  :  he  vjould  not,  howevtr^ 
refl  a  moment,  but,  flying  about,  fo  ftriBly  perfifled  in  this  reftkfs 
revolution,  that  he  7iever  alloived  himfclf  the  Jhortefl  rcpofe^  lut 
tuhcn,  o-jcrcome  byfleep,  he  could  no  longer  avoid  it" 

"  From  this  inflance  of  Infanily  thatfpecies  t./" depraved  imiei- 
nation  au;^./,.  different,  r^hich,  from  'its  reftmblance  to 

hmting^mth  a  mallet,  I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  call  malleation. 
For  as  blacJifmuhs  repeat  the  flrokes  upon  their  anvils,  fo  have -I 
feena-ivoman  ofCampen,  affeaed  ivith  this  fort  6f  Madnefs  firike 
u^on  her  knee  without  ctafng,  fomttimcs  with  her  right  hand,  and 

^  fometimes 


130     DEFINITION    W  [Ideal 

knows,  §  or  attends  to  external  objeds  about 
him  ;  and  when  he  does  perceive  external 
objcds,  is  apt  to  perceive  thera  erroneoufly  ; 
—thus  1  have  known  a  patient,  in  this  ftate, 

in 

fometlmes  with  her  left ;  and  that  -zvlth  fuch  violence^  that  J}je  muji 
have  received  much  pain  from  every  Jiroke,  had  not  her  attendants 
broke  their  force^  by  interpofn^  (tfoft  pillo-M  to  receive  theinJ" 

"  She  appeared  evidently  to  lift  up^  and  hring  down  her  arm,  in 
the  fame  manner  as  in  common  voluntary  motion  ;  hut  feemed  not  to 
have  the  fw^ver  either  of  qjiickening,  or  retarding  the  motion,  ivheu 
it  %vas  once  hegun  ;  ?nuch  lef  could  Jbe  ceafc  altogether  fro?nJiriking 
in  this  manner  ;  -zuhich,  doubtlcjly,  f:e  VJould  •zvillingly  have  laid 
afide,  (for  Jhehad  nozv  in  this-zvay  beat  the  anvil  for  five  months) 
had  fje  not  been  violently  impelled  to  it  by  fame  erroneous  appear- 
ance in  the,  ima'nnation." 

—  Vide  etiam  BartHoLINI   Hifi.  Aiiat.  Rar.   Cent.  2, 

Hift.  6g.  p.  258- 

§  "  Novimus  quendam  in  Creta  religiofum,  habitudinis  cho- 
Icricae,  jetatc  juvenera,  fubita  furiofa  dementia  correptum,  qui 
■domeflicos  omnes  gladio  pcrfequebalur,  a  pluribus  capttis,  manicis 
&  compedibus  in  carcerem  intrufus  eft  : — faHis  &  fermone  dcli- 
Tabat,  neminemque  nequc  ainicum,  neque  fodalem  noverat,  au- 

dax,  furiofus,  &c.'*  Schenehii   Obf.  Med,  Rar.   Lib.  i. 

De  Melancholia,  Symptomata.  Obf.  i.  p.  1 24. 

*'  I  knezv  a  certain  perfon  in  Crete,  o  f  a  religious  order,  youngs 
and  of  a  choleric  te7nperanunt,  zvho  tvas  fuddenly  fei%ed  ivith  a 
furious  Madnefs,  and  purfued  the  fervants  of  the  houfe  with  a 
drawn  fword  ;  ////  being  overcome  by  numbers,  heivasfecured^vith 

■handcuffs,  and  fetters,  and  confined  in  prifon.  His  delirivm 

difcovcred  ttfelf  hoth  in  adions,  a?id  dilcourfe  ;  he  knew  nobody, 
mot  even  his  neareji  frimdi  and  companions  j  ivas  daring,  furiom^ 
&c" 


^ifanity]   ARRANGEMENT.  13^ 


In  the  cleareft  day-light,  fo  grofsly  to  mif- 
take  certahi  objeft>,  as  to  imagine  bricks, 
ftones,  logs  of  wood,  flicks,  or  ftraws,  to 
be  kings,  princes,  generals,   inftruments  of 
'War,  horfes,  and  other  things  ;  to  defcribe 
I  their  drefs  and  appearance;  and  to  be  quite 
;  angry  at  the  blindnefs,  or  perverfenefs,  of 
ithofe  who  could  not,  or,  as  he  rather  imagin-  . 
fcd,  pretended    they  could  not  fee  the  fame 
objects  :  or  he  is  apt  erroneoufly  to  con- 
nect them  with  other  images  ;  which  exift^ 
as  he  fuppofes  them  to  cxift,  only  in  his  dif- 
tempered  brain  ;  as  when  a  patient,  of  this 
fort,  imagined  that  the  phyfician  who  came 
to  attend  him  had  arrows  flicking  in  his  eyes  : 
but,  in  general,  all  the  varieties  of  phrenetic 
Infanity  agree  in  this,  that  the  patient  deeps 
very  little. 

I  have  called  this  fpecies  phrenetic  Tnfamtyy 
becaufe  this  kind  of  infiuie  delirium  is  fimilar 
to  that  of  the  phrem'tis,  of  which,  as  has  al- 
ready been   obferved,   Aret^us  fays  • 

oics  f^sv  yap  Tira^oiioUoivovTCiih  Koci  ra.  ^7]  •srocpiovToi 
0^c<s<n  ^T^^BV      TircipsovToCf  ycoii  ra  fjLvi  (pxivo^i'  at  uWed, 

KXTo^iv  lySdxKsToii  "  For  in  the  Utter ^ 

K  z  ^<  phrenitisj 


131     DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


phrcnitls,  they  have  erroneous  fenfatiom,  and 
fee  things  as  prefent  which  are  not  fo  ;  objects 
"  being  reprefentedto  their  fight  which  do  not  ap- 
pear  to  thofe  about  them^"" 

I  T  is  ufually  attended  with  fome  degree  of 
rednefs,  more  or  lefs,  in  proportion  to  its 
violence,  of  the  tunica  albugineaof  the  eyes  ; 
with  rather  a  florid  countenance  ;  heat  of  the 
head  ;  a  quick  and  fometimes  a  full  pulfe ; 
whitenefs  of  the  tongue  ;    foulnefs  of  the 
teeth  and  lips ;  and  often  with  a  copious  dif- 
charge  of  mucus,    or  rather  of  infpiflated 
lymph,  from  the  mouth,  throat,  and  trach- 
ea, which  is  generated,  or  much  incrcafed^ 
byinceffant  raving  ;  with  rather  a  preterna- 
tural heat  ;  often  a  dry  and  harfh,  but  fome- 
times a  moift  fkin  ;  moifture  of  the  eyes  ;  a 
thick  fordid  rheum  adhering  to  the  edges  of 
the  eyelids,  and  in  the  corners  of  the  eyes  ; 
and  rather  a  grcafy  appearance  of  the  face. 
Patients  of  this  fort,  are  fometimes  thirfty  ; 
fcldom  have  much  appetite  ;  too  often  obfti- 
nately  rcfufe  both  meat  and  drink  ;  and  not 
"unfrequcutly  are  as  obflinately  bent  upon  de- 
ft roying 


Infaiiity]  ARRANGEMENT,  133 

ftroying  thcmfelves  in  fome  other  way  ;  the 
caufe  of  which  fatal  inclination  is,  in  fomc 
cafes,  obvious,  from  the  nature  and  caufe  of 
the  dehrium  ;  as  when,  though  arifuig  from 
a  bodilv  diforder,  it  is  vifibly  accompanied 
with  great  anxiety,  fear,  diftrefs,  and  hor- 
ror ;  ^  or,  being  generated  by  the  pulllani- 
mous  paffions,  it  has  proceeded  through  the 
antecedent  ftages  of  religious,  or  fome  other 

of 


f[  *' Ubi  Infania  vehcmenter  auct.i  fit,  banc  Gvxci  tyrlodea 
^87]^iu^r]l  y  ut  yiJetur]  appellarunt :  in  hac  ingciuui  q-jxris 
TTiala  man'uci  pcrpctrant.  Kadein  fymproniata  app;iicnt  etiam 
fx  humore  melancholuo  vehementcr  putrehit'to,  fed  cum  iis  adeft 
c^\iac^\ie,  timor  c\xm  tncpjiitia  :  unde  ifti  mclnnchollci  furcnta  pra 
timjre  pieriiinque  fc  ex  praidtis  loci's  pr^cii>itnnr,  atque  ira  inori- 
uiitur.  Q^iH  mortc  pRANCibCUs  a  Po.nte  dim  pidor  exccilen- 
tilliimis,  atque  Delphinus  a  Como,  ambo  Biiilanieiifes,  pvje- 
teritis  annis  jntc-rerunt." — Alpin'I  de  Mcdldna  Method.  Lib.  lo. 
c.  10.  p.  6 10. 

*'  IVJ.^en  Infanlty  hrcomcs  violent^  fays  Prospfr  Al.PlNt'S,  the 
Greeks  '^ivc  it  the  appellation  of  favagc.  Maniacs  of  this  fori  arc 
apt  to  perpetrate  every  kind  of  defpcratc  m  if  chief.  The  fame  fyf'p^ 
temi  may  arlf^  from  the  melancholy  humour  t'^hcn  greatly  cor- 
ruplid  ;  but  arc  in  this  eafc  aicompanied  v:ith  fear  and  dejedlion  : 
hence  it  happens  that  thefe  melancholy  Madmen,  who  become  fu- 
rious through  fear,  generally  throvj  themfel-ves  down  from  fome 
eminence,  deftroy  themfclvcs.     In  this  manner  Francis- 

c0saPoNTE,  Dei-phinus  a  CoMo,  both  natives  of  Baffii- 
noj  put  an  end  to  their  lives fume  years  ago." 


Qafcsof  thiskiad  arc  very  common. 


134      DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 

of  the  diftrefsfal  fpecies  of  notional,  to  phreni- 
iic  Infanity.* — In  other  cafes  it  appears  quite 
unaccountable  ;  arihng  from  bodily  difeafc  ; 
and  being  unaccompanied  with  any  fuch  vifi- 
ble  and  permanent  appearances  of  anxiety,  or 
anguifh,  as  feem  futficient  for  the  production 
of  fuch  an  efFe6t  ;  fo  that  it  is  impoffible  to 
difcovcr  any  adequate  motive  for  fo  horrid  a 
deed.    This  difpofition  is  often  as  ohjlmate,  and 

conjianty 

*  "  Contlgit  Antverp'ia;,  quod  faber  lignarius,  fibi  perfuadens^ 
fe  noftu  fpeiftra  horrida  vidifle,  quorum  terrore  elt  totus  amens 
fa£tus,  Miffufque  ad  tumulum  S.  Dympnaj  Virginia,  ubi  Iblent 
obfeffi  a  cacodaemone,  liberari ; — Faber  ergo,  toto  anno  alitur,  he 
nmens  utcunque  folita  implorarenter  remedia  :  cumque  nummi 
non  mitterentur  Antverpiae,  pro  femeftri  ultimo,  remilcrunt  ma- 
niacum  in  curru  vinftum.  Qui  cum  vincula  fibi  folviflet,  c 
plaullru  diffiliit,  in  ftagnum  profundum  &  vicinum.  Tandem 
extratftus  ;  pro  cadavere  ;  in  currum  depofitus.  At  deinceps  per 
annos  i8  a  mania  liber  vixit." — Van.  Helmont,  Dcmeiu  Idea. 
§  49.  Operum.  p.  175. 

"  A  certain  carpenter  at  Anttvcrp  fancied  he  had  Jecn  fame 
frightful Jpcdlrcs  in  the  nighty  •vjhich  fo  terrified  him  that  he  entire- 
ly loft  his fcifes.    He  ivas  therefore,,  fent  to  the  toml  of  the  holy 
niirgin  St.  Dympna^  vjh ere  they  profefs  to  cure  thofe  ivho  are  prf- 
feffedby  evil  fpirits. — The  carpenter  was  hoarded  tlnre  for  a  vjhole 
year  ;  and,,  though  evidently  a  Madman,,  the  ufual  Tneans  "vxre 
employed  ;  lict  710  ?noncy  heing  remitted  from  Antvjcrp  for  the  laft 
fix  months,,  he  ivas  fent  home,  hound,  in  a  carriage.  Having 
found  means,  hy  the  way,  to  extricate  himfelf  from  his  confinement^ 
he  jumped  out  of  the  carriage,  and  threvj  himfelf  into  a  deep  pool 
<ujhich  happened  to  he  near  :  from  ivhcnce,  after  fame  time,  he  ivat 
got  out,  and  replaced,  as  dead,  in  the  carriage.  Herecoveredy 
however ,^  and  lived for  eighteen  \ye4rs  <'f(crj  perftSily  fret  from 
mania^* 


Iiilanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  135 


conjiant,  as  it  is  unaccountable  ;  and  is,  in 
luch  cafes,  accompanied,  for  the  moft  part, 
with  a  gloomy  filence  and  referve  '.—fometimes 
it  is fudden,  and  unexpedled,  and  fcems  to  arifc 
from  fome  temperarj  feeling  of  extreme  dif- 
trefs,   or  fome  momentary  impulfe  of  the 
imagination,  v/hich  can  rarely  be  cxaiftly  in- 
veftigated  :— and  in  no  cafe,  can  we  clearly 
difcover  any  diftin6t,  and  habitual  paffion,  to 
which  it  can  be  attributed  ;  much  lefs  can  it 
be  traced  up  to  any  fuch  obvious  antecedent 
caufe  as  the  diftrefs  of  disappointed  love,  in- 
confolable  grief,  religious  defpair,  or  to  any 
other  of  the  defpondiug,  and  unmanly  af- 
fc6tIons,  which  fo  frequently  urge  unhappy 
mortals  to  rufti  upon  the  greateft  of  evils  to 
cfcape  from  a  lefs  ;  irrevocably  to  plunge  into 
the  very  ills  they  dread  ;  and  to  feek  by  death 
an  immediate  entrance  into  that  eternal  mife- 
ry,  the  apprehended  certainty  of  which  is  tlie 
caufe  of  all  their  horror  ;  a  ftrange  inconfift- 
ency  which  did  not  efcape  the  obfervation  of 
Galen,  who  remarks — "  funt  qui  fimul  & 
*'  mortem  metuant,  &  mortem  fibi  confcif- 

*'  cant   "  there  are  fo??ie  whofe  diforder  is 

*'  accompanied 


136      DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


*'*  accompanied  by  the  fear  of  death  ^  and  who  yet 
'■^  procure  for  themf elves  the  very  death  they 
''fearr 

The  fame  imaccountnble  inclination  to 
fulcide  fometimes  exifts  in  the  delirium  of  a 

fever,  of  which  we  have  an  inftance  in  Bak- 
tholine's  Hijforiariuni  Anatomkarum  rario- 
nwiy  Centuriafecunda  :  —  Quidam — febricitat 
"  &  tanto  ex  petcchiis  delirio  furit,  ut  abfentc 
mnlierc  condu6titia  cuftode,  ipfnmfe  fum- 
"  mo  mane— injei^la  fafcia  ad  lc6lum  fufpen- 
*'  derit  — "  A  certain  perfon  was  ill  of  a  fe- 
*'  very  and  in  confequence  of  petechi^e  became  fo 
"  highly  delirious,  that  he  hung  himfelf  up,  one 
"  morning  early,  in  the  abfence  of  the  nurfe  who 
"  was  hired  to  attend  him,  by  means  of  a  firing 
*'  which  he  fixed  to  the  top  of  his  bed, 

2.  O  F  Incoherent  Insanity  there 
are  feveral  varieties.  Its  charaSieriflic  is  an  in- 
€oherency  of  ideas,  occafioned  by  an  excessive, 

PERVERTED,  or  DEFECTIVE  activity    of  tkc 

imagination  and  memory,  accompanied  with  ima- 
ges 


lliifanlty]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  A'l  E  N  T.  137 


exijtlng  in  the  mind,  which  do  not  enijl  extern 

nally. 

This  fpecies  of  ideal  Infanity  difplays 
litfelfin  four  different  ways,  conftitutingy«)/^r 
varieties,  which  are  owing  to  fo  many  dif- 
ferent ftatcs  of  the  brain,  all  capable  of  pra- 
(ducing  either  real,  or  apparent,  incoherency 
(of  ideas.    For  incoherent  Infanity  may  arife— 
from  a  too  a6livc,  and  almoft  phrenitic  ftate 

I  of  the  brain;  from  that  kind  of  adive 

iftate  of  the  brain  which  occalions  a 
:flightinef5  of  imagination,  without  any  ten- 

•  dency  to  ii  phrenitic  ftate  ;  from  iuch  a 

iflatc  of  the  brain  as  produces,  perpetually, 
I  trains  of  apparently   unconneded,  or  very 

flightly  connetled,  ideas;  and  from  that 

ftate  of  the  brain,  in  which  there  is  a  great 
'defe£t  of  memory,  occafioned  by  an  almoft 
'total  privation,  or  by  a  fixed,  and  fenfelefs 
uniformity,  of  the  mental  operations. 

O  F  the  four  varieties  of  incoherent  Infani- 
ty, proceeding  from  thefc  four  different  ftates 
of  the  brain,  the //;y?  is  a  near  approach  to, 
and  often  merely  an  incipient  Jiate  of  phrenitic 


138     DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


Infanity,  and  might  be  termed  ardent,  or 

RAVING  incoherent  Jnfanity  :  the  feco?id 

is  that  ftate  of  incoherent  Infanity,  which  ex- 
hibiting, fudden  tranfitions,  and  rapid  flights, 
of  Imagination,  might  very  properly  be  called 

flighty:  the  third,  which  peculiarly 

dfifervcs  the  appellation  of  incoherent,  and 
might  theretore  be  properly  difllnguifhed 
from  the  other  varieties  by  the  additional  ti- 
tle of  UNCONNECTED,  Is  nearly  related  to 

the  third  /pedes  of  ideotifm  :  the  fourth  is. 

oftwofoits.,  STUPID,  and  absent  or  mu- 
iing ;  of  whjch  the  firft,  ox  Jlupid^  is  more 
efpecially  accompanied  with  great  defed  of 
memory  ;  they  refemble  the  jirjl  and  Jecond 
/pedes  oj  idioiijm,  and  the  dchrium  of  old  age^ 
which,  as  ARETiEUs  defines  it,  is—"  a  de- 
lirium [  XwTj^i?  ]  whido  has  no  refemhlance  to 
mania  ;  being  a  flupefadion  of  the  fenfes,  of 
reafon,  and  of  the  other  faculties  of  the  mind^ 
from  refrigeration  :  whereas  the  caufe  of  mania 
is  of  a\iQl  and  dry  nature^  audits  fymptoms  are 
turbulent."  § 

S  A  U  V  a  G  E  S'S 

§  Vide  A  RET /EI  Cap  PAD.  Murh,  Chron,  Lib.  i.  c.  6.  p. 
31.  B. 


Iiifanlty]   ARRANGEMENT.  1 39. 

Sauvages'S'  Amentia  feems  to  com- 
prehend the  third,  and  tlic  two  forts  of  the 
fourth  variety  of  incoherent  Itifanity^.  For 
though  in  defcrlbing  amenim,  he  diftinguiflies- 
it  from  morojis,  or  idiotifm,  yet  he  after- 
wards makes  the  iatter  a  fpeci^eS  of  the  for- 
mer ;  as  he  does  Ukewifc  the  delirium  JenU 
le. 


Amentia  eft  ineptitudo  ad  re<fle  ratiocinan- 
dum,  &  judicandiim  :  differt  a  morofi  {tM 
ftiipiditate  mentis,  quia  amentes  objeclo- 
rum  impie  liones  fentiunt  apprime,  uoii 
vero  ftupidi,  aft  amences  eas  non  attcndunt» 
non  curaiit,  led  quail  omiiino  indifferentes 
praetcrmittunt,  harum  confequeiKias  flocci 
"  faciunt,  harum  minime  fatagunt  ;— omnia- 
"  perinde  negligunt,  rident,  cahtillantj  in 
"  iifdeni  circumftantiis  in  qiiibiis  fani  de  fatiie^ 
fiti,  frigore  gemebuiidi  conqiierei-enfcuf 
minime  iracundi,  auddces,  lit  iTjdiiiaei,  heb 
'*  triftes  conftanter  &  meditabiiiidi-  lit  melah- 
"  lahcholici.  -j- 

S2  AMi:NTIA 


6i 


f  Sauvagesii  No/olng.  Mcthodi  Toin.  3.  Part.  Pilin.  p.  3.74. 


140     DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


*'  A  M  E  N  T  I  A  is  an  inability  to  reafon  and 

judge  aright :  it  differs  from  morofity,  or  Jlu- 
"  pidity,  in  this,  that  they  who  are  troicbledwith 
*'  amentia,  have  a  proper  perception  of  the  im- 

preffions  of  objects,  which  the  fiupid  have  not  ; 
"  they  do  not,  however,    attend  to,  or  regard 

them  ;  but  view  them  with  indifference,  fight 
*'  their  confequences,  and  give  themf elves  no  trou- 

"  hie  about  them  :  they  difregard  all  things  a- 

*'  like,  and  laugh  and fing,  when  men  in  their 

right  minds  would  make  heavy  complaints  of 
''^hunger,  thirfi,  or  cold:  — they  are  fieither  fu- 
"  rious,  nor  audacious,  like  maniacs  ;  nor  pcr- 
''^  petually  deje^ed,  and  thoughtful,  like  thofewho 

are  affiled  with  melancholy y 

The  two  firfl  varieties  are  iifually  accom- 
panied with  incefl'ant  talking,  or  raving,  ei- 
ther on  the  fame  fubje(5t,  or  with  fudden 
tranfitions  from  one  fubje6t  to  another,  as 
images  and  fancies  ftrike  them,— the  former 
with  fymptoms  of  approaching  Infan- 
ity ;  and  the  latter  without  fuch  fymptoms, 
and  refembhng  impulfive,  whimfcal,  flighty, 
or  fomc  other  fpecies  of  notional  Infanity^  with 

the 


Inlamty]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  141 


the  addition  of  /V^^/  ilel/nnm  :—tht  thirdwilh.  cal- 
mer,  iindlefs  perpetual,  but  frequent  incoherent 
talking,  or  muttering  ;  without  the  leafl  ten- 
dency to  a  phrenltic  ftate,  or  any  fllghrinefs 
of  imagination  : -the  two  divifions  of  the 
fourth  variety,  arc  ufually  remarkable  for  cb- 
ftlnatc  and  invincible  hlence,  and  ftupid  in- 
attention, which  in  fome  cafes  is  alraoft  invi- 
olably prefcrvcd  for  a  long  courfe  of  time  ;  ^ 
in  others  it  is  fometimes  interrupted,  and  en- 
livened, by  tranfient  ramblings,  low  unintel- 
Icgible  mutterings,  and  even  by  momentary 
^  gleams  of  intelligence,  and  attention. 

They  are  all  to  be  diftinguiflied  from 
;  notional  Infa?iity,  and  the  two  lajl  from  idiotifm, 

^  "  When  you  fee  a  ir.an  for  months  (I  may  fay  years)  toge- 
ither,  not  fuftermg  even  a  rag  of  clothes  on  him,  lying  in  flraw.; 
;and  without  fliewing  any  ligns  of  difcontent,  or  attempting  to  do 
imifchief,  maintaining  an  inviolable  filence  againft  all  the  apuHca- 
I  tions  of  perfualion  and  force  ;  what  reafon  have  we  for  calling 
(this  7L  deluded  imagination  f  Thofe  who  have  been  fo  happy  as  to 
I  recover  from  this  ftate,  defcribe  it  noothcrwife  than  a  total  fuf- 
ipenfion  of  every  rational  faculty.  Their  recovery  feems  like  the 
:  awaking  from  a  profound  fleep,  having  fcUom  any  rccoUc^ion,  or 
;at  le«fl  a  very  confufed  one  nf  what  has  pajjed  Awnng  then 

inefs."  Monro's  i^fwarii  o«  Dr.  Battie's    Treatife  on 

.  Madnefs.  p.  6. 


U2      DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


by  the  obvious  exigence,  at  fome  period  or 
other  of  the  diforder,  of  erroneous  images. 

Both  phrenitic  and  incoherent  hifamty, 
together  with  the  fpecies  immediately  follow- 
ing, to  which  I  have  limited  the  appellation 
of  maniacal^  might  not  improperly  be  conli- 
dcred  as  conftituting  a  larger  fubdivijion  ide- 
al Infanity,  and  be  called,  in  a  m  ore  extended 
fenfe  of  the  term,  maniacal ;  fince  all  thefe 
fpecies  are,  in  moll:  inftances,  attended  with 
fuch  fymptorns  as  have  ufually  been  thought 

to  lay  claim  to  that  title.  But  this  dif- 

tin6lion  I  have  waved ; — becaufe  even  this 
cxtenlion  of  the  term  maniacal  would  not 
bring  it  to  a  perfect  correfpondence  with, 
and  enable  it  exactly  to  comprehend  neither 
more  nor  lefs  than,  juft  thofe  cafes  of  Infanity 
which  have  commonly  been  ranked  under  it ; 
but  would  exclude  fome  which  have  generally 
been  taken  in,  and  admit  others  which  have 
as  generally  been  excluded  ;  the  feveral  V2ix\t' 
tiQ<aoifenJitive  Infanity,  which  have  commonly 
been  reckoned  maniacal,  would  ftill  be  exclu- 
ded, though  they  have  frequently  maniacal,  and 
Ibmetimes  even  phrenitic  fymptorns ;  and  all 


ITnnmlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  143 

tlie  fpeclps  of  noUonal  Injamt)\  many  of  which 
have  been  as  commonly  excluded,  and  referred 
to  melancholy,  would  occafionally  be  admitted, 
as  they  all  have  a  tendency  to  acquire  thefe 
fvmptoms  ;— becaufe  it  would  oblige  me  to 
change  two  very  proper,  and  fignificant  fpc- 
clfic  terms,  maniacal  and  fenfitive,  which 
would  hi  fuch  cafe  become  the  titles  of  a  ge- 
neral divlfion,  for  terms  lefs  proper  and  figni- 
ficant, if  I  would  wifli  to  avoid  the  confufion, 
which  might  arife  from  applying  the  fame 
term  to  a  fpecics,  and  to  an  aflcmblage  of  fpe- 
cies,  which  could  no  way  be  avoided  but  by 
ftriking  out.  thofe  fpecific  names,  and  putting 
others  in  their  ftead,  where  I  to  adopt  fuch  a 
fubdivllion,— and  becaufe  the  fame  end  may 
be  anfwered,  and  the  abovcmentioned  incon- 
veniences avoided,  by  barely  pointing  out  the 
analogy  between  ^/^rmV/V,  incoherent,  and  ma-^ 
niacal  Infanity,  as  I  have  defined  them,  and 
what  is  ufually  underftood  by  the  latter  term  ; 
and  fhowing  that  thefe  three  fpecies  ideal 
Infanity  form  a  collevStion  of  fpecies,  which, 
excepting  in  a  few  inflances,  pcrfecStly  refem- 
ble,  and  nearly  coniprehend,  all  thofe  fymp- 

toms 


14-4      DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


toms  of  Infaniry  which  have,  by  the  bulk  of 
medical  writers,  been  ftri^tly  fpcaking  de- 
nominated maniacal. 

3.  Maniacal  Insanity,  pro- 
perly fo  called,  as  a  fpecies,  is  of  all  others, 
perhaps,  the  moft  comprchenfive  ;  fince  it  ^.v* 
tends  its  dominion  over  the  whole  internal 
WORLD    OF    IDEAS,  and  comprehends  every 
pojpble  combination  of  fenfihle  images  which  can 
enter  into^  and  delude^  a  dijlempered  brain.  To 
enumerate  all  its  varieties  would  not  only  be 
ditScult,  but  impoflible  :  nor  indeed  would 
it  be  of  any  material  advantage  ;  as  it  will 
he  perfectly  fufficient,   for  every  practical 
purpofe,    to  know  \\\2it— this  fpecies  contains 
'-jjhaiever  comes  under  the  definition  of  ideal 
Iks-AKITY,  a7id  is  at  the  fame  time,  neither 
phrenltic,  nor  incoherent,  nor  fenfitlve  :— - 
and  that,  while  m  phrenetic  Infanity,  the  pati- 
ent fcarcely  knows,  or  attends  to,  external 
objcfts  ;  m  incoherent  3ittei\ds  to  them  but  lit- 
tle, and  remembers  them  very  imperfectly, 
and  at  befb,   cafually  and  uncertainly ;  in 
moft,  If  not  in  every  inftance  oi purely  majiia- 

cal 


Inlanltj]  ARRANGEMENT.  145 


cat  Infanlty^  the  patient  perceives  for  the  mofl 
part^ — that  is,  whenever  he  is  not  under  the 
actual  influence  of  very  ftrong  impreffions  of 
delufive  images  ;  or,  if  the  diforder  arifes 
from,  or  is  conneiled  with,  notional  Infani- 
ty,  is'not  under  the  immediate,  and  powerful 
impofition,  of  falfe,  and  abfurd  notions  ;  nei- 
ther of  which  happen  in  all  cafes,  or  at  all 
times  ;  but  both  the  one,  and  the  other,  in, 
comparatively,  but  few  cafes ;  and  in  thefe 
few  only  at  intervals,  of  uncertain  frequen- 
cy, and  duration  ;— excepting  in  thefe  circum- 
ilances,  the  patient  perceives  fuch  external 
OBJECTS  as  are  not  immediately  connedied  with 
his  delirium,  for  the  mofl  part  as  they  really 
EXIST  ;  and  confequently  knows,  in  a  great 
raeafure,  the  true  appearance,  and  fituation, 
of  furrounding  objeds  ;  knows  what  kind  of 
place  he  is  in,  wh.3.t perfons,  and  what  o^V^j, 
arc  about  him,  and  what  he  fays  and  does ; 
but  yet  has,  at  times,  and  in  certain  refpe£ts, 
ideas,  or  images,  in  the  mind,  of  things  as 
really  exifting  externally,  which  do  not,  and 
which,  in  many  cafes,  could  not  poffibly  fo 
exift  ;  it  being  not  only  contrary  to  the  real 

T  prefcnt 


146     DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 

prefeiit  appearances,  but  inconfiftent  with 
the  very  nature  of  thuigs.  A  maniacal  patient, 
for  inftance,  may  not  only  imagine  that  he 
fees  flalks  pf  oil,  which  he  does  not  fee  ; 
like  him  mentioned  by  Aretjeus,  §  who 
was  in  perpetual  fear  left  they  (liould  fall,  and 
be  broken  ;  or  that  he  is  continually  haunted 
by  a  dreadful  fpedre  ;  \  or  fees  pcrfons  who 

are 


'§  l>e  Canjis  ts"  Signis  Morh,  Acutor,  Lib.  i.  cap.  6.  p. 
3  a.  A. 

j  "  Diabolos  prjecipitatos  pinxit  Spinbllo,  8^  tarn  atrocem 
vultum  Lucifero  tribuir,  ut  &  ipfe  horrore  percullus,  huuc  dae- 
monem  Icevam  exprobrantem  pidluram,  quod  vixlt  tempus,  ociilis 

continuo  portaverit."  Tissot  SerTn.  Inaug.  de  hitcratorinn 

J^akttidme,  p.  20. 

*'  Spinello,  in  pa'nit'tng  the  cajllng  the  fallen  afigels  07it  of 
heaven^  gave  fo  fierce  and  dread f/d-  a  countenarice  to  Lucifer ,  that 
heing  Jhocked  at  it  hi>nfi  lf  he  had  continually  before  his  or.c,  during 
the  refi  of  his  Ifc,  the  image  of  that  devil,  upbraiding  hitn  fo  r  the 
horrible  countenance  ivhich  he  had  given  hnn  in  this  figure" 

A  curious  inftance  of  majiiacal  Infanlty,  juft  bordering  upon, 
it  not  aitually  become phrejiitic,  accompanied  with  extreme  ter- 
ror arifing  from  the  perpetual  image,  in  the  mind,  of  a  horrid 
fpedrc  ;  occafioncdby  a  fuppreffion  of  the  menfes  ;  is  defcribed 
at  length  in  ScHENCHlus's  0/^(V'r'/T//V«<'j  Mcdica  Rariorcs  ;  of 

which  the  following  are  a  few  of  the  circumftances :  "  Dc 

phantafmate  conquerebatur  [virgo  quasdam]  magnitudinis  inufi-i 
•tatas, — adeo  truculenti  vultus,  horrendique,  ut  cujus  intuitu  ilia 
honefcat'-'Sc  perpetuo  coutremefcat,  ejufdemque  prajfentiam  con- 

^pe6tumque 


Infamtj]   ARRANGEMENT.  147 


are  dead,  or  abfent ;  || 
founds,  which  he  does 


or  hears  voices,  and 
not  hear  ;  f  or  that 

he 


Ipeftamque  refugiat : — ^lllique  tandem  inceffit  exclamandi  voclfe-- 
nmdique  permagna  cupiditas  :  phantalma  denique  cam  crudelius 
proplulque  premit,  agitat,  confectatur  : — obnixe  rogat  fupplex, 
uc  herus  phantalmati  nequiHimo  inlidias  paret,  ipfumque  confo- 

diat.  Nos  aegrotantem  ad  parentes  deducendam  efle  percen- 

femus.  Ita  fore  ut  loci  &  aeris  mutatione  fortafle  llkid  prasgrande 
phaiitafma  diipareat,  &  evancfcat.    Eo  cum  ventum  efl,  ecce 

propere  phantalma  prsecut rifle  conqueritur  mifella."  -Lib.  i». 

p.  126.  Obf.  I. 

'•^  a' young  ivoman  co?nplaincd  of  heing  terrified  ly  a  fpc Eire  of 
unufual  magnitude,  ivhh  fo  cruel  a?id  horrid  a  cou7itetiance,  that 
Jhe perpetually  Jhuddered  and  trembled  ivhen  it  feemed  to  look  upon. 

her,  and  endeavoured,  to  fly  from  its  prefitice,  and  from  its  fight ;  > 

at  length  jhe  -ivas  fiezed  --vith  a  vafi propetfity  to  cry  out,  and  make- 
great  exclamation  :  the  fpcftre  feemed  to  prcfs  nearer  upon  her,  to 
purfue,  and  cruelly  difirefs  her  : — and  floe  earnefily  tntreated  that  her 
mafier  -Tvould  furprife  the  nvkJied phantom,  and  run  it  through  iviih 

his  fvjord,  L  advtfed  that  Jhe  Jhouldbe  fcnt  home  to  her  parents  : 

fiuppofing  that  the  change  of  place,  and  of  air,  might  occnfion  this 
monfiroUs  illufion  to  'vanifij,  and  dijappear.  But  ivhc/i  the  unhc!*>- 
py  young  woman  arrived  at  home,  fijc  covifdaiyied  that  the  phantom 
had  been  too  nimble  for  her,   and  vjas  got  thither  before  her.'" 

II  "  Noviqul  fe  fratrem  multis  inde  miliarlbus  dcgentem  vldc- 

re  dicei-et."  Wieri  de  Prafiig..  Damon.  Lib.  3.  de  Lamiis^ 

cap.  7.  §  5,  Opcrum  p.  182.  * 

"  /  knc-vj  one  ivho  fafd  he  faiv  his  brother,  itot-vJithfianding 
that  he  vjas  d^vclling,  at  that  time,  at  the  difiancc  of  many 
miles" 

t  "  Novi, — qui  fuis  auribus  femper  obftrepere  mafculorum 
concubitOKy  quemcunque  obvium,  etiam  conjundtiffimum,  quere- 

retiir.'*' 

T  2 


148     DEFINITION    ana  [Ideal 


he  is  a  king^*  princey  hero,  orator,  tragedian,  % 
a  man  endowed  with  wonderful  fcience,  ex- 
traordinary learning,  or  by  the  efpecial  favour, 
and  infpiration,  of  heaven,  with  preternatural 

power,  or  a  knowledge  of  future  events  :  + — 

but 

retur."  Wieri  de  Praftig.  Damon.    Lib,  3.   cle  Lamlis, 

cap.  7.  §  5.  Opcrum  p.  182. 

*'  I  knew  a  man  nvho  complained  that  every  one  he  mcty  even  his 
mojl  intimate  friends  and  acquaintance^  Jhoutcd  in  his  ears,  and 
called  him  a  fodomite." 

*  "  Qui  fe  totius  mundi  monarcham  &l  impcratorem  tf^t^  ac 
ad  fe  foUun  id  fpe£lare  nomen  crederet,  novi  melancholicum  Ita- 
lum  :  alioqiii  bene  habitum,  eloquentem,  nec  alio  morbo  laefum  : 
mire  interim  in  Ibis  Italicis  lythmis  de  ftatu  chrillianifmi,  de  re- 
ligionis  diffidiis,  de  bellis  im  Gallia  cxortis  &:  Belgio  componendis, 
tanquam  divinis  efFatii  f,  fibi  placentem  :  p:iffim  vero  fuum  titu- 
1am  hiice  Uteris  evulgabat,  R.  R.  D.  D.  M.  M.  id  eft,  rex  reg- 

nui7t,  dominus  dominantiumy  monarclM  mundi"  WlBRI  dc 

Prajiig.  Damon,  Lib.  3.  de  Lamiis,  cap.  7.  §  2.  Opcrum. 
p.  180. 

*'  Iknev)  an  Italian,  trouhled  <with  melancholy,  who  helievcd 
that  he  ivas  monarch,  and  emperor,  of  the  ivhole  ivorld ;  and 
that  he  alone  had  a  right  to  that  appellation  :  in  other  refpcBs  he 
vj^s  quite  rational,  vjas  eloquent,  and  did  not  labour  under  any  0- 
ther  difcafe  :  at  the  fame  time  he  was  wonderfully  amufcd  with  compo  - 
fing  verfes,  in  Italian,  relative  to  the  Jlate  of  chrifiianity,  to  the 
di^erences  about  religion,  and  to  the  putting  an  end  to  the  war 
which  then  exifled  between  France  and  Holland,  all  which  he  de- 
livered as  fo  many  divine  oracles,  -j-    He  every  where  made  known 
his  title  hy  means  of  thcf  letters  R.  R.  D.  D.  M.  M.  or,  rex  reg*^ 
\^um,  dominus  dominantium,  monarcha  mundi,  /Zia/ /V,  king  of 
kings,  lord  of  lords,  and  monarch  of  the  world." 

%  "  Sic  deniq^uc  furens  alius  iz^^Dtum  [exiflimavit],  alius 

orator  cm. 


Infanity]      R  R  A  N  G  E  xM  E  N  T.  i4«> 


but  fome  have  fancied  that  a  knife,  or  any  o- 
thcr  inanimate  thing ;  or  any  of  the  animal 
race,  by  nature  void  of  rcafon  and  fpecch  ; 
has  held  convcrfation  with  them,  or  exerted 
lome  other  power,  or  faculty,  inconfifl:ent 
with  its   nature. — One  imagined  the  whols 
furface  of  the  earth  to  be  formed  of  very  thin 
glafs,  under  which  he  could  plainly  perceive 
ferpents  without  number  ;  and  would,  by  no 
means,  be  perfuaded  to  get  out  of  his  bed  ; 
which    he    conceived  '  to    be     an  ifland, 
fituated  in  the  midft  of  this  immenfe  glafly 
expanfion  ;  and  which,  therefore,    he  dared 
not  to  quit,  left,  if  he  fliould  tread  on  this 
thin  brittle  furface,  it  ftiould  break,  and  fuf- 
fering  him  to  fall  through,  he  fhould  be  de- 
voured, or  ftung  to  death,  by  the  ferpents 

underneath.  ||  The  amiable,  and  learned, 

Harrington, 

oratorcJJi,  alms  tragcedum^  vt\comceJum,  alius  rtlpulain  fcrcns  >j?un- 

di fe fceptrum  tenere"  CjEL.  Aurel.  Morb.  Chron.  Lib.  i. 

cap.  5.  p.  328. 

"  Thus  one,  in  his  raviiigj  has  imagined  himfclf  a  God,  ano' 
thcr,  an  orator,  another  a  tragedian,  or  a  comedian,  another^ 
carrying  a Jlra'M  in  his  hand^  has  imagined  that  he  held  the  fcep- 
tre  of  the  world." 

II  ScHENCHii  Ohfcrv.  Medic.  Rarior,  Lib.  i.  p.  134.  Qbf^ 

I. 


I50      DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


Harrington,  Tmxhor  Oceana,  *'wasob- 
**  fcrvcd  to  difcourfc  of  moft  things  as  ratio - 
"  nally  as  any  man,  except  his  own  dlftem- 
"  per,  fancying  ftrange  things  in  the  opcrati- 
"  on  of  his  animal  fpirits,  which  he  thought 
"  to  tranfpire  from  him  in  the  fhape  of  birds, 
"  of  flies,  of  bees,  or  the  Hke.  And  thofe  a- 
"  bout  him  reported,  that  he  talked  much 
"  of  good  and  evil  fpirits,  which  made  them 

*'  have  frightful  appreheniions.  He  ufed — ■ 

*'  fometimes  to  argue  fo  ftrenuoufly  that  this 

was  no  depraved  imagination,  that  his  doc- 
**  tor  was  often  put  to  his  fliifts  for  an  an- 
**  fwer.    He  would  on  fuch  occalions  com- 

pare  himfelf  to  Democritus,  who  for 
*'  his  admirable  difcoveries  in  anatomy  was 
"  reckoned  diftraftcd  by  his  fellow  citizens, 
'*  till  Hippocrates  cured  them  of  their  mif- 

*'  take."*  A   woman,    mentioned  by 

Trallian,  continually  held  up  her  middle 
finger,  on  which  (lie  imagined  Ihc  was  fup- 
porting  the  whole  earth,  and  was  in  perpetual 
anxiety  left  flie  fhould  fufFer  her  finger  to  give 

*  BvitiJ!}  Biography^  Vol,  5.  p.  405, 


laianlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  151 


way,  and  deftroy  the  world,  with  its  inhab- 
itants. \  Some  have  imagined  themfelves 

to  be  God  the  Father,  others  Jefus  Chriji,  and 
others  the  Holy  Ghojl :  +— and  I  have  known 
fome  who  have  conceived  themfelves,  or  o- 
thers  to  be  more  than  one  being  at  the  fame 
time,  or  at  fuch  fmall  intervals,  and  in  fo 
quick  and  rapid  a  fucceffion,  as  amounted 

nearly  to  the  fame  thing.  And  yet,  not- 

withftanding  thefe  delufions,  many  of  thefe 
perfons,  as  was  remarkably  the  cafe  with 
Harrington,  think,  and  converfe,  as  ra- 
tionally in  moft  other  rcfpects,  as  any  man, 

of 

i  Trallian.  tie  Aric  MeJic.  Lib.  i.  cap.  17.  Halleri 
Art.  Medic.  Princip.  Tom.  6.  p.  91. 

f  '*  Tres  in  Frilia  non  procul  aGroningaco  corrcptos  enthu- 
fialmo  intellexi,  ut  l"e  Deum  Patrcfn,  Filium,  &  Spirimm  San£lujit 
credeient,  horreuinque  in  quo  fubliitebant,  efle  Noe  arcam,  ad 
quam  multi  limiliter  fere  aft'edli,  falutis  ergo  confluebant."^. 
V^izvx  de  Prajlig.  Damon,  Lib.  3.  de  Lamiis.  cap.  7.  §  z. 
Operum  p.  180. 

"  Three  men  in  Friejland,  not  far  from  Grocningen,  as  I  have 
leen  informed,  ivere pojfejj'ed  imth fo  great  a  degree  of  fanaticifni, 
that  they  imagined  themfelmcs  to  he  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghoft  ;  and  the  harn  in  ivhich  they  limed  to  he  Noah^s  ark  :  to 
ivhich  many  others,  in  like  manner  affeSled,  refortedy  that  they 
might  obtain  f ah  at  ion. ^\ 


6i 


152      DEFINITION    W  [Ideal 

of  fimilar  knowledge,  and  capacity,  in  his 
right  and  peife£l  mind. 

O  F  this  fpecies  was  the  Infanity  defcribed 
by  Horace  ;  • 

 Fult  haud  ignobiHs  Argis, 

Qui  fe  ci'cdebat  miros  audirc  tragcedos, 
In  vacuo  laetus  fcffor  plauforque  theatro  ; 
Castera  qui  vit^e  fervaret  munia  re6lo 
"  More  ;  bonus  fane  vicinus,  amabihs  hof- 
pcs, 

"  Comis  in  iixorem,  poflet  qui  ignofcere 
fervi?,  &c."  -f 

"  yf/  Argos  lived  a  citi%en^  well  known, 
"  Who  long  imagind,  that  he  heard  the  tone 
Of  deep  tragedians  on  an  empty  Jlage, 
And  fat  applauding  in  extatic  rage  : 
*'  In  other  points  a  perfon,  who  maintain  d 
*'  A  due  decorum,  and  a  life  unfaifid, 
*'  A  worthy  neighbour,  and  a  friend  fincere^ 
"  Kind  to  his  wife,  nor  to  his  faves  fever 

Madmen 

f  HoRATii  Epi/i.  Lib.  4.  Ep.  2.  v.  ia8.  5cc. 
II  Francis. 


lufanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  I53 


Madmen  of  this  fort  fometimes  ima« 
gine  that  they  arc  converfing  with  abfcnt 
people,  with  Gods,  angels,  or  devils  ;  though 
it  muft  he  acknowledged  that  this  is  more 
frequently  a  fymptom  o^ phrenitic  Infanlty, 

A  N  inftance  of  this  Converfation  with  an 
abfent  perfon  in  phrenitic  Infanity^  is  fur» 
nilhed  by  the  following  cafe  ;  in  which  th6 
diforder,  taking  its  rife  from  the  paflion  of 
love,  feems  to  have  been  at  notional,  then 
maniacal,  and  in  the  end  to  have  become 
phrenitic  :  — 

"  V  I  R  quidam  mercator,  fays  'Valeri- 
OLA,  as  quoted  by  Schenchius,  ^  ex 
"  amore  in  infaniam  dedudlus,  melancholi- 
**  cus  effe<5lus  eft,  mirifque  vifis  ctiam  inter- 
"  diu,  nedum  noGu  agitabatur,  modo  in  i- 
*'  ram  ac  furorem  concitus,  mox  placabilis  in 
"  rifum  cfFufus,  amatae  fpeciem  feln  momen- 
"  ta  fingula  in  confpe^tu  habere  affirmabat, 
"  illi  blandiebatur,  ac  H  praefens  fulflet :  mox 
*'  quod  fe  amantem  redamare  noUet,  miris 

U  "  iixcrcpabat 

%  Oh/,  Meclic,  Rar,  Libi  z.  p.  134.  Obf. 


154     DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


increpabat  modis,  omnis  de  amata,  fermo, 
*'  omnis  inter  luftus  ibat  dies,  nodem  fine 
*'  fbmno,  triftitia  moerorque  confumebant  ; 

&  fibi  ipfi  injeclflet  manus,  ni  fuorum  vl 
"  prohibitus  fulflet." 

"  ji  certain  merchant  becoming  infane^  in 

confequence  of  love,  grew  quite  melancholy  ; 
"  uoas  agitated  by  the  appearance  of  'wonderful 
' '  phantoms  in  the  day  titne,  as  well  as  in  the 
"  night ;  would fometimes  break  out  into  rage 

and  fury,  and  prefently,  becoming  mild  and 
*'  and  gentle,  would  indulge  in  immoderate  laugh- 
"  ter.  .  }ie  always  affirmed  that  his  mijirefs 
**  was  prefent  with  him  ;  and  while  at  fome 
"  times,  both  his  converjation,  and geflures,  were 
"    exprejjive  of  that  tender  attention  which  a  lover 

difplays  when  happy  in  the  converfation  of  a 
*'  miftrejs  who  is  not  infenfible  to  his  addreffies  ;  at 
"  others,  he  would  fverely  chide  her  for  not  fa^ 

vouring  him  with  a  proper  return  of  affedlion, 
**•  In  fiort,  all  his  difcourfe  was  about  her :  his 
**  whole  days  were  fpent  in  lamentation^  he 
'^^pajfed  his    nights   without  Jkcp,   in  grief 

and  diftrejsy  atid  would  have   laid  violent 

"  hand§ 


Infanlty]   ARRANGEMENT.  1^5 


* '  ha7ids  upon  hhnfelfy  had  not  his  frieiids  and. 
"  domefllcs  made  ufe  offeree  to  prevent  hm^'' 

T  A  s  s  o's  diforder,  howevef,  the  defcrip- 
tloii  of  which  has  been  already  q^uoted,  ||  isr 
an  inftance  in  which  the  fymptom  above- ' 
mentioned,  of  converfation  with  a  being 
which  was  prefent  only  in  imagination,  was 
purely  maniacal^  as  is  that  of  Luther  and 
Swede nborgh,  hereafter  to  be  noticed,  and 
of  many  other  enthufiafts. 

This  fpecies  of  Infanlty  often  approaches  near 
to,  and  is  readily  convertible  mXo ^ phrenltlc  In^ 
fanlty.  And  as  every  other  fpecies  of  Infanlty 
is  liable  to  becon:ie  manlcal  and  phrenltlc  \  fo- 
both  thefe,  befides  their  own  peculiar  fymp- 
toms,  may  be  accompanied  with  the  fymp- 
tom s  of  any  of  the  others. 

I  N  fome  cafes  which  properly  come  under 
this  fpecies,  it  is  difficult  to  dilcover  any  di- 
rect, and  pofitive,  evidence  of  the  exiftence 
of  ideal fymptoms,  except  when  the  diforder  is 

U  2     •  arrived. 


[\  See  above,  p,  lo^* 


IS6    DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


arrived  at  fuch  a  height,  as  to  be  bordering 
upon  phrenhic  Infanity :  for,  till  tfeey  arc 
thrown  off  their  guard  by  the  very  frequent, 
and  vivid,  appearance  of  delufive  images,  pa- 
tients of  this  kind  have  often  too  much  re- 
maining fenfe,  and  caution,  to  difcover  to 
thofe  about  them,  fuch  vilionary  fcenes,  or 
ideas,  as  they  themfelves   fcarcely  know 
whether  to  confider  as  realities,  or  illufions  ; 
and  which,  in  whatever  light  they  themfelves 
may  view  them,  they  are  very  fenfible  that 
their  friends  will  look  upon  as  no  more  than 
the  delirious    impreffions  of  a  diftempered 
brain.    Thefe  cafes,  we  muft  either  refer  to 
fpme  of  the  fpecics  of  notional  Infanity,  till 
ideal  lymptoms  adtually  difcover  themfelves  ; 
or,  where  appearances  are  very  ftrong,  and 
efpecially  where  the  eyes  are  in  any  degree 
fufFufcd,  we  may  be  content  to  rely  upon- 
circumftantial  evidence  ;  in  which  we  fhall 
feldom  be  deceived  ;  the  obvious  appearances 
being  generally  fufficient,  under  fuch  circum- 
ftances,  to  point  out  the  a6:ual  exiftence  of 
real,  though  latent,  ideal  Jymptoms.    It  can 
fcarcely,  for  example,  be  fuppofcd,  that  a 

man 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  157 


man  of  ordinary  birth,  and  in  a  private  Nati- 
on, (hould  imagine  himfelf  to  be  a  king,  a 
prince,  or  a  hero,  charavflers  to  which  he  has 
not  the  fainted  fhadow  of  pretenlion  ;  or, 
that  an  ignorant,  iind  ilUterate  man,  fhould 
fancy  himfelf  an  admired  orator^    or  a  cele- 
brated a6lor,  as  I  have  fometimes  known, 
at  the  fime  time,  that  he  has  never  actually 
fuftained  any  fuch  charadlcr  ;  or  fhould  con- 
ceive    himfelf,    without    even   the  flighteil 
ground  for  fuch  •  fancy,  to  be  a  man  of  prodigi- 
ous fcience,  and  learning,  poffefled  of  preter- 
natural power,  or  favoured  by  heaven  with  a 
knowledcre  of  future  events  ; — we  can  fcarce- 
ly  fuppofe  a  man  to  be  perfuaded  of  the  truth, 
of  fuch  impoffible  things,  without  fuppofm-g, 
at  the  fame  time,  that  fuch  vifionary  fcenes 
have  frequently  prefcnted  themfelves  to  his 
imagination,  as  are  adequate  to  the  produd:i- 
on  of  fuch  a  deception,   and  fufficient  to  ralfe 
in  him  a  firm  perfuafion  fo  little  confiftent 
with  reality.    Indeed  fuch  delufive  images 
are  ufually,  fooner  or  later,  adually  difcover- 
cd  to  cxift  ;  and  till  they  really  make  their 
appearance,   while  there  remains  the  leail: 

doubt 


158      DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


doubt  about  the  matter,  they  may  with  pro- 
priety be  referred  to  their  corrcfponding  fpe- 
cies  of  notional  Infanity, 

4.  B  Y  SENSITIVE  Insanity  I  mean 
that  in  which  the  diforder  Jhows  it  [elf  chiefly,  or 
remarkably,  i?i  the  erroneous  images  which 
are  excited  in  the  fnindy  relative  to  the  perfons 

own  FORM,    SUBSTANCE,  or  O/^^r  SENSIBLE 

qualities,  or  contents  ;  and  which  are 
not  only  contrary  to  truth,  hut  'often  inconfijlent 
with  rihe  nature  of  things,  and  almofl  always 
contradictory  to  the  teflimony  of  the  fcnfes  of  thofe 
about  them. 

I  call  thh  f  ft/itive  Infanity,  bccaufe  I  ima- 
gine that  fuch  erroneous  images  are  prefented 
to  the  mind,  for  the  moft  part,  if  not  altoge- 
ther, in  confequence  of  erroneous  fenjation. 

The  abfurd  imaginations  of  perfons  af- 
flicted with  this    fpccies    of   Infanity  arc 
almoft  innumerable.     Tiiey  have  thought 
themfelvcs    transformed    into    wolves,  * 
,.  ^    dogs,  § 

i 

*  "Qui  tjvanthrftpid  detlncatur,  no6tu  dorao  egreffi,  lupos 

in 


Infanity]  AR.RANGEMENT.  159 


dogs,§  lions,  j  cats,||  cows,t  oxen,^  game« 

cocks, § 

In  cunflis  jmitantur,  &  donee  dies  illucefcat,  circa  defimdorum 
monumenta  plerumque  vagantur.  Hx  comites  ipforum  notse 
flint.  Facies  pallida,  oculi  ficci,  &  ad  videndum  imbecilli,  lin- 
gua arldiffima,  nulla  in  ore  faliva,  fitis  immodica,  tibi^  line  re- 
medio  cxulcerat^,  quod  frequent!  per  nodtcm  ejus  partis  offenfi- 

one  accidit."  -Paul  jEginet.       Re  Medica.  Lib.  3, 

cap.  16.  p.  22.  1.  15. 

"  Tbey  who  are  offeBed  ivith  that  kind  of  hifan'ity  called  Ly- 
canthropia,  Icwving  their  huhitations  in  the  night  time,  imitate  in 
eveiy  thing  the  actions  of  wolvei,  and  ufually  ramble  among  the 
iomhs  till  da)/-light  appears.  The  concominant  fymptoms  of  this 
diforder  are, — a  pale  face  ;  dry  eyes,  nvith  -voeahicfs  of  fght  ;  a 
parched  tongue ;  no  fali'va  in  the  mouth  ;  incurable  ulcerations  in 
ihe  legs,  occafio7ied  by  the  frcqticnt  injutics  ivkich  they  receive  in 
thefe  nightly  excurfons." 

"  Literarum  monumentis  tradit  Gulielmus  Brabantinus 
in  fua  hiftoria,  virum  prudentem  diaboli  arteeo  perduftum  fuilTe, 
lit  aliquibus  anni  temporibus  non  fecus  fciverit  quam  fc  rapacem 
cfle  lupiim,  qui  per  loca  fylveftria  &  fpecus  oberraret,  ac  maximc 
pueros  perfequcrcrur,  &  euin  iiepe  velut  amentem  per  nemora  va- 
gari  inventum  fuille  :  qui  taodem  dei  gratia  ad  mcntem  rediit." 

"  Ad  haec  Patavii libi  yidebatur  agricola,  anno  mllleffimo 
quingcntiffimo  quadrageilimo  primo  :  multofque  in  agris  Infiliit, 
trucidavitque.  Tandem  non  fine  multa  difficultate  captus,  con- 
fidenter  afleveravit  fe  verum  effc  lupum,  dilcriraen  folum  cxiftere 

in  pelle  cum  pilis  inverfo."  Wieri  de  Prafig,  Damon^ 

Lib.  4.  cap.  23.  p.  335,  &c. 

"William  o/*  Brabant  in  his  hijfory,  tells  us  of  a  fnan 
of  good  underflanding,  ivho  was  fo  deluded  by  the  artifice  of  the  de- 
vil, that,  at  certain  feafons  if  the  year,  he  imagined  hi  mf elf  to  hi 
a  ravenous  wolf,  wandered  about  among  woods  and  caves,  chiefly 
purfuing  children^  and  was  often  found,  like  a  madman,  rambling 

through 


i6o      DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 

eocks,^'  fparibws,|l  cuckoos, J  nightingales,* 

earthen 

through  the  forejls^  At  lengthy  ly  the  grace  of  God ^  he  was  rc' 
Jlored  to  kis  right  mind" 

Alfo^  a  countryman^  at  Padua^  tn  the  year  i^^i,  fancied 
hlmfelf  to  be  a  woll: :  and  attacked  many  people  in  the  fields^  and 
killed  them,  Beings  at  length,  caught,  not  ivithouf  a  good  deal  of 
difficulty,  he  confidently  affinned  that  he  was  a  real  Wolf;  and  that 
he  differed  in  nothing  from  other  wolves,  but  in  having  the  hair  of 

his  Jkin  turned  i7iwards"  Vide  etiam  cap.  25.  p.  339, 

.  Sec  another  Cafe  of  thii  Sort  in  Zacut.  Lusitan.  dt 

Prax,  Medic,  admirand.  Lib.  i.  Obf.  51.  p.  12.  Coi.  2.  B.  C. 
Oper.  Tom.  2.    And  two  other  curious  ones  in  Schencmii 

Obf.  Med.  Rar.  Lib.  I.  p.  129.  See  alfo  Van  Swieten 

■Comment.  Aph.  1 120.  Tom.  3.  p.  521.  Bartholini  de 
Morbis  Bibilicis,  Cap.  13.  p.  68.  et  ejufdem  Efifol.  Medic* 
Cent.  2.  Epift.  100.  Tom.  i.  p.  732. 

§  Aetii  Tetrahib,  Lib.  6.  cap.  11. 

J  Avicenva;  quoted  by  Wierius,  de  Prafig.  Bamen, 
loco  fupra  citato,  p.  336.  § 

II  River  1 1  Pra)c,  Medic.  Lib.  1.  cap.  14.  p.  188.  col.  1. 

Of  this  kind  was  the  Madnefs  of  the  Daughters  of  Proetus,  a 
3ci«gof  tbe  Argives,  who  were  cured  by  Melampus,  as  men- 
tioned by  Pliny  in  his  A^a/arrt/ //{/?<7rv.  Lib.  25.  cap.  5.  p. 
457.  1.  i6.-r-ViRGii.  alludes  to  their  Infanity  in  the  tollowing 
Lines : 

*'  Prcetides  implerunt  falfis  mugitibus  agros : 
At  non  tarn  ;:urpes  pecudum  tamen  ulla  fccuta  eft 
Concubitui :  cjuamvis  collo  timuiflct  tratrum, 
jEt  ficpe  in  IcYi  qu«fiflet  eornua  fronte." 

Bucolic,  Eclog.  6.  V.  48. 

[*rht 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  i6l 

eaithen  veflelsjf   pipkins,  jars,  tea  pots,^ 

bricks,  J 

"  The  Ma'uh  of  Argos  (though  ^vlth  rage  poJJefs'Jy 
Their  imitated  lowings  fiird  the  grove) 
Tet  Jhund  the  guilt  of  thy  prcpoff  rous  lovd. 
Nor  fought  the  youthful  hufband  of  the  herd^ 
Though  lay  ring  yokes  on  their  o-zvn  necks  they  fear'd; 
And  felt  for  budding  horns  on  their  fmooth  foreheads  reared. 

Dryden. 

^  Bartholini  de  Morh.  Bihlic.  loco  fupva  citato,    de  Ne- 

hucodonnforis  mania  feu  7nelancholia.  Mead's  Medica  Sacra, 

Chap.  7.  On  the  Difeafe  of  King  Nebuchadnezzer, — Works  vol, 
3.  p.  182. 

§  C/EL.  AuREL.  Morb.  Chron.  Lib.  i.  cap.  5.  p.  328, 
§  152-.. 

"  Alii  [fe — efle  putant]  gallum  etiam  utvocem  illius  imitan- 

lur."  Trallian.    de  Arte  Medic.  Lib.    i.    cap.  17, 

interHALLERi  Art.  Med.  Princif.  Tom.  6.  p.  91. 

"  Some  have  imagined  themf elves  cocks,  a?id  imitated  thelt 
cro'Mtng." 

*' Alter cantare  audiens,  ut  hi  alarum  ante  cantum,  fic 
111c  b  rachiorum  plaufu  latera  quatiens,  animantium  fonum  imita- 
tus  eft."  Galbn.  de  Locis  affe£i.  Lib.  3,  cap.  6.  as  quo- 
ted by  ScHENCHius  Obf.  Medic.  Rar,  L,ib.  i.  Obf.  i.  p. 
123. 

"  Another  hearing  the  cro<imng  of  cocks,  imitated  their  noifi^ 
clapping  his  arms,  and  flaking  his  fides  ^  as  thofe  animals  clap  their 
vjings  before  they  cro%v," 

II  C/EL.  AuREL.  Morb.  Chron.  ib. 

.    J  River II  Frax.  Medic,  ib. 

*  TralliM;!,  de  Arte  Medic,  ih^ 

X 


i62     DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


bricksjj  caiidles^f  or  the  like.  Some  have  ima- 
gined 

f  C^L.  AuREL.  Mori.  Chron,  ib.  ' 

~  For  this  inftance,  ativd  for  that  of  male  pregnancy,  I  have 
only  the  authority  of  the  poet  ;  but  have  as  much  rcafon  to  be- 
lieve them  to  be  fads,  from  the  conlideration  of  their  relative 
probability,  as  that  of  the  goofe-pye,  which  we  are  told  inBifliop 
Warburton's  note  on  the  paiTage,  —  "  alludes  to  a  real/a^,  a 

lady  of  diJliuBion  imagined  herfelf  in  this  co7idition  :  and  it  is 

no  diminution  of  their  credibility,  that  they  are  of  a  fimilar  na- 
ture toothers,  for  which  we  have  more  grave  authority  ;  and  that 
feveral  of  the  poet's  other  inftances  allude  to  well  attefted  fafts. 
They  are  introduced  in  a  dcfcription  of  the  cave  of  Jpleen,  the 
whole  of  which  is  as  juft,  as  it  is  poetical.  He  concludes  as  fol- 
lows :  

"  Unnumber'd  throngs  on  every  fide  are  feen, 
Of  bodies  chang'd  to  various  forms  by  fpleen. 
Here  living  tea-pots  Hand,  one  arm  held  out, 
One  bent ;  the  handle  this,  and  that  the  fpout  : 
hpipkin  there,  like  Homer's  tripod  walks  ; 
Here  fighs  ajar,  and  there  a  goofe-pye  talks  ; 
Men  prove  with  child,  as  pow'rful  fancy  v/orks, 
And  maids  turn'd  bottles,  cry  aloud  for  corks." 

Pope's  Rape  nf  the  Lock.  Cant.  4.  1.  47.  &c.  Works 
vol.  I.  p.  164. 

t  C^L.  AuREi..  Morh.  Chron.  Ib.  One  thought  him- 

fclf  a  brick,  and  obftinatcly  refufed  to  drink,  left  he  fhould  be  dif- 
folredby  the  moifture." — ■ — Ar^et.  Cappad.  de  Cauftsl^  Sign. 
Mori.  Diuturn.  Lib.  i.  cap.  6.  p.  32.  A. 

TissoT  de  Falet.  Literator.  p.  12, 

II  RivERir  Frax.  Med.  ib.  Tulpius  relates  a  curious 

cafe,  which  fell  under  his  own  infpedion,  and  which  he  cured 
•by  aa  ingenious  artifigc,  of  ao  minait  painter  who  confiued  hitn- 


Infamtv]   ARRANGEMENT.  163 


gined  themfelves  to  be  made  wholly,  or  in  part,, 
of  wax, II  butter,J  glafs,*  leather,^  orftraw.f 

One 

felffor  a  whole  winter  in  bed,  imagining. all  his  bones  to  he  as 
foft  and  flexible  as  wax,  and  not  daring  to  rife,  left,  being  una- 
ble to  fupport  his  weight,  they  Ihould  give  way  under  their  load, 
and  his  whole  body  (hould  linlc  down  into  a  mifh.ipen  globular 

mafs..  Obferv.  Medic.  Lib.  i.  cap.  i8.  p.  36.  Van". 

SwiETBN.  Comment.  Aph.  11 13.  Tom.  3.  p.  513. 

%  "Orator,  poeta,  medicus  G«/7'^>  Barl/eus,  non  periculi 
ignarus,  ni?7tiis Jludiis,  vim  fenforii  adeo  tregit,  ut  fuam  cor- 
pus butiraccum  credcret,  &  igrcm  ne  li(]ueiceret  anxie  fugiebat, 
donee,  laevorura  pertsefus  meaiam,  fefe  in  puteum  pra:cipltejn 

egit."  TissoT  de  Valet.    Litcrator.    p.  20.  Vide 

Broen  Animad,  Medic:  p.  142. 

"  Cafper  BARL^fiUS,  an  orator.,  poet,  and phyftcian,  -ii'Ijo  zvaf 
not  ignorant  of  the  danger  offuch  a  conduH,  fo  injured  tbe  fenfori- 
mn  com?nune  by  too  intenfe  application  to  fludy,  that  he  believed 
hi!  bcfdy  to  be  ?nadc  of  hi\\.tc\-,  and  anxiovfly  a'voided going  near  a 

fire,  Icfi  he  fiould  melt  a-Moy  ;  till  being  -zvcaried  out  ^with  ihefc 
dreadful  apprehcnfiom,  he  put  an  end  to  his  life,  by  throi'jing  him- 

felfinto  a  ivell.^^ 

*  "  Dum  eruditus  vir  ex  immodicls  ftudlis  in  hunc  morbum 
inciderat,  credebat  fe  habere  crura  vitrca,  hinc  nullo  modo  illis 
audebat  infiftere,  fed  dc  letSto  ad  focum  deferebatur,  cui  tota  die 
ailidebat.  Ancilla,  dum  ligna  adterebat  t'oco  alendo,  ruditer  ilk  pro- 
jecit,  unde  territus  herus,  &  cruribus  fuis  vitreis  metuens,  illam 
acriter  objurgavit  :  morofa  ancilla,  &  herilis  infinise  pertaefa,  lig- 
no  percuffit  rudius  heri  tibiam,  unde  acrem  quldem  dolorem  fen- 
lit,  fod  finiul  iratiffimus  exiliit,  ut  illatam  hanc  contumeliam  ul- 
cifccrctur  ;  j)aulo  poll,  dctervefccnte  ira,  gavifus  tuit,  fc  cruri- 
bus infiflere  pofle,  &  dctcta  fuit  de  mente  ejus  vana  htec  imagi- 
naUo." — ■  'Van  Swejt£n  Comment,  11 13.  p.  514- 


164.     DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 

One  fancied  that  his  head  was  cut  off ;  J  ano- 
ther 

•*  A  learned  man  who  fell  into  this  dif order  in  confequence  of  Im- 
moderate  findy^  fancied  that  his  legs  ^\jere  nothing  hut  glafs,  and 
for  that  reafon  dared  on  no  account  •vcTiture  to  Jiand  upon  them  ; 
hut  %\3as  carried  from  his  bed  fo  the  fin  fide  ^  and  then fat  from  morn- 
ing till  night.  His  maid  bringing  one  day  fame  logs  of  wood  to  -mend 
the  fire,  threw  them  carelrfsly  dovjn  ;  for  which  her  ?nafier,  who 
was  terrified  for  his  legs  of  glafs,  fevtrely  reprifnandcd  her.  The 
furly  maid,  who  was  heartily  tired  of  her  inafier's  Infanity,  gave  him 
a  fmart  blow  on  the  leg  with  one  of  the  li>.\f,  which  hurt  him  a  good 
deal,  and fo  provoked  him,  that  he  rcjefroiu  his  feat  in  a  'violent  hur- 
ry, to  revenge  the  infult.  Soon  after,  when  his  anger  was  abated, 
he  tvas  happy  to  find  that  his  legs  were  ahlc  to  fupport  hi?n  ;  and  his 
mind  was  from  that  ti?ne  perfectly  freed  from  this  ahfurd  i?nagina- 
tion." 

"  Quidam  opinatus  eft  ex  vitro  fibi  conflatas  dunes,  fic  ut  om- 
nia fua  negotia,  atque  a»Sl:Iones  ftando  p'^rficerer,  metuens  nc  fi  in 
fedlle  fe  inclinaiet,  nates  confringeret,  ac  vitri  fragincnta  hinc  in- 

de  diffilirent."  Zacuti  Lusitani  de  Medicor,  Princip, 

Hifi.  Lib.  I.  Hift.  37.  Paraphras.  Tom.  i.  p.  74.  col.  2.  E. 

"  A  certain  perfon  i7nagined  his  pofteriors  were  made  of  glafi ; 
tind  therefore  tranfaHed  all  his  bufinefs,  and  did  every  thing  elfe, 
fianding  ;  for  fear  lefi,  if  he  foould  fit  down,  his  glafjy  foundation 

fhould-  break,   and  be  Jhivercd  into  fragme-nts."  See  alio 

ScHENCHii  Obf.  Med.  Rar.    Lib.  i.    p.  124.  col.  i.  

Bartholine  tell?  3  fimilar  ftoiy  of  a  celebrated  poet  of  Am- 
fterdam.  ,  Hifi.  Anat.  Rar.  Cent,  i,  Hift.  79.  p.  114. 

<jf  Trallian.  de  Arte  Med.  Lib.  i.  cap.  17.  inter  Hal- 
LEB.I  Art.  Medic,  Princip.  Tom.  6.  p.  91. 

f  Van  Sweiten  Comment,  Aph.  1113.  Tom.  3.  p.  5i3f 


i  Trallian.  ib^ 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  165 

ihcr  that  he  had  loft  his  thighs ;+  "  Artcmldo- 
"  rus,  the  grammarian^  as  we  are  told  by  Cm- 

Lius  AuRELiANUS,  being  terrified  by  the 

unexpcdlea  appearance  of  a  crocodile^  was  fo 
"  much  diforderedby  the  fright,  that  he  not  only 
"  imagined  the  animal  had  devoured  his  left  leg, 
"  and  hand,  but  even  forgot  all  that  he  hadJearn-^ 
"  ed  \'  Artemidcnm  grammaticum 

ApoUonius  memorat  nitcute  greffu  crocodi- 
"  lum  hi  harena  jacentem  expavifte,  atque  e- 
"  jus  metu  pei-ciiflTa  mente,  credidifle  fibi  fi- 
"  Hiftrum  crqs  atq>ue  manum  a  ferpente  com- 

meftam,  &  Hterarum  memoria  caruil-Te  ob- 
"  hvione  poflrefl'um."§ — Some  have  believed 
that  they  were  incumbered  with  enormous 
nofes       others  have  fuppofed  themfelvcs  to 

be 


■j-  TissoT  de  Valctud.  Liter ator.  p.  22, 

§  Morh.  Chron.  Lib.  i.  cap.  5.  p.  328.  §  151. 

*  "  Plebeius  apud  nos  vlr  fanguine  melnncliolico  turgcns,  r<t- 
Jum  fihi  in  earn  magnitudincm  excrcvljfc  imagiiiabatur,  ut  publico 

abilineret,  ne  nafus  a  tranfeuntibus  conculcaretur."  Bar- 

THOL.  Hiji.  Anat,  Rar.  Ceut.  i.  Hilh  79.  p.  114. 

"  A  man  o  f  the  lo-Mer  order  here,  v)hofe  'vejjils  iverc  replete  iviih 
melancholy  bloody  imagined  his  noJe  to  be  grown  to  luch  a  fize, 
il^at  he  ivas  a  fraid  ofjiirring  out  of  doors ^  kjl  people  Jljould  tread 
upon  it  as  they  fajfed  by  him" 

*'  Ciiidam 


i66      DEFINITION    W  [Meal 


be  grains  of  wheat,  and  have  been  for  ever  la 
apprehenfion  left  they  Ihould  be  fo  unfortu- 
nate as  to  be  eaten  up  by  fowls  and  we 
are  told  of  a  lady  who  conceived  that  fhe 
was  a  goofe-pye  :  one  thought  he  had  an  im- 
mcnfe  pair  of  ftag's  horns  branching  from  his 
forehead  ;||  a  man,  as  we  are  informed  by  C^- 
Lius  Auk  EL  I  ANUS,  imagined  himfelf  a  hclp- 
lefs  infant,  and  cried  to  be  led  by  the  hand 
and  fomemen,  if  wc  may  believe  the  poet, 
have  faiicied  themfelves  pregnant ;  Schen- 
CHius  relates  the  cafe  of  a  married  woman, 
who  was  pcrfuaded  that  flie  was  very  large  about 

the 

"  Cuidam  perfuafum  crat  nafum  Jibl  txcre'v'ijfe  in  immenfum^ 
atque  in  prodigiofam  longitadinem,  exporeAum  lie,  ut  elephantis 
probofcidem  circumferie  vilus  fit,  qui  nufquam  non  eflet  impe- 
dimento  adeo  ut  fubinde  patiuis,  ut  illl  cieditum  eft,  innataret." 

 ScHENCHil  Ohf.  Medic.  Rar.  Lib.       p.  124.  col.  i. — 

Vide  etiam  Broen.  Atiimad.  Medic,  p.  14.2. 

**  A  certain  per/on  was  perfuadcd  that  his  nofe  was  grown  to  an 
immcnfe  magnitude,  that  it  feemed,  as  be  -zvent  ahout,  to  dangle 
from  his  face  like  the  fnout  of  an'jlephant,  and  to  be  always  fo  7>iuch 
in  his  vjaj,  that  he f abided  as  he  fat  at  tahle^  that  he  could  not  pre- 
tvent  it  from  floating  in  the  dijhes,^^ 

X  RrvERii  Prax.  Med.  Lib.  i.  cap.  14.  p.  188.  col.  i. 
■—Broen.  Anim.  Med.  p.  142. 

II  ScHENCHii  Olf.  Med.  Rar,  Lib,  i,  p,  124.  col,  2, 
t  Cjs.l's  Aurblian.  loco  citato. 


•Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  167 

the  walft,  and  in  the  laft  ftage  of  pregnancy, 
•when,  ia  reahty,  fhe  had  been  delivered  but 
little  more  than  a  month,  and  did  not  appear 
to  be  larger  than  her  natural  fize  ;*  and  I 
have  known  a  young  woman,  who,  being 
infane,  in  confequencc  of  the  terror  occafion- 
(cd  by  an  attempt  made  upon  her  perfon,  i- 
imaginedthat  fhe  was  for  ever  bringing  forth 
i children,  and  had  a  frefh  delivery  almoft  evc- 
:ry  inftant :  the  celebrated  Monfieur  Pascai. 
^was  perfuaded  that  he  had  a  ball  of  fire  ftick- 
iing  in  his  fide  ;§  andZACUTus  Lusitanus 
1  tells  us  of  a  man  who  imag-ined  himfelf  to  be 
fo  intcnfely  cold,  that  nothing  could  reftore 

him 

*  ScHENCHii  Olf.  Med.  Rar.  ib.  p.  128.  Obf.  8 

§  "  Poft  graves  ftudendi,  copjitandi  &  imaginandi  exantlatos 
llaboies,  lie  vitiabatur  cerebrum  Blasii  Pasch alii,  ut  indefi- 
menti  motu  nonnullse  fibrs  agitata:  haac  fenfationem,  animam  per- 
;  petiio  expcrire  cogcrent,  quam  imTpxt^^iifet  globus  ignius  a  latere 
I  pofitus,  &  nervis  vida  ratio  vix  ac  ne  vix  prcefentis  giobi  ideam 
ideponere  potuit."  T de  Fakt.  Literat.  p.  20, 

"  The  hrainofthecelehratedMofiJieurVAiCKJj^  was  fo  much 
\injured^  hy  the  fe'vere  labours  of Jiudy,  reflexion,  md  imagination^ 
•  VJhlch  it  had  undergone^  that  certain  of  its  fibres  were  agitated -vjith 
>  a  perpetual  vibration^  which  excited  incejjantly  the  fame  fenfatiori 
■  in  the  foul ^  as  would  have  been  produced  by  a  ball  of  fire  fixed  in. 

his  fide  ;  ayid  reafon,  o'vercome  by  tbe  influence  of  the  ncr-ves^  could 
tfcarcdy  tver  lay  afidi  the  idea  of  the  aSlual  prefence  offuch  a  ball>\ 


i68      DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 


him  to  his  native  heat,  but  a6lual  burning  in 
the  fire  \%  many  have  conceived  that  they 
had  living  animals,  men,  devils,  or  other 
dreadful,  or  uncommon  things  within  them  ;  J 

not 


^  "  Qniclam  in  v.ir.am  incidit  imaginaticnem,  ut  fc  fregcre 
fcrpetuo  arbitraretur,  ficquc  ardcnte  firio  ad  ignem  coutinuo  fe- 
dens,  fe  iion  poffc  calefieri  praadicabat,  nifi  toto  corpore  ureretur. 
Qtiumque  dam,  fuitimque  ter  in  ignem  fe  projicerat  ;  tandem 
vin6tus  catenis,  ledens  femper  juxta  ignem,  hac  miferabili  ima- 
ginatione   detcntus,  diem,    nodlemquc  mifer  ducebat  infom- 

nis."  Zacut.   Lusitan.    Frax.    Medio.  Admirand. 

Lib.  I.  Obf.  48.  p.  II.  ad  fin.  Tom.  2.  &c  ejusdem  de  Me- 
dicor.  Princip.  Hijior,  Lib.  i.  Obf.  38.  p.  75. 

'■^  A  certain  perftm  fell  Uito  the  'valn  irnetginatlon  that  he  was 
perpetually  affcftcd  with  intenfe  cold,  fo  that^  even  in  the  heat  ef 
the  dog-days  he  would  for  ever  Jit  at  th:  firc^  and  declare  that  it 
H-vas  impojjihle  he  JJjould  ever  hecome  warin,  unlefs  his  -ivhole  body 
Hvere  burned :  and,  having  three  times  privately  and  by  Jlcalth, 
thro-Tvn  hi?nfclf  into  the  fire,  the  unhappy  man,  -zuas  at  length  fe- 
curcd  vjith  chains  ;  and,  fitting  akvays  clofie  to  the  fire,  pafied  his 
miferahlc  days  and  nights  ivithout  fieep,  under  the  infiuence  of  this 
tormenting  imagination,^* 

X  Devils.  "  Bonarum  llterarum    fludiofus  mocrore 

ex  morte  fororis  frailos  &  lucubrationibus  attritus,  de  diaboli  infi- 
diis  apud  me  conqueritur.  Affirmat  ientire  fe  malum  fpiiltum  per 
anum  ingredi  cum  vento  furfumque  in  corpore  fuo  repere  donee 
caput  occupet,  ne  facris  folita  devotione  vacare  poffit ;  eundcm 
vero  eadem  via  defcendere  &  exire  quando  ad  preces  &  Icftiones 
fanftas  accingitur.  Ante  hac  fe  inaudlta  latitla  fuifle  perfufum 
ex  affiduis  prccibus  &  vigiliis,  ut  concentum  etiam  ccclellem  ex- 
audiverit,  fpretifque  mortalibus  omnia  in  pauperes  ercgalfe  :  nunc 
dcfcrvcnte  pietate  ob  nimium  cibi  appetitum,  ob  turbatum  ifto 

vento 


Infaiiity]  ARRANGEMENT.  169 


not  a  few  have  fancied  that  fome  external 
part,  or  parts,  of  the  body,  have  been  much 

altered 

vento  cerebrum,  cujiiftlam  in  cerebro  vocem  fe  exaudire,' 
Q>\oi(r(pr}f4,lotv  exprobrantis,  tundcntes  pugnos  fe  fentire,  & 
fcetorem  ante  narcs  obverfantem."  Bartkolini  Hijl6r, 

Anat.  Rarior.  Cent.  i.  Hift    85.  p.  122. 

' '  A  certain  Jludent  dejeBed  iiHth  grief for  the  death  of 

his  fijier^  and  -vjorn  out  -xvith  Jludy,  complained  to  me  of  the  fira- 
tagems  of  the  devil.  He  ajfured  ?ne  that  he  could  perceive  the  evil 
fpirit  to  enter  into  him,  accompanied  -xvith  ivind,  by  the  fundament^ 
and  to  proceed  upivards  in  his  body  till  he  arrived  at  his  head,  fo  as 
to  prevent  him  from  attending  to  facred  matters  tmth  his  ufual  devo- 
tion :  and  to  defend,  and  pafs  out,  by  the  fame  vj  ay  ^  ivhenever  he 
betook  himfelf  to  praying,  and  reading  the  fcriptures.  That  before 
this,  through  conf  ant  praying  and  ivatching,  he  had  heen  filled  ivith 
fuch  itiexprcjjihle  joy,  as  to  hear  the  harmony  of  the  heavenly  choir  ; 
and  that  defpifing  mortal  things,  he  had  given  a-zvay  whatever  he 
had  to  the  poor  :  but  that  no-zv,  fince  the  fervour  of  his  piety  ivas 
abated,  by  the  violent  cravings  of  hunger,  and  the  difurbance 
ivhich  this  wind  had  produced  in  his  brain,  he  feemed  to  hear  a 
voice  proceeding  from  his  brain,  as  of  fomebody  accufing  him  of 
hlafphemy ,  fit  the  firokes  of fifis  on  his  body,  and  his  noflrils  ivere 
offended  by  a  fetid  fmell." 

"  Accepi — a  viro  fide  digno,  quendam  libi  perfuafifle,  tribus 
damoniis  agitari,  in  corpore  latere,  indicabat  in  fcapulis,  &  in 

fronte."  Schenchii  Obf.   Med.  Rar,   Lib.    i.   p.  137. 

Obf.  II. 

*'  I  have  been  informed  by  a  gentleman  o  f  credit,  that  a  certain 
iPerfon  perfuaded  himfelf  that  he  was  poJfeJTed  by  xhjte  devils,  whic^ 
•  were  lodged  in  his  body  ;  and  pointed  out  h's  fjoulder  bladtSy  and 
his  forehead,  as  the  places  of  their  refidence" 

Kr^iSMT?,^ 

Y 


lyo     DEFINITION    and  [Ideal 

altered  in  their  form,  bulk,  or  appearance, 
by  difeafe,  when  in  reality  they  were  in  a 
perfe£tly  found,  and  unaltered  ftate  ;^  one 

believed 

Knights.  "  A  fido  didici  tefte,  celebrem  quondam  acri- 

tate  difputarionum  Petr.  Jurieu,  &  fcriptis  piignando,  &  in  ex- 
poncnda  Apocalypfi  laborando^  fic  cerebrum  turbavifle,  ut,  caetc- 
ra  fat  fapiens,  firmiter  crederet  faevas  quibus  premcbatur  colicas, 
oriri  cx  continua  dimlcationc  inter  fcptem  equites  intcltinis  fuis  iu- 
<;lufos." 

I  have  learned  from  good  authority^  /Z'^?/ Peter  Jurieu,  once 
Jo  famous  for  the  acrimony  of  his  difpntcs^  fo  dif ordered  his  brain 
iy  writing  hooks  o  f  controverjy^  and  hy  the  labour  of  compofing  an 
expofition  of  the  Revelations^  that^  ivhile  in  his  right  mina  in  other 
refpeHs^  he  firndy  believed  that  the  violent  colics^  with  which  he 
ivas  tormented,  arofe  from  the  contintial  engagements  of  feven 
icnights  Kvho  vjereJJmt  up  in  his  io-xvels." 

A  Serpent.  Trallian.  de  Arte  Med.  Lib.  i.  cap.  17 

inter  Halleri  Art.  Med.  Princip.  Tom.  6,  p.  91.  Al- 

iim  de  Medicina  Method.  Lib.  10.  cap.  11.  p.  613. 

Frogs  and  Toads.  Schenchii   Obf.  Med.  Rar.  Lib, 

I.  p.  121.  col.  I.  Ki.vitii  de  Med.  Mtth»  ib.  p.  614. 

MicB.— — RiVERli  Pm.v.  Medic,  Lib.  i.  cap.  14.  p.  188. 
acol.  I.  • 

A  living  Mole,  or  falfe  conception.-'-^T-aL?ii  Obf,  Med. 
Lib.  I  cap.  19.  p.  39. 

A  Spike  Nail.  Bartholini  HiJ.  Anat.  Rar,  Cent. 

I.  Hift.  79.  p.  114. 

"  f  "  Sclo  quoque,  lib!  fulphui    plcem  rcdolerc  maritum  oc- 

claraarct 


Iiifanlty]    ARRANGEMENT.  1 7.1 


believed  himfelf  to  be  Atlas,  carrying  the 
world  oil  his  back  ;  and  was  in  much  anxiety 
left  it  (hould  fall,  and  not  only  crufh  himfelf, 
but  all  mankind,  to  atoms  ;||  another  imagined 
that  he  had  fo  vaft  a  quantity  of  urine  within 
him,  that  he  was  afraid  of  making  water, 
^eft  his  friends  and  neighbours  fhould  be 
drowned  in  the  deluge  it  might  produce. § 

II.  NOTIONAL 


clamaret  melancholice  v'ttium  patiens  conjux,  &  cibum  oblatum 
piper  rclijiere  judicaret  ;  qua:  quam  alicniffima  efle  a  rei  veritatc 
cognolcebantur.  Partes  item  pudibundus  inlhimatione  putoreque 
ita  vitiatas  afli;rebat,  ut  gangrfenam  fuboriturum  pertimelceret, 

his  interim  locis  ab  orani  vitio  immunibus.".  WiERi</e 

Frai/iig.  Damon.  Lib.  3.  de  hamiis  cap.  7.  §  6.  p.  182. 

"  I  knO'VJ  a  married  woman,  difordered  ivith  melancholy,  %vho  cried 
out  that  her  hujband  fmelt  of  fulphur  and  pitch  ;  and  declared  that 
the  food  which  was  Jet  before  her  taflcd  of  pepper  ;  though  it  was 
certain  that  nothing  could  be  farther  fro}n  the  truth.  She  alfo  of- 
fer ted  that  certain  parts  of  her  body,  which  were  in  a  perfeSlh 
found  fate,  were  fo  inflamed,  and. putrid,  that  fjc  was  terrified 
Icfl  a  mortification  fhould Juccced." 

II  Trallian.  de  Arte  Med.  Lib.  i.  cap.  17.  Inter  Hal- 
LERI  Art.  Med.  Princip.  Torn.  6.  p.  91. 

§  Broen  Animad.  Medic,  p.  142. 

Y  2 


172   DEFINITION    W  [Notion. 


II.   NOTIONAL  INSANITY. 

5.  T"  Have  placed  firft  in  order  under  this 
Jl  divifion,    that  fpecies  of  Insanity 
which  I  have  denominated  delusive,  bc- 
caufc  it  nearly  approaches  to  the  two  laft 
mentioned  fpecies  of  Ideal  Infanity.    It  has  a 
peculiar  title  to  the  appellation  of  delujive, 
bccaufe,  without  the  fmallcji  dijlinguifhahle 
trace  of  ideal  delirium,— the  images  in 
the  mind,  fo  far  as  can  be  difcovered,  per- 
fc(5lly  correfponding  to  the  prefent  external 
objefts  of  fenfe,  and  to  the  natural,  and  real, 
ftatc  of  his  own  body,— with  the  found  and 
unimpaired  ufe,  in  every  other  rejpe5i,  of  the  ra- 
tional faculties,  which  in  fome  cafes  have  even 
been  obferved  to  be  remarkably  acute,  the 
patient,  in  relation  to  fome  parti cu  lar  fub- 
jedf,  or  fubjeSis,  is  under  the  influence 
of  the  mofi  palpable,  and  extraordinary  de- 

O  F 


I 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  173 

Of  this  fpecies  there  are  two  varie- 
ties; the  one  nearly  related  to  maniacal^  and 
the  other  to  fenjitive  Infanlty  ;  but  it  is  free, 
in  the  former  cafe,  from  maniacal  dellrinm, 
and  in  the  latter,  is  nev^r  obvioufly  accompa- 
nied with  any  erroneous  ideas  of  the  patients 
own  form,  or  other  fenhble  qualities. 

In  the  first  mentioned  variety,  the 
patient  has  fuch  notions  relative  to  his  own  pow- 
ers^ properties,  and  relations,  as  are  Incompati" 
hie  with  his  ft  ate  and  nature,  or  Inconfiftent  with 
fadl  and  reality  ;  appears,  for  the  tnofl  part,  to 
derive  thefe  erroneous  notions  rather  fro?n  the 
fuggeftlons  of fa?icy,  than  fromthe  lllufion  of  feel- 
ing ;  and  generally  dlfcovers  fome  degree  of  felf- 
complacency,  on  account  of  this  Imaginary  poffef- 

fion  of  a  fuppofed  excellency  :  as  when  he 

imagines  that  he  has  the  power  of  workmg 
miracles  j||-~of  directing  the  idion  of  the  ele- 
ments, 

11  "  Mens  autem — crat  lafa — illi,  qui  poUlcebatur  fe  Gahri- 
elem  aut  Michaekm  coaBurt!?n^  ut  ad  fe  've?itrent^  &  illos  de  re- 
bus magnis  interrogatos  refpoiiruin  daturos.  Sed  cum  ille  rogare- 
tur  a  Cardardinale  Tournone,  ut  id  efficeret  :  refpondebat  le  non 
pofle,  nifi  praeparato  prius  corpore  multis  jejuniis  &  orationibus, 

nec 


174    DEFINITION    W  [Notion. 

ments,  regulating  the  weather,  and  dlftribu- 
ing  the  fcafoiis       thepower  of  flying  through 

the 

nec  nlfi   pro  rebus  Reipublicae  Chriftiana."  WiERi^f 

Prajiig.  Damon.  Lib.  3.  /ic  Li^miis  cap.  7.  p.  182. 

"His  wind  ivas  difordtrcd,  ivho  pretended  that  he  could  compel 
tlie  angel  Gabriel,  or  Michael,  to  come  to  him,  and  to  anpujer 
J'uch  quejlions  as  he  Jhouldput  to  them^  about  things  of  high  impor- 
tance. But  ■vjhcn  he  'voas  ajked  by  Cardinal  Tournon  to  do  fo,  he 
anfwered,  that  he  could  not,  i\>ithout  firjl  preparing  himfelf  ivith 
much  fajling  and  prayi7igy  nor  unlefs  the  comynon  ad-vantage  of 
chrijlianity  required  it." 

^  Though  I  can  produce  nothing  better  than  poetical  autho- 
rity for  this  inftance,  yet  as  it  is  perfectly  confonant  to  what  I 
my felf  have  experienced  to  be  faft,  I  have  ventured  to  fet  it 
down  as  fuch.  The  authority  I  allude  to,  is  that  of  Dr.  John- 
son, in  his  RaJJelas  ;  where  he  has  beautifully  illuftrated  this  va- 
riety, in  the  charafler  of  an  aftronomer,  who  fancied  he  had  fuch 
a  power.  The  whole  Jlory,  and  the  obfervations  upon  Infanity 
which  accompany  it,  are  as  juft,  and  phllofophical,  as  they  are 
elegant  ;  and  are  worthy  of  the  pen  from  which  they  proceeded. 

I  (hall  only  make  a  flrort  ext'raft.  About  ten  years  ago, 

ftid  the  aftronomer,  my  daily  obfervations  of  the  changes  of  the 
Iky  led  me  to  coniider,  whether,  if  I  had  the  power  ot  the  fea- 
fons,  I  could  confer  greater  plenty  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth.  This  contemplation J  o«  ot/?/^/,  and  I  fat  days 
and  nights  in  irnaginary  dominion^  pouring  upon  this  country  and 
that  fliowers  of  fertility,  and  fcconding  every  fliower  of  rain  witit 
a  due  proportion  of  funfiiine.  I  had  yet  only  the  will  to  do  good, 
I  did  not  imagine  I  fhould  ever  have  the  power." 

*'  One  day  as  I  was  looking  on  the  fields  withering  with  heat, 
I  felt  in  my  mind  a  fudden  wifli  that  I  could  fend  rain  on  the 
fouthern  mountains,  and  raife  the  Nile  to  an  inundation.    In  the 
hurry  of  my  imagination,  I  commanded  raia  to  fall,  and  by  com- 
paring 


Infaiilty]  ARRANGEMENT.  175 


the  ah',  from  one  place  to  another,  without  the 
aid  of  wings  ;— of  hanging  fufpended,  for 
any  length  of  time,  without  the  afTiftance 
of  any  mechanical  means ; — of  difcharg- 
ing  blood  from  any  part  of  the  body,  and 
efpecially  from  the  urinary  paffage,  or  of  re- 
taining it  ;  of  emptying  the  vcffels  to  any 
degree,  or  of  keeping  them  full ;  by  the  fole 
diredion  of  the  will  ;— and  of  performing  a 
variety  of  other  wonders — merely  by  blowing 
with  the  breath, — by  a  particular  motion  of 
the  leg,  or  foot,— pofture  of  the  body,— in- 
clination 

paring  the  time  of  my  command,  with  that  of  the  iaundatlon,  I 

t'ound  that  the  clouds  had  liftened  to  my  lips.  1  reafoncd 

long  againft  my  own  convlftion,  and  laboured  againft  truth  with 
the  utmoft  obftinacy.  I  fometimes  fufpefted  myfelf  of  madnefs, 
and  fliould  not  have  dared  to  impart  the  fecret  but  to  a  man  like 
you,  capable  of  diftinguifliing  the  wonderful  from  the  impoffiblc, 
and  the  incredible  from  the  falfe." 

"Why,  Sir,  faid  I,  do  you  call  that  incredible,  which  you 
know,  or  think  you  know,  to  be  true  ?" 

"  Becaufe,  faid  he,  I  cannot  prove  it  by  any  external  cvi» 
dence  ;  and  I  know  too  well  the  laws  of  de;noiiftration  to  think 
that  my  conviftion  ought  to  influence  another,  who  cannot,  like 
me,  be  confcious  of  its  force.  I,  therefore,  (hall  not  attempt  to  gain 
credit  by  difputatlon.    It  is  fufficient  that  I  feel  this  power,  that 

I  have  have  long  polTelTcd,  and  eveiy  day  exert  it."  Rajfdas^ 

Frince  of  Abijfinia,  Chap,  41.  p,  253, 


176  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


cllnation  of  the  head, — and  a  thoufand  other 
inadequate  means,  equally  trifling,  and  ri- 
diculous :  or  when  he  imagines  that  he 

poflefles  great  authority,  large  domains,  or 
abundant  riches,  when  poffefled  in  reality,  of 
no  fuch  thing. -f 

In  the  second  variety  the  patient 
is  deluded^  probably  by  fomething  very  ftrange 

and 

•f-  "  Thrafylaus  PytKodori  filius,  hae  Infania  correptus  fuit, 
vt  eejlimarct  ejji/tias  qn^ecunqric  in  Piracian  -naves  appcllarent,  il- 
las  lecenferet,  dimitteret,  deducerct,  in  portum  fubeuntes  exci- 
peret,  tanto  gaudio,  quam  fi  dominus  earum  merc'uim  eflet,  de 
his  qua:  perierant,  nihil  requireret,  de  iis  quje  allata  &  falva  tuif- 
fent  vehementer  gauderet,  lie  inulta  cum  voluptate  vita'.n  agens. 
Ubi  vero  fraterejus  Criton  ex  Sicilia  reverfus  prchewfum  medicis 
traftandum  commifit  ab  ilia  fanatus  dementia  lastius  ac  jucundius 
fe  nunquam  vixifle  affirmabat,  quoniam  et  omnis  moletba:  piorfus 
cxpcrs  clTct,  &  plurimis  interea  voluptatibus  frueretiir."  Athe- 
vm-i  Deiphnofopb.  Lib*  iz.  Vide  ScHENCHii  Oh/.  Med.  Rar. 
Lib.  I.  p.  123.  col.  2. 

*'  Th-ajylaus^  the  fonof  Fythodorus^ — ciw  fei%ccl  ivith  fuch  an  In- 
fanity^  that  he  imagined  all  the  fhips  which  came  into  the  Pyraeeus 
were  his  own  ;  revie-voed,  diftnijjed,  and  launched  them  ;  received 
thofc  vjhich  arrived  in  port  ivith  as  much  Joy  as  if  he  •ivere  the  pro- 
prietor o  f  the  merchandifc  they  hr ought   ho7nc  :    of  ivhich^   if  any 
ivtre  lofl^  he  made  no  enquiry  about  it ;   hut  rejoiced  greatly  far 
K'jhatever  came  fafc.    Thus  he  pajjed  a  li  fe  o  f  much  pleafure.  But 
his  brother  Crito,  returning  from  Sicily,  had  him  fecurcd,  and  put 
7inder  the  care  of  the  faculty  ;  vihen,  being  cured  of  his  Infanityy 
he  declared  he  had  never  lived  moith  fo  much  fatisfa3ion,  and  plea- 
fure, before  ;  ftJice  he  had  nothing  to  dtfiurb  him,  and  a  mjiltitade 
of  things  to  afftrd  him  delight  ^ 


Inflmity]  ARRx\NGEMENT.  177 

and  fingular  in  his  feelings,  fo  as  to  form  ths 
mo  ft  erroneous^  and  abfurd  conceptions  of  the  fiat 
and  manner  of  exifence  of  his  own  foul,  or  body, 
but  without  difcovering  any  obvious  indications  of 
the  prefence  of  erroneous  images  in  the  mmd,  rC" 
lative  to  his  own  form,  fubfance,  or  other  fenfi- 
ble  qualities,  or  contents  ;  and  is  ufually,  more 
orlefs,  dejeded,  and  diftrcfled,  on  account 
of  the  fuppofed  imperfedion  of  his  unparal- 
led,  and  pitiable  ftate. 

Under  this  variety  may  be  enumerated 
tlie  cafes  of  fuch  as  have  imagined  themfelves 
to  be  dead,^  to  be  deprived  of  their  pro- 
per 

^  "  Qi'i  gravius  laborant,  fefe  vel  vita  defujiEos  ere-- 

dunt."  "  Alii  epulas  pertinacillime  recufant,  amijfam  ejfe  vi- 

tam  rati ."  N  icol.  Pisonis^^  cognofc.  5s'  cur  and.  Morh, 

Lib.  I.  cap.  23.  Tom.  i.  p.  163. 

"  n^ey  ivho  are  more   nfioJently  affcBed — imagine  themfelves 

dead."-  Others  ohjlinately  refufe  refrejhment,  conceiting  that 

they  have  departed  this  life*'* 

A  young  hypochondriac  had  a  ftrong  imagination  that  he  was 
dead,  and  did  not  only  abflain  from  meat  and  drink,  but  impor- 
tuned his  parents  that  he  might  be  car\  ied  to  his  grave,  and  bu- 
ried before  his  fle(h  was  quite  putrificd.  By  the  counfel  of  phy- 
ficiaiis,  he  was  wrapped  in  a  winding  fliect,  kid  upon  a  bier,  and 

fa 

z 


I7«  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

,per  nature  as  human  beings,  §  to  have  been 

once 


fo  carried  on  men's  flioulders  towards  the  church  ;  but  on  the 
way  two  or  three  pleafant  fellows  (hired  for  that  piirpofe)  meet- 
ing the  herfe  demanded  aloud  of  them  that  followed  it,  whofe  bo- 
dy it  was  that  was  there  coffined  and  carried  to  burial?  They 
faid  it  was  a  young  man's,  and  told  his  name  :  furely,  replied 
■one  of  them,  the  world  is  well  rid  of  him,  for  he  was  a  man  of 
a  very  bad  and  vitlous  life,  and  his  friends  have  caufe  to  rejoice 
that  he  hath  rather  ended  his  days  thus,  than  at  the  gallows. 
The  young  man  heaiing  this,  and  not  able  to  bear  fuch  injury, 
roufed  himfelf  up  on  the  bier,  and  told  them  they  were  wicked 
men  to  do  him  that  wrong  he  had  never  deferved  ;  that  if  he 
were  alive  again,  he  would  teach  them  to  fpeak  better  of  the 
dead.  But  they  proceeding  to  defame  him,  and  to  give  him 
much  more  difgracefal  and  contemptuous  language,  he  not  able 
tofufFcrit,  leaped  from  the  bier,  and  fell  about  their  ears,  with 
fuch  rage  and  fury,  that  he  ceafed  not  buffeting  them  till  quite 
wearied  ;  and  by  the  violent  agitation  of  the  humours,  his  body 
being  altered,  he  returned  to  his  right  mind,  as  one  awakened 
out  of  a  trance  ;  and  being  after  brought  home  and  refrelhed 
with  wholefome  diet,  within  few  days  he  recovered  both  his 
health,  and  his  underftanding." 

"  A  noble  perfon  fell  into  this  fancy,  that  he  "jerily  lelieved 

-fje  ivas  dead,  infomuch  that  when  hi?  friends  and  familiars 

befought  him  to  eat, — heftill  refufed  all,  faying  it  was  in  vain  to 
the  dead  ;  but  when  tliey  doubted  not  but  that  this  obftinacy 
would  prove  his  death,  and  this  being  the  fcventh  day  from 
■whence  he  had  continued  it,  they  bethought  themfelves  of  this . 
device  :  they  brought  into  his  room,  which  on  purpofe  was  made 
dark,  fome  perfonated  fellows  wrapped  in  iheir  winding  (heets, 
and  fuch  grave  cloxths  as  the  dead  are  appareled  with  :  thefe 
bringing  in  meat  and  drink,  began  hberally  to  treat  themfelves. 
The  fick  m»n  feeing  this,  afks  them  who  they  are,  and  what  a- 
bput.    They  told  him  they  were  dead  perfons  :  what  then,  faid 
he,  do  the  dead  eat  1    Yes,  yes,  fay  they,  and  if  you  will  fit 
down  with  us,  you  (hall  find  it  fo  :  ftraight  he  fprings  from  out 


Iiilaiuty]   ARRANGEMENT.  179 


once  dead,  and  though  reftored  to  hfe  agaiii, 

to 

of  his  hed,  and  falls  to  with  the  reft.     Supper  ende3,  he  3rbps 
into  a  fleep,  by  virtue  of  a  liquor  given  him  for  tha:t  purpofc.'* 
■Turner  of  Difcafcz  incident  to  the  Skat.  p.  167. 

The  laft  of  thefc .ftories  is  related  by  Schenchius,  from  Le:^- 
Nius.  Vide  OiJ/'.  Med.  Rar,  Lib.  i.  p.  123.  col.  2. 

A  fimilar  imagination  in  an  ardent  fever,  i»  related  by  Schen- 
chius from  HoLLERius,  without  any  clear  account  ot  ideal 
DELIRIUM  ;  at.leall  the  patient  appears — "  to  fee  as  he  oii^ht  to 
fee^  but  not  to^judge  as  he  ought  to  judge  J'^. — - — --  "'r"  \.nfebj:e  ar- 
dtnte  Burgundui  quidam  Lutetiai — multis  clarilTimis  mcdicis  ad- 
ftantibus  mortmim  fc  affirmabat  fimul  cum  fratre  ibi  decumbente. 
Poftea  phantafia  mutata  declamabat,  precabaturque  medicos,  nc 
amplius  animas  impedimcnto  cflent,  quo  minus  e  purgatorio  evo- 
laret  ad  deum  :  aliquando  imitabatur  movibundum,  quafi  efflarct 
animam,  moncbat  ut  fpeitarent  expiratum  ;  ppflea  fumnio  ti- 
more  &  omnium  defperatione  corripiebatur.  Tandem,  bpportu- 
nis  adhibitis  remcdiis,  &  haimorrhoidum  pj-ofluvio  liberatus  eft.'* 
— — — ScHENCHli  Ohf  Med,  Rar.  Lib.  i.  p.  124.  col.  i. 

*'  A  certain  Burgundian,  at  Paris,  in  an  ardent  fever — de~ 
dared f.  iii  the  prefenct  of  many  eminent  phyjtcians,  that  he,  and  b is 
brother  %vho  i\?as  lying  ill  at  the  fame  time,  v:crc  both  dead.  Af- 
terwards,  _  the  dclirinm  taking  a  different  ttirn,  he  talked  muchy  and 
begged  that  the  fhyjicians  ivould  710  longer  hinder  his  foul  from  cfcap- 
ing  from  purgatory  to  God.  _SomctiiKis  he  imitated  a  dying  pcrfon^ 
pretended  to  be  breathi7ig  his  lajl,  and  dcfked  thty  tvould  obfernte 
him  expire.  Aftervjards  he  nxjas  feized  ivith  extreme  terror ^  and 
defpair.  At  length  he  <was  freed fro?n  his  dif order,  by  the  proper 
ufe  of  medicines^  and  a  copious  dfchargc  of  blood  from  the  hemor- 
rhoidal veins^^ 

§  "  Eo  ufque  dclirabat  [juvenis  dltiflimi  mcrcatoris  fillus]  ut 
fefchominem  effe  baud agnofceret."  •   Schenchi  i  Obf.  Med. 

^ar.  Lib,  i.  jp.  127.  Obf.  7.  ^ 

Z  2 


i8o   DEFINITION    W  [Notion. 


to  be  fent  back  into  the  world  without  a  heart, 
and  to  exift  in  a  manner  totally  different 
•  from  all  other  mortals,*  to  have  no  ratio- 
nal foul,  it  having  gradually  decayed  and  pe. 
rifhed,  fo  as  to  leave  a  living  man  indeed,  but 

perfedlly  empty  of  all  thought, \\  and  whatever 

other  cafes  may  occur,  of  the  like  wonderful 
and  unaccountable  delujions. 

Though  both  thefe  varieties  of  delujive 

Infanhy 

**  Ayoung  man,  the  fon  o  f  a  rich  merchant,  ivas  delirious  to 
'fuch  a  degree,  that  he  could  nat  be  fatisfied  that  he  was  any  longer 
a  man." 

*  "  [Quaediim]  incidit  in  Infaniam — credens  firmiter,  fe 

fato  funSlam,  ea  conditione  a  Deo  in  mundum  remillam,  ufvivs- 
'ret  deinheps  excors.  Coide  enim  fuo,  a  Deo,  rctento,  doluit  im- 
penfe,  aliamque  Jthi,  quam  aliorum  mortalium  vitam  : — afflixit 
quidem  ipfam  aliqiiandiu  hasc  triftitia  :  fed  tandem  licet  tardius, 
difcelJit."  TuLPii  Ohf.  Med.  Lib.  i.  cap.  19.  p.  39. 

"  A  certaiii  vjomati  lecame  Infajie — aiid firmly  believed  that  Jhe 
Jjad  hcen  dead,  a7id  hy  God  fent  hack  again  into  the  ivorld,  on  con- 
dition that  Jl^e  Jhould  for  ever  after  live  without  a  heart.  But  Jhe 
ivas  exceedingly  grieved  that  God  had  ivitheld  her  heart,  and  that 
her  life  was  of'fo  different  a  nature  from  that  of  other  mortals :— - 
In  this  manner  f;e  ivas  affiiSled  for  fome  time  j  at  length,  howC' 
ver,  though  Jlovoly,  her  diforder  left  her." 


11  This  is  ftrikingly  exemplified  in  the  cafe  of  Mr.  Simoh 
Brown*  j  who,  at  the  fame  time  that  he  was  iirmly  perfuadcd 


Infanity]  A  R  R  A  N  G     M  E  N  T.  .181 

Infanlty  are,  in  many  cafeSy-  obyioufly  diftind 
from  the  two  Ipecies  of  idtai  Infanity  to  which, 
as  I  have  faid,  they  are  fo  nearly  aUied  ;  yet, 
■in  others,  it  muft  be  ackpowJedged,  the'y  ap^ 
proach  fo  near,  the  one  to-mamaeal,  and  the 
other  to  Infanity, .  as  .  to    render  it 

fometimes  no  very  eafy  matter  to  diftinguifli 
them. 

The  celebrated  Va-N  ^HfeMONT  feeitjs 
to  have  been  affeiled  with  a  temporary  deltifive 
Injanity,  of  this  fecond  i>drkty-^  •  when,  after 

tafring 

of  the  truth  of  fo  abfurd  a  notioil  as  that  his  ford  had  Icxg  heen 
annihilated  "  does  not  appear  to  have  difcovered  the  fmalleft  de- 
gree oi  ideal  Infanity.  As  the  hiftory  of  his  diforder  Is  very  cir- 
CLunftantially  related  ;  is  as  well  atteted,  as  it  is  extraordinary  ; 
and  is  at  prefent  buried  amidfl:  the  multil-arjous  contents  ot  ;fo  mif- 
ccllaneous  a  repolitory  as  a  voluminous  Monthly  Magazine  ;  Hh;dl 
make  no  apology  for  traiafcribing  it  here,  at  length.'  It  ftands 
in  the  Gentleman's  Magazine  as  follows  :  

-  - .  -  ^  t 
Oifl.  .19th,  i76!2:.  ;  ;■ 

Mr.  Urban, 

*'  You  kave  been  fo  kind  as  to  oblige  your  readers,  by 
Inferting-  rhany  curious  anecdotes  and  letters  ot  deceafed  perfons, 
fome  of  which  I  have  fent  you.,  This  gives  me  encouragement 
to  hope  that  you  will  publilh  the  following  epiftle,  .  which  I  can 
warrant  an  original.  It  was  written  by  the  Rev'd  Mr.  SIMo^r 
*  Browne  (who  was  many  years  ago  a  minifter  and  an  author  in  this 

•city) 


i82    DEFINITION    an  J  [Notion, 


tafting  of  a  preparation  of  the  Napellus^  or 
Monks-hood,  he  could  plainly  perceive,  as 
he  imagined,  that  the  feat  of  his  intelledlual, 
and  rcafoning  faculty,  was  not  in  his  hrain, 
but  in  his  Jlomach. 

,  H  E  paflage  in  his  works,  which  I  here 
allude  to,  is  of  fo  curious  a  nature,  and  his 
whimfical,  and  cxcentric  writings,  though 
Interfperfed  with  many  ingenious,  and  fomc 
ufeful  obfervations,  are  fo  little  read ;  and 
indeed,  upon  the  whole,  fo  little  deferve  to 
be  read  ;  that  I  prefume  there  are  many, 
who  neither  are  converfant  with  his  works, 

nor 

city)  to  the  Rev'd  Mr.  Read,  of  Bradford,  Wilts,  dcceafed, 
from  whom  I  received  it.  It  is  well  known,  that  for  feverat 
years  Mr.  Browne  had  a  peculiar  and  unhappy  turn  of  mind 
concerning  himfelf,  imagining  that  he  had  no  rational  fo7el  ;  at 
the  fame  time  he  xvat  fo  acute  a  difputant,  that  his  friends  faid  he 
could  reafon  as  if  he  was  poffefTed  of /tut?  fouls.  Your  publi(hi»g 
this  letter,  as  it  may  be  ufeful  to  fome  perfons,  will  oblige,  Sir, 

Yours,  &c. 

R.  W." 

'      Rcv'd  Sir, 

"  I  doubt  not  you  have  bcfcn  «ameft  with  G  od  in  tnf 
•'behalf,  fmcc you  left  the  city,  who  expreffcd  fo  much  tender 

*'  concern 


Inlanlty]  A  R  R  A  N  G.  E  M  E  N  T.   1 8:3; 


nor  defire  to  be  fo,  to  whom  a  pretty  long 
cxtradt,  relative  to  this  very iingulardifcovery, 
may  not  be  unacceptable,  or  unenlertaining. 

"  C  OE  p  I,  fays  he,  diverfimodQ  Napel/um 
**  agltare.    Ac  femel-,  cum  ejus  radiccm  ru- 
*'  diter  prasparalTem,  deguflavi  in  apice  iin- 
"  gU3d.    Etenim  quanquam  nil  deglutiveram, 
*'  multumque  falivae  fputitaveram,  fenfi  ta- 
"  men  mox  abinde,  cranium  vclut  zona  fo- 
'  rinfecus  ftringi.    Turn  demum  praecipitan- 
'  ter  aliquot  mihi  negotia  familise  obvenerc, 
*  computum  quendam  folvi,  per  aedes  ober- 
'  ravi,    atque  fingula  pro  requifito  peregi. 

Tandem 

'  concern  for  me  while  you.  were  ill  ft.    I  wifh  I  could  write 
'  any  thing  to  you  that  might  turn  your  compaflion  into  thankf- 
'  glvingj,  and  your  prayers  into  prailes.    But  alas  !   nothing  of 
that  kind  is  to  be  expected  tVom  one  who  has  lived  a  life  of  de- 
'  fiance  to  God,  under  a  chriftian  profeflion,  and  a  facred  cha- 
racter ;  and  is  now,  thro'  his  juft  difpleafure,  in  the  moll:  for- 
lorn flate  a  man  can  be  on  earth,  perfectly  empty  of 
ALL  THOUGHT,  rcjle^lion,  confcience,  or  conjideratlon defti- 
tute,  entirely  deflitute  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  Chrift,  ani 
his  own  foul,  and  the  things  both  of  time  and  eternity,  being 
uua,blc  to  look  backward  or  forward,  or  inward  or  outward,  or 
upward  or  downward  ;  having  no  capacity  of  reviewing  his 
conduft,  or  looking  forward  with  expeftation  of  either  good 
or  evil;  and,  in  a  word,  without  any  principles  of  religion,  or 
even  of  reafon,  and  without  the  common  fentiments  and  re- 
flexions 


1-84.  D  E  F  I  N  I  T  I  O  N    and  [Notion. 


*f Tandem  obvenit  mihi  (quod  nunquam 
alias)  quod  fentirera,  me  nil  intelligere, 
"  concipere,  fapere  vel  imagiuari  in  capite, 
"  pro  more  alias  folito  ;  fed  fenfi  (cum  admi- 
"  ratione)  aperte,  dilucide,  difcurfive,  atque 
**  conftanter,  tptum  iftud  munus  obiri  xwpr^se- 
"  cordiis,  &  e'xpandl  circa  os  Jlomachi,  idque 
*'  adeo  fenfibiliter  &  clare  fenfi,  imo  attente 
"  notavi,  quod  quamvis  etiam  fentirem  fen- 
^*  fum  &  motum,  fofpites,  a  capite  in  totum 
'*  difpenfari  :  quod  tota  difcurfuum  facultas 
*'  notorie  &  fenfibiliter  in  prgecordiis  eflet, 
*'.cum  exclufione  capitis,  quafi  tunc  mens 
'*  confilia  fua  ibidem  meditaretur.  Admira- 

tionis 


**  flexions  of  human  nature  ;  infenfible  even  to  the  good  things  of 
**  life,  incapable  of  tafting  any  prefent  enjoyments,  or  expc<5ting 
**  future  ones  ;  dead  to  his  children,  friends,  and  country ;  hav- 
*'  ing  no  intcreft,  either  bodily  or  fpiricual,  temporal  or  eternal, 
*'  to  value  or  mind,  but  converted  into  a  mere  beaft,  that  can  re- 
•*  lifli  nothing  but  prefent  bodily  enjoyiiients,  without  taftisg 
*'  them  by  anticipation  or  recoUeftion." 

**  This  is  my  true  condition,  thus  am  I  thrown  down  from 
*'  my  excellency.    Becaufe  I  had  not,  God  has  taken  away  the 

things  that  I  had.  Indeed  I  have  not  thofe  horrors  on  my 
**  mind  to  which  you  was  awitnefs  ;  I  am  grown  more  calm,  bc- 

caufe  more  infenfible,  and  every  day  fince  you  faw  me,  has 
"  this  infenfibility  been  growing  upon  me  ;  nor  can  it  be  remov- 
*♦  cd  without  a  miracle  ot  grace>  and  for  this  grace  I  cannot  pray, 

having 


Infanlry]  ARRANGEMENT.  185 

"  tionis  itaque&  ftuporis,  infolitae  illius  fen- 
fiitionis,  plenus,  notabain  mecum  -meas 
"  notione?,  &  examen  earundem,  atque  mei 
"  iplius,  pr^cifiori  modo,  iiiftituebam.  Et 
*'  luculentcr  inveni,  ac  trutinavi,  me,  illo 
"  tota  fpatio,  intelllgerc  &  mcditari,  longe 
"  perfpicacius.  Adeoque  non  potefl  fenfus 
"  illc,  quo  perfpiciebam  me  intelligere  & 
*'  imaginari  in  praEcordiis,  &  non  in  capite, 
"  uUIs  exprimi  verbis.  Eratqnc  gaudium 
"  qiioddam,  in  ifta  intel!e£luali  claritate. 
"  Etenim  non  erat  res  exlgu^e  durationis ; 
"  nec  miiii  dormicnti,  aiit  fomnianti,  ant  a- 

"  lioqui 

*'  having  lod:  all  fight  of  God,  and  tendeniefs  of  foul  towards 
*'  him.  Such  an  inftance  of  divine  difpleaf lire,  the  world  hardly 
"  ever  faw,  much  Icfs  one  recovered  by  divine  grace  out  of  fuch 
"  a  condition.  I  doubt  whether  you  have  room  to  pray,  but  if 
*'  you  think  you  have,  I  doubt  not  that  you  will  be  fervent  at 
"  the  throne  of  grace  in  your  requells.  But  I  am  fo  changed 
*'  that  I  muft:  firll  be  made  a  man^  before  I  can  be  made  a  chrij- 
*'  t'lan  ;  having  now  none  of  that  knowledge  or  common  fenti- 
*'  ments  on  which  a  faving  change  mull  be  r  )unded.  I  am  ut- 
*'  terly  incapable  of  any  bufinefs  in  life,  and  muft  quit  my  pre- 
*'  fent  flation,  and  think  as  foon  as  I  can,  to  be  l  etiring  into  my 
"  own  country,  there  to  fpend  out  the  wretched  remains  of  a 
*'  miferabie  life,  which  yet  lam  continaully  prompt  to  deftroy. 
**  I  thought  you  would  be  willing  to  hear  trnm  me  ;  and  though 
*'  you  cannot  be  pleafed  with  the  account,  I  am  obliged  to  give 

"  you 


iB6   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

Jioqui  morbido,  advenerat  :  fed  jejuno  & 
bencvalenti  acciderat.    Imo  qimmvis  ecjlafcs 
""^  aliquot  clntea  expertus  fueram,  notavi  tamen, 
"  illas  nil  commune  habere  cum  hoc  prxcor- 
*'  diali  difcurfu  &  fenfu  intclligcndi,  omnem 
'  capitis  coopcrationem  excludente.  Quippe 
'  quod  cum  refleclione  fenlibili  (tanquam  an- 
'  tea  praimonitus  eflem)  caput  prorfus  fcria- 
^*  ri,  refpedlu  phantaiiae,   deprehendi:  quia' 
"  mirabar,  quod  phantafia  extra  cerebrum, 
*•  in  prcccordiis,  fenlibili  operationis  feftivi- 
tate  cclebraretur.    Interim  quandoquc  in 
^'  gaudio  illo  fufpenfus  timui,  infolltus  ne  ca- 


"  fu 


s 


you  a  true  one,  and  beg  an  intereft  in  your  prayers,  which 
will  turn  to  your  own  account,  if  it  avails  nothing  towards  the 
lidvation  ot  the  moft  wretched  and  wicked  linner,  who  would 
*'  yet,  if  he  was  able,  be 

Your  friend  and  ferrant, 

SIMON  BROWNE." 

*' The  following  account  of  this  extraordinar}'  man  we  have 
'taken  from  the  Adventurer,  No.  88  ,  as  a  proper  lupplemcnt 
to  this  letter  ;  for  which  wc  are  greatly  obHged  to  our  corref- 
pondent." 

*' Mr.  Simon  Browne  was  a  diflenting  teacher,  of  exenipla- 
ry  life,  and  eminent  intcllciftual  abilities  ;  who,  after  having 
'iiecn  fome  time  feized  with  melancholy,  delilled  from  the  duties 
-of  his  fundion,  and  could  not  be  perfuaded  to  join  in  any  ad  of 

worfliip 


Infanity]   ARRANGEMENT.  187 


*'  fus  in  amentiam  deduceret :  eo  quod  a  ve- 
"  iieno  incepiflet  :  fed  praeparatio  venenl,  & 
*'  ejufdem  levlcula  taiitum  deguftatio,  aliud 
*'  infinuabanr.  Interim  quanquam  claritas, 
*'  five  ilkiminatio  gaudiofa  mei  intelle6tus^ 
"  inanfpicata,  fufpeftum  ilium  intelligendi 
*'  mcdum  redderent :  attamen  refignatio  liber- 
*'  rima   mei,   in   voluntatem   dlvinam,  me 

reflituit  in  fabbatifmum  priorem.  Tandem, 
"  poft  blnas  circiter  boras,  levlcula  quc^dam 
'■''vertigo^  bis  repetita,  me  invaiit.    A  priore 

enim  rediifle  intelligendi  facultatem  per- 
"  cepi :  &  altera,  fenfi  me  intelligere  more 

folito. 


worfliip  either  public  or  private.  His  friends  often  urged  him  to 
account  for  tkis  change  in  his  condud,  at  which  they  exprefled 
the  utmoft  grict:  and  aftonifhment  ;  and  after  much  importunity, 
he  told  them,  "  that  he  had  fallen  under  the  fenhble  difpleafurc 
"  ef  God,  who  had  caufcd  his  rational  foul  gradually  to  perijh^ 
"  and  left  him  only  an  animal  life  in  common  with  brutes  ;  that 
it  was  therefore  profane  in  him  to  pray,  and  incongruous  to  be 
*'  prefeat  at  the  prayers  of  others." 

_  "In  this  opinion,  hov/ever  abfurd,  he  was  inflexible,  at  a 
time  when  all  the  powers  of  his  mind  fubfifted  in  their  full  vi- 
gour, when  his  conceptions  were  clear,  and  his  reafoning  ftrong.'* 

"  Being  once  importuned  to  fay  grace  at  the  table  of  a  friend, 
heexcufed  himfelf  many  times  J  but  the  requcft  being  ftill  re- 
peated, 

A  a  2 


i88   DEFINITION  [Notion. 

folito.  Delude,  tametjt  pojifnodimi  aliquoties 
de  eodem  Napello  degujlaverm^  aitamen  nwi- 

"  quain  amplius   quicquam  tale  mi  hi  contig'it. 

"  Perfede  enim  multa  exinde  didici."— Van 

Helm  ON  T   Demens  Idea.  §12.    Opcnim  p, 

171. 

I  began  to  /r^^/ Monkfhood  in  a  variety  of 
ways,  j^nd  once,  after  Jlightly  preparing  the 
root,  I  faffed  it  with  the  tip  of  my  tongue.  But 
though  I  did  not  fzv allow  the  fmalkjl  particle^ 
and /pit  a  good  deal  after  it^  yet  I foon  perceived 
"  myfiull  to  he  externally  bound  tight,  as  with 
"  a  broad  bandage,    fujl  then  interve?ied  a  hurry 

"  of 

peatcd,  and  the  company  kept  ^^anding,  he  difcovered  evident 
tokens  of  diftrefs,  and,  after  Ibme  irrefolute  gellures,  and  helita- 
tlon,  exprefled  with  great  fervor  this  ejaculation  :  "  Moll:  mer- 
"  clful  and  almighty  God,  let  thy  fpirit,  which  moved  upon 
"  the  face  of  the  waters  when  there  was  no  light,  defcend  upon 
*'  me  ;  that  from  this  darknefs  there  may  rife  up  a  man  to  praife 
*'  thee." 

"  But  the  moll:  aftoniftiing  proof  of  his  intelleftual  excellency 
and  defeat  is,  A  defence  o  f  the  religion  o  f  stature  and  the  chrijlian 
revelation^  in  anfvjer  to  Tindal's  chi-ijiia?iify  as  old  as  the  crea- 
tion., and  his  Dedication  of  it  to  the  late  ^teen.  The  hook  is  u- 
niverfally  allowed  to  be  the  beft  which  that  coniroverfy  produced, 
and  the  Dedication  is  as  follows 

"  Madain 


Inianlty]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  xVI  E  N  T.  189 


fr^^'^'iy  I  fettled  an  account^  went 

"  about  the  houfe^  and  did fuch  other  bujinefs  as 
*  •  was  requijite.    At  length,  what  I  had  never 
obfcYved before,  Iwas  fenfibk  thai  I  iie'ither  un- 
dcrjlood,  coficehed,  nor  in  any  rejpeci  exercifed 
the  powers  of  under fandrng  or  imaghiatwn,  m 
the  ufual  manner^  in  the  head:  but  perceived, 
"  %vith  admiration,  plainly,  clearly,  reflectively^ 
*'  and  conjiantly,  that  this  whole  bufinefs  was  per- 
"  formed  In  the  breafl,  afidfeemed to  be  expand- 
"  ed  about  the  mouth  of  the  flomach  :  and  this 
"  I  perceived fo  fcnfbly,  and  diflinSily,  and  even 
fo  attentively  noticed,  that  though  I  at  the  fame 

ti7ne 

"  Madam, 

"  Of  all  the  extraordinary  things  that  have  been  ren^ 
*'  dcred  to  your  royal  hands  fince  your  firft  Iiappy  arrival  in  JBri- 
"  tain,  it  may  be  boldly  laid,  vvhaCi;o;v  bdpeiiks  your  Majefty's 
*'  acceptance  is  the  chief. 

"  Not  in  itfclf  Indeed  ;  it  is  a  trifle  unworthy  your  exalted 
"rank,  and  what  will  hardly  prove  an  entertaining  amufement 
*'  to  one  ot  your  Majefty's  deep  penetration,  exad  judgment,  and 
"  fine  tafte. 

"  But  on  account  of  the  author,  who  Is  the  JirJI  leing  of  the 
*'  kind,  and  yet  imthout  a  name. 

He  was  once  a  man  ;  and  of  fome  little  name  j  but  of  no 

"  \Yortk 


ipo    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

time  was  conf clous  that  fenfation  and  mot'ion 
''^  continued  to  be  dlflnbuted  to  every  part  of  the 
*'  body  from  the  head  \  yet  the  whole  difcurfve, 
or  reafoning  faculty,  as  if  the  mind  was  then 
holding  its  deliberations  there,   evidently  and 
fmfibly  refided  in  the  breaf,  to  the  total  exclufi- 
''^  on  of  the  head.    Full  of  admiration,  and  afion- 
*'  ifoment,  at  this  uncommon  fenfation,  I  flriSily 
"  attended  to  my  own  conceptions,  and  began  to 
examine  both  them,  and  my f elf,  with  more prc- 
' '  cifon.    And  I  plainly  difcovered,  and  was  fa- 
' '  tisfied,  that  during  all  that  time  I  comprehefid- 
*'  ed,  and  rejie^ed  %vith  fnore  than  my  ufual per- 

fpecuity  ; 

"  worth  ;  as  his  prefent  unparcllelcd  cafe  makes  but  too  mUnlteft  : 
"  tor  by  the  imnicdiate  hand  of  an  avenging  God,  his  very 
"  th'mking  fuhjlancc  has  for  more  than  feventeen  years  been  con- 
*'  tiniially  wafting  away,  till  it  is  -ivholly  pcrijhcd  out  of  h'uiiy  if  it 
"  be  not  utterly  come  to7iothi>ig.  None,  no  not  the  leaft  rcnicm- 
*' brance  of  its  very  ruins  remains,  not  the  Jhailoiv  o  f  an  idm  ii 
"  left,  nor  any  fenfe  that,  fo  much  as  one  finglc  one,  pertedi  or 
"  imperfect,  whole  or  diminiflied,  ever  did  appear  to  a  mind 
*'  within  him,  or  was  perceived  by  it, 

*'  Such  a  prefent  from  fuch  a  thing,  however  worthlcfs  in  it- 
*'  felf,  may  not  be  wholly  unacceptable  to  your  Majcfty,  the  au- 
*'  thor  being  fuch  as  hiftory  caanot  parallel  ;  and  if  the  lact, 

which  is  real,  and  no  fiftion,  or  wrong  conceit,  obtains  cre- 
*'  dit,  it  muft  be  recorded  as  the  moft  memorable,  and  indeed  af- 
"  tonilhing  event  in  the  reign  of  GEORCiE  the  fccond,  that  a  trart 

"  comiiofcd 


Iiifaiuty]  ARRANGEMENT.  191 


' '  fpicu'ity  :  mfomucJj  that  no  words  can  defcribe 
' '  that  fenfation  by  which  I  perceived  that  I  per- 
formed  the   offices  of  the  underfandlng,  and 
' '  imagination^  in  the  breafi,  and  not  in  the  head. 
"  There  was  a  kind  of  joyful  delight  in  that  Intel- 
"  le^tual  illumination.    Now  it  was  not  an  af 
''''  fair  off jort  duration^  nor  did  it  happen  tome 
while  I  ivas  feeping,  or  dreaming,  or  in  any 
* '  refpcci  dijordered ;    but  while  I  was  fafing  ; 
"  and  in  good  health.    And  though  I  had  be- 
*'  fore  experienced  feveral  ecftaiies,  yet  I  re^ 
' '  marked  that  they  had  no  refemblance  whatever 
"  to  this  fenfation  of  reafoning  and  under fanding 

"  in 

'  compofed  byfiich  a  thing  was  prefentcd  to  the  ilkiftilous  Ca- 
'  ROLiNE  ;  royal  confort  needs  not  be  added  ;  fame,  if  I  am 
'  not  milinformcd,  will  tell  that  with  pleifiiie  to  llicceeding 
'  times. 

"  He  has  been  informed  that  your  Majefly's  piety  Is  as  genuine 
'  and  eminent,  as  your  excellent  qualities  are  great  and  confpi- 
'  cuous.    This  can,  indeed,  be  truly  known  to  the  great  fearch- 
'  er  of  hearts  only  :  He  alone,  who  can  look  into  them,  can 
'  difcern  if  they  arc  fincere,  and  the  main  intention  correfponds 
with  the  appearance  ;  and  your  Majefty  cannot  take  it  amifs, 
it  fuch  an  author  hints,  that  his  fecret  approbation  is  of  infinite- 
ly greater  value  than  the  commendation  of  men,  who  may  be 
eafily  miftaken,  and  are  too  apt  to  flatter  their  fuperiors. 

*'  But  if  he  has  been  told  the  truth,  fuch  a  cafe  as  his  will 

"  certainly 


192  DEFINITION    and  [Motion. 

in  the  hreaji^  'which  this  excluded  all  cooper  a- 

tionof  the  head.     For  I  found  by  fenfihle  re- 
jiedlwn,  which  I  exercifed  with  as  much  aite?i' 
"  tion  as  if  I  had  beenforwarned fo  to  do^  thaf^  fo 

far  as  the  imagination  was  concerned^  the  head 
*'  was  totally  unemployed ;  for.,  I  remember^  I 
"  wondered  that  the  operations  of  the  imagination 

fjould,  with  afenjiblt  exultation,  be  pe  formed 
"  out  of  the  brain,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of 

the  breajl.  In  the  mean  time  I  was  fometlmes 
*'  heldfufpended,  in  the  ml dfi  of  my  delight,  with 
"  the  fear  lejl  thefe  unufual  perceptions  foould  be 

but  the  prelude  to  Infinity  ;  f?ice  they  took  their 


"  certainly  ftiike  your  Majefly  with  aftonilhment,  and  may  raiic 
*'  thatcommiferation  in  your  royal  breaft  which  he  has  in  vain 
*'  endeavoured  to  excite  in  thole  of  his  friends ;  who  by  the  mofl 
*'  unreafonable,  and  ill-founded  conceit  in  the  world,  have  ima- 
*'  gined  that  a  thinking  being  could,  for  feven  years  together, 
*'  live  a  ftranger  to  its  own  powers,  exercifes,  operations,  and 
*'  ftatc,  aiidto  what  the  great  God  has  been  doing  in  it  and  to 
"  it. 

If  your  Majefly,  In  your  mod  retired  addrefs  to  the  king  of 
*'  kings,  Ihould  think  of  fo  fingular  a  cafe,  you  may,  perhaps, 
**  make  it  your  devout  requeft,  that  the  reign  of  your  beloved  fo- 
"  vereignand  confort  may  be  renowned  to  all  pofterity,  by  the 
**  recovery  of  a  foul  now  in  the  utmofl  ruin,  the  reftoration  of 
**  one  utterly  loft  at  prefeut  amongll  men. 


*♦  And 


IiiCuuty]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  193 

''rife  from  a  poifon  :  but  this  fear  was  counter- 
"  acted,  by  refieSling  on  the  preparation  which 
' '  the  poifon  had  undergone,  and  the  very  f  ight 
"  tafe  I  had  t  alien  of  it.  But  though  this  unex- 
''  peeled  brightmfs,  or  joyous  illumitiation  of  my 
"  underfanaing,  gave  me  reafon  to  be  fufpicious 
"■of  this  new  mode  of perception  ;  yet  a  free  and 
' '  full  ref  gnat  ion  of  myfelf  to  the  divine  will,  at 
"  once  refiored  me  to  my  former  happinefs.  At 
"  lafi,  after  about  tzvo  hours^  I  was  twice  fei%- 

"  ed 

*'  And  lliould  this  cafe  afiecl  your  royal  brcaft,  you  will  rc- 
"  commend  it  to  the  piety  and  prayers  of  all  the  truly  devout, 
*'  who  have  the  honour  to  be  known  to  your  INIajefiy  :  many 
"  fuch,  doubtlefs,  there  arc  :  though  courts  are  not  ufually  the 
"  places  where  the  devout  refort,  or  where  devotion  reigns.  And 
"  it  is  not  improbable,  that  multitudes  of  the  pious  throughout 
"  the  land  may  take  a  cafe  to''heart,  that  under  your  Majcfty's 
"  patrcn:ige  comes  fo  recommended. 

"  Could  fuch  a  favour  as  thif^efbratlon  be  obtained  from  hea- 
"  ven,  by  the  prayers  of  your  Majefty,  with  what  a  tranfport  of 
"  gratitude  would  the  recovci  ed  being  throw  himfelf  at  your  Ma- 
"  jeJly's  feet,  and  adoring  the  divine  power  and  grace,  profcfa 
*'  himfelf, 

**  Madam 

*'  Your  [Majcfty's  moft  obliged 

"  and  dutiful  Servant." 

Thijj 

B  b 


194  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


"  edwitb  a  kind  of  flight  vertigo.  In  conje- 
quence  of  the  Jirji,  I  perceived  that  my  Intel' 
"  le^ual  factdty  was  returned ;  and  of  the  fccond, 
' '  that  its  operations  were  performed  in  the  ufual 
"  manner.  Though,  after  this,  I  feveral 
"  times  tafted  of  this  fame  Monkfhood,  yet 
"  I  never  again  experienced  any  thing  fimilar. 
*  ■  And^  indeed,  I  learned  abundantly  enough  from 
"  this  one  experiment  only.'" 

I  t  miift  appear  fomething  extraordinary, 
after  reading  the  above  account  of  the  excef- 
iive  activity  of  the  Monkfhood,  when  only 
tafted  by  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  and  carefully 

fpit 

"  This  dedication,  which  is  no  where  feeble  or  abfurd,  hut  in 
the  places  v.rhcre  the  objeft  of  his  phrenzy  was  iramedlate!)-  before 
him,  his  friends  found  means  to  fupprefs  ;  wifely  confidcring, 
that  a  book  to  which  it  fliould  be  prefixed,  would  certainly  be 
condemned  without  examination  ;  tor  few  would  have  required 
ifronger  evidence  of  its  inutility,  than  that  the  author  by  his  de- 
dication appeared  to  be  mad. '  The  copy,  however,  was  preferv- 
ed,  and  has  been  tranfcribed  into  the  blank  leaves  before  one  of 
the  books  which  is  now  in  the  library  of  a  friend  to  this  under- 
taklnc^,  who  is  not  lefs  diftinguilhed  by  his.  merit  than  his  rank, 
and  \vho  recommended  it  as  a  literary  curiofity,  which  was  in 
danger  of  being  loft  for  want  of  a  repolitory  in  which  it  might  be 
|)reicrvcd."    ^Gcnilman's  Mr.gazine  io^QSiohc):  1762.  vol.  32. 

i>.  45 3 J 


Infanitv]    ARRANGEMENT.  1 95 


fpit  out  ngain  ;  -  If  we  allow  that  thefe  won- 
derful feiifations  were  not  produced  by  fome 
other  caufe,  but  were  really  occafioned  by 

the  virulence  of  this  poifonous  phint ;  that" 

it  (liould  fince  have  been  fo  ftrongly  recom-' 
mended  by  Storck,  under  the  name  of  yfco- 
n'lte,  as — "  innocuum,  &  valde  efficax  medi- 
cament um*'  \  "  an  innocent,  and  very  pow- 
erful medicine  \''  the  extrafl:  of  which,  as 

he  informs  us,  he  has  given  in  lb  large  a  dofe 
as  twenty  grains,  and  has  fometimes  repeated 
it  three  times  in  the  iliort  Ipace  of  four  and 
twenty  hours . 

6.    Fanciful   In  €,a  n  i  t  y  h 
fpecies  of  infane  delirium,  of  the  notional  kind,  inr 
which  there  appears  to  be  very  great  adlivity, 
a?id  vivacity,   oj  imagination  ;   which  difplays 
itfelf  in  almoft  incejfant  talking,  accompanied  with 
f refluent  f allies  of  wit,  quick  repartee,  acute  oh- 

fervation^ 

%  Antoxii  Storck  LihcUus^  quo  demon  fir  atnr^  Straftioni-^ 
Hyoftyamian,  Acenitum,  non  folum  tiito  pojfc  cxhlhcri  ufu  in- 
icrno  hominihus^  •vcrum  ^  ea  effe  remedia  in  multis  morhis  niaxime 
falutlfcra,    p.  51.  Experim.  14. 

B  b  3 


196    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


fervation,  ready  invention,  lively,  and  even  bril- 
liant fancy,  and,  in  a  variety  of  refpeEis,  with 
much  appearance  of  genius  ;*  and  ariles  from  a 
rapid  luccefTion  of  vivid,  and  fprlghtly,  ima- 
ges ;  and  a  wonderful  aptitude  to  catch  at 
the  fllghtcfl  aflbclatlons,  and  to  run  tii rough 
all  the  relations,  whether  natural,  or  acci- 
dental, of  whatever  obje£l3  may  chance  to 
prefent  theml'elves. 

This  fpecies  admits  of  numerous  varie- 
ties, which  it  might  be  more  difficult,  than 

ufeful 

*  "  Vidi  foemuiam,  quae  aliquot  vicibus  Maniam  pafla  fuir, 
dum  infaiiiret,  omnia  lignto  fcrmone  proauncialle,  &  mira  facil- 
itate rythmos  iiivenilfe,  cum  nihil  tale  unquam  aliter  peificere  po- 
tueratdum  eflet  fana,  imonunqua.m  tentaverat,  a  prima  jiiventu- 
te  ManuLim  laborlbus  vidtum  libi  comparare  coa^la,  &  fatis  hebe- 

tis  ingenii."  Van  Swieten  Comment.  Aph.  11  25.  Tom, 

3.  p.  530. 

"  I  /jave  fcefi  a  ivoman,  ivtjo  had  heen  fen) oral  times  Maniacal^ 
ivfjo^  ix^'hcn  her  fits  of  hfanlty  nvere  up07i  her,  al-vjays  fpoke  in  me- 
tre, afid  had  a  ivondcrful  facility  at  finding  out  rJ}ymcs  :  t hough ^ 
at  othcj-  times ^  ivhen  171  her  right  mind,  fi^e  not  only  had  no  Jkill  in. 
this  way,  but  had  ne'ver  fo  ?nuch  as  atte?npted  any  thing  of  il.^e 
Icifid  ;  havitig  been  ufed,  from  her  youth,  to  get  her  living  by  tfje 
labour  of  tier  bands  ;  and  being  no  auay  remarkable  for  quickncfs  of 
parts'* 

 Vide  etiam  ScHEiVCHii  Obf,  Medic,  Rdr.lAh.  i.  p. 

137.  Obf,  10. 


Lifaiiity]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  197 

iifeful,  to  diftlngulfh.  Its  chief  characleriftic 
is  an  a£livc  iancy,  which  may  difplay  itfeif 
either  in  mere  fmartnefs  and  vivacity, — or  li\ 
ready  invention  and  ingenuity,  — or  in  much 
appearance  of  hne  imagination,  and  genius. 

A  R  E  T  iE  u  s  feems  to  have  had  a  view 
to  this  fort  of  Infanlty,  when  he  obferves, 
that  i^-cii  Si  i^vpfoii,  roiCL  ^rj  ys.  supviTi  rs  xc^l 
W^xfjstri,  ocg'povojj.ivj  cididsiKTO^,  (piAo<ro(piyj  ttvroiAvci^^ 

are  innumerable  ;  the  ingenious,-  and  dcuie,  hav? 
become  aJiro7iomers  without  i?iJ:rudiiGn,  phihfa- 
phers  of  their  own  creati?ig,  and  poets  by  the  im- 
mediate infpiration  of  the  mufes^ 

W  I  T  H  o  u  T  accurately  marking  the 
varieties,  it  may  be  proper  to  dlftinguiih  /sji;® 
degrees,  or  rather  oppofite  extremes,  of  fanci- 
ful Infanlty. 

I  N  the  one  though  there  is  a  lively  and 
adtive  ftate  of  the  imagination ;  yet  there  is 

more 


§  De  C.iuf.  iS/^.v.  Mori'.  D'mturn.  Lib.  r.  cap.  6.  p» 
31, 


rpS    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


more  of  fprightllnefs  than  of  impetuofity  ; 
more  of  ingenuity  than  of  volubility  ;  and,  to 
a  fuperficlal  obferver,  more  of  acutenefs  than 
Infanlty  ;  the  patient  attends  to  the  ordinary 
calls  of  appetite,  obeys  the  ufual  follcltatlons 
to  the  natural  excretions,  obferves  the  feafon- 
iible  returns  of  reft  and  fleep,  and  the  other 
Common  demands  of  nature  and  decency, 
with  tolerable  attention  and  regularity  :  his 
brain  being  more  delicately,  though  often  not 
Icfs,  and  fometimes  even  much  more,  obftl- 
nately  affc6led,  than  in  the  other  extreme  ; 
in  which  the  a^llve  ftate  of  the  imagination  is 
more  inceflant,  rapid,  and  ungovernable^ 
and,  if  I  may  fo  exprefs  it,  in  a  higher,  and 
more  vigorous  ftate,  of  excitement ;  the  vef- 
fels  of  the  head,  and  brain,  are  more  vifibly 
afFe(iled  ;  the  patient  is  lefs  attentive  to  the 
neceflary  calls  of  nature,  or  the  decent  ones 
of  propriety,  and  is  lefs  difpofed  to  fleep, 
than  he  ought  to  be. 

Most,  if  not  all,  the  varieties  of  this 
fpecies,  but  efpecially  the  higher  degrees  of 
it,  have  a  great  fimilarity  to  the  fourth  varie- 

ty 


Infaiilty]  ARRANGEMENT.  199 


ty  of  impulfive  Injanlty  ;  with  which  they  are 
fometimes  combined  ;  as  they  are,  likewife, 
not  unfrequently,  w'xxh  whimjical :  and  in  the 
higher  degrees,  the  mind  is  fometimes  in  fo 
very  active  a  ftate,  as  to  indicate  a  near  ap- 
proach to  ideal  Infanity  ;  from  which,  this 
fpecies,  in  fiich  cafes  can  alone  be  diftinguiih- 
ed  by  its  apparent  freedom  from  erroneous 
images. 

7.    In   whimsical  Insanity  the  pa- 
tient is pojfejfed  with  abfurd,  and  whimsical 
fancies, \  averfio7is,\\  fears, %  fcniples,  and fufpi- 

cions  * 


t  "  Refertuniushlflorlam  Avenzoar  "  Qiii  cum  pro- 

biisclTet,  armis  minitabatiir  fervos,  ut  farinain  in  puteum  iniire- 

lent,  &  pedibus  malaxarent,  &  facerent  placentulas."  'Z\- 

CUT  LusiTAN.  J.  Med.  Princip.  H,JI.  Lib.  i.  Hift.  37. 
laraphr.  O/tra^w  Tom.  i.  p.  74.  col.  2.  E. 

"Avenzoar  tdh  the  Jlory  of  one,  <ivho,  though  a  very  ^ood 
J,rt  of  man,  obliged  his  fewants,  by  force  of  arms,  to  thro^v 
Jlovjer  into  a  ^.i-ell,  and  to  tread  and  mix  it  -zvith  their  feet,  in  order 
ro  make  pancakes  " 

Nobilis  fccmina  ex  hypochondriorum  vitio  diuturno  In  melan- 
.  choham  tandem  mcidit,  gravem  illam  &  pcitinacem,  fed  qure  tameii 
iif-iue  to  qxpugnan  Ic  phannacis  paffa  clt,  ut  rai-o  nunc  intcrpeU 

lef, 


200  DEFINITION    and  [N  otion. 

ciom  of  which  he  is  fometimes  the  fport  of 
an  end lefs  variety  ;  and  is  pecuUarly  apt  to 
imagine  lidieulous,  improbable,  or  impoflible 
things, — to  attribute  very  great,  Important, 

or 

let,  uno  fymptomate  excepto,  quod  tenaciter  adhuc  adha^rcfcit. 
Qiiotiefcunque  etiam  inter  preces  8i  maxinie  fei  ia  verfatur,  oin- 
nes  ftipulas,  &  plamas  per  totuin  conclave  anxie  veftigar,  colii- 
git,  &:  libi  feponlt.  Accedit  &:  mirum  calceorinn  novorum  defi- 
derium  :  nam  quemcunque,  &:  ubiciinquc  rcperit  novis  calcea- 
mentis  indutum,  ad  ilium  incite  fe  con fert,  Iblvit  corrigias,  et 

Cilceos  clam  fuls  ped:b  is aptat."  Baktholini  A£la  Me- 

Jxa^  Philofjphica  Hnfnicnjia.  Velum.  4.  n.  45.  p.  148. 

"  A  lady  o  f  a  nohle  family^  having  long  hcen  troubled  ivith  an 
bvpDcbandriat  al  diforder,  fell  at  length  into  a  derpy  and  ohjlinatr, 
melancholy  y  'ivhi-Jj,  howe-ver,  has  Jo  far  given  ivay  to  medicines, 
that  it  noiv  rarely  Jho-vjs  it/elf,  except  in  one  fvmptom,  ivhich'  yet 
remains  unmoved.  Jf'ljenever  Jlje  is  engaged  about  the  mojl  ferious 
tnatters,  not  excepting  even  her  prayers,  Jhe  anxioitjly  fearchcs  about 
the  room  for  Jlra  ivs,  and  feathers,  vjhich  JJk  colleSls,  and  care- 
fully lays  hy  themftlves.  She  has  alfo,  a  vionderful  fondnefs  for 
nczvjhocs  :  and  vjhenever  Jhe  finds  perfons  ivith  new  Jhjcs  on,  he 
they  ivho  or  '•xherc  they  vj'dl,  JJye  approaches  the/n  with  caution, 
u'PJuckles  their  JJjoeSy  and  carefully  puts  thcni  upon  her  eK)on  feet" 

((  A  veiy  curious  inftaiice  of  this  variety  of  whimfical  Infanity 
19  minutely  related  by  Schenchius,  of  a  lady  cf  a  good  family, 
wbofe  Infane  avcrfion  had  gradually  expended  almoll:  to  every 
thing'j  and  in  the  mldlT:  of  plenty,  had  left  her  fcarcely  a  rag  to  her 
back,  throuo;h  her  antipathy  to  the  makers  of  all  kinds  of  apparel  ; 
had  deprived  her  of  every  kind  of  aliment,  whether  folid  or  fluid, 
cscepting  the  milk  of  one  cow  which  (he  kept  for  her  own  fole  ufe, 
and  which  had  fortunately  efcaped  her  avtrfion  ;  and  had  reduced 
her  to  the  fcanty  furniture,  for  (he  had  an  averfiou  to  all  other,_ 


InGmlry]  ARRANGEMENT.  2or 


or  extraordinary  effe£ts,  to  very  little,  iiifig- 
jiificaiit,  and  altogether  inadequate  caufes ; 
or,  on  the  contrary,  to  imagine  caufes  of  con- 
fiderable,  and  even  of  vaft  extent,  and  magni- 
tude, to  account  for  the  exiftence  of  things, 

circumftances, 


of  one  bed,  and  of  one  cup,  out  of  which  flie  would  fufFer  no  one 

to  drink  but  heifelf.  The  whole  hiftory  is  worth  reading  ; 

but  is  too  long  for  this  place.  Vide  Schenchii  Ohf,  Med, 

Rar.  Lib.  i.  p.  125.  Obf.  5. 

%  "  Alii  mingere  non  audent,  ne  diluvium  indc  oriatur."— — * 
River  1 1  Piax.  Met/,  p.  188.  col.  i. 

"  So7>/e  dare  not  make  ivatcr^  lejl  they  Jljould produce  a  deluge  tj) 
fo  doing." 

"  In  Anglia  quldam  melere  noluit,  ne  fangulnem  unlverfum 
corporis  per  urinam  excernerer,  hinc  filo  penem  arfte  per  dies  a- 
liquot  conftrinxit,  cjiio  tuniido  parum  a  morte  abfuiflet,  nifi  % 
fratrc  vi  vinculum  fuiflet  folutum."-  BARtHOLiwt  Hijl, 
Anat.  Rar,  Cent.  i.  Hift.  79.  p.  115. 

*'  Fuit  autem  alter  timcns  nt  Atlas,  qui  mundum  fuftlnere  di« 
citur,  gravatus  fub  tanto  onerc  ipfum  a  fe  cxcuterer,  atque  ipfe 
cum  illo  colliderctur,  ac  nos  quoque  cufn  illo  periremus."— — — 
Galeni  de  Locis  affell.  Lib.  3.  cap.  6k  Vide  ScHENCHIi 
Ohf.  Med.  Rar.  p.  123.  Obf.  1. 

Another  feared  leJl  Atlas,  'voho  is  /aid  to  fupport  the  ujorld^ 
Jhould  become  iveary  of  the  exccjji've  load,  and  cajl   it  from  him  ; 
atid  hcy  and  the  refl  of  mankind^  Jhoulii  pcrifhin  its  ruins." 

^*  Memini  me  faplentem  in  rellquis  omnibus  vidiflc  virum,  qui 

dufh 

C  c 


i2,07.  D  H  F  I  N  rri  O  N    and  [Notion. 


-eircumil'a'nces,  or  events,  comparativelj 
•m^^Ji,  inconfiderivble,  and  no  way  uncom- 
-mQn  or  extraordinary, 

A  s  whimflcal  and  abfurd  fancies,  fears, 
and  fuff  icions^  are  the  charaderiftic  of  this 

fpecies 

i^nm  audiviflet  plures  a  cancrabido  demorfos  fulfle  faftos  hydro- 
phobos,  licet  &  vensE  fev^iones  &  alia  optima  rcmecKa  tentata  fu- 
illent,  incidit  in  banc  opinionera,  dlrum  illud  venenum,  dum 
torte  iifdem  lanceolis  ufi  t\nircnt  chirurgi  in  venx  fedtopibus  in- 
Akneiuija,  fparilim  apud  pkires  homines  latere  pofle,  atque  denuQ 
aliis  conimunicari,  Hinc  a  nullo  moitalium  tangi  fc  patiebatur, 
ut  taniam  calainitatcm  vitaret.  Nec  conjugis  aut  libeiorum  amor 
^'  feTcVo  Xoc  pro|>Diito  abducere  poterant  prtidentem  in  reliquis 
vlriini."  Van  Svvkithn  Comment,  Tom.  3.  Aph.  1094. 

-P-  47 S- 

r.:-..' 

.  "  2- .rcnffmhuv     have  feen.  a  'inan^  of  Jhrind ?nbid  in  cjery  other 
-^■cfpcMy         bavitig  heard  that  many  people  had  been  bitten,  by  a 
mad  dogy  and  that  though  they  had  been  bled,  and  had  tried  the 
mojl  approved  remedies,  they,  had  yet  leenfiized  ivith  the  hydropho- 
bia ;  took  the  notion  into  his  head,  that,  as  the  furgcons  had proba- 
ily.  Jf/ed  the  fame  lancets  i,n  bleeding  ottjer  perfans,  that  dreadful 
p^ifon  m;ght  be,  fpretifl,  and.diffufed,  through  a  number  of  people  in 
^jchjOJiLtbe  difordcr  had  ?i^t yet  mode  its  appearance,  and  might  hy^ 
them  hp.  commftnjcaijcd  tq  others.    To  arjoid,  the^-efore,  this  calami~ 
ty,  he  ivou/d  Tiot  fuffer  a  Jingle  mortal  to  t^uch  hitn.  And  Ttotr.vith- 
Jiandlng  his  good fenfe  in  other  refpeHs,  not  even  his  effeflion  for 
his.^K^lp!)  ^^td^ehil^t'f^.y  could  TTuike  hifn.  deviate  from  this  fevere. 
rcfoiutioiii^' 

To  this  head  may  be  referred  the  Infanity  of  the  carpentefy 
Tncntiouf^d;  bjg      et/eus.  j  aiid  aaothec  fimilar.  infittncc  related  by 
.i^_^RTHOLiNE  ;  which  feem  both  to  have  owed  their  exiftence 

to 


Infanlty]   A  R  R  A  N  G  E-M  Kr  >f  T.  20^ 


fpecles  of  Infanity  ;  fo-  fuch  perfaus-  are^or^^ 
cfpecially  liable  to  it,  who  are  naturally  of 
whimfical  turn  of  mind^  or  of  timid,  irrefo-- 
lute,  and  fufpicious  tempers,  and  of  a'  weak<; 
judgment :  they  are  often  indeed  exceedingly 
mgenious,  and  much  admired  for  quick  parts, 
lively  feelings,  and  brilliancy  of  imagination  j*' 
but  their  judgment,,  may  on  a  AnSi  exanlii^^ 

natioiVj' 

ton  wbimjical hnd  ahfurd  fcar^  the  one  of  going  from  bnme^ 

and  appearing  in  public,  and  the  other  of  i  eceining  tl^t facYa- 

ment  at  church.  Vide  Are  T /El  C  A  Pi' ad.    Morb\  Di-^ 

uturn.  Lib.  i.  cap.  6.  p.  32.  A. — &  BARTUor.iNi  ABa  Mc 
dicai^  FhilofophkaHafnienfiai  Vol.  i.  n;  50.  p.  102. 

*'  u-roff\oi:'--Sufph-totcs. — Aret-«:i  Cappad.  Morb.  DiU'^i" 
iurn.  Lib.  i.  cap.  5.  p.  29.  F.  &  p.  32.  C. 

"  Cum  fufpicionibus  velut  infidiarum  libi  paratantin. — C^L. 
AURbU.  Morh.  Chronic.  Lib.    i.  cap.  6.  p.  340.  181. 

*'  Some  fufptSi — that  treachetvifs  d^Jigns  are  formed  a^ainJiV 
them." 

*' Sufpicionefquc  falfas  habeat  [a:ger,]  qiiafi-  nonnulli  velint  .■ 
eum  interimere,  aut  gladio  arrepco,  aut  inedicamento  exhibito." 

•  ALexand.  Trallian.  de  Arte  Medica.  Lib.  I i  cap.  17*. 

inter  Halleri  Art.  Med.  Princlp.  Tom.  6.  p.  90..  ■ 

«  The  patient  has  groundlcfs  fufp'^cions,  as  if  people  had  a  dejigs: 
t9  take  away  his  life^  either  by  the  fvjordy  or  ky  poifiin" 


204  P  E  F  I  N  I  T  r  O  N    and  [Notion. 

nation,  always  be  difcovered,  from  fome 
caufe  or  other,  chiefly  perhaps  from  an  apti- 
tude to  form  flight  and  hafl:y  aflbciations,  to 
be  confiderably  defedive. 

We  need  not  therefore  be  furprized  to 
find  that  the  very  ingenious,  and,  in  many 
refpe£ts,  amiable  Rousseau, — whofe  quick- 
nefs  of  imagination,  and  delicacy,  not  to  fay 
irritability  of  feeling,  were  fcarcely  to  be  e- 
qualled, — was  afFe(Sled  by  the  lafl:  variety  of 
this  fpecies  of  Infanity. 

I N  a  late  publication,  entitled  Roujfeau 
yuge  de  yean  Jacques^  confifting  of  dialogues 
between  himfeJf  and  a  frenchman,— in  which 
Rousseau  defends  his  own  chara(5tcr,  as 
that  of  a  third  perfon,  under  the  appellation 
-X)f  Jean  Jacques, — in  order  to  account  for  the 
ill  ufnge  he  had  met  with  from  mankind,  he 
fuppofes,  and  endeavours  to  prove,  that  all 
the  world  had  entered  into  a  combination  to 
bumble  his  pride,  and  defame  his  charadler. 
The  mofl:  natural  way,  he  fays,  of  explaining 
tlie.  myflerious,  and  inhuman  condu£l  of 
mankind  towards  him,  is,—*'  De  fuppo- 

»•  f  er 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  205 


**  fer  nne  ligiie  dont  Tobjet  eft  la  dlffamation 
*•  de  J.  J.  qu'clle  apris  loin  d'ifolerpour  Get 
efFet.  Et  que  dis-je,  fuppofer  ?  Par  qnelqtic 
motif  que  cette  ligue  fe  foit  formee,  elle  ex^ 
ijle  :  fur  votre  propre  rapport  elle  fembleroit 
*'  uniyerfelle,  elle  eft  du  molns  grande,  piilf- 
*'  fante,  nombreufe,  elle  agit  de  concert  dans 
le  plus  profond  fecret  pour  tout  ce  qui  n'y 
entre  pas,  et  furtout  pour  rnfortune  qui  en 
*'  eft  Tobjet.  ,  Pour  s'en  defendre  il  n'a  ni  fc- 
cours,  ni  ami,  ni  appui,  ni  confeil,  ne  lu- 
miere  ;  tout  n*eft  autour  de  lui  que  pieges, 
menfonges,  trahifons,  tenebres.  II  eft  ab- 
"  folument  feiil,  et  n*a  que  lui  feul  pour 
"  reflburce  ;  ill  ne  doit  attendre  ni  aide  ni  af- 
fiftance  de  qui  que  ce  foit  fur  le  terre.  Uii 
potitlon  ii  finguliere  eft  un  wi'iqtie  depuis 
'**  Texiftence  du  genre  humain."  -f 


_______  tt 


To  fuppofe  a  league,  the  obje5i  of 
which  is  the  dejamaiion  (j/'Jean  Jacques, 
whom  It  hath  taken  care  to  render  an  uncofi' 
nedfed,  and  infidated  beings  for  that  very  pur- 


"•pofc. 


•f-  JELoussEAU  Juge     Jean  Jacques,  Dialogues,  p.  307. 


D  E  F    N- 1'  T  1  O  N    and  [Notion. 


pofe,  ]^,ut,why,'*  he-  continues,  '*  do.  I.  fhy 
*' fuppofe  ?  Whatever  w.ere  the  motives  which 

gave  rife  to  this  league,  /V-  actually  exifts : 
* '  according  to  your  own  account  it  appears  to  be- 
"  unlverfal ;.  It  Is  at  leajl.  great y  powerjul,  and 
"  numerous  ;  //  adis  in  concert y  with  the  mofi 
"  profound  fecrefy  with  regard,  to  all  who  oj'.c  not. 

concerned  In  It ^  and  ejpeclally  with  regard  to  the 
*'  unfortunate  being  who  Is  the  object  of  It,  'Jo- 

defend hmifelf  agaln/l  It,  he  has  no  fuccour,  no 
^''friend,  no  fupport,  no  council,  no  light.  He- 
"  is  fur  rounded  with  nothing  but fnares,  J alfJjoods^ 

treacheries,  and  darknefs.  He  Is  abfolutcly  a- 
"  lone,  and  has  no  refource  but  In  hlmfelf  He 
''^  has  no profpecl  oj  aid,  or  ajjijiancc,  from  any 
'''' one  per f on  upon  earth.  Afiluatlon  fo  fingular 
"  is  ^«  unique,  andhas  had  no  parallel  from  the 
"  creation  of  the  human  race  to  this  day.''' 

Th  e  prepofeffions,  and:  fancies,  of  the 
whimfically  infane,  being  ftrong  and  lively,  they 
are  ufualJy  o^llinate  both  in  opinion  and  con- 
du6l;  aadTomctimes,,  when  their  imaginati- 
ons, arc  deeply  imprefled  with  violent  fufplci- 
on,  or  other  erroneous  notions,  and  the  dif- 

order 


Infanity]  A  R  R  A  N  ©  E  M  t  N  t.  207 

order  is  bordering  \3poti  iMl  Injmky^  tefpfeti* 
ally  of  the  phrenitic  kind  j  they  arc  difpofcd, 
when  any  convenient  opportunity  prefents  it- 
lelf,  to  commit  both  vvhimiical^  an4  harrid, 
ads  of  violence. 

8.  I  call  that  impui^sive  Insanity,  in 
which  the  patient  /j  impeLleO  to  do^  or  fay^ 
what  is  highly  imprudent ,  itnproper,  unreafona-' 
He,  impertinent,  ridiculous,  or  abfurd,  without 
fujicient,  with  very  Jlight,  or  with  no  apparent 
caufe. 

O  F  this  fpcci^^  thefc  ate  feVerai  Varieties. 
Thus  a  man  may  be  reckoned  to  be  affected 
with  impulfive  Jnfariity,— (i)  When  impelled 
into  imprudent,  abfurd,  or  otherwifc  incbn* 
gruous  condud>,  by  an  irrefiiliblc  propenfity^ 
uninfluenced  by  any  paffion,  dr  ^ny  other  ap- 
parent motive,  and  merely  from  an  incapacity 


to  Feflrain  his  wayward  inclinations  : 


•  'jrnXiv\j^t\s<ri.  Aret^i  Cappad.  CauJIs  &  Sign. 
.  STtrh,  Chron.  Lib.  z.  cap.  6,  p.  32,  F. 


2o8  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

(2)  When  impelled  by  the  pafiion  of  anger, 
or  refentmeiit,  or  impatience  of  oppofition  or 
reftrauit,  fuch  pafnon  being  liable  to  be  ex- 
cited by  the  flightefl:  and  moil  trifling  caufe  :  — 

(3)  When,  by  a  kmd  of  hyflericai  aftedion, 

he 

Some  run  Kvifhout  Jioppl/ig,  an  J,  not  l-nini'in^  ivhiibcr  they 
are  goings  return  hack  again  to  the  fame  place** 

*'  Graffata  eft  etiammim  diu  multumque  patrum  noftrorurn 
memoria,  ftiipenda  Iiilaniie  quaedam  fpecies,  turn  alibi,  turn  piae- 
cipue  in  Geimaiila.  Qua  cujiifcunque  condltionls  homines, 
Tnaximc  vero  fedentaiiae  operse  plebes  correptae  :  fubito  futores 
quidem  &  fartores  atque  raftici,  calceis,  vcftibus,  aratroquc  ab- 
je£tis  ;  horrendo  fahandi  furore  perciti ;  certis  per  iutervalla  lo- 
cis  eonvenientes  ;  line  omni  decubitu  &  opSofudrjV^  ut  Hippo- 
crates appellat,  faltantes,  choreas  ad  extremum  ufquc  vitse 
fpiritum,  nili  per  vim  ad  tempus  cohiberentur,  ducebant.  Scepe 
ctiam  eoufque  furoris  progreffi  funt,  ut  fibi  ipfis,  ni  caverctur, 
vim  interrent.  Qulbufdam  horum  in  petras,  nullo  difcrimine 
fjifto,  impingentibus  :  nonnuUi  vero  Rheno,  aliifque  fluviis  fal- 
tando  fe  pr^cipitantibus.    Unde  ab  argumento  D.  Viti  chorea:, 

amentise  illaec  Ipecies,  nomen  invenit,  &c.  Schenchii  Olf, 

Med.  Rar.  Lib.  i.  p.  136.  Obf.  8. 

So  lately  as  in  the  7ncmory  of  our  fathers^  there  raged  for  a 
iong  time^  and  very  generally^  both  elfe^vhere,  and  more  efpeciaUy 
in  Germany^  an  amazing  fpecies  of  Infanity  :  ivhich  feized  upon 
all  conditions  of  men^  hut  efpecially  upon  the  lovjer  forts  of  people, 
luho  nuere  engaged  in  fedentary  occupations.  On  a  fuddvn,  fhoe- 
tnakers^  tqylors^  and pcafaiits^  leaving  their  flutes ^  their  garments^ 
<utd  their  ploughs,  were  feized  ivith  a  dreadful  rage  of  dancing, 
Oftd  meettng  at  intervals  at  certain  pUias,  would  dance  ivithout 

going 


Infinity]  ARRANGEMENT.  209 

he  is  impelled  to  laugh,  cry,  fing,  or  tlie 

like ;  % 


going  to  hcd,  or  Jit  ting  do~xi^n,  and,  rtj  Hippocrates   terms  it^ 

Oodog-a^TlV,    if  not  refrained  for  a  vjhile  by  compulfoni,  till  they 

dropped  do-xvn  and  died.     They  often  even  proceeded  fo  far  as,  if 

not  prevented,  to  lav  violent  hands  on  therifelves.     Some,  running 

any  ivhere  indifcnminatdy,  v:ould  hruife  themfelves  among  ft  ones, 

and  againft  rocks.    Some,  in  their  dancing  vjould  ruJI?  into  the 

Rhine,  and  other  rivers,  and  droivn  themfelvcs.    From  a  hind  of  v 

analogy,  this  fpecies  of  Infanity  v:as  called  St.  Vitui^s  dance." 

 Sec  a  oreat  deal  more  on  this  lubjeft,  inScHENcHil 

Ohf.  Med.  Rar.  Lib.  i.  p.  135.  136.  Obf.  7,  8,  g. 

A  fomewhat  fimllar  epidemic  delirium,  returning  at  in- 
tervals, is  mentioned  by  Lord  Moneoduo,  who  def- 
cribcs  from  his  own  knowledge,  a  particular  inftance  of  it,  in  his 

Ancient  Metaphyfics  ;  or  the  Science  of  UnivcrJ'als.  Vol.  i.  See 

the  Monthly  Rcvie-vj  iot '^Q'^i.  1779.  Vol.  61.  p.  197. 

Something  not  unlike  this,  fo  far  as  relates  to  the  irrelidable 
impulfe,  is  the  following  cafe  extraded  from  Van  Sweiten. 

"  Vidl  egregium  virum,  qui  nimils  lucubrationibus  fanltatem 
perdiderat,  ilico  vertigine  moleftiffima  correptum,  fi  attenta 
mente  aufcultarct  alios  narrantes  etiam  brevem  hiftoriolam.  Nihil 
autem  moleftius  fibi  acciderc  querebatur,  quam,  dum  aliquid  in 
memoriam  revocare  vellet,  tunc  enim  fummopere  angebatur,  i- 
mo  quandoque  in  animi  deliquium  incidebat,  cum  fummas  laffitu- 
dlnis  fenfu  :  nec  poterat  a  fcrutinio  hoc  femel  incepto  deftftcre,  licet 
Omni  modo  ohluBaretur  :  fed  cogebatur  invitus  in  eo  pergere,  donec 
dcficerct."  Comment.  Tom.  3.  Aph.  1075.  p.  413. 

"  I  have  fcen  a  man  of  great  viortb,  ivho  by  late  and  intenfe 
,  Jludies  bad  fo  ruined  his  healthy  that  he  was  inftantly  feizcd  ivith 

a 

D  d 


210  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


like  :  %  (4)  When,    by  the  quick,  and 

varying,  /;;2/>«^j  of  imagination,  he  is  difpo- 

fed 


€t  ve>y  trotihlefome  guldhicfs,  if  he  attentively  lijlened  but  to  the  re- 
lation of  a  Jhort  Jlory,  He  complained  that  nothing  was  fo  painful 
to  him  as  the  attenipt  to  recollcH  any  thing  :  that  on  fuch  occajions 
be  felt  the  mofl  exquifte  diflrcfs,  and femctimcs  even  fell  into  a 
fwoon^  accompanied  'with  a fcrfatiou  of  extreme  •wearinefs  :  and 
yet  he  could  not  defifl:  hom  the  feaveh,  when  he  had  once  begun, 
though  he  ftrove  with  all  his  might  ;  but  was  obliged  to  proceed 
in  it,  even  againft  his_inclination,  till  he  fainted  aivay;** 

^  "  In /«f/<sr«cZ'o//m  affeftuum  varietas,  &  frequentilTima  mu- 
tatio,  ut  nunc  axiiant^  furant^  fleant^  rideant^  iino  &  unico  vul- 
lu  diveriiffimorum  afte6tuum  figna  appareant,  per  conftridionem 
■&  relaxationem  villorum  cordis,  ex  altcrnatim  ingruentibus  phan- 

tafiis,   cum  apprehenlione  boni  vel   mali."  Schenchii 

Ohf,  Med.  Mar.  Lib.  i.  p,  135.  Obf,  2. 

*'  ?7;e  melancholy  experience  great  variety,  and  frequent  changes 
■nf  the  pajiojis.  They  by  turns  fing,  rage,  weep,  and  laugh  ;  and 
fometimcs  the  cxprejfious  of  different  pafjions  appear  iti  the  counte- 
nance at  the  fame  time  ;  as  the  mind  is  varioufly  affeSled  ivith  the 
apprehenfon  of  good  or  ill,  by  the  alternate  exiflence  of  dffcrent 
fancies,  producing,  according  to  their  nature,  fometimes  conflri£lion^ 
and  fometimes  relaxation,  of  the  fibres  of  the  f^eartJ* 

*'  Quidam  Wildenbergius  tribus  diebus  continuis  ad  rifum  pro- 
nus  erat,  ut  quicquid  ageret  vel  ipfe,  vel  alii,  rifum  ipfi  moveret. 
Js,  cum  forte  inter  concionandum  mulier  dormiens  de  fubfellio  ca- 
deret,  &  omnes  neliqui,  qui  id  viderant,  riderent,  coepit  etiam 
Jpfe  ridere,  ita  ut  fibi  tcmperare  a  rifu  amplius  non  polFct  tribu» 
diebus  continuis,  &  noftii,  ex  quo  adnaodum  debihtatus. — Im- 
moderatum  iftum  rifum  fubfecuta  eft  ingens  melancholia,  moeror, 
■Cttriftitia."  lb.  Obf.  3. 


^''jin  inhabitant  0fTriUenhirg,  ivas  fer  three  days  together 

1» 


Infanity]   ARRANGEMENT.  211 


fed  to  be  witty,  waggifli,  mifchievous,  pro- 
fane, infolcnt,  or  obfcene. 


A  mixture  of  the  Jirji^  and  fourth  variety 
of  this  fpecies  of  Infanity,    is  excellently 
delineated  by  the  judicious  Dr.  Monro,  Phy- 
fician  to  Bethiem-Hofpital,  in  the  following 

lines  :  High  fpirits  as  they  are  generally 

**  termed  are  the  firft  fymptoms  of  this  kind 
*'  of  diforder  ;  thefe  excite  a  nian  to  take  a 
*'  larger  quantity  of  wine  than  ufual,  (for 
*'  thofe  who  have  fallen  under  my  obfervatiuii 
*'  in  this  particular,  have  been  naturally  very 
"  fober)  and  the  peribn  thus  affctS^ed,  fronx 
**  being  abftemious,  refer ved,  and  modeft^ 
"  (hall  become  quite  the  contrary  ;  drink 
*'  freely,    talk  boldly,  obfcenely,  fwear,  fit 

"  up 


fo  difpofed  to  laugh,  that  -whatever  he  did  himfcif,  or  faw  others 
Jo,  became  an  object  of  laughter.  The  occafion  of  this  extraordi- 
nary rifibiUty  zvas  asfo/lo-ivs.  It  happened  that  tt  .voinan,  being  o- 
vertakcn  withjleep  during  fcrmon  time,  fell  from  her  feat.  The 
lyhtte  congregation,  ivho  faw  it,  laughed  at  the  accident  •  and  he- 
joined  fo  heartily  in  the  laugh,  that  from  that  time  he  could  not  re- 
frain from  laughing  for  three  days  and  nights  fuccejii-ely  •  in  con- 
fequence  ef-xvhich  he  was  greatly  dtbilitate'd.—This  immoderate 
laughter  was  fucceeded  by  deep  melancholy,  grief  and  dejedion:* 
 • — bee  another  cafe  of  a  fimilar  nature.  lb,  Obf.  4. 

D  d  2 


2   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


up  till  midnight,  fleep  little,  rife  fuddenly 
from  bed,  go  out  a  hunting,  return  again 
immediately,  fet  all  his  fervants  to  work, 
and  employ  five  times  the  number  that  is 
neceffary  ;  in  fhort,  every  thing  he  fays  or 
does,  betrays  the  moft  violent  agitation  of 
mind,  which  it  is  not  in  his  own  power 
to  corre6t,  and  yet  in  the  midft  of  all  this 
hurry  he  will  not  mlfplace  one  word,  or. 
give  the  leaft  reafon  for  any  one  to  think 
he  imagines  things  to  exift,  that  really  do 
not,  or  that  they  appear  to  him  different 
from  what  they  do  to  other  people:  they 
who  fee  him  but  feldom,  admire  his  viva- 
city, are  plcafed  with  his  failles  of  wit, 
and  the  fagacity  of  his  remarks  :  nay  his 
own  family  are  with  difficulty  pcrfuaded  to 
take  proper  care  of  him,  until  it  becomes 
abolutely  necefTary  from  the  apparent  ruin 
of  his  health  and  fortune."  || 

I  N  moft  of  thefe  cafes  it  is  difficult,  and 
L  many  perhaps  impoffible,  to  difcover  by 

what 

II  Monro's  Remarks  on  Dr,  Battie'?  Treatife  en  Mahcfs. 
7« 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  213 


what  notions  the  patient  is  influenced  ;  or 
whether  there  is  any  other  caufe  for  fnch  ir- 
regular impuiie?,  til  an  merely  an  a6l:ive  ftatc 
of  the  brain  :  fo  that  one  would  almofl  be  in- 
clined to  make  an  additional,  or  third  article 
m  the  general divi/ion  of  Infanity,  under  this 
title  of  IMPULSIVE  Insanity  ;  and  to  con- 
fider  the  wnV//Vj  juft  enumerated  as  fo  many 
diftin^l  fpecies  ;  fince,  however  obfcure  the 
prevailing  notion^  or  notions,  may  be,  it  is  ob- 
vious that  fuch  madmen  are  void  of  the  re- 
^r^/V;/ of  prudence,  or  propriety,  and  are  ir- 
refiftibly  impelled  to  act,   and  talk,  as  they 

do.  The  fame  may  be  faid  of  fanciful 

Insanity. 

But  as  wc  cannot  cafily  conceive  of  con- 
duct without  motives  ;  or  of  motives  without 
notions  ;  and  muft  therefore  fuppofe  notions, 
of  fome  kind  or  other,  to  be  the  immediately 
antecedent  caufes  of  every  voluntary  a£tion  ; 
we  may  fafely,  I  think,  reft  fatisfied  that 
the  condu6t  of  thefe  forts  of  patients  is  regu- 
lated by  notions,  however  they  may  conceal 
themfelves  from  our  obfervation. — Whatever 

thefe 


ZI4    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


thefe  notions  may  be,  there  is  reafon  to  believe 
that  they  are  as  often  the  confequence,  as  the 
caufe,  of  the  increafcd  adtivity  of  the  brain, 
and  imagination  ;  and  arc  as  various,  and  mo- 
mentary, as  the  fancies,  and  abfurdities,  of 
filch  patients,  are  various,  and  momentary. 

Madmen  of  this  fort,  and  efpecially  of 
the  fecond  variety,  often  fee,  and  lament,  the 
abfurdity,  and  folly,  of  their  condudt. 
Though  incapable  of  refifting  the  inclination 
they  feel  towards  it,  yet  they,  not  unfre- 
qucntly,  fevcrely  repent  of  it  in  their  calmer 
moments  :  §— fo  that  they  may  juftly  apply 
to  themfelves  the  noted  paffage  of  the  poet, — 

**  Sed  trahit  invitam  nova  vis  :  aliudquc 
cupido, 

"  Mens  aliud  fuadct.    Video  meliora,  pro- 
boque ; 
Deteriora  fcquor  :  J 

Difcretion 

§  ARETiEi  Cappad.  Caujs  &  Sign.  Mori,  Diuturn.  Lit. 
I.  cap.  5.  p.  30.  C. 

%  OviDii  Metamorph,  Lib.  7.  y  &c. 


Infanlty,]  A  R  R  A  N  G-E  M  E  N  T.  215 


'  '•  D  'lfcretion  this,  affeSiion  that  perfuades, 

I  fee  the  right,  and  I  approve  it  too, 
*'  Condemn  the  wrong— and  yet  the  wrong  pur^ 
fue;'  * 

and    may  with   propriety  fay  with 


Arajpas  in  Xenophon, — Auo  yoi^  e(ptj,  2  Kvpe, 

(^.yocQri  rl  Igt  kcc\  kocki^,  ocfxa,  )ca,Xuv  t6  otl^^uv 
'i^yT^v  s^yoCf  x,a]  roajTo.  cc^u  (in'Kiroci  re  xoti  « 
(^KsToct  vpoiTTen'*  aXKcc  S-/;Xov  on  Suo  eg-ov  "^u^k, 
jca]  cTUv  fzev  ^  ufuS^  xpar??,  tcc  kuXu  TrpurjeTUi' 

•— '*  I  plainly  perceive  that  I  have  two  fouls 
*'yor  if  I  had  but  one,  it  could  not  be,  at  the  fame 
time,  both  good  and  bad 'y  it  could  not  at  once 
"  aB  both  virtuoufly  and  vitioufly ;  or  will,  in 
"  the  fame  moment,  to  purfue  and  to  avoid  the 
fame  conduct.     But  having  two  fouls,  when 
*'  the  good  one  prevails  I  a£i  virtuoufly,  and  when 
the  bad  one  prevails  I  difgrace  fnyfelf  by  vice" 

9.  In 

*  Garth. 

f  Xenoj-hont,  J}e  Cyrl  Injlitutione,  Lib.  6,  p.  32S 


2i6  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

9.  In  SCHEMING  Insanity  the  patient 
ih'mlis  himfelf  either  endozved  with  better  natural 
talents,  and  with  more  penetration  and  fagaaty, 
or  improved  with  greater  acquifttions  of  knowledge 
and  experience,  or  more  enlightened  by  the  efpecial 
favour  of  heaven,  or  more  fecure  offuccefs,  by 
the  happy  concurrence  of  power,  inter ef,  oppor- 
tunity, orfome  other  advantageous  circumfiance, 
than  mofi  other  men  ;  and,  either  by  his  fuperior 
knowledge,  or  cunning,  capable  of  doing  great 
things,  which  few,  or  none,  but  himfelf  are  a- 
hlc  to  accompUp '.-or  at  leafi  feels  an  irreffiib'e 
inclination  to  be  engaged  in  fame  fcheme,  or 
Cchcnus,  of  traffic and,  as  he  thinks  himfelt, 
\inot  aUually  the  moft  knowing,  at  lealt  a- 
mon^t'a^  moft  knowing  of  mankind   fo  he  is 
fecure  of  that  fuccefs  which  the  fimple  and 
ignorant  may  wlfli  for,  but  the  wife  and  pro- 
vident  alone  can  command. 

This  fpccles  of  Infanlty  has  feveral  va- 
rieties ;  and  manlfefts  itfelf  in  literary,  ph. 
Mical,  alchemical,  trading  pohtf  .  amh- 
t  oL  h  roical,  or  any  other  fort  of  fchemrng 
S  If  conceit  Is  one  of  its  ftnking  features  • 
audit  is  nearly  allied  to  the  next  fpecies  :— 

10.  The 


nfanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  217 


10.  The  vain,  or  self-impokt ant 
Insanity  ;  with  which  they  who  are pojejed^ 
have  a  very  exalted  opinion  of  their  own  imaginary 
dignity^  confeqiicnce^  opulence^  elegance  and  fi- 
nery of  drefs,  charms  of  perfon  or  manners,  fenfe, 
iear?iing,  or  offome  other  valuable  quality  with 
which  they  fuppofe  themf elves  dignified,  or  adorn- 
ed. 

The  chara6leriftics  of  this  fpecies  of  Iti- 
fanity  being  either  an  exceffive,  and  even 
chlldifli,  vanity ;  or,  a  ferious,  and  fome- 
times  a  folemnly  ridiculous,  felf-importance  : 
its  appearances  are  as  various  as  may  be  the 
obje6l3,  and  forms,  of  abfurd  pride,  or  filly 
vanity  ;  and  difplay  themfclves  in  the  ex- 
hibition of  almoft  every  conceivable  variety 
of  prepofterous  pomp,  and  puerile  affedlation. 

Those,  therefore,  whofe  Infanity  is  of 
this  kind,  difcover  it — in  an  exceffive  attenti- 
on to  drefs,  and  ornament  ;  and  are  either 
led  by  vanity  to  a  folicitous  neatnefs  in  their 
perfons  and  attire,  of  the  charms  of  which 
they  appear  futficiently  confcious ;  or,  what 
is  not  lefs  common,  render  themfelves  com- 

♦ 

"  E  e  plctely 


2i8  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


pletely  ridiculous,  by  adorning  themfel^es  in 
the  moft  trifling,  tawdry,  and  fantaftic  tafte, 
by  the  moft  childifh  felf-admiration,  and  by 
every  kind  of  gefture  which  can  indicate  the 
prevalence  of  confummate  vanity  :— in  the 
moft  romantic  talk  of  their  own  wealth,  and 
pofleftions  : — in  ftatelinefs  of  gait,  voice,  and 
manner  : — in  vaft  afFe£lation  of  fcience,  fa- 
gaclty,  and  learning  in  perpetual  efFuhons 
of  nonfenfe  for  knowledge  : — in  an  oftenta- 
tious  difplay  of  fcraps  of  Greek,  Latin, 
French,  or  other  languages,  which  they  re- 
peat upon  every  occafion,  without  much  re- 
gard to  fenfe,  or  propriety  ;  and  even  in  the 
uttering  of  an  unmeaning  jargon  ;  which 
they  wifti  to  pafs  upon  the  hearers  for  fpeci- 
mens  of  their  great  attainment,  and  wonder- 
ful Ikill,  in  the  languages. 

The  following  is  a  cafe  of  f elf -important 
infanity,  juft  becoming  maniacal, 

"  Russicus  quidam  mcrcator, — Za- 
CHARiAS  Pankieviez,  dives,  linguarum 
<'praeter  Rufficam,  Hebraicae,  Graecae,  La- 
^  tin^i,  Germanicae,  &  Poloiucae  ex  parte 


Infanity]   A  R  R  x\  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  219 


*'  gnarus,   artifque  mllitaris  peritus,  fupra 

"  oiiines Jibl  Japere  videtur  :  Non  ita  pridem' 

nobis  moiiftravit  chartas,  cum  hac  infcrip- 
"  tioiie  ;  Zacharias  Pankieviez,  D.  (j. 
rex  Poloni^e,  imperator  Mofcov  'tce,  magnus  dux 
Liithuanicie ^  Kujfiae^  Priiffice,  Maforlae^ 
Eo  ipfo  tempore  afleveravit,  fe  dufturum 
feptingentas  uxores  ad  exemplum  Ifraelita- 
**  rum  regis  Davidis,  treccntas  &  quiiiqua- 
"  ginta  vinculo  matrimonii  copuiatas,  &  tot 
*'  pellices.    Idem  nobis  nuper  dixit,  creditc 
mlhi,   quamvls  vos  fitls  do£tores,  me  plus 
"  mtelligere,  quam  vos  ambo,  nequc  me  in  toto 
*'  regno  Polon'ia  doSi'torem  ejfe':    dicite  mihi 
*'  numerum  venarum  &  articulorum  in  cor- 
"  pore  humano,  &c.  &c."  ^ 

j1  Ruffian  merchant,  whofe  name  was  Za- 
CHARY  Pankieviez,  who  was  rich,  and 
"  had  a  /mattering  of fever  al  languages  hejides  the 
^'  RuJJian,  as  the  Hebrew,  Greek,  Lutin,  Ger- 
man^  andPoUfi,  and  had fome Jkillln  the  military 

''art 

%  BoNETi  Medicin.._Septe)ttriaHel,  CalUtttitCi  Lib*  I.  cap*. 
«6,  Tom.  I.  p.  186.  col.  2. 

E  C  2 


220   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

4 

art,  imagined  himfelf  wlfer  than  tFie  refl: 

of  mankind  :  Not  long  ago  he  Jloowed  us 

fome  papers,  with  this  fuperfcript'wn  ;  Za- 
"  CHARY  Pankieviez,  by   the  grace  of 
God,  King  of  Poland,  Czar  of  Mufcovy, 
great  Duke  of  Lithuania,  Ruffia,  Pruffia, 
Mafovia,  &c.    j^t  the  fame  time  he  ajfured 
**  us,  that,  in  imitation  of  David,  King  of  If- 
rael,  he  would  have  feven  hundred  wives,  of 
**  which,  three  hundred  and fijty  floould  be  joined 
to  him  in  matrimony,  and  the  refl  concubines* 
* '  He  lately  told  us  that,  if  we  would  believe  him, 
"  he  could  affure  us  that,  though  we  were  doc- 
*'  tors,  he  knew  more  than  both  of  us,  and 
"  that  there  was  not  a  more  learned  man  than 
himfelf  in  the  whole  kingdom  of  Poland  ; 
"  tell  me,  faid  he,  the  number  of  veins,  and  ar- 
*f  ticulations  in  the  human  body,  ^c.  &c,'* 

II.  In  Hypochondriacal  Insanity 
ihe  patient  is  for  ever  in  difrefs  about  his  own 
STATE  OF  HEALTH,  has  a  variety  of  dis- 
agreeable, and fometitnes  painful  feel- 
;iNGS,  to  which  he  is  ever  anxicufy  attentive^ 
and from  which  he  can  w^/y  divert  bis  thoughts:, 

either 


Inilinity]  ARRANGEMENT.  221 

either  to  biifnefs,  or  amuferaejit  :  and  though  the 
caiifes  of  ihcfe  dijagreeable^  ond  pa'mftd  feelings^ 
are  ufually  objlinate,  and  fometimes  incurable^  yet 
his  fear,  anxiety,  and  conceits,  are  fuch  as  at  befi 
indicate  an  irrational,  and infane,  imbecility 
OF  mind;  and  often  lead  him  to  famy  himfelf 
threatened,  or  wajiing,  tvith  dreadful  diseases, 
which  exiji  only  in  his  dijlrejfed  imaginati- 
on. 

Some,  when  the  dlfeafe  has  gained 
ground,  and  become  much  exafpeiated  ; 
when  unremitted  brooding  over  their  own 
unhappy  ftatc,  and  miferable  apprehenfions, 
has  produced  an  habitual  gloom,  and  dejecti- 
on of  mind  ;  are  afflicted  with  a  conftant  im- 
preliion  of  melancholy,  which  neither  bufiHefs 
nor  amufement  can  obliterate,  which  no  ef- 
forts, of  themfelves,  or  their  friends,  can  o- 
vercome  ;  which  yet  they  can  afcribe  to  no. 
particular  caufe,  and  which  feems  to  have  no 
fixed,  or  determinate  objeCl :  and,  while  they, 
fcarcely  can  defcribe,  or  even  diftinguifh, 
what  it  is  that  dlftrefles  them,  experience  a 
perpetual  depreffion  of  fpirits,  a  tedium 
viT-flE,  which  deftroys  all  power  of  enjoy- 
ment 


222    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

ment,  and  often,  amldft  a  profulion  of  every 
earthly  bleffing,  renders  life  an  infupportable 
burden,  from  which  death  alone  affords  any 
profped  of  relief. 

I N  proportion  as  this  gloom  continues, 
and  increafes,  life  becomes  daily  more  and 
more  intolerable ;  and  they  complain  of  a 
frequent  intrufion  of  momentary  temptations 
to  deftroy  themfelves,  and  to  quit  a  wretch- 
ed ftate  of  being,  in  which  they  not  only  no 
longer  have  the  fmalleft  hope  of  happlnefs, 
but  experience  an  hourly  increafe  of  the  moft 
grievous  prefent  mifery,  and  ftlU  more  griev- 
ous future  apprehenfions. — Such  temptations 
recur  with  more  frequency,  and  violence,  as 
the  dlforder  acquires  ftrength  ;  and  too  often 
andina(Stual  suicide. 

This  fpecies  of  Infanity,  like  moft  of 
the  others,  affumcs  various  forms  ;  three  of 
which  arc  peculiarly  ftriklng,  and  prominent, 
and  may  be  juftly  confidered  as  conftltuting 
/^r^^dlftlndt  varieties,  (i)  Some  of  its  un- 
happy vidims,  and  efpecially  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  difeafc,  at  the  fame  time  that  they 

experience 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  223 


experience  the  moft  diftreffing  nervous  feel- 
ings, for  which  they  fear  there  is  no  remedy  ; 
and,   being  aware  that  their  heads  arc  a  good 
deal  difordered,  exprefs  frequent  apprehenfi- 
ons  left  they  fhould  lofe  their  fcnfcs  ;  no'o- 
therwife  appear  irrational  than  in  the  general 
gloom  with  which  they  are  afFe6ted,  in  view- 
ing their  afflidion  as  of  vaft  and  unparalleled 
magnitude,  and  in  bearing  the  prefcnt  with- 
out patience,  as  they  look  to  the  future  with- 
out hope.  (2)  There  are  many  who,  be- 

fides  this  diftrefs,  impatience,  and  defpon- 
dency,  fancy  they  have,  or  are  threatened 
with,  at  one  time  or  other,  almoft  every  dif- 
order  which  can  afBi6t,  or  deftroy,  the  hu- 
man frame.  (3)  Others  torment  thcm- 

felves  with  fome  one  unconquerable  dif- 
order ;  and  there  is  no  one  they  more  fre- 
quently make  choice  of,  for  this  cruel  pur- 

pofe,  than  the  venereal.  It  is  common  to 

the  three  varieties^  except  in  the  laft  ftages, 
when  they  are  degenerating  into  fome  of  the 
other  fpecies  ;  and  efpecially  mto pathetic  Iti' 
fantty  ;  to  be  as  anxious  and  impatient  about 

a  cure,  as  they  are  without  hope  of  obtaining 

.  .  one. 


224  D  E  F  I  N  I  T  I  O  A    and  [Notion. 


one.  But,  when  the  Infanlty,  from  hypo- 
chotidriacal,  pathetic,  the  patient  is 

apt  to  lofe  light  of  the  hodlly  diforder  ;  and 
to  confider  the  whole  as  a  difeafe  of  the  mind, 
which  medicine  cannot  reach  ;  or,  rather, 
as  a  well  grounded  mental  affeftion,  origina- 
ting from  a  juft,  and  irremediable  mental 
canfe, — from  lome  unpardonable  tranfgreffion 
of  the  moral,  or  divine  law,  with  which  the 
ikill  of  the  phyfician  has  no  concern  ;  ai^d  of 
which  the  knowledge,  and  repentance,  come 
too  late. 

Hypochondriacal  Infanity,  in  all  it  varie- 
ties, is,  /  cannot  fay  universally,  ac-^ 
companied  with  flatulency,  and  fuch  o- 
ther  fymptoms  of  a  difordered  flate  of  the  fto- 
mach  and  bowels,  as  are  commonly  efteemed 
by  medical  writers,  both  antient  and  modern, 
to  be  infeperable  companions  of  what  they 
call   Melancholia  Hypochondriaca, 

or  Hypochondriac  Melancholy.  ||    I  have  indeed 

ieen 

t)  **  Tenia  vero  meknchollae  fpecies  eft,  o^ixs^  flatuhntam  ct  a 
prsecordiis  hypochondrlacam  appellant,  ob  inflammata  circa  ftoma- 
chum  prsecOrdia  provcnlens  :  qu£e  modo  auram  quandam  tnalig- 
atiorm,  modo fubjlantia  huvtoris  fartemz-ii  ceiebrum  furfum  tranf- 

mittit.— — 


InUniry]  ARRANGEMENT.  225 

feeii  feveral  cafes  of  this  fpccies  of  Infanity  in 
wiiich  there  was  not  only  no  appearance  of 
any  remarkable  flatulency,  but  1  have 
thouo'ht  I  faw  ^ood  reafon  to  doubt  whether 
the  caufe  of  the  difeafe  was  in  any  degree 
feated  In  the  vlfcera,  and  have  been  flrongly 
iuchned  to  fufpe£l  tliat  it  had  taken  up  its  ha- 
bitation wholly  in  the  head  ;  becaufe  while 
there  were  none  of  the  fy mptoms  of  indigefti- 

on 

mittlt.  Commvinla  omnium  [JpcclcruMl  figna  funt,  mcfus 

irl/lltia,  &c.  At  (jui  cx  pi  tCcortUis  hoc  vitii  conceperunr, 

cos  teftantur  cnidltatcs,  accidi  riiBus,  ardor,  &  ipfornm  gravi- 

las,  Sec.  Ad  ha:cciiiocl  f:\mincipicntem  morbtim  quam  raa- 

jorem  jam  effeftiim  mel;incholica  comitantur  fymptomata,  quod- 
quc  Hec  leventur,  concodiouc,  vel  exci  etione,  vel  multis  flati- 
bus,  vel  vom  ity,  vel  luftLi.  Cum  autem  nullum  cx  his,  aut 
ccrte  paiica  eveniunt,  melancholica  qux  apparent  figna  cerebium 
primario  affici  in  totum  lucci  contagione  melancholici  farentur" 
 Paul  \£gixet.  de  Re  Medica.  Lib;  3.  cap-  14.  \}.  20i 

"  A  third /pedes  of  melancbojy  is  ivhat  is  called  flatulent,  and 
from  the  feat  o/"//;(7  ^^///t'^T/I' hypochondriacal,  arifng  from  an  inflam- 
matory affcSllon  of  the  pr^ecordia  about  the  region  of  the  fomach  ; 
i<jhencc  fometimes  is  tranfmitted  to  the  brain  a  kind  of  malignant 

vapour,  fo7netimcs  a  portion  of  the  atra  bills  itfelf.  Fear, 

dejetftion,  &c,  are  the  common  fymptoms  o  f  all  the  fpecies.  Bn't 

they-xvhofe  diforder  originates  in  the  pi  KCordia,  are  likcivife  irotilled 
w///' indigeftion,  ^wV/j  acid  eruftations,  w/V-^  heat,  and  a  fe?fe  of 
weight  inthofe  parts,  &c.  yir.r.  over  fymptofns  of  melan- 
choly attend  the  difeafe^  as  -well  in  the  beginning,  as  in  its  advance- 
ment, 

F  f 


2:26  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

on  unlverfally  attributed  to  this  diforcler,  there 
were  very  probable  figns  of  an  immediate  af- 
fe£lion  of  the  brain  ;  fuch  as  duhiefs  of  hear- 
ing, nolfe  in  the  head,  dizzincfB,  fcnfe  of 
weight,  numbncfs,  and  ftupefa£llon,  and  of- 
ten a  kind  of  paralytic  tremor  of  the  hands, 
on  extending  them,  and  of  the  tongue,  on 
putting  it  out. 

Nor  can  I  fay  ih^t  Infanity  attended  with 
flatulency,  and  thofe  other  fymptoms  which 
;ire  generally  efleemed  hypochondriacal,  is 
milverfally  accompanied  with  fuch  fymptoms 

as 


merit,  and  are  relieved  either  hy  digejlion,  or  evacuation  f'Ool^ 
or  the  difcharge  o  f  -vjind  doivmvards,  or  vomitings  or  emulation. 
But  ivhen  no  fuch  jymptotns,  or  very  fe-VJ  of  them,  appear,  the 
J^?nptoms  of  melancholy  -xvhich  difcover  themfch>es,  are  ovjing  to  a 
primary  ajfeflion  of  the  hrain  itjclf,  in  confequeyice  of  the  melancho- 
ly humour  being  in  immediate  contrail  -iMith  it,  and  affeHing  that 
organ  alone^ 

■  '  Vide  etiam  Cjel.  Aurel.  Mori,  Chronic.  Lib.  i. 
cap.  6.  §  182.  p.  340. — Aret^i  Cappad.  JDe  Caufis  Cs* 
Signis  Morh.  Diuturn.  Lib.  i.e.  5.  p.  29.  C— Nrc  PISO^f. 
dc  cognnf.  fe"  curand.  Morb.  Lib.  cap.  33.  Tom.  i.  p.  164. — 
Sydbnhami  Oper.  Univ^rf,  Loco  fupra  cirato. — Schenchii 
Obf.  Med.  Rar,  Lib.  i,  p.  1 29.  Obf.  i.  Melancholia  Hypo- 
chondriaca  Dilucidatio. — ^Zacut.  Lusitan.  Prax.  Hijior. 
Lib.  r.  Opcrum  Tom.  2.  p.  208.  &  DePr«x.  Medic.  Admi- 
rand,  p.  43.  Obf.  9,  10. — Vai^  Sweiten.  Comment.  Aph, 
2 1 ©8.  Tom,  3.  p.  504. 


Iiiianity]   A  R  R  A  N  G  E  INI  E  N  T.  227 


as  I  have  defcribed  to  be  effential  to  hypo- 
chondriacal Inlaiilty.  Many  inftances  might 
be  produced  to  the  contrary  ;  and  though  it 
fhould  be  allowed  that  in  its  early  ftages,  it 
ufually  exhibits  fuch  fymptoms  ;  yet  muft  it 
be  acknowledged,  as  I  have  already  obferved, 
that  they  commonly  difappear  when  it  de- 
generates into  pathetic,  and  fomc  other  fpecies 
of  Infanity. 

I  am  fatisfied,  however,  that  the"  difeafe, 
as  I  have  defined  it,  conftltutes  a  complete  and 
diftln(9:  fpecies,  agreeing  in  a  great  meafure 
with  the  Melancholia  Hypochondriac  a  the  an- 
tients  ;  comprehending  a  few  cafes  which 
they  perhaps  would  have  excluded,  and  ex- 
cluding a  few  which  they  appear  to  have  ta* 
ken  in,  but  which,  on  account  of  the  nature 
of  the  delirium,  my  plan  obliges  me  to  refer 
to  fome  of  the  other  fpecies. 

I  T  is  common  to  all  conflituttons  :  and  ic 
moft  generally  induced  by  a  fedentary  life  ; 
clofe  application  to  ftudy,  or  to  whatever 
deeply  engages  the  attention,  or  affections  ; 
habitual  exceffes  in  eating,  drinking,  or  ve- 

F  f  s  ticry  ^ 


228    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


nery  ;  or  whatever  elfe  may  occafion  a  difor- 
dered  ftate  of  the  nerves  and  vifcera  :  and, 
while  it  lays  a  foundation  for  every  fpecies  of 
Infanity,  is  peculiarly  apt  to  run  into  the  fm- 
Jttive, .  delujive,  or  patheUc. 

S  Y  i)  E.N  H  A  M,  in  his  Dijfertatio  Eplfto- 
lari's  ^^^GuL'iELMUM  Cole, -when  treating 
on  the  hyjierkal  difjiife^  has  given  us  fom'e 
good  incidental  oblcrvations  on  this  dlforder  ; 
but  feems  to  have  fallen  into  an  e-rror,  in  con- 
founding it  with  the  hyfterical  difeafe,  from 
which  it  appears  to  be  perfectly  difl:in(5l, 
though  it  may  fometimes  arife  out  of  it,  and 
not  unfrequently  borrows  a  few  of  its  fymp- 

toms.  After  affcrting  that  the  hypochondrU 

acal diforder,  in  men,  is  the  fame  as  the  hy A 

terical,   in  women  ;    he  adds  "  Quin  et 

omnibus  tarn  ^v/?^;7C/V,  quam  hypochondria- 
quibus  fcilicet  jam  malum  inolevit,  id 

accidit,  ut Jlatus  quandoque  nidorofos  e  ven- 
*'  triculo  emittant,  quoties  aliquid  comede- 
*'  rint,  licet  moderate  tantum  &  pro  ratione 
*'  appetitus,  turn  etiam  aliquando  actdum  e- 
"  rudent,  acetum  fapore  referens,  quoties  in 

OS 


Infanlt}']  ARRANGE  M  E  N  T.  229 


OS  afcendent  :  laenmcmpe  utrobiqne  co^ti- 
one,  &  fuccis  proiiule  a  uatiixali  ftatu  intei'- 
*'  verfis." 

*'  N  E  Q_u  E  hoc  tantum  nomine  infellces 
*'  funt,  quod  corpus  ita  male  afFedtum  &  qlia- 
fi  conquallatum,  ad  inftar  aedium  ruinas 
iindequaqne  mlnitantmm,  tantum  non  cor- 
ruant  &  fatifcat,  cum  tnagts  adhiic  anlmo 
*'  t^grotent^  quam  Corpore  :  cum  cnim  defpcratio 
plane  infanah'ilh  de  hiijujce  morbl  nahirdjii, 
Indignantur  admodum  quoties  aliquls  vel 
mim'uiam  de  fiinitate  recuperanda  Ipcm  in- 
jecerlt ;  facile  interim  credentes  omnia  fe 
'  quaecunque  in  homines  cadere  pofi'unt  iii- 
*'  commoda,  qu;.eque  adeo  fert  rcrum  natura, 
"  perpeffuros,  trifViflima  qua?que  fibi  ominaur 
*'  tes,  &c.  &c.  -  —  Neque  hoc  tantum  manir- 
*' acis  accidit  &  furiolis,.  quos  dicimus,  fed 
*'  etiam  illis,  qui,  fi  hos  animi  impetus  excir 
'*  pias,  prudentia  ac  judicio  valent,  quique 
*'  et  meditationum  profunditate,  et  fapientia 
orationis  longe  eos  fuperant,  quorum  men- 
"  tes  his  cogitationum  aculeis  nunquam  fue- 
"  rint  excitatae.    Ita  iit  noii  fme  ratione  ob- 

'*  fervaverit 


«4 

it 
« 


230    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


fervaverit  Aristoteles,  inelanchoHcos  ca- 
*'  teris  ingenio  pra^are^ 

A  T  vero  tarn  horrendus  anlmi  flatus — 
**  noil  aliis  competit,  quam  lis,  qui  diu  mul- 
*'  tumque  cum  hoc  morbo  confli£tati,  tan- 
*'  demque  fubjugati  qua(i  vidtas  manus  dant  : 
*'  maxime  fi  res  adverfae,  animi  moerores,  fol- 
*'  licitudinefve,  nimia  in  literarum  ftudio  af- 
"  liduitas,  atque  animi  contentio,  cum  prava 

corporis  diathefi  confpirantes,  oieum  caml- 

no  adjecerint/'  § 

*'  All  hyfterical,  and  hypochondriacal  per- 
JonSy  are  apt  when  the  difeafe  has  taken  deep 
*'  root,  to  bring  up  offenfive  wind  from  the  Jio^ 
*'  mach,  after  eating,  with  the  mofi  perfe^  mo' 
*'  deration,  what  their  appetite  feemed  to  require : 

*'  they  have  fometimes,  alfo,  eru<Stations  of  an 
*'  acid/«^//^r,  which,  as  it  rifes  into  the  mouth, 

tafies  like  vinegar  ;  the  digefiion  being  both 

ways  impaired,  and  the  juices  confequently  de- 

"  generated  from  their  natural flate" 

„  Nor 

§  Sydenhami  0/fr.  Univerf,  p.  39a-3*4». 


IndiDlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  231 

'  *'  Nor  is  It  their  cnly  unhappinefs,  that  the  body 
*'-isfo  difordered,  and Jhattered^  as ^— like  a  houfe 
"  threatning  to  fall —hut  jujl  to  holdups  and  keep 
**  together  ;  hut  they  are  ft'iU  more  difcafed  in 
*'  mind,  than  in  body  :  for  as  incurable  dcfpair  is 
*'  of  the  very  nature  of  the  diforder,  they  cannot 
*'  hear  that  any  one Jhoidd  Juggeji  to  them  the  fmalU 
**  eft  hope  of  their  recovery  ;  readily  believing 
"  that  it  is  their  lot  to  fuffer  whatever  ills  man  can 
**  undergo^  or  nature  iftflidl ;  and  therefore  forebo* 
"  ding  the  worfi  of  misfortunes  that  can  befal  them^ 
"  —Nor  is  this  the  cafe  with  what  we  call  fnani- 
**  acal^  and  furious  madmen,  only  ;  but  with  fuch 

"  alfo,  who,  excepting  thefe  agitations  of  mind,  are 
*'  eminent  for  prudence  and  judgment;  and  who  for 
"  depth  of  thought,  andwifdomof  difcourfe,  far 
"  furpafs  other  men,  whofe  minds  have  never  been 
* '  harrajfed  with  thefe  tormenting  notions.  So  that 
it  was  not  without  reafon  that  Aristotle 
obferved,  that  the  melancholy  excelled  the 
*'  reft  of  mankind  in  ingenuity/' 

**  This  very  dreadful  fate  of  mind  is,  how- 
ever,  only  experienced  by  thofe,  who,  after  a 
long  and  ohftinate  fruggle  with  the  diforder^ 
* '  are  at  length  totally  fubdued ;  and  efpecially 

when 


232   D  E  F  1  N  I  T  I  O-N    and  [Notion. 


when  misfortunes,  grief,  anxiety,  too  clofe 
''^  plication  iG  f  tidy,  and  attention  of  mind,  con- 
fpire  with  the  difordercd  conftitution  of  body, 

t6  add  oil  to  the  fame  which  was  already 
*^  kindledr 

T  o  the' above  general  account  of  hjpochon- 
driacal  Inilmity,   let  me  add  the  following 
more  particular  one,  taken  from  a  few  very 
limilar  cafes  which  fell  under  my  own  ohfer- 
vation  in  a  fiiort  fpace  of  time,  and  in  all  of 
which  it  proceeded  nearly  In  the  fame  courfe. 
 They  were  all  men  of  rather  a  robuft  ha- 
bit of  body,  had  ufed  an  a£live  life,   but  had 
indulged  in  late  hours,  and  too  much  irregu- 
larity, dlflipation,  and  drinking.    The  pulfc 
was  generally  full,  and  there  was  a  frequent 
tendency  to  fever,  which  had  been  often  in- 
creafed,  together  with  an  Increafe  of  all  the 
hypochondriacal  fymptoms,  on  catching,  or 
feeming  to  catch,  cold;  an  accident  to  which 
the  patients  were  exceedingly  liable.  The 
tongue  was,  for  the  mod  part,  covered  with 
a  kind  of  jTlllucid,  bluKh  white,   film,  an 
appearance  not  uncommon  in  feveral  of  the 
fpecies  of  Infanitv,  and  was  generally  moift. 

The 


Iiifanlryl  ARRANGEMENT.  233 


The  blood  was  of  a  dark  colour,  and  of  a  loofe 
texture,  but  had  a  due  proportion  of  ferum. 
Such  patients  were  always  fenfible  of  their 
diforder,  complained  of  a  hurry  of  fpirits, 
and  confulion  of  the  head,  which  were  ex- 
ceedingly dlftreffing  to  them  ;  and  of  an  ina- 
bility to  keep  the  mind  from  dwelling  upon 
certain  thoughts,  fuch  as  the  hopelefs  and 
deplorable  nature  of  their  unhappy  diforder, 
or  the  pains  in  various  parts  of  the  body, 
whicli  greatly  harraffed,  and  diflurbed  them  ; 
and  which  they  had  not  the  power  to  avoid 
thinking^  of,  and  attending  to,  how  much  fo- 
ever  they  might  wifh,  and  endeavour,  to  di- 
vert their  minds  from  thefe  ceafelefs  obie6ls 
of  their  diftrefs,  and  anxiety.  In  this  fituati- 
on  they  were  ufually  laughed  at,   or  chided, 

by  their  friends  and  acquaintances,  for  com- 
plaining when  but  little  ailed  them,  and  fuf- 

fering  themfelves,  as  they  termed  it,  to  be 
hypped^  and  vapoured,  with  imaginary,  or 
trifling  evils,   for  want  of  great  and  real 

•  ones.  As  the  diforder,  however  increafed, 

it  aflumed  a  more  alarming  appearance.  The 
unhappy  fufFerer  grew  quite  melancholy ;  had 

G  g  Grange, 


234  D  E  F  I  N  I  T  I  O  N    and  [Notion 


ftrange,  find  terrifying,  thoughts  of  the  dan- 
gerous ftate  of  his  foul ;  which,  though  una- 
ble to  fupprefs,  he  was  ftill  fenfiblc  were  ow- 
ing to  the  difordered  ftate  of  his  body.  This 
fenfe,  however,  of  his  dlforder  at  length 
went  off ;  he  then  thought  himfelf  quite 
well,  as  to  bodily  health  ;  and,  falling  into  a 
religious  melancholy,  imagined  he  had  com- 
mitted fome  unpardonable  crime  ;  and,  def- 
pairing  of  ever  regaining  the  favour  of  God, 
was  difpofed  to  feize  the  firft  opportunity  of 
<leftroying  himfelf ;  but  if,  through  the  vi- 
gilance of  his  friends,  no  fuch  opportunity 
could  be  obtained,  he  has  ufually  become 
maniacal,  or  phrenitic,  and  fome  patients  of 
this  fort  have  died  raving. 

This  diforder  is  fometimes  rapid  in  its 
progrefs,  and  foon  ends  fatally  ;  but  is  for 
the  moft  part,  flow,  and  tedious,  and  void 
of  danger,  though  moft  uncomfortable,  and 
tormenting  ;  and  many  have  recovered  in  eve- 
ry ftage  of  it.  They  who  are  afflided  with 
it  are,  in  general,  anxious  to  be  cured,  and 
<too  fond  of  medicines,  but  have  not  the  refo- 

lutioii 


Infaulty]   ARRANGEMENT.  235 


lutlon  to  adhere  to  any  :  for  if  they  do  not 
fpeedlly  experience,  as  they  rarely  do,  the 
wifhed  for  benefit  ;  their  impatience  to  be 
free  from  their  prefent  mifery,  is  perpetually 
urging  them  to  change  a  medicine,  in  which 
they  have  no  longer  any  confidence  :  where- 
as there  is  fcarcely  any  fpscies  of  Infanlty,  in 
which  a  fteady  perfeverance  is  more  requiiite  ; 
or  the  noted  adage  of  the  celebrated  Justus. 
LiPSius  more  frequently  verified  — "  Illos 
ab  atra  bile  cur^t  Jies,  et  quies.  ||— "that— time- 
compofure,  are  of  much  importance  in  the 
cure  of  atrabilious  dijorders. 

12.  Pathetic  Insanity  exhibits  a 
flriking  and  melancholy  pi(fl:ure,  of  the  em- 
pire of  the  paflions.  In  this  /pedes  of  Infanity 
fome  ONE  PASSION  is  in  full,  and  complete pof- 
feffion  of  the  mind ;  triumphs  in  the  favery,  or 
defolatlon,  of  reafon  ;  and  even  exercifes  a  defpo^ 
tic  authority  over  all  the  other  afeSlions,  which 
are  rarely  permitted  to  exert  thenfelves  but  in  the 
aid,  or  to  appear  but  in  the  train^  of  this  mafler 


II  VidcTutpii  Olf,  Med.  Lib»  i.  cap.  19.  p.  39. 


226   DEFINITION    W  [Notion. 

pajfion.  It  is  diji'mguijhed from  the  other  fpec'ies 
of  Infantty  in  which  the pajions  are  concerned^  or 
intermix  themfelves,  partly  by  the Jlriking  features 
o/*^  PREDOMINANT  PASSION,  which  is  fir 
everprefent,  and,  though  in  fome  cafes  aJfiduQuJly 
^ifS^^fi^t  ^'-f J  ^^ojf.',  for  ever  confpicuous  ;  hut 
chiefly,  and  more  certainly,  by  the  a b fence,  at 
the  fame  time,  of  the  chara£lerlfl:ic  fymptoms 
of  all  the  other  fpecies.  //  may  be  farther  ob- 
Jerved,  that  all,  or  nearly  all,  the  varieties  of 
this  fpecies  of  Infanity,  are  accompanied  with 
dlftrefs,  dcje6llon,  anxiety,  or  reftlefsnefs  of 
mind.  For  even  love,  when  exceffive,  and 
inordinate,  is  all  agitation,  or  diilrefs  ;  is 
fcarcely  a  moment  at  eafe  ;  but  for  ever,  as 
its  views  of  the  obje£t  of  affeclion  vary,  whe- 
ther from'  real,    or  merely  from  imaginary 

caufes,    dejedied,   anxious,   or  refllefs :  

PRIDE  is folicitous  to  fupport  its  imaginary 
dignity  ;  jealous  of  its  honour  ;  and  tormented 
by  every  real,  or  apparent  failure  of  that  ref- 

pe<ft  which  it  thinks  its  due  :  — ^  and'ovoii 

ENTHUSIASM,  however  Intoxlcated  wlth  re- 
ligious elevation,  and  rapture,  not  only  ori- 
ginates, for  the  moft  part,   from  religious 

difirefs ; 


Iniaultj]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  237 


diflrcfs but  is  often  interrupted  by /w/^riWj 
of  deprejjion,  is  at  beft  ardent  and  refllefs  ;  and 
not  un frequently  tim!.dtuoiis,  and  turbulent  ; 
as  might  abundantly  be  fhown,  were  it  necef- 
lary,  by  taking  but  the  flighteft:  view  of  the 
hiftory  of  FANATICS,  and  fanati^m. 

Pathetic  Infanity  may  arlfe  from  bodily 
dlfeafe  ;  or  it  may  grow  out  of  fome  other 
fpecles  of  Infanity  ;  or  it  may  proceed  from  an 
habitual  indulgence,  or  accidental  eicite- 
JTient,  .of  fome  immoderate  pallion,  defire, 
or  propenlity  of  mind  ;  and  dilplays  itfelf  in 
their  unreafonablenefs,  and  excefs  ;  in  an  un- 
remitted, and  intenfe  attention  to  their  ob- 
jed;,  in  preference  to,  and  fometimes  almoft 
to  the  excli'don  of,  every  other;  and  is  as- 
various — as  violent,  and  permanent  paifions, 
—as  nngratified,  or  unconcjuerable  delires, 
may  be  vai  ious. 

Insanity,  therefore,  of  this  fort,  may 
exhibit  itfelf  under  a  great  variety  of  forms  ; 
of  which,  however,  the  following  feem  to  be 
Jthe  moft  common,  and  obvious  ; — inordinate 
fovf,  'j^^^o^fy-i — "^avarice,  mifanthropy. 


2^8    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

pride,  anger,  averjion,  fiifp'^- 

ciofij   bajhfulnefs,   irrcfolution,  tmidi- 

ty,  fear,  or  terror,  g^^^f  ^i/?^CA>  

taJgla,  fuperfiition,  enthujiafm,  def 

pair  ;  —to  which,  poffibly,  might  be  add- 
ed feveral  others. 

Hence  arife  sixteen  varieties  of 
pathetic  Infanity,  which,  from  the  paffioii 
predominant  in  each,  may  be  properly  term- 
ed— (i)  amorous,  (ji)  jealous,  (3)  ava- 

rlclous,  (  4)  mifanthroplc,  (  5  )  arrogant, 

—(6)    Irajclble,  (7)    abhorrent,  (8) 

fufplclous,  (9)  bajhful,  (10)  thnld,  

(lO  Sorrowful,  (12)   dl/lrefful, — .(13) 

nofmglc,  (14)  fuperjlltlous, — -(15)  enthu- 

Jiqfllc,  and  (16)  defponding. 

Most  of  thefe  have  a  tendency  to  urge 
their  unhappy  vidims  to  fuicide  ;  or  to  fome 
other  defperate  a<Sl  of  violence  to  themfclves, 
or  t0  thofe  about  them  ;  and  they  are  all  ex- 
ceedingly prone  to  degenerate  into  fome  of 
the  fpecies  of  ideal  Infanity, 

When  pathetic  Infanity  arifes  from  fud- 

den 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  239 


deii  bodily  difeafe,  as  a  fever,  fome  change 
produced  in  the  animal  fyftem  in  confcquencc 
of  lying  in,  fnpprcffion  of  the  menfes,  of  the 
haemorrhoids,  healing  of  old  ulcers,  or  the 
like,  it  is  ufually  violent,  and  rapid  in  its 
progrefs  towards  fome  of  the  fpecies  of  ideal 
Infanhy  ;  and  often,  whether  it  becomes  ma- 
Tiiacal,  incoherent,  ov  phrenitlc,  is  accompanied 
with  great  diftrefs,  the  moft  horrid  defpair, 
and  an  inceflant  and  invincible  propenfity,  in 
the  unhappy  fufFerer,  to  put  an  end  to  a  be- 
ing, the  continuation  of  which  appears  to  be 
but  the  continuation  of  the  moft  intolerable, 
and  hopelefs  mifery, 

i^i)^ Amorous  Infanlty. — Every  inftance  of 
that  extravagance,  and  abfurdity,  in  which  the 
paflionof  love  is  abundantly  fruitful,  may  be 
contidered  asa  degreeof  Infanity.  Many  writers 
have  adually  viewed  it  in  that  light.  %  Pau* 

^  See  the  references  in  Zacuti  Lvsitani  de  Medic  Prin» 
dp.  Hijlor.  Lib.  I.  Hift.  40.  Operum  Tom.  i.  p.  yg.  Para- 

phrafis  in  the  beginning  ;  and  again  at  the  conclulion.  See  al- 

fo  his  Prax.  Hijior.  Lib.  i.  cap.  8.  Oper,  Tom.  2.  p.  211. 
212.  de  Amore  infanoy  Ji'tJe  erotica,  paflim.  ■  ■  ■  ClCERONia 
Tufculanar,  J^ifputdt,  Lib.  4.  cap,  35,  where,  fpeaking  of  love. 


240   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


Lus  ^GiNETA  J  reckons  immoderate  love 
among  the  fpecles  of  Infanity,   describes  its 
fymptoms  with  accuracy,  and  makes  Tome  ju- 
dicious obfervatlons  on  its  nature,  and  on  the. 
method  of  cure.    But  we  ought  to  diftinguifli 
between  the  ordinary  fymptoms  of  this  un- 
ruly and  Intemperate  paflion  ;  which  a  phi- 
lofbpher,   perhaps,   may  thin-k  it   right  to 
place  in  a  very  eminent  rank  among  the  fpe- 
cics  of  moral  Infanity  ;   and  fuch  other  lefs 
frequent,   but,   unfortunately,  too  common 
fymptoms,  as  evidently  indicate  a  dlfbrdered 
ftate  of  the  brain,  and  which,  all  the  world 
will  allow,  have  a  jufl  title  to  take  their  fta- 
tion,  among  the  other  fpecies  of  Infanity. 
This  is  the  diforder  which  I  mean  to  dlftin- 
goifh  by  the  appellation  of  amorous  Infanity  ; 
a  diforder  which  is  not  illdefcribed  by  Avi- 
CENNA,  as  I  find  him  quoted  by  Zacutus 

,  LUSITANUS, 

he  fays,  — "  nam  ut  ilia  prateream,  quae  font  furor is*^— for 
to pafs  o'ver  thofe  circuvtjiances  of  lon}e^\:hich partake  of  ^l^dn&k.^'^ 

•  Sennerti   Opir.  Tom.  2.  p.   522.  col.  2.  Tozzi 

Optr.  Tom.  I.  p.  115. 

,  X  Be  Re  Medica,  Lib.  3,  c.  14.  p.  22,  1,  30. 


Iiifanirv]  ARRANGEMENT.  241 


LusiTANus,  ill  thefe  words  ;*  "  Ell:  er- 

*'  go  amantium  Lnfcinia,  follcitudo  melancholi- 
*'  ca,  ex  immoderato  amore  profedla,  variii* 
*'  que  fubinde  parhematlbiis  aiiimum  exagi- 

"  tans   "  The  Inlanlty  of  lovers  is  an 

"  anxious  kind  of  melancholy ,  proceeding  from 
*'  immoderate  love,  and  fometimes  agitating  the 
*'  7nind  with  a  variety  of  pajfions.''^ 

T  H  I  s  variety  of  pathetic  Infanity  may,  I 
.  think,  not  improperly  be  defined  as  follows  : 

Amorous  Infanity  is,    every  Infanity 
arifingfrom  love,  in  which  the  character  of  that 
^pajfwn,%  and  the  effect s\  of  its  predominancy, 

are 

*  Prax.  Hijlorlar.   Lib.  i.   Oper,   Tom.  2.    p.  312.  col. 
A. 

f  ScHENCHii  Oh f.  Med.  rar.  Lib.  i.  p.  137.  Obf.  2.  * 
p.  134.  Obf.  5.    In  this  laft  obfervation,  the  Infanity  was  be- 

cjome  phrcnltic  :  See  the  cafe  quoted  above,  in  the  text,  at 

p.  153. 

X  Inftances  of  this  are  all  the  cafes  nf  Infanity  from  concealed 

love  ;  feveral  of  which  will  be  referred  to  in  the  next  note  :  »i- 

Alfo  all  cafes  of  fjicide,  and  other  violent  5u^s,  and  effeiils,  which 

liav« 

H  h 


^42  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

are  either  obvioujly  vifible,  or,  though  caut'wiijly 
concealed^  may  be  difcovered  by  a  Jkilful  and  at- 
tentive 

iiavc  proceeded  from  love ;  nnd  bave  indicated  an  Infanity,  whic|i 
■did  not  plainly  difcover  iffelt  till  thofe  hl^s  were  committed,  of 

■attempted,  or  thofe  effects  produced.  Vide  Zacuti  Lu- 

■SITANI  de  Medic.  Pr'mcip.  Hijior.  Lib.  i.  HilK  40.  p.  80. 

■col.  2.  A.^.  ScHENCHli  0^'.  Med.  .rar.  Lib.  i.  p.  i^^. 

Obf.  5. 

_  *'  Juvenis  Brltannus,  impenfius  (ut  folet  ilia  jetas)  amori  in- 
■dulgeiis,  perculfus  tuit  adeo  vchementer  ex  Inopinata  matrimonii 
repulfa  :  ut  obriguerit  inikr  llipitis  ;  fedens  in  fedili  fua 
}caTO)(^0f,  £\'e  dctentus,  five  congelatits,  per  integrum  diem, 
retinenlque  continenter  eundem  fitum,  et  oculos  non  minus  aper- 
tos  ;  atquc  olim  fimillimum  adfedtum  dellneavit  Galenus,  Com- 
ment. 2.  in  Prorrh,  cap.  55." 

*'  A  qua  figura,  ne  latum  quidem  cum  recederet  ungnem  :  ju- 
Taffes  certo,  te  ftatuam  potius  quam  homincm  videre.  Adeo 
quippe  fuere  omnia  non  niodo  rigida,  fed  plane  immobilia.  Ve- 
4-um  ubi  exclamaietur,  alta  voce  ;  rem  iplius  meliori  eflc  loco, 
&c  cupitam  habiturum  amicam  ;  modo  ad  fc  reverteretur  ;  proli- 
iiit  confellim  ex  fedili,  et  quafi  excitatus  ex  protundiore  fomuo, 
rediitadfe,  difruptis  protinus  illis  vinculis,  quibus  ipfum  ar6le 
iigaverat,  tenaciflima  base  catoche."  -Tulpi  i  Obf.  Med. 
iib.  I.  cap.  22.  p.  43. 

*'  A  young  7nan^  a  native  of  Britain^  indulging  in  a  violent 
(tffe^ion,  as  youth  are  apt  to  do,  ivas  fo  flocked  at  an  unexpc^td 
rcfnfal  on  his  propbfing  marriage ^  that  he  became  as  rigid  as  a  log 
•ffwood;  ft  ting  in  his  chair  quite  cataleptic,  or,  as  it  ivere,  fxed, 
and  congealed ^  for  a  ivhole  day ;  ahvays  continuing  in  the  fainc 
.fqfture,  and  keeping  his  ryes  as  wide  open,  as  in  the  cafe  related  by 
'Qku^H  in  bis  Comwentaiy  on  the  Prcdi^igns" 


rnfanity]   ARRANGE  M  E  N  T.  243 

tent  he  ohferver  ;||  and  ivJj'ich  has  not  yet  acquired 
ideal  fyniptoms  of  any  kind. 

^  2  )  —Jealous  hifanity.—\ hJealousInsani- 
TY  the  tormenting  paffioii  oijeatoufy  is predom^ 
inant ;  and  di [covers  itfelf  to  proceed jrom  a  difor- 

dered^ 


"  Remaining  thus  rlvetteif,  vjifbout  the  fmallcjl  change  of  poji-^ 
tion,  you  ivoulil  have  taken  him  rather  for  a  Jtatue,  than  for  a- 
man  :  fo  rigid  i\jas  every  purt^  and  fa  pcrfe£lly  immoveable.  But 
"(vhen  one  called  out  to  hi:n^  ivi,  h  a  loud  voice ^  that  his  affaiti. 
■v.'tre  no'JJ  in  a  bettci'  ftitatio'i,  and  that  he  might  »btain  the  mif 
irefs  he  --iKnJhedfor^  if  he  -would  but  come  to  hiinj'elf  •■,  he  iminediatch 
fprung  from  his  chair^  and  relumed  to  himfclf  again^  as  if  juji 
r  on  fed  from  a  deep  fecp:  the  bands  being  infantly  broken  vjith 
which  he  had  been  fo  firmly  bound  by  this  violent  catalepfis" 

II  ARETyp-l  Cappad.  de  Caufis  ^  Signis  Morb,  Diuturn, 
Lib.  I.  c.  5.  p.  30.  E. — Zacuti  Lusitan,  de  Medic.  Prin* 
cip.  Hijlor.  Lib.  I.  Hid.  40.  Operuni  Tom.  i.  p.  79,  80. 
containing  ii  cafe  oflnfanity,  related  by  Gal  ex,  which,  by  at- 
tentive oblervation,  he  difcoveied  to  be  owing  to  a  concealed 
love  tor  a  perfon  ot  the  name  of  Pyhides:  into  the  paraphrafc  on 
which  is  tranfcribed,  from  Plutarch,  the  ftory  of  Autiochus's 
attachment  to  Stratonice,  the  wife  of  his  rather  king  Seleucus, 
which  he  had  concealed  till  he  was  fuppjfed  to  be  on  his  death-bed, 
when  it  was  difcovered  by  his  phyfician  Er  asistr  atus.  We 
are  alfo  referred,  for  the  fame  relation,  to  Valer.  Maxim. 
Lib.  5.  cap.  7.  and  to  Appi  ANUS  in  Syria,  and  Lucianus  /« 
L.ib.    de  Syria  Dea. 

The  fame  ftories  are  repeated  by  Schenchius.  Vide  Oif^i 
Med,  rar.  Lib.  i.  p.  135.  Obf.  6. 


H  h  3: 


244   b  E  F  I  N  I  T  I  O  N    and  [Notion. 


dered ft  ate  of  the  brain,  either  by  being  totally,  and 
indifputably  groundkfs  ;  or  by  being  accompanied^ 
0r  fucceeded,  by  other  obvious  f\>mptoms  of  Infani- 
iy.  It  origitiates  from  natural  temper  ;  from 
an  acquired  habit,  occafioned  by  really  fuf- 
picious  circumftances,  of  indulging  this  dif- 
treffing  paffion  ;  from  a  bodily  conftitution 
tending  to  Infanity  ;  or  from  an  accidental 
excitement  of  that  difordcr  in  a  body  no  way 
peculiarly  difpofed  to  it.  Though  not  fo 
common  as  feveral  other  varieties  of  pathetic 
Infanity ;  it  has,  neverthelefs,  been  noticed 
by  medical  writers,  who  fometimes  mention 
jealoufy  as  a  fymptom  of  Infanit3^t  Schen- 
CHius  gives  us  a  fhort  narrative  of  a  very 
remarkable  cafe  of  this  kind  :§  and  it  is  a 
diforder  which  has  fallen  under  my  own  ob- 
fervation. 

(3)— yf-Lvzr/- 

f  Tozzi  OpcrumTovci,  i.  p.  114. 

§  Anhnl  dolorcs  ac  morhl^  Jt  diu  perfcvcrent  temporls  procelTu 
dcmcntes  rcddunt,  qualcs  funt  zelotypi.  Quod  quidem  piftori  ac- 
cidille,  cum  juramento  etiam  mihi  alTcverarunt  complurcs,  ml- 
hi  familiares.  I'iflor  is,  ut  ictulcnint  cum  fufpeiftam  de  adultc- 
fiQ  uxorem  fuam  haberet,  tametfi  pudicam  &:  probam,  nec  earn 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  245 

( 3 . )  —  Avaricious  Jnfanity  Ot^  Avari- 
cious Insanity  the  inftances  are  ve- 
ry common.  I  will  not  fay  that  every  mi- 
fer  is  medically  infane  ;  though  the  defcrlpti- 
ons  of  the  poets,  the  authority  of  credible  hif- 
tories,  and  the  teftimony  of  living  examples 
which  muft  have  occurred  to  almoft  every 
man,  feem  to  vindicate  the  title  of  Infanity  to 
many  an  opulent  pauper^  to  many  a  penurious, 
and  felf-tormenting  oppreffor.  Of  this,  how- 
ever, I  am  certain,  that  avarice  has  a  natural 
tendency  to  induce,  and  often  a<Slually  termi- 
nates in,  this  truly  miferable  diforder :  which 
1  do  not  confider  as  having  yet  taken  place, 
till  avarice  be  accompanied  with  fuch  irrati- 
onal, and  abfurd,  fears  and  diftreffes,  as  plain- 
ly indicate  a  diftempered  brain.  As  when  a 
man  in  opulence,  and  over  burdened  with 
riches,  has  the  moft  groundlefs  apprehenfions 
that  he  fhall  come  to  want ;  when  a  man  who 
is  really  the  owner  of  no  contemptible  pofl'ef- 
fions,  imagines  himfelf  poor,  and  dcftitute, 

and 

in  ftupro  deprehendere  pofTct,  teftes  fibl  amputavit,  ratus,  li  ilU 
forte  uterum  gereret,  non  ex  fe,  ut  qui  ob  adempta  genitalia  gc- 
ncrando  ineptus  eflfet,  fed  ex  altero  concepiflc  certo  fciret.**  ■ 
ScHENCHii  Obferv,  Med.  rar.  Lib.  i.  p.  133.  ObC  5. 


246    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


and  in  need  of  being  fupported  by  charity. 
This  fort  of  Infanity,  which  is  a  very  fre- 
quent one,  was  not  unknown  to  Celsus, 
who  tells  us,  of  "  ^  man  of  great  wealth,  who 
*'  was  afraid  leji  he fhould  perifh  for  want ;  and 
whofe  friends found  it  necejfary  to  quiet  his  fears, 
**  by  the  news  of  pretended  legacies  an  inno- 
cent deceit,  which  he  recommends  to  the  i- 

mitation  of  others  on  fimilar  occaiions.  

Quorandam  enim  vani  metus  levandi  funt  : 
ficut  in  homine  praedivite  famem  timentc 
"  incidit  :  cui  fubinde  falfas  hpredltates  nun- 
"  ciabantur."  % 

This  variety,  like  moft  of  the  others, 
pathetic  Infanity^  is  fometimcs  the  offspring 
of  an  habitual,  and  growing  paffion  ;  and 
fometimes  it  is  the  produce  of  difeafe,  and, 
when  fo,  even  feizes  upon  people,  who, 
while  in  their  right  minds,  were  naturally  of  a 
benevolent,  and  generous,  temper.  Like  the 
other  varieties,  it  is  very  apt  to  degenerate  in- 
to the  moft  violent  degrees  of  ideal  Infanity. 

I 

%  Celsi  de  Mcdicina,  Lib,  3.  cap.  18.  p.  T51,  1.  14. 


Infaiuty]   ARRANGEMENT.  247 


I  have  known  feveral  cafes  of  each  fort. 
ScHENCHius  relates  ohe  which  feems  to  be 
of  the  latter. 

Juvenis  ditifRmi  mercatoris  filius,  cum 

ante  annum  ad  nundlnas  Nordlingenfes  pro- 
"  ficifceretur,  ac  per  decem  dies  integros,  in 
*'  eadem  profedtione  infumeret,  in  reditu  gra- 
"  vem  melancholiam  incurrit  qua  fibi  perfua- 

debat,  omnem  pecun  'iam  quajii  eo  mercatu  con* 
*'  quijierat  fur  to  Jibi  ahlatam  ;  quin  eo  ufque 

dellrabat  ut  feje  hom'inem  cffe  baud  agnofce- 

retr  * 

**  A  young  inan^  the  Jon  of  a  wealthy  mer- 
"  chant,  having  hadoccafion  to  go  to  a  fair,  and 
*'  having  fpent  ten  days  on  the  journey,  fell,  upon 
*'  his  return  into  a  deep  melancholy ;  fancied  he 

had  been  robbed  of  all  the  money  he  had  re- 
"  ceivedat  the  fair  ;  and  in  the  end  grew  fo 
"  highly  delirious,  that  he  imagined  he  was  no 

longer  a  human  being.'* 

(4.) —Mifanthropic  Infanity.^Mi  santhro- 

PIC 

*  ScHKNCHii  Oh/.  M«d.  mr.  Lib.  1.  p.  1^7.  Obf.  7. 


248   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

PIC  Insanity  fhows  itfelf  in  a  vio- 
lent dljlike  to  mankind  in  general :  a  difpofitioii 
of  mind  fo  perfectly  repugnant  to  the  natural 
feelings  of  the  human  heart  ;  and  to  the  pro- 
duction of  which  any  injury  received  from  in- 
dividuals, from  a  hody  of  men,  or  even  from 
the  fociety  at  large  with  which  it  is  our  lot  to 
be  connected,  is,  in  the  eye  of  reafon,  acaufe 
fb  totally  difproportioned,  and  inadequate, 
that  wherever  we  meet  with  it,  we  ought  in 
charity  to  fuppofe,  that  bodily  difeafe,  or  in- 
temperate paflions,  or  grievous  wrongs,  have 
Injured  the  brain,  and  depraved  the  intellectu- 
al faculties,  rather  than  grant  that  a  charadler 
fo  abfurd,  and  fo  unnatural,  can  poffibly  ex- 
^ift,  without  fome  degree  of  adlual  Infanit3\ 

Infane  perfons  of  this  fort  avoid  the  conver- 

fation,  and  hate  the  fociety  ,  and  the  very  fight 
of  the  human  fpecies  :  if  fpoken  to,  they  anfwer, 
if  they  vouch fafe  to  anfwer,  with  furlinefs,  acri^ 
inony,  and  impatience  ;  or  turn  away  with  filent 
fcorn,  or  but  muttering  malice  and  dijlike :  and 
iheir  countenances  are  clouded  with  a  gloomy  and 
unfriendly  frown  ;  or  fiafi  with  malevolejice,  ha- 
tred, and  indignation.— -^hsLET MV^  obferves 


Iiifuilty]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  x\I  E  N  T.  249 


of  them  that  "  they  jiy  into  defcris  to Jlnm  man- 
''^  kind %vhom  they  hate  \   ij-  l^yi^i-fiy  (pixiyvTi 

N  o  T  a  few,  it  is  poflible,  may  have  been 
poflcfl'ed  by  this  kind  ot  Infinity,  who  have 
palfed  with  the  world  for  faints,  or  phllofo- 
phers.  1  cannot  fay  that  1  liave  met  with  a- 
ny  who  have  acStually  fled  to  deferts,  but  I 
have  feen  feveral  "  qui  odio  habent  ho- 
mines "  II  " -xv/j^  hate  mankind')**  a  fymp- 

tom  mentioned  by  Galen,  and  fome  other 
of  the  antient  medical  writers,  and  by  many 
of  the  moderns.  Such  as  have  fallen  un- 
der my  obfervation,  whofe  cafes  I  would  re- 
fer to  this  Variety  oi  pathetic  Infanity,  have  dif- 
Covered  it,  by  railing  at  all  wlio  approached 
them  ;  by  feldom  fpeaking  but  with  furlincfs 
and  ill-nature  ;  by  fufpedling  all  mankind  of 

finifter 

§  ARET--EI  QwVKD.  De  Canjis  ^  Signis  Morb.  DJuturn, 
Lib.  I.  cap.  ^.  p.  2g.  F. 

II  Galen- I  dc  Locis  JJul.  Lib.  3,  c.  4  Lacus/E  Efi-~ 
tht^  p.  744.  1.  4. 

I  i 


,  it  so   D     K  I  N  i  T  I  O  N    W  [Motion. 

fiiii{]-er  vlfews,  and  vlllanous  intentions ;  and 
hy  wearing  lii  their  countenances  the  malevo- 
Jent  frown  of  fiifpicion,  morofenefs,  and  ran- 
cour. It  fometimes  riffes  out  of  other  fpe- 

cies  of  Inlanity,  and  is  Hot  owing  to  any 
depravity  in  the  habitual  conftiiution  of  the 
niiild  ; — fometimes  it  grows  out  of  an  habit- 
tiiil  indulgence  of  pride,  and  malevolence  ; 
— ^ilnd  oh  other  occafions  it  is  derived  from 
the  unhappy  experience  of  unexpedled  ingra- 
titude,   and   unmerited    dlfappointment.— I 
Jiave  feen  ftriking  inftances  of  it,  owing  to 
the  fecond  caufe  ;  and  fymptoms  of  this  -fott 
acGditipanying    other    fpecics    of  Infanitv^ 
thdugh  I  do  not  now  recfille^Sl  any  cafe  of 
j>nre  mifanihroplc  Infinity,  owing  to  the  firft 
eaufe  ;  as  to  the  thirds  I  know  of  no  inftancc 
which  I  could  fairly  deduce  from  it  -;  it  isj 
hoWever,  beautifully  exemplified,  in  the  flo- 
ry  of  TiMON  of  Athens^  by  Lucian  among 
the  antients  ;  and  by  our  own  inimitable 
Shakespeare  among  the  moderns,  who  to 
fatisfy  us  that  he  confidered  him  as  infanc, 
make's  Alcibi  ADEs  obferve  of  him^  that — ^ 

  «  his 


fiifiinlty]   A  R  R  A  N  G     iNl  E  N  T.  251 

  "  his  wits 

Are  loft  and  drowned  in  his  calami- 
ties/' II 

(  5 . ) — j^rrogant  Injanlty. — In  a  r  r  o  g  A  N  -p. 
Insanity  the  charaderiftic  feature  is  fober^ 
formaly  Jlately,  rcferved,  and  excejjive  pride  ; 
by  the  uniform  predominancy  of  which  it  ia 
diftinguifhed  from  vain,  or  Jelf-lmportant  In/an- 
hy  ;  which  has  more  of  the  verflitility  of  fan- 
cy, of  the  pertnefs  of  conceit,  of  the  levity 
of  vanity,  and  of  the  fiHinefs  of  a  ridiculous 
and  childifli  oftentation,  than  of  the  dignity 
of  pride  ;  which  difplays  itfelf,  in  this  varie- 
ty o'^ pathetic  Infanlty^  in  its  genuine  perfe(5li- 
011  of  gloom,  and  iufolence,  uninterrupted  by 
the  intrufion  of  any  rival  paffion,  and  accom- 
panied only  with  its  dependent  ones,  jealoufy 
of  difrefpe(9:,  or  infult,  and  refentment  of  c- 
very  appearance  of  flight,  or  inattention. 

The  Infanity  of  lSiehi€hadne%%ai\  king 
of  Babylon,  feems  to  have  been  originally  of 

this 

i  1  2 

II  TiMOK     Athens.  Aft  It-,  fccnc  4.   See  Suakespear»'s. 
Wtrh.  vol.  jr.  p.  166. 


252   DEFINITION    W  [Notion. 

tJiis  kind  ;  and  afterwards,  as  it  increnfcd, 

to  have  become  fenjltive.  —  "  Is  not  this 

great  city  J?4v/o;/,  fays  he,  which  I  linvc 
**  built  for  the  houfe  of  the  kingdom  ;  bv  the 
**  might  of  my  power,  and  for  the  honour 
**  of  my  majcfty."f 

■   (6.')'-Inifc}ble  hifauityK—VJhcw  xhc  prevail- 
ingfymptom  is  anger,  fucb    Insanity  me- 
rits the  appellation  of    irascible;     w  h e- 
ther  this  paffion  exhibits  itfclf  in  violent  and 
groundlefs  r^^f' ;  or  in  as  groundlefs,  thouglj, 
lefs  violent,  anger,  from  pevifhnefs,  and  dif- 
content  ;  or  in  a  contentious  and  Irritable  dif- 
pofition  which  is  for  ever  engaging  in  quar- 
rels, and  flaming  with  refentment.    It  is  a 
fymptom  of  Infanlty  much  noted  by  medical 
writers  :  and  is  very  apt  to  exift,  efpecially 
in  the  laft  mentioned  form,  when  the  difor- 
der  is  either  occafioned  by,  or  accompanied 
with,  immoderate  drinking.     It  difpofes  the 
patient  to  every  kind  of  mifchicf,  and  not  uii- 

frcquently  to  mifchief  of  the  moft  violent,  and 

defperate 


^  Danisi,    Chap,  4.  vcrfe  30. 


{liUnlty]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  ajj, 

Jti]>enite  nature  ;  cfpeciallv  when  it  rifes in- 
to rage,  whicli  Is  uiually  a  iVmprom  of  Tip" 
[n  oAching  p/jri'nil'c,  ox  iitcohercfit  Infimity, 

A  R  E  T  a:  u  s  mentions  ansicr  as  both  a 
CrtUlc,  and  a  lymptom  oflnfimity   fjtsTe^" 

ooy^t     ci  -.oriTo:^  jc.  t .  >  .*  ''^  Somc  tbcre  are- 

who fe  d'lf order  is  neither  accompanied  wUh  wind, 
nor  with  bhick  bile,  but  with  violent  anger, 

T  K  A  T.  L  I  A  N  relates  a  cafe  of  Infanity, 
•occafioned  by  grief,  in  which  the  patient  re- 
]phed  with  anger  to  all  who  fpoke  to  her 
nvhich  affords  a  fpecimen  of  the^ifx?//^  fort  of 
tirafcibk  Inpnity, 

(  7  ^  —  Abhorrent  hifanity.  _  Abhorrent 

IInsanity,  \w\uq\\  conjijis  in  a  viole?it  averjion 

tio,  and  abhorrence  of,  certain  perfons,  or  things^ 

fo 

*  De  Caufis  isf  Signis  Illorb.  DiMtHrn.  Lib.  i.  c.  5.  p.  29.  D. 

f  Dc  Arte  Mfd'tca.  Lib.  i.  cap,  17.  Halleri  Arils 
IPrlncip.  Tom.  6.  p.  92, 


^54    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


fb  nearly  refembl^s  ona  of  the  varieties  of 
'whhnjical  Infanltyy  that  in  fome  iiiftances  it 
may  be  difficult  to  determine  to  which  of  the 
two  the  Infanity  ought  to  be  referred  : 
but  it  may  be  obferved  that  while  in  the  latter 
the  averfiotis  are  various,  changing,  and  fan- 
Uftical,  \\\  abhorrent  Infanity  they  are  lefs  nu- 
roertJUS,  more  permanent,  formed  upon  fomc 
•  resU,  or  plaufible  grounds,  violent,  and  not 
without  evident  marks  of  difguft,  hatred,  or 
terror. 

Certain  averdons  which  are  generally 
foppofed  to  be  natural ;  but  which  are,  moll: 
probably,  by  fome  means  or  other,  acquired  ; 
fuch  as  the  being  in  great  agitation,  or  even 
fainting  away,  at  the  fight  of  a  cat,  or,  as 
we  are  told  of  fome,  when  a  cat  is  but  in  the 
room  without  being  feen  or  known  to  be  fo 
but  by  theie  effe(5ts  j  and  fome  other  very 
troublefome  averiions  of  a  fimilar  nature,  as 
the  abhorrence  of  a  rat,  ^  moufe,  an  eel,  or 
the  like,  border  upon,  and  arife  from  a  caufe 
perfedly  (imilar  to  that  of,  this  variety  of 
pathetic  Infanity  ;  both  being  the  confequence 

pf 


liinihity]  ARRANGEMENT.  ^55 


of  fome  {Ifong  Impreffion  made  At  fome  time 
or  other  Upon  the  mind,  and  nerves,  which 
they  have  not  been  able  to  recover.  But 
when  averfion  merits  to  be  confidered  as 
Infiine,  it  is  not  only  Violent,  and  abfiird,  ei- 
ther in  kind  or  degree,  but  is  accompanied 
with  other  fymptoms  of  "a  difbrdered  brain  } 
whereas  the  perfons  who  experience  the  avef-* 
Hons  I  have  juft  mentioned,  not  only  kno\V 
them  to  be  very  groundlefs,  and  ridiculous, 
but  are  often  people  in  other  refpefts,  of  ft 
found  and  manly  underftanding. 

{^.')—Sufpiclous  /w/jw/y.-— Sufpicion  is  alfo 
a  fy mptom  of  whimjical  Infanity^  wheli 
flight,  or  traniient,  and  accompanied  with 
other  fymptoms  of  that  fpecies  ;  but  ^hen 
violent^  permanent^  and  predominant,  defcrves 
to  be  conjtdered  as  a  variety  of  pathetic^  under 
the  title  of  suspicious  lf?sANiTy. 

{^.^—Bajhful  Infamty»^\n  bashful  In* 
SANITY  fliitiefs  is  the  prevailing,  and  moft 
confpicuQUs  fymptom.    Such  perfons  as  fuf- 
fer  .ic€  di^reffing  embarraffments,  fay  but  Ut- 
ile, 


.2^6  D  E  F  I  N  1  T  1  O  xN    ami  [Notion. 

tie,  love  retirement,  anxioufly  avoid  the  light 
pf  ali  who  approach  them  ;  appear  iinealy, 
dejeded,  and  timid  ;  and,  though  lefs  d:i- 
turbed  by  thole  who  are  conlbintly  about 
them,  obferve  even  towards  them  a  remarka- 
ble ihinefs,  referve,  and  tacituinitv.  Thouoh 
they  avoid  all  fociety,  and  arc  fond  of  privacy 
and  retirement  ;  yet  it  cannot  with  propriety 

be  faid  that  "  odio  habent  homines*'  

ihey  hate  mankind\*  but  rather  that  they 

arc  afraid  of  them.  They  feem  to  experi- 
ence that  fort  of  fear,  which  is  felt  bv  the 
modeft,  and  baihful,  on  going  into  the  com- 
pany of  Grangers,  or  of  their  fuperiors  :  they 
appear  diftreffed,  embarrafled,  timid,  afraid 
to  look  up;  in  fliort,  in  the  words  of  Are- 
T-Eirs,  to  beaffecled  with  a  moft  painful  and 
ileje^edbiiJJjfuhiefs  -^ccTij^jfeii;  osa?;. 

Bashfulness  is  fometimes  a  firiking 
fymptom,  where  the  Infanity  is  owing  to 
concealed  love  :  and  feems  to  be  no  very  un- 
common, or  unnatural  prelude  to  that  dread- 
ful kind  of  Infanity  the  furor  ulsr'inus. 


{^10.')— Timid 


Iiilanlry]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  257 

(^10.)  -Timid  Infanity. —  \[\  whatever  in- 
ftance  of  notional  Inianity,  fear,  or  terror , 
id  any  degree,  is  a  cori/Iant  and  prevailing 
(ymptom^  fuch  delirious  fear,  or  terror,  I 
would  denciTilnatc  timid  Insanity. 

This  is  a  frequent  variety  of  pathetic  In- 
fjnitv^  and  puts  on  every  conceivable  form  of 
the  pafiion  from  which  it  derives  its  name. 
Some  are  afraid  of  they  know  not  what,  are 
filled  with  terror  every  moment,  and  have  the 
moft  dreadful  apprehenfions  from  every  oc- 
currence, however  common,  and  infignifi* 
cant  :  others  are  afraid  they  {hail  be  brought 
to  trial,  and  condemned  to  die,  or  Ihall  other- 
wife  undergo  fome  extraordinary  punifhment, 
for  the  commifiion  of  fome  imaginary  crime 
and  yet,  fo  Intolerable  is  their  fuffering  from 
thefe  groundlefs  fears,  that  they  are  very  apt 
to  put  an  end  to  their  own  lives,  and  thus  — — « 

"  whik 


*  "  Pleriqiie  fe  criinirJs  rcos  imag'nnntiir,  &c."  Wieri 

de  Prajlig,  Daemon.  Lib.  3.  DeLamHu  cap,  7.  §  i.  p.  180. 

*'  Manj  think  that  they  arc  to  he  tried  for pntc  crime,* 

K  k 


25?   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

*^  while  they  experience  the  mojl  cruel  tortures 
"^-^  from  the  mere  apprelmifion  of  deaths  rafjiy  to 

*'  ruflo  upon  the  very  death  they  fear  ;"  mor- 

*'  temtimenr,  quamfibi  tamen  confclfcunt." 

I  have  often  known  this  difordcr  take  its 
rife  from  a  fright:  and  Van  Swieten  re- 
lates a  remarkable  cafe  if  it,  proceeding  from 
the  fame  caufe  :  ~ 

*'  V  E  R  u  M  ingens  et  fubita  turbatio  men- 
"  tis  per  terrorem  fummum  imprimlt  fenforio 
*'  communi  tarn  fortlter  novam  ideam,  ut 
*'  fazpe  nullo  modo  poftea  deleri  poffit  ;  tunc 

miferi  tales  nil  cogitant  nifi  hoc  unicum, 
*'  etiam  Inviti  et  oblu£tantcs,  atqiie  In  peffi- 
*'  mam  melancholiam  incidunt.  Vidi  hoc  in 
**  muliere,   quae  fubito  de  nodic  perterrita, 

dum  fures  feneflram  cubiculi  eftringere 
*'  moliebantur,  femper  ac  ubique  metuebat 
*'  iniidias,  et  in  primo  fomni  limine  cum 
"  fummo  terrore  evigilabat,  licet  noviflet  do- 
•**  mefticos  excubias  agere  fingulis   no<f^ibus  . 

"  nunquam 


Galen  I  de  Loc.  Affe5l.  Lib.  3.  c.  4,  Epitom,  p.  743. 
L  60,—- «— 'WiERi  tie  Prajiig.  ib. 


Infatiity]    A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  259 

*'  nunquam  potult  dcleri  llle  terror^  imprimis 
circa  vefperam  ;  tunc  enim  iiiclplebat  tre- 
"  mere,  pallefcere,  undiqne  circumrpicere, 
"  inlidias  metuens,  ficque  brevi  In  pertina- 
"  clffimam  melanchollam  incidlt."  § 


great  and  fiidden  emotion  of  mind  arljlng 
from  terror,  may  often  fo  frongty  imprefs  the 
idea  of  its  objedt  on  the  common  fenfory^  that  it 
*'  may  afterzvards  be  impojjible^  by  any  means 
whatever,  to  efface  it.  Unhappy  perfons  thu^ 
affected ,  hozvtver  they  may  frive  againff 
"  /V,  can  think  of  nothing  but  the  jingle  objcEl  of 
"  their  terror  ;  and  by  degrees  fink  into  the  mojl 
"  deplorable  mehmcholy.  I  have  fcen  an  infiance 
of  this  in  a  wo?nan,  who,  being  terrified  in  the 
night  by  a  fiidden  alarm  of  thieves  attempting 
to  get  in  at  her  chamber  window,  was,  ever 
after,  in  every  place,  in fear  of  fome  defgn  up- 
on her,  and  whenever  fie  was  dropping  to  feepy, 
ufed  to  wake  in  a  fright,  though  fioe  bievj  that 

the 


ii 


§  Comment.  Aph.  1108.  Tom.  3.  p.  503* 

K  k  3 


26o   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


*'  thr  fervants  fat  up  to  guard  the  hnufe  every 
*'  night.  This  terror  could  never  be  ove'  come  ; 
"  and  was  particularly  firong  towards  the  evm- 
*'  ing.,  when  Jhe  began  to  tremble^  grow  pak^ 
"  and  to  look  fearfully  about  ^  as  if  fhe  ffbccled 
*'  jorne  ill  dejign.  In  a  fljort  time  fJje  fell  into  a 
' '  fixed  melancholy^'' 

( 1 1 .)  —  Sorrowful  Infinity .  —  Sorrowful 
Insanity,  Is  that  which  is  attended  with 
continual,  and  wafling  grief  \  owing  to  fome 
real,  and  natural  caiife  ; —as  the  lofsofan  ob- 
ject held  in  great  efteem,  fuch  as  a  hufbaiul, 
wife,  child,  friend,  reputation,  poffeffions, 
or  the  like  ;  —  or  fome  important  error  in  con- 
duct, which  it  is  likely,  may  be  produ6tive 
of  great,  and  of  what  will  probably  be  irre- 
trievable mifchief ;— it  is  lb  far  from  being 
uncommon,  that  we  find  grief,  its  chara£ler- 
iflic,  ufually  enumerated  among  the  ordinary 
iymptoms  of  melancholy.  Aret^us  tells 
lis  there  are  three  kinds  of  melancholy,  the 
firfi  accompanied  with  black  bile,  the  fecofid 
with  wind,  and  tliQ  third  with  the  pallions  of 

violent 


Infanlty]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  161 

violent  -ciincrer,  or  gn'ef,  and  of  dreadful  de- 
prefiioii  and  ballifulneis.  ||  This  variety  is 
often  mixed  with  fear,  and  diftrefs,  which 
might  lead  us  to  place  it  under  i/?n/J or  dijlrefs- 
fill  Infanity  ;  were  it  not  lufficiently  diftisi- 
guifhed  from  the  y^m^r  by  the  obvious^r^- 
dom'inancy  of  gr.-ef ;  and  from  the  latter,  or 

(12.)—  Difirefsful  Infanity.  —  Distressful 
Insanity,  by  th.e  caufe  of  the  diftrefs  ;  for 
this  fymptora  is  not  in  diftrefsful,  as  in  for- 
rowful  Infinity,  the  coniequencc  of  nny 
great  lofs,  or  capital  error  in  conduct  ;  bnt 
arifes  from  fnalUr  misfortunes,  habits  of 
anxiety,  vexation,  difgtifl,  a  dtfreliflj  of  ihc 
world,  and  its  enjoyment  i ;  and  fimeiimcs 
merely  from  difcafe.  Indolence,  luxury, 
and  a  fa  biit.iry  lite,  whether  p.uTcjJ  \\\ 
applicAtioii  to  ftud}^,  or  to  any  other  em- 
ployment, are  principal  fources  of  this  difor- 
der  ;  and  produce  fuch  an  uncoiTifortable  ftate 
of  the  bodily  feelings,  as  while  it  renders  eve- 
ry trifling  occurrence  an  objea  of  inquietude, 
is  itfelf  aggi-avated  by  the  petty  anxieties  and 

vexations 

II  Be  Caujis  £5f  Signis  Mori.   Diuturn.  Lib.  i.  ca^.   c.  n 
29.  Z).  i  3 


262    DEFINITION    cind  [Notion. 


vexations  it  produces,  till  the  mind  becomes 
totally  funk  and  deprefled  into  a  conftant  dif- 
trefsful  deje6llon  and  melancholy,  which, 
without  any  apparently,  extraordinary,  or 
adequate  caufe,  is  often  fo  exceffive,  as  to  de- 
ftroy  all  comfort,  and  to  render  life  itielf  an 
intolerable  burden. 

A  N  Tnfanity  refembllng  this  has  frequent- 
ly been  defcrlbed  by  foreigners,  under  the  ti- 
tle of  Melancholia  Anglica,  or  Morbus  AngU- 
cus,—EngliJh  Melaticholy,  or  the  Englip  Difeafe. 
'  And  the  Aphorlfm  of  Hippockates, 

(pcCog  7}  ^U(^v^iv}  ttoXvv  X^°^'°^  ^<a]cAp': ,  ^i.'ka.y'xj' 

oXiy.ov  Tc  toiStov,  -f  "  7/^ fear  or  dlftrefs  con- 

*'  flnue  for  a  long  thne,  this  is  a  fymptom  of  me- 

"  lancholy,  feems  to  have  had  a  particular 

view  to  this,  and  the  milder  degrees  of  timid 
Infanity . 

Dr.  Lorry  pays  this  ifland  the  compli- 
ment, of  attributing  this  its  conftitutlonal 
Infanity  to  the  philofophical  turn  of  its  inhab- 
itants :  

"  Nec  infrequens,  fays  that  ingenious  writer, 

'*  annumeranda 

■\  Aphonfm,  §  6,  Aph.  23.  Opcr,  Omn.   p.  i^SZ'l 


Infanlty]   ARRANGEMENT.  263 


*'  annumeranda  hie  morbl  fpecies  qua  (ibi 
"  mortem  infontes  confcifcunt,  fine  ulla  le- 
"  gitima  mortis  optandas,  nifi  quam  fuggerit' 
*'  Infania,  ratione.  Et  eft  fane  aliquod  Infa- 
*'  nlae  genus  melancholicum  vere,  quod  mi- 
"  feros  in  hunc  furorem  praecipites  agit.  Ta- 
"  citurnum  eft  illud  atque  morofum,  circa 
"  omnia  externa  inattentum,  iifque  familiare 
"  qui  nimia  meditatione  morbum  hunc  con- 
traxerint,  diciturquc  vicinis  noftris  Britan- 
"  nis,  genti  ad  fcientias  promovendas  nat*e, 
"  familiare  ;  ita  verum  eft,  quod  ait  Plini- 
"  us,  quod  ahquis  fit  morbus  per  fapientiam 
"  mori."  + 

*'  Nor  ought  I  here  to  omit  a  kind  of  dlforder^ 
"  which  is  not  unfrequent,  and  which  leads  inno* 

cent  mortals  to  procure  their  own  death,  with- 
"  out  any  reafofi  to  induce  them  to  wijh  for  it, 
"  but  what  their  Infanity  fuggejis.    For  it  is  un- 

doubtedly  a  fpecies  of  melancholy  Infanity,  which 
* '  urges  them  to  this  fatal  madnefs.  It  is  filent, 
*'  morofe,  inattentive  to  every  thing  external,  and 

"  common 


%  Dc  Melancholia,  Part  2.  cap,  6.  Tomi  i.  p,  380, 


264.  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

'*  common  io  fuch  as  have  acquired  a  d'l [ordered 
'*  habit  of  body  by  too  much  th'mking  ;  amd  is  Jaid 
fo  be  familiar  to  our  neighbours  of  Britain,  a 
nation  which feems  to  have  received  its  exijlence 
'-''for  the  advancement  of  the  fciejices.    So  true  is 
"  the  obfervation  of  Pliny,  that  to  fiorten  our 
days  even  by  the  fudy  oj  wifdom,  is  io  die  of  a 
"  difeafe,^^ 

Sauvages^  gives  a  fimilar  account 
of  what  he  calls  Melancholia  Anglica ;  and 
very  judicioufly  renaarks  that  the  hifanity  of 
the  Milefiari  virgins,  mentioned  by  Plu- 
tarch, which  produced  a  kind  of  epidemic 
fukide,  Vv^hich  they  committed  by  hanging 
themfelves,  and  to  which  nothing  could  put 
a  flop,  till  the  magiflrates  wifely  ordered, 
that  all  fuch  young  women  as  fliould  for  the 
fotuire  be  guilty  of  felf-murder,  fhould  beex- 

poM  naked  to  the  public  view;  and  a 

iiciilar  Infanity  of  certain  French  women,  as 
related  by  Primrose,  according  to  Sau- 
VAGES,  but  according  to  SchEtNCHIUs,  by 

Cri- 


%  NafoJog.  MethoJ.  Class  viil.  Gen.  19.  Spec.  11.  Tom, 
3.  Part.  I.  p.  390. 


InfanL^]  ARRANGEMENT.  265 


Crtnitus  in  his  book  dc  Honejla  DifcipU" 
na,^-  who  drowned  themfelves  in  great  num- 
bers, were  all  probably  of  this  kind. 

(13.)  —Nojfcilgic  Infanhy.  — The  attachment, 
to  their  kinJred,  to  xhtu  friends,  to  their  aC" 
quaint ances,  lol\\t Jcencs  \\\  which  they  have 
pafled  the  happy  period  of  youthful  inno- 
cence, and  fimplicity,  in  which  whatever  is 
dear  to  them  is  contained,  and  whatever  has 
moll  nearly  iiiterefted  them  has  been  tranfa6l- 
ed, — an  attachment  which  all  mankind,  in 
fome  degree  or  other,  experience, — is  as  amia«« 
ble,  when  not  immoderate  and  illiberal,  as  it 
is  grateful  and  natural  to  the  human  heart. 
But  like  the  other  paffions,  and  efpecially 
grief  and  love,  both  of  which  in  fome  refpe6lsit 
much  refemblcs, — the  latter  in  its  general  na- 
ture, and  the  former  in  fome  of  its  effects,— 

wlien  it  becomes  violent  and  unreafonable, 

not 


*"  ScuENCHii  Ohf.  Med.  Rar,  Lib.  i.  p.  137.  OU.  I, 

L  1 


£66  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


not  only  leads  to,  but,  under  certain  circum- 
iftances,  adtually  is  a  variety  of,  pathetic  In- 
sanity, to  which,  from  Noftalgla  its  moii 
iifiial  appellation,  I  have  given  the  epithet 
NOSTALGIC. 

This  iinreafonable  fondnefs  for  the  place 
of  our  birth,  and  for  whatever  is  conne^V.ed 
"With  our  native  foil,  is  the  offspring  of  an  un- 
polifhed  ftate  of  fociety,  and  not  uncommon- 
ly the  inhabitant  of  dreary  and  inhofpitable 
climates,  where  the  chief,  and  almoll  only 
bkffings,  are  ignorance  and  liberty. 

I  T  fhuns  the  populous,  wealthy,  com- 
mercial city,  where  a  free  intercourfe  with 
■the  reft  of  mankind,  and  efpecially  the  daily 
refort  and  ffequent  fociety  of  foreigners,  ren- 
der the  views  and  connedions  more  extenfivc, 
familiarize  diftant  nations  with  each  other, 
Tub  off  the  partiality  of  private  and  confined 
attachments,  and  while  they  diminifli  the 
warmth,  vaftly  increafethe  extent  of  affedion, 
making  of  rude  and  zealous  patriots,  bene- 
volent, though  lefs  ardent,  citizens  of  the 

w^^rld,  and  of  bigots  iii  their  attachment  to 

iomc 


Inflinity]   ARRANGEMENT.  267 

fome  iiifignlficant  ftate,  or  petty  dlftii(3:,  the 
friends,  and  often  the  benefadliors  of  human 

nature  :  from  thefe  fcenes  of  civilization^ 

and  refinement,  it  flies  to  paftoral  life,  and 
rural  retirement  ;  and  loves  to.  ro*m  at  large, 
with  the  peafiint,  or  manufa(£lurer,  in  his- 
forefts,  and  plains-  

*'  Where  ev'ry  good  his  native  wilds  im- 
part, 

'^^  Imprints  the  patriot  paffion  on  his  hearty 
"  And  e*en  thofe  ills,  that  round  his  man.- 
fion  rife, 

"  Enhance  the  blifs  his  fcanty  fund  fup*. 
plies. 

"  Dear  is  that  fhcd  to  which  his  foul  coiir- 
forms, 

*'  And  dear  that  hill  which  lifts  him  to  the 
ftorms  ; 

*'  And  as  a  child,  when  fearing  founds 
moleft, 

"  Clings  clofe  and  clofer  to  the  mother's 
breaft. 


L  1  3 


268   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

"  So  the  loud  torrent,  and  the  whirlwind's 
roar. 

But  bind  him  to  his  native  mountains 
more."  f 

While  in  England,  whatever. may  be 
our  partiality  to  our  native  land  of  plenty,  o- 
pulence,  and  liberty,  we  know  nothing  of 
that  paffionate  attachm.ent  that  leads  to  this 

fort  of  Infanlty,   an  immoderate  afFeclion 

for  the  country  which  gave  them  birth,  is  c)f- 
ten  productive  of  this  dlforder,  as  we  are  af- 
fured  upon  the  beft  authority,  among  the  in- 
habitants of  the  ice  and  fnow  of  Lapland,  ^ 
of  the  bleak  mountains  of  Switzerland,  and  of 
the  remote  and  lefs  civilized  diftri£ls  of  Ger- 
many,* when  torn  by  force,  or  detained  by 

iieceliity, 

f  Goldsmith's  Traveller, 

■  ^  The  Laplanders  are  proud  of  their  country  and  confu'tutlon, 
and  have  lb  high  a  notion  of  it  and  of  themfelves,  that,  when  re- 
mored  from  the  place  of  their  nativ  ity,  they  actually  die  of  the 
Noftalgia,  or  longing  to  return." — Critical  Revievj  for  March, 
1780.  Voh  49.  p.  175.  from  a  Publication  entitled  "  Russ  I A ; 
or  a  complete  hijlorical  account  of  all  the  Nations  ivhich  co?npofe 
that  Empire*^  in  2  Vols.  8vo. 

*  New  recruits  oftSJi  fall  into  very  obftinttc  diforders,  if  they 

be 


Infanity]  ARRANGEMENT.  269 

necefnrv,  or  misfortiuie,  from  the  icenes, 
the  manners,  and  the  connexions,  which  na- 
ture and  habit  had  bound  about  their  hearts. 

This  inordinate  attachment  to  their  native 
foil,  as  it  is  fometimes  termed,  not  only  fre- 
quently produces  nojlalgic^  which  is  a  purely 
notional  Infanity  ;  but  is  often  fo  violent  in  its 
effects,  as  to  terminate  iii  fuch  infane  fyrap- 
toms  as  are  commonly  denominated  maniacal. 

H  o  F  F  M  A  N  \  mentions  nojlalgic  Infanity 
as  a  very  familiar  diforder  among  the  Swifs 
when  refiding  in  foreign  regions. 

H  A  L  L  E  K,  who  was  himfclf  a  Swifs, 
acknowledges  its  frequency  among  his  coun- 
trymen, fays  it  is  a  kind  of  grief  on  account 
of  their  abfence  from  their  friends,  and  that  it 

be  not  difmifled  frofn  the  army.  Some  are  feized  with  an  acute 
fever,  which  proves  mortal ;  whilil:  others  are  either  affefted  wiTh 

MadneJ's^  or  become  fcorbutic."  See  the  account  of —  *'  A 

Chirurgical  Treatife  on  the  Phlc-gmom  and  its   Termination^,  by 
•Joh.  Alexander  Brambilla,  firft  Surgeon  to  the  Emperor  of  Ger- 
many,"— in  the  i^ore/g-«  Medical  Review.  Vol.   i.  Part  2.  p. 
117. 

X  Mcdicime  Rtti'ionalls  Syjlematlca.  Tom.  3.  SeiSl.  i.  cap» 
5.  §  22.  Operum  Tom.  i.  p.  313. 


2  7©    DEFINITION    and  [Notion 


afFe£ts  even  the  citizens  ; —-compares  it  to, 
what  indeed  it  greatly  refembles,  the  pining 
of  certain  animals  on  being  deprived  of  their 
affociates,  and  to  the  inconfolable  grief  of 
difappointed  love,  which  gradually  confumes 
the  vital  flame,  preys  upon  it  uncealingly  till 
it  be  extinguifhed,  and  is  termed  by  the  Eng- 
lish a  broken  heart ;  and  informs  us  that  it 

fometimes  afllimes  maniacal fymptoms. 

"Nostalgia,  fays  he^  genus  eft 
tnceroris  fubditis  reipublicae  meae  f\miiiaris,  e- 
tiam  clvibus,  a  defiderlo  ndti  fuorum.  Is  fen- 
fim  confumit  aegros,  &  deftruit,  nonnun- 
quam  in  rigorem,  &c  maniam^h'it,  alias  in  fe- 
bres  lentas.  Eum  fpes  fanat.  Etiam  anima- 
lia  <;onfueta  focietate  privata  nonnunqu-am  de  ; 
pereunt,  &  ex  puUis  amiffis  etiam  lutrae  ma- 
ris Kamtfchadalenfis.  Sic  ex  amore  fruftrato 
lenta  &  infanabalis  coafumtio  fequitur,  quod 
Angli  cor  ruptum  vocant.  || 

Sauvages  gives  a  limilar  account  of 

this 

11  Element.  Phyjiohg,  Corporis  Hmani  Libt  17.  Sect,  Si 
I  5.  T«m,  5.  p.  583. 


liifanltv]   ARRANGEMENT.  271 

this  diforder ;  he  defines  it  to  be  a  kind  of 
M o R Oi I T  Y,  or  idiotifm,  which  affe6ts  perfons 
in  foreign  countries  with  fo  vehement  a  delire 
of  returning  to  their  parents,  and  to  their  na- 
tive land,  that,  if  unable  to  gratify  their 
longing,  they  pine  with  grief,  watching, 
lofs  of  appetite,  and  other  violent  fymp» 
toras  of  great  diforder.  He  adds,  that  it  is 
either  Jimple  or  complicated,  that  both  kinds 
frequently  attack  young  people,  who  have 
been  tenderly  educated  in  their  father's  houfe, 
and  happening  on  their  firfl  arrival  abroad,  to 
be  either  fick,  or  unfortunate,  revolve  in  their 
minds  the  delights  of  their  native  country, 
and  their  own  unhappy  lot  in  being  deprived 
of  the  aid  and  confolation  of  their  friends  : — 
that  the  fimple  nojialgla  is  unconne<^led  with  a- 
ny  violent  difeafe  ;  is  attended  with  dejection, 
love  of  retirement,  taciturnity,  jiverfion  to 
food  and  drink,  proftration  of  ftrength,  and 

a  low  fever  in  the  evening  :  that  he  had 

feen  it  often  in  the  infirmary  at  Montpellier, 
and  had  fometimes  obferved  livid  fpots  on 

the  bodies  of  thofe  affeded  by  it  :  that  he 

had  known  it  to  exift,  after  the  lofs  of  his  pa- 


272  D  E  F  I  N  I  T  I  O  N    and  [Notion 


rents,  in  the  foil  of  a  common  beggar,  who 
could  fcarcely  be  fud  to  have  anv  country 
but  the  ftreets,  and  pubhc  roads:  — that 
theftudents  ofphyfic  who  reforted  to  that 
place,  w^ere  too  agreeably  fituaCed  hi  the  midft 
of  a  multitude  of  young  acquauitances,  and 
farrounded  with  too  abundant  opportunities 
of  pleafing  enjoyment,  to  regret  very  fevere- 
ly  the  abfence  of  their  friends,  and  to  expe- 
rience this  dilbrder  :  but  that  it  was  fre- 
quent among  the  foldiers  of  Switzerland, 
when  at  a  diftance  from  home  ;  and  had  been 
ib  much  promoted  by  finging  a  common 
Svvifs  fong  which  celebrated  the  delights  of 
their  country,  that  they  were  at  length  for- 

Lid  to  ling  it  under  pain  of  death  :  that 

the  complicated  nofialgia  is  accompanied  with 
confiderable  fever,  and  great  debility  ;  and 
that  it  is  neceffary,  in  the  courfe  of  the  cure, 
to  be  particularly  attentive  in  fupporting  the 
ftrength  of  the  patient.  |1 

(14.)  (15.)  (i6.)--Reason   abufed,  un* 

cultivated,  or  defpifed,  has  been  the  fource  of 

the 

II  Nofolog.  Metfjod.  Class  vlii,  Gen.  ir.  T«m.  3.  Part  i, 
p.  334» 


Iiinimty]  ARRANGEMENT.  273 


the  greateft  corruptions  which  have  crept  in-' 
to,  and  contaminated,  the  chriftian  profeffi* 
oil ;  and  of  the  moft  horrid  enormities  which,  ^ 
in  confequence  of  fuch  corruptions,  have,  in 
almoft  every  age  of  the  church,  been  the 
Icourge  of  fociety,  and  the  dlfgrace  of  human 
nature. 

E  A  R  L  Y  in  the  annals  of  our  divine  reli-* 
gion,  we  find  the  abufe  of  reafon,  in  the  acriitvo- 
ny  of  difputation,  and  the  contention  for  vi6lo- 
ry,  laying  thofe  foundations  of  degeneracy  and 
error,  which  were  afterwards  raifed  to  a  flu- 
pendous  pile  of  folly  and  fuperftition*  Rea» 
fon  once  abufed,  and  mifled,   the  farther  it 
proceeded,  tlie  more  it  was  bewildered  ;  and 
had  little  chance  of  returning  back  into  the 
paths  of  truth,  while  intereft,  ambition,  and 
all  the  paffions  which  nfually,  though  unde- 
fervedly,  have  the  moft  powerful  influence 
on  human  conduct,    too   often  united  their 
efforts  to  retain,  to  encourage,  and  to  advance 
k  in  error. 

The 


M  \t\ 


274  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

The  next  flep  to  the  ahufe  of  reafon,  was 
ih^negle^ofits  cultivation.    The  fame  pafTi- 
ons,  and  the  fame  hiterefts,  which  infpired 
the  one,  of  courfe  led  to  the  other.  That 
the  good  chriftian  people  might  be  retained  in 
that  ignorance  and  darknefs,  into  which  they 
had  been  fo  happily  conduced  by  ambition, 
craft,  and  bigotry,  it  became  the  intereft  of 
their  guides  that  they  (hould,   if  poffible,  be 
totally  deprived  of  (ight ;  or,  what  would  a- 
mount  to  the  fame  thing,  no  longer  dare  to 
truft  their  own  eyes,  but  fubmit  their  fenfc 
of  things  to  the  regulation  of  their  fuperiors, 
who  pretended  to  fee  better  than  they.  For 
there  was  danger,  if  they  (hould  prefume  to 
fee  for  themfelves,  that  fome  diftant  and  im- 
perfedl  glimmerings  of  truth,  which  yet  re- 
mained, m.ight  chance  to  excite  their  curiofi- 
ty  to  fearch  for  the  fource  from  whence  they 
-proceeded  ;  that  they  might  be  conducted  in 
the  fearch,  into  the  broad  and  perfedl  day- 
light of  that  glorious  luminary  which  enlight- 
ens the  empire  of  reafon;   which  would  at 
once  difpel  the  illufions  of  error  which  had  f© 
•long  milled  them  ;  and  would  put  an  end  to 

that 


Infaiiky]   ARRANGEMENT.  275 


that  flavery  of  the  mind  on  which  the  great- 
iiefs  of  the  priefthood  was  founded  ;  a  great- 
nefs  which  was,,  in  the  coiirfe  of  time,  to  grow 
into  an  immenfc,  ^nd  aftonifhing  fabric,  of 
ecclefiaftical  tyranny  and  defpotifm* — To  ob- 
viate an  event  fo  unfavourable  to  their  defigns^ 
the  eye  of  the  mind  was  to  be  enfeebled ;  rea- 
fon  was  to  be  obfcured  ;  it  was  to  be  fufped:- 
cd,  and  mi;i(^Vufl:ed,  that  it  might  go  unculti- 
vated; and,,  bemg  obfcured,  fiifpedted,. 
miftrutled,  and  uncultivated,  it  was  to  be 
rendered  ufelefSy  ajid,  if  pollible,  to  be  annihil- 
ated^ 

The  Goths  and  Vandals  contributed  to 
promote  thefe  liberal  views,  and  to  complete  the 
mifchief  which  the  degenerate  leaders,  andpaf- 
f  ors,  of  thcchriftian  church,  had  fo  fuccefsful- 
ly begun;  and,  while  their  armsfpread  devafta- 
tion  and  terror  over  the  weftern  Empire,  rea- 
fon,  negledled,  and  uncultivated,  funk,  under 
the  depreffing  influence  of  the  ignorance  and 
barbarifm  of  the  conquerors,  into  the  lowcft 
ftate  of  degeneracy,  till,  continuing  to  pro- 
ceed 

M  m  z 


276    DEFINITION    and.  [Notion. 


cced  in  depravity,  and  fcarcely  any  thing  be- 
.  ing  too  abfurd  to  be  believed,  it  was  at  length 
almoftloft,  and  forgotten,  in  thofe  dark  age^ 
of  the  church,  when  popifli  ufurpation  tyran- 
nized, with  little  control,  over  the  minds, 
perfons,  and  properties,  of  almoft  every  in- 
dividual in  chriftendom. 

That  in  this  twilight,  or  rather  perfect 
night,  of  the  mind,  we  Ihould  fee  human  rea- 
foiidefpifed,  dllcouraged,  and  decried,  as  an 
infufficlent  and  dangerous  guide  in  matters  of 
religion  ;  and  made  to  fubmlt,  with  the  fcrlp- 
tures  themfelves,  to  the  decrees  of  councils, 
and  the  deciiious  of  the  church,  is  but  fmall 
caufe  of  wonder  :  but  to  every  man  of  rati- 
onal views,  and  a  cultivated  underftanding, 
it  muft  appear  as  extraordinary,  as  it  is  real, 
that  in  this  enlightened  age,  after  reafon  has 
long  been  emerged  from  this  difmal  night  of 
mental  darknefs,  there  are  men  to  be  found 
of  no  mean  learning,  and,  in  other  matters, 
of  good  underftanding,  who  fufFcr  themfelves 
to  he  fo  blinded  by  falfe  reafon'ingy  as  to  be 
perfe(5lly  Infenfiblc  to  the  trus  ;  to  flight,  and 

defpife 


Infanity]  ARRANGEMENT.  277 


i/t^^/yO  its  cllvliie  illumination  ;  to  fhun  it,  as 
a  dangerous,  and  delulive  light,  where  the 
revelation  of  the  gofptl  is  concerned  ;  and 
with  an  unaccountable  inconfiftency,  to  rea- 
lon  with  much  eurneftnefs,  and  a  fpeclous 
plaufibility,  againft  the  ufe  of  reafon  in  mat- 
ters which,  as  they  Inform  us,  rather  require 
the  exercife  of  faith  ;  and  to  truft  to  an  in- 
ward light,  for  the  reality  of  whofe  prefeuce, 
and  illumination,  no  better  evidence  can  be 
produced,  or  pretended  to,  than  the  very 
doubtful  one  of  every  man's  own  imaginati- 
on ;  than  which  nothing  can  he  more  uncer- 
tain, or  iinfatisfa6tory,  or  a  more  inexhaufti- 
hie  fountain  of  every  conceivable  variety  of 
Jupefjtition,  fanatlcifm,  or  Jcfperation, 

Indeed  every  man  who  is  acquainted 
with  human  nature,  and  who  underftands  the 
fcriptures,  muft  be  fenfiblc  how  dangerous  it 
is  to  abufe  the  moft  valuable  gift  of  heaven, 
at  the  in  (ligation  of  fancy,  paflion,  iiiterefi:, 
or  ambition  ;  '—-to  defpife  the  guidance  of  a 
divine  light,  to  which  the  fcriptures  thena- 
felves  appeal,  and  on  whofe  declfion  the  be- 
lief 


^78    DEFINITION  [Motion. 


lief  of  their  truth  or  falQiood  mull:  ultimately 

depend  ;  or  to  negledi  the  culture,  and 

improvement  of  a  faculty,  which,  if  rightly 
conlidered,  it  is  perhaps  our  chief  duty,  and 
our  beft  intereft,  in  this  life,  and  poffibly  in 
the  next,  to  cherifh,  exercife,  and  follow  ; 
and  is  probably  that  talent  which  we  are  com- 
manded to  employ  to  the  beft  advantage,  and 
are  feverely  forbidden  indolently  to  hide  in  a 

napkin.  But  nothing  can  afford  fo  inftru<£l- 

ive  a'leflbn  of  the  danger  of  fuch  a  condu£^:, 
and  of  the  happy  influence  of  an  oppofite 
mode  of  proceeding,  as  a  minute  detail  of  the 
hiftory  of  the  church,  and  of  all  thofe  nati- 
ons which  were  called  chriftlan,  from  the 
converfionof  Conftantlne,  and  even  earlier, — 
while,  reafon  thus  imperceptibly  finking  un- 
der the  influence  of  ambition  and  barbarKm, 
not  only  reHgious,  but  almoft  every  other 
fpecies  of  knowledge,  gradually  declined,  ex- 
pired,  and  was  forgotten,  to  the  time 

when  Luther,  aided  by  a  favourable,  and 
providential,  contingency  of  circumftances, 
by  breaking  the  chains  of  human  authority 
which  had   fo   long   cnflaved  the  mind, 

rou  fed 


lafamtj]  ARRANGEMENT.  27^ 


roufed  it  from  its  lethargy ;  made  it  feel  its 
©wn  native  and  independent  ftrength  and  dig- 
nity ;  and  infufed  a  fpirit  of  inquiry,— which 
has  fincc  extended  itfelf  to  every  obje£t  about 
which  the  mind  can  employ  its  faculties, 
and,  though  it  may  have  been  produ£live  of 
a  few  partial,  temporary,  and  perhaps  ne» 
ceflary  evils,  has  had  the  happy  efFedl  of  pro- 
moting civilization,  increaling  human  hap- 
pinefs,  improving  reafon,  and  advancing 
pure  and  genuine  chriftianity,  to  a  degree, 
which, — if  we  confider  the  vaftncfs  of  the  ef- 
fe6l,  the  apparent  imbecility  of  the  caufes 
which  put  it  in  motion,  the  immenfe  refin- 
ance of  a  multiplicity  of  powerful  obftacles, 
the  fhort  fpace  of  about  two  hundred  and  Cixty 
years,  in  which  fo  total  a  revolution  in 
the  minds  and  manners  of  the  European  na- 
tions has  been  accompliflied, — fecms  to  have 
no  parallel  in  hiftory,  fince  the  firft  propaga- 
tion of  chriftianity  ;  and  appears  no  lefs  won-^ 
derful,  than  pleafing,  to  every  fri  end  to  rea* 
fon,  religion,  and  humanity. 


From  the  ahfe^  diminution^  and  rejedliony 

of 


a8o  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


of  reafon,  in  various  degrees  and  combinati- 
ons, have  proceeded  three  kinds  of  deviation 
from  the  fpirit,  and  wifdom,  of  true  rehgi- 
on  ;    SUPERSTITION,    ENTHUSIASM,  and 

DESPONDENCY. 

Superstition  confides  the  deity 
as  an  unreafonable,  fantafticai,  and  caprici- 
ous being,  whofe  favour  is  to  be  obtained, 
of  anger  averted,  by  idle  ceremon-ies,  ridicu- 
lous obfervances,  or  painful  mortifications. 

Enthusiasm  views  God  as  the 
friend,  and  his  fpirit  as  the  guide,,  of  the 
happy  individual,  who  experiences  his  favour, 
and  is  fenfible  of  his  influence ;  and,  ailing  by 
the  impulfe  of  internal  feeling,  conviction, 

and  illumination,  and  of  an  ardent  zeal  for 
the  caufe,  and  honour,  of  God,  and  the  ad- 
vancement of  his  kingdom,  is  prepared  to  be- 
lieve every  fuggeftion  of  a  wild  imagination 
to  be  the  fuggeftion  of  the  holy  fpirit,  and 
every  impulfe  of  a  foolifh,  or  frantic  zeal,  to 
be  an  intimation  of  the  will  of  heaven,  which 
©ught  to  be  attended  to,  and  obeyed. 


Despond-, 


Infaulty]  ARRANGE  i\I  E  N  T.  281 


Despondency  reprefents  the  deity 
in  the  fiime  ignoble  hght  in  which  he  is  ex- 
hibited by  fuperjihlon  ;  and  is  as  little  go- 
verned by  reafon,  and  as  much  by  feeling, 
as  enthujiafm  ;  bat  paints  him  at  the  fame 
time,  not  only  as  capricious,  but  inexorable  ; 
not  merely  as  void  of  friendfhip,  but  as  an 
enemy,  and  a  tyrant. 

Though,  perhaps,  every  degree  of  fu-^ 
perjlh'ion^  enthujiafm^  and  defpondency,  may, 
in  the  eye  of  a  philofopher,  appear  fo  nearly 
to  refemble  Infanity  as  fcarcely  to  merit  a 
diftindlion  ;  yet  great  allowance  mud  be 
mAde  for  that  common  imbecility  of  the 
human  Intelleil,  which  renders  the  lefs  cul- 
tivated part  of  mankind  extremely  liable  to 
contradl.  In  fome  degree,  one  or  other  of 
thefc  unworthy  apprehenfions  of  the  deity  : 
it  is  only  when  they  become  fo  confpicuous, 
fo  abfurd,  and  fo  exceffive,  as  greatly  to 
exceed  the  common  deviations  of  human  be- 
lief and  condu6l  in  thefe  refpeils,  and  to 
appear  plainly  to  proceed  from  a  difordered 
brain,  that  they  are  to  be  conhdered  as  hav- 
ing an  undoubted  claim  to  the  titles  ol  fupeV' 

N  n  Jiit'iousy. 


.282  DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


Jittious,  enthujiafilc  or  fanatical,  and  de [pond- 
ing Infanity  ;  titles  which,  however  they 
may  feem  doubtful  in  many  cafes,  are  fome- 
times  obvioully  applicable  even  in  the  early 
stages  of  the  dlforder ;  will  ufually  be  allow- 
ed in  its  advancement  to  the  height ;  and  are 
often  irrefragably  conjfirmed  by  its  progrefs 
from  notional,  to  fome  of  the  fpecies  of  ideal 
Infanity. 

(^i^)—SuperJlitiotis  Infanity.— %  u  p  e  r  s  t  i- 
T  i  o  u  s  Insanity  may,  therefore,  be 
defined  to  be  fuch  an  excefs  and  extravagance  of 

fiiperfitious  notions  and  condu5f,  as  bear  evident 
marks  of  a  dijlempered  brain,  and  are  not  un- 

freqtiently  obferved  to  terminate  in  maniacal,  or 

fome  other  fpecies  o/' ideal  Infanity, 

Superstition,  which  was  noticed 

hy  Aretjeus  *  as  being  fometimes  a  fymp- 

tom 

*  H'  (5'gi(r<^a<,wcv/>jy  T^ETTOvrai.  De  Caujis  ^  Si g- 
n'ls  Mori,   Dluturn.  Lib.  i.  cap.  5.  p.  30.  A. 

Some  take  a  turn  to  fupcrjlition" 


Iiifanlty]    ARRANGEMENT.  2^5 


torn   of    Infanlty,    was    the    principal  iii- 
HirLiment,  as  it  has  always   been  the  moft 
prominent  feature,  of  the  Roman  Catholick 
church.     It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  that 
church  fliould  be  of  all  others,  themoftpro- 
lific  parent  of  fnperjijtious  Injaniiy.  Afcetics, 
Anchorets,  and  Monks,  of  every  age,  have 
aifbrded  abundant   examples  of  this  fort  of 
madmen  ;  of  which  a  more  ftrikip.g  one  is 
no  where  to  be  found  than  that  of  the  noted 
Simeon     Stylites,    whofe  extraordina- 
ry methods  of  fecuring  the  favour  of  the 
deity,  exhibit  a  painful  fpecim^n  of  fuper- 
Jlitious  Infcm'ity  which  cannot  be  better  deline- 
ated than  by  the  elegant  pen  of  Mr.  Gibbon", 
in  his  Hijiory  of  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Ro' 
man  Empire. 

"At  the  age  of  thirteen,  f:iys  that  cele- 
"  brated  hiflorian,  the  young  Syrian  defcrted 
"  the  profeffion  of  a  Ihepherd,  and  threw 
"  himfelf  into  an  auftere  monaftery.  After 
"  a  long  and  painful  novitiate,  in  which  Si- 
^'  ME  ON  was  repeatedly  faved  from  pious 
*'  fuicide,  he  eftablifhed  his  refidence  in  a 

N  n  2  "  mountaiii 


284   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


mountain,  about  thirty  or  forty  miles  to 
the  caft  of  Antioch.    Within  the  fpace  of 
a  mandra,  or  circle  of  ftones,  to  which  he 
*'  had  attached  himfelf  by  a  ponderous  chain, 
*'  he  afcended  a  column,  which  was  fuccef- 
fively  ralfed  from  the  height  of  nine,  to  that 
of  fixty,  feet,  from  the  ground.    In  this 
"  lafl,  and  lofty,  flation,  the  Syrian  Anac- 
horet  refifted  the  heat  of  thirty  fummers, 
"  and  the  cold  of  as  many  winters.  Habit 
*'  and  exercife  inn:ru(Sl:cd  him  to  maintain  his 
'*  dangerous  fituation  without  fear  or  giddi- 
nefs,  and  fuccefllvely  to  aflame  the  dif- 
ferent poftures  of  devotion.    He  fometimes 
prayed  in  aii  titdi  attitude,  with  his  out- 
"  ftretched  arms,  in  the  figure  of  a  crofs  ; 
but  his  mofb  familiar  pradlice  was  that  of 
bending  his  meagre  fkeleton  from  the  fore- 
head to  the  feet  :  and  a  curious  fpe£lator, 
after  numbering  twelve  hundred  and  forty 
four  repetitions,  at  length  defifted  from  the 
endlefs  account.    The  progrefs  of  an  ulcer 
in  his  thigh  might  (horten,  but  it  could  not 
difturb,  this  celeftial  life  ;  and  the  patient 
hermit  expired,  without  defcending  from 
his  column.*' 

This 


«t 
<t 
«( 

1 


Infanlty]  ARRANGEMENT.  285 


This  variety  of  pathetic  has  fome  relation 
to  whimjical  Injan'ity  \  from  which  it  differs  in 
having  religion  for  its  Iblc,  or  for  its  chief, 
object. 

(i  ^.^ —  Fanatical  Infanity.  — Enthutiaftic, 
or  Fanatical  Insanity,  is  an  ///  founded 
notion  of  the  uncommon  favour,  and  commiinicali^ 
ons  of  the  deity  ;  fometimes  accompanied  with  un- 
remitting fervors  of  zeal,  gratitude,  or  devotion  ; 
fometimes  with  abfurd,  extravagant,  or  violent 
conduSl ;  and  fometimes  with  extraordinary,  and 
incredible,  expediations,  of  divine  manifeflation, 
and  interference :  and,  though  in  many  cafes 
/>z^r^/y  notional,  is  exceedingly  difpofed to  acquire 
ideal  fymptoms. 

W  E  cannot  read  the  hiftorj  of  the  irregu- 
lar and  turbulent  condu6l,  or  of  the  ground- 
lefs  and  abfurd  expectations,  of  moft  fanatics, 
without  concluding  that  while  fome  were 
merely  dcfigning,  and  wicked,  others,  who 
were  more  honeft,  and  ferious,  were  actually 
influenced  either  by  a  temporary,  or  by  a 

permanent 


a86    DEFINITION    and  [NTotlon. 


permanent  Infanlty  :  II  and  it  will  appear  the 
lefs  wonderful  that  fo  many  fhould  become  In- 
fane,  at  the  flime  time,  by  a  kind  of  epide- 
mical contagion,  when  we  rcfle£l  on  the  in- 
fluence of  example,  and  of  any  favourite  and 
popular  notion,  in  exciting  the  wildeli,  and 
moft  outrageous,   extravagances,    of  a  mif- 
guided  mob  ;  when  we  confider,  how  apt  the 
brain  is  to  be  afFeited  by  a  conftant  attention 
of  the  mind  to  one  object ;   how  liable  fuch 
attention  is  to  be  excited  when  the  obje6l  is  of 
a  religious  nature  ;  and  how  much  the  pro- 
penfity,  and  danger,  is  encreafed,    if  it  be 
contemplated,    as  religi:)us    objecls,  when 
they  have  gained  the  afcendant  of  the  mind, 
are  extremely  apt  to  be,  with  emotion  and 
ardor. 

This  variety  of  pathetic  Lifanity,  as  has 

already  been  obferved,  is  peculiarly  difpofed 

to  become  maniacal ;   and  is  produ£live  of 

every  form  of  enthufiaftic  raptures,  extatic 

reveries, 

II  Vide  Sauvagbsii  Nofolog.  Method.  Clafs  vili.  Gen.  19. 
Spec.  1 1.  Melancholia  Enthuftajlica.  Tom.  3.  Part.  i.  p.392. 
&  Spec.  6.  Da:monomania  fanatka.  Tom.  3.  Parr.  i.  p.  397* 
 Lorry  De  MdanMa,  Part,  i.  cap.  6.  Tom.  1.  p. 


Infaiilty]    ARRANGEMENT.  287 


reveries,  glorious  vifions,  and  divine  revela- 
tions. —  Faffing  over  the  hlftory  of  the  firft 
Anabaptijls^  \  who  in  the  time  of  Luther 
made  wild  work  in  Germany  ;  and  of  the  firft 
^takers,  whofe  fanaticifm  made  no  fmall  flir 
in  England  J  ;  and  of  many  other  inftances  of 
epidemic enthiifiafm^  which  were  probably  fruit-: 
ful  in  this  fort  of  Infanity  ;  1  fhall  relate  a 
few  fingle  examples,  and  fome  cafes  of  a  more 
private  nature,  as  fpecimens  of  this  variety, 

John  Kelsey  went  to  Conftantino- 
ple  upon  no  lefs  a  defign  than  that  of  con- 
verting the  grand  fignor.  He  preached  at  the 
corner  of  one  of  the  ftreets  of  that  city,  with 

all 


f  Some  account  of  whofe  excefles  may  be  feen  in  Dr. 
j.^'S.TSOtih  Hijiory  of  the  rei^H  of  the  Emperor  Charles  V. 
Vol.  3.  p.  76 — 90. 

%  See  a  minute,  and  poflibly  fome  what  exaggerated,  detail  of 
fanaticifm,  in  "Leslie's  Snake  in  the  Grafs"  which,  to- 
gether with  feveral  pieces  in  its  defence,  is  pubhfliedin  the  feemd 
J^olumc  of  his  J'Forks, 

I  ought  to  add,  that  the  Anabaptifls  and  ^takers  of  the  pre- 
fent  day,  are  the  very  reverfe  of  their  predeceflbrs  whofe  hiftory 
I  have  here  referred  to  ;  and  are  as  remarkable  for  coolnefs  of  rea- 
fbn,  and  fobriety  of  paflion,  as  were  their  namefakes  of  formes 
times  fgr  warmth  of  fancy,  and  the  intoxication  of  enthufiafm. 


288  DEFINITION    mid  [Notlan. 


all  the  vehemence  of  a  fanatic  :  but  unfortu- 
nately prcachuig  in  his  native  Engllfh,  which 
was  probably  the  only  language  of  which  he 
had  any  knowledge,  he  was  difappointed  in 
his  expectation  of  being  underftood  ;  but  was 
treated  with  that  humanity  which  his  ftate  of 
mind  obvioufly  demanded,  and  fiifely  lodged 
in  an  hofpital  for  lunatics.  § 

Daniel,  Oliver  Cromwell's  porter, 
whofe  brain  was  fuppofed  to  be  turned  by 
plodding  in  myftical  books  of  divinity,  was 
treated  with  the  fame  humanity,  and  con- 
fined for  many  years  in  bedlam,  from  one  of 
the  windows  of  w^hich  he  ufad  frequently  to 
preach,  chiefly  to  female  audiences,  who 
would  often  (it  for  many  hours  under  his  win- 
dow, very  bufy  with  their  bibles,  and  turn- 
ing to  the  quotations,  with  great  figns  of  de- 
votion. 

Arthington,    Coppinger,  and 

Hacket,  three  enthufiafts,  in  queen  Eliza- 
beth's 

§  Granger's  Biographical  Hijiory  of  England.  Vol.  4.  p. 
^  Idem,  il,  p.  210, 


fnfanlry]  A  PI  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  289 


betirs  time,  met  with  lefs  gentle  treatment, 
the  latter  of  them  was  hanged,  drawn,  and 
quartered,  the  fecond  died  raving  mad,  and 
the  third,  recovering  from  his  fanaticifm, 
and  Infanity,  was  pardoned.  They  had  been 
accufed  of  being  guilty  of  a  confpiracy  againfl: 

the  q-jeeii.           "  On  friday  the    15th  of 

"  July,  CoppiNGEii  having  fent  for  Ar- 
"  THINGTON  out  of  his  bed,  declared  to  him 
"  that  he  had  had  a  revelation,  which  affiired 
"  him  that  he  was  prophet  of  mercv,  and 
"  Artkington  prophet  of  judgment ;  that 
"  Hacket  was  king  of  Europe,  and  that 
"  they  were  to  go  before  him,  and  feparate 
"the  flieep  from  the  goats.  Arthington 
"  the  more  readily  credited  this  becaufe  he 
"  found  a  mighty  bwning  in  hhnJeJfy  which  he 
"  interpreted  a  commencement  of  the  angelic 

"  nature."    Coppinger  magnified 

Hacket  as  the  holieil  man  that  had  ever 
*'  lived,  except  Chrift  :  —  a  little  after  he  was 
"  apprehended,  he  ran  abfolutely  diftraded, 
"  and  never  recovered  his  fenfes,  but  obfli- 
*'  nately  refufing  all  noaiilliment,    died  of 


"  huno;er 


O  o 


spo  D  E  F  I  N  1  T  I  O  N    and  [Notion 


*'  hunger  the  day  after  Hacket  was  exe- 
^'  cuted."  II 

Thomas  Vennek,  and  his  afloci- 

^ites,  were  treated  with  no  lefs  feverity.  

'*  Venner  was  reputed  a  man  of  fenfe  and 
**  religion,  before  his  under^ftanding  was  be- 
wildered  with  enthufiafm.     He    was  fo 
ftrongly  poffeffed  with  the  notions  of  the 
millenarians,   or  the  fifth  monarchy  men, 
"  that  he  ftrongly  expelled  that  Chrift  was 
*'  coming  to  reign  upon  earth,  and  that  all 
human  government,   except  that  of  the 
*'  faints,  was  prefently  to  ceafe.    He  looked 
*'  upon  Cromwell,  and  Charles  II,  as  ufur- 
*'  pers  upon  Chrift's  dominion,  and  perfuaded 
*'  \\\'=>'weak  brethren^  that  it  was  their  duty  to 
*'  rife  and  feize  upon  the  kingdom  in  his  name. 
*'  Accordingly  a  rabble  of  them,  with  Ven- 
**  ner  at  their  head,  affembled  in  the  ftreets, 

**  and  proclaimed  king  Jefus.  They  were  at- 
*'  tacked  by  a  party  of  the  militia,  whom  they 

*'  refolutcly  engaged  ;  as  many  of  them  believ- 
ed 

\\  Biograph,  Byitan.  Ed.  2^.,  Vol,  i.  Art.  ARTHiNGTONe 


Inlanityj    A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  291 


ed  thcmfehes  io  he  invulnerable.  They  we're 
at  length  overpowered  by  numbers,  and 
"  theu'  leader,  with  twelve  of  his  followers, 
*'  was  executed  ill  January,  i66o-r.  They 
'  affirmed  10  the  lajl^  that  if  they  had  been  deceiv" 
d,  the  Lord  himfelf  was  their  deceiver,^''* 


*'  Mr.  John  Mason,  minifter  of  Water-- 
*'  Stratford,  near  Buckingham,  was  a  man 
"  of  great  firnplicity  of  behaviour,  O'f  the  moft 
"  unaffefted  piety,  and  of  learning  and  abili- 
"  ties  far  above  the  common  level,  till  he  was 
"  bewildered  by  the  myfteries  of  Calvinifm, 
*'  and  infatuated  with  millenary  notions. 
This  calm  and  grave  enthufiad  was  as  lirm- 
ly  perfuaded  as  he  was  of  his  own  exiflence^ 
*'  and  as  flrongly  perfuaded  others,  that  he 
"  was  the  Ellas  appointed  to  proclaim  the  ap- 
"  proach  of  Chrlft,  who  was  Ipeedily  to  be- 
gin the  millennium  and  fix  his  throne  at 
Water-Stratford.  Crowds  of  people  afliem-* 
bled  at  this  place,  who  were  fully  convin- 


ced 


■*  Granger's  Bhgraph.  Hljl.  ofEngtani^  Vol.  4.  p.  206.. 

O  O  2 


292   DEFINITION    and  [Not'ion. 


*'  ced  that  this  great  aera  would  prcfently 
"  commence  ;   and  efpecially  after  Mason 

had,  in  the  mofl  folemn  manner,  affirmed 
*'  to  his  fifter  and  feveral  other  perfons,  that, 
*'  as  he  lay  on  his  bed,  be  faw  Cbrift  in  all  bis 

majcfty.  Never  was  there  a  fcene  of  more 
*'  franticy'oy,    exprefled  by  tinging,  fiddling, 

dancing,  and  all  the  wildnefs  of  enthufi;iftic 

gefturcs  and  rapturous  vociferation,  than 
*'  was,    for  fome   time,   fecn  at  Stratford ; 

where  a  mixed  multitude  alTembled  to  bail 
*'  the  approach  of  king  Jcfus.  Every  vaga- 
"  bond  and  village  fidler  that  could  be  procu- 

red  bore  a  part  in  the  rude  concert  at  this 
"  tumultous  jubilee.    Mason  was  obferved 

to  fpeak  rationally  on  every  fubjecl  that  had 
*'  no  relation  to  his  wild  notions  of  religion. 

He  died  in  1695,  foon  after  he  fancied  that 

he  had  feen  his  faviour,  fully  convinced  of 
*'  the  reality  of  the  vifion  and  of  his  owji  di- 

vine  mifhon.**  t 

We 

J  Granger's  Biographical  Hijlory  of  EtiglanJ.  Yo\,  4.  p. 
207,  Note.——"  Seea  particular  account  of  his  life  and  cha- 
rafterbvH.  Maurice,  rctStor  of  Tyringham,  Bucks,  1695. 
4to  pamphlet. 


Infanity]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  -93 

W  E  have  an  inftancc  of  this  fort  of  Infans- 
ty  in  the  fingular  and  tragical  hiftory  of  the 
family  of  the  Dutartres,  who  were  nil  (o 
infatuated  as  to  fancy  that  they  were  the  only 
family  upon  earth  who  had  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  God,  and  whom  he  vouchfafed  to  ini- 
ftrucl,  e/tber  h)>  the  immediate  impulfes  oj  hh  ff- 
r'lt^  or  hy  Jigns  and  tokens  from  heaven  ;  —  amd 
that  God  had  revealed  to  them  in  the  plainell: 
manner,  that  the  wickednefs  of  man  was 
again  fo  great  in  tlie  world,  that,  as  in  the 
days  of  Noah,  he  w'as  determined  to  deftroy 
all  men  from  the  face  of  it,  except  this  one 
family,  whom  he  w^ould  fave  for  raifing  op  a 
godly  feed  upon  earth.  This  infatuatioii  led 
fome  of  them,  with  the  approbation  and  anJ 
of  the  reft,  to  commit  inceft  and  murder;  aijid 
to  fuffer  that  death  which  was  the  confc- 
quence,  by  the  hand  of  jufflce, — if  there  could 
bejufticein  fo  punifhing  poor  deluded  mad- 
men,— with  the  utmofl  chearfulnefs,  and  even 
exultation,  in  the  firm  belief  of  their  own 
divine  infpiration,  and  that  they  fliould  prove 
to  the  world  the  truth  of  their  prctenfloos. 


294    DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


by  a(Slually  rifing  again  on  the  third  day.  ^ 

The  very  extraordinary  vlfionary  Count 

Emanuel  Swedenbokg,  affords  a  ftrlklng 

example  of  fanatical  Infanlty  with  maniacal 

fymptoms.    He  imagined  he  had  the  {ingular 

happinefs  of  enjoying  frequent  interviews 

with  the  world  of  fpirits  ;  and  has  favoured 

mankind  with  exadt  defcriptions  of  the  fcenes 

he  vifited,  and  the   converfations  he  heard 

and  partook  of,  in  thofe  wonderful  excurfions 

of  a  deluded  fancy.     "  The  Lord  himfelf," 

fays  he,  in  a  letter  prefixed  to  his  'Theofophic 

LiUcubrations,  "  was  gracioufly  pleafed  to  ma- 

"  nifeft  himfelf  to  me    his  unworthy  fer- 

"  vant,  in  a  perfonal  appearance  in  the  year 

"  1743,  to  open  to  me  a  light  of  the  fpirltu- 

"  al  world,   and  to  enable  me  to  converfe 

"  with  fpirits  and  angels,  and  this  privilege 

'*  has  continued  with  me  to  this  day.'*§ 

Very 

%  This  remarkable  hiftory  is  related  at  length  in  the  Month- 
ly Revieiv  for  December  1779,  from  '■''An  Hijlorical  Account  of 
the  Rife  and  Progrefs  of  the  Colonies  of  South  Carolina  and 
Georgia."  2  vols.  8vo. 

(.  '§  See  the  Motithly  Revic^\}      ]wnz  1770.  Vol.  4a.  p, 
"—And  hx  November  1778,  Voli  59.  p.  365> 


Infanlty]   ARRANGEMENT.  295 


Very  fimilar  to  this  were  the  vifions  of 
John  Engelbrecht,  who,  after  paffing 
many  years  in  a  ftate  of  the  moft  gloomy  and 
agonizing  defperation,  in  which  he  had  fre- 
quently been  tempted  to  commit  fuicide,  ap- 
peared at  length,  to  his  friends,  and  to  himfelf, 
to  die,  and  to  be  reftored  again  to  life  ;  and 
fancied  he  had  vifited,  during  the  fliort  fpace 
from  his  fuppofed  death  to  his  refufcitation, 
firfthell,  and  afterwards  heaven;  and  was 
from  that  time  freed  from  his  dejpondmcy, 
which  he  had  exchanged  for  the  oppofite 
emotions  of  religious  joy. 

Now  this  pretended  death  feems  to  have 
been  in  reality  no  other  than  what  Sau- 
VAGEs,^  oxhtx  nofological,  Tiwdi  pathologi- 
cal,^ writers,  term  an  Afphyxia,  or  a  total 
privation  of  external  fenfe,  and  of  all  the  vi- 
tal motions ;  and  was  of  an  exceedingly  fhort 

duration 


^  'Nofol.  Method.  Clafs  vl.  Gen.  23.  Tom.  2.  Part  2.  p. 
401.  > 

§  BoERHAAVii  hiflitut,  Medicina.  §  829,  p.  388.—-* 
Gaubii  Jnjiitut.  Fathologia.  §  783.  p.  x88. 


296   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


duration  ;  for  he  himfeif  tells  us,  that  the 
'wImU  procsjs  was  but  of  a  moments  continuance^ 
thiX  it  was  much  about  twelve,  o'clock^  at  m'ld- 
73'fgbf,  when  his  bodily  hearing  failed  and  left 
km,  and  that  when  the  watchman  cried  twelve 
iQckeky  the  extatic  rapture  had  f  ully  pafcd  upon 

B  u  T  a  fhort  view  of  the  fymptoiiis  of 
tibis  cunous  diforder,  as  defci  ibed  by  lumfelf, 

their  gradual  advancement,  and  decTme, 
villi  fufficiently  explaui  its  nature. 


I  T  was  on  thurfday  noon,  about  twelve 

©'eliock,    when  1    dijlin^lly  perceived  tl)at 

aleath  was  making  his  approaches  upon  rac 

•^^  from  the  lower  parts  upwards  ;— infomuch 

that  my  whole  body  becommg  ftiff,  I  had 

ecf  mare  feeling  left  in  my  hands  and  feet, 

**  oeitlier  in  any  other  part  of  m}''  whole  bo- 

idj  :  nor  was  [  at  laftable  to  fneak  or  fee  ; 

for  my  mouth  now  becoming  very  ftllf,  I 

was  no  longer  able  ta  open  it,  nor  did  I 

*■*  feel  k  any  longer.    My  eyes  alfo  broke  in 

my  head  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  I  diJlinWy 

*^fe!t  it.    But,  for  all  that,  I  underftood  whaf 

"  was 


lufaWity]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  297 


*'•  was  fald  wli^ii  they  were  praying  by  me 
aud  I  heard diftinclly  X.\\2inhty  faid  one  toano- 
ther,  ;jr^^ /f^/      /^^j,  how  Jl  'tff  and  cold  they 
"  are  become  ;  //  will  now  be  foon  over  rjollh  him. 

TJiis  1  heard d'lOi'indily  ;  but  had  no  percep- 
"  tlon  of  their  touch.  And  when  the  watch* 
*'  man  cried  eleven  o'clock,  at  midnight,  I 
jjeard  that  too  dijlincily  ;  and  much  about 
"  twelve  o'clock,  at  midnight,  the  bodily 
"  hearing  failed  and  left  me  too.  Tlicn  was 
"I,  (as  it  feemed  to  me)  taken  up  with  my 
"  whole  body  ;  and  it  was  tranlported  and 
carried  away  with  far  more  fwiftncfs  thati 
*'  any  arrow  can  fly,  when  difcharged  from  a 

"  crofs-bow."  He  then,  after  fome  ob- 

fervations^  relates  what  he  faw,  and  heard, 
m  the  other  world  ;  and  afterwards  defcribing 
his  return  to  life,  and  telling  us  that  he  was 
twelve  hours  in  dying,  and  the  fame  fpace  in 

recovering,  he  thu:--  proceed?  ;  "  remark* 

"  able  it  is,  that  as  I  died  from  beneath  up- 
wards,  fo  I  revived  again  the  contrary  way, 
from  above  to  beneath,  or  from  top  to  toe. 

 Frt'ing  now  conveyed  back  again  out  of 

**  the  fplendorous  glory,  it  feemed  to  me,  as 

P  p  if 


298   DEFINITION    and  [Notion 


**  if  I  had  been  replaced  with  my  whole  body 
upon  the  fame  Ipot  ;  and  then  I  firfl:  began 

'*  to  hear  a^^ain  corporally  fomething  of  what 
they  were  praying  hi  the  fame  room  with 

"  me.    Thus  was  my  hearing  the  firfl  of  all 

"  the  fenfes  I  recovered  again.    After  this  I 

"  began  to  have  a  perception  of  my  eyes,  fo 
that  by  little  and  little  my  whole  body  be- 
came  gradually  flrong  and  fprightly.  And 
no  fooner  did  I  get  a  feeling  of  my  legs  and 

*' feet  again,  but  !  rofe  and  flood  up  upon 
themWith  a  ftrength  and  firmnefs  I  never 
had  enjoyed  before,   through  the  whole 

"  courfe  of  my  life.  The  hsavsnly  joy  in- 
vigorated  me  to  fuch  a  degree,  that  the 
people  were  greatly  terrified  at  it ;  feeing 

*'  that,  in  fo  rapid  and  almoft  inftantaneous 
a  manner,  I  had  recovered  my  rtrength  a- 
gain  to  fuch  ^reat  advantage." 

During  this  fuppofed,  and  apparent,, 
death,  he  had  been  carried  in  imagination, 
or,  as  he  terms  it,  in  a  trance  or  vifion,  and. 
•fet  down  before  hell ;  where  he  had  perceiv^, 
ed  a  ^ifmal  darknefs,   a  thick  nafty  fog, 

fmoke 


InfaiutvJ    ARRANGEMENT.  29-9. 


fmoke,  and  vapour,  and  a  horrible  bitter  ftench  ;. 
and  had  heard  dreadful  hawlings,  arid  lamein- 
tations  :  had  from  thence  been  conveyed  by 
the  holy  ghoft,,  in  a  chariot  of  gold,  into  the 
radiant  ai>d  fplendorous  liglit  of  the  divine 
glory,  where  he  had  fcen  the  choir  of  holy 
angels,  prophets,  an.d  apoftles,  fmging  and' 
playing  round  the  throne  of  God,,  the  angels 
in  the  form  of  flames  of  fire,  tlie  fouls  of  be- 
lievers  in  the  fhape  of  luminous  fparks,  and 
God*s  throne  under  the  appearance  of  a  great 
fplendor  ;  had  received  a  charge  or  mellage 
from  God,  by  means  o-f  aiv  holy  angel  ;  had 
had  fuch  alTurances  of  divine  favaur,  and  felt 
fuch  delight  from  this  momentary  glhnpfe  of 
the  glory  of  God,  that  he  was  ever  after  a 
happy  enthuficiji^  and  the  joy  he  reiatned Jrom 
this  Jplendid Jpebtacle  zvas  fo  very  great  and  mi" 
fpeakable  in  his  heart,  as  to  furpafs  all  kind  of 
defcription. 

After  this  he  had,  for  feveral  years^ 
frequent  vifions,  and  revelations,  fometimes 
in  the  day  time,  and  with  his  eyes  open,  and 
always  without  any  of  thofe  fymptoms  of 

P  p  2  diforder 


300   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


diforder  which  had  preceeded  his  firfl:  vi- 
fion  :  llv^ed  fometlmes,  as  he  afllires  us,  for 
eight,  twelve,  and  thirteen  days,  and  even  for 
three  weeks  together,  without  eatini;;  and 
drinking  ;  for  thefpaceof  three  quarters  of  a 
year  without  the  leafl  wink  of  deep  ;  and 
once  heard  with  his  bodily  ears,  for  one  and 
forty  nights  together,  the  holy  angels  fing- 
ing  and  playing  on  the  heavenly  mufic,  fo 
that  he  could  not  help  joining  them  ;  and 
the  people  who  were  with  him  were  fo  much 
affedled  with  joy,  as  to  be  unable,  to  fleep, 
likewife,  and  often  continued  fiuging  along 
with  him  almoU:  the  whole  night  through. 

I  have  been  the  more  minute  hi  this  ac- 
count of  John  Engelbrecht,  and  other 
enthujia/is,  becaufe  an  attempt  is  now  making, 
by  an  apparently  ferions  and  well-meaning 
chriflian,  to  give  credit  to  his  almoft  forgot- 
ten revelations,  and  the  reveries  of  fome  other 
Dutch  and  German  myftics  and  vifionaries., 
by  publifhing  them  in  an  Englifh  drefs,  and 
in  a  cheap  form,  at  a  time  when  enthufiaftic, 
and  myftical  notions  arc  gaining  but  too  much 
ground  in  thij  kingdom,  among  the  weak, 

the 


Infaiiitv]  ARRANGE  M  E  N  T.  301 


the  ignorant,  and  the  credulous  :  for  though 
rt  be  aliowed  that  they  may  poffibly  do  fome 
good  among  the  populace,  by  roufing  men's 
attention  to  religious  matters,  and  exciting 
them  to  fobriety,  and  lerioufnefs ;  yet  it 
feems  not  improbable  that  they  may,  in  the 
end,  d'o  more  harm,  by  giving  too  much 
fcope,  and  coiifequence,  to  feeling  and  Imagi- 
nation,  and  by  impairing  and  bliiisding  the  uii- 
derftandvng.  f 

The  next,,  and  only  inftance,  more,  of 
fanatical  Infanity,  which  1  fhall  here  rclate> 
exhibits  a  fpecimen  of  the  more  common  ef- 
fects of  an  indulgence  in  enthufiaflic  i^totions^ 
and  feelings^ 

N  o  VI  ante  plures  annos  fosminam-, 
"  vcre  per  viginti  quinque  annos  fapientem, 

quae 

^  f  For  a  more  particular  hiftory  of  this  extraordinary  man,  and" 
his  wonderful  villous,  I  refer  the  reader  to  a  recent  publication^ 
called — The  dmine  Fijons  of  John  Engelbrecht,  a  La- 
theran  Protejlant^  whom  God  fcnt  from  the  dead  to  be  a  preacher 
cf  Repentance  and  Faith  to  the  Chriflian  World:  tranflated  from 
the  original  German  l>y  Francis  Okely,  foi-merly  of  Si.  foh>i'i 

College,  Cambridge,  in  2  vols,  i  amo."  from  which  L  have 

cxtraded  the  above  accomit.— — See  Vol.  i.  p.  2.  56.  5^7.  58, 
60.  68.  73.  75,  78. 


oz    DEFINITION    and  [Notion, 


quae,  male  fato,  Herneutarum  feftae  ad- 
di£la,  tota  &  unice  facro  amore  fervatoris 
noftrl  flagrans,  tota  huic  ideae  noftu  diuque 
dedita,  fie  cerebri  tonum  fregit,  ut  intra  a- 
liquot  menfes  fatua  fieret  ;  agiii  tamen  fui 
adeo  memor,  ut  illam  per  femianiiuiTi 
quotidie  vifitans,  varlifque  alloquens  fer- 
monibus,  nuUam  unquam  aliam  vocem 
obtinere  potuerim  quam  mi  fuavls  agne 
(mon  doux  agiieau  ;)  &  banc  omni  femi- 
hora,  demiffis  femper  oculis,  edebat,  & 
nullum  aliam  per  fefquiannum  edldlt  ;  quo 
lapfo  tempore  penitus  tabida  periit.*'  ;[ 

I  knew  a  woman,  fevsral years  ago,  who^ 
after  conducing  herfelf  for  five  and  twenty 
years  together  as  a  wojnan  of  found  fenfe  and 
under  ft  abiding,  happening,  in  an  evil  hour,  to 
affociate  with  the  fedi  of  Herneuters,  experien- 
ced the  moft  ardent  emotions  of  lov^  to  our  favi- 
our,  and  to  him  alone,  a?id  dwellmg  entirely 
on  this  idea  day  and  night,  fo  deftroyed  the  tone 

of  the  brain,  that   in  a  few  months  fhe 

hecamt 

X  TissoT  deFaUtudt  Litcrator,  p.,  .22t 


Infanlty]   ARRANGEMENT.  303 


''^  became  an  idiot  \  and  yet  retained  fuch  a  recoil 
* '  letlion^  of  the  lamb  of  God,  on  whom  floe  had 

thus  wholly  fixed  her  thoughts^  and  affediiom^ 
*'  that  though  I  vifited  her  and  talked  to  her  in  a 
*'  variety  of  ways,  every  day  for  half  a  year  toge^ 

ther,  I  could  never  get  a  fingle  word  fro?n  her, 
"  but  my  (weet  lamb  ;  and  this  fhe  would  re-* 

peat  about  every  half  hour,  always  fitting  with 
"  down-caft  eyes,  and  never  uttering  a  finglefyl- 

lable  bsfides,  for  the  fpace  of  a  year  and  half 
**  at  the  expiration  of  which  term  fl:e  died per^ 
fedily  wafled  to  a  fkelcion^ 

The  aiitients  efteemed  enthiipafm  to  be  a 
peculiar  fort  of  Infanity,  fometimes  occafi- 
oned  by  difcafe  of  body,  fometimes  by  erro- 
neous notions,  and  fometimes  by  the  irpmc- 
diate  influence  of  Apollo.  In  all  thefe  cafes 
it  was  fuppofed,  iis  the  very  term  implies, 
that  x\\t  enthufiafl  was  actuated,  either  in  ima- 
gination, or  in  reality,  by  the  infpiration  of 
a  divinity  ;  and  that  while  in  the  two  former 
he  miftaklngly  pretended  to,  in  the  latter  he 
really  poflfefled,  the  gift  of  foretelling  future 
events.    It  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  the  ideas 

©f  enthufiafm,  madnefs,  and  divination,  were 

coufidered 


,304  DEFINITIONS  [.VotloiK 

confidered  on  many  occafions,  as^iilmoft  in* 
jfeperable  ideas  ;  and  that  the  terms  were  fre- 
q-uently  ufed  as  fynonymous  ;  as  may  be  feeu 
by  confulting,  among  others,*  the  writings 
ofPLATo,^  Aret^eus  Cappadox,|1 
Livs  A'URELiANUs,§  and  Paulus  JEgi- 
NET  A.f  But  as  a  rational  chriftian  can  allow 
of  no  fuch  infpiration,  but  what  was  given  to 
Chrift,  and  to  the  prophets,  and  apoftles  ; 
we  muft  of  courfe  conclude  that  the  pretejiders 
to  divine  illumination,  and  the  gift  of  pro- 
phecy, were  among  the  antieiit  heathens,  as 
they  have  iince  been  among  mc^dern  chriftians, 
of  two  forts  ;  and  were  either  no  better  than 
infane,  or  were  downright  cheats  and  hnpojlors. 
The  latter  became  fuch,  either  from  private 
views  of  ambition,  reputation,  and  emolu- 
ment, a  zeal  for  the  public  good,  or  an  at- 
tachment 

*  ScHENCHii  Olf>  Med.  Rar.  Lib.  i,  p.  135.  Obf.  7. 
^  In  Phvedro. 

II  De  Caujts  isf  Signis  Morh.  Diuturn,  Lib*  i.  cap.  6.  p.  33.  B. 

§  Morh.  Chron,  Lib.  i»  C?.p.  §  i44-  P'  S^S*  ^ 
150.  p.  327. 

f  DeReMediea.  Lib.  j.  cap.  14.  p.  «0.  L  ^' 


lufaiilty]  ARRANGEMENT.  305 


tachmeiit  to  the  intereft  cf  a  party  ;  as  feems 
to  have  been  the  cafe  with  Numa,  Apollo- 
Nius  Tyan^uSj  Sertorius,  and  many  o- 
thers  :  or,  like  the  prieftefles  of  Apollo,  they 
were  fuch  from  the  very  nature,  and  neeeffity 
of  their  office. 

Wild  gefticulatlons,  incoherent  rav- 
ings, foaming  at  the  mouth,  and  convuliive 
motions,  being  looked  upon  as  fymptoms  of 
the  workings  of  the  divinity  within,  thefe 
were  always  affumed  by  the  Pythonefs,  and 
have  in  all  ages  had  a  principal  (har^  in  the 
artifices  of  fuch  kind  of  impoftures.  But  as  the 
body  cannot  be  thus  agitated  without  much 
exertion  of  mind,  and  enthufiafm  cannot  be 
well,  and  frequently,  imitated,  as  interefting 
charafters  on  the  ftage  cannot  well  be  repre- 
fented,  till  the  mimic  forgets  himfelf,  and 
feels  the  emotions,  and  imagines  Iiimfelf  in 
the  very  fituation  of  the  chara6ler  he  is  exhi- 
biting ;  fo  many  of  thefe  impoftors,  either 
through  the  violence  of  their  exertions,  the 
long  habit  of  perfonating  niadncfs,  and  the 
really  enthudaftic  feelings  which  a  zeal  for 

q  the 


3o6  DEFINITION    dnd  [Notion. 

the  honoiir  of  tlielr  God  has  excited,  or 
with  which  natural  confiitution  has  endowed 
them,  might  poffibly,  in  the  eiid,  aftually  ex- 
perience the  Inlanity  they  had  fo  often  feign- 
ed ;  and  fuch  Inlanity,  it  may  naturally  be  fup- 
pofed,  might  fometimes  terminate  in  idiotifm. 
Granting  the  probability  of  this  reprefentati- 
■on,  we  may  hence  poffibly  account  for  the 
veneration  which,  in  fome  countries,  and 
^fpecially  in  the  more  eaftern,  is  paid  to  mad- 
men, nnd  idiots ;  and  for  the  belief  that  they 
are  the  peculiar  favourites,  and  are  often  ho- 
noured with  the  infpiration,  of  heaven. 

.  ( 1 6 . ) — Defponding  Infanky. —  Desponding 

Insanity  is  a  groundlefs  apprehenjion  of  having 

iojl  the  favour,   md  irretrieveahly  incurred  the 

refcntmefit  of  the  deity  ;  and  of  being,  defined,  in 

confequence  of  fome  fuppofed  unpardonable  offence^ 

"juhich,  if  real,  is  ufually  at  the  worji  but  trifing^ 

Hindis  not  uncommonly  merely  imaginary,  to  the 

mof  unrelenting  fever  ities  of  everlafing  torment: 

und  is  frequently  accompanied  with  the  dread  of 

immediate,  a7id  temporal,  while  it  anticipates  tht 

horrors  of  future^  and  eternal^  condemnation,  and 

■tmiflmient.  ^ 

^  This 


Infaiuty]   ARRANGEMENT.  307 


This  variety  may  be  conne£ted  with  fu- 
perllitloii,  or  with  enthufiafm,  or  with  a  mix- 
ture of  them  both  ;  and  may  therefore  either 
precede,  or  follow  both  fiiperjl'iiious,  2i\\^fana^ 
t'lcal  Infanity  :  but  while  it  is  capable  of  uni- 
ting itfelf  with  the  former  ;  it  can  only  alter- 
nate, as  it  often  does,  but  can  never  exift  in 
immediate  combination,   with  the  latter. 

T  o  xefufe  all  kinds  of  nourlfhment,  and 
to  have  the  moft  invincible,  and  unremittino: 
propeniity  to  fuicide,  are  fymptoms  familiar 
to  this  deplorable  variety  of  pathetic  Infanity  ; 
andcanno  way  be  accounted  for^  but  by  thein- 
tolerable  horror  of  thofe  dreadful  feelings,  and 
that  frantic  diftrefs,  which,  though  in  part  ari- 
ling  from  views  of  futurity,  make  th^  unhappy 
fuffercrs  under  this  fhocking  calamity  ieiUi- 
ble  only  to  their  prefeiit  agonies,  which  at  a- 
ny  rate  they  are  eager  to  exchange  :  and  by 
that  felf  deteftation,  on  account  of  the  fuppo- 
fed  enormity  of  their  guilt,  and  that  full  con- 
vidlion  of  its  atrocious  and  unpardonable  nature 
which  render  them  impatient  to  meet  an  evil 
which  they  know  to  be  inevitable,  which  at 
befl  cannot  long  be  delayed,  and  of  which  the 

Q^q  2  actual 


3q8    definition    and  [Notion. 


a£lnal  fufFerIng  can  fcarccly  be  more  painful 
than  the  anticipated  apprehenfion  ;  and  ready, 
and  eager  to  lnfll(£t  on  themfelves  the  merited 
punifhment  of  their  hardened,  aggravated, 
and  unexampled  crimes.    I  have  known  piitl- 
ents  of  this  fort  cxprefs  the  moft  violent  re- 
fentment  and  indignation  agalnft  themfelves ; 
and,  though  firmly  perfuaded  that  they  were 
deftined  to  eternal  damnation,  yet  fo  bent 
upon  quitting  the  prefent  load  of  mifery,  as 
to  expoftulatc  with  their  friends  on  the  cruel- 
ty of  their  care — in  preventing  them  from  exe- 
cuting this  defperate  purpofe, — in  detaining 
them  in  a  ftate  of  fuch  exquiiite  angulfli,  as 
could  not  eafily  be  exchanged  for  a  worfe, — 
or  in  pteventing  the  execution  of  vengeance 
on  a  wretch  for  vvhofe  unprecedented  wicked- 
nefs  and  impiety  no  punifhment  could  be  too 
fevere.    Such  motives,  and  fuch  reafoning, 
may  appear  too  irrational  and  inconfiftt-.nt,  to 
be  real ;  but  it  muft  be  remembered  that  they 
are  the  motives,  and  the  reafoning,  of  mad- 
men, with  whom  nothing  can  be  fo  incredi- 
ble as  not,  on  fome  occafion  or  other,  to  gain 

belief  ;  or  fo  abfurd,  as  not  to  become  a  mo- 
tive 


Infanity]  ARRANGEMENT.  309 


tive  of  condudt.  Of  this  I  am  certain,  that 
I  have  endeavoured  ro  exhibit  a  true  picture, 
though  1  am  fenfible  it  is  a  very  imperfe<^l 
one,  of  what  I  have  repeatedly  feen,  and 
carefully  attended  to. 

This  truly  pitiable  difcrder  is  not  ill  de- 
lineated by  WiERUS.f  And  Zacutus 
LusiTANUS  relates  a  curious  inftance  of  it, 
which  had  acquired,  as  it  is  apt  to  do,  ideal 
fymptoms  ;  and  'was  cured  by  an  extraordi- 
nary ftratagem.  ||  Indeed  cafes  of  this  kind 
are  fo  common,  that  few  can  have  lived  long- 
in  the  world,  and  been  at  all  attentive  to  fuch 
occurrences,  but  muft,  at  one  time  or  other, 
have  had  an  opportunity  of  obferving  it.  Jt 
is  finely  painted  by  the  pi^lurefque  pencil  of 
our  inimitable  Spencer,  in  the  ninth  canto 
of  the  Jirji  book  of  his  Fairy-^een  ;  from 
which  my  reader  will  pardon  me,  if  I  tran- 

fcribe, 

'  f  WiERi  dc  Prajiig.  Damon.  Lib.  3.  Dc  Lamlis.  cap.  7. 
§.  5.  p.  182. 

II  Zacuti  Lusitani  Trax.  Med.  Admkanel.  Lib.  i. 
Obf.  49.  p.  II.  Opcrum  Tom.  2.  zAcsXc&m^iL  de  Med,  Princ^ 
H\ft.  Lib.  I.  Obf.  39.  Opcrum  Tom.  i.  p.  75. 


310   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

fcribe,  in  this  place,  the  three  following 
beautiful  flanzas  :  

The  knight  was  much  enmoved  with  his 
fpeech. 

That  as  a  fword*s  point  through  his  heart 
did  pierce, 

And  in  his  confcience  made  a  fecrct  breach, 
Well  knowing  true  all,  that  he  did  re- 
hearfe. 

And  to  his  frefh  remembrance  did  reverfc 
The  ugly  view  of  his  deformed  crimes. 
That  all  his  manly  powers  it  did  difperfe, 
As  he  were  charmed  with  Inchaunted  rimes, 
That  oftentimes  he  quak'd,  and  fainted  often- 
times. 

In  which  amazement,  when  the  mifcreant 
Perceived  him  to  waver  weak  and  frail, 
While  trembling  horror  did  his  confcience 
dant. 

And  hellifh  anguifh  did  his  foul  aflail ; 
To  drive  him  to  defpair,  and  quite  to  quaiJ, 
He  fhew'd  him  painted  in  a  table  plain, 
The  damned  ghofts,  that  do  in  torment 
wail, 

And 


InfanltyJ   ARRANGEMENT.  311 

And  thoufand  fiends  that  do  them  endlefs 
pain 

With  fire  and  brimftone  which  for  ever  fhall 
remain. 

The  fight  whereof  fo  throughly  him  dif- 
may'd, 

That  nought  but  death  befi:>re  his  eyes  he 
faw, 

And  ever  burning  wrath  before  him  laid. 
By  righteous  fentence   of  th'  almighty*s 
law  : 

Then  'gan  the  villain  him  to  overcraw, 
And  brought  unto  him  fwords,  ropes,  poi- 
fon,  fire, 

4.nd  all  that  might  him  to  perdition  draw  ; 
And  bade  him  chufe  what  death  he  would 
defire  : 

For  death  was  due  to  him,  that  had  provok'd 
God's  ire.  * 

13.  1  N  Appetitive  Insanity  thefd 
is  an  hnmoderate,    and  ungovernable,  dejife, 

*  Stanza  XLVIII.  XLIX.  andL,  Vol.  1,  p.  140. 


312   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 

of  gratifying  an  appetitb,  uoithout  that 
regard  to  madefy^  a?id  decency,  which  is 
commonly  obferved  even  by  the  moft  dif- 
folute,  when  in  their  right  minds  :  and  as  the 
diforder  advances,  it  ufuaily,  fooner  or  later,  dif 
covers  fuch  other  fymptoms  as  evidently  indicate 
a  dijlempered  brain. 

This  fpecles  of  Infanity  is,  in  fome  ca- 
fes, very  flow,  and  gradual,  in  its  progrefs, 
free  from  impetuofity  and  violence,  and  af~ 
fumes,  as  circumflances  determine,  without 
relinquifliing  its  own  peculiar  lymproms,  an 
appearance  o1  impiilfive,  or  oi  diflrefsjtd pathe- 
tic, and  fometlmes  of  mildly  maniacal  Inlani- 
ty  :  in  others  it  is  as  rapid  and  violent,  as  it 
is  indecent,  difgufting,  and  fhocking  ;  and 
readily  acquires  turbulently  ?naniacal,  and  not 
very  rarely  phrenitic  fymptoms. 

I  T  ufuaily  attacks  thofe,  who,  though  in 
a  fingle  (late,  and  under  the  outward  rc- 
ilraint  of  an  artificial  modefly,  have  impru- 
dently indulged  in  the  wantonnefs  of  iafcivl- 
ous  thoughts,  and  amorous  defi res,  of  which 

they  had  neither  the  faiidioi)  of  law,  nor  of 

cuftom 


Inkmty]  ARRANGEMENT.  313 


cuflom,  nor  of  religion,  to  purfue,  without 
guilt,  or  blame,  the  irregular  gratification. 
But  though  it  moft  commonly  attacks  fuch  as 
have  thus  fecrctly  cheriflied  a  forbidden  flame  ; 
yet  the  purefl,  and  moft  immaculate,  in 
thought,  and  condu6V,  are  not  perfeftly  fe- 
cure  from  its  invafion.  Certain  conditions  of 
body  may  fometimes  induce  the  diforder, 
without  the  previous  exiftence  of  any  mental 
turpitude.  But  whatever  may  be  the  exciting 
caufe,  it  rarely  difcovers  itfelf  till  it  has  rifen 
to  a  confiderable  height,  and  has  acquired 
fuch  vigour  as  to  overcome,  and  break  through 
the  very  ftrong  barriers,  and  powerful  re- 
ilralnts,  of  modefty,  and  decorum. 

A  s  it  exifts,  with  fome  neceffary  difference 
of  fymptoms,  in  the  different  fexes,  it  may  be 
divided  into  two  varieties  :  to  which  there 
will  be  no  dilficulty  in  appropriating  names  ; 
fnice  a  diforder  of  this  fort  in  men,  has  alrea- 
dy acquired  the  appellation  of  Satyria- 
sis ;  *  and,  in  the  other  fex,  that  ofNvM- 

R  r  PHo- 

_  *  Vidt  A  RET. IE  I  CaPPAD.  ^eCuu/j  &  Sigms  Morh.  J!cut 

Lib.  I.  cap.  12.  p.  25.  Paul,  ^ginet.  de  Re  Mcdlc^t. 

Lib. 


3U    DEFINITION    and  [Notion 


3^H0MANiA,  t    But  it  may  be  proper  to  ob-. 

ferve. 

Lib.  3.  cap.  56.  p.  95.  Galeni      Tumorlh.  prater  Na- 

turam;  m  'LAc\5Vi  jk  Epifo/ii.  p.    708.  1.    65.  Boneti 

Polyalth.  Lib.    4.   cap.    75.   Tom.    2.   p.    1195.  Sau- 

VAGEsii  NofoL  Method.  Clafs,  viii.  Gen.  13.  Tom.  3.  Part. 
I.  p.  339. 

A  very  curious  cafe  of  this  kind  is  circumftantially  rela- 
ted by  WiH-xUs,  which  I  {hall  here  t!-anfcribe,  as  exhibiting 
u  pretty  cxaft  fpecimen  of  the  Infanity  which  I  mean  to  difcrimi- 
JKite  under  the  name  of  Satyr  i  as  i  s.    His  words  are  thefe  : — 

"  Scribit  Pau>lus  Grillandus,  quendam  hifpanum  cleri- 
cum  &  deci  etorum  doftorem  anno  astatis  fuas  quadragelimo  quinto 
RomjE  quarundam  ju\'enum  monialium  amore  captum,  <r[uas  & 
form  i  venufta  faepius  in  m onafterio  vifitans,  verbifqiie  &  mune- 
ribus  abblandiens,  ufque  adeo  deperiit,  ut  notte  dieque,  tarn 
Ibmniens  quam  vigil,  nihil  aliud,  nifi  earundem  amplexus  con- 
cubitufque  meditaretur  corde,  verbo,  geltis,  Sd  fignis  :  paulatim 
&  eo  venit  amentiae,  quum  clericus  eflet,  ut  fe  ecclefia:  fponfum, 
■&  moniales  cj  11  fdem  fponfas  efle  palam  aflercret ;  hoc  ufus  argu- 
niento,  quod  dicerentur  Iponfje  chrifti,  qui  reprefentatur  per  ec- 
clefiam  :  hinc  concludebat,  fponfum  &:  fponfas  fpiritualei,  hoc  eft 
facerdotes  &  moniales,  poife  limul  carnaliter  congredi  fine  pecca- 
to,  &  Deum  ita  prjeordinafie,  ac  fe  putare  fummum  bonum  in  ejuf- 
inodi  congrelTu  elfe  pofitum.    Eadem  infuper  juvenculis  faepius 
prsedicibat.    Tandem  quoque  orationes  et  preces  nefarias  compo- 
nebar,  quibus  apud  Deum  &  alios  inftabat  fan£los,  ut  maximas 
vires  in  renibus  poflet  confequi,  in  lumbis  veto  talem  calorem,. 
ut  abundantur  &  fa;penumero  fuam  poflet  cxplere  llbidinem  :  de- 
inde  ut  diva  Cecilia,  Urfula,  Magdalena  &  Clara  ex  dono  fpeci- 
alis  gratiae  mentibus  monialium  lifdem  nominibus  nuncupatarura 
infunderent,  nullum  fieri  polfe  opusmagis  Deo  meritorlum,  quam 
carnaliter  com mifceri,  crefcere&  multiplicarc,  citra  ullam  perfo- 
narum  diftinclionem,  &:  voti  caftitatis  lajfionem,  idque  Deoplace- 
Te  magis  quam  holocauftum  five  facrificium  :  ut  item  illarum  cor- 
^inflainraarent  amore  ardeatierga  facerdotem  ccclefix  fponfum, 

nc 


Itifainty]   ARRANGEMENT.  315 


ferve,  that  1  ufe  the  term  Satyriasis  in  a 
more  hmited  fenfe  than  moft  medical 
writers,  who  extend  it  to  diforders,  which 
I,  who  confine  it  to  Infanity,  am  obli- 
ged to  exclude,  and  who  reckon  tVmproms,  as 
effential,  which,  however  frequently  they 
may  occur  in  this  variety  of  appetitive  Infa- 
nity, are  merely  concomitant,  do  not  neceffa- 
rilj  enter  into  the  idea  of  the  diforder,  and,  I 

have 


ne  ejus  vota  carnalia  maxima  cum  hiimilitate  adimpleve,  manda- 

tifque  ut  veri  patris  parere  gravaientur,  Scc  "  De  Prajllg^ 

Damon,  Lib.  3.  de  Lamiis.  cap.  7.  p.  181. 

■f-  Sauvagesii  Clafs.  viii.  Gen.  14.  Tom  3.  Part.  i.  p. 
345. — Sauvages,  and  others,  reckon  both  Nymphomania  and 
Satyriasis  diftint5l  genu<es  from  Injania  ;  becauie  they  arenot 
always  accompanied  with  what  they  call  Delirium^  that  is  with. 
ideal  Delirium.  Nor  do  I  here  mean  to  comprehend  every  dif- 
order to  which  others  have  given  this  appellation  ;  but  fuch  only 
as  (hall  be  found,  on  ftnil  examination,  to  be  included  in  my  de- 
finitions. The  cafe  of  Satyriajis  in  the  preceeding  note  is  plainly 
fo  ;  and  all  the  inftances  of  Nympho>nania^  which  h:'.ve  fallen  un- 
der my  obfervation,  have  been  accompanied  with  other  indifputa- 

ble  fymptoms  of  Infanity.  See  alHa  Bartholin! 

Hijl.  Anat,  liar.  Cent.  2.  Hift.  6g.  p.  2i;8.   Schench^i 

Obf.  Med.  Rar.    p.    134.   Obf.  4.  ^Zacuti  Lusitan. 

IP  rax,  Med.  jidmir.  Lib.  2.  Oper.  Tom.  2.  ad  calcem.  p.  64. 

Obf.    93.  StNNERTl    Mcdicina   FraSl.    Lib.  4.  ]"art,  2,. 

Se£t.  5.  cap.  5.  .C^^;;;</?i,^»/»OT  Tom.  4.  p.  688. 


R  r  z 


3i6   DEFINITION    and  [Notion. 


have  reafon  to  believe,  do  not  always  exift. 
What  thefe  fymptoms  are  will  readily  be  ieen, 
by  comparing  the  paffages,  referred  to  In  the 
notes,  with  the  definition  which  1  have  given 
above. 


I  have  already  mentioned  that  all  thefe  fpe- 
cies  of  Infanity  may  be  varioiifly  combined, 
and  frequently  interchange,  one  with  another. 
It  may  be  proper  farther  to  remark,  that  the 
fame  patient  fometimes  goes  through  feveral 
kinds  of  Infanity, — which  may  be  reckoned 
in  fuch  cafes,  as  fo  many  degrees,  or  ftages, 
—  during  the  courfe  of  the  lame  illnefs.  Of 
thefe  combinations,  and  changes,  there  is  al- 
moft  an  cndlefs  variety.  One  remarkable, 
and  not  uncommon  tranfition  of  Infanity,  is 
from  great  dejection,  and  diftrefs,  to  eafe  and 
chearfulnefs,  and  fometimes  to  an  uncommon 
flow  of  fpirits.  But  moft  frequently  it  retains 
its  chara(5ter  of  livelinefs,  or  anxiety,  eleva- 
tion, or  depreffion.  In  general,  all  kinds  of 
Infanity,  fo  far  as  they  arife  from  mental  con- 
ftitution,  and  are  not  the  fudden  effeft  of  any 
accidental  bodily  difeafe,  may  be  confidered 

as 


Inninlty]  A  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  317 


as  proceeding  from  two  different,  and  oppo- 
lite  conftitutional  fources  ',~'m  one  of  which 
the  chara6leriftic  temperament  of  mind  may 
properly  enough  be  called  fanciful,— and 
in  the  other,  thoughtful.  The  fir  ft  de- 
gree of  Infanity  in  the  former  cafe  may  be 
called  flighty  ;  and  the  firft  in  the  latter  melatt* 
choly.  The  following  fcheme  will  fhow  the 
natural  progreffion  of  thefe  conftitutional  tem- 
peraments of  mind  from  their  found  ftate,  if 
they  can  ever  ftri£lly  be  faid  to  be  in  a  found 
ftate,  to  the  height  of  diforder,  and  Infanity; 
and  from  thence  again  to  their  ordinary  ftatc 
of  fanity. 


— maniacal  —  t 

— phreiiitic —  !>•  flighty  —  fanciful 
—maniacal  —  J 


2.  Thoughtfi.l      me- r  _phTenitl-l'"^^^"'^^°'X^ 

lancholy-  I  _r„,„i,cal_  J  " 

From  the  firft  of  thefe  conftitutlonal 
clafles  it  appears  obvious  why  —  "  great  zvits 

to  madnefs  nearly  are  allied^  Both  of  them, 

where  the  diforder  was  not  brought  on  by 
fome  difeafe  of  body  ;  or  other  very  powerful 

exciting 


3-18  DEFINITION   W  [Nofloiu 


exciting caiife,  as  intenfe  ftudy,  the  violent  paf- 
ffion  of  love,  fuddeii  terror,  or  the  like,  which 
fpare  neither  weak  nor  ftrong  faculties, — are 
ufually  the  attendants  of  a  weak  judgement :  — 
but  with  this  difference,  that  in  the  Jirji  cafe 
the  imagination  is  chiefly  in  fault ;  and  in  the 
fecond  the  affediions  :  the  Infanity  in  the  one  a- 
rifing  from  too  flight  and  hafty  combinations 
of  fancy,  and  an  increafed  a£tivlty  of  that  live- 
ly faculty  ;  and  in  the  other^  from  violent, 
and  unreafbnable,  attachments  and  averlions ; 
—  both  of  which  originate  from,  or  tend  to 
produce,  weaknefs  of  judgment.  Perfons, 
therefore,  who  are  thus  conftitutionally  dif- 
pofed  to  one,  or  other,  of  the  above-mention- 
ed clalTes  of  Infanity,  have  adiive  imaginations^ 
Jirong  znd  permanent  affeSiions,  and  weak  judg- 
ments ;  though  ingenious,  witty,  and  acute, 
they  arc  ufually  confpicuous  for  the  want  of 
that  fober  inveftigation  in  matters  of  reafon- 
ing,  and  of  that  prudent  moderation  in  the 
conduct  of  life,  which  charafterize  men  of 
cool  heads,  and  found  underftandings  :  — ^ 
-with  regard  to  religion,  they  are  apt  to 

•r.uii  into  fuperJlitioUy  or  enthiifiafniy  pn  the  one 

hand 


Infanity]   ARRANGEMENT.  3151 


hand,  or  into  infidelity  on  the  other,  overleap- 
ing that  temper  ite  mean  within  which  a  bet- 
ter judgment  vvoLild  have  retrained  them  ;  — 
with  regard  to  Mo  ;als,  to  deviate  either  in- 
to aufterity^  or  ticentioufnefs  ;   and  with  re- 
gard to  their  health,  are  either  incautious, 
and  intemperate /r^f //wrj,  or  anxious,  and 
u p u lo  u  3  valetudinarians. 

It  may,  alfo,  be  noticed,  that  Infanity  ap- 
pea:rs  fometimes  to  be  epidemic  ;  and  either 
to  derive  its  origin  from  fome  accidental, 
and  temporary,  ftate,  and  conftitution, 
of  the  atmofphere,  which  fits  it  to  pro- 
duce fuch  bodily  dlforder  as  has  a  tenden- 
cy to  afJe£l  the  brain,  in  a  certain,  and 
determinate  manner;  or  to  take  its  peculiar 
turn  from  the  prevailing  notions,  and  fafh- 
ionable  prejudices,  of  the  times,  or  pla- 
ces, in  which  it  occurs.  Of  the  firji  fort 
of  epidemic  Infanity  we  have  inftances  in 
the  cafes  —  of  the  Milefian  virgins,  and  of 
the  French  women  of  Lyonnois,  who  hanged^ 
and  drowned  themfelves  in  great  numbers,  as 
has  already  beea  mentioned,  without  any  ob- 
vious 


320    DEFINITION    and  [Motion. 


vious  caufe  ;  ^  and  of  thofe  who  former- 
ly, jn  Germany,  were  afFefted  with  what 
was- called,  by  the  medical  writers  of  thofe 
days,  who  faw  and  defcrlbed  the  dlfor- 
der.  Saint  Vitus' s  Dance  ;||  as  well  as  of  thofe 
in  Holland,  who,  in  the  year  1375,  were 
in  like  manner  affe£l:ed  with  an  epidemic 
propenfity  to  dance,  which  fo  readily  com- 
municated itfelf  to  fuch  as  looked  on  with  too 
much  attention,  that  it  was  attributed  by 
the  populace  to  the  poffeffion  of  the  devil, 
and  was  called  Saint  Johns  Dance.   Ex- 
amples of  the  fecondh^Lve  been  numerous  both 
in  antient  and  modern  times;  and  have  grown 
out  of  the  fuperftltion,  and  enthufiafm,  of 
almoft  every  country.  Such  was  the  Infani- 
ty,  which  took  its  charader  from  the  fanati- 
cifm  of  thecrufades  ;  from  the  romantic  no- 
tions of  chivalry  ;  from  the  abfurd  belief  of 

poffefl- 

^  ScHENCHii  Olf.  MeJ.  Rar.  Lib.  i.  p.  I37.  Obf.  i. 
——See  above  p.  264. 

|[  ScHENCHii  Olf.  Med,  Rar.  Lib.  i.  p.  136.  Obf.  8. — 
See  above  p.  208. 

X  Sauvagesii  Nofol,  Method,  Cl^fs  viii.  Gen.  19. 
Tom.  3.  part  i.  p.  389. 


Inlanity]    x\  R  R  A  N  G  E  M  E  N  T.  34! 


pofle[rions,§  and  witchcraft,*  which  have 
led  many  to  confefs,  on  their  trials,  this  ima- 
ginary crime,  though  they  knew  that  death 
was  the  inevitable  confequence,  not  a  few  to 
believe  that  they  were  bewitched,  or  pofleff- 
cd,  —and  fome  to  perfuade  themfelves  that 
they  had  a6l:ually  been  tempted  to  enter  into 
a  compa£^  with  the  devil.  ^  In  fhort,  as  all 
thefe  abfurdities  abounded  in  the  dark  ages 
of  ignorance  and  credulity,  ||   fo  the  feveral 

forts 


^  Salvages  1 1  Nofolog.  McihoiL  Clafs  vili.  Gen.  19.  D^r- 
monomania.Tom.  3.  Part.  i.  p.  393. — — Schenchii  O^J.  Med. 

Ra>\  Uih.  I.  p.  138,1.  139,  2.  -Barthohni  cle  Morbis 

Biblicis  cap.  19.  p.  82. 

*  Sauvagksii  NofoJ'g  Method.  Clafs  viii.  Gen.  19.  I)xmo- 

nomania  Saganim.  ib.  vV  1 1  r  i    de  Prajiig.  Damon.  Lib. 

3.  De  Lamlis.  cap.  5.  p.  177.  cap.  14.  p.  206.   n.  8. — De 

Harn     Afrt^zVr.   Part.  2.  cap.  i.  p  64.  n.  14.  Joan- 

Nis  Clerici   Logica,  Outologia,  &  Piieumatologia.  p,  348. 

P neu-matolog.  Se6l.  2.  cap.  5.  Bartholin!   de  Mori, 

Biblicis.  p.  82. 

%  ScHENGHii  Ohf.  Med.  Rat:  Lib.  i.  p.  138.  Obf.  i, 

II  "  Our  forefathers,  fays  Addiso>j,  looked  upon  nature  with 
more  revtrence  and  horror,  berore  tr.e  world  was  enlightened  by 
learning  and  phil  >fophy,  and  loved  to  aftonilh  themfelves  with 
the  apprchenfions  of  witchcraft,  prodigies,  charms,  and  inchant- 

Ricnts. 

Sf 


P  E  F  I  N- 1  T  I-  O  N    and  [Notion. 


j(brrs  of  epidemic.  Infanity,  which  have  been 
ijamped  with  a  fimilar  charafter,  have  been  the 
peculiar  produ<^ion  of  rhofe  ages  ;  and  if  now, 
at  any  time,  a  folltary  inflarce  of  a  like  nature 
difcovers  itlelf,  it  is  always  found  to  take  pof- 
feffion  of  the  weak,  the  ignorant,  and  the 
credulous.  Nor  can  we  exclude  from  this  fe- 
Cpnd  diyifion  in  the  catalogue  of  epidemic  Tn- 
fanity,  the  pretended  aftrologers,  conjurers^ 
alchemifts,  and  roficrucians,  wh-O  flouriHied 
about  two  centuries,  or  more,  ago  ;  imong 
whom,  in  England,  were,  the  celebrated 
John  Dee,  with  his  prophet,  or  feer,  Ed- 
ward Kelly,  who,  as  Hu  DIB  HAS  informs 
us, 

  did  all  his  feats  upon 

The  deviFs  looking- glafs,  a  ftone  ; 
Were  playing  with  him  at  bo-peep, 

He  folv'd  all  problems  n^'er  fa  deep,  %^  • 

the 

ments,  There  was  not  a  village  in  England  that  had  not  a  ghoft 
in  it,  the  chiirch-yiVds  were  all  haunted,  every  large  common 
had  a  circle  of  fairies  belonging  to  it,  and  there  was  fcarce  a  {hep- 
herd  to  be  met  with  who  had  not  feen  a  fpirit,"  — •  Seegtatoj;. 
YpJ.  6.  No,  419.  p.  106. 

^  Part  II.  Cant.  3.  r.  31,  Scf. 


Inranity]   ARRANGEMENT.  323 


the  no  lefs  remarkable  Dr.  Simon  For- 
ma n,  and  many  others  ;  who,  though  ufu- 
ally  efteemed  impoftors,  appear  to  have  been 
as  much  cheated  themfelves,  as  they  were 
dlfpofed  to  cheat  others  ;  and,  if  they  were 
in  fome  degree  rogues,  they  were  alfo,  in  nd 
fmall  degree,  filly  fools,  and  madmen  ;  andt 
as  much  mifled  by  a  deluded  imagination,  as 
their  more  refpe£table  brethren,  the  fuperfti- 
tious  devotees,  and  fanatical  cnthufiafts,  who 
abounded  in  the  declining  ftate  of  chriftiani- 
ty,  and  at  the  dawn  of  the  reformation,  while 
the  mifts  of  ignorance,  which  are  now  dlfap- 
pearing  before  the  mild  illumination  of  reafoii 
and  truth,  overclouded  and  darkened  thofe  di- 
vine lights  of  the  mind,  and  involved  in  gloom, 
and  obfcurity,  the  engaging  beauties  of  pure 
and  rational  religion. 

Such  Infane  perfons.  as  dp  not  recover, 
remain  gloomy,  or  fanciful,  or  become  idiots', 
and  fometimes  have  returns  of  maniacal  Infa- 

nity,  at  uncertain,  and  irregular  intervals.  

As  for  regular  intervals,  they  are  feldom  met 
with      and  though  many  are  thought  by 

their 


324    DEFINITION    and  [Notion 

their  friends  to  be  aff  6led  by  the  full  aild 
CHANGE  of  the  MOO  SI,  I  could  never  clearly, 
and  certainly,  perceive  any  f  ich  lunar  Injlu^ 
ence.  I  do  not  aiTert  that  th  fe  relative  pofi- 
tionb  of  the  moon  have  no  influence  in  produ- 
cing fits  of  Infanity  :  there  is  fome  plaufibili- 
ty  in  the  opinK)n  that  they  have  ;  and  many 
inftances  are  rel  ited  by  medical  writers  in  its 
fupport  :  but  written  cafes  are  often  inaccu- 
rate, and  fallacious :  if  fuch  cafes  really  exift, 
I  think  I  have  reafon  to  believe  that  they  are 
exceedingly  rare. 


The  End  of  the  Firjl  Volume, 


A  Catalogue  of  the  principal  Books 
quoted,  or  referred  to,  in  the  preceeding 
Volume  ;  with  an  Account  of  the  Edi- 
tions made  ufe  of. 


U'lppocratls  Opera  Omnia.  Ab  Anut'io  Fajto  Medlo- 
matiico.    Folio.    Geneva;,  1657. 

Anutii  Fc^o  CEconomia  Hippocratis.  Folio.  Geneva, 
1662. 

Magni  Hippocratis  Coaca  Prafagia.  Cum  interprcta- 
tione  &  commentariis  Jacobi  Holleri  Stempani,  — Dejide" 
tii  Jacotii  Vandoperani  opera  in  lucem  cditis,  &c, 
polio.    Lugduni,  1576. 

D.Hieronymi  Mercurialis  Forolivienfis  in  fecundum  Lib, 
Epid.  Hipp.  PrvEleftones  Bononienfes,  Fblio.  Foroli- 
viij  1626. 

jiret(ei  Cappadocii  dc  caufis  et  fignis  acutorum,  et  din- 
tutnoruin  Morboruiti  Libri  quatuor.  De  Curatione  acuto-  " 
rum,  6c  diuturnorum  Morboi  um  Libri  quatuor.  Editio- 
ncrrl  curavit  Hermannus  Boerhaave^     Folio,  Lugduni 
Batavorum,  1735. 

Epitome  Gakni  Operum,  in  quator  partes  digefta, 
pulcherrima  methodo  univerfam  illius  viri  dofttinain 
coHipleftens :  per  And.  Lcicunam^  Secoblenfem.  Folio. 
Bafiieze,  1551. 

Pauli  A!!gimt/e  opus  de  re  medica,  Latinitatedonatum, 
per  Jahannem  Guinterium  Andernacuni,  Folio.  Pariflis, 

C<elii  Aureliani,  SIccenfis,  Medici  vctufli,  Sefla  Me- 
lliodici    de  Morbis  Acutis  &  Chronicis  Libii  viii  Jq. 

Conradus 


ii  CATALOGUE. 

'Conradus  Jmman,  M.  D.  recenfuir,  emaculavit;  Notu- 
lafque  acljccit.  Acccdant  leorlini  Theod.  Janfs.  at  Alme- 
/o^-ffw  Not£e  &  Animadveifiones.    4L0.    Amftelsed.  1722. 

Atr.  Corn.  Cdjt  de  Medicina  Libri  viii.  kc.  Cura 
&  Studio  Th.  J.  ab  Ameioveen.  8vo.  Rotterodami, 
4750. 

Artis  Medietas  Principcs,  Hippocrates,  Jretaus,  Alex-- 
■ander,  Aurelianus^  Celfiis,  Ra-zis.    RefenfuiT,  prafatus  eft 
Alhertns  At  Haller.    Tomiii.    8vo.    Laufannae,  1:769, 
1770,  1771,  1772,  1774- 

C.  Pl'inn  Secundi  Hiftorise  Mundi  Libri  xxxvii.  Fo- 
lio.   Bafileae,  1539. 

Ji/[.  TuUli  Ciceroriis  Opera,  cum  Deleftu  Commenta- 
riorum,  ex  Editione  Jofephi  Oiivcti,  Tomi  ix.  4to. 
Amftelaedami,  1745,  1746,  &  1747. 

jM.  Tullti  Ctceronii   Opera   quae  extant  omnia,  ex 
M.  S.  S.  codicibus  emendata  Studio  atque  Induftria  Jani 
Gulielmil  &c  Jani  Gr uteri,  &c.  nunc  denuo  recognita  ab 
"Jacoho  Gronovio.     i2mo.    Tomii  xi.    Lugd,  BataiK 
1692. 

M.  Tullii  Clceron'ts  Tufculanarum  Difputatlonum  Li* 
bri  V.  cum  Commentario  Joamtis  Davifil,  Coll.  Regin. 
Cantab.  PraeliJis.    Ed.  3a.  8\o.  Cantab.  1730. 

M.  7////// Cwro«/j  Tufculanarum  Difputationum  Li- 
bri quinque.  Accedunt  Leftiones  variantes,  &  doftorura, 
praecipue  CI.  Bouherii  Conjedlurae.  i2ino.  Glafgua:,  1744 

JPlatnnis  de  Rebus  Divinis  Dialogi  felefti  Graece  &  La- 
Itine.    8vo.  Cantabrigise,  1683. 

JXo^enis  Laertiij  de  Vitis,  Dogmat.  &  Apopht.  cla- 

rorum 


CATALOGUE.  ilL 


rorum  Philofophorum,    Lil^i  X.  &c.  Grace  &  Latinc. 
If.  Cafauboni  Noia,  &c.  8vo.  Geneva,  1615. 

Xenophontis.  de  Cyri  Inftitutione  Libri  ofto.    A  Thoma 
Hutchinforty  A.  M.  8vo  Londini,  1730. 

L.  Annai  Seneca  Opera,  quae  extant,  integris  Jujll 
Lip/ii,  y.  Fred.  Gtonovii,  &  felcftis  variorujn  Coiii- 
mentariis  illuftrata.  Tomi  III.  8vo.  Amftelodami,  167^.^ 

Z'lcut'i  Lujitani  Opera  Omnia  in  duos  Tomos  divifa, 
Pr/W  continentur  de  Hifloria  Principum  Medicorum  Li- 
bri VI.  Pojleriore,  Praxis  Hiftoriarum  Libn  VI.  In- 
troitus  ad  Praxin.  Pharmacopoe  i.  Praxis  Medica  Admi- 
randa,  multis.  Sec.    Folio..    Lugdani,  1649. 

Jmnnii  Schcnckii  Obfervationuin  Medicarum  rariorunv- 
Ljbri  VII.  Folio.  Lugduni,  1644. 

Alexandri  MaJJiiri aY\ctnx\ri\  Opera  Medica.  Folio. 
Lugduni,  1634. 

Profperi  Jlpini  de  Medici na  Methodica  Libri  XIII. 
Edit.  2a.  4to.    Lugdunj  Eaiavorum,  17 19. 

Nicolai  Pifrjnis  Medici  Lotharingi  dc  cognofcendis  & 
curandii  praecipue  internis  humani  Corporis  Morbis  Li- 
bri IIL  Et  ejufdem  de  Febribus  Liber  unus.  AccelHt 
Vrxhuo  Hermanni  Soerhaave.  Vol um.  duo,  410..  Lugdu- 
ni Batavorum,  1736. 

Danlelh  Sennerti  Opera  Omnia,  in  fex  Tomos  divifa.^ 
Folio,    Lugduni,  1676. 

Zazar/ Opera  Medica,  Univerfa^  Folio.  Gc- 
aevse,  1728. 

Felicia 


iv  CATALOGUE. 

_  FeUc'is  Platerl  Praxeos  Medics  Tomi  III.  cum  Cen-tu^ 
ria  Pofthuma.    410.    Bafiles,  1656. 

Georgii  Horfiiiy  fenioris.  Opera  Medica.  Tomi  I  If. 
4to.    Goudze,  1 66 1. 

Johannls  Dolce'i  Encyclopedia  Medici nx  theoretico- 
pradlicas.    410.    Amfteldami,  1686. 

yohann'is  Wieri  Opera  Omnia.  410,    Amfl.  1660. 

Nicolai  Tulpii  Obfervationcs  Medics.  Ed.  5a.  lamo. 
Lugd.  Batavor.  17 16. 

Johannh  Broen  Animadvcrfiones  Medicse,  theoretico- 
praftics  in  Henrici  Reni  Piaxin  Medlcam,  &c.  4to, 
Lugd.  Batav.  1695. 

Thoma  Bartholini  Hifloriarum  A  natomcarum  rariorura. 
Centuria  I  et  II.  lamo.    Hagae  Coniitum. 

Ortus  Medecinae,  id  eft  Initia  Phyficae  inaudita,  pro- 
greffus  Medicinae  nevus,  in  morborum  ultionem  ad  vitam 
longam,  au£lore  'Joan,  Baptiji.  Fan  Helmont.  &c.  Folio 
Lugduni,  1655.  [Opera  Omnia^ 

Th.  Bartholini  de  Morbis  Biblicis  Mircella^ica  Medi- 
ca. i2mo.    Francofurti,  1672. 

Hleronimi  Mercur'ialis  ForoHvienfis  Opufcula  Aurea,  & 
feledloria.    Folio.    Venetiis,  1644. 

Thoma  Bartholini  Afta  Medica  &  Philofcphica  Hafni- 
cnfia.  Voluraina  V.  ab  Anno  1671 — 1679.  4to.  Haf- 
flix. 

IdeA 


CATALOGUE.  v 


Idea  Univcrfae  Medicine  Prafticas  LibrisXIl  abfoluta 
'Job.  yonjioiius^  iM.  D.  conciunavit.  lamo.  Amft.  1652. 

iT/Jjc/m^? /-F////^  de  Anima  Brutornm  quae  Homhih  vitalis 
ac  leniitiva  eft,  exercitationes  duvE.  i2mo,  Londini,  1672 

Jrchibaldi  Pitcarmi  O^trz.  Ovc\m2.^1td\cz,    410,  Lug- 
duni  Batavorum,  1737. 

Thomce  Burneti  Thefaurus  Mcdicinae  PrafticE.  4to. 
Londini,  1673. 

Theophill  Bonet'i  Polyalthos.  five  I'liefaurus  Medico- 
Prafticus,  Sec.  in  qua  viri  excellentiffimi  Johannis  JonJIo' s 
7ii  iyntagma  explicatur.    2  Tom.  Folio.  Gcnevae,  T0115., 
1.  169 1.  Tom.  2.  1694. 

Theopheli  Boneti  Medici na  Septentrionalls  Collatitia,  five 
Rei  Medics,  nuperis  annis  a  Medicis  Anglis,  Germani* 
&  Danis  emiffie,  Sylloge  &  Syntaxis.  Tomi  II.  Folia, 
Genevae,  1685,  &  1686. 

Ihoma  Sydenhaml,  M.  D.  Opera  Univerfa.  Svo.  Lug- 
duni  Batavorum,  1726. 

A  Treatife  on  Difeafes  incident  to  the  Skin.  By  Daniel 
'Turner y  M.  D.  $vo.  London,  1726. 

De  Urinis  &Pulfibus,  de  Miffione  Sanguinii,  &  Fe- 
bribus,  de  Morbi,s  Capitis,  &  Peftoris.  O^ms  Laurentii 
Bellini,  dicatum  Francifco  Redi.  Ed,  quinta.  410.  Lug- 
duni  Batavorum,  1717. 

Luca  Tozzi  Opera  Omnia.  Tomi  5.    4to.  VenctiiSj 
1728. 


Frejer'ad 


VI  CATALOGUE. 


Frederlci  Hoffmanni  Opera  Omnia  Phyfico-Mcdica,  dc- 
puo  revifa,  corredla  &  aufta,  in  VI  Tonios  diftrihuta  ; 
&c.  Cum  Vita  Auftoris.  in  Volum.  111.  divila.  Folio. 
Genevae,  1761. 

Frederlci  Hoffmanni  Operum  Omnium  Phyfico-Medi- 
corum  Supplementumf  in  duas  partes  diftributum.  Folio» 
Geneva,  1754. 

Ejufdem  Operum  Omnium  Supplemeiitum  fetundum^  in 
tres  partes  diftributum.  Pan   prima.    Folio.  Geneva, 

1753-  ^    .  ■ 

Ejufdem  Operum  Omnium  Supplementim  fecundum,  pars 
fecunda;  Sc pars  tertia.    Folio.  Geneva,  1760. 

Bosrhaavii  Inftitutiones  Medicina.  8.vo.  Lugduni  Ba- 
tavorum,  1727. 

Hermanni  Boerhaavli  Vralcftioncs  Academics  in  pro- 
prias  Inftitutiones  Rei  Medica.  Edidit,  &  Notas  addidit 
Alhertus  Hallcr.    Tomi  7.  i2mo.    Lugd.  Batav.  1758. 

Gerardi  P'an  Sivieten  M.  D,  Commentaria  in  Hcrmamii 
Bocrhaavii  Aphorifmos  de  cognoicendis  &  curandis  Mor- 
bis.  Tomi  5.  410.  Ludg.  Bat   1742,  1745,  i753>  &c. 

Medicina  Dogmatica  tres  Morbos  particulares,  Deli- 
rium, Vertigincm,  &  Tuflim,  &c.  pro  fpecimine  exhi- 
bens.  Auftore  Jokanne  de  Gortery  M.  D.  &c.  4to.  Har- 
derovici,  1741. 

The  Medical  Works  of  Richard  Mead,  M.  D.  in  ^ 
yoUincs.  i2ino.  Edinburgh,  1763. 

Lauremii  Hcijleri  Compendium  Medlcinas  Praftics, 
8vo  Amfteladami,  1748. 

Principia  Mcdicir.a.  Auftore  Francifco  Hom^f  MedU 
CO  Rcgio,  6cc,    8vo  Edinburgi,  1762.. 


CATALOGUE,  vll 

Nofologia  Methodica,  iiftens Morborum  Clafles,  Ge- 
nera, &  Species,  juxta  Sydenhami  Mentem  h  Botaaico- 
Tu;n  ordinem.  Auftorc  Francifco  BoiJJter  de  Snuvages  Re- 
gis Coniiliario  ac  Mcclieo,  he,  Tom.  3,  in  Volum.  5 
divis.  8vo   Amftel.  1763. 

The  EngUp)  Malady^  or  a  Treatife  of  Nervous  Dlfea- 
fes  of  all  Kinds,  &:c.  8vo  2d  Edit.    London,  1734. 

"Remarks  on  Dr.  Battle's  Treatife  on  Madnefs,  by 
John  uMonro.  M.  D.  Fellow  of  the  College  of  Phylicians 
London;  and  Phyfician  to  Bethlcm-Hofpital,  8  vo  Lon- 
don, 1758. 

De  Melancholia  et  Morbis  Melancholicis.  Ab  Anncea 
Carolo  Lorry.  D.  M.  P.  2  Tom.  8vo  Lutetiae  Parifio- 
rum,  1765. 

S.  J.  D.  Tij/ot,  M.  D.  &  Prof.  Sermo  Inanguralis 
xlc  Valetudine  Littcratorum.  8vd  Laufaflnae,  1766. 

Jibe^l  V.  HaUer  Elementa  Phyliologias  Corporis  Hu* 
■maui.    Tomi  VIIL  410    Tom.  i,  2,  3,  4,  5,  Lau- 

fannas,  1757,  1760,  1761,1762,  1763.  Tom,  (3,  7 

8,  Lugduni  Batavorum,  1764,  1765,  1766. 

jintanii  de  Ham  de  Magia  Liber.  i2mo  Vcnetiis,  1776 

Anton'ii  Storck,  Libellus,  quo  dcmonftratur  :  Stramo- 
nium, Hyofcyamum,  Aconitum  non  folum  tuto  poflc 
exhibcri  ufu  interno  Honiiiiibus,  verum  ea  effc  rcmedia 
in  multis  morbis  maxime  falutifera.  8vo  Vindobon^, 
1762 

The  Hiftory  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  for  th« 
improving  of  Natural  Knowledge.  By  Thomas  Sprat, 
D.  D.  Lord  Bilhop  of  Rochefler  id  Edition  4to  London 
1702. 


viil   C    A   T   A    L   O   G   U  E. 

Hiftoire  &  Memoircs  de  TAcadcmic  Royalc  dcs  Sci- 
ences, et  Hiftoire  du  Rcnouvellcmcnt  de  ['Academic 
1699  i2mo.    A  Amfteidani, — Ann.  1699 — 1717. 

Afta  Eruditorum.  410  Lipfiae  Ab  Anno  1682  ad  An- 
num, 1727. 

Johannis  Ckrici  Lbgica,  Ontologia,  &  Pneumatalogia. 
limo  Cantab.  1704. 

An  Eflay  concerning  Human  Underftanding.  In  four 
Books.  W'x'xx.ttnhj  John  Locke^  Efq;  in  3  Volumes  8yo 
Glafgow,  1759. 

Gbfcrvations  on  Man,  his  Frame,  his  Duty,  and  his 
Expeftations.   In  two  Parts,   '^y  David  Hartley ^  M.  A^ 
2  Volumes,  Bvo  London,  1749* 

Otuvvcs  de  Nicolas  Boi'eau  Defpreax.  En  deux  Tomes 
lamo  A  Amflerdamj  1715. 

■RouJJeau  Juge  de  Jean  Jjicques.  Diologues^  D'apres  Ic 
manurcnt  dc  M.  RouJJeau  lailTc  entrc  tes  mains  de  M 
Brooke  Boathby,  8vo  A  Litchfield,  1780 

Granger's  Biographical  Hiftory  of  England  from  Eg- 
bert the  Great,  to  the  Revolution,  8vo  ad  Edition,  4 
Volumes,  London,  1775. 


I 


