(q  5-  (oO 


ft  9 c-tr 


/ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2016 


https://archive.org/details/b21914886 


oc 


fcy-c? 


/ 


9 


AN  INQUIRY 


INTO  THE 


tJATURE  and  ORIGIN 

7 


■ / )i  cihrcnr,  OF 

MENTAL  DERANGEMENT 


COMPREHENDING 
A CONCISE  SYSTEM 


£A* 


OF  THE 


* 


PHYSIOLOGY  and  PATHOLOGY  * 

OF  THJ 


HUM  A Ilf,  MIND. 

wti 

m 


AND  A 


HISTORY  OF  THE  PASSIONS  AND  THEIR  EFFECTS 


By  ALEXANDER  CRICHTON,  M.D. 


PHYSICIAN  TO  THE  WESTMINSTER  HOSPITAL,  AND  PUBLIS 
LECTURER  on  the  theory  and  practice  of 


l 

i 


PHYSIC,  AND  ON  CHEMISTRY. 


VOLUME  I. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  FOR  T.  CADELL,  JUNIOR,  AND  W.  DAVIES, 
IN  THE  STRAfJO. 


1798 


/ 


*. 


/ 


. 


t 


9 *♦ 


l 


' >. 


. .A 


/ 

/ 


I 


TO 


DAVID  PITCAIRN, 

M.  D.  F.  R.  S.  &c. 

WHOSE  LEARNING  AND  TALENTS, 

SO  CONSPICUOUSLY  DISPLAYED 

IN  THE  EXERCISE  OF  HIS  PROFESSION, 

HAVE  DESERVEDLY  RAISED  HIM  TO 

GENERAL  REPUTATION  AND  ESTEEM  ; 

AND 

WHOSE  LIBERALITY  AND  LOVE  OF  SCIENCE 
POINT  HIM  OUT  AS  AN  EXAMPLE 
WORTHY  OF  IMITATION; 

THIS  WORK 

IS 

RESPECTFULLY  INSCRIBED 

BY 

HIS  MUCH  OBLIGED  FRIEND, 


THE  AUTHOR 


• fy 


/ 


The  work  which  is  at  prefent  fubmit- 
ted  to  the  judgment  of  the  public,  is  an 
attempt  to  reduce,  under  certain  fixed 
principles,  a number  of  loofe  faffs,  which 
abound  in  the  writings  of  medical  men, 
metaphyficians,  and  philofophers  of  dif- 
ferent ages  and  of  various  countries.  Ma- 
ny of  thefe  faffs  have  been  long  known, 
others,  from  the  late  period,  and  foreign 
languages  in  which  they  have  been  com- 
municated, it  is  prefumed  are  only  par- 
tially fo ; but  although  they  all  relate  to 
Vol.  I.  a diforders 


11 


PREFACE. 


diforders  which  are  common  in  civilized 
nations  and  are  daily  becoming  more  fre- 
quent, and  are  univerfally  lamented,  as 
conhituting  the  greateft  calamity  to  which 
mankind  is  fubjeft;  yet  it  is  generally  con- 
feffed,  that  the  attempts  to  throw  light  on 
their  real  nature  have  been  very  few,  and 
thefe  few  have  not  been  fuccefsful. 

If  we  except  Dr.  Arnold,  of  Lei- 
cefter,  no  other  author  of  this  country 
has  written  fully  on  the  fubjeft  of  Mental 
Difeafes.  Monfieur  Dufour  is  the  onlv 
author,  fmce  the  time  of  Sau  vages,  who 
has  written  fyftematically  on  them  in 
France;  and  although  the  German  prefs 
has  fent  forth  a vafL  number  of  publica- 
tions which  relate  to  difeafes  of  the  hu- 
man mind,  yet  they  are  only  cohesions 
of  cafes,  hillories  of  individual  difeafes, 
or  accounts  of  new  remedies;  for  no  au- 
thor of  that  learned  nation,  at  lead;  as  far 
as  my  knowledge  of  their  literature  ex- 
tends. 


PREFACE. 


Ill 


tends,  has  written  either  fully  or  fyflema- 
tically  on  Vcfania . 

Above  fix  years  ago  I firfl  formed  the 
defign  of  writing  a work  on  the  connec- 
tion of  the  mind  and  body,  or  rather  on 
the  influence  which  they  mutually  exert  on 
each  other;  but  after  having  dedicated  all 
the  Ieifure  time  I could  beftow  to  the  fub- 
je£l  for  upwards  of  tw^o  years,  I difco- 
vered  what  indeed  mature  reflexion  might 
previoufly  have  convinced  me  of,  that  I 
had  engaged  myfelf  in  an  almofl  endlefs 
tafk ; for,  in  order  to  give  it  a finiflred 
form,  it  would  have  been  neceffary  to 
have  defcribed  not  only  all  the  various 
changes  which  the  body,  both  in  its  heal- 
thy and  difeafed  Hate,  undergoes,  from 
the  influence  of  each  faculty  of  the  hu- 
man mind  while  actively  employed,  and 
from  the  influence  of  each  paflion;  but 
it  would  alfo  have  been  neceflary  to 
have  defcribed  the  various  altered  and 

a 2 morbid 


I 


/ 

iv  PREFACE. 

morbid  phenomena,  which  are  produced 
in  the  mind,  by  the  aftion  and  re-a£tion  of 
the  body,  both  in  health  and  under  difeafe  : 
this  labour  appeared  to  me,  then,  to  be 
lo  much  the  more  unnecelfary,  as  I found 
the  lubjeCt  had  been  well  treated  by  a 
foreign  writer  of  great  ingenuity  and 
learning:  I mean  D.  John  Augustus 
Unzer,  in  a work,  entitled  Erjie  Giunde 
cities  Phyfiologie  der  eigentlichen  thierifchen 
Naturthierifcher  Koerper.  Leipzig,  1771. 

Although  I was,  therefore,  obliged  to 
give  up  my  plan,  I had  proceeded  too  far 
in  this  attractive  branch  of  medical  fci- 
ence,  and  had  met  with  fo  many  unin- 
velligated  objects,  that  I could  not  quit 
the  field  without  making  other  refearches; 
and,  accordingly,  I directed  all  the  at- 
tention I was  able  to  bellow  to  the  mor- 
bid phenomena  of  the  human  mind. 

About  the  time  I am  fpeaking  of  I re- 
ceived 

V 


f 


PREFACE. 


V 


\ 

ceived  from  Germany,  among  a number 
of  works  which  had  been  recommended 
to  me  by  my  efleemed  and  learned  friends, 
Profeffor  Blumenb  ach  andProfeffor  Ar- 
n em  ann,  of  the  Univerfity  of  Goettin- 
gen, one  which  greatly  interefled  me.  It 
was  entitled,  Magazine  zum  Erf  ah  rung [fee- 
lenkunde ; which  means  in  Englifh,  Maga- 
zine of  Pfychological  Experience.  This 
work  confifls  of  no  lefs  than  eight  vo- 
lumes, and  was  firft  publifhed  in  num- 
bers under  the  dirfe£lion  of  two  learned 
■Pfychologifts,  Charles  Philip  Mo- 
ritz and  Salomon  Maimon.  In  this 
work  I found  what  I had  not  yet  met 
with  in  any  other  publication,  a number 
of  well-authenticated  cafes  of  infane 
aberration  of  mind,  narrated  in  a full  and 
fatisfaftory  manner,  without  a view  to 
any  fyftem  whatever:  for  the  Magazine 
is  almoft  entirely  made  up  of  cafes  which 
are  lent  to  its  editors  by  different  hands, 
and  the  greateff  part  of  them  are  without 

much 


VI 


PREFACE. 


much  comment.  It  is,  indeed,  to  be  la- 
mented, that  by  far  the  greatefl  number  of 
cafes  contained  in  this  work  are  uninte- 
refling  to  the  phyfician.  The  Germans 
almofl  equal  ourfelves  in  a fondnefs  for 
what  is  wonderful;  and  it  mufl  be  con- 
felfed,  that  the  Pfychological  Magazine 
contains  a rich  and  ample  flock  of  mate- 
rials with  which  this  frail  defire  may  be 
gratified.  The  hiflories  of  prophetic 
dreams,  furprizing  infpirations  and  warn- 
ings, occupy  too  much  of  this  work ; 
and,  independently  of  thefe,  the  long 
and  often  tedious  relation  of  the  moral 
fentiments  of  deaf  people,  the  hiftory  of 
crimes,  & c.  are  for  the  greater  part  un- 
interefling  to  the  phyfician. 


The  acquifition  of  this  work,  at  the 
very  moment  that  my  mind  was  full 
of  the  fubjeft,  did  not  fail,  as  may  be 
eafily  imagined,  to  give  frefh  vigour  to 
my  ftudies.  I extra&ed  thefe,  at  firft,  as 

objefts 


PREFACE. 


Vll 


obje&s  of  ftudy,  and  many  of  them  will 
be  met  with  in  the  work  as  illuftrations 
of  particular  doctrines  or  aflertions. 

If  I was  urged,  in  the  firft  inftance,  to 
the  ftudy  of  this  obfcure  branch  of  medi- 
cal fcience,  by  a particular  bent  of  mind, 
and  was  afterwards  excited  to  proceed  in 
it  by  the  afliftance  which  was  thrown  in 
my  way,  a fenfe  of  duty  foon  joined  it- 
felf  to  thefe  motives,  and  obliged  me  to 
direct  my  whole  attention  to  it.  My  fitu- 
ation,  as  a public  teacher,  rendered  it  ne- 
ceflary  that  I (hould  fatisfy  myfelf,  as  to 
the  nature  of  thofe  things  in  which  I pre- 
fumed to  inftru£t  others.  The  works 
which  I had  perufed,  on  the  fubjeft:  of 
infanity,  did  not  do  fo ; and  I determined 
therefore,  to  make  it  an  objeft  of  ferious 
thought.  How  far  I have  fucceeded  in 
throwing  more  light  on  the  nature  of 
mental  difeafes,  than  thofe  have  done 
who  have  preceded  me  in  this  path 

of 


vili  PREFACE. 

of  knowledge,  is  not  for  me  to  deter- 
mine. No  one  who  has  bellowed  lefs 
pains  on  the  fubje£l  than  I have  done  can 
be  fo  fully  aware  of  the  imperfeftions  of 
the  work.  They  who  firlt  travel  into  un- 
known countries  feldom  forefee  all  the 
difficulties  they  are  to  encounter ; and  in- 
dependently of  the  difficulties,  various 
other  caufes  of  ignorance-  are  met  with, 
for,  of  the  various  obje&s  with  which 
thefe  regions  abound,  fome  necelfa- 
rily  efcape  obfervation,  others  are  of- 
ten too  haftily  examined,  and  fome 
refill  examination  either  from  caufes 
which  are  peculiar  to  their  nature,  or  from 
want  of  proper  means  for  invefligation. 

But,  in  regard  to  all  thefe,  it  is  allowable 

\ - 

to  indulge  the  hope,  that  time  and  expe- 
rience will  not  only  re&ify  whatever  is 
erroneous,  but  alfo  fupply  whatever  is 
defeftive. 

The  method  which  I have  adopted, 

throughout 


PREFACE. 


IX 


I 


throughout  the  whole  of  this  work,  is  that 
of  Analyfis.  This  is  the  genuine  touch- 
ftone  of  truth,  not  only  in  matters  of 
external  fenfe,  but  alfo  in  objedts  of  ab- 
Itrad  reafon;  lor,  as  in  concluding  this 
mode  of  inquiry,  every  condiment  or 
elementary  part  mull  be  feparately  exa- 
mined, it  is  the  fureft  way  of  deteding 
error;  and  as  all  complex  ideas  become 
clear,  in  proportion  as  the  individual 
parts  of  which  they  are  com  poled  are 
didindly  reprefented  in  the  mind,  fo  it 
is  the  belt  mode  of  eftablilhing  well 
founded  refults. 

In  order  to  condud  analyfis  with  fuc- 
cefs,  much  depends  on  the  previous 
knowledge  of  the  perfon  who  conduds 
it.  It  is  evidently  required,  that  he  who 
undertakes  to  examine  this  branch  of 
fcience  in  this  way,  Ihould  be  acquainted 
with  the  human  mind  in  its  fane  date;  and 
that  he  Ihould  not  only  be  capable  of  ab- 

llrading 


1 


X PREFACE. 

ftracting  his  own  mind  from  himlelf,  and 
placing  it  before  him,  as  it  were,  fo  as  to 
examine  it  with  the  freedom,  and  with  the 
impartiality  of  a natural  hiftorian;  but  he 
alfo  fhould  be  able  to  take  a calm  and  clear 
view  of  every  caufe  which  tends  to  affe£l 
the  healthy  operations  of  mind,  and  to 
trace  their  effefts.  He  fhould  be  able  to 
go  back  to  childhood,  and  fee  how  the 
mind  is  modelled  by  inftruftion.  He  who 
cannot  do  this  will  never  proceed  farther 
in  knowledge  than  what  he  has  acquired 
by  books  or  by  tuition ; and  how  very 
limited  this  knowledge  is,  in  regard  to  the 
pathology  of  the  human  mind,  need  not 
be  mentioned. 

When  the  work  of  analyfis  is  com- 
pleted, the  mofl  ufeful  and  difficult  part 
remains;  that  of  applying  the  refult,  or 
general  principle,  to  explain  and  arrange 
the  individual  fa&s.  It  is  this,  indeed, 
which  diftinguiffies  the  man  of  fcience 

from 


PREFACE. 


XI 


from  the  mere  fcholar.  It  is,  of  all  men- 
tal employments,  the  moll  difficult,  the 
molt  liable  to  error,  and  yet  the  mod  va- 
luable when  well  accomplifhed.  It  is  the 
abridgment  of  fads  and  fimplification  of 
all  knowledge.  Experience  and  obferva- 
tion  teach  us  a valt  crowd  of  fads.  We 
multiply  thefe  by  analyzing  them ; in  ana- 
lyzing them  we  generally  obtain  a know- 
ledge of  the  caufes  of  a number  of  their 
properties,  and  often  of  the  caufe  of 
their  produdion ; and  we  are  thus 
enabled  to  reduce  a number  of  effeds 
under  a few  general  principles.  Hence 

i 

the  utility  of  this  procefs.  But  that 
it  is  a procefs  which  is  often  dange- 
rous, and  even  hurtful  to  fcience,  mult 
alfo  be  admitted.  It  is  dangerous  when 
we  try  to  reduce  general  principles  under 
principles  Hill  more  general,  or,  as  it 
were,  to  find  out  the  ultimate  fource  of 
all  our  knowledge;  for  where  are  the  fads 
to  guide  us  in  fuch  a refearch?  The  ulti- 
mate 


$ 


Xll 


PREFACE. 


mate  principles  are  excluded  from  human 
refearch,  but,  unfortunately,  not  from 
human  curiofity.  It  is  hurtful  to  fcience 
when  a man  of  genius  attempts  to  reduce 
the  fa£ls  of  any  branch  of  fcience  under 
general  principles  while  the  fadls  them- 
felves  are  too  fcanty  to  admit  of  juft  con- 
clufions  being  drawn,  for  then  wild  hypo- 
thefes  muft  neceftarily  arife.  Let  not  this 
obfervation  be  conftrued  into  an  opinion, 
that  hypothefts  is  ufelefs.  1 here  is  a pe- 
riod in  knowledge  when  it  muft  be  in- 
dulged in  if  we  mean  to  make  any  pro- 
grefs.  It  is  that  period  when  the  fafts  are 
too  numerous  to  be  recollefted  without 
general  principles,  and  yet  where  the 
fads  are  too  few  to  conftitute  a valid  the- 
ory. If  the  exterior  form  of  an  edifice 
is  often  the  principal  motive  with  men 
for  examining  its  internal  ftrudture;  fo  it 
is  in  fcience,  that  the  fplendor  of  an  hy- 
pothecs, and  the  defire  of  proving  its 
folidity,  are  more  frequent  motives  for  re- 
fearch 


PREFACE. 


• • • 
Xlll 

fearch  than  a mere  love  of  knowledge. — 
But  to  return  to  the  explanation  of  my 
plan. 

The  objects  of  my  inquiry  are  the 
caufes  of  infanity,  and  the  various  dif- 
eafed  affections  of  the  human  mind,  if 
fuch  an  expreflion  can  be  admitted.  The 
order  into  which  I have  arranged  thefe, 
in  confequence  of  the  invefligation  which 
has  been  inftituted,  is  founded  on  the 
analogy  which  the  caufes  of  mental  de- 
rangement have  with  each  other.  I make 
four  dalles  of  caufes.  lit.  Phyfical  or 
corporeal  caules ; 2dly,  Over-exertion  of 
the  mental  faculties ; qdly,  A difpropor- 
tionate  activity  of  fome  of  the  faid  facul- 
ties; andlaltly,  The  pafhons,  or  their  in- 
fluence. 

% 

from  this  divifion  of  the  fubject  arifes 
the  divifion  of  my  work.  It  is  divided 
into  three  parts  or  books.  In  the  firlt 

I in- 


\ 


XIV 


PREFACE. 


I inquire  into  the  phyfical  or  corporeal 
caufes  of  delirium  and  other  derange- 
ments of  mind.  In  the  fecond,  the  va- 
rious morbid  changes  which  each  faculty 
of  the  human  mind  is  lubjedl  to,  either 
from  an  over-ftraining,  or  from  an  origd- 
nal  or  acquired  difproportionate  activity, 
are  inveftigated ; and  in  the  la  ft  book  I 
treat  of  the  paffions.  The  reader  mull 
excufe  me  il  I dwell  a little  longer  on 
this  plan,  fmee  it  becomes  necellary  to  do 
fo,  in  order  to  point  out  the  reafon  why 
certain  fubjecls  have  been  treated  which, 
at  firft  view,  might  not  feem  abfolutely 
neceffary  to  the  general  objecl  of  the 
work. 

The  phyfical  caufes  of  delirium,  fuch 
as  the  corporeal  effedts  of  various  excef- 
fes,  exceiTive  heat,  fudden  tranfitions  of 
temperature,  fevers,  certain  poifons,  &c. 
neceffarily  adl  in  a phyfical  manner  on 
the  human  frame.  They  produce  morbid 

alterations 


PREFACE. 


XV 


alterations  in  the  living  folids,  and  thefe 
generally  affe£l  the  fluids.  Some  of  the 
caufes  of  this  clafs  operate  mod  power- 
fully on  the  heart  and  arteries  and  ab- 
forbent  fyftem,  others  operate  with  mold 
force  on  the  brain  and  nerves;  but,  in  all 
cafes,  not  only  fenfation,  but  the  aftion 
of  the  mental  faculties  are  diflurbed  in 
confequence  of  thefe  phyfical  caufes.  To 
trace  their  operation,  then,  with  fuccefs, 
it  becomes  neceflary  to  be  well  acquainted 
with  the  general  offices  and  properties  of 
the  living  folids.  But  as  it  is  probable, 
that  many  readers,  into  whofe  hands  this 
work  may  fall,  are  not  fully  acquainted 
with  thefe  fubjefts,  I have  judged  it  ne- 
ceflary to  begin  with  the  doclrines  of 
Irritability  and  Senfibility,  as  explanatory 
of  many  of  the  data  on  which  much  of 
the  reafoning  that  follows  is  founded; 
and  as  containing  many  axioms  to  which 
frequent  reference  is  made.  This  be- 
comes fo  much  the  more  neceflary,  alfo. 


as 


XVI  PREFACE. 

ns  I entertain  peculiar  notion^ concerning 
the  manner  in  which  corporeal  fenfation 
is  carried  on,  and  as  the  phenomena  of 
many  illufions,  to  which  our  underhand- 
ing  is  expofed,  are  to  be  accounted  for 
by  thefe.  The  remaining  chapters  of  this 
book  require  no  comment.  They  follow 
each  other  in  a natural  order,  and  lead  to 
a general  but  concife  hilfory  of  the  prin- 
cipal phenomena  of  delirium,  and  to  the 
eflablifhing  of-  certain  fixed  notions  con- 
cerning the  immediate  or  proximate  caufe. 

In  the  fecond  book  I fpeak  of  the  dif- 
eafes  of  each  faculty  of  the  human  mind, 
and  alfo  of  many  kinds  of  general  diftur- 
bance  in  our  intelleftual  part,  which  are 
occafioned  by  peculiar  faults  in  the  facul- 
ties. It  is  here  that  I have  combined  the 
phyfiology,  or  natural  hiflory  of  the 
mind,  with  its  pathology  or  morbid  hif- 
tory. 


Galen 


PREFACE. 


xvn 


Galen  judly  remarks,  “ Cujufque 
morbi  tanta  eft  magnkudo  quantum  a 
naturali  flatu  recedit,  quantum  vero  re- 
cedat,  is  folus  novit  qui  naturalem  habi- 
tum  ad  amudim  tenuerit.5’  This  may  be 
faid  to  be  particularly  true  in  regard  to 
the  difeafes  of  the  mind ; for,  except  a 
ftudent  make  himfelf  well  acquainted 
with  the  natural  date  of  each  of  its 
faculties,  it  is  impoflible  for  him  to  know 
either  the  approach,  progrefs,  or  violence 
of  its  difeafes;  and,  as  a farther  induce- 
ment for  medical  men  to  pay  atten- 
tion to  this  fubjeft,  it  may  be  added, 
that  if  they  be  not  well  acquainted  with 
the  phenomena  of  mind,  both  in  its 
natural  and  difeafed  date,  they  will  often 
be  fubje&ed  to  much  uneadnefs  and  anx- 
iety when  defired  to  give  a decided 
opinion  on  many  cafes  of  fuppofed  or 
real  mental  derangement:  for,  not  being 
fatisded  in  their  own  minds,  or  rather 
not  knowing  how  to  arrive  at  a fatisfac- 
Vol.  I.  b tory 


XV111 


PREFACE. 


tory  conclufion,  as  to  the  fanity  or  infi- 
nity of  certain  individuals,  they  will 
remain  doubtful  and  will  hefitate  what  to 
pronounce,  and,  confequently,  will  ap- 
pear in  an  inferior  light  to  what  men,  who 
are  fuppofed  to  be  m afters  of  their  profef- 
fion,  ought  to  be  defirous  of  appearing  in. 

Before  I finifh  the  remarks  I have  to 
offer  on  this  book,  I ought  to  acknow- 
ledge, that  I have  endeavoured  to  con- 
denfe  the  phyfiological  part  as  much  as 
poflible,  but  I trpft  that  nothing  very 
eflential  to  the  phyfician  is  omitted. 

The  third  book  treats  of  the  paflions. 
Here  I have,  perhaps,  dwelt  too  much 
on  the  phyfiology  of  thefe  wonderful 
affe&ions  of  our  moral  part.  In  this  I 
hope  to  be  excufed,  not  only  as  very  lit- 
tle has  hitherto  been  done,  with  a view  of 
elucidating  their  influence  on  mind  and 
body,  but  inafmuch  as  the  analyfis  of  the 

paflions 


PREFACE, 


XIX 


paflions  is  abfolutely  neceffary  to  the  un* 
derftanding  their  peculiar  modes  of  ope- 
ration. 

Such  are  the  motives  of  my  undertak- 
ing, and  fuch  the  plan  according  to 
which  I have  endeavoured  to  accomplifh 
it.  It  remains  that  I fhould  fay  fomething 
of  the  various  works  I have  confulted. 

Among  thofe  which  I have  perufed 
with  ferious  attention  is  that  of  the  learn- 
ed Dr.  Arnold.  Like  the  Pfychological 
Magazine,  which  I have  already  men- 
tioned, it  contains  a fufficient  number  of 
fafts  to  build  a fyftem  on,  but  I mud 
confefs,  that  to  me  Dr.  Arnold’s  own 
arrangement  is  expofed  to  much  criticifm; 
inafmuch  as  it  is  intirely  founded  on  a 
gratuitous  diftin&ion  between  ideas  and 
notions,  and  on  the  apparent  variety  of 
thefe  which  occur  in  infanity,  rather 
than  on  the  more  immediate  nature  of 

b 2 the 


XX 


PREFACE. 


the  difeafes  themfelves.  Dr.  A.  makes 
but  one  genus  of  infanity;  and  of  this 
genus  he  makes  feveral  fpecies,  which  he 
arranges  under  two  divifions.  Mr.  Lock 
had  obferved,  that  all  our  ideas  are  either 
obtained  by  means  of  our  external  fenfes, 
or  by  reflexion;  and,  accordingly,  he 
fays,  all  our  ideas  are  either  ideas  of  fen- 
fation,  or  ideas  of  reflexion.  Dr.  A. 
choofes  to  confine  the  term  ideas  to  the 
firfl:  of  thefe,  and  to  the  fecond  clafs  he 
gives  the  name  of  notions : and  as  it 
appears  to  him,  that  in  the  various  fpe- 
cies of  infanity,  the  diforder  exifls  either 
in  the  ideas  or  in  the  notions,  fo  he  reduces 
thefe  fpecies,  as  has  been  already  obferved, 
under  two  general  divifions;  the  firfl:  he 
calls  Ideal  Infanity , the  fecond  Notional  Infa- 
nity . The  firfl  is  chara61erized  by  a deliri- 
um, arifing  from  an  error  in  the  ideas  of  a 
perfon;  the  fecond,  by  a delirium  arifing 
from  an  error  in  his  notions.  Of  Ideal 
Infanity  he  makes  the  four  following  fpe- 


cies : 


PREFACE. 


XXI 


cies:  lft.  Phrenitic ; 2d.  Incoherent;  3d. 
Maniacal;  4th.  Senfitive. — Of  Notional 
Infanity  he  conftitutes  nine  fpecies:  lft. 
Delulive;  2d.  Fanciful;  3d.  Whimfical; 
4th.  Impullive;  5th.  Scheming;  6th.  Vain 
or  Self-important;  7th.  Hypochondria- 
cal; 8th.  Pathetic;  9th.  Appetitive. 

Before  I attempt  to  point  out  the  er- 
rors in  judgment  to  which  this  arrange- 
ment appears  to  me  to  give  birth,  I can- 
not avoid  taking  notice  of  the  iingularity, 
and  very  unfcientific  nature  of  fome  of 
the  appellations.  One  might  as  well  pre- 
tend to  diftinguifh  water  from  all  watery 
fluids,  by  the  name  of  aqueous  water,  or 
wine  from  other  liquors  by  calling  it  vi- 
nous; as  to  pretend  to  diftinguifh  one  fpe- 
cies of  infanity  from  another,  by  calling 
it  maniacal  infanity,  and  another  by  the 
name  of  phrenitic  infanity,  or  a third  by 
the  name  of  incoherent : for,  furely,  eve- 
ry maniac  is  phrenitic,  infane,  and  inco- 
herent. 


xxu 


PREFACE. 


herent,  if  thefe  terms  are  to  be  taken  in 
the  fenfe  in  which  they  ate  commonly 
and  properly  received.  The  fame  thing 
may  be  obferved  in  regard  to  many  of  the 
terms  by  which  Dr.  A.  diftinguilhes  the 
various  fpecies  of  Notional  Infanity. 

But  I would  obferve,  in  general,  on 
this  grand  divifion  of  infanity,  that  it  is 
not  founded  in  nature,  although  the 
Dottor  very  ftrenuoufly  afferts  this.  It 
is,  in  fa£t,  impolfible  to  reduce  the  greater 
number  of  cafes  of  infanity,  which  we 
daily  meet  with  in  the  courfe  of  practice, 
not  only  under  any  of  the  fpecies  which 
he  mentions,  but  even  under  the  genera ; 
for,  admitting  Dr.  A s diftin&ion  between 
ideas  and  notions , I will  venture  to  affert, 
and  indeed  we  need  only  look  into  fome 
of  the  numerous  cafes,  narrated  in  his 
work,  for  the  proof,  that  one  and  the 
fame  infane  perfon  (hall  have  both 
erroneous  ideas,  and  erroneous  notions, 

in 


PREFACE. 


XX111 


in  which  he  firmly  believes.  The 
greatefl  objection,  however,  to  this 
divifion  is  this,  that  it  tends  to  cre- 
ate confufion  in  the  mind,  as  to  the 
real  nature  of  many  of  the  difeafes ; thus 
illufions,  which  are  certainly  very  diftinCt 
kinds  of  infanity  from  mania,  are,  how- 
ever, brought  under  the  fame  genus  with 
it.  Illufions,  however,  are  only  to  be 
confidered  as  partial  difeafes  of  the  hu- 
man mind,  in  comparifon  with  mania, 
for  a perfon  who  labours  under  an  infane 
illufion  may  be  able  to  conduCt  his  affairs, 
and  be  able  to  exercife  his  judgment  as 
correCtly  as  moft  men  do,  except  in  fuch 
matters  as  have  a reference  to,  or  rather 
affociation  with  the  objeCts  of  his  illufion. 
One  faculty  only  of  his  mind  is  morbidly 
affected,  and  that  only  at  particular  times. 
But,  in  mania,  the  judgment  is  in  oppo- 
fition  to  the  conviction  of  every  healthy 
perfon,  in  every  circumftance  which  actu- 
ates the  patient,  and  all  the  faculties  of 

the 


XXIV 


PREFACE. 


the  mind  are  difordered.  But  what 
appears  hill  more  lingular  is  this;  that 
Dr.  A.  defcribes  the  difeafe  which  ah 
moft  all  phylicians  have  agreed  to  call 
hypochondriafis,  not  only  as  a fpecies  of 
ideal  inf  unity,  which  he  choofes  to  call 
fenfitive  infanity ; but  alfo  as  a fpecies 
of  notional  infanity , which  he  deno- 
minates hypochondriacal  infanity.  His  de- 
finition of  fenfitive  infanity  is  this. — 
“ By  fenfitive  infanity  I mean  that  in 
“ which  the  diforder  fliews  itfelf  chiefly, 
“ or  remarkably,  in  the  erroneous  images 
“ which  are  excited  in  the  mind,  rela- 
“ tive  to  the  perfon’s  own  form , fub - 
“ fiance,  or  oihcr  fenfible  qualities  or  con- 
“ tents ; and  which  are  not  only  contrary 
“ to  truth,  but  often  inconfiftent  with 
<e  the  nature  of  things,  and  almofl;  al- 
6t  ways  contradictory  to  the  teftimony  of 
“ thofe  about  them/’  He  then  proceeds 
to  tell  us,  that  of  the  patients  who  la- 
bour under  this  infanity,  fome  imagine 

them- 


PREFACE, 


XXV 


themfelves  to  be  wolves,  others  dogs; 
fome  lions,  cats,  cows,  cuckoos,  nightin- 
gales, earthen  veffels,  pipkins,  jars,  tea- 
pots, &c.  This,  however,  is  the  true 
chara&er  of  Hypochondriahs,  as  will  be 
proved  in  the  body  of  the  prefent  work, 
and  certainly  is  not  elucidated  by  the 
place  in  which  Dr.  A.  has  arranged  it. 

The  w;ork  of  M.  Dufours  is  more 
fcientific  than  that  of  Dr.  Arnold,  but 
it  is  extremely  incomplete  in  what  re- 
gards the  difeafes  which  difturb  human 
reafon.  Mr.  D.  is  a man  who  is,  evi- 
dently, well  acquainted  with  the  mind 
in  its  natural  hate,  and  indeed  the  greater 
part  of  the  work  is  entirely  taken  up  in 
pfychological  and  phyfiological  difquifi- 
tion,  the  only  difeafes  which  he  de- 
fcribes  being  idiotifm,  mania,  melancholy, 
and  hypochondriahs.  On  thefe  fubje&s 
he  does  not  bring  forward  any  thing 


new. 


It 


XXVI  PREFACE. 

I 

It  will  be  evident  to  thofe  medical  rea- 
ders who  have  duly  lludied  their  profef- 
fion,  that,  in  confequence  of  the  analyfis 
which  I have  inftituted,  many  of  the  dif- 
eafes  which  the  celebrated  Sauvages, 
and  Sagar  have  given  a place  to  among 
the  mental  difeafes,  are  not  to  be  confi- 
dered  as  fuch.  In  the  order  Hallucina- 
tiones,  for  inftance,  I have  not  admitted 
any  illufions  which  evidently  arife  from 
difeafes  of  the  external  fenfes,  fuch  as 
the  Suffujio , Diplopia , Syrigmus.  As  to 
the  order  Morofitates , of  Sauvages, 
there  is  hardly  any  one  of  the  fixteen 
fpecies  which  he  mentions,  which,  in  my 
opinion,  have  any  title  to  be  confidered 
as  belonging  to  the  clafs  of  Vefania % if 
we  except  Nojlalgia  and  Panaphobia , which 
are  mere  varieties  of  melancholy.  The 
arrangements  ol  Sir  Charles  Linne 
and  Vogel  are  fubieft  to  more  nume- 
rous exceptions,  which  it  would  be 

tedious 


PREFACE, 


XXV11 


tedious  and  unnecelfary  to  repeat,  inas- 
much as  the  nofological  arrangement  of 
thefe  authors  is  generally  and  juftly  neg- 
le&ed. 

Of  the  authors  who,  although  they 
have  not  written  exprefsly  on  the  fub- 
je£i  of  mental  diforders,  have  yet  yielded 
me  much  afliftance,  there  is  a very  long 
lift.  The  moft  ufeful  of  thefe  authors, 
and  their  works,  I (hall  now  enumerate, 
in  cafe  others,  who  choofe  to  write  on 
the  fame  fubjeft,  may  alfo  wifh  to  go  to 
the  fountain  head.  Thofe  of  our  Britifh 
Pfychologifts,  fuch  as  Lock,  Hart- 
ley, Reid,  Priestley,  Stewart,  and 
Kaims,  need  not  be  mentioned.  Of 
foreign  authors,  the  following  are  thole 
from  whom  1 have  derived  moft  advan- 
tage; Unzer,  whofe  work  has  been 
already  named;  Feder,  Profelfor  of 
Moral  Philofophy  in  the  Univerfity  of 

Gottingen, 


XXV111 


PREFACE. 


Gottingen,  whofe  excellent  work  on  the 
Human  Will,  it  is  greatly  to  be  lamented, 
is  not  tranflated  into  Englifh.  Ewald, 
on  the  Human  Heart,  ( Ueber  das  Menfch - 
leche  Herz ;)  an  interefling  work,  which 
does  not  appear  to  be  much  read  even  in 
Germany . S c h m i d t ’s  Experimental  See/en- 
lehre,  or  Experimental  Pfychology ; Kru- 
ger’s ditto;  Meier  Ueber  die  Gemutb 
bewegungen ; Herz  Ueber  den  Schwindel ; 
We ick hard’s  Philofophifche  Arzt,  or 
Philofophical  Phyjician ; Condillic’s  Art 
de  Penfer;  Tis s o t’s  Works  on  the  Nerves, 
and  on  the  Difeafes  of  Men  of  Letters. 

In  regard  to  the  ftyle  of  this  work,  I 
may  obferve,  that  the  principal  quality 
I have  aimed  at  has  been  perfpicuity. 
This  avowal  will  fufficiently  apologize  to 
the  candid  critic,  for  the  want  of  elegance 
which  may  appear  in  feveral  parts  of  it. 
A number  of  inaccurate  exprelhons  and 

typo- 


PREf  ACE. 


XXIX 


typographic^  errors  have  efcaped  my 
obfervation;  as  an  apology  for  which,  I 
can  only  offer  the  interruption  I have  met 
with,  during  the  printing  of  the  work, 
from  my  leflures  and  other  profeffional 
avocations,  joined  to  the  want  of  pra&ice 
in  this  mechanical  part  of  authorfhip. 


Spring  Gardens, 
Jan.  30,  1798. 


CONTENTS 


OF  THE 

FIRST  VOLUME, 


BOOK  I. 

INQUIRY  INTO  THE  PHYSICAL  CAUSES  OF 


DELIRIUM. 

Page, 

CHAP.  I.  On  irritability , and  its  Laws  i 
CHAP.  II.  On  Senfation,  and  the  Exter- 
nal Sen/es  - - - - 53  # 

CHAP.  III.  On  Self -Feeling  - - 110 

CHAP.  IV.  On  Corporeal  Pleafure  and 

Pain  - - - 1 1 7 

CHAP.  V.  On  Delirium  - - 137 


BOOK  II. 

THE  NATURAL  AND  MORBID  HISTORY  OF  THE 
MENTAL  FACULTIES. 

CHAP.  I.  On  the  Mind  in  general  217 
CHAP.  II.  On  At  tent  ion , and  its  Difeafes  254 

CHAP.  III.  On  Mental  Perception } and  its 
Difeafes  - - - 291 

CHAP.  IV.  On  Memory , and  the  Affoci - 

at  ion  of  Ideas  and  their  Difeafes  - 337 

CHAP.  V.  On  Judgment , and  its  Errors  386 


CONTENTS 

% 

OF  THE 

SECOND  VOLUME. 

Page* 

CHAP.  VI.  On  Imagination , and  its  Difcafcs  i 

CHAP.  VII.  On  Genius , and  the  Dfcafes 

to  which  it  is  tnofi  expofed  - 1 9 

CHAP.  VIII.  On  Volition , and  its  Difcafcs  66 

BOOK  III. 

ON  THE  PASSIONS,  AND  THEIR  EFFECTS. 


CHAP.  I.  Analyjis  of  Human  Allion,  being 
an  Inquiry  into  the  Source  of  the 
Paffions  - - 95 

CHAP.  II.  On  Joy,  its  Modifications , and 
Effeth  - - - 

CHAP.  III.  On  Grief  and  Melancholy, 

their  Modifications  and  Effects  - 173 

CHAP.  IV.  On  Fear,  its  Modifications  and 

Effects  - - - 250 

CHAP.  V.  On  Anger,  its  Modifications 

and  Effefts  - ' - - 279 

CHAP.  VI.  On  Love,  its  Modifications 

and  Effetls  - - - 29  7 

Conclufion  - - - 33 1 

Nofo logical  Arrangement  of  Mental  Difcafcs  342 

Appendix  - - - 347 


BOOK  I. 


INQUIRY 

INTO 

THE  PHYSICAL  CAUSES 

OF 

DELIRIUM. 


VOL.  I. 


C 


<■  ->  J . . . 


. 


\ 


ANALYTICAL  INQUIRY, 

•>W 

I ' 

&c.  » 


\ 


CHAPTER  I. 


ON  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  IRRITABILITY  AND 
ITS  LAWS. 


Among  modern  phyfiologifts,  the  very 
celebrated  Baron  de  Haller  is  confidered  as 
the  firft  who  clearly  pointed  out  the  exiftence 
of  this  principle  in  animal  bodies,  and  proved 
it  to  be  the  caufe  of  mufcular  motion  ; yet  the 
merit  of  the  difcovery  undoubtedly  belongs  to 
Glysson,  who  wrote  a long  time  before  him. 


In  Glysson’s  work,  On  the  Stomach  and 
Inteflines , a whole  chapter  is  dedicated  to  the 
consideration  of  this  fubjed.  It  is  entitled 
De  Irritabilitate  Fibrx . He  there  eftablifhes 

Vol.  I.  B the 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


the  diftindtion  between  the  principle  of  irrita- 
bility and  the  nervous  energy,  and  afaribes 
the  adtion  of  the  heart,  and  arteries,  and  the 
periftaltic  motion  of  the  inteftines  to  the  in- 
fluence of  the  former.  ‘f  The  adtion  of  the 
“ heart  ” he  fays  <f  is  neither  caufed  nor  altered 
“ by  fenfation.  The  fibres  of  the  heart,  by 
,f  virtue  of  the  impulfe  of  the  vital  blood  con- 
“ tained  in  the  ventricles,  are  repeatedly  irri— 
<c  tated  and  exerted  to  contraction  and  pul- 
<c  fation,  and  the  irritation  being  quickly  re- 
,f  moved,  they  are  relaxed  and  return  to  their 
f(  natural  pofition.”  In  another  place,  he 
aferibes  the  convulfive  motion  into  which  the 
mufcles  of  animals  are  thrown,  upon  the  appli- 
cation of  acrid  liquors,  to  this  fubtle  influ- 
ence; he  takes  notice  that  the  motion  of  many 
mufcles  continue  during  deep,  and  after  deca- 
pitation, when  all  feeling  is  abolifhed,  and  ac- 
counts for  the  phenomena  by  fuppofing  them  to 
be  pofleffed  of  irritability.  The  only  thing 
which  renders  his  doctrine  in  any  degree  ob- 
feure,  and  which  has  probably  given  rife  to  the 
commonly  received  opinion  that  his  ideas  on 
the  fubjedt  were  not  clear,  is  an  expreflion  which 

he 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


3 


he  often  employs.  He  makes  ufe  of  the  terms 
perception  and  perceptible  to  denote  that  pro- 
perty of  the  mufcles  by  which  they  receive  the 
action  of  a ftimulus,  and  which  we  exprefs  by 
the  wrord  irritable  : but  he  takes  much  pains  to 
eftablifh  an  accurate  diftindtion  between  the 
perception  of  the  nerve,  of  which  he  alfo  fpeaks, 
and  the  perception  of  the  irritable  fibre,  call- 
ing the  firft  perceptio  fenfitiva , and  the  other 
perce ptio  naturalis.  See  Appendix  No.  I. 

Haller  profecuted  this  fubject  much  fur- 
ther than  Glysson  did,  and  by  the  force  of 
the  fadts  on  which  it  was  founded,  the  repu- 
tation which  he  himfelf  enjoyed,  and  the  re- 
fpedf  paid  to  his  authority,  the  hypothecs  was 
foon  fpread  through  all  the  fchools  of  Europe. 
But  it  wras  not  received  in  all  of  them  wdth 
equal  readinefs.  It  was  contended  that  the 
principle  was  the  fame  with  that  of  the  nerves, 
and  it  was  therefore  fuppofed  that  mufcular 
adtion  depended  on  fenfation.  The  mufcles  it 
was  imagined,/*?//  as  it  were  the  ftimuli  which 
were  applied  to  them,  and  it  wras  in  confe- 
quence  of  this  feeling  that  they  contradled. 

B 2 Glysson 


4 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


Glysson  and  Haller,  and  their  adherents, 
were  induced  to  think  that  there  was  a vis 
infita  in  mufcles,  (irritability):  the  others 

contended  there  was  not  any  vis  infita , but 
that  mufcular  motion,  as  well  as  feeling,  de- 
pended entirely  on  the  nervous  energy  (vis 
iiervofa). 

It  was  mentioned  as  a fact,  in  favor  of  this 
lafb  hypothecs,  that  mufcles  were  thrown  into 
action  equally  well  when  the  nerve  or  nerves 
leading  to  thefe  mufcles  were  irritated,  as 
when  the  ftimulus  was  immediately  applied 
to  their  own  fibres.  If  it  was  afked,  upon 
what  principle  it  was  to  be  explained,  that 
the  mufcles  of  animals  from  which  the  fenfo- 
rium  had  been  removed  by  decollation,  con- 
tinued to  move  for  many  hours  afterwards,  as 
in  beheaded  frogs,  turtles,  newtes,  &c.  it  was 
anfwered,  that  in  them  the  nervous  power 
was  flowly  expended,  and  that  as  long  as  any 
of  it  remained  in  a nerve,  fo  long  could  the 
mufcles  move  to  w'hich  that  nerve  was  fent. 


Leaving 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


5 


Leaving  thefe  objections  to  be  anfwered  by 
the  phenomena  of  irritability  which  are  im- 
mediately to  be  taken  notice  of,  let  it  be  re- 
marked, that,  if  in  the  examination  of  the 
queftion  we  were  to  confine  our  obfervations  to 
the  appearances  that  occur  in  perfect  animals, 
we  fhould,  perhaps,  never  arrive  at  the  truth, 
lince  in  them  nervous  and  mufcular  matter 
are  intimately  blended  together  in  the  greater 
number  of  irritable  parts.  The  fineft  needle 
when  thruft  into  any  mufcle  of  a living  animal, 
is  acutely  felt : how  then  is  it  poflible  to  de- 
termine whether  the  phenomena  which  take 
place  in  confequence  of  the  pundure,  be  owing 
to  a peculiar  iTr  infit a inherent'in  them,  or  to  the 
nervous. energy  ? But  in  extending  our  view 
to  the  reft  of  the  organized  world,  fuch  a num- 
ber of  fads  prefent  themfelves  as  are  fufficient 
to  bring  convidion  to  the  mind  of  any  im- 
partial man. 

\ h 

i 

If  it  can  be  difcovered  that  there  arc 
many  organized  bodies  pofTelfed  of  a faculty  of 
motion  which  is  totally  diftind  from  that  pro- 
duced by  mechanical  impulfe,  or  chemical  at- 

tradion. 


6 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


tra&ion,  inafmuch  as  it  is  only  peculiar  to  them 
during  their  living  date,  and  fhat  this  motion 
is  excited  by  the  application  of  ftimuli  j that 
it  follows  the  fame  laws  with  animal  motion ; 
is  augmented  by  the  application  of  addi- 
tional ftimuli,  and  diminifhed  by  withdraw- 
ing the  fame,  and  is  evidently  affected  by 
the  health  of  the  organized  body  itfelf;  and 
further,  if  it  be  proved  that  thefe  bodies,  pof- 
fefting  fuch  motion,  have  no  brain  or  nerves, 
or  any  thing  which  has  arefemblance  to  them, 
then  it  follows,  as  a neceffary  deduction,  that 
there  is  a principle  of  motion  (irritability,  or 
whatever  other  name  may  be  given  it,)  diftincft 
from  nervous  energy,  and  alfo  diftindt  from 
the  principle  of  mechanical  motion. 

It  is  among  the  vegetables,  and  lower  clafs 
of  animals,  that  the  organized  bodies  alluded 
to  are  principally  to  be  found.  The  ftamina 
of  the  barberry  when  pricked  by  a pin,  or  any 
other  fine  ftiarp  inftrument,  are  immediately 
thrown  into  evident  motion  ; when  the  leaves 
of  the  averrhoa  carambola  are  touched,  they 
draw  themfelves  together  -t  thofe  of  the  mimoja 
' pudica , 


ON  IRRITABILITV. 


7 


pudica , or  fenfitive  plant,  do  the  fame  thing, 
•cither  when  ftimulated  by  the  touch,  by  electri- 
city, or  by  ammonia.  The  leaves  of  the  plant 
called  Venus’s  fly-trap,  (Dionaea  mufcipula) 
are  befet  on  their  edges  with  fharp  prickles : 
thefe  leaves  are  endowed  with  a confiderable 
portion  of  irritability,  for  when  an  infeCt 
crawls  between  them  they  immediately  clofe 
themfelves,  and  fqueeze  the  little  animal  to 
death.  Any  perfon  pofTeffed  of  this  rare  plant 
may  eafily  convince  himfelf  of  its  pow'ers  ; for 
by  irritating  the  infide  of  the  leaves  with  a 
piece  of  ftraw,  or  grafs,  the  motion  is  im- 
mediately produced.  The  moving  plant, 
( hedyfarum  gyrans)  is  poffefled  of  evident  mo- 
tion; it  is  excited  by  the  ftimulus  of  the  rays 
of  the  fun  : for  as  foon  as  thefe  fall  upon  it,  its 
leaflets  immediately  commence  their  motion, 
and  when  the  plant  is  withdrawn  from  the 
folar  light,  the  motion  ceafes.  Many  others, 
belides  thefe  already  enumerated,  are  endowed 
with  a faculty  of  motion  in  an  eminent  degree, 
fuch  as  the  oxalis  Jenfitiva>  onoelia  fenjibilist 
the  drofera  rotund  /folia , and  longifolia , &c. 


Thefe 


3 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


Thefe  fads  are  adduced  with  the  view  of 
eftablifhing  the  truth  of  what  was  formerly 
afferted,  that  there  is  a faculty  of  motion  dif- 
tind  from  that  produced  by  mechanical  caufes, 
and  redding  in  bodies  in  the  ftrudure  of  which 
nothing  limilar  to  brain  or  nerves  is  to  be  de- 
teded.  This  dedudion  is  further  confirmed 
by  the  phenomena  obferved  in  many  of  the 
lower  tribes  of  animals,  fuch  as  hydatids  and 
polyps,  in  the  organization  of  which  nothing 
limilar  to  nerve  is  to  be  found,  and  which, 
however,  move  and  contrad  when  ftimulated. 

It  may  be  further  remarked,  in  addition  to 
thefe  arguments,  that  in  perfed  animals  the 
irritability  of  a part  is  never  in  proportion 
to  its  fenfibility,  which,  however,  might  be 
reafonably  expeded  if  the  energy  were  the 
fame  in  both  parts,  or,  in  other  words,  if 
mufcular  motion  was  owing  to  the  fame 
caufe  as  fenfation.  It  is  a fad  eflablifhed  by 
repeated  obfervations,  that  the  heart  has  very 
little  fenfibility,  and  yet  is  endowed  with  an 
uncommon  faculty  of  motion.  I have  feen 
the  iris  wounded  feveral  times  in  the  operation 

for 


ON  IRRITABILITY-. 


9 


for  extrading  the  catarad,  yet  I never  ob- 
ferved  the  patient  even  to  wince,  or  utter  any 
ejaculation  expreflive  of  pain.  There  is  not, 
however,  a part  of  the  body  poflefied  of  more 
irritability  than  this.  Although  the  fenfation 
of  a paliied  limb  be  often  almoft  totally  abo- 
lilhed,  yet  the  mufcles  retain  their  irritability 
and  faculty  of  motion.  In  fuch  cafes  the 
nerves  which  go  to  the  mufcles,  are  fodifeafed 
or  comprefTed  that  they  do  not  tranfmit  the 
impreflions  of  the  will,  but  if  a topical  flimuius 
be  applied  to  them,  fuch  as  a fhock  of  eledri- 
city,  they  are  immediately  made  to  contrad. 
The  arteries  of  a paralytic  limb  alfo  continue 
to  ad  as  ufual,  notwithftanding  the  diminu- 
tion of  the  nervous  influence. 

If  all  thefe  various  fads  and  obfervations  be 
impartially  confidered,  it  will  be  allowed  that 
it  is  a fair  dedudion  to  conclude  that  the  prin- 
ciple of  irritability  is  diftind  in  itfelf  from  the 
nervous  principle;  and  when  the  phenomena 
' of  the  brain  and  nerves  are  explained,  this 
will  appear  in  a ftill  more  ftriking  light. 


In 


10  ON  IRRITABILITY. 

In  the  human  body  almoft  all  irritable 
parts  are  of  a mufcular  ftrucfture,  fuch  for  in- 
ftance  as  the  heart  and  arteries,  ftomach  and 
inteftines,  bladder  and  ureters,  &c.  and  hence 
it  is  believed,  that  no  part  can  be  irritable 
which  is  not  fibrous  ; and  hence  another 
conclufion,  that  there  is  a peculiar  fibre,  the 
irritable  fibre , which  compofes  the  fabric  of 
mufcles.  This  opinion  prevails  much  at  pre- 
fent.  It  is  imagined  that  every  irritable  part 
is  of  a mufcular  ftrucfture,  and  many  phyftolo- 
gifts  go  lb  far  as  to  fpeak  of  the  mufcles  of 
plants,  nay  fome  affert  that  they  have  detected 
them.  That  all  mufcular  parts  are  irritable, 
I believe  to  be  a fair  and  juft  conclufion,  to 
wrhich  no  facft  can  be  oppofed  ; but  to  extend 
the  pofttion,  and  affert  that  all  irritable  bodies 
and  irritable  parts  of  bodies  are  mufcular  and 
fibrous,  I confider  as  an  error  founded  on  the 
narrow  bafts  of  a few  facfts,  but  which  want 
the  fupport  of  various  others  in  order  to  be 
confirmed. 

There  are  many  of  the  frefh  water  polypi, 
(animals  poffeffmg  the  faculty  of  motion  in  a 

verv 

J 


ON  irritability. 


It 


very  remarkable  degree,)  the  ftruffure  of 
which  can  be  eafily  difcerned  by  means  of  a 
good  lens,  or  microfcope.  In  them  nothing 
fimilar  to  a fibrous  texture  is  to  be  feen.  Their 
tender  bodies  are  formed  of  a congeries  of  ge- 
latinous points  like  boiled  fago,  and  this  is 
enveloped  in  a fine  membrane.  Here,  then, 
there  is  nothing  fimilar  to  fibre,  and  yet  there 
is  not  an  animal  more  irritable.  In  the  human 
body  itfelf  we  have  two  parts  (the  iris  and 
uterus)  remarkable  for  their  irritability,  in 
which  nothing  fimilar  to  mufcular  ftrudture 
is  to  be  difcovered.  We  muft  therefore  in 
candour  allow  that  if  irritability  be  connected 
with  any  peculiar  ftrudture,  we  are  quite  ig- 
norant what  that  peculiar  flrudture  is. 

The  phenomena  of  irritable  bodies,  or  irri- 
table parts  of  bodies,  are  extremely  various, 
and  differ  according  to  the  purpofes  for  which 
they  have  been  formed.  There  appear  to  be 
certain  fixed  laws  which  regulate  all  thefe 
phenomena.  Thefe  laws  are  general,  and 
therefore  common  to  every  irritable  body 
whatever. 


The 


I 


12  ON  IRRITABILITY. 

The  very  celebrated  Fontana  is  the  firfl,  as 
far  as  my  reading  goes,  who  has  attempted  to 
generalize  the  phenomena  of  irritable  parts. 
In  the  fir  ft:  volume  of  his  Fifica  Animaley  a work 
which  it  is  to  be  lamented  he  has  not  finifhed, 
he  has  reduced  them  under  five  general  laws, 
(fee  Appendix,  No.  2.)  but  as  his  obfervations 
at  the  time  he  wrote,  were  chiefly  diredted  to 
animals,  he  has  called  them  laws  of  mufcular 
motion.  The  fame  fubject  has  of  late  been 
Fill  more  generalized  by  an  ingenious  gentle- 
man, Dr.  Girtanner,  who  in  an  excellent 
eflay,  publiftied  in  the  Journal  de  Phyfique , for 
1790,  has  clearly  fhewn  the  analogy  between 
the  irritability  of  the  vegetable  and  the  animal 
kingdom,  and  by  modifying  the  axioms  of 
Fontana,  has  made  them  applicable  to  the 
phenomena  of  the  motions  of  all  organized 
bodies  whatever.  In  this  eflay  he  has  gone  a 
flep  farther,  for  he  has  attempted  to  eftablifh 
a theory  concerning  the  nature  of  irritability. 
This  theory  will  be  examined  in  its  proper 
place.  The  laws  of  irritability  which  follow 
are  partly  new  axioms,  partly  modifications  of 
thofe  of  Fontana  and  Girtanner. 

» Axiom  I. 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


i 


Axiom  I.  After  every  action  in  an  irritable 
part,  a fate  of  reft , or  cefj 'at  ion  from  motion , mufi 
take  place  before  the  irritable  part  can  be  again 
incited  to  aftion. 

If,  by  an  effort  of  volition,  we  throw  any  of 
our  mufcles  into  adtion,  that  adtion  can  only 
be  continued  for  a certain  fpace  of  time  ; the 
mufcle  becomes  refaxed,  notwithftanding  all 
our  endeavours  to  the  contrary,  and  remains  a 
certain  time  in  that  relaxed  Ifate  before  it  can 
be  again  thrown  into  adtion.  After  every 
contraction  of  an  artery  a relaxation  follows, 
although  the  ftimulus  which  incites  it  to 
action  (the  blood)  be  confhmtly  applied  to  its 
internal  furface.  After  every  contraction  of 
the  mufcular  coat  of  the  ftomach,  or  of  the 
inteftines,  the  fame  event  takes  place. 

X 

In  the  vegetable  kingdom  we  find  the  irri- 
tability regulated  by  the  fame  law.  Although 
the  rays  of  the  fun  conftantly  adt  for  fome 
hours  on  the  leaves  of  the  hedyfarum  gyrar.s , 
yet  their  motions  are  always  interrupted  by 
fhort  ftates  of  reft. 


Axiom  II. 


H 


ON  IRRITABILITY". 


Axiom  II.  Each  irritable  part  has  a certain 
portion  or  quantity  of  the  principle  of  irritability , 
which  is  natural  to  ity  part  of  which  it  lofes  during 
(i£ltony  or  from  the  application  of  flimuli. 

Axiom  III.  By  a procefs  wholly  unknown  to  us 
ti  regains  this  left  quantity  during  its  repofet  or 
ftate  of  reft. 

In  order  to  exprefs  the  different  quantities 
of  irritability  in  any  part,  we  fay  that  it  is 
either  more  or  lefs  redundant,  or  more  or  Iefs 
defective.  It  becomes  redundant  in  a part  when 
the  flimuli  which  are  calculated  to  ad  on  that 
part  are  withdrawn,  or  withheld  for  a certain 
length  of  time,  becaufe  then  no  adion  can  take 
place;  while  on  the  other  hand  the  application 
of  flimuli  caufes  it  to  be  exhaufled,  or  to  be 
deficient,  not  only  by  exciting  adion,  but  by 
fome  fecret  influence,  the  nature  of  which  has 
not  yet  been  deteded  ; for  it  is  a circum- 
flance  extremely  deferving  of  attention,  that 
an  irritable  part,  or  body,  may  be  fuddenly 
deprived  of  its  irritability  by  powerful  flimuli, 
and  yet  no  apparent  increafe  of  mufcular  or 
vafcular  adion  take  place  at  the  time.  A cer- 


tain 


ON  IRRITABILITY.  1$ 

tain  quantity  of  fpirits  taken  at  once  into  the 
ftomach,  kills  almoft  as  inftantaneoufly  as 
lightning  does : the  fame  thing  may  be  ob- 
ferved  of  fome  poifons,  as  opium.  If  a large 
dofe  of  diftilled  laurel  water  be  given  to  an 
animal,  it  inftantly  deprives  the  whole  mufcu- 
lar  parts,  and  indeed  the  whole  frame,  of  its 
irritability  ; it  deftroys  life  without  any  pre- 
vious evident  increafed  adtion  of  the  heart  and 
arterial  fyftem.  There  is  another  poifon  of  the 
vegetable  kind,  the  fatal  influence  of  which  is 
almoft  as  quick  as  that  of  lightning,  and  which 
fuddenly  exhaufts  the  whole  irritability  of  the 
fyftem,  without  producing  any  evident  violent 
adtion  in  the  heart  and  arteries,  or  other  irri- 
table parts  of  the  animal.  It  is  the  juice  of 
the  cerbera  ahoruai>  a poifon  with  which  the 
South  Americans  impregnate  their  arrows. 
But  in  order  that  it  may  produce  its  deleterious 
effects,  it  muft  be  applied  to  a wround.  The 
flighteft  pundture  is  fufficient  for  the  purpofe. 
My  very  ingenious  and  efteemed  friend.  Pro- 
fcftor  Blumenbach,  of  the  univerftty  of 
Gottingen,  related  to  me  the  following  expe- 
riment, which  he  made  with  this  poifon.  He 

took 


i6 


ON"  IRRITABILITY'. 


took  a young  puppy,  and  having  flightly 
fcratched  the  tip  of  its  ear  with  a neeaie,  he 
applied  to  the  wounded  part  a little  of  the 
dried  juice  of  the  cerbera  ahovai,  which  he 
feraped  from  an  arrow.  Scarcely  had  he  time 
to  lay  the  little  animal  on  the  ground  when  it 
was  feized  with  a convullion,  and  inftantly 
died.  The  mufcles  were  quite  flabby  after 
death,  and  the  blood  did  not  coagulate. 

A vaft  variety  of  natural  and  difeafed  actions 
of  irritable  bodies  are  explained  by  the  applica- 
tion of  the  fecond  and  third  laws  of  irritability. 
The  celebrated  Senac,  and  ProfelTor  Weit- 
ereclit,  of  Goettingen,  were  of  opinion  that 
all  mufcular  motion  depended  on  the  vis  ner- 
vofa  of  thefe  parts,  and  not  on  any  diftinct 
principle,  any  vis  infita  in  them.  They  ob- 
jected to  Haller’s  explanation  of  the  pheno- 
mena  of  circulation  by  the  doctrine  of  irrita- 
bility, that  if  the  heart  contracted  folely  from 
the  flimulus  of  the  blood,  it  ought  always  to 
be  in  a ftate  of  contraction  ; for  they  proved 
by  experiment  that  the  auricles  and  ventricles 
of  the  heart  were  never  completely  empty. 

Or 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


<7 


Or  if  it  did  not  always  contract,  it  ought  at  lead 
to  have  done  fo  before  the  cavities  were  half  fil- 
led, fince  there  was  prefent  a fufficient  ftimulus 
ro  act  on  the  whole  internal  furface.  This  ob- 
je<5lion  feems  to  have  occasioned  confiderable 
embarraflinent  to  Haller,  for  he  never  an- 
fwered  it  in  a fatisfadtory  manner.  ProfefTor 
Whytt,  of  Edinburgh,  although  of  a contrary 
opinion  to  Haller,  inafmuch  as  he  confidered 
the  motion  of  the  heart  to  proceed  from  an  irri- 
tation of  its  nerves,  and  not  from  any  affedtion 
of  a vis  infit a , yet  as  he  imagined  the  objection 
militated  equally  againft  his  dodtrine,  anfwCred 
it  by  faying  that  a certain  degree  of  diftention 
was  neceffary  to  produce  the  irritation  of  the 
nerves,  and  that  until  this  degree  of  didention 
took  place,  no  motion  could  enfue.  If  this 
were  to  be  admitted  as  a principle,  it  mud  hold 
good  in  every  analogous  cafe.  But  we  know 
from  the  obfervations  of  Fontana,  that  in 
eels,  turtles,  fnails,  and  fome  other  animals, 
the  heart  remains  completely  didended  with 
blood  for  fome  feconds  before  it  contracts.  If 
diftention,  therefore,  were  the  only  circum- 
ftance  which  produces  the  motion  of  the  heart, 
Vol.  I.  C here 


l8 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


\ 


here  would  be  a caufe  operating  without  an 
efFcsft,  and  under  circumftances  favourable  for 
fuch  an  event. 

The  way  in  which  the  difficulty  is  at  prefent 
explained,  is  by  fuppoftng,  that  a portion  of 
the  irritability  of  the  heart  is  exhaufted  by  each 
adtion,  and  that  a certain  date  of  quiefcence  is 
neceffary  before  that  principle  can  be  again  ac- 
cumulated in  the  part,  in  fufficient  quantity 
to  be  adted  on.  This  ftate  of  reft  in  the  heart 
and  arteries  is  the  interval  between  the  pulfa- 
tions,  and  in  thefe  organs  is  only  of  a few 
feconds  duration. 

There  is  a conftderable  limitation  to  this 
law;  for  if  an  irritable  part  be  kept  too  long 
in  a ftate  of  inadtion,  or  if  its  habitual  ftimuli 
be  too  long  withheld  from  it,  it  lofes  its  irri- 
tability, or,  to  fpcak  more  correctly,  it  ceafes 
to  form  any.  This  will  be  explained  more 
fully  afterwards. 

Axiom  IV.  Each  irritable  part  has  Jiimuli 
which  are  peculiar  to  it ; and  which  are  intended 
to fupport  its  natural  aftion. 


. ; , The 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


*9 


The  greater  number  of  animals  both  cold 
and  warm  blooded,  are  to  be  conlidertd  under 
two  points  of  view,  in  regard  to  the  prefent 
funjedt. 

i.  Each  irritable  part  of  an  animal,  fuch  as 
its  heart,  ftomach,  gall-bladder,  arteries,  ab- 
forbents,  mufcles,  6cc.  is  to  be  confidered 
as  a diftindl  irritable  body,  having  a fufeepti- 
bility  of  being  added  on  by  certain  ftimuli, 
which  in  thefe  parts  preferve  a healthy  adfion, 
but  which  if  applied  to  others  would  produce 
an  irregular  one,  and  confequent  difeafe  ; thus 
the  blood  is  the  natural  ftimulus  to  the  heart, 
arteries,  and  veins  ; but  if  this  fluid  by  any 
accident  gets  into  the  ftomach,  it  produces 
fteknefs  and  vomiting,  adding  as  a powerful 
ftimulus  to  that  vifeus.  If  the  gall,  which  is 
the  natural  ftimulus  to  the  gall-bladder,  dudds, 
and  duodenum,  is  by  any  accident  effufed  into 
the  cavity  of  the  peritoneum,  it  excites  too 
great  adtion  in  the  veflels  of  that  part,  and  in- 
duces inflammation.  The  urine  does  not  irri- 
tate the  tender  fabric  of  the  kidneys,  ureters, 
or  bladder,  except  in  fuch  a degree  as  to  pre- 

C 2 ferve 


20 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


fervc  their  healthy  action  ; but  if  it  be  effufed 
into  the  cellular  membrane,  it  brings  on  fuch 
violent  adtion  of  the  veffels  of  thefe  parts  as 
to  produce  gangrene.  Such  ftimuli  are  called 
habitual  ftimuli  of  parts. 

2.  All  the  irritable  parts  of  animals  are  to  be 
conlidered  as  forming  one  general  fyftem,  con- 
nected by  a particular  contrivance,  by  means 
of  which  the  influence  of  certain  ftimuli, 
although  only  local  in  their  application,  is 
diffufed  throughout  the  whole  body.  The 
connecting  medium  alluded  to  is  the  brain 
and  nervous  fyftem.  There  is  no  irritable 
part  of  the  human  body  whatever,  into  the 
ftrudture  of  which  fome  fibres  of  nerves  do 
not  enter,  and  by  their  means,  therefore, 
various  impreflions  are  tranfmitted  to  them 
from  diftant  places  ; thus  the  impreflions  of 
various  defires  caufe  the  w hole  mufcular  fyftem 
to  be  increafed  in  action.  Heat,  although 
only  applied  to  thefkin,  does  the  fame  thing; 
wine  or  fpirits  in  moderate  quantity,  although 
only  applied  to  the  ftomach,  do  the  fame  thing 
alfo. 

Axiom  V. 


on  irritability. 


21 


Axiom  V.  Each  irritable  part  differs  from  the 
rejt  in  regard  to  the  quantity  of  irritability  which 
it  poffeffes . 

This  law  explains  to  us  the  reafon  of  that 
great  diverfity  which  we  obferve  in  the  adion 
of  various  irritable  parts  ; thus  the  mufcles  of 
voluntary  motion  can  remain  a long  time  in 
a ftate  of  adion,  and  if  it  be  continued  as 
long  as  poffible,  another  confiderable  portion 
of  time  is  required  before  they  regain  the  irri- 
tability they  loft ; but  the  heart  and  arteries 
have  a fhort  and  fudden  adion,  and  their  ftate 
of  quiefcence  or  reft  is  equally  fo;  the  circu- 
lar mufcles  of  the  inteftines  have  alfo  a quick 
adion  and  fhort  reft.  The  urinary  bladder 
does  not  fully  regain  the  irritability  it  lofes, 
during  its  contradion,  for  a confiderable  fpace 
of  time;  the  veflels  which  feparate  and  throw 
out  the  menftrual  difcharge,  ad  in  general  for 
three  or  four  days,  and  do  not  regain  the  irri- 
tability they  lofe  for  a lunar  month. 

Axiom  VI.  All  Jlimuli  produce  aflian  in  pro- 
v portion  to  their  irritating  'powers . 


All 


s 

t 

/ 

22  ON  IRRITABILITY. 

All  our  varieties  of  food,  from  the  fimpleft 
and  mildeft  vegetables,  to  the  mold  compound 
aromatic  difhes,  all  our  drinks,  from  water  to 
the  lirongelf  fpirits,  all  gradation  of  heat,  from 
the  cold  of  the  poles  to  the  fcorching  rays  of 
a tropical  fun,  are  regulated  by  this  law  in 
their  primary  addon,  not  only  on  the  human, 
but  alio  on  every  body  pofleffed  of  irrita- 
bility. 

. ^ i 

As  a perfon  approaches  his  hand  to  the  fire 
the  adion  of  all  the  veflels  of  the  fkin  is  in- 
creafed,  and  it  glows  with  heat ; if  the  hand  be 
approached  ftill  nearer,  the  adion  is  increafed 
to  luch  an  unufual  degree  as  to  occation  red- 
nefs  and  pain  ; and  if  it  be  continued  too 
long,  real  inflammation  takes  place  ; but  if 
this  heat  be  continued,  the  part  at  laft  Iofes  its 
irritability,  and  a fphacelus,  or  gangrene  en- 
fues. 

When  an  animal  which  is  capable  of  fuftain- 
ing  great  extremes  of  heat  and  cold,  *s  ob- 
ferved  with  attention,  it  will  be  found  that 
the  quicknefs  of  circulation  is  always  propor- 
tioned 


i 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


23 


tioned  to  the  degree  of  heat.  The  heart  of 
hamfter  beats  100  in  a minute  during  the  heats 
of  fummer : in  winter  it  beats  only  15  in  a 
minute.  See  Verfucb  eintr  natur  ichen  Gefcinchte 
des  Hamfter s durch  F.  G.  Sulzer.  Gottingen 
und  Gotha,  1774. 

Axiom  VII.  The  aflion  of  every  Jimulus  is  in 
an  inverfe  ratio  to  the  frequency  of  its  application, 

• . ..  **  .j  yj  * * j f ■ . 

In  applying  this  law  in  its  utmoft  extent  to 
the  explanation  of  certain  phenomena  in  irri- 
table bodies,  it  muft  be  recollected  that  each 
irritable  part  has  a quantity  of  the  principle  of 
irritability  natural  to  it ; and  it  is  alfo  to  be 
obferved,  that  many  parts  lofe  their  irritability 
much  more  quickly  than  others. 

This  law,  then,  explains  fevcral  phenomena, 
remarkable  in  particular  habits,  which  attend 
the  ufe  of  ftimuli.  A fmall  quantity  of  fpirits 
taken  into  the  ftomach  increafes  the  aCHon  of 
its  mufcular  coat,  and  alfo  of  its  various 
velfels,  fo  that  digeftion  is  thereby  facilitated. 
If  the  fame  quantity,  however,  be  taken  fre- 
quently, 


24 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


quently,  it  lofes  its  effed.  In  order  to  produce 
the  fame  effeds  as  at  firft,  a larger  quantity 
is  neceffary,  and  hence  the  origin  of  dram 
drinking.  A fmall  portion  of  tobacco  when 
firlt  taken  into  the  mouth,  Simulates  the 
dud  of  the  parotid  gland,  and  alfo  the  gland 
itfelf,  increafing  the  flow  of  faliva ; but  if  this 
quantity  be  daily  chewed,  it  gradually  lofes 
its  effeds,  and  large  mouthfuls  mufl  be  taken. 
The  fame  theory  holds  good  with  regard  to 
various  medicines  of  the  tonic  and  ftimulant 
kind,  which  it  would  be  entirely  out  of  place 
at  prefent  to  mention. 

i M'  i 

Axiom  VIII.  'The  more  the  irritability  of  a 
part  is  accumulated^  the  more  that  part  is  difpofed 
to  be  adled  upon . 

It  is  on  this  account  that  the  adivity  of  all 
animals,  while  in  perfed  health,  is  much  live* 
lier  in  the  morning  than  at  any  other  time  of 
the  day ; for  during  the  night  the  irritability 
of  the  whole  frame,  and  efpecially  that  of  the 
mufcles  deftined  for  labour,  viz.  the  mufcles 
of  voluntary  adion,  is  re-accumulated.  The 

fame 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


25 


fame  law  explains  why  digeftion  goes  on  more 
rapidly  the  firft  hour  after  food  is  fwallowed, 
than  at  any  other  time,  and  it  alfo  accounts 
for  the  great  danger  that  accrues  to  a famifhed 
perfon  upon  firft  taking  in  food. 

The  general  effects  of  all  food  are  princi- 
pally to  be  confidered, 

1.  As  topical  flimuli  to  the  ftomach  and 
inteftines. 

2.  As  general  ftimuli,  adling  through  the 
medium  of  the  nerves. 

3.  As  materials  repairing  the  wafte  which 
is  conftantly  taking  place  in  that  ftimulus  (the 
blood)  which  fupports  the  adtion  of  the  heart 
and  arteries. 

The  food  is  the  ftimulus  therefore  which  ex- 
cites the  healthy  adtion  of  the  mufcularcoat  of 
the  ftomach  and  inteftines,  the  adtion  of  the 
veffels  which  fecrete  the  gaftric  fluid,  and 

which 


*6 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


which  keeps  up  the  a&ion  indirectly  of  the 
whole  fanguiferous  fyftem. 

When  food  is  withdrawn  it  is  evident  that 
the  addon  of  all  thefe  parts  mull  be  di- 
minilhed,  and  the  irritability  of  courfe  accu- 
mulated efpecially  imthe  fanguiferous  fyftem. 
If,  therefore,  a perfon  who  has  fuftained 
hunger  for  a great  length  of  time  eats  in- 
cautioufly,  and  fwailows  quickly,  it  has  the 
fame  eft'eCt  upon  him  as  the  drinking  too  large 
a quantity  of  fpirits  has  on  a perfon  who  has 
not  been  accuftomed  to  take  them  except  in  a 
moderate  quantity,  that  is,  it  rapidly  exhaufts 
the  irritability  of  his  frame  ; and  hence  we  have 
many  inftances  on  record  of  people  dying  from 
fuch  an  imprudent  conduCt.  In  the  fecond 
volume  of  the  Memoirs  of  the  Philofophical 
Society  of  Manchefter,  there  is  a cafe  related 
which  is  highly  illuftrative  of  this  faCl.  The 
circumflances  are  Ihortly  thefe.  Part  of  a coal 
pit  fell  in,  and  one  of  the  colliers  was  thereby 
confined  in  one  of  the  galleries  of  the  mine. 
His  companions  did  not  difeover  him  till  the 
eighth  day  after  the  accident.  When  they 

reached 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


leached  him  he  was  lying  on  his  belly,  in  a 
cavity  which  he  had  been  digging.  He  was 
Hill  alive,  and  addreffed  one  of  his  companions 
by  name,  and  aiked  tor  iomething  to  dunk. 
That  which  was  given  him  was  exactly  the 
molt  proper  thing  which  could  have  been 
thoughc  of,  a little  gruel  every  ten  or  fifteen 
minutes.  It  was  not  until  the  following 
day  that  they  got  him  home,  as  they  were 
obliged  to  dig  a paffage  tor  his  conveyance  ; 
as  foon  as  he  got  home  he  was  put  to  bed, 
covered,  and  fed  with  chicken  broth,  foon 
after  which  his  polfe  began  to  grow  quick, 
and  he  expired  without  a ftruggle. — Such  are 
the  circumftances  of  the  cafe.  It  appears 
probable  that  in  this  cafe  the  external  heat  did 
the  mod  injury.  If  he  had  continued  a day 
or  two  longer  in  the  mine,  or  had  not  beeii 
brought  into  a warm  room  and  warm  bed, 
there  is  reafon  to  believe  he  might  have  reco- 
vered, for  it  is  evident  that  he  was  doing  well 
during  the  whole  of  the  firft  day  that  his  com- 
panions difeovered  him. 


A medical 


28 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


A medical  gentleman,  a friend  of  mine,  who 
had  been  afflicted  with  various  dyfpeptic  com- 
plaints, and  imagined  they  w ere  to  be  remedied 
by  abftemious  living,  accuflomed  himfelf  for 
fome  time  to  eat  only  fuch  diet  as  afforded 
little  nourifhment,  and  which  was  eafily  di- 
gefled,  fuch  as  gruel,  boiled  rice.  Sec.  By 
this  means  his  organs  of  digeftion  feemed  to 
recover  their  former  ftrength,  his  dyfpeptic 
fymptoms  difappeared,  and  he  now  deemed  it 
unneceflary  to  continue  any  longer  in  the  fame 
rigid  plan.  Accordingly  he  returned  to  his 
former  way  of  living,  but  after  the  firft  full 
meal  he  took,  he  was  feized  with  an  inflam- 
mation of  the  bowels. 

If  one  of  the  natural  ftimuli  which  keeps  up 
the  circulation  of  the  blood  in  a vafcular  part 
be  diminilhed,  the  irritability  of  that  part  is 
accumulated,  and  difpofes  the  vefiels  to  excef- 
fiveaftion  ; and  hence  chilblains,  ophthalmias, 
and  inflamed  tonftls,  are  extremely  common 
at  thofe  feafons  of  the  year  w'hen  tranfitions 
from  cold  to  heat  are  mod  frequent,  or  w’hen 
people  come  from  a cold  atmofphere  into 


warm  rooms. 


It 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


29 

It  may  be  remarked  that  almofi  all  the  cafes 
of  inflammation  of  the  lungs  or  ftomach  to 
which  the  common  people  of  London  are  fub- 
ject,  arife  from  flmilar  caufes.  Either  they 
have  been  riding  in  carts,  or  on  the  tops  of 
coaches,  in  very  cold  weather,  and  afterwards 
have  come  into  a warm  room,  probably  an 
alehoufe  ; or  elfe  they  have  been  working  for 
hours  in  drains,  or  in  flmilar  cold  fltuations. 
While  they  remain  in  the  cold,  no  fymptoms 
of  the  diforder  occur.  It  almofi  always  com- 
mences when  they  get  home. 

If  external  heat  be  fo  much  diminifhed  as 
to  caufe  the  circulation  of  blood  in  a part  to 
be  almofi  totally  flopt,  great  danger  will  arife 
if  the  part  be  then  fuddenly  expofed  to  too 
warm  a temperature,  for  fuch  a degree  of  in- 
flammation occurs  in  thefe  inflances,  as  caufes 
a gangrene  to  enfue.  Hence  the  bed  cure  for 
a frofl-bitten  part  is  the  common  application 
of  melting  fnow,  or  cold  water.  Similar  fadls 
to  thefe  arc  to  be  difcovered  in  the  vegetable 
kingdom  : a plant  that  has  been  reared  in  a 
very  poor  foil  is  like  a perfon  half  famifhed. 

If 


30  ON  1RRITABILIT7# 

If  it  he  immediately  tranfplanted  into  a richef 
foil  it  foon  dies.  A plant  that  has  been  reared 
in  a cold  temperature  it  brought  into  a hot- 
houfe,  or  very  warm  apartment,  grows  rapidiy 
for  a flioit  while,  but  foon  dies. 

Axiom  IX.  If  the  Jlimuli  which  hep  up  the 
action  of  any  irrita  le  body  be  withdrawn  for  too 
great  a length  of  time , that  procefs  on  which  the 
formi  tioi  of  the  princip'e  depends  is  gradually 
dim, nijhcdy  and  at  lafi  intircly  defrayed. 

In  the  comment  on  the  third  axiom,  which 
expreffes  that  a certain  degree  of  quiefcence 
from  action  is  neceffary  to  repair  the  irritabi- 
lity, it  was  mentioned  that  the  axiom  was  to 
be  underflood  as  being  true  only  under  certain 
limitations.  The  principle  of  irritability  is 
not  to  be  confidered  as  a mere  quality,  but  as 
a fine  fubtle  kind  of  matter,  fecretedfrom  cer- 
tain veffels  ; or  if  not  fecreted,  at  lead  formed 
by  fome  occult  action  of  living  bodies.  It  is 
evident  that  it  depends  on  the  circulation  of 
the  blood  ; for  its  formation,  ceteris  paribus , 
is  more  or  lefs  quick  as  the  animal  is  more 


or 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


3* 


or  lefs  vigorous.  Not  only  the  healthy 
adion  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  but  a cer- 
tain proportion  and  texture  of  the  blood 
itfelf,  is  nec diary  to  its  formation.  What- 
ever diminifhes  the  healthy  adion  of  the 
vafcular  fyftem,  and  the  due  quantity  of 
fluids,  mult  neceffarily  prevent  the  forma- 
tion of  a proper  quantity  of  this  principle. 
But  all  general  ftimuli  operate  diredly  or  in- 
diredly,  either  in  caufing  a proper  fupply  of 
chyle  and  blood,  or  in  preferving  the  adion  of 
the  heart  and  arteries  ; and  therefore  the  di- 
minution of  thefe,  or  the  total  abftradion  of 
them,  may  occafion  either  a dired  debility,  or 
death  itfelf.  When  the  irritability  of  the 
fyftem  is  too  quickly  exhaufted  by  heat,  as  is 
the  cafe  in  certain  warm  climates,  the  appli- 
cation of  cold  invigorates  the  frame,  becaufe 
cold  is  a mere  diminution  of  the  overplus  of 
that  ftimulus  which  was  caufing  the  rapid  con- 
fumption  of  the  principle.  Under  fuch  or 
fimilar  circumftances,  therefore,  cold  is  a tonic 
remedy,  but  if  in  a climate  naturally  cold,  a 
perfon  were  to  go  into  a cold  bath,  and  not 
foon  return  into  the  warmer  atmofphere,  it 

would 


32  ' ON  IRRITABILITY. 

would  deftroy  life  juft  in  the  fame  manner  as 
many  poor  people  who  have  no  comfortable 
dwellings  are  often  deftroyed  from  being  too 
long  expofed  to  the  cold  in  winter.  Upon 
the  firft  application  of  cold  the  irritability  is 
accumulated,  and  the  vafcular  fyftem  therefore 
is  difpofed  to  great  adtion  ; but  after  a certain 
time,  all  aeftion  is  fo  much  diminifhed  that 
the  procefs,  whatever  it  be,  on  which  the 
formation  of  the  irritable  principle  depends, 
is  entirely  loft.  When  a perfon,  after  having 
ate  a full  meal,  fafts  for  feveral  hours,  he  is 
thereby  difpofed  for  every  healthy  adfion  ; for 
there  is  then  a fufficient  quantity  of  materials 
yielded  to  the  fyftem  to  repair  its  wafte,  and 
the  temporary  abftinence  from  food,  as  it 
allows  the  irritability  to  be  accumulated, 
caufes  the  augmented  volume  of  blood  to  adt 
more  powerfully  than  it  wmuld  do  were  the 
irritability  exhaufted  by  any  general  ftimulus 
applied  to  the  ftomach.  Drinkers  of  fpirits, 
and  the  inhabitants  of  wrarm  climates,  are 
generally  emaciated  and  weak  ; for  independ- 
ently of  other  caufes,  the  irritability  w'hich 
ought  to  be  expended  in  forming  good  chyle, 
and  good  blood,  and  in  difpofing  of  thefe 

materials. 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


33 


materials,  is  wafted  by  fuch  exceflive  ftimuli. 
Hence,  alfo,  thofe  who  eat  too  freq^entlv,  and 
too  much,  are  liable  to  various  diforders,  and 
debility  ; fuch  as  a faulty  fecretion  of  gaftric 
fluid,  a faulty  action  of  the  mufcular  coat  of 
the  ftomach,  generation  of  air  in  the  ftomach, 
faulty  fecretion  of  pancreatic  liquor,  faulty  fe- 
cretion of  bile,  enlargement  of  the  liver,  of 
the  mefenteric  glands,  palfy,  &c.  When  thefe 
primary  affections  continue  long,  they  pro- 
duce various  others  fympathetically,  fuch  as 
headach,  vertigo,  apoplexy,  &c. 

* 

Debility  and  death,  then,  may  be  produced 
by  the  too  frequent  ufe  of  ftimulants,  or  by 
taking  at  once  too  large  a quantity  of  any 
powerful  one.  To  debility  thus  occaftoned, 
a late  eccentric  genius  in  medicine  (Dr.  John 
Brown)  gave  the  name  of  indireSi  debility , 
and  from  a want  of  enlarged  views  on  the 
fubject  of  hi3  profeflion,  he  generalized  his 
ideas  of  direct  and  indirect  debility  fo  far  as 
to  make  them  the  principles  of  explaining, 
according  to  his  notions,  not  only  the  origin 
and  nature  of  all  difeafes,  but  alfo  the  action 
of  all  medicines.  The  doctrine  of  direct  and 
V'ol.  I.  D indirect 


34 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


indired  debility  is  doubtlefs  true  to  a certain 
extent,  and  explains  many  phenomena  of 
difeafes  ; it  has  alfo  modified  and  ameliorated 
practice  in  feveral  points ; but  to  make  it  the 
balls  of  a general  claflification  of  disorders,  to 
attempt  to  explain  all  their  phenomena  by  it, 
and  above  all,  to  make  it  the  only  foundation 
of  the  indications  of  cure,  betrays  a lingular 
incapacity  for  comprehenlive  obfervation,  and 
a radical  defed  of  medical  fcience. 

The  general  laws  agreeable  to  which  irri- 
tability feems  to  be  regulated  in  producing 
its  various  phenomena,  having  been  defcribed, 
a queftion  of  great  intricacy  now  arifes  for  dif- 
cuflion  : What  is  the  nature  of  this  principle  ? 

Until  of  late  no  opinion  whatever  wras  of- 
fered on  this  fubjed,  except  by  thofe  who 
conlidered  irritability  and  the  nervous  prin- 
ciple as  one  and  the  fame  thing.  Many  con- 
jectures have  been  formed  concerning  the 
nature  of  this  laft  mentioned  influence.  Some 
have  thought  it  to  be  eledricity  ; others  the 
magnetic  fluid ; others  what  they  call  aether  ; 

» others 


ON  IRRITABILITY » 35 

others  a fluid  fui  generis.  As  the  examination  ot 
thefe  hypothefes  belongs  to  the  fubiect  of  ben- 
fation,  it  will  be  more  agreeable  to  method  to 
defer  it  until  that  fubjedt  is  itfelf  inveftigated. 

Of  late  a new  doctrine  has  arifen,  which 
has  been  dignified  with  the  refpedtable  title  of 
a theory.  The  proofs  of  its  truth,  however, 
are  fo  fcanty,  and  fo  many  fadts  remain  un- 
explained by  it,  that  it  cannot  be  allowed 
fuch  an  honour.  Dr.  Girtanner  is  the  firft 
who  confiders  irritability  to  be  nothing  elfe 
than  oxygene ; the  bafis  of  pure  air.  This  opi- 
nion has  been  adopted  by  Dr.  Beddoes,  and 
a few  other  pneumatic  dodtors. 

In  examining  this  hypothefis,  it  is  impof- 
ble  for  any  one  who  has  a juft  fenfe  of  the 
value  of  candour  in  another,  not  to  be  hurt  by 
the  manner  in  which  Dr.  Girtanner  conceals 
difeoveries  that  have  been  made,  and  conjec- 
tures that  have  been  offered  to  the  public  long 
before  he  wrote.  There  is  a fpecies  of  egotifm 
in  fome  authors  which  is  fo  powerful  as  to  make 
them  hide  not  only  the  fources  from  which 

D 2 they 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


they  borrow  their  ideas,  but  often  to  aferibe 
to  themfelves  the  merit  of  difeoveries  to  which 
they  have  no  kind  of  claim.  The  opinions  of 
their  opponents,  when  eafily  combated,  are  all 
brought  forward,  becaufe  the  refutation  of 
thefe  adds  to  their  glory ; but  the  combats  of 
others  who„  have  fought  fuccefsfully  before 
them  in  the  fame  field  are  not  mentioned,  for 
fear  that  their  fame  fhould  fuffer  diminution. 
Such  a conduct  muft  neceffarily  occafion  dif- 
guft,  a fentiment  always  unfavourable  to  a 
writer,  however  great  his  talents  may  be,  for 
it  prevents  our  doing  him  that  juftice  to 
which  he  is  otherwife  juftly  entitled. 

<f  I think* * fays  Dr.  G.  <f  that  the  oxygene 
<f  is  abforbed  by  the  blood,  and  that  the 
“ venous  blood  is  oxygenated  in  the  lungs 
u during  refpiration.  The  mold  celebrated 
ft  naturalifts,  and  chemifts,  are  of  a different 
cc  opinion  ; they  think  that  the  oxygene  does 
“ not  combine  with  the  venous  blood.  Ac- 
u cording  to  them,  this  laft  lofes  carbon  and 
<c  hydrogene,  and  recovers  the  bright  colour 
" natural  to  it,  without  abforbing  any  thing 
cc  from  the  atmofphere.’* 


In 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


37 


In  another  part  he  fays,  <f  After  having  a 
“ long  time  attended  to  the  phenomena  of 
‘ ‘ refpiration,  and  made  many  experiments 
“ upon  this  fubjedt,  I think  it  may  be  con- 
cr  eluded,  that  during  refpiration  one  part  of 
**  the  oxygene  of  the  vital  air  combines  with 
tf  the  venous  blood,  of  which  it  changes  the 
tf  black  colour,  and  makes  it  vermilion. ** 

Thefe  conclufions  had  been  made  by  Dr. 
Godwin,  in  his  thefes  on  refpiration , a confider- 
able  time  before  Dr.  Girtanner  wrote.  He 
mentions  many  beautiful  experiments,  by 
which  the  opinion  is  proved  to  be  true. 

The  conjedture  that  oxygene  is  the  princi- 
ple of  irritability,  is  peculiar  to  Dr.  Girtan- 
ner. Whether  it  be  true  or  falfe,  he  has  the 
merit  of  having  firft  mentioned  it. 

Before  any  remarks  be  offered  on  this  theory , 
as  Dr.  G.  calls  it  [a)>  it  appears  but  juft  to 

place 

(a)  Among  medical  ftudents,  nothing  is  more  common 
than  to  apply  the  word  theory  to  every  idle  fpeculation 

> which 


ON  IRRITABILITY* 


38 

place  it  in  the  moft  favourable  light,  and  to 
bring  forward  the  proofs  on  which  it  is  found- 
ed ; and  as  no  perfon  will  probably  ever  do 
this  more  advantageoufly  than  the  author 
himfelf,  his  own  expreflions  are  adopted. 
<f  The  irritability  of  organized  bodies  is  al- 


which  prefents  itfelf  to  their  fancy ; but  it  is  a lamentable 
circumftance  to  fee  a gentleman  well  verfed  in  literature 
and  in  fcience,  and  who  writes  an  elegant  and  perfpicuous 
language,  abufe  abftratt  terms  fo  very  egregioufly. 

As  this  work  is  chiefly  intended  for  the  younger  part  of 
medical  men,  and  as  the  diftinftion  between  theory  and 
hvpothefis  may  not  be  familiar  to  them,  it  may  be  remarked, 
that  the  former  term  ought  only  to  be  applied  to  fuch  a 
fyftem  of  general  rules  as  is  intirely  founded  on  experience, 
and  which  explains  every  phenomenon  belonging  to  that 
branch  of  fcience  to  which  it  refers.  An  hypothecs,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  a lyflem  of  general  rules,  founded  partly 
on  faft,  partly  on  conjefture.  A theory  explains  every 
fa£l;  an  hypothefis  explains  only  a certain  number  of  fafts, 
leaving  fome  unaccounted  for,  ana  others  in  oppofition  to 
it.  There  is  not,  either  in  medicine  or  chemiftry,  even  in 
their  improved  (late,  any  fyftem  of  general  rules,  or  prin- 
ciples, which  is  intitled  to  the  denomination  of  theory. 
Doubt  always  precedes  truth  : hypothefis  prepares  the  way 
for  theory  ; — hence  the  utility  of  this  laft  in  fcience. 

(i 


ways 


\ 


ON  IRRITABILITY.  39 

c<  ways  in  a dired  ratio  of  the  quantity  of 
“ oxygene  they  contain.” 

1.  “ Every  thing  that  increafes  the  quantity 
“ of  oxygene  in  organized  bodies,  increafes  at 
" the  fame  time  their  irritability.” 

“ We  have  feen  a dired  proof  of  this  in  the 
<r  3d  experiment  cited  above.  Befides  this,  a 
u great  number  ofother  phenomena  fupport  my 
“ opinion.  The  irritability  of  animals  made  to 
“ breathe  oxygene  air  is  wonderfully  increafed. 
“ Blanched  plants,  whofe  irritability  has  been 
“ accumulated  in  confequenceof  theabftradion 
“ of  the  ftimulus  of  light,  contain  a great  quan- 
<(  tityof  oxygene,  according  to  the  experiments 
<c  of  Mr.  Fourcroy.  I have  obferved  in  the 
«c  courfe  of  my  experiments,  that  plants  made  to 
<f  grow  in  oxygene  air  became  white,  although 
" expofed  to  the  light.  But  what  {hews  more 
<€  clearly  than  all,  that  the  irritability  is  in  pro- 
fC  portion  to  the  quantity  of  oxygene,  arc  the 
“ phenomena  attending  the  adion  of  mercury 
<(  and  mercurial  falts  upon  animals.  As  this  is 
tf  one  of  the  moil  ftriking  proofs  of  my  theory, 

f<  and 


I 


4o 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


*•  and  as  I have  before  obferved,  that  many  per- 
c<  Tons,  and  among  the  reft,  philofophers  of  the 
“ firft  rank,  fuch  as  Dr.  Crawford,  have  been 
“ ftruck  with  the  novelty  and  fimplicity  of  my 
<e  mode  of  explaining  thefe  phenomena,  I can- 
<(  not  forbear  entering  into  fome  detail  upon  this 
Cf  fubjedt.  It  is  a well  known  fadt  among  phy- 
<f  ficians,  that  mercury,  in  its  metallic  ftate,  has 
“ no  effeit  on  the  human  body.  I have  known 
ct  many  people  who  for  many  years  took  a daily 
fr  portion  of  quickftlver,  to  the  amount  of  one 
<(  or  two  ounces,  from  an  idea  of  guarding 
“ themlelves  from  epidemic  difeafes,  but  who 
never  perceived  any  effedt  whatever  from  this 
<c  lingular  cuftom.  It  is  proved  by  Dr.  Saun- 
“ ders,  that  the  effedts  of  mercurial  ointment 
<f  are  owing  only  to  the  fmall  quantity  of  mer- 
tf  cury  that  has  been  oxidated  during  a long  tri- 
ff  turation.  It  is  neceffary,  therefore,  that  mer- 
<{  cury  fhould  be  oxidated  to  have  any  effect 
“ upon  the  human  body.  On  the  other  hand  it 
<f  is  well  known  that  in  perfons  who  have  taken 
«f  the  oxide  of  mercury,  the  mercury  after 
having  produced  its  ufual  effeefts,  has  paffed 
ec  through  the  fkin  in  a metallic  form,  and  has 

“ amalgamated 


ON  IRRITABILITY* 


41 


“ amalgamated  itfelf  with  watches,  and  the  gold 
«f  in  the  pocket,  &c.  The  oxide  of  mercury  in 
“ palling  through  the  human  body,  parts  with 
*'  its  oxygene,  and  it  is  to  this  oxygene  alone, 
“ which  remains  combined  with  thefyftem  that 
<r  the  efled  produced  by  oxidated  mercury  is 
“ owing.  This  e fifed:  is  the  mercurial  difeafe, 
“ the  fymptoms  of  which  are  the  fame  as  thofe 
“ of  the  feurvy  ; the  mouth,  gums,  and  the 
whole  fyftem  are  affeded  in  a manner  ex- 
<r  tremely  analogous.  But  the  feurvy,  as  I have 
“ proved  in  my  firft  efiay,  is  a difeafe  produced 
“ by  the  accumulation  of  the  irritable  prin- 
“ ciple.  The  accumulation,  therefore,  of  the 
fC  oxygene  producingthe  fame  effeds,  the  great 
<(  analogy  between  the  irritable  principle  and 
“ oxygene  appears  to  be  proved  ; and  1 think 
myfelf  authorized  to  conclude  that  oxygene 
“ is  the  principle  of  irritability. ” 

In  the  above  citation.  Dr.  Girtanner’s  opi- 
nion is  clearly  Hated,  and  the  chief  arguments 
on  which  it  is  founded  are  mentioned.  The 
force  of  the  conclulion  is  chiefly  fupported  by 
the  idea  that  the  feurvy  is  a difeafe  of  accu- 
mulated 


42 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


mulated  irritability,  or  in  other  words,  a difeafe 
in  which  the  body  is  too  highly  oxygenated ; 
for  it  is  owing  to  the  great  analogy  which  Dr. 
G.  thinks  he  difcovers  between  fcurvy  and  the 
effects  of  mercury,  that  he  concludes  that  the 
mercurial  difeafe  is  alfo  a difeafe  of  fuper-oxy- 
genation. 

As  I mean  to  contend  with  Dr.  Beddoes 
that  fcurvy,  fo  far  from  being  a difeafe  of 

j 

fuper-oxygenation,  is  one  in  which  the  blood 
is  not  fufficiently  oxygenated,  it  may  be 
thought  right  to  adduce,  in  the  firft  place, 
thofe  circumftances  which  Dr.  G.  confiders  as 
proofs  in  favour  of  his  opinion. 

tf  By  the  abftra&ion  of  many  of  the  com- 
tc  m on  ftimuli,  for  any  length  of  time,  the 
“ irritability  of  the  fibre  accumulates  fo  much, 
that  the  moft  trifling  ffimulus  produces  the 
<f  moft  violent  effe<5ts,  and  frequently,  even 
Cf  inftantaneous  death.  This  difeafe  is  called 
“ the  fcurvy,  concerning  the  nature  of  which, 
*'  medical  men  have  formed  fo  many  falfe  and 
" ridiculous  theories.  It  is  of  the  utmoft  im- 

<f  portance 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


43 


portancc  to  mankind  to  know  the  true  nature 
" of  the  difeafe;  fince,  in  confequence  of  our 
<f  ignorance  in  this  particular,  we  have  been 
(<  unable  to  find  a fure  remedy  for  it,  and  fo  , 
“ many  thoulands  of  lives  have  fallen  a facri- 
“ lice  to  its  ravages,  in  armies,  fleets,  and 
**  befieged  towns.  In  the  laft  war  the  Englifli 
fC  fleet  fuffered  dreadfully  from  the  fcurvy : 

“ and  laft  year  a great  number  of  foldiers  died 
Cf  of  this  difeafe  in  the  Imperial  army  in 
fe  Wallachia,  in  confequence  of  the  abftra&ion 
“ of  nutriment  (the  emperor  having  ordered 
“ that  a kind  of  pafle,  made  of  bread  and 
11  water,  fhould  be  given  to  the  foldiers  inftead 
({  of  meat)  of  the  ftimulus  of  oxygene,  in  the 
**  corrupted  atmofphere  of  the  fens  of  Walla- 
ft  chia,  and  laftly,  of  the  nervous  ftimulus, 

“ the  molt  powerful  of  all ; for  the  greateft: 

<c  part  of  the  army  were  engaged  by  force, 

“ and  againft  their  will. 

4t  The  abftraclion  of  all  thefe  ftimuli  accu- 
“ mulated  the  irritability  of  the  fibre,  and 
te  caufed  the  fcurvy,  and  that  dreadful  mor- 
e(  tality  that  took  place  in  the  army.”  See 

the 


44 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


the  tranflation  of  Girtanner’s  EfTay  in  Bed- 
does’  work  on  Calculus) 

To  reafon  thus  on  the  nature  of  a difeafe, 
from  a preconceived  notion  concerning  the 
manner  in  which  its  remote  caufes  produce 
their  effects,  is  by  no  means  uncommon  in 
the  annals  of  medic ine,  although  certainly  not 
agreeable  to  the  fpirit  of  philofophical  in- 
quiry. If  the  phenomena  of  the  difeafe  itfelf, 
inftead  of  being  accounted  for  by  fuch  an  hy- 
pothecs, Hand  in  dired  contradiction  to  it,  and 
the  mode  of  cure  be  found  to  coniift  in  exhibit- 
ing remedies  which  abound  with  the  very 
materials  which  are  fuppofed  to  produce  the 
diforder ; thefe  are  fufficient  arguments  to  in- 
validate the  opinion. 

The  principal  external  phenomena  of  fcurvy 
are  a dark  coloured  blood,  and  purple,  blue, 
and  violaceous  coloured  fpots  on  the  fkin,  dark 
coloured,  tumid,  and  fpongy  gums,  a foetid 
breath,  and  foetid  excrements ; and  a great  ten- 
dency to  gangrene.  But  it  has  been  proved 
that  oxygene  reddens  the  blood,  giving  it  the 

carnation 


ON  IRRITABILITY.  45 

carnation  tint  which  we  obferve  it  have  in  the 
arteries  of  healthy  people.  If  fcurvy,  there- 
fore, conftfted  in  a fuper-oxygenation  of  that 
fluid,  why  are  not  thenafual  effedls  of  fuch  a 
Hate  to  be  difcovered  ? 

It  is  now  a well  afcertained  fadt,  that  of  all 
remedies  which  have  been  tried  for  the  cure  of 
this  difeafe,  none  fucceed  fo  well  as  acefcent 
vegetables,  and  the  vegetable  and  mineral 
acids ; but  thefe  contain  vafl  quantities  of 
oxygene,  which  they  eafily  part  with,  in  the 
human  body,  and  which,  therefore,  ought 
to  do  harm,  were  fcurvy  owing  to  too  much, 
oxygene  in  the  fyftem.  Did  any  one  ever 
hear  of  fcurvy  being  cured  by  alkalies,  by 
fpirits,  or  any  medicines  which  do  not  contain 
oxygene  ? Is  not  animal  flefli  alone  incapable 
of  curing  the  difeafe,  although  undoubt- 
edly it  is  in  itfelf  a more  powerful  ftimulus 
than  vegetable  food,  and  which,  in  a malady 
ariflng  from  an  abftradtion  of  ftimuli,  might 

therefore  be  fuppofed  to  do  good? Thefe 

arguments  tend  to  prove  that  the  bafis  of  Dr. 

Girtanner’s 


46 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


Girtanner’s  reafonine;  is  faulty.  It  may  ap- 
pear, neverthelefs,  to  many,  that  oxygene  is 
probably  the  principle  on  which  the  irritability 
of  bodies  depends.  This  feems  to  be  Dr. 
Beddoes’  opinion,  as  well  as  Dr.  Girtannek’s, 
and  he  makes  it  a ground  of  argument  in  fup- 
port  of  his  aerial  method  of  treating  phthifis. 
The  fuccefs  of  his  practice  will  certainly  not 
be  adduced  in  fupport  of  the  opinion,  fince 
it  may  be  fafely  afferted  that  there  is  hardly 
any  other  treatment  which  has  been  extolled 
for  the  cure  of  this  melancholy  diforder  which 
has  not  {hewn  powers  equal,  if  not  fuperior, 
to  thofe  exhibited  by  breathing  an  atmofphere 
of  a reduced  ftandard. 

But  to  confine  our  arguments  to  the  hypo- 
thefis  itfelf,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  all  fub- 
ftances  which  are  known  to  flimulate  are  fup- 
pofed  to  a<5t  by  withdrawing  the  oxygene  from 
an  irritable  body,  by  means  of  a fuperior  de- 
gree of  chemical  affinity  which  they  have  for 
that  fubtle  element. 


Dr.  Girtanner 


ON  IRRITABILITY.  47 

Dr.  Girtanner  reduces  all  bodies  which 
come  in  contact  with  the  “ irritable  fibre  ” 
under  three  daffies. 

“ The  firfl  comprehends  thofe  which  have 
“ the  fame  degree  of  affinity  to  the  irritable 
“ principle,  or  oxygene,  as  the  organized 
<f  fibre  itfelf.  Thefc  fubftances  produce  no 
“ effect  on  the  fibre. 

1 

“ The  fecond  contains  thofe  which  have  a 
" lefs  degree  of  affinity  to  the  oxygene  than 
<c  the  fibre  has.  Thefe  fubftances,  coming 
**  in  conta<ft  with  the  fibre,  will  furcharge  it 
<c  with  oxygene,  and  produce  the  flate  of  ac- 
**  cumulation.  Thefe  fubftances  may  be  called 
<c  negative  ftimuli. 

The  third  clafs  contains  thofe  fubftances 
“ which  have  a greater  degree  of  affinity  to  the 
“ oxygene  than  the  fibre  itfelf  has.  Thefe, 
cc  coming  in  contadl  with  the  fibre,  will  de- 

prive  it  of  its  oxygene,  and  produce  the 
f‘  ftate  of  exhauftion.  I ftiall  call  thefe  pofi- 
" tive  ftimuli.” 


Tn 


48  OJJ  IRRITABILITY. 

* \ 

In  regard  to  this  theory  (as  it  is  called)  I 
have  to  obferve  in  the  firft  place,  that  the 
whole  phenomena  of  mechanical  and  mental 
flimuli  on  the  irritable  parts  of  animals  are 
not  only  left  unexplained,  but  really  Hand  in 
direct  contradiction  to  it.  Does  a piece  of 
rock  cryftal,  a particle  of  fand,  a thorn,  or  the 
point  of  a pin,  all  of  which  Simulate,  draw 
oxygene  from  a mufcle  ? Can  any  proof  what- 
ever be  given  of  their  having  fuffered  any  che- 
mical change  upon  being  applied  to  an  irrita- 
ble part  ? Yet  they  are  all  of  them  capable 
of  exciting  inflammation  when  applied  to 
naked  veflels,  or  mufcles.  The  fame  queflions 
may  be  afked  concerning  our  thoughts,  con- 
lidered  as  flimuli.  We  choofe  to  walk,  and 
accordingly  we  get  up  and  walk.  In  what 
manner  can  the  oxygene  in-  our  limbs  be  af- 
fected by  Ample  volition  ? The  brain  mud  be 
fuppofed  to  be  a chemical  laboratory,  and  the 
foul  an  operative  chemifl  who  prepares  agents 
which  have  a more  powerful  attraction  for  oxy- 
gene, than  the  mufcular  fibre.  Thefe,  it  is  to 
be  imagined,  are  fent  along  the  nerves  quickly 
or  flowly,  in  large  or  fmall  dofes,  according  as 


a man 


ON  IRRITABILITY.  49 

S.  man  choofes  to  dance,  or  to  walk,  to  lift  a 

' y 

load,  or  to  lift  a feather. 

It  is  a curious  circumftance  in  regard  to  this 
theory,  that  oxygene  is  confidered,  not  only  as 
the  principle  of  irritability,  but  alfo  as  the  agent 
that  adts  on  it.  Dr.  G.  indeed,  denies  this, 
and  fays  that  oxygene,  and  bodies  which  con- 
tain it  in  great  abundance,  are  only  negative 
ftimuli,  that  is,  they  yield  it  to  the  mufcular 
parts,  and  predifpofe  them  to  greater  adtion. 
Cold,  which  is  a negative  ftimulus,  and  hun- 
ger, if  too  long  continued,  gradually  deftroy  life 
itfelf,  in  the  way  in  which  all  negative  ftimuli 
are  fuppofed  to  produce  their  effedt,  that  is,  by 
not  fupporting  adtion.  If  bodies  which  yield 
oxygene  are  to  be  conlidered  as  negative 
ftimuli,  they  ought,  therefore,  to  do  the  fame; 
but  I appeal  to  fadts  if  this  is  the  cafe.  Does 
not  red  precipitate,  when  applied  to  a fore,  in- 
ftantly  excite  a violent  adtion  in  the  part  ? Do 
not  corroftve  fublimate  (oxygenated  muriate 
of  mercury,)  and  white  arfenic  (white  oxyde 
of  arfenic ) adt  in  the  fame  manner?  If  thefe 
fubftances  produce  their  effedts  in  no  other 

Vol.  I.  E way 


ON  IRRITABILITY. 


50 

way  than  by  caufing  an  accumulation  of  the 
principle  of  irritability,  where  is  the  ftimulus 
which  produces  the  inflammation  P The  oxy- 
gene  which  thefe  bodies  are  fuppofed  to  yield 
cannot  be  at  the  fame  time  the  principle  of 
action,  and  the  exciting  caufe  of  adtion.  If 
a negative  ftimulus  of  this  kind  were  taken 
into  the  ftomach,  one  would  naturally  imagine 
it  would  caufe  an  accumulation  of  irritability 
in  the  whole  of  that  organ,  and  if  any  ftimulus 
were  to  adfc  on  the  part,  a general  inflamma- 
tion of  that  organ  would  enfue.  But  how  is 
this  to  be  reconciled  to  the  fadt  ? When  a per- 
fon  dies  who  has  been  poifoned  by  arfenic,  is 
not  the  inflamed  part  limited  to  thofe  places 
with  which  the  arfenic  has  been  in  contadl  ? 
A highly  inflamed,  and  fometimes  gangrenous 
fpot,  not  larger  than  a fhilling,  or  a half- 
crown  piece,  is  difeovered.  All  the  reft  of 
the  ftomach,  except  it  be  thofe  places  imme- 
diately furrounding  this  fpot,  are  in  general 
but  flightly  inflamed. 

The  manner  in  which  ftimuli  adl,  and  pro- 
duce the  contradtion  of  mufcular  and  other 

' irritable 


1 


ON  IRRITABILITY# 


irritable  parts  of  the  body,  are  phenomena 
which  muft  awaken  the  fpirit  of  inquiry  in 
every  man  who  has  the  flighted:  tincture  of 
it  in  his  mental  compofuion ; but  it  is  not 
by  crude  and  hady  conjeftures  that  we  can 
arrive  at  a knowledge  of  thefe  myfterious 
intricacies  of  nature.  It  is,  for  this  reafon, 
that  the  invedigation  of  thefe  fubjecfts  fhall 
be  delayed  Until  a number  of  other  phenomena 
have  been  examined.  The  deeply  learned 
Bacon,  and  Boyle,  modeftly  conceived  that, 
previous  to  the  formation  of  general  princi- 
ples, it  was  fird  abfolutely  neceflary  to  exa- 
mine with  much  caution,  patience,  and  im- 
partiality, every  fa6t  connected  with  the 
branch  of  fcience,  to  which  the  general  con- 
clufion  related;  but  this  flow,  yet  neceffary 
procefs,  does  not  well  fuit  the  temper  of  the 
prefent  times.  Sy Items  are  formed  in  a trice, 
and  condituted  theories  by  the  authority  of 
one  or  two  individuals.  We  fimplify  every 
thing  in  a mod  wonderful  manner,  and  endea- 
vour to  approach  the  facred  fountain  of  truth 
by  leaps  and  bounds,  as  if  \fe  were  fuddenly 

E 2 endowed 


I 


52  ON  IRRITABILITY. 

endowed  with  powers  totally  unknown  to  the 
philofophers  of  former  ages.  Man  is  a fibre 
which  bends  itfelf  into  a ring,  then  becomes  a 
tube,  and  then  an  animal  ( a ).  The  principle 
of  his  motions  is  oxygene  [b)  : ideas  are 
motions  of  fibres  ( c ) : vegetables  have 

ideas  ( d ) : children  may  be  begotten  of  any 
fex,  fhape,  or  feature,  at  the  will  of  the 
male  parent" (<?).  The  whole  of  living  bodies 
are  made  up  of  a few  airs  ; and  the  great 
globe  itfelf  is  only  a fplinter  of  a fractured 
fun  (f)  ! 


(a)  Zoonomia,  Vol.  1.  S e£L  xxxix.  (3)  Girtanner  on 
Irritability,  (c)  Zoonomia,  Se£l.  iii.  ( d ) Same  book, 

Sett,  xiii,  (e)  Same  book,  Sett,  xxxix,  (jj  Buffon's 
Theory  of  the  Earth. 


i 


mA 


* 


CHAP- 


ON  SENSATION. 


53 


CHAPTER  II. 


ON  SENSATION. 


Common  definition  of  Senfation  ; fault  found  with 
it  ; nece/Jity  of  other  terms.  Nervous  imp  ref- 
fion>  what  it  is.  Senforial  imprejjion.  Mental 
perception.  External  and  internal  nervous 
imprejfions.  Application  of  ihefe  terms  in  the 
explanation  of  various  phenomena.  New  hypo - 
thejis  of  Senfation.  Figure  of  impreffion , how 
to  be  conceived  ; its  tranfmiffion  from  one  part 
of  the  nervous  fyfiem  to  another . Examination 

of  opinions . 


Wh  E N a foreign  body  comes  in  contact 
with  the  extremities  of  our  nerves,  a certain 
change,  or  affe&ion,  is  immediately  produced 
in  them,  of  which  we  are,  for  the  molt  part, 
confcious,  and  which  is  denominated  fenfation a 
or  feeling . 


The 


54 


ON  SENSATION. 


The  capability  which  a nerve  poffeffes  of 
being  thus  affeded,  is  denominated  its fenfibi- 
Uly,  and  the  change  that  takes  place  in  it  is 
fuppofed  to  be  an  affection  of  the  energy  of 
the  nerves,  or  of  the  fentient  principle. 

Simple  as  thefe  terms  are,  it  muff  be 
evident  that  they  do  not  explain  any  thing  in 
regard  to  the  effeds  which  external  bodies 
produce  in  our  nerves;  and,  indeed,  they 
are  not  fufficiently  expreffive  of  the  various 
circumftances  which  appear  to  conftitute 
Senfation. 

The  firji  effed  arifing  from  the  adion  of  an 
external  body,  which  forms  a part  of  fenfa- 
tion,  is  the  change  that  takes  place  in  that 
part  of  a nerve  to  which  the  external  body 
is  applied  ; the  fecond  is  the  change  or  affec- 
tion of  the  brain,  which  happens  in  confe- 
quence  of  the  external  impreflion  having 
been  communicated  to  it;  and  the  third  is  the 
change  produced  in  our  mind  by  this  affedion 
of  the  brain. 


The 


ON  SENSATION. 


55 


The  two  firft  effedts  are,  in  a great  degree, 
corporeal,  but  the  third  is  not  to  be  explained 
by  the  principles  of  any  fadts  in  phyfics,  of 
which  we  have  hitherto  acquired  a knowledge. 

It  is  a circumftance  of  remarkable  Angu- 
larity, that  all  our  beft  metaphyficians  fhould 
agree  in  conlidering  fenfation  as  a mere  affec- 
tion of  the  mind,  and  that  men,  acquainted 
with  the  oeconomy  of  the  animal,  fhould,  in 
their  phyfiological  writings,  have  fo  fervilely 
copied  after  them.  We  fhall  foon  be  con- 
vinced that  the  affedtions  of  the  brain  and 
nerves,  which  arife  immediately  from  the 
adtion  of  an  external  body,  are  phenomena 
totally  diftindt  from  thofc  produced  on  the 
mind.  It  becomes  neceffary,  therefore,  to 
diftinguifh  them  from  each  other  by  different 
appellations. 

To  the  change  produced  in  the  nerve  by 
the  application  of  an  external  body,  we  apply 
the  name  of  nervous  imprejjion . To  the  fecond, 
or  change  produced  in  the  brain,  by  the  com- 
munication of  a nervous  imprejjion,  I give  the 


name 


\ 

56  ON  SENSATION. 

name  of  fenforial  impreffion  from  the  word 
Jenforium . Now  we  fhall  afterwards  find  rea- 
fon  to  believe,  from  many  phenom  na,  that 
it  is  only  under  certain  conditions  that  we 
become  confcious  of  any  nervous  impreffion, 
even  although  we  have  proof  that  it  has  been 
communicated  to  the  brain.  But  when  an 
impreffion  is  conveyed  from  the  extremities 
of  a nerve  to  the  mind,  we  then  call  that 
affedion  of  the  mind  a me  ntal  perception . It 

is  furely  unneceffary  to  remark,  that  a men- 
tal perception  is  totally  diftind:  from  the  con- 
feioufinefs  we  have  of  it.  A mental  perception 
is  a mere  impreffion  as  it  were;  a paffive 
effed,  produced  on  the  mind  by  means  of 
external  objeds.  Our  perceptions  of  external 
bodies  correfpond  in  number,  kind,  and 
force,  with  our  feelings  ; but  confcionfnefs  is 
the  quality  of  fome  adive  principle  refiding 
in  the  mind,  by  means  of  which  we  know  not 
only  when  it  is  aded  on  by  external  agents, 
but  alfo  when  it  exercifes  its  own  faculties, 
and  moreover  what  the  refult  of  thefe  opera- 
tions are. 


As 


ON  SENSATION.  57 

As  it  is  of  great  importance  to  difcriminate 
accurately  between  thefe  different  affe&ions, 
efpecially  between  nervous  impreflions,  and 
confcioufnefs,  fince  they  have  been  too  fre- 
quently confounded  with  one  another  under 
the  general  term  fenfation,  I fhall  endeavour 
to  give  a clearer  notion  of  them  by  one  or  two 
illuftrations.  Other  examples  will  frequently 
occur  afterwards, 

Firjl , it  may  be  mentioned  that  nervous 
impreflions  are  of  two  kinds,  as  juftly  re- 
marked by  the  learned  Unzer.  They  are 
either  external , or  internal. 

By  external  nervous  imprejjions  are  meant  all 
fuch  as  arife  from  the  application  of  any  body 
to  that  extremity  of  a nerve  which  is  moft  re- 
mote from  the  brain,  let  that  nerve  terminate 
in  whatever  part  of  our  frame  it  may.  There- 
fore all  impreffions  on  the  extremities  of  the 
nerves  of  the  fkin,  eyes,  nofe,  ears,  mouth, 
jftomach,  inteftines,  kidneys,  bladder.  Sic.  are 
to  be  confidered  as  external  impreflions. 


. On 


ON  SENSATION. 


5* 

On  the  other  hand,  internal  nervous  impref- 
fions  are,  firft,  all  fuch  as  take  place  at  the 
origin  of  the  nerves,  as  they  fpring  from  the 
brain,  or  fpinal  marrow,  and  in  fuch  cafes 
they  are,  in  general,  nothing  elfe  than  the 
mere  communication  of  a JenJorial  imprejjion  ; 
cr,  fecondly,  they  may  arife  in  any  part  be- 
tween the  origin  of  a nerve,  and  its  extremity. 
Thus,  fuppofe  any  animal,  which  retains  life 
for  a long  time,  fuch  as  a frog,  or  turtle,  to 
be  decapitated,  and  the  fpinal  marrow  irri- 
tated, fo  as  to  produce  convulfions  in  all  the 

% 

mufcles,  fuch  an  irritation  is  to  be  confidered 
as  an  internal  nervous  impreffion ; water  in 
the  brain,  or  blood  effufed  on  its  furface, 
producing  general  convulfions,  are  in  like 
manner  to  be  confidered  as  fo  many  bodies, 
creating  internal  nervous  impreffions. 

In  our  ideas  of  external  and  internal  im- 
preflions,  the  brain  may  be  confidered  as  the 
center  of  a great  circle,  and  the  remote  ex- 
tremities of  the  nerves  as  its  circumference. 
Every  impreflion  which  proceeds  from  the 
circumference  to  the  center  is  to  be  confidered 

as 


/ 


ON  SENSATION. 


59 


as  external,  and  every  one  on  the  contrary, 
that  proceeds  from  the  center  to  the  circum- 
ference, is  internal.  In  this  way,  one  and  the 
fame  impr^fiion  may  be  both  external  ar.d  in- 
ternal as  to  its  ultimate  etfe&s  ; for' infiance, 
if  it  be  received  on  a part  of  any  nerve,  which 
lies  between  the  center  and  circumference. 
When  a blow  is  received  on  a well  knowm 
fpot  near  the  elbow,  a perfon  is  generally  con- 
fcious  of  it,  both  at  the  part  where  it  was 
received,  and  alfo  at  the  extremity  of  the 
little  finger.  The  imprelTion,  as  to  its  effects 
on  the  mind,  by  which  a perfon  becomes 
confcious  of  it,  may  he  called  external , and  as 
to  its  effedt  on  the  remote  extremity  of  the 
nerve  in  the  finger,  internal.  The  difeafe  to 
which  phyficians  have  given  the  name  of 
epilepfy,  confifls  in  the  patient’s  being  fud- 
denly  deprived  of  all  the  mental  faculties, 
and  of  the  confcioufnefs  which  attends  their 
operation,  while  the  mufcles  of  voluntary 
adtion,  and  many  of  thofe  of  involuntary 
motion,  are  thrown  into  the  mod  violent 
convulfions,  refpiration,  and  the  circulation, 
continuing  free,  or  but  little  impeded.  It  is 

alfo 


c 


6o 


ON  SENSATION. 


alfo  a well  known  fad,  that  this  difeafe  may 
arife  from  local  irritation,  fuch  as  worms  in 
the  inteftines,  or  from  matters  which  vellicate 
or  difturb  the  ftrudure  of  thefe  delicate  parts. 

The  explanation  of  all  thefe  phenomena 
naturally  enough  prefents  itfelf,  after  what  y 
has  already  been  faid  concerning  the  eflfeds 
which  follow  the  adion  of  external  bodies,  on 
any  fet  of  nerves. 

All  impreflions  on  the  extremities  of  thefe 
bodies  are  naturally  determined  to  the  brain. 

It  is  probable  that  the  compreflion  on  the 
brain,  called  fenfarial  impreffion , always  corref- 
ponds  in  kind  with  the  original  impreflions 
on  the  nerves.  When  thefe  are  weak,  it  is 
but  flight,  when  violent  it  is  greatly  difturbed. 
But  it  feems  natural  to  fuppofe,  that  when 
the  organization  of  the  brain  is  much  deranged 
by  the  violence  of  any  impreflion,  it  no  longer 
becomes  fit  to  ad  upon  the  mind,  or  to  be 
aded  on  by  it.  The  derangement  of  the 
nerves  of  the  inteftines,  by  the  gnawing  of 
worms,  is  of  this  violent  kind,  and  being 

communicated 


ON  SENSATION. 


61 


communicated  to  the  brain,  totally  impedes 
all  mental  operation.  And  hence  the  perfon 
becomes  inconfcious  of  the  impreflions  of  ex- 
ternal objedts,  and  falls  down  fenfelefs.  Yet 
the  fenforial  impreflions  arifing  from  the  irri- 
tation of  the  worm  produce  their  phyfical 
effect  on  the  origin  of  other  nerves,  and  are 
tranfmittcd  along  their  courfe  to  the  mufcular 
parts  of  our  frame.  They  adt  like  any  other 
phyfical  ftimulus,  and  incite  them  to  ftrong 
adtion.  They  are  repeatedly  relaxed  and 
re-excited  according  to  the  firft  law  of  irrita- 
bility. 

From  this  we  learn  that  mere  impreflions 
on  the  nerves  and  brain  are  quite  diftindt 
from  the  affedtions  of  the  mind  ; and  when  we 
fpeak  of  thefe  impreflions  in  general,  we  fhall 
always  mean  the  corporeal  affedtion,  in  con- 
tradiftindtion  to  mental  perception,  which 
only  takes  place  when  the  iinpreflion  operates 
on  the  mind.  This  fubjedt  will  be  further 
elucidated  in  the  fucceeding  parts  of  this 
work. 


Our 


62 


ON  SENSATION. 


Our  next  inquiry  is  a very  intricate  one. 
When  ujbe  nature  of  that  c'r portal  cha  ge  pro- 
duced  in  our  nerves  by  the  a El  ion  of  an  external 
bodyy  to  which  the  name  of  nervous  imp  region  has 
been  given  ? 


When  any  body  is  applied  with  force  againft 
another,  two  diftindt  effects  are  immediately 
produced  ; a certain  quantity  of  impetus,  or 
momentum,  as  it  has  been  called,  is  commu- 
nicated from  one  to  the  other,  which  tends  to 
difplace  it  from  the  lituation  it  has,  in  regard 
to  the  bodies  which  furround  it : and  Secondly  > 
thofe  particles  of  each  of  the  two  bodies  which 
are  made  to  come  neareft  to  perfect  contact  in 
the  moment  of  concuflion,  are  deranged  as  to 
the  lituation  they  were  in  previous  to  the  mo- 
ment of  concuflion. 


This  derangement,  or  difplacement  of  par- 
ticles, is  different  in  different  bodies,  and  it 
is  alfo  different  in  the  fame  body,  under  dif- 
ferent circumftances. 


In 


ON  SENSATION. 


6.? 

In  th Q firjl  place,  it  varies  according  to  the 
degree  of  force  with  which  the  two  bodies 
(trike  each  other.  In  fome  inftances  it  only 
occafions  a temporary  difplacement,  for  as 
foon  as  the  moment  of  concuflion  is  pad,  the 
particles  refume  their  former  fituation  ; thus, 
when  two  ivory  balls  are  (truck  together,  the 
particles  of  which  each  ball  is  compofed  fuf- 
fer  a temporary  compreffion,  and  the  balls 
become  flatter  ; but  as  foon  as  the  external 
force  ceafes,  the  particles  regain  their  former 
fituation.  At  other  times  the  derangement  of 
particles  is  permanent.  This  is  of  two  kinds. 
In  the  one  cafe  the  particles  of  one  of  the 
bodies  are  fo  far  removed,  by  the  external 
force,  from  the  reft  of  the  mafs,  as  to  deftroy 
their  attraction  for  it,  and  they  confequently 
are  completely  feparated  from  it.  In  the  other 
; inftance,  the  particles  of  the  body  ftruck  are 
fo  far  diftant  Irom  their  fpheres  of  mutual 
: repulfion,  that  they  remain  in  the  pofition 
1 into  which  they  are  forced  ; as  for  inftance, 
when  a ball  is  ftruck  againft  a piece  of  moift: 
<;lay. 


In 


64  tfN  SENSATION. 

In  th tfecond  place,  the  derangement  of  the 
particles  is  different  according  to  the  densities 
of  the  two  bodies ; for  it  mud  be  evident  that 
a hard  body  will  occalion  a much  greater  dif- 
placement  of  particles  in  a foft  one,  than  in 
one  of  its  own  denlity,  the  refilling  caufe 
being  necelfarily  lefs. 

In  the  third  place,  it  is  different  according 
to  the  elafticity  of  the  body.  The  nearer  the 
particles  of  any  body  are  to  their  fphere  of  mu- 
tual repulfion,  the  more  elaftic  that  body  mud 
necelfarily  be.  In  them  a flight  compreffion  is 
fufficient  to  excite  that  powrer  into  adtioh,  and 
the  particles,  therefore,  have  an  immediate 
tendency  to  regain  their  former  polition  ; but 
as  repulfion,  or  the  caufe  of  elafticity,  exerts 

t N 

its  influence  equally  in  all  diredlions,  it  is 
evident  that  the  particles  v’hich  are  next  thofe 
wrhich  have  received  theblowq  muft  alfo  fuffer 
a fimilar  difplacement,  and  their  difplacement 
will  affedt  thofe  which  lie  next  to  them,  and 
thus  the  impreffion  of  the  external  body  is 
tranfmitted  by  them  to  a very  great  extent. 
It  is  on  this  principle  that  found  is  quickly 

conveyed 


ON  SENSATION « 


6S 

conveyed  to  a great  diftance,  as  well  as  through 
folid  elaftic  bodies.  Doubtlefs,  there  is  a pon  t 
where  this  effedt  mu  ft  ceafe,  even  in  the  moft 
elaftic  ones,  for  as  no  cornpreftion  can  take 
place  without  a kind  of  fridtion  between  the 
particles,  the  comprefting  power  muft  necef- 
farily  be  gradually  weakened  in  its  adlion. 

In  the  fourth  place,  this  derangement  of  the 
particles  of  a body  ftruck,  is  different  accord- 
ing to  the  arrangement  of  the  furface  of  the 
body  which  ftrikes  it.  This  is  moll;  evident 
in  fuch  as  are  not  very  elaftic.  When  we  prefs 
our  finger  on  a piece  of  foft  clay,  we  obferve 
the  marks  of  the  furrow  s of  the  fkin  upon  it : 
and  on  the  fame  principle  melted  fulphur, 
glafs,  or  wax,  receive  and  retain  the  impref- 
fion  of  many  bodies  with  variegated  furfaces. 
The  fame  thing  muft  neceffarily  happen  to 
elaftic  bodies  ; hut  then  as  the  particles  refume 
their  original  pofition  almoft  as  foon  as  the 
external  force  is  withdrawn,  we  cannot  fee  it. 
I call  this  general  effedt  which  impinging 
bodies  produce,  the  figure  of  impreJfiony  or 
limply,  imprejfioiu 

VOL.  I. 


T 


The 


66 


ON  SENSATION. 


The  facility  with  which  the  figure  of  im-** 
preflion  of  any  body  is  tranfmitted  from  the 
part  where  it  is  firft  received,  to  the  reft  of  its 
mafs,  feems  to  be  in  a direCt  ratio  with  the 
repulfive  power  of  the  particles  of  that  body. 
On  this  account  one  would  naturally  imagine 
it  to  be  greater  in  the  rarer  fluids,  than  in  the 
elaftic  folids.  In  corroboration  of  which  con- 
jecture, it  may  be  mentioned  that  the  various 
gafes,  or  airs,  polfefs  this  quality  in  a much 
higher  degree  than  folids. 

i * 

That  the  particles  of  which  bodies  are  com- 
posed are  not  in  a ftate  of  perfeCt  contaCt,  is 
a truth  eftablifhed  in  phyfics  ; for,  independ- 
ently of  the  repellent  power  with  which  they 
are  endowed,  and  which  prevents  their  com- 
plete union,  a certain  portion  of  heat  is  con- 
ftantly  prefent,  which  alfo  keeps  them  Sepa- 
rate from  each  other.  A convincing  proof  of 
this  pofition  is,  that  the  moft  Solid  body  we 
know  may  be  made  to  contract  in  all  di- 
menfions  by  withdrawing  heat  from  it,  and 
may  be  made  to  re-expand  by  giving  it  its 

former 


ON  SENSATION, 


67 


former  temperature.  The  heat  either  com- 
bines itfelf  with  the  particles  .of  the  body, 
increafing  their  natural  repellent  power,  or  it 
infinuates  itfelf  between  them,  forming  atmo- 
fpheres  for  each  particle ; and  owing  to  the 
great  repulfive  power  which  the  particles  of 
heat  have  for  each  other,  they  keep  thofe  of  the 
body  afunder.  When  it  is  afierted,  then,  that 
the  medullary  particles  which  compofe  our 
nerves,  are  by  no  means  in  a ftate  of  perfect 
contact,  it  is  only  averting  that  they  are  pof- 
fefied  of  a certain  quality  which  is  common 
to  all  bodies.  The  vafcularity  of  the  cineri- 
tious  part  of  the  brain,  and  of  the  nerves 
themfelves,  their  foftnefs,  pulpinefs,  and  na- 
tural humid  appearance,  give  reafon  to  believe 
that  between  the  medullary  particles  of  which 
they  are  principally  compofed,  a fine  fluid  is 
conftantly  fecreted,  which  may  be  fitted  to 
receive  and  tranfmit,  even  more  readily  than 
other  fluids  do,  all  impreflions  which  are  made 
on  it.  I do  not  conceive  that  there  is  any 
neceflity  for  fuppoling  it  to  be  of  a fuperna- 
tural  degree  of  finenefs,  fuch  as  the  conjec- 
tural sether  of  authors  ; nor  is  it  neceflary  to 

confider 
F 2 


68 


ON  SENSATION. 


confider  the  nerves  as  tubes  in  which  it  circu- 
lates. It  is  a conftituent  part  of  their  texture, 
lying  between  and  furrounding  the  medullary 
particles.  The  particles  of  this  fluid,  as  wtII  as 
the  medullary  part  of  the  nerves,  mult,  in  com- 
mon with  all  matter,  have  each  of  them  their 
atmofpheres  of  heat,  which  probably  increafes 
their  natural  repellent  powers.  When  any  of 
the  particles,  then,  of  this  fluid  are  forcibly 
deranged  from  their  natural  fltuation,  thofe 
which  have  been  comprefled  ad  on  thofe  nearefl: 
them,  and  thus  the  figure  of  impreflion  is  tranf- 
mitted  to  the  brain  or  to  other  parts  of  the  ner- 
vous fyftem.  Hence  it  follows  as  a neceflary 
deduction,  that  what  we  confider  to  be  the 
properties  of  external  bodies,  are  more  pro- 
perly fpeaking,  only  alterations  of  our  own 
nerves.  Thefe  are  caufed,  indeed,  by  certain 
phyfical  properties  in  the  bodies ; but  our 
knowledge  of  thefe  properties  is  combined 
with  the  affection  of  our  nerves.  It  is 
on  this,  that  is  founded,  in  a great  degree, 
the  diverfity  of  taftes,  or  judgments,  which 
different  people  entertain  about  the  fame  ex- 
ternal object.  But  this  view  of  the  fubjed 

will 


ON  SENSATION.  69 

will  be  more  enlarged  on  in  another  part  of 
the  work. 

As  the  fluid,  which  conveys  the  impreflions 
of  external  bodies  to  the  brain,  appears  to 
be  fecreted  from  the  fine  veflels  which  fupply 
the  nerves  with  nourifhment,  fo  it  neceflarily 
follows  that  they  muff  be  varioufly  affeded 
by  every  thing  which  alters  the  action  of  thefe 
veflels  ; and  hence  we  find  two  laws  of  fenfi- 
bility  very  fimilar  to  thofe  of  irritability. 

1 ..All  Jiimuli  which  excite  an  increafe  of 
vafcular  action , increafe  the  fenfihility  of  the 
nerves , but  by  doing  fo,  the  ■principle  of  fenfation, 
as  well  as  the  principle  of  irritability , are  gra- 
dually exhaufed.  A certain  quantity  of  food, 
wine,  heat,  and  exercife,  all  render  a perfon 
more  lively,  and  more  awake  to  the  impref- 
fions  which  are  made  on  his  fenfes  ; for,  by 
means  of  thefe  ftimuli,  the  addon  of  the  whole 
arterial  fyftem  is  increafed,  and,  confequcntly, 
all  fecretions  go  on  more  rapidly  than  they  did 
before.  The  nervous  fluid  is  dilfufed  more 

copioufly 


70 


ON  SENSATION. 


copioufly  between  the  particles  of  the  medul- 
lary fubftance  of  the  nerves,  and  from  this 
detention  a kind  of  pleafurable  fenfation 
arifes,  which  is  felt  all  over  the  frame.  It  is 
then  that  we  are  molt  difpofed  for  every  fine 
and  are  molt  hurt  by  every  painful  feeling. 
Then,  the  defires  which  depend  on  corporeal 
fenfation  are  apt  to  be  awakened  by  the 
flighted  caufes,  as  we  are  flrongly  predif- 
pofed  for  every  thing  which  can  gratify  the 
fenfes : but  if  the  fame  ftimuli  be  too  great, 
the  irritability  of  the  body  is  exhaufied  ; fecre- 
tion  is  diminifhed,  the  nervous  fluid  is  fcanti- 
ly  formed,  and  we  become  dull,  ftupid,  and 
languid.  Our  eyes  do  not  feel  the  light,  nor 
our  ears  the  rays  of  found  ; the  brain  does  not 
receive  the  impreffions  of  volition,  or  any  of 
the  mental  operations,  and  we  fall  into  a ftate 
of  torpor,  called  deep, 

2.  When  nervous  ftimuli  are  diminished , and 
arterial  action  Supported  at  the  fame  time , the 
nervous  fluid  is  neceffarily  accumulatedi  and Senft- 
bility  thereby  increafed . 


Hence 


ON  SENSATION. 


71 


Hence  it  happens  that  all  our  fenfations  are 
increafed  after  we  have  been  fome  time  with- 
out having  had  them  excited.  A perfon  who 
has  been  long  fhut  up  in  the  dark,  cannot,  for 
fome  time  afterwards,  eafily  bear  a moderate 
light.  A perfon  in  health  who  is  prevented 
from  having  much  intercourfe  with  fociety, 
has  a high  relifh  for  the  few  gratifications 
which  he  can  obtain.  The  tafte  of  wine, 
and  of  food,  is  moft  enjoyed  by  himwhoufes 
them  fparingly.  From  this  it  may  be  eafily 
underftood  why  healthy  feelings,  and  healthy 
defires,  can  only  be  preferved  by  thofe  who 

are  moderate  in  their  enjoyments, 

, \ 

Although  the  various  opinions  which  have 
hitherto  been  offered  concerning  the  caufe  of 
fenfation  appear  to  be  extremely  different 
from  each  other,  yet  they  may  all  of  them, 
with  much  propriety,  be  reduced  under  the 
three  following  claffes. — Firjl , thofe  which 
account  for  it  by  certain  vibrations  of  the 
nerves  themfelves  j Jecondly , thofe  which  fup- 
pofe  the  exilfence  and  motion  of  a particular 

fluid. 


72 


ON  SENSATION. 


fluid.  And  thirdly , the  adlual  motion  of  the 
nervous  filaments  tnemfelves. 

In  repaid  to  the  firfl:  of  thefe  doctrines,  it 
is  to  be  remarked,  that  we  have  no  other  no- 
tion of  vibration  than  that  which  is  yielded  to 
us  by  the  vibration  of  elaftic  bodies,  fuch  as 
the  chords  of  mufical  inflruments,  or  the  tre- 
mor of  a bell,  &c.  If  the  hypothefis,  then, 
be  examined  as  to  the  fpirit  of  its  analogy,  the 
refutation  of  it  becomes  eafy  ; for  in  order 
that  any  body  may  vibrate,  feveral  conditions 
are  neceffary,  none  of  which  are  peculiar  to 
our  nerves.  It  mull  be  elaflic,  tenfe,  and 
free  from  all  contad:  with  other  bodies,  except 
at  the  points  of  its  fupport,  beyond  which 
points  vibration  does  not  proceed  ; but  the 
nerves  are  neither  elaftic,  nor  tenfe,  nor  free 
from  contact  with  other  bodies  in  any  part  of 
their  courfe,  and  confequently  they  cannot 
have  any  motion  analogous  to  the  vibration  of 
a founding  body.  If  it  be  faid  by  any  author 
that  the  vibration  of  a nerve  is  a diftindl  thing 
from  the  vibration  of  a founding  chord,  or, 
in  other  words,  is  a vibration,  fui  generis , it  is 

impoflible 


ON  SENSATION. 


73 


impoflible  to  refute  fuch  an  aflertion,  becaufe 
in  fadt  nothing  is  explained  by  it.  It  refers 
to  an  occult  caufe,  which  the  author  himfelf 
does  not  comprehend,  and  therefore  cannot 
elucidate  by  language. 

With  regard  to  the  fecond  fet  of  opinions, 
namely,  the  exiftence  and  motion  of  a parti- 
cular fluid,  phyfiologifts  have  been  much  di- 
vided, not  only  concerning  the  nature,  but 
alfo  concerning  its  peculiar  mode  of  operating. 
Some  regard  it  as  the  eledrical  fluid,  others 
as  a magnetic  fluid,  and  others  have  chofen  to 
give  it  the  name  of  aether. 

It  would  be  an  ufelefs  and  tirefome  talk 
were  I to  adduce  all  the  arguments  with  which 
the  authors  of  thefe  opinions  endeavour  to  fup- 
port  them,  together  with  the  objections  which 
may  be  oppofed  to  them  ; he  who  wifhes  to 
read  almofl  every  thing  valuable  on  the  fubject 
mud  confult  the  ioth  Book,  and  8th  Se<5t.  of 
Haller’s  phyfiology  of  the  human  body.  It 
may  be  briefly  remarked,  however,  that  the 
phenomena  of  fenfation  do  not  correfpond 

with 


74 


ON  SENSATION” • 


%vith  the  well-known  phenomena  of  electri- 
city, or  magnetifm.  Electricity,  indeed,  pro- 
duces fenfation,  and  when  tranfmitted  in  a 
certain  quantity,  it  operates  as  a powerful 
ftimulus  upon  the  irritable  parts  of  our  frame, 
exciting  immediate  action  in  them;  but  this  is 
an  effect  which  it  has  in  common  with  various 
other  ffimuli.  Electricity  is  a matter  which 
like  heat  is  contained  in  a certain  proportion 
in  every  body,  and  confequently  the  nerves 
muft  have  their  portion ; but  this  is  no 
proof  that  it  is  the  medium  through  which 
we  receive  the  impreffions  of  external  objects. 
If  it  were  the  medium  of  our  fenfations,  there 
would  be  no  need  of  any  fuch  bodies  as  nerves, 
for  as  it  pervades  the  whole  human  frame,  im- 
preflions  made  upon  it  could  be  conveyed  to 
every  part  of  the  fyftem,  without  any  fuch. 
contrivance. 

Of  all  vague  conjectures  concerning  the 
nature  of  the  nervous  fluid,  that  one  which 
fuppofes  it  to  be  the  magnetic  fluid  appears 
the  malt  abfurd,  flnce  there  is  not  even  a 
lhadow  of  fimilitude  between  the  phenomena 

of 


ON  SENSATION.  75 

of  magnetifm,  and  thofe  of  fenfation.  The 
dodtrine  of  tether  is  as  little  deferving  of  any 
ferious  thought ; for  the  exiftence  of  fuch  a 
fluid  has  never  been  proved,  and  even  if  it 
were  demonftrated,  it  is  hardly  poflible  to  con- 
ceive that  it  {hould  be  endowed  with  all  the 
fanciful  virtues  which  thofe  who  believe  in  it 
fuppofe  it  to  be  poflefled  of.  It  is  one  of 
thofe  imaginary  occult  qualities,  by  which 
the  ancients  attempted  to  explain  many  phe- 
nomena they  did  not  underftand,  fuch  as  the 
motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  the  refulgency 
of  the  fun  and  ftars,  the  life  of  animals,  and 
the  growth  of  plants,  &c. 

In  order  to  underhand  Dr.  Darwin’s  opi- 
nion concerning  the  ufe  of  the  nerves,  it  is 
neceffary  to  be  acquainted,  in  the  firft  place, 
with  the  definitions  which  he  gives  of  the 
“ immediate  organs  of  external  Jenfe and  of 
idea.  “ The  immediate  organs  of  external 
<(  fenfe,”  fays  the  Do&or,  (Zoonomia,  vol.  I. 
p.  n.)  " confift  of  moving  fibres,  enveloped 
*'  in  the  medullary  fubftance  above  men- 
" tioned ; and  are  erroneoufly  fuppofed  to  be 

u limply 


76 


ON  SENSATION. 


“ Amply  an  expanAon  of  the  nervous  medul- 
<(  la,  as  the  retina  of  the  eye,  and  the  rete 
rf  mucofum  of  the  lkin,  which  are  the  imme- 
diate  organs  of  viAon,  and  of  touch.  Hence 
cf  when  we  fpeak  of  the  contractions  of  the 
*f  Abrous  parts  of  the  body.  We  Aiall  mean 
“ both  the  contractions  of  the  mufcles,  and 
€t  thofe  of  the  immediate  organs  of  fenfe.” 

His  notion  of  idea  is  as  follows : “ The 
€t  word  idea  has  various  meanings  with  the 
“ writers  of  metaphyAc : it  is  here  ufed  Amply 
ct  for  thofe  notions  of  external  things  which 
**  our  organs  of  fenfe  bring  us  acquainted 
<c  with  originally  j and  is  deAned  a contraction 
<f  or  motion,  or  conAguration  of  the  Abres, 
which  conftitute  the  immediate  organ  of 
“ fenfe.’ * 

The  arguments  on  which  Dr.  Darwin  at- 
/ • 

tempts  to  found  his  hypotheAs  concerning  the 
contradlility  of  the  nerves,  are  a number  of 
conclufions  drawn  from  the  phenomena  of 
ocular  fpeCtra.  " Place,”  fays  the  Dr.  vol.  I. 

p.  1 6, 


ON  SENSATION. 


77 


p.  1 6,  “ a circular  piece  of  red  filk  about  aa 
t(  inch  in  diameter,  on  a fheet  of  white  paper, 
fC  in  a ftrong  light ; look,  for  a minute,  on 
Cf  this  area,  or  till  the  eye  becomes  fomewhat 
“ fatigued,  and  then  gently  clofing  your  eyes, 
<c  and  (hading  them  with  your  hand,  a circular 
“ green  area,  of  the  fame  apparent  diameter, 
“ becomes  vilible  in  the  clofed  eye.  This 
f<  green  area  is  the  colour  reverfe  to  the  red 
<c  area,  which  had  been  previoufly  infpeCted. 
(t  Hence  it  appears,  that  a part  of  the  retina, 
“ which  had  been  fatigued  by  contraction, 
“ relieves  itfelf  by  exerting  the  antagonifl: 
“ fibres,  and  producing  a contraction  in  ail 
<c  oppofite  direction,  as  is  common  in  the 
c<  exertion  of  our  mufcles.  Thus,  when  we 
<f  are  tired  with  long  aCtion  of  our  arms  in 
“ one  direction,  as  in  holding  a bridle  on  a 
“ journey,  we  occafionally  throw  them  into 
,c  an  oppofite  pofition,  to  relieve  the  fatigued 
“ mufcles.” 

The  delufive  conclufion  which  is  here  pre- 
fented  to  the  mind,  feems  to  arife  in  a great 
degree  from  employing  the  word  reverfe,  in 

the 


ON  SENSATION. 


7* 

the  fame  fenfe  as  the  word  oppofite.  The  re- 
laxation of  a mufcle  may,  with  great  propriety 
be  faid  to  be  a (late  which  is  oppofite  to  that  of 
its  contraction  ; but  fuppofing,  for  a moment, 
for  the  fbke  of  argument,  that  fenfation  is 
nothing  elfe  than  the  contraction  of  fibres, 
fimilar  to  the  contraction  of  a mufcle,  we  theii 
cannot  fay  with  the  fame  propriety,  that  any 
one  colour,  although  reverfe  to  another,  indi- 
cates an  oppofite  ftate  to  contraction  ; for,  as 
all  fenfation  is  fuppofed  to  be  a kind  of  muf- 
cular  contraction,  and  every  colour  a fenfation, 
the  green  fpeCtrum  which  is  feen  after  looking 
at  a red  objeCt,  indicates  contraction  as  much 
as  the  red  one  does.  The  author  of  the  Zoo- 
nomia  feems  to  have  been  aware  of  this  deduc- 
tion ; for,  in  the  pafiage  cited  above,  which  is 
very  fimilar  to  one  in  a paper  publifhed  in  the 
Philofophicai  TranfaCtions,  on  the  fubjeCt  of 
ocular  fpeCtra,  by  the  late  Dr.  R*W*  Darwin, 
of  Shrewlbury,  the  green  vifion  is  not  compared 
to  relaxation,  but  to  the  contraction  of  anta- 
gonift  mufcles. 

This  explanation,  and  illuftration  of  the 
man  holding  the  bridle,  (hews  that  Dr, 

Darwin 


ON  SENSATION. 


79 


Darwin  confiders  the  optic  nerve  like  an 
arm,  having  flexors  and  extenfors,  and  fingers 
to  grafp  with,  by  means  of  which  it  may 
aflume  various  gefiiculations.  But  I leave  it 
to  the  good  fenfe  of  every  man  who  has  feeii 
a nerve  to  fay,  whether  its  difpofition  and 
internal  fabric,  affords  the  flighted  proof  in 
favour  of  fuch  a fanciful  notion  as  this.  If 
every  nerve  has  antagonifi:  fibres,  there  muff 
be  fome  part  of  a nerve  fitted  for  their  infer- 
tion.  Is  the  evidence  which  we  have  of  their 

i 

foft  and  pulpy  texture  capable  of  being  re- 
conciled with  fuch  an  opinion  ? If  the  nerves 
are  to  be  compared  to  mufcles,  the  compari- 
fon  muft  be  adhered  to  ftridtly ; and  each 
fingle  nerve  confidered  as  a Angle  mufcle. 
The  optic  nerve  of  any  one  eye  being  a Angle 
nerve,  is  to  be  regarded  according  to  the 
fpirit  of  the  comparifon,  as  a fingle  mufcle. 
Now  a fingle  mufcle  is  capable  only  of  various 
degrees  of  contraction  and  relaxation  ; that  is, 
it  exhibits  only  two  phenomena,  which  are 
oppofite  to  each  other  ; for  the  mere  degrees 
of  contraction,  or  relaxation,  are  not  varieties 
in  kind.  But  the  optic  nerve  is  capable  of 

receiving 


8 o 


ON  SENSATION* 


receiving  innumerable  fenfations,  all  diftindt 
from  each  other. 


Dr.  Darwin  fays  “ that  if  the  change  or 
" motion  of  the  retina  was  a mechanical  im- 
,c  predion,  or  a chemical  tinge  of  coloured 
“ light,  the  perception  would  every  minute 
,f  become  ftronger  and  ftronger ; whereas,  in 
<f  the  experiment  with  the  piece  of  fcarlet 
“ {ilk,  it  becomes  weaker  and  weaker.”  That 
all  impreflions  mud  neceftarily  become  weaker 
the  longer  they  are  continued,  follows  from 
the  nature  of  the  fentient  principle  ; for  if  it 
depends  on  the  action  of  veflels,  or,  in  fact, 
any  living  action  whatever,  it  muft  be  ex- 
haufted  by  ftimuli  long  applied.  But  let  us 
fee  to  what  thoughts  this  fadt  leads  us,  having 
Dr.  Darwin’s  hypothecs  in  view.  It  is  an 
invariable  law  of  all  contractile  parts,  that 
when  a ftimulus  has  been  fo  long  applied  as 
to  exhauft  that  principle  on  which  its  con- 
tractility depends,  it  falls  into  a date  of 

> 

relaxation.  Now  granting  that  the  retina  is  a 
contractile  part,  it  follows,  that  when  it  has; 
been  completely  excited  by  any  ftimulus,  the: 


rays 


ON  SENSATION. 


rays  of  light  for  inftance,  which  come  from  a 
piece  of  fcarlet  (ilk,  then  the  retina  mufl  fall 
into  relaxation,  or  an  opp'ofite  ftate.  Now  if 
the  green  fpeCtrum  be  an  idea  in  the  mind, 
excited  by  the  relaxation  of  the  optic  nerve, 
this  fame  coloured  fpedtrum  ought  always  to 
be  feen  as  often  as  the  retina  has  been  pre- 
vioufly  fatigued.  But  this  we  know  is  not  the 
cafe.  Ocular  fpedtra  are  of  various  colours  ; 
many  people  cannot  be  made  to  fee  them ; and 
in  different  people  the  fame  objeCt  fnall  excite 
different  coloured  ones.  I certainly  do  not 
pretend  to  account  for  thefe  phenomena.  X 
do  not  think  we  have  yet  a fufficient  number 
of  faCts  on  which  a good  hypothefis  may  be 

I 

built.  But  it  muft  be  evident  to  every  im- 
partial man,  that  fo  far  from  their  proving 
any  analogy  between  fenfation  and  mufcular 
contraction,  they  ftand  in  direct  oppofition 
to  it. 


Vot.  I. 


G 


CON- 


$2 


ON  THE 


CONTINUATION 

OF  THE  SAME  SUBJECT. 

application  of  the  hypothecs  of  fenfation  to  the 
principal  phenomena  of  the  external  fenfes. 

THE  particular  contrivances  by  which  the 
Great  Author  of  nature  has  fitted  us  for  ac- 
quiring that  degree  of  knowledge  of  external 
bodies,  which  it  has  been  deemed  proper  w?e 
fhould  obtain  in  our  prefent  flate  of  exiftence, 
are  denominated  the  external  fenfes. 

\ 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  enter  into  a minute 
detail  and  examination  of  the  wonderful  pheno- 
mena which  thefe  curious  organs  offer  to  a re- 
fledting  mind,  far  lefs  to  attempt  a defcription 
of  their  wonderful  ftrudture,  for  this  would 
lead  me  much  beyond  the  limits  within  which 
I have  propofed  to  confine  my  refearches.  To 
point  out  the  ftriking  analogy  which  exifts 
between  the  whole  of  the  fenfes,  in  regard  to 
the  manner  of  their  being  affedted  by  external 
bodies,  and  alfo  in  regard  to  their  effedts  on 
the  mind,  are  the  objedts  of  this  chapter. 


Our 


EXTERNAL  SENSES.  83 

■ 

Our  external  fenfes  are  five  in  number  : the 
fenfe  of  touch,  the  lenfe  of  feeing,  the  fenfe 
of  hearing,  the  fenfe  of  fmelling,  and  the 
fenfe  of  tailing.  In  their  relationfiiip  with 
external  bodies,  they  may  be  faid  to  differ 
from  each  other  in  two  particulars  ; fir  ft,  in  as 
much  as  each  of  them  is  fitted  to  receive  the 
impreffions  of  certain  bodies  which  produce 
no  fenfation  in  the  others  ; fecondly , in  as  much 
as  the  fame  body  does  not  produce  a fimilar 
fenfation  on  any  two  of  them.  The  found  of 
a cannon  which  caufes  a fenfation  in  our  ears 
that  can  hardly  be  fupported,  has  no  influence 
on  the  nerves  of  our  nofe,  although  much 
more  expofed  than  thofe  of  the  organ  of  hear- 
ing ; a vivid  light  which  produces  pain  in  our 
eyes,  has  no  effedt  on  our  organs  of  taffe  ; the 
rays  of  the  fun  produce  a very  different  effect 
On  the  organ  of  touch,  from  what  they  do  on 
the  organ  of  vifion,  &c.  Upon  what  princi- 
ple this  difference  in  the  nerves  of  our  ex- 
ternal fenfes  depends,  is  by  no  means  eafy  to 
explain.  It  may  probably  be  owing  to  a va- 
riety of  caufes  exifting  in  the  ceconomy  of  the 
nerves  themfelves ; for,  although  they  all  ori- 

G 2 ginate 


$4 


ON  THE 


ginate  in  the  brain,  it  does  not  follow  that 
they  fhould  all  of  them  have  exactly  the  fame 
internal  ftru£ture.  Thofe  of  the  external  fenfes 
may  be  as  different  from  each  other  as  the 
various  other  organs  of  the  human  frame.  We 
find  that  the  arrangement  and  adlion  of  the 
fmaller  arteries  of  the  fyftem  are  different  in 
different  parts,  and  it  is  therefore  not  in  op- 
pofition  to  analogy  to  imagine,  that  although 
all  the  arteries  of  nerves  agree  in  refpeCt  to 
their  fecreting  a particular  fluid,  yet  that  fluid 
may  be  differently  modified  in  thofe  of  the 
eye  from  what  it  is  in  the  nerves  of  the  nole, 
the  mouth,  or  the  ear,  &c. 

The  feat  of  the  fenfe  of  touch  is  in  the 
nerves  of  the  rete  mucofum,  and  fkin  of  our 
body,  but  it  is  much  more  acute  in  fome  parts 
than  in  others,  fuch  as  our  fingers  ; and  in 
order  that  this  exquifite  fenfe  with  which  thefc 
parts  are  endowed  may  be  employed  to  our 
advantage,  they  are  formed  in  fuch  a man- 
ner as  to  examine  an  extenfive  furface.  To 
the  different  impreflions  which  external  bodies 
make  on  the  nerves  of  our  fkin,  we  apply 

different 


EXTERNAL  SENSES. 


$5 

different  names,  or  figns,  which,  with  a 
little  modification  we  alfo  apply  to  the  fup- 
pofed  qualities  of  the  bodies  that  excite  the 
impreflions;  thus,  external  bodies,  which  adt 
upon  our  fenfe  of  touch,  are  faid  to  be  hard 
or  foft,  wet  or  dry,  rough  or  fmooth,  hot  or 
cold  ; and  the  particular  qualities  in  the  bodies 
themfelves,  which  we  imagine  produce  the 
different  impreflions,  we  call  folidity,  moif- 
ture,  roughnefs,  fmoothnefs,  heat,  cold,  &c. 
Thefe,  together  with  a very  limited  knowledge 
of  the  fhape  and  weight  of  bodies,  conftitute 
the  whole  of  the  knowledge  of  the  external 
world,  which  we  acquire  by  means  of  this 
fenfe. 

With  regard  to  thofe  of  tafte  and  fmell , there 
are  but  few  phenomena  which  require  any 
particular  explanation. 

i 

By  the  former  we  become  confcious  of  the 
impreflions  of  all  bodies  which  are  foluble  in 
the  faliva;  by  the  fecond,  of  all  fuch  as  tire 
fitted  to  adt  on  the  extremities  of  the  olfadtory 
nerves.  The  bodies  which  adt  on  thefe  are 

of 


36 


ON  THE 


of  almoft  infinite  variety,  and  hence  wc  have 
hardly  any  generic  names  for  impreffions  on 
this  fenfe. 

Inmoftof  the  other  fenfes  the  cafe  is  widely 
different ; for  although  there  are  many  bodies 
which  differ  from  each  other  in  regard  to 
certain  qualities,  yet  as  they  produce  fimilar 
fenfations,  they  are  often  on  that  account 
claffed  together  ; thus,  in  regard  to  touch,  we 
have  hard  bodies,  foft  bodies,  moift  bodies,  dry 
bodies,  rough  and  fmooth  ones,  and  hot  and 
cold  ones.  In  regard  to  tafte,  we  fay  they  are 
fweet  and  four,  bitter  or  fait,  &c.  and  in  dc„ 
fcribingfuch  bodies,  therefore,  to  other  people 
who  may  not  .have  felt  or  tailed  them,  thefe 
exprefiions  are  of  great  ufe.  But  it  is  very 
different  in  regard  to  the  minute  bodies  which 
a6t  on  the  nerves  of  our  nofe  : for  they  are 
fo  diverfified  in  refped  of  ftrudure,  that 
very  few  of  them  yield  fimilar  impreflions ; 
and  we  find  ourfelves  obliged,  therefore,  to 
diftinguifh  each  one  by  the  name  of  the  body 
which  yielded  it:  thus,  we  have  no  other  way 
of  exprefling  the  fmell  of  a rofe,  of  lavender, 

of 


external  senses# 


«7 

of  jafmine,  or  of  a violet,  &c.  but  by  faying  it 
is  the  fmell  of  a rofe,  of  lavender,  of  jafmine, 
or  of  a violet,  &c. ; which  mode  of  expreffion 
explains  to  us,  indeed,  the  particular  percep- 
tions, correfponding  to  the  external  impref- 
lions,  but  to  another  who  never  experienced 
fuch  impreflions,  they  convey  no  diftind  idea 
whatever. 

The  fenfes  of  hearing  and  feeing  have  fo 
many  peculiarities,  that  a little  more  time 
muft  be  employed  in  their  inveftigation  than 
what  has  been  allotted  to  the  others,  in  order 
to  give  a tolerably  juft  account  of  the  pheno- 
mena which  they  exhibit. 

ON  HEARING. 

WHEN  we  gently  touch  any  body  whilft 
it  emits  a found,  we  feel  that  it  is  in  a ftate  of 
tremor,  or  vibration  ; but  as  there  is  no  im- 
mediate contad  between  the  body  itfelf,  and 
our  ear,  we  cannot  conclude  that  that  affedion 
of  the  organ  which  we  call  hearing,  arifes 
folely  from  the  tremor  of  this  founding  body. 

Other 


ON  THE 


3? 

Other  obfervations  and  fadts  give  us  more  ac- 
curate ideas.  We  have  difcovered  by  experi- 
ment, that  all  bodies  capable  of  emitting  found, 
when  placed  in  a vacuum,  do  not  atfedt  our 
ear,  although  they  vibrate  ; and  again,  as  all 
conculTions  of  air,  fuch  as  thofe  occalioned  by 
the  burfting  of  a bomb,  or  of  a bladder,  the 
cracking  of  a whip,  or  the  adt  of  coughing, 
all  produce  found,  we  are  led  to  conclude  that 
the  tremor  of  the  founding  body  muft  have 
been  communicated  to  the  air,  and  that  it  is 
this  affedtion  of  the  air  which  operates  on 
our  ears.  A found,  therefore,  is  a compound 
effedf,  even  before  it  reaches  our  organ  of 
hearing. 

\ 

i • 

We  proceed  to  obferve,  that  between  the 
expanded  extremities  of  the  auditory  nerve, 
and  the  external  air,  feveral  bodies  intervene, 
all  of  which  muft  be  more  or  lefs  affected 
before  we  hear.  Thefe  are  the  external  mem- 
brane, called  the  tympanum,  a certain  arrange- 
ment of  fmall  bones,  immediately  behind  that 
fubftance,  a certain  quantity  of  air,  and  a 

liquid. 


EXTERNAL  SENSES.  *9 

liquid,  the  properties  of  which  have  not  been 
well  inveftigated. 

It  was  natural  to  fuppofe  that  if  air  tranf- 
mitted  found  as  an  elaft ic  body,  every  other 
elaftic  one  would  do  fo  likewfe  ; and  accord- 
ingly we  find  this  to  be  true  ; all  elafiic  fluids, 
fuch  as  the  different  kinds  of  air,  and  even 
water  itfelf,  communicate  found.  Upon  this 
principle  we  can  alio  be  made  to  hear  founds 
through  other  mediums  than  thofe  which  af- 
fect the  external  ear  ; for  infiance,  if  a com- 
munication by  any  elaftic  fubftance  be  made 
between  the  bones  of  our  head,  and  the  found- 
ing body,  the  peculiar  tremor  of  that  body 
will  be  communicated  to  the  auditory  nerves. 
The  ftory  of  a perfon  who  was  deaf,  and  who 
enjoyed  the  mulic  of  a harpfichord,  by  apply- 
ing one  end  of  a cane  to  the  inftrument,  whilft: 
he  held  the  other  between  his  teeth,  is  well 
known. 

It  is  not  a juft  conclufion,  that  the  affecftion 
of  the  air,  occafioned  by  a founding  body,  is 
analogous  to  its  propuifion,  if  I may  ufe  the 

expreflion. 


90 


ON  THE 


exprcfuon,  or  to  its  common  progreffivc 
motion.  A founding  body,  like  every  other 
elaftic  one,  has  two  diflinct  motions  when 
flruck,  each  of  w'hich  produces  a different 
effed.  Firft,  its  common  vibratory  motion, 
by  which  the  body  of  air  in  contact  writh  it  is 
propelled  ; fecondly,  that  particular  derange- 
ment of  its  particles  which  I have  called  the 
figure  of  impreflion ; and  it  is  this  which 
when  communicated  to  our  ear,  produces  the 
fenfation  of  found. 

To  prove  both  of  thefe  pofitions,  namely, 
the  great  difference  that  exifts  between  them, 
and  that  the  latter  only  is  the  caufe  of  found, 
we  have  only  to  attend  to  the  different  pheno- 
mena which  they  exhibit.  The  common  mo- 
tion of  air,  as  communicated  by  a vibrating 
elaftic  body,  can  be  felt  by  the  nerves  of  the 
fkin,  and  when  violent,  it  diifurbs  every  light 
fubftance  around  it,  caufing  even  a rupture  of 
the  tympanum  of  the  ear  itfelf,  which  effed 
indeed,  is  commonly,  but  falfely  afcribed  to 
the  found. 


But 


external  senses. 


9* 

But  as  the  progrefs  of  found,  or  of  the 
figure  of  impreflion,  confifls  only  in  a mere 
derangement  of  the  fituation  of  the  compo- 
nent, or  invisible  particles  of  a body,  in  regard 
to  their  diftance  from  each  other,  and  not  in 
the  motion  of  the  body,  as  a volume,  or  mafs, 
it  gives  no  impulie  fufficient  to  put  any  other 
one  in  motion,  and  confequently  we  find  the 
very  lighted  of  all,  fuch  as  fmoke,  dame,  or 
vapour  of  any  kind,  are  not  at  all  deranged  by 
it,  although  thefe  tranfmit  found  equally  well 
as  other  elaftic  fluids. 

Again,  the  common  propuliion  of  a volume 
of  air  as  ftruck  by  a vibrating  body,  is  retarded 
by  an  oppoflte  current  of  air ; but  found  is 
conveyed  againft  the  wind. 

The  flrength  or  tveaknefs  of  any  found  de- 
pends on  the  flrength  or  weaknefs  with  which 
the  figure  of  imprefllon  is  communicated  to 
the  ear.  It  depends,  therefore,  originally,  on 
the  force  of  the  ofcillatory  motion  of  the 
founding  body. 


When 


C 2 ON  THE 

When  we  hear  and  compare  feveral  founds, 
we  have  the  idea  of  what  is  called  a note,  or 
tone  in  mufic. 

The  tone  produced  by  a thick  and  long 
chord,  which  is  not  greatly  ffretched,  we  call 
a deeper  tone  than  one  produced  by  a thinner, 
iliorter,  and  more  highly  diftended  one.  Now, 
as  the  only  difference  between  the  effects  of 
thefe  two  chords  confiffs  in  this,  that  the 
thicker, . longer,  or  lefs  diftended  chord,  vi- 
brates lefs  frequently  in  any  given  time,  than 
one  which  is  thinner,  iliorter,  and  more  highly 
diftended,  we  fay,  that  the  difference  between 
a high  and  a low  note  confiffs  in  this,  that  in 
the  former,  (the  high  note)  the  impreffions 
communicated  to  the  air  fucceed  each  other 
more  rapidly  in  a given  time  than  in  the  latter. 

If  we  take  two  chords  of  equal  thicknefs, 
and  equally  diftendeu,  but  one  of  which  is 
only  half  as  long  as  the  other,  the  found  of 
the  one  feems  to  our  ear  a mere  repetition  of 
the  found  of  the  other,  with  this  only  differ- 
ence, that  the  one  which  is  fhorteff  gives  a 

found 


EXTERNAL  SENSES.  93 

found  that  appears  higher  than  the  other.  In 
mufic,  fuch  founds,  namely,  thofe  which  ap- 
pear mere  repetitions  of  each  other,  and  differ 
only  in  the  highnefs  or  lownefs,  are  called 
octaves,  the  higher  odfave  having  double  the 
number  of  vibrations  in  a given  time  than  the 
lower. 

4 

Between  any  two  odtaves  the  ear  is  fenfible 
of  a number  of  other  notes,  or  tones,  fevcn 
of  which  are  called  radical,  in  the  theory  of 
mufic,  and  the  other  five  half-tones. 

• 

Thefe  differ  from  each  other  only  in  the 
difference  there  is  in  the  number  of  impref- 
fions  communicated  in  the  famefpace  of  time; 
for  inftance,  when  two  founding  chords  ftrike 
the  air,  in  the  proportion  of  two  to  three,  we 
call  thefe  fifths  to  each  other  j when  as  four 
to  five,  they  are  called  thirds,  majors,  &c. 

It  is  impoffible  to  proceed  further  in  the 
explanation  of  thefe  phenomena,  without  en- 
tering much  more  into  the  theory  of  mufic 

than 


94  ON  THE 

than  what  is  immediately  conne&ed  with  our 
fubjedh 

/ 

As  all  elaflic  bodies  compofed  of  different 
materials  muff  be  differently  arranged,  as  to 
their  integrant  parts,  it  follows  that  the  figure 
of  impreffion  of  each  muft  alfo  be  various  ; 
and  on  this  principle  we  are  enabled  to  ex- 
plain a difficulty,  a folution  of  which,  I be- 
lieve, has  never  yet  been  given.  How  comes 
it  that  our  ear  is  able  to  diftinguifh,  not  only 
the  pitch  of  any  note,  and  its  flrength  and 
weaknefs,  but  alfo  to-difeern,  as  it  were,  a 
difference  in  the  founding  bodies  themfelves, 
from  which  the  tone  iffues  ? How  comes  it, 
for  inflance,  that  we  know  that  the  note  A, 
when  founded  by  a flute,  hautboy,  violin,  or 
harpfichord,  comes  from  thofe  different  in- 
ffruments  even  although  they  are  not  feen. 

The  flrength  of  a note,  we  have  already 
faid,  depends  merely  On  the  flrength  of  the 
vibration  in  the  founding  body  ; and  the 
height  or  pitch  of  any  note  on  the  number  of 
vibrations  which  it  gives  in  a certain  time  ; 

but 


EXTERNAL  SENSES. 


9$ 


but  this  other  affedfion  of  the  air,  by  which 
we  diftinguifh  a difference  in  the  founding 
body  itfelf,  is  quite  diftindh  from  thefe,  and 
depends  folely  on  the  difference  in  the  figure 
of  impreffion  given  by  each  vibration  of  the 
body  to  the  air,  and  from  that  communicated 
to  our  ear.  The  column  of  air  which  is  emit- 
ted by  a flute,  has  a different  arrangement  of 
parts  from  that  of  a hautboy  ; the  chord  of  a 
violin  has  a different  arrangement  of  parts 
from  that  of  a harpfichord  ; and  the  founding 
board  of  the  one  is  alfo  of  a different  ftrudturc 
from  that  of  the  other,  therefore  the  figure  of 
impreffion  in  all  thefe  muff  alfo  be  different. 


We  next  proceed  to  explain  fome  of  the 
phenomena  of 

SIGHT. 

The  greater  number  of  the  more  remarka- 
ble phenomena  of  vifion  are  to  be  explained 
by  the  figure  and  external  ftrudfure  of  the  eye, 
and  refradory  powers  of  the  humours,  and  by 
the  phyfical  properties  of  light  and  colours. 
Thefe,  although  very  interefting  in  themfelves, 

muff 


ON  THE 


96 

mu  ft  be  patted  over  in  (lienee,  as  they  would 
require  much  time  and  place  to  be  tally  dif- 
cufled.  Befides,  they  are  not  the  phenomena 
concerning  which  there  is  fo  much  obfeur  ty 
and  difference  of  opinion,  as  a few  others 
which  are  immediately  to  be  taken  notice  of, 
and  which  more  particularly  relate  to  the  doc- 
trine of  fenfation  that  has  been  advanced. 

By  means  of  light,  and  the  organ  of  fight, 
we  become  acquainted  with  th^  fituation,  ftze, 
fhape,  motion,  and  colour  of  external  bodies. 

The  rays  of  light  as  reflected  from  external 
objedts,  crofs  each  other  in  their  paffage 
through  the  eye,  and  form  an  inverted  image 
on  the  retina.  In  this  refpedt,  the  eye  refem- 
bles  an  apartment,  the  {butters  of  which  are 
completely  clofed,  and  into  which  no  light  is 
admitted  except  by  means  of  one  fmall  open- 
ing. But  it  w'ould  be  carrying  our  compan- 
ion too  far  to  fuppofe  the  foul,  or  mind,  to 
be  a fpedlator,  which  looked  at  this  image : 
and  much  difficulty  has  arifen  from  this  com- 
panion having  been  already  made;  for  in  this 

cafe 


EXTERNAL  SENSES. 


97 


cafe  it  is  almoft  impoffible  to  explain  why  ob- 
je&s  are  feen  in  their  natural  pofition,  lince 

their  image  is  inverted  on  our  retina. 

* < ' 

« > t 

The  rays  of  light  which  are  reflected  from 
the  objects  around  us  are  to  be  confidered 
as  equ  illy  capable  of  producing  an  impreftion 
upon  the  retina,  as  a ftone  is  of  yielding  one 
to  the  nerves  of  the  fkin.  Thefe  impreftions 
are  external  nervous  feelings.  It  has  been  a 
great  misfortune  in  fcience,  that  this  fenfe  has 
been  too  much  confidered  as  of  a fuperior 
and  diftindl  kind,  to  the  reft.  Myfteries  have 
been  fought  for  in  it,  which  it  has  been 
Imagined  do  not  take  place  in  the  others  ; and 
whole  volumes  have  been  written  to  explain 
them.  Two  phenomena  in  particular  have 
attracted  the  notice  of  philofophers.  Th t firjl 
is,  that  objects  are  feen  tingle  with  two  eyes ; 
th t fecond,  that  objects  are  feen  ereeft,  and  in 
their  natural  petitions,  although  it  can  be 
proved  beyond  a poftibility  of  doubt,  that  their 
image  is  inverted  on  our  retina. 


VOL.  I. 


H 


Thefe 


9» 


ON  THE 


Thefe  phenomena  do  not  appear  to  have 
any  thing  more  myfterious  in  them  than  what 
is  to  be  difcerned  in  thofe  of  every  other 
fenfe. 

How  the  principle  upon  which  the  firfl 
hinges,  Ihould  have  been  fuppofed  by  fo  many 
philofophical  writers  to  be  peculiar  to  the  fenfe 
of  light,  is  not  ealily  to  be  explained ; and  how 
it  fhould  have  been  attempted  to  be  accounted 
for,  on  phylical  principles,  except  by  men 
unacquainted  with  the  analogies  which  exift 
between  impreffions  on  the  optic  nerves,  and 
thofe  of  other  nerves,  I know  not. 

The  queftion  is  limply  this  ; how  the  im- 
prellion  of  any  body,  happening  on  two  dif- 
tindt  nerves,  fhould  only  yield  one  perception 
to  the  mind  ? It  mull  be  evident  to  every  one 
that  this  difficulty  is  not  peculiar  to  vilion  ; 
men  have  two  ears,  yet  hear  but  one  found. 
But  if  this  phenomenon  appears  wonderful  in 
regard  to  thefe  organs,  how  much  more  ought 
it  to  have  Itruck  philofophers  in  regard  to  the 
other  fenfes,  efpecially  that  of  touch,  if  the 


true 


EXTERNAL  SENSES* 


99 


true  analogy  between  the  fenfes  had  been  at- 
tended to;  for  here  not  only  two,  but  feverai 
diflinct  nerves  may  be  impreffed  by  one  body, 
and  yet  only  one  perception  is  yielded.  If,  for 
inftance,  a perfon  takes  a large  ftone,  or  ball, 
in  both  his  hands,  there  are  many  diftindt 
nerves  which  receive  the  figure  of  impreffion, 
and  yet  the  perfon  has  only  the  perception  of 
one  body.  The  analogy  may  be  carried  farther. 
When  either  of  the  two  eyes  is  prefied  a little 
out  of  its  common  fituation,  fo  that  the  image 
of  an  objedt  fhall  fall  on  a different  part  of  the 
optic  nerve  of  that  difplaced  eye,  from  that 
which  correfponds  with  it  in  feeling  in  the 
other  eye,  we  have  the  perception  of  two  ob- 
jedls.  The  fame  thing  holds  good  in  regard 
to  touch.  If  the  impreffion  of  any  body  be 
made  to  fall  upon  two  branches  of  nerves,  not 
accuflomed  to  receive  fuch  impreffions  at  the 
fame  time,  we  think  we  feel  two  bodies.  The 
common  experiment  of  twilling  the  middle 
finger  over  the  forefinger,  and  then  rolling  a 
hard  pea,  or  fmall  bullet  between  them,  is  a 
fufficient  proof.  But  the  fadl  is,  we  feem  wil- 
ling to  make  a wonderful  diftindlion  between 

H 2 the 


too 


ON  THE 


the  feeling  of  the  optic  nerve,  and  that  of 
thofe  of  the  fkin.  If  the  organs  of  hearing 
could  be  difplaced  like  the  eyes  and  fingers, 
fo  that  the  radii  of  found  fhould  fall  upon  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  expanfed  auditory  nerve 
from  thofe  which  are  accuftomed  to  receive 
fynchronous  impreffions,  every  fingle  found 
would  for  fome  time  appear  as  two ; at  lead, 
the  analogy  of  the  other  fenfes  juftify  this 
conjedure.  With  regard  to  the  works  written 
with  a view  of  illuftrating  the  curious  pheno- 
menon in  queftion,  it  may.be  obferved  that  the 
greater  part  of  them,  fo  far  from  explaining 
its  Angularity,  only  remove  it  a ftep.  Thofe 

I 

who  pretend  to  account  for  it  on  mathematical 
principles,  endeavour  to  difeover  what  that 
particular  diredion  is  in  which  an  external  ob- 
jed  mud  be  placed,  in  regard  to  the  two  eyes, 
in  order  to  be  feen  fingle.  But  fuppofing  this 
to  be  afeertained,  as  I believe  it  has  lately 
been  by  my  friend,  Dr.  Wells,  dill  the  myf- 
terious  part  of  the  phenomenon  remains  to  be 
accounted  for : I mean,  how  the  imprcflion, 
or  image  that  falls  on  each  eye,  fhould  only 
give  a fingle  perception  to  the  mind. 

Two 


EXTERNAL  SENSES. 


IOI 


Two  other  phenomena  of  vifion  have  much 
engaged  the  attention  of  philofophers,  the 
jirjl  concerns  the  diftance  of  objects,  and  the 
fecond  their  lituation.  Thofe  who  are  wil- 
ling to  account  for  every  thing  which  con- 
cerns this  fenfe,  upon  geometrical  principles, 
aftert  that  the  angle  made  by  the  optic  axis 
with  the  objedt,  is  the  circumftance  upon 
which  the  true  explanation  hinges.  Accord- 
ing as  the  angle  is  more  or  lefs  obtufe,  fo  does 
the  objedl  appear  to  be  nearer  or  farther  from 
us  ; for  when  a body  is  placed  near  to  the  eyes 
it  neceftarily  makes  a larger  angle  than  when 
it  is  at  a greater  diftance. 

In  regard  to  this  dodtrine,  it  may  be  ob~ 
ferved,  that  as  it  puts  experience  entirely  out 
of  the  queftion,  fo  it  would  be  fair  to  conclude,, 
if  the  opinion  w^ere  true,  that  all  men  who  fee 
equally  w7ell  at  equal  diftances,  ought  to  be 
equal  good  judges  of  diftance  itfelf ; but  this 
we  know  to  be  contrary  to  fadt. 

Men  whofe  profeftion  obliges  them  to  exer- 
cife  their  eye,  with  a view  of  acquiring  juft. 


notions 


102 


ON  THE 

/ 


notions  concerning  diftance,  find,  in  the  firft 
place,  that  the  talent  is  conftantly  improved 
by  habit ; and,  in  the  next  place,  that  they 
foon  acquire  a fuperiority  in  this  refped  over 
other  men,  whofe  organs  of  fight  are  equally 
good  as  their  own.  But  if  we  faw  by  angles 
and  lines,  or  any  other  geometrical  figures, 
thefe  fads  would  be  inexplicable.  There  are 
no  two  men  who  judge  with  equal  accuracy 
concerning  diftance. 

That  an  external  objed  makes  a greater  or 
lefter  image  on  the  retina  according  as  it  is 
more  or  lefs  near  to  the  eye,  is  a fad:  which 

can  be  geometrically  proved.  In  childhood 

0 

we  learn  by  experience,  that  as  we  approach 
any  objed  it  always  appears  larger  to  us,  and 
on  the  other  hand,  the  farther  we  retire  from 
it  the  lefs  it  feems ; and  as  we  are  conftantly 
employed  in  fuch  kinds  of  experiments,  we 
foon  lorm  a judgment  of  the  diftance  of  fur- 
rounding  bodies  by  the  fize  of  the  imprefiion 
(image)  which  they  make  on  the  eye.  Inde- 
pendently of  our  moving  to  and  from  the  ob- 
jeds  around  us,  by  which  means  we  acquire  a 

notion 


EXTERNAL  SENSES.  103 

notion  of  their  relative  diftance,  there  is  ano- 
ther common  way  by  which  we  redtify  our 
judgments  in  this  refpedt,  and  which  at  the 
fame  time  teaches  us  to  judge  of  the  relative 
magnitude  of  objedts;  I allude  to  the  fenfe 
of  touch.  Our  locomotive  faculty,  and  the 
fenfe  of  touch,  afford  us  that  kind  of  experi- 
ence upon  which,  in  infancy,  we  found  our 
judgments  concerning  diftance ; and  thefe 
judgments  being  accompanied  by  particular 
fenfations  in  our  eye,  they  naturally  become 
affociated  in  our  mind  ; and  hence,  when  one 
and  the  fame  body  makes  a more  extenfive 
image  at  any  one  time,  than  it  does  at  ano- 
ther, we  conclude  it  to  have  been  nearer  to 
us  at  the  One  time  than  it  was  at  the  other. 
The  ffrength  of  that  principle  by  which  our 
ideas  are  affociated  together  in  the  mind,  is  in 
no  inftance  more  clearly  proved  than  in  the 
prefent.  If  a perfon  from  his  infancy  had 
never  feen  objedts  but  through  a re verfed  tele- 
fcope,  ftill  he  would  be  as  good  a judge  of  the 
relative  diftance  of  objedts  as  any  other  man, 
provided  he  could  tranfport  himfelf  from  ob- 
jedt  to  objedt,  and  make  ufe  of  his  hands.  But 

if 


104  ON"  THE 

I 

if  any  other  man  looks  through  a reverfed 
telefcope,  the  diminutivenefs  of  the  objedts 
awakens  in  his  mind  the  idea  of  a great  dif- 
tance.  He  fees  the  objedts  as  fmall  as  if  they 
were  far  from  him,  and  he  is  inclined  to  be- 
lieve them  to  be  far  from  him. 

The  other  queftion  concerning  our  being 
fuppofed  to  fee  objects  in  a contrary  poiition 
to  that  in  which  they  are  reprefented  on  our 
retina,  can  only  be  anfwered  by  the  applica- 
tion of  the  fame  principles.  We  are  taught 
in  our  infancy  to  apply  the  words  low  and 
lowermoft  to  thofe  bodies,  and  parts  of  bodies 
which  are  neareft  the  earth  ; and  to  thofe 

i * * 

bodies,  and  parts  of  bodies  which  are  more 
remote  from  the  furfacc  of  the  earth,  we  ap- 
ply the  name  of  uppermoft,  and  thus  we  are 
taught  to  call  the  head  the  uppermoft  part, 
and  the  feet  the  lowermoft  part  of  odr  body. 
Thefe  terms,  and  others,  having  a fimilar  fig- 
nification,  we  are  taught  to  apply  in  our  in- 
fancy to  all  bodies  which  have  an  analogous 
fttuation  to  the  earth  with  ouifelves.  Al- 
though objeds,  therefore,  are  inverted  on  our 

retina, 


external  senses.  105 

retina,  frill  as  they  have  the  fame  relative 
fituation  in  regard  to  the  furface  of  the  image 
of  the  earth,  as  they  have  in  reality,  we  con- 
fequently  affociate  the  notions  of  uppermoft 
to  thofe  things,  and  parts  of  things,  which  are 
mofr  remote  from  the  earth.  If  an  eredl  ob- 
ject is  reverfed,  we  neceffarily  think  it  turned 
upfide  down,  although  its  head  be  now  up- 
permoft on  our  retina  ; for  as  we  have  never 
been  accuftomed  to  affociate  the  perceptions  we 
derive  from  the  impreffions  made  on  the  upper 
part  of  our  retina,  with  our  ideas  of  what  is 
uppermoft  in  the  external  world,  fo  a figure 
which  is  reverfed  mu  ft  naturally  appear  re- 
verfed to  us. 

It  has  long  been  a queftion  among  philofo- 
phers  and  phyfiologifts,  whether  two  different 
fenfations,  arifing  in  one  and  the  fame  organ 
of  external  fenfe,  can  be  felt  at  one  and  the 
fame  time  : for  inftance;  whether  upon  taking 
a hot,  heavy,  folid,  and  frnooth  ball,  into 
one’s  hand,  the  perfon  feels  at  one  and  the 
fame  moment,  that  the  ball  is  hot,  heavy, 
folid,  and  fmooth  j or,  if  thefe  fenfations  are 

only 


io6 


ON  THE 


only  felt  one  after  the  other.  The  difficulty 
involved  in  this  queltion  would  never  have 
occurred  had  clear  notions  been  entertained 
concerning  the  office  of  the  nerves,  which 
conltitutes  phyfical  fenfation.  Molt  philofo- 
phers  have  been  of  opinion  that  the  fenfations 
fucceed  each  other,  for  they  cannot  explain 
upon  the  principles  of  vibration  or  undula- 
tion, how  thefe  fenfations,  as  they  call  , them, 
are  felt  at  the  fame  time. 

The  queltion  itfelf  is  a very  vague  one,  and 
cannot  be  determined  if  our  refearches  and 
reafoning  are  confined  to  the  two  politions  in- 
cluded in  it,  or  if  it  be  imagined  that  the 
queltion  is  to  be  refolved  by  proving  one  of 
them  to  be  true  in  all  cafes  of  mixed  fenfation. 

Without  confining  our  view  of  the  queltion, 
therefore,  to  either  of  the  two  oppolite  poli- 
tions, I would  remark 

lit.  That  the  nerves  of  external  fenfe  are 
capable  of  tranfmitting  mixed  as  well  as  fingle 
impreffions. 


2dly.  That 


EXTERNAL  SENSES.  * . I07 

sdly.  That  the  mind  is  capable  of  ap- 
prehending thefe  mixed  impreflions  in  their 
mixed  ftate;  but  at  the  fame  time,  by  the 
proper  employment  of  the  faculty  of  atten- 
tion, they  may  be  analyzed  fo  that  the  mind 
fhall  apprehend  each  of  the  lingle  impreffions 
of  which  the  mixed  ones  are  compofed. 

Thefe  portions  are  proved  to  be  true  by  a 
great  number  of  obfervations.  When  a perfon 
enters  a green-houfe,  where  the  air  is  richly 
impregnated  with  the  fvveet  fcents  of  many 
odoriferous  plants,  he  is  immediately  made 
fenftble  of  a perfume  which  is  quite  diftintl 
from  that  of  any  of  the  flowers  which  com- 
pofe  it.  The  art  of  cookery  exhibits  Ami-* 
lar  phenomena.  Certain  mixtures  of  fapid 
bodies  produce  a complicated  impreflion  on 
the  nerves  of  the  mouth  and  tongue,  and  one 
which  is  very  different  from  that  which  any 
of  the  bodies  which  enter  into  the  compo- 
fition  would  have  done  fingly.  In  fuch  cafes, 

1 the  impreffion  made  on  the  nerves  is  evidently 
of  a mixed  kind. 


That 


io8 


ON  THE 


That  we  can  analyze  various  mixed  impref- 
fions,  and  not  only  difcover  the  individual 
ones  of  which  it  is  compofed,  but  can  at  plea- 
fure  attend  to  any  one  of  them,  to  the  exclu- 
lion  of  the  reft,  is  a faff  which  is  alfo  proved 
by  daily  obfervation.  A mufician  can  either 
attend  to  the  whole  body  of  found  emitted 
from  various  inftruments  in  a concert,  or  he 
can  at  pleafure  attend  folely  to  the  firft  violin, 
or  flute,  violencello,  or  organ,  or  any  other 
inftrument.  A mufical  chord  makes  a very 
different  impreftion  on  the  ear  from  any  one  I 
of  the  notes  of  which  it  is  compofed  ; yet  an 
ear  accuftomed  to  muftc  hears  diftin&ly  the  j 
third,  fifth,  and  odtave,  or  any  other  note  or  I 
notes  of  which  it  is  compofed.  When  a per-  | 
fon  fuddenly  grafps  an  unknown  fubftancc,  j 
he  being  at  the  fame  time  blindfolded,  or  I 
blind,  he  is  confcious  that  the  firft  impreflion  I 
it  makes  is  a confufed  and  unufual  one,  which  I 
generally  alarms  him  fo  much  that  he  cannot  I 
attend  to  any  of  the  qualities  it  has  in  common  i 
with  other  bodies : if  he  continues  to  hold  it  1 
in  his  hand,  he  then  begins  to  examine  it  by  J 

dire&ing  I 


EXTERNAL  SENSES.  IO9 

directing  his  attention  fucceffively  to  the  va- 
rious impreflions  it  makes. 

Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  I think  it  may- 
be concluded,  in  regard  to  the  laft  queftion, 
that  when  a body  capable  of  affecting  the 
fame  nerve,  or  fet  of  nerves,  in  a variety  of 
ways,  is  applied  to  fuch  a nerve,  or  nerves,  the 
various  impreflions  which  it  is  capable  of 
yielding,  take  place  at  one  and  the  fame  time ; 

and  the  mind  either  may  apprehend  them  in 

. r 

their  mixed  and  confufed  flate,  or  under  cer- 
tain circumftances  may  attend  to  the  indivi- 
dual  impreffions  of  which  the  mixed  one  is 
compofed. 


• f : » t 
’ i • 


CHAP- 


no 


ON  SELF  FEELTNG. 


CHAPTER  lit. 

ON  THE  SENSE  CALLED  CAENESTHESIS,  OR 
SELF  FEELING. 

¥ 

The  five  fenfes  which  have  been  defcribed  j 
are  properly  called  external,  not  only  on 
account  of  their  fituation,  but  alfo  of  their 
office.  They  are  the  means  by  which  we  are 
conne&ed  with  the  things  around  us  ; they 
dired  us  in  our  operations  as  agents,  and  warn 
us  of  the  agency  of  others  ; many  of  our 
pleafures  and  pains  arife  from  the  impreflions 
which  are  made  on  them ; and  all  our  know-  i 
ledge  of  the  external  world,  and  of  the  bodies  : 
which  compofe  and  inhabit  it,  can  only  be: 
gained  through  their  means. 

It  has  been  faid,  that  although  the  nerves 
of  the  various  external  fenfes  appear  to  the 

eye 


i 


ON  SELF  FEELING.  Ill 

* 

eye  of  the  anatomift,  even  when  aflifted  by 
the  fineft  glaffes,  exadtly  fimilar  to  each  other 
in  ftrudlure ; yet  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  there  is  fome  difference,  either  in 
their  more  minute  organization,  or  in  the 
nature  of  that  principle  on  which  their  pro- 
perty of  feeling  depends,  for  many  bodies 
which  greatly  affedt  fome  of  them,  produce 
no  affedtion  in  the  others ; thus  the  rays 
of  light  which  affedt  the  retina  are  not  felt  by 
the  nerves  of  the  ear,  nofe,  or  tongue ; odori- 
' ferous  bodies  which  affedt  the  nerves  of  the 
nofe,  produce  no  change  in  thofe  of  the  mouth, 
fkin,  or  ear ; and  the  impreffion  of  bodies, 
which  the  air  receives  from  founding  bodies, 
do  not  affedt  the  nerves  of  the  eyes,  nofe, 
mouth,  or  fkin. 

As  the  diftindtion  we  make  between  thefe 
five,  depends  entirely  on  the  principle,  that 
the  nerves  of  each  organ  of  fenfe  are  fo  con- 
ftrudted  as  to  receive  peculiar  and  diftindt 
impreffions  from  thofe  of  the  reft ; and  as  all 
the  nerves  of  each  different  vifeus,  or  organ 
of  the  body,  are  fubjedted  to  the  influence  of 

A the 


I 13- 


ON  SELF  FEELING. 


the  fame  principle,  it  would  at  firft:  fight  ap- 
pear juftifiable  to  make  as  many  fenfes  as  there 
are  various  vifcera  ; thus,  as  it  may  be  proved 
that  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  feel  differently 
from  thofe  of  the  liver,  and  thofe  of  the  liver 
differently  from  thofe  of  the  inteftines,  and 
thofe  of  the  inteftines  differently  from  thofe  of 
the  kidneys,  thofe  of  the  kidneys  different 
from  thofe  of  the  bladder,  lungs,  heart,  bra- 

i • 

chea,  oefophaghus,  &c.  each  of  thefe  parts 

might  be  faid  to  be  the  feat  of  a diftindt  fenfe. 

' * « 

But  as  all  the  fenfations  we  derive  through 
the  nerves  of  thefe  parts  are  obfeure,  and  do 
not  give  us  any  clear  information  of  the  quali- 
ties of  the  bodies  which  are  applied  to  them, 
as  they  only  yield  us  the  general  feelings  of 
health,  internal  eafe,  and  comfort,  or  their 
oppofites,  bodily  uneafinefs,  pain,  and  difeafe  ; 
on  thefe  accounts  they  may  all  of  them,  to- 

_ i . j * 

gether  with  the  nerves  of  mufcles,  of  veffels, 
and  bones,  &c.  be  conlidered  as  conftituting 
fenfations  of  one  and  the  fame  kind. 

It 


ON  SELF  FEELING. 


"3 

It  is  in  this  light  that  a few  German  phy- 
fiologifts  confider  them;  and,  doubtlefs,  the 
principle  is  juft,  in  as  much  as  it  is  confident 
with  found  analogy.  They  confider  thefe 
feelings  as  belonging  to  a diftindt  fenfe,  which 
they  denominate  felbjl-gefuhl>  and  Gemeingefuhlx 
and  which  I have  chofen  to  tranflatc  literally, 
and  call  in  Englifh,  fef -feeling.  A very  in- 
genious inaugural  differtation  has  lately  been 
published  at  Halle,  in  Saxony,  on  this  fubjedt. 
To  it  I beg  leave  to  refer  fuch  of  my  readers 
as  defire  a more  ample  account  of  the  pro- 
perties aferibed  to  the  fenfe  than  what  are  here 
enumerated.  See  Commentatio  de  Caeneftheji 
DiJJert.  Inaug . Medica  Audlorei  Chrijl.  Fred • 
Uubner , 1794. 

The  feat  of  this  fenfe  is  in  the  extremities  of 
all  the  nerves  of  the  body,  except  thofe  which 
fupply  the  organs  of  the  five  external  fenfes. 

The  permanency  and  uniformity  of  the  im- 
preflions  we  receive  by  it,  when  in  health, 
render  us  lefs  confcious  of  being  pofTeffed  of 
it ; for  in  thofe  who  are  free  from  difeafe 
Vol.  I.  I there 


ON  SELF  FEELING. 


114 

there  is  no  preternatural  action  of  any  fet  of 
veflels,  no  unufual  diftention,  or  relaxation 
of  any  part,  and  confequently  no  new  caufe  of 
fenfation,  agitating  the  frame,  fufficient  to 
withdraw  attention  from  furrounding  objedts. 
That  we  derive  a feeling  from  fuch  a ftate, 
however,  and  one  of  a very  agreeable  kind  to 
us,  is  evident  from  the  many  common  and 
trite  expreftions  of  people  in  health,  who 
fometimes  tell  us  they  feel  as  light  as  a feather  ; 
they  feel  as  if  they  had  a fpring  in  every  limb, 
&c.  This  feeling  is  of  the  agreeable  kind  ; 
and  to  one  who  is  juft  recovered  from  a pain- 
ful difeafe,  is  a ftate  of  real  enjoyment.  The 
Germans  call  it  the  feeling  of  well-being,  or 
health,  Gefiihl  des  wohlfeyns . 

On  the  other  hand,  the  fenfations  of  Iafti- 
tude,  fatigue,  and  weaknefs,  the  pains  in  the 
limbs  which  occur  in  molt  fevers,  all  uneafy 
fenfations  in  the  ftomach  and  inteftines  ; 
thofe  of  anorexia  and  naufea,  and  the  painful 
uneafinefs  which  takes  place  when  the  bladder 
is  greatly  diftended,  are  all  referred  to  this 
fenfe. 


There 


ON  SELF  FEELING. 

There  is  another  kind  of  feeling,  afcribed 
to  it  by  Hubner,  which  he  defcribes  with 
more  accuracy  and  feeling  than  elegance  of 
expreflion.  “ Hue,”  fays  Hubner,  ff  et  re- 
“ ferrem  ftimulum  ad  venerem,  hanc  acutam 
rf  caenefthefis  febrem,  qua  homo  fuse  per- 
durationis  caufa  torquetur.  Gcnitalium 
“ irritabilitas  mirum  in  modum  evihitur, 
ft  omnes  fibrae  alacrius  tremunt,  humorum 
Cf  ingentes  rivuli  accurrunt,  incenduntur  om- 
fc  nia,  tument,  rubent  et  interno  adore  urun- 
“ tur,  fecretionefques  largiores  evadunt.  Om- 
c<  nes  hae  calamitates  anima  intolerabili  per- 
<f  cipit  ratione  moleftiarumque  folatia  ex  coitu 
<c  petit.  Homo,  foecundis  onuftus  humori- 
<(  bus,  eos,  ut  fe  ipfam  reproducat,  circum 
“ fe  fpargere  cogitur.  Veneris  fervi  labores, 
f<  ne  negligantur,  eo  modo  noftrae  oeconomiae 
funt  intexti  ut  dulcidine  reficiat  obedientes, 
<f  contumaces  clandeftino  igne  conficiat.  His 
<(  accedit  gratus  in  coitu  fenfus,  quia  conten- 
<f  tione  omnium  nervorum,  convulfivo  muf- 
culorum  motu,  calore  per  omne  corpus 
“ perfufe  et  fpeciali  quorumdam  nervorum 

I 2 titilatione 


ON  SELF  FEELING. 


.o»l6 

titilatione  enafcitur.  Senfus  eft  confufus,  a 
<f  mutata  corporis  conditione  in  anima  fufci- 
“ tatus  cujus  finem  fatis,  fed  minus  caufas 
lx  proximioresperfpicimus.” 


N 


i 


CHAP- 


> . 


0 


ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.  117 


' / 

CHAPTER  IV. 

ANALYSIS  of  SENSATION 

CONTINUED. 

ON  THE  IMPRESSIONS  WHICH  YIELD  THE 
SENSATION  OF  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE 
AND  PAIN. 

P LEASURE  and  pain,  thofe  extremes  of 
fenfation,  which  feem  fo  widely  different  from 
each  other,  but  which  in  reality  are  very  fimi- 
lar,  not  only  in  their  nature,  but  alfo  in  their 
caufes,  are  terms  often  indifcriminately  ap- 
plied to  denote  certain  affections  of  our  nerves, 
and  certain  emotions  of  our  mind. 

When  a perfon  cuts  his  finger,  he  is  forced 
to  acknowledge,  and  acknowledges  with  truth, 
that  it  is  in  the  wounded  part  that  he  is 
pained.  The  affeCtion  of  the  nerve  is  com- 
municated to  the  brain,  and  excites  what  is 

called 


Il8  ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN. 

called  a mental  perception,  that  is,  he  becomes 
confcious  of  the  injury  received.  But  to  fay, 
on  this  account,  that  it  is  the  mind  which 
fuffers,  or,  to  ufe  the  common  language  of 
metaphyficians,  who  in  general  are  exrremely 
ignorant  of  the  human  frame,  and  fay,  that 
all  pain  is  only  an  affection  of  the  mind,  ap- 
pears a moft  unjufhfiable  and  unphilofophical 
expreffion  ; one  might  as  well  affert,  that  it  is 
the  mind  which  fmells,  which  fees,  hears, 
taftes,  and  touches.  The  mind  has  no  fuffer- 
ing  whatever  from  mere  bodily  pain,  except 
that  which  it  derives  in  an  indirect  manner 
from  the  refieTion,  that  the  bodily  injury  re- 
ceived may  be  followed  by  lamentable  confe- 
quences.  But  fuch  thoughts  belong  to  the 
painful  emotions  of  grief,  and  are  quite  dif- 
tindl  from  the  phyfical  derangement  in  the 
ftru6ture  of  the  nerves,  occafioned  by  their 
being  forcibly  divided. 

If,  from  the  peculiar  organization  of  our 
frame,  we  are  expofed  to  many  caufes  of  pain- 
ful feeling,  we  are  indemnified,  in  a great  de- 
gree, by  the  enjoyment  which  wre  derive  from 

the 


ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.  II9 

the  fame  fource.  Foftering  warmth  gives  a 
pleafurable  feeling  toaperfon  chilled  with  cold; 
the  refrefhing  breezes  which  fucceed  the  heat 
of  a fcorching  fun,  the  fvveet  fcent  of  odorife- 
rous plants,  the  gay  and  varied  fcenery  of  the 
Spring,  the  ufual  gratifications  of  appetite,  and 
the  cardies  of  love,  are  all  proofs  which  fup- 
port  the  affertion. 

1 ? > 

1 

It  is  net  a valid  argument  againfl  this  opi- 
nion to  fay  that  fuch  corporeal  feelings  may 
be  defrayed  by  mental  caufes  ; for  inftance, 
that  a perfon  by  attending  to  any  abftrad 
fubjed,  or  in  confequence  of  receiving  any 
agreeable  news,  appears  infenlible  to  the  pain 
of  which  he  loudly  complained  only  a few 
moments  before.  It  will  be  proved  hereafter, 
that  all  mental  perceptions  occafion  fenforial 
impreflions,  which  correfpond  with  them  in 
ftrength  and  duration.  But  all  fenforial  impref- 
fions,  whether  derived  from  a mental  or  from 
an  external  caufe,  are  to  be  confideredas  phyfi- 
cal  affedions  of  nervous  matter ; and  hence  it 
happens  that  all  ftronger  ones  muft  necdlarily 
impede  the  tranfmiflion  of  weaker  ones  ; the 

fenforial 


120  ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN. 

% 

fenforial  impreffion,  therefore,  of  joy,  if  it  be 
ftrong,  counteracts  thofe  from  bodily  pain,  if 
thefe  are  not  very  violent, 

i 

When  we  inquire  into  the  nature  of  the 

* 

caufes  which  produce  bodily  pain,  wedifeover 
a great  number,  the  primary  aCtion  of  which 
is  obvious  enough.  They  evidently  derange 
the  ftruCture  of  the  nerves  to  which  they  are 
applied  ; thus,  all  bodies  which  cut,  bruife, 
or  lacerate,  occafion  pain. 

When,  of  a number  of  caufes,  all  of  which 
correfpond  in  producing  a fimilar  event,  the 
operation  of  fome  is  once  detected,  it  is  natural 
for  the  human  mind  to  imagine  that  all  the 
others  alfo  aCt  in  a fimilar  manner.  Many  of 
the  caufes  of  corporeal  pain  aCt  in  a manner 
which  cannot  be  detected  by  the  evidence  of 
our  fenfes  ; fuch,  for  inftance,  as  the  ichor  of 
certain  ill  conditioned  fores,  certain  con- 
centrated acids,  pure  alkalies,  many  metallic 
oxyds,  and  metallic  neutral  falts  ; but  as  we 
know  that  all  mechanical  ftimuli  occafion 
pain,  by  deranging  the  ftru&ure  of  the  nerves 

themfelves, 


ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.  1 2t 

themfelves,  we  are  led  to  conclude,  that  all 

the  others  ad  in  the  fame  manner. 

% 

The  nerves,  like  every  other  part  of  the 
human  frame,  are  fupplied  with  arteries  and 
veins,  and  confequently  are  fubjeded  to  all 
the  difeafes  which  the  irregular  and  inordinate 
adion  of  thefe  veffels  occalion.  Many  caufes 
of  bodily  pain  produce  their  effeds  by  exciting 
too  great  an  adion  in  thefe  veffels.  In  this 
way  ail  bodies  which  are  capable  of  exciting 
inflammation  alfo  excite  pain.  When  fpeak- 
ing  of  ftimuli  in  the  chapter  on  irritability,  I 
endeavoured  to  prove  that  many  of  them  pro- 
duced their  effed  by  altering  the  chemical 
texture  of  the  part  to  which  they  wrere  applied ; 
and  hence  the  reafon  why  many  bodies  occa* 
lion  corporeal  pain  in  a double  way,  that  is, 
not  only  by  diredly  changing  the  chemical 
conftitution  of  the  nerve,  but  alfo  by  caufing 
fuch  an  increafed  adion  of  its  veffels,  as 
greatly  deranges  its  ftrudure.  In  this  way  all 
thofe  bodies  ad  which  we  call  chemical  Jlimuli, 


The 


1 22  ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN# 

The  affection  of  the  nerves,  then,  which 
occaiions  in  us  the  feeling  of  pa  n,  is  always 
to  be  confidered  as  a phyfical  derangement  of 
its  llructure*  If  that  derangement  be  only 
momentary,  as  happens  in  confequence  of  a 
flight  blow,  the  pain  is  momentary  ; it  it 
continues  and  fpreads  itfclf,  as  is  the  cafe 
when  a cauftic  is  applied,  the  pain  is  lafting. 
All  corporeal  pain,  wherever  fituated,  is  to 
be  accounted  for  on  fimilar  principles  to  thofe 
explained.  There  is,  however,  a patfage  in 
the  Zoonomia,  Vol.  I.  p.  243,  which  feems  to 
hand  in  oppofition  to  this  opinion.  It  is  in 
that  part  where  its  celebrated  author  endea- 
vours to  account  for  the  manner  in  which 
wine  and  opium  relieve  pain.  "In  what 
*'  manner  wine  and  opium  adt  in  relieving 
cc  pain,  is  another  article  that  w'dl  deferves  , 
<f  our  attention.  There  are  many  pains  that 
" originate  from  defett,  as  well  as  from  excefs 
ct  of  flimulus;  of  thefe  are  the  fix  appetites 
" of  hunger,  third:,  lull,  the  want  of  heat, 
fC  of  diflention,  and  of  fredi  air.  Thus  if 
cc  our  cutaneous  capillaries  ceafe  to  adl  from 
ff  the  diminifhed  flimulus  of  heat,  when  wc 


a 


arc 


\ 


ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN#  I23 

*'  are  expofedto  cold  weather,  or  our  ftomach 
,f  is  uneafy  for  want  of  food  j thefe  are  both 
“ pains  from  defedl  of  ftimulus,  and  in  con- 
“ fequence,  opium,  which  Simulates  all  the 
“ moving  fyftem  into  increafed  adlion,  mull 
“ relieve  them.”  Why  Dr.  Darwin  call?  the 
<(  want  of  heat,”  and  the  ct  want  of  diftention” 
appetites,  is  left  unexplained.  In  every  fcc- 
tion  of  his  work  the  reader,  who  reflects,  meets 
with  conftant  occafion  to  lament  the  lingular 
abufe  of  common  terms  which  this  author 
falls  into  ; but  a cavil  about  mere  words  is  as 
foreign,  here,  to  the  point  at  ilfue,  as  it  is 
unneceflary  to  its  elucidation.  The  queliion 
is  this,  whether  the  uneafy  fenfations  of  hun- 
ger, cold,  luft,  &c.  anfe  from  the  mere  ab- 
fence  of  a ftimulus,  as  Dr.  Darwin  thinks  ; or 
on  the'  other  hand,  if  they  arife  from  the 
diredl  adlion  of  a ftimulus.  Every  circumllance 
feems  to  prove  that  the  painful  feeling  of  hun- 
ger arifes  from  the  adlion  of  the  galtric  fluid 
on  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  : when  any  thing 
is  taken  into  the  ftomach  on  which  this  fluid 
can  adt  chemically,  and  which  at  the  fame 
time  prevents  it  from  being  applied  in  a con- 
centrated 


124  ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN. 

centrated  ftate  to  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach, 
the  pain  of  hunger  ceafes,  nor  does  the  fenfa- 
tion  again  return  until  all  the  food  has  been 
nearly  expelled,  and  the  gaftric  fluid  is  again 
accumulated  in  an  undiluted  ftate.  This 
fluid  is  proved  to  be  of  an  acid  nature,  and 
like  all  acids,  it  may  produce  pain  upon  che- 
mical principles,  In  many  cafes  it  is  morbidly 
fecreted  in  too  great  quantity,  and  probably 
alfo  of  a more  acid  nature  than  ufual,  as  ap- 
pears to  me  to  be  the  cafe  with  many  young 
people,  fubjebt  to  acidity  in  the  ftomach  ; 
fuch  people  have  a painful  fenfation  of  hunger 
long  before  their  ftomach  is  empty.  In  fuch 
patients,  digeftion  goes  on  well  for  a certain 
time,  and  then  the  painful  fenfation,  accom- 
panied with  hunger,  arifes,  as  if  more  food 
w'as  required  to  dilute  the  preternatural  quan- 
tity of  acid  in  their  ftomach.  If  they  obey 
the  internal  monitor,  and  cat  frequently,  they 
are  always  better  than  when  they  patiently 
fuftain  the  pain  until  the  cuftomary  hours 
of  taking  food  return.  In  every  cafe,  the 
painful  fenfation  of  hunger  feems  to  arife, 
like  all  kinds  of  bodily  pain,  from  the 

diredt 


ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.  12$ 

* 

dired  influence  of  a ftimulus,  and  not  from 
the  defed  of  it,  as  Dr.  Darwin  aflerts.  People 
who  induce  a torpor  of  the  veflels  which  fe- 
crete  this  fluid,  as  hard  drinkers,  feldom  ex- 
perience acute  hunger  fo  loon  as  thofe  who 
are  in  good  health,  and  live  temperately. 

The  pain  of  lull,  like  the  pain  of  hunger, 
arifes  from  the  adion  of  a Simulating  fluid, 
which,  when  it  is  accumulated  to  a certain 
quantity,  isdeftined  to  produce  an  uneafy  feel- 
ing in  the  part  where  it  is  fecreted.  It  feems 
to  ad  chiefly  as  a mechanical  ftimulus,  for 
the  pain  always  increafes  as  the  epididemis 
becomes  hard  and  diftende^l.  The  French 
chemifts  fay  that  it  has  an  unpleafant,  acrid, 
pungent  tafte,  and  therefore  it  may  occafion 
pain  from  its  being  poflefled  of  fuch  qualities 
as  give  thefe  painful  fenfations  to  the  tongue. 
If  any  circumftance  prevents  the  fecretion  of 
this  fluid,  fuch  as  fevere  and  long  continued 
exercife,  and  a poor  and  fcanty  diet,  the  per- 
fon  lhall  bear  the  abfence  of  Dr.  Darwin’S 
ftimulus  with  more  pleafure  than  pain. 


The 


126  ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN. 

The  pain  of  cold,  which  Dr.  Darwin  a f- 
cribes  to  the  defeat  of  the  ftimulus  of  heat, 
arifes  from  the  compreffion  which  the  delicate 
and  pulpy  extremities  of  the  nerves  of  the  fkin 
fuftain,  when  the  parts  (brink  by  cold.  But 
the  contradion  of  the  (kin  is  a mechanical 
flimulus  to  thefe  nerves,  and  this  pain,  there- 
fore, cannot  be  faid  to  arife  from  a defed  of 
ftimulus.  Nor  does  any  corporeal  pain  what- 
ever arife  in  this  way.  In  order  to  deted  the 
ftimulus,  however,  which  occafions  it,  we 
mu  ft  look  a little  further  than  to  mere  external 
caufes. 

Many  circumftances  which  produce  bodily 
pain  when  they  are  diminiihed  to  a certain  de- 
gree, excite  the  fenfation  of  bodily  pleafure. 
A moderate  degree  of  heat,  and  a moderate 
degree  of  light,  a gentle  degree  of  fridion,  a 
cool  breeze,  when  the  body  is  warm,  all  pro- 
duce a pleafing  fenfation ; but  if  the  light, 
heat,  fridion,  and  cold,  be  intenfe,  the  effed 
is  painful,  or  unpleafant.  A difh  moderately 
warmed  with  fpices  is  pleafurable  ; a difh  in 
which  too  much  pepper  is  mixed,  occalions  a 

burning 


ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.  127 

burning  pain.  Since,  then,  the  exciting  caufes 
ot  thefe  two  fenfations  differ  frem  each  other 
in  degree  only,  it  is  natural  to  imagine  that 
the  aihedtionof  the  nerves,  which  we  call  plea- 
fure,  differs  from  pain  alio  in  degree  alone. 

This  idea  is  corroborated  by  invehigation. 
All  the  caufes  of  bodily  pleafure  and  pain  are 
diredt  ftimuli ; fuch,  for  m fiance,  as  heat,  fric- 
tion, light,  well-prepared  viands,  wines,  &c. 
The  firft  effedt  which  all  thefe  naturally  pro- 
duce,  is  to  increafe  the  adtion  of  every  veffel  of 
the  part  to  which  they  are  applied,  and  con- 
fequently  of  thofe  which  fupply  the  nerves  of 
the  part.  This  increafe  of  motion,  or  adtion, 
in  the  veffels  of  thefe  delicate  organs  may, 
according  as  it  is  gentle  or  violent,  be  the 
immediate  caufe  of  the  affedtions  of  the  nerves, 
which  we  call  pleafure  or  pain.  The  increafed 
adtion  of  the  blood-veffels  of  the  part  may 
alfo  be  productive  of  other  effects,  which  like- 
wife  confpire  to  the  production  of  pleafure  or 
pain.  I have  faid  that  a number  of  circum- 
stances prove  to  us  that  there  is  a peculiar 
fluid  fecreted  in  the  nerves.  Like  all  fecrcted 
fluids,  it  muff  be  changed  by  every  alteration 

1 % 

% 


in 


128  ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN. 

in  the  adion  of  the  blood-veffels.  If  the 

# 

addon  be  only  gently  increafed  it  will  flow 
more  copioufly  and  eafily ; if  the  adion  be  di- 
minifhed,  it  will  be  flow.  In  the  firft  cafe 
there  is  an  indefcribable  ftate  of  bodily  com- 
fort, eafe,  or  pleafure,  which  feems  to  pervade 
the  whole  frame;  in  the  latter  cafe  there  is 
a degree  of  nervous  uneafinefs,  which  occa- 
fions  reftleffnefs,  and  many  painful  nervous 
feelings. 

The  caufes  which  produce  the  feeling  of 
pleafure  in  our  fenfes  are  numerous  ; they  are 
either  repetitions  of  moderate  ftimuli,  which 
are  of  a fimilar  nature,  or  elfe  a fucceffion  of 
different  ftimuli  which  are  applied  with  a 
gentle  force.  The  firft  feldom  occafion  any 
exquifite  feeling  of  pleafure,  except  to  certain 
organs  of  touch.  The  latter  are  common  to 
all  the  fenfes,  touch  excepted.  All  com- 
pound difhes  yield,  in  general,  more  pleafure 
to  the  organ  of  tafle  than  bread,  or  water,  or 
any  fimple  fapid  body.  The  fmell  of  one 
flower  may  certainly  be  grateful,  but  we  are 
more  delighted  by  fragrant  odours  which 

come 


9 


ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.  1 29 

come  in  fucceffion  from  a number  of  fweet 
fcented  plants,  than  by  continuing  to  fmeli 
at  one  alone  ; a (ingle  note  of  mufic  often 
repeated  is  not  pleafurable  to  the  ear,  but 
a gradual  fucceffion,  and  a juft  combination 
of  notes,  allied  by  mufical  affinities,  are 
agreeable. 

In  regard  to  the  eye,  which  of  all  our  fenfes 
feems  to  be  the  moft  perfect,  not  only  in  re- 
gard to  the  finenefs  of  the  matter,  the  impref- 
fions  of  which  it  feels,  but  alfo  in  regard  to 
the  variety  of  objects,  of  which  it  conveys 
impreffions  to  the  mind,  its  pleafures  conftft 
either  in  certain  varieties  and  alfociations  of 
colours,  or  in  varieties  of  figure,  or  in  the 
variations  of  the  (hades  of  light. 

*_>  . , • 1 

Inftances  of  the  pleafure  arifing  from  bodies 
. in  confequence  of  a variety  in  their  colours, 
are  to  be  met  with  frequently  in  the  vegetable 
kingdom,  efpecially  among  flowers. 

Objedts  which  yield  a pleafing  feeling  to  the 
fame  organ,  on  account  of  a gradual  variation 
Vol.  I.  K of 


SJO  ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN. 

of  form,  affording  fucceffive  gradations  of 
light  and  fhade,  are  alfo  common,  and  more 
admired,  although  mankind  in  general  are  not 
aware  of  the  reafon.  We  fpeak,  at  prefent, 
of  the  elegant  form  of  fome  of  the  animal 
kingdom,  and  more  efpecially  of  the  human 
fpecies.  It  is  chiefly  on  this, account  that  the 
eye  finds  a delight  in  viewing  the  flatue  of  a 
Venus,  of  an  Apollo,  or  Antinous. 

There  is  another  objedt  of  beauty  more 
common  than  thefe,  the  defcription  of  which 
I take  from  an  author  of  uncommon  tafte  and 
fancy,  whofe  literary  talents  will  make  his 
death  lamented  as  long  as  true  genius  is  ad- 
mired. 

• r 

<c  Obferve,”  fays  Mr.  Burke,  rr  that  part 
,f  of  a beautiful  woman,  where  fhe  is,  perhaps, 
*c  the  moft  beautiful,  about  the  neck  and 
f<  bread: ; the  fmoothnefs,  the  foftnefs,  the 
tf  infenfible  /well ; the  variety  of  the  furfacei 
ff  which  is  never  for  the  fmalleft  -part  the  fame , 

“ the  deceitful  maze  through  which  the  un- 

f<  fteady 


ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.  J3I 

w Heady  eye  Hides  giddily,  without  knowing 

(<  where  to  fix,  or  whither  it  is  carried.” 

/ 

• * . j 

When  pleafurable  Himuli  are  too  long  ap- 
plied, they  exhaufi  the  nervous  principle,  and 
diminifh  the  irritability  of  the  veflels  which 
fecrete  it.  This  phyfical  derangement  of  the 
nerve  occafions  pain.  In  fuch  infiances,  it  is 
impofiible  to  fay  where  pleafure  ends  and  pain 
begins.  A certain  degree  of  titilation  is  agree- 
able, but  if  it  be  long  continued  it  becomes  an 
intolerable  pain  : the  fweetefi  mufic,  and  the 
mofi  delightful  aflemblage  of  objedts  in  a pic- 
ture, after  a certain  time  become  tirefome,  and 
at  lafi  painful.  On  the  other  hand,  many  Himu- 
li which  at  firfi  occafion  pain,  foon  after  yield 
a fenfation  of  pleafure.  This  happens  in  con- 
fequence  of  the  irritability  of  the  veflels 
which  fecrete' the  nervous  principle  being  fo 
much  exhaufied,  that  the  fluid  is  afterwards 
but  fparingly  fecreted  ; and  hence  powerful 
Himuli  are  required  to  produce  pleafure. 

The  irritability  of  the  veflels  fecreting  ner- 
vous fluid  may  only  be  exhaufied  for  a fliort 

K 2 time ; 


I32  ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN. 

1 v • 

time ; and  in  fuch  cafes  the  ttimulus  that  ex- 
haufted  them,  if  it  be  continued,  will  create 
pleafure. 

“ An  extraordinary  young  man  who  lived 
“ at  Paris,  and  who  was  paffionately  fond  of 
<f  mechanics,  fhut  himfelf  up  one  evening  in 

“ his  apartment,  and  bound  not  only  his  bread 

$ 

“ and  belly,  but  alfo  his  arms,  legs,  and 
,r  thighs  around  with  ropes,  full  of  knots,  the 
tr  ends  of  which  he  fattened  to  hooks  in  the 
wall.  After  having  patted  a conttderable 
fC  part  of  the  night  in  this  tttuation,  he  wifhed 
tr  to  difengage  himfelf,  but  attempted  it  in 
t(  vain.  Some  neighbouring  females  who  had 
“ been  early  up,  heard  his  cries,  and  calling 
“ the  attittance  of  the  patrole,  they  forced 
€t  open  the  door  of  his  apartment,  where  they 
ft  found  him  fwinging  in  the  air,  with  only 
“ one  arm  extricated.  He  was  immediately 
" carried  to  the  lieutenant  general  of  the  po- 
ff  lice,  for  examination,  where  he  declared 
" that  he  had  often  put  fimilar  trials  into 
" execution,  as  he  experienced  indefcribable 
,f  pleafure  in  them.  He  confetted  that  at 

ff  firft 


ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.  I33 

,r  firft  he  felt  pain,  but  that  after  the  cords 
<c  became  tight  to  a certain  degree,  he  was 
,f  foon  rewarded  by  the  moft  exquifite  fenfa- 
" tions  of  pleafure.”  Gazette  Literaire. 

Upon  the  fame  principle,  and  for  the  fame 
reafon,  do  all  thofe  arts  depend,  which  are 
employed  in  the  Eaft  Indies,  China,  and  other 
warm  climates,  to  awaken  certain  pleafant 
corporeal  feelings,  fuch  as  champooing,  tick- 
ling the  foies  of  the  feet  and  the  ears,  &c. 

When  any  pleafurable  ftimuli  have  exhauft- 
ed  the  nervous  principle  to  a certain  extent, 
we  become  incapable  of  bearing  the  impref- 
fions  any  longer ; we  then  fay  we  are  fatiated 
with  fuch  a thing,  and  until  the  exhaufted 
nerves  regain  the  portion  of  the  principle 
they  loft,  we  have  no  defire  to  experience  fuch 
feelings  again. 

It  muft  occur  to  every  reflecting  mind,  that 
if  ftimuli  when  applied  to  one  part  of  our  ner- 
vous fyftem  only  were  capable  of  exhaufting 
the  nervous  principle  equally  from  the  whole 

of 


1 


134  ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN. 

of  it,  that  the  balance  of  human  mifery  would 
have  been  much  greater  than  it  really  is ; for 
the  fatiety  arifing  from  any  one  pleafure,  would 
have  rendered  us  incapable  of  enjoying  any 
others.  But  in  this  particular,  as  in  all  others 
refpedting  our  wonderful  ceconomy,  we  have 
the  moft  diredt  proof  of  the  greateft  wifdom 
and  moft  benevolent  forefight  having  been 
bellowed  on  our  conftrudlion.  The  diftindfc 
claffes  of  nerves  have  each  a certain  quantity 
of  the  principle  peculiar  to  them,  which  re- 
quires the  repeated  application  of  peculiar 
ftimuli  to  be  exhaufted  ; and  hence,  when  one 
organ  of  fenfe  is  fatigued,  we  are  ftill  capable 

of  receiving  much  pleafure  from  the  others. 

# 

When,  from  the  repeated  application  of 
powerful  ftimuli,  the  nervous  principle  is 
habitually  fecreted  in  fmall  quantity,  then  in 
order  to  produce  the  fenfation  of  pleafure,  it 
is  neceftary  to  apply  fuch  ftimuli  as  would 
occafton  pain  in  the  generality  of  men. 
This  habitual  deficiency  of  the  irritability 
in  the  veflels  which  fecrete  the  fentient 
principle  may  be  either  partial,  or  general. 

As 


ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN.  I 3 5 


As  an  inflance  of  the  firft  may  be  mentioned 
chewers  of  tobacco,  takers  of  fnuff,  and  people 
who  have  been  accuftomed  to  hot,  ftimulating 
difhes.  The  quantity  of  tobacco  ufed  by  the 
former,  and  the  fpices  required  by  the  latter, 
to  produce  a pleafant  fenfation  in  the  parts  to 
which  they  are  applied,  would  excite  pain  in 
one  whofe  nerves  of  the  nofe  and  mouth  were 
in  their  natural  healthy  ftate.  Upon  the  fame 
principle  are  to  be  explained  a number  of  An- 
gularly vicious  habits  to  which  men,  exhaufied 
by  various  exceifes,  and  old  age,  are  often 
addidted.  " Nunc  audiemus,  Joan  Picum. 
44  Mirandulas  Comitem,  qui  faeculo  abhinc 
44  uno  ac  dimidio  vixit.  Is  Lib.  iii.  contra 
“ aftrologos,  cap.  xxvii.  de  familiari  quodam 
<c  fuo  vivit  adhucy  inquit,  homo  mihi  notusy 
“ prodigiofa  l ibid  inis  et  inaudit ae.  Nam  ad  vene- 
44  rem  nunquam  accenditur  nijivapulet.  Et  tamen 
*'  Jcelus  id  ita  cogitat  ; f&vientes  ita  plagas  defide - 
rat ; ut  increpet  verberantem>fi  cum  eo  lentius 
*'  egerety  baud  compos  plene  votiy  nifi  eruperit 
*r  fanguisy  et  innocent es  artus  hominis  nocentijfimi 
<f  violent ior  Jcutica  defavierit.  Efflagitat  mijer 
<<  hanc  operam  Jummis  precibus  ab  ed  Jemper 


I36  ON  CORPOREAL  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN. 

<c  femina  quam  adit y prxbitque  flagellum , fibi  ad 
Cf  id  ojflcii  aceti  infufione  duratamy  et  fupplex  a 
“ mere  trice  verberari  poflulat : a qua  quantb 
t{  Cceditur  duriusy  ch  ferventius  incalefcity  et 
ff  pari  pajju  ad  voluptatem  doloremque  conten- 
" dit Meibomius  ( de  fiagrorum  ufu  in  re 
venerea t)  p.  14. 


CHAP- 


r r • 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


137 


CHAPTER  V. 

METHODICAL  INQUIRY  INTO  THE  NATURE 
AND  PHYSICAL  CAUSES  OF  DELIRIUM, 
PARTICULARLY  THE  DELIRIUM 
OF  LUNATICS. 

Evaluation  of  terms  employed ; difference  between 
erroneous  perceptions , and  difeafed  notions  ; 
all  men  have  fome  erroneous  perceptions ; 
the  Jource  of  thefe  defcribed.  ‘The  difeafed 
notions  of  delirious  people  are  of  two  kinds  ; 
their  caufes.  Hijlory  of  maniacal  phrenzy  ; 
appearances  on  dijjt  ilion  ; new  hypothefis 

concerning  its  caufes.  The  nature  of  other 
maniacal  deliria  defcribed  and  accounted  for. 
Hereditary  predifpofition  to  infanity  taken 
notice  of ; in  zvhat  fenfe  the  exprejfion  is  to 
be  underfood.  Enumeration  of  the  exciting 
caufes  of  the  various  deliria  defcribed . 

A LL  delirious  people,  no  matter  whether 
they  be  maniacs,  or  hypochondriacs,  or  peo- 
ple 


ON  DELIRIUM* 


138 

pie  in  the  delirium  of  fever,  or  of  hyfteria, 
differ  from  thofe  of  a found  mind  in  this 
refpedt,  that  they  have  certain  difeafed  per- 
ceptions and  notions  in  the  reality  of  which 
they  firmly  believe,  and  which  confequently 
become  motives  of  many  actions  and  expref- 
fions  which  appear  unreafonable  to  the  reft  of 
mankind. 

The  expreflion,  difeafed  perceptions,  or 
notions , is  here  preferred  to  that  of  falfe  or  er- 
roneous  perceptions  which  is  employed  by  other 
authors,  firjl , becaufe  the  ideas  in  all  kinds  of 
.delirium  whatever,  arife  from  a difeafed  ftate 
of  the  brain,  or  nerves,  or  both,  as  will  be 
fatisfactorily  proved  in  the  courfe  of  this 
work;  and,  fecondly , becaufe  the  word  erro- 
neous does  not  deferibe  any  thing  peculiar  to 
delirium  ; for  every  man,  however  fane  or  wife 
he  may  be,  has  fome  erroneous  notions  in 
which  he  firmly  believes,  and  which  often 
ferioufly  affect  his  conduct.  In  the  early  pe- 
riods of  our  lives,  and  long  before  we  have 
been  taught  or  accuftomed  to  think  for  our- 
felves,  we  imitatively  employ  the  language  of 


our 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


*39 

our  parents,  nurfes,  and  thofe  around  us. 
From  them  we  firft  learn  the  names  of  many- 
external  objects,  and  of  the  various  parts  of 
our  own  frame,  of  many  of  our  wants,  and 
of  the  means  of  gratifying  them.  Our  curio- 
fity  is  excited  by  the  fine  fcenery  of  nature. 
We  enquire  what  thefe  things  are  which  pre- 
fent  themfelves  to  our  fight,  whence  they 
come,  and  for  what  purpofe  they  are  made  ; to 
all  which  quefiions  we  receive  fuch  inform- 
ation as  the  knowledge  and  inclination  to 
inftrudt,  of  the  perfon  who  anfvvers  them, 
are  calculated  to  afford.  Many  of  thefe 
anfwers  are  dictated  by  ignorance,  many  by  a 
well-intentioned,  but  very  injudicious  defign 
to  mifinform.  Now,  as  by  the  natural  condi- 
tion of  thought,  words  and  ideas  are  affociated 
together,  our  mind  foon  becomes  filled  with  a 
multitude  of  erroneous  ideas,  and  loofeand  in- 
accurate exprefiions.  How  much  are  we  fur- 
prized  afterwards  when  a good  and  liberal  edu- 
cation firft  begins  to  deftroy  the  veil  of  igno- 
rance in  which  we  were  enveloped,  and  Ihews 
us  the  many  grofs  errors  we  formerly  enter- 
tained ? Even  then,  however,  our  progrefs  in 

truth 


140  ON  DELIRIUM. 

truth  is  but  flow  and  limited  ; for  the  very  beft 
teachers  have  many  prejudices,  and  many  erro- 
neous judgments,  which  they  inflil  into  our 
minds.  We  ftrengthen  ourfelves  in  error  by  our 
own  prefumption  ; for  we  are  willing  to  hazard 
opinions  on  various  matters,  before  we  are  fuffi- 
ciently  acquainted  with  the  fubjedt,  and  confe- 
quently  before  we  have  clear  ideas  concerning 
it ; and  hence  we  acquire  a faife  logic,  to 
which,  when  once  we  become  habituated,  we 
find  infinite  difficulty  in  improving  ; and  in 
many  inftances  it  is  never  afterwards  corrected. 
If  thefe  obfervations  are  juft,  the  affertion  will 
be  granted,  that  there  is  no  man,  however  fane, 
or  wife,  who  may  not  be  fuppofed  to  have  fome 
erroneous  notions,  in  which  he  firmly  be- 
lieves, and  which  often  influence  his  conduct. 

The  difeafed  notions  which  delirious  people 
entertain,  are  of  two  kinds : 

i ft.  They  are  difeafed  perceptions,  referred 
by  the  patient  to  fome  objedl  of  external 
fenfe;  as  when  he  believes  he  fees,  hears, 
taftes,  and  fmells  things  which  have  no  real 

exiftencej 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


14I 

exigence ; as  when  he  imagines  he  fees  holes 
in  the  wall,  through  which  monfters  of  various 
kinds  appear  in  a menacing,  or  terrifying  man- 
ner ; or  when  he  fuppofes  himfelf  furrounded 

by  dangerous  beafts,  and  ferpents. 

/ 

2dly.  They  are  difeafed  abftradt  notions, 
referrable  to  the  qualities  and  conditions 
of  perfons  and  things,  and  his  relation  to 
them ; as  when  he  imagines  that  his  friends 
have  confpired  to  kill  him  ; that  he  is  reduced 
to  beggary  ; that  he  is  forfaken  by  God,  &c. 

\ 

Upon  taking  a general  view  of  all  the  more 
evident  exciting  caufes  of  delirium  in  general, 
without  regard  to  their  mode  of  adlion,  it  ap- 
pears that  they  may,  with  much  juftice,  be 
reduced  under  the  three  following  heads. 

ift.  Phyfical,  or  corporeal  caufes;  fuch 
as  too  great  determination  of  blood  to  the 
head,  as  in  fevers,  or  intoxication,  difeafed 
vifeera  of  the  abdomen,  poifons,  exceflive 
difeharges,  &c. 


2 d 1 y . Too 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


142 


2dly.  Too  great,  or  too  long  continued  ex-, 
ertion  of  the  mental  faculties,  as  in  the  deli- 
rium which  often  fucceed  long  continued  and 
abftradt  calculation  ; and  the  deliria  to  which 
men  of  genius  are  peculiarly  fubjecl. 


3dly.  Strong  padions,  fuch  as  anger,  grief, 
pride,  love,  &c. 

Now  as  there  is  no  evident  analogy  between 
thefe  three  clalfes  of  caufes,  we  are  naturally 
at  a lofs  to  conceive  how  they  Ihould  agree  in 
their  general  effect  of  producing  delirium. 
There  mud  be  fome  common  principle,  or 
principles,  011  which  they  all  adt,  and  by 
means  of  which  they  produce  iimilar  difeafed 
phenomena,  in  the  body  and  mind  of  many 
different  men.  This  is  the  great  objedt  of 
inquiry,  in  the  inveftigation  of  which,  much 
patient  attention,  and  an  ample,  fcrupulous, 
and  laborious  examination  of  fadts  muff  be 
fubmitted  to,  if  we  expedt  to  arrive  at  any  ufe- 
ful  conclufions. 


The 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


143 


The  very  ingenious  and  learned  Dufours, 
in  his  excellent  work,  already  mentioned,  de- 
dicates a whole  chapter  to  prove  that  the  dif- 
eafes  of  the  external  fenfes,  by  giving  rife  to 
erroneous  perceptions,  produce  aberration  of 
reafon.  I prefume  to  aflert,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  the  difeafes  of  the  external  fenfes 
do  not  of  neceflity  produce  any  aberration  of 
mind.  This  is  a point  which  muff  be  fettled 
before  we  proceed  a ftep  further  ; for  a great 
deal  of  miftake,  in  regard  to  the  nature  of 
delirium,  appears  to  have  arifen  from  this 
fource.  That  difeafes  of  the  external  fenfes 
produce  erroneous  mental  perception,  muft  be 
allowed  ; but  it  depends  on  the  concurrence  of 
other  caufes,  whether  any  delirium  follows,  j 

As  the  arguments  and'  reafoning  of  M. 
D ufours  on  this  fubjed:  are  confined  within 
a narrow  compafs,  I prefer  giving  a literal 
tranflation  of  the  paffages  to  making  an  ex- 
tract; from  them.  They  are  all  comprehended 
in  the  four  firft  paragraphs  of  the  ninth  chap- 
ter of  his  Treatife,  and  will,  if  properly  confi- 

dered, 


144 


ON  DELIRIUM* 


dered,  be  regarded  partly  as  a feries  of  afier- 
tions,  partly  as  conciufions  arifing  from  falfe 
analogies. 

ff  §.  114.  That  which  we  have  now  to 
tc  add,  and  the  confideration  of  all  that  has 
tc  been  already  faid  in  the  hiftory  of  fenfa- 
ff  tions,  enable  us  to  point  out  the  reafons 
f<  why  all  men  do  not  think  alike  on  the  fame 
u fubjeCt ; why  they  are  not  all  equally  capa- 
<f  ble  of  acquiring  equal  knowledge;  why 
Cf  fome  men  fhew  a natural  propenfity  to  one 
cr  thing  rather  than  to  another;  why  fome 
cf  people  ealily  conceive  and  execute  what 
<f  to  others  is  impracticable.  From  this  it 
te  will  be  further  underftood  why  fome  are 
,f  naturally  aCtive,  lively,  gay,  and  of  a pene- 
trating  wit,  while  others  are  flow,  fluggifh, 
ff  fenfelefs,  and  ftupid ; wrhy  fome  men  are 
tc  immoveably  attached  to  their  own  opinions, 
ff  and  alfo  what  the  caufes  are  which  induce 
<£  them  to  follow  error  rather  than  truth. 

<c  §.  1 15.  It  will  be  ealily  feen  from  this 
“ that  wre  at  prefent  fpeak  of  the  forgetful - 

ff  nefs 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


MS 


?f  nefs  and  abfence  of  melancholic  people, 
ff  &c.  circumftances  which  are  generally  af- 

tf  cribed  to  fome  fault  of  the  internal  fenfes, 

\ 

<e  but  which  experience  proves  now  and  then 
“ to  be  falfe.  I knew  a countryman  who  loft 
te  his  fenfes  becaufe  he  could  not  be  perfuaded 
tf  that  the  objects  he  faw  in  confequence  of  an 
“ incipient  cataraCt,  arofe  intirely  from  that 
<f  complaint.  When  he  found  that  he  could 
ft  not  remove  the  dark  web  which  appeared 
le  to  him  to  be  conftantly  floating  before 
“ his  eyes,  he  fell  into  fuch  frequent  fits  of 
“ violent  paflion  that  he  became  quite  infane. 
,f  But  as  foon  as  the  difeafe  was  completed, 
<f  he  became  more  tractable  and  fubmitted  to 
“ the  operation  like  a reafonable  man. 

fr  §.  1 1 6.  It  is,  moreover,  natural  to 
ft  fuppofe,  that  the  reflections  of  the  mind, 
“ which  in  the  moft  of  cafes  have  no  other 
<c  guide  than  the  external  fenfes,  ftiould  be 
“ faulty  and  unreafonable,  when  the  external 
t(  fenfes,  which  heretofore  ferved  it  faithfully, 
" now  go  wrong  without  its  knowledge.  For 
<f  the  fenfes,  in  fuch  cafes,  arc  like  unfaithful 

Vol.  I.  L “ fervants, 


146  ON  DELIRIUM. 

“ fervants,  who  do  not  perform  their  duty ; 
“ and  hence  a great  deal  of  confufion  and 
miftake  arifes  in  the  mind,  from  its  not 
,r  difcovering  a want  of  analogy  between  the 
“ eftedts  of  a new  and  unknown  caufe,  and 
the  former  effedts  of  well  known  and  com- 
‘r  mon  ones  in  which  it  confides. 

§.  1 17.  The  falfe  impreflions  of  the 
**  external  fenfes,  then,  muff  neceffarily 
w create  diforder  and  confufion  in  a perfon’s 
“ condudl  j becaufe  it  happens  moft  frequent- 
" ly,  that  they  determine  his  adtions.  A 
**  perfon  trufts  to  his  former  experience, 
**  which  has  taught  him  that  bodies  are  pre- 
“ fent  when  they  make  an  impreflion  on  him. 
*c  Hence  many  fallacies  of  the  fenfes,  becaufe 
" objedls  are  the  caufes  of  his  perceptions. 
*f  Hence  alfo  it  arifes,  that  we  often  confider 
u things  which  are  not  prefent  to  our  fenfes, 
**  as  prefent,  and  as  the  caufes  of  our  per- 
u ceptions  : or  if  there  be  any  thing  wanting 
" in  an  external  objedt,  imagination  fupplies 
•*  the  lofs,  and  reprefents  it  as  perfedt.” 


In 


ON  DELIRIUM.  147 

In  very  many  inftances,  the  perfon  is  con- 
fcious  of  the  error  of  the  perception  which 
is  prefent  in  the  mind ; and  in  all  fuch  cafes, 
therefore,  no  delirium  takes  place.  The  lady 
of  a very  eminent  furgeon,  in  town,  had  the 
mufcles  of  her  eyes  fo  much  weakened  by  the 
effects  oi  an  antimonial  preparation  which  fhe 
had  taken,  that  for  fome  months  afterwards 
file  could  not  diredl  them  with  the  proper 
correfponding  motions  to  the  fame  objedt. 
The  confequence  of  this  was  a number  of 

t 

very  flrange  illufions  of  fight.  All  obj-edts 
were  feen  double,  but  not  always  in  the  fame 
relative  fituations.  Sometimes  they  appeared 
above  each  other,  fometimes  befide  each 
other : yet  no  aberration  of  reafon  followed. 
Do  we  not  fee  every  day  inftances  of  faulty 
vifion  which  give  rife  to  very  ftrange  imagi- 
nary fights  ? as  in  incipient  amaurofis  and 
cataradt,  and  yet  no  delirium  or  aberration  of 
reafon  arifes  from  them.  M.  Du  fours,  indeed, 
in  the  cafe  related  above,  fuppofes  the  cataradt 
gave  rife  to  infanity ; but  the  very  recital  of 
the  cafe  fhews  that  the  mental  derangement 
did  not  arife  from  the  erroneous  perceptions 
1 L 2 which 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


I48 

which  the  difeafe  in  the  eyes  gave  birth  to, 
but  from  anger,  and  fits  of  paflion,  which  the 
perfon  fell  into  from  impatience. 

In  regard  to  the  other  external  fenfes,  ef- 
pecially  hearing  and  touchy  we  find  them  often 
difcafed,  and  confequently  giving  birth  to 
various  erroneous  mental  perceptions,  and  yet 
no  delirium  following.  From  which  it  may 
be  concluded,  that  although  one  of  the  mod 
conftant  phenomena  of  infanity,  and  of  all 
deliria , is  erroneous  perception,  yet  the  caufe 
or  nature  of  the  delirium  is  not  to  be  fought 
for  in  that  circumftance  alone. 

Thefe  preliminary  confiderations  being  dif- 
culfed,  we  are  now  prepared  to  enter  into  a 
regular  inveftigation  of  delirium.  Of  the 
remote,  or  exciting  caufes  of  this  extraordi- 
nary ftate  of  the  mental  faculties,  fome  are 
very  evident,  others  extremely  obfcure.  Of 
thofe  which  are  evident  to  our  fenfes,  fome 
are  fo  conftantly  falling  under  our  obferva- 
tion,  that  every  perfon  is  able  to  narrate  the 
fymptoms  which  gradually  occur,  from  the 


moment 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


*49 


moment  they  are  firft  applied,  until  the  dis- 
order is  formed  ; the  progrefiive  effects  of  the 
others  on  the  contrary,  are  not  fo  eafily 
traced.  Among  the  more  evident  remote 
caufes  of  delirium,  the  progreflive  effeds 
of  which  can  be  ealily  traced,  are,  certain 
powerful  ftimuli,  fuch  as  Spirits,  wines,  all 
ftrong  liquors,  and  opium.  Thofe  which 
are  evident,  but  the  progrefiive  effeds  of 
which  are  not  fo  eafily  traced,  are  certain 
caufes  arifing  in  many  febrile  difeafes.  Of 
thofe  remote  caufes  which  are  not  only 
themfelves  concealed  from  our  fenfes,  but 
whofe  mode  of  operation  is  greatly  obfcured, 
are  to  be  reckoned  all  thofe  which  proceed 
from  hereditary  difpofition  to  infanity ; and 
many  other  bodily  caufes  of  melancholy  and 
hypochondriafis. 

Order  evidently  requires  that  we  fhould 
begin  with  thofe  whofe  mode  of  operation 
we  can  moft  eafily  trace,  becaufe,  if  from 
fuch  an  inquiry  we  arrive  at  any  conclufions 
concerning  their  more  immediate  effeds, 
fuch  conclufions  will  neceffarily  ferve  us 


as 


150 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


as  the  bafis  for  conducting  a comparative,  or 
analogical  procefs  of  reafoning  for  the  reft.  I 
fhall  therefore  begin  with  the  confederation  of 
certain  direct  ftimuli,  as  caufes  of  delirium  ; 
and  after  taking  a curfory  view  of  that  which 
happens  in  fevers,  fhall  pafs  on  to  that  of 
various  kinds  of  infanity,  not  prefuming  to 
draw  any  general  conclufions  until  all  the 
facts  fhall  have  been  narrated. 

Intoxication,  from  wine,  or  fpirits,  or  other 
powerful  ftimuli,  fuch  as  aether,  opium,  &c. 
may  be  divided  into  three  ftages. 

The  firft  is  that  in  which  the  perfon  has 
feveral  unnatural  perceptions,  his  judgment, 
however,  remaining  ftill  intire. 

The  fecond  is  a ftate  of  perfect  delirium,  in 
which  he  talks  and  acts  unreafonably. 

The  third  a ftate  of  coma,  or  apoplexy. 

There  is  a certain  point  of  intoxication, 
when  a perfon  fees  the  lights  double,  and  yet 

has 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


*5* 

has  fo  much  underftanding  as  to  know  that  it 
is  a mere  illufion  of  fight,  proceeding  from 
the  wine  or  fpirits  he  has  drank.  He  has  er- 
roneous perceptions,  and  yet  is  not  delirious  : 
nay,  it  is  by  no  means  uncommon  to  fee  fome 
young  philofophers,  and  ftudents,  who  are 
accidentally  in  this  ftate,  making  the  experi- 
ment of  firft  {hutting  one  eye,  and  then  the 
other,  with  a view  of  difeovering  whether  they 
fee  right  or  not.  At  fuch  a period  a perfon 
is  ftill  capable  of  conducing  himfelf  with 
tolerable  propriety,  although  he  generally 
lofes  a little  command  over  the  mufcles  of 
voluntary  adlion.  He  gives  a diftindl  and 
rational  anfvver  to  any  queftion  that  is  put  to 
him,  but  it  is  not  always  very  diftindtly  pro- 
nounced. If  more  ftrong  liquor  be  taken,  a 
Hate  of  real  delirium  enfues,  in  which  the 
perfon  talks  idly,  and  unreafonably ; vocife- 
rates loudly ; fpeaks  in  broken  and  incoherent 
language ; emits  fereams,  and  ejaculations ; 
laughs,  and  fwears  alternately,  and  has  no 
command  over  his  adtions.  If  the  debauch 
is  continued,  he  at  laft  falls  from  his  chair  in 
a ftate  which  is  called  dead  drunk>  and  which 


is 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


■i 

• * —»  % f 

is  a date  of  real  apoplexy  ; or  if  he  has  not 
taken  fo  much  as  to  induce  this,  the  delirium 
terminates  fpontaneoufly  in  a profound  and 
comatofe  fleep,  from  which  it  is  almoft  im- 
poftible  to  awaken  him. 

During  the  whole  time  that  this  feene  is 
going  on,  there  is  a confiderable  degree  of 
diforder  prevails  in  the  heart  and  arteries,  in 
which,  indeed,  the  caufe  of  the  delirium  has 
generally  been  fought  for.  The  circulation 
is  much  quicker,  and  ftronger  than  ufual  ; 
the  pulfe  rifes  both  in  force  and  velocity ; 
the  heat  of  the  fkin  is  increafed  ; the  face 
glows,  the  eyes  become  red  and  fuffufed,  and 
a great  determination  of  blood  to  the  head 
evidently  takes  place. 

It  is  well  known  that  in  many  febrile  dif- 
eafes,  which  are  accompanied  with  ftrong 
arterial  addon,  as  in  pneumonia,  acute  rheu- 
matifm,  phrenetis  idiopathica,  and  meafles, 
a delirium  now  and  then  occurs.  This  deli- 
rium is  always  attended  by  a number  of  fymp- 
toms,  which  are  analogous  to  thofe  that  arife 

in 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


T53 

the  delirium  of  drunkennefs  ; fuch  as  a quick 
and  ftrong  vibrating  pulfe,  increafed  heat  of 
fkin,  thirft,  and  reftleffnefs  ; a hot  and  glow- 
ing countenance,  eyes  vivid,  fparkling,  and 
fub-inflamed  ; and  all  the  marks  of  great 
determination  of  the  blood  to  the  head.  In 
this  delirium,  the  perfon  exhibits  figns  of  un- 
common mufcular  ftrength,  and  is  agitated  by 
violent  paflions  ; he  requires  the  force  of 
fome  men  to  keep  him  quiet,  and  his  lan- 
guage is  generally  injurious,  and  exprehive 
of  pain,  hatred,  or  anger. 

One  would  be  induced  to  conclude  from 
all  thefe  obfervations,  that  a preternatural 
determination  of  blood  to  the  head  was  fuffi- 
cient  to  produce  delirium  ; and,  therefore,  that 
this  might  be  confidered  as  one  of  the  more 
immediate  caufes  of  this  difordered  ffate  of 
mind  ; but  a little  refle&ion  foon  forces  us  to 
a deeper  refearch.  If  a mere  increafe  of  cir- 
culation of  the  blood,  through  the  veffels  of 
the  head,  be  a caufe  of  delirium,  it  ought  to 

4 

arife  whenever  that  occurs ; but  this  we  know 
is  not  always  the  cafe ; for  a perfon  fhall  have 

the 


*54 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


the  blood  pref.ernaturally  determined  to  the 
head  by  various  kinds  of  exercife,  and  his  pulfe 
beating  120  in  a minute,  and  yet  (hall  have 
an  underftanding  as  clear  and  unclouded  as 
when  his  pulfe  was  at  its  natural  ftandard. 
Befides,  there  are  many  inftances  of  people 
labouring  under  acute  rheumatifm,  and  pneu- 
monia, whofe  pulfe  beats  1 20  in  a minute  for 
feveral  days,  and  yet  have  no  delirium.  From 
which  it  is  evident  that  fomething  elfe  than 
mere  increafed  determination  of  blood  to  the 
head,  and  quicknefs  of  circulation,  is  necef- 
fary  to  account  for  the  produdion  of  the 
difeafe. 

Before  we  hazard  an  opinion  on  this  fub- 
jecfb,  it  ought  to  be  remarked,  that  the  deli- 
rium of  many  infane  perfons  is  very  fimilar, 
in  all  its  mental  characters,  to  that  which  has 
been  defcribed;  and  its  hiftory,  therefore,  by 
enlarging  the  field  of  fads  before  us,  may 
throw  fome  light  on  the  fubjed  of  the  proxi- 
mate caufe.  The  peculiar  delirium  I allude 
to  is  called  phrenzy,  and  is  a date  of  mind 
into  which  not  only  the  milder  lunatics  and 

maniacs. 


ON  DELIRIUM. 

maniacs,  but  melancholy  people  alfo  are  at 
times  apt  to  fall. 

The  method  which  is  adopted  in  this  work 
demands  a faithful  account  of  all  the  pheno- 
mena which  precede,  accompany,  and  follow 
this  kind  of  delirium,  to  be  faithfully  nar- 
rated, before  any  fpeculative  reafoning  is 
admitted. 

Phrenzy  comes  on  either  very  fuddenly,  or 
elfe  it  is  preceded  by  a number  of  fymptoms, 
which  the  experienced  and  obfervingphyficiaft 
immediately  underftands. 

As  an  inftance  of  the  firft  kind,  the  follow- 
ing remarkable  cafe  may  be  adduced.  '*  I. 
*'  H.  G.  a ftudent  of  Belles  Lettres,  the  fon 
“ of  parents  of  a melancholic  temperament, 
" was,  in  his  early  youth,  of  a calm  and 
“ tranquil  chara&er,  appearing  free  from  all 
“ cares  and  uneafinefs.  Soon  after  he  was 
•*  put  to  fchool,  he  would,  at  times,  fpring 
u up  fuddenly,  give  a loud  fliriek,  and  run 
« up  and  down,  fpeaking  to  himfelf.  After 

" this 


ON  DELIRIUM, 


I56 

<f  this  he  acquired  a difguft  for  fcience,  and 
<f  became  quite  melancholy.  The  following 
f<  Spring  he  was  calm,  but  in  the  year  1765, 
“ he  at  once  was  feized  with  phrenzy,  and 
ft  was  obliged  to  be  brought  to  the  work- 

houfe.  This  was  in  the  month  of  May, 
“ and  in  the  23d  year  of  his  age,  &c.” 
G reding,  on  the  ufe  of  White  Hellebore . Sec 
his  Vermifchte  Schrifften , p.  73, 

This  cafe  is  curious,  from  its  having  come 
on  without  any  evident  exciting  caufe.  For 
in  the  greater  number  of  inflances  in  which 
phrenzy  fuddenly  occurs,  fome  evident  ex- 
citing caufe  is  generally  to  be  difeovered  ; 
fuch  as  certain  paflions,  pride,  fuddenly 
created  by  fortuitous  circumftances,  anger, 
and  grief,  efpecially  from  difappointment,  &c. 
Many  phyfical  caufes  alfo  bring  it  fuddenly 
on,  fuch  as  too  powerful  ftimuli ; for  inftance, 
hard  drinking,  fevere  exercife  in  hot  weather, 
fudden  tranfitions  from  heat  to  cold,  and  the 
hidden  retention  of  habitual  difeharges,  &c. 


The 


ON  DELIRIUM.  I57 

The  duration  and  mo'ide  in  which  the  dif- 
eafe  terminates,  is  various  according  as  the 
perfon  is  more  or  lefs  predifpofed  to  the  com- 
plaint, and  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
exciting  caufes. 

It  is  of  fhorter  duration,  and  more  eaiily 
cured,  ceteris  paribus , in  thofe  in  whom  it 
originates  from  accidental  caufes,  fuch  as  in- 
toxication, fudden  tranfition  from  cold  to 
heat,  the  retention  of  habitual  difcharges,  &c. 
than  in  thofe,  who,  like  the  fludent  mentioned, 
have  fome  difeafe  gradually  forming  in  their 
brain.  That  unfortunate  young  man  con- 
tinued delirious  until  the  year  1771,  when  he 
cut  his  throat,  and  died. 

c • 5 

The  phenomena  which  announce  the  gra- 
dual  approach  of  phrenzy,  when  its  progrefs 
is  (low,  are  fo  faithfully  and  well  defcribed  by 
the  late  Dr.  Monro,  in  the  fenfible  and  ele- 
gant little  effay  which  he  wrote  in  anfvver  to 
the  wild  romance  of  Dr.  Battie,  on  the  fub- 
jedfc  of  infanity,  that  I fhall  give  the  defcrip- 
tion  of  them  in  his  own  words. 

“ High 


I 


158  On  delirium. 

ff  ///^fpirits,  as  they  are  generally  termed, 
n are  the  firft  fymptoms  of  this  kind  of  dif- 
•f  order ; thefe  excite  a man  to  take  a larger 
" quantity  of  wine  than  ufual,  (for  thofe  who 
ct  have  fallen  under  my  obfervation  in  this 
**  particular  have  been  naturally  very  fober,) 
*»  and  the  perfon  thus  afflicted,  from  being 
*'  abdemious,  referved,  and  moded,  (hall  be- 
%i  come  quite  the  contrary,  drink  freely,  talk 
" boldly,  obfcenely,  fwear,  (it  up  till  mid- 
" night,  deep  little,  rife  fuddenly  from  bed, 
•c  go  out  a hunting,  return  again  immediately, 
•*  fet  all  his  fervants  to  work,  and  employ 
ft  five  times  the  number  that  is  neceffary  ; in 
<c  (hort,  every  thing  he  fays,  or  does,  betrays 
t(  the  mod  violent  agitation  of  mind,  which 
ff  it  is  not  in  his  own  power  to  correct ; and 
,f  yet  in  the  midd  of  all  this  hurry  he  will 
” not  mifplace  one  word,  or  give  the  lead 
<c  reafon  for  any  one  to  think  he  imagines 
tr  things  to  exid  that  really  do  not,  or  that 
ft  they  appear  to  him  different  from  what 
«*  they  do  to  other  people.  They  who  fe« 
u him  but  feldom,  admire  his  vivacity,  are 
fC  pleafed  with  his  fallies  of  wit,  and  the  faga- 

city 


ON  DELIRIUM.  I59 

91  city  of  his  remarks  ; nay  his  own  family 
" are  with  difficulty  perfuaded  to  take  proper 
9t  care  of  him,  until  it  becomes  abfolutely 
,c  neceffary  from  the  apparent  ruin  of  his 
99  health  and  fortune.’* 

This  is  a true  reprefentation  of  the  gradual 
approach,  not  of  infanity  in  general,  but  of 
that  peculiar  kind  which  begins  with  high 
fpirits ; allowance  at  the  fame  time  being 
made  for  the  fituations  of  life  in  which  the 
original  was  placed,  from  whom  the  Doffor 
has  copied  his  picture.  It  is  evidently  taken 
from  a man  of  fortune  and  of  a good  educa- 
tion, who  has  a family  and  fervants  at  com- 
mand. But  thofe  who  are  in  different  fitua- 
tions in  life,  and  thofe  of  the  oppofite  fex, 
have  their  condudt  marked  by  different  cir- 
cumftances.  The  phenomena  which  are  com- 
mon to  all,  whatever  their  fex,  or  fituation  in 
life  may  be,  are  thefe  : high  fpirits,  acute 
fenfation,  and  great  vivacity  of  thought,  a dif- 
pofition  to  be  eafily  and  highly  incenfed  ; or, 
on  the  other  hand,  to  be  thrown  into  extrava- 
gant laughter  from  flight  caufes  ; great  phyfi- 

cal 


ON  DELIRIUM*. 


l6o 


cal  reftlefThefs,  by  which  a penon  is  prompted 
to  take  immoderate  exercife,  a ftrong  defire 
for  fenfual  pleafures,  by  which  they  are 
prompted  not  only  to  go  in  fearch  of  every 
amufement,  but  alfo  of  every  gratification 
they  can  procure,  and  which  renders  them 
totally  regardlefs  of  their  health  and  fortune; 
loquacity,  and  quicknefs  of  repartee,  and  con- 
ftant  agitation  of  the  whole  frame ; thefe  are 
fymptoms  which  are  general. 


Such  a perfon  cannot  be  faid,  as  yet,  to  be 
delirious ; but  that  event  foon  follows,  and 
then  he  has  the  fymptoms  common  to  fuch  a 
difeafe;  the  only  difference  being  that  which 
arifes  from  the  thoughts  which  are  reprefented 
in  his  mind.  He  begins  to  rave,  and  talk 
wildly,  and  incoherently  ; fw:ears  as  if  in  the 
mofl  violent  rage,  and  then  immediately 
after  burfts  into  fits  of  laughter,  talks  ob- 
fcenely,  dire&s  offenfive  and  contemptuous 
language  againft  his  relations,  and  thofe 
around  him ; fpits  at  them ; deftroys  every 
thing  w'hich  comes  in  his  wray ; emits  loud 
and  difcordant  fcreams,  and  continues  in  this 

way 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


161 


way  till  he  is  quite  exhaufted.  The  ftate  of 
reft  which  follows  is  generally  fhortand  fleep- 
lefs  ; the  patient  is  obftinate  ; will  not  fpeak 
one  word,  and  clenches  his  teeth  if  any  thing 
is  offered  him  to  fwallow,  or  elfe,  with  a de- 
gree of  cunning,  he  pretends  to  drink  a little, 
but  immediately  fquirts  it  out  on  the  perfon 
who  offered  it.  At  once,  howrever,  he  again 
breaks  out  into  all  the  wild  and  extravagant 
language,  and  addons  he  committed  before. 
If  kept  in  ft  rid  coercion,  he  has  often  fo 
much  command  over  himfelf  as  to  behave 
mildly  and  modeftly,  and  were  it  not  for  the 
general  expreflion  of  his  countenance,  and  the 
peculiar  gliftening  appearance  and  rapid 
movements  of  his  eye,  he  might  impofe  on 
many  of  the  bye-ftanders,  and  make  them 
imagine  that  the  ftate  of  phrenzy  wras  over. 

This  kind  of  furious  paroxyfm  continues 
for  a longer  or  fhorter  period  of  time  in  dif- 
ferent cafes.  In  fome  inftances,  where  there 
is  but  little  predifpofition  to  the  difeafe,  and 
when  it  has  arifen  fuddenly  from  fome  acci- 
dental exciting  caufe,  fuch  as  a long  continued 
Vql.  I.  M ftate 


162  ON  DELIRIUM'* 

Hate  of  intoxication,  fudden  tranfitions  from 
heat  to  cold,  or  vice  verfa-  or  a violent  fit  of 
anger,  or  jealoufy,  or  defpair,  it  is  generally 
of  ftiort  duration,  and  eafily  cured.  But  when 
its  approach  is  characterized  by  the  fymptoms 
narrated  by  Dr.  Monro,  and  feems  to  fpring 
more  from  ftrong  hereditary  predifpofition 
than  from  any  evident  exciting  caufe  ; its 
duration  is  generally  much  longer,  and  the 
prognoftics,  as  to  the  ftate  in  which  it  will 
leave  the  patient,  always  doubtful.  It  may 
continue  a month,  or  two  months,  and  up- 
wards. It  happens  very  feldom,  however, 
that  it  is  then  characterized  by  fo  much  vio- 
lence as  has  juft  now  been  defcribed. 

Its  termination  is  various.  The  moft  com- 
mon is  in  a ftate  of  tolerable  mental  and  bodily 
health.  Even  thofe  who  have  a ftrong  here- 
ditary taint  often  remain  perfectly  fane  for 
fome  years  after  the  firft  attack.  Thofe  in 
whom  it  has  arifen  accidentally,  from  fuch 
caufes  as  have  been  lately  mentioned,  and  who 
have  no  hereditary  difpofition,  may  remain 
free  from  it  during  the  reft  of  their  life.  But 

thofe 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


163 

thofe  in  whofe  frame  the  predifpofltion  ftill 
exifls,  are  commonly  again  attacked  with  it 
fome  time  afterwards.  In  fome  cafes  it  re- 
turns in  the  courfe  of  a few  months.  Thefe 
are  generally  hopelefs  cafes.  In  others  the 
perfon  may  enjoy  a Hate  of  perfedl  fanity  for 
one,  two,  or  more  years,  before  any  renewal 
of  this  melancholy  diforder  takes  place. 

A phrenzy,  however,  is  not  always  followed 
by  longer  or  fhorter  periods  of  lucid  reafon. 
Of  phrenitic  patients,  many  remain  com- 
pletely maniacal  for  feveral  months  ; others 
fall  into  a Hate  of  deep  melancholy;  others 
into  idiotifm.  The  particular  nature  of  each 
of  thefe  Hates  will  be  inquired  into  afterwards. 

Upon  infpedting  the  bodies  of  thofe  who 
have  died  maniacal,  or  raving  mad,  a vaft 
variety  of  difeafed  appearances  have  been  de- 
tected. Thefe  are  found  to  exiH  chiefly  in 
the  brain.  Numerous  are  the  cafes  of  diflec- 
tion which  have  been  inflituted  on  the  dead 
bodies  of  maniacs.  Bonetus,  Morgagni, 
Herman  Boerhaave,  Meckel,  and  a few 

M 2 others. 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


164 

others,  however,  contain  every  fadt  of  any 
importance  on  this  fubjedt.  Thofe  who  have 
written  after  their  time,  have  only  confirmed 
the  truth  of  their  teftimony.  The  difeafed 
appearances  which  have  been  detedled  within 
the  heads  of  phrenitic  patients,  have  alfo  been 
found  at  times  within  the  heads  not  only  of 
idiots,  and  melancholy  patients,  but  alfo  within 
the  heads  of  many  others  who  never  were  in- 
fane during  the  whole  period  of  their  lives, 

but  who  had  laboured  under  various  nervous 

• 

difeafes.  If  any  one  will  take  the  trouble 
of  confulting  the  hiftories  of  the  diffedtions 
which  Morgagni  and  Bonetus  inftituted 

on  patients  who  died  lethargic,  apopledtic, 

• 

paralytic,  epileptic ; of  thofe  who  had  long 
fuffered  under  hyfteria,  and  thofe  who  died 
of  fevers  of  various  kinds,  he  will  find  an 
enumeration  of  all  the  difeafed  appearances 
of  the  brain,  and  its  membranes,  which 
have  yet  been  detedled  within  the  heads  of 
lunatics,  no  matter  whether  phrenitic  ones,  or 
melancholic  ones,  or  idiots.  Dr.  Arnold, 
with  much  patience  and  labour,  has  made  a 
vaft  colledlion  of  hiftories  of  diffedtions,  an 


account 


ON  DELIRIUM.  165 

account  of  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  fecond 
volume  of  his  work.  Greding  alfo,  in  his 
mifcellaneous  writings  (Vermifchte  Schrifften) 
has  alfo  made  a very  extenfive  and  well  ar- 
ranged affemblage  of  fads  drawn  from  refped- 
able  fources.  As  this  book  is  very  fcarce  in 
this  country,  and  as  I cannot  add  any  thing 
to  what  he  has  colleded,  and  by  copying  from 
him  might  give  myfelf  an  air  of  unmerited 
erudition ; a literal  tranflation  of  this  part 
of  his  work  is  inferted  in  the  Appendix,  where 
it  may  be  confulted. 

Let  us  now  paufe  a little,  and  confider  all 
the  fads  that  have  been  brought  forward,  and 
the  dedudions  which  may  be  drawn  from 
them. 

lft.  We  obferve  that  a mere  increafed  de- 
termination of  blood  to  the  head,  provided 
the  circulation  be  fo  free  that  a great  congef- 
tion  does  not  arife,  is  not  the  caufe  of  deli- 
rium, lince  in  the  cafes  of  fevere  exercife,  and 
in  many  fevers,  where  the  pulfe  beats  120  in 

a minute. 


i66 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


a minute,  and  the  face  is  flufhed  and  full,  no 
fuch  phenomenon  takes  place. 

2dly.  That  an  increafed  quantity  of  blood 
fent  to  the  head,  or  the  quicknefs  with  which 
it  circulates  there,  are  not  the  immediate 
caufes  of  delirium,  is  further  evinced  by  this 
fadt,  that  the  delirium  of  fevers,  and  many 
cafes  of  phrenzy,  begin  when  there  is  very 
little  quicknefs  of  pulfe,  and  often  continue 
after  that  fymptom  is  greatly  fubfided. 

3dly.  Difleftions  demonftrate  in  the  cleared 
manner  that  although  a vaft  variety  of  morbid 
appearances  have  been  detected  within  the 
heads  of  delirious  people,  efpecially  phrcnitic 
patients,  yet  there  is  no  one  which  has  been 
uniformly  prefent  in  all  analogous  cafes ; and 
therefore  there  is  no  reafon  to  believe  that  any 
one  of  them  is  to  be  conlidercd  as  the  imme- 
diate caufe  of  the  alienation  of  mind,  but 
rather  as  accidental  effe&s,  arifing  from  various 
caufes  which  have  occurred  either  previous  to 
the  commencement  of  the  diforder,  or  during 
its  attack.  Tumors  of  various  kinds,  oflifi. 


cations 


ON  DELIRIUM.  167 

cations- of  arteries,  and  the  membranes  envel- 
loping  the  brain,  hydatids,  ftony  concretions, 
increafed  vafcularity,  diminilhed  vafcularity, 
coloured  fpots,  increafed  denfity,  increafed 
fpecific  gravity;  preternatural  laxity,  ulcera- 
tion, ruptured  velfels,  extravafations  of  blood, 
lymph,  and  ferum,  not  only  on  the  furfacc, 
but  in  the  cavities  and  in  the  fubflance  of  the 
brain ; and  independent  of  all  thefe  appear- 
ances, a vaft  variety  in  the  form  of  the  fkull, 
has  been  dete&ed  in  various  cafes.  The  chief 
circumftance,  however,  w^hich  proves  that 
they  are  rather  confequences  than  caufes  of 
any  particular  difeafe,  is,  that  they  have  been 
found  not  only  in  phrenitic  patients,  but  alfo 
in  idiots,  melancholic  patients, ' hyfterical 
ones,  paralytic  ones,  and  epileptic  people. 

4thly.  In  all  cafes  of  that  peculiar  kind  of 
delirium  called  phrenzy,  the  firft  phenomenon 
of  difeafe  appears  to  be  a difordered  Hate  of 
fenforial  feeling,  if  the  exprehion  be  permit- 
ted. All  impreflions  on  the  brain  are  power- 
fully felt  there.  Thofe  derived  from  the  ex- 
ternal fenfes,  if  they  are  calculated  to  excite 


1 6S  ON  DELIRIUM'. 

any  defire,  or  paflion,  do  fo  in  a moft  uncom- 
mon degree  ; and  the  reaction  of  thefe  men- 
tal impreflions  diforder  the  whole  frame.  The 
perfon  ads  as  if  from  an  involuntary  impulfe, 
which  does  not  admit  of  the  operations  of 
reafon.  Hurry,  uncommon  ftrength,  buftle, 
and  violence,  charaderize  all  the  adions  and 
expreflions  of  the  patient ; every  thing  creates 
an  uncommon  excitement  of  nervous  energy 
in  him. 

' < 

We  have  had  reafon  to  believe  that  the 
medium,  by  means  of  which  all  impreflions 
ab  externo , are  conveyed  to  the  mind,  and  all 
thofe  ariflng  in  the  mind  are  communicated 
to  the  various  parts  of  the  body,  is  a peculiar 
fluid  fecreted,  or  at  leaf!  formed  in  the  medul- 
lary fubftance  of  the  nerves.  This  refledion, 
and  the  previous  concluflons  drawn  from  the 
premifes  already  laid  down,  naturally  give 
rife  to  the  conjedure,  that  the  principal  caufe 
ot  fuch  phrenzy  and  dedria  as  have  been  de- 
fcribed,  muft  be  a peculiar  morbid  adion  of 
the  veflels  which  fecrete  nervous  matter,  es- 
pecially the  fluid  in  queftion.  It  may  be 

altered 


ON  DELIRIUM.  169 

1 

altered  not  only  in  quantity  but  quality.  This 
idea  is  much  ftrengthened  by  the  conlideration 
that  the  natural  and  healthy  phenomena  not 
only  of  the  whole  body,  but  of  lingle  parts, 
and  efpecially  all  fecreting  organs,  are  much 
affedled  by  difeafed  vafcular  action.  One  fet 
of  fymptoms  proceed  from  the  mere  phyfical 

t 

derangement  which  the  uncommon  attion  of 
the  veflels  produces  on  the  folid  particles  in 
their  neighbourhood.  Another  arifes  from 
the  changes  in  the  fluids  which  circulate 
through  them,  and  confequently  in  the  fecre- 
tions  they  perform. 

Although  the  force  and  quicknefs  with 
which  the  heart  and  arteries  a6t  is  extremely 
different  in  different  individuals,  and  probably 
alfo  in  different  parts  of  the  fame  individual, 
it  is  a fair  concluflon  to  fay  that  there  is  a pe- 
culiar one  which  fupports  the  healthy  a&ion 
of  each  individual.  The  expreflion  difeafed , 
or  morbid  afiion , is  one  by  which  is  meant,  in 
a general  fenfe,  all  deviations  from  this  healthy 
action. 


It 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


170 

It  is  impoflible  for  us  to  afcertain  either 
the  peculiar  nature  or  number  of  all  the  dif- 
eafed  adtions  of  which  the  vafcular  fyftem  is 
fufceptible ; far  lefs  thofe  which  happen  to 
the  veflels  of  particular  parts  in  various  dif- 
eafes.  The  difference  that  exifts  in  the  natural 
adtion  of  various  parts,  is  by  no  means  un- 
derftood.  Of  morbidly  increafed  arterial  ac- 
tion, one  kind  is  peculiar  to  gout,  another  to 
acute  rheumatifm,  another  to  venereal  inflam- 
mation, another  to  fcrophulous  inflammation, 
another  to  eryfipelas,  &c.  Now,  although 
it  is  natural  to  fuppofe  that  in  general  the 
action  of  the  remote  branches  of  the  arterial 
fyftem  may  be  fuppofed  to  correfpond  with 
that  of  the  larger  arteries,  yet  we  have  un- 
doubted proof  that  this  is  not  always  the 
cafe.  Their  adtion  is  often  altered  in  many 
very  remarkable  degrees,  without  any  cor- 
refpond ing  change  of  action  in  the  heart,  or 
fyftem  of  larger  blood-veflels.  This  is  proved 
by  cafes  of  topical  inflammation  of  all  kinds, 
in  which  the  healthy  appearances  of  the  part 
aflfedted  are  all  changed,  and  yet  the  circula- 
tion in  general  goes  on  as  ufual.  It  is  alfo 

proved 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


171 

proved  by  many  difeafes  of  the  Ikin,  by  fe- 
condary  venereal  fores,  fcrophulous  tumours, 
&c.  In  many  cafes,  indeed,  of  topical  dif- 
eafed  arterial  adfion,  the  fyftem  at  large  is 
deranged,  bi  t :n  fuch  cafes  it  is  not  owing 
to  the  difeafed  adtion  becoming  general,  but 
to  a number  of  fecondary  caufes ; that  is  to 
fay,  the  topical  difeafe,  produces  a certain 
number  of  events ; thefe  become  the  caufe  of 
others,  and  thefe  others  of  a third  feries,  and 
fo  on.  Thus,  certain  difeafed  actions  of  the 
velfels  of  the  liver  not  only  produce  unealinefs 
there,  but  alfo  caufe  the  bile  to  be  much 
changed  from  its  healthy  ftate,  both  in  quan- 
tity and  quality  ; and  hence  a certain  number 
of  morbid  effedts,  pain  in  the  ftomach,  naufea, 
vomiting,  faulty  digeftion,  and  lofs  of  appe- 
tite, colic  pains,  and  violent  purging.  Thefe, 
if  they  continue  for  any  length  of  time,  pro- 
duce headach,  heat  of  Ikin,  thirft,  great  lan- 
guor, and  reftlelfnefs,  and  at  laft  cramps  in 
the  extremities,  and  convullions,  &c.  So  the 
difeafed  adtion  of  the  velfels  of  the  brain, 
which  give  rife  to  phrenzy,  operate  in  a 
fimilar  manner.  An  altered  ftate  of  feeling 


in 


172 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


in  the  brain  is  evident  in  the  quicknefs  and 
vividnefs  of  the  eyes,  the  irafcibility  and  the 
difordered  ftate  of  the  mental  faculties  ; the 
patient’s  infenfibility  to  cold,  and  alfo  his  de- 
praved appetite,  &c.  Thefe,  if  they  con- 
tinue, produce  want  of  fleep,  flight  febrile 
paroxyfms,  a furious  and  ungovernable  con- 
duct, wild  and  incoherent  expreffions,  and 
fo  on. 

But  if  the  action  of  the  veflels  which 
fecrete  the  fentient  principle,  be  greatly  al- 
tered from  their  healthy  ftate,  the  fine  fluid 
which  is  fecreted  muft  undergo  proportionate 
morbid  changes.  In  order  to  prove  the  effed 
which  any  unufual  change  of  the  fluids  has  on 
the  mental  operations,  I fhall  infert  a Angular 
fad,  mentioned  by  Dionis  in  the  498th  page 
of  his  Cours  d'Operationes  de  Cbirurgie . He 
fpeaks  of  a practice  which  was  at  one  time  at- 
tempted to  be  introduced,  with  a view  not  only 
of  preventing,  but  curing  many  difeafes. 

The  fad  he  fpeaks  of  is  the  transfufion  of 
blood  from  certain  animals  into  man.  The 

V. 

event* 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


*73 


event,  however,  was  terrible ; for  a great 
number  of  thofe  on  whom  the  experiments 
were  made  became  furioufly  mad,  and  foon 
died.  The  parliament  of  Paris  having  gained 
intelligence  of  thefe  experiments,  iffued  a de- 
cree, by  which  it  was  forbidden,  under  the 
moft  fevere  penalties,  to  repeat  fuch  experi- 
ments. His  words  are  thefe  : “Us  firent 
<f  plufieurs  de  ces  operations  qui  devoient  fe- 
cf  Ion  eux,  avoir  un  fuccefs  furprenant ; maix 

la  fin  funefte  de  ces  malheureufes  vidtimes 
u de  la  nouveaute  detruiflt  en  un  jour  les 
« hautes  idees  qu’ils  avoient  com^ues ; ils  de- 
“ vinrent  foux,  furieux  et  moururent  enfuite. 
“ Le  parlement  informe  de  ce  que  s’etoit 
'<  pafle  interpofa  fon  autorite,  et  donna  un 
“ arret  par  lequel  il  etoit  defendu  fous  des  ri- 
t(  goureufes  peines  de  faire  cette  operation.’* 

This  fadl  is  brought  forward,  not  with  a 
view  of  infpiring  the  idea  that  the  delirium 
of  maniacs  arifes  primarily  from  a vitiated 
flate  of  the  fluids,  but  merely  to  prove  that 
when  the  fluids  are  altered,  no  matter  what  the 

caufe 


ON  DELIRIUM* 


*74 

caufe  be,  they;  always  change  the  adtion  of  the 
vafcular  fyftem. 

Upon  the  whole,  I conclude  that  the  deli- 
rium of  maniacs,  when  it  has  the  peculiar 
character  of  that  which  has  been  defcribed, 
always  arifes  from  a fpecific  difeafed  adfion  of 
thofe  fine  veffels  which  fecrete  the  nervous 
fluid  in  the  brain.  This  difeafed  action  ap- 
pears to  be  one  which,  independent  of  its 
fpecific  nature,  by  which  it  is  diftinguifhed 
from  common  inflammation,  or  fcrophula,  is 
a preternaturally  increafed  one ; and  this  I 
think  is  proved  by  the  quicknefs  of  the  ex- 
ternal fenfes,  the  irafcibility  of  mind,  the 
heat  of  the  fkin,  the  flufhed  countenance,  and 
uncommon  energy  of  body  which  maniacs 
evince.  This  hypothefis  explains  the  reafon 
alfo  why  it  often  has  periodical  exacerbations, 
and  remiflions.  They  who  believe  that  tu- 
mors, ulcers,  and  oflifications  of  the  brain, 
or  increafed  fpecific  gravity,  or  increafed 
hardnefs  of  the  fame,  give  birth  to  mania, 
mqft  neceffarily  be  at  a lofs  to  explain  why 
the  delirium  ever  ceafes  while  fuch  caufes 

cxift  a 


ON  DELIRIUM.  17$ 

exift ; but  if  it  arifes  from  difeafed  adtion,  it 
muft  ceafe,  and  may,  or  may  not  return,  ac- 
cording as  a variety  of  other  circumftances 
confpire  to  its  re-excitement. 

All  the  phenomena  of  the  phrenzy  of  ma- 
niacs are  either  difeafed  feelings,  or  aberra- 
tions of  the  mental  faculties. 

That  difeafed  feelings  ftiould  arife  from  dif- 
eafed adtion  of  the  arteries  of  the  brain,  or 
of  the  nervous  fyftem,  is  eafily  underflood, 
lince  in  fadl  every  change  in  the  phyfical  ftate 
of  the  nerves  produces  of  itfelf  a difeafed  fen- 
fation ; and  independent  of  this,  it  neceffarily 
alters  all  impreflions  of  external  bodies  which 
are  tranfmitted  through  thefe  parts. 

Upon  what  general  principle  the  aberration 
of  the  mental  faculties  is  to  be  accounted  for 
in  fuch  cafes,  by  thofe  who  believe  the  mind 
to  be  elfentially  diftinct  from  the  brain,  will 
be  fhewn  in  the  Chapter  on  Memory,  in  which 
this  curious  inquiry  comes  more  naturally 
before  us  than  at  prefent. 


The 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


176 

The  fine  veflels  of  the  brain  and  nerves 
which  fecrete  the  fluid  principle,,  on  which 
fenfation  depends,  muft  be  fubjed  to  all  the 
laws  of  irritability  which  regulate  the  action 
of  the  other  veflels  of  the  human  body.  If 
they  are  capable  of  being  excited  into  too 
great  adion,  whether  it  be  of  a fpecific  kind 
or  not,  they  are  alfo  fubjed  to  torpor  after  it. 

But  if  the  principle  on  which  fenfation  de- 
pends be  too  fcantily  fecreted,  delirium  may 
arife ; for  in  this  cafe  impreflions,  ab  interne, 
are  weakened  before  they  reach  the  mind,  and 
confequently  thofe  which  fpring  up  there 
from  the  aflociation  of  ideas,  or  which  are 
excited  by  difeafed  bodily  feelings,  acquire 
a difproportionate  vivacity ; that  is  to  fay, 
without  being  flronger  than  they  are  in 
general,  they  appear  more  vivid,  on  account 
of  the  weaknefs  of  the  impreflions  of  external 
obj eds.  The  patient,  therefore,  naturally 
believes  that  they  have  a real  exiflence,  and 
his  difeourfe  and  adions  fpring  from  this 
fource. 


In 


Ott  DELIRIUM* 


1 77 


In  fuch  a delirium,  attention  is  greatly  and 
neceflarily  diminifhed,  and  therefore  the  ideas 
are  not  fo  permanent  as  in  maniacal  phrenzy, 
where  the  patient  is  often  agitated  by  one 
thought  only  for  a conliderable  length  of  time ; 
hence  the  images  which  prefent  themfelves  to 
the  mind  of  thofe  who  labour  under  this  low 
kind  of  delirium,  are  often  tranfitory,  and 
their  difcourfe  is  confequently  very  incohe- 
rent. 

Such  a low  kind  of  delirium  frequently  oc- 
curs in  all  the  varieties  of  typhus , and  often  alfo 
in  confequence  of  profufe  haemorrhages,  and 
difcharges,  when  accompanied  with  a quick 
pulfe,  and  other  fymptoms  of  fever.  The 
patient  is  naturally  reftlefs  and  unruly,  be- 
caufe  his  ideas  prompt  him  to  be  fo ; his  lan- 
guage is  querulous,  but  not  offenfive. 

There  is  a low  delirium  which  follows  the 
ftate  of  phrenzy  in  maniacs,  that  is  nearly 
allied,  in  its  mental  character,  to  that 
which  occurs  in  low  fevers.  But  there  is 
a very  great  difference  between  the  two 

Yol.  I*  N patients 


i 


178 


ON  DELIRIUM". 


patients  in  regard  to  other  c ire um fiances. 
The  maniac  with  low  delirium  can  ufe 
immenfe  mufcular  force  ; the  febrile  patient, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  incapable  of  ufing 
much  exertion.  In  the  febrile  patient  the 
irritability  of  the  whole  frame  is  exhaufted  by 
the  general  quicknefs  of  circulation,  and  in- 
creafe  of  heat,  which  accompanies  the  com- 
plaint from  its  beginning  ; but  mania  being  a 
local  difeafe,  and  not  accompanied  by  any 
very  uncommon  quicknefs  of  pulfe,  the  irri- 
tability of  the  mufcles  feems  often  to  be  pre- 
ternaturally  accumulated.  Thefe  maniacs  are 
often  ungovernable,  except  by  means  of  coer- 
cion,  but  they  are  more  eafily  retrained  than 
thofe  who  are  in  a {fate  of  phrenzy.  They  } 
are  intractable,  and  neither  liften  to  intreaty 
or  to  menaces.  Fear  of  corporal  punifhment,  I 
howrever,  makes  them  obey.  They  willingly  ! 
avoid  the  light,  burying  themfelves  under  the 
bed-clothes,  or  under  the  draw  of  their  cells. 
All  external  imprehions  are  greatly  weakened 
in  them  before  they  reach  the  brain;  and 
hence  fuch  patients  are  for  the  moft  part  in- 
fenfible  to  cold,  for  many  of  them  will  remain 

almoft 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


I79 


almoft  completely  naked  during  the  feverity 
of  the  winter.  They  are  totally  regardlefs 
of  decency  and  cleanlinefs,  and  from  fome 
ftrange  motive  are  often  found  rubbing 
themfelves  - all  over  with  their  excrement. 
The  fenfation  of  hunger  and  third:,  like  every 
other  natural  bodily  feeling,  is  weak,  and  they 
therefore  appear  to  have  little  appetite ; but 
their  power  of  concoction  is  feldorn  impaired, 
for,  if  they  are  made  to  eat,  they  feem  to  di- 
geft  the  food  well.  When  their  keepers,  how- 
ever, prefent  it  to  them,  his  appearance  and 
expreffions  deftroy  the  feelings  of  hunger,  and 
they  therefore  often  obftinately  refufe  to  take 
it ; and  yet  when  left  alone,  and  the  inftinctive 
fenfation  of  hunger  returrfs,  they  will  greedily 
devour  their  faces. 

What  the  nature  of  the  ideas  are  which  pre- 
fent themfelves  to  their  mind,  it  is  impoffible 
to  know  j for  although  they  generally  mutter 
fomething  to  themfelves,  it  is  in  fo  low  a 
voice  as  not  to  be  heard. 

It  appears  to  me  that  fuch  patients  often 
experience  bodily  fenfations  which  are  ana- 

N 2 logo  us 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


I So 

logo  us  to  the  impreffions  that  excite  the 
feeling  of  corporeal  pain ; for  they  now  and 
then  emit  loud  fcrcams  and  howlings,  which 
are  fingularly  expreffive  of  great  fuffering. 

The  time  that  they  are  to  remain  in  this 
peculiar  kind  of  delirium  can  rarely  be  fore- 
told with  accuracy.  In  fome  patients  it  con- 
tinues for  many  months,  and  after  a longer  or 
fhorter  period  is  always  fucceeded  either  by  a 
gradual  return  of  health,  or  by  another  pa- 
roxyfm  of  phrenzy,  in  which  the  patient  talks 
loudly,  and  inceffantly  as  formerly,  and  is  alfo 
again  agitated  with  Trelli  violence  and  fury. 
It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  thofe  who  are 
moft  furious  in  th%4Iate  of  phrenzy,  are  molt 
fullen,  gloomy,  and  infenfible  in  this  fecond 
itage  of  mania. 

During  the  whole  of  this  term  the  irritable 
organs  perform  their  offices  rightly.  The 
heart  and  arteries,  ftomach  and  inteftines, 
ureters  and  bladder,  and  all  the  vafcular  fyf- 
tem,  are  in  a ftate  of  good  health. 


There 


ON  DELIRIUM'.  1ST 

There  is  a kind  of  mania  which  is  quite 
diftindt  from  any  thing  that  has  been  yet 
deferibed.  Like  phrenzy,  it  feems  to  arife 
from  a fpecific  increafed  adtion  of  the  veffels 
which  fecrete  the  fentient  principle  ; but  at 
the  lame  time  it  feems  to  be  a diftindt  kind  of 
adtion.  It  is  not  of  fo  violent  a degree,  and 
confequently  the  paroxyfm  generally  continues 
longer,  and  is  not  fucceeded  by  a great  ftate 
of  torpor.  It  would  appear  as  if  the  impref- 
fions  which  this  difeafed  adtion  of  the  veflels 
of  the  brain  produces,  were  more  analogous 
to  thofe  of  corporeal  pleafure  than  of  pain, 
for  the  patients  are  all  happy,  gay,  and  cheer- 
ful. Although  they  are  not  infenlible  to  ex- 
ternal objedts,  their  thoughts  are  generally 
more  vivid  than  the  imprelTion  from  thefe, 
and  hence  it  feldom  occurs  that  their  attention 
can  be  fixed  on  external  things  for  any  length 
of  time. 

So  far  from  being  averfe  to  fociety  like  the 
maniacs  who  were  laft  deferibed,  they  hate 
folitude.  They  are  lively,  active,  and  ex- 
tremely loquacious ; the  women,  cfpccially, 

talk 


Jg2  ON  DELIRIUM* 

talk  inceffantly.  They  are  fond  of  all  ftrong 
liquors,  take  fnuff  with  avidity,  and  are  very 
libidinous.  The  mod  model!  young  females 
who  it  might  be  fuppofed  had  never  heard  an 
improper  or  indecent  expreflion  in  their  life, 
when  unfortunately  feized  with  this  complaint 
feem  fuddenly  to  be  infpired  with  the  fenti- 
ments  and  dialed  of  a loofe  libertine. 

Good  humour  characterizes  this  infanity, 
and  hence  the  patients  are  in  general  very 
tradable. 

The  ideas  which  prevail  moft  in  their 
minds  are  various  and  whimfical.  They  be- 
long to  the  pleafurable  paffions,  and  are  mod 
commonly  infpired  by  vanity.  The  men  are 
kings,  emperors,  popes,  lords,  and  bifhops, 
or  elfe  men  eminent  for  fome  great  talent. 
Sometimes  they  are  faithfully  attached  to  the 
characters  which  they  at  lird  afTLime,  and  uni- 
formly maintain  it  for  a confiderable  length  of 
time;  but  this  is  by  no  means  generally  the 
cafe.  In  the  8th  Vol.  of  the  Pfychological 
Magazine,  the  mental  character  of  a young 

harmlefs 


ON  DELIRIUM  * I 83 

harmlefs  lunatic  of  this  clafs  who  became  mad 
from  difappointment  in  love  is  minutely  de- 
fcribed.  f<  He  at  one  time  imagined  himfelf 
“ a great  general,  and  then  he  always  appeared 
“ armed,  and  decorated  the  outfide  of  his 
ff  habitation  with  a large  flag,  to  fhow  it  was 
{f  the  head  quarters  of  the  army.  At  another 
“ time  he  was  a monk,  and  then  he  ufed  to 
r‘  go  about  barefooted,  and  covered  only 
f{  with  a white  cloak.  As  he  is  very  con- 
“ verfant  in  church  hiftory,  his  imagination 
<c  often  made  him  believe  that  he  was  John 
Cf  the  Baptift,  or  the  apoftle  Peter,  &c.” 

Women  are  almofl  uniformly  ladies  of  dif- 

1 » 

tindion  and  falhion,  and  feldom  forget  to 
decorate  themfelves  with  every  thing  which 
they  conflder  to  be  an  ornament,  and  to  exad 
or  folicit  attention. 

This  very  peculiar  kind  of  delirium  is  often 
of  long  duration.  Now  and  then  it  is  fuc- 
ceeded  by  lucid  intervals;  now  and  then, 
though  rarely,  by  phrenzy. 

The 

/ 


184 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


The  difeafed  adtion  of  the  vefTels  of  the 
brain  which  occafions  that  kind  of  delirium 
which  is  called  lunacy,  or  infanity,  may  arife 
from  various  caufes. 

Before  we  enumerate  the  exciting  caufes, 
it  is  neceffary  to  fay  fomething  concerning 
the  predifpofition  to  this  melancholy  difor- 
der. 

1 

Every  medical  man  poffeffed  of  a moderate 
fhare  of  experience,  muft  have  obferved  that 
the  children  of  thofe  who  have  been  infane 
are  more  liable  to  attacks  of  delirium,  and 
alienation  of  mind,  than  the  defendants  of 
other  people ; infomuch  that  where  a nume- 
rous tamily  has  fprung  from  parents  who  are 
tainted,  it  rarely  happens  that  infanity  is  not 
produced  in  fome  of  that  family  during  part 
of  their  lives,  by  any  flight  exciting  caufes. 
If  they  marry  and  beget  children  the  fame 
thing  is  alfo' obferved  among  them.  This  fadl 
makes  us  conclude  that  many  have  an  heredi- 
tary right,  or  in  other  words  are  born  with  a 
predifpofition  to  the  complaint. 


When 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


185 

When  a phyfician  fays  that  a perfon  has  an 
hereditary  right  to  a complaint,  he  does  not  , 
mean  that  that  perfon  (hall  infallibly  be  feized 
with  it  in  the  courfe  of  his  life.  He  may 
efcape  having  it  if  he  is  fo  fortunate  as  to 
efcape  being  expofed  to  all  the  caufes  which 
arc  neceffary  to  excite  the  morbid  adtion  of 
the  veffels  of  the  brain  in  which  it  confifts. 
All  that  is  to  be  underftood  by  the  term  is, 
that  fuch  a perfon  is  much  more  liable  to  have 
the  difeafe  than  a perfon  who  is  not  born  of 
tainted  parents.  Caufes  which  will  not  produce 
any  mental  diforder  whatever  in  the  one,  are 
quite  fufficient  to  bring  it  on  in  the  other. 

That  children  often  inherit  the  calf  of 
features,  the  form  of  perfon,  the  tone  of 
voice,  the  temperament,  and  mental  charac- 
ter of  their  parents,  are  eftablifhed  truths. 
Since  this  is  the  cafe,  therefore,  it  does  not 
furely  require  any  uncommon  ftretch  of  ge- 
nius to  fuppofe,  that  the  internal  vifcera  of  a 
child,  fuch  as  the  ftomach  and  inteftines,  kid- 
neys, bladder,  liver,  brain,  and  alfo  the 
more  minute  parts  of  its  frame,  fliould 
alfo  partake  of  the  fame  inheritance;  and 

that 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


1 86 

that  a child,  therefore,  fhould  often  referable 
its  father  or  mother,  or  have  a joint  refem- 
blance  to  both,  as  much  in  the  fecret  or- 
ganization of  its  frame  as  in  its  external 
character.  Such  a conformation  entitles 
a child  to  a fimilarity  of  difeafes  or  unheal- 
thy actions  as  thofe  to  which  its  parents  were 
fubjedt,  provided  it  be  expofed  to  the  com- 
mon exciting  caufes  of  fuch  complaints:  and 
hence  we  find  that  the  children  of  gouty, 
rickety,  fcrophulous,  confumptive,  and  in- 
fane people,  are  more  difpofed  to  be  affected 
with  gout,  rickets,  fcrophula,  confump- 
tion,  and  infanity,  than  the  children  of 
healthy  parents.  That  people  were  dif- 
pofed to  certain  difeafes  from  birth  as  wTell  as 
from  the  operation  of  accidental  caufes,  was  an 
obfervation,  or  a mere  matter  of  fadl  which  was 
taken  notice  of  by  the  Greek  phyficians,  who 
denominated  this  caufe  of  difeafe  ; 

but  a certain  inaccuracy  of  expreffion,  in  re- 
gard to  predifpofition,  has  introduced  itfelf 
into  th(  writings  of  many  medical  men 

fince  thefe  early  .times,  and  has  induced 

them  to  call  certain  difeafes  hereditary  difeafes . 
This  inaccuracy  has  probably  been  caufed  by 

3 thc 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


187 


the  conftancy  with  which  the  influence  of  here- 
ditary difpofition  operates ; but  it  gave  occafion 
to  the  late  Mr.  John  Hunter  to  ridicule  the 
exprefhon,  and  to  alfume  the  old  obfervation 
of  the  Greeks,  as  one  of  his  own  difeoveries ; 
and  many  of  his  pupils,  who  have  very  few  ot 
his  eminent  qualities,  but  who  imitate  him  in 
felf-efteeem,  have  endeavoured  to  confirm  this 
victory  over  modern  phyficians,  by  aferibing 
the  merit  of  the  obfervation  to  him,  and  by 
their  praifes  in  its  favour. 

People  who  have  no  hereditary  taint  may 
at  once  become  infane  if  the  exciting  caufes 
are  powerful ; but  it  is  alfo  to  be  remarked, 
that  a predifpofition  may  be  formed  in  fuch 
as  have  no  hereditary  taint,  by  the  continued 
operation  of  a number  of  caufes.  It  is  a cer- 
tain fadt,  for  inftance,  that  men  who  have 
fuftained  certain  injuries  on  the  head,  and 
people  who  drink  hard,  are  very  apt  to 
become  delirious.  It  is  alfo  greatly  to  be 
fufpedted  that  after  a perfon  has  once  been 
attacked  with  a real  phrenzy,  that  the 
texture  of  the  brain,  and  the  natural  ar- 
rangement of  its  velfels,  are  thereby  altered 

from 


i88 


ON  DELIRIUM, 


from  their  healthy  ftate,  and  that  the  morbid 
organic  effects  which  follow,  greatly  predif- 
pofe  a perfon  to  the  renewal  of  the  complaint. 

The  unufual  hardnefs,  fpecific  gravity, 
drynefs,  and  toughnefs  of  the  brain,  and 
the  various  tumors,  corrofions,  enlargements 
of  particular  parts,  oflifications,  and  adhe- 
fions  of  the  membranes,  &:c.  are  often  the 
confequence  of  the  morbid  adtion  of  infanity  ; 
but  while  they  are  thus  to  be  confidered  as 
mere  effedts,  they  are  alfo  to  be  looked  on  as 
caufes  which,  by  conffant  irritation,  predif- 
pofe  the  veffels  of  the  brain  to  the  renewal  of 
the  delirium.  Another  clafs  of  caufes  which 
greatly  predifpofe  a perfon  to  diforders  of  the 
mind,  are  various  kinds  of  debility,  fuch, 
for  inffance,  as  arife  from  poor  diet,  bad  drink, 
fcrophula,  over-fatigue  of  body,  excefs  of 
venery,  felf-pollution,  exceflive  haemorrhages, 
and  exceflive  difeharges. 

The  exciting  caufes  of  the  various  deliria 
which  are  confidered  as  cafes  of  infanity,  arc 
very  numerous. 

They  are  either. 


I.  Pow- 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


(i89 


I.  Powerful  Stimuli . 

A.  Excefiive  heat,  efpecially  the  too  long 
continued  adtion  of  the  rays  of  the  fun  on  the 
head. 

B.  Immoderate  exercife,  efpecially  in  hot 
weather. 

C.  Sudden  tranfitions  from  cold  to  heat, 
by  which  the  irritability  of  the  veflels  of  the 
brain,  like  thofe  of  the  whole  body,  is  firft 
accumulated,  and  then  violently  excited. 

D.  Sudden  tranfitions  from  heat  to  cold, 
by  which  a preternatural  quantity  of  blood  is 
thrown  into  the  head,  and  acting  as  a violent 
mechanical  fiimulus. 

\ 

E.  Over-exercife  of  the  mental  faculties. 

F.  The  pafiions,  when  violent. 

G.  Powerful  ftimuli  applied  to  the  fio- 
mach',  fuch  as 

i.  Wine, 


1 


190 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


1.  Wine,  fpirits,  and  all  ftrong  liquors  : 

2.  Opium,  and  other  powerful  narcotics,  as 
they  are  commonly  called. 

3.  Cantharides,  and  other  aphrodiliacs. 

H.  The  tranflation  of  various  inflamma- 
tions, and  other  difeafed  adtions  to  the  brain, 
particularly  thofe  which  conftitute  and  accom- 
pany cutaneous  diforders. 

II.  Difeafed  nervous  impreffions , conveyed  from 
diflant  parts  of  the fyftem  to  the  brain . 

Thefe  difeafed  nervous  impreflions  may 
either  be  difeafed  adtions  of  the  parts  them- 
felves,  or  they  may  arife  from  irritating  bodies 
applied  to  them. 

It  is  impoflible  to  reduce  thefe  under  the 
form  of  a table,  for  in  fadl  they  may  occur  in 
any  part  of  our  frame.  A delirium  fimilar  to 
lunacy  has  been  known  to  arife  from  a fprain, 
from  a fradtured  bone,  from  a bullet  having 
been  lodged  among  the  external  mufcles  of 
the  body,  as  well  as  from  worms  in  the  intef- 

tines  ; 


OS  DELIRIUM.  191 

tines ; from  ulcers  in  the  uterus,  and  from 
various  difeafes  of  the  vifcera  of  the  abdomen. 

The  firft  clafs  of  caufes  may  be  confidered 
as  being  more  particularly  the  exciting  caufes 
of  pure  infanity. 

The  fecond  clafs  of  caufes,  efpecially  thofe 
ariling  from  difeafes  in  the  ftomach  and  in- 
teftines,  give  life  to  the  temporary  delufions 
which  are  peculiar  to  hypochondriacs.  The 
hiftory  of  this  complaint,  therefore,  properly 
belongs  to  this  place. 


192 


ON  DELIRTUM. 


CHAPTER  VI. 
INQUIRY  CONTINUED. 

OF  DELIRl A FROM  MORBID  NERVOUS  IM- 
PRESSIONS. THE  HISTORY  OF 
HYPOCHONDRIACS. 

The  progrefs  of  hypochondriafis  is  flow, 
and  infidious.  Long  before  any  alienation  of 
reafon  takes  place,  a number  of  fymptoms, 
evincing  a deranged  flate  of  bodily  health  oc- 
cur ; and  if  thefe  are  alleviated,  or  removed  in 
time,  no  delufton  follows  : from  which  it  ap- 
pears that  the  difeafe  is  not  primarily  feated 
in  the  brain.  The  vifeera  of  the  abdomen 
appear  to  be  the  moft  common  fource  of  this 
melancholy  diforder,  as  appears  from  its  hif- 
tory.  It  is  by  no  means  eafy  to  difeover 
which  of  them  is  chiefly  in  fault,  in  any  par- 
ticular cafe ; far  lefs  can  we  difeover  what  the 
peculiar  nature  of  that  faulty  flate  is.  Moft 

of 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


193 


of  the  fymptoms  indicate  a difordered  hate  of 
ftomach  and  inteftines  ; but  the  functions  of 
thefe  organs  are  affecfted  by  fuch  a multipli- 
city of  morbid  caufes,  and  in  fuch  a variety 
of  ways,  that  this  only  increafes  the  obfcu- 
rity  that  furrounds  us  in  our  inquiry.  The 
perfon  is  for  many  years  troubled  with  flatu- 
lency, irregularity  in  the  alvine  difcharge, 
and  faulty  digeftion.  Some  have  acidity 
in  the  ftomach,  others  have  a feeling  there 
which  makes  them  imagine  the  food  to  be 
converted  into  an  oilv  or  rancid  kind  of 
fluid.  Such  patients  generally  inform  their 
medical  attendant,  that  the  contents  of  their 
ftomach  give  them  the  idea  of  a pot  of  fat, 
boiling,  or  fermenting.  The  air  which  is 
evolved  in  the  ftomach  produces  great 
diftention  of  that  organ,  and  this  diften- 
tion  is  always  accompanied  by  an  uneafy 
feeling,  and  fenfe  of  anxiety.  The  patients 
are,  for  the  moft  part,  of  a coftive  habit ; 
now  and  then  they  are  feized  with  a fudden 
diarrhoea.  It  is,  however,  feldom  critical, 
or  ferviceable.  It  exhaufts  the  ftrength  of  the 
patient,  leaves  him  low  and  deje&ed,  and  is 
Vol.  I.  O frequently 


194 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


frequently  accompanied  and  followed  by  ir- 
regular fpafmodic  contractions  of  the  mufcles 
of  the  abdomen,  which  Mandeville  makes 
his  patient,  Misomedom,  defcribe  as  “ ten- 
<f  ftons,  fnatchings,  thumpings,  and  pulfations 
<(  in  the  belly.’* 

Hypochondriacs  are  fometimes  affeCted 
with  a bilious  diarrhoea.  They  are  very  fub- 
jeCt  to  the  haemorrhoids,  from  which  they 
often  lofe  great  quantities  of  blood.  The 
flatulency  with  which  they  are  now  and  then 
greatly  tormented,  is  at  times  difengaged 
from  the  ill-digefted  food ; at  other  moments 
it  feems  to  be  fecreted  from  the  inner  fur- 
face  of  the  ftomach  itfelf.  That  which 
affeCts  the  inteftines  produces  borborygmi, 
colic  pains,  and,  frequently,  occafions  a 
number  of  curious  fympathetic  afleClions, 
fuch  as  flight  convulfions,  and  fubfultus 
tendinum,  efpecially  of  the  abdominal  muf- 
cles. Thefe  circumftances  are  often  the 
fources  from  which  the  difeafed  perceptions  of 
the  patient  arife.  The  noife  which  the  air 

makes 

i* 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


*95 


makes  in  the  inteftines,  and  the  fubfultus 
tendinum  of  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen,  give 
birth  to  the  idea  that  fome  living  animal  is 
within  them,  or  that  they  are  poflefled  of  evil 
fpirits.  Platerus,  Vol.  I.  . i.  p.  43,  relates 
the  cafe  of  a young  phyfician,  who  firmly 
believed  he  had  living  frogs  within  him. 
I myfelf  knew  a female  hypochondriac  who 
believed  file  had  a whole  regiment  of  foldiers 
within  her;  and  Thomas  Bartholini,  in  his 
Eiji . Anat.  Rar.  mentions  the  cafe  of  a 
ftudent  of  divinity,  who  miftook  the  noife 
of  flatulency  with  which  he  was  troubled,  for 
an  evil  fpirit  who  infefted  him. 

Hypochondriacs  often  void  a wheyifh,  or 
milky-white  coloured  urine,  which  always 
announces  a great  weaknefs  and  diforder  in  the 
chylopoetic  vifcera.  At  other  times  they 
make  great  quantities  of  a pale-coloured,  and 
limpid  urine.  This  generally  occurs  upon  any 
agitation  of  mind,  or  hurry  of  fpirits.  Cold 
fweats,  which  alternate  with  flufhes  of  heat, 
efpecially  in  the  face  and  hands ; the  globus 

O 2 hyftericus. 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


1 96 

hyftericus,  and  fainting;  dizzinefs,  deafnefs, 
tinnitus  aurium,  and  fleeplefs  nights,  are 
frequently  met  with  in  the  advanced  ftages  of 
the  diforder.  The  patient  generally  feels  a 
much  more  oppreflive  fenfation  of  weaknefs 
and  fatigue  than  is  natural,  confidering  the 
mufcular  ftrength  he  is  capable  of  exerting. 
Certain  fymptoms  of  debility,  which  in  ano- 
ther perfon  would  hardly  produce  any  dif- 
agreeable  effed:,  for  inftance,  fudden  diftention 
of  the  ftomach,  flight  palpitation,  or  colic, 
inftantly  occafion  all  the  alarming  feelings  of 
fear  and  apprehenfion,  and  thefe  are  accompa- 
nied wdth  a degree  of  anxiety  which  cannot  be 
defcribed. 

1 *-  ■*  . 

That  fome  people  are  more  difpofed  to  hy- 
pochondriafis  than  others,  is  a fad:  which  is 
proved  by  daily  experience.  It  appears  that 
the  principal  feat  of  the  predifpofition  is  to 
be  fought  for,  not  only  in  weak  organs  of  di- 
geftion,  but  alfo  in  a preternatural  nervous 
fenfibility;  for  we  often  meet  with  cafes  of 
dyfpepfia,  and  difordered  ftomach  and  bow- 
els, which  have  continued  with  a patient  for 

many 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


197 


many  years,  and  yet  no  real  hypochondriacs 
follows.  I know  feveral  people  who  have 
labourecf" upwards  of  twenty  years  under  fto- 
machic  complaints  of  various  kinds,  and 
who  notwithftanding  have  never  had  any 
hypochondriacal  fymptoms. 

% • 

Thefe  facts  give  rife  to  the  conjecture  that 
there  muft  be  other  difeafed  actions  going 
forward  in  hypochondriacs,  than  thofe  which 
occur  in  the  vifcera  of  the  abdomen  ; and  this 
conjecture  is  confirmed  by  a great  number  of 
phenomena  which  are  conftantly  to  be  ob- 
ferved  in  fuch  people.  They  have  many  pain- 
ful feelings  in  parts  where  no  difeafe  apparently 
exits,  and  they  have  many  difeafed  perceptions 
which  command  their  belief,  and  greatly  add 
to  the  general  fum  of  their  mifery. 

A number  of  the  moft  diftreffing  feelings 
which  hypochondriacs  complain  of,  are  often 
external  pains,  feated  immediately  under  the 
Ikin,  and  in  parts  which,  when  examined, 
appear  to  be  in  a found  fiate.  Sometimes 
the  pain  is  in  the  middle  of  one  or  two  of 

the 


\ 


198  ON  DELIRIUM. 

the  ribs,  fometimes  in  the  middle  of  the  leg, 
thigh,  or  arm,  fometimes  in  the  back,  and 
alfo  in  various  parts  of  the  head. 

Thefe  painful  feelings  are  generally  tranf- 
mitted  from  impreflions  in  the  ftomach  and 
inteftines.  But  their  being  tranfmitted  in 
fuch  an  unnatural  way,  proves  a very  diforder- 
ed  Bate  of  the  nerves.  They  are  mod:  fre- 
quent when  the  patient  is  troubled  with  indi— 
geftion,  flatulency,  coftivenefs,  or  colic  ; and 
what  is  very  remarkable,  the  external  pain  is 
often  increafed  by  preflure.  I have,  at  pre- 
fent,  a gentleman  under  my  care,  who  is  alfo 
attended  by  my  friend,  Mr.  Lynn,  who  fufFers 
exceedingly  from  thefe  falfe  pains.  If  the 
finger  is  preffed  upon  the  part  it  generally 
brings  on  fpafms  in  the  organs  of  refpiration, 
and  occafions  fo  much  agony,  as  to  make  him 
fcream  aloud  ; after  the  preflure  is  taken  away 
the  pain  ceafes.  Thefe  pains  are  confiantly 
fhifting  their  place,  and  often  wander  over 
half  of  the  patient’s  body  in  the  courfe  of  the 
day. 


The 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


1 99 


The  mental  character  of  hypochondriafis 
confifts  principally  in  great  dejection  of  fpi- 
rits,  inability  of  attending  to  worldly  affairs, 
a conftant  anxiety  about  their  own  health, 
and  an  unremitting  attention  to  every  new 
fenfation.  After  a certain  time,  which  is 
longer  or  fhorter,  according  to  a great  variety 
of  circumftances,  difeafed  perceptions  fud- 
denly  arife.  Thefe  either  relate  to  the  ffate 
of  the  patient’s  body,  or  mind,  or  elfe  to  their 
property,  or,  laftly,  to  certain  people,  or 
various  external  objedts. 

To  attempt  an  enumeration  of  all  the  ex- 
travagant ideas  which  enter  into  the  minds  of 
fuch  people  would  be  fruitlefs,  fince  they  are 
as  various  as  every  unnatural  combination  of 
natural  ideas  can  be.  Some  who  belong  to 
the  firft  clafs  think  their  extremities  and  pof- 

• 

teriors  are  made  of  glafs,  others  that  their 
legs  are  foft  as  wax  ; fome  think  they  have  no 
heart,  others  that  they  have  no  foul,  others 
fancy  they  are  dead,  and  others  that  they  are 
changed  to  monfters ; the  pains  of  poverty, 
the  perfecution  of  enemies,  the  effects  of 

fecret 


200 


ON 


DELIRIU 


M. 


fecret  vengeance,  and  of  calumny,  are  all 
common  ideas  with  hypochondriacs,  efpeci- 
ally  if  there  be  a little  mixture  of  true  melan- 
choly with  it,  which  is  often  the  cafe. 

It  appears  to  me  that  very  little  good,  in 
regard  to  practice,  is  likely  to  refult  from  con- 
fining our  obfervations  to  the  nature  of  the 
erroneous  ideas  which  infeft  the  minds  of  fuch 
people,  except,  inafmuch  as  fome  of  them, 
now  and  then,  throw  a little  light  on  the  firft 
caufe  of  the  difeafe. 


In  order  to  make  this  affection  intelligable, 
it  is  necefTary  to  obferve,  that,  although  hypo- 
chondriafis  may  be  juftly  faid  to  arife  from  a 
difordered  hate  of  the  vifcera  of  the  ab- 
domen, yet  it  is  alfo  often  brought  on  by 
affections  of  the  mind,  fuch  as  deep  and  long 
continued  grief,  and  melancholy.  Thefe 
mental  affections  produce  hypochondriacs  by 
creating  a diforder  in  the  flomach  and  intef- 
tines,  and  in  the  nervous  fyftem  ; fo  that  in 
every  inftance  it  arifes  either  directly  or  indi- 
rectly from  this  fource.  According  as  it 

happens 


/ 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


201 


happens  in  one  or  other  of  thefe  ways,  the 
difeafe  aflutnes  a flight  variation  of  mental 
character  ; but  as  this  is  merely  accidental,  it 
makes  no  effential  difference  in  regard  to  the 
real  nature  of  the  complaint. 

When  hypochondriacs  arifes  primarily  from 
difeafed  vifcera,  the  erroneous  ideas  which 
prefent  themfelves  to  the  mind  generally  con- 
cern their  own  frame;  but  when  it  has  pri- 
marily arifen  from  melancholia,  then  the  mor- 
bid ideas  are  for  the  molt  part  unnatural,  or 
at  leaft  unreafonable  fancies  either  concerning 
other  people,  or  their  own  worldly  affairs  ; for 
the  palfions  which  give  birth  to  and  accompany 
melancholy,  are  commonly  the  molt  prevalent 
in  their  mind.  When  melancholy  is  defcribed, 
which  cannot  be  until  mental  pain  and  grief 
fhall  firft  have  been  treated  of,  this  obfervation 
will  then  appear  in  a more  Criking  point  of 
view. 

Nothing  can  be  more  interelfing  to  a phy- 
lician  who  is  endowed  with  only  a moderate 
fhare  of  the  fpirit  of  obfervation,  than  the  pro- 

grefs 


202 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


grefs  of  this  complaint  in  a number  of  pa- 
tients, efpecially  in  regard  to  its  effects  on 
the  mind.  They  always  ftruggle,  more  or 
lefs,  in  the  beginning,  with  the  lownefs  and 
dejection  which  affedt  them  ; and  it  is  not 
until  many  a fevere  conteft  has  taken  place 
between  their  natural  good  fenfe,  and  the  in- 
voluntary fuggeftions  which  arife  from  theob- 
fcure  and  painful  feelings  of  their  difeafed 
nerves,  that  a firm  belief  in  the  reality  of  fuch 
thoughts  gains  a full  conqueft  over  their  judg- 
ment. A firm  belief  in  any  perception  never 
takes  place  until  it  has  acquired  a certain  de- 
gree of  force  ; and  as  all  impreflions  which  arife 
from  the  vifcera  of  the  abdomen  are  naturally 
obfcure,  we  fee  the  reafon  why  thefe  muft 
continue  for  a great  length  of  time,  or  be  often 
repeated  before  they  can  withdraw  a perfon’s 
attention  from  the  ordinary  impreflions  of  ex- 
ternal objects,  which  are  clear  and  diftincft,  and 
% 

before  they  acquire  fuch  a degree  of  vividnefs 
as  to  deftroy  the  operations  of  reafon. 

We  meet  every  day  with  hypochondriacs, 
in  whom  the  difeafe  is  juft  beginning  to  be 

formed^ 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


20  3 


formed,  and  who  being  pofiefTed  with  the 
remains  of  a good  underftanding,  feem  un- 
willing to  tell,  even  to  their  medical  friends, 
the  lingular  and  often  melancholy  thoughts 
with  which  they  are  tormented.  They  ac- 
knowledge them  to  be  unreafonable,  and  yet 
infill  on  it  they  cannot  help  believing  in 
them.  A very  curious  difplay  of  this  kind  of 
llruggle,  between  the  habitudes  of  reafon,  and 
the  approach  of  delirium,  is  to  be  met  with 
in  the  diary  of  an  hypochondriac  ; various  ex- 
tracts from  which  were  fent  to  the  editors  of 
the  Pfychological  Magazine,  and  are  pub- 
lilhed  in  the  8th  Vol.  part  2d,  p.  2,  of  their 
work.  Some  of  thefe  are  fo  remarkable,  that 
it  is  hoped  they  will  not  prove  uninterelling 
to  the  reader. 

*f  On  the  14th  of  November,  the  idea  that 
" fome  perfon  intended  to  kill  me,  fprang  up 
“ fuddenly  and  involuntarily  in  my  mind,  and 
<f  yet,  I mud  confefs,  there  was  no  reafon 
<f  why  I Ihould  have  harboured  this  thought, 
“ for  I am  convinced  no  one  ever  formed  fuch 
«f  a cruel  delign  againlt  me.  People  who  had 

" a Hick 


204 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


<f  a flick  in  their  hands,  I looked  on  as  mur- 
“ derers.  As  J vas  walking  out  of  the  town, 
“ a countryman  happened  to  follow  me,  and  I 
c<  was  inflantly  filled  with  the  greatefl  appre- 
“ henfion,  and  flood  ftill  to  let  him  pafs.  I 
tc  afked  the  fellow  in  a threatening  voice, 
“ and  with  a view  of  intimidating  him  from 
“ his  purpofe,  what  was  the  name  of  the 
ff  town  before  us.  The  man  anfwered  my 
“ queftion,  and  walked  on,  and  I found  great 
f(  relief,  becaufe  he  was  no  longer  behind  me. 

€r  In  the  evening  I obferved  fome  water  in 
<f  the  glafs  out  of  which  I commonly  drink, 
<f  and  I inflantly  believed  it  was  poifoned.  I 
tf  therefore  wafhed  it  carefully  out,  and  yet 
<f  I knew  at  the  fame  time,  that  I myfelf  had 
“ left  the  water  in  it. 

“ 1 8th  Nov.  The  effects  of  the  nuptial 
“ embrace  on  my  mind,  gradually  grow 
more  fingular,  infupportable,  and  dan- 
“ gerous.  It  is  not  that  I find  myfelf  weak- 
ened  by  it,  on  the  contrary,  I always  feel 
u myfelf,  at  firfl,  lighter,  more  cheerful,  and 

" better 


ON  DELIRIUM.  20£ 

M better  difpofed  for  fcientific  inquiry.  I 
<c  alfo  obferve,  that  at  fuch  times  I have  much 
f<  happier  and  wittier  thoughts  than  at  any 
“ other ; but,  alas  ! this  ftate  of  mind  and 
<c  body  does  not  continue  long.  For  fuch 
<f  moments  of  connubial  tendernefs  I after- 
ff  wards  pay  dearly,  by  long-lived  days  of 
cc  mental  inquietude.  I am  then  dreadfully 
“ out  of  humour,  and  believe  that  all  man- 
ft  kind  have  confpired  to  murder  me.  I 
f(  think  I am  deprived  of  my  office,  that  I 
“ am  doomed  to  die  for  hunger,  and  to  add 
<(  to  all  this,  I am  tormented  with  horrid 
**  doubts  concerning  futurity,  and  thefe 
fC  thoughts  perfecute  me  like  furies.  Thofe 
t(  whom  I was  wont  to  love  moft,  I now 
,f  hate  : I avoid  my  belt  friends,  and  my  dear 
u wife  appears  to  me  a much  worfe  kind  of 
,c  wToman  than  fhe  really  is. 

<(  I cannot  deferibe  the  exertion  it  re- 
“ quires  to  conquer,  in  fociety,  the  averlion 
<c  I feel  to  my  fellow  creatures  ; and  to  pre- 
cc  vent  my  ill  humour  from  breaking  out 
ft  againft  the  moft  innocent  people.  When 

" it 


206  on  delirium. 

I 

" it  really  does  fo,  I fpare  no  one  ; I am  forry 
Cf  for  it  afterwards,  but  then  I am  too  proud 
*f  to  acknowledge  my  error. 

“ I find  myfelf  fo  enraged  on  feeing  a 
,f  ftupid,  vacant  countenance,  that  I have  an 
“ almofi:  irrefiflible  inclination  to  box  the 
Cf  perfon’s  ears  to  whom  it  belongs  ; the  re- 
*'  fraining  from  it  is  a fevere  effort, 

20th  Nov.  A boy  with  a face  like  a 
fC  fatyr  met  me,  and  occafioned  me  the  great- 
**  eft  uneafinefs.  Although  he  did  nothing 
<f  to  difpleafe  me,  I was  forced  to  go  to  him, 
“ and  tell  him  that  I was  fure  he  would  die 
cf  on  the  gallows. 

<c  23d  Nov.  My  fenfibility  is  often  ex- 
<f  treme,  and  then  my  belt  friends  become 
(t  infupportable  to  me.  To  their  expreffions 
<f  of  regard  I am  either  purpofely  cold,  or 
fC  elfe  I anfwer  them  by  rude  and  offenfive 
<c  fpeeches.  I can  feldom  explain  to  myfelf 
“ the  reafon  of  this  too  great  fenfibility.  If 
fC  two  people  whifper  each  other  in  my  pre- 

" fence. 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


207 


rf  fence,  I growuneafy,  and  lofe  all  command 
“ of  mind,  becaufe  I think  they  are  fpeaking 
ff  ill  of  me : and  I often  aflume  a fatirical 
ff  manner  in  company,  in  order  to  frighten 
t(  them.  Anxiety,  dreadful  anxiety,  feizes 
**  me  if  a perfon  overlooks  my  hand  at  cards, 
” or  if  a perfon  fits  down  befide  me  when  I 
<f  am  playing  the  harpfichord,  &c.” 

This  hiftory  proves,  in  a very  convincing 
manner,  the  truth  of  the  obfervation,  that  the 
perfon  often  ftruggles,  as  it  were,  with  thedif- 
eafe  of  his  mind,  until  it  at  laft  gains  fuch  an 
afcendancy  over  him  as  totally  to  overthrow 
his  reafon.  Nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at ; 
for  as  foon  as  the  faculty  of  reftraining  ones 
thoughts,  and  of  attending  to  the  comparifons 
which  the  power  of  reafon  employs,  is  greatly 
weakened,  the  fuggefiions  which  are  excited 
in  the  mind  by  the  difeafed  feelings,  muft 
necelfarily  be  believed  in. 

The  circumftance  which  appears  the  moft 
unaccountable  to  people  who  have  not  thought 
deeply  on  the  fubjed,  is  the  fad,  that  the 

fource 


208 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


fource  of  the  illufion  generally  lies  in  the 
abdomen.  Some  light  may  be  thrown  on 
this  at  prefent,  but  it  is  probable  that  it  can 
only  be  rendered  perfectly  clear  by  an  atten- 
tive perufal  of  the  fucceeding  parts  of  the 
work,  in  which  many  analogous  fails  are  ex- 
plained. 

l 

Mofl  of  the  objeils  which  furround  us  have 
been  examined  by  feveral  of  our  fenfes ; we 
have  compared  the  various  fenfations  they  have 
yielded  and  thefe,  therefore,  become  affociated 
in  our  mind,  fo  that  if  any  external  body 
thus  examined,  be  again  prefented  to  only 
one  of  our  fenfes,  the  idea  of  all  its  various 
qualities  is  recalled,  and  we  neceflarily  believe 
in  their  reality.  The  fources  of  almoft  all 
our  perceptions,  while  w7e  are  in  health,  lie 
in  external  objeils ; for  the  nerves  of  the  ex- 
ternal fenfes  are  the  only  ones  of  our  whole 
frame  which  convey  clear  impreflions  to  the 
intellectual  part.  Hence  we  acquire  a natural 
habit  of  afcribing  all  ftrong  impreflions  to 
fome  external  caufe.  In  cafes,  therefore, 
where  the  caufe  of  the  fenfation  cannot  be 

examined, 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


209 


examined,  a falfe  judgment  may  eafily  arife. 
The  languor  and  pain,  and  various  uneafy  fen- 
fations  which  a hypochondriac  feels,  naturally 
withdraw  his  attention  from  furrounding  ob- 
jects, and  as  the  exercife  of  his  judgment  is 
weakened  by  the  fame  circumftances,  he  does 
not  examine  the  unreafonable  ideas  with  accu- 
racy when  they  are  firit  prefented  to  his  mind. 
Painful  feelings  are  aflociated  with  melancholy 
thoughts  ; and  new  and  uncommon  feelings, 
upon  the  fame  principle,  are  afcribed  to  ftrange 
and  uncommon  caufes.  The  weaknefs,  there- 
fore, which  a hypochondriac  feels  in  his  limbs 
makes  him  imagine  they  are  unable  to  fupport 
him;  but  if  they  cannot  do  fo,  he  concludes 
they  muft  bend  or  break : the  idea  of  fragility, 
or  flexibility,  however,  is  often  derived  from 
fuch  fubftances  as  wax,  and  glafs,  and  he 
therefore,  believes  that  his  limbs  are  made 
of  fome  kind  of  flmilar  materials. 

f<  A painter  of  conflderable  reputation  in 
*«  his  art,  imagined  that  all  his  bones  were 
« become  fo  foft  and  pliant  that  they  mult 

Vol.  I.  P " neceflarily 


210 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


ct  necefTarily  bend  like  wax,  if  he  attempted 
“ to  walk,  or  if  any  hard  body  was  ftruck 
" againft  them.  In  conformity  with  the  fears 
« which  fuch  a notion  infpired,  he  kept  his 
« bed  during  the  whole  winter,  imagining 
« that  if  he  arofe,  his  legs  would  be  com- 
*'  prefled  by  his  own  weight  into  a lump  like 
<f  clay,  or  wax.”  Tulpius,  (Obf.  Med.  Lib.  i. 
cap.  18.) 

“ A baker,  of  Ferrara,  believed  he  was 
“ made  of  butter,  and  on  that  account  would 
«<  not  approach  the  oven  left  he  ftiould 
“ melt.”  Marcus  Donatus . (Hift.  Med. 

Rar.  Lib.  ii.  cap.  i.) 

Deje&ion  of  mind,  and  melancholy,  beget 
fear  and  apprehenfton,  and  the  emotion  of 
thefe  paflions  being  aflociated  with  horrid 
thoughts,  the  fancy  is  crouded  with  pictures 
of  impending  danger,  for  the  feelings  he  ex- 
periences are  exadly  flmilar  to  thofe  he  has 
formerly  felt  from  fear  or  terror.  As  to 
the  caufes  which  induce  him  to  think  that 
the  danger  is  threatened  by  one  perfon,  or 

by 


ON  DELIRIUM* 


2 1 1 


by  fome  perfons  rather  than  by  others;  or 
which  make  him  imagine  that  it  arifes 
from  a fuppofed  ruined  ftate  of  his  fortune, 
rather  than  from  any  other  fource,  they 
are  often  of  fuch  a trifling  nature  as  to  efcape 
common  obfervation  ; a look,  an  unguarded 
cxpreflion,  over-ftrained,  or  officious  atten- 
tion to  his  wants,  inattention  and  difregard 
of  his  wants,  a change  in  the  mode  in  which 
his  bufinefs  is  condudled,  &c.  are  all  fuffici- 
ent  to  give  birth  to  fuch  conceits,  while  he  is 
affedted  with  languor,  weaknefs,  and  difeafed 
feelings* 

The  lingular  notions  which  hypochondri- 
acs entertain,  may  now  and  then  be  eradi- 
cated from  their  mind  by  means  of  a little 
art ; but  there  is  feldom  any  real  good  to  be 
derived  from  this,  except  the  difeafe  be  at  the 
fame  time  cured;  for  if  difeafed  impreffions 
continue  to  arife  in  the  mind  from  the  difor- 
dered  vifcera,  other  illulive  notions  will  fpring 
up  as  foon  as  one  fet  is  deltroyed. 

, , j;r,  \ 

« The  wife  of  one  Salomon  Galmus 

• * . . 

« imagined  there  was  a living  monfter  within 

P 2 “ her. 


212 


ON  DELIRIUM. 


■ 


“ her,  which  inhabited  certain  parts  which 
<c  are  peculiar  to  her  fex.  Of  this  conceit 
<f  ihe  was  cured  by  the  cunning  and  dexterity 
,c  of  her  phyfician.  But  file  foon  afterwards 
tc  conceived  another  notion  which  was  not 
“ to  be  removed  with  fuch  facility.  She 

<€  thought  fhe  had  been  dead,  but  that  God 

% 

had  fent  her  back  to  the  world  with- 
t(  out  a heart,  for  he  had  kept  it  in  heaven. 
“ On  this  account  fhe  was  extremely  unhap. 
(t  py,  and  more  miferable  than  any  of  God’s 
“ creatures.”  Tulpius.  (Obf.  Med.  Lib.  1. 
£ap.  19.) 

In  other  cafes  the  difeafed  notions  are 
fo  deeply  rooted,  that  the  greateft  addrefs  is 
neceffary  to  difengage  them  from  it  j for  if 
it  be  done  in  fuch  a manner  as  brings  no 
convidtion  to  the  patient,  that  he  is  really 
cured  of  his  imaginary  malady,  the  effedfc 

is  generally  of  the  word:  kind.  A perfon, 

«• . 

ct  of  the  name  of  Vicentinus,  believed  he 
“ was  of  fuch  an  enormous  fize  that  he 
“ could  not  go  through  the  door  of  his 
Cf  apartment.  His  phyfician  gave  orders 

" that 


O.N r DELIRIUM. 


‘ 213 

,€  that  he  fhould  be  forcibly  led  through  it, 
<c  which  was  done  accordingly,  but  not  vvith- 
*r  out  a fatal  effedt,  for  Vicentinus  cried  out 
" as  he  was  forced  along,  that  the  flefh  was 
“ torn  from  his  bones,  and  that  his  limbs 
“ were  broken  off',  of  which  terrible  imprcf- 
“ fion  he  died  in  a few  days,  accufing  thofe 
<f  who  conducted  him  of  being  his  murder- 
4<  ers.”  Marcus  Dona/us.  (Hill.  Med.  Rar. 
Lib.  ii.  cap.  i.) 


j 


BOOK 


/ 


1 1 1 * 


. 

. ....  f • *'  . 


■ > ti  * , > \j 


. ‘ 

» I t ’>  «(>  i<  , W 


l . I ..  t . . 

, i..  K03  - 


i . * • • 


; 


■ 1 


BOOK  II. 


THE 

NATURAL  HISTORY 

OF  THE 

MENTAL  FACULTIES, 

And  a Defcription  of  the 

DISEASES 

To  which  they  are  fubjeSi ; 

OR, 

A CONCISE  SYSTEM 

OF  THE 

PHYSIOLOGY  and  PATHOLOGY 

OF  THE 

HUMAN  MIND. 


Nos  qui  fequimur  probabilia,  nec  ultra  quam  id  quod 
verofimile  occurrerit  progredi  poiTumus  ; et  refellere 
fine  pertinacia  et  refelli  fine  iracundia  parati  fumus. 

Non  enim  fumus  ii,  quibus  nihil  verum  effe  videatur: 
fed  ii  qui  omnibus  veris  falfa  qusedam  adjuntta  effe  di- 
camus,  tanta  fimilitudine,  ut  in  iis  nulla  infit  certa 
judicandi  et  affentiendi  nota,  ex  quo  exift.it  et  illud, 
mult  a ejfe  probabilia. 

Cicero. 


* 


- 


- ' - ' ' • . 


< ' a ; 

. 


CHAPTER  I. 


ON  THE  MIND  IN  GENERAL. 


Tanta  est  ejus  tenuitas,  ut  fugiat  aciem. 

Cigeho  Tufc.  Difp.  Lib.  i. 


The  danger  of  attempting  to  pcifs  the  limits  of 
human  underjlanding ; the  idea  of  an  univer- 
fally  diffufed  foul  embraced  by  feme  modern 
writers  ; the  principle  which  gives  rife  to 
fuch  a notion  explained , and  proved  to  depend 
on  very  loofe  analogies.  General  view  of  the 
phyfical  properties  of  bodies ; proofs  that 
there  is  not  one  elementary  matter . The 

principles  explained  on  which  the  more  com- 
mon phyfical  properties  of  bodies  depend . 
The  phenomena  of  mind  inveftigated ; the 
mind  has  faculties  and  principles  ; dijlinffion 
belvoeen  thefe.  The  nature  of  mind  examined ; 
Dr.  Priestley’s  hypothecs  invalidated . 
Faffs  and  arguments  which  few  that  the 

mind 


ON  THE  MIND. 


21  S 


mind  is  difiinff  from  any  part  of  our  frame 
which  is  evident  to  the  fenfes.  What  con- 
clufions  are  to  he  drawn  from  thefe  faffs . 


X H E attempt  to  define  the  nature  of  the 
mind,  or  foul,  is  as  vain  and  prefumptuous 
an  undertaking  as  it  is  to  try  to  find  out,  by 
thought  alone,  the  nature  of  the  Almighty  : 
or  whether  he  cxifted  before  time,  or  had 
hunfelf  a beginning.  We  have  no  means  of 
throwing  any  light  on  fuch  fubjedts  as  thefe, 
inafmuch  as  we  have  neither  any  direct  fails, 
which  explain  them,  nor  have  we  even  the 
moft  diftant  analogies  to  juftify  and  direit 
fpeculation.  Whether  we  elevate  our  thoughts 
to  heaven,  and  confider  the  various  conftella- 
tions  which  enlighten  the  firmament,  in  the 
hope  of  difeovering  its  wonderful  fabric,  or 
deprefs  them  to  the  globe  which  we  inhabit, 
and  analyze  the  many  objeits  it  prefents  to 
our  fenfes  ; whether  we  take  a grand  and  com- 
prehenfive  view  of  the  whole  frame,  and 
ftrudture  of  the  world,  or  examine  with  a cu- 

• H • _ ' • * 

j-ious  and  inquifitive  eye,  the  minuter  parts  of 

which 


ON  THE  MIND. 


219 


which  it  is  compofed,  we  {hall  find  on  every 
hand  certain  boundaries,  beyond  which  it  is 
impofiible  to  penetrate  either  with  fuccefs  or 
fafety. 

The  limits  of  human  reafon  are  clearly 
marked,  and  may  be  eafily  difcerned  by  every 
inquirer,  with  whatever  ardor  his  refearches 
be  conduced,  provided  his  judgment  be  not 
fafcinatcd  by  the  paflion  of  pride,  or  not  in- 
cumbered  with  the  ftrange  and  irremoveable 
prejudice,  that  the  powers  and  perfc&ion  of 
man  have  no  limits. 

The  conclufions,  indeed,  which  are  drawn 
concerning  the  more  hidden  fecrets  of  nature, 
by  fome  great  luminaries  of  the  prefent  age, 
are  done  with  fo  much  apparent  eafe  and 
quicknefs,  as  to  fnew  that  they  have  not  run 
any  very  great  hazard  from  an  over  exertion 
of  thought.  As  foon  as  a few  analogies  only 
have  been  difcovered  between  fome  of  the  more 
obfcure  phenomena  of  the  natural  world,  a fup- 
pofition  feems  inftantly  to  have  arifen  in  their 
mind,  that  the  caufe  of  thefe  phenomena  mull 

be 


220 


ON  THE  MIND. 


be  fimilar.  The  conjedure  is  not  examined 
with  caution,  but  is  immediately  ereded  into 
a fplendid  hypothecs. 

Many  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  philofo- 
phers,  becaufe  they  could  not  account  for  a 
number  of  wonderful  events,  which  they  ob- 
ferved  in  the  natural  world,  fuppofed  the 
whole  of  them  to  depend  on  the  agency  of  one 
active  principle.  The  motion  of  the  heavenly 
bodies ; the  {hooting  meteors  of  the  fky ; 
the  afcenficn  and  precipitation  of  water;  the 
heat  of  animals,  their  motions,  inftinds,  pro- 
creative  powers,  and  intellectual  faculties ; 
the  growth  of  plants,  their  Rates  of  watching, 
and  fleep,  their  life,  and  death ; and  many 
other  objeds  of  philofophical  wonder,  gave 
rife  to  the  notion,  that  one  divine  energy, 
or  common  mind,  was  diffufed  throughout, 
and  animated  the  whole  world. 

Principio  ccelum  ac  terras,  campofque  liquentes 
Lucentemque  globum  lunas,  titancaque  aftra, 

Spiritus  intus  alit,  totamque  infufa  per  artus 
Mens  agitat  molem,  et  raagno  fe  corpora  mifcct. 

Virg.  y£n.  vi. 

Although 


ON  THE  MIND# 


221 


Although  many  of  the  phenomena  which 
induced  the  ancients  to  believe  in  the  influ- 
ence of  one  generally  diffufed  foul  have  been 
fully  explained  by  modern  fcience,  and  {hewn 
to  arife  from  a number  of  very  different  caufcs, 
yet  the  general  doctrine  has  been  embraced  by 
many  diftinguifhed  writers  of  the  prefent  age, 
efpecially  by  Plattner,  in  his  Anthropology , 
p.  4 6 ; by  Herder,  in  his  Philofophy  of  the 
HiJIory  of  Mankind , B.  I.  p.  170 ; and  by  Dr. 
Darwin,  in  various  parts  of  his  beautiful 
poem,  entitled,  the  Botanic  Garden , and  in 
his  Zoonomia.  Although  the  belief  of  thefe 
authors  has  not  arifen  from  the  difficulty  of 
explaining  the  fame  fadts  which  influenced 
the  minds  of  the  ancients,  yet  the  notion 
feems  to  have  fprung  up  from  the  fame  kind 
of  general  principle.  Obfcurity,  in  regard  to 
the  caufes  of  certain  phenomena,  has  been 
often  looked  on  as  the  proof  of  fimilarity ; 
and  when  any  number  of  appearances,  there- 
fore, are  difeovered,  which  cannot  be  eafily 
referred  to  any  well  known  fource,  the  ima- 
gination is  apt  to  aferibe  the  whole  of  them 

to 


222 


ON  THE  MIND* 


to  the  iufluence  of  one  which  is  occul^  or 

/ 

hidden* 

Dr.  Darwin  has  thought  he  has  difcovered 
a certain  refemblance  between  the  phenomena 
of  irritability,  fenfibility,  and  mind.  He 

t % 

has  increafed  this  belief  by  a fanciful  conjec- 
ture concerning  the  motion  of  nerves ; and 
from  thefe  circumftances,  it  would  appear, 
he  has  been  induced  to  think  that  the  three 
principles  juft  now  mentioned  are  only  modi- 
fications of  one  and  the  fame  energy,  which 
he  calls  fpirit  of  animation. 

In  the  inveftigation  of  fuch  a fubject  as 
that  of  mind,  wve  muft  not  reft  fatisfied  w'ith 
the  loofer  analogies  w’hich  feem  to  captivate 
men  of  lively  fancy,  and  reftrain  them  from 
further  inquiry.  Let  us  examine  the  proper- 
ties of  bodies  writh  as  much  attention  as  wre 
can,  and  fee  how7  far  the  analyfis  leads  us. 

However  various  the  appearances  may  be 
which  are  to  be  obferved  in  different  bodies, 
yet  there  is  one  quality  which  is  common  to 
all  of  them,  I mean  form  or  ftru&ure.  We 


imagine 


imagine  that  the  form  of  bodies  arifes  from 
the  arrangement  of  a vaft  number  of  impercep- 
tible atoms,  or  particles,  which  we  choofe  to 
call  by  the  general  name  of  matter. 

As  thefe  atoms  to  which  wre  give  the  name 
of  matter,  are  never  objeds  of  fight,  or  of 
any  of  our  fenfes,  except  when  they  are  in 
'a  ftate  of  arrangement,  and  forming  bodies, 
fo  we  can  have  no  knowledge  of  their  real 
nature. 

•*> 

Every  individual  fubftance  which  confti- 
tutes  a part  of  the  globe  which  wre  inhabit, 
has  a form  of  ftrudure  peculiar  to  itfelf. 
Thus  the  arrangement  of  particles,  which 
compofe  a granite,  a piece  of  bafaltes,  a fer- 
pentine,  a piece  of  quarz,  a calcareous  fpar, 
a piece  of  gold,  lead*  or  iron,  &c.  is  different 
in  each  body.  Several  bodies  are  evidently 
compofed  of  mixed  materials,  and  wre  obferve 
that  every  variety  of  mixture  gives  them  a 
variety  of  form,  or  appearance,  from  which 
we  conclude  that  there  are  a great  variety  of 
elementary  matters  which  compofe  the  indi- 
’ vidual 


224  ON  THE  MIND. 

vidual  fubftances  of  which  the  earth  is  con- 
ftrudted.  This  conciufion  is  confirmed  by  the 
aid  of  chemiftry,  for  in  analyzing  bodies  wre 
difcover  a number  of  fimple  elementary  prin- 
ciples, each  of  which  has  diftindt  properties. 

Not  only  a difference  in  the  number  and 
kind  of  elementary  parts  of  a fubftance  pro- 
duce an  alteration  of  form  or  ftrudture,  but 
the  flighted:  variety  in  the  proportion  of  the 
ingredients  does  the  fame  thing  even  where 
they  are  fimilar  in  kind.  Thus  the  calcareous 
fpar  (native  cryftallized  carbonate  of  lime) 
when  its  ingredients  are  in  a certain  proportion 
conftantly  affumes  a rhombic  form : it  is  of 
no  confequence  where  it  comes  from,  whether 
from  Peru,  or  the  Hartz,  from  Cumberland, 
or  Chemnitz  ; but  if  the  flighted:  alteration 
takes  place  in  the  number  or  proportion  of 
the  ingredients,  there  immediately  arifes  a de- 
viation in  the  figure  of  the  fubftance  : it  is 
then  cryftallized,  either  in  a rhombic  form, 
the  acute  and  obtufe  angles  of  which  are  dif- 
ferent from  thofe  of  the  primitive  rhomb,  or 
elfe  the  particles  which  are  fuperpofed  on  the 

rhombic 


ON  THE  MIND. 


1 25 

thombic  nucleus  are  depofited  in  fuch  a 
manner  as  to  give  a new  mathematical  form 
to  the  fubftance ; thus,  of  this  fpar  we  have 
no  lefs  than  near  five  hundred  different  va- 
rieties of  the  rhomb*  all  of  them  depending 
either  on  a variety  in  the  number  of  their 
elementary  parts,  or  on  their  proportions. 

1 

The  proof  of  this  aflertion  is  to  be  found  in 
the  celebrated  work  of  Monf.  Rome  de  1’Isle, 
intitled  EJfai  Jur  la  Cryftalograpbie ; and  in  the 
various  Memoirs  of  that  acute  and  deep  in- 
veftigator  of  nature,  the  Abbe  Hauy  ; and  in 
the  fuperb  collection  of  models  of  cryftals, 
made  by  my  friend,  the  fcientific  and  amiable 
Count  de  Bournon,  and  prefented  by  him  to 
the  Hon.  Charles  Greville,  in  whofe  pof- 
feffion  they  now  are. 

Independently  of  mixture,  number,  and 
proportion  of  the  elementary  parts  of  dead 
bodies,  their  external  appearance  and  internal 
ItruCture  are  greatly  owing  to  the  mechani- 
cal attraction  which  the  integrant  molecules 
have  for  each  other. 


. Vol.  I 


Now 


226 


ON  THE  MIND. 


Now  on  thefe  caufes  molt  of  the  phyficai 
properties  of  inanimate  bodies  depend,  fuch 
as  the  form  or  ftrudhire,  hardnefs  or  foftnefs, 
gravity  or  levity,  roughnefs,  fmoothnefs, 
colour,  &c* 

It  may  be  laid  down  as  an  axiom  that  every 
variety  in  the  natural  form  of  an  inanimate  or 
dead  body , arifes  from  fome  change  in  the  number , 
kind , or  proportion  of  the  elementary  parts  of  which 
it  is  compofedy  and  on  the  mechanical  attraction 
which  the  molecules  have  for  each  other  at  the  time 
cf  its  formation  ; or,  in  fewer  words,  thefe  qua- 
lities depend  folely  on  the  influence  of  chemi- 
cal mixture  and  mechanical  attraction. 

Inanimate  bodies  are  of  two  clafles ; they 
are  either  dead  vegetables,  and  animals,  or 
the  individual  fubftances  which  compofe  and 
furround  this  globe. 

The  two  former  differ  from  the  latter  in 
being  organized,  that  is,  they  have  diftindt 
parts,  or  organs,  each  of  which  perform  dif- 
ferent offices,  while  the  bodies  are  alive.  In 

regard 


ON  THE  MIND. 


11 7 


Regard  to  the  mere  ftru<5lure  or  form  of  thefe 
organs,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  if  they 
differ  much  from  each  other,  this  arifes  from 
the  influence  of  fimilar  caufes  to  thofe  on 
which  the  difference  in  the  phyfical  quali- 
ties of  various  minerals  depend,  namely,  on 
the  number,  kind,  and  proportion  of  their 
elementary  parts. 

If  the  texture,  organization,  and  other  phy- 
fical qualities  of  bone,  are  different  from  thofe 
of  ligament,  and  thofe  of  ligament  different 
from  thofe  of  membrane,  and  thofe  of  mem- 
brane different  from  thofe  of  mufcle,  fkin,  or 
cellular  fubftance,  &c.  it  is  becaufe  the  ele- 
mentary parts  of  each  are  different,  either  in 
kind,  or  proportion,  or  both. 

There  have  been  philofophers  who  imagined 
there  was  but  one  kind  of  primitive  or  ele- 
mentary matter ; and  there  have  been  others 
who,  adopting  this  notion,  appear  to  have  re- 
joiced that  they  did  not  {land  higher  in  the 
fcale  of  nature  than  a piece  of  granite.  But 
every  fa£t  which  experience  yields  is  oppofed 

QjJ  tO 


228 


ON  THE  MIND. 


to  fuch  a conjecture.  The  compofition  of  or- 
ganic bodies  is  more  various  than  that  of  in- 
organic ones ; the  materials  are  of  a finer  kind, 
and  are  of  a much  more  difficult  analyfis; 
and  although  chemiftry  is  greatly  improved 
■within  thefe  few  years,  we  are  at  this  mo- 
ment far  from  being  fure  that  we  have  detect- 
ed all  the  groffer  elements  of  which  the  dead 
bodies  of  animals  are  compofed.  We  can 
imitate  nature  to  a great  extent  in  forming 
mineral  fubftances,  but  we  can  by  no  means 
imitate,  by  means  of  chemical  compofition, 
the  appearance,  or  ftruCture,  of  the  fimpleft 
vegetable,  far  lefs  thofe  of  animals. 

Animated  organic  bodies,  fuch  as  living 
animals  and  vegetables,  differ  from  the  dead 
ones  inafmuch  as  they  exhibit  a vaft  variety  of 
phenomena,  which  cannot  be  accounted  for 
on  the  principles  by  which  we  have  attempted 
to  explain  the  qualities  of  inorganic  ones. 
Some  of  thefe  have  been  fully  inveftigated  in 
the  chapters  on  irritability,  and  fenfibility. 
In  the  mineral  kingdom  nothing  limilar  to 
fuch  principles  is  to  be  detected.  They  mark 

the 


ON  THE  MIND.  229 

the'  limits  at  which  all  analogy  between  the 
dead  and  the  living  world  ceafe. 

The  mind  of  animals  remains  to  be  examin- 
ed. In  doing  this,  let  us  recoiled;  how  much 
real  wifdom  there  is  in  confining  our  refearch- 
es  within  the  boundaries  by  which  Nature  has 
furrounded  human  thought.  Let  us  confine 
ourfelves  as  much  as  poflible  to  a plain  detail 
of  fads  and  obfervations.  I have  hitherto  en- 
deavoured, in  this  chapter,  to  carry  the  ana- 
logy which  exifts  between  the  dead  and  the 
living  world,  as  far  as  fads  and  fair  reafoning 
will  permit,  left  it  might  be  faid  that  in  the 
difquifition  which  is  to  follow,  I had  thrown 
them  intirely  afide. 

When  the  head  of  an  animal  is  cut  off, 
every  phenomenon  of  the  mental  faculties 
ceafes ; but  this  is  not  the  cafe  with  thofe 
which  depend  on  the  more  common  princi- 
ples of  animal  life  (irritability,  and  the  ner- 
vous principle)  for  thefe  continue  to  exert 
their  influence  for  fome  time  afterwards.  In 
thofe  animals  which  feem  to  have  the  leaft 

mind. 


i 


230 


ON  THE  MIND* 


mind,  fuch  as  the  cold-blooded  ones,  thefe 
common  principles  continue  to  excite  their 
energy  the  longeft ; thus  a frog  will  leap  and 
crawl  about  for  many  hours  after  its  head  is 
cut  off;  and  certain  butterflies  complete  the 
ad:  of  generation  after  having  fuffered  the 
fame  cruel  treatment.  (See  Appendix,  No.  3.) 
Thefe  fads,  and  the  confcioufnefs  which  at- 
tends all  mental  operations  caufe  us  to  believe 
that  there  is  a certain  point,  or  place,  within  the 
head,  w’here  all  nervous  fenfations  terminate, 
and  where  they  unite  and  become  objeds  of  per- 
ception and  thought.  That  thing  which  per- 
ceives them,  as  it  were,  we  call  mindy  or  Jbuly 
in  contradiftindion  to  the  word  brain.  That 
part  of  the  brain  which  we  call  the  optic 
nerve,  cannot  either  perceive,  or  compare  the 
fenfations  which  are  peculiar  to  the  nerves  of 
the  ear;  thofe  of  the  ear  cannot  perceive,  or 
compare  thofe  which  are  peculiar  to  the 
tongue,  or  nofe  ; thofe  of  the  tongue,  or  nofe, 
cannot  compare  thofe  of  the  nerves  of  the 
ikin ; but  to  this  indefcribable  fomething, 
called  mind,  it  is  quite  indifferent  whether 
the  fenfations  are  received  by  the  optic  nerves. 


« or 


OX  THE  MIND. 


23I 


or  the  auditory  ones,  or  by  thofe  of  the  nofe, 
or  palate.  It  can  compare  them  all  with  each 
other;  thofe  of  light  with  thofe  of  touch,  and 
thofe  of  fight  and  touch  with  thofe  of  hear- 
ing, &c. 

The  mind  has  faculties  and  principles,  but 
this  is  a circumftance  which  has  not  hitherto 
been  remarked  fufiiciently  by  any  writer  on 
pfychology. 

v k 4 »<  1/  | • 

The  word  faculty  ought  to  be  accurately 
diftinguifhed  from  the  word  power,  with 
which  it  is  too  often  confounded,  not  only 
in  converfation,  but  in  writing.  People  fpeak 
of  the  powers  of  the  mind,  when  they  mean 
its  faculties,  and  vice  verfa , they  fpeak  of  fa- 
culties when  they  mean  powers.  Every  man 
who  is  not  an  idiot,  and  in  good  health,  is 
pofTeffed  of  fimilar  faculties  of  mind  with  the 
reft  of  mankind  who  are  alfo  fane,  and  in 
good  health  of  body  ; but  no  one  man,  per- 
haps, has  fimilar  powers  of  mind  with  ano- 
ther. Every  man  is  endued  with  the  faculty 
of  memory,  but  fome  men  poffefs  the  power 

of 


232 


ON  THE  MIND. 


of  memory  in  a much  higher  degree  than 
others;  every  man  can  judge,  but  the  power 
of  judging  feems  to  be  very  unequally  diftri- 
buted. 

The  number  of  the  mental  faculties  is  by 
no  means  agreed  on  by  philofophical  writers. 
Some  enumerate  five  only,  viz.  the  faculty  of 
forming  ideas,  or  perception  ; the  faculty  of 
aflociating  ideas ; the  faculty  of  remember- 
ing them  ; the  faculty  of  imagining  ; and  the 
faculty  of  judging.  But  other  writers  add  to 
thefe  the  faculty  of  conceiving,  and  thofe  of 
abftradting  ideas,  and  of  combining  them. 
This  point  cannot  be  fettled  without  entering 
into  a minute  invefiigation  of  the  phenomena 
of  each  of  thefe  faculties ; and  as  this  is  done 
in  the  fucceeding  chapters  of  this  book,  there 
is  no  neceflity  for  repeating  what  is  therein 
contained. 

Independently  of  the  faculties  which  have 
been  mentioned,  the  mind  is  endued  with  two 
other  properties  which,  in  my  opinion,  ought 
to  be  called  principles . The  difference  be- 

tween 


ON  THE  MIND, 


233 


tween  the  faculties  and  the  principles  of  the 
mind  is  this  ; the  faculties  modify  the  fenfo- 
rial  imprcftions  in  a great  variety  of  ways, 

r 

giving  them  new  characters,  and  qualities, 
and  converting  them  into  objeCts  of  thought 
and  reafon,  juft  as  the  functions  of  the  body 
change  the  food  into  a variety  of  new  matters 
which  have  many  diftinCt  properties  from  the 
food  as  it  is  received  into  the  body.  The 
principles  of  the  mind,  oil  the  other  hand,  do 
not  modify  the  fenforial  impreffion,  but  are 
excited  into  aCtion  by  them  ; and  their  aCtion 
is  transferred  to  the  faculties,  juft  as  the 
living  principles  of  the  body  (irritability  and 
the  nervous  principle)  do  not  aCt  on  the  food 
and  blood,  and  on  external  bodies,  but  are 
excited  into  aCtion  by  them.  The  two  prin- 
ciples of  the  mind  are  confcioufnejs  and  volition . 

Confcioufnefs  does  not  modify  our  thoughts, 
neither  does  volition  do  fo ; but  memory,  ima- 
gination, and  judgment,  all  operate  on  our 
perceptions,  giving  them  different  characters. 


In 


234 


ON  THE  MIND. 


In  regard  to  the  effence,  or  nature  of  that 
fomething , which  is  endued  with  thefe  faculties 
and  principles,  three  different  opinions  are 
entertained  by  fpeculative  philofophers.  The 
ffrff  is  that  the  mind,  and  brain,  are  one  and 
the  fame  fubftance.  The  fecond  is,  that  the 
mind,  or  foul,  is  corporeal,  but  of  a very  dif- 
ferent kind  of  matter  from  that  of  brain.  And 
the  third  opinion  is,  that  mind  is  an  immate- 
rial  fomething  deffgned  by  the  word  Jpirit . 

Of  all  fpecies  of  materialifm,  that  one  ap- 
pears to  me  to  be  the  mod  completely  abfurd 
which  is  founded  on  the  fuppofition  that  brain 
and  mind  are  one  and  the  fame  fubftance. 
Yet  this  dodtrine  is  embraced  by  one  who  has 
added  more  ufeful  fadts  to  fcience,  and  more 
ornaments  to  philofophy  than  almoft  any  other 
modern  wrriter.  (a) 

It 

(<*)  In  ftc  preface  to  Dr.  Priestley’s  celebrated  work 
on  Matter  and  Spirit,  when  fpeaking  of  the  motives  which 
induced  him  to  think  deeply  on  the  fubjeft,  he  fays, « Con- 
“ tinuing  to  reflea  upon  the  fubjea,  I became  fatisfied  that, 
if  we  iuffer  ourfelves  to  be  guided  in  our  inquiries  by 

' “ the 


ON  THE  MIND. 


235 


It  is  not  to  be  expeCted  that  I {hould  enter 
fully  into  the  merits  and  demerits  of  all  the 
arguments  which  Dr.  Priestley  has  brought 
forward  in  fupport  of  his  favourite  opinion. 
Many  of  them  are  of  fuch  a nature  as  to  be 
founded  entirely  on  the  notions  he  himfelf 
entertains  about  the  primitive  qualities  of 
matter.  But  this  is  a fubjeeft  which  will  ever 
remain  a queftion  of  controverfy  ; fince  it  can- 
not be  determined  by  any  fadls,  what  thefe 
are,  and  confequently  there  can  be  no  ground 
for  general  conviction.  Of  two  men  who  em- 
brace different  opinions  concerning  matter, 
one  may  indeed  refute  the  other,  but  this  will 
be  no  proof  that  the  one  who  has  gained  this 
conqueft  has  himfelf  difeovered  the  real  truth, 
or  that  his  notion  is  lefs  fanciful  ; it  only 
evinces  that  he  has  built  a fyftem  on  better 
grounds  than  his  antagonift.  Matter  and  fpi- 
rit  are  terms  almoft  equally  unintelligible  in 
themfelves.  We  have  never  feen  that  princi- 

(i  the  univerfally  acknowledged  rules  oj  philofophizing , we 
« fhall  find  ourfelves  unauthorized  to  admit  any  thing  in 
man  befides  that  body  which  is  the  objeft  of  our  fenies.” 

pie 


ON  THE  MIND. 


236 

pic  of  bodies,  which  philofophers  underftand 
by  the  word  matter,  any  more  than  we  have 
feen  that  which  they  denominate  fpirit.  We 
define  it  to  be  that  of  which  all  bodies  are 
compofed  ; but  this  definition  does  not  throw 
any  more  light  on  its  real  nature,  than  the  de- 
finition of  mind  explains  what  the  effence  of 
mind  is.  We  have  the  folly  to  afcribe  to 
matter  a number  of  qualities,  but  which,  when 
properly  confidered,  are  only  the  properties 
of  bodies.  Two  hard  bodies  cannot  occupy 
the  fame  fpace  at  the  fame  time ; and  the  prin- 
ciple on  which  this  depends  we  call  Jolidity . 
Bodies  occupy  fpace,  and  we  fay  they  have 
extenfion.  All  bodies  move  towards  each 
other  when  no  obfiacle  is  in  the  way ; and  the 
principle  on  which  we  fay  this  depends,  we 
call  attraction.  Thefe  conclufions  in  our  mind 
we  transfer  by  analogy,  to  matter,  although 
we  know  nothing  about  it,  and  we  fay  it  is 
folid,  and  polfeffed  of  attra&ion,  and  that  it 
has  extenfion. 

In  order  to  demonfirate  the  great  danger 
of  fuch  reafoning,  or  rather  fuch  alfertions 

(for 


Ott  THE  MIND.  237 

(for  it  does  not  deferve  the  name  of  reafon- 
ing),  we  have  only  to  read  Dr.  Priestley's 
work  already  alluded  to  ; and  fee  into  what  a 
dilemma  he  brings  himfelf  by  a fimilar  mode  of 
arguing.  He,  indeed,  denies  folidity  and  ex- 
tenfionto  be  qualities  of  matter,  and  defines  it 
to  be  mere  centres  of  attraction  and  repulfion. 
He  is  evidently  well  aware  that  the  mind  of  man 
cannot  have  a clear  notion  of  what  is  meant 
by  a centre  of  attraction  or  repulfion,  as  a pro- 
perty of  matter,  but  by  fuppofing  fome  very 
minute  atom  placed  there,  which  is  endowed 
with  the  qualities  of  attraction  and  repulfion  ; 
but  as  this  notion  would  completely  refute  the 
conclufion  he  wifhes  to  draw  from  it,  he  takes 

care  repeatedly  to  affirm  that  the  centre  which 

■ 

attracts  and  repels,  has  not  the  dimenfions  of 
a phyfical  point ; and  that  it  has  no  kind  of 
folidity  or  extenfion  ! (See  his  DilTertations 
on  Matter  and  Spirit,  p.  16.)  In  the  name 
of  common  fenfe,  what  is  this  thing?  Is 
there  lefs  abfurdity  in  calling  that  a fpirit 
which  is  thus  diverted  of  every  corporeal  qua- 
lity, than  in  calling  it  matter  ? If  ever  there 


was 


ON  THE  MIND*- 


*3* 

was  a boundary  put  to  human  understand ing# 
it  is  here. 

Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  another 
feries  of  Dr.  Priestley’s  arguments,  on 
which  the  mind  can  dwell  with  fafety,  and 
which  are  capable  of  being  underftood.  " Had 
*'  we  formed  a judgment  concerning  the  ne- 
,f  ceffary  feat  of  thought,  by  the  circum- 
u fiances  that  univerfally  accompany  it,  which 
<f  is  our  rule  in  all  cafes,  we  could  not  but 
*'  have  concluded  that  in  man  it  is  a property 
<c  of  the  nervous  fyftem , or  rather  of  the  brain  • 
tc  becaufe,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  the  faculty 
“ of  thinking,  and  a certain  ftate  of  the  brain, 
rr  always  accompany,  and  correfpond  to  an- 
“ other ; which  is  the  very  reafon  why  wre 
*c  believe  that  any  property  is  inherent  in  any 
“ fubftance  whatever.  There  is  no  inftance 
“ of  any  man  retaining  the  faculty  of  think. 
<f  ing  when  his  brain  was  deflroyed ; and 
“ whenever  that  faculty  is  impeded,  or  in- 
t(  jured,  there  is  fufficient  reafon  to  believe 
“ that  the  brain  is  difordered  in  proportion  : 

“ and 


ON  THE  MIND. 


239 


,f  and  therefore  we  are  neceflarily  led  to  con- 
" elude  the  latter  as  the  feat  of  the  former. 

“ Moreover,  as  the  faculty  of  thinking  in 
Cf  general  ripens  and  comes  to  maturity  with 
" the  body,  it  is  alfo  obferved  to  decay  with 
fr  it ; and  if,  in  fome  cafes,  the  mental  facul- 
**  ties  continue  vigorous  when  the  body  in 
“ general  is  enfeebled,  it  is  evidently  becaufe 
“ in  thofe  particular  cafes  the  brain  is  not 
tr  much  affedted  by  the  general  caufe  of 
<f  weaknefs.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the 
“ brain  alone  be  affedted,  as  by  a blow  on  the 
€{  head,  by  adtual  preffure  within  the  fkull,  by 
“ fleep,  or  by  inflammation,  the  mental  fa- 
" culties  are  univerfally  affedted  in  proportion . 

“ Likewife,  as  the  mind  is  affedted  in  con- 
Cf  fequence  of  the  affedlions  of  the  body  and 
,f  brain,  fo  the  body  is  liable  to  be  recipro- 
<c  cally  affedlcd  by  the  affedlions  of  the  mind, 
<f  as  is  evident  in  the  vifible  effedls  of  all 
*'  flrong  paflions,  hope  or  fear,  love  or  an- 
« ger,  joy  or  forrow,  exultation  or  defpair. 
" Thefe  are  certainly  irrefragable  arguments 

that 


24^  ON  THE  MIND* 

“ that  it  is  properly  no  other  than  one  and 
ff  the  fame  thing  that  is  fubjed  to  thefe  affec- 
,f  tions,  and  that  they  are  neceffarily  depend- 
tr  ent  upon  one  another.  In  fad,  there  is 
*f  juft  the  fame  rcafon  to  conclude  that  the 
f<  powers  of  fenfation  and  thought  are  the  ne- 
ff  ceflary  refult  of  a particular  organization, 
*4  as  that  found  is  the  neceffary  refult  of  a par- 
fC  ticular  concuftion  of  the  air.  For  in  both 
“ cafes,  the  one  conftantly  accompanies  the 
€t  other;  and  there  is  not  in  nature  a ftronger 
tf  argument  for  a neceffary  connedion,  or  any 
<f  caufe  and  any  effect.  To  adopt  an  opi- 

*f  nion  different  from  this,  is  to  form  an 

\ 

ft  hypothefts  without  a fingle  facff  to  fupport 
<f  it.”  P.  27,  et  feq. 

This  laft  fentence  contains  a falfe  charge, 
fince  it  may  be  fafely  faid,  that  to  adopt  the 
oppofite  opinion  to  Dr.  Priestley’s,  is  to 
form  an  hypothefts  which  is  founded  on  a 
multiplicity  of  well  eftablifhed  fads,  which 
he  has  either  been  ignorant  of,  or  has  not 
duly  conftdered.  The  hiftory  of  diffedions 
proves  that  the  texture  of  every  part  of  the 

brain 


ON  THE  MIND. 


241 


brain  may  be  morbidly  altered  from  its  natural 
Hate,  and  yet  all  the  faculties  of  the  mind 
remain  entire.  The  writings  of  the  learned, 
induftrious,  and  modeft  Morgagni,  and  thofe 
of  Bonetus,  and  Haller,  contain  many 
cafes  of  this  kind.  Portions  of  the  brain 
have  been  forcibly  detached  by  cutting  in- 

Bruments ; great  excavations  have  been  form- 

\ 

ed  in  it  by  abfceffes ; fchirrous,  or  fcrophu- 
lous  tumors,  near  two  inches  in  length, 
have  been  found  in  it  ; fungous  tumors  have 
arifen  from  its  furface ; all  its  arteries  have 
been  found  ofiified ; its  coats  have  been  vari- 
oufly  difeafed  ; the  interior  part  of  the  cere- 
brum, and  of  the  cerebellum,  the  balls  of  the 
cerebrum,  the  pituitary  gland,  the  pineal 
gland,  the  plexus  choroides,  have  all  been 
found  exhibiting  morbid  changes  of  ftrudture 
in#  people  who  were  in  full  polfeflion  of 
their  internal  fenfes.  There  is  a work  in  the 

* I 

hands  of  molt  literary  men,  (or  if  it  is  not  in 
their  hands,  can  be  ealily  procured,)  where  a 
great  number  of  thefe  cafes  have  been  induftri- 
oufiy  colle&ed  with  a view  of  proving  the 
fame  thing  which  is  now  advanced ; it  is  there- 
Vol.  I.  R fore 


ON  THE  MIND. 


245 

fore  deemed  unnecefTary  to  fill  this  chapter 
with  the  recital  of  them.  The  work  alluded 
to  is  the  Memoirs  of  the  Literary  and  Fbilofophical 
Society  of  Manchcfier , in  the  firft  volume  of 
which  there  is  a paper  of  a very  learned  phy- 
sician, Dr.  Ferriar,  wherein  the  cafes  refer- 
red to  by  Haller  are  all  colledted  and  tranf- 
lated. 

• ^ 

If  I were  defired  to  fay,  in  a general  way, 
what  thofe  cafes  of  difeafed  brain  are  which 
moft  commonly  produce  diforder  in  the  mind, 
I Should  anfwer,  they  are  thofe  in  which  the 
arterial  adtion  of  the  brain  itfelf  is  altered 
from  its  healthy  ftate ; as,  for  inftance,  in 
fevers,  and  general  and  local  inflammations  of 
various  kinds.  The  reafon  of  this  has  beer* 
attempted  to  be  explained. 

As  foon  as  the  altered  adlion  begins  to  fub- 
fide,  the  healthy  operations  of  the  mental  fa- 
culties return ; and,  although  the  difeafed  ftate 
of  circulation  often  produces  permanent  mif- 
chief  in  the  brain,  fuch  as  tumors,  &c.  yet  thefe 
may  be  formed,  and  may  continue  for  years, 

without 


ON  THE  MIND. 


243 


without  affeding  the  fenfes.  In  regard  to  the 
point  at  iflue,  therefore,  what  conclusion  can 
be  drawn  from  fuch  fads  ? In  favour  of  ma- 
terialifm,  the  only  one  is  this,  viz.  that  it  is 
not  the  fubftance  of  the  brain  which  is  mind, 
but  the  blood,  or  the  fluids  fecreted  from  it  in 
the  brain  ! 

Another  argument  which  Dr.  Priestley 
adduces  in  favour  of  the  corporeality  of  mind 
is  this,  that  our  faculties  decay  in  proportion 
as  the  body  grows  old  and  infirm ; but  this, 
like  many  other  general  aflertions,  has  full  as 
many  fads  oppofed  to  it  as  thofe  which  are 
brought  forward  in  fupport  of  it. 

If  it  can  be  proved  that  moft  people  who 
duly  exercife  the  memory,  imagination,  judg- 
ment, and  all  the  other  mental  faculties,  gra- 
dually improve  in  mind,  whilft  the  body  is  de- 
caying, and  finking  into  the  grave,  it  is  furely 
more  than  a prefumptive  proof  that  the  ele- 
ments of  the  foul  (if  I may  be  allowed  the  ex- 
prefiion)  are  quite  diftind  from  the  materials 
of  which  the  body  is  compofed.  In  fupport  of 

R 2 this 


244 


ON  THE  MIND* 


this  proportion,  an  authority  of  high  name, 
and  unbiased  by  any  of  the  fhallow  fyftems 
of  modern  times,  may  be  brought  forward. 
Cicero,  in  his  philofophical  and  very  beauti- 
ful Eflay  on  Old  Age,  mentions  many  inftances 
of  men  poflefting  the  full  vigour  of  their  in- 
tellects after  their  phyfical  force  was  nearly 
exhaufted,  and  accomplifhing  works  of  great 
fame  at  a very  advanced  period  of  their 
lives.  The  firft  he  takes  notice  of  is  Quintus 
Fabius  Maximus,  a man  of  confummate  wif- 
dom,  and  of  more  erudition  than  the  Romans 
at  that  time  in  general  pofTefled.  His  fon  died 
after  he  had  obtained  the  confular  dignity,  on 

which  occafion  he  compofed  a celebrated  fu- 

/ ^ 

neral  oration  ; and  Cicero,  when  he  mentions 
this,  takes  the  opportunity  of  pafling  an  eulogy 
on  the  mental  powers  of  this  diftinguifhed  old 
man.  “ Multa  in  eo  viro  praeclara  cognovi ; 
,f  fed  nihil  eft  admirabilius  quam  quomodo 
“ ille  mortem  filii  tulit,  clari  viri  et  confu- 
" laris  : eft  in  manibus  laudatio,  quam  quum 
“ legimus  quern  philofophum  non  contemni- 
“ mus  l Nec  vero  ille  in  luce  modo,  atque 
" in  oculis  civium  magnus  ; fed  intus,  domi- 

“ que 


ON  THE  MIND. 


24$ 

,c  que  praeftantior ; qui  fermo!  qua?  praecepta! 
l<  quanta  notitia  antiquitatis  1 quae  fcientia 
“ juris  augurii ! multae  etiam,  ut  in  homine 
“ Romano,  literae  ! Omnia  memoria  tenebat, 
f<  non  domeftica  folum,  fed  etiam  externa  bel- 
“ la;  cujus  fermone  ita  tarn  cupide  fruebar 
“ quail  jam  divinaram  id  quod  evenit,  illo  ex- 
" tindlo  fore  unde  difcerem  neminem.” 

Cicero  mentions  many  other  fa6ls  of  great 
importance  in  the  prefent  queftion.  Plato 
died  while  compoling  a work  in  his  eighty- 
firft  year.  Isocrates  finifhed  his  Panatbenai - 
cus  in  his  ninety-fourth  year,  and  his  teacher, 
Leontinus  Gorgias  was  equal  to  all  the  or- 
dinary employments  of  life  at  the  very  ad- 
vanced age  of  one  hundred  and  feven  1 

Were  not  all  the  ancient  governments  fup- 
ported  and  maintained  by  old  men  ? In  order 
to  be  a magiftrate  of  Lacedtemon  it  was  necef- 
fary  to  be  far  advanced  in  life.  rf  Old  age 
(fays  Cicero)  “ does  not  extinguifli  genius, 
« provided  a&ive  ftudy  be  not  abandoned. 
« Quid  jurifconfulti  ? quid  pontifices  ? quid 

“ philofophi 


24^  ON  THE  MIND# 

" philofophi  fenes  ? quam  multa  mcminerint! 
<r  manent  ingenia  fenibus,  modo  permaneat 
<r  ftudium,  et  induflria  ; nec  ea  folum  in  cla- 
“ ris  et  honoratis  viris,  fed  in  vita  etiam  pri- 
“ vata  et  quieta.  Sophocles  ad  fummam  fe- 
€r  necftutem  tragaedias  fecit ; quod  propter 
c<  ftudium,  quum  rem  familiarem  negligere 
“ videretur,  a filiis  in  judicium  vocatus  eft", 
“ ut  quemadmodum  noftro  more  male  rem 

gerentibus  patribus  bonis  interdici  folet ; 
ft  lie  ilium,  quail  defipientem  a re  familiari 
ff  removerent  judices.  Turn  fenex  dicitur 
<c  earn  tabulam,  quam  in  manibus  habebat,  et 
<f  proxime  feripferat,  CEdipum  Coloneum  re- 
“ citaffe  judicibus,  quaefifleque,  num  illud 
“ carmen  defipientis  videretur  ; quo  recitato, 
ft  fententiis  judicum  eft  liberatus.” 

But  as  recent  examples  are  generally  more 
ftriking  than  ancient  ones,  I fhall  borrow  a 
few  faefts  from  the  unfinifhed  page  of  biogra- 
phy. And,  firft,  let  our  attention  be  turned 
to  an  author,  who,  in  whatever  light  his  poli- 
tical principles  and  career  may  be  viewed, 
doubtlefs  claims  a firft  place  in  the  pantheon 

of 


ON  THE  MIND.  247 

V 

of  Genius.  Although  weighed  down  by  mif- 
fortunes  of  the  mod:  afflicting  nature,  and 
enfeebled  by  old  age,  and  by  bodily  difeafe, 
we  have  feen  him  lately  {nine  forth  as  one  of 
the  mod:  brilliant  meteors  which  has  illumi- 
nated the  horizon  of  modern  literature.  It  is 
furely  unneceffary  to  mention  the  name  of 
Mr.  Bu  rke.  Can  any  one  fuppofe  for  a mo- 
ment that  the  mind  of  that  man  made  a part 
of  his  decayed  frame  ? Do  not  his  lad:  publi- 
cations evince  a vigour  of  intellect  not  only 
uninjured  by  time,  but  even  fuperior  for  the 
fplendor  of  language,  the  vividnefs  of  imagi- 
nation, and  richnefs  of  thought,  to  thofe  which 
were  compofed  in  the  meridian  of  his  life  ? 
Are  not  Lord  Mansfield,  Dr.  Samuel 
Johnson,  Voltaire,  and  the  author  of  Zoo- 
nomia,  and  the  Botanic  Garden,  direCt  proofs 
that  the  mind  continues  to  improve  after  the 
body  begins  to  decay  ? Bifhop  Burnet,  for 
the  lad  forty  years  of  his  life,  was  a martyr  to 
the  done,  and  a complication  of  bodily  dif- 
eafes,  yet  during  that  time  he  compofed  many 
of  his  bed:  writings.  Sir  Isaac  Newton, 
when  near  his  eightieth  year,  refolved,  as  an 

amufement 


ON  THE  MIND. 


24S 

amufement  for  the  evening,  the  celebrated 
problem  of  the  trajectories  which  Leibnitz 
had  fent  to  this  country,  in  full  expectation 
that  it  would  puzzle  the  firft  mathematician 
of  the  age.  It  is  faid  that  Sir  Ifaac  under- 
took it  one  evening  after  his  return  from  the 
Mint,  where  he  had  been  actively  employed 
the  whole  day,  and  that  he  finifhed  it  before 
the  morning. 

All  thefe  facts  prove  that  the  phenomena 
and  qualities  of  mind  depend  on  a fubftance 
of  a very  different  kind  from  brain,  or  any 
other  part  of  our  frame,  which  is  evident  to 
the  fenfes.  And  this  fact  being  proved,  we 
muft  conclude,  agreeably  to  the  ftrict  rules  of 
philofophizing  laid  down  by  Sir  Isaac  New- 
ton, and  fo  warmly  recommended  to  the  at- 
tention of  philofophers  by  Dr.  Priestley, 
that  the  mind  muft  be  either  a matter  of  a 
different  kind  from  brain,  or  elfe  a fomething 
which  it  has  been  attempted  to  define  by  the 
word  fpirit. 

J r / . . t ‘ 

iYhj  fo/! 


It 


ON  THE  MIND. 


249 


It  may  be  further  obferved  in  regard  to 
this  queftion,  that  it  is  impoftible  to  conceive, 
agreeable  to  the  ftridt  rules  of  philofophy, 
that  any  body  fhould  operate  on  itfelf  in 
fuch  a manner  as  fome  of  our  thoughts  ope- 
rate on  brain  ; producing  delirium  of  various 
kinds. 

It  is  necelTary  to  obferve,  for  the  fake  of 
juftice  and  candor,  that,  although  it  can  be 
proved  that  the  phenomena  of  mind  are  quite 
diftindt  from  thofe  which  feem  to  belong 
to  brain  and  nerves,  yet  this  by  no  means  fet- 
tles the  original  queftion  concerning  the  mate- 
riality or  immateriality  of  the  foul.  Although 
eftentially  different  from  brain,  it  may  ftill  be 
matter.  Thofe  who  think  thus,  hope  to  find 
an  apology  for  their  opinion  in  arguments 
drawn  from  analogy.  The  uniform  experi- 
ence of  mankind,  they  fay,  teaches  us  that 
nothing  can  adt  on  matter  but  matter. 

Tangere  enim  et  tangi,  nili  corpus,  nulla  poteft  res.” 

Lucrkt. 


But 


ON  THE  MIND. 


250 

But  as  human  reafon  is  inclined  by  a natural 
condition  of  thought  to  build  its  opinions 
upon  the  facets  which  experience  yields,  fo  the 
notion  that  the  influence  which  acts  on  the 
brain  and  nerves,  and  produces  the  external 
phenomena  of  mind,  muft  be  a phyfical  influ- 
ence, forces  itfelf  involuntarily  upon  the  con- 
viction of  many.  Thofe  who  thinK^that  it  is 
not  matter,  do  not  found  their  opinion  on  ar- 
gument, but  belief.  The  evidence  of  our 
fenfes,  the  principal  fource  of  our  knowledge, 
does  not  teach  us  any  fact  fimilar  to  this. 
The  doctrine  of  immateriality  is  therefore  a 
fubject  of  faith,  not  of  reafon. 

It  may  be  worth  while,  before  we  relinquifh 
this  fubject,  to  take  a concife  view  of  the  va- 
rious concluflons  to  be  drawn  from  the  facts 

and  arguments  which  have  been  adduced  in 

. 

treating  it. 

After  the  phyfiologift  has  carried  his  inquiry 
as  far  as  poflible  into  the  nature  and  effects  of 
irritability,  and  nervous  fenfibility,  as  well  as 
into  thofe  of  the  mechanical  and  chemical 


powers 


ON  THE  MIND. 


25* 

powers  which  operate  on  the  human  body,  he 
(till  meets  with  many  phenomena  which  he 
cannot  account  for  by  the  known  influence  of 
thefe  agents.  All  the  impreflions  received  on 
the  external  extremities  of  nerves  to  which 
we  give  the  name  of  fenfations,  are  conveyed 
to  the  head,  and  feem  to  unite  there  in  one 
point.  Their  production  in  the  nerves,  and 
their  tranfmiflion  along  them,  the  phyflolo- 
gift  can  tolerably  well  account  for  ; but  as 
foon  as  they  arrive  at  the  place  alluded  to, 
nevv  phenomena  occur,  which  are  totally  dif- 
fimilar  from  any  thing  depending  on  the  or- 
ganization of  brain,  or  nerve  : a thought  arifes! 
an  idea  is  prefent  to  his  mind,  which  makes 
him  confcious  of  the  exiftence  of  the  external 
body  which  aded  on  him ! He  endeavours  to 
colleCt  all  the  obfervations  which  thefe  new 
phenomena  yield,  and  after  having  done  this, 
and  having  found  that  he  cannot  account  for 
them  by  the  knowledge  he  has  obtained  of  ner- 
vous matter,  he  naturally  refers  them  to  an  oc- 
cult caufe  which  remains  to  be  examined.  He 
difeovers,  by  means  of  many  fads,  that  this 
occult  caufe  is  aded  on  by  external  bodies, 

through 


ON  THE  MIND. 

through  the  medium  of  our  fenfes  ; and  on  the 
other  hand,  he  obferves  alfo,  that  it  re-ads  on 
the  brain,  and  on  the  corporeal  part  of  man, 
inafmuch  as  a Angle  thought  often  alters  every 
healthy  addon  of  the  body  : a power,  however, 
muft  refide  in  fomething ; it  muft  have  a fub- 
jed.  It  cannot  be  brain  ; for  in  no  inftance 
whatever  does  a body  ad  on  itfelf  fo  as  to  alter 
its  natural  phenomena.  But  the  mind  does  this 
in  regard  to  the  brain ; a thought  alters  the 
whole  of  its  adion ; he  is  therefore  perfuaded. 
that  there  is  fomething  in  man  diftind  from 
brain,  to  which  the  phenomena  of  mind  are  to 
be  afcribed.  The  next  ftep  is  to  find  out  its 
nature  ; but  here  he  feeshimfelf  furrounded  by 
innumerable  difficulties  : it  may  perhaps  be 
diftind  from  brain,  and  yet  corporeal.  This 
fuppofition  leads  him  to  inveftigate  what  that 
is  which  is  called  matter , andhefoon  difeovers, 
if  he  is  not  tainted  with  any  hypothefts,  that 
he  cannot  acquire  a clear  idea  of  its  real  na- 
ture from  experience.  It  is  not  an  objed  of 
fenfe.  He  is  told  that  the  occult  caufe  is  a 
Jpiriiy  or  immaterial  fubftance.  Here  he  is 
totally  at  a lofs ; but  when  he  refleds  on  the 
term,  and  how  the  notion  of  fpirit  fliould  have 

arifen 


ON  THE  MIND* 


*$3 

arifen  in  the  mind  of  man,  he  begins  to  doubt 
whether  the  confcioufnefs  which  all  men  have 
concerning  the  difference  that  exifts  between 
the  external  world,  and  their  own  mind,  may 
not  have  firft  given  rife  to  the  expreffion.  If 
all  that  is  meant  by  the  word  fpirit  be  this,  that 
it  is  a fome thing  diftinct  from  our  body,  he  ac- 
cedes to  the  accuracy  of  the  diftinction,  for 
found  reafoning,  founded  on  experience,  has  led 
him  to  the  fame  conclufion.  He  grants  that 
the  mind  is  not  an  object  of  external  fenfe  ; he 
grants  that  it  does  not  occupy  fpace  ; yet  the 
belief  of  its  exigence  is  forced  upon  him  by 
the  confcioufnefs  of  what  palfes  within  himfelf ; 
he  knows  not  what  to  decide,  but  thinks  it 
is  lofs  of  time  to  difpute  about  words.  He  is 
convinced  that  the  true  manner  of  ftudying 
the  human  mind  is  by  beginning  with  the 
ftudy  of  the  human  body  ; and  he  is  perfuaded 
that  whoever  ftudies  it  deeply  will  be  convin- 
ced that  the  mind  is  totally  diftind:  from  that 
part  which  is  evident  to  the  fenfes.  In  other 
refpedts  it  is  of  very  little  importance  to  him 
whether  it  be  called  a matter  Jui generis,  or  an 
immaterial  Jubjlance.  Neither  of  thefe  terms 
explain  any  thing  to  him. 


CHAP- 


254  ON  attention,  and  its  diseases® 


CHAPTER  II. 

ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

Definition  of  the  faculty  of  attention ; difference 
between  it  and  the  power  of  attention  • what 
Jtimuli  exiite  it.  The  queflion  whether  it  is 
under  the  infuence  of  volition  examined . The 
great  readinefs  with  which  we  attend  to  fome 
Jubjf’hls  and  objef/s,  when  compared  with  others , 
accounted  for  ; the  ejfeffs  of  education  on  atten- 
tion. The  morbid  alteration  of  this  faculty 
reduced  under  three  claffes , and  each  of  them 
deferibed  and  enlarged  on. 


W HEX  any  object  of  external  fenfe,  or  of 
thought,  occupies  the  mind  in  fuch  a degree 
that  a perfon  does  not  receive  a clear  percep- 

. 

tion  from  any  other  one,  he  is  faid  to  attend 
to  it.  The  principle  that  is  excited  in  his 
mind  by  a perception,  or  thought,  is  com- 
monly galled  the  faculty  of  attention  ; a faculty 

which 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  25$ 

which  may  be  juftly  faid  to  be  the  parent  of 
all  our  knowledge. 

/ 

The  experience  of  every  man  muft  lead 
him  to  acknowledge  that  the  power  of  atten- 
tion is  different,  not  only  in  different  indivi- 
duals, but  alfo  in  himfelf  at  different  times. 
He  meets  with  many  who  appear  to  him  to 
exert  it  in  a much  ftronger  degree,  and  for  a 
much  longer  period  of  time,  than  he  himfelf 
can  do ; and  he  alfo  difcovers  that  fome  others 
are  much  inferior  to  himfelf  in  thefe  particu- 
lars. He  alfo  obferves  that  he  himfelf  cannot 
attend  fo  well  when  wearied  with  fatigue,  or 
opprcffed  with  a full  meal,  or  debilitated  by 
difeafe,  as  when  thefe  caufes  do  not  operate : 
a proper  diftindtion,  then,  ought  to  be  made 
between  the  faculty  and  the  power  of  atten- 
tion. The  faculty  is  the  fame,  whether  in 
adtion  or  not ; the  power  is  the  degree  of 
excitement  produced  by  the  application  of 
mental  ftimuli. 

The  ftimuli  which  fet  it  in  adtion,  in  the 
firft  place,  are  either  perceptions  of  external 

objedts, 


£$6  ON  attention,  and  its  diseases* 

objeCfs,  or  thofe  renewed  in  the  different  ope- 
rations of  memory,  imagination,  and  judg- 
ment, and  when  it  is  difengaged  from  one  fet 
of  perceptions  and  thoughts,  andpaffes  to  ano- 
ther, this  happens  either  by  means  of  the  affo- 
ciation  of  ideas,  or  by  our  being  accidentally 
affected  by  fome  ftronger  impreffion  than  that 
with  which  we  were  previoufly  engaged.  The 
firft  of  thefe  pofitions  is  illuftrated  by  finding 
that  our  attention  paffes  eafily,  as  it  were,  from 
one  part  of  a chain  of  argument  to  another, 
which  we  have  been  accuftomed  to  conneCt  to- 
gether, or  from  the  recollection  of  any  onepaft 
event  to  a multitude  of  others  affociated  with 
it ; and  the  fecond  is  elucidated  by  the  fa<5ts, 
that  a fudden  and  ftrong  light,  fuch  as  a flafh  of 
lightning,  a loud  and  fudden  noife,  and  bodily 
pain,  all  withdraw  the  attention  from  the 
thoughts  it  was  occupied  vrith  the  moment 
before  thefe  events  occurred. 

Are  there  any  other  powers  which  aCt  on  at- 
tention befide  the  mental  ftimuli  already  men- 
tioned P When  we  refer  to  what  paffes  within 
ourfelves,  we  are  inclined  to  think  that  atten- 


tion 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  257 

tion  can  be  increafed  by  volition.  There  is  - 
no  caufe  to  be  difcovered  in  the  nature  either 
of  attention,  or  volition,  why  this  fhould  not 
be  fo  ; but  the  opinion  is  considered  as  very 
unphilofophical  by  fome  modern  writers,  es- 
pecially by  thofe  who  deny  the  free  agency  of 
man.  It  is  faid  that  no  man  wills  to  be  at- 
tentive, without  fome  caufe  excites  him  to 
form  that  refolution.  The  caufe  that  does  fo 
is  a motive,  and  all  ftronger  motives  overcome 
weaker  ones  ; therefore,  w'hen  a perfon  wills 
to  be  attentive,  he  only  yields  to  a ftronger 
impreflion  than  that  which  aded  on  his  mind 
before  this  ad:  of  volition  took  place ; and 
therefore  we  are  deceived  when  we  call  this 
a voluntary  ad. 

That  the  will  cannot  be  excited  to  ad  with- 
out a caufe,  requires  no  great  depth  of  philo- 
fophical  knowledge  to  comprehend.  The 
queftion,  however,  is  not  how'  the  will  is 

4 

excited  ; the  anfwer  to  that  is  of  no  confe- 
quence  in  the  prefent  cafe  : all  that  we  wifh 
to  know  is  whether  volition  has  not  a power- 
ful influence  on  the  faculty  of  attention. 

Vol.  I.  S There 


258  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


There  are*  unfortunately,  no  external  phe- 
nomena which  enable  us  to  judge  of  what 
pafles  in  the  mind  of  others  on  fuch  occafions 
as  are  fitted  to  determine  this  point ; but  as 
confcioufnefs  is  a principle  wrhich  makes  us 
acquainted  with  the  exercife  of  our  own  facul- 
ties, it  is  reafonable  to  depend  on  it  for  a 
proof.  The  convidtion  of  every  man  who  is 
not  fettered  by  any  philofophical  hypothefis, 
is,  that  he  can  increafe  attention  by  an  effort 
of  volition  ; and  when  he  willies  to  excite  the 
attention  of  any  one  elfe,  he  generally  does  fo 
by  exciting  the  will  of  that  perfon.  When 
we  form  a refolution  to  adt  in  a certain  man- 
ner, on  any  particular  occafion,  does  it  not 
often  require  the  flrongefl  effort  of  volition 
to  attend  to  the  refolution  fo  as  to  exclude  the 
impreffion  of  motives  which,  phyfically  fpeak- 
ing,  are  of  a much  more  powerful  kind  ? A 
perfon  by  previouffy  forming  a refolution  to 
fubmit  to  certain  bodily  pain,  without  utter- 
ing a groan,  voluntarily  dire&s  his  attention 
to  fome  imaginary  objedt,  and  he  feels,  or  in 
other  words,  he  is  confcious  of  the  voluntary 
exertion  it  requires  to  keep  his  attention  fixed 

on 


ON  ATTENTION , AND  ITS  DISEASES.  259 

on  that  object  under  the  pains  he  is  fuffering. 
Certain  American  tribes  by  fixing  their  atten- 
tion on  the  hatred  they  owe  their  enemies,  and 
the  injuries  which  they  or  their  friends  have 
formerly  received  from  them,  fufiain,  without 
uttering  a groan,  the  moft  excruciating  pains 
which  can  be  inflicted  on  the  human  frame. 
An  Italian  criminal,  by  voluntarily  reprefent- 
ing  to  himfelf  the  gibbet,  and  ftrengthening 
the  reprefentation  by  frequently  calling  out 
Io  ti  veddo , Io  ti  veddo , fuftained  all  the  cruel 
pains  of  the  torture  without  confelfing  his 
crime. 

The  principal  effect  which  attention  has 
on  the  mind,  is  to  render  all  perceptions  and 
thoughts  clearer  and  more  vivid,  and  confe- 
quently  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a fure  and 
faithful  recollection,  and  to  render  judgment 
quicker  and  more  correCt. 

As  the  mere  force  or  intenfity  with  which 
we  employ  attention  is,  in  a great  degree,  a 
voluntary  aCt,  and  as  all  acts  of  body  and  mind 
are  more  eafily  renewed  in  proportion  to  the 

S 2 number 


1 


> 


2 6o  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

number  of  times  they  are  repeated,  it  is  evi- 
dent how  much  the  attention  of  parents  and 
inftrucftors  of  children  ought  to  be  dire<fted  to 
this  circumftance.  It  is  almoft  impoflible  to 
begin  too  foon  to  render  children  attentive  to 
the  objeifls  of  their  education. 

There  is  a very  lingular  facft  attending  the 
cxercife  of  this  faculty,  which  muft  have 
ftruck  many  people,  but  which,  as  far  as  my 
reading  extends,  has  not  yet  been  attempted  to 
be  explained.  It  is  the  great  readinefs  with 
which  we  attend  to  certain  fubjects  and  ob- 
jects rather  than  to  others.  The  fa£t  is  fo  ge- 
neral that  it  is.  deemed  unneceflary  to  adduce 
inftances  of  it  with  the  foie  view  of  confirming 
the  affertion.  Inftances  muft  be  adduced  at 
all  events,  to  prove  the  influence  of  the 
caufes  I ftiall  aflign  for  this  curious  pfycholo- 
gicai  phenomenon. 

As  far  as  my  own  obfervation  goes,  it  ap- 
pears to  me  to  depend,  in  moft  cafes,  on  one 
of  the  two  following  circumftances : 


ift.  The 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  Ct6t 

\ 

i ft.  The  conftitutional  pronenefs  which  wre 
have  to  certain  paflions  and  emotions,  rather 
than  to  others. 

idly.  The  influence  of  certain  defires,  paf- 
fions,  and  emotions,  to  which  we  have  not,  in- 
deed, any  original  or  conftitutional  pronenefs, 
but  which  we  have  acquired  from  education, 
from  our  fituation  in  life,  our  profeflions,  or 
cuftomary  avocations,  and  various  circum- 
ftances  which  regard  our  relationfhip  with  the 
world  at  large. 

% 

The  common  manner  of  explaining  the 
nature  of  this  fecret  influence  by  means  of 
which  certain  objects  feem  to  arreft  our 
attention  more  forcibly  than  others,  is  by 
faying  that  thefe  obje&s  intereft  us ; and  in 
regard  to  thofe  things  to  which  we  cannot 
dired  our  attention  with  fteadinefs,  they  are 
faid  to  have  no  intereft  for  us.  But  what  do 
thefe  expreflions  mean  ? This  intereft,  what 
is  it  ? 


That 


262  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

That  fome  men  from  organization,  or  con- 
ditution,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  are  dif- 
pofed  to  certain  emotions  and  paflions,  rather 
than  to  others;  as,  for  indance,  to  the  violent 
emotions  of  anger,  and  its  modifications  ; 
the  emotions  of  fear;  the  defire  of  the  fex, 
and  its  modifications,  &c.  is  a fad  which 
daily  experience  is  fufficient  to  confirm. 
Such  men  have  their  attention  mod  readily 
engaged  by  every  object  or  thought  which 
excites  thefe  emotions.  A perfon  of  an  irri- 
table difpofition  feems  to  the  generality  of 
mankind,  from  the  mere  influence  which  this 
law  of  the  occonom.y  has  over  him,  to  take 
delight  in  feeking  for  fources  of  quarrel,  con- 
troverfy,  and  ill  humour.  A timorous  per- 
fon feems  to  create  caufes  of  alarm  and  appre- 
henfion  from  the  flighted  occafions. 

Although  the  defires,  emotions,  and  paf- 
fions to  which  certain  individuals  are  mod 
fubjed,  from  the  original  conformation  of 
their  nerves,  neceflarily  give  a particular  bias 
to  this  faculty  of  attention,  efpecially  among 
uncultivated  men,  and  favages,  inafmuch  as 

it 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


it  is  moft  readily  engaged  by  the  objedts 
■which  excite  thefe  affedtions ; yet  it  cannot 
be  denied,  that  education  may  do  a great  deal 
to  modify  it.  The  tendency  to  any  paffion 
may  be  diminifhed  by  many  corredlives,  but 
thefe  muft  be  very  judicioufly  applied  in  early 
infancy,  and  employed  with  unremitting  care 
for  a great  length  of  time,  in  order  to  pro- 
duce this  happy  event. 


Let  us  take  a curfory  view  of  the  influence 
of  the  fecond  fet  of  caufes,  I mean  thofe  de- 
lires  and  paflions  to  which  we  have  not  any 
particular  pronenefs  from  conftitution,  but 
which  become  predominant  in  the  courfe  of 
our  lives  from  various  habits,  from  our  mode 
of  education,  ^profetfions,  avocations,  and  other 
relationfhips  which  regard  our  commerce  with 
the  world. 

» - 

This  fubjedl  is  of  immenfe  extent,  and 
is  highly  interefting  if  viewed  in  a proper 
light ; for  it  contains  a great  (lore  of  pfycho- 
logical  riches,  inafmuch  as  it  explains  the  ef- 
fedt  which  various  fyftems  of  education,  and 


various 


264  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

various  purfuits  and  profefTions,  have  on  the 
mental  faculties,  and  moral  qualities  of  man. 

1 

The  whole  fubjedl  borders  fo  much  on 
ethics,  and  on  moral  philofophy,  ftridtly  fo 
called,  that  it  cannot  confidently  with  the 
plan  of  this  work  be  minutely  examined  j but 
as  much  of  its  outline  may  be  given  as  will 
prove  fatisfadfory  in  regard  to  the  alfertion 
which  has  been  made. 

• 

Education  has  for  its  objedl  the  improve- 
ment either  of  the  body  or  mind,  or  both. 
The  adtions  of  the  body  which  are  to  be  im- 
proved by  education,  are  chiefly  thofe  which 
confifl:  of  certain  concatenations,  or  aflembla- 
ges  of  voluntary  motions,  together  with  the 
exercife  of  the  external  fcnfes.  The  improve- 
ment of  the  mind  conlifts  in  ftrengthening 
and  rendering  its  various  faculties  more  per- 
fect, and  in  acquiring  a management  over  the 
paflions. 

v 

Particular  inftances  in  which  natural  gef- 

i 

tures  and  movements  of  the  body  have  been 

Tendered 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  20$ 

rendered  quick  and  vigorous,  yet  gracefu1  and 
eafy  ; in  which  the  organs  of  external  fenfe 
have  been  improved  to  fuch  a degree  as  readily 
to  feize  the  mod  delicate  imprefilons,  and 
their  differences ; and  which,  therefore,  en- 
able a perfon  to  difcern  and  relifh  whatever  is 
beautiful,  as  well  as  fublime,  in  the  external 
world;  and  in  addition  to  which  attention, 
memory,  imagination,  and  judgment  have  been 
ftrengthened  by  proper  objedts  of  dudy  ; and 
where  a great  degree  of  felf-command  has  been 
acquired  in  the  moft  trying  fituations  ; fuch 
inftances  are  oftener  met  with  in  the  fidtions 
of  romance  than  in  the  hidory  of  men.  Such 
prodigies,  exhibiting  the  wonderful  effedts  of 
a happy  organization,  and  of  education,  how- 
ever, have  occurred,  if  we  can  give  credit  to 
the  teftimony  of  authors.  Let  no  fufpicion 
of  vanity  arife,  if  I mention  one  of  my  own 
name  as  an  inftance : the  admirable  Crichton, 
one  whom  the  Mufes,  the  Graces,  and  Minerva 
equally  patronized.  Of  all  that  has  been  faid 
of  him,  much,  undoubtedly,  muft  be  confi- 
dered  as  the  effedts  of  exaggerated  praife,  and 
of  that  fecret  fpring  in  the  human  bread  which 

difpofes 


\ /t- 


2 66  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

difpofes  men  to  find  pleafure  in  exciting  won- 
der and  furprize  in  the  mind  of  others  ; but 
making  a proper  allowance  for  thefe  motives, 
there  is  fuflicient  evidence  of  his  having  fo  far 
excelled  the  generality  of  mankind  in  perfonal 
accomplifhments,  as  well  as  in  the  powers  of 
his  mind,  and  the  knowledge  he  acquired,  as 
to  juftify  me  in  felecting  him  as  an  example, 
illuftrative  of  a mofl  extraordinary  degree  of 

culture,  (a) 

\ 

It  is  fcldom,  however,  that  the  attention  of 
youth  is  directed  to  fuch  a number  of  objedis 
as  are  neceffary  to  the  formation  of  men  of 
this  defcription.  Of  thofe  who,  according  to 
the  prevailing  notion  of  this  country,  receive 
the  beft  education,  how  few  are  there  who 


(a)  Among  the  numerous  teftimonics  in  favour  of  the  fu- 
periority  of  this  man  there  is  one  which  is  not  commonly 
known,  though  eafily  afeertained.  A Glafgow  edition  of 
the  Claflics  were  dedicated  to  him,  many  of  which  are  dill 
extant ; and  as  he  had  no  title  to  fuch  an  uncommon  mark 
of  diftin&ion  from  birth,  or  any  other  cafual  honor,  it  may 
be  reafonably  concluded  that  his  wonderful  acquifitions 
were  the  real  caufes  to  which  it  is  to  be  attributed. 


arrive 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  C>6 7 

arrive  at  that  eminence  which  exhibits  the 
effccds  of  a regular  and  well-condudted  culture 
both  of  body  and  mind.  During  the  early 
part  of  life,  when  all  the  faculties  of  the  mind 
ought  to  be  equally  exercifed,  in  order  to  be 
equally  ftrengthened,  does  it  not  but  too  fre- 
quently happen  that  a boy  is  kept  for  many 
years  together  to  the  irkfome  talk  of  loading 
his  memory  with  a vocabulary  of  mere  words  ; 
and  that  the  adtive  faculties  of  his  foul  for  the 
want  of  proper  exercife  become  inert,  and  are 
at  laft  incapable  of  being  exerted  on  fubjedls 
of  abltradt  thought  without  pain.  Of  the 
prodigies  of  early  learning,  how  few  of  thofe 
who  preferve  their  health,  arrive  at  any  great 
eminence  in  the  paths  of  fcience.  A boy  fre- 
quently becomes  learned  at  the  expence  of 
common-fenfe,  and  now  and  then  at  that  of 
his  judgment.  It  is,  indeed,  a melancholy  re- 
flexion, that  many  young  people  who,  previ- 
oully  to  the  commencement  of  what  is  called 
education,  appear  to  be  endowed  with  the 
fineft  minds,  and  who  exhibit  a quicknefs  of 
apprehenfion  and  a docility  under  tuition, 
which  would  fccure  to  them  an  eafy  conqueft 
in  the  purfuits  of  fame,  if  they  were  managed 

with 


268  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

with  fufficient  fkill,  either  fall  early  victims 
to  mental  fatigue,  or  elfe  acquire  a great  dif- 
guft  for  inftrudion,  merely  becaufe  the  pro- 
per ftimuli  for  captivating  their  attention  have 
not  been  found  out  in  time.  The  author  dares 
not  enlarge  on  the  fubjed  without  going  be- 
yond the  proper  limits  of  his  work. 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  that  every  profeflion 
and  purfuit  of  life  may  be  confidered  as  a 
fpecies  of  education,  which,  by  creating  ar- 
tificial wants  and  defires,  caufes  a vaft  diver- 
fity  in  the  pronenefs  which  men  have  for  at- 
tending to  certain  objeds  and  fubjeds  of  ftudy 
rather  than  to  others.  It  would  be  a curious 
fpedacle  to  fee  a reprefentative  affembly  of 
men  aduated  by  the  various  artificial  wants 
which  they  create  to  themfelves  by  particular 
purfuits  and  branches  of  ftudy,  and  that  the 
means  of  gratifying  their  defires  were  to  be 
fuddenly  granted  them,  and  difplayed  before 
them.  One  would  feize  a Greek  or  Latin 
manufcript  as  a moft  ineftimable  treafure ; an- 
other a butterfly,  or  moth  ; one  would  run  to 
an  antique  ftatue ; another  to  a piece  of  painted 
glafs;  another  to  a piece  of  mechanifm;  a 

3 piece 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  269 

piece  of  fculpture,  a holy  relic,  a beautiful 
fliell,  a difeaied  bone,  a new  drug,  a fine  dog, 
or  horfe,  would  all  have  their  admirers.  One 
man  would  defire  to  mount  up  on  the  wings 
of  aether  to  the  milky  way  ; while  another 
would  feek  to  penetrate  the  granitic  cruft  of 
the  globe,  in  order  to  examine  its  inmoft  ca- 
verns and  recedes . 

If  all  that  has  been  faid  in  this  chapter  be 
duly  confidered,  it  muft  be  granted  that  the 
readinefs  with  which  we  attend  to  certain  fub- 
jedts,  and  objedts,  rather  than  to  others,  de* 
pends  on  th$  two  principles  already  ftated. 
See  p.  261 . 

As  a healthy  ftate  of  the  brain  and  nerves  is 
cflentially  neceftary  to  the  due  and  regular 
operations  of  this  faculty,  inafmuch  as  it 
modifies  all  imprefiions  received  on  thefe  or- 
gans, it  muft  be  evident  that  it  may  be  greatly 
altered,  or  even  totally  fufpended  by  various 
difeafes  of  thefe  parts. 

Attention  can  hardly  be  faid  to  be  ever 
morbidly  increafed ; for  although  in  many  in- 

ftances 


270  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

• 

fiances  this  faculty  is  involuntarily  engaged 
for  a much  longer  period  of  time  than  is  ufual, 
and  in  a degree  which  often  proves  hurtful, 
yet  it  cannot  be  called  a difeafe  of  that  faculty. 
The  attention  may  be  preternaturally  arreffed, 
for  inftance,  by  a difeafed  perception,  fo  that 
the  perfon  cannot  attend  to  any  thing  elfe  ; as 
is  the  cafe  in  various  kinds  of  hypochondria- 
cs, and  melancholy  ; but  the  reafon  why  ex- 
ternal impreflions  do  not,  in  fuch  cafes,  pro- 
duce their  full  mental  effect,  is  not  becaufe 
attention  is  morbidly  increafed,  but  becaufe 
it  is  arrefted  by  the  preternatural  vividnefs  of 
the  difeafed  perception.  Were  it  a fault  of  the 
faculty  itfelf,  the  energy  with  which  it  adted 
would  be  equally  great  to  whatever  objedt  it 
was  diredted,  but  this  is  not  the  cafe ; which 
proves  that  it  is  a perception  only  which  is 
difeafed. 

The  morbid  alterations  to  which  attention 
is  fubjedt,  may  all  be  reduced  under  the  three 
following  hea^s  : 

1 ft.  The  incapacity  of  attending  with  a 
neceftary  degree  of  conftancy  to  any  one  ob- 
je&. 

idly. 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  27I 

2dly.  A total  fufpenfion  of  its  effedts  on 

the  brain. 

, / 

The  incapacity  of  attending  with  a neceffary 
degree  of  conftancy  to  any  one  object,  almoft 
always  arifes  from  an  unnatural  or  morbid  fen- 
ftbility  of  the  nerves,  by  which  means  this 
faculty  is  inceffantly  withdrawn  from  one  im- 
preftion  to  another.  It  may  be  either  born 
with  a perfon,  or  it  may  be  the  effedt  of  acci- 
dental difeafes. 

* 

When  born  with  a perfon  it  becomes  evi- 
dent at  a very  early  period  of  life,  and  has  a 
very  bad  effedt,  inafmuch  as  it  renders  him 
incapable  of  attending  with  conllancy  to  any 
one  objedt  of  education.  But  it  feldom  is  in 
fo  great  a degree  as  totally  to  impede  all  in- 
ftrudtion  ; and  what  is  very  fortunate,  it  is 
generally  diminifhed  with  age.  How  it  is  to 
be  corredted,  will  be  fpoken  of  hereafter  in 
the  curative  part  of  the  work. 

The  incapacity  of  attending  with  a neceffary 
degree  of  conftancy  to  any  one  object,  which 
arifes  cafually,  like  other  difeafes,  accom- 
panies 


2J2  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

panics  every  nervous  diforder,  in  which  the 
fenfibility  of  the  nerves  is  greatly  increafed, 
efpccially  in  hyfteria.  Stomachic  com- 
plaints, chlorofis  and  hydrophobia  alfo,  in- 
duce it.  In  this  difeafe  of  attention,  if  it  can 
with  propriety  be  called  fo,  every  impref- 
fion  feems  to  agitate  the  perfon,  and  gives 
him  or  her  an  unnatural  degree  of  mental 
reftleffnefs.  People  walking  up  and  down 
the  room,  a flight  noife  in  the  fame,  the  mov- 
ing a table,  the  fhutting  a door  fuddenly,  a 
flight  excefs  of  heat  or  of  col^,  too  much 
light,  or  too  little  light,  all  deftroy  conftant 
attention  in  fuch  patients,  inafmuch  as  it  is 
eafily  excited  by  every  impreffion.  The  bark- 
ing of  dogs,  an  ill-turned  organ,  or  the  fcold- 
ingof  women,  are  fufficient  to  diftradt  patients 
of  this  defcription  to  fuch  a degree,  as  almoft 
approaches  to  the  nature  of  delirium.  It 
gives  them  vertigo,  and  headach,  and  often 
excites  fuch  a degree  of  anger  as  borders  on 
infanity.  When  people  are  affedted  in  this 
manner,  which  they  very  frequently  are,  they 
have  a particular  name  for  the  flate  of  their 
nerves,  which  is  expreflive  enough  of  their 
feelings.  They  fay  they  have  the  fidgets . 

Should 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  273 

Should  this  ftate  of  the  nerves  continue  for 
a great  length  of  time,  or  often  recur,  a habit 
of  inattention  is  the  confequence,  which  is 
afterwards  with  difficulty  removed.  In  fome 
cafes  it  increafes  to  fuch  a degree,  owing  to 
the  violence  and  obftinacy  of  the  bodily 
caufes,  thofe  for  inftance  which  fpring  from 
the  worH  kinds  of  hyfteria,  and  epilepfy,  as 
often  lays  the  foundation  for  permanent  deli- 
rium. 

The  fecond  difeafed  ftate  of  attention  was 
faid  to  be  a morbid  diminution  of  its  power 
or  energy.  This  may  arife  from  a great  mul- 
tiplicity of  caufes,  fome  of  which  are  corpo- 
real, and  others  mental. 

The  corporeal  caufes  appear  to  be  capable 
of  being  reduced  under  two  heads,  or  daffies. 

i ft.  Caufes  of  debility  that  operate  by  ex- 
haufting  the  principle  of  irritability,  and  con- 
fequently  diminifh  the  fecretion  of  the  fen- 
tient  principle,  and  which  of  courfe  weaken 
both  external,  and  fenforial  impreftions  in 
Vol».  I.  T force 


274  0N  attention,  and  its  diseases. 

fc 

force  and  clearnefs,  and  which  therefore  natu- 
rally fhorten  their  duration  in  the  brain. 

2dly.  Organic  difeafes  of  the  brain,  im- 
peding, to  a certain  extent,  the  tranfmiflion 
of  impreflions. 

In  both  of  thefe  cafes  attention  is  not  fufii- 
ciently  excited. 

The  fird  clafs  of  caufes  is  very  numerous 
fevers  of  all  kinds,  efpecially  the  varieties  of 
typhus  i chronic  weaknefs,  arifing  from  do- 
machic  complaints,  and  other  difeafes  of  the 
abdominal  vifcera.  It  is  a curious  circum- 

i 

dance, , that  the  chronic  weaknefs  which  ac- 
companies fcrophula,  and  rickets,  have  no 
influence  in  diminifliing  the  energy  of  any 
of  the  mental  faculties  ; but  chronic  weaknefs, 
arifing  from  poor  diet,  bad  air,  and  confine- 
ment in  warm  apartments,  circumdances  to 
which  the  inhabitants  of  large  cities,  efpe- 
cially the  female  ones,  are  peculiarly  expofed  ; 
irregularities  in  diet,  exceflive  evacuations,  and 
the  abufe  of  corporeal  defires,  are  all  caufes 
which  weaken  attention,  and  confequently 
debilitate  the  whole  faculties  of  the  mind. 


The 


I 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  275 

The  fecond  clafs  of  corporeal  caufes  are 
either  tumors,  which  are  either  gradually 
formed  within,  or  on  the  brain,  or  elfe  they 
are  organic  derangements  of  a more  fecret  and 
hidden  nature,  fuch  as  arife  in  confequence  of 
repeated  attacks  of  epilepfy,  apoplexy,  con- 
vuliions,  and  blows  on  the  head,  &c* 

The  mental  caufes  which  weaken  this  fa- 
culty are  alfo  of  two  kinds, 

1 ft.  Debility,  arifing  from  neglecting  to 
exercife  the  faculty  fufficiently,  and 

1 

t 

- 2dly.  The  over-exercife,  or  abufe  of  its 
powers. 

The  firft  of  thefe  is  a diredt  caufe  of  habi- 
tual inattention ; the  fecond  is  an  indirect 
caufe  of  a fpecies  of  diminifhed  attention, 
which  is  for  the  moft  part  of  a tranlitory  na- 
ture. 

That  negle&ing  to  exercife  attention  is  the 
certain  means  of  inducing  a dimini  ftied  energy 

T 2 of 


2*]6  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

of  that  faculty,  hardly  requires  any  illuftra- 
tion,  lince  innumerable  inftances  are  con- 
ftantly  occurring  which  cannot  altogether  ef- 
cape  the  notice  of  the  moft  fuperficial  ob- 
ferver. 

Among  the  lower  clafs  of  people,  attention  is, 
generally,  fufficiently  excited  by  their  nume- 
rous wants,  the  preflure  of  which,  by  exciting 
acute  defires,  keeps  the  faculty  alive ; and 
hence  the  natural  Ihrewdnefs  and  cunning 
which  many  of  them  exhibit  in  matters  which 
regard  their  own  intereft.  But  among  the  more 
affluent  and  independent  part  of  mankind,  the 
exercife  of  attention  is  commonly  dependant  on 
artificial  wants,  and  on  thofe  who  are  entrufted 
with  their  education.  The  influence  which 
the  firft  of  thefe  has  on  the  mind  fhall  be  in- 
vefligated  in  the  inquiry  into  the  origin  of  the 
paflions  ; with  regard  to  the  fecond,  a great 
number  of  obfervations  naturally  prefent 
themfelves  to  every  perfon  of  reflection  who 
is  accultomed  to  think  for  himfelf. 


It 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  277 

It  unfortunately  happens  that  the  mental 
treatment  of  youth,  not  only  at  fchools  and 
academies,  but  alfo  at  home,  is  generally  the 
fame  for  all  boys.  That  of  girls  is  fubjedt  to 
a fimilar  fault.  The  peculiar  ideofyncrq/ies , or 
diipofitions  of  each  individual,  are  feldom 
fufficiently  attended  to  ; and  hence  it  frequently 
happens  that  many  of  our  youth,  although  en- 
dowed with  excellent  natural  talents,  remain 
dunces  during  the  early  part  of  their  lives.  If 
they  improve  afterwards,  it  is  owing  to  felf- 
tuition,  or  accidental  circumftances  having 
fortunately  thrown  fuch  objedts  of  fcience  in 
their  way  as  are  fitted  to  awaken  new  defires, 
and  kindle  the  flame  of  curiofity  in  their 
mind.  That  fome  boys  muft  be  forced  to 
learn  by  menaces,  and  fear,  and  others  by  in- 
treaty, and  kindnefs,  is  fo  common  an  ob- 
fervation,  as  to  be  known  by  every  pedagogue. 
But  although  this  be  the  cafe,  the  pradtical 
rule,  it  is  not  always  judicioufly  applied. 
There  is  another  obfervation,  however,  more 
important  than  this,  that  is  not  generally 
known,  or  at  leaft,  its  force  is  not  acknow- 
ledged \ it  is  this  : that  many  boys  require  very 

different 


278  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

different  objecfts  of  ftudy  than  what  others  do, 
in  order  to  have  their  attention  fufficiently 
roufed,  and  their  minds  put  into  due  exercife. 
Every  public  teacher  muff  have  obferved  that 
there  are  many  to  whom  the  drynefs  and 
difficulties  of  the  Latin  and  Greek  grammars 
are  fo  difgufting  that  neither  the  terrors  of  the 
rod,  nor  the  indulgence  of  kind  intreaty  can 
caufe  them  to  give  their  attention  to  them.  If 
a boy  of  this  difpolition  be  found  to  be  by  no 
means  deficient  in  natural  underftanding,  why 
fhould  many  good  years  be  loft  in  a fruitlefs 
attempt,  which  muft  evidently  become  irk- 
fome  to  the  preceptor,  and  prejudicial  to  the 
young  perfon  ? Would  a wife  phyftcian  inftft 
on  it  that  one  kind  of  diet  was  that  which  was 
moft  fuitable  to  every  conftitution  ? If  he 
found  a few  individuals  who  evidently  could 
not  digeft  it,  would  he  not  endeavour  to  find 
out  what  things  were  beft  adapted  to  their  pe- 
culiar ideofyncrafies  ? It  will  be  found,  in 
general,  that  the  boys  fpoken  of  will  eafily 
apply  to  fome  other  branches  of  ftudy  ; and  if 
that  is  the  cafe,  the  natural  bent  of  mind  ought 
not  to  be  forcibly  thwarted,  or  left  negle&ed. 

It 


« 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  279 

It  ought  to  be  recollected  that  it  is  a matter  of 
great  indifference  what  it  is  which  a boy  firft 
learns,  provided  it  is  fome  ufeful  object,  and 
is  of  fuch  a kind  as  to  give  due  exercife  to  his 
intellectual  faculties.  If  he  once  gains  a habit 
of  attention,  it  will  afterwards  be  eafily  di- 
rected to  other  things  of  more  confequence. 

Another  circumftance  of  great  importance 
is  this,  that  as  the  power  of  attention  is  as 
different  in  different  boys,  as  their  bodily 
force,  fo  their  mental  diet,  if  the  expreflion 
be  permitted,  muft  alfo  be  varied  accordingly. 
To  fome,  all  kinds  of  ftudy  ought  to  be  ren- 
dered eafy  for  the  firft  years  of  their  lives, 
while  to  others  a certain  number  of  difficul- 
ties are  abfolutely  neceffary  in  order  to  excite 
a proper  degree  of  attention.  Boys  endowed 
with  what  is  commonly  called  ftrong  minds, 
require  hard  and  laborious  ftudy  in  compari- 
fon  with  others,  if  it  is  meant  that  they  fhould 
maintain  the  fuperiority  for  which  nature  feems 
to  have  intended  them. — Let  not  this  digrcf- 
fion,  which  certainly  belongs  to  the  art  of 
preventing  mental  weaknefs  and  difeafe,  be 

confidercd 


280  on  attention,  and  its  diseases. 

confidered  as  totally  foreign  to  the  phyfiology. 
It  accounts  for  the  ignorance  and  inattention 
of  a number  of  men,  who,  if  they  had  been 
judicioufly  treated  in  their  youth,  might  have 
become  ornaments  to  their  family,  and  ufeful 
members  of  fociety,  but  who  having  acquired 
an  early  difguft  for  ftudy,  have  fallen  a prey 
to  falfe  defires  and  wants,  to  the  great  preju- 
dice of  their  health  and  fortune. 

It  has  been  remarked  that  debility  and  tor- 
por of  body  are  caufes  which  weaken  atten- 
tion, inafmuch  as  the  nerves  of  fuch  people 
do  not  convey  the  imprefiions  they  receive 
with  a due  degree  of  force  and  clearnefs. 
The  pafiions  and  affedions  of  people  of  this 
defcription  are  naturally  weak,  and  hence 
they  are  often  of  a retired  and  unfocial  difpo- 
firion,  having  few  friendfhips,  or  attachments 
of  any  kind,  and  thefe  feldom  of  a lafting,  or 
durable  nature.  But  when  once  the  habit  of 
commanding  attention  is  fo  far  weakened  as  to 
render  a pcrfon  almoft  infenfible  to  external 
objeds,  or  to  the  imprefiions  which  awaken 
the  focial  feelings,  he  may  then  be  faid  to  be 

predifpofed 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  *8l 

predifpofed  to  a very  bad  kind  of  mental  de- 
rangement ; for  if  any  ftrong  paflion  be  acci- 
dentally  excited  in  fuch  a cafe,  how  is  the 
attention  to  be  direfted  to  ordinary  matters  ? 

I lately  attended  a very  remarkable  variety 
of  infanity  of  this  kind,  along  with  my  friend 
Dr.  Pitcairn,  to  whom  it  appeared  equally 
uncommon  as  to  myfelf,  although  his  exten- 
five  pra&ice  yields  him  frequent  opportunities 
of  feeing  the  infane. 

m 

The  patient  was  a young  gentleman,  of  large 
fortune,  and  who  until  the  age  of  twenty-one 
had  enjoyed  a tolerably  uniform  ftate  of  good 
health.  He  was  of  a very  delicate  and  {lender 
frame  of  body,  and  of  a gentle  and  calm,  but 
rather  unfocial  difpofition.  He  bore  evident 
marks  of  great  debility ; his  hands  and  feet 
were  generally  cold,  his  veins  were  fmall,  and 
although  feldom  diftended  with  blood,'  yet 
they  {hone  through  the  fkin.  His  counte- 
nance was  pale,  and  expreffive  of  great  lan- 
guor, his  hair  dark  brown,  and  his  eyes 
blue. 


When 


282  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES* 

When  I firft  faw  him,  the  mental  derange- 
ment under  which  he  laboured,  appeared 
chiefly  to  confift  in  a moft  uncommon  de- 
gree of  abfence  of  mind.  He  feemed  loft  to 
every  thing  around  him,  and  would  willingly 
fit  for  near  a whole  day  without  moving  ; yet, 
with  all  this,  he  was  not  like  a melancholy 
patient ; for  if  his  countenance  was  attentively 
obferved,  it  was  eafy  to  difcover  that  a multi- 
plicity of  thoughts  were  conftantiy  fucceeding 
each  other  in  his  mind,  many  of  which  were 
gay  and  cheerful.  He  would  laugh  heartily, 
at  times,  and  it  was  evident  from  the  character 
of  his  laughter,  that  it  was  not  of  that  un- 
meaning nature  which  we  often  fee  in  ideot- 
ifm,  but  fuch  as  any  one  might  happen  to  fall 
into  who  had  ludicrous  thoughts,  and  was 
not  under  the  reftraint  of  fociety.  In  a 
moment  afterwards  the  whole  exprefiion  of 
his  countenance  changed,  and  he  would  fink 
into  a deep  reverie.  In  the  courfe  of  his 
diforder  he  became  fo  remarkably  inattentive, 
that  even  when  prefled  by  fome  want  which 
he  wifhed  to  exprefs,  he  would,  after  he  had 

got 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  283 

f 

got  half  way  through  the  fentence,  fuddenly 
flop,  as  if  he  had  forgotten  what  he  had  to  fay. 

When  his  attention  was  roufed,  and  he  was 
engaged  to  fpeak,  he  always  expreffed  himfelf 
in  good  language,  and  with  much  propriety ; 
if  a queftion  was  propofed  to  him  which  re- 
quired the  exercife  of  judgment,  and  he  could 
be  made  to  attend  to  it,  he  judged  corredlly. 
A total  difregard  for  thofe  whom  he  had  for- 
merly moll  loved,  became  daily  ftronger,  and 
at  laft  he  fhewed  evident  marks  of  diffatisfac- 
tion  when  vif  ted  by  his  near  relations ; yet, 
unlike  melancholy  patients,  who  generally 
exhibit  a fimilar  antipathy,  this  condudt  did 
not  feem  in  him  to  arife  from  an  opinion, 
either  that  they  had  done  him  an  injury,  or 
intended  one  to  him.  He  would,  at  times, 
mutter  to  himfelf  exprefllons  of  anger  at  their 
being  prefent ; but  fuddenly,  as  if  aware  of 
the  impropriety  of  his  behaviour,  he  would 
as  quickly  change  the  expreffion  of  his  coun- 
tenance, and  feem  anxious  that  they  fhould 
not  hear  what  he  faid.  In  the  later  periods  of 
his  illnefs,  however,  he  was  not  quite  fo 

guarded. 


% 

284  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES, 

guarded,  and  would,  at  times,  behave  rudely, 
and  then  he  could  not  be  conciliated  by  kind- 
11  efs. 

When  he  was  placed  in  fuch  fituations  as 
required  the  exercife  of  attention,  in  order  to 
preferve  himfelf  from  danger  he  commonly 
exerted  himfelf  until  he  became  familiarized 
•with  it,  and  then  he  gradually  grew  lefs  atten- 
tive. It  was  with  difficulty  he  could  be  made 
to  take  any  exercife.  I prevailed  on  him, 
however,  for  a conliderable  time  to  drive  his 
curricle,  and  accompanied  him  in  it  to  watch 
his  mind.  For  a few  of  the  firft  days  he  was 
all  attention,  but  the  irkfomenefs  of  the  exer- 
tion made  him  foon  tire,  and  before  he  had 
driven  half  a mile  from  home,  he  returned, 
although  no  arguments  were  fpared  to  induce 
him  to  go  on.  He  drove  fteadily,  and  when 
he  was  about  to  pafs  a carriage,  took  pains  to 
avoid  it ; but  when  at  laft  he  became  familiar- 
ized with  this  exercife,  he  would  often  relapfe 
into  thought,  and  allow  the  reins  to  hang 
loofe  in  his  hands.  He  then  began  to  drive 
unfteadily,  fometimes  laffiing  the  horfes  with 

all 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  285 

all  his  force,  and  then  fuddenly  checking  them 
until  they  flood  ftill  ; fometimes  driving  very 
quick,  and  fometimes  juft  as  flow.  His  con- 
duct, in  this  refpecft,  never  appeared  to  be  re- 
gulated by  any  wifh  relative  to  the  nature  of 
/ 

the  exercife  he  was  taking,  but  appeared  to  me 
to  proceed  folely  from  the  natural  concatena- 
tion which  habit  inftitutes  between  the  quick- 
nefs  of  bodily  a&ion,  and  the  quicknefs  of 
thought.  His  ideas,  I have  already  faid,  were 
for  ever  varying.  When  any  one  crofted  his 
mind,  which  excited  anger,  the  horfes  buffered 
for  it ; but  the  fpirit  they  exhibited  at  fuch  an 
unufual  and  unkind  treatment,  made  him  foon 
defift,  and  re-excited  his  attention  to  his  own 
perfonal  fafety  ; as  foon  as  they  were  quieted, 
he  would  relapfe  into  thought ; if  they  were 
melancholy  ones,  the  horfes  were  allowed  to 
walk  flow,  if  they  were  gay  and  cheerful,  they 
were  gently  encouraged  to  go  faft. 

This  gentleman  generally  pafled  a good 
night,  and  he  was  fond  of  indulging  himfelf 
by  laying  long  in  bed.  His  difeafe  began 
with  a flight  ftate  of  phrenzy,  when  abroad 


286  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

on  his  travels,  and  was  excited,  according  to 
the  opinion  of  his  relations,  and  the  fervants 
who  accompanied  him,  by  the  injudicious  con- 
duct of  a travelling  tutor,  whofe  character, 
according  to  the  reports  fpread  of  him,  was 
more  fuited  for  the  feverities  of  a monkifh 
life,  than  the  companion  of  a man  of  fafhion. 
They  had  various  quarrels ; and  after  the  laft 
one,  which  occahoned  their  feparation,  the 
unfortunate  gentleman,  whofe  cafe  I have 
given,  was  obferved  to  be  very  ftrange  in  his 
conduct.  Other  caufes  of  mental  difquietude 
were  reprefented  as  having  joined  themfelves 
to  thofe  mentioned ; and  to  the  combined  in- 
fluence of  the  whole  the  firft  attack  of  deli- 

« 

rium  was  afcribed. 

I 

' * 

It  was  obferved,  that  attention  might  fuffer 
a temporary  alteration  from  its  healthy  ftate 
by  being  too  long  exercifed.  This  generally 
confifts  in  a great  diminution  of  its  powers, 
which  remains  longer,  or  fhorter,  according  to 
circumifances.  The  following  cafe,  with 
which  this  chapter  fhall  be  concluded,  is  a 
very  remarkable  inftance  of  the' kind.  It  is 

that 


ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.  287 

that  of  a Mr.  Spalding,  a gentleman  well 
known  as  an  eminent  literary  character  in 
Germany,  and  a man  much  refpeCted  by  thofe 
who  know  him.  The  cafe  is  drawn  up  by 
himfelf,  and  was  fent  to  the  celebrated  Mr. 
Sulzer,  and  by  him  prefented  to  the  editors 
of  the  Pfychological  Magazine. 

44  I was  this  morning  engaged  with  a great 
44  number  of  people,  who  followed  each  other 
44  quickly,  and  to  each  of  whom  I was  obliged 
44  to  give  my  attention.  I wTas  alfo  under  the 
44  neceflity  of  writing  much,  but  the  fubje&s 
44  which  were  various,  and  of  a trivial  and 
44  uninterefting  nature,  had  no  connection  the 
44  one  with  the  other ; my  attention,  there- 
44  fore,  was  conftantly  kept  on  the  ftretch,  and 
44  was  continually  fhifting  from  one  fubjeCt 
44  to  another.  At  laft  it  became  neceffary  that  I 
44  fliould  write  a receipt  for  fome  money  I had 
44  received  on  account  of  the  poor.  I feated 
44  myfelf,  and  wrote  the  two  firft  words,  but 
44  in  a moment  found  that  I was  incapable  of 
44  proceeding,  for  I could  not  recolledb  the 
44  words  which  belonged  to  the  ideas  that  were 

44  prefent 


288  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES.' 

,f  prefent  in  my  mind.  I ftrained  my  atten- 
<c  tion  as  much  as  poffible,  and  tried  to  write 
'*  one  letter  flowly  after  the  other,  always  hav- 
rf  ingan  eye  to  the  preceding  one,  in  order  to 
,f  obferve  whether  they  had  the  ufual  relation- 
,f  {hip  to  each  other  ; but  I remarked,  and 
,r  faid  to  myfelf  at  the  time  that  the  characters 
fC  I was  writing  were  not  thofe  which  I wifh- 
,c  ed  to  write,  and  yet  I could  not  difcover 
“ where  the  fault  lay.  I therefore  defifted, 
ft  and  partly  by  broken  words,  and  fyllables, 
u and  partly  by  gefture,  I made  the  perfon 
,c  who  waited  for  the  receipt  underhand  he 
u fliould  leave  me.  For  about  half  an  hour 
,f  there  reigned  a kind  of  tumultuary  diforder 
" in  my  fenfes,  in  which  I was  incapable  of 
%t  remarking  any  thing  very  particular,  except 
<c  that  one  feries  of  ideas  forced  themfelves 
“ involuntarily  on  my  mind.  The  trifling 
fe  nature  of  thefe  thoughts  I was  perfectly 
<f  aware  of,  and  was  alfo  confcious  that  I made 
C{  feveral  efforts  to  get  rid  of  them,  and  fup- 
ct  ply  their  place  by  better  ones,  which  lay 
“ at  the  bottom  of  my  foul.  I endeavoured, 
((  as  much  as  lay  in  my  power,  confidering 

" the 


CN  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES*  289 

r<  the  great  crowd  of  confufed  images  which 
<f  prefented  themfelves  to  my  mind,  to  recall 
Cf  my  principles  of  religion,  of  confcience* 
*f  and  of  future  expectation  ; thefe  I found 
“ equally  correct,  and  fixed  as  before.  There 
" was  no  deception  in  my  external  fenfes,  for  I 
“ faw,  and  knew  every  thing  around  me;  but  I 
Cf  could  not  free  myfelf  from  the  ftrange  ideas 
“ which  exifted  in  my  head.  I endeavoured 
,f  to  fpeak,  in  order  to  difcover  whether  I was 
t€  capable  of  faying  any  thing  that  was  con- 
,f  nedted,  but  although  I made  the  greateft 
f<  efforts  of  attention,  and  proceeded  with  the 
,c  utmoft  caution,  I perceived  that  I uni- 
ft  formly  fpoke  other  words  than  thofe  I in-* 
(t  tended.  My  foul  was  at  prefent  as  little 
“ mailer  of  the  organs  of  fpeech,  as  it  had 
(t  been  before  of  my  hand  in  writing.  Thank 
<{  God,  this  flate  did  not  continue  very  long* 
“ for,  in  about  half  an  hour,  my  head  began 
r<  to  grow  clearer,  the  ftrange  and  tirefome 
,r  ideas  became  lefs  vivid  and  turbulent,  and 
“ I could  command  my  own  thoughts  with 
" lefs  interruption. 


VOL.  I. 


u 


I now 


290  ON  ATTENTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

" I now  wifhed  to  ring  for  my  fervant,  and 
tc  defire  him  to  inform  my  wife  to  come  to 
<(  me  ; but  I found  it  ftill  necelfary  to  wait  a 
**  little  longer,  to  exercife  myfelf  in  the  right 
u pronunciation  of  the  few  words  I had  to  fay  ; 
<f  and  the  firft  half  hour’s  converfation  I had 
" with  her  was,  on  my  part,  preferved  with  a 
<(  flow  and  anxious  circumfpedtion,  until  at 
t(  laft  I gradually  found  myfelf  as  clear  and 
*'  ferene  as  in  the  beginning  of  the  day.  All 
u that  now  remained  was  a flight  headach.  I 
<f  recolledled  the  receipt  I had  begun  to  write, 
<r  and  in  which  I knew  I had  blundered ; and 
" upon  examining  it  I obferved,  to  my  great 
" aftonifhment,  that  inftead  of  the  words  fifty 
tf  dollars , being  one  half  year's  rate , which  I 
if  ought  to  have  written,  the  words  were  fifty 
“ dollars , through  the  falvation  of  Bra — with 
“ a break  after  it,  for  the  word  Bra  was  at 
,f  the  end  of  a line.  I cannot  recolledt  any 
tf  perception,  or  bufinefs,  which  I had  to 
“ tranfadt,  that  could  by  means  of  an  obfcure 
u influence  have  produced  this  phenomenon. ’* 


J 


CHAP- 


on  Mental  perception. 


29 1 


CHAPTER  ill* 


ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION,  AND  ITS  DISEASES. 

Definition  of  the  faculty  ; equivalent  terms.  Dr« 
Reid’s  fpeculations  examined  and  criticifed. 
Aristotle’ s opinion  the  bajis  of  all fucceeding 
ones  which  are  foundedon  obfervation  ■.  The  reafon 
why  two  people  have  not  always  the  fame  per- 
ception from  the  fame  object.  How  this  faculty 
modifies  imprefiions  by  its  active  power,  fo  as 
to  convert  them  into  objects  of  thought.  Various 
circumfiances  neceffary  for  the  full  production  of 
this  effect . What  caufes  weaken  imprejjions * 
The  meaning  of  the  word  idea  explained.  Dif- 
ference between  obfervation  and  reflection  ; fame 
people  difpofed  to  the  one  more  than  to  the  other  * 
the  effects  which  this  produces  on  their  mental 
character . The  faculty  is  fubjeCi  to  two  idio- 
pathic difeafes , and  various  fymptomatic  ones i 
The  difeafes  deferibed  and  examined * 


which  fupply  the  organs  of  external  fenfe,  and 
our  attention  is  not  ftrongly  engaged  at  the 


N an  objedl  a<£ts,  on  any  of  the  nerves 


U 2 


time 


£92  ON  MENTAL  perception, 

time  by  any  other  object,  we  immediately 
become  confcious  of  the  prefence  of  the  ex- 
ternal body,  and  we  obtain  a mental  percep- 
tion, or  reprefentation  of  it. 

We  become  confcious  that  fomething  which 
was  not  prefent  to  the  mind  the  moment  be- 
fore, is  now  prefent  to  it,  and  we  have  an  im- 
mediate and  firm  conviction  that  the  body  of 
which  we  have  this  intuition  is  without  us. 

/ 

The  faculty  which  the  mind  is  endowed 
with,  of  thus  receiving  the  reprefentation  of 
an  external  object,  is  commonly  called  the  fa- 
culty of  mental  perception,  wrhich,  although 
a bad  term,  inafmuch  as  it  is  borrowed  from 
one  of  the  external  fenfes,  I fhall  not  change. 
Other  terms  have  been  preferred  to  it  by  dif- 
ferent  writers,  fuch  as  apprehenfion,  and  con- 
ception ; the  Germans  call  it  vorjiellung^fkraft , 
which,  literally  tranfiated,  fignifies  the  repre- 
fentative  faculty,  and  is,  doubtlefs,  far  from 
being  a bad  expreflion  ; but  it  is  fubjedt  to 
the  fame  objedtion  as  perception,  inafmuch  as 
it  is  a term  of  vifion.  As  all  words,  however, 

that 


AND  ITS  DISEASES, 


293 


that  are  intended  to  denote  changes  which  takey 
place  in  the  mind,  muft  be  borrowed  from 
the  language  of  phylics,  it  is  of  very  little 
confequence  which  of  them  is  adopted,  pro- 
vided an  author  explains  w'hat  he  underftands 
by  them.  In  this  chapter,  the  expreffions 
mental  perception,  mental  reprefentation,  in- 
tuition of  an  external  object,  and  apprehen- 
fion  of  one,  are  all  employed  in  a fynonirnous 
fenfe,  and  mean  the  effedt  which  an  external 
objedl  produces  on  our  mind,  fo  that  we  be- 
come confcious  of  its  exiftence.  If  one  of 
them  feems  to  be  preferred  at  one  time  to  the 
reft,  it  is  not  becaufe  a different  idea  is  in- 
tended to  be  conveyed,  but  folely  for  the  pur- 
pofe  of  avoiding  the  repetition  of  the  fame 
word. 


/ 


It  muft  be  fufficiently  obvious  from  what 
has  been  already  faid,  that  the  mind  does  not 
perceive  external  bodies  immediately,  but  me- 
diately, through  the  medium  of  the  nerves  and 
brain.  This  reflection  naturally  demands  that 
fome  notice  fhould  be  taken  of  the  fpeculations 
of  Dr.  Reid,  on  this  fubjedt,  efpecially  as  his 
difeoveries,  as  they  are  called,  militate  againft 

this 


294  on  mental  perception, 

this  idea,  and  have  of  late  been  praifed  and 
adopted  by  my  very  learned  preceptor,  pro- 
tefior  Stewart,  in  his  Elements  of  the  Philofo « 
phy  of  the  Human  Mind. 

Dr.  Reid  does  not  offer  any  hypothecs  of  his 
own  concerning  the  nature  of  mental  percep- 
tion, but  he  attempts  to  pull  down  all  the  opi- 
nions of  others  on  that  fubjedt,  efpecially  thofe 
of  the  peripatetics,  and  of  Locke  and  Hume. 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  opinions  of 
Aristotle  are  to  be  confidered  as  the  balls 
of  all  the  theories  of  thofe  pfychologifts,  who, 
like  Locke  and  Hume,  have  taken  foots  and 
obfervations  for  their  guide.  But  the  mifap- 
plication  which  was  afterwards  made  of  the 
terms  he  employed,  and  the  fanciful  notions 
entertained  concerning  them  by  fchoolmen, 
have  given  occafion  to  much  mifreprefentation 
of  his  dodtrine.  The  doctrine  of  that  great 
and  wonderful  genius  is  a fair  logical  deduc- 
tion, drawn  from  a due  confideration  of  the 
qualities  of  external  bodies,  and  the  nature  of 
the  external  fenfes,  and  of  mind.  He  afferts 

that 


AND  ITS  DISEASES.  295 

that  “ as  our  fenfes  cannot  receive  external 
l(  material  objedts  themfelves,  they  receive 
“ their  fpecies  ;**  that  is,  as  he  himfelf  ex- 
plains, they  receive  their  images,  or  forms, 
without  the  matter,  as  wax  receives  the  feal 
without  any  of  the  gold  of  which  it  is  made. 
Tothefe  he  afterwards  gives  various  denomina- 
tions, according  as  they  are  objects  of  fenfa- 
tion,  or  refined  into  objedts  of  memory,  ima- 
gination, and  pure  intelledtion ; or,  as  agreeable 
to  his  notion,  they  become  objedts  of  pure 
fcience.  To  diftinguilh  all  which  modifica- 
tions of  the  forms  of  external  bodies  he  em- 
ployed the  names  Jenfible fpecies , phantafms>  and 
intelligible  fpecies . 

This  dodtrine  has  two  parts,  the  firft  of 
which  relates  to  the  manner  in  which  external 
objedts  adt  on  the  mind  ; the  other  to  certain 
changes  which  that  primary  affedtion  of  the 
mind  was  fuppofed  to  undergo,  in  confequence 
of  the  operation  of  fome  of  the  mental  facul- 
ties. It  is  the  firft  part  of  the  dodtrine  only 
which  concerns  us  ; the  fecond  is  a fanciful 
conjedture,  unfupported  by  any  fadts,  and 

hence 


296  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

hence  the  terms,  phantafms , and  intelligible 
Jpecies , ought  not  to  be  employed.  Dr.  Reid, 
however,  argues  againfi:  the  whole  doctrine. 
Hefuppofesthat  external  objects  affedt  the  mind 
not  through  any  medium  fuch  as  the  nerves 
and  brain,  but  that  they  adt  immediately  ori 
it.  He  is  too  cautious  to  explain  how  they 
do  this.  It  is  a kind  of  conclufion  that  arifes 
in  his  mind,  more  from  having  detected  the 
fallacies  of  the  fchoolmen,  than  from  any  ob- 
fervations  he  feems  to  have  made  on  himfelf, 
or  any  reafoning  founded  on  the  phenomena, 
and  well  known  qualities-of  the  external  fenfes. 
The  followers  of  Aristotle  fuppofed  that  the 
fpecies,  images,  or  forms,  were  things  which 
iffued  from  the  external  objects,  and  entered 
the  mind  through  the  fenfes  ; but  in  doing 
this  they  add  an  hypothecs  of  their  own  in- 
vention to  the  plain  fadts  which  Aristotle 
told.  Dr.  Reid  treats  this  fanciful  conjecture 
writh  the  ridicule  it  deferves,  but  the  argu- 
ments he  employs  againff  it  do  not  militate 
againff  the  opinion  of  Aristotle,  that  ex- 
ternal bodies  muff  firff  adt  in  a phyffcal  man- 
ner, on  the  external  fenfes,  before  they  affedt 
the  mind,  and  that  the  common  fenfe,  or  in- 
tellect, 


AND  ITS  DISEASES.  297 

telle#,  receives  thefe  imprelTions.  Dr.  Reid, 
although  heaffeds  to  have  divefted  the  fubjed 
of  mental  perception  of  all  theoretical  expref- 
lions,  has  in  fact  indulged  himfelf  in  an  hy- 
pothecs, which  I will  venture  to  aftert  is  more 
lanciful  than  that  of  Aristotle’s.  He  fup- 
pofes  that  the  imprellions,  which  according 
to  his  opinion,  do  not  bear  any  refemblance 
to  the  bodies  themfelves,  are  only  exciting 
caufes  of  perception  ; the  mind  perceives  the 
bodies  themfelves.  Left  it  be  imagined  that 
I mifreprefent  Dr.  Reid’s  hypothelis,  I fnall 
give  it  in  the  words  of  his  friend  and  ad- 
mirer, profeftor  Stewart.  In  page  92  of  his 
Philofophy  of  the  Human  Mind , after  having 
given  a full  account  of  the  Dodor’s  fpecula- 
tions,  he  fays,  €t  To  what  then,  it  may  be 
" afked,  does  this  ftatement  amount  ? merely 
c‘  to  this : that  the  mind  is  fo  formed,  that 
rf  certain  impreftions,  produced  on  our  organs 
€C  of  fcnfe  by  external  objeds,  are  followed 
f<  by  correfpondent  fenfations,  (which  have  no 
<c  more  refemblance  to  the  qualities  of  matter, 
tf  than  the  words  of  a language  have  to  the 
f'  things  they  denote,)  are  followed  by  a per- 

a ception 


298  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

" ception  of  the  exigence  and  qualities  of  the 
,c  bodies  by  which  the  impreflions  are  made  * 
" that  all  the  fteps  of  this  procefs  are  equally 
*f  incomprehenfible ; and  that,  for  any  thing 
“ that  we  can  prove  to  the  contrary,  the  con- 
*f  ne&ion  between  the  fenfation,  and  the  per- 
" ception,  as  well  as  that  between  the  impref- 
“ fion,  and  the  fenfation,  may  be  both  arbi- 
Cf  trary ; that  it  is,  therefore,  by  no  means 
" impoffible,  that  our  fenfations  may  he  merely 
<(  the  occafions  on  which  the  correfpondent  per- 
tf  ceptions  are  excited , and  that,  at  any  rate,  the 
,f  confideration  of  thefe  fenfations,  which  are 
0 attributes  of  mind,  can  throw  no  light  on 
" the  manner  in  which  we  acquire  our  know- 
“ ledge  of  the  exigence  and  qualities  of  body. 
u From  this  view  of  the  fubjedt,  it  follows, 
u that  it  is  external  objefls  themfelves , and  not 
<r  any  fpecies,  or  images  of  thefe  objedls,  that 
**  the  mind  perceives  ; and  that,  although  by 
“ the  conftitution  of  our  nature,  certain  fen- 
fations  are  rendered  the  conftant  antece- 
« dents  of  our  perceptions,  yet  it  is  juft  as 
ft  difficult  to  explain  how  our  perceptions  are 
c<  obtained  by  their  means,  as  it  would  be. 


upon 


AND  ITS  DISEASES.  299 

“ upon  the  fuppofition,  that  the  mind  were 
ff  all  at  once  infpired  with  them,  without  any 
" concomitant  fenfations  whatever.” 

Independently  of  the  hypothefes  already 
alluded  to  and  contained  in  the  citation  above, 
it  is  further  to  be  remarked,  that  Dr.  Reid 
embraces  the  commonly  received  notion,  that 
there  is  a certain  ad  of  the  mind  which  inter- 
venes between  the  impreflion  on  the  nerves, 
and  the  perception,  which  ad,  like  many  other 
writers  on  metaphylics,  he  choofes  to  call  fen- 
fation.  In  this  work  it  has  been  attempted  to 
be  proved  that  there  is  no  ad  of  the  mind  be- 
tween the  impreflion  which  external  bodies 
make  on  the  nerves,  and  mental  perception, 
except  the  fenforial  impreflion  be  confidered 
as  fuch ; which  however,  is  nothing  elfe  than 
a mere  continuation  of  thephyflcal  impreflion, 
made  by  the  external  body  on  the  nerves. 

The  word  fenfation  ought  either  to  be  made 
equivalent  with  nervous  impreflion,  or  con- 
fcioufnefs  ; and  whenever  it  is  employed  by 
any  author,  it  ought  to  be  accurately  Rated 
which  of  the  two  it  is  intended  to  exprefs. 

In 


300  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

In  addition  to  what  has  been  faid  in  the 
chapter  on  fenlation,  it  may  be  obferved,  that 
no  two  perfons,  perhaps,  have  exadly  fimilar 
and  correfponding  perceptions  of  any  external 
objed:  whatever.  Some  cannot  diftinguifh 
green  from  blue,  others  cannot  diftinguifh  a 
fub-acid  tafte  from  a faltifh  one  ; fome  people 
have  no  perception  of  certain  colours  ; hardly 
three  people  out  of  ten  will  agree  perfedly 
about  the  exaeft  relation  which  any  one  fhade 
of  colour  has  to  others  of  the  fame  kind  ; cir- 
cumftances  wrhich  cannot  be  well  explained  in 
any  other  way  than  by  fuppofing  that  the 
nerves  of  different  men  are  differently  modi- 
fied, and  that  owing  to  this  difference  in  ftruc- 
ture,  all  external  impreftions  muft  alfo  be  dif- 
ferent in  fuch  men.  If  this  conclufion  be  not 
admitted,  the  fad;  muft  be  explained  by  fup- 
pofing the  mind  to  be  differently  organized  in 
different  men. 

A mental  rep  re  fen  tat  ion  is  that  effect  which 
the  figure  of  impreftion  makes  on  the  mind. 

As  confcioufnefs  is  to  the  mind  w7hat  fenfibi- 
lity  is  to  the  body ; no  reprefentation  can  take 

place 


AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


30I 

place  of  which  we  are  not  confcious,  provided 
our  attention  be  not  ftrongly  engaged  at  the  time. 

This  faculty  by  which  wre  receive  reprefen- 
rations,  may  be  faid  to  be  the  bafis  of  all  the 
other  mental  faculties,  for  it  will  be  found 
afterwards  that  memory,  imagination,  and 
judgment,  are  only  the  renewal,  the  combina- 
tion, and  comparing  of  reprefentations,  or 

intuitions,  which  have  been  already  received. 

* 

As  the  knowledge  we  have  of  any  external 
objedl  is  generally  acquired  through  the  me- 
dium of  more  than  one  of  the  organs  of  exter- 
nal fenfe,  and  as  our  knowledge  of  the  body 
is  a reprefentation  of  all  the  individual  im- 
preflions  it  has  made  on  thefe  organs,  united 
as  it  were,  into  one  individual  thought,  or  idea, 
it  is  evident  that  this  faculty  of  the  mind  is 
conftituted  of  an  adtive  power  which  changes 
the  nervous  imprefiions,  and  afiimilates  them 
to  the  nature  of  mind. 

In  order  that  this  faculty  fhall  receive  clear 
imprefiions  ab  externo , and  produce  its  full 
mental  efFedts  on  thefe,  fo  as  to  give  them  the 

nature 


301  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

nature  and  chara&ers  of  thought,  many  cif-» 
cumJflances  are  neceffiary. 

It  has  been  proved  that  the  nerves  of  the  ex- 
ternal fenfes  alone  convey  diftindt  impreffions 
to  the  brain,  and  thephyfical  and  efficient  caufe 
of  this  have  alfo  been  attempted  to  be  demon- 
ftrated.  Admitting  the  mere  fadt,  it  is  to  be 
obferved,  that  all  impreffions  calculated  to  pro- 
duce a reprefentation  in  the  mind,  muft  not 
only  be  made  with  a certain  degree  of  mechani- 
cal ftrength,  in  order  to  reach  the  fenforium  ; 
but  the  fenforial  impreffion  muft  alfo  be  of  a 
certain  degree  of  force,  in  order  to  affedt  the 
mind. 

There  are  two  daffies  of  caufes  which  -weaken 
impreffions  fio  much  as  to  render  them  unfit 
for  affedling  the  mind.  The  firft  one  is  in- 
tirely  mechanical,  the  fecond  pfiychological. 
The  mechanical  caufes  occur  when  the  ar- 
rangement at  the  extremity  of  a nerve  has 
not  been  fufficiently  altered  by  the  body  ap- 
plied ; the  figure  of  impreffion,  in  this  cafe, 
either  does  not  reach  the  brain,  or  if  it  does  fo, 
the  fenforial  impreffion  that  is  produced  by  it 
is  fo  weak  as  not  to  be  fufficient  for  the  purpofe 

of 


AND  ITS  DISEASES.  3O3 

of  exciting  a reprefentation  in  the  mind.  It 
becomes  fo  much  the  more  neceflary  that  im- 
prehionson  the  extremity  of  the  nerves  fhould 
be  made  with  a certain  degree  of  force,  in  order 
to  excite  a reprefentation,  becaufe  nature  her- 
felf  feems  to  have  been  under  the  neceffity  of 
placing  a number  of  obftacles  in  the  way.  The 
extremities  of  the  nerves  of  the  organs  of  touch 
are  all  covered  by  the  cuticle,  and  a very  fine 
membrane,  the  rele  tnucofum . The  extremi- 
ties of  the  nerves  of  the  nofe  are  covered  by  a 
delicate  membrane,  and  a coat  of  mucus ; thofe 
of  the  ear  are  defended  by  a membrane,  a fluid, 
and  a coat  of  a thick,  fecreted  matter ; the  re- 
tina of  the  eye  has  many  membranes  and  hu- 
mours interpofed  between  it  and  the  rays  of 
light.  In  fhort,  the  extremities  of  the  nerves 
are  no  where  expofed  to  the  immediate  impref- 
lion  of  external  bodies.  Had  that  been  the 
cafe,  it  is  evident  that  from  their  very  delicate 
texture  they  mult  have  been  frequently  fub- 
jed:ed  to  much  violence  from  the  force  with 
which  many  bodies  are  often  applied  to  them. 

The  pfychological  caufe  is  the  faculty  of 
attention : by  its  a&ive  powers  all  impreffions 

of 


3O4  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

of  external  bodies  are  either  rendered  vivid, 
or  are  impeded  in  their  operation  on  the  mind 
upon  principles,  which  we  perhaps  fhall  never 
be  able  fully  to  comprehend.  If  on  the  one 
hand  our  attention  be  wholly  directed  to  the 
objects  which  ftrike  our  fenfes,  the  nervous 
impreflion  not  only  feems  to  be  more  acutely 
felt,  but  the  reprefentation  in  the  mind  feems 
alfo  to  be  fo  much  the  more  complete  and  ac- 
curate. On  the  other  hand,  if  it  be  already 
engaged  by  any  objedl  of  thought,  the  impref- 
fions  of  external  bodies  fail  to  produce  their 
due  mental  effect.  A perfon  who  is  thus  oc- 
cupied, may  flare  his  neareft  friend  in  the  face, 
and  pafs  him,  as  if  he  was  unknown  to  him. 
If>  in  perufing  a work  of  fcience,  or  genius, 

our  mind  is  led  aflray  to  a diflant  train  of 

\ 

abflrad:  thought,  we  may  continue  to  read, 
and  yet  not  underfland  one  word  of  the 
book.  The  words  are  feen,  they  make  a full 
imprehion  on  the  eye,  and  that  is  conveyed  to 
the  brain,  but  it  does  not  feem  to  affedt  the 
mind.  That  it  is  conveyed  to  the  brain  is 
evident  from  this,  that  if  the  perfon  was  read- 
ing aloud,  he  fhall  continue  to  pronounce  the 

words. 


AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


30S 

words,  and  yet,  if  fuddenly  ftopt,  he  does  not 
recoiled  one  word  of  what  he  has  feen.  Many 
external  bodies  are  made  up  of  parts,  which 
are  extremely  different  from  each  other  in 
form,  fize,  colour,  denfity,  and  a variety  of 
other  phyfical  properties,  which  are  calcu- 
lated to  affed  our  fenfes.  Each  of  thefe  parts 
may  be  confidered  as  a diftind  objed  of  repre- 
fentation.  The  more  completely,  then,  that 
the  feveral  parts  and  phyfical  properties  of  any 
objed  are  reprefented  in  the  mind,  the  more 
perfed  will  the  general  reprefentation  of  that 
objed  be. 

It  is  juftly  and  acutely  obferved  by  my 
friend.  Dr.  Marcus  Herz,  in  his  celebrated 
work  on  Vertigo,  that  a certain  portion  of 
time  is  required  before  an  external  body  is 
duly  reprefented  in  the  mind.  If  a number 
of  objeds  pafs  quickly  before  our  eyes,  or  a 
number  of  founds  rapidly  fucceed  each  other, 
we  have  but  an  imperfed  reprefentation  of 
them  ; they  have  not  ftaid  long  enough  in  the 
mind  to  be  fully  felt  as  it  were. 


VOL.  I. 


X 


As 


I 


306  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

As  the  faculty  of  mental  perception  is  an 
adtive  one,  and  operates  on  the  impreflions 
received  by  the  fenfes,  a certain  portion  of 
time,  however  fhort  it  may  be  fuppofed  to  be, 
is  always  neceflary  for  its  due  accomplifhment. 
If  external  impreflions  fucceed  each  other  too 
rapidly,  this  kind  of  mental  aflimilation  can- 
not take  place,  and  a crude  and  defective 
idea  is  the  confequence  ; hence  a perfon  who 
fees  an  unknown  animal,  or  a complex  piece 
of  architecture,  only  for  a fhort  time,  has 
a very  imperfedt  knowledge  of  them  ; the 
more  remarkable  parts  only  are  attended  to. 
A perfon  who  is  capable  of  painting  from 
memory,  will  make  a more  exadt  refemblance 
of  any  thing  which  has  a number  of  parts, 
after  he  has  feen  it  feveral  times,  than  he  could 
poflibly  have  done  had  he  only  feen  it  once  or 
twice  ; and  hence  we  fee  the  reafon  why  peo- 
ple have  a more  accurate  recolledtion  of  fub- 
jedts  connedted  with  their  favorite  purfuits,  or 
ftudies,  than  with  thofe  which  they  have  not 
been  accuftomed  to  contemplate. 


i 


It 


And  its  diseases*  36*7 

It  is  evident,  then,  from  what  has  been  al- 
ready faid,  that  our  knowledge  of  complex 
bodies  will  be  more  or  lefs  complete,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  number  of  their  parts  and 
qualities  reprefented  in  our  mind.  Of  thofe 
which  are  calculated  to  affedt  feveral  of  our 
external  fenfes,  our  knowledge  muft  be  flowly 
gained,  fince  a certain  portion  of  time  elapfes 
in  attentively  examining  all  the  imprellions 
which  arife  from  them. 

Our  knowledge  of  bodies  is  often  counter- 
adted  by  caufes  which  it  is  not  in  our  power 
to  remove.  If  the  organs  of  external  fenfe 
are  weak,  or  faulty,  a number  of  parts  may 
not  only  efcape  obfervation,  but  even  if  they 
do  engage  attention,  they  are  not  accurately 
reprefented.  Diftance  may  operate  in  the  fame 
way,  for  it  conceals  from  us  a number  of  the 
minuter  parts  of  the  body. 

There  is  a term  borrowed  from  the  Greeks, 
employed  by  Descartes,  Locke,  Hume, 
Berkeley,  and  moft  of  our  beft  metaphyli- 
cians,  which  is  nearly  of  an  equivalent  figni- 

X 2 fication 


3c8  on  mental  perception, 

fication  with  the  expreflion,  mental  reprefen- 
tation  ; the  word  alluded  to  is  idea . Dr.  Reid 
rejects  this  expreflion  on  account  of  the  abfurd 
hypothefis  already  mentioned,  with  which  it 
was  connected,  and  in  its  place  he  fubftitutes 
the  term  notion . Thefe  terms  are  ufefully  em- 
ployed in  a fenfe  nearly  equivalent  to  that  of 
mental  reprefentation,  in  cafes  in  w'hich  it 
would  appear  affeCted  to  make  ufe  of  this  laft 
expreflion.  It  is  more  natural  to  fay  that  a 
perfon  has  an  idea,  or  notion  of  virtue,  cou- 
rage, honour,  charity,  benevolence,  and  gra- 
titude, than  to  fay  that  he  has  a reprefentation, 
or  perception  of  them.  Although  thefe  words 
are  fuppofedto  exprefs  certain  abftraCt  qualities 
of  mind,  rather  than  any  thing  which  is  cor- 
poreal, yet  a little  reflection  will  foon  convince 
us  that  our  knowledge  of  their  exigence  arifes 
from  external  and  vifible  objeCts.  Accord- 
ing to  the  views  of  the  fociety  we  live  in, 
and  their  particular  doCtrines  and  forms  of 
religion,  certain  adtions  are  denominated  vices, 
while  others,  from  promoting  the  ends  of  fo- 
ciety, and  the  purpofes  of  religion,  are  called 
virtues.  In  our  infancy,  and  as  we  grow  up 


in 


AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


309 

in  life,  we  are  taught  to  difcriminate  the  one 
fet  of  actions  from  the  other,  by  hearing 
them  receive  the  appellations  mentioned. 
The  word  virtuous , then,  is  applied  to  con- 
duct, or  certain  actions.  In  like  manner  we 
are  taught  to  apply  the  word  courageous  to 
a man  who  fights  well  in  battle  ; he  who  re- 
lieves the  poor  is  faid  to  be  charitable  % and 
when  our  words  and  addons  are  exprefiive  of 
kindnefs  to  thofe  from  whom  we  have  received 
a benefit,  we  are  told  we  are  grateful.  Our 
notions,  then,  of  thefe  things  are  fo  far  de- 
rived ab  externo . We  have  a confcioufnefs, 
or  knowledge,  however,  that  our  own  volun- 
tary addons  are  excited  by  certain  thoughts, 
which  we  call  motives  or  principles  ; and 
as  we  naturally  imagine  that  the  addons  of 
every  other  man  arife  in  a fimilar  manner,  we 
endeavour  to  characterize  the  principles  of  hu- 
man addon  by  different  names,  and  thus  we  call 
the  motives  which  prompt  a man  to  do  vir- 
tuous actions,  virtue ; and  courageous  actions, 
courage , &c.  Although  our  knowledge  of 
thefe  principles  is  originally  derived  from  the 
external  world,  yet  as  they  themfelves  are  not 

reprefen  tat  ions 


310  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

reprefentations  of  any  individual  external  ob- 
ject, it  is  proper  to  have  a different  term  to 
exprefs  them.  It  is,  moreover,  to  be  ob- 
ferved,  that  the  word  reprefentation  cannot  be 
well  applied  to  the  knowledge  we  have  of  our 
own  thoughts,  and  the  operations  of  our  mind, 
lince  it  is  not  derived  from  any  impreffion  on 
our  external  fenfes,  but  from  a kind  of  mental 
feeling  we  call  confcioufnefs.  In  all  fuch 
cafes,  therefore,  the  old  word  idea,  or  intui- 
tion, is  a much  better  term. 

Dr.  Reid  remarks,  with  much  juffice  and 
ingenuity,  that  when  our  attention  is  diredted 
to  external  objedts  it  is  called  obfervation , and 
when  it  is  directed  to  our  thoughts  alone,  it 
is  called  reflection.  The  diftindlion  between 
thefe  two  is  obvious,  and  hence  the  utility  of 
thefe  expreffions. 

Although  education  is  the  circumftance 
w7hich,  generally,  has  a great  and  evident  influ- 
ence in  rendering  a perfon  an  obferver,  or  a 
man  of  reflection ; yet  we  mu  ft  alfo  fearch  in 
the  organization  of  the  body,  and  the  natural 

condition 


AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


31* 

condition  of  the  mind,  for  the  difference  of 
charadter.  If  a number  of  children  be  atten- 
tively obferved  at  the  time  when  they  firft 
begin  to  acquire  a tolerable  good  management 
of  their  external  fenfes,  we  fhall  difcover  a 
vaft  difference  among  them  in  this  refpedt. 
Some  are  all  hands,  and  ears,  and  eyes  ; others 
are  naturally  ferious  and  thoughtful ; and 
others  dull  and  heavy,  lumpifh  in  body,  and 
torpid  in  mind.  In  the  firft  clafs  the  fenfibi- 
lity  of  nerves,  efpecially  thofe  which  fupply 
the  organs  of  external  fenfe,  is  great ; every 
objedt  adts  powerfully  on  them,  excites  them, 
and  keeps  their  attention  conftantly  employed 
with  the  external  world.  When  this  fenfibi- 
lity  of  nerves  is  exceffive,  and  difproportion- 
ate  to  the  energy  of  the  mind,  a phyfical  reft- 
leffnefs  occurs  which  difturbs  all  inffrudlion  ; 
their  attention  is  conftantly  withdrawn  to 
external  objedts;  and  when  they  grow  up  in 
life  they  generally  run  into  every  fpecies  of 
thoughtlefs  excefs.  But  when  it  is  only  acute, 
and  accompanied  with  an  adtive  mind,  it  lays 
the  foundation  for  the  moft  fplendid  and 
fhining  chara&er.  All  depends,  then,  upon 

the 


312  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

the  mode  in  which  attention  is  diredled  ^nd. 
improved  ; or  in  other  words,  on  the  education 
that  is  given  them,  and  the  condudt  they  are 
made  to  obfervc. 

i 

The  ferious  and  thoughtful  boy  has  lefs 
fenfibility  in  the  nerves  of  his  organs  of  ex- 
ternal fenfe,  than  force  of  mind ; his  atten- 
tion, therefore,  is  more  eafily  excited  by  his 
own  thoughts  than  by  external  objects.  He 
is  filent,  abfent,  and  often  folitary  ; and  if  this 
ftate  be  not  corrected  by  the  moft  judicious 
management,  he  becomes  unfit  for  every  adtive 
commerce  with  the  world.  He  may  become 
a good  and  learned  fcholar,  aftronomer,  ma- 
thematician, or  metaphyfician,  and  may  eafily 
excel  in  every  abftradt  fcience  in  wrhich  the 
powers  of  the  mind  alone  are  principally  re- 
quired. But  he  makes  a bad  obferver,  and  con- 
fequently  always  appears  to  mankind  at  large, 
much  inferior  in  talents  to  the  generality  of  other 
people.  He  is  inattentive  to  the  common  cir- 
cumftances  of  common  converfation,  and  unac- 
quainted with  the  topics  of  it.  He  is  a perfedt 
book-worm,  for  his  natural  defires  lead  him 


on 


AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


3T3 


on  to  knowledge,  and  his  averfions  make  him 
renounce  general  fociety.  Between  thefe  two 
extremes  there  are  various  fhades  of  mental 
character,  arifing  from  a variety  of  conftitu- 
tion  ; difpofing  fome,  on  the  one  hand,  to  ex- 
ercifes  of  the  mind,  and  others  to  exercifes 
of  the  fenfes.  If  education,  and  the  acci- 
dental circumftances  of  life  do  not  correct 

I 

thefe  bialles  when  very  ftrong,  terrible  effects 
are  apt  to  follow'  in  the  courfe  of  time.  The 
mind  of  the  one  is  liable  to  become  torpid 
for  want  of  due  exercife,  the  principal  occu- 
pation of  the  perfon  being  the  employment 
of  his  external  fenfes  ; the  mind  of  the  other 
is  too  much  exalted  at  the  expence  of  the 
external  fenfes,  and  therefore  the  foundation  is 
laid  for  a predifpofition  to  fmgular  lllulions, 
the  nature  of  which  will  afterwards  be  ex- 
plained when  the  deliria  to  which  men  of 
genius  are  fubjedt,  are  treated  of. 

The  reprefentative  faculty  of  the  mind  may 
be  varioufly  altered  from  its  natural  Bate  ; and 
of  thefe  morbid  alterations  two  may  be  faid 
to  be  idiopathic,  or  fpecific,  all  the  reft  are 

fympathetic. 


3*4  on  mental  perception, 

fympathetic,  and  arife  from  difeafes  of  the 
external  fenfes. 

The  firlt  fpecific  diforder  to  which  this 
faculty  is  expofed,  is  fatuity,  or  idiotifin,  in 
which  it  appears  that  no  accurate  reprefen- 
tation  of  any  external  object,  and  no  abltradt 
thought,  or  reflection,  ever  occurs.  The 
phenomena  by  which  this  complaint  is  dif- 
tinguilhed  are  very  linking ; a vague,  un- 
Iteady,  wandering  eye,  which  is  feldom  fixed 
for  any  length  of  time  upon  any  one  object ; 
a ftupid  expreflion  of  countenance,  in  which 
no  fign  of  intelligence  is  pourtrayed  ; a gaping 
mouth,  from  which  the  faliva  flows  confiantly; 
a perpetual  rolling  and  tolling  of  the  head  ; no 
memory,  no  language,  no  reafon.  The  idiot 
has  all  the  animal  inftincts,  and  fome  of  the 
pallions.  Of  the  lalt,  joy,  fear,  and  danger, 
are  thofe  with  which  he  is  molt  frequently 
affected,  but  thefe  are  of  a very  limited  kind  ; 
his  joy  is  unmeaning  mirth  ; his  fear  a tran- 
lient  qualm ; his  anger  a momentary  fit  of 
violence  : the  toys  of  children,  and  the  gra- 
tification of  hunger  and  thirlt,  are  his  only 

pleafures ; 


AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


31$ 

pleafures  ; bodily  pain,  or  fear  of  bodily  pain, 
the  only  fources  of  his  anger.  It  is  a common 
opinion  that  idiots  have  not  only  ftrong  fex- 
ual  delires,  but  alfo  great  powers  to  execute 
them.  Whether  this  notion  is  well  founded 
or  not,  I cannot  take  upon  me  to  decide, 
having  never  inftituted  any  experiments 
whereby  it  may  be  afcertained.  It  is  certain 
that  thofe  who  are  completely  fatuitous,  fel- 
dom  exhibit  any  delire  on  the  approach  of 
the  oppofite  fex. 

This  difeafe  is  either  congenital,  or  acci. 
dental  ; the  firft  is  by  far  the  moft  frequent ; 
the  number  of  born  idiots  exceeding  thofe  of 
the  others  by  a vaft  proportion.  A faulty 
conformation  of  the  bony  parts  of  the  head, 
and  of  the  brain  itfelf,  are  generally  the  caufes 
from  which  this  humiliating  diforder  proceeds. 
Of  thofe  who  are  idiots  from  birth,  a number 
are  affedled  in  the  courfe  of  their  lives  with 
palfy,  or  epilepfy,  fometimes  with  both  ; a 
clear  proof  of  the  exigence  of  fome  organic 
affedtion  oLthe  brain  or  nerves.  The  palfy, 
jfometimes  very  partial,  occupying  the  face 

only, 


3 1 6 ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

only ; at  other  times  the  whole  of  one  fide  is 

alfedted. 

There  are  few  inftances  of  bom  idiots  at- 
taining an  old  age : they  feldom  live  until 
they  are  thirty ; and  of  thofe  who  are  epileptic 
or  paralytic,  the  greater  number  die  before 
they  are  twenty-five.  Fatuity  and  idiotifm 
may  arife  accidentally  from  a variety  of  caufes, 
which,  by  mechanically  deranging  the  texture 
of  the  brain,  deftroy  all  the  operations  of  the 
mind.  It  is  in  this  way  that  idiotifm  often 
comes  on  after  repeated  attacks  of  epilepfy, 
fevers  of  bad  kinds,  blows  on  the  head,  and 
alfo  as  a confequence  of  phrenzy. 

The  next  diforder  to  which  this  faculty  is 
fubjedt  is  vertigo,  or  dizzinefs.  Before  the 
nature  of  this  complaint  can  be  perfedtly  un- 
derftood,  a number  of  phyfiological  fadts  muft 
be  taken  notice  of,  the  mentioning  of  which 
has  been  purpofely  delayed  until  this  moment, 
becaufe  it  was  imagined  they  would  make  a 
more  forcible  impreffion  on  the  mind  of  the 

reader. 


AND  ITS  DISEASES.  3 1 7 

reader,  from  their  natural  connection  with  this 
curious  objeCt  of  inquiry. 

The  time  required  before  the  reprefentative 
faculty  of  the  mind  obtains  a due  reprefenta- 
tion  of  any  external  objeCt;  or  to  exprefs  one’s 
felf  in  fimpler  language,  the  time  that  is 
neceffary  to  examine  external  objeCts  with  a 
due  degree  of  accuracy,  is  very  different  in 
different  cafes.  The  circumftances  which 

f 

particularly  regulate  this,  appear  to  be  three 
in  number: 

1 ft.  The  greater,  or  fewer  number  of  parts, 
of  which  an  objeCt  of  external  or  internal 
fenfe  is  compofed. 

2dly.  The  degree  of  attention  employed 
during  the  examination  of  the  objeCt. 

3dly.  The  difference  in  the  natural  recepti- 
vity of  mens  minds. 

1 

1 ft.  Simple  bodies,  and  thofe  which  are  fi- 
milar  in  appearance,  fuch  as  a feries  of  fimilar 

pillars. 


318  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

pillars,  or  columns ; a flock  of  fhccp,  or  deer  $ 
a number  of  foldiers  dreffed  alike,  are  all 
quickly  examined.  The  eye  glides  eafily  from 
the  one  to  the  other,  and  no  unpleafant  effed: 
arifes  in  the  mind  in  confequence  of  the  rapid 
fuccefiion  of  reprefentations  which  occur. 
But  when  the  objects  are  different  from  each 
other,  and  new  to  us,  fuch  as  a number  of 
foreign  flowers,  or  pictures  and  ffatues,  before 
unfeen,  our  attention  is  arrefted  by  each  one, 

and  it  feems  painiul  to  withdraw  our  fight 

\ 

from  them  until  the  eye  fliall  have  repofcd, 
as  it  were,  for  a certain  time  on  each. 
This  obfervation  is  not  peculiar  to  external 
objects,  for  our  internal  thoughts  are  fubjed: 
to  the  fame  laws  ; thofe  ideas  which  are  Am- 
ple and  familiar  to  us,  glide  quickly  and  eafily 
acrofs  the  mind  without  occalioning  any  drain 
of  attention,  or  producing  any  uneafinefs  in 
their  tranfit ; but  others  arreft  our  attention,  as 

4 

it  were,  by  force,  and  we  cannot  difmifs  them 
from  our  mind  without  a kind  of  effort,  which 
is  painful.  If  they  are  forced  upon  us  in  ra- 
pid fucceffion,  they  produce  a great  deal  of 

mental 


AND  ITS  DISEASES.  3I9 

mental  diforder  which  will  be  immediately 
deferibed. 

2dly.  That  the  time  necefiary  for  obtaining 
a due  reprefentation  of  any  objed:,  is  regulated, 
in  a great  degree,  by  the  attention  employed, 

r 

does  not  furely  require  much  illuftration.  No 
man  can  have  attained  the  age  of  reafon  with- 
out having  repeatedly  made  the  obfervation. 

3dly.  The  third  circumftance  which  regu- 
lates the  time  necdfarily  employed  by  the  mind 
in  obtaining  a due  reprefentation,  or  idea  of 
any  thing,  is  what  the  Germans  very  properly 
call  receptivity. 

The  word  is  applied  to  denote  a fad:  which 
is  hinted  at  inEnglifh,  when  we  fay  that  fuch 
a perfon  has  a quick  apprehenfion,  or  com- 
prehenfion,  and  that  fuch  another  perfon  has  a 
flow  comprehenfion,  or  apprehenfion.  There 
is  a natural  difference  in  the  conftitution  of  the 
mind  which  fits  it  for  receiving  and  retaining 
with  more  or  lefs  facility,  the  influence  of  fen- 
forial  impreflions ; jull  as  there  is  a conflitu- 
tional  difference  in  the  nerves  of  people,  which 

caufes 


320  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

caufes  fome  to  feci  all  external  impreflions 
much  more  acutely  than  others.  It  is  to  this 
principle  that  a great  deal  of  the  natural  ine- 
quality which  we  obferve  in  the  intelledtual 
powers  of  different  children,  and  men,  are  to  be 
referred.  When  the  receptivity  is  great,  every 
external  objedl  is  quickly  apprehended,  and  , 
the  moft  complex  and  abftrad:  thoughts  feem 
to  be  underftood  as  if  by  intuition.  Where 
the  receptivity  is  weak,  external  impreffions 
muff  be  often  repeated,  or  long  continued,  be- 
fore the  reprefentation  in  the  mind  is  complete ; 
and  abftract  and  complex  thoughts  muft  not 
only  be  often  repeated,  but  reduced  to  all  their 
primitive  parts,  and  offered  piece-meal,  as  it 
were,  to  the  mind,  before  the  perfon  can  be 
made  to  comprehend  them.  What  we  call 
quicknefs  of  mind,  and  its  oppofite  term,  dull- 
nefs,  are  qualities,  then,  of  its  receptive  powers. 

% 

There  are  certain  ideas,  and  modifications  of 
thought  which  our  mind  feizes  in  preference 
to  others.  Some  men  are  painters,  poets,  and 
arithmeticians,  &c.  from  the  natural  conffitu- 
tion  of  their  minds,  and  in  early  youth  always 

exhibit 


I 


AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


321 


exhibit  a greater  prediledtion  for  the  peculiar 
obje&s  of  tnefe  fludies,  than  for  others.  A 
bent  of  mind  to  certain  branches  of  ftudy, 
rather  than  to  others,  may  be  acquired  by- 
habit,  as  well  as  derived  from  birth,  as  hath 
been  fully  explained  in  the  preceding  chapter  ; 
for  the  receptive  powers  are  always  rendered 
pliant  by  renewing  the  fame  fet  of  impreflions. 
Although  a perfon  fhould  find  it  painful  at  firft 
to  fix  his  attention  to  any  particular  fcience, 
yet  by  perfevering,  the  averfion  gradually 
wears  off ; and  after  he  has  made  a certain  pro- 
grefs  in  it,  he  at  laft  finds  that  every  thing 

which  relates  to  it  intereffs  him,  and  his  re- 

\ 

ceptivity  for  all  the  thoughts  connected  with 
it,  is  increafed  to  a furprizing  degree. 

When  mental  reprefentations  and  ideas  fuc- 
ceed  each  other  flowly,  an  irkfomenefs  of 
mind  takes  place,  which  the  French  call  ennui . 
The  flownefs  hinted  at  is  neceffarily  relative 
to  the  nature  of  the  ideas.  New  ideas  pleafe 
much  better  when  they  fucceed  each  other 
with  a certain  degree  of  flownefs,  than  when 
quickly  prefented  to  the  mind  ; but  when  a 

Vol.  I.  Y perfon 


J22  ON  MENTAt  PERCEPTION, 

perfon  is  confined  to  the  houfe,  and  is  de- 
prived of  fociety,  and  has  no  opportunity  of 
feeing  a fucceflion  of  new  objects,  and  is  not 
under  the  influence  of  any  defire,  or  pafflon, 
which  can  give  rife  to  a flow  of  thoughts,  he 
neceflarily  falls  into  this  diftrefling  date,  from 
the  too  flow  fucceflion  of  old  or  accuftomed 
thoughts.  If  wre  have  no  means  of  efcaping 
from  a dull,  ignorant,  and  prolix  companion, 
whofe  whole  converfation  is  about  common 
place  topics,  and  whofe  thoughts  have  no  aflo- 
ciation  with  any  of  our  purfuits,  or  inclina- 
tions, we  fall  into  a ftate  of  ennui.  This  tor- 
menter  of  human  happinefs  often  occafions  a 
degree  of  inquietude  which  is  productive  of  the 
moft  alarming  and  fatal  confequences  ; for  the 
defire  of  relief  becomes,  in  fome  cafes,  fo  great 
as  totally  to  deftroy  all  judgment,  and  confe- 
quently  hurries  the  perfon  on  to  the  moft  cri- 
minal violence  againft  nature.  It  is  in  this 
way  that  ennui,  like  melancholy,  may  terminate 
in  fuicide.  In  a lefler  degree,  it  produces  a 
number  of  well-known,  but  no  lefs  remarkable 
phenomena  ; a reftleflnefs,  and  fenfe  of  weari- 
nefs,  fpread  themfelves  over  the  whole  frame; 

the 


AND  ITS  DISEASES.  223 

the  perfon  gapes  and  yawns  frequently,  his 
fenfes  become  dull,  his  attention  unfettled, 
and  he  at  laft  falls  afleep ; or  if  he  be  young 
and  a&ive,  the  diftrefling  feelings  which  ac- 
company this  ftate  give  rife  to  a powerful  de- 
lire of  relief.  I have  feen  a perfon  in  company 
after  fuffering  impatiently  thefe  kind  of  tor- 
tures for  a long  time,  at  laft  totally  forgetting 
where  he  was,  fuddenly  ftart  from  his  chair 
like  a frantic  perfon,  walk  about  the  room  for 
a minute  or  two  with  a quick  pace,  panting 
for  breath,  as  if  he  had  not  breathed  freely  for 
fome  hours  before,  until  the  expreflions  and 
aftonilhment  of  the  people  around  him  awaken- 
ed him  from  his  delirium,  and  brought  him 
to  a proper  fenfe  of  the  indecorum  he  had 
been  guilty  of. 

/ 

It  is  a favorite  opinion  with  Helvetius, 
and  many  other  philofophers,  that  ennui  is 
one  of  the  moft  powerful  motives  in  the  mind 
of  man  which  ftimulates  him  to  great  adtions. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  general  truth  of 
this  fadt,  only  it  is  not  quite  accurately  expref- 
fed;  for  it  is  the  deftre  of  relief  from  pain, 

Y 2 and 


324 


ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 


and  not  the  languor  from  which  the  actions 
fpring. 

When  mental  reprefentations,  and  ideas, 
croud  involuntarily,  and  in  too  quick  fuccef- 
fion,  they  occaflon  the  difeafe  called  vertigo, 
or  dizzinefs.  This  is  the  opinion  of  Dr. 
Marcus  Herz,  w'ith  whom  I intirely  coin- 
cide ; he  defines  vertigo  thus  : “ It  is  a jiate 
tf  of  mental  confufion>  arifing  from  the  too  rapid 
“ fucceffi on  of  reprefentations P.  176.  To 
this  definition  the  word  involuntary  ought  to 
be  added,  becaufe  a feries  of  thoughts  may 
pafs  more  rapidly  through  the  mind,  than 
thofe  which  occafion  vertigo,  and  yet  no  fuch 
difeafe  follow  ; as  happens  often  in  the  cafe  of 
quick  reading,  and  where  we  are  under  the 
neceflity  of  recollecting,  fuddenly,  a number 
of  paft  events ; and  alfo  when  we  are  under  the 
influence  of  certain  paflions,  fuch  as  anger. 

The  fymptoms  of  the  difeafe  are  thefe : 
external  objects  appear  in  a rotatory  motion, 
revolving  either  horizontally  from  right  to 
left,  or  vice  verfa ; or  perpendicularly  from 

above 


AND  ITS  DISEASES.  325 

above  downward,  or  from  below  upwards.  It 
frequently  happens  at  the  fame  time,  that  the 
perfon  feems  as  if  his  own  body  was  in  motion, 
and  that  generally  in  a contrary  direction  to 
the  apparent  motion  of  the  objects.  Double 
vilion,  and  fudden  changes  of  the  colour  of 
bodies,  are  alfo  frequently  feen  by  vertiginous 
patients.  The  perfon  ftaggers,  a palenefs 
overfpreads  the  countenance,  the  pulfe  be- 
comes fmall  and  quick,  vilion  dim  and  ob- 
fcure,  the  mufcles  which  fupport  his  body 
give  way,  and  he  falls  down.  Dr.  Herz  enu- 
merates a number  of  other  fymptoms,  which 
he  reduces  under  fo  many  heads  ; but  it  appears 
to  me  that  thofe  already  mentioned  are  the 
only  ones  which  are  general  and  common  to 
all  kinds  of  vertigo.  Thofe  which  remain  to 
be  mentioned  arife  in  particular  cafes,  accord- 
ing to  the  nature  of  the  caufes  which  produce 
it,  and  other  morbid  affe&ions  which  accom- 
pany it. 

It  has  been  faid  that  vertigo  conlifts  in  an 
involuntary  rapid  fuccelfion  of  reprefentations 


or 


326  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

or  ideas.  The  exciting  caufes  are  various,  and 
are  either  external  or  internal. 

The  external  ones  are,  ift.  the  being  placed 
in  fuch  fituations  that  we  cannot  judge  whe- 
ther we  preferve  our  natural  pofture  or  not,  as 
when  we  are  obliged  to  walk  along  a narrow 
board,  fufpended  high  over  a river,  or  chafm, 
and  having  no  fafeguard  on  either  fide ; or  when 
we  direct  our  eyes  down  a precipice,  or  from 
any  great  height;  or,  2dly.  when  external  ob- 
jects are  made  to  revolve  rapidly  before  our 
eyes  ; and,  3dly,  they  are  fuch  difgufting  ob- 
jeds  as  upon  being  viewed  excite  naufea. 

The  manner  in  which  the  firft  clafs  of  ex- 
ternal caufes  operate  is  well  imagined,  and 
defcnbed  by  Dr.  Darwin.  He  thinks  with 
juftice,  that  we  preferve  our  upright  pofture 
by  a fpecies  of  judgment.  “ In  learning  to 
(t  walk,”  he  fays,  “ we  judge  of  the  diftance 
<c  of  the  objeds  wrhich  we  approach  by  the 
<r  eye ; and  by  obferving  their  perpendicularity 
“ determine  our  own.”  The  human  body 
cannot  preferve  an  upright  pofture  without  a 

conftant 


AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


327 


condant  exertion  of  the  mufcles  of  voluntary 
motion,  as  is  evident  from  its  falling  down, 
or  daggering,  when  volition  is  fufpended  or 
impeded.  If  by  a falfe  dep  we  are  thrown  a 
little  out  of  the  perpendicular  podure,  we  im- 
mediately obferve  it  by  the  apparent  alteration 
which  occurs  in  the  dtuation  of  the  bodies 
around  us ; and  we  know  we  have  recovered 
our  former  attitude  when  we  difcover  them  to 
be  in  an  eredt  podure  alfo,  or  in  the  one  in 
which  they  naturally  appear  to  us  while  we 
ourfelves  are  eredt.  Now  if  the  objedts  which 
govern  us,  therefore,  in  this  matter,  be  regu- 
lated in  any  manner  which  we  have  not  been 
aecudomed  to,  or  are  fo  far  withdrawn  from 
our  dght,  that  they  no  longer  ferve  as  guides 
by  which  we  can  regulate  our  podures,  we 
immediately  begin  to  dagger.  No  perfon 
who  is  blind -folded,  or  who  is  in  fuch  a dtua- 
tion where  the  objedts  around  him  are  in  an 
unufual  motion,  as  on  board  of  fhip,  can 
preferve  his  podure,  for  as  foon  as  he  feels 
himfelf  begin  to  dagger,  he  endeavours,  by 
the  exertion  of  thofe  mufcles  which  fupport 
him,  to  recover  his  podure  j and  as  this  is  fel- 

dom 


328  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

dom  accomplilhed  ^t  once,  and  when  accom- 
plilhed is  only  preferved  for  a few  moments, 
the  vibration  of  his  body  increafes  the  appa- 
rent motion  of  the  furrounding  objedts,  their 
reprefentations  pafs  quickly,  and  in  diforder 
acrofs  his  mind,  and  he  becomes  vertiginous. 
Many  people  are  feized  with  vertigo  from  fee- 
ing a large  wheel  revolved  near  to  them. 
Their  propinquity  to  the  objedt,  and  its  large- 
nefs,  are,  in  fome  refpcdts,  necelfary  condi- 
tions for  the  production  of  this  effedt ; for  by 
this  means  the  perfon  is  prevented  from  feeing 
objedts  which  are  at  reft.  In  like  manner, 
many  people  become  vertiginous  from  feeing 
a body  in  confufed  motion  near  them  ; and 
this  explains  the  fecret  of  that  myfterious  in- 
fluence, called  animal  magnetifm.  It  is  well 
known  that  many  people  faint  in  confequence 
of  being  magnetifed.  The  magnetifers  with- 
draw the  attention  of  the  perfons  from  the  ob- 
jedts around  them  by  means  of  various  and 
fudden  motions  of  the  hand,  made  almoft  clofe 
to  the  eyes  of  the  perfon.  Thefe  manipula- 
tions confift  in  a number  of  fudden  jirks  and 
rotatory  movements  of  the  hand,  and  alfo  in 

doling 


AND  ITS  DISEASES.  329 

doling  and  expanding  the  fingers  quickly  be- 
fore the  eyes  of  the  patients  ; hence  they  lofe 
the  fight  of  all  the  objects  in  the  apartment 
which  are  at  reft,  and  confequently  lofe  the 
command  of  attention  to  their  own  thoughts  ; 
they  therefore  become  dizzy,  in  the  manner 
which  I have  defcribed.  I will  venture  to 
affert,  from  what  I myfelf  have  experienced 
under  the  trials  of  Mesmer’s  difciples,  that  if 
the  attention  be  ftrongly  employed,  either  upon 
fomediftant  objedt  which  is  at  reft,  or  what  is 
much  better,  with  one’s  own  thoughts,  fuch 
as  family  concerns,  or  the  remembrance  of 
abfent  friends,  no  vertigo,  or  fainting,  hyfte- 
ria,  or  convulfions,  or  any  other  difeafe,  which 
the  magnetifers  choofe  to  call  a crifis>  will 
enfue. 

Vertigo  is  very  frequently  accompanied  with 
a loud  noife  in  the  ears  like  that  of  a torrent 
falling  over  a precipice.  This  fymptom  is 
common  in  the  vertigo  which  arifes  in  confe- 
quence  of  intoxication,  and  in  that  which 
precedes  apoplexy.  It  appears  to  me  that  it 
may  always  be  accounted  for  in  the  following 
manner  : when  the  blood  is  determined  to  the 

head 


330  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

head  in  greater  force  than  ufual,  the  vibrations 
it  communicates  to  the  petrous  portion  of  the 
temporal  bone,  are  always  heard,  and  when 
they  are  thus  heard,  they  conftantly  recall  to 
our  recollection  the  found  of  the  ruffling  of 
waters.  There  is  another  kind  of  tinnitus  au- 
rium,  or  noife  in  the  ears,  which  is  peculiar  to 
the  vertigo  of  nervous  people,  and  thofe  who 
are  about  to  faint.  It  confifts  of  a number  of 
quick  concuffions,  of  a metallic  found,  and  is 
compared  to  the  ringing  of  bells.  This,  I 
believe,  conftantly  arifes  from  a convulfive 
motion  of  the  mufcles  of  the  malleus , by  which 
it  is  thrown  into  repeated  actions.  This  con- 
jecture arifes  from  the  well  known  faCt,  that 
it  often  precedes  epilepfy,  and  hyfterical 
paroxyfms.  It  is  alfo  often  heard  by  nervous 
patients  when  agitated,  or  affeCted  by  cold, 
indigeftion,  or  fuch  caufes  as  bring  on  in  them 
flight  fpafmodic  affections.  Dr.  Darwin  ex- 
plains this  curious  circumftance  in  a different 
manner,  which  is  conftftent  with  his  general 
doCtrine,  but  which  may  be  faid  to  be  a very 
round-about  way  of  accounting  for  the  pheno- 
menon. 

" During 


I 


AND  ITS  DISEASES#  33I 

ft  During  our  waking  hours/’  he  fays,  (Vol. 
I.  p.  234,)  ff  there  is  a perpetual  confufed 
*c  found  of  various  bodies,  as  of  the  wind  in 
“ our  rooms;  the  fire  ; diftant  converfations  ; 
tf  mechanical  bufinefs  ; this  continued  buzz, 
f‘  as  we  are  feldom  quite  motionlefs,  changes 
its  loudnefs  perpetually,  like  the  found  of  a 
" bell,  which  rifes  and  falls  as  long  as  it  con- 
*f  tinues,  and  feems  to  pulfate  on  the  ear. 
tr  This  any  one  may  experience  by  turning 
**  himfelf  round  near  a water-fall,  or  by  ftrik- 
ft  ing  a glafs  bell,  and  then  moving  the  direc- 
“ tion  of  its  mouth  towards  the  ears,  or  from 
“ them,  as  long  as  its  vibrations  continue. 
<f  Hence  this  undulation  of  indiftindt  found 
€t  makes  another  concomitant  circle  of  irrita- 
tive  ideas,  which  continues  throughout  the 
“ day. 

“ We  hear  this  undulating  found  when  we 
<(  are  perfectly  at  reft  ourfelves,  from  other 
“ fonorous  bodies  befides  bells,  as  from  two 
*f  organ  pipes,  which  are  nearly  but  not  quite 
t(  in  unifon,  when  they  are  founded  together. 
“ When  a bell  is  ftruck,  the  circular  form  is 

“ changed 


332  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION, 

ft  changed  into  an  elliptical  one;  the  longed 
<f  axis  of  which,  as  the  vibrations  continue, 
<f  move  round  the  periphery  of  the  bell ; and 
*f  when  either  axis  of  this  ellipfis  is  pointed 
f(  towards  our  ears,  the  found  is  louder ; and 
<f  lefs  when  the  intermediate  parts  of  the 
<f  ellipfis  are  oppofite  to  us.  The  vibrations 
<f  of  the  two  organ-pipes  may  be  compared  to 
“ Nonius’s  rule;  the  found  is  lower  when 
<f  they  coincide,  and  lefs  at  the  intermediate 
<f  times.  But,  as  the  found  of  bells  is  the  mod 
*c  familiar  of  thofe  founds  which  have  a con- 

. * 1 

ft  liderable  battement,  the  vertiginous  patients 
tf  who  attend  to  the  irritative  circles  of  founds 
“ above  defcribed,  generally  compare  it  to 
<f  the  noife  of  bells.” 


It  mud  be  evident  to  every  one  that  Dr. 
Darwin,  in  the  above  paffage,  wanders  con- 
dderably  from  the  principal  points  of  inquiry  ; 
for  it  was  furely  unnecelfary  to  enter  into  an 
elaborate  difeuhion  of  the  caufes  which  occa- 
fion  the  undulation  of  external  founds,  when 
all  that  he  wanted  was  to  prove,  that,  as  the 
found  of  a bell  is  mod  familiar  to  us,  verti- 
ginous 


I 


AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


333 


ginous  patients  referred  the  noife  in  their  ears 
to  it.  The  caufes  which  produce  this  pecu- 
liar noife  in  the  ears,  and  which  is  referred  to 
the  found  of  a bell,  he  does  not  inquire  into. 


The  external,  exciting  caufes  of  vertigo, 
are  various,  and  of  various  origin ; fome  are 
intirely  mental.  A perfon  who  is  but  flightly 
acquainted  with  any  fubjedt  which  requires  a 
conftant  and  powerful  attention  to  be  under- 
ftood,  fhall  become  vertiginous  from  hearing 
another  perfon  fpeak  too  quickly  on  the  fub- 
jedt. I know  a lady  of  a very  delicate  frame, 
and  of  very  excellent  natural  powers  of  mind, 
but  not  much  accuftomed  to  abftradt  thought, 
who,  if  fhe  hears  a long  chain  of  reafoning, 
quickly  delivered,  conftantly  becomes  vertigi- 
nous. In  fuch  cafes,  the  attention  is  power- 
fully exerted  at  firft,  in  order  to  apprehend, 
diftindtly,  every  thing  that  is  laid  ; and  the 

thought  not  being  familiar,  there  is  an  effort 

/ 

to  retain  each  of  the  ideas  as  they  are  delivered; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  volubility  of  the 
perfon  fpeaking  preffes  new  ones  on  her  mind, 
before  fhe  can  difmifs  thofe  Hie  was  examining. 

In 


334  0N  mental  perception. 

In  this  manner  attention  is  at  laft  fo  far  weak- 
ened as  to  adt  irregularly,  and  the  ideas  are  then 
crowded  involuntarily  on  the  mind,  and  a 
momentary  giddinefs,  and  abolition  of  thought 
follows.  As  vertigo  is  often  a mere  fymptom 
of  apoplexy,  epilepfy,  fyncope,  and  hyfteria, 
it  is  evident  that  its  caufes  may  be  nearly  as 
various  and  numerous,  as  thofe  which  give 
birth  to  thefe  difeafes.  Many  of  them  are  to 
be  fought  for  in  the  ftomach  and  inteftines  ; 
wind  fuddenly  diftending  that  organ ; indigef- 
tion,  food  remaining  too  long  in  it,  and  any 
error  in  diet,  either  in  regard  to  quantity  or 
quality.  This  is  the  reafon  why  hypochon- 
driac and  hyfterical  women  are  fubjedt  to 
vertigo;  worms  in  the  inteftines  alfo  occafton 
it. 

The  way  in  which  corporeal  caufes  may  be 
fuppofed  to  adl  is  this : the  nervous  impref- 
lions  being  of  an  unufual  and  powerful  kind, 
prevent  the  action  of  impreftions  ab  externo : 
the  principle  of  aftociation  is  interrupted  by 
the  obfcure  corporeal  impreftions  alluded  to, 
and  hence  there  is  an  irregular  flow  of  ideas, 

and 


AND  ITS  DISEASES. 


33S 


and  an  irregular  adtion  of  attention;  but  this 
being  once  accomplilhed,  it  is  exactly  the  fame 
as  if  a new  feries  of  reprefentations  and  thoughts 
prefented  themfelves  involuntarily,  rapidly, 
and  in  a confufed  manner  to  the  mind. 

Women  are  much  more  liable  to  this  difeafe 
than  men ; and  old  people  of  both  fexes  are 
oftener  affedted  with  it  than  the  young  or  mid- 
dle aged.  Women  who  are  exhaufted,  from 
giving  fuck  too  long,  or  who  are  too  weak  to 
fupport  the  wafte  of  fluids  occafloned  by  it ; 
people  weakened  by  exceflive  evacuations,  or 
haemorrhages ; and  young  people  addidled  to 
the  deftrudtive  pradtice  of  felf-pollution,  are 
peculiarly  fubjedt  to  this  diforder.  Dr.  Herz 
tells  us  that  he  once  had  the  medical  treatment 
of  a young  man,  who  in  confequence  of  this 
baneful  habit  had  induced  fuch  a morbid  fenft- 
bility  of  nerves,  that  he  could  not  hear  any 
perfon  fpeak  with  a moderate  degree  of  quick- 
nefs,  for  any  length  of  time,  without  being 
affedted  with  vertigo.  P.  329. 

Independent  of  thefe  difeafes,  mental  per- 
ception is  often  altered  from  its  natural  ftate 

by 


336  ON  MENTAL  PERCEPTION. 

by -various  diforders  of  the  organs  of  external 
fenfe  ; for  if  impreflions  ab  externo>  are  altered 
in  their  paflage  to  the  brain,  a new  character 

is  given  to  the  reprefentation  of  the  mind.  If, 

• * 

for  inftance,  by  any  accident,  a perfon  be- 
comes incapable  of  directing  his  eyes  to  any 
object,  as  he  was  formerly  wont  to  do,  the 
mind  receives  the  impreflions  of  the  two  eyes 
as  two  new  impreflions,  and  each,  therefore, 
makes  a reprefentation,  and  the  perfon  confe- 
quently  fees  double.  Thofe  whofe  organ  of 
fight  is  fo  conftrudted  that  they  cannot  fee 
diftant  objects  diftindtly,  neceffarily  lofe  a 
number  of  perceptions,  which  other  people 
who  fee  more  acutely  would  receive  from  fuch 
objedts  ; and  in  this  refpedt  the  faculty  may  be 
faid  to  be  defective  : tinnitus  aurium,  or  noife 
in  the  ears,  difeafes  of  the  fenfe  of  touch,  of 
tafte,  and  fmell,  as  they  give  rife  to  unufual 
impreflions,  may  alfo  become  the  caufes  of 
difeafed  perception. 


C H A P- 


ON  MEMORY. 


337 


CHAPTER  IV. 

# 

ON  MEMORY,  AND  THE  ASSOCIATION  OF  IDEAS, 
AND  THEIR  DISEASES. 

Memory  defined . Difference  between  recognition 
and  recollection.  The  value  and  meaning  of  other 
terms  examined . Recollection  dependent  on 
affociation  of  ideas . The  principles  of  affocia- 
tion  which  have  been  afcertained  by  Mr.  Hume 
taken  notice  of  The  criticifms  of  Lord  K a i M e s. 
Dr.  Gerard,  and  Mr.  Stewart,  fated  and 
eriiicifed.  The  Abbe  Condillac  mentions  a 
principle  of  affociation  unobferved  by  Mr.  Hume. 
Memory  affeCted  by  corporeal  caufes . How  this 
is  to  be  explained.  Objects  of  memory.  Hal- 
ler’s hypothefis  of  memory.  Mr.  Locke’s 
cpiniont  and  that  of  Mr.  Hook,  fated  and  ex- 
amined. The  difference  of  memory  in  different 
individuals . Infances  of  uncommonly  quick  and 
retentive  memory.  What  the  caufes  are  which 
frengthen  this  faculty.  Memory  may  be  im- 
paired t and  abolifjcd  by  a great  number  of  caufes. 
The  caufes  mentionedy  and  methodically  arranged . 
Vo L.  I.  Z Cafes 


33« 


ON  MEMORY. 


Cafes  brought  forward  to  elucidate  their  effects, 
A peculiar  fpecies  of  vefania  depending  on  the 
principles  of  affociation,  defcribed  and  explained. 


1H  E word  memory  denotes  that  faculty  by 
which  ideas  arc  retained  in  the  mind,  indepen- 
dent of  the  caufe  which  firft  produced  them. 
There  are  two  ways  in  which  it  exhibits  its  in- 
fluence and  properties.  The  one  is  a very  paf- 
five  add  in  comparifon  with  the  other.  It  is 
called  recognition , a wTord  derived  from  the  Latin 
exprefllon  recognofcor.  By  its  means  we  are  made 
confcious  that  objects,  cither  of  thought,  or  of 
external  fenfe,  which  are  accidentally  renewed, 
have  formerly  been  prefent  to  our  mind  or 
fenfes.  As,  for  inftance,  when  a perfon  hears 
an  anecdote  which  he  has  formerly  heard,  or 
meets  a perfon  he  has  often  met  before,  he  then 
becomes  immediately  confcious  that  he.  had  a 
prior  knowledge  of  them. 

The  other  is  a very  adtive  procefs,  which 
conflfts  in  an  effort  to  recal  a former  percep- 
tion. 


ON  MEMORY. 


339 


lion,  part  of  which  only  is  prefent  to  our 
mind,  as,  for  inftance,  when  a perfon  is  defired 
to  recoiled  all  the  particulars  of  a converfation 
he  had  with  another  fome  time  back ; or  when  a 
perfon  is  afked  what  the  contents  of  any  book, 
or  effay  are,  &c.  When  this  procefs1  goes  on 
eafily,  we  are  feldom  confcious  of  the  volun- 
tary exertion  we  make  ufe  of  on  fuch  occa- 
lions  ; but  when  the  things  are  recollected 
flowly,  and  with  difficulty,  as  we  call  it,  we 
are  all  confcious  of  it.  Indeed  the  exertion, 
or  effort,  often  produces,  when  long  conti- 
nued, a very  unpleafant  fenfation  about  the 
forehead,  which  fometimes  terminates  in  head- 
ach.  This  aCtive  procefs  of  the  mind  has 
been  denominated  reminifcence  by  Dr.  Reid, 
and  others  ; but  Harris  calls  it  recollection. 
The  latter  term  ought  to  be  preferred,  becaufe 
it  is  evidently  derived  from  the  Englifh  verb 
to  recoiled,  which  is  in  daily  ufe  to  exprefs 
the  aCtion  of  this  faculty  of  the  mind  ; whereas 
we  have  no  verb  related  in  a fimilar  manner  to 
reminifcence,  for  the  verb  to  remember  is  ap- 
plied indifcriminately  both  to  the  aCtive  and 
paffive  operations  of  memory. 

Z 2 


The 


34° 


ON  MEMORY. 


' 


The  aCt  of  recollection  is  intirely  dependent 
on  the  affociation  of  ideas.  In  order  to  recoi- 
led; any  thing,  one  link  of  the  chain  of  ideas 
connected  with  it  muff  be  prefented  to  the 
mind.  Suppofe  a perfon  is  afked  where  he 
was  at  fuch  an  hour,  on  fuch  a day  ; the  name 
of  the  hour  and  day  contained  in  the  queftion 

are  ideas  aflociated  in  his  mind  with  a vaft  va- 

* 

riety  of  events,  many  of  which  muff  be  recol- 
lected before  he  can  give  an  explicit  anfwer  to 
the  queition.  If  any  thing  happened  at  the 
time  which  made  a ftrong  impreflion  on  his 
mind,  that  circumftance  is  immediately  recol- 
lected-as  foon  as  the  day  and  hour  are  men- 
tioned ; but  if  this  is  not  the  cafe,  the  perfon 
will  probably  be  under  the  neceflity  of  recol- 
lecting all  that  he  did  from  the  time  when  his 
daily  avocations  began,  until  that  hour,  and 

I 

alfo  many  things  he  did  after  it,  before  he  can 
exaCtly  remember  the  particular  event  alluded 
to.  He  may  alfo  be  obliged  to  recal  to  mind 
what  he  did  at  a fimilar  hour  for  fome  days, 
both  before  and  after  the  one  mentioned. 


The 


ON  MEMORY.  341 

The  dodrine  of  the  affociation  of  ideas  is 
at  prefent  fo  generally  admitted  by  all  philo- 
fophers,  that  it  is  deemed  unneceflary  in  this 
work  to  employ  much  time  in  illuftrating  the 
fad ; but,  as  the  fubjed  is  intimately  con- 
nected with  that  of  memory,  and  as  there 
are  one  or  two  phyfiological  fads  concern- 
ing it,  which  the  medical  ftudent  ought  to  be 
acquainted  with,  thefe  fhall  be  taken  notice  of 
and  difmifled,  in  order  to  avoid  interruption 
afterwards. 

Whoever  will  patiently  examine  what  goes 
forward  within  himfelf,  during  various  ads  of 
recolledion,  will  be  convinced  that  the  ideas 
which  are  affociated  together  in  his  mind,  are 
not  all  conneded  in  a limilar  manner.  Some 
appear  to  be  conneded  bccaufe  they  hap- 
pened to  make  an  impreffion  on  one  or  more 
of  his  fenfes,  at,  or  nearly  at,  the  fame  time. 
Thus,  when  we  think  of  any  fine  pidure, 
which  once  ftrongly  engaged  our  attention, 
we  recoiled  the  mod  of  its  various  parts,  the 
particular  view,  or  adion,  that  was  repre- 
fented  j the  mode  of  afTemblage,  among  the 

figures. 


342 


ON  MEMORY. 


figures,  their  form,  their  fize,  their  colouring, 
and  the  general  effedl  the  picture  produced  on 
our  imagination,  with  thejudgment  we  formed 
of  it,  the  painter  who  painted  it,  the  place 
where  we  faw  it,  and  thofe  who  were  with  us 
at  the  time.  In  other  inftances  the  principle 
by  which  the  aifociation  of  our  ideas  feems  to 
us  to  have  been  regulated,  is  the  relationship 
w'hich  we  imagine  exifts  between  a caufe  and 
effedt.  We  cannot  fee  an  inftrument  of  pu- 
nifhment  without  thinking  of  the  pain  it  in- 
flidts  ; if  a fudden  light  Strikes  our  eyes,  wre 
look  around  for  a luminous  body  ; if  we  fee  a 
flafh  of  lightning,  we  expedt  to  hear  thunder. 

The  very  celebrated  Mr.  Hume  has  endea- 
voured  to  reduce  all  the  principles  of  affocia- 
tion  under  three  heads,  rejemblance , contiguity , 
in  time  and  place,  and  caufe  and  effect ; but 
Lord  Kaimes  in  his  Elements  of  Criticifm, 
and  Dr.  Gerard  in  his  EfTay  on  Genius,  Dr. 
Campbell  in  his  Philofophy  of  Rhetoric,  and 
Mr.  Stewart,  in  his  Philofophy  of  the  Hu- 
man Mind,  think  that  there  muft  be  other 
principles  of  affociation  admitted  than  thefe, 

and 


ON  MEMORY. 


343 


and  they  confequcntly  aflert  that  Mr.  HumE 

has  generalized  the  fubjedl  too  much.  The 

inftances,  however,  ot  particular  aflbciations, 

which  they  adduce  in  fupport  of  their  criti— 

cifm,  are  extremely  fcanty.  The  compiler  of 

the  article  Metaphyfics,  in  the  Encyclopedia 

Britannica,  who  is  alfo  of  opinion  that  Mr. 

H ume  has  not  mentioned  all  the  caufes  by 
• 

which  the  aftociation  of  ideas  is  regulated,  has 
condenfed  the  arguments  employed  by  the  au- 
thors juft  now  mentioned ; and  he  ftates  in  a 
few  words  all  the  facts  which  feem  to  ftand  in 
oppofition  to  Mr.  Hume’s  opinion.  After 
explaining  this  author’s  hypothefis,  he  fays, 
tf  But  furely  ideas  fometimes  fucceed  each 
fe  other  without  refemblance)  without  contiguity 
“ in  time  or  place,  and  without  being  con- 
“ nected  by  the  relation  of  a cauje  to  its  effedf. 
“ Befides  all  this,  there  are  other  aftociations 
<(  than  thofe  of  ideas.  Ideas  are  aftociated 
<c  with  paflions,  and  emotions,  and  paffions 
rf  and  emotions  are  aftociated  together.  A 
t(  particular  idea  is  aftociated  with  a proper 
“ name,  and  often  with  the  general  name  of 
" the  fpecies.  General  conceptions,  fuch  as 

" thofe 


344 


ON  MEMORY. 


<c  thofe  which  Mr.  Locke  calls  mixed  modes, 
“ are  affociated  with  figns  both  audible  and 
<c  vifible,  and  figns  are  affociated  with  each 
<f  other.  Surely  virtue,  as  it  confifts  in  action 
<f  and  intention,  does  not  refemble  the  found 
tf  virtue,  is  not  contiguous  to  it  in  time  or 
tc  place,  and  is  neither  its  caufe  nor  its  effect ; 
tf  nor  is  it  conceivable  that  the  arbitrary  figns 
“ of  different  things  fhould  have  any  natural 
“ relation  to  one  another.”  Vol.  XI.  part  2. 
P-  5i3- 

* 

Thefe  objections,  when  duly  confidered, 
will  be  found  to  have  infinitely  more  apparent 
than  real  force.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  in  the 
firft  place,  that  Mr.  Hume  confines  his  ob- 
fervations  to  the  affociation  of  ideas  alone,  and 
as  it  is  probable  that  he  faw  in  a clearer  light 
than  what  his  critics  feem  to  have  done,  that 
the  affociation  which  takes  place  between 
many  paffions,  and  between  paflions  and  emo- 
tion, was  of  a very  different  nature  from  that 
which  takes  place  between  ideas,  he  very  judi- 
cioufly  took  no  notice  of  them.  Thefe  curious 
phenomena  in  our  fyflem  depend  on  principles 

very 


ON  MEMORY. 


345 


very  different  from  thofe  which  regulate  our 
ideas.  Every  paflion  has  its  emotions,  as 
every  difeafe  has  its  fymptoms.  The  relation- 
fhip  which  exifts  between  them  is  limilar  to 
the  general  one  of  a caufe  producing  its  pecu- 
liar effect.  If  an  emotion  follows  a palfion, 
or  accompanies  it,  it  does  not  do  fo  on  the 
principle  of  an  affociation,  but  on  one  which 
refembles  the  motion  of  a body  when  impel- 
led by  another ; but  this  matter  muff,  at  pre- 
fent,  be  laid  afide,  as  it  is  out  of  order.  In 
the  chapter  which  treats  of  the  pafTions  in  ge- 
neral, it  fhall  be  more  fully  explained. 

The  rvpxt  objection,  that  the  affociation  of 
ideas  and  pafiions  may  be  confidered  as  a proof 
that  Mr.  Hume  has  generalized  too  much,  is 
fubject  to  nearly  the  fame  remarks.  The  word 
paflion  is  often  indifcriminately  applied,  not 
only  to  the  motives,  but  alfo  to  the  adtions  of 
an  impaffioned  man.  When  we  fee  a perfon 
become  difturbed  in  his  whole  frame,  and  di- 
rebt  offenfive  expreff  ons  again!!  another ; 
when  we  fee  him  clench  his  hands,  and,  as  if 
impelled  by  fome  irrififtible  power,  commit 

adts 


ON  MEMORY. 


346 

ads  equally  unreafonable  and  injurious,  we 
fay  that  man  is  agitated  with  anger.  In  faying 

fo  we  allude  both  to  the  ftate  of  his  mind,  and 

* 

alfo  that  of  his  body.  If  Mr.  Hume’s  critics 
refer  to  the  affociation  between  the  ideas  and 
the  bodily  adions,  as  there  is  fome  reafon  to 
think  they  do,  feeing  that  they  alfo  confider 
the  affociation  between  ideas  and  words,  (which 
are  bodily  actions)  as  an  objedion  to  his  hy- 
pothelis,  they  would  have  done  well  to  have 
examined  this  matter  a little  more  narrowly, 

before  they  had  publifhed  fuch  a thought.  All 

. 

ideas  which  are  followed  by  voluntary  adions, 
produce  their  effed  by  exciting  a peculiar 
principle  called  volition.  The  impulfes  of 
this,  according  as  they  are  direded  to  particu- 
lar fets  of  nerves,  are  tranfmitted  along  them, 
and  when  they  reach  the  mufcular  parts,  throw 
them  into  adion,  as  many  other  phylical  caufes 
do.  Surely,  then,  there  is  no  ftmilarity  between 
this  chain  of  caufes  and  events,  and  that  which 
affociates  ideas  together  in  our  mind : one 
might  as  well  have  expeded  that  Mr.  Hume 
fhould  have  explained,  by  the  principles  he 
has  laid  down,  the  affociation  between  a flafh 

of 


ON  MEMORY.  347 

of  lightning,  and  the  noife  of  thunder  ; be- 
tween the  throwing  a ftone  up  in  the  air,  and 
its  defcending  to  the  earth  ; as  the  aflociation 
between  words  and  their  external  figns,  or 
between  the  motives  of  any  paflion,  and  the 
actions  of  the  fame.  If  Lord  Kaimes,  Mr. 
Campbell,  and  Mr.  Stewart,  allude  to  the 
aflociation  wrhich  takes  place  in  the  ideas  that 
excite  a paflion,  and  thofe  which  urge  a perfon 
to  commit  certain  adlions,  the  allufion  is  juft 
and  pertinent ; but  this  does  not  feem  to  be 
what  they  have  meant,  for  the  greater  the  num- 
ber of  cafes  of  this  kind  which  are  examined, 
the  ftronger  will  the  proof  be  in  favour  of  the 
ingenuity  and  truth  of  Mr.  Hjmb’s  remarks. 
Suppofe,  in  the  cafe  already  mentioned,  that 
the  perfon’s  anger  had  been  excited  by  fome 
opprobrious  epithet  having  been  applied  to 
him ; the  queftion,  then,  is  whether  the  train 
of  ideas,  which  follows  that  word  in  his  mind, 
is,  or  is  not,  an  exception  to  thofe  general 
rules  of  affociation  which  Mr.  Hume  has  en- 
deavoured to  eftabliih.  I will  venture  to  affert 
that  in  every  cafe  in  which  a paflion,  (no  mat- 
ter of  w'hat  kind  it  be)  is  excited  by  a word, 

the 


ON  MEMORY. 


348 

the  ideas  which  pafs  through  the  impaflioned 
performs  mind  are  all  afiociated,  in  the  firft 
inftance,  on  the  principle  of  contiguity  of  time, 
except  that  word  be  cavilled  with,  as  applied 
to  time ; for  quantities  of  time  can  only  be  in" 
fucceffion,  not  in  contiguity,  like  fpace  ; but 
putting  the  impropriety  of  the  exprefiion  afidc, 
it  will  be  found  that  no  words,  or  epithet, 
calculated  to  excite  paffion,  can  be  employed, 
which  will  not  bring  into  the  mind  the  ideas 
we  have  been  taught  to  affociate  writh  them. 
If  a perfon  is  roufed  to  anger  by  being  called 
a fcoundrel,  it  is  not  from  any  fpecihc  virtue 
in  the  found  of  this  word,  but  becaufe  he  has 
formerly  been  taught  what  that  word  means. 
He  has  been  told  in  early  youth,  that  it  is 
one  w?hich  reflects  on  his  character,  not  only 
as  a moral  agent,  but  as  a man  of  honour  ; if 
he  does  not  underftand  thefe  expreffions  ; they 
alfo  are  explained  to  him.  He  is  made  to 
comprehend,  that,  if  fuch  an  epithet  be  pub- 
licly applied  to  him,  it  muft  affect  his  deareft 
interefts  in  fociety  ; and  he  is  further  taught, 
that  no  man  ought  to  receive  it  without  refent- 

ing 


ON  MEMORY. 


349 

ing  it.  Thefe  thoughts  are  affociated  in  his 
mind  on  the  fame  principle  that  a man  recol- 
lects the  various  parts  of  a play  which  he  has 
feen  or  heard,  or  the  various  objedts  which  he 
faw  on  a journey.  They  follow  each  other  in 
a regular  fucceflion  at  the  time  they  are  pre- 
fented  to  his  mind,  and  are  united  by  the  at- 
tention paid  to  them  at  that  time.  When  one 
arifes  they  all  arife,  except  fome  cafual  oc- 
currence breaks  the  connexion.  The  ideas, 
therefore,  which  arife  in  an  angry  man’s  mind, 
are  all  affociated,  in  the  firft  place,  on  the 
principle  of  **  contiguity  of  time” 

All  the,  principles  of  affociation  already 
mentioned,  are  accidental,  and  may  be  called 
natural  ones.  There  is  another,  however, 
which  arifes  from  an  adt  of  volition,  and  which 
Mr.  Hume,  and  his  critics,  do  not  feem  to 
have  taken  notice  of,  and  which  may  be  called 
an  artificial  one.  In  the  fourth  volume  of  the 
Cours  d’Etude  of  the  celebrated  Abbe  Con- 
dillac, entitled  l’ Art  de  Penfer>  this  principle 
of  affociation  is  merely  ftated  as  one  which  is 
different  from  the  accidental  ones  ; and  al- 
though 


\ 


35^  ON  MEMORY. 

though  he  enters  into  a full  inquiry  concern- 
ing the  nature  and  influence  of  thefe  in  that 
mafterly  manner  which  is  peculiar  to  him,  yet 
he  leaves  the  other  unexamined. 

Although  by  the  laws  of  affociation  already 
mentioned,  perceptions  which  have  been  re- 
ceived at  the  fame  time,  and  thofe  which  fol- 
lowed each  other  in  a regular  fucceflion,  are 
generally  connected  in  our  mind,  yet  it  would 
appear  that  we  often  detach  a perception,  or 
idea,  from  thefe  alliances,  and  give  it  a place 
either  among  an  old  affemblage  of  ideas,  or 
with  a new  combination  of  them.  The  power 
we  poflefs  of  thus  feparating  any  idea  from  its 
ancient  allies,  as  it  were,  and  giving  it  a new 
place,  is  referred  to  a faculty  called  abftrattion , 
which  is  the  architect  of  all  fcientific  arrange- 
ment, and  one  of  the  parents  of  original  genius. 
When  a fcientific  facft  is  accidentally  mentioned, 
or  read  of,  it  is  withdrawn  from  the  extraneous 
matter  with  which  it  is  affociated  in  time  and 
place,  and  is  clafled  by  the  man  of  ftudy 
among  thofe  ideas  in  his  mind,  to  which  it  is 
fcientifically  related.  If  in  the  mixed  conver- 

v fation 


ON  MEMORY. 


35  1 


fation  which  takes  place  in  large  focieties,  the 
hiftorian,  the  aftronomer,  or  the  naturalift, 
hear  of  any  fad:,  or  fads,  which  regard  their 
peculiar  ftudies,  do  they  not  endeavour  to  aflo- 
ciate  them  in  their  minds  with  others  belong- 
ing to  the  fame  branch  of  ftudy  rather  than 
with  the  converfation  which  either  preceded, 
or  followed  it?  It  is  on  this  principle  that  a 
perfon  often  in  the  courfe  of  general  reading, 
and  general  converfation,  acquires  ufeful  addi- 
tions to  many  of  the  branches  of  knowledge 
with  which  he  is  acquainted.  Again;  by  a 
voluntary  effort  we  often  detach  old  percep- 
tions from  thofe  with  which  they  were  origi- 
nally combined;  and  by  giving  them  new  fitu- 
ations,  we  form  new  modifications  of  thought. 
This  is  the  other  parent  of  genius,  and  of  the 
art  of  compofition.  It  will  come  again  under 
our  review,  and  will  then  be  paid  more  at- 
tention to  than  what  can  be  done  at  prcfent. 
It  muft  be  evident  that  whether  we  feparate 
any  thought  from  thofe  which  are  accidentally 
connected  with  it  in  difcourfe,  or  in  writing, 
and  give  it  a fcientific  affociation ; or  whether 
we  detach  an  old  one  from  thofe  with  which  it 

was 

* « 


\ 


> 


352 


ON  MEMORY. 


was  formerly  clafled,  and  do  the  fame  thing 
with  it,  that  this  new  affociation  which  takes 
place  is  very  different  from  any  of  thofe  which 
fall  under  the  influence  of  the  principles  laid 
down  by  Mr.  Hume. 

i 

Enough  has  been  faid  concerning  the  affoci- 
ation  of  ideas  to  prove  its  exiftence  and  influ- 
ence ; we  return,  therefore,  to  conflder  the 
nature  of  memory. 

Many  are  of  opinion  that  this  faculty  de- 
pends on  a mechanical  property  of  the  brain. 
They  think  that  the  impreffions  wrhich  external 
bodies  make  on  our  fenfes,  leave  a veffige  in 
the  brain,  and  that  thefe  marks,  or  veftiges, 
are  the  objects  of  memory.  Baron  de  Haller, 
in  his  Phyfiology,  declares  himfelf  to  be  of 
this  opinion,  in  words  which  cannot  be  mif- 
underffood.  “ Eas  mutationes  in  fenforio 
" confervatas  ideas  multi,  nos  veftigia  rerum 
“ vocabemus,  quae  non  in  mente  fed  in  ipfo 
“ corpore,  et  in  medulla  quidem  cerebri  inef- 

t 

“ fabili  modo  incredibiliter  minutis  notis  et  co- 
“ pia  infinita  inferiptae  funt.”  Although  the 

celebrated 


ON  MEMORY. 


353 

celebrated  Mr.  Locke  generally  expreffes 
himfelf  in  figurative  terms  when  explaining 
pfychological  faCts,  yet  in  his  Theory  of 
Memory  he  alfo  feems  decidedly  to  have  been 
of  opinion,  that  the  impreflions  of  external 
objects  made  mechanical  marks  on  the  brain. 
“ There  feems/’  he  fays,  “ a conftant  decay 
“ of  all  our  ideas,  even  of  thofe  that  are 
“ ftruck  deepeft.  The  pictures  drawn  in  our 

mind  are  laid  in  fading  colours.  Whether 
<f  the  temper  of  the  brain  makes  this  difference , 
tl  that  in  foyne  it  retains  the  characters  drawn  on 
<f  it  like  marble , in  other  like  free-Jlone , and  in 
ct  others  little  better  than  in  J and , 1 fhall  not 
“ inquire.” 

Dr.  Robert  Hook,  one  of  the  firft  infti- 
tutors  of  the  Royal  Society,  and  a moft  inge- 
genious  man,  entertained  a limilar  opinion 
concerning  memory.  Indeed  he  goes  a great 
deal  farther  than  Locke  or  Haller,  for  he 
endeavours  to  tell  us  how  they  are  formed  in 
the  brain,  and  how  many  hundred  can  be  fa- 
bricated in  a day. 

■A  a 


Vol.  I. 


By 


354 


ON  MEMORY. 


By  thefe  hypothefes  we  are  to  fuppofe  that 
a kind  of  figure,  image,  or  picture,  of  every 
body  which  affects  our  external  fenfes,  is  im- 
preffed,  as  it  were,  on  the  brain,  where  it 
remains,  and  conftitutes  an  idea,  and  becomes 
an  objedt  of  memory.  Concerning  that  part 
of  the  brain  which  receives  this  indelible 
mark,  there  is  a variety  of  opinions.  Some 
think  it  is  in  the  center,  others  in  the  cerebel- 
lum, and  others  think  the  whole  brain  is  capa- 
ble of  becoming  the  feat  of  ideas.  Although 
there  is  much  diverfity  of  fentiment  in  regard 
to  this  fubjedt,  yet  there  is  one  reflection  in 
which  all  muft  coincide,  which  is,  that  all  ex- 
ternal objects  which  affect  any  one  fenfe,  muft 
leave  their  veltige  on  the  fame  fpot,  and  this 
muff  have  fome  correfpondence  with  the  origin 
of  the  nerves  which  fupply  that  fenfe.  All 
founds,  for  inftance,  muft  make  their  impref- 
lions  at  the  origin  of  that  portion  of  the  au- 
ditory nerve  called  portio  mollis.  But  is  it  con- 
fident witlweafon  to  imagine  that  fome  thou- 
fands  of  different  founds  fhould  each  of  them 
leave  a diftindt  mechanical  trace  on  fo  fmall 
a portion  of  medullary  matter  ? But  this  is 


not 


ON  MEMORY. 


355 

not  the  firft  difficulty ; a greater  orle  is  to 
comprehend  how  every  fucceeding  impreffion 
does  not  deftroy  the  mechanical  veftige  of  the 
firft,  feeing  that  all  the  impreffions  conveyed 
by  any  one  nerve,  muft  fall  on  one  point. 
Suppofe  a perfon  attends  a concert  of  mufic 
twice  a week,  for  fix  months,  and  during  the 
reft  of  the  time  is  as  much  engaged  in  con- 
verfation  as  the  generality  of  idle  men  are, 
how  many  millions  of  veftiges  muft  be  im- 
printed on  that  part  of  fuch  a man’s  brain 
which  correfponds  with  the  auditory  nerve. 
Of  thefe  millions  he  recollects  fome  thoufands, 
for  every  word  has  a diftinCt  found  ; and  if 
he  be  acquainted  with  two  or  three  modem 
languages,  he  may  have  often  heard  two  or 
three  founds  for  every  word.  All  thefe  are 
to  make  mechanical  marks  at  the  extremity 
of  the  port  to  mollis  of  the  nerve  alluded  to  ! 
Independently  of  thefe,  the  optic  nerves,  and 
nerves  of  the  fkin,  are  alfo  conveying  thou- 
fands of  impreffions,  which  can  be  recollected. 
One  would  imagine  that  however  minute  each 
veftige  was,  yet  as  it  is  alferted  to  be  a me- 
chanical derangement  of  fome  of  the  particles 

A a 2 of 


356  ON  MEMORY. 

of  the  brain,  fome  difference  would  be  ob- 
ferved  between  the  brain  of  a man  of  learning, 
and  that  of  a very  ignorant  man.  But  no  fuch 
thing  is  to  be  feen. 

Every  one  who  refledts  with  attention  on 
what  goes  forward  in  his  own  mind,  muft  be 
confcious  that  tnofe  affections  which  are  called 
mental  perceptions,  are  the  objects  of  memory. 
We  are  naturally  inclined  to  believe  that  men- 
tal perceptions  may  exift  in  the  mind  after  the 
' 

nervous  impreflions,  which  gave  rife  to  them, 
ceafe  to  aCt.  But  we  certainly  are  not  author- 
ifed  to  draw  fuch  a conclufion.  To  affert  this 
concerning  mind,  prefuppofes  fuch  an  inti- 
mate acquaintance  with  it,  as  we  know  from 
experience  no  human  being  poffeffes  ; and  yet 
it  feems  contradictory  to  human  reafon  to  be- 
lieve that  a mental  perception  ceafes  to  exift, 
or  to  be  any  thing  except  at  the  moment  it  is 
excited,  or  renewed,  which  muft  be  the  cafe 
if  that  pofition  be  true.  Although  the  know- 
ledge we  have  of  the  brain  and  its  properties 
forbid  us  to  believe  that  it  is  the  feat  of  me- 
mory, or  that  perceptions  are  veftiges  which 


remain 


ON  MEMORY. 


357 


remain  in  it ; yet  there  is  no  reafon  why  we 
fhould  fuppofe  that  that  fomething,  called 
mind,  which  I have  endeavoured  to  prove  is 
totally  diftindt  from  brain,  fhould  not  have 
the  faculty  of  retaining  perceptions,  whatever 
thefe  are.  If  they  were  not  fomehovv  retained, 
it  would  be  difficult  to  explain  how  we  could 
diftinguifti  the  recolledtion  of  any  thing  from 
the  firft  impreffion  of  it. 

Thofe  who  explain  memory  on  the  mechani- 
cal principle  of  veftiges  made  in  the  brain, 
flatter  themfelves  that  this  dodtrine  is  corro- 
borated by  the  well-know'n  fadts,  that  its 
powers  are  altered,  and  often  totally  deftroyed 
by  bodily  difeafes.  Memory  is  impaired  in 
almoft  all  febrile  difeafes  whatever,  and  Wep- 
fer  mentions  many  cafes  of  a flmilar  effedfc 
from  haemorrhages.  Every  phyfician  of  any 
experience  muff  have  obferved  how  much  the 
powers  of  memory  are  diminifhed  in  palfy, 
and  after  apoplexy.  It  often  becomes  ex- 
tremely defedtive  alfo  in  very  old  age.  On 
the  other  hand,  patients  who  have  loft  their 
memory  after  fevers,  for  the  moft  part  gradu- 
ally 


35  8 ON  MEMORY. 

ally  recover  it  as  their  health  returns.  In 
many  cafes  of  hyfteria,  ftomachic  complaints, 
and  chronic  weaknefs,  in  which  the  memory 
has  been  impaired,  ffrengthening,  or  tonic 
medicines,  as  they  are  called,  often  give  it  its 
priftine  powers  ; hence  the  ufe  of  cold  bath- 
ing, valerian,  bark,  moderate  exercife,  and 
country  air,  in  fuch  cafes  as  thefe.  Now  it  is 
faid  that  all  fuch  inftances  evidently  prove  that 
memory  is  a mere  corporeal  affection,  feeing 
that  it  is  impaired,  and  renovated  by  phyfical 
caufes.  This,  however,  is  neither  a fair  lo- 
gical deduction,  or  neceffary  confequence  from 
fuch  premifes. 

The  phenomena  of  memory,  like  thofe  of 
all  the  other  faculties,  require  a healthy  ffate 
of  brain,  in  order  to  become  confpicuous. 
Each  idea  as  it  is  renewed,  excites  the  fenfo- 
rial  imprcffion,  or  impreffions,  which  gave 
birth  to  it ; but  if  the  brain  is  not  in  a ffate 
fit  to  undergo  this  kind  of  change,  it  is  evi- 
dent that  all  figns  of  memory  muff  fail  ; for 
through  the  brain  and  nerves  alone  can  thefe 
impreffions  be  tranfmitted  to  the  organs  of 

, fpeech, 


ON  MEMORY. 


359 


fpeech,  which  are  Simulated  by  thefe  nervous 
impreffions  to  the  utterance  of  thofe  words, 
or  founds,  which  in  our  infancy  we  were  ac- 
cuftomed  to  alfociate  with  our  ideas.  The 
reafon  why  a perfon,  after  fevers,  and  after 
palfy  and  apoplexy,  therefore,  has  his  me- 
mory often  impaired,  and  fometimes  abolilhed, 
is  becaufe  the  brain  is  fo  diforo-anized  as  not 

O 

to  receive  imprefiions  either  from  the  mind,  or 
from  the  external  fenfes,  in  the  healthy  man- 
ner it  formerly  did.  It  does  not,  therefore, 
follow  that  our  ideas  are  retained  in  the  brain 
in  a mechanical  manner.  Such  facts  only 
prove  that  the  ideas,  when  they  are  renewed  in 
the  mind,  do  not  produce  their  fenforial  effect. 

% 

As  to  the  ufes  of  this  faculty,  they  are  as 
evident,  and  univerfally  acknowledged  to  be 
highly  important.  Memory  is  the  ftorehoufe 
of  all  our  knowledge,  in  which  are  accumu- 
lated every  variety  of  thought  which  can  either 
ennoble  or  debafe  man.  His  language,  his 
fcience,  his  moral  do&rines,  and  the  tenets  of 
his  religion,  the  good  and  bad  adlions  of  his 
life  ; his  attachments  and  endearments ; his 


cares. 


ON  MEMORY. 


36° 

cares,  and  caufes  of  anxiety  ; the  viciflitudes 
of  fortune  he  has  experienced  ; the  concept 
tions  and  plans  he  has  formed,  and  their  fai- 
lure, or  fuccefs,  are  all  treafured  up  in  this 
faculty.  To  memory  we  are  indebted  for 
many  of  our  pureft  pleafures,  and  many  of 
our  moft  acute  pains.  The  gay  feenes  of  our 
youth,  the  good  aCtions  we  have  done ; the 
praifes  we  have  juftly  merited  ; the  endear- 
ments of  friendfhip  ; the  prodigies  of  nature 
and  art  we  have  feen  in  diftant  lands,  all  thefe 
things  when  recollected  in  happy  moments  of 
eafe  and  comfort,  rekindle  our  imagination, 
and  caufe  it  to  glow  as  it  formerly  did,  when 
thefe  pleafures  were  firft  experienced.  In  like 
manner  the  recollection  of  the  evil  aCtions  of 
our  paft  life  infliCl  on  us,  afrefh,  the  pains  of 
repentance  and  remorfe ; we  cannot  think 
without  the  moft  diftrefling  fenfations,  of  the 
aCts  of  ingratitude  which  have  been  formerly 
fhewn  to  us,  or  of  the  negleCt  and  mortifica- 
tion we  met  with  from  thofe  in  w’hom  we 
hoped  to  have  found  a benefaCtor,  or  friend  ; 
the  difappointments  in  our  deareft  wifhes,  the 
misfortunes  of  our  friends,  their  abfence,  and 

their 


ON  MEMORY.  361 

their  death,  are  all  remembrances  which  fink 
us  in  painful  grief. 

The  power  of  memory  is  different  in  differ- 
ent individuals.  In  fome  it  is  not  only  quick, 
but  alfo  retentive  to  a very  remarkable  degree. 
The  following  inftance  of  this  kind  of  me- 
mory is  related  by  a Mr.  Mouchart,  in 
Vol.  VII.  of  the  Pfychological  Magazine.  It 
is  that  of  a blind  girl,  who  loft  her  fight  when 
very  young,  owing  to  the  fmall-pox,  which 
{he  had  in  a very  dangerous  manner. 

“ The  child,”  fays  Mr.  Mouchart,  “ foon 
*f  gave  proofs  of  her  being  endowed  with  fu- 
<f  perior  mental  powers,  efpecially  that  of 
“ memory.  When  fhe  wrent  to  fchool  {he  re- 
“ quired  to  have  her  lefton  only  once  read 
« over  to  her,  and  then  fhe  knew  it  perfecftly. 
« She  could  alfo  at  that  period  repeat  the  Iong- 
Cf  eft  fongs,  although  fhe  only  heard  them 
f(  once.  > 

<e  She  goes  to  church  regularly,  and  upon 
" her  return  home  can  repeat  the  whole  of  the 

“ fermon. 


ON  MEMORY. 


362 

“ fermon,  with  all  the  different  paffages  of 
“ the  bible  which  were  quoted  by  the  clergy- 
“ man,  and  the  various  chapters  and  verfes  to 
u which  he  referred.  Her  memory  is  equally 
ct  retentive  as  it  is  quick.  Her  mother  took 
<f  her  once  to  Stutgard,  to  hear  a celebrated 
**  preacher,  and  after  fhe  returned  home  (he 
t(  repeated  the  whole  of  the  difcourfe.  A 
,c  year  afterward  fine  was  afked  if  {he  then  re- 
“ collected  it,  and  to  the  aftonifhment  of  all 
“ prefent  fhe  repeated  the  whole  fermon  al- 
<r  moft  in  the  fame  words  in  which  it  had 

been  delivered.” 

As  an  appendix  to  this  cafe  may-  be  men- 
tioned that  of  the  very  remarkable  Jedediah 
Buxton,  for  a full  account  of  whom  the  reader 
is  referred  to  the  Gentleman’s  Magazine,  for 
Feb.  1751. 

This  man  was  a common  labourer,  and  lived 
at  Elmton,  near  Chefter field,  in  Derbyfhire. 
He  had  received  fo  little  education  that  he 
could  not  write  his  own  name,  yet  he  had  cul- 
tivated that  kind  of  memory  which  is  necef- 

fary 


ON  MEMORY. 


363 

fary  in  arithmetic,  in  a mod  furprizing  degree, 
being  able  to  multiply,  in  his  mind,  with  the 
greateft  facility,  five  or  fix  cyphers  by  full  as 
many.  He  was  afked  by  a Mr.  Halladay 
how  many  fquare  feet  were  contained  in  a field 
423  yards  long,  and  383  broad.  In  lefs  than 
two  minutes  he  returned  the  proper  anfwer. 
Upon  being  afked  how  many  barley-corns  it 
would  take  to  meafure  eight  miles,  he  anfwered 
in  about  one  minute  and  a half,  1,520,640. 

Thefe  queftions,  however,  were  eafy  ones 
in  comparifon  with  others,  the  folution  of 
which  fometimes  occupied  him  a whole  week 
or  two. 

Many  other  inftances  of  uncommon  me- 
mory are  related  by  ancient  writers.  Drusus, 
it  is  faid,  could  repeat  the  whole  of  Homer  ; 
Sallust  knew  the  whole  of  Demosthenes; 
Mithridates  could  fpeak  twenty-two  lan- 
guages ; and  Cyrus  could  name  every  foldier 
in  his  immenfe  army. 


The 


4 ON  MEMORY. 


36  4 

The  difference  of  memory  in  different  in- 
dividuals is  fo  ffriking  as  to  be  a matter  of 
common  obfervation.  Some  are  undoubtedly 
bom  with  fuperior  powers  of  this  faculty  in 
comparifon  with  what  others  are.  But  in  inoft 
people  it  may  be  improved  and  ftrengthened  to 
a great  degree.  There  are  four  caufes  which 
principally  contribute  to  this  : 

iff.  The  degree  of  attention  which  a perfon 
gives  to  fenforial  impreflions,  as  well  thofe 
which  arife  from  external  imprefiions,  as 
thofe  which  arife  from  the  operation  of  his 
mental  faculties. 

sdly.  Frequent  repetition  of  the  fame  im- 
preffion. 

3dly.  The  artificial  order  which  we  give  to 
our  ideas. 

4thly.  Exercifing  the  faculty  itfelf  fre- 
quently. 


This 


ON  MEMORY. 


365 

This  is  not  the  place  to  enter  into  a parti- 
cular inveftigation  of  the  influence  of  thefe 
caufes,  fince  it  is  evident  it  belongs  more  to 
the  curative  part  than  to  the  natural  hiftory 
of  the  faculty. 

Having  taken  a view  of  the  different  pheno- 
mena of  memory  in  its  healthy  ftate,  it  remains 
to  fpeak  of  its  pathology,  or  difordered  ftate. 

Memory  may  either  be  morbidly  impaired, 
or  it  may  be  abolifhed.  Almoft  all  the  caufes 
which  weaken  memory  are  capable,  if  they 
continue  to  exert  their  influence  on  the  body 
for  a great  length  of  time,  or  if  very  powerful, 
to  abolifh  the  operations  of  the  faculty,  either 
for  a long  or  fhort  while,  according  to  circum- 
ftances. 

Thefe  caufes  are  either  mental , or  corporeal 
the  mental  ones  are  two  in  number : 

1.  Habits  of  inattention.  . 

2.  Over-exertion  of  the  faculty  itfelf. 

The 


ON  MEMORY. 


366 

The  corporeal  ones  are 

1 ft . Topical,  or  general  derangements  of 
the  brain,  and  cerebellum,  as  occalioned  by 

a.  Blows  and  contufions. 

b . Apoplexy. 

c.  Pal  fy. 

d.  The  difeafcd  arterial  action,  which  takes 
place  in  various  fevers. 

e . The  diforganization  which  occurs  in  old 
age. 

2dly.  Debility,  as  occafioned  by 

% 

a . Certain  poifons. 

b.  Excefs  of  venery,  and  felf-pollution. 

c.  Stomachic  complaints,  of  various  kinds, 
comprehended  under  the  extenfive  titles 
of  dyfpeplia,  apepfia,  chronic  weak- 
nefs,  &c. 

d.  Nervous  diforders,  and  hyfterical  affec- 
tions of  various  kinds. 


Of 


ON  MEMORY.  367 

Of  thefe  caufes,  the  whole  of  the  firft  clafs 
of  corporeal  ones  are  fo  often  producing  their 
effect,  that  there  cannot  be  a perfon  of  general 
reading,  of  moderate  obfervation,  or  a phy- 
fician  of  any  extent  of  practice,  who  have  not 
either  been  a witnefs  of  their  influence,  or  at 
lead  have  repeatedly  read  or  heard  of  it.  I 
fhall,  therefore,  not  take  up  time  in  inferting 
a great  number  of  cafes  to  prove  thefe  fadts, 
but  jfhall  confine  my  obfervations  to  thofe 
which  are  either  not  common,  or  not  well 
underftood. 

Of  all  kinds  of  memory,  that  which  is  ne- 
celfary  for  intricate  arithmetical  calculation 
is  perhaps  the  one  that  demands  the  mod  con- 
dant  and  powerful  efforts  of  the  faculty  itfelf. 
Many  calculators  have  been  known  to  pafs 
feveral  days  and  nights  without  deep,  in  con- 
fequence  of  having  been  previoufly  engaged 
with  the  folution  of  fome  intricate  queftion. 
This  is  a clear  proof  that  the  adtion  of  the  vef- 
fels  which  fupply  the  brain  have  been  excited 
to  a preternaturally  increafed  adtion ; and  a 
dronger  proof  of  the  fame  kind  is,-  that  there 


are 


368 


. ON  MEMORY* 


are  cafes  related  of  fuch  men  becoming  deli- 
rious from  fimilar  caufes. 

In  other  cafes  it  would  appear  that  the  great 
excitement  which  is  produced  by  an  over- 
training of  the  faculty,  is  followed  by  an  ex- 
hauftion  of  the  fenforial,  or  nervous  principle, 
and  confequently  the  mind  cannot  act  on  it, 
and  the  memory  feems  to  be  greatly  impaired. 

i 

There  is  a very  curious  cafe  of  fudden  failure 
of  memory  from  the  too  long  continued  ufe 
of  the  faculty.  It  is  mentioned  in  Vol.  VII. 
of  the  Pfychological  Magazine.  It  dates  that 
a man,  of  rather  weak  intellects,  who  held  an 
office,  the  foie  duty  of  which  confided  in 
figning  his  own  name  to  a number  of  papers, 
had  one  day  fo  much  bufinefs  to  do,  that  he 
at  laft  was  incapable  of  recollecting  the  word 
he  ought  to  fign.  It  feemed  to  him  as  if  he  had 
totally  forgotten  it.  Almoft  all  his  friends  dif- 
believed  the  affertion;  “ Yet,”  fays  Mr.  Van 
Goens,  (a  gentleman  of  great  refpectability, 
and  well  known  in  Germany,  who  relates  the 
cafe,)  “ I am  apt  to  think  it  was  not  more 

impoffible 


ON  MEMORY* 


369 

impoflible  or  extraordinary  than  it  appeared  to 
be  to  the  perfon  himfelf.  In  j unification  of 
this  remark,  he  mentions  a cafe  much  more 
remarkable  than  the  one  juft  now  taken 
notice  of.  He  adds,  that  the  truth  of  the 
anecdote  may  be  relied  on, 

“ Mr.  V on  B , formerly  Envoy  to 

“ Madrid,  and  afterwards  to  Peterfburgh,  a 
**  man  of  a ferious  turn  of  mind,  yet  by  no 
“ means  hypochondriacal,  went  out  one 
“ morning  to  pay  a number  of  vifits. 

“ Among  other  houfes  at  which  he  called, 
“ there  was  one  where  he  fufpecfted  the  fer- 
“ vants  did  not  know  him,  and  where  he, 
“ confequently,  was  under  the  neceftity  of  giv- 
<f  ing  in  his  name,  but  this  very  name  he  had, 
tr  at  that  moment,  entirely  forgotten.  Turning 
cc  round  immediately  to  a gentleman  who  ac- 
tr  companied  him,  he  faid,  with  much  earned:- 
“ nefs,  f For  God’s  fake,  tell  me  who  I am.* 
«f  The  queftion  excited  laughter,  but  as  Mr* 

(t  Von  B infilled  on  being  anfwered,  add- 

“ ing  that  he  had  intirely  forgotten  his  own 

Vol.  I.  Bb  “ name. 


ON  MEMORY. 


370 

“ name,  he  was  told  it,  upon  which  he 
u finifhed  his  vifit.5’ 

Mr.  Van  Goens  fays,  that  the  gentleman 
who  accompanied  Mr.  Von  B—  was  the 
perfon  who  related  the  fad;  to  him. 

Thucydides  afterts  that  during  the  plague 
which  raged  at  Athens,  many  who  recovered 
from  that  dreadful  malady  loft  their  memory 
fo  completely,  that  they  not  only  forgot  the 
names  of  their  friends  and  relations,  but  alfo 
their  own  names. 

Several  cafes  of  lofs  of  memory  from  fevers 
of  various  kinds,  will  be  found  in  Shenkius, 
Ob/.  Med . Lib.  I. 

In  Boerhaave’s  Pralebfiones  Academic <e  in 
Inftit.  Med . ex  Edit.  Haller i>  Vol.  IV.  p.  463, 
we  find  the  cafe  of  a Spanifh  tragic  author 
related,  who  had  compofed  many  excellent 
pieces,  and  who  in  confequence  of  an  acute 
fever,  fo  completely  loft  all  memory,  that  he 
forgot  not  only  the  languages  he  had  formerly 

learnt. 


ON  MEMORY. 


31 * 

learnt,  but  even  the  alphabet,  and  was  therefore 
under  the  neceffity  of  beginning  his  ftudies 
again.  His  own  poems  and  compofitions  were 
fhewnto  him,  but  it  was  impoflible  to  convince 
him  that  they  were  of  his  production.  He 
afterwards,  however,  began  again  to  compofe 
verfes,  which  had  fo  ftriking  a refemblance 
to  his  former  writings,  that  he  at  lalt  became 
convinced  of  his  having  been  the  author  of 
them. 

There  is  a very  lingular  defect  of  memory, 
of  which  I myfelf  have  feen  two  remarkable 
inftances.  It  ought  rather  to  be  conlidered  as 
a defect  of  that  principle,  by  which  ideas, 
and  their  proper  exprehions,  are  alfociated, 
than  of  memory ; for  it  conlifls  in  this,  that 
the  perfon,  although  he  has  a diftinct  notion 
of  what  he  means  to  fay,  cannot  pronounce 
the  words  which  ought  to  characterize  his 
thoughts.  The  firft  cafe  of  this  kind  which 
occurred  to  me  in  practice,  was  that  of  an 
attorney,  much  refpected  for  his  integrity  and 
talents,  but  who  had  many  fad  failings,  to 
which  our  phylical  nature  too  often  fubjects 

B b 2 us. 


ON  MEMORY. 


372 

us.  Although  nearly  in  his  70th  year,  and 
married  to  an  amiable  lady,  much  younger 
than  himfelf,  he  kept  a miftrefs  whom  he  was 
in  the  habits  of  vifiting  every  evening.  The 
arms  of  Venus  are  not  wielded  with  impunity 
at  the  age  of  70.  He  was  fuddenly  feized 
with  a great  proftration  of  ftrength,  giddinefs, 
forgetfulnefs,  infenfibility  to  all  concerns  of 
life,  and  every  fymptom  of  approaching  fa- 
tuity. His  forgetfulnefs  was  of  the  kind  al- 
luded to.  When  he  wifhed  to  afk  for  any 
thing,  he  conftantly  made  ufe  of  fome  inap- 
propriate term.  Inftead  of  afking  for  a piece 
of  bread,  he  would  probably  afk  for  his  boots; 
but  if  thefe  were  brought,  he  knew  they  did 
not  correfpond  with  the  idea  he  had  of  the 
thing  he  wifhed  to  have,  and  was  therefore 
angry  ; yet  he  would  ft  ill  demand  fome  of  his 
boots,  or  fhoes,  meaning  bread.  If  he  wanted 
a tumbler  to  drink  out  of,  it  was  a thoufand  to 
one  he  did  not  call  for  a certain  chamber  uten- 
lil ; and  if  it  was  the  faid  utenfil  he  wanted, 
he  would  call  it  a tumbler,  or  a difh.  He 
evidently  was  confcious  that  he  pronounced 
wrong  words,  for  when  the  proper  expreflions 


were 


ON  MEMORY. 


373 


were  fpoken  by  another  perfon,  and  he  was 
afked  if  it  was  not  fuch  a thing  he  wanted,  he 
always  feemed  aware  of  his  miftake,  and  cor- 
rected himfelf  by  adopting  the  appropriate  ex- 
preflion.  This  gentleman  was  cured  of  his 
complaint  by  large  dofes  of  valerian,  and  other 
proper  medicines. 

For  fome  time  I confidered  this  as  a very 
rare  cafe  ; but  a few  years  afterwards  I met 
with  another,  which  came  on  in  confequence 
of  a paralytic  affeCtion  ; and  other  inftances 
of  it  are  to  be  met  wtth  in  the  writings  of 
different  medical  men.  In  Vol.  VII.  of  the 
Pfychological  Magazine,  profeffor  Gruner, 
of  Jena,  relates  the  hiftory  of  a learned  friend 
of  his,  whofe  memory  was  affedted  in  a manner 
very  fimilar  to  that  which  has  been  mentioned. 
<f  After  his  recovery  from  an  acute  fever,  one 
*<  of  the  firft  things  he  defired  to  have  was 
ff  coffee,  [kajfee)  but  inftead  of  pronouncing 

the  letter  /,  he  fubftituted  in  its  place  a z , 
ff  and,  therefore,  afked  for  a cat,  [kazze.) 
« In  every  word  which  had  an /he  committed 
«*  a fimilar  miftake,  fubftituting  a z for  it. 

Mr.  Van 


374 


ON  MEMORY. 


Mr.  Van  Goens,  whofe  name  has  already 
been  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  fays,  that  the 
wife  of  Mr.  Hennert,  profelfor  of  Mathe- 
matics, at  Utrecht,  who,  like  her  hufband, 
was  alfoa  mathematician,  and  aftronomer,  was 
affected  with  a defeCt  of  memory,  nearly  allied 
to  that  of  the  attorney  already  mentioned. 

When  fhe  wifhed  to  afk  for  a chair,  {he 
alked  for  a table,  and  w'hen  fhe  wanted  a book, 
fhe  demanded  a glafs.  But  what  was  lingular 
in  her  cafe,  was,  that  when  the  proper  expref- 
fion  of  her  thought  was  mentioned  to  her,  fhe 
could  not  pronounce  it. 

She  was  angry  if  people  brought  her  the 
thing  fhe  had  named,  inftead  of  the  thing  fhe 
deiired.  Sometimes  Ihe  herfelf  difcovered 
that  {he  had  given  a wrong  name  to  her 
thoughts.  This  complaint  continued  feveral 
months,  after  which  {he  gradually  recovered 
the  right  ufe  of  her  recollection.  It  was  only 
in  this  particular  point  that  her  memory  feemed 
to  be  defective,  for  Mr.  Van  Goens  affures 
us  that  {he  conducted  her  houlhold  matters 

with 


ON  MEMORY. 


375 


with  as  much  regularity  as  fhe  ever  had  done, 
and  that  (he  ufed  to  fliew  her  hufband  the  fitu- 
ation  of  the  heavens  on  a map,  with  as  much 
accuracy  as  when  fhe  was  in  perfedt  health. 
Pfychol.  Mag.  Vol.  VII.  part  3,  page  73. 

The  following  cafe  may  alfo  be  confidered 

as  a modification  of  the  fame  complaint. 

• 

“ A man,  aged  70,  was  feized  about  the 
“ beginning  of  January,  with  a kind  of  cramp 
“ in  the  mufcles  of  the  mouth,  accompanied 
<(  with  a fenfe  of  tickling  all  over  the  furface 
<f  of  the  body,  as  if  ants  were  creeping  on  it. 
tf  On  the  20th  of  the  fame  month,  after  hav- 
“ ing  experienced  an  attack  of  giddinefs,  and 
“ confufion  of  ideas,  a remarkable  alteration 

i 

“ in  his  fpeech  was  obferved  to  have  taken 
“ place.  He  articulated  eafily  and  fluently, 
“ but  made  ufe  of  ftrange  words  which  no- 
“ body  underftood.  The  number  of  thefe 
“ does  not  at  prefent  feem  to  be  great,  but 
“ they  are  frequently  repeated.  Some  of 
<f  them  he  feems  to  forget  intirely,  and  then 
fl  new  ones  are  formed.  When  he  fpeaks 

" quick, 


ON  MEMORY. 


376 

“ quick,  he  fometimes  pronounces  numbers, 
<c  and  now  and  then  he  employs  common 
Cf  words  in  their  proper  fenfe.  He  is  con- 
tf  fcious  that  he  fpeaks  nonfenfe.  What  he 
Cf  writes  is  equally  faulty  with  what  he  fpeaks. 
“ He  cannot  write  his  name.  The  words  he 
t(  writes  are  thofe  he  fpeaks,  and  they  are  al- 
“ ways  written  conformably  to  his  manner  of 
cf  pronouncing  them.  He  cannot  read,  and 
t{  yet  many  external  objects  feem  to  awaken  in 
tr  him  the  idea  of  their  prefence.”  Gesner’s 
Entdeckungen  der  neuejien  Zeit  in  der  Arzneige - 
lahrheit . 

That  great  debility  of  body  is  a very  com- 
mon caufe  of  a weak  memory,  every  practi- 
tioner in  phyfic  muft  be  convinced.  The 
moft  ruinous  kind,  however,  in  its  confe- 
quences,  in  regard  to  the  mind,  is  the  odious 
and  baneful  practice  of  onanifm.  This  I have 
often  known  carried  to  fuch  excefs,  in  both 
fexes,  as  not  only  to  bring  on  every  fymptom 
of  atrophy,  but  almoft  to  deftroy  every  adtive 
operation  of  the  human  underftanding.  The 
memory  is,  of  all  the  faculties,  the  one  which 

fuffers 


ON  MEMORY. 


377 

fiiffers  firft,  and  in  the  higheft  degree;  and  it 
unfortunately  happens,  that  when  it  has  once 
been  much  weakened  by  fuch  a caufe,  it  is 
feldom  ever  perfedtly  recovered  afterwards. 
Tissot  has  already  taken  notice  of  the  fadl  in 
his  treatife  on  that  vice,  and  has  dwelt  largely 
on  it.  To  that  book,  therefore,  the  reader  is 
referred,  if  he  is  defirous  of  having  further 
information  on  the  fubjedt. 

Bonetus  mentions  a cafe  of  a very  great 
defect  of  memory,  occafioned  by  that  debility 
which  accompanies  the  fuppreflion  of  a certain 
periodical  difcharge  in  women.  Medic  in*  Sep~ 
tent.  Lib.  I.  Sec.  ix.  cap.  2. 

In  W epfer’s  Obferv.  Medico  Prattic<e,  Obf. 
99.  there  is  mentioned  the  cafe  of  a man  of 
great  note,  who  refided  in  the  fame  city  in 
which  Wepfer.  lived.  This  gentleman  loft 
his  memory  for  a confiderable  time,  in  confe- 
quence  of  a profufe  haemorrhage.  Various 
other  cafes  of  a fimilar  nature  are  to  be  met 
with  in  the  fame  work,  and  alfo  in  the  Medic . 
Sep  tent,  of  Bonetus. 


It 


ON  MEMORY. 


37* 

It  would  be  an  eafy  matter  to  amplify  this 
fubjed  by  the  enumeration  of  more  cafes  of 
defedive  memory  which  arife  from  caufes 
iimilar  to  thofe  that  have  been  mentioned. 
But  enough  has  been  faid  on  the  fubjed. 

It  remains  for  us  to  turn  our  attention  to 
the  affociation  of  ideas,  and  obferve  what 
ftrange  aberrations  of  mind,  at  times,  arife 
from  it.  “ The  power  of  affociating  our 
t(  ideas,”  fays  the  celebrated  Abbe  Condil- 
lac, “ has  its  inconveniences,  as  well  as  its 
ff  advantages.  To  prove  this,  I fuppofe  two 
“ men,  one  of  whom  has  never  been  capable 
<(  of  conneding  his  ideas,  and  the  other  who 
u conneds  them  with  fo  much  facility  and 
*f  force  that  they  become  infeparable.  The 

firft  cannot  have  any  imagination,  or  me- 
f<  mory,  and  confequently  cannot  exercife  any 
tc  of  the  faculties  of  his  mind,  which  depend 
,r  on  one  or  other  of  thefe.  He  is  abfolutely 
<f  incapable  of  refledion,  and,  in  one  wrord,  is 
t{  a mere  idiot,  (un  imbecille).  The  fecond, 
" on  the  contrary,  muft  necelfarily  be  endowed 

“ with 


ON  MEMORY. 


379 


" with  too  much  imagination,  and  memory  ; 
“ and  this  excefs  is  capable  of  producing  full 
“ as  bad  effects  as  the  entire  privation  of  them. 
<c  He  would  be  incapable  of  reflection,  and 
ft  be  abfolutely  a madman.  II  avroit  a peine 
f<  I exercife  de fa  reflexion  ; ce  feroit  un  fou.  The 
" ideas  the  mod  diflimilar  being  ftrongly  con- 
“ neCted  in  his  mind,  merely  becaufe  they 
“ were  prefented  at  the  fame  time,  he  would 
“ conceive  them  naturally  allied  to  each  other, 
“ and  would  make  the  one  follow  the  other 
<f  as  a confequence  follows  the  caufe.” 

Between  thefe  extremes,  he  adds,  there  may 
be  fuppofed  to  be  a juft  medium.  This  is  a 
point  of  fuch  difficult  difcovery,  that  the  great- 
eft  geniufes  feldom  find  it  out.  Accordingly 
as  they  approach  the  one  extremity  or  the 
other,  they  naturally  retire  from  it.  “ Thofe 
“ who  have  too  much  memory,  and  imagina- 
“ tion,  are  deficient  in  many  qualities  which 
tf  are  neceffary  to  a methodical,  accurate,  and 
rc  folid  underftanding.  Thofe  who  deviate 
“ in  an  oppofite  direction,  lofe  all  the  quali- 

“ ties 


380 


ON  MEMORY. 


" ties  which  give  charms  to  wit.  The  firft 
clafs  write  with  moil  grace  ; the  fecond 
“ with  moft  depth.” 

Were  the  train  of  ideas  to  be  followed  which 
this  obfervation  of  Condillac’s  gives  rife  to, 
an  inveftigation  of  a moll  interelting  nature 
might  be  inftituted,  concerning  the  influence 
of  this  principle  in  all  kinds  of  compofltion, 
whether  in  poetry,  or  in  profe,  in  wit,  or  in 
learning,  or  in  the  arts,  and  in  fcience.  But 
as  the  faCts  belonging  to  the  natural  hiftory  of 
the  human  intellects,  which  are  to  be  brought 
forward  in  this  work,  mull  be  folely  directed 
to  the  elucidation  of  its  morbid  hiftory,  or 
pathology,  this  inticing  traCt  of  inquiry  muft 
be  abandoned,  and  our  eyes  turned  to  a more 
melancholy,  though,  perhaps,  more  ufeful  ex- 
pofition  of  mental  phenomena. 

There  is  a fpecies  of  infanity  of  fo  furpriz- 
ing  a kind,  that  nothing  but  its  frequency 
prevents  us  from  regarding  it  with  that  afton- 
ifhment  which  it  is  well  calculated  to  excite : 

a perfon 


ON  MEMORY. 


381 


a perfon  conducts  himfelf  like  a man  of  fenfe, 
in  every  refped:  except  in  one  particular  cir- 
cumftance ; but  in  that,  his  thoughts  and 
actions  are  in  fuch  oppolition  to  thofe  of  other 
men,  that  he  appears  to  them  to  be  evidently- 
deranged.  This  is  the  melancholia  moria  of 
Sauvages.  In  many  cafes  it  is  a fpecies  of  hy- 
pochondriacs, arifing  from  corporeal  caufes, 
as  for  inftance,  when  a perfon  erroneoufly  be- 
lieves any  part  of  his  frame  to  be  altered  from 
its  natural  form  ; but  in  other  cafes  it  arifes 
from  mental  caufes.  The  judgment  is  gene- 
rally naturally  weak,  or  preternaturally  debi- 
litated by  various  circumftances,  and  then 
certain  predominant  affe&ions  and  palfions 
give  birth  to  the  difeafed  alfociations ; as  when 
a perfon  believes  he  is  endowed  with  a prophe- 
tic fpirit ; that  he  is  the  intimate  companion 
of  kings  and  princes ; that  he  afcends  up  to 
heaven,  or  defcends  to  hell,  &c. 

As  the  infane  idea  of  fuch  people  generally 
confifts  of  certain  combinations  of  thought, 
which  experience  does  not  yield,  but  are 
formed  in  the  mind,  either  by  difeafed  feelings, 

or 


382 


ON  MEMORY. 


or  ftrong  pafTions  and  defires,  this  malady 
appears  to  belong  rather  to  the  fubjeCt  of  ima- 
gination, than  to  this  place,*  and  as  the  hiftory 
of  its  rife  and  progrefs  cannot  be  fully  confi- 
dered  until  the  nature  of  that  faculty  has 
been  explained,  we  fhall  defer  fpeaking  of  it 
till  then. 

t 

Although  we  are  indebted  to  the  principle 
of  affociation  of  ideas  for  all  the  benefits  of 
knowledge  and  genius,  yet  it  often  becomes 
the  fource  of  much  mifery  and  diftrefs,  as  well 
as  of  many  falfe  judgments,  which,  although 
not  commonly  confidered  as  deliria,  are  no  lefs 
aberrations  from  found  fenfe.  When  any  acci- 
dent or  calamity  happens  to  us,  fo  as  to  excite 
fome  ftrong  paftion,  every  thing  which  after- 
wards brings  it  fuddenly  to  our  recollection, 
occafions  nearly  the  fame  powerful  emotions 
as  happened  at  firft.  Suppofe  a perfon  to  have 
been  much  frightened,  and  hurt  by  fome  fierce 
animal,  the  fight  of  a fimilar  one  occurring  at 
any  period  of  life  afterwards,  will  often  excite 
violent  alarm  in  the  mind,  even  although  the 

animal 


ON  MEMORY.  383 

animal  fiiould  be  tame  and  fecured.  If  the 
fight  of  a difagreeable,  or  difgufting  objed, 
has  made  the  ftomach  revolt,  fo  as  to  induce 
naufea  and  vomiting,  the  mentioning  the 
name  of  the~objed  at  any  time  afterwards,  will 
do  the  fame  thing.  The  antipathies  and  aver- 
fions  which  many  people  have  for  certain 
things,  can  only  be  explained  on  this  princi- 
ple. Of  thofe  who  efcaped  from  the  earth- 
quake at  Lifbon,  I formerly  knew  one  gentle- 
man, who,  if  he  accidentally  heard  the  word 
earthquake  mentioned  in  company,  became 
almoft  inftantaneoufly  delirious.  Boileau, 
when  a child,  happened  one  day,  when  he  was 
at  play,  to  irritate  a turkey-cock,  to  a prodi- 
gious degree.  He  accidentally  fell  backwards, 
and  the  enraged  animal  flew  at  him,  and 
wounded  him  in  fuch  a delicate  part,  and  in  fo 
ruinous  a manner,  as  rendered  him  incapable 
of  ever  afterwards  enjoying  the  advantages 
peculiar  to  his  fex.  Weickard,  and  feveral 
others,  who  mention  this  circumftance,  afcribe 
to  it  the  hatred  which  the  poet  afterwards 
fhewed  to  women,  and  all  who  admired  them  ; 

and 


ON  MEMORY. 


384 

and  to  the  Jefuits,  who  were  fuppofed  to  be 
the  firft  who  introduced  the  Turkey  fowl  into 
Europe.  Philojophifche  Arzt.  B.  I.  bl.  7. 

Upon  the  fame  principle/ many  affociatcd 
ideas  which  are  peculiar  to  certain  countries, 
and  which  give  rife  to  a number  of  ufages  and 
cuftoms  that  appear  unrcafonable  and  cruel,  and 
even  barbarous  to  others,  may  be  conlidered  as 
national  vefanise.  Of  this  kind  is  the  affocia- 
tion  of  ideas  which  was  taught  the  Romans, 
that  it  was  much  nobler  to  put  a voluntary 
end  to  their  exiftence  than  to  outlive  a dis- 
grace ; of  this  kind  is  the  aflociated  ideas  in- 
filled into  the  tender  mind  of  the  female 
Hindoo,  who  believes  that  a voluntary  facri- 
fi ce  of  her  life,  upon  the  death  of  her  hufband, 
is  an  infallible  means  of  fecuring  to  herfelf 
everlafti^g  happinefs  ; and  the  prevailing  opi- 
nion among  the  men  of  the  more  civilized  parts 
of  Europe,  that  no  reparation  for  certain  in- 
ful ti/  can  be  otherwife  procured  than  at  the 
hazard  of  one’s  life,  is  of  the  fame  nature. 


It 


u 


ON  MEMORY.  385 

I 

It  mufl:  be  evident  to  every  perfon  of  re- 
flection, that  to  follow  this  chain  of  thought 
would  naturally  lead  to  the  examination  of 
certain  maxims  and  principles,  derived  from 
different  forms  of  political  and  church  govern- 
ment. But  it  mufl:  alfo  appear  that  a proper 
boundary  is  here  put  to  the  refearches  of  the 
author. 


VOL.  I. 


C c 


CHAP- 


386 


ON  JUDGMENT, 


CHAPTER  V. 

ON  JUDGMENT,  AND  ITS  DEFECTS* 

Clarification  of  human  judgments . Inquiry  into 

the  nature  of  judgment.  Reafon,  what  it  is. 
In  what  degree  brutes  poffefs  it . What  things 
are  to  be  confidered  as  alls  of  judgment.  A man 
is  not  mad  becaufe  he  thinks  differently  from  the 
rejl  of  mankind.  Whether  judgment  is  ever 
deranged  in  a madman . Of  judgments  as  to' 

future  events . A fpecies  of  curious  prediction 
accounted  for . Of  the  defells  of  judgment ; 
claffijication  of  their  caufes.  Erroneous  judg- 
ments, to  what  they  are  to  be  referred. 

The  common  appellation  given  to  this  fa- 
culty is  a term  extremely  proper,  as  far  as  it 
regards  the  mere  refult  of  the  mental  opera- 
tions ; iince  the  examination  of  various  percep- 
tions, or  fubjedls  of  thought,  prefented  to 
the  mind  for  the  excrcife  of  this  faculty,  al- 

wavs 


AND  ITS  DEFECTS.  387 

ways  terminates  in  a conclufion,  or  judgment, 
{judicium). 

Few  authors  have  treated  fully  of  this  fa- 
culty; and  of  thofe  who  have  done  fo,  not 
any  one  whofe  works  have  fallen  into  my 
hands,  have  taken  it  up  as  a mere  objeCt  of 
natural  hiftory.  They  have  defined  it,  and 
difcuffed  fomething  concerning  its  properties, 
in  a very  metaphyfical  way  ; but  their  defini- 
tions are  generally  faulty,  and  incorrecft,  and 
their  fpeculations  too  refined  for  the  phyfio- 
logift.  Inftead  of  attempting  to  explain,  at 
'prefent,  the  nature  of  judgment,  let  us  confine 
ourfelves  to  the  talk  of  difcovering  and  ex- 
amining the  various  claffes  of  ideas,  which 
man,  in  found  mental  health,  is  capable  of 
comparing  with  one  another.  By  this  means 
we  fhall  be  enabled  to  find  out  what  the  intel- 
lectual character  is  which  is  common  to  them 
all. 

- , . 1 

1 ft.  External  objeCts,  that  is  to  fay,  the 
perceptions  they  excite,  may  be  compared  with 
each  other,  as,  for  inftance,  when  a perfon  is 

C c 2 defired 


388  ON  JUDGMENT, 

delired  to  fay  which  of  any  number  of  men  ap- 
pears to  be  the  ftrongeft,  or  talleft,  or  oldeft,&c. 

2dly.  External  bodies,  and  qualities  of 

* 

bodies,  may  be  compared  with  certain  pre- 
exifting  judgments  and  opinions,  as  in  many 
matters  of  knowledge  and  tafte  ; for  inftance, 
when  a perfon  is  defired  to  give  his  opinion 
about  a piece  of  architecture,  a picture,  a land- 
fcape,  or  a horfe ; in  which  cafe  he  compares 
the  objeCt  before  his  eyes  with  the  notions  he 
has  already  acquired  concerning  the  things  to 
which  it  relates. 

1 

3dly.  AbftraCt  qualities,  and  prior  judg- 
ments may  be  compared  with  each  other,  as, 
for  inftance,  when  Rousseau  decides  that  that 
which  is  commonly  called  civilization,  and 
culture,  do  not  promote  the  general  happinefs 
of  mankind ; and 

Laftly,  The  comparifon  may  take  place 
between  all  thofe  things  already  mentioned, 
and  the  conclufton,  therefore,  or  judgment, 
has  a relationlhip  to  the  whole  of  them. 


as 


AND  ITS  DEHtCTS. 


389 

as  is  the  cafe  when  a judge  has  to  give  an 
opinion  in  certain  complicated  cafes  of  right 
or  wrong,  from  a multiplicity  of  dead  and 
living  witneifes,  and  from  the  relationlhip 
which  the  refult  of  their  teflimony  has  with 
former  decifions,  and  the  exifting  laws;  or 
when  a phyfician  is  defired  to  form  an  opinion 
as  to  the  probable  event  of  a dangerous  difeafe, 
in  which  cafe  not  only  all  the  phenomena  pre- 
fent  are  to  be  duly  weighed,  and  their  caufes 
confidered,  but  thefe  things  muft  alfo  be  com- 
pared with  the  knowledge  he  has  acquired  con- 
cerning the  various  caufes  and  appearance  of 
death,  and  with  the  probable  effect  which  he 
expedts  from  the  means  he  employs  to  oppofe 
that  event. 

It  is  a curious,  and  certainly  an  obfcure 
queftion,  how  the  human  mind  fhould  be  able 

to  compare  the  relationfhip  of  any  two  or 

% 

more  circumftances,  fince  one  fubjedt  of 
thought  alone  occupies  our  attention  at  one 
and  the  fame  moment  of  time.  For  if  this  be 
a fixed  law  of  the  human  mind,  (which,  indeed, 
all  the  phenomena  of  thought  tend  to  confirm) 

then 


390  4In  judgment, 

then  as  foon  as  any  one  circumftance  to  be 
compared,  has  been  fucceeded  by  another, 
there  ought  to  be  no  further  perception  of  the 
qualities  of  the  firft  one ; but  how  is  it  pofft- 
ble  to  compare  the  prefent  thought  with  the 
one  which  preceded  it,  if  we  have  no  percep- 
tion of  its  qualities  ? 

Every  queftion  demanding  an  ad  of  judg- 
ment for  its  folution,  requires  not  only  the 

examination  of  the  fads  ftated  in  it,  but  in 

$ 

every  cafe  it  exacts  a comparifon  of  thefe  fads 
with  a certain  pre-exifting  notion,  which,  al- 
though not  exprefled  in  the  queftion,  is  always 
included  in  it.  Let  us  take  one  of  the  mod 
ftmple  ads  of  comparifon  of  perception  to  il- 
luftrate  this  pofition.  Suppofe  a perfon  is  afked 
which  of  any  number  of  men  he  would  judge 
to  be  the  heavieft.  It  is  evident  that  in  fuch 
a cafe  the  perfon  muft  not  only  compare  the 
men  with  each  other,  but  alfo  with  the  abftrad 
notions  which  he  has  formed  concerning  the 
caufes  of  weight.  When  a perfon  is  defired 
to  fay  "which  of  two  horfes  he  judges  is  the 
fteeteft ; the  perfon  compares  the  peculiar 

form 


r 


A.VD  ITS  DEFECTS.  39.I 

form  of  each  horfe  with  the  abftradl  notion  he 
has  already  acquired  of  the  make  which  a very 
fleet  horfe  ought  to  have  ; and  the  horfe  which 
has  the  ftrongeft  relationfhip  or  flmilarity 
with  that  pre-exifling  thought  is  judged  by 
him  to  be  the  fwifteft.  In  doing  this,  the 
perfon  is  confcious  that  the  objects,  or 
thoughts  to  be  examined,  have  different  de- 
grees of  refemblance,  or  analogy  with  the  ab- 
ftracft  notion,  and  confequently  he  muft  be 
confcious  that  they  have  different  degrees  of 
diflimilarity  among  themfelves.  The  judg- 
ment which  he  delivers  is  nothing  elfe  than 
an  enunciation  of  this  relationfhip.  A judg- 
ment, therefore,  is  nothing  elfe  than  a percep- 
tion of  the  flmilarity,  or  diflimilarity  of  twQ 
or  more  ideas. 

The  mere  procefs  of  comparing  ideas  is 
called  judgment,  and  the  faculty  we  are  pof- 
fefled  of,  which  enables  us  to  draw  general 
conclufions  from  any  number  of  comparifons, 
is  commonly  called  reafon.  The  analogy 
which,  exifts  between  the  two  is  obvious. 


This 


ON  JUDGMENT, 


3 9* 

This  operation  of  mind  is  fuppofed  to  be 
peculiar  to  man,  exalting  him  above  all  other 
created  beings,  becoming  the  fource  and  fup- 
port  of  his  grandeur  when  duly  exercifed 
and  cultivated,  and  the  flandard  of  his  debafe- 
ment  when  negleCted,  or  fubjugated  by  vice 
and  paflion. 

Other  animals  as  well  as  man  have  the  pow- 
er of  comparing  perceptions  and  thoughts,  as 
is  evident  from  their  adtions,  which  are  often 
the  refult  of  fuch  an  examination  ; but  there 
is  every  reafon  to  believe  that  in  them  it  is 
only  exercifed  in  regard  to  external  and  par- 
ticular objects,  and  that  they  are  incapable  of 
forming  any  logical  or  general  conclufions, 
or  any  abftradt  notions. 

As  reafon  is  the  faculty  by  which  we  deduce 
certain  conclufions  from  the  comparifon  of 
our  ideas,  it  is  evident  what  thofe  things  are 
which  deferve  to  be  confidered  as  aCts  of  this 
faculty.  Thefe  are  the  inveftigation  of  truths, 
(taking  it  for  granted  that  truth  is  to  be  found) 
the  generalizing  ideas,  the  rectification  and 

proper 


AND  ITS  DEFECTS. 


393 


proper  application  of  language  ; the  applica- 
tion of  general  ideas  (principles)  to  the  im- 
provement of  fcience,  or  the  regulating  our 
own  conduct,  as  ftandards  by  which  the  con- 
duct of  others  is  to  be  judged,  the  checking 
our  paffions,  &c.  ; all  thefe  things  are  pro- 
perly confidered  by  mankind  at  large,  as  adts 
of  reafon  ; and  when  a man  is  deficient  in  any 
of  them,  he  is  faid  to  think  or  adl  unreafon- 
ably,  or  to  evince  a want  of  folid  underftand- 
ing.  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  be- 
caufe  a perfon  thinks  and  adts  differently,  on 
a few  points,  from  the  majority  of  the  world, 
that  fuch  a perfon  adts  unreafonably,  or  inju- 
dicioufly  ; for  the  principles  which  regulate 
his  judgment,  although  different  from  thofeof 
other  men,  may  be  more  corredt  than  theirs, 
and  when  made  known  may  command  general 
alfent. 

/ 

The  judgments  we  have  formed  from  paft 
events  conftitute  a great  part  of  our  experi- 
ence ; and  as  thefe  have  unfortunately  not  al- 
ways been  corredt,  they  often  adt  as  caufes 
which  miflead  us  in  our  judgment  of  prefent 

and 


ON  JUDOMENT, 


391 

and  future  events.  The  judgments  we  form 
as  to  the  probable  iffue  of  diftant  events,  has 
been  conlidered  by  many  as  a diftind  faculty, 
called  the  faculty  of  forefight , or  prediction.  As 
the  fubjed  is  naturally  allied  to  that  which 
we  have  analyzed,  it  may  be  expeded  that  it 
alfo  ihould  be  fubjeded  to  examination. 

All  men  poffefs  this  faculty  in  a certain  de- 
gree ; every  man  foretels  that  the  fun  will  rife 
to-morrow,  that  the  night  will  follow  day. 
An  experienced  feaman  foretels  a change  of 
weather,  long  before  it  happens ; a wife  and 
unimpaflioned  ftatefman  can  forefee  the  con- 
vulfions  that  will  happen  in  ilates  which  are 
in  apparent  tranquillity,  vigour,  and  power. 

Although  the  laft  mentioned  circumftances 
feem  to  be  the  effed  of  a prophetic  fpirit, 
when  compared  with  the  firft,  yet  they  both 
depend  on  the  fame  principle.  We  have  feen 
the  fun  fet  often,  and  regularly  rife  fometime 
afterwards  ; when,  therefore,  we  fee  the  fun 
fet  again,  we  judge  it  will  again  arifej  wre 
have  no  moral  certainty  that  the  event  will 

take 


AND  ITS  DEFECTS. 


39$ 

take  place,  we  only  judge  that  it  will  do  fo, 
becaufe  we  have  often  feen  the  fame  thing 
happen.  The  failor  who  foretels  a diftant 
change  of  weather,  does  fo  becaufe  he  has 
often  feen  fuch  a change  of  weather  preceded 

t 

by  the  appearances  which  caufed  him  to  form 
this  conclufion  in  his  mind.  The  ruin  of  an 
empire  is  foretold  in  the  fame  manner,  but 
the  prediction  feems  wonderful  to  the  igno- 
rant, becaufe  the  faCts  on  which  the  judgment 
is  founded  are  not  always  evident  to  the  mul- 
titude. They  are  to  be  fought  for  in  the  deep 
recefles,  and  records  of  ancient  as  well  as 
modern  times,  in  the  fpirit  of  the  laws,  in 
the  temper  of  the  rulers,  and  the  difpofition 
of  the  ruled. 

The  theory  of  fuch  predictions  as  thefe  is 
fo  clear  as  not  to  require  any  further  elucida- 
tion. The  perfon  who  predicts  fuch  events 
can  always  trace  the  circumftances  which  have 
led  him  to  fuch  a conclufion ; but  there  are 
others,  for  which,  however  habituated  he  may 
be  to  refleCt  on  the  operations  of  his  own 
mind,  he  can  feldom  give  a fatisfaCtory  ac- 


count. 


396  ON  JUDGMENT, 

count.  One  of  the  moft  common  of  thefe 
kinds  of  forefight  is  that  wonderful  prefenti- 
ment  which  caufes  many  men  to  announce 
their  death,  a confiderable  time  previous  to  its 
taking  place.  No  allufion  is,  at  prefent,  made 
to  any  preternatural  warnings  ; of  this,  pro- 
bably, hereafter.  A perfon  labouring  under 
a mortal  difeafe,  and  from  whom  the  danger 
is  carefully  concealed,  fhall  fay  to  his  phyfician 
,f  Sir  ! all  your  endeavours  are  in  vain.  I feel 
“ that  I fhall  furely  die  of  this  complaint.’* 
The  event  is  fulfilled  in  a few  days  afterwards. 

The  exprefiion  which  the  perfon  employs 
evidently  points  out  the  proper  mode  of  ana- 
lyzing this  kind  of  judgment,  fo  as  to  arrive 
at  the  principles  on  which  it  is  founded. 

It  has  been  remarked,  that  there  are  two 
very  different  daffies  of  perceptions,  the  one 
diftindt  and  clear,  yielding  us  what  we  believe 
to  be  accurate  reprefentations  of  the  objedts 
from  which  they  flow.  The  other  is  obfcure, 
and  gives  us  no  kind  of  knowledge  of  the 
caufes  which  produce  the  perceptions  in  our 

mind, 


AND  ITS  DEFECTS.  397 

mind.  The  firlt  is  received  from  external  ob- 
jects, a&ingon  our  external  fenfes  ; thefecond 
is  derived  from  impreflions  on  the  extremities 
of  all  the  other  nerves  of  the  body,  particularly 
thofe  of  the  vifcera,  of  the  abdomen,  and 
thorax.  When  treating  of  thefe  fubjefts,  the 
reafons  were  pointed  out  why  impreflions  on 
the  remote  extremities  of  fuch  nerves  did  not 
give  a clear  perception  to  the  mind,  and  the 
ultimate  end  that  was  obtained  by  fuch  a wife 
oeconomy,  was  alfo  hinted  at. 

The  ufual  and  ordinary  impreflions  which 
are  conftantly  taking  place  on  the  extremities 
of  the  nerves  of  the  thorax,  and  abdomen, 
and  all  the  other  parts  of  our  frame,  except 
the  external  fenfes,  do  not,  as  has  been  al- 
ready obferved,  produce  any  mental  percep- 
tion fufficient  to  engage  our  attention  while 
the  animal  is  in  perfect  health.  No  healthy 
perfon  feels  the  food  in  his  ftomach,  or  the 
matters  contained  in  his  inteftines,  the  blood 
which  circulates  through  the  whole  of  his 
body,  or  the  gall  in  his  gall-bladder,  &c.  But 
as  foon  as  any  organ,  or  fet  of  organs,  is  de- 
ranged. 


ON  JUDGMENT, 


39s 

ranged,  or  the  matters  which  ought  to  be  ap- 
plied to  it,  are  much  altered,  then  fenfations 
arife  which  perhaps  engage  our  attention  the 
more  drongly,  inafmuch  as  from  their  obfcu- 
rity  we  are  always  in  doubt  from  what  caufe 
they  proceed,  or  how  they  are  to  terminate. 
Many  of  thefe  we  have  been  accu horned  to 
from  our  infancy,  fuch  as  various  kinds  of 
pains  and  uneafineffes,  fenfations  of  weaknefs, 
increafed  heat,  third,  lofs  of  appetite,  quick- 
ened refpiration,  &c.  Thefe,  except  they 
happen  to  be  in  a very  unufual  degree,  feldom 
awaken  our  fears,  for  the  perfon  truding  to 
his  pad  experience,  hopes  they  will  again  ter- 
minate in  a return  of  health  ; but  when  any 
new  fenfation  is  felt,  which  affects  us  in  a very 
uncommon  manner,  apprehenfion  indantly 
arifes  in  the  human  mind.  Suppofe  a blood- 
veffel  to  give  way  in  fome  internal  part,  as  ill 
the  cavity  of  the  abdomen  : the  perfon  without 
being  confcious  of  what  has  really  happened, 
is  at  once  alarmed  by  the  uncommonnefs  of 
the  fenfation,  and  when  he  finds  this  to  be 
quickly  fucceeded  by  a dimnefs  of  fight,  and 
bidden  lofs  of  his  ferength,  his  terrors  in- 
dantly 


AND  ITS  DEFECTS. 


399 


ftantly  increafe  to  the  greateft  pofiible  degree. 
He  in  vain  calls  in  the  alliftance  of  experience, 
and  recollection,  in  order  to  judge  what  may 
happen  ; and  the  ideas  the  moft  naturally  aflb- 
ciated  with  his  fears,  therefore,  prefent  them- 
felves  involuntarily  to  his  imagination.  Now 
the  moft  alarming  of  all  ideas  which  men 
in  general  have  formed  to  themfelves,  is  that 
of  their  own  diftolution  ; and  as  they  know 
this  is  generally  preceded  by  difeafed  feelings, 
the  gradual  linking  of  their  ftrength  naturally 
excites  this  thought,  and  they  announce  their 
death. 

The  prediction  of  death  naturally  arifes 
from  the  abfenceof  thofe  feelings  which  would 
lead  us  to  expeCt  a return  of  health.  Three 
fets  of  caufes  particularly  excite  this  alarm  ; 
a confcioufnefs,  or  feeling  of  an  uncommon 
and  increafing  proftration  of  ftrength ; vertigo, 
and  its  attendant,  lofs  of  light ; and,  thirdly, 
whatever  greatly  impedes  refpiration.  In  al- 
moft  every  difeafe  in  which  patients  have  pre- 
dicted their  own  death,  one  or  other  of  thefe 
fymptoms  occur.  That  their  judgment  is 

often 


400  ON  JUDGMENT, 

often  erroneous,  need  not  be  mentioned  \ but 
as  it  has  been  looked  upon  with  wonder,  when 
the  fad  has  coincided  with  the  prediction,  I 
thought  it  might  not  be  uninterefting  to  place 
the  phenomenon  in  its  proper  light.  To  re- 
turn to  our  fubjed. 

Between  clear  and  unclouded  reafon,  and 
abfolute  infanity,  there  are  many  {hades  of 
greater  or  lefs  deviation.  To  enumerate,  or 
point  out  the  diftindion  which  exifts  between 
them  is  impoflible.  Language  is  not  fuffici- 
ently  copious  and  accurate  to  afford  fuch  a 
means.  The  caufes  of  thefe  deviations  arc 
numerous,  and  the  whole  fubjed,  therefore, 
although  very  important  to  be  known,  is  of 
difficult  invelfigation. 

In  regard  to  the  pradice  of  phyfic,  the  dif- 
tindions  which  exift  between  the  defed  of 
judgment,  or  reafon,  are  of  much  lefs  confe- 
quence  than  their  relation  to  the  moral  world, 
or  their  influence  on  fociety  j for  judgment, 
confidered  as  a faculty,  has  no  peculiar  dif- 
eafe.  The  conclufions  which  a perfon  forms 


in 


AND  ITS  DEFECTS. 


401 


in  his  mind,  may  be  erroneous,  but  the  fa- 
culty of  judging  is  the  fame  in  a madman,  as 
in  a man  in  perfedt  health.  One  would  not 
fay  that  a mufician  of  Nootka  Sound,  or  the 
South  Sea  iflands,  was  lefs  fane  than  an  able 
and  accomplifhed  mufician  of  this  country, 
becaufe  he  produced  different  combinations 
pf  found.  The  mufcles  in  the  hands  and 
arms,  and  the  faculty  of  moving  them,  may  be 
equally  healthy  in  both.  So  it  is  in  regard  to 
lunatics,  and  men  who  are  of  found  mind. 
The  faculty  of  judging  is  the  fame  in  both,  but 
they  have  different  perceptions,  and  their  judg- 
ments, therefore,  muft  bedifferentv  The  mad- 
man has  difeafed  nerves  and  brain,  and  dif- 
eafed  perceptions,  and  he  is  therefore  obliged  . 
to  draw  conclusions  which  appear  ftrange  to  a 
man  in  health.  If  a madman  judges  that  he 
has  the  government  of  the  whole  world  in  his 
hands,  and  that  the  feafons  are  obedient  to  his 
command  j that  he  can  dry  up  the  waters  of  the 
Ganges  by  a wifh,  or  thaw  the  continents  of  ice 
■which  furround  the  poles  ; if  he  believes  that 
he  can  make  the  produce  of  Italy  fpring  up  in 
the  deferts  of  Arabia,  or  the  climate  of  Arcadia 
Vol.  I.  D d reign 


402  ON  JUDGMENT, 

reign  in  Great  Britain,  he  judges  in  this  way 
becaufe  the  perceptions  which  are  prefent  in 
his  mind  force  him  to  draw  fuch  concluflons. 
The  procefs  of  his  intellectual  faculties  in  this 
cafe,  is  equally  correct  as  that  w'hich  caufed 
Sir  Isaac  Newton  to  conclude  from  a num- 
ber of  facts  that  all  bodies  gravitate  towards 
each  other,  for  the  intelletual  part  is  the  fame 
in  both,  but  the  brain  is  difeafed  in  the  lunatic. 

It  is,  doubtlefs,  a true  charater  of  infanity 
when  a man’s  judgment  is  under  the  influence 
of  difeafed  perceptions,  fo  that  he  cannot 
judge  as  the  generality  of  men  do.  It  would 
be  a very  injudicious  application  of  philofo- 
phy,  were  a perfon  in  converfation  to  try  to 
prove  that  a madman  was  not  mad  becaufe  he 
judged  corretly  about  the  objets  of  his 
thoughts. 

The  defets  of  judgment  do  not  arife,  then, 
from  any  fault  in  the  faculty  itfelf,  but  from  the 
materials  on  which  that  faculty  has  to  operate. 

The  deviations  which  thefe  materials  occa- 
fion  are  of  two  kinds : 

i ft. 


AND  ITS  DEFECTS. 


403 


# 

ift.  Incorred  judgments. 

sdly.  Erroneous  judgments. 

Incorred  judgments  may  arife, 

A.  From  a want  of  fufficient  fads,  or  ma- 
terials. 

B.  From  a too  hafty  examination  of  one  eft 
any  number  of  them. 

C.  From  not  re  colie  fling  all  the  chain  of 
analogies,  or  the  different  links  of  rela- 
tion, by  which  the  various  parts  of  evi- 
dence, or  fads,  are  conneded  with  the 
general  conclufion. 

t k ‘ ■*  1 

D.  From  the  interference  of  matters  of  be- 
lief, prepofTeffions,  prejudices,  orpaffions. 

id.  Every  perfon,  even  of  the  founded: 
mind,  is  liable  to  incorred  judgment  if  he 
fpeaks  on  a fubjed  with  which  he  is  not  Fuffi— 
ciently  acquainted,  or  if  he  attempt  to  give 
an  opinion  on  a point  which  requires  for  its 
decifion  more  fads  than  are  laid  before  him  ; 

D d 2 f or 


404 


ON  JUDGMENT, 


for  it  is  evident  that  the  judgment  in  iuch 
cafes  is  founded  on  a partial  view  of  the  fub- 
jecl,  and  many  fails  which  are  not  examined 
may  Hand  in  oppofttion  to  the  general  conclu- 
lion,  or  judgment  he  forms.  It  is  unneceflary 
to  expatiate  on  this. 

2dly.  A too  hafty  examination  of  any  num- 
ber of  fails,  on  which  a queftion  hinges,  pro- 
duces nearly  the  lame  effeil  as  a want  of  fuffi- 
cient  evidence.  The  mind  of  every  perfon 
requires  to  be  habituated  to  dwell  for  a certain 
length  of  time  on  each  fail  which  has  any  re- 
lation to  the  queftion,  and  which  is  confe- 
quently  of  ufe  in  forming  a judgment.  This 
habit  is  to  be  gained,  in  raoft  cafes,  by  educa- 
tion. The  command  of  our  thoughts  mull  be 
obtained  by  habitual  reftraint,  and  coercion, 
in  early  life,  if  it  be  required  that  a perfon 
fhould  excel  in  correit  judgment.  In  many 
cafes  this  is  a trial  of  uncommon  difficulty, 
both  for  the  inftrudlor  and  the  inftrudled. 
There  is  a certain  irritability  of  mind,  if  I 
may  be  allowed  the  expreftion,  which  it  is 
hardly  poffible  to  reftrain  by  common  means ; 

and. 


AND  ITS  DEFECTS. 


405 


and,  unfortunately,  the  generality  of  parents, 
and  of  thofe  intruded  with  the  education  of 
youth,  are  feldom  fufficiently  acquainted  with 
the  varieties  of  mental  character  to  difcover 
this  temperament  when  it  prevails.  It  is 
moft  ftrong  in  thofe  who  have  a mixture  of 
the  fanguine  and  choleric  difpofition.  Thofe 
who  are  purely  fanguineous,  although  they 
have  it  in  a lefs  degree  than  the  former,  are  ftill 
very  much  under  its  influence  ; young  people, 
when  compared  with  thofe  of  a mature  age, 
and  women,  when  compared  with  men,  may 
be  faid  to  be  of  the  fanguine  temperament ; 
and  hence  people  who  have  a mixture  of  the 
fanguine  and  choleric  difpofition,  thofe  of  a 
purely  fanguine  temperament,  and  women  and 
young  people,  are  much  more  liable  than  the 
reft  of  the  world  to  incorrect  judgment. 

3dly.  It  muft  be  evident  that  judgment  de- 
pends greatly  on  the  goodnefs  of  memory.  A 
perfon  who  forgets  the  data  of  any  fcience,  is 
conftantly  expofed  to  form  incorredt  conclu- 
fions  concerning  thofe  parts  of  it  which  have 
any  relation  to  the  data  which  are  forgotten. 

The 


406  on  judgment. 

The  neceffity  of  a correct  memory,  in  regard  to 
judgment,  cannot  be  better  proved  than  by  the 
obligation  impofed  on  the  judges  of  this  coun- 
try. In  fumming  up  evidence,  in  any  caufe, 
they  are  not  permitted  to  truft  to  their  memory 
alone.  They  muft  write  down  the  fads  which 
they  draw  from  the  witnefles,  and  which  they 

are  afterwards  to  recapitulate  to  the  jury. 

\ 

4thly.  Among  the  frequent  caufes  of  in- 
corred  judgment,  the  prepolTeflions,  preju- 
dices, and  paflions  of  men,  are  to  be  enume- 
rated ; for,  in  fuch  cafes,  the  various  fads 
will  be  examined  as  much  by  their  relation  to 
the  various  defires  and  averfions  which  predo- 
minate in  the  mind,  as  by  their  relation  to  the 
general  queftion.  If  a judge  is  prejudiced  by 
political  opinions  in  favour  of  certain  ufages, 
it  will  not  be  an  eafy  matter  for  him  to  pre- 
ferve  himfelf  pure  in  the  court  when  cafes 
come  before  him  which  regard  fuch  ufages. 
He  will  prefer  the  bye-law  of  a corporation  to 
the  exprefs  ftatute  of  government,  if  it  hap- 
pens to  coincide  with  his  defires. 

" Omnis 

V 


f 


AND  ITS  DEFECTS. 


407 


,f  Omnis  homines  qui  de  rebus  dubiis  con- 
,c  fultant  ab  odio,  amicitia,  ira,  et  mtfericor- 
dia  vacuos  elfe  decet.  Haud  facile  animus 
<f  verum  provider,  ubi  ilia  officiunt,  nequc 
“ quifquam  omnium  lubidini  limul  et  ufui 
“ paruit.  Ubi  intenderis  ingenium,  valet ; ft 
“ lubido  poftidet,  ea  dominatur,  animus  nihil 
valet.’*  Tiberli  Orat . ap,  Sallust  de  Con - 
juratione  Catiline. 

l 

Erroneous  judgments  arife  from  difeafes  of  the 
external  fenfes,  from  difeafes  of  the  body, 
preventing  the  due  agency  of  external  objects; 
from  the  caufes  which  derange  attention, 
mental  perception,  and  memory  ; and  the  fa- 
culty we  polfefs  of  abftraifting  and  compound- 
ing thoughts.  They  are  therefore  to  be  fought 
for  in  the  preceding  and  fucceeding  chapters 
of  this  work. 


END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


' J 


■ 


• /• 


/ 


* . I 

...  - 


' 


*. 


- 


* 


. • 


■ . 

- . 

’ 

• ■ 

• ; •'  " ' * ‘ 

- ' 


■ A* 

‘ 


. 


. 


/{d  /■  //■  /ff/ 


